
Housego 




1IBBIS 

amiaiB 



University of Alberta 
Printing Department 









i 4*#{* 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/albertacompositeOOhous 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


# O 


ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 
AND GIFTED YOUTH 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 

by 

IAN EDWARD HOUSEGO 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


August 19, 1958 




























"Boredom is nothing but the experience of a 
paralysis of our productive powers and the 
sense of un-aliveness" 


Erich Fromm 

-- The Sane Society 


-"the presentation of each problem is a 

challenge to undergo an ordeal" 

Arnold Toynbee 

-- A Study of History -- 



ABSTRACT 


Good secondary school programmes for gifted students are characterized 
by a set of practices or criteria supported by experience and research in 
education. This study was an attempt to formulate a set of criteria based on 
the literature dealing with the education of gifted youth and to evaluate the 
general trends in the large comprehensive high schools in Alberta (called 
composite high schools) in terms of the so-called ideal criteria. 

The following criteria can be supported as practices characterizing 
good programmes for the education of gifted youth: (1) discovery of students 
with potential possibilities for high achievement in a number of socially 
useful endeavours; (2) individual attention to gifted students in regular 
classrooms (heterogeneous ability groupings), special classes for gifted 
students, and/or acceleration of gifted students throughout their high school 
career; (3) motivation of the gifted through special guidance, through a 
variety of monetary and non-monetary rewards for worthy effort and high 
achievement, through provision of a number of try-out opportunities in which 
the gifted may develop their interests, and through contacts with individuals 
in the school and community in positions to motivate the gifted; (4) enrich¬ 
ment of the in-class and out-of-class experiences of the gifted by a quality 
of educational experiences designed to challenge them and assist them in the 
continuing birth of their potential capabilities in academic and non-academic 
fields; (5) use of community resources available to the high schools in 
promoting the best development of the gifted; (6) supervision of the teachers 
of the gifted as such. 

In order to evaluate current composite school practices in terms of 









) 



( 


... ..... 

. , 

- - ■ .... - ' .'• 







( 






. . . '.. .- .... • - <. : 


( : 








( 













the above criteria, the investigator visited each of the eight Alberta composite 
high schools. More than 100 gifted students were interviewed; the records of 
the students were examined for pertinent information; the administrative officials 
in the high schools were interviewed; more than 75 teachers of the selected stu¬ 
dents responded to questionnaires dealing specifically with what they did for 
their gifted students. 

The findings of the study suggest that Alberta composite high schools, 
while characterized by some degree of concern for the realization of the best 
development of gifted students, are not characterized by planned programmes, 
the aims of which are understood and wholeheartedly supported by teachers and 
administrators alike. School files contain information pointing out the 
intellectually gifted but their teachers, on the whole, do not know even half 
of them; the teachers of the gifted say they are unable to do all that they 
want to do for their gifted students because classes are too large and too 
heterogeneous from the viewpoint of interests and abilities; a number of the 
selected students neither win awards during their high school career, nor do 
they participate in any extracurricular activities or community organizations. 
Rather remarkably, however, 8 out of 10 of the selected students are actively 
planning to go on for further education; many of the teachers of the gifted 
make no attempt to enrich the educational experiences of their gifted students, 
and of those that do, very few make extensive efforts to provide enriching 
experiences over and above what they provide for the general run of students 
in their classes; generally speaking, the schools make limited use of community 
resources to benefit gifted students as such; the supervisory leadership provided 
for the teachers of the gifted by school administrators is very limited. 




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The investigator is indebted to officials in the Alberta Department of 
Education and the public school systems in Calgary, Edmonton, Red Deer, Medicine 
Hat and Lethbridge. He is especially indebted to the principals in the eight 
composite high schools of Alberta, the selected group of gifted students and 
their teachers and to other composite high school administrative officials. 
Without the generous cooperation of these people this study would have been 
impossible. 

The investigator is also indebted to the Faculty of the Division of 
Educational Administration for their guidance and encouragement during the 
time he was privileged to work with them. To Dr. G. L. Mowat special 
indebtedness is acknowledged. 
















: 

- 

v , - 

. 

. 






- 




: 
























. 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. INTRODUCTION. 1 

The Problem... 1 

The Research Background . 1 

Definition of Terms . 1 

Gifted Youth. 1 

Composite High School . . .. 2 

Educational Practices. 2 

Collection of Data.. . . . . .. 2 

Information From the Records. 3 

Information By Means of Structured Interviews. ... 3 

Information from the Principals. 3 

Information from Guidance Coordinators. 4 

Information from the Selected Students. 4 

Information By Means of Questionnaires. 5 

The Actual Gathering of the Data. 6 

Limitations and Strengths of the Study. 6 

Limitations . . .. 6 

Strengths. 9 

II. SURVEY OF THE LITERATURE. .. 12 

Defining Giftedness. 12 

The Aims of Education of the Gifted .. 14 


Criticisms of the Current Education of the Gifted 


16 





































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Administration and Staff Recognition of the Special 

Needs of Gifted Students. 20 

Organizational Adaptations. 20 

Identification . 21 

A Challenging Curriculum . 24 

Teaching the Gifted. 26 

In-Service Training . 30 

Enrichment. 31 

Definition. 31 

Making Enrichment Possible . 33 

Ability Grouping . 33 

Introduction. 33 

Special Classes. 35 

Partial Segregation . 38 

Acceleration . ........ 40 

Individual Attention in Regular Classes . 45 

Extracurricular Activities . 49 

Guidance Services . 51 

Teachers of the Gifted. 57 

III. THE EDUCATION OF GIFTED STUDENTS IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS: 

-CRITERIA OF A GOOD PROGRAMME. 70 

IV. DISCOVERY OF THE GIFTED. 73 

The Criterion. 73 

Current Composite School Practices. .... . 73 

Outcomes of Current Practices. 75 

Summary. 76 
































CHAPTER PAGE 

V. MAKING ENRICHMENT POSSIBLE: ADMINISTRATIVE DEVICES ... 78 

The Criterion. 78 

Current Composite School Practices.. 78 

Providing For the Gifted In Regular Classrooms. ... 78 

Special Classes For the Gifted. . 79 

Acceleration . 81 

Outcomes of Current Practices. 82 

Summary. 83 

VI. DEVELOPING GIFTEDNESS: MOTIVATION. 85 

The Criterion. 85 

Current Composite School Practices. 86 

Guidance. .. 86 

Psychological Testing . 86 

Availability of Records . 89 

Special Guidance For the Gifted . 89 

The Nature of Routine Guidance Interviews . 91 

Frequency of Students' Visits . 96 

The Guidance Departments' Influence on the Course 
Choices and Extracurricular Choices of the 

Selected Students . 0 97 

Teachers' Opinions Concerning the Adequacy of 

Guidance For a Selected Group of Grade XII Students 98 

Rewards . .. 100 

Non-Monetary... 100 

Monetary.. 102 

Providing Community Contacts. 103 



































CMP TER 


PAGE 


Try Out Opportunities. 104 

Outcomes of Current Practices . 107 

Subject Likes and Dislikes . 107 

Time Spent On School Studies Outside of School Hours 111 

Participation In Extracurricular Activities . Ill 

Awards Won By Members of the Selected Group. 114 

Liking For School. 114 

Overwork and Underwork. 116 

Subject Repeats . . '.. 117 

Further Education . 118 

Summary. 121 

VII. DEVELOPING GIFTEDNESS: ENRICHMENT. 125 

The Criterion. 125 

Current Composite School Practices. 126 

From the Viewpoint of Administrators. 126 

Honour-Type Courses . 126 

Reading Facilities . 128 

Stimulation of Hobbies and Collections. 128 

Drama Productions. 128 

Excursions to Places of Interest. 129 

Special Facilities For the Gifted . 129 

Encouragement of the Gifted to Enroll In Extra 

Courses and Honour Courses. 130 

Laboratory and Library Assistantships . 131 

Small Group Research and Seminar Work. 131 








































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


From the Viewpoint of Teachers. 133 

Enrichment Through Guidance In General Reading. . 133 

Planning More Difficult Assignments For 

the Gifted. 134 

Encouraging Individual Research . 135 

Using Gifted Students as Assistants in 

Libraries, Laboratories, Etc. 135 

Encouraging Gifted Students To Participate 

in Extracurricular Activities . 135 

Encouraging the Administration To Provide Special 
Facilities For.the Gifted . 136 

Encouraging Creative Experiences. . . 137 

Making Contacts With Outstanding Citizens of the 

Community. 137 

Stimulation of Hobbies and Collections. 137 

Encouraging Gifted Students To Participate 

In Community Organizations. ........... 138 

Organizing Exhibitions of the Products of 

Enrichment Activities . .. 138 

Making Excursions To Places of Interest . 138 

Organizing Seminar Projects For Gifted 

Class Members . .. 139 

Other Enrichment Activities Used. 139 

Library and Laboratory Facilities . . . 140 

Library . ..... 141 

Laboratories. .. 142 

Outcomes of Current Practices 

Students' Use of Library Facilities . 145 

Small Group and Individual Project Work. 148 



























CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Course Pattern Choices. 151 

Credit Load. 151 

Elective Choices of the Selected Students .... 152 

Summary. 157 

VIII. DEVELOPING GIFTEDNESS: USE OF COMMUNITY RESOURCES. . . 160 

The Criterion. 160 

Current Practice In Composite High Schools. 161 

From the Viewpoint of the Administration. 161 

Outcomes of Current Practices . 161 

Summary. 162 

IX. DEVELOPING GIFTEDNESS: ADEQUATE ADMINISTRATIVE 

SUPERVISORY PRACTICES . 164 

The Criterion. 164 

Current Practice In Composite High Schools. . 165 

From the Viewpoint of the Principals. 165 

In-Service Training . 165 

Supervisory Personnel Available . 166 

Evaluation of Teacher Effectiveness . 167 

From the Viewpoint of Guidance Coordinators .... 169 

From the Viewpoint of Teachers. 171 

Supervision From the Guidance Department. .... 171 

Teachers Involved in Curriculum Revision. 171 

Teachers Involved in In-Service Training. 174 

The Evaluation of Teacher Effectiveness. 174 

Teachers’ Efforts ’On Their Own' To Increase their 
Knowledge Concerning the Education of 

Gifted Students. 174 




































CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Summary. 177 

X. SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND FURTHER RESEARCH. 179 

APPENDIX. 188 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


204 










, „ . 








. 












LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. A Summary of the Sample of Selected Students Found In 

Alberta Composite High Schools In Grade XII 1957-1958 . . 11a 

II. The Percentage of Gifted Grade XII Students In Alberta 
Composite High Schools Known To Their Teachers As 
Gifted Students... 76 

III. The Per Cent of Teachers of a Selected Group of Grade XII 
Students Expressing Opinions Concerning the Administrative 
Procedures That Would Most Assist Them to Better Meet the 
Needs of Gifted Students. 82 

IV. The Extent to Which Guidance Departments In Alberta Comp¬ 
osite High Schools Influence The Course And Extra- 
Curricular Choices of a Selected Group of Students In 
Grade Twelve. 98 

V. Opinions Of Teachers Concerning The Adequacy Of The 

Composite High Schools' -Guidance Departments In Meeting 

The Needs Of Selected Students . 99 

VI. Extracurricular Activities Available To Selected Students 

In Alberta Composite High Schools. 105 

VII. Likes and Dislikes of a Selected Group of Grade XII 

Students of Third Year High School Matriculation Subjects 
In Alberta Composite High Schools. 107 

VIII. Reasons Given By A Selected Group Of Grade XII Students 
In Alberta Composite High Schools For Liking And Dis- 
Liking Matriculation Subjects. 109 

IX. 

IX. The Participation In Extracurricular Activities Of A 

Selected Group Of Grade XII Students In Alberta Composite 

High Schools. 113 

X. The Degree Of Liking For School Of A Selected Group Of 

Grade XII Students In Alberta Composite High Schools . . . 115 

XI. The Opinions Of A Selected Group Of Grade XII Students 
In Alberta Composite High Schools Concerning The Amount 
Of Work The Schools Require Them To Do. 117 

XII. Per Cent Of Selected Grade XII Students In Alberta Comp¬ 
osite High Schools Indicating Whether Or Not They Have 
Chosen Their Life Vocation . 119 


























TABLE 


PAGE 


XIII. The Vocational Choices Involving Further Education Of 
A Selected Group Of Grade XII Students In Alberta 
Composite High Schools . 120 

XIV. Enrichment Techniques Used And The Percentage Of 

Teachers Of A Selected Group Of Grade XII Students 

Using Them In Alberta Composite High Schools. 136 

XV. An Expression Of Teachers' Opinions On The Adequacy 
Of The Composite High School Libraries In Meeting 
The Needs Of A Selected Group Of Students. 142 

XVI. An Expression Of Opinion On The Adequacy Of The 
Composite High Schools' Laboratory Facilities In 
Meeting The Needs Of A Selected Group Of Students 
By The Teachers Of The Group. 144 

XVII. The Extent To Which Composite High School Library 

Facilities Were Used By A Selected Group Of Grade XII 

Students And The Frequency Of Visits Paid by The 

Selected Group.. 145 

XVIII. Use Made Of Composite High School Libraries By A 

Selected Group Of Grade XII Students.. . 146 

XIX. The Opinions Of A Selected Group Of Grade XII Students 
In Alberta Composite High Schools Concerning The 
Adequacy Of The School Libraries In Meeting Their 
Reading And Assignment Needs. 147 

XX. The Degree Of Participation In Individual And Small 
Group Projects By A Selected Group Of Grade XII 

Students In Alberta Composite High Schools . 149 

XXI. The Elective Choices Of A Group Of Grade XII 

Composite High School Students In Each Of The Senior 

High School Grades, X, XI, And XII.. 154 

XXII. The Membership In Community Organizations Of A Selected 
Group Of Grade XII Composite High School Students And 
The Number In Such Organizations Because The Schools 
Made It Possible. 163 

XXIII. The Extent To Which Supervisory Practices Concerning 

The Education Of Gifted Students Involved The Teachers 

Of A Selected Group Of Grade XII Students In Alberta 

Composite High Schools . .. 175 



















K: ^ ~ 1 ■' 







■ 



















CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 


1 i The Problem 

This study has attempted to evaluate the nature and extent of current 
educational practices involving a selected group of gifted grade twelve stud¬ 
ents in Alberta's eight composite high schools. 

2. The Research Background 

This study is a part of the Composite High School Project undertaken 
at the University of Alberta by a group of Kellogg Fellows in the Division 
of School Administration (Faculty of Education). The group has been under 
the direction of Professor J. H. M. Andrews. 

Since 1953., the writer has had a growing interest in the education 
of gifted children and youth. He has become increasingly aware through read¬ 
ing^ observation and discussion, of the need for Canadian authorities to 
survey and evaluate current practices in elementary and secondary schools 
that involve so-called gifted students. 

The thesis requirements at the University of Alberta have presented 
this writer with the opportunity to carry out such an investigation. 

3. Definition of Terms 

The statement of the problem contains three concepts which need to 
be defined: 

(1); Gifted youth 

For the purposes of this study the subjects considered 
gifted are those whose names appear in the 97th, 98th and 99th percentiles 


.( ■ --- / 



J 











- 


(■: 



2 


on the Dominion Intelligence Test administered to them when they were in grade 
nine by the Department of Education. The information is available in the Exam¬ 
inations Branch of the Alberta Department of Education. 

(2) Composite High school 

Any high school in Alberta offering three arbitrarily deter¬ 
mined subject patterns as choices open to students in grades ten, eleven and 
twelve shall be considered a composite high school. Students may choose to 
graduate from high school in the matriculation pattern, the general pattern, 
the commercial pattern or the technical pattern. 

(3) Educational practices 

In the writer's attempt to develop the criteria of an adeq¬ 
uate secondary school program for gifted students, the following categories 
have been considered important: the means of identifying the gifted; the 
means of motivating the gifted to obtain their potential promise; the nature 
and degree of curriculum enrichment for the gifted; the means used by admin¬ 
istrators in the composite high schools to organize the program so that qual¬ 
ified teachers can offer a challenging course of studies; the use made by the 
schools of community resources as means of meeting the needs of gifted stud¬ 
ents; the supervision and evaluation of teachers of the gifted. 

Briefly, the writer has attempted to discover to what degree 
the composite high schools are meeting the needs of their gifted students and 
encouraging their best development. 

4. Collection of Data 

If the education of gifted students in the composite high schools of 
Alberta were to be evaluated, then some sort of yardstick had to be developed 
against which it would be possible to measure current practices. The writer's 




( : 


. 










... 













3 


concern was centered around the development of an acceptable and adequate sec¬ 
ondary school program for the education of gifted students. In terms of such 
a program the writer planned to formulate devices for gathering data. 

Once the 'yardstick' was designed it became possible to decide the means 
by which data would be gathered. The means, as finally agreed upon, were: the 
structured interview technique; the questionnaire; examination of pertinent rec¬ 
ords . 

(1) Information from the records (See Appendix A) 

An information sheet was made up which enabled the investigator 
to record quickly pertinent information on each of the selected students involved 
in the study. The information came from permanent record cards in each of the 
schools and had to do with the course pattern in which each student is enrolled, 
the number of credits earned in each grade by the student and the courses taken 
by the student in each grade. 

(2) Information by means of structured interviews (See Appendix A) 
Interview sheets were formulated to elicit information from 

the school principals, guidance co-ordinators, and the selected students. 

(a) Information from the principal 

Each of the composite high school principals was inter¬ 
viewed by the investigator. The questions asked had to do with the following: 

1. The means by which the school identified gifted 
students 

2. Special courses in the school program available 
only to gifted students. 

3. A statement of the school's policy concerning the 
education of gifted youth. 

4. The extracurricular activities organized in the 
school. 

5. The nature of any special assistance given by the 
administration to those who teach the gifted. 



■ 


: n : . 


- 


: 








2.S 




- . < -• 1 ■ B «. .... ■ . 

iji J b: ...' ...1. .J Cl •• - 1 ; 


. : Lt ^: .: ...jo . ... . 

; BsjaXmios’j ve. hs"XiJ‘~ 


: 


.. v i. . ... .:.....( £) 


... 




<. 




.... ... ho: 






( 


( ) 


(■■) 








c 




- 





4 


6. The monetary and non-monetary awards available at 
the school for worthy students. 

7. The principal's knowledge of the nature and degree 
of curriculum enrichment being carried on in the 
school. 

8. The administrative devices used by the authorities 
in the education of the gifted. 

9. The nature and extent of in-service training carried 
on in the school which relates to the education of 
the gifted. 

10. The supervisory personnel available for assisting the 
teachers of the gifted, and the nature of the assist¬ 
ance they render. 

11. The evaluation of the effectiveness of teachers of 
the gifted. 

12. The use made by the school of community resources 
in meeting the needs of gifted students enrolled at 
the school. 


(b) Information from the guidence co-ordinator 

At least one guidance official in each school was inter¬ 
viewed by the investigator. The questions asked related to the following: 

1. The measuring devices used by the guidance depart¬ 
ment . 

2. The schedule of testing and measurements. 

3. The availability of guidance records. 

4. The degree of special guidance available to the 
gifted. 

5. The nature of any studies of the gifted undertaken 
by the guidance department. 

6. The nature of routine guidance interviews. 

(c) Information from the selected students 

The selected students in each school were interviewed 
as a group. Each student received the question sheets and, following a brief 
introduction and explanation of the nature of the research and the value of their 
contributions, the students were invited to answer the questions. They were urg¬ 
ed to answer honestly and fully, and were requested to ask the investigator to 
clarify any questions which they were unable to understand. 




::is* • 3 ..'. 












X . 

.. . ; . . . ..... • ■ - - i'-i ■■■■"■ 

: . J 

. ••• . s - •••• '• - • ■ 

» „• ./ i .Jd ■ J --•*-> 

« 

■ 

: 


........ - . .. .. .. 3 ->■ • . 

.... ... O. • .,.y i) , a'3 QXUaBtHp '■ 

- 

. : 

... - l 

: 

• - : - ■ ' • • 

.. . .. ... 

i.j—■ i 3 . '.-=..1 fnoy:>- it .: ■ 

. .;. . i yi::-... .. IT 

.... . 1 

; 

. . fA 


(*•; 

. 


(o 








5 


The questions related to the following: 

1. The student's association with the guidance depart¬ 
ment . 

2. Subject likes and dislikes. 

3. Time spent on school studies outside of school hours. 

4. Participation in extracurricular activities and awards. 

5. The qualities they most desire in their teachers. 

6. The degree to which they use the school's library 
facilities. 

7. The student's opinions concerning the adequacy of the 
library. 

8. Involvement in individual and 'small group' projects. 

9. Liking for school. 

10. The student's opinion concerning whether or not the 
school restricts his interests. 

11. ‘ The student's opinion on whether or not the school is 

overworking him and underworking him. 

12. Involvement in community organizations. 

13. Leadership in the community. 

14. The extent to which the school has helped the student 
to make use of community resources in satisfying his 
interests. 


(3) Information by means of questionnaires (See appendix A) 

Two devices were developed for gathering data from the teachers 
of the gifted. The first attempted to get information from the teachers which 
would enable the investigator to draw conclusions on the important matter of 
whether or not the teachers know who their gifted students are. 

The second device was the major questionnaire. It was given 
to each of the teachers of the selected group of grade twelve students. It 
contained eighteen questions having to do with the following: 

1. The teacher's use of guidance facilities as an aid 
in teaching and understanding his gifted students. 

2. The teacher's opinion concerning the adequacy of 
the guidance facilities. 

3. The teacher's conception of the ideal way for a 
school to educate its gifted. 

4. Obstacles which prevent the teacher from doing all 
that he might wish to do for his gifted class membeES. 


9«.‘ vO ItilO.. j iw : ■ . 4* 

. ... • * 

„ ....... . .... 'jSr-iJLJ. - ; '• 

. . . : .. . - . - - • 

. ■ ... 

. 


.. , . . .... ~ . ■ . 

, . ... . . ■" . 

. _•. „ ;; 'J j- ... -j-.-.-j „ .-. 



- . . : 

: -v_ ;. 










6 


5. The degree to which the teacher reads professional 
literature dealing with the education of gifted youth 

6. The nature and extent of curriculum enrichment prac¬ 
ticed by the teacher. 

7. The teacher's opinion concerning the adequacy of the 
library and laboratory facilities and amount of extra¬ 
curricular activities. 

8. The teacher's participation in curriculum revision. 

9. The degree of involvement in in-service training which 
relates to the education of gifted youth. 

10. The extent of evaluation by the administration of the 
teacher's effectiveness as a teacher of the gifted. 

(4) The actual gathering of the data 

By the end of April, the writer had formulated and printed the 
data-gathering devices; he had spent time in the Examinations Branch of the Depart¬ 
ment of Education getting the names of the subjects of the study. Between May 4th 
and 22nd he had visited the following composite high schools in Alberta: Lethbridge, 
Medicine Hat, Crescent Heights and Western Canada (Calgary), Lindsay Thurber 
(Red Deer), and Victoria, Strathcona and Eastglen (Edmonton). While at each school, 
the writer interviewed the principal, guidance official and the selected students, 
and he gathered the necessary information from the permanent record cards. The 
questionaire developed to gather data concerning the teachers' knowledge of who 
their gifted are was administered before the teachers had a chance to learn who 
the selected students were. The other questionnaire was left with the principal 
of each school, to be given out by him and after a reasonable length of time (one 
week) collected by him and forwarded to the writer in Edmonton. 

5. Limitations and Strengths of the Study 
(1) Limitations 

Perhaps the major weakness is to be found in the means by which 
the data was gathered. Pertinent information was found in permanent records in 
the composite high schools and the Provincial Department of Education. In addition, 
pertinent information was needed from the school principals, guidance officials, 


ii i. a 3 oix • „ 

- 

... ... ±ao3x» '~>z& amrtzm -vaX ,o 

. - • 

. Bss.i ..-■: : rs x&xm ii/x'j' 

j- ....... .„■■... ...:. ..:. " ..a zz : 3 

’ •• ' ' • 

- ... V... ...... J :: . .......3 a 3-3 ;3 33 3.;fi' A33 V. 3.3SJ3i3 Si 3 a . J 

. .... ( ) 

JL-3;iB3^arcol '*>&.•- . ,,;?1a3 3 x xX'iqX .cjjs 

. art; . . -- . . 

» - - . I, . ....■■ . 

. . . ....... . . ...\. i . -. SjiiuO'y.. - 33. 'C....'. -3 tux ri....... / ., i, .4 3 . . .>-. 13 . 

-■■ k( ) 3 3;,.- , - . ... . ...... ... J : , .3. .JO'A 

• ( , .. . - • -' ... . 3 . . . . : ^; . ; .. . ; ^ ( . 3 ) 

- - ••' ;.-3 ■ 3... . - 33:.. 3 . _ ^ .3, . 33.J.33 3 3)33 - J/;3. ... _,.;33'v 3- :3 

• ■ - - -33 ..333 - 3 . 3 . 3 . . 3i .33 3.3 3 ' , ’ .3 . . 3 ) .1 .. .. . 3 . . ; 'j., . .... 3 

: . ■ ' :3 .3’ ... - ... .... 3.. ... . ■/... ... ... . ,-v , . 3. .. J 3 . 


- - --- -- ■ - - ‘ - -. ' 3- .... -sli i33£ '.33...... 33 3 

■ .. 3 . .... . . , . . ... .33 

- - -- ... . _ . . 3 , '..3 - ■- - -■ 33 3 

- - 3 3, ", .3. .. ... 3 .. . 3 .. . 3 ( . 3 3 


; 33 .3 . ,..3. 3 ' 

... 3 ( .) 

■ - - : - ' ‘ 3 _.33 a ~ .3. -. 3; 

.. 

■ 

<■ 3 ■ 3. 3 : ' ; . • •- ■’ 



7 

the selected students, and their teachers. The information these people poss¬ 
essed was available only through the use of questionnaire and interview tech¬ 
niques. The investigator was faced with the problem of eliciting opinions, 
attitudes, expectations, memories, and motives. 

Principals, guidance coordinators, and the selected students were 
interviewed. It was hoped this means of data-gathering would result in more 
cooperation from the subjects than would have been achieved through the use 
of questionnaires. This approach also made it possible for the investigator 
to explain questions whenever subjects could not understand them. 

Admittedly the results from the interviews were difficult to analyze 
and to some extent the investigator's bias may have been introduced in the 
analysis of responses. There was an attempt made to overcome the operation 
of bias in the interpretation of answers by setting up as many categories 
as were needed to include all answers given„...without having to force replies 
into categories. 

In many instances the responses did not lend themselves readily to 
statistical analysis. This was because the investigator attempted to be as 
non-directive as possible in influencing the remarks and responses of the 
subjects. 

The investigator did not carry out a pilot run to determine the 
objectivity and clarity of questions as well as their reliability and validity. 
This very important weakness was overcome to some degree insofar as the invest¬ 
igator was available in the interview situation to clarify any doubts of the 
subjects concerning the meanings of questions. In the few questions that need¬ 
ed clarification from school to school, the investigator was careful to give a 
consistent response. 


- 










. 


-• - . 







oB 




. 








8 


In the development of the teachers' questionnaires the investigator 
found it very difficult to formulate questions that would result in easily 
tabulated answers and still leave teachers free to express their opinions, 
attitudes, and memories concerning that which they were doing in the education 
of their gifted students. 

An attempt was made to formulate specific questions that would avoid 
the possibility of vague answers. There was an attempt made to develop clear 
questions so that the questioner's intent would be easily understood. There 
was an attempt made to have questions that were easily answerable in terms of 
the subjects' experience. 

The investigator realizes that he presented teachers with a lengthy 
questionnaire which may have strained the good will of some of the respondents. 

To make it as easy to answer as possible only approximate answers were required; 
no questions were asked the answers to which were to be found in school records; 
the respondents were not required to identify themselves; terms open to a variety 
of interpretations were defined; as often as possible the investigator listed 
allowable answers and the teachers were able to vote, and there was a space left 
for 'others' so as not to restrict the answers of teachers; the questionnaire's 
purpose was outlined in a letter to the teachers and their cooperation was sol¬ 
icited in terms of the contribution they would be making to education in Alberta 
composite high schools. 

The objectivity, clarity, reliability, and validity of the device were 
adversely affected in that there was no preliminary try out or pilot run. The 
following considerations may also have had an adverse affect on the above: the 
data was of an 'attitude' nature in many respects; it tended to be subjective 
and personal in many respects. On the other hand, the investigator got inform- 




3 ...: ±ou % , 1 b .c 3-ii' ::o SnSi.c o..'cvs.. s..*j n.'_ 


:s . ..... . :i;-:. . . 


: . . . 








. . 


: 




. , ... 

- 

.... 


. 


i . i 


. b- ,■, 








2 . . 


. 




9 


ation and opinions from the persons in the best position to give the results of 
their first-hand experience in the education of gifted students in Alberta comp¬ 
osite high schools. 

Another important limitation is perhaps pointed up by the question, 
"Were the selected students in fact gifted students?" The subjects were select¬ 
ed in terms of their high rating on a group intelligence test given to them when 
they were in Grade IX. Their names appeared in the upper three percentiles on 
the Dominion IQ test. The results of this test were the only ones available 
which were given generally to Grade IX students. This was the only available 
data which would give the investigator the information needed without under¬ 
taking an intelligence testing programme of Grade XII students. 

While there are authorities who refuse to accept high IQ rating 
(especially from a group intelligence test) as an indication of giftedness, 
the investigator found support for the contention that an IQ test is the single 
most reliable means of selecting students with high intellectual ability. 

In addition, there are those who define giftedness to include much 
more than high intellectual endowment. To get around this difficulty the 
investigator defined giftedness 'for the purposes of the study' as high general 
intelligence. It was assumed that there exists a positive correlation between 
high mental ability and achievement in the academic areas and also the non-ac¬ 
ademic areas such as the fine arts, and social leadership. 

(2) Strengths of the Study 

One of the major strengths of the study is that in getting 
information concerning the education of gifted students in Alberta composite 
high schools, the investigator dealt with those parties most directly connected 
with the problem and those who, therefore, were in a position to give first-hand 













. 




<. 


■.at.. 1 ■£-■ 


(: - 


~) 




iC 


i-JC - . ..!;■ . ... 




t ■ L - - - 


. 



.. . . 




(:) 


- - . : . . 














10 


information» 

Table I shows that the investigator worked with approximately 
70 per cent of the probable number of gifted Grade XII students. 

The investigator had the names of 127 teachers of the selected 
students. The questionnaire return from this group was 78, or about 61 per 
cent. The teachers represented the following subjects: English, social stud¬ 
ies, science, chemistry, biology, physics, algebra, trigonometry, English Lit¬ 
erature and Language, psychology, art, drama, and the Grade XII commercial 
subjects. 

The investigator completely sampled the composite high school 
principals and guidance officials. 

A second strength of the study lies in the fact that, before 
the investigator determined the so-called criteria of a good secondary school 
programme for gifted students, he constructed a conceptual framework on the 
basis of a survey of related literature. The investigator believed that in 
order to evaluate current composite high school practices involving gifted 
students it was necessary to provide something against which the practices 
could be judged. Therefore, approximately one half the study was given over 
to the development of a frame of reference within which the investigator could 
proceed to evaluate current secondary school policies involving gifted students. 

The survey was made at a time when interest in the education of 
superior students was running relatively high across Canada. A national conf¬ 
erence on education, the ’’Sputnik" challenge of Russian education, articles in 
secular magazines, and an increasing awareness on the part of university offic¬ 
ials and teachers in general of the importance of revising the mathematics- 
science curriculums in secondary schools in order to teach up-to-date concepts, 
all these led the writer to believe that administrators, teachers and students 









: 

^ - 


<. : - 












c 


i 


K~ 








. 


< - 





: 




. 




... . . . . ;-;o . . 





.O: : . 1 t: 









11 


would be more willing to take part in the survey than might otherwise have been 
the case without widespread interest in gifted students. 

The writer hopes that as a result of the survey administrators 
and teachers alike will have, at least to some degree, an increased awareness 
of the importance of the problem of providing gifted students with the kind of 
education calculated to meet their needs. 

Now that the field is open, the writer hopes further studies 
will be made concerning the education of gifted students in Alberta composite 


high schools. 




: 

: I . .. 3: . -■ f«P .yj : as 

: ■ ■ 

- - ■ 


.. ; 0 . . / 
















.Y OF TEE SAMPLE OF SELECTED STUDENTS FOUND IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE 


P I 

0) r-4 CO 

aj 4-1 









g co p 









p a> 









Z 4-4 X) 









o P 









a) -i-i 

r-* 

00 

43 

00 

00 


O 

CM 

Probabl 
(total) 
ected S 

CM 

r-H 

i — 1 

CM 

CM 

CM 

rH 

i-4 

4-1 









O Xl 









CD 









S-4 4-1 

CD O 

<1* 

■p- 


m 

00 

r4 

OO 

CM 

43 CD CO 






1-4 



d i— 1 4-1 

II 

ii 

II 

ii 

ii 

II 

ii 

II 

P CD p 





00 

ON 



z: CO CD 

in 

o 

oo 

ON 

i — l 

1—4 

CM 

00 

X) 

m 

r—1 

in 

ON 

r-4 

r-4 

m 

CM 

CD X) P 
i—1 p 44 

44 

44 

44 

44 

44 

44 

44 

44 

43 p CO 

O 

O 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

P O 

43 44 

5-2 

fi -2 

5-2 

6-2 

5-2 

5-2 

5-2 

5-2 

o p 

P p) 

P4 

00 


P-. 

m 

I-. 

ON 

m 

r-- 


P 

o 

,p 

u 

•H x) 
£ U 
O 

CO o 
44 cd 
P Pi 
a) 

x) o* 
P M 

4-1 

c/3 


p 

CD M 
M 

6 X 


CO 

S CD pi 
xt P 
t— i cd a) 
P P x) 
POP 

4-1 pi 
CJ 4-4 CO 
<d O 


P 4-1 


X) 

p 

CO O 
PI o 
P <u 
CD C£j 
X5 

p ,p 

4-1 

<D CO *H 

p4 rs 


P CO 
•H X) 

p 

00 P 

P O 


K O 
U 

O' 0) 

M PP 


P 

CD X) 

JP CD 
g 4-1 CO 

P O PJ 

a oj p 

i—I 0) 

r4 CD Xl 
P CO p 
P 4-1 
4-1 4-1 CO 

o o 

c 


oo 

ON 

CM 

O 

CM 

00 

oo 

CM 

0O 

in 

r-4 

NO 

oo 


CM 

<± 

4t 

CM 


44 -r4 


00 

m 

ON 

\—i 

ON 

P PI 

XI 


CM 

r~- 

m 

ON 

CD P 

p 

CM 

OO 

l—1 

CO 

CM 


o o o 

o o o 

r-4 CM CO 


O O O 

O O O 

vO r-> oo 


11a 


Total 117 1879 2502 623 41 158 
















- 




;o i >■ 










' 





V ^ 













!E !! 

!! 

























































■ i-3 

- 

tO 




' 
























' 













































■ 


























CHAPTER II 


SURVEY OF THE LITERATURE 


1. Defining Giftedness 

The literature manifests no common definition of 'giftedness'. How¬ 
ever, one is able to distinguish two relatively clear centers-of-thought. One 
supports a broad definition which includes as gifted anyone who displays 
superior achievement in any of a number of socially useful fields of endeavor. 

The other supports a narrower definition which is, for the most part, concern¬ 
ed with 'intellectuality' and the potential of an individual for high achieve¬ 
ment in this area. 

In Terman's study of the gifted, the standard set for inclusion in the 
group was approximately 140 IQ on the Stanford Binet Intelligence Test. Terman 
says, "the standard set was purely arbitrary and was merely intended to insure 
that subjects admitted to the group would rate within the highest one per cent 
in general intelligence as measured by the tests used." (1) 

Similarly, Laycock associates giftedness with high general intelligence. 

On the basis of Spearman's theory of intelligence, he argues that it is made up 
of some critical factor which underlies any creative experience. Accordingly, 
high achievement in academic subjects, in music, in the arts or in mechanics is 
attributable basically to one's general intelligence. He defines a gifted child 
as one believed to have high intellectual endowment, whether or not he is current¬ 
ly using his creative ability. (2) 

In her work with the gifted, Hollingworth defined them as those in the 
upper one per cent of the population in intelligence, and she claimed general 
intelligence to be an ability to abstract symbols, a power to work with ideas. 



: . . . 

.. C . 

i. ,.ir. ,;r .v : .i :. i o: ^dsvo 

...... i: . - ■- - .... 

. l: - .:.... io v: wz -0 : :3 m* n . . •. ^ zr - 

.. 

j. ;..v .: :. -. ; /.£ : ' -/Si..- ?■} • r ? ..iiiv k& 

.: ... ..: : asm 

lb:: 3 s : v :• 2>: \ r: . t 5 nsmrjL 7 zT 

- £■; c 1;. 1 ...1 ...•;.. , I Cii■., vis. cc* cuoi,§ 

. . .... . w i ~ .: \ zz-. .- 

SI'.i. ..V:;r 'J • ;' S 7 o: i 3i'l" Xili ,-Z v..~ .. -7el 


( ' , . 3 , ... . ... ....... ..... 







13 


She was convinced that success of a scholastic nature depended upon so-called 
general intelligence. (3) 

The other center of thought is expressed by Witty^ He questions the 
acceptability of an IQ test as a device which validly and reliably measures 
one's ability to meet problem situations and successfully overcome them through 
one's originality and creativity. He equates intelligence with an adaptive 
power of the individual to successfully meet sudden and unusual demands. He 
says that this kind of ability is the kind of intelligence the world is most 
concerned about. (4) 

In these terms, Witty is able to define as gifted "any child whose 
performance is consistently remarkable in any potentially valuable area." (5) 

There are those who point out the need to broaden the definition of 
'giftedness', and who suggest the word 'talented' describes a capacity for 
outstanding achievement which more clearly conveys concern with a number of 
superior abilities. To them 'gifted' is a limited definition since it connotes 
high intellectual endowment only. (6) Bristow and others discuss how gifted¬ 
ness may be characterized by either a high level of general intelligence as 
measured by intelligence tests, or by special abilities which are not necess¬ 
arily associated with a high IQ. Thus, the definition of giftedness may include 
a much greater percentage than one per cent. It may include up to ten out of 
every hundred if individuals have the opportunities which enable the development 
of their talents. (7) 

It is pointed out by Strang that if we accept the broad definition "we 
include not only high performance on IQ tests but also creative talent in an 
almost unlimited range of socially useful endeavor." (3) She argues that special 










( 


t ■ 




'll c - 


/ : . 


j 


i-:m '$■ 


.. a _... •' ■ - - : • 


a a . 





to btxl?< 3. «:i 



H •- 


; 


( 


. 



















( ) 


. 3 . 


. ' ,..i aO.. 


..r.jr;j 








<1 


ii; 


•3 . ,TS. 





14 


talent is usually associated with above average intellectual ability. (9) 

One of the most recent views expressed on the subject is that of 
Dellaan and Havighurst. They distinguish between first-order and second-order 
giftedness. The first-order gifted are the 'extremely gifted 1 who appear in 
the upper one-tenth of one per cent of the general population in a given ability; 
the second-order gifted are those in the upper ten per cent in a given ability. 
They use the term 'gifted children' to denote those who appear in the upper ten 
per cent category. (10) This writer recognizes that definitions are made for 
man rather than man for definitions; that categories are determined to meet the 
needs of the situation at hand. Therefore, for the purposes of this study, the 
writer, in line with the thinking of Terman, Laycock and Hollingworth, defines 
giftedness as high general intelligence as measured by intelligence tests. The 
gifted subjects in this study are students who achieved a score on the Dominion 
Intelligence Test which placed them in the upper three per cent of the juvenile 
population in intellectual ability. It is assumed, from the results of the test, 
that these subjects have a high degree of ability to work with abstract ideas, 
and because they have a high general intelligence they are also likely to be 
talented in other fields such as fine arts, music, social relations and mechanics. 
2. The Aims of Education of the Gifted 

There are relatively few gifted youth in the juvenile population. Think¬ 
ing of giftedness as high intellectual endowment one can say that only one in 
every hundred tests at or above 130 on the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Test. The 
broader definition may include up to ten per cent of any given ability. From 
either point of view there is a limited number of gifted youth. 

Recognizing this important fact, Hollingworth asked the question, 'What 










. 










: 








. 




: 








. - 






- 







15 


does society want from these persons?' What does society aim for in the educ¬ 
ation of the gifted? These are the persons who can do those things that the 
rest of the population, by definition, will never be able to do. These are the 
persons who are in a position to learn over and above anything learned by those 
who test below them. (11) 

In an attempt to outline the aims of education for the gifted, DeHaan 
and Havighurst suggest three essential goals for any worthy program: discovery, 
development, and utilization. They say: 

Discovery is necessary because much potential talent goes 
unrecognized. Development is necessary because no complex 
ability will evolve of its own accord. Gifted children must 
be motivated and shown how to develop their talents. Utiliz¬ 
ation is necessary because this is the social and individual 
justification for the discovery and development of talent. (12) 

In developing giftedness, the American Association For Gifted Children 
says there has been formulated a concept of the best culture medium for gifted¬ 
ness. By 'culture medium \ they mean that at each stage of a gifted student's 
development he needs to be surrounded by an environment which will enable him 
to develop his potential to the fullest extent. Without the culture medium 
being provided, giftedness may be slow in developing or inhibited altogether.(13) 
Discussing the aims of education for the gifted, the National Society 
for the Study of Education agrees that the aims of education for the gifted are 
the same as for other children. But they go on to say that there must be greater 
emphasis placed on developing the gifted student's creative ability, on stimul¬ 
ating him to take the intellectual initiative, on developing his ability to do 
critical thinking, on his need for social adjustment, on his need to take social 
responsibility and develop unselfish leadership qualities. (14) 



( 













( 





: . 




v 

<• 









( 


j 








16 


Similarly, Passow outlines the aims in such a way that American sec¬ 
ondary schools would become resource pools of highly able, liberally educated 
youth. The gifted especially would be high consumers of the American cultural 
heritage. They would develop ethical standards because of the school's under¬ 
standing of them and its opportunity to socialize them. (15) 

The kind of education that suits the needs of the gifted is outlined 
by Laycock. It is the kind that interests and challenges them to develop 
generalized habits of thinking and studying. It challenges them to acquire 
a broad background of knowledge and to form particular individually and soc¬ 
ially valuable attitudes and appreciations. In the development of these ideas, 
Laycock urges schools to plan experiences and provide adequate guidance so that 
the gifted will use their abilities to develop habits which will prove valuable 
to them and to society. The gifted should be challenged by the nature of their 
education to acquire a broad background of knowledge concerning the history of 
civilization which will prove important to them as the raw material out of which 
their later creativity develops. This author believes that the schools should 
expecially aim to develop in the gifted an attitude of integrity, the ability 
to reasonably get along with others, a general mental health, and an understand¬ 
ing of the rich rewards awaiting them in the world of the arts and in nature. (16) 
3. Criticisms of the Current Education of the Gifted 

The implications of findings of research carried on by the United 
States Office of Scientific Personnel of the National Research Council are that 
there is a considerable loss of potential talent occurring throughout the educ¬ 
ational system. Hattery suggests the following reasons for this situation: 

(1) There is a slowing up by schools of the mental development 
of talented students to such a degree that it effectively 












17 


blocks recognition and development of their talents. 

(2) Talented students are eliminated from schools in a number of 
cases. 

(3) There develops with many talented students interests and train¬ 
ing away from fields of higher learning. 

(4) There is a lack of influence of high school teachers on talented 
students to continue their education. (17) 

While admitting that some talented individuals emerge in spite of a 
lack of recognition or guidance, Passow and others argue that there are many 
more who might develop if they were provided with the proper educational pro¬ 
grams and guidance. According to these authors: 

Surveys indicate how little some schools are doing for 
the intellectually gifted, about whose characteristics and 
learning patterns a great deal is already known. Even less 
attention has sometimes been given to the needs of youngsters 
with outstanding ability in art, music, creative writing, 
drama, social leadership, mechanics, or in a specific academic 
area such as mathematics, science or language. (18) 


Probably not half of those individuals who show youthful promise 
as gifted children achieve in adulthood the success their potential would 
permit. (19) 

In one American study it is estimated that less than half of the upper 
25 per cent of all high school graduates earn degrees from colleges. The 
reason given for this state of affairs, in part at least, is that "the bright* 
est youth do not secure the education that would enable them to work at levels 
for which they are potentially qualified. 1 ' (20) 

In all probability this situation exists in Canada as well. In support 
of this statement there is evidence which shows that at least half the students 
with IQ's above one hundred never finish their secondary education. Two reasons 









. 

. 


2 




L 





. 


( 




•' ' '' - . " • - - - 




( 














18 


given for this situation, reasons which reflect on the schools, are the nature 
of the school curriculum and lack of recognition of superior students. (21) 

Clarke found that fifteen per cent of the students who started school 
in 1939 (in grade one) passed out of grade twelve, and only three percent went 
on to University, with two per cent graduating. (22) 

Similarly, in a Toronto study by Jackson it was found that nearly fifty 
per cent of the students with IQ's 115 and above never complete secondary school. 
Of the group that remain to receive their high school diplomas, only one out of 
three enter university. Qf the students who receive their high school diplomas 
and have an IQ of 130 or above, only four out of ten go on to university. (23) 
Laycock claims that, in the main, the gifted in Canadian schools do not 
achieve in accordance with their abilities. Many have poor study habits and do 
not think deeply and critically. Many hold scholarship in disrepute. Such are 
the conditions which prevent the gifted from making use of their abilities. 
Laycock says, "There is accumulating evidence both of the great need our nation 
has for the contributions of its gifted boys and girls and of its failure to 
encourage the development of such children." (24) 

Apparently, gifted students are unchallenged by the school programs in 
which they find themselves. School to them is uninteresting. In a large num¬ 
ber of the gifted the school has been unable to create the desire to carry on 
with their education. 

There are studies which show that the subject matter in academic classes 
as it is provided in regular classes in not challenging to gifted students. (25) 
Witty states, "The gifted child is offered little that is challenging in the 















- - .'• . ... 




( • - - . . . 




'i. 


















19 


typical elementary school and the neglect is even greater in the high school. M (26) 
Strang states that when schools do not provide 'suitable experiences' 
gifted students are prevented from achieving full intellectual and social stature. 
She contends that intelligence 'unfolds' in response to experiences designed to 
help it do so. The school's responsibility is to provide those experiences for 
the gifted which will 'unfold' their capabilities. She discusses some of the 
conditions which prevent growth: ''....a curriculum that has no meaning, use or 
purpose for the child; a high school environment which causes the high school 
adolescent to suppress his real intellectual interests and avoid getting high 
marks in order to be accepted by his classmates." (27) 

Terman asks the question, 'What are the non-intellectual factors that 
affect success in school life?' From his studies of the gifted he is able to 
answer that holding a gifted student at the educational level of the average 
students results in a loss of enthusiasm for school and school studies. Such 
retardation affects the student's motivation and adjustment in an adverse 
manner. He says, "For the gifted it does matter that the pace is set so largely 
by dull minds. The inhibiting effect of slow or stupid learners upon quick or 
bright ones seems to be almost a uiiversal law among the social animals." (20) 

Over and above general criticism of current practices in the education 
of gifted children and youth, there has been direct criticism of the education 

of the gifted in comprehensive-type secondardy schools. Passow has consolidated 

' 

some of the most common of these criticisms: 

(1) Such schools fail to get many of the brightest youth to go on 
to college and advanced training. 

(2) Guidance and educational procedures fall short in motivating 
able youth when judged according to two criteria: the number 
of gifted youth working up to capacity; and, the number who 
will go on to college. 


■ 









20 


(3V The educational process in American schools lacks the quality 
found in European schools, and as a consequence, gifted youth 
suffer. 

(4) The comprehensive high school program is watered down, frag¬ 
mentized, and incohesive» Courses are. thinned to make them 
palatable to students neither academically inclined nor 
college bound.(29) 

4. Administration and Staff Recognition of the Special Needs of Gifted Students 
(1) Organizational Adaptations 

A decision to provide for the gifted a challenging educational program 
implies organizational changes in the school's administrative system. Of course, 
there is no 'one-and-only' pattern of administrative organization or pattern of 
educational program for gifted children and youth. However, a program will appear 
in response to the degree to which the school capitalizes on the particular local 
situation in which it is located and in response to the extent to which administ¬ 
rators and teachers are willing and able to provide the curriculum which best 
suits the needs of gifted students. 

Weglein discusses the general problems faced by school administrators 
who decide to plan a program for the education of their gifted students. To begin 
with, there is the problem of identifying those students to be served by such a 
program. Secondly, there is the problem of deciding whether they shall be taught 
in regular classes or in segregated classes. Thirdly, a decision must be made as 
to whether or not they shall be accelerated or be provided with an enriched curr¬ 
iculum. Fourthly, the nature and the scope of the curriculum must be determined, 
and the manner in which teachers will bring together students and curriculum. 
Fifthly, the administration must be prepared to face problems in articulation 
between the elementary, junior .high, and high school levels. In the sixth place, 





21 


they must decide on what basis the teachers of the gifted are to be selected. 

They must be teachers with adequate experience and the appropriate training, 
academically and professionally. Obviously all teachers are not equally effect¬ 
ive with the gifted; therefore, some means of selection will have to be devised 
to get those teachers best fitted to teach the gifted. Finally, the administ¬ 
rators will face difficulties in convincing school board members and the public 
in general of the soundness of any extra finances that will be required to insure 
the success of the programme, at least from the viewpoint of supplying the nec¬ 
essary facilities. (30) 

(The estimated cost of educating the gifted amounts to approximately 
one to three per cent of the total school budget.) (31) 

DeHaan and Havighurst would add some further considerations to this 
above list: administrators must get the cooperation of all those who will be 
involved in the program; they need to carefully plan the role of the guidance 
department in such a program; ideally, there should be a program-coordinator 
for the education of the gifted and a faculty committee, the function of which 
would be to represent the viewpoint of the teachers concerning the program; 
administrators will need to make provision for periodic evaluations and improve¬ 
ments of the program. (32) 

(2) Identification 

Today high schools are characterized by a student body displaying 
a wide range of individual differences. This is especially true of comprehensive 
schools called in Alberta composite high schools. These schools developed as a 
means of enabling school administrators and teachers to provide for the variety 
of interests, aptitudes, and abilities brought to the secondary schools by inc¬ 
reasing numbers of students who have decided to carry on with their education 


past the elementary school level. 




. 






( (•- 




(S 


: 


( ) 






. 






22 


For any school interested in adequately meeting the needs of its 
students, "the chief problem is to separate the individual pupil from the mass 
and take steps to afford him every opportunity for the best of educational 
facilities that it is possible to provide." (33) 

Thus, if a school is to meet adequately the needs of its gifted 
students it must identify them and the nature of their 'gifts'. 

"This task of making better use of superior ability can be divided 
into two parts, namely, finding those of superior ability and educating them 
properly." (34) 

In terms of the broad definition of giftedness the school is 
responsible for devising a means of identification which will as accurately 
as possible measure actual and potential achievement in a wide variety of areas. 

Passow and others discuss the various components of 'talent' which 
they consider should be assessed in any complete program of identification. 

They suggest talent is made up of intelligence (general and specific), critical 
judgment, creative ability, academic and non-academic aptitudes. Within the 
scope of non-academic aptitudes they consider such things as musical, artistic, 
and dramatic potential, as well as aptitude for human relations and mechanical 
aptitude. (35) 

Obviously, in undertaking the kind of identification program implied 
by the broad definition of giftedness or talent, the traditional means of select¬ 
ion by intelligence tests is inadequate. Witty says, close association between 
high IQ and creativity is no longer unequivocally held. (36) 


Even those authorities who define 'gifted' with major emphasis on 


c-~ .0 i.' 


sm : 


.. .■ V- ‘ - 


- ■ . 


.. .. . : • • j o ~v ‘ r ■ 91*3 £0 S'- 

;;; 9 liZ Hie -• .. - ... 

: . ' : 

( ' ’ - 

•_ t 1.00 

: ■ - . ■. ■' 

... 


' • - 




. 




. . 


* B: £ 


i 




....... ...... • . 1 .. - 

.. 3 .... .. . ■ : ■■ ; - ' 

; l.3C 13 ” . 

^-l • : —s n,: ks^mz.i 5* b!jso:lz -o', 

) - • • 

- <, . • ■ . 

. . . - . - 2 i . : 

( ■ : 


*( 






. , 


. .. 

s* s:; - 

o - j ::i 

■ 


.. 



: . . - rii 

: . 

: . . . ;" .u-J: 




23 


high general intelligence insist upon identifying practices being something more 
than decisions based on the results of IQ tests. For example, Laycock says, 

(A gifted child should be selected for training only on the basis of all avail ¬ 
able data , not merely on the basis of an IQ obtained from group tests of mental 
ability. M (37) 

He suggests a planned search carried out on four fronts: (1) an 
active search for gifted students by individual teachers; (2) discussion in 
staff conference of those who may be gifted pupils in the school; (3) a talent- 
scout or gifted children committee of the teaching staff; (4) close cooperation 
with parents. Of course, he assumes in his discussion of a planned search for 
the gifted, that all those involved (administrators, teachers, and parents) will 
have sufficient knowledge of what they are attempting to do to insure that the 
results are based as much as possible on objective findings. (38) 

The American Association For Gifted Children supports the following 
means of identification: mental tests, aptitude tests, reports of parents, 
reports of teachers and other professional workers, age-grade status, school 
accomplishment, and achievement tests. Commenting on each of these means of 
identification they believe that the most effective single device for selecting 
gifted students is the mental test. Aptitude tests are helpful in that they 
throw light on the nature of one's abilities when interpreted by competent 
persons. The reports of teachers and parents may prove helpful, but it is 
important to remember that such persons tend to be subjectively biased about 
certain children in an altogether unwarranted manner. Age-grade status, because 
of present administrative practices is of little use now as a selection device. 
Standardized achievements tests do a better job of identifying the gifted than 
do teachers' marks. (39) 











:• ..(30 3 


: ■ x n . • ' ' - - ■ 

. v * ... - .a: 31080*1 3d; a ' 

a. : ^ - • 

.... . :. ^ . ' . cs. . 3.3 u'3 •:''£’ do.* 


( "•) 




A) 


£3 3.1; £ 


y. . y. .. '. y:. y-> .-3... 

. ( ; . . . • - ■ ■ 

( ) . , . ;. .. . : • . . . V • i ■ ' ^ - 

( ' ■ ......... ......... ■ . . ; . y ;. j< • a 

• - • 

. i : . ,-. ;. . . .. / ) . • y> : • 3 : ..r. 3*#.u3 J £>d3 

isszai o3 . . - • - 

( ' .' . .yy.A;,/ ' " yy\y no 3 141 3 a or £S domu 83 b90ftd :& Ziluz&X. 

; . : : • 


^; ;...; ;. . yyy t g3S' ? rcy ..yyy ; :.,y...c >. ~ 'x&iiOSSfj- 3, a^Tbq&l 

. y y rr . ' : .y:.** y • 3 , . . xz‘..> -*••• 

.A • . . - ... . . - . : .. . . . . 

: . .. . - . - . . 

.... . ‘ . . . - . .. . ■ - 

. :■ - - yy.ya .yyyyyy- . ,.v.3 y.. yy:' to yjy.yyy .: .ro,y..y;q 

A ' .. .>. 33 £•' : ; .;y : :.: y;y •/:><; A:; •;?. f c;;J 3 aa3*XO«f«l 

t - . ' .. . . : . 3 . . y . . . .'.... :>;* Is .... .. ~tdo i 3£3 


- - ... . .. ....... _ ; . . . 

( " • - 








24 


Instruments for measuring talents in fields other than that of mental 
ability are few in number, and for the most part have not proved completely satis¬ 
factory. Therefore it remains for local schools to develop ways and means of 
presenting opportunities for all their students to take part in activities and 
be judged by competent individuals as to whether they show extraordinary achieve¬ 
ment or potential for such achievement if given the chance to develop. For 
example, in art, music or drama, schools should provide for the participation of 
students in activities where they may be judged as gifted or not gifted. Stud¬ 
ent government, club activities and athletic programmes should enable students 
to take part in developing social leadership skills. Such considerations as 
these are necessary when giftedness is defined broadly. 

An identification program which aims to discover all the talented 
youth who deserve an enriched curriculum and special facilities demands consider¬ 
able planning and organizing on the part of the school's administrators. 

(3) A Challenging Curriculum 

Observers generally agree, once interested, gifted students desire 
to have their capacities challenged. (40) And so it appears that the problem 
for school administrators is that of providing the kind of curriculum and extra¬ 
class experiences which will challenge them to fulfill their promise, working 
up to capacity in the program provided for their best development. 

In accord with this line of thinking, Conant says, "There must be 
courses of different difficulty and different method in secondary schools." (41) 

He opposes the idea of placing the quick and the slow together in classes where 
the ones are held back and the others are pushed beyond their capacities. He 
says, "The criterion for membership (in school courses) should be neither a 
student's intention in life, nor his background, nor the kind of diploma for 



- 




1 


. 




- 








- ■ - 








- 


J- . .'. i ... ■ - 


( ) 


- .. • •: . : : ■' 1 • - ' : •- - ■ •• - ; " 


• . ... . . ' ( > . ■ . . ; . .■ : . C:. 

; . ; .. . ; . . , . . 






( 




. ( 




. 

. : i i 






25 


which he is aiming, but simply whether or not a given course is best for him.... 
which is to say a criterion of ability." (42) 

If the majority of present day secondary schools on the North Amer¬ 
ican continent decide to offer their gifted students a challenging curriculum, 

it will be necessary to answer some pertinent questions: (1) Are the schools 
at present able to supply the gifted with what they need and want? (2) What 
parts of the traditional curriculum must be revised in order to meet the in¬ 
dividual needs of gifted students? (3) How can the school insure that the 
program shall remain flexible? (43) 

These are only some of the important issues that will demand attent¬ 
ion by administrators if, they aim to properly educate gifted students. From the 
literature it would appear as though very few have been willing to face the 
problem and attempt a solution. 

In view of this lack of attention to the problem there will be those 
who take issue with the statement that gifted students need a special brand of 
education if they are to be challenged. In refuting them, authorities point out 
that such students have fundamental curriculum needs, saying that a program for 
the gifted students: 

Is only worthwhile if it stretches them; they need 
wider and more varied experiences than average and dull 
students; they need an outlet for emotional expression 
through art, music and athletics; they need wide reading 
and oral discussion opportunities; and they need opportu¬ 
nities to develop social talents. (44) 

There have been numberous specific curriculum suggestions made by competent 
authorities. For example, the gifted, once they have mastered the fund¬ 
amentals should spend some of their time in individual and small-group project 
work. The books supplied to them should be different than those supplied average 
students, and the gifted should be provided with more books than the average. 

They should be allowed to visit the library when they’ve finished their regular 
work. The gifted need more instructional material than do average students, as 




( ) 


(-) 





























26 


well as opportunities for participation in activities of a cultural nature. 

Teachers of the gifted must realize that what their gifted students need most 
are 'intellectual adventures, a stimulating environment, and an opportunity for 
creative expression.' (45) 

There are examples of secondary schools that have recognized the 
importance of making special curriculum provisions for the gifted. For example, 
in New York City students with superior ability are segregated into subject 
classes "so that the course of study can be covered more thoroughly and, in 
many cases, so that the course of study can be amplified by dignified work 
that will stimulate mental growth in consonance with their greater mental 
ability." (46) 

In schools where special classes are not feasible, it is possible 
to make special provision in the curriculum offerings for gifted students by 
having each teacher approach his teaching job by thinking of his students 
individually. Wilson claims this has been done in a number of schools with 
very favorable results for enrichment. He notes however, to be successful, 
students must be given the time and facilities to pursue their varied interests.(47) 
(4) Teaching the Gifted 

The literature dealing with the education of the gifted generally 
recognizes that teaching gifted students is a process quite different than 
that involved in teaching those who are not gifted. Teachers of the gifted may 
be successful if they recognize that their approach must be determined by consider¬ 
ations, some of which, if they operate at all, operate differently when they teach 
the non-gifted. 

Strang discusses the considerations involved in the teaching of the 
gifted. She theorizes that ability or talent emerges or does not emerge as an 





C - 


(. 






. 




( 


- 




i 




- 


C ). 



• _ 


O' 










27 


individual interacts with his environment. Which is to say, one's environment 
helps or hinders the proper development of one's potentialities. Since the 
superior student is capable of using his environment to good advantage he 
should be surrounded by those conditions which will enable him to so use it. 

Once placed in a 'lush' environment, teachers should insure that the gifted 
have the necessary freedom to use it to best advantage. It is to be expected 
that the gifted, with their organizing capacity, will make the most use of a 
free environment. (48) 

Social conditions in the school can help or hinder the development 
of the gifted. Such students sometimes purposely make lower marks than their 
ability warrants in order to be acceptable to their less able peers. And so 
teachers are unwise if they single out the gifted student for praise or as an 
example of scholarship if it tends to divorce the gifted student from the rest 
of the group. (49) 

The attitudes and expectations of the gifted by the social group 
surrounding them play an important part in the development of the gifted. 

Strang says that those individuals with whom the gifted are in relatively 
constant contact can "either stimulate them or discourage them from developing 
their gifts and using them for social purposes." (50) 

An important implication here would appear to be that the attitudes 
and expectations of admired and respected teachers may be of considerable imp¬ 
ortance in influencing the decisions and actions of gifted students. On the 
other hand, unadmired teachers who command no respect may have an adverse affect 
on the best development of the gifted. 

The process by which gifted students learn holds implications for 
the teachers' approach to them. Teachers should prepare lessons and conduct 
lessons and learning activities knowing that "the gifted learn by complex assoc- 













( 






',X 



( 


- 



: 



















28 


iative methods rather than by simple direct rote drill; they look for abstract 
or generalized rules underlying all school subjects; they are able to do indep¬ 
endent work." (51) 

In her discussion of the theory of learning and its relation to 
teaching the gifted, Strang presents a number of ideas that teachers of the 
gifted need to consider as they meet such students day by day. For example, 
the gifted especially must see a need to learn if they are to learn at all 
adequately. Gifted students do their best in problem solving learning. 
Incentives will increase their learning if they understand and desire them. 
Threat of failure tends to disorganize the performance of the gifted, esp¬ 
ecially those from upper and middle class homes where off-spring are usually 
very highly motivated to succeed in academic work. Rivalry will effectively 
increase their performance if it is constructive. Stimuli that satisfy needs 
tend to promote their learning. Retention of material by the gifted is affect¬ 
ed by a number of factors, some of which are the student's ability to learn, 
his need for learning, the completeness of his learning, the quality of the 
teacher's instruction, and the nature of the student-teacher relationship.(52) 

Strang claims that if the gifted have effectively learned the tool 
subjects they usually take the initiative at school and go ahead on their own. 
She says, "All they need is some help from the teachers when they are ready for 
it, encouragement at home, and rich library facilities, science laboratories, 
and opportunities for art, music, and social experiences." (53) 

When the gifted were themselves asked what conditions they consider 
conducive to learning they replied that they want teachers who do not allow 
them to develop the habit of loafing in school, they want to be able to take 
the subjects in which they are interested, even if this means carrying extra 








( 






'o. . i o-j . is . 








... ■ ... .. .gj; ... 


. . 


(. '• 




j <_ 


c. . • -j: 








( 











29 


subjects, they want to learn to express themselves before others and to take 
part in stimulating discussions, they want to apply theories and principles in 
the solution of their own life problems, they want to be in a position to match 
wits with other gifted students, and they want to learn how to read and study 
efficiently. (54) 

There are a variety of techniques which teachers may use in teach¬ 
ing gifted students. These techniques have been found through experience to 
yield rich rewards in student interest and effort when used by competent teach¬ 
ers. Some of them are: the use of local resources to make the classroom into 
a 'laboratory for learning'; the use of stimulating class discussions; reporting 
on outside reading to classes by gifted students; the use of combined group and 
individual instruction with the emphasis in the teacher's approach on the inter¬ 
ests of the students; provision of a variety of activities in both the arts and 
the sciences as well as in group and individual recreation. (55) 

More specifically, some of the means used by successful teachers of 
the gifted have been reported. They include such procedures as having students 
prepare, chair, and summarize discussions, making them responsible for the success¬ 
ful completion of assignments which require critical thought, having them help 
the teacher in planning class activities, having them tutor individual students 
or groups of students, having them assist in the school library and as lab¬ 
oratory assistants, having them prepare exhibits of their project work and supply 
leadership on research committees, havin g them read books at advanced levels and 
making them responsible for the selection of books for the school library, having 
them write plays and radio scripts, giving them the opportunity to organize and 
provide executive leadership in school government and school clubs, and having 







I 




. 














t. '. ••• 1 • C 'i. 


-- . % 









30 


them prepare school publications. This list by no means exhausts the variety 
of ways in which teachers may involve gifted students in challenging learning 
experiences. (56) 

(5) In-Service Training 

Good teaching of the gifted is described by Laycock as that which 
provides them reasonable opportunities to develop in terms of their own unique 
needs and abilities. He says, "The teacher has the right to expect from every 
child according to his ability, and she has the duty to give to each according 
to his need." (57) 

It follows then, if teachers are to do a good job in teaching the 
gifted, in addition to having scholarship and a wide cultural background, they 
must know what to expect from the gifted in terms of their abilities, and must 
know what to give according to their needs. In other words, if she is to 
effectively teach the gifted student, the teacher must understand him and his 
problems, and as well be able to prescribe ways and means of solving his prob¬ 
lems and meeting his needs. 

Davis says, "The education of gifted children required gifted teach¬ 
ers who have the ability to recognize giftedness, to create an atmosphere and 
environment favorable to its development, to provide conditions that give it a 
chance to emerge and blossom." (58) 

Assuming that teachers leave training institutions with a reasonable 
knowledge of what is involved in the education of gifted youth, there still re¬ 
mains a need for teachers to keep up-to-date on new developments in the field. 
This means that there is a need for the in-service training and supervision of 
the teachers of the gifted within schools and school systems. 

There are some, undoubtedly, who would question the assumption above, 




i : 


.. - 


• . 






( " • 

( ) 




a .'a 'j:.0>.: 'O'- <-i i'j- 


... : - - 

- - • i 

. • i .tllr.' Ols *#wi ’ O 1 <.V:>C. iJ '-'2 $ ’• 3 OV 


£oO £> 0£ 0- ••'---S - -■•. 


* - 

.. . .. ' - ' ■' ■' 

( : . ^.. * - 

t- - - - •• 


• - » - 




. 


- 


-- 


- 










/::• . 


: xu ... . ' . .' i ... - t 

a ..^ . - .... . • ■ ■' ” r - X ° • 

y;i .;.v,..;: ourwtq .03 o:i s I'd sxavV-. ’Jusssm&x I V«3 

( N 


: i - 






- 


. . . . . . 

._ ';5V\(i7.v': i •• ■ •■■■■• savcis?! 


■ i ill w\ 


. - ' ,.. ; ■■.• - • 

... Ji UO.Ji; .s -ujl 2 ,%.}'-■ .H59flJ 3*nXI 

. ■ - - 


... - . .. .. A . 


‘ - 






<. . 


IS' ■ • X ' ' \ ■ •' *C 


- 








31 


and suggest instead that teachers leaving training institutions possess a very 
inadequate background of knowledge dealing specifically with the education of 
the gifted. If this is so ; then it is more important still that in-service 
training that has to do with the education of gifted children be carried on 
in local schools and school systems. 

In-service training is essential because if an administrator 
expects a teacher to effectively teach gifted students, then he must be prep¬ 
ared to help the teacher find his own unique way of doing this. There should 
be a program supervisor or consultant whose task it is to serve all the schools 
in a system from the central offices, circulating ideas and plans among the 
schools and acting as a mediator in the human relations problems which any such 
program most certainly will entail. (59) 

The American Association For Gifted Children lists a number of 
effective methods of in-service training and supervision: 

"(1) Casual conversations with individual teachers in which they 
are encouraged to express and develop their ideas about the education of gifted 
children. 

(2) Exchanging accounts of successful procedures of work with 

gifted children. 

(3) Case studies and conferences concerning children who are 
not developing their potentialities. 

(4) Child study groups and parent study groups. 

(5) Institutes, conferences, faculty meetings, workshops, 
university summer and extention courses and seminars devoted to the practical 
problems of educating gifted children. 

(6) Excursions and visits to social agencies, industries, 
professional and technical schools, and other places of interest. 

(7) Informal reading and study groups which are provided with 
fine professional books related to the education of gifted children. n (60) 


5. Enrichment 

(1) Definition 

Enrichment is a concept in education which concerns only the gifted. 
It is an admission that gifted students require something more than the regular 
course work offered average students. Enriched courses are planned to enable the 




, , ■« '■ ■' i Lj.&lJ 2 -•■s' L*i ... 

. 

j ....< ... _. j..l ■■---■ U J c3,u iiuli 

- . ... x ■ .. ■ - i S -- . ■ • ■ - ■ , ■' 

.... - _ . .s v , >%' - £ .■ U ■: - - -.■■■ .oil!. ■ Si.L 

.. ;■ ... ...... wl: . - - . . . .. . ^ :. ; 0 L..L. / LL :L- 

.. _ .-, ’ L\ .;•■ . t - .■ - ••&’■ 1 ' ~ .. 

. . . . . .... 

(- .} , . . jl......) ■ 1- •: 

.... . . ....... ... .. . • 

. "... V' . Li . L : . .'. .. - i 

i 

: . .... ........ 

( 0 

: 

<. <. <. ....... .... .. ) 

_ J X.'. LBLLl £ .£ v 

^ ■'. - . ( ) 

*- .-O o • ' -• . -;v. ... . c.. • ...i:,,.. Bit 1-iLA : LL. 

, ■ <"> 

V - • - 



_ .Jir.i l i.. . i 


syZ 

.... iy:-. 

-j 


* 



LL .. v. 

C - . . 








32 


gifted to expand their learning beyond the confines of the regular course of 
studies; they are planned to allow the gifted to delve more deeply into the 
course of studies. Because of the extensive and intensive nature of enrich¬ 
ment, class work and out-of-class work can be developed which challenges the 
interests, aptitudes and abilities of the gifted students involved in the 
program. 

Laycock makes it clear that enrichment is a teaching device and 
not an administrative device for meeting the needs of gifted students. Acc¬ 
ording to him, administrative devices make enrichment possible, they provide 
a setting in which it can take place. (61) 

DeHaan and Havighurst suggest that a school concerned about the 
education of its gifted students should direct its efforts toward making 
enrichment possible and effective. (62) These authors have outlined the aims 
of secondary school enrichment: 

In general, the objectives of secondary school programs for 
gifted pupils are one or more of the following: (1) to teach 
subjects and stimulate attitudes that will make a boy or girl 
a better citizen, parent, and neighbor; (2) to teach subjects 
and encourage the development of skills in ar area of probable 
career specialization, such as science, mathematics, or foreign 
language; (3) to give potential leaders opportunity to practice 
the arts of leadership in academic work and in extracurricular 
activities; (4) to move a boy or girl rapidly into an adult 
place following graduation from college (Here the procedure is 
some form of acceleration) . (63]b 

The most forceful argument put forth by the proponents of enrich¬ 
ment is that it is just 'good teaching'. It is, in other words, an attempt 
to individualize instruction for the gifted to as great a degree as is 
possible within the existing school organization. 








( ) • 


( 






o 


( ) 




( ■; 



^ - 


Si) 


) 


X • ) .( 


( ) 


m 












33 


If enrichment of the curriculum is to be a workable teaching device, 
the administration of the school must provide all the facilities and time for 
planning required by the teachers as they attempt to insure the success of the 
program. 

In a secondary school, enrichment usually means 'enriched curriculum'. 
It involves elective and honour courses, clubs and other extracurricular activities 
which serve to meet the needs of gifted students. Obviously, any school offering 
electives and extracurricular activities is to a degree supplying enrichment. 
Laycock presents a variety of means of enriching curricular offerings and extra¬ 
curricular offerings. He suggests that as well as elective courses and honour 
courses and extracurricular activities there are a number of means of further 
enrichment. His list is as follows: (1) through guidance in general reading; 

(2) stimulation of hobbies and collections; (3) encouraging extra-class activities 
in the school; (4) producing and acting in plays; (5) making excursions to places 
of interest; (6) using community resources; (7) making contacts with the gifted 
in the community; ^8) providing special facilities for the gifted; (9) providing 
extra electives; (10) engaging in school and community service. (64) 

(2) Making Enrichment possible 
A. Ability Grouping 
(i) Introduction 

In general the authorities agree that gifted students need 
special provision made for them above and beyond that which is offered average 
high school students. The gifted possess the ability to do mental tasks of a 
high degree of difficulty, they have a broad attention span, they quickly gain 
insights into problem situations, and they find it relatively easy to generalize 
on facts they observe. They demand the kind of education which will stretch these 







( ' : . 

• ( ) : .■ ... ( 
( : : - - ( ) 

( ) : - . ( ) 


m . ■() 

( ' • ( ) . 


( ) 








( ) 


t. 















34 


capacities rather than the run-of-the-mill type of course of studies which leaves 
them uninterested and bored, the victims of a growing inability to study properly 
and think critically. (65) 

There have been and still are those who argue that in a dem¬ 
ocracy all children should have the same educational training. According to 
Terman, "This is as absurd as saying all children should receive the same medical 
care." (66) Rather than the same kind of education these students need to carry 
on small-group work, they need individualized instruction, a suitable arrangement 
of furnishings and adequate equipment, they need a wide range of instructional 
material and a broad plan of studies. All this suggests the necessity of gathering 
students who are gifted apart from the great mass of students where they will be 
provided with centralized facilities and an enriched curriculum (67). 

From her experience with gifted students Hollingworth conclud¬ 


ed: 


From observations of the progress of highly intelligent 
children tested at an early age, I offer the hypothesis that 
pupils of 130 to 150 IQ on the Stanford Binet have quite enough 
to do in the truly efficient pursuit of the college preparatory 
curriculum of the senior high schools, and they do not need 
enrichment of this curriculum as far as challenge to ability 
is concerned. What these pupils need is merely freedom from 
the presence of great masses of classmates who are mentally 
unadapted to the college preparatory course, and the opportunity 
to work unhampered in segregated groups...(68) 

Wilson suggests that while he is not in favor of isolating 
gifted students in separate academic schools he is in favor of more ability 
grouping within the comprehensive high schools than is, for the most part, 
presently practiced. (69) 

Segregation of the gifted may be accomplished in a variety of 










(- > . 






) 









.. .■ -C"' ; o: 








( 












^ 


( ) 







35 


ways: special schools, special classes, partial segregation in particular sub¬ 

jects, and by streaming. Ability grouping is only one means which enables schools 
to adequately enrich the curriculum for the gifted. Other means, which will be 
subsequently discussed, are acceleration, individual attention in regular classes, 
and by extracurricular activities. 

(ii)Special classes 

The establishment of special classes for the gifted is one 
means by which a school may undertake to provide the organization of program 
which will enable the curriculum to be enriched. Setting up special classes 
implies that the administration is willing to supply the facilities and teachers 
who will develop courses and extra-class activities challenging to the gifted. 
There is no use segregating the gifted in special classes unless there are teach¬ 
ers willing and able to educate them properly. 

This type of segregation has both its supporters and oppon¬ 
ents. Laycock has summarized the arguments for and against. The reasons given 
in favor of special classes are: students in such classes are required to meet 
higher achievement standards; they have less chance to develop habits of lazin¬ 
ess; such classes make enrichment of the curriculum relatively easy; there is 
more time available for gifted students to partake of creative activities and 
out-of-school visits to places of interest such as libraries, museums, and 
industrial plants; chances are high that, because the gifted are homogeneously 
grouped they will stimulate one another's thinking, and activities will be of 
an experimental nature requiring critical thinking on the part of the students; 
being with his peers in so many activities will result in the gifted students 
developing a more realistic assessment of their strengths and weaknesses; by 
developing better study habits and having to meet more demanding standards, 




. - - - - ... , ...... , I: ... : 

3GQ : . . . . v 

s : . . . . . 01 

. cxxx .v. : . . . ... • . - x-.v. - sr . ■■■ : x ••. .. •. ... i. ... ;c; 




(• ) 


X c.A XSOaXX 2X3 IG 'J. iBXXSC 8 itO JCS/IH 3 a S3. Qf{' 


... : . .s ...... o: .. ... 


i j... 33...:: ibj : :. 


. 




.' j . . .;• . : .. : 


c:: sx: ; :< ./. £ ..bc ee :s:~s r j -,s ;,xi •• } :.xy onM 




. x... 3 . xx , 3 8 £.1 fly <£,s:-ss~-s aaSaa ; sx;* • _. ■- oyy • $ • ^ : • > ; «TSdT 

• . a.? - -5:‘.7 • S’ A 3.: B IS- ,.--9 

-HOG 0 0 -X.l: . ..30 XC , : US oO i *13 CO' .if,: .,c • OX: \ fj'x 0 x a'" St--'- : aliix 

1 - . sol: ■ • . / 

■ . - • _ • 2 
- ■ O 0 V£ .... ; ..... ; 


■ . 'JLH .' 


*3r 






■••• -a.' •- ■ .ox.::.;; c5: x , ox ;x'v. ■ 3.-3 s?o:n 

S \X a. r y y- •«~ i ,-n 




' - - X ' ViB-iJ XXXO . X.'.;.;' 









•' '■••'•‘O' o ,X X- XX'- X.X .:• . : SB : . a ; A IX ; ..' "S.aC . ' 3 a fQ‘J 




• - x - .. . : . . . 


x >j, ;;. cex 






S .'.. X 

. 











36 


the gifted will be better prepared to do successful university work; special classes 
can be under the direction of qualified teachers; they more certainly take adv¬ 
antage of the opportunities available for the development of the students enrolled 
than do regular classes. The arguments against providing special classes for the 
gifted are as follows: they are undemocratic, giving opportunities to the gifted 
which are denied the other students; they prevent the gifted from mingling with 
all types of students, something they need to do for later success in adulthood; 
they develop snobbish attitudes in the gifted and feelings of inferiority in those 
not chosen to be members; such segregation results in overwork and a corresponding 
lack of time on the part of the student for participation in extracurricular act¬ 
ivities; those not in the special classes miss the stimulation that comes from 
being associated with the gifted; it is difficult to get teachers to teach classes 
from which the gifted have been withdrawn. (70) 

In spite of arguments put forward against special classes, 

Witty reports, "Surveys and articles describing practices in the secondary school 
reveal a rise in the formation of classes for gifted pupils.' 1 (71) 

Scheifele insists that full time classes for the gifted present 
the opportunity to "offer an enriched program featuring a greater variety of 
activities, individual projects, and research commensurate with the superior 
abilities of the gifted." (72) 

It is argued by Carlson that being in special classes can mean 
that the gifted students are not held back in their learning. Rather, they are 
allowed to learn rapidly, leaving undisturbed their inherent patterns and rhythm 
which means the avoidance of personality problems which arise out of unchallenging 
school work. (73) 









: 





;'BA VO 


iij 'Vj/.vo.- 






c 










( 












.• 




( 


■■ .v." ’ : r.c. r 










I 







;.’jo 


. 


: i 


( 




37 


Following a study of the benefits which accrue to the gifted 
from being in special classes, Schwartz concludes that students learn to discuss 
with their peers the problems of life within their grasp, they develop initiative 
and independence of thought and they develop a 1 community-mindedness 1 which 
directs them to use their powers for the benefit of their fellowmen. (74) 

Mayer compared the achievement of high school pupils grouped 
into classes by the use of IQ tests with pupils similar in ability taught in 
heterogeneous classes in the subjects Latin and Algebra. He found that "superior 
and medium pupils do appreciably better in segregated than in mixed classes." (75) 
A double advantage is afforded by segregation, according to 
Martens. It permits bright children to work in an enriched program with class¬ 
mates of similar mental ability, and as well it leaves them free to associate 
with children of all levels of intelligence in social activities. (76) 

Evidence is presented by Lorge to show that "special classes 
engender significant gains in knowledge, while maintaining for the gifted the 
expected growth in personality, values, and interests." (77) 

According to Miller and Otto, studies of homogeneous group¬ 
ing seem to indicate that it may be effective if it is accompanied by proper 
adaptation in methods and materials. (78) 

Brown measured the achievement of thirty gifted children 
who were in a special class for two years (grades seven and eight), and reported 
successful results. Academically they continued to manifest superior performance. 
Their interests and activities outside of school remained essentially normal. 
Twenty-six of them were planning to go to college. (79) 

The effects of belonging to special classes on the mental 
health of students was evaluated by Carlson. He judges them to be desirable.(80) 





( 








. 

( V) 


( ) 






38 


In general teachers favor the establishment of special classes 
as the best means of meeting the needs of gifted students. In one study it was 
found that "younger teachers and those who had worked in such classes tended to 
favor the special classes." (81) 

Kenner reports the classification of 5,000 pupils in junior 
high schools in Chicago in terms of the Otis Classification Test was at first 
skeptically accepted by teachers and principals, but that "after nearly two 
years of trial they almost unanimously consider homogeneous grouping the best 
means of caring for individual differences under present conditions." (82) 

Justman and Wrightstone report that 46 out of the 74 replies 
from 79 junior high school principals in New York City favor retaining special 
classes for the gifted, whereas 28 favored abolishing them. (83) 

From the literature dealing with the education of gifted 
children and youth it would appear that an increased degree of ability grouping 
is probably desirable. Wilson says: 

Much of the success of extra curriculum activities as 
in music or dramatics or debating or athletics is due to 
ability grouping within those fields. The same degree of 
ability grouping in activities calling for intellectual 
operation is desirable and is in no sense undemocratic. (84) 

(iii) Partial segregation 

There may be merit in the argument that schools should create 
those conditions which allow the growth of superior capacities in an environment 
of intellectual freedom, and at the same time insure the contributions to personal, 
social, and vocational development which comes from the daily association with all 
kinds of minds. Which is to say, school authorities should devise some means of 
enabling gifted students to spend part of their school time mixing with the wide 
range of abilities, interests, and aptitudes found only in heterogeneous classes. 












(. ) 


















.. . . um: 















( ) • 














. 



* . . ... | 











39 


Scheifele says it is possible to provide for the gifted "a 
part time program in which selected children spend a portion of each day with 
their own grade group and the remainder of the day in a special class, doing 
independent research and other projects of an advanced nature." (85) She 
points out that opportunities for the talented may also be offered through 
'special interest groups' maintained in the school or in the community under 
the direction of interested citizens. 

DeHaan and Havighurst say that through special grouping 
school authorities find it relatively simple to provide for students' special 
interests. This may be accomplished by placing the students in regular classes 
most of the school day and in special interest classes for the remainder of the 
day. (86) 


Part-time special classes are usually referred to as 'honours 
classes'. An example is cited by Wilson: Each honours class is open only to 
senior students and is restricted to a limited number. The students are given 
freedom with a good teacher to make their own program. Wilson describes the 
success of such a system: 

The stimulation and intellectual excitement of these groups 
was so great that the prestige of the honours classes soon 
equalled the prestige of the football team. Able pupils, from 
their first weeks in the school, began to work for entrance into 
a senior honours class. The honours classes did college level 
work, and their existence raised the whole intellectual level 
of the school. (87) 

According to Alpern, in a discussion of what is done in 
educating superior students in the high schools of New York City, any student 
showing particular aptitude in a high school subject is placed in an honours 





1 


( ) 







( 




.. ..... -- ■ • 


:,o 














(- ) 


i. 



A 















40 


class in that subject, while for the remainder of their subjects they remain in 
regular classes. Such honors classes are found in science, mathematics, art, 
music, social studies, English, and foreign languages. In these classes the 
students receive a more advanced type of instruction or take part in more 
extensive offerings than they would receive in regular classes. (88) 

Laycock describes the use of special seminars for the gifted 
under the capable direction of qualified teachers who have been relieved of 
some of their regular teaching duties in order to plan for the seminar periods.(89) 
This author also discusses the multiple track system as another means of partial 
segregation possible within the comprehensive-type secondary schools. Such 
schools may be divided into what he calls 'sub-schools- and may include an 
'honor school' for gifted students. (90) 

A rather unique idea has been expressed by Thorndike. He 
suggests the advisability of releasing the gifted from constant association 
with the less able by providing a special room for the gifted. Here they 
would be able to read and study and carry on individual or small-group projects. 

The room would be available on a schedule, open to the gifted when they are not 
needed in their regular classrooms. It is one answer to the question, "What 
can a school do to help if it cannot provide special classes with special curr¬ 
icula and methods?" (91) 

B. Acceleration 

From the literature it would appear that acceleration is a 
misunderstood term in education. It is sometimes used synonymously with grade¬ 
skipping. The result of grade-skipping is that a student misses one level (grade) 
of educational experience in order to move into the level above, thereby creating 







; J,ll ■ . K ■ - 

, - ' - ' : : ‘ : 

Li is • J - ijO; r.i.i 3..ii. U.t; .i . . .■ ' • - • • 

- 

^ N „ ... . . ~ . .. .... . ■ 3 . 3 . .. ...... . ..... .. 

;.. - 0 5 

... . . . " - - • ■ 

. - ; i - 

. i. . j.. •... i I . .33 3 ■' 3 —i. ; ’. •. ■ :»■ ul • - ‘ - . - ' • '■> • -a 

. .... .. h ... 

• . . 

( N * .. 

. . -3._ . ijB Si; Ji •-! fiti .. £3. J t. . I ■■£' H ■. 

.. ua y* t*.. x a,:. : ..r • :. o \-:Li .j: 1b / -3 

... 

. .'-.f . “ .. .. . 333.. •" . .... ; .. jXi *. i... . j - 3 .• . .. : 3. ... Oj is .• 3 

- l-ii . i ?. i -. ... . • • li. ^ . I ' i . .. 3 .. . 3V i . / 

» ij - - . . . > - - - 

. - -lv’ ... ..... ... ... .. . .3 ■ 3 .3..-3." 33 ..3 3..-3i 33 G. ...3G.I 

( > 

3, ... ,3 3- 3. . ■ 

- - • •• -3 -3. 3. 3 ...33 3 3.. . 3333.' 3 3 3 3 .. 333 £IOXU 

1 . - . • ....... ' ;.333< ...... : .. 33333 33 3X33-. >3 C33 

' 

--• 3 . . 3.... 3. 3 3 3 3 3 .:. . 3 

< ; ■ ■ • • • .3.53 ' -•.... . ... . •!.„ .3 -. . .... 3';.....' 3',. 3 


.33 33 

K • ■ Li 3.3 

l J 3 .' IS., I. 

3 : isbav 

- 

: ..,OJ;.3Xi 

3-4- i 

. . 

ii 

.. j n iia:.t 

• 33 . 




41 


a gap in his educational background. In the past, grade skipping was a popular 
way to take care of bright students. Today most authorities would agree that 
this is an unacceptable form of acceleration. 

Against this definition there is the modern conception of the 
term. Acceleration is defined as the provision of the opportunity by school 
administrators for gifted students to move “at a pace appropriate to their 
ability and maturity and to complete an educational program in less than the 
ordinary time." (92) 

Similarly, Rideout defines acceleration as any administrative 
device which makes it possible for a student to complete his course of study 
at an earlier age than does the average student. (93) 

Passow and others say "acceleration means progress through an 
educational program at rates faster or ages younger than conventional." (94) 

The modern conception of the term is distinguished from grade¬ 
skipping in that modern definitions do not imply 'jumps' from one level to 
another with the resulting gaps in educational experience. Acceleration 
means a more rapid consecutive sequential movement through the grades. 

Those who advocate acceleration point out the following adv¬ 
antages: It enables those who have contributions to make to the welfare of 

society to more quickly assume their adult responsibilities; accelerated 
gifted students finish their public schooling sooner, thereby gaining more 
time to spend in undergraduate and graduate studies at institutions of higher 
learning; gifted students can be accelerated without an undue amount of 



: ri: 


. - . d.. - - o ■■ ■ n .• ■ 

_ 







- . t . 




3..i3*s- •.>- ^ •• .. 

. 

( £ - ^ ♦ ■ •• ■ 

( .. • 

■ 3 ^3 /3.. 33. a .r /...qp-w'. •;&- 1 ^ 

; o - : .... - • - 

. . : - 

. : - ■ - £. - 

_,U ...: ‘ . ... - .VA.-Vi, o.,', A . 




A.. B--BIL •.... 

.0 - ■:.... :..... .. .-.3 .-.>3:: J -• - - -- 

.- . ■ .. . ■ - -■ 7 ■ - : • ■ - 

. . . . - - - ■ 




. . . : - 







42 


'pushing* from teachers; if gifted students are held back in the traditional 
lock-step system the chances are greater that they will develop social and 
emotional problems; it does away with boredom and frustration which is char¬ 
acteristic of bright students working below the level of their potentialities; 
acceleration decreases the possibility of the gifted learning poor study habits; 
the risk of social maladjustment resulting from acceleration is not as great as 
is commonly believed; heterogeneous grouping of students inhibits the teachers' 
chances to successfully individualize instruction for each of their students 
because chronological age grouping is not a sensible means of grouping if one 
wishes to get as little heterogeneity of ability as possible. Acceleration 
tends to group students on a better basis for meeting the needs of gifted 
students. (95) 

The arguments against acceleration have been summarized as 
follows: accelerated students are younger than their classmates and so are 

more susceptible to emotional and social problems; the assumption that comp¬ 
arable mental ages means similarity in mental functioning may be fallacious; 
accelerated students do not get an enriched curriculum, but rather cover the 
material which is covered by the average students; grade-skipping results in 
gaps in the students' educational experience; full acceleration means that 
students need to be doing equally as well in all their subjects and this is 
usually not the case; more than likely accelerants will be set apart from 
their age-mates because they have been singled out as different by the auth¬ 
orities; acceleration reduces the number of years spent in public school and 
gets students to university teachers at an age which such teachers are unprep¬ 
ared to handle. University professors are prepared to deal with older students.(96) 




, : . im - - • • Q* • 

----- ^ • • - " 

„ , . ., xi . ; :. .. - - ..I - - - -■ ■ - -- : 

- - . 1 

£ : .. - - - . - - - ' ' 

; _ . .. ... . - - - - - ' 

; . . - 

; -.^oi : ^v.:- ~ v ...u-usy *:* SSCfJBXia 

. 

. : . . . ' ■ - - ' ■ . - - - - 
* . . - • - • - - - ' ; • 

(, ; . - : ...: 


- - - - - - 

...... . ■ • - ----- •' 

. _ . .: . I . 3 . . £ .- - - - -" 

. . ... . .. ..... : .. 

. . . ' K . - - - - - - - - - - 

..... . - . . - - -• - 

. . . . . .... - ....... - 

. . . . ... . .. : . ... ■- . ~- .. •. - • • 

.. . . v ... .... . . . ... : • . .. . .. . - : •: - - - 

: . .. . - - -- - 

i . 9 . : .. . 

■ ... . ... ^ ■ ;. - - - - - 

( ) * - ' • . .......... . :. ,.. .. c- . 





43 


In spite of the arguments against acceleration, the literature 
manifests increasing evidence to support the practice as a worthwhile means 
of enabling schools to meet the challenge of the education of gifted children. 

Terman and Oden compared the school performance of equated 
groups of accelerants and non-accelerants. Their findings indicate ‘'the acc¬ 
elerants did better in high schoo], more graduated from college, more graduated 
with honors and more of those graduating continued with graduate work. ,r (97) 

As for their social development, it has been found that there is 
no significant difference between equated groups of accelerants and non-accel¬ 
erants in either childhood or adult life. And, as adults, the accelerates were 
to be found more often in the 'A' group for occupational success than were the 
non-accelerates. (98) 

In a study by Pressy some relationships of acceleration to success 
in College were investigated. It was concluded, "The evidence was practically 
unanimous that younger entrants were more likely to graduate, had the best 
academic records, won the most honors, and presented the lowest disciplinary 
difficulties." (99) 

Justman investigated the personal and social adjustment of int¬ 
ellectually gifted accelerants and non-accelerants in junior high schools and 
found there was very little difference. (100) 

For Terman, it was not a question of whether or not to accelerate, 
but rather a question of how much acceleration is proper. From his studies of 
gifted children Terman says there is no 'one and only' rule governing how much 
acceleration is defensible. Decisions should be made in terms of the bright¬ 
ness of the students and the degree of their physical, emotional and social 






( 



<. 


- ^ 


( ) 








( 






44 


maturity. He says, ,r It is our opinion that children of 135 IQ or higher should 
be promoted sufficiently to permit college entrance by the age of seventeen at 
the latest, and that a majority of this group would be better off to enter at 
sixteen." (101) 

Most other authorities agree that any program of acceleration should 
be based on the premise that students shall be moved ahead only after careful 
study has been made of their personality, abilities, and aptitudes, and physical 
maturity. 

Acceleration may be achieved in a variety of ways. Students may be 
placed in 'special progress classes' and cover three years' work in two, or four 
years' work in three. Students cover all the material ordinarily covered at a 
school level, but they do it in considerably less time. Another means of accel¬ 
eration is to allow students judged capable to enter university following grade 
eleven. They get something more than grade twelve during their first year at 
college because they begin to specialize immediately. Acceleration may be acc¬ 
omplished by doing college-level work in the high school so that students going 
on to university enter with advanced standing. (102) 

As well as the methods outlined above, Laycock suggests another. 

He proposes that students be allowed to enroll in classes (one or more) one 
grade level above the one in which they are enrolled. He refers to this method 
as special promotion in subject matter areas. (103) 

School administrators have not been convinced by the findings of 
research that acceleration is a profitable means of challenging gifted students. 
The American Association for Gifted Children reports that typical high schools 
very seldom accelerate gifted students. Krueger and others report from surveys 
made of American school administrators that "only 15 per cent of the junior and 






v . V- --■ 







• . .., - . 






( ) 






V : 






- • - •• ■ •' ..-.Si 




45 


senior high school principals believed that pupils of superior ability should 
complete the school curriculum in less time than the average." (104) 

Dellaan and Havighurst support the claim that acceleration should 
be used as a means of meeting the needs of gifted students. They support their 
argument with judgments of parents,, teachers, as well as by evaluations with 
tests of achievement and social adjustment. They say: 

It appears that one- or two-year acceleration of a 
gifted child works out very well provided the child is 
physically and socially developed at least to the average 
level for his age. But mere acceleration into the grade 
above often fails to provide enrichment of the gifted 
child's experience. (105) 

It is imperative that along with acceleration there must go a degree of planned 
enrichment. 

C. Individual Attention In Regular Classes 

There are those in education who oppose the provision of enriched 
offerings to the gifted by any device which suggests segregation or acceler¬ 
ation. They support the idea that the gifted can be given challenging exper¬ 
iences in regular classrooms while profiting from their associations with other 
students of all levels of abilities, interests, and aptitudes. 

The wide range of abilities and interests found in regular class¬ 
rooms holds implications for education. The wider the distribution of indiv¬ 
idual differences the more difficult it becomes to adequately meet the needs of 
all those present. If students are to receive the kind of education that best 
suits their individual uniqueness, then differentiation of class members for 
teaching purposes is demanded. Which is to say, teachers must be concerned with 
the education of each class member rather than with the class as a whole. The 
more similar each class member is in those factors important in their education, 


the simpler it is to deal with the class as a whole. The wider the range of diff- 










46 


erences, the more difficult it becomes to deal with the class as a whole. If 
each student is to be taught on the basis of his individuality,,then it becomes 
the school's responsibility to know what to expect of each student intellectually 
and otherwise. The school must discover his aptitudes and any weaknesses he may 
have, as well as know and deal with any non-intellectual factors which may be 
affecting his behaviour. (106; 

Regular class teachers must approach their classes while thinking in 
terms of individual students. In large classes this would pose an impossible 
problem if it weren't possible to use groupings within the class of students with 
more or less comparable ability. 

Cutts and Moseley made a study of the difficulties teachers face and 
the methods they use in providing for bright students in regular classrooms. They 
classified the ways under six main headings: 

1. Ability grouping within the class 

2. Letting students work at their own level and speed 

3. Special assignments 

4. Group or individual projects 

5. A free choice of work upon completion of regular work 

6. Individual work with the teacher upon completion of regular work 

Teachers must know the intellectual ability of each of their students 
and how it corresponds with their achievement. Teachers must be able to relate 
the students' interests with school work and be able to guide the students' 
efforts toward self-improvement. Teachers must know how their students are 'get¬ 
ting along' with others and the level of their social maturity. Only as teachers 
have such knowledge as this can they make the plans necessary to insure the prov¬ 
ision of a challenging school experience for each gifted student they encounter.(107) 

While there appears to be little question of the premise that special 
opportunities must be extended to the gifted, authorities are quick to point out that 
this is especially difficult in regular classes. Providing opportunities for the 






( 



- _ 


- : . ■ 


£ 


«. - • • - 


^ C 






- 




...... B 




...... 


( .- ) • 


.. U . s 








- 




C i - £ 


- 


— i.i i-f ^ 


- 


u? i* 


M -. 




. 









: o 




' 


<4 ^ 


& II 








- : 







; 




: : 








- - . . - . ... 






< 




. 








47 


best development of the gifted in regular classes will tax the ingenuity of even 
the ablest instructors. (108) 

There may be a problem in determining how to challenge gifted stud¬ 
ents in regular classes, but there should be no problem of time available in 
which to challenge them. Cutts and Moseley say, "The bright child, one with an 
IQ of 120 and above, generally finds it possible to finish the required work even 
in his hardest subjects in much less time than the great majority of children in 
heterogeneous classes. The time that is left over poses a problem and affords an 
opportunity to his teachers." (109) 

Concerning the kind of enrichment that gifted students should face in 
the extra time they will have in regular classes, Scheifele says it should involve 
"a great variety of activities and materials, more independent study along lines 
of special interests, as well as group study of a broad unit experience, and 
greater opportunities for creative expression." (110) 

As well as this sort of enrichment provided for students who finish 
their classwork ahead of their less able classmates, the current trend of thought 
is that gifted students in secondary schools should receive a different kind of 
classwork. The gifted are able to master an academic curriculum which would prove 
to be far above the understanding of those other than the gifted. And such a 
curriculum should be theirs to stretch their ability and keep them interested. 
Therefore, in high school classes that are a mixture of abilities, teachers should 
teach different material to the different levels. 

Apparently, then, there are two major considerations administrators 
must take into account if they plan to keep gifted students in regular classes. 
First, they must realize that in those schools where planning has been most effect- 




: ' adz : 

( , ) . • : -v. ... : . 




. 




t - 






. 






. : 

-- 

15 i.v& -. ■ * £ ■■■ • '■ - ’ : ••••• - ■ • 




" , *r' . i!3; ^ ' '■ IC • T ! 

- - 


.(• ^ 

... 

' 

• . - - - - 

v 

(0 , j v - a ■ "... v< :■ - .' .^i<« ' 

. 

:. l. ." ,- J ;..v" 1 - ■ c 1 *" ^ 3 " ■ • ■" -• - ;f ' ••* 


V 2 - ,.i 

. .. m : e_ .. - 


I-.. .■ . a c-.a-■ - - .. . - </ 

/.- ‘ ,r. T ;M:* e: :.r .--n Scars a 13±L 

'. o J £? <. v 

. ... : . _ . ■-j ... . . : • ■ .'. : tffd 

<. - 



48 


ive, enrichment of experiences is implemented through a wealth of instructional 
resources readily available to the gifted. Secondly, they must make sure that 
teachers emphasize differentiated class assignments and teach to groups within 
their classes, varying the material taught in terms of the capacities of the 
groups . 

It is Witty's hypothesis that true enrichment is possible only 
within a heterogeneous group since such groups encourage: 

the variability in response upon which progress, 
creativity, and indeed survival in a democratic society 

depend.true enrichment of instruction occurs when 

children are stimulated by the presence of different 
personalities working at different levels. (Ill) 

DeHaan and Havighurst list what they consider to be the three major 
arguments in favor of maintaining gifted students in regular classes. First, the 
gifted will be better adjusted socially and emotionally. Secondly, other child¬ 
ren in the classroom will benefit from their presence; thirdly, it is a move in 
the direction of individualizing instruction for all children. They point out 
that certain conditions -are demanded if enrichment is to be a reality. In 
addition to adequate facilities and materials easily available to the classroom 
teachers, the size of the class must be limited so that the teacher does not 
neglect other students in her concern for the gifted. (112) 

Expressing this same idea, Roberts says, "Unless classes are limit¬ 
ed in numbers and teachers are better prepared academically and professionally, 
gifted students will find school life dull and unrewarding." (113) 

While there are supporters for the practice of keeping gifted 
students in regular classes, the general trend in current educational theory 
is special grouping or acceleration. The major objection to enrichment in 








49 

regular classes is that it just isn't practiced. 

D. Extracurricular Activities 

It is commonly accepted by those who urge enrichment for gifted 
students that extracurricular activities afford an excellent means of stimulating 
superior students to desirable growth in the social, intellectual and physical 
fields of development. 

Witty reports that surveys and descriptions of practice in secondary 
schools show an increasing use of extracurricular activities in the education of 
gifted youth.(114) 

In their discussion of how to develop creativity and special talents 
in the gifted, DeHaan and Havighurst suggest there are many ways in which interest¬ 
ed teachers can develop students through extracurricular activities. (115) 

According to Martens the social adjustment of gifted children may 
be facilitated "in the more informal atmosphere of clubs and other school organ¬ 
izations in which there is opportunity for securing first hand experiences not 
otherwise available to the learner." (116) 

The Educational Policies Commission of the National Education Assoc¬ 
iation has come out in favor of schools developing extensive programs of extra¬ 
curricular activities which are especially planned to challenge the talents of 
the gifted and develop high performance standards.(117) 

If extracurricular activities are well-organized and given the proper 
leadership there is little reason to doubt that the gifted will take an active 
part in them. In support of this statement Lewis and McGahee found that gifted 
students are characterized by their very extensive interests. This they found 
to be especially true in the areas of music and reading where their, interests 
are strikingly different from a similar group of retarded classmates. Other 
interests that appeal more to the gifted than their less-able classmates appear 
























t. 



( 


\ 


O ' 


: 




( ) 








( 








. 













50 


to be in dramatics, religious activities, scouting and campfire activities, club 
activities and collecting. (118) 

Special schools for the gifted are characterized often by their 
stress on the importance of extracurricular activities in the education of bright 
students. In his discussion of a high school of science for the gifted students 
Meister says: 


The extracurricular work ... occurs both during schools hours 
and after; within the school building as well as outside. It 
reflects the interests and activities engendered and stimulated 
by the curriculum itself. Naturally enough, a large number of 
school clubs concentrate their interests in related science 
activities such as: radio, aeronautics, microbiology, glass- 
blowing, photography, histology, mathematics, bacteriology, 
engineering, natural history, architecture, astronomy, 
seamanship, the Science Explorers Club of the freshman year, 
and others. 

Nevertheless, the spontaneous interest in the humanities 
reflects the broadest scope of the school's objectives. Large 
groups of boys are attracted to the Creative Writing Club, the 
Dramatic Society, the staff of the Science Survey (the school 
newspaper), the Forum, the school orchestra and chorus, the 
Chess Club, the language societies, as well as to athletic 
teams . 

Included too, in extracurricular activities are the large 
number of 'squads' that serve in the functioning of depart¬ 
mental offices, libraries, laboratories, preparation rooms, 
supply depots, gymnasium, and medical rooms, and school 
offices....These varied groups are unified by a democratic 
school government, with its council of school representatives 
and its elected officers, all under the sponsorship of the 
Student Organization and under the advisership of the fanulty 
committee on extracurricular activities....Freed from the 
rigidities of the school bell system and from the need for 
extremely large classes, boys and girls turn frequently to 
varied forms of extracurricular activities which are 
conducive to balanced growth. (119) 








X 









{. ^ 





( 












51 


A survey was carried out in Michigan sampling the opinions of gifted 
graduates concerning their high school experience. Dressel and Grabow clearly 
point up the importance of extracurricular activities to the students. A rather 
startling revelation is that school was pleasurable to many of the graduates 
only because of the opportunities afforded to take part in challenging and 
satisfying extra-class experiences. (120) 

There is relatively little literature dealing with extracurricular 
activities and the education of the gifted. This much seems clear, that a school 
with a science club, an orchestra, track and field teams, a drama society, and 
such like has gone a considerable distance in motivating students with 'gifts' 
in these fields . 

6. Guidance Services 

The value of psychological testing and counseling as means of 
guiding young people is firmly established. Those who are concerned with the 
education of the gifted have given over considerable space in the literature to 
discussions of the importance of guidance as an aid to the best development of 
gifted students. 

Strang outlines the nature of a satisfactory 'developmental guid¬ 
ance program' for the gifted. According to her, it aims to recognize and under¬ 
stand their abilities and needs; it seeks to provide those home, school, and 
community experiences that research shows to be desirable and necessary; it 
makes connections between each individual's needs and the resources available 
to satisfy those needs; it assists the gifted to select suitable curriculum 








- 


O 


( : ) , la . .ttsiq - 
















; 


“ - : . ^ - - . O: • .. * f ■ - 

-• ; ■'.O'-- • C.ir- ... w ~ '• Oj O/r/l/lOt. OVO so <io-: ;.; 

•••’• c- : :J< . '"A : d$ 




01 









52 


programs and progress satisfactorily in them; it helps each student to concept¬ 
ualize his most acceptable self; it seeks to have the gifted understand their 
responsibilities to society in terms of their talents; and it encourages them 
to build psychologically for emotional maturity. (121) 

It would appear from the literature that there are two major sources 
of guidance within any secondary school: that which comes from the guidance 
department through guidance counselors, and that which the gifted receive from 
their teachers. 

In discussing the role of the school's guidance department, Passow 
and others suggest that the major responsibility is to develop and carry out a 
'talent identification program.' In addition, members of the guidance depart¬ 
ment should keep up-to-date records on the correlation between ability and 
achievement in the case of each gifted student. Guidance officials should play 
an important part in assisting students select courses and career choices. 

As well as assisting the gifted to plan their academic programs, guidance offic¬ 
ials should encourage them to take part in non-academic areas of the school's 
activities, which will develop their inherent talents "without jeopardizing 
their rounded development or their opportunity to go to college." (122) 

As part of the in-service training program in the school, the 
guidance department should interpret the needs of the gifted to teachers. They 
should maintain a liaison between school and community, alerting interested 
agencies to the special needs of the talented. Guidance officials working with 
teachers should have a specific concern for gifted under-achievers. They should 
be responsible for interpreting to parents the vocational needs of the gifted. 



53 


They should obtain scholarships to be used during the high school careers of 
gifted students, and especially when they finish high school should there be 
bursaries and scholarships available to carry them on to further education. 

The guidance department is in a position to make knowledge available to aid 
the administration in making decisions concerning the education of the gifted.(123) 
Pintner stresses the importance of the psychological testing program 
in the guidance of the gifted. He says, "Along with increased time we should 
give to a more complete testing of each child, there should go a systematic 
repetition of tests throughout the whole school career." (124) 

If secondary schools are to adequately educate gifted students, 
they must aim to have teachers aware of the special needs of the gifted and 
overcome the attitude that the gifted can take care of themselves. They must 
overcome the indifference of important community folk and local school offic¬ 
ials. Teachers must become interested in learning more about the gifted and 
the best ways of enriching their educational experiences. (125) In view of 
this, it seems reasonable to propose that the guidance department, in conjunction 
with administrative authorities, are in the best position to work effectively 
toward the achievement of the above aims. 

The guidance of the gifted may be enhanced if parents as well as 
teachers are aware of what research has discovered concerning them and their 
education. Guidance officials can act as interpreters for parents. 

In the same way they can assist the gifted to be accepted by 
teachers, students, parents, the public and the gifted themselves. Laycock 
stresses the vital necessity for others to accept gifted students emotionally... 





54 


with a warm understanding. He says this is one of the most important steps 
that can be taken in helping the gifted. (126) 

DeHaan and Havighurst point out that it is the school’s responsibility 
to inform students of the financial help available to assist them in going to 
college. They also suggest that guidance officials should counsel parents 
concerning the need for achievement and the importance of value being set upon 
achievement by the home. They say, "This counseling should consist not so much 
of advising parents about their children's vocational choices as of helping 
parents to understand how ‘their attitudes and relationships with their children 
affect their children's motivation." (127) 

Ryan and others discuss the importance of conferences with the 
gifted, individually, as a means of contributing to their best development.(128) 

The school principal is specifically responsible for the careful 
consideration which needs to be given the guidance program and its role in the 
education of gifted youth. DeHaan and Havighurst say: 

It should be planned as a continuous function. 

Teachers should be furnished with guidance information 
pertinent to their pupils. The daily schedule should 
be planned in such a way that teachers and pupils have 
time for conferences and guidance activities. Supplies 
for an adequate testing program as well as adequate file 
and record space need to be provided. (129) 

So far the discussion has centered around the role of the guidance 
department. In recognizing the importance of the guidance department it must be 
noted that there is considerable support for the idea that teachers, acting as 
teacher-counselors, may be critical factors in the best development of the gifted. 

For example, Bruner claims that classmembers can be led by teachers 


"to evaluate their own progress in developing and properly using their talents."(130) 




) . 


( ) 





55 


Teachers in class discussions, and informally through conferences 
with individual students can provide valuable guidance for the gifted. The 
teacher is in an ideal position to motivate students to want to achieve and 
develop their abilities. The teacher can interest them in entering socially 
useful and self-satisfying vocations. (131) 

Strang says that while it is true the gifted are able to solve 
many of their problems, yet in some instances they need help from adults. She 
suggests. ,r a competent teacher can give such help at the psychological 
moment.” (132) 

There will be times when gifted students will display an increas¬ 
ing maladjustment. This calls for a concerted effort on the part of teachers, 
parents, the school's guidance department and outside psychiatric agencies. 
Schools should not hesitate to call upon any who are in a better position to 
assist than are the schools' facilities in the reclamation of such students.(133) 
In concluding this section on the relation of the guidance depart¬ 
ment to the gifted student program, there remains an important consideration 
which perhaps receives less attention by educators than it deserves. 

Probably there are few who would argue with the premise that 
persons occupying positions of power in the social structure should be wise 
and able persons. Reasonably one might expect the schools to play an important 
role in accepting responsibility for the development of the potentialities of 
the gifted, who, under the proper circumstances can be expected to become the 
leaders of tomorrow. Getting them 'to the top' involves not only respect for 
the individual and his capacities, but as well it is a matter of concern for 
the welfare of the state. Hollingworth was brave enough to say, "No govern¬ 
ment will succeed which keeps stupid people at the top. It must devise means 









( 














( ' 













K 




































56 


to discover and educate the able, and for its own welfare give them positions 
of influence and power.” (134) 

That the number of very able students going on to higher training 
is considerably less than should be expected, is a very real cause for concern 
to those who have the future welfare of Canada at heart. One investigator 
reports that economic and social factors make it impossible for over half the 
High school seniors with high ability to go on directly to college. Of those 
that do go on, "almost thirty per cent of the top decile in intelligence fail 
to attain significant achievement in scholarship because of emotional, educ¬ 
ational, personal, financial, or other problems." (135) 

Terman and Oden estimated that "forty per cent of the young men 
and women who are potentially good college material either do not enter college, 

< 

or if they enter, do not graduate." (136) Of Terman's group of gifted children, 
fifteen per cent did not enter college and thirty per cent did not graduate. He 
claims that adequate counselling could have overcome this wastage. (137) 

A follow-up study of the top sixteen per cent of a group of Minn¬ 
esota high school graduates was reported by Witty. He says, "In nine years 
after high school graduation only 45 per cent had received baccalaureate degrees 
and eight per cent had earned advanced degrees." (138) 

The studies reported here have been American studies, but as was 
pointed out previously, this same general picture is also true for Canada. 

It can be demonstrated that guidance throughout the school career 
of a gifted student, if it is adequate guidance, can direct that student toward 
higher education and advanced learning. And such a student can be expected, in 
all probability to become a community leader, or a leader in his field of learn¬ 
ing after graduation from university. And knowing this it must still be admitted 















57 


that guidance procedures are found wanting when judged by the number of gifted 
high school students who will go on to college. (139) 

7. Teachers of the Gifted 

In the education of gifted students some considerations are more 
important than others. In the main, authorities agree that the teachers of 
gifted students are probably the most important single factor in their develop¬ 
ment . 

Ryan and others say, "Next to the parent, the teacher exerts the 
most important personal influence on the development of gifted children."(140) 

On the basis of his study, Brandwein is able to say, "The teacher 
is the key, probably the single most important factor in the training of a 
scientist, or what is more important, in stimulating young people in school 
to turn to science." (141) 

From statements such as these it is clear that teachers are critical 
factors affecting the wholesome and desirable growth of gifted students. Good 
teachers are able to make even an uninteresting course of studies into an 
inspiring experience for their gifted students. Contrariwise, poor teachers 
are remarkably able to deaden the interest of even the brightest. 

The characteristics of successful teachers of the gifted have been 
expressed both by educational authorities and by the gifted themselves. First, 
considering the findings of investigators who have observed such teachers in 
action, Passow stresses the following characteristics: 

(1) Successful teachers of the gifted are extremely capable in their 
own subject area 

(2) They have a tolerance of new and different ideas 

(3) They are willing to let students proceed on their own 

(4) They are able to direct individual efforts toward their max¬ 
imum achievement 

(5) If not themselves creative, then they are at least sensitive 
to the creativitiy in others 

(6) They are able to stimulate creativity 









58 


(7) They can accept non-conforming behaviour, allowing a free 
exchange of ideas and the widest variety of solutions to 
problems 

(8) They are able to inspire gifted students to strive for high¬ 
er levels of achievement and develop their unique abilities.(141) 

In an article dealing with the teachers of the gifted, Davis says 
that they are characterized by scholarship and a wide cultural background, they 
understand the nature of gifted students, they have the ability to recognize 
giftedness and create an environment conducive to its development. (143) 

DeHaan and Havighurst urge administrators to demand the following 
characteristics when selecting teachers for gifted students: flexibility and 
creativity, concern for individual differences, resourcefulness in developing 
teaching techniques, energy, an enthusiasm and burning desire for high standards 
of achievement, and a desire to teach the gifted. (144) 

Brandwein found that teachers who are successful in developing 
students with high science potential are characterized by high training in 
science, they have the opportunity to teach, and have successful relations 
with children in the teaching situation. (145) "These are the teachers students 
trust, they are sympathetic to their problems, they hold up firm and high stan¬ 
dards of achievement and behaviour as well." (146) 

Gifted students have been given numerous opportunities to express 
their ideas concerning the kind of teachers they prefer to have teaching them. 
Witty reports a study in which the following traits were mentioned as desirable: 

(1) a cooperative democratic attitude 

(2) kindliness and consideration for the individual 

(3) patience 

(4) wide interests 

(5) pleasing personal appearance and manner 

(6) fairness and impartiality 

(7) a sense of humor 


" ; ; .■' ‘ ( : 

- : L'B ::c s;..iiSiw^vS 

. 


. . .... c i. . - ...-- • ••- - •• 


,fi*SiUGTCi 

.... - ( 

..... 


. sri: - - • - ■ . 

- 

■ 

( 


. 




. 






■ 






; i v - 

.... : • ( 


,vi.. v ■■ v •• ' :y 3 


.3s;. :> . 






(. .) . .. ../ . 

.. - . 

• : . - - ■ . : - 

.v. s..;. • - -• - > •• • ~ ■ D ’- ' 

... . : . v . 

.. . - ( , 

>: ( ) 

- • -•. ■ ; ( ) 
( 

. ;. I... r,. : ; nr::i .3 ... s: ' X r >• () 

. ( ) 


..... i. >J - 3 

JlO -i -TiO 

li 






59 


(8) good disposition and consistent behaviour 

(9) an interest in pupils problems 

(10) flexibility 

(11) use of recognition and praise 

(12) unusual proficienty in teaching a particular subject 
(mentioned most often by high school pupils) (147) 

According to Davis, teachers of the gifted, must satisfy their 

students as good teachers, must possess a sense of humor, encourage a sense 

of responsibility, have a knowledge of their subject matter, be firm and fair, 

understand students and really enjoy teaching. (148) 

It is safe to assume that teachers are not providing adequately 

for the needs of the gifted if such students feel restricted and if they feel 

they are being overworked and their interests stifled in the classroom. (149) 

DeHaan and Havighurst say: 

the teacher's attitude toward the education of the 
gifted is crucial. The teacher will be able to help 
them if she is sensitive to their needs and willing to 
make changes in herself, if necessary, in order to give 
them what they need. (150) 

Because good teaching is basically a job in human relations, 

Laycock says: 

....it is vital for the gifted child's best development 
that there be a warm understanding relationship between 
him and his teachers....which involves the teacher's 
accepting the child emotionally as a person and not 
merely intellectually as a brain. (151) 

Unless a teacher's program for her gifted students is a planned 
program it amounts to a waste of tine. Such planning includes a review of 
the curriculum to see where it can be trimmed for the benefit of the gifted, 
time scheduled for thinking through an enrichment program for them, and time 
scheduled for helping the gifted. (152) 

Obviously teachers of the gifted need time for planning. To 


( 1 ( 


- m 

■ <■■) 

c- > 
(■) 
c) 

> 


. 




o_ 




<- 




«. - 


( ) 




( 



( - ) 




£ / 





-O- 








m > • 




o 


u. 












60 


make this possible, administrators can limit the total number of classes carried 
by the gifted, they can have teachers of the gifted teach only one class of 
gifted students, and they can render assistance through supervisory personnel.(153) 

Administrators can reasonably expect those who teach gifted students 
to be willing to provide something more than what average students get in an 
ordinary classroom. And teachers of the gifted can be expected to know who 
these students are and the relationship between ability and achievement in 
each case. (154) 

From the readings one gathers that gifted students need teachers 
who will be willing to go to great lengths to meet the needs of such students 
and challenge them to their full potential in a free atmosphere. Such teachers, 
for example, will associate with community agencies which are in a position to 
provide opportunities for their gifted students which the schools are unable to 
provide. Such teachers will lead clubs within the schools focusing on special 
talents the teacher may have which will interest and benefit gifted students. 

Such teachers will be willing to give of their time in and out of regular school 
hours, working with the gifted in libraries, laboratories, the playing fields, 
and far afield too. These teachers will find that the gifted students recognize 
that which they are doing for them and acknowledge the efforts of the teachers 
with respect and interest and high achievement. 

Before concluding this section it is necessary to note what the 
literature has to say about the professional training of teachers of the gifted. 

The American Association For Gifted Children suggests that teachers of the 
gifted need to be involved in the 'laboratory type' training experience, where 
first-hand they develop some of the important attributes demanded by successful 




( — 


















- '. : - . . <. . : 8 • : c; 









( . ' ■ 






■ 












. - - - ■ • . 

• ..... . ... .. . - 

_ _ 

. . . . : . 










61 


successful teaching of the gifted. For example, they need to develop a point 
of view concerning their attitudes toward the gifted and those in close assoc¬ 
iation with the gifted. This is to say, there must be an eagerness on their 
part to see the gifted fulfill their promise and a desire to work with and 
understand people involved in the process. Teachers of the gifted, while in 
training-, should develop the art and science of successful counseling, since 
it can be so important in helping to achieve the aims of education for the 
gifted. Trainees who will later be teaching the gifted need training in the 
use of group techniques, for it is in group situations skilfully handled by 
the teacher, that gifted students have their intellectual interests fostered 
while at the same time experiencing wholesome social growth. And trainees 
will need to know how to work with parents ....especially those who fail to 
provide experiences at home and in the community that their children need.(155) 
In conclusion, research suggests that teachers are the most imp¬ 
ortant single factor in any program for educating gifted children. This is 
so because they are the key figures in the identification of the gifted and 
because the teachers put the enrichment plans into operation. Generally 
speaking students most admire those teachers who are well adjusted and who 
are genuine in their human relations. They need to know their subject matter, 
and teachers are best for the gifted if they are somewhat more nimble mentally 
than teachers of average students, as well as being somewhat more widely read. 
They need to understand the nature and nurture of gifted children and be 
anxious to help them grow. With their academic background and professional 
knowledge of the best means of educating gifted students they must be provided 
with facilities required if they are to carry out their plans for the best 
development of the gifted. 



. . K j 'S' . . .< • ■ ' ■ .. ... i. . .':. ■ 

^ .. Ml. .£ v $y,:i i> i i ■:*&;»; VtOf.C i*...:* ilX ^SvioVili O.U|C'S{}\ 

' 

■ K , - 

• .' :,a .0 - i "'..'. £» ' Z ,ih ijv'SA L - C ' .» . i.i ZUiiS \; Ol t :\ L . CZ c;d i '.,. S 3 .. 1 * 4*1 









- 


( : 


- 







- 






' . . . ' “ . 

.■ ..... ■ :... :. -. : ... 5, • '. ..' - - 

"s. .'...; ..... d3...: t : 3 

. . .. ...... 


. .. 

.... . . . 

... . ' jirmO: ...b 

. : 

... 


: . i Vij . ; - ; : 

.. ' ... .: ._ 's-xnl £ „ '\o : ... .: 

.... > ... . . _ 





: 








: 





. 


. 












62 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II 


(1) American Association For Gifted Children, The Gifted Child , (ed.) 

Paul Witty (Boston: D.C. Heath and Company., 1951), p.22 

(2) S. R. Laycock, Gifted Children (Toronto: Copp Clark Publishing 
Company Limited, 1957), pp. 9 - 10. 

(3) American Association For Gifted Children, ojd. cit . , p.49. 

(4) Witty, P. A. "Some Considerations In the Education of Gifted Children", 
Educational Administration and Supervision , 26(October, 1940) pp. 512 -21. 

(5) Ibid., p. 514. 

(6) Passow and others, Planning For Talented Youth , Talented Youth Project, 
Horace Mann-Lincoln Institute of School Experimentation, Publication 1 (New York 
Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University, 1955), pp.4-5. 

(7) American Association For Gifted Children, ££. cit ., pp. 10-11. 

(8) Cruickshank, W., (ed.) Psychology of Exceptional Children and Youth , 
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1956), p. 476. 

(9) Ibid., chap. x. 

(10) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, Educating Gifted Children , (Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press, 1957), p. 1. 

(11) Hollingworth, L. S. "Problems of Relationship Between Elementary and 
Secondary Schools In the Case of Highly Intelligent Pupils", Journal of Educ ¬ 
ational Sociology , 13(September-May)(1939-40) pp. 90-102. 

(12) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, o£. cit ., p. 15. 

(13) American Association For Gifted Children, op . cit ., p. 12. 

(14) The National Society For the Study of Education. The Education of 
Exceptional Children, 49th Yearbook, Part II (Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press, 1950), pp. 259-280. 

(15) Passow, A. H. "Comprehensive High Schools and Gifted Youth", Teachers 
College Record , 58(December, 1956), pp. 144-152. 

(16) S. R. Laycock, 0 £. cit ., chap. iv. 

(17) Hattery, L. H. "Why Waste Talent?" School and Society , 71(February 11, 
1950), pp. 81-84. 

(18) Passow and others, ojd. cit ., p. 10. 























FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II CONTINUED 


63 


(19) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, ojd. cit ., p. 19. 

(20) D. Wolfe, America’s Resources of Specialized Talent (New York: Harper 
and Bros., 1954), p. 269. 

(21) Rideout, E. B. "Canadian Schools Face the Challenge of the Gifted 

Student", The Educational Record , 22( ) pp. 140.155. 

(22) Clarke, S. C. T. "Students Who Drop Out of School", The Alberta School 
Trustee , 26(April, 1956), pp. 9 - 11. 

(23) Jackson, R. W. "Guilty of Brain Slaughter?" Education Forum, 6(December 
1956), pp. 

(24) S. R. Laycock, ojd. cit . , p. 8. 

(25) Barbe, W. B. "Are Gifted Children Being Adequately Provided For?" 
Educational Administration ‘and Supervision , 10(November, 1954), pp.405-413. 

(26) Ibid., p. 407. 

(27) Strang, R. "The Psychology of the Gifted", Journal of Teacher Education 
5(September, 1954), pp. 215-217. 

(28) L. Terman, "The Gifted Student and His Academic Environment", School 
and Society , 49(January 21, 1939), p. 71. 

(29) Passow, A. H. ojd. cit . , pp. 144 - 152. 

(30) Weglein, D. E."Administrative Problems In the Education of the Gifted", 
Teachers College Record , 42(February, 1941), pp. 428-431. 

(31) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, op . cit ., p. 70. 

(32) Ibid., Chap. v. 

(33) D. E. Weglein, "Administrative Problems In the Education of the Gifted" 
op . cit ., p. 428. 

(34) R. Pintner, "Superior Ability", Teachers College Record, 42(February, 
1941), p. 413. 

(35) Passow and others, op . cit ., chap, iii . 

(36) P. A. Witty, "Some Considerations In the Education of Gifted Children", 
op . cit . , pp . 512.521. 

(37) S. R. Laycock, ojd. cit ., p. 18. 

(38) Ibid., chap. ii. 















■ 

• . . ■ ( •' 


ii 


ii 2 . j p o ,2 a. ; i :i i &■ : i. 3 "x .*• > 



• ; (• - } 

■ a ( v) 


( 

( 



* ■ ■ ( v £) 

,,r -v i 


<. k : 





(-0 

( 


. ,h 


k 














!T ■ 


( ; 
( : 


( 








64 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II CONTINUED 

(39) American Association For Gifted Children, o£. cit ., p. 14. 

(40) Cutts, N. E., and Moseley, N. "Bright Children and the Curriculum", 
Educational Administration and Supervision , 39(March, 1953), pp. 168-173. 

(41) General Education In A Free Society , Report of the Harvard Committee, 
(Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press, 1945), p. 51. 

(42) Ibid., p. 51. 

(43) "The School Curriculum For the Gifted", Teachers College Record , 
42(February, 1941), p. 446. 

(44) Ibid., pp. 445-448. 

(45) Ibid., pp. 445-448. 

(46) Alpern, H., ,r Educating The Superior Students In the High Schools of 
New York City", Journal of Educational Sociology , 13(September-May, 1939-1940), 
pp. 112-119. 

(47) Wilson, F. T. "Salvaging Gifted Students In Regular Classrooms" Educ ¬ 
ational Administration and Supervision , 41(December, 1955), pp. 462-466. 

(48) Cruickshank, W. (ed.), oj3. cit ., chap. x. 

(49) Ibid., chap. x. 

(50) Ibid., p. 483. 

(51) Ibid., p. 498. 

(52) Ibid., pp. 500-503. 

(53) Ibid., p. 489. 

(54) Ibid., pp. 499 - 500. 

(55) American Association For Gifted Children, ojd. cit ., chap, vi. 

(56) Ibid., chap, vi. 

(57) S. R. Laycock, cit ., p. 2. 

(58) N. Davis, "Teachers for the Gifted", Journal of Teacher Education , 
5(September, 1954), p. 221. 

(59) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, 0 £. cit ., p. 74 
















t( 


. 



... >. .. 


; 


.... 












. . , (v ); 

... . _ ( . ' ) 

t ( i . • 

. - . t. . ( N 

. - ('• : 










( 


\ 


. -. . V, . 


. ... 


t 











■ .« ,, : ■■ (■ : 
• . . • :: ( 0 

• • <• 

. .. 

. - ( 

( . .) 

• - i. - ( ) 

• : • , . . c 

•• s - - • - ' <, - (' 0 


( 












65 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II CONTINUED 


(60) American Association For Gifted Children, ojd. cit ., p. 129. 

(61) S. R. Laycock, op. cit., p. 75. 

(62) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, o£. cit ♦, p. 97. 

(63) Ibid., p. 97. 

(64) S. R. Laycock, 0 £. cit ., chap. vii. 

(65) Barbe, W. B. "Characteristics of Gifted Children", Educational Admin ¬ 
istration and Supervision , 41(April, 1955), pp. 207-217. 

(66) Terman, L., and Oden, M.,"Major Issues In the Education of the Gifted", 
Journal of Teacher Education , 5(September, 1954), pp. 230-232. 

(67) Hildreth, G. "School Wide Planning For the Gifted", Educational Admin ¬ 
istration and Supervision , 41(January, 1955), pp. 1 - 10. 

(68) L. S. Hollingworth, "Problems of Relationship Between Elementary and 
Secondary Schools In the Case of Highly I n telligent Pupils", op . cit ., p. 97. 

(69) Wilson, H. E. "Educations],Implications of the Nations r s Manpower 
Needs", School Review , (Spring, 1957)/ pp. 

(70) S. R. Laycock, 0 £. cit ., chap, vi. 

(71) P. A. Witty, "Nature and Extent of Educational Provisions For the 
Gifted Pupil", Educational Administration and Supervision , 37(February,1951) 
p. 77. 

(72) M. Scheifele, The Gifted Child In the Classroom (New York: Bureau of 
Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University 1953), p. 38. 

(73) American Association For Gifted Children, op. cit., p. 188. 

(74) Ibid., p. 189. 

(75) H. A. Gray and L. S. Hollingworth, "The Achievement of Gifted Children 
Enrolled and Not Enrolled In Special Opportunity Classes", Journal of Educational 
Research, 24(June - December 1931) p. 259. 

(76) Noonan, N., and Norris, N. "Studies of Gifted Children" Journal of 
Exceptional Children , 4 - 5(1937-1939) pp. 46-62. 

(77) I. Lorge, "Social Gains In the Special Education of the Gifted", 

School and Society , 79(January, 1954), p. 4. 

(78) W. S. Miller and H. J. Otto, "Analysis of Experimental Studies of 
Homogeneous Grouping", Journal of Educational Research 21(February,1930) p. 102. 




















• •- > ■ ■ < v ' - • 


do 


(O;) 




. i 




('• > 


, v 






(■ : 


1 „ • ^(, ' . \ . /. ~ 

.! .‘i- A .U^ - ••'••• <. ^ 


: - ' t - V 

, ( • s ) - . 2 . : uJ v.:.-. 


.. — • —* * - ^ 

;; o V J ■ - •— :., ■ . ■ \ - 


. . ( 

.. . .. , ~ - -- 


- ^ '■ s - * ■ ' * •. ( 


. . d - • .■ • =•• o 


a '-ia, .r. ; 


■... < -■■■■■■• 




(., . . v . 


; • •- ( : 

ii . —.. . •• • -• i.i ^ . i — £» 


• y • * 


( - ■ '• 


• d 


.t. ■ ■ < 


( : 
<• : 




- 


_.i> i/i L. 




2 - 


. ( 

. , ( 


i • ’ • 


( 


• ■ d 


... c 

' «. 


. • ( : 

* j »’ i Jl *W i. '*I . XJ . v'j »*-r J , 0X2 











66 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II CONTINUED 

(79) Newland, E. T. "The Gifted", Review of Educational Research , 23( 

1953), pp. 417-431. 

(80) Ibid., p. 426. 

(81) Ibid., p. 424. 

(82) P. T. Rankin, "Pupil Classification and Grouping", Review of Educ ¬ 
ational Research , 6(June, 1931), p. 207.. 

(83) Newland, E. T. "The Gifted", o£. cit., pp. 417-431. 

(84) H. E. Wilson, "Educational Implicationsof the Nation's Manpower 
Needs", ££. cit ., p. 40. 

(85) M. Scheifele, o£. cit ., p. 38. 

(86) R. F. DeFIaan and R. J. Havighurst, aj>. cit ., p. 119. 

(87) H. E. Wilson, "Educational Implications of the Nation's Manpower 
Needs", op . cit ., p. 40. 

(88) Alpern, H. "Educating the Superior Student in the High Schools of 
New York City", og.* cit ., pp. 112-119. 

(89) S. R. Laycock, ojd. cit ., chap, vi. 

(90) Ibid., chap, vi. 

(91) Thorndike, E. L. "Gifted Children In Small Cities", Teachers College 
Record, 42(February, 1941), pp. 420-427. 

(92) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, 0 £. cit ., p. 122. 

(93) Rideout, E. B. "Canadian Schools Face the Challenge of the Gifted 
Student", 0 £. cit ., pp. 140-155. 

(94) Passow and others, o£. cit ., p. 46. 

(95) S. R. Laycock, ojd. cit . , pp . 34-38. 

(96) Ibid., pp. 38-40. 

(97) American Association For Gifted Children, 0 £. cit ., p. 37. 

(98) M. Scheifele, ojd. cit ., p. 37. 

(99) P. A. Witty, "Programs and Procedures For the Education of the Gifted", 
.Journal of Teacher Education , 5(September, 1954), p. 228. 









• • n (. ) 

. , • ( ) 

• * ( )' 

. ,( < --) , . 

, ♦' •• , ( 

■ • ' ( > 

• • 

, . „q «. K ... $>il: < . ) 

. - - . . ( N 

. . I ■■(< ) 

, . t « -■’ •' ’ * . 

. \ . < ' - , - (i $ 

• .< - - 

• . < : - • ( ) 

• ■ ' - • (• .'). 

• • , • • • ( ) ' 

. - . . ,( , 

■ • - . * * ( : N 

. . \ • ( ) 

. ■ 

1 *:_ a _ . ^ - - 

• . • V C ) 

* - * . v , < • ( ) 

• ^ • ■ <■ ( ) 

( ) 

* •( ’') 

< ., - • * ( ) 

* ( - X? - ) • t 









67 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II CONTINUED 


(100) J. Justman, "Personal and Social Adjustment of Intellectually Superior 
Accelerants and Non-Accelerants" in Junior High Schools", School Review, 61(Nov¬ 
ember, 1953) p. 


(101) L. Terman and M. Oden, and others, The Gifted Child Grows Up (Genetic 
Studies of Genius, Vol. IV(Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1957) 

p. 281. 

(102) R. F. Dellaan and R. J. Havighurst, ojd. cit ., chap. viii. 


(103) S. R. Laycock, ojd. cit ., p. 47. 


(104) 

(105) 

(106) 
Principal , 


American Association For Gifted Children, ojd. cit ., p. 260. 

R. F. Dellaan and R. J. Havighurst, ojd. cit ., p. 126. 

,l Meeting The Special Needs of the Individual Child", National Elementary 
19(July, 1940), pp. 


(107) Cutts, N. E., and Moseley, N. "Providing For the Bright Child in the 
Heterogeneous Group", Educational Administration and Supervision, 39(April,1953) 
pp. 225-230. 


(108) R. Pintner, "Superior Ability", 0 £. cit ., p. 418. 

(109) N. E. Cutts and N. Moseley, "Bright Children and the Curriculum", 
op . cit ., p. 171. 

(110) M. Scheifele, ojd. cit ., p. 41. 

(111) P. A. Witty, "Some Considerations In the Education of Gifted Children", 
op . cit ., p. 517. 


(112) R. F. Dellaan and R. J. Havighurst, ojd. cit ., chap. x. 

(113) R. H. Roberts, "The Environment of the Gifted", Journal of Teacher 
Education, 5(September, 1954), p. 220. 


(114) Witty, P. A. "Nature and Extent of Educational Provisions For The 
Gifted Pupil", ojd. cit ., pp. 65 - 79. 

(115) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, ojd. cit ., p. 178. 


(116) E. Martens, Curriculum Adjustments For Gifted Children , U .S.Department 
of Health, Education and Welfare Bulletin No. 1, (Washington, D.C; Government 
Printing Office, 1953), p. 32. 


(117) Educational Policies Commission of the National Education Association, 
Education of the Gifted , (Washington, D.C.: National Education Association, 1950), 


p. 67. 











-r*,-,yy .y Tw r y'T,-' .'V.lAXlTOO^ 


4 0 . *£>7*’ 


F |?< 

■ rV 


jul . - (:Jvi) 

.. Ln* 22 
. . (c2 X * r 

.J: ( U) 

. 4 u. ».= li ic tis-': .. 


< 


>- , . I A f 1 . • . •.. . . ( . • . ) 

- o' t ■ -t> .< -: 

ft 

, . . - i ( 

. i- » -jo- . ( .C ) 

^ 1 .i'.;:.. ns _1. . ( Co) 

.» *• ( ■ . .ml.) . < uf>:_ 


• os v , H . )'i ' 5. 2 .s' ( 


•J.) 


' j J :.■} A 1 


. (H: 

, r i . . . ( j) 

^ . _ * . ; j" .' . ( ;i } 

• •- ( : 

' , * ( ) 





( • 


( - ) 






( 


y 

it 





on no, < n, . . . Ji ( ... J.) 
‘•v. • 'n;: ’ ^ }lilt J'uui . & ( I '■) 

, J'\r, ''o. O 



<( 


q fi : J X J o r . V• iO.2 3J' 
^ j i . { ?.^) . o "i i. .. . J 


(vio 







68 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II CONTINUED 

(118) Lewis, W. D., and McGahee, W. "A Comparison of the Interests of Mentally 
Superior and Retarded Children”, School and Society , 52(December, 1940),pp.597-600. 

(119) American Association For Gifted Children, op. cit ., pp. 225-226. 

(120) Dressel, P. L, and Grabow, J. M. "The Gifted Evaluate Their High 
School Experience", Exceptional Children , 24(May, 1958), pp. 394-396. 

(121) American Association for Gifted Children, op. cit.., pp.153-154. 

(122) Passow and others, op. cit . , p. 59. 

(123) Ibid., pp. 59-60. 

(124) R. Pintner, "Superior Ability", op. cit ., p. 415. 

(125) Hildreth, G. "School Wide Planning For the Gifted", op. cit . , pp.1-10. 

(126) S. R. Laycock, op. cit., p. 17. 

(127) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, op. cit ., chap. v. 

(128) American Association For Gifted Children, op. cit ., p. 124. 

(129) . R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, op. cit ., chap. v. 

(130) Bruner, H. B. "Education's Role In Developing Leadership", Teachers 
College Record , 42(February, 1941), pp. 420-427. 

(131) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, op. cit ., p. 160. 

(132) American Association For Gifted Children, op. cit ., p. 155. 

(133) Ibid., p. 156. 

(134) W. L. Russell, "The Importance of Social Capillarity", Teachers College 
Record , 42(February, 1941), p. 381. 

(135) J. C. Gowan, "Dynamics of the Underachievement of Gifted Students", 
Exceptional Children, 24(November, 1957), p. 98. 

(136) L. Terman and M. Oden, "Major Issues In the Education of the Gifted", 
op . cit ., p . 231. 

(137) Ibid., p. 231. 

(138) P. A. Witty, "Nature and Extent of Educational Provision For the Gifted 
Pupil", op. cit . , p. 77. 

(139) A. H. Passow,"The Comprehensive High School and Gifted Youth", op . cit ., 
p. 147. 














; ( 








( 






( ■: : 

.( 

C •: : 





•v • ( 

• <. ( } 

’• * • ,( v \ ' ( , • 

- . : : - • 

, 

• : : ( ) 

- . 





FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II CONTINUED 


(140) American Association For Gifted Children, ojd. cit ., p. 106. 

(141) P. F. Brandwein, The Gifted Student As Future Scientist (New York 
Harcourt Brace & Company, 1955), p. 64. 

(142) Passow and others, ojd. cit ., p. 57. 

(143) N. Davis, "Teachers of the Gifted", ojd. cit ., p. 221. 

(144) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, ojd. cit ., pp . 81-82. 

(145) P. F. Brandwein, ojd. cit . , p. 68. 

(146) Ibid., p. 69. 

(147) American Association For Gifted Children, ojd. cit ., p. 108. 

(148) N. Davis, "Teachers of the Gifted", ojd. ci t ., p. 

(149) Passow and others, ojd. cit ., p. 57. 

(150) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, ojd. cit . , p.137. 

(151) S . R. Laycock, ojd. cit . , p. 19. 

(152) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, ojd. cit ., p. 158. 

(153) Passow and others, ojd. cit . , p. 58. 

(154) R. F. DeHaan and R. J. Havighurst, ojd. cit ., p. 138. 

(155) American Association For Gifted Students, 0£. cit ., chap, vi. 






I 



70 


CHAPTER III 

THE EDUCATION OF GIFTED STUDENTS IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS: 

CRITERIA OF A GOOD PROGRAMME (156) 

If secondary schools aim to equalize educational opportunities so that 
the unique interests and abilities of all students will be fully challenged, 
the schools need to recognize that there are ways and means of educating gifted 
students which will serve to enhance their best development. In other words, 
if secondary schools purposely set out to meet the needs of gifted students 
with a challenging education that will direct them into socially useful 
occupations and assist them in achieving social and emotional maturity, such 
schools will be characterized by a set of criteria which make for a good 
secondary school programme for gifted youth. 

Schools with a good programme for the gifted will aim to discover their 
superior students and attempt to understand the nature of their 'gifts'. The 
schools will make possible by means of administrative devices a programme that 
will provide 'enriched' experiences for gifted students. Administrators and 
teachers will recognize that the gifted need an education that is different from 
that offered the average and less-able, a curriculum deepened and widened to 
meet the needs of each individual gifted student. The schools will consciously 
set out to motivate gifted youth by a variety of ways and means, getting them 
to put forth their very best efforts to achieve successfully high academic 
standing, fuller physical development, and an emotional and social maturity 
which results in healthful human relations. The schools will recognize that 
beyond the boundaries of their limited resources exist a wide variety of 
community resources which may be used to benefit the development of gifted 
students. Administrative officials in such schools will undertake to provide 








71 


supervisory leadership for the teachers of gifted students, assisting them to 
obtain what research has found concerning the characteristics of the gifted, the 
nature of a challenging curriculum, and effective ways and means of providing 
enriching school experiences. 


/ 


. _^. ■ - ^ : ‘JC i \:.x - 

. * 2 : ...... 

hia . .'■ ; • 

. 











a :.il l 

•: ..o •••:• 

. 










FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER III 


(156) Havighurst, R.J., Stivers, E., and DeHaan, R.F. A Survey of the 
Education of Gifted Children (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,1955), 
Chapter i. 









73 


CHAPTER IV 

DISCOVERY OF THE GIFTED 


1. The Criterion 

A good secondary school programme for gifted students seeks to discover 
systematically such students. Teachers are provided with objective standards 
against which they may judge the capabilities of their students. Teachers are 
given supervisory assistance in the search for gifted students. In addition 
to the judgments of teachers, the school will use objective tests in finding 
talented youth. Ordinarily, the use of such tests is confined to intelligence 
tests and standardized achievement tests. Some use will be made of aptitude 
tests. 

v Non-academic talent (e.g.-- dramatic ability, musical ability, etcetera) 

for the most part is discovered by obtaining the results of students' efforts 
in the various talent areas and having it judged by competent judges. 

2. Current Composite School Practice 

School 100 The two major means of identification are the daily class¬ 
room performance of students, as teachers observe them in action, and the 
results of final examinations each year. Intelligence test scores are used 
as supplementary evidence. Standardized achievement tests are used for class¬ 
ification purposes in the commercial department. 

School 200 The most important single means of identification are the 
results of group intelligence tests. Some students are selected on the basis 
of teachers' judgments of their classwork and performance in extracurricular 
activities. In some cases decisions are based on students' past records as 


shown in cumulative record folders. 











umuz £. 















74 


School 300 Students are identified as intellectually gifted by means 
of a group intelligence test administered in Grade X. Cumulative record 
folders are sometimes used for further evidence. Teachers, each year are 
requested by guidance officials to name their top students in terms of 
academic ability, and talent in music, art, drama, and shopwork. 

School 400 A group intelligence test administered to students in 
Grade X, the results of the Department of Education's standardized reading 
test administered to Grade IX students, and teachers' judgments form the 
basis of the selection of gifted students at this school. Teachers are 
required to submit a list of their outstanding students to the school's 
administrative offices. Teachers decide on the basis of their own reactions 
to students as individuals and in terms of students' achievement on the 
teachers' tests. 

School 500 The basis of selection at this school is a students' 
cumulative record folder, a group test of intelligence given to all Grade X 
students, and the judgments of teachers. Teachers evaluate the potential 
of students in terms of their classwork, the leadership qualities they 
display in extracurricular activities, and staff room discussions of part¬ 
icular students in some cases. 

School 600 Here the Grade IX departmental final examinations results 
are the most important factor in the decision concerning giftedness. As 
supplementary evidence, IQ scores are available from a test given to Grade X 
students. On infrequent occasions standardized achievement tests are given 
to selected students in mathematics and English. 

School 700 A group intelligence test is administered to Grade X 
students. The results, along with information from students' permanent 












5 . 


0 


.. - 









' i 


o 



- i 




1 











75 ' 


school record cards, form the bases upon which decisions are made concerning the 
giftedness of students. The school record cards contain the students' achieve¬ 
ment in their regular classwork as measured by teacher-made tests. 

School 800 This school identifies its gifted students by referring to 
Grade IX departmental examination results, group intelligence test results from 
a test administered in Grade X, the results of standardized achievement tests 
given to all students x.n Grade X in the fields of language and reading, and 
finally, teachers' judgments. Whether or not a student is to be considered 
gifted sometimes comes up for discussion at staff meetings. 

Summary Alberta composite high schools identify gifted students on the 
bases of group intelligence test scores, marks from departmental final examinations 
(which may be considered by some as an achievement test), teachers' judgments, 
and previous school records found in students' cumulative record folders. On 
occasion decisions are made through discussions at staff meetings. Only rarely 
are standardized achievement tests used. 

School officials are concerned mainly with the identification of high 
academic ability, or high IQ. There is very little concern for the discovery 
of talents in non-academic areas such as art, music, drama, social leadership, 
and mechanics. 

3. Outcomes of Current Practice 

The question may now be raised, "Do the teachers in Alberta composite 
high schools know who are the gifted students in their classes?" Presumably, 
if teachers are to provide a special brand of education for gifted studm ts 
they must know who those students are. It should be recalled that giftedness 
for the purpose of this study has been defined as high intellectual ability. 
Students who score high on intelligence tests are said to be gifted. In the 
eight composite high schools the vast majority of students have been tested 
for IQ. These scores, along with each student's academic achievement record, 








... 








* 








m 


. :o . ... 








• — '. ' ^ t i - 




' . 













76 


are available in the central offices of the schools. Teachers are free to use 
such information. 

The teachers of the selected group of Grade XII students were asked to 
name their gifted students without reference to any records. The investigator 
assumed that if the teachers knew any of their gifted students they should know 
the students named in the selected group. These students are to be found in the 

top three per cent of the juvenile population in intelligence as measured by the 

Dominion IQ test. In all probability, they are students with IQ scores above 125. 

Table II shows that the teachers know approximately 36 per cent of their 
gifted students. 


TABLE II 

THE PERCENTAGE OF GIFTED GRADE XII STUDENTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE 
HIGH SCHOOLS KNOWN TO THEIR TEACHERS 
AS GIFTED STUDENTS 


School 

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

800 

Total 

% 

Numbers of teachers 
responsing 

15 

13 

18 

11 

16 

11 

10 

11 

105 

88 

Numbers of possible 
teacher responses 

15 

15 

27 

11 

25 

12 

11 

11 

127 

100 

Numbers of pupils it 
was possible to know 

71 

67 

103 

124 

98 

32 

41 

67 

603 


Numbers of pupils 
known to teachers 

32 

28 

46 

41 

32 

16 

8 

14 

217 


Percentage of gifted 
pupils known to 
teachers 

45 

42 

45 

33 

33 

50 

21 

21 

36 



4. Summary 

The data gathered from the school principals concerning the identification 
of gifted students shows that all the composite high school principals do have the 















.v... i. v a.\ - i,.j uj; .. . . t ., .l./(•-. »x|j 

. 


- 

. 

.. : -..a; ..... a .r.;.:. 

.... . .; : £ .' » /O ■ - - ' - • - . - • . 

-i. .......iL,. ;......'V.; . i-' aaa" ' ij.■ e>- 

. . -a. >;a- <. ..-a- .. is . .. v ;~-<a- jl .ilLmvQ 

... : . '. . ' • . ... . j a-.uaa . .. .. . ; u.au ..... 

. . ... ... . 




•. : > ' 


; : : . . 
- 








. 






















. . . I 


a hi.’V 

.. ■ ■ ... .. . a i: jaaJ: 

. f . ... . o' : 

.. . 

. 


e t 

. 

. 






. . . . . . . . 







77 


names of gifted students in terms of intelligence test results. But, while the 
administration may have the necessary information, teachers who have been work¬ 
ing with the students for the most part of a school year are unable to remember 
any more than 40 per cent of their gifted students. 




. auras: 

. - - - . - • 

. .... ... -. ... ■; - • -• - ' ; 




78 


CHAPTER V 

MAKING ENRICHMENT POSSIBLE: ADMINISTRATIVE DEVICES 

1. The Criterion 

In secondary schools with good programmes for gifted students, admin¬ 
istrators provide the organization which makes efficient and effective enrich¬ 
ment of the curriculum for them possible. 

Individual attention to gifted students by teachers in regular heter¬ 
ogeneous classes is one of the ways school administrators may seek to provide 
for their best development. Some suggest this is the ideal way to educate 
them. There are others who can strongly support the position that actual 
enrichment is more likely within the framework of special ability groupings, 
or by means of acceleration of gifted students, or by means of a combination 
of the two. 

2. Current Composite School Practice 

(a) Providing for the gifted in regular classrooms 

Two schools out of eight make an effort to keep gifted students in 
regular classrooms and meet their needs there. 

At School 600, ability grouping is said to be "scarcely feasible" 
because of the nature of the school's administrative organization. To lave 
special classes would curtail the students' elective choices. Rather than do 
that, the principal retains gifted students in regular classes. The principal 
opposes the practice of ability grouping in principle. He suggests that it is 
wise to keep bright students where they are in a position to stimulate the less 
able. At School 700 there is no effort made to place gifted students in special 
groups. The principal feels that teachers make an attempt to stream students 





. - . . 




- 










1 

- 









( ) 




- ' - . 8 . ' 






- ; : c .. - .... . . 




























. 






. 





79 


within their regular classes. According to him, the gifted in regular classes are 
expected to do more difficult assignments. The principal opposes segregation of 
the bright because the able group become the 'prestige' group, while the dull 
students get dumped into the technical courses and are disparaged for being 
'dumb *. 

(b) Special classes for the gifted 

Five schools out of eight claim to be making special efforts to 
segregate gifted students on the basis of IQ test results and/or school achieve¬ 
ment . 

The principal at School 200 said, "Certain classes such as 'x* are 
definitely designed for university prospects. While such classes are not exactly 
hand-picked there is a very real attempt made to group students in terms of 
ability." 

At School 500 students are selected for membership in special classes 
in terms of the reHults they achieved in junior high school, on the basis of 
mental ability tests, and in terms of the elective choices of students (e.g.-- 
students choosing to register in Latin are, in the main, gifted students. 

At School 100 students are selected for membership in special classes 
on the basis of their performance on the previous year's final examinations and 
not on the basis of IQ scores. 

The principal at School 300 said, with regard to administrative 
devices used to meet the needs of gifted students, "It is heterogeneous grouping, 
yet it isn't. There is a degree of grouping brought about by students' course 
choices and groups develop in terms of students' timetables." That is, within 
the matriculation pattern some courses chosen by students automatically group 
gifted students. For example, at School 300, French 11 and Mathematics 31 are 



. 

\ 






- 


. - 


• : 4 \ 




• 



. . 

i. 








80 


more or less ’gifted classes' because of the entrance requirements. 

The administrative device used at School 800, to meet the needs of 
the most able students, is what the principal called "homogeneous grouping 
according to programme." In terms of the classes students elect to enter they 
group themselves ability-wise, so that the gifted are in classes with others, 
less gifted perhaps, but still very capable. 

It should be recognized that any high school offering course 
patterns and elective choices is characterized by at least some degree of 
ability grouping, regardless of the particular philosophy of the administration. 
Out of 117 selected students only three were not in the matriculation pattern. 
Nearly all the selected students were in the university entrance programme. It 
is to be assumed that this programme contains, for the most part, students 
above average in intelligence. 

One may question this assumption, however. Byrne has pointed out 

that: 

both historical and social factors account, in part 
for the continuing strength of the academic tradition. 

By far the greater majority of students (fifty to sixty 
per cent) entering the province's composite high schools 
selects the route leading to matriculation standing. Few, 
of course, achieve their objective, as not more than five 
to seven per cent of all who enter provincial schools 
finally secure the coveted standing required for admission 
to the University of Alberta. (157) 

Is it safe to assume that students entering the matriculation 
pattern are automatically streamed in terms of high ability? It seems from 
Byrne's statement that matriculation classes, unless consciously grouped in 
terms of ability by the administration of a particular school, are for the 
most part heterogeneous ability groups. 




<• 


. 


- 




X 


O 






L) 


(- 




(■'. ) | 






.... ... ^ 0 ■ f. .1 < . .. () I 

7 

. 









81 


(c) Acceleration 

In all eight schools the administration made it clear to the 
investigator that it is very difficult to accelerate gifted students because 
of regulations of the Department of Education. Every matriculation course has 
its prerequisites and a student is allowed to earn a maximum of 40 credits a 
year. 

There have been cases of acceleration in at least two of the schools, 
but it required special permission from the Department. To get such permission, 
according to one principal, "was quite a battle." 

Out of 117 students only two were considered to be accelerants. 

They were covering three years 1 work in two years. 

Four of the eight principals said they believed acceleration may 
be a good idea and would be in favor of increasing the amount of acceleration 
of gifted students. One of the eight was definitely opposed to the idea and 
said that students should remain a full three years in senior high school. 

(Note: He opposes only one type of acceleration) 

Summary The majority of Alberta's composite high schools make what 
they consider to be a conscious effort to group gifted students in terms of 
their ability as indicated by intelligence tests and/or school achievement. In 
all the schools there is some degree of ability grouping because of course 
electives and course pattern choices such as the matriculation pattern. Two 
schools oppose any idea of segregating bright students from the less able. 

They set out to limit segregation to the degree possible through students' course 
choices. 

The regulations of the Department of Education make it very difficult 
for the high schools to accelerate gifted students. At least half the principals 



V 










.:: 


















u. 


OC'' .'v 







( 




) 















.3 








: 










y.:.. 


















82 


are in favor of accelerating some students if it were made more possible for them 
to do so. 

3. Outcomes of Current Practice 

Teachers were asked what they consider to be the most ideal means by which 
composite high schools could meet the needs of gifted students from the viewpoint 
of administrative organization. Table III shows that approximately 70 per cent of 
the teachers expressed the idea that gifted students should be segregated from 
their less-able classmates for instruction. Approximately 40 per cent said that 
smaller classes would help to make them provide more ideally for gifted students. 

TABLE III 

THE PER CENT OF TEACHERS OF A SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE XII STUDENTS 
EXPRESSING OPINIONS CONCERNING THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES THAT 
WOULD MOST ASSIST THEM TO BETTER MEET THE NEEDS OF GIFTED STUDENTS 


School 

Segregation 

of the 

gifted 

Smaller 

classes 


No. of 
responses 

For 

segreg. 

Other 

than segreg 

For smaller 
. classes 

Other than 
smaller classes 

100 

6/8 

3 

3 

4 

2 

200 

8/9 

6 

2 

6 

2 

300 

7/9 

5 

2 

1 

6 

400 

5/6 

2 

3 

2 

3 

500 

15/16 

13 

2 

8 

7 

600 

6/11 

5 

1 

0 

6 

700 

9/10 

5 

4 

3 

6 

800 

8/9 

6 

2 

4 

4 

T & % 

64/78 (82) 

45 (69) 

20 (31) 

28 (44) 

36 (56) 























■ 








o 




.. .. :q' 





































( ) ( ' ( ) ( : - ( 














83 


The selected teachers were asked to list the main reasons why they were 
unable to do all that they might have wished to do for the gifted students in 
their classes. The three most common reasons are: 



1 . 

Heterogeneous classes 

(33/69) 

48 

per 

cent 


2. 

Lack of time 

(27/69) 

39 

per 

cent 


3. 

Too large classes 

(22/69) 

32 

per 

cent 

4. 

Summary 






Administrators of the composite high schools claim to be segregating 
the gifted students from the less able in the majority of the schools, and it 
is contended by some that students in the matriculation pattern are automatically 
segregated into a 'university entrance' ability group. However, teachers of the 
gifted Grade XII students point out that the reason they are not doing for their 
gifted students all that they might wish to do is that classes are composed of 
the bright, average, and dull -- grouped together for instructional purposes. 

They want to see a policy of segregation instituted by school authorities. 

This suggests that in spite of what principals may believe, teachers want more 
segregation than is practiced presently. Also the teachers are hampered in 
their work with gifted students by large classes and by lack of time to plan 


for and teach the gifted. 





84 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER V 


(157) Andrews, J. H. M. and Brown, A. " The Canadian Survey of Composite High 
Schools ". Unpublished Monograph, Division of Educ. Adm., University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, May, 1958, Chapter 8, p. 9. 

















. - ... • r-i-A 





; 

.. 


, ^ t. <: o: GfiX ■' 




85 


CHAPTER VI 

DEVELOPING GIFTEDNESS: MOTIVATION 

1. The Criterion (158) 

It is generally agreed that before students can develop their talents 
successfully they must want to develop them. A good programme for gifted youth 
aims to motivate them to want to achieve high standards in academic work and in 
their social relations. Authorities have discovered ways and means of increasing 
the motivation of gifted students. 

For example, many students possess gifts of which they are unaware. 

Giving information to them and to their parents concerning their potentialities 
often motivates such students to develop their talents, and motivates their 
parents to assist the development as much as possible. 

Once school authorities know the nature of a student’s gifts, they can 
set out to guide the student into curricular and extracurricular activities and 
experiences that offer what appear to be the best means of development of the 
student's interests and abilities. 

Competent guidance counsellors may prove effective in motivating under¬ 
achieving gifted students to do better. Counselling may help to correct faulty 
study habits and undesirable attitudes toward learning. Counselling may help 
students overcome emotional stresses and strains. Any of these factors may be 
causes of under-achievement. 

The opportunity to 'tryout' at some activity or other may serve to 
interest and challenge gifted students to develop their talents. Secondary 
schools with a good programme for the gifted provide a wide range of 'tryout' 
opportunities such as a drama club, a science club, a school orchestra, a 
school newspaper, athletic teams, and so forth. 











i .vlu.^ : :'y,S*j: '.:u- U^llOdi viiv 





- t 






( ' 

. .. -. .•_i - •• • i _ V • lOHi *■'■,. <i.l • 

.. . !,<■- .<,j . •_ ■ ...' Y ■ . . JY. .. -- 

. .. .jiui.Y= -w ; «- .. ti •: *> J — 

, . ; . . . " - ■ : . 

. 

. . ..Y -jii . 9 i ; • 

_ _ .l • ...... gy . . _ £ni7i$l 

.. Y y Y 'Y.;;yy yjij io 

. . o•.. i.ij - . - i -...YY -J J ,1J -a 3 Oj Z 

.. .. .i .. L , 3 . o.->i j - ".O Y-Yy, -Y.->C.i Y_ .. . -1 J 

. ; ... : j.'•• .. •. Y ... ... v .Y- y..y. ' • J 3‘JO JS|< 

.. Y ;Q .y ... ... Y. .. - _. .■ ... .= y . ... 








iJii ■- J Yj Y j.... 


. ,.Y . j'j • 


..: . y. '- ...: .... ... y . .. ..... »• 


, ■. . . 




. ... . ....... .. » •. y ... ..:~i .. . ~ . .. y~ ; yy , y. , YJ8 



. . . . 





86 


If gifted students are brought into contact with gifted adults from 
either the school or the community, it may serve as a means of motivating some 
of them to want to emulate a particular gifted adult such as a musician, a 
chemist, a writer, or an artist. 

The chance to win rewards for high achievement and outstanding contri¬ 
butions to school life will sometimes motivate gifted students to a remarkably 
high degree. Such rewards may take the form of honour rolls, membership in 
honour societies, prizes and scholarships. 

In their discussion of motivation, DeHaan and Havighurst say: 

Motivation consists of the purposes, ambitions, drives and 
values of a person. Motivation is what enables a person of 
potential ability to take advantage of education, to develop 
and use his talents. Since motivation is something inside a 
person, the educator cannot manipulate it -- decrease, increase, 
or change it -- in the same way he handles other parts of the 
educational program: nevertheless, he can influence motivation. (159) 

Teachers and parents are perhaps in the best positions to initiate in 

many students the drive to be creative, to be leaders, to achieve in consonance 

with their abilities, to go on to higher education and ultimately to positions 

of community leadership, and to be leaders in their chosen professions. 

With this in mind, the investigator attempted to gather data concerning 

how Alberta composite high schools motivate gifted students and the degree of 

success they have achieved. 

2. Current Composite School Practice 

(a) Guidance 

(i) Psychological Testing 

Intelligence Tests - the eight schools make use of intelligence 




O' 








«. f - ?. ■ 


^ V 















87 


tests in the guidance of gifted youth. Schools 200, 400, 500, 600, 700 and 800 
administer group tests to all Grade X students and to any students entering 
school without an IQ score in their records. Schools 100 and 300 rely mostly 
on IQ scores found in the cumulative record folders of the students from tests 
administered in junior high school or elementary school. They do administer 
intelligence tests to those students registering in the respective schools with¬ 
out an IQ score in their records. When in doubt about a student's IQ, School 
200 administers a different group test from the one given to the student in 
Grade X. Schools 600 and 800 administer individual intelligence tests on 
occasion to some students when the necessity arises. School 800 administers 
a second group intelligence test to all Grade XII students early in September 
of each school year. 

Achievement Tests - Only one school uses achievement tests 
standardized on a country-wide basis. At School 800, language and reading 
tests are administered at the beginning of each year to students in Grade X, 

XI, and XII. Schools 400 and 500 have students write achievement tests that 
have been standardized on a city-wide basis in some subjects. 

Personality Tests and Inventories - Four schools out of eight 
make no use whatsoever of personality tests in the guidance of gifted youth. 
School 200, to a very limited extent, administers two adjustment tests. Only 
a limited number of students are involved and these are not necessarily gifted. 
On occasion School 300 refers students to the guidance department of the prov¬ 
incial university for personality testing. This is done only upon the request 
of the students. School 500 has teachers annually 'trait-rate' all students 
for guidance purposes. School 600 administers a problems check-list as the 


need arises to individual students in order to assist the counsellors to better 



1 


- J 


. . 


. 




01 . ; 


• ■ 

. 










,© 


_ .... — 

a . ,. ... . ; . .... . , : i 

j..; - 1 t - Ltn ' > n* l . - •* 1>r > - ° $ 


- . • 

, 

o ,. ... i .. . . .: O- • . o .. isi..; ;> 1 i ■ • o: -i-'..itivj 




88 


guide the students. 

Vocational Interest Tests - All eight schools use the Kuder 
Preference Record as one means of guidance. Schools 100, 200, 300 and 600 
administer the Kuder to all Grade X students and to others in XI and XII who 
register at the respective schools without having such information in their 
record folders. Schools 400, 500, and 800 get this information from students' 
records. In these centres the Kuder is administered in junior high school. At 
school 700 the Kuder is given as the need arises, i.e., as students request it. 

Aptitude Tests - Schools 400 and 800 give an aptitude test to 
all Grade X students and to any others in XI and XII that arrive at the respect¬ 
ive schools without such information. School 500 administers the same aptitude 
test to grade XI students and those in XII who missed it in XI. The same test 

is given to some students in schools 200 and 700, as the officials feel there 

is a need for it in specific cases, to assist in vocational guidance. 

Other Tests and Records - All the schools make use of the 
information found in the cumulative record folders of the students. Such 
information includes the results of previous intelligence tests and standard¬ 
ized achievement tests taken while the students attended elementary and junior 

high school. All the schools make use of the results of the Department of 

Education's testing programme involving Grade IX students. This includes the 
results of an intelligence test, standardized reading scores and the results 
of the departmental final examination (achievement). 

Summary All the schools claim to use the results of group 
intelligence tests and a vocational interest test in the guidance of gifted 
students. To a lesser degree the composite high schools' guidance departments 
make use of aptitude tests. Personality tests and standardized achievement 







, - . 

: u ~ 1. & .fit,t a i-i :v 

s . , . . . . - ' - ------ 

_ i - - - - - . . 

_i , j j-vji/.i 

. ... - ... < - . 

«. . . ..... ... 

.. j V • .«/ - -• ” - - — ■'S —' ■ - ' ' • 

; .:.... ... XX rtJ - - - . -. • . : 

.« . . ... ■ - - - 

,,i. ~ L ..... - v.'-ii- i... i : ;:-.. ../■ H.. i.-Jj~ >-'• ~ - 

...: ^v_ - . .. -■ ->i.•: . J ' - -0 .' - .. 


.’J C..■ i> -V 




. 1. 




.: . s<| •.. u. 


- 


:•{. . .. .-. .. a ax 


.. . .. . 

... .... ..j . . - i. .••-:■ ••-•- T ■ ■ 

.. ... _' .i JkZ~ C: X 1 .' li XiiXfc, . -JX... 

* 

l .1 JC.* • i_. ■■’. C Vi J ! . l.i ij-.'li. 


. (. . 






. 


- 

.7, . , ,.i i • :: & j .- :i • > J 1 3- i / 




...... 

.JL C-:.' £..iJ - - - . -• - i-.- C'i‘ i-.' 

■: 


.... _ . .. ... . , .-J... ., ; 




89 


tests of publishing companies are very rarely used for guidance purposes. 

All the schools make use of information gathered by the prov¬ 
incial department of education (e.g. IQ scores, reading achievement scores, 
academic achievement scores). All of the guidance departments make use of the 
cumulative record folders of gifted students, each of which contains considerable 
information on the history of the students' previous schooling. 

(ii) Availability of Records 

In order to discover the extent to which guidance records were 
available and to whom they were available, the investigator asked the guidance 
co-ordinator in each high school, "To whom are your records of individual stu¬ 
dents available?" 

In all the schools the records are available to the principals 
and his assistants or vice-principals. They are available to department heads 
or co-ordinators and to the teachers. In every case the records are partially 
available to students and to parents through interviews with guidance officials, 
Information that is pertinent is also available to university officials, potential 
employers of students, social welfare officials, and the like. Information given 
to parents and students is general information concerning the students' interests, 
aptitudes and abilities, and so forth, depending on the nature of the information 
contained in the records of the students. 

(iii) Special Guidance For the Gifted 

The investigator asked each of the guidance co-ordinators of 
the composite high schools, "Is this school offering any special guidance pro¬ 
visions for the gifted students enrolled?" (That is, something other than the 
regular guidance offered all the students?) 




. 




2 


) 


.( 




: 


; .- • - ... ■■ •• <. 


. - - - 


£ . . w . .. - -<:v i 


: 


. 


..... c. 


3£L .. / .. .• 1' 01 . 2 . O 


t. 




. : . 


« .... . . 


- . 









90 


School 100 At this school all grade XII students meet in the 
auditorium for one period during which time the students are informed of 
possible scholarships for which they might apply, and the more capable ones 
are urged to apply. There is an attempt made by the officials in charge to 
overcome, in the students, the 'I'm not good enough' attitude. Application 
procedures are outlined. Following the meeting a poster is posted containing 
the names of all the available scholarships. Students are frequently reminded 
of the scholarships. Guidance officials hold interviews with interested students. 

School 200 An aptitude test is given to those students who will 
make the most efficient use of the results in formulating their future plans. 

Many of the gifted are in this group. The availability of scholarships is 
pointed out to students in Grades X, XI, and XII. Bright students are urged to 
apply. 

School 300 All the students who achieve particularly well on the 
Christmas and Easter examinations are called together in a special meeting and are 
informed of the available scholarships and bursaries. It is the school's policy 
to impress upon students in Grades X and XI the necessity of hard work if they 
plan to win any scholarships. There is, also, a meeting of Grade XII students, 
voluntarily attended, at which time the available scholarships are discussed. 
Interested students are assisted in making out applications. 

School 400 Students planning on attending the University of 
Alberta are interviewed by school guidance officials concerning their vocational 
choices, and then they are individually interviewed by personnel from the Univ¬ 
ersity. Gifted students are individually urged to apply for scholarships. 

School 500 Guidance officials are especially interested in main¬ 
taining a high positive correlation between achievement and ability. The 










: 






- 




, 














- 


.X . 



<. 


. ^ 






. 

























91 


principal's belief is that counsellors have been able to give gifted students the 
kind of guidance that has enabled most of this group to become top achievers 
academically. 

Officials at Schools 600 and 700 said that no special guidance 
provisions are made available especially for gifted students. At Schools 300, 

400 and 800, guidance officials and administrators offer what might be termed 
special guidance for gifted students. In cooperation with department of educ¬ 
ation officials these school officials have made it possible for certain students 
to register in classes in the grade that is one level above them. Thus they are 
able to carry courses in their last two years of high school which they otherwise 
would not have been able to take. Such students take two years of language in 
one, and then take a course the following year in place of the second year of 
the language. This means that the students earn more than the maximum number 
of credits ordinarily allowed during three years of high school. 

Summary In the main it may be said that special guidance for 
gifted students in Alberta composite high schools takes the form of supplying 
them with information concerning available scholarships and bursaries and urging 
them to apply. 

(iv) The Nature of Routine Guidance Interviews 

The investigator believed it was necessary to find out the 
nature of counselling received by gifted students in regularly scheduled 
guidance interviews. The guidance co-ordinator at each school was asked to 
describe the nature of a typical interview. 

School 100 Counsellors concentrate on educational and vocational 
guidance and spend only a very limited amount of time on personal guidance. 





. 


. 


' - 











( ) 




1 ' 












92 


Students are encouraged to consult counsellors on any problems that may be 
upsetting them. Teachers are encouraged to refer problem cases to the guidance 
department. 

In September of each school year students in Grades X, XI, and 
XII have their time-tables checked. Counsellors attempt to place students in 
those patterns and courses in which they are most likely to succeed. During 
October the Grade X students are sorted into achievement groups. During Jan¬ 
uary and February there is a progress check and the vocational plans of the 
students are discussed. Also, scholarships are suggested to likely students. 

There is an attempt made to interview each student once per year in addition 
to the visit paid by all students to have their time-tables checked in the 
autumn. 

School 200 Students are free to request guidance interviews in 
addition to their scheduled ones, and frequently do* There is an attempt made 
by the counsellors to schedule two interviews per student per year. First there 
is the 'first-of-the-year' interview in order to check students' time-tables 
and to judge whether or not the students are in the best patterns and courses 
in terms of their abilities. The second interview centres around a discussion 
of each student's educational progress, his vocational plans, and any personal 
problems he may wish to bring up for discussion. Guidance officials are concerned 
with getting up-to-date information on the student's in-school and out-of-school 
activities and his home background. Each interview takes approximately thirty- 
five minutes. 

Following the issuance of report cards during the year there 











93 


occurs some special educational guidance for under-achieving students. Superior 
students are constantly urged to apply for scholarships and bursaries. 

School 300 Counsellors try to see each student once per year. 

In addition to this scheduled interview, students are urged to make appointments 
if they wish to discuss home, school or personal problems, or get information 
concerning employment or scholarships. 

Guidance in Grade X is a matter of discovering each student's 
interests, the nature and extent of his involvement in extracurricular activities, 
checking his time-table, and discussing the importance of choosing a proper high 
school course pattern....that is, one that suits his interests and abilities. 

In Grade XII, guidance is mostly vocational in nature. Counsellors 
find out the students' future plans. They help students decide their vocational 
choices by supplying information that can help them make up their mind wisely. 
Counsellors encourage senior students to apply themselves diligently to hard 
work in order to achieve a high standing if possible. 

As in Grade X, in Grade XI guidance is of an educational and 
personal nature. A start is made on vocational guidance. 

School 400 At the beginning of each year all students make a 
"quick visit" to guidance counsellors for a time-table check. Later during the 
year there is a longer "one-period" visit which is concerned with educational 
and vocational guidance. As early as Grade X vocational guidance begins and 
becomes increasingly more important. 

School 500 Guidance officials aim to meet each student at least 
once per year for an interview. The length of the interview is approximately 
thirty minutes and is scheduled through the central school offices. Students 





.6 : 




. . .. 


;: . . ' . 












... . : 




j -10 it. 1 j 35 


t. ~ - 


~ 






. _.w*u 


: u : 


. 


:;3^ 9 "•33. jo '>no ; 








a: 




.. 


:<j i£. 













94 


are free to request interviews and some do. 

During an interview the student's cumulative record folder is 
checked to bring it up-to-date; the student's ability and his current achieve¬ 
ment are compared and discussed; vocational interests and vocational possibil¬ 
ities are discussed. Gifted students are urged to apply for scholarships. 

School 600 Interviews are mainly limited to vocational and 
educational guidance. During the first part of the school year Grade XII 
students are met by guidance counsellors. Their vocational plans are discussed 
and their current programme is checked to see that it fits with their future 
plans. During the middle portion of the school year guidance officials deal 
with poor achievers and under-achievers. Toward the end of each school year 
time is spent with students in Grades X and XI lining up their educational 
programmes for the next year. 

Throughout the school year there is some incidental guidance. 

This is the result of students' requests for interviews. The extent of such 
guidance depends on the time available for it. Usually students requesting 
interviews want information with regard to scholarships and financial assist¬ 
ance available for any who may be interested in going on for further education. 
Gifted students are urged to apply for scholarships and go on to university. 

There is very little personal guidance given students at this 
school. There is a local branch of the provincial guidance clinic close at 
hand. Some referrals are made when it is deemed necessary by school authorities. 

The guidance coordinator at this school does not believe that 
all students have problems. Therefore, he does not insist that students must 
visit the guidance department at least once per year in addition to the time- 







- 


. ; —”- ••• • i - :: c iij - lj * 

. - . ~ : 

.... ......' . - ■- • 

... 'j. .i *•-- ■■ -• . ’■ ■ — A* ^ 1 t 

- 

• « ' . .. . 


. C J. S7 








. .. . , - - 


.. . . : . : 

. - • - .... . .. - ■ * ■ ■ ■ ■ 

. - - ‘ 

,. .... . ..:.. :.i . .. 1 .J - •' - - ..■. ■ -••• 

. . . 

fii BM'jC, ‘iiS ■. • &:iJ v'oC/. 

, 


1 - iJ-v- 


c . 




- - . ......... 


... . . ~:.i ... fl.. >. :i.V. ... CJ _. k. 

. . : 


- - - 1 • ■ . 


1". . • . .; ■■ v :':i ' : U: 












... 




■ .. . . '. .. ■ : 


& J. ... - v 




.... 











95 


table check. It is the school's policy to wait for students to request inter¬ 
views. It is believed that when students see a need for an interview the 
results will be more profitable than insisting students come in for an inter¬ 
view whether they feel they need one or not. 

School 800 The authorities attempt to insure one visit per 
student per year. Guidance at the Grade X level and the Grade XI level is 
more educational than vocational. By Grade XII it becomes mostly vocational. 
Guidance officials introduce Grade XII students to occupational trends and 
opportunities. Bright students are encouraged to apply for scholarships. 
Students planning to go on to university are assisted with registration, others 
are helped to make plans to apprentice or attend the Technical Institute or 
enter nursing. 

Students who appear to be doing poorly, academically, come 
in for some special guidance. The probable causes of the students' under¬ 
achievement are discussed and students are urged to try and do better if they 
have the ability, or to change into more suitable courses if they appear to 
lack ability. 

Guidance counsellors work closely with students, parents and 
teachers in an attempt to get students achieving on a par with their ability 
level and to get them into those courses most suited to their interests and 
capacities. 

Summary Guidance interviews in Alberta composite high schools 
are concerned mostly with educational and vocational guidance. There is to be 
a conscious attempt on the part of guidance counsellors in the majority of 




- - . - 

. . ■ ■ 31 * 

. 

,3c- >:o 'io v.3fl3 ! -. - '^• : y ' : 

• - 

. . ^ - • - ; ' : .' 

■ ; . .. : : . * .' ■■ j: 3 ' 

3 

. - - ^ ■ * . - 

■ 

. 

. .av: •••Jii .•: f 

•• ^ 5-* . ; ' -- , .. ' • - - -- — 

. - * 

. : • . - ■ ' 

• . - I - : ^ : ■ 

.-(jiiMs : | 

^ j _ .; £ ... oo ‘ •• - *-ov 'QWU£>b±tJb 

- •- - - — 

. £; . . Ov - :.o; i;c,, oia?.;oe Bzoi'. o:,i 1 -•: o. • ibvb:-, . 

j : j 

. : : • 

' £ JO - 

■ ; :c , a- ' ill //.c o'. $ r xzbXLts ICi c ao 1 ' f r : - ••' 







96 


schools to direct students into the courses for which they seem best suited. 
Much of the interview time is given over to a discussion of students' future 
plans. Most of the schools attempt to provide approximately thirty minutes 
of scheduled interview time per student per year. Students are urged to 
request interviews, if they so desire. Very little time is allotted for 
guidance of a 'personal problems' nature. Most of the schools' administrators 
make guidance counsellors responsible for assisting students select their 
courses each year and for checking their time-tables. 

(v) Frequency .of Students' Visits 

As the literature on the subject suggests, guidance can be 
an important factor in the motivation of gifted students to do their best at 
school, and can be an important means of assisting students locate themselves 
in course patterns and elective choices which fit their unique interests and 
capacities. Counsellors may be able to direct students into worthwhile extra¬ 
curricular activities which will aid their best development, socially and 
emotionally as well as intellectually. 

One of the most productive devices guidance officials have at 
their disposal in the guidance of gifted students is the interview. In an 
attempt to discover to what extent the gifted visited counsellors for interviews 
during the past school year, the investigator asked, "How many visits have you 
made to the guidance department this year?" One hundred seven students out of 
one hundred nine responded. The average number of visits is 1.64. The S.D. 
is 1.26. The large S.D. indicates that the number of visits each student made 
varied widely. Ten students did not pay any visits to counsellors. Ore student 


made ten calls. 





- 




( ) 







.c : lt.i 




:. : l . .ifi.l 

_^ i Cl 


bm . - . . . - 




. 




i - 


. 





:.: v . r ;.. .. '.c sdiiz 






. _ 


■ 


. . . .. . o .. • - • : 9 








97 


(vi) The Guidance Departments' Influence on the Course 

Choices and Extracurricular Choices of Students 

In an attempt to discover the role played by guidance coun¬ 
sellors in helping gifted students decide on the courses they will, or will 
not take, and the extracurricular activities in which they will, or will not 
participate, the investigator asked, "At any time during your enrollment at 
this school has the guidance department helped you decide to take a course? 
to not take a course? Has the guidance department helped you decide to 
participate in an extracurricular activity? not to participate? Table IV 
shows that three students out of ten claimed assistance from guidance coun¬ 
sellors in deciding to register in courses; one out of ten was assisted in 
deciding to not register in courses; Thirteen per cent were helped by 
guidance officials to decide to take part in one or another extracurricular 
activities; three per cent were assisted in making decisions not to part¬ 
icipate in extracurricular activities of one kind or another. 

From what the selected students report it seems apparent that 
guidance counsellors have little to do with the course choices of gifted 
students and the extracurricular activities in which ty do and do not 
participate. It must be remembered that perhaps the schools' policies 
concerning course choices in the matriculation are so tightly articulated 
that little room is left for students' free choices. This much does seem 
clear from the students' responses: guidance counsellors play a very limited 
role in the choice of extracurricular activities by the selecte group 
of students. The students make their own choices, on the whole, 




(..) 





<. ■ - • - ■ * : 


•tv. 







• f- 












98 


as to whether they shall or shall not participate, and in which activities 
they will participate. 


TABLE IV 

THE EXTENT TO WHICH GUIDANCE DEPARTMENTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE 
HIGH SCHOOLS INFLUENCE THE COURSE AND EXTRACURRICULAR CHOICES 
OF A SELECTED GROUP OF STUDENTS 
IN GRADE TWELVE 


School 

Influenced 

Influenced 

Influenced 

Influenced to 


to take a 

not to take 

to partic¬ 

not participate 


course 

a course 

ipate in an 
extracurr. 
activity 

in an extracurr. 
activity 



Number 

% 

Number 

% 

Number 

% 

Number 

% 

100 

3/11 

27 

0/11 

0 

2/11 

18 

0/11 

0 

200 

2/12 

17 

1/12 

9 

3/12 

25 

1/17 

9 

300 

4/20 

20 

1/20 

5 

2/20 

10 

0/20 

0 

400 

10/16 

63 

3/19 

16 

2/19 

11 

0/19 

0 

500 

10/18 

56 

4/18 

22 

0/18 

0 

2/18 

11 

600 

0/12 

0 

0/12 

0 

3/12 

25 

0/12 

0 

700 

1/7 

14 

0/7 

0 

1/7 

14 

0/7 

0 

800 

3/10 

30 

1/10 

10 

1/10 

10 

0/10 

0 

Total 

33/106 

31 

10/106 

9 

14/109 

13 

3/108 

3 


(vii) Teachers' Opinions Concerning the Adequacy of Guidance 
For a Selected Group of Grade XII Students 

The teachers of the selected group were asked; "Are you satis¬ 
fied that the guidance department of this school is adequately doing all that 










... ... & o : > - ■ * • ' . ■ l: • 

. . 

:: 

• ... :1 Jr> . 


. 


. 


» \ Z-' •, -i‘.l • .VtiJLdC -A iV 


: ;•? J: ; .> • _ - •; “ • ' it" r ' O'J - ■ ■ ~ O - 

_ 

, . . - - - 




■ 






. _- 

. 


. . 
















V 




• 






■ 



.0 












.z: 













































.. .. - £ : ( ) 

',1 .' VIZ .yc ' Z. i.DJ £ .To’I 

- - . _ ...... . . . . Z .. i 










99 


it might reasonably be expected to do in its work with the gifted group of 
students?" Table V shows that seventy-six out of one hundred twenty-seven 
teachers responded to this question. Of the group of seventy-six, fifty-four 
per cent said that guidance is adequate or more than adequate; forty-six per 
cent said that it is less than adequate or they are undecided. 


TABLE V 

OPINIONS OF TEACHERS CONCERNING THE ADEQUACY OF THE 
COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS' GUIDANCE DEPARTMENTS 
IN MEETING THE NEEDS OF SELECTED STUDENTS 


Opinion Expressed 

100 

200 

300 

400 

Schools 

500 

600 

700 

800 

% 

More than adequate 

0/7 

1/9 

0/9 

0/6 

0/15 

1/11 

1/10 

0/9 

3/76 

1% 

Adequate 

5/7 

2/9 

3/9 

4/6 

9/15 

4/11 

4/10 

6/9 

37/76 

53% 

Less than adequate 

1/7 

5/9 

5/9 

0/6 

0/15 

4/11 

2/10 

1/9 

18/76 

23% 

Undecided 

1/7 

1/9 

1/9 

2/6 

6/15 

2/11 

3/10 

2/9 

18/76 

23% 


The investigator asked the teachers to comment on their 
responses. Some typical replies were: 

"The guidance department of necessity is spending a higher 
proportion of its time with the less able and low achieving students than 
with the gifted." 

"The guidance department of this school is too small and 
thus has insufficient time to do much more than investigate problem stu¬ 
dents ." 

"I do not know what the guidance department is doing for 


gifted students." 






- c w. : : o.=, o: :o-: ^u,iv :t 

. . - -. - 

„ < . ... . . £ ; . • '? c: bs - v. 



■. _ „ _ . :. 5 / * s -- • Of.; . szs "" 1 £ 2 :•, *■ ■ ' 

.• ••• .0 -;• :::£ :i e«.s *,) ~r Mf.f. : 


v £ 5--.T <s;.8iiv*3?. v.o WQ::?ji$;) 

■. , \7- ! ih$ri - .1 ’■ r\‘V£: 

. ¥;dc,:S: ,.o :; /x ??sm&F • m 


• 2 
















; cA 

















■ 
















. 


















....'. ■"- C.M 










; L . £ - . 

£ , /: J cr&l?r; 

. ... ,-;ii '.£/•• ..:v. -£. ;ol:i:rcqtril 

, - 




: ' -■ .: ;:• .- ;• ... • ■. c ;/ r . r; 9 nX 

- - - ..... /- / . .. : . . . . ..... ; . 


: .. ... 


. . 








100 


"Every guidance officer is on the alert to detect and direct 
brilliant students but we have no special facilities for helping them." 

"The facilities are adequate under existing circumstances." 

From the data, more than half the teachers are satisfied that 
guidance facilities are adequate under existing circumstances while approx¬ 
imately one-fifth believe them to be inadequate. 

(b) Rewards 

One of the means of motivating gifted students to develop their 
potential is for secondary schools to offer rewards for worthy performance. 
With this in mind the investigator asked the principals of the composite 
high schools for information concerning the non-monetary and monetary rewards 
available for worthy students at their respective schools. 

(i) Non-monetary Rewards 

School 100 On an ’Awards Night' held annually, school 100 
presents honours awards to those students making an eighty per cent average 
or better on their Christmas and Easter examinations. Students in Grades 
X, XI, and XII are eligible to win such awards. As well as the academic 
(honours) awards, students are also eligible under certain conditions of 
performance to win athletic and citizenship awards. 

School 200 At the end of the school year all students who 
earned an eighty per cent average or better on their Christmas and Easter 
examinations are awarded an academic pin. On an 'Awards Night' each year 
the academic awards, athletic and citizenship awards are presented to worthy 
students. The feature presentation of the evening is that of the academic 
awards. This is a conscious effort by the administration of the school to 
increase the prestige rating of successful academic students. 






VM 

. 

: . - ■ • : - i; 


. - •. ... a - ■ - 

_• ; . - - • • • - ' •• 

; - ... - • ■ - ■ ■ 

. 

(• ' 

. 

.. ; . v .« ' i .. .. : . * 3 '' - • 

a ;r . • r&r o-a * z :■< :■ 

•: . ;.• s. j j : Lu& o: 

- 

ar * 1 r.: .tuKj. us. ■ a- r: Jr .'•£> am 






... 

( 

. i . .v I .■•-it *j 

. ... ... - 1 







101 


School 300 At this school there is a trophy awarded each year 
to the Grade XII student holding the highest average based on his year's work. 
Honours pins are given to students in Grades X, XI, and XII who have earned an 
eighty per cent average or better through the school year. In addition, letters, 
athletic crests, and citizenship awards are made to worthy students. 

School 400 This school has an Honours Club. Membership in the 
club is signified by a gold pin won on the basis of high achievement in academic 
work. In addition, students may win an academic scroll and have their names 
placed on an academic honours roll if their average standing for the year is 
seventy-five per cent or better. Students may also be named to a general 
proficiency honour roll determined on the basis of academic standing, citizen¬ 
ship qualities, and participation in extracurricular activities. 

School 500 This school has a permanent honour roll for high 
achieving Grade XII students. In addition the central office prints an honours 
list following each examination period during the school year. To be named to 
the honour roll and honours lists a student must earn four H's and two A's and 
have an over-all average of eighty per cent or better. On an annual 'Awards 
Night' letters are presented to students for academic accomplishments, for athlet¬ 
ic prowess and for outstanding participation in extracurricular activities. 

School 600 An honours pin is awarded the student in each grade 
with the highest academic average at the end of each school year. The Students' 
Union provides citizenship crests for leading 'all-round' students in Grades X 
and XI. Crests are presented to students in all three grades if they have earned 
an average of seventy-five per cent or better on their year's work. 






.fOiiOll 





102 


School 700 This school has an annual 'Awards Day'. Outstanding 
participants in extracurricular activities are recognized with letters and crests. 
There are plaques and trophies presented to winning athletic teams. The school 
board provides jackets and crests to students who were outstanding in athletic 
competition, publications, and non-athletic clubs. There are no academic awards 
made to outstanding academic students. 

School 800 The ten top students in each grade are annually 
awarded pins on the basis of achievement in academic subjects, in citizenship 
and in participation in extracurricular activities. 

Summary In seven out of eight schools awards are annually made 
to those students who have proven themselves high academic achievers in Grades 
X, XI, and XII. In all eight schools there are awards for students proving 
themselves worthy of high achievement in extracurricular activities. 

(ii) Monetary Rewards 

There are at least twenty Provincial scholarships available to 
worthy students in Grade XII. They are tenable at the University of Alberta. 

There are at least six scholarships available to Grade XII students of Alberta 
high schools and tenable at Canadian and American Universities other than the 
University of Alberta. Five of the eight high schools have lists of scholar¬ 
ships and monetary prizes available to only their own students at the respective 
schools. At School 400 there are thirteen awards in addition to the provincial 
and national scholarships. These range in value from ten dollars to one hundred 
dollars. At School 500 there are at least seven awards made to worthy students 
in addition to those offered provincially and nationally. They range from 
twenty-five dollars to two hundred fifty dollars. Similarly at School 600 there 
are at least fourteen scholarships and prizes locally awarded ranging in value 








.... 70 '. cj : rr; '. : as - ■ 





( ) 


a 



. ; . . . 




C <"> 






o _ c: 


0 .! . LtxP. JZXO 












103 


from twenty-five dollars to one hundred twenty-five dollars. At School 700 there 
are approximately twenty scholarships and prizes available for worthy students. 
Their value ranges from twenty-five dollars to three hundred dollars. At School 
800 there are at least six scholarships awarded annually in addition to the 
provincial and national scholarships to students in Grade XII. These range in 
value from twenty-five dollars to three hundred dollars. 

Summary There are national, provincial and local scholarships 
available at all the composite high schools at least to Grade XII students who 
are able to meet the requirements. Five of the eight schools provide monetary 
rewards throughout the three high school grades. The national scholarships are 
tenable at both Canadian and American Universities. The provincial ones are 
outlined in the University of Alberta calendar. Those schools offering local 
monetary rewards print their own publicity and the information is available 
from the guidance officials at the respective schools. 

(c) Providing Community Contacts 

Four of the eight schools provide rather extensive opportunities 
for students to meet and hear community individuals speaking on vocations on 
special days each year called 'Career Days'. For example, at School 100 there 
are between forty and fifty speakers on Career Day, each one speaking on a 
particular vocation. Students are able to take in any three of the speakers 
they wish. 

A fifth school, School 200, has a list of individuals and firms 
who are willing to come to the school to meet students interested in a part¬ 
icular vocation. However, the principal made it clear that very little use 
was actually made of the list. 

At Schools 400 and 500, speakers are brought in on certain occasions 
other than Career Day. For example, speakers have been invited to speak at 







104 


noon-hour student assemblies. One of the principals mentioned the kinds of 
speakers, among others, that visit the schools: a drafting lecturer, an 
oilman, a representative of the police department, and an artist. 

School 800 has connexions with interested community individuals 
in a local band, the Little Symphony, an Art Society and a Drama Society. 

Summary Only two schools, out of eight, consistently provide 
gifted students, along with the rest of the student body, a chance to meet 
community individuals that may serve to motivate them. Four schools out of 
eight bring community individuals into the schools on 'Career Day' in an 
attempt to motivate students to make wise vocational choices. 

(d) Try Out Opportunities (Extracurricular Activities) 

The investigator was supplied with a list of the various extra¬ 
curricular activities offered at each of the eight composite high schools. 

Table VI shows that across the eight schools there were 48 activities 
provided as opportunities in which the selected students could 'tryout' 
their interests and abilities. There activities are in addition to the admin¬ 
istrative positions available on the' students' councils and on publications and 
graduation executives in each of the eight schools. 

One school offers as many as 28 extracurricular activities. One 
school offers as few as 15. Looking at the picture as a whole, 8 schools 
provide opportunities for the development of interests and abilities in 165 
clubs and associations and athletic activities. The average number offered 
per school is approximately 21. The most commonly offered activities are 
athletics, such as basketball, football, track and field and badminton. The 
least commonly offered activities are academic and recreational activities 
such as a French club, a science club, a school orchestra, a mixed chorus or 








105 


a drama club. 

The picture as a whole may appear to be relatively good- A closer 
examination shows that some schools do very little with regard to providing try¬ 
out opportunities for the gifted in the fine arts and academic areas. For 
example, one school has two academic clubs, both available to boys only. Another 

has no recreational clubs whatsoever (e.g. stamp club, glee club, photography 

club.) 

TABLE VI 

EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES AVAILABLE TO SELECTED STUDENTS IN ALBERTA 

COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS i 


Kinds of Activities 


Schools 


100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 Total 


Interschool Athletic 

Boys' and Girls' basketball.... 1 1 

Boys' and Girls' swimming. 1 1 

Boys' and Girls' track and 

field. 0 1 

Boys' and Girls' volleyball.... 1 1 

Boys' curling. 0 0 

Girls' fastball. 0 0 

Boys' football. 1 1 


1 1 
0 0 

1 1 
1 1 
1 0 
0 0 
1 1 


1 1 
0 0 

1 1 
0 0 
0 1 
0 1 
1 1 


1 1 
0 0 

1 1 
0 0 
1 0 
0 0 
1 1 


8 

2 

7 
4 
3 
1 

8 


‘Intramural Athletic 

Boys' and‘Girls' basketball.... Ill 

Boys' and Girls' fastball.0 0 1 

Boys' and Girls' track and 

field. Ill 

Boys' and Girls' volleyball.... 001 

Mixed volleyball. 0 10 

Mixed fastball. 0 0 0 


1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

1 


111 
0 10 

111 
0 0 0 
0 0 1 
0 0 0 


0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 


7 

2 

8 
1 
4 
1 


Athletic Clubs 

Archery. 

Badminton... 
Booster. 


1 1 
1 1 
0 1 


0 

1 

0 


0 0 0 0 0 
11111 
110 0 0 


2 

8 

3 





















.. c 








(• 





















- 








: 







106 


TABLE VI CONTINUED 


Kinds of Activities 





Schools 






100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

800 

Total 

Bowling. 

... 0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

1 

1 

1 

5 

Cheerleaders. 

. .. 1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

8 

Curling. 

. . . 1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

8 

Golf. 

. . . 0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Majorettes .. 

. . . 0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

Rifle.*.. 

. . . 1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Swimming... 

. . . 0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Table-Tennis. 

. . . 0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

3 

Tumbling... 


1 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

1 

5 

Wrestling. 

. . . 0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

2 

Non-Athletic Clubs 

Academic 

Art... 

... 0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

Drama. 


0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Electronics. 

... 0 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

4 

French.. 

... 0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

2 

Geology.; 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

Honours. 

... 0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

Literary. 


0. 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

LLL (Let's Learn a Little).. 

. . . 0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

Science... 


1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

Debating. 

... 0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

Service 

Hi-Y. 

... 0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Inter-School Christian 

Fellowship. 

... 1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

0 

1 

7 

Junior Red Cross. 

... 0 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

7 

Library. 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

United Nations. 

... 1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

3 

Y-Teens... 

. .. 0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Recreational 

Chess and Checkers. 

... 0 

1 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

4 

Dance. 

... 0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Glee.:. 

... 1 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

5 

Mixed Chorus. 

. . . 0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

Orchestra. 

... 0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

2 

Photography. 

... 1 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

4 

Modelling. .. 

... 0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Stamp. 

... 0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

Total. 

.. .18 

28 

25 

22 

23 

15 

17 

17 



i 1 means the activity is carried on in a particular school; 0 means the activity 
is not c'arried on in a particular school 





















































































107 


(3) Outcomes of Current Composite High School Practice 
(i) Subject Likes and Dislikes 

A knowledge of the subjects most liked and least liked by the 
students selected and the reasons for their feelings may throw some light on 
the factors involved in the motivation of gifted students in secondary school 
academic subjects. With this in mind the selected students were asked, "What 
subjects have you liked most during your high school career? Why?" and, "What 
subjects have you liked least? Why?" In order to get at the students' most 
immediate experience the investigator decided to use only those responses deal¬ 
ing with Grade XII subjects. 

Table VII shows that subject preferences in descending order 
of preference were mathematics, biology, chemistry, physics, social studies, 
English, French, Latin. The rank order of their subject dislikes were Latin, 
social studies, English, French, physics mathematics, chemistry, and biology. 

TABLE VII 

LIKES AND DISLIKES OF A SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE XII 
STUDENTS OF THIRD YEAR HIGH SCHOOL MATRICULATION 

SUBJECTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 1 


Subject 

Number 

Like 

Per cent 

Rank 

Dislike 

Number Per cent 

Rank 

Ratio 

Like: Dislike 

Mathematics 

72/108 

67 

1 

13/108 

12 

6 

5.5:1.0 

Biology 

15/33 

45 

2 

0/33 

0 

8 


Chemistry 

46/106 

43 

3 

9/106 

8 

7 

5.1:1.0 

Physics 

35/85 

41 

4 

11/85 

13 

5 

3.2:1.0 

Social studies 

29/109 

27 

5 

41/109 

38 

2 

0.7:1.0 






: 




( ) 


( 


) 







..6 - - X 













t ^ • 











































108 


TABLE VII CONTINUED 


Subject 

Number 

Like 

Per cent 

Rank 

Dislike 

Number Per cent 

Rank 

Ratio 

Like: Dislike 

English 

21/109 

20 

6 

39/109 36 

3 

0.1:1.0 

French 

13/83 

16 

7 

26/83 31 

4 

0.5:1.0 

Latin 

0/29 

0 

8 

15/29 52 

1 



1 The numerator in each fraction is the number of students expressing 'like* 
or 'dislike 1 ; the denominator in each fraction is the number of the select¬ 
ed students enrolled in the course. 

Why do students like or dislike a particular subject? 

Table VIII shows that the main reason for liking a subject according to the 
selected group is that it is interesting. That the subject "comes easy" is 
the second most important reason; thirdly, students like the teacher and 
his subject presentation and so like the subject; fourthly, a subject is 
liked because it is a challenge to the capacities of the students. The main 
reason the selected students dislike a subject is because it is uninteresting; 
secondly, they say they dislike a subject because they lack the ability to be 
successful; thirdly, the subject, as far as they can see, is useless; and 












- 


■ 



















c. 

















/: 






lG5 












m 






^ . 
















109 


fourthly^ they dislike the teacher and his approach and so dislike the subject. 


TABLE VIII 


REASONS GIVEN BY A SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE XII 
STUDENTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS FOR 
LIKING AND DISLIKING MATRICULATION SUBJECTS 



Likes 


Dislikes 


Reason 

Number of 

Per cent 

Reason 

Number of 

Per cent 


students 



students 


Interesting 

67 

63 

Uninteresting 

50 

47 

Comes easy 

45 

42 

Lack of ability 27 

25 

Teacher 

21 

20 

Useless 

22 

21 

Challenging 

20 

19 

Teacher 

19 

18 

Useful 

12 

11 

Too vague 

13 

12 

Logical 

9 

8 

Too much 

7 

7 




memorywork 



Not sheer 

3 

3 

Too much 

7 

7 

memorywork 



effort 



No homework 

3 

3 

No challenge 

3 

3 




Poor texts 

2 

2 


In commenting on these findings it is important to recognize 
that authorities in general agree that if a subject is interesting to a student 
who has high intellectual endowment; or if it is uninteresting to him; the 
teacher is to be held responsible as perhaps the key factor in the situation. 
When a student is presumed to be gifted intellectually and does not like a 













; ... 


* ..... • 


' 

1 . - - ■ • 





: : : . • . 


: . 


lit.' a&Q c • 

.. : ' . 


..i - 







i -:o :/• n>.' 
.. —; • 

- 

1 


. 


* 




I 




. 






' : .. 















110 


subject and is not doing well in the subject, it is reasonable to expect that 
some non-intellectual factor is interfering to prevent the students from being 
interested. The non-intellectual factor may be the teacher. 

Two out of three of the selected group like mathematics because 
it is interesting and five out of ten dislike Latin because it is uninteresting. 
It may be that the teachers in mathematics and Latin are the most important 
factors determining the students' likes and dislikes. This is a question that 
needs further investigation. What factors are inherent in the mathematics - 
science courses, that cause students to like them? What are the factors in the 
social studies - languages pattern that cause students to dislike them? 

Following up this interesting question of the teacher's role 
in motivating students, the investigator asked the students, "If you had the 
responsibility of selecting your teachers what are the three characteristics 
you would most want them to possess?" One hundred nine students (100 per cent) 
responded. From their replies the investigator set up seven categories. The 
selected students want teachers with the following characteristics in rank 
order: 


1. 

Friendly understanding 

61 

per 

cent 

2. 

Knowledge of subject 

50 

per 

cent 

3. 

Teaching ability 

48 

per 

cent 

4. 

Ability to discipline 

31 

per 

cent 

5. 

Sense of humour 

23 

per 

cent 

6. 

Clarity of speech 

18 

per 

cent 

7. 

Patience 

14 

per 

cent 

The 

selected students want 

teachers who understand them and 


their problems and who are their friends. They expect teachers to know what 
they are talking about and to.know more than their students about their (the 
teachers') subjects. They want teachers who have the ability to get ideas and 
concepts across to those students who have the ability to grasp them. They 




. 








. 








f ^ U « O v/.' 


...... y. IV /_ . , . - < 


. 




■ . - 






. Hi) . . . : u t-'j o . • • iJ.-.u. \A. 











va... 1 












* 


. 0 










1 2 - a-,. 




: 


- 


. . : - .. 

; J • ^ , ••; ~j /, £ .. '... j... £ ... ■ ' ... I, <*?' 1 - ..a.:::-• - ’£*’ •• - -'. ''■< 








Ill 


want teachers who are able to control classes and provide an organization that 
insures well-mannered and respectful students. They want teachers that are 
willing to smile and have the world smile with them because they have a sense 
of humour. They want teachers that speak loudly enough to be heard and enunciate 
clearly enough to be understood, and they want teachers who will bear with them, 
to some degree at least, as they attempt to learn and live with others in the 
classroom situation. 

(ii) Time Spent On School Studies Outside of School Hours 

In attempting to determine the extent to which gifted students 
in Alberta composite high schools are motivated to do well in academic subjects, 
the investigator believed it might prove helpful to find out, even roughly, the 
number of hours the selected students spend on out of school studies. The follow¬ 
ing question was put to the students: "About how many hours a week (outside of 
school hours) do you spend on school studies?" One hundred six students replied. 
The mean number of hours reported was 10.14 per week. The S.D. was 5.18.. This 
suggests that probably two out of three students are spending from five hours 
per week to fifteen and a half hours per week on out-of-school studies. 

As an interesting comparison, Huston reports that the average 
time spent by a group of forty-two first year pharmacy students at the University 
of Alberta in study outside of scheduled classes for the entire semester was 
twenty hours per week. (160) 

(iii) Participation In Extracurricular Activities 

The investigator attempted to get information concerning the 
degree of gifted student involvement in the extracurricular activities of their 
respective schools. 

Table IX shows that approximately four out of ten of the 





• • ;i • -i ' - O' 













- i V- 


. 








: ' 


* 










. . .. . .. OG\i ' 


... 0*i - ii 




. . . ; . . . 


(- ) 

. c. J 

- i i'j . o . ' . v. . ; • j 






t- - 





















.. .. i 




ii/i 






( ) 













112 


selected students participate in athletic activities. The ratio of the number 
of activities participated in to the number of selected students per year in 
high school gives a picture of the extent of participation of the total group. 

If the number of activities participated in by the 43 students were spread over 
the total group of 109 students and divided by three years, the ratio becomes 
.38. This means that one student took part in one athletic activity one year 
out of three. Of course, the actual picture is that 43 out of 109 students 
took part in many more activities than .38 per year. A few took part in two 
or three athletic activities each of the three years they were in high school, 
while more than half the students took part in none. 

Table IX shows that approximately 6 out of every ten of the 
selected students hold executive positions in school athletic and non-athletic 
clubs, the students' union, on publication boards and graduation class exec¬ 
utives. If the number of positions held by seventy executive-holding students 
is spread over the total group of 109 students and the result is divided by 
three years, each student holds .52 positions per year. Thus, in three years 
each student holds one and a half executive positions or about one position 
every two years. Again, it must be recognized that 64 per cent of the selected 
group hold many more than .52 positions per year. Some of them hold 3 or 4 
positions each year they spend in high school while 36 per cent hold none. 

With regard to the participation of selected group members in 
non-athletic clubs such as a photography club, a science club, or a French Club, 
table IX shows that 35 per cent of the group belong to one or more of such clubs. 
If the total number of memberships held by 35 per cent of the group is spread 
over the total group of 109 students and divided by three years, the ratio of 
activities per student per year comes to .22. This means, for the group as a 







113 


whole, if a student remains in high school for 5 years he can be expected to 
belong to one non-athletic club during one of the five years. The actual 
picture is one of a few students taking part in one or more activities during 
two or three years of their high school career, while the great majority of the 
selected group belong to no non-athletic clubs. 

TABLE IX 

THE PARTICIPATION IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES OF A SELECTED GROUP 
OF GRADE XII STUDENTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 



Activity 

Number of 
students 

Per cent 

N 109 

Ratio 

(per student 
per year) 

Participation 

in Athletic Activities 

43 

40 

124/109/3 .38 

Participation 

in Executive Offices 

70 

64 

169/109/3 .52 

Participation 

in Non-Athletic Clubs 

38 

35 

73/109/3 .22 


Summary Because more 

students hold 

executive 

positions than 

belong to either athletic activities or 

non-athletic 

activities 

, one may surmise 


that the students-who take part in athletic activities do not, in general, belong 
to non-athletic activities. Probably then, the total number of students who are 
involved in athletic and non-athletic activities is somewhere near 60 per cent. 

It appears that most of the students who participate in extracurricular activities 
hold executive or leadership positions such as team captain, secretary, or pres¬ 
ident, etcetera. 

The majority of the members of the selected group belong to at 
least one extracurricular activity during one of their three high school years. 








ill 










$ i;i & «. ju *. 






c~ ...... ... 








K ■•^•*1 




.:; - c 



( 




\ 






.... -....., ... v.:I;;*..)<-w. 


..v ■- . 1 ;j. -■... ... S.K i j 


. . - 




IK . -• . 


‘ 














114 


Fewer students are involved in non-athletic activities such as science clubs and 
school orchestras than belong to athletic activities such as badminton clubs or 
basketball teams. 

(iv) Awards Won By Members of the Selected Group 

The students of the selected group were asked to list any scholar¬ 
ship prize or honour they held during their high school career. Since the time 
during which this data was gathered came before the end of the school year the 
data is not complete as to the total number of academic awards earned over the 
three year period by the selected group. Some of the members of the group 
undoubtedly won such awards upon graduation in June of 1958. 

The investigator was able to find out how many students won 
academic awards in Grades X and XI and the number of awards they won. Forty-five 
per cent of the group (49/109) won a total of eighty-two academic awards over 
a two year period. Each of the forty-nine students won 1.67 awards in two 
years. When the total number of academic awards won (82) is spread over the 
total group of one hundred nine students and this is divided by two years 
(Grades X and XI), the ratio of awards per selected student per year becomes 
.38. On this basis, each of the selected students can be expected to win one 
academic award during his high school career (3 years times .38) 

The investigator did not receive sufficient evidence to enable 
the same observations to be made concerning athletic awards and citizenship 
awards. 

(v) Liking For School 

Barbe reports that gifted students, in spite of the gross 
neglect of their educational needs in schools generally, in the vast majority 
"like school and prefer the hard subjects to the easy ones." (161) 



'c 




- 


: : . ' ■ ... 


A- 


&£.}.. u 


- L- ! .'. - • . . .- . : ' - • «-f - - • 

S - . . , . 


( 

• iir': .. v‘£< ^ . ....... " _ '. ., ■:.• •..• .. -Cm i.j.j.. AO —,-.j3 

: . 


■ 




o . () 


:■ v:;... 


•, O .- 


( ) 


■... .l Q'j . ; .■ . . ... ... 











115 


If students are highly motivated to be successful at school 
and have the capacity to be successful in many respects, in all probability 
they will like school. Thus, if the composite high schools are adequately 
meeting the needs of this selected group of students it might be expected 
that the students will have a rather strong liking for school. 

The investigator tried to get an expression of the degree of 
liking for school of the selected students. Table X shows that approximately 
two students out of ten have a strong liking for school; six out of ten have 
a fairly strong liking; and two out of ten have a slight liking or a positive 
dislike. 


TABLE X 

THE DEGREE OF LIKING FOR SCHOOL OF A SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE XII 
STUDENTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 


Degree of liking Number of students Per cent 


a 

Very Strong. 19/109 17 

Fairly Strong. 70/109 64 

Slight Liking. 18/109 17 

Positive Dislike. 2/109 2 


The selected students were asked, "If school has been disliked 
at any time, why?" Forty-nine students out of one hundred nine indicated that 
at one time or another they have disliked school. Approximately one student 
out of three has disliked school because of a teacher. The second most frequent 
reason given was that school is uninteresting (approximately three out of ten 
students). Other reasons given for disliking school at one time or another were 














. ‘ p 


... 1 








- 


-I/O 


. cc»u; 



: 


c.i iji* 



\ Gil i;t.- 




'O'.- 




( : 
















116 


home work assignments, particular courses, the anonymity of students, and the 
strictness of administrators. 

(vi) Overwork and Underwork 

"If students feel stifled in the classroom, if they feel 
restricted by strict discipline, if they are not sufficiently stimulated, if 
if they feel they are being overworked, the teacher in all probability is not 
providing for their needs." (162) In the light of this statement the invest¬ 
igator attempted to discover the extent to which the selected group felt 
restricted by their respective schools and as well, the students' opinions 
concerning whether or not the schools were underworking them and overworking 
them. 

Students were asked, "Do you feel restricted by the school in 
attempts to follow any subject-matter or extracurricular interests you may have?" 
Of the one hundred six students responding to the question, twenty-five per cent 
answered in the affirmative. The students were requested to explain their 
answer if it were 'yes'. Some typical explanations were: "I've been forced 

to take some useless courses"."Much school work is uninteresting". 

"The courses I want are not offered"."The discipline around here is too 

strict"."There's too much homework".and, "We're lost sheep here, 

there are just too many students." 

Concerning overwork and underwork, the students were asked, 

"Do you feel the school is overworking you in classwork and extracurricular 
activities?" and "Do you feel the school is not working you hard enough in 
classwork and extracurricular activities?" Table XI shows that approximately 
one student out of ten felt overworked, whereas, approximately five out of ten 


















117 


felt they were not worked hard enough. 


TABLE XI 

THE OPINIONS OF A SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE XII STUDENTS IN ALBERTA 
COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS CONCERNING THE AMOUNT 
OF WORK THE SCHOOLS REQUIRE THEM TO DO 


Amount of 
work 

Reply 

Number of 
students 

Per cent 

Overwork 

• Yes 

11/106 

10 


No 

95/106 

90 

Underwork 

Yes 

48/98 

49 


No 

50/98 

51 


(vii) Subject Repeats 

In how many instances did a selected student fail a subject in 
Grade X or XI? From the students' permanent records the following pertinent 
information was gathered: 


Mathematics 20 
Latin 20 
French 20 
Science 20 
Mathematics 10 
German 20 
Music 20 


4 students failed 
3 students failed 
2 students failed 
2 students failed 
1 student failed 
1 student failed 
1 student failed 
14 


In not a single instance did a selected student have to repeat 


more than one subject. Therefore it can be said that approximately 12 per cent 
of the selected students failed one subject during their high school career. 




















(. . .) 















■* 
























118 


Thirteen of the fourteen failures occurred in Grade XI. In spite of the 
failures of some of the students, only one student will not have the required 
number of credits to graduate from high school after three years. He does 
not have the necessary 100 credits. The remainder of the students will 
receive the matriculation diploma if they successfully meet the final depart¬ 
mental examinations. 

(viii) Further Education 

Canadian studies, show that probably not half of the gifted 
high school students who graduate from Grade XII go on to university. Passow 
claims, "The lack of desire for college training is second only to inadequate 
finances as a reason for by-passing college." (163) 

Presumably, then, secondary schools are important factors 
in getting gifted students to want to go on to college. That is to say, the 
proper motivation of gifted students during their school career is likely to 
carry them on to college in the continued birth of their potential abilities 
and interests. 

The selected group of Grade XII students were asked, "Have 
you decided yet which life vocation you wish to follow?" Eighty-six of one 
hundred nine students answered in the affirmative and fourteen per cent 
answered in the negative. The students answering r yes' were requested to 
name the occupations they plan to enter. Eighty-five of the ninety-four 
students planning who have made their vocational choices plan to carry on 
with further education at institutions of higher learning. Thus, seventy- 


. , . 









5 . 









Oj .... c. 


: 








' 





119 


eight per cent of the total group plan to go on for higher education. This is 
shown in table XII. 


TABLE XII 

PER CENT OF SELECTED GRADE XII STUDENTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH 
SCHOOLS INDICATING WHETHER OR NOT THEY 
HAVE CHOSEN THEIR LIFE VOCATION 


Choice 

Number of 
students 

Per cent 

Yes 

94/109 

86 

No 

15/109 

14 

Further 

Education 

85/94 

(85/109 

91 . 

78) 1 

Other 

9/94 

9 


1 The percentage of selected students planning to carry on with their formal 
education at institutions of higher learning. 


In terms of the literature dealing with the number of gifted 
students who go on for further education, this data is rather remarkable. 

From Alberta Composite high schools approximately eight out of ten gifted 
students are actively planning to continue with their formal education. Whether 
or not they do remains to be seen. If they do it will mean that nearly twice 
as many from the composite high schools go on as did such students in Jackson's 
Toronto.study. (164) 

More precisely, what are the vocational choices of the selected 










. : $ 





y •" : i'j 












_ 




( 



















G 




G G «. 




















V- . i 


t- ) ■ 




G 














120 


students? Table XIII shows that engineering, teaching, and nursing are the 
most popular choices. 


In order to get some idea of the experiences that helped the 


gifted students make up their minds concerning whether or not they would go on 
to higher education and what their vocational choices would be, the investigator 
asked, ‘’Under what conditions did you make the choice (that is, what influences 
determined your decision?) In terms of the students’ responses the following 
categories were set up, in rank order with respect to their frequency of 
appearance: 


1. Subject matter 

2. Closehand observation 

3. Family 

4. Reading 

5. Interests and ability 

6. Teachers 

7. Friends 

8. Guidance department 


36 per cent 
35 per cent 
34 per cent 
28 per cent 
24 per cent 
18 per cent 
16 per cent 
10 per cent 


TABLE XIII 


THE VOCATIONAL CHOICES INVOLVING FURTHER EDUCATION OF A SELECTED 
GROUP OF GRADE XII STUDENTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 


Vocational 

choice 


Number of 
students 


Per cent 


Engineering 

Teaching 

Nursing 

Accounting 

Medicine 

Chemistry 

Laboratory technician 
Business executive 


Clergy 
Physics 
Journalism 
Social Work 


£6/85 

10/85 

8/85 

6/85 

5/85 

4/85 

3/85 

2/85 

2/85 

2/85 

2/85 

2/85 


31 

12 

8 

7 

6 

5 

4 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 








- 


- ■- 




.Xj C--- Lli- C ... 


■ ) 



_ . ! "o . ia-y, ..... ... . ... K ^ 






( 









-- i 







































121 


TABLE XIII CONTINUED 


Vocational 

choice 

Number of 
students 

Per cent 

Pharmacy 

1/85 

1 

Home Economics 

1/85 

1 

Writing 

1/85 

1 

Psychology 

1/85 

1 

Law 

1/85 

1 

Design 

1/85 

1 

X-ray technician 

1/85 

1 

Mathematics 

1/85 

1 

Physiotherapy 

1/85 

1 

Bacteriology 

1/85 

1 

A.G.T. technician 

1/85 

1 

Geology 

1/85 

1 

Science 

1/85 

1 


85/85 

97 


An impression the investigator gained while visiting the 
composite high schools was that the respective guidance departments undertook 
as a major aim to influence gifted students to carry on their formal education 
at institutions of higher learning. It appears that guidance officials have 
very little influence on the vocational choices of the selected students„ 

(4) Summary 

Members of the selected group visit guidance officials for an 
interview at least once per year in addition to a visit for the purpose of 
checking their time-tables. The interview centers around educational and 
vocational guidance. Very little guidance of a 'personal' nature is provided. 










U& /sXVUv v> £*-IHAa 





. . 













. 


. 








- - 











. £ v £ • J’ . .•. . 



( : 







- 




























122 


The guidance departments 1 influence on the course choices and extracurricular 
participation of the selected students appears to be limited from the viewpoint 
of the students. 

The selected students are informed of their potential and 
urged to work and achieve academically on a par with their ability levels. In 
some of the schools at least, under-achieving students receive special guidance. 

The composite high schools appear to provide a wide range of 
opportunities for students to tryout their interests and abilities in extra¬ 
curricular activities. Mo,re often the tryout activities were athletic in nature 
rather than academic. 

The majority of the schools provide motivation by means of 
scholarships, bursaries, and awards for outstanding achievement in extra¬ 
curricular activities. 

Most of the schools provide limited contacts with community 
individuals. Usually such contacts occur on "Career Day" with the aim being 
to assist students to make wise vocational choices. 

The success of the composite schools in motivating the 
selected students is made somewhat clearer by the following findings: 

(a) Students tend to dislike languages and social studies and 
to like mathematics and science subjects. They prefer interesting subjects 
and dislike uninteresting subjects. Students are more likely to find subjects 
interesting if the teachers are friendly and understanding, know their subject 
matter, and have the ability to get ideas 'across' to students; 

(b) On the average, the selected students spend about 2 hours 
on school studies each school day outside of school hours; 


UP' P - J -J £' Qd 'i l I; £ • 1 

.*•<, ori3 ::o sicj. cshop p , :i ~:r jb q 


vom o f ---p r £ s.m? 

:• ■ . &■ 38 ■■ - 

“ - . ; . . . . . • - . - .: 

■y:'yl •.;■:••• *??tT 

: < ........ - .. ■ 

. 



. n&i 




. 

. ■■ . K : . • : • ; 


<L 


.-.P. 









ioon: - '.CO j UOX3 

■ * 

! BO - -. 


. ■. :ii'J i ■ uC: . .. ; - 3 -■ i. 

. .si P .P i i i li 'a ■ Ci-i-i- •- ^—3 <■' 



- 











123 


(c) Less than half the group win awards for outstanding achieve¬ 
ment in either academic or extracurricular activities. The group as a whole can 
be expected to win one award in three years; 

(d) Most of the selected students participate in either athletic 
or non-athletic extracurricular activities. The majority of participants are 
involved in activities of an athletic nature; 

(e) Very few of the selected group experience failure during 
their high school career. Those that do fail usually fail in Grade XI, and 
fail only in one subject; 

(f) Very few of the selected students feel overworked by the 
composite high schools; approximately half the group feel underworked; 

(g) The vast majority of the group like school. Relatively few 
have a strong liking. Those who dislike school at any time do so ordinarily 
because of teachers or because school is boring and unchallenging; 

(h) At least three-quarters of the group are actively planning 
to go on for further education to universities, colleges and other places of 


higher learning. 






u -C 


i.i' h i».'- -w • Vj*. 














, . c'..: - ' o:’ i .-I' 

O 





- . -• . • - " 

, . - . . i.. 


( ) 


i.._ .. . ~ XB X*,-J 







( ) 

















124 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER VI 


(158) 
(Chicago: 


R. F. Dellaan and R. J. Havighurst, Educating Gifted Children 
The University of Chicago Press, 1957), chap. ix. 


(159) Ibid., p. 127. 


(160) Huston, M. J. "A Survey of Study Habits of First Year Pharmacy 
Students", American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education , 12(July, 1948), 
pp. 434-441. 


(161) Barbe, W. B. "Are Gifted Children Being Adequately Provided For?" 
Educational Administration and Supervision , 40(November, 1954), p. 406. 

(162) Passow and others, Planning For Talented Youth , Talented Youth 
Project, Horace Mann-Lincoln Institute of School Experimentation, Publication 
1 (New York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University, 
1955), p. 57. 


(163) A. H. Passow, "The Comprehensive High School and Gifted Youth", 
Teachers College Record , 58(December, 1956), p. 147. 

(164) Ro W. Jackson, "Guilty of Brain Slaughter?" Education Forum , 
6(December, 1956), p. 













125 


CHAPTER VII 

DEVELOPING GIFTEDNESS: ENRICHMENT 


1. The Criterion 

A good secondary school programme for the best development of gifted 
youth recognizes that they need a curriculum which offers something more than 
they would receive in the programme offered average students in regular classes. 
Gifted students rise to the challenge of a curriculum which requires high 
ability and demands high achievement, and calls forth their very best efforts. 

Such a curriculum makes it possible for gifted students to range more 
widely and delve more deeply into their courses of study and their extracurricular 
activities than would be the case if they are involved in programs provided for 
average students. Such a curriculum makes it possible for these students to 
make extensive use of the library and laboratory facilities; to choose courses 
that will interest and challenge them from a wide range of electives. 

Teachers who enrich their offerings to suit gifted students will carry 
on classroom activities that involve procedures such as: small-group and 
individual research on the part of the students; seminar discussions on problems 
of general interest; more difficult assignments for gifted students than the 
average are required to do; widespread reading of a relatively difficult nature 
and reporting on the readings to class. 

Administrators will provide the necessary materials and facilities for 
enrichment and will provide teachers with planning time and assistance as they 
aim to enrich the school experiences of gifted students in their charge. 


117 /JSl'iAho 




a ;.. ?S. _f.'.t-. 6 . • .1 

. L -v .• . - i • UJ-/ '..:j ■ ..VV :iliUU? 



.. : . . ' . . ' . - 

- 0 ■' j - J. "S J* ■ S 10 . , . : Z V - CJ ■>-. ' ~ ■'*-* i i'■ V ,' l, 1 , 1 

... . - . • - • . ■ - 

v ■, o. a: ..O: ... : •_>o.: i.-o j . -s. 3:V , i- r , • .st .: „ j . .3 ^ 

■ • ■ .;e _ , . . .... - - -- . -■ 

- 70........VI 'O" 1 .. ..' ' V . .vV -;V.i _• V V V , 1; 1. VOW WO ,31 V O' - — • - - • : & 

■ ; ...... , : J . g .. .: - - - 

»s 3 v 1; - ■ . • ■ • ■ ■ - • ■ 

.. .'. : * ) - . # - ' ' 

- : * - . : .. 


cw jo w;u 3 .v/v wv i ......, i oil - to jistj Oil w w/i.oo, 


w - . . .... 


o:• -c io- -.1 - -o 








-'.v 1 o- o Vo -'j.'. w .j -j.'.v.' ; o. ; . -6j' -w 

. 

. :. ; _ . . '■ ... . 

t .. . - . .. - /* - 




. .. K . 


. r.' ...oc.. 


. 








126 


2. Current Composite School Practice 

(a) From the Viewpoint of Administrators 

The investigator tried to discover through composite high school 
principals, the extent to which they are providing opportunities for gifted 
students to experience enriched school provisions. The eight principals 
were asked,"Does this school enrich the curriculum for gifted students?" 

Under enrichment the writer includes the following: honour-type courses, 
general reading, hobbies and collections, dramatic activities, excursions to 
places of interest, community contacts with gifted citizens, special facilities, 
honours and extra courses, library and laboratory assistantships, student 
research, seminar work. What are the administrators doing in these areas to 
facilitate the enrichment of the curriculum of gifted students? 

(i) Honour-Type Courses 

Schools providing good programmes for gifted students often 
provide opportunities for them to register in honours classes. Such courses 
are open to those whose ability and achievement records show them to be well 
above average students. 

In an attempt to discover whether Alberta composite high schools 
provide any such opportunities for superior students the principals of the 
schools were asked, "Are any courses available in this school which are restrict¬ 
ed to students whose mental ability and/or achievement is above average?" 

Before proceeding with the principals' answers it should be 
noted that Department of Education regulations establish prerequisite require¬ 
ments for some high school courses. To a degree, then, such courses are limited 
to students showing at least some ability in the subjects. For example, students 
registering in French 20, German 20, or Latin 20 require a B standing in English 







C ) 


<. . 


o 


* . •'. t 








^ ~ 




m 



v.o: o 


j 


,i .vo'; ' go 


£ . 


3 j 

















» 








c 


, . 

o o 


O ' 










127 


10. (B standing ranges from 50 to 64 per cent on a scale of marks). Concerning 
sequential electives the Handbook of the Department of Education says, "Instruct¬ 
ion in the second course of an elective in any sequence may be taken by students 
who have at least a B standing in the first year course of the elective." (165) 

The Department of Education requires students enrolling in French 11, 21, and 31 
to show special competence in the French language. 

In answering the question put to them, the principals at Schools 
100, 600, and 700 indicated that there were no special requirements limiting 
membership to any courses offered in the respective schools except those laid 
down by the Department of Education. 

At School 200 only those students planning on later entering 
engineering, chemistry, physics, or mathematics were allowed to register in 
Mathematics 31. Similarly, at School 300 only gifted students were allowed to 
enroll in Mathematics 31. School 400 limited the membership in English Literature 
21, English Language 21, Mathematics 31, and Biology 32 to superior academic 
students. The guidance department at School 500 made a serious effort to guide 
only those students whose Grade IX achievement records indicate they will be 
successful matriculation students, into matriculation mathematics and science 
courses. Mathematics 31 is limited to gifted Grade XII students. At School 800 
only students showing considerable promise were permitted to register in English- 
Literature 21, English Language 21, and Mathematics 31. 

Summary Alberta composite high schools do have classes restricted 
to more or less gifted students, according to the principals. Such classes may be 
referred to as 'honours classes', and they appear to be the kind of courses 
purposely developed to meet the needs of gifted students. The courses are to be 
found in the fields of English, French, and mathematics. 











128 


(ii) Reading Facilities 

Six of the eight schools have full-time librarians. Seven have 
space set aside in each as the school's library....in the form of actual 
library rooms. At the school without adequate library space there is, according 
to the principal, a movement afoot to get improved facilities. In every school 
the principals felt relatively certain that the students were receiving guidance 
in their reading from teachers and librarians. 

(iii) Stimulation of Hobbies and Collections 

At School 600 nothing is being done to stimulate students' 
interests by means of the encouragement on the part of students to undertake 
hobbies and collections. At Schools 100, 300, 700, and 800 the principals 
said such activity on the part of the administration is very limited. At 
Schools 200, 400, and 500 the principals said there is a fair amount of this 
undertaken through clubs such as stamp clubs, science clubs and geology clubs. 
The administration in each of these schools actively supported such ventures, 

(iv) Drama Productions 

At five of the eight schools, drama classes or drama clubs 
stage public performances at least once, and at one school twice, during the 
course of the school year. Within the schools for the student bodies there 
are numerous student performances which called for dramatic ability on the 
part of those involved in the activities. 

At School 200 the Drama Club was disbanded because it narrowed 
the chances of students to participate in stage productions. At two of the 
schools the principals commented that producing and acting in plays is done 


to a very limited degree. 


■ ... : \ - 

■ ■ 

.... 

I ■ : ■- - : - . - - 

... - ■ ' - < 

• .; ; . :yy :.r. : ~ J 



' 


, 




. 


.■ _ . i- .. ... . . : ( . o 

........ ... - 

.... ' ■ - 

. 



: s: .-J ..si. :: _ ... . : ' y- ■ ,ii J. v.’.:* r ; r.v.J/i: ' . i:c: 


.. .. •; .; . ^ v. r .. ;/ ... : • <s - : 


• i.ii 










■; y - Hi A;>o ^ 1; c ' • • 4lj| j 

, { ‘ ! ■ y’.ii f ; v. y-t'j V.i w t ...' is tsi.OJ'iij -lo liZZ". 1-/. no/J£t'.«. j J ,1Z Q. -v.'fl 

: • . . ’jT ' ( ) . 

. .-i . . ■ ■ ... . . r <... u't. .•• . 

. . :/ -r c .' iy.y : Ar.y < .y. ,i y; :: ,.r L . y.t 'V.yfr.y y: :. ..A yyy'A 

... . 

' 

_■ ;yy;y: : y ;.- ' : - r.r/OT^-rj. r.::r, 

, . ... . : • 

'l j.'. 4 .;.;. yAi. ;..v. y/A" .: ' •' -A ! 3A 










129 


(v) Excursions to Places of Interest 

At seven of the eight schools there is a degree of student 
travel to such places as business offices by commercial classes, to chemical 
and industrial plants by science classes, and to bakeries, mills, and restaurants 
by household science classes. One school reports having made it possible for 
students to visit a power plant and newspaper printing plants. Another reports 
having sent students to take part in a Citizenship Day at the local Court House. 
Another reports having sent students to visit hospitals and such like on Career 
Day. 

(vi) Special Facilities For the Gifted 

All eight principals said that laboratories and shops are open 
to interested students outside of class hours if such students have an interested 
teacher remain with them while they carry on their activities. In the majority 
of schools the students are free to use the commercial rooms, art rooms, music 
rooms and library facilities before and after school hours, or when regular 
classes are not using them, provided that the necessary arrangements are made 
with teachers and the administrative office. 

Infrequent use is made of the laboratories and shops by 
individual students or small groups outside of class period for special studies 
according to one principal because teachers’ time and interest are both limited. 

At School 300 the Electricity Club is designed as a special 
project activity for interested students. At School 200 science and electricity 
classes have been known to remain after school to work in the laboratories and 
shops on small group projects. 


; ..... .: ... vo. ,.r. .. (/) 

• •' ; • • • ■ •• •" J •• •• • 






•. 1 1 ; 3 .* :> j ov**X|| 


, L & 

■ 


■ ■ V . ' 

^ c<: 3 c'n.t. . '■■s^-HjZac 

. : , . • . . v ~ ::v -V a- • •• -iv ••---• : -'3 • 

.; v ... X- : • - - -'C OZ» ..i~ 

• _ : ;• - . :: .j..' .. i iv-cc;- -.'.A 

. 

. .... - ■ (■■■'■ ) 

r ■■ ,;. -i oiii j.:iB Gi; 1 !: ocis': <--• 33 ..&..3 . 3 . ii. - -• ’-G j.••• 

. ; 3 . ,• • .'i '.'... " r ’." 1 1 .• - • : ^ • ~ -Ci'j - 0-$ 

. . ..• . -..3 **> - -■ ! -*~ 

........... ? . . . ..:. . : : ; <. .v -- :z,az-;.:j :ol . 

, .• . t ... v . '.A- ..... B S'd- i'SJjii : ‘ S.'i 

■ •■. ••..o 313 y £i»ur.c3vi « r £qi©r:c oz ^aj:.htsoD.9M 




■;-,. r.;• •; 3 ;C. 3 i; 3 00 cc no8 A 

. ' - ■ 

. . . - ■ >3 ... C ... 

».,:.. i f o'' 3 quoz t i X s lata n o 













130 


(vii) Encouragement of the Gifted to Carry Extra 

Courses and Enroll In Honours Classes 

Honours Classes - The administrators in the majority of schools 
encourage gifted students to register in courses especially designed to challenge 
them. Such courses are English Literature 21 and English Language 21, French 11, 
21, and 31, Mathematics 31, and Biology 32. In three of the schools students 
who have high academic ability or who are high academic achievers are urged to 
take Latin and French concurrently in Grades XI and XII. 

Extra Classes - In Alberta composite high schools an average of 
33 1/3 credits each year of the three high school years will give the necessary 
one hundred credits required for matriculation. However, Department of Education 
regulations allow students to carry as many as forty credits a year. Thus, any 
credits over 33 1/3 each year may be considered as 'extra'. 

The principal at School 100 said that Grade X students to the 
extent of 80 per cent carry approximately forty credits. In Grade XII they are 
limited to thirty-five credits. The spare period(s) they gain gives them time 
in school to study. 

At School 200 the gifted are urged to carry one course in excess 
of the standard six courses in Grades XI and XII. 

Similarly, the principal at School 300 believes that Grade XII 
matriculation students should be satisfied to carry six major courses and perhaps 
one other. 

The Administrator at School 400 has on occasion in the past 
requested the Department of Education to allow a gifted student to carry Grade XI 
and XII courses concurrently. 

School 500 requires gifted students to carry 38 credits in Grades 




- 













131 


X and XI, and 35 to 40 credits in Grade XII. Exceptions are made for students 
carrying music outside of school or for students with physical handicaps. 

(viii) Laboratory and Library Assistantships 

In seven of the eigljt schools, students serve as assistants 
to the librarians of the respective schools.* At School 100, students belong 
to a Librarians Club. They work in the library on a voluntary basis. At 
School 200, the students who assist in the library are presented with awards 
for their efforts on the school's annual Awards Night. At Schools 400, 500 
and 600, students are paid a small sum to assist the librarian. 

In not one school does the administration provide laboratory 
assistantships. The principals believe that only very seldom have teachers 
used students as laboratory assistants. In at least one school there are 
science teachers who allow students to act as demonstrators. In another, gifted 
students help the less able to complete their laboratory work. 

(ix) Small Group Research and Seminar Work 

None of the schools provide policy framework which requires 
this sort of programme planning on the part of teachers in their approach to 
gifted students. The principals at two of the schools said that to their 
knowledge nothing of this nature is occurring in their schools. The other six 
said that to a very limited extent it is being carried on in their respective 
schools. For example, at School 100 the Grade XI psychology students were 
assigned individual projects which were successfully completed on the whole. 

At School 200 small group research is carried on in the Science Club and Radio 


Club. 


3 r 


. s - 






. 

; .. XM - - 








V • (■ 

3XI£ . . ;V-: S 5 - i A - ■ ■ • * 

. .. . . :' .,./,• ..-. : i «. B • . "/Sr / \.v _ .. : - ' tfft 

... . - • ‘ ... 


Q .' . . ; - - • /. ... ' .. • / - - £ -- ... :. ; / 

, . .. . • . / : - . . , 

.: //// ./, f ■//j ■ 3:.: . v "f-o:/*/ ,b < /// //’: ■ 1 -v.f :l 

;:/../ /;■.,. 1 ... ' :; ( : ) 

. 

. . ....... . Jo / / - o . 

■ 


B ... - .. 


i ; . . . . : 








o:i //.'/j ./. .... jo ci,C /,:j/vr ».d‘T . :5 • 'X J 

... . ...... - - ; . ■ : 

■ . ; .. & ' . :. . . . . . : . .... 


. . : 


,. .; ■/■ Xli :..//../’ / O j; .loc:!:/. Xb /..-/ . ^ i./>/.-; 

■ 

. J . ... .... , i.,//,::- ./; X • : u 3G3U u'.V.F. Y-" i /.? •' >v.... /.. \ ,.fi :.. • 

G'.*i 3.. G.‘//r .<y" V.' .; r. ■ . : . ' ;'!/ . 0 OX icoa 


... . 




. 












132 


Summary Five of the eight schools have what might be called 
honour classes, reserved, in the main, for gifted students. 

Each of the eight schools has a school library and, generally 
speaking, the facilities are relatively adequate with teachers and librarians 
providing at least some guidance in reading to gifted students. 

In seven out of eight schools the stimulation by the admin¬ 
istration of hobbies and collections occurs, but on the whole such stimulation 
is extremely limited. 

In at least six of the schools opportunities are provided through 
drama classes or drama clubs for students to take part in producing and acting 
in plays. 

Seven out of eight schools had classes visiting business offices, 
industrial plants, and so forth. This is not an extensive practice. 

As has been pointed out in the section under motivation dealing 
with community contacts, five out of eight schools bring speakers to benefit 
the students on Career Day each year. Two schools bring in community speakers 
oftener than once a year; a third has connexions with community cultural groups. 

Laboratories and shops, music rooms, art rooms, commercial rooms, 
and library facilities are available within limits outside regular school hours. 

If the facilities are unused, it is, according to the principals, for some reasons 
other than that the administration is unwilling to open them to interested students. 

School authorities urge gifted students to register in those 
classes especially designed to challenge their interests and abilities. The 
extent of such classes is limited, being confined to English (creative writing), 
conversational French and French authors, and trigonometry, and in at least one 








133 


school, biology. Some students are urged to carry both Latin and French during 
high school. 

Seven out of eight schools have students act as assistants to 
the librarian in their respective- schools. The schools' use of gifted students 
as laboratory assistants is practically non-existent. Similarly, the partic¬ 
ipation of gifted students in small-group research and seminars is extremely 
limited. 

Most of the efforts to provide these kinds of enrichment are 
carried on by school administrative, authorities for the student body as a whole, 
with the gifted benefiting because they are members of the larger group. 

(b) From the Teachers' Viewpoint 

Following a definition of the concept of enrichment the teachers 
of the selected students were asked, tr What efforts have you made during the 
past school year to enrich the curriculum for the gifted students taking your 
subject?" They were asked to indicate the subject taught if they do enrich 
offerings for the gifted, and also to briefly explain what they tried to do 
and whether or not it was successful. Thirteen enrichment activities were 
listed, any or all of which the teachers may have been practicing in their 
respective classrooms. Space was provided for them to include any enrichment 
activities they practiced which were not included in the list. 

TableXIV shows that seventy-eight out of a possible one hundred 
twenty-seven teachers responded or approximately 61 per cent of the teachers 
of the gifted. 

(i) Enrichment through guidance in general reading 

Approximately three out of five teachers said they offer 
enrichment through guidance in general reading. The nature of such guidance 





(•) 


r r c.. 


- 





' , .t>* , rt - 


: 




V Q - 

1 . 











-v:.: (:) 












134 


is made somewhat clearer from the remarks of the responding teachers. One 
teacher said, "I direct the students to interesting textbooks and library 
references, particularly when they are especially interested in specific 
topics." Another said, "In literature I have suggested top-quality books 
for free reading and have used level-of-tasts ratings. In drama I have 
established a required reading list of plays. In both the above cases the 
efforts have been reasonably successful." A science teacher wrote, "Students 
have been directed to the Scientific American ." Another wrote, "Books on 
chemistry, applied and pure, are supplied from the school library as well as 
my personal library to many of the students listed." A teacher of French and 
English wrote, "I have directed gifted students to more advanced books in 
English 30 -- e.g.-- Les Miserables , David Copperfield , and the works of 
Albert Schweitzer. In French I have provided them with French newspapers, 
magazines, and books not required on the course of studies." A mathematics 
teacher said, "I've had my students purchase an extra book on mathematics for 

general reading - Mathematician's Delight . 

(ii) Planning more difficult assignments for the gifted 

Approximately two teachers out of five said they plan more 
difficult assignments for the gifted students in their classes. Typical 
examples of what they claim to be doing are quoted from their remarks: 

A teacher of mathematics and science said, "Other books than 
the required text are used for assignments in mathematics for the bright; and 
challenging problems are given in science." A literature teacher wrote, "I 
assign bright students projects which require more than average ability." A 
physics teacher wrote, "In physics a few challenging problems are made up from 
time to time and are usually well received by two or three members of each 






y. . ■ « . .... ........ .... x ■' 

■ . . . ■ - • : : " < 

-. ' ■ - 1 i! - • 

- - : ":r< ' :-r. in,’. «>?*£■*'•: — - * ->* - ■' ' ■ s: ‘ -* ■■:] 

' ' • 

< * • •• ; 

iO - X 

J . . ;• .. ■* .. . .. u. ‘ . -" - • '•" : 

■ . v v . : 

. . t, ' ' • . . •'. v z ' v . V * * *? 

- . : - 

; , ..... '' <. - - ' •' 

. ; - 

.... ■,. . ; . . • • •-■• (• ) 

■ 

- :n - ... , JiJ - ; ° 

.:.. *y ..... ■ bn& a-" :ic v A 

' 

; , 

' f • - . • •/"; ... 3 . ■ '-I; ,C V'? 

. v . . . t • . . ■ ' 

. 





135 


class." According to a social studies teacher, "Special sets of questions are 
given the more gifted." An English teacher said, "I require the gifted to 
read more of Shakespeare's plays than the one assigned by the Department (of 
Education)." 

(iii)) Encouraging individual research 

Out of every three teachers of the selected group that responded 
to the questionnaire, approximately one claimed to have encouraged gifted 
students to undertake individual research. For examples of the sort of thing 
the teachers encourage, their remarks are quoted: A biology teacher said, 

"Members of the class are encouraged to do a dissection or any other study they 
wish to undertake in the laboratory out of school hours." A mathematics teach¬ 
er said, "I encourage members of the class to subscribe to the Students' Journal 
In Mathematics and to send in solutions to the problems contained therein." A 
French teacher has arranged for her students to have pen-pals in France. 

(iv) Using gifted students as assistants in laboratories, 
the library, etcetera 

Approximately one teacher in four uses gifted students as 
assistants. One teacher reports, "I use students in the lab to prepare demon¬ 
strations." A drama teacher said, "I have used two outstanding drama students 
to direct plays." Another wrote, "I recommended students who could help in 
the library." "In Mathematics 31", wrote a teacher, "I have gifted students 
act as demonstrators of difficult questions." 

(v) Encouraging students to participate in extracurricular activities 
Approximately one teacher in five claimed to encourage gifted 
students to participate in extracurricular activities. An art teacher reported, 
"Posters, drawings, and crests are done by art students for clubs and the year¬ 
book. Such work is credited as extra art work for class purposes. Drawings for 
the yearbook become the main art project for interested students: Another teacher 


















..... J 




- 




* ( 


( 












; / .. ; <f '■ ^ - 



_ . . : - ' ■ • • i > • • ••• <. . 














V 









. 


.V. .. 1'.’ • . - c 


: 


. f. 


. 


. . t 


i«. b ' - Vo 







136 


said, "I encourage some of the better ones to join the Public Speaking and 
Debating Club.” Another said, "I call the attention of students to writing 
and speaking competitions and offer some direction in preparing for these.” 


TABLE XIV 


ENRICHMENT TECHNIQUES USED AND THE PERCENTAGE OF TEACHERS OF A 
SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE XII STUDENTS USING 
THEM IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 



Enrichment Activity 

Number of 

Per cent 



teachers 



Enrichment through guidance in general reading.... 49 63 

Planning more difficult assignments.. 33 42 

Encouraging individual research. 26 33 

Using gifted students as assistants in laboratories, 

libraries, etc. 18 23 

Encouraging participation in extracurricular 

activities. 17 22 

Encouraging the administration to provide special 

facilities for the gifted. 16 20 

Encouraging creative experiences. 14 18 

Other enrichment activities used but not listed above. 10 13 

Stimulation of hobbies and collections. 9 11 

Making contacts with outstanding citizens of the comm¬ 
unity with interests similar to those of the gifted... 8 10 

Encouraging the gifted to participate in 

community organizations. 8 10 

Organizing the products of enrichment activities 

as exhibitions. 8 10 

Making excursions to places of interest. 5 6 


(vi) Encouraging the administration to provide special 
facilities for the gifted 

One out of five teachers claimed to be encouraging the admin¬ 
istration officials in the respective schools to provide special facilities 
for gifted students. In the main such suggestions had to do with recommending 




























137 


books for the school library. A French teacher, however, wrote that she asked 
for a tape recorder, recordings of French songs and readings, subscriptions to 
French newspapers and books for free reading. Another example of the kind of 
encouragement the responding teachers gave was the recommendation by a biology 
teacher for a new and better equipped biology laboratory. 

(vii) Encouraging creative experiences 

One out of five teachers of the selected group claimed to have 
encouraged gifted students to undertake creative experiences. For example, an 
art teacher reported, "I try to keep all art work creative." An English teacher 
wrote,"I attempt to give the gifted student a chance to do creative writing in 
connexion with the English program." A physics teacher provides opportunities 
for gifted students to improvise laboratory equipment. Another teacher stated, 
"In French I'm having a student write a simple play for performance later by 
his classmates." Another teacher said, "I encourage students to enter essay 
contests." 

(viii) Making contacts with outstanding citizens 
of the community 

Approximately one teacher in ten made contacts with citizens 
of the community who have interests similar to those of the gifted students in 
class. For example, one teacher brought in a guest speaker from a university 
drama department. A French teacher wrote, "Local French-speaking people are 
invited to assist in conversation groups at city-wide meetings of a students' 
French Club." A science teacher reported, "I have suggested that certain 
students contact specific persons." 

(ix) Stimulation of hobbies and collections 

One teacher out of ten claimed to have attempted to stimulate 




, * ' - ‘ • ; 

• ^" \ ... : : .. ••• 2 --vco'to:: 

. 

t 

-o. j?- :• 2 .:■• ' ’ ' 1 

( ; 

;r .Vi . ?x . .5 :: o 7 tv:.v; . t .* .r .*rt 3 ;/.<;• ; '• tv v:: io <Mfij 




. a; - . 


. 


; :. uA , ' . a 'Vvr 


,-v v ■ v ;j :>v. O ! :> . v ’>■ 


.;, * . . :b,' c: ‘ C-v'V 


.. - - 


. ■ . - ... - 


- _ ,, . _ q '1 . » /:> ■■■:* ■ :>;v 0.’• v . vv.a: .2/ -2:.o/.?:- : 3 J: v J 

illv.A 0 i, viJ2 T ’ t 2 , •" Ov.\foa iu 1 lions’ll -Fj 




- 


■ > : f ' ■’. ? 




(• • 

■ . ; ... : • .:2: s> 




, 2 .'. ... 3 .... ..... :w_.-a., c ~ 2 ..v~A 

: 

. . . ....: ... • . •- < 








. 

_ ; 


: , • ; ........ : 2 . W I ' ^ • : 2 ■ r. 2 : t. 2 .:.... ' 


- ( ; 


o:. . v v ..o: 


.0 _ 


138 


gifted students to undertake hobbies and collections. The students of one teacher 
were encouraged to bring craftwork they may do at home to school. If students 
wished to learn a new craft the teacher attempted to find qualified instruction. 
The students of a biology teacher raised an ant colony, and of another collected 
plants and insects. A French teacher wrote, "The students have all made splendid 
scrap books on France and French Canada. Those of the good students are really 
astounding . ,r 

(x) Encouraging gifted students to participate in 
community organizations 

Approximately ten per cent of the teachers of the selected group 
claimed to have encouraged them to take an active part in community organizations. 
One teacher wrote, "Meetings are advertised when brought to my attention." A 
drama teacher wrote, "I stimulate some outside work in drama and the gifted 
respond extremely well." A science teacher said, "Some science club members 
belong to the Royal Astronomical Society of which I am a meber." Another teacher 
wrote, I've urged them to belong to the U. N. Club. 

(xi) Organizing exhibitions of the products of enrichment 
activities 

About ten per cent of the teachers said they displayed the 
products of enrichment activities. This sort of thing was done in science 
classes and in art. 

(xii) Making excursions to places of interest 

Five per cent of the teachers claimed to have made excursions 
to places of interest. A science teacher said, "We visited the Observatory." 
Another wrote, "We have visited science laboratories having to do with the 
oil industry." A third teacher said, "I have encouraged students to visit the 






feiio io ‘saiT . c 

- 

. 

..vi; ;. j-i io <, ,'v--' 


- t . - 


. ...... 

. 

. . . 

-• 


. 


. ,.. . ; ..-■ : . ... - ■; ■ - 4 .. : i" . -1 ( ) 








139 


Art Museum and other art displays. I draw students' attention to the monthly 
exhibitions at the Art Museum." 

(xiii) Organizing seminar projects for gifted class members 

Five per cent of the teachers of the gifted claimed to have 
involved them in seminar projects. Only one teacher commented. He said, "I 
attempted this but it became unfeasible because of the lack of student time." 

(xiv) Other enrichment activities used 

Thirteen per cent of the teachers said they used enrichment 
devices not included in the above list. A commercial teacher said, "My better 
typing students are assigned as 'secretaries' to teachers." A social studies 
teacher reported, "Better students make reports and the occasional speech." 

Another teacher said, "Even as simple a device as marking them on a more critical 
level is of value. They rise to a challenge better than ordinary students." 

A mathematics teacher said, "Occasionally, when an interesting topic was mentioned 
in Mathematics 31 I have told the bulk of the class that I'm going to ignore 
them and then proceeded to go on to an intellectual treat with the minority 
that could follow me." One teacher reported she enriched the experiences of 
gifted students by having private interviews with them regularly. In classes 
of French 20 and 30, gifted students are provided with the opportunity to listen 
to French records for improvement of speech and to stimulate their interest. 

Summary From the data it appears that teachers of the gifted 
are conscious of the needs of such students to some degree at least, and as a 
result are providing some enrichment of their curriculum. Every one of the 
78 teachers claimed to be doing something. 


As consolidated above it may appear to some that gifted 





. 



: - . - 

: ..... . .. c'J z&UrJC v t, j~0 ■':) 

- .. ; - •. <-> j - -i. i-i ...O 

■. - •. .. ‘r AiO . >:'%•*; r 

„ . ... ■■ - :: - : ^ r ■■■■ 1 ..j 

( • ) 

- ;■ : . , ■: 3 : M ■ - ' a 3*1 


'.'Si.; • • V .: 

iV < •' 4>'v‘JO/iii 


■ - 


> 


O «v hi :> *a ^ *>.**• 


' .... • . ■ -• ... •/.. .! ; 

• i. % 


0 




h'.> r» L . 44- i'.iBv'tT. 


. ' 


. t£‘i * o;! ■ .. .‘.i. . o. ;:o si i&'/slj 






: 






. 








- 


. • ui /. . - u 

. - . . ... * ' 

. ■ ■ ..u ;■_... ... ..... ..... 


iV" 


: -. .: . : . . . m. tOC 


. .,. . 


c 


. 




- 


. ■ < ; 


assets 'zm 







140 


students in Alberta composite high schools get rather an extensive amount of 
enriched experiences- The writer hastens to point out that in terms of what 
the teachers could be doing this may be very little. And again, individual 
teachers in some instances do rather much more than others, with many doing 
very little. There appears to be no general over-all approach by teachers 
of the gifted to provide enrichment as part of composite school policy. There 
does not appear to be a concerted effort by all the teachers to provide a 
consistent approach of enrichment for the gifted. However, gifted students 
are not without challenging experiences altogether. Some few teachers are 
doing remarkable jobs with their very able students. 

In not a single instance do all the teachers use the same 
device. More than half the teachers provide guidance in general reading. 
Between twenty-five per cent of the teachers and fifty per cent plan more 
difficult assignments and encourage individual research. Between ten and 
twenty-five per cent of the teachers use the gifted as laboratory and class¬ 
room assistants, encourage the administration to provide special facilities 
for the gifted, encourage the gifted to take part in creative experiences, 
encourage participation of the giftediin extracurricular activities, urge 
the gifted to undertake hobbies and collections, make contact with community 
individuals that are in a position to benefit the gifted, encourage the gifted 
to take part in community organizations, and organize exhibits of gifted 
students' work. Fewer than one out of ten teachers takes gifted students 
on excursions to places of interest, or organize seminar projects to involve 
gifted students. 

(c) Library and Laboratory Facilities 

The literature generally supports the conclusion that admin¬ 
istrators must provide the facilities teachers require to adequately enrich 








t :■ ."" a* s 


• - z***M 

. : - : * .... 

, - : . - - 

. - - ■' J 

• - ' * - - ' ■ 1 

... - : - : ' 9 - 

. 

: . . . : • ■ - • : • * . : 

• ■ • - 

» . ; ~ v; 

: ■ 

. a... . - £ ■ ■ • » - ■ 

- -■ . . : . : - ' - 

' lt,ui ■ ■ ‘ • ■ *■ iiiciia. 

• , •• ... '. £• </•-'- • ■!-- __ • - • « uc •<•«* v — 1 v 1 ..Cul~ ••• J 

.v.-.a- .,: -,..c.; ,..L ii l: , Ju * uO ' ;i 

^ ... . .. ;■ ■ .. .. . - ax": ....■: . ... . - . - . 0 <. • ; • . - ' Ioi 

s t .v. a-. 1 -' - ■■■ • - -■ - 1 l ;.-. - ••••- 0 - .,ii 






;. i. z As:j.x-('-'.h z>,ac..: t s^o.w;>i>. 

K ...j.. . rr-3z c z n 

, .3 i’ C. n • .. .. 1 v' '• >■ ■ 




„3 J. ii »• •- -v ■ - '.-i-i 

.. ' iii: 


: - .... ; - - • 




; c ....... ;■ -• •• ' c -* 


; : 
a ..z no! 


.... 


. : . 

( ) 




::.nv i/ 


_ 





141 


the curriculum of gifted students. Two of the most important means of facilitating 
enriched experiences are the school library and science laboratories. By the 
use of the library and laboratory facilities gifted students are in a position 
to carry on individual and small group projects over and above their regular 
assignments. It is in the library and laboratories of the school, that interest 
in a particular field may be carried farther and plumbed deeper than would be 
possible without such facilities. Indeed, it is in a rich environment with 
wide reading opportunities and the chance to experiment that inquisitive minds 
of gifted students come across topics and subjects that may lay the foundations 
for their later life work. 

With this in mind, and with the belief that teachers are 
probably in the best position to pass judgment on the schools' facilities most 
directly connected with their teaching efforts the investigator asked the 
teachers of the selected troup to express their opinions concerning the adequacy 
of the above-mentioned facilities in terms of their attempts to teach gifted 
students. 

(i) Library 

Teachers were asked, "Do you consider the school library is 
adequate to meet any calls which you might make upon it as you attempt to meet 
the needs of gifted students by means of projects, class asignments, extra 
reading, etc.?" Table XV shows that seventy-one teachers responded (55 per cent 
of the total group of teachers of the gifted). Of this group, approximately six 
out of ten felt the libraries of the composite high schools were adequate or 
more than adequate. Four out of ten felt they were less than adequate or were 
undecided. 


Teachers were asked to comment on their responses. Some of 










- 


. J ii& . ■ - Vj 






. . A. •- .'-'V. N< - •• :■ •• • - S i; - -i '• •- . . 

i.; 1: .. -V. -J ■’. .. .. x ' i _ - ..j-- A- -S-sjo ._ . » U 






. uC - . 

. 

. ■ i . ..- a 




i. ..' ; ; .. ... - jo . 




*. 


..... 




’..... ... ... ; .. ... 






S*& .. ,. 




-. ^ ... i A. 






v i.- ... . . ... 2 Li _ .jO 

II 


uo „ ^ 




... .. .. a:: 




-■ v ..'.... ... illi 














Oil • 






. j. w . 










(.; 


. 


^c;.. iiu (> 













<. - 


t, - ; • . ■ •' 


( -- 



















142 


their typical comments were: 

"We have no full-time librarian so it is less than adequate". 
..."It is less than adequate, but probably partly my own fault, since no 
request for books by me has ever been turned down"...."It is adequate because 
through school, city, university and other available libraries, students may 
obtain any material needed"...."We have an excellent library, but research 
projects go beyond our library facilities"...."There is always room for improve¬ 
ment, and improvement is being made constantly through the acquisition of new 
books"...."The librarian does wonders with the facilities at her disposal" 0 ... 

"It is difficult to make proper use of the library since it is used as a study 
hall"...."The science section has insufficient varied material, especially up- 
to-date books. There are no science magazines". 

TABLE XV 

AN EXPRESSION OF TEACHERS' OPINIONS ON THE ADEQUACY 
OF THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOL LIBRARIES IN MEETING 
THE NEEDS OF A SELECTED GROUP OF STUDENTS 


Adequacy 

Number of 
teachers 

N = 71 

Per cent 

More than adequate 

4 

6 

Adequate 

37 

52 

Less than adequate 

27 

38 

Undecided 

3 

4 


(ii) Laboratories 


Science teachers were asked to respond to the following question: 






1 

















143 


,r Do you consider the scientific equipment in this school is adequate to meet 
any demands you might make upon it as you attempt to meet the needs of gifted 
students by means of projects, individual and class assignments, research 
of an advanced nature, etc.?” Since the investigator does not know the number 
of science teachers of gifted students in Alberta composite high schools it is 
impossible to state the per cent response. Twenty-six teachers replied to 
this question. Fifty-four per cent felt the equipment is adequate or more 
than adequate; forty-six per cent felt it is less than adequate. Not a single 
teacher is undecided on this question. (See table XVI) 

The teachers were asked, "If you checked 'less than adequate', 
please name any facilities which you think the school should provide". Some 
typical comments were: 

"There is a shortage of microscopes, slices, and books on 
microtechnique"...."The equipment is adequate for one class 
at a time, but when several classes are operating at one 
time it is insufficient"...."We need more equipment for 
Science Club activities"...."We need physics lab. equipment 
of nearly all kinds in greater quantity"...."In a school 
this size we need at least two chemistry labs"...."Anything 
I order is provided"...."We need more storage space; more 
equipment kept in definite labs in order to reduce the amount 
of hunting required to locate apparatus"...."The course 
should call for more work in the labs; new and better equip- 




. I 


-J 








ment is needed”...."We have a bare minimum of equipment 
for a minimum program." 


144 


TABLE XVI 

AN EXPRESSION OF OPINION ON THE ADEQUACY OF THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS' 
LABORATORY FACILITIES IN MEETING THE NEEDS OF A SELECTED GROUP OF 
STUDENTS BY THE TEACHERS OF THE GROUP 


Adequacy 

Number of 
teachers 

N = 71 

Per cent 

More than adequate 

2 

8 

Adequate 

12 

46 

Less than adequate 

12 

46 

Undecided 

0 

0 


Summary The investigator is here dealing with facts of 
opinion. And the opinions are expressed by the group in the Alberta composite 
high schools who probably are most intimately connected with the facilities on 
which they pass judgment. Three out of five said the library facilities were 
adequate; science teachers were fairly evenly divided on the adequateness of 
the science equipment. The data suggest that there is a large number of 
teachers of the selected group who are of the opinion that library and science 
laboratory facilities in the composite high schools are not adequate to meet 
the demands of an enriched programme for gifted students. And the comments 
made by the teachers concerning their opinions appear to be legitimate remarks 
to which administrators could profitably give some of their attention. 













145 


3. Outcomes of Current Composite High School Practice 

(a) Students' Use of Library Facilities 

To what extent do the selected students use the library facilities 
of the composite high school? What is the nature of such use? What are the 
opinions of students concerning the adequacy of the libraries in meeting their 
reading and assignment needs? In an attempt to throw some light on these 
questions, the investigator asked the selected students: "About how many times 
do you visit the school library in a week?" Ninety-three per cent of the 
selected group responded (101/109). Of the group responding twenty-four said 
they never visit the libraries of their respective schools. Seventy-seven 
said they visit the libraries. 

Table XVII shows how many students visit in terms of how often 
they claim to visit. 

TABLE XVII 

THE EXTENT TO WHICH COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOL LIBRARY FACILITIES WERE USED BY A 
SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE XII STUDENTS AND THE FREQUENCY 
OF VISITS PAID BY THE SELECTED GROUP 


Number of visits 

Total 

Per cent 

Students Responding 

101/109 

93 


No visits. 24 24 

1 visit in two weeks. 16 16 

2 visits in two weeks. 19 19 


3 visits in two weeks 


9 


9 





























146 


TABLE XVII CONTINUED 


Number of Visits 


Total Per cent 


4 visits in two weeks. 12 12 

5 visits in two weeks. 7 7 

6 visits in two weeks. 6 6 

7 visits in two weeks. 1 1 

8 or more visits in two weeks. 7 7 


The students who said they visit the library (77/101) were asked 
"What type of book do you use in the library or take out from the library?" 
Table XVIII shows that approximately four out of five students using the 
libraries use reference books for assignments; five out of ten use reference 
books to satisfy their own interests; and approximately nine out of ten use 
composite school libraries to get fiction and non-fiction reading material 
for their own reading enjoyment. 

TABLE XVIII 

USE MADE OF COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOL LIBRARIES BY A SELECTED GROUP OF 

GRADE XII STUDENTS 



Use made of the 

Library Facilities 

Number of 
students 

Per cent 


1 . 

Reference books 

for assignments 

61/77 

79 

2. 

Reference books 

for students' own interest 

40/75 

53 

3. 

Fiction and Non- 

-Fiction for pleasure 

65/74 

88 


















































147 


Table XIX shows that when the selected students were questioned 
concerning the adequacy of the school libraries in meeting their reading needs, 
approximately six students out of ten said library facilities are adequate or 
more than adequate. And four students out of ten said the facilities are less 
than adequate. 

TABLE XIX 

THE OPINIONS OF A SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE XII STUDENTS IN ALBERTA 
COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS CONCERNING THE ADEQUACY OF THE SCHOOL 
LIBRARIES IN MEETING THEIR READING AND ASSIGNMENT NEEDS 


Opinion 

Number of 
students 

Per cent 

N = 106 

More than adequate 

13 

12 


Adequate 

51 

48 


Less than adequate 

42 

40 



Summary Perhaps the most significant single finding is that one 
selected student out of every four said he never makes use of composite high 
school library facilities. This statement is made in the light of what auth¬ 
orities have said concerning the reading and reading interests of gifted students. 
Gifted students do considerably more reading than their less able classmates. 

They read more widely and more difficult books. They have, for the most part, 
what Terman called 'reading craze'. (166) 


















- 

. 















148 


Although only 77 students claim to visit the libraries, 106 
express opinions concerning the adequacy of the libraries in meeting their 
reading and assignment needs. One possible explanation of this situation 
is that the students who did not use the libraries during the past year but 
did express an opinion on the adequacy of the libraries are students whose 
experience with the libraries in Grades X and XI made them decide the 
facilities are inadequate. Two students out of five feel the libraries are 
inadequate. 

Those students that use the libraries use them to assist in doing 
assignments and for their own reading pleasure. The majority of students 
make from one to three visits to the libraries in two weeks. 

(b) Small-Group and Individual Project Work 

Another generally accepted means of providing gifted students 
with enriched school experiences is the use by teachers of individual and 
small group projects that interest and challenge the abilities of the students. 

With this in mind the investigator asked each of the selected 
students, “During your enrollment at this school have you at any time under¬ 
taken an individual or a small-group project in any of your subject which 
was not an assignment for the whole class, but rather was something that you 
decided to do extra?" 

One hundred six out of a possible one hundred nine students 
responded. Table XX shows that 36 per cent said they were involved while 





......... ■ . . - 




. u 


O' 







. : . - 




o. . 






149 


64 per cent said they were not. 


TABLE XX 


THE DEGREE OF PARTICIPATION IN INDIVIDUAL AND SMALL GROUP PROJECTS BY A 
SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE XII STUDENTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 


Answer 

Number of 
students 

Per cent 

N = 106 

Yes 

38 

36 


No 

68 

64 



The students were invited to comment on the nature of any projects 
they undertook. The writer includes some typical comments. One girl undertook 
a survey in Psychology 20 entitled, "Do students Appreciate The Fine Arts?" 

Some students reported doing chemistry and physics experiments - one boy 

tried to synthesize bakelite; another built an audio-amp1ifyer. Some 
students said they made reports in social studies. For example, one boy under¬ 
took a biographic study of Napoleon, while another wrote and reported on the 
world's great religions. One student was involved in designing costumes for 
a drama production. Some reported that they tried writing short stories in 
English. One student gave a report on 'Civic Government In Action* after 
attending, as an observer, city-council meetings. Others said they did special 
reading in French. One boy built a thermometer. 

















































150 


Of the 38 students who worked on projects, 19 said they received 
assistance from teachers. The aid rendered was in the nature of direction¬ 
giving, making materials and facilities available, pointing out books to 
read and where to find information, giving suggestions with regard to remedying 
faulty apparatus construction, and giving hints on how to improve style of 
writing. 

The students who did projects were asked, "What school facilities 
were made available for you to carry on your project?" Their comments indicate 
that administrative authorities do supply materials and facilities. Students 
said they used laboratories, sewing rooms, libraries, classrooms, drama and 
technical shops. One student was given his own desk in the biology laboratory 
at which he was free to work in his spare time. 

When asked about the times at which they did their project work 
some of the students replied before school hours, others said after. Some 
did their work during noon hour and some did it during school hours. 

Summary According to the students, approximately four out of 
ten do project work either individually or in small groups. The writer is 
careful to point out that a student may have been involved in one project 
or in a number. These data give no indication of how much project work a 
given student did, only whether or not he has done some. 

And that which has been done appears to be, from the comments 
of the students, authentic enrichment. 

Some teachers help students in their project work. From what 
the students said they give valuable assistance. Administrative authorities 
make facilities available when called upon. 












- 





: > 




















151 


The significant finding is that 6 out of 10 students said they did 
not participate in any such enrichment activities. 

(c) Course Pattern Choices 

Probably there are few that would suggest all gifted students should 
be expected to enter universities and colleges upon completion of their high 
school education. However, the majority of authorities would agree that most 
gifted students should be provided with the basis in elementary and secondary 
schools that will enable them to go on for higher education later if they so 
desire. Therefore, gifted students.should be guided into the matriculation 
pattern during high school. In the university entrance pattern are to be 
found the courses that will most likely be challenging to the mentality of 
gifted youth. A study of the permanent record cards of the selected group 
of Grade XII students shows that approximately 3 per cent are to be found 
outside the matriculation pattern. 

(d) Credit Load 

Theoretically, students attending high schools in Alberta can earn 
a maximum of forty credits in one school year. (Credits correspond to classes, 
for example, third year high school English is worth five credits, and trigon¬ 
ometry is worth three). For most high school students, a full course load is 
considered to comprise thirty-five credits (i.e. -- seven, five credit courses). 
However, a student may carry more than thirty-five, but "under no condition will 
he be granted more than forty credits in one school year." (167) In order to 
graduate from high school a student must earn 100 credits. But he may earn 
up to 120 credits over three years. 

The credit system appears to open the way for a degree of enrich¬ 
ment by allowing gifted students to carry extra courses. Thus the forty credit 
maximum is used up. From a study of the permanent record cards of the selected 


' 


( ) 







: 






: /. •: ■ -.’.u 


m 





.( . ■. - • ••) 


• . ... - . 6 ,: ■ - - -• . - • • 1 ~ 

. ■ • - - .. V. . : :■. h:ji 


- 



152 


Grade XII students, the average number of credits earned by members of the 
group during their high school career is 108 credits, or approximately forty 
per cent of what they might earn over and above the necessary 100 credits. 

The school with the lowest average shows students earning four 
credits out of a possible twenty; the school with the highest average shows 
students earning eleven credits out of twenty. 

The generally expressed attitude of the school principals concern¬ 
ing students' credit loads is that, especially in Grade XII, a full year's 
programme consisted of courses totalling thirty-five credits. 

(e) Elective Choices of the Selected Students 

The nature of the courses taken by gifted students may furnish 
an important clue to the problem of the nature and extent of enrichment they 
receive at the hands of school authorities and teachers. It is admitted that 
subjects like Latin, English Literature 21, and trigonometry are designed 
especially for gifted students. From this it follows that, on the whole, the 
administrators of the composite high schools recognize that some courses, by 
their very nature, are more fitted to meet the interests and abilities of 
superior students. 

Table XXI shows the elective choices of the selected group in 
Grades X, XI, and XII. In Grade X all matriculation students are required to 
register in Mathematics 10 and Science 10. This means that Grade X students 
must in fact take Language 10, Literature 10, Social Studies 10, Health and 
Personal Development 10, and Physical Education 10, and in addition, as stated 
above, they must take, if they are in the matriculation pattern, mathematics 
and science. From this point on students are free to choose electives from the 



- 






- - 

<> 


:o : 






<. .- - t. - - - 


. . • ^ 






<. 












153 


repertoire of courses offered by the particular school in which each student 
finds himself. Most of the gifted group took Typewriting 10 (64%). In not 
another case do more than 307o of the Grade X students take the same course. 
After typing they chose Biology 11 (or Science 11), French 11, Fabrics and 
Dress 10, and Electricity 10, Drama 10, and Automotives 10, and others on 
down to the least number of students taking Metalwork 10. 

In Grade XI more students begin to take more of the same courses 
but still the range of elective choices is wide. The constant subjects which 
the gifted students must take are Language 20, Literature 20, and Social 
Studies 20. And matriculation students must continue in the mathematics- 
science pattern and also take a language. (Regulations do not require them 
to carry a language but students are led to see the wisdom of the choice if 
they are in the matriculation pattern.) 

The investigator found permanent records containing information 
on the courses of the selected students for 115 cases. All but two of this 
number took Science 20 and all but three registered in Mathematics 20. Approx¬ 
imately seven out of ten took French 20, three out of ten took Latin 20, and 
two out of ten took French 21 and Psychology 20. The students' choices from 
this point on broaden out widely with a few of the students registered in 
a variety of electives such as sociology and house furnishings. 

By Grade XII the selected group limit their choices considerably. 
More than ninety per cent of the group took Chemistry and Mathematics 30; 
more than seventy per cent took Physics and French 30; more than twenty-five 
per cent took trigonometry and biology; nineteen per cent took Latin. Past 
this point fewer than one out of ten students took any other elective. 

The so-called honours courses are, in the majority of schools, 






















154 


Mathematics 31, French 11, 21, and 31, English Literature 21, and English 
Language 21. Table XXI shows that about one-half the group of selected 
students registered in trigonometry (Mathematics 31); approximately one 
student out of every five took French 11 and 21, and only four students 
out of 115 took French 31; about one student out of ten took English Lit¬ 
erature 21, and four out of 115 took English Language 21. 

TABLE XXI 

THE ELECTIVE CHOICES OF A GROUP OF GRADE XII COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOL 
STUDENTS IN EACH OF THE SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL GRADES, X, XI, AND XII 



Grade X 

Grade XI 

Grade 

XII N=115 

Elective Number of ° 

students 

i Elective Number of % 

students 

Elective 

Number of 
students 


Typewriting. 

75 

64 

Science. 

113 

98 

Chemistry. 

108 

Science 11. 

31 

26 

Mathematics... 

112 

98 

Mathematics 30. 

105 

French 11. 

20 

17 

French 20. 

76 

66 

Physics. 

85 

Fabrics 6c Dress. 

19 • 

17 

Latin. 

34 

30 

French 30. 

83 

Electricity. 

19 

17 

Psychology.... 

26 

23 

Mathematics 31. 

55 

Drama.. 

18 

16 

Frpnrh 91 . 

19 

17 

Biology 32. 

31 

Automotives. 

18 

16 

Typewriting... 

15 

13 

Latin 30. 

19 

Foods and nut¬ 



Electricity... 

13 

11 

Typewriting.... 

5 

rition .... 

12 

10 

English Lit¬ 



Music. 

4 

Art. 

11 

10 

erature 21.. . 

9 

8 

French 31. 

4 

Woodworking. 

13 

11 

Bookkeeping... 

6 

4 

Bookkeeping.... 

2 

Bookkeeping. 

9 

8 

Physical Ed¬ 



Drama. 

2 

Music. 

8 

8 

ucation .... 

5 

4 

Fabrics 6c Dress 

2 

Business Fund¬ 



Drama. 

5 

4 

German. 

2 

amentals .... 

8 

8 

Fabrics 6c Dress 

5 

4 

Office Practice 

2 

Shorthand... 

8 

8 

English Lang¬ 



Secretarial 


Arts 6c Crafts... 

5 

4 

uage 21. 

5 

4 

Training. 

2 

Printing. 

3 

3 

Music. 

5 

4 

Business Mach¬ 


Home Economics 

3 

3 

German. 

4 

3 

ines . 

2 

General Mech¬ 



Law. 

4 

3 

Economics. 

1 

anics . 

3 

3 

Automotives... 

4 

3 

Mathematics 32. 

1 

Agriculture. 

2 

2 

Shorthand. 

4 

3 

Arts 6c Crafts . . 

1 

Metalwork. 

2 

2 

Foods 6c Nut- 








rition. 

3 

3 

Household Furn- 





Arts 6c Crafts . 

2 

2 

ishings. 

1 


: % 

94 

91 

74 

72 

48 

27 

17 

4 

4 

4 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 































































155 


TABLE XXI CONTINUED 


Grade X Grade XI Grade XII 


Elective Number of 7. Elective Number of °/ a Elective Number of % 

students students students 


Printing. 

2 

2 

Office 



Practice.... 

3 

3 

Clerical 



Practice.... 

2 

2 

Sociology. 

1 

1 

Metalwork. 

1 

1 

Household 



Furnishings... 

1 

1 


How many of the gifted students were found in subjects in the fine 
arts field (art, music, drama)? Ten per cent of the selected group took art in 
Grade X and none carried on with it in Grade XI; Sixteen per cent of the group 
took drama in Grade X, while in Grade XI the amount was four per cent, and in 
Grade XII it was further reduced to approximately two per cent of the total. 

In Schools 600 and 700 the respective administrators follow a 
policy of directing gifted Grade X students into vocational elective choices 
such as automotives and fabrics and dress. 

Summary Any schools offering elective choices are, to a degree, 
enriching the education of the students involved in them. If properly 
motivated, gifted students want to follow out their interests and prefer to 
take the hard subjects to the easy ones. They seek knowledge in many fields 
through reading, experimenting, and discussion. 















( 






1 


3 




- 





1 - Ll . t 




156 


In consonance with what has been stated above, the Alberta composite 
high schools provide opportunities to register in a wide variety of elective 
courses. There are constant subjects which all students are required to take, 
and students in the matriculation pattern have their choices limited still 
further. But, in spite of the limitations, high school students still have some 
elective choices. This is truer in Grade X and XI than in Grade XII. As a 
student proceeds through high school the elective choice range narrows. 

By Grade XII the matriculants are, for the most part, taking English, 
social studies, chemistry, algebra, physics and French. Almost half the student^ 
are taking trigonometry. With eight periods in a day and six choices filled, and 
the administrative ruling that generally is practiced in the schools, students 
are left with one free choice. From Table XXI this is probably either biology 
or Latin. 

Because a student is registered in the mathematics, science, and 
language courses, it may be assumed that he has, per se, an enriched programme. 
But unless the chemistry teacher or the Latin teacher, etcetera, provides 
challenging experiences in class, that is, provides something over and above 
what average students get in chemistry, then there is, in fact, no enrichment 
of the gifted student f s experiences in chemistry. 

Therefore, from an examination of the elective choices of gifted 
students it might appear that he is getting an enriched curriculum. Such an 
assumption may be far from the truth. 

From the data the writer feels confident enough to say that the 
potentiality of the composite high schools to provide enrichment of the 


curriculum is very great. 



A' 



<■ 





< - 


i. 


K . - • ' - ' 1 1 ‘ 


J 



















* 



- 


<. • 



. 



j; 













157 


Students stay clear of the fine arts subjects; very few are 
interested in taking two languages; not more than half carry both algebra 
and trigonometry in Grade XII; the majority of the gifted students are 
taking at least two sciences, one mathematics course, and one language 
in addition to English and social studies. 

4. Summary 

As a group, teachers and administrators tend to recognize the 
special curriculum and extracurricular needs of gifted students. According 
to principals they are willing to make possible with existing facilities the 
provision of enriching experiences both in and out of classrooms. However 
there appears to be no administrative policy of enrichment centered on the 
needs of gifted students as such. Some schools organize what might be termed 
’honour classes' more or less restricted to gifted students. 

The majority of teachers said they provide at least some degree 
of classroom enrichment. In this respect the teachers appear to be mostly 
'on their own', and receive little or no direction except what they provide 
themselves in meeting the needs of their gifted students. 

Viewing the composite school picture of enrichment as a whole 
and considering the potential for providing for the special needs of gifted 
students by means of curricular and extracurricular enrichment, very little 
is actually being done. This in no way detracts from the fact that some schools 
do much more than others. Some teachers do rather outstanding jobs in 
interesting and challenging gifted students under their direction. Such 
teachers are few in number. Most of the teachers of the gifted do relatively 
little by way of enrichment. 



. 











158 


A large portion of the students do not use the composite high school 
library facilities; nearly half the selected students feel the library facilities 
are less than adequate; a similar proportion of teachers said they are inadequate 
Composite high school laboratory facilities leave much to be desired 
as far as the education of gifted students is concerned. 

Gifted students as a group take very little part in individual and 
small group projects designed to assist them in their best development. 

Practically all the selected students are registered in the matric¬ 
ulation (university entrance) pattern taking the more difficult elective choices- 
e.g. -- mathematics, sciences, and languages. 





159 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER VII 


(165) Handbook, Senior High School (Province of Alberta, Department of 
Education, 1957-58), p. 10. 

(166) Witty, P. A., and Lehman, H. E. "The Reading and Reading Interests 
of Gifted Children", Pedagogical Seminar, 45(December, 1934), pp. 466-481. 

(167) Handbook, Senior High School, 0 £. cit ., p. 10. 











160 


CHAPTER VIII 

DEVELOPING GIFTEDNESS: USE OF COMMUNITY RESOURCES 

1 . The Criterion 

A good secondary programme for the education of gifted students uses 
community resources that are available in the best development of interested 
and able youth. 

Schools may encourage the gifted to take advantage of opportunities 
offered by community institutions and organizations to make more complete 
their education. Individual high schools are not always in a position to 
provide a particular type of enrichment for one or a number of gifted students, 
but within the community where the school is situated there may be an institution 
or an organization in a position to provide the necessary leadership and 
facilities. Some such institutions and organizations which have in the past 
proven valuable in this respect are choirs, public libraries, art classes, 
and a wide variety of youth organizations in which the gifted may become 
leaders as well as followers. 

Use of community resources may occur in another respect. Schools may 
actively exploit the community through such activities as field trips and visits 
to places of interest. Such exploitation may involve museums, courts, concerts, 
commercial firms, and industrial plants. Schools may invite gifted citizens to 
meet interested students and talk with them. 

In the chapters dealing with motivation and enrichment, the latter use 
of community resources was discussed from the viewpoint of what the schools 
are doing. Data show that to a degree schools invite in community citizens to 
meet gifted students. In the main this is done with regard to vocational 
guidance. Some of the schools visit commerical firms, etc. Because this 










/ 















. . . .. o; 


. 












- 


. 



•• : ";3 .' 




: - - . 




. 










161 


information has been previously provided, the following discussion will center 
around the schools' efforts to involve gifted students in worthwhile community 
organizations. 

2. Current Practice In Composite High Schools 

(a) From the Viewpoint of the Administration 

The composite high school principals were asked, "Are there any 
individuals or organizations (outside the school system) in the community, 
who are specifically called upon by the school in meeting the needs of gifted 
students enrolled?" Seven out of eight principals gave either a direct or a 
qualified negative answer. One principal answered a direct 'yes'. At School 
400 community resource people are called in to aid teachers enrich the school's 
offerings in science, dramatics, and music. 

At School 300 the principal made it clear that teachers point out 
to students the existing community facilities available to interested students-- 
e.g. the public library and cultural organizations. The principal of School 
700 said that while the city's curling club is in no way directly associated 
with the high school, it is anxious to provide facilities for students and 
makes efforts to attract students who are interested in curling. The principal 
of School 800 said that the school has connexions with some community cultural 
organizations to which gifted students are urged to belong. 

3. The Outcome of Current Practice 

The selected students were asked a series of questions in an attempt 
to discover the extent to which they participate in community organizations, 
and the extent to which they play a part in the leadership of the groups to 
which they belong. The questions above were calculated to put the students in 











(.: 




\ 








■ -. . ... 


<. ..• ■... ..... o. l -Xi-j.oois 


















162 


a position to answer the more important question concerned with discovering the 
number of students participating in community organizations because the school 
urged them to belong or made it possible for them to belong. 

Table XXII shows that 88 out of 109 students claimed to belong to 
community organizations. The students were asked to name the organizations 
to which they belong. On the whole they named groups such as church youth 
groups, Scouts, Cadets, choirs, fraternities, and athletic clubs. The 88 
students (81 per cent) claimed to hold 200 memberships. Spreading this member¬ 
ship over the selected group as a whole the ratio of memberships to students 
becomes approximately 1.8. Sixty-nine of the 88 students holding memberships 
claimed to be, or have been, holders of leadership positions within the 
organizations and clubs — e.g. president, secretary, etc. When the 69 in 
the leadership group are spread over the total group of selected students the 
ratio of positions to gifted students becomes approximately 1.3. (141/109) 

More than four-fifths of the selected students belong to one or more 
community organizations, and over three-fifths are or have been leaders in 
such groups. The number of selected students who said they belong to comm¬ 
unity organizations because of the schools' influence or because the schools' 
made it possible for them to belong is 11 out of 109 or approximately 10 per 
cent. 

4. Summary From the data above selected students as a group, are active 

in one or more community organizations. Their membership is not the result of 
the schools' influence. The composite high schools play a relatively small 
role in directing gifted students to take advantage of community resources 
such as bands, libraries,, drama groups, art clubs, and so forth. The 


















( 








; 


.. . . 






• • - - • c .... .: : 



■ - 
















163 

organizations to which the selected group belong are mainly service groups 
or athletic groups. They are not, in the main, cultural and educational 
organizations. 


TABLE XXII 

THE MEMBERSHIP IN COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS OF A SELECTED GROUP OF GRADE 
XII COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS AND THE NUMBER IN SUCH 


ORGANIZATIONS BECAUSE THE 

SCHOOLS MADE 

IT POSSIBLE 



Number 

Per cent 

N= 109 
or Ratio 

Selected student participation in 
community organizations. 

88 

81 


Memberships/Selected students. 

200 


1.8 

Selected students holding 
leadership positions.. 

69 

63 


Leadership positions/selected students 

141 


1.3 

Selected students participating in 
community organizations because the 
schools made it possible. 

11 

10 



Nineteen per cent of the selected group belong to no community organiza¬ 
tions. If these students have interests and abilities that community organiza¬ 
tions and groups are in a position to develop there are those who say the schools 
should undertake to interest such students in participating in the organizations 
and taking advantage of the opportunities provided. If these students have the 
potential for some day becoming community leaders, they are at present getting 
no practice in leading community groups, or for that matter, even taking part 


in them as followers. 














<. 














: .... 

. 


c . 








> 








. - . - C 

5- V: v ... r;-.?uQ:.* • ^ ::u" r - 









164 


CHAPTER IX 

DEVELOPING GIFTEDNESS: ADEQUATE ADMINISTRATIVE SUPERVISORY PRACTICES 

1. The Criterion 

Secondary school administrators concerned with the provision of a 
good programme for the education of gifted students provide adequate super¬ 
visory leadership for the teachers of the gifted. 

Teachers are involved in a programme of in-service training which 
specifically aims to interpret the problems, characteristics and needs of 
gifted students to them. And such a programme sets out to acquaint teachers 
with up-to-date ideas and practices concerning the education of gifted students. 

The supervisory programme is concerned with building an enriched 
curriculum for gifted students. It involves the teachers in a concerted 
effort to plan and carry out a curriculum that is both more intensive and 
extensive than that developed for average students. All the teachers under¬ 
stand the aims of the enrichment programme and along with administrators give 
their wholehearted support to a commonly agreed upon general approach to the 
problem of providing a challenging curriculum for those students able to meet 
high standards and hard work. 

The supervisory programme, to be effective, will involve an evaluation 
of the effectiveness of teachers and facilities in meeting the needs of gifted 
students. This would mean a constant evaluation of the schools' total approach 
to the education of the gifted and would result in changes that would tend to 


improve the programme - 




165 


2. Current Practice In Composite High Schools 

(a) From the Viewpoint of the Principals 
(i) In-service Training 

In answer to the question, "During the past year what in-service 
training has been carried on which related directly to increasing the under¬ 
standing of teachers about gifted students?", two composite high school 
principals said nothing was done. In the other six schools the extent of such 
training ranged from 'practically nothing' to a planned programme. 

The principal at School 300 said nothing was done in this 
regard except what may have been done by coordinators in meetings with teachers. 

The principal at School 400 made it clear that the departmental 
heads have dealt with the problem of the gifted in their meetings with teachers. 
He said that social studies and English courses were revised to provide the 
gifted with more difficult courses than average high school students get. The 
science course was divided in Grade X into chemistry and physics for superior 
students. 

The principal at School 500 said practically nothing was done 
in this regard. There were a number of opportunities provided during the school 
year when in-service training may have been carried on, but probably was not. 

For example, the education of gifted students could have come up at any one of 
the three regular yearly meetings of all the teachers at School 500. Depart¬ 
ment heads may have arranged to discuss the education of the gifted at their 
meetings with teachers. Once a year school guidance officials meet with new 
teachers on staff and this presents an opportunity to carry on some in-service 
training related to the gifted. The city school administrative authorities 
carry on an in-service training programme where this may come up. In addition, 










166 


the school system's guidance department runs evening classes for city teachers 
who wish to attend, where the education of gifted students may be discussed. 

At School 600 the only in-service training that was carried 
on during the school year centered around the field of English and was not 
concerned with the education of gifted students. 

The principal of School 700 said that there was some in-service 
training concerning the education of the gifted at his school. It involved 
'how to handle them and what to do for them'. Those in charge of the training 
sessions were the principal, the superintendent of schools and the assistant 
superintendent. 

At School 800 during staff meetings the progress of the gifted, 
especially those in the under-achieving category, was discussed. But nothing 
more than this was done which could be considered as in-service training of 
the teachers of gifted students. 

Summary Two schools had more or less planned in-service 
training specifically directed at the education of gifted students. Three did 
nothing in this regard. And three other principals reported something may have 
been done which helped teachers better meet the needs of gifted students. 

From the information gathered there is apparently very little 
emphasis placed on the in-service training of teachers of gifted students in 
Alberta composite high schools. 

(ii) Supervisory Personnel Available 

The composite high school principals were asked to name the 
supervisory personnel available for the teachers of the gifted to consult on 
problems they may have as a result of their attempts to teach the gifted. 



I 



. 




<. . 




- 








s. 
















... - 












167 


From their replies it can be said that in each school the 
administrative authorities are available -- i.e. -- the principal, vice or 
assistant principals, and coordinators or department heads where they are 
employed. In each of the eight schools the officials in the respective 
guidance departments are on-call and are in a position to assist the teachers 
of the gifted. Five of the eight schools feel free to call upon city-system 
supervisors of art, music, physical education, home economics, and shops. 

Such supervisors are not secondary school supervisors as such but are avail¬ 
able to assist teachers in secondary schools if need be. Similarly, the 
same five schools are in a position to call upon central office guidance 
officials. All eight schools are free to call upon the services of the 
provincial guidance officials as well as provincial high school inspectors. 

The superintendents as well as the assistant superintendents in the respective 
systems are available to assist the schools if need be. And in one Alberta 
center two of the schools may seek assistance from the school system's Rapid 
Learners' Committee under the direction of the superintendent. 

Summary While there may be a limited amount of actual in- 
service training of teachers of the gifted, apparently there is no shortage 
of personnel to plan and execute such a programme. Not only are there 
officials in each school to work with the teachers of the gifted, there are 
also officials in the local school systems as well as provincial government 
officials who may be called upon to assist in training teachers of gifted 
students on the job. 

(iii) Evaluation of Teacher Effectiveness 

The investigator made an attempt to discover whether or not 
during the past year there was an evaluation of the effectiveness of teachers 






I 


- 




j 


5 . - 



: 

























... 




. . 
















, • 











168 


in meeting the needs of their gifted students. 

Four schools said there was no attempt made to evaluate the 
teachers; two schools answered with a qualified 'no' and two schools said 
they attempted to evaluate teachers* effectiveness. 

At School 100 the principal's policy was to examine the results 
of yearly final examinations and to judge which teachers were effective as 
teachers of gifted students. He assumed that gifted students achieved well 
on final examinations if they were taught by an effective teacher. Gifted 
students who fared badly on final examinations were held to be the products 
of an ineffective teacher, one who was not able to get the best out of his 
students. On this basis teachers were assigned to the special classes in 
the school. 

At School 200 the principal visited classroom teachers during 
class hours in order to get a rough estimate of their effectiveness as teachers 
of gifted students. He said, "It was mostly an attempt to see to what degree 
the teachers were challenging the gifted by means of broadened curriculum 
offerings*" 

The principal at School 300 answered with a qualified 'no'. 

He said that all through the school year there occurred a constant evaluation 
of the effectiveness of all the teachers in meeting the needs of all the 
students. The programme of evaluation was carried out by coordinators and 
through room visits by the principal. 

At School 600 the principal said he gained some idea of how 
well teachers were meeting the needs of the students by the nature and freq¬ 
uency of their visits to him to discuss problems and seek assistance in 


. 


- 










t. 


. 


3 






. 










169 


becoming more effective teachers. He said that gifted students seek out 
gifted teachers. This gives him some clues concerning the effective and 
ineffective teachers of gifted students. 

Summary Administrators in Alberta composite high schools, 
in general, make no planned effort to specifically evaluate the effectiveness 
of teachers of gifted students. And at the schools where some form of eval¬ 
uation is carried on it seems to be a process involving the subjective judgments 
of coordinators and principals. The investigator asked each principal for a 
written statement of the policy of each school with regard to the school's 
programme for the education of gifted students. Not one school has a written 
policy. In this light it may be asked, In terms of what do the principals 
evaluate teacher effectiveness? Is it in terms of students' achievement, or 
in terms of the number of students going on for further education? Is it in 
terms of the subject choices of students? Their interest and personality 
development? The number of leadership positions held by gifted students? 

This general lack of a planned programme of evaluation may 
be the result of a lack of clear aims concerning the education of gifted 
students; it may be the result of a lack of facilities and personnel to do 
an adequate job; perhaps the principals believe the teachers are doing their 
best and so evaluation would be profitless; perhaps they believe evaluation 
to be unimportant. 

(b) From the Viewpoint of Guidance Coordinators 

Guidance coordinators in the eight schools were asked to answer 
yes or no to the following question: fr During the current school year or 
within the previous two years, has this guidance department made any study 
of the selected group of Grade XII students?" 











■ in*; 





. . - -.■ 

. ; . . . ... ... 


( ) 
























170 


In not a single school was there a study of gifted students as such 
undertaken during the past three years. However, at two schools there was a 
research-type study undertaken in an attempt to benefit gifted students among 
others. Within the past three years Grade IX departmental marks on final 
examinations were treated statistically and from the results it is possible to 
predict the probable success of students choosing the matriculation pattern in 
Grade X from each student's particular subject standings. 

For example, in School 400, if a student coming from Grade IX 
wanted to be enrolled in the matriculation pattern and it was known that his 
Grade IX departmental standings were below a B average, the student would be 
informed that his chances of being a successful matriculant were rather slim 
and he would be urged to register in the shop or commercial pattern. 

It should be pointed out that the guidance departments of the 
composite high schools have been involved since 1957 in a continuing study 
of gifted students undertaken by the Composite High Schools' Principals' 
Association. The study aims to follow up approximately the top 20 per cent in 
intelligence of the 1957-58 Grade X students. A study will be made of such 
considerations as drop-outs, acceleration and retardation, academic records- 
of achievement and under-achievement, enrichment practices of the schools, 
enrichment provided by the students outside of school, personal development, 
involvement in extracurricular activities, to name a few. The results of the 
study are to be available in 1960. 

Summary Six schools did nothing on their own to study the problems 
faced by gifted students and their teachers in an attempt to clarify the 
problems and to bring the potentialities of the schools and school systems to 




















- 








?. - 
























171 


bear on solving the problems, to some degree at least, and thereby enhancing 
the best development of gifted students. Two schools did undertake studies 
not directly related to the education of the gifted but which benefited the 
gifted in the long run. In all the schools there is at present a continuing 
study of a group of gifted students under the auspices of the Composite High 
Schools' Principals' Association. 

(c) From the Viewpoint of Teachers 

From the teachers of the selected group of Grade XII students the 
investigator attempted to discover the nature and extent of composite high 
school supervisory practices that involved them specifically as teachers of 
gifted students. The investigator also sought to discover the amount of 
reading teachers do on their own about the education of the gifted. 

(i) Supervision From the Guidance Department 

The teachers were asked to indicate whether or not they made 
any calls during the current school year in order to get help from guidance 
officials in understanding and teaching any of the selected group of Grade XII 
students. 

Seventeen per cent of the 78 teachers responding out of 127 
said they called at least once on guidance officials during the current school 
year for assistance in understanding and teaching gifted students. In the 
main the teachers sought advice concerning ways and means of assisting partic¬ 
ular students in overcoming academic, social, or emotional difficulties. (See 
table XXII) 

(ii) Teachers Involved in Curriculum Revision 

Table XXIII shows that 32 per cent of the teachers of the 




- ; . 


- 






: (:•) 










- : 


. . 





( 


. 


■ 





172 


gifted are on department of education curriculum committees. The teachers 
indicated the nature of their committee work. For example, some work on the 
development of senior high school art courses; some work on the revision of 
the Science 20 course; others are members of the English committee, the drama 
committee, the Psychology 20 sub-committee, the mathematics committee, French 
and biology and social studies committees. One teacher is on a departmental 
committee the aim of which is to revise the free reading programme in both 
junior and senior high schools. 

The teachers commented on their work. One said, "The revision 
of the psychology course is certainly not being done with the idea of meeting 
the needs of the gifted group", while another said, "The revision of the Psych¬ 
ology 20 course is an attempt to find a text which will provide for the average 
students and also stimulate the brighter students." 

A mathematics teacher said, "The high school committee on 
mathematics is continually trying to improve the scope and sequence of math¬ 
ematics." Another said, "T have spent the last eight years on the high school 
math, curriculum committee in the hope of persuading the powers that be to 
provide courses suited to the gifted." 

A science teacher said, "The general revision of the prov¬ 
incial science course is taking into consideration and has been for several 
years, the supplying of enrichment for the gifted student." 

While 32 per cent of the teachers of the gifted are on 
department of education curriculum committees, twice as many claimed to be 
revising both the subject matter of the courses they teach and the methods 
they use in teaching them, in an attempt to provide more challenging work 








173 


for gifted students. (See table XXIII) 

The teachers were asked to briefly explain the manner in which 
they revise courses and methods for the gifted. Following are some typical 
examples of what they do: 

A French teacher said, "The revision is constant with the 
aim being to give more detailed explanations and varied examples of usage." 

A drama teacher commented, "I have introduced material that is classical in 
nature, which was mostly well received; I have tried to raise the level of 
play appreciation in drama." A science teacher reported, "We have been 
experimenting with the science courses instead of following the curriculum." 
Another said, "I have always made the Science 10 and 20 courses much more 
thorough than called for by the curriculum." A teacher of mathematics said, 

"I introduce some advanced material occasionally." A physics teacher 
reported, "I undertake extra work and teaching on such things as measurement 
involving the metric system, Newton's Laws of Motion, the history of the 
development of the laws of gravitation, etcetera." A social studies teacher 
said, "Bright students in my classes are required to do wider reading and 
more reporting than average students." 

Table XXIII shows that 29 per cent of the teachers who revise 
courses and methods receive help from their respective administrators. The 
teachers commented on the nature of the assistance received. Some typical 
comments were, "I received approval for my actions."; "The recommended 
reading material was ordered..."; "The head of the science department is most 
anxious that science courses be sufficiently good for matriculation students 
and therefore he initiates, encourages and supports all efforts in this regard..."; 
"I received full cooperation...."; "Assistance was given in getting new reference 









(: . ~ ) • 



















. ' 




<. • ! . <■ 

















































174 


books and periodicals... rr ; "Assistance was received from discussions in staff 
meetings and meetings of the mathematics teachers as a group." 

(iii) Teachers Involved In In-Service Training 

Table XXIII shows that seven teachers out of 78 indicated 
they were involved in in-service training that enabled them to better deal 
with gifted students. 

Some of the comments of the teachers who were involved are 
quoted below: "We had exceptionally fine seminars in the English department. 
We had practical discussions based on a definite program to fill listed needs 
in our teaching. Seminar discussions were not limited to the gifted."...; 

"I received in-service training in counselling..."; "This year our mathematics 
department made a study of "Modern Mathematics" in order to see the bent that 
the handling of the traditional courses might take..."; "At staff meetings 
guidance department members have discussed the topic..-."; "At this school 
the science teachers had meetings with the superintendent of schools at which 
we discussed gifted students and their education." 

(iv) The Evaluation of Teacher Effectiveness 

The teachers of the selected group of Grade XII students were 
asked, "During the current school year has anyone visited your classroom while 
you were teaching any members of the selected group with the expressed purpose 
being to evaluate your effectiveness as a teacher of the gifted?" 

Table XXIII shows that not one of the 63 teachers responding 
answered in the affirmative. 

(v) Teachers' Efforts 'On Their Own' To Increase their 

Knowledge Concerning the Education of Gifted Students 

Are the teachers of the gifted increasing their knowledge of 





• - • • ( ) 







175 


research findings on the education of the gifted? In an attempt to throw some 
light on the answer to this question the investigator asked the teachers, "What 
books or articles have you read on gifted children and youth and would recommend 
to other teachers?" Seventy-seven teachers responded to this question. Of 
this number twenty-five (32 per cent) said they read about the gifted, but 
the great majority did not name what they read and would recommend to other 
teachers. Of the group that reported the names of books and periodical articles 
read, the great majority mentioned popular magazine articles found in publications 
like Life magazine and Time magazine. A few teachers mentioned books and 
articles by such persons as Terman, ilollingworth, Witty, and Laycock. 

TABLE XXIII 

THE EXTENT TO WHICH SUPERVISORY PRACTICES CONCERNING THE EDUCATION 
OF GIFTED STUDENTS INVOLVED THE TEACHERS OF A SELECTED GROUP 
OF GRADE XII STUDENTS IN ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 


Supervisory Practice Number of Per cent 

teachers 


1. Calls on the guidance department for 



assistance 

in teaching the gifted. 

14/78 

17 

2. 

Curriculum 

revision: 

Departmental. 

23/73 

32 

3. 

Curriculum 

revision: 

Classroom. 

46/73 

63 


4. Aid received from school administrators 

in the process of classroom curriculum 
revision. 

5. In-service training in local composite 

high schools. 

6. Effectiveness as teachers of the gifted 

evaluated by school administrative 
authorities..... 0/63 0 


12/41 29 

7/78 9 














<-■ 












176 


Summary One out of five teachers of the selected group 
sought help from guidance departments in solving problems related to the 
education of gifted students; one-third of the teachers are actively involved 
in revisions of the Alberta Provincial Department of Education; two-thirds of 
the teachers carried on curriculum revision in their own classrooms in an 
attempt to challenge their gifted students, and of this number, three out of 
ten received assistance from administrative authorities within the schools in 
achieving their goals; in-service training involved approximately one teacher 
out of ten in programmes specifically designed to help them better teach and 
understand gifted students; in not a single instance were the teachers know¬ 
ingly aware that they were being evaluated as teachers of the gifted by school 
administrators; one-third of the teachers said they were increasing their 
knowledge of how and what to teach gifted students through their own reading. 
This estimate is probably too high considering the intent of the question. 

Supervision by guidance officials as requested by the teachers 
of the gifted was mostly a matter of supplying information and advice concern¬ 
ing individual students rather than general information concerning the education 
of gifted students. As a group, composite high school teachers of the selected 
group are aware of the need to have more difficult and challenging courses for 
gifted students than it is necessary to have for the less able. In a number of 
instances the teachers are doing what it is possible for them to do in bringing 
about desirable curriculum changes for the benefit of the gifted. This is 
occurring at both the provincial and classroom levels of curriculum revision. 

At least one teacher out of three is doing nothing to revise his course of 
studies in order to more adequately challenge the gifted. Perhaps such teachers 












. .. 










Ill 

feel their courses are difficult enough as they exist in order to challenge 
even the brightest students. 

In the main, administrative officials wholeheartedly approve 
teachers' efforts in curriculum revision at the classroom level. In every 
case when a teacher requested assistance from the administration it was 
received. 

In-service training related directly to the education of 
gifted youth is almost non-existant in Alberta composite high schools. As 
far as teachers are concerned, there is no programme of evaluation of their 
effectiveness as teachers of the gifted which they know about. 

3. Summary 

Supervisory practices specifically aimed at the teachers of the 
selected students and having to do with the education of gifted students is 
very limited in Alberta composite high schools. In-service training of teach¬ 
ers as teachers of the gifted is generally non-existant. Some of the teachers 
are involved in curriculum revision at the provincial level; some are involved 
in curriculum revision at the local school system level. In both cases they 
are not involved specifically in revision directed toward the development of 
courses of study designed just for gifted students. Rather, they are involved 
in curriculum revision that affects all the secondary school students taking 
particular subjects. The majority of the teachers of the selected group said 
they practice some degree of curriculum revision at the classroom level...on 
their own, so to speak, in an attempt to meet the needs of gifted students. 
Certainly what they do is not part of an administrative program of supervisory 
leadership for teachers of gifted students. 


































178 ' 


No more than one-third of the teachers questioned attempt to add to 
their own knowledge concerning the education of gifted students by doing 
reading on the subject by recognized authorities. 

The composite high schools appeared to have no policy directed at 
the evaluation of teachers of the gifted. None of the teachers were knowingly 


evaluated in their role as teachers of the gifted. 





179 


CHAPTER X 

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND FURTHER RESEARCH 

The aim of this study was to evaluate Alberta composite high school 
practices related to the education of gifted youth in terms of a set of 
ideal criteria. The criteria are based on the findings of research as 
reported in the literature and related studies on the education of the 
gifted in secondary schools. 

They have to do with the following practices: 

1. Discovery of the gifted; 

2. Administrative devices used in meeting the needs of gifted 
students in regular classes, in special groups, and by means 
of acceleration; 

3. Motivation of the gifted to high academic achievement and 
participation in extracurricular activities directly related 
to the development of their interests and abilities; 

4. Enrichment of all the experiences which the gifted undergo in 
the classroom and out of the classroom; provision of a quality 
and level of curriculum different from and more difficult and 
demanding than that received by the less able; 

5. Use of community resources in supplementing the facilities, 
materials, and individuals that the schools are able to provide 
in the best development of the interests, aptitudes, and 
abilities of the gifted; 

6. Provision by school administrative officials of programmes of 
supervisory leadership involving the teachers of gifted 



O'. 




- 























180 


students in in-service training and curriculum revisions 
directly related to the education of the gifted; providing 
a programme of supervisory leadership that is concerned with 
the evaluation of the effectiveness of teachers in meeting 
the needs of their gifted students. 

More than one hundred gifted students, their teachers, guidance 
counselors, and principals were questioned concerning their education in 
Alberta composite high schools; the permanent record card of each student 
was examined for pertinent information. Some of the specific findings 
related to current composite school practices involving the gifted students 
and their teachers are: 

1. The teachers are unable to identify many of their gifted 
students; 

2. The teachers believe they would find it more possible to 
meet the needs of gifted students in their classes if such 
classes were composed only of the schools' brighter students 
and if the classes were small in numbers; 

3. The teachers of the selected students are not involved in 
local school programmes of in-service training and curriculum 
revision directed specifically at the education of gifted youth; 
nor are they involved in any evaluation by administrators of 
their effectiveness as teachers of the gifted; 

4. The students tend to like school but feel they are not worked 
hard enough while at school; 

5. The students like the subjects that are interesting and 
challenging and dislike the subjects that are uninteresting 











. 







<«' 


: 


- 



v, . . : . . . 


















. . . - 

















181 


and boring; the favorite subjects of the selected group are 
mathematics and science courses, and the subjects that are 
liked the least are those in English, social studies, and 
languages; 

6. The selected students want teachers that are friendly and 
understanding, have an extensive knowledge of their subject 
matter, and have teaching ability, i.e.--are able to convey 
ideas clearly; 

7. More than half, the group of selected students did not win 
even one award during Grades X and XI; 

8. At least one-third of the group of students are not involved 

in any extracurricular activities; and of those that are 
involved, more are participants in athletic activities than 
clubs of an academic nature (e.g. - science club or photo¬ 

graphy club ...) ; 

9. Most of the students that participate in extracurricular 
activities occupy leadership positions in the activities 
in which they participate; 

10. Practically all the selected group are found to be in the 
matriculation pattern; generally speaking their Grade XII 
subject elective choices (after English and social studies) 
are: chemistry, algebra, physics, French, and one or the 

other of trigonometry, biology, or Latin; relatively few 
students register at any time in art, music, and drama 


classes; 










182 


11. On the whole, the selected students earn fewer than half the 
credits above 100 they could earn and still remain within the 
maximum number of credits allowable; 

12. Very few of the students are found in more than one of the 
so-called honour classes; relatively few are found in any 
of the honour classes; 

13. Approximately one-fourth of the selected students make no 
use whatsoever of composite school library facilities; three- 
fifths do not participate in project work of a small group or 
individual nature; 

14. Approximately one student out of ten fails at least one subject 
during his high school career (usually in Grade XI); 

15. Most of the selected students are active members of community 
organizations in which they provide a considerable amount of 
leadership, but their membership in such organizations is not 
because the schools direct them there; two students out of 
ten belong to no community organizations; 

16. The vast majority of students have chosen their life vocation; 
at least three out of four are actively planning to go on for 
further education; the most common vocational choices are 
engineering, teaching, and nursing. 

More generally now, what may be said concerning how Alberta composite 
high schools measure up in terms of the criteria of a good secondary school 
programme for the education of gifted students? First, considering the 
discovery of gifted students, it may be said that administrative officials 




183 


in the schools have a knowledge of students with high mental ability. There 
appears to be no programme designed to diffuse the information among the 
teachers. Nor are the teachers involved in a planned search for gifted 
students. Apparently the schools define giftedness as high mental ability 
and/or high achievement in academic subjects. There is little concern for 
the discovery of talent in the fine arts field or the field of social leader¬ 
ship . 

With regard to the administrative devices used in meeting the needs 
of gifted students there are schools that set out to limit all kinds of 
special groupings and preserve the gifted in regular classes along with a 
cross-section of student-ability; there are schools that do little more 
about special groupings than the students themselves accomplish by their 
course choices; some schools actively set out to group students in terms 
of mental ability and/or high academic achievement; none of the schools find 
it easy to accelerate gifted students because of regulations of the Depart¬ 
ment of Education. Most of the principals are in favor of more acceleration 
of the gifted than is presently allowed. 

The composite high schools actively plan to motivate the gifted to 
high academic achievement by means of awards and scholarships and appear to 
do so with some degree of success; the schools stress vocational guidance, 
also with some degree of success. While students may have a knowledge of 
their academic ability from guidance officials, there is no attempt to convey 
such information to the parents of the gifted. Guidance officials do little 
to guide the selected students into extracurricular activities that will 
enhance their best development; they may be successful in guiding the gifted 





: - ■ 

‘ 

* ■ 

• - 

■ - 




. 

; 


- 

. 

. . 


. 






- 


. 








. jU - ' 

- 

.... 

.... - • 






‘ 




. 




. 


- 


. 








. . ;> : 

: 




'. : . 


. 


- 








184 


into the matriculation pattern. That is to say, the fact that most of the 
students are in the matriculation pattern may or may not be because of the 
influence of the guidance departments; certainly it is an aim of most of 
them. 

Guidance officials express concern about the problem of the under¬ 
achievement of gifted students to a greater or lesser degree from school 
to school. Certainly there is no common general approach in Alberta comp¬ 
osite high schools in meeting this problem and overcoming it through a 
planned effort on the part of administrators and guidance officials. 

Guidance of a personal nature is limited. The personality and 
human relations problems of the gifted are dealt with to a degree, but 
usually guidance officials refer serious cases to community or provincial 
guidance clinics. 

The gifted are provided with a variety of extracurricular activities, 
mostly athletic in nature, in which to try out their interests and abilities. 
Guidance officials seem to have little influence on the extracurricular 
choices of the selected students. 

Most contacts with the community for the benefit of the gifted are 
contacts made with regard to vocational motivation. Such contacts usually 
occur on 'Career Day'...once a year. Very rarely do the schools have gifted 
citizens meet with gifted students over a period of time in or out of the 
schools on subjects of mutual interest. 

The need for a special kind of education for the gifted (enriched 
education) is recognized by many administrators and teachers. And because 
of this there are in all the schools some teachers who provide a brand of 
















. .. . : 






.. 















3 




/. L.. ■' 


c: 



) 




. 




- . 







( 

















185 


educational experiences for some of their gifted students different in quality 
from those provided for their less able. They set out to challenge their 
gifted students...with the support of their administrators, at least to some 
degree. But certainly such teachers are in the minority. Most teachers if 
they undertake classroom enrichment at all, undertake very little. 

Very much less is done with regard to enrichment than could be done 
if the teachers were wholeheartedly committed to a policy of enrichment 
under the direction of administrative officials. 

It was obvious that library and laboratory facilities are not 
extensively used by the gifted students within a programme designed to 
involve them in special courses, group project work, and individual research. 

The exploitation of community resources by school officials in meeting 
the needs of gifted students is limited. Some schools send students on 
excursions and visits to places of interest. Some invite community citizens 
to take an active part in the education of the gifted. Almost non-existent 
is the practice of encouraging gifted students to belong to community clubs 
and organizations that can prove beneficial in the development of their 
potential abilities and interests. 

The administrative officials in the composite high schools do not 
purposely set out to involve teachers of gifted students as such in pro¬ 
grammes of supervision concerned with in-service training, curriculum 
revision and evaluation of teacher-effectiveness. 

In conclusion what is to be said about the education of gifted youth 
in Alberta composite high schools? The writer believes that the potential 
of these schools, with student populations ranging from 700 to 1500 students, 






186 


with a wide variety of facilities undergirding a wide range of elective choices, 
with as many as 65 teachers, with administrative staffs large enough to permit 
the establishment of department heads, and with a philosophy concerned with 
meeting the needs educationalwise of all the students that come through their 
doors, is such that they are in a position to achieve the aims of a good pro¬ 
gramme for the education of gifted youth. And the writer believes there is 
evidence of a growing concern for the education of the gifted by teachers and 
administrators. 

In spite of this, at present the Alberta composite high schools are 
doing relatively little compared to what they might do for the gifted. There 
appears to be the lack of general over-all planning with specific reference 
to the education of the gifted. Teachers and administrators are not involved 
in a programme with specific aims to which they gave their wholehearted support. 
To meet the challenge, teachers of the gifted should come to know who their 
gifted students are...gifted academically and in the non-academic areas as 
well; they should know the characteristics of the gifted and understand their 
educational needs, especially their special curriculum needs; administrators 
could do much more to make enrichment of the experiences of gifted students 
possible by means of more complete ability groupings and honours courses, and 
by means of supplying facilities required by teachers and students if their 
abilities and interests are to be challenged adequately; guidance departments 
could play a much more vital role in the education of the gifted given more 
time and better facilities to work with them; much greater use could be made 
of the resources available in the respective communities by school authorities 
in the education of gifted students. 


I 









: l - : 


. : . • . .. . 






. . . 











187 


What has been said above notwithstanding, there are teachers and 
administrators vitally concerned with the education of their gifted students, 
and who are doing, in some respects, a remarkable job. What the writer is 
suggesting is that the remarkable job done in widely separated instances and 
in different areas of the education of gifted students be carried over into 
a general approach to their education in all the composite high schools. 

This study was concerned with a survey of the education of gifted 
students in Alberta composite high schools. The results have given rise to 
some interesting questions which require further study if they are to be at 
all clarified. Following are listed some of the questions raised: 

1. Why do the selected students like mathematics-science subjects 
and dislike the languages, social studies and English? 

2. What are the qualities of successful teachers of gifted students? 

3. How many of the selected group actually went on to university 
and how successful were those that did? 

4. What are the factors in the composite school practices that 
are related to the fact that so many gifted students actively 
planned to go on for higher education? 

5. In what respects do the achievements of gifted students retained 
in regular high school classes differ from and compare with the 
achievements of gifted students in so-called special classes? 

6. With respect to the few 'accelerated students' in the composite 
high schools from time to time, what happened to them educationally? 
vocationally? Do their educational histories compare favorably 
with non-accelerates in terms of desirable educational outcomes? 

7. Could gifted students earn 120 credits and do as well in school 
achievement as if they had earned only 100 credits? 

8. What is the nature and extent of the under-achievement of gifted 
students in composite high schools? 


- 













- : - : ... ; ; .. ..:. v . - - - - - - 

. ... ; . 


• .. . . - : - • 

: - 

- 

. 

; . ... : ...... , . . . “ . i • 














APPENDIX A 














189 


SAMPLE 1 

INFORMATION FROM THE PERMANENT RECORDS 
Name of School_ Name of Student_ 

1 . Course Pattern: M _ C _ S _ G _ 

2. Course History: Constants Electives Concurrents 

Grade X 
Grade XI 
Grade XII 

3. Credits earned: Grade X _ Grade XI _ Grade XII 

4. Age as of June 30, 1958 Years _ Months _ 

Birthday: Day _ Month _ Year _ 


Others 



















190 


SAMPLE 2 

INTERVIEW SCHEDULE: PRINCIPAL 


1. By what means does this school identify gifted students? (Please check) 

a. Intelligence tests? Yes_ No _ 

If 'yes, please name the tests: 

bo Standardized achievement tests? Yes _ No 

If 'yes', please name the tests: 

c. Teachers' judgments on the basis of observation? Yes No 

If 'yes', please explain briefly the situations in which observations 
are made by the teachers before they pass judgment: 

d. School achievement as determined by teacher-made tests? 

Yes _ No _ 

e. Other means not mentioned above? 

2. Are any courses available in this school which are restricted to students 

whose mental ability and/or achievement is above average? Yes _No - 

If 'yes', please list the courses: 

3. During the history of this high school has there been any specific policy 
formulated by the administration and put into practice with the aim being 

to better enable the school to meet the needs of gifted students? Yes_ 

No _. If 'yes', please comment on the nature of the policy and 

indicate whether or not you think the aims were realized: 

4. Does the administration of this school provide special assistance to the 

teachers of the gifted as they attempt to carry out their duties? Yes _ 

No _. (For example, the administration may limit the total number of 

classes carried by the teachers of the gifted; the administration may 
supply special facilities as aids to instruction; the administration may 
supply supervisory personnel to work with the teachers of the gifted, etc.) 
If 'yes', please comment on the nature of the special provisions: 

5. Please list the scholarships, assistanceships, bursaries, etcetera that are 
available at this school for worthy students. 

6. What awards, other than monetary, are available at this school for worthy 
students? 

7. Does this school enrich the curriculum for gifted students? Yes __No _ 

"Enrichment is a special effort to challenge the abilities of gifted pupils 


















(•' 



















(. • 






<■ 


. 0 „ . • ' . . .... : • • . 











191 


in their experiences in and out of the classroom and consists in giving the 
gifted youth the opportunity to go more deeply into things, to range more 
widely than the average youth." (1) 

If you answered 'yes' to question 7, please check off any of the following 
forms of enrichment practiced in this school, and comment briefly on the 
nature of such activities, citing examples where possible. Add any not 
included in this list but which are used at this school. 

a. guidance in general reading 

b. stimulation of hobbies and collections 

c. producing and acting in plays 

d. making excursions to places of interest 

e. providing contacts with community individuals who share the 
interests of the gifted 

f. providing special facilities for the gifted where they may 
work in their spare school time or after regular school hours 
if they so desire 

g. encouraging gifted students to carry extra courses 

h. allowing gifted students to act as laboratory assistants 
and/or librarians 

i. encouraging individual and 'small-group 1 research followed 

in some instances by seminar presentations of the findings (2) 

j. other means used at this school 

8. Which of the following administrative devices are used by this school as 
it attempts to meet the needs of gifted students? 

a. by retaining gifted students in regular (heterogeneous) classes? 

Yes __ No _ Comments? 

b. by ability grouping - in special classes? Yes _ No _ 

- in special courses? Yes _ No _ 

- other means? 

- comments? 

c. by accelerating the progress of gifted students through the 

conventional three year educational programme? Yes _ No _ 

Acceleration may be practiced by offering courses considered to be 
extra to enable the accumulation of credits, or it may be practiced 
by allowing rapid mastery of single subjects (two years language in 
one, for example), or by giving college courses in the high school 
or credits for college courses. If acceleration is achieved by any 
of the above means at this school please underline. Add any other 
means not mentioned here. 

Comments? 

9. During the past year what 'in-service training' has been carried on which 
related directly to increasing the understanding of teachers about gifted 













[ ) ' ... 










( :) 



( 







... - 



■ - 

ai-'G* L/O; 


. 













I 

' 














192 


students? (For example, some in-service training activities may have 
involved the study of teaching techniques, the characteristics of the 
gifted, the nature of a desirable curriculum for the gifted.) 

Please list the activities and comment on their nature: 

10. Please name the supervisory personnel available for the teachers of this 
school to consult on problems they may have as a result of their attempts 
to teach the gifted. 

11. During the past three years has there been a specific evaluation of the 

effectiveness of teachers in meeting the needs of the gifted students 
enrolled in this school? Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', please comment on the results of the evaluation and mention who 
conducted it: 

12. Are there any individuals or organizations (outside the school system) who 

are specifically called upon by the school to assist it in meeting the 
needs of the gifted students enrolled? Yes _ No _. 

If 'yes', please list them and comment on the nature of their contribution 










193 


SAMPLE 3 

GUIDANCE COORDINATOR INTERVIEW 


1. What measuring devices are used by the guidance department at this school 
to appraise the learning and evaluate the growth of the gifted students 
enrolled? (Achievement tests, personality tests and inventories, vocational 
interest tests, intelligence tests, aptitude tests, etc.) 

2. How often do you appraise suchlearning and growth? 

a. According to a schedule? Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', please attach a schedule if possible, or explain briefly: 

b. As the need arises for individual students? Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', please explain: 

3« To whom are your records of individual students available? (Please check 
along the line across from the party to whom the records are or are not 
available) completely partially not 

available available available 

The principal. 

The vice-principal. 

Department heads or coordinators.. 

Teachers. 

Pupils. 

Parents. 

Others (please name). 

4. Is this school offering any special guidance provisions for the gifted 

students enrolled? (i.e. something other than the regular guidance offered 
all the students) Yes _____ No _ 

If 'yes', please explain the nature of the provisions: 

5. During the current school year or with in the previous two years, has this 

guidance department made any study of the selected group of gifted grade XII 
students (actual research) ? Yes __ No _ 

If 'yes', please comment briefly on the nature of and results of the study, 
or inclose a copy of the results of the study. 


















(. 




\ 


... .... 1 


i: 

( 











< 
























194 


SAMPLE 4 
STUDENT INTERVIEW 


1. Have you decided yet which life vocation you wish to follow? (e.g.lawyer, 
farmer, teacher, business executive, accountant, nurse, stenographer, etc.) 

Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', which occupation? 

2. Under what circumstances did you make the choice in 1. above? (That is, 
what influences determined the decision? influences such as school courses, 
advice of relatives, teachers or friends, reading, close hand observation,etc.) 

3. How many visits have you made to the guidance department this year? 

4. Describe anything that may have been done by the guidance officials in this 
school that has made what you consider to be a real difference to you and 
your future plans. 

5. At any time during your enrolment at this school has the guidance department 

helped you decide to take a course? Yes _ No _ 

If ’yes', name the course or courses: 

6. At any time during your enrolment at this school has the guidance department 

helped you decide to not take a course? Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', name the course or courses: 

7. At any time during your enrolment at this school has the guidance department 
helped you decide to participate in an extracurricular activity? 

Yes _ No _ 

If ’yes', name the activity or activities: 

8. At any time during your enrolment at this school has the guidance department 
helped you decide to not participate in an extracurricular activity? 

Yes _____ No _ 

If 'yes', name the activity or activities: 

9. What subjects have you liked most during your high school career? Why? 

10. - What studies have you liked least? Why? 

11. About how many hours a week (outside of school hours) do you spend on school 
studies? 


12 . 


Name all the offices or honours you have held during the last three years. 
(Examples: class officer, club officer, actor in plays, scholarship prize 












\ 




















: 



, . • v 




















o . 


( 
















a 


k "■"■ - ■ 




. 















195 


or honour, member of band or orchestra, debating team, athletic team, 
school committee, school paper, etc.) (3) 

13. If you had the responsibility of selecting your teachers, what are the 
three characteristics you would most want them to possess? 

14. About how many times do you visit the school library in a week’s time? 

15. What type of books do you use in the library or take out from the library? 

a-, reference books for assignments? Yes_No _ 

b. reference books just for the sake of satisfying your own interest? 

Yes _ No _ 

c. fiction and non-fiction for your pleasure? Yes _ No _ 

d. others? (please signify the type) 

16. Do you feel the school library is adequate to meet your reading needs? 

(Please check along the line) 

i i * 

More than Adequate Less than 

adequate adequate 

17. a. During your enrolment at this school have you at any time undertaken an 

individual or a small group project in one of your subjects (chemistry, social 
studies, etc.) which was not an assignment for the whole class, but rather was 
something that you decided to do 'extra'? Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', what did you do? 

Did you receive help from any staff members? Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', what kind of help? 

What school facilities were made available to you to carry out your project 
( e.g. laboratory, library, gymnasium, etc.)? 

If school facilities were made available when did you use them, in school 
hours, after hours, before school hours? 

18. Liking for school (underline) (4) 

Very strong, fairly strong, slight liking, positive dislike 
If school has been disliked at any time, why? 

19. Do you feel restricted by the school in attempts to follow any subject-matter 

or extracurricular interests you may have? Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', please explain: 

Do you feel the school is overworking you in classwork and extracurricular 
activities? Yes No 


20. 
































196 


Do you feel the school is not working you hard enough in classwork and 
extracurricular activities? Yes _ No _ 

Please comment on your answers, if you wish to - 

21. Name any community organizations to which you belong (e.g. Y, church groups, 
cadets, band, choir, art club, baseball team, hockey team, etc.): 

About how long have you belonged to each? 

Name any leadership positions you have held in any of the organizations you 
mention above: 

22. To what community organizations do you belong because the school suggested 
that you should belong, or because the school made it possible for you to 
belong? 






197 


SAMPLE 5 

TEACHER QUESTIONNAIRE 
Number 1 


Teacher’s name 


Without reference to any school records, but on the basis of your experience, 
name any grade twelve students, or students taking any grade twelve subjects whom 
you have been teaching this year, and whom you consider to be 'gifted'. 

(note) A gifted student is defined for the purposes of this study as one who is 
believed to have high general intellectual endowment, whether he is currently 
using his creativeness or not.) (5) 






























■ 

( ( . 







198 


SAMPLE 6 

LETTER TO THE TEACHERS COVERING THE QUESTIONNAIRE (NUMBER 2) 

To the Teachers, 

The study I have undertaken is concerned with the education of 
gifted youth in the composite high schools of Alberta. The major problem involves 
an attempt to evaluate, in terms of so-called 'ideal criteria', the current 
programmes offered a selected group of gifted grade twelve students. Sources of 
information are teachers, students, school administrators, permanent record 
cards and the department of education. The criteria are supported by research 
findings from the literature and the ideas of such persons as Terman, Holling- 
worth. Witty and Havighurst and Laycock. They have to do with such things as the 
identification of the gifted, motivation, curricular enrichment, administrative 
devices for meeting the needs of the gifted, use of community resources, and 
supervisory leadership. 

Gifted students are defined, for the purposes of this study, as 
those believed to have high general intellectual endowment, whether they are 
currently using their creativeness or not. The students selected for this study 
are those in the composite high schools who appear in 97, 98 and 99 percentiles 
(as measured by the Dominion IQ test) and who are in Grade XII this year. 

I realize that you are being requested to give a sizable portion 
of your time to the answering of a number of questions. I trust you'll be willing 
to spend the necessary time and thought, for without your assistance the study 
will be impossible. Once it has been completed, I believe it will make a 
valuable contribution to the thinking done by teachers and administrators 









. - 


S ■ 














<- 


'• 










- 









199 


concerning the education of gifted youth in secondary schools. 

When the thesis is completed (by the end of August, I hope), 
summaries of the findings will be made available to you. 

Your name is not required. The information you give will be 
treated with due respect. 


Sincerely, 

Ian Housego 












- - • ■ 


. 


1 (- 


... i, . . . 


^ .. ... 







. 











200 


SAMPLE 7 

TEACHER QUESTIONNAIRE 
Number 2 


1. a. Briefly indicate any calls you made on the guidance department of this 
school during the current school year in order to get help in under¬ 
standing and teaching any of the selected group of Grade XII students: 

b. Are you satisfied that the guidance department of this school is adequate! y 
doing all that it might reasonably be expected to do in its work with 
the gifted group of students? (Please check) 


i i r i 


More than 
adequate 

Adequate 

Less than 
adequate 

Undecided 

Any comments? 





2. Briefly describe the ideal conditions, as you visualize them, which would be 
most conducive to the stimulation, release, and development of the full 
potential of the gifted students attending this school. 

3. What especially prevents you from doing all that you might wish to do for 
the gifted members of your classes? 

4. What books or articles have you read on gifted children and youth and would 
recommend to other teachers? 

5. "Enrichment is a teaching device. It can be used in special classes, 
homogeneous groupings, special seminars, or regular classes. Enrichment 
may be either in breadth or depth, or in both. By enrichment in depth is 
meant that the gifted youth covers the same range of topics as his slower 
classmates. He is encouraged, however, to delve more deeply into these 
topics, to read more widely regarding them, and to carry on 'research' 
activities to a greater degree than average students. Enrichment in breadth 
means that gifted youth are encouraged to explore a variety of topics or 
activities which are additional to those studied by the youth of average 

or dull ability.” (5) 

a. What efforts have you made during the past school year to enrich the 
curriculum for the gifted students taking your subject? (Indicate the 
subject and briefly explain what you have tried to do, and also whether 
or not your efforts were successful). Below are a list of enrichment 
activities you may have used: (7) 

1. Enrichment through guidance in general reading 












- 

( 


. 

. 







«r 








t. 


















201 


2. Stimulation of hobbies and collections 

3. Encouraging extracurricular activities in the school 

4. Making excursions to places of interest 

5. Making contacts with outstanding citizens of the community 
with interests similar to gifted class members 

6. Encouraging the administration to provide special facilities 
for the gifted (laboratories, art room, music room, library 
facilities, etc.) 

7. Encouraging gifted students to participate in community 
organizations 

8. Encouraging individual research by gifted members of your classes 

9. Organizing seminar projects for gifted class members 

10. Planning more difficult assignments for the gifted 

11. Encouraging creative experiences (e.g. creative writing, dramatics,etc.) 

12. Organizing exhibitions of the products of enrichment activities 

13. Using gifted students as assistants in laboratories, the library, etc. 

14. Other enrichment activities you may have used which are not listed 
above 

b. Do you consider the school library is adequate to meet any calls which 
you might make upon it as you attempt to meet the needs of gifted students 
by means of projects, class assignments, extra reading, etc.? (Please check) 

it it 

More than Adequate Less than Undecided 

adequate adequate 

Any comments? 

c. Please answer if you are a science teacher: 

Do you consider the scientific equipment in this school is adequate to 
meet any demands you might make upon it as you attempt to meet the needs 
of gifted students by means of projects, individual and class assignments, 
research of an advanced nature, etc.? (Please check) 

ii ii 

More than Adequate Less than Undecided 

adequate adequate 

If you checked 'less than adequate', please name any facilities which you 
think the school should provide: 

d. Do you consider the extracurricular activities in this school to be adequate 
to meet the social, physical and intellectual needs of the gifted students 

enrolled? (Please check) 

ii ii 

More than Adequate Less than Undecided 

adequate adequate 

If you checked 'more than adequate', which of the extracurricular activities 
would you recommend should be added to those already organized for the good 










. 





<■ 





c. 







■ 








5f 





’ 





( 


. ' 










202 


If you checked 'more than adequate' which of the extrauurricular 
activities do you consider should not be open to gifted students? 

6. During the past three years have you been a member of any committee the 
purpose of which was to revise the high school curriculum to better meet 

the needs of high school students in general or gifted students in particular? 

Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', please explain briefly: 

7. During the past three years have you, on your own initiative, revised to any 
degree the material and/or methods of teaching your subject in order to 

better meet the needs of the gifted members of your classes? Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', please explain briefly: 

8. If you answered 'yes' to question 7., did you receive any assistance from 
the administration or the supervisory staff of the school or school system? 

Yes _ No _ 

If 'yes', what was the nature of the assistance? 

9. During the past three years what in-service training activities have gone on 
in this school or within the school system which have directly related to 
increasing your knowledge and understanding of gifted students and/or enabled 
you to more effectively teach gifted students? (Some in-service training 
activities may have been designed to introduce you to new techniques of 
teaching the gifted, to understand the nature of a desirable curriculum for 
the gifted, or the characteristics of the gifted) 

If you were involved in any such activities please comment briefly on the 
nature of them: 

10. During the current school year has anyone visited your classroom while you 
were teaching any members of the selected group with the expressed purpose 

of evaluating your effectiveness as a teacher of the gifted? Yes _ 

No 


11. If you answered 'yes' to question 10., was there a consultation between you 
and the one who carried out the evaluation, as a means of recognizing the 
work you were doing and/or help you to do better? Yes _ No _ 




















203 


FOOTNOTES TO APPENDIX A 


(1) S. R. Laycock, Gifted Children (Toronto: Copp Clark Publishing 
Company Limited, 1957), p. 75. 

(2) Ibid., chap. vii. 

(3) B. S. Burks, D. W. Jensen, L. M. Terman and others. The Promise of 
Youth, Genetic Studies of Genius, Volume III (Stanford, California: Stanford 
University Press, 1930), p. 492. 

(4) Ibid., p. 73. 

(5) S. R. Laycock, ojd. cit . , p.10. 

(6) Ibid., p. 75.. 

(7) Ibid., chap. vii. 






























BIBLIOGRAPHY 













205 


BOOKS 


American Association For Gifted Children. The Gifted Child , ed. Witty, P. 
(Boston: D. C. Heath and Company, 1951). Pp. xii 338. 

Brandwein, P. F. The Gifted Student As Future Scientist .(New York: Harcourt 
Brace and Company, 1955). Pp. xvi.107. 

Cruickshank, W. Psychology of Exceptional Children and Youth (Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, Incorporated, 1956). Pp. xiii 594. 

DeHaan, R. F., and Havighurst, R. J. Educating Gifted Children . (Chicago 37 
The University Press, University of Chicago, 1957). Pp. 275. 

- General Education In A Free Society , Report of the Harvard Committee. 

(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1945). Pp. xix. 267. 

Havighurst, R. J. and others. A Survey of the Education of Gifted Children , 
Supplementary Educational Monographs, Number 83. (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1955). Pp. vi. 114. 

Laycock, S. R. Gifted Children (Toronto: Copp Clark Publishing Company 
Limited, 1957). Pp. xi. 180. 

Martens, E. Curriculum Adjustments For Gifted Children , U. S. Department of 
Health, Education, and Welfare Bulletin Number 1. (Washington: Government 
Printing Office, 1953). Pp. vi. 82. 

National Society For the Study of Education. The Education of Exceptional 
Children , 49th Yearbook, Patt II. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1950). Pp. xiii. 350. 

Passow and Others. Planning For Talented Youth , Talented Youth Project, 
Horace Mann-Lincoln Institute of School Experimentation, Publication 1. 

(New York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers College,Columbia University, 
1955). Pp. ix. 84. 

Scheifele, M. The Gifted Child In the Classroom, (New York: Bureau of 
Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University, 1953). Pp. x. 84. 

Terman, L. M. and others. The Gifted Child Grows Up , Genetic Studies of 
Genius, Volume IV. (Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1947). 
Pp. xiv. 448. 
















v - ■ 








. ( 




. ( 
.( 


') 



) 







( 







i ( 





* ( 














206 


PERIODICALS 


Alpern, H. "Educating the Superior Student In the High Schools of New 
York City" ; Journal of Educational Sociology , 13(September-May; 1939-1940); 
112-119. 

Barbe; W. B. "Are Gifted Children Being Adequately Provided For?" Educational 
Administration and Supervision , 40(November; 1954); 405-413. 

Barbe, W. B. " Characteristics of Gifted Children ", Educational Administration 
and Supervision, 41(April; 1955); 207-217. 

Bruner; H. B. "Education's Role In Developing Leadership"; Teachers College 
Record , 42(February; 1941); 420-427. 

Byrne ; T. "Composite High Schools In Alberta"; The Canadian Survey of Comp ¬ 
osite High Schools , Division of Educational Administration; University of 
Alberta; May ; 1958. 

Clarke; S. C. T. "Students Who Drop Out of School"; The Alberta School 
Trustee , 26(April; 1956); 9-13. 

CuttS; N. E.; and Moseley; N. "Bright Children and the Curriculum" Educ ¬ 
ational Administration and Supervision ; 39(March; 1953); 168-173. 

CuttS; N. E. and Moseley; N. "Providing For the Bright Child In the 
Heterogeneous Group"; Educational Administration and Supervision , 39(April; 
1953); 225-230. 

Davis, N. "Teachers For the Gifted"'; Journal of Teacher Education , 5(Sept- 
ember; 1954); 221-224. 

Dressel; P. L. and Grabow; J. m' "The Gifted Evaluate Their High School 
Experience"; Exceptional Children , 24(May; 1958); 394-398. 

Gowan; J. E. "Dynamics of the Underachievement of Students(Gifted)"; 

Exceptional Children; 24(November; 1957); 98-101. 

Gray; H. A.; and Hollingworth; L. S. "The Achievement of Gifted Children 
Enrolled and Not Enrolled in Special Opportunity Classes"; Journal of Educ ¬ 
ational Research , 24(June-0ecember; 1931); 225-261. 

- Handbook , Senior High School; Province of Alberta; Department of Education. 

(Edmonton: Queen's Printer For Alberta; 1957); Pp. 54. 

Hattery; L. H. "Why Waste Talent?" School and Society , 71(February 11;1950); 
81-84. 
























/ 









207 


Hollingworth, L. S. "Problems of Relationship Between Elementary and Secondary 
Schools in the Case of Highly Intelligent Pupils", Journal of Educational 
Sociology , 13(September-May, 1939-40), 90-102. 

u 

Hildreth, G. "School-Wide Planning For the Gifted", Educational Administration 
and Supervision , 41(January, 1955), 1-10. 

Huston, M. J. "A Survey of the Study Habits of First-Year Pharmacy Students", 
American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education , 12(July, 1948), 434-441. 

Justman, J. "Persond. and Social Adjustment of Intellectually Gifted Accelerates 
and Non-Accelerates in Junior High Schools", School Review , 61(November,1953), 
468-478. 

Lewis, W. D., and McGahee, W. "A Comparison of the Interests of Mentally Sup¬ 
erior And Retarded Children", School and Society , 52(December, 1940), 597-600. 

Lorge, I. "Social Gains In the Special Education of the Gifted", School and 
Society , 79 (January, 1954), 4-7. 

Miller, W. S., and Otto, H. J. "Analysis of Experimental Studies of Homogeneous 
Grouping", Journal of Educational Research , 21(February, 1930), 95-102. 

Newland, E. T. "The Gifted ", Review of Educational Research , 23(December, 1953), 
417-431. 

Noonan, N., and Norris, N. "Studies of Gifted Children", Journal of Except ¬ 
ional Children , 4-5(January, 1938), 46-57. 

Passow, A. H. "Comprehensive High Schools and Gifted Youth", Teachers College 
Record , 58(December, 1956), 144-152.. 

Pintner, R. "Superior Ability", Teachers College Record, 42(February,1941), 
407-419. 

Rankin, P. T. "Pupil Classification and Grouping", Review of Educational 
Research, 6(June, 1931), 200-224. 

Roberts, R. H. "The Environment of the Gifted", Journal of Teacher Education , 

5(September, 1954), 218-220. 

Russell, W. L. "The Importance of Social Capillarity", TeachersCollege Record , 

42(February, 1941), 378-381. 

-"School Curriculum For the Gifted", Teachers College Record , 42(February, 

1941), 445-448. 


Strang, R. "The Psychology of the Gifted", Journal of Teacher Education , 
5(September, 1954), 215-217. 






























,( 











a 


'v 







,( 





<( 






( 





/ 



,( 


i h 


K 




t ( 



c< 


K 




,( 





208 


Terman, L. "The Gifted Student and His Academic Environment”, School and 
Society, 49(January, 1939), 65-73. 

Terman, L., and Oden, M. "Major Issues in the Education of the Gifted", 

Journal of Teacher Education , 5(September, 1954, 230-232. 

Thorndike, E. L. “Gifted Children In Small Cities", Teachers College Record, 
42(February, 1941)/, 420-427. 

Weglein, D. E. "Administrative Problems In the Education of the Gifted", 
Teachers College Record , 42(February, 1941), 428-431. 

Wilson, H. E. "Educational Implications of the Nation's Manpower Needs", 

School Review , (Spring, 1957), 35-40. 

Wilson, F. T. "Salvaging Gifted Students In Regular Classrooms", Educational 
Administration and Supervision , 41(December, 1955), 462-466/ 

Witty, P. A."Nature and Extent of Educational Provisions For the Gifted Pipil", 
Educational Administration and Supervision , 37(February, 1951), 65-79. 

Witty, P. A. "Programs and Procedures For the Education of the Gifted", 

Journal of Teacher Education , 5(September, 1954), 225-229. 


Witty, P. A. “Some Considerations In the Education of Gifted Children," 
Educational Administration and Supervision , 26(October, 1940), 512-521. 














d 

















,( 





d 








1 




d 


d 






d 



i. - 


<. 




d 




% 
































