
Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


THESIS 


Art education- its cultural basis, 
its development, and its application 
in Alberta schools, submitted by John 
Allison Forbes . 


FACUTY OF EDUCATION 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 






UBBW 

aiMSIWlJS 



















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/arteducationitscOOjohn 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


ART EDUCATION - ITS CULTURAL BASIS, 
ITS DEVELOPMENT, AND ITS APPLICATION IN 
ALBERTA SCHOOLS 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

JOHN ALLISON FORBES 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
April, 1951 





















UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and do recommend to the Committee on Graduate Studies 
for acceptance, a thesis entitled n Art Education - Its 
Cultural Basis, its Development, and It’s Application 
in Alberta Schools, 11 submitted by John Allison Forbes, 
B.Ed., in partial fulfillment of the requirements for 
the degree of fester of Education, 


Professor 



Professor 



Professor 


AUJ? 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION..... 

CHAPTER 

I ART AND SOCIETY... 

II ART EDUCATION... 

Present-Day Trends. 

Ill ART EDUCATION IN CANADA... 

IV ART EDUCATION IN ALBERTA. 

V SUGGESTIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT.. 

Programmes of Studies . 

Supplies and Equipment ... 

Training the Art Specialist . 

Superintendents and Supervisors ... 
Pleasant and Practical Surroundings 

BIBLIOGRAPHY...... 


Page 

1 


3 

42 

46 


53 

80 


87 


88 


89 

91 

94 


9 8 


iii 




































INTRODUCTION 


A study of the history of education In the Province 
of Alberta reveals that in recent years there has been in 
effect a relatively "progressive* 1 system. There has been a 
readiness to adept newer and better methods of education as 
these showed promise of being more efficient and sounder 
than those in use traditionally. This is probably more 
true of Alberta than of any other province. However most 
educators here would agree that the educational practices 
and procedures, the facilities and equipment, are still in 
many cases unsatisfactory. 

Among the causes of this situation the most prominent 
are as follows: the time lag that intervenes between the 
adoption of a new policy and its widespread and effective 
implementation, the lack of funds, and (in recent years) 
the rapidly expanding school population. These factors 
retard education generally but certainly some parts of our 
educational structure are more affected than others. This 
is true even within the subject matter field, ?/here some 
subjects are more neglected than others. Included among 

these are most of the non-academic subjects on the eurri- 

/ 

culum. It is here that the greatest discrepancy is to be 
noted between educational theory and educational practice. 
Subjects such as art, music and physical education have 
suffered greatly, and art in particular has failed to make 




































the necessary progress that is required to keep it abreast 
of our present standards in general education* 

Along with this condition It is also evident that art 
is not as well integrated with society as it might be. 
Dewey says; 

Art is remitted to a separate realm where it is cut 
off from the association with the materials and aims 
of every form of human effort, Undergoing and achieve¬ 
ment. 1 

These two conditions are cause for alarm to those interes¬ 
ted in art and education. 

What can be done to strengthen the influence of art 
in life? It might be well to consider this problem under 
several sub-quest ions: 

1. What is considered to be the relationship of art 
and society? 

2, Is this relationship being strengthened by our 
art education? 

3 * What steps must be taken for improvement? 

The above questions suggest the purpose of this study 
In an attempt, to find the answers a bibliolcgical approach 

has been employed. Many sources were consulted and many 

' !%1 

opinions considered. In connection with art history both 
historical and critical works were read. Philosophies of 
art were studied in a search for information on the place 

^ John Dewey, Art as Experience . New York, Minton, Balch, 

& Go., l^j?4, p.3* 







.♦ 

■ 

t 








* 

. 










3 


of art, and art education, in society. For the study of 
the development of art education, in the second chapter, 
books on art education old and new were consulted. The 
chapters on art education in Canada and Alberta drew 
largely on Canadian writings, including Annual Reports 
from Departments of education, Programmes of Study and 
periodicals. In connection with the last chapters many 
personal interviews and talks supplied valuable informa¬ 
tion. Also a questionnaire, given to approximately 280 
graduates/added some relevant data to these chapters. 

During the past three years many schoolrooms have been 
visited representing city, town and country. Information 
gained through these visits has also been used. 

Chapter I is concerned with the relationship between 
art and society as observed in periods of great creative 
activity. 

Chapter II deals with the history of art education 
and discusses the many factors that influenced its develop¬ 
ment . 

Chapter III is a brief study of art education in 
Canada. 

Chapter IV deals with the development of art education 
in Alberta and its present status. 

Chapter V contains conclusions, and suggestions for 


improvement 















, 









e 

. 





r 


♦ 


- 

























. 











. 







CHAPTER I 


ART AND SOCIETY 

In this first chapter the interplay of art and society 
will be briefly discussed, in order to determine the place 
of the visual arts in our heritage and to discover if pos¬ 
sible what conditions in society make for periods of great 
creative expression. 

Before proceeding it should be explained that this 
study does not intend to enter into any of the involved 
arguments about what constitutes great art. However since 
so-called great periods of art will be referred to, a 
statement regarding the choice of these periods is neces¬ 
sary. 

C-enerally the opinions of critics and historians have 
been followed in the selection of outstanding periods of 
artistic production. Since the most reliable criterion 
for evaluating art is time itself, the periods which will 
be discussed are time-tested. That is not to say that 
there is no controversy over the respective merits of 

great periods of art, but merely to suggest that the ones 

. 

chosen do, by general consent, stand higher than others. 

It is now generally accepted that all ages and 
societies of which we have record have practised the arts 
in one form or another. Of these however only the visual 
arts can be proved to have existed as a form of expression 
















. 


* 

. 

' 


















- 


. 













* 

■ 






among prehistoric men. The wall paintings in the caves 

2 

of France and Spain attest to this. 

A study of the history of art reveals that the quan¬ 
tity and quality of artistic works vary greatly from age 
to age and from society to society. It also reveals that 
in some societies there was a small number of outstanding 
artists who dominated their group. In others there exis¬ 
ted a very large number of anonymous artists who were an 
integral and essential part of their group. Besides the 
different status of artists In society, art in itself held 
many and varied positions of importance. Also one can 
never be certain, particularly In prehistoric art, of the 
motivation behind the creative activity. This is especi¬ 
ally true of primitive art. 

As far as historians can determine,the visual arts - 
painting and sculpture - played a very large role in the 
life of primitive man. But one cannot be sure whether he 
exercised his talents as an artist (that is for purely 
aesthetic reasons) or whether his paintings were created 
as a means to some other end. There is much to confirm 
the latter view. Yet many historians feel that although 
art may have been used in magical ritual there was an 
an aesthetic process involved that was over and above the 


2 


Leonhard Adam, Primitive Art . England, Penquin Books, 
1949, p.83. 







6 


mere utilitarian value. This is indicated by the qualities 

that the paintings possess: vitality, vividness and anotive 

3 

power. These are precisely aesthetic qualities. 

In the development from paleolithic to neolithic art 
there was a great change not only in style but in produc¬ 
tion. whereas the earlier drawings were created by indivi¬ 
duals who differed greatly in style and ability, the later 
age is typified by what appears to be communal work. That 
is, the designs were executed by any or all members of the 
society. What phenomena gave rise to this change It is 
difficult to determine, but it is an interesting subject 
for speculation, in view of the fact that most art educa¬ 
tors today feel that the creative impulse is Innate in all 
men. It may be that we are all born artists but that we 

are all prevented by something in our society from expres- 

4 5 

sing ourselves and realising fully our potentialities. ’ 

On the other hand modern anthropology reveals that 
the Melanesians of New Guinea have trained artists - some 
of outstanding ability and whose profession is respected by 
the community. Here apparently the individuality of the 
artist is recognized as such and the community itself 

2 Herbert Read, Art and Society . New York, Pantheon, l?4j?, 
p.ll 

4 Ibid., p.99. 

5 Ralph M. Pearson, The Hew Art Rducation . New York, Harper 
Bros., 1?41, p.j> 








' 





7 


assumes the role of appreciator• This is a recognition, in 
effect, of the variability of artistic talents and antici¬ 
pates the attitude in this regard which is widely held to¬ 
day. 

Herbert Head finds that there are two basic approaches 
to art observable in primitive societies, the naturalistic 
and the geometric. He divides the geometric art in two 
sections — according to their purpose. One is produced in 
response to a functional need - such art is termed hedonis¬ 
tic. The other is produced in response to the spiritual 
requirements of a community and as such becomes purposive. 
It has an essentially symbolic nature. The naturalistic 
art is usually individualistic and is termed expressive or 
emotive. These three aspects — hedonistic, purposive and 
expressive - all relate to one reality in the last analysis. 
They all spring from the creative Impulse and in their es¬ 
sential nature they exhibit in varying degrees aesthetic 
qualities. 

It must be admitted that primitive art is good and 
bad and the actual motivation behind the work has less 
influence than one might expect. Unlike European art 
where the great periods were religiously motivated, pri¬ 
mitive art which served religion was often inferior. 

In the pueblos of the southwest of the United 
States, art foims in pottery and textiles command 
respect of the artist in any culture; but their 








■ 


. 




. . 




e 

* 

- 


» 




, 








- 

' 




























c 




sacred bowls carried by priests or set out on the 
altars are shoddy and the decorations crude and un- 

sty^Lized.® 

Today in Africa we have a primitive society which is 
still producing works of art. A study of these reveals a 
striking resemblance to that produced in Europe in prehis¬ 
toric times. We can,by observing the habits and customs 
of these modern primitives, speculate as to the place of 
the visual arts in the Old and New Stone Age. 

Herbert Head in Art and Society attempts to determine 
the actual attitude towards aesthetic activity in the 
African Bushman. He believes that the primitive man does 
not differentiate his artistic activity as such. It is 
merely a part of his many activities. But Read goes on to 
say: 


To suggest that the aesthetic impulse does not 
exist for the primitive because he can by no means 
be aware of it, is to confuse the fact of conscious¬ 
ness with the fact of existence. All this evidence 
from the primitive stage of human culture goes to 
show that the aesthetic impulse is one of the irre¬ 
ducible components of the human mind.....7 

The above opinion adds some weight to the belief that 

it is native to man create. If this is true there are of 

/ 

course many significant implications for the educator. 

What makes for variations in the quality of primitive 

^ Ruth Benedict, Patterns of culture . New York, Mentor 
Books, 1^34. p.34 

7 Herbert Read, op.cit .» p.33 







* 

* 




















.. 

' 


♦ 

* 




. 


. 

. 








. 

* 


9 


art? Was it conditioned by the nature of the people and 
their surroundings and general climatic conditions? We 
would expect an answer in the affirmative. Here is what 
anthropologist A. C. Haddon says in his book, Evolution 
in Art : 

The conclusion that forced itself upon me is that 
the decorative art of a people does to a certain ex¬ 
tent reflect their character. A poor miserable people 
have poor and miserable art. Even among savages, lei¬ 
sure from the cares of life is essential to the culture 
of art. It is too often supposed that all savages are 
lazy and have an abundance of spare time, but this is 
by no means always the case. Savages do all that is 
necessary for life, anything extra is for excitement, 
aesthetics, or religion; and even if there is abundance 
of time for these latter it does not follow that there 
is an equivalent superfluity of energy. The white man 
who has trained faculties and overflows with energy is 
apt to brand as lazy those who are not so endowed. In 
the case of British Guiana it appears, pretty evident 
that art flourishes where food is abundant. One is 
perhaps justified in making the general statement that 
the finer the man the better the art, and that the ar¬ 
tistic skill of a people is dependent upon the favour¬ 
ableness of the environment.^ 

It seems, then, that this writer believes that a 
sympathetic environment is one of the more important fac¬ 
tors in the production of good art. This belief may be 
sound enough in primitive societies but we have seen in 
modern times many situations where the reverse is true. 
There are many societies today which have leisure and 
security and yet very little in the way of good art is 
produced by them. It may be that in the final analysis 

s 


A. C. Haddon, Evolution in Art , London, W. Scott Ltd., 
18P.9. 







10 


we must have a certain type of people growing up in a cer¬ 
tain type of environment before we can be sure that a large 
quantity of good works of art will be created. The logical 
question follows: What kind of people and what type of en¬ 
vironment? 

borne writers seem to feel that in primitive societies 
the desire to create was so strong - so much a part of man f s 
instinctive nature - that, environment aside, men would ex¬ 
press themselves artistically in any event. This is not to 
say that environment is totally unimportant, but to empha¬ 
size the human need to create. 

Man emerges from the chaotic darkness of pre-history; 
his consciousness evolves out of fear and loneliness and 
desire; he forms tribes and societies and adopts various 
modes of economic production and in the process his soul 
is swept by those alternations of superstition and joy, 
of love and hate, of intellectual confidence and humble 
faith, which transform his life making and unmaking 
dynasties and nations and civilizations. But throughout 
all this welter of forces and contradictions of aims the 
aesthetic impulse is essentially constant. It has these 
different aspects and sometimes one and sometimes another 
will dominate a whole epoch. But all these aspects re¬ 
late to one reality. For the essential nature of art is 
not given to it by a civilization or a religion but is an 
indefeasible faculty of man himself — a certain disposi¬ 
tion of sensation and intuition which impels him to shape 
things into forms or symbols which are aesthetic to the 
degree that they take on harmonious proportion and 
rhythym.9 

It is evident from the foregoing pages that primitive 
man made art one of the fundamental activities of his 
society. When man was living close to the earth, when his 


9 Herbert Read, on.cit .. p.42 












■ 



■ 














- 



. V : 


- • ' ' ■ ‘ 

' 


* 

- 

- 

. 

- 

. 



11 


life was relatively uncomplicated, the urge to create came 
almost as naturally as the emotions of fear, hate and love. 
We have perhaps found, however, that although the urge to 
create is always there, a permissive environment does have 
a positive effect on the quality and quantity of creative 
art. 

What was the role of the visual arts when man became 
more civilized, with life somewhat easier and more leisure 
time available? What part did the artist play in the com¬ 
munity? Has the urge to create continued unimpaired? 

The old kingdom of Egypt, one of the greatest periods 
of Pre-Christian art might be a logical point at which to 
begin in an effort to answer these questions. Here in the 
valley of the Nile It is not difficult to suppose that 
environment played an important part in the production of 
Egyptian Art. The extreme dryness of the desert, contras¬ 
ting with the flood seasons of the Nile, made the Egyptian 
forever conscious of the forces of nature. It Is then not 
surprising that these people sought to explain their en¬ 
vironment through a religious system. As the Nile renewed 
itself each year and as Osiris entered upon a new existence 
in another world, so every Egyptian felt that there awaited 
him a similar experience of life after death. This philo¬ 
sophy affected the life of the Egyptians and profoundly 
affected their art. Compared with the Paleolithic man T s the 


































- 















i 


. 


12 


Egyptian environment was, however, a great deal more 
livable. Thus a comparatively civilized and stable form 
of society was in existence and the nature of the art pro¬ 
duced reflected the life of Egypt. As Eric Newton wrote: 

The art of Egypt is always dignified, almost always 
sensitive, technically superb, hardly ever vulgar, 
almost never playful or humorous. YJhat it achieves 
more than any other art is a serene, aloof polished 
grandeur that survives even the mustiness of a museum 
setting. It is the perfect expression of a smoothly 
working inexorable machine. 10 

It should be pointed out however that the Egyptian artist 
was under a very rigorous control, perhaps more so than a 
commercial artist of today who must produce what his em¬ 
ployer demands. Still within these restrictions a great 
art arose. It should also be pointed out that the art, 
great as it was, did not necessarily pervade all aspects 
of Egyptian life, nor was it necessarily democratic. 

The Greeks had a very different attitude towards life 
and this is reflected directly in their art. Their gods 
possessed human qualities. Their religions consisted of 
catering to these gods who were apparently not alvfays 
guided by very high principles or ethics. The Greek people 
built superb temples to house their deities and these tem¬ 
ples have produced the greatest influence on western archi¬ 
tecture. It was in their architecture that the Greeks ex¬ 
celled and the style they evolved was admirably suited to 


10 


Eric Newton, European Painting and Sculpture . London, 
Penquin Books, 1?42. p.6? 




. 

* 

• . 


- 

. - 




. . ; . v b . „i' 6 i .. ,.v. •• i 

c 


. 








* 




. 













. 


. 

" 































13 


the terrain and climate of their country. Never has a 
society of such small dimensions created such an influence 
in the world of culture. Barton suggests that Greek art 
denotes M a race whose leading minds were emancipated from 
the terrors of darkness, a race not only logical in out¬ 
look but also a race that has found, for a time being, a 
happy and subtle adjustment of body and soul. ,,1 * L The place 
of art in the life of the Greeks was very high; in no soci¬ 
ety was the artist better favoured. However the Greek 
state, like the Egyptian, was based on a slave-labour 
economy and this left time for the citizens to contemplate 
beauty and life about them. One would hope that this 
social structure is not a requisite for a great culture. 

Greek art was not communal in the sense that all 
citizens participated, but It was communal in the sense 
that all the citizens were sensitive to good art and 
possessed highly developed tastes. Because of this the 
integration of Greek art and life was as complete as one 
could wish. 

Another great period of artistic production was the 
Romanesque Period (300 - 1000 A.D.). Unlike the Greek and 
Egyptian, Romanesque art was essentially a communal acti¬ 
vity. It is the expression of a people who did not 

J. S. Barton, Purpose and Admiration , London, 

Christophers, 1333, p.42. 






- 




- 

* 











. 





' 























. 






- 























. 


* 

* - C ■ C 












14 


theorize on aesthetics but to whom the will to create came 
as naturally as yearnings of the flesh* Behind. Romanesque 
Art of course is the faith of the common man in Christiani¬ 
ty. The thousands of anonymous artists placed their skill 
at the disposal of their religion and almost like living 
cells the great cathedrals of Southern France grew into a 
new and essentially spiritual type of design. This period 
more than any seems to exist as a testimony to sheer crea¬ 
tive activity in that there were no outstanding individuals 
but merely a people expressing their faith through their 
trades. 


Filled with the eager life that had been restrained 
for so long a time the French Commune assigned to each 
person the work for which he was best fitted. It was 
an association of strong corporations representing 
every stratum of society, wherein individual tempera¬ 
ments obeyed no other rules than those of the sponta¬ 
neous harmony we see in the woods — made up of a 
hundred trees which plunge into the same soil, are 
watered by the same rains and fertilized by the same 
winds. The art, formidable and one that expressed, 
was born in France and died with it there. It was the 
soul delivered into its own keeping for the first and 
last time. The people whom it penetrated with its 
vitalizing force could accept it and adapt it to their 
needs — they could not touch its inner principle 
without at the same time ruining its national and 

social significance. 12 

Here was community art at its highest level. The parti¬ 
cipation of the people was not of course complete in the 
practical sense by any means, but by their attitudes toward 


12 


Flie Faure, History of Art . New York, Harper Bros., 
1?24, Yol. II, p. x&O. 





* 


' 

. 








■ 

















. 












- 




. ; 

-• 




■ 





. 















. 






art and their outlook on life they represented a society 
where art and life were closely interwoven. The youth grew 
up with their heritage full upon them and yet consciously 
unaware of it. They adapted themselves readily to the 
social framework and took their place as a living cell in 
a living organism. 

Nothing in the social and natural expression is 
foreign to the earth and to the people from which 
it came forth spontaneously. And the unity of the 
symphony is the more impressive through the vast 
number of voices that entered it, for song and 
prayer, to murmur, to weep, to laugh and to combine 
the changing melody to the lacework of stone and 
glass and their rays of light with the intermit¬ 
tent thunder of the bells and with the hum of the 
sonorous names where the plain song rises and falls. ^ 

To look at another period of artistic excellence we 
can turn to the Age of the Medici in Florence. This was a 
society very different from the communes in France; in fact 
it was almost diametrically opposite to it. It was a very 
rich society but depended for its artistic patronage on the 
wealthy and powerful families that ruled the individual 
city states. Few cities have had so many great artists as 
Florence, ”The Uradle of the Renaissance.” These artists 
were by no means anonymous men who worked with the people - 
they were giants in art and were looked upon as such by the 
populace. They worked for their rich patrons and were 
rewarded handsomely for their efforts. As in all similar 


13 


Elie Faure, Ibid., p.330 












■ 


■ 


















* 




. 












16 


circumstances the artist's freedom was sometimes at stake. 
Rich patrons can kill true art by their demands for the 
mediocre and the familiar. But here In Florence the 
artists were favoured with a family that knew good art 
when they saw it and consequently encouraged the artists 
to produce the best they could. For almost three centuries 
then the Medici family by their wise attitude and rare 
sensibility disproved perhaps for the first and only time 
in history, the theory that big money makes for bad art. 

However the people of Florence too were art-conscious 
and probably were very reliable critics. It is said that 
they talked of the latest painting of some master as today 
people talk of the exploits of their heroes of the sports 
world. This unique situation has seldom been duplicated 
and it is difficult to see how a similar society could 
arise today. 

One cannot discuss this period without bringing in the 
religious aspect. Since the paintings dealt with religious 
subjects, the motivation of a strong faith must be recog¬ 
nized. But whether the influence of the church was more 
than superficial is open to question. There is a certain 
worldliness in the art of this period that is not found in 
earlier works. Indeed some critics feel it is frankly 
pagan. Also noticeable in this period is the increasing 
appearance of the artistes personal touch in his work. The 












. 




• 

















' 






* 

* 































' 

• 













































































. , 










. 

























. 

. 

■ 



17 


individuality of man is being recognized and it is quite 
evident in the works of this time. This period looks 
forward to and anticipates the modern movements in art. 

At this point it might be well to consider another period 
of individualism. 

The great period of Dutch Art came during the 17th 
Century hand in hand with the gracing wealth and power of 
the state. The patronage of art was similar to that of 
Florence but the difference was in degree. The Dutch 
artists painted commissioned portraits for wealthy clubs 
and guilds since only in this manner could they make a 
decent living. Besides these commissions of course the 
artists did much work on their own and for this the age 
is fortunate. Because of the strong Protestant feeling in 
Holland the artists were compelled to ignore religious sub¬ 
jects and thus gave us instead a portrait of Holland itself. 
Their emphasis of everyday life as a subject opened new 
vistas for those that followed. 

Of all the periods so far considered the artists of 
this time worked under the greatest difficulties. The 
Church was no longer a patron. The merchant princes filled 
this deficiency but did not fill it well. Unlike the 
Medici these rich Dutch burghers were not cultivated men, 
and their patronage was limited to portrait commissions. 

Fven the portraits allowed little freedom to the artist and 



, 





18 


eventually some gave up commission work and of course the 
comfortable living that went with it. These artists were 
then forced to work under the greatest of handicaps: 
poverty, sickness and ridicule. And yet outstanding works 
of art were created - perhaps illustrating that art is 
’•one of the irreducible components of the human mind.” 14 

These are a few of the outstanding periods of art. 

Some of these periods are characterized by an almost total 
integration of art and society. In others there is very 
little connection bet?/een the two. And yet with these 
widely differing backgrounds some of the world*s greatest 
art evolved. 

However the questions to be answered are these: is 
there a pattern to be discerned? Is it desirable to have 
art and society closely linked or should "art for art*s 
sake” prevail? What are the factors that influence art? 

At the outset we are obliged to conclude that the 
aesthetic impulse is a common factor of all periods and 
all societies that have been studied. Since prehistoric 
times man has sought to express himself creatively. This 
seeking or craving for expression seems fundamental to 
man’s nature. Perhaps this is not surprising but many 
people today persist in denying it, including unfortunately 

14 Herbert Read, Op.cit . T 27. 

R. H. Lowie, Primitive Religion , p.260. 





■ 

- 


* 

' 

. 





* 

. 

* 

, 

t — - * ■ 





1? 


many educators. More surprising is the recurrence through¬ 
out art history of certain forms that seem to suggest a 
connection between the works of art themselves. Faure 
calls this phenomenon the ‘'Spirit of the forms’*, and Read 
finds evidence for it in Jung's "collective unconscious" 
and Freud's "archaic heritage. 11 ^ 

However this study is not as concerned with the latter 
point (although it does suggest a deep psychological basis 
for the creative urge) as it is with establishing the simple 
fact that "art is the response to a fundamental human de- 
mand." 16 

Though art manifests itself in all ages, and in all so¬ 
cieties, surely the condition of the environment both mate¬ 
rial and moral affects its quality. The evidence in this 
regard seems to be positive. Art, to be wholesome and 
vital, must have a society that is favourable to its exis¬ 
tence and beneficial to its development. Italian painting 


15 

x J. A. Barton, Purpose and Administration . London, 
Christophers, 1953. p.3« 

Physical science which has the advantage and the limi¬ 
tation of dealing with material things can show con¬ 
tinuous progress as one new fact is discovered after 
another, and new facts beget new principles. Art on 
the contrary reveals and defines those human experi¬ 
ences which in all ages have been more or less simi¬ 
lar, though they may vary in range and intensity with 
corresponding variations in the power of expression. 

^ 3. M. Upjohn, Paul S. Wingert, J. G. Mahler, History of 
World Art . New York, Oxford University Press, 1949. p.3* 







. 

■ 




. 



. 

' 

. 


. 


„ 


... 



■ 

< ■ 

• . 


20 


and sculpture was better for the Medici. Greek sculpture 
and architecture owe a great deal to the social conditions 


that existed in Ancient Greece. Even primitive tribes, 
Haddon has told us, did better wor£ in the more amenable 
environments, bo although the evidence hardly shows that 
great art must have a favourable environment, it does sug¬ 
gest that good art can be made better and perhaps bad art 
can be made good under a more permissive atmosphere. It 
should also be pointed out that art that is rigorously 
controlled, however great the encouragement, is often 
inferior art. It is this very question that makes some 
culturally minded people apprehensive of government aid 
to cultural organizations. A deeper study of art history 
shows that it is rather unlikely that any material or 
superficial changes in a state will be sure to produce 
great art or even good art. Certainly an enlightened 
government and people will help greatly to foster the 
arts, but one cannot be sure by any means that great art 
will result. It must be admitted that there are minor 
examples of government aid which had a beneficial effect 
on the art of the time. In France in 1648 Colbert estab¬ 
lished the Academy of Painters during the reign of Louis 
XIY. The Academy possessed most of the disadvantages 
associated with such institutions but at the same time in 
an indirect way it had a positive influence on the Art of 


. 

' 

. 

- 

. 















, .. . •; k< . : ■ J 

. 

, . .. . 

. 










. 






























21 


France. Taking a broad view of its effects the Academy gave 
France an advantage over other countries in painting which 
has never been seriously challenged. 

The W. P. A. project in the United States is another 
example but one can hardly guage its influence at this early 
time. It is sufficient to say at present that most critics 
feel the murals painted under this scheme were little better 
than mediocre. 

There are many other factors that Influence art in our 
society. Geography has Its influence as we have seen. Eco¬ 
nomic conditions are even more influential. Periods of 
economic chaos like the Hundred Years 1 War and The Thirty 
Years 1 War have seriously hampered creative activity. 

The social structure too has a vital influence. The 
aristocratic democracies of Greece, we have seen, by their 
interest in refined cultural matters had a beneficial effect 
on Greek art. 

The influence of religion has always been strong, but 
in recent years art has been turning away from religion to 
seek nourishment elsewhere. T. S. Eliot notes this turning 
away and suggests that culture (.he uses the term in the 
broad sense; will suffer if it does not have a strong faith 
to inspire it. He calls for a ‘‘world culture ’ 1 to serve as 
a cementing force to draw nations together. 

And without a common faith, all efforts towards draw¬ 
ing nations closer together in culture can produce only 


, 

' 

• • 

. . . 

. 













































‘ 



• 












« 












• < 

- 



















. 











22 


17 

an illusion of unity, ' 

The influence of education on art has not been well in¬ 
vestigated, There are perhaps two reasons for this, 1‘irst, 
education in its present form is a comparatively new force 
in society. Second, it is difficult to assess the arts of 
the recent past. Nevertheless despite this lack of research, 
many writers and thinkers through the ages have advocated a 
more aesthetic type of education as a means to a more vital 
art and subsequently to a more enlightened and enriched so¬ 
ciety, This would seem to be all the more desirous today 
when the divorce between art and society is so obvious. 

Today artists have an abnonaal rather than a necessary 
or integral part to play in society. With this the general 
concept of art has been narrowed considerably to embrace 
only what is called the r, fine arts”, as distinguished from 
the "useful arts." The large proportion of our present so¬ 
ciety is divorced completely from the fine arts and conse¬ 
quently our art is hardly an expression of our race or our 
times. It is only when ?/e look at the Romanesque and Greek 
periods that we realize how great the breach is today. 

Barton comments, 

In this age most people persist in regarding art 
as one isolated aspect of life - a decorative, and 
in the last resort, an unnecessary appendage of civi¬ 
lization. When the word "art" is uttered, they at 

w T. S. Eliot, Notes towards the Definition of Culture. 

New York, Hare ourt, Brace & Go., 1?49 , p.o3« 























. 


. 

« 


. 


* 








































. 









































r 














23 


once interpret it as meaning no more than the sum 
of certain talents or accomplishments specifically 
labelled as literary or artistic. But if they could 
only seize the fact that art is not just one aspect 
of life but rather a way of seeing and treating life 
as a whole, they would perceive that art is preemi¬ 
nently the true human interpreter of hi story.1° 

In Canada the situation at the present time is more 
acute than in the older countries. We can justify it partly 
because we are still in some ways a pioneer country - a new 
land. The strictly utilitarian must precede the aesthetic 
in a society such as this. But the time must be at hand 
when we should come of age. We are now a rich country; 
surely our former excuses are no longer completely valid 
in explaining our neglect of art. Blanche Snell writing 
in Canadian Art says, "Aesthetically we border on being a 
nation of illiterates." 1 *^ 

Another writer says, 

It is not the Canadian artist who is not good enough; 
it is the Canadian public which is not good enough for 

the artists—-What is necessary is a long and wide 

re-education of the Canadian public away from the bar¬ 
renness of life based on running nowhere fast, to a 
realization of the importance and necessity of creative 

art.20 

There are, in Canada, hopeful signs of progress 
however, signs which indicate that in some fields art is 


1® J» A. Barton, Bur nose and Admiration . London, Christophers, 

1935. p.17. 

19 Blanche Snell, Art - u the Cinderella of the School Curri¬ 
culum” Canadian Art , April-May, 1946, p.123 

Mavor Moore, Cultural Activities News , March 1931, p.l 












24 


reviving. Most heartening is the fact that it is reviving 
on a broad scale, not merely among a small group of artists. 

It is basically a "grass-roots" movement and will undoubtedly 
have a vitalizing effect on Canadian culture. In a letter to 
Canadian Art E. M. W. Tillyard, Master of Jesus College, 
Cambridge, recognized this rebirth in the field of painting. 

I have recently been visiting Canadian Universities 
from Vancouver to Halifax: and one of the facts I learnt 
was the enthusiasm for painting throughout the whole 
country,... What is so inspiring about that art is that 
it is not an affair of one or two good artists but a 
real general movement like Elizabethan drama in England. 21 

This efflorescence of painting represents only one 
aspect of the condition of art in Canadian society. As far 
as it goes it is a happy condition and should be encouraged 
in every way. But little has been done to make art partici¬ 
pate in all our spheres of thought and action. This can 
only be done by allowing all our children to experience the 
creative, to develop their appreciative faculties when they 
are most receptive. Returning to Read we find support. 

The vast majority (of children) is aesthetically 
sensitive at birth, and it is what happens to the 
child in its first years that determines whether or 
not it will have a capacity for aesthetic expres¬ 
sion. 

"And appreciation", we might add. 

So the problem eventually returns to education. It is at 
this point that art education comes under scrutiny, 

21 E. M. W. Tillyard, Letter to Canadian Art , Spring 1?49, p.139 




















V 


U . i 








CHAPTER II 


ART EDUCATION 

Art Education as we know it today is a comparative 
newcomer to the curriculum. Yet in a broad sense art has 
long been recognized as a necessary factor in education. 

It is known that the world’s great educationists from the 
time of ancient Greece realized the value of aesthetic as 
well as mental training. 

To begin with, Plato has a great deal to say about 

art education. The traditional belief is that Plato looked 

on art merely as a vehicle for transporting moral values. 

22 

Herbert Read in his Education Through Art questions this 
belief. He suggests that the traditional concept of 
Plato’s theory of education and aesthetics is in error not 
because of inadequate scholarship on the part of philoso¬ 
phers but because of a lack of knowledge of the meaning of 
art. Read finds in Plato the recognition of aesthetics as 
a fundamental thing in education. Plato says that all 
grace of movement and haimony of living - the moral dispo¬ 
sition of the soul itself - are determined by aesthetic 
feeling: by the recognition of rhythm and harmony. Further 
he says, 

22 H. Read, Education Through Art . New York, Pantheon, 194-5, 
pp .62 et sqq. 










■ 






, 






- 














t 

< • 











26 


The same qualities enter largely Into painting and 
all similar workmanship, into weaving and embroidery, 
into architecture, as well as the whole manufacture of 
utensils in general; nay, into the constitution of 
living bodies and of all plants; for in all these things 
gracefulness or ungracefulness finds place. And the 
absence of grace, rhythm and harmony is closely allied 
to an evil style and an evil character, whereas the 
presence Is allied to and expressive of the opposite 
character, which is brave and sober-minded. ^ 

Herbert Head calls upon Plato to defend and define 
imaginative education. 


The aim of imaginative education is to give the in- 
dividual a concrete sensuous awareness of the harmony 
and rhythms which enter into the constitution of all 
living bodies and plants which is the formal basis of 
all works of art, to the end that the child in its 
life and activities shall partake of the same organic 
grace and beauty. By means of such education we instil 
into the child that instinct of relationship which even 
before the advent of reason enables the child to dis¬ 
tinguish the beautiful from the ugly, the good from the 
evil, the right pattern of behaviour from the wrong 
pattern, the noble person from the ignoble.25 

Plato realized in the last analysis the paramount im¬ 
portance of aesthetic laws in their application to educa¬ 


tion. 


Aristotle T s theory of art does not specifically in¬ 
clude education but it reveals a broad understanding of 
the arts, and he does refer to their importance in our 
daily life. 

The teachings of Plato and Aristotle were furthered 


H. Head, loc.cit , 

24 Plato, Kepublic, translated by Jowett, London, Clarendon 
Press, 1888, p. 

25 H. Head, iiiufili., p.60 









■ 

- 


















27 


by such great thinkers as Rabelais, Montaigne and especi¬ 
ally Gomenius. The latter stressed the importance of the 
senses in the learning process. Thus he urged that the 
child learn by acquaintance with actual objects or if 
necessary through pictures of objects. This was not 
strictly art education but Gomenius was interested in that 
too. Therefore the subject, art, is included on the curri¬ 
culum of his classical school. Gomenius was one of the 
first “sense realists” and his influence added much to the 
popularity of the theory. This theory arose as a reaction 
against the severity of the old “bookish” methods. It 
stressed, as its title implies, an approach to reality or 
learning through the senses. 

In the seventeenth Gentury the English philosopher 
John Locke advocated training of the senses. He derived 
something from the sense-realists, although the theory 

was now slowly evolving into a sort of empirical or scien- 

/ 

tific method. Locke influenced many other thinkers, among 
them Rousseau. Rousseau was more extreme in his views than 
most of his cont saporaries. He strongly believed in free¬ 
dom and flexibility and it is interesting to note that he 
include the manual arts as one of the activities in which 
a child should indulge. 

Other men making contributions to the existing thought 
in this regard were Halzmann, Pestalozzi, Herbart and 






■■ 



























, 






28 


T'roebel. All of these educators advocated the training 
of the whole child and recognized the importance of 
developing the spiritual and imaginative life of the child 
as well as the purely intellectual* They stressed the 
value of development through sense perception as against 
time-honoured and formal study of grammar. These men re¬ 
volted against the theory that education is a purely intel¬ 
lectual discipline. They maintained that the important 
thing in education is the- development of all human powers, 
physical, mental and spiritual; and that hand and eye train¬ 
ing is as important as the study of Latin and Greek. These 
theories at last influenced educators and gradually the 
emphasis began to change. 

Art, however, did not become an immediate addition to 
the curriculum. The history of art education itself is 
not a long one. It is only recently that art has become 
generally accepted as one of the fields of activity and 
study in the curriculum of our schools. A study of its 
progress from its first appearance on the curriculum 
reveals that its adoption was first advocated for reasons 
that are today considered hardly complimentary - for exam¬ 
ple the way of thinking that regarded art more as a train¬ 
ing or coordinating of the hand and eye than as a subject 
with any intrinsic value for the student. With this atti¬ 
tude towards art education widespread, it is not difficult 



* 

* 

. 






















■ 

r 

j/i'ZM 

* 

. . ■■ 

. 





















































2 9 


to imagine industrialists and manufacturers displaying a 
great interest in having art taught in the national schools. 
Particularly was this true of England where these men were 
largely responsible for the introduction of art - or draw¬ 
ing, as it was more properly called - into the schools. 

They felt that the school product would then be better 
equipped to take his place in Industry not only as a drafts¬ 
man and designer but also as a skilled worker who knew how 
to use his hands and eyes. This was a very ignoble begin¬ 
ning for art education, in view of our conception of it 
today, and it has had its effect in governing to some ex¬ 
tent the progress of this subject in subsequent times. 

It was in Europe that art was first considered as a 
worthwhile part of the curriculum. However at the outset 
it was not included to any great extent on the programs 
of the schools. 

In 1822 the British Government appointed a Select 
Committee to inquire into the best means of extending a 
knowledge of the .arts and of the Principles of Design among 
the people of the country. 

In this report it was stated that it would be an 
excellent thing both for the artist and the consumer 
of works of art, to make art to a certain extent, 
part of elementary national education. ° 


K. R. Tomlinson, Picture Making by Children , London, 
Studio Publications, 1924, p.12 






- 














.. 




e . • : 



. 

* 


■ • • 

* 












. 










. 






30 


This of course meant little because it was not until l8j?0 
that art was actually included on the curriculum. Also it 
must be remembered that the state-aided schools in Britain 
at this time were only a small fraction of the total 
numb er. 

At this time art had also been introduced as a school 
subject into Germany and Switzerland. 

In 1842 Ireland had recognized the value of linear 
dravang in its relation to other school subjects such as 
geometry, geography, mensuration and so forth. Also it is 
known that drawing had been introduced in certain schools 
of Belgium and Holland. 

It is interesting to note that in the New World as 
early as 174? Benjamin franklin associated drawing with 
writing and arithmetic in his Hints for an Academy . 

But art education as we are disposed to recognize it 
today did not begin with the simple introduction of drawing 
into the school curriculum. Although many philosophers 
seem to have rightly recognized where the true value of 
art education lay, nonetheless in actual practice art edu¬ 
cation was more allied to training of the motor abilities 
than to a development of the child 1 s creative powers. 
Froebel, for example, well over 100 years ago recognized 
the basic principles of art education and approached the 
teaching of art much as present day art educators are 















.. 







* 

, 


















. 




; , 











31 


inclined to. 

Singing, painting and modelling then must early 
be cultivated by the schools as essential elements 
in a complete human education and not to be left to 
chance or fancy. This not with aim of making some 
sort of an artist out of every pupil, still less of 
producing artists in general - which are indeed 
mutually destructive aims though in a sense the 
former is true of everyone - but with the simple 
and explicit intention of securing for each pupil 
a complete development of his nature that he may be 
conscious of its wealth of interest and energy, and 
in particular nay be able to appreciate true art. 2 7 

The teachings of thinkers like Froebel were largely 
ignored at the time, and art remained "training for skills." 
No one appears to have looked into the qualities that make 
up a work of art in sin endeavour to evolve a proper ap¬ 
proach to art education. Not only were Y/riters ignored, 
but the . great works of art that forms our heritage were 
also ignored - or perhaps merely misunderstood. 

There are several likely reasons for the ignoble be¬ 
ginnings of art education. 

First, it was unfortunate that art education was being 
introduced under the shadov? of the eighteenth century art. 
This period of art was one which stressed the superficial 
and ignored the more profound and lasting qualities in a 
work of art. Outside of the field of music the eighteenth 

century was not a creative period. 

_ 

Froebel, Chief Writings on Education , edited by S. 8. 
Fletcher and J. Welton, London, Edward Arnold, 1912, 
p.134. 




- 


- 

, 

* 
















. 


- 




# 




■ 


, 










. 


. . 







In general art tended to be artificial and conven¬ 
tional, bowing to the whim and dictates of the privi¬ 
leged classes. 

These conditions led art teachers and their pupils into the 
field of "naturalism" and consequently away from true art. 

It must also be remembered that as yet the camera had 
not arrived to obviate the apparent necessity to transcribe 
nature as accurately as possible. 

Another reason which has already been hinted at is 
the demand for skilled artisans that arose with the advent 
of industry. Here there was little need for imagination 
since the reproduction of works by the artist craftsman 
was accomplished with the machine - the worker playing only 
a minor role, - but nevertheless one that required a good 
deal of motor skill. Tomlinson says, 

In view of this situation, it is not surprising 
that the course of art study at first drawn up for 
use in schools in general was systematically and 
methodically arranged, and depressingly lacking in 
imagination and understanding.2? 

There was another resultant of this factor which had 
its effect on Art Education, although it was longer de¬ 
layed. Because there was no longer much aesthetic satis¬ 
faction in his work the industrial worker had to find 
relief in his leisure time activities. This only seldom 

R. Freeman Butts, A Cultural History of Education , Hew 
York, McGraw-Hill, 1947, 

2 ? R. R. Tomlinson, Children As Artists , London, King 
Penguin, 1?47, p.10. 

















. 

. 
















' 









. 

' 

- . 

. 

; 

, 

* 







led to art, but there did arise an attitude that work was a 
drudge, and leisure was much to be desired and enjoyed. 

This led in turn to many passive forms of recreation which 
even today, and perhaps particularly today, have a very 
great attraction for the working world. Act was not playing 
a very important part in their lives. It now came to be 
regarded as a "cloistered virtue" and there was some doubt 
that it was even a virtue. 

Interest in art became associated with the "high-brow" 
or the wealthy or socially superior class. It has for this 
reason become suspect among the great majority of the 
people - particularly in the Western World. Art also at¬ 
tracted dilettantes among the newly rich and those who 
thought it fashionable to be "arty", further separating 
arts from the general public. Art then was commonly re¬ 
garded not only as a leisure interest but as a mark of 
wealth and of cultural and social superiority . This has 
always been true to some extent because fine artists have 
usually been dependent on wealthy patrons for their support. 
But the advent of the machine and the decline and disinte¬ 
gration of folk art among the people have made the upper 
strata of society almost solely the guardians and protec¬ 
tors of art. 

Another movement that was in some ways tied up to, or 
grew out of the foregoing conditions was the cult of "art 




















- 




















. 






* 


■ 




























34 


for art’s sake". There is no definition that aptly explains 
this movement. There seems to be disagreement as to the 
philosophy this cult advocates. But basic to the "art for 
art’s sake" idea is the attitude that art is a phenomena 
separated from life; that only thrives in the rarified at¬ 
mosphere of an "ivory tower". The creation of beauty is a 

worthy activity merely for its own sake. This came about, 

30 

suggests Robert Hilpert, because of the aforementioned 
loss of the folk arts on the one hand and the patronage of 
the w ealthy on the other. Art was being collected and 
stored in Museums and private homes and was becoming 
separated from the original environment in which it was 
created. 

Thus they, (works of art ) have become detached from 
the life of their own time and environment and have 
become precious specimens of "art for art*s sake", 
without indicating the political, religious, economic 
and social factors that influenced or determined their 
form. 31 

This vogue had a direct influence on art education in 
establishing the "training for skills and techniques" as an 
objective. 

John Dewey in Art As Experience also refers to-the 

forces that have put art on a pedestal outside of and apart 

2° R. Hilpert, ■ N.a.a.A. fortieth Yearbook , Bloomington, 
Illinois, Public School Publishing (Jo., 1941, p.448. 

^ loc.cit. 










33 


from our normal experience. He attempts to show that the 

agencies that have been responsible for this condition are 

not inherent in art itself' 1 but arise because of specifi- 

32 

able extraeneous conditions. 

Th Art Academies of the time constituted one line of 

influence, whether or not their methods made artists out 

of their students, their influence on art education was 

patently bad. There was apparently little recognition or 

little desire to recognize that the art school student and 

the public school student were extremely different prob- 
33 

lems. The viewpoint of the Art Academy was based on 
authoritarianism and imitation, the authority and the imi¬ 
tation of the old masters and the artists of the times; 
composition and individual or imaginative conceptions came 
for the most part last or not at all. The atudent accom¬ 
plished the prescribed exercises in the prescribed manner; 
skill, technique, and realistic appearance of product were 
considered the most important values. 

The academic tradition with its interest in the pro¬ 
duct and with its stress on authoritarianism, imitation, 
naturalism and technical proficiency had a strong influence 
on art teaching. This tendency with minor variations, 

J. Dewey, Art As Experience, New York, Minton, Balch 
& Co., 1934",' p.TOY" 

^ Commission on secondary school curriculum, The 'Visual 
Arts in General Education , New York, D. Appleton- 
Century Co., 1940, p.3 








* ■ 















■ 

, 

. 

* 































. 

t 




' 










■ 







. 








56 


spread through the schools and persisted for many decades 
as the controlling factor in art teaching. In fact this 
philosophy is still in practice today in many of our schools. 
It would not be rash to say that most of the art teaching in 
Alberta is colored by this philosophy. 

There was, however, a shift of emphasis near the latter 
part of the nineteenth century which did affect some areas 
greatly, and, to a lesser degree, art education in general. 

It was at this time that impressionism began to have 
some influence on the world of art and art education. 

Artists now became engrossed in the objective and natural 
world. They studied the effects of light on colour and 
a variety of natural phenomena. In a sense they were 
scientifically pursuing realism in colour and lighting. 

This of course was characteristic of the times, which 
were becoming more and more interested in the scientific 
approach. It was of course further encouraged by the 
advances that arose from the Industrial Revolution. 

11 In an age of growing faith in science, art too had 
scientific interest and sanction.Out of this came 
what we call the formal trend in art education, since 
it stressed formal methods of achieving results. 


54 


Ibid., p.5 





















. 

- 
























37 


35 

In "The Visual Arts in General Education" it is 

suggested that this development came hand in hand with the 
theory of Herbartianism in general education which advoca¬ 
ted five fomal steps. The implication here was that 
teaching could be condensed to formulae which would apply 
in all situations. In art coincidentally there was the 
stress on formulae for design, colour, composition etc. 
Laws of perspective were emphasized. Children at this 
stage were encouraged to make value scales, color charts 
and conventional borders illustrating design principles 
in the belief that they were acquiring a knowledge and a 
respect for these things. 

In our Twentieth Century there developed another 
important movement in art - the school of expressionism. 
The tem itself is often misused and no longer can be 
accurately applied. Cheney the historian terms all 
modern art "expressionism", whereas Herbert Head looks 
on expressionism as merely one aspect of many movements 
in modem art. Perhaps the use made of it in this paper 
will be closer to the narrower sense with which it is 
employed by Herbert Head. 

Expressionism as a trend in modern art was led by 
such men as Matisse, Rouault and Derain in France, and 


33 


Ibid., p.7* 



. 

■ 

. 

. . 

. 

■ 


. 








* 








' 


. 


i 


* 

, 








. 



38 


by Van Gogh in the Dutch school. Edvard Munch was foremost 
in the school of German expressionists. Herbert Head con¬ 
tends that expressionism as an approach to painting is not 
new and points to old masters such as SI Greco, Brueghel, 
Bosch and Grunewald as exponents. It is difficult to agree 
that Brueghel and Bosch are expressionists, but one can 
agree that expressionism in a mild form has appeared in 
traditional art. Certainly the influence of expressionism 
in the last fifty years has been powerful. One definition 

of this movement is simply an "outward demonstration of 
3 6 

inner feelings. 11 ^ 

In North America the doctrine of rugged individu¬ 
alism held sway particularly in the business world. The 
individual was paramount and his particular interests and 
desires were held sacred. Thus expressionism in art had 
its counterpart in the business world. However it did not 
actually appear as an influence in American schools until 
the 1^20 1 s, and then it came largely as a result of the 
work of Eranz Gizek. 

Cizek in his school in Vienna had developed expres¬ 
sionism in his teaching a few years before with good 
results. It was his discovery that children have a scheme 
of their own with which to express themselves that gave 
art education its great impetus in Europe and eventually 

2k H. Head, Qp.cit ., p.101. 




. 

. 


. 

. 

- 

. 





* . 








, 

•« 

« 










3 ? 


in America. As in all movements there was an extreme 
group who looked upon complete freedom of expression in 
every field as something sacred. The child was to be left 
completely unhampered and his resulting work regarded as 
precious. 

In general education at this time there were some 
evidences also of a passion for self-expression in 
this same sense. This came in part from Froebel and 
other mystical influences, in part from misunderstan¬ 
ding of the doctrine of interest as expounded by 
Dewey, and in part from fear of the evils of suppres¬ 
sion as discussed by Freud. But except for a few 
sporadic instances expressionism never took hold of 
general education. It did however enter into Art 
Education in a thorough-going way. 37 

It is pointed out that this doctrine of self expres¬ 
sion had at least one outstanding and important value. It 
recognized the child as an individual. In this respect it 
paved the way for learning much about children’s interests 
and potentialities. 

However, in many instances the theory was misapplied. 
Freedom came to mean anarchy. Some teachers interpreted 
the principles of free expression to mean total neglect of 
the child. The teacher they thou^at was a mere figurehead 
who dispensed materials. This laissez-faire attitude had 
other undesirable results which did not appear until later. 
It became for some students an escape from reality. In 
other cases it encouraged egocentric habits. Unfortunately 


37 Commission on Secondary School Education, Qp.eit., p.7 




40 


too some teachers, even as in the old formal method, prized 
the product too highly and they sometimes encouraged the 
child to paint in an immature manner rather than to develop 
in a natural way. Nevertheless the step towards self- 
expression was in the right direction, and the pendulum of 
emphasis swung from the subject to the child. 

Today, backed by the large fund of information 
gathered through research, psychologists are able to tell 
us a great deal about the ehild T s creative and mental 
development. Art educators have profited by this knowledge 
but it is only recently that they have been able to substan¬ 
tiate their theories and assumptions that psychologists have 
carried out. In her book Fine Ants for Public School Admi¬ 
nistrators , Sallie B. Tannahill says: 

Today art is no longer a ’fad or a frill T but has 
taken its place as a valuable and integral part of 
the school program. To the "science 11 of living we 
sorely need the addition of the "art" of living.3o 

This book was published in 1932, and the tone of it 
implies that art has arrived, that its place on the curri¬ 
culum has been established. Unfortunately this is not 
generally true. In most of the public’s mind, and also 
in the mind of a great many teachers, art is still con¬ 
sidered a ’frill or a fad 1 . 

This situation is particularly true in Canada. Seldom 

^ S. B. Tannahill, Fine Arts for Public School Administra¬ 
tors . New York, Columbia University, 1932, p.v. 







. 


. 




. 

. 





e 



t 








. 


. 

. 

. 

' 

. 

: 



41 


is art recognized as fundamental. John Dewey has said, 

"The arts represent not luxuries and superfluities but 
fundamental forces of development. "^ 

Herbert Read goes even further: "...the claim I put 
forward for the place of art in the educational system 
is far-reaching. Indeed the claim is no less than this, 
that art widely conceived should be the fundamental 
basis of education." 40 It was Bernard Shaw who said, "I 
am simply calling attention to the fact that fine art is 
the only teacher except torture." 4 *** There are many other 
educators who do recognize that art must have a prominent 
place in our education, but even when their claims are 
not as strong as those just quoted, they are still largely 
ignored. Perhaps Read T s view will have the most effect 
because it goes deeper than most. His is a reprimand to 
society as a whole. 

Our particular trouble in this air-conditioned night¬ 
mare that we call a civilization, is that we have lost 
the very notion of cultivating the senses until butter¬ 
fingered and tongue-tied, half-blind and deaf to all 
nervous vibrations, we stumble through life unaware of 
its most appealing aspects, lost to its intensest joys 
and communions. Frustrated and brutalized, we drift 
between the boredom of peace and the self-inflicted 
wounds of war and dismiss as lunatic those few quiet 
voices that speak of love and beauty and of the renun¬ 
ciations we must accept, of power, wealth and pride, 
if we would have the influence of beauty and love 


U IMA., p.ix. 

40 H. Read, On.cit .. p.?l 

41 H. Read, Ibid., p.v. 









5 ‘ * 
































42 


prevail in our lives. 42 

The consensus among most art educators today seems to 
point to the belief that art is still being neglected in 
general education. The neglect Is twofold. rirst a sim¬ 
ple attitude of indifference to art as a school subject, 
this being most prevalent in newer areas where there is a 
distrust of anything not utilitarian; and secondly where 
art is given adequate time and attention it is very often 
the old formalized type of art education. 

Present-Day Trends 

Art educators themselves have not been neglecting art 
and their research has added much to our knowledge of the 
subject. As in other fields of education, art education 
recognizes the needs of the child first and the subject 
matter second. One can for most purposes disregard the 
exponents of formal art education. Aither they do not 
write a great deal or there are few of importance. The 
modern view reveals a preference for the n child-cent red*' 
approach. 

There are of course differences within this modern 
approach. There are on the one hand educators who 
although paying lip-service to free-expression still 

42 H. Read, Grass Roots of Art . New York, Wittenborn & 

Go., 194b, p.37* 






43 


believe that formulae and strict rules are necessary to 
teach the child art. There are others who hold the child’s 
will as sacred and seem to subscribe to a sort of anarchic 
view towards art education. 

Following are some of the attitudes of a few of the 
more prominent writers on art education. Pearson summari¬ 
zes in the following statement some of the goals of art 
educ ation: 

...development of the design sense and its applica¬ 
tion to pictures, sculptures and things of use. 

Adventure of the spirit, experiment, new experience. 
Creation. Expression both of the self and of external 
reality. Application of the creative mind and the 
sensitivity to design to life and environment.43 

Nicholas Mawhood and Trilling in Art Activities in 

the Modern School suggest that creative self-expression 

is the first objective, since in all their objectives 

these authors feel that the child is the important factor, 

everything is related to the child. 

In The Visual Arts in General Education a book that 

represents the thinking of some of the most prominent 

44 

educators in the art, three concepts are suggested; 

1. The most important concern is the growth of 
personality. 

2. Art experiences are the right of every person. 

R. M. Pearson, The New Art Education , New York, Harper 

Bros. 1941, p.ll 

44 committee on Secondary school Education, Qo.cit .. pp. 

13 et sqq. 

















. 

. 






« 

* 







; - 


. 

* 





. 

. . 








. 

■ ' 











44 


3* Art should be an inherent element in the total 
living drema. 

These concepts are supported as follows: 

...the aim of art education in the secondary school 
is to further growth of individuals in rich enjoyment 
and effectiveness, and to encourage them to create a 
society where such living is possible for all.4.5 

This point of view, it is explained, was arrived at 
or rather grew out of developments in psychology and edu¬ 
cational theory and out of changes in the social situation. 

Along with the attitudes expressed above we have those 
of Herbert Read and Viktor Lowenfeld. These men, who have 
been menti oned already, both believe that art is a funda¬ 
mental subject. Indeed, Read believes the M aesthetic 
approach 1 ’, as he calls it, should be applied to education 
as a whole. But it is the method that these educators 
advocate that sets them apart from others. They have 
studied psychology and have learned as much as possible 

about the child's needs and abilities at the different 

46 

stages, and have graded the work appropriately. 

The work of these men along with that of Tomlinson 
and several others had given modern art education a sound 
psychological foundation upon which to construct a better 

loc.cit. 

AG 

Art education cannot overlook the great contribution 
made by psychology. It is eiormous and has helped to 
explain many facts about the child which every art 
teacher should know. 









. 












. 

.. 






. 

■ 



















■ 





- 
















. 


. 

. 



. 











45 


approach. This foundation can be easily understood by any 
teacher who is interested, and therefore it has a unique 
contribution to offer. In the past we have been confronted 
with books written, by teachers of art who have been excep¬ 
tional individuals. It was impossible for the average 
teacher to adopt these inspired procedures and gain the 
same results. Now however, with the large amount of infor¬ 
mation available to teachers in some of the modern texts, 
art teaching has become less dependent upon the inspired 
artist-teacher, a rare individual, in any event. 

The foregoi ng represent the main tendencies in Art 
Education today. They are based in part on the assump¬ 
tion, which seems substantiated in Chapter I, that all 
people have in than the power to create and appreciate 
and ^iould be given opportunities to exercise these 
powers. As someone has said r Artists are not special 
kinds of men but all men are special kinds of artists. ' 

It is further generally agreed that it is not the main 
duty of art educators to produce great artists working 
in a cultured society. But perhaps by giving all our 
people a chance to develop aesthetically we will have a 
more sensitive society capable of strengthening the influ¬ 
ence of beauty in our life. Art educators feel too that 
most important of all is the need to bring art and society 
closer together. 


* 






< 

















, ■ 






. 


- 




. 

♦ 

. 








. 






CHAPTER III 


ART EDUCATION IN CANADA 


Art education in Canada has generally followed trends 
in other countries. Influences from Great Britain and the 
United states were noticeable, rhis situation is not sur¬ 
prising and was consistent with general education as a 
whole. Today, although we are somewhat behind older 
countries in our attitudes and our methods, we are impro¬ 
ving slcwly and the general outlook is one of hope. 

Ontario is perhaps the best point at which to begin 
this brief study. It was Egerton Hyerson who initiated 
and promoted the first art programme in Ontario schools. 

In 18^0 the drawing course consisted of map-making and 
Hyerson obviously felt the programme needed broadening. 

He studied European and Amerie an methods and eventually 
based his courses on what he had picked up abroad, but he 
was not at all encouraged by the results which for years 
appeared much the same as before. Drawing books were 
introduced in order to improve the course but they only 
served to make it more rigid and mechanical. This type 
of drawing became kncwn as "Linear Drawing 11 . The actual 
practices in the schools changed very little, but art 
schools and art courses for teachers were being established 
and the teachers were better trained, if only in the skills. 
Even after 1?0 0 the teaching of art as a technical skill 














« 




. 




' 


. 






. 

, 

* 

. 

.... 






■ 















■ . 









47 


was still in vogue. This point of view remained until after 
1920 when Arthur Lismer, one of Canada^ great painters, 
became educational supervisor at the Art Gallery of Toronto. 
Dr. Lismer’s contribution to art education did much to change 
the thinking and practice of art teachers in the Ontario 
schools. He discarded the old stereotyped manner of teach¬ 
ing and developed a new approach based on the needs and 
abilities of the child. Lismer became well known in edu¬ 
cational circles and he travelled widely helping to set up 
other systems. He spent some years in South Africa organi¬ 
zing and teaching. His methods were introduced there and 
have since proved successful. Ontario was fortunate in 
such a man. 

The effects of Dr. Lismer f s teachings are to be ob¬ 
served In the 1937 Programme of Studies for Ontario. This 
publication gave official sanction to many of the contem¬ 
porary developments in art education. 4 ^ 

Because of men like Ryerson and Lismer, Ontario was 
ahead of most of the other provinces in art education. 

However the evolution of art education in the newer areas 
was much the same despite its slower development. Most 
provinces today are on an equal with Ontario, but it would 
be wrong to suggest that all were so. 

4 7 C. D. Gaitskell, Art Education in the Province of 
Ont ari o . Toronto , Ryerson Press, 1948", p. 6. 













. 


i 
















■ 













« 

' 














. 







48 


48 

Blanche Snell in a recent article in Canadian Art 
describes the conditions which obtain at present in 
Ontario’s art education programme. She feels that Ontario 
can be regarded as typical of what is going on in art edu¬ 
cation in Canada. 

Miss Snell first deplores the situation that results 
when forty-odd students are put into one room and e 2 posed 
to art. These rooms usually have no opportunity for lab 
work of any kind; no materials or tools which are likely 
to give satisfaction in arts and crafts to an adolescent. 
Nor, she continues, is there any opportunity for him to 
learn to appreciate contemporary art or the art of the 
past. The child in Grade IX is often being taught by a 
person whose own school training in art ended with Grade 
VIII or IX. 

The teacher’s sole qualification for teaching 
art is a degree in languages, mathematics, science, 
or what have you, plus two or three summer courses 
in arts and crafts. 4 ? 

The results of this situation are of great signifi¬ 
cance. We Canadians grow up having made few choices in 
our school life between what is good design and what is 
bad design; between what is beautiful and what is ugly. 

Our taste and our appreciative faculties have become 


48 


Blanche Snell, Canadian Art , April-May, 1946, pp. 
123 et sqq. 

B. Snell, Ibid., p.123* 


49 









.. 


. ' ■ T ' ■' ■' •'/ 

* 

- 

. 

. 

. 

. 


, 


. 






, 

. 

* 






. 

' 








; 

. 





4 ? 


atrophied through lack of use. We depend on others for 
our decisions* Magazines flourish that tell people what 
they must buy; how they must decorate their homes,; what 
clothes will suit their personality. We most of us are 
timid when called upon to state our preferences and we 
begin all our choices of paintings with, "I don't know 
what is good art, but I know what I like." This is 
typical of the defeatist attitude that most of us exhibit 
when called upon to use our eyes for the contemplation of 
a work of art. In this sense we are not individuals. We 
have as a nation been deprived of the right to create and 
appreciate in our own way. This is surely one of the cul¬ 
tural tragedies of our time, irurtheimore art is so lowly 
regarded and so little emphasized in our curriculum that 
students procedingto institutions of higher learning 
seldom consider it for further study, whereas we have many 
examples of teachers who are continually glorifying pur¬ 
suit of the sciences, languages and mathematics as worth¬ 
while fields of endeavour. Art is not allowed to make 
its appeal and for that matter there is no one to state 
its case adequately. "The bitter truth”, as Snell puts it, 
"is that here in this country art is not recognized as of 

major importance in the future life of our citizens. Its 

50 

permanent values are not known. 


50 


B. snell, Ibid., p.12 6 



' • 




























* 



► 









. 











♦ 






















C . 




, 


' 

* 

■a 





















50 


Recently the Department of Education in Ontario has 
made provision for art to be taught to the end of Grade XII 
and the certificate which is required for University en¬ 
trance may include art. However, in Grade XII which is 
really a year of preparation for University entrance there 
is no art offered. 

The situation in Ontario schools has been discussed; 
following is a brief indication of the amount of art taught 
in the secondary schools throughout Canada. 

Prince XdY/ard Island - "Free hand Drawing“ to the end 
of Grade XI is compulsory. No art beyond Grade XI. 

Nova Scotia - Art is not compulsory in any grade, nor 
recognized for entrance to universities. Under certain 
circumstances it is recognized for High School Certificate, 
if studied privately. 

New Brunsvack - Not taught in the secondary schools. 

Quebec - French Catholic: One hour of drawing a week 
obligatory in Grades IX and X, and in XI except in indus¬ 
trial and commercial courses. 

- English Catholic: One hour of drawing a , 
week obligatory to the aid of Grade XI. 

- Protestant: Arts and crafts optional In all 
grades and accepted by McGill as an optional entrance 
subject to some courses. 

Manitoba - optional in Grades X and XI of general 



















. 


' 

- 

. 

- 

* 

' 








. 










. 









. ~ 






. 



51 


courses only* uurriculum to be revised within the next 
two years. 

Saskatchewan - Optional in all grades but not accep¬ 
ted as entrance qualification by university or any college. 

British Columbia - Elective for all grades. A dip¬ 
loma from a recognized school of art accepted in place of 
certain academic subjects for entrance to normal school. 

Alberta - Two courses are general electives for 
Grades X, XI, XII. One unit is required for students 
planning to attend the Faculty of Education.*^ 1 

More will be said about the Alberta programme in the 
next chapter. 

The feeling of hopefulness that gives Canadian art 
educators their enthusiasm, sometimes gives way to impati¬ 
ence. The general tenor of recent articles, such as 
Blanche Snell’s is one of criticism. Another writer is 
worth quoting. 

Those of us, who bear witness to the hunger for self- 
expression and the longing for creative experience in 
our youth, still find colleagues, who believe all this 
to be a frill, and guidance experts, who have had no 
art experience whatever, and we still find inconsisten¬ 
cies in the programme where children who learn sewing 
or woodworking or modelcraft get no introduction to 
desjgnirg or the chance to develop any awareness of 
line or form. 

Most of the children we teach in our art classes 
will never be artists of prominence. Many will never 
use a brush again; but all will have to face decisions 


51 


B. Snell, Op.cit., p.127. 















. 


. 

- 


• > 












* 




* 


4 • ■ : 

. 




. 






. 



. 

• e 

. 

. 

. 






’ 







: 





. 













52 


and all will have to form conclusions. The unfolding 
of such artistic abilities needs acclaim and appreci¬ 
ation so long as the opportunity to exhibit publicly 
is only given to the talented and great, just so long 
will art remain on a controversial pedestal and never 
reach the heart of the masses who have no comparable 
experiences that touch their everyday life.... The 
young artists deserve encouragement. The public 
deserves the experience of enjoying the work of the 
schools; the cause for creative education and the 
furtherance of human understanding deserve a larger 
place in our public education and the curriculum 
planning for a new world.52 

This passage reflects the thinking of many Canadians 
who care about art and education. They feel that only in 
isolated spots and on a small scale is Canadian education 
getting the most out of art. Our public is still unable 
to make sound choices in design, in architecture, in town 
planning and in appreciation of fine arts. The vast 
majority is still indifferent. 

Art education in Canada has not yet made its contri¬ 
bution, and will not, until a more benevolent attitude on 
the part of educators and the public, is forthcoming. 


(t. Paige Pinneo, High School Students Design Textiles , 
Canadian Art, Autumn 1548, p.22. 

















CHAPTER IV 


ART EDUCATION IN ALBERTA 

Generally speaking, art education in Alberta has 
followed the pattern set elsewhere in Canada. The same 
stages of development have been gone through and the same 
difficulties have been encountered. 

As in other provinces, art in Alberta was first thought 
of as map-drawing, and later as drawing exercises where many 
forms were practised until the pupil attained some proficiency 
in reproducing them. Most teachers regarded art as drawing 
alone, others included colour as an area worthy of study. 

Much time was spent teaching children to draw many and varied 
forms. These forms were broken down into simplified geometric 
shapes and the child was told to construct the form by build¬ 
ing on these shapes. Constant practice was stressed and teach¬ 
ers demanded a certain standard of excellence before recogniz¬ 
ing the student as a success in the course. The process through 
which the child went to draw these forms was immaterial, the 
forms themselves served as an indication of the worth of the 
course. Many books appeared, purporting to help the teacher 
plan an art programme. Most of these books were primarily con¬ 
cerned with drawing instructions to the teacher and pupil, and 
left little to the imagination. For example, in one such text 
which has been used in Alberta we read the following: 

"A hectograph copy may be traced over to familiarize 
pupils with the form. The figure may be cut out - draw- 




. 


. 

. 

' ' 

. 

- ■ 


- ■ ■■ 




■■■ -v •'•j.i:' 

■ 


. 


' 

. 1 ... 




. 

’ 





■ 

. 

: ’ •• 

: 




H ii'n : • *1 



r 

■ 

: 


• 



■ 

. 

.« 



• 

' 




' 

■ ;-r 

■ 



■ V'.vi; .. 



. 

k : 

, 


■ 

■ - - vf; ■' £ ' . t 

_ 

0 U V- ■-) • ; 

■; ■ 



u " * l % 







M 


ing line by line, on the blackboard.” 53 
This example is taken from the section dealing with primary 
pupilsl 

Until recently the art programmes in Alberta schools 
were based on some such philosophy as that indicated above. 
There were minor improvements year by year, but the most 
important changes were relatively recent. In 1936 the whole 
art course was revised and brought up-to-date. Again in 1950 
a new bulletin came out for the Elementary school which in¬ 
cluded the best of contemporary methods. 

To obtain a clearer and more accurate idea of the past 
in Alberta 1 s approach to art, a look at some of the past pro¬ 
grammes as described in the Department of Education's Annual 
Reports is worthwhile. In the first Programme of Studies 
which is included in the 1906 Annual Report, 54 we find refer¬ 
ence to the art course or "Drawing” as it was called. 

"Drawing is to be taught as an added means of expression. 
Pupils are to draw in blank books after observing the type 
solids and objects." 

This statement is typical of the art teaching of the time, 
where teachers spoke of expression in art, but by their methods 
seemed to deny it. Investigating further we can obtain a fair¬ 
ly accurate picture of the art education of this period in 
Alberta. Following are the actual suggestions given for the 

53w‘. p. Weston, A Teachers Manual of Drawing , Toronto, 

Thos. Nelson & Sons, n.d., p. 19. 

54 Annual Report Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta, Edmonton, 1907, p.90. 








different levels from Standard I to Standard VIII: 

Standard I 


55 


Teach the following forms as wholes from type solids 
and objects: 

Sphere and similar forms, natural and artificial, 
e.g. ball” marble, apple, tomato, cherry, lemon etc. 

Cylinder and similar forms, natural and artificial, 
e.g. pencil, bottle, spool, pint measure, cup, rope, ladder, 
mallet etc. 

Cube and similar forms, natural and artificial, 
e.g. box, chest, basket, inkstand, lump of sugar, etc. 

Teach their parts — surfaces, faces, edges and 
corners and the relation of these parts. Compare them. 

Illustrative sketching in connection with nature 

study. 


Standard II and III 

The work of Standard I and the following: 

The type solids bisected and studied as new wholes. 

Hemisphere and similar forms natural and artificial, 
e.g. half an apple, dish, bowl, cap, oil can, etc. 

Half cylinder and similar forms natural and artificial, 
etc. band box, coin etc. 

Half Cube , square, prism, right-angled triangular 
prism and similar forms, natural and artificial, e.g. box, 
trunk, car, roof of a house etc. 

Teach their parts -- surfaces, faces, edges, and 
corners and the relation of the parts, Compare them. 

Teach geometric figures -- triangular, square and 
rectangle from the solid. Draw objects based on these 
figures e.g. pennant, envelope, door, cross, flag etc. 

Illustrative sketching in connection with nature study. 

Standard I? 


The work of previous standards and forms derived from 
the type solids by variation. 

Spheroid, ellipsoid , ovoid and similar forms natural 
and artificial, e.g. lemon, cucumber, watermellon, egg, pear, 
strawberry, vase etc. 

Cone, erucular frustrum and similar forms, natural and 
artificial, e.g. cupolas, pyramids of Egypt, basket etc. 

Draw from the solids, the geometric figures, circle, 
ellipse and oval and learn the terms circumference, diameter, 
radius, arc, centre, focus, axis. Draw objects based on 
these figures e.g. target, circular window, hand mirror, 
eye glass, horse shoe, padlock, fan, spoon etc. 

Illustrations in connection with other studies. 



















. 




. ■ : 








56 


standard V 

Representation, construetion, decoration as in 
Prang T s New Graded Course in Drawing for Canadian Schools, 
Books I and II. 

Drawing obligatory in this standard. 

It is obvious that in a program such as the foregoing, 
the child was considered merely as an imperfect adult, and 
the graded drawing lessons were supposed to improve his 
skill. There was little or no recognition of the fact that 
the child develops through different stages and that at each 
stage the child is a different person. 'These attitudes were 
consistent with art education in general. In Ontario, Gait- 
skill describes the appraoch as "Linear Drawing” and deplores 
the lack of truly aesthetic qualities in the program. In 
this period the most Important equipment an art teacher 
could possess was a set of artificial models of many geo¬ 
metric shapes. We find in many Alberta schools today the 
same spheres and cubes that were used and are still being 
used in an endeavour to make the child a competent draftsman. 

The program did not change a great deal in the years im¬ 
mediately following 19 06. In the 1912 Course of Studies, as 
described in the 1912 Annual Report ,^ we find Drawing included 
in all the grades from I to V$II, and further- we find it is an 
examination subject. Included in the Course of Studies for this 
year was a Manual Training and a Household Science course. These 

^ Annual Report, Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1912, pp. 8l et sqq. 









. 

' 


* 



' 


. 

. - 

. 

. 





51 


courses were supposed to be offered in all grades in the 
Public Schools. This addition to the programme was a step 
forward indeed, and although it was hardly recognized as an¬ 
other course in art, it was in effect a recognition of the 
fact that work in three-dimensional media had some value for 
the school child. More will be said about this course later 
in the chapter. 

It has been pointed out that the drawing course had still 
much the same approach in the 1912 course as it had when the 
province was first established. There were however indications 
that a new type of thinking was influencing those responsible 
for the art or drawing course. 

The object of the course is to develop ideas in 
masses lines and colours, to increase the capacity 
of the pupils for the enjoyment of art, and of nature 
through art; and to develop taste and accuracy in 
industrial work. 56 

Despite this statement of the object of the course, a 
study of the content reveals much attention being paid to 
skills and little to expression. In Grade I we find the 
following content to be taught: 

Representation Illustrative Drawings: free illustration 
related to the child's experience and to stories. Common 
objects such as fruits in line and mass. Simple landscapes. 
Object drawing. 

The Sphere and the cylinder. 

Decoration - Border using for repetition geometric 
figures, square, circle, etc., and simple conventionalized 
natural forms, booklet, valentine. 

Colour - Study of standard colours. Use in design and 

in representation.57 

The courses in the higher grades progressed to more 








jD f t j; 













58 

difficult and complex ideas but differed little in the 
general approach* 

The manual training and household science courses were 
developed for the boys and girls respectively. Further in 
the manual arts, the programme for city schools differed from 
that for rural schools* The reason given for this was de-* 
scribed in 1912 Annual Report: 

The rise of manual training as a school interest has 
come primarily from the need of balancing up the work 
of the city schools by some kind of motor exercise and 
training, and such courses as have been adopted relate 
chiefly to urban schools* It would appear desirable to 
give recognition to this type of training in all schools. 
The general training, however, of the country pupil in 
judgment and practical resource from outdoor occupation 
makes an elaborate course unnecessary.§8 

However there is a course laid down for country schools 
and it must have had some real value. 

It is probable that these courses in manual training had 
as much freedom of expression in them as the art courses them¬ 
selves. In the drawing course the standards were high and the 
strict attention that was paid to representation cut self-ex¬ 
pression to a minimum* In the manual arts, although it was 
necessary to consider the utilitarian value of some of the ob¬ 
jects constructed, nevertheless the discipline within the 
subject was probably not as strict as in drawing. If this is 
a likelihood, then the manual arts programme was indeed worth¬ 
while . 


58 Ibid. p. 121 












. 









.5? 

An idea of the programme for city and town schools can 
be gained by a look at the Grade V course: 

Advanced Cardboard tvorks - Construction in heavy 
bristol or millboard (.old shoe boxes;. Covering and 
binding boxes, trays, folios, blotting pads, etc., with 
marble papers, end papers and binding linen. Relation 
to industry and history of materials used. 

Read and Raffia - Varieties of stitches, as Peruvian 
West African, Nigerian, Samoan, Frefian and Pinan, reed 
basketry. Raffia knotting. 

Clay and Plasticine - In this and the more advanced 
grades - used as an aid in Geography and Art. Free 
modelling .59 

One can detect In this course the influence of the in¬ 
dustrial world, which sometimes felt, particularly in Eng¬ 
land and in the Eastern provinces and states, that the 
schools main function was to provide workers for it. This 
attitude should not have influenced the early school program 
in Alberta at this time, but because of our dependence on the 
east for many things, it seemed not unnatural to adopt their 
approach to art education as well. 

At this point in the history of art education In Alberta 
there was an admirable interest in a form of manual training 
or what we now call crafts. Today we apparently do not regard 
this sort of thing as highly, for it is no longer a separate 
course. Actually the art course was supposed to take over the 
place served by manual arts, but it did not have the time to 
do both well. Art teachers today look with envy at the time 
when there were in effect two art courses on the curriculum 
and wonder why these courses were reduced to one. 




Ibid .. Annual Report, p.121 













: 














6o 

In the High School in 1912 we find art courses in 
Grades IX and X. These courses were primarily concerned 
with drawing and the approach is consistent with that in the 
Elementary School. 

In the 1914 Annual Report, 60 reference is made to the 
second annual Summer School for Teachers held in the summer 
of 1914. Instruction was offered in the so-called special 
subjects such as agriculture, nature studying, woodwork, art 
methods, design, drawing and painting and others. The number 
of courses relating to art indicates that there was a need 
for more and better training in this field. The reports of the 
inspectors regarding the low standard of art teaching seems to 
have been heeded, and it cannot be denied that the Summer School 
gave art a fair share of the time allotted. 

The courses consisted of Art Methods I, Art Methods II, 
Design I, Drawing and Painting I, Drawing and Painting II* 

The methods courses seemed to have offered almost as much con¬ 
tent as method. Things like procuring, preparation and care 
of materials were included. It was in Art Methods II that the 
book. Theory and Practice of Teaching Art by Arthur W. Dow first 
made its appearance as a text. Dow had revolutionized art 
teaching by presenting the art structure or design point of view 
as a contrast to the old idea of copying and representing. Dow’s 
influence slowly invaded our art courses and one of the first 


60 Annual Report , Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
1914, pp. 58 et sqq. 



















„ 






■ 














. 












; 1 ' 1 .. • i i "■; 




. 










i 

: 

. 

. . 

. 

; ■' .. ' Vi“.' : 

- 


■ 





6l 


important changes began to take place in Alberta*s approach 
to art education. The importance of well trained art teachers 
had been recognized with the inclusion of the five courses in 
the 1914 Summer School. Along with that the approach was chang¬ 
ing and a new set of values were being substituted for the old. 

In the Summer School of 1918,Special Certificates were 

being given in certain fields, among them Elementary Art. 

Seven courses were offered as follows: 

Art Methods I Art Methods II 

Design I Design II 

Drawing and Painting I Drawing and Painting II 

Mechanical Drawing 

Each of these courses represented 33 hours of time in class 
and so amounted to somewhat less than half of the present Uni¬ 
versity course. However it is only recently that we can offer 
as ambitious a program in art at Summer School as was offered 
in these years, and one would be forced to admit that our courses 
today are not so varied. It should also be pointed out that in 
1918 the courses at Summer School carried no credit towards a 
degree. 

Later (1923) it was recognized that art should be a require¬ 
ment of High School students planning normal entrance. Grade IX 
art was then made a specific requirement with Art I as optional 
in GradeX or XI. Manual training was also included among the 
options. 62 


61 Annual Report, Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
1918, p.35. 

62 Annual Report, Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1922 p.26. 







1 -■ 








■ 


































. 













62 


A good idea of the popularity of art among the secondary 
school students at this time may be gained from a survey of 
fifty town and city schools. The results showed that 3873 stu¬ 
dents took art as a subject in the three grades IX (compulsory) 
X, XI. Among the technical and special courses art was the most 
often taken by High School students. Only physical education 
comes close in this regard - 3526 students took it in this 
year. 63 

At this stage in the history of Alberta’s schools, art 
was receiving a good share of attention. However the attention 
derived more from enthusiasm than understanding. The programme 
itself reveals a spurious philosophy, and we can be reasonably 
sure that the actual practice of art education lagged far be¬ 
hind the programme of studies. It was during this period and 
from this type of teaching that most present-day laymen ob¬ 
tained their ideas on art and art education. These ideas, once 
absorbed are difficult to dispel. This makes any change of 
methods a slow process. 

In 1924 a new Programme of Studies was put into operation 
in the first and second years of High School. J. A. Smith in 
his Annual Report aslnspector of High Schools makes some com¬ 
ments on the new art course. 64 He feels that the course provides 
a good training in theory for those who intend entering the 
teaching profession and also a fairly careful basis for those 

63 Ibid., p. 114. 

64 Annual Report, Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1924, p. 20. 




' 


■ . ; 

' : 

..-."Vf : - ij 1 \ . ;.) : :v. 

. ' r > i, ' ;> ■ H . : : s •' &£ld ^no . | If 

. ; ■ ■ • 

U 'j • t -S . • f ;) 




■ ' • 

: 

, C : ■ ■ 

i . ■ ' ■ ". •; 

} ■ " ; • . -... 


■ 


’ > ■ ■ 














' 











63 


who are looking forward to an Art Specialists course. He goes 
on to say that the course is an improvement on the old course 
in its organization of material and limitation of topics. In¬ 
cluded in the course were sections on The Design and Theory of 
Colour, Appreciation of Architecture and Fine Art, and Picture 
Study. Specific criticisms put forward by Smith are as follows: 
there is too much work to be covered in some sections; mater¬ 
ials (i.e. pictures) are often too expensive for most schools; 
the elimination of Pen and Ink drawing is considered a mistake. 
Generally Smith finds that the chief value of an art course - 
inspiration for artistic and original ideas - is lost in an 
attempt to master rules and theory. He also notes that there is 
a general complaint among the principals that too much of the 
home study time is spent on art. Mr. Smith’s recognition of 
the fact that there would be too much emphasis on theory and 
rules if the course was followed indicates the growing reaction 
against art as skill and foreshadows later improvements in the 
program which slowly changed the emphasis from a scientific 
approach to a more aesthetic approach. 

In the 1927 Programme 65 creativeness was regarded as one 
of the prime aims in the art course, but it was last on the 
list which included things such as skills and knowledge. 

In 1933 Inspector A. L. Doucette of Vegreville makes this 

65 Programme of Studies, Department of Education, 

Edmonton, 1927. 






' - 


■j -r.': 














, 

' 












J-i! 



64 

statement regarding art in his Inspectorate; Considering the 
training received at Normal School teachers tend to slight this 
subject - especially the r picture study. tTt66 This tells us little 
except that art then as now was often neglected. Smith 1 s report, 
which has been mentioned, may offer a clue however to the reasons 
behind the neglect of "picture study.” 

In the same year Inspector W. E. Hay of Stettler attempts 
to explain the use of backward methods in the schools in a 
statement in his annual report. 

The tendency of modern educational method is pretty 
definitely towards facilitating learning by encouraging 
the pupils to take on jobs involving the enjoyable use 
of newly acquired ideas and abilities. These jobs con¬ 
sist of manual work with paper, cardboard, pencil, crayon, 
paste, scissors, pictures and other such material suitable 
for children^ manipulations. It is often the case that 
the teacher of the ungraded school correctly appreciates 
modern methods, but does not practise them on account of 
the board’s lack of acquaintance with the fact that learn¬ 
ing is accomplished by children in other ways than by read¬ 
ing from text books and reciting from memory.” 67 

This passage indicates that the problem of turning theory 
into practice was as difficult then as it is now. Teachers, 
after putting in considerable time, studying better methods and 
developing new techniques, often find that the general public 
is not at all in sympathy with their approach. The school 
boards and people of a community often have a suspicion towards 
any change that they do not understand. This provides education 


66 Annual Report, Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1933. p. 42. 

67 Ibid., p. 45. 



x-'.'V 


' 




65 


with one of the eternal conflicts, which may always be with us. 

The emphasis at this time on examinations was as strong in 
art as it was in other subjects. In 1934 we find that only 65% 
of those writing the Art 1 paper passed. This is much lower 
than the average percentage of passes of all the subjects put 
together,which amounted to 76.15%. This fact certainly betrays 
the type of thinking that must have been in effect regarding 
art. Obviously some very high standards had been set and the 
students were not able to reach them. Perhaps on the other hand 
these results are attributable to poor teaching. This has been 
indicated in part by some of the Inspector's reports. 

In 1938 after the art programme had again been revised and 
when we had, probably, the best and most comprehensive statement 
on art education up to this time, there was still the same story 
coming from the inspectors in the field. 

"In spite of the intent of the revised course in Art to 
stress the appreciation of art in our every-day lives and 
surroundings a large number of teachers have not changed 
their procedures from the actual drawing and painting of the 
traditional sets of "plates." 68 

During the late 1930*s and early 1940's the new approach 
was becoming known in Alberta but only on the higher and more 
specialized levels. There was a general feeling however that 
the emphasis had changed and inspectors were looking for changes 
in the art work in the schools. This change was not always found 


68 Annual Report, Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1938, p.48. 





. 

. •• ' . <.! 4 : i vn., 

f 

, 

- 




" 

cm ■ : 




, 

' - ■ 






- 








i ; 




In : nl 
















■ 

- • 






















■ 


















- 

• * ... 

















66 

and even when it was, the difference between the new and the 
old was slight* In the summary of inspectors’ reports there 
appeared this statement regarding Grade IX art: 

There appears to be little change in the method 
of teaching this subject and little change in the 
standard of attainment reached by the pupils. The 
results are generally on a par with those secured 
under the old course but there is evidence of slightly 
increased originality in the pupils’ efforts. 69 

This statement however points up two facts. First, the 
writer in referring to ’’standards of attainment” is admitting 
allegiance to the older ’’art as skill” type of thinking. Second, 
the writer seems to underrate the ”slightly increased originality” 
which if true must surely commend the new program which had been 
in effect for only one year, and which had to work against all 
the firmly engrained attitudes and habits that must have been 
even more difficult to dislodge than they are now. For all this 
talk of art in Grade IX, which is takento be in part,at least, 
typical of all the grades, there was not a large registration 
in this subject in the very year that the above statement was 
made. In a table in the Annual Report of 1936,it is noticed 
that in town schools there were merely 37 boys and 56 girls 
taking art. This put art well behind such options as woodwork, 
military drill and penmanship. 

In the High School as a whole (in the same chart) one finds 


69 Annual Report, Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1936, p. 59. 

70 Annual Report, Ibid. p. 86. 











. 

. . ' V 
























67 

a total of 1310 taking art. Compared with such other options 
as bookkeeping and stenography, art again falls short in total 
registration. Yet it was this same year that the Summer School 
granted 113 certificates in swimming and only 2 in High School 
art. It was this same year that found only 60% of Art 1 stu¬ 
dents passing the course compared with the general average per¬ 
centage of passes of 71.67%. This indicates that something was 
amiss somewhere. If the teaching was poor, why were so few 
teachers taking art certificates? 

Most evidence at this time points to a lack of appreciation 
of the part art should play in the school curriculum. The new 
course had not yet made its effect felt. Changes in this situ¬ 
ation were slow to take effect and art was still very much ne¬ 
glected through the early part of the 1940’s. 

It must be admitted that during this period of national 

emergency there existed a great shortage of teachers and with 

this a shortage of facilities. It seems the first subjects to 

suffer in periods such as these are the optional subjects in the 

high school, and the less academic subjects in the elementary 

school. Thus we find that in the year 1945 only 104 high schools 

outside of the cities offered Art I and no high school offered 

Art II. Probably the explanation in the Annual Report for this 

year gives a satisfactory reason for this seeming neglect. 

..........(the situation). may be explained more 

logically by the fact that teachers require extra Sum¬ 
mer Session training in these fields, involving an ex¬ 
penditure of time, money and energy, that did not seem 






. 

. ■ 

■ 




• • • 








68 


warranted during the time of international conflict. 71 
This seems the more likely when one notes the popularity of 
art as an option in the intermediate grades where no special 
qualification is required on the part of the teacher. 

It was in 1945 that teacher training was completely taken 
over by the Faculty of Education. As far as courses in art 
were concerned there was very little immediate change. The 
old Normal School art course was continued with slight changes 
according to the particular certificate or degree the student 
was working towards. In 1945 the Department of Fine Arts was 
also established at the University, including in its curriculum 
music and dramatics. The following year 1946 a Painting Divi¬ 
sion was established and by 1947 was offering five courses in 
painting and art history. These courses were the first in art 
content to be given for credit towards a degree. Thus great 
progress was made towards better training of art teachers in 
Alberta in these years. 

The 1947 Annual Report of the Department of Education re¬ 
veals some very interesting opinions regarding the quality of 
the art being taught at this time. Referring to the Elementary 
School, the Inspector’s Report has this to say: "Art is closely 
correlated with the enterprise topics, but too often exhibits 
little originality or creative work.” 72 In the Intermediate 

71 Annual Report Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1945, p. 34. 

72 Annual Report Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1947, p.30. 



j • ' • .- •* 


. 

. 


. ■ • . • , . ' ' . ... 

; 

. 




' 

- 

. 

. 

.. 


. ... . ■ . 





6 ? 


School conditions were apparently little better. "Too often 
little attempt is made to make art, community economics and 
music interesting and vital. In many classrooms the work in 
art is very stereotyped and there is little development of 
appreciations (sic) and creative ability." 73 

These statements are unusual in their forthrightness about 
a subject which some superintendents tend to overlook, and must 
certainly give some indication of the state of Art Education in 
Alberta in this year. 

In the last few years there has been no great change in 
art education. It is noted that in 1948 and 1949 there was a 
decrease in the number of schools offering Art I in their pro¬ 
gram. The decrease is great enough for one to suspect a reason 
behind it. In 1947 and before, over 100 High Schools were offer¬ 
ing Art I outside the city. Since 1947 there have been approxi¬ 
mately 88 High Schools outside the city offering this subject. 

The most likely explanation is the return to the rule requiring 
teachers of Art I to have a Junior Art certificate. This require¬ 
ment had been waived during the war and for some years immediately 
following. 

Most Art Teachers today feel that although conditions are 
improving they are not doing so fast enough. The new approach 
(if one may any longer refer to it as "new") has not been gener¬ 
ally disseminated, and where it has been introduced, has not al- 


73 Ibid., p. 32. 



- 

■ . 7 . | . - . . 

i : f;/,:• • i b.\ .• '■ •. 01 ;1 • 1;. v;In laptop 

. 

: ( 

. 

. •• ‘ . 

. 

. 

. 

■ 

, ■' ; U . 

vt ' - ■ 

. 

. 

... 








70 


79t 

ways been properly understood. The Programme of Studies in 
effect prior to the 1950-51 school term had a very comprehen¬ 
sive if slightly outdated, art course. Some of the statements 
contained therein are very good and bespeak a sound philosophy. 
However the emphasis appears still to be on skills and training. 
In a listing of three factors to be sought in the art programme 
one finds the following: 

(1) The Knowledge Factor 

(2) The Appreciation Factor 

(3) The Creative Factor 

All of these are to receive due emphasis it is stated, but 
the suspicious placing of the creative factor last on the list 
seems to suggest the importance accorded it. It is stated, how¬ 
ever, and wisely so, that the creative factor should receive 
emphasis in the lower grades. 

In each grade specific instructions are given under each 
heading (e.g. drawing, design, colour). Also there are suggested 
lists of prints to be studied for appreciation. Often in these 
instructions and suggestions there is a disregard of the child’s 
personality, his levels of development. Nothing is said,for 
example,under the heading ?T colour”of the child’s preference in 
Grades I, II and III for a colour as an emotionally expressive 
agent in his work. Colour for the Grade I child is treated from 
and objective and visual point of view. The child is asked to 


74 Programme of Studies for Elementary School, Department of 
Education, Edmonton, 1940, p. 288. 







V 
















. 




. 











71 


observe and build up a graphic vocabulary based on the real 
world when he is not either ready or inclined to do so. Draw¬ 
ing is taught to these grades in the step-by-step method which 
only confuses the child and later makes his work stereotyped 
and dependent on adult help. All through this programme there 
are inconsistencies. Creative expression is referred to but 
the child is seldom allowed to practice it freely. The know¬ 
ledge factor and the development of skills seem to have the 
greater emphasis. 

The pictures listed for appreciation are chosen first for 

their subject matter and second for their sentiment. These 

prints represent a very narrow concept of art and one cannot 

overrate the effect on the taste of our children when subjected 

to one style (not a particularly worthy style of painting at that). 

Many of the artists represented are second rate, some of them 

are obviously mediocre. Examples of pictures suggested for 

study in Grade Y are as follows: 

The Santa Fe Trail; Young-Hunter 
The Music Lesson; Terborsch 
The Solemn Pledge; Ufer 
The Shepherdess; Le Rolle 
Herd in the Sunlight; Claus 
The Retreat; Leigh 
Frightened Ducks; Benson 

One would have difficulty in finding some of these artists in 
art history books since they do not represeht the best in art 
by any means. 

In all fairness the programme does have some good points. 

For one thing the suggestions for integration are useful and 










' 


■ ' 


' 

, 








* h : ' r. 

. • 








, 


.1 ; 







' 

' 







72 


well conceived. Also it might be said in its favour that it 
is very definite in what it asks of the teacher. This type cf 
programme would certainly appeal to those teachers not too well 
versed in the subject, who feel more confident when they can 
isolate a definite body of material (or facts) and proceed to 
put them across. 

It may also be said of the old Programme of Studies that 
it subscribed to the idea that art should be inherent in everyp 
day living. This idea was often not brought out in practice 
however, because of the emphasis placed on the development of 
techniques and the learning of principles of design. 

The Programme for the Intermediate School offers art exper¬ 
iences more appropriate to the needs of the children at this 
stage. Here again though, too much emphasis is placed on 
developing of rules and principles and not enough on developing 
of confidence and freedom in the pupil* The pupil in these 
grades is all too much concerned, as It is, with the techniques 
and skills that make up art and he is easily discouraged. 
Teachers should be made aware of this since this stage is one 
of the most difficult for the child in many ways. He is chang¬ 
ing from an individual who expresses himself largely in an emo¬ 
tional way to an individual who is critically aware of his en¬ 
vironment. There is the danger of frustration and discourage¬ 
ment if a naturalistic approach is demanded by the teacher. The 
creative approach must be uppermost if the child is to continue 
his art with satisfaction. 


» 

. 

- 

■. i'; • 7' .; 

;■ 

. 

" . 

• i ■ ()" L ■ c, ■ 

. ; y i ; . . . * iV 37 . "i ':j . 3.1 ■: a- iVu 

' 

■ ■ • ' 

' 

: ■ ; ■ ■ . ' l 



' 







v> 


The Programme for Art I and Art II is not very compre¬ 
hensive and has a definite bias towards the technical rather 
than the creative. Some of the activities suggested are worth¬ 
while if properly taught, but others indicate a regrettable 
lack of imagination. Art II is merely an outline with the 
ominous warning prefixed that "Art II should be attempted only 
in schools having the necessary supplies, equipment and refer¬ 
ence material; and only by teachers who have had advanced train- 

75 

ing in art and present day methods of art instruction." 

In the Autumn of 1950 there appeared in use for the first 
time Bulletin III 76 to supersede the section on art in the 
Programme of Studies in use at this time. This bulletin brought 
the elementary art programme up-to-date and did so in a very 
simple and practical way. The philosophy behind this bulletih 
is sound and it is told in most cases in a clear and direct 
manner. For the first time in the Programme of Studies there 
appears a section devoted to the developmental stages in crea¬ 
tive activity. The knowledge of these stages is basic to gDOd 
teaching in art and their appearance in Bulletin III is commend¬ 
able. 

The aims and objectives in Bulletin III are rather poorly 
set down. The ideas are vague and often duplicate each other. 
This is a serious shortcoming when one realizes that the benefits 
of art are intangible enough without obscuring them more. 

75 Programme of Studies for the High School, Bulletin 7, Depart¬ 
ment of Education, Edmonton, 1946, p.8. 

76 Bulletin III Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1950. 




- 















. \ ' 1 ■ • • " • 

* 


.TIT ;i.i oav 

‘ ; ■ ' : aY K% 


■ 


i 






■ 

. 

. ■ . ;'•••■ 





m 

However Bulletin III is otherwise sound and is a sign of 
progress in art teaching in the province* 

Another very important innovation of this year 1950-51 
was the inclusion of an art series in the Alberta School Broad¬ 
casts. These art broadcasts originate in Manitoba where they 
have been used with the greatest success for several years. 

It is reported that each year as the children and teachers be¬ 
come better acquainted with the modern approach the results are 
better. Here in Alberta it is too early to judge the real value 
of these broadcasts, but the writer has seen many classes in 
action during these programmes and there is little doubt that 
the children and the teacher benefit greatly. Unfortunately one 
often observes teachers using the broadcasts,but counteracting 
the spirit in which they are given by allowing children to use 
rulers, erasers and other aids, typical of the imitative art of 
former years. These broadcasts provide an excellent outlet for 
the popularizing or publicizing of present-day methods in art. 

In almost eyery case observed in the country schools the work 
done by the children during the Radio Broadcasts was better than 
that in evidence under the teacher T s direction. Not all schools 
take advantage of these broadcasts but most teachers that do use 
them feel they are profitable. Criticisms that are made by 
teachers refer usually to the technical defects of the broad¬ 
casts. One frequent comment was that the narrator talks too 
much; suggests too many pictures to the children, and this does 
seem to be, in some instances, a valid complaint. 










. 






. 

r 






. ■ ■ 

; ; 












. 

■ • 

' ; : 




• // ; o n; • 1.1 /; a 




- 

V 

■ ' ' 


■ 


. ■ 









75 


Any study of an educational system is not complete until 
the students themselves are consulted for their opinions. Over 
the past two years many Alberta High School graduates have been 
questioned about the art courses they have taken. Besides this 
many written statements have been collected, mostly from students 
in the Faculty of Education. These statements were taken before 
the students had begun their courses, to prevent any influence 
that might have reached them. Needless to say it is quite pos¬ 
sible that these students know little about the real nature of 
art and their opinions are not necessarily sound or conclusive. 
When one is brought up under a system, one becomes accustomed 
to a certain standard of values, and only with great courage 
and perception can one criticize the established order. 

The question asked of these students was simply "What is 
your opinion of the art that you have experienced in your school 
career?" The students were a representative group from all over 
the province and came from city, town and country schools. A 
few had Art I and Art II; many had Art I and a large number had 
taken art only in their Elementary and Junior High School careers. 

In grouping the data, the comments were placed in four 

categories. First, those who liked the Art they had taken and 

had no criticism of it. Second, those who disliked their Art 

that 

and had much to criticize. Third, was the group#\were divided; 
that is, liked and approved of certain parts of the course and 
at the same time criticized other parts that they disliked. 

The fourth group was made up of vague statements that constituted 


. 


J s « 






. . 


' 




* 3 


;• i s 










76 


no real opinion. The results were as follows: 


Liked and approved of their 

art experiences-46% 

Disliked and criticized their 

art experiences-28% 

Divided---13% 

No opinion--- 13% 

77 


The above figures are certainly not startling and perhaps 
any subject on the curriculum might offer the same results if 
similarly investigated. But it is significant that less than 
half of the students could say that they enjoyed their art and 
that they thought the approach was reasonably good. Perhaps 
more revealing were the statements themselves. In the group 
just mentioned that approved of the art courses, approximately 
one-third stated that they had no ability in art. In fact all 
through, the statements reveal a sense of timidity and a feeling 
of inferiority towards art. Some examples of these follow; 

"I liked the art courses I have taken but I am not very 
very artistic.” 

”1 have taken Art I and enjoyed the course although I 
am not very good.” 

Other comments criticizing their art went thus; 

”My art course was merely a matter of following the 
teacher 1 s instructions neatly and accurately. I believe 
an art course should teach the pupil initiative, art 
appreciation and perception and should allow the student 
to develop his own style.” 

"When we were taught art in the primary grades, we were 
under the impression that, in order to draw well, we had to 


77 The total number of students consulted was 171 

The figures have been rounded off to whole numbers. 







, 

.. ■. ■ , 











77 


produce a piece of art identical with that of the teachers." 

"The art I received in school did not teach me to like 
it. Those who were gifted with the ability to draw had an 
extreme advantage over those of us who did not have such a 
gift." 

"I don f t believe I had the opportunity nor encouragement 
in developing any artistic talent in primary schools." 

The above statements represent the 28 c /« who disliked and 
disapproved of the art they had been taught. This group wrote 
more than any of the other groups. The ones who were satisfied 
wrote very little on the questionnaire. 

It is probably not necessary to use a questionnaire to 
assess the Art Programme in Alberta at the present time. One 
can observe some of the products of our schools in their art 
classes at University. Here the story is always the same. The 
students approach art in a stiff, stereotyped and unimaginative 
way. Also they are burdened with a defeatist attitude that only 
points to an art programme that must ignore, indeed must dis¬ 
courage, free expression and aesthetic values. In most cases 
art is still a cloistered virtue in our schools. It has not been 
brought into the realm of the everyday where it can make its appeal 
to all of our students. It is still primarily aimed at the gifted 
student. 

Not only is art often poorly taught; it is just as often 
neglected. It is no surprise to go into some country schools 
and find that art to a large extent has been ignored. In this 
regard the questionnaire was revealing. 








4 f.U .. ' 

. 


' 


. 

, 










. 










' 








78 


In my education, art was scarcely touched upon, it 
was considered more of a recreation. 

Another says; 

.I feel as if art has been neglected in my studies 

during my school life. 

These are examples of a considerable number of complaints 
about the relegating of art to a very minor role in the Elem¬ 
entary and Junior High School. 

It has already been pointed out that few High Schools teach 
Art II and even Art I is not as widely taught as it should be. 

An increase in this neglect would seriously affect the school 
programme. Signs however, i Mi cate that art is at least hold¬ 
ing its own at present and there are agencies in the province 
that are helping indirectly to create a greater interest in 
the visual arts. 

The Banff School of Eine Arts is one of these agencies 
and the influence of this institution cannot be denied. Many 
teachers have taken advantage of the courses there and quite a 
few Alberta teachers have become practitioners in the arts and 
crafts if only in an amateur way. This does not mean that these 
people are necesarily good art teachers, since we know that one 
must be more than an artist to give children the experiences 
that they require, however teachers are becoming interested in 
arts and handicrafts and this has a very desirable effect. 
Children too are going to Banff and certainly profit from the 
experience. The scholarships that are offered have turned 
more than one High School student into an art career. 













. 




. 
















. 






. 

* 

. 





* 





19 


Other agencies that serve to increase the art conscious¬ 
ness of Albertans and to help indirectly the Art Programme, 
are the Department of Extension of the University of Alberta, 
and the Visual Arts Board of the Department of Economic Affairs. 
The Department of Extension offers Community Art classes to 
people in small towns and the Visual Arts Board is doing good 
work throughout the province in publicizing and encouraging the 
arts. Alberta is thus becoming more art-conscious and it is be¬ 
coming so even in the smaller centres. This must surely have a 
beneficial effect on art education in the final analysis. It 
may be that here in Alberta we have the beginning of an era where 
art and life are integrated at all levels. There is no doubt 
much to be done, many prejudices to break down; many habits to 

be changed; modes of thinking to be re-examined; values to be 
But 

redistributed. A it can be done, and it must be done through 
education. At present our art education is inadequate for the 
task. Alberta is probably more art conscious than any other 
province in Western Canada, and perhaps is the equal of the 
east in this respect. However we cannot make the same boast 
about our art education as yet. It lags far bdhind our exploits 
in community art. Our problem is to improve our art in the 
schools so that future generations will grow up with a sensitiv¬ 
ity to beauty and good design. Then our people will not only 
be conscious of the fine arts but also of the useful arts. 

The question of what can be done in the future, to improve 
our art education, is discussed in the following chapter. 







. 



















ayl‘1 '"i 


CHAPTER V 


SUGGESTIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT 

This chapter proceeds on the following assumptions, 
which are regarded as valid in terms of preceding chapters 

(a) That art is an inseparable aspect of normal 
living for every human being. 

(b) That today in the world at large the gulf between 
art and life is too wide. 

Cc) That art education can do a great deal towards 
narrowing this gulf. 

(d) That the programme of art in Alberta is at 
present inadequate for the task and can be greatly im¬ 
proved. 

The first consideration of anyone interested in a 
subject-matter field is the amount of time allotted to the 
particular subject. Besides the Integrated Program which 
includes specifically social studies, elementary science, 
and health education, we have the following subjects lis¬ 
ted In the programme of studies; reading, language, 
writing, arithmetic, physical education, music and art. 

The more academic or r, skill-subjects" such as reading, 
language and arithmetic will likely receive more emphasis 
than subjects such as physical education, music and art. 
However there is nothing officially laid down regarding 


. 

■ 

. 

. 

< 









• . 1 


* 


. 






, * . 


' 




* 





















81 


the amount of time adequate for each. This makes for flexi¬ 
bility in the many different school situations but at the 
same time it has the effect of allowing the teacher to fit 
in certain subjects whenever time is found. Certainly it 
is very seldom that the reading, language and arithmetic 
are neglected from a point of view of time. But the same 
cannot always be said of physical education,' music and art. 
According to their interests and abilities, and often 
merely to their whims, some teachers ignore almost entirely 
some of the latter group of subjects. No scientific survey 
of the time spent on art in the ungraded schools has been 
made, but schools where these conditions obtain are easily 
found. Indeed there are teachers who frankly admit that 
they treat art in this manner and more than this they are 
prepared to defend their actions. 

Their should be more direction given regarding the 
amount of time spent on the different subjects. Most good 
teachers do not need this but beginners and the more indif¬ 
ferent teachers would profit by some tangible suggestions 
as to time allotments. It is true that there is usually 
some art in connection with the Enterprise but this too is 
purely an arbitrary matter. 

In the Junior High School there is a serious neglect 
of art. At an age when art can do a great deal for the 
child there should be more provision for art opportunities. 



82 


At present it is conceivable that a student in the Junior 
High School might take only one art course and that in 
Grade VII. This might be, and sometimes is, the only 
course that he takes for the remainder of his school 
career. 

The regulations state that "Art is required either 
in Grade VII or Grade VIII." And in Grade IX, art is op¬ 
tional, being one of eight options. It is difficult to 
understand why music is taught in both Grade VII and VIII 
while art is limited to one grade, particularly when so 
many children receive music experiences and training 
extra-curricularly. It is agreed that music has a great 
deal to offer and there is no objection to its place in 
these grades but why the limitation on art? It might also 
be pointed out that many more children take music lessons 
extra-curricularly than take art. 

A more general objection in the Grade VII or Grade 
VIII Programme lies in the anphasis on the more scienti¬ 
fic or factual subjects to the neglect of the more liberal 
or broadening subjects. It is possible for a student in 
Grade VII to take a course with the following subjects 


included. 





83 


periods per week 


English 

3 

Social studies 

3 

Health & Phys.Ed. 

3-4 

Mathematic s 

3 

General Science 

3 

Music 

2 

Typewrit ing 

2-3 


Total 23 - 27 periods 

Of the 23-27 periods in the school week only seven of 
these courses are taught either all or in part as a skill 
Health and physical education can be placed at the centre 
of the scale and general science, mathematics and type¬ 
writing tend towards the factual side in that order* 

To go farther in this regard, art should be more of¬ 
ten taken by High School students* A short digression at 
this point will illustrate one reason why this is desira¬ 
ble. 

There has been talk of instituting a 3.Ed. degree in 
Art Education and this would be a highly commendable step. 
However, at present there is no great demand for art 
teachers. The province of Ontario was in the same position 
a few years ago. They established a training course for 
teachers of art but found when these people graduated that 
there were no jobs for them. After this experience the 
authorities agreed that they must approach the problem in 
another way. It was suggested that if art were made a 







■ 

■ 

. 
















' 




■ 

* ■I-O 








' 












’ 






. 

' 



















84 


compulsory subject in the requirements for University en¬ 
trance the number of students taking art would increase and 
consequently more specialists in art would have jobs. It 
is probable that this same approach to the situation here 
in Alberta would be the best. The number of students tak¬ 
ing art should be increased and the demand for specialists 
in art education would be great enough to warrant the es¬ 
tablishment of a B.Ed. in Art or some similar program. In 
other words there must be a demand before the supply can 
be trained and brought forth. 

The best method of increasing the enrolment in art 
is either to make it compulsory or else make it a require¬ 
ment for eertain university faculties. At present art is 
not required by any faculty for entrance. N@ith.er is art 
acceptable in lieu of any of the Grade XII courses because 
there is no Art III course that could be equated with 
Music III or other Grade XII courses. At one time the 
Faculty of Education required Art I or Music I as a 
course for entrance but it is doubtful if this regula¬ 
tion was ever enforced and it is no longer in the calendar. 

Over the past two years many students in the Faculty 
of Education were questioned as to whether Art I or Art II 
was included in their High School programmes. It was found 
that 42% had no High School art whatsoever, 57% had taken 










■ 


. 

. 

< 

' 

. 






• . 


JL 


. 






































■ 


. 


. 


85 


Art I and 1% had taken Art II. 

These results are not very encouraging and point up 
the need for some action. 

If it is not possible at this time to have an Art III 
course which could be presented as a Grade XII subject for 
entrance to sane faculties, perhaps it would be possible 
to ask students to include Art I and II in their programs 
if they are planning to enter certain faculties. The 
Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Science in Household Econo¬ 
mics, Bachelor of Education in Household Economics and 
Bachelor of Education in Industrial Arts would all profit 
by having high school graduates present a programme which 
included art. Perhaps Art I and/or Art II should be re¬ 
quired for entrance to the above degree programmes as 
soon as it is feasible to do so. 

Probably the one important argument against the above 
recommendations, is that the art courses in our high 
schools today are not always worthy enough to be included 
as entrance requirements. But this objection can be 
levelled against many courses and we cannot consider art 
as any different. Also, probably the fact that art is 

280 students were questioned in this investigation 
during the 1949-1950 and the 1950-1951 terms, at the 
University of Alberta. 



* 


... 

' 

•• 

■ 

. 

■ 

. 





- 

4 















. 

. 


86 


considered a relatively easy course (or one lacking a 
great deal of content), hampers it from gaining the res¬ 
pectability of chemistry or latin. If this is true then 
the art educator job is indeed a difficult one. 

To begin now to study the possibilities of including 
art among University requirements would be to set the 
ground work for action when the proper time arrives. Art 
will never play its deserved role in Canadian life if we 
are to ignore it in the field of Higher Education. We 
must think of education as well as training, not only in 
the High Schools, but also in the Universities. 

Here the prospective University student has been 
considered but that is not because the large majority 
of high school students have been forgotten. Art can 
play a larger part in their programmes; either by making 
it a compulsory course up to a higher level or by attemp¬ 
ting to attract more into the field. This latter approach 
is important and the problems involved are not simple. 
Better courses; better art teachers - these are points at 
which to aim. 

Along with an increased enrolment of students taking 
the art courses in High School there should be a recogni¬ 
tion on the part of school authorities that the art lesson 
is different from that of other subjects, and therefore 
requires more time per lesson, it should be made possible 


. : 


■ 










. 



. 

. 

| - 

. 


87 


to break away from the one-period idea and make the art 
period longer by doubling up. This is sometimes difficult 
to do administratively, but certainly some effort should 
be made to lengthen the period so as to give the class 
sufficient time to employ techniques which could not be 
properly used in the strict confines of the average High 
school period. Also administrators should recognize the 
fact that art cannot be effectively taught in any grade 
where the number of pupils exceed 20 or at the most 2j?. 
This is particularly true of the High School Art courses, 
which however are usually not as crowded as those in the 
Junior High school. 

Programmes of Studies 

Mention has been made of the Programmes of study and 
the recent Bulletin Ill has been praised as a forward 
step, with some reservations. The next thing that must 
be done is to rewrite the Programmes for the Junior High 
school and also for Art I and Art II. This should be done 
in a thoroughgoing manner. There should be a great deal 
of thou^it put into these programmes and they should re¬ 
present the best thinking in art education today. There 
are many points at which these present programmes are 
inadequate, une of the most important aspects which must 
be iUlly investigated is that of appreciation. Alberta 






- 

< 




* 




. 





























- 








* 











■ 












88 


has never had a very good art appreciation section in her 
programmes. Some research might be in order to determine 
what type of paintings appeal to children and further what 
types of painting they should be acquainted with. In the 
past the appreciation part of the course has been confined 
to a very narrow concept. 

When the new course Is written there must be a 
broader approach to art advocated; in line with recent 
developments. There must be a recognition of the fact 
that art experiences are as wide and as varied as life 
itself and are not confined strictly to expression in 
two-dimensional media. 

As in Bulletin III there should be a sound philoso¬ 
phy of art stated in order to strengthen the convictions 
of those who believe in the present-day approach and to 
convert if possible those who do not subscribe to this 
approach. The writer believes that there should be many 
illustrations in a booklet of this sort in order to show 
teachers examples of good child art. 

Supplies and Equipment 

Another area where great improvement can be effected 
is in the matter of supplies. Divisional offices have 
been slow to recognize that art has changed in the last 
few years, and teachers are often without the proper 




♦ 

, 



8? 


materials with which to carry on an adequate art programme. 
The supplying of paper is not well planned. Drawing paper 
which is of little use in the painting class is often the 
only paper supplied, furthermore the paper is often too 
small. One can see teachers sticking two pieces of cart¬ 
ridge drawing paper together in order to get paper of an 
adequate size for painting. Large rolls of building 
paper and wrapping paper should be readily available in 
divisional offices. Often the materials dispensed are 
not only inappropriate but also are more expensive than 
is necessary. Newsprint is as cheap a paper as can be 
purchased and although it is flimsy it is very adaptable. 
This is one type of paper that all divisions should stock. 
As teachers make demands for proper materials it is likely 
that school divisions will make these materials available. 

Most of the difficulty arises out of the slowness of divi- 

as 

sions to realize that A art has changed, so also have the 
materials to be used. 

Training the Art Specialist 

A good art programme in the schools depends a great 
deal on the training given to the teachers. With the 
establishment of a fine Arts Department at the University 
in 1^46, more courses were made available for prospective 
art teachers. At present there are the following courses 










* 






. 

• 


. 

■ 






' 

* 

. 









J'V 





. 
















. 























, 












. 

: 
















90 


available.' 

.Education 132 - Elemoitary Composition 

Education 132 - Methods of Art T e aching 

Education 232 - History of Art (Primitive 

Art to Renaissance) 

Education 332 - Advanced Composition and 

Techniques 

Education 432 - History of Art (Renaissance 

to Modern) 

These courses are all very thorough and worthwhile 
to a prospective art teacher. There is a need however for 
a course in crafts to offset the emphasis on a strictly 
two-dimensional approach. A great deal of the work in art 
in the lower grades is done in three dimensional media 
(i.e. clay, construetion work, papier mache) . A course 
emphasizing design in materials to give teachers some 
experience in this aspect of art would be satisfactory. 

Some of this might be done within the methods course but 
since this course is only a half course there is very 
little time available. It must be remembered that even 
a student majoring in art might not have all of the listed 
courses. A major consists of three courses and consequently 
the student would lack a senior painting course and/or a 
History of Art. This would be a very lean course for a 
person intending to be a specialist in art. Therefore the 
question naturally arises as to the possibility of estab¬ 
lishing a special B.Ed. degree in Art in order to properly 
turn out competent art teachers. Perhaps as mentioned 



n 


before a B.Ed. in Art is neither possible nor practical 
at present. But it will be a necessity soon or art edu¬ 
cation will suffer greatly. 

Superintendents and Supervisors 

The teaching of creative art is sometimes referred 
to as a "selling job" and indeed this would seem partly 
true when one realizes the many barriers of thought and 
curtains of prejudice that must be brought down. This 
business of selling art to the public as well as to 
teachers is very important, for if the parents of chil¬ 
dren do not understand the modern approach there is 
danger of them counteracting the work of a good teacher. 
At present this danger i s often a real danger, and an 
answer must be found in order to allow art to progress 
more snoothly. Part of the answer lies in the appoint¬ 
ment of a Provincial Supervisor of Art and with this, 
supervisors of art in some of the larger school systems. 
At present there is no person in the Department of Edu¬ 
cation who can competently speak for art education. 

Before teachers and superintendents are fully convinced 
of the worth of art, it is necessary to have a person in 
high position and of some stature to speak with authority. 
Until there is a position such as this created art will 
not make the strides that it should. 







92 


An important step in 1^48 was the appointment of a 
full-time Supervisor of Art for the Edmonton City Schools. 
This was the first such position in Alberta and has greatly 
benefitted the teaching of Art in this city. This superin¬ 
tendent spends a great deal of his time in city classrooms 
but he also talks frequently to Home and School, and other 
groups in order to make known to the public just what is 
being done in art education today. The value of this type 
of work is great, as one can see by the added interest in 
art education and by the improved quality of the work. 

In yet another sphere better work might be done. In 
some school systems there are travelling art instructors 
who spend part time at different schools in the division. 
This is an excellent method of assuring that the pupils 
are receiving expert guidance. A teacher of this type 
even in analler school systems can spend a great deal of 
time perfecting his techniques and adding to his know¬ 
ledge and therefore is in a sense a specialist. This pro¬ 
cedure should be more widely adopted for the sake of good 
teaching in art. 

It is one thing to train teachers and supervisors 
of art and to keep them abreast of new developments; but 
it is another thing entirely, to similarly inform and en¬ 
lighten superintendents and other administrators. There 
are few superintendents who are former Art teachers. 



93 


Indeed it is too often the case that superintendents are 
appointed largely from the mathematics and science teach¬ 
ers. In our world of speed and efficiency we are almost 
compelled to consider matters in this way. Consequently 
the sciences receive better supervision as is the case 
with all the skill subjects. The subjects that are more 
specialized which have no special supervisors and few 
superintendents who fully understand them, lose out 
through a certain amount of indifference. In this way 
art suffers a good deal. One way of improving the situ¬ 
ation might be to have supervisors take general courses 
in the philosophy behind certain specialized subjects 
such as art. This would give these men more confidence 
in their work and would increase their effectiveness. 

It must be acknowledged however that there are many grown¬ 
ups today who have not had their creative and apprecia¬ 
tive faculties sufficiently developed, and no amount of 
training or experience would instill the proper outlook 
in these people. All art can ask is that a fair share of 
the school superintendents be individuals who are^sensi¬ 
tive to the arts in order that these subjects receive 


their due 



94 


Pleasant and Practical surroundings 

Buildings and equipment should never be overrated 
as one of the factors in a good educational system. In 
the final analysis it is the teacher who is the greatest 
single factor. But at the same time it is generally 
recognized that pleasant surroundings are very desirable 
and should be one of the aims of modern education. Plea¬ 
sant surroundings does not always have to mean modern 
buildings. A country school can be so fixed up by an 
enterprising and imaginative teacher that it is a pleasure 
to work in. More stress should be laid on this factor in 
teacher-training institutions and by superintendents. The 
children of course shculd take part in decorating the 
school and the teacher would aerve as a person of mature 
taste who would guide and direct. Too often one sees 
schools lacking good taste in the general decor of the 
interior; too many pictures or not enough, dull colours 
and ugly colours, stereo-typed border designs and areas 
of plain wall space. Teachers should change the exhibits 
of children 1 s work frequently. Act work from other years 
should never be left on the walls for a new class to con¬ 
template. The picture level where possible should be low 
enough for children to see. Good colour prints of Cana¬ 
dian Art, Traditional Art and Modern Art should be made 












. 

. 

. 






. 

■ 

. 

* 





95 


available for the teachers at low cost. At present teach¬ 
ers can buy silk screen reproductions of Canadian works, 
which are of ample size, for #4.00 apiece. Things such 
as these would be much preferable to the dark and gloomy 
prints by Millet, Landseer, cainsborough and others that 
cost so much and offer so little in real aesthetic 
pleasure. 

In the newer school plants being built there should 
be provision made - whether immediate use, as such, is 
to be made of it or not - for an arts and crafts room. 

This room should not be built in the traditional sense 
with rows of easel desks and cupboards for still-life 
objects. An art room to be of most value in today T s 
schools must have provision for doing lab. work. There 
must be large sinks and hot and cold running water 
available. Tables should be provided on which a pupil 
can do reasonably heavy work. An art room should have 
sufficient tools to carry out minor carpentry projects. 
Facilities should be extended so that work in clay can 
be readily carried out. It would be ideal indeed if 
all the newer High Schools could include a kiln and 
potter’s wheel among their equipment. The changes sug¬ 
gested above are not all-inclusive. They represent some 
very necessary changes however. It is of course assumed 
that there will be available space for storage both for 




JLl'Ui 

. 



. 



x 






' ;= 


- 








' 

• 








. . - 

* 

. ' 







v 



96 


teacher’s and pupils 1 equipment. Also that there will be 
adequate display space for appreciation lessons and exhi¬ 
bits. 

The best manner of looking at paintings is by means 
of a lantern and slides but at present in our schools we 
are far from using such expensive equipment. Too long 
however we have compelled students to look at compositions 
by the old masters in tones of brown. This manner of 
showing prints has many obvious disadvantages and unless 
schools are willing to lay out some funds for large colour 
prints or for lanterns and slides, the appreciation of 
paintings in our schools will be taught in this entirely 
ineffectual manner. The use of lantern and slides means 
of course that the art room must be equipped that the 
light can be shut out completely for these periods. 

Generally there must be more thought put into the 
design and construction of a room for art. No longer 
should it be merely another room with a north lighting 
as its only recommendation as a room for art activities. 

These recommendations will have little immediate 
effect on the necessary reintegration of art and society. 
However, It is doubtful if this reintegration can be 
achieved in any other way outside of education, it does 
not lie, the writer feels, in mere government aid to the 
arts. It will not likely come if we are to depend on the 


- 





. 

' 

- 

* 

. 



■ 




, 








. 










■ 



. 

. 







97 


industrial and business world as 20th century Medici. 
These areas have been probed and there is no example in 
recent history to indicate that the answer is there. If 
however, all people are exposed to art as a lively and 
vital force at the most formative stage of their lives, 
it may be that we will as a nation become more sensitive 
to aesthetic values, more aware of the unity of life and 
environment and more creative in all our activities. We 
must ha?;ever, make sure that our approach is sound, we 
must study our past and apply the lessons learned to the 
future. We must be sure that we do have art education 
in our schools not merely art training - only when we 
are sure can we expect our country to be a complete and 
balanced society. And that is perhaps all one can ask - 
that we have a balanced society. Art education is not 
a cure-all for the world ! s ills, but it can restore the 
world to a more even balance, and that today is what is 
needed more than anything else. 














c 


' r 
















■ ■ - 

. 


' 

. i ,•, 2, a :t 











BIBLIOGRAPHY 



99 


BOOKS 


Adam, L. Primitive Art * Harmondsworth, Penguin Books, 

1949. 271 p. 

Alschuler, R. H. & Hattwick, L. B. W. Painting and 

Personal!ty * Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press, 1947. 

Barnes Foundation. Art and Education . (Dewey, et al. ) 
Menon, Pa., Barnes Foundation, 1929. 349 p. 

Barton, J. E. Purpose and Admiration . London, 

Christophers, 1933. 278 p. 

Bell, Clive. Art . New York, Stokes, 1913. 

Benedict, Ruth. Patterns of Culture . New York, Mentor 
Books, 1949. 272 p. 

Blake, Vernon. Relation in Art . London, Oxford 
University Press, 1925. 

Boas, Belle. Art in the Schools. Garden City, Doubleday, 
1926. 

Bowen, H. C. Froebel and Education thru Self"Activity . 

New York, Charles Scribner*s Sons, 1892. 209 p. 

Bruun, G. Europe in Evolution. Cambridge, Mass., 

Houghton Mifflin, 1945. 533 p. 

Butts, R. F. A Cultural History of Education. New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 1947. p.276. 

Cheney, Sheldon. A World History of Art. New York, Viking, 
1944. 

The Story of Modem Art . New York, Viking, 1942. 
Primer of Modern Art . New York, Boni, 1924. 

Cole. Arts in the Classroom. . New York, John Day, 1940. 

Ctilingwood, R. G. Principles of Art . London, Oxford 
University Press, 1938. 

Commission on Secondary School Education. Visual Arts in 
General Education. New York, D. Appleton- 
Gentury Co., 1940. 166 p. 




























100 

D'Amico. Creative Teaching in Art . Scranton, Penn*, 
International Text Book Co., 1942. 261 p. 

Dewey, John. Art as Experience . New York, Minton 
Balch & Co., 1934. 350 p. 

Dewey, John. Democracy and Education . New York, 

Macmillan Co., 19l6. 

Dorner, A. The Way Beyond Art. New York, Witten Dorn, 

1927. 

Dow, A. Composition . Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday, 1928. 

Edman, I. Arts and the Man . New York, Mentor Books, 1949, 
144 p. 

Eliot, T. S. Notes Towards a Definition of Culture . 

New York, Hareourt-3race & Co., 1949. 12Q p. 

Evans, J. Taste and Temperament . London, J. Cape, 1939. 

Faulkner, R., Ziegfeld, E., Hill, G. Art Today. New 
York, Holt, 1941© 

Faure, Elie. History of Art . 5 vols. New York, Harper 
Bros . ,~'1924.’ 

Fletcher, S. S. F. and Weiton, J. Froebels Chief Writings 

on Education . London, Edward Arnold, n.d. 246 p. 

Froebel, F. Education of Man . International Education 
Series, Vol. V. Edited by W. T. Harris, n.p., 
n.d., p. 340. 

Fry, Roger. Vison and Design. London, Chatto and Windus, 

1928. 

Fuller, B. A. C. History of Philosophy . New York, Holt, 
1945. 560 p. 

Gaitskell, C. D. Art Education in the Province of Ontario , 
1948. Toronto, Ryerson Press. 49 p. 

Gardner, Helen. Art Through the Ages . N. Y. Hareourt- 
Brace, 1936. 

Gibbs, E. The Teaching of Art in the Schools . N. Y. 
Greenberg, 1941. 






















1 




* * ■ ■ « 




■t 




1 









Gotshalk, D. W. Art and the Social Order * Chicago, 
University of Chicago Press, 1947. 253 p. 


101 


Groves , M. The Art of Colour and Design . New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 1941. 

Haddon, A. C. Evolution in Art . London, W. Scott Ltd., 
1895. 364 p. 

Haggerty, M. Art a Way of Life . Minneapolis, University 
of Minnesota Press, 1935. 

Kepes, G. Language of Vision . Chicago, Paul Theobald, 
1§447 2&8 p. 

Knight, E. W. Twenty Centuries of Education . Boston, 

Ginn & Co., 1940. 622 p. 

Laurie, S. S. John Amos Comenius . Cambridge University 
Press'7"T904 • 27£ p. 

Lodge, R. C. Plato ! s Theory of Educatio n. London, Kegan 
Doul, French, Trubner & Co. Ltd., 1947. 322 p. 

Lowenfeld, V. Creative and Mental Growth . New York, 
Macmillan, 1947. 304 p. 

MacDonald, Rosabelle. Art as Education. New York, Holt, 

1941. 

McColl, D. S. What is Art ? Harmondsworth, Eng., Penguin 
Books, 1940. 278 p. 

Meier, N. C. Art in Human Affairs. New York, McGraw-Hill, 

1942. £22 p. 

Moholy-Nagy, L. The New Vision* New York, Wittenborn, 
1946. 

National Society for the Study of Education. Art in 

American Life and Education . Fortieth Yearbook, 
Bloomington Illinois, Public School Publishing 
Co., 1941. 819 p. 

Newton, Eric. European Painting and Sculpture . 

Harmondsworth, England, Penguin Books, 1950. 

171 p. 





















* 











102 


Newton, Eric* The Meaning of Beauty * London, Longmans, 

1950* Sbo p. 

Nicholas, F. W., Mawhood, N* C* and Trilling, M.B. Art 
Activities in the Modem School . New York, 
Macmillan, I§3Y7 

Oldham, H. W. Child Expression in Colour and Fomu 

London, John Lone the Bodley Head, 1940. 156 p 0 

Parker, DeWitt. Analysis of Art * New Haven, Yale 
University Press, 1926. 190 p. 

Payant, Felix. Our Changing Art Education * Columbus, 

Keramic Studio Publishing Co *, n«d. 84 p. 

Payant, Felix. Create Something s Columbus, Design 
Publishing Co., 1939. 

Pearson, R. M. The New Art Education. New York, Harper, 
1941. 256 p. 

Plato. Republic. Trans. B. Jowett, London, Clarendon, 

1888“ 

Read, Herbert. Art and Society. Gt. Britain, Pantheon, 

1945. 152 p. 

Read, Herbert. Art Now . New York, Hareourt-Brace, 1933® 

Read, Herbert. Education Through Art . London, Faber & 
Faber, 1943. 320 p. 

Read, Herbert. Grass Roots of Art. New York, Wittenborn 
& Co., 1^46• 

Read, Herbert. Ihe Meaning of Art . Harmondsworth, Eng., 
Penguin Books. 

Rewald, John. The History of Impressionism . New York, 

Simon Schuster, 1946. 

Rusk, W. S. Methods of Teaching the Fine Arts . Chapel 

Hill, University of North Carolina Press, 1935. 

Strickier, F. An Approach to Art Education . New York, 

A. G. Seiler, Distributor, 1941. 

Tannohill, S. B. Fine Arts For Public School Admlnistrators » 
New YorkT Eureau of Publications, Teachers * 

College, Columbia University, 1932. 145 p. 




















103 


Tomlinson, R. R. Children As Artists . London, Ring 
Penguins, 1947# 42 p. 

Tomlinson, R. R. Picture-Making By Children. London, 
Studio, 1934. IS O p • 

Upjohn, E. M., Wingert, P. S., Mahler, J. G. History 
of World Art , New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1949. 560 p. 

Viola, Wilhelm. Child Art and Franz Clzek . Austria, 
Frederick Jasper, 1937. 

Waddington, C. H. The Scientific Attitude . West 
Drayton Eng., Penguins, 1948. 172 p. 

Weston, W. P. A Teacher*s Manual of Drawing . Toronto, 
Thos. Nelson & Sons. n.d. 168 p. 

Whitford. An Introduction to Art Education. 

Wilenski. Modern Movement in Art. New York, Stokes, 

19277 ----— 

Winslow, L. L. Art in Elementary Education . New York, 
McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1942. 295 p. 

Winslow, L. L. The Integrated School Arts Program . 

New York, McGraw-Hill, 1939. 391~pT. ‘ 

Ziegfeld, E., and Smith, M. Art for Daily Living . 

Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 
1944 c 


ARTICLES 


Gayfer, Margaret. "Fun - But Is It Art?" Toronto Star 
Weekly (March 10, 1951). p. 12. 

Jackson, A. Y. "Arthur Lismer - His Contribution to 

Canadian Art." Canadian Art , (Spring 1950)« 
p. 89. 


Jarvis, L. "Notes from a Benighted Mari timer." 

Canadian Art (Summer 1947). p. 162. 

























% 



















t 






. 








i ;X 


CM 


«. * 

l 


















104 


Lismer, A. "What is Child Art?" Canadian Art , (Spring- 
Summer 1948) p. 178. 

McCullough, N. "Child Art in Canada." Canadian Art , 
(Spring-Summer 1948). p. 173. 

McCullough, N. "The Art Centre - A Flourishing Plant." 
Canadian Art , (December 1946). p. 27. 

Parkin, J. W. "A New Kind of Summer School for Teachers." 
Canadian Art , (Autumn 1949). p. 15. 

Pinneo, P. "High School Students Design Textiles." 
Canadian Art , (Autumn 1948). p. 19. 

Snell, B. "Art - The Cinderella of the School 

Curriculum." Canadian Art, (Mar.-April 1946). 
p. 125. 

Taylor, F. "Art and the Dignity of Man." Atlantic 
Monthly , (December 1948). 

Tillyard, E. M. W. Letter to Canadian Art. (Spring 
1949). p. 139. 

Zachry, C. B. "The Role of Mental Hygiene in the Arts." 
Art Education Today . New York, Teachers 
College, Columbia University, 1940. 

Zettlyn, Enid. "Child Art in Great Britain." School 
Progress , (1947). 


REPORTS AND OTHER PUBLICATIONS 


Annual Report, Department of Education, Province of 
Alberta, 1906-1950 incl. 

Art Education, Ministry of Education Pamphlet, No. 6, 
London, His Majesty's Stationery Office, 
1946. 56 p. 

Art Education Today - 1936, 1937, 1941, 1948, 1949, 
1950. New York, Bureau of Publications, 
Teachers College, Columbia University. 



















105 


Bulletin I, Foundations of Education, Department of 
Education, Province of Alberta, 1949* 


Bulletin II, Elementary School, Department of Education, 
Province of Alberta, 1949. 31 p. 

Bulletin III, Art and Writing, Department of Education, 
Province of Alberta, 1950. 

Programme of Studies for Elementary School, Department 
of Education, Province of Alberta, 1927. 

Programme of Studies for Elementary School, Department 
of Education, Province of Alberta, 1936. 

Programme of Studies for Intermediate School, Department 
of Education, Province of Alberta, 1936. 
(reissued 1941). 

Programme of Studies for High School, Bulletin 7, 

Department of Education, Province of Alberta, 
1946. 


Programme of Studies for Junior High School, Department 
of Education, Province of Alberta, 1950. 

Senior High School Regulations, Department of Education, 
Province of Alberta, 1949-50. 

Senior High School Regulations, Department of Education, 
Province of Alberta, 1950-51. 


MISCELLANEOUS 


"Answering Questions About Child Art." Canadian Art , 
(Summer 1949). p. 175. 

"Art Teachers Organize." Canadian Art , (May 1947). 

p. 128. 

"Canadian Art Schools." Canadian Art , (Summer 1947). 

p. 180. 

Museum of Modem Art. Conference on Art Education . 

Museum of Modem Art, New York, July, 1950. 











t. 





























