
Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton. AlWfo 


Atkinson, N.H. 

Carbonizing and briquetting. 1923, 


































UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF APPLIED SCIENCE 


We, the undersigned, hereby certify that w© 
have read the within thesis, entitled ’’CARBONIZING 
& BRIQUETTING”, submitted by Mr, N. H. Atkinson, B.Sc., 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the 
degree of M.Sc. in Applied Science, and w© hereby 
recommend its acceptance* 


Edmonton, Alberta, 
April 30, 1923* 


( 



( Professor of Mining Engineering 

( 

( 

( 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/atkinson1923 


TABLE OF CONTE MTS 


Page 


GENERAL REVIEW 


INTRODUCTION. ... 1 

MARKETS FOR WESTERN COAL... 1 

PROPOSED METHODS OF IMPROVING HOLD OF WESTERN COALS 

ON THEIR MARKET.. 3 

For the Souris Lignite... 4 

For Alberta Coals... 5 

CARBONIZATION. ...... . 6 

Definition... 6 

Reasons for Carbonizing... 7 

General Types of Retorts... 9 

Status of the Industry In England............... 10 

Status of the Industry In The United States..... 11 

BRIQUETTING. ........ 15 

Introduction... 15 

Characteristics of Good Briquets................ 17 

Binders Used. .................. 20 

Cost Consideration... 23 

Quality & Quantity of Binder.................... 23 

EXPERIMENTAL 

INTRODUCTION... ..................... 25 

CARBONIZATION... 26 

Description of Carboniz©r....................... 26 

Technical Details of Treatment.................. 29 

Procedure....................................... 30 

Table of Results... 31 

Discussion of Table............................. 31 

BRIQUETTING. 33 

Outline of Tests................................ 33 

Description of Equipment & Method of Making 

Briquets................ 33 

Methods of Testing Briquets................. 36 

Coals Used..,..,......, . 39 

Binders Used.. 39 

Results of Briquetting Tests.................... 40 

Effect of Pressure.... 40 

Effect of Sizing of Coal Used........,..,.,, 41 

Effect of Varying Moisture.................. 41 

Effect of Time of Mixing.................... 43 

Results Obtained With Different Binders,..,, 44 













































(ii) 

Pag* 

(EXPERIMENTAL) 

(BRIQUETTING) 

(Results of Briquetting Tests) 

(Results Obtained With Different Binders) 

Soft Coal Tar Pitch.......... 44 

Hard Coal Tar Pitch... 45 

West Canadian Collieries Asphalt......... 45 

Fort McMurray Asphalt.. 45 

Imperial Briquetting Binder. 46 

Synthetic Binders.... 46 

Tabulation of Softening Points of Binders 

Employed. .. 46 

Difficulty Caused by Adherence to Plunger 4? 

Viscosity Determinations................. 47 

Effect of Varying Amount of Binder........... 48 

Aging of Mixture... 50 

Weathering Tests..... 52 

Fire Tests.. 52 

Summary of Experimental Work On Briquetting.. 54 

CONCLUSIONS......... 55 

BIBLIOGRAPHY- ............ 56 

APPENDIX: THE BIENFAIT CARBONIZING & BRIQUETTING 

PLANT OF THE LIGNITE UTILIZATION BOARD OF CANADA. 59 

Introduction....^... 59 

Description of Plant.. 60 

Technical Details of Treatment................... 66 

Difficulties Encountered.... 67 

Future Prospects.......................... 70 
































CARBONIZING & BRIQUETTING 


b y 


N. H. ATKINSON, B, Sc, 


University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta 


1922 — 1923 





- 1 - 


CARBONIZING & BRIQUETTING 


GENERAL REVIEW 


Introduction *- 

In the following sections, a survey is made of the 
Canadian coal situation, with a view towards determining the 
need for carbonizing and briquetting, especially for the coals 
of Western Canada. This is followed by a discussion of a 
number of possible ways of improving the market for the Sas- 
katchewan and Alberta coals. Finally, a review is made of 
the present position of the arts of carbonizing and briquetting 
in Canada and elsewhere. 

Markets for Western Coal .- 

Though Nature has treated our Dominion very bountifully 
in the matter of quantity of coal, yet she has been rather 
unkind in her distribution of it. Of our resources, which 
comprise 1of the world’s total supply, 6$ is found in 
British Columbia, 87# in Alberta, 5# in Saskatchewan, and 
1# in the Maritime Provinces. The two densely settled pro¬ 
vinces of Ontario and Quebec, containing by far the largest 
share of our coal-consuming industries, have practically no 




















■ 





' 























- 












■ 









' 






■ 

















- 









2 


coal. This district is dependent on fuel imported from a 
neighbor, hitherto always very benevolent and generous in this 
regard, but still none the less foreign. Maritime coal, almost 
all of which comes from northern Nova Scotia, may be considered 
to have as its logical market all of Canada east of Montreal, 
Conceding to the American coal trade the rest of Quebec and 
Ontario, east of the Great Lakes, we of Alberta should be 
inclined to contest their right to the coal business of Northern 
Ontario, and to deny their right to the market west of Fort 
Francis. This Canadian territory should certainly be supplied 
from the immense Canadian coal stores of the provinces of 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. The Saskatchewan coal,being decidedly 
lignitic in character, requires up-grading in some manner to 
give it a chance in the competitive fight. Alberta, on the 
other hand, having practically unlimited quantities of coal, 
and of nearly every grade, is in a position to fill any require¬ 
ment of this market, provided that the transportation charges 
are sufficiently low to permit of delivering the product to 
the market at a reasonable price. Against our expensive mining 
costs and costly rail haul, th© Americans have to offer a coal, 
usually of higher grade, mined under almost perfect conditions, 
and blessed with that cheapest of all means of transportation, 
the water haul. During the last winter, American coal has been 
almost replaced on this market by Alberta coal, but this con¬ 
dition has been largely caused by the shortage resulting from 




















' ' : ■ 




t 




■ 


- 3 - 


the strike of the preceding summer. This is only a temporary 
condition which will not prevail in future years. 

To the west of us, Northern British Columbia offers 
a good market for Alberta coal, and one which will probably 
increase in years to come, as this country becomes more settled. 
Prince Rupert, the western terminus of the Grand Trunk Pacific 
Railway, should afford an excellent bunkering trade. The 
south-western part of British Columbia is, and probably will be 
for years to come, supplied from the coalfields of Vancouver 
Island and the Nicola area. 

Proposed Methods of Improving Hold Of Western Coals On Their 

Market.- 

During the last couple of months a great deal of interest 
has been aroused among the Boards of Trade and other organizations 
of our Alberta cities in regard to widening the market for our 
coals. This has culminated in the shipping of a number of cars 
of coal from the province to eastern Ontario for trial. 

The accomplishment of such an object as this requires, 
however, more than the unguided enthusiasm of those citizens 
who would like to see the coal business prosperous because they 
feel sure that such prosperity would be reflected in their own 
affairs. Fortunately the question has, for a number of years 
past, been given the earnest consideration of those men, in¬ 
cluding the staff of the Mines Branch and Lignite Utilization 







. 

- 























. 




' 








- 4 - 


Board of Canada, and the Scientific & Industrial Research 
Council of Alberta, who are best fitted to analyze the situ¬ 
ation. Accordingly suggestions as to ways and means of improv¬ 
ing Canada's position from the fuel standpoint are available 
in a number of publications which should prove of great value 
at this juncture. 

Among the matters which have been considered are the 
following:- 

F or the Souris Lignite .- 

1. CARBONIZING & BRIQUETTING.~ This is discussed 
fully further on, and so it will be sufficient to say here 
that this process promises to give an excellent product which 
can be sold at a good competitive figure. 

2. POWDERED FUEL.- The combustion of these lignites 
as powdered fuel offers possibilities for the future rather 
than the present. Before its extensive use could be assured, 
a campaign of conversion would have to be carried on among 
the coal users, their heating plants would have to be altered 
to adapt them to the process, and distributing systems would 
have to be inaugurated. Burning carbonized lignite briquets 
in the present heating plants seems to offer the better solu¬ 
tion for the present. 

3. SPECIAL TYPES OF STOVES.- While in southern 
Saskatchewan during the past winter, the writer observed a 
type of heater which had just recently been introduced into 












R 




















■ 






































the district. It was very similar to the so-called "base-burner 
of Ontario, having a vertical, cylindrical hopper in the center 
which 4 b discharged anto a grate shaped like the frustum of a 
flat cone. Very satisfactory results were claimed for it. 

Stoves and furnaces of special design might, for towns in close 
proximity to the coal field, prove to be the most economical 
solution of the problem, 'i’he 33$ moisture content on which 
freight would have to be paid militates against this as a 
means of winning markets at any considerable distance from 
the fields. 

For Alberta Coals .- 

The factor which is of paramount importance in 
determining the ultimate cost of Alberta coal in the eastern 
market is, of course, the cost of transportation. To this is 
chargeable 50 to 70$ of the price on the Winnipeg market, and 
for points further east the percentage would increase. Thus 
it will be seen that it is very necessary to induce the rail" 3 
roads to give as favorable a rate as they possibly can on 
these shipments. 

After gaining entry into new markets, consideration 
has to be given to a number of other factors if these markets 
are to be retained. Among the problems which, for the last 
three years, have engaged the attention of the fuel engineers 
investigating under the supervision of the Scientific & Indus¬ 
trial Research Council of Alberta, the following might be 





' 



























































. 





























- 6 - 


mentioned: 

STANDARDIZATION OF SIZES.- Standardization of the 
sizes which are designated by the different terms current 
in the industry. The lack of this has, in the past, engen¬ 
dered a considerable amount of antipathy towards Alberta coals 
on the part of eastern dealers. 

STD RAGE.- The determination of the action of the 
various grades of coal under different storage conditions. 

FIRING TESTS.- The determination of the best means 
of firing Alberta coals in standard types of furnaces. 

BRIQUETTING.- The briquetting of the slack produced 
in mining operations. 

Detailed information regarding the results obtained 
is available in the Annual Reports of the Scientific & 
Industrial Research Council of Alberta. 

Carbonization . - 

Definition .- Carbonization is the production, by 
heating coal, of a fuel which is higher in carbon and lower 
in volatile matter, and usually higher in ash and calorific 
value and lower in moisture, than the original coal; and 
the production also of a number of by-products, such as gas, 
tar, oils, etc. The terms M carbonization' 1 and "distillation” 
are used more or less synonymously, according as the process 





- 7 - 


is viewed from the single product or multiple product aspect. 

In England, the idea conveyed by the term '‘carbonization" 
embraces not only low-temperature carbonization, having for 
its object the production of a smokeless fuel and the inci¬ 
dental by-products, but also the high-temperature production 
of metallurgical coke and town gas. The higher temperatures 
employed for the latter purposes are, in England, in the 
neighborhood of 1100°C., and, in the United States, 1250°C. 
to 1350°C. Low-tempere.ture carbonization includes all coal 
distillation effected at temperatures below about 900°C. 
Low-temperature operations only will be considered in this 
paper. 

Reasons For Carbonizing .- Dr. C. H. Lander, Assistant 
to the Director of the Fuel Research Board of England, and 
others, in a series of articles on low-temperature carboniz¬ 
ation appearing in the "Colliery Guardian" for April 21st and 
28th, 1922, gave a summary of the arguments in favor of low- 
temperature carbonization. These were substa.ntis.lly as follows 

1. The product gives a much higher radiant heat than 
the original higher-volatile cosls. This reduces losses of 
heat in flue gases, and would accordingly give better effi¬ 
ciency for evaporation tests under boilers. It would make a 
better domestic fuel than the original coal, and should command 
a higher price. 

2. The smoke nuisance would be abated. Any coal 




' 




. 














. 


















. 









- 8 - 

containing less than 12 % of volatile matter gives practically 
smokeless combustion; and,since carbonized coal is always below 
this limit, it has this feature of clean burning to recommend 
it. The importance of this point can hardly be overstressed, 
having in mind the smoky, foggy, atmospheric conditions which, 
by their prevalence in large cities and industrial districts, 
injure the health of the inhabitants. 

. 3* Numerous valuable by-products would be obtained. 

(a) Gas, varying in quantity and quality with the coal used 
and the method of heating retorts, would be obtained. With 
good bituminous coal, a gross quantity of approximately 3,500 
cu.ft. of 900 to 1,000 B.t.u. gas would be produced. If the 
retorts were heated by some other means, for instance by pro¬ 
ducer gas, then this rich gas would be available for enriching 
ordinary coal gas. Internally heated retorts would yield 
about 25,000 cu.ft. of gas at about 230 B.t.u. 

(b) Fuel oil of good quality would be available. This would 
permit of extensive use of the highly efficient Diesel engine. 

(c) A yield of light oils which could be used as motor 
spirit is given,in quantities varying with the different coals. 
Dr. Lander states that if the 80/fc of England’s total coal con¬ 
sumption which is at present burned in the raw state were put 
through a process of low temperature carbonization, then 
500,000,000 gallons of motor spirit could be recovered. This 






- 9 - 


amount is 2-g- times the amount annually imported at present. 

(d) Sulphate of ammonia, which is such a valuable fertilizing 
agent, could be recovered in large quantities. 

General Types of Retorts .- The retorts which have 
been built for low-temperature carbonization work fall into 
one of the three following classes:- 

1. That in which the coal is exposed in thin layers in a 
gas-tight chamber to the action of heat which is conducted 
through the walls of the chamber from the outside. The coal 
is undisturbed during the process. On account of the very low 
heat conductivity of coal, this method requires a long time 
for complete carbonization unless the material is in very thin 
layers. 

2. That method, similar to the above, except that the coal 
is stirred by mechanical paddles, by sliding down an incline, 
or by some other means. This modification of Class 1 increases 
the capacity of the retort, but introduces a number of mechani¬ 
cal difficulties, especially with coking coal. 

3. That in which the retort is heated internally by means 
of producer gas. This gas may be formed in the retort itself 
by the partial combustion of some of the charge, or may be made 
in an entirely separate producer. One important objection 

to this system is that large quantities of inert gases must be 
passed through the scrubbing train, thus increasing the cost 







. 










- 10 - 


of scrubbing. 

Status of the Industry in England .* At the present 
day no one is able to state definitely that it would be ad¬ 
vantageous to undertake to carbonize all coal consumed in 
England, though consideration of the idea ks been advocated 
by many. A great number of processes have been evolved by 
different investigators, many of which give very promising 
results. Quite recently a firm called "Low Temperature 
Carbonization, Ltd.," has been formed, and has taken over the 
rights to a number of carbonization methods with the intention 
of conducting operations on a considerable scale. 

The Fuel Research Board, in its experimental plant at 
East Greenwich, has been for some time conducting quanti¬ 
tative investigations to determine the possibilities and the 
limits for carbonizing the different grades of British coal. 
Members of this Board have estimated that 80/£ of the coal 
mined in the British Isles is burned in the raw state, and, 
further, if this were all subjected to low-temperature car¬ 
bonization, then 25,000,000 tons per annum less would have 
to be mined. In view of the limited coal supplies of the 
British Isles, this provides an excellent argument in favor 


of this process. 





- 11 


Status of the Industry in the United States .- Low- 
temperature carbonization has not attracted extended atten¬ 
tion in the United States until the last few years. This 
lack of interest may be ascribed to the fact of their pos¬ 
session of such extensive and varied coal resources. Two 
fruitful fields for coal treatment do exist, however; and in 
these experimental work has been done during the last half 
decade. One of these is the alteration of the bituminous 
production into a smokeless fuel, and the other, the more 
efficient utilization of the western lignites. The former 
field, particularly, requires investigation on account of 
the rapid depletion of the Anthracite deposits. B.eliable 
estimates have placed a life of 80 years on these anthracite 
reserves. 

The process which has attracted most attention of 
late years is that of the Clinchfield Garbo coal Corporation. 
After extensive and lengthy experimentation in a plant at 
.Irvington, N.J., a plant with a capacity of 600 tons a day 
of finished product was erected at Clinchfield, Va. Those 
in charge of operations state that the process has been de¬ 
veloped to such a point that in its present form it is a 
commercial success. - 

The complete process has four main features:- 
(a) The coal is distilled at about 480®C. in a horizontal 
retort lined with carborundum shapes and having a cross-section 



























■ 
















. 










12 - 


of an inverted heart shape. The coal is stirred and advanced 
by two sets of revolving paddles. 

(b) The carbonized product from stage (a) is briquetted 

in roll presses, using for binder pitch obtained in the process. 

(c) The briquets are retorted at about 1,000°C. During 
this stage, all the binder except its free carbon content is 
driven off. 

(d) The recovery and refinement of the by-products from 
both distillations. 

Below are given comparative proximate analyses of the 
original coal and of the carbocoal produced} - 

Coal Carbocoal 


Moisture............... 0.72 1.84 

Volatile Matter. . 35*01 2.75 


Fixed Carbon........... 57*23 85*64 

Ash... ?.04 9*77 

Sulphur. 0.63 0.52 


A table showing the yields, per ton of coal, of by¬ 
products and carbocoal is given on the next page. 

The United States Federal Bureau of Mines and the 
State of North Dakota have co-operated in conducting research 
work on the lignites of North Dakota. These lignites adjoin 


those of the Souris area, which are discussed in the appendix 


to this thesis. The plant, which was located at Hebron, N.D., 
contained a number of different types of retorts for low 













' 

















































- 13 - 


TABLE SHOWING YIELDS PER TON (2,000 lbs.) OF COAL 
(35$ VOLATILE CONTENT) BY TWO STAGE DISTILLATION (CARBOCOAL PROCESS 


PRODUCTS 

UNITS 

GROSS YIELD 

NET YIELD 

Car bo coal.. 

pounds 

1,400 

1,400 

Dry tar. ... 

gallons 

30 


Light oils.... 

gallons 

—— 

3 

Oil distillates. 

gallons 

— 

15 

Pitch....... 

gallons 

12 


Ammonium sulphate.. 

pounds 

20 

20 

Gas, 650 to 750 B.t.u... 

cu.ft. 

5,000 

1,500 

Gas, 300 to 350 B.t.u... 

cu.ft. 

4,000 

1,000 

Total gas, 6000B.t.u.... 

j cu.ft. 

9,000 

2,500 


temperature carbonization and producer gas manufacture. 
The one which has given the most promise is an internally 
heated retort designa ted s i 


■&G//S 


s the Hood-Odell. 

-/fcyzper’ 

OdS o&f&Are 


//ooc? O& 
/^^rro/^ir 



&/<r- 





















































- 14 


The raw coal is charged in at the top through the 
two bells, as shown in sketch. This coal need not be closely 
sized, as lumps up to two inches are admissible. The coal, 
in its passage through the retort, is tumbled over the baffles 
shown. Control of the temperature in the retort is obtained 
by varying the speed of discharge in accordance with information 
given by pyrometers inserted into the retort at different 
points. 

One great objection to this type of retort is the extent 
to which the ash content of the residue is increased; since 
hero the percentage increases^Sto be attributed not only to the 
driving off of volatile matter and moisture, but also to the 
partial combustion of the coal. The gas given off is very much 
diluted by the products of combustion, thus reducing its calo¬ 
rific value and increasing the cost of the scrubbing, which 
only yields a fraction of the by-products obtainable from the 
externally-heated type of retort. 

On the other hand, the operation does not require the 
conduction of the carbonizing heat through a solid wall, which 
is the cause of much of the inefficiency and deterioration of 
the externally-heated type. The whole apparatus is of simple 
construction, and if one can start with a fairly low-ash coal 
and is willing to sacrifice the by-products, the retort may 
give an economical means of carbonization. 






















- 15 - 


Briquetting .- 

Introduction .- Coal, in the process of mining, trans¬ 
portation and handling, and on exposure to the weather, is 
subject to disintegration. The dust and fines thus formed amount, 
in some of the western Alberta bituminous coals, to as much as 
60/£ of the whole. If the coal happens to be of a coking type, 
this disintegration is not so serious, since the slack is in 
demand for coking plants, or, failing that, may be burned quite 
readily, with little loss, under boilers. For non-coking coals 
the situation is different, as there is not so much demand for 
the fines. Of late years a good deal of this slack has been 
burned on mechanical stokers, but even in this case it is 
purchased at a much lower price than that of the larger sizes. 

By forming this slack into briquets, the greatest pos¬ 
sible value for it is obtained. These briquets should sell at 
a price equal to or possibly even higher than that obtained for 
the lump coal from the same original coal. 

The term "briquet” is of French origin; the term "boulet” 
being used synonymously. Briquets are, in England, often spoken 
of as "patent fuel"; in Germany, as "kohlensteine”; and in 
America as "eggettes”, "coalettes”, "pressed fuel”, etc. 

Mashek credits the original making of briquets to the 
Chinese, who probably produced them by hand-moulding. Reference 
has been found to the manufacture of ”cole balls" in Germany 
in 1594, and about the same time Sir High Pratt published a 








- 16 - 


pamphlet suggesting the briquetting of coals. The first bri¬ 
quetting machines were used in France in 1842, in England in 
1846, in Germany in 1861, and in the United States in 1870. 

In Europe, the industry has had a continuous develop¬ 
ment, until today it has assumed quite large proportions. This 
is indicated by the table issued by the United States Geological 
Survey showing the world*s production of briquets. 


WORLD’S PRODUCTION OF FUEL BRIQUETS (IN METRIC IONS) 



19 2 0 

19 2 1 

Belgium. ..................... 

2,846,000 

2,646,000 

France............. 

2,058,000 

2,848,000 

Ge rmany: 



Coal.. ... 

4,972,000 

5,688,000 

Lignite................ 

24,282,000 

28,243,000 

TI n i +. &A TTin orl Am... 

2,474,000 




United States................ 

515,000 

362,000 

Canada: 



AT .... 

101,922 


Eastern Provinces...... 

20,393 



The high figure for the German lignite briquets is 
accounted for by the fact that their lignites may be briquetted 
without a binder. The lignites are crushed, dried, and finally 
pressed in plunger presses, giving pressures as high as 14 tons 


per soua 

























- 17 - 


per square inch. The coherence of the final briquet is partly 
caused by the partial melting of the paraffins and resins in 
the coal owing to the heat generated by the enormous pressure. 
These lignites are uniquely high in these paraffins and resins, 
some of them containing such large percentages as to give them 
coking qualities. 

The production of the United States has shown a steady 
increase for the last fifteen years, but even yet it is 
relatively small. 

All the Alberta production was from the C.P.R. plant 
at Bankhead. This plant is to be permanently closed in the 
near future. The output for Eastern Canada is chiefly from 
plants located at Toronto, briquetting the fines from the 
American anthracite caused by disintegration. 

Characteristics of Good Briquets .- 

COHERENCE.- The briquet must have sufficient 
coherence to be able to stand the treatment given it during 
transportation to the consumer. The best coherence test is 
made by tumbling the briquets in a large rotating iron cylinder. 
The French Naval test is made in a cylinder of 3& inches dia¬ 
meter, and 40 inches length, with a charge of 110 lbs. of 
briquets. The cylinder has three partitions radiating from 
its central axis. The briquets are left in the cylinder for 
two minutes at 25 revolutions per minute. The percentage 
retained on a screen with openings 1.12 inches square is the 




























. 












* ■ 












• ' 







. 











- 18 - 


"factor of cohesion". 

The degree of cohesion may be varied at will by varying 
the amount of pressure and of binder. In all commercial oper¬ 
ations the object is not to make the best possible briquet, 
but, rather, to make one at the lowest cost of manufacture 
which will give satisfactory service. Accordingly, ordinary 
briquets may be considered sufficiently coherent when the loss 
occasioned by dust and fines produced during delivery does not 
exceed $%• 

HARDNESS & TOUGHNESS.- If a briquet is made too hard, 
it will be also brittle; therefore it should only be made so 
hard as will suffice for the purpose to which the briquet is 
to be put. The binder used should be of such a nature that 
the briquet will not soften on the hottest day. 

DENSITY.- The apparent specific gravity gives a good 
indication of the quality of the briquet for any one coal and 
binder. A standard suggested by Dr. Mills, of the U. S. Geo¬ 
logical Survey, is that the briquet should be at least equal 
in density to the lump coal from which the slack was derived. 

SIZE & SHAPE.- The suitability of a briquet for a 
given purpose, and hence the extent of its use, depends largely 
on its size and shape. The large rectangular blocks frequently 
made in Europe give the maximum of storage in a given space. 

This has been estimated by the British Admiralty to be 20 % 
more than for lump coal. These large lumps are usually broken 



























. 

. 














. 



































- 19 - 


up before burning, and to facilitate this operation they are 
frequently grooved in pressing. This, of course, reduces the 
possible storage. Rounded edges give less breakage in handling. 
Ovoid briquets, or those of the overstuffed pillow shape, are 
most popular for small sizes. These give little loss on handling 
and give a good circulation of air through the fire. 

WEATHERING.- The briquet should stand long exposure to 
the weather with but little deterioration. If made with water¬ 
proof binders, such as the pitches, this quality is readily ob¬ 
tained. The lack of weathering qualities in the briquet is the 
great obstacle to the use of a large class of binders, such as 
starch and sulphite pitch, which otherwise give excellent results. 

ABSORPTION.- The briquet should not absorb more than 
y/o of moisture. 

BURNING QUALITIES.- 

(a) Readiness of Ignition.- This varies with the 
coal and with the binder, and with the shape and size of the 
briquet. Inorganic binders and high-ash or low-volatile coals 
would have retarded ignition. 

(b) Kind of Flame.- The briquet on ingition should 
give a clear, intense, flame, with little smoke or odor. Briquets 
made with inorganic binders or with such organic binders as starch 
or sulphite pitch fulfil these conditions. Those made with the 
pitches, which are the common binders, smoke and give off odors 

to a greater extent. 



















* 

. 











- 

. 
























. 

-• 















' 




. 




-- 






















- 20 


(c) Retention of Shape.- This quality is very 
important, since, if the briquet crumbles in the fire, the draft 
will be cut off, and one would be faced with just such diffi¬ 
culties as would be met in firing slack coal. If the coal has 
coking qualities, then the binder need only hold the coeiI to¬ 
gether until coking commences. For non-coking coals, the 
problem is more difficult. Fortunately almost all coals ha.ve 
a tendency to cake at fairly high temperatures. For those that 
do not, an inorganic binder would serve very well, except that 
it raises the ash content of the briquet. Some of the non-water- 
proof inorganic binders, such as starch and sulphite pitch, 
would also serve. 

EVAPORATION RESULTS.- Organic binders usually equal 
or exceed the coal in calorific value, and so the briquets have 
a slightly greater heat value than the original coal. Inorganic 
binders, on the ether hand, reduce the calorific value. With 
briquets, more'uniform heating conditions are obtained in a 
fire than with raw coal. This gives better evaporation effi- 
ciencies. 

Binders Used .- The following summary, from a bulletin 
of the U. S. Geological Survey, gives briefly the qualities 
desired in a binder:- 

1. It must be sufficiently cheap to make the manufacture 


of briquets profitable. 


















. 




. 









* 





















' 





- 21 


2. It must bind strongly, producing a briquet suf¬ 
ficiently hard, but not too brittle. 

3» It must hold the briquet together satisfactorily 
in the fire. 

4. It must produce a briquet sufficiently waterproof 
to stand the conditions of use. 

5. It should not cause smoke or foul-smelling or 
corrosive gases, or foul the flues. 

6. It should not increase the percentage of ash or 

clinker. 

7. It should increase, or certainly not diminish, the 
heat units obtainable from a given weight of fuel. 

No binder has yet been found which completely satisfies 
all the above conditions, though some approximate very nearly 
to them. The binder which probably has the widest use is coal 
tar pitch. On account of the great development in the last few 
years of the by-product coking industry, this pitch is produced 
in large quantities in most of the bituminous fields. This makes 
it available at a reasonable price for those briquetting plants 
which are not situated so far away from the coking ovens as to 
make the freight charges excessive. The main objection to it 
is that it gives off considerable smoke and fumes during the 
early stages of combustion. Complaints are made by the workmen 
of the fumes produced during the process of briquetting. 






22 


In the regions adjacent to large petroleum refineries 
using an asphalt base crude oil, the heavy asphalt residuum from 
distillation makes an excellent and economical binder. Four 
per cent of this binder, with a bituminous coal, makes a very 
good briquet. More would be required for anthracite, and still 
more for carbonized coal or "char”. 

Water gas tar pitch, another petroleum derivative, gives 
good results with five to six per cent of binder. This, as with 
the preceding binder, is only available in those districts 
where petroleum refining operations are conducted. 

Locally, deposits of natural asphalts are available for 
binding purposes. For Alberta the deposits of this type near 
Fort McMurray have great promise. 

Briquets which are excellent in all ways except that 
they are not waterproof can be made with 1 % of starch. These 
would disintegrate completely on exposure in wet weather. 

Sulphite pitch, which is made by the evaporation of 
the objectionable by-product, sulphite liquor, from the pulp 
industry, gives very good briquets, with the one objection that 
they are not waterproof. 

Inorganic binders are, generally speaking, inadmissible 
because of their non-combustible character. A combination of 
magnesia and magnesium chloride is the most promising of them, 
as it will give a fairly good briquet with as little as 4$. 




















... ' 





- 


. 


















. 






































- 23 - 


Cost Consideration *- The total cost of the briquetting 
process must lie within the range given by the difference in the 
market price of lump coal and slack coal. For non-coking coals 
this range is quite broad. This is evidenced by the fact that 
lignite slack is purchased for mechanical stoker firing, in 
Alberta, for 50p 7 a ton, whereas lump coal sells for $8.00 and 
$9*00. In the anthracite fields and other districts mining 
high-grade non-coking coals the situation is similar. Briquetting 
anthracite culm offers a profitable field for investment. For 
lignites and sub-bituminous coals which would require preliminary 
treatment, such as drying or carbonizing, the prospects of a 
briquetting venture do not seem so obviously good. 

Quality & Quantity of Binder .- The relation between 
the coal and the binder is entirely physical. Thus, the proper¬ 
ties of the briquet are the properties of the coal plus the 
properties of the binder. If the binder is brittle at ordinary 
temperatures, then the briquet will also be brittle; smoky coal 
or smoky binder will make a smoky briquet; and a binder soluble 
in water will give a briquet which will not stand weathering. 

The quantity of binder required varies greatly with 
different types of coal: lignite char from carbonization requires 
about 12/£; bituminous coals, 4 to 7$> and the extreme is reached 
in the use of the German lignites, which require no binder. 

The quantity of binder is also a function of the sizing 
of the coal. Just sufficient fines should be included to fill 







































C' 


. 













. 





























- 24 


the voids between the larger pieces. 








EXPERIMENTAL 


Introduction 

The sections of this thesis which follow describe a series 
of experiments carried out at the University of Alberta during the 
1922-23 session. This work was done by the writer, all under the 
supervision, and, in part, with the active collaboration of Mr. 

E. Stansfield, Professor of Fuels at the University of Alberta, 
and Fuel Engineer of the Scientific & Industrial Research Council 
of Alberta. 

Work was commenced early in October, 1922, and continued 
until the middle of December, at which time the writer accepted 
employment at the carbonizing and briquetting plant of the Lignite 
Utilization Board of the Dominion of Canada, located near Bienfait, 
Sask.. Subsequent to the temporary suspension of operation a/b 
this plant in the middle of January, the writer returned to Edmon¬ 
ton and resumed his work there. 

Consequent upon the interruption caused by the Bienfait 
trip, the programme of experimentation had to be curtailed. The 
time spent in installing the briquetting press, which arrived from 
Middleton & Co., of Leeds, England, on October l6th, seriously 
interfered with the work of carbonization. The effort expended 
on this work demonstrated the possibility of obtaining results 
of value with runs of 8 or 9 hours duration, rather than actually 
giving extended data of this kind. During the spring half of the 
session a good deal of work was accomplished on the briquetting 





. 




' 


. 

■ 


. 













. 

. 


























































































- 26 - 


research. 


Carboniz ation 

Description of Carbonizer .- The carbonizer used in the 
experimental work operated on the same principle as that installed 
at the large Bienfait plant discussed in the appendix to this 
thesis. It was built in the University workshops. The accompanying 
photographs give a general idea of its construction. The raw coal 
was placed in the glass funnel at the top. From here it flowed 
down the dryer channel, inclined at 45° to the horizontal. In 
this dryer, the coal passed under baffles similar in construction 
to that shown in the sketch on page 4 of the appendix. The dryer, 
which was built of sheet iron, was heated from below by means of 
a gas flame from a Meker burner. 



cs?css 

/p^ro/er- 


























- 27 - 


The dried coal passed from the dryer into the retort chamber, 
which is the inclined pipe shown on the photograph. This pipe has 
a diameter of 5 inches, and a length of 6^- feet. Inside it, on an 
iron frame, rest a series of flat, fire clay tiles, extending from 
top to bottom. On these tiles are placed coils of nichrome high- 
resistance 7/ire, embedded in an alundurn cement. Mica sheets cover 
the cement, and above them are laid a row of flat quartz plates, 
forming a continuous even surface on which the coal stream flov/ed. 

The baffles, which rest on the quartz plates, controlled the move¬ 
ment of the coal. The gas produced passed through the openings in 
the tops of the baffles and down the space left at the top of the 
pipe to the outlet near the lower end. 

The hot carbonized product, or "char”, passed from the 
retort into a water-jacketed pipe below. From this lower pipe 
the char was removed continuously by means of a slide which was 
given a to-and-fro horizontal motion by a rod eccentrically attached 
to a wheel driven by the main motor. The rate of discharge could 
be controlled by varying the amplitude of motion of the slide, 
and also by adjusting a gate placed in a vertical slot near the 
lov/er end of the discharge pip©. 

The gases 7 /ere drawn from the retort into a dust trap in 
which the dust and some tar were deposited. From here, the travel 
was through a series of vertical scrubber pipes, shown in the photo¬ 
graph. The tar scrubbed from the gas settled into the sump at the 
foot of the pipes. From the last scrubber pipe, the clean gas was 







































I 














































. 























- 28 - 


drawn to and through the small centrifugal pump placed at the base 
of the carbonizer. The pump discharged the gas to the meter shown 
in the background, and on the far side of the meter the gas, after 
passing through a water seal, was disposed of by burning it. A 
return-pass was placed around the pump, so that, by adjusting a 
valve in this return-pass, the suction on the scrubbing train, and 
through this onto the retort, could be varied at will. An adjust¬ 
able water seal was placed in parallel with the main suction 
system, forming a second return-pass in order to avoid the production 
of an excessive vacuum. This arrangement permitted the blower to 
be run continuously at a constant speed. Gauges reading to l/lOO 
of an inch of water were attached to the system at intervals. 

















































- 29 - 

Technical Details of Treatment .- A temperature of over 
100°C. was maintained in the coal stream at the lower end of the 
dryer. This effected a reduction of about 6 in the percentage 
of moisture of the coal, which originally contained around l8/£. 
This preliminary drying is necessary in order to avoid blocking 
of the coal in the retort. It also assists in prevention of con¬ 
gestion in the gas chamber. As no pyrometer could be installed 
in the retort, it was impossible to form an accurate idea of the 
temperatures prevailing there. From the degree of carbonization 
obtained, however, it must have been in the neighborhood of 600 °C 
Hie cooling pipe at the bottom is necessary in order to cool the 
coal to such a point that it will not ignite when exposed to the 
outer air. 

The gas from the retort carried a good deal of tar in 
suspension. This, because of its finely divided condition, is 
usually spoken of as tar fog. The complete separation of this 
tar fog from the gas is very difficult. A fairly complete elimiri 
ation, however, was obtained by the scrubbing train used. Down 
‘the first up-cast pipe, a stream of hot water from an overhead 
tank was played against the rising gas. The next two down-cast 
pipes were filled with aluminium turnings, and two of the pipes 
near the end of the train were water-jacketted. 

The pump and its appurtenances were so controlled that 
the pressure within the retort was kept within about 3/100 of 


an inch of water of the external atmospheric pressure. Increase 









































. 






- 






















■ 






. 
































■ 








- 30 - 


of the pressure beyond this ra rgin would have caused expulsion of 
the gases through the coal seals at the ends of the retort; and, 
on the other hand, an excessive decrease would draw air into the 
retort, causing combustion of the hot gases. 

The gas meter used was made by the American Meter Co. 

Its readings were checked by passing air through it from an aspi¬ 
rator of known volume. The readings were found to be correct to 
0 . 6 / 6 . 

The only coal carbonized was lignite from the IVin City 
Mine, Edmonton. This was crushed until it all passed a 4-mesh 
sieve. 

No gas analyses were made because of non-arrival of 
sampling apparatus which had been ordered. 

Procedure .- The heating current was turned on, and the 
retort allowed to heat for one hour. 3>500 grams of carbonized 
coal, or slightly more than sufficient to fill the whole system, 
was then charged into the funnel at the top. The discharge was 
then started. When the coal in the funnel was just disappearing 
down the bottom of it, 3>000 grams of raw coal was placed in the 
funnel, and a complete set of readings, as follows, was taken: 
the time was noted; the gas meter, ammeter and voltmeter readings 
were taken; and the temperature of the dried coal entering the 
top of the carbonizer was read. Samples were taken of the raw 
coal, dried coal, and of the carbonized coal. This routine was 
continued throughout the period of the run. The moisture in the 


















, 

















- 





















' 




































- 31 - 


tar was determined by adding some kerosene to it and distilling 
until the kerosene began to come over. Moistures as high as 23/£ 
were found by this method. 

Table of Results .- The following table (see next page) 
gives the quantitative results obtained. Runs Nos. 7> 9 and 10 
were made before the writer commenced work with the Research Council, 
but are included for comparative purposes. The runs are arranged 
according to ascending degrees of carbonization, computed on a dry 
coal basis. 

Discussion of Table .- The heating coils of the carbonizer 
became completely fused on the day that Run No. 1? was attempted. 

It is believed that they were partially burnt out during runs Nos. 

15 and 16. Such a conditions seems to be indicated by the results 
obtained. Before Run No. 19 was made, a complete new set of coils 
was put in. The increased heating given is shown by the increased 
current consumption and by comparing the results for Runs Nos. 16 
and 19« With almost the same rate of charging, Run No. 19 gave 
64.8$ carbonization, compared with 68 . 9 $ for Run No. 16; and car¬ 
bonization to 8.2/£ of volatile matter against 13»8/&'for Run No. 16. 
The higher temperatures apparently caused a cracking of the tar, 
since in Run No. 19 the tar obtained was much lower, and the gas 
much higher than in earlier runs. The increase in the calorific 
value of the char over the original coal is noteworthy. The figures 
given for the tar recovered are based on quantities measured over 

the entire run; whereas the figures for the other products were 
computed from measurements made during a period of steady operation. 



















■ 




















♦ 








- 




. 






























* 











































1ABLE OF RESULTS OF CARBONIZATION OF TWIN CITY COAL 


-——---■■■ .—- 

RUN NO.. 

1 K 

T A 



16 



:- 



•O 

14 


9 

7 

10 

19 

DATE . 


Oct.12 

in 

T,, 

a. 27 

Oct.17 

Jun.l 6 

Jul.ll 





UC b » J. U 

0 u 

Dec. 1 

TOTAL COAL CARBONIZED. 

RATE OF OPERATION: 


53 

60 


250 

46 

61 

99 

53 

Coal charged per hour.... 


11.7 

11.6 

1 

13.2 

9-4 

12.0 

10.2 

9-7 

Char discharged per hour. 

...lbs. 

7-0 

6.9 


7.5 

5.3 

6.7 

5.5 

5.5 

YIELD OF CARBONIZED COAL, OR 

CHAR: 








Per 100 lbs.coal as charged,lbs. 

59*3 

59.7 


! 56.8 

57.0 

55-4 

53-7 

56.5 

Per 100 lbs. dry coal.... 


72.6 

71.3 


70.5 

68.9 

68.7 

66.7 

64.8 

YIELD OF TAR (MOIST): 










Per 100 lbs.coal as charged,lbs. 

2.5 

1.6 

1 

! 3.5 

2.6 

3.6 

2.2 

0.9 

Per 100 lbs. dry coal.... 


3.1 

1.9 


4.3 

3.1 

4.4 

2.7 

1.0 

Per 100 lbs. char.. 


4.3 

2.7 


' 6.2 

4.5 

5.2 

4.1 

1.5 

YIELD OF GAS: 










Per 100 lbs.coal as charged,c.f. 

146 

152 


^63 

198 

204 

266 

352 

Per 100 lbs. dry coal..... 


178 

182 


202 

240 

252 

330 

404 

Per 100 lbs. char. 

.. .lbs. 

246 

255 


287 

347 

366 

496 

622 

AVERAGE POWER CONSUMPTION; 










Per 100 lbs. coal as charged,k.w.h. 

278 

286 


514 

340 

372 

353 

402 

Per 100 lbs. dry coal. 


383 

401 


146 

493 

542 

529 

620 

P^lp inn IVik. f'Vmr. 


469 

479 


>54 

596 

671 

657 

711 

ANALYSIS OF COAL AS CHARGED: 


' 

Moisture. 

. % 

18.3 

16.3 


19.4 

17.3 

19.4 

19.5 

12.9 


_< 




7.5 


7.9 

6.8 


Volatile Matter. 


36.2 

33.9 


28.2 

32.2 

31.7 

.. 

35.8 

Fixed Carbon. 

. % 




44.9 

•• 

41.0 



Calorific Value, per lb... 

B.t.u. 



9 J 

L 90 



9.270 


ANALYSIS OF CHAR: 















112.6 


11.8 

13.3 




16.8 

15.2 


13.8 

13.8 

15.2 


8.2 

Fixed Carbon. 

— * 


73.6 


73.0 

•• 


Calorific Value, per lb... 

B.t.u. 

.. 


12, j 

120 



L2.740 

13.6 

i.ifATorriinw TM nDTTTM? HP A D _ . . 


21.4 

21.4 



23-6 



mviuiuiui .. 



1 




























































































vW . 






Rj 5 1 


1 1 j. 



My 



H j ; ; 












- 33 - 


Briquetting 

OUTLINE OF TESTS .- 

Description of Equipment & Method of Making Briquets *- 

SUMMARY OF METHOD.- A weighed quantity of coal and 
a weighed quantity of molten binder were placed in a steam-jacketed 
mixer. When thoroughly mixed and heated, the mixture was dumped into 
a pan and carried to the fluxer. This fluxer is a steam-jacketed 
cylinder over the press, provided with a stirrer. In this, the 
mixture is kept in good condition until ready to go to the press. 

The feed is from the fluxer to the hopper underneath, and from the 
hopper to the die box below. Taro oscillating plungers form the 
briquet in the die box from which it is discharged onto a travelling 
belt below. 

DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF EQUIPMENT & METHOD.- The 
primary operation was the crushing of the coal to the sis© deemed 
best suited for the experiment in hand. This crushirg was accom¬ 
plished in an Allis-Chalmers gyratory crusher, capable of being 
adjusted to give products of different sizing as desired. From 
this crushed coal individual lots, usually of 8 kilos, were weighed 
out for the different batches. The mixer used, photographs of 
which are shown herewith, was made by Joseph Baker, Sons, & Perkins, 
Ltd., of London, England. The mixing was done by two blades, turn¬ 
ing in opposite directions, and at different speeds. The mixing 
box was jacketed so that it could be heated by steam, and the tem¬ 
perature was indicated by a thermometer placed in a tub© projecting 





. 

■ 

. 




V, 










. 















. 

. 








I 

■ , • .. : ! 







- 


■ ■' -rr;. t , 





















34 - 


the lower side of the lid, and into the mixture. Jets were pro¬ 
vided for blowing steam into the mixture if desired. The weighed 
lot of coal was placed in this mixer,and stirred and heated until 
it was at a temperature well above the softening point of the bin¬ 
der. The binder was then added. Originally it was added in the 
solid form, but later it was decided that preliminary melting of 
the binder gave more efficient mixing and was more convenient. The 
coal and binder were then mixed for a short period, after which 
they were dumped into a pan and carried to and dumped into the 
fluxer. 

This fluxer is the vertical container shown above the 
press in the photograph. The bottom of it was heated by a steam 
jacket, for which, as for the mixer, steam at a pressure of 90 
lbs. was available. Paddle arms, which kept the mix stirred up, 
were carried on a rotating vertical shaft. By opening the gate 
at the bottom of the side of the fluxer, the mixture could b© 
discharged into the hopper below. An armored thermometer was 
placed in the opening at the bottom of the fluxer,, but the readings 
obtained were very inaccurate. Below the hopper, the die box in 
which the briquets were formed. Feed from the hopper was regu¬ 
lated by means of paddle vanes mounted on a small horizontal shaft, 
which was rotated by a chain drive in such a way that a charge 
was forced into the die box when the plungers were withdrawn. 

The plungers, by means of eccentrics, were advanced towards each 
other until pressure was applied to the charge, forming it, be¬ 
tween the walls of the die box and the plungers, into a briquet. 







- 35 - 


One of the plungers was held up to its work by a heavy coil spring 
which was placed behind it. The pressure exerted on the briquets 
could be governed in three ways: first, by altering the compres¬ 
sion of the spring by shifting the lock nuts which held it in 
place; secondly, by changing the size of the briquet by moving a 
slide underneath the hopper which determined the size of the dis¬ 
charge orifice from the hopper; thirdly, by adjusting the clearance 
between the plungers when at their closest approach to one another. 

The briquet, when made, was ejected from the die box by 
that plunger which had a slower motion and a longer stroke than 
the other. The briquet then slid down a short chute onto a con¬ 
veyor belt which had such a slow motion that the briquet had time 
to cool and harden before being dropped onto a pile at the end. 

The briquets were cylindrical in shape, with convex, bulged-out 
ends. The cylindrical part was elliptical in cross-section, with 
a 2-|—inch major and a 1-3/4-inch minor axis, giving an area of 
3-g- square inches. 

By the courtesy of Professor I. F. Morrison, the spring 
used in the press was calibrated in the Civil Engineering labora¬ 
tories of the University of Alberta. The relation between spring 
length and load applied is shown in the following graph. 

With the settings of the plungers and of the spring used 
for all runs from No. 6 to the final run, No. 118, the pressures 
exerted for different 3izes of briquets are shown by the following 


table:- 








- 36 - 



Edge Thickness Total Pressure in Pounds Tons per Square Inch 


3 / 4 " 

5,720 

0.82 

7 / S " 

6,110 

0.87 

1 " 

6,470 

0.92 

1 - 1 / 8 " 

6,830 

0.97 

1 - 1 / 4 " 

7,210 

1.03 


It is to be noted that with a press of the roll type no 
such definite knowledge of the pressure to which the briquets 
were subjected could have been gained. The press described is 
of a type not met with in commercial practice, being suitable 
only for experimental work. 

Methods of Testing B r iquets .- 

RATTLER TEST.- This rattler is a standard machine 
adopted by the American Society for Testing Materials for use 
in testing paving bricks, in which case steel balls are used. 


































- 37 - 


It is an iron cylinder, 2 feet long and with a diameter of ins. 
The sides are made up of longitudinal iron castings 6 inches wide 
and spaced l/4 inch apart* The cylinder has a short shaft from 
the centre of each end. These shafts rest in suitable bearings, 
and the gearing gives the whole cylinder a rotation about its 
longitudinal axis at the rate of 32 r.p.ra. The briquets were 
placed in this rattler, and left there while it was given 200 
revolutions, as indicated by a tachometer. The fines formed 
passed through the openings between the side pieces. The bri¬ 
quets were weighed before and after the test, and the percentage 
loss reported. The test was run on the third day after the briquet 
was made, unless a wet binder was used, in which case an interval 
of one week was allowed. Regular and consistent results were ob¬ 
tained by this method, and a good estimation of the coherence of 
the briquet could be formed from the percentage loss. This test 
on egg size lumps of raw Greenhill coal gave a loss of 44/£, as 
compared with an average of less than 20 % for the briquets of 
commercial value. 

DROP TEST*- In this test, six briquets were elevated in 
a specially designed box to a distance of ten feet from the con¬ 
crete floor. The bottom of the box, which was divided into two 
halves, each being hinged, was made to swing rapidly away from 
under the briquets by means of a trigger string. The briquets 
then fell freely to the floor below. The pieces were screened 
through a 3/4-in. sieve, and the percentage retained and the 
















. 




. 




' 










■ 


- 






: 3 : 





































—- 





- 38 - 


number broken reported. Very unsatisfactory and erratic results 
caused the abandonment of this test. 

APPARENT SPECIFIC GRAVITY.- Apparent specific gravities 
were taken of samples of all the runs made, after allowing three 
days for the briquets to dry. These specific gravities gave a very 
good indication of the quality of the briquet, since increases in 
coherences were almost invariably accompanied by corresponding 
increases in apparent specific gravity. Briquets with sides one 
inch in length were selected as the standard size. 

INSPECTION & CLASSIFICATION.- At the same time that the 
rattler tests wers run, the briquets were inspected and graded 
according to the following schedule?- 

Good Commercial? A+, A, or A- 

Poor Commercial; B+, B, or B- 

Non-Commercial: C+, C, or C- 

Failures: D 

WEATHERING.- Samples containing different percentages of 
coal tar pitch for a binder were exposed for two weeks in very 
changeable, early spring weather, weights before and after were 
noted, and a rattler test was run on the samples after exposure, 
the result being checked with the regular rattler test. 

FIRE TESTS.- Samples of different runs were put on a bed 
of hot, glowing coals in a large furnace, and full notes were made 
of the behavior and strength of the briquets at different stages 


of combustion 












* 






, 


- * . ■ 





4 

. 











. 
















. - - ' '* ■ r 

: 

. 

: 






: ' *: 








- 









- 39 - 


Coals Used .- Eighteen runs were made with carbonized Twin 
City lignite; 113 runs were made using crushed 3/4-in. slack 
Greenhill bituminous coal; and one run was made on raw TVin City 
lignite. The accompanying screen analysis is typical of the sizing 
used for most of the work on the Greenhill coalj- 


Mesh 

Percentage 

Per Cent Cumulative 

+ 4 

2.0 

2.0 

+ 8 

27.8 

29.6 

+ 14 

32.2 

61.8 

+ 28 

14.9 

76.7 

+ 48 

10.1 

86.8 

+100 

_ 

92.3.. ... 

Abraham 9 s Factor......... 

....... 349.2 


Binders Used .- The majority of the runs were made with a 
soft coal tar pitch. Briquets were also made with a hard coal tar 


pitch; with a sample of asphalt sent by the West Canadian Collieries 
who mine the Greenhill coal; with asphalt known as Imperial Bri¬ 
quetting Binder, made by the Imperial Oil Co., Ltd., Montreal; 
with samples of asphalt obtained from the Fort McMurray tar sands 
by processes of separation and distillation conducted in the Road 
Materials laboratory of the Scientific & Industrial Research Coun¬ 
cil of Alberta; and with a number of synthetic binders compounded 
in the laboratory from various ingredients. 



















- 40 


The amount of binder used was in all cases expressed as 
the number of parts by weight of the binder added to 100 parts 
of coal. This has been termed the "Mixing Ratio”. 

RESULT S O F BRIQUETTING TESTS .- 

Effect of Pressure .- The following table shows how 
the specific gravity of the briquet varied with the pressure exer¬ 
ted in the case of one typical batch of briquets. 

Total Pressure in Pounds Apparent Specific Gravity 
4,970 1.220 

5,550 1.243 

6,110 1.258 

6,830 1.279 

7,410 1.290 

The pressures were determined by the measuring of the 
face thickness of the briquet and taking the pressure stated 
therefor in the table on page 3&. Hie curves below show the 
relation between the apparent specific gravity and size of the 
briquet and pressure employed, for several batches of briquets. 

It will be seen that to increase the specific gravity of the 
briquet until it more nearly approached 1*30, which is the apparent 
specific gravity of the coal used, would require an inordinately 
large pressure. The increase in the specific gravity noted also 
gives an increase in the coherence of the briquets. 






































- 










< 









. 


. 






■ . ' v : 























Sjpfc/s/c &?av r /r/' 


- 41 - 



Effect of Sizing of Coal Used .- Tests were carried out 

on Greenhill coal having sizing given by the different screen 
analyses shown in the table on the following page. Cumulative 
percentages retained on the different sizes are given in each case. 
The screen analyses are arranged according to increasing value of 
Abraham’s coefficient of size. This coefficient is arrived at 
by totalling the cumulative percentages retained. From the irregu¬ 
lar nature of the results it will be seen that sizing within the 
limits here employed has no marked effect on the quality of the 
briquet. 

Effect of Varying Moisture .- It was found, with the raw 
bituminous coal, that the addition of any moisture to the mix 
weakened the briquet very markedly. If as much as was added, 
then the briquet usually gave 100 % loss in the rattler. This is 
indicated by the results given in the table on page 43. Run No. 7 
typifies the usual mixture without the deliberate addition of 
steam. At Ottawa, the Fuels Testing Division of the Mines Branch, 























































■ 


■ 












... V.. ■ .. : L . : 


■ 

. 




















42 




tr\ 

CM 

ON 

ro 

CM 

NO 

s 

NO 




nO 

c— 

CM 


• 

• 


9 

• 

• 

1 

nO 

rH 



• 

CM 

\ ^ 


rH 

rH 

NO 

rH 

o 

H" 

1 

fO 

nO 



U\ 





oo 

NO 

CO 

ON 

ON 

1 

1 





rH 

«H 



o 

nO 

oo 

c— 

CO 

ro 

1 

CJN 




CM 

co 

oo 


• 

• 

9 

• 

• 

• 

1 

Nf 

CM 


C- 

9 

CM 

rH 


CM 

CJN 

rH 

NO 

NO 

CM 

8 

ro 

nO 



M3 

• 




CM 

N0 

c— 

co 

CO 

1 

g 





rH 

rH 



CM 

C— 

UN 

M- 

c— 

rH 

1 

e~- 




CM 

vO 

CO 



u\ 





1 

*M* 

o 


C— 

a 

CJ 


rH 

fH 

C“- 

C— 

ro 

1 

ro 

Un 



ON 

• 




CM 

nO 

C— 

co 

ON 

1 

g 





rH 

rH 



CO 

CO 

un 

c— 

ON 

rH 

f 

ro 




UN 

CO 

oo 



9 

9 

9 


• 

1 

ro 

nO 


CO 

9 

CM 



ro 

ON 

U\ 

O 

CM 

o 

( 

ro 

CM 




9 




CM 

UN 

c~- 

CO 

ON 

1 

( 





rH 

rH 



O 

nO 

no 

to 

ro 

t— 

% 

O 




rH 

NO 

ON 


• 

• 

• 

9 

• 

• 

1 

ro 

ON 


oo 

• 

CM 



rH 

CM 

vO 

ro 

Un 

rH 

1 

ro 

*=* 



CO 

9 




CM 

un 

e— 

oo 

ON 

1 

g 





rH 

rH 



ON 

ro 

C— 

un 

CO 

o 

8 

nO 




ro 

UN 



♦ 

• 

9 

9 

• 

• 

8 

CM 

rH 


Cr— 

9 

CM 



rH 

NO 

H- 

O 

CM 

o 

« 

ro 

OO 



GO 

9 




CM 

UN 

e— 

CO 

ON 

1 

fj 





?H 

rH 



CM 

CO 

t— 

co 

rH 

ro 

a 

Np 




t— 

ON 

o 


9 

9 

9 

9 

9 

a 

8 

CM 

OO 


CO 

• 

CM 

rH 


rH 

O 


rH 

H* 

rH 

8 

on 




VT* 

« 




CM 

tT\ 

C~~ 

CO 

ON 

* 





rH 

rH 



Nt 

C— 

c— 

tr\ 

oo 

H- 

t 

ro 




UN 

NO 

rH 


♦ 

9 

9 

9 

• 

9 

8 

iH 

rH 


e~ 

• 

CM 

rH 


rH 

t-~ 

O 

ON 

CM 

O 

8 

on 




NO 

9 




rH 

UN 

NO 

oo 

ON 

8 

q 





rH 

rH 



<x> 


CM 

O' 

e— 

C^~ 

1 

o 




o 

e— 



• 

9 

• 

• 

9 

• 

8 

rH 

oo 



• 

CM 

rH 


o 

ON 

o 

c— 

rH 

ON 

8 

OO 

vO 



NO 

• 




rH 

UN 

NO 

OO 

CO 

8 





rH 

iH 



rH 

o 

UN 

o 

CO 

H- 

1 

*=t 




CM 

nO 



• 

• 

9 

• 

• 

• 

8 

o 

"*£• 


c— 


CM 

rH 


rH 

o 

CO 

nO 

ON 

CO 

8 

on 

nO 



\£\ 

9 




CM 

Nfr 

nO 

c~- 

QO 

1 





«H 

rH 

un 


n£> 

o 

ON 

O 

t— 

ON 

8 

CO 




NO 



• 

• 


9 

• 

• 

8 

O' 

CM 


£— 

• 

CM 



O 

CO 

NO 

UN 

ON 


8 

CM 

ro 



ir— 

9 




rH 

Nl- 

nO 

C— 

co 

1 

1 





rH 

rH 



o 

CM 

ON 


H 

H* 

i 

O' 




MD 

UN 

nO 


9 

• 



• 

• 

1 


OO 


c— 

9 

CM 



O 

nO 

CM 

'Mr 

CM 

ro 

1 

CM 

oo 



MD 

• 





ro 

un 

C— 

co* 

1 

■ 





sH- 

rH 



o 

O 

H 

ON 

UN 

ON 

1 

O 




UN 

CM 

rH 


9 

• 

• 


9 

• 

i 

Nf 

t— 


co 

• 

CM 



O 

o 

c-~ 

CM 

ro 

UN 

i 

CM 

rH 



CO 

• 





CM 

U\ 

c-= 

CO 

8 

S 





rH 

pH 



o 

CO 

c— 

C— 

nO 

nO 

8 

UN 




nD 

OO 

CM 


• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1 

O 

tr\ 


c— 

• 

rH 



o 

o 

CO 

ro 

nJ- 

c— 

8 

CM 

CM 



O 

• 





»H 

H- 

NO 

tw 

3 

f 





CM 

rH 



o 

o 

ro 

CO 

o 

to 

8 

ON 




ro 

rH 

C- 


9 

• 

9 


9 

• 

i 




c— 

• 

CM 



o 

o 

tr\ 

UN 

rH 

nO 

8 

rH 

ro 



n£> 

9 






CM 


nO 

1 

■ 





rH 

rH 

• 



v^. 


VS. 


VL 

8 

„ 




vt. 

. 

O 













• 

55 

© 

• 

• 


% 

• 

9 

8 

© 




* 

9 


•H 







1 

3 




• 

U 

W 

. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1 

rH 




• 

o 

CQ 

>> 

s: 

Si 

Si 

Si 

s 

Si 

8 

d 


O 

u 

CQ 

9 


«H 

CO 

m 

*0 

m 

m 

CO 

8 

> 

• 

•H 

© 

© 


! 

d 

© 

<D 

V 

© 

© 

© 

8 


9 

+> 

*rJ 

O 

CO 


p 

P 

s 

1 

? 

f 

p 

1 

1 

© 

O 

25 

& 

fi 

*rl 


•p 


CO 

H- 

CO 

CO 

o 

1 

g 



CQ 

u 

a 

$3 

a 


rH 

CM 

nP 

o 

1 

3 

C 

bO 

© 

© 

© 

© 






»H 

1 

S3 

£ 

a 


rH 

u 

© 

© 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 


+ 

8 

sS 

•H 

O 

-P 

d 

h 

U 







1 

u 


X 


-P 

Pa 

o 

CO 

o 

03 







8 

1 

5 


H 


A 

Pa 

< 






















































- 43 - 


Run No. 

Mixing Ratio 

i of Moisture in Feed 

Rattler Loss 

70 

8 

o.5 

14.6 

19 

7 

5.6 

34.4 

22 

7 

6.7 

100.0 

69 

8 

9.6 

48.2 


when working with carbonized lignite, found that unless the car¬ 
bonized lignite taken had a surface film of moisture, amounting 
generally to about 5% by weight, a briquet could not be made. 

Any subsequent addition of moisture in the mixer was found, as in 
the above tests, to reduce the strength of the briquet. This 5$ 
was approximately the amount that condensed on the char when ex¬ 
posed to the air for some time. 

The almost invariable commercial practice in briquetting 
coals of any type is to add steam to the mix at some stage. 

This is done in the belief that it improves the nature of the 
mix, reduces the binder required, and improves the final briquet. 
The results mentioned above seem to deprecate this practice. 

Effect of Time of Mixing .’* It was found that if the 
temperature of the coal was about 25®C.,above the softening 
point of the binder, and if the mixer was quite hot when the 
binder was put in, then two minutes mixing gave as good a briquet 
as mixing for a longer time. On the other hand the mix could be 
left in the mixer for half an hour and still be in condition to 
give a good briquet. 








- 44 - 


Run No. 

Mixing Ratio 

Mixing Time 

Rattler Loss 

87 

8 

2 

15.4 

53 

8 

10 

16.0 

111 

8 

16 

19.8 


Results Obtained With Different Binders .- Two barrels 
of coal tar pitch of different melting points were secured from 
the coke oven plant at Sault Ste. Marie, Ont. The major part of 
the work was done with the softer of these. 

SOFT COAL TAR PITCH.® Softening point determinations, 
as given by the American Society for Testing Materials, were run 
on all the binders used. The first sample of this coal tar pitch 
was taken from the top of the barrel and the second from about a 
third of the way down. 

Cube Method Ring & Ball Method 

Sample No. I....... 66©C. 57®C. 

Sample No. 2....... 60®C. 50® C. 

The binder was melted on an electric hot plate and poured 
while fluid into the coal in the mixer. It was found that with 
the above pitch it was best to have the coal at about 80°C. when 
the binder was added. Throe or four minutes mixing usually raised 
the temperature to between 90°0» 100°C. The temperature of 

pressing was little, if any, below this. If the mixture was 
heated to much more than 100°C., then trouble was usually en¬ 
countered at the press on account of the tendency of the mix to 
adhere to the plungers. 












' 




- 




- 






















- 









45 - 


Good briquets were made with this soft coal tar pitch, a 
minimum of about 6 jo being required. 

HARD COAL TAR PITCH.- This was the harder of the two 
pitches above mentioned. It gave softening points of 8l*C. by the 
cube method, and 72°C. by the ring and ball method. It was found 
that operations had to be carried on at much higher temperatures 
than for the soft coal tar pitch to obtain the best results. This 
is illustrated by the results of the two following rune:- 





TEMPERATURES 



Run 

Mixing 

Ratio 

Binder 

Added 

Dumped From 
Mixer 

Pressed 

Rattler Loss 

74 

7 

110°C. 

140®C. 

120®+C. 

16 . 4 $ 

75 

7 

96®C. 

110®C. 

10Q®+C. 

18 . 0 $ 


Under the conditions of Run 74 better results were obtained than 
with the soft coal tar pitch. 

WEST CANADIAN COLLIERIES ASPHALT. - This was a sample 
received from the West Canadian Collieries, the miners of Green- 
hill coal on which the tests were being made. The Cube method 
test gave a softening point of 66®C., and the Ring & Ball method 
one of 55©C. Satisfactory briquets were made with this asphalt 
when working under the same conditions as were employed in 
making the soft coal tar pitch briquets. 

FORT Ms MURRAY ASPHALT. * This was produced in the Road 
Materials laboratory of the Research Council. It was the asphalt 
left from the distillation of the bitumen obtained from the Fort 





































. 













- 46 - 


McMurray Tar Sands . The crude bitumen first obtained was re¬ 
fined by the removal of a considerable quantity of light and 
heavy oils by distillation in a current of superheated steam. 

For the first sample tested, distillation was carried on up to 
29C°C.,and for the second up to 300°C. This gave the first a 
ring and ball softening point of 6?°C. f and the second,one of 71°C. 
The oil recovery in the above distillations amounted to about 50$. 
If any of the many schemes now being tried out for the separation 
of the bitumen from the tar sands prove to be commercially suc¬ 
cessful, then this asphalt should be available in any desired 
quantity and at a reasonable price. Better briquets were made 
with this binder than with any other type. 

IMPERIAL BRIQUETTING BINDER.- This is an asphalt with a 
ring & ball softening point of 62®C. It arrived too late in the 
session for any positive results to be obtained with it. 

SYNTHETIC BINDERS.- A large number of binders, made by 
associating different materials, were tried out; but none of them 
gave very good results. Among the materials used werei coal tar 
pitch, asphalt, flour, water glass, starch and potatoes. 

TABULATION OF SOFTENING POINTS OF BINDERS EMPLOYED.- 

Cube Method Ring & Bali 

Soft Coal Tar Pitch, First Sample. 66®C. 57®C. 

« « « Second ** . 60 50 

Hard ” w " .* 81 72 

W. C. C. Asphalt. 86 55 

McMurray Asphalt, First Sample..... 8 ? 

** ” Second " .. * *. 71 

Imperial Briquetting Binder...*. 82 












- 47 - 


DIFFICULTY CAUSED BY ADHERENCE TO PLUNGERS-- Considerable 
trouble was experienced, especially with the binders of low 
softening point, with the briquets adhering to the plungers. This 
caused a malformation of the briquets,or, in its worst phase, a 
complete jamming of the press, m order to work at a higher tem¬ 
perature, so that the greater mobility of the binder would result 
m a more compact briquet, the plungers were sprayed with soapy 
water. This seemed to improve conditions, but trials had to be 
discontinued before positive results were obtained. 

VISCOSITY DETERMINATIONS. “ Viscosity determinations were 
run on most of the binders used. For this purpose the float test 
apparatus shown in the sketch below was used. A plug of the binder 
tested was put in the orifice at the bottom of the pan, and the 
whole cooled in ice water. The pan was then placed on water, 
which was maintained at a constant temperature. The time ?;hich 
elapsed before the water caused the pan to sink by melting the 
plug, was noted for different water bath temperatures. The values 
obtained were plotted as shown;- 



/a/ Af/m/rscr 
























































48 


It is probable that further investigation in connection 
with this matter would prove that viscosity, rather than softening 
point,is the best basis on which to decide the temperatures of 
mixing and pressing. For instance, rather than deciding that 
the mixing temperature shall be, say, 30°C. above the softening 
temperature, it might be best to say that it shall be the tem¬ 
perature which gives a value of so many minutes with the pan vis¬ 
cosimeter. Probably also a binder giving a line which falls to 
the right comparatively slowly would be preferable to one which 
does not harden so quickly with drop of temperature since quick 
hardening after pressing is desirable. 

Effect of Varying Amount of Binder .- This is best illus¬ 
trated by tabulating the quantitative results obtained, as given 
on the next page. A mixing ratio of about six is probably the 
minimum for the coal tar pitches. With the asphalt, somewhat 
less binder would suffice. 





49 


IJT\ 

O 

rH 

1 rn SO 

>* H»« s© CM * 

pi rH< • s© 

H ojl rH rH 

c . <-4i . . 

Hf 

O 

rH 

3 Ql C~~ rH 

3 «* c— cm 

O <aj< • CM 

3 * rH rH 

CO 

C5v 

CM C— 

CM • 

• s* 

» rH rn 

. -|_t j 

(t~* 

os 

rH 1 m vC 

0) J *r\ CM 

A3 « . m 

Pr 1 rH CM 

sO 

ON 

<*J 8 U\ sC 

* s© CM • 

• 8 « CM 

08 rH CM 

H 

vD 

0 8 CO sC 

.# E— CM • I 

& ' M £ 

"«$ 

Os 

A3 * O H* 

O 8 Hr CM • 

*P 8 • OO 

»H 8 rH 

r* a 

1 ^ 

i cm rn 

U 8 >A W * 

da • oo 

Pi sH CM 

CM 

O'- 

rH 8 sO Hi- 

CO 1 s© CM « 

© 8 • 6— 

0 8 rH rH 

8 

h|" 

e*~ 

*©8 C— -H- 

U 0 C"“ CM ♦ 

Sj 1 ♦ s© 

ffi 8 rH rH 

s© 

c— 

CM % 

+ ^ d 

A3 8 rH Q 

rn 

e» 

4> 1 CM Os 

*H 9 U\ 04 

Pk 3 » rH 

8 rH rn 

CM 

C - *® 

S3 8 s© 

P 1 s© CM • 

1 » rH ! 

rH 8 rH CM 

C'-- 

ITS 

© 8 CO C-= 

O 1 6— CM • 

fl • CO 

■P 1 rH rH 

55 | 

© 8 OO s© 

CO 8 CO CH 

• Hfr 

rH rH 

• 

• 

§ 

as 

o 

-+■> 

d 

CQ 

Binder. ......... 

Mixing Rati© .... 

Apparent S. G. .. 

Tumbler Loss. .•• 



*?//0*Y/S/G /ZfJLA7Y0/V &j£7lvejr / rV &*7'/0 4.033 





































































































- 50 - 


AgLng of Mixture.- This tern was applied to a peculiar 
phenomenon which obtruded itself during the briquetting work. 

It was found that if a mixture of coal and pitch or of coal and 
asphalt was left in the fluxer, for any period of time over 15 
minutes, it lost all its coherence. It rolled up into little 
”dry” hard balls, displaying none of the sticky qualities usually 
associated with hot, fluid pitch, VTien in this condition it was 
quite impossible to make satisfactory briquets. Various theories 
accounting for the action of the mixture were considered. Among 
these was the suggestion that it might be caused by oxidation of 
the pitch. To test this idea, a weighed quantity of pitch was 
heated in a pail, and at the same time air was bubbled through. 
This was continued for a number of days with no appreciable change 
in the qualities of the pitch. Further refutation of this theory 
was furnished by the fact that, if the mixture was left in the 
hot fluxer, but not stirred, no material depreciation of the mix¬ 
ture took place in a period of half an hour. The lack of any al¬ 
teration of the mixture when left in the mixer for considerable 
lengths of time further discountenanced the oxidation theory. 
Further, that the trouble was not caused by oxidation of the coal 
was proven by stirring a batch of coal in the hot mixer for two 
hours and then producing good briquets with this "baked" coal. 
Another idea was that the change in the condition of the mixture 
might be caused by the absorption of the binder into the minute 




- 51 - 


pores of the coal. Very careful specific gravity determinations 
were run on the -4 to +8 mesh material from samples taken before 
and after aging. These were found to be practically the same in 
both cases, thus making the absorption theory unlikely. It was 
thought that possibly the driving off of moisture in some way 
caused the alteration in the condition of the mixture, but this 
was disproved by running moisture determinations on samples taken 
at intervals from the fluxer. The last, and most plausible,theory 
was that the revolving paddles, by a process of mechanical grind¬ 
ing, produced such a large amount of dust that the binder present 
was insuffient to coat the greatly increased surface area. Samples 
were taken for extraction with carbon disulphide in a centrifuge 
machine with the object of running screen analyses on the coal 
thus cleaned. Such analyses would indicate the amount of grinding 
which had occurred in the fluxer. This test had to be postponed 
on account of a shortage of reagents. A good coherent mixture was 
allowed to cool and to stand for a few days. It was then reheated, 
and very good briquets made from it. The possibility of doing 
this is of interest in connection with commercial work where "fins" 
and fines are formed in the roll presses used. These undesirable 
products may, apparently, be returned to the mixers and added to 
the regular on-coming stream. On the other hand, a batch which 
had been "aged" or "dried" in the fluxer was made to produce good 
briquets by the addition of 2% more binder. 



52 


2g£ therlnK Testa - Weighed quantities of briquets from 
different runs were exposed for two weeks in changeable and severe 
spring weather, tte rattler test before exposure was carried out 
on a sample as closely as possible similar to the one exposed. The 
results are given in the table below:- 


Run No. 







71 

72 

73 

Binder.. 


Soft 

'oal Tar ; 

’itch 

Mixing Ratio.... 


8 

6 

5 

BEFORE EXPOSURE: 





Weight.. 


2051 

2054 

2023 

Rattler Lo ss. 


15.0 

21.6 

31.9 

AFTER EXPOSURES 





Weight.. 


2051 

2054 

2023 

Rattler Loss......... 


15.2 

21.9 

31.7 


This weathering test, which is probably more severe than 
the briquets would be exposed to in practice, left them apparently 
undamaged# 

Fire Tests *- The method of conducting these was described 
on page 38 . The carbonized lignite briquets, after three minutes 
in the fire, became very friable. If stirred with a poker they 
crumbled badly; though, if not touched, they had strength enough 
to retain their shape. After thirteen minutes they hardened and 
became quite firm. The flame for the first twenty minutes was 





















- 53 - 


bright and luminous, changing from long to short during the 
interval. After twenty minutes, the flame was short and blue. 
Smoke was produced for the first throe minutes only, and was, 
no doubt, caused by the combustion of the binder. The raw 
bituminous coal briquets with a coal tar pitch binder seemed 
quite firm during the whole period of combustion. The coal coked 
after about 10 minutes, causing the briquets to fuse together 
into a large cake. A considerable quantity of smoke was given 
off during the first 15 minutes, and the flame was long and lumi¬ 
nous for half an hour,after which a fairly clear, bright fire 
formed. 

The raw bituminous coal briquets in which McMurray asphalt 
was used as a binder acted very similarly to the above except that 
up to the time that the coal coked the briquets could be broken 
down by poking. 

Briquets made with raw lignite were tried in the fire and 
gave results very similar to those obtained with the carbonized 
lignite, the briquets at first softening, and, later, when the 
coal tar pitch binder coked, becoming quite firm. 

The coking quality of coal tar pitch mentioned above gives 
good reason for preferring it to asphalt for a non-coking coal. 
With a coking coal such as the Greenhill this feature is of less 


relevance. 



- 54 - 


SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTAL WORK ON BRIQUETTING . - 

Increase of Pressure improves briquets, but is not eco¬ 
nomical above a certain limit. 

Sizing; of Coal within fairly wide limits does not materi¬ 
ally affect the briquet. 

Moisture in any quantity when added to mixture vitiates 
the quality of the briquet. 

Mixing is completed in two minutes, if done at about 
30©C. above the softening point of binder and if binder is added 
in liquid form. 

Binders .- Arranged in ascending order, according to the 
quality of the briquets obtained from them, the binders tested 
take the following sequences- Synthetic binders,with which no 
good results were obtained; soft coal tar pitch; hard coal tar 
pitch; Western Canadian Collieries asphalt and McMurray asphalt. 
About 6 J, of the pitches is required to make good briquets, while 
about 5% of the asphalts would suffice. 

Weathering .- The pitch briquets will stand severe outside 
storage with practically no loss or deterioration. 

Fire Tests .- All the briquets of commercial grade which 
were made proved to be excellent fuel, giving long burning and 
hot fires. The only feature to which objection might be taken 
is the inclination of the pitch briquets to smoke during the 
early stages of combustion. 











- 55 - 


Conclusions .- 

Owing to the plentiful distribution and the diversity of 

nature of the coals in the province of Alberta, coal of any de¬ 
ft 

sired grade may be procured with little difficulty. Under such 
conditions as these it is doubtful if the carbonization process 
will be introduced into the province. The field for low-tempera¬ 
ture carbonization is in those areas which have a supply of coal 
of a type unsuited for the market but which could be made suit¬ 
able by this treatment. Examples of districts having such con¬ 
ditions are the bituminous areas of England and the United States, 
where a smokeless domestic fuel is desired, and the area adjacent 
to the low-grade lignitic deposits of southern Saskatchewan and 
North Dakota. The difficulty which would be encountered in dis¬ 
posing of the by-products would also discourage the starting of 
a low-temperature carbonization plant. 

It is quite likely that some of the mines in the province 
will find that they can profitably briquet the slack coal produced 
at their mines. This possibility is rendered more likely by the 
promise, which experiments carried on at the University of Alberta 
have made, of making the asphalt residue from the Fort McMurray 
tar sands economically available as a binder. 




- 56 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Carbonization 

The Carbonization of Lignites: E. Stansfield & R. E. Gilmore; 
Transactions of Royal Society of Canada, Series III., 
Volume XII., 1918 . 

Carbonization of Canadian Lignite: E. Stansfield; J.Ind.ft Eng. 
Chem., Vol.13, No.1, Jan. 1921. 

Low Temperature Carbonization: Major H. L. Armstrong; Colliery 
Guardian, Dec.24 1920, p.1825. 

Low & High Temperature Carbonization: G. H. Thurston; Colliery 
Guardian, Jan. 7, 1921. 

Low Temperature Carbonization & Its Application To High Oxygen 
Coals: S. W. Parr; Colliery Guardian, Jan. 14 1921. 

Hie Fuel Problem: Dr. C. H. Lander; Assistant to Director of 
Fuel Research Board; Colliery Guardian, March 17 1922. 

Lignites & Brown Coals: Dr. Bone; Colliery Guardian, Mar.10 1922. 

Symposium of Low Temperature Carbonization: Dr. Lander & others; 
Colliery Guardian, April 21, 1922. 

The Low Temperature Carbonization of Coal: Dr. H. A. Curtis; 

Chem. & Met. Eng. J., Jan.3 1923 & succeeding numbers. 

Technical Paper 123, U.S.Bureau of Mines, Notes On Use of Low 
Grade Fuel In Europe: R.H.Fernald. 

Good sections on Low Temperature Carbonization are 
included in many of the technical books on coal, such as:- 

Coal & Its Scientific Uses: Dr. W. A. Bone; Longmans, Green & Co. 

Coal: E. S. Moore; John Wiley & Sons. 

American Fuels: Bacon & Hamer; McGraw-Hill. 





- 57 - 


Briquetting 

Bulletin 261, U.S.Geological Survey; Report on Coal Teeting Plant 
at St. Louis. 

Bulletin 343» U. S. Geological Survey; Binders for Coal Briquets. 

Bulletin 365* U. S. Geological Survey; Briquetting Tests at Fuel 
Testing Plant, Norfolk, Virginia. 

Bulletin 412, U. S. Geological Survey; Locomotive Tests on Briquets 

Bulletin 14, U. S. Bureau of Mines; Locomotive Tests of Lignite at 
Pittsburgh. 

Bulletin 24, U. S. Bureau of Mines; Reprint of Bull. 343, U. S. 
Geological Survey. 

Bulletin 27, U. S. Bureau of Mines; Reprint of Bull. 366, U. S. 
Geological Survey; House Heating Tests on Briquets. 

Bulletin 34, U. S. Bureau of Mines; Reprint of Bull. 412, U. S. 
Geological Survey. 

Bulletin 37, U. S. Bureau of Mines; Reprint of Bull. 363, U. S. 
Geological Survey; Locomotive & Torpedo Boat Tests on 
Briquets. 

Bulletin 58, U. S* Bureau of Mines; Fuel Briquet Investigations, 
1904-1912. 

Bulletin 89 , U. S. Bureau of Mines; Economic Methods of Utilizing 
Western Lignites. 

Tech. Paper 55, U. S. Bureau of Mines; Production & Use of Brown 
Coal In Vicinity of Cologne. 

Mining Brown Coal In Germany, Briquetting It & Extracting Its 
By-products; Coal Age, Oct. 19 1922. 

Mineral Resources of U. S., 1909, Part II .5 Coal Briquetting, p.197 

American Fuels: Eaccn & Hamor; Chapter on Briquetting by G.J. 
Mashek. 

Briquetting: A. L. Stillman; Chemical Publishing Co., Easton, Pa. 




- 58 - 


Canadian Coal 

Bulletins of Canadian Institute of Mining & Metallurgy:- 
Oct. 1922: Development of Coal Industry in Canada; F. W. Gray. 
Mar. 1923: Lignites of Saskatchewan; R. J. Lee. 

Mar. 19235 The Fuel Situation In Canada; B. F. Haanel. 

Mar. 1923: The Problem of Replacing Foreign Coal On Manitoba 
Market; G. B. Saunders. 

April. 1923: An Economic Study of Coal Mining In Alberta & 
South Eastern British Columbia; W. J. Dick. 




THE BIENFAIT CARBONIZING & BRIQUETTING PLANT 


OF 

THE LIGNITE UTILIZATION BOARD OF CANADA 


Early in 1917 the chemical staff of the Fuel Testing 
Division of the Mines Branch, Department of Mines, Ottawa, be^in 
a series of researches on the lignitic coals of southern Sas¬ 
katchewan. The object of this research was to ascertain their 
main characteristics, with a view toward determining a com¬ 
mercial method of M up-grading" them in order to produce a fuel 
which would stand weathering and shipment. The Lignite Utili¬ 
zation Board of Canada was created in the summer of 1918 under 
a joint agreement between the Federal, Manitoba and Saskatchewan 
governments. Subsequent to this date, the officers of the 
Lignite Utilization Board collaborated with the Fuel Testing 
Division in the necessary preliminary investigations. Based 
on the results of this research work, a carbonizer was designed, 
and it was decided to erect in the Souris coal field of southern 
Saskatchewan a large plant incorporating carbonizers of this 
type, and also the necessary drying, briquetting and other 
machinery. Construction was started in June, 1920, and com¬ 
pleted in August, 1921. 




60 


The plant is located about 5 miles south-east of Bienfait, 
and about 19 miles east of Estevan. This location was selected 
because it gave ready access to the two largest mines in the 
district: the Manitoba & Saskatchewan Collieries, half a mile 
to the north; and the Western Dominion, half a mile to the south. 

The Souris coal field from which the plant will draw raw 
material is quite extensive, comprising approximately 15,000 
square miles in Canada, and extending into north Dakota to the 
south. There are a large number of mines in the district, most 
of them being of comparatively small capacity, though three or 
four have a daily output of eight or nine hundred tons. About 
8 feet of a 13 ~foot seam is worked, the other 5 feet usually 
being left on the roof. The coal is a rather low grade lignite, 
having the following average composition: 

Moisture. 32.0# 

Volatile Matter... 27*0$ 

Fixed Carbon. 31 *0$ 

Ash. 10.0# 

B. t. u.......7>000 

Description of Plant 

The plant will be best described and understood by 
reference to the accompanying isometric sketch and plan. 

The coal is received in bottom-dump, open, steel cars, 
of which the Lignite Utilization Board owns three. These cars 
are spotted in the shed covering the track hopper, as shown, 






% 





i—n 







s 

1 

j 


z CO s 

.O r-n 

S o 

-= 





i 


5*2 

> =o 

5*h 

;§ 



| 

co —n cw 

* 1 — o 

ig 

1 

g 


X 

> z 

i£ 


1 

Z r-4 

d O 


? 

Hz 





O 





































- 61 - 


and the coal is dumped on to a hopper below the track. A 
bucket conveyor carries this coal to the crusher shown, and 
the crushed product is elevated to the two storage bins. A 
conveyor belt, shown dotted on the plan, carries the coal from 
either of these bins to an elevator which dumps it into either 
of two bins, one over each of the two dryers* These dryers are 
cylindrical shells, about 50 inches in length and 6 feet in 
diameter. They have a pitch downward towards their discharge 



They are supported by rollers along their lengths. They may 
be heated either by the waste flue gasesffrom the carbonizers, 
or by fires burning on grates underneath them. A blower is 
provided near the outlet to promote circulation, and by means 
of a system of dampers, the hot gases, after passing round 
the outside of the shell, may be-caused to go through the 
dryer either with the coal stream or against it. The 






























































- 62 - 


coal is elevated into bins with a capacity of 4 00 tons. 

The dried coal is fed into hopper (A), and from there 



constant rate by means of a rotating cylinder to which are 
attached radial paddles. The coal is retained in position 


on the incline by the baffles shown enlarged in Sketch No. 2. 
The heat for carbonization is provided, during the initial 
lighting-up stage, by the combustion of oil, and, under steady 
running conditions, by the combustion of the gas from the coal 
being carbonized. This combustion takes place in the furnace 
underneath; the hot products of combustion following the path 
indicated by the arrows on the sketch. At (B) they enter 
an underground passageway, along whicy they are conveyed either 
to the dryers or directly to the discharge stack. The floors 
of the carbonizing chambers are, in different retorts, made of 
fireclay or of carborundum slabs or shapes. The heat from the 




























- 63 - 


flue gases is conducted through these to the coal, which, by 
altering the paddles on the discharge mechanism at the foot of 
the carbonizer, may be made to travel at different rates, thus 
giving control over the temperature of carbonization. The 
gases pass through the apertures at the tops of the baffles 
and flow through the upper gas chamber (C,C) to the off-take 
pipe (D). From there the gas may be led directly to the outer 
air through a bleeder pipe, as is done during the starting 
period, or may be turned into the main gas header. This 
header receives gas from each of the retorts which may be 
operating. This gas is, of course, charged with the tar and 
other by-products. These, with the gas, are conducted along 
the header to the scrubbing train. 

The first element of the scrubbing train is a dust- 
trap with a water spray. In this, the gases deposit any sus¬ 
pended solid particles and also a considerable quantity of tar. 
This is dropped onto the water which forms a seal at the bottom. 
The gas is then passed through a tall vertical cylinder in 
which, by means of baffles, the gas is made to travel a cir¬ 
cuitous path. During its passage through this scrubber it is 
subjected to the action of continuous fine water spray which 
effectually removes most of the tar fog. Beyond this scrubber 
is a centrifugal pump which gives the gas its motion from the 
retorts, through the scrubbers, and finally into the gas holder 



64 - 


outside the building. The circulating water from the scrubbers 
is pumped into one of two large tanks outside the building, 
where the tar separates from the water, all floating to the top. 
Periodically this is removed. The water is pumped from the 
bottom of the tank, through Wolff cooler coils, and back into 
the scrubber. 

Ihe pressure in the retorts is controlled and kept 
constant by two very ingenious regulators, operated by com¬ 
pressed air, which control, respectively, a butterfly valve 
on the main header and the throttle of the recently installed 
steam turbine which rotates the centrifugal gas pump. 

The total flow of gas, the pressure at different points 
of the system and in the retorts, are all indicated by gauges, 
many of which are of the recording type. The temperatures at 
different points in the retorts are shown by a pyrometer 
indicator, to which can be attached by means of a selective 
switch leads from any of the fire ends placed in the coal 
streams. The carbonized coal has such a hi^i temperature 
that it would ignite if immediately exposed to the outer air. 
This difficulty is overcome by passing it through a jacketed 
spout, around which cool water is circulated. The discharge 
paddles, at the lower end of these water jackets, drop the 
coal into screw conveyors. These conveyors carry the carbon¬ 
ized product, or "char”, to an elevator which in turn drops it 
into bins over the briquetting room. 














































- 65 - 


The binder used in briquetting is a coal tar pitch, 
from the coke ovens at Sault Ste. Marie. This is delivered 
in tank cars provided with steam coils to facilitate discharge 
of the contents. It is stored in underground tanks outside 
the building, and is maintained in a molten condition by means 
of steam pipes. A pump accepts the binder from the bottom of 
the tanks, and elevates it through steam-jacketed pipes to a 
similarly jacketed tank near the top of the building. By means 
of an overflow pipe, a constant head is maintained in this 
upper tank. 

Following the char on its course through the briquetting 
plant, it is first dropped through an adjustable slide door onto 
a short plate conveyor, at the end of which, side by side with 
the binder, it is dropped into a horizontal, steam jacketed 
Mashek mixer. This mixer discharges into a large vertical 
fluxer in which the mix is stirred by means of arms on a 
vertical rotating shaft. The mix passes from here to an edge 
runner of the Chili Mill type, and then to another Mashek mixer 
where the final temperature regulation is made. A bucket con¬ 
veyor elevates the mixture to the presses, which are of the 
roll type. The briquets are discharged onto a shaking bar 
screen; the fines and dust dropping onto a belt which takes 
them back to the last Mashek mixer. The briquets drop from 
the bar screen onto a long conveyor belt which passes under 




THE W. S. TYLER COMPANY. CLEVELAND, OHIO 





























































































































































































































66 - 


and outside of the building to a bucket conveyor discharging 
into the outside storage bins. 

Technical Details of Treatment 

The coal, as received, is crushed to a size comparable 
with the appended screen analysis, this having been found to 
be the sizing which, after passing through the various units, 
requires the least amount of binder. 

The feed of the dryers is so regulated that the discharge 
will have about A% of moisture in it. Originally the hot gases 
were passed through the driers against the coal stream, but it 
was found that this caused the coal to ignite; the current of 
gases was accordingly reversed. 

Combustion in the retorts is so controlled that the 
lower bank of pyrometers registers between 1,00Q°F. and 
1100°F. An effort is made to control the speed of discharge 
from retorts to such a rate that carbonization to &% of vola¬ 
tile matter is obtained. Under these conditions the coal takes 
about 30 minutes for carbonization. The process gives a yield 
of char amounting to about 46^ of the original coal. Consider¬ 
ing the average original ash to be about 10^, this yield gives 
about 21% as the ash in the char. This percentage is somewhat 
reduced in the briquets on account of the addition of the binder. 

The following laboratory results were obtained by Mr. 

S. Stansfield on Shand lignite, from the Souris field, when 





carbonized under similar conditions: - 


Product 

Yield per ton of Moist 
Coal (As Received) 

j> of dry 
Lignite 

/> of original 
Heating Value 

Water*■ 


11.7 


Gas....... 

3150 cu.ft. at 385 B.t.u, 

17.0 

8.3 

Crude Tar. 

5.3 gals. 

4.1 

6.0 

Residue 
(Char).. 

910 lbs. 

66.7 

78.1 

Ammonium 

Sulphate. 

10.2 lbs. 

.... 

.... 

Lo SB. 


0.5 

7.6 


For continuous operation, probably the whole of the above 
gas would be used in heating the retorts. The tar, if distilled, 
would only give about l/5 of the 10 or 12/£ of binder necessary 
for briquetting. 

The briquetting is done at a temperature of 180®F., the 
coal being used from the bin above the briquetting room while 
still hot, and the temperature of the mixture at the different 
stages being controlled by the steam-jacketed mixers. 

A flow sheet showing the course of the materials through 
the plant, is given on the next page. 

Diffic ul ties Encountered 


During the period subsequent to December,19» 1922, when 
















68 


FLOW SHEET 


Coal 

TRACK HOPPER 

I 

CRUSHER 

RAW LIGNITE BINS 
DRYER FEED BINS 

I 

DRYERS 

f 

DRY LIGNITE BINS 
CARBONIZERS 


Binder 

RAILWAjf TANKS 
BINDER STORAGE TANK 
BINDER FEED PUMP 

I 

BINDER FEED TANK 


(Gas Tar) 
DUST CQLLECTER 

I 

SCRUBBER 


(Tar) 

SETTLING TANKS 


(Gas) 

GAS HOLDER 


(Lignite Char) 
LIGNITE CHAR BINS 


MIXER 
FLUXER 
EDGE RUNNER 

I 

TEMPER BIG MIXER 
PRESS 

SHAKING^GRIZZLY 
BRIQUET BIN 
















- 69 - 


continuous operation was attempted, a number of difficulties 
were encountered which finally resulted in the closing down of 
the plant. The dryers operated without trouble, giving perfect 
satisfaction. On the other hand, considerable trouble was 
experienced with the carbonizers. 

When starting the operation of the retorts, the gases 
wero always wasted through a bleeder pipe until such time as 
steady conditions had been attained. This pipe projected 
out of the eastern side of the building, and the prevailing 
winds at that time of year, some of them quite strong, were 
from the east. These winds caused a positive pressure to 
prevail along the eastern side of the building, which forced 
the cold mid-winter air back up the bleeder to the retort. 

This caused a cooling of the retort gases, resulting in a 
deposition of the suspended tar. The tar thus formed caked 
the coal passing down one of the channels, completely stopping 
the flow of coal in this channel. Operations had to be sus¬ 
pended, and the retort allowed to partially cool, while the 
channel was cleared. On starting up again, the gas was, as 
soon as possible, put through the scrubbing system and stored 
in the gas holder outside. The drive for the exhauster pump 
was a constant speed motor, which made the system so inflexible 
that the correct pressure could not be maintained in the retort. 
A partial vacuum was produced which drew air into the gas 













70 


chamber, causing combustion of the gases to take place. This 
lack of adaptability of the exhauster caused the abandonment 
of all hope of running with the scrubbing system in the gas 
line. Further attempts were made to operate on the bleeder, 
but they only resulted in necessitating frequent suspensions 
of operations to effect repairs. The net result of the con¬ 
tinuous coolings and heatings to which the retort was subjected 
was the cracking of the carborundum plates and the production 
of numerous leaks and cracks in the cover plates. 

The nature of the difficulties indicates, not that the 
retort should be condemned in its entirety, but rather that 
continuous operation was attempted an an inopportune time and 
with equipment which did not give the retort a chance for 
success. The steam turbine mentioned above, which gave the 
gas train the much desired flexibility, was not installed till 
after the operating period mentioned herein was completed. 

A good deal of trouble was encountered in the briquetting 
room, chiefly on account of water freezing in the elevator 
boots, etc. during the very cold weather, and of electric 
motors burning out after the installation had become thoroughly 
wetted by the very damp, steam-laden atmosphere prevailing 
there. 

Future Prospects 


During December, 1922, Mr. R. A. Strong, the chemical 























71 


engineer at the Bienfait plant, made a visit to Hebron, North 
Dakota, where the Bureau of Mines of the United States govern¬ 
ment has established an experimental station for the investi¬ 
gation of the lignites of that state. There he examined the 
Hood-Odell retort, a carbonizer operating on the internally- 
heated principle, from which the officials of the Bureau claim 
to have obtained very satisfactory results. As a result of his 
enquiries, Mr. Strong recommended to the Lignite Utilization 
Board that a trial on the Souris coals be given to this retort. 
His recommendation was approved by the Board, and he was sent 
with three carloads of Souris coal to Hebron to conduct the 
trial. Very satisfactory results have been reported, and so, 
in all probability, a retort of this type will be installed 
in the Bienfait Plant. 

Provided that equally good carbonization results are 
obtained at Bienfait, and in view of the fact that the engineers 
of the Lignite Utilization Board, by virtue of the experience 
gained, can, by some rearrangements in the briquetting plant, 
get good results there, there seems to be very good reason to 
hope that a successful commercial process will be worked out 
in the near future. 
























