For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Hurt, Everett, F. 

Bases of rural community education. 

1937 . 




























Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/basesofruralcommOOever 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


BASES' OF RURAL CQMUNITY EDUCATION 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE. GRADUATE FACULTY 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REOUIREMEHTS 
FOR THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF ARTS 


DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 


BY 

EVERETT F. HURT 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
MAY, 1937. 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


id 3 r 

^ r 


P cl^.'G 

LIST OF TABLES AND DIAGRAMS i|| 

APPENDICES 111 

Chapter 

I. INTRODUCTION 1 


II. 

III. 


CRITICISMS ? EDUCATIONAL THEORIES , 


EDUCATIONAL SOCIOLOGY OF THE PEACE 
BRITISH COLUMBIA 


TYPES OF EXPERIMENTS 
RIVER DISTRICT OF 


XV. 


V. 


VI. 


VII. 


VIII. 


EDUCATIONAL SOCIOLOGY (CONTINUED) s TYPICAL YOUNG 
CAREERS 


THE PROBLEM OF SOCIALIZATION OF HIGH SCHOOL INSTRUCTION 


THE CONSOLIDATION OF ADMINISTRATION OF SCHOOLS: 
PEACE RIVER 


RESOURCES OF COMMUNITY EDUCATION: ASPECTS OF FOLK 
SCHOOLS 


CONCLUSIONS: THE IMPLICATIONS OF COMMUNITY EDUCATION 


64 

89 

125 

139 

161 


ii 






ill ST OF TABLES AND DIAGRAMS 


TABLES Page 

I.Academic status ox ex-high school students of 

the Holla High School area. 79 

II.Vocational and professional training status of 

ex-high school students of the Rolla School area. 79 

III.Sociological,economic or vocational status of 

ex-high school students of the Rolla School area. 79 

DIAGRAMS 

I,Map of British Co limbia,showing the position of the 
Peace River District in relation to the remainder 
of the Province. 57 

II.Administrative Organization of the Peace River 

Inspectorate. 134 

III.Diagram indicating the chief physical and economic 

features of the Peace River District of B.C. 137 

1IV.Diagram indicating the present Peace River Larger 

Unit ox Administration. 138 

APPENDICES 

-'-Appendix I. 169 

Appendix II . 17S 

Appendix ill 173 

Appendix IV (Bibliography; 178 


-iii- 


















' 


. 


* 

. 

. 



















- 





- 






















CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 


The object of this thesis is to outline some of the 
educational principles concerned in the process 
of community growth. It is customary to deal with educational 
principles in terms of the education of children, and to leave 
out of the picture important factors relating to the sociol¬ 
ogical background of the educational process. It is the aim 
of the writer herein to develop the discussion, from the 
general phases in connection with the education in schools, to 
include further social aspects of community life and to indicate 
, the place and importance of adult education. 

To attain these ends in the discussion the following 
subjects are developed: 

(1) Present-day statements regarding the objects, results, 
extension and revision of educational practices. Concerning 
these aspects of education account must be taken of both pro¬ 
fessional and. lay opinion and of the criticisms arising 
therefrom. 

(2) Methods and results connected with experimentation 
with teaching and administration. 

(3) Economic and social aspects of the rural fj?ontier. 
Specific characteristics and problems of the people of the 
district concerned are made the basis of this part of the 
discussion. 

(4) Case studies of young adults and their careers in 
the rural frontier. 

(5) The philosophy of modern education with special 
reference to- curricular aims and examinations for the various 
subjects of instruction. 

(S) The importance of effective educational administra¬ 
tion in partially developed, and sparsely settled, frontier areas. 
The problem is to show how educational efficiency in such front¬ 
ier areas might be made to correspond favourably with that in 

ground of this, discussion is taken from the methods, conditions 





























, 







■ 



• ' ■ ' ' ■ ... lop.*: o 














































.. . 

.i:"■ ) 





■ 













































and results of the present operation of the Pes.ce Biver 
experiment in consolidation of administration being carried 
forward by the Department of Education of British Columbia. 

(7) A summary of the means of community education: 
extension education, folk schools, adult education, and 
correspondence education. 

These topics are related to the general welfare of education, 
but are developed in this thesis for the single purpose of 
showing the relationships of broad and varied educational prin¬ 
ciples and concepts to specific problems found in specific com¬ 
munities. Their inter-relationships form the basis of 
“community education". 

Education commences in childhood and the trends of theory 
and practice in education must first be applied to the schools 
of a community. We must overcome adverse reactions and make 
known to the parents of children and to the public mind (in 
democratic countries) the best methods devised. Co-operation 
of all members of the community must be had, and there must be 
created open minds to accept the findings of scientific experi¬ 
ment in education as it is so accepted in other fields of 
research. 

Then there is the need for educational innovation. The 
forms of innovation discussed herein are two; namely, new methods 
being practised by some outstanding private schools in Europe and 
America, and the movement towards consolidation of educational 
administration in British Columbia (see Chapter VI). In both cases 
rather courageous leadership is required for successful demonstra¬ 
tion; and it is a cardinal purpose of the present writer, to 
indicate throughout this study, the need for and value of co¬ 
operation among administrators, citizens and teachers in the 














. 






. 





























* 













■ 




















-3- 


matter of community education. There must be shown an open- 
minded acceptance of educational improvements. 

To apply successfully any educational theory or practice to a 
community the specific characteristics of that community must 
be understood and treated appreciatively and sympathetically. 

The Peace River District of British Columbia, being the last 
grain-growing frontier of Western Canada, and situated as it is 
in the north-eastern portion of the settled portion (see Fig. 1.) 
of the province, is an example of a typical frontier with a 
record, perhaps, of a longer period of isolation than any other 
grain-growing and stock-raising section of Canada. On the other 
hand we must not lose sight of the potential possibilities of 
any community. Its economic possibilities should be known and 
its beauty realized; and into the education of the youth of a 
community must be worked the basis for an appreciation of the 
varied values of the community. Two divisions of this study 
deal with the economic and sociological phases of the Peace 
River District of British Columbia and its people. 

When the educational needs of the community are known it 
seems logical to follow with a careful consideration of the 
philosophy of the available forms and facilities of education. 
This will include an examination of the objects of the various 
phases of education imposed, or to be imposed, upon the youth 
and young adults of the community. A further important aspect 
of the matter would be the technique of examining and testing 
the results of the education. Generally taken, the methods, the 
facilities, the administrative powers and the testing of results 











■-: -■ >W v:; r> ; 










■ 






. 




, 

. 

* 


















. 

. 

- 










* 








-4- 


should be based upon the curricular aims of the courses of 
study, while these aims in turn should be based upon a carefully 
considered knowledge of the socio-economic background of the 
given community* In the consideration of this topic the writer 
uses in this thesis a summary of some of the literature dealing 
with modern tendencies in philosophies of the various school 
subjects and a summary of the records of motives involved in 
present-day curricular reconstruction* An attempt is made to 
focus these philosophies upon the educational problems of the 
rural frontier. 

In addition to these considerations attention must be 
centered upon a very important factor of educational success; 
namely, the form of school administration* Ideals and theories 
are of little avail in educational units which fail to provide 
suitable settings and. adequate equipment. Outstanding educators 
and administrators of education 3^ to-day are suggesting the 
formation of larger administrative units for school systems and 
appointing to the heads of such administrations such educational 
experts as are fitted to co-operate to the fullest advantage 
with those engaged in teaching. In the writer*s own community 
such an enlarged administrative area is being used as an experi¬ 
mental ground for consolidation of administration. In a division 
of this thesis the fundamental details of this organization are 
discussed. 

Finally there is a discussion in the form of a summary 
of the various means of extending school education into "Community 
education" found in selected countries of the world. In this 












- 

■ 






* . 

m 1 








- 




■ 







■ 






. 

- 








■ 


















































-5- 


chapter there is special reference to the value found in the 
operation of folk schools 5 in correspondence education, radio 
education, special agricultural courses and the importance of 
adult education. It is hoped that through the presentation of 
the brief summary referred to in this paragraph possibility of 
correlating elementary and high school education with the edu¬ 
cational phases of the entire community will be recognized. 

It is hoped also that there will be some realization of the poss 
ibility of applying progressive philosophies of education to a 
ver3^ broad and unified field of education in a given social 
organization, in the nation no less than in the community. 









. 


' 
























CHAPTER II 


CRITICISMS, EDUCATIONAL THEORIES, TYPES OF EXPERIMENTS 


(1) Criticism* of educational methods and aims is, 
perhaps, one of the inevitable results of social evolution, or 
revolution. The sources of the criticisms are important to 
know. Lay critics are prone to, stress the need, for more pract¬ 
ical training for children and young people. They often rite 
or speak at length on this subject and upon that of the .back¬ 
wardness of the educational profession in the latter’s ability 
to adjust education to fit the demands'of ’’real” life. Uriting 
in "The 3. C. Teacher” 1 Ur. Hugh Morrison quotes the following 
extract from ”The Times, (London), editorial, October 27, 3.934, 
as being typical of lay criticism of professional educators and 
the aims of their courses of study: 

"During the past school year much loose talk has been 
flying about concerning the failure of our present schools 
and the school masters to prepare the young people for 
life in the modern world, and it is symptomatic of the 
school master r s isolation that it has come less from 
outside the schools than from -.dthin. The educationist 
is too apt to persuade himself that the burdens of the 
world are upon his shoulders, and that if he does not 
succeed in educating his pupils in the short time they 
are with him, they will go out uneducated and remain 
uneducated for life. tith him lies the responsibility 
of creating human beings; even the Creator’s part is 
overlooked." 

The writer of the above extract feels, evidently, that 
professional educators fail to give enough heed to the opinions 
of other professionals when the former set about the work of 
criticism of current educational practices end of constructing 
new curricula on bases of new educational aims, .'".hatever value 


"Idorrison, Hugh It. : "A Flea for Social Studies", The 3. C. 
Teacher , Vol. XIV, Ho. 6, February, 1935, p. 6. 





























. 































































-7- 


lies in various lay criticisms of modern educational methods 
is surely being discovered in the numerous branches of educa,- 
tional research being carried on. The future appears to promise 
sources of greater co-operation in the field of educational 
evolution than the past has shown. Such books as Dr. C. H. Judd’s 
"Education and Social Progress'S simply written for all to read, 
will doubtless increase the intimacy between homes and schools 
and between schools and the general public mind. With the 
thought of such a possibility in mind, we shall not trace the 
course of divergent and opposing criticisms further, but rather 
accept modern criticism, a growing educational consciousness, 
and educational reform as facts and deal with them as a unity. 

(2) We must remember that modern educational advance is 
based largely upon principles of education formulated by the 
thinkers of past years, and that, in our progressive systems 
new and old philosophies are being mingled. The additional 
requirement is educational research to which heed must be given 
by both administrators and teachers. We shall not attempt to 
evaluate the educational philosophies under discussion herein, 
our aim being to merely indicate the general nature of present- 
day educational tendencies and problems. 

Discussions concerning educational failures of the past, 
and attempts to reform the teaching of to-day are based, as they 
have not been heretofore, upon the realization of social require¬ 
ments of citizenship. "...To-day forward looking people are 
trying to correlate and unify the subjects of the high school 
curriculum to the end that four years in school will provide the 








. 








* 


' 








■ 
















































































- 8 - 


student with a complex of meaningful related experiences 
facilitating his more complete readjustment, physical and 
spiritual, to modern life.." 1 In consideration of educational- 
systems as a whole, Dr. C. H. Judd, in his recent book, 

"Education and Social Progress') stresses the need for social¬ 
ization and modernization of education: "...If human life is 
to develop in a wholesome way, society, which has built cities, 
must compensate for the advantages which children lost as a 

p 

result of the movement of families away from the open country,.”^ 
Modern critics of educational traditions urge further that edu¬ 
cation must be made to keep pace, in philosophy and content, 
with the progress of science and modern engineering genius. 
"...Society can discharge its duty to children only by organizing 
educational institutions corresponding in completeness of equip¬ 
ment to the modern industrial system.. In these statements we 
might recognize two modern tendencies in educational reform; 
namely, a rejection of many traditional philosophies with the 
view of making education more effective as a force in the modern 
world and, finally, a directing of reform towards improved edu¬ 
cational administration whereby the organizing and equipping of 
school systems would be performed under professional guidance. 

Many useless educational traditions have been slowly 
withdrawn from their place of influence in educational philosophy. 
One of these traditions which resulted, in numerous instances 
during the past, in one-sided educational development and much 

^Bradford, Arthur: "Integration and Socialization in the Inter¬ 
pretation of Literature", The Clearing House, N.Y,, Vol. X, #1., 
1935. „ ■»— 

JrJudd, C. H.: "Education and Social Progress", p. 339. 

,3 lbid. 













. 

. 




' 
















. 















































. 












waste for some students was the belief in the formal disciplin¬ 
ary value of the purely academic high school. Traces of trends 
towards the socialization of education are discovered in the 
progressive thought of the latter years of the nineteenth century. 
A recent report of the North Central Association on "High School 
Curricular Organization" 1 contains the following statements: 

"..The newer subjects, within a conservative range, were 
obviously for the needs of contemporary life, but they 
could also be made valuable for college entrance. They 
should be taught in the same way to both college- 
preparatory and non-college-preparatory pupils. Thus, 
one .group might get the content it needed and. ignore the 
discipline, and the other group might get the discipline 
it needed and ignore the content...This was the greatest 
educational insight achieved by the educational leader¬ 
ship of the second half of the nineteenth century.." 

In conclusion, one believes that the conservative nature of 

educational reform previous to the present decade resulted more 

from former inadequacies in educational research than from a 

neglect on the part of educational leaders to realize the need 

for the influence of education in the function of economic life. 

It was educational theor}/-, one feels, that wan at fault. 

Educational theories are to-day admittedly on uncertain 

ground in certain quarters. Educational leadership is motivated, 

however, to progressive action by one clear aim; namely, the aim 

of making education an influence in a changing world. The 

significance of this latter circumstance in educational progress 

is made clear by Mr. G. P. McNally, ^Supervisor of Schools for 

Alberta, who writes in the "Toronto School" in part as follows: 


North Central Association, Publication Office, Ann Arbor (1933): 
"High School Curriculum Reorganization", p, S.ff. 

2 "Curricula for Canadian High Schools", by G. P. McNally: 

The Schoo l, Toronto, January, 1935, p. 377, 































. ■ 

















' 



























































- 10 - 


”..In the absence of a clearly defined philosophy, 
objects which met with approved, (referring to the pre¬ 
paration for curriculum revision in Alberta), the deputy 
minister, superintendent or other responsible officer 
must devise his own line of action and do the best he 
can. It has never been the practice in any of the 
provinces to assume that in order to get a new course 
every former practice must be abandoned ana the entire 
slate wiped clean. This is fortunate, because all that 
is criticised is not bad, and along with the putting of 
this subject or that practice on the defensive, there 
must be a searching scrutiny of the subject or practice 
which it is proposed to substitute, if for no other 
reason than that it is untried. 

Although we may lack a generally accepted philosophy 
devised to meet our specific situation, we are not for 
that reason prevented from setting up certain criteria 
by which to test our work. If we agree that all our 
teaching finds justification in the theory of the 
improvability of the child, and that neither material 
nor method matters, unless desirable change results, 
we may apply certain important tests, e. g., Is the 
inclusion of this subject in the educational programme 
of a child likely to influence his thinking and behavior 
in the direction of our objects, general though they may 
be? Is the material in it likely to be of maximum value 
to the child, that is, are we satisfied that when he is 
mastering this he is better employed than when he is 
engaged at anything else? Are our courses so arranged 
that if a child is compelled to leave school at the end 
of the first year or second year, the school has enabled 
him to make the best use of his time? Is there reason 
to believe that the child, educated according to this 
plan, will be better equipped not only to live a better 
life himself but to make his contribution to the better¬ 
ing of the corporate life of the state?.,” 

In the above-quoted remarks Mr. McNally indicates, 

firstly, that the new philosophy of education will inevitably, 

and possibly, fortunately, assume the character of eclecticism, 

and secondly, he has revealed the tendency of modern educational 

reformers to base educational reform upon social and corporate 

considerations. The tendencies so indicated would seem to lead 

more and more towards the formulation of educational principles 

which would be based upon the knowledge of valuable relationships 








■ 






- 





























' 



























* 




































. 


































- 11 - 


be tween education and social progress. The principles of modern 
curriculum revision are meant to be the background of both cult¬ 
ural and vocational development. 

Further tendencies towards social progress are indicated 
in recent world conferences on education. The discussion of the 
"New Education 1 ' carried on by the representatives who met in 
Kronborg Castle in Denmark in 1929, is remarkable as an attempt 
to make a synthesis of rather a multitude of streams of educational 
theory and practice, and to weave with the latter the results of 
general psychological research and new philosophies of life. 

Such a world conference as that held in 1929, representing as it 
did such a bringing together of varied experienced opinion could 
not but result in a striking force of educational message. 
Generalizing the sum of the messages of the conferences, Professor 
William Boyd, editor of "Towards a New Education "^ makes clear 
some outstanding principles formulated by the conference as being 
general in the educational leadership of the world. Regarding 
the question of curricular reform there is clearly a tendency 
consciously directed towards the study of what is good in the 
pioneer work of all pioneers in the field of the psychology of 
child-life. In an opening address of the conference, the organ¬ 
izing director of the 1929 conference, Mrs. Beatrice Enson 
emphasized the need for educationists to disregard, in their 
discussions and work of reform, barriers formerly presented by 
considerations of "race, creed, dogma, system, place, technique 

•*-Boyd, William: "Towards A New Education" (1930); a report of 
the world conference on education, held at Kronborg Castle, 
in 1929. 



































' 






■ 


. 











. 






































































, 











or country". This broadest of outlooks, the speaker maintained, 
is required in order to enable present-day leaders of education 
to do justice to the mass of material gained by the pioneers of 
educational research. The streams of educational ideals being 
passed on from Rousseau, Pestalozzi, Froebel, Gruntwig, Dewey, 
Hall, Kilpatrick and others, it was stated, must be synthesized, 
that educational progress might be attended by a comprehension 
of educational relationships in and through society. 

The general nature of the progress of modern curriculum¬ 
building appears to be dynamic and evolutionary. There is a 
marked tendency to formulate temporary programmes of study and 
to allow the teacher more freedom in the planning of courses 
suited to his particular students and to the needs of the 
community concerned. Inevitably, marked pioneering experiments 
in education are carried on in private schools in which there 
are generally small enrollments. It may be that the latter fact 
detracts from the soundness of the various recommendations made 
by the leading speakers at the world conference on education in 
1929. Yet the New Education Fellowship movement is justified, 
for behind the movement is the desire to extend to wider fields 
the best principles of psychological experiment in education. 

If political barriers remain intact to defend national greed and 
aggrandizement, educational barriers are being banished, and human 
society through education may become unified. 

Two outstanding characteristics are found in the newer 
school curricula; namely, an attempt to apply theoretical concepts 
to the actual curricular structure and a persistent formation of 
work-units around social experiences or life-like centres. The 










. 






















. 

. 




. 

■ 









' 
























- 13 - 


latter characteristic is being motivated by the influence of the 
pragmatic educational philosophy of education. To illustrate 
the enrichment of pupil activities we may cite the new emphasis 
being placed upon the following activities: (1) Health, (2) Social 
Activities, (3) Spare-time Activities and (4) Guidance, Under 
these headings^is placed direction for definite foundational 
practice in mental hygiene, moral and social judgment and a deep 
appreciation of leisure time and its benefits. Hence it would 
appear that not only pragmatic ideals in education but also the 
dynamic concept of curriculum building have become fundamental 
motives in the latter work, State education continues, of course, 
to be controlled by broad and universal controlling principles, 
but is subject to an increasing degree to the needs of individual 
activity. 

In addition to the two tendencies in curriculum-building 
discussed in the last paragraph, Henry Harap 2 finds the following 
tendencies to dominate four years’ publications of modern curric¬ 
ula in a large number of states and countries: 

(1) Stress upon meaningful goals and attention to a 
measurement of progress in given units. 

(2) Increasing numbers of courses appear to be useful or 
functional in character. 

(3) numerous courses of study are mimeographed and stated 
to be m experimental stage (53% of material studied). 

(4) Integretation has emerged as a new trend in curriculum 
structure. 

(5) An interest is everywhere being taken in curriculum¬ 
building. 


•ktteid, E. W.: ’’Saskatchewan’s Hew Curriculum”, The B. C. Teacher, 
Vol, XIV., Ho. 4, December, 1934, p. 7. 

^Harap, Henry: “Recent energy in__Courses of Study”, The Journal 
of Educational Hesearc h, May 1935, pp. 625, 626. 
























. 




































. 








. 
















■ 








. 
































- 14 - 


(6) Courses in curriculum-building are offered to 
advanced students of education. 

(7) There is sustained interest in the revision of 
curricula, especially in those of secondary education. 

From these conclusions it is evident that experimental 
science is a basic means of improving the foundations of 
educational planning. With this scientific attitude in the 
reformation of curricula is being interwoven the valuable find¬ 
ings from the field of child-psychology and from careful studies 
in educational sociology, end the influence of varied wide-spread 
co-operation in educational progress is being felt. In this co¬ 
operative science of education no greater contributing factor 
towards discovery of better method is found, than that of the 
relatively few "free-lance n schools pioneering in educational 
practice and claiming no allegiance to tradition and recognizing 
no standard requirements in the academic field nor any outside 
supervision. 

(3) In the consideration of pioneering efforts in the 
more-or-less untried methods in education, the following questions 
arise: 1. What are the general aims of the teachers of the school 
in question? 2. What standard of academic attainment does the 
school produce, or aim to produce? 3. What are the administrators’ 
aims regarding matters of cultural and vocational training? 4. 

How are the problems of social activity and discipline handled? 

5. How are the methods in the solutions of the latter problems 
related to the practical applications found in life-situations? 

6. What educational philosophy predominates in the thoughts of 
the instructors of the school? 7. In what ways are the recognized 













' 

' 







■ 

























■ 










































- 15 - 


principles of educational psychology applied to assist the 
learning of the students? 8. What form, of measurement of pro¬ 
gress is employed? Then finally there is the crucial question: 

How nearly does the school realize its own alms and those of 
progressive sociologists? 

It is not the writer's aim to emphasize any particular 
principle involved in the practices of the "progressive" schools 
to be described. The essential interest in this present connec¬ 
tion is to note wha te v er phases in the systems which pertain to 
the development of ideals and habits regarding cultural, social 
and economic aspects of life. Dr. Kilpatrick‘S states that 
school must provide a plan for "actual experiencing". This 

"actual experiencing" must be taken to mean, however, not actual 

.2 

situations, (though that is becoming more and more possible) 
but the planning of school situations to resemble as nearly as 
possible situations of real life. Dr. Kilpatrick's view (as 
seen isolated in this statement from its context) might be 
questioned, it would seem, on the ground that many prevailing 
social and economic practices are in themselves not worthy 
examples to follow. The writer believes that many of the as¬ 
sumptions of the Pragmatic School might be criticized on the 
latter basis, and that education should not only be a training 
to fit people for the usages of the modern world but also to 
fit them with a working knowledge of growth and improvement. 

-^Kilpatrick, W. H. : "Education for a Changing Civilization",p. 113. 
^The Production of useful motion picture films as well as the 
production of poetry and prose for publication are some of the 
most recent activities of high, school students in Lincoln High 
School, H. Y. 













































. 










. 

, 01 













































- 16 - 


Before examining the systems of any of the pioneer 
schools specifically let us note some of the pertinent impli¬ 
cations contained in the pragmatic philosophy of education. 

The key to educational attitude ex-pressed in this philosophy is 
the belief in the n instrumental” function of school life 5 that 
is, in the belief that through education all useful knowledge 
can be actively humanized. Some quotations from typical passages 
in Professor John Dewey 1 s ’’Democracy and Education” will serve 
to illustrate the philosophical point at issue. Concerning the 
interest and usefulness of history as a subject of study in 
schools, Dewey writes as followrs: ’’The seggrega.tion which kills 
the vitality of history is divorce from the present modes and 
concerns of social life. The past just as past is no longer 
our affair.But knowledge of the past is the key to understand¬ 

ing the present.....The true starting point of history is always 
some present situation with its problems..”" 

Upon an examination of the above statements from Dewey, 
we feel that through modern trends in the reform of history and 
the establishment of the new subject, Social Studies, much of 
his philosophy has already been adopted. The value to be found 
in the.study of Dewey’s philosophy in connection with' modern 
curricular reform and educational practice is to be found in his 
accentuation of practical social values. The extreme aspects of 
the philosophy need not concern us in this study. The value of 
any philosophy an far as education is concerned, is its power to 
inspire progressively-minded ..teachers and administrators of 
educational institutions. 

^Dewey, John: ’’Democracy and Education”, p. 248, f. 







■ 



' 

* 








- 








* 





* ■ * 









■ 



























. 




























- 17 - 


Let us follow Dewey*s thought further. In "Decocracy 
and Education"-^- we read: 

"..Since life means growth, a living creature lives as 
truly and positively at one stage as at another with 
the same intrinsic fullness and with the same absolute 
claims. Hence education means the enterprise of supply¬ 
ing the conditions which ensure growth or adequacy of 
life irrespective of age..’* 

And with the needs of an increasingly technical age in mind and 

with the thought of this relating to education, Dewey proceeds: 

"..Thinking is the accurate and deliberate instituting 
of connections between that is done and its consequences.. 
In just the degree in which mental activity^ is separated 
from active concern with the world, from doing something 
and connecting the doing with what is undergone, words 
and symbols come to take the place of ideas...We get so 
thoroughly used to a kind of'pseudo-idea, a. half percep¬ 
tion that we are not aware how half dead our mental 
observations and ideas are and how much keener they 
would be if we formed them under the condition^ of vital 
experience which required us to use judgment."^ 

It is hoped that the above references to the pragmatic 

educational philosophy will serve as a general introductory 

consideration of pioneer schools which aim pre-eminently to 

educate their students to face realities of life with the 

greatest possible advantage educationally. 

The idea of the di ild-centred school is not new; yet the 

applic ation of the idea on the bases of scientific findings and 

modern' educational needs requires much further development. 

* 

Since Rousseau accentuated the importance of allowing for each 
stage in the development of a young learner, some effort has 
been made to correlate education with general living. A study 
of modern curricular aims would reveal a. renewed effort in this 


^Dewey, John: "Democracy and Education" p. 248, f. 
2 Ibid, 


















' 




. 

. 



























■ 


































- 18 - 


direction. The discovery of the most beneficial degree of 
individual freedom to be allowed various types of individuals 
in school has not with certainty been made. Around the general 
conception of educational influences must be woven the consider¬ 
ations of immediate discipline, social development, character 
and personality. The question of individual freedom in school 
is complicated by traditional beliefs, divergence of psychological 
theories and confusion of social aims. Because of this fact of 
confusion, there is a specially high degree of interest taken in 
'•progressive" educational experiments, intended to solve in some 
way, the vexed problems of individual development in other than 
traditional means. 

The educational principles taught by Rousseau, Pesrtolozzi, 
Froebel, Herbart and others find renewed growth in present-day 
educational development. The tone of the messages delivered 
during the activities of The Hew Education Fellowship in 1929, 
seems atune with the spirit of those earlier educationists above- 
mentioned. There appears to be an intensely renewed effort to 
make education to-day truly developmental for the countless types 
of Individual learners. Dr. Adolphe Ferriere, representative for 
the Latin countries at the 1929 conference^ at Kronborg, stressed 
the need for the recognition of the "hidden beauty of the child's 
soul" and a like need for the recognition of the individuality of 
that beauty. From Madame Montessori we have the following 
characteristic statement: "..Everyone has his own rhythm, his own 

p 

centre, his own growth, his own. beauty". Education can, no more 

3-Bo yd, op. cit., Introduction. 

2 Boyd, op. cit., p. 4. 





. 








■ 








■» 































































* 

























- 19 - 


than can the world, live upon ideals alone. Every worthy 
educational ideal is a challenge to society to establish in its 
school systems and homes, media through which the ideals set up 
for individual and social development can be striven for. Those 
schools, therefore, which adopt revolutionary methods will be of 
especial interest to students of community education. We shall 
now consider some examples of such schools. 

An outstanding project in the "new education" is that 
carried on by Mr. Paul Roberts in Frensham Heights^ a private 
school in England, Mr. Roberts, principal of the school, reported 
(1929) an attendance of 90 pupils, including both seniors and 
juniors. Each junior and beginner is in the charge of an older 
senior pupil of the school. The senior pupil is familiar with 
the principles of the school and knows the aims of the teachers. 

As supervisors of the younger pupils, the older pupils are re¬ 
sponsible for matters pertaining to general advice to their juniors 
as well as for those matters which affect the play-behavior and 
study difficulties of the pupils in their charge. Through the 
working out of these relationships and responsibilities, the 
principal hoped to develop sympathies and trust which would later 
be of value in the shaping of a wider society outside of school. 

The pupils enjoy, what is termed by the principal, limited self- 
government, but which, he claims, is real to the pupils. Formal 
meetings are held three times each term, at which the pupils 
discuss and pass upon their own social and study problems. The 
examinations of the school are set by state authorities, bringing 
one phase, at least, of the school’s activities under standard 

■^Boyd, op. cit., p. 


28 
















' 


■ 

* 












■ 


* I 













































- 20 - 


measures common ho the free schools. 

Mr. Robert’s conclusions are brief and may be stated as 
follows: 1. No school could exist without examinations 5 

2. Examinations at an early stage in the pupil's growth have un¬ 
desirable effects and were not practised in his school; 3. The 
socialized methods prevalent in the school had to be compromized 
periodically for the sake of attaining high standards in examin¬ 
ations . 

It would seem that a somewhat generally recognized 
educational difficulty is illustrated in the record of Mr. Roberts' 
school; namely, there is shown an apparent incompatibility between 
academic educational standards and the teaching of social atti¬ 
tudes through practice. The present writer is inclined to the 
belief that this incomp at ibility need not exist, that by means 

1 

of skillful leadership in the promotion of motives and in the 
providing of substantial drills, a high academic standard might 
be attained in any school In which co-operation is attained. 

In the John Boroughs^School for Boys, St. Louis, Missouri, 
there had been (1929) an attempt to apply the principles of 
socialized education for the benefit of students of secondary 
education. The students whose ages ranged from 12 to 18, were 
encouraged to develop wholesome social attitudes and emotional 
health. This aim was sought through attention to both the plan¬ 
ning of the school environment and the educational methods em¬ 
ployed. The programme of education made physical education an 
important phase of the school activities. Drama and music 
received especial attention, and in general, the school was 

^Boyd, op. cit., p. 32. 














. 







. 




























■ 







- 

, ' 


, 









- 









- 21 - 


designed primarily to develop in its students, cultural} 
friendly and desirable social traits. Yet in this school, where 
riding, swimming, art and music, and social custom were so highly 
stressed it was claimed that, generally, high scholarship had 
been attained, the highest achievement having been made in 
literature. 

From the brief report made by the editor of "Towards a 
New Education" on the John BUroughs School, it is difficult to 
draw any reliable conclusions concerning the degree to which 
good cultural results in education had been attained in conjunc¬ 
tion with high academic standing. The problems which the school 
appeared to have been attacking (up to 1929) are significant in 
the consideration of our present general problem of community 
education in pioneer settlements; for in no part of our provincial 
educational system are teachers faced with a greater necessity of 
harmonizing cultural and academic standards, than in the rural 
high or elementary school. The establishment of accredited high 
schools promises to be a point of significance in our discussion 
and will be dealt with in Chapter V. In the meanwhile it is 
important to bear in mind, that the Principal of John Boroughs 
School, Mr. Wilford M. Aikin, claimed some successes in two 
significant directions in school life, but that he concludes, 

"We are comprising principles to gain University Entrance." 

The Hof Oberkirh School^in Switzerland was reported to 
have in its aims no desire to compromise with the "ordinary" 
school practices. Its aim on the side of direct training was 
said to have been principally vocational, having for its method 
-*-Boyd, op. cit., p. 36, f. 
















■ 

' 





































♦ 







































- 22 - 


the solving of problems of practical nature. Its director, 

Herr Hermann, has the boys, whose ages range from 12 to 15, 
divided into two groups, the first group composed of those boys 
who are "practical-minded 11 , the second of boys who enjoy and are 
successful in the more abstract tasks, than those those involved 
in craftsmanship. The method of study consists of the solving 
of independent problems and units. Each boy works out his own 
solution as far as he is able. Teaching consists of constructive 
criticism and suggestion on the part of the teacher. The general 
plan of study is concentration upon one unit of work, abolishing, 
for a given number of days, all subjects but one; each student 
has one chief task each term for the completion of which he needs 
to employ the full power of his resources. During the course of 
the term the students are encouraged to learn to use a variety 
of reference books relative to whatever subject might be in hand. 

Ho individual textbooks are provided, though an adequate reference 
library is available for all students engaged in any study problem. 

It would appear that the report of Herr Hermann is among 
the land-marks of modern progress in educational methods, if for 
no other reason than its pointing to a thoroughly desirable use 
of school libraries. Organized education^of today aims to give 
Knowledge, Habits, Skills, Interests, Appreciations, Attitudes 
and Ideals—all of which must grow out of self-activity on the 
part of the learner. "..Through the daily use of books for ref¬ 
erence-work and pleasure-reading the child will acquire habits of 
study and a. taste for reading which-.will carry over into adult 

^"Department of Education Programme of Studies for Elementary 
Schools (Bulletin I., Grades I to Vi), p, 7, 1936. 




















' 


. 









. 










, 





' 






















































. 

















































- 23 - 


life. The freedom, responsibility and self-direction of the 
library activities have the dignity of an adult situation giving 
present meaning and purpose to every related pupil activity."•*■ 

Another interesting and valuable report of the New 
Education Fellowship of 1929 was given by Herr Cor Brujin of 
Holland. His school is the Work Shop in Bilthoven and is oper¬ 
ated for the children of the "workers" regardless of nationality. 
The children are taken into the school at the age of six arid are 
welcomed until they have reached maturity or such time as they 
wish to enter the world of industry. The cardinal aim of the 
school is to develop self-responsibility. The school does not 
practise self-government on the part of the students but self¬ 
assistance is encouraged in all studies and activities. Self¬ 
corrective devices have been devised for the .sake of economy, 
for all the teaching is voluntary. These very devices, however, 
have enabled the teachers of the school to motivate desirable 
social attitudes in the form of good will and co-operation among 
the students. Mutual helpfulness is claimed to be a predominat¬ 
ing characteristic of this school. 

The moral aspects of the activities of the Bilthoven SJL+~ •• 
reveals unrivalled freedom. There is no compulsion, no punish¬ 
ment; the child has no other compulsion than his own "inner light". 
No standards are set and no examinations are enforced. Study is 
a free process under willing tutors in a room around which 
shelves of books are conveniently lined. It would appear from a 
consideration of the class of families from which these students 
in the Work Shop are drawn, that the intelligence quota of the 

•'■Programme of Studies for B. C. (1936), op. cit., p. 223. 
















■ 








































, 
























school pupils would not, in general, be as high as that of the 
pupils in the more selective schools to which we have referred 
above. It is claimed, however, that, despite the laxity of 
control by the directors, read progress is made by the students. 
This, however, under the circumstances of stated standards or 
examination system, could not be counted as author at ive. The 
significant conclusion in connection with the record of this 
school, is in the fact that, though teaching is reduced to a 
minimum, students can and do educate themselves in an environ¬ 
ment which is fit for study and personal research. The impli¬ 
cations from such an object lesson lead to important questions 
concerning the goal of the teacher and school life in general 
and to questions concerning principles of motivation. 

Similar in principles and aims to those of the various 
private schools for boys which we have described above is the 
state-aided Tyringe^Girls 1 High School in Sweden. The school 
endeavours to inculcate the new principles of individual devel¬ 
opment on the side of academic work. The school, however, 
practises self-government on the part of the student body, self- 
discipline, and self-activity. There is concentration of instruct¬ 
ion upon a few subjects during a term, while during the school 
day not more than three subjects are attempted by the girls. In 
addition to their academic training, the girls receive instruction 
in "hobbies”—book-binding, photography, gardening, and in the 
knowledge of pre-parental facts. 

Carleton Washburne and M. M. Stearns^ discuss a number of 
iBoyd, op. cit., p. 33. 

2 "Hew Schools in the Old World", John Day (1926), Chapter I, ff. 


















. 






- 







. 


















































' 









■ 



























. 














- 25 - 


new schools in the old world which are outstanding for the 
stress being placed in them upon the practice of self-responsi¬ 
bility on the part of students. Among other schools discussed 
by these authors are the following which the v^riter of this 
essay believes to be of peculiar interest from the above point 
of view: The Oundle School in England, Stneantham High School 
in Belgium, and the Hamburg School. We shall consider each of 
these schools briefly as to methods and aims. 

(1) Oundle School is "a surprising combination of the 
best things in the modern....technical school with ancient trad¬ 
itions of learning.” 1 The school teaches Latin and Greek and pro¬ 
vides shop-work for all its pupils. The aim of the school is to 
find eaich person’s bent and develop it. It is found that a youth 
poor in classics may be of more than common worth at handling men 
at such work as building. The individual concerned is given the 
responsibility of proving this worth. The ’work of the school 
includes the working out of genuine problems in the shop, on the 
farm, in the trades. 

(2) In the Stneatham Hill School for Girls 2 there is 
applied the Dalton plan of study. Monthly assignments in the 
various subjects are given each girl at the commencement of the 
month. The completion of the work is the individual girl's 
responsibility. She progresses at her own rate, but is not 
given a new assignment until the first is completed. The usual 
difficulty in connection with application of the Dalton Plan is 
found to arise in the Stneatham Hill School—that of procrastin¬ 
ation on the part of the ■ girls who have no other motive to study 


^Washburne and Stearns, op. 
2 Washburne and Stearns, op 


cit. 
cit. , 


Chapter Ii, ff. 














. 










' 


. ■ 

. 
























. 










, . 
















- 26 - 


than their own inner urge. Such difficulties are a challenge 
to the resourceful teacher and the method, in general, the teachers 
of this school claim, is filled with infinite possibilities in 
the field of the development of self-responsibility. 

(3) Bedales^* is a co-educational school under the guidance 
of Head Master, Mr. Bradley. There is fostered in the school a 
frank, unsentimental comradship between the students of the two 
sexes. The study-groups are small. Discipline is quite informal. 
There is physical work for the youngsters in the morning; mental 
work comes in the afternoon when they are physically calmed and 
slightly tired. One of the chief aims of the teachers of Bedales 
is to allow the children to develop easily and naturally along 
lines most socially useful. 

(4) Dr, Decroly^ has a private school, but is instrumental 
in bringing into practice some of the principles of his education 
in the public schools of Brussels. The aims of Decroly are to 
develop the child 1 s initiative, imagination, ability to organize, 
to concentrate, to co-operate. He uses psychological devices to 
interest weaker students. Topics of study are selected by the 
children, while lectures are given by both teacher and learner. 
Weakness on the part of the students in handling lessons is 
experienced, of course, yet developmental discussion is enjoyed. 
Through the active participation of students in the class work, 
the passive learning of facts by rote is avoided. It is the view 
of the authors of "Hew Schools in the Old World", that Decroly has 
combined in his school the best features of the Dalton Plan, 

■^Washburne and Stearns, op. cit., p. 34, ff. 

^Washburne and Stearns, op. cit., p. 66,ff. 














■ 









* 


* 









































- 27 - 


individual instruction, and the principles of Montessori. 

(5) The Hamburg School is among the few experimental 
public schools of the world. It is also one of the few schools 
that have dared to give children complete freedom. The children 
even select their own teachers, and younger children are some¬ 
times placed under the guidan.ce of the older pupils of the 
school. "We do not know what children are going to rise to in 
their lives....We only know one thing—that the children are 
living souls to be developed, that we wish to give them every 
opportunity possible to develop and to express fully what is 
within them....In the new day that is dawning in the educational 
world, one of the forces that will bring about the complete 
development of each individual will be the force of greater 
freedom.. 

Several other experimental schools might be studied. 
Sufficient examples have been indicated, however, to illustrate 
the fact of renewed interest in the world in establishing ed¬ 
ucation more firmly upon the basis of the child-centered school 
than has been done in the past. Many of the schools experiment¬ 
ing in "progressive education" appear to be sounding the funda¬ 
mental needs of education, though in some cases the criteria 
necessary for the judgment of results in these schools is absent. 
Case studies of many individuals eminating from such schools as 
Bedales and Hamburg would be interesting and helpful. Where the 
aims of a school are realized in theory only, and where these 
aims are rather sentimentally expressed, much testing of practical 
results would be necessary in order to establish a dependable 
^Washburne and Stearns, op. cit., p. 110, ff. 
























































■ 

' 




























- 28 - 


working basis along the lines indicated by the theory. Again, 
certain of the experimental schools which have useful social aims 
uppermost find difficulty in attaining acceptable academic stand¬ 
ards. This fact is not a necessary indictment of the school 
concerned, yet it does point to the necessity for co-ordinative 
work in the formulation of educational programmes and objectives. 

When the alms of the various experimental schools above- 
mentioned are considered in relationships pertaining to community 
education in general, it would appear that the principles of 
social use are of the utmost importance. It may be that the 
academic examinations are of some impairing effect upon the most 
worthy results of education in a community, especially in working- 
class urban communities and rural areas. When the greater number 
of young adults of a community are to be absorbed into the social 
and economic institutions of the community concerned, it would 
appear that the education of that community should be co-ordinated 
community values of inspiration and uplift. This would require a 
break with the present plan of education and would require pro¬ 
vision for a core of academic subjects and general courses 
(especially designed) for those who desired them. 

In conclusion, the writer would express the feeling that 
the motives of n The new education 1 ' are sound. The promoters of 
new schools have sensed vital human needs and have e:xpressed 
their desires to avoid academic artificialities as did Rousseau 
and his varied followers. The modern world makes certain defin¬ 
ite demands upon the individual, however, and to cultural and 
social development must be added the power to make adaptations 



















' 

. 





, : 






























in the economic spheres of life to which individuals are fitted* 
or at all events, in which they are placed or find themselves. 

The watchword of community education must be ’'co-ordination 1 ', 
and this co-ordination must be in the fields of administration, 
subject-matter and ultimate aims. When the desirable progress¬ 
ive features of the education for a community are discovered, 
sentimentality must be abolished and workable plans laid for 
the operation of education towards the desired goal. The high¬ 
est form of testing is found in the real demands of community life. 

Some specific means of attaining this co-ordinal ion in 
education are suggested by the records of the few experimental 
schools mentioned above in connection with the New Education 
Fellowship, In the Frensham Heights School older pupils have 
been taken into the confidence of the teachers, concerning the 
ultimate aims of the school, and these older pupils aid the 
teachers in the carrying out of these aims by assuming a portion 
of the responsibility of leadership. This activity, one believes, 
is a sound one and should include a. study, on the part of the older 
students, of their individual and community needs in education. 

The John Boroughs School (p. 20) illustrates the possibility of 
combining good scholarship attainment in certain academic branches 
of study with good social and cultural development. Every com¬ 
munity should seek to attain a balanced educational programme 
and endeavour to use the motives which will stimulate indiviual 
consciousness of this need. The Hof Oberkirk School (p. 21) 
presents a case where no compromise is made with traditional 
education. Through the free activity and convenient library 
facilities*attempts to nurture self-activity and self-development. 















































o 













































- 30 - 


It succeeds in giving to its students interesting pursuits in 

- 

the exploration of knowledge and skills. The school is a refuge 
for M seekers’ 1 after knowledge. Every community has the task of 
making its young people seekers after knowledge. The peak of 
educational freedom is found in the Bilthoven School in Holland 
(p. 23). Here again, real education is obtained by the seekers, 
this time by the seekers who belong to the more economically 
unfortunate members of society. Then there is Tyringe School 
in Sweden which adds to its academic curriculum for girls a 
course of training in arts of home-building. This b tter spec¬ 
ific type of training together with a stimulation of general ed¬ 
ucational consciousness are practical bases for educational co¬ 
ordination. 
























- 


. 













. 






. • ■ 























































- 31 - 


CHAPTER III 

EDUCATIONAL SOCIOLOGY OF THE PEACE RIVER DISTRICT OF 3. C 

In the preceding chapter we endeavoured to indicate the 
general trend of educational thought and practice in the modern 
world. It is the aim of the writer cj^Lscixss in this chapter 

the social and economic background of a specific community, the 

1 

Peace River District of British Columbia, and to point out what 
educational principles are desirable for it. The chief consider¬ 
ations in this connection are: the history of settlement, the 
conditions of home-building, the geographic barriers to settle¬ 
ment, and method and progress of school organization of the area 
concerned. 

No reflective individual could travel from end to end of 

the Peace River District without realizing impressively, that 

2 

here is a land possessing significant possibilities for economic 
prosperity. Since the time, however, when the Great War sealed 
for some decades the prospect of this districts obtaining of a 
direct railway communication with the Pacific Coast ports, the 
continued isolation of the area has made economic, social, and 
perhaps cultural progress, relatively slow. Again, one could 
not visit and know the settlers of the district without a real¬ 
ization that here is a community of pioneers, who, in courage 
and virility are of a peculiarly high order. The specific 
social and educational needs of the community have grown out of 
the nature of the progress of settlement, being attended as it 
has been, by circumstances extraordinarily forboding even in 
pioneering frontiers. In view of the economic and geographic 
See Diagram I. 

2 

See Dio.gram ±1. 







. 















' 


































. 






















































- 32 - 


barriers concerned in the development of the Peace River frontier, 
the progress of settlement has been remarkably rapid, and in 
general, successful. Cause for any weaknesses of community devel¬ 
opment cannot be laid upon the pioneers who have endeavoured so 
long to struggle their way to economic security. 

Educational progress, too, has been notable. In what¬ 
ever portions of the district immigrants have settled, schools 
have been built and operated with the assistance of the Department 
of Education. Without the financial aid rendered by the provincial 
government few of these schools could have operated upon the finan¬ 
cial resources of the districts in which they have been built. 

The settlers have, however, been fundamentally loyal to the cause 
of education in the district, and in many cases in the early years 
of school-building, rendered volunteer work and materials. The 
first significant settlement of the British Columbia area of the 
Peace River District took place on the Pouce Coupe Prairie in 
1912» After the close of the War the influx of settlers increased. 
Immigration continued and received tremendous impetus from the 
migration of farmers from the dried-out areas of the Prairie 
provinces in the late ! 20's. The programme of the building of 
one-roomed rural schools kept pace with the increase and expan¬ 
sion of settlement. From the humble beginning—three small 
crude schools in September, 1915—the number of schools increased to 
sixty-two by 1933, The total school population at this time 
amounted to 1,200 pupils. The schools of the Dawson Creek, Rolla, 
Pouce Coupe and Fort St, John areas had the status of Superior 
Schools and gave instruction in high school subjects. From 1931 




„ . 















■ 




























* 

' 
















*■ GO 


there had been a resident inspector of schools with head¬ 
quarters at Pouce Coupe, and by 1935, the districts of Dawson 
Creek and Rolls, had been created High School areas. 

Development of educational facilities in the Peace River 
District has been influenced by certain recent phases in ed¬ 
ucational organization and supplementary factors. In 1934 the 
complete area was consolidated for the purpose of more economical 
and efficient administration. The work of consolidation was 
done by the inspector of schools, (who became known as the 
Administrator of Education) on the authority of the Department 
of Education and in accordance with the Public Schools Act. The 
consolidation^ paved the way for modern improvements in the rural 
schools and made possible the organization (1936) of a Junior 
High School at Dawson Creek, irhile with these latter improve¬ 
ments came the organizing of night classes for adults in approx¬ 
imately twenty centres throughout the Pea.ce River Inspectorate. 

To supplement other forms of education, children and adults, in 
cases where it is desired, are given the advantage of correspond¬ 
ence courses in elementary or high school subjects through the 
Correspondence Departments of the Education Department at 
Victoria. In 1934 twenty students were availing themselves of 
the latter opportunity . * 2 

The educational progress of the district does not conceal 
the fundamental difficulties attending this progress. Economic 
conditions are foundational 5 end where educational facilities are 
improved, administrative technique and financial resource must 


Eee Chapter VI. 

2 Sixty-Fourth Annual Report of the Public Schools of B. C., p.108. 
























- 























































. 










. 





























- 34 - 


build a structure upon which to work. 

One of the foremost economic difficulties experienced 
in the Peace River area of British Columbia has been the prob¬ 
lem, during the later years of settlement and expansion, of 
the distribution of the virgin land among the in-coming set¬ 
tlers, The first immigrants to arrive after the Great War 
were fortunate to secure claims in the relatively clear and in 
the most fertile sections of the country, and were able, at the same 
time, to obtain their land within reasonable distances from the 
villages and centres of settlement. The M bush M land has been 
made to produce abundantly by those who have the necessary 
capital, for clearing. Many of the settlers possessed no capital. 
More of these destitute immigrants arrived during the drought 
periods of Western Canada. The virgin land was found to be of 
variable quality but no provision was made at the critical time • 
to assure the immigrants of obtaining fertile pieces of land. 

The result has' been the inevitable one; many settlers have failed 
to become permanent residents through their inability to bring 
their farms to the point of productiveness. 

The condition just described cannot be claimed as general 
throughout the district. Yet misplacement of settlers has led 
to an unfortunate amount of destitution and has thrown a surpris¬ 
ing number of settlers to the mercy of the relief department. 

The condition has resulted, too, in the settling of the various 
outlying districts with bachelors whose influence upon the 
educational progress of a few school areas has not been desir¬ 
able. It is to be hoped that readjustment of the destitute 






































, 













■ 





















































, 





- 35 - 


settlers will not be delayed unduly, and that definite provision 
will be made to guard the area fr m being the mecca of numerous 
bands of destitute settlers who know not the hardships which 
await them. Economic security of the frontier settlement is the 
first basis for permanent and self-sustaining progress in com¬ 
munity education. 

The sparse population of this northern area of British 
Columbia adds to the difficulty of educational administration. 

Much credit is due the present administrator for the quickness 
and efficiency of his taxing organization. It has led to a very 
surprising equalization of the mill-rates in all parts of the 
Inspectorate. A comparison of administrative conditions in a 
more densely populated ares, with those in the Peace Paver area 
is found in the report of Mr. A. A. Jordan, published, in M The 
School”, September, 1935. 1 In York County, Mr. Jordan reports, 
ten school districts containing eighteen schools, employing 316 
teachers and enrolling 11,464 pupils have been combined and con¬ 
solidated for administrative purposes only. This consolidation 

was accomplished without the sacrifice of local authority. A 
2 

much greater area than this consolidated area in Ontario, the 
Peace River District could be organized into a unit only by the 
action of an administrator possessing wide powers. The notice¬ 
able result of the exercise of these wide powers efficiently is 
that local interest is increasing in proportion to the bettered 
educational conditions which are being obtained. The tendencies 

^Jordan, A. A.: "The Larger Unit of Administration" in Educational 
^School Areas", The School , Toronto, September, 1935, p. 11. 
oArea and population of the Peace River District are discussed 
below in the present chapter. 

















- 










. 














. 



















- 






































- 36 - 


of centralization point towards the overcoming of the 
difficulties of a sparse population living under unequal 
conditions. 

The history of Canada as a whole, however, is character¬ 
ized by difficulties arising from scattered populations, variety 
of nationalities and the exigencies arising from the general 
hardships of rural and frontier life in a virgin country. The 
Peace River setting is better understood by the consideration 
of this district as an unusually far-flung extension of the 
older frontiers of Canada. The general problem arising from 
these general Canadian conditions are set forth by Professor 
Peter Sandiford in the following words: 

M . .. .Canada is a big country with great but non inex¬ 
haustible resources, and at present is settled in the 
sparsest of fashions...The latest figures show that 
Canada has an area of 3,684,643 square miles, rather 
smaller than we previously thought it to be, but still 
a vast area, almost the size of Europe or the United 
States, and constituting more than one-fourth of the 
British Empire. Cur estimated population is 10J 
millions, which works out at fewer than 3 persons per 
square mile. Excluding the territories the density 
is 5.2 per square mile. Fortunate^ for the education, 
the population is not spread out evenly, but tends to 
congregate within a hundred or two hundred miles of 
the southern boundary, and especially in'the Provinces 
of Ontario and Quebec where 61 per cent of the pop¬ 
ulation is to be found. But the fact remains that 
every provincial department of education in Canada., 
except those of the Maritimes is confronted with the 
problem of educating a population of les density than 
10 persons per square mile..’ 1 ! 

These statements are made by Dr. Sandiford as constituting a 
national educational problem. The extent of this national 
problem will doubtless shape the tendencies for reform of ed¬ 
ucation in all its national phases. Nevertheless, frontier 

^Sandiford, Peter: ’’Problems of Canadian Education”, 

The School , Toronto, March, 1936, p. 563. 







' 
















. 

- - 










































- 37 - 


settlements provide examples of territories which are in need 
of peculiarly local reform, and in these territories of new 
settlement there is opportunity for experimental work which 
might lead to the improvement of general and national educational 
practises. 

Such an area is the Peace River area of this province. 

The total area of the district is approximately 13-J million 
acres with somewhat less than 3 million acres arable land, a 
small fraction of this being under cultivation. The district 
lies west of the 120th meridian of west longitude and extends 
north to the 57th parellel of latitude. It is 494 miles by 
rail from the southern boundary of the district to the city of 
Edmonton and approximately 1400 miles from the capital of the 
province and the Education office* Finally with a population 
of 12,000} the Peace River District illustrates conditions of 
educational pioneering at their highest degree of difficulty. 
Definite reference to these difficulties are discussed in 
Chapter VI in relation to the recent change in form of 
administration of the schools in this inspectorate. 

Regarding the severe climatic barrier to education in 
the northern interior of Canada, little need be stated here. 

In the most modernized, communities, the cold of winter is the 
cause of increased building and fuel costs as well as the cause 
of considerable hardship on the part of the boys and girls in 
attendance. The Peace River District, though possessing no more 

^-Estimates made from the Voters' List prepared, for the last 
Dominion Election. 












' 










. 













. 




























■ 
















- 38 - 


rigorous winter climate^ then the Canadian prairies farther 
south, is nevertheless, unfortunate in regard to roads for winter- 

p 

travel. From a questionnaire answered by the teachers of this 
inspectorate south of the Peace Paver (41 teachers), the writer 
learned that imp as sib 1 e roads and cold weather are the most com¬ 
mon causes of poor school attendance in this district during the 
winter months. Other causes of poor attendance as mentioned by 
these teachers were those common to the Western Canadian school. 
Poverty resulting in inadequate Y/inter clothing for some of the 
families of children was mentioned as a cause, though that con¬ 
dition is not peculiar to the northern frontier. The long winters 
however, accentuate whatever needs poverty reveals. To give our 
problems in these latter phases of educational, barriers national 
significance, we quote again from Dr. Sandiford ! s article;"Our 
climate is against us. In the sub-Arctic regions of Canada pop¬ 
ulation Is so vsparse that educational problems may hardly be said 
to arise; where the population is densest, the country has a con¬ 
tinental. climate--cold in Y/inter and hot in summer. The cold 
Y/inter requires us to build substantial buildings at a great 
expense, and to heat them at still greater expense." 3 In the 
larger centres of population the climatic barrier is a costly one; 
in the Peace River District it is .costly and detrimental to ed¬ 
ucational Standards. 

We must consider the conditions of settlement more minutely, 
for in understanding the problems of the settler we can realize 

The summer mean temperature is about 58 degrees F., the winter 
^rnean, 1 degree F. 
gSee Appendix I. 

^Sandiford, op. cit.: "Problems of Canadian Education", 

The School . March, 1935, p. 563. 






















. 








' 

























■ 






■ 




■ 



















- 39 - 


the acuteness of his educational needs end at the same instance 
know more clearly the causes for present conditions relative to 
his social progress in the community. While glowing advertise¬ 
ments were circulating throughout the Dominion of Canada, through¬ 
out the Empire, and throughout the world, making known in no 
humble manner, the extent of agricultural wealth and opportunity 
of the Peace River country, little or no precaution was made on 
the part of authorities to make the new frontier secure against 
the dangers of over-eulogistic advertising and land speculation. 
Above all, few or no attempts have been made to analyse the pro¬ 
blems of the economic and social phases of frontier life, nor to 
give honest instruction therein to prospective settlers. They 
came at random. The results have been varied, and though on the 
whole successful when considered in the light of post-war diffi¬ 
culties involved in the opening of isolated frontiers, have not 
lacked unfortunate features in matters pertaining to permanent 
welfare of the young generation in the Peace River District. 

A weakening in cultural interests and lack of vital interest on 
the part of young men a;nd women in agriculture are among the 
omens of back-sliding. 

The settlement in the Peace River District of British 
Columbia has, in many instances, taken place on a basis of un¬ 
sound aims on the part of the immigrants themselves, but in no 
less manner on the part of the agencies instrumental in ad¬ 
vertising the merits of the country in question and on the part 
of those responsible for placing the later immigrants. In the 
latter case, the agents too often stressed the romantic side of 



















































■ 





. 



























































- 40 - 


life and opportunity in a new land* To illustrate the type of 
psychological motive behind the promotion of settlement in this 
country in post-war times, we quote the following picturesque 
passage from Mr* Lukin Johnson 1 s descriptive travelogue, 

"Beyond the Rockies"."** 

"Ole Moen, late of Sweden and Minnesota, now homesteader, 
seven miles north-east of Rolla, British Columbia, 
raised a distant ripple of mirth when he wrote ’a piece 
for the paper’ , telling all and sundry of the advantages 
of the Peetce River District. Ole dispatched his missive 
to ’The Scandinavian* of Chicago, and in due' course it 
appeared in print. B 2 r and by, when Ole called for his 
mail at Rolla, the post-master handed him a budget of 
more than two-hundred letters—and Rolla began to take 
Ole a little more seriously. 

"To make a. long story short, within six months Ole 
located twenty-eight homesteads for prospective settlers 
in his own immediate district. Ole Moen has become 
known as Peace River’s star immigration agentI 

"I cadled on Ole during my journey. He paced the floor 
of his log cabin as he preached the gospel of the Peace. 
Carried away by the fervour of his own eloquence, he 
gesticulated and shouted until the old cook-stove fairly 
rattled. He drew his arguments at random.. .Everything 
in the universe furnished him with a new starting point. 
From a life-history of the founder of Christianity to 
the store-keepers of Rolla, There were long, disconcert¬ 
ing pauses during which he stood before me with hand up¬ 
raises, the while my eyes became fixed upon the piece 
of black thread with which his spectacles were mended. 

An earnest, determined soul, this, filled with the zeal 
of the Hew Forth..." 

And Ole typifies the optimism which, Mr, Johnston concludes, 

"is the mainspring of the settlers of British Columbians great 
Peace River District." 

After living among the people of the Rolla community for 
five years (1930-1935), from the years of the economic depression 
to the present, the writer’s impression varies somewhat from the 


\iohnstone, Lukin: "Beyond the Rockies", d, M. Dent and Sons, 
(1929), pp. 197, 198. 





. 



■ 


. 

. 













. 










. 




















V* ' 

. 









- 41 - 


rather glamourous one received by Mr. Johnston during his 
brief visit to the Peace River country in 1929. The type of 
optimism which he describes as the "mainspring" has been seen 
to wane, and to take its place, there has appeared to a high 
degree a more common-sensed foundation of outlook which will 
tend to make the economic lives of the settlers more secure. 

The new outlook will, at the same time, discourage positively 
the influx of people who are uninformed or misinformed concern¬ 
ing the conditions under which they would have to live upon 
entering a new land of settlement unprepared financially to 
build homes and lacking the experience necessary to conquer a 
wilderness. And again, through the medium of improved educational 
machinery, the Government of British Columbia is endeavouring 
to lay secure foundations for the fostering of education and 
health v/here conditions for these necessities of progress were 
of necessity neglected by the earliest settlers. 

We must not forget the importance of the type and distri¬ 
bution of the population in the consideration of the educational 
problems of an area. The population of the Peace River District 
is extremely sparse, the density being about two persons per 
square mile. A variety of all types of settlers is found 
throughout the district; there are cultured people and unlettered 
ones, those of British and those of foreign extraction in the 
out-lying localities as well as in the more developed areas 
close to the village centres. At Hudson’s Hope, Mr. Lukin 
Johnstone ^found "Victor Peck, trapper and homesteader of the 
Pine River Valley of British Columbia, one-time cow-boy of the 

^Johnstone, op. cit. 































, 







' 



































, 

















■ 























- 42 - 


Mid-Western States and his bride, erstwhile trained nurse of 
Vancouver and Nottingham, England” Regarding the type of pop¬ 
ulation of the Peace River District in general. Dr. Plenderleith 
writes as follows: ’’The population is now chiefly of European 
origin with a sprinkling of Americans, Indians and a few Chinese. 
In the larger centres the British element appears to dominate. 

In the rural districts it is not uncommon to find sections where 
the settlers are entireljr of one nationality, such as Czecho¬ 
slovakian, German, Swedish, Norwegian, American, and Scottish. 

In other rural districts the population is cosmopolitan in 
character. But in spite of diversity in race, practically every 
community in the Peace River area has a distinct individuality 
which it prefers to keep in tact.” 2 To whatever difficulties 
are found in the administration of education in a very sparsely 
settled area, therefore, are added those of diversity among the 
settlers themselves. 

The unfortunate nature and locality of a number of 
scattered and small settlements bring about specific educational 
and social difficulties, ’’Imagine the handicaps of a people”, 
writes Mr. Johnstone, ’’who live in the scattered settlements of 
the river flats between Hudson’s Hope and Fort St. John. There 
is the Tomkins family, a badly disabled war veteran, originally 
from Ontario, has what is known as the Cadenhead Farm, a splendid 
piece of fertile land. In 1927 he expected to harvest 1500 
bushels of wheat, but this he would have to hold until the open¬ 
ing of navigation in the spring and then ship in bags to Peace 

^Johnstone, op. cit., Chapter XVI.* 

-Plenderleith, W. A.: ’’The Peace River Experiment”, The School , 
Toronto, November, 1936, p. 186, 














' 

. 











■ 
























































































- 43 - 


River (town). Tompkins, by the way, has eight children, and in 
order to have enough for a school has 'imported 1 a married 
hired man from the Old Country."^* The writer knows of another 
school which was, until it was finally closed two years ago, 
attended by the children of one family only. The school was 
hampered by the prejudices of an ignorant settler and as a 
result the services of a valuable teacher were largely wasted 
in that district for three years. In such cases as the Tomkins 
family, the unfortunate position of their farm leads to un¬ 
speakable economic strain while on the social side the.younger 
generation grows into adulthood with a less adequate sense of 
social relationship than had the parents of this generation. 
Educational influences are reduced, in these cases to a minimum. 

Shear hardship and loneliness also result from uncontrolled 
settlement as has occurred in the Peace River country. Mr* 
Johnstone relates an entertaining and enlightening interview with 
a back-woods family* "Some miles down the river (from the Tomkins 
home) are the Freers, a family from Missouri who homesteaded at 
Fort George a;s long ago as 1909 and removed to Cache Creek in 
1914. Mrs. Freer was down to meet the boat to see the quarter 
of beef put safely aboard. Several of her youngsters came with 
her. At first I could not tell whether 'she' was a man or a 
woman, for she wore men's rough overalls and a. nondescript cap... 
'Why, man',she said, in answer to my question, 'this is the finest 
part of the continent. Only trouble is we can’t get out for a day 
or a week's holiday—we have to make it a month or nothing. If 
we ever get a real road, instead of a pack-trail, we'll be 0. K.'". 

Johnstone, op. cit,, Ci^ a p^ er XVX* 


















































. 








• 






• 



























































- 44 - 


Mr. Johnstone then continues to an eloquent conclusion concern¬ 
ing these ’few’ straggling but characteristic settlers in out-of- 
the-way localities: "Anatural question to ask is, ’Why do people 
go and settle in such remote districts?’ The only answer is that 
there always have been and there always will be, people to whom 
the frontier of civilization is life itself. Give them a town 
within fifty miles and they feel, as one settler told me, ’all 
crowded up’. They live hard lives, these people. None of the 
luxuries of the town dweller, a constant struggle to ’get by’, 
and yet there are many of them Bio find all the compensation 
they want in the freedom of the life, in the glory of the woods 
and the forests and the splendour of the mighty Peace River. 

In spite of the romance of this last thought, however, there are 
the practical problems of economic, social and educational life 
to be worked out to a finish for this and all frontiers. The 
land cannot always lie idle, as much of our Peace River arable 
land lies, the mineral resources cannot always be a mere 
’’geographic expression” to lure unwary immigrants into a land 
of deception. A true valuation of a potentially wealthy community 
will come only with the advent of a comprehensive, a stimulating 
and a thorough ”community” educational programme. 

Before continuing to outline analytically the educational- 
ana sociological needs of the Peace River District, we shall 
enumerate the points of significance touched upon thus far in 
the present chapter. We have noted in the first instance that 
the district presents a vast extent of potential, wealth and is, 
in an extraordinary degree, a promising area for future agricultural 

^Johnstone, op. cit., Chapter XVI, ff. 








' 









































* 







- 45 - 


significance* There are noticeable disadvantages connected 
with the variability of land fertility, however, which in view 
of the nature of the progress of settlement, have resulted in 
outstanding cases of poor economic adjustment of settlers. In 
addition to the wealth of soil in the district, there is to be 
found a variety of minerals including coal of high quality* 

Lack of economical transportation facilities connecting the Peace 
River area with the Pacific coast , prevents the development of the 
potential resources of the area* 

Secondly, we have noted the progress of educational devel¬ 
opment. From September, 1915, when the first schools of the district 
were opened to September, 1936, sufficient rural schools were 
built and operated to supply elementary educational opportunities 
for farm children* In four centres high schools have been operat¬ 
ing* In one case a junior high school‘d has been opened. Further¬ 
more reforms in school administration have been inaugurated. Right 
schools have been established and much improvement in the rural 
educational situation has occurred. 

Thirdly we have recognized the inevitable difficulties 
of frontier education in a sparsely settled area, and have con¬ 
sidered these in perspective with the difficulties inherent in 
the whole of Canadian education. In most cases the difficulties 
common to Canadian education, especially in rural Canadian ed¬ 
ucation are those typical of the district under discussion, but 
are in this case accentuated and acute. 

Fourthly we have referred to some specific cases of hard¬ 
ships placed upon the community and upon individuals through the 

1 ___ —..— " --- ~~ 

Dawson Creek Junior High School. 


















. 







. 

■ 








- 








. 

































- 46 - 


injudicious location of settlers upon isolated farms. In no 
small measure are the schemes of homesteading promoters and the 
exageratedly glowing advertising devices to blame for poor ad¬ 
justments of many settlers in connection with the location aid 
fertility of their land. 

It should be remembered that all these features of pro¬ 
gress have combined to make the Peace River District what it is. 

We have recognized the good progress made in every phase of the 
frontier opening. The writer feels that there is good hope for 
the future of the area, economically and socially. Yet some 
serious indictments are being made regarding its developments. 

One of the most serious indictments is that made by Major H. B. 
King**" in his official report on educational progress in British 
Columbia. The writer quotes it here with much reserve and in 
the hope that the general impression will not substantiate the 
entirity of the indictment, nor that of the rather gloomy report 
upon which the statement is based. The statement reads as follows: 
"...The description of the Peace River District before its con¬ 
solidation of administration under the Inspector of Schools, 
sketches in broad outline conditions often found in rural school 
areas. It is a picture mostly of w r aste and inefficiency. It gives 
no indication of the darker side of life in the isolated areas, 
nor of the terrorism to which the young women of refinement are 
sometimes subjected." The criticism contained in the above 

King, H. B. (Technical adviser on the Commission on School 
Finance): "School Finance in British Columbia", p. 1281 

The statement regarding the Peace River District is based 
upon the report on the district made by the Inspector of 
Schools, Dr. W. A. Plenderleith, 1934. 











■ 










? 




- 
























* 













































- 47 - 


quotation is just and valuable in that it points to the need 

for the improvement of administration of education in the Peace 

River area and to a betterment of social conditions existing 

there. It is less just, however, in its implied condemnation 

of a community of people, working under difficulties and who 

<£ 

encouraged the building more than sixty schools in the inspect¬ 
orate before consolidation was effected. In regard to the 
treatment of lady-teachers in outlying districts of the area, 
there is little evidence to indicate that there have been more 
than two or three cases of "terrorism" of these teachers in the 
whole history of the Peace River School System. A true estima¬ 
tion of the situation concerned in the matter of this paragraph 
can be made only by analysis based upon fundamental factors of 
the social life of the community. 

In order to describe the conditions of the Peace River 
District as they affect the internal or social development of 
the area, the writer is using the following three bases for 
analysis: (a) Present facilities for progress in education. 

(b) Present status in and facilities for the 
promotion of beneficial recreation. 

(c) The question of continuation-education in the 
fields of adult education, senior high school 
and vocational training. 

(a) We have dealt already with the problems concerned 
with the general problem of schools in the Peace River area. 

The rural schools are faced with the task of making education 
vital to those young people who voluntarily or involuntarily 
are to find careers in a farming frontier. It would seem that 
to a high degree the schools have failed in this task. 



f 1 1 
















' 


. 

















, 




























■ 























- 48 - 


!, Every thoughtful person who surveys the problems and difficulties 
of the public-school system.....recognizes that, coupled with the 
great financial stress in which the schools find themselves, 
they are faced with the practical problem of adjusting the public- 
school education and particularly high school education to the 
rapidly changing world..The problems of the district concerned 
in this discussion are general, yet they possess phases which 
are peculiar 5 to the community. There must be established bases 
for meeting the educational need.s of this particular district. 

In this regard the facilities for education which have to 
date been developed might easily be turned to greater service for 
the community educational needs. The administrative system now 
in force promises to establish facilities for leadership in the 
lines most desired and most needed by the district. For example, 
the libraries of the rural schools and the village high schools 
are being modernized, agriculture is being instituted in the high 
school courses and treated as a vital subject end some vocational 
needs of young adults' are being attended to through the institu¬ 
tion of night classes in a variety of useful subjects including 
business and book-keeping, English, technical subjects, commercial 
art and typing. There is room for much improvement in these lines. 
Correspondence courses and radio education promise to become 
valuable supplements to the public school education. 

Under improved administrative methods material facilities 
such as poor schoolhouses, inadequate barns and toilets, school 
equipment and janitor service are being improved rapidly. These 

"McBride, Lucia: "Challenge to the Schools", Cl ear in;:: House , 

Vol. X, Ho. , October, 1935, p. 95. 























. 







; 


' 


- 














■ 

















■ 







. 

* . - 











- 49 - 


things, though not related directly with the matter of 
educational leadership are of extremely important concern in 
the total comfort, interest and progress of training in the 
rural schools* It is to he hoped that the antiquities of the 
old rural school systems will soon disappear from even the school 
of the frontier* Whatever indictments are made of inadequacies 
in facilities for rural school educational institutions, are 
made with justice if made upon constructive grounds* The pros¬ 
pect for the improvement of rural educational facilities in the 
Peace River District is progressively hopeful at the present time 
(b) Regarding the problem of facilities for beneficial 
recreation for the young people--adults and children—in the 
district concerned, the fact of a distinct lack in adequate means 
is outstanding. This conclusion is reached through a consider¬ 
ation of the answers given by 35 teachers attending the South 
Peace River Teachers* Convention held at Rolla, October, 1935, 
to a questionnaire 1 prepared by the writer. One phase of the 
questionnaire involved definite questions regarding the facil¬ 
ities for recreational development for children and young adults 
in the rural districts. In addition to the opinions of the above 
mentioned teachers, to the effect that the greater number of 
rural districts were characterized by a retarded social develop¬ 
ment among the young people, the scout masters of Dawson Creek, 
Pouce Coupe, Rolla, all confirmed the opinion of the teachers 
in this regard and claimed that adult leadership was scarce and 
that the leaders then active found abnormally low interest on 
the part of teen-age boys in the activities of boys* activities. 
It was the unanimous opinion of these boys 1 leaders that the 

1 

See Appendix I, (Form C). 





r 


.. ). 

















4 


' - ■■ , > V 

' • 

i 

p 












- ■ • - : : - 

1 










' 












* . / 







c 















- 50 - 


chief faults in communit2^ development of the district were a 
characteristic lack of recreational facilities and an absence 
of literature and leadership in the homes. 

On the basis of answers made by teachers to the questions 
under "Social and Cultural Phases" of the above-mentioned 
questionnaire'} the following analysis of social needs of the 
young people of the peace Paver District is presented: 

(1) Present deficiency of organization and leadership for 
summer and winter sports to provide healthful recreation. 

(2) The standard of literature in the homes is low. 

(3) There is a definite need for adult education. 

(4) Leadership in the field of art and drama is deficient. 

(5) There should be more attention given to the develop¬ 
ment of social interests in young children. 

Since each of the needs mentioned in this general analysis 
requires some explanation concerning its particular application 
to the life of the community under consideration, we shall con¬ 
sider each point separately. 

(1) No rural school teacher answering the questionnaire 
on the topic of "Social and Cultural Phases" ofthe Peace Paver 
community development believed that his district had adequate 
leadership or facilities for the promotion of a variety of 
wholesome sports for young people and children. The defici¬ 
ency in this matter begins at- school where sports are hampered 
by the long winters in districts where no indoor gymnasiums 
exist. The deficiency in sport activity continues to be char¬ 
acteristic among the young adults of the district who find few 
diversions to relieve the monotony of relatively idley spent 
winters. Cars are not ovmed by the homesteaders in many cases 
so that even the summers provid.e little variety of athletic 

^See Appendix 1, (Form C.). 




. 














■ 

. 































. 















. 










, 







- 51 - 


activity in out-lying, sparsely-settled districts. Baseball 
alone is played in the rural districts and there is a resulting 
weakness of all-round athletic development and a consequent lack 
in wholesome social contacts among young people who should meet 
on common ground in other games. 

The villages are rapidly becoming centres of both summer 
and winter sport activity. This fact will, one believes, 
increase the interest of the children and young adults in a 
greater variety of sports than they now enjoy. Baseball, 
hockey, badminton, tennis and golf are now played in each of 
the four villages.-- High school sports too, are increasing in 
importance as a factor in athletic development in the Peace 
Biver District. An annual ’'field day" is now an event of much 
anticipation on the part of the students of the three high 
schools south of the Peace River. 

Practice in athletics in the one-roomed rural schools 
is slower to develop towards a higher status than is that of 
the high schools. Much benefit has resulted, however, from 
the leadership in school athletics by the rural school teachers. 
In certain schools in which discipline has formerly been a 
serious problem, the Administrator^ has wisely placed men teacher 
who have special ability in the leadership of athletics. In the 
greater number of these schools there has been both a rise in 
the activity in school sports and an improvement in the disciplin 
ary standing of the schools concerned. 

(2) The cultural), reading done by the young adults of the 
rural Peace River'districts appears (as reported by resident 

teachers) to be negligible. Ho- district was reported to have 

^Dawson Creek, Holla., Pouce Coupe, Fort St. John, 
inspector of Schools. 































































































- 





, 





























. 





- 52 - 


more than thirty percent of its homes supplied with any cultural 
literature. In most cases the teachers reported the percentage 
of homes in their districts possessing cultural literature as 
low as five percent. To give greater opportunity for cultural 
reading in the Peace River community as a whole., a travelling 
library has been introduced, under the auspices of the Department 
of Education and supported by the Carnegie Trust, to the rural 
districts. 

Cultural improvement in this sparsely populated community 
of the Peace River county cannot be expected to take place with 
great rapidity, nor can one expect a general acceptance of cult¬ 
ural reading. It is believed, however, that families with child¬ 
ren will develop a taste for a wholesome literature through the 
influence of the travelling library which is now accessible to 
them in several of the school districts. The library promises 
also to help in the solution of long winter loneliness and in¬ 
activity in outlying homestead districts. 

(3) Adult education is a very serious need among the 
young adults of the Peace River District. Its need is related 
to cultural phases as well as to the economic life and future 
of the frontier. There is, among the young adults of the area, 
an unhealthy attitude towards agriculture as a vocation. During 
the five years which the writer spent in the Roll a High School, 
periodical questionings were made in the form of personal inter¬ 
views with the high school students to determine their own 
attitudes towards the future of the district and their vocational 
desires. Out of thirty high school boys who were questioned re¬ 
garding their vocational Interests, three only expressed a definite 
interest in an agricultural career. These boys (now on the verge 













• ' 












. 

* 











































































- 53 - 


( 

of adulthood) are however, drifting into the career for which 
they as yet have taken no vital interest andfor which they have 
had no technical training. Girls* vocational problems are 
fundamentally similar to the boys*. 

The outcome of apathy of the young adults of this frontier 
for agriculture does not lead to at change of environment or a 
betterment of the personal equipment for any of them. Few leave 
the community in which they are reared* A general emigration of 
youth from the frontier would be fatal to the frontier; yet 
apathy too, is deadly to uplifting of community morale. The 
writer believes that a well directed adult-education movement 
would have beneficial influences upon the youth of this frontier. 
It would nurture an enlivening interest in the very interesting 
and vital vocation of agriculture, it might be made to increase 
the appreciation of young people for the beauties and potential 
wealth of their land, and there could be provision in it for the 
promotion of wholesome cultural pursuits. It is suggested here 
that the genera], theme of a movement for adult education should 
be similar to that of the folk schools,^ and that it should be 
aimed toward inspirational motives. 

The aesthetic aspect of adult education requires special 
and particular recognition when being promoted in a frontier in 
which the second generation is about to take over the leader¬ 
ship of the community, as is the case in the Peace River com¬ 
munity. ’’There is no aspect of man*s make-up harder to suppress 
than the aesthetic attitude. Give man half a chance, give him 
a job in which there is the smallest element of the creative 

*^See Chapter VII. 














































, 






■' ‘ 



■ ;:o : 














- 54 - 


and watch the pride of craft develop, hatch him develop skill 
for its own sake, take a delight in doing the job excellently, 
with no motive other than self-respect. The ploughman, the 
mechanic, the cabinet-maker, the tool-maker and the machinist, 
the book-keeper in charge of a set of books all develop the 
aesthetic attitude towards their jobs if they are real men. 
Certainly their jobs are a means of livelihood, but they also 
become an essential part of living, the foundation of healthy 
pride and interest.It is in this "aesthetic” respect that 
young adults must be made to see themselves and their community 


in a new light. Through adult education it would be eventually 
realized by the people of a community, one believes, that with 
better knowledge and technique for agriculture and home-making 
would come more opportunity for economic independence and pride 
in home-community and self-respect. 

(4) Again, a direct appeal to the aesthetic nature of 
individuals may be made through dramatic, musical and artistic 


activities of a. community. The education which comes through 

artistic mediums appears, as we view the matter historically, 

to have a very far-reaching effect upon the social fabric of a 

people. Socially and artistically the people of the Peace 

Paver district are in a transitional stage. The friendly, 

enthusiastic community spirit of the pioneer is passing. Schools 

are not now as they once were the centre of crude but warm 

musical gatherings and social, for adults as well as children. 

In some respects this marks an improvement of status. The 

^Wilson, Frank: f, Work and Culture”, in The 3. C. Teacher , 
October, 1335. 



















. 










■ 







' 










■ 

■ 0 ■ 











. 















- 55 - 


children now occupy more place as cultural entertainers, radio 
provides entertainment for people at home, while better roads 
and automobiles have increased the importance of the theatres 
in the villages as centres of cultural recreation. With all 
these modern improvements, however, there is a cultural need 
necessary to reawaken the community spirit and pride. This new 
spirit should replace the old of pioneer days but on a higher 
plane of cultural achievement and enjoyment. 

The high schools are assisting this reawakening of 
community interest in drama. Follovd.ng three years of dramatic 
activity on the part of the students of the Holla High School 
Society, the Elk’s Lodge of the Holla district decided to con¬ 
solidate dramatics and music on a firmer foundation by sponsor¬ 
ing the first musical and drama festival in British Columbia’s 
Peace River District. This festival was held on June 5th and 
6th, 1936, and proved so successful that the festival movement 
has been strengthened through the co-operation of citizens of 
the entire area and the Holla festival is to be continued as 
an annual event. At the first festival 150 school children 
and approximately 35 adults entered the musical and dramatic 
competitions. Adjudicators" 5 " were procured through the kindly 
support of the Department of Education, and much was done dur¬ 
ing the organization of the first festival to ensure the pro¬ 
motion of a higher standard of performance. School life and 
home life is now being enriched by the. festival movement. 

It is to be noted that the festival movement grew out 

"^For Music, Mr. PI. L. Vaughan, A.E.T.C.M., Grande Prairie. 

For Drama and Elocution, Major L. Bullock-Webster, President, 

Drama Festival Association of B. C., Victoria. 














. 














































































, 

















- 56 - 


of the activity of the school, especially that of the high 
school at Holla, Other schools in the Peace Hiver area are as 
important in their own localities. But it will be noted too 
that the festival movement represents a broader interest than 
that of school life. It has a vital significance for the cultural 
interests of young adults and parents. It limits activities to 
no single cultural practice for music and drama are placed upon 
equal grounds by the festival committee. Finally, we note that 
community gatherings for the practice of music and drama in the 
rural school districts tend to reawaken a declining social sense 
of co-operativeness and enthusiasm for community culture. What¬ 
ever may be the trend and influences of competitive music and 
drama in the urban centres, their effect in this rural frontier 
promises as yet to bear no ill fruits. 

(5) Another important phase of community organization is 
that of supplementary organizations to direct the interests of 
school children and young adults during spare time; namely, 
girls 1 and boys’ athletic clubs, reading clubs, Boy Scouts, Girl 
Guides, etc. Four Boy Scout troups are functioning in the Peace 
River District: those of Holla, Fort St. John, Dawson Creek, 
and Pouce Coupe. With, the exception of two cases none of these 
troups extend their activities to the rural districts. C.G.I.T. 
groups for girls of teen-age are organized in Holla, Dawson 
Creek and Pouce Coupe districts, the Pouce Coupe group being the 
onl 2 r one to have auxiliary groups in the adjacent rural school 
districts. No other form of organized spare-time activity is 
known to this writer to exist anywhere in the Peace River 
District of British Columbia. -.re I. 

















' 
























4 

. 































* ' 

♦ 






57 - 


Diagram I. - Map of British Columbia, showing the position of 
the Peace Kiver District in relation to the 
remainder of the Province.- 1 



° /+* Mil**. 


-Sixty-Fifth Annual Report of the Public Schools of the 
Province of British Columbia, p. H 51. 











-5S- 


This paucity of organizations for youth leaves for the school 
the task of training the youth of the district for social service 
almost unsupplemented in a vast rural area. It is found by the 
rural teachers that the teaching of play is as difficult as the 
teaching of skills and attitudes for work. Few boys and girls 
of the area have been encouraged to develop hobbies. Spare-time 
is often (largely it would appear) wasted time. The rural stores 
and country villages all have their "loafers". Many young men, 
just through with school, spend long winter eveningsajust "doing 
nothing". It is not only in the city that the country has 
"These youths who loiter about the post-office, the drug store, 
the poolroom, the tobacco shop, the street corner, who talk over 
prize fights, past and prospective, baseball and football idols, 
the girls, the movies, the radio and journalistic wise-crackers— 
what of them?"- 1 ' They have been, many of them still are, in our. 
schools but they neither know nor care for economic or civic or 
Cultural 1 conditions or programmes. They are of the community 
but they have no active place in its positive life."- 1 - In the 
frontier of the north, this "loafing" is not on a large scale. 

What there is is pernicious and is growing. All that could be 
done should be done to organize for youth, or rather provide for 
the organization of youth on youth 1 s own initiative, under dealer¬ 
ship . 

For the schools, education for the good use of leisure 
time is now a recognized objective. Concerning this matter the 
"King Report"^ reads as follows: "In the modern world people 

L The Clearing House, November, 1935, quoted from an article by 
the editor. 

2 King, II. B. : "School Finance in British Columbia", p. 33. 








• ,y 




* 






■ 

■ 


m 


■ 


, 







































































- 59 - 


are coming to "have more ,and more leisure "because of the 
inventions which have reduced the amount of labour that is 


necessary. Education, therefore, must teach people how to 
spend leisure in a wholesome way. Art, music, athletics and 
recreation of all kinds, skill in wood and metal work and in 
the domestic arts are all needed, so that the growing leisure 
which people have may be properly filled.” This fact of grow¬ 
ing leisure leaves no room for dispute, but its recognition 
indicates clearly a need for the study of local conditions, 
for and local organizations based upon such study. The need 
is no less true of the rural frontier than of the urban centre, 
the task of leadership of its youth no less challenging than 


that of the city. 


It was found from studying the replies to Form AA of 
the questionnaire mentioned above (see Appendix I), poor 


school attendance, retardation of pupils and lack of adequate 
facilities for high school education for boys and girls in rural 


districts are problems which have added to the educational handi¬ 
caps of the Peace Biver District. We need not consider at this 


point the detailed causes of these handicaps, but it must be 
noted that haphazard education has weakened the ability of leader¬ 
ship of the generation now reaching adult life. In many cases 
the children are leaving school with a lower educational standing 
than that obtained by their parents. A progressive community 


must strive to raise its educational level and to make education 


minister to the practical needs of its children and adults. 

It will be readily understood that many of the elementary 






' 

. 

























• 








• 







. 




































- 60 - 


and high school students of the Peace Riv r Inspectorate are 
retarded**' through no fault of ability, or lack of educational 
interest on the part of their parents. It is encouraging to 
numerous elementary and high school teachers in the Inspector¬ 
ate to find in their schools, students retarded educationally 
for their years, but who are attending school for the earnest 
purpose of fitting themselves better for the practical business 
of life and for citizenship. To some teachers, in schools 
poorly equipped with library facilities, the presence of these 
older students is a challenge rather difficult to meet. The 
teachers realize that, after all, young men and women hungry 
for learning cannot be satisfied or inspired through educational 
mediums especially designed for students considerably younger 
than these. Lack of time too, is a serious handicap in a teacher * 
attempt to lead her older students. A partial "solution is found 
in the organization of extra-curricular activities though the 
discrepancies in the ages of the students, especially in one- 
room schools, prevents the realisation of satisfactory results. 

We shall reserve the discussion of community education for 
young adults, for Chapter VII. It has been the aim of the present 
chapter-to describe the. background of settlement and to analyze 
the need for greater educational facilities and organization in 
the whole area under discussion. 

In conclusion of this chapter we present a series of 


The ages of the students of the Rolla High School range from 
12 to 22 years. One-third of the students of the high school 
grades are 18 years of age or over. Replies to Form A 
(Appendix I) reveal a condition of retardation in educational 
age throughout the Inspectorate, 































- 









, 









, 



















































challenges of major importance which the Peace Paver educational 
authorities and citizens must face successfully if education in 
their vast community of agricultural settlers is to grow into a 
vital force for the raising of the standards of life there. The 
writer believes further that the bases of education required 
for this frontier are fundamentally similar to the educational 
needs of hundred of rural communities in the West. 

(1) In the first place there is a need for education 
to form in the mind of the child and the young adult of the 
community a correct impression of the value end beauty of his 
own community. Into this knowledge must be woven the knowledge 
required in the art of citizenship: economic, political and 
broad social relationships wisely understood. In the incul¬ 
cation of these broad phases of education, the frontier presents 
special difficulties resulting from isolation and narrow ex¬ 
perience without the advantage of travel and even moderately 
extensive reading facilities. To this effect we cannot em¬ 
phasize too strongly the necessity for a co-ordination of aims 
and effort in the educational field. 

(2) The second outstanding challenge is directed mainly 
at the teachers and their ability to vitalize the subjects of 
instruction. In this connection it is desirable to develop 
the subject in the light of modern objectives and modern trends 
in the handling of school subjects, especially those of the 
junior high and the high school, and is considered in detail 

in Chapter V. 

(3) The third challenge is to the present and future 





























* 






















. - i 
















. 

















- 62 - 


movements in the field of adult education. Upon the success 
of adult education depends the power of leadership to be 
inspired and developed in the generation born in the Peace 
River country and which is now coming into adulthood without 
having had adequate educational advantages. There are 
desirable attitudes to develop towards citizenship, health, 
education, and culture. These phases of development require 
the "inspired' 1 leadership of virile manhood and womanhood. 

(4) A more specific responsibility of educators, 
perhaps, is that of inculcating in young farmers a love for 
and a scientific interest in their vocation. Some responsi¬ 
bility in this matter rests with the Provincial and Dominion 
representatives from the Peace River electorate. The schools, 
however, appear to be the logical medium through which basic 
interest in scientific agriculture should come. Again, it 
would seem that adult education is a very important essential. 

(5) Lastly there is the challenging need for education 
leading to a clearer recognition on the part of the citizens 
of the Peace River frontier of the value of intelligent co¬ 
operation in the political life of the community. In some 
countries, notably the Scandinavian countries, and more es¬ 
pecially in Denmark, schools have moulded the national phil¬ 
osophy which has led to fundamental co-operation of all 
citizens of the state in matters of vital concern in things 
economic, political and cultural. Elaborateness of expendi¬ 
ture need not be the index of a staters or a community^ 
fundamental prosperity and contentment. The writer believes 







- 








_ 



■ 




















































































' 



- 63 - 


that the Peace River community is most weak in the human 
essentials necessary for complete co-operation of all its 
citizens, and that when these things are strengthened, 
material facilities which may be lacking will suddenly be 
brought into keeping with the resources of the land. 







- 64 - 


CHAPTER IV 

EDUCATIONAL SOCIOLOGY (CONTINUED) : TYPICAL YOUNG CAREERS 

The purpose of the present chapter is to present brief 
records of the careers of typical young adults who have received 
education in the Rolla High School District.^ The aim is to 
indicate the nature of individual progress in relation to the 
social background, of the individuals concerned. The cases 
are selected with the view of their being representative of 
the types of young adults in the district in which they live 
and of the whole of the settled area of the Pea.ce River Block. 

Each of the individuals represented has attained the age of 
eighteen years, while in no case has the individual passed 
the age of thirty. The cases represented in the studies 
include 16 young men and 5 young women. 

Before considering the cases in question let us recall 
the following general features of the sociology of the Peace 
River settlement of British Columbia: 

(1) The generation now attaining adulthood%s that 
generation born in the frontier to the settlers who entered 
the district over the wagon trail from Edmonton and Edson, some 
before the Great War, some immediately after, 

(2) The social structure of the area is diverse, though 

the population is sparse (p. 42)* Generally, however, the area 

cannot be said to possess cultural, groups,^ though we have 

•^The individual-s are selected from this district because of the 
convenience of making the studies in the district in which the 
Q writer resided for five years. 

^The first while boy born in the Rolla District is now 22 years of age 
Spinney, R. L. and Zelney, L. C.: "An Introduction to Educational 
Sociology", Health, N* Y., 1935, p. 92, ff. 















♦ 


: •- m ■ 









- 





1 

■ 










. 




• ■ 














' 

. 

. • .< ; ■ cf 














-' , ' . ■■ ■ •> 














• • • • s' 











- 65 - 


previously noted that rural districts in certain cases (p. 42) 
have shorn a tendency to keep "their identity intact". In pract¬ 
ically every case of settlements of foreign extraction the parents 
as well as the children are English-speaking. 

(3) It should be remembered too, that, separate economic 
groups can be said to exist in the Pea.ce River community no more 
than separate cultural groups. Industry in the area is, in 
general,.agriculture, and upon agriculture the present wealth 
of the whole area is based. The mineral wealth is potential, 
trapping does not employ a great enough number of men to form 
a. "group", lumbering employs but few men, while the villages 
are small and act as receiving and distributing centres for 

the agricultural, population. 

(4) Education in the area has not been designed especially 
for the needs of frontier life. It has been general, mainly 
elementary, and has not been organized (until very recently) 

to meet vocational needs. 

With these features in mind, it will be readily under¬ 
stood that beyond individual differences in the individuals to 
be considered, and the differences arising.from conditions of 
home life, no greatly varying educational opportunities have 
influenced their development. Furthermore, it will be under¬ 
stood that the chief variations in social and economic status 
are those of individual families rather than of social and 
economic groups. Social groups have not crystallized in the 
communities of this rural frontier. 

Regarding the nature ofthe case records, the writer claims 










" 


' 
















. 


■ 

. 






















, 

























. 








- 66 - 


no technical excellence or completeness. If the histories set 
down reveal a need for scientific study of social backgrounds 
in rural communities, they will be fulfilling their highest 
purpose as far'as this thesis is concerned. The records are 
brief and embrace principally the following phases of each 
individual*s career: (1) the fact of his attendance at the. 

Rolla Elementary and High School: (2) the present age and school¬ 
leaving age of the individual; (3) general description of the 
school academic record together with a brief reference to in¬ 
dividual physical and mental qualities; (4) home factors; 

(5) Observations concerning pupil-teacher relationships; (6) re¬ 
lative facts concerning social adaptations, special abilities; 

(7) post-school careers. The studiesaare as follows: 

A. is 24 years of age. He attended the Holla High School 
until he had reached his eighteenth year, having completed 
then the work of Grade '.X, His grades at the time of high- 
school leaving were higher than those of the five other 
students of his class. He is reported (by his fellow 
students, his teachers and his parents) as having been a 
student of deep interests, especial^/- in the sciences and 
in social studies. He might be described as above average 
in both'mental and physical ability. He consistently led 
his classes at school; and, both during his school career, 
and since leaving school, he has been an outstanding 
participant in local sports. 

A ! s parents are among the earliest and most successful 
of the settlers to immigrate to the Peace River District 
of British Columbia, The father, a man of Swedish descent, 
in a veteran of the Spanish American War. This latter fact 
has meant, that, through the receipt of a, pension. A* s 
father has built a home and equipped a farm in a rather 
superior manner to those of the average settler. The home 
is a happy one, possessing good comforts and conditions 
conducive to study. The mothei? in uneducated (relatively) 
but very interested in the progress of her children towards 
better positions in life. There are four children in the 
family, all younger than A, by six to twelve years. 

A T S relationships in school appear to have been whole¬ 
some. He was interested in both athletics and study. 

Few special abilities have manifested themselves in 
A*s career, though his hobbies are interesting to record. 
His indoor pastime is embroidery and needle-work. His 






































. . 








- 

- 
























J 












- 67 - 


out-door hobby in winter is that of trapping. A. takes 
little interest in popular amusements which consist in 
this community/ of dances and house-parties in winter. 

In athletics, however, A. is an excellent leader. 

A. has shown persistent energy and interest in the 
clearing of his M bush M homestead. It lies at a point 
seven miles from the village of Rolla, and promises some 
returns after years more of clearing and improvement. A. 
is deeply interested in social questions, but has little 
patience with local, political and social doings. Unlike 
the greater number of young men of the community, A. 
keeps little social, company with young men ana women, 
seeming to find none who measure up to his intellectual 
ideal. A. is more than average a recluse. ' But'in all 
he is a type of one of the best young citizens of his 
community. He believes in himself and in his land. 

B. is 25 years of age and married. He left school 

at the age of 17, not having completed the work' of Grade XI. 

His school records show evidence of good ability in¬ 
consistently applied. He has good records in athletics 
and horse-training. He has taken active interest in 
stampede functions. 

The parents are Canadians, the father’ being of an 
eratic disposition. The home has always’ suffered from the 
result of uneconomical management, resulting' at times, in 
near poverty. The mother has been a potent influence for 
good for her children. B. has depended upon his mother’s 
assistance even after his marriage. 3’s sister shows 
greater perse\a?ance than does B. She, through perseverance 
and her own efforts, attained a high school and normal ed¬ 
ucation andhas become a successful teacher in the Peace 
River area. 

B ! s social relationships during his school life were 
sometimes unsatisfactory. He .was not at all times an inter¬ 
ested student and often took advantage of his teachers.' He 
was# however, generally successful in his studies and appears 
to have been of no essential liability to the school. 

C. is 22 years of age, having left school at’ the age 
of 18, and having completed Grade Xi. ITis school record 
is generally good, though many low marks were obtained, 
largely through carelessness on his own part. His teachers 
have expressed that his marks are not a sufficient indi¬ 
cation of his good ability. C. has an excellent record 

in athletic activities. Home conditions’ are commendable 
and above the average status of the homes of other boys. 
Conditions for home-study in books and in music are good. 

His father is a musician. C., however, has not shown 
musical ability and little interest in music. He seldom 
reads, and there is little hope that C. will reach the 
cultural status of his parents who were educated in good 
schools in tngland. 

C. has a pleasing disposition and has made very 
satisfactory social adjustments, without, at the same 
time developing a persevering attitude towards the 





' 

- 

. 












* 

; . , > 

- 

- 




. 














































. 

. 












- 63 - 


attainments of his own smbitions and ideals. The 
greatest danger is that he is becoming an economic fail¬ 
ure in the Peace Biver District. Numerous opportunities 
for permanent work and progress on the farm have been 
carelessly flung aside. He has no definite vocational 
interest, though that might have been otherwise had C. 
come earlier into contact with a vocation which appealed 
to his attitude and abilities. He is definitely opposed 
to agricultural per suits for his own career. C. may now 
have turned towards a field of more successful economic 
adjustment. He is at present (1936) studying in a busi¬ 
ness college in Edmonton. He expresses as yet, however, 
no particular interest in business as a - career. His 
return to the Peace Biver country and home would, the 
writer believes, be almost fatal"to what prospects C. 
has for making a satisfactory economic adjustment. The 
roots of C f s personality-difficulties grow deep in his 
home life and are not, it would" appear, attributable to 
any peculiar conditions existing in his home, a village 
in the rural frontier. During times of economic depres¬ 
sion, this c se wrould be typical of any community, "rural 
or urban and points to no significant problem of the 
frontier other than the usual lack there, of facilities 
for vocational guidance of students in the junior high 
school grades. 

D. is now 27 years of age. He left school at the 
age of 16, having passed into Grade XI. His parents were 
not in urgent need of his help on the farm at the time of 
his withdrawal from school (June). Hence his withdrawal 
appears to have been voluntary. 

D r s school record appears to have been better than 
average (data of "standing not extant in district records). 
Plis physical condition (as shown by the medical health 
cards) has been consistently good. In athletics, D. 
appears not to have taken a promehent" part, though this 
is not an unexpected condition amongest farm boys who 
work at home and travel long distances to school. 

His family immigrated to the Rolla district in 1912 5 
they (a family of eight children) were the first family 
to settle in this portion of the Peace Biver District. 

The family entered over the"Edson Trail" by covered wagon. 
The length of this trail from Edmonton is approximately 
400 miles. The family faced all the hard.ships of pioneer 
life in a far-flung frontier. D T s elementary education 
was received from a semi-illiterate transient preacher. 

His schooling was completed in a tw^o-room school, situ¬ 
ated-two miles from the farm home. D. has two sisters 
and two brothers who had completed their schooling in 
Missouri before the family emigrated. D’s parents are 
of puritan stock, upright, energetic, with their chief 
social interests centred upon the religious activities 
of the community. 

There is no evidence apparent which w/ould, indicate 





. 

- 

- 

' 

* 



11 


* 







. 










• 











. 














* 

















-69- 


tliat D ! s personality absorbed any tnal adjusting qualities 
during his brief elementary school career <’ Some family 
relationships (possibly those connected with a head¬ 
strong father) have caused D. to become somewhat reclu¬ 
sive in adult life. 

D. is inclined to be mechanical. Farm work holds 
some interest for him, although the mechanical aspect of 
the work is the absorbing phase for D. D. possesses no 
abnornal traits of personality beyond that of reclusive¬ 
ness. This latter trait is found in many young men of 
the frontier, especially after they have lived lonely 
lives on homesteads. The trait is a very great disadvant¬ 
age to the young men concerned, many of whom fail to 
marry and thus lay the foundation of an acute need in a 
pioneer district, namely that of a paucity of homes for 
which the building of schools is desired. 

D. , however, has been content to live with his parents. 
He has been successful as an independent farmer to the 
extent of ’’proving up” his land. He has not taken suffic¬ 
ient interest in an independent career in agriculture to 
find it necessary to improve a farm-home for himself, B. 
is of a. type of young adult living in the Peace River 
frontier that has but slight vocational interests developed. 
The ideals of these young men seem destroyed by their 
attitude towards the future prospects of the land of their 
birth, or forced'adoption—an attitude of disinterest and 
uncultured development—-and the whole course of life for 
some seems unmotivated. 

There is no better case, it would seem, for the pro¬ 
position of a well-directed programme'of post-school ed¬ 
ucation .embracing Sc variety of vocations and aspects of 
citizenship, than the examples of the unmotivated young 
adults of the frontier. The inspiration of folk-school 
education would not be out of plane in the rural frontier. 

E. left school two years ago, at the' age of 16, not 
having completed his Grade X course. The cause of his 
school leaving was the need for his assistance in the 
freighting of grain to the rail terminus. Having no 
motivating interest in the work of a general high school 
course, and not being re-inforced intellectually by the 
interest of his guardians in education, his temporary 
withdrawal from school resulted in permanent withdrawal. 

His progress at school was steady with fair marks 
throughout. He is not brilliant, yet of normal intelli¬ 
gence and dependable in all duties assigned. He takes 
little interest in athletics but is a. skilled horseman 
and a thorough ”cowboy”. 

S f s home lacks culture but is destitute of interest 
in the education of children. E, has been reared in a 
rough log-house in company with two elder sisters end 
under the guardianship of two uncles. Due to criminal 
action taken upon the father a divorce separated the 













- 




. 


. 











*. 




























* 

. 






, 










• . 






•' 7 , 















-70- 


mother from both the father and her children. These 
people were early settlers in the Peace Biver District 
and have had for many years the reputation of crudity 
and illiteracy, but of honest ideals of a better life 
for the future generation. 

E 1 s social relationships at school were of the most 
minor account beyond those of the class room where he 
was persistently reticent. His teachers have found him 
courteous and obedient. His social background did not 
promote desirable intermingling with his fellow-students. 

In many instances he is shunned, socially. His social 
career is in the balance now. There are demands upon 
community leadership, challenging it to accommodate 
personalities of potential worth, an asset sadly needed 
in the rural frontier. 

E. appears to be thoroughly adapted to the life of 
the farm. Unlike 'numerous young adults, he shows no in¬ 
dication of discontent. He ha.s hopes of becoming an 
independent farmer, - 

E. is too young to manifest interests“in adult 
social activities. His “social disadvantages promise to 
weigh most heavily against his future value as "a citizen. 
The rough . "bachelor-type" of settler is all too common a. 
factor in the growing society of this frontier region. A" 
uniformly English-speaking population, however, the Peace 
Biver District of British Columbia is equipped to spread 
an improving cultural status rapidly should adequate 
leadership and well-organized adult educational facilities 
be found. It is hoped that the se'ggregation of cultural 
groups will not become one of the factors in the crystal¬ 
lization of this community’s adjustments. 

F. is now 19 years of age, having left school at the 
age of 15 years before passing the Entrance examination. 

His parents were not in agreement concerning'the education 
of this boy; thus" in" their weakness was his opportunity to 
escape the confines of school life which he ardently des¬ 
pised. Further, an early contact with boys and young men 
older than himself, instilled habits of smoking, drinking 
along with the' other characteristic “habits of "gangs”. 

F’s early school records were more brilliant than 
those of the other members of his classes. During his 
last year of school life, however, it was manifested that 
his best interests had been diverted towards the enjoy¬ 
ment of pranks in company with "gangs”. During this last 
year of school, F’s marks indicate a fall in school inter¬ 
est. During this year too, F. created disciplinary problem 

The chief cause of the lad’s withdrawal from school 
lies, apparently, in pupil-tear her conflict, supplemented ■ 
by lack of decision and control in the home life. The 
mother has her children’s interests intelligently at heart. 
F’s behavior passed at an ear by stage beyond her control. 
The home is Canadian (English Canadian). The family of F. 


%any of these observations have been recorded on a basis 

of^the writer’s personal contacts with the cases repres- 
entea in these studies. 





















; 




' > 

; . 




























* 








. 

































. 






’ 










' c " 





* 






































- 71 - 


was among the earliest immigrants to the community. 

The farm, though of good land and well cultivated, is 
but one- quarter-section in extent and has not afforded 
enough surplus produce to finance the building of a 
home superior to the old home-stead shack in which the 
parents first settled. The six children of which F. 
is the second, were born and reared in the original 
f arm home. 

Reference to pupil-teacher conflict has been made 
above. The writer believes that the worst phases of 
this conflict could have been avoided through a sincere 
effort on the part of the teacher to have understood the 
psychological life of the boy and to have shared this 
knowledge with the parents. 

F. shows definite interest in farming and horseman¬ 
ship. The writer’s first acquaintance with F. was in 
seeing him, as a lad of 15 , win a plowing match in com¬ 
petition with senior competitors. 

F. is still young. He has left the Peace River 
District to make his own way, hiring himself to' farmers. 
Recent reports are that he has been more successful in 
adapting himself among strangers than with his own 
people and in his own home. 

G. left school at the age of 17, having'completed 
Grade X, with fair standing in his school work. He re¬ 
ports personally that his school leaving wan hastened 
by his being required to ansist with the farm work It 
home, and by the further' fact that no vocational education 
was available to him. His parents were unable, financi¬ 
ally, to assist him with the obtaining of education 
"outside". 

G’s scholastic record was a good average of that of 
his class-fellows. He showed outstanding ability in 
mathematics, and scored, in one instance, 100 percent, in 
a Departmental examination in arithmetic. The home status 
of his family is low economically. The familly of four 
children, have until the marriage of two of them, resided 
with their parents in a small dog'house possessing two 
crowded rooms and a sleeping attic. The father has taken 
little active interest in his children’s education or in 
.any improvement of the farm of one quarter-section which 
he homesteaded in the early days of the Rolla settlement. 
The mother, on the other hand, ha,s encouraged her child¬ 
ren to attend school, motivating their activities by pro¬ 
phecies that an education would enable them to leave the 
farm in the Peace River country and to lead "better lives 
outside". 

G’s social relationships at school and in the com¬ 
munity have been of desirable type. He has shown little 
inclination to be a leader, but has shown always a dis¬ 
position to. co-operate, in progressive movements. He has 
participated in church' work and in the activities of 
beneficial fraternal organizations. 












' 

- 

- 

* 




* 










, 

, 


■ 

* 




, 








.or- 

... 

. 


rr o - ' '• 

















- 72 - 


His special abilities have had no educational 
support. He is indifferent as to his own development 
beyond that of clearing enough land upon which to make 
a living. He expresses no particular interest, but is 
resigned, to his work through economic circumstances. 

G. is married, lives upon'a quarter-section which 
he'has pre-empted, and with good energy, appears to be 
progressing on the small-scale farm in a manner typical 
of young farmers who have been so handicapped as to have 
no economic backing or special home stimulus. He is 
becoming; a citizen of the second generation of settlers 
whose background of experience should guide him but 
whose economic hardships on a second-choice farm will 
limit the improvement of his home and farm. 

H. withdrew from high school at the age of 16 with 
complete Grade X standing. His high school scholastic 
grading is good, though 9L left school with a distinct 
dislike for study and with'no motive to continue his 
studies. He left high school in order to assist his 
family establish themselves in their village home and 
to assist his father in the carpentery-trade. H. was 
pleased to find a reason for leaving school. He enjoys 
his trade but will never be, it v/ould seem, a cultural 
asset to his community nor a. supporter of the cause of 
education. 

H. has a commendable home. His mother is energetic 
and intelligent, possessing an elementary school edu¬ 
cation. She is sincere in her efforts to motivate her 
four sons, of whom H. is the youngest, towards a life 
of economic security. The mother is of Scottish birth 
and descent, the fathe an Irish Canadian. 

The father has been very unsuccessful in maintaining 
a reasonable economic status for the family. His life 
appears to have been one of indecision and mismanagement. 
His sons appear to possess similar characteristics. 

They are, however, suffering from the r suits of malad¬ 
justment in their vocational careers. After two fruit¬ 
less years of labour on a wooded homestead, H., has 
returned to Roll a to become a partner with his father in 
an unprosperous .carpenter shop. His future in this occu¬ 
pation will be determined by the trends of business and 
general expansion activities of the. district during the 
years ahead and upon his ability to broaden his economic 
and social vision. 

H T s school life was characterized by quite continuous 
series of teacher-pupil conflicts. 

His special abilities appear not to have been dis¬ 
covered or realized by himself. He does not enjoy the 
occupation of farming, partly, perhaps, because no attract 
ive opportunity in that occupation with promise of future 
success has been discovered by him. His life on the farm 
has been a desperate economic struggle. H. has had no 




. 

* 

' * 

* 












■ 








. 






, 

■ 

. 














- 73 - 


adequate opportunity to ’’find himself” in carpentery, 
though he has developed commendable skill in cabinet¬ 
making ana general carpentery* 

H. has n: ver tasted the fruits of victory and is 
somewhat ’’sour” on life. At 22 he is single, still liv¬ 
ing with his parents, and without definite aims, or pros¬ 
pects for a successful career, he awaits rather passively 
the coming of a better day. ' Vocational and cultural 
training, combined with the dawning of economic prosper¬ 
ity in the Peace Riv :r country would cast new light on 
the path of H. and numerous other youths who have been 
deadened by fruitless struggle in the far-flung frontier. 

I. has taken advantage of three years of high school 
education. He left high school in June, 1934, at the 
age of 18. He attended school from a distance of three 
miles throughout his school career. He has one brother, 
a twin, one sister,his senior and one sister, his junior. 

H. left school with attractive' opportunity to follow a 
successful fanning career. His inclinations, however,' 
were vaguely directed towards'city life of * hich'he' has 
but the remotest idea.. His agricultural training is 
that obtained on his father’s wrell-equipped farm. 

I*S scholastic record is approximately the median 
of his classes'. While at school, he took active interest 
in the social studies, poetry, dramatics and athletics. 

The economic status of hi's home is well above the 
average of the Peace River "District. His f ather has 
raised high grade horses, good crops and has a Well- 
improved farm. The farm consists of 400 acres under 
the plow and provides sufficient work for the father 
and the two sons. Extra help is employed during the 
busy seasons in spring and fall. The family home is 
comfortable and of good accommodation. The members of 
the family have had a home training of purely’ economic 
nature. Cultural reading is not characteristic of 
leisure'pursuits in the home. The parents have had the 
advantage of element ary education and have found' little 
time during their 20 years on the frontier to extend 
that education, "They have sent their children to school 
but have never become intimately concerned with the 
latter 1 s progress. 

I. has developed, active and desirable social habits. 
Extra-curricular activities were his chief interest and 
an important part of his development during his school 
career. He is inclined to be a leader in social activ¬ 
ities and in athletics, though he is, nevertheless, of 
somewhat eratic nature. 

I, has good mental and physical ability. He has 
developed skill in all farm'work and is interested in 
the possibility of acquiring more technical knowledge. 

I. definitely favours and supports' Cat 22 years of age) 
suggestion for adult education in the Peace River area. 

I, is now working in conjunction with his father and 













J- • y . 

. 

' 










* 

- 

- 


, 












. 











. 



















♦ 













. 
















- 74 - 


brother on his father’s farm, but he expresses the 
desire to experience a new life n in the city”. He lacks 
the steadifying effects of travel and is unsteady in aim, 
as to the career which he will ultimately follow. His 
father is endeavouring to increase I’s interest in agri¬ 
culture. Yfould that more farmers took as intelligent 
interest in their son’s education and careers. Commun¬ 
ity ideals and aims must be moulded, andyoung adults 
must approach the work of their lives w r ith a sense of 
these ideals and aims translated into individual signifi¬ 
cance. The community cannot at all afford to lose 
maberial possessed in the personality of I. Such losses 
are taking place because of an absence of co-ordination 
of community purpose and un-inspiring educational 
practises. 

J.’s educational and home factors are identical with 
those of I. I. and J. are probably identical twins 5 
physically the boys are very similar, while in innate 
mental ability (a.s .judged by several years’ school marks) 
they are strikingly hear equality. In the literary' and 
social studies of high school, 1 . has taken less lively 
interest than has' X., and in these subjects the former 
is slightly superior to the latter. Their average marks, 
however, have frequently been approximately equal. 

J. is less erratic of temperament than is I.; he 
exhibits consistent steadiness of judgment and behavior 
and is the personality-complement of I. J. takes little 
interest in athletics but is a more dependable farmer 
than'his brother, being preferred by the father for the 
performance of painstaking work. Socially, J. is less 
a leader and not so popularly known as his more vivacious 
brother. 

J. is employed as a partner on his father’s farm. He 
feels that he too, would find life ”in the city”' prefer¬ 
able to that on the farm. He is inclined, however, to' 
face reality logically and is tending, year by year, to 
be more content to pursue his'career on the farm. His 
interest in the art of farming is commendable and he 
has developed desirable cultural attitudes. He is at 
present (1936) engaged in the study of a correspondence 
course in automotive mechanics, the course being offered 
by the Correspondence Branch of the Department of 
Education, Victoria, 3. C.~ 

E. is 21 years of age, having completed Grade XI at 
the age of 18 and thus ending his school career. His 
high school life has not motivated academic or vocational 
interests on the part of the student. School was taken 
by this boy as a very casual matter of course. Towards 
the end of his high school life, K. expressed vague 
interest in higher education for which he is obvioushp 
fitted from the aspect of mental ability. He is 


^See Appendix III for a detailed statement of correspondence 
courses for British Columbia. 










. 

, 








* “ 



t" 
















' 


, 















































- 75 - 


financially barred from proceeding with higher education 
for he is responsible for the support of his grandmother 
and two sisters* K.’s parents are dead. In common with 
other young adults of the Peace Paver District K. finds 
that an agricultural career is inevitable for him. 

K.'s school marks have shown fluctuations, indicating 
spasmodic interest in the courses of study. His chief 
abilities in so far as the general high school courses 
are concerned, are in drawing and original expression in 
composition. 

His home training has resulted in the formation in 
K.’s personality a natural grace not frequently found in 
young people of the frontier (even in homes in which the 
parents are cultured). 

The farm left (three years ago) by K.’s father to 
the keeping of his son is composed of but one Quarter- 
section, but is of good fertility. It is poorly equip¬ 
ped and its new owner shows little interest in the improve 
ment of his estate. A'general lack of interest in'ed¬ 
ucational aspects of agriculture and in the farm work 
would seem to be the causes of K.’s weak success as a 
farmer. 

K. ’s easy grace and courtesy have won him places of 
esteem in social and athletic relationships. His school 
life involved no conflicts. What of his future? In 
common with many of the youth of the district K. has 
become content to ’’drift !? with the ways of the community. 
This young man with good abilities should be developing 
into a political and social leader of his community. 

Surely there is an education obtainable—-post-school 
education—which would have the power to inspire young 
adults and develop in them a realization of their own 
abilities and purposes and also a realization of the 
future possibilities and present -worth of their community. 
It is such education which is required for the assured 
progress of the frontier of to-day. 

L. withdrew from school two years ago at the age of 
18, having partially completed the work of Grade XI. 

The causes of his school-leaving are chiefly two—his 
difficulty in the handling of academic studies and his 
ill-defined objective concerning a, future career. L.’s 
home life has been identical with that of G. He obtained 

minimum pass marks in the first two grades of high 
school. 

L. is sometimes backward in social adjustment. He 
is of a quiet, friendly nature, but is uncommonly slow 
to develop social ease. His home-environment has re¬ 
tarded L.’s development of desirable social adjustment,* 
for his parents are reclusive and take little part in. 
civic life or in social activities. 

L. shows somewhat marked ability in mechanical art. 

He has expressed desire to follow drafting as a career. 






. 

' 




, 








v 

„ 










































-Yb- 


3ut with little vocational guidance he has not taken 
steps to realize his ambition. 

L. is of unusual physical strength and endurance, 
though his eyes are weak and markedly crossed in vision. 

He reports through personal, interview that he is 
dissatisfied with work on his father’s small farm* He 
has no resources with which to develop new land for him¬ 
self. He is drifting into a stat us quo too common with 
young men whose parents, possessed of a romantic attach¬ 
ment to the virgin land, journeyed to the Pea.ce Paver 
country over the wagon road twenty years ago. 

M. is 21 years'of age. He completed Grade XII- 1 - at 
the Holla High School in June, 1935. He was retarded 
in his high school work by the fact that he was absent 
from school for three years following his completion of 
Grade IX. 

M. T s ability in academic studies is average- , Though 
erratic in his application to -work in school, he completed 
the work of His' eleventh grade by private study. 

LI. is of French parentage and is bi-lingual, The 
parents (the father is a village general merchant) are 
energetic in business and are' very public-spirited. M. 's' 1 
opportunity to do home-study has been comparatively satis- 
factory. 

He possesses an easy social grace and is a good com¬ 
munity leader and supporter of the cause of education. 

His early erratic habits of application to work are, 
apparently, being overcome. He is gifted with' a person¬ 
ality suited to the making of desirable business relation¬ 
ships. He as one of the few young adults whose career 
is not governed by a lack of financial assistance in the 
matter of obtaining an education. His parents have added 
personal encouragement to their financial assistance to 
M. in the matter of his education* 

M. plans to follow a business career and is during 
the present winter (1936) pursuing a secretarial course 
at Alberta College, Edmonton. He does not expect to 
find his career in the Peace River country* 

f. is the son of a clergyman of the United Church 
of Canada.. His cultural background, his definite plans 
for "a“university career, and, in general, his clear-cut 
procedure regarding his own aims dissociate this boy 
from the lot of those who have been born to the pioneer 
farmer of the frontier. This boy, though having faced 
identical hardships to those of his fellows in the 
Peace River District, does not face the same inevitable 
prospect of life on the land in the frontier. 

After completing Grade XI at the Rolla High School, 

H. went to live w T ith his parents in a small city in 
Southern Alberta, He has since completed Senior Matric¬ 
ulation and is proceeding with the study of agriculture 


1 Junior Matriculation 














. 









' 
























. 













«■ 






























- 77 - 


at the University of Alberta. H. is the only boy (or 
girl) to date to have taken high school work in the Peace 
River District of British Columbia and proceed with 
higher education. This fact alone illustrates a too 
dominant feature of frontier education 5 namely, that 
of an enforced limitation of educational attainment. 

The latter limitation is accompanied by a correspond¬ 
ing limitation in the variety of vocational, opportun¬ 
ities open to young adults and the youth of a frontier; 
and,in the present case, the frontier conditions in 
education are being made to lag behind the economic 
importance and progressiveness of the community con¬ 
cerned. 

Should 3M. find it desirable to return to the Pea.ce 
River District (after the completion of his agricult¬ 
ural course), he would be equipped to lay the foundations 
of a new and better educational sociology in this ex¬ 
tended frontier. It is to the agricultural industry, 
one believes, that culture must be added--culture and 
careful technique. The youth of the whole vast commun¬ 
ity need the inspiration of leadership which has broken 
from the "Ways of the homestead ’ 1 without having broken 
with its loyalty to the frontier community. 

0 . withdrew from school in the early fall of 1924, 
against the will of his father. 0 , is 18; his mother 
died when he was 7 years of age. With a fair ability 
in school studies, 0 . would rather be riding the range 
than following courses of study which, apparently, mean 
less than nothing to his interest. 

O.’s home life has not been an influence to the 
boy’s finer tastes. The father is sincere but weak and 
erratic in his handling of his children. O', learned 
early to follow the course of his own desires. Sept¬ 
ember, 1935, was the third fall term commencement which 
brought 0 . to school for a few brief weeks, then to" 
leave school for the threshing season and finally to 
struggle through"the remainder of the school year, 
making marks below the scale of his ability. He passed 
Grade IX with low standing. 

O.’s father is an American citizen whose two 
daughters (both older than 0 .) have recently returned 
to the tJ. S. A. The home is now less hospitable than 
before. The father possesses no cultural background 
upon which to base his home training. His control 
has been negative and of a censuring type. 0 . appears 
to require the quieting effects of quiet, comfortable 
home life. 

0 . has confided to the writer, that he ha.s no 
fundamental interest in farm life, though his greatest 
pleasure comes in the handling of horses. The writer, 
after some years acquaintance with 0 ., believes that 
the boy possesses fundamental characteristics which are 



















■ 






■> 3 











. 










' 

, 


' 






■ 
















. 















- 78 . 


very desirable in farmers of the frontier. His life 
need not be a failure. He would probably be benefited 
by brief, inspirational courses in agriculture and 
upon topics of practical and challenging nature. In 
this case, personality-guidance must be studied and 
applied in conjunction with carefully planned vocational 
guidance and training. The pioneering frontier is not 
an inappropriate environment for exuberant youth with 
uncontrolled but surplus physical and mental energy. 

It will be remembered that in the presentation of the 
above brief studies of young men of the Holla High School District, 
no attempt has been made to give a complete picture of the youth 
and young adults of the Peace River country. Scores of cases 
might be added to the list, while more minute detail concern¬ 
ing each individual, might be given. Our scope here, however, 
is to present a significant number of cases of young adults 
who have received some education—more than is usual for the 
young people born in the frontier—and to give in outline, 
the trends of their present lives in relation to their home 
and community backgrounds. Even from this meager study some 
basic conclusion might be drawn and a course suggested. 

Before concluding the present chapter the writer wishes 
to add brief records of the studies of five young women who 
have attended the Holla High School, all of whom are likely to 
remain citizens of the Pe • ce River community. The five girls 
selected have all completed not less than two years’ work in 
high school and are all of sufficient ability to continue into 
higher academic studies or to become intelligently efficient 
in household duties and in the duties of citizenship. Again 
the aim is to indicate the trends of typical young adults 
in the Peace River frontier. 









' 

* 











, 










, 


























■ 

















































TABLE I 


ACADEMIC STATUS OF EX-HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS 
OF THE HOLLA SCHOOL AEEA 



Number 
of causes 
studied 

Number 
having 
completed 
Grade IX 
only 

Number 
having ' 
completed 
Grade X 
only 

Number 
having 
completed 
Grade HI 
or XII 

Men 

15 

2 

3 

10 

Women 

5 

1 

0 

4 

totals 

20 

3 

3 

14 


TABLE II 

VOCATIONAL AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING STATUS OF 
EX-HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS OF THE HOLLA HIGH SCHOOL AREA 


Number 

Number having 

of cases Agricultural 
studied or Domestic 
Science 
Training 


Men 

15 

1 

2 

0 

0 

Women 

5 

0 

0 

1 

0 

Totals 

20 

1 

2 

1 

0 



TABLE III 



SOCIOLOGICAL, 
EX-HIGH SCHOOL 

ECONOMIC OR 
STUDENTS OF 

VOCATIONAL STATUS 
THE HOLLA SCHOOL 

OF 

AREA 

Number 

of 

cases 

studied 

Ho.living Ho.living 
with v'ith 

parents parents 
and and. not 

owning SISpg 

1 Anri ___ 

No. not 
living 
v/ith 
parents 
and not 

°iinS g 

Number 

Married 

Number 
e srnxng 
business 
or 

professional 
sal ary~ 

Men 15 

3 

7 

2 

2 

2 

women 5 

0 

3 

2 

1 

2 

Totals 20 

3 

10 

4 

3 

4 


Number 

having 

Business 

Training 


Number 
having 
Te acher 
Training 


Number 
trained 
for any 
other 
Vocation 









































* 












v. 


















' 























































. 










































































- 80 - 


P. is now 20 years of age and is attending the 
present session of the Provincial Normal School, Victoria, 
She obtained her high school instruction through corres¬ 
pondence with the Department of Education and at Rolla 
High School. Before the completion of Grade XII, P. was 
compelled to neglect her courses for two years while she 
was supporting herself endassisting her family. Her ed¬ 
ucation was obtained through unusual effort and exercise 
of determination. 

Her high school academic record is good to excellent. 
Her schoolwork was done always in a pains talcing manner; 
her scores in achievement tests were high. Her "bent” , 
academically, is towards mathematical and scientific 
subjects. 

At home the mother furnished an encouraging motive 
to the girl. There developed in the family mind a, desire 
to rise above the educational lot of the frontiersman. 

P, is the eldest of a family of six children and at an 
early age assumed a responsible position in the home. 

The home is a meagre structure—the homestead house, 
build 21 years a o. Though the house is an inadequate 
comfort for a large family, the family maintains a good 
average standard of living (for the district). P.’s 
brothers and sisters, as well an herself, are possessed 
with a high degree of mental and physical energy. 

P. was,throughout her -school career, a quiet, rather 
retiring personality, but possessing the qualities of 
effective leadership among her fellow students. As a 
teacher she will doubtless possess a calm efficiency. 

P.’s abilities and experience would point to a suc¬ 
cessful post-school career for this young lady, the fourth 
individual and the third lady to leave the Peace River 
District for higher studies. If P* is successful in 
obtaining a satisfactory position upon completion of her 
normal school work, she intends to continue her studies 
toward a-university education. 


Q. is a young lady of good native mental ability who 
continued to attend high school periodically until she 
had completed Grade XI at the age of 19. She is now 22' 
years of age, having left school to assist in the house¬ 
hold of her guardians. Further education could not be 
financed by her guardians, while her personal stimulus 
for higher education was lacking; chiefly, it would appear, 


because of an absence of vocational guidance from adequate 
and intelligent sources. 

Her school record is 


of her classes. Her mark; 


• roulc 1 have been higher, one believes,had her opportunity 
for study been more satisfactory. This student attended 
school from a distance of five and one-half miles, the 
trip being made on horseback. Her household duties were 
considerable often entailing much absence from school. 












' 



















. 


- 










-h :: 


• ■ *•.. • 




























- 81 - 


Q. 1 s home relationships have been ox a. socially 
retarding nature. (She is the elder sister of E.; see 

p. 70). She has lived among frequent discordant domestic 
relationships. Commendable educational motivation has 
been given Q. by her grandmother, a pioneer of pre-7/ar 
days. 

R. ’s social relationships with her fellow students 
have been few. Her low' family-status and the necessity 
of her having to leave school immediately after the close 
of classes (because of the distance of her home from the 
school) prevented her participation in extra-curricular 
activities. She has developed no special talents or 
hobbies, has no thought of an independent career, and is 
not subject to any form of cultural leadership. She 
belongs to the farm and the frontier. 

Q. is typical of a class of young women belonging 
to the frontier under discussion for which there is' no 
logical independent career. One cannot predict in such 
cases. But there is; first, an all but un surmount able 
barrier.to higher education and a professional career in 
many cases, secondly, geographic and'economic isolation 
of the district do not make the change of locality of 
many of these young women likely. Marriage in the front¬ 
ier is the most likely opening to' independence of the 
greater number of the class represented by Q. Improve¬ 
ment of the home-life of the area depends upon the com¬ 
munity^ future success' in making' satisfa.ctory adjust¬ 
ments within its borders. Vocational guidance and train¬ 
ing in health and home-making are needed essentials for 
young women. 

R. is 23 years of age. She left school at the age 

of 16, worked at home for three years and returned to high 
school at the age of 19. She completed the work of Grade 
XI that year and thus completed her high school career. 

She married a young farmer the following year (1933). 

R. *s home factors are identical with those of I. and 
J.; she is their elder sister. 

Her school life was coloured with varied interests. 

Her favorite out-door activity is riding. She has ridden 
in many horse-races. She was from an early age energetic, 
vivacious, possessing keen interests in nature and action. 

R.. x s best abilities lie in the fields of athletics, 
farm work and household duties. She is interested in 
chickens and livestock. 

She lives with her young husband on a wooded farm on 
a flat in the Peace River Valley twenty miles from the 
near|it village. She appears to be thoroughly adapted 
to the life she has chosen. She takes commendable part 
in the leadership' of community activities in the district 
in which she lives. She Is the type of those to whom the 
frontier might logically look for leadership in social 
and educational improvement. 











* 4 

- 


■ 

' 

' 
















* 


, 






* • 





















A" t * 
























































S. is 21 ye rs of age, lias left school for a period 
of three years and is now resuming her studies in the 
Holla High School. Her present objective is to complete 
the work of Junior Matriculation this year. She has no 
vocational objective. 

Her educational abilities are above average. She 
has made good marks in all subject; her especial interest 
is in literary and social studies. 

S.’s parents are intelligent and cultured .Americans 
who settled in the Peace River District in 1926. Their 
economic status has fallen rapidly, making it impossible 
for the family (four children) to enjoy adequate comforts. 
The mother desires her children to receive education and 
to become economically independent. The father has not 
adapted his abilities to life on the frontier. Opport¬ 
unity for educational advantages in this family appears 
to be vanishing while the family drifts and waits through 
the depression, hoping for better days. 

S. ’s best abilities are purely academic in nature. 

She has. no plans for a future career. Her life is in 
essence, a matter of ’’waiting”. There appears no possi¬ 
bility of her continuing studies into higher education or 
vocational training. Yet she is not content to allow the 
farm life of the frontier to absorb all her interests. 

T. left school two years ago at the age of 15. Her 
mother died when the former was an infant. Being the 
eldest of a family of three children, T. has been called 
upon to leave school, before the completion of her Grade 
IX work, to assist in the household. The senior of this 
home is the Grandmother, The father is frequently absent 
from the home for periods of some months. 

The academic standing of T. is average of the other 
pupils of her classes. She he: shown exceptionable 
ability in drawing and. design. Her home relationships 
appear to be happy onesno pupil-conflicts are evident 
in the record of her school career. 

Since leaving school, however, certain complexes have 
arisen in the personality of this girl which have caused 
her to become reclusive and somewhat sullen. Ho specific 
motives for this deficiency in social adaptation are 
apparent. In some respects, the cause of her recent un¬ 
fortunate adaptation appears to be a resentment of the 
fact of her loss of opportunity to continue her education. 

She is reported by her family as being extraordinarily 
gifted in the art of cooking. Her spare-time activity is 
drawing. 

T.’s circumstances would not be enviable were she in 
the most advantageous environment. Her education was 
cut short and certain weaknesses of personality appear 
to tend towards the production of unhappyness. The com¬ 
munity of which she will soon be an adult citizen is un¬ 
friend^ to one whose educational ambitions have been 
thwarted. An essential element in future educational 
tendencies of frontier communities, should be that of 
intellectual inspiration based upon community values. 













_ 






















. 

I. 

. 










. 


























The personal outlines given above have given little 
evidence of individual differences in personality* in ability, 
or in opportunity of the cases presented. It must be assumed 
that such differences, which have.been only faintly indicated 
in the outlines, do exist, though it is not the purpose in this 
thesis to bring to light these particular classes of individual 
differences. They are differences which exist in communities 
regardless of the locality of those communities. One aim, as 
was stated at the outset of this chapter has been to reveal 
the need for more scientific study of the sociological back¬ 
ground of the rural frontier. The second and more fundamental 
aim, however, has been to study the typical personalities in 
relation to the sociological background, which in our community, 
as it appears in the above studies, to be strikingly common, in 
fundamental ways, to all our young adults. 

Again, we may conclude from a survey of the twenty-one 
studies, that the conditions of the Peace River frontier, in 
so far as educational sociology is concerned, are not distinct¬ 
ive enough to require a special study. This conclusion is justi¬ 
fied to a high degree, but the writer wishes, in view of the un¬ 
usual isolation of the district and its newness, to claim for it 
more pressing needs in educational matters than are usually 
found in rural communities of Western Canada. Some pertinent 
facts should be noted too, in so far as they reveal this press¬ 
ing need for the improvement of educational facilities, not only 
in the Peace River area, but in all rural communities suffering 
like needs. Notable among these facts 1 are the following: 

1 See Table®4. I-m. 













. 


















... 






. 












, ; 


' 






































- 84 - 


Only two young men have, in the history of the settlement in 
question, (C. and I:.) supplemented their high school education 
with any form of vocational training; not one young man or 
woman of British Columbia* s Peace Kiver has received technical 
training in agriculture; only three-** young women have supple¬ 
mented their high school education in the fields of profess¬ 
ional or vocational training; girls have no alternative, after 
completing high school studies, but to remain in their parents 
homes in cases (an overwhelming majority of cases) in which the 
said young women are barred.:for financial reasons from leaving 
the district to receive higher education. Then lastly, in con¬ 
sidering the sociological and economic conditions of this front¬ 
ier, we are reminded of the disadvantages arising from its 
isolation and inadequate means of communication connecting it 
with the population-centres of the Province. This fact has a. 
retarding influence upon the general cultural and broadening 
developments of the settlers and their children. We recall 
that in the case of P., we have an example of a. young adult who 
was born in her parents’ homestead cabin, and had not, until the 
time of her attendance at normal school this year, been outside 
her native community or to a city. 

With these facts in mind the writer wishes to sketch- 
four general conclusions arising from the recording of the above 
case studies. Following each of these conclusions some suggest¬ 
ion regarding the correction of weaknesses and the improvement 
of .the condition in question will be made. The conclusions are 

“P. and three older women ' ho ' received only the letter portion 
of their hiph school educations in the Peace Fiver District. 
























■ 

































• 





















-85 


as follows: 

(1) The age of high school-leaving in the Holla District 
is not particularly low. In fact, in the greater number of 
cases studied students had continued high school studies beyond 
the normal age of high school graduation. This fact indicates 
a general condition of retardation rather than an abnormal 
interest in education. The retardation in many cases, however, 
is not exceedingly detrimental in so far as personal advantage 
is concerned. Older students have been noticed to get deeper 
enjoyment and value from the courses of instruction than did 
younger students; and, in the case of these particular older 
students, no other course than that of a general high school 
education has been open to them. Hence high school studies 
mean for them their last direct medium of cultural improvement 
by way of school. 

The suggestion to be offered relative to this condition 
is that education should sii^ply practical media for inspiring 
the youth of the community to the attainment of a greater 
appreciation of their community and a greater interest in the 
fundamental, occupation of the district—agriculture. Retardation 
in educational achievement is the source of significant waste 
of material resources and resources of personality. The check¬ 
ing of these losses is now in progress through the better ed¬ 
ucational organization of the Peace River Inspectorate. The 
fact of the losses has been noted, and through improvements in 
educational administration and facilities, it is hoped to improve 
the teaching-efficiency of the are r as fast as financial re¬ 
sources will permit. 











, 





















) 









' 






















. 


















(2) It is noticeable that the homes of the Peace River 
District are frequently inadequate from the point of view of 
both material comforts and social status. Seven of the fifteen 
young men and three of the young women whose records are in¬ 
cluded in the above case studies have been reared in homes 
materially and culturally inadequate—six homes are deficient 
in cultural development of the children reared in them. It 
should be added that many of the parents in the homes of this 
frontier are endeavouring to raise the social and cultural status 
of themselves and of their community. The writer would suggest 
that improvements and reforms of the land settlement of the area 
would have a vital influence upon the sociological conditions of 
the settlement in future. Some attention should be given to 
the type of immigrant admitted and every precaution should be 
made to place the settlement as a whole upon sound economy. 
Improvement of roads and communication would give settlers more 
opportunity to co-mingle and share their views and thus stimulate 
the process of developing community consciousness. The schools 
too, might be made to exert a greater influence upon the cultural 
growth of parents as well as of children. Such a movement as 
Education Week, has in the past, stimulated interest on the part 
of parents in the aims of education. The opportunities presented 
by such a movement should be used to the fullest extent. Finally, 
it is suggested that, through the agencies of the Health Unit, 
the Administrator of Education, the teachers and libraries, 
parents should become conversant with the aims of education 
and active in their co-operation with education improving 

































■ 





























































home conditions. 

(3) Again we have notices that the frontier offers little 
or no opportunity for the development in young people of special, 
abilities. In so far as artistic abilities are concerned, it 
appears that the education of the schools (curricular and extra¬ 
curricular) must be enriched and- that the schools of the front¬ 
ier must be made to educate as effeciently and as completely as 
do the schools of urban centres. 

The possibilit 2 /- of such improvement appears at first 
thought to be impossible. This, however, we believe, is not 
the case. The development of the facilities in the Junior High 
School at Dawson Creek**- demonstrates that small schools may be 
modernized, leaving out few, if any, of the fundamentals of a 
modern educational institution and possessing a varied curric¬ 
ulum. In addition to the modernization of the schools in the 
frontier, the writer wishes to suggest again that through hi ant 
school work, correspondence courses, radio education and other 
forms of community education,^ much of the drabness might be 
eradicated from frontier life. Through these educational media 
better leadership within the community will eventually develop. 

(4) There is noticed in the studies of the young adults 
recorded an almost general lack of fundamental interest in the 
life of agricultural pursuits. This condition is fatal to the 
development of happy prosperity. !t ..Agriculture is the found¬ 
ation of the distinctly rural courses that should be taught. 
Scientific advances In agriculture have enabled a farmer to 
farm more carefully than did his parents and grandparents. To 

^Organized January 1, 1935. 

^See Chapter VII. 

















■ 





. 















* 

• 











. 




























- 


































- 38 - 


succeed the f mer must be progressive. The study of Agriculture 
should be emphasized and special teachers equipped for the 
purpose, because agriculture is recognized to be T the backbone 
of the nation.."'*' The eradication of apathy towards the funda¬ 
mental industry of the are' can be accomplished, it would seem, 
through no sure" means than the inspiration of young adults with 
the interesting knowledge which their work implies. The rise 
of economic prosperity which would follow the institution of 
railway communication with Vancouver would bring a revival of 
interest in agriculture in this frontier. Education should 
consolidate the interests aroused by economic factors and deepen 
and make permanent the interest of young adults in the rural 
science, which, for so many of whom will be the chief vocational 
life-concern. The writer -suggests that for the frontier, more 
than for any other rural community, the aim should be to educate 
"to the farm" rather than "from the farm". 

It will be remembered that the previous chapter dealt with 
the general background of settlement of the Peace River are.- . In 
the present chapter the writer has endeavoured to superimpose 
a. sketch more personal and more specific than the general dis¬ 
cussion, would allow. It is hoped that the discussion of the 
trends of high school instruction which follows In the succeed- 
mg chapter will clear the way for. a more specific illustrations 
of means of organizing community education. 

^■Harold G. Etter: "Preparations for Practical Situations of 
Rural Life", The 3. C." Teacher , Vol. XII, !To• 5, January, 1933, 
p. 14. Mr. Etter, IMS. A. , is Principal of Chilliwack High School. 























. 




' 









■ 














































CHAPTER V 

THE PROBLEM OF SOCIALIZATION OF HIGH SCHOOL INSTRUCTION 

It is the object of this chapter to discuss various high 
school subjects of instruction in relation to their aims and 
philosophy and to modern trends in methods of instruction and 
testing. The method of the discussion is according to the 
following plan: (1) modern trends in the philosophy and aims 
of the mathematics, the sciences, the social studies, and the 
languages; (2) aspects of articulation and examinations; 

(3) special problems in the rural high school. In carrying out 
this discussion the writer ha,s endeavoured to refer definitely 
to the opinions of outstanding teachers regarding the subjects 
concerned, and where possible, to the opinions of active 
C anadi an t e acher s. 

It will be noted that there is no attempt to confine the 
principles discussed in this chapter to the specific needs of 
any single community or type of community. The implications 
of the subject at hand are too fee-reaching to make such a treat¬ 
ment possible or desirable. The educational implications of 
the various subjects of instruction are so varied that their 
confinement to mere community aspects of education would narrow 
the whole purpose of the school. The philosophy and content of 
curricula, however, are the nucleus of all secondary educational 
organizations and must form a basic function in the whole dis¬ 
cussion herein underway. 

(1) 7/e have referred above Ip* 13) to the general modern 
interest in the problems of curriculum-building and curricular 
revision. This interest appears to be based upon increasing 



















. 

- 




. 








. 


























degrees of scientific study in the field of educational research 
connected with sociological needs. The- second motive for curri¬ 
cular revision is probably the desire on the part of educators 
to make educational instruction a greater factor for personal 
adjustment, then the aims and philosophy of the various curricula 
are established the major problem in any educational unit is that 
of securing co-operation of all those actively concerned with 

education. "We are faced with just that problem in education 
to-day. We have teachers, social workers business men 
and others, all trying to make useful citizens out of 
our children, but each proceeding in his own way with 
little regard for the efforts of others. The thing 
needed to make education efficient is co-operation among 
the various educational agencies..•.The" Scientific attitude 
towards education is not yet widely adopted. There are 
few agencies to-day who have advanced beyond the com¬ 
promise between the two older views of the nature of 
childhood and education”. 

In no other field of education is there a greater need 
for co-operation than in that of adjusting the curriculum to 
provide a balance of culture and practical!., usefulness in the 
life of a whole community. In the classics and in mathematics 
there has been a shifting of aims. With the passing of M facuity 
psychology" there has grown a lesser regard for supposedly 
established educational values to be derived from mathematics 
and Latin. A new attitude towards these and other subjects of 
the high school curriculum is being adopted. Hewaims of in¬ 
struction are being found with the hope, that even in high 
school, traditional subjects which have been threatened, may 
prove their worth in humanizing and practical ways. In short. 


^Bowers, Henry: "Some aspects of the Academic Secondary School", 
The School , Toronto,'Januery, 1936. 











' 




' 




. 












. 

•» 







* 












































- 91 - 


the value of subjects, not specifically practical and directly 
cultural, is coming to de end upon the ability of the teacher 
to vitalize his work with the class. To do this, the teacher 
must have clesr conceptions of the educational needs of the 
community, the state, and the world'—especially of the inl¬ 
ine di at e community. 

Let us consider the problem of mathematics. According 
to the opinion of Henry Bowers,^Ottawa :formal School instructor, 
the teaching of geometry has undergone a revolution. The chief 
differences to be noticed in geometrical instruction in high 
school, are, according to Mr. Bowers, as follows: 

(1) In general there is a, reduction in quantity. 

(2) There is a new emphasis upon the introduction, practical, 
experimental and inductive in nature, extending over a period 
varying from a few months to a year. 

(3) There is no longer a distinction between book propos¬ 
itions and. original exercises. 

(4) Stress is placed upon analytic reasoning and independ¬ 
ent attack. 

(5) Memorization is discouraged. 

(6) Practical applications and correlations are sought 
with diligence. 

Regarding this subject, Mr. Bowers'writes further that 
”. .Even those who are convinced that this subject is much over¬ 
rated as an educational instrument (geometry), must admit! that 
its positiop hen been strengthened. But despite this accession 

‘‘'Bower, Henry: "Some Aspects of the Academic Secondary School”, 

The School , Toronto, January, 1936, 














































































. 

































of strength, there are some whose pleasure in teaching this 
facinating subject is occasionally marred by doubts as to the 
ultimate value, misgivings that are not lessened by the realiz¬ 
ation that whatever of practical value does result, might be 
gained by means more economical in time and energy. .The 
present writer believes that if geometry is to keep its place 
in the courses of study of the future, that it will be there 
because of its proven value in mathematical and partly mathe¬ 
matical situations, rather than because of its cultural or 
general educational value other than the mathematical sphere. 
With a reduction of the quantity of the mathematical courses, 
however, and with a special emphasis in the teaching of these 
subjects, upon experimental and practical applications in affair 
of practical life, new value may yet be added to the educational 
value of mathematics. 

The principal conclusion at this point is to the effect 
that mere academic enjoyment in* the teaching or learning of a 
given mathematical subject is insufficient grounds, in the light 
of educational research, for the retention of large scopes of 
subject-matter which will not be brought to mind in the solving 
of life-problems. The subject-matter of algebra like that of 
geometry, is subject to criticism under this same broader human¬ 
istic test. To this effect Mr. Bowers writes: ’’..It is readily 
agreed that algebra, like geometry, is a delightful subject to 
teach, demanding a high degree of skill and Insight, but this is 
no criterion by which to judge thevalue of a subject. There are 
some who would find the teaching of chess or bridge no less 





. 









































- 93 - 


exliilerating and exacting, and who would go home oppressed with 
no greater sense of futility.. 

Regarding the great amount of useless material in the 
subject-matter of mathematics as traditionally taught, there is 
substantiation of hr. Bowers’ stand in the results of such in¬ 
vestigations as that made in the field of algebra by E. L. 
Thorndike. On the other 'hand, there is good evidence,as Mr. 
Bowers indicates, that in the mathematical subjects there are 
appearing modifications in teaching methods which may lead to¬ 
wards the revitalization of these subjects in present-day ed¬ 
ucation. Such indications are illustrated in articles by lead¬ 
ing mathematics teachers in various current periodicals on ed- 

p 

ucational problems. H. A. Mulligan - " writes that the avowed 
purpose of modern treatment of mathematics in novel ways, is 
”to stimulate interest on the part of high school students.. 11 
and indicates further, that the purpose is to make mathematics 
a live interest in the field of fascinating application. Similar 
claims are made by other teachers of mathematics, typical of 
these writers is Eastern Canadian teacher, G. L. Wagar? We 
would make clear, in conclusion, that the present need for new 
motives in the study of mathematics is in no sense an indict¬ 
ment of the subject. Rather, it would appear that there is a 
realization among teachers to-day, that the subject may find a 
new and. vital place in the modern world of thought and action. 
Like other subjects, however, mathematics must be given its 

i 

p 3owers, op. cit. 

ivTulligan, H. A.: 11 An Experiment in Outdoor Mathematics 11 , 

o The School , Toronto, October, 1935. 
wagar, G. L. s ’’The Geometry of Robinson Crusoe”, The Schoo l, 
Toronto, January, 1936. 















. 








- 







































' 














■ 










































- 94 - 


correct valuation, and if need be, purged of much traditional 
exercise material. 


Upon consideration of scientific studies in school, we 
feel at once that we are dealing with a subject which is in its 
infancy, but which will have an ever-widening and deepening 
bearing upon human life. Scientific study is, first, the basis 
of technical skill, the skill upon which the multitude of mechan¬ 
ics.! ad.vantages of the modern world depend, Secondly, there are 
the cultural implications of science. Culture must include a 
willingness of wind to respect and grapple with the vastnesses 
and the minutes aspects of the universe. It must include also, 
the development of consistently o en minds, the abolition of 


harmful supers tic ion and a preparation of individuals to employ 

themselves usefully during leisure hours. Man must learn to 

find, not only the techniques by which he can earn a living for 

his body, but he must develop, also, an intellectual power of 

appreciation for beauty and truth and the might of nature. 

Surely there is the need for : well-directed, broadly planned 

course of sciences on the modern curriculum. 

The cultural aspect of the scientific subjects taught in 

schools is one somewhat difficult to approach; that is, the 

approach becomes difficult when ah earnest attempt is made to 

realize the cultural aims of science in practice at school.’ The 

stated cultural aim of science is brought to a head in the follow- 

1 

ing words by Mr. G. V. Bruce, writing in the "Clearing House" : 

"In a word then, science can yield a greater measure of 
release from the physical limit aliens of the environment 


"Bruce, C. V.: "Science Education and The Good Life", 

The Cleering House , Vol. X, Ho. 1, September, 1935, p. 8. 












- 










. 




, 










* 









, 









. 






















- 95 - 


for everyonea wholesome indifference to authority; 
a positive urge for innovation; dynamic standards of 
moral virtue and a greater measure of emotional repose, 
so that all things should work together for the good of 
them that accept science for the way of life*" 

To what extent can we in our schools lay the foundation 
for the attainment on the part of students of this ultimate 
goal set up by the author of the above-quoted words? The ideal 
thus expressed is not a new one to the history of philosophy 
but science, we must remembers, is supplying us with knowledge 
which can be made to add to the joy and fullness of life all 
round* It does not imply, as did the Platonic philosophy, a 
separation of the soul from the body. Science rather, makes 
the attainment of bodily health can exceedingly integral re¬ 
lationship with the "Good Life". It is through the science of 
health and living perhaps, that the foundations of cultural 
science should be laved* The teaching of science from this 
point of view appears to require inspirational guidance, for in 
one’s search for the cultural results of the teaching of the science 
in school—chemistry, physics, biology--there is inevitable 
disappointment. The difficulty to be found in the attempt to 
vitalize the study of science in the cultural sense, seems to 
be as significant as the difficulty found in the mathematics, 
the classics or any other branch of academic study in high 
school. The heart of the problem appears to lie in' the relation¬ 
ship of the learner to his environment. To gain the fullness of 
life the learner must know the good that his environment holds 
for him. In the writer*s own district, there is a need for ed¬ 
ucational influence in the field of agricultural science, for 
it is a district in which agriculture is the means of economic 





























■ 







■ 


. 

' 


« 



























, 







































- 96 - 


life and development. 

The objectives of teachers of chemistry and physics are 
outlined by Henry Bowers, 1 writing in "The Toronto School". 

These objectives are enumerated as follows: (1) Teachers hope 
to advance into fields of advanced scientific study those students 
with special ability; (2) To give some knowledge of the environ¬ 
ment that may aid in adaptation and control; (3) To motivate 
future citizens to support scientific research; (4) To communi¬ 
cate a scientific attitude and method, both of which, it is 
hoped, will transfer to other departments of life than those 
purely scientific. 

The same writer continues by indicating general difficult¬ 
ies in the way of successful teaching of science asa school 
subject. He grants the worthiness of the above-mentioned 
objectives .for the teaching of science and the fact that the 
ideals contained in them to be of great significance. The weak¬ 
ness of past results in the teaching of science, he suggests, 
lies in the circumstances of school organization and in the 
extensiveness of current courses of study. There is first the 
problem of "regementation" in the teaching of physics and' 
chemistry, "If we believe that a group of persons can ’keeio step* 
we delude ourselves. Such uniformity can be attained only 
through the arbitrary tempo of one big drum, and the sacrifice 

9 

of independent thought. And closely related to this difficulty 
is the time element, and there is the difficulty of the adjust¬ 
ment of science with other courses on the school time-table. In 
rural schools, especially, is this matter of adjustment of the 

lowers, op. cit,: '’Some Aspects of the Academic Secondary School", 
-The Schoo l, Toronto, February, 1936, p. 460. 

2 Ibid. 
































. 




. 





















- 97 - 


time-table an acute difficulty. Under present conditions of 
science teaching, it is inevitable that ".. a premium is placed 
upon relatively unreflective modes of acquisition." 

There are, it would seem, few bases upon which to find 
disagreement with Bowers’ position regarding the undesirability 
of promoting unreflective study of science. Something might be 
said for the value of the purely technical training necessary 
for the various lines of industrial activity. This practical 
type of training, however, is scarecely realized in the high 
school studies of science. Without well-directed reflective 
approach, therefore, the value of science study comes only from 
the vestifes of knowledge which are of direct utility in the 
technical field of a few individual students. In this regard, 
as in the other phases of community education, there is found 
a need for inspirational teaching which will motivate the students 
of the community concerned to see more of the beauty and value 
in the fields of their own future work. 

The teaching of science in rural high schools is not 
without its compensations, the nature of which we hope to indicate 
in the course of the following few paragraphs. The compensations 
are interwoven, however, with numerous troublesome problems, some 
of which are as follows: problems of limited time, limited lab¬ 
oratory equipment for science teaching, the absence of industrial 
plants which may be visited, and finally, the problem of the 
teacher whose training may, or may not have fit him to perform 
the duties of the science teacher. Whether or not his scientific 
training has been adequate, he is forced by circumstances to 

become a. teacher, of a. great variety of school subjects and cannot 
call forth with facility his abilities as a specialist. 


















. 































. 












. 












' 












- 98 - 


Regarding the problem of general science in the small 
high school, Hr. Lawrence ’.Vrinch-J- a successful rural teacher of 
British Columbia and principal at Port Moody School writes as 
follows: 

M Let us consider the problems peculiar to the small 
high school. A great handicap is the lack"of'time for 
actual teaching work. In a four grade class carrying 
eight subjects, an average allowance for general 
science will mean a little over an hour per week tin 
our own school, 65 minutes), probably subdivided again 
into three or four short "periods. Thrice that time’ 
will be spent in some form of seat work, and the danger¬ 
ous consequence is that the so-called teaching period 
is devoted to little more than the assignment and 
checking up of exercises, with a little hasty experi¬ 
ment when possible. This precludes entirely the 
opportunity for class visits' to industrial site's or 
museums—a most interesting" and valuable part of a 
course in a graded high school. M 

From his reference to the time problem in the rural high school. 
Hr. Wrinch proceeds to analyze the whole problem. Other chief 
difficulties are: (1) the absence, often, of local industrial 
plants and museums which might be studied by a class in general 
science. The M local points of interest and value are either 
very limited or probably better understood by the pupils than 
by the teacher. It would require quite a bit of local education, 
moreover, to persuade parents that 1 school learning 1 was much 
forwarded by studying the means whereby the family meal-ticket 
is provided. ,,s (2) Science teaching is confined to textbooks 

and the classroom containing an inadequate library. The time 
factor again enters the picture, for scientific models which 
might be constructed by the teacher and pupils to make up for 
the deficiency of the science laboratory are 1 - ft unmade for 
lack of time. As Hr. Hr inch puts it: n It is possible to show 

-Uvrinch, L. A. : "General Science in the Rural High School", 

The B. C. Teacher , Vol. XV, Ho, 5, January, 1936, p. 38, ff. 

2Ibid. 







. 

























. 






■ 
























































the plan of a steam engine by using tin cans and a soldering 
iron, but in the meanwhile the regular duties of school admini¬ 
stration would be dangerously neglected.(3) Another handicap 
usually found in the rural high school is the absence of a 
manual training department the stimulus of which would solve 
many of the problems concerned with a lack of models for scientific 
experiment, 

• Mr. rinch admits, despite his emphasis of the difficulties 
of the problem of rural science teaching, that there are some 
worthwhile compensations involved in the same work. The compen¬ 
sations mentioned by him are principally as follows: (1) Through 
seat-work consisting.of self-investigation and the execution of 
projects rural science pupils may gain an invaluable independence 
which might be missed by the 'spoon-fed 1 urban pupil. (2) Again, 
attendance at high school in rural districts means considerable 
sacrifice on the part of the students and the parents, for such 
a school usually draws from a large area. Students of this, type 
frequently show keen eagerness to learn. (3) Subject-matter of 
science is usually fresher to the rural student who never looks 
upon the revelations of the text-book as 'old stuff'. (4) The 
small group, seldom much larger than ten, allows for a, much 
better study of the individual and his requirements, allowing at 
the same time, a degree of pupil-co-operation that, in the crowded 
classroom, "would result in Babel 11 f 

In conclusion, Mr. iff Inch recommends for rural school areas, 
11 a selective course 11 relative to the industries of the community 


1 

9 Trineh, op. cit., 


’eacner 


The B. C 





















. 








. 





















































































- 100 - 


concerned. "Pupils in r fruit-frowing region could make a 
profitable study of canning and dehydrating methods, and the 
lumbering and pulp areas could have a live topic at hand." 

In all the remarks of Mr. Wrinch concerning his own problems 
connected with the teaching of science in the rural high school 
indicate the situation of such teaching in all rural schools. 

Mot being a science specialist, Mr. '/rinch admits that his ob¬ 
servations upon the subject of science may be at times faulty. 

This writer hasno comment to make in the latter regard. The 
observations of Mr. Wrinch have been used because they are 
expressive of the feelings of numerous rural teachers. 

It is clear that in rural centres there are definite 
problems to challenge the resourcefulness of the teacher whose duty 
it is to teach science, amid a variety of other teaching duties. 

With respect to the Pea.ce River District of British Columbia, it 
has been mentioned above (Chapters III and IV) that there is need 
for the stimulating of interest in scientific agriculture through 
science education. Indeed, this need has been felt generally 
and the Department of Education, acting through the agency of 
the Director of Education' 1 in the Peace Biver Inspectorate, has 
made arrangements to engage a specialist for agricultural in- 

9 _ 

struct ion and experiment at the Dawson Creek high School, ft 

will-be noted too, that the whole problem of local specialization 

in high school instruction has received some significant attention 

3 

and through the new curriculum for high schools may be realized 
< 2 See Chapter VI. 

'A plot of land has been purchased for the use of the students 
oOf agriculture art the Dawson Creek High School. 

nt is announced that the new curriculum for the Elementary schools 
and Junior High Schools will be in use, September, 1936, and that 
that for Senior High Schools will be complete by September, 1937. 














































' 















. 






. 





































- 101 - 


some experimentation in this field. 


The social studies require a discussion somewhat more 


extended than has been given to other subjects. Upon turning 
to a consideration of this subject it is perhaps most signifi¬ 
cant to notice at the outset that no subject on the curriculum 
has felt the force of educational evolution so forcefully during 
the past decade or two. The old subject of history has been 
welded into the fabric of geography., economics, literature and 
other studies involved in the life of man. In short, social 
studies has become the broadest and most all-inclusive subject 
on the modern curriculum of studies. The writer’s aim here is 


to deal with this subject in such a way as to touch upon the 
problem of motivation of the learner, to bring together a brief 
record, of current discussions concerning the general philosophy 


of the subject from the point of view of the teacher of social 
studies and finally to indicate the degree to which the new phil¬ 
osophy has been stimulated to grow in the educational circles of 
British-Columbia. These phases of the subject are dealt with 
under three headings. 

(a) The problem of the learner’s attitude toward the 


subject of. social studies is an extremely important one. Unless 
the student can be motivated to possess a live interest in his 
subject, no amount of idealism concerning the aims of the curric¬ 
ulum are of any avail. A prominent instructor^ in history in one 
of Western Canada.’s Normal Schools, who is likewise an author of 
historical material for senior pupils, has the following to say 
concerning the pupil’s attitude regarding social studies, and 

“This instructor’s name is held in confidence. 


















' 












; 

' 


























. 



































































' 









- 102 - 


eSpecially the subject of history: "One of the causes of 
1 undesirable attitude*, towards the study of history (in high 
school) is the amount of history that must be covered in the 
given time. The teacher must assign so much per diem.' The 
pupils must grind out their daily or weekly quota. Under these 
conditions history becomes a memoritor subject, with all the 
attendant ills of such work.." 

The same instructor finds that his students enjoy history 
for the following reasons :0) "That I cover the English History 
up to about 1800, work that they have already gone over in 
elementary school. (2) That the element of recall is at work 5 
some things are familiar. The fear of the unknown is absent. 
There is less strain. (3^ The history I teach is social in 
character. For instance, we really try to get an idea of Roman 
Britain. How the Romans lived, how they treated the Britons, 
what the roads, walls and villas were like. I have books to 
supplement the text, such as Guest*s "Social History of England "5 
Waters*, "Economic History of England", and others. Handwork 
-comes in. A map of Roman Britain is drawn. One of Saxon England 
follows. ." 

From this point the instructor proceeds to emphasize the 
importance of studying history in vhole topics rather than from 
text-book chapters. Through the topical study the introduction 
of library work can be made to supplement the textual material. 

A variety of reading on the part of the learner is of vital 
importance in the effective motivation and proper training in 
the field of social studies. Again, it is recommended by the 
instructor above-quoted, that the planning of weekly or monthly 










.... 





. 










* 

. 































103 - 


courses of study andinvestigation should receive the co-operation 
of the class concerned. Students, it is claimed, desire to have 
an awareness of their work. Too many teachers lead their pupils 
on, blindly, from day to day without purpose in the work. 

The brief analysis of the problem of motivation in history 
thus far given appears to strike at the heart of every-day diffi¬ 
culties in the matter of teaching the subject. Current discussion 
of this problem is copious and the discussion here might be p>ro- 
-longued. It is desirable, however, to proceed with the consider¬ 
ation of the social studies as a whole and to indicate under the 
two subsequent headings, further implications of the problem of 
motivation of interest. 

(b) It appears that a suitable philosophy for the teach¬ 
ing of, social studies and suitable objectives for the social 
studies course can be realized through actual practice in teach¬ 
ing and pupil study. Before entering into a discussion of the 
philosophy of the subject we should realize that this philosophy 
must be expressed in a practical way through the daily lesson 
and daily pupil-teacher contact. 

One of the most significant aims of the social studies 
courses of today is surely that of revealing to the learner the 
nature of the problems of community and national life as well 
as world relationships. Since the social aspect of man’s life 
is exceedingly complex, the problem of social studies immediately 
becomes one of providing adequate correlations of study. History 
is correlated with geography, with economics, aspects of science, 
and, at times, with literature. The general problems ©rising 



























. 










, 


■ 























' 





























from these circumstances might he summarized as follows: 


(1) The motivation of sustained interest' with the aim of 
creating in the pupil a desire to supply his own 
energy for the attainment of clearly discerned goads. 

(2) The selection of the appropriate' amount of material 
at the proper grade-levels of the students. 

(3) The finding of ways and means to ideals in the learn¬ 
ing of truth, and to help the student to distinguish 
the fundamental truths of his studies. 

Regarding the problems of national and community import 

in relationship to the subject of social studies in school, 

Professor Duncan HcArthur-^writes as follows: 

11 . .More forcibly even than the destruction effected by 
the war has the distress and misery wrought by the .ec¬ 
onomic maladjustment revealed during the post-war'period 
emphasized the insistence of the plea issued by Woodrow 
Wilson . The old wine of unrestrained individualism, of 
laissez faire , the God 1 s in His"Heaven, all 1 s right with 
the world complacency of the" Victorians will not be con¬ 
tained in the bottles"of respect for human rights, of a 
planned economy, and of subordination of individual' free¬ 
dom to the well-being of the community.' If the school of 
to-day is to discharge adequately its responsibility, it 
must recognize the old order has changed and prepare" the 
new generation to adjust itself harmoniously in an inde¬ 
pendent and integrated society..” 

With this serious statement of the social studies problem we hare 
a fundamental basis of educational philosophy necessary for the 
success of the schools in the modern world; namely, that educat¬ 
ors must realize what the problems of their age are, and must 
through instruction, make the learners conscious of the social 
evolution through which they are living. Following this realiz¬ 
ation the teacher of social studies must think immediately of 
his students* attitudes, temperments and abilities and devise 
means of making history/ live and the whole field of social 


I,IcArthur,‘ Duncan: ’Education for Citizenship”, The School , 
^Toronto, December, 1934, p. 283. 

■Woodrow Wilson is ouoted by Professor McArthur as follows: . 

"In the vital task '"of acquiring a broader view of human possi¬ 
bilities, the common school must have a large part.. ‘ 























■ 






- 

. 









































- 105 - 


studies to throb with meaning for the present. 

Professor McArthur-*- continues his discussion by pointing 


out the necessity of vitalizing the subject of history, modifying 
methods of teaching to suit present needs and interests and en- 
larging.the sphere of the historical subjects to include a study 
of men and women in all essential social aspects. 


"In recent years much improvement hats been effected in 
the shifting of emphasis' from the military and condi tu- 
tional history to the revelation of significant social 
and economic relationships of citizenship, of the be¬ 
havior of individuals as members of social groups. 

While it is a violation of a sacred trust to employ 
the teaching of history an a means of prorogating part¬ 
icular theories, it is essential that it should demon¬ 
strate the fundamental nature of man as" a social being 
and the interdependence' of the social' welfare of the 
individual and well-being of the group,. 5,2 


It will be remembered, of course, that this nev and deeper 
phase of the historical subjects, though understood by the 
teachers, will be a problem worthy of much pedagogical enter¬ 
prise. It calls too, for the co-ordination of experts in both 
the social sciences and in pedagogy. Textbooks, especially, 
will require reformation from the point of view of both content 
and pedagogy* 

There is an aspect of the socialization of history which, 
is surely in need of urgent promotion; namely, that of the hist¬ 
ory of the heroes of settlement and pioneering. This phase of 
history would, if sincerely and thoroughly presented, enrich 
the meaning of social studies for all senior school students, 
but especially those of the rural, and pioneer communities. As 
Professor McArthur points out (see p. 105,above), there has been 
a. significant shifting of emphasis in history studies from the 




























. 


. 































* 


* 




* 

. 













’ 








- 106 - 


military and constitutional! phases of the subject to the social 
aspects. Still there is more room for the story of man in his 
home-making activities. T .7riting on this subject, Dr. Hugh 
Morrison,- 1 ' Principal of Prince George High School expresses the 
point as follows: 

n .. V/hat of the settler? How little we have heard' about 
him in our Canadian history. 1 bhile we have read, and taught 
about Champlain, Frontenac, Talon, Wolf," Montcalm, Brock, 
William Lyon Mackenzie, Joseph Howe, Lord Sydenham, Lord 
Elgin, Sir John A. MacDonald, Sir Wilfrid Laurier y about 
the Seven Years 1 War, Waif of 1312, the rebellion Losses 
Bill, the Rebellions, the achievements of Responsible 
Government, Confederation, and so on, we have'heard 
little about the immigrant- and the settler—the very 
backbone of our country. Little or nothing do we know 
about the squatter--the man who widens the bounds of 
civilization--about land policies, about the' price "of 
land., or about the competition with the United States 
for the emigrants, or about the framing of land" laws in 
order to keep the Canadian in' Canada.' In short , the 
results of "our development have been presented to us' 
without any serious attempt to explain the underlying 
causes, which brought them about..." 

The above words express very adequately a common lack in 
the historical education of the past. The present writer finds 
that many of his students in the high school grades have no 
historical’feeling in regard to the "realistic" romance of the 
settlement of their own community. They see neither before nor 
back. The condition calls for a unification of community ed¬ 
ucation with much emphasis upon the education of the young 
adults of the community. The subject of social studies presents 
unique opportunities, the writer believes, to accomplish co¬ 
ordination in community education of the rural frontier. 

As a further consideration in the discussion of social 
studies, let us consider briefly the sources of the unity poss¬ 
essed by this subject as a course in school. In the first pla.ce, 

^I.brrison, Hugh U.: "The Physical Frontier in Canadian History", 

The B. C. Teacher , February, 1934, p. 17. 



































, 


























» 
































' 


■ 








- 107 - 


there is the necessity of making the subject as real as possible 
to the student. This, in turn, involves a careful selection of 
subject-matter combined with a method of instruction suited to 
the ability-level of the learner. Secondly, the essence of 
unity in the course implies a sequence of relationships. The 
history, geography and socio-economic topics and other phases 
of the content must be shown to have inter-related connections. 

It may not be necessary to stress. In the lower grades it seems 
logical to secure ^unity by making history, geography and possibly 
nature a composite subject. Then as the student enters high 
school the broadening; processes might begin to take a more real 
and tangible form. Early studies, however, should surely be re¬ 
lated to later ones? and this necessity should not be left entirely 
to the consistency of the teacher. There is a need for textbooks 
which would illustrate the unity of the subject. Despite what¬ 
ever weaknesses and flaws may be found in such texts an Mr. hells 1 
"Outline. of History", or Van Loon's "Story of Mankind", the general 
essence of unity, possessed by these books illustrates what might 
be done in future textbook writing to secure unity in the social 
studies. Other t^^pes of texts would be necessary, of course$ for 
example, books which would supply much needed romantic impulse 
for the study of history. Such books as those of Agnes Laut are 
examples of the latter type of material. Books alone, however, 
are not to prove sufficient. 

Much of the success of the future handling of social 
studies will depend upon the manner of presentation. 

"..If history were dealt with in the same manner as the 

other courses of the curriculum, it would revive and take 




















8 


8 


■ 



rr 





















on a- fullness end a richness that would make it interest¬ 
ing to the pupils for its sake alone. Imagine the chaotic 
LI* 

history is now. Suppose we took one class of chemical 
substances, gases, and drilled them thoroughly, all their 
properties, pro and con, and then set them aside. Row we 
turn to something else, to another group, miner Is; we 
would teach all the facts, the difference's, the similar¬ 
ities, drill them thoroughly, then set them aside. All 
of this, remember, with'no mention made of general laws, 
nothing about reaction or chemical change. At the end ' 
of three years of this all that would remain would"be an 
isolated fact here ancg there that stuck through some 
vagary of the mind... ,,J - 

This analogy, we believe, is not an exaggeration of the situation 
as it refers to the teaching of history in the past. With the 
advent of social studies, however, we are beginning to realize 
the wastefulness of the fallacy of teaching the content of the 
subjects concerned in unrelated portions and unrelated to the 
world, the community and the lives of people. 

(c) The objectives of the Social Studies Course^ in this 
Province are set forth as follows: 

1. The development' of a sound Canadian citizenship. 

2. A placing of'.'Canadian development in its intr a-imperial 
wor1d se ftings. 

3. A co-ordination of history, geography, economics aiid 
civics in such a manner as to indicate their inter- 
relation in the development of mankind. 

•4. An understanding and' appre c i ation of'how the peoples 
and nations of the'past have influenced our present 
world civilization. 

5. The promotion of the ideal international co-operation 
based upon an appreciation of the obligations of the 
individual to his country and to the world community. 

These objectives, briefly stated as they are, indicate 

that a worthy philosophy has been set forth as a basis of the 

teaching of social studies in British Columbia. The progress 

thus far made in this work is due to the leadership of competent 


J "3ride, . (Vancouver): 71 A Unified History", The 3. C. Teacher 

pJune, 1933,' p. 17. 

VThis Social Studies Course is in thr form of a. tentative 
revision and appears on ml ieo replied sheets. 





. 


' 

. 












■ 











































































-109- 


teachers* Numerous current articles are appearing in "The B• C. 
Teacher" on the subject of "Social Studies". Such leading 
authorities as Dr. Hugh Ilorrisoil and Hr. W. ... Bride have been 
quoted in this chapter. Others might be cited to illustrate 
the degree to which interest in a new and broad philosophy 
behind social studies is spreading in the educational circles 
of British Columbia. Committees have been working steadily on 
the problem of revision of the subject for inclusion in the new 
Programme of Studies scheduled to be ready for use by September, 
1937. 


One common criticism of history courses of the past and 
present is that, the courses have been drafted with "too much 
history", that too much emphasis is placed upon the past to the 
detriment of the present. In an article to this effect, Dr. 
Morrison-*- quotes C. C. Barnes from the "Social Studies" for 
November, 1934, as follows: "..it is generally conceded that 


the emphasis of education should be a study of contemporary life 
A study of the past alone brings the story down to the interest¬ 
ing end without, giving the ending", This, Dr. Horrison claims, 
is the chief weakness in our present syllabus for social studies 
"Throughout the four years of high school," he writes, "the 
story of the rise of western civilization is traced, and then so 
to speak, left hanging in the air. At least half of the final 

year should be devoted to current problems in the light of what 

2 

has been taught in the other three and one-half jeeTS .." This 
would involve a summing up of work taken and start a process of 
thought on the part of the students v.iiich would be based upon 


I 


The B. C. Teacher. 
Ibid. 














, 























































- 









































































-110- 




kno wn m at er i al. 

From the positive point of view, the lead in reform of 

social studies teaching has been token b 3 ^ the promoters of the 

Junior High School movement in British Columbia. Regarding the 

philosophy as it is applied in the social studies as taught in 

the Junior High Schools, we quote briefly fiom a summary of the 

question by Mr* A. S. Matheson, " Principal of University Hill 

High School, Vancouver, Mr I 1. lathe son, who is a leading member 

of the Revision Committee for Social Studies, writes as follows: 

",.When the programme of social studies for the Junior 
High Schools of British Columbia was first issued, 'in’ 
the summer of 1927, it contained not only a hew philos¬ 
ophy of education in so far as our early adolescent' 
pupils were concerned, 'but also many bold'departures 
from the traditional in both content and organization 
of the curriculum. In brief the hew’course' laid 
emphasis upon the child’s present living and demanded 
for each an opportunity to" live' a natural, happy and 
well-rounded life in the midst of the fullest possible 
provision for .growth and development along lines 
socially desirable,.. !f 

11 . .Among the departures'in content and organization of 
the curriculum, which accompanied this statement of 
philosophy, none was more radical or of greater edu¬ 
cational worth than the' abandonment of history, geo¬ 
graphy and civics, as separate subjects of instruction, 
and their inclusion in a single unified course under 
the name of Social Studies.."^ 

Mr. Matheson continues to explain that only a few of the 
boys and girls of British Colombia were able to benefit by the 
Institution of this new outlook and practice in education; 
namely, those of the Junior High School areas. A second cause 
of the retardation of the socialization of high school instruction 
during the past decade has been the lack of equipment in the 
schools and this cause lias been supplemented, perhaps, through 


"Matheson, A. S.: "The Social Studies. .With Special Reference' 
to the Intermediate School”, The B. G . Teacher , December, Id 5, 

p. 19. 








- 




' 



‘ 








. 


































-111- 


a lack of appreciation* on the part of numerous teachers, of 
the significance of the new movement. -Again* school hoards 
and citizens have not always co-operated with the teachers in 


the work of socialization of school work. Improvement in forms 
of administration^- promises to improve the latter situation. 


while the increased opportunities presented, by the teachers 1 
summer schools promises to fit teachers better for their broad 
task of socialization of school instruction. A leading field 


for such socialization is the social studies. 

A proportionately large amount of space in this chapter 
has been given to the subject of social studies. The preponder- 
ous amount of current literature on this subject may have influ¬ 


enced the writer in this regard. It is believed., however* that 
the subject of social studies is in a leading way representative 
of the recent reformation in curricular programmes, aims and 


objectives, and teaching methods that have taken place in an 
effort to socialize and vitalize subjects of instruction. F 
this reason we have enlarged upon our discussion of the aspec 
of social studies which are pertinent to the present chapter 


Before proceeding 


with further discussion, the writer 


or 


ts 



wishes to recapitulate briefly. Under the caption of social 
studies we have noted, firstly, that the attitude of the learner 
is the most essential factor affecting the successful teaching 
of historical subjects and the social studies. It was- shown, 
upon authority, that careful planing of courses with the co¬ 
operation of the students is an important aspect of motivation; 
that it is sometimes necessary to "pare down" courses in order 


1 

See 


Chapter VI. 




















' 




























. 

















■ 







































-112- 


to give students an opportunity to see given periods of history 
in a vivid way; that historical material should emphasize the 
social aspects of man’s development rather than the military 
and constitutional aspects. Special reference was made to the 
importance of studying the facts relating to the social develop¬ 
ment of the pioneers of a nation. Secondly, we discussed the 
importance of presenting the social studies in the form of a 
unified whole, indicating the necessity for the showing of inter 
relationships in the study of historical material as well as 
the related subjects which male up the social studies. Thirdly, 
we have referred to the objectives of the social studies course 
in British Columbia and have shown by quotation the significance 


of the junior high school movement in relation to the education¬ 
al philosophy of British Columbia, especially where this philos¬ 
ophy affects the social, studies. 


It is hoped that through a. consideration of the above 
remarks and quotations relative to the trends in the teaching 
of mathematics, science and social studies in high school, 
the reader will be reminded that change in educational outlook 
has recently made itself felt in the world and that teachers 
are active and thoughtful concerning the application of the 
new philosophy and all problems connected therewith. 

Regarding literature and. the whole topic of reading, 
there are old and new canons too numerous to mention. Suffice 
it to say that the records of educational research indicate 
that a wide variety of work is being done to lay foundations 
for more effective reading on the part of students and that 
literature too, will come to have gre ter social significance 




























' 

P \ 
































































■ 












































as well as aesthetic value for increasing numbers of students 
in the future. The objectives of courses of English which are 
given for those who desire university entrance cannot continue 
to be applied in educational institutions whose main work is to 
prepare students for an intelligently contented way of life in 
industrial or agricultural pursuits. Literslure is an import¬ 
ant phase of community education. 

Latin, and perhaps Greek will continue to be taught. On 
what grounds will the Classics find a plane on the curriculum of 
to-morrow? That is their purpose to-day? In reference to the 
difficulties met by those teaching Latin in some of the smaller 
high schools of Ontario,-- and in reference also, to certain 
complaints regarding the making of Latin an obligatory subject 
in high school, the Classical Section of the Ontailo Educational 
Association reported in 1935, that, n the satisfactory adjustment 
of these difficulties is to some extent a matter of administration; 
and it does not follow that the situation will be remedied by 
removing from the regular curriculum studies which make a con¬ 
siderable demand on intelligence and concentration such as 
Latin and mathematics. It has been contended that these subjects 
are difficult and unpractical. It is not the case of Latin being 
difficult for a pupil of fair ability; it does not require in 
the early stages, these qualities together with analytical abil¬ 
ity and lively imagination* It is an exacting study, but may be 
made (with good teaching) an interesting study to pupils of average 
intelligence and application. Its utility simply consists in the 
fact that it provides a balanced development of the mind and is 


1 


See note, p. 114. 















■ 

. 

































. 
























' 






















































fundamental to'the exact use of English and French. M -~ 

It is not our purpose to deny or confirm the validity 
of the conclusions contained in the above report. It is cleanly 
set forth and represents the conclusions of leading teachers of 
classics in Ontario. It would appear to the writer that Latin, 
though: not essential to culture, has the values claimed and 
might be made to add more to the cultural interests of people 
in common walks of life. Latin too, might become of more 
social significance than it has been in the past. 

What of the modern languages? In dealing with the problem 
concerning the teaching of modern languages in British Columbia 
schools, Dr. E. C. Evans, lead of the Department of Modem 
Languages, University of British Columbia, states that the 
ultimate objective of the teaching of modern languages in our 
schools is the broadening of human interests, that it is not 
the purpose of this teaching to make us "feel more at home in 
British Columbia 11 , but rather to lift our eyes with profit to 
the interests of distant fields. H La veritable instruction 

p 

est celle qui yous ddpayse".This point, we believe, is well 
taken, for there is surely no need in the modern community 
greater than that of stimulating world citizenship. 

(2) The ultimate measurement of educational achievement 
in so far as whole community education is concerned, is to be 
found in social standards of the community and in standards of 
citizenship. Yet as functional parts of the educational process 


1 


2 


"The Report on Latin 11 , made by the Classical Section of the 
Ontario Educational Association, Toronto, 3.935, (Reported in 
The Toronto School , June, 1935. 


Evans, E. 0 .: !l Cn To dern L enguage s~ ! ’ 
February, 1936. 


T he '3. C . Teacher , 


5 














. 

























. 



































, • j 








' 

















































-115- 


in school, examinations and tests are important and must be 
considered briefly here. It is obvious, that whether the aim 
of education be primarily for the purpose of imparting of in¬ 
formation and skills, or of attitudes and culture, measurement 
of results in t?nese fields—part of them or all of them—must 
be both valid and reliable . The other point of consideration 
is: who should do the testing for final results in students? 

In regard to the validity of examinations in our Canadian schools 
(High Schools), there seems to be no grounds for serious sus¬ 
picion. Writing in !f The School”, February, 1934, 'Dr. Peter 
Sandiford draws the following conclusion concerning the valid¬ 
ity of Canadian High School Leaving examinations: "that 
validity and. fairness we re practically synonomous and that 
Canadian matriculation examinations were eminently valid or 
fair because they followed so closely the courses of study. :iJ ~ Since 
Dr. Sandiford 1 s conclusion in this matter is based upon careful 
study of Canadian matriculation examinations and their results, 
there seem to appear no grounds for doubting this stated faith 
in the validity in the final examinations set by the various 
examination boards of Canada during the past years* 

As to the degree of reliability of our examinations, 
there appears to be much reasonable belief that the new type of 
objective examination is increasing this quality of our examin¬ 
ations. Following the discussion of Dr. Sandiford again, we read: 

"The only way to escape unreliability due to subjectivity 
of marking is to change the form of examinations so that 
subjectivity does not^enter into it. In other words 


^Sandiford, Peter: "Reliability of ?ests wt, 

The S chool , Toronto, larch, IS- ... 











. 







. 








' 


_ 






















-116- 


change the subjective essay-type examination into an 
objective new-type examination. Which type of test to 
use—the true-false, the' multiple choice, completion, 
matching, recall test and the like—depends upon a 
number of factors, but generally speaking the best 
test, when it can be cast into form, is the multiple 
choice 5-response test. In course of time a test 
form that promises even greater reliability than this 
may be developed. 1,1 

In dan ad a the marking of matriculation papers is some¬ 
what simplified by the fact of our having but nine provincial 
boards. In England, where the examining boards are more numer¬ 
ous, the problem of variation is, doubtless, more complicated. 

One of the most outstanding publications concerning the depend¬ 
ability of present-day examinations is that of Sir Philip Hartog 
and C. S. Rhodes, "An Examination of Examinations”, International 
Examination Inquiry, (London, Had 'illan). The contents of this 
book are discussed by Maxwell Cameron in "The Sch o ol" , February, 
1936. Hr. Cameron states that, "The investigations summarized 
in this report result from an International Conference on 
Examinations held in May, 1931, at Eastbournd, England, under 
the auspices of the Carnegie Foundation, The Carnegie Corpor¬ 
ation, and the International Institute of Teachers College, 
Columbia University. The results may be stated briefly: 

"The study found an almost ludricrous variation to the 
marks given to the same papers by different examiners. 

' The committee concludes that, ’the part played by 
chance by verdicts given at different examinations on 
which careers depend most often, at the present moment 
to be a great one. 1 hotvlthstanding their finding, 
the committee is" opposed to trie complete abolition^ of 
the traditional essay-examination. Folding that the 
new-type examination "is not in Itself" sufficient, trey 
advocate continued investigation and administrative 
experiments in allowing teachers, In conjunction with 
Government or University Inspectors, to ’brand their 
herrings".” 


2 Sandiford, op.eit. 

Cameron, Maxwell, A.: "Examinations Again" , The School, 18Cl, 
February. 







































. 





















































- 117 - 


Though the above report coes not refer to any point 
essentially new to current criticisms of the types of examin¬ 
ations, it does indicate, however, that more work and evaluation 
in connection with reliability of examinations must yet be done. 
On the other hand, teachers everywhere are at liberty to make 
their own investigations.with their own students, noting com¬ 
paratively, the relative values of the old and new-type tests. 
Also schemes of harmonizing of the two types of tests might be 
developed. 

The other phase of the examination problem in our schools 
to-day is that of the dv.gree to which examinations should be 
controlled by the Departments of Education. Only a few years 
ago W. F. Dyde, a Canadian, writing a scientific study on 
secondary schools in this country, noted that the Canadian high 
school was "examination ridden". 1 In British Columbia, at any 
rate, this situation has been relieved during recent years. In 
1929, in British Columbia, a four-year high school course was 
inaugurated and provision made for the issuance of High School 
Graduation Diplomas without examination to those students who 
had completed the course satisfactorily. In 1936, the Minister 
of Education for British Columbia discontinued the preparation 
of Departmental examination papers for Grades IX, X and XI. As 
in most countries, however, British Columbia- holds the Depart¬ 
mental examination for University and normal Entrance. That 
this plan may be discontinued is indicated by Superintendent of 
Schools, Dr. S. J. Willis. Writing in "The B. C. Teacher", 

^Dyde, W. F.: "Public Secondary Education in Canada", Teachers 
College, Columbia University, 1929, p. 99. 










«• 

. 









- 

, 

- 


. 
















, 









-118- 


October, 1934, Dr. Willis 1 states in part as follows: "..It 
now seems possible and desirable that steps be taken as soon as 
possible to adopt a system of exemption for the best students 
in the larger High Schools from the Matriculation and Normal 
Entrance examinations.." With the improvement of the educational 
conditions in the smaller town and rural high schools there 
might come, it seems likely, a fully "accredited" system of 
promotions. Such a system would effect powerful influences 
towards the increasing.of socialization of high school instruction; 
and should it be found that a system of accrediting of high schools 
would not cause : decline in the educational standards of the high 
schools concerned, much good would result from the freedom 
alioted to schools endeavouring to lay foundations for complete 
community education. 

(3) Regarding the special problems connected with the 
subjects of high school instruction, this question of examin¬ 
ations and testing seems as fundamental as any phase of the 
philosophy and objectives of teaching. 'When objectives for 
subjects of instruction are set they should not preclude freedom 
of schools. 

The resultsof this new freedom from departmental examin¬ 
ations in the rural high school have had. some definite benefic¬ 
ial fruits in the work of the first three years of high school. 
During the past four years the principle of accrediting has been 
applied to promotions in the first three grades of high school 

1 Dr. S. J Willis, Superintendent of Education, British Columbia, 
writes as follows concerning the practice of promotions in the 
first three years of high school through recommendation: "No 
serious complaints have been registered with the Department as 
to the lack of fitness for High School work of the pupils being 
promoted by recommendation". 








. 


. 
















































-119- 


in schools in which the principals were willing to recommend 
students on a basis of tests passed during the school year. In 
the Holla High School the principle has been utilized in full. 
Those students who failed to satisfy the instructors of their 
ability to be promoted have gladly reviewed the work directed 
by their insturctors to review. The results of the application 
of the principle, in the writer 1 s view, are as follows: 

(1) A needless expense in connection with fees for writing 
governmental examinations is avoided. 

(2) Students who do not aim at continuation studies are 
encouraged to attend high school for shorter or longer terms each 
year for the sake of cultural advantage gained. 

(3) The rural high school has been enabled to socialize 
its studies to a. higher degree than before the accrediting system 
came into operation. The fear of examinations is absent. 

(4) There has resulted greater extra-curricular activity 
on the part of farm boys and girls. Dramatics have become a 
real feature of enjoyment and study in the Holla School Centre. 

(5) More discussion regarding factors involved in vocat¬ 
ional aspects of education. The teachers tend to become more 
intimate advisors. There are other motives in school life, 
other than passing examinations and securing certificates. 

It may be asked: what of educational standards and those 
students who wish to secure matriculation standing? It will be 
remembered that in these cases, there are still the stages of 
Junior Matriculation and Senior Matriculation which students 
inclined for such continuation are required to pass on a. basis 













. 






. 












' 

, 












. 

. 










- 




























-120- 


of state examination. In reference to this matter it has been 
indicated above -1 upon the authority of the Superintendent of 
Education for British Columbia, that "no serious complaints" 
regarding unwise use of the power of recommendation in high 
schools. 

Regarding the use of the various subjects in the rural 
high school, there remains little to record at this point. We 
have seen that in the field of mathematics and science, in 
social studies, and literature, as well as the languages and the 
classics, there are movements, world-wide in extent, which have 
for their objectives the vitalization and socialization of the 
subject-matter in these various fields. The whole problem of 
educational sociology in the rural sections of our province 
and country may be conceived as part of that movement. As to 
the teaching methods in these rural districts, we have referred 
above to the expressions of teachers engaged in rural school 
work. It has been indicated that there are difficulties and 
handicaps well-nigh insurmountable, but that there are too, some 
compensations characteristic of the country alone. 

Finally, it will be recalled in this connection, that a 
new enunciation in the field of educational philosophy has been 
made as a background for the work of junior high schools. Through 
various media this philosophy is spreading to other branches of 
our school system. In the first chapter we referred to the 
expressions of leading teachers of our province concerning the 
needs for new attention to rur:l problems of education and sociol¬ 
ogy , We referred also to the studies in this field now under way. 

1 Note, p. 118. 





































. 






■ 

. 























■ 







- 121 - 


It seems safe ft) conclude, therefore, that to a small degree 
at least, better rural education may be expected in the future. 
Through the medium of more efficient administration which is 
promised by the movement in British Columbia"* - towards consoli¬ 
dation of that phase of education. In the latter phase, the 
Peace River District of our province is the field of experi¬ 
mentation. Yet it is growing beyond such a stage of development. 
With the establishment of rural junior high schools and night 
schools * 3 within its bounds, the Peace River community need no 
longer enjoy only the meager educational advantages. The phil¬ 
osophy of education which makes of the latter a ’life" concern 
with the individual, and a community concern in a general aense, 
is gradually coming into being in one or the outermost of 
C anada 1 s f arming frontiers. 

For the promotion of cultural education, the Rolls, High 
School has endeavoured to make use of the educational subject- 
matter being studied by the students. The principal motive of 
this policy has been the necessity on the part of teachers to 
utilize time. The method has, however, been of unforseen use 
in the making of the school a centre of interest socially and 
culturally for the young adults of the community. Dramatics, 
for example, based upon the literature texts on the high school 
courses in English, have kept alive an active dramatic society 
affiliated with the high school but whose members are largely 
ex-students of the school, using their society as a means of 
keeping th^r connection with the school. Finally, too, in their 

^See Chapter VI. 

3 The first junior high school to be established is that of Dawson 
Creek. Other schools of the district are being prepared for the 
ochange. 

d There are now 17 adult night classes operating within the 
Inspectorate of Peace River. 








. 


■ 












' 








- 







- 








































- 








activities, they were assisting directly the students of the 
high school to experience vitally the literary studies of their 
curriculum. The students and ex-students, working together, 
have studied and acted such plays ass ”A Midsummer Night’s 
Dream”, ”A Merchant of Venice”, ”She Stoops to Conquer”, Scenes 
from ”Iienry IV”, ’’Romeo and Juliet”, etc. In their activities, 
the social shpere of enjoyment has in some cases been widened 
by the performing of these plays in other school districts. 

In certain respects, the social studies promise to make 
for rural education, wider media of vitalization. This subject 
may enter into the considerations of all other branches of 
study. If the social studies can, as suggested in the aims out¬ 
lined near the commencement of this chapter, be made to humanize 
school activity and to vitalize educational processes on a basis 
of ’’natural” social activity, they. will enrich all forms of 
study. Rural education should not be devoid of such benefits, 
for it is the very core of the objectives of the social studies 
to relate school activities to activities of the community and 
of the -whole, world. 

It is to be hoped that out of the effort to attain greater 
cultural and vocational 3?esuits in education that the subject of 
agriculture in agricultural communities will not be neglected. 
More than one year ago an enquiry from the newly organized de¬ 
partment of extension of the University of British Columbia was 
forwarded to the Peace River district for the purpose of deter¬ 
mining what types of education would be most desirable for the 
young adults of our community. It was the writer’s privilege 
to respond to this enquiry, and through the auspices of the 














. 










* 


. 






. 


. 















- 123 - 


V/omen 1 s Institute of the Holla district, he recommended the 
institution of brief winter courses, at suitable centres in 
the Peace River District, in agriculture and household economics 
These courses, it was recommended, should be simple and pract¬ 
ical in type andcarrying with them vital inspiration. Regard¬ 
ing this recommendation there has been promise that a sincere 
attempt will be made to concentrate financial resources avail¬ 
able for extension education in British Columbia towards such 
an end. Such a beginning, we believe, would aly a solid found¬ 
ation for improved sociological conditions in the district and 
would eventually, one feels, destroy the present tendency among 
the young adults of our community towards dissatisfaction and 
lack of interest in farm life. 

Referring once more to the first basis of community 
education, the public school, we would emphasize the importance 
of making the school a live and vital factor in community re¬ 
search and cultural and vocational inspiration, a place where, 
in a pleasant atmosphere, children develop desirable attitudes. 

"..Perhaps we have arrived at the place where we realize that 
a school is not an institution where children ought to be forced 
into passive and unreasoned obedience in matters of thought and 
conduct. A school ought to help a child develop within the 
framework of his own abilities and preferences, though this, of 
course, ha.s its limitations. If a young boy has a fascination 
for aeroplanes, he ought to be encouraged to make an exhaustive 
study of the subject by the method of actual experimentation 
on his level of understanding. He should not be forced unduly 
into the mould required by a formal course of study., 

1 Ronald V. ^ires; 11 //hat Part Should tne School Play in Society?’ 

Social Studies, Vol. XXVI, p. 107. 









. 






* 






























* 









-124- 


Then, beyond the realms of vocation, there are the needs 
for broad citizenship within the community. There is the ed¬ 
ucation for character, the co-operation of home and school; 
there are the problems of parental education and of general 
culture. 11 ..The school should help to reveal to the students 
the relation of their work to the larger social situations. 

We should ask the school to supplement, and sometimes it has to 
take the place of, the homes in such matters as the development 
of such matters as honesty and fair play in the pupils. A good 
school ought to do much to raise the level of artistic and 
literary taste among the young people; it should prove to be 
a powerful antedote for the aesthetic diet of the average run 
of motion picture and radio programme... 

The high ideal for education expressed in the above 
quotation could be attained by a complete system of co-ordin¬ 
ation in the school and all-round co-operation in the community. 
Teachers and principals, to succeed in the attainment of such 
an ideal for their students, would have to be free agents, it 
would seem, in the direction of the solving of educational 
problems affecting their students and their community. In such 
circumstances the school would be the essential basis of ex¬ 
tended education among adults, for ideals of work and wisdom 
would have been developed in youth. On that foundation, 
community interests would develop and education would be a 
community enterprise. 


.res, op. cit., p, 


109. 






-125- 


CHAPTER VI 

THE CONSOLIDATION OF ADMINISTRATION OF SCHOOLS: PEACE RIVER 

During the year 1934 a committee appointed by the Council 
of Public Instruction of British Columbia made an inquiry re 
Educational. Financing and Administration in the province. The 
committee^ report, which was submitted in February, 1935, 
recorded its findings on the follovnng two fundamental points: 
(1) The distribution of the burden of school finance; (2) Size 
of Administrative unit. Since the former point is the vital 
basis of the form of consolidation of school administration 
which we propose to discuss in this essay, we quote below the 
first and essential clause of that report. Clause (a) of the 
report on "The Distribution of the Burden of School Finance" 
reads as follows: "That the Provincial Government should pay 
a substantial portion of the total cost, and move towards 
assuming the entire cost, of an adequate programme of education 
as laid down by the Government, such programme to be within the 
ability of the people to pay. "-** 

Without discussing the sources of revenue selected by 
the, commission, we turn to its report upon the second funda- 
mental point; namely, "Size of the Administration Unit". 0 On 
this subject the report reads in part as follows: "Upon this 
subject there appeared to be complete unanimity of opinion. 

We recommend: 

(a) That a system of Larger Units with appropriate 

organization should be established, the details to 

■'"Educational Finance and Mministraiion Commission, Report 
of Revision Committee, p. 2. 

2 Ibid. 



















■ 















* , 










































-126- 


be carefully worked out to suit the varying con¬ 
ditions of the Province. 

(b) That is the case of small school districts where no 
grouping could take place, the schools should be 
administered directly through the Department of 
Education. This change should be put into operation 
at the earliest possible moment. 

As suggested for the organization of the Larger Units we would 

recommend: 

(a) That in each Unit there should be a Director of 
Education appointed by and responsible to the Depart¬ 
ment of Education, the duties of such Director to be 
defined. 

(b) That each unit should be a separate taxation unit for 
such projects as are initiated by and financed by the 
Unit. 

(c) That the scheme should be worked" out providing for, 
and defining the duties of some form of School Board, 
partly drawn from elected representatives and partly 
from persons of the area chosen by the Department of 
education, by reason of their special fitness for 
such office. 

(d) That in connection with the organization of the Larger 
Units of Administration the question of Provincial 
schedules of Salaries for teachers should be con¬ 
sidered.. 

(e) That the movement towards the assuming the entire cost 
of an adequate programme of Education as recommended 
in Section 1 (a) might be made by means of the Pro¬ 
vince assuming responsibility for a progressively 
increasing portion of the cost of teachers’ salaries. 11 

The commission made a further report concerning modern 
findings in regard to the advantages of the Larger Administra¬ 
tive Unit. We quote the Committee’s review 1 of the situation 
as follows: ’’Research Studies and surveys generally agree that 
the Larger Administrative Units make possible: 

(a) More efficient operation. 

(b) Better education in rural schools. 

(c) Possible consolidations. 

(d) Removal of boundaries and disputes therefrom. 

(e) Better facilities for Secondary Education. 


1 


Report 


of Revision Committee, 


op. 


cit., 


p. 10. 

















■ 






* 









' 












, 
















. 



































-127- 


(f) Improve d sup e r vi don. 

(g) Greater stability'of teaching staff. 

(h) Fairer distribution of cost/ 

(i) Improved administrative personnel, for the work 
would be more attractive said important. 

(j) The more practical elective subjects of the curric¬ 
ulum can be better selected on the basis of the need 
of the community. 

(k) Better facilities for sports and recreations under 
ade qu at e supervi s i on. 

(l) More continuity of instruction. 

It might be emphasized at this point that the Revision 
Committee, whose report we have quoted in part, was of non- 
party origin and was composed as follows: Mrs. Paul Smith, 

M. L. A., Liberal Representative; Mr. Herbert Anscomb, M. L. A., 
Leader of the C. C. F.; Prof. 1. F. Angus, Head of the Depart¬ 
ment of Economics, University of British Columbia; Mayor David 
Deeming, Mayor of Victoria; Mr. R. F. Blandy, Union of 3. C. 
Municipalities; Mr. J. P. Carr, Representative of the Trustees 1 
Association. This committee spent many months on the work of 
their investigation and obtained material from numerous author- 
ative sources. Finally, the Committee did much in sounding the 
opinion of all organized concerns in British Columbia concern¬ 


ing the subject in hand. Their report concerning representative 
opinions in the Province is all but unanimously in favour**' of 
the establishment in rural areas of the Larger Administrative Unit, 
for educational purposes. 

There is little need to elaborate upon the subject of authorativq 
opinion, in the field of larger administrative units in education. 


Many might be cited. Many instances of public opposition to 

its application might be given. In conclusion to a summary 

of the benefits of the larger administrative unit, Dr. Peter Sandifor< 


'Report of the Revision Committee, op, cit., p. 5,(Mimeographed 
Report) 























- 

' 

- 

5 




. /■ • , , . 






■ 


. 
















' 















writes: 


"Pioneering difficulties in connection with education 
are everywhere test overcome by the erection of a central auth¬ 
ority in which wide powers are vested. 1 '^ Regarding the financial, 
background of educational systems, and the reconstruction of the 
machinery of taxation, there are correspondingly numerous in¬ 
stances and investigations. "School Finance in British Columbia"-' 
is, we believe, a land mark in the progress of financial recon¬ 
struction in Canada. In his recent book, "Education and Social. 
Progress", Professor C. H. Judd summarizes the needs of modern 
education and emphasizes the importance of immediate reconstruct¬ 
ion of taxing machinery on a more equitable basis, to be in turn 

the banis of reform of educational administration. In this con- 

. ^ 

nection Dr. Judd^ writes: 

v "..Education suffers from the lack of support, lax 
systems must be modernized and rendered equitable and 
efficient before school systems can fulfill purposes 
for which they exist...Correction of the difficulties 
: which have resulted in the curtailment of education 
must come from tax-system revision and ultimately from 
a wider acceptance by individuals of the principle that 
common good is more important than private luxury." 

Concerning educational administration Dr. Judd continues: 

"..If the units of the educational system are to be 
properly integrated, society will have to consent to a 
radical re-organization which will set aside many trad¬ 
itions and will destroy to a great extent institutional 
.isolation and even institutional independence.." - 

And with this reference to the necessity for society "to consent" 

to change, we turn to a consideration of nature of the opposition 

registered by the qpmmunity mind of the Peace River Block. A 

type of this opposition is anticipated by Dr. Sandiford writing 


I'Sandiford, Peter: "Problems of Canadian Education" , The School , 

^Toronto, April, 1935, p. 158. 

§King, H. B.: op. cit. 

bJudd, C. H• : "Education and Social Progress", Appleton, 1934,p. 108 
4 Ibid, p. 179. 







. * 

. 


















- 

. 





■> * 






• * 

* 









-129- 


concerning the proposal to institute such an administrative 

system in Ontario when he prophesies: 

”.. t first there would undoubtedly be considerable 
confusion, and fierce hostility on the art of the 
trustees now in office. But as things settled down, 
the improvements made would be so outstanding that we 
would wonder why we did not make them earlier. County 
would vie with county to secure the best-,education and 
a new local interest would be awakened.” 

The above statement summarizes in exceedingly accurate 

terms the history of community attitude in the Peace liver Block, 

since in September, 1934, the Order™in-Council granting the 

privilege to the Inspector of Schools to organize a single 

administrative unit in the district concerned, took effect. 

It is not our intention to deal with the details of the 

opposing correspondence which was published in ”The Peace Paver 

Block Mews” throughout the first year of the system 1 s operation 

and development. Below are listed the eight major objections 

made to the institution of the Larger Unit as it has affected 

the Peace River Inspectorate of British Columbia. With each 

objection is placed the substance of its corresponding answer 

made by Inspector Plenderleith on behalf of the Department of 

Education: 

(1) The scheme was put into effect without consulting 

thei r at ep ayer s. 

Answer: Since the Department pays an overwhelming 
majority of the costs of education where the rural 
schools are concerned, the real ratepayers, the 
people of the Province, were consulted and approved. 

(2) The scheme is undemocratic. 

Answer: Local school boards were abolished in Great 
Britain. ”Sureiy the Provincial Government as an ad¬ 
ministrator of schools is as representative as the 
average contentious Annual Meeting in a rural school- 
house. If democracy means anything, it means the 


pSandiford, op. cit. p. 659. 

reference is made here to the findings of the Commission working 
on the subject of Finance of Education in B. C. 

















■ 


















. 

■ 


< ' u JI .. , 









CO HI 


-130- 


increasing of the educational opportunities of the 
child. The Larger Unit fulfils this need where the 
smaller district has lamentably failed. 

(3) Local interest may diminish . 

Answer: M If local interest means the terrorizing of 
teachers and the petty patronage system that has in 
many cases existed in the giving out of tenders for 
school supplies and repairs, then the sooner that type 
of interest is diminished the better fill be the re¬ 
sults. If, on the other hand local interests means an 
active desire on the part of the local residents to 
give the children the best education that can be pro¬ 
vided for theiji, then the Larger Unit of administration 
will increase rather than diminish, local interest. n 

(4) Politics may enter into the administration of schools. 
Answer: Under all parties, education in British 
Columbia has been kept free from politics. Tenders 
for contracts would, as previously, be let to the 
lowest reliable bidder. 

(5) The scheme is un-British . 

Answer: "If it were un-British, would it have been in 

operation in Great Britain for decades? If it were un- 
British, would it be in operation in the Dominion of New 
Zealand? If it were un-British, would it be in oper¬ 
ation in the Commonwealth of Australia or the Union 
of South Africa? These units of the British Empire 
are successfully using the system In operation here. 

In Canada, Ontario is using it in several of her rural 
communities. The scheme is, therefore, more truly 
British than the Provincial one which has just been 
abolished. 11 

(6) The official trustee will be a dictator . 

Answ r er: "If democracy implies a delegation of auth¬ 

ority by the people’s elected representatives to those 
who are specially qualified to render efficient ser¬ 
vice, then the above criticism is invalid since con¬ 
stitutionally education is the task of the Province. 

Is it not better to have fifteen or twenty Civil 
Servants permantly employed in the role of educational 
administrators and fully accountable for the proper 
operation of the educational machinery, than to have 
the spending of the public funds in the hands of 
2,199 impermanent rural trustees, who in many cases, 
have no conception of the objectives of present day 
educational policies?" 

(7) The Advisory Board ^ will not have any say in the 
appointing of tearne rs. 


The Peace Hiver Block Hews, January 3, 1936. 

The Advisory Board is appointed at each Annual Meeting of the 
Rural School district. The purpose of the Board is to keep the 
Official Trustee conversant with the needs of its particular 
School. (It will be noted that Annual Meetings are to be continued.) 





























■ i £:■(/ ■ 

' 

- 






' » . 




















‘ -''0110(1 





















-131- 


Answer: "So long as the Government of British 
Columbia pays the overwhelming large portion of the 
teachers’ salaries in the rural schools, surely the 
Government has the right to see that the money is 
spent in obtaining the best teachers possible.... In 
reality the Advisory Board can recommend the hiring 
of a male or female teacher, and if the Department 
considers the situation suitable for the type of 
teacher requested, a good teacher of the type is 
supplied to fill the position." 

The local ratepayer s were not advised of the advant ¬ 
ages of the system . 

Answer: "This is a criticism originating in this 

district. In the first place the advantages of the 
larger administrative unit were fully explained in 
the "Block News" by Mr. Monrell, then Official Trustee, 
and later by me. You will also recall that the 
"Block News" ran a questionnaire and all ratepayers 
were invited to ask questions about the larger unit 
of administration. The complete questionnaire and 
answers were published in the "News" for the inform¬ 
ation of all who were interested. You will also re¬ 
call that a general meeting for the purpose of ex¬ 
plaining consolidation was held at Fort St. John 
last year for the benefit of those ratepayers north 
of the Diver for all those ratepayers.who were 
sufficiently interested to attend..." 1 

There is one further question concerning the nature 
of the system of consolidation introduced into this district. 
The question is: "Does consolidation of schools in the 
Peace Diver mean that some schools will be closed down 
and the pupils sent to other schools?" The answer given 
by the Administrator is: "Weather conditions of the' 

Peace Diver Country absolutely prohibit any consolidation 
of this kind.. The word ’consolidation’ as used in con¬ 
nection with the school districts of the Peace Diver 
Inspectorate, refers only to the consolidation of the 
districts under one head for administrative and taxation 
purposes." 

It Is not our purpose to discuss the rightness or wrongness 

of the system of consolidation und.er discussion. The aim is 

merely that of description with the view of showing a background 

q 

for the discussion of "The Resources of Community Education" 


llhe answers recorded were given by Dr. Plenderleith, Administrator 
of Schools, in response to a meeting of "indignation" held by the 
ratepayers of the Baldonnel School district (North of the Peace 
Diver) 

--Chapter VII. 












. 

, ■ 






' 

. 

. ■ 7 ; f7 6s: b \ 

. 

















■ 












-132- 


to be concluded in the next chapter of this thesis. It will 
be of interest, following a brief summary of the principles 
and organization of the system now in force, to enumerate the 
benefits which have actually been realized in practice. 

We shall consider first the faults of the old system of 
administration as they were noted by Inspector Plenderleith 
after he finished the first circuit of his inspectorate in 
May, 1934. They are listed as follows in Chapter XI, of the 
King Heport, 1 (that chapter being the report of an experiment 
in "Centralization"): 

(1) The system was inefficient because of a lack of co¬ 
ordination amongst the various divisions of those 
supposed to be carrying on the activities of ed¬ 
ucation. The divisions are summed up as follows: 

(1) The school trustees and the ratepayers; (9) The 
health authorities (nurses and doctors); (3) The 
Inspector and teachers. 

(2) In many of the districts' no capable and educated 
citizens were legally entitled to'become trustees, 
usually through the default of payment of taxes. 

Other instances of failure to carry out the "British 
Columbia School Law" were discovered. In some cases 
too, Dr. Plenderleith reports that "the authority 
wielded by trustees over teachers, amounts to down¬ 
right tyranny." This phase he substantiates to 
some degree by citing a few examples of such 
"tyranny", in so far as children of trustees were 
encouraged to disobey the teacher, while the tearher, 
dependent upon her position for a living was forced, 
in these cases to submit to injustices through the 
overbearing traits of trustees. 

(3) The division of the Inspectorate into small taxing 
units, each school district as a. separate unit, 
caused jealousies over varying tax rates. In cases 
where land is required from old districts to help 
form new districts, there has been refusal on the 
part of ratepayers in the old district to transfer 
their land into areas over which a higher tax rate 
might be levied. The old situation let too, to an 
annual "crop" of applications from ratepayers to 
have land transferred from areas of high mill rate 
to. areas of lower mill rates. 

(4) Secretaries and auditors were often unqualified to 

1 Kins;, K. 3., op. cit. ("School Finance in British Columbia"), 
p. f 04. 























■ 

■ 




, 

. 







■ 







. 































eo co 


1 on 


' 


hold such positions. The result was inefficiency 
end waste. In this connection the e was found also 
instances in which these officers had charged un¬ 
reasonable fees for their services.” 

(5) The non-uniformity of salaries was unfair to teachers. 
"In a rural school o: 26 pupils and poor equipment, 

an excellent teacher with several years' experience 
and a first-class certificate is receiving $780 per 
annum. In the adjacent district, where there is an 
average attendance of 8 pupils with adequate up-to- 
date equipment, a fair, inexperienced teacher is 
receiving a much higher salary. 

(6) There was a lack of uniformity in services. Some 
districts engaged a school nurse; others did not. 

Some districts voted sufficient funds to carry out 
an educational programme; others did not. 

(7) There were settled lands not being taxed for school 
purposes. 

(8) There was a sum amounting to $2000 being paid annually 
as secretaries' salaries. 


A Study of these alleged weaknesses existing in the old 
system of local administration of schools in the Peace 
Hiver Inspectorate, one cannot but admit the advantages 
of some form of administration which would increa.se the 
efficiency of the business connection of education in 
rural areas. 


On page 128 of his Report, Key or King refers to the 
conditions existing in the Peace Paver Inspectorate as 
an example of "Local Administration at its Worst". 
Rhether the indictment is just we cannot decide at this 
point. 


The Annual Report of the British Columbia. Trustees' 

3 

Association registers a protest against the proposal made in 
the King Report, to abolish trustees throughout the whole Pro¬ 
vince for the purpose of organizing education under the direction 
of School Administrators appointed by the Provincial Government. 


The game Association resolved, however, that for districts "such 
as the Peace River" the policy of the larger unit is desirable. 


1 . 

King, op. 
Ibid. 


cit., p. 106. 



: . Trustees Association, 

First Convention, 1735, p,.28, ff. 


Proceedings of Thirty- 







■ 


. 







- 


, ' 



- 








. 


■ 




















- 134 - 


Little more need be recorded here. The problem of 
taxation has been handled thus far by dividing the Peace Diver 
District into zones,- 1 - the mill-rate within each of these zones 
being uniform for that zone. The next step in our discussion 
will involve an outline of the plan of the organization of the 


combined health and educational units now functioning. The 
entire organization is under the direction of the Director of 
Education (Inspector of Schools), the personnel in charge of t 
various departments being appointed by the Council of Public 
Instruction and by the Provincial Board of Health respectively 
Diagram JX indicates the form of the combined organization. 


ne 


DIAGRAM n: 



^See Dio* 


:r< 


"i ill, representing 1936-IS37 arrangement. 









































, 

„ • to o •. j-hl 




■ - ■ r r." ' 1 ■ >" ■ 

• • . or c . > t ' .to o 

. 

. 

„ ■ ■ : ' o r o ‘t ’.n:r ■ / o 

- c - 

; 

: .... . . ■ . , ■. O' ...” 0 . "/o' .0 ,0 : O' r ooo-oorv 




IT 




* ■ • ~ - . 

■ 



- 

. . , 

. 






! -a 










j « ? * 






















- ; ‘.. ::. 
























































and through the support of 


- 135 - 

Cut of this organization, 
the Department of Education, the Department of Health} end 
through the generosity of the Carnegie Fund (in so far as the 
health 'education is concerned) and through the co-operation of 
community institutes many benefits are brought into the scope 
of the unified structure of the Peace River Unit. The following 
are the principal benefits of the system which are in many cases 
novel benefits: 

(1) A health service in which an examination of each child 
will be made by the Purses and Doctor, free preventive treatment 
'..hen necessary, including innoculation, vaccination, and goitre 
preventives. 

(2) A yearly Dental Service in which each child will 
receive a thorough examination and all remedial work attended 
to by a highly qualified dentist. 

(3) Free night school for adults in all centres where 
an average attendance of ten can be obtained. 

(4) Free tuition for students from any consolidated 
districts who wish to attend. High School in any of the larger 
centres of the Block. 

(5) Increased library facilities for each school with the 
possibility oi? a travelling library of 50 to 100 books for the 
benefit of the residents of the district. 

On the whole, the application of the larger unit of 
educational administration is opening doors of opportunity for 
educational help all round. We hope its implications will 
affect deeply the fabric of the Peace River Country as a com¬ 
munity. Already, night schools are bringing scores of adults 5 
young and old, into social groups for mental refreshment and 
social intercourse. -High schools are being equipped, and, in 
one case, a junior high school has been instituted. Through 
the work of the Health Unit of the Inspectorate a cardinal 
principle of she "new education” is growing into a force. In 
















* 

■ 

. 

. 








. 

. 

' 

„ 





















. 





- 136 - 


tlie succeeding chapter we shall consider raore fully the resources 
which may he brought into the service of n Community education' 1 , 
especially those undeveloped sources awaiting the processes of 
further experimentation and development. 

I The important fact to bear in mind at this point is 

that the application of consolidated administration of educat¬ 
ional affairs in one district in British Columbia, has indicated 
one clear path leading towards the equalization of educational 
opp o rtunity• 








Diagram III.- 


Diagram indicating the chief physical and 
economic features of the Peace River District 
of British Columbia.^- 



~~Sixty-Fifth Annual Report of the Public Schools of the 
Province of British Columbia, p. H 55. 



































f 
















Diagram IV 



. - Diagram indicating the present-Peace River 
Larger Unit of Administration." 



■^Sixty-Fifth Annual Report of the Public Schools of the 
Province of British Columbia, p. H 62. 





































































- 139 - 


CHAPTER VTI 

RESOURCES OF COMMUNITY EDUCATION: ASPECTS OF FOLIC SCHOOLS 

In Chapters III and IV we have discussed the problems 
and difficulties typical of the rural frontier, and have in¬ 
dicated the fact of specific individual problems connected with 
young adults of the Peace River community as well as the general 
problems concerning them all. Despite the presence of diffi¬ 
culties in these connections and difficulties concerned in 
individual differences in ability and in social background, 
we must accept the energy, the ability and earnestness of these 
young adults as our first educational resource. "The old trad¬ 
ition that secondary education is for the professions or leisured 
class only, dies hard.. .Common s , c rvation and practical 
life even more than the work of the professional psychologists, 
have driven home the fact that boys and girls, men and women, 
in all the practical walks of life—industry, commercial work, 
agriculture, homemaking--do have minds of constructive, efficient 
and growing ability—to think, to act and to appreciate. ! ‘ L 

Leaders of community educational activity must recognize, 
this finding, but must recognize, also, its limitations, and 
through the medium of experiment, establish, educational bases 
in accordance with the needs, resources and setting of the part¬ 
icular community concerned in any given case. The leader must 
seek co-operation in the act of instruction, in the business of 
administration, and in the act of bringing unity to the factors 
of the society in which he is working. 

^Bowser, F. G.: "Gan We Educate Everyone?", Teachers College 
Record , April, 1930, p. 603. 













. 











' 


' 


























































. 











In these fields of co-operation will be found our chief 
sources of a.ctive progress in the way of community education. 

In concluding their survey of ’‘Rural Adult Education” in the 
Unites States ? Drs. Landis and Willard^ - write .adult ed¬ 
ucation in rural America needs to recognize more fully the 
kinship with movements in urban America and in rural and urban 
groups in other countries. It has been demonstrated already 
the facts and philosophies that underlie the whole adult- 
education movement have significance for the people who live 
in the villages and on the farms of the United States. The 
educational forces now at work in rural America, although they 
are as yet inadequate to reach more than a minority of the 
peoplie, are great in number. Some enterprises, as we have seen, 
are far-reaching in organization. .. ” In our own country and in 
the Peace River community, many of these same resources avail¬ 
able for community education are present or obtainable. 

Of these resources in our own case we list below the 
principal ones: 

(1) Night schools as an adjunct to the regular' school 
system made possible through the economy of the enlarged system 
of admini strati on now in operation. 

(2) Correspondence education under the direction of Ur. 

J. W. Gibson, Victoria, B. C. 

(3) Extension education through reading courses offered 
by the University of British Columbia. Further, our proximity, 
to the University much reading service has been rendered our 
community through the extension service of that institution. 

(4) Radio. 

(5) Institutions for the betterment of rural sociology 
and health of citizens. 

■^Landis, B. Y. and Willard, J. D.: ”Rural Adult Education”, 
Macmillan, N. Y., 1933, p. 201. 










■ 







. 














, 

. 










, 

- 





- 141 - 


(1) In the preceding chapter we endeavoured to indicate 
the background of practical advantages supplied by the consoli¬ 
dated administrative system for education now in force in the 
Peace River Inspectorate. There are 17 night schools in oper¬ 
ation within the Inspectorate.^ "In Dawson Creek a sort of 
Renaissance in Learning has taken place, except for the fact 
that it is a ’new birth’ and not a ’rebirth’. Right schools 
have come into being.’ Sixty adults attend two or three times 

2 

a week to take subjects from book-keeping to commercial art." 

The average attendance of the night schools operating in the 
rural districts is approximately 12 students per school. These 
schools serve to bring adults together for purposes of mental 
refreshment and social activity. In many cases the vocational 
abilities and possibilities of the students are increased. 
Vocationally, the subjects of most value being taught are 
stenography, book-keeping and commercial art. The cultural 
aspects of the night schools are being appreciated in the few 
centres in which there are competent teachers for musical theory 
and community singing. In the Sunset Prairie School alone, there 
are 34 regular students in the subject of musical theory. In all 
there is some justification for referring to the whole movement 
of adult education in this Inspectorate as a "new bitf'th*. It 
is "new" in such frontiers. 

(2) Correspondence education in British Columbia is a 
movement worthy of the study of any student of education. Regard 
ing the development of that movement and organization in the 

^The Inspectorate includes the entire Peace River District of B.C 
^Gaitskell, C, D. : "The Larger Unit of Administration and Its 
Application to Term Schools", The B. C. Teacher, January, 

1936, p. 21. 















. 

' 


■■ 








. 




. 












* 

. 

■ 




















■ ' 





- 142 - 


Pro.vince, we quote briefly from an article 
the Director of High School Correspondence 
ment of Education, Victoria: 


written by Dr. Gibson, 
Instruction, Depart- 


"in the spring of 1929," Dr. Gibson^writes, "the writer 
was entrusted with the organization of Correspondence 
Instruction for Secondary or High School grades, Students 
began to register during the last wekk of August and by 
the following spring no less than 597 had enrolled for 
the only courses offered at that time, viz., the' regular 
high and commercial school subjects. Of this number, 

400 were under 18 years of age and 197 over that age5 
we had 332 girls and women and 265 men and boys; 15 per¬ 
cent of the students lived over three miles and under 
ten miles from the nearest high school, and 75 percent 
lived more than ten miles distant; 48 percent lived 
■'lore than twenty miles, and 13 percent more than fit 
miles distant; the average distance from the nearest 
. high school was almost thirty miles; we had 16 who 
claimed to be living more than one-hundred miles from 
a high school. Nearly 50 percent of the students were 
the children of farmers and ranchers. That percentage 
has dropped considerably, however, due to the fact that 
. we are now offering a number of technical and vocation:! 
courses that appeal to old.er boys and men in towns and 
villages.." 

"..Previous to 1929 there was only one country that had 
undertaken correspondence instruction.of high school 
grades, Australia., where lenient ary Correspondence 
Courses had started in 1914 (five years ahead of British 
Columbia) and where more advanced courses were intro¬ 
duced later on. The total yearly registration in the 
six states of Australia (including both elementary and 
secondary school courses) is now well over 15,000-- 
nearlv 3 percent of the entire school population. In 
British Columbia, this year, it is approximately 1.5 
percent, omitting students over 18 years of age. Our 
present enrollment in High School and vocational corres¬ 
pondence courses Is just over 1200 and in Elementary 
courses about 900. With the introduction of new courses 
these figures will doubtless be raised before this time 
next year." 

"Terms of admission have been changed from time to time 
a.s circumstances seemed to warrant. At first the courses 
were entirely free, and then there was a tendency to go 
to the other extreme in adding an annual registration fee 
of $2 and graded tuition fees from $2 per subject for 
students 16 years of age, up to 35 for those over 21 
years of age. During the past two years no tuition fees 
have been charged for students under 18 yearsof age. 

'Gibson, J. W.i "'dr 1 , Th_ 3. C. Teacher , 

December, 1935, p. 23. 


















♦ 











' 

■ 


.. 




















. 







■ 

. 

I 

- 


. 













■ 


























-143- 

Those 13 or 19 years oil pay $2, those 30 or 21, $3, 
and those over 21, $5 per subject, Iso the 

tuition rate for technic'1 subjects. All students, 
regardless of the age or number of subjects carried, 
pay an annual registration fee of $2. ni 

It will be noted, concerning the regulations for fees 

charged by the Correspondence Department of our Province that, 

exemptions from fees are given to all those who are classified 

in any of the following divisions: (1) returned soldiers or 

their dependents; (2) students whose families are on relief; or, 

who are certified by local authorities as financially unable to 

pay fees; (3) patients in hospitals or sanitoria; (4) men in 

employment camps. 

A further point of interest concerning the practice 
growing out of correspondence education in British Columbia, is 
the use, by many high school principals of correspondence courses 
to supplement the high school course for those boys or girls who 
do not Wish to continue with their academic work. In the small 
high schools of the Peare River Block, severe! boys have in 
this way been enabled to get credit in technical and commercial 
work done during school hours. 

In so far as the technical and commercial subjects are 
concerned, they are.designed chiefly for young adults who have 
completed their elementary or high school work and wish, while 
they are working on the farm or at a trade, to increase their 
abilities in specific skills or to enrich their lives in general 
and cultural ways. Some of the special courses offered are: 

Home-Economics, Book-Keeping, Mechanical Drawing, Farm Electric¬ 
ity, Building Construction, Auto Engineering, Prospecting, and 
others. 

1 Gibson, op. cit. 















■ 























































- 




-> . 
















- 144 - 


One might easily over-stress the importance of corres¬ 
pondence education as a factor in the education of the Peace 
River Block of British Columbia. It appears, however, that in 
combination with the regular high school and night school in¬ 
struction, correspondence education, as it is organized for 
our benefit, is a factor of increasing importance in adult 
education and in the improvement of rural education in general. 

To make this, or any form of adult education a success and a 
force in community activity, local leadership and inspiration 
are indispensable. Where students can arrange to study under 
the supervision, the writer believes that students of young 
years find it difficult to keep rigidly to their time-table of 
study. Even students 13 years of age end over are frequently 
tempted to write their examinations without first completing 
thoroughly and completely, their lesson assignments. Corres¬ 
pondence education might increase its effectiveness by being 
linked up with other forms of adult or high school education 
in the community where leadership and supervision would assist 
and inspire. 

(3) Extension education from the universities had 
scarcely touched the people of the Peace Paver Block until 
the radio programmes broadcast by the University of Alberta 
began to be appreciated by a very limited number of listeners. 

In very recent years reading courses from the University of 
British Columbia have been available to the people here. In 
the main these courses have been utilized by teachers who are 
working on degree courses during the summer sessions. Geo¬ 
graphical^, the Peace River Block is isolated rather effectively 












■ 


■ 


. 

























' 


. 





















) 


" 


















- 145 - 


f*rom the possibility of* extension work from the University 
of British Columbia. Distances are great from any of the 
universities of western Canada. T .7hen university extension 
work does.develop for this northern community, it will of nec¬ 
essity, take the form of the cheaper and indirect methods. 

The demand for extension education will come from the farmers, 
who will eventually learn the value of scientific knowledge 
:m farming. Through the influence of the teaching profession, 
the second demand will come from the young adults who sense a 
need for increased cultural instruction. 

The extension work might easily take the form of short 
winter courses in agricultural subjects; and there would be a 
possibility of ad-ding music and drama, where the attendance of 
such courses as proposed was made up principally of young adults. 
The preparation for such instruction would be rendered relative¬ 
ly easy by the present work and influence of the night schools, 1 
which are acting now as extension departments of the rural 
elementary and the town high schools. 

The possible results of intelligent extension education 
in rural, areas can scarcely be questioned. Landis and Willard 
in their chapter on M Agricultural Extension 1 ' refer to the 
general results of the extension work in the following words: 

"Educators engaged in extension teaching commonly 
refer to certain intangibles as results of their work. 

They allege that they have assisted over two million 
men and women in thinking about their own problems 
(men and women in the U. S. A.), often with the result 
that new human relationships have been discovered., 
social horizons widened, and new information is acquired. 
The extension programme has aided groups of men and 
women to think in terms ofresources for improvement of 
their situations. It has stimulated co-operative action. 
Perhaps most important of all, it has developed scores 


^See Chapter 

2 Landis and Willard, op. cit., p. 77. 




- 146 - 


of thousands of men and women for leadership in 
community enterprises and even for effective teaching 
of local groups. It has done these things chiefly while 
being concerned about farming and home-making. It has 
ventured to some degrees into reaction, chiefly in music 
and drama, and has experimented only slightly in liter¬ 
ature and the fine arts..." 

These same writers go to more specific reference by quoting 
the results of some investigations made by the Extension Depart¬ 
ment of the Department of Agriculture in the United Stated. In 
an investigation made, for example, in the states of Hew York, 
Colorado, California and Iow r a, in which, a study of 3,954 farms'^ 
was made, it was discovered that three out of four farms had 
been altered as a result of contact with the Extension Depart¬ 
ment. In addition to the direct effects which extension 
education may have upon the practice of farming in the Peace 
Biver District, it is hoped that its future development will 
effect an extension to the rural sociological work being done 
by the farmers’ and women’s institutes, by the night schools 
and the churches. 

As to what departments of extension education to develop 
for greatest service in a rural frontier, It would appear that 
a system of education balanced by cultural and vocational 
Instruction would be of greatest benefit. It would, for 
psychological reason, be forced to take the form of programmes 
or presentations which would combine practical and social appeals 
In short, to introduce a system of education into a rural district 
that education would be faced with the opposition of long. disregard 
for' "tiresome" instruction, and with the opposition of the 
emotional features of present social activities and of the "talkies 
and the radio. 

^Landis and Hillard, op. cit., p. 78. 












- 







. 

























































































- 147 - 




(4) Though controversial- 1 - as to value as an educational 
force, the radio has won its ground as a medium of extending 
education to the farming classes in both Canada and the United 
States. Regarding the sucress of the radio programmes as an 
educative force in Western Canada, we require no further 

C) 

illustrations than those given by Professor E. A. Corbett .of 
the Extension Department, University of Alberta. Writing in 
"The School”, October, 1935, Mr. Corbett points out very im¬ 
pressively the fact of progress made with radio extension work 
in Alberta. With the small annual upkeep of less than $4,000, 
the Alberta station has succeeded in interesting thousands of 
farmers and workers as well as many young adults whose homes 
are in isolated and frontier districts of Alberta and Western 
Canada. The subjects of instruction and inspiration include 
music, drama, science, travel, in addition to the agricultural 
topics of interest to farmers .1 shing to improve their knowledge 
and skill in their work upon the farm. 

It was staled above that, in view of the present uncer¬ 
tainty as to the future trends of radio, to is tremendously 
varied popular programmes, radio as a means of extension-educac¬ 
tion has yet to prove its ~ orth and become founded upon a -firm 
foundation. There are instances in experience which prove, even 
at this early stage in the development of the use of the radio 
medium, that the hope of greatly improved radio programmes which 
will be a practical assistance to men and women, young and old, 
whose school clays are over, is based upon a firm foundation. 
^Landis and'Willard, op. cit., p. 150 

2 Corbett, E. 1. , ”Can Radio be Used Effectively in University 
Extension Work?”, The Schoolj Toronto, October, 1935. 











, 


« ; 


. 
















, 




, 
































































- 143 - 


Two instances will indicate this feet and widening 
possibility. The first is taken from the experience of the 
extension radio service in the province of Alberta. 


M ..Do people actually listen" writes Professor 
E. A. Corbett, "to lectures and academic courses given over 
the air? Is it true that the average man listens a 
few minutes to a talk and then shifts the dial quickly 
to something else? Undoubtedly that is true in many 
instances, particularly in cities and towns, where 
opportunities for self-improvement are more available. 

But we know that there are thousands of people, part¬ 
icularly in rural districts, who listen eagerly to 
lectures in regular courses on history, literature, 
agriculture, general economics, current events, recent 
advances in science, astronomy, etc.." 

This report, given upon the results of serious and successful 

effort to extend education from a university centre in Western 

Canada, promises, we believe the possibility of tangible and 

widespread educational influences for more of Canada’s frontier 


communities. The Peace River District of British Columbia, 


a farming frontier, is a district of ideal background upon 


which radio education might fall with most eager acceptance--it 


is undoubtedly a field of great educational need where vocat¬ 
ional advice and cultural stimulation are concerned. 

To call attention to a field of research in the same 
educational sphere, but in a country of greater industrial and 
commercial development, we quote briefly from the conclusions 
concerning radio extension-education reached by the Radio Service 
of the Department of Agriculture in co-operation with the Station 
WGY Schenectady, Hew York, The report runs in part as follows: 

"Farmers are jealous of their radio time. They demand 
that agricultural or informational programmes be easy 
to listen to, and easy to understand and remember. But 
they want the subject matter concise and definite, concrete 
and specific. They resent the inclusion of anything that 
serves as a distraction from the information itself.." 

T Sorbett, E. A., op. cit., p. 95. 















■ 




_ 

. 

, 

. 





































: ' 








f 3 ' 1 : ' ■ i' J ■ : 









. ■ ' r- .+■ "" ■'. : r ry. 












• :vi.O 










- 149 - 


There is, therefore, good indication that the agricultural 
population of this section of the United States is not only 
interested in the extension of education through radio trans¬ 
mission, but are intelligently interested in the regulations 
of radio technique to fit the particular needs of their busy 
lives. Let the two above-mentioned instances of success in 
radio education suffice for our present inquiry. 

(5) The institutions designed to be factors in the better¬ 
ment of rural sociology can not be thought of in terms of any 
limited number of institutions that might be named. Referring 
to the common causes of delinquency, Finney and Zelney^ point 
to lack of moral standards, undesirable home life, lack of funds 
for attaining leisure, and lack of correlation between church 
and school activities with a corresponding lack of co-ordination 
of the home with both of the latter two. Whatever factors, 
therefore, which affect the social relationships within itself, 
the character of individuals, and the broader relationships of 
the individual and the group with the outside world, are factors 
of education--adult education. 'Whatever organizations or 
institutions foster these influences, are instruments of adult 
education. It is our conclusion in this matter, that the aim 
of all individuals or groups which foster the good of rural 
sociology should have for their common aim, the co-ordination of 
the efforts of all community organizations for the good of 
education. 

Reference was made in Chapter III, to the difficulties 

"'Finney R. L. and Zelney, I. "An. Introduction to Educational 

Sociology", Chicago, London (Heath), p. 29. 













■ 



































































- 150 - 


of education, curricular and extra-curricular, to be found in 
the rural frontier. These same difficulties are experienced 
by the churches, boys’ and girls’ clubs, music teachers, choir 
leaders, etc., in so far as the difficulties arise in the econ¬ 
omic, geographic and social factors of the community. Economic 
stresses have forced the people of the Peace River community of 
British Columbia to rely heavily upon the Department of Education 
for financial support of their school system. Similarly, the 
churches represented in the various districts of the ’’Block” 
are handicapped in their work by the ever-present financial 
difficulty. The churches are dependent upon the support of 
central branches in the eastern sections of Canada. The minist¬ 
ers serving the frontier communities are frequently students 
working upon a very low salary basis. Thus they are handicapped 
through lack of experience and lack of facilities through which 
to work. Despite the difficulties just recorded, however, the 
churches possess a working basis in social enterprises, and here 
as elsewhere in the world,""are inculcating in their scope of 
instruction, activity programmes which affect the leisure-time 
problem of the adolescent and young adult members of society. 

It is not our purpose to discuss the objects of religious ed¬ 
ucation, but it is important to record, in relation to the 
socializing and educating forces in the rural community, the 
fact of significant influence of the churches in an educational 
respect. The churches are so organized, and their social work 
of such a character that religious principles maty be applied in 

“Willard and Landis, op. cit. , 


p. 110, ff. 














. 












\ , ' J 

■ 






. 
















































































- 151 - 


in the realm of stimulating thought and action in economics 
and sociology. 

The second phase of the subject of social and educational 
influence which we might record, is that growing out of the work 
of the farmers 1 institutes and the women’s institutes. There 
are in the Peace diver Block approximately a dozen farmers’ 
institutes, meeting for purposes of discussing and formulating 
principles of local activity and for the purpose of carrying 
out the principles of the central organizations. The institutes 
are an invaluable aid in the promotion of district agricultural 
fairs and desirable social and educational, gatherings. Through 
the district fairs now being promoted north of the Peace River, 
school exhibits are finding a very important place. Whatever 
movement of educational value appears within the area, the 
support of the farmers’ institutes can be relied upon to assist. 
There are three W. I. organizations in the Peace River Block— 
those of Holla, Dawson Creek, and Fort St. John. The extent of 
these organizations’ work is difficult to estimate; it enters 
an increasing variety of spheres, and finds much scope in the 
rural frontier for expansion in the social sphere. Much relief 
is given the needy, and various assistance ha,s been rendered in 
the equipping of school libraries and first-aid out-fits. 

During the present year, the Institute of Holla helped, through 
donations in cash, to make possible the holding of a dental 
clinic, the work of which was free to all the children of the 
Peace River Inspectorate of British Columbia. In all, the work 
of the farmers’ institutes and that of the Women’s Institute, 
are complements in the field of cultural, social and educative 










- 152 - 


activities. They possess the qualities helpful in promoting 
adult education and the sociological improvement of the community. 

We referred in our last chapter to the institution in 
the Peace River Block of a Health Unit which works in conjunction 
with the educational system of the district. This health unit 
strives, according to its true purpose, to he an educational 
force as well as a practical preventative force against the 
spread of infectious diseases and the prevalence of neglect in 
matters of health. Whatever cultural value, whatever practical 
value there is in health education, the Health Unit is meant, 
under its specially' trained directors to inculcate. It must be 
remembered, too, that in this s, here is the problem of mental 
hygiene, a problem coming more and more into the inter-relation¬ 
ships of home, school and community. In the work of the British 
Columbia Heal-;. its being organized in the rural communities 
of the Province, there is a vast resource of educational 
possibility. 

We need go no further into such questions as those above 
outlined. It is obvious that the possible resources of adult 
education in this outlying frontier community are numerous 
enough to produce, under leadership, a purposeful working basis 
for progressive education. The lack in our community is not in 
the field of organized media. Even in the matters of music, 
drama., and study groups there is found no basis for disbelief 
in their promotion, other than in the weak response on the part 
of those for whom the work of education might be organized. The 
writer, as secretary of the first musical festival to be held 
in the Peace Elver Block, experienced the definite hardship 



























. 














, 






■ 













' 




- 













































- 153 - 


arising from this latter weakness among young people to whom 
no such appeals have previously been made. With enthusiastic 
co-operation, however, among those who propose to be leaders 
of cultural, movements’ or movements towards vocational guidance 
and training, there will doubtless be stimulated a new cultural • 
motive among those who should be the learners. 

On these grounds the writer sees no reason to withold from 
such frontiers as that under discussion, any of the educational 
advantages enjoyed by more prosperous and less isolated commun¬ 
ities. Our community is subject to development under leadership, 
but no inner motive appears to create its own leadership or to 
demand leadership. It was the general belief of the Government 
of British Columbia, that, to impose upon the community under 
-discussion a aystem of efficient administration, would create 
greeter receptiveness on the part of the community. This too, 
represents the writer 1 s conclusion regarding the development of 
adult enlightenment and education. Leadership, it appears, 
must sometimes be imposed upon a community, which previously 
left undeveloped in school or home, many essential cultural 
values and tangible plans for the vocational guidance of young 
adults. 

As a final point in this discussion, there comes the 
recognition of the influence of the older settlers of the vast 
community as described in Chapter III. There might arise a kind 
of youth-and-age conflict, where the imposition of administrative 
features from without are found necessary to promote the welfare 
of the younger generation in educational and cultural spheres. 























. 




































, 



















- 154 - 


It was pointed out in the last chapter that this tendency has 
been a real one in so far as the imposition of the consolidated 
system of administration was concerned.- 1 - It was pointed out 
further, however, that the proof of efficiency and the ultimate 
aim of maintaining the principles of democracy in practice, 
relieved the tense situation and has tended to restore harmony 
and some definite co-operation on the part of those who strenu¬ 
ously opposed the movement in the first instance of its organiz¬ 
ation for our community. 

The fact remains, however, that to gain immediate effect, 
tne principles of the new plan were of necessity imposed upon 
the people for whose benefit it was designed. Likewise, the 
v/r i ber s conclusion regarding the general development of sociol¬ 
ogical improvement within the Peace River Community as a whole, 
is maintained.* It is that leadership of rather striking and 
impressive nature must first rouse the citizens of the community 
to action. The present activity on the part of the Department 
of Education illustrates the potency of this principle of 
administrative leadership. Gradually, through the influence of 
the night classes, J the effect of the improved conditions in the 
rural schools, (especially when these improvements are recognized 
by the parents and leading citizens of the various parts of the 
community) may create a basis for educational motivation and 
educational consciousness for both children and adults of the 
whole settlement. The importance of the promotion of educational 

“There is no intent to disregard the value of diplomatic leader¬ 
ship or democratic atmosphere. 

^The details of this movement are discussed earlier in the 
chapter. 








■ 





















- 










■ 




. 


. 












-155- 

stimulus to elementary and high school work cannot he stressed 
too strongly. The schools must form the real basis, not only 
for the improved educational facilities within their walls, 
but for the continuation of education into adult life and for 
the promotion of desirable educational attitudes among citizens. 

Consideration of the social and educational attitudes of 
the people of the Peace River District and. a recognition for 
the need of making more vital, the subjects of school instruction 
led us to consider the values of the principles of folk schools, 
more especially the principles of the Folk High School movement 
.as it is found in Denmark,* It is not with the intention of 
proposing the transplanting of the Folk High School system into 
Canada that this consideration is made. Rather it is to note 
what principles of instruction would serve as well to inspire 
the young adults of our rural areas as do those principles 
stimulate fuller living on the part of the agriculturalists of 
Denmark. When the writer proposed^ to the Extension Department 
of the University of British Columbia, that the most desirable 
type of adult education to extend to the Peace River Block 
would be along the line of brief winter courses in agriculture 
and household economics, he had in mind the aim of inspiring 
interest in the essential occupation of the community. Ho ed¬ 
ucation, however essential in the whole scheme of education, is 
so basic, it would seem, as that which would result in intelli¬ 
gent appreciation of the industry of the home-community. Then 

^On behalf of the Women’s Institute of Holla, the writer, in 
reply to an enquiry made by the newly organized Extension Depart¬ 
ment re educational needs in the P. R. District, proposed the 
institution of brief agricultural courses for young men and 
women, the instruction to be given by trained agriculturalists. 











■ 




































































- 156 - 


there are many lacks in the outlying rural districts which the 

act of inspirational teaching in any branch of activity related 

to the community might help to overcome. 

"There is, in all but fortunate cases, no organized 
sport amongst the children and young adults of our rural 
schools. Cultural reading and the development of musical 
and .dramatic talent are at a low ebb; they are not 
motivated. Further, there appears to be a need for the 
stimulation of interest on the part of young adults, in 
the beauty and possibilities of their own home and 
district. There is a call,....for a form of adult ed¬ 
ucation which would vitalize agriculture in a community 
where agriculture is the means of life and development. 

The way of thorough education seems slow; yet where 
dissatisfaction and weak interest in community relation¬ 
ships are based upon ignorance of surrounding values, 
surely education receives its greatestchallenge.. "■ 

With these ideas concerning our own community in mind, 

it will be interesting to consider briefly the motives, aims, 

methods andresults of the Folk High School movement as it has 

concerned Denmark, its motherland. The movement for folk schools 

in Denmark had its origin in an historical crisis. After the 

land reforms between 1808 and 1839, which enabled the peasants 

of Denmark to own land, to a .greater degree, the cardinal 

principle^ of the Folk High School movement in Denmark was to 

educate young people to the farm. After the war with Prussia 

in 1864, when Denmark lost the provinces of Schelwig and 

Holstein, the watch-word of the leaders of the Folk School 

movement in that country was contained in "What the Enemy has 

taken by force from without, we must regain by education from 

within. "3 The movement was bolstered by the powerful enthusiasm 


Hurt, Everett, and Lean, J. E.: "Development of Education in 
Q the Peace Fiver District", The 3. C . T eacher, February, 1936, p. 17. 
uameron, Donald: "The Folk High School Movement", C.S.T.K.A. 
Heview, June, 1934, p. 12, ff. 

3The sign over the door of a Danish Folk School (quoted by 
Willard and Landis, op. cit., p. 190. 





















. 

' 

. . 

















. 






, 























- 157 - 


put into it "by the poet-churchman, Bishop Gruntwig, a Romantic¬ 
ist, so to speak, concerning the education of children and youth, 
Gruntwig*s early life^ had been impressed by the hectic days of 
the French Revolution. He had spent his youth under the stern 
discipline of the late eighteenth-century schools, the discipline 
of the Classics. He had lived through a period during which he 
had seen around him a cold, frigid attitude towards life. He 
became a tutor, was crossed in love, experiencing throughout 
his early life (his whole life period was 1733-1873) more than 
ordinary emotional experiences. He travelled and was favorably 
impressed with the freedom of England. He experienced strong 
religious changes in his life and gave expression to his feelings 
through the medium of' hymn-writing and the writing of inspirational 
poetry/ for his dejected nation. With a high vision for his own 
land andwith a broad outlook upon world affairs coupled with a 
strong belief in world brotherhood-, this outstanding Dane 
motivated an historical turn in the educational affairs of his 
country. 

The following extract embodies a fundamental discussion 

of the folk school situation in the general aspect: 

"Students of adult education vary in their appraisals 
. of the Scandinavian Folk Schools. Some think they are 
only ’on the borderland* of adult education, although 
their unique elements are appreciated. Others regard the 
schools ' as having made probably the most important con¬ 
tribution yet “made to adult education, because they 
emphasize re-creation of individuals, enlivement, en¬ 
lightenment , and the * living word*.... The folk schools 
of Scandinavia are small, with relatively little equip¬ 
ment, small faculties, and with few financial resources. 

The students are from 18 to 25 or 30 years of age. 


“A splendid anonymous artical in ird ieograph form discussing in 
outline the life experiences and character of Gruntwig, is 
supplied by the Extension Department, University of Alberta. 











. 




















, 

; ; 




. 




■ ■ 










■’ r>:lj 


" o 5 























- 158 - 


Most students attend only one term ranging from 3 to 5 
months 5 although some return for several sessions. Not 
facts, not mental gymnastics, but enlightened action is 
the end to be attained from the folk school experience. 
The humble experiences of the farm, the home, the small 
community are regarded as having cultural value rather 
than books. Faculties are selected for their fitness 
to express themselves through the ’living word’ and to 
contribute to the co-operative endeavours of faculty 
and students. The cultural subjects of history, geo¬ 
graphy, sociology, economics, literature and nature 
study receive most attention. In Norway, Sweden and 
Finland the schools make use of vocational subjects but 
they emphasize the cultural rather than the practical 
value. Above all, teachers andstudents are friends. 

There is much singing. Techniques of teaching are of 
secondary consideration. The schools are usually owned 
by the principal, or by associations of individuals. 

There are no academic requirements for entrance, no 
examinations, no credits, no marks. The majority of 
those attending are young farm people. In Denmark... 
between one-fourth and one-third of the adult population 
of the farms have attended the folk schools. The 
educational experience has given an undergirding to the 
economic co-operatives, a development sometimes over- ^ 
looked by students of the Danish economic achievements. ” 

The folk school movement was a movement historical and 

national in the evolution of educational tendencies. The 

p 

’’International Hand Book of Adult Education” for 1929 reports 
that the movement has kept very closely to the original aims 
and practices instituted foy Kristen Kold, the first eminent 
teacher in the movement, whose school was founded in 1851. 

The stress has been upon inspirational instruction rather than 
upon direct occupational training. It has been a movement 
supplementary to all other forms of education, elementary, 
agricultural, technical and continuation schools. During the 
characteristic short period, of a few months, the folk school 
gives what it has to offer. It does not encroach upon the 


i 

milliard and Landis, op. cit, p. 161. 
^International Hand Book of -Mult Education, 
Association for Adult Edacation, "1 us - 11 
p. 62, ff. 


1929, World 
Square, London, 










■ 


' 

. 

■ 










. 




♦ 






















_ 




. 































159 - 


educational activities designed for definite training, and 
little time is taken from the lives of busy young adults from 
the farms. The folk school embodies the principle of its name. 

Mr. Donald Cameron- 1 - lists the following contributions 
of the Danish Folk: High School Movement: 

(1) It has assisted the economic co-operative movement 
in Denmark by inculcating a co-operative philosophy in the 
Danish peoole. 

(2) Out of the co-operative movement has come the high 
standard of living enjoyed by the people to-day in Denmark. 

(3) There has been a political movement for the establish¬ 
ment of religious and economic liberty. The ideal of liberty 

is fostered in the Folic High School. 

(4) The movement has had an important aesthetic value-- 
artists, poets andmusicians have been trained under the Folk 
High School principles. 

(5) Prominent political leaders have been trained under 
the movement. 

In regard to these Danish characteristics, however, we 
cannot ascribe unconditionally, all of their growth to the work 
of the Folic High Schools. There are, for example certain specific 
conditions in Denmark; namely, a population of small farmers 
who are not safe acting as independent agents in the buying and 
selling market, and Denmark*s security depended at an early time 
upon her ability to develop a foreign market. These latter 
influences would, no doubt, bring before the mind of the people 
of the country the knowledge of acute necessity to act together. 



Cameron. 


op. 


cit. 





- 160 - 


The Folk High School movement entered the battle of the 
nation*s problems and prepared the people to meet their diffi¬ 
culties with one accord. 

It is not beyond the realm of possibility that with the 
passage of time, there may exi r t a contentment all round in the 
rural homes of the Peace River District of Canada. That con¬ 
dition might be brought to pass through the inculcation of 
intelligent co-operation, culture and high citizenship based 
upon an appreciation of the wealth of the area of the community, 
its beauty, and with a further knowledge of the broader relation¬ 
ships of the world on the part of the people of the community. 

To this discussion of ''Resources for Community Education 1 ' has 
been added a considers; ion of the folk school movement, for in 
the elements of it, the writer believes, there throbs a life- 
force ■required in the foundation of our own progress in this 
northern frontier. In whatever directions the recent tendencies 
in the promotion of "community education" in the Peace Paver 
Block may lead, some features of the folk school movement might 
be woven into the structure* of' administration here existing. 

The principles of such a movement are to supplement and inspire, 
not to over-ride or complete. 


















- 
















, 

. 

* . 

♦ 



















- 161 - 


CHAPTER VII 

CONCLUSIONS: THE IMPLICATIONS OF OOMMONITY EDUCATION 

The birth-rate in the Province of British Columbia has 
remained almost stationary since 1913. Yet the enrollment of 
students in high schools in the province has increased steadily 
since that date.^ Hence there is a proportionate rise in the 
curve of school costs for secondary education in our province. 

With this rise in the cost of secondary education has come an 
increased, eagerness on the part of adolescents to attend high 
school. Since Confederation the percentage in school attend¬ 
ance made by all children attending schools in British Columbia, 
has risen from approximately 55% to 90%.^ 

These facts indicate progress in education. Yet many 
questions have been put to educational authorities, among which 
one of the most prominent is; is education worth the cost? 

Other questions are; are the learners being fitted for life 
and pork? Are individual bents and. tastes being attended? 

To what extent are the schools solving the social problems d.ue 
ignorance and supersticion? Is education keeping pace with 
science? Is there training for local and community development? 

.Many of the questions must, perhaps, be answered in the 
negative. The aspect is hopeful in so far as the world is moving 
towards educational reform. Educational systems of administration 
are being re-organized upon more efficient bases, while on the 
other end, subject-matter and methods of instruction are under 
the light of scientific investigation and experiment, 

^Flng, H. 3.; op. cit., p. 176. 

BCing, op, cit., p. 198. 










, . orr‘ . ■■ ' ■ ' ; r { ’ 

. 

...... '"j () ~~ - c: r ’• • 




- 


, on; ■ ; ‘ o b::.i oea r ’- 

. 

' 

■ 




■ 

■ 



















- 162 - 


There is evidence of co-operation among educational leaders. 

In whatever fields there is advance in the formulation of 
general educational philosophy and the expertness of its appli¬ 
cation, there is advance in the strengthening of foundation for 
social advancement. Education is a vital factor of each com¬ 
munity^ progress. 

As to the question of whether or not education is worth 
the price, there is no immediate answer. The answer must be 
found in fundamental nature of social advance. There are the 
matters of vocational adjustment, the uses and value of 
examinations, the problem of the curriculum, that of the develop¬ 
ment of personality and many other problems. In these matters 
the results of education are difficult to measure. But should 
our schools succeed in promoting the best development that man 
carries potentially, it would'be clear that educational costs 
would be justified. It is assumed that with progress in the 
development of educational theory, there will be corresponding 
improvement in the sphere of administration. It would appear 
inevitable that these phases of educational progress move hand 
in hand. 

In the course of this thesis, we’have touched upon 
several phases of modern educational programmes andsystems. 

It appears that none of these aspects can be divorced from the 
main subject in hand; namely, comunity education , ue shall 
refer iefly to these various phases, endeavouring to view 
them in the light of a unity of movement and. usefulness in 
application. 







. 

" jv 




















. 

■ 

, 










* 








- 







(1) We noted in discussing some of the current thoughts in 
educational literature, that there is, evidently, a many-sided 
movement to keep education in the march of progress. Much of 
the criticism of present-day education is loose and carelessly 
made. This may be due to a lack of co-ordination between lay 
men and professionals in education. It may be due to lack of 
co-operation among administrators combined with the failure of 
schools to make their influence felt in communities and in the 
world. Despite the criticism, however, there is ample evidence 
that, through experiment, psychological and sociological studies 
carried on by co-operative methods, in both administrative 
fields and education itself, much is being done to make education 
a. factor worthy of civilization. 

In this sphere curriculums are being revised. The move¬ 
ment in curriculum-reform is world wide. It is experimental in 
method. It is cautious. Teachers are being challenged to co¬ 
operate In the work. Where well-formulated systems of educational 
philosophy are lacking the challenge is the greater. In connection 
with British Columbians present occupation with curricular reform 
the Minister of Education, Dr. G. M. Weir, '- addressed an active 
committee of teachers on the revision committee as follows: 

' "Social reforms of all sorts encounter many obstacles, 
chief among which are group selfishness and unreasoning 
resistance to all change. Teachers have to fight in 
themselves the tendency to become smotic and. to ignore 
the implications of educational research. It is easier 
to settle things on the basis of opinion and. prejudice 
and precedent than on the basis of dispassionate, 
scientific enquiry. To combat su-oh handicaps on future 
progress, the schools of tomorrow must teach co-operation 
rather than selfish competition. Their principal task 


--Weir, Wow, "British Columbia Tes.chers on Trial", The 

B . C. Teach:r , February, 1936. 










' 




. 

. 

. r : - ' 




■ 




: . ' 1 , ' ■ ■ 






■ 








, ■ 


, 







-164- 


must be recognized to be that of socializing the youth 
of the nation. Ill-informed criticism must be replaced 
by criticism based on knowledge and trained insight. 

The necessity of securing for the state a critical and 
constructive attitude towards its institutions is so 
urgent that we cannot' afford to await the new generation 
whom we hope to equip in the ordinary schools; we must 
make such rovision for adult education as will in some 
measure indemnify the present adult generation for the 
imperfections of traditional educational methods and 
institutions. u 

The above summary of the challenge of ‘resent-day society 
to schools and the teachers, strikes upon the fundamental thoughts 
laid out in our discussion of current educational; movements. 

In addition to the problem of attaining a scientific attitude 
toward educational investigation, there is that of recognizing 
certain specific needs in each community’s life. The impli¬ 
cations of community education are seen to reach through the 
home and the pre-school child, to the school child of the 
elementary grades, the student of the secondary school and to 
the adult citizen who requires further knowledge with which to 
grapple with the complex problems of modern life, whether that 
life be in the urban centres, in the highly developed rural 
sections or on the farming frontiers. Education as never before 
is considering the needs of those engaged in various walks of 
life. Throughout this study we have emphasized the importance 
of the vitalizing of agriculture through the introduction of 
scientific teaching of that subject to the young adults of the 
frontier community which we have had under consideration." 

Some private schools of Europe and America, have forwarded the 
movement of making education an inspirational experience which 
would motivate interest in occupations and in intelligent study 


'See Chapters IT 


TV 

' 5 


and VII. 









. 



















































of the technique of these occupations. On the side of culture 
too, there is need for educational work and stronger emphasis. 
The final aim of all educational leadership would appear to be 
the integration of all worthy influences in the field of train¬ 
ing for life work and cultural pursuits. The outstanding need 
in the field of community education, as has been stressed 
frequently in this thesis, is co-operation and co-ordination, 
based upon a. knowledge of community needs. 

(2) In Chapter III we indicated the significance of the 
stresses of economic and geographic aspects of the Peace River 
settlement and that these have made educational problems in 
this frontier particularly difficult. At the outset of the 
movement of active settlement in the district, the pressing 
need for the establishment of new homes and the planting of 
first crops inevitably took first place with the settlers. Then 
these necessities were attended as well as might be, attention 
was given to the problem of education for the children. The 
nature of the trends of the development of education in the 
Peace Paver community must be considered in the light of the 
story of settlement. 

Under this heading (Chapters III and IV) we have noted 
the tendency of young’adults to ignore the potential worth of 
their community, to drift into the occupation of farming without 
first having been inspired to a. genuine interest in that occu¬ 
pation, without seeing in their occupation a future interesting 
study. One of the first effects of new educational programmes 
should be the socialization of studies, and in the case of adult 
education, to vitalize agricultural and related subjects in 










. 

























■ 














v-. 














* 

. 













relationship to the life of the community.^ 

(4) In connection with the study of individual careers 
in the Peace River community, we are faced with a serious 
problem of retardation in so far as progress in the ordinary 
school work is concerned. The external cause of this retard¬ 
ation is a complex of economic and. social factors pertaining to 
frontier life. The second point in this connection is the fact 
of the isolation of school studies from the practice of life. 

There is evidence of the greatest need for vocational guidance 

2 

■ nd for adult education. The new Administrative form of 
education in the district is providing for adult education in 
the form of night schools. The progress and selection in this 
field will help vitally to determine the nature of the attitudes 
and the wisdom of the second generation of settlers of the Peace 
River- Block. 

(5) The section on the socialization of school studies 
revealed some interesting and vital movements in present-day 
educational trends, whatever subjects remain on the curriculum 
of tomorrow will perforce be subjects which we might call, all 
together, the "social studies". Those subjects which cannot 
add to the richness of the culture and to the efficiency of 
action in society must give way to more useful subjects. The 
modern philosophies of education find in the so-called "social 
studies 11 material and criteria, with which to gage all subject- 
matter. The junior high school movement, by providing ex¬ 
ploratory courses, promises to do much towards the socializing 
of secondary school work and to provide a basis for educational 

"This principle would apply, we believe, to other types of 
c oinmunities. 

Chapter VI:h 





- 




a 




















' 

. 

. 




















-■ i:-; -"rr-iro'n 1 






-167- 


aims other than the Matriculation objective. That the discussion 
regarding the socializing of the curriculum is timely in British 
Columbia, is evident by the wealth of discussion provided by 
the contributors to "The B. C. Teacher", the production of 
the "King Report", and by the activity of the Council of Public 
Instruction and the leading teachers of the iorovince upon the 
vital task of curricular reconstruction. 

The reform of education in the elementary schools should 
be the most important basis of "Community Education". Extension 
education, correspondence education and night classes form a 
supplement to that given by the homes and the schools. ¥e see 
then, that the resources of community education are many and 
that the bases of progress in community education are dependent 
upon attitudes, philosophy .and general trends in the educational 
world. The spirit, behind education appears to be of significance. 
In this matter the Folk School movement" of Denmark has added 
an element of philosophy to the background of adult education. 

The extent to which the principles of the folk school might be 
usefully applied in our own community is not know. It may 
readily be seen, however, that from the spirit of the folk 
school comes a tremendous, inspiration to the youth of Denmark. 

The schools are interwoven with the whole co-operative movement 
in the agricultural life of that country. Such results, if not 
methods would be most beneficial if transplanted in the frontiers 
o f 7/e s tern C an ad a. 

(6) Lastly we would recall the fact that, in the progress 
of education in the Peace River Inspectorate of British Columbia, 
7he institution of consolidated administration of the school 

1 

See Chapter 7/1, 





- 




, 




. 

' 


, 

f ' ‘ ■ ' : ■ ; !r o f 




' 








> v iT,Y 

, 






- 











- 168 - 

system is fast becoming the background of increased facilities 
in community education. Through the eff Ni¬ 

dation, the basic principles of modern education can be better 
applied. The reform of taxation which the whole institution 
involves, means an eauaCl.iza.tion of the financial burden. In 
high school work and adult, education, especially, are its 
forces felt. The work of the Ufesith Unit is becoming an ed¬ 
ucational force. In all we may conclude that the ground is 
cleared for the greatest educational effort known to our 
country. We hope that the energy and patience of all concerned 
with education will not allow the present enthusiasm to die and 
that patient experiment and practice may carry our knowledge of 
training for life much further, not .'in the Peace fiver community 
alone, but in all communities faced with the problem of educating 
their young adults to find greater happiness in the rural setting. 




■ 

- 

. 

. 

. ‘ ■ vr 










-169- 


APPE Tr nJX T 


(Circular to Teachers in the Feace River Block) 

FORM A 


I, (a) How many students between the ages 14 to . 21, inclusive, 
attend your school? (b) How many of these ere over 16 
years of age? 


Boys (a) .......... 

Girls (a) . .. (b) 


V 


How many student's living in joxxv school district have 
left school (1933-1935) before completing their 
e1ementary e duc ation? 


(b) How many students, having left school, are carrying on 
educational work through correspondence study? 

Boys (a) , . ,,.. , (b) .,. 

Girls (a) ............... (b) -........ 


III. How many young people between the ages 13 and 30, 

inclusive, have registered for night classes in your district? 


Men 


Women 


IV. What, in your opinion, are the leading factors in motivating 
students to leave school before their completion of at least 
two years of high school work? 

Boys Girls 

(a) ........7....... (Finances) (a) ... (Finances) 


(b) ....(‘Distance from School) (b) ..... (Distance from School^ 

(c) ....(Inadequate course of (c) , . . . (Inadequate course of 


Stud^O Study) 

(d) ..(Poor advancement) (d) ... (Marriage) 


Mote: (1) The information supplied by the teachers is too 
sketchy and incomplete to be used statistacally. 
Many of the questions were not answered. 

(2) The replies recorded in (IV) were those made by 
the Dawson Creek High School. 


















■ 

- 












. . : 








T:v . 








,.. 

' 

.. ; , , . - • 











. . ♦ • . • 

. : 





























-170- 


FOEM B 

Prevocational and Vocational Phases 

I. How m: ny students attending your school, together with 

those engaged in study T , ’are regi 

with a definitely stated vocational aim? 

(1) Farming........ . (1) (4) Household.(Indefinite) 

(2) Professional. . .. (6) (5) Nursing.(2) 

(3) Technical.___ (7) 

II. How many of your students are engaged in part-time 
appr entic eship? 

Boys.. . . (7) Girls............ (Several) 

III. (a) How many between the ages of 18 and 25 are making 

agriculture their life-work? (?) 

■(b) How many of these have taken agricultural courses? (?) 

(c) How many have had at least two years of High School 

training with or without the agricultural training? (?) 

IV. Do you believe there is a need for a specially designed 
curriculum for rural districts? Why? 

(Yes. He give them no knowledge with which to make a living.) 

V. Estimate the plane of interest taken in your district 
towards the training of youth to become more progressive 
farmers. (Eight School Glasses) 

VI. If you were to institute a brief winter course for the 
training of young people in your community, what type 
would you suggest for, 


(1) Girls?. ....... (Personally, I offer French and Commercial 

Art. I suggest home .economics and commercial courses.) 

(2) Men?. (Commercial and technical, marketing. 


agriculture. I offer French, Commercial Art, Public 
Speaking.) 

Note: (1) The answers to Form B were still more sketchy. The 

knowledge was not readily available for many of the 
rur al t e a.cher s. 

(2) The answers recorded above are those of the Davos on 
Creek High School, 














- 


. 

— . * »•. * . , " * , , « ‘i'C. : 







. ..• 



. 

. : 

. . 

' 


, . » . .. 

y 











- 171 - 


FORM C 

SOCIAL. ATT) CULTURAL PHASES; 

j.. What methods of recreation prevail for boys and girls in 
your district during the summer va.ce.tion? 

(Athletic society—all sports) 

!!• Name the clubs and societies representing the activities 
of youth in your community? 'That is the . dm of each? 

(a) ...(Athletic Society) Aim*..(Athletics) 

(b) ...(C. G. I. T.) Aim*,.(Four standards) 

(c) ...(Night School) Aim...(Professional training. 

Trade training; 

III*What percentage of the homes in your district provide 
the following to an appreciable degree? 

(a) Mental recreation.....(0) 

(b) Training for responsibility. .. (0) 

(c) Training for healthful' living... ........ . .. (0) 

(d) Training in creative hobbies ........ . (0) 

(e) Training in the discovery of vocational interests. . (0) 

(f) Training in the practice of social custom.(0) 

IV. What are the standards in your community for public 
recreation? (Fair) 

V. That is your opinion concerning the standards of wholesome 
family life found in your district? (Fair) 

VI. What means are being taken to improve the vocational 
efficiency of the next generation of farmers in political 
and social action? (Night Schools 5 technical courses) 

VII. Have you any troublesome problems in discipline? (one) 

What are two chief causes of these (if any)? (Sympathetic 
parents 5 .encouraging the pupil to oppose school discipline 3 
general ignorance.) 

VIII. Please write on the bark of this sheet your own suggestions 
as to how the school might become more of a force for better 
cultural and social development. 

IX. Kindly mention any special cases of musical, dramatic or 
artistic leadership found in your district. (Teachers and 
Clergy only) 

Notes (1) The answers to the above are from the Dawson Creek 
High School. (Few of the rural teachers answered 
more than half of the questions asked.) 

(2) The above answers are made on a basis of conditions 
existing in the town district of Dawson Creek. 




















. 
















■ 













. 







‘ 










































- 172 - 


APPERDIX II 

Economy Derived from Conso 11 da11 o n -*- of Educational Administration 
in the P eace Hiver In orate Cl 935f?G) 

In 1935 a saving of more than $12,000 was made in the business 
administration of the system by: 

(1) Elimination of secretaries 1 allowances. 


(7) Elimination of yearly- audit fees. 

(3) Elimination of bank char res on individual school accounts. 

(4) Reduction in insurance rates by using blanket-insurance- 
system. 

(5) Standardizing janitors’ salaries. 

( 6 ) Buying supplies in bulk. 

(7) A general avoidance of waste of school funds through a 
proper system of budgeting and accounting. 

( 8 ) Increase In the general pass-lists by 10 percent, throughout 
all grades in the larger unit. This increase in the pass- 
list was effected by: 

(a) Careful selection of fourteen new teachers by the Registrar 
of The Teachers’ Bureau: 

(b) Elimination of four weak teachers: 

■(c) Adjustment of seven teachers to positions they could 
hold more suitably: 

(d) Increased esprit de corps by making the entire area a 
promotion area, for the teachers: 

(e) Increased efficiency through decreased mobility of teachers 

(f) Additional improvements in teaching equipment: 

(g) Adjustment of teachers’ salaries on a 
rendered": 

(h) Guarantee of annual increment for satisfactory work: 

(i) General • uickening of professional interest as shown by 
enrolment of over 80 per cent, of staff at summer schools 
and in home-reading courses. 



P ::r h . 01 


The Public Schools of the Province 











































































































- 173 - 


APPEHDIX III 

DEPARTMENT OF EDU CATION , VICTO RIA, B. C. 

IGg SCHOOL correspond: pc : s 

hotes on Technical end Vocations 1 Corner -oncence Couri er. 

These courses are not intended for regular High School 
students but rather for those who wish to increase their know¬ 
ledge of and efficiencjr in certain types of mechanical and 
skilled occupations. Theyaare regarded as adult courses and ere 
not given to persons under 16 years of age except for very special 
sons. On the other hand it , 

very desirable, for students who register for some of these 
vocational courses to include also one or more subjects chosn 
from the list of general subjects such as English, history, 
Mathematics, Science, Art, and the commercial subjects. There 
is no age limit nor any special qualifications demanded so long 
as it is evident that the student has the • bility to profit 
from the instruction offered. It is possible, on occasion, for 
a student to register for certain subjects' below the high school 
■standard whilst carrying on with a technical subject. This is 
particularly desirable for candidates who have not had a chance 
to complete the higher grades of the elementary or public school. 

The vocational courses offered by correspondence at the 
present time are divided into two groups as follows: 

(1) Courses' treated in not less than 20 papers each 
requiring approximately 10 hours’ work. These are 
called Major or 200 hour courses, 

(2) Courses covered in fen papers-- minor or 100 hour courses 

The tuition fee for a major course is $5.00 and for a 
minor $3.00. At least 50% of the tuition fee must be paid at 
time of registration and the balance on the completion of the 
first half of the-course. The registration fee is $2.00' paid 
at time of registration and annually thereafter in September. 
Tuition fees are not'paid a second time on the same course unless 
the student wishes to repeat the course or is required to do so. 

:ions governing all correspondence courses 
consult the official circular of General Information. 


The Major Courses 


The Minor Courses 


Me c hanic al Dr awing 
Building Construction 
Engine er ing Dr awing 
Pr ac tic al Tlectricitv 
Automotive engineering (Motor 
Mechanics) 
Prospector's Course in . 

ecology arc. Mining 
Steam Engineering (Third Class 
Papers) 

Lumber Grading 


Lettering and Display Card Writing 
Diesel Engineering 

(Mot given to candidates who 
have not already had the 
course in Automotive Engineering, 
or its requivalent.) 

Elementary Principles of Radio 
Salesmanship 




























. 





































■ 
















; 
































. 





- 174 - 


Students who have not had any training in technical 
drawing or drafting, and who wish to go thoroughly into any 
technical subject would be well advised to start out with the 
course in Mechanical Drawing. Students in Building Construc¬ 
tion are required to have standing in Mechanical Drawing. 

The drawing equipment and other supplies needed for these 
courses will be found listed in the general price list for 
text-books and supplies. Address all correspondence to 

J. 7 7. Gibson, 

Director of Eigh School 
Correspondence Instruction. 




. 






■ 






























- 175 - 


D5P,;-’?It'~ T 7 OF O'FTCAOrOIT, VICTOOXA, B. C. 

KI r -" SCHOOL IgD * r OCflgI<TVJ C COFHSES 

Notes on Courses Offered for 1 935 ; 

The following notes are supplementary to the information 
supplied in the Hue folder, regularly sent to all who make in¬ 
quiry concerning correspondence courses. 

Home >9conomi c s . 

A new course has been introduced, known as Home Economics 
(CC). The former was Course (A). 

!• Home Economics (A) : carries full credit as a science'subject 
for Junior Matriculation and Entrance to formal. It is com¬ 
plete in two grades, I and II and contains' altogether 44 
papers, combining both theory and . r act ice • It deals with 
Foods, Cookery, nutrition and Dietetics, Household Management 
and the Care of the Young Child. For those planning to teadh 
Home Economics it is a desirable subject mud for those plan¬ 
ning to enter the nursing profes'ion it is a required science, 
taken in conjunction with Chemistry. 

The text-books for the (A) course are as follows: 

F irst year: Foods and Home Making (Carlotta 'Greer)...$1.85 

Foods, Nutrition and Home I > nag erne nt 

Manual...., ....32 

Second year: same as above and also 

Dietetics for High Schools (Willard 1.... 1.60 

Gillett) 

2. H ome Economics (CC): carries the same credit as the (A) 

course and is covered by 48 papers 1 in two grades, I and II. 
The work of this course is almost equally divided between 
Foods, Nutrition and Home Management on the one hand and a 
study of clothing, sewing, !esigning and applied Art in 

the other. The required text-books for the (CC; course are 


as follows: 

Foods and Home Management (Greer)......................$1.85 

Foo "s. Nutrition and Home Management Manuel. ........... .32 

Art in Home and Clothing (Trilling and Williams). 2.00 


The se bo ok s ar lirec II. 

Note: Other names sometimes used for Home Economics are: 

Domestic Science, Household Science, Domestic Economy. 

This subject may be taken by young women who are not interested 
in High School Credits, - hen taken for High School Credit 
(Junior Matriculation or Normal Entrance). Home Economics (A) 
must be accompanied by Chemistry. It can be taken in either 
Grade X and XI or In XI and XII. It can be started in Grade 
X with General Science, instead of Chemistry, in case the 
student did not take General Science In Grade IX, in which 
Chemistry woul 1 follow In Grades ICE and XII. Students who 

^Time reouired to commiete all the work of a naper, .reading. 

stmd _r , - ^Eical ~ and writ n.: or exerce - : e from 

8 to 9 hours. 







































, 

























. 






. 

; . .- . * 

' 










■ 

. 












. : 





























- 176 - 


complete all of the work in any subject at the end of 
Grade XI are allowed to take the final public examination 
in such subject at the end of that .grade. This lightens 
the load for the final year, Grade XII. 

Please note that General Science is the only science 
that can be taken in Grade IX. All the other science 
subjects—Physics, Chemistry, Home economics, Biology, 
Agriculture, Geography—may -not be taken before 
Grade X, 

""ote on Commercial Cours r r . 

The blue feller , entitled General Information nelatiny to 
Courses indicates the subjects that may be taken for a full High 
school Commercial Course leading to the Commercial Diploma, 
which calls for a wide range of subjects and a total of 120 units 
of High School credit. 

The first thing then to be decided is whether the student 
plans to complete the full jeer course for the Diploma. If not 
then how much work is he able to do and how long can he spend 
in doing it? 

Those who decide on a partial Commercial Course usually 
make the mistake of asking for too narrow a course. Some wish 
to take only Shorthand and Typewriting, not realizing that a 
stenographer who has not had a good general education is most 
unsatisfactory in any important business or office position. 

For all partial students a thorough training in English 
is of first importance and next come Social Studies (History and 
Civics), Health, Geography and Arithmetic. All students taking 
Bookkeeping should take Arithmetic. Other subjects that may be 
taken for credit are Art, Algebra, Geometry and French. 'Then 
desired it is possible to include a technical or vocational 
.subject according to the wishes or needs of the student (see 
special folder on Technical and Vocational courses^. Students 
in any kind of commercial course would be expected to include 
Typewriting which means they must have the use of a. typewriter. 

The best type of machine for instruction purposes is the standard 
office type rather than a special or portable type. At all events 
the machine must have the standard keyboard. It is possible to 
get a reliable rebuilt office type for about $40.00 to $45.00 and, 
when desired, arrangements can be made to purchase it on a monthly 
payment basis of $5.00. 

If a student is really in earnest and will work faithfully 
through the commercial correspondence course in Shorthand and 
Typewriting I and II he should be able to do all ordinary work 
in stenography but. to become really proficient Secretarial 
■practice I and II is necessary. Students who have completed a 
general high school course are not required to repeat any’of 
their high school subjects in going on with commercial training. 
They can work on the special'-sublets--Bookkeeping, Shorthand 




















- 












' 


■ 

■ 
















. 

. 

, 


















- 177 - 


and Typewriting only, or they might add one or more Senior 
I atricul at ion subje cts. 

In Bookkeeping I and II and in Accounting Practice I 
and II which follows it, special ruled business paper is re¬ 
quired in selected sets for Journal, Ledger, Cash 3ook ! , Balance 
Sheets, etc. Students should get particulars from.the Director 
with reference to these different sets of ruled forms. These 
courses, like all of our correspondence courses, may be started 
at an time of the year andstudents are permitted to send in 
Work continuously throughout the entire year as our school 
never closes. 


Lte for further information, application forms, price 
lists, etc., to the Director of High School Correspondence 
Instruction, Department of Education, Victoria., . C. 































. 

' 


























- 178 - 


APPENDIX IV - BIBLIOGRAPHY 


JOURNALS 


1« T each erg College Record , Columbia University, N. Special 
emphasis upon the socializing of school studies. Good. 

2. C.3.T.R.A. Review, Toronto. Quarterl . Agricultural 
economics; Sociology of agriculture. 

3. The School Review. Discussions of miscellaneous teaching 
problems. The modern curricular aspects. 

4. The Social Studies . Modern aspects of education from the 
point of view of the "social studies". Not technical. 

5. The School s Toronto University School of Education. A magazine 
for general inspirational reading on practical teaching pro¬ 
blems. Two publications—Secondary and Elementary editions. 

The B. C, T eacher . The official organ of the Bri 
Teachers 1 Federation. 'On educational questions, it is the 
voize of the teachers of the province. The B. C.' Teacher was 
of invaluable service in bringing together in this study the 
philosophy of education in British Columbia. 

7. The Clearing House . A monthly journal emphasizing the results 
of latest trends in educational' progress, in the United States. 
The articles are stimulating and clear, usually ba:sed upon 
scientific experiment. This journal was of the greatest 
value to the writer. New York University, (13,50). 

8 . J ournal of Educational Research . 8 Veil .Known). 


REPORTS 

1 , Sixty-Fourth Annual Report of the Public Schools of 

R: Utlsh Columbia, . (1934-1935) 

2, King H. B.s School Finance in British Columbia . This 

Report is probably one of the outstanding educational reports J . 
in the history of Canadian Education. Banfield, Victoria. (-•!•• 

3 , Folic High Schools and The Co-operative Movement . Phamplet in 
possession of the Extension Department, U. of A. 

4 # A griculture in Denmark, Royal Society in Denmark (is29). 

5. Aar 1 cul tur el Cc-orer r 5. on in , Denmark , lashington, .a. (Is 24;. 

6 . R eport of Revision Committee ; Educational Finance Administration 
Commission (Victoria, 3. C., 1935), 


























































- 

. 






























- 

' 




























































- 179 - 


BOOKS, GENERAL 

1. Allport, F: "Social Psychology", (Houghton * ifflin Co.) 

2 . Boyd, William: "Towards a New Education", (] pf, London, 19"9) 
Report of the Hew Education Fellowship, 1929. 

3. Dewy, John: "Democracy and Education". .Tell known for its- 
expounding of Pi tism in Education. Very stimulc bii £ reading 

4. ’ ' n e- ■ ' - ■ 'oo 1 :, 1 " 91 . T v htT 

in Education in Europe. 

5. Finney, R. L. and Zelney, L. C.: "Introduction to Educational 
Sociology" (Heath, H. Y., Chicago, London, 1935). A recent 
hook of very readable character revealing the results of much 
experimental work. Good for rural teachers. 

6 . JJyde, H. F. : "Public Secondary Education in Canada" (Bureau 
of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University). A ' 
careful analysis of conditions existing in relation to quali¬ 
fications of teachers, t of high schools, ex 

etc., in Canadian Secondary Education. Deals with the small 
school problem; contains definite recommendations. 

7. International Handbook for Adult Education (World Association 
for Adult Education, lo Russell Square, London.) 

8 . Johnstone, Lukin: "Beyond, the Rockies^(Dent). An interesting 
travelogue. 

9. Landis, B. Y. and Willard, J. D.: "Rural Adult Education", 

., 1931 ). 

book outlining the resources of community education. 

10 . Ragsdale, C. E.: "Modern Psychologies and Education", 

(MacMillan, 1932 ). 


11. Thorndike, E. L.: " Idult Education". Ability t learn at all 
ages, discussed on a basis of expert 

, teamen, M: "H 

(John Day, H.Y. , 1926). Exposition of the operation of out¬ 
standing experimental schools in Britain and Europe. 


MISCELLANEOUS 

1. Lectures in Education 54, (TJ. of A.) i 

2. Reports from the Office of the Inspector of Schools,Pou pe. 

3. Reports from the Peace River Block Hews. 

4. Letters from pioneer settlers of the Peace River area. 

5. Reports of Farmers 1 Institutes. 









' < ■ 



















• • : 

: • • c 








. 


' 


• . : 












. . ; 














. : 











. 




































































