
For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Library of the University of Alberta, L*L 


Peake, Heverend Frank A 
The beginnings of thm 
of Edmonton 1^75-1913.8 






0JC MM* 

awnmw 
































' 














































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/beginningsofdiocOOfran 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE B EGIN NINGS Off T HE DIOCESE Off EDMONTON , 
1875 - 1 915 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE 
STUDIES IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF 
THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF ARTS. 


Faculty of Arts 


By 

The Reverend Frank A. Peake , 

B.A. (Saskatchewan),L.Th.(Emmanuel), 

B.D. (Church Divinity School of the Pacific) 


Edmonton, Alberta. 
August 9th, 1952. 








Contents 


Chapter 

One 

- 

Port Edmonton, 1795 

- 

p. 6 

Chapter 

Two 

- 

The Beginnings of the Church 
of England in Western Cahada 

- 

P.<? 

Chapter 

Three 

- 

William Newton, Priest and 
Philosopher, 1828-1910• 

- 

p.iX 

Chapter 

Pour 

- 

Newton of Edmonton, 1875. 

- 

P* y 7 

Chapter 

Five 

- 

Indian Missions, 1875-1886. 

- 

p.«73. 

Chapter 

Six 

- 

The Diocese of Saskatchewan, 
1874-1888. 

- 

p««2y. 

Chapter 

Seven 

- 

Newton and the Community 

- 

p. 

Chapter 

light 

- 

Newton & his parishioners. 

- 


Chapter 

Nine 

- 

The Diocese of Calgary, 
1888-1913. 

- 

p. 

Chapter 

Ten 

- 

The Church in Edmonton, 

- 

p. So. 

Chapter 

Eleven 

- 

The Rural Missions. 

- 

p. 

Chapter 

Twelve 


The Edmonton Mission of the 
Archbishops 9 Western Canada 
Pund. 


p./3^ 

Chapter 

Thirteen - 

The Formation of the Diocese 
of Edmonton, 1913. 

- 

P . t&r 

Chapter 

Fourteen - 

Conclusion. 

- 

p. 



A P 

PENDICES 



I 

- 

Bibliographical Note. 

- 

p *•2.0 f 

II 

— 

Letters and Reports from Canon 
Newton and the Bishop of 
Saskatchewan to the S.P.G. 


p • o Z. 

III - 

Parishes in the Diocese of 

Edmonton at its formation 

- 

P.2l6 

IY 

- 

Records of some parishes 


p. 





Abbreviations 


Newton 

EB 

1x0 om 

S.P.G. 

S.P.C.K. 

A.W.C.F. 


Twenty Years on the Saskatchewan 


Edmonton Bulletin, folloi/ed by 
date of issue. 


Minutes of the Executive Committee, 
Synod of the Diocese of Calgary, 
followed by date of meeting. 


Society for the Propagation of 
the G-ospel. 


Society for the Promotion of 
Christian Knowledge. 


Archbishops 1 Western Canada Fund. 







I ntroductory Note 


In undertaking this study it had been the writer*s 
hope to produce a comprehensive and definitive description 
of the steps leading to the formation of the Diocese of 
Edmonton, together with histories of the constituent 
parishes. This was an excursion into a hitherto unexplored 
field in which the resources are rich but completely 
unorganized. Extensive research, carried on during the 
past two or three years, has convinced him and his 
Eaculty Advisor (whose own researches in this field are 
not inconsiderable) that such an undertaking is much 
greater than was at first supposed. The following work, 
therefore, makes no claim to be complete or exhaustive. 

It does attempt to present an accurate and representative 
study of the beginnings of the Church of England in this 
area as far as those studies have gone. 














. 

. 

. 

. 








. 




. 







* 























Chapter On e 
FORT EDMONTON. 

Edmonton had its origin as a fur trading post at the very 
end of the eighteenth century when the Hudson’s Bay and North 
West Companies were locked in a life and death struggle for the 
monopoly of the western fur trade. Both companies discovered at 
about the same time that the spot where Edmonton now stands was 
not only a profitable source of beaver but potentially useful 
as a M gateway to the North.** 

In 1795 Angus Shaw established the first Fort Augustus for 
the North West Company, on the left bank of the North Saskatchewan 
river, about a mile and a half above the confluence with the 
Sturgeon. William Tomison followed and built Edmonton House, 

the first of the name, within a mjasket shot of the rival post. 
Between September, 1801, and September, 1806, these establish¬ 
ments were abandoned and new posts built on the flat below where 
the Parliament Building now stands. In 1810, Edmonton House 
was removed to the mouth of the White Mud River where, according 
to the late Professor A. S. Morton 1 , the remains may still be 
seen, but three years later it was brought back to the second 
site. After the union of the two companies in 1821 Fort Augustus 
was closed and Edmonton House continued. 

It had always been the policy of the Hudson’s Bay Company 
to lay a certain emphasis upon the religious duties of its 
representatives and employees, especially in the matter of 
example to pagan Indians, As a rule the officers of the Company 
seem to have been men with at least some Christian convictions, 

1. Arthur Silva Morton, A History of th e Canadian Wes t to 1870-71 
LONDON: Thomas Nelson & Sons, Limited JnTd,T, p.51Xn. 















7 

and from the earliest days they were instructed 

to have public prayers and reading of the Scriptures 
• • . wheresoever you shall be resident, at least on 
the Lord’s days. As also to order the severall 
chiefs in each Factory under your command to do the 
same, That wee who profess to be Christians may not 
appear more barbarous than the poor Heathens them¬ 
selves who have not been instructed in the knowledge 
of the tru God. This is what we have formerly 
directed, and have sent over the proper books for the 
use of the Factory, to wit, the Common Prayer book, 
the Bible, and the Book of Homilies. • • • '2 

When the two concerns were amalgamated John Rowand, formerly 

a clerk in the service of the North West Company, became Chief 

Trader at Edmonton. In 1825 he was advanced to the much-coveted 

post of Chief Factor and was, for a long time, superintendent of 

the Saskatchewan district. As he was a Roman Catholic 2 3 (although 

more in theory than in practice) it is probable that the 

"Common prayer book • • • and Book of Homilies 11 were but rarely 

produced. 

In 1840 the officers of the fort welcomed a Wesleyan 
Methodist missionary in the person of the Reverend Robert 
Terrell Bundle. 4 * He arrived on September 18th,, 1840,, and was 
responsible for ministrations in the area between Edmonton and 
Rocky Mountain House. On instructions from the higher officers 
of the Company he was furnished with canoes, provisions, 
interpreter, and house, without cost. Bundle began his 
mission in Edmonton residing in the fort as the guest of Chief 
Factor Rowand. 


2. op. cit. p.81 

3. A. G. Morice, A History of the Catholic Church in 

West e rn Canada , Englich Edition, 1910, Vol. I, p.164. 

4. A. 3. Morton, A History of the Ca na dia n West to 1870-71 , 

Londons Thos* Kelson & Sons, Ltd. fn.d.) p.8!0n 
















The Church of Rome established a mission at Lake Saint 


Ann in 1842 when the Reverend Jean Baptiste Thibeault, O.M.I. 
then a missionary at Red River was sent by Bishop Provencher 
to further the interests of his Church in the North West. 

The Mission of Saint Albert, later to become the seat of the 
Roman Catholic Bishopric, was founded by the Reverend Albert 
Lacombe, O.M.I,, on January 14th, 1862, 










• •: • • • V > • . .V . 

• ' ' 




. • ... t i : ' :• 




o..! ;i0,: 



























. 













Chapter Two 


CL 


THS BBGIHHIHG 3 Off T HE CHURCH Off ENGLAND IN WESTERN C^fADA, 

Organized life in western Canada began for the Church of 
England in 1320 when the Reverend John West, curate of White 
Hoding, Essex, volunteered for service and was sent by the 
Church Missionary Society to the Red River Settlement. For four 
years he ministered to the settlers, built a Church and parsonage, 
organized and taught in a school, and undertook missionary 
journeys to the north and west* 

Hot until 1844 was an episcopal visit made to the settlement. 
In that year the Right Reverend George Jehoshaphat Mountain, 
Suffragan Bishop of Montreal, who afterwards became Bishop of 
Quebec, made the journey of more than 3,600 miles at the request 
of the Church Missionary Society* According to Dr* Vernon 5 
the trip was made by the route of the fur traders, up the Ottawa, 
over into Lake Hipis sing, down the French River into Georgian 
Bay, by the Sault and across Lake Superior to Fort William, 
then by the Kaministikwia, Rainy Lake and the Lake of the Woods, 
Winnipeg River and Lake, to the Red River and Red River Settle¬ 
ment. The voyage was made in a new birch-bark canoe, thirty- 
six feet long, manned with fourteen paddles, eight French 
Canadians and six Iroquois Indians* The bishop was accompanied 
by his chaplain, the Reverend P* J* Maning, and a servant* 

He arrived in Red River in June and found four churches, Saint 
John’s, Saint Paul’s, Saint Andrew’s, and Saint Peter’s, attended 
by seventeen hundred persons, and nine schools with four 
hundred and eighty-five pupils* He confirmed 846 persons, 
and 454 communicated at the services he held, almost daily, 
among the settlers* 6 

5* Reverend C* W. Vernon, T he Old Church in th e Hew Dominion , 
LOHDOHs 3.P.C *K*, 1929, p.134. 

6* The figures are those given by the Reverend Robert Machray, 
in his Life of Robert Machray, Torontos Macmillan, 1909, p.116 


































/> 










» J 



















By this time it was apparent that a bishop was needed for 
the west. Bishop Mountain’s vision and the anxious hopes of the 
missionary clergy and settlers found their fulfillment on 
WhitSunday, 1849 when, in Canterbury Cathedral, David Anderson, 
a Scholar of Exeter College, Oxford, and then Tutor of Saint 
Bee’s Theological College, Cumberland, was consecrated as first 
Bishop of Rupert’s Land. The endowment of the new See was 
provided by a bequest from James Leith, a former Chief Factor 
of the Hudson’s Bay Company. To it the Company promised to add 
a yearly grant of £300. Bishop Anderson was succeeded, in 1865, 
by John Machray who was to become first Metropolitan of Rupert’s 
Land, and later, first Primate of All Canada. 

Shortly after his consecration Bishop Machray made a tour 
of his far-flung diocese and came to the conclusion that one 
bishop could never hope to administer such a vast area. Within 
ten years he had been able to complete the arrangements for 
the consecration of three more bishops, John Horden for Moosonee, 
William Carpenter Bompas for Athabasca, and John McLean for 
Saskatchewan. Our concern is with the last-named. 

John McLean had for many years been the friend and 
colleague of Bishop Machray, As rector of Saint John’s Cathedral, 
as Warden of Saint John’s College, and as Archdeacon he had been 
a power for good in the diocese. On May 3rd, 1874 he was 
consecrated, with Bompas, in Lambeth Parish Church, After his 
consecration he spent the summer in England collecting funds for 
his diocese which he described as ’’bounded on the east by the 
Province of Manitoba, on the west by the Province of British 
Columbia at the summit of the Rocky Mountains, on the south by 
the International boundary line between Canada and the United 
States, and on the north by the Aurora Borealis and world without 








t 




t 




' - 










' 























^ . 






V ' 




- 






. 













• ... .... 

• . 

V: , 




m 


end." 

On his return to Canada Bishop McLean was able to attend 
the meetings of the eighth session of the Provincial Synod of 
Canada, which were held in Montreal from September 9th to 16th, 
1874. The Synod sermon, on that occasion, was preached by the 
Reverend R. W. Norman, M.A., and seems to have had a strong 
missionary emphasis. Then, on Thursday, September 10th, the 
Bishop of Saskatchewan was afforded an opportunity to address 
the Synod. According to the Synod Journal 7 he gave °a brief 
account of the position and prospects of the Church in his 
diocese and asked for young men to accompany him to that field 
of labour. On closing his address his Lordship was warmly greeted 
by the Housed 

The missionary emphasis of the Synod was further reflected 
by the decision to set aside November 30th as a day of inter* 
cession for missions, and by the appointment of a Joint Committee 
of both Houses "to consider and report on the formation of a 
Board to conduct missionary operations in British North America 
and in heathen countries not under the British Crown • » . 
whereby missionary work may be promptly begun and successfully 
carried out to the saving of lost men and the extension of our 
Divine Redeemers kingdom. ..." 

As a result of the Bishop^ appeal two priests volunteered 
for service in the new diocese, the Reverend J. Barr who was 
assigned to Port Carlton, and the Reverend Dr. William Newton 
whom we shall frequently meet in these pages as the pioneer 
missionary in the Bdmonton district. 


7. Por this information I am indebted to the Reverend Canon 
A. R. Kelley, M.A., Secretary of the Archives Committee of 
General Synod. 







Chapter Three 

WILLIAM HBWPONf PRIEST AND PHILOSOPHER 


■a 


William Newton, who laboured valiantly in Edmonton and 
district for nearly thirty years, was, in many ways, an 
enigma - shy but adventurous, scholarly yet anxious to do his 
part in surroundings that made study difficult and scholarship 
for the most part unappreciated. With it all he possessed a 
remarkable and almost prophetic insight concerning the future 
development of the country to which he had come. 

He was born in Halstead, Essex, in 1828, the son of a 
weaver, presumably poor, and baptized in the parish church of 
Saint Andrew on April 13th, 1830, as were his brother and sisters 
after him. 8 Halstead is described by one writer as being a 
place ”by no means hiding its diminished head on a height where 
a big Church and Market Place proclaim this another of the old 
cloth towns that keeps up some of its industry in . . • silk 
manufacture. But modern mills are a poor substitute for such 
old houses and inns as have been disappearing at Halstead though 
the gabled 1 White Hart 1 still stands. Even three quarters of a 
century ago, the Quaker poet Bernard Barton could hardly recog¬ 
nize the town at which he had been apprenticed to his uncle for 
seven years. It had itself to blame for the first check in its 
prosperity when the local trade jealousy turned away the Dutch 
cloth-makers. In George Ill’s reign Halstead got a new lease 
of prosperity from the straw-plaiting industry and the making 
of straw hats introduced into the neighbourhood, to flourish 


8. This information comes from the Reverend A. W. Swallow, B.Sc., 
Vicar of Halstead, in a letter of September 8th, 1950. In a 
more recent letter, June 5th, 1952, he says that they have 
no records of Confirmations except ’’for the last forty years 
or so.” 























for nearly a century, then to wither away as quickly as it grew. 

So the population of Halstead goes on shrinking though its 

q 

name is said to proclaim it a seat of health.” 

Newton was always extraordinarily reticent about himself 
and his family* and for that reason it is difficult to discover 
much of his early life. According to one who worked with him 
during his ministry in Edmonton:^ 0 

He did say that he was the son of very poor 
parents and that, even as a child he was small 
of stature. One day, during his childhood, he 
was playing by a bridge when two ladies came 
along in a carriage and, noticing him, stopped 
to speak to him. Dr. Newton did not say who 
they were but conveyed the impression that they 
were wealthy, of Portugese origin, and connected 
with a wine importing firm. At all events they 
got in touch with his parents and undertook to 
provide for his education. 

It is generally thought that he went abroad for his university 
education and assuredly, according to his contemporaries in 
Edmonton, he was steeped in German philosophy. He was always 
credited with a Doctorate of Philosophy, a degree virtually 
unknown in England at that time although common enough in the 
German universities. Although it was almost certainly genuine 
enquiry has not yet revealed its origin.™-*- On one occasion, but 
only one so far as is known, on a transfer of property in 1901, 

_ ip 

Hewton described himself as a Doctor of Divinity• In 1880 


9. A# R. Hope-Moncreiff, Essex, LONDON, A. & G. Black, Limited, 

1926, p.204. 

10. The Venerable Robert Connell. Archdeacon Connell met Newton 
first in 1894 and saw a good deal of him during the next few 
years. When Newton retired to Victoria, B.&., Connell was 
rector of Saint Luke's, Cedar Hill, in which parish Newton 
went to live. 

11. Enquiry was made of the Registrar of the University of Hiidal“ 
berg with the request that he check the lists of other German 
universities. The only reply received was that Newton's 

name did not appear on the lists of that university. 

12. "William Newton: Pioneer Missionary," by L. G. Thomas, says 
that "a photostat of this certificate of transfer is in 
the possession of the late Mr. Ernest Brown of Edmonton." 















. 

. .. 


, . . . . 

i 


. 

• ♦ 

. - * .. 

.. 

. 

* t 

• • • - .. .... V-. 






. .■ 

■ 

* ■' . .... 




• • c 1 . . ... .... . ) .■ . ■ ) 

1 .• ■ • • . ■ i • . •; ... , , . 










* t '• _. ** 

* ' 

. 

. 

. 

■ • 






' 









the Philosophical Society of Great Britain conferred its 
membership upon him. 13 

According to Archdeacon Connell he was trained for the 
Unitarian ministry but exercised his office among the Congre- 
gationalists of England. 14 Towards the end of that period he 
published two books of sermons, Studies in Divine Thi ngs (1863) 
and Fresh Religious Thoug hts (1865). The first was written from 
Bensham, Co. Durham, and suggests a pastorate in or near New¬ 
castle.^ Concerning the latter a letter from the Department 
of Printed Books of the British Museum says in part: 1 ^ 

the prefa.ce to one of his books is dated Bushey, 

1865 and reference to a Hertfordshire Directory 
of that date reveals that a Mr. William Newton 
lived at The Academy* Paddock Road, Bushey at 
that time• 


13. "Edmonton Bulletin” (hereafter cited as IB), Jan. 10th,,1881s 
”Lately the Philosophical Society of Great Britain has, un¬ 
solicited, conferred the honour of membership on the Rev. Dr* 
Newton, clergyman of this vicinity.” An enquiry addressed to 
the Society elicited only a casual reply, Jan• 23rd, 1952, 
denying all knowledge of Newton or his works. Correspondence 

in the columns of the "Spectator 11 during March and April, 1952, 
suggested that the Society was not a particularly reputable 
institution and sought to bolster its own doubtful prestige 
by conferring its "honours” on those who neither desired, nor 
sought them. 

14. Ven. Robert Connell, "Forty Years Ago: Recollections of Canon 
William Newton, 11 Church Messen ger, Diocese of Edmonton, 

Vol• IV, No. 65, September, 1935, (Cited henceforth as Connell) 

15. L. G. Thomas, in his unpublished paper, "William Newton: 

Pioneer Missionary," quotes from Studies ih Divine Th ings : 
"Newcastle is no better off for the size of its population 
in any respect and a careful observation would lead any 
intelligent and impartial person to the conclusion that for 
vice and crime this district was not behind any other in 
England." Mr. Thomas then adds, "The only copy of this 
volume of sermons available seems to be in the British 
Museum. As the reader to whom I owe this quotation observes, 
he must have had a charge in Newcastle for he would ’surely 
not be so sweeping as a mere weekend visitor.’" 

16. August 27th, 1951. 


























a 

; 

. 

•!. ■ i ... •' . ■ ' X 

- 

e 


e' - 




* 












. 














t ' 
















■ f"' ! « 

•'.. .. w i 


.. . ■ 

* • 




. 







. 

.. ; . ■ e . 7 ; : : ■ - ' 











16 


At some time during his Nonconformist ministry Newton 
married and according to report his wife was the daughter of 
a Spanish family, and apparently a woman of means. They had 
nine sons of whom the youngest, George, died in 1949.^ On 
October 9tfe, 1870 he was ordained deacon by the Right Reverend 
A. N. Bethune, second Bishop of Toronto, and advanced to the 

i Pi 

priesthood in the following year. 

Newton then spent three years at Rosseau, which is now 
in the Diocese of Algoma, and speaks of beginning the Rosseau 
Mission and building the church there. 19 While there he bought 
the point known as “The Elephant 1 s Head, tt and later as “Newton’s 
Point,* 1 and on it built a house known as **The Hermitage.** This 


17. Mr, Thomas* paper contains the following information in a 

footnote concerning the names of Newton’s sons by his first 
marriage, 11 (l) Prank Herbert, (2) Ernest Alwyn, (3) Leonard 
Plato, (4) Ralph Melville, died in infancy and buried in 
England, (5) Seville Martineau, (6) Albert Angus, who 
joined his father in Edmonton, (?) Louis Victor, died at 
the age of 19 and buried in Lindsay cemetery; noted in the 
M Edmonton Bulletin, 11 July 4th, 1885, (8) Sterling “Jeggo,” 

(9) George Harris (Henry), born in Lindsay in 1871. None 

of Newton’s sons survive but there appear to be numerous 
descendants living in Ganada and the United. States. Some of 
the baptismal names are of special interest® “Jeggo“ (Jago ?) 
was evidently his first wife’s maiden name and perhaps 
,f Seville* 1 points to the place of origin of her family. 

Seville was later Mayor of Prince Rupert, B.G. “Plato” and 
“Martineau” were thinkers much admired by Newton. 

18. ”0n the ninth of October last in Saint Stephen’s Church in 
this city (Toronto) three were ordained deacons and five 
were admitted to the priesthood. Two of those admitted to 
Deacon’s Orders were sent to supply vacancies, and the other 
has undertaken an extensive and laborious task in the new 
settlements round the shore of Lake Rosseau in the County 

of Simcoe. n Extract from the Bishop’s Charge, 1&7X; 
made available to me by the Secretary to the Bishop of 
Toronto, August 11th, 1950. 

19. Newton, Willi ami, Twenty Y ears, o n the Sask atchewan, 

LONDON; Elliot Stock, 1897, p.146. 

Henceforth cited as Newton. 












. 











. 














house still stands as part of a larger house occupied toy summer 
visitors. Newton seems to have toeen well liked tooth toy settlers 
and visitors and even today is apparently remembered with affec¬ 
tion. He was a man of diminutive stature, not more than five 
feet tall, and many stories about him turn on this point. At 
Rosseau it is said that he had his table legs cut off so that 
ordinary people could not get their knees under it. There is a 

vague memory among the old-timers that he held some services at 

. . . ' 20 
his house. 

The Journal of the Toronto Diocesan Synod represents Newton 
as still toeing at Rosseau in 1873 tout he must have left shortly 
afterwards, perhaps when the Diocese of Algoma was set up in that 
year, because from the "register of the Diocese of Huron it 
appears that the Reverend William Newton, Ph.D., was missionary- 
in-charge of the Mission of Trinity Church, Howard Township, 
in the county of Kent, in 1873-74. There is an entry in 1875 
under Dr. Newton’s name saying, ’Not on Clergy Lis t„* rt It was 

from this parish that he went in September, 1874, to the sessions 
of the Provincial Synod at Montreal. One would imagine that he 
can only have gone as a visitor, having been in priest’s orders 
for barely three years* At that time he heard and responded to 
the appeal of Bishop McLean. Of his long and difficult journey 
west he tells us himself in his book, Twenty Ye ars o n the 
Saskatchewan * 

20. I owe this information to the courtesy of the Reverend Canon 
W. T. Swainson, Rector of Rosseau. Newton’s table is now in 
the possession of the Reverend J. S. Ditchtourn, Rector of 
Bala, Ontario, whose father, Henry Ditchtourn, seems to have 
bought the property from Newton. 

21. Letter from the Venerable W. A. Townshend, Sept. 5th, 1950. 

















... • • ...... ; . 


- X .. . ' * • 


; ... '..v' . .. , . ■ ■ 

. . 


■ 

-■ 





. 





. .. j e . 


, . jo J . iii 

. . • . ; * - ■ • 




. 


. , ; .L'y. . •. .■ tjx 










i 




* . . ... 




! > 




. !S . ' i. ..... . X i . O', 

* 


. _ .. ■ . 

. 




.. • 

. - ■ . e ■ • r . t ' 

. '• 









n 


Chapt e r Pou r 

HEWTOH Off EDM.OHTOH* 1875 

The Edmonton to which Hewton came was scarcely more than a 
community surrounding and supported by the Hudson’s Bay Company’s 
fort, although this institution was rather more imposing than 
the average Company post* The fort itself, headquarters of the 
Saskatchewan district, stood about two hundred feet from the 
northern end of the present high level bridge, near the site of 
the Parliament Building© It was hexagonal in shape with an area 
300* by 200* fenced by a twenty foot palisade. It was more than 
a trading post since here York boats were built, and pemmican was 
packed in leather bags for the Mountain and Mackenzie river 
brigades* In addition, wheat* barley, and vegetables were grown, 
and Fort Saint Ann was maintained as an auxiliary fort for the 
supply of fish. The Edmonton fort was demolished in 1915 by 
those who mistakenly thought to improve the grounds of the 
Parliament Buildings. Hearby was the great house of Chief 

Factor Howand, a building sixty feet by seventy, standing three 
stories high* with real glass wind.ows, a decided luxury in that 
day and place© 

In spite of the size and importance of Fort Edmonton 
Dr. newton did not receive much co-operation from the local 
agents of the Hudson’s Bay Company almost certainly because of 
their strong Methodist leanings* a fact of which he complains 
strongly both in his book 22 and in hie first letter to the 
Bishop* 23 intimating that he would gladly have returned had 
circumstances permitted© He was* however* accomodated in the 
fort for a few days on arrival but shortly obtained the use of 
a partly finished log building in which he and the Barnado 


22. Hewton* pp. 16-7. 

23. Appendix II* Letter 1, p.JoX, 

















* 

i'ii LQ • ■ • 


v w •» . 



• \ 










. 


. 








'■•■■■■■• • 






fS 

boy who accompanied him 24 spent the winter; a very cold and 
severe one with the temperature often registering forty, and 
even fifty degrees below zero. 

"At first," he says, 25 "on looking around me, I asked 
myself what I was to do. I was far from civilization, and with 
only one or two posts in the year 4 to bring me letters® I had at 
hand a tent, a surplice, a Prayer-Book, and a Bible. There was 
no parsonage, no church, nor any means of building either. I had 
been sent as a missionary to settlers, but where were they ? 

I could not find such persons as we usually designate settlers." 
However, "from the first a few persons attended the services. 
Officials in the Hudson’s Bay Company’s service were glad to 
renew old church associations as they passed on to other forts. 
Camps of surveyors sought a little Sunday rest, and change from 
the monotony of their life on the prairies,, in public worship 
after the manner of their fathers. Mounted police, who had just 
come into the country, and were located some eighteen or twenty 
miles away, were offered frequent services. Children were 
collected for instruction; the Indian tents were visited; and 
the banner of the Church was unfurled over a new, and vast, 
and hitherto unoccupied region." 

The unfinished log building which Hewton had rented proved 
to be more of a liability than an asset. Both material and 
labour to make it habitable were very expensive, and even then 
were not always available. One carpenter wanted five dollars a 
day and food for himself and his wife, and their ten children. 

Hot unnaturally Hewton felt that he could not afford the luxury 

24. Report says that he later ran away to the United States* 

25. Bewton, pp.16-7 and 21. 



. 




. 

? - • . . / ... . . 

■ 

. 

. < : 




. 



? - 





<• 



v' 




. 








• 



t . 




. 






» • 

* 

. • ’ 

« . - 










•1 

of such an employee. For a small cooking stove and the necessary 
pipes he paid a hundred dollars, and it proved to he quite 
inadequate. "This stove was not sufficient to warm the room, 
and it needed perpetual attention night and day, with the slight 
wood of the country, to keep us from freezing in our badly-built 
house. Often I tried to write, and placed the ink on the front 
of the stove in order that it might thaw5 but before the pen 
could touch the paper and write a word the ink in the pen would 
be frozen. 

The upper part of the building was fitted up as a Church 
with a simple altar place covered with a red and blue cloth. 

•’In fine weather it was very suitable and looked very wells 
but in snowy weather the storms gave us great trouble. Often 
on Sunday mornings we had to use shovels to throw the snow out 
of the window; then, when the fire had melted the snow on the 
open rafters, the wet came down on our heads, and caused 
discomfort at the services.**^ 

Such were the tribulations attendant upon early missionary 
work. Hor was this all. The building which Dr. Hewton had 
rented belonged to Chief Trader Hardisty .28 ?/ithin a year 
ITewton was dispossessed and had to find other accomodation. 
Whether from pique or because of genuine necessity the owner 
came to Dr. Bewton demanding possession of the premises by 
ten o’clock the next morning. Because there were no funds 
available it was impossible to obtain land or a house in 
Edmonton. Hence, he chose a location some seven miles downstream, 
from Edmonton, across the river from Clover Bar, which, as 


26. Hewton, p.20 

27. Ibid, p•33 

28. Ibid, p.34 Hewton does not mention the name of his landlord 
in his book but it appears in his letter of Oct. 22nd, 1875, 
to the Bishop of Saskatchewan. See Appendix II,, Letter 1. 






2o 


previously in Hosseau, he called "The Hermitage” and on which 
he built a house, and later, other buildings. He took up 

OCX 

residence there in December, 1876. 

The Hermitage, according to one who visited it often in 
the 1890’s,, when it had been Newton’s home for fifteen years, 
’’was almost a little village. There was the house where he 
cooked his own meals and had in the kitchen corner a home-made 
bed with a full book-shelf over the head, while upstairs, at 
least when I formed ’company,* was the dining room, its walls 
and ceiling papered in my time with the pages of ’Church Bells’ 
with their pictures. Outside this building was a bell from 
England about which some controversy with the Edmonton Church 
authorities went on. Then there was at right angles a cabin 
for the entertainment of his native friends from the vast 
countryside about, and a similar cabin nearby was kept as a 
very plain and simple chapel, its chief ecclesiastical marks 
heing the little Holy Table and the red cloth that decked it 
and the wall behind. Last of all was the largest building, 
a second two-storey house encircled by some of the finest 
lilacs I have ever seen, beyond which lay green lawn and 
gay flower beds, for the Canon was an enthusiastic gardener. 
Downstairs was his library, a really remarkable collection of 
books • » . Above the library were bedrooms for his specie,! 
guests and from the windows you looked out across the river’s 
wooded valley to the fertile lands towards Clover Bar»”30 


29. The exact location was the south half of Section 19, 
Township 53, Range 23, W4th. For this information I 
am indebted to Mr. L. G. Thomas. 

30. Connell, op. cit. p.17. 























. 
































' 






During 1876 and the following year it quickly became 
apparent that a Church was necessary near the Edmonton Fort. 
Hitherto, since Dr. Newton*s removal to the Hermitage, 
services had been held in houses but these were small, and 
frequently the occupants might be away, or a member of the 
family ill, so that plans had to be changed at the last minute. 

The acquisition of a site for the Church was a particularly 
difficult problem. An officer of the Hudson’s Bay Company, 
who claimed ownership of the lots desired refused to give or 
sell a site and the Company itself, through Donald Smith, 
later Lord Strathcona, regretted that it had no power to 
grant land for such a purpose. Finally, Malcolm Groat, a 
settler west of the fort, and a Hudson’s Bay Company employee, 
allowed the congregation five acres from his claim for which 
Newton paid him five dollars to seal the bargain. 31 When the 
survey took place the five acres became nine, and extended 
from the brow of the hill ovei*lcoking the Saskatchewan river 
up to Stony Plain Hoad, along the west side of 121st Street. 

Bishop McLean of Saskatchewan paid his first visit to 
the district in 1876 and a Building Committee was appointed 
consisting of Col* Jarvis, Officer Commanding the Mounted 
Police, Richard Hardisty, Esq., Chief Trader of the Hudson’s 
Bay Company, and several others. Evidently the Bishop went away 
feeling that he had achieved all that could be desired, for 
before leaving he wroteJP ”1 had a good meeting at Edmonton 
yesterday, when a church building committee was formed. I 
promised aid towards the church from the S.P.C.K. to the amount 

31. Beatrice A. Ockley, "A History of Early Edmonton,” M.A. Thesis, 
University of Alberta, 1932, Also a copy of "Town Topics" in 
the possession of the estate of the late Mr. Ernest Brown. 

I owe this information to Mr. L. G. Thomas. 

32. Bishop of Saskatchewan to Preb. Bullock, Dec. 20th, 1876, 

See Appendix II, Letter 3, p. 







of a hundred pounds.” 

From Dr. Fewton’s point of view the episcopal optimism 
was ill-founded and he thus describes the sequel: M The Bishop 
went away, but before he was out of sight and even while the 
jingling of the dog-bells could be heard, the supposed chairman 
turned to me and exclaimed: *Don*t you suppose that I am going 
to act as chairman to a committee to build a church in such a 
country as this, and without means that can be depended upon. 
Who is to pay for it ? ,H 33 

At length, however, a church was built, the first 
All Saints* 011 what is now the corner of 121st Street and 
Victoria Avenue. The building ultimately cost about $2,500. 
Local subscriptions amounted to $500, the Society for Promoting 
Christian Knowledge gave £200, and the other thousand dollars 
was either collected or subscribed by Ifewton himself. 


33. Kewton, op. cit. p.64. 

34. It is interesting to note that the thirteenth century 
parish church of Edmonton, If.9., England, is also 
dedicated to All Saints 1 . A letter to the Vicar has 
failed to elicit an answer so it seems impossible to 
say whether this is more than coincidence. 





. 










- . 




. 





. . 

- 


















4 

. 














» 

t <• . « fit. •, 













23 


Chapter Five 

IEDIAh MISSIONS, 1875-1886 


It was not long before Dr. lewton began to extend his 

ministrations to the surrounding district. H By the summer of 
35 

1876, w he says, it had become evident that the neighbourhood 
of Fort Edmonton, on account of certain local circumstances and 
the paucity of the population, could not occupy the whole time of 
the missionary• w He,, therefore, lost no time in extending the 
sphere of his ministrations and by December of the same year was 

able to report to the Venerable Society for the Propagation of 

* 2 » 

the Gospel oP that tt at Fort Edmonton Divine Service has been 
celebrated 49 times; at Fort Saskatchewan 35 times; at the 
Upper Settlement 12 times; Long Lake 15 times; at Oxford Mills, 

50 miles above Fort Edmonton, once; on the Railway (survey) line 
about the same distance, service has been held four times. 11 

At the same time he began to visit Victoria, seventy miles 
away, which he describes as an Indian and half-breed settlement. 
By June 25th, 1878, he is able to writes 3 ^ 

At that place there is a Hudson Bay Fort and from 
sixty to a hundred families according to the time of 
year, and whether the people are out hunting or 
freighting on the plains# Some years ago most or all 
of these people were connected with our Missions in 
or around Manitoba, but moving westward after the 
buffalo they were lost to us and became attendants 
at the Wesleyan Chapel there. But as they describe 
it their connexion was one of necessity and not of 
choice. For hundreds of miles there was no Church 
of England and they were always yearning over old 
times and the self-sacrificing love of their former 
pastors# Ever since I came to Edmonton they have been 
urging me to visit them occasionally, and although it 
is ninety miles off, and several rivers to be crossed 
without bridges, I have gone several times and always 
found a warm welcome and good congregations, indeed 
it is usual for every family in the settlement to be 


35. Uewton, p.28 

36. Report, Dec. 20th, 1876. See Appendix II, Letter 2, p 

37. Report, Jun. 25th, 1878. See Appendix II, Letter4, p. 






































present at all the services* They have sent a 
petition to our excellent and energetic Bishop 
begging that a clergyman might be sent to them: and 
that petition represents every family belonging to 
that settlement* They tell me also that they are 
willing to build a house and to assist in any way 
in their power* 

It would seem that the area had been without a missionary 
of any kind for some half dozen years and before that the 
Methodist George McDougall had worked there fo£ eight years* 
"From 1863 to 1871, George McDougall made Victoria the head¬ 
quarters of his widespread missionary operations* Long 
afterwards when Victoria, later called *Pakan*, ceased to be 
an important point on the trade routes, it remained a centre 
of helpful missionary influence and fervent Gospel appeals *" 

Dr* Newton makes no reference to McDougall*s residence at 
Victoria but in his report to the Society 3 ^ says: tt At Victoria, 
a *half-breed* settlement 75 or 80 miles from this place, 

Mr. Philip Tait regularly reads prayers when the Missionary is 
absent* . * . The people until lately attended service among 
the Wesleyans,** In his book he adds,, f, I went frequently until 
the cost of travelling and broken health rendered it impossible 
for me to undertake the long rough journeys. Many years have 
passed, and yet we have no missionary at Victoria* 

His next missionary venture among the Indians was to 
Saddle Lake, some thirty miles beyond Victoria, of which he 
writes: 41 

On my first visit to them they pleaded as souls 
without a shepherd that I would tell the authorities 
of our Church their great need* They said with much 
quiet dignity of manner, l,T #e are poor and ignorant. 

We know nothing. Nobody takes any heed of us. What 
can we do *. We wish to know how to live as 

38* J* H. RiddeTljT Met hod ism “jn^he^fiddIe~Westl 
TORONTO: Ryerson Press, 1946, pp.49-50. 

39. Jun. 26th, 1879, See Appendix II, Letter 5, p. 

40. Newton, p.29 

41. Jun. 26th, 1879, See Appendix II, Letter 5, p. 














... 

. 

a 









. ■ 


_ . ,..:vT ■ 




- 


















t 

'.C .. :.‘l . 


■■ ' 













. 















. 












• . ■ X 

t ■ 

j 




f 

• • « 

. < 

c ■ • < . 









2 *$ 


civilised, and Christian men.” I ventured to encourage 
their desire for a Missionary especially when I saw 
that the station was good, and that they had really 
settled down to farm on a 1 location* where hundreds 
of *plain Crees* could soon be gathered. Every visit 
I pay them increases my interest and hope for these 
people. Day by day large numbers of children are 
instructed; service is held every evening so that the 
*wig-wam f is filled; and late into the night my tent 
has visitors asking about 1 divine things.* The sort 
of questions asked are as follows: ”What is the 
Christian religion ?” ”lhere did it come from ?” 

”Is there .more than one church, and how can we find the 
true one ?** And again, ”What ought a Christian man 
believe and do ?** Most intelligent questions and the 
same as men are asking everywhere. 

At present Joseph Howse, a respectable Cree, 
conducts rjrayers on Sun&aj r at Saddle Lake and teaches 
in the week, also acting as Interpreter when I go 
down. His salary is made up by a Government grant 
as Indian Teacher and also from assistance received 
from the Bishop of Saskatchewan. But a Missionary 
is urgently needed there, and I beseech the vener¬ 
able Society to accede to their requests I shall 
never have the heart to go and tell them that their 
prayer has been refused. 

By the end of 1881 there was a resident missionary at 
Saddle Lake, the Reverend Robert Inkster, 4 ^ a graduate of 
Emmanuel College, Prince Albert, who also took services at 
Victoria. In addition he came occasionally to Edmonton and 
conducted services in Gree at All Saints* * Anglican Missions 
at Saddle Lake, however, were not very firmly established and 
in retrospect Dr. S’ewton comments thuss^ 

Once, by special appeals to the venerable Society 
for the Propagation of the Gospel, I was able to get 
a missionary placed at Saddle Lake, more than a hun¬ 
dred miles from Edmonton, and thirty miles from any 
other mission station. At first the new mission 
seemed to be unusually promising, but the Methodist 
missionary, who had never held service there before, 
thought it becoming to visit the station regularly, 
and thus to sow contention, which resulted in the 
discouragement of our missionary and the final 
abandonment of the mission. 


42. EB. Dec. 10th, 1881 

43. Hewton, p.29 









' 










. 



. 










. .... , ■, i 


. 








: .. . . 

« ' * 




■ 

- 

. ’ 










: 







. 




t 







■ < 



* 







C ■' 







: 









. 

«i 






It is not very surprising then to discover that early 
in 1886 the Church of England mission premises were sold to 
the Methodist missionary society for $1QQ 4 ^ and that the 
Reverend Robert Inkster had been transferred to the Sarcee 
Mission, near Calgary, 45 from whence he moved, in 1888, to 
the Red Pheasant Reserve, near Battleford. There he stayed 
until his retirement in 1906. 


44. ER. May 22nd, 1886. 

45. EB. Jun. 19th, 1886 










Chapter S ix 


2 ] 


THE DIOCESE OF SASKATCHEWAN, 1874-1838. 

Dr. Newton, as we already know, had come to Edmonton at the 
request of the first Bishop of Saskatchewan. There are some 
grounds for suspecting, however, that he attributed some of his 
early disappointments concerning the work in Edmonton to the 
Bishop and that, in consequence, relations between the two men 
were always somewhat strained. 

The Bishop had paid his first visit to Edmonton in 1876 
when he gave his encouragement, but nothing more substantial, 
towards the building of a church. He does not seem to have 
appeared again until 1883, seven years later, and one wonders 
if Newton was writing * with tongue in cheek* when, in a report 
to the S.P.G. he made reference to "our excellent and energetic 
Bishop.” 

The legal incorporation of the Synod of the Diocese of 
Saskatchewan took place in 1882 46 and the Synod itself met on 
August 31st of that year, and again in 1883 and 1886. Neither 
Newton nor any lay delegates from the Edmonton area attended 
these meetings and there is but passing reference to Edmonton 
in the Bishop*s Charge. 

In the summer of 1883 the Bishop established a Bishop*s 
Council to be known as the M Dean and Canons of Saskatchewan.” 

At the morning service at Saint Mary’s, Prince Albert, on 
Sunday, July 22nd, he announced that he was taking this step 

Ary 

”in accordance with the ancient custom of the Church” ' and 
that **when he should be able to procure the erection of a 
suitable Cathedral Church . . . they would be known as the 

46. 45 Vic. Cap. 126. 

47. "Prince Albert Times,” July 25th, 1883. 









- . . 









< 

. . . , • .. 

5 - 

• *' < 




* 




■ 






, •• 

. 




? .... . , . . . i 

■ 






■ 


. 








' r - •. 

. - • : , 










• '••• o. r 


.) ; .. ' . , : . . , J. . \: ^:■ 


! • ? 1 ’ : 












« '« 




0 


. i 


' 





2g 

Dean and Canons of the Cathedral. • . . their true function 
was to act as an advisory council to the Bishop ... in such 
a large diocese as Saskatchewan it was important that the 
Bishop should have the advantage of such a council.’* Among 
those who seem to have been admitted to Honorary Canonries were 
the Reverend W. H. Cooper, at that time touring the west in the 
interests of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, 
the Reverend J. Plett, Principal of Emmanuel College, which was 
then located at Prince Albert,, and the Reverend Dr. W. Hewton. 

The Bishop’s second visit to Edmonton was scarcely more 
auspicious than his first® During August, 1883, Hewton 
evidently received word that the Bishop would come for 
Confirmations early in September® Accordingly, he announced 
that ’’candidates who have not already done so should confer 
with the Rev. Dr. Hewton as soon as possible.” 48 The date was 
set for Sunday, September 2nd, and word was received that the 
Bishop had left Winnipeg and, after visiting Port Macleod and 
Calgary, would arrive in Edmonton on September 1st. Arrangements 
were completed and there were twenty-two candidates. Sunday came 
but no Bishop and the newspaper for the following Saturday 
indicated that on the day appointed he had been preaching in 
Calgary but was expected in Edmonton that day. 

The Confirmation finally took place on Wednesday, 

September 12th, but the number of candidates had dwindled to 
thirteen, no doubt to the Doctor’s intense, and not altogether 
unjustified annoyance. While in Edmonton the Bishop met with 
the congregation and reported as follows to the next Synods 


48. EB. Aug. 11th,, 1883 






•’At Edmonton I met the people at a business meeting when the 
work of the Mission was re-organized, a separate congregation 
was formed for the town with Sunday evening service to be held 
in the Public School house until a church is built, morning 
service still being held in the mission church a mile from the 
town* Here also a committee was formed to provide a stipend for 
the clergyman.’’^ 9 

At home in Prince Albert the Bishop was able to do more 
intensive and systematic work* In earlier years he had been 
Warden of Saint John’s College, Winnipeg, and one of his concerns 
was the establishment of a school or college in his own diocese. 
This he was able to achieve in 1879 when he founded Emmanuel 
College, Prince Albert. In June, 1883, he, together with the 
Reverends J. A. Mack ay, J. Flett, G. Mackay, and W. Hewton 
were "created one body politic and corporate by the name of 
the University of Saskatchewan.* 1 ^ This state of affairs 
continued until 1907 when the charter was surrendered to the 
newly constituted Provincial University, and the college moved 
to Saskatoon to be known henceforth as "The University of 
Emmanuel College." 

The Bishop’s third visit to Edmonton took place in 
September, 1886, but was ill-fated in that before leaving the 
town he met with the accident which led to his death. He 
held a Confirmation at All Saints’ on Sunday, September 5th 
at which twelve persons received the laying on of hands. On 
the following Tuesday he started for Calgary but "in going 
down the hill to the river at the Fort the light wagon in 
which he was seated was upset. He was thrown out and received 

49. Bishop’s Charge to Synod, Oct. 11th, 1883. 

50. EB. Aug. 4th, 1883. 




V 

. 

... , ■ . .. 1 ' -- ; 

. 

. ' 

•: • .. :. J: .. 

9 . . ■. 1 . .' 

e . . t " . < 

, . ' • , * r - * ' ■ ' 

• *• ? 21 ■ •> r u'i hi JWI 

. 

. 

. V l. . . . . 7 2 . •... . t -.2 7.0 9 Ci • 


. .... 














- 




■ " .' . , 2 i;v. 2 ! f-\ i. .o.'l 


' '. • • : 2 V xil : Jf 

’ 

■ 




30 


such injuries as caused him to he detained at the Edmonton hotel 
all this week." 51 Finally, on October 2nd, the newspaper 
contained the cryptic note that "Bishop McLean left for Prince 
Albert by boat yesterday." 

A letter from his wid'tfw to Prebendary Tucker, the General 
Secretary of the S.P.G., tells an almost incredible story 
of the hardship and suffering which the injured Bishop endured. 

"It has pleased God to remove from me my beloved 
husband, the late Bishop of Saskatchewan. 

He left home on August 16th to visit the S.P.G. 
missions at Calgary and Edmonton. The day he left 
Edmonton to return home via Calgary an accident 
occurred, the horses upset the carriage and he was 
thrown out with much violence. 

Anxious to reach home he proceeded on his way 
but after driving a few miles was obliged by severe 
pain to return to Edmonton. Here he remained very 
ill for three weeks - the medical man did not realise 
the gravity of the case, the surroundings were most 
miserable, and for a great part of the time he was 
delirious; at last, feeling he could not last much 
longer he had a boat built and accompanied by two 
men and our 3on aged fifteen who was with him, he 
started for home; they were twenty-two days in that 
boat, with very cold weather and his weakness 
increasing hourly. Our poor boy thought he would 
never reach home alive, but God was very merciful 
and spared him to us for eighteen days. All that 
love, affection, good medical man and nursing could 
do for him was done, for a time he seemed to rally 
but a severe fever set in and on Sunday 7th November 
(the day he loved so well) at twelve o’clock he fell 
asleep in Jesus. We laid him to rest last Sunday 
in a quiet spot outside the little chancel of St. 

Mary’s - the first church he had built and held 
service in, in his Diocese. • . . 

The Right Reverend John McLean was succeeded by the 
Venerable William Gyprian Pinkham, at that time Archdeacon 
of Manitoba. Since early in 1886 the division of the diocese 
had been contemplated and in September, 1887, it was 
announced that "the district of Alberta has been constituted 


51. EB. September 11th, 1886. 

52. Hov. 16th, 1886. From a copy in "S.P.G. Letters from 
Abroad,’* Public Archives, Ottawa. 






























- 


. . 










u t - 







- 


















. 

- 

. 
























■ 






















. 

. t 






31 


53 

the Church of England diocese of Calgary*” Owing to the 

fact that no provision had yet been made for a second episcopal 
endowment Bishop Pinkham, although resident in Calgary, held 
office as Bishop of Saskatchewan and Calgary until 1903. 

In that year the Right Reverend Jervois A* Newnham was 
translated from the See of Moo sonee to succeed him as 
Bishop of Saskatchewan* 


53. EB* September 17th, 1887 





























Chapter Seven 

DR, NEWTON AND THE COMtMm 

When Dr, Newton arrived, in Edmonton in 1875 it was to find 
a settlement in which the only services, apart from a Roman 
Catholic Chapel within the walls of the fort, had been those of 
the Wesleyans who had been established for thirty-five years. 
Consequently his relations with them were never very happy. 

As he himself says, "It seemed as if I had come to upset 
Methodism, and to introduce religious strife into a distant, 
and not very devout community. w5 ^ Frequently, both in his book 
and in his reports to the Venerable Society he complains of the 
unchristian competition from the Methodists who seemed to regard 
his work as an unwarranted interference with their vested rights. 

With the Presbyterians his relations were much happier. 

The first Presbyterian minister arrived in Edmonton in November, 
1881, in the person of Andrew B. Baird, M,A., B,D,, later a 
professor in the Presbyterian College at Winnipeg. Dr, Newton 
was not only present at the reception tendered to Mr. Baird 
but delivered the address of welcome and in addition "gave a 
short sketch of the duties of people towards their ministers. 
Later on, at the opening of the new Presbyterian edifice on 
Sunday, October 19th, 1882, Dr. Newton took part in the services. 
When Baird went east two years later he invited Dr. Newton to 
hold his evening service in the Presbyterian building as the 
Saint Michael 1 s congregation still had no church of their own, 
a kindness which Dr. Newton acknowledged in the public press 
but declined, 56 


54. Newton, p,17 

55. EB. Nov. 26th, 1881 

56. EB, May 31st, 1884, 












, 






• o': i 








;/ . ... ; ' .. ;• 






. 

' 


. 


. ■ :: ■ r,.,. 


. ; ' . . * .. .r 

•, : *. i. : ,;. ... c- 

. 






. : 

; . ;3 ■ ;; 

V. 

■ ’ 













33 


With the Homan Catholics Dr. Hewton’ s relations were 
probably the happiest of all. Indeed he himself says so. 

”On • . • every occasion when I have met the Homan Catholic 
Bishop and his people, I am bound to say that I have received 
most graceful and kindly attentions,”a sentiment which 
evoked an oblique acknowledgement from Er. A. G-. Morice, in 
his : H istoire de l’Egl ise C atholique Dans L’Quest Canadian. 53 

Probably because of their close identification with Methodism 
Newtons relations with the Hudson’s Bay Company’s staff seem to 
have been permanently strained. The log house which he 
occupied when he first came to Edmonton was owned by Chief 
Eactor (later Senator) Richard Hardisty and his peremptory 
eviction from that building did nothing to improve the 
relationship. 


57. Hewton, p,26. 

58. "A ces ministres protestants si cruellement injustes, 
le Rev. W. newton, que nous avons deja vu diner avec 
Mgr. Grandin,^forme one honorable exception• M. Hewton 
parle par experience* Apres avoir note dans son petit 
livre, Twenty Y ea rs on the Saska tc hewan ,plusieurs des 
causes de la rebellion, qu*il n’hlsite pas 'a mettre au 
compte des autorite's d’Ottawa, il dit ce qui suit de 
Riels 

’ll voulait etre prophete, le fondateur d’une nouvelle 
religion, un Moise au petit pied, qui aliait conduire 
son peuple dans son propre pays et en chasser les 
Chananeens du dix-neuvieme siecle. Il ne reprouva point 
le meurtre des pretres au lac la Grenouille, et il separa 
autant qu’il put de 1’Eglise catholique romaine les 
gommes qui sibisaient son influence. 1 (p.90) 

De Mgr. Grandin et de son clarge le meme auteur ecrit; 

’le suis oblige de dire qu’en cette circonstance et chaque 
foise que je rencontrai 1’ev^que catholique remain et son 
peuple, j’en repus dee marques de la plus gracieuse et de 
le plus bienveillante consideration.’ 

A. G, Morice, O.M.I., Montreal, Granger Ereres, 1912. 

Vol. II, p.380. 

59. Hewton, p. 34. 










i) t 








« 


* 








3 ^ 


He was bitterly critical of the Company’s laxity in 

allowing liquor to be supplied to the Indians. Thus: 

To read, for example, in the report of a lecture 
before the Colonial Institute in London, that 
intoxicating liquor was not even kept for 
private use in the interior Hudson Bay forts, 
for the sake of example to the natives, and that 
a challenge might be made to the world to show 
such high principle in a corporation, is simply 
preposterous nonsense. I have myself seen, in 
the Mountain Fort, a curious arrangement for 
serving out rum in trade with the Blackfeet, 
and near Edmonton Port is ’Drunken Lake,’ 
keeping up the tradition of Hudson Bay’s most 
unholy rites, a tradition not likely soon to be 
extinguished. 

These allegations sound rather strange since most historians 
feel that the ’Honourable Company’ was, as a rule, scrupulously 
careful in such matters. Some colour may be lent to the 
charges by editorial comment in the ’’Edmonton Bulletin” 
concerning drunkenness on Christmas Day, 1885s 6 ^ ’’Christmas 
Day was mild and pleasant and passed off quietly. Less than 
the usual amount of sleigh-riding was indulged in. It is to 
be regretted, however, that some saw fit to celebrate the 
birth of the Saviour by getting drunk* Any other day would 
surely do as well for that purpose. The evening was scarcely 
as quiet as the day. Several saloon fights occurred between 
the civilians and police but without anything more serious 
than a squad of the latter marching up to clear out the town 
and returning without engaging in actual hostilities.” 

Curiously enough, in such circumstances, Dr. Hewton complains 
on more than one occasion that the number of celebrations 
of Holy Communion had been curtailed because of his inability 
to obtain wine. 


60. Hewton* p.43. 

61. EB. Dec. 26th, 1885 









. 

. 

. 


‘ . 


. . 

. 

1 , 





i 


i . 





■ 


■ 





' 

, , , ' ' p 

. • . . ' j . 




- 

. : 

. ... 


^ . .. j 

• *• W •" i. u 3iU\ 'n.; ; -.'ai , £10 

. 













Dr. Newton was very interested in community affairs 
but rarely appeared at public meetings, being content to proffer 
his advice and assistance through letters to the paper* When the 
Masonic lodge was established in Edmonton late in 1881 Newton 
was mentioned as being of the Fraternity although he did not 
attend the organization meeting. This absence may have been 
owing to illness because he did promise to address the brethren 
at a later date.. . 

His next concern was for the provision of a public 
cemetery, and once again he wrote to the press averring that 
"it is quite time that the inhabitants of Edmonton arranged 
for a public cemetery* Delay will cause increased trouble, 
and perhaps expense. * * • " 6 ^ A week later an editorial 
note appeared and a meeting was summoned for the following 
Saturday evening, May 13t.h, 1882, at which Dr. Newton was to 
take the chair. The meeting was not held until Tuesday, 

May 16th, when Dr* Newton, Mr* Baird, and Bishop Grandin 
were appointed as a Committee and Board of Trustees. 6 ^ Meetings 
were still continuing in 1885 but nothing seems to have been 
done • 

It may appear a little surraising that Dr* Newton did 
not take a more prominent part in matters educational. Almost 
his only venture into that field was on Friday, February 29th, 
1884, when at the first public examination of the Edmonton 
Public School Mr. Baird and he examined the senior dictation 

class. 64 


62. 

EB. 

Apr. 

29th, 

1882 

63. 

EB. 

May 

20 th, 

1884 

64. 

EB. 

Mch. 

1st, 

1884 




.... 

. 

. - • ' '. 

.... 

..... '.... . ;.. . ; •• or 

■ 

.. . i ■ . 

. . : . . 

♦ 

1 ! ■ . . . 



. ' - . - 

■ .. . , „■» V . U 6 l*X i-I 

■ .. ■■■ ... 







* • 


t 




. 









$h 

j 

Later in 1884 an announcement appeared indicating that 
marriage licenses might be procured from Canon Newton at All 
Saints* Church or at the Hermitage* The suggestion that he 
undertook this duty in order to supplement his slender resources 
is supported by the story of one who went to him to procure 
such a license* Mr* Cookson, of Tofield, had come to Edmonton 
for that purpose* Unable to obtain a license from issuers in 
Edmonton he made hie way to the Hermitage only to discover 
the H wee doctor’ 1 ill in bed and his sister, who kept house 
for him, very reluctant that he should be disturbed* Canon 
Newton, however, overheard the conversation and tottered 
downstairs to issue the all important document. On being asked 
what was the fee he replied, 11 Well, it is really three dollars, 
but people usually give me five l H No doubt he received the 
larger sum *• 

In spite of his shyness and his peculiarities Canon 
Newton was evidently held in high regard in the community 
since, when the Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Terri¬ 
tories visited Edmonton in 1884 and a complimentary dinner 
was tendered to him, w Mr* U. Boss, Chairman, occupied the 
head of one table, the Lieutenant-Governor at his right, 
and the Reverend Canon Newton at his left . * * 1,65 
Similarly, ten years later, he received a special invitation 
to the dinner of the Old ‘Timers 1 Association.^ 

When Dr* Newton came to Edmonton he left his wife and 
family in Ontario. Quite evidently he did not get on with them 
and there is no indication that he ever visited fhem again* 

The first Mrs* Newton is said to have died in the 1890’s. 

) 

65. EB. Oct. 25th, 1884. 

66. EB. Nov. 15th, 1894. 









. 






... 



• 


’ 












• 

J. • . 

. 

. 





. 





i Si U vti 





O'.. ’ 

. 



. 









. ; . i .: 




. 


; . : - 


, . vl.iv 

. 

: 






'j 


j i ... .. i 






': o :. ' v: 

*: 






t ’ ... :vV-; .7 .. ■ '.'.l- 

. , - • • - • 














• > 




. ... i ■ 






( 


. 




A# A* (Bert) Newton came to join his father, probably in 1895, 
and on April 9th, 1896 married Isabella Lloyd Powell, 6 ^ a sister 
of Canon Newton’s Churchwarden at Poplar Lake. In the summer 
of 1886 Miss Newton came out from England to join Dr. Newton, 
her brother, and on Wednesday, July 7th, he set out to meet 
her in Calgary, returning a fortnight later. This had 
evidently been planned for seme time since, in the previous 
January, Canon Newton had announced^ the arrangements "to 
receive pupils for board and instruction at the Hermitage 
in September• M It is not improbable that this venture was 
prompted in part by experience at The Academy, Bushey, as well 
as by a need to add to his income. However, the proposed 
school never materialised, its chances being spoilt by a 
combination of circumstances. Nothing had been said about the 
coining of Miss Newton and in all probability people hesitated 
to commit their children to their peculiar priest. Moreover, 
a private school, "The Poplars," was opened in Edmonton at the 
same time. 

References to a proposed Hermitage School recur inter¬ 
mittently in the newspaper but the institution never came into 
being. This may have been not only through lack of pupils but 
because Miss Newton, when she arrived, had other ideas. Shortly 
after her arrival an announcement appeared in the paper- to 
the effect that "Miss Newton, who has lately arrived from 
England to reside with her brother, the Rev. Canon Newton, is a 
regularly trained nurse in the Church of England. Miss Newton 
has practised in several London Hospitals and she holds diplomas 
and testimonials of efficiency from the leading physicians. 
Besides she was, until her health broke down, lady professor 


67. EB. Apr. 16th, 1896. 
68 .EB. Jan. 50th, 1886. 
69. EB. Aug. 7th, 1886. 










70 

in Queen Charlotte’s hospital, London. Miss Newton, should 
her health permit, hopes to resume her hospital duties at the 
Hermitage.” This advertisement continued during the summer and 
presumably Miss Newton had some patients as one of them is 
recorded as dying there *.In March of the following year 
the school announcement appeared again but with no more 
success than formerlyMiss Newton continued, her ministrations 
at the Hermitage until March, 1895, when she changed her 
residence to Grandin Street, South Edmonton. 73 

An interesting sidelight on this change of address is 
given by the Reverend ¥. R. Burns, incumbent of Holy Trinity, 
South Edmonton, at the end of the last century. In a letter to 
the writer 7 ^ he refers to a sister of Dr. Newton ’’who lived 
in Strathcona. She was in poor health and had done nursing, 
so far* as I can remember. She took up with Mary Eddyism.” 

Such a defection from the Faith would also account for the 
fact that when, in February* 1899, she was married, the cere¬ 
mony was performed, not by her brother, but by Mr. Burns. Of 

her husband we know nothing more than that he was John Black- 

7 5 

stock, of Lacombe, seventeen years younger than herself.' 


70. A letter to the Queen Charlotte Hospital to verify this, and 
asking for additional information, has not elicited a reply. 

71. EB. July 23rd, 1887. "The funeral of James Geddes who died at 
the Hermitage on Friday morning, will take place at the Edmon 
ton cemetery immediately after the morning service in All 
Saints’ Church tginorrow. ... He arrived about five weeks 
ago • • . advanced consumption ... taken to the Hermitage 
for treatment. 

72. EB. Mch. 12th, 1887. 

73. EB. Mch. 21st, 1895. 

74. Oct. 28th, 1950. 

75. Record of Marriage supplied by the Bureau of Vital Statistics 
”0n February 14th, 1899, John Blackstock, 38, Bachelor, 

born in Belfast, son of William and Sarah, to Elisa Newton, 
55, Spinster, born in Halstead, Essex, daughter of William 
Newton, weaver, and Eliza, his wife.* The marriage is also 
recorded, although with less detail, in the register of 
Holy Trinity Church, South Edmonton. 













‘I 










'» ■ 




14 


y; 





■; 







v .) v 

















t 






Chapte r Eig ht 

DR* 3SGSV/T03J A3STD HI S PAR I SHI OM RS 

On the whole Dr. Newton's relationships with other peojjle 

as individuals were even less fortunate than with people in 

community. It is possible that this may have been because 

his shy reticence was by others interpreted as disdain of his 

fellow-mortals. He does not seem to have been a man who made 

friends readily and few people are mentioned by name in Twenty 

Years on t he Saskatchewa n. To two men in particular does he 

acknowledge the debt of friendship. One was Colonel James 

Stewart, a native of Quebec 9 the son of a judge there, who entered 

the service of the Hudson’s Bay Company and travelled widely 

in the north. He joined Dr. Rae's search for the relics of 

Sir John Franklin’s expedition and died, at the Hermitage. Of 

him Newton says, "He was a brave and kindly man, and the true 

76 

friend of every one." 

The other was William Lenney, a, pioneer blacksmith, 
who was once ITewton's churchwarden and a devoted member of 
All Saints' Church. He made and gave to the church its first 
stove and acted as precentor, not always to the satisfaction 
of the congregation, but with untiring fidelity. 77 Born in 
the Orkneys, Lenney died and was buried in Edmonton. He was, 
says Newton, "a man of just mind and of a beautiful spirit.” 78 

When Newton came west he left his family in Ontario and 
seems to have had little communication with them thereafter. 

He did, however, record the death of one son, Louis N. Newton 
at Lindsay, Ontario, in the local paper 79 and another son, 

76. Newton, p.68 

77. J. R. Michael, "Church Reminiscences at Edmonton during the 
later Eighties." Church M esse nger , Diocese of Edmonton, Sept. 
1935, Vol. IV., No. 65, p~.25. 

78. Newton, p.68 

79. EB. July 4th, 1885. 













■ 

. 











A# A# Newton, came to live with him after his sister’s 
departure, and accompanied him when he retired to Victoria. 

His experiences were, at times, amusing, annoying, or 

embarassing, and sometimes a combination of all three. One of 

his earliest misadventures was to be arrested for "feloniously 

80 

and wilfully appropriating and killing a cow." The arrest 
occurred when Dr. Newton returned to the community after a 
missionary visit to Saddle Lake. Some months earlier he had 
sent out his hired man to round up his cattle which were 
pasturing near the Mounted Police barracks at Port Saskatchewan. 
When they came in one animal had an indistinct mark or brand and 
Newton was not sure that it was his. He called, in one or two 
neighbours, who were all acquainted with the cattle, sud also 
a man whom he had formerly employed, to have their opinion on 
the matter. All agreed that the cow was certainly his, and as 
she was fat he killed her for beef. Shortly afterwards he 
left for his visit to Saddle Lake, taking with him the man who 
had brought in the cattle. 

About the same time Mr. J. Lamoureux, of the barracks 
settlement, missed a cow and, hearing of the one Dr. Newton had. 
killed, went, in that gentleman’s absence, inspected, the hide, 
identified it as that of his cow, and got out a warrant for 
Dr. Newton’s arrest. The missionary was released on |800 
bs.il but apparently the case was dropped, since no more was heard. 

The rights of settlers also proved a thorny problem to 
New?ton. Coming, as he says, from England and being accustomed 
"in early life to the almost cast iron customs and habits of 


80. EB. Jan. 10th, 1881 




. 











« 






















. . . . ■ ■ 




o y 








' ■ " 



ti' j;- ; ;:j r ■ j:, i 


t 





























English life" he found the rough and ready ways of settlers, and 
their different standards of morality, not a little disturbing. 
Hence, it is not surprising to find him writing to the paper in 
this strain; 81 

As I feared some time ago there is likely to be 
new trouble for all of us who had a. little wood on 
our lots, and who may not wish to see it destroyed. 

It is well known that three springs ago I fought a 
prairie fire three days and two nights to save what 
I have on my place, besides incurring other labour 
and expense* How, through a decision in a court of 
law last summer, I am told that anybody can come 
anywhere - fence or no fence - and take what wood 
he pleases - and a man is actually doing this on my 
property while I write. 

At a distance this is supposed to be simply 
impossible in a country where there is supposed to 
be law and order, or any protection for persons 
and property. The only plea set up for this plun¬ 
der is that the Government has not surveyed our 
lands, and that therefore, there is no law in the 
matter - namely, to make people honest. 

What I have believed, and still believe, is 
that the Government, and not the settler, is res¬ 
ponsible for this state of things, and that we 
settlers who have our lots in a fair manner should 
be protected as citizens ought to be. Settlers are 
doing a foolish thing - through a mere quibble - 
to allow that their lands are Grown lands, for any 
purpose, and if they do, the time is quickly com¬ 
ing when they will repent it, and probably have to 
purchase their homesteads from the Government or a 
railway company for their pains. 

I venture to tell my neighbours, if the above 
interpretation of the law - or no law- be correct, 
if indeed all our lands are Grown lands, then it 
follows, not that any man can cut pine v?herever he 
likes but that, on the contrary, he is distinctly 
committing a lawless act by cutting any wood what¬ 
ever without the distinct permission of the Govern¬ 
ment, and the payment of fees necessary for such 
permission, according to instructions sent here 
some time ago by the authorities at Ottawa® 

In this particular matter Hewton was not alone, end the 

irritation of the settlers through petty trespassing was 

aggravated to fever heat by a wave of claim-jumping. According 


81. EB. Eeb. 21st, 1881 









to an unwritten law, a,nd there was no other, if a settler fenced 
his claim and built a house upon it, the land was his. To the 
unscrupulous such a system, offered a good many obvious loopholes. 
fhe crisis came early in 1882 and the circumstances seem to have 

op 

been as follows. Mr. Richard Hardisty had staked a claim 
between 110th Avenue and the river between 96th and 97th streets. 
He had built a house thereon, worth a thousand dollars, and had 
then sold the property without ever having lived on it. An 
astute if somewhat unscrupulous American argued with himself that 
as Hardisty had never lived on the property he had never 
really owned it, and that therefore the purchasers did not own 
it either. In such, circumstances the way was clear for him to 
possess himself of the property by building a shack there and 
occupying it. This he proceeded to do and on Saturday morning, 
February 4th, brought with him a crew of carpenters to erect 
the building. 

Feeling ran high for it was now generally realised that, 
as Dr. Hewton had pointed out, if such practices were allowed 
to continue unchecked no man’s land would be safe» Hotjbing was 
done on the Saturday - or on the Sunday - or on the Monday 
until four o’clock in the afternoon. At that time the rightful 
owners, supported by a hastily convened ’vigilante 1 committee, 
approached Mr. George and gave him half an hour in which to 
remove his building. With elaborate politeness they offered 
him every assistance should he find himself unable to accede 
to their request. Mr. George, whose astuteness evidently exceeded 
his courtesy, greeted their invitation by drawing a guns, 
whereupon D. R. Fraser, the founder of the lumber company, 
reached in and gripped him with a bear hug. Someone else snatched 


82. EB. Feb. 11th, 1882 



















u: 








•, _ : . .1 


TO 






:: v;o 




, 


. 













. 


, 














r ^ 











the gun* The carpenters, realising that theirs was a lost cause, 
rescued their tools and crept silently away. The crowd of a 
hundred and fifty grim citizens tied a rope to the shack and 
began to haul it towards the cliff. Just before it went crash¬ 
ing over the hillside Mr. George stepped from the back door. 

For the next few months there were other git tempts to 
profit by the lack of written law but the temper of the populace 
made it abundantly clear that such ventures could only end in 
failure or worse. Before long the vigilante committee and the 
need which had prompted it had ceased to exist. What Dr. hewton 
thought of such summary justice is impossible to say but a few 
weeks later we find him delivering a series of addresses at 
Evensong one of which was entitled, H The morality of land 

O '2 

jumping and house moving.* Moreover, it would seem that 

his protests were not restricted to local officials for by 

June it was reported that "Rev. Dr. hewton has received a 

note from E. Deville, Chief Inspector of Surveys, which says, 

’I am directed by the Minister of the Interior to inform you 

th%t Mr. Michael Deane, D.L.S., has reveived instructions to 

84 

proceed to Edmonton to make a survey of that settlement. 111 

It is evident, however, that Dr. Mewton’s efforts towards 
the enforcement of law and order did not always enhance his 
popularity. Perhaps because of the generally lawless character 
of the neighbourhood, but more probably because of personal 
malice towards him, stock disappeared from his acreage with 
extraordinary rapidity and almost monotonous regularity, 
promoting, on one occasion, the wistful announcement in 
the’Edmonton Bulletin:" 85 

83. EB. Mch. 11th, 1882. 

84. EB. Jun. 24th, 1882. 

85. EB. Oct. 29th, 1881. 





. X j x X J 

c... x 

bx 1 


. 

X iUtfc 

. 

: >a.;. ..... 

xX j i 



'j . 

A.U. . 


■; . vj 

ft 

.-x.,. i 

■ - 

*x . . 


: 0 ,... s' 

- . 

B j 1 

xc'XC. 

;J . 1 

[. . ; c! jl 

X X 

LbiL-L i 


. ; • . . Xi 

' 

; i m'i = Ox.X X '. boo& 

r 1 .) - - i3x> o, !.X 

,..x ©•-. * 10^1 eate&w 

. ..i i ' v i . 

■ X : . ./ : ;: J x xX •• '•‘X 1 •.? xxi 

; ' « • : . ■ 1 mut 

e . . I -:,.',: .. 

■, 1 . ,u Xxxtx : xu: h xx : I ’ 


..... . -■ - 

•J X liO . *i» Ovt 008 0CTIC l 

* » ' ■ x 


. . ■ L X 

. o'X'j’x ' i x cxij 

. X- 

. 

■ . \ 




e 



X ' .' ... ‘X 



. X 

: i ;• , •: c 

) ■. 






- . .. 

r . ■ t , ‘ , 

• ! 

. 


• ? 

. 



0 



Lost Cattle 

Strayed or stolen from the "Hermitage, n a small 
red mare (Jennette) "with her colt. Dr. Newton 
would be obliged for any information about her. 

Should this mare have been stolen there will have 
disappeared from the "Hermitage 11 in three years: 
seven pigs, three horses, and five cows. 

Dr. Newton’s relations with the members of his congregation 
were, at times, scarcely more fortunate. According to one 
account he would not infrequently quarrel with his own people, 
dismiss his organist, and ask a miember of the Methodist congre¬ 
gation to play. This would continue for a few weeks, or even 
some months, but then he would find fault and get one of his 
own people again. 

One particularly marked example of these difficulties ie 
mentioned in his reports to the S.P.Gr. In the fall of 1883 
a daughter of Archdeacon Marsh of London, Ontario, arrived in 
Edmonton. As might be expected she proved to be a welcome 
addition to All Saints 1 , assisting in the Sunday School and 
with the musical portion of the services. In July, 1885,, 
however, Harriet Thomasine Marsh was married to Alexander 
Taylor, a pillar of the Presbyterian congregation, and there 
began a conflict of loyalties. When, at Christmas, the 
Presbyterians presented a concert Mrs. Taylor’s name appeared 
as an accompanist. This much we glean from the newspapers 
but the last straw for Canon Newton came when the newspaper 
recorded that she had been made "president of a society for 
propagating Presbyterianism." Newton’s report to the 

O /? 

S.P.Gr. 0 clearly betrays his not altogether unjustified 
exasperation: 

This lady and her husband had paid me a 
visit. ... and I did not then know of this 
incident. Now, however, I sent her a letter 

86. Report, Christmas, 1885. See Appendix II, Letter 17, p. 











c 


< 













through her husband calling her attention to 
the report in the newspaper and pointing out to 
her the fact that if she were willing to be so 
described and continued such an office she should 
remember that she was cutting herself off from 
membership in the Church of England, and I 
begged her seriously to consider her position 
for her own sake, and for the sake of the 
Church in which she had been nurtured. . • • 

She keeps her office, receives the "Lord’s 
Supper” with the Presbyterians, and is loud in 
her condemnat i on of me for debarring her from' 
the privileges of her Church, This is a Cana¬ 
dian Archdeacon’s daughter, 36 years of age. 

Now what is one to do with material of this 
kind ? 

Clearly the tribulations of a pioneer missionary priest 

were many, but equally clearly, tact was not numbered among 

Canon Newton’s many virtues and accomplishments. 


































Chapter Nin e 
THE D IOCES E Off CA LG ARY 

Prom 1887 onwards Edmonton and indeed the whole district 

of Alberta was included in the Diocese of Calgary* The Yener- 

able William Cyprian Pinkham, D.D., D.C.L., was consecrated 

Lord Bishop of Saskatchewan in Holy Trinity Church, Winnipeg, 

on August 7th, 1887, by the Metropolitan, the Most Reverend 

Robert Machray* He was appointed Lord Bishop of Calgary in 

the following year by the Archbishop of Canterbury after the 

new diocese had been formed by an Act of Provincial Synod 

in August, 1887. Shortly after his consecration Bishop 

Pinkham paid his first visit to Edmonton. Quite evidently 

Hewton was on better terms with him than he had been with 

Bishop McLean, and the "Edmonton Bulletin" of October 8th 

announced that "the Bishop • • • arrived this forenoon and 

will be ’at home* at the Hermitage this afternoon." Prom the 
Pi *7 

press report the reception was a distinct success, "a 
number of the members of the Church of England and of other 
denominations were present to pay their respects ... to Bishop 
Pinkham. C. L. Shaw, barrister, Churchwarden, welcomed the 
bishop in neat and appropriate terms. His Lordshi|3, in replying, 
referred in the most touching manner to his predecessor, and 
spoke of the untiring efforts of the Rev. Canon Hewton. He 
urged upon the people the necessity of united efforts in the 
Cause of the Church," 

On the following Sunday, October 9th, the bishop held 
a Confirmation at All Saints’ when there were twelve candidates. 
He and Archdeacon Mackay, who was accompanying him, left for 
Port Pitt on the following Tuesday. 


87. EB. Oct, 15th, 1887 





















The first Synod of the Diocese was held on February 2lst, 

1889, and Newton attended, stopping to hold services at Red 

Deer on the way. When he returned, three weeks later, he 

expressed himself as being ’delighted with his visit. • • • 

During his stay he was the guest of Mr. Marsh, the mayor and 

his lady, who were profuse in their hospitality. The business 

of the Synod was very important as a constitution had to be 

formed for the new diocese. Canon Newton attended the sittings 

and took an active part in the legislation, besides introducing 

several separate motions which were carried by the synod. • • • 

At the close of the synod he preached in the cathedral to a 

88 

crowded congregation. 11 A reading of the Synod Journal would 
suggest that the account of Newton’s part in the proceedings is 
somewhat highly coloured but in all probability the trip to 
Calgary and the contacts with other clergy at the synod were a 
real tonic to a tired old man who had received little in the 
way of compliments or encouragement• 

While Dr. Newton was away a meeting was held under the 
chairmanship of C. H. Connon, a lawyer who subsequently became 
churchwarden, w for the purpose of preparing a memorial to the 
bishop of the diocese regarding the securing of a resident 
clergyman for Edmonton. More than $400 was subscribed towards 
the support of a clergyman should one be sent, and the bishop 
now attending synod at Calgary was informed of the decision by 
telegraph on Wednesday. n ^ 

The circumstances of this meeting are not at all clear. 

The fact that it was held during Canon Newton’s absence and 

88. EB. Mch. 16th, 1889. 

89. EB. Eeb. 23rd, 1889. 























. . ' 0 0 . 







-/:. j 























under the chairmanship of one who was certainly not a churchwarden, 

and perhaps not even a member of the vestry, lead one to suspect 

that it was engineered by a small group within the congregation 

who hoped by this means to rid themselves of their able but 

ageing and eccentric priest* Whether the bishop received the 

telegram, and if so, whether he discussed it with Canon Newton 

we do not know* At all events, when Canon Newton returned he 

seemed to be aware of what had happened and announced that the 

Reverend H. B. Collier, at that time in Deacon 1 s Orders and 

90 

Curate of Calgary, would be appointed. He himself would 
"continue his work as a missionary at large, to form new stations 
and generally to oversee the clergymen who may be planted in his 
extensive jurisdiction." lor some reason the Reverend H* B. 

Collier never arrived^ and one wonders if the announcement had 
episcopal authority. 

If, as we have suggested, the meeting was an unofficial 
one it speedily received the endorsement of the congregation 
for at the first meeting of the Executive Committee of Synod, 
on May 7th, 1889, "the Bishop read a letter from Mr* P. Daly, 
one of the Churchwardens at Edmonton which stated that the people 
guaranteed |400 per annum toward the stipend of a clergyman 
whenever a change in the Inc umbency of th e parish wa g made (italics 
mine) and that the ladies of the parish had some money in hand 
for the building of a church.There was no reference to the 
previous proceedings. At the next meeting, on September 28th, 

1889, "the Bishop stated that Canon Newton had resigned his charge 
of the town of Edmonton and that the people of Edmonton guaran¬ 
teed $600 toward the stipend of his successor» 1,93 Eventually 

90. S3. Meh. 16th, 1889. 

91. In the Synod Journal, Jan. 14-15, 1892, the Bishop reported 
him as among those who had "gone to other fields of labour." 

92. Minutes of Executive Committee of Synod, May 7th, 1889. 

93* Minutes of Executive Committee of Synod, Sept. 28th. 1889. 









' 

. 

. 

■ 

» 

I . . 


t • 


. 








. - . CK . '. ■ - 

' . ■. v .... 

„ . 1 : ■ .. . :.. 
t ..... . 

■ 

; . . ' • ■ • 




* 

' 






: ; 

' 

. 




< 

■ 

' 




5 . • ■ 

• ,.f : ) ' .. ) , 


* 










the Reverend Charles Cunningham was appointed to All Saints 1 
hut of that more in its place. 

The Bishop’s second visit to Edmonton took place in the 
same year. He arrived on Friday, May 24th, 94 and on the following 
Sunday took service at All Saints’, the lower settlement 95 , and 
at the Hermitage. At a congregational meeting held in the 
public school house on the Monday evening a new parish of 
Edmonton was defined to consist of the town and the land 
opposite on the south side of the Saskatchewan. It was also 
agreed that the parish would raise $500 per annum towards the 
stipend of a resident clergyman. The Bishop then left the 
Hermitage on Wednesday by skiff for Battleford and Prince 
Albert. 

In his report to the S.P.G. for the year 1889 the Bishop 

Q 

thus describes his visits u 

About the middle of May I left Calgary for a 
tour of visitation of the northern part of Calgary 
and the diocese of Saskatchewan. I drove two hun¬ 
dred miles to Edmonton, going partly by stage, and 
partly in Canon Hewton*s conveyance. Prom Edmonton 
I went down the Saskatchewan River in a flat- 
bottomed boat built expressly for me, accompanied 
by two men. * . . 

In the Diocese of Calgary* Canon Hewton has not 
only ministered to the town of Edmonton: he has also 
ministered faithfully and at great personal incon¬ 
venience to the scattered settlers of the district 
carrying the ministrations of the Church to Port 
Saskatchewan and Beaver Lake in the east, to the 
Peace Hills and Blind Man River in the south. I am 
in hopes that the long desired division of the work 
in this part of the diocese will be consummated this 
year. I am on the lookout'for an energetic man for 
the town work. 


94. EB. .June 1st, 1889. 

95. EB. Feb. 9th, 1906. ’’River lot 30, formerly known as the 
lower settlement, has been subdivided and put upon the market 
as Rosedale by H. Bush. The land is close to the east end 
park purchased recently by the city.” 

96. S.P.G. Popular Report, 1889, p.95. 
















. 




' 

. ; 

. . J 

■ 

.. . 


. 


- 




- - . • 

- " . ‘ > - ;■ v-.. •. '..:o ■. , , 

~v. . •. .... id'j ;;o 




t 


? , . ' : i 

. ... 

• j k'- I;i. s j:. 

. , . . 






- • • 

' 




. 

: 






' 

. 




c 

< * 

. 


C hapt er Ten 

THE CHUKCE IN EDMONTON. 

The Calgary and Edmonton Railway line was completed on 
September 10th, 1892, and thereafter an increasing number of 
settlers made their way into northern Alberta. This influx 
created both opportunities and difficulties for the church, 
and led, .in turn, to widespread development during the next 
two decades, culminating in the formation of the Diocese of 
Edmonton. This growth may be considered most easily in three 
divisions. Eirst of all, there were the parishes which grew 
up within the city of Edmonton; then there were the surrounding 
rural parishes and missions. A third and distinct phase of the 
work was the Edmonton Mission. This was one of three missionary 
ventures, the others being at Cardston and Regina, undertaken by 
the Archbishops* Western Canada Eund. According to a contemporary 
reports^ n The Archbishops* Western Canada Eund is the outcome 
of appeals issued by the Archbishops of Canterbury and York on 
behalf of the Church’s work in that part of Canada which lies 
west of Lake Superior and east of the Rocky Mountains. The inrush 
of immigration into these new lands has been so great, and the 
conditions prevailing there are so unique, that special steps 
had to be taken to meet the situation.” The nature of the 
special steps will appear in Chapter Twelve while the present 
one is concerned with the development of the Church in Edmonton. 
(a) All Saints* 

A second phase in the history of All Saints’ parish may be 
said to have begun when the rural work was separated from it. 

As we have seen both the parish and Canon Eewton had come to feel 


97. Archbishops* Western Canada. Eund, Annual Report, 1910, p.6 










' 

c c 

■ . 

... . . ' .(i i ,1 i* • ' • 0 iJ O ' 1 ; : 

• « . . 

. . , ■■■ ; ; o ■ .'i 

« 

: .. «... , ■ v v: i: . . • 

; . '1 ’ ... . ; 


i .. .. 












. . .. v.: . . s . . 

<* ■ - . 

■ i ■ - ■ - 1 .. : •.. j .. i: 1 ' * :r.;. ~,?i 

■ .1 . C i: v. .. : lc 

■ ’ ■ : : . m: -. o V ‘;..o i:i?C 

. ■■ ■ ... .... ;;.. -v 

' 

c • t • » . ; . : 

- ■ ...... 

■ 

. -• 1 ’ .* ■' 

’ . u ; : . - o. i ;' 

. <1 • • b •; • < 






that such a division was necessary, but there remained the 

problem of finding an incumbent for the town parish of All Saints* 

It was not until the middle of 1890 that the Bishop was able to 

announce to the Executive Committee of Synod^ that "he had 

ordained Mr. C. Cunningham and placed him temporarily in 

charge of Edmonton, mentioning that Mr. Cunningham was a graduate 

in honours of the University of Manitoba where he had gained the 

silver medal in classics, and that he was a prizeman in Theology 

of Saint Joints College, Winnipeg." 

The Reverend Charles Cunningham arrived in Edmonton from 

99 

Battleford on Wednesday 5 , July 23rd, 1890," and a congregational 
reception was held for him on the following evening in the public 
school house. Almost at once plans were made for the removal of 
the church from its somewhat inaccessible site in the west end 
to "the property of the congregation situated on the north side 
of McKay Avenue on the Hudson*s Bay Reserve which includes lots 
84, 85, and 86 of Block The contract for the removal was 

let to Messrs. J. E. Smith and ¥. R. and while it was 

being carried on services were held in the public school house* 

By the middle of November the church was established in its 
new location and ready for occupation* Evidently the parish 
flourished in its new centre and at the Easter Vestry Meeting 
in 1891 "the accounts cf last year were presented showing that 
the church was in good, standing financially, after having paid 
for the removal of the church building . • .Mr* Becher was 
again elected Churchwarden, and the following gentlemen were 

98. Minutes of Executive Committee of Synod, July 11 th, 1890$ 
henceforth cited as ExCom, with de^te of meeting. 

99. IB. July 26th, 1890. 

100* EB. Aug. 9th, 1890 

101. EB. Aug. 30th, 1890. 

102. EB. Uov. 15th, 1890. 






52 . 


elected vestrymen for the ensuing year; Dr* Wilson, Joseph 
McDonald, Henry Fraser, E* J. Bangs, J* McKernan, and John 
Looby • 

Nothing very much, seems to have been recorded for the 
following year beyond the fact that Mr* Cunningham was ordained 
to the priesthood, on January 10th, 104 and that at the annual 
meeting it was reported 106 that ”the church was in good standing 
financially there being a small balance from the closing of the 
year, also a large increase in the offertories. 1 * For the next 
year or so the life of the parish continued uneventfully and 
Mr* Cunningham found time to give occasional lectures and to 
take part in community activities. During the summer of 1893 
he took an extended holiday and evidently decided that he had 
been in Edmonton long enough for shortly after his return it 
was reported that he would be going back to England. 106 On 
September 24th he ^preached his farewell sermon to a large 
congregation before leaving for Manitoba and England.” ' He 
does not seem, to have stayed in England but held appointments 
in Rupert*s Land before returning to Birch Kills, Saskatchewan, 
where he retired in 1908. Before very long the Bishop was 
able to announce that the Reverend Alfred Stunden, B.A., of 
Birtle, Manitoba, had been appointed. He arrived in Edmonton 
on Thursday, November 9th* 1893, and was inducted by the Bishop 
on Sunday, November 23rd. H There was a good- congregation. From 

103* EB• Apr. 4th, 1891 

104. EB. Jan. 16th, 1892. 

105. EB, Apr* 23rd, 1892. 

106. EB* Sep. 7th, 1893, 

107. EB. Sep* 25th, 1893. 


















- .0' ... u ' 




















3 . ' 










the text 'Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith 
the Lord,* the bishop preached an interesting and instructive 
sermon bearing upon the duties of minister and people. The 
anthem, *0 Lord, how manifold are thy works,* was rendered by 
the choir." 10S 

Mention of the anthem reminds one that the long musical 
tradition of All Saints* was already beginning, and a few 
weeks later it was announced 109 that "A. G-. Randall, Choirmaster 
of All Saints’ Church, is engaged in getting up a cantata, 

'The Rose Maiden,' by Cowan, to be given about February 14th, 
in aid of the Church. It will be rendered by a choir of over 
fifty voices. Mr. Randall is an accomplished and enthusiastic 
musician, and there is no doubt that this effort will be a 
success." Similar emphasis upon music is to be found, in the 
report of the Christmas services; 110 "Communion service was held 
in All Saints' Church at 8.30 on Christmas morning. Morning 
Prayer followed by Communion service was held at 11 a.m. Rev. 

Mr. Stunden took for his text Saint Luke 2.14. The choir rendered 
the opening hymn, *0 come, all ye faithful;* anthem, ’Let us 
go even unto Bethlehem;* Communion hymn , 'Alleluia, sing to 
Jesus;* closing hymn, 'Hark , the herald angels sing.'" Whether 
Mr. Randall, who in private life was the Town Clerk, was as 
temperamental as musicians are sometimes supposed to be and 
took his departure in a huff is not certain, but by midsummer 
he was to be found "organizing the choir of the Presbyterian 
Church." * * 111 Thus ended that chapter in the musical history 
of All Saints' 

108. EB. Nov. 27th, 1893. 

109. EB. Dec. 7th, 1893. 

110. EB. Dec. 28th, 1893. 

111. EB. Jul. 30th, 1894. 





r . 




5 




■ 


• - ■- • •• ' ' , .. u ; : i.. 1 >, 

.. 1 .. . : 

* 




- •' . ? . 

. a 

. 


: . ' . - 

• ■ - .... ' ! ... 










. 


• • 

1 ■. ? ’ ? ,. 

- 1 c . ■ 1 , 

, f ; ■ . : ; 

S>iV. • • : ,,... 

«■ - • ' '• . ; t • , ' ... •. 'joJ 






















. 

« 

* i 




During the Reverend Alfred Stunden*s tenure of office it 
■became clear that the existing building was inadequate, and in 
1895 the present site of 103rd Street was purchased* Shortly 
afterwards it was announced*^ ^ that ’’the new Church of England 
building, to cost about $5000, will be 31 1 x 49* 6 M inside with 
chancel 16* 8 U x 91. The ceiling will be open with three 
principal rafters panelled. The walls will be solid brick with 
brick buttresses and dressed, stone caps. The chancel windows 
will be of ornamental fret work with cathedral glass. The front 
will be of brick, but the building is so planned that it can 
be removed when it is decided, to complete the building by 
adding the front and tower in the original d.esign. There will 
be a handsome porch over the front door.** 

The corner stone of the new Church was laid with due 
ceremony on Monday, August 26th, 1895, although why the masonic 
honours were necessary only the late Mr. Stunden could tell us. 
The proceedings were thus reported£^3 

Monday afternoon last was the occasion of the laying 
of the first corner stone in northern Alberta with 
masonic honours. On Monday afternoon the corner stone 
of the new All Saints* Church, now being erected in 
Edmonton, was laid by Past Master, C. W. Sutter, acting 
Grand Master. A special communication of the grand 
lodge was convened in the Masonic Hall at four* o’clock. 

At 4.15 the procession was formed, and marched to the 
site of All Saints* church in the following orders 
Edmonton Fire Brigade band* Bro. John, Coleman, tyler 
with the sword, master masons two and two, past 
masters, Bro. James Lauder, carrying Bible and escorted 
by two stewards* Bros. Jas. Ross and Joseph Hurrsell, 
principal architect Bro. M. G. Flater, acting grand 
secretary, Brc. Jas. McDonald, acting grand treasurer, 

Bro. J. A. McDougell, acting grand senior warden, 

R. B. Ferguson carrying a vessel with wine, acting 
grand junior warden, Bro. E. A. Braithwaite carrying 
a vessel with oil, acting deputy grand master, Bro. 

H. C. Taylor carrying a vessel with corn, acting 
grand master, C. W. Sutter escorted by two deacons, 

Bros. K. A. McLeod and F. D. Osborne. 


112. EB. Apr. 22nd. a,nd Jul. 11th, 1895 

113. EB. Aug. 29th, 1895. 












55 


Arriving at the site of the ceremonies the 
acting Grand Master ascended a platform prepared for 
the laying of the corner stone and, after explaining 
the purpose of the assembly, called upon the Rev, 

Bro• Stuhden to give further particulars, • , , 

Mr. G. R, P. Kirkpatrick then presented the 
acting Grand Master with an address and a handsome 
silver trowel for the work. The acting Grand Master 
in accepting the trowl thanked the building committee 
on behalf of the grand lodge, . . . 

An ode was then sung by the masons • • . after 
which a prayer was offered by the grand chaplain. 

Rev. Bro, Stunden. The Grand Secretary then read 
the following scroll which was afterwards placed in 
a tin casket and deposited in the cavity by the 
Grand Treasurers r, In the Marne of and by favour of 
the Great Architect of heaven and earth, on the 
26th day of August, A.I). 1895, A.I*. 5895, and in 
the 59th year of our Most Gracious Sovereign, 

Victoria, Q,ueen of Great Britain, Ireland, and the 
Colonies, His Excellency, Lord Aberdeen, Governor- 
General of the Dominion of Canada, Hon, C. H. 

Mackintosh, Lieutenant-Governor of the Korth West 
Territories, M.W. Bro. Charles Hapier Bell, Winnipeg, 

Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Manitoba, 

R. W. Bro. Corbet Locke, Morden, Grand Senior Warden, 

R. W. Hugh Bain, Prince Albert, Grand Junior Warden, 

R. W. Bro. H. C. Taylor, R. W. Bro. R. B. Perguson, 

Bro. E. A* Braithwaite, of Edmonton Lodge Ho* 53, 

The Right Reverend Cyprian Pinkham, D.D., Bishop of 
Saskatchewan and Calgary, The Rev. Bro. A. Stunden, B.A., 
Rector of All Saints*, G. R. P. Kirkpatrick, E. 0. 

Emery, T. W. Lines, E. A. Braithwaite, M.D., 

A. R. B. Hearn, G. H. Graydon, T. W. Chalmers, 

Building Committee, Clark and Polliot, contractors, 
Edmiston and Plater, Architects, E. G. Wilson, M.D., 

Mayor.” 

The corner stone of All Saints* Church, Edmonton 
was laid by R. ?/. Bro. C. W. Sutter , . . 

The proceedings closed, with the benediction by 
the Grand Chaplain. 

Evidently the builaing of the new church proved to be a 
strain on the resources of the congregation for references in 
the minutes of the Executive Committee of Synod 1 ^ indicate that 
the vestry applied for and received ”a grant of £50 per annum 
for two years based on the intention of erecting a new church 
in the said parish in the immediate future.” The Society for 
Promoting Christian Knowledge also promised £100 towards the 


114. ExCom. June 19th, 1895. 









54 


1 I K 

new church* During the same year the Executive Committee 

sanctioned the sale of the original nine acres for $300 6 

The old church was sold by auction for $50 and used for a 

stable, much to the indignation of Canon Newton who said, “It 

ought to have remained where it was built, and the ground around 

the Church would have made an excellent Church of England 
n *7 

cemetery." In addition, the three lots at the corner of 

McKay Avenue and 106th Street were sold for $500. 13S 

Work on the new church proceeded steadily and by the 
beginning of October it was possible to report that n the outside 
work of the new All Saints’ Church is completed and plastering 
has commenced. The building will have a very fine appearance." 11 ^ 
The dedication of the new church took place on Sunday, 

January 12th, 1896, and the ceremonies were thus described 

120 

in the local newspapers 

The dedication of the new All Saints 1 Church on 
Third Street took place yesterday. The ceremony was 
conducted by His Lordship, the Bishop of Saskatchewan 
and Calgary, assisted by the following clergy; the 
Reverend A. Stunden. Rural Dean, Edmonton; the 
Reverend H. A. Gray, South Edmonton; the Reverend 
C. H. Andras, We taskiwin; the Reverend G. C. d'Easum, 

Fort Saskatchewan; the Reverend E. W. Goodman, Red 
Deer; the Reverend R. Connell, Beaver Lake, and the 
Reverend C. B. Beck, Belmont. The ceremony began 
at 11 o’clock when members of the building committee 
and the clergy entered the church in procession, 
the clergy taking up seats within the chancel rail. 

The service was sung by the Reverend A. Stunden; 
the first lesson was read by the Reverend R. Connell, 
and the second by the Reverend E. W. Goodman. The 
dedicatory prayer was offered by Bishop Pinkham ¥/ho 
also preached an eloquent and appropriate sermon 
on the text, ’’This is none other but the house of 
God, and this is the gate of Heaven.” (Gen. 28*17) 

In the evening a fully choral service was rendered 
commencing at 7 p*m*, the clergy entering in procession 
as in the morning. The service was read by the 
Reverend Messrs, d’Easum and Gray, the first lesson 
by the Reverend C. B. Beck, and the second by the 
Reverend C. H. Andras* The sermon was delivered by 
His Lordship, Bishop Pinkham. The full choir of 

115. Ex, Com. May 2nd, 1895. 116. ExCom. Aug. 9th, 1895. 

117. Newton, p.67 118. ExCom. Oct;. 3rd, 1895. 

119. EB. Oct. 7th, 1895. 120. EB. Jan. 13th, 1896. 












57 


twelve voices was present at both services under the 
leadership of Mr. Lines and acquitted themselves with 
all credit. P.H. Andrews was organist. The attend¬ 
ance at both services was very large taxing the efforts 
of the ushers, Messrs. Poster, Bragg, and Bridges, to 
the utmost. The offertory for the day amounted to 
sixty dollars of which thirty-five went to the 
building fund. 

During his remarks in the morning His Lordship 
expressed his regret at the absence of the Reverend 
Canon Hewton who had established the first All Saints* 
Church at Edmonton many years ago. He also alluded to 
the services of Mr. Becher, now of Morden, Manitoba, 
who had been one of the first to put forth exertions 
for a new church, and had contributed, liberally to¬ 
wards it before leaving. Of the building itself the 
Bishop said that it vvas the best belonging to the 
Church of England in the Horth Wes# Territories, with 
the exception of the church in Regina. That building, 
being completed, excelled to that extent in outside 
appearance but was no better in comfort or elegance 
inside. He believed that the congregation had done 
wisely in waiting until they could build as they had.. 

The building contract of the church with extras 
amounted to $3,500, and the total to cost $5,100 
provided as follows* S.P.C.K., $500; Bishop Pinkham 
$100; proceeds of sale of old church property, $500; 
proceeds of sale of first church site $300; Guild 
of Saint Agnes, $140; Willing Workers, $75; contri¬ 
butions by members, $2,000; loan, $1,500. The contri¬ 
butions of the Willing Workers were for the purpose 
of supplying electric light, and that of the Guild 
of Saint Agnes to supply choir sea.ts, lectern, 
carpets, and curtains for the chancel, which latter 
have not arrived. A pulpit will probably be erected 
shortly by special contributions. The font is given 
in memory of a child. The seats are of oak and were 
supplied by J. T. Blowey. The plans of the building 
were by Edmiston and Plater, and the contractors 
were Clark and Polliott, who are to be congratulated 
on the excellent work done and the comparatively 
short time occupied. 

1P1 

About this time a Mr. Horo.ce letter w appeared on the 
scene and undertook duties at varicuspoints in the diocese as 


121, Excom. Hov. 14th, 1895. **The Bishop spoke of correspondence 
which had passed between himself and Mr. Horace letter, now 
in Eastern Canad©., and stated that Canon Hurst, of the 
C. & C.C.S. approved of the employment of Ml.letter as a 
Lay Reader, the Bishop stating his intentio of placing 
Mr* letter at Victoria on the Saskatchewan River from 
which place petitions had from time to time come for a 
clergyman or lay res.der to be sent. " 







. . .... 

. 


. 


• . 

* 

. 

• . 

. 

. 

t ' 4 

. 

t 

-. ' . r ... 

. 

. 

... 

, • - 

. • ■ \ ,... • • . : 1 *. .... • 

. 

. ■ 






... 


. 






sr 


a stipendiary lay reader. He conducted services on a number of 

occasions in All Saints* and some months after the opening of 

122 

the new church, presented a pulpit. In the following year he 
presented a hell, the circumstances of which are thus reported:^'-* 
"A belfry is being erected near All Saints* Church in which the 
bell, presented by Mr. letter, will be suspended. The work will 
probably be completed by the end of the week and the bell be in 
place by Sunday.** In another place in the same paper it is 
recorded that *’the new bell • • • was consecrated last evening 
by Bishop Pinkham. A short consecration service was held out¬ 
side and afterwards an address, explanatory of the occasion, 
was given by his Lordship. Ifr 

At the meeting of the Executive Committee of Synod on 
March 18th, 1897, the Bishop announced that he had accepted the 
resignation of the Reverend Alfred Stunden and, at the request 
of All Saints’ congregation, had appointed the Reverend Henry 

Allen Gray, M.A., to succeed him. The induction of the new 

124 

rector took place on Sunday evening, April 4th, at the hands 
of the Bishop, assisted by the Reverend ¥. R. Burns, end 
Mr. E. Fetter. In his address the Bishop."referred in a few 
appropriate sentences to the unusual occurrence of two ministers 
being inducted the same day in two parishes so close together 
(the Reverend W. R. Burns had been inducted to Holy Trinity that 
morning) and also spoke in feeling terms of the good work done 
by Mr. Fetter, and the assistance which he had in every way 

rendered to the Church and parish. tt 

During the summer of 1897 the Reverend H. A. Gray was 
in England with the Bishop, acting as his chaplain at the 
Lambeth ConferenceHis place at All Saints* was filled 


122. EB. Nov. 26th, 1896 
124. EB. Apr. 5th, 1897 


123. EB. May 13th, 1897. 
125. EB. Jun. 14th, 1897 






* 

! • . . ... i 


.. . 

.... * , ? 

. . ■ . : .. . . .; .. . .' V ' 


. i 



* 


, 

. . . .. . 

. u . , ■ 



• ■ ■ ; 

. 




. 


* ■ 

- 

■ • < . ... '... J 

. . . . . . . . ■ . : ■ . . ■ i '. 

* « .. , ., . ■ . ... •_> 

• ■ .... 

• ' ■ ..... 

. 

. 

< 'i’s .. 

. 












. 










S< 7 

by the Reverend W. R. Blackford, of Tecumseh, Michigan, and 
formerly of Ontario. Before leaving Mr. Gray called for tenders 
for the erection of a brick rectory on one of the lots near 

1 Of* 

All Saints 1 church. " Work was begun almost at once under 

the direction of the contractor, W. H. Clark. 12 * 7 The rector 

i pa 

returned early in September and moved into his new house. 

Unfortunately, having been built by Mr. Gray himself, it was 
never properly the rectory and when he left it passed into 
other hands. It stands today at the north side of the church 
as an apartment house. 

By 1899 it became apparent that accomodation must be 

provided for the Sunday School and other organizations. In 

129 

September it was announced that "plans for a Sabbath 
school building to be erected in connection with All Saints* 
church are being prepared by Sdmiston and Johnston, 
architects. The building is to be thirty by forty feet, one 
story in height. . • . There will be two classrooms at the 
end, one of which will be used as a chapel for weeknight 
services. Arrangements for concerts are included.* 1 

The contract for the erection of the building was let 
to J. Ball and Sons at an estimated cost of $1400 1 ^ and the 
members of the congregation worked valiantly to raise the funds 
required. The completed building was used for the first time 
on Sunday* January 14th,, 1900• 1 '^ 1 

About this same time, on Monday* January 16 th,Mr. 

Vernon West Bar ford arrived from Q,u* Appel le Station to be 


126. SB. Jun. 10th, 1897. 

127. SB. Jun. 26th, 1897. 

128. SB. Sep. 9th, 1897. 

129. SB. Sep. 7th, 1899. 

130. SB. Oct. 9th, 1899. 

131. SB. Jan. 19th, 1900. 

132. SB. Jan. 19th, 1900. 









t 


* 


. 












. .. : 




: ■ . . ' 


. . 



ia 

organist and choirmaster at All Saints 1 . In addition to his 
professional duties he has taken a lively interest in the musical 
activities of the community* At the time of writing he has 
established what must he a unique record in western Canada, if 
not in the whole dominion, by completing fifty-two years 
service at All Saints*• 

With the continued growth of Edmonton it became necessary 

to extend the work of the Church by opening a mission in the 

north-eastern part of the town. In the fall of 1904 the Bishop 

133 

reported to the Executive Committee ’ that Mr. E. E. Allport, 

B.A., B.Sc•, (Cantab.), had written to him asking for work in 

the Diocese with a view to reading for Holy Orders. It was 

decided that he should be placed in the Mission of Horth East 

Edmonton under the Reverend H. A. G-ray at a salary of $550 per 

annum, Mr. Allport arrived in Edmonton from Calgary on Wednesday, 

October 5tn, but does not seem to have stayed for much more 

than the winter and apparently never proceeded to ordination. 

In the Spring of 1905 the Executive Committee concurred in the 

Bishop’s suggestion 135 that Mr. Herbert H. Wilkinson* B.A.* of 

Trinity College, Toronto, soon to be ordained Deacon, be placed 

in the Mission of Horth East Edmonton. 

It would appear that he and Mr. G-ray were kindred spirits, 

at least to the extent that they were both interested in work 

among boys and young men. Quite evidently such interest was 

needed for in 1892 the "Edmonton Bulletin" had commented 
136 

editoriallys "The boys of this country as a rule are too 


133, ExCom, Sep. 27th, 1904, 

134, EB. Oct. 6th, 1904. 

135. ExCom, Mch. 22nd, 1905. 

136. SB. Dec. 19th, 1892. 










Gf 


precocious. They know too much and do too little. They can 
give you all the latest gossip or talk horse by the hour, and 
a great many smoke, chew, and swear. Mr. Campbell, the new 
principal of the school, is now teaching the schoolboys to 
play football in their spare time. This is a very good thing 
and it is strange that it was not done before. . • . ” Haen 
Mr. Gray came to All Saints 1 he not only served on the School 
Board for a number of years but was instrumental in forming 
a Young Men’s Institute which^ 37 occupied a building on Second 
Street* placed at its disposal by the generosity of a private 
individual. In the following year, 1900, Mr. Gray and six-of 
the boys* James Greenwood* James McDougall* George Murray, 

Walter Taylor* Paul Greenwood* and Eddie McDougall, spent ten 
days in camp at Sandy Lake • 

When Mr. Wilkinson came he brought with him word of the 
Boys’ Brigade which, he said, was ’’now a well known and success¬ 
ful organization throughout the cities of Ontario, from a dis- 

139 

ciplinary as well as a social and religious point of view.” 

On Monday, July 24th, 1905, he presided at a meeting which 
established a committee to investigate the possibility of 
forming a company. It had been hoped that the company could 
be organized in time to parade at the ceremonies connected 
with the inauguration of the Province of Alberta on September 1st, 
1905. That was not possible and. the All Saints’ Company came 
into being on Monday* October 23rd* with the following officers 


137. S3. Sep. 25th* 1899. 

138. SB, Aug, 13th, 1900. 

139. SB. Jul. 2.4th, 1905. 

140. SB. Oct. 25th, 1905. 









Capt. H. J. Venn; 1st. Lieut, H. E. Grant; 2nd. Lieut. H. G. D. 
Kemp, who was also secretary treasurer.” The movement grew and 
it was not many years before it could boast a city-wide member¬ 
ship of 160 uniformed members, although it eventually lost its 
identity in the newly formed Boy Scout movement. 

As time went on, and particularly after his ordination to 
the priesthood, Mr. Wilkinson concentrated most of his attention 
on the North Bast Mission which soon became the parish of Saint 
Paul of which he became the first vicar in 1907. 

Meanwhile All Saints* continued to grow and it became 
necessary to enlarge the church. The alterations were carried 
out during the summer of 1905 and it was re-opened on Sunday, 
October 29th. 3 - 43 ' The morning service was conducted by the 

Bishop and Evensong by the Very Reverend E. C, Paget, M.A., D.D., 
Dean of Calgary. The newspaper article goes on to say that 
M three memorial windows will be placed in the church very soon, 
and several other fixtures and decorations which have not arrived 
The new pipe organ, to cost $4,000,, will not arrive until spring. 
Actually it was not installed until the following September, 3 ' 42 
Prior to the Diocesan Synod in August, 1908, the Reverend 
H. A. Gray was created Archdeacon of Edmonton, a tribute not only 
to his ability but also to the growing size and importance of 
this area of the diocese. In 1909 the Reverend George Henry 
Webb was appointed assistant rector, and succeeded Archdeacon 
Gray as rector when, on March 25th, 1914, he was consecrated 

as the first Bishop of Edmonton. 

141. SB, Oct. 28th, 1905. 

142. EB. Sep. 25th, 1906. 






; 












c 




, ' . x .. : ; . i =.0 •- ■ i j 

. . . .. 






? 


• ' 




« ■ • ■ 











Archdeacon Gray stands out as one of the most prominent 


^3 


figures in Church life in Edmonton not only because of his 
contribution as Rector of All Saints 1 and Archdeacon of Edmonton,, 
but also because of the high office to which he was called in 
1914 when he became the first Bishop of the new diocese* 

Henry Allen Gray was an Englishman, born in London in 1863. 

At the age of twenty-three he came to Canada and for a few 
years engaged in ranching in southern Alberta. During that 
time he came under the eye of Bishop Pinkham and served 
acceptably as Lay Reader and delegate to the Diocesan Synod. 

He is mentioned as such in the Synod Journals of 1889 and 1892. 

In the latter year he entered Saint John’s College* Winnipeg, 
where he seems to have been a better than average student, 
receiving the B.A. degree in 1895, and the M.A, three years 
later. He was made deacon in 1895 and licensed to Holy Trinity, 
South Edmonton* and received priest’s orders in the following 
year. Shortly after Easter, 1897, he moved to .All Saints* and 
during that summer accompanied the Bishop to England to act as 
his chaplain at the Lambeth Conference. From 1904 to 1907 he 
was Rural Dean of Edmonton, and in the latter year became the 
first Archdeacon of Edmonton. On his election to the episcopate 
the "Edmonton Bulletin” said of him: 143 

- Since coming to Edmonton Archdeacon Gray has been 
actively associated with many public organizations. He 
is chaplain of the 19th Dragoons and had the pleasure 
of having the first company of cadets ever raised in 
the city. For several years he did excellent service 
on the school board (one school having been named 
after him, and has been a member of the Board of 
Managers of the hospital since the establishment of 
that institution in 1908. A public-spirited man in 


143. SB. Jan. 30th, 1914 













£> - 







1t 


' 








J 



'■ . j 





o. 




■. 

■ 










every way Bishop-elect Gray evinces a lively interest 
in the youth of the city, among whom he finds a great 
opportunity for doing good in his office as magistrate 
of the juvenile court, • . • 

(b) Saint Michael * s Congregation (188 2- 1888 ) 

One of the early problems of the Church in Edmonton had 
been the lack of a site near the centre of the community with the 
result that the first church, All Saints*, had been built near 
what is now the junction of 121st Street and Victoria Avenue, 
a mile or more from the settlement# As the village grew it 
became necessary to organize a second congregation further east, 
and this was the beginning of Saint Michael*s. 

The first recorded service 144 took place at three o* clock 
on the afternoon of Sunday, March 12th, 1882, More than a year 

later a meeting of the members of both congregations was held 

*1 

in the Public School house * In addition to twenty parishion¬ 

ers the Bishop was present and "expatiated on the future great¬ 
ness of Edmonton," At this meeting the advisability of moving 
All Saints* was discussed but it was decided that instead the 
afternoon service there should be discontinued and a service held 
at some suitable place in the eastern part of the town# A vestry 
was appointed for each congregation, and that for Saint Michael*s 
consisted of Messrs, J# Mowat, J# V. Kildahl, R# Michael, and 
R# Secord, with Messrs, George A# Watson and A# Dunlop as 
Churchwardens# Shortly afterwards the use of the Masonic Hall 

was secured and evening services began there on Sunday, 

$ 

September 30th, 1883# By December the congregation had adopted 

Saint Michael as its patron saint 145 and Dr# Newton was 

147 

enthusiastic in his annual report $ 

144. EB. Mch. 11th, 1882. 

145# EB, Sep# 15th, 1883# 

146. EB# Dec. 15th, 1883# 

147# Appendix II, Letter No, 9, p.«2// 














si 









c 








It gives me pleasure to report that this evening; 
service has - considering the circumstances - suc¬ 
ceeded beyond my expectations. In a changing popula¬ 
tion of perhaps two hundred souls all told, and with 
three other churches, our evening congregation has 
hitherto averaged about fifty persons. The congrega¬ 
tion is looked upon as quite established and the 
Churchwarden has mentioned to me the consideration 
of a second church. Some, I am told, who do not 
come regularly might attend our service if we had 
this church: also we now pay rent, and the rent 
helps to use up our funds. Certainly at this evening 
service I have been able to do two things I could 
never succeed in doing permanently before, viz. to 
influence and gather young men; and also to render 
our beautiful service with some degree of propriety. 

We have a very nice organ for the most part paid for, 
and a very fair choir, led excellently by a Lady who 
a few months ago seemed lost to us through her 
marriage, yet whose husband is now our people’s 
Churchwarden and as efficient a helper - without 
exception - as any I have ever had in Edmonton. 

As the report indicates the congregation had been able 

to raise one hundred and fifty dollars towards the cost of the 

organ but before long difficulties had occurred and the services 

were discontinued. The ’’Edmonton Bulletin” of April 5th, 1884, 

contains the bare announcement that ’’until arrangements are 

completed for building Saint Michael’s Church in the eastern 

part of the town that congregation will meet at All Saints’ at 

the usual hour in the evening.” The whole story, however, 

is told in Dr. Mewton’s next report: ^8 

. • . the whole service until the middle of March 
was looked upon as a great success. Although I have 
seen many changes here, and got accustomed to many 
disappointments, I too became quite sanguine about 
a permanent congregation at that end of the village. 
However, as spring advanced the congregation gradu¬ 
ally became less. There was nothing to do in the 
village, and the young men of whom the congregation 
was chiefly composed, left Edmonton mostly for 
places were employment was to be had, others moved 
on to their farms too far ’from town’ to attend this 
service. As money was scarce I was asked until the 
expenses were settled at the hall to meet on Sun¬ 
day evenings at All Saints’ the few who could 


148. Appendix II, Letter Ho. 13, 












■ - • 







t 


< 











t 




i 


i 



r 


t 















attend from the East End* This I did for the summer 
hoping circumstances would change, or bring in 
strangers belonging to our church who Would attend 
that service. Our Church furniture was retained at 
the Masonic Hail partly to see what the Churchwardens 
would see their way to do, and partly as security for 
rent. The Churchwardens too have been absent and 
nothing could be done in a satisfactory manner. 

How, however, two ladies of All Saints* have col¬ 
lected sufficient funds to clear the organ from 
debt and to settle dues for rent, etc. As soon as 
accounts are rendered this money will be paid over, 
and All Saints* will possess the organ until the 
East End people require it, and pay back to an 
organ fund at All Saints* the amount received from 
these ladies. It would give me the sincerest 
pleasure to revive this congregation as soon as 
it is practicable, and the time is ripe to give 
it permanency. 

The opportunity to revive the Saint Michael*s congregation 

evidently occurred much more quickly than he had anticipated and 

in Hovember, 1885, an advertisement appeared in the paper as 

followss 149 "Persons having lots for sale in the village of 

Edmonton suitable for an English Church and parsonage may 

communicate with the Reverend Canon Hewton. Preference would 

be given to lots somewhere near the Hardisty Avenue.** 

There does not seem to have been any response to this 

advertisement and certainly no Church was built, for a year 

150 

later it was announced that 11 • . • services will be held by 
the Reverend Canon Hewton in the Edmonton School House at 7 
o’clock every Sabbath evening until Christmas. The subjects 
are, Hov. 14th, "Signs of the Times!** Hov. 21st, "Religion and 
the Beautiful!" Hov. 28th, "Religion and ScienceDec. 5th, 
"The Relation of the Church of England to other Denominations;" 
Dec. 12th, "Pagan Paiths and the Christian Religion;" Deo. 19th, 
"Christianity," According to a later news item these services 
were well attended. 


149. SB. Hov. 28th, 1885 

150. EB. Hov. 13th, 1886 



' 

. 

. 

, 

■ 

< 

■ 

, 

* : 

♦ 








. .. ..... V ' ; • • - 

ill . 

:1 . : . : : . . 

■ . . ) i: i 1 li 

: " % : t . : 1 ’ 

- '■; I.' ? : i 1 

' 








■ 

















Evidently Canon Newton made use of these services to present 

what he felt to be necessary popular teaching and the next series, 

delivered early in 1887, have a strangely modern ring. They are 

as follows: 151 * Jan. 9th, friendship;" Jan. 16th, "Love;" 

Jan. 23rd, "Marriage;" Jan. 30th, "The Children in the Home;" 

Feb. 6th, "The Model Husband;" Feb. 13th, "The Model Wife;" 

Feb. 20th, "How to be Handsome and Beautiful;" Feb. 27th, 

"The Saviour’s Golden Rule." These, too, are reported as being 

well attended, and that in spite of severe weather. 

Services in the school house continued until the Spring 

152 

of 1888 when a notice appeared on the door of All Saints* 
intimating that Canon Newton’s state of health would only 
permit him to take one service each Sunday, after Easter, and 
that in the morning at All Saints.* When the Saint Michael’s 
congregation assembled at the school house on the Sunday follow¬ 
ing this announcement they found the building locked and no key 
available. In the circumstances no further attempt was made to 
continue the services and Saint Michael’s lapsed. The removal 
of All Saints’ to the centre of the town two years later removed 
any necessity which had once existed for the establishment of 
the Saint Michael’s congregation. 

(c) Holy Trinity, South E d monton (Strathcon a) 

When the Calgary and Edmonton Railway line reached South 
Edmonton in 1892 a townsite was laid out on the river lots 
belonging to Joseph McDonald, a member of the vestry of All Saints’, 
Thomas H. Anderson, and Frederick H. Sache, who was to prove a 
good friend of the church in South Edmonton. By the Spring 
of the following year a few business premises had been 

151. EB, Dec. 11th, 1886. 

152. SB. Mch. 3rd, 1888. 







established on Whyte Avenue, named after the Superindent of the 

Canadian Pacific Railway, close to the station. The census of 

1892 showed a population of seventy-five people. 

A winding trail led from the station down to the river 

past the McDonald farm, and on to Walter’s Perry, near the 

present High Level Bridge. Another trail led to the lower 

ferries near the present Low Level Bridge. This bridge was 

opened in 1902 and a short railway line with the ambitious 

title, "The Edmonton, Yukon, and Pacific Railway,” which 

brought passengers to the north side. 

The first recorded Anglican service on the south side 

153 

took place on Sunday afternoon, September 2nd, 1883, at 

the home of Mr. Joseph McDonald® It would appear that services 

were held fairly regularly from thenceforth, for the Church 

154 

notice .-a month later is as follows? 

’’All. Saints 1 

Incumbent - Rev. Canon Hewton, Ph. Doc. 

Service on Sundays 11 

Afternoon service on the south side of 
the river at 3 o’clock. 

Evening service in the Masonic Hall, 

Edmonton at 6.30 G f clock 
Residence at the Hermitage. Members of 
the Church coming to Edmonton are 
invited to call on the clergyman.” 

There is no further evidence of activities on the south 

side of the river for several years until the parish of All 

1 5 

Saints’ was formally established on Monday, May 27th, 1889 
and its boundaries were defined to include M the land opposite 
on the south side of the Saskatchewan, ** It seeras probable 
that services were continued there by the Reverend Charles 
Cunningham who assumed charge of All Saints’ as a deacon, 
in July, 1890. During the summer of 1893 Mr. E. W. Ridley 

Be al, of St, John’s College, Winnipeg, was appointed to assist 

152. BB. Sept. 1st. 1883 154. SB. Oct. 13th, 1883 

155. EB. June 1st. 1889 





. 


















*X ■ . .. . 




-« 



: 








■: i. ;,J.; ■„ u/ 









.. ; : 










■ 














Mr. Cunningham with the work in South Edmonton. According to 
a brochure produced by the parish in connection with its 
fiftieth anniversary 156 "an attempt at a community church, 
available for different denominations, was not proving satis¬ 
factory, and the need for a church of their own was felt by the 
congregation. . . . Harry Wilson and Arthur McLean were appoint¬ 
ed churchwardens.” 

From the same source it appears that "a site on the corner 
of 81st. Avenue and 101st. Street 'was donated by the townsite 
company, and the work of building commenced. The 3.P.C.K 
made a grant of $250 and a further sum of $175 was subscribed 
by relatives of the Wilson family in the Old Country. Other 
donations were also received, and the task of erecting a frame 
building was completed under the guidance of Joseph Peters, a 
practical builder. Most of the work was done voluntarily by 
the men of the congregation but generous help was given by 
others outside the actual congregation® Planks supported on 
chairs served at first as pews, and an old packing case was 
covered with cloth and formed an improvised altar. A pulpit 
stood in the middle of the chancel. A small organ was given 
by Mr. Sachs." 

To Mr. Cunningham fell the honour of conducting the first 
service in the new building on Sunday, September 24th, 1893, 
at three o'clock in the afternoon.-^7 This was also his farewell 
service as he left on the Tuesday following "for Manitoba and 

England. 11 The opening of the first Holy Trinity Church was thus 

158 

described by the press: 


156. "A History of Holy Trinity, Edmonton, 1893-1943 

157. EB. Sep. 25th, 1893. 

158. EB. Sep. 28th, 1893. 


tt 











.. ■ 


. 




. 






• , . .. 








.20 




: . ;• 




. -■ 


: 


... 1 . ■ 


. 

I , i , 


. 





' 












7o 


Service was held for the first time in the new 
Church of the Holy Trinity, South Edmonton, on Sun¬ 
day last by the Reverend C. Cunningham, The carpen¬ 
ter work on the building is completed and the paint¬ 
ing is in progress. The formal opening will take 
place after the seats are in position. The size of 
the new building is thirty-five feet by twenty, with 
a vestry twenty feet by twelve, A neat spire adds 
greatly to the attractive appearance of the build¬ 
ing. The total cost will be about §1400. 

The next incumbent was the Reverend Alfred Stunden, of 

Birtle, Manitoba. He arrived on November 9th, 1893, and it 

was announced that he would conduct services morning and evening 

at All Saints’ and at three o’clock each Sunday afternoon at 

Holy Trinity. A special service was held in the Church at 11 

a.m. on Thanksgiving Day, November 20th, 1893, and on the 

following Sunday afternoon a large congregation assembled for 

the dedication of the Church, The Bishop performed the 

ceremony and preached M a most instructive and appropriate sermon 

from the text, ’Learn of me.’ The choir rendered the musical 

portion of the service with excellent spirit, 

At the next Annual Vestry Meeting, held on March 24th, 1894, 

an account of the Building Fund was rendered as follows: 

To amount of contract price of church which has 
been paid to contractors by subscriptions and 
proceeds of loan from the Imperial Bank of 


Canada,, secured by note ...e...$1000» 

In addition to this the furnace and fittings cost 
about $90• This has been partly paid for. 

The debt of the Church is. s 

To-note due Imperial Bank $525.00 

To balance due furnace 43.70 

To a/c for brick and sundry items 19,35 


Note - the Church building is complete but is 
practically unfurnished, the seats being chairs 
lent by a member of the congregation. All Saints’ 
Church* Edmonton* the rector of which takes duty 
at South Edmonton, was until the past few months 
in receipt of a grant of £100 sterling. Since Holy 
Trinity was commenced this has been withdrawn and 


159. EB, Bov, 27th, 1893 

160, EB. Apr * 2nd, 1893 









- 


. 

. 




e 


. 












both churches are self-supporting. The congregation 
of the Church is small and have been taxed to their 
utmost to reduce the debt of §588.05 and in view of 
the withdrawal of £100 from All Saints* Church, 

Edmonton are barely able to meet their share of the 
rector*s stipend, &c. 

Later in the yea.r occurs the first mention*^' of the Ladies* 
Guild who announced a promenade concert to be held in Parrish*s 
Hall on Eriday, August 26th. The harvest thanksgiving service 
took place at 7.30 p.m. on Sunday, October 7th. 

In spite of the pessimism which had been expressed at the 
annual meeting the parish must have continued to flourish 
because in the following year the Reverend Henry Allen Gray, B.A. 
who had recently been ordained deacon upon graduation from 
Saint J"ohn f s College, Winnipeg, was appointed to take charge 
of Holy Trinity. His parish also included Colchester, Clear¬ 
water, Leduc, and Oonfuring Greek. The new Gurate-in-charge 
quickly commended himself to the people and the parish continued 
to grow. **A new altar was made, and a frontal added. The 
pulpit was rebuilt, and the whole appearance made more attractive 
Substantial pev?s, made locally, had already taken the place of 
the old benches, a,nd the little church became an object of 
pride 

When the rector of All Saints* church left in 1897 Mr. Gray 
became temporarily priest-in-charge of that parish in addition 
to his work at Holy Trinity. Hot at &XX unnaturally when the 
congregation of All Saints* met after Evensong on Sunday, 

March 14th, “it resolved to petition Bishop Pinkkam to send 
the Reverend H. A. Gray, of South Edmonton, to All Saints 1 church 

161. EB. Apr. 2nd, 1894. 

162. W A History of Holy Trinity, Edmonton, 1893-1943. ,, 

163. EB. Men. 15th, 1897. 





-• 








f 





o . ■ • • 


? 


.;; ■: y o i 










i ;.."i : 








; v.: 


■ 








. . 




. 






f 


« 


* 








s 












Before very long word was received from the Bishop that he had 
acceded to their request, and on Sunday evening, April 4th, 1897 
he instituted and inducted Mr. Gray as rector of All Saints*. 

Thus ended what was perhaps the first full chapter in the life 
of Holy Trinity. 

On the same day, in the morning, the Bishop instituted 
and inducted the Reverend William Rothwell Burns, M.A., (Oxon), 
formerly Incumbent of Canmore, as the second rector of Holy 
Trinity. Mr. Burns remained in the parish for three years 
and then left in 1900. It would seem that on leaving Holy 
Trinity he took up farming for in the fall of the following 
year he, with his wife, is recorded as "spending a few days in 
Strathccna preparatory to returning to England where Mr. Burns 
will resume his ministerial duties. He has sold his farm in the 
vicinity of Leduc to Mr. N. Bell-Heath.**- L64 Subsequently he 
went to Australia where he was still living in 1950. Records 
are very scarce for this period and the minutes of only one 
meeting seem to have survived, those of the annual vestry 
meeting held on April 19th, 1898. They contain nothing more 
than the formal record of elections to office as, for instance, 
Mr. Robarts as People*s Warden, Mr. E. D. Smith as Incumbent*s 
Warden, Messrs. T. G. Alansen. and James Inkster as vestrymen, 
and Messrs James McKernan and Thos. Bennett as delegates to 
Synod. 

The next rector was the Reverend George Henry Webb who 
had been trained at Trinity College, Toronto, and had served 
a number of missions in Ontario before coming to Strathcona 


164. EB. Oct. 14th, 1901. 







/3 

from Holy Trinity, Colborne, in 1900. He arrived on Monday, 
October 1st of that year 165 and was inducted on the following 
Sunday morning by his younger brother, the Reverend William 
Fremantle Webb, later Archdeacon of Calgary. 

As time went on the site of the Church proved to be 
unsuitable. Hot only was it unpleasantly close to the railway 
shops and too far removed from the residential district but 
there was no space adjacent upon which to build a rectory. 

Consent for the removal of the church was secured from the 
Executive Committee of Synod, and at a Vestry meeting on 
April25th, 1901, it was decided that “when the Church be moved 
to the new? site it be placed upon a rubble and brick 
foundation,” and that the removal be left in the hands of 
the committee. The removal took place at once and a news- 

-j /?/? 

paper report in July says that “Holy Trinity Church,. Strath- 

cona, has been moved from its old site to a location on the 

same street north of Whyte Avenue«” During the same period 

the committee decided to proceed at once with the erection 

of a rectory to cost $2000and permission to contract a 

mortgage was sought from the Executive Committee who passed 

T 

the following resolutions “That this Committee approves 

the application of the Elector and Wardens of the Parish of 
Holy Trinity, Strathcona, for the consent of the Executive 
Committee to their borrowing the sum of $1980 for the purpose 
of building a rectory, and mortgaging the Church property, 
vis. lots 27, 28, 29, 30, of block 77 in the Town of Strath- 
cons,, as security to Edward Griffiths Roberts, of Strathcona, 


165. EH. Oct. 1st, 1900. 

166. EB. Jul. 22nd, 1901. 

167. Vestry Minutes, May 8th, 1901. 

168. ExCom. JuX. 10th, 1901. 










14 - 

and. that upon the mortgage being executed by the Hector and 

Wardens of the Parish and forwarded to the Secretary, the 

consent of the Executive Committee be endorsed thereon* 1 ' 

Prom the minutes of the special parochial meeting held 

on May 25th, 1904, it appears that Mr. Joseph McDonald had 

set aside a lot in Strathcona as a contribution to the building 

fund. This was now sold for §135. Under the leadership of the 

Reverend G. H. Webb the parish continued, to progress but 

evidently was not without its difficulties as in 1903 it was 

resolved that the Secretary of the Executive Committee "write 

to the Wardens of Holy Trinity Parish, Strathcona, informing 

them, that the Executive Committee have fixed the minimum salary 

for missionaries under their control at $700 per annum, and, 

as it appears from the report of the Rural Dean of Edmonton 

that the Rector of Ho3.y Trinity receives a smaller salary, they 

deem it incongruous that the rector of a self-supporting parish 

should receive a smaller stipend, and trust that the Wardens 

and Vestry will see their way to increase the stipend of their 

169 

rector at an early date." M The Reverend G. H. Webb remained 
in the parish until 1904 when he accepted the living of Saint 
John, Pincher Creek, to which he was inducted on June 20th. Hot 
only did he give a strong lead to Holy Trinity during his 
tenure of office but seems to have enjoyed a wide reputation 
as a fluent and forceful preacher. 

The next incumbent was the Reverend William Richard George, 

of Huron College, who at the time was incumbent of Saint Cyprian*a, 


169. ExCom. Sep. 2nd, 1903. 











Lacombe with Saint Mary's, Ponoka. He was evidently a bachelor 
as the vestry received permission for w the lease of the rectory 
at Strathcona for one year as it would not be required for a 
clergyman." Ke was instituted and inducted by the Bishop 
on Sunday, August 21st, 1904. He was ad so responsible for the 
parish of Saint Stephen* Colchester, but soon realised that if 
these growing areas were to receive adequate ministrations 
help would be required. Accordingly he approached the diocesan 
authorities and the Secretary of Synod was instructed to "inform 
the parish of Saint Stephen, Colchester, that the Committee 
favour the formation of a, new mission with Colchester as a 
centre, so soon as a clergyman can be obtained." 17 ^ 

Meanwhile, Holy Trinity continued to prosper. Various 
improvements in the property and surroundings were made and 
the congregation steadily increased in numbers so that the 
church was felt to be inadequate. A mild boom raised the hopes 
of many that means might be found to erect a permanent church, 
worthy of the parish* end plans to increase the size of the 
frame building were abandoned in favour of more ambitious plans 
to build a brick structure® The boom of 1906 was followed by a 
mild depression in 1907, end after the basement had been dug 
considerable difficulties were encountered* In the fall of the 
year it was found necessary to mortgage the church property for 
1X000* 172 Eventually the basement was roofed over and made a 
temporary church to serve until such time as the building could 

be completedo 

The Reverend W. H. George, who had been Rural Dean of 


170. ExCom* Jul. 19th, 1904. 

171. ExCom. Aug. 5th* 1904. 

172. ExCom. Sep. 10th, 1907. 






n 

? 

4 








Edmonton, 1907-1910, resigned in 1910 in order to become Vicar 
of Langley, B.G., and was succeeded by the Reverend David Tones, 
D-A-, (Saint David’s College, Lampeter), Incumbent of Taber. 

Mr- Jones did not enjoy very good health and passed away on 
Sunday, November 13th,„ 1910, having been rector for only three 
months. He was succeeded by the Reverend H- Irvibe Lynds, B.A., 
who came from Hew Brunswick and stayed for a year only, 
resigning in December, 1911. 

The Reverend Christopher Carruthers, from Saint John’s, 
Lloydminster, succeeded, to the parish, and was rector from 
1912 to 1927- It was under his energetic leadership that 
the present church was built- Meetings were held during 1912 
for the purpose of making plans for the completion of the 
building, and these plans materialized in the following year. 
Sunday, June 8th, 1913, was an outstanding day in the life of 
the parish for on it the foundation stone of the new Church 
was laid. Once again, as in the case of All Saints’, those 
responsible felt it necessary to invoke the aid of the Masonic 
order and the ceremonies were described at length in the press.^ 
The work of building progressed very rapidly, end use was 
made of tapestry bricks to relieve the bareness of the tower 
and west wall. During the time that the church was being built 
services were held in the Connaught Armouries® 

The Ghurch was officially opened on October 12th, 1913, 
when the Bishop of Calgary came to perform the office of 

dedication. Most of the furnishings were used for the first 


173. SB. June 10th, 1913 



; - 

..... . . 


. 

, f • 0 

- 

. e . « . "■ t . 

* < 



■ ' 




' 

: C* :• , ' •' - ' - , 

. 

' 




„ 

* 

■ 

c ■ « . ' ■■■ t - 




. 

. 






' ■ 

* 

« • 


< ■: i! • ' ■ • • • ; , 



4 





77 


time, and the new Church was a cause for deep thanksgiving to 
God. The Bishop preached on the text: f, This is none other 
hut the house of God.” (Gen. 28.17) Archdeacon Gray was 
the preacher at Evensong. 

(d) St. Pa ul’ s 

As the city grew it became apparent that a second church 

would be required, and on June 28th, 1905, a number of Churchmen 

from the north-eastern part of the city gathered for a meeting 

with the rector, the Reverend H.A. Gray, at Mr. Seward’s house 
174 

on Mamao Avenue." 

After opening with prayer the rector briefly pointed out 
the need for a Mission Church in this district, and then produced 
a plan and elevation of the proposed Mission Church prepared 
by Mr. Barnes. Mr. Gray said that he hoped to get a grant for 
a part if not the whole of the material. The two lots on 
Kinistino Avenue at the corner of 15th Street had been 

purchased in January on a note backed by two members of All 
Saints’ Church. 

The members present were unanimous in agreeing to help 
as much as they could. It was decided to proceed with the 
building, to be known as St. Paul’s, as soon as possible so 
that services might be held. A Building Committee was appointed 
and the members agreed that they would help the two carpenters 
to be employed, as much as possible. The Reverend H. H. Wilkin¬ 
son, who had recently arrived to assist Mr. Gray, was appointed 
Chairman of the Building Committee. 

174. Minute Book of St. Paul’s Church, June 28, 1905 to 
Jan. 5th, 1920 

175. Mow 96th Street and 109th Avenue. 









The Church was evidently erected very quickly and was used 
for the first time on Sunday, August 13th, 1905. On this 
occasion it was reported that "the building is not yet completed, 
and dedication services will be held later on. A congrega¬ 

tional meeting was held on the following evening and arrangements 
were made for the financial commitments of the Church in the 
immediate future. During the next few months a Communion Service, 
Lectern, and Bible were presented to the Church, and the Vestry 
of All Saints’ offered a belfry and organ. The belfry being 
too large was declined with thanks. 1/7 

The path of the new church was not altogether smooth and 
a somewhat stormy meeting vs/as held a year later 17 ^' over its 
finances. It all started when the proposal was made that 
electric light be installed. "Mr. T. W. Teape said that in 
view of the fact that the financial state of the church was not 
in any way improving it was best to let the matter of the 
electric fittings go. Contributions were decreasing as was 
also the attendance." Causes of the difficulty were discussed, 
as well as ways of getting out of it. One of the problems 
lay in the fact that as the congregation was not incorporated 
as a parish it could not assume liabilities which therefore became 
the personal obligations of the Churchwardens. Bor that reason 
it was-decided at a later congregational meeting-*-^ that Saint 
Paul’s should be constituted as a separate parish. By the 
beginning of 1907 the deed of erection for the parish had been 
issued, and the financial situation had improved sufficiently 
to permit the installation of electricity. 

176. SB. August 14th, 1905. 

177. Minutes, January 3rd, 1906, 

178. Minutes, June 26th, 1906. 

179. Minutes, September 17th, 1906. 












• J- • . .. 


. 

. .. •• . : . , ... ; . 

( 

■. * . . • . . . r . . ; . : . , jj 

■ 

* ■ • .... 

. 

........... 

■' ■ . 

* 




. . 

’ 












. t, . .. 

. • , 



























As we have seen from his connection with All Saints 1 Mr. 
Wilkinson was an enthusiast for hoys* work and youth organizations. 
He had introduced the Boys* Brigade to Edmonton, and had been 
instrumental in establishing Companies at All Saints 1 and Saint 
Paul's. Also during his first summer Mr. Wilkinson had been able 
to secure the formation of an Athletic Club 180 which continued to 
meet in the church for some years. Two years later, in 1907, 
the vestry decided to assist both these organizations by "paying 
half the cost of two lockers at the back of the church to be 
constructed so as to be available for seats.Hot very much 
later, with the shortsightedness typical of vestries, it was 
resolved "that the only course possible was for the (Boys') 

Brigade to meet elsewhere." 152 The Reverend .H. H. Wilkinson left 
the parish in 1908 to become priest-in-charge at Port Saskatchewan, 
and was succeeded by the Reverend H. H. Summers, M.A. (Oxon). By 
this time a Ladies' Aid had been formed and was active in its 
work about the church. During the summer of 1908 a resolution of ' 
thanks was passed by the vestry 15 ^ to that organization for its 
kindness in providing kneelers for the church. 

By 1908 the parish was evidently making steady progress as 
the vestry decided that "owing to the marked increase of the 
Sunday congregation, it is necessary that fifty more seats be 
obtained as soon as possible.This particular vestry evidently 
had a lively sense of its responsibilities for the spiritualities 
as well as the temporalities of the parish for at the same meeting 
it passed a resolution, "that owing to Mrs. H— —s late mental 

180. EB• August 16th, 1905. 

181. Minutes of Saint Paul's Vestry* March 12th, 1907. 

182. Op. cite May 12th, 1908. 

183. Op, cit. July 8th, 1908, 

184. Op. cit, November 10tli* 1908. 








? 


<■ 















. ■' I 














• v 




■ 































troubles it would be advisable to write and ask her to abstain 
from too stimulating beverages.” 

In spite of the growing numbers the parish seems still to 
have been faced with financial difficulties, and had not yet been 
able to provide a vicarage. It was therefore decided ’’that per¬ 
mission be granted to the Vicar to erect a shack on the Church 
lot." 185 

At the annual congregational meeting in 191P® 6 the vicar 
’’expressed his appreciation of the services of the church workers 
during the year, especially the Churchwardens and members of the 
vestry. He reported that there was a flourishing branch of the 
W.A. at Saint Paul’s, and that a branch of the Church of England 
Men’s Society had been formed. Particular mention was made of 
the valuable and painstaking work which had been done by the 
Sunday School teachers, organist, and members of the choir. He 
mentioned that the parish had, this coming year, to raise $200 
more than last year towards the stipend, and suggested that the 
envelope system should be pushed.” 

The first mention of Saint Paul’s in the proceedings of the 
Executive Committee of Synod affords an interesting sidelight on 
the character of the parish. At its usual vestry meeting it had 
been decided that ”a letter be written to the Bishop from the vestry 
explaining the financial and general condition of the parish.” ' 

At the next meeting of the Executive Committee, ”a letter was read 
from the Wardens of Saint Paul’s, Edmonton, giving an account of 
financial difficulties in connection therewith. The letter stated 
the wish of the congregation to close with the Reverend H. H. 

185. Op. cit. July 13th* 1909. 

186. Minutes of Saint Paul’s Annual Meeting, Jan. 3rd, 1911. 

187. Minutes of Saint Paul’s Vestry,April 18th, 1911. 









J : . ; 


. 





. ... '. ■ . 




' 





o ■ . £ . . sr> J; 


. 

c. 

. ■ 

./. ... ' ' U . 01 ' , .\.0 


. . 

' 

• ■ 

. . : .. ■ , ' : • . , ■. ■ : iJ* 

. 

- = ' • . ; ' ... ^ i 

: . .. , ■' '0 ■■ .i.. J ; .• .; ... .. . ./ • J . .. a-t.. • 


.. : 


. o ■’ ■ * 


..... , 

. 








'. ; 


J ; 


i £ , 









j 


... ' . ' .. .. i.) ' »/ 'I0J w ,L'*4 : ' ! ..." •’ 1 tl Ti 6* ©(l! 


















Summers, who is leaving on May 31st, with his stipend paid up: 
that they were at present one month’s stipend in arrears to him: 
that while they would make every effort to meet their current 
expenses they expected a shortage of from fifteen to twenty-five 
dollars each month for the next few months, and presented a 
statement of their anticipated income and expenditure therefor, 

*Archdeacon Gray informed the meeting that the great diffi¬ 
culty in the parish is the unstable character of the congregation, 
many of its members being ’homesteaders’ who resided there only 
for periods, and that the establishment of adjoining parishes 
had depleted the original congregations at Saint Paul’s consider¬ 
ably.”^®^ A loan of one hundred dollars was made and another 
financial crisis was passed. 

The Reverend H. H. Summers left at the beginning of June, 
1911, to return to England and was succeeded by the Reverend 
George Howcroft, M.A. Q^uite evidently the new rector was more 
experienced and aggressive than either of his predecessors and 
the minutes of vestry meetings take on a very different tone. 

At his first vestry meeting the proposal to purchase a nearby 
house for use as a vicarage was rejected both because of its 
unsuitability and also because there was still thirteen hundred 
dollars owing on the church building. 

Shortly afterwards arrangements were made for a canvass by 
the men of the parish to gain the interest and support of the 
residents not at presented connected with the church, and to 
improve its financial position. As a result the vicar was able 
to report that ”the weekly subscribers by the envelope system 


188. ExCom. May 11th, 1911 












5 



had been raised from twenty-two subscribers subscribing about 
$7 •600 per week, to sixty-six giving $20.80£. This was considered 
most satisfactory 

By 1913 a rectory had been erected at a total cost of 
$4190.30^ and a number of structural improvements made to the 
church building itself. Interest was being paid on the church 
building loan and the annual meeting of that year was marked 
by an air of general optimism. At a vestry meeting later in 
the year the possibility of enlarging the church Y/as discussed. 

In the summer of 1922, outside the period at present under 
review, the parishes of Saint Paul and Saint Andrew were 
amalgamated, retaining the buildings of the former, and forming 
a single parish to be known as Saint Stephen's, 

(e) Christ Church ^ 9G 

The first All Saints' Church had been built a mile or so 
west of the village of Edmonton, and then when opportunity offered 
had been moved to a more convenient site. As time passed, 
however, the town spread westwards and during the first decade 
of the present century there were many houses built or planned 
west of 109th Street, During the winter of 1908-1909 the members 
of the Church of England resident in that area felt that the time 
had come for the erection of a new parish there, and on Thursday) 
March 26th, 1909, a meeting was held at the home of Mrs. 3?. S. 
O'Connor to discuss the matter. As a result of this and subse¬ 
quent meetings a deed or erection was issued by the Bishop on 
April 1st, 1909, constituting as the parish of Christ Church that 


189. Minutes of Saint Paul's Vestry, October 10th, 1911. 

190. Based upon a brochure published at the 40th anniversary of 
the parish: Porty Years On , Christ Church, Edmonton, 
1909-1949, 20 pp. 









part of the city of Edmonton west of the lane between 110th 
and 111th Streets and north of the river. 

At a congregational meeting held on Easter Monday, 

April 12th, 1909, at Mr. Nightingale’s School, "Westward Ho,” 
on 117th Street, the name of the Reverend Robert Jefferson, at 
that time chaplain of the school, and formerly Curate of All 
Saints’, was submitted to the Bishop for appointment as rector. 

The proposal was accepted by the Bishop and he was duly 
appointed# Messrs. W. H. Nightingale and T. M. Grindley became 
the first Churchwardens, while the vestry consisted of Messrs. 

G. B* O’Connor, James Henderson, G. W. Swaisland, E. C. Bov/ker, 
W# MeNab, W. J. Rolfe, A. W. Challand, and George H. Cowan. 

Mr. C. L. Gibbs was appointed Honorary Secretary-Treasurer. 

Two lots at the corner of 116th Street and 102nd Avenue 
were purchased from the Hudson’s Bay Company, and the first 
Christ Church erected there. The necessary funds were raised 
by a personal canvass of the parishioners by Messrs. ¥. H. 
Nightingale and G. B. O’Connor. The Bishop of Calgary opened 
the church on Sunday, November 7th, 1909. 

During the first few years the congregation flourished, and 
it became necessary to build an addition to the first church. 

Mr. Jefferson served the parish until January 28th, 1912 when 
impaired health necessitated his immediate resignation. Later 
he served in the Diocese of Ottawa, to which diocese he was 
consecrated Bishop on Saint Andrew’s Day, 1939, He was suc¬ 
ceeded on Bebruary 4th, 1912, by the Reverend John Joseph 
RobiB.sonp M.A., formerly Dean of Belfast, who had been serving 
Saint Andrew’s Church while visiting his son, D. L. Robinson, 
an Edmonton barrister. Mr. Robinsan served the parish until he 







was appointed Warden of Saint John’s College, Winnipeg, on 
Christmas Day, 1912* Prom that time until April 27th, 1913, 
the Reverend Arthur Murphy was locum tenens. 

The Reverend C. W. McKim, M*A*, formerly Archdeacon of 
Keewatin, came to the parish on May 2nd, 1913. His incumbency 
was one of considerable missionary activity, and the development 
of the western portion of the city of Edmonton made advisable 
the beginning of missions from Christ Church which eventually 
became the parishs of Saint John (now Saint Paul’s), Saint 
Peter, and Saint Marie. 

(f) Saint Andrew 1 s 

Unfortunately, there are no minute books for Saint And_rew*s, 
Jasper Avenue, East,; before January 7th, 1914, so that any 
history of the period under review is necessarily limited to 
snatches from other sources. The first mention of Saint Andrew 1 s 
in the Executive Committee of Synod occurs on June 8th, 1909, 
when 11 the matter of a site for Saint Andrew’s parish, Edmonton, 
having been introduced and information given by Archdeacon Cray 
it was resolved that whilst appreciating the great difficulties 
of Saint Andrew’s, Edmonton, this committee feels that the matter 
is not sufficiently advanced to justify this committee in taking 
any s teps . 1,1 ^ 

Evidently, however, the new parish went ahead because at 
the next annual congregational meeting at All Saints’ the rector 
’’gave a statement of the funds of Saint Andrew’s parish.” 192 
In 1910 the parish'was placed under the care of the Edmonton 
Mission, with the Reverend Oswyn Creighton as priest-in-charge. 
Writing to the Archbishop of Canterbury at the end of that year 
Archdeacon Cray comments thus upon the situations ° H I should 
iflT ExCom. June 8th, 1909. 

192* Minutes of the Vestry of All Saints’, Jan. 5th, 1910. 

193. A.W.C.P* Occasional Paper, Ho. 1, Jan. 1911, p,2 








■ • .u . f : v .1 X 


* ? 

: , • ... . ■ i ■■ . ■ ■ ’. 

. ■ - 

' i , ; .. . . • • ' • . iii. - ■' ■' •. - - 

. 

| 

! 

• • * . 

. , • « i ' >• ' 

. 

.. 

- 

: ; . , • ' . .. ■ • i 

' " . ' ■ ■ . ■ f ■■■ T ' ! " : .. "i 


< « . 

1 . .... . 






like to bear my testimony to the good results that are develop¬ 
ing from the help you have afforded us. At the beginning of the 
year there were three churches - All Saints*, Saint Pauls, 
partly supported by Mission funds, and the newly established and 
self-supporting parish of Christ Church. In addition to these 
there was the parish of Saint Andrew, in the east end of the 
city, without a site, church, or clergyman, or the means of 
securing them. • • . Today Saint Andrew*s Church is an accom¬ 
plished fact, and a congregation of nearly a hundred gathers 
there for woship. ...” 

Care of the parish by the Mission was evidently only a 
temporary measure and at a vestry meeting at All Saints* at the 
beginning of 1S12 194 it was decided that a grant of two hundred 
dollars be made to Saint Andrew*s church for the stipend of the 
Incumbent for 1912 .* Christ Church, Edmonton, agreed to give 
$150 for the same purpose. 

The Reverend J® J. Robinson, M.A., afterwards Rector of 
Christ Church, is listed as Incumbent of Saint Andrew*s in 
the Synod Journal for 1911* He was succeeded by the Reverend 
IT orman Ashby * M.A. (Cantab), who had served for a time at 
Radisson, Saskatchewan, and who left Saint Andrew* s in 1914 
to serve with the R.A.M.C. 

The parish was merged with that of Saint Paul in 1922 to 
form the present parish of Saint Stephen* 


194. ExCom® January 30th, 1912. 










Chapter Eleven 


THE RURAL MISSIONS . 

We now turn to the rural missions which came to life as the 
settlers moved in. As those who formed the spearhead of our 
advance in this area were much more anxious to see that all re¬ 
reived the ministrations of the Church than to keep records it 
is not surprising to find that the story does not follow an 
ordered pattern* Services were held in scores of farm homes 
and school houses across the country until obvious community 
centres sprang up in which churches could he built. Moreover, 
in this part of the diocese settlement did not follow the 
railway lines: in many places the mission was established 
before the railway arrived. In a few instances, as for example 
at Days land., which was for a time at the end of steel, the loca¬ 
tion of a missionary was determined, by factors connected with 
the railway. In the present survey, therefore, we have taken the 
parishes which came into existence before the establishment of 
the Diocese of Edmonton in approximate order of their foundation, 
and have grouped them somewhat arbitrarily using present units 
of administration. It will be noted that many parishes in 
the eastern part of the present diocese do not appear in the 
list. This, is because until 1928 they remained in the Diocese 
o f Sa sk a t c he w an. 

(a) THE STURGEON MISSION 
(i) Christ Church, Poplar Lake . 

When a curate-in-charge was appointed for All Saints 1 , 
Edmonton, in the summer of 1890 Canon Newton was able to fulfill 
his intention of concentrating upon the less settled, areas. Erom 
thenceforth he made his he ad. quarters at the bt urge on Rive/*, 










. 


. . 



. 






• v 






















. 

... ■ . ...... ..... . . • .. , 

. . .... 

. ■ .. .... . . , • s , .. ... . 








. 


- . 

.... 






- 








. 
























"7 

although, of course, he continued to live at the Hermitage• 

During the winter of 1890-91 he gave lectures and held services 
at the home of W. H. Carson. The Easter vestry meeting of 
1891 was held at the same place, and the following officers 
elected;-^5 W . H. Carson, Incumbent 1 s Warden, Wm. Taylor, 

People’s Warden, George Taylor, D. Craig, A. Carson, R. C. Dobbin, 
W. Latimer, K. Powell, James Beckett, and A. Cameron, vestry¬ 
men. At the same meeting it was recorded that "foundation 
timber is out and work will commence at once on a church building 
on the government grant of forty acres on S.W. i - l-55-24-W4th. 
The building will be twenty-eight feet by forty, of frame 
construction." Evidently the work did not continue as quickly 
as had been hoped, for in the fall services were still being 
held in houses. The first actual mention of services occurs 

I Q/? 

in October, 1891 when there is a casual announcement of 

service to he held bX Mr. Latimer's, with a sermon by Canon 

Hew ton on **The English Reformation. 11 

Even in those days it was not easy to raise funds for 

church purposes and in December, 1892, we find "the people of 

Poplar Lake » . * having a social evening on the 23rd instant 

in Mr. Ingram’s creamery. Proceeds in behalf of the Poplar Lake 
1 97 

clergyman." It says much for the faith and courage of pioneer 

clergy and people that the Church lias been so firmly established 
in and near Edmonton. 

A year later serious efforts were being made to raise money 

to build a church, and among the ventures to that end was a picnic 

held at Fielder’s Lake on July 12th, arranged by the Church- 

1 Q ft 

wardens, Messrs. W. Latimer and E. S. Mitchell. The picnic 

T95^ — EBT — AprTl~4’th^ 1891 ~ 

196. EB, October 24th, 1391. 

197. EB. December 12th, 1892. 

198. EB. July 3rd, 1893. 



































- . . 


' 

, . , ■ •• ' 


* 

. ' . . . . : : 


. 


I 

. . : 




■ 

... . 

.. . ;. I ' .a - -ajs 


. : 


. 






.. . 0 .... , 




, ' 

' . 

, . : 

* . 

. 


: i•: ' : ' ; '. • v-: /• 
















. 


« 







. . 



was a huge success and attracted several hundred people. Among 
the entertainments were the Eire Brigade Band, which was quite 
an institution in those days, swings, tennis and other games, 
and in the evening, dancing.Short addresses were given by 
Canon Hewton and Mr. Mitchell. A handsome sum was realised. 

In August a Confirmation service was held at the home of Mr. 
Latimer but the number of candidates is not mentioned. 

Other activities in the interests of the building fund were 
continued and the "Edmonton Bulletin" for April 30th, 1894, 
records a resolution of thanks from. Christ Church, Poplar Lake, 

"to all who helped with the recent ball. The proceeds were 
$53.60^." There seems to be no record of the actual building of 
the church but by the summer of the seme year it was ready for 
use, and the first service was held, in it on Sunday, duly 8th. 

As the building was not quite finished the formal dedication 
was deferred to a later date. Towards the end of the yearn* Canon 
Hew ton received a gift* of $96 from England which almost cleared 
the debt still remaining. Within a few months the debt was 
completely liquidated and sufficient funds had been raised tc 
permit the immediate completion of the church. 

200 

In April, 1896, Mr. W. E. Gibbons of the Sturgeon valley 
presented "a handsome pair of book-rests to the church," and in 
the following year efforts were made by socials and entertainments 
to raise money for an organ. One such effort, held in the 
school house on Monday, March 1st, brought in sixteen dollars. 
There is no record of Canon newton 1 s having re-visited England 
during his ministry in Edmonton but evidently he maintained 


199. EB. July 13th, 1893. 

200. EB. April 9th, 1896. 






connections there for a friend, Miss C. Gore Currie, sent him ”a 
very handsome altar cloth” for the Church. 201 In August, 1897, 

Mr* Kingston Powell presented to the congregation two acres of 
land in a square block around the church. 20 * 5 The members 
expressed their thanks at a congregational meeting, and arrange¬ 
ments were made for fencing the land in the near future. 

Canon Newton continued to work at Poplar Lake until 1899 
when he felt obliged to retire completely. A picnic to bid him 

farewell was held at the Hermitage on Thursday, July 20th* and 
203 

was reported. w as being "a decided success, end the Reverend 
Doctor might well be proud of the number of friends who gathered 
at his handsome grove to wish him a pleasant voyage end a safe 
return. A substantial sum was realised by the collection and 
by the sale of ice cream and presented to the Doctor by Mr* P. S. 
Mitchell, Churchwarden of Christ Church, Poplar Lake* Mr. 

Mitchell made a few well-chosen remarks, expressing the love and 
esteem, in which the Doctor was held in the district. In reply 
Dr. Newton said he sincerely regretted having to give up his 
work but felt that through ill-health he found himself unable 
to take the long drives to and from his appointments* but that 
he would always think most kindly of his congregation at Poplar 
Lake, and of all his friends throughout the country and town.” 

A month or so later he made his way south to the C.P.R. 
main line, pausing at Innisfail long enough to take the evening 
service there on Sunday, August 20th* 20 ^ in the following spring 
he wrote to John Pielders of Poplar Lake, saying that he was 

201 * EB. June 28th, 1897, 

202. EB. August 23rd, 1897. Diocesan records show this land to have 
been in the NWi-10-54-24-W4th. 

203. EB. July 24th, 1899. 

204. EB. August 31st, 1899. 











having a very pleasant visit at his old home in Surrey. Having 

completed his business in England, he intended to return to 

205 

Edmonton in the summer. He arrived in Edmonton on Thursday, 
July 19th, 1900, and in the following year he was able, at 

length, to sell the Hermitage, and made arrangements to move 
to Victoria, B.C. 

On Sunday, May 19th, 1901, he preached his farewell sermon 

in /ill Saints 1 Church. r, The subject of the sermon was ’The 

Beauty of Holiness,’ and the Reverend Canon Newton spoke in a 

scholarly manner of the refining influence of religion and all 

things that were good and beautiful. Religion and music elevated 

mankind to a higher mental and moral plane. The true Christian 

lives in and is ever surrounded by a halo of righteous happiness 

and peace. Religion did’good in making mankind good. He spoke of 

the life and work of Q,ueen Victoria, and of the labours and 

privations of the great missionaries who had given their lives 

to the Church, and the Cause of God. ’The beautiful,’ the 

Reverend Canon said,., ’is inexpressibly connected with religion. 

The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want; He maketh me to lie 

down in green pastures.’ In early life the child is surrounded 

by everything that is emblematic of goodness and purity. The 

teachings of Christ are intimately connected with what is 

beautiful and divine. The good that men do lives after they are 

dead, and how necessary it is that we should leave behind us a 

good name when the time comes that the place that knows us now 

207 

shall know us no more.” 


205. EB. March 31st, 1900 
206 .EB. July 23rd, 1900. 
207. EB. May 20th, 1901. 




.. 










.. 





















9 ' 

On the following Tuesday he, with his son Albert and his 
daughter-in-law, left for his new home in Victoria, where he 
lived, at ’’The Glen,” Cadboro Bay. Two years later, on February 
7th, 1903, in Christ Church Cathedral, Canon Hewton married 

208 

again. His wife was Mrs. R. Roskell Bayne, also of Victoria. 
Apparently this second marriage was no happier than the first, 
but by it he had a tenth son. He died on February 11th, 1910 
and is buried in the churchyard of Saint Luke’s, Cedar Hill 
where the Diocese of Edmonton has marked his grave with a 
tablet commemorating his long and faithful service to the Church® 
Canon Hewton was succeeded at Poplar Lake by the Reverend 
John Charles lfe.ee, who after training in England had been ordained 
by the Bishop of Calgary, and had served at De Winton in southern 
Alberta. In the Synod Journal of 1902 he is designated as 
”Incumbent of Christ Church, Poplar Lake;” by Grockford’s 
Clerical Directory, 1910, he is listed as ’’Incumbent of Hew Lunnon 
with Sunnysidej” and by the ’’Edmonton Bulletin” of February 
10th, 1902, he is described as ”of Duagh.” This serves to show, 
as we have already pointed out, that with the exception of 
definitely established centres, the work was distinctly itinerant. 
Hew Lunnon later became the parish of Emmanuel, Battenberg, 
and later still Emmanuel, Gibbons® As it is now served from 
Fort Saskatchewan it will be dealt with in that connection. 

Mr. Face’s chief, if riot only, concern seems to have been with 
Christ Church, Poplar Lake and Saint Mark’s, Sunnyside. 

To return, after this digression, to Mr, Face. He arrived 
early in 1901 and announced^ 09 that service would be held on 
Sunday, March 3rd* at. 2.30 p.m. There are no registers for this 

208. EB. Feb. 16th, 1903s quoting from the ’’Victoria Daily Colonist?” 
of February 8th, 1903. 

209. EB, February 25th, 1901. 




















i 


» . -"i. - 

* 

52 

• « 






t 










. . 






,-v 




.!. u 

•V . 





9 *- 


period extant so we have no means of knowing how well the services 

were attended, or how often they were held. On Sunday, September 

1st, 1901, the Bishop visited the mission and held a Confirmation 

210 

in Christ Church at 7.30 p.m. 

At the Easter Vestry Meeting in 1902, for which no date is 

given, the Reverend J. C. Wace took the chair and the following 

officers were appointed: Mr. F. S. Mitchell, J.P., Incumbent*s 

Warden, Mr. John Fielders, People's Warden; Messrs. Carson and 

William Latimer, sidesmen; Mrs. John Fielders, honorary organist • 

A little later it was reported that "the Reverend J. C. Wace 

has been suffering from throat trouble and has been in the Public 

Hospital for the last few days, under the charge of Dr. Braith- 

waite. We are glad to hear that he has recovered and. returned 

212 , 

to his parish at the Sturgeon." 

Evidently the congregation continued to be fairly active 

and towards Christmas it was announced that "the congregation 

of the Anglican Church, Poplar Lake, intend holding a grand 

concert and, tea on Friday evening, December 12th, in aid of 

Church funds. Doors will be opened at 7 p.m. Concert to commence 

at 7.30 p.m. Tee. will be served about the middle of the 

213 

programme and a good time is guaranteed." 

214 

At the beginning of 1903 it was made known that Mr. 

Wace had resigned his work in the Sturgeon Mission, after five 
years in Canada, and had accepted, an appointment in England. 

Later in the year the Executive Committee of Synod, "concurred 
in the Bishop's suggestion to place the Reverend F. G*. Rickard 


210. EB. August 23rd, 1901, 

211. EB. May 9th, 1901. 

212. EB. May 30th, 1901. 

213. EB. Dec. 5th, 1902. 

214. EB. Feb. 6th, 1903. 




















, . 






, l 

: ? • « 

. . . 

. 

. 

. ' * t 

. • ‘ 1 



































■ 




. . 

. . 






























21 5 

in charge of the Sturgeon Mission,” Mr. Rickard had been 
trained at Huron College and came to the mission from Saint 
Cyprian’s, Lacombe. He seems to have entered upon his new duties 
during the summer. The Bishop visited the mission again in 
November and the congregation took advantage of his presence to 
stage a concert on the Friday evening at which he was the guest 
of honour. He also preached at Evensong on the Sunday evening.^ 6 
On July 17th, 1906, the Bishop reported to the Executive 
Committee that the Reverend F. Gr. Rickard was leaving for work 
in the Diocese of New Westminster. From the records of Synod it 
seems that he was succeeded by the Reverend A. 0. Cheney who 
came to the mission from Okotoks. Shortly after his arrival a 
loan of one hundred dollars was made to him for the purchase of 
a horse. He left in September, 1908, end was apparently the last 
incumbent of Poplar Lake as such. This is another of the instances 
where there was a shift of population. Future missioners were 
appointed to Battenberg, and Christ Church, Poplar Lake, seems 
to have declined. The parish was represented at Synod in 1906 
but not thereafter. The Church property has since been sold and 
the parish disestablished, 

(ii) Saint Mark* Su nnyside. 

217 

According to diocesan records ' the parish of Saint Mark 
was established on September 3rd, 1901. From the same source it 
appears that the parish owned forty acres of land in section 
one - 55 - 24 - W4th. Sl8 No church was ever built, however, and 
the services were held in the school house. 

215. ExCom, June 3rd, 1903* 

S16.EB. November 2nd and 9th, 1903. 

217. Calgary Diocesan Synod, Journal, 1912, Appendix L . 

218. Calgary Diocesan Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix ”J”• 
















The services were probably begun by Mr. Wace immediately 

after his arrival although the first one of which there is record 

is Litany and Sermon at four o 1 clock on Sunday, September 1st, 

219 

1901, when the Bishop was present. Early in the following 

year the ladies of the congregation held a concert and pie social 

220 

for the benefit of church funds. The newspaper account 

describes the programme which was under the chairmanship of Mr. 

Wace and adds that $54.55pf was realised. Early hopes do not seem 

to have been justified, however, and in the October following it 
221 

was announced that 11 the Church of England is discontinuing 
services at Sunnyside •** 

Either the former announcement was made in error or the 

congregation determined to maize a further attempt with services 

222 

at another hour for only a month later it was reported that 

"Church of England services will (D.V.) be conducted by the 

Reverend J. C. Wace every other Sunday from, November 11th, at 

Sunnyside school house at eleven o f clock." 

The Bishop was present again a year later and the service 

223 

was to be at ^Sunnyside (school house) in the afternoon. 11 
ITo further newspaper references to services at Sunnyside are to 
be founds© that it would appear that services there lapsed with 
the departure of Mr. face. Ten years later the church property 
was leased to Mr. Lawrence Rye, and ultimately sold to him when 
the parish was disestablished. 


219. EB. August 23rd, 1901. 

220. EB. January 20th, 1902. 

221. EB. October 3rd, 1902. 

222. EB. November 7th, 1902. 

223. EB* November 2nd, 1903. 



































, 

.. 4 \ •• i I 

• , . ,. < ■ . 

. 


. 

. 

v 






, . . . - r 


: D . . 


•' 

- 








. .. ; 

: . . - . . 

■ 

. 

; ... . ;• ■ l 'i 

. 

m. . 








(b) BEAVER LAKE 


In the spring of 1893 the Bishop secured the services of 

three Divinity students from Saint John's College, Winnipeg, for 

Op A 

the summer, and among them was Mr. Geoffrey Cyril d’Easum." " 

Mr. d f Easum was appointed to assist Canon Newton and he tells an 

PP5 

amusing story of the journey to his new sphere of work. 

Through pouring rain we journeyed from Lethbridge, 
and our misery was increased by the fact that the food 
box had not been put on the buckboard, and there was 
consequently nothing to eat but mustard and cress. We 
arrived in sight of Beaver Lake, some sixty miles east 
of Edmonton; the sun at last *came out but with it 
myriads of mosquitoes and lake flies of all sorts to 
greet us. I have never seen anything Like it and hope 
I never shall again. About twelve miles from the lake 
we borrowed, or rather begged, some flour and baking 
powder from a lone bachelor and proceeded to make a 
bannock. Seated by the trail the ”little doctor” under¬ 
took the operation of baking but unfortunately he also 
wanted to deliver a lecture to me oh the teachings of 
Swedenborg, and being more interested in the lecture 
than in the mundane matter of bannock he, like Alfred 
of old, let our precious cake burn. The wet,, hungry 
listener could bear it no longer. rt Canon Newton,” I 
cried,, r, the bannock is burning l” "I like it a 
little burned,** was the only response. ”But it will 
be all raw inside l” only to receive the soft answer, 

11 1 like it a little raw inside.” So raw inside and 
burnt outside it was. Even hunger could not make it 
palatable. 

In spite of this somewhat inauspicious beginning Mr. 
d’Easum evidently had a very successful summer* In the absence 
of church buildings services were conducted in farm houses in 
different parts of the community. During the following winter 
Mr. S. 0. G. Smith worked in the area as a lay reader, and in 
the spring of 1894 he wrote to the Bishop asking that ”a clergy¬ 
man slight be sent to take ten baptisms s In response to this 

request t&e Bishop arranged with the Reverend W. H. Barnes, 


224. ExCom. May 17th, 1893. 

225. Eor this I am indebted to the Reverend E. E. Smith, L.Th., 
Rector of Wetaskiwin, for the use of a letter written to 
him by Canon d'easum. 

226. ExCom. March 14th, 1894. 













vicar of Saint George’s, Banff, to visit the mission for this 
purpose and also "with a view to more complete organization of 
the work." It was also announced that a clergyman was to be 

stationed at Beaver Lake. 


On April 8th, the second Sunday after Easter, Br# Barnes 

conducted "Matins and Holy Communion on the west side - two 

children were baptized. Two more were baptized at Mr. Logan’s. 

Evensong was held in the east side school house. On Monday 

228 

seven children were baptized." 

Meanwhile Mr. d’Easum was completing his studies at Saint 

John’s College and in his final year gained a silver medal for 
229 

classics. Hor, apparently, did he allow his scholarship to 

lapse for in 1898, in the midst of pioneer missionary labours, 

he proceeded to the degree of M.A. He was ordained deacon in 

1896 and returned, this time by train, to continue his labours 
230 

at Beaver Lake. His return was greeted with marked approval 
by the settlers, and he himself comments thus upon his mission: 

It was about one-fifth of the area of England - one 
hundred miles north to Athabasca and fifty miles south 
to Dried Meat Lake - 150 miles by 150 miles. The popu¬ 
lation was mostly half-breed from the Red River Settle¬ 
ment - Crees, AssinibeLnes, and a few white folk. . . . 

At Beaver Lake there were about thirty Indians of the 
Salteaux tribe, headed by an old warrior, Katchamok• 

Once a large and powerful nation they had been practically 
exterminated by the Crees. The old Chief was a heathen 
but always attended my services in full regalia con¬ 
sisting of the finest dress ’bonnet 1 I ever saw, of 
eagle feathers, a breech clout, red and black paint, 
and a pair of moccasins. We shook hands gravely before 
and after the service. Katchamok had three wives and 
one of these was nominally a Christian, having been 
baptized by a Baptist missionary. I was able to lance 
her for a very large and painful abcess, and the old 
chief became my firm friend. 


227. E3. April 16th, 1894. 
223. Ibid, 

229. EB. June 23th, 1894. 

230. EB. August 27th, 1894. 












I may say I was very frequently called upon for 
medical advice, the common experience of workers in 
the mission field* Cation Newton's mantle of healing 
had now descended upon me and I was Continuously 
astonished at the marvellous results of my modest 
prescriptions. I carried with me the following sel¬ 
ection of drugs which I fou. d to he useful: quinine, 
castor oil, tobacco, tea, and old brown Windsor soap, 
being specially useful as a treatment for numerous 
skin complaints. I also cured a great many, prescrib¬ 
ing sweat baths in a little willow bath cabinet 
("wickups") which were used almost daily by tribes of 
Indians in the south and Montana. 

231 

Mr. d'Easum remained at Beaver Lake until the end of"* 

1894 when he moved to Fort Saskatchewan which, he says, "was 

becoming a town of some pretensions." His place at Beaver Lake 

9 30 

was taken by Mr. Robert Connell who had been working as a lay 

reader under the direction of Canon Newton. He was ordained 

033 234 

deacon in 1895 and priest in the following year. 

(i) Saint Alban the Mar tyr 


By this time it was decided that a church should be built 
on the east side of Beaver Lake, and "a meeting of members and 
adherents of the Church of England on this side was held at 


231. ExCom. November 29th, 1894. 

232. The Minutes of the Executive Committee, April 20th, 1894, 
contain the following note: "The Bishop read application 
received from Mr. Robert Connell of Saskatoon, lately a 
Methodist preacher in that district for work in connection 
with the Church of England, with some letters from persons 
who had known Mr* Connell and his work and spoke highly of 
both. The Bishop stated his intention of stationing Mr* 
Connell for the present in the Sturgeon River district to 
be licensed under Mr. Stunden." Although licensed under 
Mr. Stunden# Mr. Connell would necessarily come into con¬ 
tact with Canon Newton. In a letter to the writer he says, 
"I stayed with him at the Hermitage several times, • . . 
and was very greatly indebted to him for his friendship 
and guidance." 

233. ExCom. October 3rd, 1895. 

234. ExCom. April 1st, 1896: although there is an obvious 
mistake in the copying, "deacon" should read "priest." 







: r:x 


« ? 









i<3 

A, R. Moody 1 s on the 2nd. Mr. Connell presided and it was 
decided to build a church on the forty acre lot 588 adjoining 
R. E. Steele’s farm." 536 At the same meeting it was decided 
that the parish should be known as Saint Alban the Martyr.^37 
Messrs. J. C. Morrison and Henry Deby were elected as Minister’s 
and People r s Churchwarden respectively, with the following as 
members of the Vestry* Messrs. G. M. Steele, A. R. Moody, 

J. V. Kildahl, H. Bradley, and with Mr. P. W. Pane as Vestry 
Clerk. 


An indication of the hardships of pioneer missionary 

work is to be found in a further extract from the pen of the 

Reverend G. C. d’Easum: 238 

One Christmas I recall that we (Mr. Connell and he) 
were caught together in a blizzard. We made our way 
to axi abandoned cabin and both came down with the 
grippe at once. We hung blankets on the walls in 
an effort to keep the wind out and took it in turns 
to go out and rustle wood to keep a fire going. In 
spite of this we could not keep the temperature 
above freezing. However, we fared sumptuously off 
a whole sheep which had been given us as a Christmas 
present. We stood it upon the floor and whacked frozen 
chunks off it with.the axe. Then the ever Useful frying 
pan came into play and we had a gorgeous Christmas feast 
of mutton straight until the blizzard abated.^39 

In the spring of 1897 the Reverend Robert Connell who had 

made a reputation for himself as an Earnest sincere preacher" 2 ^ 6 


235. Described as tt Sth. halves of L.S. 5 & 6, 10-52-17-W4th,” 
Calgary Synod Journal* 1912, Appendix ” J". 

236. EB. June 4th, 1896. 

237. The deed of erection was issued on August 8th, 1896 - 
Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix ”1” . 

238. letter to the Reverend P. E. Smith. 

239. "According to Mr. Cookson, of Tofield* Canon d’E&sum once 
killed a wolverine without a weapon other than a small knife. 
Quite unaware of the ferocity of the animal, the resourceful 
priest threw a coal over it and hacked at it until he was 
sure it was dead. This episode seems to have made a marked 
impression on those of his parishioners more experienced in 
the ways of wolverines than the missionary.” I owe this 
note to Mr. L. G. Thomas. 

. EB, April 6th, 1897. 


240 











* 







1 


, 

" * 

. 




. . , 





, ' IV'. ■ 

i 

• • ' • : A- 

. 


. 

. 

' 

, . . 



« 











« ? 

c 


< 


c 


. 














Z' 

r 







was transferred to Innisfa.il amidst the regrets and good wishes 

of his friends and parishioners. Mr. Connell, who later became 

Archdeacon of Comox, was, like his predecessors, a man of parts 

who did not allow the hardships of his work to extinguish his 

interest in the arts. During his residence at Beaver Lake a 

news item reported that "the f Toronto Week* of February 8th 

has a short blank verse poem of some merit, dated from Edmonton, 

241 

M.W.T., and signed *Robert Connell. 1 " He was also leader for 
a time of the C.C.F. party in British Columbia, end his 
delightful house in Victoria is largely decorated with his own 
water colours. 

His place at Beaver Lake was taken by the Reverend Lames 

Atkinson, of Dorchester Missionary College, who had been made 

deacon by the Bishop of London for the Bishop of Calgary. He 

242 

arrived in the spring of 1898 and held his first service 
at Mr. Moody 1 s, Beaver Lake east, on Sunday, April 3rd. He 
was advanced to the priesthood by the Bishop of Calgary in All 
Saints 1 church, Edmonton, on Sunday, December 18th, 1898. As 
yet no church had been built in the parish nor, as events turned- 

out, would it ever be built. The land was finally sold to 

243 

Mr. A. W. McCallum on January 15th, 1916, although services 

continued to be held for some years. 

(ii) Saint Lames t h e Apostle, (Hewton) Logan. 

Once again the eventual settlement of population, influenced 
to some extent by the coming of the railway, proved that the 
site on the east side of Beaver Lake was not the centre of the 

241. EB. February 18th, 1895. 

242. EB. April 8th, 1898. 

243. Properties Register of the Diocese of Edmonton. 













Anglican community. As early as January 20th, 1896, another 

parish, that of tSaint James the Apostle (Newton), Logan, had 

been set up 2 ^ to serve the west side of the lake. 245 

Gradually, however, it seems to have become the centre of 

Church life for the whole area,. By 1900 Mr. Atkinson had moved 

to the west side of the lake where he lived, in the McKenzie 
246 

district. The weakness of the Church in the area is 

revealed by the fact that the Executive Committee of Synod 

felt it wise for Mr. Atkinson to spend several months during 

the winters of 1898-99 and 1899-1900 working in other parts 
247 

of the diocese. 

The congregation at Logan seems to have consisted largely 

of English-speaking half-breeds. newspaper reports of the 

work here are few and far between but by the end of 1900 it 

was reported that work had commenced on the new church at 

PAP, 

Logan, and was proceeding satisfactorily. Six months later 

249 

it was still not completed. In the following year it was 

reported that w the Anglican churchpeople have subscription lists 

out to raise money for the completion of their church. A church 

250 

social in aid of the building fund, is expected shortly." 

At long last the church ?;as completed and " as duly conse¬ 
crated on Wednesday, November 2.6th, 1902, by Bishop Pinkham. 

The service took place in the evening. The incumbent, the 
Reverend J. Atkinson, was unable to be present on account of 

illness. The Bishop returned by way of Wetaskiwin on his way to 

251 

consecrate a new church at Lamerton.” A news item appears a 


244. Calgary Synod. Journal, 1912, Appendix “L”. The Post Office 
add.ress was n Logan, TI but the word "Newton” was included in 
the formal title presumably as 2 . tribute to Canon Newton. 

245. Calgary Synod Journal, Appendix ”J tt , where it is described 
"Part of L.S. 8 - 31*51-18-W4th, five acres." 

246.SB. April 6th, 1900. 247 ExCom. Lee. 28th, 1898. 

248. EB. Dec. 14th, 1900. 249, EB. June 28th, 1901, 

250. EB. April 4th, 1902. 251. EB. Dec. 1st, 1902, _ 







week or so later indicating that "Mr. Atkinson, of Logan, is 
improving and expects to hold services next Sunday." 252 His 
itineraries seem to have taken him to Ross Creek and, on occasion, 
to Egg Lake, Victoria, ajnd Lobstick. 

One has only to glance at the map to realise the difficulties 

to be encountered in ministering to the large area surrounding 

Beaver Lake and not unnaturally Mr. Atkinson must sometimes have 

become discouraged. Hence the following item, in the proceedings 

253 „ 

of the Executive Committee: "Two letters were read from the 

Reverend J. Atkinson relating to his own prospects, and the 
general outlook of the mission.work of the district. Moved by 
Archdeacon Tims, seconded by the Reverend G. H. Hogbejn, r The 
Committee, having heard read letters from the Reverend J. Atkin¬ 
son, giving a full account of his mission, end settlements east 
of Beaver Lake, authorize the Treasurer to send him $60 as a 
special donation. The Committee assure Mr. Atkinson of their 
sympathy with him in the special difficulties he has to encounter; 
and express the hope that he will remain to do his best to work 
the whole district; and the Committee will take the earliest 
opportunity of sending a Beacon to work with him. 1 Carried•" 

The desired opportunity does not seem to have arrived and Mr. 
Atkinson remained'in the Mission singlehanded until 1904. In that 
year the Bishop made special mention of him in his charge to 

P RA 

Synod; "I desire," he said, "to emphasise, with great satis¬ 

faction, the way in which Mr. Atkinson has done his work in the 
large and difficult mission at Beaver Lake, of which he has been 
for some years in charge. He has certainly earned an easier post." 


252. EB. December 12th, 1902. 

253. ExCom. August 13th, 1902. A further vote of $200 was made to 
him on Hov. 11th, 1903 "in view of the special circumstances 
attaching to the Mission." 

254. Calgary Synod Journal, 1904,. p.12 








/ OL. 


Following the Synod, the Executive Committee endorsed the Bishop’s 
proposal to offer him the parish of Ponolca 255 "but evidently he 
did not feel that to be much of an improvement for after a few 
months there he went to Quebec where he died in 1950* At the 
Diocesan Synod in 1906 the Bishop referred to Beaver Lake as 
being among those parishes and missions without clergy. 2 ' 55 

(iii) Holy T rinity , Tofie1 d. 

At this stage a further shift of population occurred leading 
to the establishment of yet another parish. For some years there 
had been a settlement at the south-west corner of Beaver Lake, 
named after Dr. Tofield., an Edmonton physician of early days 
who went to live theme. Mr. Atkinson had held, fortnightly ser¬ 
vices there as early as 1901 but the meagre response had not 

2^7 

seemed to justify their continuance. ' How, with the expecta¬ 
tion of the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway line passing through the 

town, further development took place and Mr. Atkinson’s successor 

258 

was stationed at Tofield, rather than at Logan. " He was the 
Reverend A. G« A. Rainier, who was in Deacon’s Orders only, and 
stayed at Tofield until 1910, during which time he served Saint 
James the Apostle, Logan and Saint Alban’s congregation, 

Bathgate, on the east side of the lake, as well as the cenyre in 
which he lived.. 

In- the spring of 1911 the Bishop was able to inform the 
Executive Committee 259 that the Reverend C. F. Washburn had been 
appointed to Tofield. He served from April 22nd, 1911, to Febru¬ 
ary 28th, 1912, 2o ° and was succeeded almost at once by the 
Reverend James Mason Yfho, since 1906, had been in the Led.uc 

255. ExCom. lov. 18th, 1904. 

256. Calgary Synod Journal, 1906, p.6 

257. EB. September 9th, 1901. 

258. Calgary Synod Journal, 1908, p.7 

259. ExCom. April 18th, 1911 

260. ExCom. July 23rd, 1912. __ 







. 










On May 24th, 1912, the Bishop of Calgary erected and form¬ 
ed a new parish of the town of Tofield, and issued the deed 
in the name of "The Parish of Holy Trinity," Tofield. This 
was at the request of the Tofield congregation who chose and 
forwarded the name. This new parish was carved out of the 
existing parish of Saint James the Apostle, Logan, to which, 
a new deed of erection was issued. 

A new church consisting of concrete foundation, lumber, 
and shingles, 20 feet by 48 feet, was commenced in Tofield on 
May 20th, 1912. It was opened and dedicated to the Holy Trinity 
by the Lord Bishop of Calgary on July 18th, of the same year. 

On June 28th, 1914, the Reverend James Mason resigned 
the living to become Rector of Saint Paul’s Church, Grand 
Manan Island, H.B., by which time the parish of Tofield had 
passed into the new Diocese of Edmonton. 

(iv) Saint Hilda, De Yille (llorth Cooking Lake ) 

A new district was opened up west of Tofield in which the 
first service held was on December 31st, 1912. It was erected 
as a separate parish in April, 1913, and disestablished on 
December 19th, 1935.. 


261. The information which follows comes from Mr. Mason’s 
notes in the Parish Register. 

262. The Parish of St. James’ is redefined as follows: "The 
whole of township 52, Range 19, and the Northwest 
fractional portion of Township 52, Range 18, all west of 
the Fourth Meridi'an. " 










■ 




- 








■ 






































« • 




. 

.. . . c fj 




■ . .... ■ ■ 


- * 

, , . . • - ' ' ; 






. 







. 

. 












(c) FORT SASKATCHEWAN 
(i) Saint Georg e r a. 

It will be remembered that Fort Saskatchewan was one of 
the first places to which Dr. Newton went after his arrival 
in Edmonton in 1875. A detachment of the N.W.M.P, had been 
established there and for a time he went there each Sunday 
afternoon .^3 By 1883 he had evidently discontinued weekly 
Sunday services at the Fort as all his time was taken up by 
services at All Saints', "on the south side of the river," 
and at the Masonic Hall? 6 ^ The only reference to services 
at Fort Saskatchewan for some years is to one held in the 
Palace Hotel on Sunday, February 12th, 1888, at which "not¬ 
withstanding the stormy weather quite a large congregation 
was present.Canon Newton was there again on April 8th^6 
and so was evidently going there on the second Sunday of 
each month. This is confirmed by a contemporary newspaper 
announcement. 7 In addition, he must have made weekday 
visits from time to time and on Wednesday, January 23rd, 1889, 
he delivered a lecture on "Ancient India - its literature and 
religion," to a very appreciative audience of which Superintend 
ent W. A. Griesbach was the chairman. 

In the spring of 1895 the community received its first 
resident priest in the person of the Reverend G. C. d r Easum, 
who had formerly been the missionary at Beaver Lake. The 


263. See Appendix II, Letter 1, p.2o2_ 

264. EB. October 13th, 1883. 

265. EB. February 25, 1888. 

266. EB. April 7th, 1888. 

267. EB. April 14th, 1888. 

268. EB. January 26th, 1889. 









. 



. 









.. , .... 








. 



. 


. 






. 


■ 

, , . 


' 

. 





nucleus of the congregation was made up of the hundred or so 
officers and men who constituted ' G’ Division, most of whom, 
says Mr. d’Easum, were faithful members of the Church of England 
The deed of erection constituting the parish was issued almost 
immediately after Mr. d’Easum* s arrival, on February 5th, 1895. ? 

By 1896 it became possible to build a church, and the dedication 

• . 270 

is thus reported: 

On Sunday the dedication of Saint George’s parish < 
church was held. ... The church was crowded and 
settlers in the adjoining district for fifteen 
miles around were present thus showing their inter¬ 
est in the solemn opening of the mother church of 
this settlement. The service was musical through¬ 
out, the Reverend H. A. Gray intoned the first part 
of the service after which followed the prayers of 
dedication by the Bishop. His Lordship also 
preached, • • . followed by a celebration of Holy 
Communion. In the evening the Reverend R. Connell 
preached. Large numbers of various denominations 
were present at both services, and expressed their 
great pleasure and interest in the solemn, reverent, 
end beautiful services of the Anglican branch of the 
Catholic Church. It is to be hoped that the dedi¬ 
cation of our little church will mark a fresh era 
of spiritual influence in Fort Saskatchewan. 

At a Confirmation held later in the year there were twenty 
271 

candidates. 

During these years Mr. d’Easum seems to have divided his 

residence between the town and a farm he had acquired. Accord- 

2 * 7 ? 

ing to a newspaper account in 1899 w Mr. d’Easum will move 

on to his farm soon, and the house he leaves will be taken by 

273 

Mr. Campbell.® In his own reminiscences he says: 

About 1895 I was receiving over #500 a year, 
nearly #600. Until then I had received #400 a 
year and boarded around, and had been given a 
horse, not too good a gift the first one; his * 
name was ’Tomactae,” meaning crooked legs. He had 
a pair of crooked front legs. I protested and 


269. Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix rt L H • 

270. EB. January 7th, 1897. 

271. EB. May 13th, 1897. 

272. EB. May 1st, 1899. 

273. Letter to the Reverend F. E. Smith, Wetaskiwin. 













later from a band of wild horses I, with the help 
of eight others, roped a magnificent black horse. 

We put him to my two-wheeled cart eventually; 
although he did $ot kick he considered it part of 
the game to do everything else. 

In 1895 I took up a homestead - having married 
the sister of Canon Hlnchliffe* With my salary re¬ 
maining under $600 for eight years 274 it was necess¬ 
ary to try to make both ends meet. We had a grand 
"bee” and four farmers in the district, three of 
whom were Scottish Presbyterians, came and ploughed 
fifty acres for me. This I afterwards seeded by 
hand, raked with a hand rake, ; mowed with a scythe, 
and carried on my buckboard. 

I built the house of logs Which I cut myself, 
plastered with mud, and roofed with rough lumber. 

I am not by any means a skillful artisan so am 
glad I have no picture of the rectory to show. It 
might astonish you as it did me. My only help was 
a Metis boy, who was first-rate at "mudding” the 
chinks but quite unequal to the fine work. To this 
country house I used to walk each night to put in 
my homestead duties, leaving my wife and family 
in town. When I sold the homestead years later 
after paying all my debts I had thirty-two dollars 
left, and we bought boots for the family, cart¬ 
ridges for ray gun, a hat, a dozen oranges, shoes 
for the horse, and a new wheel. 

The worst features were the long drives. I was 
away three and four days at a time, and if the 
weather grew very cold the supply of wood would 
soon be exhausted and I would be anxious for my 
family. A brother missioner, the Reverend G. G. 
Edwards, was storm-stayed on one occasion and. his 
small- baby actually died from the cold before his 
return. Personally, the cold winter travelling 
was preferable to me because the roads were better. 

I have travelled at 69 degrees below zero on snow- 
shoes. T T wice I had snow-blindnes»s which is very 
painful. Summer travel meant swollen rivers to 
swim the horse over, and muskeg and swamps to 
lose the horse in suddenly. Once I had to help 
my horse out five times in one day on a particu¬ 
larly lonely trail. 

With the trials, however, there were happy 
moments and blessed memories, the warm and happy 
welcome, the quiet talks around stove and fire¬ 
place, happy services, the joyous tears of hear¬ 
ing the words of the old Prayer Book again. One 


274. The following note from the minutes of the Executive Committee, 
March 6th* 1906, is of interest. The Committee "agrees, in 
view of his long service to the diocese, and on condition that 
the mission continues to raise as large a sum as possible, 
to make up the amount of the stipend received by Canon d'Easum 
to $850 for the year 1906.” 








was right next to the people* Our choir practices 
were held from home to home all through the Settle¬ 
ments - when I taught them their parts on the old 
fiddle, and we had a grand service altogether for 
the first time at Saint George’s Church, Fort 
Saskatchewan, on Faster Day* 

Negotiations were evidently proceeding in the spring of 1897 

for the erection of a rectory in the town, and at that time the 

Executive Committee sanctioned a mortgage on the Church for $500, 

at the same time expressing its reluctance "that this or any 

275 

other parish should mortgage their Church." It was evidently 
in this house that the family lived while Mr. d’Easum went out 
to perform his duties on the farm. Apparently the house was 
still not paid for in 1904 and the Executive Committee gave its 
consent "to mortgage the parsonage and site of 1^- acres, not 

including the church site of half an acre, to the Canada 

276 277 • a • 

Permanent Corporation." A note in the Synod Journal indi¬ 
cates that this mortgage was in connection with the parsonage 
debt. At the same time, however, the parish was moving towards 
self-support and the missionary grant in aid of stipend was 
declining as follows: 1899 £100; 1900 £80; 1906 £62 - 10 - Od; 

(or three hundred dollars). 

In 1896 Mr* d’Easum succeeded the Rector of Edmonton as 
Rural Dean of Edmonton, and in 1904 was created Honorary Canon 
of Saint John in Calgary Cathedral. In 1908 he left Fort 
Saskatchewan to become Sub-Warden of Bishop Pinkham College and 
rector of Saint Barnabas* Church, Calgary. 

He was succeeded at Fort Saskatchewan by the Reverend H. H. 
Wilkinson, M.A., from Saint Paul’s, Edmonton. In the absence of 


275. ExCom. March 18th and 30th, 1897. 

276. ExCom. April 6th, 1904. 

277. Calgary Synod Journal, 1904, p.23 









278 ® 
parochial records ' it is difficult to assess the strength of 

the parish. According to the proceedings of the Executive 

Committee the missionary grant for 1910 had been reduced to $225 

but that body ’’being dissatisfied with the condition of affairs 

as evidenced by reports, in the missions of . . . Fort Saskatchewan 

. • • requests the Bishop to notify the clergy of the above 

missions that unless there is a marked improvement within the 

279 

next six months, that radical steps will have to be inaugurated.” 
Presumably the unsatisfactory conditions, whatever they were, 
had been rectified within the appointed time for no further 
mention of them occurs and we are left with the interesting 
speculation as to what the "radical steps” might have been. 

Mr. Wilkinson remained in the parish until 1911 and on 
April 18th was inducted as Hector of Claresholm."^ 0 At a 
meeting of the Executive Committee on the same day the Bishop 
announced the appointment of the Reverend R. T. Ingram-John son, 

M.A., to Port Saskatchewan. He seems to have stayed only for 
a very short time and was succeeded by the Reverend T. M. 

281 

Melrose, L.S.T., a graduate of Bishop’s College, LennoxvilLe, 
who was still in charge when the parish became part of the new 
Diocese of Edmonton. 

(ii) Emmanuel« Hew Lunnong later Battenberg ^ 

282 

The parish was established on September 3rd, 1901 shortly 
after Mr. lace’s arrival, but no newspaper reference to 
services appears until a year later when^^ it was announced 
that a service would be held at Mr. Gtobbons* at 2.30 p.m. on 

278. See Appendix III, p. 2*2,4 

279. ExCom. December 7th, 1909. 

280. ExCom. April 18th, 1911, 

281. ExCom. September 11th, 1913. 

282. Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix ”L”. 

283. SB, October 3rd, 1902. 










Sunday, October 12th, the preacher to be the Reverend W. F. Webb, 

of Calgary. Meanwhile services must have been continuing, and 

with them efforts to raise funds for a church. Thus on February 

7th, 1901, a "pie social in aid of the Anglican Fund was held at 

the residence of Mr. W. R. Gibbons. Chairman, Mr. Thomas Lewis." 284 

Among those taking part was Mr. d'Easum, and the proceeds 

amounted to #63 .60^. Later in the spring a "grand concert in 

285 

aid of the Anglican Church" was to be held at the residence 

of Mr. Charles Brumfit,. The service on Christmas Bay, Holy 

Communion with sermon, took place at Mr. William Mason*s, 

286 

Victoria Farm, Hew Lunnon." 

On Tuesday, February 3rd, 1903, the congregation held a 

concert and pie social at Mr. Mason*s which realised $52.75^. 

The proceedings, under the chairmanship of the Reverend J. C. 

Wace, included a violin solo, "I cannot sing the old songs," 

287 

by Mr. Brumfit who is still an active member of the congre¬ 
gation. The first visit from the Bishop seems to have been 

288 

for Evensong on November 7th, 1903, but the newspaper does 

not mention where this service was to be held. A few weeks 

later"a successful Christmas tree was held at the home of 

Mr. Thomas Lewis, under the auspices of the Ladies* Guild of 

Immanuel parish.** The .next venture was a "picnic and sale of 

ladies* work opposite the residence of Mr. ,B. Close in aid of 

290 

the parish building fund**’ " on July 20th, 1904. A similar 

venture was held for the same purpose and on the same date in 

291 

1905 "opposite the residence of Mr. D. B. Clare." 

284. EB. February 14th, 1901. 

285. EB. March 28th, 1901. 

286. EB. December 19th, 1902. 

287. E3. February 7th, 1903. (Note - the newspaper refers to 'Holy 
Trinity, He?; Lmnnon' but this must be an error.) 

288. EB. November 2nd, 1903. 

289. EB. January 13th, 1904. 

290. EB. July 9th, 1904. 

291. EB. July 12th, 1905. 

















... V . - , ) 


! 



//O 


992 , 

When Mr. Cheney left in September, 1908,~ he was succeeded 

by Mr. W. E. Herbert who was appointed to Battenberg with Bon 

Accord as lay reader at a stipend of $45 per month. 29 ^ During 

this period Emmanuel Church was built and opened. As early as 

1904 application had been made for assistance from the S.P.C.K. 

Block Grant for the Building of Churches, and rough plans had 
994 

been submitted hut nothing seems to have happened. By the end 

of 1909, ; however, the church was built and the newspaper records 

that "the congregation of Emmanuel Church, Battenberg, has 

received from Cushing Brothers, Edmonton, a fine altar rail 

and two choir stalls for the chancel, which they have made to 

the order ©f the incumbent and churchwardens, and which is a 

very pretty addition to the interior of the church. The interior 

is not yet completed but as fast as the money can be raised the 

wardens will proceed with the work. They are at present trying 

to raise enough money to finish the chancel. They intend to hold 

a jumble sale on December 9th, and have already got several 

295 

promises of cattle, pigs, &c* 11 

Mr. Herbert was ordained Deacon in 1910 and remained in the 
mission for another two years. The exact date of his departure 
is not certain but in September, 1912, the Executive Committee 
approved the suggestion that "the stipend of the Reverend 0» J. 
Roberts from the Diocese of Athabasca, temporarily appointed to 
Battenberg, be guaranteed by the Diocese." 296 Three months later 
"a letter making application for a grant to purchase horses was 
read from the Reverend 0. J* Roberts and was referred to 

292. See p»^3 supra. 

293. ExCom. October 28th, 1908. 

294. ExCom. July 19th, 1904. 

295. EB. November 9th, 1909. 

296. ExCom. September 27th, 1912. 





?• 


c 














j !- :> 










. .1 .. : 








' 



1 w 







, 













5 





/// 


Archdeacon Gray for report and recommendation.” There is no 

indication from records at the disposal of the writer that his 

appointment was ever confirmed but he was still there in 1935, 

298 

and eventually died there, 

(iii) Holy Trinity, Excelsior; later Bon Accord* 

The deed of erection for the parish was issued by the Bishop 
on September 3rd,, 1901, and according to Synod records ”Bon Accord” 
was substituted for "Excelsior” on September 28th, 1903. The 
first newspaper reference to a service is in October, 1902, 
when it is announced tjiat a service is to be held on October 12th, 
"at Mr, Mason* s. Excelsior" with the. Reverend W. 3?, Webb, of 
Calgary as the preacher 9 More than a year later^^the 
Bishop visited the parish but the newspaper announcement 
contained only the bare statement that he would be at Bon Accord 
on the morning of November 8th, 

The only other reference to Holy Trinity, Bon Accord in 
available records occurs in 1911 when 3 ^^ "a letter was read from 
Mr. W. Mason, Warden*applying for a grant towards a parsonage 
at Bon Accord.” A grant of fifty dollars was made. 


297. ExCora. December 5th, 1912. 

■298, Emmanuel Church was moved from S.W.-J- 24-56-23-W4th to 

H.ElQ-56-23-¥4th about 1935 and was afterwards known 
as Emmanuel, Gibbons, 

299. IB. October 3rd, 1902. 

300. EB. November 2nd, 1903* 

301. ExCorn, September 28th, 1911* 

302. Mr. William Mason seems to have changed his parochial 
affiliation, Eor several years he was connected with 
Emmanuel, Battenberg, and represented that parish in 
the Diocesan Synod, Later he is found in the Synod 
representing Holy Trinity, Bon Accord, It is possible 
that this may have been a joint application from both 
parishes. 
















? 

































No parish was ever erected, nor did the Church own buildings 
or property at Agricola, but for a time there was a thriving 
congregation meeting at the school house, drawing its inspira¬ 
tion, in all likelihood, from Canon d’Easum. It is probable that 
he began services there soon after his arrival but in the absence 
of records we cannot be certain. 

The first recorded activity was a concert held in the school 
house 303 on Friday, April 4th, 1902. Among those taking part was 
Canon d’Easum himself who seems always to have been a popular 
addition to any concert programme. During the summer a garden 
party and concert was held for the purpose of raising funds to 
buy an organ for the use of the congregation. 30 ^ Baseball and 
football matches were arranged for the afternoon while for the 
evening a good musical programme was promised. 

The Bishop visited the congregation 000 for a service on 
Sunday afternoon, August 10th, 1902, having been to Saint George’s, 
Fort Saskatchewan, in the morning. The efforts at the garden 
party and similar ventures were evidently successful for a few 
days later it was recorded 306 that "an organ has been purchased 
for the use of the Church of England congregation which worships 
in the school house.” 

The on3.y venture recorded thereafter for some time is a. 

concert, also in the school house, on Wednesday, January 27th, 

30 7 

1905. At the beginning of the following year there must have 

been some optimistic souls who wished to see Agricola constituted 
as a separate parish apart from Fort Saskatchewan. Evidently 
Canon d’Easum did not share their optimism and the Executive 

303. SB. April 11th, 1902. 

304. EB. July 21st, 1902. 

305. EB, August 11th, 1902. 

306. EB. August loth, 1902. 

307. EB. February 1st, 1905. _ 





, : I ' 


■ 

, 

. 

■ 

. 

o 

■ J • e ' 

a ? 

. 







■ 








' 

, , f - • <\ ‘ ' ' «• 


. 




« 


! 






that "the 


*2 AO 

Committee agreed with him* Hence their decision' 

Executive Committee accepts the Reverend Canon d’Easum*s 
suggestion that the organization of parishes in .Agricola and 
Partridge Hills be, for the present, allowed to stand ...” 

The wisdom of this view would seem to be justified by the fact 
that no further mention of the congregation is to be found. 

(d) UTASKIWIN 

When Canon Newton came to Edmonton in 137 5 there were no 
railways in the North West Territories and travellers came by 
"Red River" cart from Winnipeg, by way of Saskatoon. 

Sight years later the construction of the Canadian Pacific 
Rail?tfay reached the -summit of. the Rocky Mountains. Thus the 
frontier was slowly receding and the flow of immigrants increased 
steadily. The completion of the Calgary and Edmonton Railway 
in the fall of 1892 assisted in the process* and by the turn 
of the century large numbers of settlers were coming in to take 
up land and establish homes near Innisfail, Olds, Red Deer, 

Lacombe, and Wet askiwin• 

In February, 1889, on his way to the first meetings of the 

Synod of the newly formed Diocese of Calgary, Canon Newton spent 

309 

the weekend at Red Deer and held services there. It is not 

improbable that this was the first .Anglican service there, and 

from news items in the Edmonton paper it seems that he visited 

Red ?Deer about once a quarter for the next few years until the 

appointment of Mr. H. R. Brashier, as a lay missionary, in 
310 

September, 1891. 

308. ExCom. March 6th, 1906. 

309. SB. February 16th, 1889. 

310. Calgary Synod Journal, 1892, p.10 








< • ' c - ■ 

• s 






4 










(i) Immanue 1, V/etaski win, 

By 1894 a considerable number of immigrants had settled in 
and near Wetaskiwin, and consideration was being given to the 

TtT "i; 

establishment of a congregation and building of a church. 

Just at this time the Reverend G. H. Andras* M.A., of Saint 
Jo.hn T s College, Cambridge, offered himself to the Bishop’^^ and 
was appointed as "incumbent of Wetaskiwin, and missioner from 
Otaskawan to Hobbema on the C.P.R. and adjacent settlements•" 

Mr. Andras was a bachelor, a man of wide experience, many parts, 
and not a little eccentricity. After graduation from Cambridge 
he was ordained Deacon and Priest by the Bishop of London, and 
served for a time in England. Evidently considering parochial 
life in Greenwich to be lacking in adventure he went, after a few 
years as a schoolmaster in Lancashire, to be 'Chaplain to the 
English residents connected with the Caucasian Railway. Later 
he went to Odessa, and in 1894, came to Wetaskiwin. 

The first service in Wetaskiwin took place on December 9th, 

1894, but was not "very 'widely made known owing to the incorn- 

313 

pieteness of the furniture and sittings." In spite of that, 
hov/ever, there was a congregation of fifty. Mrs. H. C. Lisle, the 
wife of a local lawyer, had evidently been deputed to play the 
organ but as she was unable to be present her place was filled 
by a Mr. Smith. The subject of Mr. Andras* sermon was, "The 
Efficiency of a Church." A few weeks later there is a note to 
the effect that he had been elected President of the Wetaskiwin 
Literary and Temperance Society.^ ^ 

311, EB. December 5th, 1894. 

312, ExCom. August 8th, 1894, Otaskawan was between Ellerdie 
and Leduc on the Calgary and Edmonton Railway. 

313, EB. December 24th, 1894, 

314, EB, January 28th, 1895. 












One of the characteristics of community life in western 

Canada half a century ago was the public lecture. Anyone who 

could speak interestingly and fluently could always be sure of 

a hearing and the Anglican clergy of that day seem to have been 

much in demand. Hence, it is not surprising to find the announce- 
315 

ment that "a lecture will be given in the school house on 

Friday next, by the Reverend C. H. Andras, entitled 'A Peep 

into Paradise, * illustrated by some fifty lantern views.' 1 

The announcement continues, "Mr. Andras passed some years in the 

neighbourhood of Mount Ararat, explored the Caucasus and 

Highlands of Armenia, and visited the site of the 'Garden of 

Eden,' and that of the 'Captivity of Israel,' and claims to 

have found the missing link in the evidence of their identity." 

Evidently this and similar ventures proved to be quite 

remunerative for by the spring of 1895 land had been obtained, 

and plans were afoot for the building of a church. Lot 8, 

block 12, of the village was secured and work was begun on the 

316 

foundations on May 4th. At the same time it was announced 
that the church "will be thirty-six feet by twenty-two with a 
cruciform transept (sic) of the same dimensions. An elegant 
spire will rise from the south-west corner. The tower 16', 
surmounted by a cupola 10', over which the spire will rise 
24', in all, fifty feet." 

Work continued rapidly although notes in the parish 
register suggest that it was in the main the work of the priest's 
own hands. Mr. Clifton Compton who had become temporary church- 


315. EB• March 7th, 1895 

316. SB. April 8th, 1895 














< ‘ . ' ' : 


e e • 

t c 

, . • 

<■ ' 










' 


‘ 


’* . 




-• • ^ 




. - . .. .i .i. : • T. 






« ’ 

■ ' « 7 

■ 






. 




- 

. 





warden assisted in building the porch and chimney* Changes 

were evidently made during the building process and the finished 

church was forty feet by twenty-two, with an eighteen foot ceiling* 

The cost of the building, including furniture, amounted to 

eight hundred dollars. Of this $100 was given by the S.P.C.K., 

$50 by the Diocesan Home Mission Fund, and approximately one 

hundred dollars from funds collected by Mr. Andras in England. 

The remainder, and the cost of the organ* is said to have been 

borne by the incumbent himself. 

The dedication of the church was performed by the Lord 

Bishop of Calgary on Thursday, August 1st, 1895, and was thus 

317 

described at the time: 

A muster of nearly all the clergy of northern 
Alberta met the Bishop on August 1st, at We t ask i win 
to open a new church* It is well situated upon 
high ground half way between the Roman Catholic 
and Methodist Churches. The architect is the 
incumbent, the Reverend C. H. Andras, and the builder, 

Mr* Amos Giles. It has a large triple window on the 
south side, the middle light being seven feet high, 
and is also lighted by four windows set in pairs on 
each side, and has therefore a cheerful appearance 
inside* The altar frontal with the monogram I.H.S. 
and lilies is the work and present of Miss Steele, 
pf Peigan Reserve* The incumbent has from the 
first been actively engaged in raising the structure 
with his own hands under Mr. Giles* direction* The 
furniture is very neat, the work of Mr. Charles Clin 
and the Reverend C. H. Andras* The structure when 
quite completed will be an additional ornament to 
the rapidly growing town with its large and hand¬ 
some school house and three other churches, and a 
haadsome store newly built by the same builder. 

Mrs. West, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, Mrs. Compton, Mrs. 

Foster, Mrs. -Jacobs, Mrs. Giles, Mrs. T. Ambler, and 
many other ladies prepared a sumptuous feast in the 
school house where the wonted hospitality of the 
town to visitors was shown* About one hundred sat 
down with the Bishop and clergy. After the dedication 
the Bishop gave an excellent address to a full congre¬ 
gation, recounting the progress of the Church of 
England during his experience of twenty-seven years 


317. EB. August 8th, 1895 












in the North West. 

"Lead, Kindly Light," which was followed by 
"Onward, Christian soldiers," were heartily sung 
as well as an anthem composed by the incumbent 
entitled "Morning Light," which was well rendered 
by a united church choir. The spirited, singing 
of the children was especially remarked, upon. 

The Reverend A. Stunden of Edmonton, the 
Reverend H. A. Gray of South Edmonton, and the 
Reverend F• W. Goodman of Lamerton, took part in 
the dedication, while the incumbent presided, at 
the organ. The offertory of thirteen dollars was 
devoted, towards the fund, for the completion of 
the building. Holy Communion was celebrated at 
7.30 next morning, by the Bishop and the incumbent. 

There is a growing mission of the Church of 
England on the Battle River where a small church 
will also soon be erected. 

Mr. Andras remained at Wetaskiwin until 1902 and during 
that time the parish continued to grow although his ministrations 
were, of necessity,, spread over the whole surrounding country¬ 
side,, exi ares, of some seventeen hundred square miles. On 
leaving the parish Mr. Andras went to Victor, Colorado, and 
then, after three years, back to England. 

In June, 1902, the Bishop announced to the Executive Committee 
"that he had ordained. Mr. C. G« Austin at Ottawa whom he had 
licensed to Wetaskiwin, under the Rector of Strathcona. Mr. 

Austin would arrive about the 3.6th instant." In 1904 the 
church was moved from its position on Stoney Street to a new 
site, prompting the Bishop to comment in his Charge to Synods 
"Immanuel Church, Wetaskiwin, has been moved to a new site 

and, with its new chancel and greatly improved appearance, 

319 

is now the best church building in that important town." 

At the same time efforts were being made to develop the 
town as a self-supporting parish, and to that end Mr* Austin 
sought the permission of the Executive Committee to discontinue 
some of the rural work attached to the mission. The reply of 


318. ExGom. June 10th, 1902. 

319. Calgary Synod Journal, 1904, p.15 




m 




t 













$ 










$ 


c 




V 





c 



















'z.pO 

the Committee was as follows: "the Committee approve of 

Mr. Austin giving up the distant country work so that he can 
take two services at Wetaskiwin every Sunday; and that he be 
paid at the rate of fifty dollars a quarter for the year 
ending June 30th, 1904, on the understanding that every effort 
be made to make the congregation of Wetaskiwin self-supporting 
by the end of June, 1904, and on the further understanding that 
he minister at least during the week, and. when possible on a 
Sunday afternoon, to the Church people within a ra.dius of 
ten miles from Wetaskiwin, A note in the minutes of the 
Executive Committee meeting on.July 19th, 1904, indicates that 
the parish had become self-supporting and was paying the 
minimum stipend of $700 per annum, thus relinquishing the 
missionary grant of $200 which it had formerly received, 

Mr. Austin left the parish in 1907 and was succeeded by 
the Reverend W, E, V. McMillen, B,A. (Western Ontario), Vicar 
of Saint Joints, Olds, and Rural Dean of Red Deer, During his 
tenure of the living further progress was made, A rectory next 
door to the church had been purchased, just before his arrival 
so that he was its first occupant. The Sunday School, in which 
the nei rector took a particular interest, numbered twenty 
pupils. During this period a number of gifts were presented 
to the. parish - a brass cross from Mr. Clifford E, Compton 
in memory of his son who died, in 1903, the brass altar desk 
and hymn board from Mr. H, Penton, and. from the ladies of the 
church, the rods and curtains for the chancel. Eor the 


320. ExCom, April 16th, 1903 

















j 










following Easter the congregation of All Saints*, Edmonton, 

presented a frontal, super-frontal, and drapes for the desk 

and lectern* Bit by bit improvements were made to the church 

property, and the mortgage was reduced so that in 1909 the 

congregation was able to report itself as a flourishing parish. 

After Mr. McMillen’s departure at the beginning of 1910 

the parish seems to have entered upon a somewhat difficult 

period. At the Diocesan Synod in Tune, 3.910, the Bishop spoke 

321 

of the parish as *'still vacant” with, apparently, no 
immediate likelihood of an appointment. The Reverend A. J. B. 
Bewdney, M.A., Chaplain to the Bishop of Calgary, came for a 
few services and then, in May, 1910, the Reverend Villiers M. 
Durnford, then Incumbent of Waterloo, Ontario, came to the 
parish but apparently decided, not to stay because of the state 
of the rectory. 

The next rector seems to have been quite an extraordinary 
person and one gathers that the rather violent account of parish 
history for this period is written in his own hand. He was the 
Reverend Dr. William Henry Coard, whom Crockford f s Clerical 
Directory, 1.910, describes as of the University of Chicago, but 
preserves a discreet silence concerning the Doctorate of Laws 
to which he laid claim. Ordained by the Bishop of Q,u f Appelle, 
he had. been for two years Vicar of Granum when he came to 
Wetaskiwin. Perhaps the story is best told in his own wordss 

The friction that had characterised certain 
sections of the congregation from the days of the 
first Incumbent had not been altogether dissipated, 
and the task of harmonising the jealousies and 
quarrels of the conflicting interests is evidently" 
beyond human power. Just when matters were 


321. Calgary Synod. Journal, 1910, p.18 







apparently settling down the “old guard” threw 
their usual bomb into the sacred cup, and routed 
the forces of quiet and spiritually disciplined 
soldiers of the Cross, who were too high minded, 
to quarrel with these enemies of the Church of 
Christ, . , , 

It seems that what irritated the learned doctor was the 
refusal of the parishioners to build a new rectory to replace 
the “miserable structure” which he described as being “unfit 
for habitation.” As a result Mr. Coard sent his resignation 
to the Bishop early in December and departed from the parish 
and diocese at the end of the year. 

The next rector w%s the Reverend Robert W. W. Alexander, 
B.A. (Trinity College, Dublin), who came to the parish from 
Saint Margaret 1 s, Aghadowey, Co. Derry. He speaks of finding 
the people most friendly and when the mutual confidence of 
priest and people was restored the parish began to flourish 
again, Iriting a few months after his arrival, Mr. Alexander 
said? 


At a meeting called shortly after I came the 
parishioners decided, to build a new church. A 
subscription list was opened and upwards of 
$1000 promised, the period, of payment to cover 
two years, I cannot understand the references 
to the house provided; it has not a showy 
appearance but is most comfortable. During 
these six months $463.95# has been paid for 
stipend.; $2X6.70£ for General Parish Expenses, 
and $800 towards the Building Puna for the 
new church. 32 Sunday services were held, and 
33. celebrations of Holy Communion, 24 Baptisms, 
and about 500 parochial visits,, 66 Sunday 
School pupils, with five teachers. Three 
funerals . . • 

As the months went by the. parish continued to thrive and 
in 1913 the rector was appointed Rural Dean which entailed much 
extra-parochial, work. Mr, Alexander remained at Wetaskiwin until 
June 30th, 1914, when he left, as he said, “without any unpleas¬ 
ant feelings towards the parish,” but ”on account of his liking 
for pioneering,” 







(ii) S ain t Vary , Ponoka. 


At the time that Immanuel Church, Wetaskiwin, was opened 
322 

it had been said, that "there is a growing mission of the 

Church of England on the Battle River where a small church will 

also soon be erected." Although Ponoka was outside his area 

the Reverend C. H. Andras seems to have gone there from time 

to time. In 1900 he gained permission from, the Executive 
323 

Committee to go and live there for a year* It is not certain 

that he availed himself of the permission but he held fort¬ 
nightly services there for some months. Local report has it 
that the first services were held in the old log building 

belonging to the Methodists, and afterwards in Reid's Hall 

324 

and the Canadian Order of Poresters' Hall. 

The deed of erection for the parish was issued on July 

3rd,, 1903,. and its boundaries were defined as those of the 

town of Ponoka. Services were conducted every Sunday during 

the next few years, and for a time in 1904 the parish had a 

resident priest in the person of the Reverend James Atkinson. 

Mr. E* H. Webb was appointed, to the parish as a lay reader 

325 

in 19Q6 and within a few months he was ordained deacon*^ 

326 

At the beginning of 1907 he was transferred, to Coleman and 
his place taken by the Reverend. A. A* Cramp who had come from 
Newfoundland to the Pembina mission* Mr. Cramp was informed 
that this would probably be only a. temporary arrangement. 

He was followed by the Reverend R. A. Robinson who made an 
equally brief stay. Prom 1910 until the formation of the 

322. See p.//7 supra.. 

323o ExCom. September 14th, 1900. 

324. "'Quill & Shield," Year Book of the Ponoka High School, 1944-5. 

325. ExCom. September 12th, 1906. 

326. ExCom. December 13th, 1906. 




















/ 22 - 

Diocese of Edmonton the parish was ministered to by the Vicar 
of Lacombe. The church was dedicated on Whitsunday, May 31st, 

1914, by the recently consecrated Bishop of Edmonton. 

(e) THE COLCHESTER-LEDUC MISSION 

When the Reverend H. A. Gray was appointed to Holy Trinity, 

South Edmonton, in 1895 it was expected that he would also 

minister to some of the surrounding communities. This he did, 

and when he moved to All Saints 1 the work was carried on by 

the Reverend W. R. Burns. Before long Mr. Burns felt that the 

growing work was getting beyond him and in the fall of 1898 

327 

he approached the Executive Committee'" " with a view to having 
the area divided, but nothing was done at the time. 

Almost a year later the Committee felt that it would be 
wise to form a mission with the town of Leduc as a centre, 
which would include the settlements of Colchester and Clear¬ 
water on the east, a.nd the Conjuring Creek settlement on the 

west, of the Calgary and Edmonton Railway. The clergyman in 

, 328 

charge was also to visit the Hay Lakes when convenient. 

The Committee made provision for a grant of $120 for the 
remainder of 1899 in aid of stipend, end of $240 for 1900, 
providing that the mission made up the balance to at least 
$600, At the same time the new charge was offered, to the 
Reverend Ivor James Jones, B.A. (Saint David’s College, 

Lampeter) who, after serving curacies in-Wales, was contemplating 
removal to Canada. Mr. Jones arrived but did not stay very 
long and the mission remained vacant during 1901 and 1902. 

During that time the Executive Committee felt that it would be 


327. ExCom. October 19th, 1898. 

328. ExComu September 22nd, 1899 













wise further to divide the mission*^ limiting the southern part 

of it to the area from **Ellerslie on the north to Millet on the 

south, and including the settlement of Conjuring Creek west of 

Leduc, and the settlement of Clearwater on the north east, and 

the clergyman also to visit Hay Lakes when practicable." 

(i) Saint S t ephen' s ,, Colches ter 

Services had been continuing for the preceding few years 

in the community but the parish had formally been erected by 

deed of the Bishop on December 18th, 1900®" ‘ ' Almost at once 

an pllication was made for a grant in aid of church building. 

331 

The Executive Committee voted ^ that "upon plans and specifica¬ 
tions being approved by the Bishop, this Committee recommends 
that the sum of £33 - 6 - 8d. (|>160) be voted from the S.P.C.K. 
Block Grant for Building Churches.” 

The work then proceed.ed with all speed and in July ”the 

new Episcopal Church in Colchester was opened ... by the 

332 

Reverend H. A. Gray and the Reverend G® H. Webb®”" ~ This would 
seem to suggest that Colchester was once again under the care of 
the rector of Holy Trinity® On Monday afternoon, August 26th, 
1901, the Bishop held a Confirmation there and consecrated the 
cemetery*"'’' 0 

The congregation must have continued, to grow for on 
Thursday, October 9th, 1902, "a re-opening and harvest festive,! 
service v/as held in Saint Stephen’s church, Colchester, which 
has just been completed by having the chancel, vestry, and .L porch 
added to the former building* 1,034 a fact which the Bishop noted 

329. ExCom® April 25th, 1901. 

330. Calgary Synod Journal, 19&2, Appendix ”L”. 

331. ExCom. April 25th, 1901. 

332. EB. July 15th, 1901. 

333. EB. August 30th, 1901. The church and cemetery were evidently 
on different sites. The church site is described as tt Pt. SWj- - 
10-52-23-W4th*,’ while the cemetery was”Pt. SE^ -32-52—22-W4th" 

334. EB. October 20th, 1S02. 









on 


in his next Charge to Synod. 0 " 5 Immediately afterwards, 

October 20th, 1902, the Reverend A. D. T. Floyde 335 was 
licensed as "Deacon in the new missions adjacent to Strathcona, 
under the immediate direction and supervision of the Reverend 
George H. Webb, Rector of Strathcona." He was to receive a 
stipend of forty dollars per month. The consecration of the new 
church by the Bishop took place on Sunday, March 22nd, 1903. 337 
During this period Mr. Floyde lived with the Reverend G. H. Webb? 38 

On September 20th, 1903, he was ordained to the priesthood 
in Immanuel Church, Wetaskiwin, and licensed as "Priest in 
charge of the Leduc mission." About this time he seems to have 
taken up residence in Leduc for in July there was a news item 
that "Mr. Floyde, our English minister (sic) is having a very 
pretty parsonage built on the south side of the lake." 339 
Mr. Floyde thus describes his impressions: 

This was the period of the Big Immigration, Settlers 
were coming in large numbers from eastern Canada, the U.S.A., 
and Europe in response to the Government’s offer of 
160 acres of land for $10, 

The Americans usually came up the Calgary and Edmonton 
trail in covered wagons drawn by two horses or an 
occasional!, team of oxen. Travel was slow owing to the 
heavily laden wagon with sometimes horses and cattle 
walking behind. The Calgary trail except in spring 
or after a heavy rain was usually good. There was one 
bad spot about half way between Leduc and Strathcona, 
where Black Mud creek had to be forded, and sometimes 
wagons had to be unloaded in mid-streami and early 
in the spring the water may be too deep to cross, 
and then there was nothing else to do but "camp out" 
until it was fordable, This place was very familiar 
to me as I had to cross at least once a week, and 
when flooded did the same as the Mounted Police, 
drove the horse in, grabbed his tail, and .swam across. 

It was all part of the day’s work. 


335. Calgary Synod Journal, 1904, p.14 

336. The negotiations between the Bishop and Mr. Floyde are 
described in the Minutes of the Executive Committee, Feb.20th, 
1902. The personal notes and reminiscences are contained 

in a letter to the writer, August 30th, 1950. 

337. EB. March 25th, 1903. 

338. Minutes of Executive Committee of Synod, Sept. 26th, 1902. 

339. EB. July 31st., 1903. 















■ 












































' 


















The ’’down easterners'* and others from the American 
continent usually came on the railroad by freight, 
with a car of settler's effects, including horses, 
cattle, implements, etc* These Barons of Progress 
usually knew in what neighbourhood they wished to 
settle, and after getting their car on the siding, 
would rush to the office of the Land Agent, and get 
someone to show them the land open for settlement* 
Location of land was not easy. One had to -find the 
iron stake driven on the corner of each square 
mile, with four two-feet holes around it, and it 
meant a lot of walking. Then it might be in the 
middle of a swamp or in the thick brush, and it was 
a tired but happy man who "filed." on the land of 
his choice. 

The settlers from Europe usually came by train, 
sometimes by a special train, but more often on the 
usual three trains running from Calgary to Strath- 
ccna (or South Edmonton as the Railroads called it). 

To watch them arrive at the railway station gave 
you very mixed, feelings. One wondered what the 
conditions were that prompted them to leave the 
land of their birth, in any case they were persuaded 
that Canada, was a better land, a land of Eope and 
Promise. It was very hard to judge their feelings, 
the men in their sheepskin coats and hats were as 
a rule very energetic both in speech and action, 
the women, with their shawls over their heads and 
shoulders were very quiet and retiring, looking 
after their children and bundles of clothing. 

Oftentimes one would see a small stone grist mill 
used for grinding the family flour in their own 
country - a treasured, heirloom brought all the way 
from Europe - whose future destiny was to balance 
the well sweep outside their farm home* 

Quite naturally these people of various nation¬ 
alities preferred to settle in groups of the same 
country of origin, and so they formed settlements 
of French, Danes, Swedes, Greeks, Galicians, etc., 
with the English speaking peoples settled anywhere 
in between. 

When Mr. Eloyde moved to Led.uc both Mr. Webb and the 
congregations concerned were most anxious that another priest 
should be appointed, and to that end approached the Executive 
CommitteeThey received word, however, that there was no 
immediate hope of such an appointment. In March, 1905, the 


340. ExCom, July 19th, 1904 







« 




-0 




















. 

















Executive Committee resolved that "the Reverend W. E. Kenney, B.A., 
be placed in the mission of Colchester, Cooking Lake, and 

341 

Clover Bar, in accordance with the Bishop* s suggestion.** 

Eor some reason Mr. Kenney did not accept the invitation and in 

July it was made to the Reverend Spencer Collins,. B.A., who 

342 

“was resigning his work in the Lethbridge district.”'' He did 

not accept it either and in his Charge to Synod, 1906, the 

343 

Bishop spoke of the living as being still vacant. 

Later that year the Bishop was able to announce that 

tt Mr. James Mason had arrived and could proceed to Colchester.”'^ 4 

Shortly afterwards he was admitted to the Diaconate, and•in 

1907 applied to the Executive Committee for aid in building 

345 

a parsonage at Colchester. A grant of fifty dollars was 

made and in August, 1908, the Bishop stated that a house had 

346 

been provided there. Mr. Mason was ordained Priest in 1908. 

It was not possible, however, to provide clergy for both 

Colchester and Leduc and, like his predecessor, Mr. Mason 

had to assume charge of both missions at least until 1910 when 

the Reverend Alban E* Blood, having been admitted to the 

347 

Diaconate, was assigned to Colchester and remained there 
until 1912 when he joined the staff of the Edmonton Mission. 

Eollowing Mr. Blood came the Reverend T. E. Streeter, who 
served the Colchester-Leduc mission until 1917 when he returned 
to England. Crockford* s Clerical Directory, 1925, describes him 
as being also ”incumbent of Saint .Aldlhelm* s, Millet,” but of this 
there is no mention in diocesan records. 

341. ExCom. March 22nd, 1905. 

342. ExCom. June 8th, 1905. The fact that neither of these men 
appear in Crockford* S Clerical Directory, 1910, or 1925, is 
interesting but probably unimportant. 

343. Calgary Synod Journal, 1906, p.6 

344. ExCom. September 12th, 1906. 

345. ExCom. September 10th, 1907. 

346. Calgary Synod Journal, 1908, p.2.8. 

347. ExCom. October 4th, 1910. _ 











(ii) Saint Paul ! Sy Leduc. 

This parish was erected on August 5th, 1904, while the 

Reverend A. D. T. Ployde was priest in charge. At that time 

an application was made for a grant to assist in building 

a church. The matter was left to a Committeewhich 

evidently recommended that such a grant be made from the S.P.C.K. 
349 

Block Grant. Ihen it was discovered that funds from this 

350 

source were no longer available assistance was given from. 

, 351 

the Church Building Bund. The Bishop reported to Synod in 

352 

1904 that the church was completed"' and Mr. Rloyde says that 
he preached his farewell sermon in it on June 25th, 1905. The 
rectory was reported as having been completed at the Synod of 


In 1906 the parish received a grant of £75, or three 

354 

hundred dollars, in aid of stipend and by 1910 it was 

355 

substantially the same so that the parish does not seem to 
have been marked by any pronounced growtho This is also 
apparent from, the proceedings of the October meeting of the 
Executive Committee, 1910,. at which “the Bishop read a letter 
from the Reverend James Mason, of leduc, giving an account of 
financial, difficulties owing to the illness, of his horse and 
other circumstances and requesting a change of location if 
possible. After explanations given by the Bishop it was . . . 


348. ExCom. August 5th, 1904. 

349. The w Block Grant* was a sum of money placed annually at the 
disposal of the diocese by the Society for Promoting Christian 
Knowledge, from whieh the Bishop and Executive Committee could 
assist new parishes in building churches. 

350. Calgary Synod Journal, 1904, p.8 

351. ExCom. November 18th, 1904. 

352. Calgary Synod Journal, 1904, p.14 

353. Calgary Synod Journal, 1913, Appendix fl G n . 

354. ExCom. December 13th, 1905. 

355. ExCom. December 7th, 1909. 








n.,: 












5 









! 


e 










°7 


resolved that a special grant of one hundred dollars from the 

Clergy Contingent Fund be given to the Reverend James Mason 

. .. . , 356 

under the circumstances recounted by the Bishop.” There was 

some discussion as to whether it might be wise to move Mr. Mason 

to Coleman but it was evidently decided to leave him at Leduc 

where he stayed until 1912 when he went to Tofield. At a 

subsequent meeting the Bishop and Executive Committee advised 

him to 11 discontinue the Sunday services at Hill Side for the 
357 

time being.” 

Following the departure of Mr. Mason from Leduc, and 
Mr. Blood from Colchester, the Reverend Theodore S. Streeter 
took over the whole missiop. 

(iii) Conju r ing Creek» 

Regular services at Conjuring Creek were held by successive 

clergy for a number of years but no parish was erected, nor any 

property acquired by the Church. The one newspaper reference 

says, *At the close of the morning*s service the daughter of 

Mr. & Mrs. Sidney Price was christened by the Reverend Mr. 

358 

Floyde.” 


(iv) Saint Mar k, Co o king Lak e. 

The parish of Saint Mark, Cooking Lake, was erected on 
359 

December 20th, 1907* It had small diocesan assessments that 

year which were paid in full. The Bishop reported the church 

360 

as having been built in 1908, apparently without any grant 

from the Synod. The property is described as part ( 2 ^ acres) 

361 

of L.3. 4 of 24-51-22-¥4til• 


356. ExCom. October 4th, 1910. 

357. ExCom. January 11th, 1911. 

358. EB. April 9th, 1904. 

359. Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix **L” • 

360. Calgary Synod Journal, 1910, p.18 

361. Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix n J” 










i. 























Canon Newton held occasional services at Clover Bar and 
in 1886 it was reported that "logs are on the ground for 
building a Church of England place of worship on Mr, Keith’s 
claim near Clover Bar. The building will be finished at an 

ns n 

early date." What happened is unknown but the church was 
never built. Moreover, the Church never owned any property 
here, nor erected a parish. Eor some years services were 
held in homes and school houses. 

(f) BITTERN LAKE - DAYSMAN!) - CAMR03E 

At the diocesan Synod in November, 1904^ u3 the Bishop 
announced, in his Charge, that "during the summer of 1903, 

Mr. D. T. Parker, a graduate of McGill and student of the 
Montreal Theological College; and during the past summer Messrs. 
Henry and Morris Shore, students of Huron College, London, 

Ontario, did good service in the Diocese, the first named at 
Rosenroil, and the other two at Rosenroil and Carstairs 
re spectively." 

Rdse.nroll was a community south of the present Bittern 
Lake and Mr. Parker f s first service there seems to have been 
on June 3rd, 1903. 364 In addition to the services of these 
students occasional services during the winter were held by the 
Reverend C. G. Austin, of Wetaskiwin. 

At a meeting of the Executive Committee during the summer 
of 1904, 3 "a letter was read from Mr. Irwin of Rosenroll and 
from Mr. Hinchey of Marlbank, Ontario." The former was probably 
a request for a clergyman, and the latter an offer of service, 
and the coincidence of their being read at the same meeting may 

362T'^J7~r iT”5rdr"T88 6~” “ 

363. Calgary Synod Journal, 1904, pl3 

364. This section is based upon parish records and the recollections 
of Mr, & Mrs. C. T. Roper, Bittern Lake, Alberta. 

365. ExCom. July 19th, 1904. 














well have led to Mr. Hinchey 1 s appointment to Rosenroll. At all 

events he received one hundred dollars towards his expenses in 

coming to the diocese, was ordained Deacon, and sent to 

Rosenroll for the winter. The parish of Saint Dunstan was 

organized on January 28th, 1905. No church was erected, 

however, and services were held in the school house. 

Following the departure of Mr. Hinchey there 3eems to have 

been no immediate appointment. On October 2nd,, 1905, the 

Canadian Pacific Railway began a tri-weekly train service 

over its new line to Bawlf, and it was proposed that a priest 

367 

should be placed at that point for the summer of 1906. 

By the time that the priest who had been assigned to this 

duty, the Reverend C. Bathurst Hall, L.Th., arrived the line 

368 

had reached Daysland, so he was stationed there. Thence, 

for the summer, he ministered to points along the line. 

He was followed by the Reverend A. P. Carter, 3.A. 

(Cantab.), who also began by making his headquarters at 

Daysland. It was evidently felt locally, however, that Camrose 

would be the logical centre of the new mission, for ”a letter 

from Mr. E. C. Roper .having been read it was . . . resolved 

* that Mr. Sykes be notified that the grant for a house and 

369 

stable at Camrose must not exceed four hundred dollars.* M 

The parish of Saint Andrew, Camrose, was not erected until 

370 

December 6th, 1910, although the church had been built in 
the previous year. By the time of the 1911 Synod Mr. Carter 

366. ExCom. December 15th, 1904. 

367. ExCom. March 6th, 1906. 

368. ExCora. June 6th, 1906. 

369. ExCom. September 10th, 1907. 

370. Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix ,r L B . 

371. Calgary Synod Journal, 1910, p.18 













c 


l 





f 










^ 7 ? 

was designated as "Priest-in-charge of the Gamrose Mission** 
and occupied that post until after the formation of the 
Diocese of Bdraonton. 

There does not seem to be a deed of erection for the 
parish of Saint Luke, Daysland, although the congregation 

373 

acquired lots 15 and 16, block 11, plan L. M L.V. Daysland,” 

While at Gamrose Mr. Garter also held services at 
Halley, a community north of Bittern Lake. The first one was 
held at Mr. Ladell’s house on May 3rd, 1908, when Mr. Carter 
took as his text Heb. 12.14. There was a large congregation 
present but the collection amounted to only fifty cents. In 
the following month a new church was built and dedicated to 
"Holy Angels and All Saints.” It was used for the first time 
on Sunday* January 31st, 1909, and the last service in it seems 
to have been the harvest festival on September 17th, 1919. 
Strangely enough, there is no record of this building, or the 
property on which it stood, or the parish which it served, in 
the diocesan records. 

With the coming of the railway adjustments were necessary, 
and services were begun at Bittern Lake. The first service there 
was held in the Lutheran church, which is now the Community Hall, 
on October 23rd, 1910. A building for U3e as a church was 
purchased later and used for the first time on October 17th, 

1915. Later, during the ministery of the Venerable 0. Howcroft, 
this building was sold, and the church from Halley moved into 
the village where it became Saint Dunstan*s. 

372. Calgary Synod Journal, 1911, p. 5 

373. Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix M J”. 






































(g) VERMILION VALLEY (VEGREVILLE - LAVOY - LAMONT) 

By the beginning of the present century large numbers of 
immigrants were settling east of Edmonton in the area known 

generally as Vermilion Valley, even though the Canadian Northern 

_ 374 

Railway line did not come through until November, 1905. 

In the summer of 1903 the Bishop expressed his intention of 

placing a missioner at Vegreville. For various reasons, some 

of which will be discussed in the concluding chapter, the Church 

never seems to be of prime importance to settlers, and the 

newspaper correspondent at Vegreville commented vigorously upon 

the Bishop's proposal: 

If the Bishop places a man here we shall have a 
very good share of preachers (five) in our immediate 
neighbourhood. 7/e are hoping that those in authority 
will show some common sense in their efforts to have 
unnecessary overlapping of work or foolish expendi¬ 
ture of money through rival efforts in missionary 
work • 70 

Already the theory of Church Union based upon economy rather 
than ecumenicity was beginning to appear l 

By the time this appeared in print, however, the Bishop 
had gone on his way to Saskatoon and probably never saw it. At 
all events he paid no attention to it, and in the following 
spring a priest was appointed to minister to the district. 

At the Executive Committee meeting on April 6th, 1904, ”a letter 
was read from Mr. Card stating that the Mission of Innisfail 
had reached a self-supporting status dating from Easter, 1904, 
and referring to his future work in the diocese.” It was then 

resolved “that the offer of the Revere n & Gerald Card for 
missionary work in the Vermilion country be cordially accepted 
and that the Bishop be requested to make the appointment at a 


374. EB* November 23rd, 1905 

375. EB. June 25th, 1903. 





* 





















salary of seven hundred dollars, together with two hundred 
dollars additional for travelling expenses until further notice.” 
Accordingly Mr. Card moved to Vegreville, and for the year 1906 
a grant in aid of stipend of £100,, four hundred and eighty 
dollars, was made to the mission. 

(i) Saint Mary the Vi rgin - Veg r evi lle 577 

Shortly after their arrival the Reverend Gerald Card and 

his wife took up a homestead south of Lavoy on which they lived 

until the parsonage was built in Vegreville. At first Mr. Card 

held services in the school house of the Imperial district 

but during the winter of 1905-6, following the advent of the 

railway, the little community moved a few miles north to form 

the town of Vegreville. While the town was in course of 

construction services were held in stores and homes. The parish 

3 78 

was formally erected on October 31st, 1906, and the church 

379 

built in the following year. The plans were drawn and the 
actual construction carried out by members of the congregation. 
The first service was held on July 7th, 1907, and was followed 
by a meeting of the vestry. The church was dedicated on November 
10th, 1907, by the Lord Bishop, assisted by the Archdeacon of 
Edmonton, the Venerable Henry Allen Gray? at which service there 
were two infants baptized, Albert Eenton Jones and William 
George Lacey. 

33 0 

In ISO'S a vicarage was built' next to the church, also 
by voluntary, labour. Similarly, all the articles of church 
furniture, with the exception of the pulpit which was later 
pruchased and presented by the Sunday School, were made and 

376. ExCom. April 6th, 1904. 

377. This section is taken from the parish register corroborated, 
wherever possible, by diocesan records, 

378. Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix ”L n » 

379. Calgary Synod Journal, 19013, p.28. 

380. Calgary Synod Journal, 1910, p.18 


376 
























/3i 


presented by individual members of the congregation* 

Mr. Card's ministrations carried him west as far as 

Beaver Lake, south to Imperial,, east to Lavoy, and north to 

Soda Lake, 'Whitford, and Andrew. Apparently, however, the 

consolidation of the mission was not going ahead as fast as 

the authorities thought it should. At the end of 1908 the 

Executive Committee "recommended that the Vermilion (Vegre- 

ville) mission be transferred from the list of mission districts 

and be classed for the future as an 1 Assisted Mission, 1 the 

grant in aid of stipend to be for the year 1909 at the rate of 

four hundred dollars per annum, with the prospect of a reduction 

in 1910, A year later the desired stability was still to be 

achieved but the grant was reduced to three hundred and fifty 

382 , 

dollars, and the mission included among those whose clergy 
were to be informed "that unless there is a marked improvement 
within the next six months, that radical steps will have to be 
taken.” In the fall of 1910 the parish applied for and received 
permission to enter into a mortgage with the “Colonial Invest¬ 
ment and Loan Company for a loan of five hundred dollars on the 

383 

parsonage and site of same.” In 1911, Mr. Card was succeeded 

by the Reverend R. A. Burge, Deacon, during which time the 
Reverend W. B, Earnharn, priest-in-charge of the North Bank Mission, 
came to supply the sacramental needs of the mission, Mr. Burge 
left in 1913 and was followed by the Reverend Gerald McComas, 

B.A. (Trinity College, Dublin.) 


381. ExGom, December 17th, 1908, 

382. See p* /of supra. 

383. ExCom. October 4th, 1910, 






c 



i 





c 









( ii) Saint John , Lavoy . 

The parish of Saint John, Lavoy, was erected on March 
20th, 1908, 384 and part of the south-west quarter, 4-52-13- 
W4th, Pl-an 949Q,, Lavoy was acquired as a church site on March 
16th, 1910. 385 Apparently the church was built shortly after¬ 
wards although diocesan records do not seem to show it. 

(iii) Sain t Mic hae1, L amont . 

Saint Michael 1 s parish, Lamont, came into being on 
February 2nd, 1910, 388 and the Bishop in his Charge to Synod 
of that year speaks of the church as having been built in 1909. 
The parish of Lamont seems to have been linked with the Horth 

7QO 

Bank Mission and in 1909 the Executive Committee decided 
that tt the Reverend C. Horne be requested to live at Lamont 
and try to work Chipman and Baptiste settlements, and Andrew, 
giving the stations north of the river one service a month 
for which Lamont is to provide |250 per annum, and the balance 
of the mission flOO per annum, at least towards stipend. t,3 ° 9 
Provision was made later for a missionary grant in aid of 
stipend ”up to $450” for 1910. 399 

By the beginning of 1910 it was decided that 391 "the 
Reverend W, B. Earnham should be transferred to the Lamont 
mission to take the place of the Reverend C. W. E. Horne, who 
had accepted, the position of curate at the Pro-Cathedral. w 
In March, 1910, a grant of fifty dollars was made towards a 
parsonage at Lamont. 392 The Reverend W. B, Parnham remained 
there until 1916. 

384. Calgary Synod Journal, 1911, Appendix ’’L" • 

385. Records of the Diocese of Edmonton. 

386. Calgary Synod Journal, 1911. Appendix H L lf . 

387. Calgary Synod Journal, 1910, p.18. 

388. See next section, p./3& below. 

389. ExCom. June 8th, 1909. 

390. ExCom. December 7th, 1909. 

391. ExCom, January 4th, 1910. 

392. ExCom. March 31st., 1910. 











(h) VICTORIA - PAKAN - N ORT H BA NK 

It had been one of Canon Newton’s constant preoccupations 

to know how the ministrations of the Church could be provided 

393 

at Victoria, which later became Pakan 0 Por a time he had 
been able to secure the appointment of a resident missionary 
but for the most part the community had had to depend upon 
occasional visits from the missionary at Beaver Lake. The 
minutes of the Executive Committee of Synod contain periodic 
references to such visits. 

In 1895 the Bishop received an offer of service from a 
394 

Mr. Horace Better whom he proposed to place at “Victoria 
on the Saskatchewan River from which place petitions had come 
from time to time for a clergyman or lay reader to be sent, 
one of these petitions, a letter from a school teacher there, 
being read to the committee.” There is, however, no indica¬ 
tion that the Bishop gave effect to his intention. 

In the following summer ”a letter was read from the 
Reverend Robert Connell of Beaver Lake with reference to a 
visit to Victoria and the Lobstick settlements, where he reports 

everything fairly satisfactory, apparently, and the people 

, . , ,,395 

satisfied.” 

There seems to be no further reference for several years, 
and then it is recorded that ”the Reverend J. Atkinson has gone 

to Victoria to preach the Gospel to the poor, and deliverance 

. N 396 

to the captive (sic). He will return shortly.” 

In 1907, ”the report of the Reverend G. H. Webb, General 

Missionary, on his visit to the Lobstick settlement having 

393. See p»3*/ supra. 

394. ExCom. November 14th, 1895. 

395. ExCcm. August 27th, 1896. 

396. SB, June 29th, 1900. 













r 





















397 

been read ' the Bishop suggested the appointment of the 

398 

Reverend C. W. E. Horne to that mission to work Lobstick, 

Victoria, and Egg Lake.” It was then resolved "that the 

Bishop’s suggestion be concurred in. This being a new mission 

Mr. Horne may be paid from the S.P.G. Western Canada Special 

Bund.” At the same meeting the Secretary was ordered to 

write to the congregation at Lobstick informing them that 

a stone foundation must be placed under the log church. 

In his Charge to Synod, 1908, the Bishop spoke of a 

399 

parsonage having been provided at Lobstick while at the 

next Synod, in 1910, he reported the erection of a church 

at Horth Bank, which was evidently the same place.The 

401 


parish was erected on November 21st, 1908, with the 

dedication, w Saint Columba of Iona and Saint Kentigern.” 

In the spring of 1909 it was decided that **the 

Reverend C. W. E. Horne be requested to take services at 

Lamont each fortnight, as suggested by him, till the work 
402 

be tested.” Evidently Lamont gave promise of being the 


397. ExCom. September 10th, 1907. This paragraph from the 
General Missionary’s report at the 1908 Synod is also 
relevants ”Xn June, 1907, I visited the Lobstick Mission, 
which had been without any services for three years, they 
promised to do what they could if a clergyman were sent 
to them. Subsequently the Reverend C. W. E. Horne was 
sent to them. A small house was erected for him, and 

'a church is to be built this year.” 

398, Reverend C. W. S. Horne, M.A., Selwyn College, Cambridge; 
Curate of Saint John the Divine, Gainsborough, 1900-03; 
Saint Nicholas, Skirbeck, 1903-07; Priest-in-charge of 
Lobstick, Alberta, 1907-10; Curate of Calgary Cathedral, 
1910-1913, 


399, Calgary Synod Journal, 1908, p. 28» 

400, Calgary Synod Journal, 1910, p.18. 

401. Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix ”L”. 

402. ExCom. March 23rd, 1909. 


















e 


I 




. 










' 




' 










. 





. 




•; 




e 


c 








« 


« 





c 





■ 















&7 

strongest centre in the Mission for later in the year in 

response to a letter from Mr. Horne, it was resolved, that 

”the Reverend C. W. E. Horne be requested to live at Laraont 

and try to work Chipman and Baptiste settlements, and 

Andrew, giving the stations north of the river one service 
403 

a month • . . *' 

Early in 1910, as already indicated, the Reverend 
W. B. Earnham was appointed to the Horth Bank mission in 
the place of Mr. Horne who had moved to Calgary. 

(j) KILLAM - SEDGE WICK - LOUGEEED 

In September, 1910,. the Bishop *®reported an interesting 

and encouraging visit to Killam and Sedgewick and stated 

his strong opinion that it was advisable that a- clergyman 

be appointed there as soon as, one could be secured. 

Ho action was taken at that meeting but on the last day 

of the month deeds of erection were issued constituting 

the parishes of Saint George, Killam, and Saint John, 

405 

Sedgewick• 

Six months later the opportunity came to make an 

appointment, and with the concurrence of the Executive 
406 

Committee the Bishop appointed the Reverend D. J. 

Watkins-Jones to the new mission. A few weeks later 

w the Bishop presented a. letter from the Reverend D. J. 

Watkins-Jones stating that prospects at Killam and 

407 

Sedgewick were very promising. w 

Mr. Watkins-Jones moved to Coleman in 1912 and was 


403. ExGom. June 8th, 1909. 

404. ExCom, September 9th, 1910. 

405. Calgary Synod Journal, 1912, Appendix • 

406. ExCom. March 3rd, 1911. 

407. ExCom. May 4th, 1911, 










succeeded by the Reverend J. A. Partridge, of Saint 
Boniface College, Warminster, who had for some years been 
an S.P.G. Missionary in China. During his tenure of the 
living its centre was moved, from Killam to Sedgewick. He 
remained until 1914 when he moved to Saint Andrew*s, 
Edmonton. 

The Synod Journal for 1913 reports that Saint John*s 
church, Sedgewick, had been built by that time as had also 

All Saints* church, Lougheed,, although it had not been 

. .. . a , 408 

constituted as a parish. 


408. Calgary Synod Journal, 3^913, Appendix n C rt • 



















Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Peake, Reverend Frank A* 

The beginnings of the diocese 
of Edmonton 1S75-1913. 









0x mbbi* 

auwirajiais 

MBBWIXISIS 















{• 













Chapter Twelve 


/3 


9 


THE KDM ONTON MISSION 


That Canon Newton was a man of unusual vision and fore- 

sight may he realised from his forecast of economic and 

political changes in Twenty Year s on the Saskatchewa n. As he 

looked, with no less discerning an eye,, at the Church* s 

future he felt that in the new and scattered areas of the 

west her work could best be done by loosely-knit communities 

409 

of workers.. Thus, he writes; 

We want men of genius for originating methods 
of work adapted to special circumstances end 
places, as the Archbishop of Canterbury told 
the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel 
at its annual meeting two years ago. In such 
work hard and fast lines cannot always be laid 
down and followed everywhere until they be¬ 
come commonplace and rigid customs, which are 
too antique, in a bed sense, for the work. 

With » . * simpler diocesan organization I 
would seldom plant a single man do?m in his 
loneliness in a wide district of the country; 

I would have small communities of clergy, under 
an experienced priest, who should superintend 
the work of the whole district, and be a 
father in God to the men who were around him, 
giving them, counsel and encouragement, and 
protection, and spiritual help, and intellectual 
training. He would be a practical rural dean 
where he is most wanted. In this way freshness 
and vigour could be thrown into the work, and 
efficiency and economy would be secured. This 
would be a real missionary organization; not 
necessarily interfering with settled pastorates, 
but supplementing them in some cases, and in 
others preparing them, for ??hen the population 
became more dense. 

Such spots might, as of old, become religious 
houses and centres of light and blessing, where 
prayer could be offered and work done for the 
glory of God . . • 


409. Newton, pp. 157-159. 










J 











In 1894 Canon Newton had offered to make the Hermitage 

into such a missionary centre for northern Alberta, proposing 

that some two or three men, either lay readers or clergy, 

should, be stationed there The Executive Committee, while 

fully appreciating his earnest desire to help forward the 

Church’ s work in northern Alberta,, felt that if the support 

of the people was to be fully called out clergymen and lay 

readers must, as far as possible, live among the people to 

whom they minister. In so deciding they had. put a finger 

on one of the major weaknesses of such method.s of work. 

It is probable, however, that the real deciding factor 

was Canon Newton’s own eccentricity, which rendered him 

unsuitable for the superintendency of such a venture. 

Meanwhile, during the next ten years, the area west of 

Edmonton was developing. Railways v^ere being pushed through, 

settlers were moving in, and the Church must send mis si oners« 

4 pm 

In January, 1906, it was noted that the Reverend H. A. Gray 

was shortly to undertake a visit to Lac la ITonne 11 at the 

request of the residents there, to look into the matter of 

forming an English Church mission . n His report was duly 

412 

presented to the Executive Committee and it was agreed that 
the Bishop should ’’offer the mission of Lac la ITonne to the 
Reverend A. A. Cramp, of Newfoundland; and that to assist him 
in the expense of coming the Bishop be authorized to offer him 
a sum up to one hundred and fifty dollars, on the usual con¬ 
ditions of repayment failing service for a given length of time 
according to the amount received. ” Mr. Cramp remained only 

410. ExCom. May 11th, 1894. 

411. EB. January 18th, 1906. 

412. ExCom. March 6th, 1906. 











... ; .. 




c 


■ 












c 




' 







5 




















t 













for a few months and was then transferred to Ponoka at the 

"beginning of 1907. The General Missionary, in his report to 

Synod in 1908, said, "In November, 1906, I visited the Pembina 

Mission and found that the clergyman then in charge was for 

several reasons incapable of doing the tremendous work waiting 

to be done. Since his removal, and the appointment of Mr® 

I-eversedge, the work has developed rapidly. There are now 

twelve congregations, two branches of the W.A., and a church 

413 

about to be built at one of the stations." 

No history of the Diocese of Edmonton would be complete 

without its tribute to Walter Leversedge, Lay Reader, 

Missionary Priest, Archdeacon, and Doctor of Divinity, who 

died November 25th, 1948. He stands as one of the architects 

of the Diocese, and in a very real sense gave his life in its 

service. In June, 1907, he was appointed as lay reader in 

the Pembina Mission, at a salary of forty-five dollars per 
41A 

month, A month or so later a special grant was "made to 

Mr.-W. Leversedge for the purchase of a second pony, the same 

to remain the property of Synod, and if sold the proceeds to 

415 

be remitted to the Treasurer." By this means Mr. Leversedge 
travelled, extensively, holding services and establishing 
congregations at Lac la Nonne, Sion, Rexboro, Wabamun, 0noway* 
and. other pibneer settlements. So wide was his territory 
that the Executive Committee recommended^ 0 that "for the 
year 1908, in consideration of the special circumstances of the 
mission* the stipend of Mr. Leversedge be at the rate of fifty 
dollars a month from January 1st, 1908, and also that the 


413, Calgary Synod Journal, 1908, p.48. 

414. ExCom. June 13th, 1907, 

415. ExCom. August 12th, 1907, 

416, ExCom. December 19th, 1907, 

































amount of instalment of loan for the present quarter, 


viz „ 


$25, be remitted.” 

A year later a* grant of one hundred dollars was made 
to Mr* I.eversedge "towards the completion of his house: the 
said sum to be paid back to Synod or used as it shall direct 
in the event of the house being sold." Towards, the end. of 
1909 it was reported that Mr. Leversedge would shortly be 
moving to Edmonton where he would be able to "devote consider¬ 
able time to the studies preparatory to * tslicing orders* in 
the Episcopal Church 418 His place at Wabamun was taken 
by the Reverend George G-. Edwards, a priest of the diocese, 
who served there for a short time® 


In May, 191.0, the Bishop of Calgary announced to the 


Executive Committee 


419 


that the Reverend W*. G. Boyd and hi 


associates had arrived in Calgary on the previous Saturday, 

May 7th, : and had gone on their Y/ay to Edmonton on Monday to 

begin the Archbishops* North Alberta, Mission* The resolution 

which, was then passed indicates something of the origin and 

420 

purpose of the Mission: 

This Executive Committee has followed with deepest 
interest and thankfulness the course taken by the 
Archbishops of Canterbury and York in striving to 
arouse widespread sympathy and interest, and to 
secure financial help and offers of personal ser¬ 
vice from suitable clergymen in the mother land 
for the extension of the Church’s work in Western 
Canadas and it heartily welcomes the Reverend 
W. G. Boyd, M.A., Chaplain to His Grace, the Arch¬ 
bishop of Canterbury,, and the clergy and laymen who 
are associated with him, to their headquarters in 
Edmonton, and the active discharge of their duties 
in the portions of the Diocese which the Bishop 
assigns to them. 


417, ExCom. October 28th, 1908. 

418, EB. November 18th, 1909. 

419. ExCom. May 10th, 1910. 

420. Ibid. 







In welcoming the members of the Edmonton Mission at the 

421 

Diocesan Synod in the following month, Dr. Pinkbam said: 

The present year has become memorable in the 
history of our Church, because of the appeal in 
its behalf which was issued, by the Archbishops 
of Canterbury and York, in February last. Briefly, 
they called upon the Church and people of England 
to give fifty of their best clergy to the Canadian 
Church, annually for the next ten years for work 
in western Canada, and to provide means for their 
support* * • . 

On Saturday, May 7th, I had the joy of welcoming 
here the Reverend W* G-. Boyd, M.A., Chaplain to the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, whom I saw several times 
in London before he paid his brief visit to the 
Diocese last year, and two of the clergymen and 
laymen who accompanied him. ... 

After spending their first Sunday here they 
proceeded to Edmonton where Archdeacon Cray had 
kindly provided temporary accomodation for them 
in a tent at the east end of All Saints’ church* 

I have licensed Mr. Boyd as the head, and the 
other clergy as associate members of the Edmonton 
Mission of the Archbishops’ Fund. I have assigned 
them to a district in the north east part of 
Edmonton, north of the parish of Saint.Paul, to 
be known as the parish of Saint Faith. They are 
also undertaking, for the present, the visiting 
and the services in the parish of Saint Andrew, 
and are preparing to start services at Calder, to 
the north west of Edmonton. Outside the city of 
Edmonton, I have assigned them portions of the 
diocese to the west and north-west, including 
the mission in which Mr. Edwards has been working 
for the past year, a.nd the north-western half of 
the mission where Mr. Herbert has been so strenu¬ 
ously and successfully engaged, still leaving 
him Battenberg and the large district adjacent. 

Mr. Boyd expects four additional clergy to 
join the mission in the course of the year, one 
of them being a son of the late Bishop of London. 

An anonymous gift, earmarked for the special 
purpose, has enabled Mr. Boyd to purchase in 
Edmonton a site exceeding an. acre in extent. On 
this site a clergy house will be built as soon as 
possible. Their clergy house is to be the house of 
the members of the mission, and it is hoped that 
all will meet together in it, for a week’s rest 


421. Calgary Synod Journal, 1910, pp.20-21 








. 




< 


. . . 

e • ; ■ 

* * • • ' 






e 


c * 


c 








. . * a . 


■ 


■ . 












« 

; 

. 

. 




$ 






., 


. 








* 













of body and soul, once a quarter* The clergy house 
will have a chapel and. a school room separated from 
it by folding doors, is to be attached to it. The 
chapel of the clergy house will thus form the 
chancel of a small temporary church. Part of this 
site is to be set aside for a permanent church when 
such is required# 

At the Synod held in November, 1911, the Bishop’s Charge 

contained the following summary of the work already accom- 
422 

plisheds 


The assistance which came to us last year through 
the efforts of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York 
d.uring the winter of 1910, to which I referred at some 
length in my last address, has been greatly developed, 
and is proving an immense help and blessigg^ There 
are two groups of workers in the Diocese." 

The Edmonton group consists of nine clergymen, of 
whom two, viz# the Head, the Reverend W. G# Boyd, 
and another, are working in Edmonton and vicinity; 
three at different centres along the Grand Trunk 
Pacific Railway between Edmonton and the western 
boundary of the Diocese; three in different dis¬ 
tricts north-west of Edmonton; . . » Also under 
Mr* Boyd, are eight lay readers, one a graduate of 
Oxford, a,nd five others doing missionary work under 
one or other of the clergy, while two are at present 
taking an Arts course at the University of Alberta,, 
with a view eventually to taking orders. Then there 
are three lay brothers, one of whom keeps house at 
He adquart ers and the o the r two at o ut s t at i ons » Sai nt 
Andrew f s, Edmonton, now served, by its own parochial 
clergyman, the Reverend John J# Robinson, recently 
Dean of Belfast, was for some months served by a 
member of this staff, as the parishes of Saint 
Eaith, the Good Shepherd, and Saint Michael and 
All. Angels are still served. 

Prom this general survey we now turn to the histories 
of jshe constituent parishes and missions. 


(a) THE MISSION HOUSE 

The Mission House played a very important part in the 
operation of the Edmonton Mission, and the two quotations 


422. Calgary Synod. Journal, 1911, pp.21-22. 

423# The other was in southern Alberta, under the Reverend 
W. H. Mowat, M.A., with headquarters at Cardston. 



. 

' 


■ 

C . . . '■ .» 

e . - < 

* • * 

' 

, 

.... 

* 

; , .... ' 

* 

t 

. :.i « , . 

, 1 



. . 


















C 



. 









■ 
























following show how it was built and what was its function. 

The first is an extract from a letter from the Reverend Oswyn 

Creighton, of September 19th, 1910; 424 

A large hostel is being built in an outlying part 
of the city, which is almost certainly going to be 
an important artisan suburb. Attached to it a chapel 
is also being built, opening on to a school room, 
which is to serve as the parish church for the 
district, Saint Faith's. A large piece of land has 
been bought, and eventually a proper church will 
be built. The chapel is being given by Sir Henry 
Pellat at a cost of £500, and the schoolroom and 
site by Boyd*s aunt, so that the Fund only pays 
for the actual house; this is the idea all through, 
that the Fund only provides for the maintenance of 
the living agents - all churches, etc., must come 
from other sources® 

This building which had library, dormitories and offices a 
well as the chapel served as the headquarters of the Mission. 

In 1911 the Women* s Mission' House, known as Saint Faith*s House 
was built. 

A further use for the Mission House was that it provided 

the centre and accomodation for the quarterly reunions to 

which the Bishop had made reference in his Charge to Synod in 

1911. The value of such assemblies is described in a letter 

from the Reverend A. H. Huxtable, priest-in-charge at Wabamun. 

It is dated, January 16th, 1912. 

The Members of the.Mission who are working in country 
stations make no engagements in their districts 
from the Tuesday preceding the fifth Sunday in the month 
(whenever that occurs) till the Wednesday or Thursday 
in the following week. The fifth Sunday comes, roughly 
speaking, once a quarter, and that week is set apart for 
the reunion of all the members at the Central Mission 
House in Edmonton; the plan works well.® . . For those 
members who are working perhaps nearly a hundred miles 
away from the capital, it means a long and tedious journey 
there and back each reunion, especially in the spring 
when the snow has melted and the trails are very heavy; 


424. Archbishops 1 Western Canada Fund; Occasional Paper 
January, 1911 - Fo. 1. 

425. A.W.CbF.; Occasional Paper. March, 1912. Ho. 5. 






































and yet I don’t expect there is one of them who does 
not feel at the end of the Reunion that he has gained 
far more than he has lost. Looking at it merely 
from the point of view of the creature,, that week 
at Edmonton more than repays any trouble or incon¬ 
venience one is put to in getting there. . . . 

And perhaps one gains even more from an intellectual 
point of view. . , • 

But it is spirit ually, perhaps, where we get the 
greatest uplift at Reunion times. The daily Eucharist 
in the beautiful little chapel, the ’Quiet Lay* which 
we have each Re anion, ... 

One of the fixed institutions of each Reunion 
is a general chapter meeting, when each member of 
the Mission reports to the assembled community the 
method and progress of his work. This is helpful in 
many ways. . . , 


day o 

7.15 
7.30 

8.15 
8.45 = 
9.30- 
10-11 
11-12 


The following is the programme of the first 
f our last Reunion, December 28thj- 

pm 


am Morning Prayer 12.45 

am Holy Communion 1.00 pm 

am Breakfast 6.00 pm 

9.30 am Household Duties 7.00 pm 

10 am Meditation 10.00 pm 

am Bible Study 10.30 pm 

.45 pm General Meeting 


Intercession 

Dinner 

Supper 

Evensong 

Cocoa 

Compline 


One afternoon and evening of each Reunion is 
given up to a * wild 1 dissipation. There were counter 
attractions this last time on Hew Year’s Day - a 
hockey match on skates at the Thistle Rink, and a 
matinee of ’The Private Secretary* at the theatre. 

’The Private Secretary’ procured the majority. In 
the evening we had a tremendous Christmas dinner, 
at which ’Cookie’ excelled himself, followed by a 
whist drive. (The above on being read does not 
sound quite so ’wild’ as I thought *.) 

Thus was provided the counsel, encouragement and 

spiritual help which Canon Hewton had felt to be so necessary 


(b) SAINT FAITH, EDMONTON 426 

The first Saint Faith’s church was, as already indicated 
a part of the chapel attached to the Mission House. It was 
divided into two parts by folding doors which shut off the 
Sanctuary and a small, chancel. The rest of the chapel served 


426. Condensed from 11 St. Faith’s Church* Fortieth Anniversary, 
1910-1950,” 15 pp. 













as a place for parish meetings. For Sunday services the whole 
building was used. This explains why the dedication by the 
Bishop of Calgary was a double one; the sanctuary and. chancel 
were dedicated at the eight o’clock celebration of Holy Com¬ 
munion on Friday* October 28th, 19.10, and the other part at 
Evensong on the same day* The buildings served as Saint 
Faith’s church until 1912 when the growth of the parish brought 
about a change. 

At the annual meeting at the beginning of 1912 the congre- 
gation decided that in view of the rapid rate at which the 
building was going on in the neighbourhood, increased accomo¬ 
dation must be provided* Many plans were discussed* What was 
acruaily done was this* The schoolroom* that is, the western 
part of the building* was separated from the Mission House 
buildings, and put on a new foundation prepared for it at the 
north side of the property, one hundred and fifty feet from 
its former position* The operation of cutting it off and 
jacking it up on rollers occupied two days, a Friday and 
Saturday, Then the congregation worshipped in it as usual 
on Sunday* and on Monday the actual moving was performed. It 
was then enlarged by the addition of fifty feet to its length. 

The actual date of the removal is not given except that 
it was-in the summer of 1912* As the church stands now, the 
original building forms the western half, with the exception 
of the choir vestries which were added later. The cost of 
the removal and extension was borne by the parish of Saint 
Faith, and the completed building was dedicated by the Bishop 
of Calgary on July 28th, 1912. 

The Reverend W* G. Boyd served as rector of the parish 
from its inception until early in 1918 when ill health compelled 



■ 












him to resign* He was made an Honorary Canon .when the Diocese 
of Edmonton was formed in 1914, 

427 

(c) SAINT 'MICHAEL AMD ALL ANGELS, NORTH EDMONTON 

In October, 1909,, a small number of people who worked at, 

or were connected with, Swift’s Packing House which had just 

been established in North Edmonton, came together for a service 

held on Monday evenings by the Reverend H, H, Summers, M.A.* 

(Oxon.), Priest-in-charge of Saint Paul’s Church, Edmonton, 

They met in a room over a store, lit by a borrowed lantern and 

two candles. As a rule there was a congregation of about 

twenty. The services continued through the win t era-ad the place 

of meeting changed to Graham’s lumber store. The place was 

bitterly cold and not many could attend. The singing was 

accompanied by a Mr, Dunn on the violin. 

At the beginning of 1910, Mr, ¥. Leversedge came out to 

conduct the services which were now held on Sunday mornings, 

4?8 

In February the congregation was constituted a parish. 

During the following month Messrs, T. W. Fletcher, T, Dunne, 

T, White ley, and J, Newsome waited upon the Bishop asking if 
he would send an incumbent and promising to raise some $300 
towards the stipend. The Dishop promised to do what he 
could and thought that he could probably secure a priest from 
England, Unfortunately the clergyman he had in mind fell ill 
and was unable to come. 

On Trinity Sunday, 1910, the Reverend W. G, Boyd, Head 
of the Edmonton Mission, announced that the Mission would be 
responsible for the services and work of the parish. He also 


427, From an unsigned article in the parish register,, probably 
by the Reverend C, H, Bailey, 

428, February 11th, 1910 - Calgary Synod Journal* 1911, Appendix ,f L” 





























' 

, 

■ 

. 


- ” 

t 1 • <• 






-* ' 








* 


. 












' 

. . • 




* t * " 

. 




v 

. : . 
















1 


- 































« 






said that the Archbishops 1 Western Canada Fund •would lend five 
hundred dollars towards the building of a church,, whereupon it 
was decided to build one costing approximately eleven hundred 
dollars. Two lots were secured from Mr* Grierson, who made a 
present to the congregation of one of them. Various members 
of the mission came out to take services and the congregation 
still averaged about twenty. 

On October 21st, 1910, the Reverend C. H. Bailey, B.A., 
(Oxon.), was placed in charged of the parish, and xszas to give 
rather more than half his time to this work. The ne?7 church 
was used for the first time on November 20th, 1910, and the 
regular Sunday service was moved from the morning to seven 
o*clock in the evening. A Sunday School was started which • 
met at three o’clock each week, and the Holy Communion was 
celebrated twice a month, once at 8.30 a.m. and once at eleven 
o’clock. The church was dedicated on December 1st, .1910, by 
the Lord Bishop of Calgary. 

There were eleven communicants on Christmas morning, 1910, 
and the evening congregations now averaged about thirty. A very 
small branch of the "Woman 1 s Auxiliary which had been organized 
in the summer continued to hold fortnightly meetings. 

The first annual congregational meeting was held in 
January, 1911, and Mr. Fletcher was nominated as Vicar 1 s Warden. 
Mr. L. A. Lloyd was elected as People’s Warden and seven vestry¬ 
men were chosen. The congregation undertook to pay one hundred 
and fifty dollars during the year to the Edmonton Mission. 

Six members of the congregation were confirmed at Christ Church,, 
Edmonton, that year, and on Easter Day there were eighteen 


















. 








' 





























/So 


communicants at Saint Michael’s. 

The first Confirmation in the church was held on December 
17th, 1911,, when thirteen of the congregation received the lading 
on of hands in the presence of a reverent and earnest congre¬ 
gation numbering about one hundred. At the Christinas following 
there were thirty-three communicants. The congregation at 
this time numbered about forty, and the offertories about six 
dollars a Sunday* 

The reports of the second annual meeting showed that 

during the year the parish had raised six hundred and fifty 

dollars, of which three hundred was in church offertories. The 

church site had been paid-for and the debt on the building 

reduced to four hundred dollars, a grant of two hundred and 

forty dollars having been received from the S.P.C.K. The 

parish was assessed at two hundred dollars towards the stipend 

of the priest-in-charge for the forthcoming year. During the 

previous year one of the Lady Mission workers, Miss Warden, 

had come to give half her time to this parish, and her influence 

had already proved to be a great blessing. 

By autumn, 1912, the congregation averaged thirty, 

although the number of church families had increased. Mr. Bailey 

remained in charge of Saint Michael’s.until 1913, when he was 

succeeded by the .Reverend W. P* Q’F. Fisher, H.A., (Oxon.), also 

a priest of the Edmonton Mission, who thus describes his 

429 

impressions of Forth Edmonton % 

I arrived .in Edmonton on May 3rd, 1913, and was 
told that Forth Edmonton, or Packing Town (familiarly 
called ’’Packers” by the university element at the 
Mission), was my S-pjhere of work* It is a settlement 
which has grown up round two huge packing plants 


, March, -1914. 


429. A.W.G.F. 


Occasional Paper, Fo. 13 


PP.1-2 
























e 






















. 
















.. . . 

0 r 







































where cattle, pigs, and sheep are driven up a slope 
on one side of the building and on the other side 
there waits a train of refrigerator cars, which 
receives what ..as pig, steer, or lamb, but now is 
sausage, lard, or canned beef and mutton. The town, 
once separate from the city of Edmonton, is now in 
the city limits, and by a splendid paved road the 
two are rapidly becoming one. 

The town of North Edmonton has two huge hotels. 
There are several poolrooms, but no other sort of 
amusement exists, except concerts and dances which 
are sometimes arranged. Anyone who has been in the 
West knows exactly what such little towns are, and 
how easy it is for the man in from the grade or 
construction camp to succumb to the allurements of 
hotel life, and lose in a few days the money he has 
worked monotonously, week in and week out, to get; 
then back he goes once more* 

The work of a great number of men and women in 
the packing plant is not at all elevating, to put 
it mildly, and does not draw a very high class of 
people, but at the same time a great number of 
carpenters, painters, engineers* and salemen, as 
well as clerks in the office, are employed, a good 
many of whom live in this place; and so we have a, 
great assortment of people of every language and 
every sort of employment, including, too, a certain 
number of farmers, teamsters, and labourers in the 
city * 

This is a long account, but I am trying to give 
a true picture of the place. 

Now as to my part* The church here had been under 
Bailey*s charge, and by his hard work I found a fair 
number of staunch Church families had been made, and 
there were about thirty-five communicants. Judging by 
the number of people who attended the services in my 
first few weeks, my reception could hardly have been 
called cordial, but it has been a great happiness to 
see the congregation steadily grow until once or twice 
the church has been nearly full. I think any growth 
has been due to my coming away from the Mission house, 
and having my shack among the people; it seems to them 
a more settled state of things, and they feel that 
most of my timgis being spent on them and that I am 
their own property. They know where to find me, too, 
when wanted, and the men can come in and have a talk, 
which is always a blessing, as it helps them, and it 
helps me too. 

My shack cost about .-£40 and was practically all 
built by voluntary labour. It is not quite finished 
yet, as I have only put one coat of paint on yet. 
Though ’batching* is not everything that could be 
desired, yet it is nice to have a little house of 
one's own, where you can find things in the dark and 









know where everything is. The chores take up a lot 
of time. I have had a fine stable built, too, where 
I keep Plato, and .there are a team of mules lodging 
there,, which pays for my horse’s feed. 

My church is looking rather nice now with new 
curtains over the windows, which makes it more pri¬ 
vate, and I have some imitation stained glass in the 
chancel. As to services, I have a weekly Celebration 
on Soinday morning, with an average of nine communicants, 
and Evensong at seven o’clock. Sunday School is at 
3 p.m. ... I am told that I am to have a lady worker 
after Christmas to take charge of the Sunday School 
and Woman’s Auxiliary• This is very badly needed 
indeed, for the children’s work out here is most 
important, and at present the Sunday School children 
are few. . , . 

(d) GOOD SHEPHERD * CA1DSR. 

The first reference to Caider seems to be in the latter 

of the Reverend Oswyn Creighton to which reference has already 
430 

been made. In it he described the community as a growing 

one, most of whose residents were connected in one way or 
another with the works of the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway. 

431 

Until his arrival G. R. Reeve," a lay worker, had been looking 


430. See p. supra. 

431. G. R. Reeve was, in 1910, ; reading for his Arts degree at the 
University of Alberta. There was, and continued to be, a 
close connection between the Edmonton Mission and the Uni¬ 
versity. In Mr. Huxtable’s letter (see p. ) he mentions 
that frequently at Reunions f, on two other evenings, as a 
change to religious instruction, lectures, are given on non¬ 
religious subjects by one of the professors of Strathcona 
University.” In his Annual Report for 1911, the Head of the 
Mission wrote t H We have this year a second student taking 
the .Arts course at the Provincial University of Alberta, 
which is situated at Strathcona, on the other side of the 
river. A process of sifting, and testing is going on in regard 
to the lay members of the Mission. All those who seem 
fitted for ordination will first take, we hope, a degree 

at the University. ... Ho Work in the end can be more 
important. Priests who join us from England will mostly re¬ 
turn after a set term of service, but men trained, educated, 

& ordained out here will be specially fitted for the needs of 
this country, & will, as a rule,, make their home in it.** 

Later on the Reverend Thomas Marsden, a member of the Mission, 
served for a year as Provost of the University, while Mr. 

J. B. Bickersteth, a lay member of - the Mission, & the virtual 
founder of Saint Aidan*s Hostel, served for several years 
on the teaching staff. At least two of the women workers 
married members of the faculty. 












c 












c 







in his studies 


after the parish but as he became more involved 

hr. Creighton was deputed to share in the work. The first 

services at Calder were held in a tent, but in September, 1910, 

a building committee was appointed which consisted of Messrs. 

3?. Tones, Young, and Benefield. They decided upon a building 

which was to cost about eight hundred dollars and were able 

in a short time to collect $329.51b. Work began at once and 

the church was usable, although not completed, when the Bishop 

came at the end of October. During this visit the three churche 

Saint Paith’s, Saint Michael’s, and the Good Shepherd were all 

dedicated. Mr. Creighton thus described the proceedings at 
432 

Calder: 

On Wednesday . * • afternoon I drove over to 
Calder to prepare the church for the opening. It 
had not been plastered but we fixed it up as well 
as possible. Mrs. Lloyd came, with me and produced 
some beautiful blue hangings, which went splendidly 
with some blue brocade I had brought out for an 
altar cloth. » . * The service at Calder ms to be 
at eight o’clock (on Thuesday, October 27th,) The 
Bishop, the Archdeacon, the Canon, and about a 
dozen priests, deacons, and laymen all came to 
open the tiny church. There was a congregation of 
about thirty-five. We had a procession and sang, 
psalms, and had a delightful service, the Bishop 
reading various dedicatory prayers. ... On 
Saturday . . . afternoon I went into town and got 
a gift of fruit from the grocer, which I took over 
in the buggy to Calder, and with some of the women 
there decorated the church for harvest festival. 

Sunday, the first celebration in the new church 
was held at eleven with nine communicants, followed 
by' visiting, the first Sunday school with about 
twelve little children, first baptism, more visiting, 
evensong, then cleared everything out of the church 
for the plasterers, and back again about 10 p.m. 

There was some delay in getting the plastering completed 

and it was November 20th before the church could be used again 

for service. At the end of 1910 $561.05/ had been paid out 

for lumber and supplies and against it the congregation had 


432. A.W*G.B. Occasional Paper, Ho, 1, January, 1911, pp.15-16 








secured a loan from the Archbishops* Western Canada Fund 
The first annual congregational meeting was held on 




January 11th, 1911, at the home of Mr. Squires with the Reverend 
Os Yiyn Creighton in the chair. Mr. Jones was appointed Vicar’s 
Warden, and Mr. Cook, People’s Warden. Messrs. Young, Turpin, 
Edwards, and Oreen were elected as vesrrymen. It was also 
decided that the congregation would try to contribute one 
hundred dollars during the year to the Edmonton Mission. 

During the following summer Mr. Creighton went, at the 
urgent request of the Bishop, to the parish of Alix for three 
months but was persuaded to stay there. For a time the Reverend 
C. H. Bailey ministered to the parish and then, in the summer 
of 1912, the Reverend Alban E. Blood, a deacon, of Dorchester 

43 3 

College, England, took charge of the parish. 

In 1913 a two“roomed shack was erected on the lot next 

to the church and it was, as Mr. Boyd remarked in his annual 
434 

report, r, a real advance in parish life that they now have 

their priest living alongside of the church, and not three 

miles away at the Mission house.” The Reverend A. E. Blood, 

who had been ordained to the priesthood at Saint Faith’s church 

435 

on Sunday, March 30th, 1913, during the Reunion, was 
transferred shortly afterwards to Wabamun, and his place at 
Calder taken by the Reverend 0. D. Whitaker. He too 
lived in a little shack adjacent to the church and, in addition 
to his work at Calder, had charge of a small congregation at 
Saint Albert, a Roman Catholic settlement nine miles north-west 
of Edmonton. He took a morning service there once a fortnight 
and had hopes of building a small church there• 

433. A.Y.C.F. Annual Report* 1912, p.10 , 

434• A.W.C.F. Annual Report, 1913, $.14. 

435. A.W.C.F. Occasional Paper, Ho. 10, June, 1913, p.15 








(e) THE LAG LA NOME MISSION. 

/\ r zct 

As already incidated some of the centres west of 

Edmonton had had their "beginnings before the coming of the 

Edmonton Mission, but were then taken over by its staff. 

Perhaps the oldest of these was Lac la Bonne to which the 

Reverend Gr. D* Whitaker, then in Deacon’s orders, was 

appointed in 1910* Soon after his arrival, he was visited by 

43 

the Reverend Oswyn Creighton who thus describes his visit: 

On Monday, September 26th, Boustead and I set 
off for our trip to Lac la Bonne, some sixty .miles 
north-west of Edmonton. The new line of the C.P.R. 
runs as far as Morinville, about twenty-five miles 
due north; so we started by train, Boyd seeing us 
off at the station. I carried a, pack weighing 
nearly thirty pounds on my back. I had just bought 
a great, large, strong knapsack with a head-strap, 
on which I carried my belongings. The train journey 
took us' three hours for the twenty five miles, . • * 

At Morinville, a French Roman Catholic settlement, 
as is all that part of the country, we took the 
mail stage driven by an Irishman named Flynn; it 
was a rattly old conveyance, and the road was. full 
of holes, and the stage was full* * . * After driv¬ 
ing ten miles we got out near Riviere Q,ui Bar re, 
whence at 2.30 pm Boustead and I started on a 
twenty-one mile tramp to Sion,; north-west. . • * 

After eighteen miles we got to Hodgkinson*s store 
at 8.30 p.m. • » . They made us very welcome,, and 
soon provided an excellent tea* Another three miles 
along a bit of the old Klondyke trail over a 
’muskeg 1 (i.e* swamp) and we reached Sion post 
office, a stopping place, about ten o’clock, where 
we slept. ... We had only about eight miles more 
to walk, but found them much more tiring than all 
the day before. We eventually came to Lac la Bonne, 
a lake of about six miles long and from one to two 
miles broad, beautifully timbered all round with 
little undulating hills. We passed a school house 
where the children were playing, there were twenty- 
seven on the books, a very large school, * * . 
eventually we found Ihitaker’s fee use right down by 
the lake. * • * There was a half-breed near by who 
had a nice looking pony which I borrowed with a 


436. Bee supra* 

437. A,h.C.F. Occasional Paper, Bo. 1, January 1911* p.6ff 







e ■ 

























































view to possible purchase, I decided to try her first 
with Whitaker, so we rode over together the next 
afternoon to Sion on some business, about twenty miles 
there and back. We had supper with a delightful old 
couple, who had coine out from England late in life. 

The old man knew little about farming, but was much, 
respected and had been made a J.P. and secretary for 
the school, and was churchwarden for the church which 
is to be built there. 

Mr. Whitaker was joined shortly afterwards by Mr. J» B. 
Bickersteth, B.A., (Oxon,), a lay worker, who has recorded 
many of his impressions in a most interesting volume entitled, 
The Land of Open Boors. At this stage of development it was 
necessary to hold frequent services in homes, many of them 
isolated, with only a handful of people present. At the same 
time the missioners explored the surroundihg country hunting 
out those who would welcome their ministrations, and looking 
for centres in which new missions could be established or 
churches built. In the summer of 1911 Mr. Whitaker, who had 
by that time been elevated to the priesthood, and Mr. Bicker¬ 
steth undertook an exploratory trip to Greencourt, during 
which they visited the communities of Belvedere, Lawton Graven 

Mosside, Glenister, Peavine, Mayerthorpe, Roydale, Wild Horse, 
4' 7 '8 

and Rich Valley, " In many of these places churches were 
af te rwar ds bui11. 

One of the immediate consequences of this trip was that 

439 

it became possible to report at the end of the year that. 
,f new country districts have been opened up west and north-west 
of the Lac La Bonne mission, Mr. Bickersteth is in charge of 
the work west, making a monthly trip lasting between two and 
three weeks from the Lac la Bonne mission house and back to it 

438. A.W.C.P. Occasional Paper Bo. 4, Decembers 1911, p,13ff* 

439, A-W.G.E. Annual Report, 1911, p,9 





. ... 

' ■' ,;; 

l(j ■ . 


■« ' ' 


■ 

, 


■ ■ ' 


■u 




' . . < '' : iJ 


I;• . \ 
















. 

s . 


I 





During 1912 a Church, dedicated to Saint Luke, was built 
at Sion. The annual report speaks of it as ”a second church 
in Whitaker r s district 11 so presumab 1 y Saint Peter* s, Lac La 
Honne^^ had been built before that. In the Synod Journal, 
1913, Saint Peter r s is listed as having been built since the 
last Synod, which would be between November 9th, 1911, and 
July 15th, 1913. 441 

A letter from Mr. Whitaker in 1913 affords a glimpse 

of the kind of work in which he was engaged: 

When your letter arrived I was just starting off on 
a ten days* trip so the reply had to await my return. 

We are now enjoying the June rains; the roads are con¬ 
sequently heavy, but the crops are splendid. There were 
no spring frosts sufficient to damage anything this 
year. 

I have been recently spending a few days in Wild 
Horse Valley, through which the Pembina River runs. 
Services are held once a month, and they propose 
building a log church. We have a splendid, site of 
about four acres, with a high bank on the south-east 
side overlooking two reaches of the river. A 
ferry has just been put in at the road, allowance' 
crossing beside the site. Wild Horse is a difficult 
place to get at, there is so much wet country around 
and no road. It is very difficult and expensive to 
get milled lumber hauled In, so we are hoping to get 
this log church built. The people are prepared to 
do the work and hope to be able to provide what money 
is needed, for shingles, windows, etc. Although 
sometimes there are disappointments yet on the 
whole there are many causes of encouragement which 
mere that counter-balance the former. 


440. The property is described as part of the Mi - 7-57-2-W5th, 

Calgary Synod Journal, 1911, Appendix ' 

441. The Annual Report, 1912, speaks of Lac La Fonne Church 

as having been built in 1911, and the Mission House there 
in the following year. Prior to this Mr. Creighton said 
that Mr. Whitaker had w a most magnificent spacious house, 
o'nce used as a store, with all kinds of buildings; but the 
owner has moved his business and lent it to us at a nominal 
rent.” A.W.C.P. Occasional Paper, Ho. 1. January, 1911 p.8 

442. A.W.C.P. Occasional Paper, Ho. 11. October, 1913, g.ll. 


























. 

































In a later issue of the Occasional Paper he describes 
443 

the work at Belvedere: 

Belvedere is a settlement about nine miles from 
the Lac la Bonne Mission House. It is situ - on 
the banks of the Pembina River. . . . and it is 
here that the trail from Edmonton to the country 
further north-west crossed at one of the best fords 
of the river. . . . We have been holding fortnightly 
services at the schoolhouse at Belvedere for three 
years. The people have been very appreciative and 
we can always rely upon a good congregation. Pive 
of the young people, have been confirmed* and they 
drove fourteen miles to Lac la Bonne Church for 
that purpose when the Bishop of Calgary visited 
here some time ago. We have felt the need of a. church 
at Belvedere for a long time, and had considered 
the most suitable site. Three of the homesteaders 
had each offered to give an acre of land for the 
purpose. I was riding through Belvedere one 

Saturday on my way to Mosside, . . . when I learned 
from the storekeeper that a child of one of the 
settlers had died unexpectedly the night before. 

The storekeeper told me that the parents were 
terribly distressed, and that they w/ere hoping that 
I should be able to return to Belvedere and take 
the funeral on the following Monday. . « , The 
only way was to send word to Mosside, remain at 
Belvedere, and have the funeral on Sunday after¬ 
noon, I was told that the child was to be buried 
on the father 1 s quarter section, as there was no 
churchyard or cemetery in the neighbourhood. The 
practice of burial on their own land is a very 
deplorable custom in the newer settlements, as in 
course of time the owner of the land, may move, and 
the graves become uncared for and eventually for¬ 
gotten. As we were intending to build a church at 
Belvedere before very long, it seemed desirable to 
decide at once where the site should, be and set 
aside part of the land as a burial ground, I 
therefore called to see a man who had offered to 
give an acre of land. I explained the circum¬ 
stances to him. He renewed his offer and I 
accepted it. I then called to see the parents whose 
child had died. They were overwhelmed with grief, 
and although they had already had a grave dug on 
their own land they were very glad to agree to 
the new/ arrangement whereby the grave w/oulcl be 
in a permanent burial ground. On the Sunday morning 
a few/ neighbours cleared, away the trees on part of 
the mere and dug a grave in readiness for the 
funeral in the afternoon. 

I have given the above details in order to convey 
a picture of some of the conditions under which the 
people are living here ... . 


443. A.3/.C.P* Occasional Paper, Bo, 14, July, 1914, p.Sff, 





. 

. . . . • • : ;: .. 

; \ : ‘ ’fc, t+L U vi ... -■ M V 

* 


. 





















• 




. 











♦ 






. 








. 




' 




• 

















■ - 

. 

. ■. J i-f . 




. 


' .. e. ' :•* ... 

■ * J 

. 




, v . 















The church at Belvedere was duly built and dedicated 

444 

by the Bishop of Edmonton late in 1914. In October of that 

year Mr. Whitaker was moved to Calder and Mr. E. E. H. Lewis, 
a, lay worker, assumed charge of the Lac la Honne mission, 
with the Reverend. W. L. S. Dallas visiting once a month for 
the administration of the Sacraments. 

Mr. Lewis did his best to continue the services arid, to 
carry on the work begun by Mr. Whitaker. He arrived in Edmon¬ 
ton on October 16th, 1914, and spent a few days at the Mission 
house before proceeding to Lac la Lonnie. Prom thence he wrote? 

What struck me at first was the extraordinary 
varied, nature of the work to be done, and I wondered 
how it is possible to make cooking and stable work 
.harmonize with taking services and doing what H the 
preacher is expected to do. However, one soon gets 
into the run of things, and now after about five 
weeks* work I feel as if I had been doling stable 
chores all my life i I quite enjoyed going round 
and getting to know the people as they were all so 
kind and hospitable. . . • 

According to present arrangements I take services 
at places called. Lawton and Belvedere every other 
Sunday. , . . We have just begun services at IT ale am un, 
which is about seven miles south, and I shall probably 
have a service in the school there every first Sunday 
in the month. . . . About seven miles due west of 
Fakamun is a district called Rich Talley, its former 
name was F *Onion Prairie” l Here there axe a large 
number of people who, though' not Anglicans, are yet 
very ke.en on having a service* . . . 


(f) the;WAMMUN.MISSION . 

At the beginning of the Edmonton Mission the Reverend 
A. H. Huxtable, M.A, (Oxon) was stationed at Wabamun, and 
almost at once a Mission House was built there which did 
duty as Church, Parish Hall, and Rectory. It was thus 
described by the Head of the Mission, the Reverend ¥. G-. Boyd, 


444. A.W.C.P. Occasional Paper, Ho. 16. December, 1914, p.24. 

445, A.W.C.P. Occasional Paper, Ho. 13. March, 1914. p.9-10. 





















■when he visited it during the following summer: 


446 


At Wabamun we have a nice mission house twenty- 
four feet .by twenty-eight, a story and a half high. 

It is on the banks of a beautiful lake fourteen 
miles long, about the size of the Sea of Galilee. 

Half the ground floor is church, or reading room, 
or boxing saloom, according to the day and hour. 

The alter and tiny chancel are screened off when 
it is used for the latter purposes. On the altar 
is a picture of our Lord appearing by the Lake. 

The other half is divid_ed into two, the living 
room and study# You ascend by a ladder into a 
fine attic which has four bed.3 In it and which has 
on occasion housed a good many more than four 
people; for at the other Mission houses, as well 
as at Edmonton, we are often glad to offer shelter 
to a visitor or stranded traveller. • • • 

Pat, the lay brother, keeps all in splendid 
order, and besides looking after house and. stable, 
runs a young men’s club, a boxing saloon, and a 
Sunday School, and occasionally takes a service* 
Huxtable has long distances to travel and is away 
as a rule on five days out of each week* 

A description of the work from the pen of Mr. Huxtable 

himself appears in one of the Occasional Papers for 1912 
A47 

as follows:: 

I took a trip down to Rocky Rapids last week and 
found quite a nice settlement of English and Canadians. 

I was the first ’preacher f who had reached them and 
they were really glad to see me; altogether there are 
eleven communicants there - when they are all at home. 

Rocky Rapids is about twenty-seven miles south-west 
of Tomahawk, and the trail is indescribable - it is 
practically impossible for a waggon to travel along it 
in the spring and summer, and so in the winter the 
people have to get their provisions out from Tomahawk, 
the nearest store. 

I feel the people ought to be having a service, and 
shall try and stent in next month. This will mean that 
Bntwhigtie will have to' do without a Sunday Celebration, 
but when the H- t s have gone there will not be many 
communicants left - not nearly so many as at Rocky 
Rapids and the Entwhistle people are getting a service 
every Sunday. 


446. A.W.C.P. Occasional Paper, Ho.3. August, 1911, p.3 

447, A.W.C.P. Occasional Paper, Ho.6. June 1912, p.6. 









■ > V* '.i. • • • > J-...» .J -- -• v* 

, 

/ . V' ' 

• ' 

j r ■ : ■ " ' t ’> < ’ ? j 

. , . ■ / 
































I am sorry to say that 1 Paddy 1 is laid up; he 
sprained his fetlock somehow on his way home. I 
shall do the trip on foot next time - I believe it will 
be easier and quicker. 

Tomahawk will have to be left. I hear a Method- 
ist student is going to get out there for the summer, 
which is a good thing, as there are more Methodists 
there than any other denomination, and the B-*s, 
the leading family, are keen Methodists. There are 
only two Church of England people there - anyhow, 

I can r t combine Tomahawk and Rocky Rapids in the 
summer, as it is a good six hours 1 trip between the 
two . 

Later in the year Mr. Huxtable had to leave his work 
at Wabamun, "Family circumstances made him feel it his 
duty to return to England in Sovember to the great grief of 
us all. In his quiet way he had made his influence and his 
value felt not only in his own Mission district, but among 
us all. Huxtable’s place at Wabamun has been taken by the 
Reverend E. Teale, a clergyman from England, who came to us 
after two years* experience at Lytton in British Columbia. 

The following extract from a letter from Mr. Teale sjjeaks 
of developments in parts of the country worked from that 
station which it will tax our resources to meet - ’The long 
contemplated power house at Rocky Rapids will be started 
before long. Freighters were out there the other week with 
boilers, etc. Duffield will be a busy place this spring. 
Contracts have been let for the building of a ne?</ railway 
from there up north. I think we shall have to start services 
at the Edwards* immediately after the next reunion.’” 

By 1914 there was another change and the Reverend A. E. 
Blood succeeded Mr. Teale, who had joined the Armed Forces. 

At the end of the period under survey there were, in the 
Wabamun Mission, Churches at Wabamun, Rexboro, and Entwhistle 


448. A.W.C.F. Annual Reports, 1912, p.12. 










a Mission House at Wabamun, and a shack at Entwhi stle. 44 ^ 

(g) THE SWALLOWHUHST MISSION 

In the first annual report from the Edmonton Mission it 
was indicated that Swallowhurst, “north of Edmonton, and about 
fifty miles from headquarters” was one of the new districts 
being worked by the Mission. 450 Erom the Synod Journal 451 
it appears that the Reverend A. C. Tranch, who had been 
ordained Deacon in 1910 by the Archbishop of Canterbury for 
the Bishop of Calgary, was in charge. No word of his work 
appears in the Occassional Papers for 1911 and from the 
annual report for that year we glean only the fact that “Mr. 

C. Oliver is keeping house for the Reverend A. C. Trench 
at Swallowhurst.” 

Mr. Trench was ordained priest in 1912. In the annual 
reports that year the only reference to his Mission is a note 
to the effect that ”1912 saw the building of a second church 
in Trench* s district, that of Pibroch. The first had 

evidently been Saint Luke *s Clyde. 454 - A little light is 
shed on the situation by a letter from W. J. C. Pishbourne, 
a young layman who arrived, in Edmonton from Oxford in 
November, 1912. Apparently he had been sent to the Swallow¬ 
hurst Mission to gain some firsthand- knowledge of Canadian 
life and of the ‘workings of the Mission. Some time later 

449. A.W.C.E. Annual. Report, 1914, p.15. 

450. A.W.C.E. Annual Report, 1911, pJgL. 

451. Calgary Synod Journal, 1913., p.7, 

452. A.W.C.E. Annual Report, 1912, p.10. 

453. A.W.C.E. Annual Report, 1912, p.14. 

454. A.W.C.E. Annual Report, 1913, p.15. 






. ' .. i ... 




. 4 

•' . * . ... . X 

































.... .... v . ... vi . v. . ■ 

? ... •. . • ' • 

• ... ...... • • v. .. . 1. ■ .. i. » - 

• • ... X ... . I • .. .. .t > ■ 0 • - ir. i .".Ci tv-r, ' ; 

... ... ... 











455 


/ 6»3 


he wrote as follows; 

I am afraid this letter to you is very much 
overdue. My doings during my first trip to 
Swallowhurst appear to me only as visions of 
past history. • . . All the time I went about 
with Trench paying visits and holding services, 
endeavouring to learn how an outstation ought to 
be worked. One thing, however, impressed me as 
being something quite new to me. I attended v;hat 
was called a * sock social 1 in the school house 
at Swallowhurst. • • • The socks and the auction 
realised, I believe, something like seventy~five 
dollars which was handed over to the fund for 
a church on the new town site at We stlock. . . . 

I have found Trenches instructions how to 
arrange one f s work on an outstation and how to 
look after a horse simply invaluable ... 

The annual report for 1915 contains the bare statement 

that H the Reverend A. C. Trench has left the Mission, 1 * and 

one wonders if there was any great regret on either side. 

The following report contains this note under the caption, 
456 

w ¥/e st locks rt 

This mission has suffered from a series of 
changes, and though the congregations at its three 
churches of Clyde, Westlock and Pibroch are very 
small, Mr. Brown, who is at present in charge, 
makes a visit once a month to a new settlement 
some thirty miles north where there is a keen 
little bunch of Anglicans at a place called 
Lewiston, very near to the boundary between the 
•Diocese of Edmonton and that of Athabasca. 

457 

The Mission house at We stlock was built in 1913. 


(h) BY RAILWAY TO THE ROCKIES. 

The missions directly west of Edmonton were quite 
different from other ventures within the area of the Edmonton 
Mission in that they flourished as the railway passed and 
then all too often faded. This railway, the Brand Trunk 
Pacific, and the Canadian northern after it, was f, not like 


455. A.W.C.E. Occasional Paper, Ho. 9, March, 1913, p.9 

456. A.W.C.P. Annual Report, 1914, p.16. 

457. A.W.C.P. Annual Report, 1913, p.15. 









most of those which are being built in Canada, making its 

way through a settled country to supply the needs of a 

growing agricultural community; it is transcontinental, making 

458 

for the Pacific coast.” As a result shifts of population 

were even more uncertain than in other areas. For example, 
M Entwhistle had its origin at the time of the construction of 
the great high steel bridge which carries the steel across the 
deep gorge in which the river runs. When the rail went on, 
the town dwindled ...” 11 Wolf Creek fizzled out complete-" 

ly, • • . ” lf Bickerdike has dwindled away. ” These are 
the words from successive annual reports* but it was the 
Church’s task to meet the need for her ministrations when it 
was there* and then to wait and watch for permanent centres 
of population in which parishes and settled work might be 
established. The first stage which is described here was 
that of ministering to a transient population. 

(i) Bntwhistle 

’’Bntwhistle is situated some seventy miles west of 
Edmonton on a new railway• Here a small Mission house has 
been built and a large bunk-house purchased for Church pur¬ 
poses. The Reverend G. R.- Pothergill has been doing most 
useful pioneering work from Edmonton {Bntwhistle ?) up to 
the end of the new railway, one hundred miles to the west* 

in the foothills of the Rockies.” Thus runs the report of 

459 

activities in 1910. 

In June, 1911, the Reverend W. G. Boyd undertook a trip 
to the end of steel of the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway, then 
about sixty miles west of Edson. By that time Mr. Fothergill 
had moved his headquarters to Edson in order to be in the 

458. A.W.C.E. Occasional Paper, No. 3, August, 1911* p.5 

459. A.W.C.P. Annual Report, 1910, p.9 





5 







middle of his district. Mr. Boyd thus described .his visit 

to Entwhistle where„ at the time, there was no resident 
460 

mission worker. 

On Saturday morning I continued my journey as 
far as Entwhistle, • • » This was one of the places 
in regard to which it was difficult to know what we 
ought to do. We have a site and a church to hold 
about forty made out of an old bunk-house with a 
tiny room attached to it for the missionary. Here, 
or in a little tent which did duty at first, Fother- 
gill had his headquarters this time last year. Since 
then he has moved successively to Wolf Greek, ! Mile 
16,* and Edson. Smith was in charge of Entwhistle 
during the latter part of last year, conducting 
services at Horth and South Junkin, where Ms congre¬ 
gation was largely black, and at a little homesteading 
community north-east of Entwhistle at a place called 
Parkeourt• One of the objects of my trip was to 
decide what we ought to do at Entwhistle. Things had 
not been very satisfactory there, and the services 
had been dropped, and some of the people were very 
anxious that they should be re-started. Mr. Waite, 
the schoolmaster, entertained and introduced me to 
all the people. We had a meeting of the church 
trustees..and ultimately I decided to put Reeve here 
during his summer vacation; Smith is to come to 
Edmonton to study for his matriculation. I met on 
the train a Methodist student who was being sent to 
Entwhistle. I told him I thought we ought to avoid 
the scandal of two services at the same time in so 
small a community, and I arranged that they and we 
should take alternate Sundays. So Reeve will pro¬ 
vide fortnightly services at Entwhistle and monthly 
ones at Junkin and Parkeourt. We had quite good 
services on the Sunday I was there, Waite having 
whipped up a good many who I fancy were never there 
before. They were determined to let me see Ent¬ 
whistle at its best* 

It would appear that there was not a particularly active 
response to the services held during the summer, as there was 
no further appointment to Entwhistle. It was left instead to 
the care of the missioner at Wabamun. 


460. A.W.C.F. Occasional Paper, Ho. 3, August, 1911, p.3 










. 

. 

... c 

« 

- 


. 

: 

■ 

. 

* 

* 


■ : ~ < • 

■ 





. 


. 



. 

• 











(ii) Edson 

As indicated above the Reverend G. R. Eothergill moved 

his headquarters to Edson where he and Mr- Boustsad, his 

lay companion, made themselves as comfortable as possible in 

a tent. It was in such circumstances that Mr. Boyd visited 

them in June, 1911, during his western tour of inspection. 

His description of the town and the church work being done 
461 

is as follows? 

Edson is a railway divisional point' and seems 
likely to continue to be some sort of a town. A 
great deal of building is now going on, and some 
are houses of a residential character. Six months 
ago the prospects seemed so doubtful that Bother- 
gill did not think we ought to take any steps to 
secure a church site. However, during the winter 
he had quite decent congregations at his occasional 
services in a hotel, and last April the people 
secured a very good site at the cost of five hun¬ 
dred dollars and set about building a church. The 
site is a very good one on the main street at the 
top of a rise, so that the little church with its 
high pitched roof is in quite a prominent place. 

A gift, of £50 placed at our disposal through Gan on 
Beal has been a great encouragement to the people, 
and they are working hard to pay off as quickly as 
possible what is still owing on the lot and the 
church. Much of the work on the building has been 
voluntary. I visited some of the people, arranged 
for a meeting to appoint churchwarden and vestry, 
and left next day with Boustead for another stretch 
westward. 


Shortly after this Mr. Ibthergill returned to England 

to become vicar of Saint Stephen’s, Poplar, His experience, 

said Mr, Boyd, gained in previous years in railway work in 

eastern Canada was invaluable to the Mission in the starting 

462 

up of its undertaking. He was succeeded in. the superin¬ 

tendence of the work at Edson and along the railway line by 
the Reverend G. S, Provis, M.A., (Trinity College, Dublin), 
who had recently come from England. 


461. A.w.G.E. Occasional Paper, Ho, 3, August, 1911* p.3f 

462. A.W.G.B. Annual Report* 1911, p.9 










By 1912 it was possible to say that Edson had come to 
stay, and "that. Provis’ steady, persevering work is telling 
is proved by the baptism of six adults and the confirmation 
of ten candidates when the Bishop visited the place last 
December* ” 

In 1913 Mr. Provis moved to Telfordville and later took 
a Chaplaincy in the Armed Eorces. He was succeeded at Edson 
by the Reverend E. E* Winter, M.A., (Cantab*) who had been 
priest-ili-charge of Saint Benedict’s, High River* The last 
report for the period under review is that for 1914, "Edson, 
a small town 120 miles west of Edmonton* Here the work has 
been well-maintained by the Reverend E* E* Winter in spite of 
the discouragement of the decrease of the population and also 
the increase of poverty* A very nice chancel has been added 
to the church»" 


(iii) Bickerdike 


The next, point to which the mis sioners moved was 
Bickerdike, better known as ’Mile 16,’ upon which Mr. Boyd 
commented as follows! 

Here in the bitter cold last winter Eothergill 
and Boustead passing Edson, then scarce existent 
save as a name, built themselves a dwelling of two 
tentsand lumber. The place was busy enough with 
its three or four poolrooms, three or four stores, 
half-a-dozen restaurants, and its immense barns 
for the freighters’ horses and a miscellaneous 
population* The church, if it may be so described, 
was used by Eothergill as a day school for a time, 
as a men’s reading room, as well as for worship 
on Sunday, and a dwelling house for the mission¬ 
aries* One of the inhabitants here once last winter 
described Eothergill to me; he had seen him come 
in from a long tramp and then busy (sic) hauling 
logs to build their Mission house. ’He hadn’t 


463. A.W.C.E. Annual Report, 1912, p.13 

464. A.W.G.B. Annual Report, 1914, p.16 

465. A.W.G.E, Occasional Paper, Ho* 3, August, 1911, p.6 









shaved for ever so long, his black hair was all 
over the place, he was none too clean, and his 
clothes were pretty groggy, but,* with enthusiasm, 

’ that ma n*s a hero. * 

"Ford, a lay worker, is here and we found the 
place beautifully clean and neat. It is* however,, 
much more roomy than the tent at Edson. The prob¬ 
lem before us is to know how long to stay here. The 
head of steel has moved on, and half the population 
has moved too. The rest are hesitating. • . * 

By the end of the same year the Head of the Mission 

466 

could only make the wistful comment: 

The growth and disappearance of towns along a 
railway under construction makes rapid history. 

. . • Bickerdike, where Boustead for more than a 
year lived and preached, and one winter kept 
school, has dwindled'away• , . . The Bickerdike 
mission house, church, and schoolroom all in one, 
built of rough boards and tar paper, reminiscent 
of its predecessor the tent which was blown down 
one bitter winter night on the heads of Fother- 
gill and Boustead, was pulled to pieces and out 
of the material a new shack built at Dandurand* 


(iv) Bandurand 

Hext in the succession of mission posts came Dandurand. 

At this place, a few miles further west, a rich bed of marl 

had been discovered.. arid : the Edmonton Portland Cement Company 

was formed to develop it, giving promise of employing hundred 

of men. In addition there were several logging camps in the 

vicinity hence its obvious selection as amission centre. 

Tp the building brought from Bickerdike was added another to 

serve as a church, and a tent for use as a reading room. The 

work which had been begun by Mr* Boustead was now continued 

by Mr. J. B. Bickersteth, and it is from his pen that we 

467 

get the glimpse followings 

On Sunday after the service I walked back to the 
----- Camp with ----- who had been to church, bring¬ 
ing another man with him, and then went straight 
west to the sawmill. Here I asked my way to the 
logging camp . . , 


466, 4.W.C.F. Annual Report, 1.912, p.13 

467. A.W.C.F. Occasional Paper, Ho. 9, March, 1913, p.6f 































It was a beautiful walk ... I was beginning to 
wonder how much further it was when I saw a cheer¬ 
ful light shining through the trees, and five 
minutes brought me into a splendidly built logging 
camp • • . I went straight to the cook who received 
me hospitably, immediately asked me if I had had 
supper, if not, would I stay and have it with him 
and the cookee, as the men had had theirs. • * • 
during the meal I learnt all about him, his family, 
and also about the camp. There were between fifty 
and sixty men there and only the one bunkhouse, 
and it was obvious the place to hold the service 
was this bunk'house • 

It is always a critical moment when one enters 
a bunkhouse full of men for the first time. Generally 
what happens is that the men just glance at the new¬ 
comer, size him up, and then pay no more heed to him. 

This indifference is almost harder to cope with 
than hostility. • » • The missionary has got to get 
busy and do something. The best way is to have a 
good supply of reading matter with you. • * .. I 
opened the door and walked in * . • The men seemed 
moderately pleased to see one, and they gladly 
accepted the bright-coloured magazines and illus¬ 
trated papers that I distributed all round the 
bunkhouse. There were two men playing the fiddle 
at one end of the room, they were playing a jig 
extremely well, beating time with their feet, and 
the men all round listening with great appreciation. 

I said, ’X guess you can play a few tunesJfor me 
tonight, can you ? We are going to have a short 
meeting in here if you fellows don’t object. 1 They 
laughed uneasily, shyly, like schoolgirls, and 
they were great big men, dressed in crimson shirts, 
open at the throat, and yellow corduroy trousers? 
one of them was the best axeman in the camp. I learned 
afterwards. * Oh, I guess so, parson*: if we know ’em. 1 
We had our service. I asked the gamblers to stop for 
half an hour, and they consented with perfect 
courtesy, I stood in the middle under rather a poor 
oil lamp and had to speak loud to make myself heard. 

They sang sitting, but I got them, to stand for the 
General Confession, which I said alone very slowly, 
explaining first exactly what we were going to do. 

I can tell you it was a fine sight to see all those 
great men standing in absolute silence while I 
said those familiar words* We had some more hymns, 

I read from the Bible, and gave an address. One man, 
who had just come up from the East, shook me warmly 
by the hand afterwards, and said he hadn’t expected 
Christianity would have spread that far west, and 
many appreciated the service. After spending some time 
there talking I left to reach the (cement! plant that 
night, . . . 

But Dandurand went like most of the others, and in the annual 

report for 1914 it is not even mentioned. 







; 7 ° 

(v) J asper 

Church life at Jasper was just starting at the end of the 
period under review. Like Sdson it promised from the beginning 
to be a more permanent centre than some of the others, not 
only because it was a railway divisional point, but also 
because it was the headquarters of the newly-established 
National Park. 


The work in Jasper was' begun by the Reverend G, S. Provis 


and Mr. L. H. Lang who arrived there from Edmonton on April 


5th, 19L4. From the former comes the account of life as 
468 

they saw it: 


After breakfast at the railway depot we were 
directed to the Church lots. . . . The whole 
place had changed considerably since I was last 
there for Sunday services at the end of June 
last year. There are now fine Government build¬ 
ings, stores of a substantial character in course 
of erection, and two good hotels going up soon. 

The town site has been cleared and roads and trails 
cut out in many directions. Well, it was a splen¬ 
did day, so we sajb under a tree, and said Matins, 
and discussed the situation. It was humorous - 
the Anglican Church starting in a new place with 
about seven dollars between us l However, we 
knew that we could get credit, and so we began to 
get busy, packed our tent, etc., on our backs 
from the station, made our plans, and then went 
and had dinner in one of the tent restaurants so 
common in new towns in the West, Then we went 
off to get a few boards for the floor of the 
tent. We decided that a hundred feet of lumber 
?/ould be sufficient, and proceeded to bring it 
about a quarter of a mile to the site of our 
tent. We did it in two trips, carrying four 
LO* by 8* boards at a time on our backs, also a 
saw, an axe, hammer and nails, , » • 

There are, I believe, about ten Anglican 
families here, .and the Methodists are arranging 
to put a student in here for the summer months 
(six) and have about £100 in hand for a church. 

I don’t want to see our Church beaten again, . 

. . I have seen many old faces, and I have hopes 
that we shall get our building up and keep the 
flag flying here. 


468, A.W.C.F. Occasional Paper, No. 14, July, 1914, p.llf 






. ■ . 

' 





. 

■ 

. 

- 

: . ; . . 


. . , . 

. 

* 

c 

- 

. 

! 

< 

■ 

- 


t 4 

* 




. 




• - 

• • • c ' • 


i 

4 


, . • * 



• * 







May 2nd, - ’’Anglican Tent," Jasper, Today we had our 
first vestry meeting, and thanked a friend in the Old 
Country for a donation of £50, We are also going to 
borrow from friends in the Old Country £200 for five 
years at five per cent, 

A further vestry meeting was held on May 26tii when it 
became known that the Superintendent of the Grand Trunk. 
Pacific Railway had.given to the congregation two car loads 
of cedar logs which he had brought in for the purpose of 
building a house. Plans for the church were drawn up, free 
of charge, by an architect in Edmonton, With these gifts 
and nearly £600 in cash it was possible to embark upon the 
erection of a church* and the project was finished in a 
few months. 


(vi) Pocahontas 

Prom Jasper the Mission extended to the areas beyond 
in the approach to the Yellowhead Pass® The missioners 1 
experiences are described by Mr, Langs 

I don’t think I shall ever forget the day 
that the Anglican Church ’’pulled in” ±o Poca¬ 
hontas l The outfit consisted of Winter, my¬ 
self* and a tent, 

Pocahontas is situated about twenty miles 
from the Alberta end of the Yellowhead Pass in 
the most magnificent surroundings. The town site 
is divided into two portions, the one down by 
the railroad track, which consists of the mine 
offices, bunkhouses* &c, f and the other about a 
mile up the mountain side, where the miners who 
are married have their quarters, 

Above the.whole town towers a peak, some 
eleven thousand feet high, called Roche Miette, 
and the Athabaska River runs through the valley, 
north of the Grand Trunk Pacific track, • • • 

It was quite dark and pretty cold when we 
arrived■there last September, and the moment we 
got off the train we had a feeling of w not» 
wantedness, rt This was considerably intensified 


469. A.W.C.?. Occasional Paper, No. 14, July, 1914, p.X4ff 














. 

■ 

■■ '• 













c 










. 

















when we tried to get some breakfast, but were 
refused point blank • . . We tried several people 
but no one would take pity on us, and there was 
nothing for it but to walk up and down till the 
store opened at nine o’clock, when we invested 
in a tin of sardines, some biscuits, and a pound 
of butter, and a tin opener. There being no 
obvious place to eat we decided to remain just 
where we were, and proceeded to camp in the open 
just outside the office, as a protest against our 
inhospitable reception. . „ . 

The next thing we did was to ask permission from 
the manager of the mine to put our tent up. This 
was given readily, but without much enthusiasm. 

... at last we reached the upper town site and 
pitched the tent, when we had another f al fresco’ 
meal of sardines and biscuits. A friendly miner 
took pity on us in the evening and gave us some 
supper, which was much appreciated, as it was our . 
first decent meal of the day. 

I arranged to start in with fortnightly services 
the next Sunday, saw some of the miners, and 
returned to Marlborough by the night train. 3?or 
the last six months I have been going up there for 
the weekend every fortnight to hold services® 

Living in a tent when the temperature is thirty 
degrees below zero is inclined to be unpleasant, 
and one night I got my toes frozen in bed| -but 
now that the spring is coining it is quite delightful. 

At first there was quite a little opposition, and 
the first time I went into the cook-shack for break¬ 
fast I was the butt for the exercising of the wits 
of a pretty tough bunch of men. But the wit was of 
rather an inferior order, chiefly composed of blas¬ 
phemous and profane remarks about parsons in general, 
and when they saw they weren’t going to get a rise 
they gradually desisted. (Incidentally, the man next 
me ate eleven eggs and two plates of porridge, which 
seemed to me a good advertisement for the climate of 
the Rockies). But now, I am glad to say, the opposi¬ 
tion has almost entirely gone and the ’’boys” are 
extremely good to me. It’s just a matter of getting 
to know them and showing them that although one is a 
parson one is still a man. 

We have a Sunday School of between forty and fifty 
kiddies, and there are generally about thirty or forty 
at the services; but what has been more encouraging 
than anything has been the way they have turned out 
for Celebrations. Teale came up to celebrate a 
month ago and although it was a weekday we had twenty 
communicants, fourteen of them men® 






... 

' 

, 

, . .. I : . . 


e 

















• • t 

. 




. 




,. 

' 






































/ 


We are lucky in having a first-class organist, 
he was an organist in the Old Country, and we always 
have a really good musical service, singing the 
canticles and responses, what is euphemistically 
called a "cathedral service," I have just started 
a troop of Boy Scouts which I hope will he a suc¬ 
cess . 

Perhaps the best comment on the activities of the 
Mission along the railroad out West is the opinion 
of a commercial traveller which I overheard the 
other day in the train. He was talking to a brother 
"grip man" and remarked that the places along the 
line were undergoing a sad change. "You can’t go 
to a store nowadays," he remarked, "without finding 
a couple of ----- parsons knocking about there." 

In the annual report for X914 470 there is this general 
comment upon the work of the whole areas "Jasper - in the 
spring of 191.4 we started regular work at this beautiful place 
in' the Rockies. Here is the residence for the Government 
officials in charge of the great national park,, Jasper Park, 
some seventy miles by twenty in area. Some day Jasper will 
be a great holiday resort. It is a divisional point on the 
railway. At present the populations is, as everywhere, very 
small and poor. Two nice lots are granted us by the Government 
and a beautiful log church has been built. Mr. Provis has 
been in charge and has laid down the work on sound lines. Since 
Mr. Lang left he has also had the entire charge of the congre¬ 
gations at Dandurand, where the cement plant has been closed 
down, and at Pocahontas where coal mining is still carried on. 
One of the difficulties of his work is that he has a railway 
journey between each of the three stations, and the trains are 
often on inconvenient days and nearly always start or arrive 
in the uncomfortable hours of somewhere between two and six 
o’clock in the mornIng," 


n TP 
e -p • 


470, A 


Annual Report, 1914, p.16 














(j) THE OHOV/AY MISSION 


n+ 


Settlement at Onoway began at the end of the nineteenth 

century. One of the pioneers of the district was Thomas Taylor, 

an employee of the Hudson 1 s Bay Company who had been in charge 

of the Company’s post at Lake Saint Ann. As his numerous 

sons and daughters married most of them, came to establish 

homes nearby and formed the nucleus of the community* In May, 

471 

1907, Mr. Walter Lever sedge, lay reader &t Wabamun> paid 

his first visit to Onoway, and thereafter, until June, 1909, 
came every six or seven weeks. In a letter to the present 
writer * rim?r some years ago Mr. Lever sedge recalled hi s 
first visit, and told how the first service was held on 
Trinity Sunday in the Alaop home. He continued, "Tj^e old- 
timers will remember that the first parish meetingswere held 
in the kitchen, with no chairs, since the ladies were 
occupying them at the W.A. meeting. The chairman shared the 
same seating accomodation, sitting on the floor with his 
back,' as theirs were, to the wall: which may account for 
the fact that there has never been any retreat from that 
day to this’. H 

Mr, Leversedge was succeeded by the Reverend C. G. Edwards 
early in 1909, Services at this time were' held in the Post 
Office.' Mr. Beaupre, a son-in-law of Thomas Taylor, was the 
Postmaster and is said to have selected the name "Onoway. w 

In 1910 a log Church was erected by voluntary labour a 
little south of the Sturgeon River by the Lake Saint Ann 
trail. Downstairs it was a Church; and above, reached by 
an outside stariway, was the missioner’ s residence. It 
was dedicated to Saint Guthlac by the Bishop of Calgary 


471. See supra. 










n s 


in February of the following; year. 

In 1911 the Reverend F. E. Mercer, M.A., (Oxon.), who 

had recently come from England to join the Mission staff, 

was assigned to Onoway as its first resident priest. He had 

with him, as lay brother, Mr. J. Clare. Mr.'Mercer thus 

47 ? 

describes his first Easter Day there: 

Living in the midst of a large number of Roman 
Catholic half-breeds, and accustomed to see them 
from time to time go to their chief church in 
Lake Saint Ann, our Church folk of Onoway formed 
the plan of inviting their fellow Church people 
from many miles around to come together to make 
their Easter Communion at Onoway. Within a radius 
of fourteen miles are three other places where 
services were held* These were invited to come 
en masse and private letters, were sent to indi¬ 
vidual families scattered in between. I had ar¬ 
ranged a similar massed service for the southern 
part of the district at Story Plain on Easter 
morning so was not able to get to Onoway before 
3.30 p.m. The ladies, therefore, of the W.A. 
divided the guests among themselves and arranged 
for feeding the travellers either before or after 
the service at their own homes. On my arrival I 
found all assembled in rigs of every description, 
’looking quite like a picnic,’ as one homesteader 
described it. Each congregation was represented, 
one bachelor travelling twenty-three miles and 
several fourteen or fifteen miles in. order to at¬ 
tend. The result was that our little Miss!op. room 
was more than crowded. We managed to get eighty- 
three people inside by using home-made benches as 
well as the usual chairs and by removing the heater 
and the door, but twenty more had to worship out of 
doors. We would have had the whole service out of 
doors had the ground been really dry % as it was we 
did out best. The result of such a service is not 
merely the uplifting of those able to attend, but 
• also the great encouragement to the small congrega¬ 
tions of twelve and fifteen who have now realised in 
a very practical way that there are many others of 
their Communion around them. The. ’pilgrimage’ also 
has had the effect of making many non-Churchfoik 
think of what the Church stands for, and every mile 
that was travelled made the ’pilgrim’ feel stronger 
the importance of his or her Easter Communion. We 
are hoping to mark subsequent Church festiveils in 
the same manner wherever Mature in the shape of 
roads allows. 


472. A.W.C.F, Occasional Paper 


no 


7, October, 1912, p.3f. 






s 








Under Mr. Mercer’s leadership the work developed rapidly, 

and in somewhat unusual ways. In 1912 the Mission became, by 

the kind gifts of friends, the possessor of a quarter section 

of land, unfenced, unbroken, end without -any buildings. During 

the year fifteen acres were broken and a hole dug for the 

foundation of a nursing home which it was proposed to establish 

The project is here described by Miss Warden, of Saint Faith’s, 

473 

who visited Oneway in June, 1912: 

We reached Onoway in the late afternoon, Mr. 

Mercer riding out to meet us, and we had supper 
with some people who stayed with us here some 
months ago. My hostess, Mrs. T-* - —-474, a a.ear 

old lady of ov,er seventy, a most keen Chur.chwoman 
and overflowing with interesting stories of her 
early married life in the Hudson Bay forts. She 
has a wonderful ancestry and a family tree for 
four centuries l 

She told me about rations in the forts,, and 
how tea, sugar, and so forth, 'were given out 
for six months at a time; how the thrifty Scotch 
people planned out so well that they generally 
had some over to be exchanged for something else 
at the end, and how the half-breeds had .finished 
the supplies long before the end of the time. 

Most of the things she told me had happened ir 
the ’sixties.’ The old lady had set herself ’a 
little task’ for Lent, and had made a beautiful 
patchwork quilt for an Indian school, and worked 
at it daily from 4 to 7 p.m. 

You will know of the farm that has been bought 
at Oneway. It Is here that we hope to start a nurs¬ 
ing home, and to see about this was the raison, d’ 
etre of my going. On the Wednesday morning we 
visited the farm and fixed on a site for any 
building, as it is possible that the nursing home 
. will be attached to something else. The farm is 
delightfully situated with the River Sturgeon 
running through it, and we shall be within about 
a mile of the station. It is expected that a pass¬ 
enger train will be running to Onoway within the 
next few months, which will be a great convenience^ 
but I an so thankful to have gone by road rather 
than ir. a dull train. 


473. A.77.C.3?. Occasional Paper, No• 7, October, 1912, p.3f- 

474. Mrs. Taylor, widow of Thomas, see supra. 


































'77 


In the afternoon I met all the ladies belonging 
to the W.A., and they are all keenly interested in 
the nursing scheme and eager that it should begin 
as soon as possible. We exxject that the nursing 
will be largely that of mothers and babies, and 
at the present time there is no doctor within rea.ch* 

The plan is to have a small nursing home with 
possibly two or three beds, and 3,1 so to nurse in 
the farms and homesteads round. • . • 

The Saint Barnabas Pursing Home was completed d.uring 
the summer of 1913 and it was hoped that the Lieutenant-Governor 
would be able to open it. Owing to bad roads, however,, he 
was unable to come and the ceremony was performed on August 
7th of that year by Miss Pinkham who happened to be present. 

The day began with a celebration of Holy Communion in the 
chapel when there were about eighteen present. Immediately 
after breakfast all present helped with the last minute 
preparations. During the morning Mr. Boyd received word 
from the Lieutenant-Governor that he would be unable to come. 
After lunch about 125 people arrived for the ceremony includ¬ 
ing the Roman Catholic priest from Lake Saint Ann and a 
Presbyterian student. The actual opening took place at four 
o’clock preceded by a hymn, a Scripture reading by Mr. Mercer, 
and dedicatory prayers by Canon Webb from All Saints’ church, 
Edmonton. 

The farming was equally successful and in 1913 the first 
crop yielded enough oats for the winter. In the following 
year the farm received first prizes at the local fair for 
cattle and oats. 

When the railway line was completed a new town site w as 
established near the station and lots acquired for the church 
on a slight rise overlooking the village. The new church of 




















L 


' ‘ 














* 









- 




; 




- . : 












; : 




Saint John was dedicated by the Lord Bishop of Edmonton on 
June 21 st, 191.4* The original churchwardens were hr. 

A. C. Vipan, M.A. (Cantab.) an English schoolmaster who had 
come out to take up farming, and hr. W. C. Turnbull. Mr. Vipan 
was also the delegate from Onoway to the first Synod of the 
Diocese of Edmonton. 

The reference to Onoway in the annual report for 1914 
475 

is as follows: At the beginning of the year the Reverend 

E. E* Mercer, who is in charge, had the assistance of Mr. C. V. 
Selwyn, a lay reader, and hr. Knight as lay brother. The two 
latter left Edmonton in the Pirst Canadian Contingent, and 
since then Mr. Mercer has had to try to cover the whole field 
him.self, and to remedy his loneliness in other ways. • . . 

In this mission there are churches at Onoway and Cher hill .. n 

(k) STOUT PLAIN 

The work at Stony Plain began in 1907 when that community 
was a busy railway town at the end of steel. In his Charge to 

A7 6 

Synod, 1908, the Bishop spoke of it as serving an area 

of 325 square miles and needing to be occupied. By the time 

the' Edmonton Mission arrived it was described an ”settling 

down into the second stage of its existence, a small country 

477 

town serving the needs of a thriving farming population.” 

When Mr. Huxtable arrived at Wabamun he continued the 
custom which had been established previously of conducting a, 
monthly service in the Methodist chapel. Soon afterwards he 
had the assistance of a lay reader, Mr. A. B. Mogg, and the 
service was increased to a fortnightly one. At this point 
the Church, people began to agitate for an occasional evening 

475. A.W.C.P. Annual Report, 1914, p.15. 

476. Calgary Synod Journal* 1908, p.27 

477. A.Y/.C.P. Occasional Paper, Mo. 3, August, 1911, p.l 
















? ' 










o 
























' 7 <? 

service* As the Methodist building was only available in the 

morning it became necessary to build a church. 

In 1911 the Bishop allotted two hundred and'fifty 

dollars to start a building fund, and it was decided that for 

the summer months at least Mr. Mogg should live in Stony 

Plain, rather than, at Mabamun. A shack was built for him, 

or at least he assisted materially in its building,, on the 

site which had been secured for the church* ‘ According to 

the annual report for. 1913 both the church of Saint Oswald 

and the shack were built in 1911* 

When Mr* Mercer arrived at Onoway in 1911 Stony Plain 

’was included in his area and reference has already been 

A 79 

made to his plans for Easter Day, 191.2* 

The only other reference to Stony Plain in the period 
under review occurs in the annual report for 1914 when 
responsibility for its ministrations had evidently been 
transferred to the Mission House in Edmonton, from which 
f, L* H. B. Staveley * . * spends every other weekend in the 

480 

Stony Plain mission where he ministers to three congregations* 

(l) THE KEATON MOOR - PADDLE RIVER -MISSION 

This area, an extension of the Lac la Bonne mission 
covering some five or six hundred square miles,was set up 
in 1911 with-the Reverend V* L. S* Dallas, M*A., (Oxon*) and 
Mr. H. L. Ford as missioners* In the following spring 
Mr. Dallas was able to report 2 ^°^ 

478. Lot 25, Blk, 11, Plan 4180R =* Calgary Synod Journal, 1911, 
Appendix M K H • 

479. See p.Wsupra. 

480. A.W.C.F. Annual. Report, 1914, p.14. 

481. A.V.C.F. Occasional Paper, No 6 , June, 1912, p.4f. 









■ 







e » 



c 














, ..)■ A 



c 







Work out here is getting along fairly steadily. 
Heaton Moor seems to be making some response. Last 
Sunday forty-five people came out, some from quite 
a good distance, and about a dozen men had to sit 
outside the door, which made it very difficult for 
me to addressthem* After the service I held a coun¬ 
cil re a church; four sites were offered, and we 
selected five acres in the very centre of the close 
by the post office, to which the£e will always be 
good roads from every direction. I asked people to 
let me know what they were prepared to contribute 
in (l) coin, (2) work, (3) hauling, and I have al¬ 
ready had promises of hauling, both from Clyde which 
is thirty miles off, and from, the nearest lumber 
yard. A good deal of work has been promised, end 
as soon as all the work has been guaranteed on paper 
we are going to invite a committee to see it through. 
There is no money at all in the whole district, so 
I have asked people.to write to their relations in 
the old country and ask for subscriptions. 


... I have had a house lent me, at Manola, from. 
November 1st onwards at any rate, for six months; 
and vjhen all the rivers are frozen that I think will 
be a convenient place.... 

as 2 

Work on the church - " began almost at once and it 


Y*as ready for use early in 1912. At the same time he was busy 

■ 

on the erection of st church at Paddle River which was 


later dedicated to ”Saint Mary Abbots” after the church in 

Kensington from, which he had come. Writing to Mr. Boyd in 
484 

1911, he.said: 

The snow has come at last and enabled us to 
freight up the siding, etc., for Paddle River. 

The men are all giving several days apiece and 
we are calculating on having an opening service 
in the church on Christmas morning. The Heaton 
Moor church will probably be ready by the same 
time, but we shall not open that until the Mew 
Year. . . . I am feeling at present in the best 
of spirits. The trustees of Leighton School dis¬ 
trict have at last let me into the school one 
day a week. 

In the following year, IS13, the church at Pawn Lake 
was built, and that of Saint Aid&n., G-lenreagh, in. 1914. 
Writing in 1914 Mr. Dallas almost gives an unintentional sum- 


482. KSi - 16-58-2-W5th - Edmonton Synod Records. 

483. L.S. 16 (10.63 acres) HB-J - 22-59-3-W5th - Edmonton Synod 

484.A.W.C.E. Annual Report, 1912, p.14 


































c 








:: o; 
















y of what Mr* Boyd described as "four years T remarkable 

485 

work in this mission." 

Thank you so much for the church furniture 
which I have just received - the brass cross and 
candlesticks for Paddle Piver and the oak ones 
for Heaton Moor. I have managed, to get them up 
here safely though my grips three times floated 
in the buckboard as I drove up through the 
floods. 

You very kindly ask me if there is anything 
else I want at present - I have only my private 
set of Communion vessels for the five churches, 
end I am thankful to say they have become too 
small; the result is that*I badly need one set 
at- any rate* Also we only have two organs in 
five churches,, end. as three places have put up 
churches entirely at their own cost, except for 
S.P.O.K* grants of about £15 it does not seem 
possible at present to get to the stage of buying 
organs. If by any chance you come across any- 
one who would be willing to help some districts 
that have already started and are doing their 
best, I would very much like to get a grant 
(l) to build three brick chimneys, (2) to finish 
the inside of these churches, and get real altars 
made, (3) to buy organs. 

There have been some very useful grants 
coming from the old country to Edmonton lately, 
but people when they give money for s church so 
often seem to want to give it to a district 
which has not made a start, and possibly wouldn’t 
unless it received substantial help; and 'the 
result of people in the old country specifying 
how their gift should be spent rules out any 
district where people have already got busy and 
made a move • 


(m) THE GREENCOURT MISSION 

The Greencourt Mission grew out of the. journey of 

exploration undertaken by. the Reverend G. D* Whitaker and 

486 

Mr. .!• B* Bickersteth in summer of 1911. In the 

following year the Reverend W* A. R* Ball,. M.A., (Cantab), 
and Mr. H* G* Rowsell, of Jesus College, Cambridge, both 
recently arrived from England, were assigned, the task of 

485. A.W.C.E. Occasional Paper, No. 15, October, 1914, p.3f. 

486. See p* supra. 









organizing the new work. It was an undertaking designed to 


tax the most ambitious. The new mission had no boundaries 
to the north and west, and the roads,, if they would be des¬ 
cribed as such, were in the most primitive condition. Large 
numbers of settlers, many of them English and Anglican, were 
moving in and these were the first "preachers” of any kind. 
Luring 1912 the missioners roughed it in a borrowed shack with 
only the barest essentials of furniture. In the spring of 
1.913 it Y/as possible to build a small Mission house. Meanwhile, 
the people at Greencourt were collecting subscriptions for 
the building of a church which Y^as also completed in 1913, 
and dedicated to Saint Saviour. 

In May, 1913, Mr. Ball was visited by his father who 
for more than thirty years had been a missionary of the Church 
Missionary Society in India. Some of his impressions are 

4ft 7 

recorded in the letter followings 

On Wednesday morning. May 28th, we started in a 
buekboard for Greencourt, 120 miles distant, my son 
driving the pair of ponies. . • • The trails were 
pronounced to be excellent, but to my inexperienced 
eye an opposite opinion seemed not unreasonable as 
we went along shaking and jolting, bumping and 
jumping. ... on the third day we were warmly 
welcomed at the log shack in Greencourt by Rowsell. 

The shack, with its furniture and appointments, does 
not lend itself to excessive comfort. Though nearly 
six.inches shorter than my son I could not stand 
upright under the beam supporting the roof. I found 
there was a settled division of labour - one v?eek 
stable chores and other outside work, the next, 
cooking with hewing of wood and fetching of water. 

It is an admirable rule of the Mission to have a 
clergyman and layman in each outlying district. 


Sunday, June 1st, was a, great day. We drove nine 
miles to Mayerthorpe for service in Mr. 1 s 

shack. A congregation of ten adults soon assembled. 


487. A.W.C.3?• Occasional Paper, Ho* 11, October, 1913, p.4f 



















some coming on foot, some on horseback. The room, 
was quickly made ready and the service begun. I 
took it alone as there was hardly room, for two. 

It was an inspiring service with hearty responses 
and singing. In the fact of God's presence with 
us outward conditions counted but little, end one 
felt truly thankful for the Mission which gave such 
opportunities of worship to the scattered people 

here. Some little time after Mr. & Mrs* 3?--- 

sat down to dinner with five guests, a good 
example of Canadian hospitality. We drove back, to 
Greencourt for the opening service in. the new church 
which nine days before had been non-existent. We had. 
not dreamed that the building would be ready for use 
during the time of my visit, but many willing hands 
• had laboured to make this possible. My son read 
prayers and I gave the address. I have felt the 
inspiration of preaching in fine old English churche 
and now I felt the inspiration of preaching in this 
unfinished, wooden church with but a history of eight 
days willing work behind it. What this whole service 
meant to me I can hardly express. Some thirty were 
present, mostly men, as is usually the case in 
Western Canada.. It was a red letter day for 
Greencourt, and everybody seemed glad and thankful. 

Hext Sunday we were at Padstow, some eighteen 
miles distant, for a service in the log church 
there.. . . A word of explanation may not be out 
of place. Many will think that Greencourt, Padstow 
Mayerthorpe * and Bather sage are small, towns or 
villages, but it is not so. At present the names 
indicate districts with scattered shacks, each 
standing on its n quarter section 11 - that is a 
quarter of a square mile, 160 acres. * • • 

In an accompanying letter the Severend W. A. H. Ball 

cribes the beginnings of Church life at Padstow: 

, , » lust as we were beginning to feel tired 
and hungry we came - to a big clearing and saw two 
shacks and two men, and found that we were in the 
heart of the Padstow district. One of the shacks 
was the post office, and we made for it. The post¬ 
master was away in town visiting his wife in hos¬ 
pital, but his brother was there and made us very 
welcome. . . . Next day we. rode around, saw some 
people, and I decided to start services in Pad- 
stow. 


The first service ever held was on Whit-Sunday, 
May 26th,. 1912, There were about twenty-three 
people jammed in a small shack® We started with a 
hymn; two dogs howled inside, one was turned out 
at once but the other went on howling and quite 



< 









5 




- 






' 







/*v 

drowned our singing. We manfully continued while 
the owner tried to catch the dog which cleverly 
crawled under everything in the shack in turn. 

The dog was turned out, the hymn ended, and we 
knelt to pray. We were jammed so tight that in 
turning someone put his or her elbow through the 
window pane and let in a cloud of mosquitoes. It 
was the most painful church opening I have ever 
had for I fear I was just dying for a good,, 
hearty laugh. I held monthly services after this, 
and was so enco raged that I broached the idea of 
building a church. This idea was warmly taken up 
and on March 10th, 1913, we had a "bee” to go and 
cut logs for the church. ... I never knew such 
hard work as cutting down trees with a blunt axe 
.and no skill t Later on others got to work and 
hauled the logs, which were thirty-two feet long, 
a good three miles to the church ...Site. Then a 
glorified "bee” was held lasting two weeks, . . . 

At last the church was built, and I opened it 
on Whit-Sunday, May 11th* 1913, a most appropriate 
day, seeing that Whit “-Sunday,. 1912, was the day on. 
which services were started in Padstow. The church 
is called Emmanuel Church. » • • 

A further letter, written a year later, indicates that 
the work was going on but was not without its difficulties: 4 ’^ 8 

Peavine Church is up and I opened it on May 3rd, 

1914. The Bishop will dedicate it on Sunday, June 
23th. I have named it the "Church of the load Shep¬ 
herd. " Padstow and Greencourt churches have now 
been really nicely finished. 

On Easter Sunday morning at Greencourt the few 
Anglicans here gave in the collection $43.30# to 
pay for the finishing of the church. It had only 
been finished the day before, and we were in debt 
to the carpenter for wages of $46. That debt was 
soon wiped out® Greencourt church attendance is 
poor, two or three only seam to attend the ’Pres¬ 
byterian service, and we only get from eight to 
twelve people. However, these are keen, and stick 
loyally to their church, and give well. 

Padstow improves, the people are very proud 
of their church now, and some men have told me 
that it reminds them of home to see such a digni¬ 
fied east end. On Easter Sunday the church was 
nearly full, .and we had twenty communicants. 

Hathersaga services are now going well, and at 
Hoydale the other day I had a splendid service 
at Terry 1 e house. . . . 

B -_ 


488. A.W.C.E. Occasional Paper, Ho. 15, October, 1914, p.5 














its 


Unfortunatsly, at the time appointed for the Bishop’s 
visit the roads were even worse than usual and he was not 
able to get to Peavine for the dedication of the new church. 
Shortly afterwards Mr. Ball was transferred to Edmonton to 
become Warden of the Mission House, and Mr. J. K. Digby, 
who had succeeded Mr. Roswell, joined the Armed Eorces. 

The work at Greencourt was carried on by the Reverend 
W. E, O’U. Eisher, who had been at Saint Michael’s* North 
Edmonton• 


( n) THE TELEORDVILLE MI SSI OH 

The arrival of Mr. William J. G. Eishbourne, B.A., of 
University College, Oxford, in November, 1912, made it possible 
for the Mission to move into an area south of that originally 
assigned to it. This was done at the urgent request of the 
Bishop of Calgary and of the rector of Leduc. The Reverend 
T. E. Streeter had found two or three settlements west of 
Leduc for which he was quite unable to provide ministrations. 
Shortly after his arrival Mr. Eishbourne spent a few 

439 

days with Mr. Trench* before going on to Telfordville. 

After being in the area for about six weeks he described his 
490 

impressions thusi 

I have already got three centres’to work, TeX- 
fordville and Thorsby on the second and fourth 
Sundays in the month, and Conjuring Creek, on the 
third Sunday • This month I am going to hold a 
service at Michigan Centre, eight miles east of 
Conjuring Creek, on the evening of the third Sun¬ 
day . At Telf ordville. there is quite a large Eng¬ 
lish settlement and many Anglican families among 
them. They have subscribed already, towards a 
church hall, nine thousand feet of lumber, and 
promised all the labour and team work required. 


439. See p./ki-supra. 

490. A.RT.C.E. Occasional Paper, Ho. 


9, March, 1913, p.XO 













■ 










■ 


4 








; . (t 














, 

■ 






. 

‘ 


■ 




« . 






* 




... i . ' .: 


■ > ■ x 


. 


. . 




1 ■ 

. . 




, 

C ' ' ' 










’ 




. 




’ 


4 






/6t 


We are also being presented with, an organ by 
one family. 

As far as I can make out from one tour, the 
district is poor as regards ready money, owing 
mainly, I think,, to the distance from the railway. 

The farmers seem to pay each other in kind. Prac¬ 
tically no grain is grown yet, except for feeding 
purposes; but matters will be greatly improved as 
soon as a railway comes through. I have every 
reason to believe that the steel will be through 
close to Telfordville next summer. The Canadian 
northern Railway have surveyed through the country 
and have got a charter for a railway, and they have 
bought a quarter section for a town site at 
Michigan Centre ... 

Telfordville has been settled ten years, and 
had its first Anglican service in July. It seems 
terrible to me, but I suppose there are many dis¬ 
tricts in the same case through the West. 

The church at Telfordville was built in 1912, and the 

Reverend G. S. Provis moved there from Edson in the following 

year. After Mr. Provis 1 departure for the war the 

Reverend R® M. Swan became priest-in-charge but, because of 

other work, was only able to give about half his time to 

the Telfordville mission. 


(o) THE NORTH-EAST MISSION 

At the beginning of the Edmonton Mission in 1910 the 
Reverend C. H. Bailey had been appointed to Saint Michael and 
All Angels, at North Edmonton * Gradually as the work there 
became more firmly established he was able to extend his 
effort and to re-open Christ Church, Poplar Lake, which had 
been closed for several years and to hold a fortnightly 
service there. Next he started a monthly service in another 
locality ten miles from the Mission house where services 
had been given up through lack of a man to conduct them. 


The Reverend R. M. Swan, B.A., (Oxon) arrived from 
England in the summer of 1913 and, after spending a few days 




































s_ 
















in other missions was assigned to the North East Mission 

491 

which he describes as follows: 

Eor the last two months I have had charge of 
a district north-east of Edmonton starting about 
three miles north of the Mission house and running 
from seventeen to twenty miles north, and east and 
west much further* This part has been settled for 
many years and the people are all well "fixed,** as 
it is called, and are building themselves fine 
houses, many of them very picturesque and, of course, 
all built of wood* A few have made their money 
from farming, but the majority have very consider¬ 
ably supplemented that by dealing in real estate 
and in other ways. At present I have two centres 
where services are held - one at Poplar Lake where 
is a very nice little log church built some twenty 
years ago in the.' time of Canon Newton; it has the 
distinction of having a bell in a tower. The other 
centre is Horse Hills, about five miles east of 
Poplar Lake, which is six miles north of here, I 
have services at each of these centres once a fortnight 
The work among these people is very difficult and 
at times disheartening, because for many years no 
Anglican, services were held at all, and though 
occasional services have been held, no regular 
work has been done - so that for the most part 
there is a spirit of indifference,, and many of them 
have thrown in their lot with the other denomina¬ 
tions. 

However, already the congregations are increasing 
considerably, and the work is getting more encourag¬ 
ing, On Advent Sunday I started a Sunday school at 
Cherry Grove, a centre about midway between here and 
Poplar Lake church, in a shack which has been very 
kindly lent by a man who is now living in town. 

It is taken every Sunday afternoon by "Cookie” and 
has grown in numbers each Sunday, He started with 
twenty children, rose to twenty-six on the second 
Sunday, had thirty last Sunday. Of course, they 
are not by any means all the children of Anglicans; 
but when I went round to tell the people about it 
they hailed it with delight, saying there was no 
Sunday school in the district. The Dissenters had 
one near, but had discontinued it some time ago. 

Last Sunday I started a Sunday school at Horse Hills 
before the service,, and had thirteen children. This 
was at 2.30, and at three o’clock I had Evensong 
with a congregation of twenty-four, with a baptism. 


491, A.W.C.E. Annual Report, 1913, p.22f. 

















- 

; 













1 


« 

t. 

5 



. . 
5 







« ~ • r 


r 







of a baby of one of the farmers. I very much hope 
I shall be able to continue permanently in this 
district, but I am rather afraid that I may be 
sent to one of the other districts which are vacant. 
At present I am giving one Sunday a month to Telford- 
vilie to keep Provis* worl ali e hile he is away. 

492 

Writing six months later of Horse Hills he says; 

They got up a fete a fortnight ago, into which 
they all put a tremendous amount of energy and 
raised about one hundred and thirty dollars,, and 
we have had a few subscriptions raising our fund 
in hand to about $150. The Bishop has promised 
a grant from a building fund which he has, and we 
have several other promises of donations and sub¬ 
scriptions, making all in sight about $450, so 
that we are getting on well; but we hope to be 
able to raise $1,200, so that we want a good deal 
more yet. If we could get a grant it would be a 
real encouragement• Horse Hills is about ten 
miles north of Edmonton. We have the site for the 
church, about one acrea. 


492. A.W.C.P. Occasional Paper, Ho.15, October, 1914, p.6 




THE FORMATIOH of the DIOCESE OF EDM OFT on 



The Rural D eane ry 

The firat step towards diocesan organization took 

place in August, 1894, when the Bishop of Calgary constituted 

that part of the diocese north of township 37 as the Rural 

493 

Deanery of Edmonton*" Township 37 is a mile or so north 
of Penhold, and the new deanery included the following 
clergy, Canon Newton^ the Reverend A* Stunden, who was 
appointed rural dean ; the Reverend C. H. Andras, Wetaskiwin; 
the Reverend G. C. dMUasum, Beaver Lake; the Reverend 
H. A. Gray, South Edmonton; and the Reverend F, W. Goodman, 
Red Deer. The Ruridecanajj Chapter met for the first time 
on July 24th, 1895 by which time Mr. Robert Connell, of 
the Sturgeon mission, had been admitted to Deacon 1 s orders 


and therefore became a member 
very interesting paper ’Life 
was read by the Reverend C. H 
At the Diocesan Synod in 1902 
had created a new rural deane 
moving the southern boundary 

to the north line of twonship 

' 495 

Hobbema. 


. At the first meeting w a 
among Russian Ecclesiastics 1 
. Andras during the afternoon. 

the Bishop anno miced that he 
ry, that of Red Deer, thereby 
of the rural deanery of Edmonton 
44, a mile or so north of 


a q r* 

Mine years later, at. the Synod of 1911, " J the Bishop 
announced that he had cancelled the four existing rural 
deaneries in order to reconstitute them as seven, namely. 


C algary, Edmo nt o n, Let hbr idge, 


Macleod, Red Deer, High River, 


493« E.B. August 13th, 1894; also Calgary Synod Journal,1896, p.8 

494. EB. July 25th, 1895. 

495. Calgary Synod Journal, 1902, p.26. 

496. Calgary Synod'Journal, 1911, p.18 




























« 








c 


? 












and We task! win 


There 


no indication of boundaries 


/90 


The Arc': 1 3 ico ' ry of E dimwit n 

By 1907 Bishop Pinkhaai had reached the twentieth anniver¬ 
sary of his consecration and there were ow fifty clergy on 

the staff of the diocese. Apparently by way of celebration 

497 

the Bishop created the Archdeaconry of Edmonton* and 
appointed the Reverend Henry Allen Gray, H.A., as its first 
ml ent in addition fc his office ts*, 

Edmonton. The boundaries of the archdeaconry were not 
specified out presumably they were those of the diminished 
but undivided rural deanery of Edmonton. After 1911 the 
archdeaconry would embrace the rural deaneries of Edmonton 


Sti/t 7 rail----, to .■ "o__ 0 ■: ' •: f t h.vme 

The inauguration of the Province of Alberta took- place 

on September 1st, 1905,. at Edmonton, the temporary capital. 

Long before this, but particularly after the position of 

Edmonton as the capital city was confirmed, there were those 

who thought that the time had come for the establishment 

of a see there. The Bishop made rather acid reference to 

ere willing to do his work for him during his 
4 SB 

Charge to the Synod of 1908,and said that he had not 
favoured the division of his diocese hitherto partly because 
he had felt that the time was not ripe, but chiefly because 
of the difficulty of establishing a See Endowment Eund. 
However, he expressed himself as being willing to consent 
to the formation of a new diocese with Edmonton as its see 


Calgary Synod Journal, 1908, p 
498. Ibid. p.32. 













: . 


. 










c e 





















i' 1 '* ‘ ’ ■ 












iqi 


city at the next meeting of the Provincial Synod, The 

Co tittee on the Bishop’s Charge agreed that the time was not 

yet ripe for the division of the diocese, 

Further reference to the matter was made at the next 

Diocesan Synod, in 1910, when the Bishop spoke of it in his 
499 

Charge t 

In view of the approaching meeting of the 
Provincial Synod, to he held in August, I 
■desire to express my willingness to surrender 
the northern part of my Diocese, so that it 
may he formed, or else, with that portion of 
Alberta lying east of it, form part of a new 
Diocese to he called Edmonton, whenever the 
necessary support for a hi shop is forthcoming: 
and there are at least six.clergymen in it 
who are supported either by endowment, or by 
their congregations, so that the bishop of 
the new See can be elected « 

The Province of Alberta is advancing so 
rapidly in wealth and importance that the 
principal part of the fund required for the 
Bishop’s maintenance in the proposed new 
Diocese ought to be raised within it, and 
the right to choose their own Bishop should 
be kept before, church people as an incentive 
to them to do their duty in this respect. 

The Committee on the Bishop’s Charge while assenting to the 

proposed division, urged that it should not be undertaken 

until the necessary endowment fund had been raised# 

The matter was next discussed by the Executive Committee 

500 

and at the meeting on March 6th, 1913, the following motion 
was presented by the Bishop for acceptance by the Committees 

Ihereas the City of Edmonton now has a population 
of about 55,000 and the population there, as well as 
throughout the whole district is increasing at a 
rapid rates and 

inhere as there are now twenty-eight clergy at work 
in the Archdeaconry of Edmonton, of whom eight are 
supported by the congregations to whom they minister; 
as well as a number of lay readers; and 


499. Calgary Synod Journal, 1910# p#22 
500* ExCom. March 6th, 1913* 











Whereas it is confidently expected that the 
number of clergy will be considerably increased 
in the near future and that continual progress 
will be shown in the matter of self support 5 

BE IT RESOLVED: that in the opinion of this 
Executive Committee the time is fully ripe when, 
in the interests of the Church, there should be 
a Bishop residing in Edmonton, and we heartily 
recommend the Synod at its next meeting to 
approve of the Bishop 1 s suggestion, viz* To 
request the Provincial Synod at its next meeting 
to set off and erect into a new Diocese of Edmonton 
that portion of the Diocese of Calgary lying north 
of the line dividing townships 42 . 3 L3, now 

known as the Archdeaconry of Edmonton, and that 
the new Diocese so formed should be administered 
by the Bishop of Calgary until such time as a 
Bishop can be elected as Bishop of Edmonton and 
'the House of Bishops agree to his consecration. 

In connection with this the Secretary had 
prepared a statement at the request of Canon Webb 
showing that in the Archdeaconry of Edmonton, the 
annual returns, so far as received, showed the 
following on December 31st, 1912* 

Organised Parishes - 40 . Unorganized congregations - 39 
Church people - 9 , 447 . Revenue for all purposes 
raised locally $ 54 , 309 . 35 ^ Value of church 
property - $ 238,316 *00#. Debt pn church property- 
$ 57 , 662*00/. Communicants Roll - 1 , 895 . The 
above figures do not include the following missions 
from which no returns have been received: Vegre- 
ville, Lament, Ilorth Bank, Paddle River, Green- 
court, Telfordville, Dandurand. 

After discussion and. expression of opinion given 
by Archdeacon Gray the resolution was unanimously 
ad opted* * * » 

At the 1913 meeting of the Diocesan Synod the Bishop 
501 

gave notice of his intention to 

• * * ask the Provincial Synod, at Its meeting 
in August, to erect that part of my Diocese lying 
north of the line dividing townships 42 and 43, 
and now known as the Archdeaconry of Edmonton, in 
to a new Diocese to be called Edmonton, and I 
intend to suggest that if necessary the new Diocese 
be admihistered by the Bishop of Calgary until such 
as a Bishop can be elected and consecrated. 

The only difficulty in the way of the appointment 
of a new Bishop is that the Metropolitan and Prov¬ 
incial Bishops will not consecrate- anyone, even 


501* Calgary Synod Journal, 1913, p.21 








if he were chosen, until his stipend is 
forthcoming . , . 

whereupon the Synod unanimously adopted the resolution sub¬ 
mitted to it by the Executive Committee. The resolution 
v;as then endorsed by the Provincial Synod meeting in Winnipe 

50? 

at the end of August, 1913, in the following terms: 

That this Provincial Synod hereby sets off 
and erects into a new Diocese to be known as 
the Diocese of Edmonton, that portion of the 
present Diocese of Calgary lying north of the 
line dividing townships 42 and 43, and known 
as the Archdeaconry of Edmonton, and that the 
new Diocese so formed should, be administered by 
the Bishop of Calgary, until such time as a 
Bishop can be elected as Bishop of Edmonton, 
pursuant to Section 7 of the Constitution. 

The next step took place on September 11th, 1913, when 

the Bishop informed the Executive Committee of the 

resolution of the Provineial Synod which required either 

an endowment of fifty thousand dollars, or an assured 

income of three thousand dollars per annum to be provided 

before the consecration of a new Bishop of Edmonton would 

be agreed upon. The Committee then agreed to provide half 

the episcopal income for the first year provided that the 

new diocese could furnish the rest. 

The first meeting of the Synod of the new diocese 

was held at All Saints’, Edmonton,: on Wednesday, lovember 

12th, 1913. Its personnel was made up of those ?/ho had 

formerly represented the Archdeaconry in the Calgary Synod, 

After listening to the Bishop 1 s Charge in which he outlined 

the steps which had led to the formation of the new diocese, 

the members passed the ne cess ary resolutions to provide for 


502, Edmonton Synod -Journal, 1913,, p.ll 

503, ExCom. September 11th, 1913. 












the organization of the diocese including the all important 
ones by which a constitution was adopted and the episcopal 
stipend guaranteed. The incorporation of the diocese was 
duly effected by Chapter 48 of the Statutes of Alberta (1914) 
being "An Act to Incorporate the Synod of the Diocese of 
Edmonton, and the Parishes of the said Diocese," which 
received Royal Assent on October 22nd, 1914. 

The sedond meeting of the Synod of the Diocese of 
Edmonton was held on Thursday, January 29th, 1914, for the 
purpose of electing a bishop. The Venerable H. A. Gray, M.A., 
Archdeacon of Edmonton, was elected on the fifth ballot, 
and was.consecrated and enthroned in All Saints’ church, 
Edmonton, on March 25th, 1914. 

The Bo u ndaries of th e 5 r ew Diocese 

At the time that the new Diocese of Edmonton was 
constituted its boundaries on three sides were already in 
existence. The western boundary, the height of land between 
Alberta and British Columbia, had been established when the 
Diocese of Saskatchewan was formed in 1874* The eastern 
boundary, the line running north and south between ranges 
10 and 11, west of the fourth meridian, was determined when 
the Diocese of Calgary was separated from it. in 1888, The 
northern boundary was adjusted in 1890 when At halo a ska landing 
was transferred "from the Diocese of Calgary to that of 
Athabaska. The southern boundary of the Diocese of Athabaska 
is made a line drawn fifteen miles south of the landing and 
running, parallel with the 55th parallel of latitude from 

504 

the Rocky Mountains to the 110th meridian of west longitude." 
504. EB. August 30th, 1890. 










, 

. 




. 








c 

. 


. 


























. .. . ■ - - - • ‘ 

' 

■ 


« 


. 






/?■ 

These were re-stated in the Bishop’s Cl e t ' 

Synod of 1913, together with the new southern boundary, 

505 

thus s 

The boundaries of the proposed new Diocese 
would be : on the south, the line dividing 
townships 42 and 43; on the west the height 
of land, being the boundary of Alberta; on 
the north, the line dividing townships 63 
and 64; on the east, the line dividing 
ranges 10 and 11, west of the 4th mectidian. 

The reasonableness of the southern boundary has always 

been seriously open to question. On the admission of all 

concerned the new Diocese of Edmonton was to consist of 

about a third of the undivided diocese 9 Publicly, the Bishop 

defended such a division by saying that "I look for the 

formation of the southern part of this diocese as a separate 

diocese, with Lethbridge as the see city* at an early date; 

506 

but such development may not take places in my time." 

Even at that time such a statement must have seemed unduly 
optimistic and there are not wanting rumours that the real 
reason the boundary was placed so far north was that Bishop 
Pinkham might not lose from his diocese the endowments attached 
to the Lamerton mission* In all fairness the boundary should 
have been placed between townships 36 and 37, the boundary 
of the original rural deanery of Edmonton* 


505. Calgary Synod Journal, 1913, p.22. 

506. Ibid. 















Chapter goarteen 




CONCLUSION 


In an earlier chapter it was suggested, that the Church 
was rarely of prime importance to settlers. This was due 
both to the conditions of life imposed by immigration into 
a new land, and by the antecedents of those who came. It is 
tragically easy in frontier conditions for the settler to 
lose sight of everything save the ever-present necessity 
of wresting a living from an inhospitable land, and of 
building a home without any of the facilities of more 
settled areas. The practice of religion, like appreciation 
of the arts, and other alleged luxuries of life, tend to 
be left until the stern business of the moment is completed 
and there is time to enjoy them. For that reason the 
Church tends to be brushed aside. 

Perhaps an even stronger reason lies in the character 
of those who emigrate from older settlements in search of a 
new life. It is often pointed out that frontier society is 
characterised by revolt, by independence, and democracy. 
Frequently, those who came to the frontier did so in order to 
escape the cramped and confining circumstances of older 
societies. Anyone who has worked even in the semi-frontier 
conditions of parts of the Canadian west knows how strong 
that spirit of revolt can be. There are many who have come 
to the western plains for no other reason than to escape from 
traditional forms of society and the more orthodox religions. 
It is not likely that they will be active supporters of 
the Church. 










Because of the 'democracy* of frontier society it is 
sometimes argued that when people do feel the need of religion 
their needs can ohly be met by the sects which minimise 
the corporate nature of the church, and emphasise the importance 
of the individual, rather than by an apparently authoritarian 
Church. Quite apart from the fact that this is obviously 
a heresy which the Church does not accept, it has some 
bearing upon the matter of churchmanship which, to the lay 
mind at least, in in large measure determined by the amount 
of ceremonial used. 

Prom his writings it is apparent that Canon Newton 
was influenced considerably by the Catholic revival follow¬ 
ing the Oxford Movement. We suspect, however, that like 
the leaders of that movement he continued to celebrate the 
Holy Communion at the north side of the altar, vested in 
surplice and stole. 

At a later stage an interesting contrast is to be found 
between the two Edmonton churches of which Bishop Gray was 
rector. Holy Trinity, largely through the strong influence 
of the two priests who followed him, has remained outwardly 
Evangelical. All Saints*, which probably represents Bishop 
Gray's point of view more closely, could be described as 
moderately High Church. 

The Edmonton Mission is customarily regarded as a High 
Church movement• Its members and supporters, however, were 
always careful to point out that it was a non-partisan 
society as broad and comprehensive as the Church herself. 

None the less, it is true that with the exception of the 
Reverend W. A. R. Ball, at Greencourt, those who were attracted 











.. : .. 

- 




t 

' 




: , ■ 












■ 





; 



















4 















■ 

t 

• 


r 








- 

0 . ■ . 



. 













to the fellowship of the Mission were generally those of an 
old-fashioned Tractarian tradition. In 1915 the ancient 
tradition, for many centuries in abeyance, re-appeared when 
the use of Eucharistic vestments was introduced in the Mission 
House chapel. Even today there is an interesting contrast 
to be observed between the eastern part of the diocese which 
owes its origin to Evangelical Saskatchewan and the western 
part which was developed by the more or less Catholic Edmonton 
Mission. 

Thus ends a survey, necessarily inadequate, of the 
beginnings of the Diocese of Edmonton. Since 1914 the diocese 
has developed steadily. Numbers of communicants have 
increased, new churches have been built, financial contribut¬ 
ions at home and beyond continue to grow. In 1928 the 
Diocese was enlarged by the addition of territory in Alberta 
which was formerly under the jurisdiction of the Diocese 
of Saskatchewan. Bishop has succeeded bishop until in 1951 
the Most Reverend Walter Poster Barfoot, third occupant of 
the See, was elected Primate of All Canada. 

















. 






4 


. 

t " 

, 

' 

. ; ; . • ■ 


































'< 7 ? 


APPENDICES 





I 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL ROTE 


In compiling this work the writer had had recourse to a 
wide variety of materials. In the main, however, four 
principal sources have been used. First of all, there has 
been the ’'Edmonton Bulletin," the files of which were read 
from its beginning in 1880 until about 1908. The more valu¬ 
able contributions came from the earlier years when it was 
the weekly paper of a small town and therefore interested in 
almost everyone by name. Probably a good deal could be 
gleaned from a search of the early files of other weekly 
newspapers in the diocese. 

The second source of material consisted of the Journals 
of the Synod of the Diocese of Calgary, and the minutes of 
its Executive Committee. The latter were very kindly made 
available to the writer by the Venerable Robert Axon, D.D., 
Archdeacon of Calgary, and Secretary-Treasurer of Synod. 

Their chief value lay in confirmation of local material, 
and sometimes in showing controversial matters in a somewhat 
different light. 

A fruitful source of information, and one in which a 
great deal more work remains to be done, is to be found in 
parochial records. Most parish registers contain a more or 
less accurate outline of early history and, in addition, there 
are the minutes of congregational and vestry meetings which 
at times can be very revealing 

The chapter on the Edmonton Mission is dependent almost 
entirely on the Annual Reports and "Occasional Papers'* of the 
Archbishops' Western Canada Fund, and much of the information 
therefrom is reproduced in extenso. 








. .... . . . • 




. 






- 


, 


















•:' / . , . 




* 

























, 












-2o2- 


II - Canon Newton*s Reports and Papers Relating Ther e to, 507 

1, Newton to the Bishop of Saskatchewan, October 22nd* 1875. 


My dear Lord, 


Mr. Chief Factor Hamilton told me that Mrs. 

McLean had been very ill and that your Lordship was not able 
to leave for the Saskatchewan when you expected. Believe me, 

I was sorry to hear of this affliction and I beg to offer 
your Lordship and Mrs. McLean my warmest sympathy. When your 
Lordship can come here I shall be glad to see you, for I have 
much to talk over, and several plans for work which need 
your Lordship’s counsel and help. 

Pray send me at once a Cree Diez Gram. Cree Prayer 
books, Cree hymn books, English prayer books, and 100 Church 
hymn books; either Hymns Ancient and Modern or those pub¬ 
lished by the Society for the Promotion of Christian Know¬ 
ledge. We have a few of both, but not enough for use. 

My present Sunday services are a Sunday School in the 
Mission House at 9 o’clock, Divine Service at 10, partly in 
English and partly Cree. At 12 the horses are harnessed 
and I drive fast to ’’Port Saskatchewan” where Colonel Jarvis 
and the Mounted Police Force are, and hold service as near 
3 o’clock as I can manage it, the distance being about twenty 
miles. The Sunday evening is spent conversing with the men, 
reading with them or doing anything which may arise to interest 
them in religious matters. So far as I can judge I am safe for 

a share of the people, and we hatfe a foothold in the district. 

The Methodists are working fairly and unfairly to hold the 
supremacy their position has given them. Last Sunday Mr. Mc~ 
Dougal I am told met the people coming to our service and drove 
them into his chapels but that sort of thing won’t last. 

A Mr. Manning has settled at Edmonton in place of Mr. Warner 
who has been sent to Victoria. Mr. McDougal goes to Bow Biver. 
So with Mr. McDougal*s son there are four Methodist ministers 
in this district to one of our own Church, to say nothing 
of the Roman Catholics, who with the Methodists have been here 
for years. On arriving, 1 could not obtain a room at the Port 

either for personal use of for permanent services, so the best 

and almost the only thing I could do was take an unfinished 


507. F±om copies in the possession of the Synod of the Diocese 
of Edmonton. The transcription of these documents appears 
to be somewhat imperfect. His bishop remarks with some 
asperity that Newton was “remiss in his report” and this 
may ex£)lain the incompleteness of the series. 












, . 1 ... 

- 

■ c‘ 

. ■ 






* 


1 , • ... 






* 

. 


. 


viO 


, 






' 












> < 










house belonging to Mr. Hardisty and fit it up for Church and 
dwelling house. All the Upper part, which makes a large room, 
is fitted up as a Church. We have a simple Altar place which 
I have covered with blue and red cloth, and which looks as nice 
as we could expect. My own furniture I have been obliged to 
make myself, viz. bedstead, shelves and. tables for workmen are 
very scarce and dear, and they run up frightful expenses. 

Living here is dreadful; much more expensive than even at 
Carleton and then we can*t get the things for use half the 
time. Flour 20 to 30 dollars a hundred instead of 10 dollars 
as I was told at Red River (?). Ho coal, oil or candles to 
be had at any price. Should your Lordship come across my five 
boxes of books at Fort Gavez I should be glad to have them sent 
on by the first opportunity. With best wishes for your 
Lordship*s family and hoping soon to see you, I am, my Lord, 
your Lordship's 


sincere and faithful servant, 


WM. HEWTOU. 

To the Right Revd. the Lord Bishop 
of Saskatchewan. 


2. llewton to the Society fer the Propagation of the Gospel. Dec-* 
20. 1876. „ _____ 


Edmonton Mission is about 25 miles in extent including 
”Fort Saskatchewan” the “Upper Settlement”, ”Fort Edmonton” 
and ”Mong Lake”. We sometimes go beyond these places to visit 
the Camps of Government men whose duties bring them into this 
extreme Horth West. 

In this section of Country the people are chiefly ”half- 
breeds* 1 . The whole population is estimated to be about 1,000. 

My own Mission contains 25 families and a varying number of Her 
Majesty's Mounted Police Forces. Half the Protestant population 
are Church members, although our Mission has not been established 
as yet two years. 

During the year congregations have varied from 10 to 40 
persons: the average attendance about 20. There are seven 

resident communicants: often increased by Gentlemen on the 
Canada Pacific Railway, and by others passing to the Forts of the 
Hon. Hudson Bay Company. From the newness of the Mission, 
no candidates for Confirmation have been presented, although 
5 at least are being prepared. Several unbaptized Crees fre¬ 
quently attend service at Edmonton proper, and receive the 
attention of the clergyman. At Edmonton Divine Service has 
been celebrated 49 times; at Fort Saskatchewan 35 times; at 
the Upper Settlement 12 times; Long Lake 15 times; at Oxford 
Mills 50 miles above Edmonton Fort once; on the Railway Line 
about the same distance, service has been Held four times. 










. • . •... . 

* 



' 


. 

- 


- 
























I 

■ 






« 































Our practice is to administer Holy Communion once a month, 
and on special occasions as Christmas and Easter; although 
sometimes we have great difficulty in obtaining Wine, and we 
are obliged to omit that Holy Service, We have once publicly 
catechised during Service. Six Baptisms have been performed dur¬ 
ing the year, 3 public, and 3 private, all infants. One Marriage 
and two burials have taken place. 

From the scarcity of money in this place, no offertory is 
possibles yet the people have paid their own incidental 
expenses, amounting to 5J- dollars. Also on a late visit from 
His Lordship the Bishop of Saskatchewan a most influential 
Committee was formed for the purpose of erecting a small Church 
near the "Fort" at Edmonton, consisting of (Chairman) Colonel 
Jarvis, in command of Her Majesty* s Mounted Police Force in the 
district, Richa.rd Hardisty Esquire, Chief Factor of the Hon. 
Hudson Bay Company, Edmonton, and several other Gentlemen, and 
from the spirit and earnestness shewn, there is no doubt this 
object will soon be realised. 

Luring the year I &ave received from the Venerable Society 
for the Propagation of the Gospel two hundred pounds sterling, 
and I have received salary at the same rate for the whole year 
and a half in which I have been Missionary at Edmonton. This is 
the whole of my professional income, excepting the sum of about 
£50, which his Lordship has been kind enough to allow me on 
behalf of freightage. 

Sunday Schools have been conducted at Edmonton and at the 
"Upper Settlement"j in the former were 17 children and young 
people. In the latter there are 15 children, 5 girls and 10 boys. 
Besides there are often week-day classes for religious and 
general instruction - all of which are chiefly managed by the 
Clergyman. 


3. Bishop of Saskatchewan to Prebendary Bullock, December 20, 1876 
_____ covering; letter for (2) above. __ __^_ 

My dear Prebendary Bullock, 

I enclose the Bevd. Dr. Hewton's report. I am now in his 
Mission which is from 450 to 500 miles west of Prince Albert 
Settlement, my temporary headquarters. 

I have made the journey by dog cariole over the snow. I 
left Prince Albert on November 29th, reached p&rlton 0 n the 
30th, Battleford on December 4th, Fort Pitt December 7th, Fort 
Edmonton December 17th. 

I held the services at Battleford & Fort Edmonton to 
excellent Congregations. At Fort Pitt I was joined by appoint¬ 
ment by the Bevd. J.A. Mackay, C.M.S. Secretary for my Diocese. 

We are travelling together for the purpose of looking out for 
proper locations for new Indian Missions. 








- 





. 



* 


1 , 

* 

. 










■ 

. 

. 








- . 

■ 

- 












■ 




















. 


. 

. 







I have camped out in the open air nineteen nights already, 
and expect to sleep in the same way every night for the next 
three weeks: except two or three. 

I write tonight hurriedly from Port Saskatchewan in Dr. 
Newton’s Mission as the mail is to start early tomorrow morning. 
I had a good meeting at Edmonton yesterday when a Church 
building Committee was formed as you will see by Dr. Newton’s 
report. I promised aid from S.P.C.K. to the amount of £100 
towards the Church. 

I sha.ll write to you with more time on reaching Prince 
Albert, & meanwhile 

I remain, 


Faithfully yours, 

J. SASKATCHEWAN 


4 . Newton to the S.P.G.; Report for the year endin g June 25, 187 8 

The Edmonton Mission is perfectly isolated in a large 
section of country containing at least a hundred square miles. 
Although the resident population is not large people of all 
classes are continually passing viz. Hudson Bay officers, 
surveyors, Traders, and Government men. Also there are a few 
Indians who occasionally come to Edmonton with their furs. 

Services are held for these as often as they can be collected 
and the sermon is excellently rendered into Cree by my Church¬ 
warden who although a poor man willingly does this service 
gratuitously. Formerly he was a regularly paid Interpreter of 
a Wesleyan Missionary Society. 

During the year one hundred and thirty seven services have 
been held; each service representing travel of about ten miles. 

The number of persons present at any service has not exceeded 
sixty, 45 or 50 with our sparse population of ’’Whites” and 
"Half breeds” is reckoned a large congregation. As soon as the 
tide of emigration reaches us in our distant and promising 
district we expect a large increase to the Church. 

Cur Communicants average ten: in the year Holy Communion 
has been administered 14 times. 

There have been 11 Baptisms: each baptism representing 
about 15 miles of travel. The people very seldom will bring 
their children to be baptised at the regular service. They ask 
for the rite to be performed as soon as possible after the 
child is born. The first thing they do is to collect their friends 
in a house or a tent, wherever it may be, and send off for the 
Clergyman straight away. The excuse mostly is ”the child is 
ill”, and if the Clergyman should not be at home the next Homan 
Catholic or Methodist, is likely to be called in to baptise; 
for we too in the far North West are getting "enlightened" 





















. 

. 


























. 




















. 

■ 




-4..' j* - - 


















» 













• 







. 


















Slob 

and. "above bigotry" in such things and consider it "much the same" 
whatever Church baptises. Hence it is now my habit on such 
invitation to go at once if possible; and I have often been 
rewarded by having some of our best and most interesting services 
on such occasions. 

Our Burials have been seven, - all children. The Fever has 
been raging greatly in this district, entailing a large amount 
of visiting on the Clergyman during the year. There being no 
medical man at hand he has been compelled to add this function 
to his other office. 

The Sunday Schools vary a great deal in the numbers attend¬ 
ing: the average number of children under instruction is about 
50 In this work I have little help. Colonel McLeod used to 
assist me but he has returned to Ontario. During the week I 
give two afternoons for the purpose of General instruction in 
separate places when about 50 children attend viz. at Edmonton 
and at the "Upper Settlement." 

Marriage 3. 

Notwithstanding sickness and other drawbacks our people have 
met their own incidental expenses - and in addition, have given, 
chiefly in labour, about 150 dollars towards the new Church now 
building at Edmonton. The frame of the Church is erected, and 
the roof is completed, and I did hope to begin to hold service 
in it at Whitsuntide; but the man who contracted for the door 
and windows failed in his engagement and they are being made at 
Victoria, 90 miles off. With every care the cost of building 
is frightful. Two dollars and a half, or three dollars per day 
for wages. Hails 50 cents a pound and everything in proportion. 

As soon as the windows are in, the people have agreed to do the 
flooring and other work in the inside of the Church as their 
subscription, - thus saving three or four hundred dollars in the 
cost of the building. Then we have the chancel end, and the 
tower to finish, to say nothing of the necessary furniture, 
harmonium, Communion service, bell, etc. Our isolation and the 
vast distance everything has to be carried render our work very 
difficult. The Church when finished will be a pretty building, - 
and it is picturesquely situated on the banks of the Saskatchewan. 
Several circumstances have occurred greatly to encourage the 
friends of Church of England Missions in this part of the world, 
notably one at Victoria, an Indian and Half-breed Settlement. 

At that place there is a Hudson Bay Fort and from sixty to a 
hundred families according to the time of year, and whether the 
people are out hunting or freighting on the plains. Some years 
ago most or all of these people were connected with our Missions 
in or around Manitoba, but moving westward after the buffalo they 
were lost to us and became attendants at the Wesleyan Chapel 
there. But as they describe it their connection was one of 
necessity and not of choice. For hundreds of miles there was 
no Church of England Mission and they were always yearning after 
old times and the self-sacrificing love of their former Pastors. 
Ever since I came to Edmonton they have been urging me to visit 
them occasionally, and although it is 90 miles off and several 
rivers have to be crossed, without bridges, I have gone several 
times and always found a warm welcome and good congregations, 










» 





























. 




, 



' 

* 












* . . 






















. . 





• 



" 

















■ 


. 

. 

\ 





• • 






























































- 





2o-) 


indeed it is usual for every family in the settlement to be 
present at all the services. They have sent a petition to our 
excellent and energetic Bishop begging that a Clergyman might 
be sent to them: and that petition represents every family 
belonging to that settlement. They tell me also that they are 
willing to build a house and to assist any way in their power. 

Might I beseech the Venerable S.P.G. to take these people 
into their favourable consideration. Their families are 
growing up around them and if they are lost to us against their 
will it will be most difficult in the future to overtake 
neglected work. The kind of man necessary there is a Catechist 
who would keep school once a day and conduct worship on Sunday. 
Or a man preparing for Orders in the Church. Were such an 
one sent, I would be willing, at my own expense, to go occasion¬ 
ally to Victoria and to Baptise and administer Holy Communion. 
All in the Saskatchewan who love the Church, are most thankful 
to the Venerable S.P.G. for the evident interest they take in 
the spiritual welfare of the inhabitants of this vast country. 
There are many signs that in a short time a rush of emigration 
will set in towards this great and fertile valley and compel 
us to earnest activity. May God in His great mercy give us 
Grace to meet worthily the responsibilities the Church and the 
world place upon us. 

All of which is respectfully submitted. 

m. HEWTOJT. 


5. Mewton to S.P . G.; Report for Jun e 25,1878 to June 26,1879. 

Amid many discouragements and difficulties the Mission Work 
of the Society has been faithfully pressed on during the past 
year. The Mission covers 125 square miles of a difficult 
country to travel in; and where everything is frightfully 
expensive. In this District I have conducted 211 services and 
travelled between 2,000 and 3,000 miles. Thirty nine Baptisms 
have been performed and of these 19 were adult persons living 
out on the plains. 

Holy Communion was administered only seven times owing to 
the difficulty of procuring wine. Ho marriage during the year; 
burials three. 

This year saw the opening of the first Church in this 
vast section of Country; the congregations especially during 
the ?/inter were very good, the Church often being well filled 
with settlers and Indians. For the latter were frequent Cree 
services. At All Saints Edmonton the people have fairly assisted 
by labour etc. in building the Church. The cost of building 
is enormouse, about 2,500 dollars. Around Edmonton subscriptions 
of various kinds are 500 dollars. The Venerable Society for 
Promoting Christian Knowledge kindly aids to the extent of Two 
hundred Pounds; for the other 1,000 dollars I am myself responsible 
and I fear it will be necessary for me to visit the front parts 
of Canada to collect that sum. 

The Indian part of the Mission work here has always appeared 













■ 



. 

■ ■ 

■ 




... 

• • 

. 






. 

- 









■ 




. 

■ .'J • 










to be of much importance and interest; but since I received 
my Bishop’s request to press the Indian work I have given it 
more special attention than before, with the result that the 
Indian work is quite beyond my management. In several directions 
from Edmonton Port within 50 or 60 miles, two or three Indian 
Missions could at once be established with every probability 
of success. Indeed the distress and misery of the Indian popu¬ 
lation cry aloud for Christian aid and sympathy. But I cannot 
refrain in this report from urging the Venerable S.P.G. to give 
their special attention to the earnest invitation of a large 
band of Indians at "Saddle" Lake - a place situated about 125 
miles Iff.33. of Edmonton - for a Missionary to settle amongst them. 
On my first visit to them they pleaded as souls without a 
shepherd that I would tell the authorities of our Church their 
great need. They said with much quiet dignity of manner "We 
are poor and ignorant. We know nothing. Nobody takes any 
heed of us. What can we do 1 We wish to know how to live as 
civilised and Christian men." I ventured to encourage their 
desire for a Missionary, especially when I saw that the station 
was good, and that they had really settled down to farm on a 
"location" where hundreds of l J>lain Crees" could be soon gathered. 
Every visit I pay them increases my interest in and hope for 
these people. Day by day large numbers of children are 
instructed; service is held every evening so that the largest 
"Wig-wam" is filled; and late into the night my tent has visitors 
asking about "Divine things," The sort of questions asked are 
as follows: "What is the Christian Religion ?" "Where did it 
come from ?" "Is there more than one Church, and how can we 
find the true one ?" And again, "What ought a Christian man 
to believe and do ?" Most intelligent questions and the same 
as men are asking everywhere. 

At present, Joseph Howse, a respectable Cree, conducts 
Prayers on Sunday at Saddle Lake and teaches in the week, also 
acting as Interpreter when I go down. His salary is made up 
by a Government grant as Indian teacher and also by assistance 
received from the Bishop of Saskatchewan. But a Missionary 
is urgently needed there and I beseech the Ven. Society to 
accede to their request: I never shall have the heart to go 
and tell them that their prayer has been refused. 

At Victoria a "Half-breed" Settlement 75 or 80 miles 
distant from this place, Mr. Philip Tait regularly reads 
prayers when the Missionary is absent. There also is a good 
congregation most anxious for a Clergyman to reside amongst 
them. These people until lately attended service amongst 
the Wesleyans. 

It is now just four years since I arrived in this place, 
with my Tent, the only Church of England Clergyman from 
Battleford to the Mountains: and looking at what has been 
done I cannot but be encouraged. Ho one not living here could 
imagine the rivalry - I can use no other term - of the 
Churches. Here are the headquarters of the Romanists with 
















. 


- 




* 


■ 


















' 












































• 







, 


. 





























a.Bishop and a large staff of clergy and nuns. They have large 
buildings and considerable means for mission purposes. Also the 
Wesleyans are very strong in local influence with Chapels and 
Parsonage houses free of debt. Over the distance covered by 
my mission they have five stations on which their Society 
cannot spend much less than 10,000 dollars per annum. To do 
the work as it should be done, we need more men and moremeanss 
it is quite impossible for the present agency to accomplish 
everything necessary to be done. Por the generous aid of 
the Venerable S.P.G. we are very grateful and we cannot but 
pray that the Head of the Church may so bless it with His Grace 
that the Society may be able to realise its vast aims for 
the salvation of souls and the Glory of God. All which is 
most respectfully submitted to the Venerable S.P.G. London 
England. 


m. HEWTOH, 

Clergyman at Edmonton, H.W.Ts. 


6. Hewt o n to_ S.P.G.; Re p ort for Quarter ending June. 25, 1881 

Respecting this Mission a few things may be remarked of 
interest. There is the anxious desire of Indians, more or 
less settled on their reserves, for Christian instruction. 

At present I have application from five bands of Indians for 
Missionaries: these have no stated missionary and they would 

greatly prefer missionaries of the Church of England.. In 
this section of country Romanists and Methodist missionaries 
are very numerous, while we have only 2 ordained men and our 
assistance is to be decreased during the coming year. What 
we are to do with these Indians that we have tried to influence 
I am at a loss to conceive, and it is quite impossible on the 
ground of distance and expense to visit them often. An oppor¬ 
tunity now and then offers for me to see them at Edmonton, 
but for the most part they must be as M sheep without a 
shepherd. 

Also it becomes me to report that the stream of immigration 
for some time expected to set in this direction has now reached 
us. In a year or two our white population will be doubled, or 
increased manifold. The country is good and fit for settlement 
and the work of people often seen south of the boundary line, 
is likely to $ake place here. Many write to me from a 
distance either asking for information or to express their 
intention of immigrating to Edmonton. Miles of land have been 
taken up this spring, and log shanties built; and eve£y day 
people are arriving as to a new Canaan. To meet this new 
demand on the Church will tax all our energies and the sympathies 
and practical help of the venerable Society "at Home. 1 * 













- 

. . 

■ 

, 










■ 












. 


« 

. 












... » . j 






. 

. 

' 






■ 

« 












7 « New t on to S.P.G.; Re port f or the Year ending June 25 , 188 2 

The past year's work at Edmonton has been a very quiet 
one, and not of the kind to excite much interest at a distance. 

Your Missionary had held 215 services of various kinds: 
there have been 18 infant Baptisms; and one marriage. One 
hundred and fifty dollars have been raised to pay off Church 
debt - twenty-five dollars were collected for expenses 
incidental to the Church: and I received twelve dollars 
surplice dues. 

In the autumn and winter of 1881 I gave special addresses 
and lectures, bearing on church matters which were well attended: 
most of the people coming two miles through all weathers to 
be present. 

Many who attended these services were strangers - some of 
them from England. They are now, I am sorry to say, scattered 
in all directions to Bow River and other places where we have 
no clergymen. It is my habit to encourage these wanderers to 
keep up communication with me wherever they may settle; yet 
although their intentions are good it is not easy to keep up 
the custom. Parents and friends in England would take interest 
in Missionary work if they knew the services rendered by 
Missionaries to their relatives ’’knocking about” in these 
countries, and which cannot always very well be reported. 

This year will be memorable to me as the period when we 
are clear of debt on All Saints Edmonton, This church cost 
about $2500 besides free labour. When it was built lumber 
was scarce and often not to be bought for money. Every nail 
cost us two shillings a pound or 50 cents. It was such an 
undertaking that we had to hunt up anybody on the plains who 
had the remotest idea of making a church door or window or 
chancel end of a church: and although the little church is 
modest enough it looks pretty to some of us, transformed by 
the trouble and self-sacrifice it has cost. During the year 
several gentlemen of position attendant at our church have 
settled at Edmonton: when their families arrive they will be 
quite an acquisition. 

As soon as the means of travelling here have been established 
a large influx of population is expected. 

I am, Reverend Sir, 

Your Faithful Servant, 

WM. 39EWTOB • 


8, liewton to S.P.G- . ; Report for Quarte r E nding Michaelmas, 1885 


Baptisms 5. 

One Marriage 

Dumber of Services 36. Attendances 6, 12, 25, 50 




























„ 










. 













■ 







. 
























' 






. 






















, 











Holy Communion once 

Offertories $21.10. $16 was sent by Canon Cooper as 

offertory to the Ven. S.P.G. The remainder was used 
for incidental expenses. 

13 persons were confirmed by his Lordship, the 
Bishop of Saskatchewan. 


9. Uewton t o S.P.G.s Report for Quarte r ending D ec. 25, 1883* 

The work of this Mission has been continued without loss 
of time by serious ill health or any other cause. My work 
still requires all patience and faith. Our people are so 
scattered and rove so much, that the venerable Society may 
only expect faithful work from me, and not very striking 
reports. Besides regular services at All Saints the evening 
service has been continued, in the Masonic Hall, and at other 
points as opportunity offers. Our congregations are not 
much under our control, the people come from great distances, 
and snow, and rivers, and rains, and other difficulties of 
travel hinder often, besides, the other causes at work in 
civilised countries. Carelessness is too common, and although 
I cannot always procure wine for Holy Communion drunkenness is 
very common, and other vices I can only indirectly mention. 

In the village of Edmonton itself the population during 
the Quarter has decreased rather than increased. At Christmas 
there might be 250 souls all told. To meet the religious needs 
of these people there are four churches of different bodies, 
and five congregations, viz. I have two congregations at the 
opposite ends of the village, and the Homan Catholics, the 
Presbyterians and the Methodists make up the rest. The few 
immigrants who came into the district last autumn are almost to 
a man Scotchmen, and they are as a matter of course Presbyterian. 
Hext Spring the probabilities are that many of our unsettled 
people will flock to Calgary and other parts where speculation 
is more rife. 

One of the disagreeable things to a Missionary at Edmonton 
is the intense competition of the churches - I can use no other 
phrase - there are not in fact people enough to make a good 
congregation, and yet, we have four missionaries, and in 
addition a Homan Catholic Bishop, with a large and most 
efficient ecclesiastical organization close by. Hitherto we 
have managed our matters with kindness and mutual courtesy but 
the rivalry the churches are pressing on to this point will tax; 
and try us in every way. Also what an illustration of the 
evils following a divided Christendom *. I wish the ven. Society 
would allow me a young active Beacon, or a Catechist preparing 
for Holy Orders to assist me generally in this Edmonton district 
who would reside at my headquarters, and give general assistance 
wherever work could be done. In this way the country for a 
hundred miles could be covered and all the fair claims of 
church people could be met, until towns arise where the people 
could be induced to support their own clergy. I respectfully 






press this matter on the attention of the Society "because I 
believe it best, and that it would answer all needs, and also 
because my own health is overstrained, and without some such 
assistance I must at an early date resigfl my Mission and seek 
some rest and change as an absolute necessity. 

All which I respectfully submit to the venerable Society. 

TO. KSWTON. 


1 0. Hewton to S .P.G.s Re port for Quarter ending C hristmas, 1883 

On the 19th Sunday after Trinity - by the Bishop*s 
request when His Lordship visited Edmonton - we began an 
Evening Service at the other end of Edmonton Town Plot. All 
Saints Church was built where it seemed probable the village 
would arise, and indeed on the only piece of land then procur¬ 
able. But the few houses there are have been built a mile or 
a mile and a half away, and the village people at present 
mostly live at that distance. They who prefer our service 
thought the distance too far to go to All Saints, hence it 
became advisable to hold an evening service regularly in their 
midst. It gives me pleasure to report that this evening 
service has - considering the circumstances - succeeded beyond 
my expectations. In a changing population of perhaps 200 
souls all told, and with 3 other churches, our evening congre¬ 
gation has hitherto averaged about 50 persons. The congregation 
is looked upon as quite established, and the Churchwarden has 
mentioned to me the consideration of a second church. Some I 
am told who do not come regularly might attend our services 
if we had this churchs also we now pay rent, and the rent 
helps to use up our funds. Certainly at this evening service 
I have been able to do two things I never could succeed in 
doing permanently before viz. to influence and gather young 
men; and also to render our beautiful service with some degree 
of propriety. We have a nice organ for the most part paid for, 
a very fair choir, led excellently by a Lady who a few months 
ago seemed lost to us through her marriage, yet whose husband 
is now our people*s Churchwarden and as an efficient a helper - 
without exception - as any I have ever had in Edmonton. 

Perhaps I ought to explain to the Ven. Society that at 
All Saints my work has been and is still, almost an Indian 
work. Methodism, from local circumstances, was very strong 
here, and Homan Catholicism was even stronger, this being the 
headquarters of a large Roman Diocese. The people who came 
to me were mostly passing visitors, or persons who had left 
the Hudson Bay employment, or half breeds and Indians, who 
seldom can help much. Then from incessant changes in such a 
roving population what I built up with difficulty in one 
year, the next it had to be done again - with the same kind 
of material. Often I have wondered how all alone, with very 
little help, and the enormous cost of everything to live by, 
and to work with, we have made any headway whatever, yet I 
can today express my conviction - sustained by the kind judg¬ 
ment of Roman Priests and others who have come across our 












_ ... . . . . . • « , ■ *■.. . . 






* 

f C 

. V 4. ' . 






, 






« 




■ 





. 




, 






* 


















i 





















■work and are able to form an unbiassed opinion upon it - as 
well as from friends who wish to encourage - that our church 
is not behind any in its good influences, and that in any 
storms at sea, we are as likely to come to harbour, by God 1 s 
blessing, as safely as any of the church organisations in our 
neighbourhood. The fact is too much is often expected of us 
in these out of the way places. People coming here from a 
distance, with their expectations raised by the reports of 
land speculators, expect to see a large population with 
crowded churches and completed church organisations - which 
they are generally very unwilling to do anything to help, 
and they go away dissatisfied with us who have been doing our 
best amid discouragements and self-sacrifice - beyond their 
comprehension. 

Also it becomes me to report as a matter of fact that 
our population for the la,st year or two has remained stationary 
as to numbers. Mow there is much depression on all sides. 
Through hailstorms, and summer frosts, the harvests have not 
been good. Manners cannot sell their grain, and usurers 
cannot collect their debts, so business is at a standstill 
with very uncertain issues before us. One hopes this 
depression is temporary, for the country has many things 
to recommend it; if people would not ruin it by wild 
exaggeration. I was glad in the late autumn to receive a 
visit from the Reverend Mr. Cooper, and soon after from His 
Lordship the Bishop of the Diocese and his Lady. To a 
Missionary in such exile, such visits are most helpful and 
welcome. All of which I very respectfully submit to the 
venerable Society. 


m. KB WON. 


11. Hewton to S.P.G.; Report f or Quarter ending Mch. 25, 188 4 

Prom Christmas to the March Quarter the work of this 
Mission was duly prosecuted. On one Sunday I was unable 
through nervous prostration to attend to my work; excepting 
this break all my duties were fulfilled. The attendance of 
my people was fairly good at Divine Service, and at 
St. Michael’s congregation in the east end of the village 
it was excellent. This congregation made an effort to raise 
an organ fund, and they raised $150 for that purpose. 

Also I made a special effort in connection with this 
congregation to form a Sunday afternoon class for men and 
women to study together, religious and church subjects, 
desiring to come into closer contact with some of my people 
than the public service allowed me. Some attended - about 
7 or 8, but on account of the distance people live from the 
village and the many changes always occurring, the class 
was only partly successful. People told me if they 
attended the class in the afternoon they must neglect the 
public service - and of course worship is of the supremest 
importance • 





. 

' 

■ 

. 
















, 










. 

■ 




, 















During the Quarter, on week nights or on any occasion 
that offered I held services in houses at different points 
of my mission. Sometimes settlers found the small congregation - 
Canadian or English people. At other points the people were 
half-breeds, at others Indians. Were the community to whom 
I minister not so scattered and not so roaming I should rejoice 
in my work; but it is next to impossible at present to mould 
the people into strong congregations and so to give, in 
various ways, the training one desires as the result of 
his labours, among the people. This Edmonton district is 
in a state of transition from the old Hudson Bay rule, to a 
condition not yet fixed and settled. Ho industries have 
come to give stability to the population and even agriculture 
is in the stage of experiment. Hence many come and many go; 
and everybody around us is ready with the old saying, M We 
know not what a day may bring forth.' 1 


1 2. ne wton to S.P.G.s Report fo r Q.uarter en ding Sep. 29, 1884 

In addition to the enclosed papers I beg to remark 
further that my work proceeded as usual during the Q.uarter 
ending September 29th. Besides the routine duties of my 
mission I have little to remark excepting that the affairs 
of the East end congregation are taking shape, and I hope 
that they will proceed satisfactorily. I am the more anxious 
in this respect inasmuch as the Bishop thought it necessary 
that I should hold this particular service in the east part 
of the village. I of course was glad to do it so far as my 
strength allowed and I gave this work my best attention. A 
choir was organized, an organ bought, a room hired, and the 
whole service until the middle of March was looked upon as 
a great success. Although I have seen many changes here, 
and got accustomed to disappointments I too became quite 
sanguine about a permanent congregation, at that end of the 
village. However as the spring advanced the congregation 
gradually became less. There was nothing to do in the village, 
and the young men of whom the congregation was chiefly 
composed left Edmonton mostly for distant places where 
employment was to be had, others moved on to their farms 
too far n from to\m' 1 to attend this service. As money was 
very scarce I was asked until the expenses were settled at 
the Hall to meet on Sunday evening at All Saints the few 
who could attend from the East end. This I did for the summer 
hoping circumstances would change, or bring in strangers 
belonging to our church who would attend that service. Our 
church furniture was retained at the Masonic Hall partly to 
see what the churchwardens would see their way to do, and 
partly as security for rent. The churchwardens too have been 
absent and nothing could be done in a satisfactory manner. 

How however two ladies of All Saints have collected sufficient 
funds to clear the organ from debt and to settle dues for rent 
etc. at the Hall, As soon as full accounts are rendered this 
money will be paid over, and All Saints will possess the organ 
until the East end people require it, and pay back to an organ 
fund at All Saints the amount received from these laides. It 
would give me the sincerest pleasure to revive this congregation 
as soon as it is practicable, and the time is ripe to give it 
permaneucy. 




* 

0 

, 






« 

























a, 






















• 



















■ 

. 







. 



. 

' 
































. . 


• 






























. 









































• 




























. 










* 

* 

* 

. 

f 

, . . 


* 

. 

- 





13* Newton to S.P .G-.: Report for Q.uarter ending Chr i stmas, 1684 

The Quarter ending at Christmas allows me in our work here 
to notice two things: 

First, that we have been able to greatly improve the musical 
part of our service. Until lately we had no organ at All 
Saints and no one to manage a choir in the service. Now we 
have a good organ, paid for, and a young gentleman from the 
Mother Country gives his services, and makes himself very 
useful in helping us to render our common chants and hymns 
more worthily than heretofore. A large number of our people had 
been trained to sing in the manner of the Orkney Islands, and 
it has required the patient management of years tu> change their 
ideas of music so as to make our church music acceptable to their 
sense of devotion. In this matter we have much improved without 
jarring the feelings of the people - and we hope to "hasten 
slowly ,r in this direction. 

Yet here we are much tried by the changes always occurring 
in our midst, and two of the best voices in our little choir 
are expected to return to Manitoba shortly. 

Secondly. Our Sunday School has largely increased. A 
Clergymans Daughter has removed here from Ontario and this 
Lady has given the School great assistance. Prom various causes 
this has been a difficult part of our work, low it is almost 
satisfactory to me. On Christmas - although efforts had been 
made to proselytise our children - we gathered about 70 children, 
most of whom I had baptised, and not one was present whose parents 
were not connected with our church. About 20 were absent from 
want of clothing, or some such cause, and I have good grounds 
for hoping that our school will increasingly prosper. The 
Yen. Society will kindly remember the sparseness of our pop¬ 
ulation, the changes always taking place, that very many of our 
settlers are single men, that the large majority of the inhabit¬ 
ants of the district are French or Scotch, and it will be evident 
that we have more than our share of the young under our influence. 
As I hope my reports have been understatements of the different 
phases of our work rather than overstatements, I may be allowed 
to say now, that I have in many ways proofs of the general con¬ 
fidence and respect of this population - a state of things not 
always easy to bring about - situated as we are and surrounded 
by such conflicting sects and circumstances. 

At the same time, it seems necessary to be said that I 
am surprised and pained by the general run of the few churchmen 
who come here from Canada. They are mostly useless to the Church: 
and their example offers little to aid the clergyman in any way. 
Our most faithful members are won from other religious bodies. 

All of which is very respectfully submitted to the Yen. 
Society. 


1M. NEWTON. 












14. Be w ton to S.P.G.s report for Quarter ending Ma rc h 25,1885 . 

My work at Edmonton during the Quarter ending in March 
went on as usual, and nothing occurred worthy of special remark. 
This Quarter is always a trying one to my mission. Usually the 
roads are very had, first with the snow-drifts, and then with the 
Spring floods travelling is always difficult and sometimes 
impossible. Many, and indeed good part of our people live at 
great distances from the church yet their attendance was good 
and gratifying, especially in the morning service. Their attend¬ 
ance showed considerable interest; to come two, three, five, six 
or eight miles to service meant rising very early and taking 
the roads into account great self denial. 

Also 1 have to report, for my deep comfort, an increased 
seriousness on the part of some of my people. Lately more 
have sought counsel and direction in the Holy Life than heretofore. 
This has not been a mere desire for sympathy in their worldly 
matters, but a real desire to find the mercy and the love of 
God, and to realise them as Christian people should. Hence 
attendance at Holy Communion is quietly increasing and the 
church as a supernatural institution is better understood and 
valued. The spring exodus took away from us several of our 
most useful members. Still our population is changeful as the 
people come and go all the time and our spiritual sowing is 
indeed casting bread-seed upon the waters to spring up when and 
where God wills. 

The general state of morals in this far Western district 
has been nothing to boast of* drunkenness especially has been 
checked lately; a year ago it was frightful in the neighbourhood; 
all this in spite of liquor laws and the reports in Europe that 
we are sober people. 

A large proportion of the peot^le who come here at present 
are unmarried men; or persons come to see the country before 
they remove their families westward. This class are seldom 
good "Church-goers’ 1 , yet I think we improve in that respect, 
and lately several miners who have not been to a service for a 
long time - in one case for 22 years - have been induced to come 
to church and they ha^e assured me that they will try and 
begin devout habits and aim to live religious lives. 

Reverend Sir I remain your Faithful Servant, 

WM. HEWTOH. 


15 • B ewton to S.P.G.s Report for Quarter ending June 1885 

The Quarter ending in June was noticable for an Indian 
rising in this part of the B•W• Around us on all sides are 
bands of Indians who look upon Edmonton Fort, as one of the 
centres of trade and travel. These bands all through the 
springtime were in a state of excitement and were preparing 
to make a raid on our small settlements. They knew the white 




















. 























- 



























? 


















■ 






people were almost defenceless. People collected at the forts 
expecting the Indians to appear every day. Undoubtedly there 
was imminent danger. The mounted police were very few and not 
well prepared for serious conflict. However we were in God’s 
Providence saved from a raid because the Indian horses were 
not in good condition, and the spring grass had not grown, and 
also by the prompt action of the Canadian Government who poured 
their troops in and overawed the Indians in our vicinity. 

Of course this was a busy and an anxious time for me. 

All sorts of persons came to me for every kind of business, 
comfort and help. Often I looked at our little church which had 
cost us work and self-denial, and wondered what would happen in 
a few days, if God were not gracious to us. How the danger is 
past one thing causes me regret. Among the Indians to the H.W. 
of Edmonton was a little girl whom I had often visited in her 
mother’s tent near our fort. She was very sick and I administered 
medicine and the consolations of religion, until her people 
went to their gathering-place to hold a council to see what 
they would do, and what part they would take in the rebellion. 

A secret message came to me from the mother telling me the 
child was dting and that she begged to see me if I would go, 
as no Indian would fetch me. As the Indians were off their 
reservation this was not easy to be accomplished, so I tried 
to find out on what part of the prairies the Indians were 
encamped that I might get to them. Ho one knew exactly but two 
men thought they could find them if I could get no one seise to 
go with me. I gladly appointed a time for the first man and the 
horse was harnessed to start on the journey, but he came not, 
and was out of the ways the next man was hunted up and he refused 
to undertake the journey, the risk was too great. And so the 
little Indian maiden died alone on the wide plains and was 
placed in her solitary grave without the ministrations of religion. 
Yet surely the silent angels were there and the presence of the 
Master who said ’’Suffer the little children to come unto Me. 11 
As I said above, this incident caused me regret. 

The general state of the Indians in this neighbourhood is 
still very unsettled. Prom information I have received, I 
should not be surprised if there \?ere new trouble next spring¬ 
time . 


It gives me pleasure to report that I have suffered no 
losses by the rebellion. 

All of which is respectfully submitted to the Venerable 
Society. 


m. HEWTOH • 


16. Hewton to S.P. G.s Report for Qua rter ending Sep t. 29, 18S5. 

This quarter at Edmonton was more quiet than tile preceding 
one in the history of this mission, Por a time the neighbour¬ 
hood was almost denuded of its male population who had gone to 
the nlains in various ways to give assistance to General Strange. 
Still the morning congregation at All Saints was usually very 
good and the work of the church was pressed on in every practical 
way. 









* 

■ 

i 

. 




















' 










' 

' 

4 . • • 


: \..j. 'u L-" 

: ? . :)■ : 14 jil .. ■ ■- ■ 

..: :. J n i w : . 






0 ■ 

..... ci: .. i..;o 
. ' . ‘.U 


> . . .. >J 




o : iJ ; 






...VO: : 





















This quarter was very observable by me, inasmuch as I lost 
a faithful helper in the death of Mr* Win. Lenny, Blacksmith, of 
the Port. He had been Churchwarden for several years, and 
precentor almost from the beginning of my work in Edmonton. He 
was originally from the Horth of Scotland and a Presbyterian, 
but he came to love our Church and her services, and in every 
way became a devoted member of the Church of England. He was a 
true son of a true Mother and I often thought if I had 12 such 
men, by God's help and blessing, we could have done almost any¬ 
thing at Edmonton. After men are gone from us we often see that 
every man has his place in the Church and the world, and that 
even what appear deficiencies may be helps to good works specially 
needed at the time. So our friend was not a model singer of 
Church music as we like it in England, yet he sang with hearti¬ 
ness the only melodies and tunes the people here knew, and could 
sing, and thus helped in this far away place, the best congre¬ 
gational worship we could manage, and when other ideas and customs 
began to reach us, he modestly gave way to others who had not 
always his perseverance and stability of character. 

This musical part of the service is here as everywhere one 
of the trials of life. This quarter has seen our little choir 
quite broken up. Hear the church we had for a time a family 
settled from Manitoba: the children, three of them, had unusually 
nice voices. We trained them with great care and without stint 
of labour, and became quite proud of out little choir when lo l 
as soon as the plains were under the control of troops and they 
could manage the journey they fled away from us, where they had 
less chance of being scalped, and left us almost desolate to 
begin again the same thankless toil, and almost certain of the 
same result. 

Another item of interest was the arrival here of Archdeacon 
MacDonald on his way to the far north. It appears the Archdeacon 
found it impracticable to get through connections to his Mission 
before the winter set it, and so for a time he concluded to 
remain at Edmonton for the winter, and then to begin his toil¬ 
some journey early in the spring. However he found living here 
so dear, and generally inconvenient, that he considered it worth 
while to take the long journey back to Winnipeg and come back in 
the spring rather than endure the inconvenience of remaining. 

The Archdeacon very willingly gave me every assistance in his 
power, the several weeks he stayed at Edmonton, and I was glad to 
confer with him on the spot on matters connected with pay mission, 
and I invariably received kind and wise counsel. Amongst other 
matters we discussed the difficulty of gathering the people 
twice a day at All Saints and I proposed to him and he accepted 
the duty of taking the evening service himself while I did what 
work I could elsewhere. In fact I wished to try whether a fresh 
face and manner, or a different person of higher office in the 
Church would draw a second congregation to All Saints. The 
result was not encouraging. 

Then again as Mr. Inkster of Saddle Lake Mission was through 
the rebellion around Edmonton, I proposed a Cree service and 
consulted Mr. MacDonald as to the most convenient time for the 
service, before inviting Mr. Inkster to hold the Cree service. 





Mr. Inkster expressed his willingness and saw no objection to 
the hour of 3 o'clock in the afternoon. It was thought some 
might like to remain over from the morning service, and then get 
home to their places by.the time their evening farm work had to 
be attended to, while possibly some not well versed in English 
would like to take advantage of such a service and make some 
special effort to attend it. So an urgent notice was given out 
the Sunday before calling attention to the Gree service. Before 
the Sunday also I had a notice placed in the local newspaper 
urging attendance. Personally I could not be present, and on 
meeting Mr. MacDonald in the evening anxious to hear the result 
of an afternoon Gree Service, I found to my regret that not a 
Gree person came and t..*at Mr. MacDonald and Mr. Inkster were 
there alone. As to most of our people they are scattered about 
in all directions from one to 7 or 8 miles on both sides of the 
Saskatchewan River. Mostly there are no bridges and, in 
certain times of the year travelling is difficult or impossible. 
Living is very dear and precarious and women and children stay 
at home for want of proper clothing, or the men are away freight¬ 
ing, and their families have no means of transit even if they 
could leave their places unprotected. Difficulties of this kind 
abound in a Mission of this kind unknown to places where the 
populations are around the church, and are near to be gathered. 
Also visiting is just as difficult. The missionary may travel 
many miles and do but little, and often if he did not take food 
with him for himself and his horse they must do without, and in 
cases of accident this is a pretty common experience. 

So far as I can judge our mission here is fairly prosperous; 
yet we abundantly need the loyalty of our people and the blessing 
of Almighty God. All of which is most respectfully submitted to 
the Venerable Society. 

TO. HEWTOff. 


17. newton to S.P. G.s R ep ort for Quarter e n d ing Ch r istmas, 1885 

In my report for the previous quarter, I forgot to say 
that I was absent from my duties one Sunday in August. Through 
a restive horse I was very much injured, the effects of which 
I have felt ever since. However as Archdeacon MacDonald kindly 
took my duty at All Saints I was the chief sufferer. It may also 
be excused if I remind the Ven. Society that for ten long years 
except from these accidents I have had no holiday, and my life 
has been passed with the same unvarying round and monotony. 

During the present quarter I have used every exertion to 
revive the Sunday evening service in the opposite end of the 
village of Edmonton to that in which All Saints Church is 
situated as yet without avail, although any day I may hear of 
a room adapted for the purpose. The Ven. Society I think under¬ 
stands that All Saints was built before the village of Edmonton 
arose, in the only available position then available, and no 
one suspected but’that any village would-be built in the same 
direction. Also all experienced men allow that to remove the 
church would be a folly; first because the building would not 
bear to be removed - and would fall to pieces; secondly the 
church has land of value belonging to it, which could not in 















■ .-■ 




» ■ < ■ 

_ 






























. 


















, 


















. 


V* v,' V. • . 















honour be retained if the church were removed: thirdly all allow 
that if Edmonton should be other than a paper town the present 
church would be in the best of all situations for a resident 
population; and even how as almost everybody in this country 
keeps a horse, or horses, the inconvenience is more fanciful 
than real; for if the people do not ride to church they ride 
somewhere else; and remembering these things and the great 
difficulty I had in clearing the church of debt the clamour 
raised about the situation of the church sounds to me in all 
moods to be the result of thoughtlessness; in some it appears 
great ingratitude* A large number of the subscriptions promised 
to build All Saints were never paid, and I myself at great incon¬ 
venience had to use my own money to prevent the church from 
being seized for debt* Again the last service I held in the 
room we occupied in the East end of the village at a considerable 
rent - was badly attended it being early spring, and fine weather, 
when I enquired the reason I found beside the removals, which 
were numerous, most of the congregation had been out for their 
pleasure walking or riding, very likely in the very direction 
in which All Saints Church was situated. The churchwarden was 
discouraged at the condition of the finances and advised the 
use of All Saints for summer evening, and again I had to come 
to the rescue to prevent the organ being finally retained for 
rent, and ladies of All Saints settled the debt due for rent and 
organ and removed it to the church where I hope it will remain* 

It is necessary plainly to state these facts for the 
information of the Yen. Society that they may clearly understand 
the difficulties of the Church here, and the various anxieties 
their Missionary has, beside his usual work* As to the service 
in the village after much careful consideration I have come to 
the clear conclusion, that the only thing to do is to build a 
room on one or two of the best selected lots and to keep a site 
for a permanent church when it may be required, and the people 
can pay for it. A lot on the town survey in the best situation 
would cost about one hundred dollars - as things are now - soon 
they might want #500 for the same position. A log-room would 
be set up for five or six hundred dollars and with a little 
taste could be made quite pretty, and answer all purposes for 
years to come* For some time I have taken trouble to find what 
can be done in this matter, and what lots are available, and I 
think such lots can be secured on the terms I mention above. 

And on this matter of situation a great deal, almost everything, 
will depend* A lot offered for nothing might be a hindrance 
and kill the work. One person offered a lot and a hundred 
dollars subscription if a church were placed on property in 
which he is interested. Very likely if this were put to a 
popular vote this offer would be accepted. First, he would want 
a more expensive church built than we could find the money for. 

His object of course is to make his other lots of value by our 
building on one of them. He is not interested at all in our 
church, his offer is for speculative purposes merely. Secondly, 
the man has only a disputed title to the lots he claims, one of 
which he offers to give us, and the gift so called might lead 
us into difficulty and legal expense. Thirdly, the position is 
altogether out of the way and in rny judgment the worst that 
could be chosen as a "stand” for a permanent church. I do hope 
fervently that no popular voice will "locate” a new church far 
away from where the Public School and the Presbyterian and 



Roman Catholic places are situated: it would be a fatal mistake 
and injure our work beyond calculation for years to come. 

Perhaps these matters will take a definite shape, when 
His Lordship the Bishop is able to visit this distant part of 
the Diocese. 

One or two other matters occurred in this quarter well 
worth relating to the Yen. Society as illustrations of the work 
we have to do at Edmonton. Some time since I mentioned in my 
report the assistance I received in the Sunday School at All 
Saints by a Lady a Miss Marsh Daughter of Archdeacon Marsh of 
the Huron Diocese Ont. Up to a few months ago this assistance 
continued when I heard that she was engaged to one of the chief 
men in the Presbyterian congregation and that she was in the 
habit of leading the Presbyterian singing every Sunday evening. 
This continued until her marriage which took place at our church, 
and I went to the breakfast. Now, the Lady sometimes came to 
church in the morning, and communicated with us, leaving the 
Sunday School however, and showed no desire to assist her own 
church in any way and declined any work I asked her to do, 
pleading her circumstances an excuse. A little time went on, 
and on taking up our local paper what did I see reported but a 
meeting of "Presbyterian Ladies" in which Mrs. Taylor was made 
President of a society for propagating Presbyterianism. This 
lady and her husband had paid me a visit a day or so before and 
I did not then know this incident. Now however I sent her a 
letter through her h sband calling her attention to the report 
in the newspaper and pointing out to her the fact that if she 
were willing to be so described and continued such an office 
she should remember that she was cutting herself off from 
membership in the Church of England, and I begged her seriously 
to consider her position for her own sake and for the sake of 
the Church in which she had all her life been nurtured. At the 
same time I enclosed Bishop Kip's (sic) book on the Church and 
asked her to read it with her husband. My letter was retained, 
the book was sent back. She keeps her office, receives the 
"Lord's Supper" with the Presbyterians, and is loud in he r 
condemnation of me for debarring her from the privileges of her 
church. This is a Canadian Archdeacon's daughter 36 years of 
age. Now what is one to do with material of this kind ? 

Again, at Christmas time I year by year gather all my 
children at All Saints from the small stations around, first to 
make them happy, and also keep in their memory our claims on 
them and the fact of their relationship to us. We ask no 
outside help and in every respect we manage the festival 
ourselves and distinctly on church lines. This we did on 
Christmas as usual. Now without any invitation from us the 
Methodist Minister and his wife came to the meeting after the 
tea. The church was crowded and I was busy in the "Chair," 
managing everything, and had no opportunity of speaking to 
the Gentleman, and I did not wish to change the end and purpose 
of the festival which were as I said, on distinctly church lines. 
All this seemed simple and innocent enough, yet to my surprise 
I found a few days after that I was accused of "disgustingly" 
bad behaviour to Mr. Howard and a letter came to me stating 
that a petition was being got up for my removal from Edmonton. 

The very success of our festival was a clear demonstration of the 








22X 


succeS3 of our work, and its influence on the young and rising 
part of our population. Without any special effort on our part 
we had present 100 children most of whom I had baptised or 
instructed in the teaching of the Church, No other single 
church in Edmonton could present that number and perhaps it 
would require all of them together to do it. Our opponents 
and detractors could not deny the fact for the list was open 
for their inspection. Of course in England this number would 
be nothing, but with our sparse population and the number of 
churches it is not so bad, 

I wish I could arouse a moderate love of the church in this 
place and a faithful consistency of church principles. Although 
the Romanists are strong and the Methodists are through the 
Hudson Bay Govt, the established religion, and the Scotch by 
their clannishness hold together, yet it would not be impossible 
to make ours the most influential church of them all. The 
popular desire is to make us one of the sects among the sects, 
and to force that positi o n upon u s. Here as elsewhere, ignor¬ 
ance can be clamorous, and a mob loves domination - no matter 
how cruel. 

All of which Reverend Sir is humble submitted to the 
Yen. S. P. G. 


WM. NEWTON. 


18. Bi s hop of Saskatchewan to S.P.G, Novemb er 12, 1 880 (Extract ) 

My dear Mr. Tucker, 

I wrote to you last on 9th September. Since 
then I have visited the Edmonton District. I travelled by the 
Hudson Bay Company's Steamer up the River Saskatchewan 370 miles 
when I had to leave her and make the rest of the journey over¬ 
land - as the water of the river was so low at that season of 
the year that the vessel frequently ran aground on sand banks. 
During the summer months the river is well adapted for steam-boat 
navigation, but late in the autumn the channel is much more 
difficult owing to the water becoming very low. I landed at 
Victoria about 80 miles from Edmonton. Here Dr. Newton endeavour¬ 
ed for some time to keep up the Church Services by the aid of a 
Lay Reader. The Settlers are almost all Church of England 
Members, but the Methodists have for many years had a Mission 
among them. That Mission was established long before the Diocese 
of Saskatchewan was in existence. The road between Victoria and 
Edmonton is the very worst I have seen in this country. It is even 
dangerous to travel from its extreme roughness and the absence 
of bridges across the creeks. Dr. Newton nearly lost his life 
in crossing one of these creeks during high water. His ca,rris,ge 
^as upset by the force of the current and he himself was washed 
down the stream some distance before his man could rescue him. 

I myself had a narrow escape of being upset in the same stres,m 
by the wheel of my carriage being caught by a rock. I held a 
Confirmation at All Saints Church Edmonton. Unfortunately some 
of the candidates were absent from the settlement so that only 
seven were confirmed, but I went back by Victoria and held a 
second confirmation there confirming five, making in all tv/elve. 









b.±. oi 












.. 


I • ' 


• • 






All Saints Church is a very tasteful and ecclesiastical looking 
building, well worth the money it has cost - considering the 
high prices that rule at Edmonton, Dr. Newton has given a great 
deal of time and attention to the Indians around Edmonton. His 
tastes induce him to prefer Indian Mission work and I have 
proposed to him to take charge of the Eort MacLeod Indian 
Mission next spring and let a younger man be appointed to 
Edmonton. The settlement is increasing there; new settlers are 
coming in - for the most part they have a great effort to 
establish themselves as, owing to the great distance of Edmonton 
from the nearest railway (about a thousand miles), and there 
being no roads but only cart trails to travel on, reaching the 
settlement at all becomes a costly and laborious business, and 
then the high prices of all imported articles makes living 
dear, so that it will, I fear, be some time yet before we can 
calculate on much aid from the people in supporting the mission¬ 
ary. I think that a young man with £150 a year will do very well 
at Edmonton to work up the Church among the settlers, while Dr. 
Newton with his £200 a year might go to the great Indian Mission 
Centre at Eort MacLeod, and the £150 granted for MacLeod might 
be transferred to Edmonton. Dr. Neviton entered cordially into 
my ideas on the subject. I told him that I would mark my sense 
of his zeal and self-denial in behalf of the Indians by promoting 
him to the dignity of a Canon of the Diocese when the transfer 
was made. 


19. B i shop of Sa skatchew a n to S.P.G- . July 50, 1 881 (Extme t) 

2. The £80 per annum now used in paying a Native Helper to 
Dr. Newton to be in future used for work on a Reserve. The 
Helper lives with Dr. Newton and goes with him to interpret 
when he visits an Indian camp. I jave come to the conclusion 
that such visits are of little, if any, practical value. To 

do any good among heathen Indians settled upon a reserve a 
man must live on the Reserve, teach the children in School, 
and the adults at every opportunity. Dr, Newton resident at 
Edmonton cannot even attempt this. Besid.es all this the Edmonton 
district as regards the Indians is already largely in the 
hands of the Methodists and Roman Catholics. The Roman Catholic 
Bishop of Saint Albert resides within a few miles of Edmonton 
and has been there for many year. 

3. Dr. Newton thus relieved of all liability to travel 
among the Indian Camps ought to have £150 instead, of £200 per 
annum from S.P.G-, The extra £50 has been allowed in considera¬ 
tion of travelling which will no longer be necessary. 

4. I have written to Dr. Newton explaining to him the 
necessity of the foregoing action. It may be as well that I 
should give you a verbatim copy of what I wrote to him. I first 
gave him a verbatim copy of your letter intimating the £50 
reduction for next year. I then wrote: M I have adopted the 
suggestion of the Standing Committee and given up the £50 from 
my own allowance - thus leading the grant for missionaries the 
same as before. But this does not meet the whole difficulty. I 
had applied, for a grant for at least one more missionary s/t 
Eort MacLeod to be placed, on one of the Indian Reserves, and 
also for £40 per annum to secure £120 per annum to the Rev. 












... 

, 

' 




' 







. 








r i? i 




- 

4 

» 

* 

* 

. 





* 












- 

- 








R« Inkster, You will remember that the grant for Saddle Lake 
was only &80 but there was an unused balance from the block grant 
to the diocese out of which the additional £40 has hitherto 
been paid to Mr. Inkster. That balance is now nearly exhausted. 

I have no alternative therefore but to give you notice that your 
salary as S.P.G. Missionary will be £150 p.a. instead of £200 
p.a. after 25th December next. You are the only S.P.G. Mission¬ 
ary in the Diocese with more than £150 a year. In justice to the 
other missionaries this difference must cease. Mr. Inkster 
must have £120 p.a. and funds must be got to pay at least one 
more ordained missionary on the S.P.G. list to be sent next 
spring into the Port MacLeod district. H 

In another letter intimating to Dr. Newton the necessity 
of applying the £80 for the Native Helper to pay one who would 
reside on and work on a Reserve I wrote: H You are of course by 
this action entirely released from any responsibility about 
visiting Indian Gamps or reserves in the neighbourhood of 
Edmonton. w 

As regards Dr. Newton’s salaray the people of Edmonton 
ought by this time to have done something towards it. Unfortun¬ 
ately both for the church and his own happiness he appears to 
be entirely out of sympathy with at least many of the people 
there - and I feel, therefore, that little, if any, help will 
be afforded him. I cannot, however, recommend his holding any 
longer more than the maximum 8.P.G. salary allowed to the other 
missionaries. His wife and children are still in Ontario, 

Canada. He has been absent from them upwards of six years. 

You will remember that I stated last year that the Edmonton 
Settlement required a younger man and that I wished him to take 
an Indian Mission. I also mentioned, to you subsequently that 
he had written to me that the state of his health would not 
allow him to go into a rough mission. My own opinion is that it 
would be better for his own happiness to return to Ontario where 
he would be re-united to his family, and where he might obtain 
a sphere of labour free from the broils and troubles that seem 
to surround him among the people at Edmonton, 


20. Bishop of Sas ka tchewan to S.P.G . Oct. 8, 1883 (Extract ) 

In the journey from Calgary to Edmonton - a distance of 
over two hundred miles - we passed through a beautiful country - 
with rich soil - abundance of wood and water - and healthy 
climate. It will soon be settled by a large agricultural 
population. On reaching Edmonton I at once called the church 
people together to a business meeting. As n All Saints’ 1 Church 
is a mile from the new town I organised a second congregation 
by the election of a vestry. I obtained the use of the Public 
School from the trustees for holding services on Sunday 
evenings - and arranged that Dr. Newton should in future hold 
service in the Church on Sunday morning and in the town School 
House in the Evening - and that he should prend two days every 
week in visiting the people of the town. A Committee was formed 
to endeavour to raise a salary for Dr. Newton. 

I send you a report fro&t him which was written before my 
visit. 

I held a Confirmation at Edmonton - 12 persons were confirmed. 















. 

. 












' 


- 






. 

, 




























. 




« 














21 ♦ Bish o p of Sas kat chewan to S.P.G- . Septembe r 1 5, 188 4 (Extrac t) 

Dr, Newton though not so blameworthy as Canon McKay has 
also be remiss in his reports and has not been a successful 
Missionary. I intend to notify him of the retribution that has 
overtaken Canon McKay and that his own connection with S.P.G. 
may soon come to an end unless he shows a marked improvement 
in the immediate future. 







21L 

III - Parishes of the Diocese of Edmonton at it 3 formation , 

abstracted from Appendix ,, D ?r 7~Calgary Synod Journal, 1913* 


Battenberg, 

Emmanuel 

Beaver Lake, 

Saint Alban 

Bittern Lake, 

Saint Dunstan 

Calder, 

Good Shepherd 

Catnrose, 

Saint Andrew 

Cooking Lake, 

Saint Hilda de Ville 

Colchester, 

Saint Stephen 

Coronation, 

Saint Mary 

Edmonton, 

All Saints’ 

Edmonton, 

Christ Church 

Edmonton, 

Saint Andrew 

Edmonton, 

Saint Paith 

Edmonton, 

Saint Michael and All Angels 

Edmonton, 

Saint Paul 

Edson, 

Saint Catherine 

Entwistle, 

Saint Peter 

Excelsior, 

Holy Trinity 


Port Saskatchewan, Saint George 


Greene ourt, 

Saint Saviour 

Heaton Moor, 

Christ Church 

Highland Park, 

Saint Luke 

Killam, 

Saint George 

Lac la Honne 

Saint Peter 

Lament, 

Saint Michael 

Lavoy, 

Saint John 

Leduc, 

Saint Paul 
























.... 

.. : : , : : ■ 





, 

, 

e • 









North Bank, 

Saint Columba & Saint Kentigern 

Onoway, 

Saint Guthlac 

Paddle River, 

Saint Mary Abbots 

Padstow, 

Emmanuel 

Pibroch, 

Chri3t Church 

Ponoka, 

Saint Mary 

Poplar Lake, 

Christ Church 

Redwater, 

Saint Mary 

Rexboro, 

Saint Aidan and Saint Hilda 

Sandy Lake, 

Saint Peter 

Sedgewick, 

Saint John 

Sion, 

Saint Luke 

Stony Plain, 

Saint Oswald 

Strathcona, 

Holy Trinity 

Sunnyside, 

Saint Mark 

Telfordville. 

Saint John 

Tofield, 

Holy Trinity 

Vegreville, 

Saint Mary 

Wabamun, 

Saint Saviour 

Westlock, 

Saint Philip 

Wetaskiwin, 

(Emmanuel 









IV 


Some Parochial Records 


1. The Cathedral Church of All Saints 1 , Edmonto n, 

as at August 15th, 1951, 

A, REGISTE RS 
1. Services 

(a) September 20th, 1914 to February 9th, 1919. 

(b) January 1st, 1919 to December 31st, 1923. 

(c) January 1st, 1924 to March 3rd, 1929. 

(d) January 1st, 1929 to October 5th, 1935. 

(e) October 6th, 1935 to December 31st, 1941. 

(f) January 1st, 1942 to November 25th, 1948. 

(g) Current. 

(2) Baptisms 

(a) 'November 23rd, 1893 to March 29th, 1903. 

(b) April 19th, 1903 to July 12th, 1908. 

(c) July 12th, 1908 to August 31st, 1938. 

(d) November 6th, 1938 to December 31st, 1942. 

(e) Current. 

(3) Confirmationa 

(a) April 5th, 1896 to June 29th, 1902. 

(b) September 21st, 1903 to April 5th, 1914. 

(c) March 10th, 1915 to April 17th, 1930. 

(d) January 8th, 1931 to December 20th, 1936. 

(e) June 11th, 1939 to December 23rd, 1942. 

(f) Current. 

It will be noted that there is a break in 

the Confirmation register from December 20th, 1936, 

until June 11th, 1939. 

(4) Marriages 

(aj^August 7th, 1894 to March 25th,. 1903. 

(bj April 15th, 1903 to July 8th, 1907. 

(c) July 15th, 1907 to March 7th, 1912. 

(d) March 25th, 1912 to November 28th, 1913. 

(e) December 3rd, 1913 to December 5th, 1916. 

(f) December 6th, 1916 to May 11th, 1920. 

(g) May 12th, 1920 to April 13th, 1925. 

(h) April 14th, 1925 to October 28th, 1930. 

(i) November 1st, 1930 to July 7th, 1932, 

(j) July 14th, 1932 to December 28th, 1932. 

(k) October 14th, 1932 to September 24th, 1938. 

(l) September 24th, 1938 to December 23rd, 1942. 

(m) Current. 

1 5 ) Burials 

aT February 7th, 1894 to March 26th, 1903. 
b) April 21st, 1903 to December 8th, 1914. 
c) January 5th, 1915 to September 19th, 1938. 

(d) October 26th, 1938 to December 29th, 1942. 

(e) Current. 

















B. MINUTE BOOKS 


1. V e stry Meeting s 

"Ta) March 28th, 1894 to December 11th, 1918. 

(b) January 30th, 1919 to September 24th, 1923. 

(c) October 8th, 1923 to January 7th, 1928. 

(d) February 8th, 1932 to December 14th, 1936. 

(e) Current. 

2♦ Archdeaconry of Edmonton 

Taj December 2nd, 1914 to June 28th, 1924. 

5. Brotherhood of Saint Andrew (Edmonto n Chapter ) 

(a) November 19th, 1904 to June 28th, 1909. 

(b) July 12th, 1909 to May 9th, 1923. 


C. MISCELLANEOUS . 

rST Annual Cash Statement, Easter, 1893. 

(b) Annual Cash Statement, Easter, 1898. 


2. Parish Church of the Holy Trinity, Edmonto n, 

as at March 13th, 1952. 


A. REGISTERS 

1. Services 

Taj July 7th, 1895 to January 31st, 1915. 

(including Colchester services, Nov. 11th, 1901 to 
September 22nd, 1902.) 

(b) February 7th, 1915 to January 10th, 1926. 

(c) January 17th, 1926 to December 31st, 1935 

(d) January 5th, 1936 to December 26th, 1948. 

(e) Current. 

2 . Baptisms 

TaT June 30th, 1895 to January 31st, 1915. 

(b) February 7th, 1915 to December 13th, 1925. 

(c) March 21st, 1926 to September 16th, 1937. 

(d) Current. 

3• C onfirmations 

Xa)~~January 12th, 1896 to December 18th, 1913. 

(b) May 20th, 1917 to March 22nd, 1931. 

(g) April 20th, 1932 to April 2nd, 1939. 

(d) Current. 

4. Marriages 

(a) November 20th, 1895 to January 6th, 1904. 

(b) April 28th, 1905 to March 7th, 1915. 

(c) April 14th, 1915 to December 26th, 1922. 

(d) January 4th, 1923 to April 29th, 1933. 

(e) Current. 
























? 


i 




T' ; - 



- 





- 











& 






i 













■ 







c 




, 


. 







5. Burials 

fa) July 18th, 1895 to December 10th, 1914. 

(b) April 10th, 1915 to May 2nd, 1933. 

(c May 15th, 1933 to August 11th, 1942. 

(d) Current. 


B. MIHUTS BOOKS 

(a) Cash Accounts, April 9th, 1896 to 1901, 

including minutes of annual meeting, April 19th, 1898. 

(b) April 10th, 1901 to September 10th, 1917. 

(c) February 9th, 1920 to June 2nd, 1926. 

(d) September 7th, 1926 to March 9th, 1937. 

(e) April 13th, 1937 to May 13th, 1942. 

(f) Current. 


3. Parish Church of Saint Paul, Edmonton 

as at July 14th, 1952. 

A. REGISTERS 

1. S ervice s 

TaT~August~~13th, 1905 to May 3rd, 1908. 

(b) June 7th, 1911 to January 2nd, 1921. 

(c) January 9th, 1921 to September 3rd, 1922. 

2 . Baptism s 

la) June 22nd, 1905 to June 13th, 1910. 

(b) October 2nd, 1910 to December 28th, 1913. 

(c) January 11th, 1916 to September 24th, 1922. 

3. Confirmations 

TaJ~April 5th, 1911 to May 8th, 1921. 

(b) March 3rd, 1912 to April 16th, 1916. 

4 . M a rriages 

XaY December 2nd, 1905 to September 28th, 1910. 

(b) October 7th, 1910 to April 20th, 1913. 

(c) May 10th, 1913 to June 15th, 1922. 

5. Burials 

(a) August 3rd, 1905 to August 15th, 1919. 

(b) May 16th, 1911 to October 13th, 1917. 

(e) September 18th, 1919 to May 1st, 1922. 


B. MI MITES BOOK S 

“^'aF’June 23th, 1905 to January 5th, 1920. 
(b) January 10th, 1921 to July 25th, 1922. 



















* 

* 






, 

i 

. 

. *:■ ■ ' •' 

* 










... 


. 








. « . ■* ;j -Tv'T" 

. , . 






<■ -■ 

«■ > 

























4. Parish Church of Saint Andrew, Edmonton 


as at July 14th, 1952 

A. REGISTERS 
L Services 

[aF September 3rd, 1911 to January 8th, 1922. 

(b) January 1st, 1922 to September 3rd, 1922. 

2. Baptism s 

Ta] October 1st, 1911 to September 9th, 1922. 

3. C o nfirmations 

(a) June 14th, 1914 to 1921. 

4. Marriages 

Taj September 6th, 1911 to July 24th, 1922. 

5. B urials 

TaT^Decamber 24th, 1912 to &uly 4th, 1922. 


B. MINUTE BOOKS 

TaT^January 7th, 1914 to July 24th, 1922. 


5 . Parish Church of Saint Stephen, Edmonton , 

as at July 14 th, 195 2 

A. REGISTER S 

1. Services 

Ta) September 10th, 1922 to July 20th, 1929. 

(b) July 2lst, 1929 to September 24th, 1933. 

(c) October 1st, 1933 to April 11th, 1939. 

(d) Current. 

2. Baptisms 

"TaT”October 15th, 1922 to December 18th, 1938. 

(b) September 15th, 1940 to September 1st, 1946. 

(cj Current* 

5. Confirmati ons 

(a) May 25th, 1924 to June 9th, 1940. 

(b) June 15th, 1941 to July 25th, 1946. 

4. Marriages 

(a) September 22nd, 1923 to October 16th, 1935. 

(b) October 26th, 1935 to May 26th, 1940. 

(c) June , 1940 to July 23rd, 1946. 

(d) Current. 

5. Burials 

(a) October 8th, 1923 to May 25th, 1946. 

(b) Current. 




























B. MINUTE BOOKS 


1. Cong reg ational Meeting s 

"Cal September 12th, 1922 to January 18th, 1938. 

(b) Current. 

2 . Vestry Meeting s 

Cal January 19th, 1923 to March 8th, 1927. 

(b May 10th, 1927 to December 5th, 1933. 

(c) January 30th, 1934 to January 6th, 1941. 

(d) February 2nd, 1941 to December 12th, 1950. 

(e) Current. 


6. Parish of Christ Church. Edmonton , 

as at July 22nd, 1952. 


A. REGISTERS 


1. Service s 

(a) November 7th, 1909 to December 29th, 1912. 

(b) January 5th, 1913 to July 8th, 1923. 

(c) July 15th, 1923 to October 27th, 1931. 

(d) December 31st, 1931 to December 11th, 1938. 

(e) December 18th, 1938 to November 2nd, 1947. 

(f) Current. 


2. B aptisms 

(a) September 9th, 1909 to July 7th, 1918. 

(b) September 1st, 1918 to December 29th, 1946. 

(c) Current. 


5. Confirmation s 

(a) February 27th, 1910 to December 13th, 1944. 

(b) March 16th, 1924 to June 5th, 1927. 

(c) Current. 


4. Marriages 

(a) March 10th, 1910 to July 9th, 1923. 

(b) July 20th, 1923 to December 27th, 1929. 

(c) January 10th, 1930 to June loth, 1940. 

(d) Current. 

(5 ) Burials 

Taj August 23rd, 1910 to November 14th, 1944. 

(b) August 6th, 1923 to November 26th, 1928. 

(c) Current. 


B. MINUTE BOOKS 

1. Congregational Meeti ngs 

(a) March 25th, 1909 to January 13th, 1930. 

(b) January 26th, 1931 to April 28th, 1952. 

(c) Current. 























. 

. . . ■ ■ . 

, 


. 




* 

« 












. 


. 












2. Vestry Mee tings 

(a) December Sp^ET* 1912 to April 7th, 1919. 

(b) May 26th, 1919 to November 22nd, 1927. 

(c) January 3rd, 1928 to December 10th, 1946. 

(d) January 14th, 1947 to December 6th, 1949. 

(e) Current. 


7. Parish Church of Saint Andrew, Camrose 

as at May 3rd, 1952 


A. REGISTERS 

1. Services 

fa] October 28th, 1906 to December 26th, 1915. 
(includes services at rural centres) 

(b) January 7th, 1934 to June 11th, 1949. 

(c) Current. 

2. Baptism s 

(a) November 27th, 1904 to June 9th, 1929. 

(b) Current. 

5. Confirmatio n8 

To) January 15th, 1905 to April 19th, 1936. 

(b) Current. 

4 . Marriages 

Ta) April 15th, 1909 to February 14th, 1928. 

(b) Current 

5 . BuriaJs 

raT~February 18th, 1909 to April 17th, 1952. (Current) 

B. MINUTE BOOKS 

”Ta) November 30th, 1910 to November 5th, 1922. 


8. Parish Church of Saint Dunstan» Bittern Lake. 

as at May 3rd, 1952. 

A. REGIST ERS 
1. Services 

fa) June 3rd, 1906 to February 5th, 1922. 

(b) January 6th, 1924 to December 29th, 1935. 

(c) Current. 

B. MINUTE BOOKS 

(a) February 24th, 1905 to April 30th, 1911. 

(b) September 19th, 1915 to January 17th, 1926. 






















. .: ■■■■ 

' 

. 






. 

■ 





, 













’ K> 


■ 







■< 






9» Pariah Church o f Saint George, Fort Saskatch e wan 


as at July 9th, 1952. 

A # REGISTERS 
1 * Services 

(a) November 29th, 1931 to June 25th, 1950. 

(b) Current. 

2. ‘Baptisms 

Tal September 6th, 1894 to December 26th, 1911. 
(b) Current. 

3. Confirmations 

TaT May 11th, 1897 to June 9th, 1912. 

(b) Current. 

4. Marriages 

(aV January 21st, 1895 to February 7th, 1912. 

(b) Current. 

5. Burials 

(a^ September 2nd, 1894 to December 22nd, 1911. 
(b) Current. 

B. MIMITE BOOK S 

IT one available during writer’s visit. 


10. Parish Church of Sai nt George, Killam , 

as at July 51st, 1952 

A. REGISTERS 

1 . Service s 

TaT^January 4th, 1914 to present date. 

2. Baptisms 

(b) February 9th, 1908 to present date. 

3. Confirmation s 

TaJ^June 30th, 1912 to present date. 

4. Marriages 

(a) July 15th, 1919 to present date. 

5. Burials 

(a) September 6th, 1918 to present date. 

B. MIHUTE BOOKS 

(aT^pr iT~25th, 1911 to present date. 

Fote - this information was obtained by correspondence, 
and is probably not complete. 


























11, Parish Churc h of the Holy Trin it y, Tof ield, 


as at May 1st, 1952>. 

A, REGISTERS ~ “ 

1. Services 

(a) November 30th, 1924 to December 31st, 1942. 

(b) Current. 

2. Baptisms 

XaT January 19th., 1896 to January 30th, 1935, 

(b) Current. 

5. Confirm a tion s 

(a.| September 11th, 1898 to September 10th, 1936. 
(b) Current. 

4 * Marriages 

X a ) December 24th, 1896 to September 3rd, 1919. 
(b) Current. 

5. Burials 

(a) January 28th, 1896 to December 10th, 1936. 

(b) Current. 

B. MINUTE BOOK S 

faT^April 25th, 1927 to July 5th, 1942. 

(b) January 31st, 1943 to October 30th, 1949. 

(c) Current. 


12. Parish Chur c h o f Saint John, Sedgewick , 

as at July 31st, 195 2 

A. REGISTERS 

1. Services 

T^r^January 6th, 1918 to present date. 

2 . Baptism s 

r5T~January 1st, 1910 to present date. 

5. C o nfirmations 

XaT June 30th, 1912 to present date. 

4. Marriages 

(a) July 12th, 1906 to present date. 

5 . Burials 

Xa) October 5th, 1906 to present date. 

B. MINUTE BOOKS 

Bone listed. 

Bote - this information was obtained by correspondence, 
and is probably not complete. 





















e 

t • 

• 

. 

. 

■ 

* 1 . ■ <| 

■ 


. 


. 

. 

* 

r 


, 


- 
















