

0k 




For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Universal Bindery 

BOOKBINDING - GOLD LETTERING 
Edmonton, Alberta 


















£5 IS 

1145 

THS UNIVERSITY 0? ALBFHTA 


\ 

THE BEGIE17IH& ADIS GB0W53 02* 
TEE ALBUSTA SCHOOL SYSTEM 


A DISSERTATION 


III PARTIAL FJLPILJOTT 01? TI:? FOR 

THE D55SBEE OF MASTIC OF EBUGATIOH 


FACULTY OF FLCOATXOH 


(■ 


XSXS0&3 WP^Kf 


mmro . a ? . . rta 

MAY, i5’;-4 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


LIST OF TABLES iv 

LIST OF HOUSES v 

Chapter 

Z. EAKLI MISSION SCHOOLS IN THE PlOTUCL OF ALBERTA 1 

The Hudson* s Bay Company Changes Its Policy 1 

Missions and Missionaries of the Catholic Church 2 

Missions and Missionaries of the Protestant Church 7 

Weakness and Strength of Early Fission Work 14 

ii. the onic : iK..iss2) mrsussusm of a Itatb mzzm 16 

The North-West Territories Act s 1371 16 

The North-West Territories Act*1375, IT 

The Petition from St .Laurent 20 

The First State-Aided Schools 24 

III. THE BOARD OF EDUCATION (XBS5-133S) 30 

The Oliver Bill 30 

Tho Board of Education in the Hew School System 34 

ITHE BOARD OF EDUCATION BT THE STRUGGLE FOR 

RESPONSIBLE GOFERMFNT 45 

The Struggle for Responsible Govermont 45 

The Board of Education 43 

Inspectors ' 53 

Qualifications of Teachers 54 

School Grants 57 

Secondary Education ‘ 59 

Inspectors* Reports 63 

Conclusion 64 

V. ESTABLISHMENT OF STATE CONTROL - THE COUNCIL OF 

PUBLIC INSTRUCTION 65 


The School Ordinance* 1892 
Th© Superintendent of Education 
D--"" •/.' : for Normal School Training 
Amendments to the School Ordinance* 1395 
Criticism of the Council of Public Instruction 
Popularity of the Super! vhmdeni 
Progressive Thinking In the Aon. ably 
The End of the Plonc r - a;. 


70 

72 

73 
75 
77 
79 
SO 


3 6813 


ii 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/beginninggrowthoOOisid 


VI. THE PEEPAMTIOH FOR PR07IS0I--I. (T'i:l-I905) 


Department of Education 
Educational Council 
Separate -Schools 
School Grants 
Problems of Ministration 
The Autonomy Bills, 1905 


8?. 

83 

83 

84 
87 
89 


vii. developi, err OF THE EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM (1905-1921) 99 


The Ukrainian National Group 99 

Other National Groups 3.02 

The Problem of Teacher Shortage 103 

First Attempt to Encourage Teachers 107 

School Grants 110 

Vocational Schools 111 

Consolidated Schools 112 

Secondary Schools 113 

Attendance 114 

Inspectors 116 

School Libraries 116 

Conclusion 117 

VIII. THE TEACHER AS A PROBLEM HI ADEHIIS^TIOH 119 

Reasons for the Coning Struggle 119 

Residences and Two-Room Schools 120 

Teacher Training 121 

Provision for Secondary Education 123 

Inspectoral Staff v 125 

School Libraries 127 

- School Grants 128 

The Problem of Examinations, 131 

Pensions for Teachers 132 

Teachers 1 Contracts ’ 134 

Board of Reference 138 

Professional Status 141 

IX. THE LARGER UNIT OF SCHOOL ADWISTRATION 144 








LIST OP TABLTSS 


I. 

Summary 

of School Statistics, 

issb -1904 

Page 

85 

It. 

Summary 

of School Statistics, 

1905-1943 

129 



- iv - 







Figure 


Page 


!•* Early Map of the Western Pi Pug 


o 



— X — 


CHAPTER I 

FARCY MISSION SCHOOLS IM THF PE0VIUCH OF ALIA1TA 

The ez rly history of education in that rt of the North -lest 
Territories which is now Alberta is the history of the onrev mission rios 
end of the missions established by thorn* Records of this o rly period are 
already meagre end living witnesses to it re fast disappe-ring* A few 
monuments remain in the form of old mission honors, one of the host preserved 
of which is located at St. Albert, a for mil - r north of Edmonton, Soure of 
information regarding the pioneer efforts in education ore 'confined largely 
to personal letters and diaries of missionaries, and to casual r'-cord.spln J r.e 
files of various religious end missionary organisation. Specific re ■ -rrcnc-r 
to these will bo mode in footnotes. 

The records, though meagre, ere sufficient to reveal in c f r out¬ 
line the high courage and energy of men who as missionaries and educators 
faced one severest kinds of hardship and privation with > all too often, ■ 
minimum of preparation end frequently with a minimus of support * Phy :-ic, 1 
eccommod&tion for educational activities p.v s usually of the^ructest: a circle 
around a campfire, a smoke-fillec! .tent, at best a room in a fort. The good¬ 
will of the Indian chiefs was usually to be count' d upon, if for no other 
reason than that some fear might bo put into the hearts of uzmry warriors. 
The chiefs themselv s looked forward to the visits of anyone who brought them 
n v/s of the outside world. ' The trading companies were less imp res sod with 
the bone fits to be deriv'd fros the services -of the mitssionaries. 

The Hudson* 3 Bay Company Changes its Policy 
x From 1/40 onward the Hudson*a Ray ^ompr-ny promoted the policy of 
establishing missions amongst the Indians and of encour ping the activities 
of missionaries. The impulse behind this av parent altruism v s probably 





to bo found in the voice of criticism rising in England touching the n cord- 

i 

of'overseas trading companies. sThere was also the fact that the Compcri ~r 
had been forced to abandon some of its trading posts in ere'', overrun by 
warring Indian tribes, A minimum of astuteness vjso re-uired for Company 
officials to see that any abatement of Indian fighting temper would be 
likely to stimulate fur trading, 

^The first missions were established along the North Easksteha :-n 
and Mackenzie basins, at .'web : points as Lac La Biche, Lac Ste. Anna, --nd 
Smoking Lake, The rivers provided natural highways for the canoe, the local 
tribes-mainly Cree- snddothers who spoke Gree-were friendly, and xurs were 
relatively abundant• The region south of the Saskatchewan, at least as far 
as the Battle River, was a t5 No Man 8 s Land”, the battleground of the Cree 
and the Blackfoot, Most of the Company trading posts, and consesusntly the 
missions, were located at a coupr re tively S" fa distance north of the Sask¬ 
atchewan* 

Missions and Missionaries of the Catholic Church 

' The first priests, on whose identity the records are clear, were 

Father Demers r nd Blanchet, who arrived at Fort Edmonton in 183S. Of the 

visits of earlier Jesuit missionaries to the Western lands there remain 

only vague traditions among a few Indian tribes. Father Morice doubts the 

authenticity of such traditions and suggests rather that elements of Catholic 

teaching were introduced by Irocmois Indians in the employ of the trading 

2 

companies end by French voyageurs from Eastern Canada. 


Martin, R.M., "The Hudson 
London, England; h,W, h r: , ■ ,,. .1349* 


Bay Terri 


x VO¬ 


S'nd Vancouver Island, 1 


2. Moric 


A.G. Rev., n History of the Catholic Church in Western Caned-* / 


--- y ~ y ^ — W** - . ^ ' -- W** 

Tpronto, Ontario; Ilusscn Mah Comr;-ny f , Ago.,, 1910 







































“ p - 


In 1842 Father Thibault rrived at Lae .'-to. Anne and charing the 
following year established the Ste. Anne Mission. His period of service 
w 2 brief and little was done in education. His successor, Father Bourasse, 
spent most of his time in winning the goodwill of tho Crea and Blackfoot 
Indians, a goodwill which contributed greatly in subsequent years to the 
success of the Catholic work amongst the native peoples* 

s In 1852 Father Lacombe arrived at Fort Edmonton where he spent 
a reasonably comfortable year studying Cree and trying his bend at teaching 
both young and old within the fort. Every day he recorded his progress in 
mastering the language and set down the principles T/hich he had learned* In 
subse' uent years he prepared and published a Cree dictionary. 

The Edmonton fort and settlement at this time were described by 
Captain Palliser in papers published in 1859* 

”In shape it is an irregular hexagon, about 100 yards long nd 70 
yards vide, and contains a population of about 40 men, 30 women and 80 

children.Little agriculture is carried on about Fort Edmonton 

owing partly to the want of acquaintance with even the leading princi les 
of agriculture and principally from the disinclination of both men end women 
to work steadily at any agricultural occupation*"! 

According to the Edmonton Bulletin the inhabitants consisted of 

2 

Qrkneymen, French Canadians, and Metis, with Cree as a common language. 

Father Lacombo mentions the difficulties he encountered with the 
overbearing attitude of the Company^ officers, especially those of a different 
faith; but he admits that no mission work would hove been possible without the 
aid extended by the Company* He reports • that the missionary did not dare to 
discuss the ethics of the fur trade* These difficulties led him to change his 


I. Palliser, J. Capt., "Papers Relative to the Exploration by Captain Palliser," 
London, England: George TTllii- r • • ) and VIM 1 -m r-t-ti nwood. 1859 p*H6. 

2* Edmonton Bulletin, December 27, 1884* 

4 







- 4 - 


•residence to Ste. Anne, but ho continued travelling, helping Father Romas 
to establish the mission at Lac Le Biche in 1S54, end visiting the Blackfoot 
in 1857* His success was such that Bishop Tache was delighted to find the 

Indians behaving so well at Ste, Anne after the scenes of debauchery he had 

I 

witnessed at Fort Pitt, 

'From about 1859 there began a period of continuous effort in 
education. In that year three nuns arrived rt Lac Ste. Anne. In the next 
year a Blackfoot chief took advantage of the visit of the Bishop to ask for 
a missionary among his people. This influenced Father Lacombe,to move nearer to 
Edmonton, and with the Bishop 9 3 blessing a new settlement v/rs begun rt St. 

Albert in 1861. This post became the centre of a Metis settlement. In the 
meantime, Father Ltcoi.be took advantage of the presence of an oblate novice 
to begin a school at Fort Edmonton for the children of the Company* s clerks 
and servants. Many of the children, - c cording to Father La combe, wore deer¬ 
skin garments and carried lumps of pemmicon or dried meat in their pockets as 
dainties* At the sound of the vcyag-rursv songs they flew like arrows from 
bows to welcome the brigade home* Jeon gunshot signals arose from the south 

side they rushed to see what stranger would return in the boat sent across 
2 

from the fort. 

The settlement at St. Albert as of 1863 was described by Viscount 
Milton and W* B* dies.dies 

n At Lake St. Alban*s about nine males north of the Fort, a colony 
of freemen have formed a small settlement which is presided over by a Romish 
priest..... 

*&The priest*3 house was a pretty white building with a garden 
around it and adjoining the chapel, a school nd c nunnery.*’ 


I . Frog Lake 

2. Hughes, Katherine, ’’Father Lacc-me, The Black Robe Voyageur,” 
Toronto. Ontario: McLelland and Stuart. 1920 
































































- 5 - 


n Iie built a chapel and estalli 

children.it must be confess 

their Protestant brethren in missionary 


shed schools for the hrlforeed 
ed the Romish priests far oneel 
enter-rise arid influence. 17 


The missionary work of the Church went on apace*. Father La combe 


built a house and chapel for himself at Fort Edmonton next to the Big House 


where the Government Building3 now stand* He organized a colony of Cree 
Indians on the banks of the Saskatchewan half way between Edmonton and Fort 
Pitt, which he called St. Paul dee Gris. To- this colony in 186.5, he trans¬ 
ported from St. Libert fifty bushels of seed-;;:;, in, a plow, and provisions* 

His purpose was to organize a second Grae settlement duplicating that at ft. 
Alberta. 

Having thus completed the framework of an organization along the 
banks of the Saskatchewan, Father Lacoir.be proceeded to extend his work into 
the territory of the Blackfoot Indians south of the river. He told his 
biographer that he found the Blackfoot less docile than the Cree, but on the 
other hand they responded much more readily to an appeal based on logic. By 
way of illustrating the meaning of Christianity, he invented the famous 

O 

Ladder, a copy of which may still be • und in St. Albert, But in spite of all 
his-I-hours he discovered that enduring result could be accomplished only 
through the establishment of Indian Schools. To raise funds for this pur¬ 
pose he journeyed to Eastern Canada only to find that the Church h d other 
plans for him. His missionary work in the West was interrupted for many 
years. 


1. Milton, Viscount, md Cheadly, TIB., ,f Hortb-W- t Passage by Lend, 17 
London. EnwLands Caswell, Pot -aid G'B~'v~ru 1865• 

2. Chief Factor's house built by F- etor Rowe/nd. 

3. A colored poster depicting stori . from the Bible. 






Aa.s'iurboim 


- 6 - 

FIGTJK2 X 



Palliser, J., Copt. 9 Paper s Polative to the ISnploration hy Captain Pallia or 9 # 
Tendon. rn^lnnd? George William }>ro md ffiHiawt S-oottiswood * 1S59 p#l l6* 






















/ 

s' s 

f I 

V sv 

:, vO / 

V ( 

\ ^ 




a *°JC 




J0 

'»'Vy\ - V V 








< \y 

N / <j< 
<< 

i 

, J ^ 

j * * 

** 



K 


•s 

i 

<5 




> 

f 

§ 

$ 

| 

_C * < 


^'wkjh, 

' %>> Hu/J. 










V; StJ 






/ 


~v 




/! 


-rfi 


■j # #^ 


r 


*gb>" •* w\\v'' '‘-VP' - , 

:#^ V .‘if *■ ::\i ;■$' 

i; 


ilativo to the Exploration "by Captain Pallicor 0 , 
an IVre and 'fill jam Sr.^tMciTood . 18^9 p*Xl6* 
























- 7 _ 


Missions and Missionaries of the Protestant Church 

xThe first Protestant missionaries in the present province of 
Alberta were sent by the authorities of British Methodism. C-eorge hi Epson 
had his attention directed t o the state of Indian missions by Rev. James 

Bvahs who was stationed at a post in the western portion of Upper Canada. 

I 

Five missionaries, were employed. In the minutes of the Council held at 
Norway House on June IB, 1840, there is the following resolution: 

"That three missions be established in the Northern Department for 

this season——say one at Norway House* .••••..•• .and one r.t Ed: nut.on under 

the charge of Rev. Mr. Bundle 

There is also a reference to the stipends of the missionaries: 

11 That the gentleman in charge of York Factory be directed to 
issue an extra Commissioned Gent lemon* s Allowance for tie use of the 
mission. 

Ait the next meeting of the Council on the twenty-fourth of June 
the Chief Factors were instructed to give every assistance to missionaries 
in travelling. 

x Rev. Robert Bundle arrived on September, 1840, to take charge of 
the whole Saskatchewan Basin. He does not seem to have been in my w?y 
fit a a for the hardships he was to endure. He had to undergo severe 
physical suffering, and his lack of success with the Indians \t s very dis¬ 
heartening. He felt his failure.keenly because of the arrival of two 
Roman Catholic priests, Father de Smett, and later "Mr." Thibault. 

The latter especially seemed to have qualities which drew the Indians to him. 


1. "Bundle, R.T., "Extracts from the Journal of Rev. Robt. Terril R-iidle." 
Typewritten diary in the possession of the Legislative Library, 
Government Buildings, Edmonton, Alberto... 

2. Oliver, E.H., "The Canadian. Ncsrth-West, Vol. 2, " Ottawa. Out: riot 

Public:.ti no of the CanadR'ii . rcAIves, ,A)._ A t Ott-v-w Printing Bureau* 

1914, P.813. 


3> Ibid., P.814 


















































~ 8 - 


In spite of his difficulties. Bundle '.eft a lr ating influence 
which his -successors readily ' cle v . . •• 3god, :lo setter how short a ' oriod 
the Indians spent near the fort £» -...niy sought opportunities to meet 

the adults, but also called the children logoi her to to ch them whatever 
was possible under the circumstance a. Twenty y. rs later John V, clougall 
described Maskepetoon, an Indian Chief and a pupil of Bundle. 1 2 s who might 
have been a credit to any race of people. He had actually mastered the 
Cree alphabet and learned taread the: Gospels in Cree# Through the 
nobility of his character he'-exerted a re12u.1ke.ble ascendency over the whole 
Cree nation. For one so ill-trained for western life. Bundle travelled 

over a very wide area. At one period we find him w instructing the children 

I 2 

of the fort in the elements of Christianity. n Three weeks later he is 
carrying on'lessons with Indian children somewhere on the Battle River. In 
the next year he started a school for a short period.at Lesser SI ve Lake. 

Only Father Lacombe, of all the missionaries, can be compared with Bundle in 
the range of territory covered. 

Bundle*s work in the field of education was not extensive. The 
Indians seldom remained long enough anywhere to permit the building of 
school or church. Schooling was at best secondary to missionary work and 
Bundle was primarily a missionary. He vs recalled to Fa stem Canada in IS 46 . 

Upon the departure of Bundle the far west w?s left without any 
Prot stant missionaries until 1855* v In that year Rev. Thomas Woblsey was 


1. Fort Edmonton. 

2. Bundle, R.T., n Extracts from, the Journal of Reis. Eobt. Terrill Bundle. 11 
Legislative Library, Government Buildings, Edmonton, Alberta. 


Ibid 








- 9 - 


sent to Edmonton end Rev. H. B. Steinhauer went to establish a mission at 

I 

Whitefish Lake# Their advent meant the establishment of closer relations 

with the Canadas. While it is generally known that our system of education 

\ 

yj; s obtained from Ontario, few realise that our early missionaries were 
intimately associated with the Byerson brothers in their work amongst the 
Indians in Ontario at Rama and elsewhere* Steinhauer himself was one of the 
Indians among whom Egerton Byerson had been a missionary* Woolsey li d been 
ordained at Rams.* 


Woolsey did not have much opportunity to establish cny permanent 
missions, though he visited Figeon Lake and Smoking: Lake. John McDougall 
doscribed him as a very gentle sort of person totally unfitted by training 


and experience for the hardships of pioneer life. On the other hand, 


Steinhauer had no difficulty in adapting himself to the new conditions 
find him establishing a permanent settlement at Whitefish Lake almost 
immediately* It was the custom in early missionary work to apprentice 
novice to teaching. Taking advantage of this practice on the arrival 


. We 


of a 


novice at his mission Steinhauer established a school. Its success 


attracted the notice of visitors to the colony; On his visit to the 


school Dr. Grant eulogized the efforts of the Methodists because of the 
establishment of schools among the Indians, declaring this to be the only 
lasting work* At an exhibition held in the Whitefish School on the occasion 
of his visit, the pupils surprised him with their attainment in the common 
school subjects. The report of Mr; Snyder* the teacher, showed that he had 
eighty names on the roll; Fortunately for his school the Indians could 
spend a good deal of their time in the settlement since the fish were plentiful 


2 . 


Bundle, R. T 
^Legislative 


55 Extract3 from the Journal 
Library, Government Building 


of Rev. Robt. Terrill 
s, Edmonton, Alberta. 


Bundle, 





































































- 10 - 


while the territory was inaccessible to the war—parties ot tlu; marauaing 
Blackfoot. As it was, both Mr. Snyder ; nd Mr. Stoinhaucr followed their 
charges even on the annuel buffalo hunt, teaching p. it of the time and 
hunting the rest. This w s the most successful Prot stant mission of the 
time, approaching in its stability even that of ; t» Albert. 

N Tho outstanding achievements in the establishment of mission 
schools must, however, be credited to the efforts of the McDougells, 
father and son. George McDougall, the father, was another son of Ontario 
to take up the Protestant cause in the West. Though he started late in life 
as a missionary in the same field as others in Ontario, he vw s appoint' d m 

I860 as W C hairman of the District embracing the mission stations of the 
Wesleyans* in Western Canada. His determination is noticeable from the 

energetic way in which he took control. Leaving his family at Norway House 
in 1862, he and his son John set out on a visit of inspection to the mission 
at Whitefish Lake and to a new one at Smoking Lake just established by 


Woolsey. 

At Smoking Lake the McDougalls found only a. small house and a 
roofless stable. Woolsey had established the mission far enough north cf the 
Saskatchewan River to be out of reach of the Blackfoot. Join McDougall 
estimated the distance t> be about thirty five miles north of the Saskatchewan 
River but this was an exaggeration* The ruins of the two buildings which 
wore found by later settlers were about twenty two miles away from the river. 
With characteristic resolution George McDougsll ordered the removal of the 
mission to the banks of the North Saskatchewan where Pakan now stands and re¬ 
named it Victoria. 


During the next two year; 


mi'Sion house and a school wore built 




















- II - 


by the McDougalls on the new site* Hr* Connor, a trader, tvs hired for 
the first year to teach the children of the McDougalls, the Steinhrtr-rs, 
and any Indian children in the neighborhood. Connor was drowned on a trip 
to Lac La Biche a year 1- ter, but a permanent teacher, Mr. Mackenzie, wa.s 
obtained from Winnipeg. He had been educated at St. John 1 s College in 
Winnipeg end later took holy orders in the -Anglican Church. Both Mrs. Young 
and Mrs* Wood, the only surviving daughters of George Mcgougal" , remember 
quite well the type of teaching. School was opened with the Lord 1 s Prayer, 
but there w s little formal religious teaching. The books were Ontrrio text¬ 
books and the subjects ware those taught in Alberta until a few years ago. 
Connor, of course, was only a trader serving ag teacher for the time being. 


probably talcing this method of paying his board, bill. On the other hand, 

Mackenzie was a trained teacher*. Mrs. Young and Mrs. Wood, in conver. ation 
Tdth the writer in 1933, paid special tribute to his ability in music. It 
seems that soon after their arrival there w s a large influx of English and 
Scotch half breeds from the Red River. The' children made a welcome addition 
to the choir which Mr* Mackenzie was training. Dr. Grant paid his usit at 

'tvy. : a ..dd;v. . V. X' : X %d..,|b -p d" ax. x X 'S; ■. y x . ".... x. , \ 

this time after he had left Whitefish Lake. In his book he noted that there 

were sixty children on the roll, forty halfbreed and twenty Indian. Apparently 
ho visited the colony just as Eh** Mackenzie w s leaving to make place for 
Mr. Snyder from Whitefish Lake. Such wore the beginnings of education in 
Alberta« 

After the smallpox epidemic in 1370 the McDougalls moved from 
Victoria to Edmonton where a.night school was opened. To this night school 
came not only the children of the employees, but the employees too. Comment 
might be mad© on the short sight edhelRPof the Hudson* s Bay Company in fail¬ 
ing to provide forth© educational needs of the community. Presumably, 




































































however, the conditions of life inse ed limit. and diet: trd prioritir 
The absence of a garden was noted by Mrs.' Young, who states though th* t for 
successful venture in gardening thers was too little room inside the fort 
walls and too many marauding Indians outside them. George McDougeJLl forth¬ 
with opened a school and planted a garden. His young daughter, now Mrs. 
Leslie Wood, with some pride but with much fe- r, took tearsorary charge of 


the school. 


It is fitting at this point in the narrative to attempt an estimate 

of Georgs McDougall 1 s efforts in the field of education. Had he been one of 

the foremost educators of his time, he could not have labored more diligently 

or more successfully. However, he vr »« a simple man with very little of the 

learning that is considered necessary in a teacher of the present day. He 

had begun as a pioneer farmer, and had seen the vision which grew with the 

\ 

education he received. To the end of his life, schooling remained a part of 
his religion, as did all progress^ Hierever he established a mission centre 


the school immediately followed the church; rather the school was within the 
church. Immediately on the appointment of the missionary there followed 
usually the appointment of a school teacher. The teaching, 'furthermore* was 


not confined to the, ordinary school subjects, but included an attempt to 
acquaint both adults and children with.farming methods, especially those 
fitted to a pioneer country. In this he followed the sound example set by 
Father Lacombe* (There is evidence that John visited both St. Albert and 
Lac La Biche to obtain grain and cl ;ickens for Victoria*) And who could have 
passed on these methods better than this eminently practical man whose 
experiences had never been divorced from pioneer life? In these efforts he 
not only worked himself but enlisted the help of his children* 










































































































- 13 - 


The later history of the methodists ns educator can he dis¬ 
missed very briefly. There is no reference to any school established e.t Pigeon 
Lake though John McDougell began his work there in 1865. Victoria became 
a Hudson’s Bay post in IS 64 . Wooisey returned to Ontario that same year 
after having-spent nine years in the territory. In 1867 a new missions ry 
arrived in the person of Rev. Peter Campbell, who was first stationed at 

Edmonton and later at Victoria. With Campbell also came the two Snyders 

\ 

who taught in the mission schools. In 1872 a conference was held at 
Winnipeg at which John McDougall a. s Instructed t o establish a mission in the 
southern part of the province. He chose a eight where Morley now stands. 

The mission was primarily built for the Stoney Indiana but it was also in¬ 
tended to reach the Blackfoot who were gradually being tamed bp- the dis¬ 
appearance of the buffalo and the terrible inroads of the epidemic of small¬ 
pox which destroyed half of the Indian popul tion in 1870. The first 
teacher at this mission was a Dr. Yorey of wh on we hear later a : the first 
teacher in Edmonton in the employ of a voluntary organization of citizens. 
Unfortunately, the southern school did not achieve the success of other 
schools since the Stoney Indians were and still remain a nation of hunters• 

An orphanage was attempted but later closed. A mission expressly for the 
Blackfoot was established in Fort Mncleod in 1880. Unfortunately for its 
future as an Indian mission Fort E-.e-leod soon became a white settlement. 

During this period we mu.,t remember that the Catholic Church wns^. 
already established in the southern p; rt of what is now Alberta. When 
John McDougall founded the Morley Mission, he found Father Oeollen already 
at work in tbe neighborhood. Father Lacombe had been visiting the Black- 
foot for years, and missions had oeen planted, by tne Catholics t :: oth Fox*t 














































































- 14 - 


Hacleod rnd Calgary. 

Weakness and Strength of Early Mission Work 
This short account mst end the history of educational effort 
among the Indians. Great as were ah efforts and sacrifices of the religious 

pioneers, the me,.in stream of educe.i.Lena 1 'progress sprang from a new source 

\ 

with the immigration of white settlers during the eighties. 'Individual 

enterprise, however brilliant, has never 'been able to approach state effort 

\ 

in the magnitude of its achievement 'tor must we overestimate the level 
of education actually achieved durt ig t,:ii . early period. The work was at 
best primary as judged. by our present standards, For a higher education, 
even Mcfouga.ll was forced to send his children to a boarding school in the 
East. In some of the schools Cree wcs taught as well as English and French. 
With the limited amount of time .at the disposal of teacher and pupil, very 
little more than basic reading rnd writing was possible. Wisely, the early 
missionaries were more intent upon tarching the Indian how to live than upon 
forcing theoretical book-learning upon him. 

There has been-a tendency on the p rt of some people to minimize 
this effort of the early missionaries in the field of education, but, with all 
our vaunted progress, we have not been able to do much more in our modem 
Dominion Indian Schools. Indians who were settled cround missions and taught 
farming methods by Father Laeonbe, and, to a lesser extent, by the McBougalis 
~nd the Steinhauers, remain settled to the present day. IIo amount of teaching 
in the use of modern machinery has been able to do more and it must be ad¬ 
mitted that the white educator has been far less successful with the American 
Indian than he has, for example, with the New Zealand Maori. 




On tho other hand we cr:Mc>z c.bwc'..v;- the early missionaries 

from blame for some of the lack of success- Very often their seel to 

advance the interests of their a nticulrr chair cl blinded them to the 

effect competition would have on the Indians. Here and there throughout 

the writing of John HcDougall fear and diotruct of the Catholic Church 
\ 

creep through. The whole busine: cf Ca tholic- Protestant rivalry was 
probably bewildering to the Indians and mast have made them more reluct an' 
to accept Christian! t y which would bring school end settled life. 








- 16 - 

CHAPTER II 


THE ORIGIN .MID DOT&OPMENT OF A STATE SYSTEM 

x By an Order in Council of the British Government dr ted June 23, 
1370, ’Rupert* s Land and the North-West Territory became a wart of the 
Dominion of Canada end the. parliament of Canada obtained full rights to 

legislate for the future welfare and good government” of the inhabitants 

I 

of this territory. This order merely confirmed the agreement in April, 

1869, betv-'^n the Canadian Government and the Hudson* s Bay Company which the 

Imperial Government had sponsored. Immediately following the agreement 

and the Red River Rebellion the Province of Manitoba was established by rn 

act which received the assent of the Governor-General on May 12, 1870. The 

2 

clause limiting the territory in question reads as follows: 

11 And with respect to such portion of Rupert*s Land and the North- 
Western Territory, as is not included in the Province of Manitoba, it is 
hereby enacted, that the Lieutenant-Governor of the said province shall be 
appointed by Commission under the Great .Seal of Canada, to be the Lieutenant- 
Governor of the same, under the'name of the North-West Territories, and sub¬ 
ject to the provisions of the act in the ne^rt section mentioned.” 

The North-West Territories Act, 1871. 

\ 

In the following year the North-West Territories Act provided a. 
government for this territory consisting of s council of twelve members with, 
tho Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba as president of the council. Though its 
powers were but vaguely defined, the Council proceeded forthwith to legislate 


1. Oliver, 35 . H., Prof., **The Canadian North-West, Vol. 11”, Qttrw-, OrvAr a: 
Publications of the Canadian Archives, No. 9. Government Printing Bureau, 

1^5 7"?p” 939-944:--;- 

2. The Krnftobs. ?ct, Statute? of Cf-a-da, 1370, cfc. 3. 

3. An. Act to mnhe further provision for the Government of the North-West 
Territories, Statutes of Canada, 1870, ch. 16. 
















. 























- 17 - 


on such matters as it thought necessary for good government in the 
territory. It also sought to impress upon the Dominion Government the 

importance of proceeding immediately with Indian Treaties. Among other 

I 

recommendations we find the following! 

H ..the treaty should provide for the establishment of 

Schools for the education of Indians, for the purchase of agricultural 
implements, cattle, and also for teaching the Indians the proper mode of 
cultivating the soil.* 1 

v Other acts provided for the regulation of schools maintained in 

the North-West Territories by voluntary contributions und r the control 

of the different religious bodies. These institutions were maintained 

2 

primarily for Indian orphans. One clause enacted that these schools were 

bound to provide w proper nutriment, medical care, clothing and education.. 

.......until such child reach the age of sixteen years. R There is no 

record of any debate as to the inability of any school to provide the above. 

The provision was probably a formal one inserted to protect children over 

whom special rights were granted in these institutions. 

The North-West Territories Act, 1875 

X In 1875 Alexander Mackenzie introduced a new bill dealing 

with the government of the North-West Territories. By this time the 

importance of the region west of Manitoba had increased sufficiently to 

require a separate seat of government and a separate governor. The bill 

3 

also provided for a new Council not exceeding five members. Notwithstanding 

% 

any ideas of the increasing importance of this territory which the 
Dominion Government might have, the difficulties of government during this 


1 . 


2 . 


Oliver, E.H., Prof.., R The 
and Legislative Records, 11 
1915. p. 123* 

Ibid., pp. 1034-1035 

The North-West Territorie; 


Canadian North-West - Its Early Development 
Qtta Ontario: Government Printing Bureau 


of Canada, 1875, ch. 45. 


JL 


3 










r.,'"" : 


































































. 





















































period prevented it from takings further action so that the act was not 

proclaimed until a year Is.ter. The new Council was appointed in October* 

1276 , It consisted of the governor, the Hon. David Laird* the two 

stipendiary magistrates of the IJorth-Tfest Territories and tfc« Commissioner 

X 

of the Horth-Vest Counted Police. ‘Hie view of the government at Ottawa 
with respect to this Council is evident from the clause of the act which 
outlined the duty of the Governor. He was Ho administer the Government 
under instructions from time to time given him 'by Orders-in-Council or by 
the Secretary of State”* The duty of the Council was Ho aid the Lieutenant- 
Governor in the administration of the Korth-Rest Territories.” 

The first Council met at Livingstone, Swan Biver, where the north¬ 
west Mounted Police were quartered, and remained there while other premises were 
being erected at Battleford. The -four members were the following: 

Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Richardson, Matthew Ryan* Lieutenant Colonel 
James F. McLeod, and the governor himself. In addition, Arae&ee 2. Lorget 
was appointed Clerk of the Council. All members were sworn in on November 
27 , IS 76 , within two months of the proclamation of the act. 

Two sections of this Jforih-West Act merit our special consideration. 

One deals specifically with the power of the Council with respect to 

education. This section (11) reads as follows: 

\ 

H Vhen, and so soon as any system, of taxation shall be adopted, in 
any district or portion of the ITorth-West Territories, the Lieutenant- 
Governor by andVith the consent ox the Council or Assembly, as the case 
may be, shall pass all necessary ordinances in r< spect to education; but it 
shall therein be always provided tlr t r majority of the ratepayers of any 
district or -oortion of the Morth-Most Territories or .any lesser portion or 
subdivision thereof, by whatever name- the same be known, may establish such 


1. Brown, J-pmes, w Education in the Horth-tfest, IS 9 IH 1 2 (TJjrp©written copy 
of article published in The Winnipeg Monthly Journal, 1^91) Legislative 
Library• Government Buildings, Sdmonton, Alberta. 

2. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, 1877. 

































































. 















- 19 - 


schools therein as they may think fit, and make the necessary assessment 
and collection of taxes therefor, and further that the minority of the 
ratepayers therein, whether Protestant' or Catholic, may establish separate 
schools therein, and that, in such latter case, the ratepayer*?? establishing 
such Protestant or Homan Catholic separate schools shall be liable only to 
th<^ assessments of such rates p s they may impose upon themselves in respect 
thereof » u 

She other section ( 13 ) is worthy of mention because it indirectly 

' s. 

affected the establishment of school districts later on. It provided for 
the erection of electoral districts by the proclamation of the Lieutenant- 
Governor as soon as any district of the territories not exceeding one 
thousand miles in area should contain a population of one thousand inhabitants 
of adult age, exclusive of aliens or unenfranchised Indians, Should the 
population of the district Increase to two thousand, the act provided that 
such inhabitants should bo entitled to elect a second representative, When 
the number of all members elected amounted to twenty-one, the appointed 
Council was to cea.se its existence and the elected members were to Constitute 
the Legislative Assembly of the Horth-West Territories and all the powers 
vested by this act in the Council were to be henceforth vested in and 
exercised by the Legislative Assembly, 

* s From the above we can see that it was the purpose of Parliament 
p” 

to establish separate schools with powers similar to those of Ontario and 
Quebec, with a probable preference for the Quebec system where state control, 
is almost limited to the provision of revenue, leaving most of the power in 
the hands of the church. Strangely® the act wo.s passed under the guidance * 

* 

of Mackenzie who headed the party which had shown the greatest bitterness against 
any concession to the French or the Homan Catholics. In the debate, 

Howard Blake stated that the purpose of the clause dealing with separate 
schools would ba the laying down of a general principle with res-oect to 
public instruction in order to avert the heartburnings and difficulties which 



























' 





















































■ 




■ 



















- 20 - 


certain other parts of the Dominion had experienced,. It might he said 
that he gave voice to the views which were acceptable to both parties 
in the Dominion parliament. 'She Liberal party supported the measure 
because office had brought its responsibilitiesand there was a r^al 
desire to show a spirit of fairness and friendliness. On the other hand* 
the Conservative party had not yet sufficiently recovered from the 
disastrous defeat of 1873 skow any desire to make a public issue of 
the separate school question. It is probable* also* that the accord which 
had brought about the British North America Act was too recent for any 
responsible statesman to desire to break it. 2t might be anticipated that 
this attitude would change as the memory of Confederation grew dim and 
there arose newer statesmen who were ignorant of the issues which drew 
the Fathers of Confederation 51 together. Another source of future discord 
might be expected to be the newer provinces, whose people would be concerned 
about their immediate problems of forging a new nation out of numerous 
‘newcomers. A mere agreement between Wo races or religious sects would 
then appear to be of minor importance. Only one voice of warning, that of 
G-eorg© Brown, was raised, but his name had been so long connected with the 
struggle over religious and racial privilege that little attention was paid 
to his speech in the Senate. 

She Petition from St.Laurent 

.Dor the first time in the history of the North-West territories 

X 

the voice of the people was heard through the medium of a petition to the 
North-West Council.^ From a district in the northern part of the present 
province of Saskatchewan, an area settled by French Metis, there came a 
petition to the Council signed by Moise Cuillette and Pierre Landry praying 

1. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, 1877• 








































































- 21 - 


for assistance towards the erection of a schoolhouse and the support of 
a teacher, The petition came from St, Laurent which was one of the areas 
settled by these people after the Red River Rebellion, The petition is 
interesting because it shows that these people had been accustomed to social 
amenities which could not yet be provided in a new land. 

It might have been expect d that the Council, composed of men whose 
chief efforts were directed towards leeping peace in a pioneer country, 
would neglect what was obviously a luxury in a new land overrun by savages 
who were rapidly becoming more and more disparate because of the rapid 
disappearance of the herds of buffalo, Far from neglecting the matter, the 
members went into a committee of the whoI p to discuss this petition, dis¬ 
regarding others which dealt with ferry transportation and bridges, never¬ 
theless, the position of the Council made it impossible to grant any aid 
for educational purooscs. Neither had the Dominion Government granted funds 
for any such purpose, nor had any provision been made for any kind of 
taxation, They requested w His Honor to reply to the petitioners that there 

are no funds.applicable to educational purposes, and that the council 

do not think it expedient, at present, to consider the question of establishing 
a system of taxation, 11 In spite of the difficulties they were not going to 
forget th© matter, though the reply to the petitioners was somewhat dis¬ 
couraging. The resolution to the Lieutenant-Governor further suggested 
the followings 

“That His Honour do forward the above petition to the Hon. the 
Minister of the Interior, in order that the Dominion Government may b© 
made acquainted with the desire of the people of St. Laurent. which is 
believed to extend to other settlements in the Territories.* 5 " 


1. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, 1SJ7* 





















































In 1S7S # the LieutGovernor laid on the table correspondence 
with the Minister of the Interior with respect to the above petition. The 
letter written by him to Ottawa is more specific than the answer which the 
Council had desired him to send to the petitioners. After a preliminary 
statement of the circumstances which have led him to write this letter, he 
continues: 

51 As it does not appear that the Council has now the power to impose 
direct taxation, except in Electoral Districts, I fear that, without some 
allowance froin the Federal Government for general purposes such as is granted 
to the provinces, the children in small settlements in isolated sections of 
the Territories must grow up in ignorance. 53 3. 

In the remaining portion of the letter, the Hon. David Laird gives 
expression to his anxiety that the rising generation will be not only unfitted 
to exercise the franchise intelligently, but also unable to perform the 
active duties of life. It is evident from the daily business of the Council 

that the disappearance of v buffalo was causing reel concern*. The romantic 

/ 

and comparatively easy existence of the Indian and the Metis had passed* Ho 
longer was life to be one buffalo hunt after another; settled life was be¬ 
coming compulsory as also were its more rigid social forms. 

About a month later, on January 14, 187$, the Honorable David Mills, 
the Minister of the Interior, gave the following reply to the Governor's, 
letters 

•While agreeing with you that the Council of the North-West Territories 
has not the power to impose direct taxation for school or other purposes, 
it appears to me that the Council might obtain the end ’in view, namely; the 
raising of a fund for School Corporations and giving them the right to impose 
a school rate. The constitutional objections of want of representation which 
v/ould apply in the case of taxation by the Council, would not be applicable 
to School Corporations who would merely tax themselves* 


1. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, 1377 






























































































23 - 


"In the event of School Corporations being established rs above 
suggested, and it is found necessary to supplement the amount raised by 
them the amount so required should be placed in you-' estimates for the 
Government of the Territories, taking care to indicate the special object 
for which such amount is required.®^ 

' On December 10, 1878, the Lieutenant-Governor included in his 
estimates an item of $2000 for schools, following the suggestion of the 
Minister of the Interior. Somewhat later, in a. letter dated on January 1, 

1879» he wrote to Ottawa again, recommending certain changes in the North¬ 
west Territories Act. One of his suggestions was that the Act be amended 
by striking out "electoral district® and substituting "portion or district 
of the North-West Territories.® However, the method was of secondary impor¬ 
tance to Laird. In his opinion, the qualifications for an electoral 
district were too high. If the number of adult voters were reduced, he 
stated the words "electoral district" would not be so objectionable. He 
particularly wished to urge upon the Dominion Government the provision of 
an amendment which would enable the North-West Council to pass on Ordinance 
empowering the people of any settlement to form a school and to assess 
themselves toward its support. 

Beyond an acknowledgement of the receipt of the letters by the 
Deputy Minister at Ottawa, no farther notice was taken of the recommendations* 
Some writers are prone to regard this as an instance of habitual neglect 
on the part of the Dominion Government when it came to deal with matters 

O 

respecting the west.”* In mitigation it may be said that most of the 
correspondence had taken place with the Minister of the Interior. In the 
meantime, an election was held which was followed by the organization of 

1. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, January 14, 2 oJ8* 

2, Hawkes, J., "The Story of Saskatchewan and Its People®, S*r:' - 

atchrwng S, J. Clarke Publis h Inr Company . 1924. p. 341* 















































- 24 - 

a new cabinet unacquainted with vhafc was taking place, Anxiously laird 

again wrote Ottawa from Battleford, July 1 , l ;/ 79» requesting an answer 

with respect to the item he had included i,r schools in the estimates for 

the year. In return to a request from Ottawa, he wired the following scheme 

for school aids 

“To Colonel Dennis, 

Ottawa. 

Propose aid schools supported by missions or voluntary subscriptions 
of settlers to extent of paying half teachers * salaries where minimum average 

of fifteen scholars taught.* 1 ^ 

In spite of the encouraging request for information from Ottawa, 
no further notice v/as taken of Laird’s representations by official commun¬ 
ications. She Council held their meeting without any additional information 
on the matter of establishing schools 0 Eext year there was no session as it 
was anticipated a new act would be passed in Ottawa, making profound changes 
in government. ’ In 1$SX the last session held at Battleford saw the beginning 
of representative government in the Territories, In that year the popul; iion 
had grown to such an extent around Battleford that an Electoral District 
was formed and an .election was held. This election resulted in the election 
of Lawrence Clarke, Chief Factor of the Hudson Y s Bay Company in Carleton* 

This was also the Last year in which the Honorable David Laird held the post 
of Lieutenant-Governor. When the Council assembled in 188} t the Honorable 
David Dewdney had already been Lieutenant-Governor for a year. 


The First State-Aided Schools 




&' Dp to this tine the Saskatchewan Liver was the highway to the west. 

On its h-nhs near the Hudson’s Bay forts, such as Edmonton and Battleford, 
all the settlements were planted. Here we also find the first newspapers. 
The first “Edmonton Bulletin* 1 was issued in Edmonton in 1SS0 while the 
“Saskatchewan Herald" of Battleford came in the same year. The latter 


unci! of the Horth-West. Terr it'a 


1. Journals of . 


. 1*79 














































. 























- 25 - 


\ 

proved a convenient means of disseminating information concerning ice 
work of the Lieutenant-Governor and bis Council. In the south the 
only settlements that could "be found were a few huts around the Forth-West 
Mounted Police posts atMacleod aiJ 1 .nary. (Mother such settlement grew 

up in the north around Port Saskatchewan). It was the north, therefore, 
which began tho establishment of schools separate from the ordinary mission 
schools. 

v Edmonton was the scene of the establishment of the first such 
school in Alberta. In the chapter or. mission schools, some mention has 
already been made of r, school began in Edmonton by the KcDougalls. Dr, Iferey 
seems to have taught this school in 'Edmonton during the years 1£>74-1G75 

1 

before he left with John McDoug&ll to’ teach at the Morley Mission School. - ' 
Whether the school was kept open continuously in Edmonton from that tine 
on is difficult to determine, but we find a reference with respect to a 

p 

Mr. Glass who was a permanent teacher in X8B0. It is also with some 

surprise that we find that the Lieutenant-Governor was ultimately successful 

in persuading the Dominion Government to accept his submission with respect 

\ 

to a school grant, Through the columas of the Edmonton Bulletin, Mr. Glass * 
Informed the citizens of the settlement that half of his salary henceforth 
would be paid from Battieford upon the completion of certain forms ? An 
advertisement in the Saskatchewan Herald stated, at the same time, that 
'the Dominion Government would pay half of the teacher*s salary when the 
number of pupils attending school reached fifteen. The school register 
was to be certified by two of the parents of the children attending school. 

N This last announcement stimulated a good deal of activity in the 

1. McDougall, J. „ Eev., w George MoBougalX" , Toronto. Ontario: W5.7F -r: _.legs 

1902. 

2. Edmonton Bulletin, December 27# 1S20. 

3 . Edmonton Bulletin, January 24, 18S1. 
























































organization and ‘building of schools outside those already established by 

the various missions. Already, on February 7» 1881, we find that the lower 

settlement in Edmonton was planning to proceed with the erection of a 

schoolhouse.^ On October 29, the Edmonton Bulletin revealed that a committee 

of nine men in the Upper Settlement had agreed to guarantee the salary of the 

teacher up to the sum of fifty dollars each. Three hundred dollars had 

already been collected towards the building of a free school to be supported 

by the public. It was to be built near the Methodist Mission end wes to be 

used as a town hall and for entertainment purposes. Finally the contract was 

let to Oliver and MacDonald to build a frame building for nine hundred 

sixty-eight dollars, and a Mr. Karris was hired as the first teacher at 

fifty dollars a month. Apparently the financial position of these early 

schools was not .too prosperous, for early school fathers had to resort to 

various methods of raising money. There was nothing a3 simple as a school 

tax which could be levied upon every individual ratepayer. As a result, 

they had to resort to entertainments for the sole purpose of financial aid 

to the school. A loan had to be made before the building could be begun* 

through these and other methods we find the year 1832 ending with the school 

finances in a reasonable condition. 'The receipts for the year were $797*00 

while the expenditures were $805.00, the sum of eight dollars being owed to 
2 

Matthew McCauley, of whom we hear so much in the early school history of 
Edmonton. In spit© of difficulties this school continued in operation until 
the establishment of a school system for the Eorth-West Territories. 

Mr. Harris was followed by a Mr. Stiff while Mr. Second, later of McBougall 
and Secord, Edmonton, succeeded the latter. 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, February 7, 1881. 

2. Edmonton Bulletin, December 20 , XSS2. 












































































- -27 - 

Shis was the position of Edmonton prior to the inauguration of 
a Territorial system. What was the progress made in other settlements? 

By far the greatest improvement hod been mr&e at St. Albert. The early 
issues of the Bulletin are filled with announcements from this school con- 
corning visits of church dignitaries at closing exercises, and marks 
obtained by individual pupils. In the same year that Matthew McCauley, 
frank Oliver arid others were worrying about the erection of a. school in 
Edmonton, St. Albert had already another new building which apparently 
replaced the one built through the efforts of Father Lacombe. At this 
time St. Albert had an attendance of sixty or seventy-five pupils dally, 
of whom about fifteen pupils were boarding In the institution. In 1881, 
a, commercial course was already being taught in the institution, for which 
the fee was one hundred and fifty dollars.^ Kor did the school take care 
of all the people in the district. So fast was the population growing that 
on December 27* 1884, the Bdnontcn Bulletin reported that three more schools 
were being organised ia the $t„ Albert vicinity* The next year a special 
examination was held in the school with, visitors from Edmonton In attendance# 
It was found that the school was made up of five divisions, and the exaaiin- 
at ions were conducted in both French and English. On exhibition were, copy¬ 
books and needlework* and pupils worked problems In arithmetic on the 
blackboard# 

The Methodist Church report for the year 1881 named four schools . 
which were maintained by the church. Those included Morley, Pigeon Bake, 
Edmonton, and Whitefish Lake* Surprisingly, Victoria, was unable to maintain 
its early lead as the report showed only that there was an ordained minister 
at that point. Nevertheless, in the next year, Mr* Secord, later of Edmonton 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, December 17, 1881. 





































' 






















was hired to teach school in Victoria* "/hit ©fish Lake school had an 
attendance of twenty-eight pupils* 

It remains only to discover whether any other attempts were mad© 
to organize schools by public bodies outside church control, Reference 
has already been made to a school opened in the lower settlement in Edmonton 
Tills school was later closed owing to poor attendance^* and financial 
difficulties, No photograph of this school exists, Shis is a pity for 
it was the first organised, dating back to loj^. When it was closed in 
the spring of 1282, the trustees owed one hundred and fifty dollars to the * 
J* S, Harris estate and to another private individual. Apparently Mr, Harri 
had not remained in the employ of the upper settlement very long. To the 
north of H&raonton there was also a small school in existence, for we find 
a notice that it was to be closed for repairs so that it might be comfortabl 
in winter.^ 

Calgary was late in Comparison to other areas, The first school 
organized there was started through the efforts of Col* James Walker with 
twelve pupils registered* Mr, J* Costello was the first teacher. 

To modern minds this beginning might appear meagre and inefficient, 
but one must remember that *ste te education was only beginning in many parts 
of Europe, England was just initiating a program of aid and supervision 
which was to culminate in state control? but this was not to happen for a 
long time yet. It is indeed fortuna te that, in a pioneering period, the 
west received settlers of earnest and far-seeing outlook who laid the right 
foundations. In spite of the lack of roads and the social and economic 


1, Edmonton Bulletin, April 22, Xl:>$2, 

2, Ibid,, November 26, 1282, 

3 , Bayne, D*C., n Calgary School District Ho, 19**, Pamphlet in Legislative 
Library, Government Buildings, Edmonton, Alberta, 
















































- 29 - 

primitiveness of the era, these first fathers found time to think of their 
children as citizens of a future western enraire, and proceeded to lay a 
humble hut lasting foundation for that future. The work of %erton Payers on, 
in Ontario, was transplanted to the west in more than one way* 






CHAPTER 


30 - 
Ill 


THE BOARD OF EDUCj 




s In 1882 the seat of governi^-nt vs 
Regina because of r, change in th' ntrvay o: 
Owing to the great changes which h>vi tv Aon 


? moved from Battleford to 
the Canadian Pacific Railway, 
area, no session of the Council 


was -held in 1882. If the North-West lets of 1875 and 1880 ore studied 
closely it is evident that the Council rav called merely to give advice, 
while the Lieutenant-Governor was an official: of the Dominion Government. 

During the troublesome times when P. gin wen invaded by railway gangs, he 
did not wish to be hampered by a Council. After the excitement was over, in 
1883, elections were held in six electoral districts and a session of both 
elected and appointed members was called on august 20, 1883. The only elected 
member in this year from Alberta w . Frank Oliver from Edmonton. Calgary did 
not schieve the dignity of an elected representative until next year. Count¬ 
ing the Lieutenant-Governor, the numbers of elected and appointed members 
were equal. A definite change was seen in the business of the Council after 
it was strengthened by the addition of elected members, for these men 
introduced hosts of petiti. ns dealing with the life of the inhabitants in the 
North-West. 

The Oliver Bill 

\ 

From one of these elected members, fr.~ Frank Oliver, came the 
proposal to establish a school system in the North-West Territories. This 
initiative came from Mr. Oliver not only because of his superior public 


spirit, but also because he h§4 lived for years in one of the oldest settle¬ 
ments in the north-west, Edmonton. As the first school supported by the 


public was established hdtre, it was also fitting t 


1 ir st suggostion 











. 





for a nubile school system should emanate from the same community. 1 2 3 4 His 
bill was referred to a special committee which ordered that the bill be 
printed and distributed to the members for further study. It6 withdrawal 
cannot surprise us a great deal when we consider the large number of matter s 
with which the Council had to deal immediately. Surveying had been neglected 
as also had the financial arrangements for immediate expansion. In the mean¬ 
time the Lieutenant-Covomor was still paying grants amounting to half of 
the salary of the teacher under the system inaugurated by Governor Laird in 

December, 1880. Though the Journals do not tell us anything of the discussions 

2 

which took place in the House, we find elsewhere that Colonel McLeod raised 
the objection that the Council had not the power to make such a bill oper¬ 
ative. In his opinion, such an act could only be applied within municipalities. 

He referred to the following quotation! 

"Whenever any Electoral District shall be found to contain net less than 
one thousand inhabitants, the Lieutenant-Goveiinor, by and with the consent of 
the Council or Assembly, as the case may be, may pass ordinances erecting the 6ame 
into a municipal corporation or corporations as they may think fit, and thence¬ 
forth the power of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council or Assembly as herein 
conferred in respect for municipal purposes shall cease, and every such 
Municipal Corporation she 11 thenceforth have the ri^it to pass By-Laws for 
raising within such municipality, by taxation, a revenue for municipal rurposee 
in such district . "3 

The Lieutenant-Governor hoped that the necesearjr legislation would be passed 

at the next session of the Dominion parliament. In the meantime an act wee 

h 

passed providing for the organization of municipalities. 


1. Journals o' the Council of the Horth-West Territories, September 13, I 883 . 

2. Edmonton Bulletin, September 21, I 883 . 

3. Statutes of Canada, 38 Vic., Chapter 49* 

4. Edmonton Bulletin, September 27 , 1883* 
























In the session of 1884, Mr. Oliver was careful to arrange that 
the school question should receive very early attention. The session was 
opened on July 3* an< l R Standing Committee on the provision of schools wee 
formed the next day.^ On July 7» Mr. Olivarvintroduced his hill while the 
Committee presented e report requesting the Lieutenant-Governor to proclaim 
Section 93 of the British North America Act as provided by Section 8 of the 
North West Act. By requiring the proclamation of Section 93, the Council 
was asking for the same powers with respect to schools as had been allowed 
the provinces. Section 9 of the North West Act provided that the Lieutenant- 
Governor in Council should have such powers to make ordinances for the 
government of the North-West Territories as the Governor-General in Council 
might, from time to time, confer on him. The reply of the Deputy Minister 
of Justice is significant in that he immediately recognised the implications 
of the Committee’s request. In his telegram, after stating that the message 
had been forwarded to the Minister of Justice, he answered as follower 

"Outside of the legal oueetion involved, it is probable that e. question 
of policy will arise.’’^ 

J TLat he fully recognized the implication ie strange, but he did not have to 
wait long for other evidence of the same desire on the part of the Council. 

This bod;- desired to be recognized, mode and more* ae a responsible body. 

This was the first claim to provincial rights. 

In the meantime, the Council proceeded to deal with school matters 
as if the consent had already been given. On July 8, Mr. Rouleau, an appointed 
member, introduced another school bill. It also was referred to the special 
committee which had already been appointed to deal with Mr. Oliver’s bill. 

1. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, July 4, 1884. 

2. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, 1884, Appendix B. 





































- 33- 


Iq introducing the bill. Judge Rouleau stated that his ourpoee wee merely 
to remedy some of the legal weaknesses of the Oliver Bill and to make more 
definite the privileges of Roman Catholics. In the Edmonton Bulletin, 
January 17, 1385, Mr. Oliver gave an account of his stewardship as member 


1 


for Edmonton and described the passage of the bill. 


Mr. Oliver claimed 


that the Rouleau Bill was identical with his own. To us it seems hardly 

possible that Mr. Oliver, with his training as editor of the Bulletin and 

member of the North Meet Council, did not recognize the difference. We 

can only conclude that while the French were already active in the west to 

protect their privileges, the English speaking element did not yet resent 

those privileges. It is likely, also, that this broadmindedness was not 

altogether due to any magnanimity peculiar to the inhabitants of the west. 

We must remember that Protestants had also gained under the separate school 

system when they were in the minority and had no desire to see their children 

attend school where the majority of children were Homan Catholics. Statistics 

show that the Roman Catholic Church had by far the larger number of adherents. 

It must also be remembered that the privileges accorded to minorities under 

the British North America Act were granted on the insistence of Celt to 

protect the Protestant minority in the Eastern Townships and not to protect 

the Roman Catholics in the first instance. In Committee, Mr. Oliver and 

Mr. Rouleau agreed that a third bill be drafted embodying the better suggest! one 

of both. What Mr. Rouleau's contribution was can easily be noted by corapadng 
2 

Mr. Oliver's proposed bill with the finished ordinance ao passed by the 
Council in 1834.^ Though the wording has been changed throughout the Ordinance 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, speech of Mr. Oliver, January 17. 1835. 

2. There is a printed copy o f thi bill at the Legislative Library, 
Government Buildings, Edmonton. 


3. An Ordinance Providing for the Organization of Schoole in the North-West 
Territories, Ordinances of the North-West Territories, No, 5. 1834. 




























- 34 - 


the moot startling contribution is noted in the first Wo pages under the 
heading of "Board of Education". 

She Board of Education In the Uw School System 
In this section we see that the system of Quebec had been trans¬ 
planted to the west. The Ordinance empowered the Lieutenant-Governor in 
Council to appoint a Board of Education whose numbers were not to exceed 
twelve members. Of these six were to be Catholics and six Protestants. In 
addition to the ordinary powers the Board retained while sitting as a body, 
it was also empowered to resolve itself into sections, one Catholic and one 
Protestant, each section to have the following powers over schools vhi h were 
under its control: 

(1) To have under its control and management the schools of the section 
and to make, from time to time, such regulations as may be deemed fit for their 
general government and disciplines and the carrying out of the provisions of 
the Ordinance. 

(2) To arrange for the proper examination, grading and licensing of its 
teachers, the recognition of certificates obtained elsewhere and for the with¬ 
drawing of tho license upon sufficient cause* 

(3) So select all the books, maps and globes.provided..... .such 

selection by the Catnolic section of the Board shall be subject to approval of 
the competent religious authority. 

(4) To appoint inspectors, who shall hold office during the pleasure of 
the section appointing them. 

The importance accorded this section is evident from the place that was given 
to it in the act. Is it just possible that Mr* Oliver was biding his time 
as he did not think it expedient to oppose the section so early in the history 
of the Territories? After many sittings of the Committee of the Whole, in 
which some amendments were made, the Bill was finally road the third time on 
August 6, 1SS4. 

Before passing on, it might b© well to define the points at issue 

i 

between the two rival systems as exemplified in tho proposed bills of the two 
'members. Mr. 01iver , s scheme was the state system as established In Ontario. 







- 














Mr. Bouleau wished to transplant the system of Quebec where schools 're 
controlled "by the various churches. Eo much are we accustomed to look at 
the state as the source of j 11 powers that we forget that this was not a Iveys 
so, and that other Conditions prevailed elsewhere. Prior to the Hoformatlon 

all control of schools was in the hands of the church. As time went on, this 

r' 

control gradually passed to he state, though'some countries, especially 
England, ..till allow the church & good deal of power. Almost the last strong¬ 
hold surrendered by the church anywhere has been the school. In Canada, 

Quebec retained a system of education controlled by the Church, In Ontario, 
after a long struggle, the appointment of Egerton, Hyerson heralded the 
victory of state control. After a long study of educational organizations 
In the United States and Europe, he initiated the system as we know it today. 
Even the separate schools vre modelled after those of Ireland where similar 
conditions prevailed. 

On the other hand, it is unthinkable to the citi3en of Quebec that 
education should remain under the control of political parties subject to the 
upheavals and changes of political fortune. Sine© the aims of education are 
permanent the French Canadian believes its administration should be left in 
the hands of a permanent body separate from, and, to a large extent, independent 
of the political body in power. Xt must not be inferred that any such 
reasoning prevailed In the establishment of the existing system in Quebec. 

The system owes its being to the control exercised by tlie church in all . 

Homan Catholic countries. The reasoning grew oat of the necessity to defend 
an established order. Furthermore the Homan Catholio Church has special 
claims on the gratitude of the French Canadian people. When the French 
Canadians were left to their fate by the French Government in the Treaty of 
Paris 1763, almost all the old ties were broken except those of religion. 

Under th© Qpebec Act the rights of th© Homan Catholic Church were respected 
















' 

































































- 36 - 


in practice and guaranteed by lav. That those rights were not always 
aporeoiated "by the Trench Canadians Is evident from a perusal of documents 
dealing with early Canadian history. The intelligentsia even sought to 
break the rule of the cur/, but the disastrous outcome of the 1337 rebellion 
reinforced that control. However impatient of the power of the church he may 
be, the Trench Canadian lias never failed to recognize the benefits the church 
brings him. On the other hand, the chur.h., recognizing its responsibility, 
has sought to increase that control by encouraging isolation from other 
elements in the country. This is one reason why we find the habitant clinging 
so tenaciously to his language. 

In Quebec the government interferes in educational matters only to 
the extent of allotting grants to the two committees. The entire adminis¬ 
trative machinery is under the control of the Department of Public Instruction, 
headed not by a responsible minister, but by a superintendent who 1c safe¬ 
guarded from political influences. This Superintendent is the president of 
the Council of Education which is divided into Protestant and Catholic 
Committees. Each Committee is supreme in the control of money allotted to 
it towards education and in the administration of schools under Its control. 

The local schools must be kept up by local effort, but again, the control is 
denominational. There is no fear of dispute between the two bodies as they 
have no contact. 

When the Trench Canadian compares this dual order with vhr.t his 

compatriots have to experience in the other provinces It ic no wonder that 

% 

he becomes bitter. He cannot understand that the difference is not so much 
one of race as of philosophy. The Protestants, since they are almost every¬ 
where in control, have lost their mistrust of state systems. Besides the 
numerous sects amongst the Protestants make agreement upon a state school 
system almost a necessity. It is the clash on these two administrative 


























































. 











_ 














- 37 - 

concepts that, h^s 'brought the Separate School question to the? fore In 
Canada; and the greatest strife cane in the west where the basis of a. 
net/ educational system was about to be laid, Messrs, Oliver and 'Rouleau 
were chosen by fate to champion the opposing philosophies. 

In the meantime, the members of the Council, after providing for 
the organisation of new schools, wished to protect those which had been 
receiving aid under the old arrangement. Some of these schools had got into 
difficulty owing to the large attendance required before aid was given by the 
government, Messrs, Oliver and Hogs were the stormy petrels of the assembly 
for they took the lead in criticising the Dominion Government for the strin¬ 
gency of the regulations. They insisted that the number of pupils required 
for the continued operation of schools already organised should be reduced 
from fifteen to ten*^ Hitherto the requirement had been fifteen pupils. 

In his report to the house the Lieutenant-Governor stated that twelve schools 

2 

were receiving aid under the old requirement with a total of JQl pupils. 

The Ordinance of 18tf4 caused-tremendous activity in the educatinnnl 
field, As the Dominion Government had Increased the school subsidy consider¬ 
ably, applications for aid beg^n pouring In from all over the Territories, 

The Lieutenant-Go varror reported that ho had received applications from sixty- 
five school districts, sixty-four of which were for Public Schools and one for 
a Separate School. lihen the report was me.de, thirty Protestant and eight 
Homan Catholic schools had been proclaimed. This, represented a nopulotlon of 
1355 children of whom 918 were already on the school rolls Although a 
perusal of the reports would seem to indicate that there was universal supnert 


1. Journal of the Council of the Horth- Tl? ast Territories, July 24, 18&4. 

2. Journals of the Council of the north-West Territories, November 5 , 1235. 

3. Journals of the Council of the Worth-West Territories, Kovember 5, 1235. 















. 




























' 
























































- 38 - 

for public schools, othor sources do not support this conclusion, D&monton 
should serve as an example of what really did happen in most districts. 

Within Wo months after royal assent had been given to the Ordinance 
a petition was presented to the Lieutenant-Governor asking for the erection 
of the Edmonton Protestant School District. As this was the first petition 
received by the Lieut©nant-Ck>vcrnor 6 Edmonton might have easily had the dis¬ 
tinction of being the first organised school district in the Uorth-’est 
Territories had it not been for the opposition which, sanifested itself almost 
immediately. The dissidents did not oppose a public school but objected 
to a school supported by Compulsory taxation, believing that money raised by 
public subscription, as hitherto, should be sufficient. Especially loud 
was the outcry from the officials of the Hudson*s Bay Company stationed in 
Edmonton, and their influence extended far beyond the employees of the 
Company through carriage and prestige. So strong was the protest that 
Mr, Oliver decided that a very tactful summing up of arguments in favor of 

taxation might not do much harm from th© Columns of his paper. Just how 

. | 

difficult it was for him to exercise this tact at times can be gleaned from 
even a cursory glance at the Bulletins of this period. The inhabitants at 
this time did not even attempt to hid© their real thoughts from their neigh¬ 
bors, and sometimes expressed themselves in very emphatic language. 

\ 

In his argument for public taxation, Mr. Oliver first denied any 
desire to include the schools in a municipal organization. Municipal organ¬ 
izations were very unpopular at this period because of the disasters which 
had followed the organisation of two Manitoba towns, Emerson and Winnipeg. 

That such disasters might be the result not of municipal organisation but of 
bad judgment on th© part of individuals did not carry much weight. Since 
people hated municipal organization, Mr. Oliver argued that the control of 

X 

schools by the municipal bodies was out of th© question. These reasons led 
him to support taxation by an elected body separate from dther elected bodies. 





Public taxation would force non-r!?sids:it-« who owned property to support the 
school. This was a very conclusive argument to the future ratepayers who 
visualized the Hudson^ Bay Company with its largo holdings around the 
settlement of Edmonton. Lastly, Mr. Oliver claimed that a good school 
would enhance the value of the community. The latter assertion was probably 
made not because of any theoretical values but with the understanding that 
a good school would encourage settlement, end settlement might help to bring 
in the railway which was already approaching Calgary 

The voting apparently took place somewhere between December 2:0 
and December 2J, for the editorial in the Bulletin on the latter day con¬ 
gratulates the people of Edmonton on the stand taken. The article states that 
a decision oth^r than the one made would have been in favor of the speculators. 
By the letter term Mr. Oliver doubtlessly meant the Eudson , s Bay Company but 
did not wish to express himself too openly; for in spite of the surrender of 
its charter is 1S69» the Company was still a name to conjure with. 'Ihere 
is also soma comment on the co-oporation of Protestants and Roman Catholics. 

The editorial goes further to draw a contrast between the broadmindedness of 

4 . 

the west In religious Emitters as compared to the sectarian narrowness of the 
east. It cites as an instance the Earth-Vest School Ordinance which guarded 
scrupulously the rights of tho minority no matter to what church the minority 
belonged. In view of his later utterances ono might wonder whether Mr. Oliver 
ever read any of his former speeches or editorials. It is probable that the . 
expressions were always sincere, but that those cited above owed their origin* 
to a somewnat heady benevolence following upon the school victory in Edmonton. 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, December kO, 1884. 







- 40 - 


In proceeding*: vltb the narrative itself rs in the Bulletin 

we must be careful not to accent everything as being the absolute truth, 
for in the excitement of battle there were charges end countercharges which 
were not meant to be proved but to bring victory in the battle itself. 

This is the story as told in the Bulletin: 

' "The voting on the organisation of ^dmonton School District took place 
according to announcement on Saturday last. The oontest was a hot one, no 
effort bring spared by either side to bring victory. To see that order was 
preserved Sgt. G-eidert, of the police, had been requested to attend by 
Mr. McPougnll of the *nd tvro special constables, Messrs. J. Conner 

and L* Gurneau, were sworn in besides. Before nine o*clock teams were on 
the street to bring up voters. At the hour appointed the returning officer, 
Mr. McCauley, opened the poll book and proceeded to record the vote cast... 

.The first batch of votes were po 11 by the antis, but these w®re 

soon balanced by the arrival of a sleighload of those favouring the scheme, 
end from that time forward until three o*clock neither party gained much on 
the other. During the forenoon Mr. Watson was replaced as scrutineer by 
Dr. Wilson. At noon the vote stood 37 fer to J! 4 against... .a detachment 
of Hudson*s Bay Company employees who were not generally known to have votes 
arrived on the scene and nut the anti-school party five or sir votes ahead. 
The men voted as tenants of rooms in the H. 3. buildings. To this attack 
the school party replied by bringing up the bo-rders of the Edmonton Hotel 
and Jnsnor Rooms who also voted on the rooms occupied by them, both parties 
swallowing the cast iron oath like men. At four o f clock the poll 1 2 wan 

declared closed just as an anti-school voter arrived on the scene.The 

returning officer and scrutineers counted ur> the vote*? and announced as a 
result 54 for and 43 against the organisation of the school districts.... 

A greet deal more of the effects of liquor were apparent during the day 
than might reasonably b© erpected in a country under a prohibitory liquor 

low*.Contrary to expection no objection was made to the method of 

conducting the voting or to-the legality of votes cast. Watson declared 

that although he considered several of the votes cart for the school to be 
illegal, if these were struck off the school would still-have a majority...** 

The opposition did not stop with the voting in Edmonton. Soon 

afterwards Dr. Wilson, the leader of the malcontents, announced his 

intention to run for election. Encouraged by the resolute resistance of 

the opponents to an established school system in Edmonton, the disaffection 

2 

spread to other districts. Thou h the opposition finally died down.the 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, December ?7 j 1$$4. It has been considered advisable 
to give the original reoorfc of the elections in the Bulletin than others 
vrhicb have been given from time to time. It is more restrained and 
probably to be relied on more than succeeding one.3. This report acknow¬ 
ledges that both sides did not adhere strictly to the law. 

2. Edmonton Bulletin, January 3 , 1^5. 








































. 














irritation did not cease, "but manifested itself in.the defeat of the sitting 
member, Hr. Oliver, v/ho was not returned at the next election. 

In spite of the excitement the people finally bowed to the 
inevitable, end, after a momentary recession, organization went on rapidly, 
as v/e heve already learned from the report of the Lieutenant-Governor. 

Within the year eleven schools were organized in Alberta of which the majority 
were still in the north though the railway had been built through the south. 
Though the opposition delayed the establishment of a school in Edmonton so 

that it was the seventh to be organised in the North-West Territories, it was 

V 

in fact the first to be so organised in the present province of Alberta. 
Calgary followed. Victoria, wh^re the first mission school had been estab¬ 
lished by the McDougalls, was not legally established until the next year, 
from then on until I&92 the majority of school districts were set uo in the 
southern area of the province along with the first railway. It is only in 
that year that there came a revival of organising activity along the new 
railway which was being built from Calgary to Strathcona. About half as 
many schools were built in IS32 as in all the years -orevious to this. In the 
history of the province the setting up of new districts became a mere detail 
henceforth and not a matter for general comment ao had been the case hitherto. 
The Bulletin mentions their organization less and less frequently. 

In the meantime let us turn back to the legislative and official 
history of our s hools. The imported Quebec system was doomed to failure 
from the beginning* In the first place, the organization could not be 
proceeded with as arrangements had not all been concluded with the dominion 
Government. Though a handsome subsidy had been voted by the Dominion 























































- 42 - 


Government, no authority had been granted to spend the money thus voted* 

In addition to this a largo number of the -provisions of tho hill had heen 
found impracticable; the Lieutenant-Governor therefore decided to wait until 
tho Council had been assembled so that tho 1 2 act might be amended. The Council 
felt its position keenly and protested against the dilatory procedure with 
Territorial business adopted by the Dominion Government. In the Address in 
Reply to the Lieutenant-Governorspeech, the members condemned the 
restrictions which had been placed oa the money granted, preventing the Council 
from spending it on the organisation of schools. It also took this oppor¬ 
tunity of berating the Government for granting various companies odd-numbered 
sections which led to dispersal of settlement and thus mad© organization 
more difficult. 

Nevertheless the minds of the members had not changed with resnect 

X 

to the existence of the Board of Education, for w© find them discussing in 
committee the advisability of nominating one immediately. On the question 
of its anointment the Council was unanimous but there was a difference in 
opinion as to the number. This question was bound uo with thrt of expen¬ 
diture. Finally it was agreed that two members should be appointed in each 
section while the Lieutenant-Governor was to sit as chairman of the body* 
Falling in with the desire of the Council, the Lieutenant-Governor finally 
appointed the members of the Board. There was, however, still some difference 
of opinion as to the powers of this body. In the early period of the 


1. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, November 5* 1885* 

2. Edmonton Bulletin, December &, 15. 3i>, 1825* 


i 



























































- 43 - 


Council 1 a existence Mr. Rouleau appeared as the chamoion of Separate School 
rights and we find the records teeming with suggestions from that 
gentleman to the end that the privileges of his church might he guaranteed 
in both law and custom. The first members of the Catholic section were 
Mr. Rouleau and Father Lacorabe. In the Protestant section were the Messrs* 
Secord and Marshallsay. The secretary was John Brown. The name SeCord is 
seen very often in the educational records of this period but Mr. Secord*a 
influence was even greater than can be gathered from a study of the docu¬ 
ments* Prom one contemporary, at least, there comes a recognition of his 
services. It seems that the Li out enant-Governor, whatever his other 
abilities were, was not a close student of educational systems. As a result 
he depended to a large extent on the suggestions of Mr. John Secord. For 
his work he was well fitted as a lawyer; and very*' onveniently he resided 
at ftegina where he could be reached easily in case of need.^ 

The act passed in I 885 began as a series of amendments to the 
School Ordinance of 1684. So great were the changes proposed that it wrs 
decided to revamp the whole act with the result that it became M an Ordinance 
to amend and consolidate as amended the School Ordinance of 1SS4 M , Hot 
only were there weaknesses in the old act, but the increase in the number 
of school areas made simplification necessary. In the first act sections 
dealing with one topic were distributed throughout the document* In the 
new act some attempt made to bring these sections under one heading. 
Furthermore changes were made in the authority to be wielded by the Board 


1. In my conversation with Dr. Baird I mentioned the activity of the 
Lieutenant-Governor in educational matters. He assured me that the 
activity was chiefly due to the work of Mr. Secord* 








































. 



















. 















































- 44 - 


\ 

of Education both as a body and in. sections. In the first act the majority 
of powers had been conferred on that body sitting in sections. x These powers 
included the examination of teachers, the selection of books, and the appoint¬ 
ment of inspectors. N The second act loft to the sections power only to cancel 

the certificate of a teacher upon sufficient cause and to control test-books. 

\ 

In these changes we note a definite tendency towards a state control, never¬ 
theless the act as a whole showed a greater understanding of school admin¬ 
istration. v Duties of trustees, teachers, and other officials are clearly 
defined. In spite of these changes the act was not larger than it had been 
before. v Apparently the aims of the changes had been a gradual elimination 
of religious control and a greater simplification of content,^ 


! 

i 



1. The School Ordinance, Ordinances of .the North-West Territories, I 8 S 5 , No. 4 






























































































































- 45 - 


CHAPTER XV 

THE B0A2D 01 EDUCATION IN THIS STRUGGLE IDS RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT 

The period, 1S&5 to 1892, was marked by experimentation in 
government. The Dominion Government was perennially at a loss to know 
how provision could he made in the administration of the North-West 
Territories for the rapid development that was taking place. This apparent 
difficulty is also evident in the legislative attempts of the North-West 
Council and Ip ter of the Assembly when it cam© to deal with such matters as 
the rapidly extending school system. Western public opinion in so far as it 
was expressed in the utterances of the members of the Council and the 
Assembly was demanding greater rights for the legislative body. The members 
showed impatience at any evidence of Dominion control. They sought to lessen 
the -cowers of the Lieutenant-Governor, and demanded greater initiative in 


legislating for the educational needs of the people 


The Struggle for Responsible Government 


x Dor three years the Lieutenant-Governor governed almost alone. 


There was no cabinet, and the Council met only occasionally. In his fare¬ 



well speech to the Legislative Assembly in 1893 • the Lieutenant-Governor 


described his position as foliar: 


H I was responsible to the Privy Council alone for all executive acts 
don© in the territories.....the Lieutenant-Governor was T>ractically a 
Political Commissioner under whose direct supervision and authority the 
affairs of the territories were conducted and administered. 


When elected members were added to the North-West Council in 1884 


they expressed resentment against the dictatorial powers of the Lieutenant- 

2 

Governor. In reply to the Speech from the Throne in 1835, after a 


1. Oliver, A.E. t w Tha Canadian North-West, Vol. 2 {l , Ottawa. Ontario : 

Publications of the Canadian Arc'- Ives. Ho. 9. Ottawa Printing Bureau , 

1914, p. 1153. 


2. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, December 7® 1885* 




























. 













































































prolonged and exoiting discussion., the following amendment wrs inserted to 

the resolutions 

"While congratulating ourselves and the country on the increased 
representation afforded, we cannot omit to point out to your Honor the still 
greater rights to representation which v/e feel we are entitled to, hut have 

not yet received...we confidently look forward to the next session of 

Parliament granting our requests and calling to their councils representatives 
of these territories. M 

In the same year, a lengthy memorial^* was presented to the Dominion 
Government hy the North-West Council detailing twenty-seven grievances and 
requests, though the Dominion Government could not agree to grant all of 
these requests, some concessions were made which pacified the westerners for 
a time. Pour Federal Electoral districts v/ere formed, and two Senators provided 
for the North-West Territories. The powers of the council were extended to 
make Ordinances for direct taxation for territorial and municipal uurposes. 
During the session of ISSo, in the Speech from the Throne, the Lieutenant- 
Governor stated that the Dominion Government would welcome suggestions in 

p 

working out a scheme for a local legislature. As a result, a special committee 
of the members of the Council was appointed. In 1SS7, this body recommended 
that the North-West Council be abolished and that a Legislative Assembly of 25 
elected members be established. It recommended further that the Lieutenant - 
Governor Should carry on his functions by and with the advice of an Executive 
Counoil of three members appointed from this Assembly.^ In 18S8 the Dominion 

1. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, December 15* 1S85* 

2. Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, October 22, 1826. 

3 . Journals of the Council of the North-West Territories, November 19» 1887* 


























. 














































- 47 - 

Parliament abolished the Council, creating a Legislative Assembly of 25 
members, 22 of whom were to be elected, and three others chosen from the 
territorial judiciary rs legal experts without the power of a vote. Pro¬ 
vision wat also made for an Advisory Council of four members, who, with the 
Lieutenant-Governor, vrould constitute an Executive Committee in all matters 
of finance. This change coincided with the appointment of a new Governor 
in the person of the Honorable Joseph Royal. 

The struggle for legislative and financial control was resumed 
in the session of 1883. The Assembly found itself continually hampered by 
the limitations placed on its l^w-meking powers by the Dominion Government. 

An excellent illustration is in the field of territorial expenditure* The 
provisions of the North-West Territories Act as regards finance were as 
follows: 

"The Lieutenant-Governor shall select from among the elected members of 
the Legislative Assembly four persons to act as an Advisory Council on matters 

of finance..and the Lieutenant-Govemor shall preside at all sittings 

of which an Advisory Council and have a right to vote as a member thereof, end 
shall also have a casting vote in the case of a tie. 1 * 1 

The first Advisory Council, headed by the Honorable P. G. Haultain, 
resigned as a body declaring they could not serve in the anomalous position 
of having responsibility without authority. The immediate question at issue 
vss that of school grants. The Lieutenant-Governor took it upon himself to 
make grant reductions in the face of Council opposition. Dr. Brett was 
appointed to head a new Advisory Council on the understanding that the 
Lieutenant-Governor would continue to control the expenditure of the grants 


1. The North-Vest Territories Act, Statutes of Canada, 1883, C.19 








































































. 


























from the Dominion Government* Dr, Brett's statement to the Assembly reeds 
as follows: 

M The Council of Hia Honor # s advisors, formed under the law, will 
exercise the functions of an executive in matters affecting the territorial 
finances only, as well as in the discharge of the duties assigned by the 
ordinances to the Lieutenrlnt-Oovernor-in-Counctl. ,, * 

The contest became exceedingly bitter. The assembly refused to 
allow the /dvisory Council to serve on committees and in the session of 1090 
refused to go into a committee of supply. Though some concessions were made 
to pacify the majority of the members of the legislative Assembly by the new 
act of 1391# the constitutional issue did not disappear until the departure 
of the Honorable* Joseph Boyal. Such was the atmosphere in which our present 
school system was developed* 

The Board of Education 

Prior to 1000, there is little recorded criticism of the Board 
of Education* During the period of contention just described, however, the 
Board found itself drawn more and more into the limelight, CHticism came 
from various sources* To the assembly it appeared a tool in the hands of 
the Crown, and hence an obstacle to the development of responsible government 
To the public, exercised over the Manitoba Separate School Question, the 
Board seemed an instrument serving mainly the interests of the Catholic 

2 

minority. The secrecy of its meetings aroused the suspicions of the press. 


1. Journals of the Assembly of the North-West Territories 1009, November 5 . 

2. The Edmonton Bulletin, August 29 , 109 1 2 * 




- 49 - 


When Mr. H. S. Cayley of Calgary succeeded Mr. P. W, G. Haul tain to the 
office of Premier in 1888, it was even charged that the appointment wae 

a reward for hi? opposition to the latter 5 a attempt to establish national 

1 \ 

schools. Finally, in IS 92 , the Board of Education, after many attempts 
had been made to modify it, was superseded by another body known as the 
Council of Public Instruction. 

In the School Ordinance of 1887 we find the following clause 

clarifying the division of pov/ers between the constituent Protestant and 

Catholic sections of the Board of Educations 

"Each section of tho Board shall have the selection of text-books 
for the examination of teachers in history and science and it shall have 
the power to prescribe any additional subjects of examinations for the 
teachers of the schools of its section, and in all examinations on such 
subjects the examiners of each section shall have' exclusive jurisdiction”^ 

Owing to the increase in the number of schools the cons i tut ion 

\ 

of the Board of Education was changed in the final session of the North- 
West Council in 1837 to five Protestant and three Roman Catholic members, 
and the Board appointed one of its members to be chairman.^ 

In spite of small changes In the Ordinance of 1887 experience 

\ 

proved that further amendments were necessary in the School Ordinance of 

188p to make it workable. In several districts difficulties had arisen 

which required the reference of disputed clauses for legal advic®. It was 

discovered that some sections were even inoperative, since they conflicted 

with the provisions of the North-West Territories Act. Accordingly, a new 

4 

Ordinance was prepared to consolidate and amend the Ordinance of 1885* 


1* The Edmonton Bulletin, November 24, I 892 . 

2. Ordinances of the North-West Territories, I 8 S 7 , No. 2. 

3 . Report of the Board of Education, I 887 . 

• i 

4. ibid., 





- 50 - 

and submitted to the newly constituted Legislative Assembly in 1888. 

However, it was becoming increasingly evident that mere clari¬ 
fication of the clauses in the School Ordinance was not the sole nurpos© 
of the members of the Council, and later the Legislative Assembly, In 

spite of very thorough study and of the resulting changes in the School 
\ 

Ordinance of 1888, the Separate School question and the Board of ^Education 
became very Important items in the discussions of the members of the Assembly 
in the next year. The strife in Manitoba seems to have affected the inhabitants 
closest to the boundary, for we find no mention of any strife in the we^t in 
the columns of the Bulletin, As late as September lU k 1889* Frank Oliver, 
the member for Edmonton, congratulated the people of the West on the far¬ 
sighted intellectual honesty of their leaders. He declared in the following 
observation, that the desire of the westerners was to avoid tyranny: 

*Whil© it is the undoubted right of the majority to rule it is only 
right to consult the feeling of the minority to some extent. M 

On Wednesday, October 30 , 1889, Mr. J. if, Betts'*’ moved the second 
reading of a bill to amend the School Ordinance, 1888, He declared that 

f . ■ ", ' . \ 

his only desire was to save money, as each member of the Bo r rd was paid 
$500 per annum. For this reason he proposed a rediictlon of the number of 
members in the Board of Education, and the abolition of the sections of the 
Board. In addition he proposed that all schools should be merely public or 
or separate^ and that the power to form separate schools be vested in the . 
Lieutenant-Governor. Furthermore he desired to make it lawful for the 
members of the Board of Education or any Justice of the Peace to inspect 


1. “Hansard* 1 2 of the Legislative Assembly of the Horth-West Territories, 
October 3°^h, I 889 . (A collection of newspaper reports of Legislative 
activity to be found in the Legislative Library, Government Buildings, 
Regina). 

2. The purpose of the proposal would hove been to allow separate schools 
but to abolish denominational control. 






















































































- 51 - 


the books of any* school district. The hill was defeated through the 
opposition of the leader of the Advisory Council which had resigned the 
day before. Mr. Haultain objected that it was too late in the session to 
discuss such fundamental changes, especially as the school ordinance had 
been amended so recently. Five days later Mr. J. F. Betts was one of the 
four members to be appointed to the new Advisory Council with Dr. R. (J. Brett 
of Rod Deer as his leader. We cannot determine whether the defeat of his 
proposal had any effect in helping him to make up his mind on the invitation 
of the Lieutenant-Governor. 



The opponents of denominational Control did not give un the 


N 


struggle. The Dominion Government had informed the Lieutenant-Governor 
that changes were being considered in the North-West Territories Act and 
asked for suggestions from the Council of the Worth-West Territories* 
Having been defeated In the attempt to transform the Board of Education, 


some of the members conceived the idea of attacking at the root of the evil- 


the special privileges given to denominational schools under the Dominion 
act* Accordingly, Mr* B. ?. Richardson seconded by Dr* R* G* Brett, moved 
that a "humbld 1 address be presented to the Dominion parliament asking that 
the Worth-West Territories Act be amended by repealing all of subsection 1 



that his purpose was to indicate the feeling of the Assembly before any 
amendments would be considered in the Dominion parliament. The sub-section 
read as follows* 


1. Journals of the Legislative Assembly of the North-West Territories, 
October 29, 1GS9* 






_ 













■ 
















































































- 52 - 


"The Lieutenant-Governor in Council shall -aass all necessary ordinances 
in respect to education; hut it shall therein always he provided that a 

majority of the ratepayers of any district.may establish such schools 

therein as they think fit...and also that the minority of ratepayers 

therein whether Protestant or Romsn Catholic may establish separate schools 
therein—and in such case the ratepayers establishing such Protestant or 
Honan Catholic separate schools shall be liable only to assessment of such 
rates as they impose upon themselves in respect thereof**. 

The deletion of all words after the word ’‘education* 1 would have made the 

Territorial Assembly supreme in education; separate schools would have depended 

on the will of the Territorial Assembly* 

Mr. Justice Rouleau, the doughty defender of Separate Schools, had 

been appointed one of the legal experts in the new Assembly. Though he had 

no vote he exercised his right to discuss questions very freely. He declared 

that he was opposed to the resolution as it did not consider protection of 

the minority. In his opinion the resolution should not be passed unless some 

extraordinary state of affairs could be proved to the House. He was satisfied 

that the present system was working remarkably well since there never had 

been any friction. He declared that the House wanted to augment the power of 

the majority, and that this power would likely be abused. 

- . " ■ . k.v a . ;? ' , \> ' li 

\. 1 

1 

Ik 

The other members also hastened to chide Mr* Rouleau on his attitude*. 

f 

R. 0. Brett hoped that Justice Rouleau had sufficient confidence in the 
present and future members of the Assembly to believe that their power would 

1. The Horth-West Territories Act, Revised Statutes of Canada, 1886, Ch. 50* 


This latter, observation brought the member from Edmonton to his 
feet. He declared that there was no intention to legislate against separate 
schools, out, only to give to the Assembly the right to legislate as it saw 
fit* He believed in giving privileges to the minority, but he insisted that 
those privileges should not be to the injury of the majority* 




































' 


























■ 

































- 53 - 


not bo ebused. Mr. Betts regretted to he^r Mr. Justice Rouleau sooak on 
this question. He declared that Mr. Justice Rouleau had always advanced 
arguments which were distasteful to him (Mr. Betts). He said that Justice 
Rouleau was there as an interpreter of the law and it was a matter of regret 
that he should advance the claim to be the representative in the Assembly 
of any section of the people. 

On November 6* minor changes in the School Ordinance were again 
considered and Mr* Betts again attempted to introduce an amendment giving 
the power to appoint school inspectors to the Lieutenant-Governor. Again 
his proposal was criticized by the unabashed judge and voted down by the 
majority of the Assembly. Mr. Betts was one of the new Advisory Council* 
and the majority of the Assembly simply resorted to the expedient of 
rejecting any proposal of this Council whether the proposal had any mexi t 
or not. The same fate awaited Mr. Richardson^ address when he moved it 
again next year,* 

Inspectors 

* When the Board of Education met in Regina on March 11, 1836, its 
first duty was the appointment of Inspectors. The direjt influence of the 
churches is evident from the appointment of clergymen to these positions. 
v Pour inspectors were appointed to the area now known as Alberta. In Edmonton 
Rev. A. B. Baird served as school inspector for tho Protestant Sohools. 

There is no record of his report to tho Board of Education but the columns 
of the Bulletin contain evidence of his work* We discover that on March 14, 
1835, Mr. Laird had given the newspaper a report on Writing in the Edmonton 
school. His inspectorship was not the only official position which he held 
under the Board of Education, as he also served on the Board of Examiners. 

1. "Hansard” of the Legislative Assembly of the North-West Territories, 
October 30, 1890. 






Many others could he mentioned. Tout his name evokes the most intern t as 
he is the only individual still alive of' those whose names can "be found in 
the oldest official reports. The sa.la.ry of an inspector varied from $25 
to $500 a year in addition to travelling expenses* On October 11, 1886, 
it was resolved to fix the travelling expenses at five dollars per day. 

At the session of the legislative Council in 1800 the regular salary of an 
inspector was fixed at $20 per school and $5 per day for travelling 
expenses.*’ Clergymen ware not appointed altogether because of the influence 
of the churches. The appointments were also a matter of convenience. 

While the eastern side of the Territories was becoming thickly settled and 
could almost support a permanent inspector, the north and west had very 
few schools. There was no question of any special training for the 
vocation. The most capable men for such casual employment were clergymen 
who lived close by and could be trusted to give an honest appraisal of 
work accomplished. The appointments were made annually very much as school 
auditors wore appointed in later yearc. With the abolition of the Board of 
Education the appointment of clergymen ceased, but for many years no special 
training was demanded. Morally and intellectually these appointments were 
probably of a higher level than those which immediately succeeded them. 

Qualifications of Teachers 

^ The most pressing problem in this period was the obtaining of 
teachers in sufficiently large numbers. For that reason a certificate to 
teach was made as accessible as possible. To take advantage of any avail¬ 
able teacher in the Territories and to encourage others who might wish to 

v 

come to the west, the Board of Education recognized any certificate obtained 

1. H Eans&r& M of the Legislative Assembly of the North-Weet Territories, 
October 31, 1880, and December 11, 188S. 

















- 55 - 

from a Normal School. Provision was also mad© to enable teachers to 
obtain higher certificates. A second class teacher could obtain a first 
class c ertifiCate by producing an insT>ector*s report with the grading 
"excellent". A third class teacher could likewise obtain a second class 
certificate by producing a report with the grading "Good". Any graduate 
of any University, British or Canadian, could obtain a third class certificate 
by producing evidence of his degree. 

Experience convinced the Board that the above provisions were 
too lax. Accordingly the regulations with reference to the granting of 
certificates Came under review in June, IS87, and the following ohangea were 
made) 

"Third Class Certificate": 

A candidate on passing the required examination for a Third Class Cer¬ 
tificate will be granted a Third Class Non-professional Certificate, valid 
for one year. 

On production of such certificate at the expiration of that time, 
endorsed by the School Inspector, the candidate will, subject to the approval 
of this Section of the Board, receive a Third Class Professional Certificate, 
under which he must teach for at least Wo years. 

"Second Class Certificate": 

On production of a Third Class Professional Certificate with two endorse¬ 
ments by the Inspector of Schools, and passing the required examination for 
a Second Class Certificate, a candidate i^ill, subject to the approval of this 
Section of the Board, be granted a Second Class Non-Professional Certificate, 
valid for one year. 

On production of such certificate, at the expiration of that time, 
endorsed by the School Inspector, the Candida.to will, subject to the approval . 
of this Section of the Board, receive a Second Class Professional Certificate, 
under which he must teach for at least one year. 

"First ClaGs Certificate": 

On production of a Second Class Professional Certificate endorsed 
by the School Inspector and passing the required examination for a First 
Class Certificate, a Candidate will, subject to the approval of this Section 
of the Board, receive a first class Professional Certificate, valid during 
good behaviour. 













- 56 - 


"Provisional Certificates": 

Provisional Certificates will "be granted to teachers, not holding 
Normal School or any class of certificate, on theltr sending the following 
information to the Inspector of Schools for the District in which they 
desire to teach viz: 

1. A recommendation from the Board of Trustees of the Sohool District, 

2, Evidenoe of good moral character, 

3* Satisfactory evidence as to competency, 

4, An application for the certificate in the ©ppMeant 1 2 3 s own handwriting. 

Provisional Certificates shall only remain in force for one year from 
the date of issue, hut shall lapse sooner If the holder shall fail to pass 
the examination for a Third Class Certificate held during the year."! 

As the number of teachers increased the qualifications necessary for 
teaching certificates were raised still more. ' All applicants except graduates 
of Universities in the British Empire were compelled to write Territorial 
examinations in I89O. Over all examinations there was appointed annually a 
Board of Examiners consisting of two appointees from each section of the 
Board of Education. This Board also had control over examinations which 
qualified for entrance to the Union schools which were provided in the larger 
centres in order to meet the demand for a higher education.^ The entrance 
examinations which qualified a student for admission to high sohool eontlnued 
in existence until recently when changes in the curriculum brought a change 
in the organization of the schools. All examinations were apparently held 
annually as we find one of the early Inspectors in Edmonton, Fattier J. Lestano, 
criticizing the period during which they were held.3 In his opinion July 
and August die not give the pupils sufficient time for study; he recommended 
winter as a more suitable period. Apparently his recommendation was not 


1. Deport of the Board of Education, 1SSJ. 

2 . Yi&o "Secondary Education" in this chapter. 

3. Report of the Board of Education, 1#S6. 






- 57 .- 


implemented. According to the Report of the Board of Education for IS90 
five examinations had already Been hold and 126 persons had applied for per¬ 
mission to write the Teachers 1 Examinations for that yerr. The stiffening 
of regulations against outsiders was on attempt to protect those who were 
being educated in the Territories. 

In spite of the attempts of the Board to raise the nullifications 
of the teachers, the reports of the Inspectors show that there were many 
weaknesses. As a result of their demands for increased training and improved 
academic qualifications, the Board of Education decided in IS90 to make 
Hormal training compulsory in the eastern area bordering on Manitoba. They 

also recommended the appointment of a Hormal School Principal who would hold 

\ - 

sessions in various parts of the country. Faculties of several universities 
were likewise requested to make arrangements for holding examinations at the 
most important centres in the Territories. 

School Grants 

This was also a period of experimentation in the aid given to 

\ 

sohools through grants. In the School Ordinance of 1 SS 5 . grants were given 
to schools on the following basis : 

(1) on teacher , s qualifications: 

(a) $250 annually to each school employing a teacher with a third Class 
or a provisional certificate. 

(b) $300 annually to each school employing a teacher with a second class 
certificate. 

(o) $350 annually to each school In which a teacher with a first class 

teacher^ certificate was employed. 

(2) on attendance: 

(a) $2 ner child per annum to every school which had an average of at 

least eight pupils, for every child who attended school 100 days, 
where school was kept open for one term. 





















■ 



































































- 58 - 

(b) $ 2.50 per child per annum to every school having an average 

attendance of at least eight pupils, for every child who 
attended l6o days where the school was kept open during winter 
and summer terms. 


( 3 ) On the Inspector f s reports of the school; an annual grant not exceeding 
the total amount of the capitation grant for attendance, if the Inspector 
reported favorably on the work of the school, 


(4) for additional teachers: 

(a) to every school district whore the average daily attendance exceeded 
forty, a sum of $150 for an assistant teacher, 

(b) to every school district where more than one assistant teacher was 
employed and where the average diilly attendance was at least twenty 
pupils for each teacher, a grant of $100 for every* assistant after 
the first, 


(5) for advanced classes; 


to evory district employing a teacher holding a first class certificate 
a grant was given to one group of pupils examined In the same subjects, 
not being more than two subjects, at the rate of one dollar per child, 
per pubject.^* 

By* the Ordinance of 1SS& a definite percentage of the teacher^ 
salary was assured to each school district, the grants being distributed on 


the following basis; 

(1) to every school having a daily average attendance of not less then six 
pupils there was granted 75 percent." of the teacher^s salary if the teacher 
hold a first class certificate; 70 percent of the salary if the teacher 
held a second class certificate; and 65 percent of the salary if the teacher 
held a third class certificate, 

(2) grants for regularity of attendance, 


P 


In school districts where the number of children of school age did 
not exceed twenty-five, a grant was paid which varied from sixty 
dollars to thirty-five dollars, according as the average daily atten- . 
dance varied from 75 percent* of the number of pupils on the roll®/- 


(3) grants for additional teachers, where the average dally attendance was at 
least twenty for each teacher employed, were distributed on the same basis 
as stated In section one* 


1. School Ordinance of 1S&5, Section #5* w Ai& to Schools* 1 





- 59 - 


Secondary Education 

% 

Secondary* education grow out of a desire to train teachers for 

\ 

the rapidly increasing number of schools. On July 22, 1226, the Board of 
Education of the Territories met with the Honorable Thomas White, Minister 
of the Interior, and proposed that a High School, with a Training School 
for teachers attached, should be erected at Hegina, The Minister promised 
to give attention to the matter on his return to Ottawa.^ 

In the same year Inspector Thomas Grover of the Western Assiniboia 
Protestant Schools reported on the necessity for such a provision. His 
report to the Board of Education on this matter was as follows: 

"There are many teachers now holding provisional certificates, who in¬ 
tended to follow the profession of teaching, and who would like to attend 
a Training and High School to fit themselves for their profession, provided 
they could do so without incurring the additional expense of leaving the 
Territories. 112 

\ 

During the year 1227, the following resolution was forwarded to 
the Minister of the Interior: 

H That this Board desires to urge upon the Federal Government the 
desirability of a grant of $ 30,000 being made to the North-West Territories 
for the purpose of establishing one or more High Schools and a Central 
Training School . n 

The resolution further explained that the existing grant was 
barely enough for the 11 Common schools'* so that no provision could be made 
for the high schools out of ordinary expenditure. Apparently a similar 

v 

resolution had already come from the North-West Council, for the Deputy 
Minister replied that the two resolutions would be considered simultaneously* 


1. Report of the Board of Education, 1226. 

2. Ibid. 



















There is no evidence that the Dominion Government, authorized any special 
grant for this purpose hut in the next year a sh re of the income from 
grazing leases was made available for educational purposes. On September 
13, 1888, the Board of Education recommended that clauses be added to the 
Ordinance authorizing the establishment of High Schools.^* These changes 
were mad© in the School Ordinance in the very thorough revision and consol¬ 
idation of all the ordinances whioh took rlace in that year as the result 
of the inauguration of the Assembly which hod replaced the Council in this 
year. 

The Board of Education had a vary busy time at its meeting of 
2 

March 14, 1889* The new schools, known as Union Schools, provided a 
Secondary Education and were required to make provision for the training of 
teachers wherever there was a demand, Regulations were drrwn up with refer¬ 
ence to Entrance Examinations end Courses of Study, The Board recognized 
that such regulations could only be tentative but that they were necessary 
to n exnedit* ^w.t'cttion as early as possible 1 2 *, tfith regard to Normal School 
training the Bo^rd relied on the discretion of the Principal end the Inspector 
who visited such a school. That these regulations were too lax is evident 
from the order issued in 1890, that no time be spent on Normal School training 
without a special authorization from the Board of Education. This came in 

response to criticism of the amount of time spent by principals of Union 

\ 

Schools with these classes, to the consequent neglect of the ordinary school 
subjects. 


1. PiOport of the Board of Education, 1888. 

2. Report of the Board of Education, I 888 -I 889 . 


















































































































The Head Teacher of the High School branch of a Union School 
waa required to be a graduate of some University in the British Empire, 
or to have attainments which, in the opinion of the Board of Education, 
were equivalent thereto; and he was required to satisfy the Bosrd as to 
his knowledge and ability to conduct such a school and to train teachers. 

The Board also saw fit to set a maximum salary of $1,800, as the ordinance 

\ 

of 1888 assured each district of a grant equivalent to 75 peroent of the 
teacher 1 s salary. 

It was compulsory for every Union School to have a Normal School 
Department which should hold one session in each year if required to do so 
by the Board of Education* Every such session opened on the first Monday in 
November and closed on the last Friday of the following March# Each Union. 
School was also to have a library of which the 'books were prescribed by the 
Board of Education* Examinations on the subjects of study and on practice 
teaching were to be set by the Principal of each, school in collaboration 
with the inspector of the schools of the district* For the continuation 

\ 

of secondary work Standard 11 was to be added* On the whole, the program 
of studies for the Union Schools does not indicate that there was any 
definite break in subjects of study be Ween the elementary and the high 
school* The more advanced courses were on the whole, attempts to remedy 
weaknesses that remined as the result of defective teaching in the elementary 
schools* 

In 1890 there were Union Schools already established at Edmonton, 
Calgary, Medicine Hat, and Lacombe, in the present province of Alberta* 

In Saskatchewan, Moosomin and Regina were the two centres* However, one 
should not make the mistake of thinking that Normal School training was given 








































































































- 62 - 

at all these schools. Not only was Normal School training not given, 
hut ordinary secondary school subjects must have been taught fitfully; 

for various reports mention Union Schools as in the nrocess of organization 

^ 1 

where they had been reported as already in existence the year before. 

(This confusion forced the Board to forbid the teaching of Normal School 
subjects without special permission. The only record that we have of any 
work done in this connection is that of Mr. A. H. Smith, B.A. at Moosomin. 

In 1S91 this training was offered in Ifoosomin and Regina but no students 
applied for the latter place, with the result that Moosomin remained the 
only centre of training. The Boerd also ordered that these schools were to be 
taught by Inspectors for the district. At no time was the work very success¬ 
ful. The schools in the other inspectorates in the Territories were few and 
widely scattered so that there was no question of extending these advantages 
• beyond the two areas already mentioned. 

As far back as January 1S83, the Board had submitted to the 
Lieutenant-Governor thw following proposition: 

"That the Board feels that the appointment of a Normal School Principal, 
whose duty it would be to hold Normal Sessions in different parts of the 
country, would have the best possible results in increasing the efficiency of 
teachers and in stimulating education”. 

They concluded their resolution with this petition* 

"That His Honor th© Lieutenant-Governor be requested to urge upon the 
Dominion Government the advisability of granting th© sum of five thousand 
dollar© for the next financial year for Normal School purposes". 

When ordinary methods failed to make any marked progress in 

1 teacher training, many of the members of the Advisory Council returned to the 

\ 

• idea first proposed by the Board of Education. Accordingly in 1892 a 


1. Report of the Board of Education 1890-91. 

2. Report of the Board of Education 1889-90. 






















































































































- 63 - 

Superintendent of Education was appointed with the additional duty of 
Director of Normal Schools. V 'Only then was Normal School training put on 
a permanent bs^is. 


Inspectors* Resorts 

The inspectors* reports are given in some detail.^* During the 
earlier part of this period the most professionally able reports came from 
Inspector Thomas Grover whose duties covered the south eastern portion of 
the present province of Saskatchew&n. In his first report, 1SS6, he complained 
about the tyoe of teaching and urged the consideration of a training school. 

In the same year there Wer© also two reports from Alberta inspectors, both 
of Homan Catholic schools. Prom the north father Lestanc notified the 
Board of Education that not all the schools had been operated during the 
year. In his opinion, too, the qualifications demanded of primary teachers 
were too high* The latter observation was probably influenced by the nunfo er 
of schools which had failed to obtain teachers. J. W. Costello gave a report 
of the work In Laoombe Separate School. 

In the intervening years between 1886 and X&90 none of the 


•... §0 , | ' 1 • V 

inspectors* reports have anything of interest* Perusal of sne reports 

given* In I 890 reveals that there was another able inspector by the name 
of Rothwell In Western Asslniboia* He recommended more advanced non- 
professional training* To him the greatest weakness was the habit prevalent 
among school boards of hiring untrained teachers for the youngest children* . 

He recommended that the Normal School courses last for ten week* only, but 
that there be a written examination at the *nd of that period. He also 
recommended that there should be an opportunity during the Normal School term 


1. Reports of the Board of Education, 1886^.1891, 







































































■ 

































for practical teaching "before approved judges. In addition he submitted 


a comprehensive plan for future grants to school districts.^ 

Conclusion 

This Completes a general picture of this period. It Is a period 



'of pioneering and experimentation * r ith many failures which resulted in 
criticism of the governing authorities. The whole history of legislation 
shows that the ma jority of members were inclined to blame religious Inter¬ 
ference for the failures. Year after year amendments were made to decrease de¬ 
nominational control. Ey IS 9 I the Lirutenant-Governor-in-Council had assumed 
the right to licence teachers and to appoint inspector© in the Territories. 

The Catholic bishops were of the opinion that these were underhand devices 
to nullify the privileges of their flock. Their demand for the appointment 
of a Cetholio inspector was granted, but he was kept occupied In his office 

p 

at Regina so that he could not visit any schools. After preparatory attacks 
had been made on the powers of the Board of Education it was natural that the 
oitadel of denominational control itself should be attacked. Both sides 


became increasingly bitter in the debates, and the constitution struggle 
merely prolonged the life of the Board as the attention of the members was 



bill to abolish the Board. Though consideration of the bill was postponed, 
the support which it evoked made the abolition of the Board only a question 


of time. 


1. Reports of the Board of Education. 1S#6-1391. 

2. Korrice, A.G., Rev. ’’History of the Catholic Church in Western Canada”, 
Toronto. Ontario: Husaon B o ok Company . 1910. 
















































' 


























- 65 - 


CHAPTER V 

ESTABLISHMENT OF STATS COUTBQL - THE COUNCIL OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION 

The period of years between 18#$ and 1$93 was narked, as has been 
mentioned before, by a struggle for responsible government in the Territories. 
The Legislative Assembly was pressing; for full control of all money whether 
raised by taxation or granted by the Dominion Government • As the Lieutenant- 
Governor and the Dominion Government would not concede this, the Advisory 
Council resigned, forcing the Llnxtenanfc-Oovernor to appoint a Council 
which had not the confidence of the. najority of the members. The time of 
the Legislature was taken up chiefly with resolutions and memorials to the 
Dominion Government, in which the Assembly claimed control of the expenditure 
of funds and full independence in legislation. With respect to education 
such a plea was made when the Territorial Assembly petitioned the Dominion 
Government to amend "The North West Territories Act* by repealing sub-section 

1 of section 14 after the word education" in the second line.^ 

/ 

*' The School Ordinal on. 1892. 

Late in the session of 1 $ 9 <- Mr. Daniel Mowat from Battleford 

\ 

moved the second reading of his bill to amend the Ordinance of 18$8. The 
most important proposal of his bill was the section abolishing the Board of 
Education and substituting for it a council of Public Instruction to bo 
nominated by the Lieutenant-Governor from the members of the Executive 
Committee. In his speech he did not attach any blame to the Board of Education; 
indeed he recognized the place of the Board in the history of educational 


1, Journal of the Legislative Assembly of the North-West Territories, 
October 29, 18#9* Also vide above Mr. 3. ?. Richardson 1 © motion. 





































I 


















































- 66 - 


development, The organization of the Board had been a temporary measure 
at a time when educationalists were scarce and clergymen and lawyers had to he 
entrusted with leadership. Abolition of the Bo^rd, Mr. Movat declared, would 
save the uublic twelve hundred dollare a year while bringing the control of 
education directly under the representtatives of the people and would rectify 
salary abuses. Some teachers w re getting higher salaries than seemed 
reasonable to some of the members. Already, in the case of Union Schools, 
the regulations had forbidden the payment of more than eighteen hundred 
dollars per year to any teacher. 

Though the economlo reasons for his act must have seemed very 
weak he proceeded further to annihilate the force cf his argument by proposing 
to appoint a superintendent of Education; to aid the Superintendent two 
examiners were to be appointed to examine and certificate teachers. Mr. 
Prince, a French member, was quick to seise upon this weakness when the bill 
was re-introduced in the next session. 

Another far-reaching proposal dealt with the inspection of schools. 
There v/ere to be appointed four inspectors with salaries not exceeding 
eighteen hundred dollars. They were not to be allocated to any schools but 
were to be sent where necessary. This section was meant to abolish the 
practice of appointing part-time inspectors chiefly from the clergy. It 
must be remembered that there was no provision for religious sections ^ 
in the new Council, so that the same inspectors visited both Catholic and 
Protestant Schools. To make certain that no clergyman could be appointed 
in the future, Mr. Mowat proposed another section (when this bill came up 
again a year later) to bar any clergyman from taking any position whatever 

1. Vide Board of Education, Chapter III. 

7 P 







in the school system.* 

There bed been some difficulty in paying the schools the full 
grants to which they were entitled. The Lieutenant-Governor had met this 
difficulty by deducting a certain percentage of these grants. The standing 
Committee on Education had nrotested to the Lieutenant-Governor and asked 
that payments be made to all schools in accordance with the said Ordinance 

p ’ 

with as little delay aB possible. Mr. Mowat recognised the financial dif¬ 
ficulties of the Government and proposed to deal with it in a manner hallowed 
by tradition and very popular in periods of excitement, that is, by encour¬ 
aging the payment of lower salaries to teachers. Grants were to be changed 
in the following manner: Seventy per ent of the teacher f s salary was still 
to be paid provided that such salary for a third class teacher did not exceed 
three hundred and sixty dollars. Twenty-five dollars, in addition, were to 
be allowed a second class teacher, and fifty dollars to one holding a first 
class certificate. There was also to be an extra grant based upon attendance 
and achievement of the pupils. 

This bill had been prepared in committee and Mr. Mowat had merely 
introduced it into the house with the authority of that body. Most of the 
sections had been copied from the act in force in British Columbia at this 
time. In addition, he added two other proposals which he thought should be 
discussed, though these did not have the sanction of the committee. The first 

was that all teaching be in IRngllsh. The other clause was the one which has 
had a long history in taxation, namely that all landowners be compelled to pay 
a tax for the support of schools. The mover explained thrt he was a sincere 


1. "Hansard" of the Legislative Assembly of the Horth-Vest Territories, 
August 15» IS 92 . 

2. Ibid., December l 6 , IS 9 I. 



















■ 





' 


. 














. 























' 




























- 63 - 


admirer of the single tax system, and that a tax on land came remarkably 
olose to the requirements for such a tax. Shis clause was criticized on 
the ground that it would hinder settlement, but was finally passed when the 
word "personal* was added to "real" property. 

As was to be expected the bill caused a good deal of discussion. 

The opponents first locked horns over the question of minority representation 
in the Council of Public Instruction. A suggestion by Dr. Brett was finally 
accepted since it symbolized a partial surrender of both sides. His amend¬ 
ment allowed the appointment of an Advisory Board of four members, two 
Catholic and two Protestant, in addition to the ordinary members of the 
Executive. The Board was to sit in on the meetings to advise on educational 
matters, but its members were not given a vote. 

She next clause to cause dissension was the one ordering that all 
schools were to be taught in English. Mr. Antonio Prince, a member from 
Alberta representing the Prenoh-spcaking colonies to the north of Edmonton, 
had succeeded Mr. Justice Rouleau as the defender of separate school privileges 
and the Drench language. Mr. Prince believed the children should be taught 
their native tongue before beginning English. Mr. Oliver took this occasion 
to tell the members how difficult it had boon to compel the teaching of 
English In the separate school at Edmonton. A course in Drench was finally 
made permissible. 

Daring the discussion over this act a point was raised as to fcho 
could be assessed for a separate school. It w&t» Mr. Mowat*s desire to allow 

only the assessment of those ratepayers who had petitioned for its organization* 

\ 

Accordingly the old law was amended to provide for the compulsion of only 
those ratepayers who wished to support a separate school. After this victory 























































- 69 - 


the ardor of the members cooled somewhat, for a week later the hill was 
moved hack to the committee stage. After all the question wee still an 
academic one and not worth a legal battle over the rights of the Legislature 
with respect to separate schools* The old lew which provided for the 
compulsion of all ratepayers of a given religious faith was restored* 

Such were the changes which led towards the centralization of the 
school system. The separate school adherents never had a chance in the 
struggle. Unfortunately for them the whole question of separate schools was 
hound up with that of Provincial or Territorial autonomy and also with the 
struggle against established privilege* This was the day of large grants 
of land to railway companies and of other privileges to profiteers by the 
Dominion Government. The west also was girding up its loins for ”better 
terms”. Anything with the flavor of special privilege received short shrift 
at the hands of the local assemblies whether that privilege had any right in 
law or not. Dominion sanction of a rig*it did not make such an institution 
any more popular. Those who regard our criticism of our governments as a 
sign of decay should hear one of the ”01d Timers” about governments of his 
day. The editorials of the Bulletin are very enlightening on this subject, 
reflecting tho uncompromising attitudes of the people. It is email wonder 
then that separate school rights should have been Ignored in the way they 
were. Hr. Prince mi^at thunder about the rights of minorities; and 
Mr. Clinkskill might argue that, in practice, all important questions would 
be left in the hands of the Superintendent with less reponsibility to the 
Bouse than the existing Board of Education; but this left the members 
unoerturbed. They had determined to establish a uniform system of education 
for the territories.^ There was to be a common inspectorate, a common 











































































































examination and uniform qualifications for teachers. Furthermore there 
was to he one approved list of text-hooks. It was indeed a great blow to 
the Roman Catholic separate schools. 

It is probable that this act only hastened an inevitable process 
of development. Under the old act separate schools could only be organized 
within the boundaries of existing public school districts. Owing to the 
©parse population this clause almost nullified any attempt to organize 
separate schools. This in itself would have made the rights of minority 

/ 

schools insignificant within a few years. But the struggle left great 
bitterness for a long time. 

She Superintendent of Education 

\ 

In IS 93 the bill became law and tha government moved to implement 
the changes which had been instituted. Ur. D. J. Goggin, Principal of the 
Manitoba Normal School in Winnipeg, was appointed Superintendent of 
Education in the North West Territories at a salary of three thousand dollars 
per annua. That the appointment was not received with much enthusiasm on the t> 
part of the members can be seen from the records. Mr. Haul tain, the Premier, 
was forced to defend the high salary from the standpoint of the multifarious 
duties which Dr. Goggia would perform, rather than from the standpoint of 
merit or qualifications. The duties of the Superintendent consisted of the 
training of teachers, the inspection of schools, and the chairmanship of 
the Board of Ibcaminers. He stated that the government could not appoint 
a man for each of these positions. However, something of the real reason 
for the appointment is evident from his further statement that no elaborate 
system of organization could b© expected to work without a good teacher. 

Shore was no qualified individual in the Territories to take charge of 
teacher-training. To provide good teachers was to be the assignment ©f 













































■ 























































- 71 - 


Dr. Goggles organization.* 

ITo "better appointment could have "been np.de for the position. 

This does not mean that the appointment was always popular with the members 
of the Legislature. Even as lata as 1#95 some were still criticizing the 
salary paid to the "offioial* 1 2 of the Council of Public Instruction. With the 
people at large, however, and with the teachers, he became increasingly 
popular, as he infused new life into the educational system. Even the documents 
gained bulk as they became filled with reports of current teaching methods 
and future plans. By birth and training Dr. Goggin was connected with the 
best educational traditions of Ontario and had a high reputation with the 
educational bodies of the Dominion of Canada. Many of the present teachers 
of our province remember him as an affable individual well eouipped to meet 
public bodies. Hot only had he a broad education and a lofty idealism him¬ 
self, but he war, able to impart a great'deal of his seal to the teaching 
body. This idealism, combined with the practical experience which he had 
obtained In Manitoba, provided an impetus to education which can still be 

felt. One need only attend teachers 1 conventions of todey to hear echoes of 

■ \ 

statements which fill his reports, and which were repeated often in the 

2 

conventions of those days. 

So well were the foundations laid that there was little change in 
principle during the next few years. However, the growing population demanded 
a specialisation of function for the various administrative bodies. 

It could not be expected that the whole council sitting as a Counoil of Public 


1. "Hansard” of the Legislative Assembly of the Horth-West Territories, 
September 4, 1893 • 

2. Dr. Baird of Winnipeg, now retired, smoke of Dr. Goggin as e speaker with 
a remarkable ability to get in close touch with students end teachers. 







■ 






















































Instruction could attend to all the Administrative duties which were 
forced upon it. Pressure of public business induced the government to 
set up a department to take care of the administration of education in the 
Territories. 

The separate school question was a perennial trouble maker. 
Provision hod been Biade in the act of 189 1 2 for the appointment of four 
non-voting members to the Council of Public Instruction. In 1894 these 
appointments had not yet been made; Mr. Prince therefore moved that certain 
information be given with respect to a meeting of the Council. Apparently 
the whole executive Council had difficulty in meeting on every question of 
school administration. Still more difficult was the provision for the 
inclusion of the four members who sat in an advisory capacity* It was easier 
to leave matters to the Superintendent without calling a formal meeting. A 
memorial from Archbishop Tache and the criticism of the opposition forced 
the Executive to refer their grievances to a Standing Committee* Ho action 
was taken on th© desire of the Roman Catholics to exercise greater control 
with respect to textbooks and the teaching of French; but the Committee came 
to a decision in regard to the procedure of the Council of Public Instruction 
namely that no general regulations respecting the management and discipline 
of schools, inspection or Normal training should bo adopted except at a 
general meeting of the said Council. 

Demands for Normal School Training 

During 1894 much time was spent in discussing a resolution intro¬ 
duced by Mr. Botts^ providing for the establishment of a larger number of 
Norrael sessions throughout the Territories. His resolution definitely named 


1. Journals of the Assembly of the Korth-Wesst Territories, Saotember 6, 1894 

2. "Hansard" of the Legislative Assembly of the North-West Territories, 1894 
















































- 73 - 


a larger number of centres where these sessions might he held, and he 
complained especially that the district of Saskatchewan had been denied the 
benefits of Hormal training altogether. Apparently there had been complaints 
from other quarters, too, for Mr. toil tain was ready with a detailed list of 
the applicant teachers in each district. Alberta had five applicants for a 
Second Class session and six for a third. Saskatchewan fell below this. 
Apparently Mr. Betts was vulnerable in the debate because he had treated the 
matter from the standpoint of teachers. Mr. Ha.OLtain declared that it was 
necessary to consider the mattei* from the standpoint of the people as well 
as the teachers. It was impossible, financially, to establish a Hormal 
School wherever there were applicants. 

In the above discussion there is an interesting reference which 
shows the relative iraoortanc© of f&monton as compared with the other centres 
in the Territories. Mr. Oliver saw an opportunity to advance the olaims of 
Edmonton upon this point and clashed with. Mr. F. H. Insinger upon the claims 
of another centre, Wallace, in Saskatchewan. The best argument that Mr. Oliver 
Could marshal on this occasion for Edmonton as against Wallace was that the 
latter was near the Manitoba boundary where teachers Could be obtained easily. 
Thera was no question of population or Importance. Apparently Edmonton had 
suffered badly for want of a railway between 1884 and 1892. 

Amendments to the School Ordinance, 1895 

By 1895 ^ 0ro been changes which compelled a further consol¬ 
idation of the Ordinance. An already substantial influx of foreign settlers 
« 

necessitated a simplification of the text of the Ordinance, and it seemed a 
good opportunity especially as copies of the Ordinance of I 892 had run out. 

The amendments proposed by Mr. Haul tain did not make any changes in principle 











: 





































































- 74 


except that they sought to make the organisation of new districts more 
difficult, Mr. Haultain felt that such a restriction was necessary if 
the members wished to avoid a decrease in the grants to existing schools.^ 

He now proposed that an enrolment of at least twelve children of sohool rge 
be required before a new district could be organized. In introducing this 
bill he felt that some opportunity ought to be given the members to propose 
amendments as the old ordinance had been. in force for three years. In that 
period he felt that weaknesses should have made themselves evident, which 
members would have the opportunity to rectify. One major change proposed 
was in the payment of school grants. Under the old system increased grants 
had become operative with success in the examinations. The new system 
proposed increased grants on the basis of the inspector 1 ® report. Mr. n &uitain 
claimed this to be an improvement following the British system. Another 
change increased the grants in favor of schools which were operated only 
during the summer months. 

There was an immediate outburst of criticism of the proposed 
changes. Mr. Oliver objected to lowering school grants in any way. It may 

\ 

be that he was influenced in his criticism by the effect of the new proposals 
upon urban schools which would be visited more often by the inspector, but 
it is more probable that he was also thinking of greater difficulties of 
organization around Mmonton, which was just beginning to receive -settlers 
in great numbers. Both he and Mr. Mowat felt that there were other places 
where cuts might be made. The latter even hastened to point out where the 
economy might be effected, ^e declared that there was an official of the 
department who received more money than Mr. Haultain himself. In smite of 


1. “Hansard” of the Legislative Assembly of the North-West Territories, 
August 29, IS 95 . 























































































' 































- 75 - 

Mr. Jlaultain^ assurance that every opportunity would be given for the 
proposal of amendments, the separate school supporters were disappointed 
to hear that thi3 would not fcpply to the text of the bill but to the amend¬ 
ments which h« himself had suggested. The bill passed very much as he had 
planned. 

Criticism of the Council of Public Instruction 
Hiring the closing years of the nineteenth century the criticism 
of the Territorial Government^ school administration could be divided 
under the following heads. In the first place, there was the question of 
norms! schools and qualification of teachers. With this there was connected 
the whole question of separate school rights over which there had been a good 
deal of controversy in Manitoba and Ottawa. In the second place, there was ' 
opposition to the appointment of Dr. Goggin personally. Sometimes this 
criticism followed upon the increasingly stringent qualifications demanded 
of teachers. At oth'rr times it flamed over the difficulties which had to be 
experienced in the inspection of schools. Sometimes also the real reasons 

came out in the open and definite proposals were made for reducing his 

/ 

salary. It is very &lff5.cult to separate the issues at stake. One can only 
follow the events and draw Conclusions* What mu3t be remembered is that 
upon almost every issue opinions differed not upon the basis of any party 
policy but because of personal interests. As the separate school ouestion 
receded into insignificance In the territories after the Ordinance of IS 92 , 
a growing independence was manifested in the behaviour of the various 
members. Of those Hr* Oliver of Edmonton strangely comes to the front* 

This ip especially surprising Mien we consider that throughout the whole 
struggle over "responsible government" in the Territories, Hr. Haultain 
had no stronger supporter than Mr. Oliver. 











































- 76 - 


Soon after the appointment of Dr. Goggin the regulations with 
respect to teachers became more severe. Compulsory attendance of all 
teachers, no matter how long their experience, was demanded at a Normal 
school* As the only normal school was at Regina this oauaed great inoon* 
venience especially to the poorer schools where teachers with lower certif¬ 
icates had been hired. The separate school supporters declared that his 
regulation had been specially aimed at Roman Catholics. On the oth^r hand, 
Mr. Oliver saw a large number of schools closed near Edmonton^ which was 
still one of the pioneering areas, and he wasted no time in bringing these 
to the notice of the Assembly. He declared that the regulation had been 
passed without the knowledge of the Assembly and was detrimental to tiae 
interests of education. Especially was It harmful as (in his opinion) the 
Normal School of Regina had not enough to offer in return for the sacrifice 
demanded. He considered that those teachers who had been trained in the 
Hast had quali float ions superior to anything which they could acquire in 
Regina. The Roman Catholics were demanding that the Sisters be exempt from 
this regulation. Mr. Oliver did not hesitate to offer even these a measure 
of support. If they were qualified then they should be allowed to teach 
without any further trouble. If not. he would refuse t6 grant them a 
certificate to teach, apparently the west, having gone through a period of 
excitement earlier, refused to be drawn too deeply into the separate school 
controversy which was continuing In other parts of Canada. Having achieved 
State control over education in principle, members were willing to make con¬ 
cessions on details. 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, January 11, lE^U, 















































































































- 77 - 


Debate on this question was resumed on the floor of the house 
when the School Ordinance was introduced again by Mr. Haul tain in 1895* The 
French-speaking members again led the attack on the Council of Public 
Instruction. The Premier replied that Ls «nuld not see any advantage to be 
gained by attacks upon the Council. Public opinion had pretty well crystallised 
over the whole problem and it was useless to prolong the matter further. At 
the same time he answered Mr. Daniel Maloney 8 s charge that schools were closed 
because the qualifications demanded from teachers were too high. It was not 
the difficulty of the examination® nor the stringency of the regulations of 
the Council that caused schools to remain without a teacher. He declared 
that if all schools demanded only scholarship and fitness for the task, teachers 
could be found to fill the schools of the Territories especially as provisional 
certificates could b© obtained upon the application of the trustees. What 
caused the difficulty was the special qualifications demanded by the people 
themselves. In addition to everything else, Mr. Maloney f B schools demanded 
that the teacher be a Homan Catholic.^ Unfortunately too few Homan Catholics 

f • : V 

chose to tali© up teaching so that there was difficulty in obtaining the 

teachers necessary. In spite of this defence of government policy, provision 

was almost Immediately made for the holding of Third Class normal Sessions 

in Edmonton. Hitherto In the present province of Albert^ such sessions had 

2 

only been held in Calgary. 

Popularity of the Superintendent 
A full dress debate on the status of Dr. Goggin took place on 
December 7# 1^97 when Mr. T. J. Agnew moved that the salary be reduced from 


1. "I'-agard" of the Legislative Asseinbly of the North-West Territories, 
September 30, IS96. 

2. Edmonton Bulletin, December 21, I 896 . 





' 









■ 








- 





















































- 78 - 


$3000 to $2500. When the mover introduced his motion he was not very certain 

of himself, and he was oorroct in estimating that hia support would not ho 

very strong. Between the time of hia appointment and this dehate Dr. Goggin 

had visited a l^rge number of settlements and was very well known to the 

\ 

people of the country. It was his custom to bring the teachers together in 
towns for professional discussion. Thus began the Teachers 1 2 Institutes, 
later known as Teachers 1 Conventions.* Hot only did he speak to the teachers 
during the day, but it was also his custom to address the public on educational 
matters in the evening. The topics were usually well chosen and invariably 
interesting. We must remember that the only opportunity the people had for 
intellectual oontacts was an election ©very few years or a service at the 
ohuroh if there was a minister, furthermore, a speaker with the qualities 
of Dr. Goggin was sure to gather all those who had children. He vps thoroughly 
modem in his view that moral® and manners should be a principal part of the 
teaching given to a child. To a modem teacher there might be too great a 
stress upon the manner side of the question, but the thirst for continual 
addition to the course of studies had hardly begun yet to replace this subject. 
He was also deeply religious and the importance of religion in education 
received his attention. Piety, h© believed, should be imparted by the parents, 
for teachers were forbidden to teach religion as part of the course. 

In addition to these services, Dr. Goggin had saved the members 

of the Ass ©ably a good deal of trouble in solving some of the tangles In 

\ x 

their districts. Ho member was inclined to oppose one who had become popular 
and who had contributed so much to educational progress. Even Mr. James 
Cllnksklll, a separate school supporter, hastened to express his entire 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, May 30, I 898 . 

2. Ibid., July 2, 1294. 













































satisfaction with the work of the Superintendent though he admitted he had 
“been critical of the apuolntment in the first place.* He supported 
Mr. Haul tain and others in declaring that permanent heads should get fixed 
salaries so that they might keep thoir positions under successive govern¬ 
ments. As an argument in defence of the anointment the Premier stated that 
Dr. Goggin had refused an offer of $2#00 la Winnipeg to accept the position 
in the Horth-Vest Territories. He believed the salary reasonable, as the 
holders of similar positions in Canada and the United States received $5^00 
and above. In answer to the criticism of Hr. Boucher from the JBattleford 
district that seven sohools had been closed in his area, he deolared that 
the schools were closed because the teachers were not giving value for the 

grant paid. Better teachers could not be brought in because there was no 

\ 

place for thorn to live.- furthermore the districts had no organ!?ation and 
collected no taxes, which made it still more difficult to obtain the teachers 
required. 

Progressive Thinking in the Ass ©ably 
In spite of all the critic isms of the government reviewed here at 
some length, the period was not barren of progressive efforts on the part of 
the members. For instance, vigorous opposition by Mr. Clinkskill blocked a 
move on the part of Mr. Mowat to delete the clause requiring trustees to pay 
a teacher for a period of sickness up to a limit of one month* Be deolared 
this would leave a teacher altogether at the mercy of the trustees. 2 The 
same Mr. Mowat, however, showed a more progressive bent when he made a plea 
for technical education. He believed there was too much useless learning 
which did not fit anyone for life. Of course it v/as too early to gain any 

1. "Hansard 1 * of the legislative Assembly of the Horth-West Territories, 

December 7. 1897. 

2. Ibid., October 1, I 89 S. 



















































































. 















- 30 - 

support for such a progressive mem sura, out the incident shows that som© 
members were interested, Mr. Efaultfiln opposed the idea on the ground of 
expense. However, he hastened to add other rorsons which prove that he 
had discussed the matter at some length with the superintendent. He declared 
that school was not intended to fit one for a particular trade hut to give 
mental training. Furthermore h<* did not know what technical education 
involved. Would Mr. Mowat include sowing? During this period the Premier 
also introduced a Public Service Bill which heralded the beginning of a 
departmental system. The work was f^st becoming too involved to be dealt v 
with by the executive sitting as a Committee of Publio Instruction* Soon 
after this an amendment had to be m?de to the Ordinance delegating some of 
the authority in routine matter® to the chairman alone* Even compulsory atten¬ 
dance, so necessary a part of our modern system, was proposed by one of the 
members. The state of the country was not such as to permit any change at 
this time, but the proposal (having been accepted In the most progressive 
educational systems) was certain to become law later** 

The ,32nd of the Pioneer Sra 

' 11 •- ' - \ 

In fact we are coming to the end of an era in the government of 

the Horth-West Territories. Hitherto there had been no elaborate govern¬ 
ment, and educational matters had been dealt with by the HxeOutive* Vp to 
this time there had only been two members who had sat as a permanent 
executive* As the population of the territories increased and as the demand, 
for provincial status became stronger, it could be expected that many of the 
practices of provincial governments would be followed. Departmentalisation 
of the various branches of the service, and ©specially of education, became 


1. “Hansard 1 * of the Legislative Assembly of the North-Vest Territories, 
December 11, 1897* 






































. 





















































- 31 - 


\ 

a crying need. The service had grown to such an extent that it merited the 
attention of one member of the cabinet; indeed it Could no longer he per¬ 
formed by a body meeting only occasionally. Such a practice would certainly 
throw all the responsibility on the non-elective part of the administration. 
There might have been some point to the criticism of the separate school 
supporters that the superintendent had too much power. 

N We see the end of an era, too, in the financial provision for 
educational administration. Hitherto the government had provided seventy 
percent of the school expenditure. The grant towards education took a much 
larger proportion of the annual Territorial budget than of any modern 
provincial budget. In fact, much more was spent on education than the 
pioneering conditions warranted. In the words of Hr* Haultain, other services 
had been starved to maintain education. The time was coming when the people 
themselves must submit to higher taxation so that the provincial grant might 
form a smaller part of the annual expenditure for education. In spit© of the 
generous provision of the Dominion government there was difficulty in meeting 
this expenditure. It was fortunate that towards the end of the century 
additional income came from the discovery of gold in the Yukon.* Unfortun¬ 
ately; that region was separated from the Territories shortly after the gold 
rush, so that the Territorial Government had a surplus for only one year* 
nevertheless, even in that year, the government hastened to Increase school 
expenditure wherever this might be necessary*^ 


1. Journals of the Legislative Assembly of the Worth-West Territories, 

August l6, 1S9S* 

2. w Eansard M of the Legislative Assembly of the Horth-Weat Territories, 
September 13, I&9S. 















/ 

- 32 - 
CHAPTER VI 

THE PREPARATION K>R PROVINCIAL STATUS (I9OI-I905) 

N The Act of 190l\aade certain changes in the administration of 
schools in the Territories which were to he of vast importance to the 

educational system. Under this act a Department of Education was organized. 

s 

In charge of this there was a political head known as a Commissioner of 
Education whose status was similar to that of a present day Minister. A 
permanent head was provided in the person of a Deputy Commissioner. The 
officials first appointed to these posts were Eon. I*. W. 0. Haul tain and 
Mr. J. P. Calder respectively, Dr. Goggin remaining as the Superintendent 
of Education. Daring the interval under review Mr. Haul tain resigned from 
the nosition of Commissioner leaving Mr. Odder in his place, as the latter 
had resigned his position and had become a member of the Territorial Assembly. 
N In I903 Dr. Goggin resigned, having accepted a position with a publishing 
company In the east. His position was not filled again. So well had the 
organization of schools got under way that his duties were performed by the 
r^w Deputy Commissioner of Education, Mr. D. ?. McColl, who had become 
Principal of -the Eeglna Normal School after Dr. Goggin** resignation. 

The nm sections of the Ordinance respecting schools read as 

follows: 

* Department of Education 

* 3* There'shall be a department of the public service of the Territories 
called the Department of Education over which th® member of the Executive 
Council, appointed by th© Lieutenant-Governor la Council under the seal of 
the Territories to discharge the functions of Commissioner of Education for 
the time being, shall preside. 


1. The School Ordinance, Ordinances of the North-West Territories, 1901. 





' 

' 








- S3 - 


4. The department shall have Control and management of all kindergarten 
schools| public end generate schools, normal schools, teachers' Institutes, 
and the education of the deaf, deaf mute and "blind persons. 

5. The Commissioner shall have the administration. Control and management 
of the department and shall oversee and direct the officers, clerks, and 
servants thereof." 

M Educational Council 

S. There shall he an Educational Council consisting of five members at lecst 
two of whom shall he Roman Catholics to he appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor 
in Council; who shall receive such remuneration as the Lleutenant-Govemer in 
Council shall determine. 

10. All general regulations respecting the inspection of schools, the exam¬ 
ination, training, licensing and grading of teachers, course of study, teachers' 
institutes and text and reference bools before being adopted or amended shall be 
referred to the council for its discussion and report. 

11 . The council....may also consider any question concerning the 

educational system of the Territories as to it roay seem fit and shall report 
thoreon to the Lieutenant-Governor in Council .' 5 

separate Schools 

An important change was effected with respect to separate schools. 
Under this ordinance no religious teaching could be given in any school until 

the last half hour. Under the act of I 8 S 5 * religious teaching was not allowed 

' 

in public schools but no mention was cade of separate schools. The Ordinance 
of IS 92 had returned to that of 1SS4, which allowed religious teaching in the 
last hour. The Ordinance of 1901"* stated that the first school in any 
district must be a public school. If a minority desired their own school, they 
could create a separate organization .* 1 2 3 4 However, the control of teaching, 
inspection and text-books was so centralized under the Department of Education- 


1 . The School Ordinance, Ordinances of the North-West Territories, 1£8>5® 

2. The School Ordinance, Ordinances of the North-West Territories, 1SS4. 

3 . The School Ordinance, Ordinances of the North-West Territories, 1901. 

4. 


Ibid, 











- 84 - 


that the privileges of separate schools! were very inconsiderable and were 
hardly worth the trouble and expense. This was a long step from the rights 
originally given to the minority by the Uorth West Territories Act, 1SJ5* 
.Again and again had the Roman Catholic hierarchy protested against this 
continual watering down of their rights, but, after the stora in Manitoba, 
no Dominion government dared to interfere too openly* 

School Grants 

This was a period of tremendous development in the history of 
the Worth-Weet. When the Liberal government came into office in IS 9 S the 
national immigration figures for the year had reached about sixteen thousand. 

\By I 905 the annual figure was almost a hundred and fifty thousand. A large 
proportion of these immigrants entered the West creating new problems. Towns 
and cities grew almost overnight. There were ever growing demands for more 
schools and more teachers, from a total of schools In operation In 1901 

in the Worth-West Territories, the number grew until w© find a total of 
1459 regularly formed districts in I 903 . Two hundred and thirty-seven 
districts were formed in 1904. The number of teachers required grew 
proportionally to the development in the organization of districts. So 
great was the demand for new teachers that the Horrnal Schools were forced to 
hold two sessions annually instead of one. Even then teachers had to be 
brought in from other provinces. The report of the Department of Education 
for I 903 states that two hundred and twelve teacher"* were admitted. In 
addition to this, eighty-two permits were Issued. How the cities grew can 
be realized from the fact that a school costing forty thousand dollars was 
built in 1902 in Edmonton. The same report states that another building 



















■ 


■ 









































■ 
















- 85 - 


Table I 

Summary of School Statistics 18S6-19G4 1 


2 Year : 
2 : 

Schools in 
Operation. 

Pupils 

Enrolled 

Teachers 

Employed 

t 

• 

Total Grants Paid 
to Schools 

1 

| 

• • 

s 1886 s 
2 2 

76 


2,553 

84 

1 

: 

• 

$ 8,908.72 

I 

t 

2 1837 2 

• 9 

111 


3,114 

8 125 

0 

• 

2 

a 

36.s97.47 

2 

l 

2 1838 2 

131 


3,453 

! 150 

J 

: 

% 

44,547.06 

2 

2 

1 I889 : 

164 


*. 57 * 

: 183 

• 

• 

• 

• 

56,984.63 

2 

2 

2 IS90 i 

2 • 

195 


5.389 

8 224 

© 

• 

85.002.55 

2 

2 

2 1891 2 

213 


5.652 

248 

• 

• 

129,042.01 

2 

• 

• 

8 XS92 8 

249 


6,170 

8 295 

2 

121,056.94 

3 

2 

: 1893 8 

e • 

262 


8,214 

: 307 

B 

s 

• 

e 

106.576.59 

2 

2 

a 

8 1 S 94 8 

e 9 

300 


10 J 21 

E 

353 

5 

113. 999-85 

s 

2 

• 

i 1295 i 

* t 

341 


11,972 

4oi 

* 

112,182.90 

♦ 

• 

• 

8 XS3o 8 

a a 

366 


12.796 

433 

2 

126,218.21 

2 

2 

2 I897 i 

394 


14,576 

. 457 

2 

: 

121,457.18 

2 

2 

t 1898 2 

426 


16.754 

483 

2 

: 

e 

133,642.79 

2 

2 

a 

2 I899 : 

* # 

454 


18,801 

545 

e 

9 

e 

142,455.89 

s 

• 

a 

8 1900 8 

4 4 

492 


20,343 

592 

l 

9 

168,322.03 

* 

2 

a 

8 1901 8 

564 


j 

23.837 1 

: 632 

i 

9 

9 

a 

162,215.07 

4 

2 

a 

5 1902 8 

e s 

64o 


27,441 

783 

< 

: 

e 

155,558.41 

e 

2 

a 

8 1903 8 

1 • 

743 


33.191 

916 

• 

: 

• 

213,764.72 

3 

2 

• 

8 1904 8 

917 


41,033 I 

! 1.129- 

e 

$ 

239,380.01 

* 

i 


■.. ; [ 

1. Reoort of the Department of Education of the Horth-West Territories # 
1904 - 1505 . 






















- 86 - 


vould have to 'be erected owing to the rapid growth of the school population.* 

2 

She Ordinance of 1901 mad® further changes in the method of the 
payment of school grants. There were to he five conditions upon which 

X 

depended the amount of school grants. An altogether new principle was the 
payment upon the amount of assessable land. Hitherto every district had 
been paid a flat per diem amount; this had operated to the disadvantage of 
small and sparsely settled districts. On the new basis every district that 
comprised 6400 acres of assessable land would receive $1.20 for each day that 
school was kept open. In case the district was larger, the grant was reduced 
gradually to a minimum of $.90 a day. Bonuses were p?id depending upon the 
length of time school was kept open and the class of certificate held by the 
teacher. The first bonus was meant to encourage schools to keep open more 
than one hundred and sixty days per year, by providing an additional grant of 
forty cents for every day of operation In excess of that number. The other 
bonus was paid to all schools whose teachers had a first class certificate. 

The payment was only ten cents a day but its effect was to encourage both 
teachers and trustees. The latter found it profitable to secure better 
tea. hers while the former were encouraged to seek higher qualifications. A 
new bonus was also offered depending upon the regularity of attendance. 

Hitherto the payment had been on the basis of average attendance and larger 
schools, which were usually more prosperous, could earn higher grants. The 
new grant plan was a plan to aid the smaller schools. It was hoped, moreover,, 
that the new grant vould increase the regularity of attendance. The last 
factor in the allotment of grants was a principle copied from the old ordinance. 

1. B&monton Bulletin, June l 6 , 1902. 

2. The School Grants Ordinance, Ordinances of the Horth-West Territories, 1901. 

% 























































•The amount depended upon the report of the inspector with respect to the state 

of the school* Its effect was to compel both teachers and trustees to take 
a greater interest in the school* Half of the sum received under this 
section was to he spent on the purchase of books for the school library. On 
the whole these grants were the best that could be effectively administered 
under the pioneer conditions existing at the time* Ihey encouraged regularity 
of attendance a the building up of a school library, the employment of 
teachers with higher certificates and the care of the sohool* Ho better 
system could be evolved until larger districts were organized to make the 
promotion of teachers more systematic* It is unfortunate that the later 
governments did not continue some of the policies followed at this time* 

Problems of Administration 

Other questions disturbing the minds of those interested in 
education were those of consolidation of school areas and the introduction 
of manual training. The Ordinance of 1901 offered additional inducements for 
the establishment of consolidated schools, fhe government concluded that 
school districts with a limited population could offer only limited facilities 

A 

In education. She annual report of 1903 complained of the difficulties 

especially with respect to secondary education*^ In this report it was 

! 

recognized that increased financial assistance would have to be forthcoming. 

In speaking to the Dominion Educational Convention in Winnipeg, Mr* Calder 
admitted that the difficulties were very great owing to the sparsity of 
population* Tker® was still a large prejudice in the minds of the legislators 
in favor of the smaller school area. The report of 1903 visualized that an 
increase in the population would bring demands for smaller districts rather 


1* Report of the Department of Education of the Eorth-Wast Territories, 1903 























































































' 









. 


















- 38 - 


than larger. Prom what can be gleaned from the newstjapers and the reports 
of this period there does not seem to be any indication of extraordinary 
interest in or enthusiasm for consolidated schools. 

Manual training schools were established at Calgary and Edmonton 
as a result of a generous private donation. As many of the virtues claimed 
for the subject seemed extravagant to Dr. Ooggln, he gave some room in his 
report to a treatment of its values and limitations.* Ee stated that 
manual training was really not another subject but rather an added mods of 
study. It was only a further attempt to help the pupils to convert thought 
into action since *action tests and clarifies thinking*• Manual training, 
in other forms, had long been a subject of study. The only Innovation was 
in the materials used. Ee divided its supporters into two Categories. 

Some advocated the subject for its utilitarian value. Others valued it 
because it revealed to the pupil hidden aptitudes and Indicated what calling 
the student was fitted for. He condemned the extravagant claims made for it. 
It would not take the place of reading, writing, or arithmetic. Its greatest 
value lay in a correlation of the physical, the manual, and the intellectual. 

Probably some further notice should be taken of the resignation 
of Dr. Goggln from his position as Superintendent of Education in I 903 . 

As late as June we still find him attending meetings of teachers throughout 
the country. On June 9, 1905 • there is a report of his address to the 
Teachers 9 Institute held in Edmonton where he spoke of the teaching of 
Arithmetic and Composition. In spite of the loss, his resignation was a 
blessing in some respects. So manifestly did his influence predominate in 
all matters of educational Interest in the Horth-West that his presence was 


1. Eoport of the Department of Education of the Ebrth-West Territories, 1903* 







- 39 - 


a deterrent to the healthy development of the teaching organization. 

After his departure more responsibility was placed on the individual 
teachers and their organization, and in succeeding years teachers them¬ 
selves prepared resolutions for the consideration of the Department of 
Education. Nevertheless his influence was lasting, and the Report of the 
Department of Education for 1903 gives expression to the universal ragret 
at his resignation. Some of his former pupils acknowledge his influence 
even at the present day. 

She Autonomy Dills, 1905* 

Earlier in this chapter mention was made of the tremendous 
development In the North-West. It is important to note this development 
for another reason; the Dominion Government could not postpone the consider¬ 
ation of provincial status for the Terri tori ?s very much longer. On the 
debate over the Autonomy Bills, Mr. Hobart Borden twitted Sir Wilfred Laurier 
for refusing to concede that status in answer to resolutions from the 
Territorial Assembly and for postponing it until the election in 1904. 

It seemed strange to him that the Prime Minister had discovered the necessity 

\ 

for conceding autonomy in the midst of an election campaign. Speculation 
had been rife from 1903 about th© policy of the government with respect 
to the ever youthful question of s©oarate schools. The Ontario newspapers 
foreboded that Ottawa would shackle the provinces by Halting their freedom 
in education. There was even an effort to make this an issue in the 
election but it failed owing to the "Fabian tactics of the government".^ 

Following the election there had been some discussion as to 
the policy which the government would follow with respect to the school 
question. Hon. Clifford Sifton, Minister of the Interior, was forced to 


1. Dafoe, John W., "Clifford Sifton in Relation to his Times*, 
Toronto. On tario! Macmillan and...Companz. 1931. P* 277. 





















































. 








- 90 - 


go south for his health when the session opened. Knowing that the matter 
would cone up for consideration he had Called the western members into 
consultation* His own position in the Manitoba School Question and his 
inclination prompted him to leave the provinces free to follow their own 
devices. On the other hand, he knew that such a step would throw Canadian 
politics Into a turmoil over religious and racial issues which might work 
incalculable harm to the future of the Canadian nation* Accordingly he came 
to the conclusion that the best policy was to Incorporate in the constitution 
a clause guaranteeing the rights which the minority already held under the 
Ordinance of 1901* He Intimated this to the Prime Minister prior to his 
departure. 


On February 21, 1905* Sir Wilfrid introduced the Autonomy Bills. 


In these bills he had incorporated, word for word, the clause from the Worth 
West territories Act of 1275* his speech he drew a parallel between the 
policy of Croat Britain and that of the united States with respect to schools 
and was loud in his eulogy of school© where religion was taught I 



H I would say that I never could understand what objection there Could 
be to a system of schools wherein, after secular matters have been attended 
to, the tenets of the religion of Christ.are allowed to bs taught*. 1 

Shore is still a dispute as to what Sir Wilfrid meant in the clause which 

was Introduced, She statement which Is quoted above would indicate that he 

only wished religious tenets to be taught during the latter part of the day, 

which was allowed by the Ordinance as it stood at the time. On the other 

hand, his opponents claim that he would not have spoken so long about the 

Value of religion in schools if he had merely carried out Mr. Sifton*s wishes. 


1. Sir Wilfrid Laurier In Eansard, 1905, Vol. Ij p. 1452, 







- 91 - 


Sir Wilfrid himself always claimed that he wished to incorporate the rights 
of the Catholics as they stood at the time under the Ordinance. 

Daring this speech he also gave an exhaustive account of the 
history of the separate school question and the clause in the B.N.A. Act 
which guaranteed separate school rights. It was on the insistence of Galt that 
the clause had been incorporated. At the Quebec Conference the delegates 
from Quebec and Ontario alike had promised that acts would he passed 
guaranteeing those ri^ita. Quebec tod carried out her part of the bargain, 
but the opposition in Ontario tod mads th© agraoment ineffective. Because 
of this Galt tod resigned, hut he was still invited to accompany the delegation 
to London to watch over the piloting of the hill through the British 
Parliament, in order that the rights of the Protestant minority In Quebec 
might be defended. She Act of 1£J5 tod been passed without much protest 
except a warning in the Senate from George Brown. Alexander Mackenzie 
had incorporated the separate school clause on the advice of Edward Blake, 
who felt that this would prevent future heart-burning and encourage the 
settlement of all classes and religions in the west. Under this law a 
majority of Catholics could create a Catholic school. Where they were in 
the minority they could create a separate school. We have already reviewed 
the subsequent history of separate schools in the various ordinances of the 
North West Territorial Assembly. 

In parliament there was only a mild interest. Robert Laird Borden,, 
the leader of the Conservative Opposition, was conciliatory. The bill only 
lmclemented what he had advocated for many years. As leader of the opposition 
he had supported the denands of Mr. Haul tain in the last election. Mr. Borden's 
support and the government's vacillation had finally convinced Mr. Haul tain 
that western rights could only bo obtained through a crushing defeat of the 




Liberal party. 1 2 3, .After protesting that a copy of the hill had not been 

provided, Kr. Lor den merely said the follow ing:- 

*.I sincerely trust that on both sides of the House wo 

will not seek to make this a political question in any sense .2 

The vest also refused to be e;c itod though criticism persisted in 

some of the newspapers and pulpits. It is true that Mr. Haul tain's stand 

against the Liberals received warm support in Saskatchewan, but there was no 

such non-partisam leader in Alberta; and the other alternative, Conservatism, 

did not anneal to this province* While the west was opposed to the Premier's 

original clause, the general prosperity of the railway expansion era had 

resulted in an Inclination to compromise.3 Again and again the Bulletin 

expressed surprise that there should be so much interest in the Bast, claiming 

that separate schools in the sense understood by the people of Ontario did 

not exist in the West.* 4, 

Sir Wilfrid had anticipated some criticism but ho was not prepared 
for the outburst which followed in the Bast. The attack was led by the 
Toronto newspapers,5 A good deal of the outburst was not quieted oven after 

the compromise clause was substituted, since it came from those who wished v 

. . ' \ 

to destroy separate school rights altogether. The Orangemen circulated a 

petition to parliament against the measure. This was to he expected, but 
from less biassed quarters came similar expression. Such men as Br. J. Goggia, 
L.L.B., the former Superintendent of Education, and Rev. Charles W* Cordon 
addressed meetings of protest. The Globe of Toronto published, an open letter 
addressed to the Prim© Minister by Kr. Haul tain, criticising the autonomy 

1 . The Canadian Annual Review, 1904, p. 202, 

2. Hansard, February 21, 1905, p. 1466. 

3. Edmonton Bulletin, June 7# 1905. 

4. Edmonton Bulletin, May 10, IS 05 . 

. The Canadian Annual Review, I 903 , pp. 41-92, 


5 



















- 93 - 


legislation end asking that all reference to separate schools he deleted 
altogether from the Autonomy Bills, Mr, Eaultaln explained that such an 
omission would leave the power exclusively in the hands of the Provincial 
legislature subject to the provisions of the B.H.A. Act** 

Of greater concern was the storm in the Liberal party itself. 

Mr. Sifton hurried hack to Ottawa, and, after a long session with the 
Prime Minister on February 27, sent in his resignation the next day. 5Vro 
days later the resignation was announced in th© house, where Mr. Sifton gave 
as his reasons the principles stated In the Prime Minister's speech and 
specific provisions dealing with education within the Autonomy Bills. Humors 
were rife that Mr. Fielding was about to follow his axasple. She "Globe," 

a Liberal newspaper in Toronto, declared that the government had no ri^it 

' - 

to dictate in matters of education to a province, though it might do so in a 
territory. 

. 

Sir Wilfrid was at a loss to understand the extent of the agitation. 
He had been prepared for some criticism, but h© certainly had not expected 

it to be so severe. It was his view that the compact of Confederation applied 

. 

to all minorities as well as to the provinces. He was particularly surprised 
by the criticism within Liberal ranks since the bills continued a compromise 
initiated by Alexander Mackenzie. He protested In a letter to J. H. Dougall 

p 

of the Montreal Witness that the bills merely safeguarded the existing 
system in which there were no separate schools as Ontario understood them 
but a system of essentially national schools. He quoted from th® Ordinance 

i 

of 1901 to show the extent of the control of th© Department of Education over 


1. The Canadian Annual Eeview, 1905. P• 5 ^. 

2. Skelton, O.W., "Life and Letters of Sir Wilfrid Lanrier, Yol# 2", 

.Oxfor d,Hniv.ers.ity_„Prjgss. 1921, p. 232. 







- 94 - 


what were considered separate schools. Ho denied any inconsistency between 
his positions in IS 96 and 1905* On both occasions he had opposed intolerance, 
first, the intolerance of Homan Catholic ecclesiastics who would deny freedom 
to their own followers, then the Intolerance of the Protestants who would 
accept privileges for the Protestant minority in Quebec, but who were 
unwilling to carry out their share of the compromise when a Catholic minority 
was Involved. He sympathized with the ideals of those who urged the need of 
national schools to hold together a country of many diverse creeds and origins 
but he could not agree that, in the schools or out, national unity involved a 
drab and compulsory uniformity. 

Arguing from the above. Sir Wilfrid's supporters claimed that the 
whole furore was a blunder due to the desire of such men as the Minister of 
Justice, Mr. Pitzpatrick, to force the Issue. On the other hand, those who 
supported Mr. Sifton claimed that the Government was following a well planned 
scheme to establish separate school rights by hurrying the bills through 
before the return of Mr. SIftou from the south, there is no need to take 

\ 

either side very seriously. We mu^t imagine the Prime Minister as a busy 

\ 

man subject to all kinds of pressure. Having finally reached a decision, he 
introduced a clause which, in his opinion, would be satisfactory to both 
sides, lo one with the experience of Sir Wilfrid, especially after the 
Manitoba episode, could have thought it possible for any separate school 
rights to exist after the people had made up their minds to abolish those 
rights, ffiio clause of 1SJ5 would satisfy tho Homan Catholics that he was 
doing the best possible under the circumstances* On the other hand the 
Protestants could not complain because they had built up a national school 
system In the Horth-Weat Territories with that clause in existence. It 
merely served as a brake for the legislators, reminding them that there were 





























































































' 


l 


■ 





















- 95 - 


minorities which it would he well to placate. There is no evidence that 
Mr. Sifton had stated any objections to the clause. 

On the other hand Mr. Sifton was probably reading into the clause 
what he heard from others, probably frci? French-speaking members like 
Mr. Bourassa. Furthermore, there was no love lost between him and the 
Minister of Justice. Mr. Fitzpatrick, owing to the latter^ appointment to 
a position which he himself had coveted.^ Twice had Sir.Wilfrid acted in 
opposition to his wishes. Might there not be a hidden motive in the clause? 
As it stood there were a number of objections in suite of the good intentions 
of the Prime Minister, To ascertain the rights of the separate schools 
litigation was necessary. It waa certainly desirable that the new act 
should be a settlement and not the beginning of a long period of uncertainty. 
When Mr. Sifton objected to the clause Sir Wilfrid asked him to submit his 
own for the government *s consideration. Apparently Mr. Sifton understood 
that the clause would have to resemble the one from the Act of IS75. It is 
difficult to analyze motives. Twice he had applied to the Prime Minister for 
appointments which would free him from the storm of political life. This was 
getting too strenuous; and there were rumours of a further attack upon his 
administration in his capacity as Minister of the Interior. (An attack did 
come in the nest session though by that time he had almost retired from 
politics). Whatever were the plans of the Prime Minister, Mr. Sifton 
suggested before his departure th^t the would agree to a clause in the 
autonomy bills continuing the educational system as it had been fashioned 
by the Territorial Assembly up to 1905*^ * m8 favor of giving the 

provinces a free hand, but he decided that the above clause was the only one 

1. Bafoe, J.W., “Clifford Sifton in Halation to His Times", Toronto. Ontario : 

MrcKlll-n rnd Company . 193 -U p. 279 * 

2. Ibid., pp. 302-326. 

3. Ibid., p.237. 




















- 96 - 

which had the shadow of a chance to pass the Pomlnion Parliament without 
a political upheaval. In his opinion it was a compromise. On the one hand, 
it would chock Mr. Haul tain as the clausa merely continued a system which 
Hr. Haul tain had been instrumental In forming. On the other hand, it should 
satisfy the Catholics as it was the most they could get under the circum¬ 
stances . An attempt to obtain more might jeopardise the rights they would 
have under this clause. When Mr. Sifton returned from his vacation and 
discovered that the clause from the Forth-Vest Territories Act of 1SJ5 had 
been substituted, he immediately resigned in order to be free to organise 
an Independent following in opposition to the measure. 

Hearly a month of private discussions followed, for some time the 
Prime Minister showed & tendency to refuse to have anything to do with any 
changes. It is likely that political life did not bear more lightly upon 
him than it did upon Mr. Sifton. furthermore, the latter's resignation had 
lowered the prestige of the government. Fortunately more moderate councils 
prevailed and Mr. Sifton was asked to collaborate with the Minister of 
Justice In the preparation of the new clause. The insurgents chose 
E. M. Howell, X.G., of Winnipeg to represent them in conference. From what 
can be gathered these meetings were not always very peaceful. Suggestions 
for a compromise abounded. Mr. Haul tain believed that restrictive measures 

applied to the new provinces as well as the old, and that it was unnecessary 

) 

to incorporate any further limiting clauses in the Autonomy Bills. Sir 
Robert Borden agreed with Mr. Hault&ln about not including any clauses with 
respect to education, believing this would altogether free the provinces 

with respect to education. Finally the clause as it now stands, guaranteeing 

\ 

the rights of the minority as they stood under the Ordinance of 1901, was 
drafted and agreed upon. The second reading of the bills took place on Maroh 












- 97 - 

22, a month after they had boon Introduced. 

In parliament the amendment reunited the party hut there was not 

tho came disposition to accept the measure in Ontario. W© find the Bulletin 

reporting the visit of Br. Carmichael, Superintendent of the Presbyterian 

Missions. As late as June 7th, Br. Carmichael remarked upon the absence of 

agitation in the West though there was still excitement In Ontario. He 

himself believed it was the best possible Compromise under the circumstances. 

On April 2nd, the same sourcu reported that Archbishop Langevin deprecated 

the failure of the government to guarantee the rights of the minority as they 

had been granted in 1S75* Apparently the good archbishop was worried over 

the tendency of his adherents to accept the compromise philosophically. The 

Liberals had a good talking point in supporting the compromise. They claimed 

that separate schools had greater legal rights in Ontario while in Manitoba 

the government was conceding much more outside the law.^ In the absence of 

any strong objection from the West the agitation burnt Itself out. Though 

the debates were long, both bills were reed for the third time at the end 
\ 

of June and the two provinces came into being. 

It remains to give an account of what transpired just prior to the 
elections. Mr. Haul tain chose to ally himself with the groups in active 
hostility to the bills, even In their new form. On March 24, the Prime 
Minister had read Mr. Haul tain 1 a open letter on the floor of the House. The 
chief attack from the Conservative side was to the effect that Haul tain had 
not been consulted when the two bills were Introduced. Mr. Haul tain® together 
with Mr. E. B. Bennett® later Prime Minister of Canada® had campaigned in 
the two by-elections held in Ontario in the interval between the second and 

1. Edmonton Bulletin® April 19® 1905* Speech of J. S. Williams of Toronto. 


















third reading of the two hills. Accordingly Sir Wilfrid summoned 

Mr. Walter Scott to the Premiership of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

/ 

George H. V. Bulyea, because of his close association with Mr. Haultain, 
was made Lieutenant-Governor of Alberta where he would not suffer the pain 
of having to turn against an old friend politically. In the elections which 
followed, the Conservative Party under Mr. Haul tain in Saskatchewan and 
Mr. Bennett in Alberta suffered defeat. Mr. Scott remained Premier in 
Saskatchewan while Mr. A. C. Rutherford became Premier of Alberta. Some 
attempt was made by both to resurrect the school question but without any 
success. The West was developing and satisfied. Furthermore, the Liberal 
cry of Conservatives and the G.P.R. tt was a slogan which could not be beaten. 
The Liberal Party came into power in both provinces. 


► 


- 99 - 


chapter vn 

BOTLOPMHOT OP THE 3SKJCATI033AI. PKOGBAJI I905 - 1921 
The Province of Alberts was formed on September 1, 1905* It 
inherited a rapidly developing system 00 nsiating in this first year of some 
600 schools. The first Alberta government assumed its duties in regard to 
education with enthusiasm and seal, Within the first year 144 new school 
districts were organized and schools built. The province was being rapidly 
settled, albeit largely by non-English Immigrants who knew nothing of the 
English language and little of British traditions. 

The Ukrainian National Group 

It was realized that one of the first necessities was to proceed 
as rapidly as possible with the Ganadianization of the new-comers* A post 
designated Supervisor of Schools among foreigners was created, Mr. Robert 
Pietcher being the first appointee with headquarters at Wostok. He was 
directed to give every possible assistance to the non-English settlers in the 

\ 

V 
\ 


the services of well qualified teachers. While people were quite willing to 
assume control of their affairs, they did not always make the proper 
financial arrangements. local boards were often too optimistic as to the 


establishment of schools, the securing of teachers, and the levying and 

collection of taxes. He was authorized to act as official trustee for any 

1 . 

district, and in this capacity to administer the affairs of the distrlot 
pending the election of local trustees. 

The task facing Mr. Fletcher was by no means easy. By 1915 there 
existed within his sphere of jurisdiction one hundred and thirty schools, 
lying for the most part in the area between Bruderhelm and Vermilion. The 
most difficult problems were those of finding adequate funds and securing 













- 100 - 


amounts collectible. On the other hand the people of the districts were 
not always willing to contribute the amounts for which they were assessed. 
Whether Boards were elected or not the ratepayers insisted on being consulted 
on all matters, and friction was cons tan. t. 

There was no difficulty in the performance of the duties of 
trustees especially when it came to securing properly qualified teachers. 

In 1913 Ur* Fletcher reported that the province was being raided by teachers 
from other provinces sent by an organisation composed of "certain well known 
agitators” • It is open to question whether this was true. Teachers had 
come from Manitoba where they had been prepared in the English School for 
Foreigners instituted by the Conservative Government under Sir Bodmond Boblln 
It might have been true that many of them were warmly grateful to the 
Conservative Government, especially as their treatment in this province was 
by no means generous. The stigma of "agitators" was attached to them by 
those who were supporters of the existing government of Alberta* Furthermore 
their qualifications were low as compared with those of Horsal-trained 
teachers though they compared favorably with those of "permit" teachers. 

Being very certain of support on both political and educational grounds, 

Ur. Sletcher acted promptly* The government was persuaded to pass amendments 

to the School Ordinance depriving an unqualified teacher of the right to 

/■\ 

recover in a court of law any remuneration for his services as a teacher* 
Another amendment made such a teacher liable to a fine not exceeding fifty 
dollars or to a term of on© month imprisonment for teaching without a permit. 
About twenty school districts were involved, but most difficulty was exper¬ 
ienced in Bukowina School^* where the Supervisor reported he had to take legal 


1* Beport of Department of Education, 1913* 


















- 101 - 


action to recover money illegally collected by the secretary, as the latter 
had used the school tax-roll to obtain taxes for the salary of an unqualified 
teacher* 

It was one thing to prevent unqualified teachers from securing 
positions in these districts but another to provide sufficient certified 
teachers* To encourage more students to enter the teaching profession, 

Mr* Fletcher attempted to have residences built near the schools* Shis 
policy continued to the dying days of the Liberal Government when an amendment 
to the School Act authorized the government to grant one-third of the cost 
of a teacher's residence in order to encourage districts to build* 

A further effort was mde to prepare Ukrainian teachers for these 

districts* Following the example of Manitoba and Saskatchewan an English 

School for Foreigners was established in Vegrevillti* In a resolution before 

the Legislature supported by Messrs* Walker and Holden, three thousand dollars 

were voted to establish a *Euthenian Training School*.* The object was to 

Improve the students 1 knowledge of English before allowing them to enter the 

Mormal Schools* Some criticism of this step was offered by the opposition 

who objected that this was planned to give special privileges to foreign-bom 

students* In answer to this criticism the Minister of Education, the Hon* 

J. H* Boyle, had to explain that the purpose of the institution was to give 

regular diplomas on the conclusion of the work and that no permit to teach 

would be Issued without the regular training,** W* A* Stickle, B* Pood* was * 

1 . , ^ ■ i; 

appointed principal, and in 1912 a vacant store was rented to house the 

school in Tegrevllle* During the first year the number of students mounted 


1* Edmonton Bulletin, January 31 , 1912* 

2* Edmonton Bulletin, September 13, 19^6* 








- 102 - 


to twenty-six In grades ranging from one to nine* The principal had some 
difficulties in dealing with these students, hut, on the whole, the 
experiment was eminently successful. The report of 1914 states that three 
of these students wrote on the Grade XL examinations. While the school was 
primarily opened for the purpose of training future teachers for the colony 
north of Vegreville, its graduates exerted influence which reached heyond 
the ranks of teachers alone. The young men from this institution became 
missionaries of education amongst their own people, and living symbols of 
the opportunity which beckoned to on© and all of the newcomers in this 
country on an equality with all Canadian citizens. While a few remained 
permanently in teaching many entered the professions and others went into 
business.^ As individuals they are a strong factor In Ukrainian life even 
today. Judging from this standpoint it is a pity the experiment had to b© 
discontinued towards the end of the war when the problem of re-establishing 
returned soldiers occupied the public mind more than the training of young 
foreigners. She students themselves attempted to carry on with the help of 
Ukrainian-speaking citizens, and one institution, the Ukrainian Institute 
of Edmonton, organized on the dormitory principle, exists at the present day. 

Other National Groups 

With respect to the other new national groups In this country, 
there is little to say, She Lutheran Church established private school® 
throughout the province which became important enough to obtain special notice 
in the Departmental Beport of 1914. As they received little encouragement 
from the Department of Education, most of them were closed in the same year 

1. Beport of Department of Education, I9l4, 


i 








- 103 - 


and did not reappear again as elementary school institutions.^ In the 
secondary field, however, the Lutheran College in Camrose and the Concordia 
College in Edmcnton have overcome their difficulties and are still thriving 
institutions. She Boukhobors did not water Alberta in large numbers hut the 
Eutterite Colonies are extensive, nevertheless, little trouble has been 
experienced in establishing schools among these people.** On the whole, 
religious minorities seem to have caused much less difficulty in our schools 
than in those of any other province in Canada. This has probably been due to 
delicate handling by the officials but probably, also, to the overwhelming 
majorities of the parties in power. The Opposition groups were too weak even 
if they had wanted to champion the cause of any of the minorities. 

Tho Problem of Teacher Shortage 

The immediate problem in the organization of schools was that of 
obtaining sufficient teachers. A Normal school was opened In Calgary in 1905 
under the principalship of Mr. G. J. Bryan. Almost Immediately the instructors 
of the Normal School began to press for a longer period of training but this 
reform did not take place for many years. With the scarcity of teachers 
the Department was not too careful about qualifications. Two normal sessions 
were held during 1907# la the next year the Calgary Normal School building 
was completed and a practice school organized. In spite of this the number 
of teachers continued to be low. Not only were country schools being built, 

but there was feverish activity in the erection of school buildings in the 
fe, • ■ - 

towns and cities. Most of the large Edmonton and Calgary schools are of pre¬ 
war origin. The Department advertised for teachers in the British Isles and 

infji tutted a short course for those who came, to prepare them for Canadian 

conditions. 

1. Export of Chief Inspector of Schools; Raport of Department of Education, 191^* 

2. Report of Department of Education, 1919; Mennonite Schools. 







- 104 - 


Tor the first time la 1913 graduate# of accredited Hl^i Schools and 
Universities in the United States were granted permission to enter the 
Normal Schools on the condition of pausing special examinations in History, 
Civics, end Geography. A new Normal School was built at Camrose in 1P12 end 
classes were organized under the princlpalship of Ur. J. 0. Miller. There 
was some criticism from the Opposition** ae to the choice of location, but 
th© Government hoped rural teachers might obtain special training here, 
especially as there was a good deal of interest in two courses which were 
added to the curriculum, viz., Agriculture and Gardening. As a result of 
these efforts we find that in the supply of teachers became sufficient 

to meet the demand. With this growth of supply, demands for a lengthened 
term also increased. Especially pressing in their recommendations were 
Ur. Coffin, principal of the Normal School, Calgary, and Inspector C. Sansom. 
They insisted tha t the short course was becoming an unbearable strain on th© 
practice teaching facilities. Too many students had to be given ?n opport¬ 
unity to teach and the numbers were still growing. A longer course would 
not only make professional preparation easier but would provide opportunity 
for more academic training. At one time Ur. Coffin had hazarded the opinion 
that preparation for teaching should, begin with grade £* In 1916 he 
recommended that a ten-month course be instituted* Hot only this, but all 
Normal Training, in hir> opinion, should be followed by some scheme of 
progressive qualification sine© the attainment of a permanent certificate . 
often marked the horizon of a Candidate. Principal C. IP. McNally of Camrose 
Normal School also pleaded for the extension of the training period. In hlft 
opinion the necessity for leadership in rural educational and social life 
demanded better trained teachers. Both hoped the School Boards might b© 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, March 19, 1913 





educated to encourage teachers "by paying hi^ier salaries and by providing 
more permanent employment.* 

The war again caused a shortage of teachers. The situation became 
so acute in 191S that the Eon. J. R. Boyle, the Minister of Education, was 
forced to immediate action. The short term not only made :it easy to enter 
the teaching profession, but enabled teachers to leave on slight pretext 
without serious loss of vocational preparation. The Department of Education 
obtained 300 teachers from outside the province and the Normal Schools trained 
467, and yet the shortage was S00 at the end of the year. As a preliminary 
step a new scheme was initiated to provide extra-mural qualification for first 
class interim certificates. This consisted of a preliminary reading course 
followed by a course at summer school. It was also announced that the short 
course would be discontinued after that year. In 1918 the period of training 
was extended to eight months. As many were unable to attend Normal School, 
the Government announced that loans would be made to Normal students to enable 
them to complete their course. Special consideration was given to returned 
soIdlers.3 

This did not settle all the difficulties of the Department. As 
there still ontinued to be a shortage of teachers, a third Normal School 
was opened in the Highlands School, Edmonton. The program of this school, 
at the beginning, was limited to an emergency course of twelve weeks intended 
to Increase the number of available teachers immediately. At its completion 
only a temporary diploma was granted, the regular certificate being Issued 
at the completion of additional trainingj 1 2 3 4 Graduates were only required to 


1. Report of the Department of Education, 1917* 

2. Ibid., 191S. 

3. Ibid., 1919. 

4. Edmonton Bulletin, Feb. 11, 1919 : 








- 106 - 


complete a four-month course to obtain a regular certificate.* Some of 
these measures were short-ltoed, as experience showed a decline in the 
quality of teaching. The depression following the Great War together with 
these measures soon made the supply equal the demand, and regulations were 
made more stringent. It was never found necessary to lower the entrance 
requirements again. The last Minister of Education of the Liberal Admin¬ 
istration, the Honorable G. P. Smith, was so optimistic in this regard that 
he sponsored an amendment to the School Act establishing the "Alberta Teachers* 
College." Apparently it was to be connected with the University but was to 

p 

remain under the authority of the Department of Education. Many years were 
to pass before any steps were taken in the fulfilment of this clause, but 
it shows us the direction of the planning. Pew changes have been made in our 
Normal School training since this period. 

In 1906 the number of employed teachers was with an average 
salary of a little more than six hundred dollars. The opportunities for 
advancement were almost negligible, offering very little incentive to any 
teacher to choose teaching as a permanent vocation. Even this modest estimate 
of the average annual salary is misleading when we consider that most schools 
were merely summer schools in which employment was possible for only six 
months a year. With such conditions prevalent it was Impossible to hope for 
s any permanence in the teaching profession* With the feverish activity in 
school organization, the Department of Education advertised for teachers in . 
all the other provinces and in the British Isles* Some of those who came 
taught school until other opportunities offered themselves. Some taught 


1. Report of Department of Education, 1921; Calgary Normal School 

2. Edmonton Bulletin, March IS, 1920* 






































1 




























■ 























- 107 - 


only while they fulfilled their residence obligations on their homesteads * 

Of necessity the Department was forced to depend on the "permit" teacher 
who only obtained permission to teach for a certain stated period. As late 
as 1912 one inspector reported that forty-six out of a hundred and twenty 
teachers in his area were teaching on permitsFurthermore pioneer 
conditions did not permit women to enter the teaching profession in large 
numbers. 

Gradually the picture changed. Efforts were cont inued to make 
attendance more regular. Trustees were encouraged to keep their schools 
open during the whole year. It was a difficult thing to break a settled 
habit of the people, and many reasons were advanced for closing schools until 
compulsory legislation was invoked. The severity of the winter season and 
the lack of winter clothing were the chief reasons advanced* When permanence 
of employment is mentioned in these reports, we must remember that the 
retention of a teacher for a whole year was unusual. In Cities and towns 
the situation was much better, and a sign of more settled conditions is 
noticeable in the organization of the Alberta Educational Association la 1910 . * 
Unfortunately the irregularity of employment, together with the demand for 
increasing enlistment in the army, brought about a reduction in the 

number of male teachers. Especially was their loss felt in the villages 
and towns where they had formerly served as principals. 

First Attempt to Encourage Teachers 
Criticism of teaching conditions became more marked towards the 
end of the war. As less time had to be spent in organizing new districts, 
the inspectors had more opportunity to evaluate results* They began to 
realize that the greatest problem was the retention of the teacher for any 
extended period. One inspector noted that boarding difficulties increased 

X* Eeport of the Department of Education, 1912 $ Vermilion Inspectorate* 

, u 





- 108 - 

with, the Increase of prosperity. In some areas it was almost impossible 
for teachers to obtain a place to board as farmers considered them too much 
trouble. In addition, there was amongst factions in the districts continual 
bickering into which the teacher was certain to be drawn, When we add the 
short period of employment in many areas and the small salaries to be obtained, 
it is to be wondered that the people were given any service.* Such was the 
condition at the end of 1918 . 

In the next few years, beginning with the last year of the war, a 
new policy of inducement to teachers was inaugurated, of which some details 
have already been mentioned, The Hon, J. R. Boyle passed an amendment to the 
School Act making $840,00 the minimum salary for teachers. Returned soldiers 
were admitted to the Normal Schools with Grade X standing, They were given 

p 

loans to complete the course and no fees were charged. In the same session 
the formation of two-room schools was stimulated by the payment of a double 
grant to one of the rooms,3 She re was also an increased grant for teachers 1 
residences. To encourage improvement in qualification, larger grants were 
made to secondary and technical schools. 

Nevertheless this policy had certain definite limits. The 
Hon, G. P. Smith had become Minister of Education about the time that the 
teachers had organised the Alberta Teachers 1 Alliance* The minister resented * 
the militant policy of this new organisation and refused to give them any 

representation in deliberations, preferring to deal with the Alberta Educational 

4 .. 

Association. The Minister was one of a large body of people during that 


1. Report of Chief Inspector; Report of Department of Education, I 9 I 9 . 

2. Edmonton Bulletin, February 11, 1919• 

3 . Ibid., March 25 , 1919 . 

4. Ibid., February 19 t 19 2 3 4 1* 

























































- 109 - 


period who were opposed to th© growing strength of scions. At the same 
time the industrial unrest everywhere was affecting the teachers. A 
strike of the Calgary 1 teachers was imminent, and everywhere there were 
demands for an increase in the minimum wage which had been set by the 
former minister* Ehough Mr. Smith was adamant on this point he bowed to 
the storm hy making minor amendments to the School Act to make the teachers 1 
positions more permanent. She cans© of teachers 1 seourity was vigorously 
championed by W. M. Davidson, member for Calgary. On his initiative a Board 
of Conciliation was set up to investigate grievances of both teachers and 
trustees, but it was only given power to make a report. Mr. Davidson*8 
original proposal would have conferred upon the Board power to compel both 
teacher and trustee to abide by its decision. On th© other hand the minister 
agreed to make obligatory a standard form of contract between the teachers 
and trustees throughout the province. This contract had a * continuous" clause 
which kept the agreement in force from year to year end provided for a 
schedule of salary increases. It also mrd® compulsory the hearing of a 
teacher by the Board in case th© teacher felt himself unjustly used. He 
refused to consider a form submitted by the Alberta Teachers* Alliance 
allowing dismissal for Inefficiency and misconduct alone. In this he was 
supported by most of th® Conservative members. On the whole the amendments 
were good political strategy. To the trustees he could say that there was 
nothing in th© Act to fore© them to keep a teacher, while he could tell the 
teachers that only time would show how the amendments would affect them.^ 

Time did show, but the Hon. 0. P. Smith was no longer Minister of Education 
to effect any more changes. He was forced to resign with the whole Cabinet 
on the defeat of the Liberal Administration in 1921. 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, April 15, 1921 













































I 

$ 





























































- 110 - 


Scnool Grants 

2 0 tv eon 1905 and 1920 amendments were made in the School Grants 
to improve the position of rural schools. On the other hand there was a 
definite decrease in the proportion of the aid given to elementary schools. 

The ordinary per diem grant was reduced from $1,20 at the inception of the 
province to $1,00 in 1919 * A special grant to schools which had been kept 
open for l6o days during any year was repealed in I 9 I 3 • However, in I 9 I 3 
a new grant of 40 cents per day was provided for the first four years after 
the organization of a district to help the pioneer areas* This was reduced 
to twenty cents in 1919 * bonus given in 1901 for the employment of a 

first class teacher was repealed in 19 * 3 * A grant of 15 cents depending on 
an inspector^ grading was retained in 1913 but was reduced in 1919* Further¬ 
more this grant was sot aside for the purchase of books for the school 
library, The grant formerly given for a high percentage of attendance was 
also abolished. The grants to village rnd town districts vent down as low as 
thirty cents per day, but some improvement was made in 1919 *0 that no schools 
received less than 60 cents per day.^ 

With respect to other schools little improvement took plaoe in 1913* 
However each room containing at least eix pupils above the eighth grade 
obtained a grant of forty doUa.ro per term and high school rooms retained the 
grant of seventy-five dollars per term, A small grant was made to Consol¬ 
idated Schools for each conveyance employed. 

In 1919 we note a definite attempt to encourage secondary schools, 
consolidated schools and two-room schools, for each vehicle employed in 
conveyance there was a grant of $1.50 per day. For a motor vehicle there 
was an additional grant. Assistance warn aloo given to Consolidated Schools 


1. School Grants Aot, 1919 




















■ 








































- Ill - 


if one room was equipped for community purp oscs. The upper room in a two- 
room school obtained double the ordinary grant. To rooms exclusively 
devoted to high school purposes, there was a grant of $700 par annum in 
Tillages ana towns, and $600 in the cities. 

Additional grants were enacted for the advancement of technical 
education, providing a certain percentage of the salary of the teachers and 
the cost of the equipment. This grant also varied with town and village 
districts. In 1P20 the grant allowing-a certain percentage of the instructor's 
salary was Increased to forty per cent. 

Vocational Schools 

A study of the changes in the school grants indicates the direction 
of the interest of the people during this period. Dr. J. C. Miller was 
appointed Director of Technical Education in 1914 and he issued a report on 
the state of technical education in the province. He mentioned Hormal Schools 
as the first Vocational Schools in the province. The other types existing 
at this period were Agricultural Schools, Commercial classes and Hight 
Schools, With respect to subjects studied in the schools he noted manual 
training and household science as subjects on the curriculum from the 
earliest period in the history of the province. To give the teachers the 
necessary training, Summer Schools had been established. Ha stated that an 
Institute of Technology and Art would have to he established to provide for 
the training of specialists. He recommended reforms in the curriculum of 
the Hormal Schools, though many of the practical arts had already been taught 
there. TJnfortunetely the depression in the early years of the war did not 
allow very much development. Calgary retained its Pre-vocation*! School and 
Edmonton its Technical School, but Lethbridge abandoned its attempt. Oamrose 
was the only point outside the two cities which was still experimenting. 






































































































- 112 - 


Eight classes remained veiy popular, Justifying the grant of fifty percent 
of the teacher*s salary paid by the government. 

The building of the Institute of Technology and Art gr*# out of the 
demand of the city of Calgary for a University. A denominational school 
called Calgary College demanded the right to grant degrees in I91*>. Th»? 
report of a Commission appointed in the same year to study the proposal was 
unfavorable.^ Instead this body recommended the establishment of the Institute 
of Technology and Art. This was organized in 1916 with temporary quarters in 
East Calgary. In I917 the Minister of Education, the Hon. J. R. Boyle stated 
that the organization had been brought to a point where Immediate educational 
assistance could be given to returned soldiers. This work was discontinued in 
1920. In the meantime the greater interest manifested in technical education 
forced the government to provide additional accomodation for the students, 
and the present Institute of Technology, associated for many years with the 
Calgary Normal School, was completed in 1922, 

Consolidated Schools 

The Interest in consolidated schools was revived in a debate in 
2 

the Legislature in 1912. The next year legislation was passed to allow 
their organization. The grant for conveyance, however, was too small to 
offer very much inducement. Improvement in crop returns revived this interest 
in the later years of the war, the number of such schools organized in 1917 
being forty-twoThe departmental officials enco-raged the organization 
not only because it offered greater opportunities to the pupils, but also with 
the hope that it might give impetus to an adult community movement and that 


1. Edmonton Journal, March 24, 1915* 

2. Edmonton Bulletin, January 31, 1912. 

3. Reports of the Department of Education, 1917 and I9IS. 








- 113 - 


thereby* country life might he made more attractive to the children and 
thus prevent the exodus to cities. On the other hand, the officials were 
instructed to make plain the increased expenditure necessary for this type 
of school so that districts might not venture into this field blindly. 

The peak of the movement was reached in 1918 with the majority of schools 
organized in southern Alberta. The schools generally were of two types; 
some were organized to give an opportunity to offer high school work in 
the country; others merely united schools with insufficient numbers of 
children. The advantages were evident in all districts, but owing to the 
depression in the years succeeding the war their hi^i cost made them unpopular. 
Iheir importance decreased with the growing interest in the organization of 
larger units of administration. In the north, with its more thickly-settled 
population, two-room schools were the order of the day# 

Secondary Schools 

The secondary schools during this period differed little from 
those in existence in 1935 - There were one-room village schools in which 

\ 

Grades IX, X, and XI were taurht, where the teacher could do little more 
than to supervise work don© by th© students. Then there were larger schools 
where Grade XII was taught in addition to th© others with two or three 
teachers in charge. Th© last type was the urban school with specialists at 
the head of every department 3 Prior to the increase of the grant in 1919# 
the cost of such a school to the district was very great# The result was 
that teachers* qualifications were very low and a minimum was spent on 
laboratory equipment. The villages found such a school difficult to finance, 
especially as no financial aid was forthcoming from the rural areas# It 


1. Beport of the Department of Bducation, 1915* 





was the rapid increase in the high sohool population at the end of the war. 
which forced the Government to increase the grants* hut for many years it 
was a problem to provide sufficient accomodation for the increasing enrolment. 
Ho curricular changes of any value were made to suit the growing needs of 
the new type of student. Junior High School organization was begun in the 
cities to provide a transition from the elementary to the high school. 

This was the only concession made to those growing needs. 

Attendance 

A number of changes were mad© in the School Act of 193-3 vhich 
enabled the Department of Education to keep a closer check on attendance. 

On the one hand, the amendments placed a check on the indiscriminate closing 
of schools; on the other hand, regulations were tightened to enforce 
attendance. Heretofore, school boards had not been obliged to operate 
their school for more than one hundred and twenty days unless there were at 
least twenty children between the ages of seven and fourteen resident within 
the district; nor was the board obliged to operate the school unless there 

were ten resident children of school age.^ How no board of trustee® had \ 

, - . • / ' ■ : ; : 1 \ - • • 

the authority to close the school for any cause whatever without the approval 

f 

of the Minister. Th@ department waa to be notified immediately of the 
closing of any school for any cause other than statutory holidays. She 
department was thus to be kept informed continually instead of being forced 
to wait until the completion of the terra return. The School Ordinance of 
1901 had provided compulsory education which could not be enforced because 
of the above weakness. Cities and towns were now compelled to have truant 
officers, while the enforcement of the law in rural areas remained in the 

1. The School Ordinance, Ordinances of the' Nprth-Wesi Territories, 1901. 







- 115 - 


hands of the Department. In the Department the organization of this 

service consisted of the chief truant officer, the Inspectors, who were 

the provincial truancy officers, and the teachers.* It was the duty of 

the chief officer to investigate the non-attendance of ohlldren reported 

by the teachers. .If conditions warranted and the parents neglected a 

warning sent to them the inspectors were Instructed to prosecute. 

Mr. M. M. Obrien, who died in 194} while still in the employ of the 

Department of Education, was appointed Chief Truant Officer and remained in 

that position until 1916. In this year the Truancy Act was repealed to give 

place to the School Attendance Act and the Inspectors became Provincial 

y 

Attendance Officers. In X 9 IS attendance was made compulsory for all children 
under the age of fifteen whether the child hod completed grade 3 or not. 

Under the old act there was no oom^ulslon beyond grade 3. The act was also 
amended to allow inspectors to Institute proceedings before a justice of 
• the peace should a warning not be heeded within a certain definite limit. 

In I 925 the age of compulsory attendance was raised from fourteen to fifteen. 
Provision was made, however, to exempt a child of this age if he was in some 
useful occupation. The strict enforcement of tho School Attendance Act was 

one of the most important duties of inspectors during this*period. Almost 

I 11 |L , ■ if , ... 1 HI . : ; .v I 

every inspector 8 s report mentioned his difficulties with enforcement. It y 

was one thing to pass an act but another to compel people to observe It’, 
nevertheless, with tho disappearance of pioneer conditions, difficulties 
with attendance gradually ceased except In a few isolated cases. Generally 
people learned they had to send a child to school unless clothing were 
lacking. Because of the latter trouble, irregularity of attendance recurred 
when ^employment grew and the price of farm produce was low. 

1. Report of the Department of Education, 1913* 












- 116 - 


Inspectors 

The ears and eyes of the Department of Education were the 
inspe 'tors, just as they are today. In 1906 there were only six inspectors. 
Owing to the difficulties of transportation and communication the number 
grew to forty in 1919* Th© Chief Inspector described their main duties as 
having to do with the organization and operation of schools. During the 
period there were continual complaints about the lack of time to give effective 
supervision. Travelling from school to school by horse and buggy, compulsory 
attendance and other duties took so much of their time that supervision was 
impossible. For this reason provision was made for the appointment of ten 
additional inspectors in I 9 I 9 .* Unfortunately, even this was unsatisfactory. 
The Chief Inspector began to realise how ineffective the system was. To 
him proper supervision could only be possible with large administrative units, 
sine® the responsibility for supervision snoald lie with the local admin¬ 
istrative body rather than the Department. Of the ten additional inspectors 
appointed, two were assigned to the high schools, while the rest looked after 
the elementary schools, including those in the cities. As we shall see this 
was only a temporary measure. As inspection became easier because of the 
improvement of roads and better training of teachers, and when it was 
acknowledged In the Departmental reports that supervision had not gained by 
the change, the new government found the inspectoral! service a very 
convenient place to economize. The end of this period found a greater number 
of inspectors in the employ of the Department of Education than at any ^ 
succeeding period until the inauguration of the larger administrative unit. 

School Libraries 

The school library system established in this province was better 
in many respects than that of any other province. From the beginning free 

1. Edmonton Bulletin, March 25 , I 919 . 

2. Reports of the Department of Education, 1914 and 1921. 

































I 







' 























- 117 - 


Readers were issued. Premier Rutherford, vho was also Minister of ‘Education, 
introduced a measure to enable the government to do this in 1902. The 
Readers were prepared through the co-operation of the three western provinces. 
Another hill gave power to the Minister of Education to make a contract for 
the supplying of text end reference hooks to the pupils as well as globes and 
charts and other necessities.^ In 1913 the special grant of fifteen oents 
per day based on the grading given by the inspector was set aside for the 
purchase of books for the school library. Because of the difficulties of the 
trustees in ordering books, the Legislature changed the Act in the second 
session of I 9 I 3 , authorising the Bepartment to supply books in lieu of the 
special library grant* Prom that time on the Library Branch carried a heavy 
stock of books. In 1916 two thousand and seventy-three schools received 
consignments of books instead of the grant. Prom the standpoint of children’s 
literature there was a big loss when the policy was abandoned after the 
resignation of the Liberal Administration, but the greatest loss was suffered 
in adult education since the Library Branch was beginning to supply books 
for both juvenile and adult reading. 

\ 

Conclusion 

This is the picture of conditions in Alberta schools during the 
period from the beginning of the Great War to the end of the war boom* The 
progressive legi slation was an attempt to raise the quality of the work as 
far as possible through the medium of larger grants* In the province there, 
was a general lack of interest in education* The trustees were incompetent 
and the teachers inexperienced. Even when these defects were removed the 
lack of interest resulted in insufficient funds, even in wealthy districts* 


1. Bdsionton bulletin, January 1, 1903. 












- 118 - 


A good deal of the inefficiency might liave been overcome through better 
supervision, but the roads and laclc of organization made this impossible 
for a long time, teachers changed schools frequently without very much 
opportunity for inspection. As a result it was impossible to weed out mis¬ 
fits. Many sent out by the Korraal Schools were too youthful to take their 
duties seriously. Daring the war* too, many of the districts were depopulated 
* due to enlistment, with a further financial impoverishment of the taxable 

area* Oils also lowered the calibre of trustees in the pioneer settlements. 

in 

Laxity in financial planning and collection of taxes was a common occurrence. 
In addition, lack of supervision resulted very often in dishonest pilfering 
of tho school treasury by the secretary-treasurer or the trustees. It was 
this condition that departmental officials attempted to Improve. It is no 
wonder they groped everywhere trying one thing and another, from consolidation 
to longer normal school terms and an increased number of inspectors. And, 
in the main, they built better than they knew. As yet there was no quickened 
Interest among the teachers to help them. When it did come suddenly as the 
result of men returning from the war with new ideas, it is no wonder that the 
official world was dazed by the suddenness of the change. However, that strife 
Came in the next period. In the meantime the Alberta School system had 
developed about as far as was possible under the conditions prevailing at 


that time 





































































- 119 - 


chap nil viii 

THE TEACHES AS A PROBLEM IN ADMINISTRATION 
A Seasons for the Coning Struggle 

V' 

The status of the teacher eventually stood forth, in Alberta 
as elsewhere, as the chief determinant of future educational progress. 

Tlie reports of inspectors and officials showed that attendance had increased, 
grants h^d extended the school year, hut the results were still disappointing. 
With teachers changing continually, with younger teachers in endless 
procession underbidding and crowding out those who were experienced, our 
school system was not giving the results that the expenditure warranted. 

With this realization on the part of the officials there was a growing 
consciousness of the teacher's importance on the part of the teachers them¬ 
selves. This la d to the formation of the Alherta Teachers* Alliance. 
Unfortunately the reforms did not Come as quickly as some had anticipated. 
While the officials had given protection to teachers in the past* they were 
unwilling to raise the status of the teacher on the demands of an aggressive 
association of teachers. An organization of teachers Was a new and unknown 
factor in education, arousing fear and suspicion. In the struggle which 
followed the imperative need for the improvement of teacher status was 
forgotten. Legislative enactment in that direction was violently opposed 
by the school hoards of the province. The minister, caught squarely between 
the youthful combativeness of the Alherta Teachers* Alliance and the 
intranslgeance of the employing Boards was continually on the defensive and 
had to maintain the poise of his Department by frequent changes of front. 


1. The School Ordinance, Ordinances of the North-West Territories, 1901 

























































































' 


















- 120 - 

Only when security of tenure came through the establishment of the large 
unit of a&ndnistratlon was it received with comparative indifference. Having 
lost control of the email diBtrict the people lost interest in any further 
changes. 

Residences and Two-Room Schools 

It heCame evident to the officials of the Department that * the 
greatest problem was the securing of well-trained ar.d well-equipped teachers" 
Several reforms would have to be effected bofore such an objective could be 
gained. The building of & teacher's residence beside the school, was one 
such reform. In 1921, however, one inspector reported that a residence was 
insufficient. Ke believed living conditions must be improved and the 
financial reward za&de more attractive. The teachers 1 organisation vent 
farther and Insisted upon a more permanent tenure. This was the reason for 
the demand for a Board of Reference in 1921. 

It was also hoped that the organisation of two-roora schools would 
aid in the encouragement of a superior type of teacher, at least in the upper 
room. Hot only was the grant for a second room very generous but there wag 
also an additional grant for secondary work. These schools became especially 
numerous among "Hew Canadians" 2 where additional pressure could be used 
through the Supervisor of these schools. There was little difficulty in 
pointing out the advantages of the tv/o-room school to the people. In some 
cases, when ths Equalization Grant was paid, the upper room more than paid 
for itself. In a few poorer areas in the early depression year 1930* the 
amount of grant paid was more than the salary of the two teachers. On the 


1. Report of the Department of Education, 1921. See report of Chief Inspector. 

2. Report of the Department of Education, 1921. See report of T. S. Carr. 












- 121 - 


whole this second-room grant was the most practical administrative reform 
undertaken. It enabled the rural people to enjoy some of the blessings of 
a secondary education and gave an opportunity for the division of work in 
the elementary section. Furthermore it became customary to give some recog¬ 
nition to a first class teacher by putting him in the upper room. Some of 
these teachers were married with families, and through their maturity exercised 
a very important influence amongst teachers in a given area. Fortunately, 
too, the Supervisor was successful in getting residences at the two-room 
schools. If northern Alberta has had any advantage over other parts of the 
province in the number of children attending secondary schools, the advantage 
Is almost wholly due to the two-room school* 

Teacher Training 

The temporary lowering of requirements for entrance to Normal School 
in 1920 was quickly reflected in the qmllty of the students, so that 
regulations were stiffened almost immediately. Not only was admission granted' 
only to those who had fully Completed Grade XI, but the "passing mark" was 
raised from 3 ^ to 40.^° In 1923, the Normal School year was extended to nine 

. . , Y 

months* Normal School loans were granted only in oases where a student could 

not attend without the loan* In suite of this the enrolment was so large in 
Calgary that additional space had to be provided. This may have been due to 
the rumor that the course would be extended to two years, bat there is no 
doubt that the Departments policy of suppressing permits forced those who 
wished to teach to take their course immediately. Furthermore, many of those 
who had previously held a third class certificatetook the opportunity to attend 
a short couree for the completion of requirements for a second class certificate. 


1. Baport of Department of Education, 1922. 

2. Report of Department of Education, 193** 













- 122 - 


During the later twenties there was again a shortage of teachers. 

For this reason a Normal School was planned for Edmonton with a building on 

the University Campus. This was Completed in 1930* In the meantime Normal 

training was given in King Edward School, Edmonton. For the first time, too, 

in 1929, the School of Education was organised in the University of Alberta 

to give professional training to graduate students* Dr. Milton La Zerte was 

placed in control of this pbar.® of the training. 

A very important feature was added to the ordinary Normal training. 

For a long time it had been a weakness of the Normal School Course that 

little experience could b© obtained in the ungraded schools where most students 

later found their first positions. Now arrangements were made to give each 

student a week in a rural school with some successful teacher. The economic 

depression again brought changes. The number applying for admission became 

so large that further steps had to be taken to limit the numbers. In 1931 

the number of admissions was limited to seven * hundred. The loan was reduced 

to a maximum of two hundred and fifty dollars, and preference was given to 

those who had completed Grade XII.^ la the next year the loan policy was 

abolished and the entrance fees were raised to fifty dollars* These wore 

subsequently doubled and a decision was made to close one of the Normal 

Schools. Because of the financial conditions it was felt that Edmonton 

would suffer least. Accordingly the government decided to close the Edmonton 
o 

school. To everyone it was evident that this could be only a temporary 
measure es the Edmonton building was the most modem. For the time being, 
however, it was hoped this would reduce the number of students and consequently 

1* Report of the Department of Education, 1922. 

2. Report of the Department of Education, 1931* 










- 125 - 

decrease the numbor of unemployed teachers. It In noteworthy that none 
of th© fin© arguments used at the building of tho Camrose Normal School 
were given for its retention* Treraendous changes had taken place since Its 

Inauguration# Sic automobile and tho highway had chattered the picture of 
an ideal country community, removing the old distinctions between country 
and city. When it became evident that two training institutions were sufficient 
to provide the teachers for our schools, there was no question a© to which 
two of the three (Edmonton, Oamross© and Calgary) would survive* 

Provision for Secondary Education 
Secondary education received an Impetus during this period. In 
the earlier years tho elementary school hnd received attention due to the , 
type of set tier who came into our province. r fhe older children helped to 
clear the land while the young received an education in the elementary school* 
Aa pioneer conditions began to disappear these children advanced to the upper 
grades. She high prices due to the war also freed the children from a good 
deal of tho labor at home# She governments encouraged this tendency* At 
the session of 1 C J22 the U.F.A* Administration voted a grant of fifty cents 
per day to schools attempting work beyond tho eighth grade#* As many of 
tho members were farmers, there was a natural desire to make education more 
accessible to the farm* Already In 1921 the Secondary Consolidated School 
Act had given authority to two or more school districts to unite for the 
purpose of organising a rural higli school* This amendment was ©f little 
effect because people preferred to follow the simpler plan of earning an 
increased grant in their own rural school* The first two grades of the high 
school became so numerous that they were a source of worry to Inspectors 


1. Deport of the Department of Education, 1922 












124 


because they monopolized far too much of the overburdened teacher*s time. 
School trustees were even unwilling to pny a monthly fee of three dollars 
per child to have their children educated in a town school. The permission 
granted by the Department of Education in 1922 to write Grade VIII provincial 
examinations in the local school tended to aggravate the situation still 
more.* The grant to rural school© was lowered hut the unit system made it 
possible for them to carry the high school work partially. As might he 
expected the work was slipshod and incomplete. The power given to teachers 
to recommend pupils in Grades II and X was abused and led to a large number 
of failures in the next grade. Between 1920 and 1926 the statistics of the 
Department of Education showed that there was an increase of one hundred 
and fifty percent in the high school population. There came a very urgent 
demand for teachers with training for the secondary grades, hut the numbers 
were very limited. Certificated teachers frequently taught grades which 
were the summit of their own attainment in high school. The inspectors were 

finally given power to permit secondary school work only under specified 

\ 

favorable conditions, hut many realized how difficult it was to refuse that 
permission. . They sighed for the day when large units might rid them of these 
difficulties. After a period of experiment the grant for secondary work in 
rural schools was abolished in 1932. 

Hot only was there incompetence in rural schools, hut many of the. 
village schools were also too ambitious. After 1923* for many years, there 
was only one Inspector for the high schools. Occasionally he was aided by 
one of the other inspectors or by the Supervisor of Schools, Dr. McHally. 


1. Report of the Department of Education, 1922. 














- 125 - 


In 1927 another high school inspector was appointed. In the tyoe of school 
under their control Grad© XII was becoming increasingly popular and was 
overloading the instructional program Just a§ Grade IX-had done in the 
rural school. Accordingly, certain schools Wf-re forbidden to give more than 
a reasonable number of units in each year. The one-room village school wag 
required to provide for a two-year cycle for Grade XII. 

Inspectoral Staff 

The duties of the inspectors differed very little from those of 
the earlier period between 1905 and 1920. Many of their special difficulties 
have already been mentioned in the last chapter, but one duty of the 
Inspector has been omitted. In many cases it had become necessary to take 
over and administer the affairs of a school district. In such cases the 
inspector became an official trustee. In some provinces a particular official 
was appointed to manage schools of this type, but, with some wisdom, the 
governments in this province have usually let the inspector handle this duty. 
The department was unwilling to administer the affairs of any district perman¬ 
ently, realizing that such imposed management fails to develop local pride 
and produces distrust. for that reason this action was resorted to only 
after careful investigation, and the expedient was only temporary. The 
official trusteeships were necessary when prompt action was required, and 
especially when factional strife hindered any such action. Sometimes both 

sides agreed to allow the inspector to carry on, when they might be unwilling 
£ - 

to trust one another* Sometimes the inspector assumed trusteeship when a 
district had been depopulated or there were too few residents with the 
necessary qualifications for school board duties. Most often the difficulties 













- 126 - 


were financial. A school hoard often was unwilling or unahle to provide 
the money for the operation of a school. 

The dismissal of a large number of inspectors in I 923 medo the 
work mtfre onerous than before, giving still less time to supervision. The 
average number of districts in 1926 under each inspector was one hundred and 
thirty-one. In the non-English areas the inspectorate was limited to one 
hundred schools, thus raising the average number for the other inspectors.^* 
These inspectors continued to give effect to educational policy as expressed 
in the law and regulations. They were expected to advise the minister on 
adjustments regarded as necessary to meet new and ever-changing conditions. 
About one-third of the inspector*© time was spent in these administrative 
duties. The most important and more technical part of his work had to do with 
the supervision,and Inspection of schools. The latter consisted of super¬ 
vision of the conduct of schools, organisation of the work, application of 
the course of studies, promotions, and the certification of teachers. The 
result was that the inspector did not have an opportunity to take the teacher 
into his confidence on methods to be adopted and objectives to be achieved, 
and thus establish the cordial.ity necessary for perfect work. An essential 
step in this direction was taken in 1925 when the inspector was required to 
hand one copy of bis report to the teacher after each inspection. Previously 
only the School Board and the Department of Education had each received one 
copy. Nevertheless, the annual inspection still seemed to the teacher merely 
an attempt to discover his weaknesses. 3 The only new duty of the inspector 


1. Report of the Department of Education, 1926 . 

2. Report of the Department of Education, 19^4. 

3 . Alberta Teachers* Alliance Kagasine, April, 192$. 













- 127 - 


rose out of the powers conferred upon him with respect to the observance 
of minimum salary regulations within the contracts. Though this power was 
short lived, it illustrates the chronic tendency of the Department to dele¬ 
gate power to the inspector with respect to any law or regulation, because 
the inspector was very closely in touch with the situation in his area. 

School libraries 

She School Libraries Branch suffered a blow from which It took a 
few years to recover. In I 923 an amendment was made to the School Grants 
Act abolishing the special grant for the purchase of books for the school 
library in the older established districts, but retaining it for the first 
six years only after the organisation of a school*^ She situation became 
especially critical in 1924 when the new currioulum came into force and many 
schools could not purchase books which had been recommended* This grant is 
still in effect but other changes gave a new impetus to the healthy develop¬ 
ment of this branch of the Department of Education. In 1926 a new bill 
presented to the legislature gave the Minister of Education power to issue 

p 

and print school books. In the same year the School Libraries Branch was 
reorganized and renamed the School Book Branch* Under this name it received 
the sole right to the wholesale distribution of text-books in this province. 
Arrangements were made With ©very publisher to give a monopoly of the sale of 
authorized texts to the School Book Branch. Library books can still be 
bought elsewhere. It will be interesting to note the effect of the new 
curriculum on the further development of this service* 


1. Report of the Department of Education, School Libraries Branch, 1924* 

2. Edmonton Journal, March 26, 1926, 











- 128 - 

School Grants 

Organization and operation of schools received a set-hack in the 

early twenties. So had did conditions become that the government was forced 

to resort to special grants to keep schools open in the north. In the south 

where settlements were somewhat older, loans were made to help those districts 

which were unahle to keep their schools open as a result of repeated crop 

failure. Hot only were economic conditions had because of the post war 

depression, hut local difficulties tended to aggravate the situation. Y/hile 

the south was suffering from a prolonged period of drought, the north had 

very little cleared land, and financial returns were very meagre. As the 

depression increased still fewer taxes were paid, many returned soldiers 

under the Soldier Settlement Board having abandoned their farms. To make 

matters worse, the secretaries of the municipalities neglected the collection 

of taxes, remining satisfied with filing a caveat against the land where the 

taxes were unpaid. In 1923 was set up the system of grants which remained 

substantially the same through the whole period and continues to the present 

day. The per diem grant for rural schools was cut from $1.00 to $.90® For 

' . • ... ■ \ 
rooms that contained grades above the eighth the grant was lowered from $.50 

to $.25 per diem. Hewly organized districts obtained $.20 per diem for only 

two years. The library grant was limited to schools in the first six year® 

after their organization. Special grants for schools with rooms used for 

community purposes, for technical education in one-room schools, for gardens. 

and teachers 1 residences were all struck out. Town schools received a similar 

cut. Where there were two rooms the grant for the senior room was reduced 

from $3.00 to $2.00 per day. High School and consolidated school grants were 

j 

reduced by fifty percent. 










I 







































































sablii il 


Summary of School Statistics 1905~19^3 


1 



l 

Year : 2 

Schools 

In On ©ration 

s Pupils $ 
s Enrolled_*_ 

Teachers 

Baplored. 

Total Grants 
Paid to £ahoola 

t 

— L 


i 

1905 * 

602 

♦ 2 

• • 


$ 120,723.61 

2 

: 


1906 S 

746 

s 23,734 s 

924 

lU2.g3S.3i 

1 


1907 s 

902 

: 34,338 8 

1,210 

197.767.39 

: 


1903 ! 

1,070 

8 39.653 ' 

1,463 

220,712.12 

2 


1909 i 

1.250 

*. 46.04& : 

1,315 

307,136.13 

: 


1910 : 

1,501 

8 55.307 * 

2,217 

301,239.31 

: 


1911 : 

1.734 

8 61,660 S' 

2.651 

432,376.52 

s 


1912 i 

2,029 

8 71.042 8 

3,054 

■ 414,115.73 



1913 * 

2.235 

s 79.909 * 

3,298 

461,238.56 

• 

• 


1914 * 

2,360 

8 39,910 8 

3.973 

507.631.95 

? 


1915 : 

2.473 

8 97.236 s 

4,213 

540,235-08 

j 


1916 : 

2,593 

: 99,210 • 

4,607 

553.141.44 

! 


1917 8 

2.773 

8 107.727 * 

5.133 

9s7.l69.6S 

: 


191S : 

2,964 

i 111,029 s 

5.652 

625,329.54 

: 


1919 8 

3.106 

: 121,567 8 

4,902 

713,032.92 

! 


1920 8 

3.215 

8 135.750 1 

5.014 

335,523.94 

2 


1921—23 i 

3.367 

: 142,302 j 

5.737 

1,146,721.95 

2 


1922—23 t 

3.383 

t 143,045 : 

5.669 

1,241,>518.32 

2 


1923—24 . 

3.409 

8 147,373 8 

5,727 

1,117,023.20 

f 


1924—25 . 

3.431 

: 147.796 t 

4,864 

1.054,732.93 

I 


1925—26 : 

3.463 

: 150,526 i 

5.135 

1,034,873.75 

s 


1926—27 : 

3.515 

: 154,330 1 

5.330 

1,137,637.58 

J 


I927—23 j 

3.571 

8 159.036 s 

5.315 

1,218,572.62 

: 


1922—29 s 

3.640 

• 164,350 8 

5.3?7 

1,321.158.03 

• 


1929—30 S 

3.720 

j 163,076 8 

5.705 

1.355.962.95 

2 


1930-51 ; 

3.755 

s 163,730 8 

5,344 

1,593.995.15 



1971—32 s 

3.7 S3 

8 170,795 8 

5.760 

1,511,776.29 

2 


1932—33 8 

3.734 

8 171.445 8 

6,050 

1,675,229.46 

2 


1933—34 s 

3.766 

8 172,030 1 

5.912 

1,537.793.87 

2 


1934—55 , 

3.312 

8 167.954 8 

5.911 

1,444,704.57 

2 


1935—36 s 

3.359 

8 1§7.193 * 

6,001 

1,432,034.66 

2 


1936—37 8 

3.926 

8 167,950 8 

6,130 

1,390,2^7.57 

2 


I937—33 8 

3.973 

s 166,654 : 

6.173 

I.527.056.W 

2 


1932—39 : 

3.992 

: 163,241 8 

6,176 

1.635.503 M 



1939—40 • 
194.0—41 : 

4,003 

4,005 

8 162,352 8 
8 163,425 8 

6,290 

6,588 

1.809,392.43 ' 
1,870,412.66 

• 


1941—42 j 

4,001 

8 161,209 8 

6,336 

1,916,012.65 

1 


1942—43 t 

4,003 

8 157.506 8 

6,490 


2 


1. Eeports of the Department of Education, X 905 —19^. 













- 130 - 


The general tendency from 1920 to 1935 *a« towards a reaction of 
grants. On the other hand a very outstanding development took plaoe in 1926 
when the Equalization Grant was instituted to aid Bohools whose assessment 
was below $75*000. Schools with an assessment below $10 e 000 received $ 2.80 
per day. Those with assessment between $ 70*000 and $ 75*000 received twenty 
oents per day. Schools with assessments between $ 10,000 and $ 70,000 received 
amounts between $ 2.00 and $.20 in proportion to their assessments. This 
scheme-benefited over four hundred schools in the first year. The number of 
schools operating at least one hundred and sixty days increased from seventy- 
five percent in 1926 to ninety percent in 1927. By *930 8 summer schools 8 could 
only be found in the Peace River area. Hot only was this grant a boon to 
poor pioneering areas but it helped in another way. Instead of wasting 
valuable time discovering what the actual needs of each district were before 
recommending a special grant, the Inspector could spend more Ha© in the 
supervision of actual teaching. There is no doubt that this was the only 
palliative to a very difficult situation, for without this aid hundreds of 
schools would have remained closed in the depression after 1930. 

The other changes were not important. In 1933 school grants were 
paid for only one hundred and eighty days of operation due to the financial 
difficulties of the government. In the meantime there existed an anomaly in 
the grant system which had to be rectified. Hue to the special grants and 
the Equalization Grant some two-room school districts contributed very little 
money to the school budget. As the depression became more sever® some of 
these areas became so active in the game of cutting teachers 1 salaries that 
they received grants in excess of their salary expenditures. In 193^ $h« 
maximum amount of grant paid to any school was fixed at five hundred dollars. 


s* 









- 131 - 


Furthermore the amendment stated that In no case van the grant to exceed 
seventy-five percent of the teacher'n salary, This was a return to a 
principle in effect In the Worth-West School Ordinance. This system of 
grants remains In effect to the present day except that the two-hundred-dey 
year has boon fully restored. 

/.a the depression deepened towards the end of our period hark loans 
to individual districts failed to meet the situation# Various temporary 
moans w< re utilised. In some districts people carried on a Campaign to obtain 
at least a portion of the taxes. Drastic salary reductions were made. 
Requisitions for libraries and supplies were cut down. In new areas log 
buildings were built by co-operative effort. In the extreme north teachers 
accepted as salary the labor of homesteaders on their own homesteads. In 
ether p-rts teachers boarded from house to house, the amount owing for board 
being applied to a ratepayer** tax account. To save the financial situation 
from collapse, the government passed the Tex and Rates Collection Act in I 93 I 
making the municipality the collecting agency instead of the school district. 

\ ; 

Through its control over a larger area the municipality could borrow money 
from banks more easily and thus provide at least a part of the amount necessary 
for operating the schools. To encourage additional payments of taxes, the 
Tax Consolidation Act was passed snaking It easier for each ratepayer to pay 
at least a portion of his arrears annually. By these almost heroic efforts, 
the people of the province ware able to keep their school system intact through 
the worst period of their history. 

The Problem of Examinations 

The examination system un&erwant a number of changes. In 1920, 
in keeping with the new consciousness on the part of the teachers, there came 
a wide demand for the abolition of at least part of the examination system. 

/ " . M !i£ ;■!; ■ 













- 132 - 


A system of promotions vas established "based on the student*s work during 
the year in certain specified schools. In schools where six teachers were 
employed teaching grades ei^it to eleven, students were promoted from Grade 

VIII upon the recommendation of the principal or superintendent. Promotions 
through the same recommendations were allowed from Grade IX to X. In the 
next grade such a system was only allowed in cases where three teachers were 
employed exclusively in the high school grades. In 1921 the privilege of 
writing the Entrance Examination was extended to all schools where Grade VIII 
students applied to write on that examination. In Grade IX, questions for 
the examination were provided "by the Department of Education hut the answers 
were valued by the teacher. Owing to the criticism of high school teachers, 
this system was abolished and Departmental examinations were again imposed 
on these grades with the establishment of the unit system in 1924. Shis 
policy remained in effect until 1930 when public opinion underwent another 
change. In that year the right to promote pupils from Grade VIII to Grade 

IX was again granted to certain schools. Gradually this was extended to 
include all the schools, teachers were al6o allowed to promote certain pupils 

\ 

in all the first units of every subject and the English units of Grade X. 

Shis vas the system In effect until the reorganization of the whole curriculum 

ia 1935. 


Pensions for teachers 

Pensions for teachers stood high among the aims of the teachers* 
organization in this province. 2he Alberta Educational Association formed 
a committee to go into the matter fully in 1917 . In reply to a report by 
this committee in 1913 the Minister of Education, Son. J» B. Boyle, dealt 
with pensions in his address. He declared he was not re^dy to accept the 
scheme of the Alberta Education Association committee but he was quite prepared 
















































































































- 133 - 


to go ahead with a pension or superannuation Boheme. By a vote of the 
Alberta Educational Association at this convention the matter of pensions 
was handed over to the Alberta Teachers 1 2 Alliance. Through its system of 
"locals" the Alberta Teachers* Alliance referred to the teachers the whole 
problem of pensions for close and systematic study. In the meantime the 
Hon, J. B, Boyle had resigned and hie place was taken by the Hon. G. P.‘ Smith 
who pleaded time for study as he was new to the office, Prom that time on 
the matter was brought to the attention of the ministers concerned almost 

every year, A proposed act was drawn up by the Alberta Teachers* Alliance 

( 

to be presented before the legislature, Finally, as no action was taken, 

Mr, Hector Lang of Medicine Hat moved a resolution that a fund be established, 
pending a general pension scheme* to take care of those teachers who were 
unable or unfit to work. On the reply of the Minister of Education that a 
few teachers could be dealt with without changing the existing legislation, 

Mr, Lang withdrew the original motion and substituted one which gave the 
Department the right to investigate certain cases end deal with them as the 
officials saw fit. 1 

■ 

In 1930 Mr* Hector Lang re-introduced his legislation, but It 
was doomed to defeat. It was a matter of encouragement to the teachers, 
however, that the government did not altogether frown on the scheme. Some 
members of the cabinet shoved that they had given some study to the plan 
but could not accept it as they did not think most of its proposals were 
actuarially sound. The hopes raised were unfortunately doomed to disappoint¬ 
ment as the depression increased. The teachers had to wait for another turn 
of the economic wheel of fortune. Especially were they disappointed as most 
of the other provinces had already adopted some pension scheme® 

1. Edmonton Journal, March 7th and 15th, 19?9- 

2. Alberta Teachers* Alliance Magazine, April, I 925 . 





- 134 - 

Teachers 1 Contractu 

Teachers* contracts were a subject of much debate on the floor 
of the House and at Teachers* and Trustees* Conventions. The aim of the 
teachers was to establish as great e© curity of tenure as was possible except 
in cases of gross negligence or misconduct. On the other hand, the rural 
trustee wished to be untrammelled in "hiring and firing" the teacher. This 
was the field of struggle for almost twenty years. While it seemed a struggle 
betweei two organizations it was in fact a struggle between two philosophies. 
It was a struggle between the philosophy of the owner of the land, to whom 
only property seeias permanent, and the philosophy of the laborer, who 
desires permanence in his vocation. The struggle has been re-enacted many 
times since the beginning of tie Industrial Revolution. What embittered the 
fight and confused the ideological issues was that in our province we had to 
pass through all the stages of economic development in a single generation. 
Furthermore the position of a pioneer farmer or a pioneer laborer in this 
country had never been very rosy. While harsh experience probably made 

some people more tolerant, it only strengthened rebellion in others. Taxation 

' 

has never been popular. What then was more natural then irritation at the 
teacher who was a living symbol of taxation In the community? 

In the period towards the end of the First World War there was, 
as previously mentioned, a growth of professional consciousness amongst 
the teachers. To Implement a wore aggressive policy on such matter© a® 
pensions, contracts and tenure a new organization, the Alberta Teachers 
Alliance, was formed with Mr. J. W. Barnett m General Secretary. The 
older Alberta Educational Association continued its existence but the newer 
"A.T.A." as it was called, gradually absorbed all the important functions 
of a teachers 1 organization until the two were finally amalgamated. The 





- 135 - 


A.?.A, vigorously denounced the Inequality of teaching as compared vith other 
professions «ad net before itself the difficult task of raising tho status 
of the profession. In this attest it aroused the vehement opposition of 
school boards and very often the hostility of members of the Legislature 
and even the governments in power, Especially was the antagonism violent 
toward® Mr. Barnett who* e t»*Jc it v&® to keep the deiastade of the organisation 
before the public, though the irasu*dir te results of the struggle wore vary 
disheartening, the conflict wes an ad win tag* reaching beyond the tonoorcry 
victories or defeats. In organizing itself for the contest the teaching 
body trained leaders whose influence extended far beyond its confines, 

She A, 1‘. A. first demanded protection for teachers in the prescribed 
form of agreement. As the result of negotiations the Minister of Education, ' tile 
Hon, ft. P. Smith, with th® consent of Path teachers' and trustees 1 organisations 
amended the agreement form to provide for tvro principles! 

(a) Continuity of services 

(b) A meeting or heorin^ for the teacher when dismissal was pending. 

Clause (3) provided that the agro®w»nt should be in force from ye*r to year 
unless it was tormina ted in a specified, manner. flaace (5) provided tho \ 

manner of termination. Within five days nfter receipt of a thirty-day notice 
the teacher Could request an opportunity to dlecuse the termination and 

answer charges at a meeting with tho Board, After such an application the 
notice did not become effective until the holding of such a meeting- fan 
days 1 notice was to be given tho teacher of tho holding of such n nesting, and 
the tencher could attend it with notne ratepayer or member of his immediate 
family. At the conclusion of such a meeting the Bonrd could either confirm 
or rescind its previous action, tn the former event, the notice became 
effective thirty days after the teacher had been notified in writing of euch 









- 136 - 


confirmation.* 

Subsequent to this the Alliance concentrated on two aims. In 
the first place, the teachers desired that the hearing should ho held 
prior to the notice for the termination of the agreement since many hoards 
were reluctant about going hack on a decision they had made. In the second 
place, the Alliance felt that the hoard should he required to establish 
valid reasons for such dismissal. In 1922 the Eon. Perren Baker reversed 
the proceeding in Clause ( 5 ) by providing that a "hearing" should orecede 
notice of termination of agreement . 1 2 3 4 He did not favor the second recom¬ 
mendation which suggested an appeal to the Minister for dismissal without 
cause shown during the term, hut vlii ;.b. allowed all dismissals at the end of 
the year.^ The Alliance also urged that a teacher he represented by some 
agent at the meeting hut the Minister demurred, stressing the unpreparedness 
of rural school hoards for perfect legal procedure, in which they would have 
to he well-versed when Confronted by such an agent at their meeting. This 
was in effect the objection of the Executive of the Alberta Trustees’ 

Association when they mot In conference with the Minister and the Executive 

4 

of the Alliance. In accordance with the wishes of the Alliance in this 
matter the form of contract wps changed to provide the meeting between 
teacher and trustees prior to the issuance of the notice to terminate the 
agreement. Unfortunately only two clear days were allowed for that meeting 
between teacher and trustees* There was an immediate protest from the 


1. Fora of Agreement up to February, 1923 * Department of Education® 

2. Form of Agreement, 19^5* Department of Education. 

3 . A.T.A. Magazine, January and February, 1920. 

4. Files in Possession of the A.T.A., March 5, 1921. 













- 137 - 


executive of the A.T.A. supported by resolutions from its Annual General 

Meeting. The teachers pointed out that the Minister had proposed an appeal 

to him on the part of the aggrieved party and that they had accepted his 

suggestion.^ They declared that he had not implemented any of his promises 

and had deprived the teacher of even the meagre rights that belonged to him 

tinder the old agreement. There was no provision for any agent to represent 

the teacher. This form remained in existence until 1926 when the clause was 

2 

amended to provide for five day^ notice of meeting instead of two# 

In the meantime this clause, which had become Clause 6 in the new 
form of agreement, was a source of great protection to the teachers and one 
of great irritation to the school boards of the province# They had not 
manifested such enthusiasm on its adoption and its retention had made some of 
the trustees 1 conventions very acrimonious towards the Minister# Many boards 
attempted to avoid the provision by sending out a notice of the meeting when 
the teacher had left for midsummer vacations# In the Hunt vs. Brant case 
the Supreme Court ruled that this clause must be strictly observed. Some 
school boards adopted the method of making the agreement valid for only one 
year by scoring out the continuous provision. Influenced by the animosity of 
the trustees, especially after the cool reception by them of his proposed 
large areas, the Minister gave notice that Clause 6 would be deleted leaving 
a straight thirty-day notice. Instead he proposed and in 1931 directed through 
the legislature an amendment to the School Act forbidding dismissal by the 
trustees o t resignation of the teacher during the instructional year without 
the approval of the inspector. Notices to terminate the agreements Could 
only be given in the month of June by the school board. The teacher was 


1# A.T.A. Magazine, January and July, 1323 • 

2. There were no amendments to the School Act. The School Act gives the 
right to the Minister to authorise the form of agreement® 







































■ 













permitted to resign only in the months of June and July. Hone of these 
amendments affected the right of the hoards to inflict summary dismissal for 
gross misconduct, neglect of duty, or neglect to obey a lawful order of the 
hoard; in which case the teacher had the right to appeal to the Minister* 
Clause 6 was never restored as the field of struggle shifted to another 
demand of the teachers which had gained force through the years, This clause 
had only been an expedient to enforce some stability of tenure* 

Board of Beference 

The Hon* G. ?• Smith, the last Minister of IS&ucation under the 
Liberal regime, had been persuaded to amend the School Act In 1921 giving 
the Minister power to appoint a Board of Conciliation n to Inquire into end 
investigate any such disagreement or dispute, and to make such report thereon 

as is just and reasonable.. . M Tills Board had the power to investigate 

any disagreement or dispute which related to the proper carrying out of a 
contract. This section was further amended by the Hon* Perren Baker In I926. 
The purpose of the amendment was to clarify the powers of such a body as it 
had not functioned in any way hitherto* It gave the power to the Minister 
to set up a Board of Conciliation or Arbitration. When any dispute arose 
either party had the right to refer the case to the Minister who appointed 
a Board of Beference. When this body acted on the application of one side 
it was known as a Board of Conciliation. When the application came from 
both sides it became a Board of Arbitration. The amendment further stated? 

**£he Board shall institute such investigations as may seem to be 
warranted or necessary, and shall deliver a report of its findings to the 
Minister 0 


1* Edmonton Journal, April 2, 1927 








. 




- 139 - 


Unfortunately this Board did not function well. Though numerous cases were 
reported the findings of the Board had little Influence on the parties 
concerned. Judge Taylor, Chairman of the Board, complained that its chief 
weakness was its lack of enforcement power. On the other hand, he "believed 
that the institution of the large* school area would help.* Another weakness 
vac that school hoards were not prevented from hiring another teacher during 
the period "between the application and the delivery of the findings of the 
Board of Reference. 

Baring this period while the whole question of teacher tenure was 
in dispute, representatives of the Alberta School Trustees 1 Association and 
the Alberta Teachers 1 Alliance met under the chairmanship of Dr. J. T. Boss, 
the Deputy Minister of Education. One such meeting was held in 1931 and 
another in -February, 193 2 * At the last meeting the representatives agreed 
that enforcement powers be granted to the Board of Reference. This amendment 
the Minister finally introduced at the suggestion of Premier J. SS. Brownlee, ; 
but it was conceded that its proclamation would be postponed until the 
general feeling of trustees was known. The Hon. Perron Baker contended 
that the representatives of the trustees had not the power to make any such 
agreement without submitting the scheme to the Alberta School Trustees g 
Convention. The amendment was never proclaimed owing to the hostility of 
the trustees. The Alliance charged, with some reason, that the Minister 
used his influence to sway the opinion of the trustees* Some of the Executive 
of the Trustees 1 Association said that tho Minister had attempted to change 
their opinion in this regard. He had also intervened at the convention and 
declared himself against it. nevertheless, due to the demand of the Labor 


1. Bdmonton Journal, Report before the Agricultural Committee, March 13* 19^9* 























- 140 - 


Group which was friendly to the government, and the resolute suonort of 
many of the U.P.A. members, the Minister gave way end the Bo?rd of Refer¬ 
ence was established by an amendment in the School Act, 193^ • She Board of 
Reference obtained the right to reverse a decision of the boards of trustees 
if the trustees, In dismissing the teacher, had not noted as "reasonable 
persons". The rest of the amendment vent on to enumerate cases in which the 
Board of Trustees might be deemed to act as reasonable persons. 

The triumph of the teachers vms snort lived. There was a tremendous 
agitation against the measure. Just ae the Minister had objected, such a 
Board of Reference had great dif ficulty in dealing with trustees in small 
units. In 1935 the pressure on the members of the legislature became so 
great that many of them gave way to the delegation of trustees which spent 
some days in the House lobby. As this was election year it was difficult 
for many to maintain the proper perspective with respect to this important 
question. In addition, a large member of the members did not need much per¬ 
suasion when it came to a dispute between teachers and trustees. As a result 
an amendment was introduced by W. C. Smith, U.P.A., abolishing the Board of 
Reference. Uever were the hopes of the teachers at a lower ebb than after 
this session. Privileges had been lost which they had held since 1921* On 
the other hand, a good deal of glee was shown by the local boards of trustees 
who could dismiss a teacher without any hindrance. It was probably best 
that it should be so. The state of education made it imperative that a new 
government deal with the matter immediately and effectively. Vhat the future 
held in store was little realised by the rank and file of people in th© 
provinces. The political revolution which came in that year changed th© whole 
emphasis of people 1 # interests. The school question was not neglected© 









In 1937 the Legislature proceeded to restore the Board of 
Reference. The occasion was the introduction of the Teachers* Tenure 3111 
by the member for Vihitford, Mr. William Tomyn. His original measure would 
have permitted the dismissal of a teacher only on the vote of a majority of 
the ratepayers. The bill was referred to the Agricultural Committee. Owing 
to the opposition to the proposed measure, an amendment was moved by another 
member, Mr. J. Hooke, restoring the Board of Reference. Under the regulations 
a teacher was to be permitted to appeal to the Board of Reference upon making 
a deposit of twenty-five dollars. A large number of the other proposals were 
withdrawn but restrictions were retained on contracts. Term contracts were 
forbidden, and notice of dismissal was to be given by June twentieth. Thus 
passed the last measure for which the teachers had agitated for years.*’ 

Professional Status 

During the last year of the U.F.A. administration. In 1935# * 
determined attempt was made by the Alberta Teachers* Alliance to win 
professional status for the teachers of this province. The Teachers* Society 
Bill, as Introduced by Mr. 0. A. Ronalng, member for Gamrose, would have 
made the holding of a teacher*a position in Alberta dependent on membership 
in the Alberta Teacher® 8 Association. It Contained proposals for wide 
disciplinary powers over the members of the teaching body. It also empowered 
the trustees to retain the membership due® of each teacher. To ensure 
collection the Department of Education was to deduct the amount from the 
grant owing to each school district. The act was modelled after a similar 
measure passed by the Saskatchewan Legislature. In introducing the bill 
Mr* Ronning claimed that It would release the teachers from the annual 

1. Edmonton Journal, April 14, 1937 - A.T.A. Ma&aslne, April, 1937* 








- 







drudgery of canvassing membership and liable them to pursue the aims and 
objects for which the Alberta Teachers 9 Association stood. In spite of 
strong support from the opposition,, chiefly from the Labor benches, the 
nee sure was passed in a vastly different foria from what was originally 
intended. It was opposed by Hon. Perren B'.ker, who believed that the act 
would increase the friction between teachers and trustees. The Alberta 
School Trustees 1 Association already had a delegation protesting against 
the measure. As a result the bill w&s passed only after the compulsory 
features had been deleted. 

. After the defeat of the U.P.A, Government amendments were passed 

$ 

to include the compulsory features in spite of the renewed opposition of the 
trustees, who protested that its acceptance would leave every school board 
at the mercy of a n union. tt ^ This was In 1936. The act has bestowed certain 
benefits upon the organized teachers. It is no longer necessary to waste 
the resources of the body in mere organization, and much of the revenue of 
the A.T.A. has been devoted to research. Already the Alberta Teachers® 
Association has been able to finance invesligations In various fields of which 
the most important is that of Vocational Training** The results of this work 
by Mr. Tyler, B.E&. have been compiled into a book entitled “Choosing Tour 
Life Work". This Is only the beginning of a large field of enterprise which 
tho teachers entered when they were freed from the necessity of reorganising 
annually, with the expenditure of time and energy that this demanded. With 
the introduction of the large units, professional status has also made Co¬ 
operation with tho trustees easier. On the other hand it also placed contain 
obligations on the teachers themselves. In becoming a profession they were 

1. Edmonton Journal, February 10, 1939* 


















































































' 


































forced to undertake tho task of disciplining member*, a duty hitherto 
performed hy the Department of Education. 









CHAPTER IX 


THE LARGER WIT OF SCHOOL •D^KISTRATION 

At the time of writing, practically all the settled rural 

portions of Alberta 1 ere organized for administrative ? nb supervisory 

purposes into fifty-one divisional areas. Only five percent of rural schools 

still lie outside the divisional boundaries, end these ere for the most pert 

isolated schools not conveniently located. The story of the struggle for 

the larger unit may be briefly told. 

At the 1925 session of the Provincial Legislature the Hon. Ferren 

Baler proposed a levy of throe mills on the assessable value of all land 

1 

within the province lying outside urban areas. The estimated revenue of 
$1,600,000 was to be used to increase the grant to each school district by 
$500.00, a sum considerably in excess of half of the average annual expen- 
diture per district. 

The proposal received fairly general support in the House in its 
first and second reading, but the school trustees in convention did not 
hesitate to manifest their decided coolness, not to say hostility* The 

proposal was dropped. 

During the following three years a number of suggestions for 
providing a more solid basis for rural education were considered and rejected. 
It was noted, for example, that permissive legislation in Manitoba, making 

\ „ A 

it possible for any municipality to establish a municipal school unit, had 
become operative in only two areas. Obviously legislation must be centrally 
initiated and must be mandatory. 


1. A. T. A. Magazine, November, 1925 







































































Filially in March 1928,^ the Minister of Education presented the 
issues squarely to the Alberta Trustees 1 Association. Ee pointed out the 
many limitations and disadvantages associated with local district admin¬ 
istration. and restated the arguments for larger administrative units. In 
particular he drew a picture of the tremendous Inequality of the tar burden 
from district to district, of the inequality of educational opportunity, 
of the shortened school terms, of the difficulties in payment of adequate 
salaries to teachers, of the difficulties of providing adequate secondary 
education, and in general, of the impasse at which rural education had 
arrived. In contrast he pointed out the far-reaching advantages of a broader 
taxation basis, which, he claimed, would give the rural areas a new lease of 
educational life. 

2 

In October, 1928, the Minister caused to be published a pamphlet 
entitled "Bural Education In Alberta", outlining the scheme he had in mind. 
His proposal was to divide the province into twenty units or "Divisions"• 

The chairman of the Divisional Boards were to form a Central or General Board 
which was to set a province-wide mill rate for all educational purposes 
other than the cost of buildings and equipment. The chief powers of the 
Divisional Boards Consisted of the right to appoint, place, and dismiss 
teachers within the Division. Each Division was to have approximately one 
hundred and fifty schools, and the Divisional Superintendents were to he 
appointed by the Department of Education. 

x 

Violent criticism emanated from two sources, from school trustees 
throughout the province, and from opposition members in the House.^ The 
usual cries of centralization, autocracy, confiscation, end Injustice were 
heard. 'The Minister courageously fought for his proposal, and fought almost 


1. Edmonton Bulletin, March 14, 1930 







- 146 - 


alone. Even his colleagues were scarcely luke-warm to it. She Mil vent 
through a second reading but wee dropped. 

In 1930 a new bill was introduced} In the interval the problem 
and suggested remedial measures were widely discussed. Several helpful 
suggestions were received from the Alberta Teachers 1 Alliance. The new 
bill omitted reference to the General Board proposal and to the Province- 
wide scheme of taxation, the essential issues remaining centered about the 
creation of divisions, the setting up of divisional boards, and the appoint¬ 
ment of superintendents and supervisors. Moreover, the legislation was 
not to be mandatory. A vote was to b© taken in any area before a division 
could be created. In finite of all these concessions, tha bill was rejected. 

It remained for a new administration to give form and substance to Mr. Baker 1 * 
dream. 

Some tentative steps forward were, however, made by the U.F.A. 
government. In 1930 the Tax and Hat© Collection Amendment Act was passed. 1 
This act constituted the municipal councils the collectors of eohool taxes 
throughout the municipality. The moneys so collected from each component 

V 

school district were then placed at the disposal of the said district, the 
chief merit of the arrangement being that the councils were more efficient 
collecting agencies than the local boards hed been. The act no doubt made 
possible the operation of many schools which would otherwise have had to be 
closed between 1930 and 1935 . 

Of many nemes which might be mentioned in connection with educational 
reform the most outstanding was that of Charles Lionel Gibbs, a teacher 

1. Edmonton Bulletin, March 14, 1930. 









































' 















■ 



















































■ 







- 147 - 

member for Edmonton. Tearless In criticism, a master of irony, and probably 
the most able debater in the House with the exception of Premier Brownlee, 
he was ever on the defense for teachers and education. Had he lived, not 
only would he have held an important place in education, hut no doubt would 
also have boon an important factor in the political future of this province. 
She reform of the Board of Reference was his especial cause from year to 
year. In the large school unit controversy his voice was always on the 
side of reason. He made mistakes, but they were those of a great man. 

Being honest and fearless himself, he could not understand subterfuge and 
evasion in others, and woe betide the member or minister whom he suspected 
of such weakness. Shere was plenty of opportunity for criticism. In the 
opinion of many the three years 1 strife over the large unit had embittered 
and exhausted the minister. They charged that his refusal to attempt any 
amelioration in the status of the teacher was due to this cause. 

In spite of earlier animosities Hr. Gibbs' espousal of a cause 
dear to the Minister drew the two men together. The plan and scope of 
the investigation of the Committee which was formed In 193*1 was the result 
of their co-operation. 

In 193^ & resolution was moved by Mr. Gibbs as follows* 

"Whereas there is general agreement in the assembly and throughout 
the country that the difficulties of all kinds confronting the rural 
districts in maintaining an efficient educational system are very serious; 
and 

"Whereas there is a definite social obligation, also generally recog¬ 
nized, to see that all the children of Alberta are properly educated 
physically and mentally; 

"Therefore be it resolved that a committee of this Assembly be 
appointed to make a comprehensive survey and study of education in rural 
districts and report their findings and suggestions at the next session of 
the Legislature." 










- 148 ~ 


In moving his resolution Mr* Gibbs stressed that such a committee 
would be of value in making public much informtion which had been compiled 



supported by Mr* Chester Ronnlng of Oa.m*ose # another teacher member, and a 

bill embodying the resolution was phased. 

o 

2he Executive Council appointed a committee of tea members of the 
Legislature with the Eon. Perron Belter as chairman. She other members were 
Messrs. Hector Lang, W. E. Payne, J. Mackintosh, C. L. Gibbs, 0. B. Walker, 
A. G. Andrews, 0. A. Ronning, I, Goresky and R. M* McCool. 

Mr* A. L. Smeaton was appointed later to fill the vacancy caused 


by the death of Mr. C. L. Gibbs. 

As an approach to its task the Committee Called upon all organ¬ 
isations interested in education to submit briefs of their viewpoints. 
Individuals also who had spent their lives in the educational field were 
summoned to give evidence. Incidentally it must be mentioned that a great 
deal of credit for the success of the Committee** work goes to the late 
Mr. G. W. Gorman, Deputy Minister of Education, who acted as secretary 
to tho Committee. Upon the basis of submissions received, the members of 
the Legislative Committee made a number of recommendations dealing with 
the rural schools. 5*he point of greatest interest is that most of the 
recommendations were contingent upon the establishment of a larger admin¬ 
istrative area. It was but logical that the final recommendation should 
propose the establishment of the larger unit. Nevertheless, it was pointed 
out that a considerable measure of public support would be necessary to the 
successful introduction of some of the proposed reformsAt the same time, 


1. Edmonton Journal, March 81, 193^* 

2. Report of the Legislative Committee on Sural Education, 1935* 

3. Report of the Legislative Committee on Rural Education, 1935# 2b 











- 149 - 


as proof of the possible success of the experiment, an account vas included 
in the report of two large areas already established, vis.. Turner Talley and 
Berry Greek. 

In the Turner Valley area the experiment had been forced on the 
authorities because of the tremendous oil development in the region* She 
small school districts had been totally inadequate to cope with the rapid 
increase of the population. Owing to the greater efficiency of the large 
unit in assessing property and collecting taxes, the farmers in this area 
p^id taxes which wore actually less than in the last year of the smaller 
school districts. Furthermore, the unit could boast of better buildings and 
equipment and the institution of medical treatment for the children. Though , 
this experiment took place under the administration of an official trustee, 
there was evident satisfaction at the results. 

Sie Berry Greek experiment had been undertaken in the depopulated 
areas in the Hanna inspectorate. Sixty-seven local districts were incor¬ 
porated Into a single division. In its first year a earing of about thirteen 
thousand dollars was effected, with a corresponding reduction in the actual 
taxes paid in. In addition, a large part of the liabilities of the district 
was liquidated. 

It was probably fortunate for the future of the large school unit 
that nothing was don© immediately to implement the recommendations of the 
Committee. Any attempt by the B.F.A. government to institute these reforms * 
would probably have retarded the whole process towards unification. For¬ 
tunately, also, the ©lection of 1935 gave the new government an overwhelming 
majority. Having just won an election they were able to undertake experi¬ 
ments that no former administration would have dared to attempt.. Above ell 















- 150 - 

the new Social Credit Party was conroosed of men who were eminently fitted 
for the task before them. The l*te Premier Aberhert was a Calory school 
principal and in hio ranks were teachers of real ability like Messrs. Tanner, 
Low, Hook, Ansley and others of strong professional loyalty like Messrs. Luke, 
Bourcier and Macl&chlan. It seemed as if the paot misfortunes of the teachers 
had contributed to the emergence of a new class of provincial and national 
leaders who were not too sensitive to criticism and were willing to sacrifice 
personal popularity to support a commendable cause* 

In the fall of 1935• Premier Aberh&rt, who was also Minister of 
Education, announced that the government would attempt to introduce a system 
of larger units at the earliest opportunity. A paitrohlet* was issued outlining 
the weaknesses of the existing system and the advantages of the new nlan. It 
is interesting to note that the proposed organization followed, to a great 
.extent, the ideas of the former minister. The appointment of superintendents 
was still to be in the hands of the Minister of Education* There was to be 
an elected board of five directors to administer the affairs of the division. 
In order to meet the celticism that power was too far removed from the people 
who supported the schools, each local school district was to elect an advisory 
committee of three members. This committee wa9 to have the power to advise 
the [Divisional Board on all matters which concerned the local district* The 
whole Division was to constitute the taxing area to provide funds required, 
but the municipal authorities were to rerap in the tax collecting agencies. 

On the other hand, the units were to be much smaller than originally planned* 
Instead of the twenty divisions the new plan envisioned about forty-five in 
the province. 


1. M What Is and What Might Ba in Eural Education 1 * • This pamphlet was 
published by the authority of the Minister of Education* 

















- 151 - 


There was an outburst of criticism almost Immediately. To a 
large extent the criticism came from those who had been in opposition to 
the newly elected members in the recent election. As the members 1yd been 
elected in spite of their opposition it was not likely they could exert ns 
much personal influence upon the course of events. The Alberta School Trustees* 
Association resorted to the tactics of the previous year. A delegation was 
sent to interview the government and to influence members to block the move.^ 

To their demand that the change be postponed for a year, the Premier replied 
that that would only b© postponing the experiment for one year, Furthermore, 
he intimated that the change would come about gradually. In the new school 
bill the Minister of Education was empowered to set tip new districts by order 
without a vote of the ratepayers 

In the Legislature there was little opposition to the measure. 

The Government had too overwhelming a majority for the same tactics to b© 
employed as had prevailed against the measure proposed by the former minister, 
furthermore the parties to the left of the treasury benches had approved the 
change in principle when the Report of the Legislative Committee on Rural 
Schools had boon accepted. To the opposition of the trustees the best answer 
was given by the member from Whitford, Mr. William Tomyn, who declared that - 
he could not see how six hundred and fifty trustees in Convention could 
dictate to the provincial government with the majority of the people behind them. 

1. A.T.A. Magazine, March, I 936 , P* 

2. Edmonton Journal, February 18, 19 36 • 

3 . Edmonton Bulletin, March IS, 193 6 * 















- 152 - 


Thus ended the struggle to place education in Alberta in the forefront 

as an example to provinces who only dared to hope that such a measure might 

bo considered at some future date. It was a during venture for any government. 

In the fall of I 936 eleven largo units Comprising seven hundred and 
forty-four school districts were organised. In the first year of o-oeration 
substantial savings were made in the management of districts in the south* 
but the northern area did not show as great a gain financially. ftevertheless 
economies were made everywhere in s^ite of larger salaries paid to teachers. 

In every Instance the Divisions closed the year with salaries paid up. The 
increased supervision that was foreseen did not m terialise in the first 
year, but a substantial program of repairs was carried out. This was 
especially important as, In many cases, school buildings had been neglected 
during sis years of depression. Teachers were posted from one school to 
another with almost no friction. Ifaren when it was found necessary to dismiss 
teachers there wo.s very little trouble. Out of sixty cases before the 
Board of Reference not one case was from a larger unit. In addition to this* 
many schools embarked upon programs of health supervision* library service, 

V 

and other services which could not have been contemplated under the small 
unit. Ample care was also taken of the High School population. The first 
year showed that the plan was eminently successful and the organisation of 
other units progressed to-such an extent that nearly all the schools in the 
province were in the large areas in 19 ^ 0 . 

It seemed doubtful whether the large units would remain as there 
was still dissatisfaction in some of them in 1939* The criticism was 
especially bitter amongst some who had been school trustees or secretary 
treasurers under the old system. In addition some of the wealthier school 
districts in large units had their taxes raised to aid the poorer schools 














- 153 - 


in the same area. Thera were threats] of tax strike*. Fortunately there 
was no group to take advantage of this opposition. The old Alberta School 
Trustees 1 Association which might have served as a rallying point for 
reactionaries gave place to a new hut smaller “body of trustees from the large 
units who showed no inclination to lead a revolt against their own admin¬ 
istration of these large units. On the part of many there was even enthusiasm 
because of the increased facilities in education. The various political 
groups also refrained from criticising the new order in the election of 19 ^* 
However unwilling they might have been themselves to institute reforms in 
education in the face of opposition from the ratepayers and school trustees* 
they recognized the need for such reforms and tacitly agreed to give the 
large Units a trial. Hot only did the war attract more attention as it 
continued but the resulting increased prosperity tended to make people more 
tolerant of changes at home. Opposition to large units gradually subsided 
as it had done over the institution of ''free schools". It is not likely that 
the new generation will want to surrender the benefits which have been gained 
through the new system to return to the old individual school district. 

Fortunately too the new organisation came at a time when there was 
a new spirit abroad for reform. In the general desire to improve living 
conditions education has not been neglected. Though the new curriculum was 
designed as recently as 193^ further modifications compatible with changing 
conditions are now being considered. In the past few years the success of * 
training schemes in the Armed Forces, together with the desire of governments 
to give the returned men and women an opportunity for further education, 
have given adult education a new importance. Composite and Community High 
Schools are being planned to provide better facilities both for high school 






- 154 - 


students nd adults. The School of Fducetion • t the Univer 'tv of "Ibert 
hrs boon r;:i/-od to the statue of Faculty of ??dwr>ti n 'nd it i ' rlcnned 
to combine the whole to.- cher training ptorvvr. under the F* cult/ of ? 'ne/ tion. 

The Alberta teacher.: or* in a good powiti. z* to give effect to the 
new progrcffl* Fuel; remains to be dan/• - Salaries .'re not high enough to 
attract the young wen and women who will be returning from tho Armed 
Forces. Stability of tenure still remains low in rural and vill; go 
school: but it is high as compared to tho situation in other provinces* 

They control their own profession md have introduced a measure of fairness 


and stability into salary negotiations with the Boards of the Large Units. 
However, the new order has placed greater re ponsibilitiee on the teachers 


themselves. Tho danger of the future is that tley may imbibe so so of the con¬ 
servatism that KotiV'.ted tho rural school trustee in the past# Nevertheless 


as long as there are curricul- r change# to promote a spirit and * regress 
with a resulting incroo.ee in scholarship, smugness will have very little 
chance to develop. Furthermore the large unit should provide a wider score 

Y? 

for unselfish effort which could not be utilised in the past. The teachers 

\ 

should bo ror dy to do their p rt in education for the social changes which 
aro coming* 























' 




























- 155 - 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Oliver, E. H., "The Canadian North-West," Ottawa,, Ontario: Publications of 
the Canadian Archives. No. 9. Ottawa. Printin g Bur eau . 1914. 

Hughes, Katherine, “Father Lacombe, The Black Rohe Voyegeur," Toronto. Ontario ; 

McLelland gad Ctnart . 1920. 

Skelton, 0. D., “life and Letters of Sir Wilfrid Lnurier," Toronto. Ontario : 
Oxford University Press . 1931* 

Dafoe, J. W., "Clifford Sifton in Relation to Hir» Tines," Toronto. Ontar io; 

M acMillan ano Conpe ny . 1931* 

Blue, J., "Alberta, Past and Present," Chioago. I11lno1s ;_P ioneer Historical 

,P ublishing Company . 19^4. 

McBougall, J., "George Milliard McLouga.il," Toro nt o. Ontario: William Briggs . 
1902 . 

Siegfried, A., "Canada," London . E ngland: Came Company. Ltd .. 1937* 

Weir, G. M., "The Separate School Question In Canada," Toron t o. Ontario ! 
Ryerson Press . 1934. 

Bundle, R. T., "Extracts from the Journal of Rev. Roht. Terrill Bundle," 
Edmo nton . Al bert a: Library of the Alb erta legislative Assembly . 

Brown, James, "Education in the North-West, IS 9 I"» Edmonton. Albe rta: Lihr--ry 
of the Albert a Legislative Assem bly. 

Bayne, D. C., "Calgary School District, Ho. 19" > Edmo ntpn. Alberta: Library 
of the Albe r ta Legislative AnsjembJ. y. 

Waite, W. II., "Summary of the History of Education in Saskatchewan", Winnipeg. 
Manitoba! Wniver s ity of Ifenitoba.(diesis) 

Denny, J., "The Organization of Puhli Instruction in Saskatchewan" t Regina . 
Saskatche wani Library of the Saskat c hewan Legisla t ure . (Thesis). 

McKee, 0. A., "Edmonton School District, Ho* 7 M ® Edmonton. Alberta! Library 
of the Al be rta Le gisl ative A ssembly. 

The Edmonton Bulletin (1880-1940)« 

' ... ^ 

Tho Edmonton Journal. 

Saskatchewan Herald (1881-18&3)• 

"Hansard'* of the Legislative At*sab!y of the North-West Territories. (A col¬ 
lection of newspaper reports of legislative activity to b© found in the Legis¬ 
lative Library, Government Buildings, Regina, Sask.) 






































- 156 - 

Statutes of Canada., 1370, 1375, 1SS3 and 1905. 

Revised Statutes of Canada., 1336. 

Ordinances of the North-West Territories, (1334-1904). 

Statutes of Alberta (1905-1936). 

Journals of the Council of the Worth-West Territories (1377-1904). 

Journals of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Alberta (1905-1936). 
"Renorts of the Board of Education, 1336, 1337, 1333, 1339, 1390 and 1391. 

P.eoorts of the Council of Public Instruction, 1396-1900. 

Reports of the Department of Education of the North-West Territories (1901-1904) 
Reports of the Department of Education of the Province of Alberta (1905-1942). 
A.T.A. Magazine (1920-1940). 

Correspondence files in possession of Alberta Teachers 1 Association, Imoerial 
Bank Building, Edmonton, Alberta. 

Hansard of the Dominion Parliament. 

Report of the Committee of the Alberta. Legislature on Rural Education, 1935* 

STJPPLTOWTART BLBLIOGRAPHY 

Martin, R. M., ’’The Hudson's Bey Territories and Vancouver Island", London . 
England; H. V. Boone . 1349. 

Morton, A. S., "A History of the Canadian West to 1370-1371", Toronto . OnV rlo : 

Mel son and Sons. 19*59 . 

Morice, A. G., Rev., "History of the Catholic Church in Western Canada*, 

Toronto. Ontario! Musson Book Coaonnv. Lt d.. 1910. 

Palliser, J. f Capt., "Papers Relative to the Exploration by Captain Palliser", 
Lond on., Englandt George Mil Ho rn P yre a nd V/i 111? in S pottlsvoode , 1359. 

Milton, Viscount, and Cheedle, W. B., "Worth-West Passage by Land", London . 
England! Cassell. Potter and Cain ip . 1365. 

Grant, G. M., Rev., "Ocean to Ocean: Sandford Fleming's Expedition Through 
Canada in 1372", Toro nto. On tario : Jame s > mpbel'l and Son . 1373* 

Henkes, J., "The Story of Saskatchewan and. Its People", R egina. S r> katc he van ? 

S. J. Clarke Publishing Company, 1924. 





























































































































- 157 - 


McDougall, J., "Saddle, Sled and Snowshoe", Toronto. Ontario: Willlr-m Br’rs . 
1898. 

McDouall, J., "Pathfinding on Lake and Prairie", Toronto. Ontario : 

Willlan Brl^-s . 1S98. 

/ 

MeDougall, J., “In the Days of the Bed River Rebellion", Toron t o. Ontario :—^ 

Will-l am 'Brlg/rs . 1913. 

McDougall, J., "On Western Trails in the Early Seventies", Toronto. Ontario : 

Win jam Brings . 1911. 

McDougall, J., "Forest, Lake ana Prairie", To ronto. Ontario : Will i am Briggs . 

1895. 

Black, N. F., "A History of Saskatchewan and the North-West", Retina, Saskftcrewr 
IIorth-h T e : 't Historical Co:;Toany . 191J* 

MacRae, A. 0., "History of the Province of Alberta", Calpe r y, Alberta s 

yhf; Western Canada Historical Co -pany . 1 C )12 . 

NcLean, J., "John McLean's Notes of a Twenty-Years 1 Service in the Hudson's 
Bav Company", Toronto. Ontario8 The P ublications of the Champlain Societ y. 

1932. 

Simpson, Sir, "Narrative of a Journey Round the World", Tendon. England : x 
H enr?/ Colburn , 1H48. 



itO 







































































































































368131 ’ 










































