For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 




A BIBLIOGRAPHIC STUDY OF CERTAIN CONCEPTS 
IN THE ART OF TEACHING 

by 

Clifford E. Shelton 


DIVISION OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 





















©X MBBW 

arawniim 

mmnxMis 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/bibliographicstuOOshel 


A BIBLIOGRAPHIC STUDY OF CERTAIN CONCEPTS 


IN THE ART OF TEACHING 


A DISSERTATION 
SUBMITTED TO 

THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 


CLIFFORD E. SHELTON 





















ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


To Dr. H. T. Coutts, Dr. S. C. T, Clarke, and Dr. W. D. McDougall, 
members of my committee, I am indebted for reading and criticism of this 
study. 

I wish to express my appreciation also for the advice and 
encouragement given me by Dr. H. S. Baker. 

To Harry Fisher and the late Everett B. Ooley my obligation and 
gratitude are recorded here. By precept and example they did more than 
they knew to lay the foundation for this study. 


Edmonton, Alberta 
April, 1958. 



SINOPSIS 


Contemporary literature has been increasingly concerned with the 
efficacy of methodology in our schools. The controversy between those 
who would perpetuate our cultural heritage to the exclusion of all else 
and those who would find answers to their problems only within the 
culture of today has been significant for all concerned with education. 

The primary purpose of this study was to determine what reaction 
to this controversy was evinced by the Alberta Teachers 1 Association 
Magazine during the years 1935 - 1955* The hypothesis that there is a 
middle way, probably superior to the extremes in methodology, was taken 
as a limiting factor in the investigation of bibliographical material. 

For the sake of clarity and perspective published opinion pertain¬ 
ing to controversial issues in methodology was investigated first in 
articles sampled from the Education Index . One hundred articles were 
located and read. From the bibliographical material obtained these two 
facts emerged: first, the controversy was concerned chiefly with the 
relative merits of traditionalism and progressivism; and secondly, the 
art of teaching concerns so much more than methodology that a study of 
methods apart from other aspects of instruction is impractical. 

"Where published opinion favored either of the methodologies in 
its extreme form, its theoretical superiority was logically established. 
Critical comment, however, pointed up the deficiencies of extremes in 
practice. Somewhere in a continuum between the extremes published comment 
indicated that a point could be found by the good teacher where he 
performs at his best. It was evident that the dichotomy found in print 




















. 






.. 


. 



































was rarely found in practice. 


When progressivism became the basic philosophy of the Alberta 
School Curriculum after 1935» it was apparent that the A. T. A. Magazine 
favored the ’’new" techniques in methodology. Whole-hearted acceptance of 
progressive ideas, however, was not evinced by all writers. Minority 
opinion expressed concern for future educational outcomes, and there was 
criticism of the manner in which the new curriculum was introduced into 
Alberta schools. 

By 1950 published comment in the A. T. A. Magazine , much of it 
American reprints, was less favorably disposed toward progressive 
techniques. Other factors influential in good teaching such as socio¬ 
logical aspects and the teacher’s personality were being given attention. 
A synthesis of effective techniques from both methodologies was now 
suggested, and teaching was being looked upon as an art rather than a 
craft. 


The bibliographical data from the investigation was classified and 
analyzed. The following conclusions were drawn; 

1. Methodology in teaching cannot be divorced from the aims 
and objectives of education. 

2. Published opinion indicates a trend away from the extremes 
in methodology toward the idea of a synthesis of diverse 
procedures. 


3. The teacher is the crux of all good teaching. 


4. Good teaching is an art rather than a craft. 

5. An eclectic methodology is the most promising of all 
procedures for good teaching. 


v 















- 













. 






' 










■i 

























■ ■ ■ 

. 












TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. INTRODUCTION . «... 1 

1. Concepts of Curricula and Methodology- 

in Education ... 1 

2. The Issues Involved.... 2 

3. The Present Study... 3 

Purpose — Scope — Procedure 

II. TRADITIONAL CONCEPTS ...... 6 

1. Sources and Method of Presentation ........... 6 

2. The Traditional Approach to Good Teaching .... 7 

III. PROGRESSIVE CONCEPTS . ...... 25 

1. The Philosophy, Aims, and Techniques of 

Progressivism ... 25 

IV. CONCEPTS IN A CONTINUUM ........ .... 4l 

1. The Common Denominator... 4l 

2. The Good Teacher ...... 4? 

3* Sociological Aspects of Good Teaching . 50 

4. Commentary.... .... 55 

5. A Question of Prejudice .... 56 

V. REACTION IN THE ALBERTA TEACHERS’ MAGAZINE TO THE 

IDEOLOGICAL CONTROVERSY 1935 - 1945 .. 6l 

1. Sources and Method of Presentation ........... 6l 

2. Concepts in Alberta’s Education 

1935 - 1945 .. 62 

vi 

























CHAPTER 


PAGE 


VI. REACTION IN THE ALBERTA TEACHERS 1 MAGAZINE TO THE 


IDEOLOGICAL CONTROVERSY 1945 - 1955 ... 84 

1. Concepts in Alberta's Education 

1945 - 1955 ..... 84 

VII. AN INTERPRETATION ...... 104 

1. The Problem.......... 104 

2. Conclusion ....... 105 

3. Expansion ...... 106 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


109 











CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

1. Concepts of Curricula and Methodology in Education 

Contemporary literature in the field of education is increasingly 
concerned with curricula and methods of teaching. Writers are adamant 
about the need for reevaluation. There is no dearth of published opinion, 
but its nature is so diverse, and the points of view so much at variance 
that ultimate answers to the persistent problem in curricula and method¬ 
ology would seem far removed from the present. 

The arguments advanced in educational literature concerning what 
is good and what is bad in teaching usually fall into one or other of two 
schools of thought. One group of writers supports the idea that new 
problems have permanent answers in the past, and would have teachers 
perpetuate our cultural heritage through the essentialist or traditional 
method. Others hold the view that new problems have answers to be dis¬ 
covered within the changing social and intellectual culture of the 
present, and suggest that teachers favor methods of progressivism or 
experiment alism. 

Consequently teachers are faced with an accumulation of exhortations 
often couched in terms of scholastic semasiology. They are urged to make 
each student one of the group, to give him his own individuality, and to 
help him in his quest for significance. They are to assist the whole 
child in the unfolding of his unique potentialities. This can be done, 
so they are told, through a functional approach and an interactive process 




' 






iiw 

, 







- 



■H ' 




: 








• 


. 






























• 








• V: 1 









. 








. • 








■ 








- 















■ 



















■ 


















2 

within an area of living rich in experience. 

On the other hand teachers are called upon to inculcate the 
verities, to strengthen character through example, and to stress those 
skills needed for mental discipline. The approach, in this instance, 
shall be catechetical, the process, drill, and the area of learning 
carefully scheduled in time and scope. 

2. The Issues Involved 

This controversy and the exhortations indicate a healthy democratic 
interest in educational problems. Wherever, in this conflict, criticism 
of curricula and methodology is objective and constructive, progress 
toward the solution of what constitutes good teaching is being made. 
However, when major changes are advocated by organized groups making 
systematic attacks on present day methods, or individuals use the public 
press to gain wide attention for their views, a more immediate appraisal 
of the concepts of good teaching seems in order. 

Though in travelling toward a goal we are always in the happy 
state of arriving, there is a need for a quickening of pace in educational 
thinking. Administrators must be concerned about the time lag between the 
discovery of good educational methods and their implementation in the 
classroom. 

Experienced teachers who would use the most effective methods may 
be confused by the great variety of procedures, practices, and techniques 
urged upon them, and frustrated by the arguments for the adoption of new 
methods, or the retention of old. The teacher new to the classroom is 








"#jl. 














. 



' 










































even more concerned. In the conflict of educational ideologies he is 
to find the means of becoming a superior teacher. Only to the child he 
is to teach will a lack of resolution in issues basic to good teaching 
be more significant. 

It seems reasonable to assume that there are less divergent views 
possible in methodology than those of traditionalism and progressivism. 

It may be that for every teacher there is a synthesis of the two method¬ 
ologies somewhere in a continuum between the extremes. It is conceivable 
that the synthesis of techniques chosen by an experienced teacher will 
operate within a frame of reference dealing with learning objectives and 
the needs and interests of his pupils. In the present study this 
hypothesis of synthesis will be used as a unifying and limiting factor. 

3. The Present Study 

Purpose : The issues involved in this ideological controversy 
emphasize the pertinence of the following question: 

What cognizance of the controversy, and what reaction toward it is 
to be found among educationalists and teachers of Alberta as revealed in 
the writings of the Alberta Teachers 1 Association Magazine? 

An investigation of this question forms the basic purpose of this 
study. It involves an extensive examination of concepts concerning the 
art of teaching as they appear in the Alberta Teachers 1 Association 
Magazine . 

Though the foregoing is the main part of the study, additional 
investigation is feasible to obtain a range of concepts in periodical 
literature concerning the art of teaching. The question under review 























' 







■ 






























- 




4 

can be resolved most adequately in the light of findings that emerge in 
an extensive survey of related studies. 

Scope : This is not primarily a search for psychological or 
philosophical principles although these may be implied. In the literature 
of periodicals it is to review, analyze, classify and compare the ideas 
advanced by writers over a period of twenty years about the art of teaching. 
More significantly it seeks to find what range of thought, or trend of 
ideas, concerning skill in teaching is expressed in the Alberta T eachers 1 
Magazine during that same period of time. 

Procedure ; For the first part of the study - a survey of pro¬ 
fessional opinion concerning the art of teaching - it was necessary to 
consult the literature of a number of writers in the educational field. 
Because the area of reading had to be restricted to reasonable limits, 
only that of two decades, from 1935 to 1955* was reviewed. To avoid 
editorial or professional bias in obtaining an expression of opinion, 
the Education Index was used as a source book. From it 100 titles, 
applicable in whole or in part to methodology in teaching, were located 
and read. The concepts in the material reviewed provided the means of 
investigation into professional opinion regarding the art of teaching. 

The second part of the study - an investigation of the published 
opinion of educationists and teachers concerning the art of teaching 
appearing in the Alberta Teachers 1 Association Magazine used that organ 
for the years 1935 to 1955 inclusive. 

Chapter II, following, classifies, reviews, and analyzes concepts 





















. 










■ 























5 


of a traditional nature in published opinion, and presents expressed 
criticisms of the same. Chapter III reports on progressive concepts 
similarly, while Chapter IV reviews the concepts in the art of teaching 
which do not appear to embrace either traditional or progressive ideas. 
Chapter IV also summarizes and interprets the material previously 
presented. 

The second half of the study - a review of published opinion in 
the Alberta Teachers 1 Magazine - is presented in a time sequence. Chapter 
V reports on published opinion in the A. T. A. Magazin e previous to and 
during World War II, and Chapter VI on the writings following the war. 

The final chapter summarizes and interprets the findings of this study. 








CHAPTER II 


TRADITIONAL CONCEPTS 

This chapter and the next present a range of written opinion 
expressed by professional people concerning the art of teaching. Those 
concepts which are regarded as essentialist or traditional are investi¬ 
gated first, those which are experimental or progressive later. 

Published critiques by writers of both groups are reported on as an aid 
to interpretation, analysis, and classification of the concepts presented 
by diverse opinion. Whereas the principles basic to good teaching apply 
to all levels of education, and writers in expressing their opinion take 
cognizance of this fact, no attempt is made here to separate the data 
into "levels of education". 

1. Source and Method of Presentation 

For the literature of professional opinion concerning the art of 
teaching the Education Index was consulted as the most unbiased source 
available. The volumes used were those from 1935 to 1955 inclusive. 

The information obtained lay mainly under the head of 'Teaching* and the 
sub-head 'Methods' though subject heads were referred to also. 

Because of the great number of titles listed, random sampling was 
attempted by choosing every fifth one as a reference. The dearth of 
periodicals in the library made this method of sampling impossible, and 
choosing every third title was no better. Consequently the investigation 
was limited to the periodicals available in the library. 











■ 






■ 





























„ . 






















. 






















7 


Because of the limited source material the range of concepts 
presented is no more than that, and the possibility of defining a trend 
of opinion is ruled out. However, published opinion over a twenty year 
period, insufficient though it may be to establish a trend, or to provide 
an exhaustive study of non-selective data, does present a range of 
concepts valuable as a background for a study of published opinion in the 
Alberta teachers* official organ concerning superior teaching. 

The method of presentation is influenced by the paucity of source 
material in that no set pattern can be followed which will yield a 
balanced sequence. The order, then, is conceptual rather than chrono¬ 
logical. The information garnered from publications available has been 
divided into three areas. Concepts of a traditional nature are reported 
on in this chapter, those of an experimental or progressive theme in 
Chapter III. Published commentaries and criticisms are included wherever 
they help in the analysis of the concepts under discussion, but their 
authors are not necessarily traditional or progressive, or either. 

2. The Traditional Approach to Good Teaching 

If education is for systematic indoctrination, learning by drill 
and repetition is the method par excellence ... If education is for 
the independent reconstruction of patterns ... the emphasis should be 
on learning by coordination and on training in independent thinking. 

The contrast between traditional and progressive viewpoints is 

^P. T. Orato, "Conflicting Viewpoints in Contemporary American 
Education." Educational Administration and Supervision , 22: 299 - 313; 
January 1936, p. 303» 







8 

succinctly brought out by the above quotation. There is an implication, 
too, that methodology in teaching cannot be divorced from purpose. The 
aims and objectives of education determine the methods to be used. If 
this is so, the daily curriculum of the classroom will be in accord with 
the philosophical viewpoint of those who determine the purpose of 
education, and the activities performed, the result of the methodology- 
adapted to the purpose. 

It follows, also, that methodology is a clue to the philosophical 
viewpoint held by the educator. Drill and repetition are usually favored 
in a traditional approach, and training for independent thinking in a 
progressive curriculum. The traditional concept as a superior way of 
teaching is held by Carolyn Towle who said: 

If some of us recall our early school days we will find that some 
of the customs in those days could stand up very well with customs 
today. It is a pity that so many of the good methods of teaching 
have been scrapped because some educator has been afraid he will be 
tagged 'old fashioned’ or because some publishing house wants to 
put new text books on the market. 

It might be an advantage to present day teachers to go back a few 
years with us and see that teaching in the early 1900’s was thoroughly 
interesting and educational in every sense of the word. 

What the author means by "the good methods of teaching” is 
clarified in her explanation of daily instruction in geography. ’’The 
teacher,” she said, "would pull down a map of the United States, hand us 
a pointer and send us to the board to designate the capital and largest 


^C. Towle, "Don't forget the good old Methods.” American 
Childhoo d, 37: 7-8; February 1952, p. 7* 











- 

* 



■ 








































































































3 y 

city of each and every state in the union." The outcome of this method 

was apparently satisfying for she states, "We could name the oceans, the 

continents, the countries, the towns, cities, lakes, and rivers of the 

4 

whole world." 

This mastery of content material as an end in itself made possible 
through a repetition and drill method apparently engenders a feeling of 
well-being for in her recollections of literature, and of poetry in 
particular, she recalls that, " ... the louder we shouted the words 
in our singsong manner the greater the applause from our listeners. 

What if we didn’t always understand what we were saying, the full meaning 
would come to us later in life anyway?""^ 

H. G. Caswell, referring to methodology in the early 1900’s, said: 

It was commonly believed at the opening of this century that the 
mind was composed of a group of faculties such as reasoning and memory 
It was thought that these faculties could be developed especially well 
by certain subjects and that once they were developed they would apply 
to all the situations that one encountered. Thus it was believed 
that mathematics had special value in developing reasoning and that 
once a person was taught to reason through mathematics he would reason 
well about all types of problems. 

It followed from this conception of learning that the best way to 
educate was to put an individual through rigorous courses in fields 
that would develop the desired faculties. It was commonly thought 
that the harder a subject was, the better material it was for learning 
This was the disciplinary conception of education.® 


^ Ibid ., p. ?. 

4 

Ibid ., p. ?. 

%bid., p. 7. 

^H. L. Caswell, "Great Reappraisal of Public Education." T eachers ’ 
College Record , 54: 12 - 22; October 1952» P« 16. 
























. 


















. 





























■ 



10 


It would seem that this mental training and strengthening of 
will explains some of Carolyn Towle’s satisfaction with traditional 
methodology. Of her recollections in English she said, "Our work was 
almost wholly drill work and quite boring and uninteresting. 

The implication in the foregoing that the attitude of the learner 
is not of first consideration in traditional methodology, but is subordi¬ 
nate to the indoctrination of subject matter is borne out by Clarence A. 
Weber who, in listing aspects of traditional teaching, stated: 

1. Subject-matter should be studied in chronological 
or mathematical sequence 

2. Motivation is an incidental problem of the teacher 

3. School subjects educate the child 

4. Attitudes are secondary to acquisition of information 
and skill 

8 

5. Facts are the essentials of learning ... 

This concern of traditionalists with the inculcation of factual 

9 

material is warranted according to I. L. Kandel because "without a 
knowledge of facts or subjects arranged in an orderly sequence even the 
existence of a problem cannot be recognized."^ 0 The teacher’s job, said 
Kandal, is the transmission of a heritage of knowledge to be applied to 

?C. Towle, ©£. cit ., p. ?. 

Q 

C. A. Weber, "A Reply to Critics of Progressive Methods in 
Education." Educational Administration and Supervision , 31s 79 - 86, 
February 1945, p. 84. 

^1. L. Kandel, "The Swing of the Educational Pendulum." School 
and Society « 77* 27 - 28. 


























































































' 

















• - 








. 























11 

an interpretation of today’s problems. He says, "It is true that we are 

creatures of our culture, but the schools exist to accelerate the impact 

of the essential aspects of that culture by suitable selections.”* * 1 ' 1 A 

teacher, holding this viewpoint,would appeal to experience presumably 

wider and deeper than her own or that of her pupils. She would appeal to 

authority and indoctrination . Kandel found such methodology consistent 

with democracy for he stated, "There is nothing in the concept of 

democracy or in the theory of the learning process to prohibit indoctrination 

12 

of faith in the ideals of freedom ... and holds "revolt against authority 

13 

and indoctrination as baseless." 

Though "indoctrination of faith in the ideals of freedom" is a 
traditional tenet,for children in the classroom "freedom means chaos and 
should not be encouraged," 1 ^ and "pupils cannot be allowed to discover for 
themselves the ideals that are inherent in that [our] culture." 1 ^ 

One method which fulfils traditional purposes, and curtails overmuch 
pupil activity is referred to in a study 1 ^ of the practices of 104 best 

i:L Ibid., p. 27 . 

12 I. L. Kandel, op. cit., p. 2?. 

1 ^I. L. Kandel, on. cit ., p. 2?. 

14 

C. A. Weber, Op. cit . , p. 84. 

^I. L. Kandel, op. cit ., p. 2?. 

1 ^T. H. Briggs, "The Practices of Best High-School Teachers" 

School Review , 43: ?48 - 752. 







. 

' 

* 


- 



12 


teachers in New York and suburbs. Thomas H. Briggs had this to say of 
them: "Of the 104 examples about four in every five were conventional 
teaching from the textbook. 

18 

Another method is oral teaching which T. H. Spencer deplored as 

being deprecated in favor of practical work activity and experience by 

"present fashion." This is the method which G. H. Bartock^ referred to 

as "verbal and linguistic education" in his contention that "not all a 

20 

child needs to learn can be the result of direct sensory experience." 

Formal teaching makes use, also, of " ... the conventional 

procedure of questions by the teachers on an assignment with answers by 

21 

the pupils or of specific directions followed by board or seat work." 

The lecture, a fundamental technique of traditional methodology, 
particularly in the higher grades, has a valuable contribution to make to 
individual instruction according to Robert ULieh who said, " ... I 
remember lectures which impressed me deeply. They gave me a feeling for 
a great teacher*s personality and thinking, for the continuity in humor, 

^Ibid., p. 746. 

^®T, H. Spencer, "Pendulums Swing" Journal of Education (London) 
71: 383 - 384, June 1939. 

19g. H. Bartock, "Activities and Formal Work in School." Journal 
of Education , (London) 84: 401 - 402 , 452 plus, 510 plus, September - 
November, 1952. 

20 Ibid .■ p. 512. 

2 ^T, H. Briggs, on. cit ., p. 750. 















' 




- 




























































13 

thought and culture and for the art of logical architecture as well as 

22 

for the art of appealing presentation.” This observation gains signifi- 

23 

cance in the light of a research study report ^ which states that ” ... 

the lecture method has been greatly undervalued in pedagogical literature 

24 

for all levels of instruction.” 

The lecture, supplemented by a blackboard outline and discussion, 

was considered superior by students in a study by Ford, and reported on by 
25 

A. N. Broening. Of this method, the last of four in the study, 

Broening reported, ’’Ninety-five per cent of his j Ford's students believed 
they learned more by the fourth method ... " ° The observation follows 
that, in the opinion of these students, the lecture with or without a 
blackboard outline and no discussion, or a discussion and recitation with 
no lecture are all three inferior to the lecture supported by outline and 
discussion. 

The recitation method which Monroe and Marks stated was ’’commonly 


22 

R. Ulich, ’’Some Comments on Recent Contributions.” School and 
Society , ?4: 89 August 1951» p. 89. 

S. Monroe and A. Marks, ’’General Methods of Teaching 
Evaluated.” Educational Administration and Supervision » 24: 581 - 592, 
November 1938. 

24 

Ibid ., p. 582. 

25 

A. M. Broening, ’’General Methods of Teaching.” 

Educational Research , 9: 295 - 302, June 1939. 


Review of 





















' 


















- 
















■ 









































designated as the traditional or textbook method" * 2 * * * * ^ has not fared so 


well in research according to the above authors who say," ... the find¬ 
ings of research have been generally but not consistently unfavorable to 

2ft 

the recitation method." 

Another method, difficult to define, is the project. Lynch 

reported that "Stormzand, Stevenson, Wells, Collings, and Kilpatrick 

each use the term ‘project method* to designate widely different pro- 
29 

cedures." 7 In its traditional setting it is subject centred, and in 

30 

contrasting it with "large units of experience" it has been reported 

that "Whereas the project method and the object lesson both hold the 

subject matter at the center of attraction, the new method is built about 
31 

the child." In expressing his opinion of the project method W. F. Fogg 
said, "All projects of necessity involve content, and all mastery of 
content involves some kind of activity. 

27w. S. Monroe and A. Marks, og. cit ., p. 583. 

28 Sld., p. 584. 

2 9j. M. Lynch, "Teaching Practices and Generally Accepted Tbeoiy." 
Educational Administration and Supervision , 22: 538 - 542, October 1936, 

P. 539. 

■^D. E. Lawson, "A Critique on the Present Status of Unit Teaching." 
Educational Administration and Supervision , 26: 424 - 429, 1940, 

p. 428. 

31 Ibid .. p. 429. 

F. Fogg, "Project versus Subject: A Critical Review." 

School and Society 51: 276 - 278, March 1940, p. 276. 





























- 




- 




15 

Repetition and drill, basic elements of traditional methodology, 

are common to the procedures outlined in the foregoing. Of drill it was 

said, "Indeed, there is no reason drill should always be avoided; it is 

after all the quickest means of learning tables" [and] " ... a really 

33 

vital teacher can make drill an activity." It would seem that the 

vital teacher would do more than use drill for teaching tables, and this 

is implied by L. C. Mossman in saying, "Thoughtful students of the 

learning process are not abandoning drill, but are trying to give it a 

34 

more dynamic interpretation."-^ 

These methods which indoctrinate are favored by teachers whose 

philosophy of education emphasizes the transmission of culture. It 

follows that a teacher, as a transmitter of culture, is pre-eminent in 

whatever goes on in the classroom. He has that same tutorial status 

which, in the opinion of John Neitz^ was considered proper by Horace 

Mann in 1843. In speaking of the great educator Neitz said, "Apparently 

he [Horace Mann ’ did not think of methods or any other matter in 

relation to the learning process without thinking of these as emanating 

36 

entirely or largely from the teacher. 

h. Bartock, "Activities and Formal Work in School." Journal 
of Education (London), 84: 401 - 402 , 452 plus, 510 plus, September - 

November 1952, p. 512. 

C. Mossman, "Some Comments on Certain Newer Practices in the 
Elementary School." Teachers 1 College Record , 38: 54? - 555 > April 1937» 
p. 551. 

J. A. Neitz, "Horace Mann's Ideas on General Methods in Education. 
Elementary School Journal, 37: 742 - 751* June '37* 

36 


' ibid ., pp. 743 - 744. 










































. 




















































16 


In some measure published opinion continues to hold that the 

teacher's job in our day is that of inculcating the truths of yesterday. 

This is made plain in the statement, "The school teacher is a professional 

37 

culture transmitter." The writer, Mark May, emphasizes this function 
of an educator in outlining the means by which a teacher can best fulfil 
his duties. He said: 

The first item in the professional equipment of the teacher is 
that he should know the culture that he is supposed to transmit, be 
skilful in presenting it, have certain attitudes towards it, and be 
motivated to preserve and to promote it.° 

From the standpoint of the learner the same writer saw education 

as " ... the process by which the biological human organism becomes 

39 

socialized or domesticated in the culture into which it is bom." 

Therefore, he suggests that the teacher " ... should know both scientific 

40 

cally and intuitively the process of socialization" and realize the 

extent of this socialization through " ... expert knowledge of face-to- 

41 

face, interpersonal relations with his pupils." Furthermore, he should 

have " ... an expert knowledge about and skill in performing the role 
that he as the teacher is supposed to play in the sub-culture in which 

A. May, "Teacher as a Transmitter of Culture." Educational 
Administration and Supervision , 26: l6l - 175» March 1940, p. 163. 

38 Ibid ., p. 164. 

39 Ibid., p. 162. 

4 ° Ibid ., p. 165. 

4l Ibid .. p. 167. 











































■ 





















17 


his school is located. In other words, in the community, this 
teacher is to lead "... a godly and exemplary life and be a model of 
perfection for his pupils."^ 

Adherents of traditional methodology and purpose since the time of 

Horace Mann to this day have transmitted the "eternal verities" through 

textbook and chalkboard, through lecture and recitation. Theirs has been 

the subject centred curriculum, organized, sequential, and related. 

Criticisms of their aims and techniques have not been uncommon. In their 

44 

published opinion people like H. ¥. Household, at one time Secretary 

for Education in the Gloucester County Council, have been unfavorably 

disposed toward traditional methods. Household Is not particularly happy 

with teacher training institutions which perpetuate "the baleful heritage 

of those early days ... preparing their students to give clever lessons, 

to question skilfully and elicit answers, to cover blackboards with able 

summaries, to dictate notes and explain the obvious and in general to do 

a great deal that the pupils could be set with much greater profit to do 
45 

for themselves." 

A further criticism of conventional methods is found in the state¬ 
ment that "Everyone recognizes the marked tendency of formal educationalists 

A. May, on , cit., p, 168. 

43 Ibid . . p. 168 . 

4h 

H. W. Household, "Charlotte Mason Methods in the Elementary 
School," Journal of Education (London), 71* 534-536, August 1939. 

W. Household, op. cit ., p. 534. 






■ 

























































to become exclusively verbal 


A more competent teacher has the 


18 


ingenuity and resourcefulness to provide for his pupils a wide variety 
46 

of expression ... " 

Further to this criticism of verbalism is that of S. R. Laycock 

who saw lessons in 185 classrooms in the four western provinces, Quebec, 

47 

and Ontario. He said, "Nearly all teachers talk too much. There is 

48 

too much teacher-activity and too little pupil activity." 

An oblique censure of conventional methodology is made by Evelyn 

4q 

Rogers 7 when comparing a new progressive teacher with a former Miss Smith 
of traditional vintage in having a fictitious pupil say, "Miss Smith gave 
you an outline of what was in the book, and a list of questions that would 
be on the examination; you memorized them and passed. This fool teacher 
does not know how to teach; she is always asking you what you think. 

Published opinion has also been critical of textbooks as teaching 
material. William Van Til quips, "All captured traditionalists ... 


^S. M. Corey, "Evaluating Technical Teaching Competence." 
Eleme ntary School Journal , 4l: 577 - 586, April 1941, p. 583. 

4 ? S . ft* Laycock, "Common Faults in Teaching." School (Elementary 
Ed.) 33: 659 - 664, April 1945. 

^Ibid., p. 659. 

^E. G. Rogers, "Progressive Ideals in Practice; Teacher’s Dilemma." 
Progressive Education , 25*. 252 - 255» October ’47. 

^°E. G. Rogers, op. cit., p. 253. 









* 









































19 


questioned about their materials of instruction have reluctantly- 
handed over The Textbook for the Course. Without it, the traditionalist 
is noticeably nervous and insecure. 

In the controversy between traditional methods and progressive, 
outcomes of research have not always been in favor of the former. Report¬ 
ing on a study^ 2 comparing the two, G. C. Kyte has this to say: 

Ward, William E. compared two methods of teaching chemistry in 
high school: (a) the ’traditional textbook method* with subject 
matter as *the end in itself* and (b) the *modern method* using 
subject matter as ’a means to an end.’ 

One case of significant difference out of 21 classes favored the 
textbook method, but eleven favored the modem method ... pupils with 
low intelligence taught by the modem method achieved better results 
than did the comparable pupils taught by the traditional method.53 

Monroe and Marks^ in presenting a summarization of studies involv¬ 
ing the lecture, recitation, laboratory, project, socialized recitation, 
and Morrison Plan methods of teaching, pointed out: 

Viewing the research as a whole, the present writers were impressed 
with the number of instances in which the traditional method was shown 
to be inferior and the project method and certain laboratory methods 
(Dalton and Winnetka plans) were found to be superior. 

It should be noted, however, that probably no method makes it 
impossible for a resourceful teacher to provide for individual 
differences and to emphasize student responsibility, and the adoption 
of any method does not insure that these things will be done. 55 


■^W. A. Van Til, ’’Fable of Textbook Strategy.” Educational 
Leadership , 5: 215 - 220, January 1948, p. 215. 

5 2 G, G. Kyte, ’’Methods of Teaching,” Review of Educational 
Research , 15: 218 - 226, June 1945. 

^G. C. Kyte, op. cit .» p. 219. 

5 V S. Monroe and A. Marks, "General Methods of Teaching Evaluated.” 
Educational Administration and Supervision , 24: 581 - 592, November 1938. 

55 E2id., p. 591. 













. . 





- 




' .. j . ' . .. . . , , . ■■ ■ y ; ‘ '■ ■ t 'V, 

, ■ • - 


■ 




f 







- 


■ 




; • - • 

. 

. .. . -J .... • . . 





20 

The inference in the foregoing that individual differences are 
more likely to be taken care of with methods other than traditional is 


broadened in another study reviewed by the same authors^ to include 


benefits for the group. This review stated: 

" ... Stokes reports a study of the Winnetka plan made with two 
hundred students in ninth-grade algebra. He found that his students 
in the Winnetka classes covered an amount of work in seven and one- 
half months which was comparable to the amount done in a traditional 
recitation class in nine months and ... quality of the work ... was 
the same for both classes ... *7 

Further support for methods non-traditional is found in a report on 



twelfth-grade social studies classes in which it is said, 


"Funk found that students working with the Morrison plan did more reading 


59 

than did students with the recitation method." 


Opinion and research are not 9 however, wholly unfavorable toward 
traditional methodology. In the ideological controversy which exists in 
published opinion between conventional methods and those of progressivism 
the former has not lacked for support. There is evidence, also, that the 
weight of opinion favoring experimental techniques has not always influenced 
the practices of the classroom. Certainly, the 104 best teachers reported 
on by Briggs^ 0 and referred to earlier in this chapter took little 
cognizance of any movement away from traditionalism. Of these teachers 


-^W. 3. Monroe and A. Marks, op. cit., 581 - 592. 


5 7 Ibid ., p. 584. 
5 8 Ibid ., p. 584. 
39 Ibid ., p. 584. 


H. Briggs» "The Practices of Best High-School Teachers." 
School Review . 43: _ 748 - 752, 1935- 


1935. 


















. 




. 




















. 

. 






























' 
































. 


■ 












a 

who used predominantly a traditional method of questioning on assigned 
lessons, Briggs says, M It was obvious from these reports of 104 classroom 
procedures that the unit method of work, as advocated by Morrison and 
others, has found no hospitality among these superior teachers in the 
high schools of the New York metropolitan area. Not a single lesson 
could be assigned to this type. 

This lack of "hospitality" toward progressivism is pointed up by 
A. J, Steffey who, as regional supervisor for Northwest Iowa, had an 
opportunity to observe not only what instruction was given in teacher 
training ins titutions but also what went on in the classroom. In his 
excellent summation of what constitutes traditional instruction and his 
indictment of it his concern as an administrator for the time lag between 
what training colleges offer as acceptable teaching methods and their 
inclusion in the school curriculum becomes evident. Pertinent to this is 
the following quotation: 

Classroom visitations ..• revealed that high-school teaching in 
the smaller high schools of Iowa was quite traditional. The question- 
and-answer type of procedure and page by page assignments still 
prevailed. There was little enrichment of the textbook by collateral 
reference or study. The instruction and discussion were predominantly 
abstract and academic. There was a need for making them more interest¬ 
ing and meaningful and related to the experiences or environment of 
the pupils. There was a scarcity of pupil activity and a lack of 
variety in teaching procedure. On the whole there was too little 
evidence that teachers were following progressive practices taught 
in the teacher-training institutions or advocated in professional 
literature and research studies. ^ 


6l Ibid ., p. 751. 

A. J. Steffey, "Use of the Demonstration Technique." American 
School Board Journal , 95; 4l - 43, September 1937* 

^A. J. Steffey, o£. cit . , p. 4l. 








? 








- , 
















































■ - 

. 

. 



























' ■ . 

















22 

Furthermore, Steffey found that teachers, after attending an 

institute arranged for the demonstration of new techniques and rating 

it generally helpful, returned to their classrooms to teach much as they 

had before - conventionally. Of this he says, "In most cases there has 

64 

been little carry-over into classroom thinking." 

Comment which lends some support for the continuation of traditional 
methodology in practice, if not in published opinion, is that which empha¬ 
sizes the consideration of subject matter in teaching. The pivotal 
position of subject matter is taken by Sanford^ in his thesis that "the 
technique of teaching means the technique or methods of presenting subject- 
matter."^ He quotes John Dewey in support of this opinion as follows: 
"Method means that arrangement of subject-matter which makes it most 

67 

effective in use. Never is method something outside of the material ..." ( 
That this subject matter consists of past experiences to be used in 
an interpretation of todays living, and that anything else is not edu¬ 
cation is inferred in the following statement, "These heritages from the 
past make up what we call civilization. The process of transmitting these 

6 4 Ibid ., p. 42. 

^5c. W. Sanford, "Combined Course in Student-teaching and the 
Technique of Teaching." E ducational Administration and Supervision . 22: 

636 - 640, November 1936. 

6 6 Ibid .. p. 636. 

^ Ibid ., p. 636 . 







6ft - 

abiding values or "eternal verities" is called education." ° It would 

seem that those teachers who give subject matter such prominence will 

continue to teach conventionally. 

Published opinion and research have on occasion favored the 

69 

conventional methods. Broening ' reporting a study said, " ... Forlano 
stated that in the case of school children in the fifth and sixth grades 
working under ordinary classroom conditions and with methods and materials 
common to the school, learning by recitation is clearly superior to learn¬ 
ing by reading."^ 0 

71 

In a study by Guetzkow with classes in elementary psychology in 
which three teaching methods were compared he said, "By and large, we found 
no differences between the three methods from the point of view of edu¬ 
cational outcome. The few statistical differences, in general, favored 

72 

the recitation-drill method." 

The aim, as Orato*^ has pointed out, is quite important in 


6ft 

°P. T. Orato, "Conflicting Viewpoints in Contemporary American 
Education." Educational Administration and Supervision , 22: 299 - 313; 
January 1936, p. 304. 

60 

A. M. Broening, "General Methods of Teaching." Review of 
Educational Research , 295 - 302, June 1939* 

7 ° Ibid ., p. 297. 

^H. Guetzkow, "Experimental Comparison of Recitation, Discussion, 
and Tutorial Methods in College Teaching." Journal of Educational 
Psychology , 45: 193 - 207, April *54. 

72 Ibid ., p. 205 . 

7 ^P. t. Orato, 0 £. cit., p. 299 - 313. 


















.4 









































. 


















. 


. . 




























24 

determining the method. This opinion is pointed up by G. M. Wiley who 

said, "Ruskin holds that subject matter of education and its methods 

74 

should be determined by the goal or end in view. M 

Where the “end in view" is indoctrination and the content the 
"eternal verities", from the foregoing it may be deduced that the method 
is traditional. That the method is good for the purpose in mind is 
supported by the fact that John Dewey, commonly accepted as a great edu¬ 
cator , used traditional methodology. Of him it is written, "Dr. Dewey 
does not teach his classes by the method he describes, but lectures to 
them." 75 

The foregoing has presented a classification and an analysis of 
what published opinion says constitutes traditional methodology. Published 
commentaries 9 criticisms, and research have also been outlined. 

Proceeding to the other extreme in the controversy of ideologies, 
and seeking further for what is considered good in the art of teaching, 
the following chapter classifies and analyzes the published opinion of 
those aspects of education usually described as progressive or experimental. 


M. Wiley, "Increasing the Educational Dividends through 
Superior Teaching." School and Society , 45: 761 - ?66, June 1937* p. 766. 

75 j. M. Lynch, "Teaching Practices and Generally Accepted Theory." 
Educational Administration and Supervision , 22: 538 - 542, October 1936, 
p. 539. 


























. 






-J 





















- 

■ L . . . 




. 


















. . ■ 










CHAPTER III 


PROGRESSIVE CONCEPTS 

The previous chapter was concerned with the traditional approach 
to good teaching. By reference to published opinion from the Education 
Index, the purpose and nature of traditional methodology was presented. 
The effectiveness of conventional methods and their limitations were 
investigated and reported on in so far as library facilities permitted. 

The present chapter is devoted to a bibliographical study of 
progressivism with the Education Index as a source of material. The 
nature of progressivism is investigated, and its merits and demerits 
assessed to the extent that published opinion over two decades, 1935 - 
1955f permits, and library sources are available. 

1. The Philosophy, Aims, and Techniques of Progressivism 

Literature relating to the methodology of progressivism is more 

prolific than that of traditionalism. This may be due to immediacy, or 

to the possibility that "at the present moment, indeed, the so-called 

functional approach' to the study of educational values seems highly 

promising."^ It may be due to a spirited defence of progressivism which 

in the conflict of methodologiies must face such published opinion as 

2 

"Progressivism ... has done little to improve methods of teaching." 

* 4 ). S. Sneddon, "Learnings: A Promising ^erm for Education 
Planners." School and Society , 45: 157 - 159; January 1937» P« 159* 

^N. V. Scarfe, "Is American Education Undemocratic?" School and 
Society , 79: 193 - 196; June 1954, p. 194. 
























. . 





















. 

















* • t ■ •> • ■ ; ' ; , ' 



















26 

In literature pertaining to progressive techniques pupil-activity 


is emphasized more than in the traditional approach. On this point 
S. R. Laycock expresses himself thus: 

They (the pupils] must be challenged to think * to discuss, and in 
other ways, to learn to do by doing. The ideal class is a co-operative 
group - discussion or activity group - where teacher and pupils ~ 
together are thinking through problems and carrying out activities. 

Where the purpose of education is "for the independent reconstruction 
of patterns” and the emphasis is on "learning by coordination and on train¬ 
ing for independent thinking,it is this "functional approach" which is 
favored. 


The mastery of skills within the framework of reconstructing 
patterns is accomplished at that time when unity of learning would be 
hindered by a lack of such facilities. Of this L. B. Jacobs says: 

In functional teaching ... skill is achieved when the child works 
to make sense of a tool that, if used appropriately and masterfully, 
makes a difference in his accomplishments. 

The cause for learning a skill, the skill itself, and how to design 
the pattern within which the skill is one thread are all learned ^ 
concomitantly and thus makes the learner more effectual skill-wise. 

A broad application of this principle of teaching skills at the time 
of need is given by John De Boer^ in his treatise on the language arts 


■^S. R. Laycock, "Common Faults in Teaching." School ( Elementary 
Edition), 33: 659 - 664, April 1945, p. 659. 

^P. T. Orato, "Conflicting Viewpoints in Contemporary American 
Education." Educational Administration and Supervision , 22: 299 - 131» 
January 1936, p. 303. 

-*L. B. Jacobs, "Another Look at the Three R* s." Teacher*s 
College Recor d, 55: 308 - 312; March 1954, p. 309. 

6 J. J. De Boer, "Earmarks of a Modem Language Arts Program in the 
Elementary Schools." Elementary English , 31: 485 - 495; 1954. 















































■% 




















l ■ 






. 










27 

program in the elementary school. The functional and active aspects of 
progressive education are evident throughout the following quotation: 

Basic to the changes that have occurred in the elementary school 
is a changed conception of the functions of education. The school is 
now thought of as a school for living, not a place of apprenticeship 
for future living. The findings of psychology have supported the 
view that the best way to prepare for adult life is to improve the 
quality of the child’s present living. The present moment must have 
meaning and value. The policy of persistent procrastination, the 
theory of the endless chain of prerequisites, the fetish of the 
’minimum essentials’ have been discredited by the evidence about how 
children learn. 

If the school is to be a school for living, children will develop 
the necessary abilities in situations which they encounter in every¬ 
day life. They will learn to speak, to write, to read, and to listen 
as they have opportunities to carry on these activities under 
appropriate guidance and with sufficient motivation. They will learn 
most effectively if the activities have purpose and significance to 
themselves. They will learn most effectively if the activities are 
carried on in an atmosphere of friendliness, of acceptance, and of 
concern for the whole child instead of a mere fragment of his 
personality.* 

Within the framework of cooperative "thinking through problems 
and carrying out activities" and the provision made for the teaching of 
skills, progressive educators emphasize pupil thinking. The motivation 
of independent thought is suggested by the following opinion; "In the 
social sciences, the pupils must be told, not what to think, but how to 
think •.. the essential need for a fixed point of orientation in think- 

Q 

ing offers a challenge to the best of good teaching skill.Furthermore, 
this training of pupils in thinking for themselves is broadened in 


^J. J. De Boer, op . cit ., p. 485. 

®D. E. Lawson, "Technique of Teaching to Think." Educational 
Administration and Supervision , 24: 2?7 - 281; April 1938, p. 280. 






- 

- 

. 








■ 

. 




' 


. 

■ 

. ' 










28 


Laycock's opinion to that point where "children should be led to put 

q 

themselves under the discipline of acquiring skills and knowledge.” The 

progressive teacher is challenged to create in a pupil self motivation 

10 

and self discipline. Dr. Ridenour reiterates this aspect of progressivism 

in the art of teaching in saying, "We as teachers want to preserve for 

children the joy, the excitement, the adventure of finding out, the thrill 

of wondering and of learning to think for oneself."^" 

The progressive concept of education’s concern for self-reliance 

in the development of skills is extended to include skills other than 

academic. L. B. Jacobs says that "modem teachers believe that the skills 

12 

which children learn should be mid-century modem,” and should include 
verbal, manipulative, and human relations skills. It is apparent that 
progressivism is concerned with the "whole child" in the development of 
skills. 

13 

This concern for the "whole child" is emphasized in Garrison's 
statement relating to those progressive schools which were sound . He says, 

9s. R. Laycock, ojo* cit., p. 663. 

Ridenour, "The Children We Teach." Grade Teacher , ?2: 

9, June 1955. 

^Ibid., p. 9. 

^L. B. Jacobs, ag. cit . , p. 309- 

^N. L. Garrison, "Changing Concepts in Methods of Teaching." 
Elementary School Journal , 52: 197 - 206; December 1951* 









' 

. 




t 








' 




s 







1 


. 






. : 





29 

"The sound progressive schools, however, always dealt with the funda¬ 
mentals. The whole child was to be developed, and this constituted the 
goal which all education should seek. A pupil learned by his experience - 

14 

social, ethical, emotional, and physical, as well as mental." 

Learning through experience is a keynote in progressive techniques. 
In his opening paragraph of "Experience as Subject Matter"^ Harold Shane 
has this to say: 

This article, which reflects the views of a group of capable 
creative teachers, is dedicated to the proposition that children need 
experience for optimal personal growth and development. In the 
following paragraphs an attempt is made at examining this concept of , 
experience as the raw material or basic ingredient of subject matter . 1 

It can be assumed from the foregoing that the development of the 

whole child through experiences is fundamental to progressive methodology. 

It is concerned with a broad concept of skills, and seeks to build 

attitudes of self-reliance and independence. 

Through the experience doctrine there may be some inculcation of 

social customs and group attitudes in pupils. This would seem to be the 

case where "in George Ellery Hale School educational administration has 

been shaped by a philosophy of learning which maintains that anyone learns 

what he lives and that learning (or experiences which are emotionally and 

17 

intellectually accepted) are learned to the degree that they are lived." 


l 4 Ibid .. p. 199. 

^H. G. Shane, "Experience as Subject Matter." Progressive 
Education , 26: 146 - 149? March 1949. 

l6 Ibld ., p. 146. 

3-7 J. Michaels, "Democratic Administration in the Elementary School." 
Elementa ry School Journal , 51: 450 - 453; April 1951* P« 450. 





















. 














- 




. 














. 
















, 

















. 








30 

It would seem that the art of teaching asks of progressive teachers that 
skill which recognizes or builds situations which are "emotionally and 
intellectually acceptable." The child is to develop along certain pre¬ 
conceived lines. The author continues in the same vein by saying, "All 
too often, however, educators tend to be exceedingly verbal and fail to 
provide children with the real experiences of democracy as a type of 

18 

society which requires particular ways of living and specific attitudes." 
Though the child is to grow in self-reliance, in acceptance of responsi¬ 
bility, and in independence, this growth is to proceed within a frame of 
reference, namely the social mores and customs of the group within which 
he is to be an individual. 

The interaction of individuality and the group concept is brought 

out in a succinct comment on teaching skill by Josephine Hintzen who says, 

"The effectiveness of teaching depends on how skilfully the teacher 

provides those experiences that the boys and girls need individually and 

19 

in groups now and tomorrow." The good teacher, she believes, will find 
that to " ... provide opportunities for each child to serve so that he can 
develop desirable motives, ideals, and aesthetics, abilities, and appreci¬ 
ations and expressions, the best possible training is functional citizen- 

H 20 

ship." 

-I Q 

Ibid .. p. 451. 

19 

J. Hintzen. "Just Good Teaching." Educational Leadership . 5 - 
504 - 50?; p. 505. 







































. 















































































■ 




4 * . 


r 






' 









































31 


The philosophy, aims, and methodology involved in the all-round 

development of citizenship outlined in the foregoing takes cognizance of 

subject matter also. "Subject-matter content is also important," says 
21 

Josephine Hintzen, who then adds as a caution, "sometimes the teacher 

gets so sold on his subject that he forgets that it's worthless except for 

22 

its worth to human beings." There is an inference here that subject 
matter is better as a tool in building human relationships than an end in 
itself. 


It would seem that progressivism challenges a teacher to make use 
of more resources and equipment than are required in traditional method¬ 
ology. Speaking of the summation session of the National Conference for 
the Improvement of Teaching held at Miami University, July 5» 1947 • Grace 
Storm said: 

The group discussing the teacher in today 9 s culture pointed out 
that the school of yesterday trained for a relatively static society, 
whereas now it should train children to live in a rapidly changing 
society. The school of yesterday used very limited equipment, but 
today the instructional program uses the resources of the radio, the 
museum, the library, and travel. The changes in modern society and 
in educational methods require changes in the teacher’s procedures# 
relationships, and attitudes .^3 

The use of a wide variety of techniques, materials, and resources 


21 Ibid . , p. 505. 

22 

J. Hintzen, on. cit., p. 505. 

2 ^G. E. Storm, "Issues in the Improvement of Teaching." Elementary 
School Journal , 48: 2-6; September 19^7* P« 3 - 4. 











• : 


. 


. « 

• 

. 

• 



■ 




• 



. 

, < 

. 




* 


■ 

: 



32 

in meeting child needs and interests is stressed again in the following; 

Our side - the experimentals of course - uses a variety of 
materials. We use pamphlets and posters, curriculum labs and 
collected curios, movies and magazines, charts and child creations, 
film strips and free stuff, best sellers and biographies, travel and 
teaching aids, radio and realia, participation, and partents. True to 
our beliefs, we try anything and many things. ^ 

Furthermore, the implementation of many and varied techniques and 
resources into classroom practice is accomplished in groxip situations 
where children assist in the evaluation of progress brought about by the 
process. Pertinent to this is the statement of one teacher who says; 

Each month the children in all classes evaluate themselves on the 
progress they have made in the improvement they decided they wanted 
at the beginning of the year. This evaluation is in terms of living, 
learning, and growing together in the classroom - and it is done 
entirely by the children. ^ 

26 

On this topic Corey expresses his opinion as follows; 

Taking field trips, looking at motion pictures and slides, listen¬ 
ing to the radio, studying graphs, debating, participating in a panel, 
holding an interview — all these are illustrative of a few of the 
activities that the effective teacher will suggest. 27 

He adds further; 

The apparent inability of many teachers £g take advantage of 
resources other than textbooks is shocking. 


Oh, 

W. A. Van Til, "Fable of Textbook Strategy." Educational 
Leadership , $•. 215 - 220; January 19^8, p. 215. 

2 -5e. Baxter, “Three Teachers Tell Their Story." Educational 
Leadership , 5: 513 - 518; p. 518. ' 

2 ^S. M. Corey, "Evaluating Technical Teaching Competence." 
Elementary School Journal , 4l: 577 - 586; April 19^1. 


2 ?S. M. Corey, ojd. cit. , p. 583. 



















■ 






■ 






. 




. 














■ 























' 


. 




, 









33 

Group situations, Dorothy Stewart suggests, are instrumental in 


getting the highest quality of work from pupils because ” ... children 

prefer multiple textbooks, working in groups, and self-direction in the 

29 

finding of materials ... " The curriculum suggested by progressive 

educators to make adjustment for individual differences and “whole child” 

education is “a series of purposeful experiences growing out of pupil 

interests and moving toward an ever more adequate understanding of, and 

30 

intelligent participation in, the surrounding culture and group life.” 

This idea of intelligent participation in a living culture, 

socialization, and self-direction is carried out in various subject 

fields and cross-sectioning of subject areas. Of teaching art, for 

example, Ronald Day says: ”... art educators can guide the use of 

traditional art in the stimulation of creative expression for children, 

provided that they make no attempt to impose adult usages but combine 

such usages with the knowledge of the psychology of creative expression 

31 

at different age levels.” 

Joyce Duncer, speaking of a teaching unit in music says, "We found 

32 

it easy to integrate our unit with every phase of the curriculum." 

29 

D. H. Stewart, "Children’s Preferences in l^pes of Assignments." 
Elementary School Journal , 47: 97; June 1947, p. 97* 

E. Herrick, "Planned and Unplanned GurricuLums." Elementary 
School Journal , 47: 563 - 570; June 1947, p. 566. 

-^-R. Day, "Children’s Creative Use of Museum Exhibit Material.” 
Progressive Education , 31: 100 - 111; February 1954, p. 111. 

3^J. L. Duncer, "Music Around the World.” American Childhood , 4l: 
10 * 11; November 1955, P* 1°. 




























































' 











































■ 




. 














■ 






- 












. 










34 

The outcomes from the progressive point of' view were meaningful 
in that "valuable information was learned," "many skills were developed;" 
there was "much practice in group participation," and "each child had a 
definite part." 

A teaching unit, or enterprise, cutting across subject areas is 

33 

reported on by Malinda Garton. It illustrates the techniques of 

progressive teaching in some detail. 

A pupil, after a visit to the South, had brought a stalk of cotton 

to school. The ensuing class interest in cotton motivated the unit of 

study. As Garton expresses it: "The children wanted to know more about 

34 

cotton, how it was planted, and how it grew." The class went to the 

library for books on various reading levels. There was an integration 

in the unit of reading, writing, spelling, oral and written language, and 

some crafts. Factual knowledge was an integral part of the study with 

socialization and concern for individual differences primary adjuncts. 

Published opinion has praised methodology of the kind outlined 

above. Such comments as "Few reputable educators would deny that the aims 

and the methods of progressive education, as taught in good schools of 

33 

education, are of value," ^ and "To-day the broad unit of work has been 

33 

M. D. Garton, "Cotton; Nature Study and Creative Activities." 
American Ch ildhood , 4l: 28 - 29; November 1955® 

D. Garton, op . cit . , p. 28. 

^-*E. G. Rogers, "Progressive Ideals In Practice; Teachers Dilemma." 
Progressive Education , 25: 252 - 255» October 194?, p» 253® 




































■ 






- 





















. 


















. . 

' 






- 







35 


accepted as one of the most promising teacher-learning activities for 

providing the integrating experience necessary for developing a functional 

36 

unified personality. 11 Also, " ... teachers today who use modern methods 

get better results in pupil achievement than were realized with old- 

fashioned methods, and at the same time cover a much broader curriculum 

37 

than in earlier times. M 

Such published opinion as this is more significant in view of the 
criticism of education twenty years earlier in Vaughan*s statement: "One 
of the most serious indictments against present day techniques is the 
charge that students acquire theories without learning how to put them 
into practice, 

The foregoing does not imply that there has not been criticism of 

progressive methodology. Indeed the severity of critical comment has, in 

39 

some cases, amounted to censure, Karl Pratt 7 comparing progressive 
educators with the Sophists is condemnatory in his opinion of both. He 
finds in progressive methodology little opportunity for individual 
activity and initiative and says, "Instead we find slippery sophisms to 

L. Garrison, "Changing Concepts in Methods of Teaching." 
Elementary School Journal , 52: 197 - 206; December 1951» p. 199. 

^H. L. Caswell, "Great Reappraisal of Public Education." Teachers * 
College Record , 5^: 12 - 22; October 1952, p. 19- 

3%. F. Vaughan, "Our Impractical Education." S chool and Societ y, 
46: 688; November 1937» 688. 

3%. c. Pratt, "Sophistry in Modern Education." Educational 
Administration and Supervision , 26: 339 - 34-9 * May 1940. 


















. 































. 




. 


















. ' , 

■ 


























. 

























the effect that 'individuality is to be realized through group living'." 40 
He is critical of the "adulation of group patterns of behavior" and the 
"social conformities" finding less freedom in progressive education than 
in traditional, saying that " ... 'group living' requires that all 
individuals accept a common •line’." * * * 4 - 1 ' 

The activity aspect of progressive methodology is not acceptable 

ji p 

to Fogg ^ who found the activity program too complicated to administer 
surely. Whereas Pratt denounced the group concept of progressivism, his 
contemporary, Fogg, felt that the activity program emphasized the develop¬ 
ment of the individual at the expense of social needs, and expressed an 
opinion that "What we need sorely is education for social living ..." 

Published opinion of the following nature is not favorable toward 

44 

progressive techniques. James Jewett, writing at a time when the 
progressive movement had had two decades and more to prove itself had 
this to say: 


^K. C. Pratt, op. cit., p. 341. 

4l Ibid ., p. 342. 

42 W. F. Fogg, "Project versus Subject: A Critical Review." 
School and Society . 51: 2?6 - 2?8; March 1940. 

4 3 ibid ., p. 2??. 

44j. p. Jewett, "Conventionalism in Education." School and 
Society , 77: 37 - 39♦ January 1953. 








37 


Possibly because of the preoccupation of Progressive education 
with methodology, the improvements it has effected tend to petrify 
in practice. Methods are used simply for their own sake; the form 
is retained while the substance of education becomes amorphous. * 

He enlarges upon this marked concern for methods in the following 
comment: 

The preoccupation with techniques harks back to the worst features 
of the scholastic disputation, with the additional handicap that the 
participants are not even learning the elements of formal logic. They 
are being sociable, sometimes not much else.^ 

A similar criticism is made of progressive techniques by Dr. 

47 

Bartock in his published lectures from University College, Leicester. 

He, also, finds that in progressivism substance is sacrificed to form, and 
meaningful learning to self-perpetuating activities. For him, as the 
following excerpt implies and other portions of his published opinion 
maintains, activity in the classroom is not a prerogative of progressive 
educationists, but a technique abused by them. His criticism not only 
lays bare the ’environmental technique* of progressivism, but with subtlety 
lampoons their romantic camouflage. 

So the teacher, using the activity method so-called, becomes not 
less important but more so. His knowledge - which should be extensive - 
is one of the vital elements in the success of the scheme. It is this 
element in the situation which progressive educationists so often tend 


^J. P. Jewett, op. cit . , p. 37» 

46 Ibid., p. 38. 

^7g. H. Bartock, "Activities and Formal Work in School.” Journal 
of Education (London) , 84: 401 - 2, 452, 510; September - November, 1952. 














































. 

. . 

















'■ 










. 




. 







. 


. . 



• * 




























to neglect. The feeling tends to be that the function of the teacher 
is simply to create an environment within which, as a recent writer 
somewhat exuberantly expresses it, the children will be able to 
'follow up lines of interest and exercise every muscle in their bodies 
and every faculty in their minds’. The implication is that the 
activity, once under way, should be self-perpetuating , as it were, or 
at most that it should merely reflect the direction of the child’s 
own interests and inquiries, and all that is asked of the teacher is 
what is miscalled a ’wise passivity* in the face of the event. ® 

N. L. Garrison, expressing his opinion of progressive institutions, 


is concerned with the lack of ’’learning” in our schools today. Because he 

49 

has spoken favorably of certain aspects of progressive education " his 


criticism of its weaknesses would seem to be significant. When this 
criticism points up the same broad area of sophism and self-perpetuating 


activities mentioned previously as detrimental to the outcomes of sound 


teaching, it behooves a teacher seeking the best method to pause before 
accepting willy-nilly the progressive techniques in preference to those 
which had some control over learning and achievement, albeit in a formal 
and mechanical way. Pertinent to this is Garrison’s published comment 


that: 


Many of our schools have been criticized because they have not 
produced the expected learning in the fundamental skills and under¬ 
standings that the pupils needed and the public anticipated. This 
weakness has been due to the fact that teachers have been under 
constant pressure to stress primarily socialization of teaching. The 
constant demand for co-operative activities in the classrooms (in 
which pupils assume suitable responsibilities for all phases of the 


^G. H. Bartock, op. cit . , p. 452. 

L. Garrison, ’’Changing Concepts in Methods of Teaching.” 
Elementary School Journal , 52: 197 - 206; December 1951* 







. 

! : - A... .... , . ' ^ .. S. ■ " ! . , : . ■ ' ill i - \ „.,j •... I 

. • . 





39 


work, from purposing to evaluating) for this unit teaching ... has 
absorbed the attention and effort of teachers. This drive for 
socialized teaching has led to the neglect or condemnation of 
learning procedures to gain ends sought.50 

A more outspoken critic of progressivism is Neville Scarfe-^ 

presently Dean of the Faculty of Education of the University of British 

Columbia. It is his opinion that intellectual training as the particular 

function of the school is not particularly well taken care of by progressive 

methods. Instead of the growth and change which, for him, forms the 

essence of democratic thought, he finds progressivism developing mediocrity 

through "gross overemphasis on the importance of social growth" and "group 
52 

conformity." Though he gives little credit to traditional methods, it 
is progressivism he condemns roundly in the statement: "Thus, incongruously, 
progressive education has laid the foundations for the tyranny of the 
Americans by McCarthyism."53 

This chapter, in presenting a range of opinion concerning pro¬ 
gressivism, has outlined, in some measure, the strengths and weaknesses 
of its methodology. Through its evolution from a child-centred concept 
to the idea that the group is important opponents have advanced criticism 


^°N. L. Garrison, "Changing Concepts in Methods of Teaching." 
Elementary School Journal , 52: 197 - 206; December 1951* P- 200. 

V. Scarfe, "Is American Education Undemocratic?" School 
and Society , 79: 193 - 196; June 1954. 

^ 2 N. V. Scarfe, pp. cit., p. 194. 












. 
























. 
















, 






' 



























40 

of its sophistry, its group conformity, and misdirected activities. Its 
adherents have been equally adamant about its virtues. 

In the next chapter published opinion which cannot be easily 
classified as traditional or progressive is presented. The chapter will 
also present aspects of the art of teaching apart from methodology. 




CHAPTER IV 


CONCEPTS IN A CONTINUUM 

This chapter, in farther searching for the attributes of good 
teaching, takes leave of traditional and progressive controversies, and 
investigates methods ■which are not wholly conventional or experimental. 

It presents the methods and concepts which seem to fall between the two 
extremes, or those which utilize features of each. The chapter also 
identifies those characteristics of good teaching which may be outside the 
orbit of methodology, which may be a part of the teacher rather than of 
the method he uses. In brief, the chapter presents published opinion con¬ 
cerning viewpoints neither traditional nor progressive. In conclusion a 
summarization and commentary are presented of significant outcomes of the 
study thus far useful in an interpretation of published material in the 
Alberta Teachers * Magazine . 

1. The Common Denominator 

The possibility that there is a common denominator in the charac¬ 
teristics of good teaching has prompted considerable published comment. 

Dr. Alice Keliher^ may have considered the common denominator to be the 
teacher*s enjoyment of new experiences. She advised that a teacher ** ... 


•*-A. V. Keliher, "You Are a Good Teacher if ... 
Experiences. ’* Grade Teacher , 73: 73; June 1955* 


You Enjoy New 


























. 































- 





















































42 


2 

be flexible, enjoy new experiences and welcome change." L. B. Jacobs, 

speaking of modem teachers, said, " ... they strive to be true to the 

best interests of the children whom they teach. This is their first 

3 

concern in the role of teacher." C. E. Seashore, commenting on the 

teacher*s job, sees him "keeping each student busy at his natural level 

of successful achievement, which I have always regarded as the highest 
4 

goal of teaching." 

This emphasis on providing for individual differences, and the 
exploitation of latent ability would seem to be in the best interests of 
children. At the same time there is a demand placed upon the teacher for 
flexibility in approach, and willingness to cope with new experiences 
which would probably arise in dealing with pupils as individuals. 

The perspicacity of a teacher may be the key to good teaching. 
Knowing the child and being interested in his individual needs and 
interests will enable the alert teacher to have insight into the means of 
developing a learning situation. Awareness of the moment at which the 
child is ready to benefit from instruction may be as important as the 
manner in which the instruction is given. George Brown says, "Every real 
teacher seeks to know when and how something may be added to the 

2 

A. V. Keliher, ojo. cit., p. 73. 

^L. B. Jacobs, "Another Look at the Three R*s," Teachers 1 
College Record , 55: 308 - 312; March 1954, p. 308-9. 

^C. E. Seashore, "Note on the Teacher’s Job." School and 
Society , 50: 724; December, 1939* p. 724. 








- 





■ 
















































education of one or of all the pupils 


.,5 


43 


It would seem that a teacher not only must have an intuitive aware¬ 
ness of a readiness to learn, but must also know how to take advantage of 

the awakened interest. This implies a choice of methodology. According 

6 

to R. B. Norris , however, the situation of when and how something can 

be added to a child’s education can be resolved through democratic 

procedures. Not only is readiness to learn awakened, but the means of 

learning are provided through democratic experiences. Norris, speaking 

of students in teachers’ colleges, working toward their own selected 

goals, says, "Democratic participation is one of the most forceful means 

n 

of promoting (such) interest." Further benefits are promoted by demo¬ 
cratic experiences according to Norris who states that " ... facts will be 
learned because they have meaning, individual philosophies will be 
strengthened because the students will understand the application, and 
each individual will grow through participating in a democratic experience 
which can be carried ever into his own classroom regardless of his subject 

g 

of specialization .” 

The concept of a democratic approach to learning situations as a 

5q. a. Brown, "How Validate the Quality of Teaching?" Journal of 
Educational Research , 31: 534 - 535; March 1938* p* 534. 

^R. B. Norris, "We Teach As We Are Taught." School and Society , 

67: 209 - 212; March 1946. 

7 Ibid ., p. 211. 

Q 

R. B. Norris, o&. cit ., p. 211. 


















. 

' 


* 


• 




. 








V 


; 


















44 

common denominator in good teaching procedures poses a number of 

possibilities. The use of democratic experiences in the classroom would 

9 

involve a teacher in new and flexible situations referred to by Keliher 

and would probably be acceptable to Jacobs'^ who would have teachers 

"true to the best interests of the children." At the same time , because 

democracy has respect for individuals. Seashore’s^ concern for a student 

being kept busy at his natural level of attainment is satisfied. 

The possibility that the utilization of democratic practices in 

12 

the classroom is the key to good teaching is supported by Harold Shane^ 

who urges teachers " ... to develop devotion to democracy and insight 

13 

into democratic values in a world matrix*" as a first basic objective. 

14 

The inference that Dorothy Stewart is in agreement is observed in her 
study of children's preferences in types of assignments. She suggests 
that because " ... children prefer multiple textbooks, working in groups, 
and self-direction in the finding of materials then these are the 

^A. V. Keliher, op. cit ., p. 73. 

^°L. B. Jacobs, op. cit ., p. 308-9. 

^C. E. Seashore, op. cit . , p. 

12 H. G. Shane, "Experience as Subject Matter." Progressive 
Education , 26: 146 - 149; March 1949. 

13 Ibid., p. 146. 

Stewart, "Children's Preferences in Types of Assignments." 
Elementary School Journal , 47: 93 - 97; October 1946. 







' 









- 

„ : 





























- 










’ 















45 

procedures to use in securing the highest quality of work from the 
childrenand recommends that teachers use these techniques because 
they are " ... a more democratic way of working and are making adjust¬ 
ment for individual differences." 1 ^ 

17 

N. V. Scarfe also upholds the democratic approach, not as 

something that permeates methodology, but as a method in itself. The 
good teacher, in his opinion, is a "democratic pragmatist" who empha¬ 
sizes method. "The method by which a subject is taught," he says, 

i ft 

"matters more than the precise quantity of facts."" 10 In this he is 
opposed to the traditionalist viewpoint which he regards as "spiritual 
and metaphysical". At the same time he rejects the methodology of 
progressivism as "mechanistic" and conducive to "group conformity". For 
Scarfe, "intellectual training, which is the particular function of the 
school, must be very adventurous, experimental, creative and exploratory. 
For him, growth and change involved in the training are the essence of 
democratic thought. 

Though democracy may be a common denominator in good teaching 


15 Ibid . , p. 97. 
l6 Ibid.. p. 97. 

•^N. V. Scarfe, "Is American Education Undemocratic?" Sdhool and 
Society , 79: 193 - 196; June 1954. 

18 Ibid .. p. 194. 

"*-pbid. , p. 194. 







* 





















- 




















































. 











46 

either as a catalytic force ameliorating methodology, or as a method 

itself, the possibility of utilizing it in classroom situations is a 

20 

factor to be considered. Norris , though he is particularly concerned 
with students in teacher training institutions, has said that democratic 
experiences can be carried over into classrooms. This transfer is empha¬ 
sized in his statement that "Any course at any level in an educational 

system can be organized to draw upon the inherent values of democratic 
21 

action ..." He outlines a number of principles involved in this 
organization as follows: 

1. The individual is allowed to develop along lines 
originated or accepted by himself 

2. Students are encouraged to use their own initiative, 
or that of the group, in the planning, location, and 
presentation of material and other class activities 

3. The students work as a true democratic society operates 
together in the solution of common problems 

4. Responsibility for final outcomes is placed on the group 
and on the individual 

5. Democratic classroom techniques are employed: interviews, 
panels, editing of compiled reports, small group 
discussions, and so on 

6. The individual is called upon to contribute his ideas 
based upon past experiences 

7. The solution of problems or the attaining of enrichments 
real to learner become the aims of the course^ 


B. Norris, "We Teach As We Are Taught." School and 
Society , 67: 209 - 212; March 1948. 

21 Ibid ., p. 212. 

22 Ibid . . p. 212. 
















' 






































\ 











• 

■ 



































4 ? 


The teacher’s place in a school program embracing democratic 

principles is pointed up by Norris in his statement: "In such classes 

^organized along democratic linesj the professor guides, inspires, 

participates, counsels, co-ordinates, leads, and, with proper provocation» 
23 

lectures." In a research study dealing with this same problem, Schwebel 
24 

and Asch, taking a more extreme view suggested that non-directive teach¬ 
ing had possibilities. The students of the psychology class with which 
the study was concerned discussed any subject they wished in class and 
" ... the instructor would only summarize, reiterate, classify student 
remarks." 2 ^ The advisability of a teacher acting only as a compiler in 
other areas of a school program suggests further research. 

2, The Good Teacher 

Democracy at work in the classroom has been investigated as a 
common denominator in good teaching. The teacher's place in a democrati¬ 
cally organized school program has also been considered. The possibility 
that the teacher, rather than the means through which he works, is now 
given some thought. If good teaching depends wholly upon the kind of 
person who does the teaching then it becomes a question of who should 

23 Ibid .. p. 2X2. 

Schwebel and M. J. Asch, "Research Possibilities in Non- 
directive Teaching." Journal of Educational Psycho logy, 39: 359 - 369; 
October 1948. 






' 


- 


.... 

- 

■ 

: .’ X hi i. 



teach rather than of how he should teach. 


kQ 


The qualities of a good teacher involve more than personality, 

more than likability, for it has been written: " ... charming manners 

26 

can hide a great deal of professional ineptitude." The good teacher 
has a professional attitude toward his work, a desire to learn as well as 
to teach, and the patience to strive beyond the ordinary demands made of 
him. Those whom he would teach he must first understand. "Probably the 
most important aspect of technical teaching competency is the teacher*s 
willingness and ability to learn about children in such a way that his 
knowledge will function in the teaching process. Most successful teaching 
practices are based on this knowledge."^ 

The good teacher is a person of character, an individual from whom 
a pupil goes with a feeling that something newer and better has been added 
to his own self. Of the student it may be said, "He, through his associ¬ 
ation with a great man, caught a broader view of what education really 

. ,,28 
is." 

29 

Research has attempted to identify the good teacher. Weber 

26 

S. M. Corey, "Evaluating-Technical Teaching Competence." 
Elementary School Journal , 4l: 577 - 586; April 1941, p. 579. 

2 7 Ibid .. p. 579-80. 

OO 

E. G, Rogers, "Progressive Ideals in Practice; Teacher*s Dilemma." 
Progressive Education , 25: 252 - 255; October 1947* p. 253* 

A. Weber, "Some Characteristics of College Teachers." Journal 
of Educational Research , 46: 685 - 892; May 1953. 











. 

. 

' » , ' ■ ' ... : 


















































working with one hundred college graduates sought to select a best l iked 


teacher and a best instructo r. "Seventy-three of the respondents stated 
that their best liked teacher was also their best instructor . None 
indicated that his least liked teacher was also his best instructor . n ^ Q 

The best liked teacher and the best instructor have the following 
characteristics in common: 

1. They plan their classwork carefully 

2. They require written work to be neat, accurate, grammatically 
correct, and handed in on time 

3. They are good classroom managers 

4. They have a good sense of humor 

5. They are physically vigorous and have plenty of 

drive 

6. They are cultured, refined, frank, sincere, honest 

7. They are cheerful, happy, and not cross or crabby 

8. They recognize that beginners frequently grope and fail, 
and are willing to help such students 

9. They measure achievement largely in terms of the ability 
to use facts and information in formulating judgments 
rather than in terms of mere memorization 

10. They are skilful in utilizing student energy, interest, 
and ability in planning the learning activities rather 
than impose such activities upon the students 

11. They utilize student energy, interest, activity, and skill 
in formulating learning goals for the course rather than 
impose goals on students 


^°C. A. Weber, 0 £. cit. , p. 686. 














- 
















50 

12. They utilize student opinion in measurement of 
achievement 

13. They are prompt, businesslike, and yet patient, 
kind, and considerate 

14. They 'enjoy* working with students 

15. They are aware of the vocational opportunities which 
are opened up to one who has mastered the subject taught 

16. They are willing to take a position on controversial 
issues^ 

Lester Anderson says, "Apparently teachers with relatively high 

32 

morale can be expected to teach more effectively."^ The good teacher 
has a sense of well-being, a deep appreciation of life as being worth 
while, an optimistic philosophy. His outlook is that of one whose 
morale is bolstered by confidence and faith in himself. 

3. Sociological Aspects of Good Teaching 

The good teacher is the vital element in a school program. Through 
him comes the enrichment of a child's way of life; through him the growth 
and change which constitute learning. His influence upon a pupil, 
irrespective of the method, is personal, for as Butler explains % "Socio¬ 
logical forces in method, then, designate those personal influences that 
are necessary or expedient as stimuli in the development of traits and 


31c. A. Weber, op. clt . , p. 690. 


32 l. w. Anderson, "Teacher Morale and Student Achievement." Journal 
of Educational Research , 46: 693 - 698; May 1953* p. 696. 






1 iki . , 

, 

, 

- 

. 













- • 



















33 51 

abilities set up as vital and valuable outcomes." ^ 

A teacher, though he is paramount in releasing these sociological 

forces, cannot be influential without some means of communication. To 

reach the child he must employ some media, methodology, or technique. 

The forces of sociology in teaching do not exist apart from other factors 

of learning, but operate through them. As Butler says, "Sociological 

forces in method cannot be shaken out of the complete instructional 

process and set aside as specified factors of educational sociology 

because educational psychology includes within its scope of study all 

34 

stimuli, the social included, which bear upon learning." 

The art of teaching demands more than the knowledge and application 

of methodology. It is more than Caswell means when he says, "Effectively 

applying principles of learning to teaching is a difficult task, which, 

at the upper level of performance is artistry of the highest order. 

Household realizes it in saying, "No method can be fool-proof where the 

36 

human element plays so great a part . 11J Shannon found that simplification 
of what constitutes good teaching was not easy. After his interview with 

*^F. A. Butler, "Sociological Forms in Method." J ournal of Educational 
Sociolo gy, 13: 419 - 428; March 1940, p. 419. 

34 Ibid .. p. 420. 

35h. L. Caswell, "Great Reappraisal of Public Education." Te achers * 
College Record . 54: 12 - 22; October 1952, p. 19. 

36 h. W. Household, "Charlotte Mason Methods in the Elementary 
School." Journal of Education ( London ), ?1: 534 - 536; August 1939, 
p. 534. 












. 




■ 

. 




52 

"one hundred sixty-four experienced and reputable public-school 
37 

supervisorshe found that "the elements of merit which contribute most 
to success in teaching are 'teaching skill', 'personality', and teacher 

oo 

pupil relations’." That the elements of personality and rapport are 

sociological factors influencing the results of teaching is emphasized 

by Butler. He points out that neither skill in teaching nor any "high- 

powered concept of the activity program" are necessarily the differential 

factors in educational outcomes. He said, "Surely there must be an 

additional consideration. Considerable evidence seems to indicate that 

this extra factor, this determining element, is the sociological power of 

one person acting upon others. It is the social stimulation of the 

instructor acting upon his pupils. The force of personality works along 

with mechanical phases of method, but it is always above automatic and 

39 

routine aspects of instruction." 

The personal element in teaching, the sociological force, implies 

the need of good rapport. In this matter the good teacher is a therapist. 

Of this, Glicksberg says, "At the beginning of the term, the teacher 

endeavors to create an atmosphere of rapport," and "The teacher," he 

adds "like the therapist, makes use of a number of transference tech- 
41 

niques." As an alternative to rapport he points out that the teacher 

3 ?J. A. Shannon, "Elements of Excellence in Teaching." Educational 
Administration and Supervision , 27: 168 - 1?6; March 1941, p. 168. 

38 Ibid ., p. 175. 

A. Butler, og. cit ., p. 420-21. 

40c. I. Glicksberg, "Personal. Element in Education." School and 
Society , 73: 305 - 309; May 1951. p. 305. 

4l 

Ibid ., p. 305. 











53 

" ... has nothing but the symbol of institutional authority and the 

competitive value of marks to motivate and sustain the labor of his 
42 

students." The alternative, however, may not be conducive to good 

mental health in the classroom, and it seems better that with good 

rapport established, "children can be helped to look upon tests as 

43 

revealing the state of their progress." Where good mental health is 

assured, it has been said also that "teachers find they can afford to be 

more accepting and more permissive of pupils resulting in better pupil 

attitudes. A good teacher does not even find that disciplinary problems 

arise. She has focussed her attention on a meaningful and realistic 

program and carries the children along with her in this program. 

The sociological aspect of good teaching is further emphasized by 

Wiley who says, "In some respects we can use the term 'superior teacher' 

without recognizing the part in the process that is played by the superior 

teacher. Not only is the teaching process complex, but the teaching 

45 

situation is also a highly personal relationship." 

46 

The intangible element of sociological forces was found in a study 
42 Ibid., p. 305. 

^P. M. Symonds, "Mental Health Through Education." Progressive 
Education, 26: 143 - 145; March 1949, p. 145. 

^P. M. Symonds, op . cit. , p. 145. 

45 

G. M. Wiley, "Increasing the Educational Dividends Through Superior 
Teaching." School and Society , 45: 76l - 766; June 1937* p. 762. 

46 

H. P. Allen, "Earmarks of a Good Teacher." American School Board 
Journal , 96: 25 - 26; March 1938. 




















' 



















































- 










■ 











■ 















54 


made by H. P. Allen. A test emphasizing knowledge of subject matter, 

technical knowledge, breadth of interests, and general observation was 

used to select teachers for a city system. The ratings given these new 

teachers by their supervising officials when combined and compared with 

4 7 

the test results showed a correlation of minus .25. 

Allen says, "The test did serve to destroy considerable faith in 

knowledge of subject matter and technique as the major differentiating 

factors in selecting teachers." ° Later, he added, "A survey of some 

sixty objective studies which have attempted to isolate and define those 

factors which are major determiners of teacher success or through which 

teacher success may be predicted, leaves the reviewer perplexed and 
49 

discouraged." 7 Then he concluded: 

We have all too often thought of subject matter as the end of 
teaching. Even if this were true, personality seems as essential 
motive power for subject matter. If it is not true, as is generally 
conceded, but merely a means to an end of preparing young people 
for life by giving them an experience which will permit them to grow 
into well-rounded individuals, morally, emotionally, intellectually, 
and physically, the personality of the teacher becomes even a more 
important factor. 5® 

A question posed by Butler now has an answer. He asked, "Is it 
method in its purest routine form, or is it method supported and animated 

47 Ibid ., p. 25. 

^ Ibid ., p. 25. 

^h. F. Allen, 0£. cit . , p. 25. 

5°H. P. Allen, op>. cit . , p. 26. 

























. 

. 














■ 
















































by the teacher, that accounts for productiveness of instruction? 


55 


Published opinion over a period of almost two decades has stressed 
the sociological factor as a vital force in the art of teaching. The ideals, 
attitudes, and enthusiasm of a good teacher are built into his methodology, 
and lend poirer to his instruction. That is why Butler says, "The socio¬ 
logical force of the teacher is being recognized as an essential and vital 

component in the resulting power of method, and this is especially true 

52 

when the so-called intangibles of learning are concerned.''^ 

4. Commentary 

The merits and demerits of traditional and experimental method¬ 
ologies have been investigated within the limits set. An education based 
on either of the extremes of these controversial methods would seem to be 
limited to the objectives sought by each. The favorable outcomes accruing 
from any one method would be lost if a combination of the two was not 
possible. In published opinion the dichotomy is fairly clean cut; in 
practice a continuum is always found. The good teacher may use a little 
of one and a little of the other according to the needs and objectives 
of his class until the method is neither one nor the other, but some com¬ 
bination of the two. This combination is his own. 

The method which has become the teacher’s own is not necessarily a 

53-F. A. Butler, "Sociological Forms in Method." Journal of Edu ¬ 
cational Sociology , 13: 419 - 428; March 1940, p. 422. 

5 2 F. A. Butler, 0 £. cit. , p. 451. 















































































. 













' 































56 


mean of the two controversial procedures. It will probably favor one 
more than the other, often to a marked degree, and the teacher may be 
designated as progressive or traditionalist according to his preference. 
The good teacher, however, works within a frame of reference, and adapts 
his methods to the best interests of the children he teaches. Their 
objectives and their needs are paramount. In building his method the 
good teacher uses democratic principles as a common denominator, and in 
the classroom the result is so personalized that the labels of progressive 
and traditional need not apply. When method based on sound educational 
psychology and permeated by the power of a strong personality reaches out 
to children and democratically motivates their learning, the procedure is 
just good teaching. 


5* A Question of Prejudice 

"Teachers are failing to reach the high standards in teaching to 
which they aspire and of which they are thoroughly capable, because they 
consciously stress only one of these phases of good teaching and fail to 
handle the other satisfactorily." Though this comment is obviously an 
over-simplification, it is equally obvious that prejudice can negate good 
teaching. Over-much enthusiasm for any one method to the exclusion of 
any other may approach the point of absurdity. This possibility is 
pointed up by the comment that "Babbitt criticized the Harvard Report as 


-53^. L. Garrison, "Changing Concepts in Methods of Teaching." 
K) gYttftntarv- School Journal , 52i 197 ~ 206; December 1951» P« 200. 








' 























. 
























' 



















. 













■ 























* 5 ? 

calling for a single universal verbal program of general education. 

Whether Babbitt's criticism is justified or not, it does suggest that 
regimentation in methodology could be detrimental to good teaching. 

Teachers need freedom to consider the possible rejection of such extreme 
traditionalism as the following comment implies: 

Education is conceived to consist of learning such things as are 
found in a course of study and textbooks: spelling words, type problems 
in arithmetic, causes and results of wars ... and the seven basic food 
groups. Good teaching is conceived to consist of threatening, coaxing, 
drilling, rewarding, punishing, driving, testing and reviewing until 
the pupils verbalize these facts. Providing for* .individual differences 
means getting all pupils over the passing mark.-^ 

They need the same freedom in considering a methodology which, in its 
extreme form, substitutes structure for substance, and places more value 
on process than product. Prejudice should not make impossible the 
rejection of progressivism where it over-emphasizes group conformity, 
contemporary affairs, and socialization, nor should it blind anyone to the 
fact that where formalism becomes a fetish the point of absurdity in 
progressivism has been attained. 

If, as Garrison has pointed out, teachers consciously stress a 
particular method, and neglect other good teaching techniques, the cause 
may be in the preparatory work of training colleges or universities. 

Norris says, "Probably the most outstanding paradox of our educational 
system is its attempt to educate for a democratic society while using most 


H. Bair and W. E. Young, "Curriculum: Methods and Materials." 
Review of Educational Research , 18: 265 - 272; June 1948, p. 268. 

55w. W. Cook, "Individual Differences and Curriculum Practice." 
Journal of Educational Psychology , 30: 141 - 148, March 1948. 




































' . 












' 













autocratic methods and practices 


He continues: “The usual method 


n56 


58 


..• which is applied by teachers in graduate schools and teacher colleges 
is the simple art of lecturing from prepared notes ... using not all the 
experiences of the students, and not following their interests• empha¬ 
sizing preparation for the answering of technical questions on an 
examination scarcely touching on the practical application of the 

57 

material." 

Van Til castigates the professors of education as "Jekyll-Hydes" 
and says, "In many lectures they condemn lectures. They advocated pupil 
planning after they passed out their detailed syllabi on the first day of 
class. They inveighed against arbitraiy assignments and assigned required 
reading on the matter. Before passing out the A's and F's, they thundered 

to 

against the tyranny of grades . xxD This paradoxical practice in teacher 

training colleges and universities may account for the prejudicial 

preference for traditional methodology in secondary schools. 

Pinsent suggests a practical reason for adopting one particular 

method. He says, "Teaching attitudes and methods have been conditioned 

59 

by the availability of apparatus and materials." Though this is 


^R. B. Norris, "We Teach as We Are Taught." School and Society , 
6?: 209 - 212; March 1948, p. 209. 

5 7ibid . , p. 210. 

58tf. Van Til, "Fable of Textbook Strategy. " Educational 
Leadership , 5: 215 - 220; January 1948, p. 21?. 

59 'A. Pinsent, "Educational Attitudes, Teaching Methods, and 
Material Cultures." Joumal of Education ( London ) , 78: 9 - 11; 

January 1946, p. 10. 




































. 






































probably true in some cases, there are teachers who have not been so 


59 


"conditioned". They adapt their methods to some degree to suit the needs 
and objectives of their pupils. 

Another basis for prejudice in favor of one particular method may 
be a teacher*s faith in educational research. This is sometimes the case 
where an experimental or progressive technique is adopted because someone 
has found it an expedient procedure in a research study. Teaching is so 
complex, and there are so many variables in the sociological area, that 
results of research should be viewed with caution. Much of the edu¬ 
cational research in the decades investigated concerned high school or 
college teaching, and may not be applicable on a practical basis in the 
elementary grades. 

The findings of educational research are not so infallible that a 
method can be chosen solely on their merit. Pbilpott in discussing 
fallacious arguments brought out in research studies, makes this point: 
"Some methods of teaching are occasionally recommended on the ground that 
although they may not favor the bright child as much as one would have 
expected, they are nevertheless valuable in that the lower members of the 
class seem to profit ... This argument of the 'pushing up of extremes' is 
usually fallacious ... It can be advanced in respect of any and every 
method of teaching ever devised. Moreover it can be reversed. 

6°S. J. F. Philpott, "Fallacious Arguments from Experiments on 
Methods of Teaching." British Journal of Educational Psychology , 15: 

57-69; June 1945, p. 57. 












































































6o 


Another reason for a prejudiced attitude for or against a 
particular method may be the influence of published opinion. Alberta 
teachers are likely to be impressed by their own professional magazine. 
The controversial issues in methodology as found in the Alberta Teachers’ 
Magazine and the attitude toward teaching practices therein will con¬ 
stitute the bases for investigation in the next two chapters. In this 
study further attention will be given to sociological forces as they 
pertain to the art of teaching. It has been well said that "As there is 
artistry in craftsmanship so is there artistry in teaching."^ Method¬ 
ology, however, is insufficient. Where teaching is an art there, also, 
is the artist. 


^G. M. Wiley, "Increasing the Educational Dividends Through 
Superior Teaching." School and Society , 4 5: ?6l - 766; June 1937* P*762. 









CHAPTER V 


REACTION IN THE ALBERTA TEACHERS 1 MAGAZINE 
TO THE IDEOLOGICAL CONTROVERSY 1935 - 19^5 

In the foregoing phases of this study the Education Index was 
used as the sole source of bibliographical material. The articles made 
available through this source were predominantly non-Canadian. It cannot 
be taken for granted that published opinion of educationists in the United 
States, or elsewhere, expresses in full the thinking of educators in 
Alberta for the period under research. Therefore it seems important that 
bibliographic comment in the Alberta Teachers 1 Magazine for the years 
1935 - 1955 be investigated. 

1. Sources and Method of Presentation 

This chapter offers excerpts from the Alberta Teachers 1 Magazine 
for the years 1935 - 1955* These are presented to ascertain the concepts 
of 9 or attitude toward, the controversial educational issues referred to 
in the earlier chapters of this study. These excerpts in the opinion of 
the writer are those which deal with methodology. Specifically the 
chapter seeks to determine, during the same period of time investigated 
in the foregoing chapters of this study, what practices or procedures 
related to the art of teaching were suggested in the Alberta Teachers 1 


Magazine as preferable. 















































. 


















v 












■ 

' 














2. Concepts in Alberta's Education 1935 - 19^5 


62 


But if there is any place on the American continent where the old 
conservative educational ideals hold sway, it is in the Province of 
Alberta. There they are innocent of 'modem' educational methods. 

They are guiltless of progressive education ... Their instructors 
have been drilled in the subjects they teach. No trick methods. No 
standard tests. 

This commentary by William Russell, expressing an American viewpoint 
of Alberta's education in 1936, is even more intriguing when compared with 
an editorial comment in the Journal of Education (London) of March 1939 
which said: 


..•in British Columbia, and Alberta ... a very definite coloring 
of 'progressive' education and suggestions as to methods of learning 
and teaching are in the nature of 'activities', 'projects', 'units', 
and such like. The propaganda ... in the States on behalf of 
progressive education is beginning to bear fruit in the reorganization 
which is now taking place throughout Canada. 

If, in a three-year period, a change from well established tra¬ 
ditional conservatism in educational ideals to "a very definite coloring 
of progressive education” took place in Alberta, it would seem important 
that the Alberta Teachers ' Magazine have cognizance of the fact. 

An investigation of published opinion for this period reveals an 
interesting metamorphosis in Alberta's concept of good teaching. Not only 
is an awareness of change in educational ideals found in the Alberta 
Teachers ' Magazine , but evidence of the Magazine as an instrument of change. 


3-W. F. Russell, “Straws from Alberta." Teachers ' College Record ,37: 
1935 - 1936, January 1936, p. 272. 

^Editorial, "Empire and Foreign News." 

(London ) 71: 169; March 1939 1 p- 169. 


Joumal of Education 






























. 

































63 

During this period the Magazine not only published and praised government 
educational decrees, but outlined the methodology for their inception in 
school practice. Unlike published opinion in the United States there is 
a marked absence in the Alberta Tea chers 1 Magazine of virile opposition 
to change during this revolutionary period. 

In the beginning (1935) was an expressed satisfaction with the 
mental discipline theory and trained faculties of the mind. Clericus, 
suggesting that "we are doing a worth-while man-sized job” quotes from 
an editorial in the Toronto Star Weekly which said, in part: " ... Why 
should he [a man j lie on his back and kick his toes in the air when this 
accomplishment is to be of no use to him later? The answer is, of course, 
that it gives a tone to his system and a strength to his muscles which fit 
him better for his everyday tasks. Education is like that. In later life 
the equality of two angles at the base of an isosceles triangle may not 
matter, but the mind exercise involved in such a problem is not un¬ 
important. 

In this year of 1935 there was evidence of Alberta being "guiltless 
of progressive education". Outlines from the Calgary Public School Board 
for each subject were published in the Alberta Teachers® Magazine for the 
edification of all Alberta teachers. Traditionalism was suggested in such 
comments as this for Grade Two: "Teach the words from the first term list 
in the Course of Studies, taking four or five words in a day, according to 

^Clericus, "Of Interest to Teachers." Alberta Teachers 1 Magazine , 
September 1935* P* 17- 













. 64 

difficulty, for the first four days of the week ... " 4 and to get Grade 

Seven off to a start for October: "(a) Wars of the Roses - their effects 
«.5 


In October, however, this comment was made by Clericus: "This year 
a new Course of Studies for Rural Schools is being experimented with. For 
a long time the uselessness and impracticability of trying to follow in 
rural schools a curriculum devised for graded schools has been realized. 
Another sign of things to come was evinced In the inclusion of an article 
which concluded with this paragraph: 

After visiting a score or so of schools where the Hadow system was 
at work, one was left with the impression that there was growing up a 
generation for whom that “leisure time", so inevitable in the near 
future, will have no terrors, for in music, reading, art, history and 
geography, they were approaching each subject, not with a view to 
reaching a test standard, but through its resources for intelligent 
interest, cultural value and a stimulation that will permeate their 
attitude to things educational when their school days are over,^ 

Susie Bawden also had forward looking thoughts concerning socio¬ 
logical forces in commenting, "The teachers of the future may be chosen 
for their personality rather than so much stress being laid on their 


%ur Teachers' Helps Department, A. T. A. September 1935» p. 19. 
^ Ibid ., p. 24. 

^Clericus, “Of Interest to Teachers." A. T. A..16: October 1935, p. 
7 

f Ruth Cherry, "The Hadow Schemes at Work in English Schools." 

A. T. A. 16: October 1935. p. 13. 





8 ^5 

attainments." Mr. G. A. McKee reiterated this in the following remarks: 

You cannot make teachers by putting all and sundry through the 
processes of a normal school course. The main consideration in a 
teacher’s qualification is that teacher's personality. I am not 
saying it is the only qualification. I am saying it is the main 
qualification.9 

The move away from traditionalism is discerned, also, in John Liebe’s 
plea for flexibility in manual training. He says, "Coaching in the main 
points of the authorized text is considered successful teaching by the 
majority of teachers and accepted as a necessity by almost all of them* 

Some of our ablest teachers have to keep from their students the best 
they have to give in order to meet minute detailed requirements of the 
course. 

Realization of the conservatism of Alberta education was voiced by 
A. J. Hooke who said, "We have in Alberta an educational system, speaking 
of the curriculum, which is now antiquated. It has not been changed 
materially for nearly a century. Our children still leam the three R's 
with a few additional purely academic subjects. The University dominates 
our course on every hand. We have an educational mould and every student 
is modelled into it. 

o 

S. Bawden, "Some Thoughts on Education Past, Present, and Future." 

A. T. A. 1 6 : November 1935» p. ?• 

Q 

G. A. McKee, "Our Profession." A. T. A. 1 6 : February 1936, p. 5» 

^J. Liebe, "Drafting Courses in Manual Training." A. T. A. 16: 
December 1935» P* 8. 

-^A. J. Hooke, "Education in the Legislature." A, T. A. 16: 

March 1936, p. 5» 











. 

' 


* 

, 





■ 

. 





■ 








- 









66 


This dissatisfaction with traditionalism led to a revision of 
curriculum and methodology. Three programmes of Elementary, Intermediate, 
and High School courses were planned for September 1, 1936. The Official 
Bulletin of the Department of Education said: "A new method of procedure 
known as enterprise teaching will be explained and illustrated for use 
to a limited extent in these grades I to VT. The use of the procedure 

IP 

will be recommended but will not be compulsory.” 

Clericus, reporting on this procedure, said, ”A few days ago we had 

the pleasure of attending the culmination of an enterprise in the Edmonton 

Normal Practice School. In case you don’t know, an enterprise is a means 

of motivating learning. It teaches children to co-operate and co-ordinate 

their efforts. They learn to do things because they need to know how to 

do them to attain a certain objective. While the enterprise centres 

around some certain subject ... it draws upon the fields of art, music, 

science, literature, reading, manual training, arithmetic, writing, etc. 

13 

...So this is the ’new learning’ l” 

Dr. Lazerte, seeking to establish the validity of the enterprise, 
identified it as ’’one form of an activity program” and outlined its 
adoption in Alberta as follows: 

The new curriculum will utilize activity for motivation, a little 
of the interest and freedom, and less yet of the social implications 
except as relating to the aim of developing a wholesome personality, 
and inculcating desirable character traits. We have showm our respect 
for the old curriculum, in that the skills — reading, writing, arith¬ 
metic and language — are taught separately. The new curriculum has 
adopted an integration of subject matter, particularly in the social 


12 H. C. Newland, "Official Bulletin" A. T. A. 16: April 1936, p. 10. 
^Clericus, "Of Interest to Teachers." A. T. A. 16: April 1936,p.17. 




. ' , - . :* ■. , - ■■ ‘ 






.. 

. 




■ 








. 










... $f? ; - • f 






* 




. 















67 


studies — geography and history; and has associated activities in 
art, music, language and dramatics. We are using the enterprise 
method as motivation, a centre of group activities, and as providing 
a culmination or satisfactory completion.^ 

The subject outline schedules from Calgary by this time had ceased 
to appear in the Magazine, and their place had been taken by formal enter¬ 
prise outlines supplied by experimenting Edmonton teachers. Traditional 
exercises had given way to committee activities such as this in Grade III: 
’’This committee is to make a Robin's nest, and make a report to the group 
describing how it was done ... "or "A study of activities on the farm., 
such as (a) setting hens ... This is to be represented through dramatization, 
and also pictorially. It would seem that the "coloring of progressivism" 
was now more pronounced. 

By October of 1936 Clerieus was advising caution. He said: 

Could we speak a word of caution to the zealous teacher who left 
summer school with great ambitions as to putting into practice the 
new enterprise program? In our opinion, the main role of the school 
is still to impart a thorough knowledge of the three R's together 
with some information along geographical and historical lines, etc. 

Unless we are totally wrong, the enterprise is to be regarded as a 
means for making the learning of the skills real and meaningful, to 
co-ordinate the various subjects of study and to show how a knowledge 
of them is necessary to bring the enterprise to a successful cul¬ 
mination. We have every reason to believe that the enterprise 
program will put new life into many a school, will supply a purpose 
which may not have been sensed before, but let us not forget that 
it is still very important for our young boys and girls to learn how 
to read and spell and add and subtract correctly.16 


Ik 

M. E. Lazerte, "The Enterprise Program - Its Validity." A. T. A. 

16: May 1936, p. 28. 

«C. Tyner, "Enterprise for Grade III." A. T. A. 16: June 1936, p.24. 
■^Clerieus, "Of Interest to Teachers." A. T. A. 16: October 1936,p.12 























68 

There is an element of caution, also, in Doctor Dickie's comments 
on "how to interpret the new course of study." She said: 

Looked at in detail, the new course offers several puzzling 
features, but by and large it is really quite simple. Think of your 
course as divided into three parts: 

(a) The skill subjects pp. 7-108 

(b) The information-culture subjects pp. 109-266 

(c) The enterprise procedure pp. 267-320 

(a) The skill subjects, including reading, writing, language, 
arithmetic and, in Divisions II and III, Art and Music, are set out, 
in pp. 7-108, in instruction courses. These subjects are to be 
taught by the same methods of formal instruction, drill, and. test 
which have been used in the past ... ' 


The foregoing states quite definitely that, in the opinion of Dr. 
Dickie, the skills are to be taught outside the activity program. In the 
following month, however, this comment appeared in the Magazine: 


What about the fundamentals? That the skills do not suffer under 
the Enterprise procedure was demonstrated in an investigation conducted 
in Edmonton last winter. Two schools having similar social backgrounds, 
pupils of relatively equal capacity and equally competent instructors, 
but operating under different techniques were tested in November and 
May by the Public School Achievement Test. While a complete statisti¬ 
cal report is not yet available, there is sufficient evidence to 
indicate that under the Enterprise procedure pupils make at least as 
satisfactory progress in the skills as under the conventional program. 
Studies of a similar nature made at widely separated points in the 
United States would confirm this statement.!® 


There seems to have been some reluctance to do away with "formal 
instruction, drill, and test", and some confusion as to what was expected 
from the Enterprise procedure. In one case a rural teacher was having 


J. Dickie, "A Comment on the New Course of Study for Elementary 
Schools". A. T. A. 16: November 1936, p. 35. 

^Editorial, "Our Teachers' Helps Department." A. T. A. l6» 

December 1936, p. 31. 














' . 










. 





























































































, 

























1 









' 
































. 









69 

difficulty in initiating M a really successful co-operative undertaking.'* 
She had eight pupils, ranging in age from eight to fourteen, in five 
grades. The A. T. A. Magazine suggested the Winnetka technique for 
pupils in Grades III and IV (one boy and one girl), and shorter enter¬ 
prises for the two Grade I's. The senior group, the Magazine suggested, 
could tackle a "he-man job" such as "some project that is going to be of 
direct benefit to the community."19 

If the Enterprise technique proved somewhat difficult to adapt to 
areas of sparse population, it seems to have been helpful in non-English 
districts. An A. T. A. Magazine excerpt from "Our Teachers' Helps Depart¬ 
ment" suggested that: 

The children in these schools [ non-English; are artistic, 
unaggressive, and quite eager to become Canadianized. They like to 
read descriptive articles in magazines, encyclopedia and other 
reference books, and then to tell their classmates or teacher about 
them. They have a wonderful chance for this in Enterprise in read¬ 
ing for information ... 

Further evidence of what the Joumal of Education ( London ) has 
called "propaganda" from the United States at work in Canada is found in 
an article appearing in the Magazine concerning adjustment of instruction 
to levels of ability. After deploring the disadvantages to individual 
students instructed in large classes it stated: "Attempts to remedy these 
evils have led, especially in the United States, to the development of 
systems or plans for the improvement of instruction to meet individual 

19... »Our Teachers' Helps Department" A. T. A.17: February 1937» 

p. 22. 

^... "Our Teachers' Helps Department" A. T. A. 17*. April 1937» 


P. 37. 















. 




















/ft* 























' 














21 70 

capacity.” The article, then, outlined the system used first in 

Dalton, Massachusetts, as “the most famous of all the attempts to return 

22 

to the individualization of instruction.” 

Though Dr. Dickie had pointed out that the skills belonged to 

“formal instruction, drill, and test” the experimentalists in Edmonton 

had satisfied themselves that "through Enterprise Education the children 

do achieve as high a standard of attainment in the skill subjects as under 

23 

the conventional programme, except in Grade I ... " 

There was no doubt in the minds of these experimentalists that 
enterprise was “progressive education". They stated, "The progressive 
school practices upon which data of this study are based have changed the 
emphasis from an assignment-question technique to a problem-investigation- 
interpretation technique which demands more independent pupil activity in 
defining the problem, obtaining material through investigation and research, 
and co-operative pupil-teacher interpretation and conclusions from data 
collected. 


21 Men's Educational Club, Calgaiy, "Adjusting Instruction to differ¬ 
ent Levels of Ability." p. 33; June 1937» p* 37 4* 4* 4* 17. 

22 

Ibid., p. 37. 

"Our Teachers' Helps Department." A. T. A. 17: 46 - 48, 

June 1937» p. 47. 

2 ^The Teachers' Helps Department, “Pupil Progress Under the 
Enterprise and Conventional Techniques." A. T. A. Magazine, 17: 46 - 48; 
June 1937, p. 










71 

From the foregoing it may be assumed that the revolution in method¬ 


ology was theoretically an accomplished fact in Alberta by 1937 - two 
years before the Journal of Educat ion ( London ) had become aw a re of it. 
The "coloring of progressive education" poured from Official Bulletins, 
and spread by the A. T. A. Magazine , had permeated instruction even into 
the hinterland. That the new order was "progressive" and not something 
else was pointed up by H. B. Trout who stated: 

'Alberta has adopted a programme of studies whose underlying 
philosophy is that of the Progressive Education Association. 1 Some 
doubt seems to exist concerning the meaning of such a statement. To 
most readers it is entirely clear, but perhaps a brief outline of 
what the writer ventures to think is the common interpretation of 
it may be timely. * 

In his interpretation several salient points are elucidated. 

Trout said: 

What is involved in Alberta's educational philosophy? The answer 
is, in general outline, the democratic philosophy of John Dewey. 

Now, it is true that various other epithets have been applied to 
Dewey's thought. It has been called Pragmatic. Well, ideas that 
cannot be made to serve the needs of men aren't of much concern to 
men. Instrumental? Yes, thought is a useful instrument. Experi¬ 
mental? Yes, science is needed in the modern world. Humanistic? 

No excess of humanism is visible in our society at present. But 
such quibbling is scarcely illuminating. 

It is common knowledge that the philosophy underlying Alberta's 
enterprise curriculum is to be found in Dewey's work, D emocracy and 
Education ... 


2 ^H. B. Trout, "Democracy and Education in Alberta." A. T. A. 
Magazine, 19: 2; June 1939; p* 2. 







































72 

It seems axiomatic of the times that a man who lectured to his own 
classes should be able to capitalize on the connotation of democracy to 
such an extent that with one textbook he could activate a revolutionary 
movement in education adverse to lecturing and demanding of a multiplicity 
of books. 

After the Enterprise system had been established, the A. T. A. 
Magazine referred to it only occasionally. Salaries, professional status 
for teachers, pensions, world news, and sub-local affairs dominated its 
pages. Progressive education, reported on by the Magazine, was evolving 
as it had in the United States. The expanding curriculum, now concerned 
with the senior grades, included articles on agriculture, bookkeeping, 
oral French, home economics, and current events. Visual aids, excursions, 
and libraries were being stressed as valuable adjuncts of education. A 
"new concept" of history, geography, and civics as social studies was 
being presented in "the Guidebook Series.” The publications, not text¬ 
books , were intended as aids in “the new synthetic approach known as 
Social Studies." 2 ^ 

The 11 new system 11 had now reached the point where an evaluation was 
considered possible by C. W. Beattie of Fallis. He said: 

Under the new system, the scholar, under efficient direction and 
supervision of the teacher, searches for and browses for the required 
material; creates and builds up his own world of knowledge and 
experience in his own way. He lives and feels the actualities of life; 
he becomes a part of all he does, and the whole enterprise tends to 
better equip him for the duties of after life. 


^Book Review, "New Books in Social Studies." A. T• A. Magazine 
18: 12; October 1937» p. 12. 


















' 























































































73 

The new course then automatically brings the scholar directly in 
contact with practical things. He does instead of listens; he takes 
part in real actualities instead of merely reading about them. 


All these are the result of the enterprise work in the elementary 
school and the new improved course of the intermediate school. ° 


The assumption that the pupil "becomes a part of all he does" 
implies that personality is one of the primary concerns of the activity 
program in Alberta. Dr. Dickie supported the implication in the following: 

Enterprise education means experience education; it means that we 
plan to develop our boys and girls, not by requiring them to memorize 
isolated facts which may, or may not be absorbed into consciousness 
and so affect personality, but by a series of concrete experiences 
which cannot fail to be absorbed into consciousness and therefore, 
cannot fail to contribute to the development of the pupils’ 
personality ... ^9 

G. G. French emphasized personality development by pointing out 

that Melvin, in his book. The Activity Program , holds that, 'The wholeness 

and the balance of internal relations is preserved only when human 

personality is regarded as the primary goal of both learner and teacher. 1 

French added, "The purpose of the procedure appears to be the development 
30 

of personality." 

This viewpoint is subtly expressed in the following: 

To organize teaching psychology is to integrate teaching activities. 
This new revision reflects to a great extent the views of modem 


28 C. ¥. Beattie, "The Modern Teacher." A. T. A. Magazine , 18: 12; 
October 1937» P- l 2 * 

2 9d. Dickie/'Enterprise Education". A. T. A. Magazine , 18: 

7-8; September 1937* p. 7* 

“^°G. C. French, "Personality". A. T. A. Magazine , 18: 9 - 11? 
February 1938, p. 9. 









* 










' . ! " : ff,v l 1 ' ■ t ■ -Wv-'-y iX;:. /•$ 

• . 

■ - 


' 










- 




























74 

American educators. The interpretation is based on a new conception 
of education, explicitly stated as the development of character and 
citizenship and the provision for pupils of a stimulating environment 
in which their natural tendencies will be directed into useful 
abilities and desirable attitudes." 1 

M. B. Ricker found that: 

The development which progressive educational efforts hopes to attain 
may be summarized as the development of: 

1. Intelligent thinking 

2. Social concern 

3. A rich many-sided personality 

4. Mastery of skills for social participation." 

As the foregoing chapters have indicated, similar objectives had 

been formulated in America. Of them, Dr. Bode, an American advocate of 

progressivism said, r, It is about time the Progressives in the United States 

33 

were taking thought of where they are going.” 

Not everyone felt that Alberta’s new activity program was sufficient 
in itself for good teaching. Occasionally someone pointed out that the art 
of teaching includes more than methodology. Walter King, speaking of 
good teaching, said: 

The indisputable fact that real teaching comes from within, more 
especially that kind of teaching such as now lies ahead, is perhaps 
a truth that is all too little recognized. Good teaching, really 
good teaching, like good singing and good acting, is a sort of 
spontaneous effervescence, the outcome of a personality rich in 


3 1 H. Lobay, ”Psychological Organization of Teaching." A. T. A. 
Magazine, 18: 35* April 1938, p. 35. 

3%. B. Ricker, "Individual Instruction." A. T. A. Magazine , 19: 

28 - 30; September 1938, p. 28. 

33 C . Sansom, "Marginalia." A. T. A. Magazine , 19: 9 - 10; June 1939* 

p. 10. 












. < 
























. 

. 




1 1 




















































. 




















75 


experience and ability motivated with an irrepressible urge to 
pass on the inner message. Good teaching must be a living, vital, 
individual experience.^ 

Dr. Sansom, who held a similar opinion, spoke of the good teacher, 
saying, "He has that within him as a personal quality which is more to be 

35 

coveted by a teacher than all the work-benches and libraries in the world." 

The published opinion that the art of teaching, like all other arts, 
requires the inspiration of the artist was significant. It was particularly 
significant at a time when progressive techniques seemed to be generally 
gaining favor. The expression of opinion that good teaching was more than 
methodology was evidence of critical thinking among teachers actively 
engaged in classroom work. Those in higher office were also critical on 
occasion. Freedom, a basic principle in enterprise, was criticized by 

Dr. Sansom as a philosophical misinterpretation of Dewey’s theory of 

. - 36 

impulses. 

That there were those who considered the new course of study and 
the methodology for which it was built insufficient for good teaching was 
pointed in the following: 

I sometimes wonder if much of the admittedly valid criticism of 
the old course could not be laid to the manner in which it was taught... 


King, "The New Teacher." A. T. A. Magazine , 19: 19; 
January 1939» p. 19. 

35 c . Sansom, "Marginalia." A. T. A. Magazine , 19: 19; 
December 1938, p. 19. 

3^C. Sansom, "Philosophy of Impulse - Marginalia." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 20: 16; October 1939» p. l6. 








... . . ' ' . 





76 


When I look at those sections of the Grade Nine course which 
overlap the Mowat text, I can never feel that the change has been 
so revolutionary after all. I sometimes wonder if good teachers 
were not covering much of this material years before the new course 
came out •.. 

The foregoing is not to be taken as criticism, merely a reminder 
that a revised course of study is not necessarily a substitute for 
a high standard of professional skill.37 

To interpret Progressivism, and to explain away criticisms of 
"lower scholarship, disregard for essential knowledges and skills, 
uncontrolled freedom, and shoddy work habits,representatives of the 
Progressive Education Association participated in the "inspirational 
part" of Alberta Teachers* Conventions. One of these, Dr. McSwain, of 
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, said, "Haste in using what 
is professionally respectable leads to shoddy instruction and effects 
faulty learnings by the child. It is unintelligent and professionally 
dishonest to expect teachers to use principles in teaching which thejr do 
not properly understand or in which they have no faith. 

The comment above is supported by Leonard Bercuson who said, 
"Adherents of John Dewey*s ideas!, have often allowed their enthusiasm 
to trample over their judgment and their intelligence. I observed classes 
at a so-called Progressive School in Montreal which bore a close 


3?j m b. "The Spare Period." A. T. A. Magazine , 20: 22; 

February 19^0, p, 22. 

T. McSwain, "The Philosophy of the New School." 

A. T. A. Magazine , 20: 3 - 6; October 19^0, p. 3. 

39 


E. T. McSwain, op. cit., p. 3. 













■ 





, _ 












. 












.. 




' 














. >'• 

.. 


, 




























• •' ■ - . , 






















resemblance to my mental picture of Bedlam ... 


77 


In the foregoing the inference is clear that whatever was wrong 
with Progressivism lay in an abuse of its fundamentals, and that in time 
an intelligent application of its principles would eliminate criticism. 

J. A. Smith, president of the Alberta Teachers' Association, 
however, felt that an evaluation of the progressive system was a fairly 
immediate problem. Writing about conventions, he said, "Apparently the 
people charged with the responsibility of securing guest speakers are 
satisfied that the philosophy of progressive education is worthy of being 
followed in this province. However ... certain of our members are 
definitely of the opinion that the whole framework of progressive edu¬ 
cation is nothing more than another 'batch of frills' which will eventu¬ 
ally be discarded. Just how widespread this opinion is I do npt know, 
but I do feel that the time is opportune for us as members of the 

4i 

Alberta Teachers* Association to express ourselves one way or the other." 

That a vital part of Progressivism had already been discarded was 
noted by Dr. Sansom. Referring to a "pronouncement" in the Progressive 
Education Magazine he said, "One of the first things that struck me in 
trying to work my way through the thing was that we 'Progressive' teachers 
must no longer speak of 'child-centered* schools. This is official ... 

Like subject-centered schools and teacher-centered schools they have had 

iw L. Bercuson, "The Eight Year Study." 21: A. T. A. Magazine , 
9-10; Januaiy 1941, p. 10. 

4l J. A. Smith, "President's News Letter." A. T. A. Magazine, 

22: 9 - 11; November 1941, p. 9» 











' 























. 













































, 



■ 










42 7o 

their day and ceased to be." The child-centered school, he explained, 

43 

had been '’blacked out” in favor of those which were "society—centered* ” 

Leonard Bercuson recognized that Progressivism in Alberta was 

approaching a period of dilemma. He said, "A storm of criticism is 

brewing on the immediate horizon over the question of which educational 

philosophy, the progressive or the traditional, is to be accepted finally 
44 

in this province." He attempted to explain "the aversion to the progress¬ 
ive schools" as "the instinctive distrust of the new and the novel. 

After pointing out that Dewey's theories had been promulgated before the 
year 1900, he added this significant statement: "... it was not until 

the year 1934 that the words 'enterprise' and 'activity' suddenly swam 
into the ken of a goodly number of Alberta teachers. Ever since, they 
have been obliged to knuckle down under a system imposed from above, a 
system in which they did not believe, and which many openly distrusted. 

There was consequently much resentment which time and the ministrations of 
guest speakers from the Progressive Education Association have not succeed- 

46 

ed in dispelling." He admitted that " ... instruction in the progressive 

^ 2 C. Sansom, "Philosophy of Progressivism - Marginalia." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 22: 20-21; November 1941, p. 20. 

^ Ibld . , p. 21. 

^L. Bercuson, "Are We Marching Backward?" A. T. A. Magazine, 22: 

11 - 14; December 1941, p. 11. 










school too often degenerated into a consistent pampering of the child ..."^7 
but considered this alien to the modern educational approach, and felt that 
Alberta teachers would eventually accept progressive education over¬ 
whelmingly. 

That Dr. Sansom would not be the first to respond overwhelmingly in 
favor of Progressivism was evident in the following statement made by him: 

My own view is that, having been saturated to the dripping point 
with Progressivism for the past five years or so, we are now entitled 
to a respite to give us a chance to do some thinking about education 
on our own account. 

Dr. Argue of the University of Alberta felt that progressive edu¬ 
cation was not possible in all situations because of the physical settings 
of classrooms. He commented: 

Anyone familiar with classrooms knows that the techniques of 
Progressive education, valid though they be, are much more difficult 
than those of the traditional lecture and text type of teaching. 

They are too much for an amateur or ill-trained teacher. Indeed, 
they are too much for any teacher when classes get too large and 
when the physical setting of education is so designed that it 
sabotages one's every attempt to use activity methods. ' 

In view of the thesis in this study. Dr. Argue's suggestion of 
integrating the old and the new philosophies is interesting. He said. 


47 Ibid., p. 14. 

Sansom, "Progressive Curriculum - Marginalia." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 22: 40; January 1942, p. 40. 

^K. F. Argue, "New Wine in Old Bottles." A. T. A. 

22: 29 - 32; June 1942* p. 30 . 


Magazine , 






„,* 










- 








. 




















































80 


"My suggestion is simply that the combination of the old and new, which 
may be termed Progressive education, be given a fair chance to produce 
the rich returns it promises." 

Though both those who favored progressivism and those who did not 
had intimated that imposition of a methodology "from above" was detri¬ 
mental to teacher morale and pupil learning, official bulletins continued 
to appear in the A. T. A. Magazine . Bulletin number sixty - five is an 
example of the "knuckle-down" ordinance issued. Not only did it say what 
to teach but it stated how it was to be taught. 

The Programme of Studies for the Intermediate Grades is to be 
interpreted, not as a programme of separate and unrelated subjects, 
but rather as an integrated programme in which English, Social Studies, 
Science, and, to some extent at least. Mathematics are to be taught 
in close connect ion, through activities that provide plenty of 
opportunities for practice in oral and written English, for class 
discussions and for social responses . Under these conditions, a 
pupil*s educational growth should be total -- not partial or 
specialized; ... 31 (italics inserted) 

It would seem that the "respite" to which Dr. Sansom felt entitled 
was to be long in coming, and the "resentment" among teachers mentioned by 
Bercuson long to continue, if the teachers* own professional magazine 
persisted in acting as a courier for departmental edicts. 

Reference to methodology and to controversial issues in the art of 
teaching became almost negligible during the year 1943 and concern for 
this fact is evident in the following editorial of the A. T. A. Magazine : 


5° lbid ., p. 30. 

^Official Bulletin, Department of Education, A. T. A. Magazine , 
23; 31 - 36; October 1942. p. 31. 

































































• 

• 








- 














-, • 








































81 

The A. T. A., while continuing to interest itself in the economic 
status of its members, should give more thought to those educational 
and professional problems which must be stressed constantly if our 
Association is to build wisely upon foundations already laid ..• 

Stress on professional aspects of our work has been rather inter¬ 
mittent to date ... - 

In The Math-Sci Come r, which did continue to provide professional 

material for teachers, there is a reference to the controversial issue of 

methodology. Kathleen Collins wrote, "Teachers complain that students 

entering high school have not mastered the elementary steps in calculation. 

The survey also revealed that the intermediate grades were carrying 

capacity courses ... yet more time should have been given to drill in 

elementary calculations. Would it be possible to put some of this 

53 

responsibility back into the primary grades? " It would seem that in 

the higher grades there was some dissatisfaction with the results where 

the scholar "searches for and browses for the required materials; creates 

54 

and builds up his own world of knowledge and experience in his own way."* 

G. C. French emphasized the need for a re-evaluation of the "new 
method" in skill subjects. His opinion, in part, is expressed as follows: 


-^Editor (John W. Barnett), "Must Laymen Take Over?" A. T. A. 
Magazine, 23: 1-4; May 1943» p. 1. 

5%. E. Collins, "More Math? Where?" A. T. A. Magazine, 23: 
28 - 30; May 1943, p. 28. 

^c. W. Beattie, "The Modem Teacher." A. T. A. Magazine , 18: 
12; November 1937* p. 12. 




















■ 










82 


Efficient planning for the classroom program of skill subjects 
will always be necessary. Our schools cannot permit a lower standard 
of skill development as a result of the increased emphasis on the 
emotional, social and personality growth of school children. It is 
true that school pupils require a well-balanced personality, but this 
a ll-sided growth would not be complete without a satisfactory know¬ 
ledge of fundamental skills. The public is beginning to accept our 
newer education which stresses the integration of experiences 
gained through activity work, but still insists that school 
graduates be up to standard in such basic skills as arithmetic, 
reading, writing and spelling.-^ 

A succinct comment is added which has a bearing on the thesis of this study: 
r, The viewpoint of the teacher usually determines the methods which he uses 
and the evaluation system which he employs. This is a significant 
statement in view of the fact that "official bulletins" had been seeking 
to do this job for the teacher. 

The thesis of an eclectic method, a methodology which is individual, 
which is personalized through the inner, vital, and inspirational perspi¬ 
cacity of the teacher was growing out of the controversial issues of 
methodologies. The idea was taking shape in comments like the following: 

... Without minimizing the contribution that the introduction of 
this methodology £ Enterprise J has made in Alberta by way of breaking 
down old and stereotyped procedures and causing us all to reflect on 
the deeper meanings and purposes of education, there still seems to 
be some doubt as to its being the best method to be used by all 
teachers in all circumstances. It might be better to regard it 
rather as a technique that is merely approved and recommended ... 

There are some who even hold that ’method' is not the sort of thing 
that can be safely standardized, owing to the great diversity in 
the temperaments and personalities of teachers and in the conditions 
under which they work. It is strictly a professional matter and one 
which practicing teachers are surely in the best position to discuss 
intelligently and assess ... ^7 


C. French, "Planning for the Skill Program." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 24: 23 - 24; January 1944, p. 23. 

56 ibid .. p. 23. 

5?c. Sansom, "President's Report". A. T. A. Magazine . 24: 

6 - 10; May 1944, p. 9. 












- 




































. 












- - 

































■ 






. 







83 

Another opinion which supports the eclectic idea was: 

Contrary to the beliefs of those who seem to think that the only 
way to improvement is backwards to the "good old days", the school 
has been, for too long, a place where all too many children go, Just 
because they must; sitting there for an endless period while 
thousands of useless facts are hammered into unwilling and un- 
retentive minds. However, the writer most definitely does not 
support those psychologists who seem to favor a course of study 
chosen by the children in its entirety. It is difficult to see 
how such a course could lead to anywhere but chaos ... 58 

This chapter has recorded the progress of a revolution in edu¬ 
cational methodology. It has shown how, throughout Alberta, in ten years, 
a change was wrought in teaching techniques from traditionalism to 
progressivism, and how, in that time, the "new method" was evaluated. 

The next chapter will present the findings of an investigation of 
material in the A. T. A. Magazine relating to concepts of teaching 
techniques during the post-war years of 1945 - 1955* That the period was 
significant for education is expressed in a comment by R. V, Clark who 
said, "It is very difficult to Judge what the postwar era will have to 
offer youth ... If Progressivism in the High School means an Intensifi¬ 
cation of the students' preoccupation with the immediate present, with 
handicrafts, with amateur dramatics and with their own ephemeral emotions 
and amusements, even though it be centred in the community it will hardly 

59 

meet the needs of the vital years that lie ahead." 


58 d . s# Arbuckle, "Progress Lies Ahead." A. T. A. Magazine , 24: 
12 - 14; June 1944, p. 13. 

59 R< y. Clark, "Some Thoughts on Progressivism and the Post-War 
Era." A. T. A. Magazine , 25: 49 - 51; February 1945, p. 50. 






















■ 







. 

















































. 




















































CHAPTER VI 


REACTION IN THE ALBERTA TEACHERS* MAGAZINE 
TO THE IDEOLOGICAL CONTROVERSY 1945 - 1955 


This chapter presents the findings of an investigation into what 
was considered good teaching in Alberta for the years 1945 - 1955 using 
the Alberta Teachers 1 Magazine for this period as a source of published 
opinion. The decade has been referred to by R. V. Clark as "the vital 
years.That these years were to be significant was the opinion of 
D. S. Arbuckle who, speaking of "what is to be taught, and how," said: 

Today, however, this battle of the curriculum has reached a more 
clearly defined stage. It is no mere matter of professional 
argument among educators; it is a struggle which vitally affects, 
and will affect even more, our very way of life. There is no doubt 
that just what that way of life will be depends a great deal on the 
outcome of this conflict. 

It is the purpose of this chapter to summarize, analyze, and 
comment upon published opinion in the Alberta Teachers 1 Magazine for this 
period in which the controversial issues of how to teach have come to "a 
more clearly defined stage." 


1. Concepts in Alberta's Education — 1945 - 1955 


In view of the opinion that the years 1945 - 1955 were considered 


•^R. V. Clark, "Some Thoughts on Frogressivism and the Post-War 
Era." A. T. A. Magazine , 25: 49 - 51; February 1945, p. 50. 

%). S. Arbuckle, "Curriculum Conflict." A. T. A. Magazine , 26: 
10 - 12; December 1945, p. 10. 
















































■ 


- 








■ 

































































■ 
























85 

"vital years" and a time of "struggle ... at a more clearly defined stage," 
it would seem that much published opinion concerning the art of teaching 
would be presented in the Alberta Teachers * Magazine . There was, in the 
beginning, much more said about "the cold fact that the cause of the 
debacle in which the educational system of Alberta and the other provinces 

3 

find themselves is 90$, at least, solely economic." One comment of 
significance, however, was found in The Math - Sci Corner of the Magazine . 

It was as follows: 

For a number of years now, we have heard about activity in edu¬ 
cation and at times an implication, if not the actual statement, that 
nothing should be presented in school that does not admit of actual 
manual activity by the pupil. Examine the grade nine science course 
and see how rich an association of meaning is missed if such a policy 
is followed to the letter. The invisible demands attention.^ 

Aside from this polite murmur of disapproval there was little in 
published opinion concerning the technique of teaching as formulated and 
advocated for use in Alberta schools. It would seem that the Progressive 
system was so firmly intrenched that comment either for or against was not 
needed, or that concern for the art of teaching had, indeed, been supplanted 
by economic considerations. The gist of convention discussions, at Grande 
Prairie for instance, implies both factors as significant. The following 
was put on record.: 

Following a short business session the teachers were addressed by 
Mr. A. B. Esrenson, Associate Director of Curriculum for Alberta 


Barnett (Managing Editor) "Back Again - Editorial." A. T. A. 
Magazine, 26: 1-4; September-October 1945. p. 2. 

^G. Dann, "Theory in Grade IX." A. T. A. Magazine , 26: 58 - 62; 
April 1946, p. 58. 























































86 

schools. Mr. Evenson explained that in the revision of the Elementary- 
Course of Studies now under way, the Enterprise System has been 
definitely retained. His Department feels only by this activity 
program can we hope to accomplish our educational aims of developing 
the whole child and of promoting a democratic social order. Mr. 

Evenson stated that by the proper use of group techniques in the 
classroom in all grades desirable social attitudes can be formed 
that will be retained by the pupils throughout their lives. 

... Mr. Ansley, the new General Secretary of the A. T. A., spoke 
briefly on several matters of vital interest to all teachers — 
salaries, pensions and the possibility of organizing an information 
bureau to assist teachers to locate desirable positions. 

There was, however, much more published comment with reference to 
the art of teaching made available in the A. T. A. Magazine during the 
year 1947. Though it was often in the form of reprints from United States 
sources, the inclusion of material involving more than a naive acceptance 
of progressive technique was significant. At a time when progressive 
practices were regarded as sufficient in "promoting a democratic social 
order," articles expressing other concepts of the art of teaching were 
published. An article of this kind was contributed by Christian Gauss. 

He said: 

Good teaching is often not immediately popular. The good teacher, 
it should be repeated, must exercise a significant and abiding influence 
on the intellectual and spiritual development of his students. The 
man who is determined to succeed as a teacher often corrects his own 
personal deficiencies and in some measure at least develops the 
qualities required. Genius in teaching conforms to the old definition, 
that it is an infinite capacity for taking pains ... ' 


^Local News, "Grande Prairie", A. T. A. Magazine , 27: 58 - 64; 

November 1946, p. 59. 

ibid., p. 59. 

?C. Gauss, "What Makes a Good Teacher?" A. T. A. Magazine, 

27: 17 - 22; May 1947, p. 19. 







' 

- 

. 

' 




' 


. 





87 


• •• What makes a good teacher? Enthusiasm, which includes the 
desire to communicate and a catholic sympathetic interest in 
students’ minds. Culture, which includes breadth of interests and 
a sense of values and of relevances. Knowledge, which includes a 
real sense of criticism and a belief that one's subject is not 
finished, packaged and tied up with blue ribbons and forget-me-nots. 

It would seem that not by method alone, but through the whole being of 

the teacher, and through the environment in which they live together shall 

the child become educated. 

Other articles were definitely slanted toward the propagation of 
Progressivism in Alberta. One from Pr ogressive Education said, "Only 
appropriate education, orientation to knowledge in general, and equipment 
to function not as a specialist but as a member of society in all areas of 
knowledge can fit the individual to assume his responsibilities and be 
well adjusted; there is no alternative. The realization of this makes 

Q 

general education a basic necessity." 7 

The foregoing is significant in view of the expanding curriculum 
being adopted in Alberta. No doubt considerable thought was given to the 
meaning of "general education" in the preparation of a new course of 
studies whose aims could be accomplished through the activity program. 

The article had this to say about general education: 

The pragmatist in America was even more practical and specific. 

The pragmatic arguments are so well-known and still so commonly with 
us that they scarcely need to be cited. But the argument that one 
never knows what one will have to do, that it is good business to be 
able to talk to anyone one meets about his particular hobby, that it 


%bid . , p. 22. 

9 E. J. Megroth and V. Z. Washbume, "No Longer a Luxury." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 27: 15 - 20; June 19^7* P* 20 










; 



















. 












88 

is useful to be entertaining at dinner parties, that it is detrimental 
to one's social and economic advancement not to be able to discuss 
art and literature and music, and even better argument that in the 
last analysis one can only depend on oneself and that therefore one 
should develop oneself, still weigh very heavily among the reasons 
that both students and teachers advance for a general education . 

It cannot be assumed in view of a paucity of published comment that the 

Sophism of a "general education" was al3_ that Alberta Progressives meant 

when they referred to "desirable social attitudes" as an outcome of their 

curriculum. 

In view of the thesis of this study that an eclectic methodology 
is the one which the good teacher must ultimately employ in the art of 
teaching, an article by Frederick Lewis Allen, editor of Harper's 
Magazine has particular significance. In the reprint of this article in 
the A. T. A. Magazine he stated: 

I have long been amazed and amused to see how many people there 
are who, when they talk, write, and presumably think about education, 
think of only one thing at a time, who argue furiously for one single 
educational principle or reform, and seem to believe that if you can 
only hold fast to this one principle, or achieve this one reform, 
everything else will somehow take care of itself ... 

His comments on Progressivism were as follows: 

Then there are the progressive educator s, vintage say 1925, with 
their insistence on regarding the pupil as the unit of education, on 
leading his spontaneous interest rather than cramming education down 
his throat, on learning by doing. 

This is an educational principle of dynamic value. But the last 
man to admit that the whole truth was made manifest to John Dewey 
on a mountain top would be John Dewey himself. Most of us would 


10 Ibid ., p. 15-16. 

L. Allen, "Education is a Complicated Thing." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 28: 19-20; September - October 19^7» p. 19. 










■ 




















, 






r 

■ 
















89 


agree that this principle, too, is not one to be applied by people 
who wear blinders to everything else. It too carries with it the 
dangers of over-simplification — a danger that the student will 
neglect the things he must know in favor of the things that amuse 
him, a danger that he will always scorn routine, want to argue with 
the buzzer, and be out of tune with necessity. 2 

His concluding paragraph emphasized the eclectic idea in methodology, 
and inferred that factors other than those of methodology are involved in 
the art of teaching. He said: 

This movement, (the common corej perhaps the most vigorous of the 
moment in higher education, also expresses a valid principle — if, 
when you try to put it into practice, you don't forget that you may 
in so doing throw away some other educational assets, if you don’t 
forget that education is a very complicated thing and must pay some 
attention to each of the things that these various groups of people 
have had in mind; and to a great many other things, too, including 
things which will excite the educational zealots of I960 and 1970« 
whatever those things may prove to be. ^-3 

Where published comment alone is consulted there seems to be little 
or no concern among Alberta educationalists that Alberta's "new” teaching 
techniques should be so criticized by an American layman. 

More cognizance was taken of the criticism of Progressivism as 


encouraging young folk to be "destructively critical, ultra critical, of 


all things in heaven and in the earth, and of all things in between ..." 
The president of the Alberta Teachers' Association defended "the new 
teaching aims" which "undertook to make our school youngsters active and 
critical in their thinking" on the grounds that "the docility and con¬ 
servatism of age settle down upon them soon enough." 


14 


12 F. L..Allen, o£. cit ., p. 20. 

13 Ibid ., p. 20, 

E. Smith, "Our President's Column." A. T. A. Magazine , 28: 
6; November 194?, p. 6. 

3-5 ibid ., p. 6. 













i *- • ... 













90 

Another proponent of Progressivism in Alberta undertook to analyze 
and defend progressive education. He stated among other things the aims 
of the progressive schools as follows: 

The progressive school aims to develop the social intelligence of 
the child in order to assist him to come to grips with the social 
problems of adult living, provincially, nationally, or internationally. 
Children should work at current problems and controversial issues in 
order to develop independent thinking in preparation for citizenship. 

Experimentalism and progressive education utilize the scientific 
method and both are rooted in experience. Learning must be related 
to living. So, too, character is built up in living. The curriculum 
must be related to real life. 

Experimentalism and progressive education aim at democratic edu¬ 
cation which should produce responsible, selfgdirected citizens who 
are to live in a rapidly changing world ... 

Dr. Sansom, in an article a ironth later, had this to say: 

Progressive writers do emphasize aims and objectives but do not 
state them clearly. Progressives abhor clarity. 

Of greater import is the following comment by the same writer on 
Progressivism*s preoccupation with method: 

Progressivism puts great stress on method. But method is not the 
important thing in education. There is good teaching by any method. 

And note that the goodness belongs to the teaching, not the method. 

The reason is that method is a physical process and teaching is a 
spiritual process.--^ 

The concept that the teacher is superior to the tools he works with 
would seem to be a part of Dr. Sansom’s thinking. 

Method is but the means to an end, and the good teacher will adapt 


1&A. L. Doucette, "Is Alberta Education a Failure? No ... " 
A. T. A. Magazine , 28: 8 - 12; December 1947» P* 9 - 10* 

17c # Sansom, "Progressive Education." A. T. A* Magazine, 28: 
43 - 44; January 1948, p. 43. 





' 



. 




















his techniques to the needs and interests of his class. That method will 
be his own, and through his skill it will be applied with whatever changes 
are necessary for the objectives planned for, the children he teaches, and 
the environment in which they live. Take from him the right to choose his 
own way to teach, and you have taken from him his dignity, his liberty, 
and his birthright. No one method can in itself be democratic. It is the 
manner in which it is used in conjunction with all other attributes of 
good teaching that makes it democratic. Democracy implies freedom of 
choice, and should a teacher be denied the privilege of choosing a method, 
or combination of methods, then democracy itself has been abused. 

Dr. Sansom had this to say about the introduction of Progressivism 
in Alberta: 

One of the most ghastly things that were done in Alberta where 
Progressivism was introduced was the prescription that all elementary 
teachers, regardless of training, experience, temperament, school 
setup, or anything else, were required, on pain of dire consequences, 
to use the same instructional methods and techniques. The pupils 
were set free. The teachers were put in chains.™ 

The prescriptive technique was less noticeable after September, 
1948. Official bulletins, not* that "the orientation of education" had 
been accomplished, were more conciliatory. Bulletin numbered 115 had 
this to say: 

Teachers are urged to make use of the guidebooks that have been 
prepared to accompany the authorized readers from Grades I to VI ..." 


19 C . Sansom, op. cit., p. 43. 

on 

Official Bulletin, Department of Education, A. T. A. Magazine , 
29: 2? and 48; September - October, 1948, p. 2?. 




- 




i 

- 






92 


Speakers for local conventions were chosen, now, not for their 

adherence to Progressivism, but for their interest in guidance and public 

relations. Articles concerning counselling and spelling gained precedence. 

The milder educational climate, in published comment, at least, produced an 

article concluding with this statement: "Professional educators need the 

cooperation of the subject-matter specialists. The strife which has gone 

on for years between these two groups is basically caused by a lack of 

understanding. Professional educators can, by the excellence of their 

21 

work, gain cooperation where conflict has existed ... " The idea that 
something could be gained from integration of basically sound concepts in 
traditional and modem education was progress toward the thesis that the 
good method is personal. 

W. S. Flack supported the idea that the best teaching is done where 

teachers are free to choose the way in which they teach. He said, "It is 

bad for the profession to give the impression that teachers are not 

permitted to exercise their personal judgment and discretion regarding the 

22 

aims and methods which they adopt in their day-to-day work." 

That teaching, to be an art, must have in it the soul of the artist 
is pointed up by Joy Morgan. "The first fundamental," she said, "is for 
the teacher to know himself and to understand how every phase of his 


21 r. h. Morrison, "Subject-Matter Specialists vs. Professional 
Educators." A. T. A. Magazine , 29:^ 13 - 13; March 1949, p. 15 

(Reprinted from The Education Digest ) 

22 W. S. Flack, "Teachers Plan Curriculum." A. T. A. Magazine , 29: 
1? - 19; March 1949, p. 19. (From The S choolmaster and Womans Teachers 1 
Chronicle ) 





























thinking and living plays upon his teaching. No one can teach more than 

23 

he is ... " That a teacher can have little influence with a child he 

does not understand was inferred in her statement H the second fundamental 

is to understand the growth and development of the child — to know him as 

24 

an individual different from all others." The environmental factor in 
educational growth which the good teacher must consider was involved in 


her comment "the third fundamental is to understand society, which is in a 

constant state of change and growth. Our task as teachers is to seek to 

learn the laws of that growth and to educate in accordance with them 

25 

instead of against them." To use these fundamentals of teaching in 
the awakening of selfhood and individuality in a pupil is an art. 

Where a teacher plans the daily curriculum, where she is free to 
think» she can be a nice teacher. Elsie Adams, supervising teacher in 
Denver, had this to say of those who, from the child's point of view, 
would be nice : 

Teachers can try to be nice teachers: to like and understand each 
individual child; to explain things carefully; to be patient when the 
explanation fails to go over; to take time out now and then for a talk 
and a little joke; tc be both reasonable and consistent in the demands 
made upon children. Teachers can vary the day's program and work 
definitely tc make it more interesting. They can plan the unusual 
experience ... The schoolroom can be made a happy place with pictures 


^J. E. Morgan, "Some Fundamentals of Teaching." A. T. A. Magazine . 
29: 27 - 28; June 19^9, p. 27. (From NEA Journal ) 

24 

Ibid ., p. 27. 

25 Ibid., p. 27. 














, - . 



































. 


. 
















, 














' ' 


94 


and growing things; and the children can help to keep it orderly 
and attractive ... ® 

It was indeed fortunate that published comment from American 
sources appeared in the Alberta Teachers 1 Magazine in the years of 1949 - 
1950* Without it the art of teaching would have been almost wholly 
neglected in print. It was as though this period did not belong to the 
'’vital years", or that payment, pensions, and professionalism were upper¬ 
most in the minds of most Alberta teachers. With the exception of John 
Charyk’s articles 22 on the use of concrete objects as aids in teaching 
mathematics, American opinion dominated the pages of the A. T. A. 

Magazine in areas of concern to this study. 

In his advice to new teachers, E. A. Barrel! of the Dover High 
School, Delaware, said, "Please realize that teaching is inevitably 

po 

empirical," and also, "Please realize that different methods ’work’ 

29 

with different pupils." From this it may be inferred that methods 
taught in teacher training institutions provide the raw material from 
which a practical and personal method may be developed through experience 

2 ^E. W. Adams, "Children State Their Educational Philosophy." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 29*. 9 - 11; October 1949, p. 11. (From Educational Leadership ) 

22 j. G. Charyk, "Mathematics Teaching on the March." A. T. A. 

Magazine , 31* 22 - 23, 40 - 44, 48; October 1950* 

28 E. A. Barrell, "So You’re a New Teacher?" A^_ T A A a Magaz ine, 31: 

29 - 30, 36 - 38; October 1950, p. 29. (From The Delaware School Journal ) 

2 9 lbid ., p. 36. 
















under actual classroom conditions. 


95 


The idea that teaching is empirical is found in a comment made by 

F. Seymour, President of the Alberta Teachers' Association. Referring to 

the new curriculum for the Junior High School he said, "We are being asked 

to attempt new courses and new organization on a tentative basis. Our 

opinions are being invited as to the actual application of these revisions 

30 

in the school organization." 

The concern of educationists with empirical teaching was supplemented 
by the idea of a synthesis of methodologies. That the time had come for a 
practical middleground in methodology was pointed up by William Ragan, 
Professor of Education in the University of Oklahoma. That his article 
was published at this particular time in the A. T. A. Magazine had 
significance. With curriculum changes in the offing either-or thinking 
of extreme opposites in methodology was being recognized as inadequate. 

The concept of a medium of instruction with values drawn from both 
extremes was gaining ground, and Ragan's article gave it a stimulating 
impetus. Of particular import was the following: 

Many leaders in education are recognizing the need for harmonizing 
the real values inherent in traditional education with those sought by 
the advocates of reform. Olsen insists that both the traditional 
school and the progressive school have certain limitations and 
proposes the 'community school as the best medium through which a 
higher synthesis of educational values may be achieved.' Caswell 
warns students of elementary education against 'setting up in 
opposition to each other values which really should be complementary. 1 
Mead and Orth suggest the 'transitional school' as a medium through 


3°F. J. C. Seymour, "Our President's Column." A. T. A. Magazine , 
31: 7 - 8; November 1950, p. 8. 














' 


























































* 














. 





































' 












































. 











■ 

























• 














■ 

















96 

which the two theories 'may be reconciled without either, of 
necessity, supplanting the other. 

In advocating more "do-democracy" in education. Dr. Yauch suggested 

that, "Putting democracy to work in the individual school implies that the 

teachers will get together and plan their own curriculum and course of 
32 

study." That this had been done was the opinion of Professor Ragan who 

said, "In practical school situations the teacher seldom finds it necessary 

to choose between the extreme traditional point of view and the ultra- 

progressive point of view ... In actual practice most teachers will find 

it necessary to choose a practical middleground somewhere between the two 
33 

extremes." 

The harmonious integration of extremes in methodology was not the 

only significant aspect of educational thought at this time. The concept 

of the teacher as a sociological force in the art of teaching was claiming 

attention. Sister Joselyn had this to say: "Teaching, like art or 

prayer, is a profoundly two-way action ... Teaching occurs when the stuff 

of the teacher's mind is conveyed to the innermost depths of the other 

34 

person and stays there as a permanent part of him." To have something 

to convey meant that "teachers must see more, think more, and understand 

35 

more than the average man and woman of the society in which they live." ^ 

3-4tf. B. Ragan, "The Pendulum Swings Too Far." A. T. A. Magazin e, 

21: 16 - 17, 44; November 1950, P* l6. (From The Oklahoma T eacher ) 

3%. a. Yauch, "Democratic Education Must be Practiced." A. T. A. 
Magazine, 31 *• 8 - 10; December 1950, p. 9. 

B. Ragan, p£. cit . , p. 1 6 . 

■^Sister M. Joselyn, "Real Teaching is a Two-Way Action." A^ T. A. 
Magazine , 32: 28; November 1951* P* 28. 

35 

... "The Good Teacher Has Wide Interests." A. T. A. Magazine , 32: 
21; January 1952, p. 31. (From What the Colleges Are Doing ) 










- 


’ 

. 










' *. 










«.,v 

' 





















. 






- 






. 










97 


Greater respect for the teacher's personal influence on child 
growth and change brought also a more favorable attitude toward textbooks. 
It was said, "Next to the teacher himself, the textbook probably exerts 
greater influence than any other factor upon the curriculum of American 
schools." "The modern textbook," said Hollis Caswell, "is an invalu¬ 
able servant but an intolerable master for a competent teacher. 

Donald Durrell pointed out that "textbooks are designed to aid learning 

and teaching. Their value depends upon the intelligence with which they 
38 

are used. nJ 

The concept of teaching having possibilities of integrated method¬ 
ologies, sociological significance, and intelligently used textbooks had 
barely gained notice when John Dewey died in June, 1952. There followed 
a number of articles in the A. T. A. Magazine favoring Progressive 
philosophy. The tenor of these articles is found in the following: "How 
can the teacher become a more effective catalyst in helping the group to 
set up goals, to choose leaders, to initiate action, to encourage the 
non-contributor? How can she, with Dewey, cultivate in the individual 

^Excerpts from The Phi Delta Kaopan , February 1952, "What Textbooks 
Are For." A. T. A. Magazine, 32: 9 - 11; May 1952, p. 10. 

3? Ibid . , p. 10. 

3®D. D. Durrell, Excerpts from The Phi Delta Kappan , February 1952, 
"What Textsbooks Are For." A. T. A. Magazine, 32: 9 - 11; May 1952, 

p. 11. 


































■ 





, 







, 










- 








- 



















. , 


















the social spirit and the power to act socially? 


,39 


98 


Within the year a more significant evaluation of the teacher's 

worth was made by A. L. Doucette, Director of the Calgary Branch of the 

University of Alberta. He said, "Great teachers are persons of mental 

vigour, wholesome personality, and moral discrimination. They know the 

art of helping and guiding others. They possess an abiding faith because 

40 

they make the teaching of ideals their life work." 

Then an article of even deeper significance appeared which not 

only deplored the over-simplification of teaching as methodology, but 

gave expression to the concept of teaching as an art. Like Sister 
4l 

Joselyn who regarded teaching as a "two-way action" the writer, 

F. M. Salter, felt the need for "communication of meaning." Particularly 
significant, in view of the thesis of this study, is the following: 

There are no rules for any art; and the modem tendency to make a 
fetish of individual techniques of instruction is therefore rather 
distressing, for the technique should be the servant of the artist 
and not his master. Moreover, the vogue of one technique inevitably 
means the neglect of others that may be just as good, and in some 
hands, better; and vogue brings dictatorship or high-priesthood. 


39 C. C. Pitt, "A Philosophy of Education." A. T. A, M agazine , 
33: 24 - 27; January 1953* p. 27. (From School Program ) 

™A. L. Doucette, "Teachers — A Valuable Asset." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 33: 9; May 1953* p. 9. 

^Sister M. Joselyn, "Real Teaching is a Two-Way Action." 

A. T. A. Magazine, 32: 28; November 1951* 










• ■ 

■ 






And the moment anyone sets himself up as the high priest of any art 
and lays down rules, along comes an artist who knocks the rules 
into a cocked hat •. • ^ 

Salter deplored the over-emphasis which educationists had placed 
upon methodology. He said, "If we could clearly understand and set our 
hearts upon the fundamentals of the art of teaching, we should not need 
to worry so much as we do about educational techniques and methods."^ 
These fundamentals are basic to any art. For the art of teaching, 
concerned as it is with the creation of intangibles, they have more than 
ordinary significance.These principles, applicable to any art, have been 
defined as "Significance, Enthusiasm, Restraint, and Sincerity."^ 

It would seem that these indispensables can be applied most 
advantageously where a creative teacher has the freedom to use a 
synthesis of methodologies. An implication of this is found in Ernest 
Hodgson's argument for a more uniform and definite curriculum in Alberta. 
Speaking of social studies in the high school he said, "Any method 
congenial to a teacher or class, and 'natural' in its effect, ought to 
be used."^ 


42 

F. M. Salter, "The Art of Teaching." A. T. A. Magazine , 

33: 10 - 13. 24 - 26 , 33 - 3?; June 1953. p. 13. 


^F. M. Salter, op . cit . , p. 11. 

44 

^Ibid ., p. 13. 

^E. Hodgson, "The Middle Way." A. T. A. Magazine , 34: 
6 - 7» 46; December 1953* p. 7. 








. 

. 






' 








































100 


That an integration of the inherent values of traditional and 
progressive techniques was evolving in educational thinking in Alberta 
was further exemplified in an address given by Dr. Swift, Deputy Minister 
of the Department of Education. He said: 

My best guess is that educationists for the next while will not 
be pushing further into the field of the antithesis, nor will they 
be swinging the pendulum back. They will be seeking to go forward 
into new positions reconciling the old and the new, and insofar as 
human ingenuity permits, improve on both.^ 

In view of the fact that in the latter part of this study the 
implication has been made that the Alberta Teachers* Association through 
A. T. A. Maga zine in its earlier issues fostered the progressive 
techniques almost to the point of propaganda for a methodology "from 
above" the following comment by Dr. Swift was significant: 

Officially the Alberta Teachers* Association, as far as I am 
aware, has taken no philosophical or ideological stand respecting 
pedagogical matters. It may be observed, however, that over many 
years, completely on its own initiative, it has brought several 
convention speakers each fall, chiefly from the United States, 
the majority of whom could scarcely be termed traditional in 
their outlook. 7 

A forthright article by Dr. Scarlett, Chancellor of the University 

of Alberta, emphasized the need for a middleground in educational method- 

48 

ology, and pointed the way for its inception through university support. 


^/J. H. Swift, "Pendulum or Synthesis." A. T. A. M agazine , 
34: 6 - 9 * 43 - 45; February 195^* P* 8. 

^Ibid . , p. 45. 

^E. P. Scarlett, "Variations on a Noble Theme." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 35: 6 - 9* 42 - 47; April 1955* 






































. 


















. 


- 



































- 















































101 


In his argument for a "common ground and a common program" he said, 
"Surely it is time that we ended this stage of violent controversy and 
moved into a second more constructive period ... the educational 
authorities and those who are stubbornly determined to push the methods 
of recent years should realize that all is not well, that an autocratic 
attitude is disastrous, that they have no vested interest in education, 
that all wisdom does not reside in specialists or methods, that 

49 

authority crushes independent and creative thinking in teachers ... " 

It would seem that in so far as creative thinking of teachers has 
been crushed "from above", to that extent the art of teaching has 
suffered. To the extent that a method has been used to propagate what 
Dr. Scarlett defined as "social religion of the democratic gods, and 
the idols of the market place,in that amount has sophistry supplanted 
education. It was significant that, at this time, the A. T. A. Magazine 
should publish an article in which it was said: 

All parties, therefore, should get together, reconcile their 
differences and achieve a better balance between the limits which 
make for sound education and for a better life ... 

This need for coming together for the reconciliation of differences 
in philosophy and methodology was pointed up, also, by H. E. Panabaker 

Ibid ., p . 6. 

5° Ibid ., p. 6. 

51 


’E. P. Scarlett, o£. cit . , p. 7. 












. 
























. 
























































. 
























102 

who approached the problem from a professional point of view where 
classroom teachers can contribute. He suggested the following: 

The teachers on a school staff are professional colleagues. Each 
has something to contribute; each can make himself highly conversant 
with some one area of education, possibly reading, or arithmetic, or 
science, or guidance, or remedial work. Every staff should be a 
professional team characterized by a genuinely professional sharing 
and seeking: a sharing of experiences and ideas and a seeking of 
advice and information from those whose experience and training 
make them our superiors in any area. 

The real significance in the foregoing lies in the more intangible 
results accruing from togetherness. Teachers sharing experiences and ideas 
professionally will move toward a synthesis of methodologies, and are 
more likely to incorporate into their teaching the principles of 
significance, enthusiasm, restraint, and sincerity and so create an art 
where before there may have been only craftsmanship. 

The year 1955 was the fiftieth anniversary for the Province of 
Alberta. An A. T. A. Magazine editorial, without any loss of gratitude 
for those who had led the way before, proclaimed the need for vision and 
bold action in the years ahead. It concluded with this paragraph: 

Parallel to the ceaseless struggle to improve the economic position 
of the teacher in society is the battle to improve the service of the 
teacher to society. Current views of methodolo^-, of curriculum, of 
teacher education, are the hodge-podge of the archaic, the expedient, 
and mysticism. They reflect British and American influence but 
little that is purely Canadian. A challenge and an obligation rests 
with us. Let us not fail in our duty. 53 


52 H . E. Panabaker, "The Teacher as a Professional." A. T. A. 
Magazine , 35 *• 6 - 9» 44 - 47; March 1955» P* 46. 

53p. j. c. Seymour, "Editorial." A. X_. A. Magazine , 35: 
4-5; June 1955t p. 5- 














. 




- 






. 

, it)- ' ' • 1 t ■ 






















4 






























' 











- - 



















103 

This chapter has presented the findings of an investigation of 

educational issues closely related to methodology as found in the A. T. A. 

Magazine for the years 1945 - 1955* These "vital years" saw little to 

54 

lessen the concern of men like R. V. Clark who felt the need for some¬ 
thing more substantial in high school education than that which had gone 
before. The years, however, were significant for education. There was 
evidence of a frontier spirit among teachers, a reluctance to accept 
without question a methodology imposed upon them "from above," Some¬ 
thing more than an either-or choice of methodologies was stirring. The 
art in teaching was being given more attention, and there was a definite 
feeling that a synthesis of methodologies was possible and preferable. 
These were forward looking thoughts and augured well for the future. 


54ft. y 9 Clark, "Some Thoughts on Progressivism and the Post-War 
Era." A. T. A. Magazine, 25: 49 - 51; February 1945» p. 50. 







CHAPTER VII 


AN INTERPRETATION 

1. The Problem 

The problem with which this study has been concerned grew out of 
the issues involved in the ideological controversy about methodology in 
teaching. It was stated as follows: What cognizance of the controversy, 
and what reaction toward it is to be found among educationalists and 
teachers of Alberta as revealed in the writings of the Alberta Teachers 1 
Association Magazine ? 

The study involved a preliminary review of professional opinion 
regarding the art of teaching. Using the Education Index for the years 
1935 - 1955 as a source book, the writer located and read 100 titles 
pertaining to methodology in teaching. This investigation yielded a 
range of concepts concerning the art of teaching. The writer found it 
reasonable to assume at this point that a synthesis somewhere on a 
continuum between the extremes of progressivism and traditionalism was 
possible. This hypothesis aided in the organization of the material 
presented in the study. 

The second part of the investigation involved an extensive survey 
of articles appearing in the A. T. A. Magazine for the years 1935 - 1955» 
and which in the writer’s opinion dealt with methodology. 
























' 






























































- 




































. 


















- 





2. Conclusion 


105 


That educationists and teachers of Alberta had literal cognizance 
of the controversial issues in education during the years 1935 - 1955 is 
evident from the aggregate of bibliographical samples of a professional 
nature in the Alberta Teachers * Association Magazine . 

The findings of a survey made of the articles in the A. T. A. 
Magazine, which in the writer’s opinion dealt with methodology, are as 
f olloi'Js: 

1. Generally speaking, professional opinion expressed in the 
A. T. A. Magazine held progressive techniques in fairly 
high esteem during the early stages of their appearance in 
the Alberta School Curriculum. 

2. One reaction to progressivism is exemplified in comments 
which maintained that in so far as "information-culture” 
subjects were concerned, progressive techniques could be 
employed to advantage, but held that retention of instruction 
was necessary for skill subjects. Progressive practices were 
found useful in developing social and personality outcomes. 

3. Infrequently early published opinion emphasized that method¬ 
ology was not the whole of teaching. Other factors such as 
the teacher’s personality and the vital urge to teach were 
considered essential to good instruction. 

4. In later issues of the A. T. A. Magazine a trend toward the 
idea that an integration of effective techniques would 
materially help instruction became evident. 


























































- 
























- 



. 














. 



' 



























3. l£xpansion 


106 


Methodology in teaching cannot be divorced from the aims and 
objectives of education. Therefore it may be deduced from the foregoing 
investigation that where education seeks to inculcate good citizenship 
and personal effectiveness in so far as a child's natural abilities 
permit, the controversy found in published opinion need not exist in 
practice. It is not a matter of what exclusive method to choose in 
teaching, but what combination of techniques is most efficacious for 
the outcomes desired at a specific time and with particular children. 

The trend is away from traditionalism or progressivism carried 
to extremes. In published opinion the dichotomy is fairly clean cut; 
in practice a continuum is always found. The good teacher may use a 
little of one and a little of the other according to the needs and 
objectives of his class until the method is neither one nor the other 
but some combination of the two. This combination is his own. 

The teacher is the crux of all good teaching. In this study, 
and particularly in that part where sociological factors have been 
stressed* the importance of the teacher has been made manifest. Where 
a teacher has the perspicacity to recognize readiness to learn in a 
pupil, good teaching can be done. Good rapport is basic to any method¬ 
ology. Where a teacher through his own personality can induce a child 
to develop a good attitude toward learning, growth and change can take 
place. It follows that the methodology or means of communicating with 
the pupil should be consistent with the teacher’s personality. 



To develop an understanding of children and a method of 


107 


commimicating with them experience in actual classroom situations over 
a fairly long period of time is needed. As intimated in this study, 
the empirical nature of teaching is a factor in choosing a vital method 
of instruction. Good ideas in methodology can be badly applied in 
practice. On the other hand good teaching can be done through various 
methods or combinations of methods. Only through experience can a 
teacher become a good teacher. 

Where teaching is an art, there is something created in the 
person who is taught, something that becomes a part of the learner 
where before it was a part of the teacher. There is communication of 
meaning. Something of the artist must become intelligible to another. 
The art of teaching involves much more than methodology. Faultless 
though a teacher may be in applying any one of several techniques, he 
may do no teaching. There may be nothing more than a set of gyrations. 
Where there is art in teaching, the artist has more significance than 
the tools he uses. Unfortunate, then, is any undue stress which has 
been put upon method as though it were an end in itself. Published 
comment could have been better employed with principles of teaching 
rather than with procedures. 

From the foregoing it may be inferred that methods taught in 
teacher training institutions provide the raw material from which a 
practical and personal method may be developed through experience 
under actual classroom conditions. A synthesis of methodologies is 
feasible, and an eclectic methodology, personalized, vital, and 




individual seems most promising as an aid to good teaching. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


109 


EDUCATION INDEX SURVEY 


Allen, H.P. "Earmarks of a Good Teacher." American School Board Journal 
96: 25-6. March 1938. 

Anderson, Lester W. "Teacher Morale and Student Achievement." Journal 
of Educational Research 46: 693-98, May 1953• 

Bagley, William C. "Some Master Teachers I Have Known." Educational 
Administration and Supervision 22:427-37» January 1936. 

Bair, F. H. and Young, W. E. "Curriculum: Methods and Materials." 

Review of Educational Research 18:265-72, June 1948. 

Bantock, G. H. "Activities and Formal Work in School." Journal of 

Education ( London ) 84:401-2, 452, 510, September-November 1952. 

Baxter, Edna "Three Teachers Tell Their Story." Educatio nal Leadership 
5:513-18. 

Briggs, Thomas H. "The Practices of Best High-School Teachers." Schoo l 
Review 43:748-52 

Broening, A. M. "General Methods of Teaching." Review of Educational 
Research 9:295-302, June 1939* 

Brown, G. A. "Hoi* Validate the Quality of Teaching?" Journal of 
Educational Research 31:534-35, March 19387 

Brueckner, L. J. "Selected References." Elementary School Journal 
48:46-7, September 1947* 

Buswell, G. T. "Psychology of the Newer Methods of Teaching." Elementary 
School Journal 46:14-22, September 1945. 

Butler, F. A. "Sociological Forms in Method." Jo urnal of Educational 
Sociology 13:419-28, March 1940. 

Caswell, H. L. "Great Reappraisal of Public Education." Teachers’ 

College Record 54:12-22, October 1952. 

Clark, Elmer J. "Teacher Reactions Toward Objectionable Pupil Behavior." 
Elementary School Jo urnal 51:446-49, April 1951* 




























































































































. 








. 



. 






: Cj\i 




■ • 






























no 


Cook, Walter W. "Individual Differences and Curriculum Practice." 

Journal of Educational Psychology 30:141-48, March 1948. 

Corey, S. M. "Evaluating Technical Teaching Competence." Elementary 
School Journal 41:577-86, April 1941. 

Day, Ronald "Childrens Creative Use of Museum Exhibit Material.!.' 
P rogressive Education 31:100-111, February 1954. 

DeBoer, J. J. "Earmarks of a Modern Language Arts Program in the 
Elementary School." Elementary English 31:485-95 

Denman, G. E. "Who Has Failed? Child or Teacher?" American School 
Board Joumal 97:43, December 1938. 

DiVesta, F. J. "Evaluation of Several Teaching Methods by Adult Students." 
Journal of Educational Research 46:529-35, May 1953. 

Duncer, D. H. "Music Around the World." American Childhood 41:10-11, 
November 1955. 

Eaglesham, E. J. A. "An Enquiry Concerning the Practicability of Typical 
Educational Aims." British Journal of Educational Psychology 
7:23-38, February 1937.” 

Evans, N. Dean "George Bernard Shaw on Education." School and Society 
13:145-146, October 1950. 

Fildes, R. E. "Blackboards and Their Use." Elementary School Journal 
35:760-67, June 1935. 

Fish, H. D. "Can Children Be Taught to Read - For Pleasure." American 
School Board Journal 97:26, October 1938. 

Fogg, W. F. "Project versus subject: A Critical Review." School and 
Society 51:276-78, March 2, 1940. 

Freeman, G. L. "The Value of Written Reports in Demonstrational Teaching 
Before College Classes." J oumal of Educational Research 31: 

211-13, November 1937. 

Garrison, N. L. "Changing Concepts in Methods of Teaching." Element ary 
School Journa l 52:197-206, December 1951* 

Garton, M. D. "Cotton; Nature Study and Creative Activities." American 
Childhood 41:28-9, November 1955. 

Glicksberg, C. I. "Personal Element in Education." School and Society 
73:305-9, May 19, 1951. 













































































- 




; . , 






j 
















■ 










. 





, < 

. 











Ill 

Graham, Alva Whitcomb “Do Teachers Who Use Democratic Methods Develop 
Democratic Attitudes?" Elementar y School Journal 47:24-27, 
September 1946. 

Guetzkow, H. "Experimental Comparison of Recitation, Discussion, and 
Tutorial Methods in College Teaching." Journal of Educational 
Psychology 45:193-207, April 1954. 

Harris, F. E. "Do Children Think Critically About Classroom Procedure?" 

Joumal of Educational Psychology 39:52-59» January 1948. 

Harston, H. T. "Meaningful Arithmetic in First Grade." Instructor 
65:7^+, September 1955. 

Hatfield, W. W. "Versatile Procedure," English Journal 33:428-32, 
October 1944. 

Hentgen, Josephine "Just Good Teaching." E ducational Leadership 5:50^-7 

Herrick, V. E. "Planned and Unplanned Curriculum." Eleme ntary School 
Journal 47:563-70, June 194 7 , 

Hildreth, Gertrude "Hazards of Straight Promotion." Educational 
A dministration and S upervision 32:19-26, January 1946. 

Household, H. W, "Charlotte Mason Methods in the Elementary School." 
Journal of Education ( London ) 71:534-36, August 1939. 

Jacobs, L. B. "Another Look at the Three R's." Teachers 1 College Record 
55:308-12, March 195^. 

Jewett, J. P. "Conventionalism in Education." School and Society 
77:37-39, January 17, 1953. 

Jewett, James P. "The Revival of Formal Discipline." Educational 
A dministration and Supervision 40:168-74, 195^. 

Kandel, I. L. "The Swing of the Educational Pendulum." School and 
Society 77:27-28 

Keliher, A. V. "You Are a Good Teacher if...You Enjoy New Experiences." 
Grade Teacher 73:73, January 1955. 

Kyte, G. C. "Methods of Teaching." Review of Educat i onal Research 
15:218-26, June 1945. 


Lawson, D. E. "Technique of Teaching to Think." Educational Administration 
and Supervision 24:277-81, April 1938. 












































































I 

- 














■ 















. 




















. 





- 

■ 

























112 


Laycock, S. R. "Common Faults in Teaching." School ( Elementary 
Educatio n) 33:659-64, April 1945. 

Ludeman, W. W. "Master Teachers Who Have It." American School 
Board Journal 97:18* November 1938. 

Lumley, J. M. and Overn, A. V. "Adjusting Instruction to the Observed 
Needs of Pupils as a Means of In-Service Education of Teachers." 
Elementary School Journal 47:286-90, January 1947. 

Lynch, J. M. "Teaching Practices and Generally Accepted Theory." 

Educational Administration and Supervision 22:538-42, October 1936. 

McCall, W. A. "How Wide is the Gap Between Principle and Practice?" 
Teachers 1 College Record 37:603-6, April 1936. 

McKeachie, W. J. "Student-centered versus Instructor-centered Instruction." 
45:143-50, March 1954. 

May, M. A. "Teacher as Transmitter of Culture." Educational Administration 
and Supervision 26:161-75* March 1940. 

Michaels, Joseph "Democratic Administration in the School." Elementary 
School Journal 51:450-53. 

Moore, W. J. "Selected References on Elementary-School Instruction; 

Methods of Teaching and Study." Elementary School Journal 
51:46-7; 52:49-51; 53:50-4. 

Moore, W. J. "Selected References on Elementary-School Instruction; Methods 
of Teaching and Study." Elementary School Journal 56:37-9* 

September 1955. 

Monroe, W. S. and Marks, A. "General Methods of Teaching Evaluated." 

Educational Administration and Supervision 24:581-92. November 1938. 

Mosier, R. D. "Logical Analysis of Subject Matter." Journal of 
Educational Research 44:373-79* January 1951* 

Mossman, L. C. "Some Comments on Certain Newer Practices in the Elementary 
School." Teachers 1 College Record 38:547-55* April 1937. 


Mulford, H. B. "Destroying the Time Lag in Educational Progress." 
American School Board Journal 115:31* November 1947. 


























































- 

' 





















. 






■ 




. - 



































. 

■ 













113 


Murphy, H. G. and Young, W. E. "Methods and Materials for Childhood 

Education." Review of Educational Research 18:249-64, June 1948. 

Neitz, J. A. "Horace Mann's Ideas on General Methods in Education." 
Elementary School Journal 37:742-51, June 1937. 

Norris, R. B. "We Teach As We Are Taught." School and Society 
67:209-12, March 20, 1948. 

Orato, Pedro T. "Conflicting Viewpoints in Contemporary American Education." 
Educational Administration and Supervision 22:299-313» January 1936. 

Pathael, L. L. Jr. and others "Comparison of the Extent of Retention 
Accompanying the Use of Three Teaching-Testing Procedures." 

Joumal of Educational Research 47:65-70* September 1953. 

Philpott, S. J. F. "Fallacious Arguments from Experiments on Methods of 
Teaching." British Journal of Educational Psychology 15:57-69» 

June 1945. 

Pinsent, A. "Educational Attitudes, Teaching Methods and Material Cultures." 
Journal of Education (London ) 78:9-11» January 19^6. 

Prager, F. "Changing Character of Education." School and Society 
60:227-28, October 1944. 

Pratt, K. C. "Sophistry in Modem Education." Educational Administration 
and Supervision 26:339-^» May 1940. 

Quinn, J. W. "Can Army Education Methods be Adapted to Public Schools?" 
American School 3oard Journal 111:43-4, September 1945. 

Reynolds, R. G. "Teacher's Part in Guidance." Teachers ' College Record 
37:691-97» May 1936. 

Ridenour, Dr. Nina "The Children We Teach." G rade Teacher 72:9» June 
1955. 

Rogers, E. G. "Progressive Ideals in Practice; Teacher's Dilemma." 

Progressive Education 25:252-55» October 19^7. 

Russell, William F. "Straws from Alberta." Teachers ' College Record 
37:1935-36, January 1936. 

Sanford, C. W. "Combined Course in Student-Teaching and the Technique of 
Teaching." Educational Administration and Supervision 22:636-40. 
November 1936. 













































114 


Schwebel, M. and Asch, M. J. ’’Research Possibilities in Non-directive 
Teaching." Journal of Educational Psychology 39:359- 69 .October 
1948. 

Scarfe, N. V. "Is American Education Undemocratic?" School and Society 
79:193-96, June 26, 1954. 

Seashore, C # E. "Note on the Teacher’s Job." School and Society 50:724, 
December 2 , 1939. 

Shannon, J. R. "Elements of Excellence in Teaching." Educational 
Administration and Supervision 27:168-76, March 1941. 

Sneddon, D. S. "Educating for the Seven Careers of Men of To-day." 

School and Society 43:864-68, June 27 , 1936. 

Sneddon, D. S. "Learnings^ A Promising Term for Education Planners." 
School and Societ y 45:157-59. January 1937* 

Spencer, F. H. "Pendulums Swing." Journal of Education ( London ) 
71:383-84, June 1939. 

Standlee, L. S. "Dynamics of Students Teaching Themselves." Progressive 
Education 31:112, February 1954. 

Stiffey, A. J. "Use of the Demonstration Technique for the Improvement 

of High-School Instruction in Iowa." American School Board Journal 
95:41-43, September 1937- 

Stewart, M. L. "Study of Success and Failure in Eleven Years of Rural 
Teacher Training." Educational Administration and Supervision 
26:372-78, May 1940. 

Storm, Grace E. "Issues in the Improvement of Teaching." Elementary 
School Journal 48:2-6. September 1947. 

Symonds, P. M. "Mental Health Through Education." Progressive Education 
26:143-45. March 1949-. 

Towle, C. "Don’t Forget the Good Old Methods." American Childhood 
37:7. February 1952. 

Uiich, R. "Some Comments on Recent Contributions." School and Society 
74:89, August 11, 1951. 

Van Til, W. A. "Fable of Textbook Strategy." Educational Leadership 
5:2;5-20, January 1948. 

Vaughan, W. F. "Our Impractical Education." School and Society 
46:688, November 1937. 









































115 


Weber, Clarence A. "A Reply to Critics of Progressive Methods in 
Education." Educational Administration and Supervision 
31:79-86. February 1945. ~ 

Weber, C. A. "Some Characteristics of College Teachers." Journal 
of Educational Research 46:685-92. May 1953. 

Wheeler, Lester R. "An Experimental Study of the Value of Informal 
Methods in Teaching Primaiy Reading." Journal of Educational 
Research 31:335-47, December 1937- 

Wiley, G. M. "Increasing the Educational Dividends Through Superior 
Teaching." School and Society 45:761-66, June 5» 1937* 

Woodring, M. N. "Use of the Stenographic Lesson in Improving 

Instruction." Teachers 1 College Record 37:504-17, March 1936. 

"Are the Changes Here to Stay?" American School Board Journal 109;39. 
April 1944. 

"Good Schoolmaster." Journal of Education ( London ) 71:590, September 1939. 

"New Teaching Methods and Curricula for High Schools." School and 
Society 46:790-1, December 18, 1937* 

"What is the Unit of Teaching?" American Chj.ldhood 21:22-3, May 1936. 





























GENERAL 


Alberta Teachers * Association Magazine , Volumes 1 6 - 25 inclusive, 

1935 - 1955. 
























