


























X 


WMQ$ 

auBwwrasB 






















UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


Department of Modern Languages 


A Brief Survey of the History of Amber 


A Thesis submitted to 
The Committee on Graduate Studies 


by 


Doris G. Stevens 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April 1941 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https ://arch i ve. o rg/detai Is/bri ef s u r veyof h i sOOstev 


ft *4 


in 


Table of Contents 

Page 


Bibliography IV 

List of Illustrations VI 

1 . Geological Background 1 

2 . Chemical and Physical Properties 6 

3 . Amber-like Substances 6 

4 . Basis of determination of Northern Amber 8 

5 • Where found as a raw material 8 

6. Names of Amber 9 

7 . Theories of the Ancients about Amber 10 

8 . Chronological Table 13 

9 . Upper Palaeolithic 14 

10 . Mesolithic 15 

11 . Neolithic 15 

12 . A.eneolithic 28 

13 . Bronze Age 32 

14 . Iron Age 42 

I Hallstatt 42 

II La Tene 43 

III Pytheas Voyage 45 

IV Roman Imperial Period 47 

V Migration Period 49 

VI Middle Ages and Modern 49 












IV 


Bibliography 

1. Black, G.: Amber and its Origin . American Mineralogist, Vol. IV, 

July, 1919, No. 7, and August, 1919, No. 8 . 

2 . Beolsche, W.s Im Bemsteinwald. Stuttgart, 1927 . 

3. British Museum: A Guide to the Antiquities of the Stone Age . 1926. 

4. British Museum: A Guide to the Antiqui t ies of the Bronze Age. 1920. 

5. British Museum: A Guide to. the Early Iron Age Antiquities t 1925. 

o. Burkitt, Miles and Childe, V. G.: Chronological Table of Prehistory 

Reprinted from Antiquity for June, 1932. 

7. Clark, J. G. D.: The Mesolithic Settlement of Northern Europe, 

Cambridge, 1936. 

8 . Coon, C. S.: The Races of Europe . New York, 1939. 

9. Dana, J. D.: System of Mineralogy . 1911. 

10. Dawson, C. H.: The Age of the Gods. London, 1933 . 

11. Ebert: Reallexikon der Vorgeschichte. Berlin, 1926. 

12. Encyclopedia Britannica. 

13. Guide to Nationalmuseet, den Danske Samling . Oldtiden. 

Copenhagen, 1927. 

14» Homer: Odyssey . 

15. Hoops, J.: Reallexikon der Germanischen Altertumskunde. 

Strassburg, 1911 - 1913 . 

16. Karsten, T. E.: Die Germanen . Berlin and Leipzig, 1928. 

17. Kaufimann, F.: Deutsche Altertumskundg, 2 Bde., Miinchen, 1913. 

18. Kendrick, T. D.: 


A Histor y of the Vikings . London, 1930. 






































V 


19. MacCurdy, G. G.: Human Origins. New York and London, 1926. 

20. Meyer: Lexikon. 7te Auflage, Bibliographisches Institut, 

Leipzig, 1926. 

21. Mosso, Angelo: The Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, tr. from 

the Italian by Harrison, M. C., New York, 1911. 

22. Mullenhoff, K.: Deutsche Altertumskunde . 4 Bde., Berlin, 1920. 

23. Muller, S.: Oldtidens Kunst. Stenalderen 

24. Nature: September 21, 1935* 

25 . Pauly-W issowa: Real-Encyclopadie der classischen Altertumswissen- 

schaft« Stuttgart, 1894- 

26. Pliny: Historia Naturalis . 

27. Schrader, 0.: Reallexikon der Indogermanischen Altertumskunde. 

2 Bde., Berlin and Leipzig, 1917 - 1923* 

28. Schutte, G.: Our Forefathers. 2 Vols., Translation by Young, J., 

Cambridge, 1929. 

29. Schuchhardt, C.: Alteuropa, Berlin and Leipzig, 1926. 

30. Schwantes, G.: Geschichte Schleswig-Holsteins, Neumunster, 1939* 

31. Seyffert, 0.: Dictionary of Classical Antiquities. 3rd. ed., 

London, 1894* 

32. Sophocles: Antigone . 

33* Strabo: Geography. Vol. 11, Loeb Classical. Library. Translation 
by Jones, H. L., London. 

34* Tacitus: Germania . 

35. Vergil: Aeneid. 

36. Wilke, G.: Archaologische Erl^ttteremgen zur Germania deg Tacitus. 

Leipzig, 1921. 

































VI 


List of Illustrations 

Figure Page 

1. Amber Coast in the Tertiary Period 2 

2. Contour of the stratification if the Samland coastal 4 
declivity, Boelsche: Im Bernsteinwald, p. 31. 

3. Distribution of North Sea Amber % 

4» Amber Artefacts of the Mesolithic Age 16 

a, c, Clark: Mesolithic Settlement of Northern Europe. 
fig. 59 , no. 7 , fig. 164 , nos. 10 , 11 . 

b, Miiller: Oldtidens Kunst. Stenalderen. fig. 29. 

5* Amber Artefacts from the Neolithic Age 17 

Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein. Tafel 133* 

6 . Amber Pendants of Neolithic Age IS 

a, b, c, Muller, S.: Oldtidens Kunst. Stenalderen . 

figs. 59, 60, 49. 

d, MacCurdy: Human Origins . Vol. II, fig. 296. 

7. Distribution of Copper Age Amber Artefacts in 20 

eastern Europe, Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein. 

Tafel 135. 

8 . Expansion of Megalithic Culture 21 

Schulz: Die Indogermanen. Abb. 26. 

9. Expansion of Corded Pottery Culture -22 

Schulz: Die Indogermanen. Abb. 29. 

10. General Distribution of Neolithic Amber Finds 23 

11. Amber Beads from the 4th Mycenian Shaft Grave, 24 

Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein, Tafel 134> b. 





































VII 


Figure Page 

12. Heolithic Amber Artefacts, 25 

a, Schulz: Die Indogermanen. Abb. 42, 

b, Schwantes: Schleswig-Holsteins Geschichte. Band I, 
Lieferung 3, Abb. 280. 

13. Bronze Age Trade Routes 30 

14* Amber Necklace from a Bronze Age Barrow, 34 

MacCurdy: Human Origins . Vol. II, P. 210. 

15* Brooch from Italy, set with Amber 36 

Ebert: Reallexikon u nder Fibel. Tafel 105. 

16. Bronze Age Trade Routes across Germany 37 

17. Face-um and violin-bridge pendant, 41 

a, Kauffmann: Deutsche Altertumskunde , Vol. I, 

Tafel 17, n0. 2. 

b, Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernst,ein T Tafel 133, h. 

18.. Earring, brooch and necklace of the Early Iron Age, 44 

y 

a, Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein. Tafel 133,1* 

b, c, British Museum: Guide to Early Iron Age 
Antiquities, figs. 45, 35* 



















' r < 















1 . 


I 

Nature of Amber 
1. Geographical Background 

In early Tertiary times repeated upheavals of the Baltic 
seabottom had formed a large belt of land separated from Central 
Germany and the rest of Europe by a broad channel whose bays and 
gulfs covered East and West Prussia and Pomerania. To the north 
this land was bordered by the sea which enclosed the island of 
Rligen and Bornholm and covered Jutland, the Danish Islands and 
what is now the Baltic. In those times, when the climate was tem¬ 
perate, if not subtropical, the margins of this belt of land were 
covered by a dense growth of trees of many varieties, most of them 
coniferous. These formed what is often referred to as the amber 
forest^ 

That vast quantities of resin were shed from these trees is 

proven by the huge stores of amber in this area. It was shed in 

different degrees of fluidity, sometimes glutinous, sometimes it 

fell in drops from the size of a pea to that of an orange. Other 

2 ) 

drops in a more liquid state were flattened in falling. 

1. Black, Geo.: Amber and its Origin . American Mineralogist, Vol. 
August 1919, No. 3. 


2 . ibid 

































































2. 



The. coait llr. the Terteiry Teriotd. 

Wa.t«r 

The liquid resin enclosed many plant structures, the remains of a 

large variety of insects, spiders, annelids, crustaceans and other 

small organisms^ Over 230 diptera, 49 of the 75 kinds of beetle 

known today, moths, termites, butterflies, centipedes, molluscs, 

2 ) 

hairs and feathers have all been found enclosed in amber 'as well 
as fragments of wood. Most of the wood found in amber has the 
properties peculiar to conifers. Goppert uses the term ’Pinites 

1. Encyclopedia Britannica under Amber . 

2. Meyers Lexikon under Bernstein . 








































J 












- 















3. 


succinifer* which leaves it indefinite whether it is a pine or fir- 

tree and this is generally accepted^ H. Conwentz ( Monograph der 

Baltischen Bem steinbaume , Danzig, 1390, quoted by Helm) showed 

that true amber (succinite) was derived from *Pinus Succinifer*.' 

3 ) 

•Professor Zaddach 'of Konigsberg made a thorough study of 
the peninsula of Samland and found that wherever the Tertiary for¬ 
mation crops out, it always comprises two different deposits. The 
lower one consists of thick beds of glauconitic sand which sometimes 
attain a height of twenty meters above sea level. Upon this rest 
beds of lignite or brown coal from twenty to thirty meters or more 
in thickness. Above this is a drift deposit of marl and sand. All 
these strata contain amber though it occurs only in isolated pieces 
in the two upper ones. It is distributed evenly and with great 
abundance in the lower glauconitic or greensand bed. In the lower 
part of the greensand is a dark clayey-sandy vein called the •blue- 
earth*. This is the treasure-house of amber. It is so plentiful in 
this vein that an area of ten square meters may yield several 
thousand kilograms. The blue-earth layer varies from one to seven 

1. Black, Geo.: Amber and its Origin . American Mineralogist, Vol. 4, 

August 1919, No. 8. 

2. Dana: A System of Mineralogy, p. 1003 

3. Quotation from Black, Geo.: Amber and its Origin . American 

Mineralogist, Vol. July 1919, No. 7 
(Somewhat condensed.) 











4 





















5 . 


meters. It contains besides amber, many fossils of the Oligocene 
epoch. The greensand also contains many pebbles or pieces of compact 
stone which is evidently its parent rock as it is composed of exactly 
similar granules of quartz bound together by a marly cement. The 
amber earth also abounds in fragments of chalk-marl containing 
Cretaceous fossils identical with those found in the Cretaceous 
deposits of Bornholm. This proves that the Oligocene glauconitic 
sand has been made from the greensand of the Cretaceous formation, 
and that the trees yielding the amber resin must have grown upon 
the sand of the early Oligocene formation which then formed the 
shores of the sea or estuary where the lower division of the Tertiary 
accumulated. Zaddach assumes that at that time the coast sank 
slowly, and the forest soil being washed by the waves, the amber 
was carried into the sea." 

"The deposit stretches along the peninsula of Kraxtepellen 
to Rantau, and Zaddach 1 s researches showed that in many places it 
sinks to depths inaccessible to miner*s shafts and that it also runs 
out below sea level. It was discovered in recent years that this 
undersea stratum extended to a distance of some thirty kilometers, 
and hence, as Runge points out, we have an explanation of the 
presence of amber in the Baltic. Large quantities of this submarine 
deposit are constantly being washed ashore by the waves and tide." 









6 . 


2. Chemical and Physical properties . 

Amber shades in colour from yellow and yellowish-white to 

brown, from transparent to opaque. Its specific gravity varies from 

1.05 - 1.10. It has a hardness between 2 and 3* At 287°Ck it melts 

and decomposes, yielding oil of amber, and leaving a black residue 

known as •amber pitch*. This forms amber varnish when dissolved in 

linseed oil or oil of turpentine. When burning, amber gives off 

aromatic and irritating fumes. It is partially soluble in alcohol, 

chloroform or ether, contains several resinous bodies, ethereal oil 

and succinic acid"P It acquires an electric charge by friction, a 

quality which was noticed in very early times, and which was first 

2 ) 

recorded by Thales of Miletus. Amber is frequently referred to as 
•succinite* to distinguish it from a number of fossil-resins to which 
the name *amber’ is given sometimes. 

3* Amber-like Substances . 

Other fossil resins occur in the amber area of the Baltic and 
in other parts of the world. The main varieties are as follows:- 

(1) Gedanite, which closely resembles amber (succinite) but is more 
brittle, has a lower melting point and contains no succinic acid. 

(2) Stantienite, a brittle, deep-brownish-black resin containing no 
succinic acid. 

1. Meyers Lexikon under Bernstein 

2. Encyclopedia Britannica under Amber . 

















7 


(3) Beckerite, in earthy brown nodules, contains little or no acid. 

(4) Glessite, brown, opaque, contains numerous microscopic cavities, 
little or no acid. 

(5) Krantzite, a wax-like resin, found in the lignites of Saxony, 
contains little or no acid. 

(6) Allingite, a fossil resin allied to amber (succinite) from Switzer¬ 
land. 

(7) Roumanite or Rumanian amber, a dark reddish resin. 

(8) Sumetite or Sicilian amber, a beautiful resin with remarkable 
tints and fluorescent quality, contains no acid. 

(9) Burmite, yellow or reddish, fluorescent, contains no acid. 

Many other fossil resins are allied to amber. Schraufite is 
a reddish resin from Carpathian sandstone and is found with jet from 
the Lebanon]^ambrite is found in many of the coals from New Zealand; 
retinite occurs in the lignite of Devonshire and elsewhere; copaline, 
in the London clay of Highgate in North London; Chemawinite or 
cedarite from the Saskatchewan river in Canada. Amber-like resins 
have been found to a limited extent in the United States, but they 
have small economic value. Some amber-like resins are found in 

g) 

Southern Mexico. They are also recorded from the Dominican Republic. 

1. Eberts Lexikon under Bernstein 
Encyclopedia Britannica under Amber 

2. Encyclopedia Britannica under Amber 













8 


4. Basis of determination of Northern Amber 

The interest of the historian and the archaeologist lies, not 
in raw amber, but in amber artefacts. To relate accurately the 
presence of Northern amber in distant parts of Europe with the 
existence of trade routes and the movements of peoples, requires a 
method of identifying northern amber. This has been one of the great 
difficulties in the historical study of amber. After comparisons of 
fossil resins according to physical and chemical properties, it has 
been shown that the only characteristic that varies enough to be at 
all conclusive is the content of succinic acid. Helm states that all 
artefacts with a succinic acid content of 3 % or more are of Baltic 
amber. Olshausen goes further, stating that all amber from old finds 
containing 1 % or more of succinic acid is succinite Or Baltic amber. 

The controversy"^over this point seems to have been settled finally 
in favor of Helm, as most references state that true amber contains 
about 3 - 8 %> succinic acid. The common term •amber* will be used 
here to refer to succinite, the true northern amber. 

5. Where found as a raw material 

The greatest amber-producing area is the promontory of Samland. 
Amber is also found along the shores of a large part of the Baltic 
and North Seas. It is found on the east coast of England especially 
near Cromer, and as far south as Walton-on-the-Naze in Essex and 
northwards to Yorkshire. It is also found on the coasts of Holland 
and Denmark, Prussia and Pomerania, in the south of Sweden, in Bornholm 

1. Eberts Iexikon under Bemsteint Par. 5 and 6. 
















9 . 



■iKstr < b U.t i orv of Baltic and North S et ^ A w ter - , 

and the other islands, and in South Finland. It occurs widely across 
Northern -^Wope and as far east as the Uralsk 

6. Names of amber 

The name f amber* comes from the Arabic *anbar* probably 
through Spanish, formerly referring to ambergris which is an en¬ 
tirely different substance. The oriental word *karabe* which means 
•that which attracts straw* has been used, referring to the electric 
properties of amber. This quality of acquiring an electric charge 
by friction suggested the name used by the G reeks *el£ktron*. Un¬ 
fortunately the word was also applied to an alloy of gold and silver. 


1. Encyclopedia Britannica under Amber . 


























































10 . 


and restraint must be exercised in translating passages in which 

this word occurs. Latin writers call amber Plectrum 1 * 3 4 5 6 7 , 'sucinum 1 

(succinum) and 'glaesum 1 or •glesum'^ The modern German word is 

Bernstein* from ^rennstein* in allusion to the ease with which 

it is burned. The word f glaesum f used by Latin writers is the 

2 ) 

prehistoric Germanic word ^leza* (glas, M.H.D. glar: Harz). 
Strabo used •lingurium* in reference to amber and occasionally, 
•eleotrum?^ The Hebrew ’Hashmal* seems to have been amber^ 


7. Theories of the Ancients about Amber . 

Amber was known to the Greeks as early as the Homeric age 

as a result of their trade with the Phoenicians^ Many and fanciful 

are the theories about its origin. According to Tacitus^ and 
7) 

Pliny, Nicias believed that toward sunset the sun f s rays struck the 
earth so forcibly that an oily substance was left, which accumulated 
and was driven to the Germanic coasts by the tides. Many Greek 


1. ibid . 

•2. Kauffmann: Deutsche Altertumskunde. p. 29* 

3. Strabo: Geography . Vol. II, p. 259, note 1; p. 265. 

4. Encyclopedia Britannica under Amber . 

5. Seyffert: Dictionary of Classical Antiquities under Electrum . 

6. Tacitus: Germania. 45. 


7. Pliny: Historia Naturalis , 37, 36 





















11 . 


poets related^ that when Phaethon was struck by lightning, his 

sisters were changed into poplars by their grief and the tears they 

shed were electrum. Pliny takes pleasure in recording a number of 

theories which seem fantastic now. Prominent among these is that 

of Demostratus who claimed that amber came from the urine of 

lynxes, the towny and fiery-coloured from the males, the white and 

2 ) 

pale-coloured from the females. 

Most of the theories of the Greeks and of the ^omans, 

reported by Pliny, consider amber an exudation of some sort, from 
3) 4) 

the rocks, from the soil, or a sediment or accumulation from the 
ocean waters?^ But Pliny reports^ a theory that approaches very 
nearly the truth. This states that amber is a pine resin which 
hardens, is carried from the shores by high tides and washed back 
again. Also ' that "our ancestors believed it to be a juice of a 
tree and on this account called it , sucinum l 2 3 4 5 6 7 . For it is a sign of 

1. Pliny: Historia Naturalis, 37, 31 

2. Pliny: Historia Naturalis. 37, 34• 

3. ibid : 35. 

4. ibid : 37 and 40 . 

5. ibid : 35. 

6. ibid : 42 and 43. 


7. ibid : 43 











12 . 


this kind of pine tree that it gives off a pine odor when rubbed and 
when kindled burns in the manner and with the odor of a pine torch". 

Tacitus saysP ".nay, they (the Suiones) ransack the 

sea also, and are the only people who gather in the shallows, and on 
the shore itself the amber, which they call in their tongue ’glaesum 1 ” 

"Nor have they, being barbarians, inquired or learned what 

substance or process produces it.Yet you may infer that it is 

the exudation of trees: certain creeping and even winged creatures 
are continually found imbedded: they have been entangled in its 
liquid form, and, as the material hardens, are imprisoned. I should 
suppose, therefore, that just as in the secluded places of the East, 
where frankincense and balsam are exuded, so in the islands and lands 
of the West there are groves and glades more than ordinarily luxuriant: 
these are tapped and liquefied by the rays of the sun, as it approaches 
and ooze into the nearest sea, whence by the force of tempests they 
are stranded on the shore opposite; if you try the qualities of 
amber by setting fire to it, it kindles like a torch and feeds an 
oily odorous flame and soon dissolves into something like pitch and 
resin." 

The records show then, that some of the ancients had a fairly 
accurate idea of the material source of amber, but not of its fossil 
state. 


1. Tacitus: Germania : 45 , 












13 . 


It should be noted here that the ancients had beliefs in the 
medicinal value of amber. Pliny ^ tells us that women from the areas 
across the Po wore necklaces of amber both for adornment and for 
their medicinal value. It was believed to ward off diseases of the 
throat• 

In Antiquity the word , Elektron l 2 3 was used to refer to an 

alloy of gold and silver, and also to amber. It is probable that in 

the Homeric poems the reference is for the most part to the mineral 

2 ) 

alloy. This being the case with other classical writers references 
from classical literature have very little bearing on the question 
of amber in antiquity and we are forced to fall back on the archae¬ 
ological record, and definite references to amber and the amber trade 
3) 

in Latin sources. 

8. Chronological Table . 

This table will be followed in outlining the history of amber 

(1) Upper Palaeolithic. 

(2) Mesolithic. 

(3) Neolithic. 

(4) Aeneolithic (Transition Period, Copper Age) 

1. Pliny: Historia Naturalis: 37, 44 

2. Soph: Antigone 1037, Homer, Ody . IV 71f. 

Verg: Aen. VIII 402, 624. 

3. Pauly-^issow 0 -: Encyclopedia under Elektron . 














14 . 


(5) Bronze Age (Near East, Central Northern Europe)• 

(6) Iron Age (Hallstatt, La T6ne). 

Homan Imperial Period. 

Migration Period. 

Middle Ages. 

Modern. 

9. Upper Palaeolithic . 


Amber first appears in conduction with human beings in the 


Upper Palaeolithic. This can be explained by the presence of ice- 
sheets over the amber coasts during the Pleistocene Epoch. The cave- 
dwellings in Moravia have yielded a few pieces of amber and it has 
been found in the Gudenus cave in Northern Austria, in the Pyrenees, 



Palaeolithic sites, and many references fail to mention its presence 



in this age. Comte 


specimen of 


palaeolithic sculpture in amber, a horse's head, found in 1934 in the 
Istudtz Cave. This is from the Magdalenian Ag e . 


How amber travelled so far from its source is difficult to 


say. Baltic amber may have been carried into Central Europe by 
glaciers. Wandering hunters who at times, no doubt, travelled sur¬ 
prising distances may have picked up odd pieces. Illustrations of 
these are not available but it seems likely that they were kept in 


1. Ebert: Reallixikon under Bernstein. Par. 10 A. 
-2. Nature. Sept. 21, 1935, p. 4^0* 





































15 


the state in which they were found, or were perforated and worn &§ 
crude pendants. 

10. Mesolithic 

different views are expressed in reference to the occurrence 

of amber artefacts in the Mesolithic Age. ^ome authorities state that 

it was entirely absent^ Certainly it had no gre&t importance at that 

time, but several artefacts have been found from Resen Mose, Jutland 

and Denmark. The designs on these pendants are interesting in their 

2 ) 

resemblance to some Spanish rock paintings, but no direct inference 
may be made because of this. 

11. Neolithic 

Amber artefacts are very numerous in the Neolithic Age, 
especially in the districts where amber was found. The most famous 
find is in Schwarzort, East Prussia. Tubular or reed-shaped beads, 
buttons pierced with a V-shaped perforation, irregularly shaped 
pendants and pendants shaped like axes, shields, arrow heads or boats, 
lens shaped pieces, disks and rings. A number of human figures in 
primitive sculpture have been found and are suspected to have had 

3) 

some cult significance in the arctic Stone Culture* 

Jutland also has offered a great many amber artefacts from 
the same period. On the north and west coast stations have been 
discovered in the swamps as well as on firm land. The amber pieces 

1. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein, Par. 10 A 

2. Clark: Mesolithic Settlements, p. 164, 168 

3. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein . Par. 10 A 














16 



of t»oles for 5M.spension, vj'sctle. 


Stale 




Fi<^. **-. 

Aw fc er A rtt fa.c"ts »9 tke He^olitk C c 


















17 . 



Fc<j. b. 

/Imter flr'f'efact^ from the IVeo|t£/\.<c A<ja 
a , lens - s ka.^ej dis^, £> ■ I crn . d Lam • , from Gro^z. A fort n. , k , c, axe-S ha. fed 
beads, Denmark ( /3 ^ d , |0 end 4 Ti f } % j e , o J f Scku;«.rz.or£ y /if.2 C<t*. )on<j } * 

fj nxs-sJiap ed pendant ^ Scku/av-zor^ S ■ 4> crr\. / on ^ ; t u. tt on. uj ct k l/- sha.p«d 

pevforatcon. , Scktoa.r2.0 rt f ^ . 
































18 



o. , b , amber uda-vi t s, fro™ «. Mej «■ U t hie ymve. 

C ' jjenda.'nt from be<ji-n-«.iof Neolithic, A<je^ oldey tkan 
Mc^aLt/itc jrav€ S; 3 /4. J, «.« - *U f c a jo e-ndaixt , 6o)t.m. s Uv, , 
Siv e J e n j . 


































19 


are found often in pots of clay or wood and are in the form of beads 
or large pieces which have been perforated to serve as pendants?) 

Amber artefacts are common enough in Neolithic finds to be 
considered a characteristic product of the northern culture. Swedish 
amber finds are mainly from the corridor graves and megalithic stone 
cists in Bohuslan, Vastergotland, Halland and Schonen, and are scarce 
in East Sweden. Obviously the raw material was brought from Jutland 
and did not reach as far as East Sweden in any great quantity. In 
Denmark the Zealand giant stone chambers have afforded the largest 
amber finds. These artefacts are in the form of round beads, flat 
pendants, double-headed buttons with perforation, and axe-3haped 
pendants?^ 

In Northern Germany Neolithic amber artefacts extend from 

Westphalia to Hannover in the West to East Prussia in the East. They 

are more widely distributed with the spread of the Megalithic pottery, 

ball vases and East German corded Pottery (Single grave culture) to 

extend as far to the southeast as West Prussia, Posen and Sii es i a to 

East Galicia. In Koncaisko je, in the Nowgorod district a find of 267 

amber pieces very like those from East Prussia was made. Finds in 

T) 

Russia have been indicated on Tallgren f s map; In the more northern 
parts of the arctic stone culture amber products were introduced in 
considerable amounts, in the Karelien district of Finland, and even 

1. Guide to Nationalmusut. Copenhagen, Par. 75 - 73. 

2. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein. Par. 10 A. 













20 . 



Dibtri ‘o ut ion of Copper A<je Aw, U r f\ rt e. fa, ct$. m East furo 

(Afte- Till^en.) 

















21 . 




























22 













































23. 





















24 . 



fl-mter bead S 


FVy //. 

fro>n tAe ce>i n <^ra,i/£ (_tke *ftkj 

[flfi er Sc.lilLftva.-n-n J 














* 5 . 



O. 















26 


further north as indicated on Tallgren's map. A few amber artefacts 

have been found in the arctic culture of Norway^ In Neolithic 

Scandinavia it was worked into beads, pendants and native axesT^ 

Amber artefacts have been found also in small stone cists 

tz 

from West Poland to Cracow and Liablin A the mouth of the Vistula. The 

Fatjanovo Culture, which was influenced by the Single Grave culture, 

3) 

had Baltic amber. 

There are occasional instances of Northern amber in the 

Lake Dwellings of the Northern Alps, at Maurach, Sutz and Obermeilen. 

This suggests a trade to the north, though it must not be forgotten 

that wandering peoples may have cairiffid the amber to its distant 

location. Another possibility is a trade of amber from the North 

to the bearers of the Lake Dwelling Cultured 

In England jet, slate and sandstone were worked in much 

the same way as amber was in Prussia. Amber artefacts are found also 

beside these pieces. These pieces of amber in England in the Neolithic 

Age were imported from Jutland^ Amber artefacts also occur in France 

6 ) 

in the cave-dwellings, in the dolmens and also in Switzerland as 


1. ibid . 

2. MacCurdy, Geo: Human Origins. Vol. II, p. 98. 
3* Dawson: Age of the Gods, p. 270. 

4. Eberts ■ 

5. MacCurdy: Human Origins. Vol. II, p. 209* 


6. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein. Par. 10 A. 




























27 . 


mentioned above. On the contrary, no amber artefacts have been 

found in any of the other districts of the Alps, in South Germany, 

Austria, Hungary or the Mediterranean area"P 

The origin of all these widely scattered pieces of amber 

has been thoroughly examined and no definite conclusion has been 

reached. Tischler believed originally that all amber beads with the 

V-shaped perforation were peculiar to the East Baltic area, but 

Olshausen proved that this occurred not uncommonly in the area of the 

Megalithic Culture, and was general in Europe until the early Bronze 

Age. Therefore this characteristic cannot be used to distinguish 

between West and East Baltic Amber. The occurrence of amber idols, 

both animal and human, cannot be limited to the East Baltic districts 

even though it is more frequent there. On the contrary amber artefacts 

in the shape of axes, double-headed hammers and double-bladed axes, 

obviously copied from stone tools, and used as native axes, are 

peculiar to the West Baltic area. These are^s have much in common in 

the form and workmanship of amber, and the differentiation of East 

is 2) 

Prussian and Jutland amber pieces in most cases impossible. 

The maps (Fig. 8 and 7 ) show the movements of the Baltic 
(Megalithic) and Corded Pottery (Single Grave) Cultures and Fig.io 
shows the main areas where amber from the Neolithic Age has been 

1. ibid. 


2. ibid. 















28 


found. There is definitely a correlation and it seems only reasonable 
to suppose that amber as well as other goods was carried in at least 
small quantities by these restless peoples who were moving over 
Europe at this time, and whose path included the areas where amber 
was so plentiful. Though not mentioned in many references, amber 
was found in Troy, Tiryns, Mycenae and Pylos 1 2 ^ in the Northern 
Neolithic Age. This may explain the presence in the north of the 
Trojan double-axe shape as found in amber beads. Possibly the native 
amber axes were phallic symbols, an evidence of influence from the 
fertility cults of the near East. 

12. Aeneolithic 

During the Northern Stone or Neolithic Age there was a 

highly developed metal industry in other parts of E ur0 pe. If the 

Neolithic Age of Scandinavia and Northern Germany is set at 3000 - 

1500 B. C., it is contemporaneous wii^i the Bronze Ages of the 

Mesopatamian area, Crete and Aegean, Italy, Central and Eastern 

2 ) 

Germany, and the Copper Age in Hungary.' In Neolithic Graves of the 
North isolated examples of metals objects are found and it is assumed 
that already there was a trade in metal goods from the South and West 
to the North. It is noteworthy that the stone tools of the Northern 

1. Kauffmann: Deutsche Altertumskunde. p.113. 

2. Burkitt, Miles and Childe, V. Gordon: Chronological Table of 

Prehistory . 
















29 . 


Culture were shaped like the metal tools of the South and West. The 
North was freed from the Stone Age when, instead of importing a few 
tools, they brought in the metal and wrought the implements themselves. 
Then began an independent metal industry and a new cultured 

A copper industry had been established in Hungary as early 
as 1900 B. C., and there was in time a trade of copper reaching as 
far as Mecklenburg and Scandinavia. Double-axe-shaped wedges of copper 

were transported also from Southern France to the Rhine and then by 

2 ) 

intervening streams to the Elbe and Weser river areas. From the 
earliest metal age in the Mediterranean area there was a route by way 
of the Rhone reaching not only Central Europe but extending to the 
amber area. According to Montelius"*' trade routes began to be used 
as early as 2500 B. C. He bases this assumption on the discovery in 
Northern Germany (Mecklenburg) and Scandinavia (Zealand, Moen, Jutland 
and Southern Sweden) of bronze weapons of Italian workmanship. The 
routes which are known to have been used by amber traders in the Bronze 
Age must have been used to some extent in the Aeneolithic. These 
routes were: (l) by way of the Vistula and Dniester to the Black Sea; 
(2) the Elbe-Moldau-Danube route; (3) North Sea to the Mediterranean 
by way of the Rhine and Rhone; ( 4 ) the Maritime route by way of the 

1. Kauffmann: Deutsche Altertumskunde, p. 123 

2. ibid . 

3. Hoops, J: Reallexikon under Handel . 

4. MacCurdy: Human Origins. Vol. II, p. 209. 

























! ' 




' . '■ . ; .. . :: 

. , ■ . ■ 


, 


















- 




: "... . ' i . ' 


. 










. 















































31 . 


North Sea, English Channel and Straits of Gibraltar. In support 
of the existence of the latter route is the fact that Jutland amber 

3 ) 

reached Great Britain even in the Neolithic Age. Montelius has 
associated this distribution of amber with the geographical distri¬ 
bution of the stone-cists with Seelenldcher (soul-holes). This trade 
was especially intense in the transition period to the Bronze Age as 
is shown by the presence in Scandinavian territory of British and 
Irish axes and Irish Lunulae. Apparently this trade was based on the 

3) 

exchange of Irish gold and other metals of the British Isles for amber. 

Amber also makes its first appearance in the Iberian 
Peninsula in the Aeneolithic Age, only in small amounts. The oldest 
find is some olive-shaped beads from Los Millares of the Almeria 
Culture. A number of small ball-shaped pendants and beads have been 
found from the Aeneolithic in the graves of Alcalar in Algarve, 
Portugal. Olive-shaped beads have been found also in Early Bronze 
Age graves in Catalonia and Barcelona. These finds are important even 
though small, for they are of Northern amber and indicate some trade 
relations with the North. The route by which the amber arrived in the 
Iberian Peninsula can only be guessed. It may have come overland by 

c 4) 

way of Southern France, or over the sea from Brittany. The maritime 


1. MacCurdy, Geo: Human Origins. Vol. II, p. 209. 

2. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein 

C i Groszbritannien . 

3. ibid. 

4. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein . 

Es Pyren^ehhalbinsel. 


















32 . 


route quoted from MacCurdy (footnote, p. 31) might suggest the route 

it followed to arrive in Spain and Portugal. 

The amber finds of Troy, Tiryns, Mycenae and Pylos 1 2 3 4 ^ 

mentioned above in connection with the Neolithic Age should be noted 

again here, as they may have been contemporaneous. 

Amber is found in the graves of the Bell-Beaker people whose 

invasion went from the Rhine to the Danube, and eastward as far as 

2 ) 

Poland and Hungary 
13. Bronze Age. 

Amber was no longer used so lavishly for ornament by the 

Northern peoples when they discovered that traders from the south 

admired it and were willing to give in exchange for it bronze and 
3) 

gold. At this time amber appears widely in other parts of Europe, 

even where it had been lacking in the Neolithic Age. At the same 

time the large numbers of Bronze Age gold-finds in Jutland support 

4) 

the assumption of an important trade. Some of the Stone Age forms, 
the V-shaped perforation for instance, continued into the Bronze Age 
for a while. Then new forms arose, better and more carefully executed, 
made possible no doubt by the use of metal tools. The V-shaped 
perforatioh was abandoned. A new use for amber was invented, namely 

1. Kauffmann: Deutsche Altertumskunde, p. 113. 

2. Coon: Races of Europe, p. 155* 

3. Kauffmann: Deutsche Altertumskunde. p. 119. 

4. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein 

B: Bronze under Hallstattzeit. 



















33 . 


inlay work in the hilts of swords and daggers and on metal ornaments'. 

In East Prussia considerable amounts of amber were found 
in the mound graves in the form of flat, four-cornered pieces, hemi¬ 
spheres and round beads. In other Bronze Age finds in this area amber 
is rare. Very little amber is found from the Bronze Age in West 
Prussia, Sweden and Denmark. Also very little is found in Schleswig** 
Holstein from this time though a little more than in Denmark. One 
group of graves in Mecklenburg has amber artefacts from the early 
Bronze Age, but in the later Bronze Age only isolated examples are 

found. In Pomerania as in North-western Germany the number of Bronze 

2 ) 

Age amber finds is small. 

The same scarcity of amber is true of Middle and Southern 
Germany, Switzerland, and Austria-Hungary with the exception of 
Bohemia and Hallstatt (late Bronze, early Iron). The early Bronze 
Age graveyards of Aunjetitz have yielded a good many amber beads and 
amber is found in several of the Bohemian Bronze Age graves. Olshausen 
cites the Bohemian finds as proof of the so-called Elbe-route of the 
amber traded 


1. ibid. 

2. ibid. 

3. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein . 

B: Bronze under Hallstattzeit. 



















* 1 / 



Fi v ( 

/jmter- -V\ec,)( U c « fro»i K Bronze A^e B a. ^ L a. k e j 

\jjUtikiY*. Zr^U-*J- % f €rh rU-Uj a-H* b f. f/lfeS a*J *-*«> Ws 












35 . 


Amber appears in Southern Europe for the first time in the 
Bronze Age. Here the oldest finds (and they may be older — see 
note 1, p. 32) are from the Mycenean shaftgraves, where great numbers 
of amber beads were found. Amber artefacts and raw amber were found 
in the 'Kuppelgrttber* (cupola graves) of the younger Mycenfcan period^ 

The appearance of amber beads in Crete during the late 

2 ) 

Minoan indicates some influence from the North. During the Pre- 
Homeric Age there was a trade-route from Crete to the Gulf of Argos, 
thence to Tiryns and Mycenae, then to Corinth, to Orchomenos and thence 

3) 

to Thermopylae. 

1. ibid . 

2. ibid : under Kreta . 

3. Dawson: Age of the Gods, ch. XV, Passim . 

(It is extremely probable that archaeological research 
in the future may find evidence of a trade route to 
Central Europe by way of the Danube River. In that case 
the Bronze culture of Hungary received definite stimuli 
direct from Greece as well as from the Adriatic. And 
amber would undoubtedly have played a major role in the 
exchange of commodities). 
















36 . 


In Italy the first traces of amber are in the graves and 

pile-dwellings of the transition period between the Neolithic and 

Bronze Agesl^ The late Bronze Age Wekropolen 1 2 (burial places) contain 

2 ) 

amber finds. 



1. cf. British Museum: A Guide to the Antiquities of the Bronze Age . 

p. 124 (Swiss Lake Dwellings) n .the 

amber beads have been proved to come from 
Italy (not the Baltic)". 

2. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein . 


B: Bronze under Hallstattzeit . 

















• Ki-i-W . 












37. 



^}<lt Tv-a.de. "l^ovute HCVOS^ Gervn 


Bron z e 





















38. 


In Britain amber finds are especially numerous in the ftound 
Bajfows of the Bronze Age, and in the later Bronze AgeV 

Bronze Age sepultures in France have a few amber beaded 
Throughout the Bronze Age, Germany was crossed by two main 
amber trade-routes. The first went from the head of the Adriatic near 
Venice up the valley of the Adige, through the Brenner Pass down the 
Inn to Passau, where it joined the Danube. Then it crossed the Bohemian 
Forest to the Moldau, and followed the Elbe to the North Sea. The 
second route went from the Gulf of Trieste, north-east to Laibach, thenc 
to Gratz and down the Leitha to the Danube at Pressburg. It ascended 
the tributary March and after crossing Moravia passed through Silesia 
along the Oder, reaching the Vistula by crossing Posen and terminating 

3) 

in Danzig. (Fuj. to,) 

The latter route cannot have been used to any great extent 
until a later period, at least not for the transportation of amber. 
During the Stone and Bronze Ages the West Coast of Jutland was the only 

important source of amber. After that time Prussia became the chief 

4) 

source. 

1. ibid ; under Bernstein . 

C: Groszbritannien . 

2. MacCurdy: Human Origins. Vol II, p. 222. 

3. British Museum: A Guide to the Antiquities of the Bronze Age, p.136 
'+• MacCurdy: Human Origins. Vol, II, p. 209. 


















39. 


A proof that Jutland was the chief source of amber in the 
Bronze Age is the distribution all over that area of the gold spirals 
that ser\ra3 as a medium of exchange at that time and had been used 
to procure amber. Their use was widespread from the beginning of the 
Bronze Age until about 400 B. C. The mainstream of this gold came 
from the Danube area into the course of the Elbe and across to the 
Jutish Peninsula. It had tributaries from Southern Germany, Switzer¬ 
land, south-eastern France and Italy, but no gold is found in Prussia, 
even in the Hallstatt period. With the discontinuation of the gold 
import bronze became the most important article in exchange for amber 1 
These little gold rings or spirals are found also in Mecklen¬ 
burg, Pomerania, Brandenburg, Saxony, Schleswig-Holstein, Jutland, 
Silesia, Posen, Hungary, Hannover and Westphalia, but not in East or 

West Prussia, which indicates that the East Baltic amber district was 

2 ) 

not in use at this time. 

3) 

The Northern Bronze Age was due largely to amber. Some 
valuable commodity was needed in order for the northern peoples to 
procure bronze articles^ Amber was what caught the fancy of the 
traders and the Jutish Peninsula afforded huge stores of it. Metal 

1. Hoops: Reallexikon. Vol II, under Handel. #S. 

2. Kauffmann: Deutsche Altertumskunde . p. 123. 

3 . ibid : p. 119 > Also Coon: Races of Europe, p. 166. 


4. Coon: Races of Europe, p. 134 
















40. 


finds are most numerous in the districts that could export the largest 
supplies of amber^ 

It has been suggested that the significance of the Bronze 

Age amber-trade may have been exaggerated. At that time cremation 

was becoming common and was an established custom in the later Bronze 

2 ) 

Age. This explains the absence of amber finds in graves. Also it 
is possible that the gold spirals were not taken directly to the north 
for the sole purpose of procuring amber, but that they arrived there 
after many a detour, and came finally to be exchanged in this way. It 
seems impossible that the huge amounts of metal in the north at that 

3) 

time can be explained by the amber-trade alone. 

However some authorities may try to lessen the importance 
of amber as a medium of exchange during the Bronze Age, it cannot 
be denied that it played a tremendously important part in bringing 
metal to the north, and in developing trade routes, a part that makes 
it stand out above all other possible exports. 

1. Kauffmann: Deutsche Altefrtumskunde. p. 119. 

2. Eberti Reallexikon under Bernstein . 

B: Bronze under Hallstatt 

3. ibid : under Handel. #4&. 

















u 















42. 

14* Iron Age . 

I. Hallstatt . 

With the coming of the Iron Age the civilization that had 

flourished in the Scandinavain North collapsed^ At the same time the 

amber-trade was transferred from Jutland to Prussia. Now the amber 

was exported by way of the Vistula and the Oder to the head of the 

Adriatic, from here to North-eastern Italy and Etruria where it ap- 

2 ) 

peared in large amounts by the seventh century B. C. 

Hallstatt received extraordinary amounts of amber as It 

3) 

was near the trade route south from the Baltic. The graveyard at 
Hallstatt yields such great quantities of amber, in such a variety of 
forms and in so many kinds of grave from the richest to the poorest, 
that it is obvious that at that time amber was common and not expensive^ 
Trade for salt must have had a great part in bringing it there^ Beads> 
rings and pendants are among the finds^P 

During the early Iron Age raw amber is often found in the 
mound graves of East Prussia. Manufactured pieces are rarer. Of the 
latter many are in the shape of a violin-bridge. In the area of the 

1. Kendrick: A History of the Vikings, p. 50. 

2. Dawson: Age of the Gods, p. 372. 

3. British Museum: A Guide to Early Iron Age Antiquities, p. 35. 

4. Ebert: Reallexikon under Bernstein . 

B: Bronze under Hallstattzeit . 


5 . ibid . 

























43. 

face-urns (Pomer&nia, West Prussia and Poland) small amber beads are 
found, often strung with glass beads on metal rings, often used as 
earrings on the face-urns (fig./7,<0«^ 

2 

The Hallstatt graves of Caucasia have contained some amber. 

The Villanova culture in Italy was under the influence of 

3 ) 

the Hallstatt culture. Amber is next to glass in importance in the 
graves of Bologna and Villanova. Here a common form was a simple 
brooch set with a piece of amber (fig. if). West of the Apennines 
amber was rarer at this time, but it was found in the oldest Greek 
graves of Southern Italy^ 

II. La T&ne. 

In the La T&ne period amber was no longer popular. In all 
northern and middle Europe only scattered examples of beads, rings, 
and pinheads are found. Finds are somewhat more numerous in the 
Etruscan graves of the 5th and 4th centuries B. C. Little is found 
west of the Apennines. In the Classical period the Greeks had very 
little use for amber.^ 

1. ibid . 

2. ibid . 

3. ibid under Villanova . 

4. Ebert; Reallexikon under Bernstein . 

B; Bronze under Hallstattzeit . 

5. ibid : under Bernstein, 


Ci La T&nezeit. 



















• , . 

















44 . 




• < WWOOotcOI^ 

<flttajEXXWs 


aD- 

^oo{)£Dcaxxa> 


© 


Fi<j 18 

6roocV (aLte. (sercod , avnbjv j>*eces o ■*. the f Ln k , 6«*-rir.<i 

ft.»>be»- t e a Jj«.ar IrO-n fljC. £eW S Ujiil\ tone p/a.fcs, Ha-U 


w'.tk 

ta.tt. 




















45 . 


A very few examples have been found in the Maine burials 

1 ) 2 ) 

in France, and in England. 

Amber was common in La T&ne tombs in Liguria and on the 

3) 

Adriatic coast and in the Vicinity of Ancona. 

Ill* Pytheas 1 Voyage . 

The Phoenician traders had brought some amber to Greece as 
early as the Homeric Age, presumably North Sea amber^ They used a 
sea-route. Later amber was brought from the Baltic to the mouth of 
the Po and thence south 

Massilia (Marseilles) was founded about 600 B• The 

merchants of Massilia received amber by way of the Rhone and tried to 

7 ) 

find a direct route to the amber coast. Between 340 and 320 B. C. 

a Greek, Pytheas, was sent by the merchants of Massilia to find the 

8 ) 

oceanic route used by the Phoenicians in their tin-trade. 

1. British Museum: A Guide to Ear ly Iron Age Antiquities , pp. 50, 60, 

69. 

2. ibid , p. 121. 

3. MacCurdy: Human Origins. Vol.II, p. 279. 

4. Seyffert: Dictionary of Classical Antiquities under Electrum. 

5. ibid . 

6. Burkitt, Miles and Childe, V. Gordon: Chronological Table of 

Prehistory . 

7. Kauffmann: Deutsche Altertumskunde . p. 222. 

8. Mullenhoff: Deutsche Altertumskunde. Vol. I, p. 223. 



























46 . 


1 ) 


He visited the west coast of Schleswig Holstein and there found amber 

Pytheas made the acquaintance of the peoples to the west of 

the Elbe and called them Celts. He did not penetrate beyond this 

river, but heard about the peoples who lived there indirectly and 

called them Scythians. The description of his journey states that 

there was an island off the Scythian coast which was the chief source 

of amber which was deposited on its coasts by the spring tides. H e 

seems to have learned this from the peoples he saw and they could have 

referred to one of the Baltic sources. Timaios tells us that Pytheas 

had heard of a Baltic amber-island whose name was Basileia and whose 

/ , 2 ) 

Germanic appelation was 'Baunonia' (Bornholm). 

In the North Sea Pytheas described an inlet 1100 kilometres 
wide with the name 'Metuonis*. A day's journey from there he came 
upon the island 'Abalus' (which Timaios mistakes for Basileia) and 


learned there that the inhabitants burned the amber they gathered. 


3) 


or traded it with their neighbors the Teutons. The latter were called 


the true amber-merchants. 


4) 


1. Kauffmann: Deutsche Ajterturnskunde, p. 119 • 

2. Kauffmann: Deutsche A1terturnskunde, p. 225. 

3. ibid . 

4* ibid . 



























47 . 


IV. Roman Imperial Period . 

firing the Republican Period amber was not a popular ornament 
in Rom®. At this time few Roman coins are found in the East Baltic 
area, but toward the end of the first century A. D. they are very 
common^ 


Amber was very fashionable in Roman Society in the Imperial 

Period. It was imported in such quantities that even the peasant 

women could afford to wear it. Its peculiar quality of acquiring an 

electric charge and attracting bits of lint and straw may have caused 

2 ) 

people to attribute to it magical properties. It was worn in dis¬ 
tricts where the water was bad (perhaps deficient in iodine) to ward 


off swellings of the throat. 


3) 


The Romans preferred a transparent golden variety of amber 
the colour of Falernian wine, and it was the fashion in high society 

4) 

for women to dye their hair to match it. 

Its electrical properties made it useful for spindle-S, 


as it attracted bits of lint. 


5) 


1. Pauly-Wissowa: Real-Encyclopadie under Bernstein . 

2. Boelsche: In Bemsteinwald, p. 7. 

3. ibid, p. 9. 

4. ibid . 


5. ibid . 





























48 . 


By this time the Homans had conducted their Germanic cam¬ 
paigns, had taken their fleets into the North Sea and had official 
information about the area. Pliny himself had held a military post 
in occupation territory^ 

There was at this time an intensive trade between Rome and 

the North. The routes are well marked with Roman goods of all kinds, 

glassware, weapons, beads. They obtained from the north, besides 

2 ) 

amber, slaves, furs and cattle. 

At Nero * s time a Roman knight was sent to the source of 
amber by Julianus, the manager of the imperial gladiatorial contests. 
His task was to bring back quantities of amber, which was very popular. 
The knight was most successful, reached and explored the amber coast, 
and brought back so much amber that at the next games the nets that 
hung before the imperial boxes at the arena, as protection from the 
wild beasts, were studded with pieces of amber. The costumes and 
weapons of the gladiators too were thus ornamented. The knight also. 

3) 

brought back a single piece of amber weighing thirteen pounds. 

This journey clarifies for us the route to the Baltic. He 

passed by way of Carnuntum to the river March, thence to the Vistula 

and the Baltic. The distance from Carnuntum to the Baltic was 600 

4) 

Roman miles or 900 kilometres. 

1. ibid . 

2. ibid . 

3* ibid . Also Pliny, Natural History, 37, 45. 


4. 


Kauffmann: Deutsche Altertumskunde_, p. 378. 







' 




(1 


: .7 . 3 7.3 * ■: '"'j.O ' < . . . I;. 

’ ’ - ■ ?-■ • ' , ■ " , '• 

'■ ■■.. ■-. :i. • ... •' ■: 

•’ . : <»4 -■ . w i . ... ... v , 

t ....... :., A ... v.o-' 3' V . »v . 

■ - - ■ • .v, • t. j . ■ : 0:3 .' 3 '-, 

• 7 307 i 3„ ... ' 7.^3 

. - . g ' .. i .. 

• . ■■ ;• 7 : ■ : ■: \ - -r 

:o 7.733 77 C0.7 3* /..■ 007 1*0 „.3:. ; . .... 

. 

' ...... 

:■ - - .7..:-'- ...3 :/• 3 : ..• •;, ; :: ; m 









r S « viv *’ -J.. 


•v 





49 


V. Migration Period . 

The trade with the north continued up to the migration period 

Theodoric the Great was sent a costly collection of amber when he was 

2 ) 

in ^taly. 

With the migration period the hey-day of the amber trade was 
left behind. Indeed after the use of coinage in the Homan Imperial 
Period amber had not quite the same significance as before. From that 
time on it ceased to be a medium of exchange except in the general 
way of all articles of trade. From that time on archaelogical records 
were replaced by written ones. It might be said that amber had played 
its role in helping to explain early history, and might be expected 
to fall back into oblivion. But that remarkable and even mysterious 
substance was yet to have a share in some interesting pages of history. 

VI• Middle Ages, and Modern . 

As far as is known, the gathering of amber was, in the 
oldest times, free to all. Towards the end of the thirteenth century 
amber acquired new significance as a very suitable material for rosary 
beads and other religious symbols and ornaments. Gone were the days 
when simple fisherfolk might profit by the tastes of their neighbors, 
for the bishops of the Church soon realized the wisdom of taxing amber. 

1. Boelsche: Im Bemsteinwald, p. 14. 

2. Schiitte: Our Forefathers, Vol. I, p. 80. 











. . ifv.fi* af> tv- 

V| r V / «.-r orti 





-• - ■ r .... - ^ r, ! • ,f O . 

. -.t f r ; , -v . • ■ > f Pn -•I % «v ’ f ; 

' 




P* . . ;'' 4 ; f' ’V J ' ; ;• 

-!• rv»■ -V * - »- - --- • 








’■ ■ - ■ -■ 


. 



, •• ,• i ' r - —ot .2 i A : 




. . ■ - n :vrrj:*n^t rr- 


'■ it r <.r • 

; f." ■ ; '•. ( J ; - ri - >n ^r’cd') ‘ * ~Z ~ " 









r . f - ** 






50. 


The Teutonic Order of Knights then fulfilling its mission in the 
neighborhood of the Prussian coast, acquired a monopoly on amber. The 
strand-dwellers were forced to deliver amber in as large quantities 
as possible, receiving in payment the salt they required for preserving 
their fish. To discourage theft and smuggling of amber, amber-courts 
were established and the strand-dwellers were forced to take the 
amber-oath, the breaking of which was sometimes punished by death. 

The oldest record of the taxing of amber is from 1264. Amber com¬ 
panies were formed in 1300 in Brugge and Lubeck, in 1450 in Stolp, 
Kolberg and Danzig, 1640 in Konigsberg. For a time the amber yield 
was leased to the Danzig merchants who soon extended the trade as far 
as India and Persia and established factories in many cities. This 
tempted the administration to take charge of such lucrative trade and 
there were many exchanges between leasing the amber yield and govern¬ 
ment control. The old amber-oath was not repealed until the end of 
the 18th century. After 1811 the right to collect amber was given by 
a general lease and after 1837 it was leased to the highest bidder. 

In i860 the enterprise of Stantien and Becker began with such success 
that it soon dominated the whole amber market. The Prussian govern¬ 
ment bought this company. According to the statute of February 22, 

1867 and the TCest-Prussian Provincial law 73 and 75, the collection 
of amber in most of the Baltic amber locations became a government 
monopoly^ 

1. Meyer: Lexikon under Bernstein . 


Also see Boelsche: Im Bemsteinwald, pp. 17, 18, 19, 46, 47. 










.. .. . 


- J 




U 4. . .-i, J J.. 


■ ■ - O ' 


J- i‘~- 1 v ] U 


' a ' A ' ~ • r 

'IT 8 


■ iX, U.V'vii C•-* • vV j' 


i jj.~. i. .v. 


■*• -w; 


- ~ A -W .1 i 


- ' fly 

; .., : 

..... u .. . . . 

: . W *:v\ ; jl *i^v‘i.x 

- 

. Q .1 _ .. . i . -U A...~ v . . ' .:.0' .1 -: . 

i, ■ - ; . I : ... 

.. i 

‘ * I .1. ■ »w » fcv’j ... A<*.0 ..»••< I S' ' — X ;; .. ;,r\r ■ J 1 ' ', . .... 

. ' .... . 


•1-i 'Hi VV’V ■ 



51. 


It should be added that the collection of amber from the 
waters by hand was replaced by the dredging of Stantien and Beeker, 
and later by mining^ 

In 1879 a method was discovered for utilizing the small 
pieces of amber left over in the manufacturing process. Heating and 
hydraulic pressure was found to unite these solidly, forming 
*Preszbelnstein f , known in English as 1 2 3 4 ambroid 1 . 

Amber is used today for jewellery, smoking tools, and toilet 
articles. It is prized by the Turks for the mouthpiece of pipes,for 
they believe it incapable of transmitting infection when the pipe is 
passed from mouth to mouth. Until recently amber was prized as an 

amulet and is still believed by a few people to possess a certain 
3) 

medicinal value. 



the following lines from Klebs, here translated;- "Oriental and 
English women are especially fond of strings of cloudy yellow amber 
beads; the bony-whitish varieties adorn the dwellers of West and East 
Africa; the Caucasians demand the transparent kinds; the finest and 
clearest go to France, Brunswick and Tartary; Russia and Africa use 
those of less value. The functionary of China takes the same pride in 

1. Boelsche; Im Bemsteinwald. p. 46 . 

2. ibid, p. 47. 

3 . Encyclopedia Britannica under Amber . 

4 . Boelsche: Im Bemsteinwald , p. 43. 










■ 






■f. 



«T 















52. 


the possession of a long mandarin’s chain of amber as the Indian in 
his earrings of the same material. Approximately 10,000 prayer beads 
of amber go yearly into the hands of the pious Mahometans, and a still 
greater number of rosaries to southern France, Spain and Italy. The 
warrior in Morocco wears his horned protective amber amulet on his 
breast, even as the warrior of China. Indeed many Persians adorn not 
only themselves and their dead, but also their horses with strings of 
clear, cracked, often egg—sized amber beads•" 

Much of the mystery about amber has been stripped away by 
the research which has revealed so many of its secrets. But even today 
there can be found people who wear it with a belief in some medicinal 
virtue, just as they wear small bags of herbs. To most people today 
amber is a familiar name, though the material is not fashionable, and 
few people attach to it any more significance than to any semi-precious 
stone. The historian, however, must give thanks to those remote amber 
forests for a substance which has opened many a page of European 
history that might otherwise have remained closed perhaps for all time. 





.O-i. 


, .< • 




■- Jui • : • ’X- o or:. *J .-- OIF*•- ‘1 r■ 
; ^ : ..c, • 


J,viiuc ‘1 :'l x rLos'rss-' 


- 


"1 O -i "Ji 










. . . h< : 'ov. x -m\ c'• ■ - - 

j ■_ i •■■£-iJj ■. . ’ £■' 1.' --' O r '<.• i'-. 

.... V A V».f‘,,' t:r. ?£■ I I . IV 'V ; 

' 

oi : a m - ■ - 

< ‘ •• ' i; ' • ’* * : ' 

’ 

,-■ 7 . /. <40 ..%• : ;o.: r 000 X 0 x- TC ■. . 


..V. O. I C v'.-.i,. ii-i. : OW C J ■ oi- ' i’-V T 

















