A OOMPABATill BAUM 


MALE A El) 


iifivA SBLBCTtlO 


lElIKlill HIGH- BCBiML 


By 

-JigiTtess S. T 






































URIMIIIISM 



M 









University of Alberta 
Printing Department 












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/comparativestudyOOhrab 





THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF 

MALE DISCIPLINE AND MALE NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 
IN A SELECTED COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOL 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 


BY 

JAMES S. T. HRABI 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


SEPTEMBER 1958 










• ' \ 


















SYNOPSIS 


School discipline has been and still is one of the major 
problems that school adniinistrators and classroom teachers must face, 
yet relatively little research on this topic has been carried out in 
Alberta* This study is an attempt to add to the research by com¬ 
paring male discipline cases with male non-discipline cases in a 
selected composite high school, and by revealing pertinent data 
regarding the incidence of discipline cases* 

Discipline cases were defined as students whose behavior was 
such that it was reported and recorded on discipline cards* These 
discipline cases fell into five categories: truants, lates, smokers, 
students guilty of causing disturbances, and multiple offenders 
(students guilty of more than one offense). 

Discipline cases and non-discipline cases were compared with 
respect to age, size of family, mental ability, occupation of bread¬ 
winner, academic retardation and certain home conditions (broken 
homes and mothers working). Incidence of discipline cases was ana¬ 
lyzed according to grade, course pattern and home room. Disturbance 
offenses were treated according to place of disturbance. Truancy, 
smoking and disturbance offenses were categorized by time of 
occurrence (day of the week and month of the year). 

The data on 735 male students in the selected composite high 
school, for the eight month period from September, 1957* to April, 
1958* inclusive, were obtained from discipline cards, class achieve¬ 
ment records, cumulative records, registration forms, an administered 
intelligence test, and an interview with the principal* 















' 

■ 

• . ;■ ■ . ;• rv : 

* ' ' 

* 






' 

: 

. 

* 








’ 

i 

* 

■ 


' 


' 

; 






. 


' 


r, • ; 









The findings of the study indicate that of all the factors 
considered in the comparison of discipline and non-discipline cases 
working mothers and broken homes were the most significant in 
differentiating between the two groups* Age, intelligence, occupa¬ 
tion of breadwinner, achievement and retardation were significant 
in certain respects. Size of family was not significant in any 
respect. 

Concerning the incidence of misbehavior these conclusions 
were reached: 

1. The incidence of discipline cases was similar in each grade 

2. The incidence of misbehavior was higher in the general 
pattern than in the matriculation pattern. 

3. There was a higher percentage of discipline cases among 
students in certain home rooms. 

il. Teachers new to the staff, especially those who had no 
previous teaching experience, had more classroom disturb¬ 
ances than did the senior teachers on the staff. 

5. The incidence of misbehavior was high on Monday and Friday, 
and in the months of October and January. 



■ : ' ' $d T i! • 






* 

i 

. . ‘ 








• >' ; 




' 


* _.i 

" : 1 ; ' : ~V " - ' 1 , ■ - '■ , ‘ :v; .d ./rod /: . 




) "v , j. .' • i ;/ ;;; 

* 









































ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to express sincere thanks to the 
members of his thesis committee, Dr. G. L. Mowat, Dr. H. T. 
Sparby, and Dr. J. W. Chalmers, for their assistance in the 
presentation of this thesis. Thanks are also extended to Mr. 
M. J. V. Downey, Director of Personnel and Research, Edmonton 
Public Schools, for permission to conduct the investigation 
in the Edmonton Public School System. The writer is indebted 
to the Principal of the school in which the study was done, 
who must remain anonymous for obvious reasons. His assistance 
in the gathering of the data is greatly appreciated. 


• * • • - ■ 

. , . 

* ■■■- • ■ 

■ 

■ 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

LIST OF TABLES...* lx 

Chapter 

I. THE PROELEM . • ... . • . . 1 

School Discipline is a Matter of Concern » • . . • 1 

The Problem Investigated . ... 2 

Delimitation of the Problem.. li 

II. SURVEY OF RELATED LITERATURE ............ 7 

Relatively Little Literature Published on the Topic 7 

Studies in the Field of School Discipline • • • • . 8 

Summary of the Literature • * 0 • . • » • • . • * • li 

III. METHOD OF INVESTIGATION . . ... . 18 

Selection of School in which Investigation was 

Conducted • • • « 3.8 

Definition and Identification of Discipline Cases « 18 

Sources of Data » »»**»»<>*»«», » • • • . 20 

Occupational Glassification « * • * • • * . * • * * 21 

Comparison of Discipline Cases and Non-discipline 

Cases in Achievement. ••••••••••••.. 22 

Criteria for Classification by Course Pattern , * a 2k 
Treatment and Analysis of Data . . 2 5 
















vii 

Chapter Page 

IV. COMPARISON OF DISCIPLINE AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES. . 26 

Age. 26 

Size of Family .. 25 

Intelligence 30 

Achievement .. « 32 

Occupation of Breadwinner. ............ 1*1 

Mothers Working and Broken Homes ......... k3 

Academic Retardation ............... 1*5 

Conclusions Resulting from the Comparison of 

Discipline and Non-Discipline Cases. .. 1*5 

V. THE INCIDENCE OF DISCIPLINE CASES. ......... 1*8 

Distribution of Discipline Cases by Grade and 

Course Pattern ................. 1*8 

Distribution of Discipline Cases by Offense^ Grade 

and Course Pattern ............... 50 

Distribution of Discipline Cases by Home Room . 9 52 

Places Where Disturbances Occurred ........ Sh 

Time of Occurrence of Offenses .......... 56 

Conclusions Resulting from an Investigation of the 

Incidence of Discipline Cases ......... 61 
























viii 


Chapter Page 

VI. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS... 63 

Conclusions Resulting from a Comparison of 

Discipline and Non-discipline Cases. . , . 61* 

Conclusions Resulting from an Investigation of the 
Incidence of Discipline Cases and of the 
Incidence of Certain Types of Offenses 6? 

Administrative Implications of the Study ...... 69 

VII. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY. .......... 70 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. . ... .. 7b 

APPENDICES 

APPENDIX A. The Policy of the School in Which the Investi¬ 
gation Was Conducted With Respect to Lates, 

Smoking and Truancy •••.••••••••. 77 

APPENDIX B. Forms Used in Gathering Data ......... 81 

APPENDIX C. Procedures Used to Find the Reliability of the 
Differences Between Percentages, Means, and 
Standard Deviations. ............ 81* 

APPENDIX D. Specific Dates of the Occurrence of Truancy, 

Smoking and Disturbance Offenses ...... 90 





















LIST OF TABLES 


Table Page 

I. Mean Ages and Standard Deviation of the Ages of 

Discipline and Non-discipline Cases* •••*••• 27 

II. Mean Sizes and Standard Deviation of the Sizes of 

Families of Discipline and Non-discipline Cases. . 29 

III. Mean Intelligence Quotients and Standard Deviation 
of the Intelligence Quotients of Discipline and 

Non-discipline Cases.. 31 

IV. Mean Achievement and Standard Deviation of the 
Achievement of Grade Ten Discipline and Non¬ 
discipline Cases ...«••• ».. 35 

V. Mean Achievement and Standard Deviation of the 

Achievement of Grade Eleven Discipline and Non¬ 
discipline Cases ................. 38 

VI. Mean Achievement and Standard Deviation of the 

Achievement of Grade Twelve Discipline and Non¬ 
discipline Gases .................. 1;0 

Vila Percentages of Discipline and Non-Discipline Cases 

in Various Occupational Classifications. ..... 1*2 

VIII. Numbers and Percentages of Discipline Cases in the 
Total Male Population, Matriculation Pattern and 
General Pattern, ••••••••••• „ .... . k9 

IX. Percentages by Grades of Truancy, Smoking, Late, 

Disturbance and Multiple Discipline Cases in the 

Total Male Population in the Matriculation 

Pattern and in the General Pattern ........ 5l 









































' 









Table 


x 


Page 

X. Number of Male Students, Number of Discipline Cases and 
Percentage of Male Students Who Were Discipline Cases 

in Each Home Room in Grade Ten.. 53 

XI. Number of Male Students, Number of Discipline Cases and 
Percentage of Male Students Who Were Discipline Cases 
in Each Home Room in Grade Eleven. .......... 5k 

XII. Number of Male Students, Number of Discipline Cases and 
Percentage of Male Students Who Were Discipline Cases 
in Each Home Room in Grade Twelve. ••»....••• 55 

XIII. Percentage of Occurrence of Truancy, Smoking, 

Disturbance and Total Offenses on Each Day of the Week 57 

XIV. Percentage of Occurrence of Truancy, Smoking, 

Disturbance and Total Offenses in Each Month of the 

Year ......................... 59 

XV. Date of Occurrence of Truancies. 91 

XVI. Date of Occurrence of Smoking Offenses ......... 92 

XVII. Date of Occurrence of Disturbances ........... 93 






















) 


. 














CHAPTER I 


THE PROBLEM 

1. SCHOOL DISCIPLINE IS A MATTER OF CONCERN 

Educators are faced with many difficulties. It is the 
opinion of several writers that one of the major problems of both 
school administrators and school teachers is that of discipline 0 
Trott declares: 

Today discipline is a fighting word. A recent 
bulletin states, 1 discipline—not salaries, not chang¬ 
ing curricula, not reformed report cards—but disci¬ 
pline, is the greatest single problem facing teachers 
in our schools today.* 1 

This view is shared by Bruce, who states, ”The problem of 
juvenile behavior continues to be a cause of worry to educators, 
particularly men and women responsible for secondary schools.” 2 

In a recent publication, the Guidance Branch of the Alberta 
Department of Education pointed out that discipline was still a 
problem.^ There is further evidence of concern regarding school 
discipline in Alberta. The University of Alberta Leadership 
Course for school principals, which was inaugurated in 1956 and 
held again in 1957, included on its agenda on both occasions 
addresses on the topic of school discipline. 

Though the topic of discipline is of importance to all 
school personnel, it is of particular concern to administrators 
and teachers in composite high schools because of the nature of 
these institutions. Schools of this type, because of the wide 
range of programs offered, must be large in order that adequate 
use be made of the expensive facilities provided. There are 




! 










2 


indications that a distinct relationship exists between the size 
of the school and the incidence of misbehavior, with the latter 
increasing out of proportion as the former increases* This point 
is emphasized in a study of teacher opinion of pupil misbehavior 
reported in the National Education Association Research Bulletin: 

Sheer bigness of the education enterprise and trouble 
with students go hand in hand. This was one of the 
clearest and most definite relationships established in 
the study.k 

Since school discipline seems to be one of the problems 
of administrators and school teachers, especially in large composite 
high schools, there is need of research, in this area. As Cohen and 
Rosenblum state, in a discussion of a possible solution to the 
problem of delinquency in schools: 

The present school ”crisis” underlines the need for 
basic research that will unearth the real causes and 
suggest imaginative solutions-«not. only to end delinquency 
in our schools, but also to help our desperate young 
people.5 


2. THE HIOBIEM INVESTIGATED 

The objective of this study is to reveal pertinent informa¬ 
tion regarding those students in a selected composite high school 
who constitute discipline cases. 

In this study, a composite high school is defined as one 
which has a large enrolment (over 1000 students), a large staff, 
and offers a wide variety of courses (academic, commercial, home 
economics, technical and general). 

The school in which the investigation was conducted main¬ 
tains a separate card for each student on which offenses are noted. 
For the purposes of this study, a student whose behavior was such 








■ . - ' ■ . ■ ' ■ 

, 

' • ■ • 

; ' J' : . '1 ■ 3 ;j ' ■ ‘ ., ' • ' 






; 

* 






. 0 


n v: j. 






i 

. . 

: 


fi • ' ' ' ' .‘.I . : 

— 


. 

* 








' 

* 


' 

l ) .“• : > .> '■ . ’ "" v. ■svo ' ; **. ' 


• ' ( . , , ), r;) n ■ ■ / • 

- 

■ ■ i . v ; ' 




3 


that an offense was reported and recorded on these cards was 
defined as a discipline case. This procedure for defining dis¬ 
cipline cases is similar to that used by Dresher in his study of 
the incidence of behavior problem cases or discipline cases among 
drop-outs of Michigan schools.^ 

The major problem investigated was: What is the status of 
those male students who constitute discipline cases as compared 
with the status of those who do not? 

The aspects of status in which the discipline cases and 
non-discipline cases were compared were: age, size of family, 
intelligence, achievement, socioeconomic status and academic 
retardation. Two aspects of home conditions—working mothers and 
homes broken as a result of separation, divorce or death—also 
were investigated and compared. 

Since it was desired to reveal administrative difficulties 
resulting from behavioral problems, the study sought answers to 
the following questions: 

1. Is the percentage of discipline cases significantly 
higher among male students in any one grade? 

2. Is the percentage of discipline cases significantly 
higher among male students in any one course pattern? 

3* Is there a significantly higher percentage of discipline 
cases among male students in any one home room? 

1*. In regard to discipline cases arising from classroom 
disturbances, are a few teachers responsible for 
reporting a large percentage of them, or are they spread 
out evenly over the entire staff? 


‘ . ■ ■ ' ■ ■ '• 

• ’ - ‘ • >' ^ '• • ’• 0 > :• •: : 

' 

’ - 

’ 


■ 

' • • •: ' - 


c.. v 

■ ■ . 

: £ . .. , 




0 3 • 

* 



\ 



- 

• t 



: V ' 




t .r ; t . 

■ 






, 


• . 



h 


5. Does a significantly higher percentage of offenses occur 
on any one day of the week? 

6* Does a significantly higher percentage of offenses 
occur in any one month of the year? 

3. DELIMITATION OF THE PROBLEM 

The study was limited in several respects. It was con¬ 
sidered advisable to limit the study to male discipline cases and 
male non-discipline cases for two reasons. Firstly, the student 
population of the school in which the investigation was conducted 
was large; limiting the study to the male population reduced the 
number of students involved and permitted detailed analysis, yet 
provided an adequately large sample. Secondly, since comparisons 
were to be made by course pattern, and since the percentage of 
girls vary in the different patterns, and since research has 
indicated that the incidence of misbehavior is higher among boys 
than among girls, therefore the inclusion of the sex factor in the 
study could lead to erroneous conclusions. 

The study was further limited to male students in the 
matriculation and general patterns. There were twenty-seven boys 
enrolled in the commercial pattern in the school in which the 
investigation was conducted. It was decided to exclude this 
group because they were in a different building under virtually 
separate administration as far as handling misbehavior was con¬ 
cerned. Furthermore, the number of male students involved was very 
small as compared to numbers of male students in the matriculation 
and general patterns. 



* 

. 

' 


* 

. 


* 


' 

* 

i 









■ 


. 









5 


Because of the time when the study was conducted, only those 
offenses were considered which occurred during the first eight 
months of the school year, September, 1957, to April, 1958, 
inclusive. There would have been certain advantages to have 
investigated discipline cases during the entire previous school 
year. This procedure, however, was impossible as the cumulative 
record folders of students who had left school, either through 
completion of their program or through dropping out prior to the 
completion of their program, had been sent to the school board 
office where the cards on which the offenses were reported had 
been removed from the folder and destroyed. 









. . •' .' ■ ' ' ; : 

0 ' iu 

■ ‘ •' • -■ • • 

w 

, . 






)■.; 






n . ■ 




■ )• ■ r ' i . : • . ? 

t •• • ' j i if ' i a 

1 ■■ ■ ' 

; 






6 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER I 


(1) Trott, Vernon, "New Dimensions in Classroom Discipline,” 

The Educational Courier , XXVII, (February, 1958), p. 12* 

(2) Bruce, William E., "The Problem of Juvenile Behavior," The 

American School Board Journal , CXXXVI, (March, 1958), p. 5k* 

(3) Guidance Newsletter, Department of Education, Edmonton, 

Alberta, p. 7. 

(ii) "Teacher Opinion of Pupil Misbehavior, " National Education 
Association Research Bulletin , Washington," d7c., XXXIV, 
(April, 1956), p. 16k* 

(5) Cohen, Eli, and Rosenblum, Lila, "Are Jobs the Answer to 
Delinquency”, The School and Society, LXXXVI, (May 10, 

1958), p. 215. 

Dresher, R. H., "Seeds of Delinquency”, Personnel and Guidance 
Journal, XXXIII, (May, 1957), p. 595. 


(6) 



















. • ..' ■ . . .. . • . • 
. - . . • . . 


» . .. . 

* 

« . 1 ... 

* 

. 

* . . - 

* 

- 




CHAPTER II 


SURVEY OF RELATED LITERATURE 

1# RELATIVELY LITTLE LITERATURE PUBLISHED ON THE TOPIC 

From 3930 until recently relatively few books have been 
published on the topic of school discipline* Similarly, there have 
been few articles in periodicals, journals, and magazines* Ladd 
states that there are several reasons for this lack of literature: 

1. The increase of a spirit of humanitarianism, co¬ 
operativeness and democrac^r following the first 
World War tended to make educators feel guilty about 
concentrating on an aspect of teaching that was so 
frankly manipulative* 

2* In zealously focusing the profession’s attention on 
procedures that would likely further long range goals, 
educators created a climate in which it became un¬ 
fashionable to think about short range goals* 

3* Two men, E. K* Hickman and John Dewey, were instru¬ 
mental in the decline of published material on the 
topic of discipline*^ 

Ladd concluded that Hickman’s exerted influence because of his 
famous 1928 study of children’s behavior and teachers’ attitudes, 
in which he frowned on teachers who regarded defiance to authority 
and dishonest behavior as serious problems, or who required that 
the pupil obey simply because the school demanded obedience*^ 
Similarly Ladd concluded that John Dewey’s definition of discipline 
could be regarded as approximating a definition of self-discipline* 


Cl 






dv.y.. v,U?v.' '-.r, r i ; - -o •/ C:\v;i. 






r. 


) 









1 ' ’ 1 : - • 
















: '. :■ ' . 





Kip U 


■ ' j\ : 


-,’i: ' -> C 




8 


A person who is trained to consider his actions, to 
undertake them deliberately, is in so far forth disciplined. 
Add to this ability a power to endure in an intelligently 
chosen course in the face of distraction, confusion and 
difficulty, and you have the essence of discipline.3 

Ladd felt that since Dewey's influence on American education 
has been so great, this emphasis on self-discipline was widely 
accepted, so much so that the problem of keeping order in a class¬ 
room tended to be looked upon as insignificant, as losing sight of 
that which was really important. 

There are indications that this reticence toward outspoken 
discussion of the topic of discipline is gradually changing. This 
is shown by an increase in the last year or two in the number of 
periodical, journal and magazine articles on the subject. Cutts 
and Mosely, in their book, "Teaching the Disorderly Pupil in the 
Elementary and Secondary School", a 1957 publication, state: 

There was a time not so long ago when teachers were 
afraid to say that classroom discipline was a problem. 

Any such admission was looked upon as a sign of weakness. 
This attitude is rapidly changing, if, indeed it has not 
altogether changed.4 


2. STUDIES IN THE FIELD OF SCHOOL DISCIPLINE 

The studies that have been made on delinquent behavior 
and discipline cases in school indicate considerable agreement 
regarding certain characteristics of these students who constitute 
discipline cases. They also indicate lack of agreement in this 
regard. » s 

In a study of misbehavior in the schools of Phoenix, 
Arizona, during a one-year period, Zeitlin reports the following 
findings: 


• ■■ ■ ’ r i. . r,':: ■; " >r 

, 

" 

' ‘ ■ ' ' ' * • 

* 


' 




■ 












■ 




■ • ‘ ' ■. ’ ' • ■' ' . ' ■ ■ • 

* ' . • ■ . ' • • ■ . ' , 

■ ' ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ - , 



■ . • n 

, a 





; 



' ■ ' 

• ■ ' ' ' * ' ' 

* 

- ’ : 1 ' - ‘ ! '• •: • . ■ • ••• ■ ' • " > ; •• 

■. ‘ • ' - ■ ' • ' 





1. Forty-one per cent of the student body was cited for 
misbehavior at one time or another 0 

2. The four types of misbehavior that occurred most fre¬ 
quently were habitual tardiness, truancy, disturbances 
and disobedience. Smoking occurred very infrequently, 

3. Schools attended by students of the lowest socioeconomic 
status level had much the same problems as schools 
attended by students of the highest socioeconomic level, 

U, In comparing misbehavior of boys and girls, it was found 
that members of both sexes committed the same types of 
offenses, though there was a greater frequency of mis¬ 
behavior among boys. One exception to the above trend 
involved misrepresentation (lying, cheating and false- 
note writing). Girls were guilty of this offense 
roughly three times as often as boys,^ 

Kravaceus, in asserting that school counselors must be 
alert to the tell-tale signs identifying the potentially delinquent, 
presents a list of personal and environmental deviations of many 
delinquents as reported in controlled studies of delinquents and 
non-delinquents. Some of the deviations listed ares 

1, Mean I.Q, of 8?. 

2, Atypical home structure (broken home), 

3, Economic stress, insecurity and/or substandard economic 
conditions, 

U« Inadequate supervision by the mother, 

5, Poor or failure marks, 

6, Repeating grades (retardation), 

7, Truancy, 




1 ' ’ . - 

. ' ' . ‘ ' ' 

• - 

' 




: 


< • n . . ■ 

, ■ ' :' ‘ 




'■ 




• : ' : ' ' ' '• ' ' - •' ' ' . 

• ' .’ ~ ' ■ 

' 

. . . ' ' . ' ' 

fir jw* • ' ' 

; ' ‘ ~ > ■ 


, £ * 


* 














:j r. • " 


* ' * 

’ 


10 


8. Serious and persistent misbehavior in school*^ 

In a case study of sixty-eight truant children over a two- 
year period, in a selected census tract of Washington, D.C*, Kamedze 
arrived at these conclusions: 

1. One-third of the truants had normal or above average 
intelligence* Another one-third were classified as 
dull or backward. The remaining one-third were classified 
as borderline or feeble-minded* 

2* The number of school terms repeated was an indication 
of poor academic progress* Sixty-six per cent had 
repeated between one and four terms* 

3* Three factors in the home situation of the truant 
children contributed greatly to their truancy. These 
factors were the lack of stability in many of the homes, 
the lack of parental supervision, especially on the part 
of the mother, and the large number of broken homes 
which were found among the families of these children*^ 
Dinitz, Kay and Reckless related delinquency vulnerability 
measures to intelligence test scores and to reading and arithmetic 
levels of sixth-grade boys* They found that delinquency-prone boys 
were significantly lower in intelligence than the boys that were 
not delinquency-prone* However, they state: 

These findings seem to contradict the generally 
accepted finding that there is very little difference in 
intelligence quotient levels of comparable samples of 
delinquent and non-delinquent boys®^ 

The same study revealed significantly lower achievement in 
reading and arithmetic of the delinquency-prone group as compared 
to the group that were not delinquency-prone. 


* . 

■:. . 

. ■ , . « V ’ ■ ' ' " ■ 1 ; ■ : ; ' «, ' 




'/y-r\ n- v»,; v 3J r .v i' o b r jJ: 


* 


I 












. 








. 




' 


■ ) 


‘ 1 ' , . ' ' ■ 


- 






. ' ‘ ■ ' . ' ; . : 

cLI Tj 

* 

■ ■ \ - fvi O m : I : 


■ ) 


11 


Coleman studied 125 pupils in Hammond High School, Hammond, 
Indiana, that were discipline problemsHe arrived at several 
pertinent conclusions* Nearly three-quarters of the problem pupils 
were boys* In comparing the group who constituted discipline 
problems with a group whose conduct was satisfactory, he found that 
they were of approximately equal mental ability* Since twice as 
many problem pupils as non-problem pupils had been retarded in 
elementary school, Coleman concluded that unsatisfactory achieve¬ 
ment accompanied unsatisfactory conduct. In regard to family- 
conditions, he found that more non-problem pupils than problem 
pupils came from broken homes. The average number of children in 
the families of the problem pupils was 3*III, and in the families 
of the non-problem pupils the average number of children was 3.71. 
Furthermore there was no indication that gainful employment of 
mother or stepmother had any effect on the conduct of the pupils. 

It should be noted that in reporting the study no indication was 

given as to whether the differences in number of broken homes 

and average size of families between the two groups were significant. 

Hanna, in a study of the relationship of discipline in high 
school to the intelligence of the students, concurred with Coleman’s 
conclusion that there is no difference in the mental ability as 
measured by intelligence test, between discipline cases and non¬ 
discipline cases.^ 

In an investigation of the behavior problems of children 
from broken and intact homes, Russel found that children from 
broken homes exhibit significantly more behavior problems than 
childrenfrom intact homesHe found that this conclusion was 
especially true for the offenses lying and stealing* Extreme 


• ' '■ ‘ • .. '■ !/. ' . : )■ ■ 

* . 

- •: . • 

, 

: : 

* 

• ■ • ■ ' ■ 

‘ ■ - ' ; ; ' ■ ' ' .: ; 

“ 

■Ws. . ■ ' , 

' 

*' '■ ! ' • ' ■ ■ • 

■ 

: - '■ ■ . - ’ ' ■ - - i: ().'■ ».? {j 

■' ? * 

' . • : 

... _ } ••••■.. 

.■ : - ■■ / C ■ 

- ' ' . ' r ; ;n; • : o •. 

... 

. 

■ 

’ . •. ■ ■ 






. . . . 

. 



..... .0 

", ) 






12 


anger and disobedience seemed to be found more frequently in homes 
broken by divorce or separation than in homes broken by death; 
conversely, there is a tendency for academic retardation to be 
found more frequently in homes broken by the death of one parent* 
Hand was concerned with the popular opinion that children 
of working mothers would have a tendency to be more maladjusted 
than others, presumably because of the smaller amount of associa¬ 
tion with the mother and because of the increased tension of the 
mother who had two jobs to do*12 He conducted a study of 102 
children in grades four to eight. Half of the group came from 
homes in which the mother did not work; half from homes where the 
mother worked* Using the California test of personality to measure 
adjustment, Hand concluded that there was no significant difference 
to be found between those children whose mothers were employed and 
those children whose mothers were not* 

In discussing causes of school behavior problems, Oliva 


says: 


Family background accounts for a large percentage of 
behavior problems* Factors in the family setting that 
must be considered are the attitude of the parents, the 
socioeconomic level of the family, the status of the home 
(whether it is broken by separation, divorce or death in 
the family), the handling of discipline in the home and 
the extent of the training given the children in manners 

and morals. ^ 

Smith and Jesse imply that freshmen in a senior high school 

lii 

are more likely to misbehave than are juniors and seniors. The 
transition from a position of high status in the junior high school 
to a position of low status in a senior high school is a difficult 
adjustment for the freshmen to make. These students are acquainted 
with the norms of behavior in the school which they had attended 
but must adjust to the prevailing norms in the school in which 







■><55 Ou .osnaoa 


',.,'33 








T 


. . 


:j a 








■ i v >. 


) 




, ).[ cJ:i ioaooo , T ; 

■ 

. • 









. • ■' : 


i l ‘ : ' ■ 





Lv/ : 


3 '■ 


' 


' 





' 



m 



13 


they are now enrolled. It is acknowledged that a good orientation 
program can acquaint these students with the ideal norms of conduct, 
but considerable experimentation is done to determine the actual 
norms that prevail* 

In discussing the sociological aspects of juvenile delin¬ 
quency, Lohman arrives at these conclusions: 

1* The rate of delinquency varies in different neigh¬ 
borhoods of every urban centre* 

2. The highest rates of delinquency are in the low income 
areas of the older inner sections of cities. Delin¬ 
quency rates decrease with distance from these centres* 

3* Exceptions support this rule* They are accounted for 
by the presence of large industrial or commercial sub¬ 
centres and delinquency rates decrease with distance 
from these sub-centres. 

iu Areas with high truancy rates are also characterized 
by high ratios of juvenile and adult court commit¬ 
ments*^ 

The National Education Association, in a recent survey of 
teacher opinion of pupil behavior, reports these findings: 

1* Large classes (over thirty pupils) cause more trouble 
than small classes* 

2. As classroom teachers become older and gain more 

experience, they tend to have less trouble. The trend 
seems to be reversed, though, after teachers attain 
the age of fifty. 










■ ■ 


* 

, 

. • ■ ■ , • . .. 

* 












» 




‘ ■- 




* 

* 


1 V t. '• • ■ ' ; . > , ■; 
























3. Neighborhoods in which business, industry, and residential 
areas are interspersed are more likely to produce child¬ 
ren who create problems in schools than those areas 
which are largely residential* 

I;. There appears to be a relationship between the family 
income level of the majority of pupils in school and 
incidence of misbehavior in the school* 

5* The presence of one or two pupils in a classroom who 
need, but are not getting, psychiatric treatment, 
appears to have a strong effect on the behavior of the 
group as a whole. 

6. The factors most frequently associated with misbehavior 
in the schools, in the opinion of classroom teachers, 
are related to the home and family. Irresponsible 
parents, unsatisfactory home conditions, and lack of 
supervision because of mothers working, account for a 
large proportion of misbehavior in school. These factors 
were evident not only from statistics, but also from 
comments of teachers on questionnaires.^ 

3. SUMARY OF THE LITERATURE 

There is general agreement that low achievement and academic 
retardation are found more frequently among students guilty of 
misdemeanors, and that young, inexperienced teachers tend to have 
the most difficulty. 

As previously indicated, there seem to be certain areas of 
disagreement regarding possible factors associated with misbehavior 
of school students. Some research indicates that low intelligence, 


' 




■ ■. ■ 







... 

) * i . / ' a i *. * 

■ ’ ' ■ ' 







■' : ' ■ ; " >£■£'»' v ) ■ 


■ 


- 


swiiao f>*wt' if-* jtj'i" o ySiO$ c o.t 




‘ 


, ' . j 






• • ■ ' . 0*YL vj; 


. 

. 

: ' ■ ' ' ' ' 

' ' ' L . ' ‘ ' ' '' ■ 

■ " • ' :!■ . . • , s;■'} 



15 


low socioeconomic status, broken homes and working mothers are 
characteristic of students who constitute discipline cases, while 
other research indicates that these factors are present to the sane 
degree among non-discipline cases* Concerning intelligence, it is 
worthy of note that those studies (Coleman and Hanna) which con¬ 
clude that there is no difference between the two groups in this 
respect, were reported prior to 1930, and the two studies 
(Kravaceus and Kamedze) which conclude that there is a difference 
between the two groups in intelligence, were reported within the 
last three years* Furthermore, Coleman’s study is the only one 
reporting a larger number of discipline cases coming from intact 
homes than from broken homes* Kravaceus, Kamedze, Russel and Oliva 
indicate the exact opposite is true. 

This writer was unable to find any research pertaining to 
the relative frequency of offenses in the various course patterns, 
on various days of the week or in various months of the year* 




' ' : ' '• ' ' 'x , . ' : ' . ■ : ,0 -t. . >.• 

. 


o i 







16 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II 


(1) Ladd, Edward T., "The Perplexities of the Problem of Keeping 

Order", Harvard Educational Review , XXVIII, (Winter, 1958), 

pp. 20-21. 

(2) Wickman, E. K., Childrens Behavior and Teachers* Attitudes, 

New York: Commonwealth Fund, 1928, pp. 155-17?. 

(3) Dewey, John, Democracy and Education . New York: MacMillan 

Company, 1916, p. l5l. 

(1) Cutts, Norma and Nicholas Moseley, Teaching the Disorderly 
Pupil in the Elementary and Secondary Schoql. New YorJc: 
Longmans Green & Co., p. vii. 

(5) Zeitlin, Herbert, "Phoenix Reports on High School Misbehavior", 

Personnel and Guidance Journal, XXXVI, (October, 1957)* 

p P ;"3'8L-38^r 

(6) Kravaceus, William C., "The Counselor’s Role in Combatting 

Juvenile Delinquency", Personnel and Guidance Journal, 

XXXVI, (October, 1957), pp. 100-101. 

(7) Kamedze, Brother Paul, A Study of the Major Sociological 

Aspects of Truancy WithTn^eiecTed Census Tcacts “of 
Washington , D.C. , Doctoral fhesS“Abstract, Washington, 

D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1955, pp. 9-15. 

(8) Dinitz, Simon, et al, "Delinquency Proneness and School 

Achievement", Educational Research Bulletin, College of 
Education, Ohio State UniveFsT£y,^l7 XAprxl 10, 1957), 
p. 1.^1 • 

(9) Coleman, C.T., "The Characteristics of Disciplinary problem 

Pupils in High Schools", School Review , (June, 1930), 
pp. 1*31-172. 

(10) Hanna, Leroy Wayne, "Relationship of Discipline in High 

Schools to the Intelligence of the Students", (unpublished 
Master’s thesis. Department of Education, University of 
Chicago, 1925) p. 69, cited by C. T. Coleman, "The 
Characteristics of Disciplinary Problem Pupils in High 
Schools", School Review , (June, 1930), p. 11*0. 

(13.) Russel, I. L., "Behavior Problems of Children from Broken 
and Intact Homes", Journal of Educational Sociology, 

XXXI, (November, 1957)7 pp/T2B=TS97™ ~ 

(12) Hand, K. E., "Working Mothers and Maladjusted Children", 

The Journal of Educational Sociology, XXX, (January, 1957), 
pp. 215-276. 


















































17 


(13) Oliva, Peter F., "High School Discipline in American Society", 
The Bulletin of the National Association of Secondary 
School Principals , CX,~ {January, 1$56), p. 2?* ** 

(111) Smith, Arthur and Josse, Jane, "Some Socio-Psychological 

Aspects of the High School Orientation Program", Journal 
of Educational Sociology , XXX, (November, 1957), pp. 9? - 106. 

(15) Lohman, Joseph D., "A Sociologist-Sheriff Speaks Out About 

Juvenile Delinquency", Phi Delta Kappan, XXXIX, (February, 
1958), p. 207. 

(16) "Teacher Opinion of Pupil Misbehavior", National Education 

Association Research Bulletin , XXXIV, {April, 19567, ’ 

pp. 10h-106. 



























, 






. 

- 

■ 

. 




. 








CHAPTER III 


METHOD OF INVESTIGATION 

1. SELECTION OF SCHOOL IN WHICH INVESTIGATION WAS CONDUCTED 

Since administrative records, procedures and policies vary 
from one school to another, comparison of different schools with 
respect to discipline problems is subject to criticism* Therefore 
it was decided to limit the study to one school. The school 
selected is a composite high school located in the city of Edmonton. 
It was chosen because the writer had previously completed a paper 
on a similar topic in this school and was acquainted with the record 
system. Furthermore, this school serves a section of the city 
which included the main business centre, an area which research 
indicates produces a larger percentage of behavioral problems. 

The school attendance area was sufficiently large to include 
purely residential sections as well as the business area. From 
observation it was concluded that none of the residential sections 
is extremely high in socioeconomic status. Since the section of a 
city adjacent to the business centre usually contains those of 
extremely low socioeconomic status, therefore the population 
sampling in this study tended to include a larger than average 
percentage of students in this classification. 

2. DEFINITION AND IDENTIFICATION OF DISCIPLINE CASES 

For each offense, school administrative practice was to 
indicate on a separate card for each student the name of the 
student, the home room of each student, the nature of the offense. 















.. - 










i 










) 


) 


3 .. ' \>.f. 




• o o ■ ■: J 







sm 












•_ : r ; 

: ' ' ■ ' 1 




: 




■ 








19 


the date of the offense, the place where the offense occurred 
(classroom^ hallway, playground, gymnasium or cafeteria), and the 
action taken as a result of the offense (detention, interview, 
letter home, suspension, etc.). An examination of the cards 
indicated that offenses reported fell into four categories: lates, 
truancies, disturbances, and smoking on the grounds. 

The school had a definite policy with respect to truancy, 
tardiness and smoking on the grounds. A copy of this policy is 
included in Appendix A. For the purpose of this study, students 
guilty of truancy and smoking on the grounds were classified as 
discipline cases if they had one or more offenses. An arbitrary 
decision was made in the case of students reported as late. After 
being late the third time, the student was warned that further 
tardiness would result in a detention being assigned, or even in 
suspension from school. For the purpose of this investigation a 
discipline case arising out of tardiness was defined as one in 
which a student has been late four or more times. 

No definite policy was maintained in the school concerning 
disturbances. Whether an offense was reported or not is left 
entirely up to the classroom teacher or hallway, playground, 
gymnasium and cafeteria supervisor. It is likely that with a staff 
of sixty-six teachers, individual differences resulted in consider¬ 
able variation in the types of offenses considered worthy of 
reporting. This lack of consistency is accepted as an admitted 
weakness of the study. 

The record system, therefore, indicated four types of 
offenses: lates, truancy, disturbances, and smoking, as well as 




') . 




> ' ) 






:,n 




' 






■ 



' 


j 





five types of offenders: lates, truants, smokers, those causing 
disturbances, and multiple offenders (those guilty of more than 
one type of offense)* 


20 


3* SOURCES OF DATA 

Various sources of information were used to gather the 
required data* From the discipline cards the problem cases were 
identified by name and home room number* Further information 
from these cards included the nature of the offense, the date on 
which the offense occurred, and in the case of disturbances, the 
place where the offense occurred* 

An examination of the class lists made it possible to 
categorize the discipline cases by grade and to check on home room 
number* 

In this particular school, achievement in all courses for 
each student was recorded on large bristol boards, one for each 
home room. These were used to categorize discipline cases and 
non-discipline cases according to course pattern* Achievement of 
the Grades Ten and Eleven students in language and social studies, 
and of Grade Twelve in English and social studies on the Christmas 
and Easter tests, also was obtained from this source, as were the 
intelligence quotients of the Grades Eleven and Twelve students 
(as measured by the Otis Gamma Intelligence Test - Form AM)* 

Since this intelligence test had not been administered to 
the Grade Ten students and since the writer desired scores for 
all students on the same test in order to validate comparisons, the 
Otis Gamma Intelligence Test (Form AM) was administered to all 


Grade Ten male students 




' 










, • 




. 




■ 


y. 


1 ’ 7 ; 


) 


' 


. ■' - » 


' 




' 

. 

- 






■ ' ' " l • • : ' ' 

v, ' ' I l ' 1 






21 


Age, size of family, occupation of father and mother, 
retardation and evidence of broken homes were obtained from an 
examination of cumulative record folders and student registration 
forms for the present year. The latter source was particularly 
important in investigating size of family and occupation of father 
and mother, since these are subject to change. Examples were noted 
where the cumulative record cards were not precisely up to date. 

It must be noted that the data for retardation are incomplete. 
A student was classed as a repeater if he had failed in one or 
more grades from one to nine inclusive. There were numerous 
instances in which the cumulative record folders were started 
after the student was well on in school life, particularly when 
students had moved into the Edmonton Public School system from 
other parts of the province or from other provinces. Therefore, 
the conclusions arrived at regarding retardation must be considered 
with this limitation in mind. 

Information regarding school policy was obtained by inter¬ 
viewing the principal of the school. The same source provided 
information regarding the training and experience of those staff 
members who reported large numbers of disturbance cases. 

Forms prepared by the writer to gather data for each 
discipline case and for the non-discipline cases are included in 
Appendix B. 


lw OCCUPATIONAL CLASSIFICATION 

To obtain an indication of the socioeconomic status of the 
discipline cases and non-discipline cases, the occupations of the 
breadwinner of the family were classified and compared. The 


. ' ' ; ‘ 

* 












. ' 

■ ■ - ■ . • ’ • • 

* re.®* 

. ' ' ■ * ;• ' 

* 

' 1 1 ■ ' • ' ■ ■ 








' 


' 






■ ■ [ :■ 

• : . 














' ' ■ ■ > , • Jffo-fS'X ■ 





. 


. 

•• 

. 


22 


breadwinner of the family was defined as the father in the case of 
intact families; the father or the mother in the cases of families 
broken by death, separation or divorce (depending upon which parent 
the children resided with); the foster-father in the case of 
remarriage following death or divorce; or the guardian in the case 
of orphans* An exception to the above definition occurred in the 
cases of intact families in which the father was unable to work 
because of ill health or injury. In such cases the occupation of 
the mother was noted as the occupation of the breadwinner of the 
family. 

An occupational classification was devised which included 
the following categories: professional, semi-professional, 
managerial, clerical, sales, service, agricultural, skilled, 
semi-skilled, unskilled, retired and unknown. This classification 
is that used in the United States Department of Labor Dictionary 
of Occupational Titles.^- The last two categories of the classi¬ 
fication used in the study—retired and unknown—were added by the 
author, the first for obvious reasons and the second because in a 
few cases inadequate records made it impossible to determine the 
occupation of the breadwinner. 

With the aid of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 
all occupations noted on emulative record folders and registra¬ 
tion forms were placed in the appropriate category of the classi¬ 
fication. 

5* COMPARISON OF DISCIPLINE CASES AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 

IN ACHIEVEMENT 

In Alberta senior high schools, an elective is defined as 
a course which the student may or may not choose to include in 













; 




) r >’ 



. )b »d 
























■ 












his program, A constant is defined as a course for which all 
students must receive credit if they are to qualify for a high 
school diploma. It was desired to compare discipline and non¬ 
discipline cases with regard to achievement in the same course. 

This could be 'done for a single grade only, as no course is taken 
by all three grades at the same time. Since course choices vary 
considerably, because of the wide selection of electives available 
in a composite high school, it was •unlikely that all students in 
any one grade would be enrolled in the same elective. Therefore, 
achievement of discipline and non-discipline cases was compared 
only in certain constant courses. 

The constants chosen for comparison purposes were language 
and social studies, at the Grade Ten and Grade Eleven level, and 
English and social studies at the Grade Twelve level. Achievement 
on tests at both Christmas and Easter were noted and compared. 

It is school policy to have all teachers offering the same 
course act as a committee to prepare tests in that subject, as well 
as to prepare keys for correcting the tests. Therefore students 
taking the same course write the same tests. There was one exception 
to this policy, that being in Social Studies 20, the Grade Eleven 
course. There was disagreement among the teachers as to methodology 
to be used in offering the subject, with the teachers divided into 
two groups on this question. Since the two methodologies were 
designed to yield somewhat different learning outcomes, two commit¬ 
tees were formed (one from each group), each to prepare a separate 
test and key. The achievement scores noted in Grade Eleven social 
studies, then, are obtained from different tests. 


> ' ; ■ * " ■' 

;• ; •.. ■ : ■ V ' ■' o Tv IT. i ■ - t 

- 






a 




t ; ■ ' :. n ; . 


- 





. 




* 

' 

» . ’ ' 

■j ■: ; ■: .• ■ . *.• ; • . ... c-vau 


: ' 

„ ' ' 


, 



• 













' 



■ 

» 

■ 

. 

. 

- 

. 




2k 


6. CRITERIA FOR CLASSIFICATION BY COURSE PATTERN 

As indicated in Chapter One, the study was limited to male 
students in the matriculation and in the general course patterns. 

It was originally intended tc categorize the male students into four 
course patterns or streams—matriculation, commercial, industrial 
arts, and general. The students in the commercial pattern were 
excluded since they were so few in number, and since they were in a 
separate building under virtually different administration as far as 
disciplinary action was concerned. An interview with the principal 
of the school revealed that there was no way of distinguishing be¬ 
tween students in the industrial arts pattern and those in the general 
pattern. The only distinction that could be made was between those 
students who were attempting to obtain matriculation and those who 
were not. The latter group had as their objective only a grade 
twelve diploma. Therefore, for the purpose of this investigation, 
students who were taking course leading to matriculation were defined 
as being in the matriculation pattern, and those who were taking course 
that would lead only to a Grade Twelve diploma were classified as being 
in the general pattern. 

In order to classify students as to course pattern (matricu¬ 
lation or general), the writer, in consultation with the principal 
of the school, set up definite criteria. In Grade Ten, a student was 
classified as being in the matriculation pattern if he was enrolled 
in Mathematics 10 and Science 10. In Grade Eleven the criteria for 
classification in the matriculation stream was enrolment in Mathe¬ 
matics 20, Science 20 and either French 20 or Latin 20. Repetition 
of either Mathematics 10 or Science 10 or both did not exclude a 
student from the matriculation classification. In Grade Twelve a 




u) al : 

1 ■ ■ ■ ■■ • 

■ . , ’ - ' : ■ , :■ ■ . . j 

. . " . ■. ' * : ■ • ' £ . - • i 

- 

>' )■■?,-. '• ' ; ) : ■ 0X3 

' 

■ 

■ : • ' ' ' ' ' f.S ' : 

* 

*- • • "•'> ' ' > ■ . r 

- ■- ■ ■ ' 

■. . • ■ ■ . ■■ . ■ 

* - • \ ■ 

- ' ,/;i: V . v \ ) u •' 

. 

* 

’ 

: : ' ' 

" : 1 ■■ . n :. 3 t ' a •' x£o 

. ' ■ ' ' ' ; HV.'' : . ' ••• . ' 

' 

*noj : O-.V : ' ■ 

. 



student was noted as being in the matriculation pattern if he was 
enrolled in six of the courses required for matriculation. If he 
was not enrolled in six of the required courses, his cumulative record 
was checked as it was possible that the student could be taking two 
years to complete his Grade Twelve matriculation requirements. If 
the cumulative record indicated that such was the case, the matricu¬ 
lation classification was used. All students not in the matriculation 
pattern were classified as being in the general pattern. 

7. TREATMENT AND ANALYSIS OF DATA 

In the treatment of the data, various statistical measures 
were used. Means and standard deviations were employed in discussing 
the age, size of family, intelligence and achievement of comparable 
groups. Percentages were employed in comparing discipline and non- 
discipline cases with respect to broken homes, working mothers and 
academic retardation. In presenting the data concerning the incidence 
of misbehavior, percentages were used exclusively. 

When differences were noted in related means, standard 
deviations, or percentages, these differences were tested to discover 
if they were statistically significant. Procedures used to test 
for significant differences between means, standard deviations, and 

p 

percentages for uncorrelated groups were those suggested by Garret. 
Examples indicating the methodology used are included in Appendix G« 

FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER III 

(1) Dictionary of Occupational Titles , Part H, United States Depart¬ 

ment of labor, Washington, D.C.s United States Government 

Printing Office, (1939), p. ix. 

(2) Garrett, Henry E., Statistics in Psychology and Education , New York: 

Longmans, Green and Co., (1953), pp. 213-239. 








' 











lo ;cJ : ■ 1 


■ 






















■ 




■ 






il- 3 












' ' 














CHAPTER IV 


COMPARISON OF DISCIPLINE CASES AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 

The discipline cases and non-discipline cases were compared 
in several respects. These included age, size of family, intelligence, 
achievement, occupation of breadwinner, academic retardation and home 
conditions. Comparisons were made separately for each grade and also 
for the whole male population if this was meaningful and feasible. 
Discipline cases in the matriculation pattern were compared with the 
discipline cases in the general pattern with respect to age, size of 
family, intelligence and achievement, 

1. AGE 

The ages of ail students were reported to the nearest year, as 
of May 1, 1958, Table I indicates that there are certain differences 
between the age distribution of the discipline cases and the age dis¬ 
tribution of the non-discipline cases. 

There was considerable variation in the mean ages of the two 
groups. At the Grade Twelve level the mean age of the discipline 
cases was lower than that of the non-discipline cases, whereas in 
Grades Eleven and Ten it was higher. The differences in the mean 
ages of the two groups were significant (,01 level) only at the Grade 
Ten level. The fact that the difference in mean ages was significant 
only at the Grade Ten level, coupled with the fact that the mean age 
of the discipline cases in Grade Eleven was only 0,7 years greater 
than the mean age of the discipline cases in Grade Ten, may indicate 
that the older discipline cases have a tendency to drop out of school. 


- 

' . ■ ' * . ' 

* 

* 

- 


: . ■ ' 

- ' : - . . ' ' 

, 


- • 

- 

. 

... .. 

* • 1 . ' . ' . ' ; 

















27 


TABLE I 

MEAN AGES AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE AGES 
OF DISCIPLINE AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 



Non-disci¬ 
pline Cases 

Discipline Cases 


All 

Cases 

General 

Pattern 

Matriculation 

Pattern 

Grade Twelve 





Mean Age 

17.3 

17.1 

17.1 

17.1 

Standard Deviation 

.91 

.89 

.70 

.99 

Number of Students 

156 

61 

17 

hh 

Grade Eleven 





Mean Age 

16.1 

16.2 

16.3 

16.1 

Standard Deviation 

1.03 

.76 

C\J 

CO 

« 

.71 

Number of Students 

166 

83 

32 

51 

Grade Ten 





Mean Age 

15.1 

15.5 

15.7 

15.3 

Standard Deviation 

1.12* 

.9h 

.93 

.91 

Number of Students 

182 

.. - - - 

87 

2*6 

10 





















28 


The variability of the ages of the discipline case was con¬ 
sistently less than that of the non-discipline cases. The differences 
in the standard deviations of the two groups in this respect are not 
significant in Grade Twelve, are significant at the .01 level in 
Grade Eleven, and are significant at the .05 level in Grade Ten. The 
analysis of variability leads one to conclude that the discipline cases 
are not deviates with respect to age, that is, they are not drawn 
from the very old or very young students in any one grade. 

There are no significant differences between the mean and the 
standard deviation of the ages of the discipline cases in the general 
pattern as compared with the mean and the standard deviation re¬ 
spectively, of the ages of the discipline cases in the matriculation 
pattern. 

It should be noted, however, that the difference in the mean 
ages of the two groups decreases as the grade increases. In Grade 
Ten the difference is 0.1* years, in Grade Eleven the difference is 
0.2 years and in Grade Twelve there is no difference between the mean 
ages of the two groups. These findings could suggest a tendency on 
the part of older discipline cases in the general stream to drop out 
of school. This hypothesis is supported by the continuous decrease 
in variability of the ages of the discipline cases in the general 
stream as the grade increases. 

2. SIZE OF FAMILY 

Table II indicates that size of family is not a significant 
factor in differentiating between discipline cases and non-discipline 
cases. Though there are small differences in mean size of family 
and standard deviation of size of family between the two groups at 









' 


.o ■: :.v 






■ 




. 






>' ■. 




0 







i 
















0 


■ 







29 


TABLE II 

MEAN SIZES AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE SIZES OF FAMILIES 
OF DISCIPLINE AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 



Non-disci- 
pline Cases 

Discipline Cases 

All 

Cases 

General 

Pattern 

Matriculation 

Pattern 

Grade Twelve 





Wean Size 

3. h 

3.6 

3.5 

3.7 

Standard Deviation 

2.05 

2.35 

2.25 

2.39 

Number of Students 

156 

61 

17 

kb. 

Grade Eleven 





Mean Size 

3.2 

3.2 

3.2 

3.1 

Standard Deviation 

1*82 

1.62 

1.71 

1.56 

Number of Students 

166 

83 

32 

51 

Grade Ten 





Mean Size 

3.2 

3.0 

3.2 

2.8 

Standard Deviation 

1.61+ 

1*1+5 

1.51 

1.31+ 

Number of Students 

182 

87 

h6 

1+1 

All Grades 





Mean Size 

3.3 

3.2 

3.3 

3.2 

Standard Deviation 

1.86 

1.80 

1.73 

1.85 

Number of Students 

501+ 

213 

95 

136 




















•, :■ 

' 










■ ' ’ 

' 



II * 




J ■ 1 ■'. ; 

■ ' ■ 















30 


the different grade levels, the differences are not significant. This 
point is emphasized by a comparison of the mean size of family and the 
standard deviation of size of family for all discipline cases and for 
all non-discipline cases. The differences are almost negligible. 

When discipline cases in the matriculation pattern were com¬ 
pared to discipline cases in the general pattern, the same observations 
were noted. There were no significant differences between the means 
of the size of families and the standard deviations of the size of 
families at any grade level. 


3. INTELLIGENCE 

All data with respect to intelligence, indicated in Table III, 
were based on scores achieved on the Otis Gamma Intelligence Test 
(Form AM). 

A comparison of the mean intelligence scores of the discipline 
cases and non-discipline cases reveals no consistent relationships. 

The Grade Twelve discipline cases had a slightly higher mean score 
(109.9) as compared to the Grade Twelve non-discipline cases ( 109.1].). 
The Grade Eleven discipline cases, conversely, had a slightly lower 
mean score (107.1) than the non-discipline cases (108. !|). In neither 
case was the different significant. However, the Grade Ten discipline 
cases had a mean I.Q. (I0lj.2), significantly lower (at the .Oj level 
of confidence) than the mean I.Q. of the Grade Ten non-discipline 
cases (107.2). When data were compiled for all grades, the mean 
score of the discipline cases was not significantly lower than the 
mean score of the non-discipline cases. There were no significant 
differences between the standard deviation of the I.Q.*s of the 
discipline cases and the non-discipline cases at any grade level. 















) 




. 


















31 


TABLE III 

MEAN INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE INTELLIGENCE 
QUOTIENTS OF DISCIPLINE AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 



Non-discipline 

Cases 

Discipline Cases 

Total 

Matricula¬ 
tion Pattern 

General 

Pattern 

Total 

Matricula¬ 
tion Pattern 

General 

Pattern 

Grade Twelve 







Mean I.Q. 

109.1* 

111.8 

102.5 

109.9 

110.8 

107.6 

Standard Deviation 

9.8 

9.3 

7.3 

8.9 

8.6 

9.1 

Number of Students 

136 

116 

1*0 

61 

UU 

17 

Grade Eleven 







Mean I.Q. 

108.lt 

109.5 

101.6 

107.1 

109.9 

102.9 

Standard Deviation 

9.9 

9.5 

9.6 

9.2 

8.8 

8.1 

Number of Students 

166 

11*3 

23 

83 

51 

32 

Grade Ten 







Mean I.Q. 

107.2 

109.9 

98.0 

10it.2 

108.8 

100.1 

Standard Deviation 

10.9 

9.8 

8.6 

10.8 

n.5 

9.1* 

Number of Students 

182 

11*0 

1*2 

87 

1*1 

1*6 

A.11 Grades 







Mean I.Q* 

106.3 

110.1* 

100.5 

106.7 

109.8 

102.1* 

Standard Deviation 

10.2 

9.5 

8.8 

10.0 

9.7 

9.3 

Number of Students 

501* 

399 

105 

231 

136 

95 




























. 














32 

These findings seem to indicate that the discipline cases of 
low mental ability tend to drop out of school after Grade Ten* This 
conclusion is supported by the decrease in standard deviation of the 
intelligence scores of the discipline cases from Grade Ten to Grade 
Eleven (10.8 - 9*2). 

One relationship shown by the study of mental ability was the 
striking difference between the mean I.Q.*s of the students in the 
general pattern and the students in the matriculation pattern, both 
for discipline and non-discipline cases. Students in the general 
pattern had mean I.Q. ! s significantly lower (at the .01 level of 
confidence) than every comparable group of students in the matricula¬ 
tion pattern, with one exception. Though the mean I.Q. (107.8) of 
the Grade Twelve discipline cases in the general pattern was lower 
than the mean I.Q. (110.8) of the Grade Twelve discipline cases in 
the matriculation pattern, the difference was not significant. 

There were no significant differences between the standard de¬ 
viation of the intelligence scores of the students in the general pat¬ 
tern and the standard deviation of the intelligence scores of the stu¬ 
dents in the matriculation pattern, both for discipline cases and for 
non-discipline cases. These facts indicate that though the discipline 
cases in the general pattern are, on the average, lower in mental abili¬ 
ty than the discipline cases in the matriculation pattern, the degree 
of variability of mental ability is much the same for both groups. 

li* ACHIEVEMENT 

Discipline cases and non-discipline cases in Grades Ten and 
Eleven were compared on achievement in language and social studies. 
Discipline cases and non-discipline cases in Grade Twelve were com¬ 
pared on achievement in English and social studies. 


■ 
















■ ‘ lot) 


. 


- 

, 






/ ■■ - i h .0 U ■ j v ’ [ 

' ■ ' • • :> ■: 



33 


Marks obtained on both Christmas and Easter tests were used as 
measures of achievement, but were treated separately* 

It must be noted that the number of students in a given group 
varies with respect to achievement* For example, in Grade Ten there 
were 139 students in the matriculation non-discipline group at 
Christmas and II 4 O students in the same group at Easter. In Grade 
Eleven and Grade Twelve the variation in numbers of students in a 
given group is quite extreme in some cases. For example, in Grade 
Twelve there were twenty-six non-discipline cases in the general 
pattern in English and thirty-one non-discipline cases in the general 
pattern in social studies. These variations were caused by several 
factors. Firstly, additional students had registered in the school 
after Christmas. Secondly, a few students had not written their 
Christmas or Easter test. Finally, some students had failed in 
only one of the courses included in this study* An example of the 
last factor mentioned would be a student who had failed social 
studies in Grade Eleven, but had not failed language. This student 
would probably be enrolled in Grade Twelve English but would not be 
enrolled in Grade Twelve social studies. 

Further discrepancies may be noted between the numbers of 
students in Grade Eleven and Twelve as having an achievement mark in 
a certain subject, and the total number of male students reported in 
that grade. For instance. Table V, page 38, reports the achievement 
of 229 students in Grade Eleven language at Christmas, whereas 
Table VIII, page b9, reports the total male population in Grade 
Eleven to be 2l*9. Part of this discrepancy is accounted for by 
registration of students in Grade Eleven after Christmas, and by the 
failure of some Grade Eleven students to write the Christmas test 




' 





.. . i - ) . 




ci-:, 


* 


)*'/ 




n r ' a v_, : _ 


* 


' 






. 


■ ■' ' '■ 

' 


■ ’; . ..." : 

/ ! ’ ■ : v J : ' J_ ■ ' j, ; • . i i-i 


' 


■ •:.>! • O" 


K 

. 


■ ' 


■ ■ ■ 




' . ' 1 

' ' ' 


■ 






. 








. 

' 

1 .. . : ' • ■. 


: i . : '& 

' . 

o.v/. 

' 


>.u 








3k 


in language* However, the main reason for the discrepancy is that 
marks of students who were repeating a course were excluded from 
Table ?. Therefore a high percentage of the twenty students not 
accounted for in the example mentioned would be repeating Grade Ten 
language* 

The discrepancies noted in Grade Twelve were even greater. 

The marks of 16? students were reported in Grade Twelve English on 
the Christmas test (Table VI, page 1^0 ), whereas Table VIII, page l& 9 
indicates a total of 217 male students in Grade Twelve. The greater 
discrepancy is accounted for by the presence of an additional factor. 
When gathering data the writer noted that several of the Grade Twelve 
students were in their second year in this grade and had completed 
the Grade Twelve English course the preceding year. The same factor 
accounts for a large per cent of the difference between the total 
number of male students reported in Grade Twelve and the numbers of 
students reported as having an achievement mark in Grade Twelve social 
studies. 

The conclusions arrived at with respect to the comparison 
of the achievement of discipline cases and non-discipline cases, and 
with respect to the comparison of the achievement of discipline cases 
in the matriculation pattern with the achievement of discipline cases 
in the general pattern can be regarded as tentative only, because of 
the variations in the number of students in comparable groups. 

Table IV shows the mean and the standard deviations of the 
achievement of the Grade Ten discipline cases and non-discipline 
cases. This table indicates that the mean mark of the discipline 
cases in the general pattern is almost the same as the mean mark of 
the non-discipline cases in the same pattern. The greatest differ- 





35 


TABLE IV 

MEAN ACHIEVEMENT AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE ACHIEVEMENT 
OF GRADE TEN DISCIPLINE AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 



Non-discipline Cases 

Discipline Cases 

Matriculation 

Pattern 

General 

Pattern 

Matriculation 

Pattern 

General 

Pattern 

Language (Christmas) 





Mean Mark 

61w2 

147.5 

S8.3 

U5.8 

Standard Deviation 

12.2 

10.7 

12.ii 

12.2 

Number of Students 

139 

hi 

10- 

I16 

Language (Easter) 





Mean Mark 

60.9 

36.5 

5o.it 

36.2 

Standard Deviation 

lii.8 

12.5 

16.6 

12.7 

Number of Students 

li(0 

k2 

hi 

h6 

Social Studies (Christmas) 




Mean Mark 

61+.2 

50.3 

59.li 

50.1 

Standard Deviation 

11.5 

7.0 

lli.l 

ii.ii 

Number of Students 

139 

ill 

itl 

1(6 

Social Studies (Easter) 




Mean Mark 

66.8 

I46.I4 

59.3 

lt7.3 

Standard Deviation 

12.0 

8.6 

17.3 

11.2 

Number of Students 

iko 

h2 

hi 

1(6 






















r: 











i 








" ) 










' 


); 


’ 










36 

ence in the mean achievement of these two groups was in language on 
the Christmas test. This difference of 1.7 points is not significant 
statistically. 

The mean achievement of the discipline cases is consistently 
lox-jer than the mean achievement of the non-discipline cases in the 
matriculation pattern. The differences are significant at the .01 
level in language achievement at both Christmas and Easter, and sig¬ 
nificant at the .06 level in social studies achievement at both 
Christmas and Easter. 

The mean achievement of the discipline cases in the general 
pattern is significantly lower at the .01 level than the mean achieve¬ 
ment of the discipline cases in the matriculation pattern for both 
courses, on both Christmas and Easter tests. This is also true of the 
mean achievement of the non-discipline cases in the general pattern as 
compared to the mean achievement of the non-discipline cases in the 
matriculation pattern. 

The standard deviations of the achievement scores of both dis¬ 
cipline cases and non-discipline cases in the general pattern were 
consistently lower than the standard deviations of the achievement 
scores of the discipline and non-discipline cases in the matriculation 
pattern for both courses at Christmas and at Easter. The variability 
of the achievement scores of the discipline cases in the matriculation 
pattern was consistently greater than the variability of the achieve¬ 
ment scores of the non-discipline cases in the matriculation pattern. 
Similarly, the variability of the achievement scores of the dis¬ 
cipline cases in the general pattern was consistently greater than 
the variability of the achievement score of the non-discipline 
cases in the general pattern. 






i '■ ' V 


" fl i'j 








. . 'i'j • ; > • , •' ... V Ji 


■ .. 


, ■ . ■ . :■ 














': } ... 






■ 


r i • : 








• n. 






' ■ • ’ 

* ' : ■ 








. 






37 


An analysis of the mean and standard deviation of the achieve¬ 
ment of tile Grade Eleven discipline and non-discipline cases* as shown 
in Table V, indicated similar trends. The mean marks of the discipline 
cases in the general pattern were not significantly different from the 
mean marks of the non-discipline cases in the general pattern in either 
language or social studies. The largest difference in mean scores of 
the two groups was 3*h points (the difference in mean scores of the 
two groups in language at Christmas). The mean scores of the dis¬ 
cipline cases in the matriculation pattern, however, was significant¬ 
ly lower at the .01 level, than the mean scores of the non-discipline 
cases in the matriculation pattern in both courses on both Christmas 
and Easter tests. 

The mean achievement of the discipline cases in the general 
pattern was significantly lower at the .01 level than the mean 
achievement of the discipline cases in the matriculation pattern, 
with one exception. The mean scores of the discipline cases in the 
general pattern in language at Easter (hh*3) was not significantly 
lower than the mean score of the discipline cases in the matricula¬ 
tion pattern on the same test (1*7*5). In regard to non-discipline 
cases, the mean score of the students in the general pattern was 
significantly lower at the .01 level than the mean scores of the 
students in the matriculation pattern. 

■With respect to variability of scores, only one trend 
reported in Grade Ten was present in Grade Eleven. The standard 
deviations of the scores of the discipline cases in the general 
pattern was consistently lower than the standard deviations of the 
scores of the discipline cases in the matriculation pattern. 

The mean and standard deviation of the achievement of Grade 
Twelve discipline and non-discipline cases reveals similar relation- 


- '■ ■ ■■ 

' 

. *...■■ 

, 


1 • >.: :• 

. ■ • 


„ 

* 

’ 

**-! s - " '• ». ; : ,x.f lx ■ c 4 ' - ; i;.■ ftufj n': It'-ie 10L 

* 

t | 

, 

* 




* 

. 

» 

- 





38 


TABLE V 

MEAN ACHIEVEMENT AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE ACHIEVEMENT OF 
GRADE ELEVEN DISCIPIINE AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 



Non-discipline Cases 

Discipline Cases 

Matriculation 

Pattern 

General 

Pattern 

Matriculatior 

Pattern 

i General 
Pattern 

Language (Christmas) 





Mean Mark 

61.7 

1*8.5 

53.7 

1*5.1 

Standard Deviation 

12.2 

13.0 

13.1 

11.6 

Number of Students 

13k 

20 

U9 

2 i* 

Language (Easter) 





Mean Mark 

57.1 

1 *5.0 

1*7.5 

1*1*. 3 

Standard Deviation 

16.0 

17.5 

18.8 

ll*.0 

Number of Students 

139 

20 

1*9 

26 

Social Studies (Christmas) 




Mean Mark 

60.1 

111 . 8 

50.3 

1 *2.2 

Standard Deviation 

13.0 

9.7 

12 .1* 

9.5 

Number of Students 

136 

22 

1*8 

27 

Social Studies (Easter) 




Mean Mark 

60 .ii 

1 *3.8 

5 l.o 

1*2.5 

Standard Deviation 

13.3 

12.9 

12.9 

10.7 

Number of Students 

llil 

22 

1*8 

28 




































39 


ships to those indicated in Grade Ten and Grade Eleven,, Table FI 
shows that the greatest difference between the mean scores of the 
discipline cases in the general stream and the mean scores of the 
non-discipline cases in the general stream was 2.3 points (the 
difference between the mean score of the discipline cases in the 
general pattern and the mean score of the non-discipline cases in 
the matriculation pattern in English at Easter). This difference 
in mean scores was not significant. 

With respect to the matriculation pattern, the discipline 
cases had a significantly lower mean score than the non-discipline 
cases in both subjects, on both Ohristmas and Easter tests. The 
level of significance was .0$ for differences in mean scores in 
language, and .01 for differences in mean scores in social studies. 

The discipline cases in the general pattern had a signifi¬ 
cantly lower (.0^ level) mean achievement than the discipline cases 
in the matriculation pattern for both courses on both Christmas and 
Easter tests. Similarly the non-discipline cases in the general 
pattern had a significantly lower (.01 level) mean achievement than 
the non-discipline cases in the matriculation pattern for both courses, 
on both Christmas and Easter tests. 

The standard deviations of the marks of the non-discipline 
cases in the general pattern were consistently lower than the 
standard deviations of the marks of the non-discipline cases in the 
matriculation pattern. 

A comparison of the findings in each grade leads to certain 


tentative conclusions 




. ' 


■; o 






!: 





: 























. ) 


5 • - •- ’’ .) : ■ ' . ; ", : • •- 


. 

' 



* 








ho 


TABLE VI 

MEAN ACHIEVEMENT AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE ACHIEVEMENT OF 
GRADE TWELVE DISCIPLINE AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 



Non-discipline Cases 

Discipline Cases 

Matriculation 

Pattern 

General 

Pattern 

Matriculation 

Pattern 

l General 
Pattern 

English (Christmas) 





Mean Mark 

57.2 

1*2.7 

50.8 

1*1*. 9 

Standard Deviation 

11*. 0 

9.1* 

15.3 

10.1* 

Number of Students 

95 

26 

31* 

12 

English (Easter) 





Mean Mark 

51*.5 

1*0.5 

1*8.3 

39.6 

Standard Deviation 

llt.5 

8.9 

13.7 

8.9 

Number of Students 

95 

26 

31* 

13 

Social Studies (Christmas) 




Mean Mark 

62.9 

ma 

51*. 8 

1*6.7 

Standard Deviation 

lit. 8 

11.2 

11*. 7 

13.9 

Number of Students 

9 It 

31 

37 

15 

Social Studies (Easter) 




Mean Mark 

6iu3 

U6.7 

55.8 

1*8.7 

Standard Deviation 

13.7 

8.1 

13.1 

13.8 

Number of Students 

9 it 

31 

37 

15 






























r • 








. a o 




■ 















ill 


Discipline cases in the general pattern achieved equally as 
well as non-discipline cases in ihe same pattern. The mental ability 
of the discipline cases in the general pattern was comparable to the 
mental ability of the non-discipline cases in the general pattern, as 
was the mean achievement of these two groups. 

Discipline cases in the matriculation pattern, as compared with 
non-discipline cases in the matriculation pattern, tend to be under¬ 
achievers. The two groups were comparable in mental ability, yet in 
every grade the mean achievement of the discipline cases in both 
courses, and on both Christmas and Easter tests, was significantly 
lower than the mean achievement of the non-discipline cases. 

The mean achievement of the discipline cases in the general 
pattern tended to be significantly lower than the mean achievement 
of the discipline cases in the matriculation pattern. Similarly, the 
mean achievement of the non-discipline cases in the general pattern 
tended to be significantly lower than the mean achievement of the 
non-discipline cases in the matriculation pattern. This finding was 
to be expected since, with respect to both discipline cases and 
non-discipline cases, students in the general pattern had a signi¬ 
ficantly lower mean I.Q. than students in the matriculation pattern. 

5. OCCUPATION OF BREADWINNER 

Comparison of discipline cases and non-discipline cases, with 
respect to the occupation of the breadwinner of the family, was in¬ 
conclusive. As can be seen by an examination of Table VII, only one 
occupational classification—semiprofessional—shows a consistently 
higher percentage of discipline or non-discipline cases at all grade 
levels. In this particular case, the percentage of discipline cases 


. . ■ • r > ■ • ' . - • [ 










■ 


■ 




: ;. o../' • /.. *. / > 












. • ‘ : 














) i 
















•-v-> , r 






‘ Hi •: ■■ , ■■ vO 5•&£ I : ■ 1 ia fi > Q ■; "• |fjot 

. U . • . ' > ' j’OO 

• : ‘ : ' ■ . : > 0 .".: ' / • ■; ' ■ > 

. ’ - ■ ■ ' ■ ■ • ■. 






TABLE VII 


PERCENTAGES OF DISCIPLINE CASES AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 
IN VARIOUS OCCUPATIONAL CLASSIFICATIONS 


Occupational 
Classification - 

Grade Twelve 

Grade Eleven 

Grade Ten 

All Grades 


Group A* 

Group B* 

Grp A 

Grp B 

Grp A 

Grp B 

Grp A 

Grp B 

Professional 

k.$ 

6.6 

10.2 

2.1 

7.1 

2.3 

7.3 

3.5 

Semiprofessiona3 

1.3 

3.3 

1.2 

2.1 

2.7 

3.1 

1.8 

3.0 

Managerial 

22.ii 

16.1 

16.3 

15.7 

17.0 

8.0 

18.5 

13.0 

Clerical 

8.3 

ii.9 

8.3 

8.1 

8.8 

9.2 

8.3 

7.8 

Sales 

5.8 

11.5 

5.1* 

1.8 

7.1 

10.3 

6.2 

8.7 

Service 

13.5 

1.6 

9.0 

10.8 

11.3 

11.5 

12.3 

8.7 

Agricultural 

3.8 

1.6 

.6 

1.2 

1.1 

1.1 

1.8 

1.3 

Skilled 

26.9 

23.0 

28.3 

32.5 

18.1 

23.0 

21.2 

26ol 

Semiskilled 

1.9 

1.9 

9.6 

9.6 

9.9 

8.0 

7.3 

7.8 

Unskilled 

7.8 

18.0 

8.1 

6.0 

11.5 

13.8 

9.3 

12.1 

Retired 

.6 

3.3 

1.2 

0.0 

.5 

2.3 

.8 

1.7 

Unknown 

3.2 

h.9 

1.9 

6.0 

1.6 

6.9 

2.2 

6.1 


*1n this table, the designation Group (or Grp) A signifies the non- 
discipline cases and Group (or Grp) B signifies the discipline cases. 






















$ 



' ' 10 , 











who came from homes in which the occupation of the breadwinner was 
classified as seraiprofessional was higher than the percentage of 
non-discipline cases who came from homes in the same classification. 

The differences in percentages were not significant at any grade level. 

When the data were compiled to represent the entire male popu¬ 
lation, there were two occupational classifications in which the per¬ 
centages of discipline cases were significantly lower than the per¬ 
centages of non-discipline cases. The percentage of non-discipline 
cases from homes in which the occupation of the breadwinner was class¬ 
ified as professional was 7.5* while the percentage of discipline cases 
from homes in the same classification was 3*5* These two percentages 
are significantly different at the .01 level of confidence. Similarly, 
18.5 per cent of the non-discipline cases came from homes in which 
the occupation of the breadwinner was classified as managerial, while 
only 13.0 per cent of the discipline cases came from homes of this 
type. These two percentages are significantly different at the .06 
level of confidence. In all other categories of the occupational 
classification the difference between the percentage incidence of 
discipline and non-discipline cases was not significant. 

,6. MOTHERS WORKING AND BROKEN HOMES 

A consistent relationship was maintained between the incidence 

of misbehavior among students whose mothers worked and students -whose 

mothers did not work. The percentages are as followss 

Percentage of students whose Percentage of students whose 
mothers work who constituted mothers did not work who 
discipline cases constituted discipline cases 


Grade Ten 

5o.o 

29.8 

Grade Eleven 

Wu8 

31.8 

Grade Twelve 

59.1 

2J+.6 

All Grades 

50.6 

28.9 




t 




). 








V, .• 'jo .. x 








At every grade level the occurrence of misbehavior among students whose 
mothers were employed was higher than among students whose mothers 
were not employed. When all grades were considered the difference in 
percentages was significant at the .01 level of confidence. It is 
therefore apparent that the incidence of misbehavior is greater among 
students whose mothers work than it is among students whose mothers do 
not work. 

A similar relationship was evident between the percentages of 

students from broken homes who constituted discipline cases and the 

percentages of students from intact homes who constituted discipline 

cases. The percentages are as follows: 

Percentage of. students from Percentage of students from 
broken homes who constituted intact homes who constituted 
discipline cases discipline cases _ 


Grade Ten 

1*2.9 

30.8 

Grade Eleven 

51.6 

30.7 

Grade Twelve 

37.0 

26.8 

All Grades 

1*1*. 1 

39.6 


At each grade level the percentage of students from broken homes who 
were discipline cases was higher than the percentage of students from 
intact homes who constituted discipline cases. When all grades were 
considered, the difference in percentages was significant at the .01 
level of confidence. This evidence leads to the conclusion that the 
percentage incidence of discipline cases among students from broken 
homes is significantly higher than the percentage incidence of dis¬ 
cipline cases among students from homes which are not broken. 




• ' 

. 

* F,i J '■ 7 - 


. 

■ • . 

. ■.' ■ : - 



■ 





- 

* 


: ’ , 




. 

* 



* 

* 



* 

* 

, ' 






^ : '• ' i uwruri i-svyS, &$&*%■ m$o ,t.V 

' 

; ' 

■' • .! • • " ■ ! . , / ■ 

, . . , • • 





7. ACADEMIC RETARDATION 


As can be seen from the following figures, the evidence with 
respect to academic retardation is not consistent at all grade levels« 
The percentages of retarded students who constituted discipline cases 
and the percentages of non-retarded students who constituted discipline 
cases are as follows: 



Percentage of retarded 
students who constituted 
discipline cases 

Percentage of non-retarded 
students who constituted 
discipline cases 

Grade Ten 

Sh.S 

28.0 

Grade Eleven 

36.8 

33.0 

Grade Twelve 

25.0 

28.2 

All Grades 

J46.I1. 

29.8 


In Grade Ten the percentage of retarded students who were discipline 
cases is significantly higher (.01 level) than the percentage of non- 
retarded students who were discipline cases. Because the school 
records of many of the students were not complete, conclusions con¬ 
cerning retardation must be regarded as tentative, pending further 
investigation. However, the evidence in this study seems to indicate 
that retarded students who constitute discipline cases tend to drop out 
of school after Grade Ten. 

8. CONCLUSIONS RESULTING FROM THE COMPARISON 
OF DISCIPLINE AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 

The comparison of discipline and non-discipline cases resulted 
in the following conclusions; 

1. The mean ages of the discipline cases and the non-discipline 
cases were comparable except in Grade Ten where the mean age of 
the discipline cases was significantly higher. 




' 

. - • 

. 




' 




' 






■ "... r -. ' ■ , ' 

> 

' 


* 























■ 



. ' ' ' ■. 

' 












' 








. 


.... . . 




• ;o 

' 















h6 


2. The evidence concerning variability of the ages of discipline 
cases and non-discipline cases shows that the discipline cases 
were of normal age, that is they were not the very old or very 
young students in the group. 

3. Size of family was not a significant factor in differentiating 
discipline cases from non-discipline cases. 

ii. The mean intelligence scores of the discipline cases and the non¬ 
discipline cases were comparable, except in Grade Ten, where the 
mean intelligence score of the discipline cases was significantly 
lower. 

5. Students in the general pattern (both discipline and non-discipline 
cases) were significantly lower in mean mental ability than stu¬ 
dents in the matriculation pattern. The variability of the intel¬ 
ligence scores of the two groups was comparable. 

6. Discipline cases in the general pattern achieved on a par with 
non-discipline cases in the general pattern! however, discipline 
cases in the matriculation pattern were under-achievers as com¬ 
pared to non-discipline cases in the matriculation pattern. 

7. The mean achievement of students in the general pattern (both 
discipline cases and non-discipline cases) was significantly lower 
than the mean achievement of students in the matriculation pattern. 

8. The percentages of non-discipline cases from homes in which the 
occupation of the breadwinner was classed as professional and 
managerial respectively, were significantly greater than the per¬ 
centages of discipline cases from homes in the same occupational 
classifications. The differences in the percentages of discipline 
cases and non-discipline cases from homes in the eight other 
occupational classifications were not significant. 


■ 





1 


0 . •' ■') 




- ! 




hi! 









■ 







. ■ - 


• ; ; " • > 




•; • 


■ -j: 


/ 

■. ■ . . 







hi 

9. The percentage incidence of misbehavior among students whose 
mothers worked was significantly greater than the percentage 
incidence of misbehavior among students whose mothers did not 
work* 

10, The percentage incidence of misbehavior among students from 
broken homes was significantly greater than the percentage 
incidence of misbehavior among students from intact homes* 

11* In Grade Ten, the percentage of retarded students who were dis¬ 
cipline cases was significantly higher than the percentage of 
ncn-retarded students who were discipline cases* In Grades 
Eleven and Twelve, retardation was not a significant factor in 
differentiating between discipline cases and non-discipline cases* 
12. Discipline cases who drop out of school tend to be those who: 

a. are relatively 61 der. 

b. are in the general pattern. 

c. are low in mental ability. 

d. are academically retarded. 

13* Discipline cases who drop out of school tend to do so after 
Grade Ten. 




'' . '• 




) 









•i 


’ 


r 


f 







■■■ > • r ) 




■) 










CHAPTER. V 


THE INCIDENCE OF DISCIPLINE CASES 

The objective of this aspect of the study was to determine if 
trends were evident in the incidence of misbehavior. More specifical¬ 
ly, it was desired to ascertain if there was a significantly greater 
percentage incidence of discipline cases in any one grade, course 
pattern, or home room. Furthermore the place where disturbance 
offenses was investigated to determine if a few teachers were 
responsible for reporting most of the cases. Finally it was desired 
to determine if a significantly larger number of offenses occurred 
on any one day of the week or in any one month of the year. 

1. DISTRIBUTION OF DISCIPLINE CASES BY GRADE AND COURSE PATTERN 

Table VIII indicates that 73? male students were enrolled in 
the matriculation and general course patterns, 269 in Grade Ten, 

2k9 in Grade Eleven and 217 in Grade Twelve. According to the 
definition of discipline case used in this study, 231 or 31. ij. per cent 
of the students were reported in this category. The percentages of 
students reported as discipline cases in Grades Ten to Twelve were 
32. 3, 33*3) snd 28.1, respectively. The differences between the 
percentages of the students reported as discipline cases in the 
various grades were not significant. 

There were ?3? students reported as being in the matriculation 
pattern. Of these 136, or 25*h per cent, were classed as discipline 
cases. Two hundred students were reported as being in the general 
pattern, of which ninety-five, or k7»k per cent, were classed as 
discipline cases. The difference between these two percentages was 




s 




) 


[ 







;■ ) 


o 






r 



; . ' • 


n ’ . . i 




> 


.» • 


y "> '■ • 










h9 


TABLE VIII 

NUMBERS AND PERCENTAGES OF DISCIPLINE CASES IN THE 
TOTAL MALE POPULATION, MATRICULATION PATTERN AND GENERAL PATTERN 



Grade 

XII 

Grade 

XI 

Grade X 

All Grades 


Number 

% 

Number 

% 

Number 

% 

Number 

% 

Total Male Population 

217 


2l*9 


269 


735 


Discipline Cases 

61 

28.1 

83 

33.3 

87 

32.3 

231 

31.!* 

Matriculation Pattern 

160 


191* 


181 


535 


Matriculation Dis¬ 
cipline Cases 

kh 

27.5 

51 

26.3 

ill 

22.7 

136 

25.1* 

General Pattern 

57 


55 


88 


200 


General Discipline 
Cases 

17 

29.8 

32 

58.2 

1*6 

52.7 

95 

1*7.5 


significant at the .01 level of confidence. In Grade Ten and Grade 
Eleven the percentage of discipline cases in the general pattern was 
significantly higher (.01 level) than the percentage of discipline 
cases in the matriculation pattern. In Grade Twelve the percentage 
of discipline cases was higher in the general pattern than in the 
matriculation pattern but the difference in percentages was not sig¬ 
nificant. 

With the single exception of the Oade Twelve level, the per¬ 
centage incidence of discipline cases in the general pattern was 
significantly higher than the percentage incidence of discipline 
cases in the matriculation pattern. 




















v/,r.\ ' 










'A ro-'^ -IaK 





. • 




■■ ’ ) 0 ' ) .■ 

; . 


; 

• ' ■ > . >a ’ 


- ' v . ' ■ ■ . ■ ■ 




1 


.. ) ' ‘ •• . - .■ ‘ '■ ■ ■: 


' 


. ;■ ■ ’ ; ■ )p :l- aiy • .' 







. 





















The evidence concerning the distribution of discipline cases 
by grade and course pattern leads to these conclusions* 

1. With respect to total numbers of discipline cases, there was 
no significant difference in the percentage incidence among 
grades. 

2* There was no significant difference among grades in the 

percentage incidence of discipline cases in the matriculation 
pattern* 

3* There was a significantly higher percentage incidence of 
discipline cases in the general pattern in Grades Ten and 
Eleven than there was in Grade Twelve* 
lu The percentage incidence of discipline cases in the general 
pattern was significantly higher than the percentage inci¬ 
dence of discipline cases in the matriculation pattern* 

2. DISTRIBUTION OF DISCIPLINE CASES BY 
OFFENSE, GRADE AND COURSE PATTERN 

Table IX, the distribution of discipline cases by offense, 
grade and course pattern supports the conclusion that the percentage 
incidence of discipline cases among students in the general pattern 
is higher than among students in the matriculation pattern. This 
trend was consistent for truancy, disturbance and multiple cases 
for all grades and for late cases in Grade Ten and Grade Eleven. 

The percentage incidence of smoking cases was higher in the matricu¬ 
lation pattern than in the general pattern for all grades. Dif¬ 
ferences in the percentage incidence of smoking cases in the 
matriculation pattern and the percentage incidence of smoking cases 
in the general pattern were not significant at any grade level. 


. 


, 


* 


• ' 









' • ■: i ■ ■ \\7\ .v> m o : : 






] ■ 0 


' • 

... ’ r. • v: . , ■ 

■ ' ' •' ' ■ . ’ . ' ■ • ■ 

■ ’ 

. ' : 


■ 

' ' > > \ " i;; 





5i 


TABLE IX 


PERCENTAGES BY GRADES OF TRUANCY, SMOKING, LATE, DISTURBANCE AND 
MULTIPLE DISCIPLINE CASES IN THE TOTAL MALE POPULATION, IN THE 
MATRICULATION PATTERN AND IN THE GENERAL PATTERN 



Grade XII 

Grade XI 

Grade X 

All Grades 

Truancy 





Total Population 

7.8 

8.8 

6.3 

7.6 

Matriculation Pattern 

6.9 

7.7 

6.1 

6.9 

General Pattern 

10.5 

12.7 

6.8 

9.5 

Smoking 





Total Population 

2.3 

2.0 

2.6 

2.5 

Matriculation Pattern 

3.1 

2.6 

2.8 

2.8 

General Pattern 

0.0 

1.8 

2.3 

1.5 

Late 





Total Population 

6.0 

5.6 

1.9 

h.h 

Matriculation Pattern 

6.9 

k.l 

1.1 

3.9 

General Pattern 

3.5 

10.9 

3.U 

5.5 

Disturbances 





Total Population 

2.3 

h*k 

11.2 

6.3 

Matriculation Pattern 

1.9 

3.6 

6.1 

3.9 

General Pattern 

3.5 

7.3 

21.6 

12.5 

Multiple Cases 





Total Population 

9.7 

12.1 

io.5 

10.8 

Matriculation Pattern 

8.8 

8.3 

6.6 

1.9 

General Pattern 

12.3 

25.5 

18.2 

18.5 





















I. 







52 


Although there are differences in the percentage incidence of 
each type of case when considered by grade, the differences in per¬ 
centages were significant only with respect to disturbance cases. 
Considering discipline cases in both course pattern, the percentage 
incidence of disturbance cases in Grade Ten was significantly higher 
at the .05 level than the percentage incidence of disturbance cases 
in Grade Eleven, and significantly higher at the .01 level than the 
percentage incidence of disturbance cases in Grade Twelve. 

This evidence generally supports the conclusion that there was 
little difference in the percentage incidence of discipline, cases 
among the various grades. 

3. DISTRIBUTION OF DISCIPLINE CASES BY HOME ROOM 

An analysis of the distribution of Grade Ten discipline cases 
by home room indicated that there was a considerable variation in 
the percentage of male students in the various home rooms who con¬ 
stituted discipline cases. As shown in Table X, the percentages 
for the twelve home rooms varied from 9.5 to 66.7. The percentage 
incidence of discipline cases in Room G (66.7) was significantly 
greater than the percentage incidence of discipline cases in Rooms 
C and E at the .05 level of confidence, and was significantly greater 
than the percentage incidence of discipline cases in Rooms D, F, H 
and I at the .01 level of confidence. It may be concluded that there 
was a significantly larger percentage of students who constituted 
discipline cases in certain home rooms in Grade Ten. 

Table XI, page 5k, which shows the percentage incidence of 
discipline cases in the various home rooms in Grade Eleven, indicated 
the same trends. The range of percentage incidence of discipline 















53 


TABLE X 

NUMBERS OF MALE STUDENTS, NUMBERS OF DISCIPLINE CASES AND PERCENTAGES 
OF MALE STUDENTS WHO WERE DISCIPLINE CASES IN EACH HOME ROOM IN 

HRADE TEN 


Home Room 

Male Students 

Discipline Cases 

Percentage 

Room A 

31 

7 

22.6 

Room B 

19 

11 

57.9 

Room C 

22 

6 

27.3 

Room D 

19 

2 

10.5 

Room E 

16 

5 

31.3 

Room F 

22 

h 

18.2 

Room G 

21 

lh 

66.7 

Room H 

17 

2 

11.8 

Room I 

28 

16 

57.1 ; 

Room J 

27 

12 

ltlt.lt 

Room K 

21 

2 

9.5 

Room L 

26 

6 

22.2 


cases in the eleven home rooms varied from 13.3 to 62*5* The per¬ 
centage incidence in Room A (62.5) was significantly greater than the 
percentage incidence in Rooms D and H at the .05 level of confidence, 
and was significantly greater than the percentage incidence in 
Rooms C, E, F, G, and I at the .01 level of confidence. 

Table XII, page 55* which shows the percentage incidence of 
discipline cases in Grade Twelve, also indicates a fairly wide range 
in percentage incidence of discipline cases among the various home 
rooms (15.0 to 50.0). However, the difference in percentage incidence 
of discipline cases was significant (.05 level) between only two 

















* 






* 





0 

* 






* 





> 







* 






* 






* 











: ,io 

* 




■ 


- 

. . 


' . i . 3 7 ■ ) .< '• 

' 



•> 


1 ' ■ ' 

■■ 




1 • 




' ' 


' " 




; • ’ }:o?.sb 


■ . 









. * . 


... 







51 * 


TABLE XI 


NUMBERS OF MALE STUDENTS, NUMBERS OF DISCIPLINE CASES AND PERCENTAGES 
OF MALE STUDENTS WHO WERE DISCIPLINE CASES IN EACH HOME ROOM IN 

GRADE ELEVEN 


Home Room 

Male Students 

Discipline Cases 

Percentage 

Room A 

32 

20 

62*5 

Room B 

26 

12 

1*6.2 

Room C 

13 

3 

23.1 

Room D 

27 

8 

29.6 

Room E 

15 

2 

13.3 

Room F 

21 

k 

19.1 

Room G 

26 

h 

15.1* 

Room H 

26 

9 

3l*.6 

Room I 

18 

b 

22.2 

Room J 

22 

8 

36.1* 

Room K 

23 

9 

39.1 


home rooms, G and H. 


The evidence suggests that certain home rooms have more than 
their share of discipline cases* 

IV. PLACES WHERE DISTURBANCES OCCURRED 

One hundred twenty-seven disturbances were reported* This 
number does not mean that 127 students were involved, since several 
students were reported more than once for creating disturbances. 

Of the 127 offenses reported, twenty-four occurred in the gymnasium, 
hallway, detention room, study hall, cafeteria or on the playground. 











: '0 i 




: > : 


1 •••.*.) 


I 


) 


‘ 

s > 

* ’ ■ 

* 




* 

-i . ■' > yh v : 

: ' • • • 

‘:;n ■ > . ■ ' ' 








55 


TABLE XII 

NUMBERS OF MALE STUDENTS, NUMBERS OF DISCIPLINE CASES AND PERCENTAGES 
OF MALE STUDENTS WHO WERE DISCIPLINE CASES IN EACH HOME ROOM IN 

GRADE TWELVE 


Home Room 

Male Students 

Discipline Cases 

Percentage 

Room A 

ho 

10 

25.0 

Room B 

29 

10 

31*.5 

Room C 

2b 

6 

25.0 

Room D 

19 

6 

31.6 

Room E 

16 

h 

25.0 

Room F 

26 

5 

19.2 

Room G 

20 

3 

i5.o 

Room H 

12 

6 

5o.o 

Room I 

31 

11 

35.5 


and eighty-three occurred in classrooms. For twenty offenses, the 
locations were not recorded. 

Forty-four teachers reported no disturbances, nine teachers 
reported one, three teachers reported two, four teachers reported 
three, one teacher reported six, one teacher reported seven, two 
teachers reported eight, and one teacher reported twenty-five. 

It is interesting to note that the five teachers who reported 
six or more disturbances accounted for fifty-four, or sixty-five per 
cent, of the eighty-three offenses occurring in classrooms. All of 
these five teachers, three of whom had no previous teaching experience, 
were new to the staff this year. 










, 










KM 



... 









56 


These findings indicate that during the period in -which the 

study was Conducted, discipline cases arising out of classroom dis- 

• j 

turbances occurred more frequently in classes conducted by teachers 
new to the staff, and especially teachers who had no previous teaching 
experience. 


V. TIME OF OCCURRENCE OF OFFENSES 

The specific day on which truancy, disturbance and smoking 
offenses occurred was investigated. Discipline cases arising out of 
tardiness were excluded from this aspect of the investigation. 

Since students had to be late four or more times to be classed as 
discipline cases, using the date of the fourth or last offense would 
not have been particularly meaningful and using the date of all 
offenses would have necessitated, for comparative purposes, including 
the dates of the offenses of all students who had been late one, 
two or three times. 

Table XIII, which indicates the percentage of occurrence of 
truancy, disturbance, smoking and total offenses for each day of the 
week, shows significant differences between the percentages. 

With respect to truancy, the greatest percentage of the 
offenses occurred on Friday (26.7)« This percentage was signifi¬ 
cantly larger (.07 level) than the percentage of truancies on Tuesday 
and Wednesday, was significantly larger (.05 level) than the per¬ 
centage of truancies on Thursday, but was not significantly larger 
than the percentage of truancies on Monday. Though the percentage of 
truancies on Monday was larger than the percentages occurring on 
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, the differences in percentages were 
not significant. 



. 

\ : 10 U X i 0 2.C 7 0 % i : \ : " tt ' \ 

' 

. 


■ " . ' ... <\ ' , ' ■ ' ' / ' ./ : • ■ • 


- ■ : 


*■ ' - 

• 



' 





‘ 

• 





• 




5vsd J'on 

.7 ■ ' • 





< ■ 7 7 . . , 








* 


?: > ■ ‘ , r: o • 0\.:7 00‘ 

It 


. 


. ■ . • 7 ' ■.....-> s . '.... ' 



: ■ 

• 

. 

- 

' 


. 

■ ' ■ ■ 



: ■ ' ' 

■ 

* 

. 


• 

> ' •: . > 

■ • i 


. 

, 

' 




. 

. - .bn.3 . 




' 

i 9; ; ;.-Cu ;iOO 

• 

: • i ' 




. ‘' - 



zhaoU- no 


■ • . . ■ ■ . ■■ ■ 7 t ; : 

r. ?7 

■. 

■ 

- 




» ;•. ' 









57 


TABLE XIII 

PERCENTAGES OF OCCURRENCE OF TRUANCY, SMOKING, DISTURBANCE 
AND TOTAL OFFENSES ON EACH DAY OF THE WEEK 


Offense 

Monday 

Tuesday 

Wednesday 

Thursday 

Friday 

Truancy 

23.9 

17.6 

17.6 

lU.1 

26.7 

Smoking 

28.6 

22.1; 

12.2 

16.3 

20.1; 

Disturbances 

lit. 8 

18.6 

17.2 

25.0 

21;. 2 

Total Offenses 

21.0 

18.8 

16.6 

18.8 

21;.8 


In the ease of smoking offenses, 28.6 per cent occurred on 
Monday, -while only 12.2 per cent occurred on Wednesday. This differ¬ 
ence was significant at the .05 level of confidence. The percentages 
of smoking offenses on Tuesday, Thursday and Friday, 22.16.3 and 
20 .k respectively, were net significantly different from those per¬ 
centages on other days. 

Greater percentages of disturbances occurred on Thursday and 
Friday than on the other days of the week. The percentages of dis¬ 
turbances on these two days, 25.0 and 2lw2 respectively, were sig¬ 
nificantly higher at the .05 level of confidence than the percentage 
of disturbances on Monday (li|.8). The percentages of disturbances 
on Tuesday and Wednesday^ 18.8 and 1?.2 respectively, were not sig¬ 
nificantly different from the percentage occurring on any other day. 

With respect to all types of offenses, 2l*.8 per cent occurred 
on Friday, 21.0 per cent on Monday, 18.8 per cent on Tuesday and 
Thursday and 16.6 per cent on Wednesday. The differences between 
the percentage occurring on Friday and the percentages occurring on 
Tuesday and Thursday were significant at the .01 level of confidence. 











4 ' ' ' 


„ . . ' • . J ’ )■ 

' ' - ' , 

. r 

: ■ • ■ ■ 

- 

- ' . : y . ... v; : " " ■' ' '' 

» 

. 

. 

* . . ", . r . » \ >-r ■ 

• ■ * ■ . 

4 

• v : • t •.••••.» : v-» >f£n v.oo. ! ;'f no i r ./•. o t •;•£.!r;ocrn >i orJ 

. ■ . ■ , . 7. . ’■ 7 . " \ . ,< 7 i 7 '• - ‘ •' 






The difference between the percentage occurring on Friday and the 
percentage occurring on Wednesday was significant at the .01 level 
of confidence. 

The numbers of the various days of the week on which school 
was conducted during the period of investigation were as follows: 


Monday..29 

Tuesday. 31 

Wednesday.32 

Thursday.31 

Friday.31 


Therefore neither the greater percentage incidence of 
offenses on Friday and Monday, nor the lower percentage incidence of 
offenses on Wednesday was because of the greater or smaller number of 
these specific days on which school was in session. 

It is apparent that the day of the week was a significant 
factor with respect to the occurrence of truancy, smoking and dis¬ 
turbance offenses. On Monday the incidence of truancy and smoking 
was high, while the incidence of disturbance was low. On Tuesday 
there was a relatively high number of smoking offenses, but the pro¬ 
portion of truancies and disturbances was low. The incidence of all 
three types of offenses was low on Wednesday. On Thursday the per¬ 
centage of disturbances was the highest, but the relative number of 
truancy and smoking offenses was low. On Friday the incidence of all 
three types of offenses was high. 

Table XIV, which shows the date of occurrence cf the offenses 
truancy, smoking and disturbances, indicates differences in the per¬ 
centage incidence of these offenses according to month. 
















: 





. : l 




■; ) 










uO" D9€l.£D’xio 

















' 


' / ' ■ ' 


* 

v/7 

. ' . . • ' , - 





1 ■ . i . : 






* ■ ' : 


- t: 









59 


TABLE XIV 

PERCENTAGES OF OCCURRENCE OF TRUANCY, SMOKING, DISTURBANCE 
AND TOTAL OFFENSES IN EACH MONTH OF THE YEAR 


Offense 

Sept. 

Oct. 

. Nov. * 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

Truancy 

l.k 

31*0 

12.7 

Iu2 

20.li 

13.lt 

11.3 

5.6 

Smoking 

8.2 

18. if. 

k.l 

12.2 

26.5 

12.2 

lit.3 

k.l 

Disturbances 

2.3 

8.6 

21.1 

9.k 

21.9 

20.3 

8.6 

7.8 

Total Offenses 

2.8 

20.1 

llu7 

7o5 

21.9 

16.0 

10.7 

6.3 


Concerning truancy, the percentage incidence was low in 
September, rose sharply in October, fell gradually until January where 
another sharp rise was in evidence, and then decreased gradually until 
April. A further analysis of the actual dates on which offenses 
occurred (see Appendix D) indicates that forty-four truancies were 
reported in October. Of the forty-four, nineteen occurred in the 
second week, just prior to Thanksgiving, and thirteen occurred in the 
week following. Similarly in November, of the eighteen offenses 
reported, ten occurred in the first five days of the month, and in- 
January, of the twenty-nine truancies reported, nineteen occurred 
in the first seven school days. 

This evidence indicates that truancies occured more frequently 
in the months of October and January. Furthermore, offenses of this 
nature, rather than being evenly distributed throughout the months 
of October, November, and January, tended to occur with greater 
frequency within smaller intervals of time. 

















- * ■' in 


’ 








- 

”/J. V) ... • ■ ; > ; • 

■ l ' ■ ■ . f 

-• " 1 ' • •; ' ' • ' - '• ' : ■ i- ■ or.)) ■ y j 


) i it 




: 




> 


* 


- 

't *. J / ■. V . ' - 




■ ■ 

' ' ' • ] . : 


J 




' 















60 


The percentage incidence of smoking offenses does not indicate 
gradual rises and declines. However, as in the case of truancy, 

October and January had the highest percentage incidence* An analysis 
of the actual dates on which the offenses occurred (see Appendix D) 
reveals that offenses occurred with unusual frequency in the latter 
part of October and especially in the latter part of January. In 
October eight of the nine offenses occurred in the last eight days* 

In January all of the thirteen reported offenses occurred in the last 
ten days of the month* 

"With respect to the percentage incidence of disturbances, a 
gradual trend was in evidence. From September to November the per¬ 
centage incidence increased. This increase was followed by a drop 
in December, a rise in January, approximately the same percentage 
incidence in February and then a drop in both March and April. Again 
an analysis of the actual dates on which the offenses occurred 
reveals an interesting point (see Appendix D). There were six days 
on which four or more disturbances were reported. On one day 
(January 30), thirteen offenses were reported. The thirty-eight 
cases reported on these six days represent 29*7 per cent of all the 
disturbances reported. 

With respect to all types of offenses, the percentage incidence 
in January was significantly higher than that in September, November, 
December, March and April (.05 level of confidence as compared with 
November and .01 level of confidence as compared to the other months^ 
Similarly, the percentage incidence of offenses in October was sig¬ 
nificantly higher than that in September, December, March am April 
(.05 level of confidence in all cases). 


) ' > 0 i! 

. 

* 

. 

- 




‘ > 












ili 














' \ • ■ ' 

. 

* 

' 




- • ; ■ ' ■ ■ 
. - ! hi ■ . 




61 


6. CONCLUSIONS RESULTING FROM AN INVESTIGATION OF THE 

INCIDENCE OF DISCIPLINE CASES 

The investigation of the incidence of discipline cases re¬ 
sulted in the folio-wing conclusions: 

1. With respect to the total number of cases, there was no sig¬ 
nificant difference in the percentage incidence among grades* 

2. The proportions of students in the matriculation pattern, 
who were discipline cases, were similar at all grade levels* 

3* The percentage incidence of discipline cases in the general 
pattern in Grades Ten and Eleven was significantly higher 
than it was in Grade Twelve* 

U* There were proportionately more trouble-makers among those in 
the general than in the matriculation pattern. 

5>. The analysis of the incidence of specific types cases 
(truancy, late, disturbance, smoking and multiple) supports 
the conclusion that there were relatively more discipline 
cases in the general than in the matriculation pattern, and 
that there was little difference in the percentage incidence 
among the various grades. 

6* There was a significant difference in the percentage incidence 
of discipline cases among students in the various home rooms* 

7. Teachers new to the staff, especially teachers with no 
experience, had more classroom disturbances than did other 
teachers. 

8. The incidence of misbehavior was high on Friday and Monday 
and low on Wednesday. 

. Relatively, truancy, smoking and disturbance offenses were more 
frequent in January and October. Furthermore, truancy and 


9 


. 

* 

*' 

, - / . . ■ ' ' ■ •' - 

* 

, . 

. 


- ' ■ . V '■ 

• ■ ■ . - • 

i ' 

' 








* 




, ■ 





62 


smoking offenses tended to occur more frequently in limited 
periods within a month, while disturbances tended to occur 
more frequently on certain days of the month. 



CHAPTER VI 


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 

This study is an attempt to compare male discipline cases 
with male non-discipline cases in a selected composite high school, 
as well as an attempt to reveal pertinent data regarding the incidence 
of discipline cases. 

Discipline cases were defined as students whose behavior was 
such that it was reported and recorded on discipline cards. These 
discipline cases fell into five categories: truants, lates, smokers, 
students guilty of causing disturbances, and multiple offenders 
(students guilty of more than one offense). 

Discipline cases and non-discipline cases were compared with 
respect to age, size of family, mental ability, occupation of bread¬ 
winner, academic retardation and certain home conditions (broken 
homes and working mothers)# Incidence of discipline cases was 
analyzed according to grade, course pattern and home room. Dis¬ 
turbance offenses were treated according to place of disturbance. 
Truancy, smoking and disturbance offenses were categorized by time 
of occurrence (day of the week and month of the year). 

The data on 735 male students in the selected composite 
high school, for the eight month period from September, 1957, to 
April, 1958, inclusive, were obtained from discipline cards, class 
achievement records, cumulative records, registration forms, an 
admi n istered intelligence test, and an interview with the principal. 

The conclusions of the study are summarized under two 
headings, conclusions resulting from a comparison of discipline and 
non-discipline cases and conclusions resulting from an investigation 












61 * 

of the incidence of discipline cases and of the incidence of certain 
types of offenses, 

1. CONCLUSIONS RESULTING FROM A COMPARISON OF 
DISCIPLINE AND NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 


Age 

The mean ages of the discipline cases and the non-discipline 
cases were comparable with the exception of Grade Ten where the mean 
age of the discipline cases was significantly lower. At all grade 
levels the ages of the discipline cases showed less variability than 
the ages of the non-discipline cases, with the differences being sig¬ 
nificant in Grade Ten and Grade Eleven. These findings lead to two 
conclusions: 

1. The older discipline cases tend to drop out of school 
after Grade Ten, 

2. The discipline cases do not tend to be drawn from the 
very old or very young students within a grade. 

Size of Family 

There were no significant differences between the discipline 
and the non-discinline cases with respect to mean size of family and 
with respect to standard deviation of size of family. 

Intelligence 

The mean intelligence scores of the discipline cases and the 
non-discipline cases were comparable with the exception of Grade Ten, 
where the mean intelligence score of the discipline cases was sig¬ 
nificantly lower. This evidence seems to suggest that discipline 








' 


























' 






• 



: ■ 

« 



. 






... 

' 




' » 



. 

' . 

' 





: 




. 

. 




« 

■ 





• : 






, 


j 














. 

' 














' " ' t 














6 ? 


cases of low mental ability tend to drop out of school after Grade 
Ten. 

Students in the general pattern (both discipline cases and 
non-discipline cases) were significantly lower in mean mental ability 
than students in the matriculation pattern. The variability of the 
intelligence scores of the two groups was comparable. 

Achievement 

In the general pattern, the mean achievement of the discipline 
cases was comparable to the mean achievement of the non-discipline 
cases. In the matriculation pattern, the mean achievement of the 
discipline cases was significantly lower than the mean achievement of 
the non-discipline cases. When both mental ability and achievement 
are considered, discipline cases in the general pattern were achiev¬ 
ing on a par with non-discipline cases in the same pattern, but 
discipline cases in the matriculation pattern were under-achieving as 
compared to non-discipline cases in the matriculation pattern. 

The mean achievement of students in the general pattern (both 
discipline cases and non-discipline cases) was significantly lower 
than the mean achievement of the students in the matriculation pattern. 

)ccupatlon of Breadwinner 

The percentages of discipline cases from families in which 
the occupation of the breadwinner was classed as professional x>r 
managerial respectively, were significantly lower than the percentages 
of non-discipline cases from families in the same classification. No 
significant differences were found between the percentages of discipline 
cases and non-discipline cases from homes in which the occupation of 
the breadwinner was in one of the eight other occupational categories. 





. [) r! ' ", o ;\.y ';v : ; OvS ftw>A Ifil XB&tvQkf IfflZ 

. 

. . . , , ■ ■ 

. 

. • 1 < 

I >rl ‘ ) 

v; ^ ?. 

) . . j . 

- i'“i . ' . V ” r ih> 

•; ■ . 1 ■ ' ' ' : 

. ' • ; "• ‘ ' 

’ 


■ 

■ • , ■ ■ a';. ; ' ' 1 ■ 

. , '.v r. r t ■ ; ■ 

- 

' C - ' • 

- 





66 


Broken Homes and Working Mothers 

The percentage of discipline cases from homes broken because 
of separation, divorce or death, was significantly greater than the 
percentage of discipline cases from intact homes. Similarly, the 
percentage of discipline cases from homes where the mother was 
employed was significantly greater than the percentage of discipline 
cases from homes where the mother was not employed. 

Academic Retardation 

In Grade Ten the percentage of retarded students who were 
discipline cases was significantly higher than the percentage of 
non-retarded students who were discipline cases. In Grades Eleven 
and Twelve retardation x^as not a significant factor in differentiating 
beWeen discipline and non-discipline cases. This evidence seems 
to indicate that discipline cases who are retarded tend to drop out 
of school after Grade Ten. Because the academic records of many of 
the students were incomplete, this conclusion must be regarded as 
tentative, pending further investigation. 

Summary 

Of all the factors considered in this comparison of discipline 
cases and non-discipline cases, working mothers and broken homes 
were the most significant in differentiating between the two groups. 
Age, intelligence, occupation of breadwinner, achievement and re¬ 
tardation were significant in certain respects. Size of family was 
not significant in any respect. 














• '■ ' • ■ ' . ' : 

. 



. 

' 




. 


• ' \ x. > • . 


; 




. . 






H:F, ' 








■ ' ’ 

' 


.! f: 












67 


2. CONCLUSIONS RESULTING FROM AN INVESTIGATION OF THE 
INCIDENCE OF DISCIPLINE CASES AND OF THE INCIDENCE 
OF CERTAIN TYPES OF OFFENSES 


Grade 


No one grade showed a percentage incidence of discipline 
cases significantly different from that in either of the other two 
grades. This conclusion was also true for the incidence of all 
specific types of discipline cases with the exception of disturbances. 

Course Pattern 

The differences in the percentage incidence of discipline 
cases in the general pattern and in the matriculation pattern were 
significant in Grade Ten and in Grade Eleven, but not in Grade 
Twelve. When all grades were considered, the percentage incidence 
of discipline cases in the general pattern was significantly greater 
than the percentage incidence of discipline cases in the matricula¬ 
tion pattern. The conclusion that there is a higher percentage 
incidence of discipline cases in the general pattern than in the 
matriculation pattern is supported by analyzing the incidence of 
all specific types of cases except smoking. In the latter case the 
percentage incidence in the matriculation pattern was slightly higher 
than in the general pattern in all three grades. 

Home Room 

The evidence clearly indicated that there was a significantly 
higher percentage of discipline cases among students in certain home 
rooms at all grade levels. 



















* 

* 


0 






■ 


■■ . ■ f 1 • : • ' ■’ ■ 

. • : . • ■■ » V 




- 

■ * , 

' 


» 




. 








* 

















68 


Place of Disturbance 

Teachers new to the staff reported a larger number of dis¬ 
cipline cases than teachers who were not new to the staff. Of the 
five teachers new to the staff, three had had no previous teaching 
experience, while the other two both had more than ten years of 
experience. 

Time of Occurrence of Offenses According to Day of the Week 

The percentage of truancy offenses occurring Friday was sig¬ 
nificantly larger than the percentages of truancy offenses occurring 
on Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday. The percentage of smoking offenses 
occurring on Monday was significantly higher than the percentage of 
smoking offenses occurring on Wednesday. The percentage of dis¬ 
turbance offenses occurring on Thursday and on Friday was signifi¬ 
cantly higher than the percentage of disturbance offenses occurring 
Monday. With respect to all types of offenses, a significantly higher 
percentage occurred on Friday than occurred on Tuesday, Wednesday or 
Thursday. The evidence then indicates that certain offenses tend to 
take place with greater frequency on certain days of the week. 

Time of Occurrence of Offenses According to Month of the Year 

With respect to total offenses (truancy, smoking and dis¬ 
turbances), a significantly higher percentage occurred in October 
and in January than in September, December, March and April. Large 
numbers of truancy and smoking offenses tended to occur in limited 
periods of time within months, and large numbers of disturbance 
offenses tended to occur on certain days of the month. 












f - . . ' ■ )(- ' V : V 

. 

. 


' 










. 


■ 




' 

*X 

■ 

. 






' ' . • . 

i , ' ■ . ' 

- 

* 



■ ' . 1 : 










' 




. 


l/J‘, . > ' . ' d ' ’ 


. 


■- ■ • 




t . 




















69 


3. ADMINISTRATIVE IMPLICATIONS OF THE STUDY 

The findings of this study indicate that the students likely 
to become discipline cases are those who: 

1. come from broken homes. 

2. have mothers who are employed. 

3. are academically retarded. 

i;. are in the general pattern. 

5. are under-achieving in the matriculation pattern. 

Similarly, this study indicates that the staff of the school 
might decrease the incidence of misbehavior by taking special pre¬ 
cautions on Monday and Friday, and in the months of October and 
January. The high incidence of discipline cases in certain home 
rooms suggests that the administrative policy followed in assigning 
students to home rooms might be re-examined. 














CHAPTER VII 


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY 

1* Because of the limited scope of the present study, no generaliza¬ 
tions can be drawn from the conclusions reached* A similar study 
could be conducted in another composite high school to determine if 
certain conclusions arrived at in the present study tend to persist* 
Because of the differences in school administrative policy and type 
of records kept, difficulties would arise in the comparison of the 
findings* However, there should be enough similarity between school 
policies are records to enable comparisons to be drawn between the 
conclusions of the two studies, and thus enable fairly valid 
generalizations to be made. 

2* As the study progressed certain questions arose in the mind of 
the writer* Is misbehavior consistent throughout the school life of 
the student? At what stage of school life is persistent misbehavior 
most likely to begin? What is the relationship between personality 
characteristics and misbehavior in school? What home conditions 
other than those investigated in this study are likely to be charac¬ 
teristics of students who misbehave? Further research, perhaps in the 
form of case studies, is required to answer these questions and 
formulate conclusions regarding causal factors of school misbehavior. 

3* Additional information on the extent to which experienced and 
inexperienced teachers new to a staff have difficulty with classroom 
disturbances would be valuable* Certainly no generalizations can be 
made from the conclusions of the present study because of the extremely 
small sample* Such information could have important implications with 






71 

respect to staff placement and transfer within a school system, as 
well as important implications with respect to adequacy of teacher 
training programs* 

1*. The study indicated that drop-outs tend to be: 

a. Older discipline cases in the general pattern. 

b. Discipline cases with low mental ability. 

c. Discipline cases who were academically retarded. 

It was indicated also, that discipline cases who dropped out of 
school, did so after Grade Ten. Further investigation of drop-outs 
in the composite high schools is required to validate these findings 
and thus determine the extent to which misbehavior and premature 
departure from school are related. 

5. The writer found it difficult to explain why discipline cases 

as compared to non-discipline cases in the matriculation pattern were 
under-achievers, while discipline cases as compared to non-discipline 
cases in the general pattern were not. One can hypothesize that, for 
various reasons, all the students in the general pattern were under¬ 
achievers, therefore misbehavior had no further effect. Further study 
is required to substantiate or refute this and other hypotheses that 
could be advanced to explain this lack of consistent under-achievement 
of discipline cases. 

6. The percentage incidence of discipline cases was significantly 
higher in certain home rooms in all grades. Since the presence of 
many discipline cases in a home room is likely to have a detrimental 
effect on the progress (social, personal and academic) of all the 
students in the room, this is an undesirable situation. Further stuc(y 
is needed to reveal why the situation occurs. Perhaps it is because 





72 


of the administrative policy in assigning students to rooms. Perhaps 
it is because students in these hopje rooms are exposed to poor teach¬ 
ing. The administration of the school cannot attemjjt a solution until 
further investigation indicates the real causes. 

7. With respect to the times of occurrence of offenses, the following 
questions can be raised: 

a. Why did more truancies occur on Monday and Friday? 

b. Why did more smoking offenses occur* on Monday? 

c. Why did more disturbances occur on Thursday and Friday? 

d. Why was the percentage incidence of offenses higher in 
January and October? 

Certain hypotheses can be developed in answer to these questions. 

Perhaps the reason for the frequency of truancies on Monday and Friday 
is simply because of a desire on the part of the students to enjoy a 
long week-end. More smoking offenses might be found on Monday 
because the teachers on supervision are more alert after the week-end 
and therefore discover more students guilty of this offense. The high 
percentage of disturbances on Thursday and Friday may be due to increas¬ 
ing tension on the part of both students and teachers as the week pro¬ 
gresses. Perhaps the higher incidence of offenses in January and 
October can be explained by administrative policy within the school. 
These questions represent administrative problems. Further research 
is required to develop other hypotheses and to substantiate or refute 
the hypotheses advances, in order that these administrative problems 
might be solved. 

8. Several conclusions were reached in this study regarding all 
discipline cases as compared to non-discipline cases. Since these 
conclusions were made as a result of calculating and comparing 




' 

■ ' , ; ’'J . ; . M j". . •/' »'! . 


. > ■ • ■ ■ > 









r r >0 


• • 










j 


. . ) v , ' ' ■ 











. ! j 










. u }j:\h :$ .... - 1 y ' , ' 


o 




■ 








> 


I ID 






73 


averages 9 applying them to a specific type of offender (e.g. truants) 
is open to criticism* Further investigation is required to determine 
the extent to which the conclusions reached do apply to specific 
types of offenders* 






BIBLIOGRAPHY 















75 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Books 


Cutts, Nonna, and Nicholas Mosely, Teaching the Disorderly Pupil in 
the Elementary and Secondary School, New York: Longmans Green 

& co., I?577 l7S“p. 

Dewey, John, Democracy and Education, New York: MacMillan Company, 
1916, h3b p. 

Garret, Henry E. Statistics in Psychology and Education , New York: 
Longmans, Green '& Co.,””1953, b$9 p. 

Kamedze, Brother Paul, A Study of the Major Sociological Aspects of 
Truancy Within Selected Census Tracts of ~Jashington D. C., 

Doctoral Thesis Abstract, Washington D.C.: Catliolic~University 
of America Press, 1955, 59 p. 

Wickman, E. K., Children 1 s Behavior and Teachers ’ Attitudes , New York; 
Commonwealth Fund, 1928, 217 p. 


Periodical Articles 

Bruce, William E., "The Problem of Juvenile Behavior," The American 
School Board Journal , CXXXVI, (March, 1958), p. 5b° 

Cohen, Eli, and Lila Rosenblum, "Are Jobs the .Answer to Delinquency?" 
The School and Society , LXXXVI, (May 10, 1958), pp. 215-216, 

Coleman, C. T., w The Characteristics of Disciplinary Problem Pupils 

in High School, 1 * School Review , XXXVII, (June, 1930), pp. k3h~kh6* 

Dinitz, Simon et al, "Delinquency Proneness and School Achievement," 
Educational Research Bulletin , College of Education, Ohio State 
University, XXXVI, (April 10, 1957), pp. 131 - 137. 

Dresher, R. H., "Seeds of Delinquency,** Personnel and Guidance Journal, 
XXXIII, (May, 1957), pp. 595-598. ' ~ 

Hand, H. B., "Working Mothers and Maladjusted Children,** The Journal 
of Educational Sociology , XXX, (January, 1957), pp. 215-216. 

Kravaceus, William C., "The Counselor’s Role in Combatting Juvenile 
Delinquency," Personnel and Guidance Journal, XXXV, (October, 

1957), PP. 10C- - 101. 

Ladd, Edward T., "The Perplexities of the Problem of Keeping Order," 
Harvard Educational Review , XXVIII, (Winter, 1958), pp. 19 - 29. 




















































•>oO; 


















76 


Inhman, Joseph D., "A Sociologist-Sheriff Speaks Out About Juvenile 
Delinquency,” Phi Delta Kappan, XXXIX, (February, 1958), 

pp. 206-211;. 

Oliva, Peter F., ”Kigh School Discipline in American Society,” The 
Bulletin of the National Association of Secondary School 
Principals , CX, (January, ~l9 56)7 PP* 1—2IT- 

Russel, I. L., '‘Behavior Problems of Children from Broken and Intact 
Homes,” Journal of Educational Sociology, XXXI, (November, 1957), 
pp. 125 - 129. 

Smith, Arthur, and Jane Josse, "Some Socle-Psychological Aspects of 
the High School Orientation Program,” Journal of Educational 
Sociology , XXX, (November, 1957), pp. 9$ - 1C'6, 

"Teacher Opinion of Pupil Misbehavior," National Education Associa¬ 
tion Research Bulletin , XXXIV, (April, 1956), pp. 52" lOl;. ~ 

Trott, Vernon, "New Dimensions in Classroom Discipline,” The 

Educational Courier , XXVII, (February, 1958), pp. 12, 13, 50, 60. 

Zeitlin, Herbert, "Phoenix Reports on High School Misbehavior,” 
Personnel and Guidance Journal , XXXVI, (February, 1957), 
pp. 3"®. 


Miscellaneous 


Dictionary of Occupational Titles , Part II, United States Department 
of Labor, Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing 
Office, (1939), 330 p. 

Guidance Newsletter, Department of Education, Edmonton, Alberta, 
(March, 1957). 









































APPENDIX A 









78 


SCHOOL POLICY WITH RESPECT TO TRUANCY, LATES 
AND SMOKING ON THE GROUNDS 

Besides providing for the courses on the curriculum, our school 
makes an honest attempt to train our young people to become good 

Canadian citizens. To help develop habits of punctuality and regu¬ 
larity of attendance, the following rules have been laid down: 


1. Dates 


1st Charged Late: 

Recorded in office. No detention. 

2nd Charged Late: 

Recorded in office. No detention. 

3rd Charged Late: 

The student shall be referred to Guidance 

Counsellor. No detention. 

Uth Charged Late: 

The student shall be referred to the Assistant 

Principal or Dean of Girls. Pupils shall be 

given one detention. 

5th Charged Late: 

The Principal shall warn the student that the 

next time he is late he will be sent home. 

The Principal shall also inform the home by 

telephone or by letter* Pupil shall be given 

one detention. 

6th Charged Late: 

The Principal shall send the student home. 

The student shall bring a parent to the school 

and both will sign the probation form in 

triplicate. (Original to School Board; 

Second copy to School; Third copy to parent). 

If student does not return with parent by the 

/ 

following school day the home will be contacted. 

7th Charged Late: 

Office shall refer the student to the Principal 

who shall take whatever action he may see fit. 


• „, / ! ‘ • )■ > ). Vi; I jrj :ji. : / /.Y.j* WJ. ' 



* 

:■ ) X.aX’ Ov-X r.j ^fij'uufXo'X ■ 


» 

* 


i 


. 


. 




* 


* 




, : . 

ifiOt;* 


. • . 


* . ■ ’ 

• 







* 

* 






+ • ' . . • : < .. 






79 


2. TRUANCY 


1st Offence: 


2nd Offence: 


3rd Offence: 


After the first truancy the student will be required 
to take home a letter informing his parents of the 
offense and requesting one of them to come to the 
school for an interview. This letter must be signed 
by one of his parents and brought to the Principalis 
Office before 9:00 a.m. on the following school day. 
The pupil may then be admitted to his classes. 

The student must see the Principal who shall send him 
home. The student shall bring a parent to the school 
and both will sign the probation form in triplicate. 
(Original to School Board; Second copy to School; 
Third copy to parent.) If student does not return 
with parent by the following school day the home will 
be contacted. 

The student shall be sent home, and he, together with 
a parent, must contact the Assistant Superintendent 
of Schools before he will be readmitted to classes. 


3. SKCKING ON THE SCHOOL PREMISES 

1st Offence: (a) Recorded on conduct card. 

(b) One detention 

(c) The student shall, be referred to an Assistant 
Principal or the Bean of Girls. 

2nd Offence: (a) Recorded on conduct card. 

(b) One detention. 

(c) The Principal, shall inform the home by letter 
or telephone. 













' . 

* 

' 

* * 

. 

. 


' . : : 


. ■ - 


: 1 ’ . 



. ■ 




' 








- ‘ : . 












' 


* 


' 









3rd Offences (a) The Principal shall send the student home. 

(b) If the student wishes to be re-admitted to 
school, he, together with a parent, must 
contact the Deputy Superintendent of School; 













APPENDIX B 










FORM FOR GATHERING DATA ON DISCIPLINE CASES 


Name _ 

Age ___ 

Grade _ 

Father 1 s Occupation_ 

Mother’s Occupation _ __ 

Evidence of Broken Home _ _ _ 

Size of Family________ 

Address _______ 

Intelligence Quotient___ 

Achievement: 

Language or English: Christmas _ Easter _____ 

Social Studies: Christmas ___ Easter ______ 

Course Pattern: Matriculation__ General _______ 

Number of Grades Repeated: ___ 

Offense: Truant __ Smoking _____ Late __Disturbance 

Date of Offense: Truant, 

Smoking _______ 

Disturbance 


Hone Room: __ 

Place Disturbance Occurred 


Other Pertinent Data 































: 

: . ' ' ' _ f: •; f J ' 



















83 


FORM FOR GATHERING DATA ON NON-DISCIPLINE CASES 


Home Room Number _ Number of Non-Discipline Cases 


Size of Family 

1 

2 

3 

h 

5 

6 ’ 

7 

8 

9___ 

Over 9 


Repeaters _ 

Course Pattern: 
Matriculation 
General 

Intelligence 
Below 85 
85-89 “ 

90-91* 

95-99 

ioo-ioh 

105-109 

110 - 111 * 

115-119 

120 - 121 * 

125-129 

130-131* 

135-139 __ 

Over 139 


Age 

13 _ 

H* 

15 _ 

16 
17 

13 ’ 

19 

20 

21 _ 

Achievement: Language or English 

Xmas Repeater Easter Repeater 

10-3.1* 

15 - 19 “ ~ ’ 

20 - 21 * 

25-29 

30 - 31 * 

35-39 “ 

1 * 0 - 1 *!*™“-- “ “ ' 

1 * 5 - 1*9 — — — - * 

50 - 51 *“” “ 

55 - 59 “ ~ “ ~ —— ’ 

60 - 61 * ” — —- ■ 
65-69 
70 - 71 * 

75-79 ~-- ' 

80 - 81 *“" “ “ ” — — ““ “ ’ 

85 - 69 “ — — “ ” 

90 - 91 *__ ___ _ __ / ‘ 


Achievement: Social Studies 

Xmas Repeater Easter Repeater 


Occupational Classification 10-li* 

Professional 

15-19 

Semiprofessional 

20-2* 

Managerial 

25-29 

Clerical 

30-3* 

Sales 

35-39 ‘ 

Service 

itO-Uli 

Agricultural 

l*5-l*9 

Skilled 

50-51* ' 

Semiskilled 

55-59 

Unskilled 

60-61* 

Retired ____ _ 

65-69 

Unknown 

70-71* 

Home Conditions 

75-79 

80-81* 

Broken Homes 

85-89- 

Working Mothers 

90-91* 


95- 






































































































































































































85 


EXAMPLE OF PROCEDURE USED TO FIND 
RELIABILITY OF DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TWO PERCENTS 

In all cases in this study the groups were uncorrelated, 
therefore the procedure used was that to find the reliability of 
differences between two percents when the groups are uncorrelated. 

In comparing the incidence of discipline cases among students 
in the matriculation and general course pattern, it was found that 
25.il- per cent of the students in the matriculation pattern were 
discipline cases and that 1*7.5 per cent of the students in the 
general pattern were discipline cases. Setting up the null hypothe¬ 
sis that no true difference exists between the percentage of dis¬ 
cipline cases in the two groups, it is found that: 


where P]_ * 25.1* Ni s 535 

P 2 s 1*7.5 N 2 = 200 

P(pooled estimate) = N 1 P 1 + N 2 p 2 535 x 25.1* * 200 x 1*7.5 - 0 -i s o/ 

--- s —■■ ■— - -- —“— 

»x + N 2 535 + 200 

Q s (1 - P) 

Q = 68.6# 



CR = (Pi - P 2 ) - 0 

Pi - > 2 


s 22.1 - 5.81* 


3.8 


The critical ratio exceeds 2.58. Therefore the null hypothesis 


is rejected and the difference in the percentage of discipline cases 
in the matriculation pattern and the percentage of discipline cases 
in the general pattern is said to be significant at the .01 level of 
confidence. 








. 

























_ 




* 

■ '' • ; ' ' ! ' i ' i 

' 




















86 


EXAMPLE OF PROCEDURE USED TO FIND 
THE RELIABILITY OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TWO MEANS 

In all cases in this stucfy the groups were uncorrelated, 
therefore the procedure used was that to find the reliability of 
the difference between two means when the groups are uncorrelated* 

The mean intelligence of the discipline cases in Grade Ten 
was 10l*.2 and the mean intelligence of the non-discipline cases 
in Grade Ten was 107.2 Setting up the null hypothesis that no true 
difference exists between the mean intelligence scores of the two 
groups, it is found that: 

Where Mp _ 10U.2 dp = 10.8 Np = 8? 

M 2 - 107.2 d 2 = 10.9 N 2 = 182 

% - M 2 W rf l 2 ♦ ^2 2 B V(10.8)2 (10 .9)2 . 

Nl N 2 87 + 182 

cr = (m - m 2 ) - o . 2>llt 
^ - 4 i 2 

Since the critical ratio exceeds 1.97 (df “ 267), but is 
less than 2.59, the null hypothesis is rejected at the .05 level of 
significance. 










' 








87 


EXAMPLE OF THE PROCEDURE USED TO FIND 
THE RELIABILITY OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TWO MEANS 
WHEN THE NUMBERS WERE SMALL 


When the numbers of students in the groups compared were less 
than fifty, the following procedure was used to calculate the rel- 
liability of the difference between the means. 

The mean achievement score of the Grade Ten discipline cases 
in the general pattern was 50.1, and the mean achievement score of 
the Grade Ten discipline cases in the matriculation pattern was. 59.1*. 
Setting up the null hypothesis that no true difference exists between 
the mean scores of the two groups, it is found that 


where Mp = 50.1 dp » 11. lj Np m 1*6 

M 2 = 59.1* d 2 = lli.l N 2 * 1*1 

SD * y/ i(X x - W^) 2 + £(X 2 - M 2 ) 2 
(Ki - 1) + (W 2 - 1) 

r J (ll.lt) 2 x U5 + (liwl) 2 xF 

1*5 * ho 

s 12.71* 

SEps - 12.1k J 1*5 + 1*0 - 2.60 

N i x n 2 v HF 

CR - (Mx - M 2 ) - 0 _ 2^2 s 3.58 

SEju 2.60 

Since the critical ratio exceeds 2.61* (df * 85), the null 
hypothesis is rejected at the .01 level of confidence. 

















88 


EXAMPLE OF PROCEDURE USED TO FIND 

THE RELIABILITY OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN UNCORRELATED STANDARD DEVIATIONS 


The standard deviation of ages of the Grade Eleven discipline 
cases was *76 years» The standard deviation of the ages of the Grade 
Eleven non-discipline cases was 1*03 years* Setting up the null 
hypothesis that no true difference exists between the standard 
deviations of the ages of the two groups, it is found that: 
where <5^ = *76 N^ =- 83 
6 2 - 1.03 N 2 s 166 

- d 2 m ^ 

\J (.71x. 76)2 + (,71xl.03) 2 

83 166 

x .08 

CR » ( d l - 6 2 j - 0 

- ^2 

= .27 

.08 


s 3.38 

Since the critical ratio exceeds 2.60 (df - 2ii7), the null 
hypothesis is rejected at the »01 level of confidence® 









v 

. 

- . SO 










89 


EXAMPLE OF THE PROCEDURE USED TO FIND 
THE RELIABILITY OF THE DIFFERENCE IN VARIABILITY BETWEEN TWO GROUPS 
WHEN THE NUMBERS ARE SMALL 


When the numbers of students in the two groups compared were 
less than fifty, the following procedure was used to find the reliability 
of the difference in variability between the two groups. 

Setting up the null hypothesis that no true difference in 
variability exists between the intelligence scores of the Grade Ten 
discipline cases in the general pattern and the intelligence scores 
of the Grade Ten discipline cases in the matriculation pattern, it 
is found that; 


£s.\ ■ 170 

- 1*6 

^x- 227 

n 2 = 1*1 

SD-, 2 - 170 

5 3.77 



SD, - 227 

z 3.68 

l*o 



SD, 


l.5i 


SDj 2 

Since the F ratio is less than 1.52 (degrees of freedom for 
the greater mean square s 1*5 and. degrees of freedom for the smaller 
mean square - 1*0), it is not even significant at the .01 level. The 
null hypothesis that no true difference exists between the variability 
of the intelligence scores of the Grade Ten discipline cases in the 
general pattern and the variability of the intelligence scores of the 
Grade Ten discipline cases in the matriculation pattern, is accepted. 







APPENDIX D 
















91 


TABLE XV 

DATE OF OCCURRENCE OF TRUANCIES 



Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

Monday 

Tuesday 

2 

3 

1 


2 1 

3 

6 2 


3 2 
IT" 

1 

Wednesday 

i* 

2T 


h~ 

sir 

5 

5 

2 

Thursday 

5 

3 


5 

9 3 

6 l 

6— 

3 

Friday 

6 

h 1 

1 h 

6“ 

10 3 

7“r 

7“ 

k 

Monday 

9 

TT 

ITT 

9“T 

13T* 

10“ 

10“ 

irr 

Tuesday 

10 

8T 

5— 

10~ 

iinr 

llT 

llT 

15TT 

Wednesday 

11 

9T" 

6 2 

11 

15“ 

12 

12“ 

i6~r 

Thursday 

12 

ioT 

TT 

12 

16“ 

13“T 

13“T 

i7“r 

Friday 

13 

n_8_ 

8“ 

13 

17 

1 h l 

l ITT 

18“ 

Monday 

16 ' 



16 

20 

17 

17““ 

21 1 

Tuesday 

1?” 

15_2. 

12 

17 

21 

18- 

18 

22 * 

Wednesday 

Thursday 

13- 

19 

17_L 

13“ 

ib~ 

18“ 

19 

22 1 
23“ 

19“ 

20“ 

19“ 

20“ 

23 

2 if - 

Friday 

20 

18~3 

15“ 

20. 

2ii 3 

21 3 

21“ 

25“ 

Monday 

231. 

21 2 

18~ 


27“T 

2lfT 

2k 3 

28“ 

Tuesday 

2h 

22 i 

19 


28 l 

25“2” 

25~r 

29 

Wednesday 

25 — 

23 1 

20 3 


29 1 

26 1 

26“ 

30 ~ 

Thursday 

26 

2lT~ 

21“ 


30" 

27 

27~r 


Friday 

27 

2ST 

22 


31“ 

28 1 

28“ 


Monday 


28 l 

25“ 




31“ 


Tuesday 


29 

26 2 






Wednesday 


30 l 

27~ 






Thursday 


31 1 

28 1 






Friday 



zrr 






Totals 

2 

hh 

18 


29 

19 

16 

8 




" " " 

T 

1 " r 

- i— ■ ■« i 

' 



In the above table the following dates were omitted; 

October Hi 
November 11 
February 3 and h 
April 7-11 

School was not in session on these dates because of statutory holidays, 
teacher’s convention or Easter vacation 























> 









1 , ,• 

. 

' ' ' 

; - V J '• ■ 

* 






ibaaiioov, 




i - 




’ 



























92 


TABLE XVI 


DATE OF OCCURRENCE OF SMOKING OFFENSES 



Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

Jan o 

Feb. 

March 

April 

Monday 

Tuesday 

Wednesday 

2 

3 

k 

1 1 

2 


2 _L 

3 

lf~ 

6 

8- 

5 

3 

U 1 

1 

2 

Thursday 

5 

3 


5— 

9 

6" 

6 ZL 

3“ 

Friday 

6— 

i* 

1 

6 

10 

7 

7 

IT 

Monday 

9 

7 

IT' 

9 

13 

10 

10““ 

iF 

Tuesday 

10“ 

8- 


10“ 

l h~ 

11“ 

11“ 

Wednesday 

11“ 

9 

6— 

11 ' 

15“ 

12“ 

12 

16“ 

Thursday 

12 

10 ' 

7 

12“ 

16“ 

13“ 

13“ 

17" 

Friday 

13 

11 

8“ 

13 

17 

lit" 

lit” 

18“ 

Monday 

16 



16’ 

20 l 

17 

17" 

21 

Tuesday 

17 

15 

12 

17 

21 1 

18“ 

18- 

22 

Wednesday 

Thursday 

18“ 

19 

16 

17" 

13 

lit 

18“ 

19“ 

22 2 
23“ 

19" 

20“ 

19" 

20 

23" 

2it 

Friday 

20 

18“ 

15" 

20__ 

2h i 

21 

21 

25 — 

Monday 

23 

21“ 

18 


27 2 

2h 2“ 

2b 1 

28“ 

Tuesday 

2 irr 

22T 

19 “ 


28 2 

25“ 

25" 

29 

Wednesday 

2ff“ 

23 

20 “ 


29 

26 

26 

30 

Thursday 

26 

2 inr 

21 


30 

27 

27“ 


Friday 

27T* 

25“ 

22“ 


31 3 

28 1 

28 1 


Monday 

3°„ 

28 

25~r 




31 


Tuesday 


29~r 

26 






Wednesday 


30 

27 ' 






Thursday 


31Z 

28 






Friday 



29 






Totals 

h 

9 

2 

6 

13 

6 

7 

2 


In the above table the following dates were omitted: 

October lit 
November 11 
February 3 and U 
April 7-11 

School was not in session on these dates because of statutory holidays, 
teacher 1 s convention or Easter vacation 




















■ 


r 








‘ 

>"• : , rtf; <]' o J, ;;; 


* 














93 


TABLE XVII 

DATE OF OCCURRENCE OF DISTURBANCES 


Sept* Oct* Nov* Dec* Jan* Feb. March April 


Monday 

2 



Tuesday 

3 

1 


Wednesday 

irr 

2 


Thursday 

s 

3 


Friday 

6 

ITT 

1 2 

Monday 

9 “ 

7~r 

h ~ 

Tuesday 

10 

e“ 

5TT 

Wednesday 

Thursday 

11 

12 

9 = 

10” 

6“ 

Friday 

13 

11 

8TT 

Monday 

16 



Tuesday 

17 

15 

12 

Wednesday 

18” 

16” 

13“ 

Thursday 

19 

17“ 

III 2 

Friday 

20 

18“ 

ilT~ 

Monday 

23 

21 

18“ 

Tuesday 

2irr 

22 

19“T 

Wednesday 

2? “ 

23“r 

20T” 

Thursday 

26 

2 u 

21“ 

Friday 

27 " 

2 rr 

22 2 

Monday 

30 1 

28 l 

2rr 

Tuesday 


29 

26~r 

Wednesday 


30“ 

27 

Thursday 


3rr 

2 err 

Friday 



29JT 

Totals 

3 

11 

27 


2 

6 


3 


3“ 

7 


ii 3 

1 

h 1 

8” 

5 

rr 

2 

5 

9“ 

6”T 

6— 

3 1 

6T 

10 

7"T" 

7“ 

IT 

9~r 

13“” 

iot 

io“r 

nrr 

10“ 

III 2 

11 1 

11 

i5~r 

11 T 
12“ 

15“ 

16“ 

UT£ 
13 1 

12 

13 “ 

16 " 

17 

13 2 

17 

nr 

iii ~ 

18"T 

16 “ 

20 2 

17 

17 

21” 

17“ 

21 

18“ 

18“ 

22“ 

18 1 

22 

19“ 

19“ 

23 1 

19“ 

23“ 

20“ 

20“ 

2U 

20“ 

2 h 1 

21“ 

21 1 

25— 


27 2 

2ii 1 

2ii“ 

28 


2 rr 

25“T 

25~r 

29 


29 -r 

26 

26 “ 

30” 


3 c nr 

2?“T 

27~T 



31 “ 

2831 

28“ 





31“ 



12 28 26 11 10 


In the above table the following dates were omitted % 

October lli 
November 11 
February 3 and li 
April 7-11 

School was not in session on these dates because of statutory holidays, 
teacher*s convention or Easter vacation* 



















I . 











■ 

* 














































