



Gfx aiBBIS 
wpatn®ww 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/comparativestudyOOblai 


A COMPARATIVE STUDY O? OFFSHDEBS 

Atm HOH-oiroroEEs is the 

CAHADIAS Affi.fr. 1948 . 


W.B.H. BUIE, B.A. (Alberta) 


A thesis submitted to the School of Graduate Studies 
in partial fulfilment of requirements for the lias ter 
of Arts Degree. 


UHIVSHSITY Of ALBSB f £A 

April 1949 































ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

I wish to acknowledge the assistance given by a 
number of organizations and persons in connection with this 
study. 


The study was made possible by the Department of 
National Defence, first, in financing a year's postgraduate 
work at the University of Alberta and, second, in permitting 
my associates and myself to test and interview subjects 
throughout the Canadian Army, 

Dr, N.W. Morton, of the Defence Eesearch Board, and 
Capt. E.A. Wendt, of Army Headquarters, provided valuable 
assistance in planning the project. The latter also inter¬ 
viewed a number of the subjects, supervised the collection 
of reports and located certain background information re¬ 
quired to complete the study. Miss ?. MacDonald, also of 
Army Headquarters, prepared the original directives and 
copies of tests and inventories. 

The staff of Personnel Selection Service, Canadian 
Army, assisted in gathering much of the research data. 

Mr. ff.B. Brennan, University of Alberta, helped to 
analyse the Minnesota MuXtiphasic Personality inventory 
results. 

A special word of appreciation is due Dr. D.B. Smith 
and Dr. D. Spearman of the University of Alberta, who pro¬ 
vided the direction and constructive criticism necessary to 
make the study a success. 


W.S.N. BLAZE 






I 









TABLE Off CONTENTS 


Section Number 

I INTRODUCTION 

Security classification, definition. 1 

of terms; the problem of the mill* 
tary offender. 

IX THEORIES OF CRIME AND RELATED ES31AR0H 

Introduction; single vs multiple .. ^ 

causes; causation vs contingency; 
biological and physiological 
factors; social factors; person¬ 
ality traits; other theories; 
military studies. 

Ill THE PRESTO STURT 

Object; nature and ©cope; materials. 1$ 

used; research methods. 

IV RESULTS . 31 


1 CONCLUSIONS . SO 

VI SIS...... 64 

VII APPENDICES 

»A« - Bibliography. 1 

*3* - Department of National. 4 

Defence authorisation 

»q» • Orientation talk &e~.. • •• 5 

livered to subjects 
h D«-«G« Materials used. 

« b 5? ..... S' 

»E«... 12 

«f«. l6 

#G«. 31 






































1 


I 

introduction 


SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

This study was undertaken with the approval of 
the Department of National Defence on the understanding 
that the research data obtained and the final report on 
the project would be treated according to the military 
security classification “ Confidential 1 1 . (Appendix W R“) 


DEFINITION OF TERMS 

The study was concerned with a comparison of 
samples of offenders and non~o£fenders in the Canadian 
Amy during 1948# To avoid any confusion in the selection 
of samples, precise definitions of terms were provided# 
“Offender* was defined as a soldier who had committed an 
offence against military law and was serving a sentence in 
detention. “Non-offender* was defined a® a soldier who 
had no record of any kind of misconduct during his service 
in the Canadian Army, Active Force, (the present permanent 
Army), and who had served in that force for at least one 
year. It was believed that the introduction of the cri¬ 
terion, the sentence to detention, would facilitate the 
differentiation of offenders and non-offenders, since the 
former would represent an extreme group# 


THE PROBLEM OF THE MILITARY OFFENDER 

It should be noted that a soldier is subject to 
both ordinary law, as a citizen of Canada, and military 
law# This study, however, was concerned only with of¬ 
fences against the latter, an entirely distinct cod© which 
govern® the members of the Army and regulates their con¬ 
duct at all times. The Any Act designates the forms of 
behaviour which are considered offences against military 
law. These offences rang© in relative military importance 
from, for example, treachery, to giving false answers at 
the time of enlistment. Punishments are scaled from death 
to forfeitures, fines and stoppages of pay. ( 23 ) The most 
common major offence of interest la connection with this 
study is absence without leave# 
















: <7 . 






i. 










■ 




■ 


Hi • ? 

* 










-{H. 


‘ 


f 


’ 















2 


The cumulative total of offenders from the formation 
of the Canadian A rmy t Active Force, on October 1, 1946 to 
November 30, 194S was ISIS. Over the same period the Army 
varied in si20 from 14,000 to 17,000, approximately. 

Numbers of offenders, considered as an Independent 
factor, do not convey the magnitude of the general problem 
they present. The soldier who is absent without leave, or 
in detention, is a total loss to the Army. In addition, he 
represents a large overhead cost, with respect to his re¬ 
covery (in the case of the absentee), trial, confinement to 
detention and, in some cases, discharge. In a survey made 
during the last war of a large sample at the Canadian Detention 
Barracks in England, it was found that of the offenders 

were discharged after they had served their sentences. (7) 

The money spent on them in connection with their enlistment, 
training, transportation, food, clothing, equipment, shelter 
and medical car© also may be considered largely a loss. 

Betts (3) in his report on a study of incipient army 
criminals” stated that the case records of “moral casualties’ 1 
(here defined as “offenders”) in Army prisons indicate that 
most of their stay in the Army represents a loss. He sug¬ 
gested that this loss might be as high as the one calculated 
for psychiatric casualties in World War I, namely, $30,000.00 

The absentee presents a special problem. Apart 
from the loss he causes in terms of money, he leaves his 
position vacant thus adversely affecting his unit 1 s ef¬ 
ficiency at any time and, In time of war, probably endanger¬ 
ing the lives of his associates. 

Psychologists and psychiatrists often are able to 
identify probable “trouble-makers” at the time applications 
are made for enlistment. It is apparent, however, that many 
escape detection until they have committed offences. More 
accurate methods of personnel assessment are required if the 
problem is to be solved. If such methods were available 
It might be possible to reject applicants likely to become 
offenders or to at least identify them early and ensure that 
they received a fair trial, which could involve the application 
of specially conceived techniques of man management. 





4 


' 

- 








3 


The problem of the military offender was con¬ 
sidered sufficiently important to warrant systematic 
examination* This study represents an attempt to under¬ 
take that responsibility* It was believed that facts 
obtained about offenders, and in contrast - about non¬ 
offenders, might assist in improving selection methods 
and Army man management. 

Before commencing the study, available liter¬ 
ature, concerning similar studies conducted in military 
and civilian field®, was read with the view to obtaining 
some guidance regarding a logical course to follow. This 
literature will be discussed briefly in the next section, 
insofar as it is related to the present study. 

At the outset it was assumed that the behaviour 
of the military offender could be considered analogous to 
that of the civilian delinquent or criminal. Influenced 
largely by Heckless, however, it was expected that this 
behaviour would be subject to individual variations due 
to time, place, other external circumstances and personal 
attributes or deficiencies. (27) It was believed probable, 
for example, that personal maladjustment, indicated by 
personality deviations, might tend to be associated with 
military offences to a higher degree than would be so in 
the case of civilian crimes. The high incidence among 
offenders of such military offences as absence without 
leave, drunkenness and insubordination, would seem to 
support that belief. On the strength of the assumption 
noted above, reports on studies of civilian crime and 
delinquency have been Included for comparative purposes, 
in addition to studies dealing with military offenders 
specifically. 





4 


II 

THEORIES 01 CRIME AND RELATED KESMROH 


INTRODUCTION 

The earliest theories of criminal behaviour were 
those in which crime and sin were closely identified. Moral 
philosophers insisted, at least to the early part of the 
nineteenth century, that crime was directly attributable to 
moral defects of the individual. They contended that man’s 
destiny was in the hands of God and man’s course of conduct 
was freely chosen by himself. They considered that no one 
need be a criminal. Anyone who became a criminal, in their 
opinion, was simply a morally bad man. It followed that 
little could be done about this situation except to punish 
the criminal, the severity of the punishment presumably 
being calculated to outweigh the pleasures he derived from 
his crimes. Such concept® naturally did not stimulate any 
scientific approach to studies of criminal behaviour. 0$ 

The doctrine of evolutionary biology, the dis¬ 
coveries of science and the increasing emphasis on determi¬ 
nism in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, brought 
Into question such speculative generalisations as the early 
concepts regarding crime. Towards the end of the nineteenth 
century, there appeared another point of view which en¬ 
couraged thought and research on the problem. Cesare 
Lombroso, an Italian criminologist, put forward his theory 
of a distinct criminal type, recognizable by certain 
physical irregularities. The phenomenon of criminality, 
according to Lombroso, was not due to inherited sin but to 
inherited biological constitution. Although his con¬ 
clusions were based upon somewhat spurious observations, 
which would scarcely be admitted as scientific evidence 
today, they aroused other investigators to prove or dis¬ 
prove them or create other more satisfactory explanations 
of criminal behaviour. His conclusions accentuated, among 
other controversial issues, one concerning the relative 
influence of heredity and environment in criminality. The 
issue In its simplest form is generally regarded today a© 
unproductive but some valuable evidence was discovered 
while it was being debated. 













I 




5 


SI SOLE ys. MULTIPLE CAUSES 

Research to discover the cause or causes of crime 
is comparatively recent, dating hack approximately on© centu¬ 
ry. (30 Initially most Investigators concentrated upon 
identifying the single cause of crime, acting of course, on 
the assumption that criminal behaviour was due to one cause. 
This approach perhaps can he understood on the basis of the 
historical background discussed briefly above. As single 
theories were demonstrated to be untenable and the complexity 
of the causes of human behaviour came to be realized, research 
into the pauses of crime became popular. If any investigator 
dealt with a single factor and its relationship to criminal 
behaviour, at least during the past decade, he usually ex¬ 
plained his position in terms of searching for one of the 
many factors presumed to be related to crime. (2*3) It Is 
generally agreed now that criminal behaviour Is the result 
of the operation of many factors, some of which ar© present 
in certain cases and some in others, the importance of each 
factor varying in each individual case. Where disagreement 
exists today, It is usually in connection with the Import¬ 
ance to b© assigned to individual factors. This disagree¬ 
ment is most apparent in the concepts advanced by extreme 
situatlonalists and constitutionalists. The former have 
appeared to make the most progress, probably because they 
have been more successful In eliminating unwarranted as¬ 
sumptions and in validating their conclusions. 


CAUSATION YS. OOOTIfflHfiBCT 

Reckless contends that studies directed toward 
the discovery of causes have retarded criminology. He 
points out that this is unfortunate because the concept of 
causation is not too useful In the social sciences, due to 
the difficulty of isolating causative and contributive 
factors. He also suggests that a search of that kind 
assumes a relation between cause and effect, in his opinion 
a faulty assumption because It is never clear in human 
behaviour which is which. He recommends, therefore, that 
investigators deal with contingency rather than causation, 
from traits and conditions known to be associated with 
criminal behaviour he would calculate the statistical 
chances of individuals becoming criminals. (2$ This 
study is directed toward that end, first, in attempting to 
determine what factors are associated with criminal be¬ 
haviour and, second, to attempt to calculate what might be 
called offender "risks* 1 . 












6 


BIOLOGICAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL FACTORS 


H3KSDITT 

It is known today that criminals are somewhat more 
likely to have criminal brothers and slaters, or parents, 
than are non-criminals. The Glueckis found that &k.8$ of 
the reformatory population of Massachusetts came from homes 
with other criminal members. (8) K©suits of twin studies 
by Lange in Bavaria (1929) and by Kosanoff and others in 
America (193*0 are sometimes cited as positive proof that 
criminality is in large part traceable to heredity. Thors 
are some investigators, however, who point out that the 
factor of environment has been completely omitted from the 
studies. (1) Monographic family studies such as the Juke® 
by Bugdale (1884) and the Zallikaks by Goddard (1912) have 
also been submitted as evidence that criminality tends Ho 
run in families 5 *. It is not possible to say, in respect of 
aay of the above examples, however, whether the incidence 
of criminal behaviour Is the sole result of biological in¬ 
heritance or of the environment, which in the case of a 
family is shared by all to a considerable extent. The 
more general and, it is believed, reasonable view is that 
criminality is the product of both environment and heredity. 


IMTSSLLIGSgCS 

?or a time it was thought that feeble-minde&ness 
was an important characteristic of criminals. Goddard, for 
example, concluded that it was the greatest single cause 
of crime. 06) Studies since that time have tended to 
question that conclusion. Evidence concerning the inci¬ 
dence of defective intelligence among offenders, however, 
is confusing and inconclusive because different measure® 
and standards have been used and also because of the 
doubtful validity of the theoretical distribution of In¬ 
telligence test scores of the general population. { 25 ) 

Eel ©ay, on the basis of 173 studies among ol,999 criminals, 
using the Binet test, reported that the percentage of the 
criminal population (3*&p), which fell below a mental age 
of eight years, was higher than the estimate of feeble¬ 
mindedness in the general population. He did not regard 
the results sufficiently significant, however, to conclude 
that feeble-mindedness should be regarded an important 
causative factor. $&) Sutherland in 1931 ( 3 I} and Tulchia 
in 1939 ( 3 $ concluded that the delinquent population does 










.. ' • 




i ' ■ . ; ■. ' ' 











. 

. 

4 '■ 1 'I' i;:?' 


’•1 


' . . ; ■ ■: ■ : , i : ' 


\-y* i%. m 








■ 

e 


1 

, ■ *; 

, . 

- 

. ■ ■ - 

■ 






7 


not appear mentally inferior to the non-delinquent popu¬ 
lation living in similar conditions, or innately inferior 
to the law-abiding population in general* Hill reported 
on the basis of a sample of 1255 male offenders at a state 
reformatory that, while they were classifiable in the dull- 
normal group, they excelled on the average a group of men 
considered representative of the Army draft. (L&) On the 
other hand, Brequet (5), working with a sample of 1000 
cases in a reformatory, concluded that 10 . 1 $ were feeble¬ 
minded. Piotrowski and Hobbs (26) reported that there was 
a percentage of .75 defectives in the American Army in the 
last war but 21 $ of the general military prisoners were 
classified as defective mentally. They concluded that the 
chances of a mentally defective soldier committing a major 
offence were about thirty times those of a non-defective 
soldier. Studies of soldiers serving sentences in the 
Canadian Detention Barracks in England during the last war, 
however, failed to reveal significant differences In in¬ 
telligence between the offenders and the general army 
population. ( 7 ) The view that defective intelligence is 
the most significant factor in criminality does not appear 
to be supported generally by the facts. Host investigators 
consider other factors to be operating and would conclude 
that low intelligence may be significant only in individual 
cases. 


m 

There is considerably more agreement in respect 
of chronological age and its association with criminal 
behaviour. Beck!ess (2J) contends that the statistical 
chances of an individual becoming an offender decrease with 
age. He reports that the delinquency rate rises sharply 
from 10 to 19 years, reaches a peak between 19 and 24 and 
declines from about 27 years of age. The Olueck^s 6 . 3 ) 
in their 1930 study of 500 criminal careers found that 
had been in conflict with social authority by age 10, I 37 
by age l4 and 393 4y age l6. Studies conducted in military 
settings tend to confirm the above conclusions. Fodor (XL) 
found youthfulness to be a salient factor in a study of a 
group of United States Army offenders. Stouffer and Otness 
(35) agree but Brady and Hildreth ( 4 ) in a study of 233 
disciplinary cases and a comparable control group, found 
no significant difference in this respect. The weight of 
evidence accumulated to date would seem in general support 
of the view that there is a relationship between age and 
criminal behaviour. 





t gg iq^jnaBBL 


8 


Lombroso's Influence was also manifest in the 
search for criminal n types M . Goring and Pearson, an 
English physician and statistician, respectively, published 
in 1913 an anthropometric study of 3 OOQ prisoners under the 
title M The English Convict*. They were unable to discover 
the existence of Lombroso*s criminal Hype*. As late as 
1939, however, a prominent American anthropologist, E.A. 
Hooton, published the results of a twelve year study, which 
in many ways supported Lombroso’s findings. At least he 
concluded that normals and criminals do not have the same 
physical characteristics. 0 * 9 ) Hrdllcka, also an authority 
of note, and most reviewers, disagreed with his findings 
and questioned his research techniques. Hrdlicka is of 
the opinion that there is no single physical sign or col* 
lection of signs which would permit the prediction of 
criminality. (£0) 

lather sweeping claims have be® mad© by some 
endocrinologists in the past concerning the relationship 
between glandular dysfunction and criminality. £2 59 More 
recent reports, notably Wolf* s (3S)» suggest the presence 
of dysfunctions and aberrations of the endocrine glands, 
which may lead to emotional disturbances and, under 
appropriate conditions , to crime. 

Although there would appear to be no distinct 
physical type associated with criminal behaviour, there is 
a fairly general belief that physical disabilities appear 
more frequently in criminals than in the general population. 
Wood and Waite have suggested that poor health and other 
deficiencies tend to go along with the economic conditions 
of many problem cases. Sutherland 09 has pointed cut 
that physical defects are significant to some criminals, 
because of the ridicule they occasion. It is possible 

that aggressive or criminal bdmvlour may be explained 
sometimes on that basis. 










f * 




' 

. 

- 


. 





















9 


SOCIAL FACTORS 


the home 

Coulter (S) has classified the homes, from which de¬ 
linquents and criminals come, into five categories: “(a) homes 
with criminal patterns; (b) homes in which there are unsatis¬ 
factory personal relations because of domination, favoritism, 
nonsolicitude, overseverity, neglect, jealousy, a step-parent 
or other interfering relative; (c) homes in which one parent 
has a physical or mental disability - invalidism, feeble¬ 
mindedness, blindness, deafness, p.sychoneurQsis; (d) homes 
socially or morally maladjusted because of differences in 
race, religion, conventions, and standards or an immoral 
situation; and (e) homes under economic pressures - unemploy¬ 
ment, low income, homes In which the mothers work out.” Although 
not all authors on the subject would agree completely with the 
classification, it is useful here to outline the scope of this 
one social factor. The precise relationship of what might be 
called H the inadequate home” to delinquency and crime is not 
known, but the evidence gathered to date suggests that its in¬ 
fluence is complex and of considerable magnitude. 

The Glueck^a (13 found that in JO percent of their 1000 
cases, there was evidence of unsound family disciplinary 
practices, Brequet (5) reported that the incidence of family 
disorganisation was ’’great” in his study of 1000 reformatory 
inmates, and this was particularly noted in respect of divorce, 
death, intemperance and financial troubles. Burt (") reported 
a high correlation between overcrowding and delinquency. The 
problem of the broken home, that is, broken through death of 
one parent or separation, has occupied the attention of several 
investigators. Evidence Is not conclusive largely because of 
the difficulty of isolating the factor being studied, but it 
would seem that in some areas and under certain circumstances, 
at least, there is a significant relationship between the 
broken home and delinquency. (L2) Similarly, the economic 
status of the home (1), parental attitudes and parent-child 
relationships 07) have been demonstrated to be factors associ¬ 
ated with delinquency and crime. These few examples certainly 
are not intended to outline all of the home influences, which 
exist or which have been investigated. They have been cited 
here merely to suggest the importance of studying an offender’s 
home background thoroughly, if it is desired to understand his 
behaviour. 







' 








V / 

■ 


t 




10 


MARITAL STATUS 

The marital status of male adult offenders would appear 
to he related to criminality. Single and divorced male prison¬ 
ers form a much higher percentage of the offender group than 
could he anticipated on the basis of their representation in 
the general population. Single males, for example, constituted 
51 $ of the individuals committed to prison® and. reformatories in 
the United States in 193#* y®fc the percentage of single males in 
the general population was only Comp&r&hle percentages 

for divorced, married, and widowed males, respectively, were as 
follows? 9.5 and 1.3; 40.S and 6l.2; 2.7 and 4 . 3 . (L2) When age 
is taken into account, married males have a lower commitment 
rate than single males at almost all ages. On the other hand, 
Lemk&n and Kent in a military survey of SGS cases found that 
marital status was not a significant factor in relation to mili¬ 
tary misconduct. £l) It would he necessary to know, however, 
whether their sample was representative of military offenders, 
generally, before their conclusion could he related to the 
present study. 


RUBAI; - U3BAH IHIXU1HCES 

The incidence of criminal and delinquent behaviour tends 
to be much higher in urban than in rural areas. Smith ( 52 ) in 
1937 reported that there was also a relationship between de¬ 
linquency rates in rural areas and the distance of those areas 
from urban communities. Shaw and Mclay (31) after twenty years 
of ecological research have reported, among other important 
findings, that the incidence of delinquency declines from the 
inner areas of cities to the peripheral areas. The common 
basic factor in delinquency, in their opinion, is social dis¬ 
organization and this phenomenon is considered to be localized 
in congested urban areas. Delinquency, according to their 
studies of several cities, is highly correlated with changes 
in population, inadequate housing, poverty, the presence of 
Negroes and foreign born, tuberculosis, mental disorders and 
adult criminality. It should be noted that the authors speak 
of “correlates* rather than “causes’*. There are many reasons 
for the greater amount of delinquency, and criminality, too, 
in larger urban areas, such as the relative number of laws and 
the extent and. effectiveness of law enforcement programs. What 
is of interest here is that the correlation exists. 









; ■ ' ’ : v. ... 
















RELIGION 


11 


It has been assumed generally that religion plays an 
important part in checking crime. This assumption has not 
Lean supported by the evidence obtained to date. It must be 
admitted, however, that the influence of such factors as 
religion is not easily measured and the evidence may well be 
the result of unsound approaches. Barnes and Teeters (1) 
deal with the subject as follows! “Prison populations show 
an overwhelming majority of those who claim some religious 
affiliation. A high percentage of church membership in the 
total population has no apparent influence in reducing crimi¬ 
nality in the community. Pending further study, we may accept 
Dr. Miners statement that * there Is little evidence that the 
churches play any major role in the prevention of crime*. M 
The approach of the present author has been to minimize the 
importance of claimed religious affiliation and concentrate 
upon actual practice of religion, as measured by the frequency 
of church attendance. 


EDUCATION 


This factor has been discussed widely from many 
viewpoints. Some writers have criticized the treatment of 
the mentally superior and the dull students in many schools, 
in that they have not been provided programs of study, which 
would bs in keeping with their capabilities. The assumption 
seems to be that this deficiency is conducive toward truancy 
and delinquency. Others have dealt with the lack of vocation¬ 
al guidance and training along vocational lines, in some school 
systems. The assumption in this case is that the deficiency 
leads to vocational maladjustment, which in turn may lead to 
crime. (24) The professional competency of teachers in some 
school systems has also been questioned, and some critics have 
gone so far as to suggest that many delinquent careers can be 
traced to that factor. (37) The degree of education is more 
easily measured than the above factors and, consequently, more 
conclusive evidence has been obtained in that respect. Gillin 
0-2) has reported that the incidence of illiterates in the 
prison population of the United States was somewhat more than 
their percentage of the general population. The ratio of 
commitments stood highest for illiterates and reduced sharply 
a.s the degree of education increased. Gillln suggested that 
education may act as a “selective agent in determining be¬ 
haviour**. The Gluecks have reported on another aspect of the 
relationship between education and delinquency and crime, 
namely, retarded progress in school. (l4) They state that of 














' 




■ 

■ ' • ' 

. 



12 


fly© hundred cases studied, one fourth of them left school In 
the sixth grade and only seventeen percent entered high school. 
Only one fifth of the group were in the normal grade for their 
age. They also reported on one final factor to he mentioned 
here in this connection, namely, truancy at school. Seventy- 
five percent of the five hundred cases were classified as 
school truants. 


GANG- ACTIVITIES AND COMMODITY DXSOKC-MXZATZON 

Closely related to the social disorganization of some 
parts of urban areas, is the early beginning of delinquent 
careers, one manifestation of which is neighborhood gang acti¬ 
vity. Children and youths living in such environments have 
ample opportunity to learn the techniques of crime through 
contact with organized gangs. It has been suggested that gang 
activity stimulates the formation of attitudes and interests of 
the habitual delinquent. Moreover, it has been said that this 
activity tends to provide satisfaction of certain basic needs, 
for example, companionship. In certain parts of urban areas 
the gang represents a major source of social contact and satis¬ 
faction. The community organizations which tend to encourage 
respect for law and order, such as the home, school and church, 
are not always too influential. It Is not surprising, there¬ 
fore, that professional criminals are In many cases graduates 
of the delinquent gangs. Thrasher states that between 25,000 
and 30,000 young men and boys, as an estimate, in Chicago were 
subject directly or indirectly to the influence of such gangs 
in 1935 , thus ensuring the continued production of adult crimi¬ 
nals. (33 


IMIS 

At one time this was considered an important factor. 

Early investigators based their estimates of its importance 
largely on the assumption of cultural conflict. They contended 
that the foreign born and their offspring faced great difficulty 
in adjusting to another environment, which was radically dif¬ 
ferent in complexity and organization from the one to which 
they were accustomed. Early statistics appeared to support 
such conclusions. A survey of juvenile court statistics in the 
United States In 1930 revealed that forty percent of the girls 

and,twenty f er ^fnt of the boys reported were x foreign bora., 
la 1937 , nofrever, these figures had changed to a total or twenty 

three percent, whereas forty-four percent of the children of the 
general population of the areas concerned had parents of foreign 
birth. It is doubtful, therefore, whether the factor should be 
assigned any particular significance now. 01) 








13 

PERSONALITY TRAITS 

Metfeesel and Lovell ( 25 ), after surveying studies of 
factors associated with crime made from 193 $ to 19 ^ 0 , reported 
that test results show offenders to be inferior in many aspects 
of personality. This situation was said to be evident in their 
“emphasis on worry, their high scores on tests of neurotic ten¬ 
dency, and their retardation on tests of social maturity.* 1 
Offenders also seem to be psychotic slightly more than the 
general population but the relationships of certain psychoses 
to kinds of criminal behaviour have not been investigated 
thoroughly. Dunham (9 ) studied schizophrenia and its possible 
relation to crime in 1939 &hd concluded that It was a negligible 
factor in crime causation. Ee reported, however, that in a few 
cases where crime and mental disorder appear in the same person, 
schizophrenia is apparently more significant than all other 
psychoses as a causative factor. The terms “psychopath 11 or 
“psychopathic personality” have been used by some writers to 
refer to personality disorders considered typical of delinquents 
and criminals. The terms are extremely broad, however, includ¬ 
ing so many manifestations of the disorders in their definitions 
as to render them of doubtful value for diagnostic purposes. 

The psychoanalytic workers have made important contri¬ 
butions to a fuller understanding of criminal behaviour in em¬ 
phasising, among others, concepts of motivation, the early 
beginnings of personality development, mental conflicts, and 
the mechanisms of escape, compensation and others. These 
concepts encourage the most complete kind of examination of 
each individual - his background, himself, and his environment - 
to provide an understanding of his behaviour. 





, 


S'*:’ 






: i 


.. ■ 



b • ■ :• ,: • " 

'V • • 'll > 









■ * M ■ • v.'ji 






: 

St i 


■ 






. : % 




t i 1 


■-I 















- 





OTHER THEORIES 


14 


The more important fields of research, in connection 
with the present study, other than the military itself, have 
been outlined briefly. Certain other factors have been studied 
and some of these will be mentioned now. The effects of 
geography and climate on criminal behaviour represent a study 
in themselves, but emphasis has shifted from these factors to 
ones more closely connected with the individual and his im¬ 
mediate environment. The influence of the press, radio, and 
motion pictures have also been reported upon but they were 
omitted from this study because objective criteria to use in 
assessing their influence was lacking. 














15 


MILITARY STUB IBS 

Relatively few studies of factors associated with de¬ 
linquent or criminal behaviour have been conducted in the 
military field. Tour have been chosen to refer to in some 
detail here because of their applicability to the present 
study. 


Stouffer and Ctness 03) compared 100 naval enlisted men, 
in disciplinary status, who had also served thirty days or more 
in civilian penal institutions before enlistment, with 100 un¬ 
selected enlisted men on active duty. They reported as follows 
regarding the delinquents; 

(1) Fifty percent were under twenty-one. 

(2) Divorce and separation were predominant. 

(3) They tended to com® from larger families with 

inadequate social and economic backgrounds. 

(4) They showed lower educational achievement. 

( 5 ) They gave indications of previously developed 

asocial attitudes toward conformity and order. 

(6) They showed a prevalence of psychopathic and 

psychoneurotie traits. 

Lerakan and Kent £1) in a study of 9&8 cases in an Army 
Heurosis Center reported on various sociological factors and 
their relation to disciplinary actions, as follows 

(1) Hormal homes produce a significantly smaller 

proportion of military delinquents than 

broken homes. 

(2) Homes with inadequate finances tend to produce 

a larger proportion of military delinquents 

but not to a statistically significant degree. 

(3) The military delinquents are more likely to 

com® from an urban background. 

(4) Marital status is not a significant factor. 

( 5 ) Men who held but one job prior to enlistment 

are less likely to become military delinquents, 
than those whose work histories were badly dis¬ 
organized. 

Betts (3) has reported on a sample of 4,27^ American 
selectees, with previous criminal records who were examined 
during 1944 and 1945. The examination took the form of com¬ 
pleting a specially constructed Biographical Case History. 







16 


Items for the case history form were eel acted from data pub¬ 
lished in connection with the prediction of success in the 
probation and parol© of civilian prisoners. (It might be 
noted that as early as 1927 , parole M risks'* were being calculated 
by E.W. Burgess. The Grluecks also had devised a method for 
predicting success or failure on parole, factors most closely 
associated were weighted by assigning to each sub-category of 
each factor the actual percentage, to three decimal places, of 
the subjects in the category, who failed on parole. Then 
experience tables based on failure scores were constructed.) 

Betts assumed that a potential parole violator would also be a 
poor Army risk. Successive trials of the measuring instrument 
on contrasting criterion groups revealed that it was capable of 
differentiating, to a statistically significant degree, first 
offenders from recidivists and offenders from operative soldiers. 
Critical scores were selected on the basis of the probability of 
selectees becoming either normal operative soldiers or offenders* 
Of the 4,278 selectees, 57 percent were rejected for failure to 
meet the moral standards for enlistment. Scores obtained on 
the Biographical Case History indicated, according to Betts, 
that 92 percent of the rejects likely would have become military 
offenders had they been inducted. 

The Betts study was of considerable value in planning 
the Canadian Army project. Items of the same general form and 
content as those in the Biographical Case History were used in 
the present study. It was concluded, however, that further 
validation of a technique, such as the one devised by Betts, 
was necessary before it could be used as a selection method. 

The present study was conceived, in part, to remedy that 
apparent deficiency. 

Feldman and MaXeski (10) conducted a similar study during 
the last war at a United States Army Special Training Unit. 
Illiterate inductees, who were sufficiently intelligent to 
assimilate military training, were sent there for elementary 
educational training. The object of the study was to develop 
a rating scale, which would assist in identifying individuals 
likely to go AWL* Fifty AWL cases were matched with fifty 
non-AWOl cases and both groups were evaluated on a rating 
scale of 165 it©ms dealing with their experiences, behaviour 
and attitudes. The items, which differentiated significantly, 
between the two groups were chosen to form an abbreviated scale 
of 26 items, Whan they repeated the procedure with the same 
criterion groups using the abbreviated scale, the authors found 
a difference of 6.4 between the mean scores (one point was 
assigned to each significant answer). The standard error of 
the difference was *54. The authors concluded that the scale 
may be H very useful for practical purposes**. 









17 


They noted, however, that there had been no cross- 
validation in the ©tody. They suggested, therefor®, that they 
might have been sampling merely the peculiarities of the 
criterion group ana they concluded that further study was in¬ 
dicated, It was possible to profit from their experience in 
planning the present study. It was decided, for example, to 
use both random and matched controls to avoid the probable 
sampling error reported, by ?eldman and Maleski. 







1 





IS 


III 

THE PRESENT STUDY 


mm 

The immediate object of the study was to Improve Army 
selection methods by devising a means of identifying those 
recruits, who would probably become military offenders if 
they were enlisted. Ultimately it was hoped to be able to 
calculate the offender "risk** for any individual case. 


NATURE AMD SCOPE 

The study took the form of gathering comprehensive data 
about the backgrounds, intelligence, personalities, and atti- 
tudes of military offenders and non-offenders. In deciding 
what kind of information was likely to prove pertinent the 
author was guided by results of previous rea&ardh, particularly 
with reference to civilian criminals and delinquents. Psycho¬ 
logical tests, inventories, and interviews were administered 
to three groups of other ranks distributed throughout the 
Canadian Army. The groups consisted of the experimental sub¬ 
jects (the offenders) and a matched and a random group of con¬ 
trols chosen from the non-offender Army other rank population. 
It was intended to compare the information obtained regarding 
the three groups, to discover if any of It produced a notice¬ 
able differentiation between offenders and non-offenders. 

Because of their wide distribution, it was possible 
for the author to test and interview only me-third of the 
subjects. The Army made available the services of Personnel 
Officers to handle the remainder. 


MATERIALS USED 


MINNESOTA MULTIPHAS1Q PERSONALITY I 


mmm 




As stated earlier in this report, it was believed that 
personal maladjustment was rather closely related to military 
offences. Further, it has been demonstrated that personal 
maladjustment sometimes stems from personality deviations. 
Consequently, it was desired to use some means of assessing 

























* 


' 

•a,* ' ■ .; . ■/ . 










19 


the more important phases of personality in this study. The 
authors of the MMPI have claimed that it is capable of per- 
forming that function and recent research tends to support 
their claims. 

The personality characteristics said to be measured by 
the inventory are classified into types, each one represented 
by a scale of the inventory. The following scales are in us© 
at present* hypochondriasis (Es), depression (D), hysteria (Hy), 
psychopathic personality (Pd), masculinity - femininity (Mf) t 
paranoia (Pa), psychasthenia (Pt), schizophrenia (Sc), hypo- 
mania (Ma), and introversion - extroversion (Ie). All except 
the last mentioned were used in the present study. It was 
omitted because it is still largely in experimental form and 
little information is available concerning it. 

In addition to the scales, referred to above, several 
other scores are obtained, which are said to provide estimates 
of the validity of any test record. The Question Score (?) is 
simply the number of unanswered questions in the group test 
record or H Cannot Say 11 responses in the individual form of the 
inventory. The Li© Score (L) gives a measure of th© extent to 
which a subject may have attempted to falsify his scores by 
choosing the more socially acceptable answers. The Validity 
Score (F) is said to provide a check on th© validity of the 
whole record, whether that validity was affected by careless¬ 
ness, lack of comprehension, or errors in correcting th© 
record, finally, there is th© I factor, which is supposed to 
accentuate the discriminatory power of certain scale variables, 
Hs, Pd, Pt, Sc, Ma. 

The test yields raw scores for each scale, which may 
be converted to standard scores by the us© of conversion 
tables. The normal group used in the standardization of the 
scalas consisted largely of visitors to the Minnesota Uni¬ 
versity Hospitals and outpatient departments. These subjects 
were in large part from rural Minnesota. 

Standard scores of 'JO or over generally speaking nay 
be considered abnormal but the authors caution against making 
conclusions based on on© scale abnormality. They would pre¬ 
fer a clinical analysis of th© patterns of scores obtained 
by each individual. (I?) 






X. 






?a 




14 





























20 


Benton (2) has reported on on© of the few studies, where 
the MMPI was used in a military setting. In a survey of S*> 

Naval neuropsychiatric patients, he found that 13 of l6 military 
offenders were positive on the Psychopathic Deviate Scale. 

Benton’s report suggested that the inventory might he of value 
in the present study. 

In addition to personality deviations it was desired to 
assess certain attitudes common among offenders and non-offenders. 
The MMPI devotes l6 items to sexual attitudes, 19 to religious 
attitudes, 46 to political attitudes and f2 to social attitudes. 

It was necessary to choose a personality test or inventory 
which would he easily administered and scored. Both requirements 
are met hy the MMPI. Projective techniques of personality 
assessment, however desirable from the standpoint of a more 
accurate analysis, were beyond the range of capabilities of the 
investigators. All factors considered the MMPI appeared a 
logical choice, so it was adopted. The group form was chosen 
for ease of administration. 


. 

This inventory was developed by the Applied Psychology 
Panel of the National Defence Besearch Committee in the United 
States during the last war. The purpose of the inventory was 
to assist in identifying quickly emotionally unstable men, who 
were likely to break down under the strain of hazardous duty. 
Using psychiatric judgement as the criterion, the inventory 
proved capable of differentiating normals and those classified 
as emotionally unfit for service. In the best differentiation 
obtained, 70 percent of psychiatric discharges were identified 
by a cutting score, which included only 3 percent of the 
normals. In the poorest differentiation, 43 percent of the 
discharged and 3 percent of the normals were identified by the 
same cutting score (the scores representing the total signi¬ 
ficant answers, one point assigned to each). 

The inventor/ also showed a tendency to differentiate 
between good and bad conduct cases. The mean score for men 
with good conduct records was 1.7 points lower than the mean 
score for men with some conduct offences (critical ratio 4.1), 
and 2.8 point® lower than the mean score for serious offenders 
(critical ratio 4.6). 













21 


The Biological Research Division of the Defence Research 
Board* Department of National Defence* had been using the in¬ 
ventory experimentally prior to the commencement of this study* 
The 60 items of the original inventory and 11 additional dis¬ 
criminative items revealed by a second item analysis constitute 
the experimental form used In Oanada, the one shown at Appendix 
«D». 

There is considerable duplication in the items of the 
MMFI and Personal Inventory tt B 5 *, since both include educational, 
occupational, social and attifcudln&l factors, as well as 
questions regarding symptoms, which tend to differentiate normals 
and psychiatric cases* Because of its record in the military 
field, however, it was decided to include Personal Inventory 
M 3 H as one of th© methods of assessment In this study. 


ATTITUDE TOWARD TEES TBM.TMFMT OF 03IKXHALB 
(Appendix ) 

Th© two attitude questionnaires, Forms A and 3, were 
developed by Thurstone of Chicago. Their purpose is to de¬ 
scribe people 1 ® attitudes toward the treatment of criminals 
without any implication that one attitude is more correct 
than another. Each form consists of 20 questions to which 
the author has assigned values, the higher values being 
associated with statements favoring severe punishment of 
criminals. A person 1 © score is the median scale value ©f all 
the statements he endorses. A table is provided to permit 
interpretation of individual scores, the interpretations 
ranging from Strongly opposed to punishment of criminals 5 * to 
fi Favoring severe punishment of criminals 51 . The author also 
suggests that comparison of mean scores obtained by several 
groups of people may be of value. Forms A and B are said to 
give comparable scores. 

This particular type of attitude questionnaire was 
chosen because it was believed that military offenders and 
individuals, who had no record of military misconduct, would 
regard the subject quite differently* 


BIOSMPHICAL OggSglOBaAlBB (Appendix “?») 

This questionnaire, which was prepared by the present 
author, represents an attempt to obtain as much background 
information as possible about the offenders and non-offenders. 









' 



■ 

, 

; 

. 












22 


from which discriminative items could he drawn. It comprises 
158 items, which were administered to both groups and 1J 
additional items, which apply to the offenders only. These 
items cover a wide range of research data, some of which will 
ha analysed in the next section under such headings as Intel* 
ligsnce, age, discipline in the home, and religion. The re* 
main in" item will he treated separately as part of an ex¬ 
perimental inventory. Because they are available for in¬ 
spection in their original form at Appendix "F 1 *, and because 
they will be discussed later. It was not considered necessary 
to outline them in detail here. 


BmSKD mMIRATIOg »M" (”M» Test) 

This test was not administered as part of the project. 
"M* Test scores were available for the subjects, however, be¬ 
cause the test is administered to all soldiers at the time of 
their enlistment. As test scores will be referred to later, a 
brief word of description will be given now. 

The test provides a measure of intelligence. It is 
composed of S sub-tests, three of which are non-verbal, two 
deal with generalised knowledge of common tools, and three form 
a verbal group. The sub-tests correlate to a high degree with 
the total score (coefficients range from .692 to .$45), which 
has been taken as evidence that the sub-tests measure the same 
factor, general intelligence, although their content differs. 

Th© test-retest reliability is *96. A high degree of 
validity has been demonstrated in connection with the relation¬ 
ship between high scores and success in terms of rank and on 

special training, which requires a high level of intelligence. 

The test contains 211 items and the score distribution 

on the English forms, with the associated interpretations in 
terms of general intelligence, are as follows $ 


Group 1 - 
2 - 



175 to 211 - 

l60 to 1?4 - 

130 to 159 - 

100 to 129 - 
70 to 99 - 
0 to 69 - 


Superior 

High 

Average 

low 

Inferior 
Very Inferior 














23 



SELECTION OF SAMPLES 


THE OFFENDERS 

The experimental group, the offenders, were selected 
in accordance with the definition provided in the H Introduction” 
section of the report. At the time the study began, there were 
only 28 soldiers serving sentences in detention throughout 
Canada. As this sample was considered rather small. Instructions 
were Issued to Personnel Officers to test and interview all 
soldiers sentenced to detention until at least 5$ cases were 
obtained. 

A total of 62 offenders were reported upon over the 
three month period covered by the study. Twelve of these had 
to be omitted from the final analysis, however, because certain 
records (for example, the KKPX« which was filled in by the 
subjects) were completed so carelessly that they were of little 
or no value. The final sample, therefor®, comprised 50 
offenders. 

Because the offenders were from all detention barracks 
in Canada, it was considered that the sample should be repre¬ 
sentative of the peacetime Army 1 ® offender population. To 
verify this assumption certain data was obtained concerning a 
large sample of soldiers sentenced to detention from October 1, 
1946 to November }0 9 1948 and similar data for the experimental 
group was compared with it. The results of this comparison 
are shown in Table 1, below. The number of cases vary in 
respect of certain factors because of incomplete records. 














24 


Comparative 

„ ..-..- -.. 

Experimental 
Croup N-50 

Offenders 

1946-1948 

H of Offenders 11 
1946-1948 .. 

'Age .» 


,. 22.0 . 

270 

Mean Education . ,. 

... 8.7 ... 

.. 8.54 . 

... 254 . 

Mean M M H Score . . . 


. 140.3 . 

253 

Marital Status (Married).. 

.... 22* ... 

... 17* . 



(Single). .. 

.... 78* ... 

... S3* . 



$ with previous service. ». 

62 * 

45* 



$ with no previous service 

.... 38* ... 

* * • F JP* • 

... 55* .. 



Nature of Offence (AWL)... 

.... 62 * ... 

... 77* . 



(Others) . . 

.... 38* 

... 23 * . 



Racial Origin (Anglo .. . . . 

, ... 68*... 

... 72*.. 

i 



Saxon) .. 



f 

vjn 

(Fr.Cdu. ).,. 

..... €$.... 

... 15$.. 


O 

(European &. ... 

.... zki ... 

• • • * 

.-..13*.. 


o 

Others) 




Rural-Urban (Farm or ..... 

.... , 12 $. .. 




Village) 




Background (Town)...... 

.... 34* ... 

.. 22 , 7 *.. 



(City) ..... 

... 48* ... 

.. 66 , 7 *.. 

|: 



jEABLS 1 A Comparison of the Experimental Croup with Soldiers 
Sentenced to Detention from October 1, 1946 to 
November 30 , 194*. 




























j 












25 


An examination of the above table will reveal sufficient 
similarity to lend support to the assumption that the experimental 
sample was representative of military offenders in general, at 
least under peacetime service conditions. This is particularly 
true in respect of age, education and Intelligence, as measured 
by the *M H Test. 


THE MATCHED CONTROL GROUP 

It was intended that this group of control subjects 
should be matched, man for man, with the offender group of 5$ 
on the following factors: age, intelligence, education, racial 
origin (classified as Anglo-Saxon - English, Scotch, Irish, 
Welsh; French Canadian; European - all continental European 
races, including the Bussian group and Semetic; and Others), 
regional origin - meaning the part of the country in which the 
subject lived chiefly (classified according to the five Army 
Command Areas - Eastern, Quebec, Central, Prairie and Western), 
and finally a© to whether the subject was raised primarily in 
a city, town, village or on a farm* It was found quite im¬ 
possible to complete the matching process with so many precise 
factors involved. Intelligence and regional origin had to be 
left out. Age was retained although it was found difficult to 
locate non-offenders, who possessed the other requirements 
and were as young as many in the offender group. 

It might be noted that both the offender and the matched 
control groups were made up of soldiers in the rank of Private. 


THE BA3TOM COHTBQL SBDUP 

Two choices were considered with respect to the selection 
of the random controls, one, to select them from the general 
Army other rank population or, two, to select them from the 
non-offender other rank population. The latter choice was 
adopted. The reason was simply that the study in this initial 
phase was designed to differentiate offenders and non-offenders 
in the service. Subsequent validation studies should include, 
as controls, samples of the general Army population and also 
samples of the general recruit population. 

It was originally intended that this random control 
group should total at least 100. Wastage, due to faulty 
records, and the inability of one command to complete its 
assignment, reduced that figure to 75* 












26 

'■?k 

Begional representation was fairly adequate in the light 
of the latter factor. It is probable, however, that a larger \ 
percentage of subjects from Ontario could he anticipated on \ 
the basis of the number of soldiers enlisted there. Another 
factor, which might have been operating, Is obscured by the 
incompleted assignment. This factor Is th© probable higher 
incidence of military offences among soldiers from certain 
regions in Canada. \ 

V \ 

Unlike the matched control group, the random controls 
included a fair percentage of HGOs, actually 14 out of th© 75 
sample, ranging in rank as high as Sergeant. 

To ensure that the group would be chosen at random, 
instructions were issued to Personnel Officers to draw from 
their personal history files, which are maintained for each 
soldier, every tenth document until the assigned number of 
acceptable cases had been obtained. The numbers assigned to 
each station were based upon the number of soldiers there, in 
relation to th© total Army population. If any document drawn 
from the files revealed a history of military misconduct, it 
was rejected and put aside. If th© required number of cases 
were not located after one turn through the files, the pro¬ 
cedure was repeated* 

Although th© sample was not designed to be representa¬ 
tive of the general Army population, including Officers, MCOs 
and other ranks (offenders and non-offenders), inspection of 
the results of th© initial analysis suggested that there was 
probably a degree of similarity, at least on some factors. 

Bata on three factors, age, education and w M f} score, was ob¬ 
tained from Army Headquarters for comparison with similar 
data on the random control group. The comparison is presented 
in Table 2, below. 







27 


Comparative 

Factors 

Random Con¬ 
trols 1-75 

General Array 
Population 

N in General Army 
Population Samples 

Mfifin Age ........ 


.... 27.60 . 

.... 16.193 . 

Range in Age® ... 

. 17 to 46 .. 

17 to 53 • 

.... ,W| ■•‘JJ *•»«••• 

Mean "M" Score.. 

t , •. 151*2 .. 

.... 150.0 . 

5,429 . 

Mean Mucation . 

..... 9*2 •» 

..... 9*^ • 

.... 15,071 .. 

Range in Mucation 

• 7 to 12 »• 

6 to Dniv. 




Grad. 



TABLE 2 A Comparison of the Random Control Croup with Large 
Samples of the General Army Population. 


It is not intended to conclude from the above comparison 
that the random controls are entirely representative of the 
general army population and that no further validation is neces¬ 
sary. The comparison is presented merely because it does show 
the random sample to be sufficiently representative that at 
least tentative conclusions can be formed on the basis of this 
study. 


COLLECTIOH 0? BATA 

It was assumed that the maximum degree of cooperation 
between the subjects and the interviewers would be enjoyed if 
the subjects understood that their answers were to be treated 
confidentially. Accordingly, the following instructions were 
issued to the interviewers 

*13. The anonymity of ALL persons tested and interviewed 
will be preserved throughout the survey and thereafter. 10 
reference will be made in any report resulting from the survey 
to any Individual by name. It must not be possible for any 
one to relate answers, which may be given to any question, to 
any individual. Delinquent cases will be numbered 1 - 50 
(inclusive). Matched control cases will be numbered 1A - 5^A 
(inclusive), #1 in the delinquent group being matched with 
#1A in the matched control group, and so on. Random control 




























2 g 


cases will be numbered. 101® to 20QB. Names or regimental 
numbers will SOT be recorded on any of the report forms used 
in the survey and NO reference will be mad© on Cdn Army (AJ) 
documents to the interview answers or impressions gathered 
by the interviewer. Interviewers are also requested to re¬ 
frain from discussing the content of the questionnaire, or 
the responses of any subject with anyone outside Personnel 
Selection Service. Because of the need for discretion with 
respect to conducting the survey, Command Personnel Officers 
are requested to ensure that only the experienced and most 
trustworthy interviewers participate In the survey. 

14. Subjects in the two control groups must be volunteers, 
in the sense that, when they have been located and the pur¬ 
pose of the survey has been explained to them, they must 
signify their willingness to be tested and interviewed. 
Naturally interviewers will make every possible attempt to 
obtain the maximum cooperation from the delinquent group, as 
well. They should at least ff f@ 9 l n that their approval has 
been sought. Interviewers should realize that their job is 
to establish rapport with the subjects, to supervise the 
filling out of Personal Inventory ** 3 % the Minnesota, and the 
Attitude Scale, to ask the questions in the Biographical 
Questionnaire carefully and in no rush, and to record the 
answers, and to assure each subject that hie answers will be 
held in the strictest confidence. They are not expected to 
probe for the truth, if they suspect that it is not being 
offered. They are not expected to offer an analysis of the 
factors operative in each case. Their main responsibility 
is to obtain the confidence and cooperation of the subjects 
and retain that throughout the tests and interviews. Toward 
that end, the interviewers should guard against displaying 
surprise, disapproval, condemnation, or disinterest. They 
should mike it clear in their introduction in a simple, 
straightforward manner that they want the truth and then 
they should look and act as though they were getting it and 
are properly appreciative.”* 

A copy of the instructions issued to interviewers 
which were to be followed in requesting the cooperation of 
the subjects my be found at Appendix ”0” . 

& 

Quoted from an instruction from AHQ (Personnel Selection 

Service) to Command Personnel Officers, under file 

references! HQC 121-65-16 (Org 10) and HQ 121-65-30 

(Org 1C), dated S 00T 46. 












29 


ANALYSIS OF THE DATA 

The data to he analysed consisted of the following: 

(1) MMPI of 566 Individual items and 13 scales 
and scores. 

(2) Personal Inventory "B H of J1 H Y®s~M0 M or 
"True-False* item®. 

( 3 ) Attitude toward the Treatment of Criminals, 

Forme A and B, each with 20 items of the 
"Agree-Msagree-Gannot Say" variety. 

(4) Biographical Questionnaire with l^S questions, 

S 3 of which could he classified as "Yes-lo" or 
"True-False" types, and the remainder as de¬ 
scriptive items. After inspection and rejection 
of unsuitable items, the questionnaire was re¬ 
duced to 8 3 "Yes-Ho" and 40 descriptive items. 

The total items to he analysed, apart from any overall 
analysis of the scales, totalled 7^0. In addition, there were 
40 descriptive items from the Biographical Questionnaire which 
required evaluation. 

It was decided to adopt th© following approach: 

(1) Calculate mean raw scores and raw corrected 
scores (with the *K M factor added) for each 
seal© of th® MMPI and for each group of sub¬ 
jects. Compare the differences between th© 
mean scores by the critical ratio method. 

It was decided to compare the offender group 
with each of the control group® using th© 
same method. If the ratios obtained from 
the two calculations were similar, it was 
not intended to compare the two control 
groups in a similar fashion, the assumption 
being that a significant ratio would not 
result in the latter case. 

(2) Calculate the mean standard or T scores for 
each seal© for each group of subjects and 
compare these graphically. 




- 




.. 
























.Si 

, 


‘ 

- 










30 


( 3 ) Compare the scores obtained by the three groups 
on the two attitude scales by the critical ratio 
method. 

(4) Analyse the 40 descriptive items, such as age, 
education, M score, family income by comparison 
of means and by percentages falling in various 
classifications, as applicable, 

(5) Analyse the j6o individual **Tes~Ho n , "True- 
False 1 *, **Agree-Bisagree H items from all four 
questionnaires by the Lawshe Homograph technique, 
(Appendix "G"), This is a short method of ob¬ 
taining discrimination values of test or in¬ 
ventory items from the percentage of successful 
or significant responses given by members of 

two criterion groups. 

Time would not permit any further study of the results. 
Personal Inventory "B 1 * could not be examined as a separate 
measure. Items from the inventory were analysed according 
to (l) above and further study of the inventory’s discrimi¬ 
native qualities will be undertaken later. 








IV 


31 


MSULTS 


mitosota HULTIPHASIC pBRsomiTY nmmom. 

All scales and validating scores of the HMP1 will he 
analysed hereunder in tabular form, including both raw scores 
and scores corrected for five scales by the addition of the 
H K M factor, with the exception of the le Scale and the 
Question Score {?). The former was discussed earlier. The 
latter score, in the case of the group form of the inventory 
used in this study, refers to unanswered items. Since no 
record in the study contained more than JQ unanswered items, 
the number deemed significant by the authors of the 4 inventory, 
an analysis of the question scores would not appear profitable. 
It is noteworthy that all Question Scores up to and including 
30 are converted to a standard or H T tt score of 50 * 

The first table will present the means and standard 
deviations for both the raw scores and the corrected raw 
scores in respect of the three groups used in the study. In 
addition, the same data calculated for what was considered 
normal males by the authors of the inventory will be recorded 
to permit comparisons with the group data obtained in this 
study. 

It will be noted that matched control group means and 
standard deviations, based upon raw scores, without the 
addition of the H I H factor, have not been included. The 
reason for this is that means and standard deviations were 
calculated on the basis of corrected raw scores first. The 
relationship between the random and matched control data was 
so close that it was decided to omit matched control cal¬ 
culations on the basis of raw scores obtained on the five 
scales. 






















32 



Offenders 

Matched 

Controls 

§ 

* 

Controls 

Author’s Data & H 

SCALES 

Mean 

S.D. 

Mean 

S.D* 

Mean 

S.D. 

Mean 

S.D. I 

N 

i* L tt 

2.6s 

l.SS 

4.02 

2.13 

4.17 

1.95 

- 

- 

- 


11.64 

5.0 

13.92 

4.37 

14.13 

4.82 

- 

- 

- 


S.52 

6.16 

3.74 

2.92 

3.S0 

2.89 

- 

- 

• 

M Hs" 

5-5^ 

4.33 

- 

- 

3.50 

2.79' 

4.53 

4.37 

294 

5* 

11.12 

3.S4 

10.74 

3.09 

10.86 

3.22 

In. 34 

3.90 

274 

«D 8 

19.36 

4.05 

17.34 

2.77 

17.24 

3.59 

16.63 

4.18 

294 

tlgytt 

16. s6 

4.3s 

16.14 

3.54 

15.96 

3.56 

16.49 

5.51 

345 

M Pd M 

21. SO 

4.66 

- 

. r :.J 

14.74 

2.99 

13.99 

3.93 

294 

«Pd«J. 

4K 

26.30 

4.43 

20.7 

3.34 

20.3s 

3.7s 

18.86 

4.25 

274 

«*Kf» 

21.74 

4.17 

20.13 

7.81 

22.13 

4.34 

20.44 

5.13 

117 

»?a» 

10.36 

1.4l 

6.92 

3.05 

7.33 

3.11 

8m 06 

3.56 

293 


17.74 

s.36 

- 

mt 

8.93 

6.53 

| 9*^6 

7.19 

293 

"Pt"+ 

12 

29.0 

5.56 

22.74 

3*67 

23.06 

4.33! 

22.95 

4.88 

274 

«Sc» 

17.ss 

n.62 

- 

- 

7-70 

4.96 

9.57 

7.43 

294 

M Sc M 4- 
IK ^ 

29.14 

9.64 

22.0 

4.27 

21.84 

4.46 

22.26 

5.21 

274 

"Ma" 

20. 82 

4.44 

. 

- 


1S.0 

3.43 

14.51 

4.4e 

294 

»Ma«-L 

2K r 

22 m 88 

ssssd 

4.1S | 

i=i 

21.64 

3*44 

20.85 

' 

j 3.53 

! s ! 

16.83 

= 

3-99 

214 


TABLE It 

Means and Standard Deviations of Eaw and Corrected Saw 
Scores Obtained by the Three Croups in the Study and by 
the "Hormal Males** tested by the Authors of the MMP2. 






















































33 


To discover whether there was a statistically significant 
difference "between the mean scores recorded in Table 3 , the 
formula for the “critical” or “significance ratio” was applied 
to the data. This method, described in detail by Lindquist fcg), 
enables one to find the chances that the true difference 
between means is greater than zero, A critical ratio of 3 or 
more is considered significant. With a ratio of 3t there would 
be 99*9 chances in 100 that the true difference is greater than 
zero. 


The following table presents the critical ratios for each 
of the scales, based upon both raw and corrected raw scores. 

The offender group means are compared with the matched control 
group means using corrected raw scores only, and with the 
random control group means using both corrected raw scores and 
raw scores without the factor. 










'•* : 

. 

: •**: . • 

- 

. 

- 


' ' 






' 




■ , 

i 
















34 


Scales of 
MMPI 

A. Critical Ratio 
Offenders - Matched 
(Corrected Raw Scores) 

L Critical Ratio 

Offenders - Random 
(Corrected Raw Scores) 

5 /Orltlcal Batic 
0ff©nders-Rangg 

(Raw Scores fox 
Scales) 

M L tt 

3.33 

4.09 

- 

«&” 

2.43 

2.76 

mm 


4.90 

4.90 

mm 

»Hs" 

.55 

.39 

2.95 

t»D» 

2.96 

2.99 

mm 

n Ey» 

.96 

1.21 

mm 

«Pd« 

7.14 

7.75 

9.49 


1.1S 

.50 

- 

M Pa» 

7.24 

6.28 

- 


6.64 

7.38 

6.28 

«se M 

4.80 

5.01 

5.88 

"Ma" 

I.67 

2.82 

3.80 


I 1 ABLE 4> 

Critical Eatios Obtained When Mean Scores on 
&KFI for Each Group Were Compared. 


































t ! 











■ 












; 


r 






■' . r '* 
V 












ANALYSIS Of DATA THOM MMPI 


35 


1* It will be noted that there is a high degree of uni¬ 
formity In the critical ratios obtained when the offenders 
are compared with either control group. Because of this 
uniformity the two control groups were not compared with each 

other, 

2. Critical ratios of statistical significance were ob¬ 
tained for the following scales and scores of the MMPIs- 

The Lie Score (**L M ) 

The Validity Score ( M ? M ) 

The Psychopathic Deviate Scale (”Pd H ) 

The Paranoia Scale (”Pa n ) 

The Psychasthenia Scale ("Pt ?J ) 

The Schizophrenia Scale ( H Sc w ) 

In addition, critical ratios obtained for the tt K* 

Scale, the Depression Scale (raw corrected scores) and the 
Hypomania Seal© (raw corrected scores) approach the level of 
significance chosen as a requirement in connection with the 
study, a C.E. minimum of 3* 

3. The M K S factor, it will b© recalled, is intended to 
be a correction factor which accentuates the discrimination 
power or value of the variables measured by the inventory. 
Column ”C M of Table 4, above, shows the critical ratios ob¬ 
tained for the five “E*® scales, without the us© of the 
factor. When only raw scores are used, higher critical ratios 
are obtained for four of the scales and lower critical 
ratios for one scale, a Psychasthenia H , This would suggest 
that the factor does not operate as the authors of the 
inventory intended, at least in connection with military 
offenders and non-offenders, Hubin has noted similar results 
in a study of psychiatric patients in a Veterans Hospital.(23 ). 

4. Variations noted by inspection of the authors® data 

and the scores of H normals” In this study prompted a comparison 
of random control group data with the authors 1 data. Again 
the critical ratio method was used. Eatios obtained for 
each scale using raw corrected scores follow: 






36 


Hs - 

1.09 

Pd - 

3.04 

Pt - 

.18 

D - 

1.26 

Mf - 

2.45 

So - 

.69 

Hy - 

1.05 

Pa - 

1.76 

Ma - 

8.48 


It will be noted that statistically significant ratios 
are obtained for the *Pd H and "Ma w scales and that the Mf ratio 
approaches the chosen minimum of 3 * 

The two "normal* groups appear quite different in respect 
of the qualities measured by the scales mentioned above. It is 
noteworthy that the Army "normals* have higher scores on all 
three scales. 

5 . An examination of Table 3 reveals that the offenders 
have lower mean B L M and n K n scores than the non-offenders. 

The offenders have a lower mean Mf score than the random con¬ 
trols. In the case of all other scales the offenders have 
higher scores than the non-offenders. As shown in Table 4, 
above, the- differences in the scores obtained on six scales 
are statistically significant. 


DATA BASKS UPOB u ff w SCOPES Of MMPX 



L 

K 

f 

Hs 

D 

¥ 

Pd 

Mf 

Pa 

Pt 

Sc 

Ma 

Offenders 

- 

0 

24.0 

0.0 

fS.O 

2.0 

38 

2.0 

16.0 

26.0 

2S.0 

34 . c 

Matched 

Controls 

- 

2 

2.0 

- 

- 

- 

2.0 

2.0 

- 

- 

2.0 

24. ( 

Bandom 

Controls 

- 

4 

2.6 

2.6 

6.6 

- 

1.3 

4.0 

2.6 

4.0 

1.3 

17.; 


TABLE 5: 

Percentage of Subjects in Bach Group Having 
"T* Scores of JO or Above on Individual Scales 
of the MMPI, 




































f ' ■ ' ' f"" I: | 




• • : •"■vi 









SCORE. 


37 


TABLE 6l 



H s D H y Pd h/l f Pa. P t S c Ma. 

+.5K +.4-K +!K +IK +.2K 


uj ? L K F 
Q: 

O . 

^ J>0 50 49 ez. 49 5 \ 67 53 56 62. 63 65 

R 50 53 53 4 9 51 49 55 49 47 50 50 63 

z J>0J>0 53 53 49 _J1 _49 53 _47 J50 _50 _60 

< 

Ul 

5 


Le.GLNP: 

A - 

e> —- 

c — 


OrFE.NDE.RS 
MATCHED CONTROLS 
RANDOM CONTROLS 


Mean 5? Scores Obtained on Minnesota Multlphasic 
Personality Inventory by Groups of Military Offenders 

Matched Controls and Handom Controls• 


oo> > 















































































6. The lower offender H L M score could be explained on 
the grounds that offenders are less concerned about seeking 
socially acceptable answers. Similarly, the lower offender 
M K W score is suggestive of a desire to get a “poor* score, 
although this interpretation is advanced with a good degree 
of caution in the light of paragraph 3, above. The higher 
offender H F tt score would suggest further caution in drawing 
conclusions based on the high critical ratios. This score 
is supposed to be a check on the validity of a record. The 
results of the study in this respect must be checked on new, 
and preferably larger, samples. 

7. The other significant ratios, and near significant 
ratios, tend to support the initial hypothesis, referred to 
earlier, in respect of the relationship between military 
offences and personal maladjustment. If the results are 
valid it is apparent that the military offender tends to be 
a remarkably unstable individual. Types of offence, and 
other factors reported in Personal Adjustment*, also suggest 
that is a fact. 




- 




4 













« 







■ 








ATTITUDE HOWARD THE TREATMENT OF CB1MIHALS 


Scores obtained by all three groups of subjects on 
Form A of the attitude scale were treated statistically. In 
addition the individual items of both forms were analysed as 
part of the longer item analysis. Since the two forms are 
stated to be comparable, means and standard deviations were 
not calculated for Form B. 

Data on Form A is presented belows 

Offenders Matched Controls Random Controls 


Mean Score - $.6 

5.5 

5.6 

S.D. - 2.47 

1.97 

2.3 3 


The interpretations of the mean scores 5*5 §.6 are 

H neutral or doubtful*. In other words, a noticeable differen¬ 
tiation was not produced by the attitude scale. The critical 
ratio calculated in comparing the offenders with the matched 
controls was 0.22. Offenders and random controls were not 
compared further because their mean scores were both 5 . 6 . 









' .'f v.:.' : * 





. 

. . ■ 

. 

- .. ” f 







40 


BIQGRAPHIcal information 

Factors covered in the Biographical Questionnaire, 
which could not he analysed hy the nomograph technique,were 
examined separately. These will he reported upon now. Head¬ 
ings used earlier in outlining theories of crime and related 
research will he repeated to facilitate the comparison of the 
results of this study with previous reports. 


BIOLOGICAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL FACTORS 

CRIME IN THE FAMILY 

12$ of the offenders and 8$ of the controls came from 
families where a member had been to jail. The factor does not 
appear significant insofar as this study is concerned. 

INTELLIGENCE 

The mean tt M M score of offenders was 144.0 and the range 
of scores was 110 to 1?2. Comparable figures for the matched 
control group were l4jj.6 and 102 to I 83 , aad for the random 
controls 151*2 and 107 to 193* Comparing the differences 
between means by the critical ratio method yielded a ratio of 
for the offenders and matched controls and 2.2Sfor the 
offenders and the random controls. The mean scores reported 
above are all interpreted as w average 53 . Generally speaking, 
as in civilian research, intelligence does not appear a 
significant factor although it may have some bearing on mili¬ 
tary offences in individual cases. 

AGE 

In general, the offenders were younger than the controls, 
this fact tending to support previous studies referred to 
earlier in the report. The mean age of the offenders was 
22.64 compared with the mean age of the random controls of 
28 . 96 . As this was on© of the matching factors, the matched 
group could be expected to have the same mean age and range 
as the offenders. As mentioned previously, however, it is 
probably significant that considerable difficulty was ex¬ 
perienced in matching in respect of this factor. 

The range of ages for offenders was TJ to 37 and, for 
the controls, 18 to 46. ^8$ of the offenders were 20 years 

of age or younger and only 6.6$ of the controls could be 
classified in that category. 


















. 





X .. »' 



f 


■ 


,-j.: .r,; : i . 


■ 




v 

; 

* . • •'> b • ? 

* 


- 





41 


PHYSICAL OCTOITIQI 

When describing previous theories, reference was made 
in this report to physical tt types M and the probable influence 
of physical defects on criminal behavior. Such factors could 
not be treated properly in this particular investigation. 
Questions were asked, however, concerning the subject’s own 
assessment of his general health (item® 59 and 66 of the 
Biographical Questionnaire are examples), 22$ of the offenders, 
compared with S$ and 4$ of the two control groups, reported 
that they were often sick as children. Similarly, in relation 
to their present health the offenders reported a higher 
incidence of tiring easily, sleeping poorly and having "trouble® 
with their "nerves®. It is noteworthy that such complaints 
suggest functional rather than organic deficiencies* 


SOCIAL fACTOBS 

the HOME 

58$ of the offenders compared with 44$ and 50 . 6 $ of the 
controls came from families with more than five children. XJ$ 
of the offenders were either “only® children or the youngest 
in the family, as compared with 40$ .and 24$ of the controls. 

The offenders tended to show a more marked preference 
for on© or the other parent. 5^$ of the offenders, for example, 
had no preference for either parent whereas the controls were 
the same with 78$ of each group so classified. It is possible 
that parent - child relations in the homes of certain offenders 
could account for a strong liking (or dislike) for one parent. 

It is significant that 28$ of the offenders considered 
discipline in their family was not strict enough, whereas only 
8$ and 1.3$ of the controls were of that opinion. The survey 
failed to reveal, however, ary noteworthy difference in the 
nature of the discipline in the homes being compared. 

Similarly there was not much difference between the 
group® in respect of whether their own parents raised them or 
not. l4$ of the offenders, 12$ and 6.2$ of the controls were 
raised by step-parents, foster parents or by others (including 

institutions). 












The father’s income was chosen as a measure of the 
economic security associated with the home. Ho significant 
differentiation was discovered between the offenders and non¬ 
offenders in this regard. The same situation prevailed in 
connection with the factor of home-ownership. 

Separation for long periods (24$ and 15$)* divorce 
(24$ and 15 $) and frequent quarrels (22$ and 11$) among the 
subjects * parents were more common in the case of the offenders 
than the controls. Similarly offenders reported that they 
quarreled with other children in the family more than did the 
controls (26$ and 17 $* respectively). 66$ of the offender® 
reported that they believed their parents were glad when they 
were born as compared with 90 $ of the controls* 

It will be seen that, in the case of some factors, the 
offenders’ homes tended to resemble those reported upon in 
connection with civilian delinquency and crime. 

MARITAL STATUS 

76$ of the offenders wera single. Of the married 22$, 
two were separated and one had a common-law wife. When these 
figures were compared with those for the random controls, the 
situation was reversed (24$ single, married, with on© 

separation recorded). 


sural,- 

Tery similar percentages of each group of subjects 
could be classified according to whether they had been raised 
chiefly on. a farm or In a village. In a town,, or in a city. 
These findings are in disagreement with reports of investi¬ 
gations suggesting that there is a relationship between urban 
backgrounds and criminal behavior. 


mmm 

Two subjects in each group mad® no claim to a religious 
affiliation. The distributions of subjects, according to 
affiliations, were similar and not of any apparent significance. 
l6$ of the offenders stated that they never attend church as 
compared with 12$ and 6.6$ of the controls. Similarly less 
offenders attend church regularly (6$) than non-offenders 
(10$ and 20$). This factor, however, does not appear to be 
generally significant on the basis of the percentages obtained. 































. 





. 




"'. . . 


* 

. 








rv;v'; f . 









EDUCATION 


^3 


When the offenders and the random controls were compared 
on this factor means of 8*7 and 9«2* respectively, t*rere ob¬ 
tained. The difference between the means was examined by the 
critical ratio technique and a ratio of 2*5 was obtained. 

30 $ of the offenders were retarded (so classified if a 
subject repeated more than one grade) as compared with 12$ and 
4.9$ of the controls. 


PERSONAL ADJUSTMENT 


SCHOOL HISTORY 

It was not possible to differentiate to a significant 
degree between offenders and controls on the basis of the in¬ 
cidence of truancy (defined in terms of irregular attendance) 
or behavior, which resulted in a subject being suspended or 
expelled. Both offenders and controls, with few exceptions, 
said thay liked their teachers and they believed the feeling 
was reciprocated. 

l6$ of the offenders reported, however, that they war© 
late more than the majority of the pupils, compared with the 
figure 4$ for both control groups. 

The factor of gang activity during school years, as 
defined here, failed to provide any significant differentiation. 
Probably the criterion was at fault. Items 93* 93A and 95 
certainly do not express the idea of organized delinquent gang 
activity particularly well. 


OCCUPATIONAL HXSTOBT 

The offenders reported numerous job changes to a greater 
extent than the non-offenders (40$ compared with l4$ and 10.6$). 
Also, th© offenders quit their jobs over disagreements, for no 
particular reason or because they were fired considerably more 
than the controls (2o$, 6$ and 13 $). 














A : .V ■ 












44 


There was no significant difference between the groups, 
however, in their reported attitude toward their work (Items 
134 and 135 of the Biographical Questionnaire). 


FEELINGS OF INFERIORITY 

One factor which produced a noticeable differentiation 
was whether the subject thought h® was wanted as a child (item 
13 of the Questionnaire). This was referred to in the section 
dealing with “The Home”. 

Another factor, which is probably classifiable under 
this general heading, is the extent to which the subjects were 
subjected to teasing (item 35 ). 34 $ of the offenders, com¬ 

pared with l 6 $ and 12 $ of the controls, reported they were 
teased a great deal. 

40$ of the offenders stated they wanted many things as 
children, which their families could not buy. The controls 
reported this situation to a lesser extent, 26 $ and 22 $. 
Similarly, the offenders felt their friends were better off 
than they, ( 2 S$, S$ and 17$). 3$$ of the offenders, 10$ and 

4$ of the controls, felt they were less well dressed than most 
pupils at school. There was very little difference between 
the groups in respect of whether they thought they had more 
or less friends than most pupils at school. 


goTOH 

42$ of the offenders reported they had no hobby or 
favorite spare time activity compared with 12 $ and 6 . 6 $ of the 
controls. The offenders, as a group, appear to read less than 
the controls. 


SEXUAL ACTIVITY 

The offenders reported that they started to “go out 
with girls” somewhat earlier than the controls. Sixteen 
years and under marks that point of development for the great 
majority ( 76 $)» whereas 54.6$ is a comparable figure for the 
random controls. 













45 

Similarly, the offenders reported earlier sexual ex¬ 
periences than the controls. The majority (92$) of the of¬ 
fenders claim to have had intercourse at 18 years or less. 

A comparable figure for the random controls is 5#$* 

52$ of the offenders were classified as ‘‘promiscuous”, 
compared with 22$ and 36$ of the two control groups. 


ClYXLXAH QJFBHOBS 

26$ of the offenders reported one civil arrest, 18$ - 
2 to 5, 2$ - 6 to 8, and 2$ - 9 or more. Only 52$ had no 
previous criminal record. of th© matched controls had one 
civil arrest, 8$ admitted 2 to 5* &nd #4$ had no criminal 
record. Percentages for the random controls are similar to 
the matched group data. 

Two of the offender® were th© only subjects to report 
reform school records. 

HATUFJS OF MILITARY OmBOBS 

62$ of the offenders were sentenced to detention for 
being AWOL. Other offences constituted Insubordination and 
trouble associated directly or indirectly with excessive 
drinking. 34$ of th© offenders were recidivist®, one of 
whom reported he had been in detention or field punishment 
thirteen times over a considerable period of service. 

Seasons for th© offences, as reported by the subjects, 
were drinking (28$), “fed up 1 * (20$), “not sure” or rt n© reason* 5 
(22$), and several others such as broken promises regarding 
leave, and the like, "wanted my discharge 51 , and n carelessness”. 

4S$ of the offenders cam© from training schools, 26$ 
fro© regiments and 26$ from service units. 18$ were employed 
at what would appear to have been productive work; 3 2 $ said 
they were doing fatigues; 46$ were on training and the remain¬ 
ing 4$ were in hospital or awaiting disposal. 

l4$ of the offenders stated that they didn’t get along 
well in their units. The same number felt that someone in 
the unit M had it in” for them. 40$ were either not sure or 
believed that the punishment would not keep them out of trouble 
in future. 


















46 


PRIMING- HABITS 

98$ of the offenders stated that they drink beer, hard 
liquor, or both, compared with $Oj* and So.6$ of the controls* 
The offenders engaged in heavy drinking far more than the 
controls* for example, 40$ stated that they became drunk 
once every few months or more, compared with 12$ and 3*9$ of 
the controls* 


RACIAL AND REGIONAL ORIfllN 

There were no significant differences in respect of 
racial origin, as defined in item 4 of the truestionnaire* 

Regional representation in both the offender and non* 
offender groups was what could have been anticipated on the 
basis of the distribution of the army population, and the 
method of sampling. 


ITEM ANALYSIS RESULTS 

125 items of the KMPI, 12 items from Personal Inventory 
H 3 H , no items from the two attitude scales, and l6 items from 
the Biographical Questionnaire were found to possess discrimi¬ 
nation values (L-values) of .5 or more, as measured by the 
Lawshe Nomograph technique* 

la obtaining this number of items offenders and the 
two control groups were compared in respect of the percentage 
of significant responses to each item. The Devalues so ob¬ 
tained were very similar, this fact obviating the necessity of 
comparing the two control groups in the same manner. However, 
if any difference in values existed, the lower value was 
selected as the measure in relation to this study. 

The "cut-off* 1 of *3 was chosen arbitrarily after in¬ 
specting the results. The relative percentages in each 
criterion group vary at the lower ends of the scales. A fair 
approximation of the effect of the choice of .5 as a cut-off 
will be obtained, however, by noting that, if 62$ of the high 
criterion group and 38$ of the low criterion group gave sig¬ 
nificant responses a positive value of *3 would result. 















kj 

The more discriminative items, referred to above, may 
be found on succeeding pages, together with an indication of 
the offenders* choices and the Devalues of each item. Item 
1-123 are from the MMPI, 124-135 from Personal Inventory M B M , 
and items I36-I5I from the Biographical Questionnaire, 


Offender 

Xtei$ Eespons® 

1. I wake up fresh and rested most False 

mornings, 

2. My daily life is full of things False 

that keep me interested, 

3. When I take a new job, I like to false 

be tipped off on who should be 
gotten next to, 

4. % sex life is satisfactory. false 

5. At times I have very much wanted True 

to leave home. 

6. At times I have fits of laughing True 

and crying that I cannot control. 

7. Ho one seems to understand me. True 

£• Evil spirits possess me at times. True 

9. When someone does me a wrong l True 


feel I should pay him back if l 
can, just for the principle of 
the thing. 

10. I find it hard to keep my mind on True 

a task or job. 

j; \ ■ %$A . % 

11. If people had ndfchad it in for me True 

I would have been much more 
successful. 

12. Most any time I would rather sit True 

and daydream than to do anything 
else. 


D-Value 

•5 


1.2 


• 5 

.7 

• 6 

•7 

.9 

.6 

•5 


.3 

•5 


5 











* 

, - • .‘u*. i 




■ ' 













48 


item 

Offender 

Eesponse 

3)-Valu© 

13, I have had periods of days, weeks, 
or months when I couldn't take 
care of things because I couldnH 
"get going". 

True 

.5 

l4. Much of the time my head 3sons to 
hurt all over. 

True 

.9 

15. I do not always toll the truth. 

True 

.6 

l6. My judgment is "better than it 

ever was. 

false 

.8 

17* My soul sometimes leaves my body. 

True 

1.0 

IS. I am a good mixer. 

false 

•5 

19. I have not lived the right kind, 
of life. 

True 

•5 

20. Parts of my body often have feel¬ 
ings like burning, tingling, 
crawling, or like "going to sleep". 

True 

.5 

21. Most of the time I feel blue. 

True 

•5 

22. I sometimes tease animals. 

True 

.6 

23. Sometimes I am strongly attracted 
by the personal articles of others 
such as shoes, gloves, etc., so 
that I want to handle or steal 
them though 1 have no use for them. 

True 

.8 

24. I think most people would 11© to 
get ahead. 

True 

•5 

25. I do many things which I regret 
afterwards (I regret things 
more or more often than others 
seem to). 

True 

1.2 

26. I go to church almost every week. 

false 

•7 

27. I have very few quarrels with 
members of my family. 

false 

.6 














: , 

- 

- 

. 

■ ■ 

- 

- 

' 

* 

. 

- 

- 










49 


Item 

Offender 

geaponse 

BsMSS 

£8. hardest battles are with 

myself. 

True 

•7 

29. I don*t seem to care what 
happens to me. 

True 

.6 

30. Much of the time I feel as if 

X have done something wrong 
or evil. 

True 

•5 

31. Someone has it in for me. 

True 

l.l 

32. Often I feel as if there were a 
tight band about my head. 

True 

1.0 

33. In school I was sometimes sent to 
the principal for cutting up. 

True 

.5 

34. My speech is the same as always 
(not faster or slower* or 
slurring; no hoarseness). 

False 

.7 

35. If I could get into movie without 
paying and be sure I was not 
seen I would probably do it. 

True 

1.0 

36. I believe that my home life is as 
pleasant as that of most people 

I know. 

False 

.9 

37. Sometimes I feel as if I must in¬ 
jure either myself or someone 
els®. 

True 

.9 

3S* I certainly feel useless at times. 

True 

.6 

39* X would like to be a soldier. 

False 

1.5 

; ? 

40. X have the wanderlust and am never 
happy unless I am roaming or 
traveling about. 

True 

.7 

4l. Most nights I go to sleep without 

thoughts or ideas bothering me. 

False 

•9 







Items 

Offender 

Response 

50 

»-Valu@ 

42 * I have had periods in which I 
carried on activities without 
knowing later what I had been 
doing. 

True 

.7 

43. I feel that I have often been 
punished without cause. 

True 

.8 

44 . I have never felt better In mgr 
life than l do now. 

False 

1.1 

45. I like to study and read about 
things that I am working at. 

False 

1.0 

46 . I liked school. 

False 

•7 

47. I do not have a great fear of 
snakes. 

False 

.6 

4 S. Mgr mother was a good woman. 

False 

1.3 

43 . I am worried about sex matters. 

True 

.6 

50. I am against giving money to 
beggars. 

False 

•7 

51. I daydream very little. 

False 

.6 

52. I like to flirt. 

True 

.6 

53. I have used alcohol excessively. 

True 

1.1 

54 . I frequently find myself worrying 
about something. 

True 

.6 

55• 2-$y parents have often objected to 
the kind of people 2 went around 

with. 

True 

1.1 

56. 2 have been told that I walk during 
sleep. 

True 

.9 

57 . I have been Inspired to a program of 

life based on duty which 2 have 
since carefully followed. 

False 

.8 

5S'. 2 brood a great deal. 

True 

.7 


5$'. I “brood a great deal 









51 


Offender 


l*g?- 

Bespo n&i 

59 . I have periods of such great 

restlessness that I cannot sit 
long in a chair. 

True 

60 . I have been disappointed in love. 

False 

6 i. I dream frequently about things 
that are heat kept to ays elf. 

True 

62 . My way of doing things is apt to 

be misunderstood by others. 

True 

63 . Hy parents and family find more 
fault with me than they should. 

True 

64* Ho on© cares much what happens to 
you. 

True 

65 . I usually expect to succeed in things False 

1 do. 

66 . 2 have difficulty in starting to 
do things. 

True 

67 . Once a week or oftenar 1 become 
very excited. 

True 

6 S. When I leave hone 1 do not worry 
about whether the door is locked 
and the windows closed. 

True 

69 . X am sure X am being talked about. 

True 

70 . I am always disgusted with the law 
when a criminal is freed through 
the arguments of a smart lawyer. 

False 

71. Life is a strain for m© much of 

the time. 

True 

72. At times X have very much wanted 
to leave home. 

True 

73. So one seems to « ld «' atan4 

True 


P-Yalue 

•7 

•5 

.6 

.6 

.s 

•5 

1.6 


•5 

•7 

•5 

.6 

.6 


1.0 


1.0 


1.4 






4 . 

' 





it 






Item 

Offender 

Response 

52 

D-Value 

74. I cannot keep my mind on one 
thing. 

True 

1.6 

75 * I easily become impatient with 
people. 

True 

.8 

76 . Sometimes I become so excited 
that I find it hard to get to 

sleep. 

True 

.6 

77* Often I cross the street in order 
not to meet someone I see. 

True 

• 7 

78 . I often feel as If things were not 
real. 

True 

.7 

79 . I have a habit of counting things 
that are not important such as 
bulbs on electric signs, and so 

True 

.7 


forth, 

50. I have strange and peculiar thoughts. True 1.0 

51. Sometimes I enjoy hurting persons 

1 love. 

82. Bad words, often terrible words, 

come into ray mind and I cannot 
get rid of them. 

83 . Sometimes some unimportant thought 

will run through my mind and 
bother me for days. 

84. People say insulting and vulgar 

things about me. 

85. 1 feel uneasy indoors. 

S6» Even when I am with people I feel 
lonely much of the time. 

8 J. Policemen are usually honest. 

88. I aa often said to be hotheaded. 

89. Lightning is one of my fears. 


True .6 

True 1.1 

True .6 

True .9 

True .6 

True .7 

Pals© .8 

True .8 

True .5 







. 

- 








. 



' 

. 

- 


- 

- 

- 

... 

' ■ 

■ 

, 

* • 



Offender y 

Item flesponse D-Yalue 

90. The only miracles I know of are True .8 

simply tricks that people play- 
on one another. 

91* My plans have frequently seemed True *9 

so full of difficulties that I 
hare had to give them up. 

92. The future is too uncertain for a True .9 

person to make serious plans. 

93* Often, even though everything is True .9 

going fine for me, I feel that 
1 don’t care about anything. 

94, I have sometimes felt that dif- True *7 

ficulties were piling up so 
high that I could not overcome 
them. 

95- I often think, »I wish I were a True .5 

child again*. 

96. I am usually calm and not easily False .6 

upset. 

97. Itmakes me feel like a failure True .6 

when I hear of the success of 
someone I know well. 

98. At times X think I am no good at True .9 

all. 

99. I feel hungry almost all the time. True .6 

100. X worry quite a hit over possible True .5 

mis fort lines. 

101. X used to have imaginary companions. True .5 

102. There are certain people whom I True .5 

dislike so much that X am inwardly 
pleased when they are catching it 
for something they have done. 




















* 


- 


. 

. 

: 


• ; . 




* 

. 

- 


- 

■ 













Items 

Offender 

Besponse 

5* 

B-Vaiue 

103* It makes me nervous to have to 
wait. 

True 

•5 

104. I have had periods in which I 
lost sleep over worry. 

True 

•5 

IO5. I am bothered by people outside, 
on streetcars, in stores, etc., 
watching me. 

True 

.6 

106. I like to poke fun at people. 

True 

•5 

107- I have used alcohol moderately 
(or not at all). 

False 

1.0 

108. In school my marks in deportment 
were quite regularly bad. 

True 

.8 

109. I have one or more faults which 
are so big that it seems better 
to accept them and try to control 
them rather than to try to get 
rid of them. 

True 

•5 

110. I feel like giving up quickly 
when things go wrong. 

True 

.6 

111. I read in the Bible several times 
a week. 

True 

1.0 

112. I have had periods when I felt so 
full of pep that sleep did not 

seem necessary for days at a time. 

True 

•5 

XI3. X have a daydream life about which 

I do not tell other people. 

True 

.5 

1X4. I cannot do anything well. 

True 

1.0 

113. I have often felt guilty because 

X have pretended to feel more 
sorry about something than I 
really was. 

True 

.6 
















V ■; ; • 

. 
















. 

■ 


'$K 


■ ..... <i 

■ 4 '■ ... • 'X V '■■■•rV-A 


' 




















1 ^ . 





•• ■ v - ; - 






, ’{■ ... , 




* 















Item 


55 

Offender 

Response D~Valu.e 


lib* * The future seems hopeless to me. True 

117. It makes me angry to have people True 

hurry me. 

118. Several times a week I feel as if True 

something dreadful is about to 
happen. 

119. I like repairing a door latch. False 

120. Sometimes I am sure that other True 

people can tell what I am 
thinking. 

121. I sometimes feel that I am about True 

ready to go to pieces. 

122. I have often been frightened in True 

the middle of the night. 


•9 

•5 

•5 

•5 

.6 

.9 

•5 


I23. I find it hard to set aside a task False .5 

that I have undertaken* even for 
a short time. 


124. The hours at night seem long. Yes 


125. School didn’t bother me any more Alternative 

than the next guy* Statement. 

- or - 

X left school because I had 
©nought of it. 

126. Since leaving school I’ve averaged Alternative 

less than one job a year (or I 
haven*t been out of school a year) 

• or - 

Since leaving school I have 
averaged more than one job a year. 


.9 

.6 


.9 


127• I sometimes drink because it Yes 

helps me to forget. 


1.0 







. 

. 












- 


: 






. 


■ 






• • 

' 


. 




i 

' 

- 











Item 

Offender 

Response 

5b 

D-Value 

12$. Being in a small closed-in space 
never bothers me, 

- or - 

Being in a small closed-in space 
makes me uneasy* 

Alternative 

•7 

129. The few jobs I've had I've 

been very much interested in, 

- or - 

I've worked at all kinds of 
things• 

Alternative 

1.0 

130. I prefer working my way up in 
one job 

- or - 

When I change jobs I like to go 
to another town* 

Alternative 

1.2 

131* I like to stay put, 

- or - 

I've gone "on the bum". 

Alternative 

1.1 

I32. I am reckless, 

- or - 
I am calm* 

first 

statement 

.$ 

133* My family is somewhat disappointed 
in a© 

- or - 

My family is fairly pleased with 

me* 

first 

statement 

1.3 

134. I didn't waste my time hanging 
around after school, 

- or - 

I spent quite a bit of time in 
school activities. 

first 

statement 

•6 

I35. Have you bitten your nails since 
you i*@re 15? 

Tea 

.7 


136. Bid your mother nurse you or were 
you fed "by bottle" as a baby? 


"By Bottle" .7 




















. 

, 

- 

- 

. 




! 











- 


- 


, , ■ 











, 

‘ 




- 












. 


V : . . 


: 

4 




' 











* 









* 











- 







57 


\ - - 

Offender - 

Item Hesoonse P-Yalue 

137. Do you think your parents were $0 .9 

glad when you were horn? 

I3S. Did you get along well with your ISo .8 

parents? 

139. Did you prefer any one of the Yes .5 

children in your family to all 
the others? 

140. Are you still quick tempered? Yes .5 

141. Has your quick temper ever got Yes .5 

you into trouble? 

142. Were you often sick as a child? Yes .5 

143. Do you have much backache? Yes .5 

144. Did you want to start to school? Ho .5 

145. Did you find that you liked school? lo ,8 

146. Did you find it easy to 11 put things Yes .5 

over on your teachers 51 ? 

l4j. Did you ever run away from home Yes .5 

during your school years? 

148. Have you ever been in jail? Yes *7 

149. Have you ever stayed drunk for a Yes .7 

day or more? 

I 50 * Is this the work you wanted to do lo 1.1 

when you came into the Active 
Force? (referring to trad© or non 
trade qualifications) 

151. In your opinion were you given a lo .9 

fair statement of what you might 
expect in the Army at the time 
you enlisted? 
























‘ . 


t ::.X 












. 




, 


■ 


:■! 






. 


' 

. i. 

. . : : •? 

’ ■ ’ 








'* . 4 ; 

■ 


■ 






58 


On the basis of the percentages reported in connection 
with the descriptive data above, it would be possible to con¬ 
struct it eras, which could be used in an experimental inventory 
in addition to those reported to have D-valuea of *5 or wore. 
Such items would make any experimental inventory more compre¬ 
hensive than the ljjl items, recorded above, but they would 
have to be tried on fresh samples to discover their D-values * 
The following items are considered worthy of a trial: 


1. Bo you prefer one parent to the other or did you 
prefer one to the other as a child? 

2. Bo you think your parents did not discipline you 
strictly enough as a child? 

3* Vere your parents separated or divorced or did 
they quarrel much? 

4. Bid you quarrel much v/itr other children in 
the family? 

5* Are you married or single? 
b. Bo you never attend church? 

7. Bid you repeat more than one grade in school? 

£. Were you often late arriving at school? 

9. Were you ever fired from a job or did you ever 
quit a job for no particular reason? 

10. Bid you ever belong to a gang, as a child or 

youth, that got into trouble with the police 
or school authorities occasionally? 

11. Were you teased & lot as a child? 

12. Bid you feel badly often as a child because 

you believed your friends were better off 
than you or able to have many thing© you 
wanted and could not have? 

13. Bo you have a hobby at which you spend at 

least several hours a week? 

14. Bo you read at least six book© a year? 

15. Did you start to go out with girls when 

you were 16 years of age or lass? 

16. Bid you first have intercourse at IS years 

of age or less? 

Do you have, intercourse monthly or more 
frequently with several or many women if 
you are single, or more than once a year 
with several women, other than your wife, 
if you are married? 

IS. Have you been arrested more than once? 

19* Bo you become drunk once every few months 
or more? 


















r. ' .= v. '' ■ 

; { • : f. 

- 

. 

■ 




59 


SAMPLE CONTAMINATION 

An examination of several case histories suggests 
that definitions chosen for “offenders” and “non-offend©rs“ 
were responsible for the inclusion of certain individuals 
who, with different definitions in effect, might have been 
found in opposite groups. One case of an “offender” will 
illustrate what is meant. 

The subject was a highly intelligent young man (“M“ 
score of 171). married with one child. He had completed 
Grade 11 in eleven years and, while at school, he had taken 
a leading part in social activities and athletics. He had 
well defined adult social interests and hobbies and was 
“accepted” by a wide circle of friends. During the last 
war he served in action with distinction and held HCO rank. 

He did not have a single record of misconduct in over seven 
years* service. On the MMPI his T scores were all along the 
50 line with the exception of the Hypomania scale, on which 
his score was 63 . He was sentenced to detention for 21 days 
for using a vehicle without permission, his first offence. 

On the basis of his military record, his civilian background 
and his personality* the author would not classify the sub¬ 
ject as a typical “offender” but the fact that he had committed 
an offence, which was punished by detention, caused him to be 
included in that group. 

Similarly, some individuals with delinquent, and even 
adult minor criminal records, were members of the “non¬ 
offender” groups. 

Beferenc© is made to this point in respect of the 
choice of criteria in such studies. The contamination, so 
introduced, would tend to lower the significance of the 
differentiations between groups. Higher discriminative values 
might have been produced if other definitions had been used. 







y 


60 


CONCLUSIONS 


1. The two attitude scales called “Attitude Toward the 
Treatment of Criminals” were demonstrated to he of no as- 
3itance in differentiating offenders and non-offenders in 
the Army. This is true whether the scales are used as 
separate measures or whether their items are treated indivi¬ 
dually. It is assumed, therefore, that the scales would not 
he of use in identifying recruits, who would probably become 
offenders if they were enlisted. 

2. An item analysis of all materials used in the study 
produced ljl items, which are considered sufficiently dis¬ 
criminative to us© further in experimental form with fresh 
samples of subjects for validation purposes. To these lfjl 
it sms it is considered desirable to add 19 new items based 
upon descriptive biographical material, which produced 
noticeable differences between the experimental and control 
groups. 


The various D-v&lues calculated for the individual 
items could be used as weighted scores in attempting to es¬ 
timate “offender risks” at the enlistment point. Before 
attempting to make practical use of the information, however, 
the validity of the items and the reliability of the values 
must be assessed carefully. 

3 . The MMPI distinguishes between offenders and non¬ 
offenders to a statistically significant degree (Critical 
Ratio of 3 or over) on six scales and approaches significance 
on two other scales. It is submitted that this is evidence 
of a relationship between personal maladjustment and military 
misconduct. If this conclusion is correct the MMPI would be 
of value in the selection of recruits. 

It Is noteworthy that the factor has not operated 
as the MMPI authors predicted, at least in the military field 
with the approach of this study, further, it should be noted 
that the authors* “normals” differ from “non-offenders” to 
a significant degree, in respect of the “Pd“ and “Ha“ scales. 

It might be concluded that soldiers could be expected to differ 
in this regard from hospital visitors and outpatients from 
rural Minnesota. The physical conditioning, the healthy out¬ 
door life, speaking generally, and the daily associations with 








' 

. 





















■ 




- 


. 

- 




. 










; 

* 















males, similarly conditioned, may set the soldier apart in 
relation to the two scales. Certainly further comparisons 
of data are necessary, however, before firm conclusions In 
this regard can be made. In the meantime the rt Pd M scale, 
and the other five, will probably continue to differentiate 
offenders and non-offenders, the main concern of this study. 

123 of the 151 items, referred to in paragraph 2, 
immediately above, are from the MMPI. The inventory, there¬ 
fore, would appear to be of use in identifying offenders, 
either used in its complete form or with its more discrimi¬ 
native items removed to form another inventory. Permission 
from the authors would, have to be obtained for the latter 
course of action. The shortened inventory would be applic¬ 
able to the military field only in relation to its ability 
to differentiate offenders and non-offenders. It would 
appear that the complete MMPI might serve eg a useful 
diagnostic tool in the hands of Army Personnel Officers to 
assist them in assessing personality traits generally. It 
has been concluded, therefore, that it would be wise to use 
the complete MMPI, together with discriminative items from 
the Biographical Questionnaire and the Personal Inventory 
W B H , at least until further validation studies have been 
evaluated. She 2S discriminative items, together with the 
19 untried it ms, referred to in paragraph 2, could form an 
inventory whose scores could be assessed in conjunction 
with the 123 MMPI items. Moreover, the complete MMPI, with 
its various scales, would be available for whatever purpose 
it proves satisfactory. 

4. Certain limitations in connection with the present 
study should be noted? 

(a) The possible effects of sample contamination, 
referred to under H B@suXts B . 

(b) The possible influence, on the practical 
application of the results, which might be 
caused by the manner in which research data 
was gathered. To gain the cooperation of 
the subjects, every possible effort was 
made to preserve their anonymity. In 
future, at the enlistment point subjects 
could be assured that information obtained 
during clinical examination would be 
treated confidentially. In fact, that 
situation prevails today. If they knew 











62 


records associated with their names were 
maintained, however, a lesser degree of 
honesty in responses might he experienced. 

The author of this study tends to regard 
this possible influence as relatively un¬ 
important. Becruite are accustomed to 
searching questions administered by ex¬ 
perienced interviewers in the Army setting. 

(c) The comparison of small samples (50 and 75)* 
from this study, with larger samples to 
determine whether or not the small ones are 
representative is a poor substitute for 
dealing with large samples in the first 
place. Only by the validation of the results 
obtained here, using large samples repre¬ 
sentative of their respective groups, can 
this deficiency be remedied. 

(d) Two extremes were considered in the study, 
the offender, who is caught committing an 
offence and is tried and punished, and the 
non-offender, who has not been in that kind 
of trouble. Ultimately, some effort should 
be made to distinguish between individuals, 
who belong to a lesser gradation of offender, 
and the non-offender. This study represents 
only a first and tentative step in the pre¬ 
diction of “offender risks”. 

(e) The possible application of the results of 
this peacetime study to a wartime situation 
is obscured by the variation in situational 
factors, which may be operating. Long 
separations from families and the stresses 
associated with danger affecting one's 
person are but two such variations. 

(f) The critical ratio method of statistical 
analysis is not entirely valid, when 
applied to matched groups (22). However, 
car© was taken not to draw conclusions on 
such evidence unless comparisons between 
the random group and the experimental group 
supported the conclusions. 









■ 








. 


■ 




<* 

. 














. 




■ 


. 

: 


. 


- 






















• 


. 






f 











s. * 

. 



i 




• 


. 









. 



















. 









. 





















. 




















$3 


(g) Precipitating factors in military misconduct 
have received insufficient attention in this 
study. It is believed that investigations 
into that field would he profitable from 
both the military and the strictly psycho¬ 
logical points of view. Reference is made 
here to such probable influences as Improper 
or inadequate orientation, employment, which 
is not commensurate with capabilities, failure 
to recognize individual differences and to 
base personnel management practices upon that 
understanding. 

It might appear from the foregoing that the author 
was in search of some oasy way to assess human beings and 
their behavior. It might be assumed that, by the adoption 
of the experimental inventory, the author hopes to make 
the prediction of military misconduct a simple and almost 
automatic procedure. Such is not the case* The study was 
undertaken to gather facts about military offenders and to 
attempt to devise one more objective measure of that ex¬ 
tremely complex phenomenon, the human personality. Measures 
of that kind may assist the clinical psychologist or the 
personnel officer but they will likely remain merely aids, 
whose results must be synthesized, interpreted and applied 
by what has been called ^subtler and more comprehensive 
psychological techniques”. 






64 


VI 

SUMMARY 


1* Three groups of Army personnel, an experimental 
group, military offenders, and two control groups, non- 
offenders, were examined in an attempt to differentiate 
the two categories. 

2. The control groups consisted of subjects matched with 
the offenders and a group chosen at random from the general 
non-offender army population. 

3. The examination took the form of interviewers adminis¬ 
tering the Minnesota Multlphaeic Personality Inventory, 
Personal Inventory M B rt , Attitude Toward the Treatment of 
Criminals, Forms A and B, and conducting an interview, which 
was recorded on a specially prepared Biographical Question¬ 
naire. 

4. Statistically significant differences were obtained 
with the MMPI, on 6 scales, and with 123 Individual items. 

The attitude scales produced no significant difference. 2& 
discriminative items from the other two inventories were 
chosen to form a trial inventory with the 123 MMPI items. 

In addition, 19 new items were suggested by the author for 
inclusion. 

5 . The author concluded that It appeared possible to 
differentiate offenders and non-offenders combining the 
experimental inventory with clinical interviews. 

6 . Validation studies involving the use of the experi¬ 
mental inventory were suggested. Limitations of the present 
study and further research indicated by the study were dis¬ 
cussed. 






1 


APPENDIX "A" 


BIBLICflRAPHY 


(1) Barnes, H.E. I 
Teeters, N.K. 

(2) Benton, A.L.s 

(3) Betts, G.L. s 

(4) Brady, J.P.! 
Hildreth, H.M. 

(5) Brequet, B.! 

(6) Burt, O.J 

(7) Carver, E.S.M. t 

(S) Coulter, G.W .1 

(3) Bonham, H.W. j 

(10) Feldman, H. s 
Mai ©ski, A. A* 


(11) Fodor, &•: 


"New Horizons in Criminology”, 1947, 
P. 173- 

"The Minnesota Multlphasic Inventory 
in Clinical Practice", Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disorders, 1945, 

102, pp. 4l6-420. 

"The Detection of Incipient Arnyr 
Criminals", Science, 1947, Voi. 106, 

Bp. 93-96. 

"Characteristics of a Disciplinary 
Croup in a Naval Hospital", Navy 
Medical Bulletin, Washington, 1945, 

45, p P . 500-505. 

"American Journal of Medical 
Jurisprudence", 1938, 1, pp. 101-118 

"The Young Delinquent", 1925. 

"Selection in the Canadian Army", 
1945, Dept, of National Defence. 

"Family Disorganization as a Causal 
factor in Delinquency and Crime", 
federal Probation, 1948, 3, pp 13-17 

"The Sehizophrene and Criminal Be¬ 
haviour", American Sociology Heview, 

1939. K PP- 352-361. 

"Factors Differentiating AWOL from 
lon-AWOL Trainees", Journal of Ab¬ 
normal and Social Psychology, 1946, 

1, pp. 70-78. 

"The Psychology of Numbers", Journal 
of Clinical Psychotherapy, 1947, 8, 
pp. 841-^47. 















' 






* 










. 


. 






. 








' 

. 


























2 


(12) 

Gillin, J.L.: 

"Criminology and Penology", 19^5* 

(13) 

Glueck, S. and E. j 

"Five Hundred Criminal Careers", 
1930. 

(14) 

Glueck, S. and E.; 

"Five Hundred Criminal Careers in 
Retrospect", 1937* 

(15) 

Glueck, S. and E.: 

"One Thousand Juvenile Delinquents", 

1934 . 

( 16 ) 

Goddard, H.H.: 

"Peeble-Mindedness: Its Causes and 
Consequences", 1926. 

(17) 

Hathaway, S.R.; 
McKinley, M.D. 

"Manual for the Minnesota Multi- 
phasic Personality Inventory", 19^3» 

(18) 

Hill, G.E. s 

"Journal of Juvenile Research", 

1936. 20, pp 20-27. 

(19) 

Hooton, E.A.s 

"Crime and the Man", 1939* 

(20) 

Hrdlicka, A.? 

"The Criminal", Journal of Criminal 
Psychopathology, 1939* 2, pp S 7 - 91 . 

(21) 

Lemkan, P.V.! 

Kent, F.E. 

"Sociological Factors in Patients 
in Army neurosis Centre and Their 
Relation to Disciplinary Action". 

(22) 

Lindquist, E.F.: 

"A First Course in Statistics", 

1942 , pp 130 - 133 . 

(23) 


Manual of Military Law, Chapter 1. 

(24) 

Merrill, F.E.i 
Elliott, M.A. 

"Social Disorganisation", 1941. 

(25) 

Metfessel, 14. s 
Lovell, C. 

"Recent Literature on Individual 
Correlates of Crime", Psychological 
Bulletin, 1942, pp 133-164. 

( 26 ) 

Plotrowski, Z.A. i 
Hobbs, J.M. 

"Mental Deficiency and Military 
Offence", Psychiatric Quarterly 
Supplement, 1945, 19, pp 5~1$* 

(27) 

Reckless, W.C.s 

"Criminal Behavior", 1940. 




- 


- 


- 




• - 




. _ 

, * . - 

- 

. . 


’ 


' 

* 

' 

, . 

- . 

* 





3 


( 28 ) 

Rubin, E. t 

"The HMPI as a Dianostic Aid in a 
Veterans Hospital", Journal of 
Consulting Psychology, 1948, pp 
251-254. 

(29) 

Schlapp, M.G.: 
Smith, E.H. 

"The Hew Criminology**, 1928. 

(30) 

Shalloo, J.P.J 

"Trends in Criminological Research" 
Federal Probation, 1942, pp 21-24. 

(3D 

Shaw, C.H.t 

McKay, H.D. 

"Juvenile Delinquency and Urban 
Areas", 1942. 

(32) 

Smith, M.J 

"Tier Counties and Delinquency in 
Kansas", Rural Sociology, 1937» 2, 

pp. 310 - 322 . 

(33) 

Stouffer, G.A.; 
Otness, H.R. 

"100 Civilian Delinquents in the 
Havy", Journal of Clinical Psycho¬ 
pathology, 1946, 8 , 251 - 270 . 

(34) 

Sutherland, E.H. $ 

"Mental Deficiency and Crime", 1931 

(35) 

Sutherland, E.fi. s 

"Principles of Criminology", 1939* 

(36) 

Thrasher, P.M. s 

"Gangs, the Gangster - Why?", 1935* 

(37) 

Thurston, H.W.s 

"Concerning Juvenile Delinquency", 
1945. 

(38) 

Tulchin, S.H.i 

"Intelligence and Crime", 1939* 

(39) 

Wolf, W.: 

"The Role of the Endocrine Glands 
in Emotional Disturbances, Crime 
and Rehabilitation", Journal of 
Clinical Psychopathology and Psycho 
therapy, 1946, 7. PP. 539-560. 

(40) 

Wood, A.E. s 

Waite, J.B. 

"Crime and Its Treatment", 1941. 

(41) 

Zeleny, L.D.: 

"Feeble-Mindednes s and Criminal 
Conduct", American Journal of 
Sociology, 1933. 38. 574. 





APPENDIX "B" 


4 


H<i 121-65-16 (Org 10) 

DBPABTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENCE 
Army 

Ottawa, Canada. 

15 Sep 43 


Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Science, 
University of Alberta, 

EDMOKTON, Alberta. 

Dear Sir? 


X wish to advise that Major. tf.H.N. Blair has 
been granted authority to undertake an investigation In 
the field of Army delinquency, in connection with his 
postgraduate studies at the University of Alberta. 

Major Blair, or other officers designated by 
him, will be permitted to conduct psychological tests 
and clinical interviews among personnel in military de¬ 
tention barracks and among the Army other rank population 
at large. 

I would request that the research data gathered 
by Major Blair, and his representatives, and the final 
report on the investigation be treated according to the 
military security classification "Confidential”. 


lours truly, 


Signed? F.J. FLEUEY, Col. 

for (2.G. WEEKS), 
Major-General, 
Adjutant-General. 





APPENDIX W Q» 


5 


Introduction of Subjects to Testing Program 

(Personnel Officers will repeat this statement, elabo¬ 
rating upon it only as required.) 

I am one of several officers who are trying to find if 
possible what types of personalities are most likely to have 
difficulty getting along in the Army. We also want to discover 
if there is any relationship between the home, school and work 
background of a person and his ability to succeed as a soldier. 
Finally, we want to know what things in the Army cause soldiers 
to get into trouble. 

Now, all of this covers a pretty big field. We had to 
make up a lot of questions to cover every possible angle. Maybe 
some of the questions won’t apply to you. But we are convinced 
w© must ask all of them in every case if we are to get the infor¬ 
mation we need. 

We expect that we may be able to improve the treatment 
of soldiers, both good and bad conduct cases, as a result of 
our study. 

Those of you, who are willing to help u© by answering 
our questions, will be subjects in a scientific study. As 
such your names are of NO importance to us. We do NOT want to 
learn them. BO attempt will be made now or in the future to 
relate your names to the information you give us. 

Tour cooperation and truthfulness are of great im¬ 
portance. You can be sure that everything you tell us will be 
held in the strictest confidence. We would ask that you play 
ball with us, by keeping the questions to yourself. Please 
do not talk about them to anyone else. 

If you will help us, on this understanding, we will be 
very grateful to you. If you do not wish to answer the 
questions, please tell me now. 






APPENDIX "D" 


6 


PERSONAL INVENTORY (B) 


Name 


Following are some pairs of statements. Look at each 
pair, and if you think the one on the left describes you better, 
put a circle around the number on its left. But if you think 
the one on the right applies more to you, put a circle around 
the number on its right. Do every item. Even if you are not 
sure, mark the answer you think is nearest to the truth. Here 
are some examples (the first two have been done for you)i 


1. Most days I eat some food. 

2 . I am more than eight feet 

tall. Yes. 

3 # I am a man. 

4. I am over 15 years old. 

Yes. 

5 . Most of my friends are 
luckier than I am. 

6 . I like to take a chance. 


7 . I get ©©harassed easily. 

S. Drinking alone is usually 
a waste of good liquor. 

Yes. 


Z never eat at all. 1 

2 

. . . No. 

I am a woman. 3 

4 

.No. 

I have my share of lucky 5 
breaks. 

I like to think things 6 

through before I do them. 

I seldom get embarassed. 7 

8 

.No. 


Go ahead with those that follow on the remaining pages 
as soon as you are told. 
















' 


' 
















. 

m . ■&*'£;* v 













101 


7 

I 


• I graduated from high 


school. Yes. 


101 . 

102 . I was a sickly child. 

X was an active child. 

102 . 

IO 3 . I have felt bad more from 
head colds. 

I have felt bad more from 
dizziness. 

103 . 

104. 1 seek excitement. 

X avoid excitement. 

104. 

IO 5 . I like to have people do 
things my way. 

I like to have people 
figure things out for me. 

105 . 

106 . I am more nervous. 

I am more easy going. 

106 . 

107. Somehow I never could find 
enough to do in my free 
time. 

My free time always seemed 
to be filled. 

107 . 

108. I wish I woulda 1 t feel so 
tired. 

I wish I could have a more 
responsible job. 

10 s. 

109 * I wish I could have more 
excitement. 

X wish X weren’t bothered 
by bad dreams. 

109 . 

110 . I wish I diamt have so 
many aches and pains. 

X wish I wouldn’t keep 
changing my mind. 

no. 

111 . 1 wish X weren’t so 
nervous. 

X wish I wouldn’t keep 
putting things off. 

111 . 

112 . I wish I could get myself 
to take more chances. 

X wish worrying wouldn’t 
make me sick to my stomach, 

112 . 

> 

113 . I have more headaches than 
the average person. Yes. 


113 . 

114. She hours at night seem 

long. Yes. 


llU. 

115 . I like most any kind of 
food. 

X have a poor appetite. 

115 . 

Il 6 . After exertion I feel 
hungry. 

After exertion I feel 
dizzy. 

116 . 

llj. When excited X feel weak. 

When excited I feel 
stronger. 

117 . 

IIS. I think I might like to 

watch a surgical operation 

The sight of blood upsets 
me. 

1XS. 


sometime. 













119 


119 . My heart sometimes speeds 
up for no reason at all. 

Yes, 

120 . 1 have never gone to a 
doctor for headaches or 
dizzy spells. 

121. School didn't bother me 
any more than the next guy. 

122. Since leaving school I've 
averaged less than one job 
a year (or I haven't been 
out of school a year). 

123 . I left school because I pre¬ 
ferred working to studying. 

Yes. 

124. When I'm excited or upset 
I feel sweaty. 

125. When I get excited I find 
it hard to talk straight. 

126 . X usually like to go to bed. 


127 . 1 sometimes faint for no 
good reason. Yes. 

12 S. I sometimes drink because 
it helps me to forget.Yes, 

12 §. I wish my feelings weren't 
so easily hurt. 

130 . I*ve always been somewhat un¬ 
easy. 

Ijl. 7 sometimes get confused 
without any apparent 
reason. Yes. 

132 . You have to worry more 

about heart trouble than 
most people think. Yes. 


S 


.No. 

I have occasionally gone 120 . 
to a doctor for headaches 
or dizzy spells. 

I left school because I 121 . 

had enough of it. 

Since leaving school I 122. 

have averaged more than 
on© job a year. 

123. 

. .... No. 

When I'm excited or upset 124. 
I don't show it much. 

When I get excited I talk 125. 
better than I usually do. 

Sometimes I dread going to 126. 
bed. 

127. 

.No. 


12S. 

.No. 

I wish I had more time to 129 . 
spend with my friends. 

Nothing ever bothers me. 130 . 

131. 

. . ... . No. 

132 . 

. . . . ..No. 













f.-.y 












r . 












3 


133* As a boy I had my share 
of cuts and bruises. 

134. As a child I had night¬ 
mares. Yes. 

135• X have never had a head 
injury. 

136. I stopped school before X 
got to high school. Yes. 

137* I repeated a grade in 

school. Yes. 

138. I*ve had my share of back¬ 
aches, headaches, and 
3 tomach aches • I es. 

139* Being in a warm room makes 
me drowsy. 

140. I have felt bad more often 
from colds. 

141. I have sometimes wet the 
bed (urinated) since the 
age of 10. 

142. I had an unhappy child¬ 
hood. 

143. I*ve had my ©hare of sick¬ 
ness. 

144. Before entering the armed 
forces X have gone to a 
doctor or a hospital for 

my nerves. 

143. People talk to each other 
coo much about things that 
concern me. 

146. Has anyone in your family 
ever gone to a doctor or 
hospital for nervousness? 

Yes. 


I had my share of dizzy 
spells as a boy. 

133 


134 

I have had a head injury. 

135 


136 


137 


138 



Being in a warm room makes 
me dizzy. 

139 

I have felt bad more often 140, 
from nausea. 

I have never wet the bed 
since the age of 10. 

l4l, 

% childhood was happy. 

142, 


I *ve had my share of 143 

happiness. 

Before entering the armed 144 
forces X have never gone 
to a doctor or a hospital 
for my nerves. 

People are open and frank 14^ 
with me. 


Ho 


146 



















10 


147* Being in a small closed- 
in place never Bothers me. 

Being in a small closed- 
in place makes me uneasy. 

147 

l4S. Did you ever wake up and 
find your finger bitten? 

Yes. 


148 

149 . Have you ever had a con¬ 
vulsion (fit)?. Yes. 


149 

150. Have you ever been arrested 
for anything other than a 
traffic violation? Yes. 


150 

151. In school the other boys 
went their way and I went 
mine. 

I was happiest when I was 
with the gang. 

151 

152 . I am somewhat disappointed 
in my family. 

I am proud of my family. 

152 

153 * I*® very careful to take 
medicine when I need it. 

Most people aren't as 
sick as they think they 
are. 

153 

154. Being up in high places 
never bothers me. 

I feel uncomfortable about 
being in high places. 

154 

155 • X can't think straight 
when I am mad. 

I think better when I am 
mad. 

155 

156 . I think being afraid is 
worse. 

I think lying is worse. 

156 , 

157 . 1 wish I could have more 
responsibility. 

I wish I wouldn't worry 
so much. 

157 

15 S. I got my first steady job 
(or entered the services) 
within four months after 
leaving school. Yes. 


158. 

159 * I was a sensitive kid. 

I was a happy-go-lucky kid. 

159. 

l60. Something makes me say and 
do things I don't mean. 

I can get along in most 
any situation. 

160 , 

\ 

l 6 l. fhe few jobs I've had iVe 
been very much interested 

I've worked at all kinds 
of things. 

l 6 l, 


v in. 



















11 


162. I prefer working my way 
up in one job. 

163 . In civilian life I would 
rather be a mechanic. 

164. I like to stay put. 

165 . I wish I had more res¬ 
ponsibility. 

166 . I am reckless. 

167 . My family is somewhat 
disappointed in me. 

l6S. I didn't waste my time 
hanging around after 
school. 

169 . In school I like to be 
by myself. 

170. Have you bitten your 
nails since you were 15 ? 

Yes. 

171* Have you ever been sent 
to jail or ref 01 ® school? 

Yes. 


When I change jobs I like 162. 
to go to another town. 

In civilian life I would 163 . 
rather be a florist. 

I # ve gone H on the bum”. 1 64. 

I wish I had more self- 163 . 
confidence. 

I am calm. l 66 . 

My family is fairly 167 . 

pleased with me. 

I spent quite a bit of l 6 S. 

time in school activities. 

In school I preferred to 169 * 

be with a gang. 

170. 

..Ho. 

171. 

.Ho. 






12 

APPENDIX "B" 

ATTITUDE TOWARD THE TREATMENT 
OF CRIMINALS 


FORMS "A" and "B tt 


INSTRUCTIONS FOR BOTH FORMS: 


This is a study of attitudes toward the treatment of 
criminals. On the following page you will find twenty state¬ 
ments expressing different attitudes toward the treatment of 
criminals. 


Put a check mark ( ) if you agree with the statement. 

Put a cross (X) if you disagree with the statement. 

If you cannot decide about a statement, you may mark 
it with a iuestion mark. 

This is not an examination. People differ in their 
opinions about how criminals should be treated. 

Please indicate your own attitude by a check mark 
when you agree and by a cross when you disagree. 












FORM «A" 


13 


( ) 1. Whether a person should be punished or not depends on 
his offense. 

( ) 2. All criminals are victims of circumstance and deserve 
to be helped. 

( ) 3* Ro leniency should be shown to criminals. 

( ) 4. We need punishment to defend society. 

( ) 5* Petty offenders can be reformed without punishment. 

( ) 6. Punishment is never justified. 

( ) 7* A criminal will go straight only when he finds that 
prison life is hard. 

( ) 8. Society gains more by reforming its offenders than by 
throwing them into Jail. 

( ) 9 . Intense physical pain is the only way to make people 
fear the law. 

( )1Q. failure to punish the criminal encourages crime. 

( )11. The occasional offender deserves special corrective 
treatment. 

( )12. Punishment of criminals is a disgrace to civilised 
society. 

( 313. Criminals must be punished. 

( )l4. A combination of education and punishment is the best 
method of treating criminals. 

( )15. Justice demands the punishment of criminals. 

( )l6. Corrective measures are just as necessary as punishment. 

( )17. Correction is civilised; punishment is brutal. 

( )18. More severe punishment of criminals will reduce crime. 

( )19. Some punishment is necessary in dealing with the criminal. 

( >20. Prison influence is degenerating. 





. 

i 

. 

I 


- 

* 


• 


. 








. 


. 

* 

■ 

* 






* 




- ■ -V ■ 






' 





FORK "B« 


Ik 


( ) 1 . 
( ) 2 . 

( ) 3 . 

( ) k. 

( ) 5- 

( ) 6 . 
( ) 7. 

( ) S. 

( ) 9. 
( ) 10 . 

( ) 11 . 
( ) 12 . 

( ) 13- 
( ) 14. 

( ) 15. 
( ) 16. 

( ) 17. 
< ) IS. 


A criminal should be first punished and then reformed. 

Corrective measures for criminal# are imperative in an 
enlightened age. 

Severe punishment of criminals is the only way to 
prevent crime. 

It is fair for society to punish those who offend 
against it. 

Society often loses a useful citizen in imprisoning 
the chance offender. 

We should abolish all of our penal institutions. 

Lawlessness in this country is due to insufficient 
punishment. 

Correction is more effective than punishment in 
preventing crime. 

Only by extreme punishment can we cure the criminal. 

So-called scientific treatment of criminals does not 
stop crime. 

Occasional offenders should be reformed. 

It is wrong for society to make any of its members 
suffer. 

One way to deter men from crime is to make them suffer. 

Some criminals should be punished; others should be 
given another chance. 

We should not consider the comfort of a prisoner. 

fhe circumstances of each crime should determine the 
treatment of the criminal. 

Only humane treatment can cure criminals. 

Persons who offend against society deserve no pity. 












s 








I 











f 








: . 

. 


- 

- 

- 
















15 


K)&M “B" 

( ) 19* The effectiveness of punishment or correction depends 
upon the Individual criminal. 

( ) 20. Harsh imprisonment merely embitters a criminal. 






- . 

. 





















■ 

. 

' 














































APPENDIX W F» 


16 


BIOGRAPHICAL QUESTIONNAIRE 


Now I am going to ask you quite a number of questions 
about yourself. Some of the questions will be about your 
ohlldhood. Maybe all you will know about some of them will be 
what your parents or others have told you. In any case please 
answer the questions as completely and truthfully as you can. 
Some of the questions may seem a little queer to you but I 
would like you to answer them as carefully as any others. 
Remember that the answers you give me will be treated in the 
strictest confidence. 1 will not refer to you by name at any 
time in this report so your name and your answers oan never 
be related by anyone. 

1. Personnel Officer record “M M score here, form _ 

Pr or Eng _ Total _ Sub tests_ 

2. In or near what village, town or city and in what province 
did you spend most of your life before you enlisted? 

3 . Give the date of your birth. Day _ Month _Year _ 

4. What is your racial origin? (Circle appropriate de¬ 
scription). 

Anglo-Saxon (English, Scotch, Welsh, Irish and 
Descendents) 

Pr ench-Canadian 

European - All continental European races, including 
the Russian group and Semetic. 

Others. 

5 . What is your religion? 

Circle the appropriate answers where applicable . 

6 . Are both your parents living? Yes No 

7 . Which parent is dead? Father Mother Both 

8 . Of what illness did either or both parents die? Father 

Mother 

9 . How old were you when your parent (s) died? 

10. How many brothers and sisters have you (incl. deceased) 

and what are their ages? Brothers _ Ages _ 

Sisters __ Ages __ 













, _ . 


>■! • 
■ 




y 





. . 

•' V';. j —. * - 




. 

. 








■: Vi , :■ 'i . 





' 

a: i , 











CU:;;,; 


1 : . .V 

' 

■ - ' £ 


' ■' ; " , ■ , ■ ■ ■ ' ■ l : 












i i 


.. > iv, ■' - / ' •./;■■■■■' 'i n i ! 




. ' 11 ;■ 


;' “i '■ 







11 


Were you born at borne or in a hospital? Home Hospital 


17 


12. Did your mother nurse you or were you fed H by bottle" as 
a baby? Nursed Bottle 

13. Do you think your parents were glad when you were born? 

Yes No Uncertain 

14. Which parent did you like best? Father Mother No difference 

15. If your parents are living, are they in good health? 

Father _ Mother _ 

16. If not, of what illness does either suffer? Father _ 

Mother _ 

17* Are your brothers and sisters in good health? Yes No 

18. If not, what is wrong with them? Brothers __ 

Sisters _ 

19. Did any member of your family or a close relative ever 


have fainting spells? 

Yes 

No 

have a nervous breakdown? 

Yes 

No 

have fits? 

Yes 

No 

have to go to a mental hospital? Yes 

No 

Commit suicide? 

Yes 

No 

go to jail? (What for?) 

Yes 

No 

drink too much? 

Yes 

No 

become an invalid? (Why?) 

Yes 

No 

appear in court on charge? 

(Why?) Yes 

No 


20. Were your parents ever separated for a long period? 
Yes No 

21. If so, what was the reason? 

22. Were your parents divorced? Yes No When? 

23. Did your parents quarrel a lot? Yes No 

24. If you know why, state the reason. 

25. Did you get along well with your parents? Yes No 

26. If not, which one did you have differences with? 

Father Mother Both 

27. What was the trouble, in your opinion? 












• :> f ■ ■ ■ 





' ‘V ■ : 

i ■ 










: 



■■■ 


■ 

• - ' 1 : 










. 




■ 








.• ' 

• 







L-- 

























* 

- 

. ' ■ 

■ 

. . 

• ■ ; 











IS 

28. Were your parents too strict with you, not strict enough 
or did they handle you fairly well? 


29 . How did your parents discipline you? 

Whipping? Yes No 
H&king you do without things? 
Reasoning with you? Yes No 
Any other punishment? Yes 
No attempt to discipline you? 

30, By whom were you raised? 

Your own father and mother? 
Step-parents? 

Foster parents? 

Other relatives or persons? 

(State relationship to you) 
Others? (Specify) 


Yes 

No W; 

> 

No 1 

stfhat? 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 


Without what? 


31. Did you often feel that the persons who raised you did not 
like you or want you? Yes No (What made you think this?) 

32. Do you think you received favored treatment from those who 
raised you in relation to other children in the home? 

Yes No (In what way?) (By whom?) 

33 * Were you "picked on" by those who raised you more than the 
other children in the home were? Yes Ho 
(In what way?) (By whom?) 


34. Did the children in the home quarrel often amongst them¬ 
selves? Yes No 


35* Were you teased a great deal 
at home? 
at school? 
outside? 

36 * Why do you think you were teased a great deal? 

37 * Bid you not get along with any one of the children at home? 

Yes Ho Why 1 

3 S„ Did you prefer any one of the children to all the others? 
Yes No Why? 

39, What did your father (or the person who raised you) do for 
a living? Estimate his yearly income. 


40. Did your mother work too? At what? 





. 












' 








. 




■ . ■ : - s -i ■ . 




. 

















- 

. 

' 

. 

■ 









41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

45 . 

46. 

47 . 


46. 


49 . 


50. 


51 . 


52 . 


Did. your parents own their home or pay rent? 

How much rent did they pey per month? 

Was your father (or the person who raised you) regularly 
employed? Yes No If not, state why? 

Did you want many things as a child which your family could 
not huy? Yes No If yes, state what. 

Did you get a regular spending allowance? Yes No 
How much per week? 

Did you earn money yourself as a child? Yes No 
How? 

Did you feel that your friends were better off than you? 

Yes No In what way? 

Where did you live as a child? 

Farm 

Village 

Town 

City 

Before you started to school, did you play mostly alone? 

Yes No 


with one or two other friends? 

Yes No 


witn a gang of friends? 

Yes No 


If you played with more than one 

friend, 


were you able to get them 

to do what 

you wanted? 

Yes No 

did you nave to do what they wanted? 

Yes No 

Were your friends mostly 

older than you? 

Yes 

No 

younger than you? 

Yes 

No 

about the same age? 

Yes 

No 


Would you say that you and your friends were tougher than 
other kids in the neighborhood? Yes No 
Why would you say that? 

How old were you when you first 
walked? 
talked? 


53 . At approximately what age did you stop wetting the bed? 

54. Did you stutter as a child? Yes No At what age did you 
stop? 









' • 


. 










































, 

. 




’ 






. 

















; 

■ 
















20 


55* Did you bite your nails? Yes No At what age did you 
3top? 

56 . Did you have “temper tantrums 11 as a child? Yea No 

57- Are you still quick tempered? Yea No 

58 . has your quick temper ever got you into trouble? Yea No 

59. Were you often sick as a child? Yes No 

60. What serious illnesses did you have as a child? 

6 1. Have you ever been knocked out? Yes No 

62. Was this because of a blow on the head? Yes No 

63 . Has sickness Interfered with your work? Yes No 
To what extent? 

64. Have you ever had a skull fracture? Yes No 

65 * Have you ever had a sickness during which you had a high 
fever for a long time? Yes No If you can do so, name 
tne illness• 


In relation to your present health will you answer t] 

following: 



(a) 

Do you have fainting spells? 

Yes 

No 

(b) 

Do you have a great many headaches? 

Yes 

No 

(c) 

Do you have dizzy spells? 

Yes 

No 

(d) 

Do you have much backache? 

Yes 

No 

(e) 

Do you have much stomach trouble? 

Yes 

No 

(f) 

Do you have heart trouble? 

Yes 

No 

(g) 

Do you have rheumatism? 

Yes 

No 

(h) 

Do you have kidney trouble? 

Yes 

No 

( 1 ) 

Do you tire easily? 

Yes 

No 

(J) 

Do you sleep poorly? 

Yes 

No 

00 

Are you often on sick parade? 

Yes 

No 


What for? 


Do your nerves troubls you? Yes No 

6 S. Have you ever had to go to bed because of a nervous break¬ 
down? Yes No If so, at what age? 

69 . How long did this attack last? 

70. What do you think caused it? 





21 


71. Did you ever get ao M down in the dumps rt you couldn*t work? 

Yes No. 

72. Did you want to start to school? Yes No Why or why not? 
73 * At what age did you start? 

74. At what age did you finish? 

75* What grade did you complete? 

76 . Did you repeat any grades? Yes No If so, state what 
ones and why. 

77 • What kind of school did you attend? 
public 
separate 
one room 

more than one room 

75. Did you find that you liked school? Yes No 

79* Where did you generally place in the class standings? 
first 

in the top few 
in the middle 
in the bottom few 

last 

80. Did you feel that you were better dressed 


than most of the pupils? 

Yes 

No 

as well dressed as most? 

Yes 

No 

less well dreased than most? 

Yes 

No 

r did you like reciting or reading 

or working 

on the 


blackboard before the other pupils? 

Didn*t like it? 

Bid not mind it? 

Liked it? 

82. Did you find it easy to w put things over oa H the teacher? 
Yes No 

83 . Were you punished 

more than 
about the same as 
less than 

the other pupils? 

84. Were you ever suspended or expelled from school? Yes No 
Why? 






. 






' 














. 










. 




. 
















- a - 














■ 

. 


. 









85 . Did you attend school regularly? Yes No If not, why not? 


86. Did you arrive late at school 
more than 
about the same as 

less than 


Why? 


the majority of the pupils? 


87 . Did your parents 
often 
sometimes 
seldom 
never 


punish you for poor attendance at school? 


88. Do you worry about your parents because of their 
finances? 
health? 

relationships with one another? 
for any other reason? (State what) 


89 . If you got into trouble with the teachers did your parents 

”side with you? 

w side H with the teachers? 

let the matter “drop”? 


90. Do you think that 

most 

some 

none of the teachers like you? 

91. Bid you like 

most 

some 

none of your teachers? 

92. Did you have 

more friends than most 
about the same number as most 
less than most 

at school? 


93. During recesses how did you spend your time? 
iteadingt 

Doing other things in the school by yourself? 
Playing with one or two friends? 

Playing with a group of friends? 



' 








. 






■ 


4 




■ 




- 










. • 






. 


. 










23 


93-A• After school hours did you play 
mostly alone? 

mostly with one or two friends? 
mostly with a gang of friends? 

94. During your school years, if you played with more than one 
friend, 

were you able to get them to do what you Yes Ho 
want ed? 

did you have to do what they wanted? Yes Ho 

95* During your school years were your friends mostly 
older than you? 
younger than you? 
about the same age? 

96 . At about what age did you start “going out” with girls? 

97 * At about what age did you first learn about sexual 
int ercourse? 

9 S• from whoa did you learn? 

99 * What is your marital status? 

Single 

Married (legally) 

Married (common lav/ wife) 

Widowed 

Married but separated 
Divorced 

100. How many children do you have? 

101 . How many years did you know your wife before you were 

married? 

102. At about what age did you first have sexual intercourse? 

10 3 . In general, if you are or have been married, about how 
often did you have intercourse before marriage? 

frequently (once or more a month) 

Sometimes (twice a year or less than frequently) 
Seldom (once a year or less) 

Never 

104. Was this with one person, several or many? 





- 







, 

.. 




. 

• 

. 






■■, ' 






■ 


. .. -v.. . 4 -, a:, ; ; 

. 















. 


- 








- 


. 






. 

. 
























24 

105. If you are not married or have not been married, how often 
have you had intercourse since you were l4? 

Frequently ) 

Sometimes ) 

Seldom ) Defined as in Ko. IO 3 

ftever ) 

106. Was this with one person, several or many? 

107. If you are married, state how you get along with your wife? 

Very well 

As well as most married people 
Hot too well 
Hot at all 


108. If you do not get along very well, state what you think 
the reason is? 

109. If you are married, state how often you have had intercourse 
with wo men other than your wife? 

Frequently } 

Sometimes ) 

Seldom ) Defined as in Ho. IQ 3 

Sever } 

110. If you are married, state whether you would like to he 
separated. Yes Ho Conditional (or what?) 


111. How many times have you had intercourse with prostitutes? 

Frequently ) 

Sometimes ) 

Seldom ) Defined as in Ho. 103 

lever ) 


112. Have you ever had VB? Tea fto 

113. If you had VD, wh&t kind was it and where did you pick 
it up? 

114. How many times have you oem arrested? 

1 


9 and over 

ftever 

115. For what offences have you "been arrested.? 

116. Did you ever run away from home during your school years? 

Yes Ho 



, 




* 


?'■ 


















.v . > . . 

. 



■ ’ 

. 






, 








v , i • ■ 




. 






, 








. 

- 

. 







’ 




' 









25 


1X7* If you h&v© run away from home, state the reason. 

118. How many years have you spent in an industrial home or 
a reform school? 

1 year 
2-5 yc^rs 
6-8 years 
More than 3 years 
Hone 

119. If you have been in an industrial home or a reform school, 
what was the nature of your offence(s) and why do you think 
you committed it (them)? 

120. Have you ever been in jail? Yes Ho 

121. If you have been in jail what was the nature of your 

offence(s) and why do you think you committed it (them)? 

122. Do you drink beer, hard liquor or both? 

1 23 . How often do you get drunk (ao that you don’t know what 
you are doing)? 

More than one© a week 
About one© a week 
Once every few months 
Very seldom 
lever 

124. Have you ever stayed drunk for a day or more? Yes Ho 
How long? 

125. What clubs have you belonged to? 

During school years 
After leaving school 

126. Did you take a leading part in the club(s)? Yes Ho 
If so, in what way? 

If not, why? 

127. State how often you attend church? 

Regularly (every weak) 

Sometimes (more than once a month but not regularly) 

Seldom (less than once a month) 

Hever 

128. State how often your father attends (attended - if 

deceased) church. 

Regularly ) 

Sometimes ) 

Seldom ) As defined in Ho. 127, above 

Hever ) 




* 


ir 












■ 




. 






















- 




v- 












4 


- 








- 




ijyo^A ... : ni hesipte-p si 








2 6 


129* State how often your mother attends (attended - if 
deceased) church, 

Begularly ) 

Sometimes ) As defined in No, 127, above 

Seldom ) 

Never ) 

130. What was your main occupation before you enlisted? 

131 . How long were you at that work? 

132 . How many employers did you have during that time? 

1 33 . What other jobs did you have and for what periods? 

134. Bid you like your major occupational Yes No If not, 
why not? 

135* $id you do your work well? Yes No If not, why not? 

136 . Why did you chage jobs? (Suggestions - to get more pay? 
Fired? Quit without any particular reason?) 

137 * Bid you get along satisfactorily with most, some, or 
none of your employers? 

138 , What work did you do after school? during vacations? 

139 - Bo you think you had to work too hard for the pay you 
got? Yes No 

140. If you could take any training you want, what kind of 
job would you choose in civilian life? 

141. In your spare time, since leaving school, have you 

kept pretty well to yourself? 

associated with one or two friends? 

55 gone around” with a group? 

142. What are your favorite spare time activities, including 
any hobbies you may have? 

143. Do you spend much (some or none) of your spare time 
reading? 

144. Name your favorite paper _ favorite magazine _ 

145. Name the last three books you read. 

146. What is your favorite reading? 












. 

- 

. 

■ 



; . • 

- 

' 

. 

; 

, 

, 

- 

. 

' 

' ' .« - 










27 


147. Why did you enllat in the Actlye Force? (Interviewer to 
repeat all before calling for an answer) (Circle appro¬ 
priate letter) 

(a) Was it because you were unable to find satisfactory 
employment in civilian life? 

(b) Bid you enlist to get away from your family? 

(c) Was it because of the security offered? 

(d) Was it because you wanted to learn a trade? 

(e) Was it because certain members of your family 
with military service influenced you? 

(f) Did you feel that it was your responsibility 
to do so? 

(g) Was it for any other reason? If so, specify, 

l4S. If you had any previous military service before enlisting 
in the Active Force, please state, 

(a) What force or service. 

(b) What the periods of service were in each. 

(c) What your major employment was. 

(d) What your trade or non-trade qualifications were. 

(e) Whether you were overseas or not. 

(f) Whether you were called for service or volunteered. 

(g) What your highest rank was in each case and when 
you held it. 

(h) Whether you had any crimes. 

(i) Whether you were ever in detention before and 
what for. 

(j) Whether - apart from crimes for which you served 
la detention - you had to forfeit pay, and if so, 
approximately how many days. 

(k) What your reasons were for any of the crimes you 
have described. 

149. When did you enlist in the Active Force? 

150. State briefly what you have done in the Active Force since 
your enlistment over the periods recorded below. State if 
you were in detention or hospital during any period. 

State courses taken and your employment in detail. 

1 0C5 46 - 31 BBC 46 
1 JAB 47 - 31 HAS 47 
1 ape 47 - 30 jot 47 
1 JOT 47 - 30 S3P 47 
1 005 47 - 31 DEC 47 
1 JAB 4S - 31 MAE 42 
1 APE 48 - 30 JOT 48 
1 JOT 48 - 30 SEP 48 






"i * ' 








.... vA': 


. 


(I ' 















-.7 : ■: 



■ 






151. What is your present trade or non-trade qualification? 

152. Is this the work you wanted to do when you enlisted in 
the Active Force? Yes No 

153 * II* not, what did you want to do? 

154. Why do you think you did not get that type of work? 

155. Do you get enough time to do your work as well as you 
would like? Yes No 

156 . What was the attitude of your parents to your enlistment 
in the Active Force? 


(a) Did they oppose you? 

Yes 

No 

(b) Were they enthusiastic? 

Yes 

No 

(c) Did they seem not to care? 

(d) If none of the above, specify. 

Yes 

No 


I 56 A, Will you apply for re-engagomant when your present term 
of enlistment expires? Yes No State why you have 
made that decision. 

157 * la your opinion were you given a fair statement of what 
you might expect in the Army at the time you enlisted? 

Yes No 

15S. Did anyone make promises to you, or seem to make promises, 
which were not kept? Yes No If so where were the 
promises made and. what were they? 


(Note to Interviewers The remaining questions will he asked 
only of those personnel in detention). 

159 . What precisely was your job at the time you got into 
trouble? 

160. What was the nasi© of your unit and/or detachment? 

161. Did you get along well with most, some or none of the 
following 

members of your unit? 
the officers? 
the NCOs? 
the Other Hanks? 






■ M 


* 


' 














! 












i ; «• i: i i\ 

■ r ,/ i - ; 1 :. - , • ; . ' 1 r * 




•. 










. 










. 

. 

* 

■ 







































29 


162. Was there any particular member^) of the unit who ”hnd 
it in” for you? Yes No Don't think so. If so, 
was It 

an officer or officers? 

an NCO or NOOs? 

an Other Hank or Other Ranks? 

What made you think so? 

163 * What was the nature of the ”charge” which resulted in 

your sentence to detention? (AWL, insubordination, etc.) 

164. Do you think you deserved /hat you got? Yes No 

165 . Yor what period were you sentenced? 

166. Tell me why you think you got into trouble? 

167 . During your entire military career approximately how many 
times have you "been up before” your C.O.? 

l6S. How many times have you been in detention or in field 
punishment? 

169. What do you want to do when you get out of detention? 
(Circle appropriate letter.) 

(a) Get out of the Army? 

(b) Change units? 

(c) Change employment? 

(d) Others? 

170. Describe what you generally do in a day here in detention. 

Morning 

Afternoon 

evening 

171. What suggestions would you make regarding improvements? 

172. Do you think that your axperience in detention will keep 

you out of trouble in the future? Yes No Not 

sure. State why you hold that view. 














. 


. ■ J . . 


























■ ' - 











30 


NARRATIVE REPORT BY INTERVIEWS 


(Comment regarding the characteristics and behaviour of the 
subject during interview. Specify any questions which did 
not seem to be phrased in a manner understandable to the 
subjects.) 


&ote to Interviewers ; 

Before dismissing the subject repeat the assurance that 
his identity will not be disclosed in relation to any answer 
given, fh&nk him for his cooperation in assisting the Array 
to gain a better understanding of soldiers who may get into 
trouble. 








APPENDIX "a w 


31 



A Nomograph for Estimating the 
Validity of Test Items 
by the Kelley Technique. 

















APPENDIX w Gr” (Cont*d) 


32 


THE LAW SHE NOMOGRAPH AND THE KELLEY TECHNIQUE 

Truman L. Kelley is credited with the development of 
a special technique for estimating the discriminative value 
or validity index of inventory or test items. This technique, 
in its successive stages, may he described briefly as follows: 

1. Determine the percentage of successful responses to 
a given item by members of the ’’high” criterion 
group. (’’Successful responses” and M high criterion 
group” may be chosen arbitrarily. For example, 

a ’’successful response” could be regarded as all 
the ’’True” answers in a True-Falss inventory. 

Similarly, the "high criterion group” could be 
either the experimental or the control group in 
a comparative study of, for example, military 
offenders.) 

2. Determine the percentage of successful responsee to 
a given item by members of the ’’low” criterion 
group. 

3 . Using the appropriate normal probability curve 
tables, find the standard score value of the 
ordinate which subtends the percentage found in 
Step 1. 

4. Find the corresponding value for the percentage 
found in Step 2. 

5 . Determine the discriminative value or validity 
index by subtracting the result obtained in Step 4 
from the result obtained in Step 3 . 

Lawshe decided to try to simplify this procedure because 
of the labor involved in analysing several hundreds of items. 
His ”nomograph” is the result of his efforts. Use of the 
nomograph reduces the time necessary to estimate discriminative 
values and the results have shown that the method is adequate 
In terms of accuracy. 

Three scales form the nomograph. The two outer scales 
range from 1 to 99, in reverse order. These are the percentage 
scales, on which the percentage of successful responses for the 
two criterion groups are located. The center scale ranges from 
0 in the centre to 5 at the top and bottom. D-values or dis¬ 
criminative values are read off this center scale by placing 







. 

. 

. 

, 

. 

. 

. 

■ - 

- 















* 

< 

. 

- 

' 

- 

. 

, - 

- 













APPENDIX w Gr H (Cont'd) 


33 


a ruler on the two percentages located on the outer scales and 
noting where the ruler passes through the center scale. Values 
above the 0 are plus values and those below are minus values. 

In terms of inventory responses of the True-Ealse variety, a 
plus value simply means that the high criterion group gave more 
successful responses than the low criterion group. The reverse 
is true in the case of minus values. By noting whether the 
values are plus or minus, it is possible to see quickly what 
constitutes a significant answer. 

The highest possible discrimination values are obtained 
when 99 percent of one group and only 1 percent of the other 
give a "successful 9 response to any given item. If any item 
so identifies 99 percent of both groups, the discrimination 
value would be zero. Authors of inventories and tests must 
decide at what D-valu© they are going to reject items, select¬ 
ing those which are most discriminative. 


* 

Summarized from 

“A Nomograph for Estimating the Validity of Test 
Items", an article by G.B. Lawshe in the Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 19^2, pp. ShS-849. 



















. 


- . • 


































. 




- 






























