












@X lIBBIf 
snirajitTisis 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/criticalexaminatOOjohn 















THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE EXPERIMENTALIST’S 
CONCEIT OF INTEGRATION 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY - EDUCATION 


by 

JOHN MALCOLM BLACK 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
AUGUST, 1952* 






L 

. . ... : ... '• ' ; . • r. : : 

■- Jv: •; ;• rr, ] ■; r.-C £, ? J'c; ■ ;ur 

. 

■ = • 
















A CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE EXPERIMENTALIST *S 


CONCEPT OF INTEGRATION 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 

SYNOPSIS.... 1 

CHAPTER 

I. INTENTION AND SCOPE OF THE THESIS... 3 

II. THE GENERAL CONCEPT OF INTEGRATION..... 9 

PART I. THE EDUCATIONAL USE OF THE TERM INTEGRATION. 9 

II. THE MECHANICS OF INTEGRATION. 11 

III. THE TWO MAIN PRINCIPLES OF INTEGRATION...... 13 

IF. THE ROLE OF VALUES IN INTEGRATION... 21 

V. THINKING, KNOWING AND SCIENCE IN INTEGRATION 32 

VI. THE SOCIAL FACTOR IN HsiTEGRATICN......__ 43 

VII. EVALUATING INTEGRATION..... 47 

111. CURRICULUM IMPLICATIONS..... 33 

PART I. EDUCATION AND THINKING... 53 

II. THE NEEDS, INTERESTS AND ABILITIES OF THE 

pupil. .. 57 

III. LEARNING FROM EXPERIENCE... 70 

IV. THE APPROACH TO SUBJECT MATTER IN THE 

CURRICULUM... 78 

V. SPECIAL PROBLEMS IN INTEGRATIVE LEARNING.... 102 

IV. WEAKNESSES IN THE .EXPERIMENTALIST’S PHILOSOPHY OF 

INTEGRATION... 115 

PART I. THE GENERAL CONTRADICTION AS TO VALUE.116 

II. THE THEORY OF "GROWTH" ....... ..... 118 

III. THE "INTRINSIC CONTINUITY" THEORY.123 

IV. FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS..........134 

REFERENCES. 140 

BIBLIOGRAPHY... 14& 









































1 


SYNOPSIS 

In this work the author had four objectives* First it was 
his aim to explain the Experimentalist’s concept of integration. 
This task was largely expository. Secondly, he attempted to fit 
this concept into the background of the general Experimentalist 
philosophy, i.e.» to interpret Experimentalist philosophy in 
terms of the concept of integration. This naturally involved 
interpretive as well as expository work. Thirdly, the resulting 
theory was applied to educational practice in order to reveal 
its main implications in that field. Again this was a matter 
both of interpretation and exposition study. Finally, the 
author discusses what he considers to be the weaknesses of the 
Experimentalist's philosophy of integration. 

It was found that the concept of integration, for the Experi¬ 
mentalists, is a philosophical one. Indeed, it was found to be 
the central concept of their philosophy (though unrecognized by 
them as such), sine© it was equivalent to the concept of "growth". 
The main implication of this philosophy for educational practice 
is that it stresses the necessity of learning by problem-solving- 
problem-solving being, for the Experimentalist, the definition of 
thinking. Naturally, this essentiality involves certain other 
practical necessities which will b© dealt with in Chapter III. 

As for the weaknesses of the Experimentalist’s philosophy, the 
author found that their value-philosophy, which is central to the 
philosophy of integration, is incapable of performing the task it 



, . ■ - • . ’ :• ' 


* 

. 



■ 

* 






I / ♦ ! 


. « . 




, 



, . n.i >. *- . 









, 

. 


- 

■ 





* 

' 

' 

' 

in-.; v' •.••• • ■ * . 

' 

... ... 

- 

. 

. 



2 


was designed for, in that it is contradictory and self-destruc¬ 
tive. Nevertheless, this weakness is not as fatal as it might 
seem since its correction would require only certain common-sense 
amendments in the theory which are already generally made in 
practice. 



3 


CHAPTER I 

THE INTENTION AND SCOPE OF TEE THESIS 

The present writer was first attracted to the topic of inte¬ 
gration through his own confusion as to the meaning and signifi¬ 
cance of the term in the field of educational theory. According 
to some sources, integration is a psychological term referring 
to the method by which people do in fact learn and adjust, to 
changing conditions. Others have taken integration to be a 
mechanism whereby the educator can organize subject matter in 
order that it may be more meaningfully learned® Others have 
taken it to be a general philosophical concept which should be used 
in guiding educational practice. Moreover, to add to the confu¬ 
sion, within each of these fields of belief there is a variety of 
opinion as to the general significance of integration® Some say 
that it can be more or less ignored since it is an automatic pro¬ 
cess over which w@ can have little influence® Others say that 
the teacher can and must be the agent of integration for the 
pupil. Another school takes a more or less midway position and 
maintains that the teacher can and must guide and direct the pro¬ 
cess but cannot, and must not attempt to, actually do it for the 
pupil. 

Consequently, the writer decided to find out what exactly 
was the concept of integration held by the Experimentalists.* 

This school was chosen because of its prominent and influential 

*By "Experimentalist” we refer to that group of philosophers, of 
whom the dean is the recently deceased John Dewey. They are often 
referred to as the "Progressives”, "Pragmatists", or by other 

titles. Experimentalist is evidently the title that they, them¬ 
selves, prefer. 









' 

. 

.... : . . - , - 

. ■ • ■ ' . V ' t 

- 

- 

. 

. . . 


>1 


. 

- 










* 





' 

■ 

. 


' 

■■ ■ , ■ : : , 



. 

- 

a: 



o 'iJ- ' . 

*■•■■■• 1 !:■.:■ - V T, 1 - lit i M ' 

' 







4 


position in the field of education, and also because it is within 
their educational philosophy that integration is given the most 
consistent stress* Thus, the first objective of this thesis was 
set: to find out what exactly was the Experimentalists 9 concept 
of integration. To this extent the work is expository and inter¬ 
pretive. 

The next objective of this thesis was set by the very nature 
of the reading. It was found that very little has been written 
directly on the topic as an educational concept* Mich more has 
been written on its application to school programmes* However, 
since the first objective was to find what the concept itself was, 
these writings were more or less ignored* The greatest percentage 
of what has been written on integration as an educational concept 
has been implicit, in passing reference, or under the general 
heading of other topics* From the nature of these implications 
it became apparent that for the Experimentalist the concept of 
integration was a philosophical one* Not that the Experimental¬ 
ists deny its validity in the field of psychology and neurology, 
but for them the main educational significance is apparently 
philosophical* They seem to see it as a fact of neurological or 
psychological study that has significant implications for the 
philosophy and practice of education* But, because so little has 
been written on it directly in this light, the next objective be¬ 
came to fit the Experimentalist’s concept of integration into the 
general background of their philosophy. This task involved a 
study of that philosophy, and, because of the lack of direct 
material, it also involved a good deal of interpretation in order 


. 

* 


' • 

■ 


, 


.,,.5 5 


s 




« 

■ 



. 

, 





-MS+A 





\ 


v,; .:. . - 

.... ' : 


, 

V OS' ■ 


■ ' {‘Jit ' . 

, 










' , • . ' • 



* 



W-.l 






■ 


1 c ■' ' 


* 

, 

. 

t ... • •'.'■■■ 



5 


that the importance of the concept of integration in relation to 
general Experimentalist philosophy could be discovered. 

A third objective was set by the nature of the material read# 
This stemmed frcm a weakness in Experimentalist writing. Too 
often, having a specific concept in mind, these writers phrase it 
in such general terms that it is very difficult to understand 
precisely what they mean. It has been a general complaint that 
throughout their works there are numerous ambiguities and apparent 
paradoxes. 

As an example of this we may skim quickly through W. H. 
Kilpatrick’s book "Education for a Changing Civilization". On 
page 85 of this book we are told that "No longer can one genera¬ 
tion bind the other to its solutions”. Yet, on the same page, we 
are told that we must see to it that they "hold their course amid 
change" and that they develop certain "habits and attitudes". It 
is certainly not immediately apparent what is meant by these 
statements, though, as a matter of fact, when seen in the light 
of their general background the apparent contradiction is resolved 
Again, on page 97* we are told that the child must learn "by doing 
Now this can be interpreted in many ways, depending on the defini¬ 
tion of "doing". Some educators evidently limit "doing" to physi¬ 
cal activity; the question is, do the Experimentalists? On page 
111, Kilpatrick says, "We must rid the schools of dead stuff". 
Which subjects, or phases of subjects, are dead? And how do we 
judge the vitality of a subject—by its immediate utility? Of the 
Experimentalist’s concept of the curriculum he says on page 128: 


* 

X ... . ; 

A' i: ; 


U 

.-v; 


r ■ 

: . , ■ 


* 





sxxnx, fxnx :. «i: ; 

$ ' X.X :x J.iw 

. 

'zobmj oX. 


. : : X: ; 



. ' . -v a ' • . 

. 

' 

OiiBZ ' ' 

. HO l • • 

, : . ' , . aXx .JJ 

■ ! :j -X ; f. c.X xx,, xx*,.;. ^ - . J x . .... LX' ■/.: ' 

./ j;.. XxX;.: Lux •*>'''■ :'I r : x: r:. ; jo;: xl-. J .X \.\v0 : 

. : 

: i j t> i 'to f< r . .. 

x xu xi:x:-x ■■■• . x\:,xx re.i'xx;qxxxxx xL fXXO xx'L 

/ 

■ • 

M /x.x 'J 1 * a,; \ Lxx.... .! . , X ' 

■ rX . -. qtLlLx'JXv vx : j 

.*.■.. ;j.x.,:x.i;x xL'i ‘Lqxx... >x r- J -X..txX'. 



6 


«It uses subject matter but it does not consist of subject matter". 
Does this mean that subject matter is not to be treated as organ¬ 
ized fields of knowledge? As a final example, on page 132 he says 
that in education "your standard to the end will—and should- 
remain hypothesis"* Nevertheless, on the same page he says that 
we must develop "that type of person who is able and disposed to 
think for himself, think freely without warp of prejudice, decide 
unselfishly, preferring the social good to any merely private 
good or gain" • Now, how is this latter statement to be rational¬ 
ized to the first—surely it is a constant standard* 

Thus, it became necessary to do further interpretation by 
way of clearing up these ambiguities* This type of interpretation 
will be found mostly in the chapter on the curriculum implications 
of the general philosophy* 

Finally, the last chapter of this work makes a general evalu¬ 
ation of this philosophy and discusses certain phases of it for 
which the writer could not find sufficient justification. 

The thesis is organized so that the second chapter is devoted 
to the task of fitting the Experimentalist’s concept of integration 
into their general philosophy* The third chapter deals with the 
implications of the second chapter for educational practice. The 
last chapter is primarily critical. 

The general nature of the thesis, in consequence of its 
objectives, it not merely expository but also interpretive. 
Also, in consequence of the Experimentalist's concept of integra¬ 
tion the thesis is philosophical rather than psychological. 


£) : : X : h 


! 0 •. .•* vi £ 



U Hit C.;:,r... 0 1. - • *- j •• 






o cl 


S- j V -,f. ■: ,c : 




-..j , f. Icl'c -cl 1 c- ' l"i = 


, 1 : J. 


' , .. iqTf:'' .. H" ■' - : : '• ■' ; ' :m : 

. 

' ! ■ ’ ■ 

» 


, . • 

t , • ul .1'.": 1. : - J|, /i: pf, ‘ . ' r, .11 . . L . : : : ci d ■ ■ f 

. ' ' ' 

' 

••■... s.'■ 

: 

. 

n al , . cl; 1'• 

^xo4-i..aoqxe • ^ . , . 1 

. v .' u / 111 .. ; c <:•' c ; ' -1 ■ 1- 


7 


Because of this latter limitation the reader will not find in this 
thesis much discussion of such topics as transfer of learning or 
other psychological aspects of integration* 

The writers chosen as representing the Experimentalist school 
are mainly: John Dewey, Joseph Ratner, W. H. Kilpatrick, and L. T. 
Hopkins* The present writer feels that he has been justified in 
doing so since these men have been particularly influential in the 
fields of philosophy and education* John Dewey, as recognized 
dean of this school, has been given particular emphasis* 

By way of general introduction to the Experimentalist's 
concept of integration it might be said that it is a philosophical 
concept* It expresses the belief that the quantity and quality of 
meaning of what is learned is directly proportional to the number 
and quality of relational appreciations that are established. 

That is to say, that the more connections the pupil is able to 
make between what he is learning and what he has already learned, 
the more significant his learning will be* Thus, this philosophy 
suggests that the way to improve the quality of learning is to 
increase its relatedness* 

In conclusion, it is also felt necessary to justify the writ- 
ing of this type of thesis. It seems to be in vogue to be cynical 
about the value of philosophical work in education* It is criti¬ 
cized as being of little use* Whenever these critics find them¬ 
selves in agreement with the philosophy they dismiss the concept 
with the statement that, after all, good teachers have always 
held that particular belief* But, it must be said of this that it 


: . ji^'y''3 01QOv .- . 

. 

■ r J", : :■ ■ J ■" / r , ■ '"o ' :r.v , ' : : 

, 

, < • 

! .. . . : ■ ■ • ' : r J; ' : 

* 

. 

, 

« 

<r i^ t,j ■: v 

4 

' 

■ ' r - J .. /•;. . .1 .J ' ' ;j •; : v r- .. 

' 

L . ' ■ '. . 

■ : ' . ■ '...o. ta-:-; .-‘i c -vi.yy 

- 

■ » . 


8 


is of undeniable value to present, in an organized way, the dis¬ 
coveries of the best teacher. It might also be pointed out that 
even the best teachers are not always consistently good in prac¬ 
tice. Such a condition is largely the result of the lack of a 
consistent philosophy. Philosophy is theory, and the purpose of 
theory is to be a guide to consistent and efficient practice. 

That much philosophy is incapable of practical application is a 
condemnation of the philosopher rather than of philosophy. More¬ 
over, there has been a tendency in education to believe that 
psychology is taking the place of philosophy. This is thought to 
be a good idea since it makes educational theory a matter of sci¬ 
ence rather than of opinion. In this respect it is worthwhile 
noting that the purpose of science is limited to telling us what, 
in fact, is. Educational theory needs more than this. Educators 
must decide what should be. This is the job of philosophy and not 
psychology or any other science. 


- ■ ■ ? ' ■ • 

* 

. . . . 

. 

, 

. .• : 

. 

t 

.v bzzZakL c.i- ccu'v.ou on 

... -; "■ 1 - '• ■ • - • 

. v i - r ':. ; . ' • • ■ 


■ 





9 


CHAPTER II 

THE GENERAL CONCEPT OF INTEGRATION 


PART I 

THE EDUCATIONAL USE OF THE TERM INTEGRATION 


Since the nine teen-twenties the term *’integration” has been 
used with increasing frequency in education circles. The meaning 


of the tern, however, has been more or less obscured because of 
the variety of uses to which it has been put. 


It has been used to describe the individual as a whole, 
some aspect of his behavior, the entire school curricu¬ 
lum, the working relations between teachers and pupils, 
the administrative organization, the relation of the 
school to other social agencies or the community as a 
whole, the function of the school in a democracy, how 
learning takes place, and in many other ways too numer¬ 
ous to mention, 


1 * 


Essentially the concept of integration is that of fitting the 
part into the whole. According to Webster’s New International 
Dictionary to integrate means % ” To unite (parts or elements) so 

as to form a whole; also, to unite (a part or element) with some¬ 
thing else, especially something more inclusive* 1 . 

Educationally, of course, the term has a rather specialized 
meaning, and, as will be shown, it is a central concept of the 
experimentalist’s educational philosophy. In referring to integr¬ 
ation in the school the experimentalist refers to the behavior of 
the pupil and not to the subject matter or organization in the 
school. He is concerned with seeing that the pupil is integra ting , 
but he is not much concerned with seeing that the pupil is integra¬ 
ted. The possibility of a completely integrated person is denied 


* Please see page 140 for references. 








r:_. 












o 0 





iJ ' (. lam i; -3 .' ... ’ . 1 .' 


* 

'id ' ;: C : ' Cf-X . .. . 


. • ; 


i 


. 


;.a;I v' ....o ■ 


■ . : .... .:cf r. .. r /: ■ 1 •• ■. d 11 ■ : n . ...' c J .. .. .. .. . . 

. £1 ...... 


’ : . 


. j j . ~ -J j. . 1.0 . L .J ., 1 * 1 1 v 

' 




' 

. -in .. 


i d ' i ' ... o ' "■ 

- 






10 


simply because integration is seen by the experimentalist as an 
on-going process. 

The only completely integrated person or society, pre¬ 
sumably, is a dead one...Education does not seek to 
produce integrated personalities who may function 
satisfactorily in an integrated society, but rather 
integrating persons living dynamically in an integra¬ 
ting society. 2 

The reason for this stand will become clearer as the reader pro¬ 
gresses through this work. 

In other words, the term integration stands for the concept 
of a particular way of behaving in which units of experience are 
interrelated with one another, by the pupil, so as to form wholes. 

It is important to note the emphasis is placed on the aim of 
ensuring that the pupils are integrating, rather than on the 
subject matter being integrated for the pupil. According to the 
Experimentalist’s philosophy the individual can only integrate for 
himself. This is because integrated learning is a result of the 
pupil working to solve a problem in which he has an intrinsic 
interest, i.e., it occurs where the pupil has a real purpose, 
has set a real value on what he is doing, where the pupil has "a 
real motive behind and a real outcome ahead"^, Specific interests, 
purposes and values, according to the Experimentalists, are self- 
initiated. Consequently, no person can integrate for another, 
though, of course, :he may assist in that achievement. (This 
topic will be dealt with further in the section on the role of 
values in integration). 

This concept of integration is germane to the Experimentalist's 
philosophy of education. It is so simply because it is essential 






I 



11 


to learning with meaning. A parrot may learn without meaning; and 
learning is parrot-like without integration. Facts of experience, 
whether gained within or without the class-room have meaning only 
in so far as they are related to other facts of experience. No 
completely isolated fact of experience has meaning. The meaning 
of any fact is found, only in its relation to other facts. That 
it is raining, for example, is a meaningful fact only in consider¬ 
ation of the fact that rain is needed for the crops, or that rain 
will spoil the picnic, and/or in consideration of any number of 
other facts. The educational philosophy of John Dewey is constant¬ 
ly emphasizing this point, as, for example, when he says: 

The increment of meaning corresponds to the increased per¬ 
ception of the connections and continuities of the activity 
in which we are engaged...An activity which brings educa¬ 
tion or instruction with it makes one aware of some of the 
connections which had been imperceptible, ^ 

Thus, experience is educative in as much as the learner is 
able to integrate what he experiences with other facts of his 
experience. And, seen in this light, the process of education is 
a natural one, continuous throughout life. Our effort in educat¬ 
ing, consequently, should be to see that the pupil increases his 
ability to thus integrate the facts of his experience. We are 
interested in ensuring that the pupil is integrating. 

PART II 

THE MECHANICS OF INTEGRATION 

Before going further it will be valuable to examine briefly 
some of the factors in the mechanics of integration. We do so. 






» ' 




' ■ 0 ' . 


,1 


■n: 




/ 















.. - ^ 




« 




• ! 





12 


not in order to give anything like a thorough explanation of the 
"laws of integration" (as they are called by Raymond H# Wheeler 
in "Integration, Its Meaning and Application"), but in order to 
give a clearer idea what process it is we are talking about when 
we speak of integration. A more thorough examination of this 
aspect of integration would be more technical than is felt neces¬ 
sary here* 

The process of integration is essential and fundamental to 
living. Living is a process of the organism interacting with the 
environment (changing and being changed by the environment). Yet, 
in order to exist the organism must establish some sort of organ¬ 
ized or balanced relationship with the environment, i.e., there 
must be seme sort of equilibrium established if the organism is 
to satisfy its needs of existence. But since the environment and 
organism are continually changing and the equilibrium is constantly 
being upset, the organism inevitably finds itself part of a changed 
situation in which there are new*needs, drives, and desires, etc. 
This fact demands that the organism be constantly readjusting it¬ 
self to the environment—it must always be re-establishing an 
harmonious relationship with its environment through adjusting it¬ 
self to meet the conditions of the environment. The continual 
process of establishing and re-establishing an equilibrium is the 
process of integration—of the organism adjusting so as to take 
into account the facts of new and changed situations. The integr¬ 
ation process is started by an inharmony or problem and its aim is 
to eliminate that inharmony or problem—to adjust. 




. 




! 


i. ax.ui.dj'a 


'diZJ r,;; 


■j <,> x • ■ V. : «i 


00. 



13 


The idea of an organization of relationships (an integration) 
suggests the concept of wholeness* And wholeness is fundamental 
to integration* An integrated organism is one in which the parts 
and elements are so related that the organism as a whole responds 
to change. If it did not respond as a whole it would mean that 
there were parts which were not related—which had no effect on 
one another—in which case they would not be parts of that organ¬ 
ism but parts of something unrelated to that organism. Hence, an 
integrated whole is an equil ibrium in itself, wherein a change in 
any of its parts changes the internal equilibrium, thus changing 
the whole and vice versa. 

As R. H. Wheeler says: {, The properties of parts are derived 
from their position in the whole. There is no such thing in nature 
anywhere as an innate quality, trait or property".^ 

In reference to the individual changing as a whole, Hopkins 
states: ,$ In every conscious attentive movement to restore equili¬ 
brium in a situation the Individual acts as a whole organism. 

This means that all aspects of his being are involved.••the physi- 
ological..«the physical... the emot ional... the mental... !l b 

For example, it is the whole individual who responds to watch¬ 
ing a ball game. The mind, the emotions, the nervous system, the 
glandular system and the physical organs are all used in a unified 
way by the spectator, and a change in any one of them affects the 
others and the person as a whole. Thus: M The condition of being 

integrated is primary. We should speak of an integrated whole, 

7 

not an integration of parts...”* 

Since integration is universal, wholeness is found not only 











• B.r 









. 


■j 




■ 








ii 
















* * • . . ♦ . . 

. r sijo l .. .... . : , „■ . 




14 


in the individual responding to the environment but also in the 
environment to which he responds. The whole individual responds 
to a whole situation. 

There is no one-to-one correlation between a particular 
external stimulus or disturbance and the response of 
the affected whole. The whole responds relationally to 
a total situation; that is, rt to one disturbance in rela¬ 


tion to other disturbances. 


8 


This means that we never respond to an isolated element in 
the environment, but we are affected by the emergent result of all 
the related elements in the affecting environment. The principles 
of associative learning illustrate this concept. 

Moreover, the process of integrating interaction is not merely 
a matter of change, but it is at the same time a process of develop¬ 
ment. Those changes made by the organism which are designed to 
meet something new—i.e., the integrating changes--add something 
to the structure of the whole. As Wheeler puts it, "Wholes evolve 
as wholes...it is a process of preserving integration while it 
becomes structurally more complicat ed."^ We see this illustrated 
in the growth of an infant, taking more and more of the environ¬ 
ment into itself. As it solves more and more problems in the 
environment, the infant becomes a more and more complex organism. 

Finally, it should be noted that the process of integration 
is not merely additive; that is to say, during an integrative pro¬ 
cess the whole does not change merely in quantity but also in 
quality. The quality of a whole is never merely the sum of its 
parts. The quality of a whole is not a thing-in-itself or a 
collection of things-in-themselves, but it is an emergent result, 
produced by relating the parts in a particular way. Thus, the 



f 


15 


quality of the whole is different from the sum of the qualities of 
its parts and different from the quality of its parts related in 
any other way. (“...from the standpoint of integration the whole 
is more than the sum of its parts 11 10). For example, it is a well 
known fact that the temperament of a crowd (i.e. a number of indi¬ 
viduals so related as to form a whole) is different from the sum 
of the individual temperaments that make it up. Or, to bring the 
example closer to borne, we all know that when we take in a fact 
which really teaches us something (which has real meaning) we do 
not merely add another fact to our warehouse, but we have a 
"gestalt", we see the whole of the related facts in a different 
light. 


PART III 

THE TWO MAIN IRXNCIPLBS OF MTEXHhiTION 

The Principle of Continuity of Experience . Experience which 
is educative (meaningful) does not occur as an isolated point on 
the scale of time. Meaningful experience is integrated with the 
past and future; it has, as Dewey puts it, "continuity". Any 
experience we have which is isolated from what we have previously 
experienced and what we expect to experience lacks significance 
and is of no account or value. 

This continuity is normal in experience and it is seldcm, if 
ever, that an experience is altogether lacking in continuity. We 
know that the nature of our present experience is conditioned by 
our past experience. For what we did yesterday largely determines 
what .njre can do and what we want to do today. And, thus, it must 









\ 







•/ ;]• 




V v/ 



16 


follow that tomorrow is similarily conditioned by today# So it 
is that all our experience is in this sense a unified and expand¬ 
ing whole•> Past, present and future are bound together by 
necessity. Dewey's own formulation is as follows: 

The principle of continuity of experience means that 
every experience both takes-up something from those 
^ which have gone before and modifie|^in some way the 
quality of those which come after. 

But, what is objectively done in the past, present, and 

future, is not all that forms an integral whole. The meaning and 

significance of what is done and experienced also has continuity. 

What our experience means to us is a result of the integration of 

past, present, and future. And it is the continuity in meaning 

which mostly concerns the educationist. 

The meaning of a fact or experience is not found in that fact 

or experience itself. The significance of a particular experience 

depends upon what we know of it from the past, and what we expect 

of it in the future. Dewey gives the example of the significance 

attributed by a baby to a flame set before it: 

This significance consists of the consequences that vail 
result when what is seen is acted upon. A baby may see 
the brightness of a flame and be attracted thereby to 
reach for it. The significance of the flame is then not 
its brightness but its power to burn, as the consequence 
that will result from touching it. We can be aware of 
consequences only because of previous experiences.^ 

Naturally past experience referred to need not be direct or 
even personal; it may be "a knowledge obtained partly by recollec¬ 
tion and partly from information, advice, and warning of those 

13 

who have had a wider experience". 

Hence, we see that what is learned by a pupil in any experience 




. ■ ’ - ' ' 1 ’ ' . . . 

. . ; ■ ’. J* i s t’i c 1 , ■ 

. 

r'./ ',,7, ..." ' J - 7 

" V.; J .. : 


, 






' L 


. .. 


1 




, < . ... i) "Iv- ,0:1 ffo L‘VV 




' 


' 






■ 














.. "... ■ •’ J 



i ■ rvU 


* 


: 




r :" . ' • • ' ", i: 


t 








•V J' ; ’•/ . O-.'U : 







17 


depends upon what his background is. We can in no way ensure that 
a particular educative experience will always have a particular 
educative result. The significance of what is learned (i.e. what 
is actually learned) depends upon the pupil's attitude towards the 
experience—upon what he relates it to in his past and upon what 
he expects from it in relation to the future. The particular way 
in which an educative experience is taken in or integrated largely 
depends upon the individuality of the pupil. Goodwin Watson points 
out that^recent psychological experiments (particularly those of 
Wulf, Allport, and Perkins) showed that the phenomena of memory 
distortion is caused by the integrating process of the mind. For 
example: "Experiments have shown that children asked to replace 
objects seen along a track tend to place desired objects closer to 
themselves and repulsive objects further away. Even spatial 
memory is an integrated affair,"^ 

Moreover, the continuity of experience is not merely physical 
and intellectual, it is also emotional. The emotional significance 
of past experience is an important factor in determining the kind 
and amount of integrating done with present experience. We can 
all recall numerous occasions when, for example, we have avoided 
a particular experience, or have rationalized it or repressed it, 
for no good rational reason, but because of a purely emotional bias 
which we developed in the past through an association of the exper¬ 
ience in question with something unpleasant. Dewey recognizes 
this principle when he says: 

The revivals of memory are...rarely literal. We naturally 
remember what interests us and because it interests us. 

The past is recalled not because of itself but because of 
what it adds to the present. Thus the primary life of 
memory is emotional rather than intellectual or practical. -5 


I • 


J'.ij : u 
















. . : . ■ ' . 


. ■ ■ 




l 







... i, ' ■ r • •. . 

• * ? 



'' ...... o' \. ■' ■/ . •. . .' ,; : ' J ,; 

: ; r - ■ -I.J - . r.o. j . /u • 

- 

: * , ' ' ■ ' 

* * > * 

. ;■! ,/. • i, j -;oo"f .’ 

dr ;] ' : • 




18 


Though the continuity of experience is normal v/herever there 
is any meaning in experience, it can easily be seen that the 
quantity of the integration (and consequently the meaning) will 
vary greatly* By recognizing this law of learning (for it may 
rightfully be called this) the educator may utilize it to increase 
the meaning of school experience through facilitating the pupil's 
integrating of his school experience* (The quality of the continu¬ 
ity—the desirability or undesirability of the meaning taken frcm 
an experience—is, of course, a variable too, but this, must be 
dealt with under a more appropriate heading). 

Thus, integration increases as the continuity of experience 
increases* 

The Ifrinciple of Interaction * Another factor in integrating 
experience is that of interaction between the subjective and 
objective aspects of the experience* This principle was implicit 
in the principle of continuity, for the attitude or "set" of the 
subject doing the experiencing is largely determined by his past 
experiences. 

The principle of interaction states that the real meaning of 
an experience cannot be discovered by examining the objective con¬ 
ditions alone. A situation can be understood only if the subject's 
"internal” organization or attitude is considered in its relation 
to the objective conditions. A situation is what it is because of 
the particular arrangement and condition of both subject and object 
in their interaction. For example, to say that George experienced 
a tragedy is an inaccurate statement unless we really mean, George 
experienced a tragedy-for-George; i.e„, the nature of the tragedy 



V'-l- 






> 








- 























ilC. 














■ 

* 





19 


cannot be understood from the objective conditions alone. What 

the tragedy really was—what its real meaning was—depends not 

only on what happened to George but also on what was the condition 

or attitude of George at that time. 

Any normal experience is an interplay of these two sets 
of conditions. Taken together, or in their interaction, 
they form what we call a situation. ® 

Thus, integration is a process of interaction between the 
individual and the environment, each affecting and changing the 
other. 


Integrating refers to continuous, intelligent, interactive 
adjusting.».This means that the culture affects him and 
he in turn affects the culture.17 

Any interacting adjusting behavior, therefore, joins the 
individual with the environment in some new ways or re¬ 
lationship.*^ 

The interactive aspect of integration is easily observed in 
the development of an infant. As the infant reaches out and takes 
in new aspects of its environment (as it is changed by the solu¬ 
tion of problems in its environment) it at the same time changes 
its environment. The parents and the household adjust to fit the 
new needs that arise out of the infant’s development. 

Thus, in the learning situation, we must consider both as¬ 
pects of the experience, objective and subjective. What is learned 
from an experience is not entirely determined by the object of 
learning, for, wherever there is life there is activity, an acti¬ 
vity having some tendency or bent of its own ."^9 But, though the 
"bent" may be prior to the object of learning, the learning does 
not take place in a vacuum, and the objective factors inthe situation 





' 



I,.'-. . .'i.'.O 













01 . 





’ x 






. s.U 


V s 









20 


condition what is learned. 

The two integration principles of '‘continuity” and "inter¬ 
action” are obviously not entirely distinct principles, Dewey 
calls them "the longitudinal and lateral aspects of experience”. 

Different situations succeed one another. But because 
of the principle of continuity something is carried over 
from the earlier to the later ones. As an individual 
passes from one situation to another, his world, his 
environment, expands or contracts. He does not find 
himself living in another but in a different part or 
aspect of one and the same world. What he has learned 
in the way of knowledge and skill in one situation 
becomes an instrument of understanding and dealing 
effectively with the situations which follow. The pro¬ 
cess goes on as long as life and learning continue. 

Otherwise the course of experience is disorderly, since 
the individual factor that enters into making an experi¬ 
ence is split. A divided world, a world whose parts 
and aspects do not hang together, is at once a sign and 
a cause of a divided personality. When the splitting 
up reaches a certain point we call the person insane. 

An integrated personality, on the other hand, exists 
only Y/hen successive experiences are integrated with 
one another. It can be built up as a world of related 
objects is constructed. 2 ® 

lack of continuity and interaction (lack of integration) is, 
of course, as disas.terous to meaning and usefulness of knowledge 
as it is to personality. The less continuity and interaction 
characterizing the development of knowledge, the less integrated 

the knowledge is and the more it tends to exist in an isolated and 

■< 

meaningless world. (For example, I may tell you that an alcohol 
may have one, two, or more OH groups and still be a substance of 
a simple function. Without a very specific background in chemistry 
and a very specific problem in your mind, this fact will be all btt 
meaningless.) In fact, the effects on meaning and personality are 
two aspects of the same development. It is, however, the effect on 









: . : iv.rj I J. J- ;r ;Ivi ■ .L’a; • ‘TIC ;:J-0 





- 










; . ' . . ' - , ' . 

. 










. 



j.:i lAoi, rr--- r . ;.,n. I'zo 1:.;^ 

J . : J ' . ■■■.. : . ' : :/ : : 1 . \ ; 'J; 




' 


f ■ * . 

' - v j. 

■ 


i 0 ■ ‘ . 




■ 





21 


knowledge with which we are mostly concerned in this thesis since 
the problem of integrating personality, though not very distinct 
from that of integrating knowledge, is more properly the concern 
of the psychologist rather than the philosopher in education* 

PART W 

THE ROLE OF VALUES IN R^TECRATIQN 


In speaking of the process of integration we have had to use 
such words as "purpose 11 , "tendency" ."meaning", and "emotional 
value"* These may have suggested to the reader, quite correctly, 
that values and valuation play a significant part in the process 
of integration* 

It will be remembered that the process of integration springs 
from a need. The organism being out of harmony has a need or a 
lack, i.e., it faces a problem. Consequently, it must readjust 
itself, it must integrate* 

Such behavior (says Hopkins) is purposeful, directed to- 
ward ends, consciously formulated and reformulated in the 
process by the individual as he resolves his disturbance. 
Purposeful behavior implies intelligent behavior. From 
the educational viewpoint, then, integration must be the 
shorthand word to describe the process involved in this 
intelligent ongoing, interacting, adjusting behavior.^ 

Thus, the individual's integration becomes self-directed. 

Faced with a problem the individual’s actions and the resulting 

integration are directed by the purpose of solving that problem 

(i.e. relieving that conflict or supplying that lack). As the 

purpose is formulated in the end-in-view (the value) it follows 

that without value there can be no integration. So we see that the 




OC. . Juiij cU ' 

j ;r ! . ■ ' ' ■ 10i 

o' , .. ! J : ; 

' ; 


. )X OX y. 

, 

■; . .. . ' .! :1 iC " X i .1. Xo 



~.— —- • • .... 

e J - 

' 


t ■ . , ,.0 O; ? ' ■ ' . ;-ia : - •- 

;• 

■ ,• .J X'Xv' . ' ■ . ■ , ■ • 1 i: '• 

.' ‘j. \. ; '... J" . *: 

•.o ’ ";x . YJ.. 


' . : L.i'rX-J-. •„ . . J\ V’ . J ■ : : . J ” 


• 

^ t J , V. 1 

. ", . f . . . 

* ‘ . ; • • - 

-OX y ■„ /.ij:' 

, j'. j ...'■ . ,• •'£<.:• X / \ti :>0 

. 

■ "-" ./ ■ .....'... 

• 

\j 1 L - 1. , 1 o' . ... .j '■ (. J,. ..... f i'iil/,)-. 1 .i. i ../ .•> 

• 

• 

... 0- r,0 ,1.'UC v; ; i '-j.v>‘K" 

• 

. ' o o . ‘ , , ... i 

. 

■ 

56 :,*X . f . ' . . i, .' ' ' 

■ 

* 

• ' ■ . 


* ' ' . t-ll ■ ' J . 




22 


role played in integration by values is not only significant but 
fundamental and essential. 

Values Have “Intrinsic Continuity 11 , It must be noted here 
that the Experimentalists maintain that ends or values are not 
external to the process of integration. They believe that ends 
are integral parts of the process of integration. They are not 
merely objectives but are parts of on-going activities in which 
they are latent and potential as well as being completions. 

Values and ends have “intrinsic continuity 5 *. Dewey contrasts mere 
results with ends: 

Any exhibition of energy has results. The wind blows about 
the sands of the desert; the position of the grains is 
changed. Here is a result, an effect, but not an end. 

For there is nothing in the outcome which completes or 
fulfills what went before . There is mere spatial redis¬ 
tribution, One state of affairs is just as good as any 
other. Consequently there is no basis upon which to 
select any earlier state of affairs as a beginning, a 
later as an end, and to consider that intervenes as a 
process of transformation and realization . 2 ^ 

Incidentally, it should now be clear why it is that the pupil 

cannot be integrated by the teacher, school, or course studies, 

and why it is that we must facilitate his integra ting of hims elf. 

For the purpose of integration and meaning the pupil must have 

“self-initiated ends** ; he must be working on a problem that has 

“a real motive behind and a real outcane ahead” (c/f p.io) if his 

behavior is to have the "intrinsic continuity” necessary to value 

and hence necessary to integration. Thus Dewey points out that: 

To talk about an educational aim when approximately each 
act of a pupil is dictated by the teacher, when the only 
order in the sequence of his acts is that which comes 
from the assignment of lessons and the giving of direc¬ 
tions by another, is to talk nonsense .^3 








j: 


* 


' : 30 LiiW 


ai' a'o J ~ . J . . 


.J':' ' .,. ■ a a oo o •• J - •/ ifio.;:. Jo 




J* 'J: 


■■ i 






J < 7 : : . ; 









i;.'oo ' >v i; v;o I 73 •; 11 




■ 




' 


■ 



. 

■Jo.'. ' . 0 0 3 6.3 ! 

■ • , . -0 . J ' 1 

•. ■... ... t. ; o a": t 











23 


No 11 intrinsic continuity" means no aim. It might he well to 

note at this point that Dewey goes on to warn that: 

It is equally fatal to an aim to permit capricious or dis¬ 
continuous action in the name of spontaneous self-expres¬ 
sion. An aim implies an orderly and ordered activity, 
one in which the order consists in the progressive com¬ 
pleting of a process.24 

There Are No Absolute Values . Since aims and values are 
intrinsic to the process of integrative development, and since 
the nature of that process depends upon the variable conditions 
of the factors of continuity and interaction (i.e. all integrative 
developments are unequal and particular as they depend for their 
nature upon the nature of all the factors in the whole situation), 
it follows that there can be no set and absolute values which 
exist distinct from particular processes of integration. A value 
is a particular part of a particular process and can be nothing 
else. 


The concept of absolute values, as final and ultimate goals 
at which we should constantly aim, is an unnecessary and dangerous 
concept. For, according to the Experimentalists, values originate 
in, and as part of, experience. Our experience, say they, is 
either satisfying or unsatisfying--it is either harmonious or in¬ 
harmonious. If it satisfies us we have no desire to change our 
experience. If, however, our experience is the result of conflicts 
we are notified and motivated to readjust by an upsurge of emotion.* 
Emotions, says Dewey, have "their origin in and from the need of 
actions". 2 ^ Thus, in terms of our present experience, we construct 
an ideal picture of what we feel would be more satisfying. 

* Even pleasing and aesthetic emotions are being recognized by some 
scientists and philosophers, including Dewey, as motivators to re¬ 
adjustment—they represent the desire and need to take in some 
broader aspect of possible experience, (c/f - "Art as Experience"— 
John Dewey). 





: 7 . ' . 7. : . 



■ \ , ' ; . : . . J : ' 


. 









/ 









. 










* 



. 

- . ■. (.Xa 







most! 








V.-' 


■ . 

. ;■ ; '. • ■ a , ; c i .. : J-;: ■. 1. / 

• , 


i-: -- 1 ■' : 07 . U; A ;k.. j 




' •••• ■ 7 J u. 

. ■ ■' ■’ ' : : . : < a . . , .. / j.; 

t 

■ * ■ * ■ t - . ' 

■ -j .-■j'.v.v..: a,t : .!■;J’.co 

■ - '■ 3'.v ■ '. ... J : ‘;i;I . I;;. 

\ , . ' , . „ M 

. 

j 1 ' . , t . , ■ c , ■: j' . : 

, 

* ■ ' i 0.7 j , [ jto': • a-ja . . - 










.... 3 

: J" o':; O'., OO'X 

' 


■ L 

J J ' • C ■ 

.4 > ■ | 

. , i ' 110 


i.O 



24 


•..the troubles which men undergo are the forces 
which lead them to project pictures of a better state 
of things. 

As man works to create a more satisfying world for himself, 
to achieve his ideals, his experience suggests possibilities— 
suggests alternatives. 

The standard used to measure the value of suggestions 
that spring up in the mind is not congruity with fact 
but emotional congeniality. 

Consequently, there is no need for absolute values, because 

the standard of value in a particular situation is merely emotional 

congeniality. Values are entirely human in that they are partly 

intellectual (as conscious intelligent plans for action) and partly 

emotional (in that the significance and meaning of aims originates 

in what we feel we like or dislike). 

Dewey analyses the historical development of absolute values 

as a "rational justification of things that had been previously 

accepted because of their emotional congeniality and social pres- 
28 

tige"• Bence absolute values are conceived and born in conflict 

with new knowledge and fact. They had to be bolstered by a great 

"apparatus of reason and proof" and were justified as values by 

logically demonstrating that they were ultimate realities, more 

real than changing nature. These unchanging ends were necessary 

to reaction and thereby fatal to change and progress. 

Therefore, if we see that the concept of absolute value- 

ultimate reality--"has sprung from a conflict of inherited insti- 

29 

tutions with incompatible contemporary tendencies" ' we see that 
it is really the opposite to real value. Absolute values deny the 


r j- .v , ".,.J . s i'D.A/ $0- A ,:.'I y O J“ a. ,7 



1 

fv.:X),y; y, r'jyK-yo :'-0' w : - r L-"T CiA ■ 


. ~ ; < ;* . . ' . r r r •: o ; C. J' 



, ' . 

G-’ic icj-urvy^;a' AO - iS. ,/ oi-- 


y : ' * - 

.1; l i ' . . . . . 

. 

: ' e . . ■' . ’ 

./ , .y - > y, : 0 


' 


,, 

A::.; \ i./iyj': ■■ : vy'i a:;;,.". ;; J"y y 

• ' ... . .... 

' 

' 

y.- :H v " ,A ■ .v.y ./, yo J;y jypl 

. 



... . . . . , 

■' '. - .' . :. y -' f r : y ;:. 0 ; 




. .: . A; . y.. . 

f , ■. .. 

* 

t ' • ' ■ ■ 

» j v'.- . v , .. j ...i ’ ... ,.: D 

>-'■■■ ' ;; - -y, 


• 3 oxy 



■ ;• y '. ■- ; . •: •; a : 


. . • . ' . ; >i: ; 


25 


need for change; real values are at the centre of integrative ad¬ 
justment. 

The absolute value, say the Experimentalists, being a final 
end toward which we should always strive under all conditions, 
ignores concrete and objective fact. On the other hand real 
values, which motivate and direct the constant process of inte¬ 
grative adjustment, are concrete and objective since their func¬ 
tion is toward the solution of concrete and objective problems. 

Aims mean acceptance of responsibility for the observa¬ 
tions, anticipations, and arrangements required in 
carrying on a function—whether faming or educating. 

Any aim is of value so far as it assists observation, choice 
and planning in carrying on activity from moment to moment 
and hour to hour; if it gets in the way of the individual's 
common sense (as it will surely do if imposed from without 
or accepted on authority) it does harm.3^ 

Thus values, ends, aims, purposes, etc., are both objective 
and subjective. They are subjective because they represent what 
we feel (what we desire), but they are objective too since they 
represent what we feel in a concrete and objective situation— 
they represent what specific thing we Y^ant in this specific situ¬ 
ation. Objectivity and subjectivity are the two poles of the one 
thing, which cannot be separated without destroying the thing they 
compose. 

Values as Good-In-Themselves . Nevertheless, it is true that, 
since experience is always referred to in the process of planning 
for the future, and since, in the past, certain situations have 
been found satisfying—have been found to be emotionally congenial-- 
man builds for himself a system of "intrinsic values"—i.e. things 
which man desires for their own sakes as good-in-themselves and 






* 

• < .. ■ : . . ) . « 

, J '■ . 'I'.l ' ■<', ' 

1 . .. :.;' 

- ,j-..a . ..... ., •„. ; .. .., , d c; J’ .: l c .' a ■■ .; > *.'. .. f . v 

•; . .. ... * / :. . .< a .. J'aa.a:' : ' ; ? > .. ^ ' • - ' V o a'a , 

. _ '...... 

-aaa-,,.; . V a. *; aJaa" L :i.;:aao.... u;.a. J . ; 'J‘j ■ aaraa aatLa 

' ■' i t -a ; J 

a • J. ’.. '.ii o i! Si H7 ~ j .j • - ilC. •_ a ,'I'I 

( :-y a a \..:aa.. ,.w , J ;; utf aid i;Ljv ia. ...xt 

, 

. . ‘ . . j- l 

' ... ' i , .1.. M .... ■ r. 4 •. ao : i. o 

, 

. * r ... .... , .. ! , « W 

.. . ... . , . , >J ■ . . ■ '. . . ■ . • • , * • a , A 

a : a ‘.... a ■ a' .. aa s :a -a: v. ' a J' a , : .. j ;. a. j . r .. sw 

- . . : a a a. J :..•■■■/.■; a :. ':aa-.a' a a.'. I ... a; .j a,.,- J'.:. .... . a, aai 

- ^ . a' . ' a ' '. . a a ’ . '. ....... J ■: . •... , a 

. . • 

. a .. .. .J ... , .4 ■ • ■ o •< • ■ ’L ! - ... ... t J- ■ 

. 

4 "4 a: V 4 /. \ .. ..■ 

j a :. . ... ' .... a j 4 j- .' '.aaa.-. a. .. ..a....: . '. : a a .a a.:. .a., 

' • -a- ' , . .. .. :. J • \ f , .a . a'. < '.a ' ... .... . a , a. . .; . 

- a , a : a , av Java ari;.;aj. laaaa' 




26 


not as means to other ends (happiness for instance). These intrin¬ 
sic values form the basis of value-judgment as they are the things 
which we desire in general. But, of course, they are not absolute 
values since we do not and cannot desire them at all times (e.g., 
much of the time, being concerned with other ends, we are not con¬ 
cerned with being happy. As I write these words, for instance, I 
am concerned with expressing my thoughts clearly and the desire 
for or feeling of happiness is not part of my consciousness). Nor 
are these values concrete. They are merely formal values, since 
their content—what actually composes them—varies with the speci¬ 
fic situation (e.g. happiness may consist in going to a show, 
reading a book, swimming, etc., depending on the particular set 
of circumstances). 

Often our action is almost automatically directed by such 
values, but in a case where intrinsic values compete or conflict, 
we are forced to make a conscious choice between them. In such a 
case, then, these values cease to be intrinsic and become instru¬ 
mental (means to ends), since the choice between them is made on 
the basis of which will best satisfy the demands of the particular 
situation. Thus things which are good-in-themselves merely form 
a basis for value-judgment (i.e. a sort of reservoir from which we 
select), but the concrete situation—the specific problem--is our 
reference for choice. 

Since this point is the bone of contention in disputes over 
Dewey’s value theory, it may be best to quote at length from Dewey 


himself: 








27 


Sane goods are not good for anything; they are just goods. 
Any other notion leads to an absurdity. For we cannot 
stop asking the question about an instrumental good, 
one whose value lies in it being good for something, un¬ 
less there is at some point something intrinsically 
good, good for itself 

Intrinsic values are not objects of judgment, they cannot 
(as intrinsic) be compared, or regarded as greater or 
less, better or worse. They are invaluable; and if a 
thing is invaluable, it is neither more nor less so than 
any other invaluable* But occasions present themselves 
when it is necessary to choose, when we must let one 
thing go in order to take another. This establishes an 
order of preference, a greater and less, better and 
worse. Things judged or passed upon have to be esti¬ 
mated in relation to sane third thing, some further end 
with respect to that they are means or instrumental 
values. 

We may imagine a man who at one time thoroughly 
enjoys converse with his friends, at another the hear¬ 
ing of a symphony, at another the eating of his meals, 
at another the reading of a book, at another the making 
of money, and so on. As an appreciative realization, 
each of these is an intrinsic value. It occupies a 
particular place in life; it serves its own end which 
cannot be supplied by a substitute. There is no ques¬ 
tion of comparative value, and hence none of valuation. 
Each is the specific good which it is, and that is all 
that can be said. In its own place none is a means to 
anything beyond itself. But there may arise a situation 
in which they canpete or conflict, in which a choice has 
to be made. Now comparison canes in. Since a choice 
has to be made we want to know the respective claim of 
each competitor. What is to be said for it? What does 
it offer in ccmparison with, as balanced over against, 
some other possibility? Raising these particular 
questions means that a particular good is no longer an 
end in itself, an intrinsic good. For if it were an 
intrinsic good its claims would be incomparable, imper¬ 
ative. The question is now as to its status as a means 
of realizing something else, which is then the invaluable 
of that situation. If a man has just eaten or if he is 
well fed generally and the opportunity to hear music is 
a rarity, he will probably prefer the music to eating. 

In the given situation that will render the greater con¬ 
tribution. If he is starving, or if he is satiated with 
music for the time being, he will naturally judge food 
to have the greater worth. In the abstract or at large, 
apart from the needs of a particular situation in which 




. 




.. ; f. 

!' fi 

* 

- ' ]■ i . . 

• : ,/ff; fill . r / :< 

■ '.'.v -■" 1 ■o.'.i ovi.tf J - 














28 


®hoi ce has to be made, there is no such thing as degrees 
or order of value 

Thus, not all value is instrumental nor is all behavior a 
means to an end. A subject may be studied or a game played merely 
for its own sake. But such behavior is still integrative because 
it is purposeful, even though the purpose is self-contained. 

Though such behavior is engaged in for its own sake it is still 
adjustive and integrative in that it satisfies a need—a felt need 
for itself. 

The Continuity of Snds-Means . The Experimentalists claim 
that the process of integration does not end with the end (so to 
speak) for it is an ongoing process—a process which has continu¬ 
ity. And in any such prodess the distinction between ends and 
means is dangerous. We cannot, say they, sharply distinguish be¬ 
tween what we wish to achieve and how we wish to achieve it, for 
an end is what the means make it and vice versa. Thus ends and 
means are seen to form a continuity in which the end is defined 
in terms of the means of achieving it. 

For example, let us suppose our w end-in-view M is enjoyment 
of roast pork. The end-achieved, however, depends upon our means. 
If we burn down our house in order to roast the pork, as accord¬ 
ing to Lamb the original roast pork eaters did, it is obvious that 
the end-achieved is not simply enjoyment of roast pork. In fact 
the end-achieved would more than likely nullify the enjoyment of 
the end-in-view. And such is the sort of thing that happens when 
we consider the end as something in itself. 

The consideration of ends arid means always occurs when we 







•./ \ . .- 




' 


e r' ' - '■ 

. . 

•;.i o:sif>v .d>. Jon 

. 

- 

, 

I ^ : ...... ' v;;. i ;; neon 

. . ... .. V ; - > . . ... ' fj 







. ; ■ . . ■ .;... : ' ... . ' ... ■ ......'.t. .. 






.... ... .. 

. ‘ . ' .. v 


V 

. ■ ' . . . 


: .. •' •- ' ~: .' ■ . ... >0 ; .. « . . . - -t 

( . . t vs ■■■ . ' '' o' . i.. 

J ‘ivsfZy- n. ; : oo/;...o' o.jo rr ;oh rnncf 'll 

«. o .. : .. J... .... a . .•/ c Jrt ;.. .o ; ■ .i; 

' ■ . . , '. . ■- •- . j ■ 

7 ■ ’ 

* 

* 

■ - ■' ■ i.-./v.. /n 5 ;. 0 




29 


are faced with a problem. The projected solution of a problem is 

always chosen as a value—-it is our end in view. 

The “valued of different ends that suggest themselves 
is estimated or measured by the capacity they exhibit 
to guide action in making good^ satisfying , in its 
literal sense, existing lacks. 

But what is really the nature of this good, (value, end-in¬ 
view), is what means will resolve the conflict or supply the lack 
(which is our problem). In other words, we don't previously 
decide what our goal or end will be. We examine the problem, 
thereby discovering the cause of the problem, and our end-in-view 
becomes whatever means will solve our problem. 

We use ,s .. .observation to locate the source of the trouble and 
to indicate the effective means of dealing with it. These means 

form the content of the specific end-in-view, not sane abstract 
3k 

standard or ideal”. 

Nor are ends-means merely a unity. They also form a, continu¬ 
um. This is because behavior which is both an enc and a means 
changes us, changes our environment, and as a result we find our¬ 
selves on a new footing from which to face new changes and pro¬ 
blems. Thus, our last activity gives us a new means—is itself a 
new means—for facing further problems. The end-in-view (the ends- 
means) has thereby been a process of building up, of expanding and 
changing our integration. Bence, the continuum of ends-means is 
the basis of integrative growth. 

In the continuous temporal process of organizing activi¬ 
ties into a co-ordinated and co-ordinating unity, a 
constituent activity is both an end and a means; an 
end, in so far as it is temporally and relatively a 
close; a means, in so far as it provides a condition to 
be taken into account in further activity.3J2 









o' 




; fi, 


ovJ: J 


J : : 'I- 



o' . -i o - £ 


->j. • 






/: :.i r . .. < .00. I; 


-X'JO X noo: 1/. - 'Lifa o'-n-: : o . su tjtf&t&di) 

' 






‘io ' ;. ilMlUii' I'D ; 0 : :> a,DDCf ^CfS’XDia* ^ Ml.v* jj^fl 

. 

* 

■ ■’ - j:- ■ • : - 0- ;f ; j' .i, ■. : .o' :00 fti'o 0.1 

• ■ f •~0D . > > 00 - ... i :.o i'JO.Lo 

i i 

■ . ' • . ; ; .: 1c 




30 


Separating ends from means results in trying to solve prob- 
lems without due consideration of the facts of the problem. It 
results in blindness—in the forms of immaturity, dogmatism, in¬ 
sanity, or fanaticism. Ends and means, according to Dewey, are 
causes and effects, operating in a continual chain and thus form¬ 
ing a continuum. 

Morality . Under the heading of values it is customary to 
consider morals as a special sub-division. That is, it is custom¬ 
ary to separate moral-judgment from other value-judgment; to assume 
a separation between moral goods and other goods. The Experiment¬ 
alists disagree with this approach, and Dewey has dubbed it the 
"narrow and moralistic view of morals". For them moral-judgments 
are identical with all value-judgments. 

A moral situation is one in which judgment and choice are 
required antecedently to overt action. The practical 
meaning of the situation—that is to say the action needed 
to satisfy it—is not self-evident. It has to be searched 
for.3 6 

This, as we have seen, is the case in all experience. Values 

are generated in the search for the solution of problems. Hence, 

in so far as our life is intelligently and scientifically conducted— 

in so far as it is educative--it is moral. 

To pursue a purpose that is sufficiently difficult to be 
educationally acceptable is definitely to face actual 
moral situations.3? 

By this token morality is seen to take an active part in the 
process of integration. On the other hand, absolute moral ends 
limit moral living to living by rote and dogma; they divorce moral 
living from intelligent, integrative and meaningful living. As 


Dewey points out: 







, 0 'U : i .yx '.i. 






' 






Utl v 


i 


t ;Joo' 




J L, 













31 


...The primary significance of the unique and morally 
ultimate character of the concrete situation is to 
transfer the weight and burden of morality to intelli¬ 
gence. ^ 

Dewey's pronouncements on the teaching of morals in school 
bring into clear focus the need of learning integratively. Facts 
of morality, like facts of science, mathematics, history, etc*, 
have meaning to the pupil and cease to be mere symbols only in so 
far as they are taken in integratively—only in so far as they are 
part of the framework built up in the pursuance of a self-initiated 
end. ^ewey sayss- 

Only a personal response involving imagination can possibly 
procure realization even of pure "facts". (By "personal 
response" he means "a warm and intimate taking in of the 
full scope of a situation").39 

What Dewey has to say to those who would impose adult standards 

upon the pupil applies equally to those who would impose adult 

standards in knowledge, facts and skills. 

(The adult).,•.has learned to look upon qualities like 
honesty, amiability, perseverence, loyalty as moral 
goods; upon certain classics of literature, painting, 
music, as aesthetic values, and so on. Not only this but 
he has learned certain rules for these values—the golden 
rul e in morals; harmony, balance, etc., proportionate 
distribution in aesthetic goods; definition, clarity, 
system in intellectual accomplishment. These principles 
are so important as standards of judging the worth of 
new experiences that parents and instructors are always 
tending to teach than directly to the young. They over¬ 
look the danger that standards so taught will be merely 
symbolic; that is largely conventional and verbal. In 
reality, working as distinct from professed standards 
depends upon what an individual has himself specifically 
appreciated to be deeply significant in concrete situa¬ 
tions. ...A youth who has had repeated experience of 
the full meaning of the value of kindliness toward 
others built into his disposition has a measure of the 
worth of generous treatment of others. Without this 
vital appreciation, the duty and virtue of unselfishness 
impressed upon him by others as a standard remains 








, „ . o •• u ;. >: r. 



, 

4 . e .. j' .!. w,.. O . i C' ) ...... f'.i ‘i.'Q 

.. . . o o: J" . J- - V; :o 

. . - •: ‘ . 




•: 7>.>b i :..o 
I^XO&TO' • * 

. i J C. ;. r ; ' •_ .J' " J . ' • i ■ . 

" ... :: X. X' - u 


, , , r ■ . , : \ . 

■ , ; '• t I ■' • X ■■■ . .■ ■.' . . .. , ‘0 j . . 

, . ... .■. ... ■ 

- . 

■f . • • 

• • :■ . - : ; X /'■ . ' :: .. ; > ... i. 7 

'. .. ■ '. ; ! , , ■. • bo .b .:.■■■ 

'■ ' .... ' •' -. • / ul O V' b.J' 0.0 ; .;0.'0.. . •• ' ibbo'^ob J' || 

) 

* . . 

t ■ .... 

o'- ,o .. o.oo- Xv' v \;.i orJ:..: aoi^s, jo737fo7A'oi: 







32 


purely a matter of symbols which he cannot adequately 
translate into realities* His "knowledge' 1 is second¬ 
handed; it is only a knowledge that others prize unself¬ 
ishness as an excellence, and esteem him in the degree 
which he exhibits it.^ 


Thus the meanings of values, like the meaning of other know¬ 
ledge* are ”learned from experience”—learned from integrative 
experience in which knowledge is a means to the end of solving a 
problem. 


PART V 

THINKING, KNOWING AND SCIENCE IN REIATIGK TO H^TSGRATION 

The Role of Thought . In speaking of integration it would be 
impossible to avoid mentioning intelligence or, more specifically, 
intelligent behavior. This fact has been noted in the preceding 
section on values. 

Dewey says that: j, No experience having a meaning is possible 

without seme element of thought.”^" And, as we have seen, the 

meaning of an experience is derived from its integrativeness. 

Even more explicitly, Hopkins introduces his work on integration 

by stating that: ”Integration is a shorthand word used to desig- 

h2 

nate intelligent behavior.” Furthermores ”To raise the level 
of action from, physiological to thoughtful purposes with their 
more intelligent means of attaining and maintaining normal unitary 
behavior is the integrating goal and process.”^ 

The connection between thought and integration is, of course, 
that they both describe the effort to solve a problem—to resolve 
an inharmony. The intelligent approach to problems is, obviously, 
the most efficient approach, and, hence, the most efficient means 





. 





-X ■ 



X ■: ..X 


' 


-v e: 


. ' - " ' 


- 


* 






■S'A 


' 


.■I.; 


v 




/. . .' . '. . '• *. ■ , - -• • 

: 

• 

. . : ■■ . ' ; c .' . ' ! . V 

■■ ' ■ . . ■ ' - ' X ■ ' , •' 

*ri 

■ ■ » ; X . ■' ' . : 

: . . 

- 







: ■: : * • . . : : 

. 



33 


of integrating--of resolving conflicts through adjusting so as to 
take in new factors of experience. Were man in a state of perfect 
harmony there would be no need to integrate, no need to think. 

Thus, ..."thinking takes its departure frcm specific conflicts in 
experience that occasion perplexities and troubles" which is 
just the position frcm which the process of, integration takes its 
departure. So, we see thinking to be intelligent integration. 

We have described integrative behavior as purposeful behavior 
—i.e., working toward an end. It is the special function of 
thought to provide the end in integrative behavior. Take away 
frcm integrative behavior its purposefulness and you, are left 
with something other than integrative behavior. You may be left 
with a behavior that (like evolution before the advent of intelli¬ 
gent biological matter) is adjustive; but, without purpose, it is 
a haphazard and unfree adjustment that is made, if any. Were any¬ 
one to insist on calling such behavior integrative (as they might, 
since it is an adjustive and taking-in process), they would stil 1 
be talking about something different from what we are concerned 
with for it would lack the essential elements of meaning and signi¬ 
ficance. Take away man’s intelligence and you take away his ability 
to behave toward an end. For man’s aims, values and ends are 
arrived at by the process of thought. Only through reason can man 
arrive at values. Were he non-rational, man would be incapable of 
preferring one thing to another since he would be a machine-like 
creature merely doing what he was determined to do. To be values 
end-results must be consciously preferred—selected—by the organ¬ 
ism. Says Dewey, acting with an aim is all one with acting 





.. . 0 0 


■ .j.: 'X :j 


. 



, ..; .. . j . . 

. 




* - ■ 

'■ „ •. J. . . . ... . . : •- - •' "• . : .. ~ .. 


■ 

'' 7 I. " ■; 77 V>.",. • v . v -j"; L .■. >J’. 0 .. ,■ .••• . . fr : 

• * * ~ 

J . 1 .: , ; -.:j . i; •.. -.o .V - • ■ ' • * ■ • 1 — 

, ' . i ' .* ‘ ' " 

. .... 1 . : 7 V ;.J .:.7 '"7 . - •• . >’ -'•■■■- '■ - ‘ ■'* ■ ■ 

.' . •, ; .;. 'j . . . ■. .. -. i , .; 7 , 

• . x •- ■■ 

.. . j.,. > ■ J' , , v. y .7 J 7. . y ’7 .. .-•. 7 .. . v..'J 

;,: j.; , c •: Ln..i >-v.'.: it-, ...; j■ co 

fj ijy, o ;j- v ■... j ; 7 ’\i 7 y.uod.:> K . ... ij. s 7 . 

• .'j ' 





: .. . .. . 

. 

' ' . . . 

0 ; ' "... : .. . .. .iJ‘ /; >.' - : ;;>■'v_ ... ... 

.. ' . j .... ; !. 0 

y 7'‘. v l' ...■ ".... '\L^.y j\„; ■ ....... 

‘ 






34 


intelligently."^ 

Thus, it is thought which gives integration its value, which 
guides and directs the process of integration. 

But it is not "pure reason", or thought in a vacuum, which 
discovers ends and resolves conflicts. When we are faced with a 
problem we think because we want to resolve our conflicts. We 
examine our concrete situation and clarify it by the process of 
abstraction and classification. Thus clarified, the nature of 
the conflict becomes apparent and our thoughts take the form of 
suggested resolutions of the conflict. "The first distinguishing 
characteristic of thinking, then, is facing the facts. 

The Role of Knowledge . Intimately connected with thinking 
and the process of integration are knowledge and learning. Know¬ 
ledge and learning, like thinking, come from the facing of facts. 

In fact they are the product of man’s interaction with his environ¬ 
ment. The interaction of man with his environment (the integrative 
process) produces concretely adaptation of man to the environment 
and utilization of the environment by man, while abstractly it 
produces knowledge. 

Knowledge is not the result of a passive absorption by a 
purely intellectual and cognitive thing called the mind. Know¬ 
ledge is a result of experience—of actually integrating. To 
learn we must "learn from experience". And learning from experi¬ 
ence is, according to Dewey, both active and passive. That is, 
in order to learn about things we must act with and on them. This 
is so because a thing is of no significance in and of itself. A 
thing is its relations. What it is, is what it will do. 








* 


:ooo’^ 






it 


0 






4 


■.o;sb<> , m 


q 



' 






35 


It is through what we do in and with the world that we 
read its meaning and measure its value.47 

It is in the sense of interaction with the environment that 

Dewey uses the term "experience” . 

The living undergoes, suffers, the consequencesof its 
own behavior* This close connection between doing and 
suffering forms what we call experience.48 

It is incorrect to interpret the Experimentalist's emphasis 
on "learning from experience" as meaning that the child can learn 
only fron the concrete physical environment—only from doing 
physical things. A pupil*s environment is anything which concerns 
or affects him* His environment might be some abstract and intel¬ 
lectual problem in which he is, as we say, "wrapped up". The 
essence of experience is conscious interaction between subject and 
object, where the object presents some barrier in the path chosen 
by the subject, where the subject must "try" various means of 
overcoming that barrier to his progress. Obviously then, "experi¬ 
ence" need not be physical, and, in fact, limiting it to the 
physical arrests the development of the intellectual powers. 

A flame means nothing to a child until he sticks his finger 
into it. As soon as he does this with the flame, as soon as he 
connects flame with burn he has learned something. He learns more 
as he discovers that he can do other things with a flame such as 
cook, light, destroy, etc. 

Basavely, knowledge results from the perception of the rela- 
tiors which are revealed in our doing. What the child learns are 
the relations—it is these that have meaning and significance. 
"Burn" and "flame" have no meaning in and of themselves. Only 




r;; crciilJ' . 

, s .f,.r-. ^ a-: ;>.C ■ 

X ii,l 'utt’j'X.lV'i 

. ' ■ ■ - £c:;n 

■J> ]■ C‘ t 

. , . , ■ .“.'.f'g 0 : iT 

* 

■ ' • ; ... ..• • ’ - « 


r \ j .j. j .1 ‘' -X - • -i >. • 

. . ■. o ! 11 - 



/.•: . ~~x. ■, L ,1;. ■; J--o - j . j: ^ V- - 

. ■ o - 0 :. v. 

• . : 

;} i . , j • 



. ; ' - - - 



■ 

y.:'o 

J , o '. 1 t U •• • ’ o •' , 


...... . % . 


• •• •• .» . ■ ' • • - 

. 

_v. ,... '. . ■.. . ...'. •. * .. h.j - - 


j • 

.. • • 



:: : , . . 

,' :j-j . j- -x rb a .:o od s.-Jj oS 

. . . ■ 


: -j . ■: _ . -* ...;-v; ' -• x . n:' t v '- -J ■ 


; . , ' nx l ' 


* ■. 

; cv . J- cha i tu* o ~x ota 

. 

: . ' hi . : 1 .... : 


36 


when the causal relation between them is established does either 
have meaning. 

To "learn from experience" is to make a backward and for¬ 
ward connection between what we do to things and what we 
enjoy or suffer frcm things in consequence. Under such 
conditions, doing becomes a trying; an experiment with 
the world to find out what it is like; the undergoing 
becomes instruction—discovery of the connection of 

things.^ 

Or again, in reference to the changed attitude toward know¬ 
ledge generated by the discoveries of biological science: 

Experience becomes an affair primarily of doing. The 
organism...does not wait passively and inert for some¬ 
thing to impress itself upon it from without. The 
organism acts in accordance with its own structure, 
simple or complex, upon its surroundings...the inter¬ 
action of organism and environment, resulting in some 
adaptation which secures utilization of the latter, is 
primary fact, the basic category. Knowledge is relega¬ 
ted to a derived position, secondary in origin, even if 
its importance, when once it is established, is over¬ 
shadowing, Knowledge is not something separate and self- 
sufficing, but is involved in the process by which life 
is sustained and evolved. The senses lose their place 
as gateways of knowing and take their rightful place as 
stimuli to action.-^ 0 

Thus, Imowledge and learning are the result of man’s active 
process of integrating—adjusting to real problems in real experi¬ 
ence. They themselves, as a result, are integrated. 

Not to learn frcm experience is to learn in a vacuum, which 
is not to learn at all. It is a process of registering symbols 
without meaning—a process of writing in water. Merely to enumer¬ 
ate the qualities of a thing is not to learn about the thing. To 
learn about a thing is to learn its use, its cause, the relations 
and bearings of it upon other things, physical, psychological, 
social and economic, etc., i*e. to learn its integration. 

Words, the counters of ideas, are, however, easily taken 




?vj;; d : 







37 


for ideas. And in just the degree in which mental acti¬ 
vity is separated frcm active concern with the world, 
from doing something and connecting the doing with what 
is undei’gone, words, symbols, come to take the place of 
ideas.-"* - 

Therefore, the process of thinking is seen to be the discern¬ 
ment of the relation between what we try to do and what happens 
in consequence. From this we learn what to expect from certain 
actions in certain circumstances. As soon as we can do this, but 
not before, we are capable of directing our actions to an end* 

But it is not sufficient for this purpose that we merely observe 
what actions bring about what results in certain circumstances* 

If we are going to be able to direct our actions to an end (if we 
are going to be able to act to the end of resolving our conflicts) 
we must know why one thing follows another. To know merely that 
one thing does follow another is just hit and miss. If we do not 
know why , changing circumstances and unknown forces will make it 
impossible for us to know what to expect. When we do know why one 
thing follows another we are able to control results by controlling 
the circumstances. And thus we are capable of directing our 
actions toward ends. This involves learning in detail the rela¬ 
tions involved—it involves the establishment of a detailed chain 
of connections—i*e., knowledge is integrative* 

Thinking, in other words, is the intentional endeavca? 
to discover specific connections between something 
which we do and the consequence which results, so that 
the two become continuous. Their isolation, and con¬ 
sequently their purely arbitrary going together, is 
cancelled,* a unified developing situation takes place. 

The occurrence is now understood; it is explained; it 
is reasonable, as we say, that the thing should happen 
as it doesv-^ 

Having discovered the specific connections we are capable of 




I, 








vi 0 


G . 7 .v v 


j ' • ■ 7 l ■ ■ , . 






: ' . . " • ,* _ , : ii 

■ 7 G) ; jIO.' 

: - 1 i '. . . ■ ■ . ,. 

Gj: , • : j . 

c J'vj-r ijro'fi ... 0. Cr'VUiOQO G-ir 

. J- g.; g . f / , ; 











38 


working toward an end—we are capable of integrating. Thus we can 
see why Hopkins identified integration with intelligent behavior. 

Through our knowledge of a thing’s relations we have a know¬ 
ledge of the factors that control it—we know its laws. And "... 

being at hand they (the laws) are also capable of being under 

53 

hand”. Hence, said Bacon, "knowledge is power"—power to do, 
power to control oir environment. So it is that knowledge coming 
out of experience—out of our interaction with the environment--is 
turned back upon the environment in order that we might control it. 

Through controlling our environment we gain self-control; 
for through being able to control our environment, we are able to 
direct our actions toward self-initiated ends, and we cease to be 
controlled by it in as much as we have controlled it. The more we 
are able to consciously and wilfully change the environment, the 
less it changes us and the more we are able to determine how it 
will change us in the future. In a word, integrating experience 
leads to increasing freedom. 

On this point Bewey says, "... freedom from restriction, the 
negative side, is to be prized only as a means to freedom which 
is power" P 4 Or again, "The aim of education is the creation of 
self-control" .55 

The Scientific hiethod . From this stand on thinking and knowing 
it follows that the scientific method is not a method exclusive to 
the use of men with test-tubes. The scientific method is merely a 

4 

systematization of the method of effective thinking. The method of 
science is to observe, to hypothesize and to test the hypothesis. 








1 t... . 




0', j 


Jn .0 




o 


■ 'I: 




$ 


. { . • 













' 



39 


And this, of course, is the method of effective thinking. In both 
cases they are called for in the occurrence of a problem. In both 
cases the facts of the situation must be examined. In both cases 
past experience is referred to for suggested (hypothetical) solu¬ 
tions of the problem. Finally, in both cases the hypothesis must 
be tested in fact. Once tested and confirmed the hypothesis becomes 
fact itself and is the solution of the problem. Thus, like scien¬ 
tific knowledge, '’knowledge begins with specific observations that 

define the problem, and ends with specific observations that test 

5§a 

a hypothesis for its solution”. Both thought and theory are 
”tools" of integrative experience. They are not ends but means- 
means to the resolution of conflict in experience. Both thinking 
and science derive their value from the fact that they are instru¬ 

mental to the process of integration . It is because of this that 
the Experimentalists stress the fact that thinking must be experi¬ 
mental. To sum up this point neatly Dewey states: 

Concrete suggestions arising from past experiences, 
developed and nutured in the light of the needs and 
deficiencies of the present, employed as aims and 
methods of specific reconstruction, and tested by suc¬ 
cess or failure in accomplishing this task of readjust¬ 
ment suffice. To such empirical suggestions used in 
constructive fashion for new ends the name intelligence 
is given. Therefore reason is experimental intelligence, 
conceived after the pattern of science.. . n 55 j * 

That integrative thought should be systematized as a method 

(the scientific method) is apparent when we reflect on how easy it 

is, and how ineffectual, to think and do by rule of thumb. The 

experimental method emphasizes the fact that we live in a changing 

world wherein, if we are to solve the problems that arise in it, 

we must face the facts. For a specific problem can be solved only 







. 




j ' . £ . 

. 

a>~ 1 . ‘ ■>. -I o ■' o. . . ;o 




ci-.r; 


' 


j/J 




s - 


yj r o 


;r : i 



j ; i 









C i 



; . ... ... .:-v: : -:c : /.C;':: J-vu' 




iv'; 








.; r. 'j 3; j ... j‘J. ■ J J. £ ■’ 

■ vl.iod* : o .' .: ' ■:? Jv/ .oX*'x .v 


/ ’ J ■ 'i .o I i J 


.'J ‘to 1 


*■ 





40 


if we know the specific facts in that particular case. There is 
no one solution to all problems or class of problems. Our solu¬ 
tions must all arise as hypotheses from observation of particular 
cases. Moreover, the experimental method emphasizes the fact 
that there is no final solution of problems. Though particular 
problems are solved they lead into further problems in which the 
old solution becomes part of the conditions of the new problem. 
(Take for example Newton’s solutions of the problems of space in 
his time. They were true as far as they went, but they merely 
served as stepping stones into the more complex ’’curved space” 
where they no longer apply.) Knowledge froms a continuum, an 
integrated and expanding whole. ’’Ours”, says Dewey, ”is an open 
world, an infinitely variegated one, a world which in the old 
sense can hardly be called a universe at all; so multiplex and far- 
reaching that it cannot be summed up and grasped in one formula.” 
Thus it is the method of science—the experimental method—that is 
all important. The particular lav/s and solutions are derivative 
and temporary—suited to particular conditions and needs. Science 
is “constant in function”, but destroys itself through destruction 
of its purpose (the solution of new problems) if it becomes “con¬ 
stant in existence"• 

Consequently, "...science marks the emancipation of mind from 
devotion to customary purposes and makes possible the systematic 
pursuit of new e nds. It is the agency of progress in action. 
Progress is sometimes thought of as getting nearer to ends already 
sought. But this is a minor form of progress, for it requires 
only improvement of the means of action or technical advance. More 





J :,[j- CiJ-OiVx 


!"• 


Llo'z 


o on 




’ .. (' 




.o.u.'o‘j 


T.i'j ■ 






(I 


[ •- 






7:. n. 


0 .i 



- : ■ v . tar;: a i j v 

■ ■" * .. 'I;- j." 


J .:. Si 




j f> 


Oil J' 


so 


■ 





41 


important modes of progress consist in enriching prior purposes 
and in forming new ones. Desires are not a fixed quantity, nor 
does progress mean only an increased amount of satisfaction* 

With increased culture and new mastery of nature, new desires, 
demands for new qualities of satisfaction, show themselves, for 
intelligence perceives new possibilities of action. This projec¬ 
tion of new possibilities leads to search for new means of execu¬ 
tion, and progress takes place; while the discovery of objects not 

57 

already used leads to suggestion of new ends." 

Man's intelligence and his method of intelligently dealing 
with the world is, thus, creative. Through facing up to problems 
and solving them he is constant ly in the process of wedding past 
experience to present experience which results in the conception 
of future experience. In Dewey's words, intelligent meaningful 
and purposeful living is a process of constantly "reconstructing 
experience". 

The Experimentalists "...regard intelligence, not as the 
original shaper and final cause of things, but as the purposeful 
energetic re-shaper of those phases of nature and life that ob¬ 
struct social well-being. (They) ...esteem the individual not as 
an exaggeratedly self-sufficient Ego which by some magic creates 
the world, but as the agent who is responsible through initiative, 

inventiveness and intelligently directed labor for re-creating the 

58 

world, transforming it into an instrument of intelligence." 

The Concrete and Particular Versus the Abstract and General . 

The experimental method has often been misinterpreted as a method 
of crude and immediate utility which concentrates entirely on the 






' 














42 


concrete and particular, scorning the abstract and general. A 
close examination of the philosophyreveals the incorrectness 
of this interpretation. If the method were limited to the con¬ 
crete, particular and immediately utilizable, there would be no 
justification for calling it experimental, for the essence of the 
experimental method is its flexibility in application to an ever- 
changing and ever-expr-anding range of problems. The method itself 
is the height, of abstraction from successful methods of dealing 
with particular problems. To be limited to the concrete and 
immediate is to be arrested on a low plane of development. As 
the experimentalist theory of knowledge shows, the development of 
knowledge and power depends upon abstraction and generalization 
from past experience which, when added to the concreteness of the 
present situation, results in a theoretical and hypothetical pic¬ 
ture of the future. Thus exclusive concern with the concrete 
and immediate leaves us forever in their grasp--and man's intelli¬ 
gence is no longer creative. The Experimentalist's emphasis on 
the utility is merely an emphasis on the fact that knowledge is 
for use and comes from use. Nothing could have less utility than 
mere concern for immediate utility, for without generalization and 
theory we have no "tools" with which to meet the constant onslaught 
of novel problems. Theory, says Dewey somewhere, is after all the 
most practical of things. But, the Experimentalists add, theory, 
if it is to be valid and useful, must spring from what is concrete 
and actual and be confirmed by what is concrete and actial. 

On this question of abstraction and theory Dewey says: 





I ..:,; o -.vJ 






. 






.0 


.0*'i 




‘.hs. -I 


iY ' ■ 






♦ 

.. ‘ i ■ ■ > ■ 


■iiu", J • 


o . v ..o : 










J " 


* 




( 

: ' .. ■ - ;; : ./ .. 






43 


..•The advantage as an instrumentality is on the side of 
the intellectual tool. Just because it is not formed 
with a special application in mind, because it is a 
highly generalized tool, it is the more flexible in 
adaption to unforseen uses... More definitely, abstrac¬ 
tion is indispensible if one experience is to be applic¬ 
able in other experiences... .Abstraction sets free some 
factor so it may be used. Generalization is the use .*^9 


In reference to the learning situation he says: 


....beans, shoe-pegs, and counters may be helpful aids 
to a realization of numerical relations, but when em¬ 
ployed except as aids to thought—the apprehension of 
meaning—they bedome an obstacle to the growth of arith¬ 
metical understanding. They arrest growth on a low 
plane, the plane of specific physical symbols. Just as 
the race developed especial symbols as tools of calcula¬ 
tion and mathematical reasonings, because the use of 
fingers as numerical symbols got in the way, so the 
individual must progress from concrete to abstract sym¬ 
bols—that is symbols whose meaning is realized only 
through conceptual thinking. And undue absorption at 
the outset in the physical object of sense hampers this 
growth.60 


PART VI 

THE SOCIAL FACTOR IN INTEGRATION 
A question, as yet undealt with, naturally arises; What is 
to be done when the process of individual integration conflicts 
with that of society? The Experimentalists do not deny the possi¬ 
bility of this occurring. In fact they emphasize that it is often 
the case. But, their answer to the question is that such a con¬ 
flict should not and need not occur. In a society where the inter¬ 
action between the individual and social institutions is unimpared 
the question wouldn't arise. What is good for the integrative 
development of society is good for the integrative development of 
the individual and vice versa. 

The supposition that individual and social values (and develop- 




"'■0 






- 

r 

,, „ 

• *.. 


: -V: / U 



J . V 










J":: 












0 DO.Jvtt ,0-D, 




* 

. ■ 






mental processes) will inevitably conflict, say the Experimental¬ 
ists, supposes a false separation of ends and means. The indivi¬ 
dual is not a means to the ends of society, nor is society a means 
to the ends of the individual. Individuals and social institu¬ 
tions depend upon one another and are in constant creative inter¬ 
action. The individual, "in developing to maturity and old age, 
...is conditioned by his growth needs and the accumulated experi¬ 
ence of the culture in meeting these needs. This means that the 

61 

culture affects him and he in turn affects the culture.” The 
individual is what he is because of society, and society is what 
it is because of the individuals that make it up. Individuals 
and society merge in a dynamic developing process. That is, the 
Experimentalists agree that social institutions exist for the 
individual but they believe that the individual is a social crea¬ 
tion. 

Even though social institutions are made for individuals 

"...they are not means of obtaining something for individuals, 

not even happiness. They are means of creating individuals.... 

Individuality in a social and moral sense is something to be 
62 

wrought out." 

As forms of association develop, becoming larger and more 
complex, so the capacities of the individual expand and develop. 
Through the process of ever-increasing social interaction the 
nature of the individual (his interests, abilities, and knowledge) 
expands and develops, and the individual finds his world to be 
one of constantly expanding meaning and value. 



. f ' ' ■ 

■ : • t - 

, 

* 

~... . -rv. ‘ J . .J . ',y± - iUr; ‘i j -• ■ ■ *r. : ’... ; .. 

• < i • ' ' 

•.. . . * + * 


... . 

, 

.... , w , . . .o i ■ -• - -■ 





£ ‘I 


0 








j\.,' J- oi t .-j ^ x *x 


.roc a 





. 


.... 

■ 


- .. , X J iOcc;; j 

. < . 

. . ■. •: - : v> '.i . :: J . .;,J " J 

N -. . • ' . ' ' ' ' e ; : o’. , ' -:. r J -0 r c ;j 

' ' if . . . - 

* . .' ; .. , ; i;. .. .. ;IJ, i j i> .«.o c u( 



45 


Thus we see, 11 •••the individual mind as a function of social 

life—as not capable of operating or developing by itself, but as 

requiring continual stimulus from social agencies, and firing its 

6 3 

nutrition in social supplies.” 

Meaning itself is primarily social. For example: i! The bare 
stimulus of light is not the entire reality; the interpretation 
given to it through social activity and thinking confers upon it 
a wealth of meaning.” 0 ^ 

Society is the process of associating in such a way that 
experiences, ideas, emotions, values are transmitted 
and made common. To this active process, bolh the indi- 
vidual and the institutionally organized may be truly 
said to be subordinate. •2 

So, in this sense, both the individual and social institutions are 

subordinate to the process of socialization. In fact the measure 

of value of a society, says Dewey, is the extent to which it pro- 

motes free intercourse and communication of experience both in- 

66 

ternally and externally. 

The Experimentalists point out that herein lies the supreme 

value and justification of Democracy. For it is the most effiei~ 

ent social system for releasing the full powers and capacities of 

each social individual. It is the system which offers the greatest 

guarantee that the social process will continue to expand* 

Full education comes only when there is a responsible 
share on the part of each person, in proportion to 
capacity, in shaping the aims and policies of the social 
groups to which he belongs. This fact fixes the signi¬ 
ficance of democracy. * 

Hence, the supreme values of the individual are social; his 
integration is social. Since it is through the social process 
that the individual becomes what he is--it is in the social pro¬ 
cess that value and meaning develop for him. 








« * * 

. 

, 

: - ' • 

:r.: : .3 i'J '■ ■■■• 



•1 ' 


'• . ... ... 


. .. ., ■... ; " . . • » 

. 









o'^u a-;' J: c‘. . J j'L. .... i • a.. ... . 


j . J « 












. 
















r ' . . 3 




, . 



, 3 a : 

. ' { 1 ’ ■ 
' : . . . . J < . ' ’■ 

'. . , , . ... i.. .. .. . ' . • 

, 


3 • • ./ 



.'J ' ' ■ 

: ~i. .■ .; ■ ... :* -o 


* 




46 


Nevertheless, the Experimentalists are careful to warn us 


that what has intrinsic value in society is not its institutions 
hut its process of development. We are warned against the 
quietism which develops from believing that since individuals and 
society co-exist they cannot "really" conflict. In fact, Hopkins 


warns us that the lag between social needs and social insti tutions 
has been a common and disasterous occurrence in the history of 
the world. 

Social institutions represent means set up by society 
for conducting interests shared by large numbers of 
individuals. Once conceived, such institutions gradu¬ 
ally tend to become rigid, fixed, and in many instances 
to overlook or neglect the function which they are 
supposed to serve in the process of social adjustments. 

They then become unnarnable to, antagonistic to, and 
sometimes in violent opposition to the thinking going 
on about them. This is especially true when the think¬ 
ing tends toward an improvement of the conditions under 
which the group interests operate...When institutions 
refuse to yield, the individual has little possibility 
of intelligent interaction. 00 

Thus, moral reform is not merely internal change in the indi¬ 
vidual. Social reform is also moral reform—social reform is a 


moral necessity. As Dewey says: "The moral and the social quality 

69 

of conduct are, in the last analysis, identical with each other." ' 


Consequently it is of vital importance to recognize the social 
nature of the individual, for: 


When the self is regarded as something complete within it¬ 
self, then it is readily argued that only internal moral¬ 
istic changes are of importance in general reform. 
Institutional changes are said to be morally external... 
Morals withdrawn from active concern with detailed 
economic and political conditions..And while saints 
are engaged in introspection, burly sinners run the world. * 

*The reader will no doubt note that, since values are a social 
creation, it should follow that moral values, which are identified 
with other values, should also be social. This is precisely the 
view of the Experimentalists. On pages 414-445 "Democracy in 
Education" Dewey states: "As a matter of fact, morals are as 
broad as acts which concern our relationships with others...The 
moral and the social quality of conduct are, in the last analysis, 
identical with each other." 





* 












j :> 








' 


. 





■ 




. 




ih;..::’ 


; c o;: L: ! \i v'!'-: lX - 

t 

: 

, 

: 

■ 








47 


Hence, the theory of integration demands that we, "subject 

every form of organization to continual scrutiny and criticism 

71 

’asking* what sort of individuals are created?" 

PART VII 

EVALUATING IHTHjrRATICN 

Finally, we come to the problem of evaluating integration. 
Since the process of integration is a process of working toward 
an end (a process of problem solving), and since a problematic 
situation generally presents the individual with a number of alter¬ 
natives (a number of ends or ways of solving the problem), the 
process of integration begins with a value judgment. It is for 
this reason that the process of integration is creative. For, 
when the individual selects the end toward which he will work he 
is determining his own future and the future of those things with 
which he interacts. The attitude of the individual in confront¬ 
ing the objective facts of his situation determines how he will 
interact with them and thus determines his and their objective 
future as well as determining the meaning of the interaction and 
its result. For example, what will be the objective and meaning¬ 
ful results of our knowledge of drugs is determined by how we value 
those drugs—what they mean to us. If their value and meaning to 
man is strictly financial, our knowledge of drugs may well result 
in an environment festering with drug addiction. But if their 
value is read in terras of human relations our future will be a 
healthier and happier one. 

The process of integration involves value judgment, i.e., it 
involves a selecting of ends--selecting the direction which the 


















\ 


J : ‘ : 




. . ^ . . 

cl ' ’ ' ' 

' 

. 

- 

. 

, 

• * 




process is going to take. Thus, Dewey says, "Every experience is 

a moving force. Its value can be judged only on the grounds of 

72 

what it moves toward and into.” But, nevertheless, it must be 
recognized that every experience has at least some integration. 

All experiences, to a certain degree at least, carry the past 
through the present to the future and, hence, have significance, 
meaning, and value, etc. Consequently, it is not sufficient 
justification of school experience that it is integrating. We 
cannot be content with merely seeing that the pupil is continually 
integrating his school experience. School experience may easily 
result in undesirable learning, as, for example, when the pupil 
directs his learning toward the end of getting by with the least 
effort. As a result, “discrimination is made between the inherent 
values of different experiences".^ 

In order to discriminate between the various integrations 
possible in any one situation it is necessary that we have a 
standard of value in education. What, then, is to be our standard 
of value? 

Having considered the dynamic nature of value and of experi¬ 
ence itself, we readily see that our standard cannot be sane 
absolute end (in the sense of a goal to be achieved) toward which 
we shall strive under all the variety of circumstances that occur 
in this changing world. Our philosophy,of value, as was constantly 
stressed by Dewey, must be “a philosophy of change". 

If we turn to the process of integration itself we notice that 
it is a cumulative movement. We notice that each integration de¬ 
rives its value from the fact that it not only solves a problem 









■ ' f ■ * ' ■ 

■ 

.. I J'’ ' • - ' ■ " :,vc " v • : ‘ r Y 

. 

0 f : • ' ~ ,v • ’ f tv-0 " i'inr xo U.\ 

' ’ . . <• 0.: - f • ; ■ ■ ' •- ■ ' ' ' ! '■ ; 

t . - ' 1 ♦ 

, 

. 

:-J ! < • » • * 

-.u i: ‘J v; ; ■' ' r ^' 0; ;‘ L f 

; , • < 


j . . ' d:s a .-rv - 

a r'/.j-ri C ..”.J o.v.'i Ti.l . 

j. . a . ./ , ' '• "• * ' ■ ' • v' ' >■' ' -■ ■' ~ ' ; 

;1 7 ' . • 

: ; 

. 

...... : • . . : t . . . - , .• •• ... ■ '■ v ■■ - •' *'■ Y • 

, . . ; . . : ! 

.... . jo- .'. L ■■ r ■■ J v ; a 






49 


for us but it expands our capacity to deal with problems. With 
each integration we find ourselves having adjusted to a wider 
environment. Our world of meaning and significance has become 
richer and our power to control ourselves and our environment 
has increased. Thus the very essence of the process of integration 
is this cumulative expansion of adjustment, meaning and control, 
a process of continual reconstruction of experience. Dewey calls 
it, plainly, "growth", and it is "growth” which is the Experi¬ 
mentalist’s standard of value. 

Since education is development, and since all meaningful 
experience—all meaningful living—is seen by the Experimentalists 
as being integrative development, it is easily seen why the 
Experimentalists equivocate meaningful living and education. 
Education must not, say they, be conceived of as something apart 
from the ordinary stream of life. Living is educative and educa¬ 
tion is living. Hence, the value-standard of living (integrative 
living) is the value standard of education. On this point Dewey 
says : 

Our net conclusion is that life is development, and that 
developing, growing, is life. Translated into its educa¬ 
tional equivalents, this means (i) that the education 
process has no end beyond itself; it is its own end; and 
that (ii) the education process is one of continual re¬ 
organizing, reconstructing, transforming.*4 

So it is that the standard "growth” is the standard of 

education. 

Since in reality there is nothing to which growth is 
relative save more growth, there is nothing to which 
education is subordinate save more education. 

Education is growth. The premotion of education is the pro¬ 
motion of growth and vice versa. That integration, that educative 









m 


Ti 













50 


experience, which is of most value, then, is that which promotes 

growth. We give value to a particular educative experience or 

integration ’’...only when development in a particular line cond- 

76 

uces to continuing growth.. 

The Experimentalists have often been criticized in relaion 
to their standard of value, because it is said that they never 
make it really clear what they mean by ”growth". How, it is 
asked, is "growth" to be defined? What are its contents? 

It is true that the Experimentalists do not give a very 
satisfactory definition of "growth". What they mean by the term 
however, is not too hard to understand when we notice what pro¬ 
cess they refer to by using it. And, the fact is that the term 
"growth" stands for the process of integration. "Growth and 
integration are synonymous terms . 

The following quotations fran three of the leading Experi¬ 
mentalist philosophers should confirm the opinion that "growth" 
and integration are synonymous terms—if that opinion has not 
already been sufficiently confirmed. (Whether or not the Experi 
mentalists themselves fully realize this equivalence is another 
question. As the last section of this thesis will point out, 
there is reason to believe that they don't). 

In defining education (which, we remember, is synonymous 
with growth) Dewey says 

We thus reach a technical definition of education. It 
is that reconstruction or reorganization of experience 
which adds to the meaning of experience, and which in¬ 
creases ability to direct the course of subsequent exp¬ 
erience. (i) The increment of meaning corresponds to 
the increased perception of the connections and continu¬ 
ities of the activities in which we are engaged...An 








-t'V 


■ - . 













51 


activity which brings education or instruction with it 
makes one aware of some of the connections which had 
been imperceptible... (ii) The other side of an educa¬ 
tive experience is an added power of subsequent direction 
or control.'' 

Speaking of .a standard of education, Hopkins says, “The test 

O 

of improvement lies in the integrating effect upon behavior." 

Finally, Kilpatrick states, "Growth...consists in taking more 
and more of life into account...(it is) widening effectual con- 
trol." 79 

Sim e it has been the main point of this thesis so far to 
prove that such is the nature of integration, it shouldn't be 
hard to see why we say that “growth” and integration are synony¬ 
mous terms. 

One further point in relation to “growth" (integration) as a 
standard of value needs to be made. Though.it is true that such 
a standard is a quantitative standard, i.e., we value highest 
that experience which promotes the most growth, it is also true, 
say the Experimentalists, that it is a qualitative standard. 
Critics of this philosophy have said that “growth" is not an 
adequate standard of value because it is merely quantitative. 

They say that, on these grounds, growth in efficiency at burglary 
must be acceptable. In other words, it is said that the standard 
“growth" does not discriminate between good and bad growth. Bewey, 
in "Experience and Education", replies that this argument does not 
hold water. By this standard he says we are warned of integra¬ 
tions and directicns of growth which, though at the time promote 
more growth, finally lead into dead-ends of experience. For 
example, growing into an efficient burglar would stunt social 




t if, 


0 f - 







\y-l. 








52 


growth. ’’Only when a development in a particular line conduces 
to continuing growth does it answer to the criterion of education 

qo 

as growing”. That is to say, educationally good integration is 
that which conduces to continuing further integration. 

Comprehension of the concept of integration leads to certain 
conclusions as to educational practice. 









53 


CHAPTER III 

CURRICULUM UvEPLIGATIONS 


PART I 

EDUCATION AMD THINKING 


The primary significance of this philosophy of education is 
that the only experience that is educative is the experience of 
dealing with a problem. By "dealing with a problem" we refer to 
the process wherein the individual takes two things (the present 
problematic situation, along with his attitudes and values derived 
from the past) from which he forges a third (a solution or new 
integration). Simply, the only educative experience is that which 
demands real thought. Thus, the educative process is that of 
thinking and learning to think.* 

Bodies of information (facts, figures, techniques, theories, 
etc.) can be consumed or imprinted upon the mind by the barrel- 
full, and not one iota of real learning or knowledge will result 
unless they are somehow thrown into the machinery of thought. 
Bodies of information must be amalgamated with purpose and action 
(mental or physical). They must be taken in so that they do some¬ 
thing as yet undone which the learner feels needs to be done. 
Unless the learner asks himself, "so what?", and forges for him¬ 
self a truly self-satisfying answer, there will be no learning. 

Without this intimate and personal machinery being set to 
work, impressed though they may be, however neatly filed away to 
be efficiently reproduced upon request, bodies of information 
will be meaningless and valueless. 

* We use "thinking", of course, in the sense of problem solving 
and not in the sense of mere contemplation. 











* 


; ,=■' •: 


. . 


. i, 








a:; 


. -;i \... ... ' rjiXo... . !o V- : - - ' '... , ; , J. f-\ j ; ii ■;.* 

..a' ..!v;. ... . . .. • . . i ‘ . - 

. . . 


. 

c '..... t ... ' . • .. i ..... . : . • ' .. 

» 

* 

• • 

■ 







, , ... l ' : . 

.. .. .. ' . ..... ..., .r-uv: si rx!X f<0 

. • . . 

•• :i. 

. 





-Li if if : .. L : • ? j ■ -J lf.i 






. 



5k 


Perhaps, yes, bodies of information merely stored in the 
memory may someday be taken frcm their filing cabinet and, if not 
too badly withered and faded with age, they may be used. If so, 
they will be educative and have meaning in proportion to their 
importance in the purpose they serve and in proportion to the 
importance of the purpose itself. If this happens, it offers no 
proof that the learner’s former experience was educative. It 
proves, rather, that he has now educated himself and, instead of 
referring to some book for the required material, he has referred 
to that dusty old filing cabinet so proudly constructed by his 
teachers and sadly mislabelled a mind. Moreover, it is highly 
unlikely that bodies of information which are taken in with little 
or no meaning will be remembered any length of time. 

All education is,in a real sense, self-education. Nowhere 
is there a person who is not self-educated. Others may aid and 
inspire the process of your education but they cannot perform it 
for you. Refer to a text-book and you are observing a memorial 
which honors someone's job of self-education. The book is the 
product of his education. But though the book may be yours by 
physical possession, the education is his and you cannot merely 
take it from him nor can he merely give it to you. The closest 
thing to taking the education from a text-book that can happen is 
that you can repeat the struggles of the author, facilitated by 
his handing you the raw materials. Only when you worry and wonder 
and ponder as did the author can you learn what is in the book.* 

* From this it should be clear that, rather than a halt in the 
process of learning, discussion and debate in the classroom are 
excellent teaching methods. They are very valuable for raising 
problems, exposing loose ends that need to be connected, and, in 
general, stimulating thought. 





. 

,. ' ■ • ' ■ 








. 

!J . i • ' 





. 

. ■ ' , ' . . , ' . r., . 

' 

- , , V . ' . ' ‘ '■ . . ‘ . 

t ' 

. 





■ '..:c . f .. . 

' - . J:... . • 0 < \ 

i' 

- 

• c “ ' 







55 


Commit it to memory page by page, and that merely, and you will 
know nothing in consequence. You will have merely addbd to your 
all-but-useless filing cabinet of responses. 

There is no suggestion in this theory that immediate utility 
sets the limits on what is and will be learned. For it is impos¬ 
sible to teach a fact together with all the possible purposes it 
can serve and meanings it can have. Certainly, as has been 
pointed out, old knowledge finds its chief use in serving new pur¬ 
poses and thus resulting in new knowledge. So it is that we must 
expect that much of what is learned will, in a sense, be filed 
away. But, if it is to be learned in the first place, it must go 
through the thinking-mill. Thus, though it is necessary that the 
learner have in his possession the “tools” of thought, the posses¬ 
sion of the “tools” of thought no more makes a thinker than the 
possession of the tools of carpentry makes a carpenter. The thinker 
must be able to use his tools, and the only way he can do this is 
by using them before he stores them for future use. If he doesn't 
use them at first he will not realize their significance, and thus 
will not be able to realize their usefulness in the future. 

The main interest of the educator is to see that the pupil 
learns to think effectively through practice in thinking. The 
importance of the tools of thought is entirely derivative and 
secondary. Too often, however, it is taken as a serious criticism 
of this kind of education that progress in this development cannot 
be accurately measured. It is said that we must make a science 
out of the study of education, and in order to have an accurate 
science we must be able to measure accurately. Consequently, 









. i i'i;i, 



. . .! 


;j\ ;o,.; i: o '■ id ' 1 






■ ’ 




; 







with this attitude, what could be more natural than to emphasize 


the consumption of facts, figures, skills, techniques, theories, 
etc. Such things are very nicely suited to measuring. But 
efforts in this direction do not tend to make a science out of 
the study of education, but tend, rather, to reduce education to 
the science of psychology or, more accurately, a science of 
stimulus—response neurology. Effective thinking and methods of 
thinking, as well as correct intellectual attitudes, etc., cannot 
be stretched out on a table and measured. At best they can be 
estimated, as, for example, on the non-objective and essay type 
examination. This is because meaning and the whole process of 
integrating is, as we have seen, not merely quantitative nor merely 
objective. What the value and meaning of a learning situation will 
be cannot be forecast so as to be measured quantitatively. Learn¬ 
ing results in a qualitative change in the whole (though perhaps 
slight) which cannot be measured quantitatively. Psychology has 
its place in education, but, as Bev/ey points out in n The Sources 
of the Science of Education", it is not the place of Psychology 
to decide what educational philosophy or practice should be: 

No conclusion of scientific research can be converted 
into an immediate rule of educational art. For there 
is no educational practice whatever which is not highly 
complex; that is to say, which does not contain many * 
other conditions and factors than are included in the 
scientific finding.-*- 

Further, he states: 

There are those who would restrict the term (science) 
to mathematics or to disciplines in which exact results 
can be determined by rigorous methods of demonstration. 

Such a conception limits even the claims of physics and 
chemistry to be sciences, for according to it the only 
scientific portions of these subjects is the strictly 
mathematical. 




' 


t i .. i ■ , - d ' i j 1 J d ' .. 

. ■ ■ .V';. , ...: ...: • r j. 




. 


' ■ • 1 


©o " 

v. v;.' l.../ J j a 


' 


d- i 






d’ < LdU p i>C 


J 


; ’£< 


. 


:0;r,3o' J 


' 




hiuoyiy. o$*iv okioiB\ 

. Cif ‘XO 1 ., Q$ 

. 

• • -. ' v:- ; .1. .re? : : J'-' oofiOO .: :IO:.rlp 

: ' ;j. ': .. . v ' -xi ■ ..j ppeJ o 1: ; o 





To be scientific, says Dewey, a subject need only have 
"systematic methods of enquiry” , which give us understanding and 
control of facts, 

PART II 

THE NEEDS, INTERESTS, AND ABILITIES OF THE PUPIL 

$ 

Beginning with the Pupil , If experience is meaningful and 
educative because it is integrative, then the educator must con¬ 
sider the needs, interests, and abilities of the pupil when select¬ 
ing the object of learning. In fact, it is of paramount importance 
that we "begin with the pupil”. The pupil comes to the educator 
already equipped with a complex of purposes (actual and potential), 
attitudes, knowledge, and interests. That is, we are presented 
with a pupil who is an integrated whole. If what we wish him to 
learn has no relation to this meaning-bacground, if it cannot be 
fitted into or used to expand what he already knows, desires and 
needs, then, having no relation to what the child is already, the 
object of learning will not affect what he is to be—it will be 
meaningless. The major consideration in selecting what is to be 
learned is the particular condition of the whole pupil. 

This principle applies not only to such obvious situations 
as trying to teach a pupil algebra before he has mastered simple 
arithmetic but also to a myriad of other situations less obvious. 
For example, the fine points of formal grammar have traditionally 
proven to be difficult, detested, and useless to the majority of 
pupils who found no interest in the subject or actual use for it. 

It was ”so much Greek 1 to them. We all know how difficult it is 





. 

. ■ - • • ■ o . i' • • ■ $ 


i 



' ‘ , . , : " . ' 
.. ' . ' ' , - , ' < - ... . i : , ; •' i 

‘ 

*. 

. ' : . ■ ! 

; '\i . 1 ; ; At: ^ ; ..> ... ; K>“ J 

, ; . . . « . 


' . 

... . . . 

, .. .: .. .' < . .' f . ' 

--:a ' ; vt J- J- ; t X... .... 

4 

. 


' 

- 

. 

' 

. ■. * ' . • : 1 ; . . I .;/■. 

i 



58 


for adolescents to understand and appreciate the motivations of 
people in history or novels, simply because they ’’haven't had 
the experience” ♦ Or again, it should be no cause for wonder v/hen 
adolescents fail to respond to moralizing on social-consciousness 
and the co-operative spirit when they are subjected to the constant 
barrageof hate, lust, selfishness, and brutality that is current 
in the movies, books, magazines, and in news reports of gangsterism 
in politics, "killer raids”, etc. Certain art-forms cannot be 
appreciated because the pupils, and often the teacher, are not 
familiar with the idiom. 

Nor can the teacher be satisfied with merely considering the 
needs of the class as a whole. "There is also an inclination to 
propound aims which are so uniform as to neglect the specific 
powers and requirements of an individual , forgetting that all 
learning is somethirg which happens to an individual at a given 
place and time .* 0 This warning does not mean to suggest that the 
course of studies must be built up on a strictly individualistic 
basis| that, in a class roan of twenty-five pupils, there may be 
twenty-five different courses of study. Except in rare cases, 
individuals, because they are social products, are individual 
variations on a general theme. There are always general and 
relatively constant conditions to be found in the class room which 
make certain learning objects and methods generally required. 
Obviously, for example, reading and number-work are generally 
required in grade one. The significance of this warning is that 
the teacher must always allow for flexibility in the course of 
studies and the methods of teaching. In teaching, let us say, 















■ JTXflCf 


< 




' 






’ v.' 







:j- J, 






t 








I: i 


. 


aiJ v i : ‘:r. y: r o ;oJ 


. 






59 


> 

an arithmetical concept to a class the teacher is wasting a good 
deal of his effort if he isn’t constantly checking on individual 
difficulties; for it is these difficulties which reveal that this 
pupil needs to go back a step or two before he can comprehend the 
subject under consideration, or that another pupil requires a 
different approach. In social studies a variety of interests 
and needs will be found within the scope of any one topic. One 
pupil may be willing to put forth a good deal of effort on some 
particular research. Another may need and be ready for experience 
in organization and leadership of a committee, etc., etc. 

‘At all times the teacher should avoid having cut-and-dried 
ideas of the method of handling the content, or the result, of 
any topic to be learned. There is no telling precisely what can 
be learned and how it will be learned by the individual pupil. 

If an attempt is made to rigidly limit the method and outcome, the 
teacher will not only be disappointed but will also be severely 
limiting the educative effect of the work. Individual differences 
must be allowed for. To ignore this is to ignore the fact that 
the pupil must ultimately educate himself and that the teacher’s 
job is to aid in the process, because he cannot actually do it 
for the pupils. 

Consideration of the Value-Stress in Adolescence . A special 
application of this principle merits consideration. Hopkins 
points out that various stages of growth in education produce 
’’crises 1 ’, which the educator must aid the pupils in overcoming. 

”A crisis in growth”, he says, ”may be regarded as a situation to 
be met for which the learnerfe previous experience has not adequacy 





, ' X' r ‘ ' • . 

.: . - ' ‘ x 


'XX - 





. X/ .V .‘.v : X; .X r :! X 'XX .7 X Xo'.tc ,' X . J- . 

. X' . - : ' : '' j- ' ,! 7 ' . ;X. ‘ .. . >) ■" r ' > d l X "... J ‘ 

' 

* . ■ I 

, 

[ 

0, i ... . .. , . 'X' 

. J X t • d ' ■ ^ X J' ' : , 

« . 

. 

. 

' 

' 

■ V: '• ' X , . . . od , f\d-X:;X'70 '. 1 

'■ :r...... . X . X;. XX,. ■. X* ■ ■ ; 



‘■Of... 


6o 


prepared him; what is lacking may be knowledge, feeling-release, 
or sense of value.That is the pupil finds himself faced with 
a frustrating problem because he hasn't the knowledge, the emotional 
adjustment, or the proper sense of direction, which areneeded to 
resolve his conflict* 

The stage, he goes on to say, where all three of these factors 
are most generally lacking is that of pubescence and early adoles¬ 
cence (approximately grades seven to eleven). It is at this time 
that the pupil, emerging from childhood, begins to feel the need 
of taking responsible control of his own development* Generally, 
he lacks the equipment and ability. 

At this stage the pupil begins to wonder about the relations 
of various fields of knowledge. He wants to know what bearing 
they have upon one another and what bearing they have upon living. 

It is here that he begins to note and be worried about the conflict 
between the real and the ideal* Which is most valid and why? Here 
it is that his emotional attitudes begin to conflict with the 
adult world. He feels the need of responsibility and independence 
and yet his approach to this leads to conflict with parent and 
teacher, etc. In this period he begins to make conscious choice 
of relations with others. His choices are not always approved of 
by others, nor do they always satisfy himself. 

In brief, this is "essentially a value-stage in growth." 

Most of his problems are problems of value-judgment which are 
frustrated by the lack of a developed sense of value, lack of 
emotional adjustment to his new world (resulting in a conflict 
between childhood attitudes and more mature purposes) and also 



. ' ... . f 

.. .. 

J "■ t "• .£. .'O. u : 

.. . e --: ' . • V'. . ; - ' ■ « ' 

o J' X .. t - ’ ' t 

, oz ■ . ■ I i - ■ 

.... ' ,/ .J .0 ' 0 

- ," ' ' ' , • ' ' : - • 

, 

,l i 

... j.. - J C" ■£•* « • - 

.. . : iw ... • 

. . 

.r . . . : ' . ' : 

.. . ' t j { ' 







* 



■ 










>' ......... . . I. .. 



. 

I 





. 










• « 

. 


. 


. . ' . . . • ' i r v ■" , i.i’lO fl -r-.V'J 




61 


lack of knowledge. The school, as a result, must he equipped to 
help him answer value questions, to take advantage of this need 
and interest in order that he might make a satisfactory adjust¬ 
ment. 

Mishandling of these vital and formative years is chronic 
and the results are all too obviously exemplified in young people 
who are indifferent to responsibility and who are anti-social. 

This is the period where personality adjustment should be one of 
the prime concerns of the school. And it is not sufficient that 
the school establishes a guidance program or course in personal 
and social problems. 

The whole curriculum should emphasize the social and value 
sides of its subjects. Knowledge must be bent toY*ard meaning and 
value. The why must receive heavier weighting than the how and 
the what . This is the time that social, economic, political, and 
personal problems should be emphasized. Pat answers and formulas, 
teacher ignorance and indifference are deadly at this stage. At 
this stage the pupil is particularly penetrating, unsophisticated 
and honest. Discussion and thought must be encouraged. The emo¬ 
tional and aesthetic side of the communicative arts must be 
stressed. There are many barriers to this vitally needed adjust¬ 
ment. Pupils are prevented from full exploration of value problems 
by weaknesses in the teachers and the school organization. Tea¬ 
chers are often too timid to deal with such problems either because 
of lack of understanding themselves or because they feel that such 
questions are taboo in school. They often feel that, bedause there 


'• 










j. ; . i 





■ 














seems to be no final and complete answer to such problems, or be¬ 
cause the pupils n lack experience”, such things cannot be dealt 
with, forgetting that if the pupil is not allowed to find out 
about these things in school he will more than likely find out 
about them in some very undesirable way or from seme very undesir¬ 
able source. The attitude of the teacher is often that such ques¬ 
tions are a waste of time when there is so much formal material 
which must be covered (most often it is because the course of 
studies is so heavy with formal material). This error speaks for 
itself. Subjects in school are often so specialized that integra¬ 
tion is impossible. Most of all there is a great danger in the 
discipline of the school. The procedure of behavior is dictated 
with little or no satisfactory explanation. The teacher fails to 
show respect for the pupil as an individual. Too seldom the pupil 
is encouraged to regulate his own behavior through an intelligent 
appreciation of his particular situation. Sympathy for the pro¬ 
blems and frustrations of the pupil in this period when he most •• 
needs it is often conspicuously lacking. 

Hence, the teacher and the school must solve a few 
problems of their own if they are to properly fulfill the func¬ 
tions of educating. 

Selecting from Pupil Interests and Needs . Basing the object 
of learning upon the present needs, interests and abilities of the 
pupil naturally makes the task of the educator more difficult 
than if he merely follows a rigidly laid-down course of studies 
based upon seme concept of preparing the pupil for the future. It 
is not simply a matter of observing where the interests of the 




oj'ci. ■ j.:,; *:.i : ry.i < s 

, 


. 

' 

. 

- 





■ ' - . 

. ; ... ■ ■ ;■ , J ■■■. ' *’J ' ’ - 

' l . ' ■■ . j/.i '■ ; 

... . , . i,'X 

,: ■ V ;; : 0;* o o ;; ■ :; 




63 


pupils lie. Though the object of learning must be designed to 
satisfy a real and present need, at the same time the teacher 
must be careful to see that the present needs which are utilized 
are those which are capable of being expanded into a "fuller, 
richer and also more organized form." A pupil's present interests 
and needs will not be educationally fruitful if he hasn't a back¬ 

ground of meaningful experience upon which to base an expansion . 

For example, the fact that a six-year-old is concerned about the 
interest on some small sum which his parents have placed in the 
bank for him does not make bank interest automatically a topic of 
study. At this age the child obviously lacks the proper back¬ 
ground for such a study. Our subject-matter must always be chosen 
with reference to the pupil*s past, for it is in his past, we 
remember, that we find the source of meaning and significance, A 

topic, says Dewey, "...can expand into the future only as it also 

6 

enlarges to take in the past". 

Thus, in order that the pupil’s past and present experience 
ma^ be fruitfully broadened, the educator must be capable of 
selecting for development its most premising aspects. If he fails 
to do this, far frem avoiding what some believe to be the crime 
of outside interference with the child’s integration, the educator 
is guilty of withholding from the pupil the gifts of knowledge 
generated and handed down from age to age of social intercourse. 

"There is no point," says Dewey, "in his being more mature 
if, instead of using his greater insight to help organize the con¬ 
ditions of experience of the immature, he throws away his insight... 
The mature person, to put it in moral terms, has no right to withhold 








■ 




J’ 











■ 


- 







1 


t 





from the young on given occasions whatever capacity for sympathetic 

7 

understanding his own experience has given him .’ 1 

In other words, the teacher must guide the experience and 
development of the pupils. And this is a constant job for the 
pupils are always developing in one way or another. But this guid¬ 
ance must not degenerate into external control. The Experimental¬ 
ists do not mean the teacher to let the pupil follow his own whims 
and fancies, nor do they mean the teacher to absolutely control 
them. To do a proper job the teacher must, first of all, be con¬ 
stantly alert to perceive the develop ment of new interests, 
attitudes and tendencies. Secondly, he must, from reference to 
his own broad and considered experience, be able to select which 
are conducive to continued growth and which are detrimental (i.e., 
he must be capable of correct value-judgment). Finally, in order 
not to impose upon and disrupt the pupil*s process of integrating, 
the teacher must have a sympathetic understanding of what is going 
on in the pupil's mind, and, rather than forcing the pupil in a 
certain direction, he should guide and encourage the pupil into 
the proper channels through suggestion, arousal of interest, and 
the provision of opportunity. 

Thus, the teacher at the same time as he checks the pupil’s 
past, must also have an eye to the future. He must be Quick to 
pick out those interests and abilities of the pupil which can be 
expanded into broader fields. An interest in relating stories, 
for example, may be cultured and nursed into an ability to write 
creatively. A curiosity about nature, properly nurtured, may 
develop into an interest in science, etc., etc. The thousand and 










r 


J 1' ' 


■ 


■J. 


. .. ' a . / ■ i; 


c . v . 








65 


one little interests and abilities encountered in the class-room 


hide many a potential source of achievement and the accompanying 
sense of ability and confidence so necessary to the individual. 


Dewey's statement on this point is as follows:. 


It th\j.s becomes the office of the educator to select 
those things within the range of existing experience 
that have the premise and potentiality of presenting new 
problems which by stimulating new ways of observation 
and judgment will expand the area of further experience. 
He must constantly regard what is already won not as a 
fixed possession but as an agency and instrumentality 
for opening new fields which make new demands upon 
existing powers of observation and of intelligent use 
of memory. Connectedness ingrowth must be his constant 
watchword.° 


Preparation for the Future . Consequently, there is a real 
sense in which the pupil must be prepared for the future. The 
pupil cannot be prepared for the future in the sense that the 
supposititous future is the all-controlling factor in selecting 
what is to be"learned" • Nor can the educator prepare the pupil 
for the future merely by transmitting to him bodies of information 
and skills which he may need at some future date. (On the other 
hand, of course, it is equally disasterous to ignore the future 
and sacrifice it to the present, for this reduces education to 
mere present-enjoyment, narrow utility, and arrest on a low plane 
of development.) The present must be the meeting place of past 
and future. Heal preparation for the future—the only actual 
preparation possible-consists of ensuring that the pupil gets 
out of the present all there is in it for him. It consists in 


him gaining knowledge and value from his present experience which 
will provide a stepping-stone for future expansion. The more 
meaningful and integrated the present experience is, the more 




i 




8 " 










meaningful and integrated the future experience can be. 

We always live at the time we live and not at some 
other time, and only by extracting at each present time 
the full meaning of each present experience are we pre¬ 
pared for doing the same thing in the future. This is 
the only preparation which in the long run amounts to 
anything.' 

When Dewey says: "If at whatever period we choose to take a 

person, he is still in the process of growth, then education is 

not, save as'a by-product, a preparation for something caning lat- 
fo 

er"—when he says this it is obvious fran what has been said that 
he cannot mean that the teacher need not consider the future use 
of the pupil's knowledge. Dewey is fully aware that the teacher 
must be concerned to lead the pupil into knowledge and means of 
control which have been socially evolved and which are socially 
necessary. What he does mean is that the teacher, rather than 
conceiving of education as the acquisition of set answers to set 
problems, should be mainly concerned with the present widening of 
the pupil's ability to deal effectively with problems and particu¬ 
larly novel problems. If we think of education as merely the 
quantitative accumulation of a prescribed set of information, 
skills, and techniques, then we limit knowledge to what has been 
somehow acquired in the past. We build up the attitude in the 
pupil that new knowledge is either given by someone else or is 
come upon accidentally. 

Such an attitude is in contradistinction to the proper atti¬ 
tude* As we have already pointed out, knowledge is power to deal 
with novel situations and new knowledge is built upon old. The 
pupil must learn that what he already knows is an instrumentality 


„ i 

... 

■ 

, 






< 




* 

■' ■ • r . 





if :l " > 





. .. . ‘ 


p • 



. i ' j. 




' 

. - : ■ : ■ '' • j ' l - 


...' : . .■ I 


t * 

w '... j : ' J ’ J ■' ' i .. i v'i^O 1 'js £'<' OdQO 

' ' . . ' ♦ • 

. . ' ... !' . ' 

. • - . ..... . 

, ' j . .. .. ; ' ...V i ' . .■ : ’ . .1 ' Ui o > t . ' - ’ j r . - - ) 












hi . i 


' 

. 






- ' J . : 'j l J :■ f , 


* 


. . - ; .: ...; . : -a :v.; l: • 1 >J ; ' /-»n - .... 


: . : ... j ; -j ; -J- ;y ./j ... ; 









67 


for learning what needs to be known now; that its power is not 
limited to solving the problems whereby it was taught; that its 
main value is that it can, by abstraction and generalization, be 
applied to novel situations. This is one of the main significances 
of the concept of education as growth--growth seen as the "continu¬ 
ous reconstruction of experience". 

This concept, of course, has application to class-room pro¬ 
cedure, There are many ways in which the teacher can encourage 
the proper attitude toward learning. The most obvious method is 
for the teacher at all times to insist that the pupil call upon 
his own resources in solving problems; he must discourage the ex¬ 
pectation of being handed information on a platter; he must always 
encourage thought. The unquestioning acceptance of and. reference 
to authority must be discouraged, and the teacher must insist that 
ail opinion be backed with- fact and reason. Pat answers, also, 
must be revealed for what they are. Bather than answering ques¬ 
tions, the teacher should concentrate on raising them. 

Summing this concept up, Kilpatrick says: 

It is the active use and adaptation of the old in and for 
new situations that we must stress. As teachers we must 
make ourselves progressively unnecessary.-^ 

Regulating the Learning Environment with Consideration for 

the Pupil . This brings us to a consideration of the objective and 

subjective factors in educational experience, which, though they 

have been dealt with by implication in the preceding paragraphs, 

merit some special attention. 

If the nature of experience (including its meaning) is derived 
from integrating the nature of what is objectively ' experienced 














' 


r 










0 










J' ; ■J' JS‘ 






7' 70 vi 



7 ' 










$ 





i j7. t ,o J’7> ... oo’.C ■ j:»v 












68 


with the nature of who is experiencing, we must beware of letting 
education experience be directed entirely from within or entirely 
from without. Traditional education violated the principle of 
interaction between the objective and subjective factors of experi¬ 
ence by letting the objects of learning almost entirely determine 
what the learning experience would be. The resulting lack of mean¬ 
ing and use has been dealt with already. The reaction away from 
this, fostered by various schools of progressive thought in educa¬ 
tion, has, however, tended to go to the opposite extreme. "This 
happens whenever the place and function of the teacher, of books, 
of apparatus and equipment, of everything which represents the 
products of the more mature experience of elders, is systematically 
subordinated to the immediate inclinations and feelings of the 
young. This violation of the principle of interaction from 
the side of the subjective is generally justified by saying that 
it avoids external control and the limiting of freedom of experi¬ 
ence. But this is no real justification; it is merely a mistaken 
notion of the nature of experience. No experience takes place in 
a vacuum. There are sources outside the individual which invariably 
give rise to and condition experience. This is a fact which cannot 
be avoided. The principle of interaction, thus, suggests that the 
educator is responsible for choosing and regulating these objective 
factors so that the maximum educative result may be achieved. In 
other words, the educator must help select what is to be learned. 

So that it will be stimulating, challenging and suited to the needs 
and abilities of the pupil. If the objective factor is not intelli¬ 
gently regulated it will be accidentally regulated, and there is 









- 









0 




; ■ ' :f ■ ■ o 


« 
















69 


no greater tyranny than accidental and unintelligent condition¬ 
ing. 

Moreover, this intelligent regulation of the learning environ¬ 
ment is by no means a limitation of the pupil’s freedom, nor an 
interference with his integration. The maximum educative result of 
an experience is the result which gives the most knowledge and 
hence the most control and freedom (if we are to take freedom in 
the Experimentalist sense of power-to-do, as opposed to mere lack 
of restriction). 

The pupil’s real experience makes certain demands on him-- 
places him in a position of real need—but his desires and impulses 
do not necessarily correspond to this need. The pupil who, for 
example, has a feeling of inadequacy, may quite naturally feel the 
desire to retire from any group activity. His need, which an • 
experienced teacher will immediately recognize, is for some form 
of achievement that will give him confidence in himself. Obviously 
it would be most harmful to let him folio?/ his impulse. The 
teacher, then, is obliged to present him with objective conditions 
fran which he can gain mastery and from which he can take pride in 
accomplishment. Or, consider the case in which a pupil’s bullying 
and selfish attitudes were rooted out by the simple expedient of 
placing him in a class where the other pupils had learned to place 
high value on cooperation. Thus, it is up to the teacher to 
intelligently regulate the objective conditions of the learning 
situation. 

Another important aspect of this problem is the failure to 

















70 


consider the subjective side of the learning situation. It is 
common error, for example, to think that a pupil learns only the 
particular thing he is studying at the time. This ignores the 
fact that the pupil, at the same time as he is learning a particu¬ 
lar thing, is also learning attitudes, likes, and dislikes. And 
it is these attitudes which are generally more important than the 
particular topic of learning. "For these attitudes are fundament¬ 
ally what count in the future. The most important attitude that 
can be formed is the desire to go on learning# M ^3 Consequently 
the importance of interest in the object of learning is apparent. 
(Interest and effort will be dealt with under another heading.) 

If the pupil feels no need for the object of learning, if it serves 
none of his purposes, if it cannot be related to what he knows, if 
learning is a drudgery, not only will it tend to be meaningless, 
the pupil is actually "robbed" of a capacity for a particular 
branch of knowledge because he has come to dislike and avoid it. 

PART III 

LEARNING PROP FXPFRIHICCa 

If the value of an integrative experience is to be judged on 
the grounds of what it leads into (how much of an expansion it 
entails, and whether or not it conduces to continuing further 
integration), then the educator must consider what kind of an 
environment is mos£ conducive to this expansion. Such an environ¬ 
ment will, obviously, have to be one which has real significance 
for the pupil and which offers him real challenge. That is, it 
must be an environment in which there is a felt need to learn 










, 

. ‘ » 

. 

<• 

XX-J. . 












T ■' .. . 




'. 






.. X .. X. ....; o ■ •j ■ - } 

r ' X ....; , o 

, . ....... - - ? • 

* 




j. ... d 




X 










• . ... /... 


• ' . : c. , • : .' . J ■. ox;£ :. X ;o. ax I . •. t r >rt i v, . 

, . 




... 




















because of real lacks and conflicts. It must be environment which 
offers real experience. It is this problem that the Experimental¬ 
ist has in mind when he says that the child must learn from experi¬ 
ence- -must learn by doing. Their concept of an experience is a 
situation in which the pupil is adjusting to the demands of his 
environment by resolving the conflicts that occur in it. Experi¬ 
ence is oppQSed to mere impression. Experience is an interaction 
of subject and object, where the subject is working upon the object 
as well as being affected by the object* It is no experience for 
the pupil if facts are merely imprinted upon his mind. Though 
this kind of thing may be called an experience, it is certainly 
not learning experience, since learning comes from integration. 
Thus, personal experience 0 is the kind in which the person has a 
personal stake and interest. 

School Experience linst be Belated to Living. This means 
that there must be an 11 organic connection between educational and 
personal experience 0 .^ If education does not come from experi¬ 
ence in which there is personal purpose rather than artificial and 
imposed purpose, it does not really ccme at all. If school experi¬ 
ence is isolated from the rest of experience, the learning which 
results will be isolated from use and value outside of school. 
Knowledge comes from solving problems, and in as much as the pro¬ 
blems are artificial and divorced from the real needs, interests, 
and purposes of the pupil, the resulting knowledge will be useless 
to his real purposes in life. Educational experience must, thus, 
be lifelike and vital rather than cloistered. It must be a matter 


of using what is known in order to discover what needs to be known. 









. o o.: f :> 











72 


Referring to the fact that it is common for adults to wonder 
what has become of all the learning they amassed in their school¬ 
days, Dewey says: 

When the question is asked, then, what has become of 
it, where has it gone to, the right answer is that it 
is still there in the special compartment in which it 
was originally stowed away. If exactly the same con¬ 
ditions recurred as those under which it was acquired, 
it would also recur and be available. But it was 
segregated when it was acquired and, hence, is so dis¬ 
connected from the rest of experience that it is not 
available under the actual conditions of life .^ 

Tlie Special Demand hade by Industrial Society . Kilpatrick 
points out that the modern age makes a special demand that educa¬ 
tion be strongly related to life outside the school. This is be¬ 
cause the family and the community in the industrial age cannot 
provide the regular and regulated education that used to be pro¬ 
vided by these institutions. Previous to the industrial era the 
family and community presented the child with the educative envir¬ 
onment of a more or less complete economic unit, and in this envir¬ 
onment the child learned the source of basic values and motivations 
in his every day life, which meant a resultant understanding and 
control. Dewey makes the same point when he says:- ’’The entire 
industrial process stood revealed, from the product!on...of the 
raw materials till the finished article was actually put to use. 

Not only this, but practically every member of the family had his 
own share in the work.'’^ b 

This is no longer possible. Entertainment, values, ideas, 
and problems which were previously acquired in the controlled 
environment of the home and community, now largely come haphazardly 
from the outside world. On top of this the increased scope and 





, : O 


. f 

‘ '<■■■! ■ - * •• • 

. 

. [ . • - *1 

c t : •...■■. o) •• ■" . 1 ' 

■ . t : • " ' ' • ’ ■ 


00 


o 






U 

, •• •' 0 
, •, ; \....I • - " Y. y u . 

, ' J Y ' •' 

. • . . r .Y . X 


r 










. 




; * . .... 

J 

« ’ 

. 

- ' ... 


: j ' *f&*t 

■ 

I ill S' 

: ‘ ’ 1 ■ Z 








. 



73 


pace of modern life leaves much less time for family and community 
living* Thus, the school has inherited a job which was previously 
largely the task of the home and the community. Naturally, if "the 
school must became a place where life, real experience, goes on... 
All this will call for correlative changes in school equipment, 
text books, management and activities..."^ 

Examples . An ever-present source of vital and life-like 
educational challenge is to be found in the pupil’s problems 
(actual and potential) which arise in the local community. The 
physical, historical, economic, occupational, aspects of the com¬ 
munity are all potential educational resources. In fact, if edu¬ 
cation is to be experiential, it is necessary that these resources 
be utilized. 

To ensure the life-like quality of the pupil’s school experi¬ 
ence, subjects such as geography should be "nothing but a more 
formal and definite statement of the facts which they see, feel, 
and touch every day."* 10 

There should be an "organic connection between school and 

19 

business life". ' That is to say, the school must take into con¬ 
sideration the realities of business-life. The school must not, 
for example, teach antiquated business arithmetic. 

The school must deal with life as it actually exists in the 
present--particularly in relation to the study of society and 
its institutions. There is no place for Horatio Alger books in a 
realistic school. The pupil must become acquainted with actual 
conflicts in society and become experienced in dealing with these 
conflicts. We cannot go on "...preparing the child for a perfect 








. . ■; 









v..:; :, fl; 




:L~ 


, 
















’ 








' 




. i. 









world--teaching him what is 'good for him' in an idealized world 

20 

that does not exist except in textbooks." This of course means 
that the teacher must have an education in and an intelligent 
understanding of the realities of present-day society. The study 
of "Canadian Democracy in Action" for example must be a study of 
what the action really is and not merely what it should be. Nor 
can important conflicts be brushed aside with the customary, "Of 
course, our form of Democracy is not perfect". At the appropriate 
time, these conflicts must be dealt with in school if the pupil's 
experience is to be educative and if we are to produce intelligent 
citizens. 

Moreover the pupil "...must become acquainted with truths, 

instead of things that were regarded as such fifty years ago or 

that are taken as interesting by the misunderstanding of a parti- 

21 

ally educated teacher". 

The topics of study, too, must be taken in their organic 
connection with the rest of the world. Geography must not be iso¬ 
lated from history and history must not be isolated from man's 
economic development, etc. As for the study of botany, Dewey 
says: "...a real study of plants takes them in their natural 

environment and in their use as well, not simply as food, but in 

22 

all their adaptations to the life of man." In order that the 
pupil be integrated through establishing relations between his 
experiences, the real relations of experiential facts must be dis¬ 
covered. 

Actual and Vicarious Experience . But it must be emphasized 
that -fchis approach to education does not intend that educational 











j 


« 



■ 


j . ic'y 









£ : ' 












j-u' 
















... O'-',-'! 





75 


experience be limited to direct concrete experience, nor that the 
aim of all education should be immediate practical utility* This 
is a frequent misinterpretation of the Experimentalist's educational 
philosophy. 

We have already explained the Experimentalist's attitude to¬ 
ward abstraction, generalization and theory. These are all 
vitally necessary if knowledge is to be truly useful. The Experi¬ 
mentalists merely warn us against the " ivory-tower" attitude to¬ 
ward knowledge; it must not be isolated from the facts of the 
sensual world. 

This attitude implies an acceptance of vicarious experience 
as legitimate. The pupil need not be hit on the head with a 
hammer in order to have an educative experience. The experience 
of others gained from books and from their teachers, etc., can 
form a real part of the pupil's experience. The only requisites 
in this case are that the pupil have a meaning-background in which 
to absorb this vicarious experience and that the experience answer 
to seme integrative purpose of the pupil. Nowhere do the Experi¬ 
mentalists condemn vicarious experience; in fact it is recognized, 
especially in the later grades as being the major form of school 
experience. 

In so far as we are partners in common undertakings, the 
things which others communicate to us as the consequence 
of their particular share in the enterprise blend at 
once into the experience resulting from our own special 
doings.».The amount heard or read is of no importance — 
the more the better, provided the student has a need for 
it and can apply it in some situation of his own,"-' 

However, this particular emphasis on concrete experience 

may be taken to warn us that many topics require a background 







.• . . 






f ; ‘Ji 


'.X ■ • o' 




... i ; , 


. ' . : . ... 








{ 




- 


.■ u ■: i j * : ....a. i » .' i. L j ,.' $ ^i./***' i -i £ . C- ; ... i*’ 






v ' ' J' r • ; , - ... 


; ' ■ .. ,, o' j ,; 












. r : v ’ ...... 

•... .... . . .. 









. -. 


. J . j . 11,.:./ 1 
•. • .. ;..V. \l o.cJ f a o J- 

. * . . 

. .. 

. 








76 


of concrete experience before they can have significance as topics 
of study, and that concrete experience always increases the mean- 
ingfulness of vicarious experience. (It is in this light that the 
function of audio-visual aids becomes apparent.) The educator is 
familiar with the difficulty pupils have in appreciating attitudes 
and feelings that are out of their particular idiom, (e.g. The 
experienced instructor in creative writing always discourages 
young people from writing about love or battle-experience.) 

The Position of the Book in Experience . Thus, we can appreci¬ 
ate "...the position of the 'book' or reading in education. Harm¬ 
ful as a substitute for experience, it is all-important in inter¬ 
preting and expanding experience 24 

It must always be remembered that by "experience" the Experi¬ 
mentalists merely mean that which results from problem solving-- 
from the pursuit of self-initiated ends. There is no reason why 
the problem need be concrete and practical; it can just as well be 
formal and theoretic. The result is educative regardless of 
whether the pupil solves a problem ?mich occurs to him in studying 
a relatively formal textbook or in his concrete relations with 
things and people. The important thing is that the pupil is pur¬ 
suing a purpose which really has him thinking and interested. 

Books become "a substitute for experience" when they are merely 
used as a source for the filing-cabinet mind. As was pointed 
out at the beginning of this chapter, textbooks can serve educa¬ 
tion only as reference sources and relators of partially unrelated 
facts. What is in-a textbook cannot be learned by merely reading 









j; _ 


■J o 




>./ . 


■■ ■ jj • | -■ 1 










' 




- 0 












77 


or memorizing it. To learn what is in a book the pupil must, 
himself, solve or resolve the problems solved by the book. 

Another danger with books is that it is nearly impossible 
for any one person, let alone a whole class, to closely follow 
the course of the author’s integration. The interests, needs, 
and purposes of the pupil constantly diverge fran that of the 
author. To follow a book closely in all its organization is to 
waste a good deal of time through reading material that diverges 
from one’s interests and purposes. The more a person burrows into 
a topic the more integration and learning result. But one cannot 
burrow if 'one is constantly being scooped out of £aSr±-r own pro¬ 
jects and swooped along the surface of the topic ground by the 
author. The scooping-out and swooping-along process very soon 
kills all initiative and the pupil becomes a passive and mildly 
interest tourist over the author’s territory, content to observe 
and note but without the desire to find out. 

Public enemy number one in this field and also in the field 
of organic disconnectedness is the history course which is not 
only rigidly prescribed and limited (a textbook in large), but 
which is also extremely broad because of its avowed interest in 
the ” important features” of the period covered. The pupil is 
never allowed, let alone encouraged, to burrow into some phase of 
the topic which has caught his interest. He is constantly reminded 
of the prescribed course and its cut-and-dried final examillation* 

As a result, the pupil finds it impossible to really learn even 
what is prescribed. In various phases of the work problems occur 
to him which means that he feels the need of some related facts to 









. ... 

« . 


, j ,1.- , -.I 






' • i 














■0 








■ . ■■ , 

. 


a;oa 


- ■ ... ; 




; ,,., - .... ' J;. '■ - ■ - 




' 

. 

. • 

: 


* 



78 


make these phases meaningful. But there is no "time” for these 
things. Problem after problem is passed over; the course abounds 
with loose ends. Naturally under these conditions, lacking the 
meaning background, the "highlights" and "important features" of 
the topic are meaningless. At best they are crammed and memorized 
and generally detested, but certainly not learned. 

This brings us to a consideration of subject-matter as such. 

PART IV 

THB APPROACH TO SUBJPGT-MATTER IN THE CURRICULUM 
The Experimentalist's attitude to subject-matter has been 
the occasion for much debate and misunderstanding in the field of 
education. When Kilpatrick says: "This new curriculum consists 
of experience. It uses subject matter, but it does not consist 
of subject matter.”^ many questions come to mind. Just what is 
the role of subject matter? Is it to be presented in an organized 
form or is it to be used incidentally and disjointedly to fit the 
contingencies of the pupil's experience? Do the Experimentalists 
mean to imply that education has no need for organized learning? 

Is there to be no forethought or planning in education? 

Subject Matter Must be Adapted to the Pupil . The answer to 
these questions has its beginning in our understanding of the 
Experimentalist’s use of the term "experience". As we know, they 
see experience as problem-solving, maintaining that the pupil 
learns only in as much as he is motivated by a felt need to solve 
some problem. Hence, it follows that they conceive of the curri¬ 
culum as consisting of such problematic situations. Naturally, 






V' \ 




U'»j\ 




; 


iT :J 


f.i'itf t 






' j-0 


. J' : 


') 







experience can, and should, take place within subject matter 
fields. The Hjcperimentalists merely mean to emphasize that subject 
matter loses its educative value if it doesn't correspond to the 
needs and interests of the pupil, that the subject matter must be 
adapted to the pupil, that the logical organization placed upon 
it by experts cannot be followed meaningfully from A to Z by 
immature pupils. The logical organization of subject matter must 
be varied to suit the pupil. It is poor educational practice, for 
example, to insist that the first history lesson begin with the 
earliest times and the last end with current affairs. The pupil 
must see and be able to see purpose in(and must be stimulated to 
thought by) whatever subject matter he pursues. Merely forcing 
the pupil to cover the ground of an organized field of knowledge 
does not ensure that the pupil will do otherwise than memorize 
meaninglessly—does not ensure that the pupil will absorb the 
subject matter as organized knowledge. 

Consequently, the subject matter must always be selected and 
approached with specific reference to the needs, interests, and 
abilities of the child. For example, though the three "R's", as 
Dewey points out in "The School and Society", should occupy from 
sixty to eighty percent of the pupil's time in the first four 
years of schooling, they cannot be approached on the basis of what 
the expert thinks is their logical organization. During this 
period the child's interests are predominately practical. He is 
after results rather than principles. This particular stage of 
development makes the method of learning closely approximate that 






: r. 


1 i 











80 


of play* As a result learning must, at first, follow use rather 
than subject arrangement. 

This means that the pupil must be given a wide variety of 
personal experience which vail stimulate a felt need for learning 
the three ’’R’s" . Arithmetical concepts should be developed fn 
situations that give rise to a real need for them—e.g., in ’’play¬ 
ing store”, marble games, discovering who has the most objects in 
his desk, etc. Reading and writing should begin with the pupil’s 
natural interest in relating tales and in his curiosity about 
people and things which affect him. 

Science, in this period, should be predominantly applied 
rather than pure. The pupil is naturally interested in what 
people do and from this science should be a study of how they do 
things. Elementary chemistry should be studied through the pro¬ 
cesses of bleaching, dyeing, soap and candle-making, etc. Physics 
should consist of the elementary mechanical principles involved 
in the spinning-wheel, loom, lock, scales, etc. 

Creative studies should be approached from the pupil's natural 
and eager desire to express what his own experiences have been. 

Nevertheless, the teacher is cautioned by the Experimentalists, 
that in order to avoid complete disjointedness in learning, (and 
consequent relative meaninglessness) at this stage, the teacher 
must be careful to see' that the pupils draw general conclusions, 
arrive at principles, and rules, and make connections with other 
knowledge, whenever they are engaged in a learning process. This 
integrating of knowledge should be, as far as possible, done by 
the pupils themselves. But, it will require constant insistence, 







;-;W- 





81 


suggestion and help from the teacher* This means that the proc¬ 
eedings will have to be halted at appropriate points, the pupils 
questioned and aided in making these connections* 

The obvious direction of this process of learning is toward 
a broader and more formal organization of knowledge* The teacher, 
as a consequence, must have this general end in mind at all times 
and be constantly directing the learning process toward it. Know¬ 
ledge must begin with use and progress toward subject arrangement* 
(This topic will be dealt with more specifically in a subsequent 
section*) 

Sven when the stage is reached where the pupil's interests 
develop into a more formal concern with facts and principles, 
subject matter must always be selected with inference to the 
particular educational situation. Its ability to evoke a desired 


response from the pupil must be considered, which means that the 
question to be asked by the teacher in considering a particular 
subject matter is, "can this material carry forward and broaden 
some development which the pupil already has?" This is what Dewey 
means when he says: 


It is not enough that certain materials and methods 
have proved effective with ether individuals at oxher 
times* There must be a reason for thinking that they 
will function in generating an experience that has 
educative quality with particular individuals at parti¬ 
cular times. 


So, in accordance with the principle of satisfying the needs. 


interests, and abilities of the pupil, subject matter is used, but 
always in a way that is truly useful. 


; 

■ , 









'v' 





O ; 1J.. • 




i 


i ;iO t.l 






' 















82 


The Value of Subject Matter . Subject matters of themselves 

do not have intrinsic value* That is, they cannot be expected to 

have specific effects regardless of the educational circumstances. 

The tendency to consider that certain subjects and methods are, in 

themselves and under all conditions, intrinsically cultural or 

intrinsically good for mental discipline is responsible for much 

haphazardness in learningj for, in neglecting the specific powers 

and purposes of the pupils, it fails to consider the limitations 

of the pupil's capacity. As De?/ey says, "It is not the subject 

27 

per se that is educative or that is conducive to growth*" The 
subject is conducive to growth in specific circumstances. 

This does not mean to imply that certain subjects are not 
generally more conducive to growth than others. It is for good 
reason, for example, that most curriculums give more general and 
consistent stress to a subject like English than they do to a 
subject like Biology. Y/hat is meant here is that the particular 
educational position of the pupil demands various subjects, aspects 
of subjects, and various methods at different times, and that the 
educator must be constantly on the alert to see that these demands 
are met by the prompt provision of what is needed. 

The tendency of the traditional school was to set a rigid 
curriculum based on the idea that since Latin was good for mental 
discipline and Mathematics for logical thinking, etc., the pupil 
need merely progress through the logical sequence of a certain 
set of subjects and his education was assured. And when an educa¬ 
tion was not the result the blame was put upon the stupidity or 


laziness of the pupil. 






. 

c • ' • 






. - • •• ’ , , ..' '..0 £1.0 ‘l/ml . • y. « 


: j ■ ■ •... • ■; >; ■ . , ■ •; : ' .V' ' L> • ' 1 S.-.j to/ I ‘IOx ?K<Cl) 





' 










0 " 


' - ■ e 




ivJ; ; ‘ v ’;.i j r . i' X ■ £ '> 


' 




< . t -■* . . 1 ’.. .. . r " J' ; • ■ ■ - ..- • 




;£ - 




' 


■ : 




















83 


The Experimentalists, on the other hand, maintain that a 
subject has these specific values if and when it accomplishes 
these results, and not otherwise. In other words the value, or 
lack of value, of a subject depends upon the context of the learn¬ 
ing situation. 

Science for example may have any kind of value, depend¬ 
ing upon the situation into which it enters as a means... 

(Its value may be)...military...technological...commer¬ 
cial. ..philanthropic...As a matter of fact, science 
serves all these purposes, and it would be an arbitrary 
task to try and fix upon one of them as its real end. 

It is being admitted here, of course, that various subjects 
can accomplish specific results. But, knowledge of these possible 
results can only be used by the teacher as a frame of reference, 
a value background, which will give him a knowledge of the alter¬ 
natives and possibilities of development in a given educational 

teacher 

situation. Which of these values is selected by the/will depend 
upon his value-judgment in reference to the particular situation. 

Thus, the Experimentalists suggest that education be gone 
about in a scientific manner, so that the pupilfe growth be not 
restricted to the accidental concurrence of his needs with the 
provisions of the curriculum. In this way the pupil is provided 
with the opportunity of expanding growth through following out 
productive interests, through special attention to his weaknesses 
and difficulties, and through cultivation of his particular abil¬ 
ities. Literature, for example, rather than being approached on 
the basis of the ”hundred best stories” and “hundred best poems”, 
is approached on the basis of what poems and stories are best 
suited to the age group and which tie in best with the pupils' 







84 


knowledge background and present interests. 

Kilpatrick tells us, in "Education for a Changing Civiliza¬ 
tion” , that we are to stress the "function” rather than the 
"structure" of knowledge. In Literature this means that, rather 
than being concerned to see that the pupils "know" a certain set 
of selections, we should be concerned with seeing that the pupils 
have found Literature to have "done something" for them--that they 
like it, have a desire to read it and know how to read it and for 
what purpose. In History, rather than being concerned with their 
having covered a certain ground, we should be concerned with see¬ 
ing that the pupils more and more turn to the past for guidance 
and understanding in the present. Science must be seen as a 
method of control throughout life and not as a set of rules and 
laws. In all, there is no one royal road to education. An educe 
ation may be gained by innumerable routes. The main requirement 
is that there is an increasing power to understand and control 
which is gained through the integration of facts of experience. 
Without the meaning that comes from integration, no matter what 
the route, the greatest expectation you can have is sheer pedantry. 

The foregoing mu*st not be taken to mean that a subject matter 
is educative only in so far as it is a specific means to a specific 
end. A subject does not have to have a specific instrumentality 
in order to have educative value. Though it is true that, in 
order to be integrative, a subject matter must serve the purposes 
of the pupil and must develop along the problem-solving line, it 
does not folio?/ that the purposes and problems need be external 
to the subject matter. As we already know, a subject is capable 







. 


J 


, , J-.'• .... U:\ J. ■, .‘a : ■ 

c 





... ; „ .... .... .. ■■ f 


. ■? J- irt. xuoox so■ > gain'd tt-'SAJ 










;jr 














< 






f'D :, .o •; it f us-j •' 




; -< : ..-.'V,. ■ ■ ■ • ; .• - -■ ... : c ' ••• u o 

u 

v *p- $iXQ.o : ■. 

j . --j;c,;r .7; : j ,. .. ':i j,.;-.W -'•' -? !3 - 

... . . 1 .,' ...... . . . . . ■ ' : .. . 1 • i 

, ■ : ./ ■ .. •' J . • ... n- 

... » 

f . . . ./■ ... ... , iV7 \ : 

. . „• ., . ;. ... ... : ■ . . j 0 ■ "i .... t / l O-j ‘-i 0 ‘ - ‘ 

aV t ■ .. .... ■ , ; .! i/':<X1.0I J 1 UlSi'l ln\ lX.<iUi:£ ■ - 'ic 

iJ , • 




of serving almost any end, and this extends to include the possi¬ 
bility of its being an end-in-itself--of its being educationally 
good-in-itself* Dewey says: 

-••.as long as any topic makes an immediate appeal, it 
is not necessary to ask what it is good for •••Some goods 
are not good for anything; they are just goods.. .Neither 
they nor the teacher could possibly foretell with any 
exactness the purposes learning is to accomplish in the 
future...It is unsound to urge that, say, Latin has a 
value per se in the abstract, just as a study, as a 
sufficient justification for teaching it. But it is 
equally absurd to argue that unless teacher or pupil 
can point out some definite assignable future use to 
which it is to be put, it lacks justifying value. When 
pupils are genuinely concerned in learning Latin, that 
is of itself proof that it possesses value.^ 

The point here is that the pupil might easily, and generally 
does, find purpose and challenge in a subject for its own sake. 

Is this not a necessary justification for the study of separate 
formal subjects? This is just the point that Dewey is making 
when he states, in "Interest and Effort in Education", that in¬ 
direct and instrumental interest in a topic (e.g., Art as a means 
to illustrate) may easily beecme a direct interest in the topic 
for itself (e.g., the pupil becomes interested in Art itself). . 
Leading into a subject as an instrumentality, the pupil will often 
find that the s ubject itself becomes a challenge, that it raises 
problems for him and arouses his interest. 

The only limiting factor in the development of such interest 
is that of time. The teacher must consider, in view of the time 
allotted and in view of the possibilities of learning in other 
fields, the weight that should be allowed any one of these intrin¬ 
sic interests (e.g, the writer was informed of a young girl in 














. 












86 


school who was allowed to spend the largest part of her time over 
a considerable period in discovering and illustrating the develop¬ 
ment and use of spoons through the ages* There is no doubt that 
she learned a great deal about spoons and much correlative materal, 
but evidently she also had a number of critical needs and lacks 
that were not being attended to.) This brings to light the fact 
that there is no sharp dividing line between intrinsic and instru¬ 
mental value. We can never find a case where the value in a sub¬ 
ject is exclusively one or the other. There is always an overlap¬ 
ping, though generally the emphasis is on one kind of value or 
the other. Thus, the intrinsic value of a subject is always con¬ 
ditioned by its instrumental value. And in weighing the value of 
a subject in which the pupil is intrinsically interested, the 
teacher must inquire whether, in view of the shortness of time, 
there are not other things of intrinsic value which in addition 
have greater instrumental value* 

The fact that subjects are not necessarily specific instru¬ 
mentalities, that they can have any of a number of values, depend¬ 
ing upon how they are used, and including the fact that they can 
be good in themselves—has an important implication of general 
philosophical and social import for education. 

Instrumentalism in education tends toward a concentration on 
technique, since education is thereby seen as, n a specific instru¬ 
ment designed to attack specific problems and hence...(is expected 

QQ 

to)...produce specific results.But, if education is to be 
integrative, every problem cannot be thought of as being a specific 
problem with a specific technique of solution. To ensure integration 













j ; j—.V, , . \ .. . - -'v , l J' : tf: . <4 - O' < V •' J. 



V 






















to a 










. 

: U’c'O o v t 

. 

• ,.... 


. t 





87 


each problem must be considered in the light of the whole situa¬ 
tion and only then, when all the factors and values involved have 
been considered, should the technique be designed* By its concen¬ 
tration on technique, Instrumentalism tends to generate a narrow 
specialization and fractionalism, the ultimate result of which is 
that the specialties become divorced from their true purpose. The, 
technique in any subject is a means. If it is overemphasized it 
becomes meaningless and even dangerous. The broader and social 
values of any subject must, at the very least, be in the back¬ 
ground of study. This of course applies to universities as well, 
even though they are considered to be beyond the reproach of educ¬ 
ators whose "specialized" field is supposed to be at the pre-uni¬ 
versity level. 

The narrow special ization of pre-war Germany, with its dis- 
asterous divorce of sciences and studies from broader human and 
social values, should serve as ample warning. The human suffering 
that resulted, the libraries filled with useless volume upon vol¬ 
ume of detailed and narrow specializations, and the resulting 
inability of all this fine study to do what it was designed to do 
(e.g., the inability of the German scientists to master neuclear- 
fission is attributable to their concentration on applied science 
to the exclusion of pure science), should cause us to reflect on 
our own system of education. For this technical and instrumental 
approach to learning has gained a firm foothold in our system. 
Techniques are tending to be applied regardless of the values in¬ 
volved. Witness, for example, the tendency to let the military 


over-ride the political. 









, 'O' i' o^;.r 

V 






- 


J . V 



. 

• ' 










.. 'v< . ... ■ 


■ .., ... :j. ] ... so'li'Vx ") -j\. ; 


. 



r I, 




, ’ • iv. 

. 

. 

* 

' . . : ' ■ 

■/ f . • . . 7 . / 

* 





88 


Our society is now equipped with multitudes of such 
specialists, products of education, who are prepared to 
use their tools in connection with any purpose or end. 

They are not particularly interested in ends, especi¬ 
ally such ends as justice, freedom and beauty.3^ 

Educative growth is limited if subjects and methods are 
taught as specific instrumentalities. Though specific instru¬ 
mentalities are acquired in the process of growth they are justi¬ 
fied by growth and not vice versa. 

In school this means that the interconnections of knowledge 
(and especially the social value) must be constantly emphasized. 

The pupils must learn, for example, that the methods of science 

are not limited to the formal subjects of science, that there are 

not some fields where it applies and others where it does not, 

but such things as revelation and authority do.* They must, of 

course, learn this through practice in using scientific thought in 

all fields. Technique in Literature must always be related to 

what it is trying to achieve. We mustn’t allow pupils to believe 

that a poem is good merely if there are a sufficient number of 

figures of speech in it. They must learn that the beginning and 

the end of good writing is clarity of expression, that a figure of speech 

is a good one only if it is appropriate to what the author is 

trying to express. 

We have had frequent occasion to mention such things as the 
teacher encouraging the pupil to study this or that topic, or the 
teacher selecting the subject matter with reference to the possi¬ 
bilities inherent in the pupils' development, etc. This might 


* It is not meant to be suggested here that religious beliefs 

should be scientifically examined in SC hool. Fran the Experiment- 
alist’s point of view religion:is better i e ft out of school-- 
particularly as a subject. 








. • • 




: -i • . : . S .. 


■ ■ / ' ■■ . J : : i 








J . 


, ; 




.. / . ' 0 


.4)0 a . 


r • !io . . 


... ... 




J :j i 




. 


■ j; ti) ■: 

. 


■ 


oo.: 


j 


n 




'•‘ . . ' . .. 








■ 

:'■■■ 1 ' ' 






89 


% 


easily be mistaken to be an invitation to "the vice of externally 

imposed ends". But the reader need only recall the foregoing 

sections on selecting from the pupils* needs and interests and 

the regulation of the learning environment, to realize that this 

is not implied. Imposition of ends in the way of subject matter 

or purpose of subject matter is a result of introducing it in a 

manner foreign to the pupil's process of development, i.e., forcing 

aims on pupils that ignore their state of integration. As Dewey 

points out, we merely need to know that: 

The aim set up must be an outgrowth of existing condi¬ 
tions. It must be based upon a consideration of what is 
already going on; upon the resources and difficulties 
of the situation.32 

Thus the teacher is bound to make value-judgments as to sub¬ 
ject matter in the learning process—but he must at all times con¬ 
sider the whole of the particular educational situation. There 
is nothing to prevent "self-initiated ends" from being inspired 
by the teacher and, in fact, many of them must be if the teacher 
is going to justify his existence. We mustn't let the pupil do as 
he wants, but must help him to do what, in consideration of his 
particular integration, he needs to do. 

The Organization of Subject Latter . We now come to the 
question of how subject matter should be organized in the school 
programme. There should be no question as to whether it driould be 
organized, for the whole concept of integration depends upon the 
establishment of interconnection and organization of experiential 
fact. 

Kilpatrick says that one must grant "That which is learned 





« 


10 OJV’OOC 





' 

n . 


J . : 1 ::0o cL:': 'V: ' J « ... 1■ _ o ' 





90 


anywhere should ultimately be joined with its logical mate to 

t 

form in time a criticized whole and so in time lead to separate 
33 

subjects. 

The subject matters which are dealt with in the school are 
generally more meaningful to the teacher than to the pupil. The 
reason for this, obviously, is that the teacher is aware of more 
of the inter-connections and relations, their structure and organ 
ization, of each topic than is the pupil. Nor are these connec¬ 
tions and structures in the teacher's mind arbitrary or personal. 
They are largely the result of the past collective experience and 
learning of the race. It is this fact which the Experimentalists 
refer to when they speak of the sociality of meaning and value. 
Consequently, the subject matters with which we deal in school 
are highly inbred with a social pre-organization. 

This, of course, does not mean that the social organization 
is rigidly and inflexibly necessary. It does not mean that know¬ 
ledge cannot be reorganized and meanings changed. What is meant 
is that the significance of the facts of our present experience 
increases in proportion to our understanding of how man has come 
to organize and use them. Mathematical symbols and methods, for 
example, have meaning only in so far as we understand what man 
has meant them to represent and how he has used them. An under¬ 
standing of democratic government is dependent upon an understand 
ing of its organization, use and history. The same applies to 
the concepts and methods of science as well as those of all the 
other subjects dealt Ydth in school. The personal significance 
and the new use of things v/hich we learn is dependent upon their 
social meaning and use—upon their social organization. 

Thus, since the teacher must aid the pupil in discovering 


■'./ , j •••■ r j ■ ;■ 0 «i 1! ’’-w i 

. 

« « 

; 

. ; . ’ 

. 

> 

. 

„ 




; 

, 


, 



• *$ 





« 

<! 

■ 

. 



• f 

* 

* 




.... ■, . 


1 o. . : ‘ ; : . a 



a.-:;- 





{ • 

.. ■ ■ ■ • ■ • ' ’ " V f ■ ; 

... — ■ 





91 


the meaning of the subjects studied, it is necessary that the 
pupil come more and more to understand their structure and organ¬ 
ization. This is what Dewey is driving at when he says: 

The subject matter of education consists primarily of 
the meanings which supply content to existing social 
life. The continuity of social life means that many of 
these meanings are contributed to present activity by 
past collective experience. As social life grows more 
complex, these factors increase in number and import. 

There is need of special selection, formulation, and 
organization that they may be adequately transmitted to 
the new generation. 

It remains to be seen how the teacher is going to use sub¬ 
ject matter, and how the pupil is going to be led to an ‘under¬ 
standing of its structure and organization. The above quotation 
suggests that it requires special procedure. 

It has been previously pointed out that the younger pupils, 
in order that their learning will be integrative, must not begin 

with the formal study of subject matter. "But, in the beginning, 

35 

learning follows use rather than subject matter." They must 
begin with concrete activities and, as they are guided to the 
discovery of principles and laws, gradually work into the begin¬ 
nings of formally organized subject matter. We cannot expect 
the school environment to be a learning environment if we start 
the pupil on facts and truths which are outside his range of 
experience• 

But finding the materials for learning within experience 
is only the first step. The next step is the progressive 
development of what is already experienced into a fuller 
and richer and more organized form, a form that gradually 
approximates that in which subject matter is presented 
to the skilled, mature person. 3° 

Thus, in using subject matter the teacher must follow all the 












.;in. 









. 


Ip:--d-r,orid: 

' 

? 

- 

' 




: \ - ... 

.j .. ;■ ( . . ' . „ ■ , 

, 

■ 

; :.P ' • . . , « '. 0 0 - P, ; : ' ! : :.>f 


< ■ I ■ : 

■ 

* • . • . ;I , 1 

';■ [ P ' ■j “i:I<. Cm, 0 P d ;'!u 

- 

* 

■ '.p\; :;.p. ;i ; . , ' p; 'i :.OptieI pi m.Xj oPJir ( i 

' 

. .: ; ... pi.. . i a .; >« 7 'P , 

. 

; . . , ' 

p, JPi i n < ■ > . 




92 


principles of learning from experience. The teacher must select 
those elements in the pupil's experience which are most capable 
of being expanded into a more organized form. But the pupil must 
be guided into this expansion rather than having it imposed upon 
him from outside. Each step in the direction of fuller organiza¬ 
tion must be an educative experience for the pupil; that is, it 
must be in the form of some problem which is meaningful to him in 
terms of his knowledge background, and which he is capable of 
solving by use of this background. The pupil approaches the for¬ 
mal organization of sublet matter through the process of recon¬ 
struction of experience. 

In general, then, subject matter in the earlier stages of 
schooling must be organized, but it must be organized by the pupil 
himself in the process of solving problems that occur in his 
experience and as aided and guided by the teacher. The organiza¬ 
tion which results will not be arbitrary and personal, because 
the process will be guided toward the socially significant by the 
teacher who has this fore-knov*ledge as a touchstone of signific¬ 
ance. To restate this in another way, the pupil must come to 
appreciate the organization of subject matter through realization 
which result from his experience of solving relevant problems. 

The teacher must participate in this process as a guide--directing 
the process into proper channels, but into channels that are also 
proper for the pupil in consideration of his understanding, inter¬ 
ests, and abilities. 

Even ?/hen the stage is reached where the pupil is capable 



4, 

* 



j 






. 

i ’ < 



Li- J. .• ; . ' •' *.' ' i ■ 


t . ; , r -j 


. 

■ o'' 'J xv xiv.x vjiO'X'J ■ 

, ■ ' 


. ; 




' 


• 

. 




' 


.f .. ' : ■/ 


- • 

■. J: J .: ". ■•i-.i'o 


. 

• 

i 

0r*X/; J'C.ffj; ttleiM. , '.. a,.:,,' 

. 

i 

' 


. : 


' 




93 


of making a meaningful study of separate subjects, it is impera¬ 
tive to learning that these separate subjects be organized on the 
basis of experience. Their organization must be flexible enough 
that the pupil can follow his own productive purposes. The teacher 
must allow for the pursuit of intrinsic interests in particular 
phases of the subject. The bright student must be encouraged to 
burrow into a subject and go beyond the prescribed minimum learn¬ 
ings. The organization of subject matter must also be flexible 
in order to allow the teacher to make connections and relations 
which will be found necessary or helpful to meaning but which can¬ 
not easily be anticipated from a distance. For example, the 
teacher may find that a concept in Social Studies, such as "how 
the environment affects our living*', can be learned in a much 
more meaningful way than is suggested in the course of studies. 

He might decide, for instance, that the particular educational 
situation in his class demands that the topic be approached with 
the emphasis on the social and economic point of view rather 
than the geographic. But if the course of studies and final 
examinations demand a particular organization and approach, many 
an educational opportunity will be wasted and must waste time will 
result. The writer had an experience along this line, in which a 
class studying the conditions and changes leading up to modern 
industrialized society became very interested in the agricultural 
revolution. The pursuit of this topic became quite vital, for 
the class was composed largely of farm children, but it had to be 


cut short because of the demands of the course of studies and the 



■ 

i . 

•'* ;..L j .a, o::.. - ; .J , s ’. .1 


. 

j .. .-v d.C. - J‘ .; < 

. 

' 

* 

/ : j . ■ ..Cl 5 •" o' i 


: ■ 


'j ... , . ‘ . •, J ' • '' ■ ( 1 w ’• 

' 

Si' ' . ■ • ’ , . v ' . I ' - o < ' -■ t • > 


\. . . 

... ..; .. . . .... , .. ... ‘. r;C‘lOv.^o i.iir >..j ....; 

■.. . ., ■. ... ' .. . .. .■ ' * • ■ . ' - : ; . * ; 

• *v 1 ; v-v)S: av ri,: o h-aa &s.icjz$-U*m9 add. i> 

> f J f . f /J Ili j v ,, _,i 'V/ „ ivU) ^dcdOO.'. I \ 1 i® <& U tv 


! 


. : j * 

t . . , . 1 ■ . . • ' 

.: : ■'... : ; ... .: :JV - a; . 0 d a,, ...... tuo 




94 


final examinations. 

Thus, subject matter in schools must be organized; in the 
earlier stages of schooling as an organization of concepts which 
the pupil must ccrne to truly appreciate; and, in the later stages, 
as a separate field in which the pupil is to learn. But at all 
times the appreciation of the organization must come fran the 
pupil’s own experience in dealing with the subject matter and must 
develop out of his meaning background. 

There is nothing wrong with having a course of studies— 

with selecting understanding that the pupil should have. In fact 

this is necessary if anarchy and disconnectedness is to be avoided, 

and if the school is to fulfill its duty of preparing the pupil 

to fit into society. But, the course of studies cannot be too 

closely and rigidly organized for this is tantamount to trying to 

do the pupil’s integrating for him. $he curriculum-makers should 

scientifically select useful problems and correlative material in 

connection with a particular field of study. They should even 

make a selection of the general understandings and appreciations 

that are to be achieved. But all these things should be for the 

appropriate use, rather than the passive acceptance, of the 

teacher. The teacher must be allowed to use the material and work 

toward the goals when the demand and opportunity is present. The 

teacher must be allowed to deal with the needs that are most 

present. ’’The sooner we proclaim that teaching is not a factory- 

37 

hand job but a profession, the better ."^ 1 

Another thing that is neglected by the rigidly-fixed course 





. • A ' 

.At. ' , . ■. .1 . ; A o .. o . ;A.' 

- 

... ... . . J t .. : \ A" ■ :j A o :Ai& v . i/.A 

. ' ■ ■ 

. ['■ >.. 0 . . j i>.<■ 1 l.'_ .. 

J _ . . ... , . A.; • : J ,. i . ...A... - A. : 1 . .' i. I: 1 , •' iT. O ’ A.'ivJt,. 

, 

~ - , 

. . • ... . ’ .1 . ' ... J ' ; • . A :> 

I ; ., A ... : . ' : . ' : ' . l .... w - ' ... ■ • 

( ....... 

' . /■; A; '. j . -;; ■. , ■ : A A- , ' . .' . . ■ 1 . A Gl> 

:J: 1‘ J' . !.; .../v.. o , ... A; .. jAA ,.a •.. - . \..A-A LAa a 

. . i i ■ 

.A:-.. ; A. ..,Aa " . ... ... . .. •.:> 'A >; •: 

• ..■ i. -.! : ■ -• . . .. ■-■.-> ... » .' 1 j J ' : ‘ ~ o •• ■ o 

, . ;.*A , 

J 

, A. . . . . I ■ : ./ . J 

A..-.....: AA/ A. ■ -a. .... A .A A AA ^vwolin,. cxi Amja 

. 

' J -r ■ J : J j U u '.J.'- A 

A '. : -j. a: A,i 'xAitfoM -; 







95 


of studies is the particular knowledge of the individual teacher. 
No two teachers are capable of properly teaching in exactly the 
same way or of directing the learning process in exactly the same 
direction. The individual meaning-background of each teacher 
demands that the subject matter be made significant in various 
ways by various teachers—that the pupil be directed in different 
channels by each teacher. Nor does it make any difference to the 
educative process if this variation occurs, for, as we have seen 
subjects are not specific utilities, they are not set answers to 
set problems, and thus it is sufficient merely that the pupil 
integrate in some acceptable way for it is impossible for him to 
do so in all acceptable ways. 

This approach to the organization and use of subject matter 
makes certain demands on the teacher. In the first place he must 
be properly trained in the appropriate methods of teaching and 
must have the knowledge background appropriate to them. The 
teacher must consider himself a leader rather than a lecturer and 
task-master. He must see teaching mostly as a matter of raising 
problems for the pupil to solve rather than of presenting facts 
for the pupil to digest. He must know how to challenge the pride, 
resources and initiative of the pupils. Research into numbers 
of sources must replace the use of a single textbook. Committees, 
reports, discussions, debates, must take much of the time formerly 
occupied by "book-learning". "For teacher and pupils to work to¬ 
gether at unsolved problems is apparently the most educative of 

qQ 

all school endeavor•"^^ Finally, the teacher must constantly 
direct the pupil’s endeavors into the channels which are 

















/w j ( 








VX*##-f $: 0 &i >'* 'I t.V'i ’U,fX3i>l A i ).L)U'.’0. 

" •../ ; .: .. ;/: L. : -x, i: 

' 


■.. :■ 

, 




, 

.... 

V.' v, :. . ’ • ; 

■ 


,i 


! 


-i 


, . ',•'■■ i 

, 

. 


. 






96 


educationally most fruitful. All these things are necessary if 
subject matter is to be used so as to be integrative, educational. 

Geography and History as Subjects . The philosophy of inte¬ 
gration has significance for all subject matters in school, but 
it has a special significance for the teaching of Geography and 
History. This is because the function of these subjects is so 
completely integrative in their supplying of background, context, 
and outlook for the facing of present situations. 

The meaning with which activities became charged, con¬ 
cern nature and man. This is an obvious truism, which 
however gains meaning when translated into educational 
equivalents. So translated, it signifies that geography 
and history supply subject matter which gives background 
and outlook, intellectual perspective, to what might 
otherwise be narrow personal actions or mere forms of 
technical skill. With every increase of our ability to 
place our own doings in their time and space connections, 
our doings gain significance.^ 

Thus, in teaching these subjects particularly, it must be 
“constantly borne in mind that the educational centre of gravity 
is in the cultural or humane aspects of the subject*”^ Geo¬ 
graphy must essentially be a study of-how various geographical 
factors affect man and how man has utilized them for his purposes. 
It must include the significance of geography in the life known 
by the pupil. History must essentially be a study of the develop¬ 
ment of man in society rather than of battles, kings, or even 
politics. It must be the study of the way in which people have 
lived and the ways in which they have changed their mode of liv¬ 
ing. Stressing the importance of economic history, Dewey says; 

Economic history is more humane, more democratic, and 
hence more liberalizing than political history. It 
deals not with the rise and fall of principalities 









. . 0 ' > 

. 

1 


i t • 

■ . 




'J 












. 


. 




. 


. 


'J-’VX ■: 






. . 







, 


i 

- 


. 





97 


but with the growth of effective liberties, through 
command of nature, of the common man for whom powers 
and principalities exist.^ 

It must also be remembered that in reality history and geo¬ 
graphy are not separated* They have been and are complementary 
in the life of man. Consequently they should not be studied as 
separate subjects. Their meaningfulness depends upon their inter¬ 
connections with one another just as surely as ,it does upon their 
internal relations* The geography of Egypt, for example, should 
be studied right along with the history of its early civilization 
showing, for instance, how the effluvial Nile permitted easy cul¬ 
tivation and high yields, thus releasing manpower and creating 
new needs that led to the development of one of the first urban 
civilizations. Naturally certain geographic concepts must be 
taught in special lessons, but the emphasis should be upon the 
social effects of the concept. 

Finally, as far as the study of history goes, it must be 
re-emphasized that the only justification for its study is that 
an understanding of the past is the key to the understanding of 
the present. If it is not, then we had best bury the past. 

Hence, the study of any period must be made with the idea in 
mind of gaining some understanding of the present. Without this 
relation to the present the study is a dead one* 

The special Hole of Science in Education . Science, say the 
Experimentalists, is experience become rational. It is the 
supreme method which man has evolved for the solution of his 
problems, for the control of nature and of himself. The scien¬ 
tific method, in brief, is the most efficient method of 



. 




, 


. 


* 


. . 






J: i -4 




t : 




<L>.; O' 


c 

« 




- 

. 

... ■ . ■ , . ' . 

* 1 . . • 

. . ' d>i' ■ 

t 

: 


; ' ' . . ■ IS € 

1 

» 

: 




! . .. , • • 

> c 




98 


integration. Its use is not limited to the subjects normally 
denoted by the title of ’'science". The method of observing the 
facts, proposing a hypothetical solution, and testing its validity 
in experience is applicable to all of man's affairs. Consequently 
it is of vital imports ce that the pupil gain experience and skill 
in the use of the method of science. 


The problem of the educational use of science is then 
to create an intelligence pregnant with the belief in 
the possibility of the direction of human affairs by 
itself. The method of science engrained through educa¬ 
tion in habit means emancipation from rule of thumb and 
from routine generated by rule of thumb procedure.^ 


Too often the teaching of science is limited to the teaching 
of scientific "rules'-', "laws" and "principles", forgetting that 
the most important thing about science is its method. Scientific 
"laws" are relative to particular uses. They are being abandoned 
and revised every day, but the method of science remains the same 
and is the agent of this progress. If "science" in school is thought 
of as a set of "laws" to be learned, the pupil fails to appreciate 
the real use of science as an agent of control and progress. In¬ 
stead science becomes a set body of information to be memorized 
and, if used, limited to special techniques. 

Consequently, the teacher must exhibit a scientific attitude 
in all his work and must work to see that the pupil learns to do 
the same. Moreover, in the study of science itself, the pupil 
must begin with using science and only end with its logical organ¬ 
ization. He must learn the scientific way of treating the familiar 
material of ordinary experience, rather than acquiring a technical 
body of information without ability to trace its connections with 




. 

it ' 


< 


* 


' 



' . c ; 

; j ' K> ... . .!. ...... . .< 

- 

ii.I* V.; j.'..' ' w i i::. inXl’Vo 00'i 1 , 


• 


' . , , : • . 







\ 


i.'. ■ » 


: 


' * 



•X ' r> 

. ' 


. .-■... :■ .. . ■ ... : '.. j.y.;..;- ■>...■ . : . - 




99 


objects and operations with which he is familiar, for this process 
generally results in merely a peculiar vocabulary. Science, in 
other words, must have the humanistic and social use in school 
that it has in reality. The separation between the physical and 
social studies is more formal than real. It serves its purpose, 
but only if the humanistic value of the physical is appreciated. 
(Witness again the dilemma of Nazi science.) Science must be seen 
to influence and be influenced by all fields of knowledge. Natur¬ 
ally, the pupil must be presented with the opportunity for the 
specialized study of science, but his preparation for this should 
be gradual and carefully developed from actual use. 

"Rules'’ and "laws" must be built up from use so that the 
pupil can appreciate the real significance of them by seeing the 
interconnections that make them up. This "psychological" approach 
may be slower than the "logical" approach but it is certainly more 
significant and interesting for the pupil. "Rules" and "laws" 
are means to ends, and meaning increases as the connection between 
ends and means is appreciated. (These conceptions, naturally, 
apply to the teaching of the exact sciences,(matheibatics, etc.) as 
well as to the natural sciences.) Jls Dewey says: 

"Knowing" the definitions, rules, formulae, etc., is like 
knowing the names of parts of a machine without knowing 
what they do. In one case, as in the other, the mean¬ 
ing, or intellectual content, is what the element accom¬ 
plishes in the system of which it is a member. 4 -' 

Learning itself may be called the appreciation of the rela¬ 
tion between ends and means. The teacher must therefore facilit¬ 
ate the increase of this appreciation by the pupil if he wishes 
to improve the quality of learning. An example from the author's 


• 

' 1 ' ■ . 

. ; 



L 

• ■ 



- 


. V. ... \ 

* 

: 1 V ' 

: . ;■<■: ;;I /: " ■ ■ J 






. 0 . X.ouj 0J3 :wi j 


: j .j ( /i'3 ■' ■ j (J i'iO '.'I UXf J 

■ , . , : ' . ! . . 







. 


, . 



« 



; , ■■ ., , : !, i : . ‘X P ■ 1 ■ 


■ • . , <* - ' ' ' 

vu x-;/■•■. :i\ .. . ■ '' : O/..; 1 ■ 

■ • . . ... 

. 

. , .. ... ... ; . '-.I. j 

, * 




. 


- 


100 


own early schooling comes readily to mind. A group of grade one 
pupils were being taught how to make an Easter basket out of 
colored paper. The lesson consisted of making this measurement, 
drawing that line, cutting this, and pasting that. The physical 
result was a roomful of identical baskets. But if the author was 
at all typical little was learned about basket-making. At best 
we learned, through doing it, how to use scissors and paste. The 
reason for this lack of learning, of course, was simply that we 
didn’t know why we we doing what we did. The relation of ends 
and means was not at all clear, and it would be surprising if one 
pupil could have thereby, on his own, made a basket. 

Using the scientific method in school brings up one further 
problem. Of late there has been much emphasis upon the scientific 
attitude in dealing with controversial or problematic issues. 

The pupil is cautioned to always keep "an open mind” in ihese 
matters. This is as it should be, but too often the “open mind” 
is confused with the empty one. Keeping an ”open mind” does not 
mean reserving judgment indefinitely, until "all the facts” are 
known. This is so because it is impossib3.e to know ”ali the 
facts” about anything. The scientist 'merely reserves judgment 
until he has sufficient facts upon which to base his hypothesis. 
His mind is "open” to changing that hypothesis if experience 
proves it to be inadequate. The hypothesis is a tentative deci¬ 
sion, If the scientific attitude is to be of any use at all, 
the pupil must learn to make decisions scientifically, and, of 
course, be willing to scientifically alter that hypothesis in 





, . , ' . ' ' . .. ■ ■- I' 

t i ' . 

. ; v ... . ■ i . . 

, ... , ' i j'.:. ij vJ. ^ J ; 

» 

, . , : ... v.., '... 

. 

« .. . 


; 'J :. ■■ 1 j 


t ■ .. . ; ' 

■ 


... 




. 









. 




. 

. 

* 


. . ■ 

. 

. 

. 



101 


face of facts. He must, however, make the decision. If the pupils 
are not encouraged to make and test decisions, then all the palaver 
about the 11 scientific attitude" is wasted breath. The same result 
is accomplished with more economy of time by telling the pupils 
not to think at all. 

Finally, an important point made by Kilpatrick should be 

noted. One of the major characteristics of the modern world is 

hj± 

the "fact of permanent, rapid, and increasingly rapid change". 
Consequently, if the school is to fulfill its function of prepar¬ 
ing the pupil to fit into this world, the philosophy, the curricu¬ 
lum, the methods, and the learnings must be adapted to this fact. 

We must give our children the method of controlled change, which 
is the scientific method. We must leach them to efficiently decide 
matters for themselves. "No longer can one generation bind the 
other to its solutions."^ Certainly we must pass on the cultural 
heritage but it mustn't be bound on the pupil. The pupil must 
understand and appreciate the cultural heritage, but he must also 
be able to control, change and advance it. Indoctrination, in a 
word, is death to the scientific attitude. No doubt there are 
many aspects of our cultural heritage that are good and valid 
today, but even these, if they are to be appreciated, cannot be 
indoctrinated; they must be thoroughly examined and open to criti¬ 
cism. 

Vocational Training . Concluding this section on subject 
matter, there is need for a few words on vocational training. 

There is no doubt that an emphasis on vocations brings to the 
school that touch of real life and purpose which makes learning 



, > •: ' 


• 



; ns , . ■ 


. 

, ;' J . i <■ - • 

(f: . 

■ ' ..' :; 0 

/ ..'1 ' ' "■ r 

r - 1 . , .' , ♦ - 


:V ■ ’ r\: f '"-i 



* 


. 




* 





. - , . 

» . x i~ -.i - - 

i 


?)';.! . , : , J’ sjr 


vi ’ . .; : e ;:ioi t • is : o ■."... ; rid; 


' ■■ 

: 


• 

. 

‘L?\ ' " " ' ■ ' 





102 


meaningful and useful. The things we learn must be connected with 
the things people do. Thus there is great value in such courses 
as Shop, Home Economics, Typing, Bookkeeping, etc. However, there 
is a danger that the teaching of vocational subjects can degener¬ 
ate into a mere training of pupils to fit into specific economic 
notches. This, of course, is an undemocratic procedure. Voca¬ 
tional subjects should be limited by their utility in education. 
Education should never be sacrificed to training. On this point 
Dewey states : 

...there is a movement in behalf of something called 
vocational training which, if carried into effect, would 
harden these ideas (i.e. re the value of vocational 
subjects) into a fomm adapted to the existing industri¬ 
al regime. This movement would continue the traditional 
liberal or cultural education for the few economically 
able to enjoy it, and would give to the masses a narrow 
technical trade education for specialized callings, 
carried on under the control of others.46 

Democratic education provides the maximum education that 
each individual is capable of absorbing. Any scheme which arbi¬ 
trarily limits them to special fields and amounts is undemocratic. 

PART 7 

SPECIAL PROBLEMS IP INTEGRATIVE LEAPING 
The Problem of Interest and Effort . The traditional school 
often had a tendency to believe that unwilling attention should 
take precedence over spontaneous interest in the learning object. 
If a pupil was genuinely interested in a subject—so much the 
better, but it was not generally expected and often not even en¬ 
couraged. Pure effort was seen to be character-building as well 
as a preparation for life in which problems were seldom interest¬ 
ing. In reaction to this another approach was developed in which 








,o .) : 

. 


aJ. 


brr 


;ci y: \.o'.Uj i,.ai a 










., ,., , 1 v •{ j -,l ■ ■ i ’ J' : r io . i. 

.:> . ,j. ;jY’: 7j/),' .1. • ..'o 

' . til ' 







** '■ 1 U 


, :u ,, .> i " j ; ... : 

aao ao^a ’Z-oyi,; 

’ 


o \t aa >oa J".a v:a 


•y. i.. 'O 



... 




O* :r■■ .i‘J' Oa a £ 






103 


almost the sole criterion was that the pupil be interested iri 
what he was doing* That is, either the object of learning must 
be "made' 1 interesting for the pupil, or the pupil need do only 
what he was interested in. 

The Experimentalists hold to neither of these two extreme 
theories. They do believe that genuine interest in the object of 
learning is necessary to proper education. In fact, they point 
out, where there is absolutely no interest there will be absolutely 
no activity. Even where the learning activity is backed by mere 
brute effort there you will still find a motivating interest; but, 
the interest will be in other than the object of learning. In 
such a case, where the pupil has no interest in his studies, he 
will have an interest, but it will be in things ulterior to the 
studies—e*g. in the avoidance of punishment. If a pupil ”learns” 
by brute effort what is actually learned will not be so much what 
is studied but what is the best method of having the appearance 
of learning the subject. As we already know, the values that a 
pupil has, his interests or his ”set” , largely determine what 
will be the result of the learning situation. The pupil, by 
brute effort, may well 11 learn by heart” fiftylines of poetry, but 
he will learn very little about peotry, other than it is objection¬ 
able and to be avoided. In arithmetic the same applies; the pupil 
may learn” the bare minimum by brute effort, but the learning will 
be mechanical and little used outside of school. No genuine 
facility and skill can be developed in this manner. Consequently 
the sole guarantee of attention and genuine learning in school is 
an intrinsic interest in what is being learned. 





























, 

■ 






' ' 






v' v' 


: 





t 
















■ 

, 

.. j. ... u.. j vi v - • ••• 

i7. , • ' 

. 

, . - . ' . 




: , j ;.o i 





1 , \j ■ . ■ ^ . i. . >.i’ •» f > -j • • ' “ 






■ 











On the other hand teachers who "make” things interesting for 
the pupil are not guaranteeing intrinsic interest. The "sugar- 
coating" of topics has just about the same result as it claims to 
avoid. For, if we "sugar-coat" interest tends to be in the sugar 
rather than what is sugared. As with the pure effort school, the 
sugar coating school produces interest in things ulterior to the 
learning object. In neither case does proper learning result. 

True interest on the part of the pupil, intrinsic interest, 
is the result of the pupil seeing the necessity of taking in the 
object of learning in order that he might achieve his ends. That 
is, it comes from a felt need to learn. If the object is to be 
learned the pupil must have an interest in it itself. No object 
of learning can be integrated as knowledge without this interest. 
So it is that intrinsic interest is seen as a vital part of inte¬ 
grative learning. Of course, interest may be direct or indirect. 
That is, a boy may be directly interested in aircraft design and 
thus have a vital, though mediated, interest in mathematics. And 
here, Dewey goes so far as to say that proper learning demands 

47 

that interest be equally as vital in the means as in the end. 

Integrative interest, he says, does not separate ends and means* 

both are of equal value. Interest which integrates broadly is as 

much in the process as it is in the result. As an example he 

cites the artist who is intent not only on the end product of his 

work but also in the quality of each of his strokes. 

Genuine interest, in short, simply means that a person 
has identified himself with, or has found himself in, a 
certain course of action. 4° 

This theory of interest points up the necessity of suiting 




. 










. 

. 

: V , ...... -.: 


. ' •. ' I 

... 

- 








. 

' s 






' 






t . • (i: 

' _ J ' •; , ; .1 • ... 1 *. ■ ■.) 

. ' - : .. 




r • id 


. 





105 


the subject matter to the child's 3tate of integration. Objects 
of learning must be selected with reference to the pupil's present 
experience, powers, and needs, otherwise there will be no intrin¬ 
sic interest aroused. It is obviously a dangerous practice to 
attempt to make the object of learning interesting after it is 
selected. The result of this practice is generally ’'sugar-coat¬ 
ing" . The first step in selecting a topic must always be to con¬ 
sider the pupil. However, it is often necessary to stimulate the 
pupil's interest in some topic which the teacher knows he is pre¬ 
pared for and has need of. In this case the pupil must be prepared 
for the topic by showing him its relation and value to his inter¬ 
ests. Elementary pupils, for example, may be prepared for subtrac¬ 
tion by showing them its value in "shopping for mother". 

Thus it is the job of the teacher to stimulate intrinsic 
interest in the topics of learning. For intrinsic interest means 
an awareness of relations and value. It means that the pupil is 
aware of what he must know and why he must know it. In a word, 
intrinsic interest is the guarantee of integrative learning. It 
is not a mere tool that can or cannot be used in education. It 
is essential to all phases of genuine education and is stimulated 
by all the techniques used in integrative learning. 

Yet, effort is not to be scorned in education. In fact it 
must be encouraged. For problem-solving, which is learning, 
implies effort. "Spoon-feeding" is not educative. Things which 
are too easy for the pupil are not problems—do not call forth 
his powers of thought, and, hence, do not increase his ability as 


. 

. ilu / 

. , r 

* 

' 

- ' * • ■' .. ■: " ^ ’ ' ' • 

* 

, < ’ • *• 












■ 

* 

• . 

« 

* 

, « r:' : >1 •- •' 




io6 


they should. Yet, genuine effort must be distinguished from mere 
doggedness, which is generally blind and unthinking. Genuine 
effort results frcm a problem which has no obvious solution, 
which stimulates thought, which demands an attempt to gain a 
clearer idea of ends and means, and which engenders new energies 
for the task. 

Good teaching, in other words, is teaching that appeals 
to established powers while it includes such new material 
as will demand their redirection for a new end, this 
redirection requiring thought—intelligent effort.49 

Activity in the Classroom. Since learning is an active pro¬ 
cess of doing, it should be expected that a learning situation 
will involve a certain amount of physical and vocal activity on 
the part of the pupil. Education cannot be integrative if the 
pupil is bound to his desk and limited to reading, writing and 
answering questions. Integrative learning naturally demands that 
there be a good deal of physical and vocal activity in the form 
of using the library, consulting the teacher, and other pupils, 
committee work, oral reports, demonstrations, working with physi¬ 
cal objects, self-expressive activities, etc., etc. 

The social nature of education makes the main demand for 
activity in the classroom. We know that, in order to provide 
integrative experience, the school must provide for the social 
needs of the pupil. And all our needs are to seme extent social. 
Our knowledge is largely a social product and its purpose is large¬ 
ly social use. Even our individual personality is mostly a product 
of living in society, and finds its justification in society. 

Thus, the pupil must learn the social use of his knowledge, and he 



• . 

i 

: " ■-•o'... i J'v. 

f 

' • - • '.fl'.! lO L', ' ■-! ‘t ' - • 

,. . . ' J . J 

■ • 

. 

; ,. ,,'X ' .3 J\ ...-j - « ■ - -■ 

; o - • • • ; p ■ ’ 

* 

r,,:.o ,0',; . ' 

. 

■-■■■;.. . •’ . : t : 

- ■ - ' 

' . •. r - . • •• • 

t » ■ • : 

.... X ' ■ ' 

' 

« 

t 



107 


must learn how to live in society. But such knowledge and adjust¬ 
ment can be assured only if the child learns in a social environ¬ 
ment. Consequently school work, as with work in society itself, 
must be a matter of working together M along common lines, in a 
common spirit, and with reference to common aims" * ^ The pupil 
must see his oim work as part of a social project. This will 
necessarily involve a free communication of ideas, an interchange 
of ideas and suggestions, and group evaluation of results. The 
medium of social learning will vary all the way from taking a 
particular part in some larger project, to simply working out in 
common some problem. In short, integrative learning is active 
rather than passive, social rather than individual. Working to¬ 
gether means helping one another, aiding in the growth of each 
other. It only becomes cheating and "messing around" when it pre¬ 
vents the growth of each other. 

Certainly it is necessary that even in this kind of environ¬ 
ment a certain amount of "order" must prevail. But "order" is a 
means to an end, and it is justified only in that it aids in the 
achievement of whatever end is in view. Quietness in the class¬ 
room is justified only in so far as it aids but does not prevent 
the achievement of the end in view. All workshops must have order 
in them if they are to produce, yet if they are producing they 
also have a certain amount of disorder. The means must be appro¬ 
priate to the end. 

The mental growth of elementary children, especially, necessi¬ 
tates physical activity, particularly if it is going to be self- 





. 










• > ' ■_ 














1 . ■ i 


* 

t 

. ■: 

. 

t . 



108 


motivated. For one thing, the young ones must learn the motor- 
control that animals have instinctively. As we also know, their 
development at this stage makes their activity practical rather 
than theoretical. They act in order to achieve rather than to 
find out. The activities which are typical of the younger ones 
are characterized by a direct interest in the immediate activity. 
Nor is it until later in their development that they are properly 
capable of postponing their ends and taking an interest in inter¬ 
mediate means of achieving it, which is characteristic of the 
intellectual and less physical forms of activity. Thus proper 
care for the needs of the elementary pupil will provide for a 
large amount of physical activity. When the theoretical stage of 
learning is reached, where the pupil thinks and works in order to 
find out, less physical activity is needed. 

Of course, any kind of activity is not educative or accept¬ 
able in school. The teacher requires a great deal of knowledge 
and skill in order to direct the pupil’s activities into educative 
channels. All activities should involve an understanding of the 
meaning of what is done, i.e., as far as possible the pupil should 
become aware of the relations of his activity. Naturally, no 
activity should be imposed on the children, i.e., it should be 
suited to their particular state of integration. Random activity 
is without purpose and in this much is not integrative, i.e., all 
activities must have definite purpose. It must also be remembered 
that activities cease to be integrative, in the sense of expansion, 
in so far as they are repetitive and habitual, i.e., activity must 
be progressive. 











« 






109 


A particularly worth-while form of activity, suited to the 
pupil who has not yet advanced to the place where he can begin 
more formally organized and theoretical study, is the enterprise. 
Though the enterprise is a study on its own account, and hence 
cannot be studied in any detail here, its advantages can be pointed 
out. Primarily it provides almost innumerable learning-leads that 
can be adapted to individual needs, interests.and abilities. 
Properly handled it is highly integrative* In any one enterprise 
a great variety of activities will be noted: reading, research 
in books, interviewing, field trips, manipulation of physical 
materials, oral and written reports, letter-writing, computation 
and measurement, etc*, etc. Science, history, economics, litera¬ 
ture, language, social training and so on can be brought into 
active use in any one enterprise. Here is learning by doing. Here 
the connection between ends and means is most obviously apparent. 
Here is real opportunity for growth.. 

For example, an enterprise on wool will involve such things 
as: a study of sheep-raising, actual carding, spinning and weav¬ 
ing of wool, field trips, writing for permission to visit farms 
and factories, comparison of the qualities of cotton and wool 
fibre, deductions as to the reason for the, earlier historical 
development of wool-weaving, the historical effects of the growth 
of the. wool industry, a study of the machinery involved and the 
simple mechanical principles of the machines, reports, committee 
investigations, illustrations, plays, etc., etc-. 

A few'words of warning here, however. The teacher must 














pr/. 


, 










,. 












no 


always remember that the purpose of the activity in an enterprise 
is to give the pupil insight into the principles and relations 
involved in what he is studying. The teacher is misusing the 
activity if he expects the pupil to gain facility and skill in 
some particular form of activity, e.g., weaving. The teacher must 
also be very careful to see that the activity is appropriate to 
the learning situation. If, for exampl , the pupils are studying 
ancient Greece, the teacher is mistaken to think that the pupil 
is learning about ancient Greece by learning how to weave on a 
hand-loom. Such a procedure is not justified simply because the 
ancient Greeks did it. It would be largely a waste of time, if 
what you wished to learn was how the ancient Greeks lived, for 
most of the learning time would have to be expended on learning 
the skill. A film on the techniques of hand-weaving would be 
muc|i more appropriate. 

Thus, the natural activities of the pupil should be utilized 

i 

rather than repressed and ignored. Dewey says: 

The child is already intensely active, and the question 
of education is the question of taking hold of his acti¬ 
vities, of giving them direction. Through direction, 
through organized use, they tend toward valuable results, 
instead of scattering or being left merely to impulsive 
expression.-^ 

Learning Proper Social Behavior and Discipline . We have yet 
to specifically answer a question that naturally occurs.in regard 
to the development of the pupil in a socially acceptable way. The 
question is, if we are going to allow the child to develop in a 
way suited to his own needs, how are we going to guarantee that 
this development will be socially acceptable? 



. 















. 











‘ , . J* 0 / ■ 




. 

. 



' 








’ 




t 

• 









, or V ■ j . . . 








' 


'■ ....; 'J" aJ 






. 


» 



■ 


■ 



, 






‘ , v •; .. 









r d •• ’ • - 





' 







. 


• J .1 ![:>'; :. 








: 



i.. 

* 





f . - ' - < ■ ' 

.. ■■ ' ■- 

' 

. 

. 


. ... « 1 







Ill 


The answer to this question is implicit in the section of 

the second chapter of this thesis, dealing with the individual 

and social factors in integration. We discovered there that the 

Experimentalists see the individual as a social creation. His 

values and the meaning of his experience are socially generated. 

Hopkins states this as follows: 

The individual does not experience himself directly 
since he cannot detach, see, and examine himself. He 
can experience himself only indirectly through the way 
in which other members of the group react to him. By 
examining their behavior toward him, he builds up sane 
concept of the kind of self which he is. This means 
that the individual cannot build the self apart frcm 
social interaction, or in other words that self is 
essentially a social structure and arises out of social 
experience. 53 

Hence, individual attitudes are created in and by the social 
situation. And if we examine the nature of the social situation 
we find that it in turn is determined by the ends toward which the 
people in the society are working. Thus, the morals of a slave 
society differ from those of a democratic society, or the rules 
of baseball differ from those of football, and the individual 
members of these social organizations vary their behavior accord¬ 
ing to the demands of the social situation. Accordingly, if the 
pupil properly appreciates the social situation of which he is 
part (as he should do very easily in a school in which education 
is seen as social experience) then he will at the same time 
appreciate the necessity of behaving in the way demanded by the 
nature of the social undertaking—he will appreciate the necessity 
for socially acceptable behavioi’. For example, it is impossible 
to enjoy the game of baseball, say the Experimentalists, unless 




f , o' ,, ' 






. 


dr'si X 



:..o . .'v- 

■ .‘i -v. '^.ir/v^xl 




l . I 

. « • 

/ ■ , : . .. . .. •• '■' ■ . ; • ••• 

■ • ^ ' ■ ' • ■ ' - ■ : 

: e .. ; 

■ j .. .. •- ' .J -• ■ ■ - 

■ • • 

; • . ± • 

i't o'I — ' ’ . : 

; f • • 



112 


the rules of baseball are followed, for if the rules are not 
followed the game of baseball does not exist. Similarly, if 
rules of social procedure are not followed, such as prime inter¬ 
est in the group, consideration for the rights of others, etc. , 
etc., the individual will not be able to benefit from the advant¬ 
ages of democratic living. And, as we know, the individual can 
come to an appreciation of the worth of social behavior only if 
its value is discovered in his actual living experience. 

This social control is not arbitrary or external to the aims 
of the individual, for the individual's purposes are created in 
the social situation. ”The control is social, but the individuals 
are parts of a community, not outside it."*^ Naturally, however, 
there will be times when individuals will not act in a socially 
acceptable way. When this happens it is because the individuals 
concerned either do not or cannot appreciate the true nature of 
the social situation (i.e., they do not understand what it is the 
group is trying to do and what their particular part is in the 
process). If the pupil merely does not understand, then the 
teacher must try to make it clear. The greatest assurance that 
he will understand the nature of the social situation is, of 
course, that the situation be properly planned with reference to 
the needs, etc. of the pupils. Often, though, the pupils cannot 
properly appreciate the social nature of a situation in which they., 
find themselves, even though the situation is otherwise highly 
educative in all other respects (e.g. very young pupils often find 
it impossible to respect the property of others, simply because 


. ... - . ■ ... .: . : '. .. : ; 

. 

:: . .. t ... :■ ; ■ ■. ' i' '. 

,■* . r ' ■ 

' i: 

... f 0 ’ ,i ' • • 

*... . 


. ' * 

t 

. 


' 

■ 

f .... ' •' "• 7 

. 

’. ■ , 

■ 

. . 





113 


lack necessary experience). In this case the teacher must exercise 
a certain amount of personal control until the proper ability to 
appreciate develops. Nor is this personal control, if directed in 
the interests of the growth of the group, an a-social or one which 
disregards the freedcm of the individual. 

Therefore, in a progressive school, the primary source of 
control is the nature of the work. The pupil learns to examine 
the social situation of the classroom, the nature of the work in 
progress, and adjusts his behavior according to whatever is neces¬ 
sary to the whole situation. This, as Dewey says somewhere, is 
the only genuine source of discipline. 

Consequently, the teacher must adjust to this process. The 
teacher mustn’t lay down rigid rules of behavior and ethics to be 
obeyed at all times. In fact the fewer rules the better. Rather, 
the teacher must at all times try to bring the pupil to an appreci¬ 
ation of why such and such behavior is necessary in a particular 
situation. That is, the teacher must encourage the pupil to act 
intelligently in each situation, as a person who is capable of 
responsibility for his own behavior. This does not mean that the 
teacher should have in his mind a rigid set of rules which he 
rationalizes and justifies as being necessary in each situation. 

The teacher must be as intelligent as he expects the pupils to be, 
for the pupils are quick to distinguish retionalization from reason. 
There needs to be much more flexibility in behavior expectations 
than is common. Sometimes it is quite acceptable for the pupil 
to stop work and indulge in a bit of horse-play; adults do it when 


* 

■ 

i.: iv ■■ ' 

- . ■■■ , 

t ■ « 

* 




- 


1 

, 








, . ‘ * 


' 


# 


, 


‘ 

' 



■ o 


* ' 




114 


they work together, why shouldn’t children? It is acceptable if 
it doesn't harm the educative process and particularly acceptable 
if it aids in it, as it often does. 

This approach makes discipline and behavior, as they should 
be, internal to the process of the pupil's development. Genuine 
discipline is a matter of appreciation and respect, not so much of 
pupil for teacher or teacher for pupil, but of them both for the 
joint effort of learning whatever is being learned. Though in a 
more narrow sense it is necessary that the teacher have more res- 
pect for the pupil than is general. If the teacher is going to 
aid in the pupil's integration, he must have understanding of and 
sympathy for what the pupil really is, really was, and really 
ought to. be. 



115 


chapter iv 

Vi/EAKNSSSES IN THE EXPERUvISNTALIST 'S PHILOSOPHY OF INTEGRATION 

A clear understanding of any concept demands that its weakness¬ 
es, as well as its strength, be known. Consequently, it is felt 
that this thesis is well advised to conclude with an examination of 
the weaknesses of the Experimentalist's philosophy of integration. 
Throughout the thesis much effort has been put into presenting a 
consistent and fair interpretation of this philosophy, and it is 
partly because of this that any criticism of the theory has been 
left until the conclusion. Nevertheless, the writer has found 
that he does have sane criticisms to make. These criticisms take 
the form of questions that arise from the theory but which are not 
satisfied by it—i.e., relevant problems which are not resolved by 
the theory. It might be added that none of these criticisms, even 
though they were correct, would have a fatal effect on the theory 
as a whole, but 7/ould merely recessitate some clarification and 
emendation. 

The writer is quite well aware that such criticism may easily 
amount to simply saying that he does not agree with the Experiment¬ 
alists. This, of course, would be of little value, and in order to 
avoid this the standards of criticism used have been consistency 
and concretization. That is, two questions have been asked. 

First, "Is this consistent with other parts of the theory?" And 
second, "What would this mean in application?" Naturally, there 
is the ever-present danger,that'the theory has been misinterpreted. 
As it is an ever-present danger, however, the only precaution that 












.. j. 




■ 













sot' 





i £V i i X if/ - s> • '•< ' ! .C ' 'i.'.-' J 

t , . * 


.. . t 


. • 




v f w. d *: l.. 

, 










116 


can be taken is an effort to be fair and to document as much as is 
feasible. This the writer has done to the best of his ability. 

PART I 

THE GENERAL G ON TRAP 1C ATI ON AS TO VALUE 

The weaknesses of the Experimentalist's philosophy of integra 
tion can best be exposed by first making a general statement and 
then, later, by examining its parts.* In general, then, the main 
weakness of this theory is that it has a double standard of value* 
That is, it has two distinct theories of value which contradict 
one another.* Naturally, since the value concept is such an import 
ant part of the integration theory, this phenomena is bound to 
cause some confusion in the general theory. (Nevertheless, as we 
have said before, the bad effects of this situation are surprising 
ly limited, considering the importance of the error. Common sense 
has no doubt been an important factor in this amelioration. ) The 
first of these value theories might be called the '•growth” theory, 
and the other may be labelled the "intrinsic-continuity 51 theory. 

According to the "growth" theory, growth is the standard of 
value in education. No experience is educative unless it’contri¬ 
butes to "continuing growth". We remember Dewey saying that not 
all developments and continuities are educative, and hence we must 
discriminate between them, using growth as our standard."^ By this 

*This general statement will merely be an overview of the problem 
which will attempt to make clear what it is in general that is 
being criticized. Because of this the reader should reserve his 
judgment of the analysis until the more detailed part is reached. 







V 





' 





























117 


standard, for example, we prevent the pupil from developing in ways 
which, though they may have a great deal of continuity, are anti¬ 
social* In a word, we are presented with a standard of values, 
applicable in all cases, which discriminates between various forms 
of continuity developments. On the other hand, however, we are 
presented with a contradictory theory value which says that there 
is no need to discriminate between various forms of continuity 
development. A goal becomes a proper aim in education if it "com¬ 
pletes or fulfills what went before it", if it has "intrinsic 

p 

continuity". In other words, all forms of continuous development 
are educative and have value. There is no need to discriminate 
between continuity developments; there is merely a need to see that 
they occur--i*e., we must merely prevent development from being 
discontinuous and disconnected* 

These two theories form an obvious contradiction which cannot 
be resolved* Particularly, as we shall see later, the Experiment¬ 
alists are unable to resolve it successfully. The "growth" theory 
is a qualitative theory of value which says that some kinds <pf 
continuity development are good and some are not; the "intrinsic- 
continuity" theory is a quantitative theory which says that all 
forms of continuity development are good* The "growth 11 theory says 
that all development must be judged by the one standard of value, 
"growth". The "intrinsic-continuity" theory says that there is no 
one value standard that can be applied to all situations, each 
situation is unique and all ends must be read in terms of the means 
?/hich solve the particular problem at hand. If a goal becomes a 



- 

, 

j ■ 0 ' . ■ ■ ■ j 

*• 







118 


value simply because it has intrinsic continuity and because it is 
a means of solving a particular problem \ then all values are means 
to an end, and no value can be good-in-itself. Yet, we are told 

by Dewey that: “Some goods are not good for anything; they are 

3 

just goods”. That is, the one theory will not allow the study of 
a subject unless it has direct utility, and the other theory main¬ 
tains that a subject need not be good for anything in particular. 

By using the standard ”growth" the teacher actively participates 
in the process of the child’s education by discriminating between 
various forms of possible development. If, however, the teacher 
were to follow the "instrinsic-continuity” theory he would be 
limited to merely seeing that the pupil were consistent in his 
development. The Experimentalists wish to establish the fact that 
man's development is “creative” and “free”; but the "intrinsic 
continuity" theory necessarily makes man's development determined 
by the continuity of his past. 

Thus, it should be clear that no one theory can contain two 
such concepts of value. Let us then examine them separately. 

PART II 

THE THEORY 0? 11 GROWTH" - 

The Inadequacy of th? Standard of "ilrowth”. The first question 
to be asked of the "growth 11 theory is, what is growth? That is, 
how exactly is it to be defined—what are its contents? To be 
sure, we have discovered, in the second chapter of this work 
(c/f p. 50 ) tuat the process described by this term is the process 
of integration. Consequently, we know that the concept of "growth” 






J 








M:: -,yj' ,< V-v . ' Ci 












. 


'Q"C' 









,V 


• ,.i • ; y... V. 1 ; 1 ’ J' v.-v J‘I, 0 >Ca/ 


. 1 : 


. . ' ' 4 








„ . : ; . 4' r. j' 'J' :\'1J V (4 oJ' 

>j - ' ' ■ ■ '■ ■ ' : 

v ■>’' ■' ' V ■' ' i; '.’v ' f$i|: ■> ' 

I. sJ* . 





119 


is one of continual integrative expansion of knowledge begetting 
increased self-control and adjustment. But, if this is all that 
there is to ’’growth"—if it is merely another term for integration- 
then it is not, as the Experimentalists claim it to be, a standard 
which makes qualitative discrimination between continuity develop¬ 
ments. In this case, it would be a purely quantitative standard as 
is the standard of 11 intrinsic continuity", and there would be no 
contradiction between the two value theories. Yet, as things 
stand, we know that this is not the case. The Experimentalists 
claim that the standard of "growth" definitely is capable of being 
used to make qualitative discriminations between kinds of continu¬ 
ity developments (i.e. integrations). Consequently, as we have 
already pointed out (c./f. p.50), it is unlikely that the Experi¬ 
mentalists would agree that "growth" is merely synonymous with 
integration. Indeed it is logically necessary to its being a quali 
tative standard that it be more than merely integrating. But, if 
"growth" is more than merely integration, what is it? And it is 
here that the Experimentalists fail to satisfy us. As far as they 
define "growth", which they generally do only by implication, it 
is merely the process of achieving a larger integration. 

To illustrate this point let us use one of Dewey's own exam¬ 
ples. If he can use the standard of "growth" to discriminate be¬ 
tween two forms of continuity development, then this standard is, 
as it claims to be, a qualitative standard which is sufficiently 
defined. In "Experience and Education"^-he claims that it is neces¬ 
sary to discriminate between one form of continuity development 






' . '. ir. ' 








fci 



















* 









120 


and another. The case in point is that of developing into an 
efficient criminal; is it "growth"? Dewey decides that such a 
development is not growth, and he claims to use the standard of 
growth in making this discrimination. By the standard of "growth", 
says Dewey, the development of criminal efficiency, though a con¬ 
tinuity development, is not "growth". This is so because it pre¬ 
vents development in other directions; namely, it prevents the 
social development necessary to democratic society. But, surely 
it is clear that by this means Dewey has not used the concept 
"growth" to make this discrimination. As far as it is ever defined 
by the Experimentalists, growing is merely the process of develop¬ 
ing larger and larger integrations. And, by. this token, develop¬ 
ment of efficient criminality is just as much an expanding integr¬ 
ation as is the development of efficient democratic citizenry. 
Neither form of development is necessarily self-limiting, and each 
begets ah expansion of knowledge, power and control. In as far as 
•’growth * 1 is defined, any development which has continuity is. growth-- 
has value and is educative. Thus, in as much as it cannot be used 
to make a discrimination which Dewey knows must be made, as well 
as does the general public, the concept of "growth" as a standard 
of value is inadequate, for it, in fact, allows all developments 
which have continuity to be considered educative, i.e., "growth 1 ! 
as defined is not a value standard. 

Possible Errors . The fact that Dewey is, however, by use of 
the standard of "growth", seemingly able to discriminate against 
grov/ing into criminality indicates that he has made one of two 



* 

.. 

■ - ■ i<o- r . •'/ '■ 

, 

. 

■ -j , 

v ” '^o v_. . ,i $ | « ;; ^ ; J ,0 

. 

. 

»'x ‘ ' , ■ ' . i f : • 

( ♦ • V — • ■ i 

, 

j , , 

' 

. 

. 

« . i o ash' . ; . ■ ii 

' 

« 



121 


possible errors. The first error he may have made is that of judg¬ 
ing growth by the standard of expanding democratic society. If he 
has said that developing into criminality is not to be considered 
as growing because it leads away from democratic society then he 
is guilty of a contradiction. For we remember that Dewey justi¬ 
fies democratic society because it contributes to "growth" ( c./f. 

P*45)* -In this case, however, he is justifying "growth" because 
it contributes to democratic society. This i$ a sheer case of play¬ 
ing both ends against the middle. Dewey must make it one way or 
the other. Either democratic society has value because it contri¬ 
butes to "growth", or "growth" has value because it contributes to 
democratic society. He can’t have it both ways. The other error 
he may have made is that of using a double standard—i.e. of some¬ 
times judging a development by the standard of "growth" and some¬ 
times by the standard of expanding democratic society. If this 
is the case, Dexvey has sneaked in another standard without telling 
us about it, and it is not justified by the rest of his theory, 
for he says, "...there is nothing to which growth is relative 
save more growth."^ 

The necessity of an Absolute Standard . Though the major weak¬ 
ness in the "growth" theory of value is that its standard, being 
inadequately defined, cannot perform the function it was designed 
for, the theory has one other important weakness. Because they 
deny the validity of absolute values, the Experimentalists deny 
that the standard of growth is an absolute value. But an examina¬ 
tion of its characteristics show that growth is, in fact, an abso¬ 


lute value. 






i. 


■ 










' BQ||n^| fs. 


. 

f ; i 

■ 

' 

. 

•; ' • , 1 

. 

■ - • . 

t J '■ "... - • • *" 


r.;. 0 ‘ i 

* 

: ' , ; . 1 i . ■ ! . ■ - • 






. 


,, i • 




1 

_ .,:o- ■ > ; .... ©no «« rf vtowtf 

. 

, 

. 

. 


9 











122 


The fact is that, there are various kinds of absolute values. 

The Platonic absolute was a reality more real than the things we 
know—a perfection--and it was supposed to be the prime aim of man 
to realize it. The Aristotelian absolute was a goal which man 
should work towards; it too was a final and ultimate end. Now it 
is this sense of the absolute value--a final and ultimate goad to 
be achieved—that the Experimentalists attack. And they have much 
justification in doing so, for no one who recognizes the nature and 
value of dynamic change as utilized by modern science, can be con¬ 
sistent in accepting the idea of an unchanging and ultimate goal. 

It is unjustified by scientific evidence and fatal to controlled 
progress. But, to reject the concept of an unchanging and ultimate 
goal is not to reject the concept of an absolute value, as the 
Experimentalists seem to think it is. If a value standard is non¬ 
contingent, i.e., if it is universally and invariably applicable 
then surely it is absolute. And surely the standard 9 growth 9 is 
an absolute standard, simply because it has these characteristics. 

Is not 9 growth® universally and invariably applicable to educative 
situations? The Experimentalists certainly claim that it is. 

Such an absolute standard does not have the faults of the 
classical absolutes. It does not rigidly limit for all time man*s 
aims and achievements. It does not produce unintelligent and dog¬ 
matic behavior. It Is thoroughly in accord with scientific behavior, 
and, as a matter of fact, is necessary to it. For, in as far as 
man does not have an absolute standard (in the sense of an abstract 
measure which is always applicable) his behavior is not socially 


. 

, i.yy:. ax.:-/ Hxrx ax -i xiai o.' .. J' xi etfp 

. 

« 

,. . . ; . ..x ; ; x ■, 

: , . .■ ..■ ••• i 7 ' J-::/. • •: . ’ 

. ■ \ : ,J' T 

... 

♦ 

. . i 

i j ■ s ' ■ , 


• • • • • 



,}2 " V J ?.:.l ' 

a* '• or. so a .2 J*oo' u x.; 

• 


.. : V 

. 

..1 \ j•- 


. 

... 

. 

si :: 


. . . ■; O ' 

•;‘.,V'V .:x 

V 


t 


■ 

; 

; ,1 x ...s ;I.ivin;; i: . 4 ' 





. j •. ■ re . j‘ x 


r ■ .. . ; ' t. .. . '.x a . ■ a - 0 i 

* 

■ » 

, • 

. ‘ ■ . 6; f J '"7. . . :• a 1 1 a:' 

xax'xax ■ ns x : si.) ^xXo&cfs ax &&&& 

. v • . ' . ; •' - . ' ■ a..;.:. . 



123 


organized or consistent. A variety of standards, a contingency of 
standards, or a lack of standards, produces an anarchy which is 
fatal to scientific behavior. For example, consider the chaos 
and retrogression that would result if, within the field of 
scientific procedure, scientists were to abandon their absolute 
standard of verification (sense-data). Each field of knowledge 
and endeavor must have its own absolute standard if this unsocial¬ 
ity and anarchy is to be avoided. The Experimentalist’s standard 
of "growth”, however, is not even limited to a particular field, 
for, since "education is living" and "growth" is its absolute 
standard of value, "growth" is a universal absolute value. 

In conclusion we might say that this phase of Experimentalist 
philosophy needs a good deal of alteration and investigation. 

The incompleteness and hedging that characterize Experimentalist 
value theory (not to mention its contradictions) prevents their 
theory from being, as they claim all theory should be, a satis¬ 
factory guide to practice. 


PART III 

THE " INTRINSIC CONTIMJITY” THEORY 
The name assigned to this phase of the Experimentalist’s 
value theory is quite arbitrary, for it could equally as well be 
called "the continuum of ends-means 9 theory.* Regardless of the 
name, however, the reader has been made familiar with the theory 
in Chapter II of this work ( c/f. p.28) 

* The Integrationists, of course, have no particular name for it, 
since they don't recognize it as a theory separate frcm the rest 
of their value theory. 




. 


. 


' 

, 

, 

■j u 

. 




. ' 

.:L- ; • . 



i 


i t ■, 


* 

' 




V. 

* 


' 

, . . ... 


, 

V 

■ 

i. ■' . ' ' ‘ I 

; 1 S 'v 1 i 1 ' . 



, j .: V • ■■■ " 

i 

. 

taaoi-t. ' ■ : : ■ *■ * CJ; 

- 

* 

' 

r 

: 

. r ■ 1 1 » 

. 






124 


In brief, the theory maintains that a value judgment can be 
properly made merely and entirely by reference to the facts in the 
situation which demands a value judgment (i.e. a problematic or 
inharmonious situation); that there is no need for a standard of 
value. Now certainly, the Experimentalists are justified in being 
impressed by the scientific method of dealing with problems, which 
demands constant reference to empirical facts* Science has been 
able to solve man's problems in nature precisely because it begins 
by examining the facts of the problem, and ends by verifying its 
hypothetical solution with reference to empirical facts. Moreover, 
it is a scientific fact that each problem we face has an element of 
uniqueness in its content, which means that we must recognize its 
particular factors if the problem is to be effectively solved. 

Dr. Ratner says in his introduction to Dewey's Philosophy, 
“...you can know that things should be different only as a conse¬ 
quence of knowing how they are". ^ 

If the above is true (as modern experience seems to have proven 
it to be), then it follows that no problem can be intelligently 
solved—no value judgment effectively made—without reference to 
the facts which are the content of that problem. What will be a 
good solution of the problem, what will be the end at which we 
should aim, what will be the specific nature of the value involved, 
depends upon the specific facts of the problem. There are no 
rules-of-thumb or ten-commandments by which we can make intelligent 
and effective value judgments. 

So far, so good. Up to this point we cannot quarrel with the 




... ■ '• • 


. * 

■ 

l 

„ ' . . • • - ' 1 ■ ’■ -V:- ■ ' 

1 

. : y • .■ V ‘ • ' -I 0 . * : ' - 'b • • i. - • J ' bOiy', • 


r ' 

. 

; '■ • ' ' ■ * ■' 


.. ' ’ . -I b:. ;' •. ’ •' : •' ’• • ■ 




' 


. 



, v . . vh;.. , .■ 

* 



i r, L'.v : toy , ’ r 

. 


125 


Experimentalists. Each problem must be solved on its own merits. 

But, cm a value judgment be made merely and entirely by reference 

to the facts of the problem? In order to decide this question let 

us see how Dewey proposes that it be done. In his work on the 

continuum of ends-means he says: 

The “value" of different ends that suggest themselves 
is estimated or measured by the capacity they exhibit 
to guide action in making good, satisfying, in a literal 
sense, existing lacks. Here is the factor which cuts 
short the process of foreseeing and weighing ends-in- 
view in their function as means. Sufficient unto the 
day is the evil thereof and sufficient also is the good 
of that which does away with the existing evil. Suffici¬ 
ent because it is the means of instituting a complete 
situation or an integrated set of conditions.7 

What Dewey is saying here is that the value—the standard of 
our judgment—is set by the nature of the problem. The "good" 
solution of the problem will be that which eliminates the conflict 
or supplies the lack—the solution which re-establishes the 
"intrinsic continuity", or integration, upset by the lack or con¬ 
flict. He gives the example of the medical doctor who decides 
what will be "good" for the patient on the basis of what is "wrong" 
with the patient. What is wrong with the patient is decided by 
observing what are the physical conflicts or lacks from which he 
suffers. Thus, the physician is able to make a value judgment 
without having to refer to a standard of judgment. The judgment 
is made merely and entirely by reference to the facts of the case. 
Moreover, there is no need to discriminate between various solu¬ 
tions of the problem, each having "intrinsic continuity", because 
there is only one solution which does "complete or fulfill what 
went before" and that is the solution which resolves the conflict 



, ' ' ■ 

. . v -; ■" 1 t • ;i, . • •" 

o -' i' ■. j 

; ... ;Y ) -ft.; : ■ ", ' /' ' ' ' fc 

. 

., "■ ' ' ' * C&.O ..1 J : — 

* 

- ; , 

* 

, — s. Jj JL-rV 1.; at ^ - ’■ >>&*•' 

. ' ,i ■ l ■; u .... . . .■ -ui 

V' :.. .:.o.L • - • vz?--’ . r .l; - lei ;.v, • --' ■- ■< 

4 '..-.; • -• - .iw.rJ nx<\i • nS~<Ua-,.'. - •-. *'- ! 

* j . i ■ , 

* 

„;i: J orl" 'it, ®i r js no taalia-i. '..oa w '- :i ^ l&w fm'fo 

. ' . . ... ■ . * ■ 

, 7 < /,.-V.., ..,',0;. ■ oJ'w'■* Vl:'.>.OC' 1 ^ ^ ' o'*"’' 

, 

, 

«■ 

r ,■ ■■ ' , ;■ ', : v . i ' ,i i ■ ' i ,o - - - •'■'- 



126 


or solves the lack. 

This theory is called "the continuum of ends-means" theory 

because it gives a particular meaning to ends and means. If the 

value or end-in-view that arises in connection with a particular 

problem is read in terms of the means of solving that problem, 

then it is clear that ends and means are merely different temporal 

phases of the same thing. The end or value is merely the means 

of solving the problem. "The means form the content of the speci- 

8 

fic end-in-view, not some abstract standard or ideal." Hence, 
ends and means form a continuum. Ends cannot be separated or 
entirely distinguished from means. All ends,are really means, 
and ends and means have equal value. This is so because the con¬ 
tent of each end is the means of arriving there, and each point- 
of-arrival is a means to further ends. Thus "ends" and "means" 
are merely different temporal terms for actual identicals. The 
terms "means" and "ends" apply primarily to the position occupied 
by acts as stages of a single development and only secondarily 
to things or objects. Ends, or values, are discovered within 
the facts of the particular problem. 

Now the question is, has Dewey's physician really made a 
value judgment merely and entirely by reference to the facts of 
the case, i.e., has he done it without reference to a standard of 
value? More exactly, our question is, can anyone in any case do 
so? In order to aiswer this question let us consider what a 
sadist or a professional murderer would have done with the patient. 
They certainly, in t heir capacities as sadist and murderer, would 







' 




* 




r 











- 




?: . ; .L . V ;; . ... 


* 

. 



’ : ' ■ * 






127 


have done differently than did the physician. Here, the question 
is why? It is evident that the difference in treatment of the 
problem would not stem from a lack of factual understanding. 

Given that each was an expert, each would have an understanding 
sufficient to his purpose. And it is the word "purpose" that 
gives us the answer. The physician, the sadist, and the murderer 
would each treat the case differently, would each have a different 
kind of success, simply because each would have a different pur¬ 
pose, each would have a different standard. Without a standard 
of value a problem may be justifiably handled in almost any way 
at all. 

The "intrinsic continuity" theory of value, of course, makes 
but one qualification and this is that the solution must be in 
continuity—must be integrated with—the previous development of 
the situation. That is, it must not be disconnected or erratic. 
But this qualification makes no difference to the fact that the 
problem can be handled in many different ways and still be con¬ 
sidered "good". By this token the potential deliquent in the 
classroom can be coached into efficient deliquency or led into 
social behaviori it makes no difference which, for the one is 
euqally as "good" as the other, each is integrative with his back¬ 
ground. Hence, it should be obvious that without a standard of 
value (and an absolute, or universally applicable one at that), 
it is impossible to make value judgments. 

The reader might question the last statement by saying that 
surely each of the various judgments could be considered a value- 
judgment, and that, therefore, value judgment was not impossible 






f . ■. ' i 1 ; ? 

• ' 

. 

■ ■ 

■. y. 1 . ,1, . y. - V. r ' • ■ - ■ "■* • ■ J - y ■ - : ■ - • 

..J. / ■ M ; " • : '• ■ ';' ■ • -■ ' • ■ 

. • e ' 

; 

, 

... ... , 

j r j • , Y..-.UY., • , -yt jyyy -J,y Oyy l-y.n o;> * y.tJ 

\ ■ .. - .; . ■ ... . ' . ' ■ - 

;. ' , * 


- j jo.-V ; j oo, y JJ:.C .. ■ aKl i-'c 

.y,y ; y;y,.. :’ yy. • : yo : 

* 

,. : ; i:C' 0 ; v r- i :j ■ ■ Y ■ . ..." 

.... o • ' '‘.i - V . t ■ ' :: :■ ... .yy ! ; j. : / : ' :> X .;> - • 

' 

,' . •• ?>s. s ■ , * - ■ - 

:-3 • • , '. ■ r . • ■ 

t ■ ■ • ■ ■ 

, . • . ’ J . ' . , . J . ' '■ ' 






. ' ■ ' 
. . . , ■ « ■■ 


128 


without an absolute standard of judgment. In this case it merely 
needs to be pointed out that if each of the different judgments 
is equally as "good" as the other, then one is no better than the 
other. Consequently, there is no question of "good", “better" or 
"best"—which questions value-judgment is concerned with. All 
that this theory allows us to be concerned with is the consistency 
of our judgment. Hence the theory negates the possibility of 
value judgment. In order to avoid this lack of value, we not only 
need a standard, but we need an absolute standard. That is, we 
need some one standard that will make each judgment measure up on 
the same scale. 

"If It Works, It is Good" . More than this, however, the 
"intrinsic continuity" theory ignores the fact that the problem 
is set by the value rather than vice versa , and in so doing the 
theory reduces us to the standard supposedly abhored by the 
Experimentalists; "if it works, it's good". To return to the 
example of the physician, the murderer and the sadist, we note 
that not cnly did they have different treatments for the patient 
because of their various standards, but also they each saw in the 
patient a different problem. Because of his standard the physic¬ 
ian saw the case as a problem of how best to relieve suffering. 
Because of his standard the murderer saw the case as a problem of 
how most efficiently to dispatch the patient. And because of his 
standard the sadist saw the situation as a problem of how best to 
prolong and increase the suffering. In school the same applies. 
Various standards make various problems out of the same case. For 





< 

iC V ->I3 £ . • !■«, 

' 

, 




. 

, 

• 


. 

' 


» 

- 

■ 

e;/'0 Mo 


0 




: 


. 



* 

c : , .' .. .. • !.■ • j ' ■ " J - ; » .. 

. • • 

. 

: ' 

, 

, ( yl . .. ■ .. . • 

- 

, 

. 

. ' 

. 

t <. .. .. 1 ■ ■ 

. 

. 


129 


example, by traditional standards the pupil who refuses to work 
would more than likely be a mere discipline problem, but by modern 
standards he would more than likely be considered a guidance pro¬ 
blem. Thus, we see that it is the standard which sets the problem 
and not, as the Experimentalists claim, the problem that sets the 
standard* 

We began the previous paragraph by saying that the above 
error leads to the theory that "if it works, it’s good"* This is 
so because, according to the "intrinsic continuity" the cry, we 
need merely be concerned with solving the problem, and if the one 
situation can be seen as a hundred different problems then there 
are a hundred different solutions, all equally "good". Hence, 
if the solution works, it's good. W© have no justification for 
concerning ourselves with what it works. One way of seeing a 
situation, one solution, is as good as another. It all depends 
on what you believe is lacking or inharmonious in the situation, 
and one belief, as far as this theory allows, is as good as the 
other. It doesn’t matter whether we think the child should be 
more criminal or less criminal, so long as we achieve what we 
think needs to be achieved. The disasterous effect of carrying 
this theory into school practice, or any practice for that matter, 
is obvious. 

Denial of Things Good-in-Thems elves . It might also be pointed 
out that in order to believe that a value judgment can be made 
merely and entirely by reference to the facts of the problem 
necessitates a belief that there are no things good-in-themselves. 




> . ■■ •, ■ ■ J. ‘ j - .. •: " ... . ' . "...: .... t 

. 

. ' "■ • '■ : : •. ■; o ! m: -, 

f 

. •: , . 

: - -J •/ L . ' ■ . • - •r: ■ ■ r 

« ' •- f 

, . . : 

f. ■; ii ; ,: ' L.iOO . . ; ' 2 vl ■■ 0 £C! C!" hOW 

;... j \ : . e ., ..:' r oi ... j.j a 0 a l 'y-U xo 

. . . , 

■■ ’ ... ! j , • .. / .. . ■ ‘ 

' ... : j : ... . : ,V ' . - /. . ■>. < o 

. 1 ; , , . •/. 

,. ;uuJJ x «Jj- ; J: :.,ur inoo-o y.£A ov 3 l Ivo rev j-o/jyf no 

.. . . a b s.t ( < 

■ 

v 7 '/ . ov; oe < x ;2 y 10 I s..:- o;..o» o e^XOiii 

. :■ .. x . , . •::: I >:. . . x o ■ lo r ' i.o; :. v; o..i 

* e.ycxvtfo 

■ - • .... . , j. . : v _ . _ ./ ■ ;. . ... . 

. ." j ,n ... ■ \,lrY , ,o:;,o ov::-J:lou 'xorno i' ; l $;;u 

r-;'L. f J nj'yox ol' eone r i-3 loi a* bm 

. . - . - . . .' :;i ri ", . o uij J': ' L ' f . ,.i j ..f Vc.^0 0 I 



130 


(If there were things good-in-themselves problems would be solved, 
at least in part, by reference to them,) Thus Dewey speaks of 
"♦..the fallacy involved in the position that ends have value 
independent of appraisal of means involved and independent of 
their own further causal efficacy."^ Now this is most clearly an 
out-and-out contradiction of what Dewey says elsewhere. In 
“Democracy and Education* 1 he points out that things good-in-them¬ 
selves are necessary to value judgment of any kind. 10 

The Value of Ends and Means . If our criticism of this parti¬ 
cular phase of the Experimentalists’ value theory is correct, 
then it follows that ends and means are not of equal value, for 
the means are subsidiary to the ends. It also seems that this 
conclusion is upheld by common sense. It may be true (though it 
is doubtful) that the artist is as much interested in each brush 
stroke as he is in the final product of his work, but it is 
certainly not true, by coxrmon experience, that even the best 
student is as much interested in the means of achieving his goal 
as he is in the goal itself. The student of psychology who must 
learn a minimum of statistics in order to do the clinical work he 
has set his heart on is not as interested in statistical studies 
as he is in clinical work. The student of modern philosophy who 
needs a background in classical philosophy is not as interested 
in the latter as he is in the former. Certainly, the more interest 
a student takes in means the more knowledge he will have of the 
means. The teacher should encourage this, but within definite 
limits, for if the interest in the means becomes too great the end 




1 - '.j- i' "0 ' 0 7 ' - .'■ ' 

... -■ ' ; : 

■ 

t w ; r v^o&oille- X.ea?iot- nf'j ■ 

,, • , * ; . 'I-: ’ ' ■ - '■ 

. 

, 

.. ...;; . j; •. ' .. v .. . .■ 

■ 1 * 

• # ' y I 1 . O' ; ' ■ : • '• 

, . 


. . j. i i St ). ■ • 0 . 


, 

, • :T i, ■ ", '■ J O' 

r , O ( ' ' V" ,o , Jo X- ' • ' 0 " ' ::j ' •' 

. ' V , •., M.iJ f ■ . : ■ . ' * • ■' ■- ' ‘ ,J - " 

; ' •.; , . ,. ;■.v o<. o‘ ' £••' vo .5 o j O'O, 

.. .. ' . 71 . .00 j ■ . ' * 

c-J* o.", -,4 •,oooo'. ;d oooooo".-: o: mi-drd-x’-'* 

■ . - 

, 

. . * 

. • • : ■; ■ ■ ''or - 0 ■ 0:0. Ou .... o:o 





131 


will be replaced by something more in line with the means. 

It follows from this that means are, in fact, separated from 
ends. An end may often be achieved by a variety of means, and 
quite often it makes little difference which of various means are 
selected. For instance, my end-in-view may be to get down town 
at a certain hour; it may easily be of little significance whether 
I walk or take a bus. Or, to take a more serious problem of valu¬ 
ation, my end-in-view might be to gain experience in school admini¬ 
stration; it is quite possible that it will make very little 
difference whether I do this at the elementary, intermediate or 
senior level. It seems apparent, however, that the Experimental¬ 
ist's warning about the separation of ends and means does have 
some validity. In considering means it is very dangerous to ignore 
the end. In choosing means one must be careful that they are 
appropriate to the end, that in the process of achieving the end, 
more goods are not lost than gained. Thus, the first roast-pork- 
eaters did not choose means that were appropriate to their end of 
eating roast pork because in making their choice of means they 
ignored the relative value of roast-pork-eating as compared to the 
value of their home. Conseqiently, the teacher must always be 
very careful to consider the relative value of the end in any 
school project before choosing the means of achieving it. If the 
aim is to teach the pupils some simple concept in arithmetic, it 
may be very wasteful in consideration of other aims to do so by 
means of a complicated enterprise. 

Continuity and Creativity . The concept of the continuum of 




.v lo, uril-'i't 


. 


• r . - ' 

, 

- ■ 

« 

■ 

t* 

■ 

: '.. v 0,1 ': r • i - 'U\i ol'Ji ■ ■ . • ' :.{ - : - 

• , . •• <■ ■_ r ' 

- - ; « »• * ' 

- 

. r ■■ - r .: 'l ■>: - • ,: : ' . 

-- ; - : ... * 

. 

....: ; ; '■ , i ; . - .. ;> N, :C •// ' - ''' - f - ' 

. 

... .' ... ' :! ‘ to : ■" ■ - 

4 , ' ... 

. ■ 





132 


ends-means also emphasizes another consideration which is very 
important to the philosophy of integration. This, of course, is 
the point that whatever is projected for the future must be built 
upon a sufficiently firm foundation of past development. This 
means that our future is always conditioned by our past. Our past 
invariably puts us in a position where our choice of aims is 
limited, i,e., there are certain things we can successfully do 
and certain things which we cannot, even though we try. This 
realization calls for realism and objectivity in all our projects; 
it puts system and science into our behavior. In knowing how we 
are limited and why, we are limited, we know the factors that 
govern our experience, and having this knowledge we have the power 
to manipulate these factors towards achieving whatever end we 
choose among the various possibilities present in the situation. 
The intelligent teacher will not try to do the impossible with 
his pupils but will try, rather, to do the best possible under the 
circumstances. 

This concept is emphasized by the continuum of ends-means 
theory, but if that theory is carried to its logical conclusion, 
however, that very concept of creative knowledge, freedom, and 
self-control, is negated; for, if the end of man’s action is 
determined by the means of solving a problem, and if the nature of 
the problem is strictly a matter of empirical fact, rather than 
something which is partly determined by empirical fact and partly 
by evaluation, then man's intelligent action is neither free nor 
creative. Plan's intelligence adds nothing to knowledge; it is 




' , «■ : 

i $3 ■ ■ ■ 

. 


; 1 > ; v i . * >' i.- I 

•l - v .Jruou \\iS 

: 

■ 1 ' ■ 


„iO 1 I • ‘ 






• , 








, « * ' 




. 




••• ; ":.;y ‘V v --j :.'x1vr . ... 

.I'.';;. :d o . 

•- 


r."„ yi , r , < .j;;u ho^lndi C^s 

?: ''(n'i! ■ < 

. ; y' : . ■ Vt yy !■■■■■■..: ; •/; yy >.s ft o~ o 

j-r. ~ , £ [■. ■ •/. ‘^yi' ;tryy;yii, : >.;\ 

. 

* 

£ • ' • - 

e :• ' . v ' '■ ' ; : ' f ' ; 

■ . '■ : : ’ - ' •” 

♦ 

• .I ' •••'.:■■ ' L - ‘ '• ! ■ ' ' : ' 

: ; 


133 


merely a medium far recognizing what is correct. Man is free and 
creative only in the making of mistakes, for what is the correct 
action is determined by things over which man has no control. 
Moreover, if we consider closely the Experimentalist's concept 
of the source of knowledge we will find that man is not even free 
to make mistakes. He is entirely determined. 

The Experimentalists believe that knowledge is a mere "deri¬ 
vative" of experience, past and present.So knowledge becomes 
determined on one side by experience. On the other side knowledge 
is determined by the "structure of the organism". Consequently, 

"The senses lose their place as the gateways of knowledge and take 

12 

their rightful place as stimuli to action”. 

Certainly, this form of determinism is not mechanistic. It 
allows man to be an active agent in experience, changing as well 
as being changed, but it limits man to "freedan" of the merely 
biological organism like the jelly-fish—which "freedom" is 
illusory. For, in what sense does it allow man to be "creative", 
"responsible" and "self-controlling”? Surely if man's reaction 
to a situation is determined by that situation, by his past experi¬ 
ence and by his organic structure, it is a contradiction to say 
that man is "creative", "responsible" and "self-controlling". On 
this basis man dods not control nature; he is controlled by it (his 
own and his environment’s). Though natural forces act through 
the intermediary, man, it is they that must control man rather 
than vice versa. 


Ratner expresses the same contradiction when he says: "To 



: ... • ' ' O ' ' ' ■ ^ 

' . '■ 


! 



. 






, 

■ , > ■; - • • "•!’ ! ; „ ..! ,■ .: : 

' j • . »; ' . : . , ", : 1.. X ' " 

’ I 

.. ; , :/ '.'■ - ■ i ' ' '■ : ' : • ' 

; 

♦ 

. 

. 

. 

; 



134 


control it is necessary to be controlled; to exercise control over 
it is necessary to be controlled by." 1 ^ 

If man is controlled, he cannot control. Surely none of the 
Experimentalists would say that the shovel controls the sod 
simply because it is an intermediary for man's control over the 
sod. If it cannot be said that the shovel controls, how can it 
be said that man controls when he is controlled by nature? 

The present writer is not saying, at the moment, that the 
Experimentalists should be determinist or free-willist—though 
naturally he would prefer the dignity of having a free-will. It 
is merely being pointed out that it would appear logically impos¬ 
sible for the Experimentalists to believe in both theories at once. 

It seems obvious that man is limited by his environment but 
he must have choice within those limitations if we are to be 
justified in considering him "creative 0 and "free". 

In summation, then, our conclusions are that the "intrinsic 
continuity" theory is an unsatisfactory theory of value since it 
negates the possibility of value judgment, reduces us to the crass 
utilitarianism which the Experimentalists wish to avoid, contra¬ 
dicts the possibility of goods-in-themselves, fails to distinguish 
between ends and means, and denies that man is free-willed, 

PART 17 

FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS 

Developing Social Behavior in the Pupil . We remember that, 
in connection with individual and social values, the Experimental¬ 
ists maintain that individual values are a social creation—are a 










: I ' 

' .:: : o' oJ-‘ ooo/: c,l i 

* , X 

. ; . : rod?. ••• ; . :j : .:i : i- ...Vo. ■./ 

- 

•; ;■ :• 1 : •' : ! •' : / v- - :':" r'j-'l ,uo -J i::*. 

• . : • . ' i < 

.. ■ . ■ 

' 

. : f ' ■ ' 

' 

' 

. •\ . *■ ■. ; . i l £ 

■',< 1 . ' ’ . . o . , •’ 

■ 

■ '■ - ri -; ; 

I 

. 

, 

• ..■.../ ■ 

, 

, 

. ' . .o . ' .. : • - 0 v 








1 35 


creation of the social process (c./f. p.44 and p.45). Consequently, 
they believe that an individual's values, once he fully realizes 
the social situation of which he is part, are those which are 
socially acceptable because socially necessary* As a result, they 
maintain that to ensure the pupil's development along socially 
acceptable lines the teacher need only make sure that all the 
pupil's experience is socially meaningful* 

In its most important aspects this theory is very convincing. 

It is hard to see how anyone, having sympathetically studied this 
theory, could deny that individual values are largely a social 
creation* Yet, surely we must distinguish between their being 
socially conditioned and their being socially determined * If it 
were true that individual values were "really" social—that the 
social situation necessitated the acceptance of social values, as 
is maintained by the Experimentalists—how could the individual 
possibly fail to accept and apply social values? Since the 
Experimentalists maintain that all meaning (value) is social, it 
follows that it should be impossible for an individual's values 
to be other than social. Obviously, this is not the case* 

If man is a free agent, as the Experimentalists at the same 
time maintain he is, then it follows from this that his values are 
not "really" social, anti-social, or a-social. If man really has 
free will there is no necessity of any kind that his values be 
one thing or another. This allows for the fact that man's values 
are socially conditioned— i.e* that they are created within the 
social nexus and limited by it. It also allows for the fact that 






* . 

* 

■ 

, 

* ?: '■ 

.j; • 0".., : ..v‘ t-[ "..'J 'r~'W '■ , 4 

' ' ' 

■ 








3/lt v OXj' -- - :. 


I 

• ■ 


ti , lai: ... . 


' 




... j 






U.A OX I,-. 


•I t 










■j ... ^ :xi. 





# ' 

. 


,.: .. 'o oi 


'v o'j t ,o u 

♦ 

0 C, O': . j:V,r ' x.XX I' . ' 




. C . .. 

. 

. 


i . ’ 

* 


i 


' 


;fvvi hoM .oo.O o x .'ox. x 


136 


if the vast majority of individual values were not social, the 
possibility of social living, and the benefits arising therefrcm, 
would disappear. It does not, however, make it necessary that 
each individual, even in his own ’•best" interest, accept social 
values. The prima facia evidence of common experience indicates 
that man does have freedom of choice, and that certain self- 
centred and parasitic individuals are successful in choosing to 
misuse the fact that others live in a socially-conscious way, in 
order that they, the parasites, may benefit themselves to an even 
greater extent than they probably would if they lived in a socially- 
acceptable way. 

Dewey illustrates the necessity of accepting social values by 
using the example of a game. 1 ^ If a game is to exist at all, 
says Dewey, the rules of the game must be accepted. If individuals 
disregard these rules their fun will cease because the game will 
disintegrate# But, as a matter of fact, we have all seen children 
cheat during a game and receive a great deal of pleasure in getting 
away with it. We all know people who have developed this selfish 
and parasitic attitude and carried it out into adult life. We 
cannot say of them that they have misconceived their own interests— 
though we can say that their selfish interests are parasitic in 
that they depend upon the sociality of others# We can merely say 
that their values are anti-social. Nor can we say of than that 
they are not growing as much as the socially-conscious person. It 
seems apparent that a person can grow as much and as integratively 
in an anti-social direction as in a social direction. 




0:1 J’ « X« l 

1 1 : : V ■ ‘ 1 • V 

, 

: ; 'i I: ,riX-;i lo 4 / U.i;ua:. q. 

, 

• Vi'- ■ - ■■ - '' 

' 

•' . ...;■■■:. i.i ; .j.{ < v. ,...’ v .. :.:i -0^-" 

c.:: v. V: : . 'J- ■■■ 

* 


■ V',-:. . D/., .^ ;.X r; 7 ^i c,y:h JT ;r. 

.'o J. 

, . ,; 4 , 1 : '>< i: U 2 ■■ ■ - 


, . ; ; .... r : • , ,-j :h cx'u c b:.: 

iitvva ou 

. . : ... ■.. .. 4 3 . ;i X "X 

X.'U’yC’U 

■ ■ : .... i.: ■: ■ . ' - ■j' - - • - 

. 

... jjlev Xti : ool. ... 

• . . < , . . 

. , ; v ’ 

. 




) 


1 ii’.'i " s x:..r o -■ 


.i 'II:.; evx 

, ... . . ’ . * - J ' 

.J: ' -i c 

..' ' V ‘J> : ' :X. : ' : ' . • . X' 4 .X'..' 


* 

. 

v ; '' u-. -.j .;i ]'■; "i .jo o.t h:u$ 


' ■ 


• 

, x „ oCi ....'■.« x . 4 ' X)'.. ... -.'ii./ 


. 


,f a.:icl- • i' '\- 3 - : i :> r 

i . ■ ■ ^ ■ 


, . . • ,e ■ ■ 


' . ; ' • ' ; 

„ 



137 


In all, this phase of the Experimentalist's value theory 
seems to be unsatisfactory in many respects, and to involve itself 
in contradiction. Yet, on the other hand, it involves some con¬ 
cepts that are very important to a philosophy of education. Of 
prinary value is the concept that the only way a pupil can truly 
appreciate social values is for him to have a thorough understand¬ 
ing of the facts of social existence which demand (though not with 
binding necessity) the acceptance of certain values. To return 
to Dewey's example, by way of illustration, the best way of ensur¬ 
ing fair-play in games is to demonstrate to the pupils how fair- 
play is necessary to the very existence of the game. In the case 
of classroom discipline the pupils should realize why it is neces¬ 
sary to the project under way that they behave in a certain way. 

In conclusion; then, v/e may say that it is up to the teacher 
not only to make the pupil's experience socially meaningful but 
also to see to it that the pupil takes the proper social meaning 
from his experience. That is, the teacher must take care that 
the pupil's natural interest in others develops in a co-operative 
rather than in a selfish way. This can be dene only by developing 
proper habits through leadership, example, and social compunction. 

Morality . As to the Experimental 1 st.'s concept of morality 
in particular, we remember that he sees moral problems as being 
identical with other problems. In other words any value judgment 
is a moral judgment (c./f. p*3°)» 

As this is more strictly a problem in ethics rather than in 
educational philosophy, we will limit ourselves to saying here 





;• , . • ■ v v : . . , ,■ • \ ‘ ‘ • • ■ ■' : - - 



.>0 a . 



> 




( . 

. 


■ V : 


. 

















1 


0: •' V 



. . 





. 


• 


/ i,-. 

/ . .. '. 




. ; . a: . . ■ .j 








... ... 

U‘ . . 1 • ■' 

. 


. 

.i 

. 




: . i ./.yj : 


' 

- 

■• , , V ,J\, 


■ ■ 






, ... 

a’ 

■■J 


’ 











• 







v :• 1 . J 


. 

.. •; • a . 


-.. 1. ■ J _. 


■ 









' 












. '.•/?'' , ' . .. 







. 















' .. 










..... . .: 






\£ r : 0 : 





* • ' 

• - _ . .. ' 



" 





.. .j 









- . 

. . . 'v ^ • I 



> 




r 


- 




i 



■ .’«* - 




9 It 


. 



. jij .,'i a?, a: ■/; 




. • 


7«d; tenta'X :: '</ 

r .... : ' J 



.■: •• . .. i- •• . o .'i.. ■ ' J -• .'. 

' 

: . .... ■ : V , . • . ■.' ■ S. ■' 




138 


that this concept seems to contradict what is commonly agreed upon 
by moral philosophers and what seems to be indicated by canmon 
experience* 

Surely a man who makes a mistaken judgment as to the value 
of two kinds of pleasure (let us say he is choosing between going 
to the movies and staying home with a book)—surely this man is 
not to be morally condemned. No doubt such a judgment is a value 

judgment, but obviously the differentia that makes for moral-value- 

% 

judging is lacking. Consequently we cannot say that all value 
judgments are moralistic. 

Concluding Evaluation of the Experimentalises Philosophy of 

Integration . It has no doubt been noted that all the apparent 
weaknesses of this philosophy seem to be in the field of values. 

In general the weakness has taken the form of the use of two contra¬ 
dictory theories of value, the one upholding the necessity of a 
standard of value and the other denying it. As a consequence of 
this neither theory is consistent, far the Experimentalists are 
constantly being forced to rationalize the conclusion of the one 
theory in terms of the other. 

The writings of the Experimentalists indicate that if they 
saw the necessity of making a choice between the two theories 
they would select the 9 growth 0 theory rather than the 8 intrinsic 
continuity 8 theory. The present writer is convinced of this be¬ 
cause the 8 growth 8 theory has the potentiality of being developed 
into a system which would uphold all those concepts which the 
Experimentalists are most ardent in proposing. It could be, in a 
completed form, entirely consistent with the scientific method and 






: . •; .'<•/ X: 

7 J:.-; •; i 

. 



. . ct 


•• 




. 





: ' « ; ■ 


. * ’ -• 

. * ...... 

' . ■ . . : n l.<cyr- K [ 

, ■ ' * 

■ ' 

' 


XrdX o ->i ;; X $ l i o.j'.u o friict 'io 





: ’X ■ 




- 

■...J.X., 'a 

b : o. :k vrioo 

- 



..o XL-.: uiix-v; v'oi^j .. 

' . , tv ' ' 

■ 




139 


at the same time be consistent in maintaining man's freedom and 
creativeness* On the other hand, though it appears to be scien¬ 
tific, the "intrinsic continuity" theory denies the possibility 
of man's freedom and creativity, and is thus not consistent with 
the prima facia evidence of common experience. More than this, 
however, the "intrinsic continuity" theory contradicts itself in 
necessitating the denial of all value judgment. It limits us to 
crass utilitarianism. 

As it stands, the "growth" theory limits growth to mere 
integration, thus making it impossible for it to be used in the 
discrimination of value as it was designed to do. Consequently, 
if this theory is to be a satisfactory guide to practice, "growth" 
must be recognized as an absolute standard and it must be given a 
content that is more than mere integration (c./f. pp.118-123). 

Finally, in his own self-defence, the present writer would 
like to b© allowed to point out that the Experimentalists and 
their devotees have a tendency to make use of an unfair means of 
defence to which their theory is particularly well adapted. 

The contradictory nature of their value theory allows them, so to 
speak, to play both ends against the middle. When, for example, 
one points out that their theory leads to the maxim of "whatever 
works is good", it is very easy for them to defend themselves by 
pointing to some other phase of their theory which denies this. 

It should be apparent that the very use of this mechanism is self- 
condemning for their ability to do this reveals the contradictory 
nature of their the cry. 






. - ‘ ■ . :' .. : x x • •-> ■ ■ - 

' 

' ! $<J f l ' ■ ■ 

; ■ j ; ,-o . r 6Y> ' ;>■.; 

. r ■ . i to; j . ' ■. ;r,.. . ! J ' l: ‘ t vrswoti 

, 


' 






- < 

■ to ; ; u; 

■ * • ■ . * 

« 


t ' t i. , > ’ 

- 

'••.vV: ' 0 00 ' /; O :r to t . <: r: 

... :i ■ • ■ t ot; t t o 0 

. ... V: i , I ; :.:t 


, :Ui 


' 


J, - "t • . ' J ; ;■ - ^ 

., ; :j .; : i a 0 - .. r o • ' ; r-. ... -tv ‘ 




s i> 


■ 




* 

c ■ 'i" -! .. , ■ 

v t .. 1 'to .'to . 

r . 

; 


; . . • . 

* i ; ; f '' ’ 

;■ . •: ■'it:; j / ' t ; x.ih ' , 

. 

\/:,oo.tt to ‘lOuio ruOCo :.C"\ 

/it 





140 


REFERENCES - CHAPTER II 

1. L. T. Hopkins & others - Integration, Its Meaning and Appli¬ 

cation - p. 1* 

2. Ibid. - p. 23 

3* John Dewey - The School and Society - p. 9 

4. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 89. 

5. L. T. Hopkins & others - op# cit. - p. 4. 

6* Ibid * - p. 43 

7* Ibid # - p. 45* 

8. Ibid * - p. 48, 

9- Ibid , t p. 2j5 

10* Ibid * 

11. John Dewey - Experience and Education - p. 26. 

12* Ibid . - p. 79* 

13. Ibid . - p. 80. 

14. I* T® Hopkins & others - op. cit. - p. 112. 

15. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 2. 

16. John Dewey - Experience and Education - p. 38. 

I?. L. T. Hopkins & others - op. cit. » pp. 1-2. 

18® Ibid . - p. 7. 

19. John Dewey « Interest and Effort in Education - pp. I8-I9. 

20. John Dewey - Experience and Education - pp. 42-43* 

21. L. T. Hopkins & others - op. cit. - p. 2. 

22. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - pp. 117-118. 

(underlining my own). 

23. Ibid . - pp. II8-II9. 

24* Ibid . - p. 119. 




















. 





v 






141 


25. John Dewey - The School and Society - p. 93. 

26. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. II3. 

27* Ibid . - p. 6. 

28. Ibid . - p. 20. 

29. Ibid . - p. 21. 

30. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 125• 

31. Ibid . - p. 283. 

32 - Ibid . - pp. 279-280. 

33. John Dewey - "Theory of Valuation", selection in Ethical 

Theories - p. 363, I. A. Melden, Prentice Hall Inc. 
New York, I950. 

34. Ibid. - p. 364. 

35. Ibid . - p. 365. 

36. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 163. 

37. W. H. Kilpatrick - Education for a Changing Civilization 

p. 119. 

38. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 163. 

39. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 237. 

40. Ibid . - pp. 274-275* 

41. Ibid . - p. I69. 

42. L. T. Hopkins & others » op. pit . - p. 1. 

43. Ibid . - p. 6 

44* John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 138. 

45* John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 120. 

46. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 140. 

47* John Dewey - The School and Society - p. 19* 

48. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 86. 

49. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 164* 


























X 


I':"': ".-I 


i - - • 




1 w O\foQ. Hilo 











■- ' lo . ' i ' : - 






. M 


a Kti 




Xv; 









142 


50. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - pp. 86-87. 

51. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 168. 

52. Ibid . - pp. 170-171. 

53* John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 65* 

54* John Dewey - Experience and Education - p. 74 * 

55. Ibid . - p. 75. 

55a John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 148. 

55b Ibid . - pp. 93-96. 

56. Ibid . - p. 6l. 

57. Ibid . - p. 26l. 

58. Ibid . - p. 51. 

39- - pp. 149-131- 

60. John Dewey - Democracy and Education pp. 313-316. 

61. L. T. Hopkins and others - op. cit. - pp. 1-2. 

62. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. I94. 

63. John Dewey - The School and Society - p. 90. 

64. Ibid . - p. 91. 

63. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 207. 

66. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 63. 

67. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 209. 

68. L. T. Hopkins and others - op. cit . - p. 8. 

69. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 413- 

70. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - pp. 196-197* 

71. Ibid , - p. 33. 

72. John Dewey - Experience and Education - p. 31. 

73* Ibid . - p. 26 






















■ 


■:> I \ ■ 










143 


74* John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 59. 

75. Ibid . - p. 60. 

76. John Dewey - Experience and Education - p. 29. 

77* John Dewey - Democracy and Education - pp. 89-90. 

78. L. T. Hopkins and others - op. cit . - p. 195• 

79• W. H. Kilpatrick - op. cit . - p. 124• 

80. John Dewey - Experience and Education - p. 29. 

REFERENCES - CHAPTER III 

1. John Dewey - The Sources of a Science of Education - p. 17. 

2. Ibid . - p. 8 

3. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 126. 

4* L. T. Hopkins and others - Integration, Its Meaning and Appli¬ 
cation - p. 31 

5* John Dewey - Experience and Education - p. 86. 

6. Ibid . - p. 88. 

7* Ibid . - p, 37. 

8. Ibid . - p. 90. 

9. Ibid. - p. 51* 

10. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - p. 184* 

11. W. H. Kilpatrick - Education for a Changing Civilization - 

p. 123. 

12. John Dewey - Experience and Education - pp. 36-37* 

13. Ibid . - p. 49* 

14* Ibid * - p. 13* 

15. Ibid . - p. 49- 

16. John Dewey - The School and Society - p. 5* 

17* 


W. H. Kilpatrick - op. cit . - p. 85 





















; 







144 


18. John Dewey - The School and Society - p. 67. 

19* Ibid . - p. 68. 

20. L. T. Hopkins and others - op. cit . - p. 6l. 

21. John Dewey - The School and Society - p. 77* 

22. Ibid . - pp. 74-75* 

23. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 219. 

24. John Dewey - The School and Society - p. 76. 

25. W. H. Kilpatrick - op. cit . - p. 128. 

26. John Dewey - Experience and Education - pp. 44 - 45 * 
27* Ibid . - p. 45 * 

28. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 282. 

29* Ibid . - pp. 283-284* 

30. L. T. Hopkins and others «• op. cit . - p. 23. 

31. Ibid . - p. 24. 

32. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 121. 

33. W. H. Kilpatrick - op. cit . - p. 118. 

34. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 226. 

35. W. H. Kilpatrick - op. cit . - p. 118. 

36. John Dewey - Experience and Education - p. 87. 

37. W. H. Kilpatrick - op. cit . p. 127* 

38. Ibid . 

39. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 244* 

40. Ibid, p. 249. 

41* Ibid . - p. 253. 

42* Ibid . - p. 263. 

43 * Ibid . - p. 26l. 


























, 













145 


44. W. H. Kilpatrick - op. cit . p. 49 

45. Ibid . - p. 85. 


46. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 373* 

47. John Dewey - Interest and Effort in Education - p. 23 . 

48. Ibid . - p. 43* 

49. Ibid . - p. 58. 

50 . John Dewey - The School and Society - p. 11. 

51* John Dewey - Interest and Effort in Education - Chapter on 
"Types of Educative Interest*• 

52# John Dewey - The School and Society - pp. 37-38. 

53 . L. T. Hopkins and others - op. cit . - p. I 89 . 

54. John Dewey - Experience in Education - p. 58. 


REFERENCES - CHAPTER IV 

1. John Dewey - Experience and Education pp. 26 - 29 . 

2. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - pp. 117-118. 

3 . Ibid. - p. 283 . 

4 . John Dewey - Experience and Education - p. 29 . 

5* John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 60 . 

6 . Joseph Ratner - Intelligence in the Modem World - pp. I 3 I-I 32 . 

7. I. A. Melden - Ethical Theories - p. 363 (c./f. Reference 

#33, Chapter II) “ 

8 . Ibid . - p. 344* 

9* Ibid . 

10. John Dewey - Democracy and Education - p. 283 . 

11. John Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy - Chapter IV - 
"Changed Conceptions of Experience and Reason". 

Ibid . - p. 87* 


12 . 


























146 


13* Joseph Ratrier - Intelligence in the Modem World - p. 119* 
14. John Dewey - Experience and Education - pp. 35“68. 














BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Dewey, John. Reconstruction in Philosophy . Boston, The Beacon 
Press, 1948. 

Dewey, John. Democracy and Education . New York, The MacMillan 
Co., I 938 . 

Dewey, John. Interest and Effort in Education . Boston, New York 
and Chicago, Houghton Mifflin Co., The Riverside Press, 
Cambridge, Copyright I 9 I 3 . 

Dewey, John. The School and Society . Chicago, The University of 
Chicago Press, I 915 . 

Dewey, John. Experience and Education . New York, The MacMillan 
Co., 1947. 

Dewey, John. The Sources of a Science of Education . New York, 
Horace Liveright. The Kappa Delta Pi Lecture Series, 
1929. 

Dewey, John. Experience and Nature . Chicago, London, Open Court 
Publishing Co., 1926 . 

Dewey, John. Problems of Men. New York, Philosophical Library, 
1946. . 

Dewey, John. The Quest for Certainty . New York, Minton,Baleh, 

1929 - 

Dewey, John. Art as Experience . New York, Minton, Balch & Co., 

1934. 

Childs, John. Education and the Philosophy of Experimental ism . 
New, York, D. Appleton-Century Co., I 93 I. 

Counts, George S. Social Foundations of Education . New York, 
Chas. Scribner's Sons, 1934* 

Kilpatrick, W. H. Education for a Changing Civilization . New 
York, the MacMillan Go., I 928 . 

Kilpatrick, W. H. Remaking the Curriculum . New York & Chicago, 
Newson & Co., 193&. 

Kilpatrick, W. H. The Educational Frontier . New York & London, 
The Century Co., 1933• 

Kilpatrick, W. H. The Essentials of the Activity Movement , and 
The Social Philosophy of Progressive Education , 

reprinted from "Progressive Education", Oct. 1934* 

May 1935* 

























; 









;;7 











148 


Kilpatridk, W. H. Philosophy of Education . New York, The 
MacMillan Co., 1951* 

L. T. Hopkins and others. Integration. Its Meaning and Applica¬ 
tion . New York and London, D. Appleton Century Co. 

Inc., 1937. 

Morgan, J. J. B. Keeping a Sound Mind . New York, The MacMillan 
Go., 1934- 

Ratner, Joseph. Edited and with Introduction by. Intelligence in 
the Modem World . New York, The Modern Library, Random 
House Inc., 1939* 

Schilpp, P.A. The Philosophy of John Dewey . Chicago, The Library 
of Living Philosophers, Vol. I, Northwestern University, 

1939. 

Tippett, James S. and others. Schools for a Growing Democracy . 
Boston, Ginn and Co., 1936® 

Melden, I. A. Ethical Theories . New York, Prentice Hall, Inc., 
1950. 


Articles 


Dewey, John. The Problem of Values . Journal of Philosophy, 

8 May I913X, 268-269. 

Dewey, John. Reasoning in Early Childhood . Teachers' College 
Record, Jan. 1914, XV, 9-15. 

Hopkins, L.T. Arguments Favoring Integration . Teachers' College 
RecordT Vol. 36 (April 1935)* PP* 604-612. 

Lincoln School Staff. Integrated Education in Lincoln School—A 
Symposium . Teachers' College Record, Yol. 37 (Feb. 
193^), PP* 363»447. 

Watson, Goodwin. Wholes and Parts in Education . Teachers' 
College Record, Yol. 34 (Nov. I932), PP* 119-133• 




















■ : . .. ...... r •• 0 ' 7 - 

■ ’ t ;: .- " 

< • •. ♦ 

. 

- 


■ .; : . , 




, . : t V ' i.‘‘ 




. 



■ . . 

* 



, ( 






* .. 



:• O. .!■ ... 1 . ■■ : - 

. . 








:'.C , V • •• 


■ f./ _7 


. 

- 


’ .... 

- 


■ 


* 


. 

L > D 


C-riO ■: . 
















r 


l 













