.A DESCRIPTIVE S'OIAEY 

OF THE 

51TRA.piJEEIci:LAl F10&E1MB 

OF THIS 

COMPOSITE 1K1H SCHOOLS 
OF ALBERTA . 


For Reference 

NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


By 

.■tetlMif Kmtimmn 











6x mans 

OTWJBglMIS 

WWJKW 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/descriptivesurveOOkrat 







THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A DESCRIPTIVE SURVEY OF THE EXTRACURRICULAR PROGRAMS 

OF THE 

COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 


by 

ARTHUR KRATZMANN 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


OCTOBER 15, 1956 






























ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The researcher wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to the 
following persons for the contributions they made and the cooperation 
they extended in making the completion of this thesis possible: 

The members of the advisory committee, Dr* A* Reeves, Dr* E* 
Buxton, and Mr. H. Melsness, for their constructive assistance with 
procedure, organization, and the final format of the thesis; 

The principals, teachers, and students of the seven high 
schools surveyed, for their willing cooperation in giving up time, 
effort, and valuable information during the obvious disruption of 
their daily schedules of work; 

The W. K* Kellogg Foundation, through whose generosity this 
effort was financially possible; 

The members of the Faculty of Education and the Graduate 
Students in the Division of Educational Administration, who by their 
presence provided an academic challenge and by their advice assured 
professional progress. 
















• * 

* 
























































ABSTRACT 


In recent years large composite schools have been mushrooming 
across the nation* Each of these schools brings together large 
numbers of students whose abilities and interests differ markedly. 

To study the provisions made for the extracurricular life within the 
school for these students, this investigation was undertaken. 

Seven Alberta composite high schools were investigated, with 
one being involved in a pilot study only. Principals, sponsors, and 
student-leaders—the personnel most concerned with the administration 
of extracurricular programs—were contacted. Principals gave informa¬ 
tion to the researcher in structured interviews ; sponsors and student- 
leaders completed questionnaires$ school documents pertinent to the 
subject were perused. Special areas investigated included the 
central administrative organization of the programs, supervision of 
extracurricular activities, student participation in programs, 
financing of the extracurriculum, scheduling of activities, and major 
problems confronted in providing adequate extracurricular programs. 

The results of the investigation, including tables which 
present data gathered, are summarized in this thesis. The final 
chapter draws conclusions from the survey. Growing out of these 
findings, and with Alberta practices viewed in the light of theory 
as reviewed in Chapter III of the thesis, recommendations for more 
efficient administration of extracurricular programs have been made. 

The survey revealed that large numbers of activities are pro¬ 
vided for students in the composite high schools of Alberta, sponsored 
by approximately one-half of the high school teachers, with from one- 
third to one-half of the enrolled students taking advantage of such 
offerings. Participation was greatest in athletic endeavours, and 




. 








„ 

* 

• * 

. 

V " J '■ V-’" 

. 


















I 




■ 

*■ 




r •- 








t 


, 






■ 








































V 


great emphasis was placed on competitive sports. Hence, physical 
education teachers carried a disproportionately heavy share of extra¬ 
curricular supervision. 

Programs seem to be determined by tradition and by the 
interests and qualifications of the teachers more than by a study of 
the needs and interests of the students. In the majority of the 
composite high schools, activities were weighted and sponsors were 
paid in terms of such weighting. However, at least one-half of the 
teachers so paid considered that time free from regular instructional 
duties is a desirable substitute for extra remuneration. 

Large amounts of money, drawn from students* fees, proceeds 
from athletic and social events, concessions, and minor school grants, 
were expended on extracurricular programs, with interscholastic sports 
and yearbooks absorbing the major share of the finances. The in¬ 
volvement of students in financing of programs varied markedly from 
school to school. 

Perhaps the most disconcerting discovery was the general lack 
of clearly formulated objectives for the extracurricular programs. 

The absence of goals tended to result in haphazard and divergent 
efforts. While comprehensive programs were offered, and much effort 
was expended, there was, because of inadequate pre-planning, little 
direction of the energies expended, and no opportunity to assess the 
degree of progress achieved. 

It is the researcher*s hope that some insight has been gained 
into significant problems in the sphere of the extracurriculum and 
that, through an analysis of the best theory and through continued 
research, solutions to some of these problems will be forthcoming. 


- 












- 








1 
















... 

» 








. 
















. 

' 












TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. THE PROBLEM AND DEFINITION OF TERMS. 1 

The Problem...• • 1 

Statement of the problem. 1 

Importance of the study.. . 1 

Definitions of Terms. 2 

Composite high school. 2 

Extracurricular activities. 3 

Sponsor .. b 

Student leaders .. it 

II. SOURCES OF DATA, METHODS OF PROCEDURE, AND TREATMENT OF 

FINDINGS. ......... . 5 

Sources of Data ••••»••.. . 5> 

Methods of Procedure .. 6 

Treatment and Organization of Findings. 9 

Limitations of the thesis .. 10 

III. REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE.11 

An Overview. 12 

Values of Extracurricular Activities.13 

Opinions of values of extracurricular activities. • • 15 

Problems in the Administration of Student Activities, . 17 

Organizational structure for extracurricular 

programs. 18 

The supervision of extracurricular activities .... 20 

Teacher load. 21 

Training of sponsors.22 































vii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Student Participation in Extracurricular Activities, . . 23 

Guidance of limitations.2? 

Reasons for non-participation.26 

The Evaluation of Extracurricular Activities . 27 

Coordination with Outside Agencies . 29 

Review of Investigations in Alberta Schools.30 

Summary. 32 

IV. THE CENTRAL ORGANIZATION FOR PROGRAMS OF EXTRACURRICULAR 

ACTIVITIES IN THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA. . . 37 

Organizational Structures.38 

Summary, ••.••••••••••••••••••••• h3 

V. THE NATURE OF EXTRACURRICULAR PROGRAMS OFFERED IN THE 
COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA AND THE BASES FOR 

THEIR INITIATION. h6 

The Nature of Program Offerings. 1*6 

The Initiation of Program Offerings. .. 50 

Summary. . ...... . ..... 5l 

VI. SUPERVISION OF THE PROGRAM OF ACTIVITIES ..53 

The Degree of Sponsorship ...... . 53 

Schools* Philosophies Concerning Sponsorship . Sh 

Assignment of Sponsors ...••••• . ... 55 

Suitability to the Activity .. 57 

Teacher Load in Extracurricular Supervision. ...... 58 

Experience and teacher load ..58 

Background for Sponsorship . ..59 

























viii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Weighting of Activities . 61 

Opinions of Sponsors Concerning a Philosophy of 

Supervision...62 

Summary . . • .. 6)4 

VII, STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES ... 66 

The Encouragement of Student Participation.67 

Awards.67 

The Limiting of Participation. 69 

Student Leadership Participation.. ..70 

Pertinent data concerning student leaders . 71 

Summary...... 72 

VIII. FINANCING EXTRACURRICULAR PROGRAMS. ........... 73 

Financial Structure ..73 

The Raising of Funds*...75 

Summary. 76 

IX. MISCELLANEOUS ASPECTS OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF EXTRA¬ 
CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES IN THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS . . 77 

Scheduling. 77 

Annual Basis. ........ . 77 

Weekly and Daily Bases. .. 77 

Times and Places of Meeting.. . 78 

Evaluation. .... 7 8 

Values Ascribed to the Program.. 79 

Summary.... 82 

X. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS. 83 

An Overview of the Thesis ... 8 3 






































IX 


CHAPTER PAGE 

Conclusions Resulting from the Investigation.81| 

Recommendations Resulting from the Investigation • • . ♦ 86 

BIBLIOGRAPHY...92 

APPENDIX. 9h 

Appendix A, Questions Asked of Administrators in a 
Structured Interview Concerning Extracurricular 

Programs. .95 

Appendix B, Questionnaire for Sponsors .. 97 

Appendix C, Questionnaire for Extracurricular Student 

Leaders. «•••••«••• . ••••• 100 

Appendix D, Problems Suggested by Sponsors for Study 

on a Provincial Basis. .. 101 

Appendix E, Suggestions for Improved Administration 

as Recorded by Sponsors and Student Leaders.103 



















LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Type of Organizational Structure for the Administration 
of Extracurricular Activities as Found in One of the 

Composite High Schools of Alberta • • • •.• . 38 

II. A Second Type of Organizational Structure for the 

Administration of Extracurricular Activities As Found 

in Four Alberta Composite High Schools.39 

III. The Board System of Organizational Structure for the 
Administration of Programs of Extracurricular 
Activities As Observed in One of the Composite High 

Schools of Alberta ..iil 

IV. Kinds of Activities Offered in Six Composite High 

Schools of Alberta.... i*8 

V. Degree of Teacher Sponsorship in Six Alberta Composite 

High Schools. 51} 

VI. Sponsors’ Reasons for Volunteering and for Being 

Assigned Supervisory Duties .. 56 

VII. Subject-Matter Areas, Types of Activities, and Time Load 

of Sponsors in the Composite High Schools.59 

VIII. Background of Experience and Training Fitting Teachers 
for Sponsorship of Extracurricular Activities in the 

Composite High Schools of Alberta ..... . 60 

IX. Sponsors’ Opinions Concerning a Philosophy of Extra- 

Curricular Supervision for the Composite High Schools 
of Alberta . ......... 63 















1 


. • • . - ,• 

' • > 















xi 

TABLE PAGE 

X. Total Number of Students Participating in Each Type of 
Activity in Six Composite High Schools Surveyed in 

Alberta.66 

XI* Program Expenses for Three Composite High Schools * . . • 7U 
XII* Values Ascribed to Extracurricular Programs by Teacher- 

Sponsors in Six Composite High Schools of Alberta ... 80 

XIII. Values Ascribed to Extracurricular Programs by Student- 
Leaders in Six Composite High Schools of Alberta. . . • 


81 





CHAPTER I 


THE PROBLEM AND DEFINITION OF TERMS 
I. THE PROBLEM 

Statement of the Problem 

It was the purpose of this study to investigate, through 
an administrative perspective, the actual nature of extracurricular 
programs being offered in the composite high schools of Alberta. 

The intent was to record the nature of activities offered, the 
types of organization for the programs, the nature of the super¬ 
vision of activities, the factors concerning student participation, 
and the details pertaining to the financing, scheduling, and 
evaluating of extracurricular programs. Also, an attempt was made 
to ascertain values ascribed to program offerings and to determine 
suggestions which might help to remove obstacles which stand in 
the way of the realization of these values. 

Importance of the Study 

There is ample evidence available in daily city newspapers, 
school magazines, and school yearbooks, that extensive extra¬ 
curricular programs are in existence in the composite high 
schools of Alberta. However, very little of a concrete nature 
is to be found on the library shelves concerning extracurricular 
program offerings; the Department of Education of the province 
gives little direction concerning the nature of extracurricular 
programs or their administration; and no official body, including 
the far-reaching Cameron Commission presently in session in the 
province, has made any step toward a comprehensive study of 

extracurricular programs. Yet teachers have spent many 






















■ 

■ 






■ 




■ 






, 




' 




- 















■ «sim 



2 


hours in the supervision of such activities; students have given 
valuable time to participation in sports activities and club work; 
letters to editors of newspapers have been repeatedly concerned 
with the so-called extracurricular M frills" of high school programs. 
In an effort to counter the apparent dearth of information concerning 
programs of extracurricular activities, and to take stock of offer¬ 
ings which have absorbed much of the time of administrators, sponsors, 
and students of the schools, this investigation was designed. 

It was hoped that the impact of the study would be greater 
than the mere production of facts and figures. In view of the 
national trend toward the institution of composite or comprehensive 
schools, with its attendant problems due chiefly to large enroll¬ 
ments and diversified student abilities and interests, the investi¬ 
gator intended also that some guidance, in terms of what is being 
done in some schools, of the Province of Alberta, would be made 
available to the administrators of newly-formed schools. 

Since this represented an initial study in a relatively 
virgin field, it was anticipated that educators might gain some 
small insight into the problems which exist in the field, and that 
solutions might be forthcoming through continued and related 
research in the future. 

II. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS 

Composite High School 

Theoretically, the composite high school may be thought 
of as one in which youth may secure both a general education 
which will explore their interests and capacities, and 














v 










, 

' 




■ 







. 






' 


- 














, 

















3 


a specialized education which will, in terms of their abilities 
and their projected goals, prepare them for entry into a particular 
vocational field. In the Province of Alberta, composite high 
schools are specifically those which, within one organizational 
structure and within one defined school, provide, in addition to a 
program leading to university entrance, other programs or routes. 

In the schools which are pertinent to this study, the programs 
offered were matriculation, general, commercial, technical, and 
home economics. 

Extracurricula r A ctivities 

The use of the term "extracurricular activities**, viewed in 
terms of the objectives of most school systems and of the Department 
of Education of the Province of Alberta, appears questionable. It is 
used in this thesis because it produces, in the minds of the readers, 
a picture which approximates more closely the actual school situation 
than would any other term found in the literature. It has unfor¬ 
tunate implications in that the term would imply that the activities 
are extraneous to the real purposes of the school. 'While co-curric- 
ular, extra-class, semi-curricular, and allied activities represent 
preferred terminology, the older term will be used throughout this 
paper for no better reason than that people generally understand its 
meaning. The following definition will apply in this research: 

Programs and events, carrying no academic credit, sponsored 
and organized by pupils* or students* organizations or by the 
educational institution, designed to entertain, instruct, and/or 
provide exercise of interests and abilities, subject to some 
measure of control by the institution.^- 


























m 




















1 : 













k 


Sponsor 


The following definition, stated by McKown, applies in 
this thesis: 

The sponsor is a teacher who accepts responsibility for 
some particular phase or activity of the program. He is an 
adviser of a club, committee, staff, or other group. He is 
responsible for the organization, administration, and pro¬ 
motion of his activity...His job is to counsel, advise, and 
promote student activity. 2 


Student Leaders 

For the purpose of this thesis, student leaders are limited 
to members of students® union executives, team captains of inter¬ 
scholastic athletics, club presidents, and editors-In-chief of 
school publications. 


Footnotes to Chapter I 


•kk>od, C. V., Dictionary of Education . 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 19k ?)? p. 7. 


(New York: 


2 McKown, Harry C., Ex tracurricular Activities . (New York: 
The Macmillan Company, 1952), p. 617. 













CHAPTER II 


SOURCES OF DATA, METHODS OF PROCEDURE, 

AND TREATMENT OF FINDINGS 

I. SOURCES OF DATA 

The findings in this paper were based upon data obtained 
from the following composite high schools of Alberta: 

Crescent Heights High School, Calgary 
East Glen Composite High School, Edmonton 
Lethbridge Collegiate Institute, Lethbridge 
Lindsay Thurber Composite High School, Red Deer 
Medicine Hat High School, Medicine Hat 
Ross Sheppard Composite High School, Edmonton 
Western Canada High School, Calgary, 

Within these schools, several groups of persons were 
asked for information* Most of the data resulted from a structured 
interview with the principal of each of the schools, and with 
certain individual teachers who had a large share of the responsi¬ 
bility for extracurricular programs* 

Filed documents, such as students 1 union constitutions, 
and papers outlining duties of sponsors, regulations for special 
boards, lists of awards, and audited accounts were studied and 
recorded. 

Questionnaires went cut to 153 sponsors of activities and 


to IliO student leaders 















6 


Ross Sheppard Composite High School was used for pilot 
survey purposes only, and the findings reported in the thesis were 
obtained from the remaining six schools, 

II. METHODS OF FROCEDURE 

The major purpose of the investigation was to acquire 
data from those persons most vitally concerned with the administra¬ 
tion of extracurricular programs in the composite high schools 
during the school year 195>7-1958. The most important persons were 
the principals of the schools, although in some instances other 
staff members were interviewed, if such persons had been delegated 
responsible administrative duties by the principals. The areas 
discussed during a structured interview with each of these persons 
were as follows: 

1. The central organization of the program of activities—* 
including the actual activities sponsored, the basis for their 
initiation, the organized administrative structure for the opera¬ 
tion of the program, the role of the student council in the 
initiation, and administration of the program, and the manner of 
recording programs of, and participation in, activities. 

2. The supervision of the program, including any policy formu¬ 
lated for supervisors, the selection of sponsors, the in-service 
training of sponsors, orientation of new teachers to the program., 
the weighting of activities, and any monetary or time privileges 
extended to sponsors in respect of their contribution as program 


leaders 






■ ■ • 









' '(* : )■ 


' 


- 









7 


3. Participation by students, including decisions on encouraging, 
limiting, and rewarding of participation, the manner of choosing 
various student leaders, and the recording of student participation. 

U* The financing of the program, including the organized 
financial structure, the costs of operating extracurricular 
activities, the sources of funds and their distribution, the degree 
of student involvement in financing, and the nature of checks and 
balances upon school program financing. 

5. The evaluation of the program, including the goals formulated 
for the program to achieve, the provisions made to assess the worth 
of the program by students and teachers, and the provisions made 

to justify the inclusion of the activities on the school program. 

6. Scheduling activities, on a yearly and a daily basis, 
including controls of times and places of meeting. 

7. Major problems in providing adequate extracurricular 
programs, with a discussion of possible means of overcoming such 
problems or obstacles. 

Those who appeared to rank next in importance for the 
adequate administration of a program of activities were the teacher 
sponsors. To each of these persons in six of the schools a 
questionnaire was presented, requesting the following informations 

1. The type of activity sponsored; 

2. Subject matter taught in the regular program; 

3. Time spent in sponsorship; 

lu Length of teaching experience; 

5. Background of preparation for sponsorship; 





. if/ 





- 







'■ > •> i • I'.: 

■ . ‘ ■■ 




i.! »' 




"j > 






















. 

. 




8 

6. Opinions concerning the adequacy of teacher-training for 
potential sponsors, suitability to the activity sponsored, and 
philosophy concerning the supervision of extracurricular programs ; 

7. Opinion-values ascribed to the program; 

8. Suggestions for the improvement of programs and for continued 
study. 

The original draft of the sponsors’ questionnaire was pre¬ 
sented at Ross Sheppard Composite High School and West Glen High 
School, both in Edmonton, Alberta, This preliminary questionnaire 
was time consuming, since it required that the sponsors give many 
subjective responses to questions. As well, it was found that some of 
the data secured did not lend itself to processing and interpreta¬ 
tion, Consequently, the questionnaire was revised to include objective 
questions based upon the responses of the original draft. Two ques¬ 
tions were deleted entirely* The revised questionnaire was forwarded 
to each sponsor by way of the principal of each of the six composite 
schools* Questionnaires were returned to the investigator during his 
presence in the schools at a later date. Ninety-three per cent of the 
153 sponsors returned completed questionnaires. 

The reasons for using the questionnaire technique were two. 
First, it was anticipated, and later proved to be a reality, that 
little of the information required of sponsors would be found in writ¬ 
ten form. Secondly, the only other method of acquiring the information 
would be by interview, and this was at once discarded as impracticable 
since it would involve either limited, sampling or the expenditure 
of much time and the interruption of school schedules* 






~ 

■ ' p . ; 


' 

' • • . 

. 

t » • ‘ ; 

* 




* 

' 

. 















* 






• ’ ' 


; 





9 

Extracurricular student leaders, because they were worthy 
representatives of the student body at large, and because of their 
involvement in the program, were also requested to complete a 
questionnaire. These students were requested to give their grade 
levels, sex, program of studies, grade standings, degree of parti¬ 
cipation, both as a member and as a leader of activities, and 
opinions concerning values ascribed to the program, as well as sug¬ 
gestions for the improvement of school extracurricular activities. 
Because two of the questions required guidance in interpretation, 
the investigator was present when the leaders assembled as a group 
to complete the questionnaires. Consequently, a one hundred per cent 
return of such questionnaires was assured. There were IkO student 
leaders involved in the survey. 

Wherever possible, responses given in the interviews and ques¬ 
tionnaires were authenticated by written documents filed in the of¬ 
fices of the schools, although these documents were not at all complete* 

III. treatment and organization of findings 

Since this thesis was designed to be a descriptive-survey, 
much of the data gathered has been reproduced per se in a running 
discussionaS. type of organization. Some of the facts have been 
presented in tabular form to give greater clarity of interpretation, 
and elementary statistics have been introduced where necessary. The 
description of the survey has been preceded by a brief analysis of 
the most pertinent literature, and the resulting recommendations are 
arrived at by viewing Alberta practice in the light of the best 
findings in such literature. 


. 




' 










: 


' . 


■ ■ 


'■ . . tt 










■ • 
















. 






































10 


Limitations of the Thesis 

Certain limitations must be recorded so that the study can 
be cast in its proper perspective. The chief limitations are: 

1. The recommendations in this study are based on the theory as 
presented by American educators and are accepted by the candidate 
as being applicable to the Alberta scene. 

2. Since only limited amounts of data were available in written 
form, it was necessary to lean heavily upon the subjective responses 
of a small number of administrators. The investigator assumed that 
the responses given were completely factual and unclouded by 
personal bias. 

3. Since sponsors are extremely busy people, the time and 
thought that they gave to the adequate completion of questionnaires 
may have been limited. This thesis was completed on the assumption 
that each sponsor gave to each answer the necessary time and thought 
to make the information reliable. 

U. Many of the responses given on teachers* and students* 
questionnaires were based on attitudes and opinions. In the 
presentation of this thesis, they were treated as such; that is, 
as facts of opinion and not as opinions of fact. 

5. Since the breadth of the administration of extracurricular 
activities is extremely extensive, many aspects of the program 
have been given meagre treatment, and only those factors which 
seem to have a general and very significant bearing upon program 
administration have been included. 






11 


6. A great number of teachers and a very great number of stud¬ 
ents were denied a voice in this survey. Only those persons who 
were actually involved with the administration of extracurricular 
programs gave information. Hence, responses cited in this thesis 
as to the values of activities may be positively slanted by those 
people who, perhaps by their own choice, are ?, on the inside, looking 


out. M 



. 

- . ■ ' ■ 


' .... 




CHAPTER III 


REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE 

I. AN overview 


Extracurricular activities have come of age. During the past 
four decades, remarkable progress has taken place in the develop¬ 
ment of extracurricular programs. 

Paralleling the more formal activities of classroom 
and course of study is a vast array of clubs of various 
types, athletic teams, assembly programs, social gather¬ 
ings, musical and dramatic performances, and journalistic 
enterprises. This "school within a school" rivals the 
formal curriculum in its claim for the interest and 
attention of pupils, as well as in its demands upon the 
time and energy of teachers 

In fact, instead of being in separate tents away from the 
main marquee housing the curriculum, the emphasis upon the extra¬ 
curricular has so mushroomed that some educators claim that "the 
tail is beginning to wag the dog." 2 

Be this as it ma j } the high schools of today are faced 
with the administration of extensive programs of activities. The 
development of activities has progressed through the stages of 
teacher suppression and teacher toleration. Vestiges of use of 
the extracurriculum as bait for the curriculum have gradually 
disappeared, and a stage has been reached where the extracurricular 
activities have been viewed as worthy ends in themselves. Approved 
activities are now encouraged under proper supervision, and it is 
generally agreed that 

,,,it is the duty of the school to teach pupils to do 
better those desirable things which they will do anyhow and 
to reveal to them higher types of activities which they are 
led to desire.-- 












. 

_ a . ■ 


• . 

.: e ,; '' ■■■•' ■ r ■'., <■■ . 

' 




, 


. 










■ 

■5 

■ ).; 

• • • ; ■ : 
























... 

. 

■ ’■i •: > • 

. 



13 


While the actual stage of development appears to vary from school 
to school and from area to area, most high schools have reached 
the point where they recognize two parallel and reasonably coordin¬ 
ated areas of positive contribution to the education of their school 
populations. It seems significant at this point to consider the 
values which have been ascribed to extracurricular activities, for 
program offerings must stand or fall in terms of the contribution 
thejr make to the all-round development of students. 

II. VALUES OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

The actual worth of extracurricular activities has largely 
been a matter of judgment, and few of the claims proposed by the 
writers in the field have been scientifically proven. It has been 
difficult to assess the values of extracurricular participation 
for two reasons. In the first place, the factors involved are 
extremely intangible and consequently difficult to gauge. Secondly, 
extracurricular activities are so closely allied to adult living 
that their real worth cannot be ascertained until the students have 
projected into adult life the results of their learning in the 
extracurricular field. Consequently, opinion values of administrators, 
teachers, students, graduates, and parents have been freely quoted 
as substantiation for the existence of programs. 

A few studies seem to indicate a positive relationship 
between participation in activities and success in later life, 
between participation and school discipline, and between partici¬ 
pation and retention in jiigh school. Whether such relationships are 
indicative of true cause and effect associations is significant in 









' 




■ 



















.. 





• j' ).* • 




lit 


their interpretation* Rugg^ studied the success of teachers, for 
example, in relation to their participation in extracurricular 
activities while in high school and college. Teachers with a sub¬ 
stantial record of participation in extrauurricular activities tended 
to receive higher salaries, secure better positions, go to large 
school systems, do more graduate work, and receive better pro¬ 
ficiency ratings than those who had little or no record of parti¬ 
cipation in student activities* 

In studying factors related to high school drop-outs, Thomas 
revealed that students who were active participants in extra¬ 
curricular activities presented fewer disciplinary problems than 
those who were non-participants. 

Where participation of all students in activities of con¬ 
cern to each is assured, behavior problems are rare* Except 
for extremely maladjusted students whose problems are too 
deep-seated for any solution by the school alone, boys and 
girls rarely present behavior problems of a disturbing 
nature unless the school is failing to present adequate 
opportunity for association with other boys and girls, for 
development of worthwhile interests, and for recognition and 
acceptance by the school organization.^ 

Numerous authors mention the retention values of extra¬ 
curricular activities. 

Inasmuch as the extracurricular program helps to develop 
both vocational and avocational interests of youth, and makes 
significant contributions to the Intellectual as well as the 
social development of young people, participation in this phase 
of the school program is regarded as an important factor in the 
holding power of the school*^ 

The above statement by Hohol is supported by the findings of 
Thomas. In the study of high school drop-outs referred to in an 
earlier paragraph, Thomas found that M not one person who dropped 




” '■ ' 1 ' • • ■ ' ' ■ t' ' ' ■; u' 

•• ' '• ' '.' ! . • ' 








'• \ki ' ;■<: 

' 

. 






' 

'■ 

. ■ 





15 

out before completing the third year had engaged in even one 
activity, and that eighty-nine per cent of those who finished had."? 

In the absence of scientific research, many opinion studies 
of the value of participation in extracurricular activities have 
been made, A few of the more extensive opinion surveys will be 
considered. 


Opinions of Values of Extracurricular Activities 

One of the most extensive studies of the values of participation 
was conducted by the North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary 
Schools and revealed the following values, as listed in order of 
significance, by enrolled high school students: 

1. Development of new friendships, 

2. Made school more interesting. 

3. Taught sportsmanship. 

4. Created a greater school loyalty, 

5 . Gave something worthwhile to do in leisure time. 

6. Resulted in more friendly relations with teachers. 

7. Increased ability to accept criticism from peers. 

8. Gained information unavailable in regular courses. 

9. Developed poise and ease in social contacts. 

10. Developed special abilities and skills. 

Leonard V. Koos, in an analysis of early literature related 
to extracurricular activities, recorded a number of writers who 
recognized particular values in program offerings. Those values, 
listed eight or more times in the selected forty writings, were 
the following. (The numbers in parentheses indicate the frequency 
of mention for the particular value.) 

1. Training in some civic-social-moral relationship (37); 

2. Recognition of adolescent nature (2ii); 

3. Training for leadership (22); 

k* Improved discipline and school spirit (21); 

5 . Training for social cooperation (19); 

6. Actual experience in group life (17); 

7. Training for citizenship in a democracy (l6); 






- 


' 

. : 













. 




















- 

' 

. 












16 


8. Training for recreational and aesthetic participation (15); 

9. Training for ethical living (ll); 

10. Improved health (10); 

11. Recognition of interests and ambitions (10); 

12. Improved scholarship (8). 9 

Five of the above values (1, 5> 6, 7* and 9) reveal the 
socialising possibilities attributed to participation in extra¬ 
curricular activities. Chisholm explained why such social outcomes 
can be expected. 

...The various extracurricular activities generally are more 
democratically carried on than is the classroom work, the doings 
of the typical adolescent gang or group outside the school, 
family relationships frequently, and many social activities in 
the community. The possibilities of the extracurricular activi¬ 
ties put them in a unique position in providing youth with rich 
and interesting experiences in wholesome social living. 

Chisholm stresses also a point which gives considerable impetus to 

the consideration of providing an adequate program of extracurricular 

activities. He maintains that "there are as many boys and girls with 

significant social deficiencies as there are those with deficiencies 

in any other area of the work of the school. "H 

Viewed thus in terms of their contributions to social and 
personal development, the extracurricular activities, so often 
classified as frills, assume considerable importance. Kilzer, in 
answer to those who condemn activities as being superfluous to the 
education of school youth, makes the following point. 

Perhaps it is justifiable to say that activities, courses, 
and services that are most predominantly frillish are those of 
least value to the individual and to society in general. If 
such a point of view is accepted, it is at once evident that 
many of the so-called frills constitute very important parts 
of a well-rounded education, and that parts of history, mathe¬ 
matics, Latin, and English, which were once regarded fundamentals, 
are really the frills of education...- 1 - 















' 



i . ■■ 


1 














: !. 
















17 


Thus opinion values of students and of leading writers in the field 
place significant emphasis on the contributions made by programs of 
extracurricular activities in the secondary school. The limited 
number of scientific studies support such opinion. Administrators, 
in view of such expressed opinion, have initiated and administered 
programs in the high schools. In doing so, they have encountered 
many problems. The most perplexing of these are discussed in the 
section which follows. 

III. PROBLEMS IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF STUDENT ACTIVITIES 

Accomplishments in the extracurricular programs have not 
always measured up to expectations of administrators. Nor have the 
values ascribed by writers always been in evidence, Johnson traces 
this lack of achievement to weaknesses in program administration*^ 
He presents the "more fundamental of these weaknesses** in the hope 
that they will be recognized and eliminated by conscientious 
administrators. The first and most challenging weakness presented 
by Johnson is concerned with objectives for the program. 

Many schools have adopted the forms of an activity program 
without any real understanding by teachers and pupils of the 
function it should perform. 1 -. 

Ronald C. Faunce makes a similar conclusion. 

The tendency to develop activities programs by imitation 
and consequently without much relation to needs and purposes, 
appears to be characteristic.15 


It is likely true that objectives and outcomes are fully realized 
more readily when such purposes are clearly formulated and under¬ 
stood by the administrative body of the school. 
















* . :■ ' : 

- 

* 


- 




















. 


* 





























18 


And it is also evident that the more adequate and comprehensive 
the administrative organization, the greater are the chances for 
clear formulation of policy and understanding of purposes. In the 
light of the above, the organizational structure, as proposed by 
writers in the extracurricular field, merits analysis. 

Organizational Structure for Extracurricular Programs 

Organizational patterns as such are difficult to find in the 
literature related to this topic. Miller, Moyer and Patrick^ offer 
an organizational chart for the administration of extracurricular 
activities in large high schools. They propose that all activity 
groups, with their advisers, student leaders, and student members be 
directly subordinate to the student council. The student council, in 
turn, works under the direction of a central planning committee of 
teachers. The chairman of this planning committee would be the direct¬ 
or of extracurricular activities, a person whose responsibility for 
the welfare of the program has been delegated by the principal, and 
who is given special time allowances for the execution of his extra¬ 
curricular duties. McKown proposes a similar structure, maintaining 
that the director, or chief administrative officer of the program, 
should be one of the several assistant principals. He claims that 
M a director of activities is as logical as a director of curriculum, 
of supervision, of guidance, or of administration. 11 17 McKown also 
presents a similar view concerning the appointment of a faculty com¬ 
mittee on activities, a group which ’determines the policies, cor¬ 
relates elements of the program, supplies material and equipment, and 
in other ways helps to shape the activity life of the school.”-^ 


























: >:■ ", 1 
















, 











■ . 








' 
























19 


Miller and McKown have indicated the necessity of the involve¬ 
ment of teachers and student leaders in a cooperative working arrange¬ 
ment* Johnson stresses this partnership, and claims that all too often 

We have been afraid of democracy* We have lacked faith in 
the ability of pupils to plan, to make intelligent decisions, 
and to accept responsibility.19 

Consequently, he maintains that too frequently student bodies have 
been thinly camouflaged agencies of administrative domination* 

Alstetter iakes an adamant stand on this issue* 

The entire program and each of its units should be charac¬ 
terized by pupil initiative, pupil participation, pupil manage¬ 
ment, and pupil evaluation of progress and outcomes,20 

There is, however, not a single writer who would claim that such 

management by pupils should be unguided* In the first place, it is 

realised that the principal of the school is responsible to parents 

and to administrative superiors for every activity that is carried 

on in the school. Therefore, he must reserve the authority to veto 

student action if he deems it necessary to do so. Staff guidance 

in activity management is a necessity* As Koos states. 

The pupils themselves are active primarily on the play 
level, which means that, they are especially motivated by sheer 
pleasure in the activity without regard to its effect on their 
own development. Being permitted without guidance to follow 
their impulses, they are bound to waste time in ill-balanced 
activity.21 

It seems essential that student involvement in extracurricular 
management needs to be fostered to a greater degree, but that such 
responsibility shouldered by students be carefully guided by a 
sympathetic staff. 


V • . 1 ; • - 

■ ■ : ■ ■ ' M •> J ) ’• ; ; 

' 

I ' 

. 

- 







* 


* 


• . 

■ ' • ° • '■ ’ , - 

. 

* 

" 

, 




20 


Bat sympathy alone is no criterion for adequate program 
guidance. While Koos may be stating a view which is slightly more 
extreme than that of most writers who discuss this point, he does 
reveal the need for an organized staff with views aligned to the 
formulated objectives of a sound extracurricular program. 

If certain perverted attitudes could be changed, the 
barriers which now separate curricular from extracurricular 
might well disappear. Among these attitudes are the worship 
of subject matter and the assumption that by the absorption of 
a body of erudition one is educated; the disposition to measure 
education in marks and credits; the view that extracurriculum 
activity should be pointed toward the production of public 
spectacles; and extracurriculum by the competitive principle 
rather than by the idea of developing the individual. 22 

To this point, we have seen the need for a carefully 
planned administrative organization, maintaining an optimum working 
agreement among principals, teachers, and students, and democratical¬ 
ly designed to assure that the objectives of the program of extra¬ 
curricular activities be realized. Within this broad framework, 
specific aspects of two major elements, supervision and partici¬ 
pation, will next be analyzed. 

The Supervision of Extracurricular Activities 

An adequate extracurricular program in a large secondary school 
is comprised of many activities, catering to a wide variety of interests. 
There is a need for a large number of teacher sponsors with a wide range 
of training and aptitudes. It has been implied by writers quoted 
earlier in this chapter that the entire school staff must be sensi¬ 
tive to the educational significance of the extracurricular program. 

To ensure the maximum utilization of their potentialities, it seems 
desirable to assign sponsors on the basis of background, training, 






































21 


interests, and abilities. Furthermore, it is axiomatic that effective 
sponsorship results from the judicious distribution of the supervisory 
load, so that no teacher feels unnecessarily burdened by his extra¬ 
curricular duties. Also to be considered is the recognition which is 
accorded the activity sponsor. This discussion will now be centred 
around the above eLements, and more particularly around the two areas 
most commonly discussed in the pertinent literature—teacher-load and 
teacher training for extracurricular sponsorship. 

Teacher load . In summarizing the findings concerning teacher 
load, Munro^ concluded that certain teachers, categorized in terms 
of subject-matter taught, tended to do, or be asked to do, more than 
their share of supervision. Those bearing the brunt of the load 
were the teachers of physical education, English, science, and the 
fine arts. 

Munro outlines two methods for the recognition of the extra 
efforts of teachers: 

1. Extra pay for extra effort; 

2. Reduction of a regular teaching load. 

While there are many exponents for both of the above adjustments, 
two arguments appear against the principle of additional remunera¬ 
tion. In the first place, many administrators believe that dis¬ 
harmony often results from the provision of salary differences. 
Secondly, as Koos points out, 

...additional salary is given on the assumption that the 
teacher works overtime. Either he does that at the expense of 
health or recreational activity or he neglects part of his other 
work, such as preparation for his classes or the correction of 
papers, and neither of these alternatives is desirable.^4 



. 

f, yi;\ 














. 






■ 















- 

. 


. 

. 





22 


Training of Sponsors * If one were to set up an ideally 
administered program of extracurricular activities, all teachers 
would be expected to be interested sponsors, each taking his share of 
the supervisory load. However, any competency of sponsorship would 
in part be dependent upon the teacher*s background of training and 
experience. None of the writings in the field clearly indicated how 
a desirable background for sponsorship could be secured. However, 
three sources of such a background appear significant: 

1. Experience as a participant in extracurricular activities 
at high school and college levels; 

2. Instruction at teacher-training institutions; 

3. Formal or informal in-service training. 

Obviously, the -first of these three is often lacking, and naturally 
there is no way of ensuring at the high school level that future 
teachers will get such experience. Consequently, preparatory or 
on-the-job training is necessary. Munro summarizes the opinions 
of administrators concerning the training of would-be sponsors. 

Principals generally believe that teachers-in-training 
should participate in, and have the experience of supervising 
activities in a training school, and principals try to assign 
adviserships on the basis of special fitness. However, many 
feel that they have been assigned tasks without such considera¬ 
tion , and that they lack suitable training for their advisory 
work. 2 6 


Sterner outlines very specific suggestions for teacher-training. 

1. Teacher education institutions should provide appropriate 
preparation for sponsorship of activities because a large 
number of beginning teachers have such responsibility. 

2. College authorities should carefully supervise the 
participation of prospective teachers in college activities, 
especially because of the preparatory value of such 
activities. 

3. Specific instruction in sponsoring home rooms and clubs 
might well be provided in methods classes. 





. 

) : . ■ . 

v 

. 

. ' • . ■ 

« 



' . > ' ■ 

: ' ' 




























* 














. 









23 


U. The place and function of extracurricular activities in a 
modern school should be developed in an undergraduate course 
in secondary education. 

5>. Practice teaching offers unusual opportunities for each 
prospective teacher to observe master teachers who sponsor 
activities, to practice methods and principles previously 
learned about supervising activities, and to become familiar 
with the varied parts of the school program.27 

Johnson supports this stand, claiming that, while majors 

have been outlined in the various subject fields, preparations for 

the even more difficult duties of extracurricular sponsorship have 

been entirely inadequate. 

At a recent meeting of a state principals 1 association, 
the committee on teacher training cited this as the most 
notable problem in the survey of the orientation of beginning 
teachers. They come well prepared in subject fields, but know¬ 
ing little of the duties of a home-room sponsor, the activities 
of a school club, or the function of the assembly. These 
responsibilities they have to learn by trial and error on the 
job. Probably this will always be true in some measure. A 
program of in-service training is the responsibility of the 
alert principal. His task will be rendered easier, however, as 
institutions for the preparation of teachers recognize the 
importance of giving prospective teachers meaningful experiences 
in this important phase of their future responsibilities.28 

To this point we have revealed from the literature that 
many significant problems in extracurricular programs are the product 
of inadequate administrative practices in the school, all too.often 
engendered by a lack of a consistent and meaningful philosophy. The 
problems are aggravated by the manner of assigning sponsorships and 
by the lack of a sufficient background of experience which the 
average beginning teacher brings to his first teaching position. It 
is now necessary to turn to the end product of administrative 
organization—the participating student. 

IV. STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

Because of the values outlined on pages 15 and 16 of this thesis, 


















■ 1 ■ 




• • 


- J,' ■ f“ " ' ■.? • 

' 






. 
















; 




























' 


■ 












2h 

it seems highly desirable that all pupils participate to at least 
some extent in the extracurricular program* However, surveys reveal 
that non-participaticn is very extensive among high school students. 

In a questionnaire study in approximately one hundred secondary 
schools, Bowden^ discovered that, in one third of the schools, less 
than fifty per cent of the school populations were active partici¬ 
pants. Trumps studied the participation of four thousand Illinois 
high school students for a twelve month period. He reported a range 
of from 0 to 16 activities per pupil, and pointed out that 20 per 
cent of the girls and 30 per cent of the boys took no part at all 
in the extracurricular programs offered by the schools. 

This tendency for some students to carry heavy programs of 
activities while others scarcely participate is widespread. To 
alleviate the situation many schools have attempted both to limit 
and to encourage participation* Schools justify limitations on the 
following grounds: 

1. Protection of scholarship] 

2. Equitable distribution of office-holding] 

3. Assurance of quality of student leadership] 

lu Restriction of membership to ensure effective working groups] 

5* . Assurance that schools are suitably represented at public 
competitions and performances® 

The first-mentioned of the above reasons has aroused the major 
interest of writers in the field. Those who speak in favor of 
academic limitations claim that such limitations allow the poor 
student extra time to concentrate on the subjects in which he is 
weak, and that they afford the teacher a rewards-and-punishments 


• ' 

\ • • 1 ■. 

■ ' ■ '■ 

' . . 1 






. ' iz 

* ■ • ''.I 












« 


: 

' 

* 






l 
i 

, 

. 

* 

- 

, 








motivational force for academic subjects. The arguments against 
participation limitations based on academic standing include the 
following: 

1. The child who is academically weak, but who is achieving to 
the limits of his capabilities, is denied an experience in which he 
feels a sense of achievement 5 

2. Extracurricular activities have values of their own and 
should not be dependent upon academic achievement. 

If the activity program is of the educational significance 
that we have assigned to it, it is as illogical to require a 
pupil to maintain passing grades in order to participate as 
it would be to say to the pupil, ”You may not take English; 
you failed algebra last semester. ”31 

3. The practice is psychologically unsound. 

Reliance on extraneous compulsion 
work of a traditional curriculum has 
for a revision of the curriculum and 


Guidance of Limitations 

Koos33 and Chisholm3^ are typical 

propose that the only adequate limitations are those that grow out 

of careful guidance on an individual basis. Chisholm states, 

As interest in guidance has grown, many teachers and 
administrators have come to the conclusion that the only 
defensible solution to the problem of encouraging and limiting 
student participation in the extra-class activities is through 
an adequate program of guidance. Through such a program, the 
contribution of each activity is considered in relation to the 
individuals needs and his other experiences, both in the 
curricular work of the school and in the community. Any plan 
for encouraging and limiting student participation in the 
extracurricular activities that is not in harmony with an 
adequate concept of guidance deals with students* needs en 
masse , rather than individually. The net result in most cases 
has been inadequate. 


to ensure effort in the 
often been substituted 
of its methodology ...^ 2 


of those administrators who 


Koos claims that 














* 



















' 











. 

> - , 


1 



26 


...it seems most sensible to have the limitation on parti¬ 
cipation rest largely on diagnostic study of the individual 
pupil, taking into account his ability, shortcomings, environ¬ 
ment, and interests, and what can be done for him through both 
the curriculum and the extracurriculum. 


Reasons for Non-Participation 

Some direction for administrators in guiding students in 
participation in extracurricular activities can perhaps be gleaned 
from a study of reasons given for non-participation. Gory asked a 
large number of graduates to appraise high school programs of 
activities and to give reasons for a lack of participation in the 
extracurricular program. He listed the reasons for non-participa¬ 
tion as follows: 

1. Lack of time; 

2. Lack of initiative; 

3. Lack of knowledge; 

U. Lack of money; 

5. Poor health; 

6 . Distance from school; 

7. Lack of ability; 

8 . Conflict in schedules; 

9. Lack of interest; 

10. Poor conduct in school; 

11. Physical handicap; 

12. Poor marks.35 

On the basis of his findings, Cory made the following recommendations: 

1. The program of activities should be more extensive and 
flexible; 

2. More time should be provided for activities during the school 
day; 

3. Activities need to be properly presented, better sponsored, 
and more varied; 

U. A clearer outline at the beginning of the year would enable 
students to make a better choice. 

Several factors have been found to account for the popularity 
of various activities. The particular school may place emphasis 
upon one activity, awards may act as incentives, some sponsors 
are far more competent and popular than others, and the 






. 

























' 




















. 

. * 

. 




. 


- 

, 








. 


, .. 













J . •• ; . ■' -. : "■ 

- 

















' 






27 


personal glory and satisfaction derived from achieving in prestige 
activities attracts membership* The popularity of an activity 
results, naturally, in increased participation. But popularity 
alone is no criterion for the value of an extracurricular activity. 
Each activity offered should be carefully analyzed and evaluated to 
see that its existence on the program is fully justified. Such an 
analysis is possible only if carefully developed measuring devices 
are employed and accurate records are kept. To a more complete 
discussion of program evaluation we now turn our attention. 


V. THE EVALUATION OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 


If a raspberry patch is to be productive, it is necessary 
each fall to cut out the dead canes in order that the new shoots 
may have an opportunity to grow. Neglected, it soon becomes a 
bramble patch, a tangle of dead and living vines, inaccessible 
and worthless. Too frequently the analogy is applicable to 
school activity programs. They have been allowed to develop 
aimlessly without regard to the functions the various activities 
were expected to perform, the extent to which the aims were being 
achieved, or the amount of dead wood awaiting the pruning 

shears. 

While Johnson*s views as stated above may be a little harsh on 
practicing administrators, he does stress the emphasis for careful 
evaluation of ongoing activities. However, there appear to be at 
least four reasons why difficulty is experienced in measuring the 
worth of extracurricular activities: 

1. The results of activity participation are very intangible ; 

2. Evaluation must be based, to a large degree, upon subjective 
opinion; 

3. Agencies other than the school are working towards the same 
ends and the degree to which the school has contributed toward 
outcomes is difficult to assess; 














. 






- 










. 





. 












* 













































. 
















28 


In A great deal of time elapses between extracurricular 
training and real life utilization of learnings* 

However, the difficulty of the task should not negate the 
chances of accomplishment in evaluation. The types of evaluative 
procedure should be carefully examined and implemented. McKown 
outlines four types of such procedure in evaluation.- 1 These are 
summaried as follows: 

1. The extent of participation. While it does not tell a great 
deal, the amount of participation does alloxj for interschool 
comparisons $ and the degree of interest, industry, and activity of 
the participants does reveal the quality of different offerings. 

2. Expressions of opinion. Opinions represent measurement in 
that they are based upon standards that are felt, implied or stated. 
The devices which may be used in expressing opinion include simple 
reactions of like and dislike, score and rating cards, analytical 
and evaluative discussions, written detailed reports, and balloting. 
The opinions of administrators, teachers, students, graduates, and 
parents may be solicited. 

3. Anecdotal and cumulative records. The latter, particularly, 
provide an overview for the sponsor and he may study student response 
over a pleriod of years. They assist the principal who wishes to get 
a wide-angle or long-term view of the whole activities program. 

ij. Controlled experimentation. Controlled experiments are 
difficult to organize, promote, and administer because of the widely 
varying opportunities and the range of student abilities, capacities 


and attitudes 


* 

. 

■ * . 










* 


. . ■ 



. 

. 

• ■ 














-• 

* 



29 


VI. COORDINATION WITH OUTSIDE AGENCIES 


So that there is no unnecessary duplication of effort, there 
needs to be a close working relationship between the school and out¬ 
side agencies which offer activities for youth. Furthermore, if the 
individual guidance principle mentioned earlier in this paper is to 
be implemented adequately, the administration must have a clear 
knowledge of the various activities beyond the school in which its 
students participate. Koos makes this point definite: 

In home, church, and community life and in the unorganized 
social life of the school, there are many opportunities for 
self-expression which may well be the equivalent in personality 
formation of those represented by the organized extracurricular 
life of the school.™ 

Furthermore, schools have a responsibility to ally their 
activities programs with the leisure time activities of the adults 
of the community. Eckert and Marshall, in a survey of carry-over 
of participation in leisure-time activities, discovered that US per 
cent of the boys and I 4 . 6 .I 4 , per cent of the girls studied belonged 
to no leisure-time organization after graduation. 

Examination of the leisure-time pursuits of these pupils 
indicates that many of the constructive activities begun in 
school are left off as soon as the pupils leave school. It 
is apparent that neither the school nor the adult organiza¬ 
tions in local communities make any systematic effort to en¬ 
courage out-of-school youth to continue activities begun in 
school.3 9 

Chisholm, in outlining the responsibility of the school with regard 
to the carry-over of activities, sets up the following principles 
for high schools to follow: 

1. Be thoroughly familiar with each pupil*s recreational 
needs and development while in school and keep this information 
up to date as part of the cumulative record folder of the 
individual pupil. 











. '' 

' 

. . 


































■ 

. ' 


•; 


. 




■ 


























. 











30 


2* Keep accurate information concerning all recreational 
activities in the community* together with the names of the 
leaders of each activity* and make the information available 
to all students as a part of the responsibility of the school. 

3. Work regularly with community recreational leaders 
as a means of securing their cooperation in helping the school 
give special attention to this particular group of boys and 
girls. 

li. Give special guidance* through group and individual 
conferences* to students prior to graduation concerning their 
future leisure-time activities. 

5. Make periodic surveys of the leisure-time activities 
of former students* 

6 . Give major attention to the appropriate guidance of 
parents in the special needs of boys and girls as they end 
their formal school days as well as to acquaint parents with 
the interest and the efforts of the school in the leisure-time 
guidance of this group of youth. 


VII. REVIEW OF INVESTIGATIONS IN ALBERTA SCHOOLS 


Two publications have been completed in the area of extra¬ 
curricular activities in Alberta. The first was a master’s thesis 
by Watkin*^" presented in 1938. Watkin found it difficult at that 
time to secure reliable data on the development of extracurricular 
activities* and found most programs were incidental and not at all 
formally organized. Participation consequently suffered. There 
was a general lack of equipment for activities* teachers appeared 
extremely subject-conscious* and students had little opportunity 
for democratic participation in school management* 

In his investigation* which covered all of the high schools 
of Alberta* Watkin forwarded questionnaires to students* graduates* 
and principals. Although ninety-six per cent of the responses 
indicated that extracurricular activities were considered worthwhile* 
and that program offerings had distinct social and vocational values* 


























« 














. 










* 









1 • 




, 















* 


* 1 




















31 


teachers seemed to lack time, interest, or ability to direct 
activities* There was a feeling that academic courses were too heavy 
students felt already overloaded with assignments; and principals 
looked to the Department of Education for some direction in the field 
of extracurricular work, perhaps through the assistance of a field 
supervisor* 

The final chapters of Watkin’s thesis presented a compre¬ 
hensive survey of the program of extracurricular activities in the 
Banff High School* Watkin felt that this school was turning out 
students who were academically proficient and who, because of 
extracurricular participation, were discovering and cultivating 
interests which would endure in later life, long after formal 
classroom lessons were forgotten. 

The second Alberta study is a report of the Committee to 
Study Administrative Rroblems of the Composite High Schools, 
organized by the Edmonton High School Local, and completed in March, 
1958* Entitled M A Survey of the Teacher Load in Curricular, Extra¬ 
curricular, and Professional Activities of the Edmonton Public High 

ho 

Schools for the Year 1956-57* 11 it outlines very clearly sug¬ 
gested objectives for extracurricular activities, and reports the 
results of questionnaires designed to discover the extracurricular 
load of high school teachers. The major recommendations of this 
study included the followings 

1. Streamlining the initiation of extracurricular programs; 

2* Preventing the imposition of an undue burden on teachers; 

3* Co^pr-ning the priority of approved activities in terms of 
a) Benefits to participants; 






. 

'■ 

‘ 

. 

* 

: 

. 

■ 
























32 

b) Relation to the curriculum; 

c) Student involvement; 

d) Availability of sponsors; 

e) Wishes of the community; 

k* Limiting athletic participation; 

5* Recognizing the contributions made by teachers to programs; 

6. Fostering a clearer understanding of the importance of 

extracurricular activities by the Department of Education* 

by school boards* and by the public* 

Both of the Alberta studies reveal that administrators see 
very definite positive values in extracurricular participation; 
both are concerned -with the haphazard development of the total extra¬ 
curricular program offerings® The two studies show concern for the 
time and effort that must be expended by the average teacher® Each 
study looks beyond the walls of the school for guidance from a higher 
administrative and coordinating body* The Edmonton survey appears to 
be the first attack on the formulation of specific objectives for 
extracurricular activities in the high schools of Alberta. 

VIII. SUMMARY 

Extracurricular activities have come of age and the high 
schools of today are faced with the responsibility of administering 
extensive programs of activities* Such administrative obligations 
seem justified by the values which have been attributed to extra¬ 
curricular activities* with the socializing potentialities of student 
participation waxing as the most signiilcant contributions of any 


program. 














- 




* 

* 

* 

























. 











33 


Accomplishments in the extracurricular field have not always 
measured up to the expectations of administrators. The shortcomings 
have been attributed to basic weaknesses in program administration. 
Sound objectives for programs have seldom been clearly formulated 
or understood; there has often been a lack of a carefully planned 
administrative organization which could maintain an optimum working 
agreement among principals, teachers, and students; and many prob¬ 
lems related to teacher sponsorship and student participation have 
been neither clearly recognized nor solved* 

While the evaluation of programs of extracurricular 
activities is not an easy undertaking, efforts must be put forth 
to justify the initiation and continuance of program offerings. All 
too often, this has not been done. Furthermore, the degree of non¬ 
participation of graduates in adult community offerings calls for a 
greater degree of coordination between the school and outside 
agencies so that programs in the school are adapted to students 1 
post-graduation leisure time pursuits* 

The two Alberta surveys support most of the above state¬ 
ments. Alberta high school teachers recognize the values of extra¬ 
curricular activities* But, as is evidenced in American literature, 
the local studies reveal the need for a definite attack upon object¬ 
ives for the program, and for an administrative organization which is 
concerned with the realization of these goals. 














• . ' \ 

• : . : - 

■ 

' 

■ 

. 

. 

- V- «; fv-;-. ;. '• ' . •’ • ’■ "• •; 

* 

♦ 

* 







FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER III 


^Johnson, Edgar G., "Critical Problems in the Administration 
of Student Activities," ] tulle tin , National Association of 
Secondary School Principals, XXXVI, (February, 1952), p. 1. 

^Miller, Franklin A. and others. Planning Student Activities * 
(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, inc7, 1956), p. 11# 

Llzer, Louis oth , Allied Activities in thr 

School , (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1956), p. 17 

^McKown, Harry C., Extracurricular Activities , (New York: 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1952), p. "13, 

^Thomas, R, J., "An Empirical Study of High-School Drop-Outs 
in Regard to Ten Possibly Related Factors," Journal of Educational 
Sociology , XXXVIII, (September, 1951), p. 17. 

^Hohol, Albert E,, "Factors Associated with School Drop-Outs," 
Alberta Journal of Educational Research, Volume I, Number 1, (March, 

’WSTT pTT^T-■ — 

^Thomas, loc , cit , 

Q 

°Bossing, Nelson L,, Principles of Secondary Education, 

(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1955), p# i|31# 

%oos, Leonard V., "An Analysis of the General Literature on 
Extracurricular Activities," Twenty-Fifth Yearbook, N.S.S.E,, 
(Bloomington: public School Publishing Company, T926), p. 15* 

- V; Chisholm, Leslie L., The Work of the Modern High School . (New 
York: The Macmillan Company, 19537, P* 315'* 

11 

Ibid ., p. 317. 

12 

Kilzer, op* cit ., p. 5. 

1 ° 

Johnson, op. cit ., p. 2. 

"Ibid ., p. 3* 

Id 

■'Faunce, Ronald C., "Schools for Adolescents; Non-Class Experi¬ 
ences," Review of Educate lesearch , XXIV, (February, 19510, p. 6 




















































- 

. 






35 


■^Miller, op. cit., p. 89. 
^McKown, op. cit., p. 619. 
^Ibid. 


-^Johnson, loc . cit . 
on 

Alstetter, M. L., ’’Essentials of a Program of Extracurricular 
Activities,” School Review , XLIII, (May, 1935), p. 372. 

2 ^Koos, Leonard V., Administering the Secondary' School . (New 
York: American Book Company, p. 137* 


22 Ibid., p. 11*0. 

2 %unro, Walter S., Encyclopedia of Educational Research . 

(New York: The Macmillan Company, 1952), p. 126. 

^Eoos, op. cit ., p. 158. 

25 

McCreary, Charles, ’’Any Class Today?” School and Society , 

(March 2, 1957), p* 73* 

^°Ilunro, op. cit ., p. 1*27. 

27 

Sterner, William S., ’’Preparing Teachers to Sponsor Activities,” 
The Bulletin, National Association of Secondary School Principals, 
XXVI, (February, 1952), p. 1*2. 


28 

Johnson, cp. cit., p. 11. 

po 

^Kilzer, op . cit ., p. 21. 

3 °Ibid . 

31 

Johnson, op. cit., p. i*. 


j\oos, op. cit., p. 150. 


^Ibid. 


3h 


Chisholm, op. cit., p. 1*31® 





























“ 










- 








36 


"^Cory, F. Byron B., "High School Graduates Appraise Extra- 
Curriculum Activities,” School Review , XLIII, (November, 1935), p* 675. 

^Johnson, op. cit., p. 10. 

3?McKown, op. cit., p. 635. 


38 


Koos, op. cit., p* 136. 

30 

Eckert, Ruth E. and Marshall, Thomas 0., Rhen Youth Leave 
School . (New York: The McGraw Hill Book Company, 1936), pTT79. 

liO 

Chisholm, op. cit ., p. 336. 

^\[atkin, J. F., ’’Extracurricular Activities in Alberta’s High 
Schools,” (unpublished Master’s thesis. University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1938). 

^^Edmonton High School Local, Report of the Committee to Study 
Problems of Administration of Composite High Schools, ”A Survey of 
the Teacher Load in Curricular, Extracurricular, and Professional 
Activities of the Edmonton Public High Schools,” (March, 1958). 


















, * 


r ■ 












i 




.; ... , - .. : ... :■ ■ 


. 

’ 

* 

4 

. 


■ 







CHAPTER IV 


THE CENTRAL ORGANIZATION FOR PROGRAMS OF EXTRACURRICULAR 
ACTIVITIES IN THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


It was revealed in the survey of related literature in the 
preceding chapter that many of the accomplishments, or lack of 
accomplishments, in the extracurricular field can be traced to the 
nature of the central administrative organization for programs of 
activities* A well planned, well organized, and well coordinated 
program tends to achieve the desired outcomes more readily than a 
haphazard or inefficiently organized program* 

Before proceeding with a survey of the various organizational 
structures which were in operation in the composite high schools of 
Alberta, one needs to have a clear picture of what organization 
entails, and what part it plays in the administration of extra¬ 
curricular activities. Perhaps the most precise explanation of 
the term is that of Sears. 

The term organization is used widely to refer to any 
collection of persons, materials, procedures, ideas, or facts, 
so arranged and ordered that in each case the combination of 
parts makes a meaningful whole. An organization of men is an 
arrangement of individuals whereby each member may contribute 
to or participate in a joint activity, in conformity with a 
planned purpose and procedure, to the end that the talents and 
energies of all may be applied economically, effectively, and 
harmoniously in the activity.^ 

Miller, Moyer, and Patrick would support the application of the 
above definition with regard to extracurricular activities. 

The need for organization is always closely allied with 
the complexity of the job to be done. Whenever many indi¬ 
viduals or, as in the case of the cocurricular program, many 
groups of individuals must work together, there needs to be 




• fiv : ' - ' ' ■ ■ > • ■ , ' ■ \ ; 

: 1 t • ■ 

■ 

* 

V,f. ' r : r,r ; ■; ■■■•■ -0, !;• . v .fy/v • ;> V—-; ; V_ • .... , 


* ' 

• • '■ • — v ; ’ , 

' It'/.; • ; 

' r 

■ 

- 

* 

. 






38 


an established organizational procedure whereby these groups 
of individuals must work together, harmoniously and cooperative¬ 
ly, and be able to serve their individual or collective needs 
most efficiently.2 

With this framework of reference, the types of organizational 
structure which were found in the six Alberta composite high schools 
under study will now be presented. 

I. ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURES FOR EXTRACURRICULAR PROGRAMS 
IN THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 

Three types of organizational structure were found in the six 
Alberta composite high schools. These structures, as outlined in 
Tables I, II, and III, respectively, will be discussed in turn. 


TABLE I 

TTPE OF ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF 
EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES AS FOUND IN ONE OF THE COMPOSITE 
HIGH SCHOOIS OF ALBERTA 


Principal 

I 

Student Council 

(Elected Executive and Representatives 
from Each Home Room) 

I I I ^ I j I 

Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 

I | I I ! I 

Sponsor Sponsor Sponsor Sponsor Sponsor Sponsor 

Members Members Members Members Members Members 

The organizational structure, as shown in Table I, was in 
effect in one of the composite high schools surveyed in this study. 
It is, at least on paper, the essence of simplicity. The principal 
is the director or coordinator, the chief officer of the extra- 
























39 


curricular program* He works with an elected stucty- body, with every 
extracurricular activity in the school being under the direct 
jurisdiction of the elected students* council* The principal and 
the students* executive, particularly the president, are concerned 
with every facet of administration in every activity* Teachers are 
concerned primarily with the supervision of their own particular 
activities, and do not meet to view the program as a whole* They 
receive administrative guidance from the principal through the student 
body. 


TABLE II 


A SECOND TYPE OF ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE FOR THE 
ADMINISTRATION OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES AS 
FOUND IN FOUR ALBERTA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 


Principal 


Student Council 


(Student Executive and Home-Room Representatives) 


Sports Council or Association 

(Physical Education Teachers 
and Student Representatives) 


Non-Athletic Activities 


Athletic Activities 


Sponsors 

Participants 


Sponsors 

Participants 





















■ 

. 

1 

* 

. 

. 

* 


















ho 

The organizational structure as shown in Table II was in 
evidence in four of the composite high schools included in this 
survey. As will be evidenced in later chapters of this thesis, 
sports activities absorb a very large portion of the time and effort 
devoted to extracurricular activities in the composite schools. The 
organizational structure in Table II represents an attempt to meet 
the challenge posed by the growth in number of athletic offerings 
on extracurricular programs. Physical education teachers work with 
student representatives delegated by the student council to organize 
and coordinate the many athletic activities which are operating in 
these schools. The non-athletic activities are administered in the 
same manner as outlined in the description of lable I, and are 
principally the concern of student council executives and school 
principals• 

The third and most complex organizational structure, here¬ 
after referred to as the "board" method of organization, was in 
effect in the remaining school under investigation. It is treated 
at length in this thesis because, in the opinion of the investigator, 
it entails the application of most of the principles for sound 
organization as outlined in the introduction to this chapter. The 
board method of organization, shown diagrammatically on page Ul, 
can be understood more clearly in the words of a student handbook 
which was designed to orient students to the operation of every 
phase of school life, including the extracurricular.^ 

Student Government 

Students’ Union . The Students’ Union is the governing body 
responsible, in conjunction with the school administration, for 
all extracurricular activity. Its officers are elected annually 
by a vote of the entire student body according to a procedure 






: ■ ' 

, 

. 

- 


■ ■ ■ 

■ . ?! *i.o • • 

■ 

. 

- ‘ t >*-: "0 r or.;! / tj \ , x 1 r v, : , .. ■ • ; ; f* .... :>• 

■ 

- 

‘' 

‘ 

•; •: ' VV i ■ ■ 






hi 


TABLE III 

THE BOARD SYSTEM OF ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE FOR THE 
ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAMS OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 
AS OBSERVED IN ONE OF THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 
































































































h2 


stated in its constitution* All clubs, coinmittees, and athletic 
groups are represented by one member on the Student Council. 
Meetings of the executive and full council are held on alternate 
weeks, and the latter are open to any member of the student bocty- 
who wishes to hear the proceedings. Students* Union fees are 
used to subsidize athletics, to provide scholarships, to make 
awards for outstanding school achievement, to cheer the sick 
and extend sympathy to the bereaved, and, in general, to pay 
for all worthwhile things that students feel should be supported. 
A member of the staff is appointed to attend all meetings as an 
advisor, and to provide liaison between the student organiza¬ 
tion and the school administration. 

Assemblies Board . All students' entertainments in the audi- 
torium (movies, meetings, lits, etc.) are under the jurisdiction 
of the Assemblies Board. The board is composed of three 
teachers, and two students appointed by the Students' Council. 

Athletic Board . The Athletic Board coordinates and guides 
athletics in which our students participate. One of its duties 
is to distribute the Student Council allotment of money among 
the athletic clubs. A gymnasium schedule for extracurricular 
activities is made by this board. Cooperation with other boards 
for such things as eligibility, recommendations for athletic 
awards and social activities is maintained. The board has charge 
of some athletic clubs. The board consists of a chairman who is 
a physical education staff member, two other staff members, 
the presidents of the boys' and girls' athletic associations, 
and a student council representative. 

Awards Board . This board selects winners to receive awards 
made by the Council to students who are outstanding in scholar¬ 
ship, in servioe to the student body, and in athletics. This 
choice is made by the application of standards agreed upon by 
the Awards Board, a system of point ratings being the main 
criterion for selection of recipients of citizenship and athletic 
awards. Board members include four teachers chosen by the staff 
and four students chosen by the Students' Council. 

Clubs Board . The function of this board is to oversee the 
activities of clubs (other than those involved in sports) which 
operate in the school. The advisability of starting new clubs 
is considered and those in operation are assessed to determine 
whether the students are sufficiently interested to warrant 
continuing the activity. The board is made up of representatives 
of the students and the staff. 

Finance Board . The operation of the Students' Union runs 
into big money. The disposition of such large amounts of money 
requires careful, wise, and controlled budgeting. No school 
group should obligate the school without the consent of the teach¬ 
er sponsor. The Finance Board is made up of teacher members and 
the student treasurer. 











- 






, 






, 








* 






. 








- 












1*3 

Publications Board , The purpose of the board is to meet 
and give consent to all official publications of the student 
body. Any materials appearing in these publications must first 
be read by a member of the publications committee. Any new 
publication intended for distribution throughout the school must 
first be discussed with and approved by the board. The board 
consists of two staff members and one member of the student body 
who is appointed on the advice of the Students' Council, 

Social Board , The Social Board plans and organizes social 
activities, such as skating parties and dances. It is made up 
of student and staff representatives, A social committee of 
, boys and girls is formed to work under the direction of the 
board to decorate, plan entertainment, buy prizes, and clean 
up after any social function. 

Eligibility Board. This board shall endeavour to control 
the participation of the individual students in their extra¬ 
curricular activities sponsored by the school to ensure that: 

1. The representatives of the school in any interscholastic 
activity, in any public performance, or in any executive posi¬ 
tion are worthy representatives of the school; 

2, The participation is not detrimental to the best 
interests of the individual and/or the school. 

The board is composed of staff and student representatives. 

Advisory Board , Each of the above boards has a staff chair¬ 
man. These chairmen meet with the principals and other staff 
members at large regarding the coordination of all extra¬ 
curricular activities and to deal with any problems which might 
have arisen. 


II. SUMMARY 

Alberta's composite high schools, sensitive to the complexity 
of the task of administering programs of extracurricular activities, 
have initiated three types of organizational structure. All three 
types have common elements: 

1. All recognize the principal as the chief administrative 
officer of the extracurricular program. 

2. All schools have employed the support of the student body 

in administrative procedure through the election of a student council; 
















Ill* 


3 » All subordinate the activities, their leaders, and their 
members to the student council in the administrative heirarchy. 

Five of the six Alberta schools being surveyed have made 
efforts to involve increased staff and student members in the 
formulation of administrative policy* Four of these five schools 
have done so by the institution of an organized body to coordinate 
and control athletic activities, since these outnumber non-athletic 
activities in most schools. The fifth school of this group has 
initiated a system of ‘'board” control. It will be readily recog¬ 
nized from the text of this chapter that such a system: 

1. Involves more staff members and students in an adminis¬ 
trative capacity than either of the other two systems outlined 
above; 

2. Reduces the load of the principal and student president in 
extracurricular administration; 

3 e Attempts to coordinate the total extracurricular program 
by the participation of all teachers on the advisory board. 

Because of its clearly established organizational procedures, 
whereby many administrative groups are working together to serve 
the individual and collective needs of all students, the ‘‘board" 
type,of organization, at least from a surface investigation, appears 
to approximate the theoretical ideal more closely than the other 
types of organization which exist in the composite high schools of 


Alberta, 




■ • : 

- 


, 

- * 

- 


: • 

, 

. 

* ' 

























hS 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER IV 


-1-Sears, Jesse B., The Nature of the Adminis tr a ti ve Process # 

(New York: The McGraw-Hill Book ITompany, l£50), p. . 

^Miller, Franklin A. and others, Planning Student Activities # 
(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall Inc,, 1956), pV 9l 

^Eastglen Composite High School, Students’ Handbook. Edmonton, 
1957, pp. Ui-18. 




















*■ 






. 

* 


■ 


* 














































































CHAPTER V 


THE NATURE OF EXTRACURRICULAR PROGRAMS OFFERED IN THE 
COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA AND THE BASES FOR 
THEIR INITIATION 

I. THE NATURE OF PROGRAM OFFERINGS 

In the preceding chapter the organizational structure of 
extracurricular programs in the composite high schools of Alberta 
was discussed* Whether the offerings in extracurricular activities 
resulted from the organizational structure or whether organizational 
patterns evolved to meet change and growth in program offerings has 
not been determined* Probably the two progressed side by side, 
although it seems likely that increases in school populations would 
necessitate organizational changes regardless of the actual number of 
activities sponsored. 

For the purposes of this report, activities offered during 
the 1957-1958 school year in Alberta 1 s composite high schools have 
been divided into seven categories* Such categorization has been 
copied from the report of the Edmonton High School Local^ in its 
recent study of teacher load in composite high schools in that city. 
The classifications are as follows: 

1. Interscholastic athletics —those sports in which there is 
planned and supervised competition among schools on a league basis 3 

2. Intramural athletics —those sports which are organized and 
operated within the confines and administration of one particular 
school, without reference to similar activities in other schoolsj 

3* Athletic clubs —those clubs which are organized around some 
particular athletic skill or skills, and which are organized within 
the school on a membership basis ; 







■ 






* 

. 

. 


* 

' 

, ' ' :■ r •/. ■>: "}•• , ' ,,,g^ i 






■- 

. 

■ 








It. Non-Athletic Clubs —usually service and subject-centred clubs. 


without athletic emphasis; 

5* Publications —school yearbooks and periodical newspapers; 

6 . Administrative activities —those requiring executive duties 
of students, especially those concerned with student government; 

7. Social activities —tfce planned social events of the school 
which are not under the auspices of an affiliated club. 

Table IV shows these categories, and indicates the actual 
program offerings in each classification. The figures in paren¬ 
theses show the number of composite schools of the six investigated, 
which sponsored the particular activity for the 1957-1958 school year. 

In the six Alberta composite high schools, 71 kinds of 
activities were offered, with a total of 191 individual offerings. 
Seven athletic activities and seven non-athletic activities were 
common to all schools, while 85 activities, representing i*iu5 per 
cent of the total number offered, were athletic in nature. The 
number of activities offered in the individual composite high schools 
ranged from lit to 37* One of the factors which determined the number 
of offerings appeared to be the enrollment of the school, since the 
school with lit activities was the smallest composite school sur¬ 
veyed, and that with 37 activities was the largest. 

Having established the specific nature of program offerings, 
attention was next focused on the bases for the initiation of 
extracurricular activities in the composite high schools of Alberta. 
How did the activities come into being? Who was responsible for 
their initiation? Do certain activities tend to continue year after 
year? If so, why? These and other questions the investigator sought. 









. - • - 

. 

loo 

* 

- 

■ 


... 






» 

' . 


- 

* • - 










* 


* 
















TABLE IV 


KINDS OF ACTIVITIES OFFERED 
IN SIX COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


W 


Classification 

Activity 

Number of 
Schools 

1. Interscholastic 

Basketball (Boys) 

(6) 

Athletics 

Basketball (Girls) 

(6) 


Fastball (Girls) 

(1) 


Football 

(6) 


Swimming (Boys) 

(1) 


Swimming (Girls) 

Track and Held 

(1) 


(Boys and Girls) 

(6) 


Volleyball (Boys) 

(1) 


Volleyball (Girls) 

(1) 

2* Intramural 

Basketball (Boys) 

(2) 

Athletics 

Basketball (Girls) 

(2) 


Fastball (Mixed) 

(1) 


Touch Rugby 

Track and Field 

(1) 


(Boys and Girls) 

(6) 


Volleyball (Boys) 

(1) 


Volleyball (Girls) 

(1) 


Volleyball (Mixed) 

(W 

3. Athletic Clubs 

Archery 

(1) 


Badminton 

(6) 


Booster 

(2) 


Bowling 

(U) 


Cheerleaders 

(6) 


Curling 

(6) 


Golf 

(1) 


Majorettes 

(2) 


Rifle 

(2) 


Swimming 

(1) 

(1) 


Table Tennis 


Tumbling 

(M 


Wrestling 

(2) 

!*♦ Non-Athletic 

Subject-Centred: 


Clubs 

Drama 

(2) 


Electronics 

(2) 


French 

(2) 


Geology 

(1) 


Honours 

(1) 


Let*s Learn a Little 

(1) 


Science 

(3) 




















; : 









' 




















































' - 







- 










































TABLE IV (CONTINUED) 


b9 


Classification 

Activity 

Number of 

Schools 

i*. Non-Athletic 

Service: 


Clubs 

Hi-Y 

(2) 

(Continued) 

International Students* 

(6) 

Christian Fellowship 


Junior Red Cross 

U) 


library 

(i) 


United Nations 

(3) 


Y-Teens 

Recreational: 

(2) 


Chess and Checkers 

(2) 


Dance 

(2) 


Glee 

(3) 


Mixed Chorus 

(1) 


Orchestra 

(1) 


Photography 

(2) 

5* Publications 

Yearbook 

(6) 


Newspaper 

(6) 

6. Admini s tr at ive 

Athletic Association 

Boards: 

(2) 


Athletic 

(1) 


Assembly 

(1) 


Awards 

Clubs: 

(1) 


Finance 

(1) 


Publication 

(X) 


Social 

(1) 


Graduation Executive 

(6) 


Sports Council 

(b) 


Students* Council 

(6) 

7. Socials 

Awards Nights 

(6) 


Band Concert 

(1) 


Dances 

(6) 


Fashion Shows 

(3) 


Graduation Events 

(6) 


Operettas 

(2) 


Skating Parties 

(b) 

Total 

71 kinds of 
activities 
































: . • 




















* 
























































50 

and an attempt has been made to provide the answers in the section 
which follows* 

II. THE INITIATION OF PROGRAM OFFERINGS 

The bases for the initiation of activities tended to follow 
somewhat of a regular pattern for most of Alberta’s composite high 
schools. The following factors were found to be significant in 
determining the initiation and continuance of extracurricular 
activities in these schools: 

1. Many activities continue year by year because of tradition. 

In one city, for example, an athletic association which coordinates 
the interscholastic activities for high schools has existed since 
1929. Indeed, it would be a drastic measure for any principal to 
defy twenty-nine years of tradition and state boldly that his school 
was not intending to participate in the athletic events sponsored by 
the association. 

2. Staff interests and qualifications are strong influences 

in the determination of activities to be sponsored. Four of the six 
principals who were interviewed were very adamant in stating that, 
despite the degree of student interest which prevails, most adminis¬ 
trators would refrain from putting an activity into the hands of an 
unqualified or unwilling sponsor. 

3. The six composite high schools vary in their philosophies 
concerning the actual point of activity initiation. Three of these 
schools conduct no activity unless interested students make the first 
move and appeal for an organization and a sponsor. The remaining 
three schools make allowances for the interested teacher to come 


* 

. 

' 

' 

» 


' 



■ ~ • 


• ' ' \ 






- . ' .' 


« 




. 











■ 



51 


forward and offer his services as a sponsor, or for his being per¬ 
suaded to do so if he displays talent to lead an activity which 
appears to have educational merit# 

k* Initiation, based upon a survey of student interests, has 
been proposed by one of the composite high schools. Such an interest 
survey has been conducted in this school, but the findings are not 
available at this time. 

5# One of the six Alberta schools has divided activities into 
two categories, continuing activities and conditi onal activities. 

This school considers that the students' council, the library club 
(a service organization), the graduation committee, and the posi¬ 
tion of staff-treasurer are the only positions and activities which 
are absolutely essential, and which "continue" from year to year 
without renewed sanction. All other activities to be sponsored 
must be given the approval of a board comprised of both students 
and teachers; a guaranteed membership is necessary; a sponsor must 
be available; and final approval must be given by the students 1 
council. 

Ill. SUMMARY 

Extracurricular activities which are offered in the pro¬ 
grams of six composite high schools of Alberta may be divided into 
seven classifications—interscholastic athletics, intramural 
athletics, athletic clubs, non-athletic clubs, publications, 
administrative activities, and social events. There are 191 
individual activities offered in all, with almost half of these 
being athletic in nature. Fourteen activities are common to all 




* 1 

• - ■' 




. 

* 


■ ■ ' ' 

' ; ' ' 1 ■■ : 

..' ■: ", f.V > •" *‘ 

’ ' 


. 

• ... ' . ) f 






* 




- 


• • ■ ■ j , u-., i ; ^ 

_ 

. .. . 




■ 


. 


.r 




. 



52 

six schools. There appeared to be some relationship between school 
size and the number of activities offered, with the smallest Alberta 
composite high school, in terms of enrollment, offering lit activities, 
and the largest 37 activities. 

Tradition, staff interests and qualifications, and initial 
student interest seemed to be the chief bases for program initia¬ 
tion. One of the six schools surveyed has conducted a school-wide 
investigation of student interests to determine future program 
offerings. A second school has a very limited number of activities 
which continue each year, with the great majority of offerings being 
resanctioned each fall on the bases of educational merit, guaranteed 
interest and attendance, and availability of sponsors. 


FOOTNOTE TO CHAPTER V 

^Edmonton High School Local, »A Survey of the Teacher Load 
in Curricular, Extracurricular, and Professional Activities of the 
Edmonton Public High Schools, Report of the Committee to Study 
Problems of Administration of Composite High School, (March, 1958), 
pp. 23-25. 








J. 






■ 


' 


' 

■V 1 ' ‘ • 


































' 



































CHAPTER VI 


SUPERVISION OF THE PROGRAM OF ACTIVITIES 

The six composite high schools of Alberta surveyed in this 
study were staffed by 25l teachers. This chapter is concerned with 
those teachers in the six schools who were actively engaged as 
sponsors of extracurricular activities. It attempts to answer the 
following questions concerning the supervision of activities: 

1. How many teachers are engaged in sponsorship? 

2. What are the philosophies of the six schools concerning 
teacher sponsorship? 

3- How are teachers assigned to the sponsorship of extra¬ 
curricular activities? 

h» Ho teacher-sponsors consider themselves suited to the 
activities they sponsor? 

5. Who assumes the major load of supervision? 

6. What background do sponsors have that fits them for the 
supervision of extracurricular activities? 

7. How are activities weighted in order to balance the load of 
supervision? 

8. What considerations do teacher-sponsors favour with respect 
to remuneration and/or reduction of their regular teaching load? 

I. THE DEGREE OF SPONSORSHIP 

Of the 25>1 teachers employed in the six composite high 
schools of Alberta studied in this survey^ 132 were engaged as 
sponsors of extracurricular activities. Table V reveals that 
the degree of sponsorship varied markedly from school 








TABLE V 


DEGREE OF TEACHER SPONSORSHIP IN SIX ALBERTA COMPOSITE SCHOOLS 


School 


Percentage of Teachers Engaged 

As Sponsors of Activities 

A 


92 

B 


72 

C 


bh 

D 


37 

E 


1*0 

F 


k9 

Mean 53 per cent 


to school. Percentages were used in the table to preserve the 
anonymity of the six schools. Fifty-three per cent of all teachers 
were sponsors of activities. The range on an individual school 
basis was from 37 to 92 per cent. 

II. SCHOOLS* PHILOSOPHIES CONCERNING SPONSORSHIP 

The sharp differences in Table V were, in part, possibly 
explained by the philosophies of the individual composite high schools 
concerning teacher sponsorship. School A maintained that, except when 
extenuating circumstances prevailed, it was definitely part of a 
teacher*s responsibility as a staff member to assist with the program 
of extracurricular activities. In School B teachers were free to accept 
or to decline the sponsorship of extracurricular activities, although 
the principal of the school admitted that he frequently used the power of 
persuasion to enlist the efforts of talented staff personnel for what 












J v • ' 




, 






. 














. ■ . 1 

. 












55 


he deemed worthwhile activities. In Schools C, D, E, and F, the 
sponsorship of activities by teachers was voluntary, with the 
exception of some teachers in two of the schools. The principals 
of Schools C and E felt that teachers of physical education were 
hired as coaches for sport as well as classroom and gymnasium 
instructors. 

In five of the schools (all except School A) no concrete 
policy concerning supervision of extracurricular activities was to 
be found. The same five composite high schools had no formulated 
policy concerning the orientation of new staff members to the 
extracurricular program; nor did they make any provision for the 
inservice training of sponsors. The sixth school (School A) had a 
definite mimeographed policy of supervision and took stock of new 
staff members, easing them gradually into the program and under the 
guidance of an experienced sponsor. Also, by the very nature of the 
school*s administrative organization, the teachers of this school 
were exposed to meetings and discussions concerning the extra¬ 
curricular program. 

III. ASSIGNMENT OF SPONSORS 

In view of the composite high schools* philosophies outlined 
above, it was expected that the number of teachers who volunteered 
their services would be high. This proved correct, since seventy- 
six per cent of the teachers replied that they had volunteered as 
sponsors. 

Reasons for offering their time and services are given in 
Table VI. Over one-third of the teachers who volunteered did so 
because of an interest in the subject-matter of the activities. One 
sixth of the sponsors considered supervision to be part of a teacher*s 













i ' ' j; 














56 


TABLE VI 

SPONSORS* REASONS FOR VOLUNTEERING AND FOR BEING ASSIGNED 
SUPERVISORY DUTIES 


A. Reasons for Volunteering Percentage of 

Volunteers 

lm Interest in the subject-matter of the 

activity 35 

2. Considered it part of a teacher*s responsibility 16 

3. Recreational interest in the activity 1;5 

U. Genuine desire to share the load 11 

5. Sonebody had to do it 11 

6. Administrative interest in the position 6 

7* Miscellaneous reasons 6 

Total 100 

B. Reasons for the Choice of Percentage of 

Non-Volunteers Non-Volunteers 

1* Because of qualifications 35 

2. Because of a knowledge of the teachers* interests 25 

3* To balance the load and give the teacher his share 17 

k. No known reason for the choice 10 

5* Because of the subject taught 3 

6. Miscellaneous reasons 10 


Total 


100 









































1 ' - : ® . 













57 


responsibility, while a further eleven per cent had somewhat similar 
views in wanting to take a genuine part of the load of supervision. 
One-seventh of the sponsors were interested in recreational aspects 
of the activities sponsored. 

The twenty-four per cent of the teachers who were assigned 
sponsorship roles on a non-voluntary basis gave as their reasons for 
being chosen one or more of those outlined in the second division of 
Table VI. Sixty per cent of such teachers felt they had been 
selected for sponsorship because administrators were aware of their 
qualifications or interests. Seventeen per cent believed they were 
assigned a role in order to balance the load of supervision. Ten 
per cent indicated that they did not know the reason for the assign¬ 
ment of duties. 

IV. SUITABILITY TO THE ACTIVITY 
Asked whether they felt they were sponsoring the activity for 
which they were best suited, teacher-sponsors gave the following 
replies: 

Yes. 67 per cent 

No. 5 per cent 

As well as any.28 per cent 

Since it has been indicated in earlier paragraphs that 
seventy-six per cent of these people entered supervision by their 
own choices, the small percentage of ’’no^” is an expected out¬ 
come. All of the negative responses did, in fact, come from those 
teachers who had been assigned duties on a non-voluntary basis. It 
is perhaps significant for administrators that seventy-nine per cent 

of those teachers who were asked to supervise extracurricular activi¬ 
ties felt they were suited to the sponsorship thus assigned. 



















58 


V. TEACHER LOAD IN EXTRACURRICULAR SUPERVISION 

Table VII indicates the subjects which occupy the majority 
of the classroom instructional time of teacher-sponsors, the types 
of activity each subject-group of teachers supervise, and average 
time given by each subject-group to the supervision of extracurricular 
activities. 

The following observations seem significant: 

1. Physical education teachers were responsible for over one- 
half of the total hours spent in the supervision of activities. 

2. Physical education and English teachers were responsible for 
the supervision of almost half the activities. 

3. Those teachers of fine arts—art, drama, and music—who 
supervise extracurricular activities spend more time each in 
sponsorship than any other group of teachers. 

1;. The major load for publications is carried by the English 
teachers. 

5. Non-athletic clubs are sponsored by a more diverse group of 
teachers than any other extracurricular category of activities. 

Experience and Teacher-load 

Years of teaching experience were cross-checked with time 
devoted to sponsorship of extracurricular activities, and it was 
discovered that younger and inexperienced teachers were contributing 
more time to extracurricular supervision than the experienced 
teachers. Those teachers of Alberta*s composite high schools with 
less than ten years of teaching experience spent an average of 5-5 
hours per week on supervision of the program. Those with ten years 

or more of teaching experience averaged a contribution of 2.5 hours 
each per week. 



























. 


■ 

■ 

, 

, 











59 


TABLE VII 

SUBJECT-MATTER AREAS, TYPES OF ACTIVITIES, AND TIME-LOAD 
OF SPONSORS IN THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 


Subject 

Number of Teachers 
Sponsoring Each 

Type of Activity 

Total 
Number 
of Ac¬ 
tivities 

Average 
Time Per 
Week for 
Each 
(Hours) 

Total 

Hours 

Per 

W e ek 

.0 

1 * 

$ ^ 

''C m 

v) N 

? < 
t Si 

\ 

r * 

3 * 

r 

'Q 

* 

u 

.u 

* 

< 

t 

.V) 

'M 

< 

O 
. ^ 

$ 

( 

N 

,U 

NQ 

.S 

< 

.<0 

Si 

.c 

\ 

English 

3 

2 

it 

16 

10 

2 

37 

1.9 

70.2 

S. Studies 

2 

2 

3 

6 

il 

2 

19 

2.1 

ItO.O 

H.P.D. & P.E. 

16 

ik 

8 

2 

1 

1 

h2 

8.7 

365.5 

Mathematics 

3 


1 

3 

3 


10 

1.8 

18.0 

Science 

3 

5 

u 

9 


2 

23 

3.0 

70.0 

Commercial 

3 


3 

i* 

5 

1 

16 

1.6 

25.5 

Technical 




2 

1 

1 

it 

1.9 

7.5 

Home Ec. 




1 



1 

5.0 

5.0 

Foreign Lang. 




5 

2 


7 

1.8 

12.5 

Fine Arts 




It 



it 

9.7 

39.0 

Psychology 






1 

1 

5.0 

5.0 

Guidance 




1 


1 

2 

5.8 

11.5 

Totals 

30 

23 

23 

53 

26 

11 

166 


669.7 


VI. BACKGROUND FOR SPONSORSHIP 

All but one of the six composite schools which were 
surveyed had no program for the orientation of new members to 
the staff in terms of extracurricular duties. The same 






































































60 


five schools had no program for in-service training* Since these 
five schools, one would presume, would still expect that adequate 
supervision of activities be given, it seemed significant to take 
stock of the background of training and experience which these 
sponsors had and which might fit them for the supervisory tasks in 
the extracurricular program. Table VIII indicates the background 
which, in the opinions of the sponsors themselves, best fitted them 
for the sponsorship of activities. 


TABLE VIII 


BACKGROUND OF EXPERIENCE AND TRAINING FITTING TEACHERS FOR 
SPONSORSHIP OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES IN THE COMPOSITE 

HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 

Experience or training 

Percentage of 
Sponsors 

1. Participation in similar activities at 
the high school or college levels 

20 

2. University courses 

29 

3. Experiences as a leader of similar 
activities beyond the school building 

20 

lw No experience or training in particular 

13 

Miscellaneous experiences 

18 

Total 

100 


Although twenty-nine per cent of the sponsors indicated 


that they had received significant help through university instruc¬ 
tion, the following question and responses would indicate that many 
teachers felt they would be better fitted for their extracurricular 
duties if they had received greater assistance in this regard during 









, 

1 r, r. • .. ' , ' . 

n.t' ” . a ; ■ ' ; l i . biP ' ' • ■ \'rx;j 

, 

■ ;u , ; V ' . .. ■ ■. r 


'' • ' 'i:o u . h: v ; ■' ' ./. 




. ■ ' 


' 

* 

* 








61 


their university training. O n ly those sponsors who have had less 
than ten years of experience were considered. It was felt by the 
investigator that those who are many years removed from teacher 
training institutions would hardly be in a position to make decisions 
that would have implications for the now functioning college insti¬ 
tutions . 

Question : Do you feel that teacher training institutions give 
too little, adequate, or too much stress to extracurricular programs 
in their preparation of teachers who are destined to become sponsors? 



$8 per cent of sponsors 
38 
k 


Too little 


Adequate 


Too much 


The following figures represent the types of activities 
sponsored by those teachers who felt that too little emphasis was 
given to extracurricular activities by college instructors: 


Interscholastic activities 


2k per cent of such sponsors 


Intramural athletics 


18 


Athletic clubs 


12 


Non-A'thletic clubs 


22 


Publications 


18 


Adminis tra tive 


6 


Vn. WEIGHTING OF ACTIVITIES 


Administrators in the composite high school of Alberta have 


used three methods of weighting activities in an attempt to 
balance the load of supervision. 








62 

1. In five of the schools, extra pay was given for extra 
effort* Remuneration was offered on a unit basis, with various 
activities being ascribed unit values. Sponsors were paid a special 
allowance by school boards according to the number of units of super¬ 
vision they had completed. However, the amounts paid in terms of the 
efforts expended by teachers seemed meagre. For example, a teacher in 
one school who spends five hours per week in supervision of sport 

and who makes as many as ten out-of-town trips a year with inter¬ 
school teams, can earn a maximum of two hundred dollars a year for 
doing so. Perhaps one teacher was getting close to the truth when he 
stated, M They (the allowances) are nothing beyond honoraria in recog¬ 
nition of a job well done. It is difficult to envision their acting 
as a real incentive and luring complacent teachers into putting forth 
greater effort.” 

2. There were some instances, in three of the above five 
schools, of certain teachers being given extra free time in the 
school day in recognition of extracurricular effort. Those so 
involved were teachers of physical education and the fine arts. 

3* The sixth school, as mentioned earlier in this thesis, 
had a philosophy which expected that every member of the staff should 
take a justifiable share of the supervisory load. It further held that 
remuneration for such shared duties was quite unnecessary. 

VIII. OPINIONS OF SPONSORS CONCERNING A PHILOSOPHY OF SUPERVISION 

Table IX reveals that there was a diversity of opinion as to 
what constituted the nature of adequate supervision. In general, those 
teachers who were required to undertake duties of supervision without 
remuneration and without time privileges tended to reflect approval 




' 


: 


i . ! '■ . ‘ ' 

-•/ . ' / ' : a : 

■ ' ' 





. i 








■ • i i •' 


. 


» 

' 

, 

1 ■■■; ' . ■ : J .. ■: . ■ ' 1 i • . . i : 




63 


of such a philosophy in their responses. Those teachers who were paid 
tended to be divided in philosophy. There was little support for the 
hiring of special extracurricular teachers. Almost half of the 
sponsors favored supervision by the regular staff, but with some time 
allowed free from instructional duties to compensate for the added 
effort. 


TABLE IX 

SPONSORS 1 2 3 * 5 OPINIONS CONCERNING A PHILOSOPHY - OF EXTRACURRICULAR 
SUPERVISION FOR THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


Type of Supervision 


Percentage 
in Favour 


1. Regular classroom teachers, without added 

pay, with supervision over and above a 

regular teaching load. 12 

2. Regular classroom teachers, with pay in 

proportion to the amount of supervision 
of activities, over and above a regular 

teaching load. 26 

3. Regular classroom teachers, without added pay, 

but with some time allowed free from instruc¬ 
tional time to allow for the supervision of 
activities. Ul 

!u Special extracurricular teachers, hired and 

paid specially for the responsibility of 
supervision of activities and without any 
regular teaching load. 13 

5. Other suggestions 2 


Total 


100 









■ ■ ' • 

* 

' 








• : j 





















* 


* 


■ 

- 










„ 

* 





» 






6h 


IX. SUMMARY 

Fifty-three per cent of the 251 teachers employed in the six 
composite high schools of Alberta studied in this survey were 
engaged as sponsors of extracurricular activities. The degree of 
sponsorship varied markedly from school to school. The schools' 
philosophies concerning teacher sponsorship had some bearing upon 
such variance. Four schools operated on a completely voluntary basis, 
one principal used the art of persuasion, while the sixth school 
expected that every teacher assume a justifiable share of the total 
load of extracurricular supervision. Seventy-six per cent of the 
teachers had volunteered as sponsors. The chief reasons for offering 
their time and services were interest in the subject-matter of the 
activity, consideration of supervision as part of a teacher's re¬ 
sponsibility, and an interest in recreational activity. Over half of 
the sponsors who were assigned duties on a non-voluntary basis be¬ 
lieved that their qualifications and interests were the deciding 
factors in such assignments. All but five per cent of the sponsors 
felt they were well, or reasonably well suited to the activities 
they sponsored. 

There seemed to be considerable imbalance in the sharing of 
the extracurricular load, with physical education teachers spending 
well over half of the total hours which are given over to supervision 
of the extracurricular program. English teachers and instructors in 
the fine arts made major contributions also. An average of four 
teacher hours were devoted to each of 166 activities in five of the 
Alberta composite high schools. In these schools, a total of over 
25,000 teacher hours were spent on extracurricular supervision during 




* 

- 

• • ' : •. 

, 

. 

. ■ * ■ ■ - ■■ 

. 


~ ' ’ •• i r, ' V.., ’ • ' rs.* 

* ' • ' . ' • • - ; 
- 

- 


* ' 


:;i ' ' r , .. ■; i .. 












. ' 








65 

the 1957-1958 school year* Young and inexperienced teachers tended 
to spend more than twice as much time in sponsoring activities as 
did older and experienced instructors* 

Sponsors cited several elements of training and experience 
which fitted them for their supervisory responsibilities. In order 
of decreasing frequency of mention, these were university courses, 
participation in similar activities at the high school and college 
levels, experiences as leaders of out-of-school activities, and 
miscellaneous reasons* Over half of the teachers felt the need for 
greater emphasis by college instructors upon extracurricular pro¬ 
grams for teachers who are destined to become sponsors. 

Attempts to weight activities included payment for supervision 
on a weighted unit scale, and the awarding of extra spare periods to 
physical education and fine arts teachers. Eighty-five per cent of 
the sponsors felt that classroom teachers should be responsible for 
the supervision of extracurricular activities. Over half of those 
who indicated this philosophy suggested that teachers be allowed 
some time free from instructional time to allow for the adequate 
supervision of such activities* 


: • ; ♦ ■ ■ 

. 










, 





t 







* 

£:;'i 

- 

. 











CHAPTER VII 


STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

This survey was designed to ascertain only an approximate 
picture of the total student participation in extracurricular 
activities. Table X gives aggregate figures for participation, and 
some adjustments for those students who participated in more than 
one activity would have to be made before the actual degree of total 
student involvement is ascertained. The table does, however, show 
the great emphasis which is placed upon athletic activities. 


TABLE X 

TOTAL NUMBER OF STUDENTS PARTICIPATING IN EACH TYPE OF ACTIVITY 
IN SIX COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS SURVEYED IN ALBERTA 


Approximate Number of 
Type of Activity Participating Students 


1. 

Interscholastic athletics 

930 

2. 

Intramural athletics 

1880 

3. 

Athletic clubs 

1335 

h. 

Non-athletic clubs 

820 

5. 

Publications 

no 

6 . 

Administrative positions 

260 


Athletic participation thus outnumbers non-athletic by 
almost four to one, despite the fact that it was revealed in Chapter 
VI that more than half the sponsored activities are of the non- 
athletic variety. 








■ 

‘ 

» 

* 






















, 

* 


' 






-• 






* 






67 


Although this investigation was not intended to reveal the 
actual numbers of students who do, and who do not, take advantage of 
program offerings, estimates were sought of principals in the absence 
of more concrete evidence in most schools. Such estimates of the 
degree of total student participation varied from one fourth to one 
half of the student population. Some statistical evidence is avail¬ 
able. Of the 2,362 students who completed a questionnaire in the 
Calgary high schools in 1957, 1,365 took no part in extracurricular 
activities sponsored by those schools. An earlier survey conducted 
by one of the smaller composite high schools in Southern Alberta 
revealed that two out of three students refrained from taking part in 
the school*s program of activities. Concern was felt by two principals 
that many students who stood to gain most by participation were not 
active. 

I. THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF STUDENT PARTICIPATION 

None of the composite high schools of Alberta had a definite 
policy for direct encouragement of participation. Activities were 
publicized in all six schools through home-room announcements, through 
bulletin board displays and directions, and at assembly gatherings. 

One school published a student handbook which outlined the administra¬ 
tion and nature of program offerings. There was little evidence of 
individual guidance in the selection of suitable activities. 

Awards 

Each school surveyed had a definite set of extracurricular 
awards. These, in the form of trophies, cash awards, sweaters, 
crests, and pins were awarded to such persons as: 


1. The best all-round athletes; 

2. Outstanding track and field stars; 







68 

3« Successful interscholastic and intramural athletics 5 
lu Holders of executive positions; 

5. Outstanding participants in individual sports and contests. 
Five of the Alberta schools which were surveyed had initiated 
the awarding of some recognition to students who made all-round con¬ 
tributions to the school community. Such attributes as academic 
standing, sports participation, leadership and citizenship were 
assessed. Awards were provided by local businessmen, by service 
clubs, by teachers and ex-teachers of the schools, and through the 
sponsorship of the schools, usually by the Students' Councils. Two 
examples of the methods of selecting students as recipients of all¬ 
round awards are given. 

School A : 

A prize of one hundred, twenty-five dollars was made by a 
local service club to both a boy and a girl. The money was awarded 
on a point basis in the following ratios 
Academic 8 
Sports 7 
Leadership 10 

Minimum attributes included an eighty per cent academic average, a 
prominent role in three sports, a reasonable degree of executive 
service, commendable school attendance, desirable attitudes, and 
general sound school behavior and cooperation. 

School B : 

The Home and School organization awards ten pins each year 
to members of each of the three grades. The following are the bases 


of such awards 




* 

* .... 

■ 


*• 






■ 

- • ‘ •' ; 
















- 


* 


















• M .... 




* 














: 






69 


1. On the basis of examination results and final academic stand¬ 
ing, a maximum of.15>00 points; 

2. On the basis of attendance and punctuality a maximum 

of. 200 points; 

3. On the basis of extracurricular participation a maximum 

of.£00 points; 

k* On the basis of good citizenship, conduct, and cooperation 
a maximum of. 300 points; 

5>. On the basis of application (scholarship related to mental 
ability), a maximum of. $00 points; 

In the two examples of awards given above, as in others not 

outlined, the degree of participation in, and service given to, 
extracurricular activities played a prominent part, 

II. THE LIMITING OF PARTICIPATION 

The principals of all six composite high schools of Alberta 
included in this survey agreed upon, and instituted, eligibility rules 
for participation in interscholastic athletics and in public perfor¬ 
mances and productions. The reasons given were two: 

1. To protect the student*s academic progress, since inter-school 
activities tended to be extremely time-consuming; 

2. To ensure that the school was represented by worthy citizens 
who were capable of academic endeavour as well as athletic prowess. 

With four schools, the eligibility rules were strictly 
black-and-white propositions; either a student had the academic re¬ 
quirements or he did not represent the school in interscholastic 
competition. Two principals made exceptions in particular individual 
cases. The point of view of one of these two men was as follows, 














70 

“Where it is advantageous to the welfare of the student, and not 
detrimental to the school at large, obviously rules are overlooked.’ 1 

No academic limitations were set for intramural sport and 
for club membership. Asked if any precautions were set to guard 
against overloading, principals gave the following responses. 

“No." (Two principals) 

“We tell them (the students) to get into one activity and don*t 
get into too many.” 

“School policy encourages participation in a maximum of one 
physical activity and one club. Academic emphasis comes first.” 

“Only on an individual basis. Some students take on as many as 
seven or eight activities provided marks do not suffer markedly." 

"We consider that three activities should be a maximum for the 
average student." 

III. STUDENT LEADERSHIP PARTICIPATION 

Certain restrictions were imposed to ensure that the students* 
chief executive officers were a relatively select group. Without 
exception, the president of the council had to be a Grade XII student, 
possessing at least a basic academic standing, and with credit and 
attendance qualifications. Similar, but slightly less demanding 
requirements, faced aspirants to council executive positions. 

Team captains and club executives were chosen in all com¬ 
posite schools by the popular vote of members, and hence met no 
restriction other than popularity within the group and the approval 
of the sponsor. Editors of publications were staff appointed, 
usually jointly by the principal and the publications sponsors. 

Two schools required that the student treasurer be a student 
pursuing a commercial program. 


■ 






■ 




- 






, 



































. . 

. • . . 

. 

' 








71 


Pertinent Data Concerning Student Leaders 

The following facts have been recorded after an analysis of returns 
of student-leaders* questionnaires, and are reproduced in the order in 
which they appeared on the questionnaire form. 

1. Most of the student-leaders were Grade XII students. 

Grade X 5 per cent (7) 

Grade XL 2k (33) 

Grade XII 71 (100) 

2. There existed no significant opportunity-differences between 
the sexes. 

Male leaders 5l per cent (72) 

Female leaders k9 per cent (68) 

3. The great majority of student-leaders followed the matricu¬ 


lation program. 

Matriculation 

General 

Commercial 

Technical 


79 per cent (111) 
9 (13) 

8 ( 11 ) 

k (5) 


1*. Leaders did not tend to concentrate their attention upon 
the leadership of one or two activities, but were participants in 
various numbers of activities. 


1 activity only 

16 student 

leaders 

2 activities 

hi 

u 

ii 

3 activities 

19 

11 

it 

k activities 

21 

II 

it 

5> activities 

20 

II 

t! 

6 (or more) activities23 

11 

11 
















72 


5* Approximately half of the students (i;7 per cent) occupied 
similar leadership roles beyond the school* 

Student-leaders* ascribed values, suggestions for program 
improvement, and other data are presented in later chapters* 

IV. SUMMARY 

Participation figures reveal the great focus of attention that 
is being placed on athletics by the composite high schools of Alberta* 
Athletic participation outnumbers non-athletic by four to one* 

Extimates of the degree of total student participation in 
extracurricular activities varied from one fourth to one half of the 
student body, and the limited statistical figures which are avail¬ 
able would support such estimates* 

No definite policy of the encouragement of participation 
prevails in the composite high schools, although awards appear to 
act as incentives for talented students. Academic limitations are 
imposed upon interschool athletes and performers by all schools. No 
limitations are set for intramural sport and for club membership* 

The chief executive positions for students call for special 
selective qualifications. Most student leaders are Grade XII stud¬ 
ents following a matriculation program. Leaders tend to participate 
in a varying number of activities, and approximately half of them 
participate as leaders in similar activities which are sponsored by 
out-of-school organizations. 







CHAPTER VIII 


FINANCING EXTRACURRICULAR PROGRAMS 

As the student handbook of one Alberta composite high school 
stated, M The operation of the Students* Union runs into big money. 

The disposition of such large amounts of money requires careful, 
wise, and controlled budge ting. 11 It is true that great amounts of 
money have been expended on extracurricular programs. Table XI 
shows the approximate figures for the financial operation of programs 
in three of the composite high schools for the academic year 1956-57. 
Readily available figures for the remaining schools were incomplete, 
as were all figures for the 1957-56 year at the time of this in¬ 
vestigation. 

Again, as seen earlier in a table showing the degree of 
extracurricular sponsorship, certain areas of the program dominate 
the picture. Interscholastic athletics absorb a large share of the 
money although, like social events, they tend to be financially 
sustaining. Very small amounts are spent on clubs, and the amount 
expended for intramural athletics is small in terms of the numbers 
of participating students. 

The greatest drain on funds is the publication of the year¬ 
book, and it is only through an intensive drive for advertising 
donations and by the direct appropriation of a large share of the 
students* general fees that yearbooks reach print. This situation 
held true in every composite high school that was visited. 

I. FINANCIAL STRUCTURE 

There were almost as many methods of handling extra¬ 
curricular money as there were composite high schools. Two 
extremes will be cited first. In one school, despite a neatly 














1 

. 

. 








. , ■ 










































■ , . . • ; • r •. 






. 










7k 


TABLE XI 

PROGRAM EXPENSES FOR THREE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS * 




School A 

School B 

School C 

Interscholastic 

Receipts 

$1300 

$1150 

$ 755 

Athletics 

Expenses 

$ 131*5 

$1200 

$ 725 

Intramural 

Receipts 

NIL 

NIL 

$ 15 

Athletics 

Expenses 

$ 300 

$ 300 

$ 125 

Athletic Clubs 

Receipts 

NIL 

NIL 

NIL 


Expenses 

$ 75 

$ 35 

NIL 

Non-Athletic 

Receipts 

NIL 

NIL 

$ 1*0 

Clubs 

Expenses 

$ 25 

$vio5 

$ 80 

Publications 

Receipts 

$ 91*5 

$ 575 

$ 920 


Expenses 

$11*90 

$1125 

$1200 

Social Events 

Receipts 

$ 800 

$1170 

$ 625 


Expenses 

$ 1*50 

$ 680 

$ 390 

Miscellaneous 

Receipts 


$ 575 

$ 20 


Expenses 


$ 205 

t 60 

TOTALS 

RECEIPTS 

$301*5 

$31*70 

$2375 


EXPENSES 

$3685 

$3650 

$2570 

^Information presented from those 

schools with complete 

financial 

records available. 






prepared students* constitution which calls for entirely different 


practice, the principal is the treasurer for the extracurricular 
program. He keeps the books, receives initial budgets, handles 
chequing and banking, and audits his own books. In another school. 





















■ ■ : . :• .. : 










































■ 










. 


■ 


. 

• . • 












IS 


the Students* Union treasurer does all of these duties with the 
exception of auditing, which is done by a staff member. The remain¬ 
ing schools have staff financiers, with student treasurers being 
delegated varying degrees of freedom and responsibility under their 
guidance. In one school, where the chief treasurer was a vice¬ 
principal, two student treasurers kept books for minor outlays and 
incomes, and their main responsibility was that of attending func¬ 
tions to ensure the adequate collection of door receipts and con¬ 
cession money. In another school those activities other than sports 
and the yearbook were under the jurisdiction of the Students* 

Council and hence the student financier was responsible for them. 

In yet another school, the student treasurer*s contribution was 
reduced to the responsibility for three scholarships, graduation 
expenses, and a library grant. 

Where a finance board operates, its staff advisor and the 
permanent staff treasurer worked hand in hand, with the latter 
keeping books and signing cheques. Requisitions for money came 
from the executives of the activities themselves, by way of initial 
budgets and later emergent requests. These requisitions were 
channeled through the students* union where, if approved by that 
body, the student treasurer issued a 11 dummy” cheque and passed it, 
along with the original requisition, to the staff treasurer. If he, 
under the direction of the finance board, approved the expense, the 
actual cheque for the amount was signed and forwarded to the recipient. 

II. THE RAISING OF HJNDS 

The chief sources of funds for extracurricular activities, 
in order of magnitude, were: 






' 




. 


















































f ••• ' 








76 

1. Students’ fees, paid by every member of the Students' Union 
and ranging from $1.00 to $8.50. In all schools, the Union itself 
and the yearbook took the major portion of the fees; 

2. Gate and door receipts to interscholastic athletics and 
social events; 

3. Concessions; 

Membership fees, levied by clubs in two of the composite 
high schools; 

5. Grants from school boards for equipment and, in four of the 
schools, for the supervision of activities. 

III. SUMMARY 

Large amounts of money are spent on the extracurricular 
programs of the composite high schools of Alberta. Interscholastic 
sports and the publication of the yearbook absorb the major portion 
of the funds. The degree of student involvement in the handling of 
extracurricular money varies from complete control on the one extreme 
to the carrying of the title only at the other. The chief sources 
of funds are students' fees, receipts from athletic and social 
events, conceessions, membership fees, and school board grants. 












■ 

. . 

„ 

s 

' 








* 

■ 








* 






















' 







CHAPTER IX 


MISCELLANEOUS ASPECTS OF THE AMINISTRATION OF EXTRACURRICULAR 
ACTIVITIES IN THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS 

Several aspects of the administration of extracurricular 
programs in the composite high schools of Alberta, because of 
limited data available with respect to each, have been treated in 
this chapter. The scheduling of activities, the evaluation of 
programs, and values ascribed to the extracurricular activities by 
sponsors and student leaders will be discussed in turn. 

I. SCHEDULING 


Annual Basis 

Since most extracurricular activities are associated with 
seasonal sports, there tends to be a balance of athletic activities 
spread over the school year. All but two composite high schools in 
Alberta attempt to terminate athletic activities with the completion 
of the spring track and field meet. Club activities, paying no 
homage to particular seasons, persisted for the entire school year. 
In some instances, students were concerned that many activities 
were not initiated until late in the first school term and looked 
for a solution to the problem. 

Weekly and Daily Bases 

There were instances of some activities being operated on a 
“when should we meet next and what space is available" basis. Most 
activities, however, were assigned regular times and places. Only 
one school had a clearly defined and mimeographed schedule which was 
made available to students. Two schools used a bulletin board to 
list times and places for meetings. 


























. 

' 




■ 

. 

























, 














- 





. 







78 


Times and Places of Meeting 

Administrators insisted that, wherever possible, activities 
be held on the school premises. Exceptions were interscholastic 
athletics, and such activities as curling, bowling, and swimming. 
Activities were scheduled, in most instances, after four o*clock 
and during the noon hour, the latter being most suitable for those 
who came to school by bus and for those occupied after school with 
part-time employment. Two of the larger schools had rather exten¬ 
sive morning programs, beginning in each case at 7:30. 

II. EVALUATION 

Evaluation of the extracurricular programs in effect in the 
composite high schools of the province does not occur on any definite 
basis. Only one school had formulated goals for the extracurricular 
program to achieve; extracurricular programs were seldom the subject 
of staff discussions; and five of the six schools had no form of 
inservice work in the extracurricular sphere. 

When questioned concerning objectives, the five principals 
who o operate without formulated goals for their programs responded 
with very general statements which might apply to any area of 
instruction, or else drew from their own unwritten philosophy. And 
indeed there was a great variety of views, as the following state¬ 
ments of the five principals concerned will reveal: 

"Extracurricular activities are outlets for the academically 
able students only. Many of our teachers are not interested in 
such activities, so why should they be called in on discussions?" 

"All work and no play makes Jack a dull bey. Extracurricular 
activities offset the impact of concentrated academic effort." 







f 


























■ 

: 














. 

' . :■ 


f . 
























' 




* 




























79 


"Primarily, the school is concerned with training students in 
adequate communication and sound thinking. Extracurricular 
activities are supplementary, providing for an excellent all-round 
school community." 

"There is no need to waste time with the discussion of ob¬ 
jectives for this and that. When one builds a house, does he 
have to rebuild every year? It is the same with our extra¬ 
curricular program. It was put in order some years ago and has 
remained so ever since." 

"We have no written objectives but we would hope that all 
teachers see the value of activities and that as many as pos¬ 
sible take an active part in their administration." 


III. VALUES ASCRIBED TO THE PROGRAM 

Table XII tabulates the responses made by teacher-sponsors, 
including principals, concerning the values of extracurricular 
programs presently in effect in the six composite high schools of 
Alberta. The specific values listed for evaluation by teachers were 
the result of subjective responses on the pilot survey and were 
supplemented from a survey of values most commonly occurring in the 
literature. The investigator was concerned with establishing some 
justification (or lack of it) for the existence of extracurricular 
activities and hence for their adequate administration. 

More than fifty per cent of the sponsors indicated that 
there was great value or some degree of value in sixteen of the items 
listed. For the first nine values listed, over eighty per cent of 
the teachers found considerable merit. Sponsors rated the following 
values as very significant and in the following order of importance: 

1. Training in citizenship; 

2. Training for social cooperation; 

3. Training in assuming responsibility; 

h • Training for leadership; 

5. Development of worthwhile friends; 

6. Training for use of leisure time; 

7. Outlet for super-abundant energy; 

8. Improved school spirit; 







80 


TABLE XII 

VALUES ASCRIBED TO EXTRACURRICULAR PROGRAMS BY TEACHER-SPONSORS 
IN SIX COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


Value 

Degree of Contribution 
(Percentage of respondents) 



Much 

Some 

little 

1. Training for leadership . 


51 

3k 

15 

2. Training for social cooperation • . 


kl 

hi 

12 

3* Outlet for super-abundant energy. . 


1|6 

38 

16 

k • Training in assuming responsibility 

• • t 

b2 

kh 

111 

5. Training for use of leisure time. . 


bZ 

k2 

16 

6. Improved school spirit. 


h2 

ho 

18 

7* Development of worthwhile friendships • . 

39 

US 

16 

8* Training in sportsmanship , . . . . 


39 

U2 

19 

9. Training in citizenship . 


37 

5k 

9 

10. Training in basic skills . 


28 

ks 

2k 

11. Improved school discipline. 


22 

k5 

33 

12. Improved physical health . 


22 

ill 

37 

13. Improved school-community relations 

• • # 

20 

k9 

31 

111. Cultural development ....... 


18 

39 

k 3 

15. Training for aesthetic appreciation 

• • • 

18 

30 

52 

16. Therapeutic values for individuals. 

• • ♦ 

17 

k6 

37 

17. Retention of students in school . . 


16 

kl 

k3 

18. Training for parliamentary usage. . 


11 

33 

56 

19. Motivation for academic work. . . • 


8 

ko 

52 

20. Vocational training ........ 


6 

ko 

5k 





























81 

9* Training in sportsmanship; 

10. Training in basic skills* 

The opinions of sponsors are supported by those of student- 
leaders, for the five values rated highest by students were among 
the ten values cited above. Over eighty per cent of the student- 
leaders felt that the extracurricular program made large contribu¬ 
tions to the social adjustment of students, to the development of 
friendships, to training for citizenship and recreation, and to the 
improvement of school spirit and discipline. Table XIII reveals the 
responses of these student leaders. 

TABLE XIII 

VALUES ASCRIBED TO EXTRACURRICULAR PROGRAMS BY STUDENT-LEADERS 
OF SIX COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOLS OF ALBERTA 


Values Degree of Contribution 

(Percentage of respondents) 



Much 

Some 

Little 

1. Better social adjustment . 

68 

27 

5 

2. Making worthwhile friendships.. • 

67 

27 

6 

3. Training in citizenship. 

62 

31 

7 

lu Better school spirit and discipline. ... 

56 

25 

9 

5. Developing recreational skills . 

1*8 

1*0 

12 

6. Learning important facts . 

26 

51 

23 

7# Help in choosing a vocation. 

16 

1*9 

35 

8. Keeps students in school longer. . 

10 

a 

1*9 

9* Improves regular class work. . 

6 

37 

57 




















82 


iv. smmi 

The scheduling of extracurricular activities in the composite 
high schools of Alberta seems to pose few problems. A large number 
of activities are associated with seasonal sports and thus an athletic 
balance is maintained throughout the year. Most activities are assigned 
specific times and places of meeting, although only one school has put 
such information into the hands of every student. Wherever possible, 
activities are held on the school premises. After four and during 
noon hour are the popular times for activities, although two schools 
offer morning programs. 

Evaluation of extracurricular programs is not definitely 
pursued in any of the six composite high schools visited. Only one 
of the schools has formulated goals for the program to achieve. 
Principals gave a great variety of philosophies concerning the 
objectives of extracurricular activities. 

Sponsors and student-leaders, however, indicated that they 
saw some considerable contributions being made by extracurricular 
programs in the composite high schools. Chief of these contributions 
were, in their opinions, the social adjustment of students, the 
development of worthwhile friendships, training for citizenship and 
for the use of leisure time, and the improvement of school spirit 
and discipline. 










r 








* 











* 

* 

* 






• • 

* 








. 







CHAPTER X 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

I. AN OVERVIEW OF THE THESIS 

As indicated in the opening statement of the thesis, the 
purpose of the study was to investigate, through an administrative 
perspective, the nature of extracurricular programs being offered 
in the composite high schools of Alberta. Chapters I to III outlined 
procedures for the investigation and reviewed the most pertinent 
literature concerning extracurricular activities. In Chapter IV, 
the three types of organizational structure presently in existence 
in the six composite high schools under study were discussed. 

Chapter V introduced the actual program offerings and considered the 
nature of their initiation. The supervision of extracurricular 
activities was the theme of Chapter VI, with such factors as the 
degree of sponsorship, the schools* philosophies concerning super¬ 
vision, the assignment of duties, and teacher load being discussed 
in detail. The end product of the administration of programs— 
student participation—was briefly dealt with in Chapter VII. The 
degree of participation, the limiting and encouraging of participa¬ 
tion, and the nature of student-leadership were given brief treatment. 
The raising and spending of funds, the organizational structure for 
the handling of money, and other factors pertinent to the financing 
of extracurricular programs in Alberta*s composite high schools were 
given attention in Chapter VIII. Finally, Chapter IX considered 
miscellaneous aspects of the administration of programs, including 
scheduling, evaluation, and values ascribed to extracurricular 
activities by teacher-sponsors and student-leaders. Not included 


■ 

. 

, 

. 

1 

* 

. 

1 







in the thesis proper, but appended to indicate the need for further 
investigations in the extracurricular field in the composite high 
schools of the province, are suggestions for the improvement of 
programs recorded by students and teachers, as well as proposed 
topics for intensified study outlined by sponsors. 

II. CONCLUSIONS RESULTING FROM THE INVESTIGATION 

Based upon the data presented in this thesis, the follow¬ 
ing conclusions appear, to the investigator, to be particularly 
significant. 

1. There is a great diversity of structures for the adminis¬ 
trative organization of extracurricular programs in the composite 
high schools of Alberta. The patterns in effect present extremes— 
from the role of a principal who is all things to all activities, 
to the involvement of all staff members in a clearly outlined, but 
relatively complex structure. 

2. Program offerings reveal a great emphasis upon athletic 
pursuits, especially interscholastic sports, where few students 
participate actively and the majority are spectators. 

3. Staff interests, staff qualifications, and the tradition of 
continuing with established practices are more important factors 
in program initiation than are student interests. 

The composite high schools 1 philosophies of supervision of 
extracurricular activities are as numerous as the schools them¬ 
selves. Generally, teachers volunteer their services for a variety 
of reasons, but forty-seven per cent of the entire number of teachers 
in the six schools surveyed make no contribution whatever to the 


.. •. >. ! 







’ 




. 

■ 





* 

* 





















. 



. 















. 4 






1 

■ 








85 

supervision of the extracurricular program. Because of the earlier 
mentioned emphasis on athletics, teachers of physical education bear 
the brunt of supervision, being responsible for over one-half of the 
total hours spent on extracurricular supervision in the schools* 

5. Three methods have been implemented to weight activities for 
the purposes of supervision. One school expects that all teachers 
will share the load; four give scanty remuneration for supervision; 
three schools give limited time free from instruction duties to a 
few teachers. Sponsors themselves are in disagreement as to the 
nature of adequate supervision, but the largest number favor the 
load being carried by regular classroom teachers with some time 
allowances made to their instructional responsibilities in lieu of 
extracurricular duties. 

6. Student participation is highest in athletic activities. 
However, participation by the school populations is rather limited, 
with estimates by principals ranging from one-fourth of the enrolled 
students to one half. Participation is neither markedly encouraged 
nor limited in any of Alberta’s composite high schools. A consider¬ 
ably large number of students occupy leadership positions, with half 
of these people indicating that they occupied no such role beyond 
the school building. 

7. The financing of extracurricular activities in any one of 
the composite high schools of Alberta runs into thousands of dollars, 
with the greatest amounts of such money going to the support of inter¬ 
scholastic sports and to the publication of yearbooks. The financial 
structures for the administration of extracurricular monies vary 
markedly—from the principal-treasurer who handles the finances 


... 






- 





' •■■■ !• 


4 

, 

. 

; ' ' ' ) ' ' ' 

' 

' 

■ 

* 

~ 

’ '• < 






. ' • > ■ > 




- 










’ '■ 


. 














86 

alone to the student-treasurer who is allowed to manage all financial 
undertakings save auditing. Generally, the degree of student involve¬ 
ment in finances is very slight. 

8. Evaluation of extracurricular programs does not occur. Per¬ 
haps this is a natural outcome, since five of the six composite high 
schools have no formulated goals for the programs to achieve. 
Objectives, as cited by school principals, vary greatly and, in at 
least three cases, bear little resemblance to the commonly cited 
goals in recent literature. 

9* The great majority of sponsors and student-leaders ascribe 
much value to the extracurricular program. Although they tend to see 
little relationship between academic progress and participation in 
extracurricular activities, their responses would indicate that the 
latter have inherent values which are not to be found in the day to 
day activities of the regular classroom. 

III. RECOMMENDATIONS RESULTING FROM THE INVESTIGA'IION 

The following recommendations are based upon the conclusions 
immediately preceding this section and are made with respect to the 
literature reviewed in Chapter III. The investigator feels that the 
theory as propounded by American authors applies to the Alberta scene 
and that a survey of its content by the administrators of the composite 
high schools of the provice could lead to nothing but the improved 
administration of extra-curricular activities in their respective 
schools. 

1. Both of the studies made at earlier dates in Alberta high 
schools suggest the possibility of assistance by the Department of 




















' • 





























87 


Education in implementing extracurricular programs. While the imple¬ 
mentation of a successful pro grain at the particular school must 
always be clearly aligned with local needs and condition, administra¬ 
tors are in need of assistance through guiding principles, model 
constitutions, and more direct statements of aims and objectives. 
Programs of activities are likely to remain f, extra n as long as all 
the directives that come from departmental offices are concerned 
only with the academic aspects of secondary education. 

2. In terms of the best theory and in regard to investigations 
in the composite high schools of Alberta, the investigator recommends 
the "board" structure of organization outlined in Chapter IV. The 
chief advantages of this organizational pattern appear to be the 
following: 

i. More teachers and students are involved than with any 
other basic organizational pattern found in the province; 

ii. The load of supervision is more uniformly carried by 
teachers than in schools employing other arrangements; 

iii. Clear lines of authority are established and there is no 
overlapping of times and energies; 

iv. Teachers are more concerned with a complete perspective 
and understanding of the total enterprise. 

3. In three of the schools surveyed, there were great differ¬ 
ences between what was set down as constitutional for extracurricular 
administration and what actually happened in practice. If student 
constitutions are worthy of the time and effort expended in their 
initiation, they should be also worthy of conscientious implementa¬ 
tion. To meet with students and draft procedures, only to follow 


* 


: : ' L ' r ' ■ 


•••• 

• ‘ ' ■ •' • ' ' ’• ■ , 


. 

S.\£ r.l u,r. ! : M,\ ;• ;1 






' 


* 

' 


. i i r> : o 

, 




' 

■ ■ 


■ 




v' •’ - '■ ’ .V ■' ' A. J . ■■ V-: .. . • ■ ■: ■ / 


• • ■ • 

. 

* 

- 

- 

' 

' '• ■ ’ ■ ■ 1 ■> . • „• .1 > . ■' . : ' ■' 

. 






88 


a different approach in practice, is nothing short of democratic 
hypocrisy. It is strongly recommended that administrators have more 
faith in the ability of students to plan, to make intelligent deci¬ 
sions, and to shoulder responsibility. 

ii. While tradition will insist that certain activities continue 
from year to year, and while activity sponsorship must be moulded 
around the particular capabilities of teachers, it seems imperative 
that a survey of students' interests be undertaken before initiating 
any program of extracurricular activities. In the Calgary survey 
mentioned in Chapter VII, when students were asked to cite problems 
concerning programs, twenty-four per cent checked the "lack of 
activities that appeal to me." It seems necessary, if universal 
participation is the goal, that universal interest be the gauge of 
program initiation. 

5. The great emphasis upon athletic endeavours has been referred 
to frequently in this thesis. While competitive sport will always be 
with us, there are aspects of the sports program which hardly find justi¬ 
fication. As one example, there is the matter of storing thousands of 
dollars worth of equipment so that some seventy football players can 
take the field for a limited period each fall. Would the same schools 
be prepared to spend that same amount of money for the training of 
seventy boys in club membership? And would not their contribution be 
a more worthy one if they did? Economy may be defined here as it is 
in any educational spheres—the maximum educational returns for every 
dollar spent. Are the fostering of the competitive spirit in a 
handful of students and the fostering of spectatorship adequate 
returns for the money appropriated to interscholastic athletics? 


' 




« 

»• 








. 1 ; . 

* 

. 

■ 

* 

. • . ' • * 

• i 

. 

* 














89 


6. If, as most administrators agree, extensive programs of 
extracurricular activities are to be offered in the composite high 
schools of Alberta; if, as sponsors and student-leaders have indi¬ 
cated, extracurricular activities have many inherent values; then 
it should follow that all teachers should be concerned with the 
supervision of activities. Regulations in this province outline 
responsibilities for all teachers in this regard. Presently, how¬ 
ever, in the schools studied, physical education teachers and others 
who volunteer their services bear the load, while as many more look 
on. To the investigator, it seems no more logical to expect that a 
teacher of physical education will automatically be the football 
coach than it is to expect that the science teacher will spend ten 
evening hours a week with the science club. However, it does seem 
logical, if programs are worthwhile and are operating, that adminis¬ 
trators should take immediate measures to see that some teachers are 
not overworked while others "sit and wait”, 

7. If the employment of all teachers as supervisors does not 
balance the load adequately, adjustments must be made. It is 
recommended that this not be done ty padding a teacher's pay cheque. 
Rather, if the expectation of teachers is that of doing a regular 
day's work in any given day; if supervision is considered part of 
that day's work; if activities are to assume a ranking which makes 
them an integral part of a well-rounded program and not always "extra”; 
then the relief for a heavily-burdened sponsor should take the form 

of a reduction in regular classroom teaching duties. 

8. It was found that the composite high schools of Alberta were 
giving leadership training to at least seventy students in the extra- 





- 


) 


n 

) 


y 













. 


: 

■. - ; j ;•* « ' , ’ : uf"! ' 

. 

. 

. • 

. 

. • . . 

• ■ 

. 

, 

. ■ ■ ' 

■ J ■ ■ ' • 

* 

. ' 

, 

' ■ 

. 

' 


■ 

' 


. 



















90 


curricular field who were not getting a similar opportunity away 
from school. A continuation of efforts in this regard is recommended 
Perhaps a more careful study of the possibilities in this direction 
may bear added fruit. For example, in one composite high school 
several students held three or four leadership positions each. One 
student was a leader of seven activities! Such a monopoly on 
leadership does a disservice to many other students and ultimately 
to the society into which these young people graduate. 

9. Relative to the financing of extracurricular activities, two 
recommendations will be presented. The first involves the degree 
of student participation in the handling of monies. There are 
splendid opportunities in this area for students who are bent on a 
vocation of accounting to acquire first-hand experience. A com¬ 
petent student, guided by a staff member, and assisted, if necessary, 
by an office clerk, could and should be the chief financial executive 
The auditing of books could be done by the commercial department. 

Secondly, and in line with the above suggestions, adminis¬ 
trators could show more faith in the integrity of students with 
regard to handling money. If a reliable system of checks and 
balances is superimposed upon the financial organizational structure, 
surely any problem of misuse of funds will disappear. 

10. The time and effort which went into the mimeographed 
activity schedule in one of the composite high schools of Alberta 
must have been appreciated by the students. It revealed that the 
administration was as interested in finding a suitable place for 
the science club to meet as it was in scheduling a time and place 
for Latin. This procedure is recommended, for it enables a student 




' 

* 

. 

: 

■ ) 


■ 

. '• 

. 

■ ■ 



* 

: :. ; r .' ' 

. 


, : V j r.JO >? ' r-.,,..[ 

- 


-t' : ,)jr; , >.n 


■ 


. 


■ 




x:j 








* 

-Vi . \ ■. . V 1 : ; V 






. 














91 

to plan his school work, his extracurricular activities* and his 
other casual activities and duties around set time appropriations* 

11. A final recommendation is intended to carry as much weight 
as all the other suggestions combined. And this is natural, since 
the foregoing recommendations will be of little avail without the 
implementation of suggestions which now follow. 

Administrators need to take time to analyze exactly what they 
are attempting to do in the field of extracurricular activities. 
Objectives must be formulated; planning, coordinating, organizing, 
directing—all the aspects of sound administration need to be 
implemented in setting up the structure in which the program will 
work; and the efforts so expended must periodically be gauged to 
determine how successfully the aims are being realized* Until a 
school staff has a clear conception of where it is going, it can 
never determine whether the goal has been reached. The move toward 
the analysis of values which could accrue from extracurricular 
activities, the formulation of objectives, the evaluation of pro¬ 
gress—these seem to be basic steps which may lead the composite 
high schools’ retreat from haphazardness in this field of adminis¬ 


tration, 


' 


a • ■ * 


■ 

* 

% 




-V-yr ... / 

1 


■' ■ '' — &j( - I ■ ■' ' ' 3$) 




■ 







BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Alstetter, M. L. “Essentials of a Program of Extracurricular 
Activities,” School Review , XLIII, (May, 1935), 371-73* 

Bossing, Nelson L. Principles of Secondary Education * Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1955* 

Chisholm, Leslie L. The Work of the Modern High School * New 
York: The Macmillan Company, 195JI 

Cory, F. ^yron B. "High School Graduates Appraise Extra-Curriculum 
Activities," School Review , XLIII, (November, 1935), 672-82. 

Eastglen Composite High School. Students 1 Handbook * Edmonton, 1957. 

Eckert, Ruth E. and Thomas 0. Marshall. When Youth Leave High 
School. New York: The McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1938. 

Edmonton High School Local. "A Survey of the Teacher Load in 

Curricular, Extracurricular, and Professional Activities of the 
Edmonton Public High Schools*" Report of the Committee to Study 
Problems of Administration of Composite High Schools, Edmonton, 
Alberta, March, 1958. 

Faunce, Ronald C. "School for Adolescents: Non-Class Experiences," 
Journal of Educational Research , XXIV, (February, 1951;), 66-73. 

Good, C. V. Dictionary of Education . New York: The McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, 19 15* ~ 

Hohol, Albert E. "Factors Associated with School Drop-Outs," 

Alberta Journal of Educational Research, Vol. I, No. 1, 

(March, W%TTl - 17. 

Johnson, Edgar G. "Critical Problems in the Administration of 
Student Activities," The Bulletin , National Association of 
Secondary School Principals, XXXVI, (February, 1952), 1-12. 

Kilzer, Louis R. and others. Allied Activities in the Secondary 
School . New York: Harper and Brothers,19567 

Koos, Leonard V. Administering the Secondary School. New York: 
American Book Company^ 191*0. 

. "Analysis of the General Literature on Extracurricular 
Activities," Twenty-Fifth Yearbook . N.S.S.E. Bloomington, 
Illinois: Public School Publishing Company, 1926. 

McCreary, Charles. "Any Class Today?" School and Society, (March 2, 
1957), 72-73. 

McKown, Harry C. Extracurricular Activities . New York: The 
Macmillan Company,"1952. 












































93 


filler, p**anklin A. and others. Planning Student, Activities . Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1956. 

Munro, Walter S. Encyclopedia of Educational Research . New York: The 
Macmillan Company, 19 

Sears, Jesse B. The Nature of the Administrative Process . New York: 

The McGraw-HiTT”Book Company, 1956". " 

Sterner, William S. “Preparing Teachers to Sponsor Activities,“ 

The Bulletin, National Association of Secondary School Principals, 
IXVI7 (February, 1952), 32 - 1*2. 

Thomas R. J. “An Empirical Study of High School Drop-Outs in Regard 
to Ten Possibly Related Factors," Journal of Educational Socio- 
logy , XXXVIII, (September, 195k), 1TZDT. 

Watkin, J. F. "Extracurricular Activities in the High Schools of 

Alberta." Unpublished Master’s thesis. The University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 1938. 














. 

L.c 


. 




■ 





- 


- 


, 








, 

. 


* 



- 







APPENDIX 










APPENDIX A 


QUESTIONS ASKED OF ADMINISTRATORS IN A STRUCTURED INTERVIEW 
CONCERNING EXTRACURRICULAR PROGRAMS 


Central Organization 

1. What are the actual activities that are sponsored in 
this school? 

2. Does the school have a written constitution, guidebook, 
or similar written document of policy concerning extracurricular 
activities? 

3* What were the bases for the initiation of the extra¬ 
curricular program in this school? 

il. What is the organizational administrative structure for 
the operation of the program? 

5. What part does the student council play in the initia¬ 
tion and administration of the program? 

6. What record is kept of programs and of participation? 

Supervision of the Program 

1. What is the nature of the home-room organization in this 

school? 

2# What is the school policy concerning the supervision of 
extracurricular activities? 

3. How do sponsors become sponsors? 

it. Are student sponsors used in any capacity? 

5. What percentage of the staff is actively engaged in 
extracurricular sponsorship? 

6. Is there any provision for the in-service training of 
sponsors? 

7. How are new staff members oriented to the program? 

8. Is there any method used for weighting activities in 
order to balance the load of supervision? 

9* Is any time allowed free from instructional duties for 
activity sponsorship? 

Student Participation 

1. What are the numbers participating in each activity? 

2. Is participation in activities encouraged? to what 
extent? why? 

3. Is participation controlled? to what extent? why? 

it. What system of extracurricular awards exists in this 

school? 

5* Who makes the decisions regarding limiting, encouraging, 
and rewarding participation? 

6. How are the various student leaders chosen? 

























■ 

■ 











* 

* 

'.'a- ■ ■; :V : ; ■ r ‘t ■.'■■/yxn 






. 

















96 


Financing the Program 

1. What are the total yearly costs of operating the extra¬ 
curricular program? 

2• How is the cost distributed? 

3, What is the organizational financial structure in this 

school? 

U* From what sources are funds drawn? 

5. In what manner are funds allocated to various activities? 

6. What checks and balances are placed upon school financing 
of the extracurricular programs? 

Evaluation 

1# What goals have been formulated in this school for the 
extracurricular program to achieve? 

2* What provisions are made to assess the worth of an 
activity and justify its inclusion in the program? 

3. What stock is taken of student participation? 

Scheduling 

1. In what manner are the various activities scheduled 
on a yearly basis? on a day-to-day basis? 

2* What limits are set on time and place of meeting? 

3. What is the most common meeting time for activities? 

Coordination 


1. What efforts are made to gear the program to the 
anticipated adult life of the students as they enter the community? 

2♦ What coordination takes place between school and other 
youth-serving agencies to avoid duplication of effort? 

Miscellaneous 

1* What do you find to be the major problems or obstacles 
in providing an adequate extracurricular program? 











APPENDIX B 


SURVEY OF EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

1957-58 

QUESTIONNAIRE FOR SPONSORS 


1. What type of extracurricular activity(ies) do you sponsor? 

(Check where applicable) 

(1) Interscholastic athletics . 

(2) Intramural or house league athletics • •••• 

(3) Athletic club . 

(It) Non-Athletic club. 

(5) Publication .*••• 

(6) Administrative (e.g. Council Adviser) . 

2. What time (approximately) per school week would you spend in 
sponsorship of the activity(ies) if such time were spread evenly 
over the forty week year? 

. hours per week* 


3. What subject takes most of your instructional time in your 
regular classroom teaching”load? Check one only, unless you 
give even amounts of teaching time to various fields* 


(1) English • «... 

(2) Social Studies *.... 

(3) Health and P*D. 

(It) Physical Education ••••• 

(5) Mathematics 

(6) Science . 

(7) Commercial Subjects...** 

(15) Other (Specify) 


(8) Industrial Subjects • • 

(9) Home Economics *.... 

(10) French, Latin, German 

(11) Art, Music, Drama ... 

(12) Economics ..... 

(13) Psychology, Sociology 

(lit) Agriculture. 


It. How many years of teaching experience have you had? 

(1) Less than five years ..... 

(2) Five to .nine years ..... • 

(3) Ten years or more ..... 


5. What background do you have that, in your opinion, fits you best 
as the sponsor of the activity(ies) for which you are responsible? 
(Check one only ) 

(1) University courses..... 

(2) Participation in similar activities yourself at the high 

school or college level(s) . 

(3) Experience as a leader of a similar activity beyond the 
school building ••••• 










































o 












98 


(U) Other experience (Specify briefly) •••••«••.••••••• .. 

(5) None in particular . 

6. Do you feel that teacher training institutions give too little, 
adequate, or too much stress to extracurricular programs in 
their preparation of teachers who are destined to become sponsors? 

(1) Too little ..... 

(2) Adequate . 

(3) Too much . 

7* Is the activity which you sponsor the one for which you feel you 
are best fitted? 

(1) Yes . 

(2) No . 

(3) As well as any . 

8. Did you volunteer to supervise the activity? 

(1) Yes . 

(2) No . 

9. Why did you volunteer? (Answer if applicable) Check one . 

(1) Interest in the subject matter of the activity ..... 

(2) Recreational interest ••••• 

(3) Administrative interest ..... 

(ii) Genuine desire to share the load 
(5>) Part of your responsibility. 

(6) Somebody had to do it ••••. 

(7) Other reason (Specify briefly) ..... 

10. If you did not volunteer, why were you chosen? ( Check one .) 

(1) Because of the subject you teach ••••• 

(2) Because of your qualifications ..... 

(3) Because of a knowledge of your interests •••.. 

(ii) To balance the load and give you your share ..... 

(5) You don't known ..... 

(6) Other reason (Specify briefly) ..... 

11. In the following, check the one response which comes closest to 
your philosophy concerning the supervision of extracurricular 
activities: 

Supervision should be done by 

....(1) Regular classroom teachers, without added pay, with super¬ 
vision of activities to be over and above a regular teaching 
load. 

....(2) Regular classroom teachers, with pay in proportion to the 
amount of supervision of activities, over and above a 
regular teaching load. 































99 


••••(3) Regular classroom teachers, without added pay, but with some 
t3jne allowed free from instructional time to allow for the 
supervision of activities. 

. .,.(li) Special extracurricular teachers, hired and paid specifically 
for the responsibility of supervision of activities and 
without any regular teaching load. 

•... (5) Any other suggestion (Specify) .. 

12. Participation by students in extracurricular activities, con¬ 
sidered as a group, 

....(1) Enhances their progress in regular course work; 

.♦..(2) Has little effect upon their regular course work; 

••••(3) Impedes their progress in regular course work. 

13* A list of values ascribed to extracurricular activities is given 
below. Judging from your experience with extracurricular 
sponsorship, please evaluate the amount of benefit to students 
in each instance. 

Much 

Value Some Little 

(1) Training in basic skills ...... ...... ...... 

(2) Training for social cooperation.. .. 

(3) Training for leadership.. . 

(li) Training in sportsmanship.. 

(5) Improved physical health..... 

(6) Outlet for super-abundant energy.... ...... ...... 

(7) Training in assuming responsibility. 

(8) Cultural development .... 

(9) Improved discipline in the school.. .. 

(10) Improved school spirit...... 

(11) Retention of students in school.. ...... 

(12) Development of worthwhile friendships ... 

(13) Training for use of leisure time.. ...... 

(Ill)Therapeutic values for individuals..... ...... 

(15) Training for aesthetic participation.. ...... ...... 

(16) Motivation for academic work.......... ...... .. 

(17) Vo national Training.. . 

(18) Improved school-community relations... . .. 

(19) Training for parliamentary usage. 

(2G)Training for citizenship.. .. 

Hi. What suggestions would you like to make for the improvement of 
any aspect(s) of the program of extracurricular activities in 
this school? 


IS. list any areas of the program or any particular problems that you 
would like to see studied on a provincial scale. 




















































APPENDIX C 


QUESTIONNAIRE FOR EXTRACURRICULAR STUDENT LEADERS 
1# In what grade are you now enrolled? 


Grade X. Grade XI. Grade XII 

2. Indicate your sex 

Male. Female. 


3. What program of studies are you pursuing? 

Matriculation ..... 

Diploma General . 

Diploma Commercial ..... 

Diploma Technical ..... 

Diploma Home Economics . 

[i. What is your estimated average grade standing? 

H. 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

5* Of how many extracurricular activities are you a member 
(including those in which you have a leadership position)? 

. activities, 

6. Are you also a leader of one or more similar activities out of 
school? 

Yes. No. 

7* Which of the following values derived from extracurricular 
activities do you consider of great value, of some value, and 
of little value? Check one evaluation in each case. 

Great Some Little 

(1) Improvement of physical health.. ...... .. 

(2) Better social adjustment ..•••••••.. ...... . 

(3) Help in choosing a vocation.. ...... ... 

(1*) Learning of important facts...... 

(5) Developing recreational skills....... ... 

(6) Better school spirit and discipline.. .... 

(7) Making worthwhile friends........ 

(8) Training in citizenship.... 

(9) Improves regular class work....... 

(10) Keeps students in school longer.. ... 

8. What suggestions, if any, would you like to make for the improve¬ 
ment of the program of extracurricular activities in this school? 




























































APPENDIX D 


PROBLEMS SUGGESTED BY SPONSORS FOR STUDY ON A PROVINCIAL BASIS 

1. Values derived by students from extracurricular activities.• 
during school attendance and in post-school years. 

2. The effect of student participation in extracurricular activities 
upon academic progress. 

3. Methods of determining reasonable student participation in 
extracurricular activities. 

ll. An analysis of the aims and objectives of extracurricular 
activities. 

5. Placing extracurricular activities on the regular schedule? 

6. The school newspaper—its value from the viewpoint of the 
English department. 

7. The values of subject-centred clubs. 

8. Clubs to enrich the courses of study for gifted children. 

9. The values of individual sports. 

10. Scientific realities through science club activity. 

11. The evils of spectator sports. 

12. Enjoyment of sport by all versus training the few for high- 
calibre play. 

13. Teacher load, training, and compensation. 

lii. The physical education teacher’s load. 

15. Is coaching of inter scholastic teams a job in itself? 

16. The training of sponsors—pre-service and in-service. 

17• Determination of a reasonable teacher load. 

18. The role of school boards in providing support for extracurricular 
activities. 

19* Professional athletic pressure groups and their effect upon 
school sport. 

20. Uniform offerings from school to school. 











- > 

. 






* 









* 



: 




. 


■ 































102 


21. Increased emphasis on provincial competition in sport—a 
desirable development? 

22. The need for a suggested balanced program from the Department 
of Education. 



APPENDIX E 


SUGGESTIONS FOR IMPROVED ADMINISTRATION AS 
RECORDED BY SPONSORS AND STUDENT LEADERS 


Sponsors 1 Suggestions . Sponsors were invited to record 

suggestions for the improvement of extracurricular programs as 

offered in their respective schools# These suggestions have been 

categorized below in an attempt to determine particular problem 

areas for the guidance of administrative policy# The suggestions 

cover a wide field and present many viewpoints, suggesting that there 

exists little semblance of unity of purpose and coordination of 

philosophy# The numeral following each suggestion indicates the 

number of teachers who made the precise or an associated suggestion#• 

1# Program Offerings 

A. Change of Emphasis .•. 

i# away from interscholastic sports (8) ; 
ii# away from sports in general (3) ; 
iii# away from w public show 11 (l) ; 
iv# to more cultural activities (7); 
v# to more subject-centred activities (3); 
vi# to more leisure-time activities (3); 
vii# to more social activities (l); 
viii# to the exclusion of spirit-fostering clubs (l). 

B# Extent of Offerings ••• 

i. Decrease in the number of activities (7). 

2# Participation 

i. Greater limitation of participation (12); 
ii# Encouragement of wider participation (9); 
iii# Establishment of minimum participation requirements (2). 

3# Sponsorship 


i. More staff interest (k); 

ii. Greater teacher effort (2); 

iii. Sharing of the load by aH teachers (3); 














* 

■ 

* 


, 








. 

. 


I ' , -:'r: , "■ ■ - 







iv* Time-off for heavily-loaded sponsors (7); 

v. More adequate training for sponsors (2); 

vi. More definite specification of duties (1); 

vii. Provision for the in-service training of sponsors (l); 

viii. Employment of permanent extracurricular personnel (l); 
ix* Employment of outside sponsors with Department approved 
qualifications to supervise cultural and recreational 
activities (l). 


lu Scheduling 


i* Extension of the school day to include activities in 
the program (2)$ 

ii* Inclusion of activities on the daily schedule with some 
compulsory participation (l)$ 
iii. Provision for scheduling major and “continuing” 
activities on the program (2); 
iv # More coordinated scheduling of activities (l); 
v # Retention of present policy, with activities scheduled 
out of school time (l)* 

5* General Administration 

i. More coordination among clubs and sponsors (3); 
ii* Greater delegation of authority to teachers and 
students (l); 

iii* Promotion of student supervision (l); 
iv. Appointment of a special extracurricular director (l)$ 
v* Reorganization with set principles and policies (l)$ 
vi* Formation of a sports council (l). 

6* Financing 

i. Increased grants and facilities (6). 


Students * 1 Suggestions * On the assumption that much adminis¬ 
trative guidance comes from those who are most intimately affected 
by staff decisions, student-leaders were also invited to offer sug¬ 
gestions “for the improvement of the program of extracurricular 
activities 11 in the particular school in question* Their responses 
have been categorized and fall into the same groupings as those of 
the sponsors* The numerals have the same intent as above* 











. • . . . -. 












* 

' 

. 

; ' - 

« 

* 

' 

* 












' 

■; J . ' ' ■ . 






■ 

, 


' 










105 


1* Program Offerings 

i. Increased sport (7); 

ii. Greater variety of activities (6); 

iii. Provision of specific activities (10 ... choir, debating, 
religious, crafts...; 

iv. Greater opportunities for girls (1); 

v. Activities based on interests (l); 

vi. Quieter activities (l); 

vii. More clubs for the bright student (l); 

viii. More social clubs (l). 

2. Participation 

i. Wider participation by students (7); 

ii. More opportunities for the "average" athletes (ii); 

iii. More quality of offerings and less quantity (3)$ 

iv. Less activities with more members in each (2); 

v. Compulsory participation (l); 

vi. Slackening of eligibility rules (l). 

3. Sponsorship 


i. Greater staff interest (10); 

ii. More delegation of responsible student leadership (5); 

iii. Closer cooperation between students and sponsor (2); 

iv. Less teacher authority (l); 

v. More able teacher-sponsors (l); 

vi. More sponsors available (l). 

U. Scheduling 


i. Coordinated scheduling to allow for wider participation 

( 2 ); 

ii. An earlier beginning in the school year ( 3)5 

iii. More adequate time-tabling (1). 

5. General Adminis tration 

i. More student interest and support (9); 

ii. More publicity for activities (8); 

iii. More school spirit (5); 

iv. More cooperation among clubs (3)j 

v. Improved facilities (2); 

vi. Wider use of school equipment (l). 

















J ! 

'. 7 '; - 





. ' d ' , : ■ 







\ 

••••*' ’fj,".■ 








■. ' ■ - Ml 














■ : ' ■ 7 “ 

. 


• ' \ 

' 

• • ’ ■ . 
* 





































