For Reference 



NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


THE DIAZO GIVING SUBSTANCE 
IN URINE IN TUBERCULOSIS 






















©X iIBBiS 
WltSMB 

mmmiwisb 








THE DJaZQ GIVING SUBSTANCE IN URINE IN TUBERCULOSIS 


l he 


Roger G. Young B. Sc. 


A thesis submitted in conformity with the requirements for the 
degree of blaster of Science by the University of Alberta. 


department of Biochemistry 


University of Alberta 

1 9 k S 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/diazogivingsubstOOyoun 


AGKNOWLEDGEME H T 


The writer wishes to express sincere thanks 

to Dr* G. Hunter for his invaluable direction and 

criticism throughout the progress of this work. 

Thanks are due to Dr. M. M. Cantor for 
helpful advice and assistance in obtaining material 
from the Charles Camsell Hospital, Edmonton. 

The writer is also indebted to Dr. M. Matas 

and the staff of the above hospital for their kind 


co-qperaticn 





















TABLE OF CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 1 


METHODS 3 


EXPERIMENTAL 7 


Normal urine 

Determination and Removal of Chloride 7 

Determination of Lead Requirement & 

Lead Fractionation 9 

Composition of Basic Lead Fraction 10 

Phosphotungstic Acid Precipitation 13 

Tuberculous urine 

Lead Precipitation 16 

Granular Lean Salt 17 

Methods of Freeing Basic Lead Salt 18 

Mercury Precipitation 18 

Phosphotungstic Acid Precipitation 19 

Experiments on PTA Fraction 22 

Chromatographic Adsorption 25 

CONCLUSIONS 35 

REFERENCES 37 
























- 1 - 


INTRODUCTION 

Of the substances present in urine which are capable of coup¬ 
ling with diazonium salts in alkaline solution, the one which oc¬ 
curs in some pathological urines and is responsible for the pos¬ 
itive Ehrlich and the Hunter type B reactions has not yet been 
characterized. It is a reducing substance, very easily oxidized, 
particularly in basic solution. 

Weiss (15* 16, 17) in a series of papers has described some 
of its apparent properties and has applied to it the name uro- 
chromogen implying a relationship to the normal urine pigment 
urochrome. 

On the basis of a strong xanthoproteic acid test (16) and 
the odor of phenylacetaldehyde after oxidation with chromic acid, 
he considered it to be a derivative of phenylalanine. From a 
greenish ferric chloride test, the coupling reaction and a neg¬ 
ative Millons test, he deduced the presence of a hydroxyl group 
in the ortho position of the alanine chain. Other unspecified 
groups were held to be present to account for its ease of oxida¬ 
tion in alkaline solution. The presence of lead blackening 
sulfur (17) later indicated a relation to phenylcysteine. 

Hermanns (6) prepared a dye from Ehrlich positive tubercu- 
















o 

- -c 


lous urine by condensation with diazotized dichloraniline. From 
analysis of this he suggested that the substance may possess a 
coumarone nucleus. Sachs (ll) later separated similarly prepared 
dyes into four fractions, one of which she suggested as the probabl< 
carrier of the Ehrlich substance, and possibly related to kynurenim 
a possibility also presented by other workers. Bondzynski, Dom- 
browski and Panek (l) have associated the diazo compound with the 
poorly defined proteic acids. 

Hunter (7) has discussed the diazo reaction in urine and by 
means of a diazo reagent developed by Koessler and Hanke (9)> 
achieved a clear separation of alkaline diazo reactions into, 

(a) type A, present in all urines and due to iminazoles and phenols 
chiefly, and (b) type B, an unmistakably characteristic transient 
red color typical of acute febrile urines. The substance respon¬ 
sible for the type B test and also without doubt for the positive 
Ehrlich reaction, is that with which this work is concerned. 

The name substance T will be hereinafter applied in view of 
the fact that Ehrlich first noted its presence in typhoid urine. 
There is insufficient evidence of its chromogenic nature to merit 
continuance of the term urochromogen. 












- 













■ 


■ 





























- 3 - 


KETKQjjS 

The diazo reagent according to Ehrlich (2) is prepared as 
follows: 

(a) 1.0 gnu sulfanilic acid with 50 ml. hydrochloric 
acid made to 1.0 litre with water. 

(b) 5*0 gm. sodium nitrite made to 1.0 litre with water. 
From these a working solution is made up by mixing 50 ml. of 

(a) with 1.0 ml. of (b). In performing the test (3) an equal por¬ 
tion of reagent is added to a portion of urine. There may result 
a primary color attributable to the presence of bilirubin. On 
making the solution alkaline with ammonium hydroxide, a secondary 
red color develops. When shaken, a red foam indicates a positive 
test which was regarded as significant in certain febrile disorders 
The composition of the Koessler and Ranke (9) reagent is 
given below with the procedure employed by Hunter (?)• 

(a) 9*0 gm. sulfanilic acid with 90 ml. 37% hydrochlor¬ 
ic acid made to 1.0 litre with water. 

(b) 50*0 gm. 90% sodium nitrite made to 1.0 litre with 

water. 

(c) Freshly prepared 1.1% sodium carbonate. 

The test reagent is made by placing 1*5 ml. of (a) in a 50 ml. 
volumetric flask, followed by 1.5 ml. of (b), then after five min- 





















» 





. 


. 












. 




. 







- 










- 




. 


. 






. 


















- 4 - 


utes 6.0 additional ml. of (b), and finally five minutes later 
making to the mark with water. Both the Ehrlich and Koessler 
and Hanke reagents are quite unstable; it is essential that they 
be kept cold and freshly prepared every day or so. 

For testing, 2.0 ml. of working solution are added to 5*0 
ml. of 1.1 % sodium carbonate, mixed and followed within one minute 
by one drop of urine. The type A reaction results in a yellow to 
reddish color, developing to a maximum in three to four minutes. 

The type B test is characterized by a bright orange red flash when 
the urine strikes the reagent. This fades in a few seconds with 
mixing and there follows an intensification of color as in the type 
A reaction. This phenomenon is found in acute febrile urines. 

For quantitative estimation of substance T the Ehrlich rea¬ 
gent was employed as follows. 

To appropriate aliquots of urine or extract, water was added 
to make 2.0 ml., followed by .3 ml. diazo reagent, and finally 
after mixing, 1.0 ml. of 2.5 N sodium hydroxide. The resulting 
red color which was stable for a few minutes was matched against 
a color standard (S) prepared from Congo Red and Methyl Orange, in 
a visual colorimeter with the test solution set at 10.0 mm. From 
the reading of the standard, the total diazo value of a given 












. 

* 














* . 












- 

' 







* 
















- 5 - 

volume was calculated. Since substances other than substance T 
may also couple, the color may vary from almost yellow to the 
pure red of substance f, depending on the concentration of the 
other condensing compounds present. In some instances, using 
untreated urine or impure extracts the color produced was such 
that accurate comparison was impossible. However the method is 
adequate and the diazo values served as a valuable aid. 

A comparison of the Ehrlich and Koessler and Hanke reagents 
elicits the fact that the Ehrlich solution contains an excess of 
sulfanilic acid and the Koessler and Hanke an excess of nitrous 
acid. The effects of this difference are shown in Table I. It 
also offers an explanation for the specificity of the Hunter test. 








- 6 - 

TABLE I 


EFFECT OF 

CHANGE IN REA 

.GENT AND ALKALI 

ON DIAZO 

TEST 










Reagent r 

4 - 

Base 

or 

Sub. T 

—>- Result — 

Base 

or 

Sub. T 


Result 

l) Koessler & -J- 
Hanke 

Na2C0^ 

Nil 

H" 

Sub. T 

- 

Type B 

2) Ehrlich 

-1- 

Na 2 C 03 

Nil 

- 4 - 

Sub. T 

— 

Type B 

3) Ehrlich 

+ 

Sub. T 

—Nil 

+ 

Na 2 C 03 


Type B 

4 ) Koessler 
Hanke 

& + 

Sub. T 

Yellow 

Color 

+ 

Na 2003 


Type A 

5) Koessler & 4 - 
Hanke 

Sub. T 

—^Yellow 

Color 

+ 

NaOH 


Type A 

6 ) Ehrlich 

H- 

Sub. T 

—Nil 

+ 

NaOH 


Permanent 

Red 

(Quantitative] 

7) Ehrlich 

+ 

NaOH 

—Nil 

+ 

Sub. T 


Nil 

8 ) Koessler 
Hanke 

& 4- 

NaOH 

—► Nil 

+ 

Sub. T 


Nil 


Substance T couples in sodium carbonate solution, the azo 
compound is however unstable in the weak base. The free nitrous 
acid in the Koessler and Hanke reagent decomposes substance T 
with the production of a yellow color. Other constituents are 
unaffected. Coupling does not occur in strong base unless sub¬ 
stance T is first dissolved in the reagent. 














* 












'f 












r ■ - 












- 7 - 


jjj-XPhHIl-MTAL 

Work in this laboratory (10) has established that the diazo 
substance is precipitated by lead acetate in the pH range 6.8 to 

9.0. 

The material obtained in this region has been used for this 
investigation. 

Normal Urine 

It has been demonstrated (10) that urinary chloride is not 
completely precipitated in acid lead acetate solution. Part is 
carried over ana removed by basic lead precipitation. When this 
material is treated with hydrogen sulfide to separate the lead, 
the filtrate resulting is strongly acid with hydrochloric acid. 
‘To avoid this complication, removal of chlorides before lead 
fractionation was adopted. 

Determination and iiemoval of Chloride 

The Volhard-Harvey (5) method was employed as follows to 
estimate chloride. 

To 1.0 ml. of urine diluted with an equal volume of water 
in a 50 ml. centrifuge tube was added 2.0 ml. of a standard sol¬ 
ution of silver nitrate, containing nitric acid and ferric am- 














- 8 - 


monium sulfate. After mixing, the tube was centrifuged and the 
supernatant excess of silver nitrate titrated with standard am¬ 
monium thiocyanate to the ferric thiocyanate end point. From the 
titration value the amount of chloride present in the urine was cal¬ 
culated. Then to the main volume of urine, definitely on the acid 
side, was added the calculated volume of a standard aqueous solution 
of silver nitrate. The silver chloride was centrifuged off, washed 
twice with water and the washings added to the supernatant. 

An excess of lead acetate over that required for complete pre¬ 
cipitation was used. To control this excess a determination of the 
lead requirement was carried out. 

Determination of Lead Requirement 

A series of tubes was set up, each containing 2.0 ml. of chlor¬ 
ide free urine. Forty percent lead acetate solution was added 
in increasing amounts to each tube, excess concentrated ammonium 
hydroxide was then added, after centrifuging, a few drops of 
each supernatant were tested for lead with 5 N sulfuric acid. 

The first tube containing lead in the supernatant was taken as 
the requisite amount, and from its original lead acetate content 
the requirement for the whole volume was determined. A diazo 










- 

* 







- 






' 


' 








. 

* 

* 

* 








- 


■ 


























- 














- 9 - 


test on the supernatant was of value in determining whether pre¬ 
cipitation was complete in pathological urines. Normal specimens 
required usually from 6 to 8% of their volume of l±0% lead ace¬ 
tate solution. 

Lead, fractionation 

The calculated volume of lead acetate added to chloride free 
urine precipitated a reddish cream colored mixture of lead phos¬ 
phate, sulfate, carbonate, urate, and other organic constituents. 
This was filtered off, washed and discarded. When freed of lead 
with hydrogen sulfide it gave no alkaline diazo reaction. The 
yellow colored filtrate of pH near 5 was then treated with 2 N 
potassium hydroxide to a pH of 9 as determined by thymol blue. 

From pH 7 to 9, a bulky cream colored precipitate appeared which 
was filtered off and washed twice with water. The practically 
colorless filtrate containing material not precipitated by lead 
was discarded. 

The basic lead precipitate was suspended in water, gassed 
with hydrogen sulfide to excess, the lead sulfide filtered off 
and washed till the washings were colorless. The filtrate and 
washings were then freed from hydrogen sulfide by a stream of car¬ 
bon dioxide, yielding a lead free extract of pH 3 to 4* 




























* ' 


























































. 


- 






1 

































- 10 - 


Composition of Basic Lead Fraction 

This material was investigated to determine its nature and 
complexity. Some properties are given in Tables II and III. 


Table II 


SOLIb AND 

ASH CONTENT OF BASIC LEAL FRACTION OF NORMAL URINE 

(as mg. per 100 ml. of original urine 

except as noted) 

Specimen 

Solids 

Sulfur in 
Pb. Frae- 

Ash 

Sulfur in 
Ash 

Ash 

% of Solids 

Number 


tion 




1 

107 


25 


28 

2 

201 


3£ 


19 

3 

S9 


23 


26 

4 

54 

3-0 

6 

.8 

11 

5 

137 

3-5 

16 

2.1 

12 

6 

128 

3-5 

12 

1.7 

9 

7 

123 


16 


13 

8 

71 


15 


21 

& 8a 

82 


6 


7 

9 

120 


11 


11 

& 9a 

114 


9 


8 


ft Basic Pb. ppt. Washed 5 Times With Water 

• 


For qualitative tests } basic lead fractions were dried at 
1X0°C. 

















































- 11 - 

Table III 


QUALITATIVE tests on basic lead fraction 

OF NORMAL URINE 


1 Test 

Result 

Glycuronates 

pos. 

Benedicts 

pos. 

Molisch 

green color 

Urobilin 

neg. 

Urorosein 

neg. 

Indican 

neg. 

Mlllons 

pos. 

Xanthoproteic 

pos. 

Biuret 

neg. 

Ninhydrin 

neg. 

Creatinine 

pos. 

Knoop 

pos. 

Hopkins Cole 

neg. 

Diazo 

type A 

Sulfate 

pos. 

Reduction of permanganate (acid) 

pos. 
















































- 12 - 


Quantitative estimation of reducing substances was done by 
the Shaffer Hartmann (13) technique for blood, after removal of 
interfering substances according to Polin and Svedberg ( 4 )• Zero 
values were obtained with dried material but an extract before 
drying gave values of 4*3 and 3•£%,calculated as percent glucose 
of the dried solids. The Van Slyke Cullen method ( 14 ) for urea 
and ammonia showed results of .6$ urea and .2 % ammonia calculated 
on the dried material. 

During the evaporation of some lead fractions a considerable 
quantity of pinkish colored crystalline material was deposited. 

On purification it proved to be mostly uric acid which had escaped 
precipitation in acid solution. By allowing the acid lead preci¬ 
pitate to stand for about a half hour before filtering, the uric 
acid was precipitated and no further difficulty was encountered. 

The instability of the basic lead extracts was quite marked; 
on standing a week in the refrigerator they turned brown. Drying 
under vacuum at low' temperature resulted in the formation of dark 
brown resinous material. 

Of the higher alcohols normal butanol extracted 25% of the 
solids and most of the pigment from the fraction. Concentration 






- 















. 






. 


































1 












































- 13 - 


and precipitation with diethyl ether deposited a dark gum. 

After again determining the amount of lead required, a second 
fractionation with lead acetate was effected as previously des¬ 
cribed. The acid lead salts were small in quantity and reddish 
brown in color. A greenish solution with no type B diazo reaction 
resulted from treatment with hydrogen sulfide. 

Phosphotungstic Acid Precipitation 

Extracts which had been precipitated twice with lead acetate 
were made .5 N with respect to sulfuric acid, then a 20% solu¬ 
tion of phosphotungstic acid (PTA) in .5 N sulfuric acid was ad¬ 
ded till no more precipitation occurred. After standing overnight 
the pink precipitate was filtered off and washed with .5 N sul¬ 
furic acid and a small amount of cold water. 

By diluting lead fractions to the original urine volume and 
warming to U0°0 the phosphotungstates were deposited as reddish 
prisms. Complete precipitation required several days standing 
in the refrigerator. By dissolving the material in a mixture of 
acetone and water, then pouring into an appropriate volume of .5 N 
sulfuric acid> recrystallization was effected. 

Barium hydroxide was ordinarily used to free the phospho- 
tungstates. This procedure was accompanied however by some re- 








■ 




' 


- 

- 








, 





' 

. 

■ 

■ 

' 











. 








. 
















- 14 - 

duction to the blue PTA complex. To minimize this effect, solid 
barium hydroxide (approximately *75 gnu per gnu of precipitate) 
and the phosphotungstate were separately ground and suspended in 
water. Mixing was carried out rapidly with vigorous shaking. 

The resulting slightly basic solution was filtered and gassed im¬ 
mediately with carbon dioxide. After filtering off the barium 
carbonate, sulfuric acid was used to remove the last traces of 
barium. The pK of the final filtrate was near 4* 

One freed PTA precipitate from a pooled specimen of urine 
(5 litres) was nearly colorless and gave a slight yellow diazo 
test. On concentration a doubtful type B reaction was observed. 

A second similar specimen (10 litres) gave a yellow colored 
extract with a type A diazo. 

Evaporation of these solutions to small volume yielded small 
amounts of crystalline diazo negative solid. 

The practically colorless filtrate from the PTA separation 
was discarded following the definite establishment that substance 
T is precipitated by PTA. 

Table T\f compares some properties of the filtrate and pre¬ 
cipitate from the PTA separation. 
















* ■ 











. 



















? 








1 



!!i 












- 15 - 


Table IV 


COMPARISON OF PTA PRECIPITATE AND FILTRATE FROM TWO NORMAL URINES 


ML.IN KMhQ^ decolorized 
per 100 ml* original 
urine 

Ferric chloride 
color in acid 
solution 

Type of diazo 
reaction 

Specimen No 

1 

2 

1 

2 

1 

2 

PTA 

precipitate 

•7 

3 

.2 

yellow 

yellow 

orange 

B? 

A 

PTA 

filtrate 

s.o 

5-a 

brown 

brown 

A 

A 


A yellow colored solution resulted on reduction of potas¬ 
sium permanganate which was done in acid medium* 
































- 16 - 


Tuberculous Urine 

Specimens of urine from tuberculous patients were tested for 
the type B diazo reaction. From those showing positive results, 
the urine was collected under toluene and sent to the laboratory 
twice a week. Despite the considerable lapse of time before urines 
were fractionated the diazo reaction remained strong. One specimen 
kept in the refrigerator still gave a good test after four months. 

The removal of chlorides before separation with lead was not 
carried out on tuberculous urines because of the destruction of 
substance T by silver salts. 

Lead Precipitation 

Requisite amounts of lead acetate were determined as describ¬ 
ed for normal urine. .Volumes of k®% lead acetate solution between 
10 and 14 $ of the urine volume v/ere required, the increase being 
due no doubt to the fact that chlorides had not been removed and 
pathological urines are often more concentrated than normal. 

If necessary, specimens were made definitely acid with acetic 
acid before acid lead precipitation. It was found inadvisable to 
leave the urines for any length of time at the acid lead stage 
since loss of diazo material was noted. 










* 














' 






- 
















' 


’ 











- 17 - 


The sulfur yellow colored basic lead salt may be dried after 
washing thoroughly with acetone, and substance T so preserved. In 
a moist or wet state the lead salt soon turns brownish and the 
diazc disappears. 

Granular Lead Salt 

On several occasions the basic lead precipitate was found to 
contain a small amount of bright yellow, coarse granular material. 
In three instances it was separated from the main bulk, washed and 
freed with hydrogen sulfide. The following was found in the three 
cases. 

1) A weak type B diazo on concentration which also caused the se¬ 
paration of crystalline diazo negative needles and combs which 
did not melt at 260°C. 

2) Both type A and B diazo reactions. More than 50% of the sub¬ 
stance T present in the whole basic lead fraction was in the 
granular salt. The freed granular salt gave a purple color with 
acid ferric chloride, and reduced potassium permanganate. 

3) Only 10% of the substance T in the whole lead fraction was pre¬ 
sent in the granular material. 

Though hydrogen sulfide was a convenient method of freeing 
the lead salt, other methods were tried to ensure that maximum 
quantities of substance T were being obtained. 



















. 








i 













« 





■ 












- 








- 




. 

. 


. 























- 18 - 


Methods of Freeing Basic Lead Salt 

Small portions of dried lead salt were ground in a mortar 
with portions of 10% sodium carbonate solution until no further 
diazo material was freed. The lead, carbonate was centrifuged off 
and washed. Any lead left in the supernatant was removed with po¬ 
tassium sulfate. Sodium bicarbonate, potassium acid sulfate and 
5 N sulfuric acid were also used in a similar manner. The carbon¬ 
ates yielded approximately 75%* of the total diazo obtained by hy¬ 
drogen sulfide from the same weight of lead sa.lt. The sulfates 
caused a considerable reduction in the type B reaction, a condi¬ 
tion later shown to be probably only apparent. The lowered yields 
from the carbonates may be explained on the basis of the lability 
of substance T in alkali, an unavoidable occurrence in this method. 

Hydrogen sulfide is advantageous in that an excess does no 
harm because of its reducing nature and it can easily be displaced 
by carbon dioxide. 

Further attempts to separate the lead fractions were made by 
the use of mercuric salts. 

Mercury Precipitation 
l) Mercuric Sulfate 


To a basic lead fraction (diazo value 5000 mm.) a 10% solu- 




















. 

- 

. 

' 






















* 



















- 19 - 


tion of mercuric sulfate in 2 N sulfuric acid vias added until com¬ 
plete precipitation. The light brown precipitate was removed, 
suspended in water, then treated with hydrogen sulfide to excess. 
The mercuric sulfide was filtered off and carbon dioxide used to 
displace the hydrogen sulfide. The resulting solution gave a type 
B reaction and a diazo value of 1500 ram. The original filtrate 
showed only the type A reaction ana a aiazo value of 2300 mm. 

2) Mercuric Acetate 

A similar aliquot of lead fraction was treated with mercuric 
acetate, the pH raised to 7 with 10% sodium carbonate and more 
mercuric acetate added to complete precipitation. The precipitate 
when freed with hydrogen sulfide also showed a type B test and a 
diazo value of 1000 ram. The filtrate was devoid of substance T 
and possessed a diazo value of 2400 ram. 

Though substance T was separated from other diazo giving 
substances by mercuric salts, losses of 24 and 32 % of diazo sub¬ 
stance ensued. Since phosphotungstic acid was later found to 
give a clear cut separation without loss of substance T, mercury 
precipitation was not further employed. 

Phosphotungstic Acid Precipitation 


Procedures exactly as described for normal urine were used. 










■ 




- 
































' 




* 








. 











































- 20 - 


The folio-wing figures in Table V establish that no loss of sub¬ 
stance T occurred. 


Table V 


DIAZO VALUES OF BASIC LEAD PRECIPITATE, PTA PRECIPITATE, AND PTA 
FILTRATE FROM TWO TUBERCULOUS URINES 


Diazo Value, mm. per 100 ml. 
original urine 

Specimen No. 

1 

2 

Freed basic lead fraction 

550 

1600 

PTA precipitate 

68 

570 

PTA filtrate 

570 

1100 


Larger amounts of phosphotungstate were obtained from patho¬ 
logical than from normal urines, but the crystal structures were 
identical. 


The aforementioned difficulty of comparing quantitative diazo 
values became very apparent at this stage. The diazo color of the 
PTA filtrate was quite yellow and impossible to compare accurately 
with the red orange of the standard. 

The intensity of the type B diazo test decreased considerably 
in solutions made .5 N with respect to sulfuric acid, prior to pre¬ 
cipitation with PTA. The test returned to normal when the solu¬ 
tion was again brought to near neutral. However if the normality 




























. 












« 
























. 




♦ 






■ 

.■ 

































- 21 - 


was raised to 5«0 complete recovery could not be effected. 

In solutions .1 N or less with respect to sulfuric acid the 
PTA precipitate failed to coagulate and settle even on long stand¬ 
ing. In *5, 1*0, and 2.0 normal solutions settling occurred read¬ 
ily and the diazo value was recovered by treatment with barium hyd¬ 
roxide . 


Table VI 


COMPARISON OF DIAZO AND PERMANGANATE REDUCTION IN PTA PRECIPITATES 
AND FILTRATES FROM TWO TUBERCULOUS URINES 


Diazo value per 
100 ml. original 
urine 

Ml .IN KMn04 
decolorized per 
100 ml. original 
urine 

Ratio: Diazo/ 
IlMnO^ 

Specimen No. 

1 

2 

1 

2 

1 

2 j 

PTA precipitate 

570 

90 

1.0 

2.6 

570 

35 

PTA filtrate 

1100 

100 

11.3 

16.7 

9B 

6 


The potassium permanganate titrations whose values are given 
in Table VI were carried out on cold aliquot portions containing 
a few drops of 5 N sulfuric acid. Reduction was accompanied in 
all cases by the appearance of a yellow color in the solution. 

The table indicates that no fixed relationship exists between 
the reduction of potassium permanganate and the diazo value, and 
that the greater part of the reducing power of basic lead fractions 
is due to materials other than substance T. 

The ferric chloride test on the PTA filtrate was a brownish 
purple, and on the freed precipitate a definite yellow orange. 















' 

' 

''I..';. -. t 1 - 


. 















- 22 


■Experiments on PTA Fraction 

deduction of volume of freed PTA precipitates was carried 
out under vacuum at 40°C. In every case this resulted in the pre¬ 
cipitation of light brown amorphous diazo negative material, which 
contained some ash, but no barium, which it was thought might have 
escaped removal after freeing the phosphotungstate♦ The inert 
material was removed at as low a volume as convenient and methanol 
added to the concentrated filtrate. Yellow amorphous material with 
a strong type B diazo was thrown down; however it rapidly turned 
dark brown when exposed to air* When this substance was redis¬ 
solved in methanol and ether added, similar material resulted. 

A small amount of this was dried. When tested six months later 
it still gave a strong type B reaction. 

Inert material was precipitated out of other fractions and 
the solutions dried in a desiccator over sulfuric acid. After 
grinding and refluxing with 98% ethanol the concentrated solutions 
were slowly cooled and left at 0°C. After a week, minute quanti¬ 
ties of yellow semi-crystalline material had precipitated. After. 
filtering, the solutions when concentrated yielded brownish col¬ 
ored amorphous material which gave a strong type B test. Ash on this 





























. 

, ■ •' - ..:•;/>?*- 

. 

. 








. 

■ 











' 












~ 23 - 


material was 3 %* 

From these experiments it became evident that the PTA preci¬ 
pitate was complex. 

Since substance T appeared to have acid properties, isolat¬ 
ion as a sodium salt was attempted. 

A PTA fraction of pH 4 was raised to a pH of 8 with sodium 
hydroxide. On further reduction in volume and eventual drying in 
vacuo, the material turned dark and the diazo disappeared. 

when a solution of substance T was placed on one side of a 
cellophane semi-permeable membrane against distilled water, sub¬ 
stance T diffused through until equal diazo values were found on 
each side of the membrane. 

A substance T fraction was placed in a U tube and a current 
of 110 volts D.C. applied through platinum electrodes for two and 
a half hours. After this time the diazo value near the anode was 
double that at the cathode; however the value for the whole tube 
had diminished by 50$. There, was an amorphous brownish colored 
precipitate in the anode section and the pH there w r as 8*4* The 
alkalinity at the positive pole would account for the loss of sub¬ 
stance T; however by a suitable arrangement of cells and voltage 










■ 


• •>'••• . 3 ^, •• 3 


' 


* 










* 






- 

' 

' 





















- 24 - 


it might be possible to separate substance T from other material 
without appreciable loss. 

As previously noted, the PTA precipitates from normal and 
pathological urines were identical and apparently homogeneous. 
However, the diazo values of these precipitates when freed varied 
from zero in normal to 7000 mm. per gram in the tuberculous speci¬ 
mens. Substance T eventually disappeared when the precipitates 
were repeatedly crystallized. 

The following hypothesis indicates that very small weights of 
substance T were present so that adsorption of it on the phospho- 
tungstate could explain the variable diazo values. 

Histidine has a diazo value of 900 mm. per mg. compared as 
in this work with the methyl orange Congo red color standard (8). 

If we assume that substance T has a molecular weight near that of 
histidine and that the quantitative coupling reaction produces a 
similar amount of color per given weight, then approximately 8 
milligrams of substance T would give a diazo value of 7000 mm. 

Since substance T fractions used in this work had diazo values 
of from 1000 to 10,000 mm. it may be seen that all experiments were 
carried out on very small quantities of substance T. 








- 














. 

e 






' 










. 










' 






• 






















- 25 - 


Chromatographic Adsorption 

Tswett (13) first applied the phenomenon of adsorption in 
such a manner that a separation of the components of a mixture was 
simply achieved. 

The process depends on the variable affinities of different 
compounds in a solution for the surface of a solid adsorbent. 

Under ideal conditions* by arranging the flow of solution 
through a vertical column of adsorbent, the component with the 
greatest affinity is held on the top portion. When it has all 
been taken up, the next strongly adsorbed part of the mixture is 
held below the first, and so on for the remaining components. A 
second solvent allowed to run through the column then serves to sep¬ 
arate the bands more widely. This is termed development. Two 
courses are then open to isolate each component in solution. The 
column may be carefully removed from its tube and the layers separa¬ 
ted by cutting the adsorbent column. These are then placed in appro¬ 
priate solvents which separate or elute the adsorbed materials from 
the adsorbent, which is then filtered off. Alternately a third 
solvent may be percolated through the column after development, 
causing the bands to slowly migrate toward the bottom where they 











- 






■ 






































- 26 - 


are collected separately as they filter through. 

A comprehensive review of the principles and practice of 
chromatography is given by Zechmeister and Cholnoky (IS). 

In attempting to establish adequate procedures for materials 
that adsorbed substance T* tubes were made by sealing a short sec¬ 
tion of glass tubing on to the bottom of a 100 x IS mm. test tube. 
Columns were prepared by placing a wad of glass wool in the con¬ 
striction of the tube. On top of this was placed a closely fitting 
circle of quarter inch thick filter paper* which served as a firm 
base for the adsorbent. The tube* fitted into a filter flask un¬ 
der slight suction was then filled tc approximately two-thirds 
its height with adsorbent. Additions were made in small portions* 
each being followed by gentle tamping. 

Each portion of adsorbent was of such a size as to form a 
layer 2 to 5 mm. in depth when tamped. It was absolutely necessary 
that the column be uniformly packed* otherwise the irregularities 
caused the colored layers to deform, preventing satisfactory sep¬ 
aration. Mien enough adsorbent had been added* a filter paper cut 
to the exact diameter of the tube was carefully laid on the top 


surface. 













6 


































■ 


* 

. 











' 





















- 27 ” 

With light suction still on, the substance T fraction was 
very carefully run onto the column so as not to disturb the ad¬ 
sorbent. The use of high vacuum to draw the liquid through caused 
unequal rates of flow with consequent distortion of the layers. 

Barium sulfate was prepared by adding sulfuric acid to a sus¬ 
pension of barium hydroxide, digesting, filtering and washing the 
precipitate with water, then drying at 110°C. The barium sulfate 
was so finely divided, however, that flow through the column was 
prevented,so an equal volume of Super Cel (Johns-Manville) brand 
of diatomaceous earth was mixed with the barium sulfate to act as 
a filter aid. The mixture adsorbed substance T best from 75 % 
methanol, and 50 % acetone in water was used to elute it. 

Calcium sulfate prepared in the same manner was found to act 
similarly to barium sulfate. The substance 1 eluates from these 
two experiments deposited colorless inorganic crystals on standing. 
It was believed they were derived from the sulfates and not the 
Super Cel because their crystal forms were different. 

A developed column of Super Cel and barium sulfate was ex¬ 
truded from its tube and visual examination revealed that the 


greater part of the adsorption of substance T had taken place on 



* 


- 


















































. 


























A t , ... . 


















- 28 - 


the Super Cel. 

Consequently columns of this material were set up and adsorp¬ 
tion from 95$ methanol found to be effective. 75$ methanol was 
used fairly satisfactorily for elution. 

The initial filtrate was nearly colorless and contained mater¬ 
ial which gave a type A diazo test. The Super Cel yielded small 
amounts of inorganic substance to methanol. Further supplies were 
not available for further investigation. 

Blood charcoal and acid washed ground animal charcoal adsorbed 
substance T from water and partial elution was possible using pure 
methanol. Mo quantitatively effective agent could be found. 

Four other diatomaceous earths were tried as adsorbents, but 
all proved ineffective. 

Permutit (Eimer and Amend) adsorbed little or no substance T 
from water solution, but did remove some diazo negative material 
from the fractions. 

Aluminum oxide may be prepared in a variety of ways leading to 
widely different states of surface activity. For this work a sample 
of alumina hydrate was obtained from the Aluminum Company of Canada. 

Two hundred grams were shaken with 500 ml. of 2$ hydrochloric 



& 














. 
















' 








. 




. 








: e 


















- 29 - 

acid for two to three minutes, filtered under vacuum, then washed 
with four litres of distilled water. Activation was carried out 
by heating in a muffle furnace at 250 to 300°C for two and a half 
hours. Just before use it was screened through a 100 mesh sieve. 

A column prepared with the material adsorbed substance T from water 
however, development with water caused the substance T band to dif¬ 
fuse throughout the column. Moreover the filtrate had a pH of 8. 

Another portion of hydrate was washed, this time with 5 % hyd¬ 
rochloric acid, and finally heated at 450° C for seven hours. This 
preparation adsorbed substance T too strongly from water solution. 
•5? sulfuric acid did effect elution but considerable destruction 
of substance T resulted. 

A less active reagent would allow the use of a milder eluting 
agent. 

The previous batch of alumina xvas left in a loosely stoppered 
bottle for three weeks which allowed some loss of activity. After 
this time a column was set up and found to behave quite satisfac¬ 
torily when 2 % acetic acid was used for elution. The resulting 
solution of substance T had a pH of 5• 

In an attempt to duplicate this degree of activity, acid 





& HR 




' 










■ 

















- 



















. 

• '■ ' ■ • '■ • ■ J 




















- 30 - 

washed hydrate was heated at 450°C for five hours. Under these 
conditions a material was obtained which proved too inactive. 

Further activation time trials proved that six hours heating 
at 450°C was satisfactory, and 1 % acetic acid was found to be an 
effective eluting agent. The adsorbent was not stable even in a 
tightly closed container ; therefore the material was treated with 
hydrochloric acid, activated,and screened through a 100 mesh sieve 
just before use. 

It was found desirable to avoid a large excess of adsorbent. 

A column ISO x 22 mm. was sufficient for a diazo value of 10,000 
mm. 

Adsorption from ethanol as well as from water was found to 
take place satisfactorily and indications were that the solution 

f 

obtained by decomposing the PTA precipitate in water and acetone 
was a satisfactory medium for adsorption. This would avoid the 
alkaline solutions which occur when the PTA precipitate is freed 
with barium hydroxide. 

Larger columns were used for large scale experiments after the 
procedure had been satisfactorily established. 

They were prepared as previously described. A light brown 







. 

















. . 







■ t 
































* 

















- 31 - 

colored layer was held at the top of the column with the substance 
T immediately below. Development was carried out with water. The 
greenish colored initial filtrate, containing material that was 
not adsorbed gave a type A diazo test. The substance T solution 
obtained by elution with 1 % acetic acid had a pH of 4*5* 

A freed PTA precipitate having a diazo value of 10,000 mm. 
was put through the adsorption step. The eluate showed a diazo 
value of 12,^00 mm., indicating that some material which inter¬ 
feres with the quantitative coupling reaction was removed by the 
procedure. 

The disadvantage of the method lies in the finding that the 
adsorbent is slightly soluble in 1 % acetic acid. A solubility de¬ 
termination run by saturating 100 ml. of 1% acetic acid with the 
adsorbent gave a value of .!%• 

It was thought that such a low solubility would be of little 
consequence so a solution of adsorbed and eluted substance T was 
evaporated under vacuum at 35°C to very small volume. 

Crystalline material was deposited. It was not removed and 
the concentrate was brought to dryness. This was then extracted 
by refluxing with absolute ethanol. The residue remaining was 










. 










































. 
























' , . ! 








- 















- 32 - 

again treated in the same way* On cooling, these two concentrates 
formed gels. They contained 90% of the original diazo value. 

The gels were centrifuged down and the supernatants poured 
off. Washing the residues was attempted using absolute ethanol; 
however the gels dissolved along with the substance T present. The 
supernatants were reduced in volume, but again gels formed on 
cooling. 

Attempts were then made to remove the aluminum present. The 
pH of an adsorbed fraction was raised to 7 with ammonium hydroxide. 
The aluminum hydroxide was filtered off and the pH of the filtrate 
returned to 4*5 with acetic acid. The diazo value was lowered by 
15 % and when the material was dried under vacuum and taken up with 
absolute ethanol, 67% of the diazo value was found to have disap¬ 
peared. A repetition of this experiment resulted in the loss of 
approximately 33% of the substance 1, while a reduction of solids 
from 32 mg. to 11 mg. resulted. 

In a further attempt to remove aluminum 340 mg. (diazo value 
6000 mm.) of dried material from an adsorption experiment were ex¬ 
tracted twice with one ml. portions of ice water. This resulted 
in a loss of 10% of the solids and 1% of the diazo material. After 





- 







































■ 















■ 













■7 











• 

■ 

• 

* 

■s 




















• 




. 

• 

. 















- 33 - 

drying the extract so obtained, a second treatment with small quan¬ 
tities of water removed 7$ of the inert material. A third ex¬ 
traction with water failed to effect an appreciable change in the 
solid content nor did extraction with ethanol. 

The ash content of the solid material above was r f% > corres¬ 
ponding to about 12% aluminum hydroxide. 

The solid content of substance T fractions was determined 
merely by drying the material overnight in a desiccator. Heating 
was avoided to prevent destruction of substance T. The values 
did not give an accurate picture of the concentration effected 
by the adsorption procedure because a considerable portion of the 
solids in the eluted material vas dissolved from the adsorbent, 
and would therefore vary with the volume of the eluate. Despite 
this, the solid content of substance T fractions was reduced by 
adsorption and elution. 

A different measure of the effectiveness of the adsorption 
step was obtained by comparing the diazo values per gram of PTA 
precipitate before and after the adsorption procedure. 

A PTA precipitate was freed with barium hydroxide, excess 
barium removed and the diazo value determined at 1300 mm. per gm. 







'"V ■■■■ 







































. 










- 



































. 





















- 34 - 

of PTA precipitate. After adsorption and elution of the fraction 
it was again precipitated with PTA* When dried and freed and 
with barium hydroxide the diazo value was found to be 3000 mm. per 
gram. 









- 35 - 

CONCLUSIONS 


Precipitation with PTA of lead fractions obtained in the pH 
range 7-9 from tuberculous urine separated substance T from type 
A diazo giving substances. The crystalline phosphotungstates 
which were of the same form as those from normal urine were com¬ 
plex and it is believed that substance T was adsorbed on the pre¬ 
cipitates. 

The colorless filtrates from the PTA precipitation soon ox¬ 
idized to a brown color. They gave a type A diazo reaction and a 
brownish purple color with acid ferric chloride. Oxidation of 
these solutions by potassium permanganate in acid medium produced., 
as substance T a yellow color. The greater part of the perman¬ 
ganate reducing material in basic lead fractions occurred in these 
filtrates. Therefore Weiss’ (15) claim that the red diazo giving 
substance of basic lead fractions which he called urochromogen 
was responsible for the reduction of permanganate is not confirmed. 

The chromatographic adsorption procedure developed for freed 
PTA precipitates yielded relatively simple solutions of substance 
T except for considerable amounts of alumina introduced from the 
adsorbent. They had a pH near 4*5* The type B reaction was clearly 













. 


■ 







♦ 

♦' 

* 




■ 


























' 














- 36 - 


defined, with no apparent type A test. The quantitative diazo 
reaction yielded a bright red color stable for at least thirty 
minutes. The solutions of substance T gave a positive xantho¬ 
proteic acid test and a yellow orange color with ferric chloride 
in neutral or acid solution. 

The solutions were stable in slightly acid reaction but soon 
oxidized in the presence of free alkali* Nitrous and nitric acids 
and potassium permanganate in acid solution oxidized substance T 
fractions to a bright yellow color. In an electric field sub¬ 
stance T concentrated at the anode and it rapidly diffused through 
a semi-permeable membrane. 

The type B reaction has not been observed in native normal 
urine. Two specimens of normal urine fractionated by basic lead 
acetate and PTA failed to give conclusive evidence for the pre¬ 


sence of substance T. 













1 i4V 





* 











































- 37 - 


i&PErfcd-.CES 


(l) Bondzynski, Dombrowski and Panek 


Z,. physiol. Chem. 46 83 (1905) 


(2) Ehrlich, P. 


Deut. med. Woch. 2 549 (1883) 

Cited from Hunter, G. 

Biochem. J. 13 . 25-33 (1925) 

(3) Ehrlich, P. 

Charite~Ann 8 140-166 (1883) 

Cited from Blunter, G. 

Diazo reactions in their delation to 
Biochemistry (unpublished) 

(4) Folin, 0. and Svedberg, A. 

Jour. Biol. Chem. 20 405-426 (1926) 

(5) Harvey, S.C. 

Arch. Int. Med. 6 12 (1910) 

(6) Hermanns, L. 

Z. physiol. Chem. 122 98-103 (1922) 


(7) Hunter, G. 

(8) Hunter, G. 


Biochem. J. 12 25-33 (1925) 


Biochem. J. 12 42-46 (1925) 

(9) Koes sler, K. and Hanke, M. 


Jour. Biol. Chem. 32 497-519 (1919) 




















- 3 * - 


(10) McKerns, K. W. 


(ll) Sachs, P. 

The Basic Lead Precipitate from Urine 
- unpublished 

Z. physiol. Chem. 242 19-22 (1936) 


(12) Shaffer, P •A* and Hartmann, A.F. 


(13) Tswett, M. 

Jour. Biol. Chem. l£_ 363-390 (1921) 

Chromophylls in Plant and Animal 

World Wars chau:Tipogr 

Warshawskago utschebnago okruga 

Cited from Zechmeister and Cholnoky 
- Principles and Practice of 
Chromatography 


(14) Van Slyke, 1).D. and Cullen, G.E. 



Jour. Biol. Chem. 1° 211-228 (1914) 

(15) Weiss, M. 

Biochem. Z. 102 228 (1920) 

(16) Weiss, M. 

Biochem. Z. 112 61-97 (1920) 

(17) Weiss, M. 

Biochem. Z. 122 331-349 (1922) 


(IS) Zechmeister, L. and Cholnoky, L. 


Principles and Practice of Chroma¬ 
tography 



























* * 












B29755 




