



































































EARLY HISTORY OF CALGARY 


Lawrence H. Bussard, B. A. 

Department of History 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A THESIS 

Submitted to the University of Alberta in Partial 
Fulfilment of the Requirements for the Degree of 
Master of Arts. 


Edmonton, Alberta. 


April, 1935. 























GOAT OF ARMS OF CALGARY 


The upper third of the shield shows the 
Rockies. The lower two-thirds bears the Red 
Gross of St. George, mounted by the Maple Leaf 
which again is inset by a Buffalo Bull. The 
supporters, a Horse and Steer, represent the 
wealth of Calgary. 

The Crest shows the Royal Crown (a sign of 
loyalty), and a Sunburst. Below are the Rose, 
the Thistle and the Shamrock, declaring the 
ancestry of Calgary which was founded in 1882, 
and in 1894 received her City Charter. The 
motto is "ONWARD," and the Union Jack and Can¬ 
adian Ensign speak of the Empire. 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/earlyhistoryofcaOObuss 


CHAPTERS 


Page 

Jurly ;xplorers t .orts and 'JJraders of the south- eot.1 

The Sotafellihaont of Fort Otlgari.19 

j’ort Calgary—-.n Isolated Military Post.29 

Transportation—Old and Hew..*.. .... .•44 

Six Months of Rapid Growth*• •... ..52 

Calgary roves......... *64 

The Rebellion Year.. 89 

A 7entern Cow-Town...••*••«••••..•• .106 

Ranching....•...... 130 

Conclusion ...... . .145 


—-ooOOoo- 




















IK LEX OF PICTURES ANL ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Fort Calgary 1876. 

Frontispiece 

Map of Early Exploration. 

Page 

1. 

N• M. j . Earracxs (picture) 

Page 

39. 

N* V. M. P. EarracKs (diagram) 

Page 

41. 

Carts from the North. 

•rage 

44. 

East Calgary I863* 

Page 

i>2. 

Mg.p of Calvary 1883- 

Page 

57- 

Roman Catholic Mission. 

Page 

62. 

First Town Council. 

Page 

83- 

Stephen Xvenue 

rage 

106. 

Calgary Pair 1886. 

Page 

113. 

After the ^reat Fire. 

Page 

117 

Calgary 1888 

•rage 

119 

Calgary I089 

Page 

124. 

Calgary 1891 diagram) 

Page 

145. 

Calgary 1892. 

Page 

146. 

Calgary 1935- 

Page 

147, 

Appendix . 



business Men-1884 

Page 

147. 

Settlers in the bistrict-l8c4. 

Page 

149. 

Ranchei st1890. 

Page 

151. 

Bibliography 

^age 

152. 







































CHAPTER I 


EARLY EXPLORERS, FORTS AND TRADERS OF THE SOUTH-WEST 


Beyond the great prairies and in the shadow of the 
Rookies, lie the foothills. For nine hundred miles the 
prairies spread themselves out in vast level reaches, and 
then begin to climb in softly rounded mounds that ever 
grow higher and sharper till here and there they break in¬ 
to jagged points, and rest upon the great bases of the 
mountains. 

In this foothill country, in the Upper Saskatchewan 
district, there dwelt the Blackfoot Confederacy, compris¬ 
ing the Blackfeet, Sarcees, Piegans and Bloods. The Black- 
feet, Bloods and Piegans were the advance guard of the 
Algonquin migration, which had been deflected southward 
by the Crees to the country of the South Saskatchewan} 

Here they were joined by the Sarcees, a branch of the 
Athapascans of the north, who, having separated from 

their kinsmen the Beavers, travelled south, and were ad- 

2 

mitted into the Blackfoot Confederacy about 1800. 

These tribes quickly adapted themselves to the roving 
life of the buffalo hunters. They held their territory 
against invasion from the Crows, Flatheads and Kutenai 

1- -Alberta, Past and Present, Blue, Jotyn—Pioneer Histor¬ 

ical Publishing Co., Chicago, 1924. P.207-208 

2- -Kistory of the Province of Alberta, MacRae, A.O. Western 

Canada Historical Co. t 1912. 65-66 









, 















. 





. 













, 























- 







- 2 - 


of the south, from the Assiniboines of the east, and 
from the Crees of the north. In their raids to the south 
they secured horses, whioh made them formidable in war and 
successful in the ohase. The four main divisions lived 
independently of each other; each had its own head chief, 
oounoil and sun dance.' 1 ' It was this restless, aggressive 
and predatory people that the white men met when they 
came to the south-west. 

The French were the first to invade this region; in 
1749 Legardeur de Saint-Pierre was sent out by M. de la 
Jonquiere, Governor of New France, to take charge of the 
western posts. He, at once, dispatched one of his lieut¬ 
enants, De Niverville, up the Saskatchewan, with instruct¬ 
ions to establish a fort beyond the farthest point that 
had been reached by French explorers. On his way De Niver¬ 
ville fell ill, but his men continued the journey. Upon 
their return, they asserted that they had reached the foot 

of the Rocky Mountains, and that they had built a fort 

x 2 

there, which they had named La Jonquiere. 

The site of this post is still a matter of speculation. 
The historians, Coues and Masson, suggest that the fort 
was built at, or near, the site of the present city of 
Calgary. Captain Brisebois, the first Mounted Police 

commander of Fort Calgary, stated that he had found trace s 

1— Blue, op cit p 207-208. 

2— MacRaa, op cit p. 4-5. 
































1111 




- 


• 











. 


. 

, 

, 

, 












, 




, 

, 








, 















- 3 - 


of the old Frenoh fort at the junction of the Bow and 
Elbow in 1875^ 

However there is evidence to believe that the fort 
was never built; Anthony Hendaly, who spent the winter of 
1754-55 with the Blackfeet, heard not the slightest rumor 
of a white man’s fort. The Indians would certainly have 
mentioned it to their white guest if they had known about 
it, and that it could exist, without their knowledge, was 

o 

impossible. 

Dr. John McDougall, who spent the greater part of 
his life among the Indians of the south-west, and who knew 
them and their traditions perhaps better than any other 
white man, wrote in 1910, "It seems strange that none of 
the Indian tribes should have knowledge of such a fort. 

They knew of the forts. Mountain House, White Mud House, 
Beaver House along the North Saskatchewan, of Chesterfield 
House on the South Saskatchewan, and of the Bow Fort on 
the Bow River, but after fifty years of understanding their 
language, and sojourning with them, and studying their 
traditions and history, I have never heard a word of any 
house near where Calgary now is. Moreover, if such a fort 
had been built, surely there would be strong physical 
evidence of it. Such is the character of the soil and 
1—MacRae, p. 6-8. 

£—In the Shadow of the Rockies, Maclnnis, C.M.Revington 1 s 
London, 1930. p. 28. 


















, 


< 

- 


. r\ 


* 









r 
































* 




, 














- 4 - 


climate of the Bow River Valley, that any disturbance of 
its surface will remain for a long period of time. In 
those days all the heating was done by huge chimneys of 
stone and mud, and whenever these were built, they remain 
unless removed by the hand of man. 

If the French did actually build such a fort, it was 
soon deserted as the French began withdrawing their forces 
from the West soon after the outbreak of the Seven Year’s 
War in 1754. 

The business of exploration was soon taken up by 
their great rivals, the English. Anthony HendBy, an em¬ 
ployee of the Hudson’s Bay Company, left York Factory on 
the Hudson Bay in June, 1754; ascended the Hayes River to 
the Saskatchewan where he left his canoes, and set out 
overland. He crossed the Red Beer River somewhere between 
Knee Hill Creek and Three Hills Greek, about the mid die 
of October. Three days after crossing the river, he enter¬ 
ed a camp of the Blackfeet comprising over 200 lodges. 

Hendry spent the winter with these Indians, and in the 

spring of 1755, he went down the Red Beer to the Saskatchewan 

2 

and thence to Hudson’s Bay. 

The next white man to visit the Black'ffoot country 
was Bavid Thompson. In 1787, in the hope that the Western 
Indians might be induced to trade with the Hudson Bay forts 

1— Calgary Morning Albertan, March 2, 1911--Letter by Br. 

John McBougall. 

2- -MacInnis op cit p. 27. 









{ 







-5- 

on the North Saskatchewan, a party under Thompson set out 
from Manchester House to visit the Blackfeet. They travel¬ 
led south-west to the Bow River, which they struck near its 
junction with the Swift River (the present Elbow). Here 
they found a large camp of Piegans, with whom Thompson 
remained for the winter, living in the tent of an old chief 
Sankamapee. He probably saw the present site of Calgary as 
he stated that the Bow River derived its nane from a species 
of yew, which was used by the Indians to make their weapons. 
The only trees along the Bow that could be mistaken for yew 
are the Douglas fir in the present Bownees Park.^Thompson 
noted that the Bow River, which at that time meant the whole' 
of the South Saskatchewan, was the great resort of the bison 
the red deer and the natives. In the spring he returned 
overland to Manchester House. 2 

The next -traveller in the Bow River country was Peter 
Fidler of the Hudson 1 s Bay Company. He left Fort George 
on the North Saskatchewan in 179£; crossed the Battle, 

Red Deer, and Bow Rivers, and wintered on the Little Bow. 

He returned by a more easterly route, crossing the Red Deer 
at the mouth of Rosebud Creek, near the present Drumheller, 

which he named Edge Coal Creek, this being the first record 

1—Early Exploration Along the Bow and Saskatchewan Rivers. 
Paper delivered to the Calgary Historical Society by 
J. N. Wallace. 

Z —Maclnnis op cit p. 37. 







' 

. 

r 































■ . 






6 - 


of the discovery of coal in the south-west.^' 

Fourteen years after his first visit, Thompson was 
again in the foothill country. He spent the winter of 
1800-01 at Rocky Mountain House, a trading post established 
by the north West Company in 1799 on the North Saskatchewan. 
In November, the ever-restless explorer started on a jour¬ 
ney to the Bow River district. He crossed the Bow River 
at, or near, the site of the present Calgary, and continued 
south to the Spitzee River, the present Highwood. Here he 
spent some days in Piegan camps, then started north-west, 
crossing Sheep Creek, Pine Creek, the Swift River (the 
present Elbow) and the Jumping Pond Creek. He followed the 
Bow up to the Gap where he climbed a mountain and had a 
soundless view to the east. Thompson returned to his horses 
which had been left at the mouth of the Ghost River, and 
from there started for home, reaching Rocky Mountain House 
on December 13. 1 2 

Despite the work of these explorers, the south-west 
remained little known, and it was not until the nineteenth 
century that the British made an attempt to establish a fur- 
trading post there. In the early years of the fur trade, 
the buffalo and wolf were not highly prized, and as these 
were the principal products of the south, no great atten¬ 
tion was paid to the Indian trade of this region. Any 

1— The Range Men. Kelly, L. W. W. Briggs, Toronto, 1913. 

2- -New Light on Early History of the North-West. Coues 

1897. p. 703-4-5. 
















- 7 - 


business with the Blackfoot nation was done at Edmonton, 
Rocky Mountain House, or Fort Pitt; posts on the North 
Saskatchewan. However, by 1800, the Hudson’s Bay and 
Northwest Companies had established posts at all the 
strategic points in the north, so they now directed their 
attention to the south-western prairies where two forts 
were built. 

In 1805 John Macdonald of the Northwest Company, 
with four canoes and twenty-five man, ascended the South 
Saskatchewan and erected a winter post at its junction with 
the Red Beer. This was named New Chesterfield House as a 
temporary post of that name had been built in the same 
locality in 1791. They were soon joined by Hudson’s Bay 
traders who also put up houses. In the spring both parties 
abandoned the posts, and it was not until 1822 that the 
Companies, now combined, sent a party of over 100 men 
under Bonald Mackenzie to re-establish Chesterfield House. 
This post was permanently abandoned in 1826 as it was too 

expensive and too dangerous to maintain in the country of 

1 

the hostile and war-like Blackfeet. 

The other southern post. Old Bow Fort, was built on a 
plateau on the north bank of the Bow River, at its junction 
with Bow Fort Creek, about fifty miles west of the present 
Calgary but there is little authentic information as to 

when, or by whom, it was built. __ 

1--Walla«e op cit. 




! 

















m§ 

















o 














< ' - 

, 












. 










- 8 - 


Dr. Elliot Goues states that it was built by David 
Thompson, or under his direction, in the early years of 
the nineteenth century. However, the construction of such 
a fort is not mentioned in Thompson's Narrative nor is it 
shown on his Great Map of 1812. Furthermore, there is no 
mention of it in the memoirs of John McDonald of Garth, who 
was Thompson's superior officer at the time. 

There is much more reason to believe that it was a 
Hudson's Bay post. Captain Palliser, who visited the ruins 
in 1857, thought that the post had been established by 
that Company to attract the trade of the Blackfeet, Piegans 
and Bloods, but that it had been abandoned because of the 
expense involved in keeping a sufficient staff for its 
protection. 

It is probable that Old Bow Fort is the Piegan Post 
whic£ was constructed in 1832 by the Hudson's Bay Company 
to attract the Piegans. In interviews given in 1908 by 
Joseph Mo-Donald of Edmonton, that old employee of the 
Company said "In 1826 the Company established Bow Fort 
near the present Morleyville site. Messrs. J. E. Harriott, 
Fraser, Bird, Munro and my father built it. The Indians 
regarded it as an intrusion; became troublesome and danger- 
our so it was abandoned in two years time when the Indians 
burned the buildings." 

The records of the Hudson's Bay Company make no men¬ 
tion of Bow jr or t, but the journals of 1833-34 show that the 




, 












































. 









- 



* 

. 

























- 9 - 


names of the occupants of Piegan Post agree with those 
given by Mr. MacDonald. Also, according to the official 
records, Piegan Post was abandoned in favor of Rocky 
Mountain House in January, 1834. 

Mr. McDonald*s error in the date was a very natural 
one for an aged man. The existence of two names is easily- 
accounted for; the council at York Factory named the new 
post after the tribe for which it was being built, while 
the builders called it after its location. 1 

After these two attempts to establish forts in the 
south-west, the Hudson*s Bay Company left this territory 
to its original inhabitants for the next forty years. How¬ 
ever, it was not to remain without visitors. 

At the instance of the British Government, Captain 
Palliser and Dr, James Hector made journeys in the west 
between 1857-60. In 1858 the party crossed the Red Deer 
River several miles below the site of the present city of 
that name. Here Palliser with two companions left the 
main party and riding southward, traversed much of the 
country between the present Calgary and the boundary, then 
turning north, they followed a more westerly route to Old 
Bow Fort, where they found the rest of the expedition in 
camp but with provisions running low and in great fear of 
the Blaokfeet. 

l--Notes on Old Bow Fort. McLeod, J.E.A. Canadian 
Historical Review, Yol. 19?1, p. 407-411. 
















, 

■ 

























, 






, 







, 

' 

e 





- 




. 


, 

- 






. 
































. 










- 10 - 


After spending the winter at Fort Edmonton, in May, 
1859, the party started south, and travelling via the Hand 
Hills and the Red Peer River, reached the Cypress Hills. 
From this point Palliser continued due west, and crossed 
the mountains by Kootenay Pass. Hector went up the South 
Saskatchewan to the mouth of the Belly, and then struck 
across country to the Bow, which was followed to the 
mountains.^ 

In his report to the British Govt, on his exploration 
Dr. Palliser declares that the southern part of the ter¬ 
ritory is an arid desert which is qiite unfit for agricul¬ 
ture, and which should be left to the Indians and fur 
2 

traders. 

After 1860 traders from Montana began to invade the 
hunting grounds of the Blackfeet and the firm which I.G. 
Baker had established at Fort Benton in 1855 soon became 
the great trading corporation of the south-west. At 
first the trade was nomadic in character, M.W.Endsly, Jeff 
Davis, and Sandford Sims directing bullock trains, which 
visited the various tribes, trading whisky and tobacco for 
buffalo hides and wolf skins.^ 

In 1868 Baker began to establish permanent trading 
posts in the Blackfoot country. Fort Hamilton was built 

at the junction of the St. Mary's River wit h the Belly 

1- -MacIrmis", op cit p^ 52-54. 

2- -Blue, op cit p. 95. 

3- -Calgary Morning Albertan, Feb. 28, 1909 p. 1. 

Anniversary Humber. 








-11- 


River. This post was commonly known as Fort Whoop-Up 
because Baker had warned his men not to let the Indians 
whoop-up, that is, to round them up. Fort Kipp, named 
after its manager, was built at the juncture of the Belly 
and the Old Man Rivers. On the low land lying between the 
Waterton and Belly Rivers, Stand-Off was established by 
Fred Wachter. A short time before, five whisky traders 
had been able to "stand-off" the American authorities in 
this vicinity by the simple expedient of crossing the 
boundary line. It was not long before the traders, con¬ 
gregated at Stand-off, decided to erect another post at 
a particularly desirable point farther up the Belly River. 
Two of these traders, Healey and Hamilton, slipped away 
or slid out, during the night, and started construction 
on the proposed site so that they might claim ownership 
by priority; thus Slide-Out received its narne.*^ 

Within the next few years the traders spread farther 
afield. Spitzee, the Indian name for high timber, was 
located on the Highwood, near the site of the present town 
of High River. Fort Conrad was built on Sheep Creek(near 
the present Okotoks) by C. Conrad of the I.G.Baker Co., 
but it was burned down by the Indians in 1871. Fred 
Kanouse had a post. Fort Warren, in the foothills where he 
traded with the Kootenays. There were also temporary 


1 Albertan - 1909 A nn iv* Page 1. 



















- .. 

_ 











-12- 


posts on the Bow and Elbow Rivers and even as far north 
1 

as the Red Beer* 

The Indians were never permitted within the walls 
of these pallisaded posts. The trader stood at the wicket, 
a tubful of whisky beside him, and when a customer pushed 
in a buffalo robe, he handed out a tin cupful of the 
poisonous mixture. A quart bought a fine pony. When 
spring came wagonloads of the xoroceeds of the traffic were 
escorted south to Port Benton. 

There were a few legitimate American traders who 
traded Winchester repeating rifles and ammunition to the 
Indians. These weapons enabled them to hunt the buffalo 
with success and so increased the quantity of robes to be 
traded. However, it made the business of the whisky trad¬ 
ers more dangerous, and to put a stop to it they organ¬ 
ized a body of men styled "The Spitzee Cavalry" after 
the name of the head-quarters. These ruffians soon forced 
most of the legitimate traders to leave the country. 1 2 

The Indians, although much reduced by the ravages of 
smallpox, were still powerful and of a warlike, character. 
The Hudson’s Bay traders could not have established them¬ 
selves in the Blackfoot country had they not been led by 
men who knew war. 

Only the traveller who courted death went west of 

1— Calgary Daily Herald. Anniversary No., Oct. 22, 1923 
Page 4. 

2— Albertan - 1909 Anniv. Page 1. 







-13- 


the Cypress Hills without an escort. The half-breed 
hunters and others of the Red River settlement never ven¬ 
tured into this territory except in well organized armed 
bands, with guards, scouts and pickets. Whenever they 
halted in the Indian country, their carts were formed in 
circular corrals with the shafts turned inwards and the 
hubs touching. Tents were pitched inside and the horses 
were corralled in the enclosure. The Blackfeet were de¬ 
termined to guard their land against all intruders, but 
it was not long before the white man’s liquor had under¬ 
mined their resistance, 1 

To counteract the evil influence of the whisky 
traders and to bring the story of Christ to these savage 
peoples, there was a force at work in the west, now weak, 
but destined to become ever stronger; that of the Christ¬ 
ian missionaries. 

The first of these men was the young Wesleyan Miss¬ 
ionary, the Rev. Robert Rundle, who reached Rocky Mountain 
House in February, 1841. A large party of Piegans and 
Blackfeet soon arrived, and Rundle at once started his 
work among them. That spang he went south, and visited 
the Blackfeet on the Bow and the Stonies in the vicinity 
of the present Banff. Rundle worked among these Indians 
until his return to England in 1848. His brother-in-law, 

l--Forty Years in Canada. Steele, Sir, S.B. Toronto, 
McClelland, 1914. p. 57-58. 







-14- 

The Rev, Thomas Woolsey, then came west and continued the 
work until 1853. 1 2 The success of their work can best he 
judged by the report that Palliser made of the Stonies in 
1857: "Every morning and evening they devote a short 
time to religious duties and make it a rule to rest from 

p 

the labors of the chase and travel on the Sunday."^ 

The next missionary to visit the southern Indians 
was the Roman Catholic, Father Lacombe, who had been 
assigned to the Edmonton Mission Field in 1852, In 1857 
the Blackfeet, who at that time were suffering from an 
epidemic of scarlet fever, appealed to Lacombe to come to 
their aid. While attending them he contracted the disease, 
and by his devotion won a place in the hearts of these 
savages unsurpassed by that of any other white man. Two 
years later the Blackfeet asked for a missionary; they 
promised that the priest would not be hindered in his 
work and that they would make no more war on their old 
enemies, the Crees. Lacombe was very anxious to answer 
the call and finally in 1865 he was allowed to do so. 

For the next six years he lived among them, sharing their 
privations, and taking as his parish all the country east 
to the forks of the Saskatchewan and from the north branch 

1— MaoRae, op cit Page 156. 

2- ~Palliser--Journal Reports, Relative to the Exploration 

of British North America, 1857-60. Page 88. 







. 






. 

, 








o • 















, 

. 


















« ^ 




, 










v 











-15- 

to the American boundary. When, in 1872, he was called 
east, his work among the Blackfeet was continued by 
Fathers Scollen and Fourmond. These priests established 
the Mission of Our Lady of Peace in a small cabin on the 
Swift River, about twenty-five miles above its junction 
with the Bow. 1 2 3 

Soon after this a Methodist missionary, the Rev. John 
McDougall, went to labor among the Stoneys, who had been 
neglected since the days of Rev. Thomas Woolsey. John 
McDougall had helped his father, the Rev. George McDougall 
to establish a mission at Victoria, near Edmonton, in 
1863, and for five years he had been in charge of the 
mission at Pigeon Lake. In 1872 the Methodist Conference 
held at Winnipeg decided to open up a new mission field 

in the south-west, and the Rev. John McDougallms 

2 

assigned to it. Accordingly he and his bride arrived at 
the scene of their work, on the Bow thirty miles from its 
junction with the Swift, in November, 1873. The residence 
was a little hut of logs with a sod roof and parchment 
windows. Although this intrepid missionary made his 
headquarters with the Stoneys, frequent visits were paid 
to the Blackfeet on the plains. 

l*"“Herald - 1923 Anniv, Article by D.D.MacDonald. 

2— Blue, op cit Page eGG. 

3- -Steele, op cit p. 59, 







!' 

« 


■ 









. 

, 


c 












' 


. 

* 


e 

















, 













-16- 


Despite the work of these pioneer churchmen, it was 
impossible to improve conditions in the west until the 
authority of law had been established. Methods of doing 
this were suggested at various times by the Revs. George 
and John McDougall, Father Lacombe, Colonel P. Robertson 
Ross, and Sir Sandford Fleming, all of whom had a first 
hand acquaintance with the prairie country. 

Captain W.F.Butler, also, who had been sent out to 
investigate conditions by Adams G. Archibald, Lieutenant- 
Governor of Manitoba, and the North West Territories, 
reported in March, 187!)., that: "The institutions of Lav/ 
and Order are wholly unknown in the regions of the Sask¬ 
atchewan, as the country is without any executive organ¬ 
ization and is destitute of any means to enforce the auth¬ 
ority of the law." 5 '" Consequently he recommended the 
appointment of a civil magistrate or commissioner to 
reside in the region of the Upper Saskatchewan, and the 
organization of a well-equipped force of from one hundred 
to one hundred and fifty men for service in that district. 1 2 

About this time, several events took place in the 
west which gave weight to the recommendations for a police 
force. On April 9, the Ottawa Free Press featured 

the following news: "Latest Saskatchewan advices bring 
the intelligence of a fight between Cree and Blackfeet near 

1— MacRae, op cit P.218. 

2— Ibid p.246 











-17- 


Fort Whoop-Up, in which many of the former were killed 
at long range by breech-loading rifles. The Grees were 
not aware that their enemies had been furnished with so 
deadly a weapon. The rifles had been furnished by Amer¬ 
ican traders. It is a pity that this cannot be stopped. 

No one knows how soon these weapons will be turned against 
our own people.News also reached the East that in 1872 
some whisky traders in the Cypress Hills had had their 
horses stolen by Indians, and in retaliation they had 
gathered together a number of American desperadoes and 

p 

had wiped out a camp of some thirty Assiniboines. 

These events could not be overlooked, and in 1873 
the Dominion Parliament, on the motion of Sir John A. 
MacDonald, passed a bill for the creation of a police force, 
for the North-West. Lieutenant-Colonel George A. French 
was appointed Commissioner and Major J, F. Macleod As¬ 
sistant-Commissioner. Recruiting took place in Eastern 
Canada and by June, 1874, six divisions of nearly four 
hundred men had arrived at Dufferin, Manitoba. 

The march west began on June 12, The long pro¬ 
cession consisted of not only two cannon but also of cows, 
calves, plows, harrows, mowing machines and other agri¬ 
cultural implements as the force was to be both a police 

1— Kelly, op cit Page 93. 

2- -Calgary Daily Herald, Jan 21, 1922, Article by the 

Yen. Archdeacon J. w, Tims. 














































. 




«■ 


























, 














, . ■ , ' : i v' ■ . • 





-18- 


and a colonizing agency. Division A, under Inspector 

Jarvis, proceeded to Edmonton, Divisions D and E, under 

Commissioner French, went to Swan River, which had been 

made the headquarters of the force* Divisions B, C* and 

F under Assistant-Commissioner Macleod were sent into the 

Blackfoot country where the whisky traders were most 

active, They marched to the Old Man River, being guided 

for the last part of their journey by a famous half-breed 

scout of the plains, Jerry Potts. Here they established 

a fort since known as Fort Macleod. 1 2 

When Crowfoot, the famous Blackfoot chief heard 

from Rev. John MacDougall that the Police were coming, 

he said, "My brother, your words make me glad. I listen 

to them not only with my ears but with my heart also. In 

the coming of the Long-Knives (Americans) with their 

fire water and their quick shooting guns, we were weak 

and our people have been woefully slain and impoverished. 

You say this will be stopped—we are glad to have it 

stopped. We want peace. What you tell us about this 

strong power* which will govern with good law and treat 

the Indian the same as the white, makes us glad to hear. 

2 

My brother, I believe you and am thankful." 

1— Albertan, 1909 Anniv. Page 2. 

2 — On Western Trails in the Early Seventies. McDougall, 

John. W.Briggs, Toronto, 1911. Page 186. 

























W 































. 








. 




























- 19 - 


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF FORT CALGARY 

Before 1875 white men had occasionally passed 
through the valleys of the Bow and Swift Rivers, but they 
had paid no more attention to them than they did to any 
other bit of prairie or foothill. In that year there 
were less than a dozen white inhabitants in the district. 
Fathers Scollen and 'Fourmond still lived with Brother 
Alexis up the Swift River. John McDougall had been joined 
at Morleyville by his brother David, who opened up a post 
to trade with the Stoniest During the summer of 1875, 
the Hudson’s Bay Company built a small post some twenty- 
five miles up the Bow, at the mouth of the Ghost or Dead 
Man’s River, At the same time John Glenn started a farm on 
Fish Creek Y/here he irrigated from 15 to EO acres of 
garden and oats from Sheep Greek with excellent results. 
His was the first irrigation system in the west, Sam 
Livingstone, an old place-miner and prcspector, was the 
pioneer of the district as in 1865 he had come from B.C. 
by way of Rocky Mountain House, and had settled near the 
camp of Charles Jackson on the elbow of the Swift six 
miles above its mouth.^ 

Although the valleys of the Bow and the Swift 


rivers had little attr action for white settlers, they 

1— The Birth of Western Canada, Denny,''Sir Cecil E. 
(Manuscript fprm, in Leg. Library Edmonton) 

2- -Albertan, Article by John MoDugall, May 11, 1914. 
















mw I " 
















. 











4 • 









, 





























- 20 - 


a favorite hunting ground for most of the Blackfoot, 

Sarcee and Stoney Indians. Here the elastic wood of the 
young Douglas fir provided material for bowmaking, the 
high river banks and the thick evergreens gave protection 
from the winter winds, and the swift flowing waters of the 
Bow, rarely entirely covered with ice, attracted those 
buffalo wintering in the north. 

It was here also that the whisky traders frequently 
met their Indian customers. As early as 1871, an outpost 
of Healey and Hamilton had been built, seven miles up the 
Swift, by Fred Kanouse and three other traders. It con¬ 
sisted of a living-room, a store-room and a trading room 
with a passage running in front into which the Indians were 
admitted one at a time to trade. In 1872 the Blackfeet 
attacked these traders, killed one of them, ran their 
horses off, and wounded Kanouse in the shoulder. Mr. 

Davis, later in charge of the I.G.Baker post at Calgary, 
who was trading a few miles above lent them horses to go 
south. 1 Despite this setback, itinerant traders from the 
south continued to frequent this locality because they 
could slip in from across the line, dispose of their 
whisky, and escape before the police could be sent up 
from Macleod. It was to meet this situation that the 


1—The Birth' of Western Canada, Denny op cit. 







- 21 - 


polioe authorities decided to send F Detachment from 
Macleod, to erect a post at the junction of the two rivers 

This troop was first detailed to meet General 
Selby Smith, an imperial officer in command of the Can¬ 
adian militia, who was making a tour of the North-West 
Territories, under police escort. Inspector Jarvis’ 
detachment stationed at Edmonton was to accompany the 
General south to Tail Creek (near the present town of 
Lacombe) from which point the troop from the south was 
to escort him to Fort Denton where he could board a 
steamboat on the Mississippi River. 

F Troop, with Inspector Brisebois in command, 
Captain Denny second officer, and accompanied by Colonel 
Macleod, set out on the northern trip on August 18, 1875. 
It had been intended to start much earlier in the season, 
but Colonel Macleod had been detained in Helena, Montana, 
in connection with the Cypress Hills massacre of 1872. 

The detachment, consisting of fifty men mounted on horses 
in good condition, was followed by wagons carrying the 
baggage, supplies, tents, and forage. They reached the 
Bow River five days after leaving Macleod and made the 
crossing in wagon boxes covered with tarpaulins. From 
there to the Red Deer the journey was difficult because 
of the soft nature of the ground. After the troop struck 


1—The Birth of Western Canada. Denny op cit. 













» 













- 22 - 


the lakes and swamps of the park country, the mosquitoes 
were frightful. At night the men had to build great fires 
around which the horses would crowd for the protection of 
the smoke, and it required great care to prevent them from 
burning their hoofs. The Red Deer River was also high and 
it took some time to cross it. They met General Smith at 
Tail Greek and after inspection and a rest the party 
proceeded south, and in early September reached the hill 
overlooking the junction of the Bow and Swift Rivers.^ 

Far to the west of them were the innumerable foot¬ 
hills and to the east the open prairies while before them 
was a spacious valley through which two good sized rivers 
wound their way; the Bow coming from the west, and the 
Swift from the south-west. The site of the present city 
of Calgary was covered with long grass and the numerous 
small lakes were literally swarming with wild fowl. The 
river banks were heavily timbered on the south side, the 
present Victoria Park was covered with large cottonwood 
trees as was a large island in the Swift which was washed 
away by the floods of 1885. A colony of beavers had built 
a large dam across the Swift and it had flooded much of the 

p 

land south of the present Canadian Pacific Railway. 

The Slice descended to the rivers^edge, and pro¬ 
ceeded east to where the Hangevin Bridge (Fourth Street 

East) is now loc ated. They caulked the bottoms of the 
1 Herald 1923 AnnuV Page 5. 

2—Albertan 1909 Anniv. Page 4. 





, 






















e 





















t 








■ 












* 






■ 









- 23 - 


supply wagons; reinforced them with tarpaulins and started 
across. Corporal G. C. King was on the first improvised 
raft, and it was he who seized a rope, jumped into the 
water and waded to the south hank; thus being the first 
policeman to set foot on the site of the present Calgary. 
The troop followed the Bow down to the junction with the 
Swift where they found a solitary tent the occupants of 
which were an Indian hoy and a Roman Catholic priest. 

Father Doucet. The latter had been sent from the mission 
at St. Albert to study the Blackfoot language with the 
object of opening a mission at Fort Macleod. 

The police tents were soon pitched but as the 
September nights were very cold the men proceeded to dig 
trenches and cover them with earth and brush. Some of 
these huts held from six to eight men and with plenty of 
firewood to burn in the crude fireplaces, there was little 
difficulty in keeping warm. 

For the site of the new post, the police chose a 
flat bit of high ground at the forks of the two rivers 
which would provide protection on two sides from Indian 
attack. This spot, now marked by a stone, is immediately 
north of the present Canadian National Railway freight 
sheds. 

The I. G. Baker Company had contracted to build the 
fort and its men arrived in a few days. They proceeded up 






- 24 - 


the Swift about six miles and out dry pine logs, A boom 
was built a little above the mouth of the river and soon 
all the logs had been driven down. The pine logs, fourteen 
feet long, were placed upright in three-foot trenches to 
make the outer walls of the buildings which faced inwards, 
forming a square of from 150 to 200 feet on the side. The 
men*s quarters were on the east side of the square with 
the storerooms and shops opposite. On the north side 
were the stables built for fifty horses, and on the south 
the officers quarters and the guard room. ‘The buildings 
were covered with poles and earth and the speces between 
the logs were closed with clay. Lumber for the doors and 
floors was cut with a whip saw by the half-breeds who 
were camping in the vicinity. The fireplaces were built 
by John Glenn out of good building stone found in the 
river. The buildings were ready for occupation by Christ¬ 
mas, although the ten foot palisade was not finished until 
later. A party of men went up the river and drove down 
enough firewood to last all winter.^* 

After the Baker men had finished the fort, they 
built a substantial store and two cabins on the west 
bank of the Blbow and a short distance south of the bar¬ 
racks. to. D. W. Davis was placed in charge and an ex¬ 
police sergeant, Kinghorn, became clerk. A billiard table 
was put in by an enterprising whisky trader. 

1—Herald—1925, Anniv. Page 5. 




















. 














* 

, 















































* 








. 


e 











- 25 - 


The Hudson 1 2 s Bay Company moved down one of the 
buildings, from the recently established post at Ghost River 
to a location across the Swift from the Fort and the Baker 
store. Additions were made to it and a manager’s residence 
and interpreter’s cabin were built, John Bunn was placed 
in charge with Angus Fraser as storeman. Their trading 
goods soon arrived from Edmonton on a string of carts in 
charge of George Emerson, 1 

When the police first came, they had found a pile 
of logs to be used in the erection of a Roman Catholic 
chapel at the junction of the two rivers. Capt&dn Brisebois 
told Father Boucet that if he would build on a site farther 
up the Swift River the police would guarantee him possession 
of all the land he wanted. This the priest did, erecting 
a small house on the sharp hill just soutji of the present 
Holy Gross Hospital* It was constructed of logs taken from 
the Old Mission up the Elbow as Fathers Boucet and Scollen 
had joined forces. Two Roman Catholic policemen, Whelan 

p 

and Kenear, assisted in building the chapel. 

The half-breeds who had helped build the fort, now 
erected log cabins for themselves on both sides of the 
Swift or Elbow River as it now came to be called. They did 
considerable freighting for the police and the two stores 
with their Red River carts. 


1- -Albertan 1909 ^nniv-, Page 3. 

2— Herald, June 2, 1925. ’ Art. by William Pearce. 























< 






. 

















r 









, 




« 







. 





. 


. 

, 













. 

. 











- 26 - 

In two months the Elbow, as the settlement was 
first called, had become the most populous centre between 
Macleod and Edmonton. 

In the meanwhile the police visited the neighboring 
Indians who were friendly and prosperous with large bands 
of horses in their camps. An old Indian death lodge was 
found on the banks of the Bow^ containing the bones of some 
three or four Indians who had been killed the previous 
summer by whisky traders. The remains of the man who was 
killed when Kanouse’s post had been attacked were also found 
The police were now well housed. Their food came 
by bull train from Fort Benton, it consisted chiefly of 
flour, beans, pork, dried apples, sugar, coffee, tea, and 
canned milk. This was supplemented by fresh venison and 
buffalo meat while fresh vegetables were obtained from the 
Glenn garden. After the terrible march across the western 
plains in 1874 and the hard winter at Fort Macleod, the 
new home looked like a veritable Garden of Eden. There 
was an abuhdance of trees for shelter, good water and plenty 
of game. As many as ten buffalo were shot in a morning on 
the hill where the General Hospital now stands.*^ 

The first Christmas Eve was celebrated by a dance 
given in the newly-erected billiard hall. The ladies 
were half-breed lassies who turned out in large numbers 
and the Red River jigs and reels were the most popular 


1--King, G. C. ; in an interview with the writer. 


























cs , • 


















f 

























' 





- 27 - 


of the dances. On Christmas day a dinner was given at the 
barracks, by the non-commissioned officers, to which most 
of the civilians, resident in the settlement, were invited. 
It took place in the mess room which was seventy feet long. | 
The police had obtained raisins, currants and other dried 
fruits, nuts and candy from Ed. McPherson*s trading post 
at Sheep Creek, the present Okotoks. The tin cups, mugs, 
tin spoons, cheap knives, and forks were placed on the long 
bare table. The dinner began with soup made of canned 
oysters and condensed milk after which came prairie chicken 
trout, deer and buffalo meat, plum pudding, mince pie, nuts, 
candies, and coffee. Then followed toasts and songs and 
another dance while whisky traders and horse thieves for 
the time being were forgotten.^ 

It was not until spring that the new settlement was 
given an official name. In February., Assistant-Commissioner 
A. Gr. Irvine wrote the following despatch to the Minister 
of Justice at Ottawa: 

"As we now have a post or fort at the Bow River, 
it would be well if it was known by some name. I visited 
the post about a fortnight ago with Colonel Macleod and when! 
we were there Inspector Brisebois, who is in command of the 
station, issued an order without consulting either Colonel 
Macleod or myself, stating that all public documents sent 
out from his fort were to be headed *Fort Brisebois." I, 
of course, cancelled the order at once, as in the first 
place. Inspector Brisebois had no authority to issue such 
an order, and in the second place, the fort was not built 
by Inspector Brisebois’ troop, and neither the troop or 
the people about there wish the place called Brisebois. 


1—King, S.C. 











ff 


' 









9 > 














-28- 


"Colonel Macleod has suggested the name Calgary, 
which, I believe, in Scotch means *clear running water 1 , 
a very appropriate name, I think. 

"Should the Minister be pleased to approve of this 
name, I will issue an order to that effect." 1 

Irvine f s suggestion was approved and after April 5 
the settlement was officially known as Fort Calgary, al¬ 
though the old name of the Elbow clung to it for several 4 
years. 


1--Calgary Daily Herald, Nov. 18, 1935. Page 21. Anniv. 







-29- 


FORT CALGARY AN ISOLATED MILITARY POST 

After the excitement of establishing the post and 

exploring the surrounding country had subsided, life in 

the little settlement became very uneventful. Except for 

the periodic arrival and departure of the Baker bull teams 

and the Hudson*s Bay Company 1 s carts very little happened. 

Calgary was to retain for the next five years the free and 

easy life of an isolated military post. 

John McDougall had come down from Morley shortly 

after the establishment of the fort, and before long he 

started holding fortnightly services in the barracks. 

Before spring they were transferred to the Baker store, 

which was kept open for business all day Sunday, except 

at the time of service. It was several years before 

1 

either company closed its posts on the Sabbath. 

Late in 1875, George and John McDougall visited the 

Blackfeet and chose a location near the Pincher Creek at 

which to establish a mission. The Rev. George McDougall 

decided to spend the winter at Morley instead of going 

back to Edmonton so that he might begin the work early the 

next spring. However, an event took place which ended 

all his plans for the uplift of the Indian. On the twen- 

tieth of Januar y, with John and his nephew Moses, he left 
1—Herald, 1925 Page 12. 





4 





















■ 











































. 




. 













-30- 


Morlay to go to the plains for meat® They made camp 
about ten miles from the barracks at the Elbow, and on the 
twenty-fourth they killed some buffalo four miles from 
camp. It was dusk before they started back to camp* and 
when within a mile and a half of it, Mr. McDougall rode on 
ahead. When John came into camp, he found that his father 
had not arrived. He and Moses fired shots the remainder 
of the night but without success, and it was not until 
February the fifth that the frozen body was found. It was 
thought that snow-blindness had caused him to become lost. 
As it was unhurt, there is no truth in the story that he 
had been killed by whisky traders, seeking revenge because 
of his opposition to their traded 

As yet Galgary was merely an outpost in the Indian 
country, and the trade of the two stores was almost en¬ 
tirely with the natives. They sold flint-lock muskets, 
overcoats, blankets, Hudson 1 s Bay knives, that could be 
used as hatchets, pig-tail tobacco by the fathom, carrot 
tobacco in three-pound rolls, sugar, tea and trinkets. In 
exchange they took in buffalo robes, pemmican, tallow and 
dried meat. In 1876 the Baker store shipped 15,000 robes 
south; each of which cost in trade about fifty cents, but 

p 

brought from five to ten dollars at Benton. * 

The Indians also found it profitable to hunt the 

lesser animals as in the seventies badger pelts brought 

~ 1—Herald 1923 - Ann iv. Page 12. 

E—Galgary Tribune June, 1914 n Log of an Old Timer” 


















-31- 


sixty Gents, those of the big grey wolf from five to six 
dollars, of the coyote from two to three dollars, of the 
grizzly, black and cinnamon bears from four to eight 
dollars, and of the antelope, deer and elk, thirty cents 
a pound.^ 

In 1876, F Detachment, consisting of a sub-inspec¬ 
tor and thirty-five constables with Colonel J. F. Macleod 
in command, found plenty of work to do. Although the 
Blackfeet had patched up a temporary peace with their 
enemies the Orees, they continued to steal horses from 
each other, and often some of the marauding braves would 
be killed. To watch the different bands scattered along 
the Bow and the Red Deer Rivers was no easy task, and 
many strong detachments had to be sent down to the Black- 
foot headquarters at the Grossing of the Bow, some sixty 
miles below Calgary, 

It was at this point that Treaty Number 7 was 
negotiated with the Blackfeet, Sarcees, Bloods, Piegans, 
and Stoneys in the fall of 1877. This was the last of a 
series of treaties made, after the Red River Rebellion, by 
the Dominion Government with the Various Indian tribes 
of the West, by which the natives ceded their land to the 
Dominion and received in return protection, money and 
supplies. As the Blackfeet were afraid that their land 
would soon be taken from them without compensation, they 


1—Albertan, 1909 Anniv 


p, 5. 












v> 














e 






























32 


had asked for a treaty through the Roman Catholic mis¬ 
sionary, Rev. C. Scollen. The Dominion had acceded to 
their request and on Monday, September 17, 187ft, the 
Indians met the two commissioners, Hon. David Laird, 
Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Territories and 
Colonel Macleod of the police, at the Blackfoot Crossing or 
Ridge-Under-the-Water, as it was known to the Indians. 1 

A large council tent and a whole village of smaller 
tents and teepees had been erected in a meadow stretching 
about a mile back from the south bank of the river. About 
eight thirty in the morning, the piercing war-cries of the 
assembled braves led by their war chief rang out, fol¬ 
lowed by a deafening roar of hundreds of muzzle-loading 
guns and pistols. On the skyline there appeared some 
3,000 warriors in war paint mounted on ponies. Then fol¬ 
lowed a mad dash down the hill, the leaders only drawing 
the horses to their haunches when their noses almost 
touched the first row of tents. Thereupon a dignified and 
stately figure walked to the front, spread a robe on the 
ground and sat down. It was Crowfoot, head chief of the 
Blackfeet, A stone pipe was filled and lighted; Crowfoot 
took one puff, and the pipe was then passed on to Governor 
Laird and Colonel Macleod. The conference was now begun. 

The Governor explained that the Queen desired that 
the Indians allow the white men to raise cattle and that 


1'—MacRae, op cit. Page 338. 








, 

. 








. 

, 







r ... • \ ;v £ ■ $ 








■ 





-33- 


that she Ytrould help the Indians raise cattle to take the 
place of the rapidly disappearing buffalft. Then he out¬ 
lined the terms of the treaty. On Friday, Crowfoot an¬ 
nounced his adhesion to the treaty; other head chiefs and 
minor chiefs spoke after him, all expressing their grat¬ 
itude for the protection offered by the Police. The 
Indian chiefs signed with crosses and on Saturday a salute 
of thirteen guns announced that the treaty was concluded.^ 

By its terms the Indians could hunt over unsettled 
land; the Blackfeet, Bloods, and Sarcees were given a res¬ 
erve along the north banks of the Bow and South Saskatchewan 
Rivers, the Piegans were given a reserve on the Old Man 
River, and the Stonies received land near Morley. All the 
Indians ?;ere given money, cattle and farm implements, but 
it was several years before they forsook their exciting 
nomadic life for the less eventful existence that the 
white men offered them. 

The y/inter of 1877-78 was astonishingly mild and 
rain, fog, and mud resulted in much sickness. H. Taylor, 
who had erected a billiard room near Baker*s store, held 
several dances during the winter. The police celebrated 
the anniversary of their arrival at Fort Macleod by a big 
dinner and dance in the mess room, to which all the 
neighboring civilians were invited. 2 
1*—Maclnnis, op cit p. 105 

2--Riders of the Plains, Denny, Sir C.E. Calgary Herald 
Co., 1905. p.103 



























( 











. 


















, 







. I 

. 






. 











-34- 


In the spring of 1878, Captain Williams, an Amer¬ 
ican officer from Fort Shaw, Montana, visited Calgary* He 
came up from Fort Maeleod where he had been trying to re¬ 
cover some mules, the property of the United States Gov't, 
which had been carried off by settlers. The visitor ex¬ 
pressed his surprise when told that the police treated 
both white and red man alike, and that only twenty-five 
men were required to keep order among 3,000 Indians. After 
a week's stay at Calgary, Captain Denny took him on a 
fishing trip up the Bow where they visited the Methodist 
mission at Morley, and were hospitably received by Rev. 

John McDougall, 1 2 

In the early summer Inspector Crozier was ordered 
to take one half of F Troop to Fort Walsh, in the Cypress 
Hills, v/here the whisky traders were most active. About 
midsummer Captain Denny left with all the remaining force 
except ten men for by this time whisky trade had almost 
ceased in the Bow River district. The fall and winter 
passed quietly as nearly all the plainsIndians had gone 
south into Montana after the buffalo.2 

In the fall of 1879, Calgary was visited by Prof¬ 
essor Macoun, Dominion Governmot naturalist, who was 
favourably impressed with the site of the little settlement. 

1- -Riders of the Plains, Denny,Sir C.E., Cal. Herald Co. 

1905, p.105. 

2— Ibid p. 106. 






-35- 


He wrote: " Two miles before we reached the fort, we 
stopped at the top of the last slope and looked down over 
a scene long to be remembered. At oar feet lay the Bow 
River and its beaatifal valley. As the river wound from 
side to side, it left wooded points on the outer margins 
of all the bends, and from our altitude, water, wood and 
meadow seemed so beautifully intermixed that the landscape 
was more like an artist*s ideal than a natural picture. 
Standing by the river*s margin or feeding on the green 
meadows were hundreds of cattle and horses; these added 
to the natural features, and gave a pastoral character to 
the scene. Only three short years ago, this same valley 
was filled with countless herds of buffalo, and the Black- 
foot and Sarcees were in the midst of affluence. Today 
the buffalo are dead or gone, and the Indian, broken in 
spirit, either dies with the stoicism of his race, or 
partakes of the white man*s bounty. 

"Calgary itself lay hidden among the distant trees, 
quietly nestling under a bluff of light colored sandstone, 
while about a mile beyond in a little grove, could be seen 
the Oatholic mission. Outside the river valley the 
prairie extended roll over roll into the horizon, dotted 
here and there with clumps of bushes, but altogether with¬ 
out trees except in the valleys of the small streams. 
Beyond rose the Rocky Mountains like a wall, bounding the 
horizon to the west, and giving a vastness to the picture 
which the holder could feel but not describe. 

"Calgary is situated on the right bank of the Bow 
River, in an angle formed by the Elbow or Swift river, 
where it joins the former. It is merely a stockade en¬ 
closing a few huts which would be very little protection 
if the Indians were troublesome."! 

After being shown the farms of John Clean and Sam 
Livingstone, Mr. Hacoun wrote: "Here Glenn had 5,000 cab¬ 
bages, all commencing to head and without doubt the finest 
lot I have ever seen. Barley and oats in the same 
field were excellent, and the potatoes were fine. Mr. 
Livingstone, another farmer, living a few miles off had 
also an excellent crop, and all united in saying that the 
climate was moist enough to grow anything. At the Roman 
Catholic mission all kinds of grains and vegetables have 
been raised."2 

Thus Professor Macoun became one of the first 

supporters of agriculture in the south-west, but most 

l-Caigary Herald 1923 AnM^~P^ 

B--lbid p.5. 










1 

















-36- 


people continued to hold to the belief, which had been 
spread by the Hudson’s Bay Company’s officials, that the 
southern prairie was practically a desert with the ex¬ 
ception of the narrow fertile belt in the foothills region* 
Despite this wide-spread belief, the district 
around Calgary was gradually being settled. As early as 
1876, a Frenchman, named Beaupry, had settled on the 
Ghost River, the L'Herondelles had started ranching near 
the Fort and James Yotier had settled on a farm near Fish 
Creek.^ By the close of 1879 there were quite a number of 
settlers scattered from Calgary south to Fort Macleod. 
Fourteen were in the country to the west, most of them 
engaged in cattle raising. 

During the fall the recently appointed Indian 
Commissioner, Mr. Dewdney, visited Calgary and bought Mr. 
Glenn’s farm where he placed Bruce Wright, a government 

demonstrator. This farm was to remain one of Calgary’s 

2 

show places for many years. 

The Indians were slow to take up agriculture and 
affluent a few years before they were now in a state of 
semi-starvation. In 1877 the buffalo had been numerous 
as Chief Factor Hardisty of the Hudson’s Bay Post at 
Fdmonton, in travelling south to take part in the negot¬ 
iating of Treaty Number 7, had observed the prairie east 

of Calgary to be black with almost one continuous herd of 

1— Kelly, op cit p.116 

2- -Ibid p.136. 








, 



















* 

. ! u .. , 
























■ t 





* f 



























. 


•«' 



' 










-37- 


buffalo. 1 2 However, during the next year great prairie 
fires drove the buffalo south to the last great slaughter 
on the Missouri. They were never to return in any great 
numbers to the Territories as the American Indians cooped ^ 
up the main herd south of the Milk River. Some of the 
Canadian Indians followed the buffalo south while those who 
remained were soon reduced to a state of starvation. They 
ate gophers, mice and snakes, and it was not an uncommon 
sight to see some great warrior lying patiently beside a 
gopher hole, hoping to snare the little animal.2 

When Mr. Dewdney visited Crowfoot late in 1879, the 
old chief made no complaint of suffering although his band 
was sick and destitute. He only asked that a hole might 
be made in the barrier of the Sioux so that his young men 
could get to the buffalo. 3 

Captain Penny, in charge of the Calgary post, took 
the responsibility of feeding the neighbouring Indians 
during the summer of 1879, although Mr. Pewdney had ordered 
that rations were not to be given at Calgary. Penny bought 
2,000 pounds of beef daily at seven cents a pound, from Mr. 
Emerson, paying for it by voucher on the Baker store. In 
the late summer, Pewdney arranged with the Baker Company, 

for large quantities of cattle and flour to be sent to the 

1— Herald 1933-* Anniv.. Art. by R. G. Hard isty. 

2— -Kelly op cit p.124. 

3— Ibid, p.124. 



























. 




I 7 JKi’ 3 

m • ■■ • » 









,. 









• ■ 








-38- 


various reserves, but the amount was far from being 
sufficient.~ 

All the tribes were in a dangerous mood, and in the 
fall of 1880, the few white men of Calgary were called 
upon to face the so-called Sarcee War* This quarrelsome 
tribe had been given their reserve with the Blackfeet at 
the Crossing, but they could not get along with Crowfoot’s 
band. Knowing the weakness of the force at Calgary, they 
went there under their principal head chief. Bull’s Head, 
to demand food. To add force to their demands, they fired 
off their guns in both stores, and started a fire in front 
of the Baker post. As soon as word of this reached Fort 
Macleod, the Indian agent, Colonel Norman Macleod, Capt. 
Benny, Sergeant Lawder, and eight men hurried to Calgary. 
Upon their arrival, they promised the Sarcees rations at 
Macleod as there were no cattle or supplies at Galgary. 

For three days the Indians refused to move, and even 
threatened the fort, which had fallen into a sad state of 
disrepair. Finally, Benny had Sam Livingstone bring up a 
number of carts in which to transport the tents and goods 
of the wayward Indians. Then Benny began to pull down 
the teepees after drawing up his men, re-inforced by the 
four police from Calgary, with rifles loaded. He met with 
no opposition and by the afternoon the Indians were well on 


l“~“Biders °P the Plains, Benny op cit p.137. 








■ r 

f 


a 






































(Ji/d rter- Master St&bles 


v 


<u 

3 

i 



^ Q 
^ O 


O 

oo 

°o 


X- <o 

rd to 
5j v» 

L r- 

<u t?L - 

OO 

o 

H O 
oq: 
<u 

cr 


T | 
SJ 
o'* 


X, £ 

<u § 

~T3 
i. cc 


09 


O 

<4 


(d 

cO 

Q_ 


om 

id 

c: 




cu 

<0* 

QZ 


jn 

£, 

<D 

to 

u? 

S 

s 

o 

<o 


£ 

£ 















































































































-39- 


the road south. The following spring, after much argument, 
they were taken to a separate reserve south of Calgary.” 

Chief Crowfoot of the Blackfeet was a frequent 
visitor to Calgary at this time. Although fifty years of 
age, he was erect and tall, with a majestic bearing; 
prominent, aquiline nose and long, straight, black hair. 

He invariably appeared in a scarlet coat, buckskin breeches 
and shirt. Attached to a small chain, which extended from 
his neck to his waist, was his huge Treaty medal (the size 
of a bread-and-butter plate) and a framed copy of the 
Treaty. He was patient, honourable, wise in council and a 

p 

born leader of men. 

In September of 1881, the Marquis of Lome, Gover¬ 
nor-General of Canada, visited Calgary. C^pt. Cotton and 
Constables Clarke, Beattie and Leroise were in charge of 
the fort at this time. In connection with the expected 
visit of the Governor 7 General, Constable Clarke made seven 
trips to Macleod with despatches. Leaving Calgary in the 
morning, he had supper the same night in Macleod, and the 
return trip was made in the same remarkable time. Cotton 
and Clarke laid out the site for the governor f s camp, the 
latter hoisting the first Canadian flag in the district. 
After visiting Calgary, the governors party was ferried 
across to the north shore of the Bow, in two boats twelve 

feet long and three fe et wide. They were met with dem- 

1— Denny, "Riders of the Plains” p.143. 

2— When the West was Young. Higinbotham, J.D. Ryerson, 

luronxo, p.229 














-40- 


oorats and were driven to the Coohrane Ranch at Mor ley 
to witness a display of horsemanship by the ranch cowboys. 
(Twelve boats had been built in Calgary to carry the Mar¬ 
quis and his party east by river, but at the last moment 
the river passage was countermanded, and the party returned 
to Ottawa by way of Fort Benton and the Union Pacific 
Railway.^* When the Governor-General returned to Ottawa, 
he requested the government to name the new administrative 
district, which was to be formed, after his wife. Princess 
Louise Alberta, second daughter of Queen Victoria. 1 2 

During the early eighties, many cattle ranchers 
began to settle in the neighbouring country, and as a result 
several business men found it advantageous to establish 
themselves in Calgary. One of the first of these new¬ 
comers was George E. Jacques, who arrived in 1881, and 
decided that the settlement, which now boasted of seventy- 
five inhabitants, could support a jewelry store. He 
bought a small log shack near the Barracks and set himself 
up as the first watchmaker west of Winnipeg. 

The next year Mrs. Jacques arrived; she was the 
first white woman in the settlement. Her first home, which 
was purchased from McVittie, the surveyor, was a twelve by 
sixteen foot shack with a dirt floor, a mud roof, a 
leather-hinged door and one window. Her furniture consis- 

1— Albertan 1909 op cit p.8. 

2— Higinbotham, op cit p.76." 




























-41- 


ted of a home-made bed with a hay-stuffed mattress, a 
three-legged stool, two home-made benches and a trunk, 
which was used as a table. She cooked the venison, bacon 
and bannock over an open fire. Seven months later, the 
bride of Jim Barvis, an employee in the Baker store, ar¬ 
rived in Calgary.^ 

Early in 1882 Colonel Walker, while still manager 
of the Cochrane Ranch, situated west of Calgary, had set 
up a small sawmill near the junction of the two rivers. 
When he resigned as manager, late in the summer of 1882, 
?/alker took the sawmill and timber limits in lieu of sev¬ 
eral thousand dollars that he had invested in the ranch. 
This mill, just below the junction of the Bow and Elbov/, 
was to furnish the lumber for most of Calgary 1 s early 
buildings. The log shack was now a thing of the past. 

Calgary had become such an important point that, 
in July 1882, E Detachment of the Police, under Inspector 
Erench, was moved from the Blackfoot Crossing to Calgary. 
As the old barracks were no longer tenable. Major Walker 
was given the $35,000 contract to erect new buildings. 

He bought the old Methodist Church, which had not been 
used for several years, and added to it, to make a raw 
home for the force, which now consisted of one superinten¬ 
dent, two inspectors, seven sergeants, five corporals, 


1—Calgary Herald, 1923 Anniv. p.12. 







< 



1 












- 42 - 


sixty constables, and sixty-seven horses. The old pallis- 
ade was replaced by a low fence as Indian attacks were no 
longer anticipated."^ 

In 1882, the settlement became very excited over a 
reported silver strike in Castle Mountain just west of the 
present Banff. Joe Healy, Clinker Scott and "Old Man" 
McLaughlin contrived to start a mining boom at Silver City, 
the name of the new camp. Healy, who carried splendid 
specimens of ore obtained in Montana, held claims at 
Silver City. He was not at all particular in making sure 
that the specimens he showed interested spectators were 
from Montana or Castle Mountain. Mining fever raged in 
Calgary for a year or two with the result that there was a 
shortage of help and many of the settlers left their ran- 

p 

ches for the mining camp. 

In May and June of 1882, Sid Van Cpurtland and 

William Wright accomplished what perhaps is the only trip 

ever made by river, from Calgary to Lake Winnipeg. The 

two men felled spruce trees, sawed them by hand, and then 

had a French-Canadian build a small boat. This boat, built 

of unseasoned lumber, gave much trouble until they reached 

the Blackfoot Crossing where they found oakum and tar, 

which had been left by C.P.R. surveyors. The two men 

simply floated down with the current, using only paddles 

to steer with. They h ad with them about a thousand pounds 
1'—Ibid, p. 4. ” ” ~ ™ 

2—Kelly, op cit p.160. 





























r> 














« 













t 








- 43 - 


of valuable furs, mostly black and cinnamon bear, which 
they sold to a Hudson*s Bay trader at Prince Albert. From 
this point, the rest of the voyage was made to Winnipeg by 
steamer.^ The Bow and Saskatchewan never played an im¬ 
portant part in the history of Oalgary as did the North 
Saskatchewan in that of Edmonton. 

1—Herald 1925 Anniv. Page 12. 






























- rCrsjBfcaL 

* * rr ''"APHIS 
«^« 6 ! 

'vMow if 

-i O.A 




















44 


TRANSPORTATION 

During these years Calgary was dependent for trans¬ 
portation upon the Red River cart of the north and the 
great bull teams of the south* The northern carts, every 
three of which required a driver, were drawn either hy a 
single Indian pony or an ox, and could he heard creaking 
at the distance of a mile. They were built of alder-wood 
with birch axles and the wheels were five feet in diameter. 

The beds were two and a half by four feet with the sides 
. 

constructed of upright staves held in position by a top 
rail. Not a trace of metal was used and the only tools 
required were a couple of different sized augers, a draw 

knife and a spoke shave. If a break occured, it was men- 

■ 

ded by a strip of moist buffalo hide, which contracted and 
hardened when it dried, binding the break firmly and making 
the cart as strong as ever. Each cart carried from 900 to 
1,800 pounds and the common rate of progress was twenty 
miles a day.^ 

The I, G. Baker store obtained its supplies, from 
Fort Benton, by bull train. This form of transportation 
was only possible over a period of seven or eight months 
when pasture could be obtained. A team was made up of 

1--Seventeen Years in the North-West. Begg, Alexander 
London, 1884. Yol. 1, page 898. 





























e 












■ 




C'O 3 






“ 







« 


e . : 





, 

. 

, 

. 




. 














- • i ■: • M 












- 45 - 


frora twelve to fifteen pairs of oxen, strung out. A heavy 
chain passed through an iron ring at the centre of the ox- 
yokes and extended from the leaders back to the lead wagon. 
To this front wagon were hitched two other wagons, swing 
and trail; also a cart carrying the cooking outfit, blan¬ 
kets and a tent. The wagons had a broad guage of five 
feet, which made them much more stable on side hills. They 
were strongly built with the bows on the wagon*s boxes 
covered with canvas so that the goods would remain dry, 
regardless of the climatic conditions. As much as fifteen 
tons of freight could be carried by the three wagons. The 1 
whole team attached to a wagon was in charge of one man, 
the bull-whacker, who guided his team by means of a heavy 
whip. WTien the bull teams travelled in brigades, they 
were directed by a wagon boss, who by voice and action 
forced the teams along at a rate of fifteen miles a day. 

This form of transportation was only used south of the Bov/. 
An attempt was made during the Rebellion of 1885 to trans¬ 
port freight from Calgary to Edmonton by bull team, but, 
owing to the soft nature of the ground, it was abandoned.! 

At first, most of the travelling was by horseback, 

but this was replaced by stage-coaches in the early eighties. 

In the Macleod Gazette of April 24, 1885, the Benton, 

Fort Macleod and Calgary Mail, Passenger and Express Line 

announced its time-table for the departures of its four- 

horse coaches for the n orth and south. _ - 

1—Herald 1925 Anni'v. p.5. 
























































, 














. 












- 


t 








, 

, 









- 46 - 


Daring that fall, Edmonton became connected by a 
stage coach line with Calgary. This stage left the Hud¬ 
son’s Bay Store every Monday morning and arrived in 
Edmonton on Friday, after making night stops at Willow 
Creek, Red Deer Crossing, Battle River and Peace Hills. 

The return stage left Edmonton on Monday, and arrived in 
Calgary on Friday. The single fare was $25.00 and express 
matter was charged 10^ a pound.^ This line continued in 
operation until the C.P.R. reached Strathcona in July,1891. 

All the mail for the south-west came through the 
United States; in summer, by steamboat up the Missouri to 
Benton, and in winter, by stage from Gorrin on the Utah- 
Northern branch of the Union Pacific Railway. From Benton 
it was carried by messenger, under contract with the 
Mounted Police, to Maclead. From there the Calgary mail 
was brought by freighting outfits, and left at the Baker 
store. When it was opened, there was a general rush for 
the store. As there was no postmaster, everyone looked 

c 

through the pile of papers and letters. 

In 1880, Colonel Walker, while on a business trip 
to Macleod, asked for the Calgary mail, and was told that 
it had left two weeks before by bull team for the north. 

He overtook the outfit at Sheep Creek Ridge where he got 
the mail from the driver and brought it on to Calgary, ar¬ 
riving a week before the freighting outfit did.^ 

1— Blue, op cit p. 309 • ~ ~ 

2— Albertan 1909 Anniv. ' p.l. 

3— Ibid p.l. 
































. 


















, 

. 

, - , 



























- 47 - 


I 

Shortly after this, VSTalker, who was then manager 
of the ^ochrane Ranch, took up the question of better 
mail facilities and succeeded in getting $75.00 a month 
subscribed for a semi-monthly service to Macleod. A re¬ 
mittance man, Lord Hewgill, was engaged as mail carrier. 

In 1883, a regular post-office was established in the back 
of the Baker store with Mr. William Bannerman as postmaster. 
American stamps were used on all outgoing letters until 
the arrival of the railway.*** 

As long as these slow and expensive forms of 
transportation and communication continued, Calgary could 1 
have no future* There was no market for the few horses and 
cattle raised and the agricultural possibilities were con¬ 
sidered negligible. The authorities had seriously consid¬ 
ered transferring the four men to some other post and 
Fred White, Controller of the Police, had actually offered 
to sell the site of the fort to the Cochrane Ranch. 2 It 
was only through the influence of the Governor-General, the 
Marquis of Larne, who had been favourably impressed with 
the possibilities of Calgary that the post was not aban¬ 
doned in 1881. However, conditions were soon to change. 

Late in 1880 surveys were made up the Bow River and through ■ 
the Kicking Horse Pass, and in 1881 Major Rogers, the 

engineer-in-charge, stated that the road would follow thi s 

1— Ibid, p.l. 

2 — Benny, Op cit p.137. 





















i 





O 






, 

( 

{ 

< 









- 48 - 


route. This would give southern ranchers a market for 
their stock and Oalgary would'become the shipping and dis¬ 
tributing centre for the territory south to Macleod, north 
to Edmonton and west far into the mountains. However, it 
was not until June 14, 1885, that the railway,for which 
the west had waited so long, crossed the South Saskatchewan 
near Medicine Hat and started across the prairies of 
Alberta. 

General-Manager Yan Horne of the Canadian Pacific 
had brought the firm of railway contractors, Langdon and 
Sheppard, from St, Paul, to build the line from Oak Lake, 
Manitoba, to Galgary, and they had set out to establish a 
record of steel laying, which others believed to be unat¬ 
tainable, In the winter of 1881-82 tons of material had 
been shipped to the supply yards at Elat Creek which was 
then at the end of steel. This included thousands of ties 
which were laid 2,800 to the mile and thousands of 30 
foot rails of 6 different weights, the heaviest, the 60 
pounders, being used for the steeper grades. There was 
material for stations and section houses, to be located 
on alternate sidings, 20 miles apart and also for water 
tanks to be built where water could be found while bridge 
timbers had to be teamed long in advance of the rails so 
there would be no delay, when the steel reached the places 
that had to be bridged. All this material had to be 














, 






















' 

dl i 




t 





- 

, • 






















, 




t 









t 


« 

r 

















- 49 - 


rashed to the end of steel and then from siding to siding 
as the railhead advanced. Construction trains ran on a 
regular schedule, the empties returning to the base of 
supplies. There was a penalty of $5,000.00 an hour should 
the Langdon, Sheppard Company he held up for lack of 
material.^ 

The contractors had experienced little trouble with 
Indians, but when they approached within a few miles of the 
Blackfoot reservation, through which they must build, 1,500 
red men, armed to the teeth, went on the warpath, threat¬ 
ening to kill the first white man that dared invade their 
territory. Father Lacombe was informed of the danger, and 
as quickly as horseflesh could carry him, he hurried to 
warn the workmen. He advised them to stop work for a few 
hours so that he could pacify the Indians. The workmen 
answered the warning in their usual way of contempt for 
the Indian. Lacombe decided to protect the workmen if 
they would not protect themselves. He bought sugar, tea, 
tobacco, and flour, and invited the Indians to a grand 
council. After the presents were distributed, he advised 
them to permit the white men to build their road, and then 
the governor would reward the Indians. Crowfoot declared 
that the advice of the Chief of Prayer was good and would 

be taken. The trouble was over and the workers continued 
2 

unmolested. 

1- -Herald 1935 Anniv. p.20. 

2- -Calgary Morning Albertan - 1909 Page 4. Anniversary. 


















, 






rx 


















- 








. 





























r 

r 

* 

















. . ... 













-50- 

AQ the oonstraction gangs approached the Bow, most 
of the towns-people crossed the river to watch the track 
laying. The grading was done by horse teams, then the ties 
were sent on and were placed in position. Then came the 
handcars, each drawn by two horses, which brought the rails 
along the completed portion of the line. On reaching the 
end of the last newly-laid rails,IE men, 6 on either side 
of the trusSk, seized a rail, carried it forward and threw 
it down into position. Two others then guaged the distance 
between the rails, four men placed spikes at each end, 
four others screffed in the two fish-plates, and another 
four raised the ties with crow bars while the spikes were 
being hammered in. The truck containing the rails then 
passed on, while more men came to make the rail secure. 

In advance of these, were others fixing the telegraph and 
getting the grade and! the next siding ready. 1 

On August 9, construction had reached the east bank 
of the Bow and there was a delay of forty-eight hours 
while the bridge was being built. Half a mile of track 
was then laid, and Engineers Jim 0*Hagan and Leslie Mc¬ 
Laughlin, in charge of engines "Old 81" and "126" brought 
the first train of eight boarding and sixteen flat cars 
into Calgary. The ,12th of August was spent in constructing 
a bridge across the Elbow, a spur track was then laid west 
of the river and on the 16th the station, a box car, 

1—Life and Labour in the Ear West. Barneby, Henry. 

Casseland- Company, London. 1884. p.267. 












\ 

















I 















- 51 - 


arrived, and was set u.p about where fourth street east is 
today. The cooking oar, eight boarding cars, two store- 
cars, and the contractor's car were switched onto a spur 
track, A camp for the men was pitched about where the 
Capitol Theatre now stands and later a water tank and 
windmill were set up on the bank of the Elbow,1 

Calgary soon became the distributing centre for the 
territory to the north, west and south. Benton as a source 
of supply was wiped out; the bull team was a thing of the 
past; southern Alberta was no longer an appendage of 
Montana, 

1--Herald 1933 Anniv. Page 20. 






















p^c. n be r / # $ 3 ( iVov-f (ij. 




















- 52 - 


SIX MONTHS OF RAPID GROWTH 

It was daring the spring of 1883 that the little 
settlement of less than one hundred people suddenly became 
the most important point in the Ear West, Easterners 
trecked overland from the end of the steel; Major Walkers 
mill could not turn lumber out quickly enough, and many 
merchants and professional men set pp their offices in 
tents until their orders for building material could be 
filled* 

By this time news of the opportunities offered by 

the West was penetrating even to the Maritime Provinces, 

: 

George Murdoch, a harnessmaker of St. John, New Brunswick, 
reached Winnipeg in April, 1883, and was advised to seek 
his fortune in Calgary. He bought a camp outfit and rode 
to the end of the steel, at Maple Creek, in a box car load¬ 
ed with wagons. On May 3, the future mayor of Calgary 
started overland and ten days later he reached Calgary. 

Here he found "prospects good, Calgary bottom is the fin¬ 
est natural town site I ever saw." The day after his 
arrival, he borrowed a cabin for a temporary habitation 
and in the first morning he had two jobs of repairing 
for which he "charged like the mischief as a dollar is 

' 

here like twenty-five cents at home." On May 16 he started 

■ 
























. 










' pv ) j • ;x: {: 










■ 

. . . ■ ■ ■ ■ , ■; 

- 

, 






' 










e 



















- 53 - 


to build a shack, twelve feet square and on the 18th he 
put his name in the window—the first sign in Galgary. 1 

Dr. Andrew Henderson, late of Montreal, rode a 
cayuse from Maple Creek and on June 8 arrived in Calgary. 
He secured temporary accommodation with -Tom McYittie, 
Dominion land-surveyor, but soon the doctor erected a 
building, thirty by twenty-four feet, on the east side of 
the Elbow, near the Hudson’s Bay post. This was to serve 
both as his office and as a drug-store, but as no supplies 
were received until the track was laid into Calgary, the 
building was used as a pay-office for the crews of track- 
layers and graders employed by Langdon and Sheppard.~ 

On June 11, Messrs. Van Wart and Freese of New 
Brunswick arrived and started a general store east of the 
Elbow. They had to meet the opposition of the Hudson’s 
Bay and Baker stores, but as the old companies continued 
to cater chiefly to the Indian trade for some time, the 
new store was very popular with the new-comers from the 
East . 5 

Calgary had hardly recovered from the railway 
excitement when the second important event of the year 
took place, the appearance of a weekly newspaper, the 
Calgary Herald, Mining, and Ranch Advocate and General 

Advertiser. It was not the first newspaper in the Ter- 

1— -Albertan, 1909 Anniv. ardock’s Diary p.4. ~~~~ 

2— Herald 1923 Anniv. p.8. 

3— Ibid, p.8. 






1 

. 




FS 












. 







































- 54 - 


ritories as prior to this, the Saskatchewan Herald had 
been established at Battleford, the Bulletin at Edmonton 
the Times at Prince Albert, the Gazette at Fort Macleod 
and the Leader at Regina* 1 

The publishers, Messrs. Braden and Armour, had 
come from Ontario during the summer, and until their 
press arrived by the first train., they had canvassed the 
settlement for advertisements and subscriptions. George 
Murdock noted in his diary that he had given a subscrip¬ 
tion ($3.00) and an advertisement to Braden on July 31. 

As soon as their Washington hand-press was unloaded from 
the first train, it was set up in a white canvas tent on 
the west bank of the Elbow, and the two men worked night 
and day to produce a paper before any of the subscriptions 
or advertisements were cancelled. Finally on the after¬ 
noon of August 31, the anxious partners calmly announced 

to the crowd of nondescripts, gathered outside the press 

2 

tent, that the Galgary Herald was out. 

The little paper announced its mission life to be: 
"The collection of all news items of local interest, the 
encouragement and support of all agricultural, mining and 
ranching enterprises. The encouragement of all measures, 
religious and moral intended for the welfare of the com¬ 
munity. The exposure of any measure or acts on the part 
of individuals, corporations, or governments, which 
appear to be framed against the true interests of the 
place, people or district. 

"Thoroughly independent in Hihe matter of politics, 
always ready to give credit to one and all irrespective 
of creed, color, race or politics, whose efforts ma y be 

1— Canada and Its Provinces. Shortt, Adam & Doughty,A.G. 

Tor. Pub. Assn of Can.. 1914, Yol 19pl64. 

2— Herald - 1923 Anni'v. p.2. 






1 
















. 















. 



















- 55 - 


worthy of recognition. 

"Having always the courage of its convictions, the 
Herald will not be found afraid to speak out its mind 
freely when there are wrongs to be redressed or manifest 
abuses to be reprimanded."* 

With a true western spirit the editors next dilated 
upon the possibilities of the little town. 

"Calgary, which at the present time is creating so 
much interest throughout the whole North-West % Ontario 
and England, is located upon a beautiful stretch of 
bottom land about six miles in length and three miles 
wide, enclosed on the north by the Bow River in semi¬ 
circular form, and on the south by a range of hills from 
one hundred to one hundred and fifty feet in height. 

"It is divided into two parts by the Elbow River, 
which, at its confluence with the Bow, forms a number of 
beautiful islands, well wooded and admirably suited for a 
park. Both rivers are pure, clear and cold with pebbly 
beds and beaches, dotted with innumerable trees and cap¬ 
able of supplying water-power for an unlimited number of 
mills and factories, while on the north side of the Bow, 
another rangq of hills rises to about two hundred and • 
fifty feet from the bed of the River, and away to the 
west and south-west rise the Rockies in majestic grandeur, 
covered with everlasting snow plainly visible to the 
naked eye, as though they were only a few miles distant. 

"Calgary has long been acknowledged as the great 
central point of the extensive fertile strip along the 
Rockies, extending from the Blackfoot Reserve on the east 
to the mountains on the west, a distance of two hundred 
miles, and an extent from north to south of scarce less 
distance; but it will now assume a place of much more 
importance, and will become the greatest distributing 
point west of Winnipeg.^ 

As soon as the success of the paper seemed assured 
Braden secured advertisements from most of the early 
business men. I. G-. Baker Company advertised dry goods, 
harness, saddlery, hardware and agricultural implements. 

The Hudson 1 s Bay Company kept a first class assortment of 

1—Ibid, 




























- 56 - 


dry goods, groceries and hardware. G. C. King & Company 
of Calgary and Red Deer had just received a large consign¬ 
ment of pickles, jams, prepared soaps and potted meats 
from the house of Crosse 8c Blackwell, London, England. 
Tailoring was a specialty with Maclean 8c Thomas, who also 
dealt in drugs and stationery. I. S. Freeze sold Prairie 
Rose flour, eggs, butter, green apples and all general 
merchandise. Goods at low prices was the advertised motto 
of J, G. Van Wart & Bon. E. Costello, in his new store 
next to the post-office, sold ready made clothing, tin¬ 
ware, calfskin boots, felt boots and mocassins. S. Cos¬ 
tello advertised his furniture store next to the Royal 
Hotel and George Fraser his confectionery store just be¬ 
side the Herald office. G. E. Jacques styled himself the 
pioneer watchmaker and jeweler of the North-West while 
James C. Linton carried wallpaper, stationery, newspapers 
magazines and novels. The Calgary Bath House and Barber 
Shop was managed by Arnaud and Ogburn, while Cornelius 
J. Soule operated the Highland Studio, a photographic 
tent next door to Dr. Henderson*s office. Mr. Soule was 
also an architect and building superintendent. Dr. Hen¬ 
derson advertised his place as Medical Hall as he had a 
druggist business in connection with his practice. Mor¬ 
timer & Co. made Vienna bread and sold the Winnipeg Free 
Press, Bannerman 8c Co. kept the post office and also 






























































-57- 


carried a line of stationery. Major James Walker's mill 
stocked all kinds of timbers, doors, windows, and builddr's 
supplies. John Rivet, John McQuire and John Morrow oper¬ 
ated blacksmith shops, and J.D.White & Company advertised 
themselves as Plain & Artistic Sign & Showcard Writers. 1 

Now that the town had a newspaper to tell the out¬ 
side world of the many opportunities, and now that it had 
a railway to bring settlers in, the population increased 
rapidly and by the late fall between four and five hun¬ 
dred people had decided to make Calgary their new home. 

The town was situated east of the Elbow, in 
section 14, as Section 15, west of the river and north of 
the track, had been reserved by an order-in-council as a 
grazing ground for the police horses. The only buildings 
west of the Elbow, except the barracks, were south of the 
track. They were the Baker store, J.A.McKelvie*s store, 
the half-tent, half-board office of the Herald, the box 
car railway station, and the Roman Catholic mission. The 
latter was so far from town that it was found necessary 
to build a new church east of the Elbow. 

The town itself was a collection of log shacks, fr 
frame buildings and tents. Stretching north from the 
railway crossing in a curve following the Elbow were 
Beeker's legal office, the Hudson's Bay store with Chief 
Factor Hardisty in charge, Sandy MacDonald's livery barn. 


1—Herald 19£3 Aiiniv. Page 1. 














-58- 


E. E. King’s store, Chipman f s store, Tim Dunne’s Calgary 
House, which was the main hostel—a long low pine board 
structure with a water-trough and hitching-bar in front, 
then Oswald Bros,, and down the river Major Walker’s mill. 

In the cluster of buildings opposite King’s store there 
were Dr* Henderson’s drug store, the Idyll Hall, Jack 
Innes’ shack and corrall, the Royal Hotel, which had been 
built by James Reilly from four portable houses brought 
from Regina, Dr. F, J. Lindsay's office, George Murdock's 
shop, George Jacques' jewelry store, I. S. Freeze’s store, 

J. G. Van Wart’s grocery, George Frazer’s bakery. Graves', 
McKelvie’s and Adam’s grocery, Bain Brothers’ livery stable, 
Jack Ellis' restaurant and barber shop, and the residence 
of W. H. Cushing, carpenter, J. N. Muir, barrister and 
James Lougheed, barrister.^ 

Calgary was no longer the sleepy settlement of the 
year before, every man wh could saw wood and drive a nail 
was busy at it. In October, Major Walker advertised in 
Winnipeg papers for twenty additional carpenters, at from 
$3.00 to $3.50 a day. He had just received an order for 
a couple of carloads of timber to be used in the mines at 
Medicine Hat. His unseasoned lumber was selling at $ 50.00 
a thousand. The Hudson’s Bay employees were kept busy 
unloading flour and bacon for Edmonton; about one hundred 

and twenty carts went north each month and as the freight 
1--Herald 1923 Anniversary P.2. 













r 


r 


( 



r 




m 




r 


i 











-59- 


rate was three cents a pound, the freighters always had 
money. 1 This traffic greatly helped the ferryman, who 
transported all goods for the north, across the Bow, at 
about the site of the present Langevin Bridge. He charged 
$1.00 for each cart while a horse and rider was charged 
fifty cents, and each animal twenty-five cents. These 
rates were doubled after sunset.^ 

On Sunday very little work was done as it was the 
day of recreation; on one Sabbath in August a horse race, 
two foot races, a baseball game and two auction sales took 
place while the billiard halls and stores did a rushing 
business. The other holidays were also the occasion for 
those sporting events characteristic of a western town. 
Thanksgiving Bay was celebrated by a football match'be¬ 
tween the police and the citizens, James Lougheed being 
unpire and Major Walker referee. 3 November 17 was also 
a time of celebration as on that day the first white child 
was born in Calgary. Mr. and Mrs. W. M. Costello were the 
tapPW parents and their infant son, John Calgary, received 
two lots from the citizens as this was a custom in the 
towns along the C.P.R. Christmas Bay saw a broncho-break¬ 
ing competition on the land west of the Elbow and the 

cowboys also displayed their skill by dashing along, 

1- Log of Old Timer 1914 op cit 

2- -Barneby, op cit p.201. 

3- -Albertan 1909 Anniversary Page 3. 



























' M 














r 








. 










, 




























, 





_ 








-60- 


shooting their guns, and picking up their handkerchiefs 

on the full gallop. That evening there was a dance in the 

mess room of the Barracks, which was decorated with flags, 

bunting and evergreen. Two violins furnished the music 

and as there were few white women in the town, there were 

1 

many dusky lassies present. 

The fact that this new town, with the railway 

construction camps near-by, did not develop a spirit of 

lawlessness was entirely due to the splendid work of the 

police. They were the sole dispensers of justice; the 

police commandant was a Justice of the Peace, and from 

his conviction there was no appeal. 

The Scott Act made it illegal to bring liquor into 

the Territories, except for medicinal purposes, and then 

only on a permit from the Lieutenant-Governor. The police 

found it almost impossible to enforce this law as liquor, 

purchased at §4.00 a gallon in the East, could be sold in 

Calgary for §10.00 a bottle. Many householders, who were 

fortunate enough to possess permits, which entitled them 

to five gallons of whisky a year, legally imported it, 

but illegally sold it to their less fortunate fellow 

citizens. Liquor came into Calgary in eggs, in pickle and 

jam tins, and in cunning containers which bore the appear- 
2 

ance of Bibles. 


1- -3tirret, Mrs. C. Art. in Herald 1933, Anniversary. 

2- -MacInnis op cit p.105. 





« 


' 




























r 


, 
























-61- 


The attempts to enforce this law were particularly 
odious as they made the Force unpopular with many people. 

A notice which appeared on one occasion showed the at¬ 
titude which many in Calgary took on this subject: "A 
meeting will be held to protest against the late mean 
and despicable action taken by the police in subpoening 
respectable citizens to give evidence as whisky sneaks, thu 
interferring with the liberty of freeborn subjects, and as 
likely to intimidate good citizens from entering hotels. 
Everyone should attend, to protest against such a resur¬ 
rected tombstoned, iron-heeled law, to bear which is to 

1 

suffer worse than the slaves in Siberia." 

When not attacked from this quarter, the police 
were liable to equally vituperative remarks from the drys, 
who accused them of being too lenient in the enforcement 
of the law. 

Late in the fall, the police found great difficulty 

in securing evidence against many who, they were sure, 

were engaged in whisky running. Finally they came to 

suspect Constable Taylor of divulging their plans. One 

night a band of policemen ducked the suspected constable 

in the cold waters of the Bow; after this no more infor- 

2 

mation of police doings reached the outside world. 

Although the liquor question affected many of the 


1— Maclnnis op cit p.105 

2- -Kelly, op cit p.161. 








- 















. 




. 





* 






, 








, 



















... 
















































-62- 


oitizens, to many more it made little difference as they 
had come west to make an honest living, to build homes, 
and to rear families. In order to assist them in this, 
several churches had been established before the end of 
the year. 

Father Doucet, still in charge of the Mission of 
Our Lady of Peace, held services in the new church sit¬ 
uated east of the Elbow, just south of the railway. It 
was a modest wooden structure, twenty by forty-five feet. 

Rev. John MacDougall had held servics in Oalgary 
since 1875, but the Methodists were without a church, as 
the building erected in 1877, had been sold to Major Walker 
They felt that the growing town needed a resident minister 
so in the spring of the year, the Rev. James Turner, in 
response to their call, came overland from British Columbia 
Mr. Turner was a very active worker, and in July a new 
church was built east of the Elbow, of lumber brought 
from Brandon. 

In June the first Presbyterian service was held in 
the Baker store when Rev. Angus Robertson spoke to a con¬ 
gregation of thirty. After the first week, services were 
held in the hospital room of the barracks; later they were 
transferred to a tent east of the Elbow. In October, Knox 
Church was built on land donated by Captain John Stewart. 

The congregation was organized with Rev. A Robertson as mod¬ 
erator and Major J. Walker and Joseph McPherson as elders. 






















, 

■ 






£ 

* 

. 

« .. 












- 63 - 


In August, the Right Rev. John McLean, first 
Anglican Bishop of Saskatchewan, visited Calgary and held 
a few meetings in a small, tent just west of the Barracks. 
Seven Anglicans met in King*s store in October and drew 
up a letter to Rev. J. W. Tims at the Blackfoot Reserve, 
asking for regular services. The first meeting held by 
Mr. Tims was in the orderly room of the barracks on the 
first Sunday in November. The seats were planks placed on 
nailkegs and the organ, borrowed for the occasion, was 
transported to the Barracks in a wheel barrow. 1 

Thus the year rolled down on the little pioneer 
settlement nestled along the east bank of the Elbow. The 
ground on which the buildings and tents stood was held by 
squatter*s rights. Trains came in as the railway needed 
supplies. The steel was Just a few miles west of Calgary. 
There was no municipal organization and no civic improve¬ 
ments. The only streets were the trails which were cut 
by the wheels of the Red River carts, and by the feet of 
the horses of the police and cowboys. There were no bridges 
to cross the many streams, and there were few clergymen 
to point to the pioneers the narrow trail, which was not 




so well defined in the days of 1883. 


1— Herald, 1923 Anniv. Page 2. 

2— Ibid. 





















. 





. 









. • 








































. 





• 









~64 


1884—CALGARY MOVES 

The New Year opened with a bitter quarrel between 
the G.P.R. and most of the townspeople over the location 
of the townsite. Section 14, on which the town was sit¬ 
uated, had been homesteaded by Captain Denny in 1882 after 
he had left the police force. By 1883 it had passed into 
the hands of Captain Stewart and Colonel Irvine, although 
a Mr, Roselle had a claim on it. In that year the C.P.R. 
had tried to buy the section but when they failed to come 
to terms with these pioneer real estate operators, they 

I 

had the order-in-council concerning Section 15 cancelled, 
as by their charter, they had been given all the odd-num¬ 
bered sections along their lines in the north-west. The 
Company then located the railway station west of the Bow, 
and through the North-West Land Company began to sell lots 
in Section 15, which was being surveyed by Messrs. McVittie 
& Orr. Intending purchasers sent their names into the 
land agent and late in December, 1883, these persons drew 
numbered tickets for the order of choice of lots. John 
Glenn, the old-timer of Fish Creek, drew number one. 

Corner lots sold for $450.00, the others for $350.00, 

subject to a rebate of fifty per cent if buildings had 

2 

been erected and occupied by April 1, 1884. _ 

1— See page 57. 

2- -Herald Files Of 1883. 





















. 

( ■ 


« 










- 
















- 65 - 


The first building on the new townsite was that of 
Felix McHugh, who in February, 1884, built a log cabin 
on the north-west corner of Stephen Avenue (8th) and 
Osier Street (1st Fast). Mr. McHugh had, in May, 1883, 
settled a homestead south of the present Louise Bridge 
on which he had built a shack and stable, and had broken 
and fenced twenty acres. However, the CfR forced him to 
move when the surveyors found that he had squatted on an 
odd section. He then bought two twenty-five foot lots 
on' Stephen Avenue, and in October 1883 drove the logs, 
which he used in his cabin, from twenty miles up the Elbow.1 

When Mr. Bannerman was induced to move the post- 
office to the new townsite, by the offer of two free lots, 
and when the railway threatened to move the station far¬ 
ther west, the holders of lots in the Lenny Estate pro¬ 
tested vigorously. A public meeting was held in the 
Methodist church on January 7 at which Mr. Reilly was the 
main speaker. He recapitulated the difficulties which he 
and others had on arriving in town to secure building 
sites, and ended by advising the people to refrain from 
building on Section 15. Lrs. Henderson and Lindsay, 

Messrs. Moulton, Armour, Bower, Bredin, Braden, Martin, 
and Murdoch all voiced approval of his speech. g 

On January 23 the Land Agent for the Lenny Estate, 

Mr.J;K.Oswald, placed the f ollowing ad. in the Herald; 

1- -MaoRae, op cit p.548-9 ~ 

2— Herald, Jan 10, 1884. 











































- 66 - 


"Denny Estate — the Centre of Calgary City. All 
surrounding sections now under sub-division. Proposed 
railroad to enter Calgary by Nose creek Valley, junction 
with the C.P.R. on Walker's Claim. Public land grants; 
Calgary market, with hall and stores; head office. Ran¬ 
cher's Bank, capital $1,000,000.00; city hall square with 
five acres for public buildings; passenger and freight 
grounds; school and college reserve; Roman Catholic, 
Methodist, Presbyterian and Anglican Churches. A bridge 
will be built across the Bow on the line of King Street, 
connecting the trails from Edmonton and Macleod. 

The following newspaper notes indicated the evident 
popularity of the Denny Estate: 

TT Mr. Moberly, architect, left for Winnipeg, Thurs¬ 
day last. He will return in a week or two and open an of¬ 
fice on the Denny Estate. He had already taken orders for 
the new Market hall, the Rancher s Bank and residences 
for Colonel Macleod, H. Bleecker, 0. G. King, Dr. Hender¬ 
son, Major Dowling, Capt. Hughes, J. Brady, J. K. Os wald 
and Capt. Stewart. The Church of England has been donated 
lots for the erection of a church and manse. Major Walker 
has entered into an arrangement with Captain Stewart for 
the erection of stores and dwellings on unoccupied lots 
on the Denny Estate during the coming summer. Mr. Sparrow 
butcher, is now building an ice house and temporary shop 






■ 










- 67 - 


on the Denny Estate, until such times as the new market 

1 

place is erected.2 

Despite the activity of the promoters of the Denny 
Estate, West Oalgary soon outstripped its rivals as it had 
the station and the post-office. Most of the business men 
moved their buildings across <bn the ice during the winter 
or built new frame structures on the new town site. As. 
the police had not been officially notified of the cancel¬ 
lation of the order-in-council, they held up construction 
until the latter part of January, when the matter was 
cleared up. 

Most of the buildings were situated along Stephen 
Avenue east from McTavish Street (Centre). They were one- 
storey structures with straight fronts topped with large 
signs. They were either built right up to the street line 
or back a few yards with a hitching p&st in front. The 
Hudson*s Bay Company erected a one-storey frame store, 
thirty-five by one hundred feet, at the corner of Stephen 
Avenue and McTavish Street. The Royal Hotel was built 
diagonally across the intersection; it was three stories 
high and was the best hotel west of Winnipeg despite the 
fact that the upper portion was divided into male and 
female quarters by factory cotton partitions. East of 
these two buildings there were Linton's Book Store, (*. C. 

King’s store, I. G. Baker T s store, Rankin & Allen's store, 


1—Herald Jan. 23 , 1884. 






, ' 


















. 










I 





























1 

« 

. 

. 





1 










, 


' 









-68- 


Martin Bros., Grant & Rogers Hardware, Trott's Drag Store, 

Dunn’s & Sparrow’s Meat Market, The Dominion Land Office, 

and Boynton 1 s Hall* a large frame structure which had been 

erected by Captain Boynton, a retired army officer but 
1 

now a rancher, As the buildings were being erected, the 
streets were graded and wooden sidewalks were laid. 

As yet there was no traffic bridge between the two 
sections of the town. To cross the Elbow with a convey¬ 
ance necessitated fording the river about one hundred yards 
above the railway bridge. During the spring or fall this 
was likely to result in the driver getting a bath as the 
ice extended out from both banks, but being absent in the 
middle, it caused the wheels of the vehicle to sink sud¬ 
denly to a depth of three feet. A floating bridge, consis¬ 
ting of three or four logs chained together, was used by 
foot passengers. The Herald of April 2, contained the 
welcome news that the traffic bridge over the Elbow would 
be completed within a week, 

Calgary was now progressing very rapidly and from 
time to time the Herald wrote optimistically of this growth. 
In March, the Roselle claim to Section 14 was settled; 
this was the occasion for a long editorial, 

"The settlement of this claim removes the dispute 
as to whether Calgary will be situated on the east or 
west side of the Elbow. The town has received a good 


1—Herald 1923 Anniversary Page 5. 








' 











i 






























































- 










. 













-69- 


start on Section 15, bat we do not expect one section to 
be large enough to contain the future city. It requires 
very little foresight to predict that Calgary will be the 
largest city in the north-west. We already anticipate 
another Chicago, and can hear the sound of the busy mill 
and see, in our mind’s eye, the street cars plying their 
traffic from the east of Section 14 to the west of Section 
16, and from river to river in the opposite direction. 

"Our mining, ranching and farming interests , will 
make Calgary a desirable spot for the capitalist and 
business man. Our beautiful scenery, genial climate and 
peculiarly healthy atmosphere will make this a locality 
to which the invalid will cast his longing eye for health, 
which he has endeavoured to obtain elsewhere. 

Enthusiasm for Calgary ! s future was by no means 
confined to the editor of the Herald for in a speech befor 
the Royal Colonial Institute, in London, on April 8, 1884, 
Alexander Begg said: "In my opinion this place, owing to 
the vicinity of the great cattle ranches to the south and 
the fine agricultural land surrounding it, is destined to 
be one of the most important cities in the north-west. 
Altogether, I am inclined to place great faith in the 
future of Calgary. 

Building continued during the early summer. Mr. F 

Welsh, manager of the Winnipeg Telephone System, offered 

1— Herald, March 12, 1884. ~~ ~ 

2- -Morning Albertan, 1909. Anniversary p.8. 












■ 






; 




. 




























■ 





























-70- 


to establish telephone systems if he could obtain twenty 

1 

subscriptions at $70*00 a year. Nothing came of this 
proposition. Fathers Lacombe and Doucet erected a church 
and priest's residence on the section of land which they 
had homesteaded south of Notre Dame Avenue (17th). The 
building was fifty by thirty feet and was of the best logs 
although it was boarded on the outside. 

Because of the large quantities of pine shavings and 
the long dry grass, there was much danger of fire in the 
town. The Herald suggested that a two-inch pipe be laid 
from the Bow down Stephen Avenue and cisterns be dug at 
different places along the line of pipe. An engine would 
be necessary to pump the water. 

The Herald had occasion to criticize the for 

being ten days late with lumber, necessary for the con¬ 
struction of the many buildings, which had to be completed 
before .April 1, if their owners were to obtain the rebate 
on the purchase price of the lots. However, in April , 
it was able to write more favorably of the railway system. 

"At last the C.P.R. seem to be awakening to the 
importance of Galgary, and are putting forth their best 
energies to supply ample passenger and freight accommoda¬ 
tion for the number of travellers and large consignments 
of goods which will find their way to this growing metrop¬ 
olis. The passenger station, which is fast approaching 

completion, is a commodious, one storey building, twelbe 
1--Heraid, May 7, 1884. 















, 


































. 













-71* 


by sixty feet; it is surrounded by a large platform. The 
freight and ooal sheds, which will be in keeping with the 
requirements of the place are to be placed on the south 
side of the track.” 1 2 

Even while the townsite fight was raging, it was 
felt that Calgary should have some sort of civic government 
and so on January 8, 1884, a meeting was held at which it 
was decided that the election of a civic committee or in¬ 
formal council of seven should take place on January 14. 

The following candidates were nominated: Messrs. Swan, 
Reilly, Lindsay, Armour, Breden, Murdoch, Tennant, Bowen, 
Butler, Hard isty, Thomas, Lougheed, Tan Wart, King, Moultcn, 
Stewart, Gushing, Ramsay, Oswald, Walker, Henderson, 

Clarke and Eraser. The voting took place in Wright & 
Latimer 1 s Hall, and the following were elected: Major 
Walker, G. C. King, George Murdoch, Captain Stewart, Dr. 

Henderson, Thos. Swan and G. D. Moulton, Major Walker 

2 

having headed the poll was appointed chairman. 

The first duty of the council was to welcome Mr. 
Lewdney, now Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Ter¬ 
ritories, to Calgary. 'When Mr. Lewdney arrived on Jan. 24, 
he was interviewed by the committee who drew his attention 
to the following matters: bridges, incorporation as a town, 
schools, and representation in the North-West Council. 

Mr. Lewdney told the committee that, if they wanted 


1— Herald, April 15, 1884. 

2- -Al’bertan 1909 Anniversary. Page 2 











, 















































72- 


inoorporation, it was only necessary to take a census, and 
if there were more than three hundred adult males in Calgary 
incorporation would be granted on petition of two-thirds 
of the population. The school question rested with them¬ 
selves; if they saw fit to engage a teacher at a salary not 
exceeding $600.00, the North-West Council would pay half 
the salary, providing the average attendance was fifteen. 
Concerning representation, he explained that Calgary would 
soon be made an electoral division, but as the Dominion 
Government was likely to make some changes in the laws 
regarding the territories, he considered it wiser not to 
issue the proclamation at once.**- 

Soon after this, a committee was appointed to take 
the census, and it was found that the population of Calgary 
was four hundred and twenty-eight. The question of fire 
protection was fully discussed at a meeting held on March 12 
and a man was engaged to plow furrows around all the 
buildings as a protection against fire. 

The few expenses, which had been incurred to date, 
had been defrayed by public subscription, but when the 
Hudson's Bay Company presented a bill of $17.40 for pow¬ 
der and flannel used in discharging the mid-day gun, the 
council decided to redouble its efforts to sefiure incor¬ 
poration so that taxes could be levied in the usual way.^ 

1- -Herald, 1923 Anniversary. Page 5. 

2- -Herald, 1933 " " 21, 




« 












. 


, 
















* c a'U .. - 

, ‘ " 

































■ 

, 

, 










-73- 


In due course the committee reported that the sum 
of $100.00 would be required to defray the cost of a 
charter. This money was subscribed within a few minutes, 
and it was forwarded to Lieutenant-Governor Dewdney with 
all the necessary petitions, census returns and other doc¬ 
uments. The committee expected to receive the order of 
incorporation by the return mail but when a letter was 
finally received from Ottawa, it was found that the town 
limits as outlined by the committee did not conform with 
the Dominion Government survey reports. This necessitated 
a new survey. 

At a meeting on May 13, it was decided to adopt 
railway time, and the gunner was ordered to report to the 
G.P.R. station every day for the official time. It was 
at this meeting that a committee was appointed to survey 
sites for a town hall and a fire hall so that work could be 
begun with as soon as the letters of incorporation were 
received. ^ 

As there were now quite a number of children in 
Galgary, the public-spirited Major Walker called a meeting 
to he held in Wright Sc Latimer’s Hall for the purpose of 
discussing the establishment of a public school. At this 
meeting it was decided to appoint Messrs. Douglas, McNeil 
and Gostello as a committee to canvas for contributions, 
to procure a suitable room and to engage a teacher. Within 


1--Herald, 1933. Anniversary. Page 22. 













, 


























- 




























-74- 


a short time $125.00 was subscribed. A building near the 
barracks was obtained and on Monday, February 18, seventeen 
children were present to meet the new teacher, Mr. W. Cos¬ 
tello. School was held regularly until the latter part of 
April when a public examination took place at which Mr. 
Armour presented prizes to : L. Mickle, H. Moulton, Kate 
Douglas, Mable Haney, M. Costello, Louis McNeill, Samuel 
McNeill, Thomas McNeill and W. Costello. School was then 
dismissed for the summer as all the money had been used and 
no more was forthcoming.^ 

Early in June news reached the town that it had 
been given representation in the North-West Council. This 
was the first electoral district to be established in the 
district of Alberta as at that time only six districts, 
all in Saskatchewan, sent representatives to the Council. 

Mr. T. A. Braden was appointed returning officer, 
and he received the names of J. K. Oswald, J. D. Geddes 
and A. Begg as candidates. Their political platforms 
dealt with the problems of a pioneer district: restric¬ 
tion of prairie fires, many of which had been started by 
C.P.R. locomotives, proper railway crossings at all the 
principal settled points, a bridge across the Bov/ at 
Calgary, the opening-Hp of railway lands to settlement, 
the evils of the lease system, which sacrificed the 
intereste of the potential settler to those of the large 


1--Herald, 1923 


Anniversary. Page 6. 












- 75 - 


cattleman, the limits of cattle and 3heep grazing, the 
need for an alteration in the mining laws, the immediate 
sale of school lands, the permit system of obtaining li¬ 
quor, representation in the House of Commons, and the 
placing of eastern office seekers in the Government pos¬ 
it ions which should have been given to westerners.^ 

The election was held on July, and as the friends 
of each cnadidate used every means to secure the return of 
their man, the contest was very spirited. Announcements 
regarding the voting were made from time to time as the 
poll was an open one* In Calgary Mr. OsYrald headed the 
list throughout the entire day, and in the evening, out of 
the one hundred and thirty-two votes polled, he had a 
majority of twenty-eight. However, Mr. Geddes had received 

a sufficient majority at Fish, Pine and Sheep Greeks, and 

P 

at High River to ensure his election. The successful 
candidate received the congratulations of his supporters 
at Clarke & Beaudoin's Saloon. Speeches were made by 
Messrs. Geddes, Peterson and Lougheed, and a triumphant 
procession bearing burning brooms paraded the town. Thus 
ended the first election in Calgary. 

The political campaign brought to a climax the 
bitter feud between the Herald and its rival the Nor-#ester, 
edited by G. B. Elliott. The Herald had supported Mr. 

Oswald, but Mr. Geddes had been given far more substantia l 

1— Herald, June 26, 1884. 

2— Herald, July 3, 1884. 

















. 
























. 




. 


■ 

•Hi'. :■ I i SKHb I 














- 76 - 


backing by Elliott, who could write much better than 
either Braden or Armour.' 1 ' After the election the editors 
of the Herald had promised that they would pay no more 
attention to the Nor-Taster, but it was found necessary 
to attack the fighting Elliott again. 

"Let us whisper a word in your ear, Mr, Nor-Wester. 
We conduct our business on business principles. We pay 
our hands every Saturday night. We do not get credit from 
the stores and compel the proprietors to take pay in print¬ 
ing. We do not make the boast that the government will 
see us through. 

"Henceforth, it is our intention to allow the 
wailings and whinings of the Nor'-Wester to die upon the 
air. Qur paper is needed in the community. We have no 
time for scanning the dictionary for spiteful epithets. 

We cannot take up space by inserting answers to the Nor'- 
Wester’s remarks, nor soil our pen with the froth and scum 
of newspaper talk. Adieu, Nor -Wester, Adieu. 

However, the feud did not end w■th this, but was continued 
for several years until the Nor --Wester disappeared from 
the field. 

Although the business of Calgary had grown to con¬ 
siderable proportions, it was handicapped by lack of 
banking facilities as the much-advertised Rancher's Bank 
had not materialized. As no bank seemed anxious to es¬ 
tablish a branch in Calgary, the citizens sent a long 
letter to the Bank of Hamilton in which the following 
facts were set forith: 

"There are about 2,000 residents in Calgary and 
district, Calgary is the shipping and supply point for 
the Edmonton and Red Beer districts on the north; the 
mining district to the west and the Eort Macleod district 
on the south. The finest agricultural, grazing and min¬ 
eral lands in the northwest are near at hand. The town 
only commenced its existence in July of last year, and 

1- -Heraid, 1923 Anniversary. Page 10. " ~~ 

2- -Ibid. Page 2. 

















« • 








- 77 - 


daring this time, its trade has been more than half a mil¬ 
lion dollars, and it presents every evidence of increasing 
every year in the future. A very desirable class of set¬ 
tlers are coming into this district; men with capital, who 
intend to go into mixed farming which has already proved a 
decided success here. There is a large business to be 
done in English exchange. The ranchers would do all their 
financing at this point if a bank: were established here. 

The value of their cattle is about $2,000,000.00 and is 
increasing rapidly each year as the ranches are only 
partly stocked. The sales this year will be about $300,000; 
from one to two hundred thousand dollars is spent yearly 
in handling and caring for the cattle on the ranches. The 
expenses of the police at this point are about $30,000 
annually; the Indians Department*s outlay is double that 
sum. 


The Bank of Hamilton failed to take advantage of 
the large and profitable business offered by Galgary, but 
two private banks were soon established; Le June, Smith*& 
Company of Regina and Lafferty & Moore. Dr. Lafferty 
lived in Galgary, while Mr. Moore resided in Ireland. 

These banks were absorbed by the eastern banks when the 

p 

latter opened branches in Galgary the next year. 

Although ranching was by far the more important 
industry, several farmers had settled in the district. In 
the issue of April 2, 1884, the Herald editor gave an 
account of a recent trip south to Sheep Greek, the pres¬ 
ent Okotoks. 

"We passed through a lovely country dotted with 
settler*s houses, and showing signs of spring improvements. 
Here and there we noticed men plowing and were informed 
that some had already begun seeding. We passed the farms 

of Messrs. Glenn, Shaw, Mclnnes, Smith, Pratt, Robb, 

1— Herald Anniversary, T923 Page 1. 

2— Ibid. 








■ 


. 













■ 














. 































- 78 - 


McDonald and Carroll." 

Immediately to the we3t of Calgary at Shaganappi 
Point, Messrs. Lawrey and MoAalay had farms where beans, 
sweet corn, pumpkins, squash, tomatoes, radish, lettuce, 
cress and cucumbers were grown.-*- 

The C.P.R. was anxious that the agricultural 
possibilities of the district should be known in the east 
so in October, 1883, the railway company sent samples of 
wheat, barley, oats, potatoes, cabbage, parsnips, turnips, 
carrots, and beets from the farms of Messrs. Glenn, Vo~- 
tier and Livingstone, to the Boston Exposition. 

By the summer of 1884 the number of farmers around 
Calgary had grown to such an extent that a meeting was 
held in Boynton^ Hall on August 16, for the purpose of 
organizing an agricultural society. Mr. Geddes stated 
that about §200.00 of the agricultural grant from the 
.North-West Council would be appropriated if the society 
?/ere organized. A committee was named to take prelimin¬ 
ary steps towards towards the formation of a society. 

At the meeting held on the following Friday, some fifty 
persons applied for membership, from whom the following 
officials were elected; president, Augustus Carney (who 
had a homestead on land which is now the Union Cemetery); 
Vice-President$, J.L.Bowen, John Glenn; Secretary, J. G. 

Fitzgerald; Treasurer, T. B. Braden; Directors, James 

1— Herald, July 9, 1884. . ~ ~ 

2— Log of Old Timer, 1914. 














, 










- 79 - 


Reilly, Chas. Geddes, Leo Gaetz, George Murdoch, Sam 
Livingstone, Jas. Yotier and Joseph Butlin and Messrs. 

Ring and Robb. 1 

One of the first acts of the Society was to vote 
$50.00 to be expended on a pamphlet for free distribution 
in the East. The first part of this bulleting dealt with 
the scenery of the country, "the eye is gladdened by hill 
and dale, by verdant slopes and grassy meadows, by tree 
and foliage, by the crystal waters of mountain rivers 
in their tortuous windings, and by the cloud pierced, 
snow-capped Rocky Mountains, as they girdle the western 
horizon. n 

An article on the minerals of Alberta, opened with 
the claim that "The district of Alberta is undoubtedly 
destined to rank as one of the richest mineral districts 
in the Dominion. It is already known to contain enormous 
beds of coal of the best quality, immense deposits of 
petroleum, and copper ore in abundance." After dilating 
on the coal resources, the writer told of the copper ore 
discovered near the Bow River, about a hundred miles west 
of Calgary, of which specimens assayed sixty per cent 
copper and $29.00 per ton in gold. Galena, silver and 
iron were also mentioned. 

The pamphlet went on to warn workers that Ihe labor 
market was overstocked at present, and that those coming 

should be prepared to take up land, and go into farming. 

1-—Calgary Agricultural Society's Bulletin, 1926. 























< ' 











- 80 - 


There ware included letters from Mr, Molnnes of Pine 
Creek, from James Votier, S. W. Shaw, A. F. Lambert, A. 
Winterbottom, C. Russell, G. Boltall, all of Fish Creek, 
and from John Livingstone and J. D. Geddes of Calgary. 
Other items dealt With the various forms of stock raising 
and there was a short note from Rev. J. Dyke, testifying 
to the truth of the statements made by the settlers.^ 

This pamphlet was circulated widely in the Fast, and 
perhaps influenced the stream of people which began to 
come into the district the next year. 

The summer of 1884 was one of the wettest on 
record, and Calgary suffered much from high water. A 
great flood swept across the flats in the spring, doing 
considerable damage to the gardens and low-lying areas. 

The Bo?/ River burst its banks and flowed do?/n Notre Dame 
(17th) Avenue, entering the Elbow at about the point where 
that avenue now ends at the river bank. From early June 
until the middle of July heavy sho?/ers fell almost every 
day. On July 15 a steady downpour started and continued 
for forty-two hours. The ferry across the Bow was ren¬ 
dered useless. On the 17th the supports of the centre 
span of the railway bridge over the Elbow gave way, 
leaving the ties and rails hanging in mid-air. This was 
repaired as soon as possible. In the meantime the mail 

and passengers were transferred acr oss the Stephen Avenue 
1—Calgary Daily Herald, 1922. Article No. 85. 













, 

. 


. 




■ 




O' 




* 

■ 



. 


, / 


• 







. 










e 
















. 


* 












- 81 - 


traffic bridge until it was rendered useless by the bat¬ 
tering of logs, which had been swept down from a pile on 
the banks of the Elbow. The Baker Company lost 1,500 logs, 
and the C.P.R. had ten or twelve bridges, to the west, 
washed out. Many cattle were drowned and numerous set¬ 
tlers and cowmen risked their lives in hazardous fords.^ 

Calgary entertained two distinguished visitors 
during the autumn of 1884. On August 27, Honorable Alex¬ 
ander Mackenzie, the leader of the Liberal Party and former 
prime minister of Canada, arrived. He was hurried off to 
view the farms of Messrs. Livingstone, Vo tier and Glenn; 
all of which had splendid crops. That evening a banquet 
was held, at which about fifty of Calgary*s leading cit¬ 
izens were present. Mr. Mackenzie in his speech stated 
that he was sorry that the Territories had no representa¬ 
tion in the Dominion Parliament. He was surprised to find 
in this country such crops as he had seen, after all the 
tales of excessive drough, summer frosts, and snows in the 
Territories, which had been told in Ontario. On the land 
question, he intended to work for the rights and liberties 
of the small settler in opposition to the domination ex¬ 
ercised by the large ranchers. He again thanked those 
present, and said he could endeavor to secure representa¬ 
tion for the Territories. 

On September 10, Calgary was called upon once 


1- -Herald, July 25, 1884. 

2— Herald, Aug. 28, 1884. 














■ ;£>« i 





















< 











4 













- 82 - 


again to extend its hospitality, this time to Sir Hector 
Langevin, Minister of Public Works in the cabinet of Sir 
John A. Macdonald. The citizens were not at all adverse 
to entertaining these influential Easterners as, upon 
every occasion, the need for some public improvement was 
impressed upon the visitor. 

The special train, containing a deputation which 
had gone to Gleichen to meet the honorable gentlemen, steam¬ 
ed into the station about ten o T clock. Shortly after his 
arrival Sir Hector visited the police barracks, luring 
the day a petition was presented, requesting that a bridge 
be built across the Bo-w and that public buildings be 
erected. 

9 

Owing to the almost incessant rain, the committee 
v/as unable to make the visit as interesting as it might 
have been, but the banquet in the evening convinced Sir 
Hector of the capabilities of the citizens to make his 
visit a most enjoyable one. At the head of the festive 
board sat Mayor Walker, on his right the guest of the 
evening. Rev. Father Lacombe, Ohief Factor Hardisty and 
Sheriff Ghapleau. On the chairman’s left were Colonel 
Macleod, Mr. Geddes, Mr. King and the Protestant clergy¬ 
men of the town. 

Sir Hector told his audience that he had come in 
place of Sir John A. Macdonald, and he wished to do the 










r $ t lovvrv Council - 155 *t. 











- 83 - 


best he could for the people of the West. He predicted 
a bright future for Calgary and the district of Alberta, 
and though the time would come when they must have re¬ 
presentation in the Dominion house, the district was not 
ready to assume the cost of establishment as a province, 
and thus be entitled to representation. He concluded 
his speech by referring to the class of men who had set¬ 
tled in the Territories and said he expected they would 
help make Canada one of the greatest powers of the world.1 
In November the news of incorporation reached 
Calgary. The town was to have an area of 1,660 acres in 
Sections 14, 15 and 16, which took in most of the ter¬ 
ritory between the Bow and railroad. The land south of 
the railway which Fathers Lacombe and Doucet had filed 
upon, remained apart from the town, 

Calgary now required a mayor and official council 
so on November £6 nominations took place. The election 
was held a week' later at which Geo. Murdoch defeated his 
rival, Mr, Redpath, for the position.of mayor, and Messrs. 
Hogg, Lindsay, Millward and Clarke were elected to the 
Council, The announcement of the result of the voting 
was greeted with the firing of a small cannon on the lot 
adjoining Mr. Murdoch 1 s house, followed by a fusilade of 
small arms from the neighboring lots. That night a torch¬ 
light procession was held in which the new mayor was 


1——Herald, Sept. 12, 1884. 


















, 











































* 

- 

' 

c « 





















. 









-84- 

carried about the town on the shoulders of his loyal 
supporters* 

Mr. T. T. A. Boys was selected for town clerk, 
the deciding vote being cast by a councillor who said that 
he had just read Mr* Boy's latest poetic effort "The 
Riders of the Plains" and therefore he thought that Mr. 
Boys should make a first class town clerk. 

The council soon became tired of meeting in sal¬ 
oons, hotel rooms and stores, and a committee was appoint¬ 
ed to secure suitable quarters. After Christmas a room in 
the Nar West Hotel was rented until a town hall could 
be built. 

The first bylaw passed by the council was on 
December 17; it provided for the purchase of fire equip¬ 
ment and the erection of a fire hall when the finances 
of the town permitted. 

At the meeting on New Year’s Sve the following 
officers were appointed--Henry Bleeker, town solicitor; 

C. Sparrow, treasurer; Spencer Douglas, tax collector; 

Jack Campbell, bailiff and assessor; Jack Ingham, town 
constable.1 

The citizens held several meetings during the 
winter at which the Dominion Government was asked for a 
fair and just representation of the North-West Territories 

in the Dominion House, for more stipendiary magistrates, 


1--Herald, Anniversary, 1933. Page 6. 




. 



r 










■ 

. ■ « . 





















-85- 


that all oivil power should be taken from the police and 


that a court of appeal, a court house and Jail, and a 

1 


new bridge should be granted to Calgary. 

In December, Mr. H. S. Cayley became editor of the 
Herald. He had arrived in Alberta the previous spring, 
and had gone through to Silver City to start a legal 
practice. The slump in mining had caused him to come to 
Calgary where he returned to the profession he had follow¬ 


ed in New York and Eastern Canada. He nobly took up the 

2 


Herald's feud with the Nor -^Wester. 

By the end of 1884, Calgary had a population of 
well over a thousand. Business was flourishing as the 
depression of 1885 had not set in. The district between 
McIntyre (7th) and Atlantic (9th) Avenues was well built 
up. The buildings were all of frame construction, none 
were painted but many had their weather-beaten sides 
covered with black tar paper. 

The churches had been very active throughout the 
year. During the spring, Mr. Tims conducted Anglican ser¬ 
vices in the barracks. On Easter morning there were 
eighty persons present and after the service, the Anglicans 
chose a committee to obtain a building site and to solicit 
subscriptions for a church. The Rev. E. Paske Smith, who 
arrived from Oxford, England, became the first resident 
minister. He held his first service on May 27, in Boyn¬ 
ton's Hall. The Methodisjt church had been moved from 
1 A-I¥ertan, 1909. Anniver. p. 4 . 2-- H eraia. i9r.o.. rir .n. 2„ 













* 












, 




. 









r 








' 
















. 

















. 













- 

. 












-86- 


East Calgary to a location between the main part of the 
town and the barracks. Later in the year, a larger frame 
building was erected on McIntyre Avenue just east of Mc- 
Tavish Street. Mr. Turner was still the minister. Fathers 
Lacombe and Doucet held their services in the new church, 
situated about where the Sacred Heart Convent now stands. 
The Presbyterians had moved their church to the corner of 
McIntyre Avenue and McTavish Street. Mr. Robertson was 
still in charge. A Union Sunday school was held in the 
Methodist Church until fall when the Presbyterians started 
a Sunday school with Alexander Allen as superintendent. 1 

The members of the police force were required to 
attend church and as the police in Calgary no?/ numbered 
sixty-three, they added very materially to the attendance 
of the various services. They made a fine sight as their 
dress uniforms consisted of white helmets, red tunics, tan 
breeches with gold stripes, white gauntlets, cavalry 
boots, cavalry cloaks and capes. 

Calgary considered itself quite a civilized town 
but it was not so to Christopher Crayon of England who 
visited it in October: 

T, I am writing from Calgary, a little but growing 
collection of huts and wooden houses. It is a gay place, 
and just now is unusually so as there is a celebration 
with athletic events and a ball. We have a Chinese cook; 


1--Herald Files, 1884. 






* 







* 
























, 

. 

. 

. ■ ■■ " , 

; 

' 









< 

* 

» 


















- 87 - 


our dining room is a very dark shed having a canvas on one 
side and unpainted boards on the other. Few houses are 
painted, Many of them have been brought all the way from 
Ontario which perhaps accounts for their smallnes. They 
chiefly consist of two rooms, one a shop and the other a 
sitting or bed room. The larger number have been erected 
during the past few months. As to my companions, they are 
young and vigorous and usually use language that would not 
be tolerated in polite society. Their talk is chiefly of 
horses and bets. They ride recklessly up and down the 
streets, and it would not break their hearts if they 
knocked a fellow down; or they drive light wagons creat¬ 
ing a most overwhelming dust as they rush by." 1 

In the last issue of the Herald for the year, the 
Editor, now that Calgary had become the greatest commer¬ 
cial centre west of Winnipeg, took a retrospective glance 
over the past two years, and peered into the future: 

"Two years ago Calgary consisted of two stores, 
the old fort of the mounted police and a few log houses. 

The gay monotony of city life was unknown, and the re¬ 
finements arising from the visits of the pale face ladies 
were few indeed. Two members of the police force were in 
charge of the barracks but their duties were light. The 
turn-turn of the medicine man T s drum or the lively notes of 
the half-breed*s fiddle were the only musical sounds to 
be heard. 

"There is a change. With it have come joys and 
sorrows. The free and easy life of the old frontiersman 
has departed. Instead of the long procession of half- 
breed carts or of ox-teams dragging their weary feet amid 
a profusion of oaths and western slang, the polite demeanor 


1—Herald, Letter, Sept. 10, 1925. 














« 

. 

a • •= 



















« 





























1 




’ 










* 

















- 88 - 


of the Pullman oar porter and the lightning speed of the 
T fire-wagons T is bequeathed to us. The musical talent 
of our city has increased both in quantity and quality, 

"Our church was the one silent monitor, regarding 
the morals of the Protestant community. An occasional 
service was held in one of the stores, while the wants of 
the Roman Catholic portion of the population were supplied 
by the priests who lived at the mission near town. Our 
religious interests are now well attended to, and judging 
from the progressive spirit manifest by the clergy and 
laity belonging to the several denominations, there are 
bright hopes of abundant success. The medical and legal 
professions are well represented. Two years ago not a 
single member of either was to be found. 

"Calgary is but in its infancy, only laying aside 
its swaddling clothes. The growth of the past year is 
full of encouragement. If taken hold of with a true spirit 
of enterprise, the development of the future will amply re¬ 
pay the devotion and energy expended on all the public 
interests of the town." 1 


1—Herald, Pec. 23, 1884. 












- 89 - 


1885—THE REBELLION YEAR 

The Herald, always to the fore in matters that would 
advance the interests of the town, now began to work for 
a public school. In 1884, the Legislative Assembly of the 
Territories had passed an ordinance providing for the 
erection of school districts in those communities in which 
ten children, between the ages of five and twenty years, 
could be found. Galgary had many times that number and on 
January 8 the Herald informed the towns-people that "the 
school meeting called for to-night, to consider the advis¬ 
ability of petitioning the Lieutenant-Governor for the 
erection of a school district, should be largely attended. 
The Galgary school dismissed before Ghristmas has not yet 
assembled. For the eleven months of its existence the 
school has been supported by the private munificence of 
Messrs. Freeze, McNeill and Douglas. There is yet a sum of 
$50.00 to be made up and it is hoped that the meeting will 
subscribe that sum on the spot. Mr. Spencer Douglas has 
had fifty pupils for the past year so it would be advisable 
to procure a second teacher." 

This meeting voted in favor of petitioning the 
Lieutenant-Governor for a school district which resulted in 

the Galgary Protestant School District No. 19 being es¬ 
tablished on March 1885. Stephen N. Jarrett, J. A. 










. 


'' (t<) : tO • 'X 

, 


















' 



' 




■ 






. 


' 

























- 90 - 


Lougheed, and C. W. Peterson were elected trustees and on 
April 16 they held their first meeting. Mr. Spencer 
Douglas was hired at a salary of $60.00 a month, and the 
building formerly used.as the private school was rented at 
$30.00 a month. The school assessment was fixed at four 
mills on the dollar. 

The school continued until July 10 when it was 
dismissed for the summer vacation. As Mr. Douglas had at 
this time seventy pupils. Miss Oreir was engaged at $200.00 
a year for the fall term, which began on August 10. By 
October 1, the school attendance had increased so greatly 
that a third teacher. Miss Rose Watson, was hired at $25.00 
a month,^ 

In addition to the public school, a Roman Catholic 
school had been operating since spring. In March, several 
Roman Catholic nuns had been driven from Prince Albert and 
St, Laurent by the rebellion. They came to Calgary, and, 
shortly after, started giving instruction in a small wooden 
building just east of the present site of the Sacred Heart 
Convent, 

On March 18, news of the Second Riel or Saskatchewan 
Rebellion reached Calgary, and the Herald put out a special 
edition, giving the despatch in full: 

TT Prince Albert--Riel has openly defied the Queen 1 s 
authority. He claims that the half-breeds and Indians 

are under his complete control, and that they will fight 
1—Outline of Calgary Schools--Pub. by Calgary School B'd 


b., 1935. 











. 













„ 

« 

■ 










* 




























' 

, 


# 




. 













- 91 - 


for their rights. The white settlers are alarmed. A 
meeting was held at Prince Albert today, at which five 
hundred men were present. They state their willingness 
to enroll against Riel if the government will find them 
arms and ammunition..” 

This rising of the Indians and half-breeds along 
the North Saskatchewan was the result of many grievances. 
With the rapid disappearance of the buffalo, the half-breeds 
gave up their nomadic life and were content to settle down. 
Most of them lived along the valley of the broad, spread¬ 
ing Saskatchewan, and in laying out their farms, they 
placed themselves on pieces of land only a few chains wide 
at the water front, but stretching back some two miles. 

The new system of square sections, which was being intro¬ 
duced by the Nominion surveyors, would do away with the 
method they were accustomed to. It stirred up their 
bitter resentment which wqs increased when they saw white 
settlers coming in, selecting the finest sites, yet of¬ 
fering no explanations as to their place in the new order 
of things. The old order was about to change, and they 
had no assurance of what the new might mean. 1 

At that time Louis Biel, who had led the Red River 
Rebellion of 1870, was employed as a teacher in St. Peters 
Mission of the Jesuit Fathers in Montana. In June, 1884, 
a delegation composed of Gabriel Dumont, T. Isbister, 

Moise Ouellette, and Mr. Dumas went to Montana to invite 

1—Herald, Anniversary, 1923. Page 7. ” "—— 






* 


■ 












* 

















, 




' 

V 

, 

, 













■ 








« •' . 












-92- 


Riel to become their leader in their efforts to secure what 
they considered their rights. After due deliberation, 

Riel decided to return with them. He drew up a Bill of 
Rights and forwarded it to Ottawa, but it received no 
attention. To treat this people with contempt, placed in 
the hands of Riel a weapon, which he used with deadly ef¬ 
fect among his excitable compatriots. 1 

After December he no longer spoke of constitution¬ 
al methods, but began to stir up his followers to armed 
action. On March 28, the first skirmish took place at 
Duck Lake, south of Prince Albert. The police were then 
the only armed force in the west and as it would take 
some time to bring troops from the Bast, all the available 
policemen were ordered to the scene of "trouble. 

Fifty-five were sent from Calgary to Regina, leav¬ 
ing only seven men under Inspector Dowling to man the post. 
This alarmed the citizens of Calgary as there were about 
2,000 Blackfeet, 400 Sarcees and 600 Stonies in the dis¬ 
trict and it was known that these tribes were receiving 
emmissaries from Riel. 

A meeting of the citizens was held in the Masonic 
Hall on March 27 to consider precautionary steps for 
mutual protection throughout the district. Ranchers had 
been particularly requested to attend. General Strange, 
a retired British army officer, at that time manager of 


1—MacRae, op cit Page 401. 












. 










e 




, 


, 



« 














* 














r 



















■ 

-l 


- 
















-93- 


of the Military Colonization Ranoh at Gleichen, addressed 
the meeting. He spoke of the present emergency and of 
the necessity of forming a volunteer corps. He was in 
favor of mounted infantry with cavalry equipment. He 
referred to his own service in the British Army for 
twenty-five yeafs, and said that he was still ready with 
his services if they were required. The meeting decided 
to form a mounted corps, hut it was also arranged that 
those, who wished to form a company of infantry, could 
do so." 5 " 

The Canadian Government looked to General Strange 
to take charge of the forces raised in the Calgary dis¬ 
trict, and in April, Major-General Middleton authorized 

him to assume command of all the troops between Macleod, 

2 

Calgary and Edmonton. 

Strange made Calgary his headquarters where he 
started recruiting. At first, the mayor and others tried 
to prevent the enrolment of men, telling them that they 
would he forced to march away while the town, left unprot¬ 
ected, would he plundered and burned by the Indians. 
Strange held a public meeting, explained the situation and 
the western men began to enrol freely. The majority were 
cowboys out of work, many of whom had been compelled to 
sell their horses and saddles during the winter. Strange 

was implored by some of the citizens not to enlist these 

1— Herald, March 30, 1885. ~~ ~ 

2— Gunner Jingo’s Jubilee, Gen. T. Bland Strange, John 
■- MacQueen, London, 1896. r. 41 4. 





















I , 






■ 














■ 

. 


* 






, 










-94- 


men as they would never submit to discipline. 

Father Lacombe had been busy among the Blackfeet 
and his efforts were crowned with success for on April 11, 

Chief Crowfoot wired Sir John A. Macdonald, Premier of 

Canada: 

"We are determined to remain loyal to the Queen. 

Our young men will work on their reserve and will raise 
all the crops we can; we hope that the government will 
help us sell what we cannot use. 

"Continued reports are brought to us, and we do 
not know what to believe, but now that we have seen the 
Governor and heard him speak, we will close our ears, and 
only listen to and believe what is told us by him. 

"Should any Indians come to our reserves and ask 
us to join them in war, we will send them away. I have 
sent messengers to the Bloods and Piegans, who belong to 
our treaty, and have told them what we intend to do about 
the trouble.”^ 

Because of this expression of loyalty, the Herald 

. m 

assured its readers that there w^s little danger: 

"It may be said that Calgary is not especially 
excited' over the half-breed trouble. It is true that the 
Edmonton insurgents might make a raid south and plunder the 
Hudson's Bay store here, but the country is too open about 
this point for safety; there is not enough bush or timber 
1*—Ibid p.408. 

£—Macinnes, op cit Page 168. 













, 
















- 


. 













-95- 


to hide in, and a chase over the foothills is not exactly 
what Riel may be supposed to calculate on." 1 

Nevertheless, precautions were taken and the mayor 
instructed Chief Constable Ingraham to warn the shop¬ 
keepers against selling ammunition to the Indians. Some 
Blackfeet subsequently came to town and tried to secure 
cartridges, but were in every case refused. A home guard 
was enrolled under Major Walker to protect the town. He 
divided his one hundred and six men into a company of in¬ 
fantry and one of mounted troops, and put them through 
military drills and parades. 

At this time, a hoax was played upon the citizens— 
a cowboy rode in from Langdon with the news that the 
Blackfeet were headed toward Calgary. In ten minutes the 
home guard was lined up in front of Boynton Hall ready for 
action. The mounted troops were sent out as a skirmishing 
party, and the foot soldiers were placed at strategic 
positions aJ.ong the Bow. Every light in town was put out 
and the women folk gathered in Boynton Hall, which was to 
be used as a temporary hospital* For hours the Calgary 
men lay in narrow, damp, surface trenches along the river.. 
When dawn came the troops straggled back to town to learn 
the cause of their night of discomfort and uneasiness.^ 

The real danger from the Indians was along the 
North Saskatchewan where the Crees were in a rebellious 
1—Herald, April 14, 1885. 

E—Smart*s Reminiscences, Pub. in Calgary B. Herald,1951-4 




, 















- 


, • 





















r 









. 


* 




. 








. 

. 

C 









. . 











-96- 


mood, On April 7, Strange received the following telegram 
from the Edmonton Committee of Defence: "Have wired Sir 
John. Indians on the war path. Send as men and arms 
immediately. Can you help as at once." 1 Strange now 
basied himself with getting together a force which he 
coaid take to Edmonton, and then down the Saksatchewan to 
the scene of trouble. 

A troop of Scoat Cavalry, the nacleas of which was 
twenty Moanted Police drawn from the moantains, was 
rapidly whipped into shape by Inspector Steele. They were 
armed with short Winchester magazine rifles and six-shot 
revolvers. On April 15, fifteen of these men were sent 
north ander Lieatenant Oorryell. 

Strange had to wait for two regiments of militia 
from the east. On April 15 the 65th Regiment of Montreal, 
ander Lieatenant Colonel Oaimet and consisting of twenty- 
seven officers and two hundred and ninety-eight men, 
arrived by special train. Lieatenant-Colonetl Oaimet soon 
retarned east, and Major Haghes assamed command. He 
drilled his men incessantly; musketry instruction, target 
practice, skirmishing, and oat post practice were carried 
on. 2 

On the 18th, the Ninth, a #rench-Canadian Battal¬ 
ion from Winnipeg, arrived. It consisted of seven compan¬ 
ies of forty-two men and three officers each. They had 

joined solely because they thought they would have a brash 

^"Strange, Ibid p.410. 2--Herald , April 20, 1885. 















-97- 


with the Indians, It was consequently somewhat against 
their will when one of the companies, under command of 
Major Lewis, was sent to Gleichen to watch the Blackfoot 
reserve. Company Six, under Captain Callacey, was sim¬ 
ilarly detailed for duty at Macleod.' 1 2 

By April £0, sufficient supplies, ammunition and 
forage had been obtained for the trip north. The forage 
was necessary as the prairie had been burnt by the Indians 
for many miles along the line of travel. Teams were hired 
from the settlers, at from $5.00 to $8.00 a day, for 
transportation purposes. 

On the 20 th, Major-General Strange left Calgary 
with the right wing of the column consisting of Steele T s 
Scouts and four companies of the 65th Battalion. Rev. 

John MacDougall had been sent ahead with four Stoney 
scouts to interview the Indians between Red Deer and 
Edmonton, and to bring news of relief to the northern 
settlement. The left wing, consisting of two hundred 
and forty-two men and a nine-pound cannon, left three 

p 

days later under the command of Major Perry. 

The troops covered the 200 miles to Edmonton in 
ten days. The French -Canadians were experienced axe-men so 
were of great service in making a road through the brush. 

As the telegraph wires connecting Edmonton with the east 
had been cut by the Indians, courier service was established 


1- -Herald, April 22, 1885. 

2— Blue, op cit p.181. 








:■ . i . h; %'4 1 . l \■. / 







-88- 


between Edmonton and Calgary, each man oovering a beat of 
from twenty-five to thirty miles. One of these messengers 
was Dan E. Riley, who later became the cowboy Senator from 
Alberta. Strange left detachments at Red Deey, Battle 
River and Peace Hills to keep the line of communication 
open.^ 

On May 6, the detachment under Major Steele left 
Edmonton for Fort Pitt, by trail along the north bank of 
the Saskatchewan. It was followed two days later by 
Lieutenant-Colonel Hughes, commanding the remainder of the 
65th Battalion. On the 14th, General Strange*s command 
took transport to Victoria on flat-bottomed boats. Here 
they disembarked and advanced by trail until a junction was 
made with Major Steele at Frog Lake. They met the Indians 
at Frenchman*s Butte, but before a decisive action could 
take place, the Indians withdrew. On July 2, Big Bear was 
captured by a Mounted Police patrol at Fort Carleton and 
the rebellion was over.'" 

The Alberta Field Force then started its long 
march back to Calgary. A cross-country route was selected 
and as they had only one large river, the Red Deer, to cross 
the march back was made with little difficulty. The force 
reached the Bow on the afternoon of July 18 and was given 
a royal welcome by the citizens. The men looked well in 
their Montana broadcloth and cowboy hats after their 

seventeen hundred mile ride. Some of the coats were torn 

1— Blue, op cit, p.182. 

2- -Ibid, p.185. 









, 


, 

ft ■' l • i m b .u;:v6- 







. 

> 






. 






. 


* « ? 





















•• 













- 99 - 


and some of the horses looked thin, hat most of the hats 
were blazoned with the words: "Stand-off Coulee", 
"Medicine Lodge" and "Loon Lake"; reminders of the dangers 
passed and the arduous labors accomplished by the gallant 

troops. 


The procession started from the ferry in the fal¬ 
lowing order: The carriage containing the mayor, council 
and municipal officers; the carriage containing the 
reception committee; the civic band under Mr. Millward; 
Steele*s Scouts; the Alberta Bifles under Major Hatton 
and the concourse of citizens on foot, mounted and in 
carriages. 

On the arrival of the procession at the arch on 
MacTavish Street, Mayor Murdoch read the following address 

"We, the citizens of Calgary, are proud of the 
present opportunity of welcoming you home again. You 
have brought to a successful termination an arduous and 
dangerous expedition to quell rebellion and lawlessness 
in our Mr country. 

"We have watched your movements from day to day 
with the utmost interest and while we kno?/ that you were 
imperilling your lives, we have felt that our country's 
honor was safe in the hands of our brave Alberta men. 

"We are glad to be able to welcome you back again 
to your home and friends. This is a proud day for us and 
the memory of your noble acts and self-sacrifice in the 
campaign will long remain green in the minds of your 
friends who remained at home." 

Major Steele thanked the mayor £nd the citizens. 

He said that the men, he had the honor to command, fully 

deserved every praise. For discipline, endurance of hard¬ 
ships, and pluck, they had no superiors and he never 









' 


■H . . 
















« 





























- 100 - 


wished to command a finer body of men. 

On the evening of July 22 , a reception and ban¬ 
quet was held in the Boynton Hall. Three hundred and fifty 
guests attended. At the main table were placed: Mr. 

Riley, the chairman. Major Steele, Major Walker, Captain 
Oswald, Major Hatton, Captain Hamilton, Major Bowling, 
Rather Lacombe, Mr. M 0 Gibbon, Rev. Mr. McDougall, and the 
mayor. The many speakers referred to the recent rebellion, 
but true to the western spirit, they emphasized the 
glorious future which was in store for the west.' 

After the disturbances of the rebellion had been 
settled, thousands of settlers from the East and the 
United States began to flock into Southern and Central 
Alberta. There agriculture was in a flourishing condition. 
Seeding had been completed before the Rebellion broke 
out and the crops were in a forward and entirely satis¬ 
factory state. The advent of the troops also had offered 
a market for all the surplus products of the settlers. 

Many of them, too had earned much money for their trans¬ 
portation services during the trouble, and they were able 

p 

to get back to their farms in time for haying. Calgary 
became the outfitting centre for the new-comers who were 
attracted by these prosperous conditions and during the 
summer months her growth was nearly as rapid as it nad 

been in the fall of 1883, 

1— Herald, July 23, 1885. 

2— Bulletin of Calgary Agricultural Society, page 2. 





■ 




« * ■ ' C ' < 

i ~ " • ■■ *t' > -i'b ;b %' 4jN£ 

. 

, 

. 


. 

. 


■ 












- 101 - 


It was felt that an organization of the business 
men would be conducive to the welfare of the town, so on 
July 14, the first meeting of the Calgary Board of Trade 
was held in the Royal Hotel. About forty members were 
present, comprising almost every business man of standing 
in the town. The bylaws of the Winnipeg Board of Trade 
were adopted and Major Walker was elected president. This 
meeting petitioned the Dominion Government for a bridge 
over the Bow; and before winter a big steel bridge was 
erected at Dewdney Street (4th East)."' 

Despite the editorials of the Herald, Calgary was 
still without fire protection, although a fire which might 
have destroyed the entire town had taken place in January, 
1835. J. L. Bowen’s house on Atlantic Avenue had burned 
as the water carts of Messrs. Beaupre and Johnson had 
failed to check the blaze, while the citizens had recourse 
to throwing snowballs at the flames but not with much 

success. In twenty minutes the house was completely 

I 

destroyed. This gave the Herald an opportunity for in¬ 
creased agitation, but it Y/as not until July that the 
Council took action. Then $1,100.00 was appropriated 
for a hook and ladder apparatus and provision was made 
for the digging of wells and the formation of a fire 
brigade as soon as the necessary equipment’ should arrive. 

This did not include a fire engine Y/hich was considered 

1- -Herald Riles, 1885. 

2— Herald, January 23, 1885. 













- 102 - 


impraoticable as it would have necessitated the building 
of-tanks and a fire hall.^ On August 25, however, the 
hook, ladder and bucket brigade was duly organized with 
Steve Jarrett as first captain. Mr. Donohue was made 
lieutenant; W. H. Gushing, treasurer; Joe Radway and 
James Smart, laddermen; Jack Summers, Walter Jarrett, A. 
Keman, S. J. Glarke and S. N. Jordan, hookmen. The fire- 
wells were equipped with large wooden pumps each having a 
long iron handle, which four men could operate at the same 
time. Rubber buckets were used. A Holloway chemical 

p 

engine was later purchased. 

Calgary had grown so rapidly that it was given two 

seats in the North-West Council, and on September the 

citizens chose as their representatives, D. Lauder and 

H. S. C a yley. By this time the Edmonton, St. Albert and 

Macleod districts of Alberta were also represented.^ 

During the Rebellion the Herald had issued a daily 

telegraphic bulletin, but on July 2 it embarked upon the 

publication of a regular daily newspaper. On the day of 

its publication Mr. Cayley, the editor, wrote: 

"Today marks the issue of the first daily paper 
in Calgary. Slight as are its proportions, they are not 
very much less than were those of Winnipeg’s first daily. 

"We are aware that it is not generally admitted that 
Calgary can support a daily paper. It is a pity that its 
citizens have so little faith in the future of the town, as 

1- -Herald, July 23, 1885. 

2- -Smart’s Reminiscences. 

3- Albertan, 1909,Anniversary, Page 3. 













fc wt 















- 








































* 

















-103- 


to suppose it oan undertake anything without carrying it 
through. Calgary has undertaken much bigger jobs than the 
issueing of a daily paper, and in spite of a good many 
pessimists, it is today in a better financial condition 
than any other town in the Territories. 

T, V7e have the utmost confidence that a daily will 
be a success and we have not the slightest doubt that the 
town will welcome its appearance.”! 

The new venture was successful, and the Washington hand 
press on which the first editions were printed, was soon 
superseded by a Prouty cylinder press which had a capacity 
of four hundred copies an hour. 

About this time, George B. Elliott, the Herald’s 
journalistic enemy, left for the east, to accept a position 
on the Toronto Mail. Mr. Bailey took over the Nor -Wester 
and renamed it the Tribune. It carried on the feud wi th 
the Herald so effectively that' its editor was soon charged 
with libel. 

The year closed with a bitter fight between Mr. 
Jeremiah Travis, an Easterner, who had become stipendiary 
magistrate of Calgary, and many of the citizens. Prohib¬ 
ition had always been a troublesome question in Calgary 
yet the bitterness of feeling had been mitigated a good 
deal by the slack and spasmodic enforcement of the law by 
the Mounted Police. However, this easy-going and comfort¬ 
able state of affairs was destined to a rude disturbance 
by Mr. Travis, who was a staunch prohibitionist. Within a 


1—Herald, 1923, Anniversary, Page 2. 





















. 
























< 


( » 4 







-104- 


few months, one alderman had been sentenced to six months 
in prison while the rest of his colleagues, including 
Mayor Murdoch, had been disfranchised and declared incap¬ 
able of holding office, despite the fact that they had 
recently been returned by a large majority. The defeated 
ticket, with James Reilly as mayor, had been declared by 
the court to be the only real and legal council in existence 
Mr. Cayley, editor of the Herald, had written 
regarding Mr. Travis: "He makes an elegant stipendiary 
but we would have preferred, if not a local, at least a 
Manitoba lawyer tn good standing, whose acquaintance with 
the Territories might be considered on a par with Mr. 

Travis’ acquaintance with Ottawa lobbies.To make 
matters worse, John Innis, a local artist, had illustrated 
the front page of the Herald with cartoons of Mr. Travis. 

For this article Mr. Cayley was condemned to a 
brief term of imprisonment but was allowed to deliver him¬ 
self up at the police barracks at his own time. On the 
appointed day, he set out from the Herald office seated on 
a-wagon hauled by the stalwarts of the anti-Travis faction, 
in a long procession headed by a brass band. After stops 
at each saloon along the way, he was finally handed over 

p 

to the police by his reluctant admirers. 

There were now two mayors, two councils and two 

sets of officials in existence. Mayor Reilly kept pos- 

1— Herald, 1923, Anniversary, page 10 

2— Herald, 1933, " " 3. 













. 











. 

« 












' 



- 











- 








-105- 


session of the city hall while Mayor Murdoch, who had 
retained the town books, held the meetings of his oouncil 
in a saloon. Neither could collect any taxes nor pay 
its officials, and a most preposterous situation had to 
be overcome be an order from Ottawa, dissolving both 
councils and ordering a new election. Mr. G. C. King, 
postmaster, was returned as mayor, and the municipal 
tangle was thus straightened out. 1 

In the meantime, Mr. Murdoch, who had been sent to 
Ottawa by a number of the citizens, despatched a telegram 
to Calgary--"Calgary released, cemetery granted, Jerry 
mus t go."^ 

1- -Albertan, 1909. Anniversary, Page 6. 

2- -MacRae, op cit. Page 617. 




t 

K 

. 



























































-106- 


A WESTERN C0W-I0WN. 


After the excitement of the Kebellion and the mu¬ 
nicipal dispute, Calgary settled down to the quiet life 
of a western "cow-town." Occasional sports days, church 
suppers, and theatrical performances, together with 
political campaigns and civic elections helped to enliven 
an otherwise somewhat humdrum life. 

The school, always a centre of interest in a small 
town, received frequent mention in both the herald and 
iribune. In 1886, J. hoag succeeded Mr. Douglas as 
principal, Miss Watson continued as assistant teacher, 
inspector John McLean visited the school during the 
summer and reported very favorably on it. 

"Doth teachers have shown considerable enterprise 

in their work. There were sixty pupils present, all of 

whom evinced a deep interest in their studies. Their 

progress has been in general rapid, ^rasping intel¬ 
ligently the subjects being taught, they are enabled to 
throw aside the drudgery consequent upon the old methods 
of task of memory. 

"ihe order maintained is excellent. This has been 
secured by kindness and tact. A healthy tone pervades 
the school, the pupils trying eagerly to excel. 

"The school building (a store building on Stephen 
Avenue East) is in poor condition, lacking proper arrange¬ 
ment, suitable location and necessary warmth. Pupils who 








* 







e 

Mi -cm 




, 























































* 
















e 



-107- 


have not attended school for years, and many who are just 
commencing to study, have introduced an element that mater¬ 
ially hinders rapid advancement,"1 

This defect was remedied the next year when a four-room 
brick veneer school was built near the location of the 
present Central school. 

At this time there were only six schools in the 
country from Red Deer south to the Boundary and from Med¬ 
icine Hat west to British Columbia. Mr. Maclean, mission¬ 
ary at the Blood Indian Reserve, supervised all the work 

2 

done in the Protestant schools. In January 1889, James 

Short became principal of the Calgary school. He had three 

assistants, Miss McIntyre, Miss Cowan and Miss Wheeler. 

During the summer, a high school department was 

organized; the second in the territories, the other one 
3 

being at Regina. At that time the following students 
were enrolled in the upper room; Louisa McNeill,'Samuel 
McNeill, Forbes McNeill, Harry Watson, Florence Watson, 

Jane McIntyre, Frank Constantine, Thomas Bruce, Willie 
Collins, Lizzie Collins, Mary Dillabough, Helen Harris, 
Muriel Harris, Alex Duncan, George King, John Smart, Polly 
King, Benjamin Gouin, Maud Cushing, Louisa Cushing, Ernest 
Wood, William Curran, May James, Leta James, Sadie Carr, 
Laura Eshelman, Pearl Grant, Beilis Thorpe, Maud Ramsay, 
George Hunter, Herbert Bishop, George Chapman, Laura 

4 

O’Neill, May Marsh, Fred Algar, William Ell is, Emma Eshelm aa 
1--Qutline of Calgary Schools, p.2.^2—Higinbotham op cit 
p. 122. // 3—Herald , June 2, 1923 p. 12.// 4—Herald , 193%p8. 

















, 








, 








' 























-108- 


Dux ing these years, the education of those pupils 
attending the Roman Catholic private school was well 
looked after by the sisters who had started the school. 

That other agent of civilization, the Christian 
church, was very active. The Methodist, Boman Catholic 
and Presbyterian congregations grew rapidly and in 1888 
the Methodists built a fine new church with a seating 
capacity of four hundred at the south-east corner of Angus 
Avenue (6th) and Hamilton Street (2nd West). This was the 
iargest church in the town for some time. About the same 
time the Anglicans erected a place of worship costing 
$3,200.00 at the corner of Angus (6th) Avenue and Osier 
Street (1st East) and the Catholics made additions to the 
convent and church, on Notre Dame Avenue (17th). 

The first Baptist church in Calgary was organized 
on May 15, 1888, at the home of Mr. S. King; the charter 
members were-Mr. and Mrs. Edward King, Mr. and Mrs. Eshelmaa 
Mr. J. Gr. Van Wart, Mrs. George Constantine^, and J. S. Povah. 
The first service was held in the Masonic Hall, but a ware£ 
house, on McIntyre Avenue, was soon leased from G.-C. King 
for church purposes. The first ordained minister was Rev. 
Geo. Cross who began his work in May, 1889. He was largely 
instrumental in having a church built the next year. 1 

There was little bitterness between the various 
congregations. As a rule the various churches went 


1—Herald, 1933 Anniversary. 


























■ 










. , 






' 

. 




, 




, 


, 






















-109- 


together to stage Christmas concerts in the Knox Presby¬ 
terian Church and at a concert given by the Catholics on 
St* Patrick’s Pay, 1888, to secure funds to build a 
church, all the clergymen in the town were present and one 
half the audience was Protestafct. 1 

Calgary was well served by the two daily newspapers, 

the Herald and the Tribune, neither of which had lost its 

old time bitterness for the other. In January, 1885, Mr. 

Cayley sold the Herald to Mr, A. Lucas, formerly of :in- 

nipeg. At this time, Mr. Cayley was sueing T. B. Braden, 

then with the Tribune, for libel. The case was dropped 

The 

after an apology had been printed in the Tribune. Herald's 
new editor, Mr. Ewer, continued the feud and the second 
issue of the paper under his charge denounced the Tribune, 
as a venal sheet, and another article compared its move¬ 
ments to those of a bucking broncho. Later it was a 
"shameless libeler." The various political campaigns 
which were waged at this time augmented the bitterness 
of the quarrel. 

In 1888, the Herald moved to a building on Stephen 
Avenue just west of MacTavish Street. At this time it took 
over the Alberta Live Stock Journal, a weekly which had 
been published by Major Hatton. 

On August 31 the Herald celebrated its fifth 
birthday by a special edition printed in red ink. It 
looked back to the time when it started in a tent on the 


1--Herald, 1923. Anniversary, page 6, 


























. . : 









-110- 


banks of the Elbow, to the worthy causes it had supported, 
to its quarrels with the Nor -Wester and the Tribune, and 
to the growth of Calgary during the five years. With a 
fine burst of Western optimism it made a forecast as to 
the future, when Calgary would rival Chicago, Denver and 
Winnipeg as key cities of the West. 1 

Ever since the establishment of the original post, 
athletic and sporting events had received much attention 
in Calgary. Impromptu horse races, bucking contests and 
foot races were very popular but it was not until 1887 that 
games were more formally organized. On April 15 of that 
year, at a meeting held in the Gerald House, it was de¬ 
cided to recruit a baseball club, the Pilots, under the 
captaincy of George Eozier. A diamond was mapped out 
south of the railway tracks, and many interesting games 
took place. 

Lacrosse enthusiasts soon followed the lead of 

the baseballers, and Dave Patterson, who had starred on 

several Eastern Canadian teams, was elected captain and 

playing coach. Two teams were chosen and the game vied 

with baseball for popularity in the town. Despite the 

fact that lacrosse was originally an Indian game, the 

western tribesmen were too indifferent to take an active 

9 

part, although many of them were interested spectators. 

_ _ The celebration held in honor of Queen Victoria^ 

1— Herald, 1923. Anniversary, page 6. 

2- -Smart’s Reminiscences, 
















* 






, 






























, 









♦ 






. 


« 

. ■ 












, 






, 











- 111 - 


Jubilee, o,: July 8, 1887, was typical of all such events. 
Stephen Avenue was a mass of color, the store fronts were 
decorated with red, white and blue bunting, from every 
roof-top flew either the Union Jack or the Canadian ensign 
and every buttonhole was adorned with small rosettes of 
the national colors. The high-wheeled bicycle race, which 
was run over a half-mile course on the Mission property, 
was won by Jim Horner. The Indian pony races were held 
in the afternoon and then came the field and track com¬ 
petitions. The main event, the hundred-yard dash, was won 
by George Irvine, who lost the quarter-mile race to the 
great Blackfoot runner, Deerfoot. After supper, the sports 
were transferred to Stephen Avenue where the fire-reel 
races were run off. The tug-of-war between the firemen 
was won by E. R. Roger’s team. For the best decorated 
store front, first prize was awarded to G. G. King, second 
to I. G. Baker Company and third to W. H. Kennistown. 

The programme was closed with a grand ball in the firehall. 

The year 1888 began with the first hockey game 
ever played in Calgary, There were ten men to a side; 
they used hockey sticks and old brooms, and the puck was 
a wooden block. This game, which lasted for one and a 
half hours, was played on the Flbow River where a space 
about one hundred yards long had been cleared off. 

The most outstanding sport’s event of the year was 


1--Smart's Reminiscences. 













« 


































> 


€ 


:* 













. 





1 












- 112 - 


the baseball matoh played in Galgary in September between 
Medicine Hat and Donald, British Columbia, for the cham¬ 
pionship of Western Canada. Practically the whole popul¬ 
ation of Calgary witnessed the game which was won by 
Donald by a score of twelve runs to four. Additional 
games were played at Medicine Hat on September 27 with 
Donald again the victor and Medicine Hat second, Leth¬ 
bridge third and Calgary fourth. 1 

Many impromptu horse races were held during the 
summer as the Indians and cowboys were always ready to race 
their ponies for any distance from one hundred yards to a 
mile, provided that a bet was forthcoming. These races 
aroused so much enthusiasm that the newly-organized Alberta 
Turf Club held a meet on September 9 and 10, on their mile 
track, in Elbow Park. John Lineham was president and 
George Murdoch secretary. 

On July 1, 1890, a race was held which attracted 
much interest, particularly among the Indians. A grey 
horse from the Battle River country (one hundred and forty 
miles north of Calgary) was matched against a local horse, 
Firefly, the property of Joe Spence, a half-breed. On the 
day of the race, half-breeds and Indians from all over the 
country began to pour into Calgary. Many wagers were made, 
and it was announced before the race, that Spence had bet 

three ponies, one cart, one set of harness, one grain _ 

1--Smart , s Reminiscences. 









. 















> 

, 







, 

, 







. 































- 115 - 


wagon, three green shirts, one stock saddle and , t i4.00 in 
cash. Spence’s horse won which resulted in many of the 
Indians from the north being forced to walk home. 

On the night of July 10, the townspeople were 
invited to attend a sundance at the Sarcee Reserve, but 
when the cash constributions were not forthcoming, the old 
chief. Bull’s Head, calmly announced that he couldn’t 
make any braves at that price so the cdremony was indef- 
inately postponed. 

The fall race meet which opened on August 13 was 
the big event of the late summer. • Hotel accommodation was 
at a premium, and many visitors were required to pitch 
their.tents at the race track. Instead of pari-mutuel 
betting machines, auction pools were sold, and the gentle¬ 
men in charge did a good business. The meet, which was 
very successful, continued for three days. 1 

The agricultural society, which had been formed in 
18B4, was re-organized in 1886, and a fair was held on the 
19th and 20th of October in Glaxton’s Star Rink located 
on the south side of Angus (6th) Avenue, just east of 
McTavish (Centre) Street. Unfortunately, a snow storm 
which occurred on the 18th adversely affected both the 
number of exhibits and the attendance. Nevertheless, the 
occasion was a distinct success. There were twelve 
classes for roadsters, which included driving horses. 


1--Smart’s Reminiscences. 































, 















. 




, 

r 





, 

. 


4 













; 











- 114 - 


trotters, pacers and horses driven to democrats. Five 
classes were listed for heavy draft horses while Durhams 
were the most popular breed of cattle. Prizes for the 
best exhibits of sheep, swine and poultry were offered. 
Grain and garden vegetable classes were plentiful, as were 
those for homecooking, fancy work, knitting, embroidery, 
dairy produce, plants and flowers. Prizes were also given 
for the best buggies, carriages, democrats, wagons and 
horse shoes. The entries of ladies work and vegetables 
were particularly good but the live stock exhibits, 
except for horses, were a disappointment. There were no 
sheep entered and the classes for cattle, J>igs and poultry 
were poorly represented. 

The first event of the second day was the baby 
show, and as there were only three entries, the money was 
taken from the sheep classes so that each baby could be 
given a first prize. In the band contest, the Police Band, 
under Sergeant Bagley, won over the city entry. 

The annual fairs were continued, and in July, 

1889, the present exhibition grounds, at that time ninety- 
four acres in extent, were purchased from the Dominion 
Government by the Agricultural Society.* 1 " 

Despite the dry years following 1885, settlers con¬ 
tinued to come into the surrounding districts, and the 

police authorities found it necessary to extend their wo gk 
1--Agricultural Society’s Bulletin. 














’ 


* • Ifrx ..'I 











, 

, 

- 






































. 






f 


c . 

. 













- 115 - 


accordingly. Outposts were established at Stimson’s Ranch, 
fifty-five miles to the south-west, at Scarlett’s, forty- 
eight miles north, at the Blackfoot Reserve, at Banff and 
at the Anthracite coal mines near Banff. E Division was 
increased to ninety-nine men. Most of the work, however, 
was routine in nature as shown by the report of November, 
1887. "To Regina with horses, with horses to be left at 
Kerfoot’s Ranche on herd, with supply of oats for the 
Stimson detachment; to Radnor with search warrant, no 
stolen goods found; five miles up the Elbow to arrest Davis, 
liquor; to Cochrane to seize liquor (500 gallons) reported 
as coming on the C.P.R. to that place, none found. 

Whenever a serious crime did take place, it aroused 
much excitement in the town. In May 1886, two notorious 
characters, Gallagher and Crackerbox Jones, had escaped 
from Sergeant Gordon after shooting him. On August 14, 
two men (supposedly these two) robbed two brothers named 
de Rambouville, near Calgary, and on August 23, the 
Edmonton stage was held up and robbed. The stage, driven 
by Pete Campbell, with Mr. J. Burns, traveller for J. H. 
Ashdown, J. Glokey, traveller for the Massey & Company, and 
an old Frenchman as passengers, had arrived at Twin Buttes, 
two miles south of Dixon’s when two men, masked with Union 
Jacks, sprang up from the long grass and covered the stage. 


1—N.W.M.P. Commissioner’s Report for 1887. 












- 116 - 


The passengers were robbed and three mail bags were opened 


but, fortunately, the registered mail was not found. In 

1 


all, #435.00 was taken, 

Seventeen police were sent out but the men could 
not be tracked for more than two miles because of the 
short grass and hard ground. After this, the mails between 
Calgary and Edmonton were constantly escorted by the police 
until cold weather made this unnecessary. Outposts were 

then placed at the stopping places along the road, and the 

2 


The two highway men 


next spring patrolling was resumed 
were never discovered. 

On February 28, 1888, a brutal murder took place, 
which together with the two subsequent trials, provided 
Calgary with news for several months. Rosalie, a Cree 
squaw, was found dead in a room over the Turf Club res¬ 
taurant which stood on the west side of McTavish (Centre) 
Street between Stephen (8th) and Atlantic (9th) Avenues. 
Jumbo Fiske confessed the crime. He was committed to tidal 
at a preliminary hearing, and on April 9, was tried before 
Mr. Justice Rouleau in the immigration shed on Pacific 
(10th) Avenue. J. R. Costigan represented the aown while 
Fiske was defended by E. P. Davis of Calgary and F. Tyrell, 
an eminent criminal lawyer of Morrishourg, Ontario. 

Although Constable Dillabough testified that Fiske had 


confessed to him, the jury, after a trial of three days, 

1- -Albertan, 1909 Anniversary page 2. 

2— N.W.M.P. Commissioners Report for 1886. 




































, 
















. 




























' 




















- 117 - 


brought in a verdict of not guilty. The judge refused to 
accept this decision and ordered a new trial. This took 
place in July when j.*'iske was found guilty of manslaughter 
and was sentenced to fourteen years imprisonment in the 
Stony Plain Penitentiary.^ 

There were many cases of cattle stealing and of 
negligence in setting prairie fires but these occasioned 
little excitement. 

On Sunday, November 4, 1886, Calgary ! s first great 
fire broke out in the flour and feed store of S. Parish & 
Company. The bell in the English Church aroused all the 
townspeople who quickly gathered. The fire spread with 
great rapidity and in a short time the whole block on the 
south-west corner of McTavish Street and Atlantic Avenue, 
as well as the Union Hotel across the street, was in flames. 

The town council had some few months previously- 
purchased a chemical engine and horse reel, but because of 
lack of money Ihey had been unable to remove it from the 
customs building. However, in this time of necessity, 
the volunteer fire brigade re-inforced by a number of 
citizens, broke open the door of the office and wheeled 
out the equipment. It failed to check the flames, which 
fanned by a heavy wind, spread to the Crand Central Hotel, 
and then started to eat north, tov/ards Stephen Avenue. An 
attempt was made to blow up Geo. Murdoch 1 s store with 


1--Smart ! s Reminiscences. 































1 




. 


















, 






























« 








, 

, 









. 















- 118 - 


dynamite but the charge failed, and the fire approached 
the Royal Hotel where everyone was working with a will. To 
save the building wet blankets were hang over the roof and 
out of the windows. The flames failed to jump the alley 
behind the hotel but it was not until late in the morning 
that they were extinguished. The following day a second 
fire broke out which was thought, at the time, to be the 
work of an Indian incendiary. The mayor requested the 
Mounted Police to take charge of the town for a few days 
to restore order.1 

The buildings destroyed were: the Parish Store, 

the Union Hotel, the Grand Central Hotel, the Mountain 

View Hotel, the Athletic Hotel, Sherman House, the Massey 

Manufacturing Company 1 s building, Bunn and Lineham’s 

warehouse, I. G. Baker*s store and warehouse, W. Hunter’s 

Store and dwelling, I. Stirrett’s bakeshop, John Ellis 1 

store, George Murdoch T s harness shop, S. Parrish and Co.’s 

store,, H.Rodway 1 s tinshop, and the Pullman saloon. The total 

loss was $100,200.00 of which $32,000.00 was covered yrith 
2 

insurance. 

This fire stirred the Council to action and a fire 
engine was purchased from J. D. Ronald for $4,000.00. 

Tanks were built and a fire .all, costing $800.00 was put 
up by Mr. O’Keefe. The citizens contributed $500.00 to 

furnish the fire hall, and it was opened by a concert and 
—Albertan, 1909. Anniv. page 2. 

2—Herald, 1923. " « 7. 



























- 119 - 


dance. So attractively was it fitted up that the town 
Council started holding its meetings there. This did not 
please the volunteer fire company so it resigned in a body. 
The Council then organized another brigade, consisting of 
the mayor and councillors under a high-salaried chief. 
However, they were so unsuccessful in their first fire that 
the old brigade was asked to come back.^ 

The next serious fire took place on February 5, 
1889, when Boynton Hall, the scene of all the early balls, 
dinners, and dramatic shows, was burned to the ground. kt 
that time the building was being used as a Salvation Army 
barracks. When the volunteer brigade arrived on the scene, 
flames were shooting out of the roof and although the 
Ronald engine was brought into play, and a bucket brigade 
was quickly formed, the building was soon destroyed. Then 
it looked as though the flames were going to spread, 
storekeepers and business men came to the assistance of 
the brigade. The majority of the town’s buildings were 
of frame construction, dried out by the sun, which made a 
fire a very serious matter. Soon after this a regular 
fire brigade of ten men was formed to take the place of 

p 

the volunteer corps which had done splendid work. 

In 1886 Calgary had a population of about 1,200. 

The town with the exception of one or two dwellings, the 
convent and the mission, was situated north of the railway' 


1- -Smart , s Reminiscences. 

2 — Ibid. 










. 












* 








. 










< 


r 

















* 













, 










- 120 - 


track. The wooden sidewalk on the north side of Stephen 
Avenue extended from Hardisty (3rd Street East) to a point 
about half way between McTavish Street and Scarth (First 
Street West); beyond this there was only the prairie sod. 
The principal avenues and streets had been graded but were 
almost impassable in wet weather. The Hudson’s Bay store 
was a one-storey frame building on the present site of 
the Royal Bank and the space between it and McIntyre Ave¬ 
nue (7th) was usually filled with the carts of half-breeds 
from the north. The Bank of Montreal and the Imperial 
Bank established branches in Calgary in 1886. Both were 
lodged in a frame building on Stephen Avenue owned by 
John Lineham. A. D. Braithwaite was the first manager of 
the Bank of Montreal while Samuel Barber guarded the int¬ 
erests of the rival firm.' 1 ’ 

In 1887 steps were taken to instal an electric 
light system and a contract was entered into with A. P. 
McMullen, president of the Electric Light Company, which 
called for ten, thirty-two candle power lights at the 
cost of $6.00 per month apiece, the lights to be on aL1 
night. In 1890 this company was taken over by the Calgary 
Power Company, often called the Eau Claire Power Company 
because of its close association with the Eau Claire and 
Bow River Lumber Company. This company secured a fran¬ 
chise to supply electric current to the town for commaid&l 


1—Herald, 1923 


Anniv. page 6. 








■ 










. 










. 


































’ 


. , 










■ 









• , 









-Inl¬ 


and domestic purposes. The new plant, which was situated 
on the south-west corner of MoTavish Street and McIntyre 
Avenue, represented an outlay of ^30,000. It could light 
five hundred Edison carbon-filament lamps of sixteen 
candle power. The plant was soon enlarged and on March 1, 
the streets were illuminated with forty lights of fifty 
candle power.* 1 ' Many of the citizens spent hours walking 
up and down the streets in the evenings as at that time 
four other Canadian cities or towns could boast of 
electric lights. 2 

In 1887, Mr. Lucas was granted the exclusive right 
to lay water and gas mains in the town and the council 
assisted him in drilling for gas but the venture was not 
a success. 

By this time the private telephone line, construc¬ 
ted by Major Walker between his saw-mill and residence 
when Calgary was in its infancy, had been taken over by 
the Bell Telephone Company^ It had grown to a line of 
forty-five subscribers. James Walker was still the 
manager and as there were no numbers the subscriber 
simply announced the name of the person or firm desired. 
The directory of November, 1889, listed the following 
subscribers: Fire Hall, Electric Light Station, C.P.R. 

freight office, dominion Express office, Mounted Police 

Barracks, J. Sharpies, Bannerm an & Co., Eitzgerald & Ellis 
2—Smart's Reminiscences. //' 1—Albertan, 1909 inniv p.4 




































' 

* 





f 












, 










- 122 - 


Royal Hotel, Palace Hotel, F. G. Topp & Company, Hull & 
Trounce, Bank: of Montreal, Imperial Bank, Dr. Rouleau, 

Dr. Lafferty, a. W. Trott, chemist, 1. R. .Rogers, hardware, 
A. Grant, Hardware, G. C. King & Co., I. G.•Baker & Jo., 
Hudson's Bay Co., J. G. MpCallurn, Eau Claire Mills, Bow 
River Mills, Calgary Lumber Co., Calgary Planing Mills, 

F. Dick's Lumber Yard, W. H. Ford, Bam 8c Hamilton, 3. 
McDonald, Bell 8c Riddell, Armstrong 8c McHaughton, the 
Calgary Tribune, the Calgary Herald, and the private 
residence of E. H. Hodder, H. A. Dundas, Dr. Lafferty, 

Dr. Rouleau, James Walker, S, G. McCallum, J. A. Walker, 
and J. H. Freehan. 1 2 

By 1889 all that part of the town between Atlantic 
and Stephen Avenues, which had been destroyed by the great 
fire of 1886, had been rebuilt. Some of the new buildings, 
notably the Alberta Hotel, the Bank of Montreal, and the 
Alexander Block, were constructed of native aand stone. 
Calgary was considered the best built town west of 
Winnipeg. 

Mr. W. S. Caine who visited Calgary in the fall of 

1887 found it a typical western town just emerging from 

its pioneer days He wrote: "Calgary is a thriving infant 
of two years. It is a place of much vigor and bustle with 
a population of nearly 2,000. Building is going on every¬ 
where, and with two or three exceptions, everything is of 
wood. It is laid out in the usual fashion, in wide streets, 
covering in area of about two miles each way. The bulk of 
these streets are at present prairie but a brisk trade 

1- -Herald, 1933. Anniv. page 34. 

2- -MacRae, op cit page 428. 











pc 
































. 




. 


. 

- f 



e 










- 123 - 


goes on in town lota. 

"The great feature of Calgary society is the over¬ 
whelming predominacne of the male sex; hardly a woman is to 
be seen on the streets. Neither did I see any old men; 
the whole population appeared to be under thirty years of 
age, and almost entirelyEnglish. 

"The hotel at which we stayed was full to over¬ 
flowing; many sleeping two in a bed. If the Leland Hotel 
had possessed a liquor bar, it would have been impossible 
for a decent, quiet person to stay there, and a similar 
town to Calgary, in Idaho, Montana or Dakota, would have 
been one long avenue of liquor saloons and music halls. 

The same class of population frequent Calgary, cowboys, 
farmers, idlers, yet the town is as quiet as an English 
country village. 

"The popular amusement is the Salvation Army (es¬ 
tablished in August, 1Q87). We went to their meeting in 
the evening. They marched around the town in their usual 
fashion, passing through crowds of cowboys and similar 
young fellows, without encountering a jeer or coarse word. 
When they entered their barracks, all the men in the place 
swarmed in after them, to the tune of five or six hundred. 
They took their places quietly, joined heartily in the 
hymns and evidently enjoyed themselves thoroughly."! 

However, Calgary had not entirely outgrown its frontier 

days, and even as late as 1890, the council had to pass 

by-laws prohibiting the firing of revolvers on the main 

streets and the grazing of cattle on Stephen Avenue, 

The ranks of Calgary business men were increased 
in 1890 by the aavent of Patrick Burns, who was destined 
to head Calgary’s greatest business firm, the P. Burns 
Meat Packing Company. Burns had started in the meat 
business by selling a team of oxen in his homesteading days 
at Minnedosa, Manitoba. He realized such a profit that he 

bought another pair and fattened them, then he tried hogs, 

1--A Trip Round the World, 1887-8. Caine,W.S. George 
Routledge and Son, London, 














. 






































- 124 - 


and was the first person to ship western live stock to 
the eastern market. In 1886, he secured contracts from 
Mackenzie and Mann, the railway contractors, to supply 
their construction crews with- fresh meat. In 1890, he 
came west to look after the requirements of the construction 
gangs working on the Oalgary and Edmonton line. At this 
time he established a small retail store on Atlantic avenue 
just west of McTavish Street. His business grew rapidly and 
he soon entered the wholesale meat field. 1 2 

It was felt that the interests of Calgary would be 
furthered by a board of trade, and in July, 1890, an organ¬ 
ization meeting took place. Alexander Lucas was elected 
president, and P. J. Nolan, who was soon to become one of 
Calgary ! s foremost lawyers, was the first secretary. The 
board interested itself in all matters that would increase 
the prosperity of the town. Its committees studied freight 

rates, mixed farming and ranching, and the entire board did 

2 

its best to encourage settlement in the Calgary district. 

The interests of the town were also kept to the 
fore by the Galgary Retail Merchants 1 Association which 
consisted of: James Thomson, T. C. Power, Y. C. Kitley, 

A. Allan, J. F. Glanville, A. Grant, W. H. Ford, I. S. 
Freeze, F. G. Topp, J. Hutchings, James Bannerrnan, A. 
Carson, F. Gillespie, T. B. Linton, J. L. Bowen, G. C.ling, 
A. L. Cameron, W• J. Riley, W. H . Kinnistown, J. Tho mson, 

1— Herald, 1933. Anniv. page 31. 

2— Smart T s Reminiscences. 













-125- 


J. H. Kerr, A. D, Rankin, A. 3. Shelton, R. /• James, T.B. 
Braden, W. MoLean, and the Herald Publishing Company/' 

These two organizations advertised for settlers, 
and together with the C.P.R. were largely responsible for 
the alberta fever which nit Eastern Canada and the middle 
United States at this time and which resulted in the steady 
influx of settlers to take up homesteads in the rich 
farm lands of the south-west. 

A strange stream of humanity moved through Calgary 
during these eventful years, and not the least interesting 
of all were the remittance men, those sons of Old England 
who were sent to the new land because, when once there, 
they could not come before the people of the Old Land so 
prominently. To the ordinary western mind, a remittance 
man was a rich Englishman who had proven a failure in his 
own land and had been sent into the new land to work out 
his own regneration, if possible. For years the doings 
of these men, their misfortunes, their characteristics, 
were the source of many a Western story. They, with their 
leggings, monocles, caps, accent, habits and freqient 
cheques from home, were the everlasting sources of en¬ 
joyment and personal gain to tne hard headed settlers and 
cowboys. 

The remittance men of Alberta were as vigorous and 
as busy as any in the land--busy and vigorous in pursuit 


2—Herald, 1923 Anniv. page 6. 
































' 











* 

c ■ 










- 





































-126- 


of leisure, pastime, and mad excitement. Their money was 
the mainstay of the hotels, the proprietors of which 
boarded, gave sleeping rooms, and allowed the bar to trust 
them. They rode through the streets, they drank with 
every one and they made pitiful exhibitions of themselves. 
Sometimes when the disgusted folks at home learned of 
their incorrigibility they cut the remittances off. Then 
the pioneers saw sadder sights than just plain waste; they 
saw these scions of good families become ragged and shift¬ 
less, drink-beggars and hotel hangers-on. However, 
sometimes a brighter result was shown when the latent man¬ 
hood came to the surface and they became upstanding men to 
whom the opprobrious word "remit tance ,T was no longer 
given. 

Ever since the coming of the G.P.R. in 1883, 
there had been various plans for a railway connecting 
Galgary and Edmonton, but all these proposals had come 
to naught. Stage coaches continued to carry the mail and 
passengers while Red River carts and wagons transported 
the freight. Whenever a train arrived from the East, 
hundreds of these freight vehicles assembled at the east 
side of the town to await their turn to load up. Some of 
the freighting outfits owned more than 1,000 horses, and 
they numbered their drivers by the hundreds. However, 
such a slow and expensive method of transportation could 


1—Kelly, op cit, page 241. 






f .. 






' 















. 












1 *% ■ 


















, . 








' 




■ 



























. 

, 











-127- 


no t continue in a west that was rapidly being opened up, 
and to meet the nedd for a railroad to the north, the 
Calgary and Edmonton Railway Company was formed. 

The Company received a charter from the Canadian 
Parliament and at the same time a grant of 1,900,000 acres 
of land. A bond sale in England provided sufficient money 
to build the road and an agreement was made with the C.P.R. 
by which that company would operate the C.&E.line until 
1896, with the option of buying it. The contractors 
quickly gathered their equipment and men together, and by 
the latter part of July, 1890, everything was ready for 
the turning of the first sod which was to be done by the 
Honorable Edgar Pewdney, Minister of the Interior. 

The ceremony took place on July 21. A town holiday 
had been declared and practically the only places that 
stayed open for business were the restaurants. There was 
a procession led by Mayor Lafferty and Mr. Pewdney in a 
carriage drawn by a fine team of horses. They were fol¬ 
lowed by Sir Donald Mann, representing the railway, Comp¬ 
troller White and Colonel Herchmer, representing the 
police, members of the town council, officials of the 
C.P.R., members of the legislative assembly of the North- 
West, and other prominent citizens. There were fully one 
hundred and fifty carriages and scores of ranchers and 
cowboys on saddle horses. The guard of honor was provided 










. 



















■$> . 

















.6 

. 

























« 





' 





















-128- 


by a detachment of the Police. 

Upon arriving at the site of the proposed railway, 
located Just east of where the Elbow joins the Bow, the 
crowd formed a big circle. Mayor Lafferty mounted a small 
platform and extended a warm welcome to the visitors and 
then James Ross and Nicoll Kingsmill, representatives of 
the 0. & E. Go., related the events which had led up to 
the financing of the project. Mr. Dewdney, after a short 
speech, discarded his' high hat and Prince Albert coat, and 
taking the official spade, attacked the soft sod, and with¬ 
in a few minutes had filled the wheelbarrow provided for 
the purpose. 

The big open barbecue had to be postponed for a 

short time as the huge ox, which had been provided by the 

W. R. Hull Go., had spoiled in the hot sun. The committee 

soon secured another beef which was cooked in the approved 

manner. Every person present was provided with a sandwich 

and a glass of lemonade, after which the procession moved 
1 

back to the city. 

Shortly after this, actual construction work was 
started and by the end of 1890, ninety-three miles of 
track had been laid. The railway entered Strathcona in 
July, 1891, but it was some years before it was extended 
across the Saskatchewan into Edmonton. 

This line opened up much new country. The country 


1—Herald, 19325. Anniv. page 35. 

























- 
































- 

































, 









. 


















-129- 


to the south and west had been fairly well filled up by 
this time, but few had settled to the north. Men from 
Eastern Canada and the middle states of the Union began 
to take up homesteads along the 0. & E. , and before the 
railway had reached Strathcona, small settlements iad come 
into existence along the line, all of which added to t. e 
prosperity of Calgary. 

The new-comers went into the brush country, clear¬ 
ed it, and began to send out carloads of Red Eife Wheat, 
Banner Oats, barley, hay, hogs, and dairy cattle. They 
gave a solid prosperity to Calgary, but until the end of 
the f 90 T s Calgary was to remain a "cow-town". The ranch¬ 
ing industry of the south and west, despite its ups and 
downs, had made the town in the early T 80's and until 
the twentieth century ranching was to continue to be its 
chief source of prosperity. Let us glance next at the 
range country which thus formed the economic background 
of the little town, which had sprung up at the meeting 
of the Bow and Elbow. 










■ 




' 








c 

e '- 
























' 












-130- 


HANCHINGr 

The ranching industry, of which cattle raising was 
the most important, was started by those pioneers, the 
Mcitougalls of Morley, when they took a band of fifty horses 
and cattle south from Edmonton to Morley, in November, 

1871. The following year they brought in a hundred head 
of steers and breeding stock from Montana. 

In the fall of 1874 a man, named Shaw, drove five 
hundred head of beef stock through the Kootenay Pass, from 
British Columbia; turned north and arrived at Morley 
where Kev. John McLougall persuaded him to winter. He 
stayed until 1876 as the police at Calgary afforded a 
good market for beef. 

In 1876, George Emerson, a former employee of the 
Hudson's Bay Company, gathered up a small herd of cows 
Ln -Edmonton and drove them south to a location near 
3algary where he supplied the police with butter and milk. 
He formed a partnership with a Mr. Lynch, and they made 
a business of driving in cattle and selling them. 1 

These rachers did not permit their cattle to range as 
the bulls would have been killed and the cows carried 
away by the buffalo herds. However, just as soon as the 
great buffalo herds disappeared in 1877, cattle were 
placed on the open range as the country south of Calgary 

was particularly well adapted for that industry. The 

1--Heraid-1923-Old Times. An article written by 

F. W.Groodsal. _ 


















- 

. 

* • px : 

- - : . 1 ’■ loti 


































, 







-131- 

many streams running in deep valleys, provided both 

water and shelter for the range animals. The dry 

autumns permitted the prairie grass to dry and cure which 

made excellent pasture. The Chinook winds moderated the 

winters so that there was rarely more than a few inches 

of snow on the ground at any time. This enabled the 

cattle and horses to find feed on the range except in 

the severest weather. These natural advantages, which 

had made the country a favorite haunt of buffalo, elk, 

moose and deer also made it the centre of a great raneh- 
1 

ing industry. 

In 1877 , Fred Kanouse the former whisky trader 

brought twenty-two head of cattle into the Macleod 

district and permitted them to run wild on the prairie. 

2 

These were the first rang© stock in the south. 

The cattle which had been promised to the Indians 

by Treaty Number 7 did not arrive until late in the fall 

of 1878, since Colonel Macleod did not consider it wise 

to turn this breeding stock over to the Indians at once, 

as they were on the verge of starvation and they had not 

learned to settle dcwn in one place. V/hen this stock 

was eventually delivered, the Indians thought more of 

Z 

immediate consumption than of the future increase. 

^--Maclnnes, up oit. Page 4. 

2—Kelly, $p cit. Page 120. 

3r-Ibid. Page 124. 








’ 

* 









t • 


■ 

, 















- 132 - 


The herds of the early ranchers also suffered at the 
hands of the natives. At first they killed quite boldly, 
but as police punishment taught them the result of such 
evil doing, they resorted to other means. One clever 
method was to herd stock onto the smooth glare-ice 
sheets caused by the overflowing of springs, tha^, very 
frequently, one or more head would slip and go down with 
all four feet radiating in different directions. This 
would tear the ligaments and muscles so that the beast 
was only fit for death. The natives would then eagerly 
ride to the owner's ranch and report the unfortunate 
animal that they had just found. As a rule they would 
be permitted to kill and keep the beef. 1 

In 1879, the dominion Government started leasing 
huge tracts of land for twenty-one years, at one cent 
an acre, per year. Many wealthy easterners took advan¬ 
tage of this; Senator Cochrane secured a lease west of 
Calgary, along the Bow; John H. Craig and associates 
obtained thousands of acres in the hills, west of 
Mosquito Creek, the Oxley Kanch, and Sir John Y/aldrond 
and associates leased a huge tract in the southern part 
of the Porcupine Hills. The Allan or Bar U lease was 
taken on the Highwood by the Allans of Montreal. 2 These 
large companies secured the finest leases and the small 


1— Ibid. Page 48. 

2— Ibid. Page 140 






, 

' 










e 












. 










» 

. 









- 133 - 


man was forced to content himself with what was left. 
Instead of the country filling up with small stockmen, 
it was monopolized by a few. 

The ranches were stocked with cattle from Montana 
or the Bast as the leaseholders could bring in stock duty 
free* In the spring of 1881, A. P. Patrick, who had 
been doing survey work for the Dominion Government in the 
West since 1878, went east and purchased two hundred 
good stock in Ontario* He shipped the cattle to Winnipeg 
by the C.P.R. and then drove them overland. This band 
was the foundation of the Mount Royal herds, which 
ranged along the Ghost River on the edge of the hills.^ 

Major Walker, manager of the Cochrane Ranch, stocked 
the 100,000 acre lease, which extended from Morley to 
Calgary on both sides of the uow, with cattle from 
Montana. In the spring of 1881, he bought over 6,000 
cattle at $16.00 a head, delivered at the boundary. The 
I, Gr. Baker Baker Company contracted to deliver this 
stock at the Cochrane Ranch for $2.50 a head. Frank 
Strong, the Baker foreman, had thirty cowboys and three 
hundred horses under hijfu He divided the herd into two 
sections; the first contained steers and the second cows 
and calves. The stock was shoved along at a merciless 
rate; the steers averaging fifteen to eighteen miles a 
a day, while the cows often did fourteen. The animals 
l-~Xbid. Page 144. 














. 

} it 

♦ 

, * * 

' 

« 

, - 

* 

* • 

. 

. 

: 

* 

, 













- 134 - 


were kept on the move from daylight until dark, and at 
night they usually preferred resting to eating. Little 
calves dropped out and were piled in wagons, traded for 
whisky, or left behind. The worn and weary stock were 
Jammed across the Bow at Calgary, and were turned over to 
Major Walker and his men. The counting took place near 
the present C.P.R. depot, and then the animals were sent 
west to get located on the new range. Winter came on 
before the stock could recuperate; hundreds died befar e 
they could find shelter and water. They were only hair- 
branded that fall (marks made by acid or scraping with a 
knife) and by spring these brands had entirely disappeared. 
Major Walker was ordered to round up every head of un¬ 
branded stock which included the cattle owned by the 
settlers of the district. These small ranchers, in self- 
defence, reaped a harvest of Cochrane stock which had 
been missed in the general round-up. 1 

In 1882, Major Walker went south again, and bought 
over four thousand head from Poindexter and Orr. This 
herd was driven hard and reached £‘ish Creek, in September, 
in a weary and exhausted condition. Despite a fierce 
snow storm which buried the trails. Walker pushed the herd 
on to the Big Hill, near the present village of ^ochrane. 
This was done by driving lusty native steers through the 
snow drifts and then putting the trail-worn herds into the 


1—Ibid, p. 150. 







, 

. 


































, 

r 





, 


















, 

















- 135 - 


path they had made. Acting on telegraphio orders from 
the East, the Cochrane hands held the herds to their 
snow-bound range although there was fine grazing at the 
Blaokfoot Crossing. When the spring of 1883 finally came, 
it was seen how terrible the loss had been. Some of the 
long ravines were so filled with carcasses that a man could 
walk their entire length without having to step from a dead 
body. Out of the 12,000 Cochrane cattle, a scant 4,000 
remained. The next spring the remaining cattle were taken 
south to a new lease near the Waterton Lakes. - 

In 1883, Mr. Lynch of the Bar U bought 3,000 head 
of cattle at Lost River, Idaho. The stock left in May 
and arrived at the ranch west of High River early in 
September. While in Idaho, Lynch hired a negro cowhand, 

John Ware, who was to share with Johnny Franklin of Macleod, 
and Frank Ricks of Jochrane, the mythical rough-riding 
championship of Alberta. At this time the wages of cow¬ 
boys ranged from $40.00 to $60.00 a month while foremen 

2 

drew from $100.00 to $120.00. 

By this time, the valley of the High River was 
dotted with the herds of Emerson, Lynch, Quirk, and French. 
In 1883, the Chipman Ranch was started at the Elbow, and 
Malcolm Mclnnes put both horses and cattle on Fish Creek. 
Near Calgary Sproule and Walsh had a ranch. Patrick and 
Bayne had gone into partnership in the Ghost River country. 


1— Ibid, p. 152. 

2— Ibid, p. 150. 




i | ' 

, 








■ 





















. 










, 














, 







< 










-136- 


The Military Colonization Company, under the management 
of General Strange, had leased and stocked a large ranoh 
east of Calgary, in the valley of the Bow. This ranch 
was a sort of educational school for young English gentle¬ 
men who wished to learn ranching. Before the close of 

1883, there were 25,000 cattle between the Bow River and 
1 

the Boundary. 

In 1884, new lease regulations, which favored the 
smaller ranchers, were passed. No lease could exceed 
100,000 acres or run for longer than twenty-one years. 
Rental rates were $10.00 for 1,000 acres yearly and within 

three years there must he at least one head of stock for 

. 2 
every ten acres. 

In June and July of 1884, high water caused small 
streams to become raging torrents, many cattle were swept 
away, and men risked their lives in hazardous fords. 

However, the winter of 1884-5 was the best for stock 
that had ever been experienced and the cattle required 
no hay at any time. The weather, until the thaws came 
in February, was a steady invigorating cold, staying in 
the vicinity of zero. In January, two hundred head of 
cattle were driven from Pincher Creek to Calgary, and in 
February one hundred and fifty cattle came the one 
hundred and thirty miles from the mouth of the little Bow 
to Calgary. Both herds arrived in fine condition. 3 


1—Ibid, p. 156. 


2--Ibid, p.156. 


3—Ibid, p. 164. 




























, 




. 











































, 

. 








. 








-137- 


The stockmen north of Mosquito and Willow Greeks 
met at Skrine’s Ranch in September, 1885, and formed the 
North-West Stook Association with Alexander Hill, president, 
F. S. Stimson, vice-president, and G. levinge, secretary. 

It was composed of the Oxley, Bar U, Sheep Greek, Mount 
Head, Little Bow, Military GOlonization, Winder, Skrine, 
Fmerson, Iken, and ^uirk ranches.^ 

The winter of 1886-7 was one of the worst on rec¬ 
ord. From before Christmas to the end of February it 
was very cold and then it changed to wild floods and 
fierce snowstorms. The crusted snowdrifts caused heavy 
losses especially among the new stock, nay was not to be 
had and great steers were found with their throats and 
stomachs punctured by sharp splinters from dried and 
frozen branches. Bodies lay in piles from six to eight 
feet deep in the ravines. West of Calgary the snow was 
not so deep but six weeks of very cold weather killed 
even the strongest cattle. The average loss in the Calgary 
district was from fifty to sixty per cent. On top of 
this, there came a drop in the price of beef. However, 

the cattlemen proceeded to stock up again, and huge 

2 

quantities of hay were cut. 

Until the railway came in, the I. G. Baker co. 

bought all the animals that the ranchers had to sell. 

Their market was the Indians, the Mounted Police posts, 

J.— Ibid, page 185. 

2—Ibid, pages 199-204. 





, 

, 




1 










, 







































. 


- 








. 























, 







- 





—138- 


and later the railway construction camps. They paid from 
$35.00 to $45.00 and they bought indescriminately as old 
bulls were as toothsome to the Indians as the best-fed 
steers. The ranchers prospered during the Rebellion of 
1885 as the government paid .14^ a pound for the run of 
the herd, i?‘or the next few years, the ranchers suffered 
for lack of adequate markets but in 1887 they began to 
realize the possibilities of the British market. The 
first overseas exports netted $45.00 a head but shipments 
a year later turned out a dead loss as they had not been 
selected with the same care. It was the realization that 
the Old Country would accept nothing but the best, which 
induced many ranchers to improve their herds. 1 

At this time, another large market was opened up 
when the Von Valkenburgs, a large retail organization on 
the Pacific Coast, purchased two trainloads of stock at 
High Hiver. 

Next to a hard winter, the ranchers feared prairie 
fires, which might sweep down upon their herds at a 
minute's notice and leave in their wake blackened ranges 
and cattle for which death was a merciful deliverance. 

One of the most devastating of these was described by an 
early traveller: 

"Darkness had not settled over the prairie, before we 
saw long tongues of flame thrown up against the sky from a 


1-—Maclnnes, op cit page 239. 











-139- 


distant ridge; these disappeared and the bright glare only 
remained. A few minutes passed and a nearer ridge was 
reached and a long line of fire was seen to cross it and 
disappear. A few minutes more and the fire had passed the 
last ridge and with the speed of a fast horse it bore 
down upon us. As it came near, the whirling smoke and 
flames seemed to take the forms of living things that were 
in terrible agony. When it reached our oasis, it swept 
past on either side and a few gulps of smoke accompanied 
by a strong, hot wind were the only discomforts it caused 
us. When it was past, we saw that it kept an even front 
and wherever the grass was long and thick the flame 
continued for some time after the first rush had passed.1” 

Horse raising was relatively much less important. 
Before 1874, with the exception of those belonging to 
whisky traders or occasional travellers, Indian cayuses 
were the only horses found in the south-west. The 
original stock had been obtained by the Piegans during 
the second or third decade of the eighteenth century, 
from the Snakes, who lived across the mountains. Their 
increase, despite the haphazard methods of the Indians, 

2 

showed that the country was well adapted for horseraising. 

The coming of the police marked the real beginning 

1— Manitoba and the Great North-West. Llacoun, J. 

World Publ Go., Guelph, 1882. Page 652. 

2— Maclnnes, op cit page 6. 






-140- 


of the industry. A breeding farm was established near 
Pinoher Creek in 1875 as the native Indian ponies were 
quite unsuited for polioe purposes. 1 2 In the following 
year, a man named Christie, brought from Montana the first 
herd of horses offered for sale in Southern Alberta. He 

found a ready market at $100.00 a head among the white 

4 

settlers, the Indians and the police. When the Rev. 

John McDougall returned to Morley after the negotiation 

of Treaty Number 7 in 1877, he took with him a band of 

horses which he had purchased from an American at the 

2 

Blackfoot Crossing. 

Early in the ’89’s, General Strange imported a 
number of stallions and mares. It was hoped that the 
British Army would provide a steady market but, mainly 
because of the transportation problem, this venture was 
not wholly successful. The completion of the C.P.R. gave 
an immediate stimulus to the horse industry, and by 1887, 
the Cochrane Crritchley, Rawlinson, and Barwis horse 
ranches had been established on the Bow, and the Stimson 
ranch on the Highwood. Clydesdales, Hackneys, Irish 
Hunters, and Thoroughbreds were placed on the range, and 

f7 

attempts were made to develop the industry on proper lines. 

The Bow River Horse Ranch, located on part of the 
old Cochrane range, employed only Englishmen to handle 

1- -Blue, &p cit p.339. 3—Report of NWMP Comm./90, p.14 

2- -Kelly, op cit p.lEO. 4—Kelly, op cit p.115. 






■ 

. 

. 














. 








- . 

« 

e 












-141- 


and break the animals in order that they would be better 
suited for the British market, 1 R. Gr. Robinson, who 
bought the Chipraan Ranoh, obtained a stock of brood mares 
from John Lineham and was very successful in raising 

9 

good grade workhorses*~ 

The majority of the cattle ranches raised their 
own saddle ponies and as the demand for draft horses for 
agricultural purposes was only beginning by 1890, the 
number of horse ranches compared with those devoted to 
cattle was relatively small. 

Sheep ranching in Alberta never attained the 
proportions that did either cattle raising or horse rais¬ 
ing, although Dr. Hector, of the Palliser expedition, 
had been impressed with the possibilities of the country 
for that kind of stock, and Alexander Begg believed that 
Alberta ?/as even better suited for the production of sheep 
than for that of cattle and horses. The foothills and 
river bottoms would, he thought, supply the necessary 
shelter, the country was well furnished with an abundance 
of water, and its dry climate and altitude, together with 

the rich natural grasses, would make it a shepherd's 

3 

paradise. 

The first few sheep were driven into Southern 

Alberta in the late '70's but before the '80's no in- 

1—Kelly, op cit p.214. 2--Ibid, p.216, 

3—Macoun op cit p*228. 














. 


, 











. 












t 

, 




* 










- 

. 

f 


























-142- 


dustry had been established as the wolves, ooyotes and 
starving Indians would have rendered it unprofitable.! 

In 1884, W. D. Kerfoot, manager of the British-American 
Horse Ranch Company, whioh had taken over the old Coch¬ 
rane Ranch, brought in 8,000 fat grade sheep from Mon¬ 
tana. The herd crossed the Bow at Calgary, in a blinding 
September snowstorm. Two hundred Shropshire Down rams 
were imported. Alexander Begg, at the mouth of the High 
River, had been successfully breeding sheep in small 
numbers but Kerfoot f s was the first great drove to be 
turned loose in the district.^ 

But sheep raising was not destined to experience 
as great a success as had attended cattle raiiching. For 
one thing, the cattle men of the south, knowing that 
cattle could not live on the same range as sheep, pet- 
tioned the Government for protection, and in 1884, sheep 
raising was prohibited south of the High River and the 
north fork of the Bow. 3 Then the sheep experiment on the 
old Cochrane Ranch met with disaster; in March a prairie 
fire destroyed 1,000 head; over 300 were drowned in a 
deep slough during a snowstorm and hundreds of ewes died 
while lambing. As a result the British-American Co. 
soon returned to cattle raising. Other ranchers were not 

deterred by this Cochrane experience, and by 1886 there 

1--Maclnnes, op cit page E37. 

£--Kelly, op cit page 169. 

3—Ibid, page 178. 









« 

, 

. 

' o- 

« 














, 


, 


















m . 

. 

* 












-143- 


were 25,000 sheep in the Calgary district. Pettapiece 
and Potter, Lafferty and Brown each had 4,000 head on 
Nose Creek and Frank White's Merino Ranch, west of Calgary, 
was soon to have 5,000 head.’ 1 2 ' However, by 1889, the sheep 
ranchers were beginning to reduce their herds, preparatory 
to withdrawing from the business because of the continued 
low price of wool and the possibilities of heavy winter 
losses. 


By 1890, the business of breeding live stock on 
the range had developed from a haphazard system to a fairly 
careful and methodical business of which the most minute 
details were studied in orddr to achieve a maximum of 
efficiency in production. The first big herds were 
thrown on the open range and left to themselves, cowboys 
being engaged to see that they kept within reach of their 
own ranges, to assist weak stock in the springtime, to 
work on the roundups and to brand in the spring and fall. 
But after the first ten years, various lessons had been 
learned, sometimes in a very bitter form, and the ranching 
business now entailed much work. The best ranchers were 
weaning and feeding their calves; weak cows were being 
corralled for winter feeding; bulls were generally held 
at the home ranch, and the good stallions were usually 

kept up though scrubs were still allowed on the range.2 

1— Kelly, op cit page 194. 

2— Ibid* page 251. 





« 


■ 




' 

* 

, 




















« 




, 













, 

, 




. f 












. 






. 










- 144 - 


Shorthorns and Herefords were the prime favorites al¬ 
though Polled Angus were gaining in favour, and many were 
using Highland bulls to give a better rustling animal 
with better textured meat and finer robes.^ The cayuse 
stock was gradually being replaced by Clydesdales. 

The ranches were decreasing in size but increasing 
in numbers; the days of the 100,000 acre ranch with its 
thousands of cattle were over. The small rancher with 
little capital but with practical experience had ousted 
the large ranches, capitalized in and managed from the 
East. 

The cattle and horse industry was to prosper until 
the turn of the twentieth century, when the small farmer 
who combined tillage with stock raising, with his deadly 
barbed-wire fences, completed the work of shutting off 
the water-holes, the choice ranges, and the well protected 
river valleys from the range stock. With the passing of 
the open range, the old ranching industry was doomed; a 
more solid but far less romantic, economic order, had 
come to take its place. 

1--Kelly, op cit Page 211. 












































































































- 145 - 


CONCLUSION 


The gradual evolution of the eoonomic life of 
Southern Alberta was reflected in the business, social and 
political life of Calgary as it was in all the towns of 
the south-west. Middle-aged men from Ontario and the 
Central States came in to take up free homesteads or to 
engage in the business life of the towns so that their 
sons might have those opportunities which the East did not 
provide. Most of these men had money and they gave the 
west a stability which it would not otherwise have had. 

The dry years of 1890-94 gave a setback to the 
south-west as many of the settlers moved to the bush 
country along the Calgary-Edmonton line. However, the 
wet years following 1894 stopped this exodus with its 
accompaning auction sales and notices of bankruptcy. The 
completion of the Macleod branch of the C. & E. line 
hurt the Calgary retailer, but it started the influx of 
eastern wholesale houses into Calgary. 

The increase of wealth and population resulted in 

well-defined social classes replacing the more democratic 

life of the frontier town. The relative proportion of 

women to men increased and more attention was paid to 

§. 

education and the other niceties of civilization. 








■ 


. 






■ 









' 




m 




















. ■ 




■ 








. 

, 



















. 








- 146 - 


The men from the East brought their political 
faiths with them and instead of campaigns being waged 
about the personalities of the respective candidates, the 
platform of the Conservative and Liberal parties now 
became the principal consideration* The position of the 
various political standard-bearers regarding tariffs and 
the Manitoba School Question received more attention 
than did their stand.on ranch leases, homesteads, range 
laws, around which the earlier political campaigns had 
been waged* The newcomers from the East resented the 
position of Alberta as a territory and soon all united 
to obtain provincial autonomy for Alberta. 

Calgary 1 s position as the chief centre of the 
district of Alberta seemed to be assured. By 1894.its 
population had increased to 3,000 so on January 1 of that 
year the Lieutenant-Governor of the North-West Territories 
signed the charter which incorporated it as a city, the 
first centre in the Territories to be so honored. The 
following years were to be kind to Calgary and although 
it never equalled Denver and Chicago, as the men of 1884 
had optimistically prophesied, it was to have a population 
of 80,000 just 60 years after the founding of Fort Calgary, 
an isolated police outpost in the country of the Blackfeet. 







. 

' 












< t 





. 










. . 


. 

' 


, 






, 






























/ 








m 


7*7 

BUSINESS MEN - 1S84 . 

Rankin & Allan, gents* furnishings; C.E. Jacques, 
jeweler; Thos. Burns, auctioneer; I.G, Baker & Company, 
general merchants; S. Parrish & Company, flour and feed; 
Thomson Bros., stationers; A. Ferland & Chas. Watson, 
sellers of bankrupt stock; S. W. Trott, druggist; 

McIntyre & Davidson, jewelers; Jas. C. Linton, stationery 
and tobacco; J. D. White & Company, painters; Ross & 
McNamara, shoemakers; J. H. Rodway & Company, tinsmiths; 
Geo. L. Fraser, confectioners; J. 0. Van Wart, general 
merchants; A. Henderson, M.D. and druggist; Geo Squibb, 
baker; I.J. Claxton, baker; Mortimer & Company, baker; 

R. J. Ogburn, barber and bathhouse; Geo. Murdoch, harness; 
k, C. Sparrow, butcher; A.P. Samples, butcher; Cummings & 
kllen, livery; W. A. Mickle, livery; A. G. McDonald, 
livery and feed; Geo. A. Winton, mail driver; King & 
Company, Royal Mail Line, passenger and express; S. J. Hogg 
& Company, lumber; Frank Dick, lumber; Jas. Walker, lumber; 
Murphy & Martin, gents’ furnishings; Penistan & Jarvis, 
real estate; J. K. Oswald, notary public; Chipman Bros., 
hardware; Thos. Watts, architect and builder; E. McCraskie 
<k Company, architect; W. T. Ramsay, notary public; 

Jas. Martin, H. E. Smith, Jarrett, Cushing, carpenters; 

J. F. McGuire, J. B, Rivet, D. Hamilton, blacksmiths; 

Jr. Neville; Dr. J. Lindsay; Dr. A. Henderson; W. Wilson, 








i h i 

dentist; seven legal cards: Peterson & Peterson; Perry & 
Coleman; H. Bleecker; Jas. A. Lougheed; C. N. Campbell; 


Stewart, Chrysler & Gormelly of Ottawa; T. 
Winnipeg. Surveyors: C.W.H. Sansom; G. A 
McVittie Bros.; Miles & Brown. 


H. Gilmour, 

. & L. B. Stewart 









SETTLERS IN CALGARY AND DISTRICT IN lgg4 


Mrs. Alex Matheson 
Mrs. G. C. King 
Mrs. John McDougall 
Mrs. Fred Graham 
Mrs. David McDougall 
Mrs. Norman Luxtan 
Mrs. George Ransome 
Mrs. G. E. Jacques 
Mrs. Malcolm Millar 
Mrs. E. P. McNeill 
Mrs. James Grant 
Mrs. S. W. Shaw 
Mrs. R. C. Thomas 
Mrs. J. M. William 
Lady Lougheed 
Mrs. Frank Collicut 
Mrs. William Cousins 
Mrs. H, E. Kelley 
Mrs. George Lane 
Mrs. J. J. McHugh 
Mrs. L. A. Pierce 
Mrs. George Ross 
Mrs. B. E. Canniff 
Mrs. C. E. Cope 
Mrs. J. E. Eckersley 
Mrs. J. D. Holmes 
Mrs. J. D. Lauder 
Mrs. Edward Loder 
Mrs. Alex McRae 
Mrs. P. J. Nolan 
Mrs. W. C. Pinkham 
Mrs. William Renwick 

Louie Ahlenious 
J. H. Brown 
Ralph A. G, Bell 
Harry W. Bright 
A. P, Bremner 
Harold Bannister 
P. Turner Bone 
Harry 0. Breain 
Robert Butler 
Fred A. Bagley 
J. W. Clarke 
CT. W. Carroll 
W. H. Cushing 
Dr. M. C. Costello 


Thomas N. Christie 
Clifford E. Clarke 
Dr. T. J. Costello 
James Clark 
Duncan Clark 
Thomas Copeland 
W. N. Damon 
Daniel Davis 
J. S. Dennis 
Thomas C. Douglas 
Robert Dixon 
Henry F. Dennehy 
Alonzo E. Earl 
John J. Fidler 

I. S. Freeze 
Jas. Falconer 

G. L, Fraser 
John Finnigan 
Robert Fletcher 
James S. Gibb 
Emil Griesbach 
Frederick W. Godsal 
Samuel W. Graham 
Raymond L. Gaetz 
George Godlonton 
James H. Galloway 
Andrew Henderson, M. D 
Arthur H. Heney 

John W. Hayes 
Frank Hudson 
Charles J. Hudson 
Fred W. Ings 
William Thomas Jones 
Charles Jackson 

J. H, Johnston 
George C. King 
Rufus A. Kimpton 
John E. Lethbridge 
James C. Linton 

J. D. Lauder 
Malcolm T. Millar 

H. F. Maunsell 
Herbert Millar 
Norman T. Macleod 
Thos. N. Martin 
Peter MacArthur 
Alfred S. McKay 

























, 

. 








4 










R. B. MoNabb 
Morley McDougall 
Malcolm Mclnnes 
W. H. McCardell 
John F. McGinnis 
Hon. R. G. Brett 
Sir James A. Lougheed 
Wm. Roper Hull 
A. E. Cross 
Howard Douglas 
Dr. N. J. Lindsay 
David McDougall 
Rev. Father Gaspard 
John J. McHugh 
AngU6 McDonald, Sr. 

James N. Rankin 
Rt. Rev. Cyprian Pinkham 
IVm. Pearce 
Chas. C. Short 
leorge Skelding 
tfarston Sexsmith 
John A. Nolan 
Addison McPherson 
John McKinnon 
Malcolm P. McNeill 
James McKevitt 
James Mitchell 
John G. Mitchell 
E. H. Maunsell 
Sdward Larkin 
Thomas Scott 
Trank Sibbald 
Wm. A. Thompson 
Trancis White 
Wm. R. Wright 
Samuel Wigmore 
Jeorge B. Hall 
Daniel G. Gillies 
Archie Grant 
Alfred D. Fidler 
Adam Dalgleish 
A.B.A. Cunningham 
0. G. Colquhoun 
John Clark 
James Brogden 
Jos. Bannerman 
•'rank Beattie 
Dr. R. H. Brett 
?hos. S. Burns 


James McKernan 

Alex S. McTavish 

David P. McNab 

Robert Newbolt 

Wm. N. Parslow 

Frederick Peel 

George C. S. Patterson 

Robert Patterson 

Henry Pitkin 

Harry J. Richards 

Wm. Robertson 

Andrew Sibbald 

Arthur F. Scheer 

Lt.-Col. G. E. Sanders 

T. J. S. Skinner 

James Smart 

J. A. Shields 

Soloraan Spafford 

Veil. Archdeacon J.W.Tims 

R. C. Thomas 

Wm. Wilson 

R. A. Wallace 

Col. James Walker 

William J. Walker 

Milton Williams 

George T. Young 

Alexander Allan 

Tom Wilson 


algary Daily Herald-1933* Pages l£ and 27 















‘ 

£ rs q • i 

1 

. 

. 

' 


, 








\* v 

RANCHERS IN CALGARY DISTRICT - 1590 - FROM 
MOSQUITO CREEK NORTH TO THE BOW . 


McHugh Bros. 

C. P. Cattle Company 
Johnson Bros. 

High River Horse Ranch 
W. Iken 
C. F. I. Knox 
C. C. Ranch 
W. Skrine 

E. A. Cross 

H. B. Alexander 

N. W. Cattle Company or Bar U 

Sanson & Harford 

Ross & Podgers 

F. Brown 

J. J. Sullivan 
[ngs Bros. 

>. Emerson 

3ow River Horse Ranch 
Scarlett Bros. 


D. Lynch 
J. Robinson 
Hull Bros. 

D. McDougall 
J. McDougall 
Leeson & Scott 
Mount Royal Ranch 
W. D, Kerfoot 
W. Bell-Irving 
J. McKinnell 
Brealey Bros. 

Shea & Madden 
W. Cowan. 

Merino Ranch Company 
Quorn Ranch 
Heald & Eustace 
J. Fisher 
J. Guirk 


Phe Range Men. Kelly,L.W. Pages 25O-25I 





- 


. 











I**- 

BIBLIOGR APH Y OF WORKS CON SU LTED . 

Barneby, Henry. Life and Labour in the Far-West, 1884. 

London, Cassel ana Company. 

Begg. Seventeen Years in the Canadian North-West. 

London, Alexander 1884. 

Blue, John. Alberta Past and Present. Chicago, Pioneer 
Historical Publishing Company 1924. 

Calgary Daily Herald: 

October 22, 1923—Anniversary Number. 
September 10, 1§25. 

January 21, 1922. 

June 2, 1925 

November 18, 1933—Anniversary Number. 

Files 1883-90 

Reminiscences of Cappy Smart 1931-34. 
Calgary Morning Albertan: 

February 28, 1909—Anniversary Number. 
March 2, 1911. 

May 11, 1914. 

Calgary Agricultural Society's Pamphlet—1926. 

Calgary School Board's Outline of Schools—1932. 

Caine, W. S, A Trip Round the World, 1887-8. London, 

George Routledge and London. 

Coues. New Light on Early History of the North-West—1897. 
Denny, Sir Cecil E. The Riders of the Plains. 

Calgary Herald Company—1905. 

Denny. The Birth of Western Canada (Manuscript) 

In Legislative Library, Edmonton. 
Riginbotham, John D. When the West was Young. Toronto 
Ryerson—1933. 

Celly, L, W. The Range Men. Toronto, W. Briggs—*1913. 
flcDougall, John. On Western Trails in the Early Seventies. 
Toronto, W. Briggs—1911. 

McLeod, J.E.A. Notes on Old Bow Fort. Article in 
Canadian Historical Review-—1931. 
dadnnes, C. M. In the Shadow of the Rockies. London, 
Rivington* s—1930. 

;^acoun, J. Manitoba and the Great North-West. Guelph, 
World Publishing Company—1882. 

HacRae, A, 0, History of the Province of Alberta. Calgary, 
Western Canada Historical Company-—1912. 
Palliser—Journal Reports relative to the Exploration of 
British North America—1857-80. 

Reports of the Commissioner of North-West Mounted Police— 

1878-90. 

Steele, Sir S. B, Forty Years in Canada. Toronto, 
McClelland—1914. 







(tv 





I 









I 







Shortt, Adam and Doughty, A,G. Canada and Its Provinces. 

Volume 19. Toronto Publishers Association 
of Canada—1914. 

Strange, Gen. T. Bland. Gunner Jingo*s Jubilee. London, 
John MacQueen—IS 96 . 

Tribune, Calgary—June, 1914—Log of an Old Timer. 

Wallace, J. N. Early Exploration Along the Bow and 

Saskatchewan Rivers. Paper Read to the 
Calgary Historical Society. 
























