
THE EFFECT OF CERTAIN DRUGS ON SKELETAL 
MUSCLE STIMULATION 
by 


Frederick Wilson Teare, B* Sc 























0JC UBMS 

ara«si»a® 

m&mmm 









Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 





https://archive.org/details/effectofcertaindOOfred 





THE EFFECT OF CERTAIN DRUGS ON SKELETAL MUSCLE 


STIMULATION. 


Frederick Wilson Teare, B.Sc. 


A thesis submitted in conformity with the require¬ 
ments for the degree of Master of Science by the 
Universiy of Alberta. 


School of Pharmacy 


University of Alberta 
1951 








ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


The author gratefully acknowledges the valuable 
assistance and constructive criticism given by Dr. M. J. 
Huston throughout the course of this investigation. 

He wishes to thank the Ganadian Foundation for the 
Advancement of Pharmacy for making this investigation 
possible. 

His thanks are also due to the Department of 
Biochemistry for supplying the experimental animals. 

He wishes to express his appreciation to the 
following pharmaceutical manufacturers for supplying 
the materials used in this investigation; 

Abbott Laboratories 
Eli Lilly and Company 
Parke, Davis and Company 

















. 







■ 

’ 











c 











TABLE OF CONTENTS 







PAGE 


I. INTRODUCTION 1-20 

1. Morphology of Skeletal Muscle 1 

2. Motor Nerves and the Innervation of Skeletal 

Muscle 1 

3® Morphology of the Motor End-Plate 2 

4. Impulse Transmission at the Neuromuscular and 

Ganglionic Synapses 3 

(a) Chemical Theory 4 

(b) Electrical Theory 7 

(c) Dual Theory 8 

3* Neuromuscular Transmission Block 9 

60 Chemistry and Pharmacology of the Drugs 10 

(a) Barbiturates 10 

(b) Meperidine Hydrochloride 13 

(c) Benzethonium Chloride 16 

(d) d-Tubocurarine Chloride 18 

(e) Paradione 20 

II. STATEMENT OP THE PROBLEM 21 

III. EXPERIMENTAL 22-28 

1. Method 22 

Apparatus 

(a) Method of Stimulation 22 

1. Sciatic Nerve - Gastrocnemius 

Muscle Preparation of the Rat 22 

2. Isolated Phrenic Nerve - Diaphragm 

Preparation of the Rat 22 

(b) Method of Securing and Recording 23 

1. Sciatic Nerve - Gastrocnemius 

Muscle Preparation of the Rat 23 

2. Isolated Phrenic Nerve - Diaphragm 

Preparation of the Rat 


23 



: : 


' 







PAGE 


(c) Artificial Respiration for the Intact 


Animals 24 

(d) Aeration of Tyrode f s Solution for 

Isolated Muscle Experiments 24 

2. Procedure 24 - 28 

(a) Sciatic Nerve - Gastrocnemius Muscle 

Preparation of the Intact Rat 24 

(b) Isolated Phrenic Nerve - Diaphragm 

Preparation of the Rat 26 

IV. RESULTS 29 - 97 


Part I. Sciatic Nerve - Gastrocnemius Preparation 29 - 70 

1. Barbiturates 29 - 49 

(a) Sodium Pentobarbital 120 mg./Eg. 29 

Denervation Experiments 55 

(b) Sodium Pentobarbital 250 mg./Kg. 55 

Denervation Experiments 41 

(c) 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylally1)-5-Ethyl 

Barbituric Acid (sodium salt) 25mg./Kg. 41 

Denervation Experiments 45 

2. Meperidine Hydrochloride 45 

(a) Meperidine Hydrochloride 80 mg./Kg. 45 

Denervation Experiments 55 

(b) Meperidine Hydrochloride 105 mg./Kg. 50 

5* Benzethonium Chloride 25 mg./Kg. 55 

Denervation Experiments 58 

4. Paradione 1000 mg./Kg. ^3 

Denervation Experiments ^3 


Part II. Isolated Phrenic Nerve - Diaphragm 
Preparation 

• Barbiturates 


71 - 97 


1 


(a) Sodium Pentobarbital 10 mg.% 


71 - 82 
71 
















: . - 

.F iV,; ) 





PAGE 

(b) Sodium Pentobarbital 50 mg.% 71 

Curarization Experiments 74 

(c) 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-5-Ethyl 

Barbituric Acid (sodium salt) 10 mg.7> 78 

Curarization Experiments 78 

2. Meperidine Hydrochloride 82 

(a) Meperidine Hydrochloride 5 mg.% 82 

(b) Meperidine Hydrochloride 20 Mg.7<> 82 

Curarization Experiments 82 

3* Benzethonium Chloride 5 Mg.% 87 

4# Paradione 220 Mg.% 91 

Curarization Experiments 91 

V. DISCUSSION 98 - 111 

(a) Sodium Pentobarbital (Nembutal) 98 

(b) 5 - (gamma, gaxnma-Dime thy lallyl) - 5 -Ethyl 

Barbituric Acid (sodium salt) 102 

(c) Meperidine Hydrochloride (Demerol HC1) 104 

(d) Benzethonium Chloride (Phemerol Chloride) 107 

(e) Paradione 109 

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 112 - 115 

VII. BIBLIOGRAPHY H 6 - 120 






















LIST OF TABLES 


PAGE 


TABLE I. 


TABLE II. 


TABLE III. 


TABLE IV. 


TABLE V. 


TABLE VI. 


TABLE VII. 


TABLE VIII. 


TABLE IX. 


Response of Normal Gastrocnemius Muscle 
of the Rat to Electrical Stimulus at 
10 sec. Intervals 30 

Response of Denervated Gastrocnemius 

Muscle of the Rat to Electrical Stimulus 
at 10 sec. Intervals 31 

Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 120 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Normal Gastroc¬ 
nemius Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 35 

Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 120 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Denervated 
Gastrocnemius Muscle (Artificial 
Respiration) 56 

Comparison of Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 
120 mg./Kg. on Normal and Denervated 
Gastrocnemius Muscle 57 

Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 250 mg./Kg. 
on the response of the Normal Gastroc¬ 
nemius Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 58 

Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 250 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Denervated 
Gastrocnemius Muscle (Artificial 
Respiration) 42 

Comparison of Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 
250 mg./Kg. on Normal and Denervated 
Gastrocnemius Muscle 43 

Effect of 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)- 

5-Ethyl Barbituric Acid (sod. salt) 25 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Normal Gastrocnemius 

Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 46 



' 


* 

■ ' ; 

. 

. 

- 

. 

- 


, 





PAGE 


TABLE X. 


TABLE XI. 


TABLE XII. 


TABLE XIII. 


TABLE XIV. 


TABLE XV. 


TABLE XVI. 


TABLE XVII. 


TABLE XVIII. 


Effect of 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)- 

5-Ethyl Barbituric Acid (sod. Salt) 25 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Denervated Gastroc¬ 
nemius Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 47 

Comparison of Effect of 5-(gamma, gamma- 
Dimethylallyl)-5-Ethyl Barbituric Acid 
(sod. salt) 25 mg./Kg. on Normal and 
Denervated Gastrocnemius Muscle 48 

Effect of Meperidine Hydrochloride 80 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Normal Gastroc¬ 
nemius Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 31 

Effect of Meperidine Hydrochloride 185 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Normal Gastroc¬ 
nemius Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 52 

Effect of Meperidine Hydrochloride 80 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Denervated 

Gastrocnemius Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 

56 

Comparison of Effect of Meperidine Hydro¬ 
chloride 80 mg./Kg. on Normal and Denervated 
Gastrocnemius Muscle 57 

Effect of Benzethonium Chloride 25 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Normal Gastroc¬ 
nemius Muscle ( Artificial Respiration) 59 

Effect of Benzethonium Chloride 25 mg./Kg. 
on the Response of the Denervated 

Gastrocnemius Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 

60 

Comparison of Effect of Benzethonium Chloride 
25 mg./Kg. on Normal and Denervated 
Gastrocnemius Muscle 


c 






. o . > • ; ir.. ■ , 


. 

C 

' ' . 

* 


■ 




' ' ' ■ 

' 

* 

. 

it ' ■ ■ ■ * 

" ' ; 

. . ' *' ■ 

' 

. 

















PAGE 


TABLE XIX. 

TABLE XX. 

TABLE XXI. 

TABLE XXII. 

TABLE XXIII. 

TABLE XXIV. 

TABLE XXV. 

TABLE XXVI. 

TABLE XXVII. 

TABLE XXVIII. 


Effect of Paradione 1000 mg./Kg. on the 
Response of the Normal Gastrocnemius 
Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 

Effect of Paradione 1000 mg./Kg. on the 
Response of the Denervated Gastroc¬ 
nemius Muscle (Artificial Respiration) 
Comparison of Effect of Paradione 
1000 mg./Kg. on Normal and Deneryated 
Gastrocnemius Muscle 
Effect of Ethanol 65% on the Response 
of the Normal Gastrocnemius Muscle 
Effect of Nembutal 10 mg.% on the 
Response of the Isolated Diaphragm 
Effect of Nembutal 50 mg.% on the 
Response of the Isolated Diaphragm 
Effect of Nembutal 50 mg.% on the 
Response of the Isolated Curarized 
Diaphragm 

Effect of 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)- 
5-Ethyl Barbituric Acid (sod. salt) 

10 mg .% on the Response of the 
Isolated Diaphragm 

Effect of 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)- 
5-Ethyl Barbituric Acid (sod. salt) 

10 mg.% on the Response of the 
Isolated Curarized Diaphragm 
Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 5 mg.% 


64 


65 

68 

69 

72 

75 

76 


79 


80 


On the Response of the Isolated 
Diaphragm 


85 









. 

* 



* 

. 



















, 


, 








PAGE 


TABLE XXIX. Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 20 mg.% 
on the Response of the Isolated 
Diaphragm 84 

TABLE XXX. Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 20 mg.% 
on the Response of the Isolated 
Curarized Diaphragm 88 

TABLE XXXI. Effect of Phemerol Chloride 5 mg.% on the 

Response of the Isolated Diaphragm 89 

TABLE XXXII. Effect of Paradione 220 mg.% on the 

Response of the Isolated Diaphragm 9 2 

TABLE XXXIII. Effect of Paradione 220 mg.% on the 
Response of the Isolated Curarized 
Diaphragm 9J> 


TABLE XXXIV. Changes in PH of Aerated Tyrode f s Solution 

as a Result of the Addition of Drugs 96 





LIST OF FIGURES 


PAGE 


FIGURE 1. Apparatus for Isolated Diaphragm Experiments 27 
FIGURE 2. Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 120 mg./Kg. 

on the Normal Rat Leg 34 

FIGURE 3* Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 120 mg./Kg. 

on the Denervated Rat Leg 34 

FIGURE 4. Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 230 mg./Kg. 

on the Normal Rat Leg 39 

FIGURE J. Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 230 mg./kg. 

on the Denervated Rat Leg 39 

FIGURE 6. Comparison of Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 
120 mg./Kg. on Normal and Denervated 
Rat Leg 40 

FIGURE 7« Comparison of Effect of Sodium Pentobarbital 
230 mg./kg. on Normal and Denervated 
Rat Leg 40 

FIGURE 8. Effect of 3-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-3- 

Ethyl Barbituric Acid (sod. salt) 23 mg./Kg. 
on the Normal Rat Leg 44 

FIGURE 9. Effect of 3-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-3- 

Ethyl Barbituric Acid (sod. salt) 23 mg./Kg. 
on the Denervated Rat Leg 44 

FIGURE 10. Comparison of Effect of 3-1 gamma, gamma- 
Dimethylallyl)-3-Ethyl Barbituric Acid 
(sod. salt) 23 mg./Kg. on Normal and 
Denervated Rat Leg 49 

FIGURE 11. Comparison of Effect of Phemerol Chloride 

23 mg./Kg. on Normal and Denervated Rat Leg 
FIGURE 12. Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 80 mg./Kg. 


on the Normal Rat Leg 


95 



















































PAGE 


FIGURE 1J. Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 80 mg./Kg. 

on the Denervated Rat Leg 33 

FIGURE 14. Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 183 mg./Kg. 

on the Normal Rat Leg 34 

FIGURE 13. Comparison of Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 

80 mg./Kg. on Normal and Denervated Rat Leg 34 
FIGURE 16. Effect of Phemerol Chloride 23 mg./Kg. on the 

Normal Rat Leg 62 

FIGURE 17. Effect of Phemerol Chloride 23 mg./Kg. on the 

Denervated Rat Leg 62 

FIGURE 18. Effect of Paradion© 1000 mg./Kg. on the 

Normal Rat Leg 66 

FIGURE 19. Effect of Paradion© 1000 mg./Kg. on the 

Denervated Rat Leg 66 

FIGURE 20. Effect of Ethanol 63 % on the Normal Rat Leg 

( Control for Paradione) 70 

FIGURE 21. Comparison of Effect of Paradione 1000 mg./Kg. 
on Normal and Denervated Rat Leg 
also Effect of Ethanol 63 % based on the 
Normal Control Curve 70 

FIGURE 22. Effect of Nembutal 10 mg.% on the Isolated 

Rat Diaphragm (Tracing) 75 

FIGURE 23. Effect of PH Alteration on the Response of 

the Isolated Rat Diaphragm (tracing) 73 

FIGURE 24. Effect of Nembutal 30 mg.7° on the Isolated 

Rat Diaphragm (Tracing) 77 

FIGURE 23* Effect of Nembutal 30 mg.% on the Isolated 
Curarized Rat Diaphragm (Tracing) 


77 







PAGE 

FIGURE 26. Effect of 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-3- 
Ethyl Barbituric Acid (sod. salt). 10 mg.% 
on the Isolated Rat Diaphragm (Tracing) 81 

FIGURE 27. Effect of 3-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-3- 
Ethyl Barbituric Acid (sod. salt) 10 mg.% 
on the Isolated Curarized Rat Diaphragm 8l 

FIGURE 28. Effect of Several Doses of 3-(gamma, gamma- 
Dimethylallyl)-5-Ethyl Barbituric Acid 
(sod. salt) on the Isolated Curarized Rat 
Diaphragm (Tracing) 85 

FIGURE 29. Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 3 mg.% on 

the Isolated Rat Diaphragm (Tracing) 83 

FIGURE 30. Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 20 iag.% on 

the Isolated Rat Diaphragm (Tracing) 86 

FIGURE 31. Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 20 mg.% on 

the Isolated Curarized Diaphragm (Tracing) 86 

FIGURE 32. Effect of Phemerol Chloride 3 mg.% on the 

Isolated Rat Diaphragm (Tracing) 90 

FIGURE 33. Effect of Several Doses of Paradione on the 

Isolated Rat Diaphragm (Tracing) 90 

FIGURE 34-. Effect of Paradione 220 mg.% on the Isolated 

Rat Diaphragm (Tracing) 94 

FIGURE 33. Effect of Paradione 220 mg.% on the Isolated 

Curarized Rat Diaphragm 94 



INTRODUCTION 









1 


An understanding of the morphology and histology of the 
structures involved in the innervation and contraction of 
skeletal muscles is essential to a problem concerned with the 
effect of certain drugs on these structures. 

1. MORPHOLOGY OF SKELETAL-MUSCLE 
Skeletal muscle, the most abundant tissue in the body, 
consists of long multinucleated fibers supported by connective 
tissue. A thin membrane, the sarcolemma, encloses each muscle 
fiber. The perimysium surrounds the fasiculi or muscle 
bundles of which a large number are held together by another 
external layer of connective tissue to form the muscle (1)* 
Highly developed myofibrils running the length cf the 
muscle fiber are surrounded by sarcoplasm, a fluid proto¬ 
plasmic substance. The myofibrillae consist of long proto¬ 
plasmic threads composed of alternating disfcs of light and 
dark material, which when lined up with adjacent fibril discs, 
give striated muscle its striped appearance (1,2,3)® The 
alternating light and dark discs are called J and Q discs 
respectively. Each J disc is bissected by a Z line which 
extends from one side of the muscle fiber to the other. The 
portion between two Z lines is a sarcomere and is considered 
to be a small contractile unit of striated muscle (2). 
Connective tissue harnesses the muscle fibers by connecting 
them to the tendons or other structures upon which they exert 
their pull (2,4)® 


2. MOTOR NERVES AND THE IiVNERVATION Of SKELETAL MUSCLE 








2 


Skeletal muscles are innervated by motor nerves running 
from the ventral horns of the spinal cord (2,3). Most somatic 
nerves are covered by both the neurolemma and a myelin sheath 
while others are covered only by the former. The peripheral 
nerve consists of various bundles of nerve fibers covered by 
layers of connective tissue in a somewhat similar manner to 
that seen in voluntary muscle (2). The axon passes through 
the several layers of connective tissue to the muscle fiber 
where the end of each nerve fiber loses its myelin sheath and 
ramifies into a terminal arborization. Every motor nerve 
fiber supplies an average of one hundred or more muscle 
fibers (5). The neurolemma of the nerve fiber appears to 
merge with the sarcolemma of the muscle fiber. Each terminal 
network enters a shallow pool of sarcoplasm, just below the 
sarcolemma, where it forms a plate-like net known as the motor 
end-plate. There is at least one end-plate for every muscle 
fiber (1,2,6). 

Skeletal muscle exhibits varying degrees of contraction 
in response to electrical stimuli of different intensities. 

This is due to the fact that a varying number of muscle fibers 
are excited by different strength stimuli, which range from 
minimal effective shocks to those producing maximal contract¬ 
ions. The number of fibers excited and therefore the degree 
of shortening of the muscle is dependent on the number of 
nerve fibers stimulated. The individual muscle fiber contracts 
maximally or not at all. Likewise excitation is propogated 
maximally or not at all in the single nerve fiber, i.e. they 
obey the tr all or none law Tt . This law does not apply to a 











, 

. 

■ 






. 


... S J 














f 




* t - 


. 






















■ 








. 







- 3 - 


muscle bundle or nerve trunk (4). 

3. MORPHOLOGY OF THE MOTOR END-PLATE 

Motor nerves to skeletal muscle end in an arborization 
at a special region of the muscle known as the motor end-plate. 

This has been shown to be a structure which is separate from 
and outside the terminal arborization of the nerve (7)* Rod¬ 
like masses appear to be lined up side by side perpendicular 
to the terminals. Fine thread-like projections run from the 
ends of the rods which face the muscle and extend into the 
sarcoplasm of the muscle fiber. Cross sections of the end- 
plate reveal that the nerve endings lie in gutters and grooves (7). 

Nerve and muscle fibers both have physiological 
membranes across which potentials are maintained. The exterior 
of the two membranes face one another in the end-plate region. 

The region lined with palisades is considered part of the 
physiological membrane of the muscle. The arriving nerve 
impulse and departing muscle impulse represent waves of 
depolarization of their respective membranes. 

4. IMPULSE TRANSMISSION AT THE NEUROMUSCULAR ALP GANGLIONIC 

SYNAPSES 

Many more phenomena at the neuromuscular synapse can 
be explained by the chemical mediator (acetylcholine) theory 
than by the electrical theory which proposes the action current 
to be the transmitter, therefore only the former will be dis¬ 
cussed in any detail. 












- 4 - 


( a ) Chemical Theory 

Kibjakow (9) was the first to suggest that impulses 
might be transmitted at the autonomic ganglion by means of a 
chemical mediator. The agent released at this ganglion, as 
a result of preganglionic stimulation, was shown to be acetyl¬ 
choline by Feldberg and Gaddum (10>). About this time the 
motor nerves to skeletal muscles were shown to be cholinergic 
and it was suggested by Dale and Feldberg (11) that acetyl¬ 
choline was also the mediator in the somatic nervous system 
as well as the autonomic nervous system. Since then much 
evidence has been advanced that a chemical mediator exists. 

Dale, Feldberg and Vogt (12) observed that a substance, 
pharmacologically similar to acetylcholine, appeared in the 
perfusate of a perfused dog leg when the motor nerves were 
stimulated. Furthermore acetylcholine administered by close 
arterial injection causes a contractile response, consisting 
of a brief tetanus, in skeletal muscle (13, 14) 

The action of cholinesterase inhibitors has been put 
forward as further evidence in support of acetylcholine as 
the chemical mediator. Anticholinesterase substances, of which 
eserine is typical, 1.) cause an increase in the height of 
the twitch response to a single nerve stimulus. This is due 
to repetitive firing of the muscle. 2.) cause greater de¬ 
pression of response to high frequency stimulation of the nerve. 
3#) alter the response to injected acetylcholine when the 
muscle is stimulated indirectly, but cause no change when 
the muscle is stimulated directly (16). Anticholinesterases 
have no effect on directly stimulated denervated or curarized 
muscles (13). This shows that the neuromuscular transmission 




■ . ; .i :c ; v-'- : • 



, 














;< { 





- 5 - 

is affected by the accumulation of acetylcholine when the 
nerve is stimulated (16). These facts are compatible with 
the chemical theory of transmission of excitation from the 
nerve to voluntary muscle in the mammal. 

Eccles and O^Connor (18, 19, 20) and others (16, 21, 22) 
have shown that every nerve impulse upon reaching the neuro¬ 
muscular junction releases acetylcholine which sets up an 
end-plate potential that is recorded as a local depolarization 
of the post-synaptic membrane. When this depolarization 
reaches a sufficient amplitude it gives rise to a propagated 
impulse in the muscle membrane surrounding the junction. It 
has been noted that the amplitude of the end-plate potential 
is proportional to the concentration of acetylcholine and its 
decay parallels the rate of destruction of this mediator. 

The sequence of events in synaptic transmission is ; pre- 

synaptic nerve impulse- > liberation of acetylcholine -■— 

end-plate potential —muscle impulse (12, 16, 23, 24). 
Electrical recordings of the end-plate region reveal that 
the application of acetylcholine here causes depolarization 
intense enough to excite a muscl6 impulse which causes the 
collapse of the depolarization. This depolarization is again 
built up by acetylcholine and a train of muscle impulses 
results (25). 

Additional support for the chemical theory results 
from the comparison of the electric organs of certain fish, 
ie. Torpedo and Electrophorus electricus, to the motor end- 
plate of skeletal muscle. The electric organ has been 
described as an accumulation of modified motor end-plates 



.... 

- , c .••• ' ■ - •: 

■ 









lacking the contractile structure of the voluntary muscle 
fibers. There are many nuclei near the innervated face of the 
plate of this organ as in the sarcoplasmic sole of striated 
muscle (26, 27) The electric organ consists of many prisms 
arranged side by side. Each prism consists of approximately 
500 superposed plates covered with a terminal nerve net on 
the ventral side. At the moment of discharge the ventral side 
of all the plates becomes negative to the dorsal free side. 

One of many hypotheses to explain this electrogenic effect is 
that the discharge is caused by the release of an electrically 
active substance (27)* Nerves to the electric organ are 
cholinergic and produce acetylcholine upon stimulation. Evi¬ 
dence of this is found in the venous effluent of a perfused 
electric organ. The injection of acetylcholine into the organ 
also produces an electrogenic effect (27)* There is a direct 
proportionality between the voltage of discharge and the 
cholinesterase activity in the electric organs (28, 29). The 
striking parallel of effects caused by acetylcholine on the 
electric organ and that of motor nerve stimulation on the 
end-plates of skeletal muscle lends strong support to the 
chemisal theory of transmission. 

Couteaux recently described rod-like structures at the 
motor 6nd-plate which were believed to exist only in the 
electric organ (50). The established existance of an end- 
plate potential preceding the propagated muscle impulse renders 
the analogy between the electric organ and end-plate still 
more evident ( 26 ). 









- 7 - 


A comparison of transmission at the autonomic ganglion 
and the neuromuscular junction reveals that a similarity exists 
between these two synapses. Elliott (3U was the first to 
point out the striking resemblances between motor end-plates 
of striated muscle and the cell bodies in the sympathetic 
ganglia. Acetylcholine is produced on stimulation of pre¬ 
ganglionic fibers of the ganglion and also in skeletal muscle 
upon activation of the motor nerves. Small doses of acetyl¬ 
choline elicit muscular contractions and discharge ganglion 
cells whereas larger doses paralyse both synapses (23). 

Langley (32) noticed that small doses of nicotine also caused 
muscular responses and discharged ganglion cells and that 
larger doses paralysed both structures. 

Anticholinesterases cause repetitive discharges of the 
post-synaptic elements on arrival of single pre-synaptic 
nerve volleys. Rosenblueth (23) concluded that although 
quantitative differences exist, no qualitative difference 
has been noted between these two structures. 

(b) Electrical Theory 

Eccles (33) has postulated an electrical theory of 
transmission of excitation from nerve to muscle fibers. A 
brief summary of this theory is as follows: 

(1) an impulse in the pre-synaptic nerve fiber generates 
a current which gives a diphasic effect at the synaptic region 
of the post-synaptic cell, having a total duration not ex¬ 
ceeding one millisecond in mammalian muscle and the spinal cord 
initial anodal focus, with cathodal surround; more intense 
cathodal focus with anodal surround. 



















. 










































- 

. 

. 

. 


. 












- 














(2) This cathodal focus sets up a brief and intense local 
response at the synaptic region. 

(3) From this local response a catelectrotonus spreads 
decrementally over the post-synaptic cell membrane. 

(4) A propagated impulse is set up in the post-synaptic cell, 
if this catelectrotonus is above a certain critical value, if 
below then the local response subsides and the catelectrotonus 
surround decays passively. 

One of the more recent contributions of Eccles was the 
insertion of the local response which provides a mechanism for 
setting up the large post-synaptic response. Relatively weak 
currents could effect transmission in this way (21). 

While the electrical theory of transmission explains 
some observations on transmission at the neuromuscular junction, 
the chemical theory which assumes acetylcholine to be the 
mediator is capable of explaining many more phenomena of 
transmission (23, 8 ). The curare block (33) and the effect 
of anticholinesterases on the end-plate potential are two 
examples that cannot be adequately explained by means of the 
electrical theory, but are readily explicable by acetylcholine 
mediation (21, 36). Eccles (1948) believes the evidence now 
favors the chemical theory of mediation as he states that the 
muscle contraction is caused by a relationship existing be¬ 
tween the membrane depolarization ( not the action current 
flow ) and the contractile mechanism (37)* 

(c) Dual Theory 

A dual theory has been proposed by Monnier 138, 39) 
which considers that both the spike potential and the 













, 




. 











- 9 - 


liberation of acetylcholine are essential for the excitation 
of the post-synaptic elements. Acetylcholine has been shown 
to be indispensable for transmission, for, wherever there is 
a lack of acetylcholine transmission fails even though other 
factors are normal. Rosenblueth (25) considers the spike 
potential an inadequate stimulus for post-synaptic elements 
but assigns it the role of discharging acetylcholine at the 
nerve terminals. 

Many observers believe K ions may have an important 
role in synaptic transmission. The theory developed by 
Rosenblueth in his recent monograph (25) gives acetylcholine 
the role of essential transmitter while he accepts K ions 
as an important adjuvant. Cowan (40) noticed that K ions 
were lost during stimulation of unmyelinated nerve fibers. 
Later (1947) Hodgkin and Huxley (41) concluded that K ions 
leak through the membranes during the propagation of an 
impulse and are reabsorbed during the subsequent recovery 
period. 

5. NEURQMUSCULAR TRANSMISSION BLOCK 
A block of the neuromuscular transmission occurs when 
one of three mechanisms are at fault, according to the 
present concept of transmission ( 8 )• 

(1) The f transmitter r of the influence of the nerve to 
end-plate may be inadequate, if so the end-plate potential 
is small and the muscle is not excited. 

(2) If the * transmitter f is normal but the end-plate 
is unable to repond, then the muscle is not excited. 

(5) Despite a normal end-plate response the muscle may 
not respond because its excitability is too low or its ability 








' 


* 

.... 

: 


' 





* 




. 

' 

. 







10 


to conduct impulses is impaired. 

6. CHEMISTRY AND PHARMACOLOGY Off THE DRUGS USED IN THIS 

INVESTIGATION 

A knowledge of the drugs and their general pharmacological 
properties is essential in interpreting the experimental results. 

(a) Barbiturates 

Two barbiturates were used here; 

1. Sodium Pentobarbital (Nembutal) 

sodium-ethyl(1-methyl-butyl) barbiturate 

2. 5-(gamma, gamma-dimethylallyl)-5-ethyl barbituric acid 

(sodium salt) 



NaO-C 


// 

\ 


N — C 


\ ^CH2CH=C(CH3) 2 
/ Cn c 2 h 5 


Nembutal is primarily a central nervous system de¬ 
pressant while the latter stimulates this site. 

Pharmacology 

(a) Central Action 

Sodium pentobarbital depresses first the cerebral 
cortex then the hypothalamic centers of the diencephalon (48). 
Quigley et al (49) found the psychic excitement factor and 
restlessness more frequent with small doses of Amytal than 
barbital, and less frequent with pentobarbital than either 
of these. 













11 - 


(b) Effect on Respiration 

The respiratory center response to carbon dioxide 
is so suppressed by deep barbiturate narcosis that breathing 
is much less sensitive to anoxia (30). Pentobarbital and 
Amytal in doses sufficient to quiet struggling rats, bound 
dorsally, decrease the minute volume of respiration. The 
minute volume depression caused by amytal is about if times 
greater than that produced by comparable doses of pentobarbital. 
(3D. 

(c) Effect on the Autonomic Nervous System 
Amytal, pentobarbital and pernoston abolish the 

peripheral vagus function in moderate doses while the central 
vagus remains unimpaired after massive doses. Barbiturates 
depress the peripheral ganglion of the cardiac vagus (32) by 
a mechanism similar to that of curare and nicotine (35, 34, 55). 
Amytal has a considerably greater and longer duration of 
depression on the peripheral vagus than has sodium pento¬ 
barbital. Picrotoxin has been shown to antagonize the cardiac 
vagus depression caused by ortal, evipal and pentobarbital in 
9 out of 12 experiments (32). 

(d) Effect on Smooth and Voluntary Muscle 

1. Smooth Muscle 

Barbiturates are known to exert an action on 
smooth muscle. A number of them cause a decrease in tone of 
the stomach (3&), bladder (37), and uterus (38). In un¬ 
anaesthetized trained dogs intravenous administration of 
barbiturates depress the activity of the stomach, ileum and 
colon. In this action pentobarbital has approximately J of 
the effect of amytal in equivalent anaesthetic doses (49). 










. 




. 























? ■ 

, 


. 






% 




. 


. 






, i 






12 


2* Voluntary Muscle 

Huston et al (59) by perfusing isolated dog 
legs with defibrinated blood containing large doses of 
sodium pentobarbital and seconal demonstrated a depressant 
action on the myoneural junction. The same workers noted 
an increase in the response caused by these barbiturates, 
which preceded a depression, in both normal and denervated 
muscles electrically stimulated. They attributed the stim¬ 
ulant effect to a direct action on the muscle fibers. A 
similar action was shown by Riedel and Huston (45) using 
amytal on the sciatic nerve - gastrocnemius muscle preparation 
of the rat. They also demonstrated that the alterations in 
the response were not due to PH changes caused by amytal, as 
Gruber et al (58) had suggested in the case of smooth muscle. 
2. 5-(gamma. gamma-Dimethylallyl)-»5-Ethyl Barbituric Acid 

( sodium salt ) 

Very little is known about this barbiturate other 
than that it produces convulsions. 

Other barbiturates are known to stimulate the central 
nervous system. One of these, 5,5 (1,5-dimethyIbutyl) ethyl 
barbituric acid is purely convulsant resembling picrotoxin 
more than strychnine. Amytal suppresses the convulsions 
produced by this compound. In spinal dogs this barbiturate 
had no influence on the gastrocnemius twitch produced by 
motor nerve stimulation when given in doses which augment 
the flexion reflex (60). 

Small doses of dimethylallyl barbituric acid stimulate 
the spinal flexion reflex but depress it in larger doses (6l). 
Swanson and others observed that the site of the convulsant 








* 




, 
























* 

< . 

. 

. 

■ ' 
















' 










. 




. 

- 





















- 13 - 


action of certain thio-barbituric acid derivatives lies in 
the spinal cord ( 62 ). 

(2). Meperidine Hydrochloride ( Demerol Hydrochloride ) 
Chemistry . 

Ethyl-l-methyl-4-phenyl-piperidine-4-carboxylate 
hydrochloride. The hydrochloride salt is a colorless 
crystalline powder which readily dissolves in water to yield 
neutral solutions (63). Other names for this compound include; 
Isonipecaine, Dolantin, Dolantol, Pethidine and Eudolat (63). 
Pharmacology . 

(a) Effect on the Nervous System 

Demerol hydrochloride possesses a powerful 
analgesic action and some sedative effect (63). Sleep results 
from large parenteral doses (64). This drug is one of a 
large number of piperidine compounds and has been reported 
to possess spasmolytic properties on the stomach, pylorus, 
large and small intestines (64). Batterman (63) attributes 
the spasmolytic effects of demerol hydrochloride to its 
atropine-like action on the parasympathetic nerve endings 
and to a direct depression of the smooth muscle resembling 
the action of papaverine. 

A weak cerebral depressant action is caused in 
animals in doses comparable to therapeutic doses, but 
cerebral stimulation and convulsions result from large doses ( 66 ). 
Way ( 67 ) discovered a strong local anaesthetic action on the 
rabbit’s cornea, the frog’s sciatic nerve, and the human skin. 

This effect on the rabbit’s cornea was observed also after 
the systemic administration of demerol hydrochloride. A 
definite effect was noted on the irritability of the cardiac 
vagus nerve after the administration of demerol hydrochloride 


















" 




$ ■' i 


. 




„ 

























. 
































- H - 


to dogs (66). 

(b) Cardiovascular Effects 

The vasodilatory effects of this drug are 
transitory* An increased volume of the limb and spleen was 
noted by Gruber and others (66). This action appears to be 
peripheral and not central. Demerol administered by the 
intravenous route causes a sharp fall in blood pressure 
consequently it is never given by this route (64, 66). 

(c) Effect on Respiration 

Demerol hydrochloride has been reported to cause 
a transitory respiratory depression in animals (66, 68). 

Large doses of this compound by intraperitoneal injection 
may result in death due to respiratory paralysis (64, 66). 

(d) Absorption and Excretion 

Demerol hydrochloride is rapidly absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract and tends to become concentrated 
in the kidneys, spleen, lungs and liver. Appreciable levels 
are reached in the brain with lower concentrations in the 
heart and muscles (69). 

* 

Several contradictions of the pharmacological activity 
of demerol have been reported in the more recent literature. 

A reinvestigation of some pharmacological properties of 
demerol has revealed that its atropine-like action cannot be 
demonstrated on the small intestine, extra hepatic biliary 
tract or the cardiovascular system of the dog (70)® Demerol 
has been shown to stimulate the motility of the small intest¬ 
ine ( 71 ), duodenum and ileum of dogs (66), yet it is still 
commonly referred to as a smooth muscle depressant and that 
it resembles atropine in its action on other systems ( 72 , 6j>). 





£ 

. 

. 

y .. - . 










• 






tf 

• 






V 


• 






- 



? • 



. 




/ 

' 

C . 












- 15 - 


Furthermore, Blicke (75) has pointed out that atropine¬ 
like activity depends on an amino alcohol group which is 
not found in the demerol molecule and therefore it is 
unlikely that atropine-like action could result from its 
structure. Demerol has no antagonistic action to acetyl¬ 
choline depressed intact frog hearts (71)* The more recent 
evidence of demerol activity places it in the same class 
as morphine and not atropine with respect to its effect on 
autonomic innervated structures. 

Dutta (74) found that demerol as well as atropine, 
benadryl and guanidine salts caused a fall in the body 
temperature of mice and that these agents reverse the vaso¬ 
constrictor action of adrenaline on rabbit vessels (75). 

He studied these drugs further for their curare¬ 
like action on the superior cervical ganglion and the motor 
end-plates of the rat diaphragm preparation (74). A 67 % 
increase in the response of the rat diaphragm, stimulated 
through the phrenic nerve, was noted after the addition of 

-4 

pethidine (demerol) to the bath giving a concentration of 10 
A similar effect was observed when the diaphragm was stimulated 
directly. Demerol hydrochloride 10 mg. % in Tyrode’s solution 
produced an augmentation of the response to a directly 
stimulated curarized diaphragm. A depression ensued after 
the initial increase when larger (26 mg.%) doses were used. 

This augmentation of the response was not affected by 
the presence of d-tubocurarine chloride in a concentration 
just sufficient to block neuromuscular transmission. The 
stimulation was attributed to a direct effect on the muscle (74). 






16 - 


(5). Benzethoniuin (Fhemerol) Chloride 
Chemistry . 

Benzyldimethyl^2- ( 2 - (p-1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl- 
phenoxy) ethoxy] ethylj ammonium chloride monohydrate. 

Phemerol chloride is a synthetic substance belonging 
to the cationic group of detergents. It is commonly em¬ 
ployed as a germicide and antiseptic ( 76 ). The pure 
crystalline form was used in this work. It was dissolved 
in distilled water yielding solutions with a PH of 3 - 6 
which are stable in dilute acids, dilute alkalies, light 
and heat up to 100 °C. 

Pharmacology . 

Ing (77) and Ing and Wright ( 78 ) have pointed out the 
three well defined pharmacological actions of onium salts; 

1 .) curare-like paralysis of the motor nerve endings of 
voluntary muscle, 2 .) stimulation of the parasympathetic 
nerve endings (muscarinic action) and 3 .) nicotine-like 
properties which include stimulation and depression of the 
sympathetic ganglion, contracture of skeletal muscle of 
the frog, fowl and denervated mammalian muscle. 

Nearly all quaternary ammonium and simple phosph- 
onium, arsonium, stilbonium, iodonium and sulfonium salts 
have been found to possess eurariform activity with few 
exceptions (77, 78 , 79, 80). Onium salts are not hydrolysed, 
the free bases being comparable to alkali hydroxides. 
Quaternary ammonium salts penetrate cells very slowly if 
at all (8l). Craig (80) has made a very comprehensive 
study of onium compounds and states that the quaternary 
ammonium salts possess the most effective curare-like group. 
d-Tubocurarine chloride is a bis-tetrahydroisoquinolinium salt 








. 

. 

. 

. 

- 

. . r 






- 







. 









- 

, 


















. 




■ 

















17 - 


with two quaternary nitrogen atoms (82). Barlow and Ing (85) 
suggested that the exceptional potency of this salt compared 
to simple quaternary ammonium ions might he due to an optimal 
distance between the two cationic groups. These men and others 
studied a number of polymethylene bis-quaternary ammonium 
salts in which the nitrogen atoms are attached to the terminal 
carbon atoms of the chain. The most potent member of the 
bis-trimethyl series was that which contained a 10 carbon 
chain, Cj_q (85, 84) and was found to have three times the 
activity of d-tuboeurarine (85). The member of this series 
is the most potent sympathetic ganglion blocking agent and 
is an effective antagonist for C^q (84). 

The rat diaphragm (85) as well as various smooth muscle 
preparations have been used to study the effects of many 
quaternary ammonium salts, however, the results varied so 
much that they were of no value in classifying these salts (86). 

A number of detergents, consisting of several organic 
sulfonates and a quaternary ammonium salt ( rt zephiran chloride“) 
were observed to increase the response of chronically de- 
nervated skeletal muscle and the superior cervical ganglion 
of eats to injections of acetylcholine and potassium chloride. 
This action was attributed to an increase in cell permeability. 
Only "zephiran chloride" inhibited cholinesterase activity ( 87 ). 
In addition to this, all but one of these compounds depressed 
smooth muscle suggesting that these detergents have some 
additional pharmacological actions. 

Holton and Ing (88) concluded that at least two 
N - methyl groups play an important role in the structural 















- 











* 


• 











- 












. 









c 












. 















- 18 - 


specificity of choline derivatives. 

(4). a-Tubocurarine Chloride 

d-Tubocurarine chloride was used as a physiological 
tool to block the neuromuscular transmission so that the 
action of the drugs investigated could be studied on the 
diaphragm’s performance, excluding the end-plate and 
nervous elements. 

An earlier explanation of curarization, in terms of 
the electrical theory of transmission, was that curare 
suppressed nerve impulses and the nerve endings or increased 
the electrical threshold of skeletal muscle (89). This has 
since been prooven erroneous (23, 35), curare is now believed 
to act by preventing the depolarization of the muscle 
membrane by acetylcholine at the neuromyal junction. This 
action is generally assumed to be one of competitive inhibition 
with curare competing with acetylcholine for the "receptive 
substance" located there (8, 12). Before paralysis is 
reached by curarization, the end-plate potential may be 
reduced to about a third of its original height. Trans¬ 
mission fails when the end-plate potential falls below a 
critical level (8, 16 ). 

Lucas has shown that a complex curve is obtained with 
direct stimulation of a nerve free part of skeletal muscle 
and that it is unaltered by curare. He therefore identified 
this excitability with that of the muscle fibers (90). These 
results and inferences have been supported by Rushton (91) 
and others (36, 92). These workers and another (36) have not 
detected any change in muscular excitability, to electrical 













■ 




. 



. 

, 

. 













. 

■ 

. 

. 



. 










. 

, 







* 






- 19 - 


stimuli, when doses of curare just sufficient to block the 
neuromuscular transmission were used. Large doses of curare, 
far exceeding those necessary to block transmission, render 
the muscle less excitable to electrical stimulation (56). 

Curare is also capable of blocking transmission at the 
autonomic ganglion 195). 

A number of substances such as potassium chloride (94,95), 
azo dyes (96), certain phenolic compounds (97), guanidine (98) 
and neostigmine exert a decurarizing action. 

d-Tubocurarine chloride in a concentration of one 
microgram per milliliter of bath solution is required to just 
curarize the phrenic nerve - diaphragm preparation of the rat 
at 59°C. (74, 98). Larger doses of this agent are necessary 
to just produce a neuromuscular block of transmission at 
temperatures of 20 - 25° centigrade (99). Guyton and Reeder 
reported that the diaphragm of the dog requires, on the 
average, about If times the curare to paralyse it than is 
required by the gastrocnemius muscle of the same animal. 

On the other hand, adequate doses of curare produce maximal 
paralysis of the diaphragm approximately 2§ times more 
rapidly than in the case of the gastrocnemius muscle. The 
amount of curare had no demonstrable effect on the time 
required for maximal curarization to occur(99). The 
action of d-tubocurarine chloride in the presence of carbon 
dioxide is about 2§- times greater than that when only oxygen 
is used to aerate the solution in the muscle bath. This 
increased action is believed due to the carbon dioxide since 
it has been found to catalyse the diffusion of ions through 
membranes (54). 







. 






. 


. 








* 


; 














c 














. 

. 


. 










■ 

. 

. 







20 - 


(5)• Paradione . 

Chemistry . 

Paradione, a homologue of tridione, is a synthetic 
compound. Tridione (3,5,5-trimethyloxazolidine-2,4-dione) 
is a white crystalline powder, while paradione (3,3-dimethyl- 
5-ethyloxazolidine-2,4-dione) is an oily liquid only slightly 
soluble in water but quite soluble in alcohol. 

Pharmacology . 

Paradione as well as tridione are used primarily for 
the treatment of petit mal epilepsy. The anticonvulsant 
properties of paradione and tridione were discovered and 
investigated by Richards and Everett [31, 100, 101). These 
two drugs also display antagonism to picrotoxin, procaine, 
cocaine and strychnine. In sedative doses they modify 
responses to electrical shock. A direct depression on skeletal 
muscle has been demonstrated on the gastrocnemius muscle of 
the rat with large intraperitoneal doses of tridione (102). 
Toxicology . 

The acute toxicology is rather low for these compounds. 
Although paradione is similar to tridione in pharmacological 
properties, it has a greater sedative action, higher acute 
toxicity and a lower incidence of side effects. The L.D.^q 
for mice is approximately 1 gm./Kg. of body weight. Paradione 
has little effect on the cardiovascular system and impairs 
respiration only in high doses.(103)• 












« 0 

. 








, 








- 

- 

j 














. 




















STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 








21 


STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 


The action of barbiturates on the autonomic 
nerve endings is well known. The chemical mechanism 
of transmission in the autonomic system, and perhaps 
the central nervous system, is analogous to that at 
the myoneural junction of the somatic system. Bar¬ 
biturates, therefore, might be expected to have some 
effect on the somatic endings. Huston et al (39) 
have shown that 100 mg.% of sodium pentobarbital and 
seconal depress the somatic neuromyal junction. An 
initial stimulant effect on the muscle was observed at 
this concentration, while larger doses depress the muscle. 
Riedel and Huston (45) demonstrated a stimulant effect 
with amytal on the gastrocnemius muscle of the rat and 
a depressant action at higher doses (107). 

One purpose of this investigation was to in¬ 
vestigate further the effect of sodium pentobarbital on 
the somatic myoneural mechanism. 

Several other compounds were also investigated 
for a possible action on the neuromuscular junction or 
the skeletal muscle. 



























. 





















. 























' 



. 
















. 









EXPERIMENTAL 














22 


1. METHOD 

( a ) Method of Stimulation 

Electricity was the form of stimulus used throughout 
this work since it can be accurately graduated in intensity 
and timed as to application. Furthermore it causes less 
damage to the tissues than other forms of stimulation. 

1. Method of Stimulating the Sciatic Nerve - Gastroc¬ 

nemius Muscle preparation of the Intact Rat 
The sciatic nerve was placed in a shielded electrode 
and stimulated by means of an electronic inductorium which 
delivered shocks producing maximal twitches at ten second 
intervals. The same stimulator was employed for direct 
stimulation of the denervated muscles. The electrodes in 
this case consisted of two fine wires which made contact 
with the muscle. One wire was connected to the calcaneous 
tendon while the other was stiched into the belly of the 
gastrocnemius muscle 

2. Method of Stimulating the Isolated Phrenic Nerve - 

Diaphragm Preparation of the Rat 

Condenser discharges from a 0*3 MFD. condenser 
charged anywhere up to 43 volts supplied the stimuli nee» 
essary to maximally excite the isolated diaphragm through 
the phrenic nerve. A higher voltage (43 - 1JQ volts) and 
a larger condenser (4 MFD.) were required for the direct 
stimulation of the curarized diaphragm. 

Electrodes which consisted of two thin platinum plates 
embedded in plastic (42) were used to make contact with the 
phrenic nerve. Two thin platinum wires were used for the 


















- 23 - 


electrodes in the direct stimulation of the curarized 
diaphragms. Both of these wires made contact with the 
muscle below the surface of the fluid. A double purpose 
was served by the lower wire in that it was hooked through 
the base of the preparation to hold it in place as well 
as its function as an electrode. The upper electrode was 
clamped at one end to the apex of the diaphragm strip and 
to the end of the writing lever at the other. The diagram 
of the circuit used for charging and discharging the 
condensers was kindly sent to us by Chen (43). 

(b) Methods of Recording and Securing the Preparations 

1. Method of Recording and Securing the Intact rat 

Only male rats were used in these experiments. 

The rats were bound dorsally to the apparatus platform by 
means of strong cords attached to three legs. The left hind 
leg was left free. This leg was tightly clamped to the 
platform with small clamps placed over the knee and ankle 
bones. A stout thread tied to the ealcaneous tendon was 
passed over a small pulley and attached to an isometric 
muscle lever. The responses of the gastrocnemius muscle 
to stimulation were recorded on smoked paper rotated by 
a slowly revolving kymograph. 

2. Method of Recording and Securing the Isolated 

Phrenic Nerve ~ Diaphragm Preparation 
The base of the diaphragm strip was held in the 
bath by means of a platinum hook which was fused into a 
glass tube. An isotonic writing lever was used to record 
the responses of the diaphragm on smoked paper revolved 






. 




. 



















. 











. 


. 




. 

. 











. 


. 


. 












- 2k - 


slowly by a kymograph. 

(c) Artificial Respiration for the Intact Animals 

Artificial respiration was necessary since in most 

experiments the rats were injected with drugs in doses 
exceeding the lethal dose. The artificial respiration 
apparatus employed here was described by Riedel and Huston (44). 
This method of artificial respiration has prooven efficient 
enough to prolong the life of rats given twice the lethal 
dose of barbiturates (4j?) and was successfully used in this 
work. 

(d) Aeration of Tyrode T s Solution for the Isolated 

Muscle Experiments 

In the case of the diaphragm preparation, Tyrode T s 
solution containing twice the normal glucose was used in 
a 100 ml. muscle bath. A gas mixture of 93 % oxygen and 3 % 
carbon dioxide was bubbled into the solution by means of 
a very fine glass capillary tube. All experiments were 
carried out at room temperature. 

2. PROCEDURE 

(a) Sciatic Nerve - Gastrocnemius Muscle Preparation 

of the Intact Rat 

The spinal cord of male albino rats was sectioned in 
the upper lumbar region under ether anaesthesia, twelve to 
twenty four hours before each experiment. The animal was 
bound dorsally to the apparatus table. The skin was stripped 
back on the ankle for a short piece and a strong thread tied 
to the calcaneous tendon before it was cut at the lower end. 
Pascia was removed from the end of the gastrocnemius to allow 












, 




















. 


























25 


free movement during contractions. An isometric spring, 
whose resistance to pull was calculated in grams, was used 
to record the responses of the muscle. The thread tied to 
the calcaneous tendon was passed over the pulley and attached 
to this isometric lever. A shielded electrode was clamped 
gently around the sciatic nerve just above its entry into the 
gastrocnemius muscle. The nerve was then severed centrally 
to prevent antidromic stimulation. 

In denervated experiments a fine wire was wound about 
the calcaneous tendon and another inserted into the belly of 
the gastrocnemius muscle for direct stimulation. 

The muscle was allowed to contract at ten second 
intervals for approximately lj- hours to allow for the 
completion of stretching and for the response to level off. 
When the muscle was contracting maximally the drug was 
administered by intraperitoneal injection. 

The force of contraction was calculated in grams by 
measuring the height of the twitch recorded by a calibrated 
isometric lever. All measurements were made from the rest¬ 
ing level of the muscle. Changes in the response to drugs 
were calculated as a percentage of the initial contraction 
tension just prior to the injection. 

Denervated muscles were prepared five days in advance 
by aseptic section of the sciatic nerve at a point just above 
its entry into the gastrocnemius muscle. Transmission at 
the neuromuscular junction fails on the third or fourth day 
following nerve section ( 8 , 46) and the nerve degenerates 
before five days (47). 















. 






















• 



: . f. 



' 


■ 







' 





■ ■. * , ■ t ( - 


• 




' 




- 

















: 






























t 

















- 26 - 


(b) Isolated Phrenic Nerve - Diaphragm Preparation 

of the Rat 

The phrenic nerve - diaphragm preparation of the rat 
was prepared according to Bulbring (42), A strip of the 
diaphragm complete with approximately 2-5 cms. of phrenic 
nerve was washed in Tyrode f s solution to remove any traces 
of blood. Both the electrode and the glass tube holding 
the muscle hook were attached to the same clamp thereby 
decreasing any chance of damaging the nerve - muscle 
connection by an accidental pull (see figure 1). A fine 
thread was tied to the end of the nerve and used to pull 
it through the small hole in the electrode. The platinum 
wire attached to the apex of the preparation was then 
attached to the writing lever which was brought to bare 
on the smoked paper with little pressure. The kymograph 
drum was rotated at a speed just sufficient to record each 
twitch individually. 

The diaphragm was allowed to contract for a period 
of approximately JO minutes until an even maximal response 
resulted. The drug was injected directly into the bath 
by means of a finely graduated on© cubic centimeter syringe. 
Thorough distribution of the drug was assured by the stream 
of gas bubbles aerating the solution. All responses were 
measured in millimeters from the resting level of the muscle. 
Alterations in the height of the responses were expressed 
as a percentage of the contraction height immediately before 
the injection of the drug. The recovery time was not 
determined, however, it was noted whether or not the muscle 
would recover. 




. 

: ' . : 


- 




. 

XI 


. 

. 

. 
















- . i: 

. 


' 








■ 


. 















• 






t 









27 - 


Lead wires for 
Electrode used 
for Indirect 
Stimulation. 



Lead Wire to 
Platinum Hook for 
Direct Stimulation. 



Isotonic Lever 


Platinum plates 
of electrode for 
indirect stim¬ 
ulation. 

Phrenic Nerve - 

Diaphragm Strip - 



Platinum Wire also 
Electrode for Direct 
Stimulation. 


-- Glass Tube with 

Platinum Hook Eused 
into the end. 


—— Muscle Bath 

Containing Tyrode T s 
Solution. 


FIG. I 

APPARATUS FOR THE ISOLATED 
PHRENIC NERVE - DIAPHRAGM 


PREPARATION 









































- 23 - 


Curarized preparations were used in order to de¬ 
termine the site of action of the drugs investigated. 

The neuromuscular transmission was blocked by a dose of 
d-tubocurarine chloride just sufficient to produce this 
effect. Such a dose does not affect the excitability of 
the muscle to direct stimulation (26), therefore this 
preparation was used to study the effects of the drugs 
on the diaphragm excluding the myoneural junction and 
nervous elements. 























RESULTS 










































( 


- 29 - 


PART I 

SCIATIC NUR 'Ati -G ABIuOCREMUIS LUSJIE RKEi Axa'I'IU l Pi.- 'lnE RAT. 

Two series, one of 30 and one of 22 control animals, 
were run by Riedel and H us ton 1102) to establish a criterion for 
the experimental results. Their figures for these control groups 
have been employed here since the same equipment and preparation 
were used. The results of the normal controls and denervated 
controls appear in Tables 1 and 2 respectively. 

BARBITURATES 

1. SODIUM PENTOBARBITAL 

(a). Sodium Pentobarbital (Nembutal) 120 mg. per Kg. 

A preliminary search for a dose of sodium pentobarbital 
that would just show some depression of the response was undertaken. 
Various dose levels which lie below the lethal dose were tried, 
none of which seemed to change the response significantly. It was 
therefore decided to run a series of experiments, using artificial 
respiration, in which the reported lethal dose of 120 mg. per Kg.(105) 
was injected intraperitoneally. A few animals died, in spite of the 
artificial respiration, before the end of the experimental period. 

No readings were taken after death. 

The results from ten experiments are recorded in Table 3* 
In most cases a small increase in response was noted and the mean 
increase reached a maximum in 9 minutes. Following this, a gradual 
decline of response during the experimental time was obserbed. 

In 3 animals which lived beyond 240 minutes a slight recovery of the 
response was noted. The greatest single decrease reached 0% end 











.... - 


' . 

[ : : j , - ' ' ■ ■' - 












. 

. 

. 









. 






. 





RESPONSE OF NORMAL GASTROCNEMIUS MUSCLE OF THE RAT TO ELECTRICAL STIMULUS AT 10 SEC. INTERVALS 
Figures represent percentage of initial contraction tension 

Time in Minutes 


- 30 - 


3 

02 


O 

to 


o 

02 

rH 


O 

O 


CN2 


o 

nO 


in 

-4 


O 

<n 


in 


02 


ON 


so 


CO 


09 *. 

Ht0 4 4HO‘AO -4 nO 
into o OnnO rH to On 02 On 


On On nO C^-ntNO'tO mrH 
«••••••••• 

vO -4 cv -4- c*- cnvO m co On 
in ON to OnvO O to on on 


vO no h <n rH onto o- cnto 

«*»»•*•••• 

ON m\0 NHO ON to oo rH 
NO ON to ON 0-0 to On ONtO 


-4 O rH O-tO On O O- m m 

o cnvO 02 H to O to ON -4 
to ONtO O to ON ON ONtO to 


\0 04iAOONCM4 conO -4 iTN\0 OnQnO OtOtO Hr^r^ONONW O-tO 


0T\rHO-4O-rHON-4-4O-0NC\*rH O-tO cncnH O H 02 rH NO O- -4tO H OnO-H 
O to tO to to O ONtO On On to O 0-t>-t0 O OnQnO On1» ONtO ONtO On On On ONtO 

H rH H rH rH 

-4 -4 into O 02 ONtO <n cn 4 O-4 m 02 02 On O O to to rH <ntO (n On 02 O 02 


rH | o -4to rH ONtO NO 02 CNi NO -4 -4tO in rH O rH 02 rH ON £>-nO CO rH On O-tO 

O tO tO tO O ONtO On On On O O-tO ON O On O O ONtO ONtO ONtO O On On On to 

rH rH rH rH rH rH 

-4 C^-no -4 0 oi co no co in-4 in On O 02 on 02 O Ototo rH co to 0002 CNi o-o 


rH I NO ONOi H ONO 0-C^-4Oi-4rH o C^to H O H-4rH ONO~rH fOH ONl>0 

O tO tO On O On On ON On On O O-tO O O On On O ONtO ONtO ON O'O On On On O 

rH rH rH rH rH .—1 rH rH 

-4nO CONO O2OO2-4ON00O-4O OnnO OiC^rHOtOtOtO OiOON-4H Oit>-4 


HOiinH\OHtOin ONtO ONO 02H0N O-tQ t0O44H02O^H<0t0 OnO 
O OnQnOnOnO ONONONONONOtOtOtO O OnOO ONtO OnOnO OnO OnQnOnOn 


Omcv2NOC\iOOOO-4 -4 to OnnO -4 nO OOOsinC^-C^ONONOOOO 

O -4to H NO rH ON O ON ON <ntO into to rH cnvQ OHrl-^incVdO^ OC'-O 
OONONQNONOONOONONONOtOtOtO OOnQnOOOnOnOnOOOOnOnOnO 


OWOHnOOOO -4<ntO mr-OCN 2 t 0 OOOH (no to ONO o o o o 


O r-O inr-H OnO ONONOtO C^-OHnr-OOHnHOHHOO ON NO o 
OONOONONOONOONONONOtOONONOONOOOONONOOOOOONONO 
rH rH rH rH rH rt HrHH rH H I—I rH ■—I rH 

0c\i0rH(n0000-4n-40Hcnc\2C^000Hin £>tO ON o o O O on 


OCN-OiAlNHONOONONC^CVi ON into C^rHOOrHini>-»nrHHOO OnnO O 
OONOONONOONOONONONOtO ONtO OOOOOONONONOOOOONONO 
HrH rH rH rH rHrHHIrHrH rH rH rH rH rH 

OCNiOHOOOOOHfnOmONininc^-ONONOinO mto On O On O O no 

Ot>OinOOOOO'(ViC^On44 -4 to HOtOO-OC^-HrHOrHQOcn 
OOnOOnOOOOOnOOnOOnOOnOOnOOOnOnOOnOOOOOOO 
rH rH H H H H rH rH rH rH rH rH H rH rH rH rH rH rH rH 


OCN2OOOOOOOrHcn-4OOmOC^-OON0inoOO0NOOOO<n 

Or^OOOOOOONCViC-CN2tOON-4HtOOOtOONOOOrHOOOOt> 
OOnOOOOOOOnOOnOOnOnOOOnOOOnOnOOOOOOOOO 
rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH H i—I HHHHHHrHHi—I 


CN2 


On 


in 

to 


to 

to 


NO 


o 

ON 


ON 


(Ni 

ON 


in 

ON 


ON 


ON 


NO 


to 

ON 


On 

• 

o 

o 


s 

<u 


NO 

# 

4* 

in 

cn 


CV2 


CNi CNi 


02 


02 


NO to 


-4 

On 


to m 


to 

ON 


to ON 


nO 

o 


c^ 

« 

o 

s 

Q 

CO 





























RESPONSE OF DENERVATED GASTROCNEMIUS MUSCLE OF THE RAT TO ELECTRICAL STIMULUS AT 10 SEC. INTERVALS 


- 31 - 




rH O uanO 4 O nO CM ua 4 

4- O 

o 

»*9**«««t* 

• ♦ 

4 

PA 4tO O On A-O'PA PA UA 

to 4 

CM 

A- OnnO to On nO to A-nO A 

A 


OnOOnO--4pAOnOnO CM 

to to 

o 

«»•*«*••*• 

• • 

to 

nQApaCM0n0nCMn04ua 

O PA 

rH 

A On AtO OnnO On AnO A 

to 


pa O On to -4 to On O rH -4 

PA rH 

O 

• ••*«••••« 

• • 

CM 

CM rH U\ 4 OnnO O tO UA A- 

CM PA 

rH 

to ON At© On C On AnO A 

to 


PAO On to O O to to rH nO 

-4 CM 



• • 

o 

CMrHUA40CM40N IfNtO 

PA PA 

ON 

to ON AtO o to ON O-nO A 

rH 

to 


rH nO tO PA PA UAtO ON UA O rH rH PAO O 44 nQ t© rH rH nO 

to o 

CM 

UAtO ArHtQ -4 nOnO AMD rH PAWH QnO On A -4 PAUAtO 

-4 PA 

A- 

nO A UAtO tO QN tO On O'On tO tO On tO to CAtO ONtO nO [A- 

to 


AMD PA O PA UAtO OnuaOnOiHA20-40n -4nO UA rH AnO 

NO A 

o 


• • 

NO 

to to PA ONtO «4 nO no AnO UA CANO rH H nO On A PA PAtO to 
nO O-nO ONtO ONtO On O' On AtO to ONtO to ONtO ONtO nO A 

UA CM 

to 


CMOtOrHOONPA-4UAPArHrHCMO-400tOUArHCMC 

PA CM 

UA 



4 

-4 <Ai to PA AMD On UA At© -4 pAnO H pa(AO O papa4(V 

A- tO nQ ONtO ONtO ON On On At© to ONtO to O On ONtO At© 

rH 

A CM 
to 

Pi 

CM -4-40N0N-4PAA~UArHN0 ONrHOtONO O 4 CM On CM 4 

O CM 

PA 

4ua AO AtO On A- A On rH AP'AP'AnO rH O ua cm A- -4 ua 

A-to A- O tO ONtO On On ONtO tO On ONtO On O On ONtO AtO 
rH rH 

d CM 

ON 


c^O AOMDOH AOH\0 40NOCMfA0 4H4pAO 

-4 PA 

UA 



rH 

4HH\OHd6 AOOn4 PAnO ua 4vO On£) nO pa-4 H 
to OnOnOnOnO OnOnO ONtO On On On On On O On On ONtO On 
rH rH rH 

-4 H 

On 


tONAOHOvO AOOH0iOO(V4OAHNWW 

tO CM 

cm 



rH 

CN2pAiH\0-40CN2A-00 A-nO O ua 4tQ O OnnO nO tO PA 

tOONONONONOONONOOtOONOONONONO On On ONtO On 
rH rH rH rH rH 

UA i—1 

ON 


0NPAA-0N-4OOA-OO\0uAOO04OOA-rHLr\0NPA 

A- ON 

ON 

CV4H0 40 UAA-OOt0 40UN400 On HD 4 CM 4 
OnQnOnOOnO On On O OtO OnOOnOnO O OnOnOnOnOn 

rH rH HH rH HH 

no o 

ON 


Hpaua0n-4OOOOOOpaOOn0OOA v -A-pAiHpa 

O A 

nO 

v0 4pa0 40 waOOO c*a AO uanO O O ONtO AvO -4 
OnOnOnOOnOOnOOOOnOnOOnOnOOOnOnOnOnOn 

rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH 

to d 

ON 


N0N0rH0NPAOOOOOUA-4OON0OOO A- -4 HD nO 

O 4 

PA 

A A-to O'vOOOOOOAAOO'OOOOtOAAA 
OnOnOnOOnOOOOOOnOnOOOnOOOOnOnOnOn 
rH rHrHrHrHrH rH rH rH rH rH 

ON O 

ON 

« *: 

4 Q 

\ w 

IS CO 





















EFFECT OF PENTOBARBITAL SODIUM (NEMBUTAL) 120 mg.per.Kg. ON THE RESPONSE 
OF THE NORMAL GASTROCNEMIUS MUSCLE OF THE RAT. 


- 32 - 

















CO 




O 

UO 




4 


LfN 

1 


1 

LT\ 

CO 




4 

ITN 

X 

X 


On 

X 

!>- 

9 

X 

1 

0- 

• 




02 












rH 
















rH 
















0- 




o 

to 




to 

o 

UO 

1 

<D 

1 

uo 

UO 




•oo 

4 

X 

O 


to 


O 

1 

i 

CO 

• 




1—1 












NO 
















rH 




o 

LTN 

02 

, 


02 

NO 

to 

1 

O 

NO 

rH 

On 

O- 




02 

ITS 

t> 

I 


to 


NO 

i 


t> 

uo 

• 




1 — 1 












OH 
















rH 


G 














O 


O 


o 

co 

CO 

NO 


to 

NO 

OH 

NO 

o 

NO 

rH 

to 


*H 


ON 

NO 

ON 

to 


to 


O 

NO 


t> 

NO 

• 


CO 














o 


G 














rH 


0 
















■p 














rH 


G 


ir\ 

to 

co 

rH 


to 


NO 

rH 

o 

VO 

NO 

4 


O 



NO 

ON 

O 


to 

rH 


c- 



NO 

o 







rH 









•H 


•P 














rH 


O 















G 

cd 















O 

U 














C^- 

•H 

-p 


O 

ON 

O 

4 


*4 


4 

O 

t> 

NO 

o 

co 

-P 

G 


NO 

0- 

O 

ON 

X 

On 

rH 

to 

to 



t> 

• 

cd 

O 




rH 










rH 

u 

Q 














pH 

•H 
















A 

rH 

CO 














to 

cd 

W 













O- 

<D 

•H 

E-< 

ir\ 

to 

O 

o 

o 

4 

r- 

to 

o 

o- 

•4 

ir\ 

02 

Ph 

•P 

13 

4 

to 

c 

o 

0- 

ON 

rH 

to 

to 

0H 

to 

O- 

• 


•H 

S 



rH 

rH 









ON 

rH 

G 

M 














cd 

♦H 

S 














•H 
















O 

Ch 

a 













CO 

•H 

O 

M 

O 

UO 

O 

NO 

uo 

o 

rH 

OH 

OH 

O 

4 

4 

* 

CH 



CO 

ON 

o 

O 

to 

o 

co 

ON 

ON 

ir\ 

to 

to 

o- 

•H 

<D 

M 



rH 

rH 


rH 








■P 

b£) 















U 

cd 

R 














4 

-p 

Eh 















G 














co 


0) 


LTN 

4 

o 

4 

UO 

02 

to 

CO 

o 

co 

CO 

to 

o 


o 


rH 

o 

o 

rH 

ON 

rH 

NO 

o 

o 

On 

ON 

On 

• 





H 

rH 

rH 


rH 


rH 

rH 




4 


0 
















Ph 
















-P 














IT\ 


G 


OH 

4 

o 

4 

o 

OH 

to 

CO 

NO 

CO 

CO 

O 

CO 


0) 


rH 

O 

o 

rH 

o 

rH 

0- 

O 

o 

ON 

ON 

O 

• 


CO 



rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 



rH 

CO 


0 
















Jh 
















P, 
















0 














rH 


U 



t>- 

o 

4 

o 

OH 

ON 

co 

NO 

co 

o 

CO 





O 

o 

o 

rH 

O 

rH 

to 

O 

O 

ON 

o 

O 

« 


to 



rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


H 

rH 


rH 

rH 

OH 


0 
















U 
















G 
















bO 














O 


*H 



4 

co 

NO 

o 

OH 

ir\ 

O 

nO 


o 

rH 

rH 




NO 

o 

On 

O 

o 

rH 

ON 

o 

o 

CO 

O 

O 

• 





rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 


1—1 

rH 

ON 

pH 

rH 

02 
















ON 





4 

co 

NO 

o 

OH 

o 

o 

o 

o 

§ 

OH 

WN 




CO 

o 

On 

o 

o 

rH 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

• 





rH 


rH 

rH 

i—1 

rH 

sH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 
















• 

a 















a 

• 















<4 

Q 















w 

• 















£ 

co 


x 


Died — not recorded 












- 33 - 


appeared after 75 minutes, 

A comparison of the experimental mean and control mean may¬ 
be seen in Figure 2 and Table 3* 

The initial increase in response at this dose level does 
not appear to be very great and perhaps not significant even at the 
maximum height reached, but the subsequent depression does appear to 
differ {Figure 2) from the control curve. 

The t test of significant difference, as outlined by 
Johnson (104), was applied to the results obtained at the 43 and 
90 minute periods. The t value was calculated from the results of 
the experimental group and control animals at the specified periods 
of time, t equals 2.12 with 37 degrees of freedom after 45 minutes 
had elapsed. This value lies just below the 57® level and there¬ 
fore is apparently significant. After 90 minutes the probability 
is 0.023. Therefore a significant depression of the normal muscle 
has occurred with this dose of sodium pentobarbital. 

Denervated Experiments 

Denervated gastrocnemius muscles were employed in an 
attempt to localize the site of action. Since neuromuscular trans¬ 
mission fails in 3-4 days following nerve section (8,46), any change 
in response of the denervated muscle caused by sodium pentobarbital 
would be attributable to a direct action on the muscle. 

In this series 13 rats were used, none of which died be¬ 
fore 180 minutes under artificial respiration. As in the case of the 
normal experiments a very slight increase in response, reaching a 
peak in 6 minutes, was seen. The highest single increase rose to 
1097o while the greatest single depression fell to 0% in 180 minutes. 
The decrease in response was neither as great nor as rapid as that 

observed in the normal legs (Figure 3). The maximum mean increase of 








































. 






















. 










































34 



FI6. 2 



FIG. 3 



































- 35 - 


1% occurred in 6 minutes and slowly declined to minimum mean response 
of 67% in 180 minutes. (Table 4-). 

The depression of the response in the case of the denervated 
muscle was less than that of the normal leg. After 45 minutes the 
t value was 2.11 with 35 degrees of freedom, therefore the depression 
was barely significant. A probability of 0.01 occurs after 90 minutes 
These values indicate a significant depression of the response at 
these time intervals. 

A comparison of the effect of sodium pentobarbital 120 mg. 
per Kg. on the normal and denervated legs is shown in Figure 6 and 
Table 5. A probability lying between 10% and 50% was calculated by 
using the normal and denervated experimental results after 90 minutes. 
After 120 minutes the probability was still above the 10% level. 

(b). Sodium Pentobarbital (Nembutal) 250 mg. per Kg. 

The largest dose that was found to be compatible with life, 
while using artificial respiration, was 250 mg. per Kg. of body 
weight. This dose was slightly over twice the M.L.D, Only a few 
animals died within the experimental time. Six out of ten rats lived 
over 180 minutes, while only one lived beyond the 120 minute mark. 

As in the case of the smaller dose, a slight mean increase 
of response occurred reaching a maximum mean peak in 3 minutes. 

(Figure 4). This was not great and may not be significant. A marked 
depression followed rapidly reaching 12% in 180 minutes. In three 
experiments a fall to 0% response was observed in one hour.(Table 6). 
In the one animal that remained alive beyond 240 minutes, a slight 
recovery of the response was noted by 420 minutes. After 3 minutes of 
action the probability lies above the 5% level and therefore the 
initial increased response does not appear to be significant. After 
15 minutes of action t equals 2.44 with 38 degrees of freedom. 





TABLE IV 

EFFECT OF PENTOBARBITAL SODIUM (NEMBUTAL) 120 mg. per Kg. ON THE RESPONSE 
OF THE DENERVATED GASTROCNEMIUS MUSCLE OF THE RAT. 


- 36 - 





O 

to 

-4 

i—1 

o 

UN 

NO 

un 

4 

o 

NO 

NO 

ON 

rH 




to 

i—1 

CH- 

nO 

NO 


to 

O 

r- 

ON 

CH- 

CH¬ 

-4 

NO 

CH- 




o 

to 


CNJ 

-4 

ON 

NO 

un 

-4 

nO 

UN 

C^ 

UN 

i—( 




C\i 

rH 

o- 

UN 

UN 

-4 

NO 

C"- 

CH- 

ON 

NO 

to 

UN 

to 

CH¬ 




O 

to 

-4 

CH¬ 

-4 

rH 

i—! 

un 

4 

NO 

NO 

CH 

UN 

ON 




O 

IH 

NO 

UN 

■4 

NO 

to 

C- 

to 

NO 

o 

UN 

to 

CH 


G 


un 

to 

■4 

CH- 

4 

ON 

rH 

un 

4 

NO 

NO 

CH¬ 

UN 

On 


O 


O 


NO 

un 

-4 

NO 

to 

CH¬ 

to 

NO 

CH¬ 

UN 

to 

!H- 


•H 

















CO 
















-—* 

G 
















G 

CD 
















o 

-P 
















•H 



o 

to 

O 

CH¬ 

-4 


UN 

UN 

o 

4 

UN 

On 

1—1 

CH 

-P 

G 


nO 

o 

CH- 

UN 

-4 

O 

to 

1H- 

ON 

CH¬ 

to 

nO 

o^ 

to 

cd 

O 
















g 

•H 

















P> 
















a, 

o 

CO 















to 

cd 

w 















0 

G 

EH 

UN 

c*- 

O 

to 

4 

ch- 

o 

rH 

o 

ON 

UN 

On 

UN 

CH- 

ffj 

■P 

{ID 

-4 

to 

CH¬ 

NO 

UN 

o 

On 

to 

o 

C^- 

to 

nO 

to 

to 


G 

{55 









1—1 






rH 

O 

M 















cd 

O 

s 















•H 

















O 

rH 

s 















•H 

cd 

M 

O 


UN 

ON 

ON 

UN 

o 

!H- 

o 

rH 

UN 

On 

4 

o 

<H 

•H 


CH 

to 

CH- 

ch- 

NO 

to 

ON 

to 

o 

ON 

to 

NO 

ON 

o 

•H 

■P 

fxJ 









rH 





rH 

■P 

G 

•H 

G 

§ 
















•H 

Eh 



































un 

<r\ 


to 

UN 

to 

o 

ON 

o 

UN 

o 


o 

O 


O 


rH 

ON 

to 

ON 


ON 

o 

ON 

o 

On 

o 

O 

o 

O 










rH 


rH 


rH 

to 

rH 

rH 


0) 

















tuD 

















cd 

















-P 

















G 


CN2 

ON 

r- 

ON 

o 

to 

O 

ON 

O 

UN 

o 

o 

O 

o 


CD 


rH 

ON 

to 

to 

ON 

ON 

o 

On 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

O 

o 


O 

(. 








rH 


rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


M 

0) 

















Oh 

















*P 



o 

-4 

o 

o 

CH= 

o 

On 

o 

rH 

O 

ON 

o 

o 


G 


on 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

O 

C 

On 

o 

ON 

o 

O 

o 

o 


0) 



rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


1—1 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


CO 

















0 

















G 

















Oh 

















0 



o 

•4 

c 

ON 

ch- 

o 

O 

NO 

to 

o 

ON 

o 

o 


G 


sO 

O 

ON 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

o 

o 





rHI 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


CO 

















0 

















G 

















0 

















bjO 



o 

O 

o 

o 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

O 

o 

O 

O 

o 


•H 


CH 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

C 

o 

o 

o 


E*r 



rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


MEAN 100 101 100 96 94 35 79 76 70 70 70 67 

S.D.M 0.11 l.U 1.25 1.33 2.08 2.80 3.30 3.75 3.39 3.47 4.00 6.42 















TABLE V 


- 37 - 


hO 


a 


Jh 


0 ) 


Ph 

• 


Eh 

o 


b£) 


6 

M 

O 

PC 

Oi 

Eh 

1 — 1 

pin 

. — *. 

O 




w 

&H 

i-q 

a 

0 

© 

co 


P 

W 

[§£ 

S 



co 


B 

b 


M 

w 

Q 

a 

O 

0 

CO 

0 


03 

a 

Eh 


CO 

Eh 

< 

M 

0 

PQ 


pc; 

Q 

<< 

M 

PQ 

Eh 

0 

<*5 


> 

a 


W 

w 

Dh 

a 


W 

&H 

« 

0 

Q 

Eh 

a 

O 

<$ 

W 


&4 

a 

W 

1 


0 

O 

a 

a 

W 

0 

a 

co 

Eh 

H 


Pi! 

a 


0 

PL, 


S 


O 


0 



u 

•H 

Ph 

m 

<D 


cd 

•H 

o 

•H 

4h 

«C 












TABLE VI 

EFFECT OF PENTOBARBITAL SODIUM (NEMBUTAL) 250 mg. per Kg. ON THE RESPONSE 


- 33 - 


















o 





O 

on 


O 

o 

XI 

O 

o 

o 

X 

XI 

CM 

to 





t)0 

-4 

X 

OH 








rH 

• 





i—1 











X 

















o 





o 

to 


NO 

o 

XI 

o 

o 

O 

o 

4 

NO 

rH 





CM 

x 

XI 

4 








i—1 

• 





rH 












rH 

















rH 

















o 





O 

nO 

4 

to 

o 

XI 

ON 

o 

O 

o 

rH 

O'N 

CM 





ON 

to 

CM 

UN 



CM 




rH 

CM 

• 

















O 

















rH 



c 














O 



o 


U\ 

cm 

O 

4 

o 

XI 

NO 

o 

O 

o 

CM 

ON 

o 



•H 


X 

ON 

4 

NO 



on 




CM 

CM 

• 



co 














rH 



G 














rH 



0 















• 


-P 















E-* 
















o 

4 


G 


o 

4 

ON 

CM 

X 

XI 

NO 

o 

O 

o 

1 

ON 

rH 

« 


O 


nO 

ON 

UN 

IX 


cry 




8 

ON 

• 


^—■* 

•H 














ON 

w 

c 

■P 














rH 

a 

o 

O 
















•H 

CO 
















-P 

G 














O 

fa 

as 

-P 


un 

-4 

H 

O 

U\ 

o 

ON 

rH 

X 

to 

-4 

to 

4 

o 

G 

G 


4 

ON 

NO 

to 

rH 


4 

rH 

rH 


UN 

on 

© 


*H 

O 














O 

w 

fX 

O 

co 













rH 

4 

to 


w 














o 

0 

H 

Eh 














co 

PcJ 

cO 














O 

1—1 


•H 


O 

4 

CM 

ON 

-4 

NO 

ON 

CM 

4 

o 

o 

X 

ON 

pg 

i—1 

•P 

H 

on 

ON 

X 

to 

ON 

ON 

NO 

4 

-4 

CM 

X 

UN 

• 


aS 

•H 

s 












X 

CO 

•H 

G 















4 

O 

•rl 

a 














M 

•H 


H 














S 


<H 















w 

•H 

O 

1 

un 

O 











O 

a 

■P 


rH 

o 

NO 

o 

NO 

NO 

NO 

X 

NO 

4 

X 

ON 

rH 

o 

G 

<0 


rH 

ON 

o 

NO 

ON 

to 

NO 

X 

UN 

to 

to 

• 

o 

< 

bC 

Eh 




rH 









UN 

fa 


cO 















Eh 


-P 















CO 


G 














4 



0 


CM 

O 

o 

ON 

ON 

o 

4 

X 

ON 

CM 

rH 

O 

UN 

C 


o 


rH 

o 

o 

ON 

X 

o 

ON 

NO 

to 

to 

On 

ON 

• 



G 



rH 

rH 



rH 







ON 

4 


0 

















a 

















■p 














UN 

o 


G 



rH 

o 

ON 

X 

o 

o 

rH 

ON 

CM 

NO 

UN 

rH 

a 


0 


ON 

o 

o 

On 

to 

o 

o 

to 

ON 

ON 

ON 

On 

• 



0 



rH 

rH 



rH 

rH 






CM 

w 


0 















a 


G 















EH 


Pi 

















0 















fa 


G 



o 

OH 

ON 

NO 

u\ 

o 






4 

o 




NO 

o 

O 

On 

ON 

rH 

O 

ON 

o 

O 

ON 

CM 

ON 



co 



rH 

pH 



rH 

rH 

ON 

o 

o 

o 

O 

• 



0 










rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 



G 

















G 

















b£) 














X 



•H 



ON 

o 

On 

o 

to 

X 

o 

X 

o 

ON 

UN 

to 



fa 


on 

ON 

o 

ON 

O 

CM 

O 

o 

O 

o 

rH 

O 

o 







H 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

















• 

s 
















a 

• 
















<4 

Q 
















fa 

• 
















a 

CO 


I Died 




































( 




CONTRACTION TENSION % CONTRACTION TENSION * 


- 39 - 



FI6.4 



FIS. 5 



















































CONTRACTION TENSION 


- 40 - 


COMPARISON OF EFFECT OF PENTOBARBITAL SODIUM 120 MG/KG 
ON NORMAL AND DENERVATED RAT LEGS 

-NORMAL LEG BASED ON CONTROL CURVE 

- DENERVATED LEG BASED ON CONTROL CURVE 



TIME IN MINUTES 


FIG. 6 



TIME IN MINUTES 


FIG.7 















Denervated Experiments 


Ten animals were used, 5 of which lived over 240 minutes 
and 5 of these lived for over 360 minutes. 

The highest single increase in the response, 14%, was 
noted after 12 minutes, (Table 7), while the minimum single response 
reached 0% in 50 minutes. No significant mean increase was noted at 
this dose, but a maximum mean decrease to 5&% took place in 180 minutes. 
(Figure 5). 

While the mean depression in both the normal and denervated 
experiments was greater with the higher dose, the denervated muscles 
were neither depressed as greatly nor as rapidly, at either dose 
level, as those in the normal experiments. The probability was 
0.024 after 50 minutes and 0.014 after 90 minutes, indicating a 
significant depression. 

A comparison of the effect of sodium pentobarbital 
250 mg. per Kg. and the normal and denervated muscles may be seen in 
Figure 7 and Table 8. A probability exceeding the 10% level was 
calculated from the normal and denervated experimental results after 
120 minutes. 

2. 5-( gamma, gamma-dimethylallyl)-5-ethyl barbituric acid (sodium 

salt ) 25 mg. per Kg. 

This barbiturate is a central nervous system stimulant, 
producing violent convulsions in small doses. None of the literature 
gave a minimum lethal dose. It was decided to use the highest possible 
sublethal dose under artificial respiration. This dose was found to 
be 25 mg. per Kg. of body weight. All injections were made intra- 
peritoneally. 

No initial augmentation of the mean response could be 


detected on the normal muscle.(Figure 8). However, single increases 












' 








■ 




. 







































. 




TABLE VII 

EFFECT OF PENTOBARBITAL SODIUM (NEMBUTAL) 250 mg. per Kg. ON THE RESPONSE 


42 






o 

IX 

On 










4 





150 

-4 

4 

X 

X 

IX 

X 

o 

X 

X! 

X 

NO 

CM 





i—1 





P\ 




4 

PA 

• 

















ON 





o 

PA 

ON 










PA 





CM 

IX 

4 

X 

X 

o 

rH 

o 

X 

X 

IX 

UA 

to 





rH 





UA 

UA 



4 

4 

• 

















ON 

• 




O 

PA 

ON 

o 

X 

rH 

to 

o 

XJ 

XJ 

4 

NO 

ON 

x 

Eh 




O 

150 

4 



NO 

IX 


UA 

4 

« 

Si 
















CM 

rH 

w 

















35 
















i—1 

Eh 


C 


UA 

PA 

NO 

o 

XI 

rH 

150 

o 

PA 

XJ 

CM 

IX 

o 


--* 

o 


IX 

150 

UA 



IX 

IX 


CM 

NO 

4 

o 


a 

*H 













CM 

O 

o 

CO 














rH 


•H 

a 















W 

P 

0 















4 

CO 

p 














to 

O 




o 

4 

NO 

o 

X 

rH 

150 

o 

PA 

XJ 

CM 

to 

NO 

CO 

♦H 

c 


NO 

ON 

U\ 



x 

C"- 


CM 

NO 

4 

• 

JP 

Oh 

o 

CO 













CM 


ro 

•H 

w 













rH 


0 

P 

Eh 














co 

05 

O 

|—^ 














£3 


cd 














O 

M 

rH 

O 

M 

ua 

4 

rH 

CM 

rH 

UA 

CM 

o 

PA 

XJ 

CM 

rH 

CM 


cO 

P 

s 

4 

ON 

NO 

H 

CH 

IX 

ON 


PA 

NO 

UA 

• 


•H 

0 














o 

S 

O 

o 

a 













rH 

o 

•H 

o 

M 














o 

Ch 
















05 

•H 

rH 

1 













PA 

EH 

P 

as 

O 

UA 

to 

CM 

ON 

rH 

CM 

o 

rH 

X 

O 

UA 

NO 

CO 

O 

•H 

pa 

ON 

NO 

CM 

ITS 

to 

ON 


UA 

o 

IX 

NO 

• 

<s 

< 

p 

Eh 









rH 



o 

o 


•H 














rH 


















Q 


•H 















W 
















PA 

Eh 


<P 


ua 

£X 

CM 

rH 

4 

o 

On 

to 

UA 

4 

UA 

PA 

rH 

4 


O 


rH 

O 

to 

UA 

to 

ON 

On 

CM 

to 

rH 

to 

to 

• 

> 





rH 








rH 



150 

05 


0 















M 


bC 















S 


ctf 















w 


P 














4 

Q 


0 


CM 

4 

CM 

ON 

O 

UA 

On 

C*A 

UA 

4 

PA 

o 

IX 



0 


rH 

rH 

150 

NO 

o 

ON 

ON 

4 

ON 

rH 

ON 

ON 

• 

M 


a 



rH 



rH 





rH 



nO 

35 


U 















Eh 


0 

















Oh 































On 

O 


P 



PA 

to 

ON 

NO 

UA 

8 

to 

O 

X 

PA 

NO 

On 



0 


ON 

rH 

to 

to 

O 

ON 

NO 

O 

O 

ON 

ON 

• 



0 



rH 



rH 


rH 


rH 

rH 



PA 



0 

















0 

















o 

















Oh 














PA 



0 



CH 

4 

4 

NO 

UA 

o 

PA 

O 

X 

o 

ON 

NO 



U 


NO 

rH 

ON 

ON 

o 

ON 

O 

to 

O 

O 

o 

ON 

• 






rH 



rH 


rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 


CM 



w 

















0 

















o 

3 














X 



hO 



o 

CM 

ITS 

8 

o 

O 

o 

o 

NO 

o 

o 

PA 



•H 


PA 

On 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

• 



fXH 




rH 

rH 

sH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

















• 
















s: 

• 
















<s 

Q 
















iS 

CO 












TABLE VIII 


43 - 


bfl 

P 

0 

a 


W) 

S 

o 

u\ 

CM 


rH 

<C 

E-i 

S3 




A 

t3 

M 

Q 

O 

CO 

rH 

<c 

&H 

M 

PQ 

0=5 

< 

m 

o 

Eh 

S 

M 

a. 

fe 

o 

Eh 

o 

w 

P 

(H 

M 

P 

o 

s 

o 

CO 

M 

§ 

o 


a 

o 

•H 

P 

cd 

P 

•H 

P. 

W 

0 

P=3 


cti 

•H 

Q 

•H 

4h 

•H 

p 

<=$ 


o 

p 

-p 

g 

o 

o 

bO 

c 

•H 

-d 

G 

o 

P. 

w 

0 

p 

p 

o 

o 

0 

Hi 

p 

<4h 

o 

0 

h£) 

cd 

p 

c 

0 

U 

p 


aJ 

P 

G 

0 

e 

•H 

P 

a> 

P, 

X 

0 

P 

G 

0 

co 

0 

p 

p, 

0 

p 

0 

0 

P 

3 


CO 

w 

Eh 


S 

M 

W 



CM 

NO 

o 

• 

0 

to 

-4 

-4 

1 — 1 

rH 

-4 


i — 1 

to 

o 

• 

9 

cm 

to 

-4 

1 — 1 

i — 1 

UN 


nO 

-4 


• 

9 

o 

UN 

un 

ON 

CM 

UN 


<r\ 

to 


• 

9 

u\ 

rH 

-4 

r- 

ON 

un 


-4 

O 


• 

9 

o 

UN 

NO 

NO 

C*\ 

u\ 


NO 

UN 


• 

« 

ITS 

O 

to 

-4 

-4 

UN 


-4 

C*- 


9 

9 

o 

ON 

rH 

cn 

u\ 

C^ 


NO 

UN 


• 

9 

un 

-4 

O 

iH 

to 

to 


to 

C'N 


9 

9 

cm 

o 

-4 

rH 

ON 

ON 


o 

CM 


♦ 

9 


NO 

O' 

ON 

ON 

ON 


rH 

CM 


• 

• 


rH 

rH 

NO 

O 

o 


rH 

rH 


<r\ 

-4 


9 

9 


-4 

rH 

C*N 

o 

O 


rH 

rH 

w 

rH 

O 

co 


w 

tD 


rH 

o 

X 


CO 

W 

Eh 


»H 

> 

Ph 

w 

s 


o 

W 


s 

Q 











































CONTRACTlOw ; LUSJ^N % CONTRACTION ■■ ; . NON 


44 



FIG. 8 



FIG. 9 































- 45 - 


in 3 out of 10 experiments were noted.(Table 9). The greatest 
single increase was 26 % and a single decrease to 17 % was noted. 

A maximum mean depression was reached by the end of the experimental 
time of 180 minutes.(Figure 8 and Table 9). The depression observed 
here appears to be a significant one since the probability is less 
than 1% in 13 minutes. The t value equals 3*81 with 38 degrees of 
freedom. 

Denervated Experiments 

A small mean increase of 2% in 6 minutes occurred in the case 
of the denervated muscles. Six out of ten muscles contracted with a 
slightly greater force for a few minutes.(Table 10). 

As can be seen in Figure 9, the depression that followed did 
not differ significantly from that of the control experiments for 
over two hours then decreased more readily. The probability was less 
than 1% after 13 minutes therefore highly significant. The t value 
equals 3.19 with 31 degrees of freedom. 

The comparison of the effects shown on normal and denervated 
muscles may be seen in Figure 10 and Table 11. 

It would appear that there is a significant initial depression 
on the myoneural junction since only this would show a decrease in the 
normal muscle while the denervated muscle remains relatively unaltered 
at this dose. The probability was 0.039 in 90 minutes, therefore is 
just significant. 


MEPERIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 

(Demerol Hydrochloride) 

(a). Demerol Hydrochloride 80 mg. per Kg. 

The L.D.^q has been reported as 93 mg. per Kg. for rats. 





















. 










. 


. 























. 






























' 




- 




















! . 

■ 






TABLE IX 

EFFECT OF A CNS STIMULATING BARBITURATE (5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-5-ethyl 
barbituric acid (sodium salt) 25 mg,per Kg, ON THE RESPONSE OF THE NORMAL 
GASTROCNEMIUS MUSCLE OF THE RAT* (Artificial Respiration) X Died 


- 46 - 















CA 

o 


to 

1 


CM 


o 

o 

o- 


On 

OS 

to 

1 — I 

X 

<r\ 

1 

Ixl 

CM 

X 

lf\ 

o 

1 — 1 

O’N 

X 

4 

i — 1 













o 













to 

o 


NO 

o 

U"\ 

C'- 

4 

to 

O 

ir\ 

NO 

On 

• 

CM 

X 

4 

o 

ur\ 

f—1 

4 

NO 

O 

iPv 

4 

U-\ 

to 

rH 


rH 





rH 




UA 














rH 

O 

<r\ 

4 

O 

CM 

ON 

UN 

rH 

ur\ 

tr\ 

ON 

4 

• 

O' 

NO 

ITN 

O 

NO 


UH 

o- 

On 

IfN 

4 

nO 

NO 




rH 









CM 













CM 

ir\ 


4 

4 

NO 

<T\ 

ITN 

to 

ir\ 

ir\ 

ON 

4 

• 

C^ 

NO 

irv 

ON 

NO 

NO 

UfN 


ON 

Wf\ 

4 

NO 

tr\ 













CM 













4 

o 

r- 

4 

ON 

NO 

NO 

to 

to 

ur\ 

ua 

as 

ON 

• 

nO 

nO 

LfN 

to 

NO 

r- 

VfN 

14 

ON 


UA 

NO 

4 













CM 













u\ 

tr\ 


4 

On 

NO 

rH 

to 

CM 

WfN 

CM 

On 

rH 

« 

4“ 

NO 

ir\ 

to 

NO 

to 

ir\ 

to 

ON 

NO 

tr\ 

4 

4 













O 













4 

O 

rH 

CM 

-4 

ON 

rH 

NO 

CM 

LTN 

LTN 

NO 

NO 

• 

as 

!>- 

NO 

ON 

NO 

to 

5>- 

to 

ON 

NO 

NO 

4 

CA 













4 













UA 

tr\ 


CM 

ir\ 

rH 

NO 

CM 

CM 

O 

«H 

NO 

c^v 

« 

rH 


nO 

ON 

to 


On 

to 

o 

O' 

4 

to 

CA 









rH 




oa 













to 

CM 

i — 1 

CM 

LfN 

LT\ 

NO 

ON 

<r\ 

o 

14 

CM 

4 

• 

rH 

to 

NO 

ON 

to 

C-- 

ON 

ON 

o 

ON 

to 

to 

as 









rH 




4 


-4 

CM 

l/N 

4 

rH 

*4 

rH 

LTN 

£4 

4 

CM 

CM 

ON 

to 

NO 

ON 

ON 

to 

O 

rH 

ON 

On 

ON 

On 

, 







rH 

rH 





4 













ua 


o 

CM 

o 

«>- 

i>- 

4 

NO 

o 

C 

to 

O 

CM 

NO 

On 

NO 

o 

ON 

o 

!—1 

CM 

o 

O 

o 

O 

• 




rH 


rH 

*H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

1—1 

rH 

ITN 













4 


O 

CM 

o 

-4 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

to 

4 


On 

to 

O 

O 

O 

rH 

o 

O 

o 

o 

ON 

• 




i—1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


CM 













• 

s 












!s 

• 












< 

Q 












Hi 

CO 







I 

$ n . ] ' ~ 1 

it 


I 

{ 


I 




EFFECT OF A CNS STIMULATING BARBITURATE (5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-5-ethyl 
barbituric acid (sodium salt) 25 mg. per Kg. ON THE RESPONSE OF THE DENERVATED 
GASTROCNEMIUS MUSCLE OF THE RAT. (Artificial Respiration) X Died 
Figures represent percentage of initial contraction tension 

TIME IN MINUTES 


- 47 - 














o 

o 


nO 

£>- 

ON 

rH 

NO 

UA 

o 

O 

ON 

to 

CM 

-co 

X 

UA 



UA 

to 

o 

to 

NO 

-4 

UA 

. 

1—1 







rH 





PA 













CM 

o 


CM 

-4 

ON 

to 

NO 

to 

UA 

PA 

to 

ON 

O- 

CM 

X 


PA 


t>- 

to 

On 

to 

I>- 

ON 

C'- 

• 

iH 












UA 

o 

pH 

On 

PA 

o 

to 

NO 

to 

UA 

PA 

to 


On 

ON 

to 

C-- 

NO 

to 

to 

to 

On 

o 

r- 

ON 

to 

• 









1—1 




PA 













O 

UA 

rH 

O 

rH 

£>- 

PA 

NO 

to 

UA 

PA 

to 

to 

PA 

r- 

ON 


r- 

to 

to 

to 

ON 

o 

o 

ON 

to 

• 









1—1 




PA 

o 

PA 

O 

to 

l>- 

CM 

to 

to 

NO 


to 

NO 

O 

PA 

NO 

to 

to 

o 

to 

l> 

c^- 

ON 

ON 

C"- 

ON 

to 

• 













PA 













rH 

ua 

PN 

o 

to 

{> 

to 

CM 

to 

NO 

rH 

to 

NO 

NO 

-4- 

to 

to 

o 

to 

NO 

t>- 

ON 

ON 

to 

ON 

to 

• 













PA 













C^- 

O 

CM 

o 

-4 

o- 

CM 

CM 

to 

o 


rH 

NO 

CM 

PA 

ON 

to 

to 

c^- 



ON 

ON 

c- 

ON 

to 

. 













PA 













UA 

ua 

CM 

to 

rH 


to 

NO 

to 

UA 

o 

rH 

to 

-4 

rH 

On 

to 

ON 

£> 

to 

to 

to 

ON 

ON 

ON 

to 

• 

r — 1 













UA 

CM 

CM 

to 

o 


o 

CM 

ON 

o 

NO 

to 

-4 

rH 

rH 

ON 

to 

o 

O- 

o 

On 

ON 

o 

ON 

ON 

On 

• 




rH 

C- 

1—( 



rH 




CM 













O 


CM 

to 

NO 

O 

NO 

O 

to 

UA 

o 

o 

o 

O 

ON 

ON 

to 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

• 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 













o 


CM 

to 

NO 

rH 

UA 

O 

to 

to 

UA 

o 

CM 

PA 

NO 

ON 

to 

o 

rH 

o 

o 

o 

O 

On 

o 

O 

• 



rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

CM 













O 


CM 

rH 

On 

rH 

O 

8 

to 

8 

nO 

o 

O 

to 

pa 

ON 

ON 

ON 

rH 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

. 





rH 

rH 

i—1 

1 — 1 

rH 


rH 

rH 

1—1 
















TABLE XI 


- U8 - 


i 

tr\ 

I 


cd 

r—I 

s: 

-p 

0) 

& 

•H 

Q 

I 

cfl 


cd 

bJO 


cd 

bO 


J 

UA 


&H 

O 

E-* 

O 

w 

Oh 

&H 

w 

&H 

o 

a 

o 

CO 

H 

04 

< 

Oh 

S 

O 

o 


o 

(0 


X* 

*H 

O 

cd 


U 

•P 

♦H 

u 


>» 

■p 

0) 


E-« 


W 

33 

Eh 

Oh 

O 

w 

P3 

o 

CO 

s 


O, 

CO 

Q> 

04 


cd 

•H 

O 

•H 

<+H 

•H 

+3 

C# 

c 















- 49 - 



FIG. 10 



FIG. II 
























50 - 


Some of the animals died, after receiving doses as low as 60 mg. per 
Kg. by intraperitoneal injection, if artificial respiration was not 
given. 

A dose of 80 mg. per Kg. was chosen in order to determine if 
any effect would be shown in a dose which is less than the reported 
lethal dose. Artificial respiration appeared to be necessary for most 
animals. Convulsions were observed at this dosage in most animals. 

Demerol hydrochloride appeared to have very little, if any, 
action on the response recorded when 80 mg. per Kg. was administered 
intraperitoneally. (Figure 12). The maximum mean decrease to 5&% 
occurred after 240 minutes, with 6 out of 11 rats remaining alive 
at this time. Only five experiments exhibited any preliminary increase 
in response within 6 minutes, while an increase in two others was 
observed at a later time.(Table 12). No mean increase was demonstrated 
at this dose.(Figure 12). The maximum mean decrease fell to 60% in 
180 minutes. After 90 minutes of action a probability of 0.044 was 
calculated. 

(b). Demerol Hydrochloride 18.5 mg. per Kg. 

All but 2 out of 10 rats lived for 180 minutes with 
artificial respiration. No significant change occurred for about 
90 minutes when the response fell off more rapidly.(Figure 14). 

Only two muscles showed any signs of an increased response. The 
same pattern of depression as that exhibited by the smaller dose 
resulted. 

In four experiments a slight increase was noted after the 
depression had started.(Table 15). The maximum single increase 
reached 152% after 60 minutes. A single maximal decrease to 0% was 
not achieved until 2 hours had elapsed. A number of rats died after 

or just before 180 minutes, therefore the rapid decrease towards the 
end of the experimental time is likely not significant. 













* 



. 












. 




• 


. 




* 

. 












1 

. 
















. 

* 

■ 


















' 






■ 




























. 

. 












51 





















CM 







o 

1 

NO 

1 

ua 


O 

On 

H 

UA 

I 

-4 

o 

OA 







to 

1 

o- 

1 

H 

o 

-4 

On 

NO 

O 

1 

NO 

NO 

• 







H 





H 





OA 


W 


















H 


EC 




















Eh 


















r—1 


S 





o 

-4 

H 

H 

H 

o- 

O 

On 

H 

UA 

to 

-4 

H 

to 






02 

ir\ 

to 

ON 

£H 

o 

-4 

On 

NO 

C"- 

OA 

NO 

O 

o 


O 





r—i 





H 








NO 


W) 




















« 


















to 



• 




o 

ua 

NO 

NO 

H 

O- 

On 

On 

to 

o 

to 

-4 

to 

-4 


G 

Eh 




ON 

NO 

to 

ON 

F- 

o 

-4 

O 

O 

to 

UA 

NO 

C"- 

o 


0) 










H 







UA 


a 

« 



















• 

W 



















bp 

EC 

















r-H 


S 

Eh 


G 


ua 

£> 

NO 

NO 

uta 


H 

UA 

to 

-4 

UA 

-4 

OA 

CM 



Oh 


O 


O* 

nO 

to 

O 

C^ 

o 

C^ 

H 

o 

to 

NO 

NO 

to 

« 


o 


•H 







H 


H 






UA 


to 

O 


ai 




















G 


















w 


0 

















H 

H 


P 















CM 


o 

o 

a 



O 

t> 

NO 

NO 


{> 

H 

UA 

-4 

-4 

CM 

OA 

NO 

UA 


EC 

CO 

o 

G 


vO 

vO 

to 

ON 

to 

O 


H 

to 

to 

to 

O- 

to 

• 



1—> 

•H 

o 







H 


H 






-4 


hhI 

s 

+3 

•H 

















o 


cd 

p 

















PC 

CO 

Eh 

o 

CO 
















M 

0 

•H 

cd 

P3 














-4 


§ 

Q, 

G 

Eh 

ua 

oa 

NO 

NO 

02 

I>- 

NO 

UA 

NO 

On 

O 

CM 

OA 

On 


M 


W 

p 

Ed 

-4 

J> 

to 

ON 

ON 

O 

to 

H 

to 

to 

H 

to 

On 

« 


Q 

w 

0 

G 







H 


H 



H 



OA 

M 


s 

04 

O 

M 















H 

tw* 

o 


o 
















X 


o 

rl 

















W 

(C 

CES 

HI 

S 














NO 

M 

Q 

Eh 

•H 

cd 

H 

O 

ua 

NO 

NO 

o- 

£>- 

o 

ON 

oa 

ON 

O 

UA 

-4 

O 

M 

CO 

O 

•H 


CO 

D- 

to 

ON 

to 

O 

o 

ON 

ON 

to 

H 

ON 

On 

• 


P5 

< 

•H 

P 

OP 





H 

H 



H 



OA 

PQ 

O 

o 

CH 

•H 

s 















< 

H 


•H 

G 















E-t 

EC 


P 

•H 

Eh 
















O 

<ai 

G 
















On 


o 

)5? 

<4 

Ch 


ITS 

O 

NO 

CN2 


O 

CO 

ON 

CM 

ON 

NO 

o 

UA 

OA 


pc; 

s 

■—^ 

O 


HI 

to 

to 

ON 

to 

o 

On 

ON 

O 

ON 

O 

o 

ON 

• 


o 

Q 









H 



H 


H 

H 


CM 


>H 

s 


0 

















EC 



bO 


















w 


0 

















w 

EC 


P 















UA 


1S5 

Eh 


G 


02 

o 

o 

CM 

E> 

O 

-4 

On 

CM 

UA 

O 

UA 

-4 

-4 


M 

&4 

O 


0 


H 

to 

ON 

ON 

to 

o 

to 

On 

O 

O 

O 

ON 

ON 

• 


0 


o 

G 







H 



H 

H 

H 



CM 


cc 



0 

















W 

P3 


ft 

















Oh 

co 

















O 


pr3 

s 


P 



-4 

o 

to 

CO 

O 

-4 

ON 

HI 

UA 

O 

o 

-4 

O 


Jg, 

o 


G 


ON 

o 

o 

to 

to 

o 

to 

ON 

O 

O 

o 

o 

ON 

o 



Oh 


0 




H 



H 



H 

H 

H 

H 


OA 


Oh 

CO 


w 

















o 

w 


0 


















04 


G 

















Eh 



A 















CM 


O 



0 



02 

o 

ON 

c^ 

o 

c*\ 

CM 

H 

UA 

-4 

-4 

ON 

UA 


W 



G 


NO 

to 

o 

ON 

to 

o 

o 

H 

O 

O 

On 

O 

ON 

« 


P>4 







H 



H 

H 

H 

H 

H 


H 


CM 


Ex, 



CG 

















W 



0 




















G 




















G 















O 





bO 



CO 

o 

8 

NO 

O 

NO 

ON 

NO 

O 

u* 

UA 

ON 

OA 





•H 


CO 

ON 

o 

ON 

O 

o 

ON 

o 

O 

On 

ON 

ON 

• 





04 




H 

H 


H 

H 


H 

H 




H 




















• 

s 



















s 

9 



















<4 

Q 



















W 

• 



















s 

CO 










52 








O 

















to 

X 

O 

o 

X 

o 

CNi 

to 

O 

rH 

O 







rH 





CO 

to 

rH 

CNi 

-4 



w 

















ad 
















• 

Eh 





o 

















CNi 


ON 

un 

o 

to 

O 

rH 

NO 

C- 

O 


a 





ft 



on 


-4" 

rH 

o- 

-4 

C- 

pH 


o 











rH 






bO 

















w 





O 

o 

CNi 

to 

UN 

UN 

NO 

CNi 

ON 

ON 

-4 







ON 

ON 

NO 

un 

(Ni 

UN 

CNi 

£— 

C— 

On 

CNi 


Jh 











rH 






0) 

















Oh 

• 

















bQ 

• 


c 














B 

Eh 


o 


UN 

CH, 

-4 

NO 

o 

CNi 

CNi 

NO 

On 

ON 

ON 



< 


•H 



ON 

to 

NO 

UN. 

NO 

OH 

c— 

c- 

ON 

CNi 


UN 

ft; 


03 








rH 






to 


c 

a 














«—4 

ft 

o 

0 















ad 

•H 

■p 














.—>. 

Eh 

■P 

















cd 

c 


o 

NO 

sa- 

ON 

-4 

C^ 

CNi 

NO 

UN 

o 

rH 


o 

ft 

u 

o 


NO 

ON 

to 

NO 

o 

NO 

CO 

c- 

to 

o 

UN 


ad 

O 

•H 

•H 

CO 







rH 



pH 





ft 

■P 

ft 













Pi 

ft 

03 

O 

Eh 












H 

o 

ft 

0) 

cd 

aa 












H 


o 

ft 

u 

a 












H 

a 

CO 


p> 

M 

UN 

on 

c^ 

o 

(N* 

UN 

pH 

rH 

ON 

ON 

ON 

x 

a 

g 

rH 

cd 

a 

o 

a 

-4 

O 

rH 

to 

to 

ON 


CNi 

rH 

to 

ON 

ON 

to 

i 

Q 


•H 

Q 

a 












w 


CO 

O 


H 












PQ 

ft 

5 

*H 

ft 

pH 

cd 

M 












:< 

Q 

£ 

•H 

•H 

§ 

o 

UN 

o 

NO 

(Ni 

ur\ 

o 

rH 

ON 

ON 

UN 

;eh 

M 

ft 

■P 

■P 

H 

on 

o 

to 

to 

o 

r- 

rH 

to 

ON 

ON 

ON 


0^ 

a 

JH 

•H 

Eh 


rH 



pH 


rH 





\ 

o 

o 

<d 

fl 













! 

ft 

o 


•H 













1 

ad 

03 
















o 

Eh 


ft 














o 

CO 


O 


ir\ 

to 

NO 

NO 

CNi 

UN 

O 

UN 

ON 

NO 

UN 



<£ 




pH 

ON 

c- 

to 

O 

ST¬ 

rH 

to 

ON 

to 

ON 


Q 

o 


0 






rH 


pH 






>H 



to 














ac 

ft 


cd 

















•p 














ft 

g 


sd 














a 



0 


CNi 

to 

NO 

NO 

to 

UN 

O 

UN 

ON 

o 

UN 


M 

o 


o 


rH 

ON 

r- 

to 

ON 

E— 

*H 

to 

O 

o 

ON 


Q 

a 










pH 



rH 



M 



0 














« 

ft 


ft 














ft 

ac 















. 

ft 

Eh 


-P 

c< 













I 

§ 

fin 


0 


ON 

o 

NO 

o 

to 

CNi 

U"N 

o 

ON 

o 

UN 

i 


o 


m 



o 

D- 

ON 

ON 

to 

o 

On 

On 

o 

ON 


ft 



0 



pH 





pH 



rH 



o 

ft 


k 















CO 


ft 














Eh 

a 


0 














O 

o 


u 













j 

a 

ft 




NO 

ON 

O 

NO 

CNi 

to 

O 

UN 

ON 

O 

o 


ft 

CO 


m 



o 

to 

to 

o 

to 

o 

ON 

ON 

O 

O 


ft 

ft 


0 



rH 



rH 


rH 



pH 

rH 


ft 

ft 



















as 

















bO 

















•H 

















ft 


ON 

on 

on 

ON 

o 

-4 

O 

o 

o 

ON 

o 








O 

ON 

ON 

o 

ON 

O 

o 

o 

On 

o 








ft 



rH 


rH 

pH 

rH 


rH 


On 


-go 

NO 


NO 


-4 

•co 


ON 


CM 

ON 


ON 


CNi 

ON 


o\ 

ON 


UN 

ON 


to 

On 


S.D.M.l.20 2.50 2.75 3.48 3.51 3.67 4.18 7.03 8.77 9.78 11.74 10.11 















53 



FIG.12 



FIG.13 






















































54 



TIME IN MINUTES 


FIG. 14 



TIME IN MINUTES 


FIG. IS 

























55 - 


A probability lying between 5-10% levels was calculated after 
12 minutes, while it reached 0.059 in 90 minutes. 

Denervated Experiments 

Denervated experiments were done only at the lower dose 
level since the depression even at the higher dose did not seem to 
warrant two series on the denervated muscle. 

The mean response of Demerol hydrochloride 80 mg. per Kg. 
on the denervated muscles remained above that of the corresponding 
denervated control group, during the whole of the experimental 
period. The response fell below 71% in one animal only.(Table 14). 

The maximum mean response rose to 104% in 12 minutes and fell down 
to 84% after 180 minutes.(Figure 15). All animals lived over 2 hours 
but 4 died before the end of 5 hours. After 12 minutes the 
probability was just over 1%. (t equals 2.75 and has 51 degrees 
of freedom). 

A comparison of the means of the denervated and normal 
experimental muscle responses may be seen in Figure 15 and Table 15. 

The probability calculated on normal and denervated exper¬ 
imental results lies above the 10°/L level after one hour. 

BENZETHOilIUM CHLORIDE 

(Phemerol Chloride) 

Phemerol Chloride 25 mg. per Kg. 

The maximum dose that could be injected into these animals 
was 25 mg. per Kg., if they were to remain alive for 5 hours. In 
higher doses up to 75 mg. per Kg., a rapid but steady decline in the 
response was noted before death. Death occurred early and was ap¬ 
parently due to respiratory failure. Several rats were given arti¬ 
ficial respiration while the heart beat was still easily detectable, 

but it was unsuccessful in prolonging the life of the animal. 












. 


* 




. 










, 






. 






























. 






































. 













56 







CC 




Eh 




S 




o 




• 

• 



to 

Eh 




<H 




Pi 







a) 

W 



Ph 

PC 




Eh 



• 




to 

Ph 



s 

o 



o 

pq 

„— 


to 


c 



o 

o 


«s 

CO 

*H 



p~> 

-p 


o 


Cd 


cc 


p 



CO 

•H 


rH 

{3 

Ph 


o 

M 

CO 


PC 

J5? 

<u 

> 

1 

w 

PC 

H 

s 


XI 

w 

o 

«—i 

Q 

o 

£d 


—^ 

PC 

•H 

w 


Eh 

O 


w 

CO 

•H 

PQ 

Q 

<t 

CH 

< 

M 

a 

•H 


PC 


■P 


3 

§ 

< 


PC 

Eh 



o 

< 



o 

> 



PC 

PC 



Q 

m 



X 

s 



nc 

w 




a 



w 




s 

PQ 



M 

PC 



Q 

Eh 



M 




PC 

Jxh 



w 

o 



Plh 

w 




CO 




s 



pH 

o 

2 




CO 



Eh 

w 



O 

PC 



w 




ptf 




pEn 




w 









XI 










PA 




O 

O 

pa 

XI 

X 

UA 

02 

NO 

PA 


to 

-4 

-co 




to 

to 

rH 




to 

02 

o 

to 

XI 

ON 

to 

• 




i — 1 







i — 1 

rH 





UA 

















rH 




o 

o 

rH 

1 — 1 

-4 

to 

UA 

rH 

PA 

PA 

o 

to 

ON 

-co 

1 — 1 




cm 

ON 


x 

to 

1 — 1 

to 

rH 

ON 

to 

o 

On 

to 

• 




pH 





rH 


rH 


1—i 



NO 

















O 




o 

o 

CM 

rH 

ON 

to 

02 

rH 

PA 

X 

o 

O 

PA 

to 




ON 

ON 

NO 

X 

to 

rH 

On 

rH 

On 

ON 

o 

o 

ON 

« 









i—1 


rH 



rH 

rH 

-4 


P 


ua 

-4 

NO 

rH 

UA 

to 

02 

02 

On 

X 

O 

O 

UA 

3 


o 


{X 

ON 

UA 

X 

ON 

rH 

ON 

02 

On 

ON 

O 

O 

On 

• 


•H 

0 

P 







rH 


rH 



rH 

rH 


UA 


a) 

















-p 















o 




O 

-4 

X 

-4 

UA 

to 

-4 

02 

O 

x 

X 

x 

X 

1 —1 


P 


nO 

ON 

-4 

to 

On 

rH 

ON 

02 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

ON 

9 


o 

CO 






rH 


rH 

rH 

1—1 

rH 

NO 


•H 

w 
















•P 

Eh 
















O 

|—> 
















cd 















o 


P 

M 

ua 

O 

X 

rH 

On 

to 

-4 

i —i 

O 

NO 

x 

X 

ON 

PA 


-P 

£ 

-4 

O 

-4 

ON 

On 

pH 

On 

PA 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

ON 

• 


P 



fH 




pH 


i—! 

rH 


1—1 

rH 


NO 

0 

o 

s 















•H 

o 

M 















Q 

«H 

1 














UA 


cd 

O 

8 

CM 

rH 

On 

CM 

-4* 

rH 

o 

NO 

-4 

X 

rH 

i —1 

XI 

•H 

pa 

NO 

ON 

ON 

pH 

On 

PA 

O 

ON 

rH 

o 

O 

• 


•P 

Eh 


rH 




pH 


rH 

rH 


pH 

1—1 

rH 

UA 


•H 

















P 

















•H 















X 


<H 


UA 

O 

-4 

PA 

ON 

UA 

O 

to 

O 

rH 

x 

X 

CN2 

CN2 


O 


rH 

o 

to 

ON 

ON 

O 

O 

02 

O 

O 

o 

O 

O 

9 





pH 




i — 1 

rH 

rH 

•H 

rH 

rH 

i — 1 

rH 

PA 


0 

















to 

















cd 

















■P 















o 


P 


CM 

o 

-4 

PA 

ON 

02 

O 

to 

O 

rH 

x 

X 

-4 

o 


0 


rH 

o 

ON 

ON 

ON 

pH 

o 

02 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

• 


a 

t. 



pH 


rH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

PA 


M 

<D 

















Ph 















X 


■P 



o 

to 

PA 

UA 

NO 

o 

to 

PA 

NO 

O 

o 

PA 

ON 


P 


ON 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

O 

o 

02 

ON 

ON 

o 

O 

O 

• 


0 



pH 

pH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 



»H 

rH 

rH 

CM 


to 

















0 

















P 

















Ph 















X 


0 



UA 

to 

PA 

UA 

NO 

-4 

O 


o 

O 

o 

PA 

CM 


P 


NO 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

O 

ON 

02 

ON 

O 

o 

o 

O 

• 





pH 

rH 


rH 

rH 


rH 

ON 

rH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

CM 


w 

















0 

















p 

















p 















NO 


to 



fH 

-4 

8 

NO 

o 

O 

02 

O 

rH 

o 

o 

rH 

PA 


•H 


PA 

O 

ON 

O 

o 

O 

pH 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

• 


fin 



rH 


rH 

pH 

rH 

pH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

















• 

s 
















S 

• 
















■< 

Q 
















w 

• 
















s 

co 
















TABLE XV 


57 


W) 


« 


Jh 


<D 


a 


• 


bO 


s 

• 

o 

&h 

to 

2 



>-q 

pq 

o 

PC 


eh 

f-q 

Ph 

o 

o 


pq 

§ 

t-q 

w 

o 

Q 

CO 

'— ' 

5 

m 


Q 

CO 

M 

P^5 

B 

O 


t-1 

pq 

PC 

s 

o 

o 

o 

o 

CCS 

P3 

a 

£h 


CO 

PC 

<£J 


O 

W 


S 

Q 

M 

pq 

Q 

Eh 

M 

<C 

P^ 

> 

pq 

PC 

Ph 

pq 

1 

125 

pq 


Q 



o 

g 

£h 


O 


w 

•-q 

fe 


pH 

*gj 

w 

o 

Ph 

s 

o 

pq 

s 

pq 

o 

Eh 

CO 

s 

H 

p^ 

o 

<u 


pH 


s 


o 


o 



c 

o 

•H 

■P 

OS 

u 

♦H 

a 

CO 

0 

ttJ 


05 

•H 

O 


•H 

Ch 











- 5 « - 


Marked cyanosis was evident in all experiments, 

Phemerol chloride 23 mg. per Kg. injected intraperitoneally 
appears to augment slightly the mean muscle response to electrical 
stimuli delivered through the nerve. This increased response was 
evident for approximately an hour and then it gradually declined. 
(Figure 16). A maximum mean increase of 37® and a single increase 
of 31°/® was observed in 13 minutes. (Table 16). The single increase 
was exceptionally large compared to the others. The lowest single 
response reached 297® which again was exceptional. The minimum mean 
response was 7^7® in l80 minutes. The probability calculated from 
experimental and control results after 13 minutes of drug action 
was 0.012. 

Denervated Experiments 

When the mean of the experimental responses are compared 
to those of the denervated control, no significant difference is 
observed.(Figure 17). Single decreases of response reached 17® and 
3% in two animals, but again these were exceptional.(Table 17). 

The minimum mean response was 397® in 180 minutes. There 
was no increase in the mean response of the denervated muscle. 

All but two rats lived throughout the experimental period. 
The pattern of response in both normal and denervated experiments 
was similar after 1 hour, but the increase noted in the normal 
experiments was absent in the denervated muscles.(Figure 16 and 17). 

A comparison of the experimental means of the denervated and 
normal muscles based on their respective control curves may be seen 
in Figure 11 and Table 18. The probability calculated on the normal 
and denervated experimental results after 13 minutes was 0.013. 













































. 








. 






- 






































TABLE XVI 

EFFECT OF BENZETHONIUM CHLORIDE (PHEMEROL CHLORIDE) 25 mg. per Kg. ON 


- 59 - 




















ON 





O 

UN 

NO 

to 

to 

ON 

to 

pH 

o 

o 

NO 

NO 

rH 

NO 

O 





to 

NO 


to 

NO 

cm 

On 

to 

to 

to 

IN- 

to 

ON 

o 

• 





rH 













tf\ 





O 

to 

4 

to 

UN 

ON 

NO 

pH 

to 

o 

CM 

NO 

O 

4 

o 

pH 





CM 

UN 

to 

to 

C^- 

UN 

o 

ON 

to 

On 

to 

to 

O 

to 

• 





i—1 






pH 






rH 


4 

• 


















O 

EH 




o 

UN 

to 

to 

ON 

£>- 

to 

NO 

pH 

UN 

NO 

CM 

ON 

to 

NO 

4 




ON 

NO 

to 

to 

O 

NO 

ON 

ON 

ON 

On 

to 

On 

O 

to 

• 

P3 
















rH 


ON 

W 



















33 



















6-* 


















O 



C 


un 

UN 

to 

to 

NO 


NO 

4 


O 

rH 

CM 

ON 

O 

4 

EH 


O 



NO 

to 

to 

o 

NO 

o 

ON 

ON 

O 

ON 

On 

rH 

ON 

• 

o 


*H 








rH 



pH 



rH 


4 



CO 

















M 


C 



















0 

















O 


■P 
















4 

CO 

C 



O 

o 

to 

CVI 

ON 

CM 

NO 

NO 

o 

O 

rH 

4 

pH 

ON 

UN 

3 

o 

S3 


nO 

{> 

to 

ON 

to 

r- 

O 

ON 

o 

O 

On 

ON 

ON 

On 

* 

S 

♦H 

O 








pH 


rH 

rH 



pH 


4 


•P 

•H 

















co 

cti 

■p 

















n> 


O 

CO 
















H 

•H 

<d 

W 















O 

SJ 

0 

a 


Eh 

us 

CM 

NO 

r- 

t> 

to 

CM 

NO 

4 

UN 

O 

4 

On 

t> 

4 

W 

-P 

p) 

4 

to 

ON 

ON 

to 

t- 

rH 

ON 

o 

o 

O 

ON 

pH 

ON 

• 

a 

0 

53 

25 







rH 


rH 

pH 

rH 


rH 


ON 

o 

P3 

O 

M 
















o 


o 

a 
















P3 

i—1 

















e-« 

cd 

rH 

a 















ON 

CO 

•H 

cd 

M 

O 

UN 

NO 

UN 

NO 

pH 

CM 

o 

4 

o 

o 

4 

ON 

O 

to 

< 

O 

•H 


on 

On 

ON 

ON 

ON 

to 

rH 

o 

O 

pH 

o 

ON 

i—1 

O 

o 

CD 

•H 

-P 

prl 







rH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

CM 


<H 

•H 

















4 

•H 

53 

M 
















erf 

-P 

•H 

Eh 
















jg] 


















4 

prj 

4 

<H 


ITS 

O 

o 

o 

4 

o 

CM 

O 

O 

o 

UN 

4 

pH 

UN 

I>- 

o 


O 


rH 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

pH 

O 

o 

rH 

O 

On 

ON 

O 

• 

s 


0 



pH 

pH 

pH 

rH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

rH 

pH 


rH 

pH 

CM 

w 


bO 

















33 


cd 

















Eh 


-p 
















4 



53 


CM 

O 

NO 

o 

-4 

ON 

NO 

o 

IN- 

UN 

UN 

IN- 

CM 

CM 

ON 

fH 


0 


pH 

o 

ON 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

On 

O 

O 

On 

pH 

O 

• 

O 


O 



rH 


rH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

pH 


pH 

pH 


i—1 

pH 

rH 



U 

















w 


0 

















CO 


a 

















a 


















o 

o 


p> 



o 

NO 

O 

4 

ON 

sO 

ON 

IN- 

UN 

UN 

ON 

o 

CM 

o 

Ph 


53 


ON 

o 

On 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

ON 

O 

O 

O 

o 

O 

• 

CO 


0 



rH 


pH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

pH 


rH 

pH 

rH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

w 


CO 

















P4 


0 



















Sh 

















w 


53, 
















r- 

33 


0 



o 

o 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

ON 

O 

o 

UN 

ON 

O 

pH 

ON 

E-< 


U 


NO 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

• 






rH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

pH 

rH 

pH 

rH 

pH 



CO 



















0 



















S3 



















3 
















to 



bG 



ON 

o 

o 

8 

o 

O 

ON 

O 

UN 

UN 

ON 

o 

CM 

O 



•H 


ON 

rH 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

O 

• 



P*H 



rH 

rH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

pH 

pH 

rH 

pH 

rH 



















o 

a 


















53 

• 


















4 

Q 


















s 

co 









EFFECT OF BENZETHONIUM CHLORIDE (PHEMEROL CHLORIDE) 25 mg. per Kg. ON 
THE RESPONSE OF THE DENERVATED GASTROCNEMIUS MUSCLE OF THE RAT. 


60 - 





O 

to 

CM 

ON 


rH 

O 

CM 

NO 

-4 

UN 

O 

X 

ON 

ON 





-oo 

0- 

UN 

UN 

X 

IN- 

o 

r- 

o 

-4 




UN 

o 





rH 






rH 


1 — 1 






• 



















rH 



















rH 





o 

nO 

ON 

O 


CM 

o 

ON 

NO 

O 

UN 

On 


O 

On 





CM 

-oo 

■co 

NO 

X 

to 

O 

o- 

O 

NO 

rH 

rH 

X 

r- 

nO 





rH 






rH 


pH 






• 



















ON 





O 

NO 

ON 

•co 

-4 

to 

o 

ON 

-4 

CM 

CM 

o 

UN 

ON 

rH 





ON 

-oo 

■oo 

NO 

UN 

to 

o 

o- 

O 

IN- 

ON 

UN 

NO 

IN- 

ON 











1 — 1 


rH 






• 



















UN 



G 


UN 

NO 

rH 

IN¬ 

CM 

-4 

rH 

UN 

■co 

on 

On 

in- 

CM 

CD 

NO 



O 


£> 

■co 

On 

IN 

NO 

On 

rH 

to 

ON 

IN- 

-4 

un 

IN- 

•co 

to 



•H 








rH 










■ —< 

CO 
















-4 


G 

G 


















O 

0 


















•H 

•P 


















-P 



o 

UN 

rH 

ON 

ON 

-4 

o 

i — 1 

■co 

IN- 

rH 

ON 

CM 

NO 

o 


ct 

G 


NO 

ON 

ON 

ON 


On 

o 

ON 

ON 

•co 

NO 

NO 

-co 

to 

to 


G 

O 

CO 







rH 








• 


•H 

•H 

w 















CM 


G, 

-P 

E-» 

















CO 

O 

j —) 

















0 

cO 


















P3 

G 

M 

UN 

NO 

rH 

ON 

rH 

O 

rH 

rH 

to 

r- 

-co 

o 

rH 

o 

O- 



-P 

s 

-4 

-oo 

ON 

ON 

•co 

O 

rH 

ON 

ON 

•co 

IN- 

to 

-oo 

ON 

c^ 


i — 1 

G 







rH 

rH 








• 


0 

O 

s 















CM 


•H 

o 

H 

















o 


















0 

*H 

i—l 

















•H 

Ch 

cO 

§ 

O 

-4 

CM 

ON 

ON 

O 

rH 

rH 

UN 

i>- 

O 

o 

CM 

1—i 

NO 

Q 

•H 

•H 

|—1 

on 

ON 

■co 

ON 

IN- 

o 

rH 

ON 

o 

-00 

o 

-co 

On 

ON 

o 


■P 

P> 

Eh 






rH 

rH 


rH 


rH 




• 


G 

♦H 
















ON 

X 

< 

G 



















•H 



















cm 


UN, 

~4 

CM 

o 

rH 

o 

rH 

On 

to 

-4 

o 

rH 

rH 

-4 

o 



O 


l—1 

ON 

•co 

o 

to 

o 

rH 

On 

ON 

ON 

o 

ON 

to 

On 

nO 








rH 


rH 

rH 




rH 




• 



0 
















CM 



bO 



















03 



















■P 



















G 


CM 

-4 

CM 

o 

rH 

o 

o 

ON 

to 

-4 

o 

rH 

rH 

ON 

NO 



0 


rH 

On 

to 

o 

t30 

o 

o 

ON 

ON 

On 

o 

ON 

•oo 

ON 

CM 



O 





rH 


rH 

rH 




rH 







g 
















CM 



0 






































-P 



-4 

o 

o 

UN 

o 

o 

o 

O 

NO 

O 

o 

rH 

NO 

NO 



G 


QN 

On 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

o 

On 

On 

O 

o 

to 

ON 

NO 



0 




rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 



rH 

rH 



« 



CO 
















rH 



0 



















g 



















ft 



















0 



-4 

o 

o 

UN 

O 

o 

-4 

to 

NO 

O 

o 

rH 

NO 

in- 



g 


NO 

On 

o 

o 

On 

O 

o 

On 

ON 

On 

o 

o 

to 

On 

un 







rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 




rH 

rH 



o 



CQ 
















rH 



0 



















G 



















P 

bO 



-4 

O 

o 

UN 

o 

o 

UN 

to 

-4 

o 

o 

ON 

to 

-4 



•H 


ON 

ON 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

ON 

ON 

On 

o 

o 

ON 

ON 

o 







rH 

rH 


«H 

rH 




rH 

rH 



o 



















o 

• 





































s 

• 


















<d 

Q 



















to 



















TABLE XVIII 


- 61 - 


bO 

fed 

<D 

ft 


bO 

s 

oi 

Q 

M 

Pd 

O 

PI 

o 

o 

Pd 


w 

ft 

ft 

o 

E-* 

O 

ft 

ft 

ft 

ft 

ft 

o 

s 

o 

CO 

H 

Pd 

2 

§ 

o 


ft 

ft 

Eh 

ft 

o 

o 

co 


co 

i-> 

M 


ft 

o 

o 

Pd 

Eh 

CO 

s 

§ 

&-» 

<d 

s 

ft 

ft 

ft 

Q 


C 

o 

•H 

-P 

cd 

Sh 

•H 

ft 

CO 

0 

Pd 


cd 

•H 

O 

•H 

•H 

■P 

U 

<d 























UUNIKAGIIUN I tNSION 


- © 2 “ 



TIME IN MlftUTES 


fig, ie 



FIG, IT 






























- 63 - 


FARADIONE 

Paradione 1000 mg. per Kg. 

A L.D. __ of 1 Gm. per Kg. of body weight has been reported 
50 

for mice. The medical product which consists of a solution of 
paradione (o.5 Gms. per c.c.) in 657° ethyl alcohol, was used in the 
experiments on the intact animal. 

It was found that doses under the reported lethal dose did 
not alter the muscle response noticeably. A dose of 1000 mg. per Kg. 
was settled upon since it seemed to show some change in response. 

Eleven animals were used, all of which lived beyond the experimental 
period of 240 minutes. Only two muscles showed any signs of an 
increase in response,(Table 19), and these were small. No mean 
augmentation of responses was evident. The minimum single response 
achieved was 8% and this was not recorded until after 4 hours had 
passed. The minimum mean response recorded after the same time was 
45%. The results are recorded graphically in Figure 18, where they ap¬ 
pear to differ significantly from the corresponding control. A 
probability lying between 1-2% was calculated after 12 minutes of 
drug action, (t equals 2.61 with 59 degrees of freedom. 


Denervated Experiments 

Six out of ten experiments showed some tendency to 
exhibit a greater contraction tension following the administration 
of Raradione. The highest single increase obtained was 157° in 
12 minutes, while 100% depression after 240 minutes was the lowest 
recorded response.(Table 20). The latter change in response level 
was exceptional. A maximum mean increase of only 1% appeared in 
the first three minutes. A minimum mean response of 65% developed 
after 4 hours. It can readily be seen that the experimental curve 
does not differ to any extent from that of the control except during 
the first hour when the denervated muscle exerts a slight rise in 









- 















. 

. 













. 








. 

. 

' 





































EFFECT OF FARADIONE (ABBOTT) 1000 mg. per Kg. ON THE RESPONSE OF THE NORMAL 


6 U 






O 

rH 

c 

UN 

O 

-co 

NO 

O 

NO 

rH 

o 





-4 

•co 

rH 

ON 

o 

rH 

-4 

4 

CNi 

ON 

ON 





CNi 




1 — 1 










o 

o- 

l>~ 

ON 

ON 

CNi 

O 

-co 

NO 

rH 

CNi 





to 


rH 

-4 

ON 

-4 

UN 

-4 

ON 

ON 

ON 





1 — 1 














o 

ON 

-co 

CNi 

UN 

rH 

-co 

-co 

to 

O 

NO 





CNi 

NO 

(Ni 

UN 

C"- 

NO 

UN 

UN 

-4 

ON 

-co 





«H 















O 

ON 

O- 

-co 

nO 

rH 

NO 

rH 

-co 

rH 

-CO 





ON 

o- 

on 

UN 


NO 

NO 

NO 

UN 

UN 

r- 

• 


C 


UN 

t>- 

O 

O 

o 

NO 

NO 

ON 

NO 

NO 

-co 

e-« 


o 


r- 

i>- 

u\ 

NO 

o 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 

UN 


c 


•H 













cd 


CO 














G 

C 













w 

O 

0 














•H 

P 














-P 



o 

*—i 

-co 

NO 

c\i 

rH 

o 

UN 

o 

rH 

to 


ctf 

o 


NO 

-co 

UN 

NO 

•co 

c- 

{>- 

NO 

r^ 

NO 

O- 

C»h 

u 

o 

CO 












O 

•H 

•H 














Oh 

P 

Eh 












W 

CO 

O 

£3 













0 

0 

s 












O 

Cc5 

u 

M 

UN 

4 

NO 

fH 

-4 

UN 

UN 

NO 

ON 

I> 

-oo 

CO 

p 

s 

-4 

-co 


ON 

ON 

o- 

O- 

NO 

£> 

NO 

c^- 

1—> 

rH 

c 













g 

CIS 

o 

s 













•H 

o 

M 












CO 

O 














p> 


rH 













w 


Cti 


o 

CN2 

rH 

ON 

UN 

UN 

ON 

ON 

U\ 

NO 

to 

s 

•H 

•H 

pH 

ON 

ON 

ON 

to 

o 

to 

•co 

NO 

£>* 

E^ 

IN- 

P 

P 

Eh 




rH 







s 

U 

•H 













o 















o 

cc; 

Eh 


•H 














CH 


un 

CNi 

l>- 

4 

UN 

UN 

rH 

O 

to 

NO 

ON 

CO 


O 


rH 

ON 

ON 

•co 

O 

ON 

ON 

EN- 

•co 

•ca 

-co 

<$ 








rH 







O 


0 















to 















aJ 















P 















0 


CNi 

Oi 

o 

I> 

UN 

UN 

UN 

CN2 

ON 

CNi 

o 



0 


rH 

ON 

o 

to 

o 

On 

ON 

•co 

ON 

On 

ON 



o 




rH 


rH 









k 















0 















a 















P 



CNi 

O 

rH 

O 

UN 

ON 

UN 

ON 

UN 

o 



0 


ON 

ON 

O 

On 

O 

ON 

On 

-co 

ON 

ON 

ON 



0 




rH 


rH 









CO 















0 















Sh 















a 















0 



NO 

C^- 

rH 

o 

O 

On 









NO 

ON 

ON 

ON 

o 

o 

o 

CNi 


to 

ON 









rH 

rH 


ON 

ON 

On 

ON 



0 















0 















u 

rt 















P 

to 



NO 

on 

-4 

o 

O 

On 

o 

r> 

to 

NO 



•H 


ON 

ON 

a 

On 

o 

o 

On 

o 

On 

ON 

ON 



fx< 



rH 


rH 

rH 


rH 





to 


to 

CH 


ON 

-4 


O 

UN 


O 

to 


o 

•co 


-co 


-4 

On 


-4 

ON 


-4 

ON 


4 

ON 


On 


UN 

UN -4 
-4 • 

ON 


NO 

NO ON 

-4 • 


NO 

UN 


NO 


-co 


o 

ON 


4 

On 


NO 

On 


-co 

On 


C"- 

On 


un 

NO 


ON 


CNi 


ON 

-co NO 

C"- • 

CNi 


•co 

o 


ON 


0- 

ON 

<Ni 


to 

on to 

On • 








*• 


















EFFECT OF PARADIONE (ABBOTT) 1000 mg. per Kg. ON THE RESPONSE OF THE 
DENERVATED GASTROCNEMIUS MUSCLE OF THE RAT. 


65 

















in 




O 

cv 

cv/ 

CV 

ON 

O 

ON 

on 

in 

CV/ 

in 

on 

On 




-4 

rH 

rH 

to 

on 


ON 

m 

to 

ON 

in 

NO 

♦ 




cv 

rH 










rH 
















rH 
















NO 




O 

CV 

nO 

m 

on 

-4 

On 

NO 

m 

CV/ 

in 

i—i 

on 




to 

i—1 

CV/ 

to 

in 

cv/ 

On 

NO 

to 

ON 

no 

tv 

• 




rH 

rH 











On 
















to 




O 

cv/ 

ON 

in 

NO 

to 

NO 

in 

ON 

CN2 

On 

in 

to 




CV 

rH 

-4 

to 

to 

in 

ON 

to 

ON 

On 

to 

to 

• 




i—1 

rH 











in 


G 
















O 














4 


•H 


o 

CV/ 

in 

in 

cv/ 

O 

NO 

o 

O 

On 

in 

o 

(V 


W 


ON 

i—1 

NO 

to 

ON 

cv 

ON 

ON 

O 

On 

On 

ON 

• 


G 



rH 







rH 




on* 


0) 
















P 
















G 














rH 


O 


in 

NO 

CV/ 

in 

o 

cv 

NO 

-4 

o 

ON 

in 

on 

C\i 

G 

•H 


C^ 

O 

to 

to 

o 

CV 

ON 

ON 

o 

ON 

ON 

ON 

• 

O 

P 



rH 



rH 



rH 



on 

•H 

O 















-P 

Cd 















cd 

U 















G 

P 














(V 

•H 

G 


O 

NO 

m 

ON 

o 

NO 

NO 

-4 

o 

On 

in 

in 

in 

a 

O 

CO 

NO 

O 

ON 

to 

O 

£V 

ON 

ON 

o 

ON 

ON 

ON 

• 

0) 

t) 

W 


rH 



rH 




rH 




CN/ 

CD 


Eh 















rH 

C3 















cd 

a 














rH 

•H 

M 













ON 

cd 

P 

s 

in 

NO 

-4 

ON 

o 

NO 

NO 

-4 

NO 

ON 

in 

IV 

to 

•H 

•H 


-4 

O 

O 

to 

o 

V- 

ON 

ON 

o 

ON 

O' 

ON 

O 

a 

G 

a 


rH 

rH 


rH 




rH 




cv/ 

*H 

•H 

H 














Ch 
















•H 

<H 

M 














P 

O 














tv 

Sh 



O 

O 

-4 

on 

o 

nO 

O 

-4 

NO 

ON 

in 

tv 

On 

4 

0 

Eh 

on 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

V- 

O 

ON 

O 

ON 

ON 

ON 

• 


b£) 

cd 

p 

G 

CD 

o 



rH 

Hi 


rH 


rH 


rH 




rH 



in 

On 

on 










CV/ 


U 


rH 

ON 

rH 

rv 

tv 

nO 

o 

■4 

NO 

o 

o 

o 

rH 


0 



rH 

ON 

o 

to 

o 

On 

O 

o 

o 

o 

• 


a 






rH 


rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CV/ 


p 

«—t 
















p 

0 


CV 

On 

on 










CV/ 


co 


rH 

On 

rH 

!V 

CV 



-4 

NO 

c 

o 

rH 

ON 


0 




rH 

On 

O 

-4 

O 

On 

O 

o 

O 

O 

• 


u 






rH 

On 

o 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


a 








rH 








0 
















Jh 














ON 





O 

CV/ 

in 

to 

O 

o 

O' 

NO 

o 

O 

rH 

4 


CO 


ON 

O 

rH 

On 

ON 

o 

o 

On 

o 

o 

o 

o 

• 


0 



rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


U 

P 
















bO 

•H 














rH 





O 

-4 

o 

O 

O 

O 

ON 

rH 

o 

rH 

o 

4 




NO 

O 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

o 

o 

• 





rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


1—1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

O 
















4 





O 

-4 

o 

o 

-4 

o 

On 

rH 

O 

rH 

rH 

in 




m 

O 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

On 

O 

O 

o 

o 

• 





fH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

O 
















, * 















a 
















• 















<$ 

Q 















w 

• 















s 

co 















. 




' 


































: , ss 










. 

: > ? t f- •, 










. 

■ 


















CONTRACTION TENSION 


66 


EFFECT OF PARADIONE (ABBOTT) IOOO MG/KG 
ON THE NORMAL LEG OF THE RAT 

- EXPERIMENTAL II 

-CONTROL I I 



firm—ss— -a —-*r —h 8 


TIME IN MINUTES 


FIG. 16 



FIG. 19 




































- 6 ? - 


response.(Figure 19). After 12 and 60 minutes the calculated 
probabilities were 0.011 and 0.010 respectively. 

A comparison of the normal and denervated experimental means 
based on their corresponding control curves may be seen in Figure 21 
and Table 21. The probability, calculated from the normal and de¬ 
nervated experiments results at 12 minutes, is 0.009, and there appears 
to be a highly significant difference at 60 minutes, (t equals 6.74 
with 19 degrees freedom. 

Ethyl Alcohol Control 

In order to determine if the alcohol content of the 
Paradione solution had any effect on the muscle response, a control 
group was run using an amount of alcohol equivalent to that in the dose 
of Paradione. It was injected intraperitoneally. The ten experiments 
done,exhibit quite regular results. Figure 20 and Table 22 show 
that the amount of alcohol present does not produce any significant 
change in response from that of the normal control. 

Figure 21 is a comparison of effects of Paradione on both 
normal and denervated muscle, and alcohol and normal muscle, all based 
on their respective control curves. This graph shows clearly that the 
normal muscle is depressed considerably by Paradione, while the de¬ 
nervated muscle exhibits a hypernormal period of response before 
beginning to decline gradually. The alcohol content of this solution 
does not appear to alter appreciably the response of the muscle. 



. 



















. 












' 


* 




■ - 





















TABLE XXI 


- 68 - 


EH 

Eh 

O 

OQ 

OQ 

<U 


a 

o 

M 

Q 

<$ 

P3 

<aj 

O. 

O 

Eh 

O 

W 

Ph 

P*H 

W 

ft, 

o 

s 

o 

CO 

M 

Ct3 

2 

S 

o 


w 

w 

Eh 

pq 

o 

w 

o 

co 


CO 

tD 


s 

o 

s 

£h 

CO 

<=$ 

o 

Q 

W 

Eh 

<d 

§ 

M 

S 

PS 

Q 












69 








o 

O 

O 

i — 1 

X- 

ON 

nO 

NO 

NO 

ON 

40 

X- 







-4 

CV2 

O 

i — 1 

vO 

ON 

to 

to 

NO 

to 

ON 

ON 

ON 

X- 


W 


















►4 


















O 


















co 





o 

ON 

o 

40 

X- 

On 

NO 

NO 

NO 

4 

40 

IX 


§ 





-co 

H 

o 

rH 

NO 

to 

150 

■to 

NO 

to 

ON 

On 

ON 

to 


CO 


















p> 


















M 


















s 





o 

x- 

o 

40 

40 

4 

NO 

co 

IX 

4 

40 

to 


w 





02 

_J 

O 

NO 

to 

On 

to 

NO 

ON 

ON 

ON 

ON 

to 


f*—4 

o 





rl 

rn 












o 


















PC 


















Eh 






x- 

o 

40 

40 

to 

4 

CO 

X- 

4 

40 

to 


CO 





o 

o 

NO 

to 

ON 

o- 

X- 

On 

On 

ON 

ON 

to 


<J 



C 


o 

rH 












O 



o 

















-■—■* 

•H 















►4 


0 

CO 















<s| 


$C 

£ 



X- 

CO 

40 

40 

-4 

ON 

IX 

X- 

4 

o 

On 


s 


o 

<D 


40 

o 

40 

to 

On 

to 

X- 

On 

ON 

ON 

o 

to 


w 


•H 

P 


X- 

rH 









H 



o 


TC 
















s 


ctf 

C 















w 



o 
















CO 

•H 



CO 

CO 

40 

40 

4 

nO 

X- 

X- 

4 

O 

to 


w 


P-, 

P 


o 

o 

40 

to 

ON 

to 

o- 

ON 

ON 

On 

O 

to 


Eh 



O 

CO 

nO 

rH 






H 






c0 

pq 














pt. 

• 

o 

u 

Eh 













H 

O 

Eh 

<H 

p 

pp 













H 

w 

S 


c 

s 


-4 

NO 

40 

O 

ON 

co 

X- 

r^ 

4 o 

O 

H 

XI 

i—I 

o 

M 

40 

O 

40 

to 

o 

to 

to 

ON 

ON 

ON 

O 

ON 

XI 

co 


O 

o 

S 

-4 

rH 



HI 






i—1 



s 

pq 

$-t 
















o 

PC 

P 

rH 

s 













w 

PL, 

Eh 

fi 

CO 

M 













►4 

co 


o 

•H 



4 

4 

40 

O 

40 

ON 

o 

o 

40 

o 

HN 

QQ 

pq 

fe 

o 

P 

pq 

o 

O 

NO 

to 

O 

ON 

to 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

ON 

< 

PC 

O 


♦H 


to 

rH 



H 



H 

H 


rH 


Zr* 



H 

SC 

(—1 














pq 


O 


Eh 














PC 


.C 
















Eh 


o 




4 

02 

NO 

O 

40 

NO 

o 

O 

4fN 

o 

X- 




o 

O 


40 

o 

to 

ON 

o 

ON 

ON 

o 

o 

ON 

O 

ON 


S 


rH 



rH 

rH 



rH 



rH 

H 


H 



o 


4 

0 


















bO 


















(0 















4T\ 



P 



4 

NO 

NO 

o 

40 

NO 

o 

O 

40 

o 

X- 


vO 



$C 


02 

o 

to 

ON 

o 

On 

ON 

o 

o 

ON 

o 

ON 





0 


rH 

rH 


rH 



rH 

H 


H 



>4 



o 















o 


















s 



0 















4 



a, 















ffi 


















EH 



p 



o 

ON 

O 

o 

40 

NO 

O 

O 

40 

O 



w 



sc 


O 

o 

to 

O 

o 

ON 

ON 

O 

o 

ON 

O 

to 





0 



rH 


rH 

HI 



rH 

rH 


H 

ON 


P*H 



0 















O 



0 


















h 















Eh 



a 















O 



0 



o 

NO 

o 

o 

o 

NO 

Q 

o 

O 

o 

ON 


w 



Ph 


nO 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

O 

ON 

O 

o 

o 

o 

On 


fan 






rH 


rH 

H 

H 


H 

H 

H 

H 



P*4 



0 















P4 



0 




































P 

b£ 



o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 





•H 


CO 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 








rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

rH 

rH 

H 

H 

H 


















S 


















< 


















pq 


















S 


S.D.M. 0.00 0.54 l.H 1.55 1.87 4.21 4.29 4.68 4.73 4.27 4.27 4.49 5.57 












CONTRAG T iO' 


- 70 - 



TIME IN MINUTES 

FIG. 20 



TIME IN MINUTES 


FIG. 21 


































71 - 


PART II 

THE PHRENIC NERVE-DIAPHRAGM PREPARATION OF THE RAT. 

BARBITURATES 

1. SODIUM PENTOBARBITAL 

(a) . Sodium Pentobarbital (Nembutal) 10 mg. % 

A preliminary search was undertaken to find the lowest 
dose that would show an effect on the phrenic nerve-diaphragm 
preparation. A concentration of 10 mg. % was settled upon, although 
it is not necessarily the lowest dose to alter the response of this 
preparation. 

The results of six experiments, as well as the result of a 
second application of the drug to the preparation which is numbered 
2a is shown in Table 25. This table clearly reveals that an in¬ 
creased response was obtained in every experiment and that this was 
followed by a gradual depression. The latter only appeared after 
considerable time had elapsed. The greatest rise in response, 6l%, 
was shown by experiment 6 after 90 minutes had passed, while the 
smallest increase, 20%, was observed in experiment 4 in 15 minutes. 

One experiment was recorded in Figure 22. 

A hypernormal response occurred following every change of 
solution in which the drug was removed. This was followed by a gradual 
decline to a level either below or just above the initial level of 
the response. 

(b) . Sodium Pentobarbital (Nembutal) 50 mg. % 

A higher concentration of the drug was employed in order 
to determine whether or not a depression of his preparation could be 
achieved. 50 mg. of Nembutal was dissolved in Tyrode’s solution and 
injected directly into the bath. This dose produced a rapid increase 
in the response which was soon followed by a marked depression. 








... .. .. -. 


. 




... 










. I 






4 

‘ 










. 


. 






. 






. 








. 


- 












. 


















- 72 - 





o 

rH 





-4 

to 





-4 

rH 

| 

1 

1 

1 

CM 

-4 





02 

rH 




iH 

rH 





Eh 

PC O 

NO 





to 

to 





e> cm 

02 

I 

1 

1 

1 

-4 

to 





M rH 

w 

rH 




rH 

rH 





0 

PC 











Eh 

a 

rH 



O- 

rH 

CO 

rH 

to 


a 


o— o 

CO 

i 

1 

co 

ON 

lO 

NO 

CO 


Eh 

Ph 

M c Os 

rH 



rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 


<4 


Eh o 










PQ 

P3 

O -H 











PC 

< -P 










• 

Eh 

04 a 

NO 


ITS 

to 

CM 

to 

ON 

NO 


rH 


Eh 0) O 

CO 

8 

vO 

CO 

o 

to 

to 

CM 


s 

Pm 

a *0 vO 

rH 



rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 



O 

o a 










o 


O *H 










o 

S3 











rH 

O 

i-q fr. 

NO 

ON 

O 

to 

-4 

to 

rH 

O 



M 

<4 <D O 

CO 

CO 

WO 

CO 

rH 

to 

to 

-4 


u 

Eh 

Hp -4- 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


a> 

23 

Eh Ch 










a 

M cd 









1—1 


<4 

a 









1—1 

« 

Pu 

M <0 

to 

ON 

co 

CO 

O 

to 

On 

to 


w) 

pq 

<D O 

02 

CO 

-4* 

co 

CM 

-4 

CO 

co 

Xj 

X 

B 

04 

Pm +3 CM 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

o 

PL. 

O 3 

c 










«H 

S 

P3 *h 











O 

O B 

rH 

ON 

CO 


O 


rH 

to 

w 


< 

<aj —^ to 

02 

02 

CO 

02 

CM 

co 

CO 

CM 

3 

5 

Pm 

Eh rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

PQ 

H 

PC 

a 










n 

Ph 

« 









E-» 

o 

CO 

S 

o 

P4 

to 

rH 

o 

CO 

to 

NO 

CM 

co 



Q 

m a 

rH 

02 

CO 

CM 

H 

CM 

CM 

CM 


hQ 


Pm rH 

rH 

rH 

«H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


< 

» 











E-* 












H 

&q 











PQ 

> 


O 

-4 

O 

to 

Hi- 

to 

CM 

to 


P4 

P4 

VO 

rH 

rH 

02 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


< 

W 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

«H 

rH 

rH 

rH 


PQ 

a 











O 












Eh 

o 

a 










a 

M 

o 










w 

S 

M 










P-4 

pq 

Eh 











P4 

O 










Pm 

PC 

< 










O 

Ph 

PC CO 












Eh Eh <jJ^ 










Eh 

W 

a a 










O 

PC 

o o a o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 


w 

Eh 

OHMQ 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 


Pm 


W fed H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


Pm 

a 

^ a < 










W 

o 

<4 Eh 

M 












Eh 

M 

a 

M 

cm o 

-4- 

CO 

=4- 

-4 

-4 

-4 

CM 





S o 

02 

02 

02 

CM 

02 

CM 

CM 





Eh 












9 








a 




Ph ♦ 



£d 





< 




EX 

NO 

rH 

02 

02 

CO 

-4- 

to 

nO 

s 












FIGURE 22 


Effect of Nembutal 10 mg.% on the Normal Isolated 
Rat Diaphragm. 

N - Nembutal. 


FIGURE 23 

Effect of PH Alteration on the Response of the Isolated 

Rat Diaphragm. 


Ne - Nembutal Numbers represent the time. 






ss aHuoii 


bedfiJCesI IbutxoK 9rid no ^*^nr 01 ladr/dmeM *ic dos'llS 


ni^BiTiqniQ dsH 

,iBdndmsM 


- M 



fs aHUoij 

bedsXoal arid Oo eanoqasH ©rid no noidsnedlA IH to doellS 

• m'g B'liiqsxG d£.H 

.©mid ©rid dnsasnqs*! snedmirll Ifidndmsil - ©M 

















- 73 - 



FIG. 22 


■ 


r 


ias 


* u, 


It WwV 




T-. 2+C ft W« ^ 


T t ^ 

?H We “P W 


tK> &/*i9a ph -<g.2z nr 'sottsi lit 


f 



liti 


£ 

PH 

fJS' 



FIG. 23 













- 74 - 


(Table 24) . 

The inhibition of response was not allowed to proceed to 
0 % in any experiment since it was desired to show a recovery in a 
short period of time. A recovery to supernormal levels, followed by 
a gradual decline toward the normal level was observed in all 
experiments. This same sequence of response can be shown more than 
once on a single preparation.(Table 24). The second stimulation, 
however, does not appear to be as great as the first. 

A 30 mg.% concentration of Nembutal produces a depression 
of the response in a much shorter time than does the 10 mg.%. 

A maximum single increase in response of 68% in 20 minutes was 
noticed, while the maximum mean increase reached 139% in 13 minutes. 

An example of the action of Nembutal 30 mg.% appears in 
Figure 24. In three experiments a hypernormal response followed 
the replacement of the experimental solution by fresh Tyrode T s sol¬ 
ution . 

Curarized Experiments 

Curarized diaphragm preparations were used in the hope of 
determining the site of action of the drugs used in this investigat¬ 
ion. 

It has been found that 1 microgram of d-tubocurarine 
chloride per ml. of bath is sufficient to just paralyse the neuro¬ 
muscular transmission at 39°0.(74,98). A larger concentration of 
this agent was required to produce this block at lower temperatures. 

130 micrograms per 100 ml. of the bath was found to be sufficient for 

o o 

this purpose at temperatures ranging from 20 C.-27 0. This is the 
range over which these experiments were carried out. 

Six curarized preparations were used to determine the effect 
produced by 30 mg.% of Nembutal. In every case an increased response 
to this drug was noted. (T a bq e 23 ). 

























. 









. 


. 


. 













































« 




















. 










■ 









: 











- 75 










Eh 











pc 

O uh 











M CH 

pq 

SC 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 




S 










• 

O— O 

H 

ON 

HD 




NO 



Eh 

M C CH 

nO 

C"- 

IX 

1 

1 

1 

NO 


SC 


Eh O 









Eh 

PC 

O -H 









<«; 


<S -P 









PQ 

pq 

PC O 

-4 

ch 

0 


CH 

UH 

CH 



sc 

Eh (U UH 

CH 

rH 

rH 

« 

O 

UH 

NO 


• 

Eh 

S *o OH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 


rH 


rH 


0 G 









S 

P«H 

O *H 










O 










O 


►Q U 

cn 

rH 

rH 

to 

NO 

to 

to 


O 

S 

<C <D O 

UTN 

CH 

OH 

X- 

ITs 

ON 

NO 


rH 

O 

M P CH 

rH 

HI 

rH 


rH 


rH 



M 

Eh Ch 









U 

Eh 

H cd 









0) 

a 

s 

S 

M 10 

rH 

rH 

ON 

0 

UH 

CH 

-4 




0 UH 

UH 

CH 

-4 

0 

NO 

rH 

nO 


• 

P-. 

Ph -P rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

> 

bp 

pq 

O 2 








M 

S 

PC 

G 










Ph 

PQ -H 








XI 

O 


0 a 

r- 

CH 

UH 

CH 

to 

to 

rH 

UN 

s 

<C ■*—' 0 

-4 

CH 

-4 

CH 

UH 

rH 

UH 



0 

Eh rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


5] 

<$ 

s 








pq 

5 

PC 

PQ 








►q 

R 

sc 

O 








PQ 

Q 

P-I 

PC 

IX 

CH 

ON 

CH 

O 

UH 

O 


O 

a 

PQ uh 

CH 

rH 

CH 

CH 

-4 

rH 

CH 

EH 

CO 

PL. 

rH 

H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 



Q 










tA 












1 










Eh 


S5 









M 

pq 

O 









PQ 

> 

M 









PC 

PC 

Eh 









<sj 


O 









PQ 

O 


S CO 









Eh 

0 

Eh Eh<U^. 









S 

w 

J23 SC 









m 

a 

0 0 a 0 

O 

O 

O 

8 

O 

O 

O 


a, 

pq 

O H w 0 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 



PC 

PQ « rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 



sc 

»-Q SC < 









0 

PC 

< Eh 

M 









Eh 

pq 

Eh 









O 

sc 

M 









pq 

Eh 

S 











M 










S 










PQ 

O 












pT 

S o* 

CH 

CH 

CH 

CH 

-4 

-4 

-4 




PQ O 

Eh 

CH 

CH 

CH 

CH 

CH 

CH 

CH 




• 











PC 


C6 


CO 


cd 





EX 

NO 

rH 

rH 

CH 

CH 

CH 

CH 

-4 


MEAN % 100 125 133 139 131 HI 
















76 


Eh 

33 





o 



vO 

H 







El 

60 

1 

1 

-4 

-4 

1 

1 

-4 



• 

33 










Eh 

a 

to 

o 

to 

to 

H 

o 

O 



*=3 

O---* Q 

o 

nO 

to 

r- 

O- 

NO 




03 

M C -4 

Eh O 

1 — 1 









M 

O *H 










33 

<3 -P 

-4 

O 

to 

cr\ 

-4 

ir\ 

ON 



Eh 

03 O O 

«H 

o 

o 

ON 

ON 

On 

ON 




EH 0 C°s 

H 


HI 







Oh 

S *o 










o 

o c 









33 


O *H 

-4 

-4 

-4 

C^ 

NO 

On 

r^ 


Eh 

a 

Lf\ 

H 

o 

H 

On 

o 

O 

o 


<3 

o 

P P (V 

H 

rH 

H 


H 

H 

H 


PQ 

M 

<4 0 










Eh 

M p 









• 

a 

Eh Cm 

nO 

-4 

O 

CM 

0- 

ON 

LfN 


iH 

H cd O 

rH 

rH 

CM 

O 

H 

H 

H 


S 

<3 

S CM 

H 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 



PL, 

M CO 









O 

m 

0 









o 

33 

Oh -P 

sO 

to 

CM 

r- 


CO, 

to 


r-H 

Oh 

O 2 CTN 

rH 

H 

CM 

o 

CM 

CM 

H 




C H 

rH 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 


U 

s 

W »H 









0 

O 

o s 









Ph 

<3 


-4 

to 

CM 

C- 

O 

0r\ 

On 

> 


P3 

Eh O 

rH 

rH 

CM 

O 

o-\ 

CM 

H 

X 

• 

33 

S H 

H 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

X 

bO 

Oh 

W 









a 

<3 

o 










M 

03 

to 

CM 

sO 


O 

ON 

ITN 

m 

O 

Q 


o 

rH 

H 

O 

C^N 

H 

H 

p 

IT\ 

Oh 

rH 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

PQ 


I 









< 

t—Q 










Eh 

<3 

W 










EH 

> 

S 









3> 

P3 

o 









PQ 

m 

M 










s 

Eh 









p£) 


O 









s 

o 

<3 










M 

03 CO 










535 

Eh Eh 









o 

W 

a pa 










P3 

o o s o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 


Eh 

33 

o m m o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 


O 

Oh 

OQ 1*3 H 

rH 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 


w 


P 33 <3 









&H 

Q 

<3 Eh 









fe 

W 

M 









M 

Csl 

Eh 










M 

M 










03 

S 










<3 

H 










03 











t=> 











O 

• 










m 

Oh O 










33 

jgj • 

-4 

-4 

LfN 

er\ 

tr\ 

-4 




Eh 

w o 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 





Eh 










S 











o 








a 




• 







<4 




Oh 











El 

NO 

rH 

CM 

CH 

-4 

lf\ 

NO 

* 











FIGURE 2h 

Effect of Nembutal 50 mg.% on the Normal Isolated 

Rat Diaphragm. 

N - Nembutal W - Wash 


FIGURE 25 

Effect of Nembutal 50 mg.% on the Isolated Curarized 

Rat Diaphragm* 

M - direct stimulation of the muscle W - wash 
Ne - Nembutal 




4S 3HU0I1 

becTBloal IsanoM aril no Isdncfmsl' lo cfoeYiS 

♦ m^s'iriqsKI IbH 

rfeeW - W Iscfi/dnisW - M 


?S SHUOr* ' 

* "in 0< IsdudmaM lo tfo9*113 

«ms£T:rfqBxG dsH 

dss: - V eXosurr! arid lo noxdsiumxda Xosnib - M 


I-SlndmeW * sM 









- 77 - 




FiG. 29 











- 7 $ - 


A maximum mean increase to 119% was observed after 10 minutes. The 
greatest single increase reached 130% in 5 minutes. The gradual 
decline following the stimulation reached a mean of 77% after 
40 minutes in the curarized preparation. This fall in response 
occurred more rapidly than in the normal preparation. Figure 25 
is an example of the direct action produced by this drug on the 
diaphragm. 

2. 5-(gamma, gamma-dimethylallyl)-5-ethyl barbituric acid (sodium 

salt) 10 mg.% 

In every experiment a concentration of 10 mg.% of this 
barbiturate produced an augmentation of the response. Table 26 
reveals these changes in 6 experiments. 

The maximum mean increase rose to 118% in 40 minutes then 
commenced a gradual decline. A maximum single increase of 35% occurred 
in the same time, while the lowest recorded response was 94% in 
120 minutes. 

The response levelled off at a lower level after the 
solution containing the drug was replaced with fresh Tyrode T s solution. 
One experiment is shown in Figure 26. 

Curarized Experiments 

3 out of 6 experiments exhibited a slight increase in the 
response following the injection of this drug. The greatest increase 
reached 111% which was about three times as high as the next largest 
change. A mean increase of only 1% was followed by a slow decline to 
78% in one half hour.(Table 27). In 2 experiments the response had 
fallen to 94% and 95% within five minutes and continued to fall 
gradually. The lowest response recorded was 64% which took 30 minutes 
to develop. 






EFFECT OF 

5-(gamma, gamma-DBffiTHYLALLYL)-5-ETHYL BARBITURIC ACID (sodium salt) 

10 mg. per 100 ml. BATH 



- 79 








o 

-4 


ON 

O 

-4 

-4 


CV 

rH 

1 

O 

CA 

CV 

ON 


r—1 

rH 


rH 

i — 1 

rH 



Eh 








a 








o 








(H 

rH 


On 

o 

A- 

O 


w o 

i — 1 

1 

O 

CA 

CNi 

o 


a on 

rH 


i — 1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

• 

a 







E-* 

o — 







<C 

H G 

rH 

CN2 

rH 

UA 

O 

o 

a 

Eh O O 

rH 

o 

rH 

CA 

CA 

o 


O -H v£> 

rH 

rH 

H 

r — 1 

rH 

1 — 1 

w 








a 

a o 







Eh 

Eh <D 

a i-3 

rH 

o 

rH 

UA 

-4 

NO 

Ph 

o c o 

rH 

CNi 

(—1 

CA 

CNi 

o 

o 

O *H -4 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

a 

a u 







o 

<C 0 







H 

M -P 

On 

UA 

On 

O 

UA 

NO 

Eh 

Eh Ch O 

O 

rH 

O 

CN2 

i—1 

o 

a 

H cfl CNi 

a 

rH 

rH 

rH 

i—1 

rH 

rH 


M (0 







a 

0 







fx3 

Oh 4-> 

ON 

CA 

o- 

ON 

UA 

NO 

PC 

O S ua 

O 

rH 

o 

rH 

rH 

o 

O-i 

£ iH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


a .h 







a 

o & 







o 








<u 

Eh 

NO 

rH 

UA 

NO 

CNi 

CA 

a 

a o 

o 

rH 

o 

rH 

rH 

o 

sc 

W rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

Oh 

o 








a 







M 

03 







Q 

a 

CA 


-4 

i — 1 

NO 

CA 


UA 

O 

o 

O 

rH 

O 

o 

8 


«H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

oq 

a 







> 

o 







a 

M 







W 

EH 







a 

O 







o 

2 co 







M 

a Eh 







a 

a a 







fx} 

o o a o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 

PC 

O M r q o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

a 

03 a rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

0h 

a a < 

C Eh 







w 

M 







a 

Eh 







EH 

M 








a 







a 

M 







o 

• 

a o 

S 

CA 

CA 

-4 

-4 

NO 

-4 


w o 

Eh 

CN? 

CNi 

CM 

CN2 

CNi 

CNi 


Ou • 








EX 

NO 


CN2 

CA 

-4 

UA 

NO 


b-» 


MEAN % 100 106 109 112 114 118 115 115 114 

















- SO - 




-p 


• 



rH 


Eh 



cd 





CO 


X 

X 



P 


X 



•H 


Eh 



•© 





O 


X 



CO 


o 



' 


a 



0 


o 

M 



o 


Eh 



<$ 


2 



o 


<u 



M 


X 



X 


X 



X 


X 



Eh 

X 

X 



H 

Eh 




X 

<< 

s 

M 

M 


X 

<c 

X 

X 

• 

o 

s 

> 


rH 

X 



X 


X 

X 


>H 


< 



X 

O 

M 



Eh 

o 

Q 

fa 

ta 

X 

rH 


X 

o 

8 


i 

X 


UA 

u 


<SJ 


8 

Q) 

X 

Eh 

Eh 


X 

> 


o 



X 


ia 

>H 

• 

X 


x 

X 

bO 

a 


a 

X 

s 



ia 

<d 


o 




o 

H 



>H 

rH 

a 



X 


X 



Eh 


X 

X 



S 


X 



Q 


R 



8 


X 



cd 


CSJ 





M 



g 


X 



s 


3 





X 



#s 

i 


o 




X 



g 


X 





Eh 



bD 





■—*> 


a 



i 


o 



ua 




2 


Eh 

X 

C!J 

M 

X 

X 

a 

Eh O 
O -H 
•P 
O 
Eh 0) 

a *o 
O G 
O *H 

X U 
<$ a> 
H P 
Eh «h 
W oS 

a 

M CO 
<D 

X -P 
O G 
G 

X -H 
O S 
<$—' 
Eh 

a 

fa. 

o 

X 

ta 

x 


o 

OA 


ir\ 

cm 


O 

(V 


UA 


UA 


a 

o 

M 

Eh 

O 

2 co 

EhHC^ 

a a 

o o a o 

OHWO 
MMH 
X X < 

<$ Eh 
H 
Eh 
M 

a 


X 

S 

EH 


© 

O 






OA 

to 

OA 

rH 

8 

8 


to 

to 


to 

to 

■4* 

U\ 

o- 

O 

NO 

to 

nO 

N0 

to 

to 

On 

D"- 


-4* 

ON 

UA 

rH 

OA 

NO 

rH 


vO 

to 

ON 

ON 

r- 

to 

(Hl 

rH 

NO 

NO 

ITs 

CVi 

!>- 

to 


ON 

On 

On 

to 

to 

£">■ 

ua 

o 

o 

C-- 

UA 

rH 

to 

O 

o 

o 

ON 

to 

ON 



rH 

rH 




o 

On 

to 

O 

o 

»H 

to 

o 

to 

o 

o 

o 

On 

ON 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 



oa 

ua 

rH 

-4 

o 

-4* 

rH 

o 

On 

rH 

o 

o 

On 

o 

rH 


fH 

H 

rH 


rH 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

rH 

«H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

«H 

rH 

ua 

rH 

-4 

i> 

UA 

to 


cm 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 








a 








rH 

CM 

OA 

-4- 

UA 

NO 

x 







§ 













•- ■ 












f 

' 















i 









t 

1 






[ 








FIGURE 26 


Effect of S.B, 10 mg.$ on the Isolated Normal Rat 

Diaphragm. 

S.B. = 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-5-Ethyl 
Barbituric Acid ( sodium salt) 


FIGURE 27 

Effect of S.B. 10 mg.% on the Isolated Curarized 

Rat Diaphragm. 

S.B. - 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-5-Ethyl 

Barbituric Acid (sodium salt) 

M - direct stimulation of the muscle 




d£ SHUOia 


ctsH IsartoW bSxtBloal 9rfcf no ^*§ffi 01 *0*8 1o tfos’lia 

. rags'! rfqsxG 

lYrf^a-^-.(lYllBlYrfct9mi:a-Binm6S t smmsg)-c! = .9*8 

(cfXss mx/ibos ) bxoA oi'iuJid'isQ 


VS 3 flU 0 I>l 
bssx'is'ixrO b9^BlogI arid , 

♦ mgs'XriqsjtG JsH 

lyriJ3~Z~(Ixll£lYdJ9mi(l-GmmBg t £minsg}-? * ,9*8 

{$Ibs mux boa ) bxoA O-HuctM-xsa 

elosum erfcf lo noUsLumiJe cfosnxb - M 





- 81 



FIG. 26 



FIG. 21 








- 32 - 


Figure 27 is an example of the action elicited by 10 mg.% 
of this barbiturate. Figure 28 shows the apparent lack of action 
produced by 3 such doses injected at intervals of several minutes. 

There appears to be a greater increase in the response 
of the normal diaphragm preparation than in the denervated muscle of 
the intact animal. 


MEPERIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 

(Demerol Hydrochloride) 

(a) . Demerol Hydrochloride 3 mg.7° 

In every experiment an increased response was recorded. 
(Table 28). The maximum mean response was 138% at 40 minutes. This 
rise in response was followed by a gradual decline to 117 % hy the end 
of 4 hours. 71% was the largest single increase in response and 
occurred after 40 minutes of drug action. At the end of 240 minutes 
the lowest single response was 75% of the original response. 

One experiment was photographed and appears in Figure 29. 

When the Demerol hydrochloride was washed out of the bath, 
the response fell somewhat and levelled off at a lower height. 

(b) . Demerol Hydrochloride 20 mg.% 

This dose of Demerol hydrochloride gave a much sharper 
rise than the lower dose.(Table 29 ). The subsequent depression also 
occurred in less time and fell more rapidly. The maximum mean 
response of 1457° was reached in 10 minutes. The greatest single 
response was 191% and developed in only 10 minutes. 

Figure 30 is a photographic record of one experiment. 

A supernormal level of the response occured shortly after- 
washing out the drug before gradually declining to a lower height. 


Curarized Experiment 



























. 



















. 



' 





* 





















- 


. 




- 



















- 83 - 





O 


O 

CO 



UN 

i — 1 

UN 




-4 

i 

CO 

02 

1 

1 

IX 

i — 1 

-4 




02 


rH 

rH 




i — 1 

i —1 




Eh 

PC O 


On 

3 



NO 

UN 

CO 




O 02 

i 

-4 

| 

8 

ON 

CO 

-4 




M rH 

PQ 


rH 

rH 



rH 

rH 




• 

PC 











Eh 

S3 

CO 

CX 

02 



-4 

O 

ON 



PC 

o -— o 

ON 

un 

NO 

1 

1 

O 

-4 

-4 




H G O' 


1 — 1 

rH 



rH 

rH 

rH 


PC 

PQ 

Eh O 










Eh 

PC 

O *H 










< 


<P -P 










PQ 

pin 

cc o 

o 

4 

rH 

ON 

IX 

On 

UN 

ON 



Eh 0) O 

rH 

NO 

O- 

rH 

ON 

rH 

-4 

-4 


• 

O 

a *r-3 NO 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

i — 1 


pH 


o c 










a 

a 

O *H 










o 

M 

hQ 5h 

-4 

-4 

rH 

ON 

IX 

rH 

IX 

O- 


o 

Eh 

CD o 

02 

NO 

o- 

rH 

o 

02 

•4 

-4 


r—i 

Sj 

M -p -4 

Eh Ch 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

i —1 

1 l 

u 

< 

M cC 









r—i 

i J 

CD 

PL, 

a 









r —1 

i I 

P, 

W 

M CO 

ON 

UN 

UN 

-4 

NO 

UN 

02 

NO 

n 


PC 

<D O 

02 

-4 

UN 

rH 

O 

rH 

CO 

CO 

X 

X! 

• 

PL, 

P«4 -P 02 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

«H 

rH 

fctO 


O 2 









a 

£ 

G 











o 

CQ -H 










vr\ 

2 

CO g 

ON 

O 

NO 

02 

NO 

O 

IN- 

02 

PQ 


«aj ^ un 

02 

-4 

-4 

rH 

o 

rH 

02 

CO 

►■Q 

« 

PC 

Eh rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

PQ 

r-H 

PL, 

a 









< 

O 

*4 

PQ 









EH 

PC 

M 

O 











PQ 

PC 

02 

O 

rH 

C'- 

NO 

to 

O 

to 


►H 


PQ O 

02 

CO 

CO 

o 

O 

O 

02 

02 


O 

] 

PL, rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


PC 

PQ 

ls»» 











si 

PC 


o- 

ON 

NO 

UN 

-4 

nQ 

rH 

ON 


Q 

M 

UN 

rH 

1—1 

02 

O 

O 

o 

rH 

rH 


a 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

i—i 

iH 


P<H 












O 

o 

a 











M 

o 










Eh 

S3 

w 










O 

PQ 

Eh 










m 

PC 

O 










p*. 

PC 

< 











PC 

PC CO 










PQ 

PQ 

PC 

Eh Eh <£1^^ 

a a 

o o a o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 



Eh 

O M PQ o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 




PQ a rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 



S 

(QPCO 











O 

<£ Eh 

M 












Eh 












H 












a 












M 

• 












PL, O 

S • 

to 

to 

to 

■4 

NO 

-4 

-4 

-4 




PQ O 

&H 

• 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 




EXP 

NO. 

rH 

02 

CO 

-4 

UN 

NO 

X- 

to 


MEAN % 100 113 119 125 129 138 134 134 133 117 

























- - 




Eh 










33 










O 










M 










W 










33 










S3 

O'— 

O 









M C 

Eh O 

nO 

1 

t 1 

t 

1 

1 

1 1 


# 

O «H 









Eh 

<»J -P 









< 

33 0 









33 

Eh 0 

O 









a *o 

-4 

1 

i 1 

1 

1 

1 

i 1 

33 

W 

O C 








&H 

33 

O -H 








<H 

Eh 









PQ 

P*H 

H *h 


rH 

O 

rH 

*4 

O 



<u 0 

O 

CM 

<X 

CM 

rH 

CM 

1 1 

• 

O 

M -p 

Csl 

H 

8 

rH 

rH 

rH 


fH 


Eh Ch 








B 

S3 

M Ctf 









O 

S 








O 

H 

i — 1 U) 


to 

X- 

ON 

-4 

X- 

O 

O 

Eh 

0 

tx 

to 

0 

IX 

ix 

-4 

to 

rH 

3 

On -P 

rH 

rH 

1 rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

8 



u 

<G 

C3 










0 

Ph 

M -H 










Pf 

w 

O S 

rH 

O 

CM 

On 

fH 

O 

IX 

O 



33 

O 

ON 

On 

LX 

IX 

IX 

LX 

O 

-4 


• 

CL, 

Eh iH 

rH 


rH 

H 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

XI 

M 

s 

ag 

33 

W 









XI 

0 

0 

O 

31 

tx 

CM 

tx 

CX 

HI 

X- 

IX 

CM 

rH 

CM 

ps 

M LX 

NO 

-4 

<X 

NO 

H 

cx 

CM 

CM 



33 

Ph 

rH 

rH 

sH 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

H 


• 

CL, 










w 

rH 

«$ 











O 

M 

S 









PQ 

33 

Q 

O 












M 









Eh 

H 

i 

Eh 










O 


O 










33 

W 

<£| 










W 

> 

31 CO 











33 

Eh Eh 










w 

W 

a 33 










Q 

S 

0 0 a 0 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 



0 M w O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 


Oh 

O 

H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

rH 

H 

H 


O 

M 

H 33 < 











a 

«J Eh 










Eh 

P=3 

M 










O 

33 

Eh 










w 

33 

M 











Ph 

a 










fXH 


H 










W 

W 












31 












Eh 

• 











S25 

Oh O 

X- 

LX 

ITS 

ix 

ITS 

IX 

NO 

NO 



O 

W O 

Eh 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 


Ph 

XI 

w 


§ 


eg ,£) cd 

N W (M 4 1A 


MEAN % 100 138 145 143 101 

















FIGURE_23 


Effect of Multiple Doses of S.B. on the Isolated Curarized 

Rat Diaphragm. 

M - direct stimulation of the muscle N - nerve stimulation 
S.B. - 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-5-Ethyl Barbituric 

Acid (sodium salt) 


W - wash. 


FIGURE 29 

Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 5 mg.% on the Isolated 
Normal Rat Diaphragm. 


D - Demerol HC1 




fcs; SHUDia 


baslis'iuO beJsIoal srfd no .tf.8 lo aseoG elaidlirM 1o doslia 

• dfiil 

noxdfilijmxda svi9n - M 9loeirm erfd lo noicfjsljjmxds ctosixb - M 
orutfxd'isH lYrfda-^-(lYllBlYrfd9inia-6mmB3 t smm6§}-^ - # 8.8 

(cTIbs muiboa) bxoA 


.rfsBw - W 


:: 

PS HHUflli 

bsdsloel odd no tt.ga £ 9bin clrfocibyH lonemeG lo dosTia 

.mgB'idqBxG dsii IsmoO 

• I OH 10*19X290 - G 





85 “ 



FIG. 28 



FIG. 29 










FIGURE 30 

Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 20 mg.% on the Isolated 
Normal Rat Diaphragm. 

D- Demerol HC1. W - wash 


FIGURE 31 

Effect of Demerol Hydrochloride 20 mg.$ on the Isolated 
Curarized Rat Diaphragm. 

C - d-tubocurarine chloride D - Demerol HC1. 


M - direct stimulation of the muscle. 




afluoi^ 


bsdslosl arid no o^.gin OS 9bi'ioIdoo r tbYH IcnsmsG 'io doeYiS 

• ffigBiriqsiQ dfiH IsnnoM 
rfssw - W ,I0H lonsmsa ~Q 


it 

)S sbiToIrfooibYH lonsmeCI 
♦ msfi'stfqBiG dsH bssi'iBiirO 
.I0H XonsrasG - G sbinolrio enins'itfoocfjjd-b - 0 
• slosjjm 9dcf lo noxdBlumxcfa doerrib - M 











86 - 



F! G. 30 



FIG. 31 











As in the case of the normal preparations an augmentation 
of the response preceded the slow decline. The maximum mean 
response, however, was not as great as that in the normal preparation. 
It reached a peak of 115% in 5 minutes, then fell off slowly reaching 
a level of 71% after 40 minutes. The largest single increase was 
58% in 15 minutes.(Table 50). 

Although the change in response did not rise as sharply 
or as high as that of the normal preparation after the addition of 
Demerol hydrochloride, it was also not depressed as rapidly. 

The short dash in the tables indicates that the inhibition 
was stopped at this point by changing the bath for fresh Tyrode T s 
solution. 


BENZETH0NIX3M CHLORIDE 

(Phemerol Chloride) 

Phemerol Chloride 5 mg.% 

In 9 experiments not one increase in response was noted 
following the infection of Phemerol chloride 5 mg.% into the muscle 
bath. Only depression results from this compound. 7 experiments out 
of 9 reached a 0% response within 20 minutes, while the other two 
reached this mark only 5 minutes later.(Table 51). A marked rise in 
tone accompanied the decreased response in every case. Figure 52 
shows the photographed tracing of one experiment. 

When a 0% response was reached and the nerve was stimulated 
by the maximum intensity of a 0.5 MFD. condenser charged to 45 volts, 
or a Harvard inductorium which delivered repetitive shocks, no 
response could be demonstrated. When the muscle was stimulated 
directly by either of these stimuli, a good response was recorded 
indicating that the primary depression, at least, was probably due to 
a block of the neuromuscular transmission of excitation. 


















. 







. 

. 








. 













' 

- 























- $8 - 





Eh 





a 





o 





M 





M 





a 





a 

o 




o— o 

to 



« 

m a -4 




Eh 

Eh O 





O »H 




« 

«4 P 

x- 




a o o 

ON 



W 

£h 0 CO 




PC 

a *o 




Eh 

o c 





O -H 

X 



a 

to 

o 


Eh 

O 

t-P Jh cm 

rH 


<4 


«4 0 



PQ 

a 

M p 




o 

Eh «H 

ITS 


• 

H 

H Ctf O 

HI 


rH 

Eh 

a 02 

rH 


B 


M CQ 




« 

0 



O 

<4 

Cx, p 

X 


O 

PL, 

O P to 

rH 


H 

W 

c ^ 

pH 



pci 

W *H 



5H 

a 

O fi 



0 


<4 «*—» 

X 


O, 

S 

Eh O 

rH 



o 

a rH 

rH 

X 

• 

<4 

a 


X 

fafi 

PC 

o 


X 

S 

a 

a 

lO 



PL, 

a to 

rH 


o 

< 

a 

rH 

Cxi 

02 

M 



i-3 


Q 



PQ 

• 




<4 

rH 

1 

a 


Eh 

o 


o 



a 

M 

M 




> 

Eh 



K—1 

PC 

O 



q 

a 

<c 



a 

a 

a co 



M 


Eh Eh «4^ 



S 

o 

a a 



W 

M 

o o a o 

o 


Q 

a 

OHWO 

o 



w 

WWH 

rH 


&H 

PC 

Jac 



O 

a 

<4 Eh 




a, 

M 



Eh 


Eh 



O 

Q 

M 



W 

Cx| 

a 



px. 

CnI 

M 



CX4 

M 




w 

PC 

<4 





PC 

a 

a o 




o 

g • 

tO 




a o 

02 



w 

Eh 




a 





Eh 





a 

a* 




o 

XI o 

rH 




a a 



X 


-4 



-4 


rH 

to 


to 

i 

8 

NO 

8 

X 

to 

to 

O 

x 

to 

rH 


nO 

ON 

ON 

ON 

to 

NO 

EX 

1 

to 

-4 

o 

O 

to 

CO 

to 


to 

o 

o 

O 

rH 

to 

IX 

8 

ON 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 





n£> 

NO 

CM 

rH 

-4 

to 

ON 

CO 

o 

o 

rH 

CO 

ON 

to 

X 

O 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 




rH 

to 

nO 

EX 

to 

CM 

O 

X 

ON 

O 

O 

rH 

CO 

O 

O 

t© 

o 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

i—1 

rH 


rH 

to 

CO 

ON 

rH 

X 

-4 

IX 

CO 

o 

rH 

rH 

CO 

o 

rH 

ON 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


r—! 

NO 

co 

x 

o 

X- 

NO 

to 

to 

o 

rH 

rH 

CM 

O 

CO 

o 

rH 

rH 

H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

i—1 

rH 

rH 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

02 

-*4 

o 

CO 

CO 

o 

O 


CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 









a 








<4 

CM 

CO 

-4 

to 

nO 

X- 

to 















- 39 


co 

a 

P5 

3 


Eh 

M 

a 


Ph 

X 

txj 


o 

o 


g 


0 O 0 
> P, > 
<D *H CO -H 
CO CO 0) 

P P d 
O O O 
0 . 0,0 
0 0 P 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

P 

P 

P 

P 

P 

P 

P 

P 


O Q) O 0) O CD O 


Ph > Ph > P-, > 

CO *H CO «H 0 *H 
0000 0 000 
POCdPdGd 
o o o 
do PhO do 0.0 
wccocwcrac 


0 

<D—v 

0— 

0 

0— ' 

0 ' — ' 

0 — 

d 

d • 

d • 

d 

d • 

d . 

d • 


CO 

CO 


CO 

CO 

co 

O 

. 

• 


• 

• 

• 

P 

a 

PC 


PC 

PC 

PC 


__ 

__ 






o o a) o a) o o 
o > o > o 

0 *H CO -H 0 

0 0 0 0 

P O P d 

O O 
O O O O 
0 C 0 C 
0 
u 


0 O 
H fl 0 
0 O 0 
P o d 
O 0 
O 0 d 
0 d 0 
0 -P 
d 0 0 
S 0 
O d 
0 hi) 




• 

3 

PC 

0 

0 0 

0 0 

W CO 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 0 




Eh 












s 







' — *' 

—,—«—.—«— 

—-—«—----- 



PC 

Eh 

pq 


1 

1 1 

1 1 

9 9 

1 1 

1 1 

1 9 

1 1 

1 1 1 



Eh 


asasasasasasasasas 



CQ 

Ph 










==**5 



o 

O 













M 

a 

-—* 












s 

o 

P LA 













M 

hP O 02 

t 

1 

I 

9 

1 

o 

1 

I 

O 

O 


o 

Eh 

<4 -H 












o 

4 

HEh P 












H 

PC 

EHffi O 













4 

MO 0 











H-1 

d 

Ph 

a m *o o 

o 

1 

o 

O 

O 

4 

1 

o 

ON 

o 

X 

0 

pq 

MJxJ P 02 






4 



02 

M 

X 

X 

O, 

PC 

a *h 












Ph 

Ph 











• 


oa d 












s 

s 

O 0 

pq M +3 IA 

02 

o 

o 

02 

CO 

to 

o 

CO 

O 

IA 

w 

O EH M M 



IA 

\C 

02 

nO 


vO 

«A 

CO 


IA 

2 

4 O Ctf 











CQ 


PC 

£H4 











< 

w 

Ph 

a pc 0 











Eh 

e 

3 

pq Eh 0 
o a -p o 

to 

CO 

02 

to 

IA 

4 

NO 

to 

IA 

IA 


PC 

Q 

DCO 0 M 

vO 

O- 

r- 


O- 


vO 

to 

to 

{> 


o 


pq o P 












w 

1 

Ph -H 












PC 


a 












o 

pq 











NO 



> 

IA 

C*- 

O 

c^ 

02 

02 

02 

IA 

o 

o 


HP 

qC 


to 

to 

to 

On 

to 

to 

to 

On 

On 

to 


o 

pq 













a 

a 













g 

o 

a 












w 

M 

o 












PC 

a 

M 












ou 

pq 

E~* 













p3 

O 












Ph 

PC 

(3 co 












o 

Ph 

pq 

a 











Eh Eh 4^ 

a pc 

o o a o 


Eh 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

8 

O 

o 


pq 

Eh 

o M pq o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 


Ph 


pq X M 

M 

M 

M 

M 

M 

M 

M 

M 

M 

M 


P4 

a 

t~q pc 












w 

o 

4 EH 

1_1 












co 

02 


CO 

02 


CO 

02 


4 

02 


CO 

02 


4 

02 


4 

02 


02 


02 CO 


UO vO O- tO O 


a 

a 


ABBREVIATIONS: N - Nerve (f.s.) - full stimulus ( U5 v., 0.5 MFD. Condenser ) 

M - Muscle (H.S.) - Harvard induction coil (repetitive stimulation) 









FIGURE 32 

Effect of Phemerol Chloride 5 mg.% on the Isolated 
Normal Rat Diaphragm. 

P - Phemerol Chloride N (s - full) - full intensity 

of condenser charged to 45 v. 
applied to the nerve. 

W - wash N (H.S.) - nerve stimulation by 

means of a Harvard Inductorium. 

M - direct stimulation of the 
muscle. 


FIGURE 33 

Effect of Multiple Doses of Paradione on the Isolated 
Normal Rat Diaphragm. 


Para. 


Paradione 


M - direct stimulation of the 
muscle 




se 3HU0I r i 

bedslosl 9dd no £ sbrxoIdO ionsxnsri^ lo dosllK 

.mg£'iriq6ia dsH IsnrxoW 

Ydxansdni Uul ~ (lli/l ■- g) M ebxioIdO lonemsdl --q 
. v od bs^Brio issnebnoo lo 
,9v*i9n sdd od boxlqqs 

Yd noidslmnide evier, ~ (. 8 ♦ . • y: dssw - W 

• mninoctoi/bnl bnsvnjsK s lo anssm 

add' lo noldBlumids dosnib - M 

.elosnra 


eg anuoiq 

bsdsloal add no snoibBifiG lo aaaod alqillxrM lo doellS 
♦ mss'idqsiG dsH IbchoM 

©dct lo noidslx/mida dosnib - M enoibBisl - .snsG 

aioanm 






- 90 - 



FIG. 32 



FIG. 33 










- 91 - 


Experiment 9 was one exception to the above, but it too 
agreed wihthe others upon the further addition of a small amount of 
phemerol chloride. 

PARADIONE 

Faradione 220 mg.% 

Table 52 shows the results of 6 experiments at this dose. 

A preliminary rise in response was observed in all ex¬ 
periments. The maximum single response reached 114% after 2 minutes. 

A maximum mean response of 108% was achieved in 5 minutes. 52% was 
the lowest single response observed and developed in 50 minutes, while 
the minimum mean response was 44% in the same time.(Table 52). 

A photograph of one experiment may be seen in Figure 54. 
Figure 55 shows the augmented response and the peculiar response 
resulting from the addition of small doses during this augmented re¬ 
sponse. It also demonstrates clearly that the muscle responds well to 
a direct stimulus when twitches can not be elicited through nerve 
stimulation. 

CURARIZED EXPERIMENTS 

All experiments showed an increased response in the presence 
of d-tubocurarine chloride, as well as on the normal diaphragm. 

(Table 53) • The decline of responses, however, was much more gradual 
than that recorded in the normal experiments. The maximum single 
response increased to 111% in 10 minutes and the lowest single response 
of 75% was observed after 40 minutes. 107% and 88% were the maximum 
and minimum mean responses and were noticed after 4 and 40 minutes 
respectively. 

In 50 minutes the mean response of normal preparations was 
depressed more than twice that of the curarized diaphragms. 







- 92 - 


x 

x 

x 


w 

CQ 

Eh 



E-1 

3 


w 


S3 

s 

Eh 

tr* 1 

< 


PQ 

O 

• 

s 

rH 

o 


M 


Eh 

O 

< 

O 

Pi 

rH 

< 


Ph 

u 

W 

0 

pc; 

a 

(X, 

# 

S 

bO 

o 

S 

g 

o 

» 

02 

Ph 

02 

< 


M 

w 

Q 

s 


o 

1 

M 


Q 

fxj 


> 

« 

Pi 

<U 

W 

Ph 

3 

Ph 

O 

o 

M 


S3 

Eh 

w 

O 

Pi 

w 

53 


Ph 

Ph 


w 

M 




EH 


s 


o 


Eh 

53 

O 

M 

W 

S3 

s 

O—' 
M G 
Eh O 
O -H 
■P 
O 
Eh 0 
S3 *o 
O C 
O -H 




rH *h 
<C 0 
M -P 
Eh Ch 
M 0 

55 

M 10 
0 

P*< +3 

O 3 

c 

W »H 

o s 

Eh 

S3 

W 

O 

Pi 

W 

Ph 


o 

co 


IPv 

02 


O 

02 


nO 


-4 


02 


S3 

o 

M 

Eh 

O 

<d 

Pi co 
HHC^. 
S tc 

o o ss o 

O M pq O 
WWH 
JSC 
<C Eh 
H 
Eh 


S3 

M 


pj O 



Ph 


o 

53 


02 



O- 

-4 


-4 

co 

1 

1 

-4 

U"\ 

1 

•4 

02 

■co 

i—1 


-4 

co 

ON 

co 

to 

vO 

-4 

ir\ 

o- 

to 

CM 

to 

rH 


-4 

o~ 

O 

CO 

to 

nO 

-4 

ir\ 

o 

NO 

tr\ 

rH 

rH 

O- 


CO 

02 

CO 

O 

NO 

-4 

uo 

to 

NO 

3 

O 

rH 


-4 


O 

o 

O- 

-4 

NO 

ON 

c^ 


rH 






O 

O 

VO 

co 

to 

o- 

t> 

0- 

o 

o 

ir\ 

to 

O 

to 


rH 




rH 


vr\ 

02 

-4 

On 

CO 

o 

-4 

O 

rH 

rH 

0- 

O 

rH 

O 

r-i 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

02 

02 

-4 

to 

NO 


to 

O 

rH 

rH 

O 

o 

o 

o 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

O 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

rH 

rH 

«H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

co 

ITS 

02 

ir\ 

02 

CO 


02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 








S3 














m 

H 

02 

CO 

-4 

U"\ 

NO 













93 


o 

- 4 - 





Eh 




05 

O 

M O 




pQ of'x 

05 



o 

a 



Eh 

3 

o — 

M c *r\ 

Eh O CM 

O *H 



W 

< -P 



w 

« o 



Eh 

Eh Q) 

a O 



P«4 

O C CM 


a 

E-< 

O 

O *H 


a 



< 

o 

< <D 


PQ 

M 

M -p LfN 



Eh 

Eh «h rH 


• 

<d 

m cd 


rH 


S 


a 

< 

H W 



Ph 

<D 


o 

W 

Pk -P O 


o 

05 

O 0 rH 


#H 

Oh 

0! 

M 



W -H 

M 


s 

o a 

M 

Q> 

o 

<£5 — 

X 

X 

(X 

<c 

Eh vO 


05 

a 


♦ 

Oh 

w 


bO 

Oh 

o 


fi 

<J5 

05 

w 


M 

W -4“ 


o 

Q 

Oh 

OQ 

CM 



< 

CM 

1 


e-« 

W 

W 

CM 


a 

> 



o 

05 



H 

W 



Q 

S 







W 

o 

a 


<*! 

M 

o 


(X 

a 

M 




Eh 




O 


o 

05 

Oh 

Q§ CO 


Eh 


Eh Eh <3j^ 


O 

Q 

a 05 


W 

W 

o o a o 


P*H 

IS) 

O H H O 



M 

W WH 


w 

05 

<q 

►4 EC < 

<£} Eh 



a 

M 



a 

Eh 



o 

W 




a 




M 



W 




Eh 




S 

• 



o 

Oh O 




0 O 




Eh 


• 

Oh 

• 

1x5 

Q 

W 

a 


-4 


to 

C^v 

to 

C^ 

to 

-oo 

1 

O 

C^ 

to 

to 

to 



rH 





rH 


to 

ON 

U"N 

-4 

-4 

o 

o 

o 

C*- 

ON 

QN 

ON 



rH 





(H 

o 

r—1 

CM 

NO 

C^- 

NO 

o 

o 

rH 

to 

ON 

ON 

ON 


rH 

rH 




o 

\0 

rH 

to 

o 

O 

rH 

o 

O 

rH 

to 

o 

O 

o 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

NO 

<r\ 

-4 

o 

CH 


O 

O 

rH 

o 

O 

O 

O 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

l> 

o 

0^ 

r- 

CH 

NO 

NO 

O 

rH 

rH 

ON 

O 

o 

O 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

t> 

o 

rH 

o 

Cr\ 

NO 

NO 

o 

rH 

rH 

o 

O 

o 

O 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

o- 

o 

rH 

CO* 

UH 

vO 

IH 

o 

rH 

rH 

o 

O 

o 

O 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

-4 

vO 

to 

r\ 

tTN 

NO 

IPs 

O 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

rH 

rH 

rH 

HI 

rH 

rH 

rH 

W\ 

nO 

WTN 

ir\ 

ITS 

NO 


CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 








a 







<*; 

rH 

CM 

C*\ 

-4 

U"\ 

NO 





































I 


























































■ H ' A I' 

































- 





















































. 


















1 






























































































































• 






























» 









































FIGURE 34 

Effect of Paradione 220 mg.$ on the Isolated Normal 

Rat Diaphragm. 

N - nerve stimulation M - muscle stimulation 
W - wash 


FIGURE 35 

Effect of Paradione 220 mg.% on the Isolated Curarized 

Rat Diaphragm. 

C - d-tubocurarine chloride N(F.S.) - nerve stimulation 

full intensity of 
condenser charged 

M - direct muscle stimulation to 45 v. 




LsmoW b&jnlcsl sd$ no o?.^.ra OSS enoib.B'xs*! cfoeYlH 

.nigB'iriq&lG deH 

nc£jaLssml$a alosma - M noltfsIimijccfB evien ~ VL 


rfenw ~ ¥ 



















i'f 5HU01U 



besita-tuO becrsloal orftf no OSS snoibsiel lo JoeTi3 

. :n;^B"inqBlQ d\sH 

joid-sl,.: : t.-t8 evnren - {.8.<)M ©biiolrfo aniiMuoodurf-b - 0 
• o v^isnscfni Iltfl 
be^Biio Ttaansbnoo 

.v ^ od ncl.j&lzmrje siosum Sosilb ~ M 






- 94 - 





• , 1 'b 

4-'" >• 1 .>('1- ■ Vi. ‘ r |H! , |> ' v 




T*KAp lOHjr 

0-2 q; 

(ilt ^ 


7~‘ 2J*t 


VARAD/CH? 
O'OS- CC 

( f 5 v\y ) 



FIG. 34 



FIG. 35 









- 95 - 


A slight increase in tone (2-9 mm. in 40 minutes) during 
the experimental period was observed, especially in curarized pre¬ 
parations . (Figure 35). 

IB CHANGES II. THE MUSCLE BATE. 

That none of the changes in response to these drugs was 
caused by an alteration of the PH of the muscle bath has been shown by 
altering the PH in a few experiments, one of which is recorded in 
Figure 23. The change in Ph in this case was as great as, or greater 
than any caused by the addition of drugs to the bath. No augmented 
response was noted by the addition of N/10 NaOH to the bath until 
a change of approximately two PH units had occurred. This is twice 
as great as the largest PH change caused by a drug.(Table 34). 

When a change is response did occur after the addition of NaOE, a 
flocculent precipitate was observed in the bath, probably calcium 
hydroxide. The removal of calcium ions is known to produce repetitive 
contractions to single nerve volleys and the motor end-plates become 
hyperexcitable ( 16 ). 





0 

g 

0 120 

£> 

0 

ON 

PS 

•H 


Q 

■P 


O 

•H 

73 

vo 

Eh 

73 


W 

£> 

cd 

G 


Q 

0) 

O 


-P 

nO 

CO 



W 

cd 


O 

a 

co 

vo 

<S 

0) 

-4 

as 

■p 


0 

S3 


as 

CJ 

•H 

O 

Oh 

fi 

co 



15 


fx, 

o 


CO W • 

p p ^ o 
a P« a 

O <aj H o 

3 ^ ° 

PS 

Q P 


a 

O 

M 02 
Eh O 

< O 
PS 

<S vo 
O 73 

a c 

H cd 

ps 

PD 02 
Q O 

CO%^ 
H vo 
O On 
S 

< X 
3S Eh 
O H 

as 

PH 


s 

02 


o 

02 


o 

o 


o 

VO 


o 

CO 


as 

a, s 

w sa 

O O Eh 

<$ PJh <$ 

PS W PS 
WCQM 
> <S 

<c 


hS 

o 

CO w 

o 
w < 

Q 

§ 

H 

E-« 


- 96 - 


O 

NO 

02 



vo 





02 

O 

02 



02 





• 

• 

• 

I 

| 

• 


1 

| 

1 

IV 

V 

V 



V- 





02 

0 

O 

On 

ON 

vo 


02 



02 

rH 

-4 

rH 

rH 

02 


02 



• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

» 


• 

| 

1 

IV 

V 

V 

V 

V 

V 


V 











-4 










O 


1 

8 

1 

1 

9 

1 


1 

• 

1 









V 


0 

0 

to 

0 

On 

02 


NO 

vo 

0 ; 

CO 

02 

VO 

02 

rH 

02 


rH 

O 

1—1 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


• 

• 

• 


V 

o- 

V 

V 

O- 


V 

V 

V 








NO 

vo 

0 








rH 

0 

rH 

1) 

9 

i 

1 

1 

1 


• 

• 

• 








V 

V 

V 

O 

vo 

VO 

NO 

V 

NO 


rH 

NO 

0 

nO 

-4 

to 

r-i 

•H 

1—1 


1 —1 

O 

rH 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


• 

• 

• 

IV 

V 

V 

V 

V 

V 


V 

V 

V 

CO 

O 

0 

NO 

ON 

CO 


V 

On 

vo 

to 

V 

0 

rH 

rH 

rH 


1—1 

O 

1 —1 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


• 

• 

• 

IV 


to 

V 

V 

V 


V 

0- 

V 




rH 










O 







PJ 



as 







< 







hS 



Eh 



Hi 




O 



a X X 

X! 

O ! 

XX 

X 


PS X X 

X 

PQ 



PS 







S 02 02 

02 


-4-4 

-4 


S 02 02 

VO 








w 



a 







a 






Q 




Ph 



to 


ON 

02 

CO 

-4* 





0 


O 

rH 

02 

rH 

W 




• 

i 

• 

• 

• 

# 

PS 




iv 


IV 

V 


V 

O 










co cm 




NO 

vo 

-4 

-4 

to 

CO 

a w 




O 

O 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

O PQ 

.—. 

*—>* 

-—■» 

* 

• 

• 

« 

® 

• 

H 

IQ 

CO 

CO 

tv 

V 

V 

V 

V 

V 

Eh® 

U 

u 








S3 Ph 

S3 

S3 

S3 







rH 

O 

O 

O 

to 

vo 

VA 

ON 


02 

O Eh Q 

a 

a 

a 

O 

O 

rH 

H 


rH 

wsw 




9 

0 

• 

• 

1 

<9 

Q 

vo 

vo 

vo 

iv 

V 

V 

V 


V 

O Eh Q 

8 

1 

1 







a co<s 

-4 

-4 

-4 

ON 

V 

rH 

O 

0 

NO 

MS 




O 

0 

02 

02 

02 

rH 

^OO 

G 

G 

G 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

OOP 


•H 

•H 

IV 

V 

V 

V 

IV 

V 

HS PS 

•_^ 


»—»• 







HO Q 




nO 

V 

On 

VO 

VO 

02 

O Eh 

rH 

O 

V 

H 

rH 

co 

co 

02 

02 

fX| 

rH 

rH 

rH 

• 

• 

« 

• 

• 

9 

Q 

• 

• 

» 


V 

V 

V 

V 

cv 

W W 

V 

V 

V 







a Eh 




-4 

02 

O 

02 

VO 

q 

Eh ^ 




CO 

-4 

NO 

VO 

VO 

«4 

PS 




• 

• 

• 

• 

« 

• 

w 




V 


V 

IV 

V 

V 

<s 




CO 

-4 

On 

nO 

ON 

to 


0 

ON 

vo 

ON 

tv 

VO 

nO 

to 

to 


NO 

vo 

NO 

• 

• 

9 

• 

9 



• 

• 

• 

V 

V 

V 

IV 

V 

V 


V 

V 

V 

CO 

10 


u 

CO 

CO 


co 

CO 


>> 

c 

V 

S3 

iv 

>> 




V 

cd 

•H 

cd 

O 

cd 

cd 


cd 

cd 

cd 

73 

fi 

73 

4S 

73 

73 


73 

73 

73 

CO 

Vf\ 

rH 

rH 

NO 

NO 


VO 

CO 

rH 


rH 










i i 


i i 


i i 


15 mins. 7.68 7.43 (in 4-5 hours) CNS 7.50 7.45 7.45 7.44 

STIMULATING 

2 days 7.57 7.09 (in 4-5 hours) BARBITURATE 7.12 7.08 7.06 7.06 

1 day 7.59 7.05 (in 2.5 hours) 2 X 7.13 7.08 7.08 7.08 












TABLE XXXIV 


Q 

W 


Eh 

a 

O 

O 


- 97 - 



O 





CM 

i 

a 

1 


i—i 









o 

c o 




ED 

O ON 

i 

i 

9 

o5 

•H 




Q 

p 





♦H 




o 

73 m 




Eh 

73 I>- 

cti 

i 

a 

1 

W 






Ph 

o 

o 

O 

Q 

<D O 

o 

o 

t© 


■P NO 

« 

• 

• 

CO 


c*- 

£> 

NO 

W 

cU 




O 


o 

rH 

o 

a 

CO ir\ 

o 

o 

ON 

<u 

0 ) -3- 

• 

• 

• 

EC 

•P 

C- 


vO 

o 

3 





a 

O 

rH 

o 

EC 

•H o 

o 

O 

ON 

Pu 

& Cr\ 

• 

• 

« 



r- 

!>■ 

NO 



CM 

CM 

o 


in 

o 

O 

o 


rH 

• 

• 

• 





c^- 


Pm 




Q 

O 




W 


[V] 



CO 

w • 

25 



ED Q 

^ o 

Pu S 

o 

MXX 

X 

O <U H o 

Q 



ED 

Eh O 

<d CM CM 

CM 

03 


P3 



Q 


< 




§ 

PC 



W 





05 





o 





CO Pm 

a w 

O PQ 





M 


CO 

CO 

CO 

Eh EC 


u 

U 

U 

ED P-i 


3 

3 

2 



o 

o 

O 

OHQ 

coS&q 

43 

43 

43 

< Q 

m 

in 

in 

O Eh q 

• 

• 

• 

a co <c 

CM 

CM 

CM 

M S 





3500 

C 

fl 

a 

O o ED 

•H 

•H 

*H 


05 


w 

-*—«• 

nlO Q 




O Eh 


VO 

CM 

1—1 

Pm 


o 

O 

O 

P 


• 

9 

• 

W W 
EC Eh 



O- 

o- 

W 





< 





EC 





Ph 

a 




M O 

WCtlH 

O O EH 

o 

o 

o 

<d Pm 

a 

m 

in 

in 

05 W 

• 

• 

• 

WPQH 

c^- 

o- 

O 

> 

<c 




<q 





a 















o 

CO w 


m 

co 

(0 

o 



E» 

>> 

w <c 


ctf 

c3 

03 

Q 


73 

73 

73 

O 





05 


CM 

CM 

CM 

N 





Eh 


























DISCUSSION 











- 93 - 


Discussion 

(a) Sodium Pentobarbital (Nembutal) 

Sodium-ethyl(1-methyl-butyl)barbiturate 
(1). Sciatic Nerve - Gastrocnemius Muscle 
Preparation . 

Two different dose levels were employed, one 
of 120 mg. per Kg. of body weight,which is the reported 
lethal dose for white rats, and the other was 250 mg. per 
Kg., the largest dose that could be administered when 
the animals were given artificial respiration. Both 
normal and denervated muscle preparations were employed 
in an attempt to determine the site of action of the 
drugs used. The muscle fails to respond to stimuli 
applied to the motor nerve after 3 - 4 days following 
nerve section (46, 47)# A slight augmentation of the 
response of both the normal and denervated gastroc¬ 
nemius muscles was noted in some experiments following 
the intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital. 
When the t test was applied to these apparent increases 
in the response they were found to be insignificant since 
the probabilities were in excess of the 5 °fa level. The 
method of calculating the significance of the results 
appears in a book by Johnson (104)# The rise in the 
graphs (Figures 2-5) above the 100% level therefore 
does not appear to be significant. 

Huston et al (59) observed that sodium pento¬ 
barbital and seconal (sodium propyl-methyl-carbinylallyl 
barbiturate) produced an augmented response of the normal 
and denervated gastrocnemius muscle of perfused isolated 


















' 












f ' i 


r 








L./’ 


i 

' 




. 










* 


■ 










. :• .. • f . • 

• ;v.'. j • r- • \ 






















, 










■ 





- 







- 99 - 


dog legs. After the addition of much larger doses 
to the perfusate a depression of both the myoneural 
junction and the muscle was observed. Riedel and Huston (45) 
by injecting amytal intraperitoneally into rats showed 
that the response of the gastrocnemius muscle was increased 
when electrically stimulated. 

The difference in our results from those of the 
above workers may be due to the difference in species 
of the test animals in the first case and to a quanti¬ 
tative difference in the barbiturates in the latter. 

Various barbiturates are known to produce similar effects 
on certain structures in the body, but differ in degree 
of action (51, 52). In addition to the above differences, 
the doses used by us were not comparable to those used by 
others. 

In the experiments done here, both doses of 120 
and 250 mg. per Kg. appear to depress the normal gastroc¬ 
nemius muscle more markedly than the denervated preparation 
(Figures 2-5). No significant difference in the depress¬ 
ion of the responses of the normal and the denervated 
muscles could be found when the t test was applied to 
the experimental results at certain time intervals. At 
90 minutes and 120 minutes the depression caused by 120 mg. 
per Kg. on the normal muscle does not appear to differ 
significantly from that caused on denervated muscle. The 
probability of the observed differences occurring by chance 
exceeds the 5% level. The depression of the response 
therefore appears to be mainly on the muscle with the 
doses employed here. The probabilities calculated at 







































. 


* 




. 

, 










100 - 


at various time intervals reveal that a significant depression 
of the response occurs at both dose levels. After 45 minutes 
the t value calculated from the normal experimental (120 mg. 
per Kg.) and the control results indicates a significant dif¬ 
ference exists between these two groups (t value of 2.12 with 
37 degrees of freedom). The probability was 0.023 after 
90 minutes. In a similar manner the denervated experiments 
were shown to differ significantly from the denervated controls 
at different time intervals. In 45 minutes the difference 
in the experimental and control results was barely significant 
(t value of 2.11 with 33 degrees of freedom). 90 minutes 
after 120 mg. per Kg. of sodium pentobarbital was injected 
into the animals a probability of 0.01 was found. Therefore 
the depression of the denervated experimental muscles appears 
to be highly significant. When a dose of 250 mg. per Kg. 
was administered a significant depression of the normal 
muscle had occurred by 15 minutes, (t value of 2.44 with 
3S degrees of freedom). After 30 minutes this dose appears 
to cause a significant depression of the denervated muscle 
(probability of 0.024), while after 90 minutes the depression 
is more significant (probability of 0.014). There does not 
appear to be a significant difference in the depression shown 
on the denervated and the normal muscles at either dose level 
since the probabilities calculated from the results of the 
normal and denervated experiments all exceeded the 5% level. 

The depression of the response, therefore, appears 
to be due chiefly to a direct action on the muscle. 












- 







r 













' 



* 













- 





























- 




















« 














* 
















< 


- 


* 















. 

























* 




, 






. 












101 - 


(2). Isolated Phrenic Nerve - Diaphragm Preparation 

Normal and curarized isolated phrenic nerve - 
diaphragm preparations of the rat were used in order to 
substantiate the results obtained in the intact animal 
experiments. When a comparison is made of Figures 24 and 25 
as well as Tables 24 and 25 further evidence of the direct 
action of nembutal on skeletal muscle is obtained. Nembutal 
produced an increased response in both normal and curarized 
diaphragm preparations. It will also be noted that when 
a comparison of the above tables is made, that the onset of 
depression which follows the augmentation, occurs more rapidly 
in normal than in curarized preparations. This suggests 
that perhaps the myoneural junction is depressed to some 
extent as well as the muscle itself and that the depression 
at the two sites contributes to the overall decrease of the 
normal muscle response. 

The lower degree of augmentation occurring in the 
curarized diaphragm preparations to nembutal (Tables 24 and 25) 
might be due to the action of d-tubocurarine chloride. While 
the concentration of this blocking agent used here may not 
alter the electrical excitability of the muscle, it may 
through a synergistic action with nembutal be great enough 
to speed the onset of the depression thereby masking some 
of the stimulation ordinarily observed. A syn er gistic 
action exists between d-tubocurarine chloride and barbiturates. 
Pick and Richards (106) observed that small doses of pento¬ 
barbital enhance the sensitivity of an animal to d-tubocurarine 
chloride. The effective dose of d-tubocurarine chloride is 
reduced to one-tenth to one-half of the usual amount required. 













. 


- 





































* 


































. 















r 














- 




« 

* 






* 






- 















102 


Riedel and Huston (107) showed a synergistic action on 
skeletal muscle between amytal and curare* 

Both the initial augmentation and the subsequent 
depression caused by sodium pentobarbital appear to be due, 
in part, to a direct action on the muscle. Some of the 
depression may be due also to an involvement of the myoneural 
junction. These results are in agreement with those of 
Huston et al. 

(b). 5-(gamma. gamma-Dimethylallvl)-5-Ethyl Barbituric 

Acid ( sodium salt) 

This barbiturate is hereafter abbreviated S.B. 

Little is known about this barbiturate other than that it 
produces violent convulsions. These were observed by us. 

One rat was given a 5 mg. per Kg. dose of S.B. which failed 
to produce convulsions or any peripheral effect. 10 mg. per 
Kg., however, did produce the characteristic convulsions. 

(1). Sciatic Nerve - Gastrocnemius Muscle Preparation. 
An examination of the results recorded in Tables 9 
and 10 would indicated that this barbiturate causes a 
significant depression of the the response of the normal 
muscle (Figure S) ( t value of 3*$1 with 3$ degrees of 
freedom at 15 minutes). A small but significant depression 
of the denervated muscle is shown in Figure 9 ( t value of 
3.1? with 31 degrees of freedom at 15 minutes). No significant 
augmentation of the response was found in either the normal 
or denervated muscles. When a comparison is made of the 
denervated and normal muscle response to S.B. relative to 
their respective controls (Figure 10 and Table 11) there 





. 

. 

* 

. 




. 

- 


< 


















* 







* 

* 















- 103 - 


appears to be a much greater depression of the normal muscle. The 
more marked depression of the normal muscle appears to be significant 
and could be the result of a depression of the neuromuscular junction, 
(probability of 0.039). 

(2 ). Isolated Phrenic Nerve-Diaphragm. Preparation. 

In the experiments on the isolated normal diaphragm, the in¬ 
creased response elicited, by a 10 mg.% concentration of S.B., was 
less than one-half as great as that produced by the same dose of 
Nembutal.(Tables 23 and 26). This difference would then appear to be 
a quantitative one caused by the difference in the chemical structure 
of these two barbiturates. 

When a comparison is made of the effect produced on the normal 
and curarized diaphragms (Table 26 and 27), it will be noted that 
the gradual increase in response of the normal muscle is replaced by 
a slow decline in the curarized diaphragms. This would suggest that 
there is either a slight stimulant effect on the transmission of ex¬ 
citation at the junction or that this barbiturate increases the 
sensitivity of the preparation to d-tubocurarine chloride which alters 
the usual effect of the drug. The latter inference is more likely, 
since the former is not supported by the results of the experiments on 
the intact animals. The results in Table 27 indicate a slow decrease 
in the height of the contractions of the curarized preparations which 
is not evident in the normal diaphragm until 1^ to 2 hours after the 
addition of S.B. The stimulant effect produced on the normal isolated 
diaphragm (Table 26) was not produced on the normal or denervated in¬ 
tact gastrocnemius muscle (Tables 9 and 10) or the curarized diaphragm 
(Table 27) to any extent. The lack of a stimulant action on the latter 
was probably due to the presence of d-tubocurarine. 











- 








. 


















. 












































. 


. . 

- 















104 - 


It is difficult to compare the action of a drug on two dif¬ 
ferent muscles since marked differences in the sensitivity of different 
muscles to drug action are known. A good example of this is the 
progressive paralysis of the different muscles following curare ad¬ 
ministration. Circulatory effects may also have a bearing on these 
differences. The increase of response of the normal diaphragm and 
the general decrease of response in the normal gastrocnemius to the 
action of S.B., may be due to differences in the two muscles or to 
the drug concentrations used in these experiments. It appears 
probable that both the stimulant effect on the normal diaphragm and 
some gastrocnemius muscles, as well as the weak depressant action, 
are due to a direct action of S.B. on the muscle. 

Figures 26, 27 and 28 are example experiments showing the 
effect of S.B. on normal and eurarized isolated diaphragms. 

(c). Meperidine Hydrochloride (Demerol HC1) 

(ethy1-1-methy1-4-phenyl-piperidine-4-carboxylate 

hydrochloride) 

(1). Sciatic Nerve-Gastrocnemius Muscle Preparation. 

During the first hour Demerol hydrochloride, in doses of 
80 amd l 8 j? mg. per Kg. , appears to have no significant action on 
either the myoneural junction or the normal skeletal muscle of the 
intact animal.(Figures 12 and 14, Tables 12 and 15). After 9 0 
minutes Demerol hydrochloride, 80 mg. per Kg., apparently has a 
depressant action on the normal muscle.(Figure 12). (probability 
of O.O 44 ;. a greater depression resulted when a dose of 185 mg. per 
Kg. was administered. This depression was apparently not significant 
after 12 minutes, (probability of over 5 %) $ but appears to be sig- 



















* 





' 




■ , " 




- 


. 






- ■ 


. 









■ 

, f ■ 



./ . 





. 


* 






* 








• • 




% 




:: , 







. 



. 

. 











■ 






























- 105 - 


nificant after 90 minutes of drug action, (probability of 0 . 059 ). 

No indication of a stimulant effect appeared in normal muscles. 

In the denervated experiments, however, there appears to 
be a stimulant action which maintains the response at a level above 
that of the corresponding control for over 90 minutes.(Figure 15 and 
Table 14). The significance of this increase was determined at the 
12 minute interval, (t value of 2.73 with 51 degrees of freedom). 

This would indicate a significant increase in the response of the ex¬ 
perimental muscles as compared to those of the control group. 

Denervated muscles are known to become sensitized to various 
agents such as acetylcholine, potassium ions, nicotine, and caffeine 
(108). No report was found to indicate that demerol hydrochloride 
produces sensitization in denervated muscle. That sensitization to this 
drug is not necessary to produce an increased response, is evident 
in the experiments done on the normal and curarized diaphragm 
preparations, (see results Fart II). 

There appears to be a marked difference between the effect 
produced by Demerol hydrochloride 80 mg. per Kg. on normal and 
denervated muscles, (Figure 15), but there is apparently no significant 
difference between the action on these two muscles preparations at 
60 minutes, (probability exceeds the 10% level). 

The depression of the normal muscle response may be due to 
a local anaesthetic action on the nerve or a depression of the myo¬ 
neural junction. The stimulant action is believed to be due to a 
direct action on the muscle. The absence of this effect on normal 
muscle may be due to a depression of the nervous elements which would 
mask any weak stimulant action on the muscle. 




























■ 





. 























. 




, 



















- 106 - 


12). Isolated Phrenic Nerve-Diaphragm Preparation, 

Large increases in the response were observed in both 
normal and curarized diaphragms after the addition of Demerol hydro¬ 
chloride to the bath.(Tables 28-50). The augmented response of the 
curarized diaphragm clearly indicates that at least part of the stimul 
ant action is due to a direct action on the muscle. A primary 
depression of the myoneural junction or of the conduction of impulses 
in the nerve would mask the direct stimulant action on the gastroc¬ 
nemius muscle. This would explain the differences between response 
of the normal and denervated muscles. This, however, was not in¬ 
dicated in the experiments on the normal diaphragm where the increase 
in response was greater than that of the curarized preparation, on 
the other hand, the normal diaphragm was depressed by demerol hydro¬ 
chloride more rapidly than the curarized preparation,(Table 29 and 50) 
This suggests that a depression of the myoneural junction or nerve 
impulse conduction hastens the depression of the muscle response. 

This is only indirect evidence. It would appear then, that both the 
stimulant and depressant action of demerol hydrochloride is due 
mainly to a direct action on the muscle, while a slight depression of 
the nervous elements including the junction may occur as well. The 
effects are demonstrated in Figures 29-51 • 

The results of this work confirm those of Dutta (74) who 
recently reported that demerol hydrochloride produced increased 
contractions of the rat diaphragm. Concentration differences between 
his work and ours probably account for the quantitative differnces 
in results. Slightly lower doses were used in this investigation. 

Demerol hydrochloride has been reported to possess a de¬ 
pressant effect on smooth muscles by a direct papaverine-like action 
and an atropine-like action on the parasympathetic nerve endings (65). 







107 - 


The atropine-like action has since been contradicted by others (70). 

A morphine-like action on the central nervous system has been noted 
in relatively small doses (64,66), while larger doses produce con¬ 
vulsions in animals (66). The latter was evident in the doses used 
in our work on the intact animals. Way ( 67 ) has demonstrated a fairly 
potent local anaesthetic action of demerol hydrochloride on the 
frog T s sciatic nerve. This local anaesthetic action may account for 
the depression of the normal gastrocnemius muscle and the absence of 
a stimulating effect on this preparation. The stimulant action is 
believed to be due to a direct action on the muscle while the slight 
depressant action may be due to impaired nerve impulse conduction in 
the nerve or a depression of the myoneural junction. 

(d). Benzethonium Chloride (Phemerol Chloride). 

Onium salts, with few exceptions, possess a certain amount 
of curariform activity (77-80). Quaternary ammonium salts are the most 
efficient of this group. Phemerol chloride was selected since it 
could easily be procured in highly purified crystals and because it 
is commonly employed as a germicide and antiseptic in solution. 

(1). Sciatic Nerve-Gastrocnemius Muscle Preparation. 

The highest dose that was found to be compatible with life, 
under artificial respiration, was 25 mg. per Kg. of body weight. 

Even at this dose some animals died after the experimental period. 

The experimental mean of the normal gastrocnemius muscle responses, 
when compared with the control, shows a small increase which reached 
a peak of 105% in 15 minutes.(Figure 16 and Table 16). This increase 
appears to be significant since the probability of it occuring by chance 
is only 0.012. A similar augmented response was absent in denervated 
experiments (figure 17 ) with one exception and the response was 






- 



. 

, 












. 


. • 
















- 





































1 


, 











- 10a - 


erratic in this case.(Table 17). After an hour the pattern of the 
depression in both experimental groups appeared to be alike. The 
depression was slightly greater in the denervated series, as might be 
expected, due to the less robust nature of this preparation. 

Figure 11 shows a comparison of the effects on the de¬ 
nervated and normal muscles relative to their respective controls. 

From this, it appears that the slight stimulant effect occurs only in 
normal muscles. This difference is likely due to the inability of the 
denervated muscle to respond to such a small stimulant action. The 
difference in response of the normal and denervated muscles appears to 
be significant at 15 minutes, (probability of 0.013). 

The only significant action appears to be a slight stimulant 
effect which is probably on the muscle. 

(2). Isolated Phrenic Nerve-Diaphragm Preparation. 

A concentration of phemerol chloride as small as 5 mg.% 
produced a reversible neuromuscular block in the isolated phrenic 
nerve-diaphragm preparation within 20 minutes. The site of action is 
clearly demonstrated in Figure 32 and Table 31. When muscle contract¬ 
ions could no longer be elicited by electrical shocks, applied to the 
nerve by means of condenser discharges or a Harvard inductorium, which 
delivers repetitive stimuli, the muscle still responded well to 
direct stimulation by condenser discharges of the same intensity as 
those applied to the nerve. No case of an augmented response appeared 
in 9 experiments on the normal diaphragm. The muscle may or may not 
be depressed by this concentration of the drug, but the primary de¬ 
pression occurs at the neuromyal Junction or on the nervous elements.. 
The latter is unlikely since acetylcholine, which is also a quaternary 
ammonium salt, produces no effect on the intact myelinated nerve. 











. 

















. 

. 

. 

r ' • 
















. 


. 












. 




. 

' 


. 


, 



















- 109 - 


Nachmansohn (29) explained this lack of action by the inability of 
quaternary ammonium salts, which are highly ionized in aqueous solut¬ 
ion and therefore not likely to be lipoid soluble, to penetrate the 
myelinated nerve covering which consists of a lipoid membrane. 

The depressant action therefore appears to be on the 
neuromyal junction, while the site of the stimulant action in the 
case of the intact animal is not clear. 

(e). Paradlone (5,5-dimethyl-5-ethyloxazolidine-2,4-dione). 

A large dose of Paradione was administered intraperitoneally 
since its toxicity is relatively low. The lethal dose reported for 
mice was 1000 mg. per Kg. and this was the dose used in our work on 
the intact animals. The trade preparation consisting of 0.5 G-m. per 
ml. of 65% ethanol was employed. It therefore became necessary to 
run an alcohol control group in order to determine what, if any, 
effect was produced by the alcohol content of the paradione solution 
administered. Table 22 and Figure 20 show quite clearly that the 
alcohol did not produce a significant difference from that of the 
normal control. The alcohol may have affected the rate of absorption. 

(1) . Sciatic Nerve-G-astrocnemius Muscle Preparation. 

When Figures 18 and 19 are compared, it would appear that 
paradione depresses the neuromuscular junction or conduction in the 
nerve. The normal muscle response has been significantly depressed, 

(t value of 2 # 6l with 39 degrees of freedom at 12 minutes, and a 
probability of 0.01 at 60 minutes). 

The denervated muscle response was augmented for over an hour, 
(probability of 0.011 at 12 minutes), but did not differ greatly from 
the response of the control thereafter. 


















. 








.. 






. 






J 









V 











• ' 1 ' 






. 






... , . 






. 










- 



110 - 


A comparison of the effect of paradione on denervated and 
normal gastrocnemius muscles may be more readily seen in Figure 21 
and Table 21. The normal muscle was depressed to a much greater 
extent than the denervated muscle, and it would appear that possibly a 
depressant action on the neuromuscular junction or nerve transmission 
had masked any stimulant action on the normal muscle. There appears to 
be a highly significant difference between the two experimental 
groups, (probability of 0.009 in 12 minutes and a t value of 6.74 
with 19 degrees of freedom at 60 minutes). 

A more marked reduction in the height of the muscle contract¬ 
ions was produced by Paradione than by three and one-half times the 
concentration of Tridione (102). The depression, however, did not 
occur as rapidly as in the case of Tridione. This may have geen due 
to a difference in the rate of absorption of these two compounds. 

(2). Isolated Phrenic Nerve-Diaphragm Preparation. 

The experiments on the isolated diaphragm agree with the 
results obtained on the gastrocnemius muscle preparation of the in¬ 
tact rat, except in the case of the normal diaphragm. In this case a 
transitory stimulation precedes a marked depression of the muscle re¬ 
sponse. (Figure 54 and Table 52). The results on the curarized pre¬ 
parations support the inference that a primary depression of the re¬ 
sponse involves the neuromyal junction or nervous elements, while the 
stimulant action is due to a direct action on the muscle.(Figure 53 
and Table 53). Figure 53 also demonstrates that possibly the neuro¬ 
muscular junction is the first to be depressed since good muscle re¬ 
sponses are elicited by direct stimulation of the muscle after the 
transmission of excitation at the junction is blocked. 











PH CHANGES IN TEE BATH 


That the changes in response of the diaphragm preparations 
are not due to PH changes caused by the addition of the drugs, has 
been shown, (see Figure 23 and Table 34). 





SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 













112 


1. Sodium Pentobarbital (Nembutal) 

(a ) . Sciatic herve-G-astrocnemius iviuscle Ire parations . 

No significant increase of the response was observed with 
doses of 120 and 250 mg. per Kg. of body weight. The muscle was 
depressed directly by this drug at both dose levels. The depression 
of the normal muscle does not differ significantly from that of the de- 
nervated muscle. 

The depression of the muscle response is due chiefly to a 
direct depression of the contractile elements. 

(b). Isolated Phrenic Nerve-Diaphragm Preparations. 

Nembutal, 10 and 50 mg.%, produced an augmented response 
of both normal and curarized diaphragm preparations. The depression 
which follows this stimulant effect, occurs more rapidly in the 
normal than the curarized preparation. 

The stimulant effect is believed to be due to a direct 
action on the muscle. The depressant action on the muscle was due, 
in part, to a direct action on the muscle and possibly involved the 
myoneural junction. 

2. 5-(gamma, gamma-Dimethylallyl)-5-ethyl barbituric 

acid (Sodium salt) (S.B.) 

(a). Sciatic Nerve-G-astrocnemius Muscle Prepartions . 

25 mg. per Kg. of S.B. produced a significant depression of 
the normal muscle and a smaller but still significant depression of 
the denervated muscle. No augmentation of the response occurred in 
either preparation. 

The depression of the response is believed to be due, in 
part, to a direct action on the muscle. An additional depressant 
action on the myoneural junction may account for the greater de- 










- 113 - 


pression observed on the normal muscle. 

(b). Isolated Phrenic 'Nerve-Diaphragm Preparations. 

An increased response was observed in the normal diaphragm 
after the addition of 10 mg.% of S.B. to the bath. No significant 
augmentation of response occurred in the case of the curarized 
diaphragm with the same dose. Only a slight depression of the response 
of the diaphragm occurs in the case of the curarized preparation. 

The augmentation of the response appears to be due, in part, 
to a direct action on the muscle. The absence of this increase on 
curarized diaphragms is believed to be due to the presence of a 
synergistic depressant action between the barbiturate and d-tubo- 
curarine chloride. 

3. Meperidine Hydrochloride (Demerol HC1) 

(a) . Sciatic Nerve-G-astrocnemius Muscle Preparations. 

80 and l8j? mg. per Kg. of Demerol HC1 cause a small but 
significant depression of the response of normal gastrocnemius muscle. 
On the other hand, 80 mg. per Kg. produced a significant increase in 
the response of denervated muscle but produced no depression. 

The depression of the response is believed due, in part, 
to an action on the myoneural junction or nervous elements. The 
augmented response of the denervated muscle is believed to be due to 
a direct action on the muscle and not to a sensitization of the de¬ 
nervated preparation. 

(b) . Isolated Phrenic Nerve-Diaphragm Preparations. 

Both the normal and curarized diaphragm preparations re¬ 
sponded more forcefully when 3 and 20 mg.% of Demerol hydrochloride 




























• 



























































. 






. 

- 
















. 





















- 1H - 


were added to the bath. A marked depression followed shortly after the 
initial increase of response when the larger concentration was used. 

The normal diaphragm was depressed more quickly than the curarized 
preparation. 

Part of the depressant action is believed to be due to a 
depression of the myoneural junction or local anaesthetic action on 
the nerve. The muscle may also be depressed. The stimulant effect 
is due in part to a direct action on the muscle. This agrees with 
experiments on the intact animal. 

4. Benzethonium Chloride (Phemerol Chloride) 

(a) . Sciatic Nerve-Gastrocnemius Muscle Prepartions. 

23 mg. per Kg. of Phemerol chloride produced a slight in¬ 
crease in the response of the normal muscle but not in the denervated 
muscle. 

The augmentation of the response may be due to an action on 
the muscle or the neuromuscular junction. The absence of the stimulant 
effect on denervated muscle is believed to be due to the less robust 
nature of this muscle. 

(b) . Isolated Phrenic Nerve-Diaphragm Preparations. 

3 mg.% of Phemerol chloride produced only a depression of 
the normal muscle response. 

The depressant effect is believed due to an action on the 
myoneural transmission since the muscle still responded well to direct 
stimulation. 


3 . Paradione 


(a). Sciatic Nerve-Gastrocnemius Muscle Preparations. 







■ 
















' 

. 








» 






- 
















. 






, 



















- 115 - 


1000 mg. per Kg. produced a marked depression of the normal 
muscle response while it produced a slight stimulant effect on the 
denervated muscle. 

A primary depression of the myoneural junction or nerve 
transmission is believed to mask the stimulant action on the normal 
muscle. The stimulant action is due, in part, to a direct action 
on the muscle. 

(b). Isolated Phrenic Nerve-Diaphragm Preparations. 

220 mg.% of Paradione produced a slight augmentation of the 
normal and curarized diaphragm preparations. The increase in response 
is due, in part, to a direct action on the muscle, while the primary 
depression is believed to be due to an action on the myoneural junction 
or a local anaesthetic action on the nerve. 












BIBLIOGRAPHY 





- 116 - 


1. Kendall, J.I. "The microscopic anatomy of vertebrates'* 

Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia 
Second Edition, 1940, page 90. 

2. Ham, A.W. "Histology”, J.B. Lippincott Co., Montreal, 

1950, Gh. 19 and 20. 

5. Cowdry, E.V. "A Textbook of Histology", Lea and Febiger, 

Philadelphia, 1958, 

4. Mitchell, P.H. "General Physiology", McGraw - Hill Book Co., 

Inc., 1948, page 1. 

5. Clark, D.A. J. Physiol. 70:18-19 P., 1950. 

6. Hinsey, J.C. Physiol. Rev. 14:514,1954. 

7. Couteaux, R. Revue Canadienne de biol. 6:565,1947. 

8. Acheson, G.H. Federation Proc. 7:447,1948. 

9. Kibjakow, A.W. Pflugers Arch. ges. Physiol. 252:452,1955. 

10. Feldberg, W. and J.H. Gaddum. J. Physiol. 81:505,1954. 

11. Dale, H.H. and W. Feldberg. J. Physiol. 8l:59-40P.,1954. 

12. Dale, H.H., W. Feldberg and M. Yogt. J. Physiol. 86:555,1956. 

15. Brown, G.L. J. Physiol. 89:220,1957. 

14. Brown, G.L., H.H. Dale and W. Feldberg. J. Physiol. 

87:594,1956. 

15. Brown, G.L., H.H. Dale and W. Feldberg. J. Physiol. 

87:425, 1956. 

16. Hunt, C.C. and S.W. Kuffler. Pharmacol. Rev. 98:96,1950. 

17. Koelle, G.M. and J.S. Friedenwald. 

Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol, and Med. 70:617,1949. 

18. Eccles, J.C. and W.J. O'Connor. I. Physiol. 94:7-9P.,1958. 

19. Eccles, J.C. and W.J. 0 f Connor. J. Physiol. 94:9-llP.,1958. 

20. Eccles, J.C. and W.J. O'Connor. J. Physiol. 97:44,1959. 

21. Kuffler, S.W. Federation Proc. 7:457,1948. 

22. Cowan, S.L. J. Physiol. 88:5-5P.,1956. 

25. Rosenblueth, A. "The Transmission of Nerve Impulses at 

Neuroeffector Junctions and Peripheral 
Synapses". John Wil6y & Sons, Inc.,New York, 
and The Technocracy Press of 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,1950. 



















- 117 - 


24. Paton, J.D.M. Quart. J. Pharm. and Pharmacol. 5:274,1949. 

25. Kuffler, S.W. J. Neurophysiol. 6:99,1943* 

26. Fessard, A.E. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 47:375,1946. 

27. Feldberg, W. and A.E. Fessard. J. Physiol. 101:200,1942. 

2d. Nachmansohn, D., C.W. Coates and M.A. Rothenberg. 

J. Biol. Chem. 163:39,1946. 

29. Nachmansohn, D. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 4$:395,1946. 

30. Couteaux, R. C. R. Soc. Biol. 139:641,1945. 

31. Elliott, T.R. J.Physiol. 35:367,1907. 

32. Langley, J.N. J. Physiol. 36:347,1907. 

33. Eccles, J.C. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 47:429,1946. 

34. Jacobs, M.H. and D.R. Stewart. J. ges. Physiol. 25:539, 

35* Luco, J.V. and A. Rosenblueth. Am. J. Physiol. 126:5$,1939. 

36. Rosenblueth, A. Am. J. Physiol. 129:22,1940. 

37. Eccles, J.C. Ann. Rev. Physiol. 10:93,194$. 

3#. Monnier, A.M. and Z.M. Bacq. Arch. Int. .Physiol. 40:4^5,1935. 

39. Monnier, A.M. Symp. Quant. Biol. 4:111,1936. 

40. Cowan, S.L. Proc. Roy. Soc. London (B), 115:216,1934. 

41. Hodgkin, A.L. and A.F. Huxley. J, Physiol. 106:341,1947. 

42. Bulbring, E. Brit. J. Pharmacol. 1:3$,1946. 

43. Chen, K.K. Private communication, Lilly Research Laboratories 

Indianapolis, Ind. 

44. Riedel, B.E. and M.J. Huston. Canadian Pharm. Jour. May1,1950 

45. Riedel, B.E. and M.J. Huston. Can. J. Research. E. 27:$1,1949 

46 . Lissak, K., E.W. Dempsey and A. Rosenblueth. 

Am. J. Physiol. 12$:45,1939. 

47. Cook, P.D. and R.W. Gerard. Am. J. Physiol. 97:412,1931. 

4$. Fulton, J.F. and A.D. Keller. Surg.,Gynec. and Obst. 

54:764,1932. 

49. Quigley, J.P., O.W. Barlow and C.K. Himmelsbach. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 50:425,1934. 





c 





c 


















- 113 - 


50. Marshal, E.K. Jr. and M. Rosenfeld. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 57:457,1936. 

51. Barlow, O.W. and J.D. Gledhill. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 49:36,1933. 

52. Gruber, C.M., C.M. Gruber, Jr. and N.A. Golosi. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 63:215,1938. 

53* Linegar, C.R., J.M. Dille and T. Koppanyi. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 58:128,1936. 

54. Koppanyi, T., C.R. Linegar and J.M. Dille. 

Science 82:232,1935. 

55* Koppanyi, T., J.M. Dille and G.R. Linegar. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 58:119,1936. 

56. Gruber, C.M. and C.M. Gruber, Jr. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 72:176,1941. 

57. Everett, G.M. and R.K. Richards. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 81:402,1944. 

58. Gruber, C.M., R. Scholten, A. DeNote and J.F. Wilson. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 56:341,1936. 

59* Huston, M.J., A.W. Martin and J.M. Dille. 

Arch. int. pharmacodynamic 74:46,1947* 

60. Swanson, E.E. and K.K. Chen. 

Quart. J. Pharm. and Pharmacol. 12:657,1939* 

61. Knoefel, P.K. J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 84:26,1945* 

62. Swanson, E.E., W.E. Fry and O.W. Reagen. 

J. Am. Pharmaeeut. Asso. 34:183,1945* 

63* United States Dispensatory, 24 th. Edition, page 1424. 

64. Batterman, R.C. and G.K. Himmelsbaeh. J.A.M.A. 122:22,1943* 

65 . Batterman, R.C. Arch. Int. Med. 71:345,1943* 

66. Gruber, C.M., E.R. Hart and G.M. Gruber, Jr. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 73:319,1941. 

67 . Way, E.L. J. Am. Pharmaeeut. Asso. 35:44,1946. 

68. Duguid, A.M.E. and R.St.A. Eeathcote. 

Quart. J. Pharm. and Pharmacol. 13:318,1940. 

69. Way, E.L., A.I. Gimble, W.P. McKelway, Helen Ross, 

Chen-Yu Sung and H. Ellsworth. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 96:477,1949* 

70. Pickering, R.W., B.E. Abreu, D.F. Bohr and W.F. Reynolds. 

J. Am. Pharmaeeut. Asso. 38:188,1949* 










- 119 - 


71* Scott, C .C., K .K. Chen, K.G. Kohlsteadt, E.B. Robbins 
and E.W. Israel. J. Pharmacol. Exper. The rap. 
91:147,1947. 

72. Yonkman, E.E., P.H. Noth and H.H. Hecht. 

Ann. Int. Med. 21:7,1944. 

73* Blicke, E.E. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 15:549,1944. 

74. Dutta, N.K. Brit. J. Pharmacol. 5:246,1948. 

75. Burn, J.H., and N.K. Dutta. Brit. J. Pharmacol. 5:554,1948. 

76. New and Nonofficial Remedies, J.B. Lippincott Co., Montreal, 

1950, page 115. 

77. Ing, H.R. Physiol. Rev. 16:527,1956. 

78 . Ing, H.R. and W.M. Wright. Proc. Roy. Soc. London. 114:48, 

1954. 


79. Hunt, R. and R.R. Renshaw. 

J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 25:515,1925. 

80. Craig, L.E. Chem. Rev. 42:285,1948. 

81. Harvey, E.N. J. Exper. Zool. 10:507,1911. 

82. King, H. J. Chem. Soc. 1581, 1955 

85 . Barlow, R.B. and H.R. Ing. Brit. J. Pharmacol. 5:298,1948. 

84. Paton, W.D.M. and E.I. Zaimis. Brit. I. Pharmacol. 4:581,1949. 

85 . Bulbring, E. and E. Depierre. Brit. 1. Pharmacol. 4:22,1949. 

86. Ravetos, J. Quart. J. Exper. Physiol. 26:561,1957. 

87 . Huidobro, E. and P. Atria. J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 

96:458,1949. 

88. Holton, P. and H.R. Ing, Brit. I. Pharmacol. 4:190,1949* 

89 . McIntyre, A.R. Physiol. Rev. 27:464,1947. 

90. Lucas, K. J. Physiol. 56:115,1907. 

91. Rushton, W.A.H. J. Physiol. 77:557,1955- 

92. Kuffler, S.W. J. Neurophysiol. 8:77,1945. 

95. Brown, G-.L. and W. Eeldberg. J. Physiol. 86:10P. ,1956. 

94. Quilliam, I.P. and D.B. Taylor. Nature, London. 160:605,1947. 








- 








120 - 


95. DeJalon, P.G. and G.B. West. Nature, London. 159:341,1947. 

96. Kensler, C.J. J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 95:23,1949. 

97. Mogey, G.A. and P.A. Young. Brit. J. Pharmacol. 4:359,1949. 

93. Fastier, F.N. Brit. J. Pharmacol. 4:315,1949. 

99. Guyton, A.C. and R.C. Reeder. J. Pharmacol. Sxper. Therap. 

97:322,1949* 

100. Richards, R.K. and G.M. Everett. Federation Proc. 3:39,1944 

101. Everett, G.M. Federation Proc. 5:26,1946. 

102. Riedel, B.E. and M.J. Huston. Unpublished. School of 

Pharmacy, University of Alberta. 

103. Richards, R.K. and Everett, G.M. 

Dept, of Pharmacology, Abbott Laboratories 
North Chicago, Ill. 

104. Johnson, L.P.V. f, An Introduction to Applied Biometrics", 

Burgess Publishing Co., Minneapolis, 1950, 
Page 55-57. 

105. Carmichael, E.B. J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 62:284,1938. 

106. Pick, E.P. and G.V. Richards J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 

90:1,1946. 

107. Riedel, B.E. and M.J. Huston Canad. J. Med. Sc. 29:79,1951. 


108. Dale, H.H. and H.S. Gasser J. Pharmacol. Exper. Therap. 

29:53,1926. 


























B29763 



