





























For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


Mf • 
















@X MBBI* 

now 


tfV Of 


















V 














Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/essentialbalanceOOrace 



THE ESSENTIAL BALANCE 


BETWEEN 

INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL EMPHASIS 
IN CHRISTIANITY 


A Dissertation Submitted by- 
Winfield Davis Race 
In Candidacy for the B.D. Degree 


April 10, 1941 













BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Atkins, G.G. The Making of the Christian Mind. 

Garden City, Doubleday. Doran & Co., 1928. 
(referred to as Atkins) 

Barker, R.J. It Began in Galilee. London, Holder and 
Stoughton, 1938 (referred to as Barker) 

Caird, Edward.The Evolution of Religion. Glasgow, 
MacLehose and Sons, 1907, Vol. I. 

(referred to as Caird). 

Latourette, K.S. A History of the Expansion of 

Christianity. N.Y., Harper and Bros., 1937. 
Vol. I. (referred to as Latourette) 

Macmurray, John. Creative Society. N.Y. Association 
Press, 1936 (referred to as Macmurray) 

Rauschenbusch, Walter. Christianizing the Social Order. 
New York, Macmillan, 1912. 

(referred to as Rauschenbusch) 

Taylor, A.E. The Faith of a Moralist, London, 

Macmillan, 1931, Series I. 

(referred to as Taylor). 











THE ESSENTIAL BALANCE BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL 


EMPHASIS IN CHRISTIANITY. 

I. 

It is a commonplace of all realistic thinking 
about the world to-day that this is a time of crisis, 
of transition, of the unsettlement of old orders and 
the establishment of new, of stress and strain, of 
flux and flow on a vast scale. The world is struggling; 
the world is bewildered; the world is desperate. Nor 
has there been seen anywhere in the world a clear 
pattern, authoritatively presented and universally 
acceptable, of the way that must be followed for the 
upbuilding of the nations and the restoration of 
personal peace of mind alike. Time was, in periods 
of vast change and vast confusion in the past, when 
the Christian Church could utter counsels with a power 
| that reached both to the hearts of individuals and to 
the strategies of governments. Then the Church led. 

But in the world-wide crisis of to-day the Churches, 
not one now but many and various, do not lead; they 
follow. It is not perhaps to be expected that men to-day 
will obey as of yore the one Christian voice of an 
authority not to be questioned; they love freedom and 































' 








































self-determination too well. But, on the other hand, 
"if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall 
prepare himself for the "battle? n John Macmurray gives 
expression to a widely experienced perplexity when he 
explains how for two years he attempted, time and time 
again, to write a book comparing Christianity and 
Communism, only to find that his efforts were in vain 
and that others neve similarly failing. For, says he, 
"the difficulty of the task lies in our inability to 
give any satisfactory account of what we mean by 
Christianity".^ He believes this inability to be 
due to the indefiniteness of all the answers rather 
than their multiplicity. And certainly their multi¬ 
plicity itself has been great. Any one definition which 
we may propose to give for Christianity is open to the 
objection that it has been proposed before and that it 
has been declared by someone to fail to do justice to 
some important element in Christianity. But even so, 
almost innumerable definitions have been propounded. 

Why have we this vagueness, this confusing 
variety in Christian definitions? We would answer that 
it is because Christianity in its long development has 


(l) Macmurray, p. 11. 











. 



































. 





































































































- 3 - 

been like a tree, which as it has grown larger, has 
put forth a Y/ider spread of limb. And the common fault 
of the Christian has been to climb out upon some 
particular limb and, noticing some particular fruit 
that grows there, insist that the tree is to be defined 
only in terms of that fruit. But this is a tree with 
the remarkable property of producing many different 
fruits, and there have arisen accordingly many differ¬ 
ent definitions. Now it is perfectly true that the 
Founder of Christianity said, !! By their fruits ye shall 
know them”, ^ but he said it in a context which makes 
it very clear that this is a maxim for ascertaining 
what is Christian, but not what Christianity is. 

"Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a 

(2) 

corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit."' ' By the 
fruits you can knov/ whether the tree that produced it 
is good or bad. And by the good or bad conduct of the 
individual you can know whether good and sound religion 
holds his loyalty, or he is really in the grip of evil 
forces. But though you recognize the Christian by 
his good actions, you cannot so define the ultimate 
principle of his Christianity. As though, because 
most Christians are careful to worship upon the Sabbath 


(l) Matthew vii:20(A.V.) (2) Matthew vii:17(A.V.) 





















< 































. 

- 

. 
































. 


. . 














4 


Day, the principle of Christianity could be held to 
lie in Sabbath observance! Or, because most Christians 
are generous in their gifts to the poor, the meaning 
of Christianity might be sought in benevolence alone! 

Too many Christians, we repeat, have climbed out on 
a branch of the tree of Christianity to dissect a 
particular fruit, and then proudly proclaim the 
principle of the whole tree from that dissection, only 
to feel "left out on a limb” by the insistence of 
another that the particular fruit which he has examined 
tells the truth more accurately. 

The more sensible thing would appear to be the 
recognition that fruits are only fruits and that the 
life of the tree is determined rather by the nature 
of the soil, the strength of the root system, the sound¬ 
ness at the heart of the gnarled old trunk. By this 
we mean to say that Christians need not continue to 
fumble with the multiplicity and indefiniteness of 
their definitions of which Macmurray complains. They 
can achieve certainty as to the essential elements in 
Christianity, certainty vrtiich they must achieve if 
their religion is to give guidance once again to a 
world in need, a world that without its leadership may 
fall into utter ruin. That certainty is to be found 












. 




















































































5 


in a three-fold study, first of the nature of the 
eternal soil out of which Christianity springs, the 
reality which forever conditions its birth and growth; 
second of the roots actually sent down by the first 
Christian seed in the life of Jesus Christ and His 
teaching, implicit and explicit, roots upon whose work 
the whole tree must ever depend; and third, of the 
sound growth of the trunk itself, the trunk that is 
the Christian Church itself pushing its main growth 
ever gradually upward through the storm and sunshine 
of the atmosphere that is human history. It will be 
our thesis that each part of this three-fold study 
will lead to the discovery of the same principle at 
work, the principle which must therefore be held to be 
basic to all that is or ever will be properly called 
Christian. That principle is, briefly, the advancement 
equally of the welfare of the individual and of the 
whole society of mankind in a balance, which is main¬ 
tained through the whole-hearted seeking of God for 
his own sake. 


























. 


















































6 


First, then, consider the nature of the soil 
in which Christianity must attempt its growth, the 
reality with which it is inescapably surrounded as the 
framework of its whole existence. That soil is the 
human consciousness. If Christianity is to make its 
appeal at all, it must be to human beings, and to them 
within the limitations laid upon them by their very 
nature as human. Each human being enjoys a physical 
life ?\rhich has a definite growth, maturity, and final 
decay, controlled by laws of food, rest, shelter, exer¬ 
tion, and so on, which he can only obey. This physical 
life has many of its controlling features in common 
with all simpler form's of life found on this earth. 

But what makes him distinctively human is that upon this 
physical life there is mysteriously superimposed what 
we call consciousness. It too has its limitations 
and its laws, and within these Christianity does its 
work with mankind if it does it at all. This human 
consciousness is, we repeat, the soil in which Christian¬ 
ity must take root and grow. It is the form of life 
we call mental and moral and spiritual. The merely 
physical life which humanity shares with the beasts 
would seem to be a sort of subsoil, underlying and 
supplying nutriment to the soil, but itself unable to 









. 












. 








t. 

. 




























. 


























- 7 - 

provide the conditions for Christian growth. Yet in 
the very subsoil of the simpler, lower forms of physical 
life is found some rudimentary indication of the 
principle that makes possible the growth of Christianity 
in the soil above. And in human consciousness itself 
the indications in the same direction are unmistakable. 

The simplest, lowliest form of life upon this 
planet is known to biology as the "amoeba 11 . This uni¬ 
cellular organism, devoid of all the specialized 
capacities for seeing, hearing, walking, etc., that seem 
to us inseparable from life, would seem to be merely 
alive, and nothing more. But even this simplest of all 
forms of life displays a balance between self-regarding 
and other-regarding impulses. It naturally reaches 
out to seize, and take into itself for food, various 
elements of its environment, thus asserting itself at the 
expense of what is. around it. At the same time, and 
equally naturally, it gives of itself by cell-division 
for the propagation of the species, thus sacrificing 
itself in the interest of another life outside of it¬ 
self. Here is the rudimentary beginning, insisted upon 
by nature, of the balance between self-concern and 
social concern as a principle of life. The higher the 
form of life the more clearly this principle emerges. 


























. 















■ 




. 





























. 






































































8 


The bird or aniteal that is seeking a mate will fight 
to the death with a rival for its own selfish rights 
to that mate, but the parent bird or animal will 
willingly sacrifice its own life if need be in defence 
of its young. The same is true in the lowest reaches 
of human life, where consciousness seems hardly yet to 
have supplanted instinct. Here family life, not 
necessarily monogamous or monoandrous, is entered into 
for the gratification of self-centred desire, but 
maintained for the protection of the weak offspring by 
the willing self-sactifice and suffering of the strong 
parents. 

What happens when we reach the stage of the 
emergence of that higher form of life, hirnian conscious¬ 
ness? Edward Caird has given the world a masterly 
analysis of the nature and limitations of human conscious¬ 
ness in words which we quote: 

"When we consider the general nature of our 
conscious life - our life as rational beings endowed 
with the powers of thinking and willing - we find, that 
it is defined, and, so to speak, circumscribed by three 
ideas, which are closely, and even indissolubly, connected 


with each other 






9 


"These are the ideas of the object or not-self, 
the idea of the subject or self, and the idea of the 
unity which is presupposed in the difference of the self 
and the not-self, and within which they act and react 

on each other, in other words, the idea of God. 

The object is the general name under which we include 
the external world and all the things and beings in it, 
all that we know and all that we act on, the whole 
environment, which conditions the activity of the ego 
and furnishes the means and the sphere in which it 
realizes itself.....There is only one thing which stands 
over against this complex whole of existence, and 
refuses to be regarded simply as a part of the system; 
and that is the ego, the self, the subject for which it 
exists.....All our life, then, moves between these two 
terms which are essentially distinct from, and even 
opposed to, each other. Yet.....they are also essentially 
related, nor could either of them be conceived to exist 
without the other.....We know - the object only as we 
bring it back to the unity of the self; we know the 
subject only as we realize it in the object. 

"But lastly, these two ideas....point back to a 
third which embraces them both, and which in turn con¬ 
stitutes their limit and ultimate condition...Recognizing 

















- 10 - 

that the object only exists in distinction from, and 
related to, the subject, we find it impossible to 
reduce the subject to a mere object among other objects. 
Recognizing that the subject exists only as it returns 
upon itself or realizes itself in the object to a mere 
phase in the life of the subject. But, recognizing 
them as indivisible yet necessarily related, we are 
forced to seek the secret of their being in a higher 
principle, of 'whose unity they in their action and 
reaction are the manifestation, which they presuppose 
as their beginning and to which they point as their 
end....To put it more directly, the idea of an absolute 
unity, which transcends all the oppositions of finitude, 
and especially the last opposition which includes all 
others - the opposition of subject and object - is the 
ultimate presupposition of our consciousness . Hence we 
cannot understand the real character of our rational 
life or appreciate the full compass of its movement, 
unless we recognize as its necessary constituents or 
guiding ideas, not only the ideas of object and subject, 
but also the idea of God.”^ 1 ) 


(l) Caird. p. 64 ff. 











11 


To sum up CaircPs argument, with which we 
heartily agree: By our very constitution as human beings 
we are compelled to give attention both to ourselves and 
to the surrounding world of things and people, all the 
while realizing, however dimly, that there is a higher 
controlling power behind their mutual opposition, yet 
mutual relationship. Nothing is said as to the exact 
degree of attention that must be given, normally, to 
each element in this situation that confronts our 
consciousness, yet the implication is plain that thought 
and action will move in a nicely balanced way between the 
self and the not-self because of the recognition that 
such a balance is ordained by the higher power. Thus 
our thesis has emerged in the very soil of the human 
nature with which Christianity has to deal. 

It may be objected that there is nothing 
specifically Christian in all this as yet. There cannot 
be, of course, the full flowering of Christianity in 
the primeval soil of human nature before ever the seed 
is planted. But there is at the very da?ra of conscious¬ 
ness a clue to the appeal that the world 1 s greatest 
religion must make when it comes in fulness if it would 
plumb the depths of human possibilities. This is found 
in the idea of God as supplying the basis for the 









































. 









. 
























. 




. 
























12 


relationship yet distinction of the ideas of self and 
not-self. Here is no mere moral preachment. One is to 
give attention to others around him not because of 
qualities inherent in them but because they and he him¬ 
self are alike in some connection with God. The bond 
of unity between him and his fellow human beings is 
never to be found in any merely human connection such as 
common racial origin but is always to be traced back to 
God Himself. Here in the very possibilities of human 
consciousness is thus found the groundwork for the 
glorious religion of the brotherhood of all mankind 
beneath the Fatherhood of God that found its fruition 
in Jesus Christ. Furthermore, there is here to be seen 
a sufficient motivation for sustained moral endeavor 
when the stage is reached where the consciousness not 
only apprehends the ideas of self, not-self and God, but 
acts upon them. For if, as Caird insists, the self and 
not-self ”in their action and reaction are the mani¬ 
festation” of a higher principle !, which they presuppose 
as their beginning and to which they point as their end”, 
then the initiative in matters moral must lie with that 
higher principle. As A.E. Taylor finely puts it: ”If 
God is not only the goal, but the author and sustainer 
of moral effort, the whole moral endeavour of man must 








- 13 - 

be a response to what we can only call a movement from 
the other side. It is, indeed, our own because it is 
the response of such moral personality as we already 
possess, but none the less it is a response to a divine 
initiative. In that language of human social relations 
on which we have to fall back whenever we try to speak 
of these matters, we love God because God first loved 
us." ^ And, as we might add, we love ourselves and 
each other because God first loved us all. 

III. 

But Christianity, while expressing itself in 
accordance with the nature of human consciousness in 
general, is nevertheless a specific growth, a movement 
which had a definite beginning at a particular time and 
place. In the life of one Jesus, called Christ, of the 
village of Nazareth in out-of-the-way Galilee at the 
eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea, in the days when 
Caesar Augustus ruled all the world from Rome, a seed 
was sown in the soil of human possibilities. And that 
seed took firm root and became first a slender but 


(l) Taylor, p. 239. 

















































14 


strong sapling able to outlast any storm, and finally 
the massive, towering tree which we know as Christianity 
to-day. The growth of the tree has very largely 
depended, and still depends, upon the kind of seed 
that was sown and the manner in which it developed a 
root-system wide-spread and vigorous enough to send 
nourishment from the soil of reality to the whole of 
the mighty tree. To understand the principle of the 
tree T s growth we must know something of the seed and 
the root-system. 

Jesus was born into the politico-religious order 
called Judaism, wherein the worthy life was held to 
consist in the strict fulfilment of a system of law, 
very detailed in its application to daily life. He 
spoke of himself as introducing the Kingdom of God (or 
Kingdom of Heaven), and devoted his teaching and his 
comment upon his action to the exposition of what that 
Kingdom involved. R.J. Barker gives a fine summary of 
the content of Jesus f teaching in these wards: "First 
of all He d_eclares He has not come to destroy, but to 
fulfil: T not an iota, not a comma, will pass ^rom the 
lav/ until it is all in force. Therefore whoever relaxes 
a single one of these commands, were it even one of the 
least, and teaches men so, he will be ranked least in 

























' 

















. . 





















15 


the Kingdom of heaven; hut whoever obeys them and 
teaches them, he will be ranked great in the Kingdom 
of heaven. ’ ^ The fulfilment of the law did not mean 
the fulfilment of everything the Jew of his time 
accepted as T the law 1 2 . That is obvious not only in 
His treatment of the five principles which He selects 
from the old law, illustrating how the righteousness 
He proclaimed had a wider and deeper significance than 
that of the Scribes and Pharisees.^ He also 
declared that two laws were paramount: T The chief one 
is IT You must love the Lord your God with your whole 
heart, with your whole soul, with your whole mind, and 
with your whole strength.” The second is this: !I You 
must love your neighbor as yourself 1 And when an 
enthusiastic Scribe said with approval, T that is far 
more than all the holocausts and sacrifices 1 , Jesus 

( 3 ) 

said to him: T You are not far from the Kingdom of God T . ' J 
Earlier a lawyer asked him: T Teacher, what am I to do 
to inherit life eternal? 1 Jesus replied with the 
question: f What is written in the law? What do you find 

(1) Matt.V:18-20(Moffatt) 

( 2 ) Matt.V:£0-48 
(o) Mark xii:29-33 

















. 





. 





' 























- 16 - 

there? 1 2 3 The lawyer answered by quoting the two commands 
of love. And Jesus said to him: ! A right answer. Do 

that and you will live .* .Always these commands 

determined His attitude to ancient laws and customs. 

If these organized observances did not meet the material 
and spiritual needs of men He brushed them on one side, 
and He evidently regarded that kind of action as the 
evidence by which a man proved that he had T eternal life 1 
Once again we have the insistence - ! By their fruits 
you shall know them. 1 Love to God and love to our 
neighbor are integral parts of the one saving experience, 
and the reality of this new life of loving relation¬ 
ship with men and with God is seen in the revolution 
it makes in the life of men together, and this is not 
a by-product, it is a fruit. It draws its vitality 

and its character from the tree that bears it. 

"That the * social side 1 of Christianity is the 
character of its new individual life, and no by-product, 
is seen in such passages as T By this every one will 
recognize that you are my disciples , if you have love one 
for another, T and ’I tell you, love your enemies and 
pray for those who persecute you, that you may be sons cf 
your Father in heaven. T It has its characteristic 

(1) Luke x:25-28(Moffatt). (4) Matt.v:44,45(Moffatt) 

(2) Matt.vii:20 , 

( 3 ) John xiii:35(Moffatt) 






















. 




. 

; . 















































- 




















17 - 


expression and becomes real in the meeting of the needs 
of men. Those who do so are the 1 2 blessed 1 and they 
inherit C the kingdom prepared for you from the foundat¬ 
ion of the world. 1 ^ ^ 

In the teachings of Jesus our thesis is therefore 
explicitly insisted upon. If we are to be followers 
of His, we must practise a balanced love of those 
around us and of ourselves within the framework of 
a whole-souled love for God. The entirely necessary 
connection between these elements in our rdigion is 
well portrayed by Barker. At the same time, he does 
not perhaps sufficiently stress the key significance 
of our love for God as alone enabling us to love our 
neighbor as we ought. It is never difficult for a man 
to love himself, though he may frequently fail to 
advance his own good through ignorance of it. But it 
is often tremendously difficult for him to love his 
neighbor, for he in turn may be ungrateful, mean, or 
positively hateful and harmful in his attitude. Further¬ 
more, the love of neighbors is apt to become stereo¬ 
typed within the limits of ordinary unavoidable connection 
as in the family or the business. And Jesus is pro- 


(1) Matt.xxv:34(A.V.) 

(2) Barker pp.92 ff. 






















■ 











• 


• 















' 








' 















. 

. 

. 















. 










18 


pounding a principle which must apply to any and every 

neighbor. On this point, the Parable of the Good 

Samaritan leaves no doubt.It was to break the 

grip of inadequate habits in this region and give 

access to the only enabling power that Jesus delivered 

some startling utterances. "If anyone comes to me", 

he said, "and does not hate his father and mother and 

wife and children, aye and his own life, he cannot be 

a disciple of mine; whoever does not carry his own 

cross and come after me, he cannot be a disciple of 

( 2 ) 

mine." v J And "whoever wants to save his life will 
lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake will 
find it."(^) Such utterances appear superficially the 
negation of both love of neighbor and love of self, a 
direct contradiction of his own insistence upon these 
loves. But what they are is a rejection of these loves 
on their usual low, habit-ridden, self-centred plane 
in order that whole-hearted devotion may first be 
registered in love of God. God cannot be truly loved 
unless he becomes the focus of the whole attention and 
desire. We love God when we let no lesser loyalty keep 
us from offering our all to Him and from doing His 
bidding as we become aware of it. The Cross, as it 
presented itself steadily, insistently to Jesus Himself 


(l)Luke x:30-42 (2)Luke xiv:26,27(Moff) (3)Matt.xvi:25(Moff 

























■ 









- 













. 










, 

. 


















































19 - 


for many months before the actual event, was the call 
to love God to the extent of performing His bidding to 
the uttermost. So he n stedfastly set his face to go to 
Jerusalem”^ and so he began to "shew unto his disciples 
how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many 
things.”^), and so he scornfully rejected Peter 1 2 s 
objections as being human counsels of prudence rather than 
expressions of the mind of God. J And in the hour of 
the final testing of his self-discipline, in the Garden 
of Gethsemane, he prayed: "nevertheless not as I will, 
but as thou wilt.”^) The cross which he said his 
followers must carry was a similar^daily renewed, con¬ 
secration unto God, wherein their lives would be 
virtually lost in complete willingness to do the will 
of God. 

When once this condition has been met, and we do 
truly love God with our whole heart, soul, mind, and 
strength, then we become able to love all our neighbors 
because God loves them, and to do good to them because 
God does so. "Love your enemies, bless them that curse 
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them 
which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye 
may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: 


(1) Luke ix:5l(A.V.) 

(2) Matt.xvi:21(A.V.) 


(4) Matt.xxvi:39(A.V.) 

(3)Ibid:23(' 






■ 






. 
















< 




. 


■ 




















20 


for he maketh his SiB^to rise on the evil and on the 
good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust... 
...Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which 
is in heaven is perfect.”^ In accordance with the 
laws of consciousness, the higher principle is needed 
to explain and energize the relationships between the 
self and others. The love of God is a presupposition 
of the love of neighbor balanced with the love of one¬ 
self. The n initiative of the eternal” supplies the 
moral motivation. Jesus Christ in His life and on His 
cross is the great revealer of the "initiative of the 
eternal”, of the love of God for all men, which love 
supports and encourages, indeed makes possible, both 
our love for Him and our love for each other. Indeed, 
ultimately, it supplies the ground for our own proper 
self-love. We must at times ”hate our own life” in 
order to learn to love God, but when we have so learned 
there will be place for self-love in the light of God*s 
love of us. We are not Insignificant. We are the 
objects of a glorious providence. ”Are not two sparrows 
sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on 
the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of 

your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye 

( 2 ) 

are of more value than many sparroYfs.” v ' 


(l)Matt.v:44,45,48(A.V.) (2)Matt.x:29-51(A.V.) 














' 






. 






, 







21 


IV. 

Jesus' life and teaching was the seed of 
Christianity planted firm in the soil of human possibil¬ 
ities. And the germinative principle of that seed was 
the same principle which as we have shown, governs the 
very life of the human consciousness; namely, a balanced 
love of self and of others energized by a whole-hearted 
love of God. 

The Christian movement was the seed taking root 
and growing and daring to shoot up into the atmosphere 
of human history. Not always was its growth sure and 
steady. Sometimes there were wintry storms that 
threatened to freeze the sap in the trunk and kill 
the whole young tree; sometimes there v/ere parching 
winds that seemed "determined to scorch and wither 
leaf and branch; sometimes worms ate their way perilously 
near to the heart of the tree. Not always was the growth 
as it should be. ^he friendly warmth of the sun from 
time to time encouraged the excessive growth of 
branches on the sunny side of the tree to warp and bend 
the main trunk by their weight. Sometimes the prevailing 
wind would blow relentlessly until it caused the whole 
tree to yield in the direction of its pressure. But 
through every difficulty the tree went on, losing here 
but gaining there, changing the trim beauty of youth 






























' 






' 






















■ 






















22 


for the scarred but triumphant dignity of age, pressing 
ever upward into the blue and pushing its roots ever 
deeper after every storm into the soil of reality. 

From the nature of its growth we can learn more of the 
secret of its growth, more that will help us know what 
pruning and what encouraging care it needs to-day. 

Let us try. 

The social as well as individual nature of sal¬ 
vation is made very plain in the New Testament description 
of the first great ingathering of new followers of Christ: 
11 And t;hey continued stedfastly in the apostle 1 s doctrine 
and fellowship,and in breaking of bread, and in 
prayers....And ail that believed were together, and had 
all things common; And sold their possessions and goods, 
and parted them to all men, as every man had need. And 
they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and 
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat 
with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, 
and having favour with all the people. And the Lord 
added to the Church daily such as should be saved.” 

R.J. Barker quotes two significant comments on this 
passage. The Greek word here translated fellowship is 
Koivuov KL (koinonia) . Says Dr. Anderson Scott: 
f! The emergence of consciousness described as Koinonia 

(1) Acts ii:42-47 (A.V. 












































































. 























- 23 


points to the fact that the primary function of the 
Spirit was the removal of 1 diffinities ! , and the 
bringing into existence of a sacred Fellowship in which 
1 there was neither male nor female, bond nor free T . 

And this Fellowship became in turn the organ of the 
Spirit, and so an extension of the Incarnation, to which 
it was only natural, ere many years had passed, to give 
the description 'Body of Christ 1 ....The word (koinonia) 
in this specific sense would appear to denote a fellow¬ 
ship which was not merely a fellowship of believers 
inter se , nor yet a fellowship of the believers in¬ 
dividually with the Spirit, but a complex experience 
which included both. It was in relationship with one 
another that men continuously realized their relation 
to Christ and to God through Him....It was a new name 
for a new thing, community of spirit issuing in 
community of life."^ The second comment is from 
Dr. Bicknell, as follows: "Everywhere there is a great 
sense of togetherness. The common meal, whatever else 
it signified, at least expressed the idea of brotherhood. 
The sharing of all possessions was no communism imposed 
by law. It was the unpremeditated impulse of those who 
were so filled with the Spirit of fellowship that they 
literally loved one another as .truly as themselves. 


(l) Quoted in Barker, p. 122. 




























































24 


It is a libel on their enthusiasm to suppose that it 
originated from any calculation that the end of the 
present age was at hand, or from any economic scheme. 

The conclusion which Barker draws seems to us 
justified: tT If the Spirit, whose primary function is the 
removal of ’difficulties 1 2 , is related to the Fellowship 
as the Spirit of Jesus was to his body, it is easy to 
see the essential social character of the new life 
emerging at Pentecost. This is no by-product of 
religion, it is the crucial element of Christianity, 
being the condition of that fuller and deeper knowledge 
of God which is described as ’’the Spirit within” and 
at the same time the positive creation of the indwelling 
Spirit. 

’’There is no escape from the certainty that in 
the New Testament the doctrine of the Spirit is the 
doctrine of the Divine Community, that the having ’’all 
things in common” is at once the direct result of 
Christ’s coming to the hearts of men and the necessary 
condition of His full indwelling.”W 

All through the book of the Acts of the Apostles 
are indications that this conclusion is in accordance 
with the facts. 


(1) Quoted in Barker, p. 123. 

(2) Barker, pp. 122, 123. 





















. 
















. 

. 



































. 

' 

. 










t 









- 25 


The epistle of James comes from an early period 

in the life of the Christian community in Jerusalem. 

Its author T s understanding of the nature of the gospel 

is essentially the same. He sternly rebukes the 

tendency to be more considerate to the rich man who 

enters the fellowship than to the poor man, declaring: 

Wlf ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are 

convinced of the law as transgressors.”^ He urges: 

"Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is 

( 2 ) 

exalted: But the rich, in that he is made low.” 

He further says: "If a brother or sister be naked, and 
destitute of daily food. And one of you say unto them. 
Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstand¬ 
ing ye give them not those things which are needful to the 
body; what doth it profit? Even so faith, if it hath 
not works, is dead.”^' J ) 

It should be remembered that the writer of this 
epistle was almost certainly the brother of Jesus, the 
recognized head of the Christian group in Jerusalem. 

And this Jerusalem group contained the eye-witnesses 
of Jesus’ life, the largest number of those still 
living who had shared the earthly days of Christ’s 
ministry, who were witnesses of Eis resurrection, and 
who had shared the days of waiting till His Spirit filled 
(l)James ii:9(A.V.) (A)Jamesi:3,10(A.V.J(3)Jamesll:15-17 

n.v.) 
























































































- 26 


their hearts. We need not concern ourselves with the 
adequacy of the forms in which this first community 
expressed its repudiation of material wealth save only 
as a means of fellowship. For after all, our purpose 
is not to try to prove that they deliberately planned 
and then applied some specific economic scheme. It is 
to see whether or not they felt any necessary inter¬ 
connection between concern for others and concern each 
for himself in the light of their vision of the love of 
God in the face of Jesus Christ. The evidence is very 
complete that they did feel this necessary inter¬ 
connection. and did act upon it. u To dismiss their way 
of life as the aberration of excitement, or as due to 
an early expectation of the end of the world, or as an 
impracticable experiment, is to pass reflections not 
only on the character of that community but on the mental 
and spiritual quality of those men who had been chosen 
to be with Jesus; nay more, it is to belittle the 
Master 1 s mind, whose thoughts and Spirit they shared.”" 1 ) 

The remainder of the New Testament gives us 
pictures of this same consciousness at work throughout 
early Christian history. Paul, on his missionary journeys, 
establishing local groups of Christians in many different 
places, never let them forget that they were part of a 


(l) Barker, p. 128. 



















. 










































27 


great brotherhood. When famine and persecution dis¬ 
tressed the Christians in Jerusalem, he encouraged all 
these groups to make generous gifts. He never regarded 
this giving as a "sacrifice"; indeed, it was an obligat¬ 
ion and a means of spiritual enrichment to the giver. 

As he put it in his second letter to the Corinthians: 

"The service rendered by this fund does more than 
supply the wants of the saints, it overflows with many 
a cry of thanks to God. This service shows what you 
are, it makes men praise God for the way you have come 
under the gospel of Christ which you confess, and for 
the generosity of your contributions to themselves and 
to all; they are drawn to you and pray for you, on 
account of the surpassing grace which God- has shown to 
you. Thanks be to God for his unspeakable giftl"^ 

And again, writing to the Roman community, he says: 
"Macedonia and Achaia have decided to make a contribution 
(koinonia) for the poor among the saints at Jerusalem. 
Such was their decision; and yet this is a debt they 
owe to these people, for if the Gentiles have shared 
(verb form of koinonia) their spiritual blessings, they 
owe them a debt of aid in material blessings".Here 
the spiritual is closely bound up with the material, the 
sharing in material possessions with the sharing in 

(1)2 Cor.lx:12-15(Moff.) (2) Rom.xv:26,27(Moff.) 
















. 




























28 


spiritual possessions. This was a tremendously import¬ 
ant feature in the early growth of Christianity. 

As Professor C.H. Dodd points out in his book, 

U1 he Meaning of Paul for To-day”: ”For all the elaborate 
organization of the Empire with its local and central 
government, there was no real community wherein a 
man could find that wholehearted fellowship with others 
in the common concerns which is necessary to a full 
life....The result in the Roman Empire was the formation 
of religious and semi-religious guilds, of which the 
central government was perpetually jealous, which it 
tried, time and time again, to cripple but never dared 
utterly destroy. The Christian Church was the biggest 
attempt to create a real community within the amorphous 
society of the Roman world. To a large extent it 
succeeded, because it based itself upon a real experience 
of fellowship founded upon a free and personal relation 
of a ! Lord ! whose character was definite and known - 
a personal relation v/hich was one of 1 faith 1 or complete 
confidence.”^ 

And so, while the power of the Roman Empire 
weakened because of its lack of real community, the power 
of Christianity grew because of its true community 
that was its very nature. It was inevitable that the 


( 1) Quoted in Barker, pp. 130,131. 


















































































- 29 


latter should finally grow stronger than the former. 

Had the process been allowed to follow its normal 
course, the result might have been the permeation of 
the whole Roman world with the spirit of Christ both 
individually and socially expressed. As it was, every 
forward surge of Christianity was bitterly opposed and 
terrible persecution was visited time and time again 
upon each section of the growing Christian community. 
This forced the movement to a largely underground 
existence. The result is well expressed by G.G.Atkins: 
"Christianity was, in its first great formative period, 
compelled, too largely, to become the opponent of 
organized social life and government. Its interests, 
even its existence, lay apart from the going concern 
of humanity. It could not bring its essentially great 
force for social reformation to bear upon a situation it 
might have gone far toward saving. Or, if that were 
impossible, as Dill and Boissierbelieve, it might have 
had a training in endeavoring to save society which 
would have released Christian forces only now beginn¬ 
ing to come into action - and moving stiffly from long 
disuse. If the first three Christian centuries could 
have made possible a more sympathetically intimate and 
creative alliance of religion and. civilization, it 




































- 







































































50 


would be impossible to calculate the result. But that 
was impossible; by the time Christianity was in a 
position to take classic civilization in'hand, classic 
civilization was on its deathbed.”^ 

Even so, and in spite of the fact that most 
Christians were not possessed of the rights of citizens, 
early Christianity exercised considerable indirect 
influence for social reform. It had to be indirect, 
and not too obvious to the pagan general public, because 
a direct attack upon entrenched social evils would have 
aroused resentment and retaliatory persecution, and the 
Christians had to endure enough persecution as it was. 

But their loyalty to what they felt to be implicit in 
the gospel made the Christians exert a certain indirect 
but real pressure for the alleviation of great social 
wrongs. K.S. Latourette writes interestingly of the 
effect of early Christianity upon slavery, for instance: 

”Slavery was a characteristic feature of the 
social and economic organization of the ancient world.. 
...Yet manumission was frequent and the freedman 
constituted a prominent feature of society....The 
Christians conducted no organized campaign against 
slavery. No effort was made to abolish it, even among 
themselves. The Christian conscience of the time did not 


(l) Atkins, p. 114. 
















































■ 




































. . 





































- 31 - 

condemn the institution. Christian thinkers held it to 

be due to the Pall, to be a rod of discipline in the 

hands of God, and one of the laws of the state appointed 

by God. However the Christian attitude could not but 

tend to rid slavery of some of its most extreme features. 

Paul declared that * in Christ Jesus 1 2 3 no distinction 

existed between bond and free,(!) and in a brief but 

famous letter charged a Christian master to receive as 

a brother a runaway servant of his who had become a 

Christian.On the other hand, it is also significant 

that Paul did not charge the master to free the slave, 

but sent the latter back to his old service. He was 

(S ) 

no emancipating revolutionist. ' Christianity helped 
to lighten the opprobrium from which labour suffered. 

It emphasized the duty of work. Since labour had been 
associated with slavery, the latter was thereby relieved 
from some of the oblbquy which attached to it. Leading 
exponents of Christianity also declared that both bond 
and free were capable of the same moral and spiritual 
life. Several maintained that men in their original 
nature were free and equal. Ambrose said that the 
slave might be superior to his master in character and 

(1) Gal.iii : $8(2). 

(2) Philemon: 15, 16. 

(3) Philemon: passim. 









32 


be really more free than he. Augustine held that God 
did not create rational man to lord it over his rational 
fellows. How far these ideas as found in the minds of 
these Fathers had their source in Stoicism and how far 
in the Gospels, we do not know. It is clear, however, 
that they were believed to be in accord with the 
Christian message. Moreover, many Christians freed 
their slaves. Manumission was often performed in a 
church and on the great festival days, especially 
Easter, but it was looked upon not as a duty, but as 
an act of piety or as a means of expiating past sins. 
Sometimes the freedom of slaves was purchased by church 
funds. We even hear of Christians who surrendered 
their ovra freedom to ransom others. Slaves were granted 
religious equality and were permitted to hold office 
in the church, even that of a Bishop. The matrimonial 
ties of slaves were protected. Non-Christians were 
urged to liberate their slaves or to allow them to purchase 
i their freedom, because by such servitude under non- 
Christians, the religious welfare of the slave was 
supposed to be imperilled. All of these actions and 
attitudes, while not regarded as deliberate steps 
towards terminating the institution of slavery, tended 
in that direction. 11 ^ 


(l) Latourette, p. 261-5. 







55 


In spite of these fine things, however, the three 
centuries of steady conflict with paganism tended to 
harden the Christian mind in general. Something of the 
gentleness of the gospels, the long-suffering patience 
of the beatitudes was lost in the long struggle with 
opposition and persecution, and Christianity began to 
develop a militant :Epirit, a hardened temper, an 
impatient intolerance. When at last the persecutions 
ceased and the Emperor proclaimed Christianity the state 
religion, the Church grew proud with its sense of 
possessing the Empire and promptly began to wield its 
new power in stern imperial manner. And when, so shortly 
afterward, the Empire collapsed before barbaric invasion, 
Christianity soon found its whole attention taken up 
with administrative and executive duties involved in 
restoring order, and taming the new wild men to her 
ways. It is hard, perhaps, to see how things could 
have been very different, but certainly by the time 
that the Church had organized itself into a vast 
imperial system, it had lost important elements of the 
mind of Christ. Such masses of men untrained in 
Christian ways were now under its care that it felt it 
could not give close attention to the spiritual needs 
of individuals. It must rather herd them into the 






































■ 
















. 









. 






























34 


discipline of organized thought and organized forms of 
worship and service which would provide the groundwork 
for Christian living. 

Accordingly the next period of Christian history 
saw the careful formulation of creeds and the standard¬ 
ization and elaboration of all Church procedures. Once 
the creeds were formulated all who would be Christians 
were asked to learn them, assent to them, and repeat them 
frequently as the expression of their faith. Unable 
under persecution to show a thorough-going practical 
concern for the social aspects of the Kingdom of God, 
Christianity was now so intent upon the practical 
social pattern which it desired to establish that it 
was failing the individual. All the precious meanings 
and promises of the Christian faith were held out to 
the individual v<rho would recite the doctrines formulated 
for him and admit that they stated his faith. And he 
who felt that he saw something in the personality of 
Jesus or in the nature of his demands of him that was to 
be differently conceived was turned away as no Christian 
at all. The doctrines of the Church no doubt carried 
the central truths of Christianity and kept alive the 
spirit of Christianity in the face of the new paganism 
that political chaos brought. But the use made of them 
throughout the Dark Ages and Middle Ages was too rigid. 




























. 











- 




























. 


















. 































. 










35 


There is an element of spontaneity and limitless mutual 
trust in all true fellowshii) or community. That is 
implied in the very simplicity of the command: u Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself". But spontaneity 
was discouraged and limits of trust were sharply fixed 
by the Church's standardization of the pattern of 
Christian belief and action. The individual came 
gradually to be considered almost wholly in terms of the 

ike iY\sti tuition ? 

institution;^growing steadily in power, wealth, and 
pride of position, became exalted as the fellowship 
ordained of Christ Himself, For a thousand years the 
Church dominated civilization, and it is often a question 
how much it truly loved God and how much it loved only 
its own power and authority. 

The reaction toward the individual and his needs 
was not long in setting in, but it took centuries to 
gain strength sufficient to influence the whole move¬ 
ment. And by that time it could do so only through a 
violent upheaval. The beginnings of the reaction are 
seen in the withdrawal of some into a life of holy 
seclusion, in the self-separation from worldly things 
of monks and nuns. In this connection, Atkins remarks: 
"It is almost as if the love of freedom, having no social 
way to assert itself, went off into a kind of excessive 



« 















































36 


individualism, which had no use for society at all. 11 ^ 
Nothing much of a constructive and continuing character 
came of all this hermit-Christianity in the Eastern 
or Greek Church area. The motive was a good one - 
withdrawal from the stained worldliness, luxury, moral 
lawlessness of the East. But the method used succeeded 
in doing nothing more than losing in the desert sands 
much that was essentially precious, for it almost 
totally overlooked the necessity of 11 community” and 
made each man or woman who withdrew a hermit. Thus 
in escaping the weakness of the extreme to which popular 
Christianity had gone, it fell into the weakness of the 
opposite extreme. The similar movement in the West, 
however, wisely avoided this extreme by accomplishing 
early some social organization of itself into monasteries 
wherein socially creative things were done. "The monks 
of the early Middle Ages were pioneers, farmers and 
craftsmen...The monasteries were centres of peace through 
centuries of fighting; they preserved for us what 
writings of the classic world we now possess....They 
were hospitals, charitable foundations, homes for the 
aged, and a safe shelter for a traveller in a lawless 
time....They were, first and last, the most successful 
experiments in communism so far recorded, because they 


(l) Atkins, p. 160 








' 









’ 






. 

■ 







































37 - 


supplied a motivation strong enough to hold men to the 
communal life."^^ We know, of course, v/hat that 
motivation was - a balanced concern for individual and 
social good energized by whole-hearted love for God. 

A further evidence of reaction against the 
excessive formalism and institutionalism of the med¬ 
iaeval Church is found in the growth of mysticism. 
Mysticism is the assertion of the value of inner exper¬ 
ience in religion. Any assurance of God and the reality 
of religion through an inner joy and peace is mystical. 

By this test the elements of mysticism are to be seen 
in Christianity from the start. But v/hen the almost 
universal tendency was to ignore them in excessive 
attention to externals, things mystical came to receive 
the greater stress in some lives as though to provide 
the Christianity with a needful self-corrective. 

The struggles and changing conditions economically 
of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries in western 
Europe brought it about that poor people, who suffered 
most under the circumstances, "without very much 

organization or leadership.formed themselves into 

sisterhoods and brotherhoods to practise the primitive 
Christian virtues. They adopted a half communal type 

(l) Atkins p. 182,3. ~ ----- 













. 










* 




































58 


of life. It was easy for them to share what they 
had among themselves because they had so little. They 
provided hospitals for the sick and the aged; took 
care of the sick or the insane; they carried the dead 
to their graves, and healed as best they could the 

wounds and sicknesses of a sorely wounded time. 

..."The brethren of the "Free Spirit" reacted strongly 
against the whole sacramental system and anticipated 
the Anabaptists of the Sixteenth Century....They 
believed themselves to be guided by an inward voice, 
wjiich was surer than the truths preached in the 
Church. «(D 

This development took place mostly in Flanders. 
Meantime German mysticism was being given its initial 
impetus by Meister Eckhart (1260-1327). He was high 
in the Dominican order, but St. Dominic would have found 
his teaching strange reading. He found a way to peace, 
in which God is all in all and the world nothing at 
all. Time and space disappeared in his teaching; and 
the soul and God were found to be but two shingings of 
the same light. Such are the rarefied regions of thought 
into which pure individual contemplation of God carries 
the one who ignores the social scene. It is the lack of 
balance being displayed again. But it had its provocation 


(l) Atkins, p. 227. 















. 












. 




















. 
















. 







, 


















39 


in the absorption of the Church in the social scene alone. 

Such teachings as these, with other influences, 
created the Friends of God. "The Friends of God were 
and desired to remain faithful members of the Catholic 
Church; but they put before tradition the direct 
experiences of the Spirit. They believed there was 
a f divine spark T in every soul which, kindled into flame, 
would make T divine and supernatural 1 men and an T upper 
school of perfect resignation in which selfhood was 
slain and the Holy Spirit became teacher and guide. 1,1 (-0 

The whole mediaeval development of mysticism can 
rightly be called, with Atkins, "not a movement with 
clear marked retaining walls, but a ferment and a 
leaven”He refers to the difficulty which a 
qualified scholar has "to place and identify a single 
figure in the dissolving moving picture of a religious 
phase which colours the spiritual history of Europe for 


three hundred years. 


!! ( 3 ) 


Some followers of the mystic 


way practised a very sensible brotherhood life. But 
others "surrendered themselves to an excess of self- 
examination, grew spiritually morbid, and sought the 
peace of their souls through the crucifixion of their 
bodies. Henry Suso is a classic example." 

(1) Atkins, p. 228, quoting in part Evelyn Underhill, 

The Mystics of the Church, pp.137-138. 

(2) Atkins, p. 228. 

L3J Atkins, p. 229 
(4) Atkins \ p. 251. 











. 

































































40 


In spite of the rebuke administered by monastic- 
ism and mysticism, the Church in general continued on 
its formalistic way, seeking to regularize individual 
conduct within the conduct patterns of the institution. 

The tragedy was that even that amount of genuine social 
concern with which she began became overshadowed by 
her concern for her own machinery until she could no 
longer prevent the major crisis known as the Reformation. 

Of course more than one factor combined over a 
long period of years to produce, ultimately, the Reformat¬ 
ion. And it would be wrong to say that negligence on 
the part of the Church was responsible for it all. 
Nevertheless, the issue might have been very different 
had the Church been more truly sensitive to social 
needs. For instance, the impact of nationalism upon 
the dissolving unity of the mediaeval order was certainly 
a contributing factor in producing the Reformation. 

Atkins comments significantly: tf Between the end of the 
Empire and the rise of modern nationalism there was 
nothing for a man to belong to save the Church or his 
feudal overlord. All the forces which combined to make 
a nation naturally created the national mind, and that 
changed everything. 

”If the Church had possessed a more far-sighted 









































- 











. 



































• • • « • 











41 


understanding of what the rise of nationalism really 
meant, and been more sensitively hospitable to the 
demands of the national spirit, the religious history of 
the last four hundred years might need to be entirely 
rewritten. Or if, on the other hand, Christianity had 
really possessed force enough to create among competitive 
nations a real sense of unity in destiny, operation, and 
faith, the history of the last four hundred years might 
be rewritten with the omission of many bloody chapters. 

“Western civilization has been caught and ground 
for four hundred years between the upper and nether 
millstones of these two failures. ..(i) 

From the point of view of our thesis we might 
express it thus: 

The Church had failed for centuries to present the 
gospel in its properly balanced form. Its policy had 
been to subordinate the individual and his needs to 
the Great Institution, the Church. And for the very 
reason that the Church had, for a long time, managed to 
be in itself the almost all-inclusive social framework. 

It had come to equate even the social side of the gospel 
with the advancement of the interests of the Church. And 
so the Church 1 s gaze had become centred upon itself. It 
was thus unable to see the growing sense of individual 


(1) Atkins, pp. 247-8 




































. 
























42 


worth and destiny that pulsed through the new nation¬ 
alism that was arising. It was not, therefore, 
"sensitively hospitable to the demands of the national 
spirit 11 , as it should have been. And at the same time 
it could not realize that there was demanded in the 
gospel a larger social good than could be forever 
comprehended within the framework of any organization. 

It continued to seek to conform the new social outlook 
of nationalism to its own social pattern, and in failing 
to look beyond itself it failed "to create among 
competitive nations a real sense of unity in destiny, 
operation and faith." The failure on both individual and 
social sides was the failure to interpret and apply 
Christianity in accordance with its own inherent genius. 

The second great contributing factor to the 
Reformation, called Humanism, did much to show up this 
failure for what it really was. Symonds in "The Revival 
of Learning”, defines humanism as a "new and vital 
perception of the dignity of man as a rational being 
apart from theological determinations, and...the further 
perception that classic literature alone displayed human 
nature in the plenitude of intellectual and moral 
freedom."For a thousand years this world had been 
in the thought of the devout only the threshold of heaven. 


(1) Quoted in Atkins, p. 251." 
















































- 

. 






. 





















, 














43 - 


hell, or purgatory. Natural reactions against the 
grossness of paganism had carried the Christian mind 
away from the world of time and the senses, leaving 
countless lovely and human things behind in the change. 
The human body, for instance, had come to be regarded 
as either a garment to be impatiently worn till one 
might put it off, or else, through its appetites, an 
enemy of the soul. Humanism was the return of the 
human spirit upon the interests, freedoms, beauties, 
meanings of the world. Since classic art and literat¬ 
ure were the materials upon which it first seized, 
seeming to possess a magic power to release them, it 
began in those lands in which classic art and literature 
had flourished, then spread gradually to other countries. 

Of course, a sheer paganism came back with the 
pagan poets, and the pagan marbles and bronzes found 
in Roman gardens were set up in the light again. There 
was nothing in the movement so far to release new 
religious forces. But the new knowledge of the Greek 
language led more serious scholars to the critical 
study of the New Testament, and this had profound effects 
These scholars n began to check off the glosses of the 
theologian and the claims of the churchman by the 
actual words and the plain actual meanings of the Gospels 












■ 























































. 

' 





























44 


and Epistles,” ^ and what they found in these docu¬ 
ments did not seem to fit in with what they actually 
saw around them in the manners and morals of the Church, 

A new standard was thus discovered by which to Judge 
the achievements and failures of organized Christianity, 
a standard that possessed the authority that ever 
rests with original meanings over later modifications 
and accomodations. 

Once this new authority was set up and its force 
accepted, something was started which again might have 
done a steady, quiet work for human good had the Church 
understood. But it could not understand a challenge 
to its age-old authority; it resisted; and a struggle 
began which was fanned by nationalism and other factors 
into the major conflict of the Reformation and the 
Counter-Reformation. 1 11 She movements of the Reformation and 
all that went with it filled Europe with fighting and 
divisions for almost exactly one hundred and tv^enty-five 
years and, when the dust of the last battle was laid 
and trampled lands had begun to grow green again, every¬ 
thing had changed and modern Europe had been born in so 
tremendous a travail.”^) 

What was the effect of it all upon the growth of 
the Christian tree? Christianity since the Reformation 


(1) Atkins,p. 253. 

(g) Atkins, p. 265. 













45 


has been richer in content, more many-sided in express¬ 
ion than before. The unity of the old Church was being 
maintained at the cost of variety and vitality. Variety 
there has been since in great measure, and Christianity 
is probably richer for High Mass in St. Peter’s and 
Quaker meetings and the many varieties of Christian 
expression that lie between. Vitality, to?, was re¬ 
stored to Christianity through the searching ordeal of 
the long conflict, the graver pre-Reformation abuses 
have never re-appeared. A sense of the saving nearness 
of God has come to multitudes of the devout under 
Reformed leadership. The Catholic Church itself, which 
has surrendered no position held by it to be essential, 
has profited by the freedom and challenge of Protestant¬ 
ism. The annals of conscientious devotion to the gleam 
the soul follows have been enriched by a lengthening 
record of sacrificial constancy. The ethical standards 
of Christianity generally have been raised and purified. 
All this, we feel, was accomplished because with all its 
complexity of causes, methods and results, the Reforma¬ 
tion did really mean something of a return to the basic 
principles apparent in Christianity’s robt system and 
early growth, namely, concern for the full welfare of 
both oneself and his neighbor, the individual and the 























. 





- 






. 

' 

■ •• 

- 







* 

. 






























46 


social order through the balancing, energizing power of 
a supreme concern for God and the doing of His will. 


V. 

The great quest of the Protestant mind ever 
since the beginnings of the Reformation has been for 
freedom of faith and worship and action. Very great 
devotion has often been directed to the securing of it, 
devotion equal to the finest recorded to the credit of 
the followers of Christ of ancient days when all the 
world was against them. Lutheranism and Anglicanism 
sought freedom from the papal system. Calvinism and 
the freer reform movement in general sought a whole new 
church organization based upon Biblical antecedents, to 
be freely established by free individuals drawn by 
conscience from out the ranks of men. A burning zeal 
was roused by the search for these freedoms, a zeal 
with force enough to satisfy the soul through its com¬ 
plete absorption in the object sought. And for long 
years the way was disputed, and Protestantism, sumrnon- 
all its energies to the task of achieving freedom, 
failed to realize what it was at the same time losing. 

But it is now generally admitted that Protestant¬ 
ism as a whole has stripped religion too bare. It 

has so emphasized the right of self-determination in 




















. 






. 


- 






' 





























































' 
















47 


in matters of religion as to make almost inevitable the 
splitting up of the Church into many separate fragments 
and to make those fragments careful only for their own, 
but indifferent to each other ! s,welfare. Thus was 
religion stripped almost bare of the sense of fellow¬ 
ship transcending differences which always thrilled the 
early Christians. Furthermore, the effort to reach 
the individual with the secret of his freedom has been 
mostly directed to convincing his intellect, and has 
made all Protestantism too excessively doctrinal, too 
aridly intellectual. A man 1 s intellect would appear to 
be the citadel of his freedom, the general headquarters 
in which is planned the strategy of his warfare and 
from which must issue all commands for the defence of 
his rights. But his behavior is not actually so 
completely determined by his intellect as might at first 
appear. Present-day psychologists are demonstrating 
conclusively that emotions, desires, states of bodily 
health, and many pressures of environment both physical 
and human, may play large parts in determining actual 
conduct, sometimes to the total negation of the commands 
of the intellect itself. Now it is probably quite 
unfair to say that the Protestant churches have failed 
to realize something of this. Those of them which made 



. 

■ 














48 


few changes at the Reformation, except to change their 
titular headship from the Pope to a king, have continued 
the mediaeval Church 1 s wise provision of a many-sided 
appeal to the people. They have made much use of 
richly ancient symbolism of worship, of beauties of 
architecture and furnishings, and have usually possessed 
enormous influence in matters political and economic 
that has enabled them to provide variegated social 
controls for their people. And the freer churches have 
repeatedly made their great emotional appeals and 
accomplished their "revivals” wherein coldly intellectual 
factors had little place. Nevertheless, the necessity, 
at the time when the great rift first occurred, of 
challenging the authority of the Church with some still 
greater authority, brought it about that the Bible was 
exalted as the source of all true religion. Against the 
infallible Church was set up the infallible Bible, from 
which it was believed that there could be deduced a 
series of doctrines indispensable to salvation. 
Difficulties arose when there was disagreement as to the 
doctrines which could legitimately be found in the Bible, 
and split after split occurred between Protestant 
groups on this very point, but the method of doctrinal 
emphasis continued, and still continues. 

The greater the division of Protestantism, the 



















































. 

























. 


















. 





















49 


more individualist became its whole appeal, and the 
less it was able to create a deep and wide and abiding 
sense of fellowship, of social bond. But the genius 
of Christianity being what it is, it was only natural 
that, as at every previous stage in Christian history, 
a corrective reaction should set in. Of recent years, 
we have witnessed the workings of two great tendencies 
in Protestantism, both in the direction of a greater 
recognition of the hitherto overlooked social factor 
essential to healthy Christianity. One of these 
tendencies is toward a greater appreciation of the values 
of Christian fellowship. The Protestant mind seems to 
have rediscovered the value of the group, the supple¬ 
menting, correcting, purifying, encouraging influence 
of the ideas and attitudes of the Christian group upon 
the ideas and attitudes of the Christian individual. All 
sorts of ■unofficial experiments in Christian fellowship 
have been undertaken spontaneously, very often across 
denominational lines. Very many discussion groups have 
arisen, for instance, for which the personnel has been 
deliberately chosen to represent various points of view 
meeting in an atmosphere of candor and goodwill for the 
discussion of all matters important to the Christian. 

The Oxford Group Movement is another example of the same 

































. 

■ 














. 






. 













... 




. 



































' 

































50 


spontaneous tendency. Its raison d T etre has been the 
need for some joyous and natural Christian fellowship 
that would overleap the barriers of denominational 
tradition and prejudice. Official experiments in wider 
Christian fellowship there have been too. Protestant 
groups long separate have learned the new habit of 
sending official delegations to conferences between 
denominations. These have grown from small local 
beginnings to world-wide assemblages of all non-Roman 
Churches, such as the Oxford Conference of 1937 dealing 
with Life and Work, and the Edinburgh Conference of 
1937 dealing with Faith and Order. Out of these has 
grown most recently the plan of a World Council of 
Churches, which at the time of this writing is rapidly 
becoming a reality in spite of a World War. 

The other tendency which has developed in Protest¬ 
antism recently has been towards a concern for the 
application of Christian principles to the reforming of 
the whole social order. This concern has shown itself 
more upon this continent than elsev/here in Christendom, 
and more during the t?;entieth century than ever before. 
Its chief apostle has been Walter Rauschenbusch of 
Rochester Theological Seminary, who gave it a great 
impetus by his books on the subject and his series of 



























{ 

. 










51 


lectures in various seminaries during the first two 
decades of this century. He explains the emphasis he 
champions in these words in one of his books: 

"The chief purpose of the Christian Church in the 
past has been the salvation of individuals. But the 
most pressing task of the present is not individualistic. 
Our business is to make over an antiquated and immoral 
economic system; to get rid of laws, customs, maxims, 
and philosophies inherited from an evil and despotic 
past; to create just and brotherly relations between 
great groups and classes of society; and thus to lay 
a social foundation on which modern men individually 
can live and work in a fashion that will not outrage all 
the better elements in them." 

"It is unjust to Christianity to call our 
civilization Christian; it is unjust to our civilization 
to call it unchristian. It is semi-Christian. Its 
regeneration Is in process, but it-has run in streaks 
and strata, with baffling inconsistencies and hypocrisies, 
even as with you and me. 

"To say that we want to moralize the social order 
would be both vague and powerless to most men. To say 
that we want to christianize it is both concrete and 


(l) Rauschenbusch, pp. 41,42. 





































■ 
























































































52 


compelling. Christ’s spirit is the force that drives 
us. His mind is the square and plumb line that must 
guide us in our building. 

!f An unchristian social order can be known by 
the fact that it makes good men do bad things. It 
tempts, defeats, drains, and degrades, and leaves men 
stunted, cowed, and shamed in their manhood. A 
Christian social order makes bad men do good things. It 
sets high aims, steadies the vagrant impulses of the 
weak, trains the powers of the young, and is felt by 
all as an uplifting force which leaves them with the 
consciousness of a broader and nobler humanity as - 
their years go on. :t (l) 

A great zeal for social reform in the name of 
Christ has certainly been aroused by Hauschenbusch and 
the others who have followed him. In fact, for a time 
it threatened to turn the North American Christian mind 
totally away from the gospel of inward individual 
renewal. But a voice from Europe, the voice of Karl 
Barth, finally came to be heard by many of this side of 
the water. It was a stern voice, calling men back to 
the realization of the sinfulness that pervaded all 
their unaided human efforts and of their utter dependence 
upon God. The heeding of that voice has done much to 
(l) Rauschenbusch, pp. 125-127. 








53 


restore a balance between individual and social 
emphasis, which thinkers like Niebuhr and Tillick 
and Vlastos are doing much to continue. 

It would appear, in conclusion, that this balance 
must continue to be observed if Christianity is to 
save itself costly mistakes and difficult recovery 
from extremes. The nature of the human consciousness, 
the plain meaning of the life and teachings of Jesus 
Christ, the detailed and total experience of Christian 
history, all point to this as the fundamental principle 
of Christianity: an equal love of self and others, a 
balance of concern for the individual 1 s welfare with 
concern for the social order, in the light of God T s 
great love for all his creatures made apparent to the 
one who loves Him 'with all his heart. Let this principle 
be lived out in all its implications, and the remaking 
of our torn and bleeding humanity is assured. 























































