
University of Alberta Library 


0 1620 3369972 7 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


AN EVALUATION OF AN ORIGINALLY ORGANIZED SYSTEM 


OF TEACHING PRIMARY READING UNDER ORDINARY CLASSROOM 


COPT)IT IONS 


Arthur Georg© Rayly, B* Ed 


































Gfx aiBBW 
amwjiwsis 

WillM 




















THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


AN EVALUATION OF AN ORIGINALLY ORGANIZED SYSTEM OF TEACHING 
PRIMARY READING UNDER ORDINARY CLASSROOM CONDITIONS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE GRADUATE FACULTY 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE 
DEGREE OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

ARCHER GEORGE BAYLY 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
APRIL, 1948 





37 

ms 


A 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/evaluationoforigOObayl 


PREFACE 


This thesis is based upon an experiment in primary reading 
undertaken at the request of the Department of Education of the 
Province of Alberta for the purpose of evaluating a method of 
teaching reading originated by a Mr. F. Turnley. The experiment 
was carried out in a number of First-Grade classes in the 
Edmonton schools during the 1945 - 1946 school year with the 
kind cooperation of the Edmonton Public School Board. 

The organization and development of the experiment was 
under the direction of the author acting in consultation with 
Mr. Morrison L. Watts, Director of Curricula, on behalf of the 
Department of Education; and Mr. R.S. Sheppard, Superintendent 
of Schools, on behalf of the Edmonton Public School Board. 

The author wishes to express appreciation to Mr. Watts and 
other members of the Department for providing the necessary tests, 
assistance and support throughout the course of the experiment 
reported here; to Mr. Sheppard for his advice and help in 
providing the facilities for conducting the experiment under 
satisfactory test conditions; to Dr. H.E. Smith of the University 
of Alberta for suggestions and help in arranging for the marking 
and tabulating of some of the tests by his graduate students; to 
Dr. W.D. McDougall of the University of Alberta for suggestions 
in connection with many phases of the work; to Miss B.M. Newton 
of the University of Alberta for her analysis of certain features 
of the reading system being evaluated, together with many helpful 
suggestions concerning the tests and testing procedures which 
were used; to Mr. A.V. Evenson, Associate Director of Curricula, 
for his assistance in developing the list of objectives upon 
which the main outcomes of the experiment were based. 

The success of the experiment was dependent to a very 
considerable extent upon the cooperation of the teachers in 
charge of the test classes. For their conscientious observation 
of the numerous regulations, and their willingness to undertake 
the extra responsibilities that the experiment entailed, the 
author is indebted to Miss L. MacLaren Anderson, in charge of 
the experimental class; to Mr. T. Blacklock principal of the 
school in which the main experiment was conducted for rendering 
valuable assistance and attending to the various details related 
to the proper supervision of the test class; to the Misses G. 
Christie, E. Yfilliams, E. Bruce, V. Swanson, J. Elliott and H. 
Yfalker who were in charge of the control classes participating 
in the experiment. 


ii 



J 

















f 





* 



, , , ; 


. . /. o'".: 






,2 








, 



: 













’ 





■ 

; 

■ 





. 



„ * 

» * ( 


















. 

* 



- 



■ 










. 

■i 










. 


> 

, 


. \ 




, , , 

■ 

: 













The experiment involved a considerable amount of careful 
testing. For assistance in administering and marking the 
various tests special thanks is due Mr. A. Pike, third-year 
Faculty of Education student in the University of Alberta and 
the following students who kindly volunteered their services: 
Miss P.L. Gutteridge, Miss E.L. Ancion, Mr. W.L. Thompson, 

Mr. G.G. Farewell, Mr. J.G. Jensen, Mr. M.T. Sillito, Mr. H.F. 
Ulmer, Mr. M.G. Yaworsky. 

Acknowledgment is also due Dr. William S. Gray, University 
of Chicago, for the kindly interest he has taken in the 
experiment and for permission to use mimeographed copies of his 
Oral paragraph Heading Test; and to Mr. H. Gerry and Mr. R. 
Johnston who rendered assistance in checking the statistical 
and editorial work of the report. 


Edmonton, Alberta, 

March, 1948. A. George Bayly. 


iii 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


PREFACE . . . .. ii 

LIST OF TABLES . vi 

LIST OF FIGURES. vii 

Chapter 

I. A STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM. 1 

Some Introductory Considerations 
Definition of the Problem 
Purpose of the Experiment 

II* THE BASIS FOR COMPARISON *.. 8 


Selection of Experimental and Control 
Classes 

Selection of Teachers 

General Conditions Governing the 

Experiment 

Basis for Measuring the Results 


III* PRIMARY READING IN THE MODERN SCHOOL ... 15 

Newer Tendencies in Reading Instruction 
Methodology of the Control Class Teachers 

IV. THE TURN LEY READING SYSTEM. 24 


General Description 

Additional Notes on Special Features of 
the Turnley System 

V. A COMPARISON OF THE TURNLEY SYSTEM AND 


PRESENT DAY METHODS.. 32 

VI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE EXPERIMENT. 37 


Procedure in the Experimental Class 
Procedure in the Control Classes 
Absences 

Selection of Tests 
Administration of Tests 































. 













Chapter Page 

VII. THE TEST RESULTS .............. 45 

Section I Comparison of the Test Results of 

the Experimental and Control Groups 
Section II Comparison of the Test Results of 
the Matched pairs 

VIII. INTERPRETATION OF THE TEST RESULTS ..... 51 

IZ. A CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF THE TURNLEY SYSTEM• . 56 

APPENDICES 

I. Statistical Data ............ 66 

II. Samples of the Tests Used ....... 74 

BIBLIOGRAPHY ........... . 107 


Y 










, . 

























LIST OF TABLES 


Table 


Page 

1 

Comparison of Experimental and Control 
Groups on the Basis of Chronological 
Ages and Mental Ability 

10 

2 

Comparison of Matched pairs on the 
Basis of Chronological Ages, Mental 
Ability and Social Status . 

10 

3 

List of Reading Tests Used in the 
Experiment 

41 

4 

Comparison of the Results on the Word 
Recognition Tests • 

43 

5 

Comparison of the Results on the Word 
Attack Test . 

44 

6 

Comparison of the Results on the 
Comprehension Tests • 

44 

7 

Comparison of the Results on the Oral 
Reading Tests *.. 

45 

8 

Summary of the Directed and 
Supplementary Reading Done in the 
Experimental and Control Glasses* * • 

46 


vi 














' 

w ... *1 









) 








UST OF CHARTS 


Chart 

1 Chart Showing Average Scores 
Made by Experimental pupils 
Paired with Control Pupils on 
the Three Gates 1 Tests ... 


2 Chart Showing Average Scores 
Made by Experimental pupils 
Paired with Control Pupils on 
the Three Metropolitan Tests . 


Page 


48 


49 


vii 




CHAPTER I 


A STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 

Some Introductory Considerations 
In modern society the importance of the ability to read is 
widely recognized. The importance of reading is attested to by 
the large amount of time devoted to it in school, the wealth of 
teaching devices and techniques originated in relation to it, 
and the relatively large number of investigations that have been 
made in reading during the last forty years. Both school 
experience and scientific research offer evidence that mastery 
of the process is essential to the learning of nearly every other 
school subject. 1 It is properly regarded as a fundamental educa¬ 
tional tool. 

Unfortunately, many people have less appreciation of the 
complexity of the process. Too often they take the ability to 
read for granted without realizing that the skill represents one 
of the most involved achievements of which human beings are 
capable. Research has indicated that the facility evidenced by 
the proficient reader actually is based on physical and mental 
activities more subtle and sensitive and requiring finer coordina¬ 
tions than can be found in the most delicate man-made mechanism.^ 
That the process is complex and difficult to master appears to be 

^oris M. Lee, The Importance of Reading for Achieving 
in Grades Four, Five, and Six (Bureau of Publications, Teachers' 
College, Columbia University, 1933). In this study it is shown 
that pupils entering the fourth grade with reading deficiencies 
are almost always handicapped in their work in other subjects. 

^Arthur I. Gates, The Improvement of Reading (Macmillan 
Company: New York, 1937) Pp. 4,5. 











2 


substantiated by the high incidence of failure in the subject, 
particularly in the lower grades. 1 Despite the progress that 
has been made, and is being made, there are still far too many 
pupils at every grade level who have not acquired sufficient 
reading skill to meet their needs. 

It follows, then, that educators must be constantly alert 
to the possibilities in every system or special procedures which 
may help to alleviate the distress many pupils experience in 
learning to read. To begin with, the best practices in use to¬ 
day must be more generally adopted if their benefits are to be 
extended to all. At the same time, there must be a reasonable 
readiness to modify present practices and viewpoints where the 
results of scientific study have shown the way to more effective 
instruction. 

It is with this latter viewpoint in mind that the present 
investigation has been undertaken. The subject of this thesis 
is a system of reading developed by a Mr. Turnley. The under¬ 
lying philosophy and recommended procedures of his system are in 
most respects radically opposed to currently accepted principles 
and ordinary classroom experience. Nevertheless, it is our 
purpose to examine carefully this system for the possible contri¬ 
bution it might make to our greater understanding of the subject. 
While there is wide divergence between Mr. Turnley*s claims and 
those ordinarily made by exponents of other reading methods it is 

^Walter p. Percival, A Study of the Causes and Subjects 
of School Failure (unpublished doctor*s dissertation. Teachers 1 
College, Columbia University, 1926). In this study it was found 
that 'failures in reading* was given as the reason for non-promo¬ 
tion in 99.15 per cent of the cases in Grade One. 














. 

. 




e • 








A- . . 






' . 




< 






■ 


. 


* 












- 

* 








t : • 

' 


* - ■ 

. 





















, 


< • - . 


, - • 


' 
















- 3 - 

still our function to reserve final judgement until his system 
has been impartially examined. 

Chief among the claims made by the originator of the system 
of reading under review is the assertion that "Children from five 
years of age can easily attain Grade 4 to 6 reading ability with¬ 
in one year".* 1 * It is asserted that mastery of the reading skill 
by this method "requires but 15-30 minutes a day for the first 
six months, after that not more than an hour a day". 2 It is 
further claimed that "pre school children can be taught readily 
at home by this system" and "for remedial purposes with backward 
readers the system is equally effective". S 

Such claims obviously mark a revolutionary departure from 
commonly accepted views upon the subject. Under ordinary circum¬ 
stances it would be questionable Y/hether they would be seriously 
entertained. The claims lack scientifically acceptable substan¬ 
tiation other than that implied by the performance of the 
originator 8 s daughter. Furthermore, the procedures advocated for 
effecting the rapid progress claimed are, in many instances, 
procedures which have been discredited by too much reliable 
evidence to necessitate their re-evaluation here. 

Yet there are a number of considerations which obligate us 
to give the system a careful and impartial examination. The wide 
publicity which the system has received has precipitated consider¬ 
able lay and professional interest without providing satisfactory 


Edmonton Journal , August 18, 1945. 
^ Edmonton Journal , October 18, 1945. 


3Advertisement, Edmonton Journal , October 18, 1945 

















. 







. . 














* 








. 






■ 












• v , .... i " . cJ? 

* 










- 










* 


.• ;.r 
















' 









■ 






- 












, 








. 












4 


evidence as to the accuracy of the claims made on its behalf. 

In fairness to those whose interest has been aroused, to those 
engaged in teaching who are anxious to know if the system has 
some contribution which will help them in their work, and 
particularly to those parents whose children are having trouble 
in reading, it is imperative that the claims made for the system 
be reliably evaluated. The best means of doing this is through 
an independent investigation on an objective basis. 

In addition to these considerations there are several unique 
features of the system which warrant attention. In keeping with 
our original position, the subject of reading is too important to 
permit us to dismiss lightly any special technique without first 
submitting it to careful examination. Our main concern will still 
be to determine whether or not the system is capable of achieving 
the results claimed by the author. But in the process of evalua¬ 
ting these claims considerable attention must be given also to the 
system*s special features related to reading. The possibility 
that they may contribute in some way can not be overlooked. If 
in this study some clue, some suggestion is found that will enlarge 
our understanding of the reading process — then the time devoted 
to the experiment will be amply justified. 

Definition of the Problem 

Apart from, and yet related to the considerations mentioned 
above, there were a number of other aspects of the problem which 
have to be taken into account when determining the exact nature 
of the experiment. Mr. Turnley has a number of views on the 
training of children associated with his system of reading. It 
might have been interesting and perhaps profitable to have explored 


■ 





5 


some of these supplementary areas more fully than has been done. 
However, practical considerations have impelled us to confine our 
experiment within certain limits. 

For instance, the author has associated with his system of 
reading a number of activities which, it is contended, help to lay 
the foundations for a life of literacy. 1 Included are teaching 
techniques designed to develop skill in spelling and handwriting 
and to acquaint the child with the fundamental facts of history 
and geography at the same time as mastery of the reading process 
was being accomplished. It was felt that to broaden this study to 
include an evaluation of these procedures carefully would extend 
the scope of the experiment beyond practical limits. It was 
decided, therefore, that our attention would have to be confined to 
a study of the ’lurnley Reading System 8 proper. The supplementary 
activities would be considered only insofar as investigation might 
show that their relation to the reading part of his system was of 
an integral nature. 

Practical considerations also militated against conducting 
the experiment with a large number of classes. We are vitally 
concerned with securing sufficient evidence on which to base our 
opinions. But the methodology and objectives of the Turnley 
reading system, especially in the area of social development, are 
too contrary to present views on the subject to justify experimenta¬ 
tion on more than a minimum basis. Accordingly, it was decided to 
conduct the experiment with only one class of pupils, with the 

Francis R. Turnley, The Turnley Reading System, (Edmonton: 
Published by author* 1945) p. 28 and Edmonton Journal, June 23, 

1945. 






. 




























. 

' i • 1 

.... 










' 





« 


... ; a '; £ c ... • .. ■ J1 . ; . ; -j.. c c , ;o o11 

* 

« 

J 

. , 1 ' '. .' ' ... 

, V $; 7 -' i * '"~5 

. Cue: ' : o ' 
















6 


understanding that if the results of the experiment warranted it 
the experiment could he extended later. 

One of the other matters pertinent to a full definition of 
the problem included a consideration of the length of the training 
period. The claims made for the lurnley system were on a twelve 
months® basis. As it was not feasible to extend the period 
devoted to the experiment beyond the regular school year, such 
comparisons as would be made would have to take this fact into 
consideration. Also, no direct effort could be made within the 
limits of this study to examine the validity of the system 1 s 
claims with respect to pre-school children or backward readers. 

The main investigation should, however, reveal sufficient evidence 
to enable us to make a reasonably accurate evaluation with respect 
to them. 

Purpose of the Experiment 

Within the limits briefly outlined above, then, we are 
concerned with examining the validity of the claims made by Mr. 
Turnley for his system of reading along with the broader purpose 
of attempting to discover what contribution the system might have 
to offer to better reading instruction. 

Prom a general educational standpoint we are anxious to 
determine whether or not his system of reading is suitable for 
use as a class method of teaching reading in Alberta schools under 
ordinary conditions of operation. 

Resolving the above purposes to a specific purpose; it is 
proposed to compare the results secured by a representative group 

of Grade I pupils taught exclusively by the lurnley reading method 

with those secured by similar groups taught by the reading methods 












, 










, 


. 


■ 






■ 







« ' : - -• ' ' '■ ’ -> 






, 























ft 


• 





. ..,3 ot; 











































7 


regularly used by Grade I teachers in the Edmonton Public Schools. 

The next chapter will be devoted to a description of the 
steps taken to ensure that the groups to be compared will be 
approximately equal in ability. The chapter will also include a 
list of the objectives in reading which shall serve as the basis 
for comparison of the two groups. 












CHAPTER II 


THE BASIS FOR COMPARISON 

One of the most difficult matters to contend with in educa¬ 
tional experimentation is the fact that there are usually so many 
factors present which are uncontrollable or difficult to control* 
The present study is no exception* To make a comparison on a 
reasonably valid basis, differences in teachers, and differences 
in pupils as to intelligence, home background, etc*, must be taken 
into consideration. 

This study is also further complicated by the wide differences 
in methodology and viewpoint in the respective systems. Objectives 
are different. For example, should the ability to say words or 
sentences after having heard them spelled aloud be considered an 
acceptable objective in teaching reading? What of the advanced 
reading goal set for the Turnley system — is it a legitimate 
objective for Grade I pupils, or are there more important goals? 
These and many other differences have to be considered in determin¬ 
ing an acceptable basis for comparison. 

It should be noted at this point that one of the express 
conditions of the experiment is that the 9 Turnley System* should 
reflect an appreciable superiority over present methods in the 
results secured, if it is to be seriously considered for adoption 
in part or in its entirety in Alberta schools. On this account it 
was not considered necessary to equate the two groups so exactly or 
control variable factors so fully as is the case where conclusions 
have to be based on fine distinctions. Nevertheless, in the 
interests of scientific accuracy and reliability an attempt has 









9 


been made to control every condition which might have an 
influence on the results. 


ESTABLISHMENT OF CONTROLS 


Selection of Experimental and Control Classes 
It was decided that the experimental class should be 
representative of the average type of class found in the Edmonton 
Public Schools* Accordingly a Grade I class from Norwood School 
was selected as meeting with this condition. 

Four classes, instead of one, were selected from adjacent 
districts 1 to act as controls. This was considered necessary in 
order that differences in the abilities of the respective classes 
would tend to balance out to produce a group more comparable in 
average ability to the average ability of the experimental group. 
Such an arrangement would also tend to balance the differences 
found in the abilities of the control class teachers. 

The Detroit Beginning First Grade Intelligence Test was 
administered to all pupils participating in the experiment. On the 
basis of the results secured the median intelligence quotient for 
each group was calculated. These median results are indicated in 
Table I. It will be noted that the two groups are approximately 
identical as far as chronological and mental ages are concerned. 


^The selection of control classes was arbitrary but a 
deliberate effort was made to so select them that a composite group 
would be secured that was about equal in ability to the Norwood 
group. One of the classes selected was definitely below the Norwood 
group on the average, two classes were about the same and the 
remaining class was slightly higher in ability and general background. 
Two other control groups were also selected originally, but it was 
found that a satisfactory composite control group could be secured 
without including them. Some pupils from these extra controls had 
to be used, however, in making up the matched pairs. 







, 















- 

» 


: 














. 






' 


. 




. 


* 

* 
















* 

-• " ' , 

. 









10 


TABLE 1 


COLIP ARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL AND COMPOSITE CONTROL GROUP 
ON THE BASIS OF CHRONOLOGICAL AGE AND MENTAL ABILITY 



Experimental 

Group 

Control 

Groups 

Number of Pupils 

“ 34 

104 

Median Chronological Age 

6 yrs.-3 mons. 

6 yrs.-B mons. 

Median Mental Age 

6 yrs.-6 mons. 

6 yrs.-6 mons. 

Median Intelligence Quotient 

104 

105 


As an additional control each pupil in the Norwood group was 
first paired with two other children from the various control classes 
on the basis of their mental and chronological ages. Then, after all 
their home backgrounds had been checked, the pupil of each pair of 
control children, whose ability and background was most nearly 
identical with the corresponding Norwood pupil was selected for final 
comparison. Home backgrounds were rated on the basis of the Sims 
Socio-Economic Status Scale, A comparison of the matched pairs is 
presented below. (Table II) More detailed data are contained in 
Section II of the Test Results and in the Appendix. 


TABLE 2 

COMPARISON OF MATCHED PAIRS ON THE BASIS OF 
CHRONOLOGICAL AGE AND MENTAL ABILITY 



Experimental 

Group 

Control 

Group 

Number of Pupils 

34 

34 

Median Chronological Age 

6 yrs.-3 mons. 

6 yrs.-3 mons. 

Median Mental Age 

6 yrs.-6 mons. 

6 yrs*-5 mons. 

Median Social Status Rating^- 

16 

16 


^Individual ratings on the Sims Socio-Economic Status Scale 
may be found in the Appendix, page 69• 


























- 11 


Here again it will be noted that the grouping is quite 
satisfactory for purposes of comparison. 

Selection of Teachers 

The teachers in the four control classes were the teachers 
who happened to be in the particular schools selected at the time 
of the experiment. No valid reason was seen for making any change 
as they were all teachers of considerable experience, capable, and 
professionally interested in their work. They differed in ability, 
as was to be expected, but as mentioned above it was hoped that 
such differences as there were would be balanced out. This was 
felt to be a better arrangement as far as both teachers and classes 
were concerned than if only one teacher and one class had been used 
as a control. 

A young teacher was selected to operate the experimental class 
as being more likely to conduct a radically different type of 
instruction more impartially, and possibly with more enthusiasm, 
than might be the case with an older teacher. The teacher selected 
was regarded as a good teacher. She has indicated a particular 
interest in primary work as is attested to by her five specialist's 
courses in the field. 

General Conditions Governing the Experiment 

In addition to the above measures taken to effect the maximum 
control over the principal variable factors, definite attention was 
given to a number of other factors more difficult to control. As 
they were capable of influencing the results in one direction or 
the other, care was taken to minimize their effect as fully as was 
humanly possible. Among these factors were the following: 



















, 

' .v. • ■ , , : - 

■ 




. 






<• 






f 




) : 






, 






- . ; < . j. 

. 





- 12 


1. The Attitude of the Teacher in the Experimental Glass — 

It was realized that much would depend upon the sincerity and 
enthusiasm of the teacher conducting the test class* Accordingly 
the teacher was shown the importance of making every effort to 
interpret the Turnley system as the author intended, and to take 
pains to carry it out efficiently and conscientiously. It is my 
opinion from personal observation, and from the reports of the 
principal who visited the class every week during the course of the 
experiment, that the teacher attempted to do so to the best of her 
ability and with the proper professional spirit. 

2. Adequate Training in the Techniques of the System -- While 
the author of the system constantly stressed the relative ease with 
which children could be taught by his system 1 (e.g. parents without 
previous experience using his book could teach their own children) 
it was felt that the importance of experiment made it imperative 
that the teacher be well versed in his method. To this end, it was 
arranged that the teacher receive preliminary instruction from him 
and advice and suggestions from him when the need arose during the 
school year. This was done. Mr. Turnley was permitted to visit the 
class at stipulated times; to observe, to demonstrate occasionally, 
and to instruct the teacher on new techniques as the class progressed 
through the system 5 s various phases. 

3. The Influence of the Parents — It was realized that If the 
parents helped it would be very difficult to credit properly such 
progress as their children might make. Accordingly the parents in 
the experimental class were advised that under no circumstances 


Advertisement, Edmonton Journal , August 


1945, p. 












. 




, 




/ " 














, 














- 




* . 

■ 

' 

■ 




■ 












f 





< : ... 


■ 




. 












1 






, 



















13 


would their children’s interests be jeopardized. Under the circum¬ 
stances they were asked to refrain from helping their children at 
home, particularly with present methods, and to preserve normal 
conditions in the home. 

4. Freedom From Publicity --It was felt that an undue amount 
of publicity would be detrimental to the maintenance of normal class¬ 
room conditions and might, therefore, cause some distortion of the 
results. On this account it was stipulated that publicity should be 
discouraged as much as possible. For the same reason, and also to 
discourage the competitive element, neither the names of the pupils 
nor those of the teachers or the individual class results were to be 
made public. 


Basis For Measuring the Results 

With the establishment of the maximum possible control over all 
the variable factors and conditions likely to affect the groups 
being compared, the next problem was one of determining the basis on 
which to measure the results. 

As stated before, the general purpose of the experiment was to 
determine which system is the most effective in teaching reading 
i.e. which system develops the best readers. It would appear that 
the answer to this question could be secured by testing the two 
groups; objectively where possible, and subjectively otherwise, on 
a common basis. It is contended that such a common basis is to be 
found in the list of objectives indicated below. 

Leading authorities in reading and a majority of primary 
teachers consider this list to represent the most desirable 













, 

, , ' 




















, 


- - 




















' 

















, 




























• ■ , ■: 









, 






* 




















14 


objectives to attain in primary reading. The teachers 
participating in the experiment accepted them unanimously. For 
these reasons it was chosen as the basis for measuring the relative 
effectiveness of the two systems. 


Desirable Objectives 


Aims 

1. To promote ability to 

recognize words and word 
groups accurately and 
independently. 


2. To develop the ability to 
interpret the meaning of 
increasingly longer units 
of material. 

3. To improve the quality of 
oral reading. 


4. To establish correct basic 
habits of reading orally 
and silently. 

5. To stimulate increasing 
interest in reading. 

6. To develop the habit of 
thinking about and using 
the content of what is read. 


of Grade I Reading -*- 

Desirable Attainments 

(a) Recognizes at sight a wide 
range of words. 

(b) Uses context, word form and 
phonetic clues in recognizing 
words which are familiar in 
sound and meaning but not in 
appearance. 

(a) Reads longer units with clear 
comprehension of meaning. 

(b) Follows printed directions 
correctly. 

(a) Reads easily selections with 
few or no new words. 

(b) Reads orally in phrase units. 

(c) Reads orally showing a clear 
interpretation of what the 
characters do and say. 

(a) Reads silently with few or no 
lip movements and no pointing. 

(b) Reads with wider span of recogni¬ 
tion and correct eye sweep. 

(a) Enjoys class reading. 

(b) Reads independently simple 
story material. 

(a) Discusses stories with others. 

(b) Asks questions, gives opinions. 

(c) Finds statements in support of 
a point. 


^William S. Gray, The Teaching of Reading : A Second Report 
Thirty Sixth Yearbook, Part 1 , National Society "For the Study or ~ 
Education (Bloomington: Public School Publishing, 1937), Pp. 8b-99. 
This section of the yearbook lists separate objectives for the pre¬ 
primer, primer and first reader stages of the initial reading period. 
The main objectives, only, for the whole period have been listed above 

















. 




.. ' t . 







- 


. : ' . - 






. 


- 










































. 































CHAPTER III 


PRIMARY READING IN (EHE MODERN SCHOOL 

If the procedures followed in developing the experiment are 
to he fully appreciated one should have a general knowledge of 
the essential features of the two systems being compared. Such an 
understanding is also necessary if the full significance of the test 
results is to be correctly interpreted. Accordingly this chapter is 
devoted to giving a brief description of the modern viewpoints in 
primary reading to which the control class teachers subscribe and 
particulars as to the reading methods they employ. In the succeeding 
chapter a description of the Turnley system is outlined. 

Newer tendencies in Modern Reading Instruction 

It is naturally impossible to give a completely comprehensive 
description of the theory and practice of reading in the modern 
school within the limits we are forced to set. One has only to 
consider the tremendous amount of literature which has been written 
on every conceivable aspect of the subject to realize the futility 
of our efforts in doing it full justice. We have attempted to 
indicate here only those tendencies in modern reading which we feel 
are particularly characteristic and hence, pertinent to our study. 

1. Reading is considered to be a functional skill rather than 
a formal school exercise. 1 From the start the pupils are encouraged 
to read to satisfy their purposes, to find out what the ’stories 1 
have to tell them. Reading directed toward satisfying the learner’s 
purposes is considered more satisfying and effective than reading 


•^Gertrude H. Hildreth, Learning the Three R's, A Modern 
Interpretation (Educational publishers: Philadelphia, iy5b)pp.“110,111 


















•- ' ' ' - Ou; 













■ ' ■ 


'= 




... 






) 


... ." ./v : '-C 






- 


- 








. 

"* • > •< U ' 

.■j. 

, 

. 










, ■ 10 ‘2 


.. 




. ' .. 




, 






. • 






1 










. 


t . 

• /. .) ;• . : : . : 'or. 









16 


'to read 1 , a process that begins and ends in itself. 

2. Reading is integrated with other activities in the 
modern school.Reading is not an activity detached and isolated 
from all other activities and experiences but originates with those 
activities or stimulates the creation of related activities. This 
arrangement ensures that reading will be functional and that the 
content and ideas conveyed will be within the range of the pupils 1 
interests, experience and understanding. 

3. Reading instruction is individualized. 2 Variations are 
provided in the time at which children are first instructed in 
reading and in the techniques used in instruction, in the rate at 
which children are expected to progress, and in the ultimate goals 
in speed and comprehension they are expected to achieve. To this 
end teachers usually follow the practice of dividing their classes 
into several groups — fast, medium and slow on the basis of observa¬ 
tion together with formal and informal tests. In this way it is felt 
that the program can be adapted to meet individual differences to the 
best advantage. The goal for each child is not arbitrary but rather 
commensurate with his ability, background and opportunity to learn. 

4. In keeping with the above, teachers are sensitive to the 
danger of premature instruction in reading. Instruction is delayed 
until the children show sufficient maturity to profit from instruc¬ 
tion. There is an informal introductory period each year in which 


^■Clarence R. Stone, Better primary Reading (Webster 
Publishing Company: St. Louis, 1936) p. 198. 

^Donald D. Burrell, Individual Differences and Their 
Implication With Respect To Instruction in Reading " - 'THTTrEy sixth 
Yearbook National Society for the Study of Education (public School 
Publishing Company: Bloomington, 1937) Ch. XI. 







. .. ; ' • . * r; 

» ■- 

, 






. 

. . 


. 

. 


. 

' 




- 






, 

. 

, 

' 

< ~ : ■ 

■ 


- : . ' . . . 














, ‘ L 

. 




* 

' 


- 






. 







. 














. 

' 









17 


the teacher becomes acquainted with the children and establishes 
the necessary background to the reading program proper, in other 
words, reading readiness. 1 

5. The whole program in reading rests upon a full apprecia¬ 
tion of the many psychological factors inherent in the process. 

Due regard is taken of the importance of the various laws of learning, 
interest, practice, attention, maturation and the many other factors 
which must be properly interpreted and implemented if the numerous 
highly complicated specific skills involved in reading are to be 
skilfully integrated for success. 

6. Finally, reading is regarded as primarily a reasoning 
process. 2 It is a process in which the individual is expected to 
get meaning from the abstract symbols; a process, futhermore, which 
makes large demands on the cognitive powers, on thinking, and on the 
higher mental processes — reasoning, judgment and interpretation. 

It is felt that word pronunciation or 'saying the stories* is not 
necessarily reading. The modern viewpoint is predicated upon the 
theory that "only in the sense of deriving meaning does the child 
truly read". 


%. Lucile Harrison, Reading Readiness (Houghton Mifflin 
Company: Boston 1940) 

^Gertrude H. Hildreth, Learning the Three R* s (Educational 
Publishers: Philadelphia, 1956) tp. 7y,b0* ~~~ 
















































18 


Methodology of the Control Class Teachers 

Before outlining the methods employed by the control class 
teachers it is necessary to note the relation of their efforts to 
the program of basic reading instruction as a whole. The teachers 
in the control classes are only expected to provide their pupils 
initial guidance in learning to read. Ordinarily, they have 
achieved their objective if a majority of their pupils are able to 
read simple books with enjoyment, ease and understanding, and are 
also able to do some independent reading by the end of the first 
school year. It is their responsibility to lay the foundations. It 
is left to teachers in succeeding grades to refine, perfect and other¬ 
wise broaden the fundamental reading attitudes, habits and skills 
which the first grade teachers have introduced. 

Furthermore, in keeping with the modern outlook, the control 
class teachers are not concerned solely with the mechanical aspects 
of reading instruction. Their concern is extended to include every 
factor in the child’s growth and development which might influence 
his progress — physical, mental, emotional and social. In general 
the type of training they provide is in harmony with the principles 
enunciated in the previous section. In the attainment of their 
final objectives their pupils are directed through three successive 
stages. 

1. The Pre-Primer Stage Once readiness for reading, 
capacity for learning and other factors have been determined, the 
pupils are grouped in preparation for formal instruction. The main 
objectives for this stage include procedures: 







19 


(1) To stimulate interest in reading, (2) To cultivate 
a thoughtful reading attitude, (3) To develop a small 
sight vocabulary, (4) To develop good habits of recog¬ 
nizing and interpreting simple units in both silent 
and oral reading, (5) To develop ability to follow 
directions for seatwork and to engage in other 
activities that apply the ideas secured, (6) To culti¬ 
vate social attitudes desirable in a reading group and 
(7) To develop proper habits in the care and use of 
books * 1 

At this stage, reliance is placed on the whole 2 3 method of 
building a sight vocabulary. The child learns to recognize self 
contained units, words, phrases or short sentences at sight. The 
emphasis is placed upon associating meaning with the symbolic 
thought units while noting peculiarities of their appearances. 

The children do not sound out the separate letters or syllables. 
What pupils actually learn is the general appearance of the unit. 
Although there maybe some pronunciation of the word or phrase, the 
method rests primarily upon visual memory and the association of 
the appropriate meanings with the visual patterns. 

During this stage the pupils proceed through several pre- 
primers. The vocabulary thus acquired is supplemented by words 
learned in a variety of ways including: learning names, labels on 
pictures, action words connected with classroom activities, direc¬ 
tions, games and special words from experience charts. Because of 


William S. Gray, The Teaching of Heading : Thirty Sixth 
Yearbook, Part I (Public School Publishing: Bloomington, 1937) p.91. 

2 Louella Cole, Improvement of Reading (Farrar and Rinehart: 
New York, 1940) Gh. I p. 10. In comparing various reading methods 
the author ascribes to the whole method the following advantages: 

1. It is simple, direct and understandable to the childish 
mind. 

2 # When children teach each other it is the method they 
voluntarily use. 

3. It is considered to be the only way of learning the many 
non-phonetic words in our language. 














' 

, 













* 








i • . v; 


















' 





















- 20 


differences in ability pupils are allowed to develop at their 
own rate. Ample repetition of the basic words is provided 
and every effort is made to develop interest in reading and 
favourable attitudes toward it. In general, the progress of 
the different groups varies according to ability and previous 
experience of the pupils, the skill of the teacher and the 
degree of emphasis given to the subject. From eight to twelve 
weeks is usually devoted to the pre-primer stage. By the end 
of the period a majority of the pupils are able to recognize 
at sight from 50 to 75 words, 

2. Primer Stage — The chief goal for the second period 
is to develop the ability of the pupils to engage in continuous 
meaningful reading from simple primer type books. As soon as 
the pupils have mastered sufficient vocabulary and have shown 
themselves otherwise ready, they are introduced to primers. 
Continued attention Is given to the objectives mentioned in 
connection with the pre-primer stage. In addition a beginning 
is made in promoting greater independence in reading. By the 
time the pupils have proceeded about one half of the way 
through the primer being used or when their sight vocabulary 
has increased to from 125 to 150 words the pupils are encouraged 
to begin reading easy pre-primer level material by themselves. 
This supplementary reading is continued with increasing 
emphasis at the same time as the teacher continues to give daily 
lessons on the regular program. 

By this time many of the pupils have begun to notice similar- 






21 


ities and differences in familiar words. Also limitations * 1 2 3 in 
the whole method as the sole means of increasing vocabulary are 
becoming apparent. For these reasons the teachers gradually 
begin to introduce their pupils to other ways of unlocking or 
attacking new words. I 1 he pupils are guided to anticipate the 
meanings of new words from the context. They are occasionally 
encouraged to study pictures as an aid in interpreting the stories. 
Simple phonetic analysis methods are introduced whereby the pupils 
are shown that by sounding out unfamiliar sight words they can 
often discover their meaning, The method is confined largely to 
learning the initial consonant sounds at this stage, and only 
applied to those words which are already known by sound. This and 
the other types of word analysis mentioned are not considered as 
methods in themselves but rather as valuable aids to the child in 
helping him to become increasingly more independent and versatile 
in reading by himself. 

The time required to achieve the objectives of the second 
period varies widely. Some of the children make very rapid progress 
while others need extended practice and much help. The teachers 
have to be continually regrouping their pupils as new adjustments 


1 Ibid., p. 10, Besides listing the advantages of the whole 
method of teaching reading Miss Cole also summarized the disadvan¬ 
tages which are as follows: 

1. There is a limit to the number of words a child can readily 
recall by relying on memory alone. 

2. As the 'saturation point 1 is approached the tendency to 
guess more less wildly makes its appearance. 

3. Children who are trained exclusively by this method are 
inclined to be helpless in making out new words for them¬ 
selves • 









' 

, 


/ 





, 














, 

. 

' 

... 
















. 





' 




4 






















, . . ■ , , _ _ 

: 




1 

* 

, 














become necessary. Most classes require from twelve to twenty 
weeks to attain creditable standards for this stage before going 
on to the next. 

3. r J?he First Reader Stage — The new goals for this stage 
are the ability to read books of average first reader difficulty 
with interest and absorption in the content, and growth of 
interest in reading independently. By the time this stage is 
completed it is the hope of the teachers that a majority of their 
pupils will have realized the specific objectives which constitute 
the basis of comparison chosen for this study (page 13). 

As with the other stages of initial instruction, the rate of 
advancement varies widely with individual pupils and teaching pro¬ 
cedures have to be adjusted accordingly. Systematic guidance is 
continued for all, but the slower learners receive extra attention 
while the better pupils are often excused to engage in independent 
reading. 

Considerable attention is devoted to perfecting the perfor¬ 
mance of the pupils with respect to the skill and habit objectives 
set for this period. In addition the third stage is marked by more 
varied reading activities and wider opportunities to read for the 
purpose of fostering desirable attitudes toward reading and develop¬ 
ing greater independence. The pupils read different kinds of read¬ 
ing materials for different purposes, such as to enjoy a story or to 
find the answers to questions. They participate in dramatizations 
to aid in mastering the thought of a selection. More supervised 
seat activities are given to train pupils in habits of independent 












, 







, 

• ' 












1 

. •. : : . • f '. . J f - . 
















. 








■ 


, 

- 


, 






23 


study and in the thoughtful interpretation of what is read. 

These and many other similar activities are introduced so that 
the pupils will be ready for the next phase of their training in 
the second and third grades. 

It is felt that a program based on the foregoing principles 
and methods has many favourable outcomes. It is contended that 
such a program, correctly interpreted and implemented, will 
promote genuine reading proficiency. The children will enjoy 
reading and suffer less during the learning process. They will 
develop positive and favourable attitudes toward reading and 
finally, they will read voluntarily when they have the opportunity. 








CHAPTER IV 


THE TURNLEY READING SYSTEM 
General Description 

An examination of the system developed by Mr. Turnley 
reveals a number of viewpoints and procedures which are at 
variance with most of the practices and principles which are 
generally accepted today* At the same time certain practices 
he recommends exhibit features in common with methods which have 
once been popular f but which have since been discarded. 

Mr. Turnley’s basic contention is that the English language 
has been incorrectly analyzed in the past* He has therefore 
developed an analysis of his own*^ According to this analysis 
our five vowels are the foundation for 18 basic sounds. These in 
turn form the basis for 513 word pieces called sonsils. It is his 
contention that these sonsils comprise all the common sound 
elements present in our language. Every word has at least one of 
these sonsils. It is contended that a knowledge of them gives one 
’’the keys to our language”. 

The reading system is based upon these assumptions and a 
system of teaching reading has been developed in keeping with thou. 
In short daily lessons the pupils are drilled, in a fixed routine, 
on specially prepared tables of words containing the sonsils until 
all of them have been learned. 

Francis R. Turnley, Guide Book No. 1 To Accompany Turnley 
Reading System (Edmonton, 1945) p. 6. 












: 

. 


.. ...... M . ? .J : ; . 

i 


; 


• . t O ;. 






0 ...:£ 








. 




. ' - 




.. 


. 












. jco;;: 




< 


■ : . . . 


' 


^ : 


- 


















- 25 - 


These daily lessons on lists of isolated words, and the later 
reading of books,bear a superficial relation to the whole method 
now used, and a stronger resemblance to the earlier Alphabetical- 
Oral Method 1 combined with procedures similar to those used in 
the Phonetic Method. 

The words in a given list are repeated after the teacher 
and then the children spell out each word after her. The letters 
are not "sounded 1 - as they are in phonetic teaching but the later 
phases of each lesson are apparently designed to achieve much the 
same purpose as when phonics are used except that the words are 
’’spelled", e.g. B - U - G (spelled aloud by teacher) is BUG. What 
is D - U - G? The purpose of this latter procedure, although not 
clearly stated or implied by the author, is apparently to make the 
child gradually familiar, through much repetition, with the sounds 
of initial letters, consonant blends, etc., and of the common 
combinations of letters (sonsils) within a word. Theoretically the 
child is thus being provided with the means of attacking new m rds 
he meets in reading independently. 

During the fourth to sixth months of this routine, ’Spelling 
in the Mind 1 and ’Reading in the Mind 1 are introduced. These 
accomplishments involve the ability to recognize words and sentences 
through having heard them spelled aloud. They are also considered 
to be necessary prerequisites to actual reading. 

The transition to reading from books is begun in the seventh 


iLouella Cole, The Improvement of Reading , (Farrar and 
Rinehart: New York, 1940) p. 4. See also Phonetic Method, p. 6. 




















' 






« 
















, 

. '■ 

. 

■ 












* 

■ ■ - ~ 


















, t TO 




■ 








0 


. . ... 





' ( ■ . • . • 


. 1 . ' ' 
■ 

, . 










i : 








- 26 


month. "All reading is done aloud, in unison or with selected 
pupils reading while others watch their lines 11 .-*■ Finger pointing 
is encouraged. Unfamiliar words are spelled out to effect recog¬ 
nition. Several pages of material are read a day with very little 
comment on the content. The common procedure is to have the teacher 
read a passage and then have the whole class repeat it after her. 

In this manner the children are expected to proceed rapidly 
through a number of readers of increasing difficulty. By the end of 
the eighth month a class is expected to finish the regular Grade I 
reading program and one grade level thereafter until by the end of 
the twelfth month the children should be able to read Grade 6 
Readers and "the wide range of books in library or school or home... 
hitherto used by youngsters of ten years of age or older"^ 

The system, in the words of the author, "makes its appeal to 
both sight and hearing, with especial emphasis in the first six 
months on hearing".^ All drill on the tables is naturally oral 
during this time, and after the transition to reading is made all 
instruction continues to be oral until sometime in the eleventh or 
twelfth month when the child may begin silent reading. 

An integral part of the system is the daily reading and conver- 


^Francis R. Turnley, Guide Book Ho. 4 To Accompany the 
Turnley Reading System (Edmonton, 1945) p. 3. 

^Francis R. Turnley, The Turnley Reading System , p. 2V 

^Turnley, Guide Book Mo. 1 (Edmonton, 1945) p. 6. 
































, 

/ 







. 

, 

* 











- 














. 









27 


sation of the teacher on topics "above- * 5 - the child 1 s level". 

These talks and readings are on a variety of subjects including 
world affairs, current events, natural phenomena like cyclones; 
their causes, places of occurrences, their effects. In addition 
an attempt is made to give the pupils a broad panoramic view of 
the universe; an outline of the course of history and the funda¬ 
mentals of Geography. These mature discussions are designed to 

"broaden the child*s general knowledge and vocabulary as quickly 
2 

as possible" in anticipation, apparently, of his early mastery 
of the mechanics of reading. 

A further purpose of the latter 5 talks* is concerned with 
the fact that the child*s mechanical progress in reading may out¬ 
distance his ability to comprehend what he reads. The talks in 
advance of his present experiences are therefore designed to 
provide the child with the 1 meaning beforehand* of Y/ords he will be 
meeting shortly when he is on his ov/n. 

Additional Notes On Special Features Of The Turnley System 

The above brief description covers the main features of the 
Turnley Heading System. The account is based on personal observa¬ 
tions of the system in operation, conversations with the author, 
and a close examination of the various booklets he has published 
to explain the system. 


^Op. cit ., p. IS. 

S Ibld .. p. 22,23 

















■ 


. 

c 

« 

« 







J 



, 


' 


f 

. 

e ■ e • . • - J 

* 


I t 




















. 



























-* 










. 

- 


. 












28 


Space does not permit giving the system a much more 
detailed exposition. However, in case the exact nature of 
certain unique features might not be sufficiently understood a 
fuller elaboration of them is given here. This supplementary 
account consists of summaries of explanations contained in the 
booklet entitled ’'The Tumley Heading System, Based on Sonsils". 

An attempt has been made to amplify these summaries wherever 
possible by actual excerpts from the booklet. 

1. Definition of a Sonsil 1 

According to Mr. Tumley*s analysis, the commonly recognized 
sound variations of our five vowels are the foundations for his 
18 basic sounds. For example, he lists 5 * basic* sounds under the 
letter A as illustrated in the following five words: 

Ate At Are Air Awe 

The remaining 13 basic sounds are listed under E I 0 U in a 
similar manner. 

The 18 * basic* sounds in combination with certain letters 
form 1 sound syllables* which are called sonsils. There are 
supposed to be about 313 of these elements or sonsils in our 
language. It is contended that "they are the component parts of 
all words", i.e. "every word in the language is composed of one or 
more of these little 1 sound pieces*". 

As the author points out the sonsils are not to be confused 
with ordinary syllables. 

For example, consider the following list of words taken from 
one of the tables in the booklet: 

BAFFLE CALF DAFT DRAFT DRAUGHT LAU(2i 

All of the words, except the first, are single syllable words 
as ordinarily understood. Each word contains a common sound element. 
This is the sonsil AF. It will be noted that the emphasis is on 
similarities in sound and that differences in spelling are ignored. 


llhe Tumley Reading System , p. 6 







< * • 

- - 



■ 













f 







■ 


, 



. 













■ 

• 




, - 

I 











1 1 


* 











. 


' 1 

, ' . 1 : - sol 

, 







- 29 


2. The Relation Of Sonsils To The Turnley Reading System 1 

The sonsils are the fundamental features of the system. To 
familiarize the ohild with them, 'Sonsil Tables ! of specially 
selected sets of words have been prepared. Through the medium of 

a lesson routine the author has devised, the child is expected to 

learn the Sonsil Tables "at the rate of one a day". 

The first objective in this system is to complete the tables 

which embody the 313 sonsils before any actual reading is done. 

In the process of 'learning 1 the sonsils the child is expected to 
learn, in the words of the author: 

"1. All the sounds of the language 

2. The accent which each sonsil should possess 

3. The actual symbols of our language i.e. the alphabet 

4. The effect of all 26 letters of the alphabet when they 
are the first, or initial letters 

5. The effect of the constantly uniform double initial 
letters (pr, tr, qu, etc.) 

6. The effect of the constantly uniform triple initial 
letters (str, spr, thr, etc.) 

7. The varying spellings of the 313 sonsils 

8. The meanings of about 1,300 useful words, which the 
teacher defines" 

The work with the Sonsil Tables thus appears to be primarily 
for the purpose of familiarizing the child, through constant 
repetition, with the function of sonsils in words and the relation 
of the various combinations of letters to them. Until these 
fundamental structural relationships of the system are learned it 
is evidently not considered practical to commence reading. In this 
connection the author states: 

"No reading is necessary or advisable until the Sonsil Tables 

have been completed, which in the case of a 5-year-old will 

take approximately six months"• 

No definite attempt is made by the author to justify this 
postponement of reading but the evidence tends to suggest the 
viewpoints upon which the recommended procedures are based. It is 
apparently assumed that reading should be postponed for a similar 
reason to that formerly given by music teachers who contended that 
the playing of musical selections should be deferred until the 
'scales 5 and the theory had been mastered. 


^- Ibid ., p. 4 






' 

. 









- 30 


The chief reason, however, probably lies in author’s convic¬ 
tion that he has perfected an analysis of our language which has 
eliminated all of its complexities. He would probably contend 
that he has, in effect, developed a comprehensive formula based 
on ’sonsils 1 which will enable the child to read practically any 
type of reading material he may meet. The first phase of the 
system would, therefore, be to master the formula. Once the 
formula has been fixed the child will be equipped to proceed in a 
very short while on his own. 


3. The Daily Lesson Routine 1 

The following account may help to illustrate the daily lesson 
routine pupils are expected to follow in learning the Sonsil Tables. 
It will be noted that no deliberate effort is made to teach or 
explain the structural organization of the system. The inference 
may be made that the author assumes that the child will eventually 
come to sense almost unconsciously the manner in which the system 
works, and hence, how it can be applied to ’unlocking 1 new words 
met in reading later on. This assumption would also help to explain 
the author’s disregard for meaningful learning. It would almost 
appear as If the child is expected to learn the system mechanically 
and then apply it mechanically. 

The description below Is an actual excerpt from the booklet 
11 The Turnley System Based on Sonsils". Although the remarks are 
directed to the parent in the home the procedure is identical with 
that followed with the experimental group. 

T! Your blackboard is prepared. You have put on it let us say 
five words from the TJG Sonsil Table: 

BUG 

DUG 

HUG 

LUG 

MUG 

The FIRST PHASE: The child is standing close to you. Use a 

pointer. 

"Say these after me IT you ask. Then you say 
the words one by one from top to bottom of 
the list, and the child says them ONE BY ONE 
seight after you. "BUG" you say, and the 
child repeats "BUG" ; "DUG" you say and "DUG" 
he repeats. Just once down the list. 


1 rbld., p. 8,9 
















, 




• e 3 ■' t ■ ■' , 

1 

, 








n; , .'o .■).' "... .■" w 7 



• ' ■ . . ' • 

T 1 

, 

* ., ■ ,: i A ...^ - •. ■ • l ■ 

. 


■ 


. 









t 






■ 





: 





- 






. 



... 








: jtQ-U 














- 31 


The SECOND PHASE: Immediately following his last word on the 

list, you return to the top and, tapping 
each letter as you name it, with your 
pointer, say "B-U-G, BUG'." with emphasis on 
the word itself. "B-U-G, BUG'." he repeats. 

Then down the list in this manner. .. 

Just once down the list. 

Between this Phase and the THIRD PHASE give tiny sentences or 
ask him a pointed question: "A BUG is a nuisance sometimes" — 

tapping the word BUG with your pointer. .. You do not 

need to explain in this way (in context) the meanings of all the 

words, but do it at least with some words every day, .. 

Now swing right into the 

THIRD PHASE: "Which word is DUG?" let him have your pointer to 
help him pick it out. "YThich is MUG?" -- and so 
on for the five. 

If he gets none right in the first week or so, do 
not worry, and spend NO TIME AT ALL trying to 

urge him. ... Save your temper and 

keep your child's interest by NEVER insisting on 
accuracy. IT IS NOT AT ALL IMPORTANT . Time, 
repetition, the child's own intellectual diges¬ 
tive processes are all working while you take it 
easy. 

FOURTH PHASE: Without any pause, switch your talk about "Yftiich 
is Dug?" etc., to this: 

"Now, B-U-G (spelling it as you did in Phase Two) 
is BUG; what is D-U-G? If he answers, fine; if 
not, try another: "L-U-G is LUG, what is M-U-G?" 
and so on -- just three or four questions of this 
sort will be enough. When you come to the full 
10-word Tables, you will still only ask four or 
five of these little questions. . 

FIFTH PHASE: This is the hardest from the child's standpoint, 
and neither at this time nor when you are into 
Tables with "Complexities" such as varying 
spelling or double and triple initial letters, 
need you worry if you get few correct answers. 

You start the child off on the "sound-beam" just 
as you did in Phase 4 by giving an example: 

"B-U-G is BUG; HOW DO YOU SPELL RUG? How do you 
spell MUG, etc." 

This routine is supposed to be repeated several times througi - 
out the day with each table. The procedure is repeated on succeed¬ 
ing days but with new tables each time and continued until the 313 
Sonsil Tables have been taught. At first only one Table is intro¬ 
duced each day but later, between the fourth and sixth months, 
when the ability to spell and read in the mind is beginning to 
develop, the Tables may be given at the rate of two or more a day. 























i 


< 














CHAPTER V 


A COMPARISON OF THE TURNLEY SYSTEM AND PRESENT DAY METHODS 


An examination of the following chart will serve to 
elaborate some features of the Turnley system not fully covered 
in the last chapter as well as to indicate more readily some of 
the significant differences in the systems being compared. 


CHART SHOWING PRINCIPAL DIFFERENCES IN THE TWO SYSTEMS 


Specific Feature 


Present Day Methods 


Turnley System 


General Purpose 
for 

leaching Reading 


To prepare for the 
efficient utilization 
of reading ability 
from a practical stand 
-point and also for 
its recreational 
values. These broad 
objectives include 
extending the exper¬ 
ience of pupils 
through reading, 
deepening understanding, 
broadening interests, 
enriching personality, 
etc. 


Not stated, but would 
probably accept this 
definition: "To equip 

the masses with read¬ 
ing skill and knowledge 
necessary for intelli¬ 
gent reading". 

Is concerned with rais¬ 
ing the level of 
literacy from what the 
author contends is its 
present low level 
through teaching the 
child to read well at 
an early age. 1 


Specific Reading 1, Development of skill 
Objectives in all types of 

ability required for 
both silent and oral 
reading. 

£. To cultivate strong 
motives for and 
permanent interest 
in reading. 


Not stated or clearly 
implied. From observa¬ 
tion of Mr. Turnley*s 
methods, his conversa¬ 
tion, and his writings 
the impression is made 
that once the child has 
been helped to master 
the mechanical aspects 


1 Turnley, Guide Book No. 1 , p. 3 















































, 




* 
















* 



: '■ iiJ :■ ; 

















33 


Specific Feature 

Present Day Methods 

Turnley System 


3. Extension of exper¬ 
ience through reading. 

4. Stimulation of 
critical thinking 
powers. 

5. Improvement of tastes. 

of reading, the ability 
to master the various 
types of reading skill 
required for different 
types of material or 
for different purposes 
can safely be intrusted 
to the child 1 s intui¬ 
tive powers. 

Provision for 
Individual 
Differences 

pupils are grouped 
according to their 
individual needs and 
methods are adjusted to 
facilitate progress at 
individual rates. 

Individual differences 
not given serious 
consideration. Pupils 
are expected to progress 
en masse at the same 
rate to reach same goals. 

Views on Read¬ 
iness for 
Reading 

Pupils must reach the 
right stage of maturity 
before instruction can 
be profitable to them. 
(This stage for reading 
considered to be reached 
at a mental age of six 
and a half years 

Considers that children 
of ’’five years of age 
or younger” are capable 
of learning to read. 
Disregards differences 
in mental ages. 

Views on Child 
Development 

Learning distributes 
itself over time. The 
maturation of physical 
and mental capacities 
determines the rate at 
which children will 
learn. 

Disagrees with accepted 
views. Children are 
capable of mastering 
the intricacies of the 
reading skill within 
twelve months along 
with a general apprecia¬ 
tion of the main ideas 
of world history and 
geography.* 5 


■^Turnley, Guide Book No* 4, p. 3. 

^Ivlabel V. Morphett and Carleton Washbourne, "When Should 
Children Begin To Read", Elementary School Journal , XXIX (March, 
1931), pp. 496-503. 

^Op. ci t., p. 8 















































- 34 


Specific Feature 

Present Day Methods 

Turnley System 

Views on the 
Psycho¬ 
logical Bases 
of Learning 

Appreciate the import¬ 
ance of the various 
laws of learning, 
maturation, practice, 
motivation, associa¬ 
tive thinking, etc., 
etc., in the learning 
of any skill. 

No evidence that their 
importance is apprec¬ 
iated, other than the 
value of repetition. 1 

Function of 
Heading 

From start pupils read 
to achieve purposes 
satisfying to them¬ 
selves. Heading is 
functional; pupils read 
to find out* 

Early training is 
preparatory to adult 
level reading. In the 
preparatory stage child 
"reads to read". 

Emphasis is centred on 
the process instead of 
the functions it serves. 

Explanation of 
the Reading 
Process 

Reading is regarded as 
primarily a reasoning 
process. "Only in the 
sense of deriving mean¬ 
ing does the child truly 
read"• 

No explanation is given. 
In its early stages, at 
least, reading is 
regarded as a mechanical 
process. Little atten¬ 
tion is given to meaning, 

General Nature 
of Method 

Analytic. A combina¬ 
tion of the best 
features of the whole 
method, phonetic method 
and the use of context¬ 
ual clues. 

Synthetic. A combina¬ 
tion bearing a super¬ 
ficial resemblance to 
the Word Method and a 
stronger resemblance to 
the Alphabet Method and 
Phonics. 

Chief Emphasis 

Visual memory and the 
association of approp¬ 
riate meanings with 
visual patterns. 

Auditory memory and the 
association of approp¬ 
riate meanings to some 
extent with auditory 
patterns. 


^Ihe Turnley Heading System, p. 11 





























• - ' . - 






















55 


Specific Feature 

Present Day Methods 

Turnley System 

Hate of Intro¬ 
ducing 
Vocabulary 

A range from 0 to 6 new 
words introduced on 
each new page of readers 
in use. Total directed 
vocabulary acquired 
during first years ranges 
from 500 - 500 new words. 

At least 1200 isolated 
words are introduced 
through the daily tables 
during the first 6 
months. 1 The re aft e r 
number of new words 
introduced depends upon 
number of readers read. 
Theoretically possible 
to expose child to about 
1800 additional words by 
end of regular school 
year. 

Hepetition 

of 

Vocabulary 

Repetition definitely 
provided in both 
readers, work books, 
and oral exercises, but 
in an inconspicuous 
manner. Repetition 
occurs usually in 
context. 

High degree of repeti¬ 
tion provided for in 
daily lesson routine on 
isolated lists of words 
in a fairly conspicuous 
manner. When transition 
to books is made repeti¬ 
tion provided by authors 
of text books is relied 
upon. 

Means of Extend¬ 
ing 

Vocabulary 
(apart from 
directed 
reading) 

1. Supplementary read¬ 
ing in search of 
information for 
activities. 

2. Free supplementary 
reading of easy story 
books at their level. 

5. Reading stories to 
children related to 
their own interests. 

1, Daily reading by the 
teacher of material 
above the child 1 s 
level e.g. newspapers, 
books, magazines. 

2. Talks to the class 
about world affairs, 
natural phenomena, 
great people, etc. 

5. Encouraging pupils to 
read, browse, examine 
copies of adult lit¬ 
erature and magazines 
from a magazine table, 


^ -Ibid ., p. 11 

Burnley, Guide Book No« 2 , p. 6 




























36 


Specific Feature 


Present Day Methods 


Turnley System 


Function of 
Readers 


1. To he used as a medium 
for developing many 
types of reading 
ability, both oral and 
silent * 

2. To arouse interest and 
a desire to read, 

3. To stimulate thought, 

4. To elevate tastes. 


Contents not considered 
to have much intrinsic 
value 1 but readers 
provide a convenient 
medium for: 

1. Developing 1 sonsil' 
skill. 

2. Providing oral 
reading practice. 

3. bringing new words 
before child in 
orderly fashion 1 , 

4. Providing a means of 
measuring the child's 
progress. 


Type of Reading 
Material 
Favored 


Selections which appeal 
to children's interests, 
related to their own 
experiences, simple 
poems, fanciful tales. 


Not definitely stated 
but strongly implied 
that child of the 
Twentieth Century^ only 
casually interested in 
childish things, child¬ 
ish literature. Through 
teachers reading at 
first, and later on his 
own, child wants to read 
material on a more adult 
level. 


3- The Turnley Reading System , p. 16 
^Ibid ., p. 22. 


























- 

t 

, 















CHAPTER VI 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE EXPERIMENT 

Our next concern after the purpose of the experiment has 
been determined and defined is naturally to decide what proced¬ 
ures should be followed in order to effect a satisfactory solu¬ 
tion of the problem* Reference has already been made to the 
preliminary steps taken in this direction* In Chapter II a 
definition was given of the objectives in primary reading, in 
terms of which the effectiveness of each system would be 
compared. Reference has also been made to the manner in which 
the classes and teachers have been selected and the measures 
taken to control every variable factor capable of influencing 
the results. 

As a further preliminary measure all teachers participating 
in the experiment were carefully instructed in the procedures to 
follow. They were given printed instructions explaining the 
purpose of the experiment and the objectives which would be the 
basis for the comparison. In the case of the experimental class 
teacher several meetings were held in advance of school opening. 
The introductory meetings for the control class teachers were 
held during the first week of school. 

Procedure in the Experimental Class 
The teacher in the experimental class based her reading 
instruction throughout the year entirely upon the principles 
and techniques advocated by Mr, Turnley. Other activities 
such as rhythmic games and drawing were handled in the usual 





























' 

* 






■ .... . . . _• '■ . .--icy: | 


- 




; ' . . - ’ . . - ■ ■ ' 






, 












* 


* 

















■ 










. . ; 

' 





















38 


manner but the teaching of such subjects as arithmetic, 
socialized activities and verse speaking had to be modified 
in order to eliminate the vocabulary gains ordinarily derived 
from such sources. 

The necessary equipment was also provided for the class. 

This included in addition to regular primary classroom equip¬ 
ment a large easel-mounted blackboard and a large globe of the 
world. Special desk holders for books (made according to Mr. 
Turnley^ specifications) were provided for each child. Also, 
individual blackboards were made for each pupil as a concession 
to the author's contention that the handwriting to be done on 
them was intimately related to his reading system. 

In keeping with the original agreement the teacher was 
given special instruction by Mr. Turnley at various times through¬ 
out the year. In addition, he was granted permission to observe 
the class in operation and tender advice to the teacher at the 
school from time to time, and particularly at critical phases in 
the development of his system. 

Visits to the class were made by myself periodically, and by 
the principal every week during the course of the experiment, to 
see that the proper test conditions were observed. Visits for 
the same purpose were also made by the Department of Education 
officials interested in the experiment. It is my confident 
observation, supported by the principal and others who had an 
opportunity to observe, that the teacher maintained the proper 
professional attitude to the experiment and that a conscientious 












■' .. . -:V f ; . . . 

. 







* 

■ 

j ' 


, 

. 



' 


* 


. 

* 

, 



' 

: ■ - ■ -- " -• l 










39 


effort was made to do as effective a job with the system as 
possible. 


Procedure in the Control Classes 

The teachers in the control classes were instructed to 
proceed in their usual manner, which has been described in 
Chapter III, They were instructed to give no more attention to 
reading than they ordinarily would. Other than that, no special 
conditions were imposed. From observation and a comparison of 
the present and past performances of their classes I feel that 
they have also maintained a strictly scientific attitude toward 
the experiment. As a precaution against a competitive spirit 
developing one of the general conditions of the experiment was 
that none of the names of the teachers taking part in the experi¬ 
ment would be revealed. 

Absences 

One of the most difficult factors to control was the 
problem of attendance. The teachers in the control classes were 
absent during the year an average of approximately four days. In 
each case substitute teachers were provided. 

The teacher in the experimental class was absent a total of 
seventeen days during the sonsil training period. A substitute 
was provided but no sonsil drills were given other than occasional 
ones given by the principal. The loss was made up in part by the 
teacher on her return through extra lessons. 

As a further compensation for any loss in training sustained 

















. 






. 

, ■ .. :oo 

, 

* 

, 

* 

■ 


. 




, 

















- 40 


the testing period for the experimental class was extended. In 
this way several extra days of instruction were gained before 
the three Gates tests were given, and ten days before the Word 
Attack and Gray’s Oral lest were begun. The three Metropolitan 
tests were not given until two weeks after the other classes had 
received theirs. 

Absences among the children in the control classes were more 
numerous than they were in the experimental class both during the 
year and during the testing period. If it were necessary to make 
fine distinctions between the classes this factor would have to be 
given more consideration. As it is the differences in favor of 
the experimental class would probably be offset somewhere else. 

Toward the end of the experiment the teacher in the experi¬ 
mental group broke her ankle and a permanent substitute for the 
balance of the year had to be provided. This substitute was 
especially selected because of her acquaintance with the system. 
The substitute had taken a course with Mr. Turnley, was enthus¬ 
iastic about the system and had been teaching a small class 
privately using his method. For these reasons it is felt that no 
significant loss in training was sustained. During her time in 
the class she made a determined effort to complete the program. 

Selection of Tests 

Many of the most highly regarded primary reading tests were 
examined and a final selection was made of those most applicable 
to our purposes. The tests selected are widely recognized for 
their reliability. Each one used has benefitted from a great 













... ; .. 


. r 

. 


.. 




1 












, 

. 

« 






- 

. 

* : ■ : ; JO 


3 / _ . ‘ * ; . 


. . '. : .. , : . ; s 




y : 





















. 

' 




' 














- 41 


deal of research extended over many years. 

TABLE 3 

READING TESTS USED IN THE EXPERIMENT 


Name purpose of Test 


Gates Primary Reading Tests (Form 3) 

Type 1. V/ord Recognition . . To measure ability in word recognition 

Type 2. Sentence Reading . .To measure ability to read and under¬ 
stand sentences of increasing length 
and complexity 

Type 3. Paragraph Reading. . To measure ability to read and under¬ 
stand paragraphs of increasing length 
and complexity 


Metropolitan Achievement Tests, Primary I Battery: Form A 


Test 1. Word Picture . . 

Test 2. Word Recognition 
Test 3. Vtford Meaning . . 


To measure ability to recognize words 
and phrases 

Same purpose as for Test 1 

To measure pupil 1 s grasp of the meaning 

of words 


Gray f s Standardized Oral 

Reading Paragraphs ..... To measure oral reading ability In 

paragraphs of increasing difficulty 


Dolch-Gray Word Attack 

Test No. 1 ......... To measure ability to sound short 

vowels, single consonants and combina¬ 
tions of both 


Administration of Tests 

Due to the fact that a large number of tests were used in the 
experiment It was not possible to administer them all personally. 
Each teacher administered the Detroit First Grade intelligence Test 
to her own class. Fortunately all the teachers participating in the 
experiment had considerable previous experience in giving this test 





















42 


so that variations in the results due to differences in the way 
each teacher administered them should not he particularly significant. 

Of the tests administered at the conclusion of the experiment, 
Gray's Oral Reading Test and the Word Attack Test were also given by 
the teachers. The former test, in all cases, was given and marked 
with the assistance of other teachers in each school. Both tests 
were given during a stipulated period in June and full instructions 
for administering each test were provided. 

The three Gates tests were given by volunteer Faculty of Educa¬ 
tion students working in teams with each team concentrating on one 
test. The three Metropolitan tests were given by myself and another 
Faculty of Education student. As a preparation for giving these 
tests all teams familiarized themselves with the tests, tried them 
out on individual pupils,and then on neutral classes. There is every 
evidence to believe that the testing was done quite satisfactorily. 








CHAPTER VII 


THE TEST RESULTS 


In examining the test results below, it should be noted that 
Section I is devoted to a comparison of the results secured by 
the experimental class with those secured by the control classes 
in the various tests. Section II is confined to a comparison of 
the results secured by the Norwood pupils and the individual control 
class pupils who have been paired with them on the basis of ability 
and social background. All results in both sections are expressed 
as median grade scores except in the case of the Word Attack Test 
where the results are expressed as median raw scores. 

SECTION I 

As stated before, the tests have been specially selected to 
measure the extent to which the pupils trained by the two methods 
have approached or exceeded the recognized objectives of primary 
reading instruction. The more important of these objectives have 
been listed with the particular test results to which they are 
related for convenient reference. 

TABLE 4 

COMPARISON OF THE RESULTS SECURED ON THE 
WORD RECOGNITION TESTS 


OBJECTIVE Is TO PROMOTE ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE WORDS ACCURATELY 
Evidence; Recognizes at sight a wide range of words 


Name of Test 

Median Grade Scores 

Diff. in Favour 

Exp.Group 

Controls 

of Exp.Group 

Type I Word Recog. (Gates) 

1.75 

8.95 

- 1.2 

Test 1 Word Picture (Metro.) 

1.49 

2.64 

- 1.09 

Test 2 Word Recog. (Metro.) 

1.55 

2.69 

- 1.14 





































■ 

* 






. 

























■ 

. 


u 

















: 




. 






, 


. - 



■ 






. 

* 















- 44 


TABLE 5 

COMPARISON OF THE RESULTS OF THE WORD ATTACK TEST 


OBJECTIVE 2; TO PROMOTE ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE WORDS AND WORD 
GROUPS ACCURATELY WITH INCREASING INDEPENDENCE 
Evidence; Uses context, word form and phonetic clues in 
recognizing words which are familiar in sound 
and meaning "but not in appearance. 


Name of Test 

Median Grade Scores 

Diff. in Favour 

Exp. Group 

Controls 

of Exp. Group 

Word Attack Test No. 1 
(Dolch-Gray) 

i 

CD 

* 

H 

03 

16.5 

- 8.37 


Note 1. Analysis of objective 2 not comprehensive enough on basis 
of this test alone. Conclusions have to be based on 
reading of connected passages as well. See results of 
Oral Test for further evidence. 

Note 2. Norms are not provided for this test but the authors 
suggest that the scores of classes doing satisfactory 
work by the end of first year should fall within the range 
of 10 to 15 items correct. 


TABLE 6 

COMPARISON OF THE RESULTS OF THE COMPREHENSION TESTS 


OBJECTIVE 3: TO DEVELOP THE ABILITY TO INTERPRET THE MEANING OF 

INCREASINGLY LONGER UNITS OF MATERIAL 
Evidence: Reads longer units with clear comprehension of 

meaning. Follows printed directions correctly. 


Name of Test 

Median Grade Scores 

Diff. In Favour 

Exp.Group 

Controls 

of Exp. Group 

Type 2 Sentence Read.(Gates) 

1.48 

2.45 

- .97 

Type 3 par. Reading (Gates) 

1.73 

2.66 

- .93 

Test 3 ?iford Meaning (Metro.) 

1.34 

2.53 

- 1.19 


All scores indicated under the Control Group heading in 
Section I represent the median grade scores of the four control 
classes combined. 








































- 45 


TABLE 7 

COMPARISON OF THE RESULTS OF THE ORAL READING TEST * 


OBJECTIVE 4: TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF ORAL READING 
Evidence: Heads easily selections with no or few new words. 

Reads orally in phrase units. Heads orally showing 
clear interpretation. 


Grade Scores obtained by the Experimental and Control Pupils on 
Gray T s Oral Reading lest, grouped in five months 1 intervals; 


Groups 


Control 


Experimental 





• 

• 




-p 

-p 

-p 

-p 




0 

© 

0 

0 


d 


FQ 

m 

pq 

W 

w 

0 ,d 






d 

M P, 

hO 

hD 

w 

w 


♦H 

cd cd 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 


EH d 

•H 

•H 

•H 

•H 


0 

CjD 

r—1 

d 

d 

d 

d 

0 

0 cd 

•H 

o co 

o to 

o co 

O C\2 

o 

d d 

ed 

o • 

o * 

o « 

o • 

M 

•H cd 

Ph 

CO i—4 

CO c\2 

CO c\2 

CO to 


Eh Ph 

0 







P> d 

-P fd 

-P fd 

-P rd 

•P'd 

-P 

0 *d 

d o 

d d 

d d 

d d 

d d 

d 

&D cd 

0 Q 

© cd 

© cd' 

0 cd 

© cd 

0 

cd 0 

O CO 

o 

o 

o 

G 

o 

d cd 

d 

d 

d CO 

d 

d cr> 

d (XJ 

0 

0 o 

© • 

0 • 

© • 

0 . 

0 • 

o 

Ph Eh 

Ph H 

id H 

Ph C\3 

Ph W 

Ph to 

<4 eh 

19 

20 

19 

16 

10 

16 

1 min. 

1 sec. 

Of 33 t>upil£ 

3 tested, 30 

failed to 

4 min. 

score 

i. Three pupils scored 1 

.6, 

1 sec. 

1.8 and 1.9 







^ Observations Related to the Oral Headin g Te st 

In the Oral Reading test the pupils are tested individually 
and privately. They are required to read aloud standardized para¬ 
graphs of increasing difficulty while the examiner carefullv notes 
the time required and the kind and number of errors made. 

On the basis of his performance the child is graded according 
to a standardized scale. The test, while not as finely graduated 
in its lower limits as it should be for primary children, is yet 
recognized as the most authoritative in the field. The following 
are copies of the first two paragraphs in the test. According to 
the scale, a child who can read the first one with one or no errors 
would be credited with senior Grade I standing. A child who can 
read both paragraphs without error is entitled to a Grade Score of 
2 . 6 . 








































46 


- 1 - 

A boy had a dog. 

The dog ran into the woods. 

The boy ran after the dog. 

He wanted the dog to go home. 

But the dog would not go home. 

The little boy said, 

"I oannot go home without my dog." 
Then the boy began to cry. 


- 2 - 

Once there was a little pig. 

He lived with his mother in a pen. 

One day he saw his four feet. 

"Mother,” he said, "what can I do 
with my feet?" 

His mother said, "You can run with 
them." 

So the little pig ran round and 
round the pen. 


In attempting the first and succeeding paragraphs of the Oral 
Reading Test a majority of the experimental class pupils exhibited 
little ability to read fluently or independently. There was much 
random guessing. Very few words were recognized at sight. Some 
resorted to spelling out unfamiliar words themselves but in most 
cases failed to recognize the words when so treated. It was noticed, 
however, that many could get a word when it was 1 spelled out 1 for 
them. In all but three cases so many errors were made and so much 
time was taken to read a paragraph that no credit could be allowed. 


TABLE 8 

ANALYSIS OF DIRECTED AND SUPPLEMENTARY READING 


OBJECTIVE 5: TO STIMULATE INCREASING INTEREST IN READING 
Evidence; Enjoys class reading. Reads independently simple 
story material. 


For the purpose of measuring this objective teachers were asked 
to keep a careful record of the directed and supplementary reading 
done by their pupils, and to devise some method of assuring them¬ 
selves that the pupils had actually read the books credited to them. 
The data collected on this basis are therefore not scientifically 
accurate but will serve to give an approximation of what was done in 
this direction. 


1. The following is a record of the average amount of directed 
and supplementary reading done in the Control Classes; 


Type of Read, 

Pre-Primers 

Primers 

First Readers 

Directed 

3.8 

2.3 

1.6 

Supplementary 

7.4 

3.7 

1.0 

Totals 

11.2 

6.0 

2.6 















































47 


2. No supplementary reading was done by the pupils in the 
Experimental Group. After the transition to reading was made 
all their reading time was devoted to covering as many of the 
regular readers as time would permit. By the close of the year 
they had read together: 3 pre-primers, 1 primer, 1 first reader 
and 1 second reader. 

Note: Directed reading refers to the reading done by the 
pupils in the regular reading periods under the 
teacher's close supervision. Supplementary reading 
is largely independent reading with occasional 
assistance from the teacher when the need arises. 


SECTION II 

COMPARISON OF THE READING TEST RESULTS 
OF THE MATCHED PAIRS 


In this section the results secured by each Norwood pupil 
are compared with those secured by a corresponding pupil from 
the control classes whose ability and background is as nearly 
identical as nature and circumstances will permit. 

In order that the differences in the results may be perceived 
more readily they have been represented graphically. In the first 
chart on page 48 the composite or average reading score secured by 
each pupil on the three Gates tests has been indicated. The second 
chart on page 49 indicates the composite scores secured by the same 
pupils on the three Metropolitan tests. The 'paired 5 pupils are 
directly opposite each other on the charts so that differences for 
each pair can be readily noted. The pairs have been arranged on 
the charts in an ascending order according to their intelligence 
quotients. Detailed data in regards to the individual test results 
for each member of the matched groups may be found in Appendix I on 
pages 69 to 73. 



, 





♦ 








: 




« ' - . ■ ■ ' : 

. 































* 






»V : 

■ 








. 






* , /■■■■: , > . ■ 


, 




■ 




. 









- 48 


CHART 1 

Average Scores Made by Experimental Pupils Paired With 
Control Pupils on the Three Gates Tests 


9 "*> 



Note: Each number on the base line stands for a pair of 
matched pupils, one from the experimental group 
and one from one of the control classes. 


Average Grade Scores 

Median G.S. 
Exp. Group 

Median G.S. ^ 
Control Pupils 

Diff. in Eavor 
of Exp. Group 

(1) Word Recognition)! 

(2) Sentence Reading)> 

1.67 

2.75 

- 1.08 

(3)Paragraph Reading 



. - -.— 

























































































- 49 


CHART 2 

Average Scores Made by Experimental pupils Paired With 
Control Pupils on the Three Metropolitan Tests 



■Pairs of Experimental and Control Pupils 


Average Grade Scores 
on 

Metropolitan Tests 

Median 
of Exp. 
Group 

Median of 
Control 
Group 

Difference 

in Favor of 
Exp. Group 

(1) Word picture )] 

(2) Word Recog. ) 

(5) Word Meaning )J 

1 

1.42 

ro 

» 

O 

- 1.48 
































































































50 


1. Explanatory Comment on Chart 1 

In studying Chart 1 it should he noted that the 
variable factors, intelligence and home background, are 
under control. Differences in performance are therefore 
largely attributable to differences in the abilities of the 
teachers and the methods used* The fact that all but two 
of the control pupils have exceeded the performance of the 
experimental pupils and that they have been drawn from 
different classes would indicate that the factor of teaching 
ability can be discounted here or at least subordinated to 
differences in method. 

2. Explanatory Comment on Chart % 

The general comments made with respect to the results 
shown on Chart 1 are also applicable to those shown on Chart 
2. Although the Metropolitan Tests appear to be slightly 
more difficult than the Gates Tests, there is a high correla¬ 
tion between the two as is indicated by comparing the two 
charts and by examining the individual results. 

A study of the marked fluctuations in performance present 
in both groups affords an Interesting sidelight to the immediate 
investigation. These fluctuations appear to be a further mani¬ 
festation of the fact that a pupil 1 s progress is influenced by 
many complex factors. In this study, where pupils of about the 
same ability in either group are concerned, the influence of 
home background appears to have an important bearing on the 


matter 











CHAPTER VIII 


INTERPRETATION OF THE TEST RESULTS 

While our chief reliance must rest upon the objective data 
presented in Chapter VII when making comparisons, due considera¬ 
tion must also be given to the limited nature of the experiment 
and the need, therefore, to draw conclusions with scientific 
reservation. In spite of all the precautions and compensating 
measures taken it is recognized that the results secured by either 
group are susceptible to modification through several factors which 
have been difficult to control. Had the results been fairly close 
the problem of drawing conclusions would have been considerably 
more difficult. 

As it is, the comparatively wide differences in performance 
between the experimental and control groups, together with the 
marked discrepancy between the results actually achieved by the 
test class and those predicted for it by the originator of the 
system, warrant the making of several fairly definite observations 
and a number of inferences: 

1. Eviden ce Fails to Support Claims Made For the Turnley S37 , stem 

On the basis of this experiment there is no evidence to 
indicate that pupils trained by the Turnley system, under ordinary 
classroom conditions, are capable of attaining the goals predicted 
within the time specified. In this case, after making allowances 
for lost time, the training period was considered to be approximately 
nine months. According to the assertions made, the test pupils 
should have been able to read a grade three reader at the end of this 
time. There was no evidence to indicate that they were able to read 


























. 









■ 


































52 


at this level, as the ability to read is interpreted by present 
standards, or even from a purely mechanical standpoint. 

The experimental class did finish reading in unison a 
second grade reader by the end of the test period. As the 
accomplishment also involved considerable assistance by the 
teacher, including the recitation of passages after her, it was 
not considered to be a reliable basis for assessing individual 
performance* The procedure offered too many opportunities for 
rote memorization and the example of other pupils to influence 
perfo nuance. 

It was for these reasons that the pupils were tested individ¬ 
ually with standardized material with which they had had no 
previous acquaintance. On this basis the actual oral reading 
grade level achieved by the majority of the test class pupils was 
considerably lower than that reached by the average Grade I pupil 
after the same period of training. 

2. The Turnley System Is Less Effective in Helping the 
Children At'tain theDesIred“'Ob jeotives Than Present Method" 

While there was considerable variation in the performance 
of the control class pupils the evidence tended to indicate that 
the average pupil in the control classes was capable of reading 
more fluently and more expressively and was more Independent in 
attacking new words than was the case with most of the pupils In 
the test group. These observations appear to be supported by the 
results of the Word Attack test, the Oral Reading test, and from 
personal observation of the pupils while they were reading simple 





, 

, 

■ 

- 

„ • 

, 


. ' . .. .. - : 

*. • 

. 

> 

r 


- 




, 

t■ « 















53 


story material. 

The test results also tend to indicate that the Turnley 
system is less effective than present methods in developing 
the other specific reading objectives that are fundamental to 
modern reading efficiency. In word and phrase recognition, and 
in the comprehension of simple language units such as sentences 
and paragraphs, there appears to be approximately a year*s 
difference in attainment between the two groups. This observa¬ 
tion appears to be substantiated by the fact that practically 
the same differences in results were secured in both the Metro¬ 
politan and the Gates tests. 

3. The Relation of Special Features of the Turnley System 
to Heading Process Is Not Apparent 

This investigation was primarily concerned with making 
comparisons on the basis of end results in terms of recognized 
objectives. Nevertheless a study of the special features of 
the Turnley system was mad© to determine their psychological 
foundations. It was not possible to discover any fundamental 
relation of "Spelling in the Mind" or "Beading in the Mind" to 
the mental and physiological processes involved in learning to 
read either orally or silently. 

The pupils in the experimental class displayed varying 
ability in these two special activities; some of the better 
pupils showed commendable skill in recognizing words and 
sentences spelled aloud. However, no particular advantage could 
be discerned for acquiring facility in the techniques as their 
use would apparently have to be discontinued later on in the 

















54 


interests of reading efficiency. 

4. The Turnley System May Develop Greater Proficiency in 
Spelling . 

The system may have an advantage over modern methods in the 
area of spelling. By the Turnley system the child tends to learn 
the spelling of a word at the same time as he learns to recognize 
it. It is conceivable that the emphasis given to spelling in the 
daily lesson routines, in the process of learning to TT spell in 
the mind", and in attacking unfamiliar appearing words in the 
reading lesson might be helpful to the pupils with their spelling. 
On the other hand, it should be noted that any possible advantages 
in this direction would be partly offset by the fact that many of 
the sonsil tables list the words to be learned on the basis of 
similarities of sound. For example the "er" table contains the 
following words: err-burr-curr-fur-squirrel, slr-stir-were- 
goitre-theater. From this example it would appear that the non- 
phonetic nature of so many of our words v/hich hinders the pupil’s 
efforts to master their spelling would be operative to a consider¬ 
able extent in the Turnley system as well. As the spelling feature 
of the system was not, strictly speaking, considered to fall within 
the scope of the experiment it was not investigated to any extent 
and, therefore, any opinions expressed with respect to it can not 
be regarded as at all conclusive. 

5. Value of Turnley System for Individual Instruction Gan 
Only Be Conjectured 

The tests results serve to give an indication of the compari- 
tive merits of the two systems under ordinary conditions of class¬ 
room operation® The merits of the system on the basis of individual 























. 








* 






* 




, 

* 






a 

- 

' 

. 

« 









, 

. 


























55 


instruction can only be conjectured. It is conceivable that 
the average child could be taught to read effectively by this 
method. The high rate of repetition associated with the 
process together with the individual attention a child would 
get in mastering its structural features should enable him to 
acquire satisfactory facility with the mechanics of reading in 
a shorter time than is usual. However, experience has shown 
that effective results can be secured on the same basis with 
almost any system. Consequently the advantages attributed to 
the Turnley system in this respect are not considered to be 
particularly unusual® 
















, 






... 

. 


. 


* 

. •• •• ' " * . ■ .■ -• ■ 



















■ 
























CHAPTER IX 


A CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF THE TURNLEY SYSTEM 

It is felt that a complete explanation of the consistently 
low scores obtained by the test class can not be made on the basis 
of the test results alone* An analysis of the techniques employed 
and the principles upon which they are based may serve to shed 
further light upon the problem* Such an analysis may lack objective 
finality but there is considerable research evidence to support the 
views expressed. 

1. Relative Ineffectiveness of the Method is Probably Due . 
in Part, to a Failure to ModiTy~Tnstruclionta Meet Individual 

Differences. 

Countless tests have shown that children differ widely at the 
outset of instruction and such differences as are apparent at the 
beginning will become greater with time. Most primary teachers 
recognize this fact by grouping pupils according to ability, by 
delaying formal Instruction for some, and by generally moving 
forward in accord with the rate at which children mature and grow 
in experience* 

One of the recommended procedures of the Turnley system 
advocates having pupils advance in unison through the program at 
the same rate. The observed result was that the pupils become 
increasingly more dependent upon each other and finally as the 
work became more difficult the burden of reading came to rest on 
a few of the better pupils. The rest of the class repeated the 
words after them or the teacher with little apparent enjoyment or 
understanding of what they were reading. 

It is probable that had the pupils been grouped to progress 








57 


at different rates some of the better pupils might have given 
a more creditable performance. Failure to develop independent 
ability also helps to account for the class's generally weak 
showing in individual testing. 

2 • Considerable evidence, secured from observing the test 
pupils, indicates 'that they are notTphy sic ally or mentally cap~ 

able of advancing at the rate demanded of them. 

This observation is amply supported by independent opinion. 
Countless teachers have observed the futility of instruction and 
practice in a skill which the child is not ready to perform. 
Furthermore, experience has shown that premature or 'forced 1 
learning may be seriously detrimental to the child's emotional 
and social development. 1 By constant drill many may be able to 
pronounce the words with little or no understanding but the 
modern view does not consider that correct word pronunciation is 
actually reading. 

Learning to read is regarded as the most complex, formidable 
learning problem children have to face® Complete mastery of it 
is subject to the processes of maturation as is the case in 
walking and talking. There is reliable evidence to show that 


Ij.L. Thomson, Director of Child Guidance of the public 
schools of Glen Ridge, New Jersey, made a study of the attitude^ 
of children toward reading when they were allowed to "delay their 
attack upon reading until they were approximately seven*. The 
result of the postponement of reading was that the number of 
children who had "developed difficult social, emotional and mental 
traits, in the second grade", had "decreased by at least 90 per 
cent”. Further, "only one-fifth as many children disliked reading 
as formerly". — Journal of Education, CXYII, pp. 445 - 446. 













58 


maturation in the skill can not proceed in advance of the 
development of visual and auditory perception. The refine¬ 
ments of the skill must perforce await the development of 
refinement in the ocular-motor co-ordinations of the eye.^ 
While exceptional children have frequently mastered the 
mechanics of reading at early ages; for most children, present 
evidence tends to indicate that learning to read is a slow, 
gradual, evolutionary process. 

The rate of progress expected of the test pupils was 
definitely beyond the ability of most and placed considerable 
strain on the resources of the teacher. Comprehension and 
enjoyment were sacrificed in the interests of Covering 1 a 
specific amount in a given time. It was felt that much more 
satisfactory results might have been possible if more modest 
objectives had been set. 


3. The relative 1; 

¥ low attainment in oral reading ap] 

Dears 

to have resulted from 3 

having placed too much reliance on i 

bhe 


A contributing cause of the test class 1 s relatively poor 
showing in oral and silent reading appears to be the system 1 s 
reliance on the "Spelling Out" method as the sole means of 
effecting recognition of new Y/ords. 


^According to Xuella Cole "The eyeballs do not reach 
their adult shape until the child is eight or nine years old". 
Commenting further on the defects of vision among elementary 
pupils she writes: "When pupils enter school only about 20 
percent have absolutely noimal, fully developed eyes. This 
situation is due in part to the usual incidence of eye defects 
in any population and In part to mere immaturity ----- as late 
as the seventh grade, 44 per cent of the 1,685 children tested 
in one city still had defective eyes. Eyesight is thus a vital 
problem, especially In the first grade, where visual^immaturity 
has the greatest and most permanent effect upon reading". 

Luella Cole, The Improvement of Heading , pp. 28 - 29. 




























. 



' 


. 











. ' 






■ 



' 
















- 

- 

■ 

. 

‘ . }j_. , " .« -■ 




: 




. - 




, 






59 


Children who are dependent on only one method of attacking 
new words are seriously handicapped when the time comes for 
them to read independently. Children trained by present 
methods are trained to develop flexibility in word attack; they 
eventually become increasingly versatile in recognizing new 
words with the aid of contextual clues, phonics and other forms 
of word analysis. The test group depended entirely on spelling 
out all unfamiliar words. As this involved spelling out many 
words, which ordinarily can be recognized more readily by other 
methods, the test pupils were inclined to read more laboriously 
and more slowly than the control pupils. 

The emphasis on spelling has also been shown to be inimical 
to the proper development of eye movements and to reading with 
understanding. The spelling method was observed to encourage 
the habit of fixating on each letter as the child read. Besides 
seriously retarding the reading rate the method is considered 
detrimental to understanding. Experience has shown that pupils 
trained in this manner often have difficulty in seeing such a 
word as "house” as a whole. The word is seen as five different 
letter elements* h-o-u-s-e. 

Experience has also shovm that the habit of spelling out 
may persist throughout life. It is difficult to suppress habits 
of speech which have accompanied a child’s earliest efforts. The 
child is likely to articulate each word more or less completely 
to himself and consequently read at a slQ7/er rate than those 
taught by other methods. 











... 

: .. ‘ 

* 

, 

. 




















. 










* 

- 

• ’ 

' 








60 


4. It was observed that many of the pupils were not able 
to recognize at sight many of the commonest words used "in the 

tests. 

This weakness was a contributing factor to their low scores 
on the comprehension and word recognition tests and a major factcr 
in their hesitant performance in oral reading. 

An explanation for this deficiency can be discovered through 
examining the tests used and the Turnley tables. All of the tests 
used contain a representative sampling of the commonest or basic 
words that are found in reading material for the primary grades. 

It is contended that if a child cannot read or recognize these 
words, he will be handicapped In his efforts to read the more 
representative and important childrens books.^ 

A limited study of the Turnley tables which the pupils are 
required to learn reveals that many of the words contained are 
unusual and hence foreign to the childrens experience. The 
following list is indicative of some of the more unusual words 
found in the tables*. 


1. Archaic forms of words: 
dost hast wast 


2. Slang: 

tosh josh nab 


5. Colloquialisms: 4. Abbreviations used as Y/ords: 

hunk gab Feb. Lil. sis. lem. 

6. Words which are not in a child 1 s speaking vocabulary: 

bosh duff hawser sump torque avent 

goth kurd lout dib Bob 

6. Words which are not in Webster*s Collegiate Dictionary: 
bab kneed goy guffer nye jude 

soiled binge nul bub tye wilk 

coud gurd toff rolph pesk kurd 


^Arthur I. Gates, A Reading Vocabulary For the Primary 
Grades, (Bureau of Publications, Teachers 1 College, Columbia 
University, 1935.) 
























■ 


i ( 
















' 










' 





. 



■ 

* 

! 



.... c . 


* 





’ 




, 












; 



* 










: -j - 








. 

. 

* 







61 


5. The most serious criticism of the Turnley system lies 
in its apparent failure to provide instruction which would 

extend the "ability to read beyond the mere mastery of the" " 

mechanics of reading. 

From the modern standpoint "developing the ability to read" 
means not only learning to recognize printed symbols and to trans¬ 
late them into words and sentences, but also learning to interpret 
and think reflectively about what is read. 1 The major justifica¬ 
tion for teaching the child the reading skill is that he may there¬ 
by be enabled to derive meaning from the printed page. Any partial 
process from which the child does not derive meaning -- word drills, 
phonic drills, pronunciation exercises -- is not considered to be 
reading. These activities may facilitate certain reading skill but 
they do not in themselves constitute reading. 

From this viewpoint, the Turnley system is essentially a 
partial process. The system subordinates meaningful comprehension 
to the mechanics of reading. Its various features may facilitate 
mechanical progress but its lack of emphasis on meaning is a serious 
weakness. Evidence to show that meaning is under emphasized has 
been secured from observation of the system in operation and from 
a study of the practices advocated by the author in his various 
booklets. 

Parents and teachers using his system are admonished not to 
spend too much time on explaining words or discussing the stories 

^Freeman G. Macomber, Guiding Child Development in the 
Elementary School (American BooE~Oompany: New York7~1941, p. 186) 















. 













, 

« . 

* 

■ :• ■■ ' ■ 


. 

.. ■•••: I:Ioog 

. 















. 












62 


read.- The emphasis always appears to he on having the pupils 
just read so many pages of "material" per day or so many books 
per month, apparently without commentAfter the transition 
to reading has been made, the teacher is advised to "blaze the 
trail" for the pupils by reading new passages to them first, 
after which the same passage is read aloud by all the pupils, 

"in unison, or with selected pupils reading while the others 
watch." 3 

6. While a judicious use of partial processes has been 
known to facilitate mastery of the reading skill, yet the over ¬ 

emphasis of such processes has usually tended to have an inhibit ¬ 
ing effect on the fullest development of the' child 1 * s reading 
powers . 

The possible effectiveness of many of the special procedures 
of the Turnley system seem to have been nullified in this way. 
Chief among the procedures which appear to have been overstressed 
are the following: 

(a) Qver-emphasis on spelling out words . Reference has 
already been made to this in connection with oral reading. 

Besides slowing the rate of reading the method has been found to 
discourage reading in thought units. With the emphasis on single 
letter elements the child often fails to grasp the total meaning. 


Ip. Turnley, The Turnley Reading System , p. 26 

^Ibid , pp. 16,17 


3 Guide Book No. 4 , pp. 5,4 





















63 


H>) Over-emphasis on isolated lists of words . Experience 
has shown that words learned in isolation are not readily 
recognized in context; pupils are inclined to form associations 
between the words in the list rather than between the words and 
their meanings. It is considered very difficult to attach mean¬ 
ings to individual words in isolation and consequently pupils so 
trained are seriously handicapped when they attempt to read 
connected passages. 

Co) Over-emphasis on analytical exercises — The routine 
of blending f initial letters 5 , *double initial letters®, etc., 
with the sonsII elements is similar to the process involved in 
phonetics. As with the latter procedure, pupils develop the 
habit of becoming word conscious. Such a habit tends to make 
pupils neglectful of thought and slow to grasp larger units. 

Incidentally, reasonably conclusive experiments have proven 
that analytical procedures require more ability than learning by 
the whole method. In one experiment it has been shown, with 
respect to phonics, that children of high mental ability some¬ 
times fail to acquire phonic ability but those of low mentality 
are almost certain to fail. 1 The evidence tends to indicate 
that this is equally true in regards to the sonsil blending 
feature of the Tumley system. 


^arry L. Tate, "The Influence of Phonics on Silent 
Reading in Grade I”, Elementary School Journal , XXXVII (June, 
1937) pp. 752 - 763. 















_ 
































. 










' - . t ; : 


. 















< 














• b 


. 














■— . 











64 


(&) Over-emphasis on oral reading . The system*s failure 
to check comprehension tends to cause the oral reading to 
degenerate into word calling exercises, devoid of meaning. 
Furthermore, the failure to provide any silent reading exercises 
until the twelfth month -- in the experiment, none at all — 
encourages the child to articulate every word he uses with the 
result that the swifter reading required for silent reading is 
seriously impeded. 


IN CONCLUSION 

Throughout the experiment every effort has been made to 
maintain the maximum control over those factors most likely to 
have an Influence on the reading performance of the children. 

Due allowance was made, or compensating measures were taken, 
wherever It was felt that the control over variable factors was 
not adequate. Care was also taken to preserve an impartial 
attitude throughout, as the Turnley Reading System was carefully 
studied to determine its possible contribution to better reading 
instruction. 

In the course of conducting the experiment many data were 
secured which should prove helpful In evaluating present day 
methods and achievement, apart from the information obtained to 
help effect a satisfactory solution to our main problem. Many 
of the facts revealed by the investigation should tend to 
stimulate a greater Interest and probably result in some improve¬ 
ment in primary reading under present conditions. 

In making a final evaluation of the Turnley Reading System 

























( 

- 





















■ . 















•' - . - c ■ . :. . 










< . 

■ 













, 



























65 


our decision must rest largely upon the objective evidence 
available, but because of the way in which reading is related 
to other factors in the child's all-round development, subjective 
observations must be taken into consideration as well. Our deci¬ 
sion must be influenced not only by a consideration of specific 
objectives but also by an appreciation of the broader functions 
served by reading in the child's whole pattern of growth. 

On this basis, it is our considered opinion that the Turnley 
Heading System, is too narrow in its scope and too restricted in 
its objectives to be suitable for use in our schools in its 
entirety or in part under ordinary conditions of operation. 

It is recognized that the results secured might have been 
considerably improved if we had been privileged to modify the 
procedures used to conform with accepted psychological principles 
without violating the basic assumptions and techniques of the 
Turnley System. Nevertheless, with this fact given due considera¬ 
tion, there is no evidence to indicate that the advanced goals 
set for the system are capable of being achieved. 

Furthermore, it would appear that the system has a number of 
fundamental disadvantages that tend to outweigh to a considerable 
extent any merits that it may possess. It is also felt that any 
contribution the system might'make to the improvement of reading 
instruction would be of negligible value. Moreover, any special 
features of the system which could be adopted are already 
available to teachers in some better form in one or another of 
the methods of primary reading instruction commonly used at the 
present time. 











. 










7 o . : 7 

- 

1 

. 



- 



■ :>c 7 ' . ., : 









, 


. r..v:.‘ :c ■ ’cric o 9 




, ■: ■ •: . 

' 

« 




- ' - 




. 




< 






. 


, . * ' .. ":.c oc .■ . . 1 










' 

* 




APPENDIXES 


I. Statistical Data 


The following tables contain relevant data with respect to 
the chronological ages, mental ages and socio-economic ratings 
of the pupils in the experimental group, the four control groups 
and the control members of the matched 1 pairs*. Included also 
are summaries of the various test scores made by the respective 
groups upon which the test results mentioned in the text are based* 

1. DISTRIBUTIONS RELATED TO TABLES I AND II (TEXT) 


iron. 


.stribution, According to Ghrono- 
)gical Ages of Experimental "Class 
' and Control Groups 


-0 and over 

^10 --- 

L8--- 

r6---- — 

(-3—-— - 

j-g ——— 
^•l—— — — — — — — —— 

-11 — — — 

10- 

-9- 

-8- 

-6 -- 

5—— — 
-4 and under* 


otal 

Median Chron. 
ge ——- 


Exp. 
Grp. 


34 

6-3 


Matched 
Control 
Group 


34 


6-3 


Four 

Control 

Groups 


-6 

-1 

-3 

—4 

-4 

-3 

—7 

—8 
*10 
- 5 
■ 8 
•13 
■11 

• 5 

■ 4 

■ 6 

• 4 
■ 1 


- 1 


104 

6-2 


Distribution, According to Mental 
Ages of Experimental Class and 
Control Groups 


Mental 

Ages 

Exp. 

Grp. 

Matched 

Control 

Group 

Four 

Control 

Groups 

7-0 and over - 

6-11--- 

ft -If) - - - - 

—4— 
—1— 

— 

i 

-—23 
— 2 

4 

ft ... o . .. 



Q 

ft .rt ... ..- . -- . -- 

—3— 

9_ 

» *= a* mr»£j «■»-*• 

— - 7 

2 

6-6—-— 

ft k . 

—4— 
.—3 _ 

—3 — 
_ 2 _ 

4 

6-4———— — 
6-3— — — — 
6-2——— 

—4— 
-—4— 
—1— 

—6—- 

— 9 

— - 8 

3 

— 3 

0”i” — 

p; 1 1 _ _ „ 

—1— 


— 3 
_ , 4 

5-10— — 

5-9 ——. 
p; q _. 


_ 

— 3 
_2 

5-7— — — — . 
p; a „ _ „. 



— 2 
_ 2 

k Pi 




D-D — ------i 

5-4 and under-’ 


_g_ 

_ 6 




Total 

Median Mental 
Age — ——— 

34 

6-5 

34 

6-5 

98 A 

6-6 


t Mental Ages for 6 cases not supplied by participating control classes 


66 










































































- 67 


2. DISTRIBUTIONS RELATED TO TABLES IV AND VI (TEXT) 


(a) Distribution, According to Reading Scores on Three Gates Tests, 
Of Experimental and Control Groups. 


—---- - - 

Reading 

Scores 

Word Recognition 
Gates - Type 1 (48i 

Sentence Reading * 

I Gates - Type 2 (45 

. Paragraph Readin 
) Gates Type 3 (26 

Exp. 

Control 

Exp. 

Control 

Exp. 

Control 

41 and over 

1 

47 


23 



40 


3 


1 



39 

1 

2 


1 



38 


0 


5 



37 


2 


2 



36 


4 


1 



35 

1 

3 


4 



34 


2 


3 



;33 


2 


7 



32 


3 


5 



.31 


3 


4 



30 


1 


9 



29 

1 

4 


2 



28 


5 


0 



27 

1 

1 


0 



26 

1 

0 


3 


3 

25 

1 

1 


3 


7 

24 

1 

2 


6 


6 

|! 23 


3 


6 


9 

22 


0 


3 


10 

21 


4 

1 

2 


12 

20 

1 

0 


1 

1 

3 

, 19 


2 


1 


12 

18 


1 


2 


7 

17 

1 

1 

1 

0 

1 

4 

16 


0 


0 


11 

15 


4 

2 

2 

2 

6 

14 

1 

1 


1 


4 

13 

1 

1 


3 


4 

12 

3 

1 


0 


2 

11 

3 

2 

2 

0 


3 

10 

1 

1 

1 

2 

1 

0 

9 

2 

3 

5 

3 

5 

1 

8 

3 

1 

4 

1 

4 

2 

7 

2 

2 

3 

2 

4 

1 

6 

2 


1 

0 

1 

1 

5 

1 


5 

1 

5 

1 

4 

1 


3 


4 

0 

3 

1 


2 


2 

3 

2 



1 


2 

2 

1 



1 




0 

1 


0 




Total 

32 

~T3T“ 

32 

109 

32 

114 

| Median 

12 

36 

8 

31 

8 

19 

Grade Score 

1.75 

2.95 

1.48 

2.45 

1.73 

2.66 











































68 


(b) 


Distribution, According to Grade Scores on Three Metropolitan 
Tests (Primary Battery 1), of Experimental and Control Groups 


Reading 

Grade 

Scores 

Word 

Metro. 

Picture 

-Test 1 

Word Recognition 

Metro.-Test 2 

Word Meaning 
Metro.-Test 3 

Exp. 

Control 

Exp. 

Control 

Exp. 

Control 

3.4 — 3 . 6 

CZ ^ rz rz 


1 

" 




11 

O . 1 ” 3.3 

2.8 - 3.0 

O C or i 

1 


1 

30 


5- 

1 

13 

1 

Sl- 


19 

— 2 *7 

O O O A 

1 

22 

2 

19- 


£2- 

TO O T 

1 

20 


18 

-2- 

19 

1.9 — 2.1 

1.6 - 1.8 
“5 f? *i r 

1 

~T~ 

”“3“" 

—ET- 

-S' 

14 

5 

9 

7 

8 


9 

1 • — 1 #5 

17 

7 

11 

7 

8 

8 

1 • 0 — <» 1 • 2 

5 

5 

7 

1 

T6- 

E - 

Total 

Median 

Grade Score 

32 

1.49 

116 

2.64 

32 

1.55 

116 

2.69 

- 

1.34 

116 

2.53 


3. 


- DISTRIBUTIONS RELATED TO TABLE V 
Distribution, According to Raw Scores on the Dolch-Gray Word Attack 
lest No. 1. Of the Experimental Group, the Matched Control Group and 


Reading 

Dolch-G 

ray Word Attack Test No. 1 

Scores 

Exp.Group 

Matched Controls 

Combined Controls 

25 


2“- 

- g - 

24" 


3 

8 



T” 

8 



1 

8 

21 

- -Of*— -- - - - 


2 

12 

CTO 


3 “ 

6 

XP 

" 1 

2 

2 

18“ 

1 

. . 2 


' 17 

1 

1 

a 

16 

2 

2 

4 

15 

0 

1 

A 

14 

0 

. 0 

5 

~ ~15 

1 

. ... 0 ... 

7 ... . 

‘ 12“ 

1 

. 2 

5 

- -- Ir —-—“-— 

0 

1 

7 

10 

~~T~ 

2 

7 

9 

2 

0 

3 

5 “■ 

“4“ 

0 

1 

7 

4 

1 

3 

6 

2 

4 

7 

5 

“5“ 


1 

.4 

3 


ft 

3 

1 


2 . 

2 

1 



1 




-0- 




Total 

Median 

Score 

33 

8.13 

33 

19.25 

122 

16.5 




























































































4. DATA RELEVANT TO MATCHED PAIRS 


i 

ii 


»• 



L 


3 . 


B. 

7. 

I 

8. 


0. 



L Z. 



\ 


A. 

LB. 


Chart, Showing Relevant Mental and Social Data of the Matched Pairs; 
also Scores Made in the Oral Reading and Word Attack Tests. The 
Pairs Have Been Arranged in An Ascending Order According to 
Intelligence Test Scores. 

Note: The first named of each pair (CAPITAL LETTERS) is a member of 
the experimental group; the second named in each case (lower 
case letters) is that of a pupil in one of the control classes. 


Matched 

C.A. 

M.A. 

I.Q,.# 

Socio-Ec, 

Gray 1 s 

Dolch-Gray 

Pairs 


(Adjs'd.) 

Status 

Oral 

Word Attack 

GARRY 

6-8 

4-9 

64 

13 

0 

5 

Terry 

6-2 

5-0 

74 

10 

0 

15 

LORAINE P. 

6-6 

5-6 

77 

20 

0 

9 

Maureen 

6-7 

5-6 

76 

12 

0 

6 

IVAN 

6-0 

! 5-3 

80 

— A 

0 

7 

Donald 

6-1 

5-3 

78 

— A 

1.4 

18 

GLEN G. 

! 6-7 

5-11 

82 

__ 

0 

10 

David 

6-9 

5-9 

78 

4 

0 

6 

GERRY 

6-6 

5-11 

84 

11 

0 

8 

Elvin 

6-3 

5-11 

87 

5 

0 

7 

LORNA 

6-3 

6-0 

89 

20 

0 

5 

Betty 

6-5 

6-3 

90 

15 

3.4 

19 

ELLEN 

6-3 

6-3 

90 

17 

0 

5 

Joyce S. 

6-4 

6-4 

93 

13 

2.6 

23 

MARILYN 

6-4 

6-3 

91 

12 

0 

3 

Joanne 

6-2 

6-3 

94 

28 

3.4 

21 

JEAN 

6-6 

6-6 

93 

— A 

0 

12 

Patricia 

6-7 

6-5 

97 

11 

1.8 

10 

SYLVIA 

6-8 

6-8 

93 

12 

0 

13 

Joyce H. 

6-11 

6-8 

89 

6 

1.4 

17 

KEITH 

6-1 

6-3 

95 

13 

0 

7 

Robert 

6-1 

6-4 

97 

17 

2.9 

23 

WILL 

6-3 

6-5 

95 

19 

0 

7 

Teddy 

6-3 

6-4 

93 

17 

3.4 

20 

JACK 

5-9 

5-11 

95 

19 

0 

8 

Alastair 

6-0 

5-11 

91 

15 

3.2 

23 

GLEN M. 

6-4 

6-7 

96 

14 

0 

7 

Garry 

6-6 

6-7 

94 

11 

1.8 

25 

PATRICIA ! 

6-5 

6-8 

96 

17 

0 

4 

Beth 

6-9 

6-9 

99 

17 

2.6 

16 











































' 















- 








. . 





















70 



Matched 

Pairs 

C.A. 

M .A. 1 I.Q,.# 

(Adjs'd.) 

1 Socio-Ec. 

Status 

Gray 1 s Dolch-Gray 

Oral Word Attack 

L6. 

JAMES J. 

6-3 

6-6 

97 

18 

0 

6 


George 

6-2 

6-6 

98 

14 

1.9 

10 

: A 

KENNETH 

5-4 

6-3 

98 

16 

0 

16 


Arthur 

5-11 

6-3 

98 

14 , 

1.9 

6 

L7. 

EDWIN 

6-4 

6-8 

98 

— A 

0 

4 


Bobby 

6-3 

6-7 

98 

— A 

2.6 

18 

18. 

PHYLLIS 

6-2 

6-6 

98 

9 

0 

4 


Pauline 

6-5 

6-3 

90 

8 

1.8 

12 

19. 

ROSE 

5-11 

6-4 

98 

13 

0 

2 


Helen 

5-11 

6-4 

98 

14 

2.8 

21 

80. 

JANICE 

6-3 

6-7 

98 

16 

0 

10 


Joan 

6-2 

6-10 

102 

22 

3.2 

22 

21. 

ANITA 

6-7 

6-11 

98 

10 

0 

10 


Arlene 

6-6 

6-11 

100 

14 

3.4 

24 

! 22. 

BARBARA 

5-9 

6-2 

100 

15 

0 

8 


Gail 

5-11 

6-3 

98 

13 

3.1 

19 

23. 

JAMES R. 

5-10 

5-10 

98 

16 

0 

10 

if 

Dennis 

5-11 

5-11 

98 

21 

0 

11 

1 

DARLENE 

5-10 

6-4 

101 

4 

0 

__ 


Marilyn 

5-11 

6-3 

98 

9 

0 

10 

24. 

FRANCES 

6-0 

6-1 

101 

22 

0 

9 


Donna 

6-0 

6-4 

98 

7 

2.4 

20 

25. 

MALCOIM 

5-9 

6-4 

103 

12 

0 

8 


David 

5-8 

6-5 

104 

16 

1.6 

6 

26. 

JOYCE 

5-10 

6-5 

103 

13 

0 

5 


Vera 

5-8 

6-6 

107 

14 

1.8 

24 

1 

27. 

THOMAS 

6-9 

7-6 

104 

17 

0 

5 


Frank 

6-8 

7-4 

101 

16 

3.2 

23 

28. 

HAZEL 

5-9 

6-5 

104 

25 

0 

6 


Patricia C. 

5-10 

6-4 

101 

24 

2.6 

12 

29. 

GARTH 

6-6 

7-8 

111 

26 

1.8 

19 


Paul 

6-5 

7-8 

112 

23 

3.9 

20 

30. 

IAN 

5-7 

6-10 

117 

17 

0 

18 

5 

Robert G. 

5-10 

6-9 

109 

17 

2.8 

16 

" 

31. 

MURRAY 

6-3 

7-7 

116 

22 

1.6 

16 


Tommy 

6-4 

7-6 

112 

22 

4.0 

25 

32. 

ALAN 

5-8 

7-11 

139 

15 

1.9 

17 


John 

5-11 

8-2 

138 

13 

4.0 

24 














































•--' r • "• " ' ' 












■ 

■ :• 










. 















, 



















71 


A Unable to contact parents, or unable to arrange 
for a mutually convenient time to secure 
necessary information to complete 3ims Socio- 
Economic rating. 


A A These pairs not represented on Charts I, II, 

due to absence during testing period or 
transfer to some other school, of members of the 
experimental group. 


# As mental ages derived from Detroit Beginning 

Grade I Intelligence Tests were found to be too 
high, it has been our practice to make certain 
adjustments to the calculated I.Q. to secure a 
more exact indication of the pupils* intelligence 
rating. Corresponding changes were not made in 
the Mental Ages given here as it was felt that 
their function in providing a basis for comparison 
could be served satisfactorily as they were. (It 
may be noted that the publishers of the test have 
since eliminated the need for making adjustment 
in their 1946 revised edition of the test.) 






72 


1 . 

2 . 

3 . 

4 • 

5 . 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9 . 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 


5. DATA BELATED TO MATCHED PAIRS (FIGURES 1 and 2 TEXT) 

Chart, Showing Grade Scores Made by Matched Pairs in the Three Gates 
and the Three Metropolitan Reading Tests. The Pairs Have Been 
Arranged in Ascending Order According to Scores Made on Intelligence 
Tests. 


Matched 

Gates Primary Tests 

Metropolitan Primary Batterv 

Pairs 

W r ord 

Sent. 

Par. 

Av. 

Word 

Word 

V/ord 

Average 


Rec. 

Mean. 

Mean. 

Piet. 

Rec. 

Mean. 

GARRY 

1.25 

1.45 

1.45 

1.4 

1.2 

1.3 

1.3 

1.3 

Terry 

3.0 

1.95 

2.1 

2.4 

1.6 

2.0 

1.4 

1.7 

LORRAINE P. 

1.7 

1.52 

1.8 

1.7 

1.5 

1.4 

1.6 

1.5 

Maureen 

1.35 

1.5 

1.45 

1.4 

1.2 

1.5 

1.5 

1.4 

IYAN 

1.2 

1.48 

1.45 

1.4 

1.3 

1.2 

1.0 

1.2 

Donald 

2.45 

2.1 

2.0 

2.2 

— 

— 

— 

ab. 

GLEN G. 

1.2 

1.58 

1.6 

1.5 

1.2 

1.7 

1.3 

1.4 

David 

1.8 

1.5 

1.6 

1.6 

1.6 

2.0 

1.5 

1.7 

GERRY 

1.85 

1.57 

1.6 

1.7 

1.6 

1.3 

1.4 

1.4 

Elvin 

2.2 

2.0 

2.2 

2.1 

2.0 

2.2 

1.9 

2.0 

LORNA 

1.55 

1.57 

1.6 

1.6 

1.3 

1.7 

1.0 

1.3 

Betty 

3.29 

3.1 

2.75 

1.4 

2.7 

3.0 

2.6 

2.8 

ELLEN 

1.4 

1.57 

1.7 

1.6 

1.5 

1.3 

1.0 

1.3 

Joyce S. 

3.32 

2.65 

2.9 

3.0 

2.6 

3.3 

2.9 

2.9 

MARILYN 

1.4 

1.48 

1.6 

1.5 

1.1 

1.5 

1.0 

1.2 

Joanne 

3.2 

2.65 

2.6 

2.6 

2.6 

2.4 

2.5 

2.5 

JEAN 

2.33 

1.55 

1.75 

1.7 

1.8 

1.8 

1.2 

1.6 

Patricia 

2.47 

2.4 

2.5 

2.5 

2.2 

2.7 

2.1 

2.3 

SYLVIA 

2.47 

1.55 

1.8 

1.9 

1.6 

2.1 

1.4 

1.7 

Joyce H. 

2.8 

2.45 

2.75 

2.7 

2.1 

2.7 

1.8 

2.2 

KEITH 

1.5 

1.5 

1.75 

1.6 

1.4 

1.5 

1.2 

1.4 

Robert 

ab. 

— 


2.2 

3.1 

3.3 

2.4 

2.9 

WILL 

2.15 

1.62 

1.85 

1.9 

1.8 

1.7 

1.5 

1.7 

Teddy 

3.32 

2.9 

3.22 

3.1 

3.1 

2.7 

3.0 

2.9 

JACK 

2.37 

1.45 

1.9 

1.9 

1.8 

1.5 

1.8 

1.7 

Alastair 

3.29 

3.4 

3.44 

3.4 

3.1 

3.0 

2.9 

3.0 

GLEN M. 

1.65 

1.45 

1.55 

1.6 

1.3 

1.7 

1.2 

1.4 

Garry 

3.3 

2.65 

2.75 

2.9 

2.7 

2.5 

3.0 

2.7 

PATRICIA 

1.75 

1.53 

1.8 

1.7 

1.5 

1.3 

1.3 

1.4 

Beth 

3.25 

2.4 

2.3 

2.7 

3.1 

3.0 

3.8 

3.3 

JAMES J. 

1.2 

1.48 

1.7 

1.5 

1.3 

1.5 

1.6 

1.5 

George 

1.9 

2.1 

1.95 

2.0 

1.8 

2.1 

2.0 

1.9 


































































73 


Matched 

Gates 

Primary Tests 

Metropolitan Primary Battery 

Pairs 

Word 

Rec. 

Sent. 
Mean. 

Par. 

Mean. 

Av. 

. . _ 

Word 

Piet. 

Word 

Rec. 

Word 

Mean. 

A vcvacte s 

o 

KENNETH 

Arthur 

2.65 

2.35 

2.6 

ab. 

2.5 

2.5 

2.2 

2.3 

2.3 

EDWIN 

1.55 

1.30 

1.55 

1.5 

1.5 

1.2 

1.0 

1.2 

Bobby 


— 

— 

ab. 

3.0 

2.5 

2.7 

2.7 

PHYLLIS 

1.27 

1.53 

1.8 

1.5 





Pauline 

1.9 

1.95 

2.3 

2.0 

1.8 

2.1 

2.2 

2.0 

ROSE 

1.7 

1.47 

1.65 

1.6 

1.5 

1.2 

1.0 

1.2 

Helen 

3.29 

2.9 

3.35 

3.2 

3.0 

3.0 

2.7 

2.9 

JANICE 

1.5 

1.45 

1.7 

1.6 

1.3 

1.4 

1.2 

1.3 

Joan 

3.29 

3.4 

3.75 

3.4 

3.1 

3.3 

2.6 

3.0 

ANITA 

2.3 

1.9 

2.2 

1.8 

2.3 

2.0 

2.1 

2.1 

Arlene 

3.33 

3.45 

3.35 

3.4 

3.2 

3.3 

3.5 

3.3 

BARBARA 

1.3 

1.52 

1.5 

1.4 

1.3 

1.5 

1.0 

1.3 

Gail 

3.3 

3.2 

3.55 

3.3 

2.8 

3.0 

2.2 

2.7 

JAMES R. 

2.0 

1.52 

1.60 

1.7 

1.4 

2.5 

2.2 

2.0 

Dennis 

2.27 

2.0 

2.3 

2.2 

2.1 

2.4 

2.3 

2.2 

DARLENE 




ab. 

1.1 

1.6 

1.0 

1.2 

Marilyn 

2.3 

2.2 

2.2 

2.2 

2.2 

2.2 

1.8 

2.0 

FRANCES 

1.7 

1.42 

1.75 

1.6 

1.5 

1.2 

1.3 

1.3 

Donna 

2.9 

2.45 

3.1 

2.8 

2.2 

2.5 

2.1 

2.3 

MALCOLM 

1.75 

1.35 

1.5 

1.5 

1.4 

1.1 

1.0 

1.2 

David 

2.55 

1.7 

2.3 

2.2 

2.0 

1.9 

2.1 

2.0 

JOYCE 

1.8 

1.48 

1.7 

1.7 

1.3 

1.7 

1.3 

1.4 

Tera 

3.1 

3.0 

3.1 

3.1 

2.7 

3.0 

3.0 

2.9 

THOMAS 

1.75 

1.30 

1.55 

1.5 

1.3 

1.2 

1.0 

1.2 

Frank 

3.32 

---- 

3.55 

3.4 

2.9 

3.3 

2.5 

2.9 

HAZEL 

1.45 

1.5 

1.55 

1.5 

1.2 

1.2 

1.0 

1.1 

Patricia C. 

3.1 

2.55 

2.5 

2.7 

2.8 

3.0 

3.5 

3.1 

GARTH 

2.8 

2.3 

2.2 

2.4 

2.6 

3.0 

2.0 

2.5 

Paul 

3.33 

3.4 

3.35 

3.3 

3.3 

3.3 

3.5 

3.3 

IAN 

2.4 

1.75 

1.8 

2.0 

1.9 

1.9 

1.7 

1.8 

Robert G. 

3.15 

2.5 

— 

2.8 

2.9 

3.0 

2.9 

2.9 

MURRAY 

3.2 

2.7 

2.4 

2.8 

3.1 

2.7 

2.1 

2.6 

Tommy 

3.33 

3.45 

3.75 

3.5 

3.2 

3.3 

3.5 

3.3 

ALAN 

3.1 

2.7 

2.9 

2.9 

2.8 

3.3 

2.4 

2.8 

John 

3.33 

3.45 

3.75 

3.5 

3.2 

3.3 

2.7 

3.1 













































II. Samples of the Tests Used 


The following pages contain samples of the various 
standardized tests used in connection with the study. 
Included are: 

Page 

1. Detroit Beginning First Grade Intelligence 

Test, Form A ................. . 75 

2. Sims Score Card For Socio-Economic Status, 

Form G ...... ..... 83 

3. Gates Primary Reading Tests. 85 

Type 1, Word Recognition, Form 3 
Type 2, Sentence Reading, Form 3 
Type 3, Paragraph Reading, Form 3 

4. Metropolitan Achievement Tests, primary I 

Battery. .................... 97 

Test 1, Word picture, Form A 
Test 2, Word Recognition, Form A 
Test 3, Word Meaning, Form A 

5. Dolch-Gray Basie Reading Tests ......... 105 

Word Attack Test No. 1 

6. Gray’s Standardized Oral Reading Paragraphs. e . 106 


74 























DETROIT 

BEGINNING FIRST-GRADE INTELLIGENCE TEST 

(Revised) 


By Anna M. Engel, Assistant Director, Special Education, Detroit Public Schools, 
and Harry J. Baker, Director, Psychological Clinic, Detroit Public Schools 

Last name.First name.Initial. . . Sex: M. . . F 

City.School.Birth date. 

Rating...Mental Age.IQ. 

EXAMINATION: FORM A 


No. OF 
Test 

Score 

1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 


Total 







# ft 






Score: Test 1 


Published 1937 by World Book Company, Yonkers-on-Hudson, New York, and Chicago, Illinois 
Copyright 1935 by Anna M. Engel and Harry J. Baker. Copyright 1921 and 1937 by World Book Company. Copyright in Great Britain. All rights reserved 

PRINTED IN U.S.A. DBF6IT-16 

This test is copyrighted. The reproduction of any part of it by mimeograph , hectograph , or in any other ^ p~ 

way, whether the reproductions are sold or are furnished free for use, is a violation of the copyright law. / 








































Detroit Beg. First-Grade Int.: Rev.-A 















































Detroit Beg. First-Grade Int.: Rev.-A 



Score 


pa^ 

77 
























































Detroit Beg. First-Grade Int.: Rev.-A 
































































Detroit Beg. First-Grade Int.: Rev.-A 



1 


Test 5 



3 





5 


Score 


























































Test 7 


Detroit Beg. First-Grade Int.: Rev.-j 






7 

























































Test 8 


Detroit Beg. First-Grade Int.: Rev .-A 


Test 9 


























Detroit Beg. First-Grade Int.: Rev.-/ 


Test 10 




















An Adaptation of the 

SIMS SCORE CARD FOR SOCIO-ECONOMIC STATUS 


Name__Score_ 

Chron. Age Mental Age 

Underline the Righ t Ans wer 

1* Have you a telephone in your home? .. Yes No 

2* Is your home heated hy a furnace in the basement? Yes No 

3, Do you have a bathroom that is used by your family alone?. Yes No 

4. Do you have a bank account in your own name? Yes No 


i5* Did your father go to university? ....* * Yes No 

6* Did your mother go to university? . •••••••••...»•.• Yes No 

I 

7. Did your father go to high school? ... Yes No 

1 8. Did your mother go to high school? Yes No 


j 9. Does your mother (or the lady of the home in which you live) 

regularly attend any lecture courses of which you know?... Yes No 
10. Do you have a room all to yourself? .. Yes No 


i 

Jil. Do you take private lessons in music.?*... Yes No 

12 , Do you take private lessons in dancing? .. ......... Yes No 

13. Does your mother belong to any clubs or organizations of 

which you know? ..Yes No 


14. Did you go to a kindergarten before starting Grade I? .... Yes No 

15. Does your family attend concerts? 

Never Occasionally Frequently 

16. Where do you regularly spend your summers? 

At Home Away from Home 

17. How often do you have dental work done? (Underline only one) 

Never When Needed Once a Year Oftener 

18. How many servants, such as a cook, a housekeeper, a chauffeur, or 
a maid, do you have in your home? 

One Part Time One or More All the Time 


None 

























- 2 - 


19. Does your family own an auto which is not a truck? 

None One Two or More 

If your family does own an auto, write the make of the at to on 
this line ( ... ■» r> o f* *5 © c o «• * o * r> «* ' 

20. Hov; many magazines are regularly taken in your home? 

None One Two Three or More 

If any are taken, write the names of three of them -- or as 
many as are t aken - - on the se line s ( tV > 


21. About how many hooks are in your home? (Be Tery careful ..with 
this one. A row of hooks three feet long would not have mere 
than twenty-give hooks in it.) 

None 1 to 25 26 to 125 126 to 500 More 

22. How many rooms does your family occupy? 

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 More 

How many persons occupy these rooms? 

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 More 

23. Write your father r s occupation on this line 


Does he own Part All None of his business? (Under¬ 
line' ; 

Does he have any title, such as president, manager, foreman, 
boss, etc? .... Yes No 


If he does have such a title, write it on this line 

... ) 

How many persons work for him"? (Underline the right number) 


u. 


/ 


None 


1 to 5 


5 to 10 


More than 10 























GATES PRIMARY READING TESTS 

For Grade 1 and Grade 2 (First Half) 

Type JL Word Recognition form 3 

|] : = 

Lte your name here . 

en is your birthday?.How old are you?. 

e.School.Grade. 



did 

egg 

dog 

two 

be 

bed 

bag 

she 



he Examiner: 1. See that each child has a pencil. 2. Dis- 
te papers. 3. Have children fill in blanks at the top of the 
! (with your help). 4. Instructions to children: "I want you 
ok at the first picture, this one up here (holding up your 
and pointing to the picture of the dog). Next to it there 
ome words. One of the words goes with the picture. You 
> draw a ring around that one word that tells about the pic- 
Put your finger on the word that belongs with the picture, 
t is it? (Let one child answer.) That’s right, ‘dog.’ The 
words are 'did, 5 'egg,’ 'dog,’ and 'two’ (pointing to the 
s on your own copy and making sure children look up at 
| copy). We are going to draw a ring around the word 'dog’ 
ise that’s the one that tells the most about the picture, 
yone find the word 'dog’ on your paper and draw a ring 
id it. (Check to make sure children have marked the correct 
,.) Now look at the box right underneath that one. Find 
jfvord there that goes with the picture. What is it? (Let a 
answer.) That’s right, 'bed.’ The four words are 'be,’ 'bed,’ 
and 'she.’ We are going to draw a ring around the word 'bed’ 
ise that’s the one that tells us the most about the picture, 
yone find the word 'bed’ and draw a ring around it. (Check 
ake sure that each child has marked the correct word. Con- 
* in the same way for the third and fourth boxes. When you 
lustrating with your copy ask children to look up if need be.) 


Do not open your books until I tell you to. Now I am going 
to show what we are to do next. On the inside of the book are 
some more pictures and words. (Examiner holds up copy of the 
test showing the inner pages.) You are to do the first one, then 
the next one below it, etc. (Examiner points down first column, 
then second, etc., and also demonstrates order on all three pages.) 
As soon as you have drawn a ring around the one word for one 
picture, go right ahead and do the next one. Now remember, 
first you are to look at the picture, then at the words next to the 
picture, then find the one word that goes best with the picture 
and make a ring around that one word. Make a ring around one 
word only for each picture. Do you understand? All right. Open 
your books and BEGIN. Go ahead.” 5. Inspect the work of 
each, child; see that each works from top to bottom of columns 
and that each follows the pages in order. Urge children individ¬ 
ually to try the examples in order but do not tell them the an¬ 
swers. Discourage dawdling over difficult problems; tell them to 
try the next. Watch for children who make rings indiscrimi¬ 
nately and tell them to make only one ring for each picture. 6. 
The signal STOP is given at the end of 15 minutes. Collect 
papers immediately. 7. The score is the number of exercises 
marked correctly minus one-third the number incorrect. If more 
than one word in an exercise is marked, that exercise is scored 
as incorrect. For further details see the Manual of Directions. 


BUREAU OF PUBLICATIONS, TEACHERS COLLEGE 
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK 
Copyright, 1943, by Arthur I. Gates 


id in U. S. A. 











































made 

girl 


ball 

drum 


hay 

end 



are 

hen 


ball 

cent 

duck 

ears 

fox 

cup 

dig 

not 


duck 

face 



all 

eye 


fish 

rock 

fly 

pig 




wish 

nest 

does 

nose 

horse 

home 

ring 

shoe 

























dogs door 

corn wish 

feet city 

doll fire 

talk wolf 

work wood 

lip stop 

ship shoe 

rope hop 

road ride 

monkey mouse 
name money 

garden grow 

wash gate 

riding rooster 
hiding raining 



37 























































pair pony 
money puppy 

shake late 
stick skate 

dance daisy 
prince down 

sweet sweater 
swallow sister 

moon spring 
soon spoon 

band hand 
bank bark 

funny fairy 
dirty family 

wheel wheat 
what smell 































GATES PRIMARY READING TESTS 

For Grade 1 and Grade 2 (First Half) 

Type 2. Sentence Reading 


: your name here. 

i is your birthday?.How old are you? . . 

• ..School.Grade 


us is a cat. i 
us is a book. II 
us is a cup. Ill 



ie girl has a book. I 
te cup is white. II 
Le cat has a ball. Ill 









Examiner: 1 . See that each child has a pencil. 2. Distribute 
3. Have children fill in blanks at top of page (with your help). 
motions to children: “We are going to see how well you can 
)o you see the sentences and the pictures in the boxes on the 
ige of your booklet? Everyone look at the first sentence—up 
ustrating with your own copy). What does it say? (Have child 
3 sentence aloud.) Yes, it says ‘This is a cat.’ Now look at the 
5 in the box beside the sentences. Which one tells the same thing 
y) as the sentence? Yes, that’s right, the cat. Now notice the 
the end of this sentence, ‘This is a cat.’ How many lines are 
One. That is right. Now draw one line on the picture of the 
how that it tells about this sentence, like this (illustrating with 
m copy). (Check to see that they all have marked it correct- 
>w look at the second sentence. What does it say? (Have child 
itence aloud.) Yes, that is right, it says ‘This is a book.’ Now 
* picture that goes with this sentence. Which one is it? That’s 
he picture of the book. Put your finger on it. Do you see the 
the end of this sentence? How many are there? Two. That is 
Now draw two lines on the picture of the book to show that it 
th that sentence, like this (illustrating with your own copy), 
to make sure that they have marked it correctly.) Now look at 
tence right under that one. What does it say? Yes, it says 


‘This is a cup.’ Can you find the picture of the cup? Everybody put 
yOUr finger on it. How many marks are we going to put on it? That’s 
right, three, because there are three lines after the sentence, ‘This is a 
cup.’ ” (Continue in same fashion through second exercise.) “It is very 
important to see how many lines follow each sentence and to draw the 
same number on the right picture. Be very careful about this! Now, 
turn over the first page. Here are some more pictures and sentences. I 
want you to read these sentences and mark the pictures just as we did 
before. Be sure to mark the picture with one line if the sentence is 
followed by one; with two lines, if the sentence is followed by two; and 
with three lines, if the sentence is followed by three. As soon as you 
finish on£ sentence, go on to the next. I want you to do as many as 
you can before I say ‘STOP. ’ If one sentence is too hard for you, don’t 
spend too much time on it, b.ut go on to the next one. Do you under¬ 
stand? All right! BEGIN.” 5. Inspect the work of each child; give 
individual instructions when needed. Discourage long delays over diffi¬ 
cult problems; tell the pupil to try the next. Watch for failures to 
mark the pictures according to instructions. 6. Say “Stop” at the end 
of 15 minutes. Collect papers immediately. Children who failed to fol¬ 
low directions should be retested under supervision. 7. The score is: 
Number of exercises (that is, the number of pictures) which are 
correctly marked. 


U. S. A. 


BUREAU OF PUBLICATIONS, TEACHERS COLLEGE 
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK 

Copyright, 1943, by Arthur I. Gates 


































The man sits. I 
The cow eats. II 
The man runs. I 






This is a bed. I 
This is an eye. 
This is a horse. 




This is a tree. I 
This is a nest. I 
This is a hand. 







The coat is old. I 
The goat is running. 
The fish is swimming. 








The boat is black. I 
The girl has a flower. II 
The baby has a drum. Ill 




























e chick has food. I 
e duck is in the grass, 
e fox is drinking. II! 


e boy is making a 
dte. I 

e letter is on the 
able. II 

is mouse is white. Ill 


3 man has a fork. I 

is is a picture of a 
ring. II 

is is a picture of a 
iger. Ill 


3 policeman has a 
•uppy. I 

3 chicken is asleep. II 

3 basket is full of 
ranges. Ill 

re is a fine airplane, 
is- animal is on a log. 
3 elephant has a flag. 



91 . 

















This is a broken bottle. I 

Here are cabbage and 
carrots. II 

Mother is cleaning a 
suit. Ill 


This is the corner of the 
kitchen. I 

The teacher sees the 
smoke. II 

This is a nice warm 
stove. Ill 


This is a bunch of 
grapes. I 

Here is a person looking at 
an eagle. II 

The engine is smoking. Ill 


This bookkeeper works in 
an office. I 

This lamp is made of 
silver. II 

This prince bows to the 
queen. Ill 

This engine runs into the 
factory. I 

This jar of sweet honey is 
for the teacher. II 

The brave captain raises 
the flag. Ill 


















































GATES PRIMARY READING TESTS 

For Grade 1 and Grade 2 (First Half) 

Type 3 . Paragraph Reading 


ite your name here 
len is your birthday? 


FORM 3 


How old are you? 


te 


School 


Grade 



he Examiner: 1. See that each child has a pencil. 2. Distribute 
rs. 3. Have children fill in blanks at the top of the page. 4. Instruc- 
! to children: "We are going to see how well you can read. Do yov 
lie stories and pictures on the front page of your booklet? Every 
ook at the first story—up here (illustrating with your own copy), 
t does it say to do? (Have child answer.) That’s right, put an X 
ae ball. Everyone find the ball and put an X on it. Be sure yot 
it right on the ball. (Check to see that they all have marked it 
ictly.) Now look at the box right under that one. What does this 
tell you to do? (Have child answer.) That’s right, put an X on 
nilk bottle. Everyone find the milk bottle on your paper and put 
. on it. Be sure to put it on the bottle exactly as the story asks you 
(Check to make sure it is done correctly.) Now look at the first 
on the next side—up here (illustrating with your own paper), 
t does the story say to do? (Have pupil answer.) That s right, 
a line under the little book. Be sure you find the little book, and 
ire you draw the line under it exactly as the story asks you to. 
:ck to make sure papers are marked correctly.) Now look at the 
under that one. What does this story ask you to do? (Have pupil 
er.) That’s right, draw a line from the pig to the tree. Do it on 
: paper. Be sure it goes from the pig to the tree exactly as the 


story asks you to. (Check to make sure it is done correctly.) Do not 
open your books until I tell you to. Now I am going to show you 
what we are to do next. On the inside of the book are some more pic¬ 
tures and stories. (Examiner holds up a copy of the test showing the 
inner pages.) You are to do No. 1 (Examiner points to it on his own 
copy), then go on and do No. 2, then do the next one, and the next 
one, etc. (Examiner points down first column, then second, etc., and 
also demonstrates order on all three pages.) As soon as you have fin¬ 
ished one story, you must go right ahead and do the next one right be¬ 
low it. Now remember, first, you are to read the story below the pic¬ 
ture; then you are to take your pencil and do exactly what the story 
tells you to do. Do you understand? All right. Open your books and 
BEGIN. Go ahead.” 5. Inspect the work of each child; see that each 
works from top to bottom of columns and that each follows the pages 
in order. Urge the children individually to try the examples in order 
but do not tell them the answers. Discourage dawdling over difficult 
problems; tell them to try the next. 6. The signal STOP is given at the 
end of 20 minutes. Collect papers immediately. 7. The score is the 
number of directions which are followed correctly. The mark made 
must be the one which is specified in "the story” to be correct. For 
further details with respect to this test see the Manual of Directions. 


BUREAU OF PUBLICATIONS, TEACHERS COLLEGE 
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK 
ed in U S. A. Copyright, 1943, by Arthur I. Gates 


95 . 

































1. Put an X on the cat. 





6 . Draw a line under the hire 
sitting in the nest. 






2 . Put an X on the girl. 


7. Put an X on one of the 
squirrels. 





3. Draw a line under the big 
tree. 


8 . Put an X on the girl whe 
is reading a book. 





4. Put an X on the little three. 


9. Draw a line under the onlj 
cow that has on a bell. 






5. Draw a line under the black 
kitten. 


10. Draw a line under the big 
gest clock in this picture. 


























_. Put an X on the girl who is hold- 
l g a pretty doll in her arms. 


15. A horse likes to eat corn. This 
horse is hungry. Draw a line from 
the horse to the corn. 



t Rabbits like to eat green leaves, 
raw a line from the rabbit to the 
saves. 



16. The flowers are climbing over 
the garden wall. Mother has to cut 
them back. Put an X on what she 
uses to cut back the flowers. 



|h Here are nine little chicks. Draw 
line under the feet of four of these 
licks. 


17. When it snows in the winter, the 
boy takes out his sled. Draw a line 
under what the boy rides on in winter. 




Here are some toys for children. 
>raw a line under one toy that you 
link a boy would like best. 


18. The squirrel and the bird live in 
the tree. The squirrel climbs the tree. 
The bird flies into the tree. Put an X 
on the one who must climb the tree. 


<9 S' 

































19. At night the horses come home 
from the meadows. They come 
home to their barns to sleep. Look 
for the barn in the picture and draw 
a line under it. 



23. A boy wanted to telephone hi 
father. His mother gave him a nicke 
to put into the telephone. Draw 
line from the nickel to the boy who i 
going to telephone. 



20. Mother is waiting for a letter. The 
children run to the mail box. Look for 
the one who is bringing the letter. 
Draw a line from him to the mail box. 



24. Oranges, apples, plums, an< 
pears grow on trees. Potatoes, pumj 
kins, and lettuce do not grow on trees 
Find a picture of something that doe 
not grow on a tree. Put an X on it. 



21. This elephant lives in a circus. He 
does funny things to make the chil¬ 
dren laugh. The children give him 
peanuts. Draw a line under the ele¬ 
phant that makes the children laugh. 


25. It was the night before Christ 
mas. The stockings were waiting fo 
Santa. Down the chimney he came 
He knew just what to put in eacl 
stocking. Draw a line from a stock 
ing to the one who is going to fill it 






22. Mother must put these five things 
into her cake. She says, “I have put 
in sugar, butter, three eggs, and 
some milk.” One more thing must 
go into the cake. Make an X on it. 


26. A fairy had a beautiful cradle. I 
was a yellow buttercup. Once a cater 
pillar almost ate her. “I thought yoi 
were a piece of buttercup!” he cried 
Make an X on the fairy in her cradle 























































METROPOLITAN ACHIEVEMENT TESTS 

Primary I battery: form a 

(Revised) 


By Gertrude H. Hildreth, Ph.D. 

Teachers College, Columbia University, New York 


For Grade 1 


Prim. I 

A 

(Revised) 


Name...Date 

Grade. .... .Age.. . .yrs. .. .mos. Teacher. 

School.City... 


19. 


State 


Test 

! Score 

Grade 

Equiva¬ 

lent 

1. Word 
Pict, 



2. Word 
Recog. 



3. Word 
Mean. 



Aver. Reading 


4. Num¬ 
bers 



Total 

Ach’t 




65-- -- -- -- -- --260 


SCORE 


55-- 


R 

waPict 


50-- 


EADIN 
.2 
WciRec. 


G 

„ 3 

WHMean. 


40-- -- -- -- -- --: 


ARITH. 

4 

Numbers 


--240 --3° --8 


—220 —2 


TOTAL 

ACH’T 


GRADE 

EQUIV. 


— 200 — 2 ° 


--180—I 5 


AGE 


--6 

-160--1° —6 


8 - 
7- 
7- 

+ 7- 

7- 
7- 
7- 
7- 

7 

7 
7 
6 


The norms given in this booklet represent average achievement as deter¬ 
mined from the scores of pupils in different school systems. To evaluate 
achievement for local purposes, it is preferable to express pupils’ scores as 
grade equivalents in terms of local medians. See the Supervisor’s Manual. 


This test is copyrighted. The reproduction of any part of it by mimeograph, hectograph, or in any other 
way, whether the reproductions are sold or furnished free for use, is a violation of the copyright law. 


Published 1940 by World Book Company, Yonkers-on-Hudson, New York, and Chicago, Illinois 
Copyright 1931, 1940, by World Book Company. Copyright in Great Britain. All rights reserved 


PRINTED IN U.S.A. MAT : PRIM. I : REV. : A-H 


9)7 


















































































Metropolitan : Prim. I : Rev.: A 


TEST 1. READING —WORD PICTURE 





cat 

mouse 

drum 

pig 






a little bear 
a white rabbit 
a pretty ring 







egg 

door 















Metropolitan : Prim. I: Rev.: A 







duck 

head 

house 

kitten 



grapes 

bridge 

lunch 




- [ 3 1 . 


<39 

















Metropolitan : Prim. I: Rev.: A 


25-27 





a smiling face 
bread and milk 
a small cart 





28-30 







fish in a bowl 
a girl is walking 
the white horse 





3i-33 






a pair of shoes 
the man with a stick 
a train under a bridge 



4*1 














Metropolitan : Prim. I: Rev.: A 


34-36 






the farmer and his cow 
a child is eating apples 
a robin at the window 

t 1 





a squirrel eating nuts 
the farmer is digging 
a house on a hill 



40-42 





a boy takes off his coat 
a woman with an umbrella 
children going to school 




No. RIGHT 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12|l3 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

Score 

41 

41 

41 

42 

42 

43 

43 

44 

44 

45 

45 

46 46 

47 

47 

48 

48 

48 

49 

49 

50 

50 

51 

52 

52 

55 

58 

54 

55 

55 

No. RIGHT 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

421 


lot. 

Score 

56 

56 

57 

58 

58 

59 

59 

60 

61 

61 

62 

651 


























































Metropolitan : Prim. I : Rev. : A 


TEST 2. READING —WORD RECOGNITION 


a. 

my 

be 

we 

me 




i 


b. 

Pig 

big 

bid 

dig 




i < 


c. 

go on 

in to 

go in 

go up 











1 . 

in 

. 

all 

and 

ball 






2. 

his 

has 

her 

here 






3. 

are 

were 

arm 

sir 






4. 

here 

hits 

high 

sign 



r 



5. 

cook 

word 

with 

work 






6. 

stay 

start 

cart 

stand 






7. 

water 

enter 

waste 

waiter 






8. 

kettle 

litter 

little 

kitten 


guarded garden gather arbor 

m 


9 . 




















Metropolitan : Prim. I: Rev. : A 


willow 

winning 

wonder 

window 


rowing 

right 

riding 

riders 

- 

catch 

search 

scratch 

watch 


13. 

cabbages 

carriages 

vegetable 

valley 






14. 

she is 

he is 

it is 

hers is 






15. 

run away 

run play 

come away 

ran away 






16. 

after him 

after them 

after her 

catch him 





/ 

17. 

she comes 

he comes 

she came 

we came 






18. 

help yours 

keep young 

keep yours 

kind sirs 





r 

19. 

small slices 

all pieces small pieces small peaches 






20. 

baby girls 

big calves 

baby cows 

a 

baby calves 


21. 


come through slip through pig trough clip those 


No. RIGHT 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

Score 

41 

41 

42 

42 

43 

43 

44 

45 

45 

46 

47 

48 

49 

50 

51 

52 

54 

55 

57 

60 

63 


[ 7 1 


103. 









































Metropolitan: Prim. I: Rev. :~A 


TEST 3. READING —WORD MEANING 


a. house 

boy 

stone 

mouse 

man 

eyes 

b. ball 

meat 

pin 

doll 

skates 

rose 

1-3. song 

trees 

chair 

boys 

bottle 

flowers 

4-5. mouth 

milk 

plate 

bread 

table 

dress 

6-8. blue 

cow 

sing 

do g> 

horse 

grass 

9-11. house 

fish 

bird 

ball 

bee 

airplane 

12-14. beans 

books 

carrots 

wagon 

corn 

car 

15-17. run 

green 

paint 

brush 

blue 

brown 

\ : 

18-19. tree 

cup 

bed 

spoon 

girl 

nose 

20 - 22 . sheep 

man 

mother 

flower 

candy 

Jane 

23-24. very 

four 

here 

late 

wide 

nine 

25-27. little 

far 

large 

big 

city 

every 

\ 

28-30. lamp 

runs 

book 

winter 

sing 

jump 

31-32. this 

mine 

who 

that 

when 

those 


Difference 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

Score 

41 

42 

42 

43 

43\ 

44 

44 

45 

45 

46 

46 

47 

4H\48\ 

49 

50 

51 

52 

53 

54 

55 

56 

57 

58 

59 

60 

61 

62 

64 

65 

67 

68 









































































105 



Word 

-Attack Test No. 

1 




by 




Edward W. 

Dolch and William 

S. Gray 


Pupil’s 

Name 

School 

Date 


Practice 

Exercise 




a. 

cot 

cat 

cad 

sat 

b. 

hem 

len 

hin 

hen 

c. 

hat 

hot 

lot 

hod 

1. 

kam 

han 

ham 

horn 

2. 

lib 

lep 

hip 

liP 

3. 

bos 

bus 

hus 

bud 

4. 

pen 

pin 

pern 

gen 

5. 

hix 

fex 

fix 

fis 

6. 

map 

mop 

nop 

mog 

7. 

bad 

bet 

hat 

bat 

8. 

gum 

gun 

yum 

gam 

9. 

lit 

hid 

led 

lid 

10. 

hot 

dot 

dat 

dol 

11. 

. Jam 

jan 

Jam 

gam 

12. 

hen 

tem 

tin 

ten 

13. 

lum 

hum 

hun 

horn 

14. 

web 

wed 

wob 

meb 

15. 

cab 

rob 

cob 

cod 

16. 

tug 

tag 

tay 

lag 

17. 

sib 

rip 

reb 

rib 

18. 

gob 

jab 

job 

jod 

19. 

hub 

tob 

tub 

tup 

20. 

leg 

beg 

big 

. beg 

21. 

hin 

tim 

ten 

tin 

22. 

gup 

Pep . 

P- U P 

puy 

23. 

beb 

hed 

bed 

bad 

24. 

cad 

sod 

sab 

sad 

25. 

not 

nad 

nod 

mod 


Note: In this test pupils are expected to encircle words indicated 

by examiner. For example, for lines 1,2,3, examiners ask 
pupils to mark: ham, lip, bus. 





















































































GRAY'S STANDARDIZED READING PARAGRAPHS 
PIL__ SCHOOL _________ DATE 


boy had a dog. 
e dog ran into the woods, 
e boy ran after the dog. 

I wanted the dog to go home, 
t the dog would not go home. 

|e little boy said, 

: "I cannot go home without my dog." 
I|en the boy began to cry* . 

|oe there was a little pig. 

I 

lived with his mother in a pen. 

|e day he saw his four feet. 
"Mother," he said, "what can I 
with my feet?" 

1 

jIs mother said, "You can run with 

em. ” 

I 

the little pig ran round and 
und the pen. 

Ice there were a cat and a mouse, 
ley lived in the same house. The 
t bit off the mouse f s tail. "Pray, 
ss,” said the mouse, "give me my 
•ng tail again." 

"No," said the cat, "I will not 
live you your tail till you bring 
some milk." 


4 

Once there lived a king and 
queen in a large palace. But 
the king and queen were not 
happy* There were no little 
children in the house or gar¬ 
den. One day they found a 
poor little boy and girl at 
their door. They took them 
into the beautiful palace and 
made them their own. The 
king and queen were then 
happy. 

5 

One of the most interesting 
birds which ever lived in my 
bird-room was a blue-jay 
named Jackie. He was full of 
business from morning till 
night, scarcely ever still. 

He had been stolen from a nest 
long before he could fly, and 
he had been reared in a house 
long before he had been given 
to me as a pet. 

6 

The part of farming enjoyed 
most by a boy is the making 
of maple sugar. It is better 
than blackberrying and almost 
as good as fishing. One rea¬ 
son why a boy likes this work 
is that someone else does most 
of it. It is a sort of work 
in which he can appear to be 
very industrious and yet do 
but little. 


-to (o- 

























■ 

' 

•v •'.«»•# 





V 











' 

XL . 

• . 

■ ' •'* . : - K- 

■ 

■ 

' 

. 


fon,T, .Ofv 




' 





Of;. 




; 






BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Better Reading Instruction , Research Bulletin of the National 
Education Association. Washington D.G. XIII (November 
1935). 

Cole, Luella. The Improvement of Reading . New York; Farrar 
and Rinehart, 1940. 

Dolch, Edward W. Teaching Primary Reading . Champaign: Garrard 
Press, 1941. 

_ . The Psycho logy and Teaching of Reading. New York: 

~~ Ginn, 1931. 

Durrell, Donald D. Improvement of Basic Reading Abilities . 
Yonkers on Hudson: World Book, 1940. 

Fernald, Grace M. Remedial Techniques in Basic School 
Subjects . New York: McGraw-Hill, 19431 

Gates, Arthur I. New Methods of primary Reading . New York: 
Bureau of Publications,"teachers 5 " College, Columbia 
University, 1928. 

. A Reading Vocabulary For the primary Grades . New 
York: Bureau of Publications," Teachers 8 Co1lege, Columbia 
University, 1935. 

. The Improvement of Reading. New York: Macmillan 

..” 1937 . 

Harrison. M. Lucille: Reading Readiness. Boston; Houghton- 
Mifflin, 1939. 

Hildreth, G. Learning the Three R f s . Minneapolis: Educational 
Publishe rs, 19 36. 

Kirk, S.A. Teaching Reading to Slow Learning Children . Boston; 
Houghton-Mif f iin7~ 1940. — ~ 

Lee, Doris M. "The Importance of Reading for Achieving in 
Grades Four, Five and Six. Bureau of publications. 

Teachers 1 College, Columbia University, 1933. 

Macomber, Freeman G. Guiding Child Development in the Elementary 
School . New York: American Book, 1941. 

McKee, Paul. Reading and Literature in the Elementary School . 
Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1934. 


107 

































* 





■ 







Morphett, Mabel V. and Washbourne, Carleton. "When Should 
Children Begin to Read." Elementary School Journal. 

XXIX (March, 1931) pp. 496“"To3. 

Pennel, Mary E. and Cusak, Alice M. The Teaching of Reading 
For Better Living . Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1935. 

Percival, Walter P. "A Study of the Causes and Subjects of 
School Failure". Unpublished doctor*s dissertation. 
Teachers* College, Columbia University, 1926. 

Stone, C.R. Better Primary Reading . St. Louis: Yiebster 
1936. 

Storm, Grace E. and Smith, Nita B. Reading Activities in the 
Primary Grades . Boston: Ginn, 1930. 

Tate, Harry L. "The Influence of Phonics on Silent Reading 
in Grade I". Elementary School Journal. XXXVII (June 
1937). 

The Teaching of Reading: A Second Report . Thirty-Sixth 

* “Yearbook Part I. National Society for the Study of 

Education. Bloomington: Public School Publishing, 1937. 

Thomson, J.L. "The Effect of Postponing Reading on Personality 
Development". Journal of Education GXVII. 

Turnley, Francis R. The Turnley Reading System Based on 
Sonsils. Edmonton: Published"by the author, 1946’. 

Witty, P.A. and Kopel, D. Reading and the Educative Process . 
Boston: Ginn, 1939. 


108 





































V' 











1 





























