
3 or ^^-T 

-fo Ac used iM- tb^ 


'fitter znCA ^eascO^ic^ 


&x ubms 

wmmmm 

TOiMIiaSlS 














UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA. 
LIBRARY 


Regulations Ro n 'xrd in a Te e ses jai u. " iss or t at i o ris 

;> sscr Lpt copi ss ol th©£ . s a ... c t . i tatipns foi Ivlaj tor’s 
and Do : ctor ! s degrees deposited *in- the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy, of the Faculty of -Graduate Studios 
may be consulted in th( eference Rear ing Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supervision the wort: was done. Some ■ irt snts are "willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the lire orlibrary loan 
service of the University of alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used onlg with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 
Vhen permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub1ishe d work. 


This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 
user. 


Please sign below: 


Date 


Signature 


Ins titution 



















































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/evaluationofseleOOwill 


THE UNIVERSITY OE ALBERTA 


AN EVALUATION OF SELECTED TESTS AS PREDICTORS OF SUCCESS 

IN INDUSTRIAL ARTS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

WILLIAM PHILIP WAGNER 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


APRIL, 1951 



;\ 

*5 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


Tiie undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and do recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled "An 
Evaluation of Selected Tests as Predictors of Success 
in Industrial Arts," submitted by William Philip 
Wagner, B*A., B. Ed., in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of Education, 



Professor 



ii 







SYNOPSIS 


The main purpose of this investigation was to eval¬ 
uate certain aptitude tests as predictors of success in 
industrial arts. The criterion was the composite mark 
assigned to the student for the year’s work in one or two 
shop courses. Five tests of mechanical ability and one 
test of intelligence were administered to boys enrolled 
in industrial arts at Victoria Composite High School. The 
coefficients of correlation between the test scores and 
the composite marks formed the basis for evaluation. 

Though each of the tests showed a significant relation¬ 
ship with success in industrial arts, the writer con¬ 
cluded that reasonable accuracy could not be expected in 
predicting an individual’s probable success in shop work 
from a test score. The writer attempted to show, however, 
that the tests of mechanical ability of this study pre¬ 
dicted group performance in industrial arts with reason¬ 
able accuracy. 

As an ancillary study, the relationship between the 
Otis Mental Test and each of the tests of mechanical ability 
was investigated. A positive correlation was found to 
occur in each case, indicating probably that these tests 
of mechanical ability are related to intelligence as 
measured by the Otis test. 

iii 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to express his appreciation to 
Mr. G. M. Dunlop, Chairman, Division of Educational 
Psychology, Faculty of Education, for his advice and 
assistance throughout the course of the study reported 
here; to Dr. H. E. Smith, Dean of the Faculty of 
Education, for suggestions in planning the thesis; and 
to Dr. S. C. T. Clarke of the University of Alberta, 
for helpful criticisms during the final stages of the 
work* 

The cooperation of Mr. C. 0. Hicks, Principal of 
Victoria Composite High School and his staff of teachers 
is gratefully acknowledged* The writer is indebted to 
Mr. H. A. McFarland for organizing and supervising the 
administration of the tests; to Mr. E. C. Stirling for 
administering the tests and attending to the various de¬ 
tails related to the proper supervision of the classes; 
to the following shop teachers for their help in 
establishing an adequate criterion and for the extra work 
involved in preparing shop marks for this thesis; 

Mr. W. E. Robinson, Mr. R. J. Eby, Mr. R. F. Henderson, 
Mr. G. J. Ross, Mr. K. E. Kirkwood and Mr. V. T. Young; 
to Mr. W. L. Smith, Westglen High School for including 
the Westglen shop students in this study and for his help 
in scoring their tests. Acknowledgement is also made to 

iv 




u£i':' 





Mr. R. S. Sheppard, Superintendent of Schools, for his 
kindly interest in the study, and to Mr. A. G. Bayly, 
Director of Elementary Education, for his help in 
editing the thesis* 


v 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 


ACKN OWLEDGEMENT S. iv 

LIST OF TABLES. vi 

CHAPTER 

I. INTRODUCTION . ..... 1 


Background of the Problem 
Prediction 
Basis of Prediction 
Uses of Prediction 

II. THE PROBLEM.. 6 

General Statement of the Problem 
The Nature of Mechanical Ability 
The Present Problem 

III. RELATED STUDIES. 11 

Studies in Industry 
Studies in Industrial Arts 
Studies in Engineering Schools 
Differential Aptitude Tests 
Relationship to Intelligence 

IV. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN ........ 17 

Influence of Shop Training 

Administration of the Tests 
Criterion Score in Industrial Arts 
Rationale 

Statistical Treatment 
The Nature of a Criterion 
Homogeneous vs. Heterogeneous 
Population 

V. PRESENTATION OF DATA. 26 

Subj ects 
Courses 

Reliability of the Obtained 
Coefficients 

Reliability of Prediction 


vi 













CHAPTER 


PAGE 


The Accuracy of Individual Predictions 
from Regression Equations 
Coefficient of Alienation 
Coefficient of Forecasting Efficiency 
Group Performance Prediction 
Forecasting Tables 
Expectancy Tables 
Relationship between Mechanical 


Ability and Intelligence 

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS. 45 

Conclusions 

Recommendations 

Suggestions for Fut.ure Studies 

BIBLIOGRAPHY .. . 50 

FOOTNOTES. 51 

APPENDICES .... . ...... 54 

A. Supplementary Table VIII 


B. Computational Procedure Involved 
in Obtaining the Coefficients of 
Alienation 

C. Computational Procedure Involved 
in Obtaining the Coefficients of 
Forecasting Efficiency 


vii 









LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAG-E 

1 . Intercorrelations of Test Scores and 

Criterion. 12 

II. Coefficients of Correlation ...... 14 

III. To Determine the Reliability of the 
Coefficient of Correlation of each 
Test with the Composite Marks in In¬ 
dustrial Arts, Victoria Composite High 
School . . ..... o o ..... • • 29 

IV. To Determine the Reliability of the 

Prediction of an Individual Mark in In¬ 
dustrial Arts from a Test Score .... 31 

V. To Predict from the Space Relations 

Test the Proportion of Students Making 
Certain Grades in Industrial Arts ... 38 

VI. To Predict from the Otis Quick Scoring 
Test the Proportion of Students Making 
Certain Grades in Industrial Arts ... 40 

VII. To Determine the Reliability of Cor¬ 
relation between Tests of Mechanical 
Ability and the Otis Quick Scoring 
Mental Test .............. 43 

VIII. Means and Standard Deviations of Scores 
Obtained by Shop Students at Victoria 
Composite High School on Five Tests of 
Mechanical Ability and the Otis Test of 
Intelligence, Appendix A ...... . 55 














CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

BACKGROUND OP THE PROBLEM 

PREDICTION 


Every normal person speculates about the future* 
Anxious parents worry about the progress of their child 
at school. Will he graduate from high school and enter 
university or will he leave school before he completes 
grade ten? For what vocation is he best fitted? 

The teacher assesses the capacities and interests 
of her pupils as a basis for instruction. From this 
initial assessment, supported by subsequent evaluation, 
she attempts to predict their probable performance. 
Employers attempt to estimate the potentialities of their 
personnel. Has this apprentice the capacity to become a 
qualified craftsman? Can this young engineer be entrusted 
with more responsibility? 

In industry, at school, and In daily life we are 
concerned with the prediction of human performance. We 
continually try to forecast or anticipate what a person 
will become or do in the future. The important thing is 
how successfully we can predict. The unscientific methods 
in phrenology, graphology and other allied pseudo-sciences 





















t 

« ■ 

■ 




■ 






, 


- 





























. 








2 


have been discredited by dependable evidence. Today we 
attempt to predict on the basis of more reliable procedures 
which, in most cases, involve the use of standardized tests* 

THE BASIS OF PREDICTION 

A test measures the ability or aptitude of an indiv¬ 
idual which is objectively defined in terms of a specified 
task. The validity of a test is the closeness of agreement 
between the scores and some other objective measure known 
as the criterion. The coefficient of validity of a test is 
the coefficient of correlation between test scores and 

criterion scores. The size of this relationship is an 

1 

index of the predictive value of the test. Prediction then 
is a scientific way of forecasting future behavior from 
measures of present performance of some task. It is an 
estimate of a person’s probable criterion score based on a 
knowledge of his test score. 

This estimate is subject to error. The validity of 
the test, as noted above, determines the size of the error. 

In actual practice it is risky to make a prediction based 
on a single test score. Estimates based on two or three 
tests are only somewhat more dependable. Counsellors and 
personnel experts are careful to make use of all available 







- 3 - 


information obtained from questionnaires, interviews 

or observed behavior of the counsellee. As a general 

rule allowance must be made for a wide margin of error 

in estimating criterion scores from aptitude test scores* 

Prediction of educational or vocational achievement is 

2 

often no more than ten per cent better than a guess. 

Even this estimate, however, is of value, if it aids in 
providing better counselling and placement of the indiv¬ 
idual. 


USES OP PREDICTION 

Selection and guidance have become accepted 
practices in business, in the military services, in the 
trades and professions, and in educational institutions, 
because they contribute to economic efficiency and to the 
happiness of the individual. Progress has been mad© in 
the development of tests of manual dexterity which are 
used for measuring the aptitudes of the semi-skilled. Em¬ 
ployment offices and factories make use of performance tests 
to appraise the motor abilities of applicants. Paper and 
pencil tests are being developed for measuring the more 
complex aptitudes necessary for success in the skilled 
trades. The validity of these tests is not high. Per¬ 
sonnel officers however, feel that they are justified in 



- 4 - 


using them as further evidence of abilities. The 
military services developed tests of intelligence and 
of other abilities to aid in the selection of individ¬ 
uals for different duties, for courses and special 
trades, and for promotion. 

Personnel selection and vocational guidance are 
recognized as important by the professions. It is 
desirable that a candidate be prevented from entering 
a profession for which he is not fitted. Tests b& ve 
been designed for predicting success in engineering, 
accountancy, law, medicine, surgery, dentistry, and in 
nursing. Counsellors do not depend upon these tests 
solely for their estimates of success. They also 
utilize scholarship records and ratings of the person¬ 
ality traits and interests of the individual. 

Guidance in the schools implies prediction. Intell¬ 
igence tests are the most common and often the only means 
of forecasting school achievement. They have high correl¬ 
ation with teacher ratings of academic perfcrmance. Tests 
for measuring scholastic and clerical ability have proved 
more valid than tests developed for measuring aptitudes 
required for success in industrial arts. The lack of 
uniformity in the content of shop courses and in the 
teaching methods employed have made it difficult to 

* 3 

develop suitable tests. Students commencing secondary 



- 5 - 


school are forced to choose courses which wl11 lead to 
an academic, commercial or technical career* They need 
help in the appraisal of their abilities before making 
a choice* 

It appears that aptitude tests for predicting 
success in industrial arts are not as adequate as those 
employed in academic and commercial areas. For this 
reason sehool administrators and counsellors are faced 
with the necessity for close study of the existing tests 
in this field in order that only the best tests may be 
used and their results properly understood* 







6 


CHAPTER II 
THE PROBLEM 

GENERAL STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 

Much waste and unhappiness occur in industry through 

the unwise selection and placement of employees in jobs 

unsuited to their abilities and interests. Likewise poor 

choice of courses by students in vocational and secondary 

schools has resulted in wrong placement, loss of opportunity 

and dissatisfaction. It has been estimated by the Canadian 

Research on Practical Education that 73,000 students have 

4 

’dropped out’ of secondary schools in Canada in 1948. Lack 
of interest and unsuitability of the curriculum were given 
by many students as reasons for leaving school. 

Personnel managers and educational and vocational 
counsellors seek to overcome such conditions by proper 
methods of discovery and evaluation of the abilities and 
interests of an individual. Tests of mechanical ability 
show promise in vocational guidance. Are these tests suit¬ 
able for predicting success in jobs requiring mechanical 
ability? What tests are adequate in predicting success in 
industrial arts? What relationship exists between the traits 
or abilities measured by tests of mechanical ability and the 
abilities necessary for success in shop work? 




7 


Each test is constructed to measure certain factors 
or aspects of mechanical ability. The items selected are 
intended to produce a standardized task which would require 
an individual to apply a certain kind of mechanical aptitude* 
Such a test may be used to predict success inwork which 
requires the kind of mechanical ability the test purports to 
measure• 


THE NATURE OP MECHANICAL ABILITY 

There has been much controversy about the nature of 
mechanical ability* Generally the term is employed to 
designate whatever ability or abilities are required for 
creditable work with tools and machinery* There appears to 
be a hierarchy of levels of mechanical ability. The levels 
are as follows: manipulative skills and coordination such 
as are involved in jobs in the carpentry and machine shops, 
insight into the setting and relationships of objects in 
space, factors of time, motion, space coordination, and 
attention, and finally, the professional level of mechanical 
ability which demands superior verbal and numerical capacity. 
Another approach to the subject suggests that mechanical 
ability may be broken down into six Independent factors 
including spatial visualization, stereotyped movement, 
scholastic ability, manual dexerity, perceptual speed and 


steadiness 







■ 


' 

' 

. 




















- 






- 

b 


















. 








The reader will recognize that many abilities 
necessary for success in shop work are included in these 
definitions of mechanical ability. There ar© however other 
intangible factors such as motivation, persistence and 
interest, which ultimately affect success but which may be 
only indirectly measured by a test of mechanical ability. 

A low score made by an individual on such a test need not 
necessarily indicate low mechanical ability; the low score 
may be the result of little interest in writing the test. 

Since existing tests of mechanical ability are fre¬ 
quently designed to measure one aspect of mechanical ability, 
it is evident that more than one test may be necessary to 
predict success in shop work which involves many different 
kinds of skills and abilities. 

THE PRESENT PROBLEM 

In the present study it is proposed to evaluate six 
tests currently in use in Victoria Composite High School 
as predictors of success in industrial arts. The basis 
for evaluation will be the coefficients of correlation 
of the individual test scores and criterion scores based 
on success in Shop work. As an ancillary study the relation¬ 
ship between intelligence test scores and the scores obtained 
on each of the tests of mechanical ability will be made. 




> . ■■ ’ f s - 

. 

* 

. 

* 

' 

/ 

C& I ■;<> .. o :: 




















i 



























9 


The tests under study are as follows: the Otis Quick 
Scoring Mental Ability Test Gamma Test (Form AM), the O'Rourke 
Mechanical Aptitude Test (Form A), the MacQuarrie Test for 
Mechanical Ability, the Revised Minnesota Paper Form Board 
Test Series AA, and the two Differential Aptitude Tests, Space 
Relations (Form A) and Abstract Reasoning (Form A). 

Intelligence and achievement tests have been used in the 
Edmonton Public School system for several years. Norms have 
been established and teachers have interpreted the results 
of -their testing with reasonable success. In 1946 it was 
decided to introduce a guidance program. Counsellors were 
appointed the following year. They found the vocational test¬ 
ing program inadequate and set about to improve it. 

When Victoria Composite High School first offered 
complete technical courses in 1949 and the need became more 
evident that tests of mechanical ability were required if the 
counsellors were to give reliable educational and vocational 
guidance to their students. 

There were many tests of mechanical ability on the 
market. However, no studies have been made to determine the 
value of such tests in predicting success in shop courses for 
senior high school students of this city. 

The selection of the tests of mechanical ability at 
present administered has not been based on local research. 





10 


Such factors as cost, ease of administration, format, and 
opinions of authorities have influenced the final choice^ 

This study may be of value in determining which of these 
tests of mechanical ability should be retained for counselling 


purposes 



CHAPTER III 


RELATED STUDIES 


A survey of research relating to the predictive 
efficiency of current tests of mechanical ability reveals 
that very few studies have been concerned with industrial 
arts in high schools* They have been more concerned with 
industry* However many employees tested are of high school 
age and their work resembles that of the boys in shop 
courses* The results of such studies may then b© considered 
relevant to the problem of evaluating the tests as predic¬ 
tors of success in industrial arts* 

STUDIES IN INDUSTRY 

In a study recorded by Super, the MacQuarrie, the 

CMRourke, the MPFB and the Otis tests were included in the 

7 

tests administered to ij.6 factory employees. The tests 
were evaluated against a criterion score consisting of two 
independent ratings of experts on job performance. The 
following table shows the coefficients of correlation 
between the tests and the criterion scores and also 
between the tests of mechanical ability and the Otis test* 



12 


TABLE I 

INTERCORRELATIONS OF TEST SCORES AND CRITERION 


TEST' 

OTIS 

CRITERION 

MacQuarrie 

.623 

.650 

Otis 

T- 

.614-3 

MPFB 

.616 

.>473 

O'Rourke 

.158 

. 2 I 43 


Taken from Table I, page 231, Sourcebook for Vocational 
Testing, Study made by A. Q. Sartain* 


Combinations of tests were reported as being more 

valid predictors of success than the single tests. Very 

few studies show coefficients higher than *500 when related 

to success in job performance. The small number of cases 

may be partly responsible for the coefficients of correlation 

in Table I which are higher than *500* 

In another study recorded in the sarnie source book, a 

test battery was developed, which would predict success in 

8 

mechanical training courses. The Bennett test of mechanical 
comprehension, and the MacQuarrie and 0 f Rourke tests of 
mechanical ability were administered to lij.? high school boys 
and National Defence trainees. The criterion score was the 
median rating on four traits given by the instructors on the 
work done in machine shop, woodshop and welding. The best 
combination of tests consisted of the entire Bennett 





















* 










' 











- 13 - 


test, five sub-tests of the MacQuarrie and Part II of 
the O f Rourke test. A multiple correlation coefficient 
of •I}-7 was obtained. 

The foregoing studies illustrate the nature and 
extent of correlation between the test scores and the 
criterion scores. Moreover they indicate that a battery 
of tests will probably have a higher predictive value than 
a single test* 

STUDIES IN INDUSTRIAL ARTS 

Hunter reports a study in which 75 junior and senior 

9 

high school boys were tested* The criterion scores were 
work samples graded as objectively as possible on the basis 
of accuracy, quality of finish and speed. The coefficient 
of correlation of each test score with the criterion score 
was stated as follows: MPFB *i \S 9 the MacQuarrie *37 and 
the Otis test .28. 

A study by Cottingham dealt with the predictive value 

of tests of mechanical aptitude in relation to woodworking 

10 

achievement in junior high schools. Pour tests of mech¬ 
anical ability and two tests of intelligence were given to 
359 boys* In order to avoid the influence of previous shop 
work the tests were given to the boys when they were in grade 
six. A breadboard to be constructed as a standard first 
project according to exact uniform specifications provided 


. 


„ 




































■ 






" • 













- Ik - 


the objective criterion. The project was evaluated 
by industrial arts students at a state college. The 
following table shows the coefficients obtained for the 
two criteria. 


TABLE II 

COEFFICIENTS OF CORRELATION 


TEST 

CLASS MARKS FOR THE 
YEAR'S WORK IN SHOP 

BREADBOARD 

SCORE 

Detroit Test 

.25 

.59 

Mellenbruch Test 

.21 

.21 

Stenquist Test 

.16 

.11 

Bennett Test 

.01 

CM 

, 


The above information was taken from Table II, Cottingham, 

Uniformly low coefficients of correlation between 
school marks and mechanical aptitude were obtained from the 
two studies above. The tests in Cottingham f s study show 
lower predictive value in relation to work projects than 
those in the Hunter Study, 

Cottingham reported that combinations of the tests 
showed greater predictive value than single tests. This 
conclusion may be stated as referring generally to most 
studies. 









- 






■id' 
















* 

- 

- 








- 15 - 


STUDIES IN ENGINEERING SCHOOLS 

The MPFB manual records studies carried out in 
12 

engineering schools. These mature students probably 
possess a high level of mechanical ability* A coefficient 
of correlation of was obtained between MPPB test scores 
and grades in engineering drafting* Another study gave 
coefficients of *1^.1 with grades in mechanical drafting, 

.3^ in blueprint reading and *3^4- with elements of metal 
work. In a University of Minnesota study, employing the 
same test of mechanical aptitude the following coefficients 
were obtained: *2? with first year engineering grades, 

•33 with engineering drawing and *60 in shop work. Prom 
these studies it can be concluded that the MPPB test has 
some predictive value in relation to the criteria mentioned. 

DIFFERENTIAL APTITUDE TESTS 

A coefficient of correlation of *02 was obtained from 
Space Relations test scores and marks obtained in mechanical 

13 

drawing by grade ten boys* A coefficient of ,69 was 
obtained from scores of the same test and end of course 

iu 

grades by watch repair employees. The manual records only 
one school grade for which the predictive value of the Space 
Relations and Abstract Reasoning tests was considered in 
relation to success in industrial arts. The subjects were 





* 















- 16 - 


67 grade nine boys. The coefficients were .ij .9 and *1|3 

15 

respectively. 

The wide variation in the coefficients of correlation 
obtained from the above studies indicates that the predic¬ 
tive value of tests in relation to success in a specific 
job performance varies with the purpose of the test, the 
nature of the criterion, and the size and nature of the 
samples concerned. It may also indicate that any one test 
measures only one aspect of mechanical ability and that 
consequently two or more tests may be necessary to measure 
the more important factors of mechanical ability involved 
in industrial arts. 

RELATIONSHIP TO INTELLIGENCE 

Bingham states MacQuarrie attempted to prepare a 
test which would not measure intelligence, but studies 
have shown coefficients of correlation in the range of 

16 

♦291 and *507 between the MacQuarrie test and intelligence. 
A high correlation of .623 is seen in Table I. Cottingham 
concluded that two of the tests of mechanical ability in 
his study produced results relatively unrelated to intelli- 

17 

gence test results. In the MPPB Manual, seven studies 

indicated coefficients of correlation with the Otis test 

18 

and the MPPB test extending from ,17 to .62. It would 
appear that there is evidence of definite relationship 
between tests of mechanical ability and of intelligence. 






































- 






CHAPTER IV 


EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 

The plan of procedure was to administer six standard- 
ized tests to all the boys registered in industrial arts 
at Victoria Composite High School. The scores obtained in 
each test were then correlated with the composite marks 
assigned by experts for the year f s work in industrial arts. 
The coefficients of correlation were used as the basis for 
evaluating the tests as predictors of success in shop work. 

In an ancillary study the coefficients of correlation 
were computed for the scores obtained on the tests of 
mechanical ability and the Otis mental test. The coeffic¬ 
ients were then used as a basis for evaluating the relation¬ 
ship between the scores obtained on tests of mechanical 
ability and the intelligence of the students as measured by 
the Otis test. 

Preparation^for administering the tests were made by the 
vice-principal. Arrangements could not be made to administer 
the tests in the fall because of the delay in opening the 
shops due to equipment and power not being available until 
late in November. Consequently, the tests were given in the 
spring as soon as it was considered administratively sound 
to do so. 


. 










. 










' \ 








. 



















. 




18 - 


INFLUENCE OF SHOP TRAINING 


It is argued that for true predictive value, the 
tests should be administered before any shop work is done 
to avoid the influence of shop training upon the measure¬ 
ment of mechanical ability. In the study made by Cotting- 
ham the preliminary tests were given to the boys in grade 

19 

six. The criterion scores were obtained from shop work done 
in grade seven. Such precautions would have produced several 
difficulties. In the present study the subjects were in 
grades ten, eleven and twelve. Students tested in grade six 
would be difficult to locate in the high school. Many of 
them may not register for shop courses. Moreover, nearly all 
boys in the Edmonton public school system elect the industrial 
arts options in one or more of their junior high school years. 
For this reason it would appear that all the subjects have 
been afforded similar opportunities for shop experience. 

ADMINISTRATION OF THE TESTS 

All the tests except the Otis were administered by 
the teacher of drafting. Classes were small, averaging less 
than twenty-five. Tables were conveniently spaced in the 
classroom. An electric clock with a sweep second hand was 




- 19 - 


in full view of the instructor and the class. These con¬ 
ditions made supervision easy and tended to produce uniform¬ 
ity in the administration of the tests. 

The method of adminfstoring the tests was carefully 
explained and supervised by the writer and the vice¬ 
principal of the school. The classes were motivated by 
an introductory talk concerning the purpose of the tests. 
Since a drafting class meets only once a week, it required 
six consecutive weeks to complete the testing. The O’Rourke 
test was given in tv© sessions because of its length. The 
MacQuarrie and O’Rourke tests were scored by the author with 
the aid of the vice-principals of Victoria Composite and 
Westglen High Schools. The other tests were machine scored 
by the Examinations Branch, Department of Education. The 
Otis tests were given by home room teachers to all students, 
shop and academic, in February 1950 as a general adminis¬ 
trative procedure of the guidance program. 

CRITERION SCORE IN INDUSTRIAL ARTS 

The criterion of capacity in industrial arts was 
obtained by the computation of a composite score based on 
the marks assigned by the shop instructors for the year’s 
vork in their various subjects. The method for evaluating 


- 



* 




* 


- 



- 


- 

- 

. 




- 

•• 






20 


a student’s yearly work was discussed with the instructors 
and the administrators. Ratings in multiples of five were 
estimated by each instructor on the following basis: the 
quality and quantity of projects completed, ability in 
organizing and planning the work, application to the job, 
and skill in the use of tools and machinery* 

Each shop course consists of practical and theoretical 
work and drafting* For the year 19ii9~50 one instructor 
taught drafting to all and assigned a mark to each shop 
student. This was estimated from the quality and quantity 
of all completed drafting assignments, and from the results 
of regular tests during the year. As automotives included 
work done in the metal shop, the marks of two instructors 
were combined. 

The final composite mark was then computed in the 
following manner. The mark obtained by a student for his 
year’s work in woodwork or in any other shop course was 
trebled and added to the drafting mark. The total was 
divided by four. The time allotted to drafting is one- 
fourth of the total time for the whole course. The marks 
obtained by a student registered in two shop courses, such 
as automotives and metals, were added and doubled. The 
total was then added to the drafting mark and the result 
divided by five. The time allotted to drafting in this 
case is one-fifth of the total time for the two courses. 



21 


The calculation of the coefficients of the correlation 

was made by the product-moment method, illustrated by 
20 

Garrett. 


RATIONALE 

Tables were then made of the coefficients of correlation 
and other related data. Two problems were then considered, 
the reliability of the coefficients obtained and the relia¬ 
bility of the predictions. In the first problem, it was 
necessary to discover if there was a positive correlation 
between the test scores and the criterion scores, and then 
to discuss the extent of this correlation. 

In the second problem the accuracy of individual pred¬ 
iction and the accuracy of group prediction were estimated 
from the data presented. The tables and procedures neces¬ 
sary for the above discussions were taken from Garrett f s 
textbook on statistics. 

STATISTICAL TREATMENT 

The reliability of each coefficient of correlation was 
tested against the null hypothesis. The method consists in 
comparing the t value (as in Table 29) for an obtained r 
(coefficient of correlation) with the values of t which may 
be expected by chance at the ®05 and .01 limits. The 



24 


reliability was then checked by using the data of Table 49 

which indicate the values of correlation coefficients at the 

22 

5% and 1 % levels of confidence. 

The value of t for a given r is computed from the 
r — 2 

formula t = —==-o where r = the obtained coefficient and 

Vl - r^ 

N = the number of cases. The standard error of estimate 
(S.E est j was computed for each test to evaluate the relia- 

23 

bility of individual prediction from regression equations. 
Coefficients of alienation (k) and coefficients of fore¬ 
casting efficiency (E) were computed and used as quick 
estimates of the predictive efficiency of the obtained r’s 
Two tables of expectancy were prepared to illustrate the pre¬ 
dictive value of tests in relation to group performance in 
25 

industrial arts. 

In the ancillary study the reliability of each coef¬ 
ficient of correlation was also tested against the null 
hypothesis. The same method was used. A value of t for 
each obtained r was computed from the formula given above 
and compared with values of t which may be expected by 
chance at the .05 and .01 limits. A check was also made on 
the computations by the use of the data in Table 49 as noted 
above. 


THE NATURE OF A CRITERION 


In a study involving coefficients of correlation a 






23 - 


number of factors must be considered. One of these factors 

is the nature of a criterion. Most aptitude tests have 

26 

validities seldom higher than .50. Some reasons fcr this 
may be traced to the nature of the criterion selected, A 
person’s achievement in a specific field is due to a great 
variety of causes in addition to his aptitudes. In selecting 
school marks as a criterion for measuring success in school 
work, the assumption is made that the student’s performance 
of a job demands the same kind of abilities measured by the 
test used. To make sure of this, a test should be validated 
against the criterion before using it as a means of pred¬ 
icting success. The reliability of the measure of success 
is usually questioned unless the criterion scores are vali¬ 
dated against some higher or purer criterion. The narrowness 
or impurity of a criterion offers an explanation for the 
relatively low coefficient of validity of an aptitude test. 
Motivation, persistence and dependability may contribute 
more to successful work than the application of a specific 
ability. 

We are not certain whether the individual has tried 
to do his best on a test or at a job. It would appear that 
coefficients of validity of the best tests of aptitude will 
necessarily continue to be smaller than their true merit 


warrants 



- 2k - 


HOMOGENEOUS VS. HETEROGENEOUS POPULATION 

Another factor is the influence of the sample 
population upon the reliability of a test. The relia¬ 
bility of a test is dependent upon the variability of the 

27 

group tested and retested. Publishers state the coefficient 
of reliability of their test. A counsellor may be comparing 
two tests of mechanical ability, whose coefficients of relia¬ 
bility are stated as .50 and .8? respectively. On the basis 
of the reliability published he would prefer the second test. 

However, if he examined the groups, tested and retested 
to ascertain the reliability of the tests, he may find the 
first test as reliable as the second one. The first test 
may have been administered to a highly selected and homo¬ 
geneous group of machine apprentices; the second test may 
have been given to a heterogeneous high school population. 

The spread of abilities in the second group may be twice 
as great as in the apprentice group. If the first test 
were given to the heterogeneous group, the coefficient of 
reliability may rise to *87* 

The dispersion of mechanical abilities in the heter¬ 
ogeneous high school population may be tmrice as great as in 
the more homogeneous shop boys in the same school. It is 
conceivable that this may be true since the shop courses 
are optional and enrollment in such courses may be influenced 


/ 


























































- 25 - 


by the greater mechanical ability and interests of the 

students. This argument was, however, not supported by 

28 

the Minnesota studies. There a startling finding was 
recorded; students majoring successfully in vocational 
secondary schools and those in a college of engineering 
were not demonstrably superior on a test score criterion 
to individuals in academic curricula. 




CHAPTER V 


PRESENTATION OF DATA 


The tests selected for this study were; the Otis 
Quick Scoring Test Gamma Test (Form AM), the 0*Rourke 
Mechanical Aptitude Test (Form A),.the MacQuarrie Test 
for Mechanical Ability, the Revised MPFB test Series AA, 
and the two Differential Aptitude Tests, Space Relations 
(Form A) and Abstract Reasoning (Form A)* 

SUBJECTS 

The tests were administered to 227 boys registered 
in industrial arts in Victoria Composite High School in 
1949-50, 72 of whom were enrolled in grade ten, 104 in 
grade eleven and 51 in grade twelve. Of these students, 

149 registered in only one shop course, while 78 registered 
in two shop courses. 

COURSES 

The courses in industrial arts were authorized by 
the Department of Education as first year vocational 
electives of the high school program. Each course carried 
eight credits. Enrollments were as follows: Automotives I 
(141), Electricity I (60), Woodwork I (46), and Metals I (43). 
Enrollments in double courses were as follows: Automotives 
and Electricity (25), Automotives and Woodwork (20), Auto¬ 
motives and Metals (19), Metals and Electricity (8), Woodwork 
and Electricity (4) and Metals and Woodwork (2). 


















* 










. ' 

































- 

































. 


































27 


Tiie problem of evaluating the tests as predictors 
of success in industrial arts resolves itself into an 
interpretation of the coefficient of correlation between 
the scores of each test and the composite mark obtained in 
industrial arts. 

RELIABILITY OF THE OBTAINED COEFFICIENTS OF CORRELATION 

Does a coefficient of correlation of .500 between 

Space Relation test scores and composite marks indicate 

a significant relationship? This question involves the 

reliability of the coefficient of correlation which may be 

tested against the null hypothesis. The method consists 

in comparing the t value for the obtained r with the t values 

to be expected by chance at the .05 and .01 limits as found 

29 

in Table 29 of Garrett. 

Table III presents the statistical data. Column 3 
indicates the values of the coefficients of correlation 
between the obtained scores of the tests and the composite 
marks in industrial arts. Column 4 indicates the values 

of t computed from the formula t = ~ where t is 

Vl - 

used for determining the significance of a computed r on the 

null hypothesis, in which r equals the obtained coefficient 

30 

and N equals the number of cases. The value of t is then 
read as 2.61 and 2.60 from Table 29 of Garrett, taking N - 1 





































- 




























, ■ 

. 








28 - 


degrees of freedom as 150 for each N. As all the values 
of t noted in column Ip are greater than the corresponding 
value of t at the .01 level of significance in column 5, 
the null hypothesis is rejected; and each r is assumed to 
be significant, since only once in 100 trials TAOuld a value 
of t as large or larger than 2*61 arise through sampling 
accidents. 

As a further check on this computation of t, direct 
use was made of Table lp9 of Garrett. For 150 degrees of 
freedom, the nearest to any N of the present study, the 
value of r must be .208 to be significant at the »01 level* 
This value is less than any coefficient of correlation in 
Table III. 

It may therefore be stated that there is significant 
correlation between the obtained scores of each test and 
the marks in industrial arts. Column i|_ indicates that Space 
Relation, the MPFB, and the 0 f Rourke have the highest sig¬ 
nificance. There is no doubt then of the reliability of 
each coefficient of correlation. 

RELIABILITY OF PREDICTION 

THE ACCURACY OF INDIVIDUAL PREDICTIONS FROM REGRESSION 
EQUATIONS 


Is it possible to predict with reasonable accuracy 


















29 


TABLE III 


a 

c 

M 

Eh 

< 

iJ 

W 

K 

g 

o 

Qh 

o 

Eh 

W 


w 

o 

o 

H 

ffi 

Eh 

% 

£ 


ffl 

H 

w 

« 

W 

H 

Eh 

w 

H 

s 

g 

Eh 

W 

Q 

O 

Eh 


C 

H 

a 

Eh 

CO 


Eh 

H 

00 

O 

P-i 

S 

o 

o 


Eh 

cn 

W 

Eh 

« 

o 

W 

&H 

o 











- 30 - 


the achievement of an individual in industrial arts from 
his score on one of the tests? Individual predictions are 

31 

made from regression equations. Regression equations are 
the equations of the two regression lines in a correlation 
table representing the straight lines which ,! best fit” the 
means of the successive columns and rows in the table. The 

equations y = r °y )(x is known as the regression equation 

Ok 

of y on x. The values of y and x are deviations taken from 
the means of Y and X, the two related variables* 

Suppose we wish to predict an individuals probable 
composite mark in industrial arts at Victoria Composite High 
School this year from an obtained score on the Space Relations 
test. The test score and the corresponding composite ma^k 
of an individual are taken as the values of Y and X respect¬ 
ively. We first substitute in the regression equation above 
the values of r, x and y computed from the correlation table 
of the Space Relations test scores and the composite marks 
in industrial arts for the 178 shop boys of the present study. 
The resulting equation is then converted to a regression 
equation in score form in terms of Y and X. By substituting 
for X in this score form equation, the test score obtained 
by the individual, we may compute the predicted probable 
composite mark ( y ) in industrial arts. 




* 




























« 


• 





— .' • 


, 










* 











31 


TABLE IV 


S25 

< 

Cm 

o 

izj 

o 

M 

EH 

O 

M 

S 

cm 


3 


M 

s 

§ 

u 

Q 

o 

Eh 


a 


o 

K 

fe 

CO 

Eh 

££ 

iJ 

<C 

M 

« 

Eh 

B 

Q 












32 


Let as assume this predicted mark is 70. How 

accurate is this prediction? The standard error of 

estimate (^Test. Y) is used to indicate the degrees of 

accuracy with which Y scores can be predicted from X 

32 

scores from a regression equation. Column 6, Table IV 
gives the standard error of estimate for each coefficient 
of correlation for the tests of this study. The values 
for the standard error of estimate (^"est. Y) were obtained 
from the formula est.Y )= y Vi - r 2 , which is used 

for a Y score predicted from the regression equation 

_ ^ 33 

7 = r ^ Y x, 

(fx X 

The standard error of estimate for predicting a com¬ 
posite mark from a Space Relations test score is given in 
column 6, Table IV as 10.17. If a mark of 70 in industrial 
arts is predicted from a test score on the Space Relations 
test, the chances are about two in three that the prediction 
does not miss the student’s actual mark by more than ± 10.17 
marks. The chances are one in three that the prediction may 
miss the student’s actual mark by more than lb 10.17 marks. 

Stated in another way the chances are two out of three 
that the actual mark in industrial arts, predicted as 70, may, 
from a score on the Space Relations test, be any mark in the 
range 5S.83 and 80.17. It also means, however, that the 
chances are one out of three that the actual mark in in¬ 
dustrial arts, predicted as 70 from this individual test 





33 


score may be outside the range 59.83 and 80.17. The 
standard errors of estimate for the other tests as given 
in column 5, Table TV appear to be of the same order of 
size. Thus the margin of error which will occur in indi¬ 
vidual predictions based on scores obtained from these 
tests will extend over a similar range. Garrett states that 
when the correlation between two variables is high, as when 
r r .90, the values of one variable may be predicted from 

known values of the other variable with fairly high degree 
34 

of accuracy. However, when the correlation is low, pre¬ 
diction from regression equations becomes so unreliable as 
to become almost valueless. The coefficients between the 
test score and the composite marks in this study range 
from .257 to .500. For this reason the writer abandoned 
the use of the regression equation for predicting an in¬ 
dividual’s probable composite mark from a test score. Con¬ 
sequently, it may be said that the coefficients of correl¬ 
ation for the test scores and the composite marks in in¬ 
dustrial arts are too low to permit reasonable accuracy in 
individual prediction. The tests of this study cannot be 
expected to predict with reasonable accuracy a student’s 
mark in industrial arts from a single test score. 




- 3>k - 


COEFFICIENT OF ALIENATION 

Another method for evaluating the effectiveness of 
a coefficient of correlation is by means of a coefficient 

,/-p 35 

of alienation (k), derived from the formula k -yl - r . 

The coefficient of alienation designates the degree of 
absence of relationship. Coefficients of alienation are 
given in column Ij., Table IV. Garrett states that the 
estimation of an individuals score in one test from 
another is not warranted unless r is at least *9®* The 
computational procedure involved is illustrated in App¬ 
endix B. For coefficients of correlation of .80 or less, 
the coefficients of alienation are so large that predic¬ 
tions based upon regression equations are little better 

36 

than guesses. 

COEFFICIENT OF FORECASTING EFFICIENCY 
The coefficient of forecasting efficiency (E) is 

37 

obtained from the formula E = 1 - k. These coefficients 

expressed as percentages are given in column 5* The value 

of r must be above .87 for the test?s forecasting efficiency 

38 

to be greater than 50 percent. In the field of vocational 
testing, the coefficients between test batteries and various 
criteria requiring mechanical aptitude rarely rise above 
.50. Bingham reassures counsellors that though a coefflc- 



- 35 - 


ient of .1^5 permits a prediction of only ten percent 
better than a guess, that is about as well as one would 
do if he undertook to predict the scholarship marks of 
students in college from the grades that they had earned 

39 

in high school. The computational procedure involved is 
illustrated in Appendix C. 

GROUP PERFORMANCE PREDICTION 
FORECASTING TABLES 

A counsellor may decide that the tests of this study 
are of little use to him since they are not dependable 
for predicting the mark an individual will receive in 
industrial arts. However, these tests are more reliable 

ko 

in predicting the performance of groups of students. 
Forecasting tables are often used for the prediction of 
performance of groups. Table 50 of Garrett is part of a 
large forecasting table in which "proportions considered 

ij-i 

satisfactory in achievement" range from ,05 to .95* 

From this smaller table can be predicted the proportion 
of the best 20$ or of any other arbitrarily selected per¬ 
centage of students, which can be expected to prove satis¬ 
factory in industrial arts. The data in Table $0 may be 
used if it is agreed that satisfactory performance is 
achieved when 70$ of the members of a class obtain grades 



36 


above the minimum passing mark. For any other definition 
of satisfactory performance it would be necessary to refer 
to the large table from which Table 50 was taken. 

Suppose on the basis of the Space Relations test scores, 
we selected the best 20$ of 178 shop students. What propor¬ 
tion of this group can be expected to do satisfactory work 
in industrial arts? We note from Table IV that the coef¬ 
ficient of correlation between Space Relations test scores 
and composite marks is .50. The entry .91 is found in 
column 20 of Table 50, opposite r - .50. This means that 91$ 
of the top 20$ of our students, or 32 out of 178 students 
who scored highest on the Space Relations test, may be pre¬ 
dicted to achieve satisfactorily in industrial arts. This 
result should be compared with the 70$ of the students which 
might be expected to fall in the satisfactory group when 
selection is by guess, not knowing the correlation. The 
entry .70 is in column .50, opposite the r of .00. But 70$ 
of the top 20$ of 178 pupils is 25 pupils or 7 less than the 32 
predicted to achieve satisfactorily. 

In this case the use of the tests improved a forecast 
by guess, by 28 per cent. Consequently group predictions 
from the tests of mechanical ability of this study may be 
considered sufficiently accurate to justify their use in the 
manner illustrated . 


. 

' 

, 










- 









- 37 - 


EXPECTANCY TABLES 

Expectancy tables may also be used In the prediction 
of group performance. As illustrated in Table V an expec¬ 
tancy table is a grid showing in each cell the number or 
percentage of students with a certain test score who have 
attained a specific degree of success in some course. The 
authors of the Differential Aptitude tests recommend its 
use for the prediction of group performance from differen¬ 
tial aptitude test scores. They refer to the table as 

i+2 

follows: 

An expectancy table is a useful device for 
translating test scores into chances of success. 
Such a table presents in more detailed form the 
same data which are summarized in a correlation 
coefficient• 

In this study prediction may be made in terms of the 
percentage or proportion of students making certain grades 
in industrial arts. The expectancy table resembles a 
scatter diagram. The data for Tables V and VI were 
obtained from the distribution of scores made for the 
computation of the coefficients of correlation between 
the test scores and the marks in industrial arts. The 
accuracy of prediction will evidently depend upon the 
number of cases and the coefficient of correlation between 
the test scores and the marks in industrial arts. The 
sample may be made more representative of the population 
by using the data which accumulates over the years. By 












































* 






* 





TO PREDICT PROM THE SPACE RELATIONS TEST THE PROPORTION OP STUDENTS 


TABLE V 


<73 

Eh 

5 

3 


K 

Eh 

GQ 


a 

g 


c 

Eh 


O 

es 

a 













































* 


i i t 




! •... 






















- 39 - 


means of the data in Table V and VI a comparison of group 
performance in industrial arts may be made between the 
Space Relations test and the Otis Mental test. From the 
discussion which follows it is evident that the Space 
Relations test has greater predictive value* 

The data of Table V may be used to predict from the 
Space Relations test scores the proportion of students 
doing satisfactory work or achieving certain arbitrarily 
selected grades of work in industrial arts. The left hand 
side of the table indicates the number of students receiving 
each grade in shop work. Grade D may be considered as a 
failure; Grade B may be considered as satisfactory perform¬ 
ance since the mean score for composite marks is approx- 
imately 65* The right hand portion expresses in a percent¬ 
age the number receiving each grade. The raw scores are 
the scores on the Space Relations test. John Smith obtains 
a test score of 50 on the Space Relations test. What may 
be predicted concerning the students receiving this mark in 
industrial arts? 

The test score of 50 lies in the interval if.O-59 Tn the 
column of raw scores. The percentage of students receiving 
each grade in industrial arts are given as Q% for D, 
for C, klf° Tor B and 2% for A. It may be stated that the 
students obtaining a score of 50 on the Space Relations 






























* 








* 


T 

























-No¬ 
table vi 


O 

M 

Eh 

« 

o 

pH 

o 

« 

pH 


Eh 

CO 

W 

Eh 

O 

525 

M 

« 

O 

O 

CO 

w 

o 

M 

O’ 

CO 

H 

Eh 

O 

H 

W 

Eh 


CO 

Eh 

« 

<3J 

l-q 

c 

H 

« 

Eh 

s 


M 


Q 

< 

« 

o 




















- kl - 


Test would most probably earn a B or C grade in indus¬ 
trial arts since 90 % 0 f the students who obtained a test 
score in the interval 1^0-59 were successful in receiving 
a composite mark in industrial arts which fell in the 
interval 50-79* This may be stated in another way* Of 
the students obtaining a test score in the 14 - 0-59 interval, 
it may be predicted with reasonable accuracy that Q% will 
probably fail in shop work, 2 % will receive honors, 1|_9$ will 
pass without doing satisfactory work, while 9 including 
honor students, will perform satisfactorily in shop work. 

The data of Table VI was computed from the obtained 
Otis Test scores and the related composite marks in ind¬ 
ustrial arts. An examination of the data shows the follow¬ 
ing incongruities. Approximately the same percentages 
receiving each grade are recorded for the students whose 
Otis test scores fall in the interval 95~99, as for the 
students in the interval llQ-llk. A student does as well 
in industrial arts with an Otis I.Q. of 97 as with an 
I.Q. of 112 . It will be observed that the chances for 
failing shop are twice as great for students with an Otis 
I.Q. of 107 than for students with an I.Q. less than 95, 
and three times as great as those with an I.Q. of 97* 

This negative association is counterbalanced by the 
positive relationship between extreme scores and achieve- 





ment In industrial arts. Of students with an I.Q. of 
113 or more, more than 50% will probably do satisfactory 
work (65-79), whereas of the students with an I.Q, below 
95, less than 20 % will do satisfactory work. It can be 
concluded that the Otis test scores do not predict group 
performance in relation to success in industrial arts as 
accurately as the Space Relations test. The coefficient 
of correlation for the Abstract Reasoning test is of the 
order of the r of the Otis test. It may be concluded 
that the Abstract Reasoning test scores are as inaccurate 
as the Otis scores in predicting group performance in 
industrial arts. It is the writer's opinion that the 
other four tests of mechanical ability may be considered 
to be reasonably accurate in prediction of group perform¬ 
ance in relation to industrial arts. Forecasting tables 
are strictly accurate only when the distributions are 
normal both in the test and in the criteria of performance 
When the distributions are approximately normal and the N ! 
are large, they can be used with considerable confidence. 
In any case Garrett states they furnish useful approxi- 

1+3 

mations. 

RELATIONSHIP BETY/EEN MECHANICAL ABILITY AND INTELLIGENCE 

Table VII shoves the coefficients of correlation 
between the tests of mechanical aptitude and the Otis test 








* 








t * 

' 

. 

. 








* 

* 

* 




















TABLE VII 


53 


O 


M 

Q 

EH 


< 

c 

1-5 


CQ 

>H 

« 

Eh 

K 

M 

O 

iJ 

o 

H 

&H 


o 


>H 

3 

Eh 

O 

H 

H 

P 


H 

<$ 

CQ 

w 

< 

o 

H 

w 

P 

(VI 

s 

a 

&H 


o 

W 


K 

CO 

Eh 

Eh 

W 

CO 

w 

525 

Eh 

M 


s 

PS 

53 

M 

Eh 

tg 

H 

Eh 

Q 

PQ 


CQ 

O 


Eh 













44 


Tiie data was computed in the same manner as for Table III. 
The values of t in Column 4 are seen to be greater than 
the corresponding value of t in column 5, at the .01 level 
of confidence. The coefficient of correlation between 
the tests of mechanical ability and the Otis test of intelli 
gence is significant at the .01 level. It may be concluded 
that the scores of the tests of mechanical ability are 
significantly related to those of the Otis test scores. 

On page 16 it was noted that MacQuarrie attempted to 

make a test of mechanical ability which would not measure 

intelligence. This is often considered as a criterion for 

including a test of mechanical ability in a battery of 

tests, which will predict success in the performance of 

44 

work requiring mechanical ability. If that is accepted as 
a criterion for evaluating a test then the 0*Rourke and 
the MacQuarrie are superior to the others. As noted in 
Chapter II one of the components of mechanical ability is 
scholastic aptitude which is closely related to intelligence 
Since Abstract Reasoning, MPFB and Space Relations show a 
high relationship with intelligence, they would be consid¬ 
ered superior to the other two tests of mechanical ability. 
The assumption that there are levels of mechanical ability 
which seem to increase with intelligence as noted in Chapter 
II would indicate why such tests as the MPFB and Space 












. 


















. 



















, 














































45 


Relations are more often administered to engineering 
students. Intelligence appears to be highly related to 
the factors of mechanical ability measured by the three 
tests, Abstract Reasoning, MPFB and Space Relations, and 
only slightly related to the factors of mechanical 
ability measured by the O f Rourke and the MacQparrie. 



CHAPTER VI 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

CONCLUSIONS 

The purpose of this study was to evaluate certain 
tests in use at Victoria Composite High School in pred¬ 
icting success in industrial arts. A summary of the 
results follows: 

1. The correlation between the scores obtained in 
each test and the criterion scores was significant at the 
.01 level. The Space Relations, Minnesota Paper Form Board 
and the O'Rourke tests showed the highest significance. 

2. The coefficients obtained in order of size are, 
Space Relations .500, Minnesota Paper Form Board .ij-79, 

the O'Rourke .I 4 . 72 , the MacQuarrie .ij-27, Abstract Reasoning 
.383 and the Otis test .257* 

3. These coefficients are considered too low for 
accurately predicting accomplishment in a course in ind- 

k5 

ustrial arts from an individual test score. As the 
efficiency coefficients of Space Relations, MPFB, O'Rourke, 
Otis and MacQuarrie tests are approximately ten per cent, 
these tests may, however, be considered of use in providing 

kb 

a lead to vocational counsellors. 

ip. The coefficients of correlation of the tests of 
mechanical ability with success in industrial arts warrant 
































* 








* 


L 






, 



















- 1+7 - 


the use of these tests in forecasting the performance of 

kl 

groups from forecasting tables. 

5. Prom the ancillary study of the relationship of 
the scores on the tests of mechanical ability and the Otis 
test scores the following coefficients were obtained: 
Abstract Reasoning .519 > MPFB • b^-b, Space Relations .359* 
MacQuarrie *292 and the O’Rourke *265* 

6 . The MacQuarrie and the O’Rourke tests appear to 
measure components of mechanical ability only slightly 
related to intelligence as measured by the Otis test. The 
Abstract Reasoning, the Space Relations and the MPFB tests 
tend to measure the levels of mechanical ability which 
demand a higher degree of intelligence as measured by the 
Otis test. 


RECOMMENDATIONS 

1. If only one test is to be used to predict success 
in industrial arts the writer recommends the Space Relations 
or the MPFB test since these tests have somewhat greater 
predictive value than the others. 

2. If two tests are to be selected as a battery 
either the Space Relations or the MPFB, and either the 
O’Rourke or MacQuarrie test are recommended. Each test of 
the first pair has approximately the same correlation with 








r * 

„ 


- 



* 

* 




















* 

i: ..u 





























- 1*8 - 


the criteria and with the intelligence score* Each of 
the second pair of tests has approximately the same cor¬ 
relation with the criteria and with the intelligence 
scores. 


SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE STUDIES 

1* A profitable study might be made of the pred¬ 
ictive value of each test in relation to success in 
drafting* It may be that the drafting instructor controls 
the mark a student obtains in his shop work* 

2. A multiple correlation Of study is recommended 
in which a battery of tests will be developed to predict 
success in industrial arts in Victoria Composite High 
School* 

3* A similar study is recommended in which the 
tests of mechanical ability are administered during the 
first week of the fall term at Victoria Composite High 
School. A control group of students registered in aca¬ 
demic courses should be included in this study* Students 
registered in academic courses may be found to do as well 
on tests of mechanical ability as the students in shop 
courses • 

ij.* A study similar to the present one is also sug¬ 
gested, in which it is proposed to evaluate the same tests 
as predictors of success in home economics. 



• 



' X - 











_ 


4 



vO. 



* 

* 





- 




* 

- 

* 

" 

* 





49 


5. A study is suggested in which the predictive 
value of the tests of the present study is evaluated in 
relation to success in the second and third years of 
industrial arts. Tests of mechanical ability may be 
measuring what is easily acquired in response to spec¬ 
ific experiences. Perhaps more stable abilities are not 
being measured. If these can be identified they may be 
used in long term predictions. 



- 50 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bingham, Walter Van Dyke. Aptitudes and Aptitude Testing . 
Harper Brothers PuETishers, 1937.370 p. 

Monroe, Walter S. Encyclopedia of Educational Research . 

Revised Edition. The MacMillan Co., 1950. 3320 p. 

Canadian Research Committee on Practical Education. Report 

No. 2. Your Child Leaves School . A study of 12, 12i| 
graduates and lU,219 Drop-outs from Canadian Schools 
during 19M3. February 1950, 127 p. 

Hahn, M. E. and MacLean, M.S., General Clinical Counseling 
In Educational Institutions, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 
First" Edit ion ,“1950. 373”p. 

Wittenborn, J. R., Mechanical Ability, it3 Nature and Measure ¬ 
ment . An Analysis of~"the V ar 1a!5TlT” Ermo^ h e 

Preliminary Minnesota Experiment . Source book for 
Vocational testing, D. E. Super, Editor. Bureau of 
Publications Teachers College, Columbia University 

191*6. 360 p. 

Sartain, A. Q., The Use of Certain Standardized Tests in 

the Selection oT~Tns^e^TorT^Ijr"an~ Air craft Factory . 

Source book for Vocational Testing. D. E. Super,” 

Editor. Bureau of Publications Teachers College, 
Columbia University 19W>. 3&0 p. 

Likert, R. and Quasha, W. H., The Revised Minnesota Paper 
Form Board Test . Manual I 9 I 4 . 5 . The Psychological 
Corporation. "T6 p. 

Cottingham, H. F., Paper and Pencil tests Given to Students. 

"Occupations' 1 . The Vocational Guidance Journal - "" - 
Vol. XXVII No. 2., November 19ij-8. 

Garrett, H. E., Statistics in Psychology and Education . Third 
Edition” Longmans, Green and Company 191+7 • ”9.85 p. 

Bennett, G. K., Seashore, H. G. and Wesman, A. G., Manual 
Differential Aptitude Tests . The Psychological 
Corporation. I 9 U 7 

Buros, 0. K. Editor. The Third Mental Measurements Year 
Book . Rutgers" Uni versTty TFess“ 1949• ~~10l+7 p. 

Bennett, G. K. and Cruickshank, R. M., A Summary of Manual 
and Mechanical Ability Tests (Preliminary form). 

The Psychological Corporation. 19^3• 80 p. 

Buros, 0. K., The Nineteen Forty Mental Measurements Year 
Book . The Gryphon Press l91iST~ 679- p. 

























- 5i - 


FOOTNOTES 


1* Bingham, Walter Van Dyke, Aptitudes and Aptitude 

Testing. Harper Brothers Publishers, Mew York, 

1937. p. 2124.. 

2. Ibid, p.213 


3® Munroe, Walter S* Encyclopedia of Educational Research . 
Revised Edition. The MacMillan Company, New York, 

1950. p. 585. 

1+. Canadian Research Committee on Practical Education. 

Report No. 2. Your Child Leaves School. Toronto, 
1950. p. 16. 

5. Hahn, M. E. and MacLean, M. S. General Clinical Counsel - 

ing in Educational Institutions . McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, New York, 1950. p. 216. 

6. Wittenborn, J. R. Mechanical Ability, its Nature and 

Measurement . Source Book for Vocational Testing* 
Bureau o t Publications Teachers College, Columbia 
University, New York, I9I4.6. p. 30?. 

7. Sartain, A. Q. The Use of Certain Standardized Tests in 

the Selection of Inspectors in"an Aircraft Factory . 

Source book for Vocational Testing. Bureau of Publi¬ 

cations Teachers College, Columbia University, New 
York, 19i|6. p. 230. 

8. McDaniel, J. W. and Reynolds, W. A., A Study of the 

Use of Mechanical Aptitude Tests in the Selection of 

Trainees for Mechanical Occupations. Source book ’ 

for Vocational Testing. Bureau of "Publications 
Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, 

1914.8. P . 7. 

9. Hunter, R. S. Aptitude Tests for the Machine Shop . 

Manual for the Revised Minnesota Paper Form Board 
Test. Psychological Corporation, New York, 1948® 

p. 7. 

10. Cottingham, H. F. Paper and Pencil Tests Given to 

Students. ”0ccupations' 1 . The Vocational and 

Guidance Journal, November, I9I4-8. p. 95 • 

11. Ibid, p. 96. 

12. Manual for Revised MPFB . p. 7. 
























- 52 - 


13- 

Differential Aptitude Tests Manual. 

Psychological 


Corporation, New York, 191+8. P 

. E- 24 . 

14. 

Ibid. p. E-62. 


15. 

Ibid. p. E-19. 


16 . 

Bingham, Walter Van Dyke. op. cit. 

p. 317 

17- 

Cottingham, H. F. op. cit. p. 98* 


18. 

Manual for Revised MPFB. op cit. p 

. 9 . 

19. 

Cottingham, H. G. op. cit. p. 95* 


20. 

Garrett, H. E. Statistics in Psychology and Education. 


Longmans, Green and Company, New York, I 9 I+?. P* 2$3 

21. 

Ibid. p. 190. 


22. 

Ibid. p. 299* 


23. 

Ibid. p. 312. 


24, 

Ibid. p. 336 


25. 

Differential Aptitude Tests Manual. 

op. cit. p. 62. 

26 . 

Bingham, Walter Van Dyke. op. cit. 

p. 219 

27. 

Ibid. p. 215 


28. 

Hahn, M. E. and MacLean, M.S. op. 

cit. p. 220. 

29. 

Garrett, H. E. op. cit. p. 190 


30. 

Ibid, p. 298 


31. 

Ibid, p. 312. 


. 

CM 

Ibid, p. 320. 


33. 

Ibid. 


34. 

Ibid. p. 322. 


35. 

Ibid, p. 336. 


36. 

Ibid. 


37. 

Ibid. p. 337. 
























- 53 - 


• 

00 

rO 

Ibid. 



39- 

Bingham, Walter 

Van Dyke. op. cit. p. 213. 


4o. 

Garrett, H. E. 

op. cit. p • 3^2 • 


4i. 

Ibid. p. 324. 



42 . 

Differential Aptitude Tests Manual, op. cit. p. 

E- 62 . 

43. 

Garret, H. E. 

op. cit. p. 328. 


44. 

Bennett, G. K. 
Manual and 

and Cruickshank, R. M. A Summary of 
Mechanical Ability Tests. (Preliminary 


orm) • The 

1943. P- 8 

Psychological Corporation, New York, 

9 

45. 

Garrett, H. E. 

op. cit. p. 336. 


46. 

Bingham, Walter 

Van Dyke. op. cit. p. 213. 


47. 

Garrett, H. E. 

op. cit. p. 323 * 


48. 

Ibid. p. 336. 



49- 

Ibid. p. 337# 





















ill 





- 5k - 


APPENDICES 


A supplementary table of means and 
standard deviations based on the scores 
obtained in the present study at Victoria 
Composite High School. 


Computational procedures involved In 
obtaining the coefficients of alienation and 
the coefficients of forecasting efficiency. 



- 55 - 


APPENDIX A 

TABLE VIII 


MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF SCORES OBTAINED BY 
SHOP STUDENTS AT VICTORIA COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOL ON 
FIVE TESTS OF MECHANICAL ABILITY AND THE OTIS TEST 
OF INTELLIGENCE 


Name of Test 

(i) 

N 

( 2 ) 

Mean 

(3) 

3» E • 

(U) 

S.D. 

(5) 

Space Relations 

178 

57.39 

1*77 

23.66 

Minnesota Paper 


I 4 .O .88 

♦61+ 


Form Board 

195 

8.91 

O'Rourk© 

191 

222.31 

3.01 

14-1.614- 

MacQuarrie 

200 

69.^0 

*80 

11.32 

Abstract 


3U.32 



Reasoning 

169 

♦55 

7.19 

Otis Quick 





Scoring 

195 

105.67 

♦ 63 

8.80 


The above table indicates the means and standard deviations of 
the test scores obtained by the shop students at Victoria Composite High 
School* 


Column Z indicates the number of cases* column 5 the means of the 
scores for each test when correlated with composite marks in industrial 
arts* column 4 the standard error for each mean* and column 5 the standard 
deviation for each mean. 

All computations are made according to the methods outlined in 
Statistics in Psychology and Education* H. E. Garrett. 



































. 






* 












- 56 - 


APPENDIX B 


COMPUTATIONAL PROCEDURE INVOLVED IN OBTAINING THE COEFFIC¬ 
IENTS OF ALIENATION 

Column (i|) Table IV indicates the coefficient of alienation 

for each test of this study* The value of k in each, case 

/—^ > 8 

was obtained from the formula k = Vl - r^ as follows I 


Space Relations r « *500 


MPFB 

0 f Rourke 

MacQuarrie 

Abstract 

Reasoning 

Otis Test 


r = .ij-79 
r = .14-72 
r - .427 

r r .383 
r = .257 


k = \A - *500 2 = .8658 

k - V 1 - ^79 2 = .8779 

k - \/i - .b,12 2 - .8818 

k = yi - *42? 2 = .9044 

k = V 1 " -383 2 = .9234 

k = \/l - ,257 2 = .9665 














57 


APPENDIX C 


COMPUTATIONAL PROCEDURE INVOLVED IN OBTAINING- THE COEF¬ 
FICIENTS OF FORECASTING EFFICIENCY 


Column (5) Table IV indicates the coefficient of forecasting 

efficiency (E) in percent for each test. 

The values of E have been computed from the formula 

49 

E z 100(1 - k) as follows: 


Space Relations k - 


MPFB k - 

O f Rourke k = 

MacQuarrie k - 

Abstract 

Reasoning k z 

Otis Quick 
Scoring k z 


.8658, S = 100(1 
.-8779, E z 100(1 
.8818, E = 100(1 
.9044, E = 100(1 

.9234, E = 100(1 
.9665, E = 100(1 


- k) = 13.42% 

- k) = 12.21% 

- k) = 11.82% 

- k) = 9.56% 

- k) = 7.66% 

- k) = 3.34% 







































. 

: . :: 








. 






• 




. 

. 



«• 







n 



- - . 







