













@X UBBW 
WWttWIS 









UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 
LIBRARY 

Regulations Regarding Theses and Dissertations 


Typescript copies of theses and dissertations for Master's 
and Doctor's degrees deposited in the University of Alberta Lib¬ 
rary, as the Official Copy of the Faculty of Graduate Studies, may 
be consulted in the Reference Reading Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supervision the work was done. Some Departments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan service 
of the University of Alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. Written permission of the 
author and of the Department must be obtained through the University 
of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. When permission 
has been granted, credit must appear in the published work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance with 
the above regulations by the persons listed below. The borrowing 
library is obligated to secure the signature of each user. 


Please sign below; 


Date 


Signature 


Institution 



















































UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 

The undersigned hereby certify that they have read and 
do recommend to the Committee on Graduate Studies for accept¬ 
ance a thesis entitled "An Experimental Comparison of Two 
Methods of Teaching Unit Two of the High School Social Studies 
20 Course (1952)" submitted by Louis Charles Mix, B. A., in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Education. 


Professor 

Professor 


Professor 









Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/experimentalcompOOmixl 



THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


AN EXPERIMENTAL COMPARISON 
OF TWO METHODS OF TEACHING UNIT WO 
OF THE HIGH SCHOOL SOCIAL STUDIES 20 
COURSE (1952) 

A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

LOUIS CHARLES MIX 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


APRIL, 1954 






ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The writer wishes to express his appreciation for the 
encouragement and assistance received during the preparation 
and progress of this work. The judicious advice and careful, 
pertinent observation of the development of the experimental 
study by Dr. H. T. Coutts is gratefully acknowledged. The 
writer also expresses his gratitude to Dr. W. D. McDougall 
for his aid in the preparation of the testing device and for 
his keen and helpful observations regarding the significance 
of the results, and to Miss D. M. Lampard for assistance in 
preparing the study. For the help of Mr. D. R. Innes, 

Principal of Strathcona High School, in the formation of 
the experimental classes, and for the co-operation and inte¬ 
rest of the members of the High School staff, Mr. R. A. McNaught, 
Mr. 0. A. Olson and Mr. 0. A. Stratte in conducting the pre¬ 
test and the final test, the writer expresses his appreciation. 
Acknowledgment is also made of assistance received from Miss 
E. E. Clever and the staff of the Faculty of Education 
Library, and from the students of the Strathcona High School 
whose part in the project made this study possible. 


(iii) 














* - 






t 















- 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I * THE THESIS PROBLEM AND ITS BACKGROUND. 1 

II. THE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE SOCIAL STUDIES 

COURSE. 5 

III. A DEFINITION OF METHOD AND A DESCRIPTION 

OF SEVEN METHODS. 6 

1. The Textbook Method. 14 

2. The Supervised Study Method.*.. . 14 

3. The Project Method. 14 

4. The Problem Method. 15 

5. The Laboratory Method... 15 

6. The Lecture Method. l6 

7. The Socialized Recitation Method. 18 

IV. THE PLAN OF PROCEDURE.. 21 

Preparations for the Experiment. 23 

Preparation of the Unit Outline, the Test 
Material, and the Questionnaire. 26 

V. ADMINISTERING THE PRE-TEST. 29 

VI. TEACHING PROCEDURES AS USED IN THE EXPERIMENT_ 31 

1. Introducing the Unit. 31 

2. Teaching by the Lecture Method. 32 

3. Teaching by the Socialized Recitation Method.. 33 

VII. A COMPARISON OF THE I.Q. RATINGS, THE ENROLLMENT 
OF THE CLASSES, THE PROPORTION OF BOYS AND GIRLS, 

AND THE CLASS ATTENDANCES, OF THE TWO GROUPS, 

A-C AND B-D.. 37 

1. A Comparison of the I.Q. Ratings..... 37 

2. A Comparison of the classes according to 

Enrollment, and to Distribution According 
to Sex..... 

(iv) 


42 


































... 

■ v , . . ..... .. - • 

- 


' ' 

• ^ 


- 

. 

. 


. 

* 





















CHAPTER PAGE 

3. The Class Attendance During the Study. 42 

VIII. A COMPARISON OF THE RESULTS OBTAINED ON THE 

PRE-TEST WITH THOSE OBTAINED ON THE FINAL TEST... 47 

1. Pre-test Scores... . 47 

2. Final Test Scores...... ... 51 

3. A Comparison of the Scores According to Two 

Factors of Learning: Retention of Facts and 
Reasoning Ability. 5& 

IN. A STUDY OF THE RESULTS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE 

WRITTEN AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE FINAL TEST. 6l 

1. The Teaching Method and the Time Element. 6l 

2* The Teaching Method and the Preference for 

the Sub j ect.. 6l 

X. CONCLUSIONS DRAM FROM THE RESULTS OF THE STUDY.. 64 

1. The Significance of the Experiment. 64 

2. Conclusions Concerning the Acquisition of 
Factual Knowledge and the Development of 
Reasoning Power under the Different Methods 

of Teaching. 65 

3. Conclusions Regarding Students* Interest and 
Preference as Influenced by the Two Methods 

of Teaching... 67 

4* Conclusions Regarding the Length of Time Re¬ 
quired for an Adequate Presentation of 
Material by each Method... 68 

5. Other Conclusions Reached Regarding the 
Students T Growth in Desirable Responses as 

a Result of the Use of Each Method of Teach¬ 
ing the Unit in Social Studies. 71 

6. A SUMMARY OF THE CONCLUSIONS REACHED IN THIS 

STUDY......... 72 

XI. RECOMMENDATIONS. 77 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 79 


(v) 





















APPENDICES. PAGE 

A. An Outline Plan of Unit II, Social Studies 20 Si 

B. Question Paper of Pre-test and Final Test.... $5 

C. Sample of Questionnaire Submitted to All 

Students at Completion of Final Test. 92 

D. Record of Daily Progress. 95 

E. Instructions to Supervising Teachers Regard¬ 
ing Procedures in Conducting Tests . 97 

F. Excerpts from Students 1 Answers to the 

Questionnaire. 9$ 













LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I* Distribution of I.Q. Eatings of the Four Classes 

Employed in the Study, Classes A, B, C and D.... 39 

II. A Comparison of the I.Q. Ratings of the Two 

Groups Taught by the Different Methods. 40 

III. Enrollment Per Class According to Sex.. 44 

IV. Enrollment Per Group According to Sex. 44 

V. Record of Students 1 Attendance at Classes during 

the Period of the Experiment... 4& 

VI. Scores Obtained on the Pre-test by the 

Students in Each Class.. 4$ 

VII. Scores Obtained on Pre-test: Lecture Group (A—C) 

and Socialized Recitation Group (B-D).. 49 

VIII. Scores Obtained on Final Test by Each Class. 53 

IX. Scores Obtained on Final Test: Lecture Group 

(A—C) and Socialized Recitation Group (B-D). 54 

X. A Comparison of the Scores Made by Each Group 

on the Pre-test and on the Final Test. 55 

XI. Factual Retention Scores of Each Group, A-C and 

B-D, on Pre-test and Final Test. 59 

XII. Reasoning Ability Scores of Each Group, A-C and 

B-D, on Pre-test and Final Test... 60 

XIII. Responses of Students in Each Group to the 

Statements Regarding the Time Allowed for the 
Unit ... 63 

XIV. Students f Preferences for Social Studies in 

Relation to Their School Subjects. 63 

XV. A Comparison of the I.Q. Rating Medians, the 
Pre-test Scores, and the Final Test Scores of 
the Four Classes, A, B, C and D...... 64 


(vii) 
































c 













LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Comparison of I.Q. Ratings of Students in 
Classes A and C with I.Q. Ratings of Students 

in Classes B and D... 41 

2. Comparison of the Two Groups of Students 

According to Number and Sex. 45 

3. Comparison of Scores Obtained on Pre-test. 50 

4. Comparison of Pre-test Scores with Final Test 

Scores for Groups A-C and B-D. 56 

5. Actual Gains Made by Students on Final Test. 57 


(viii) 











, 

....... 

. 

, 

- , . . ■ 














SYNOPSIS 


The author T s primary aim in this investigation was to 
compare in effectiveness as teaching procedures the lecture 
and the socialized recitation methods. To this end, the 
study was limited to a consideration of tw T o outcomes which 
were measurable objectively; namely, the acquisition and 
retention of factual knowledge, and the increase in ability 
to draw conclusions from ideas gained in the study of the 
unit. The criteria used were the gains made in writing, as 
a final test, a paper which had been written by all the 
students as a pre-test. This test was composed of eighty- 
four questions, half designed to measure retention of facts, 
half the increase in reasoning ability. 

The results obtained showed that the lecture method 
was the more effective in giving the students a definite 
body of factual material and in having them retain the facts 
for the period of the study; however, the effectiveness of 
the lecture method over the socialized recitation method was 
not apparent in improving their reasoning ability. 

Minor aims of the study were to determine the effect 
of each method on the student T s preference for the subject, 
and the relationship between method and economy of time. 
Evidence was found that the method is not a determining 
factor in preference for the subject, but that students 
generally require more time for study by the socialized 
recitation than by the lecture method. 


(ix) 




















< ' 

- 

C 

* 






t 















■ 























CHAPTER I 


THE THESIS PROBLEM AND ITS BACKGROUND 

The problem of this study was a comparison of two 
methods of teaching in order to determine their relative ef¬ 
fectiveness in a certain field. The nature of the study was 
an experiment carried on under the ordinary classroom condi¬ 
tions of an Alberta city high school during the school year 
1952-1953, using four classes enrolled in the school. The 
subject of the study was Unit Two, Social Studies 20, entitled 
"The Effect of Science on Our Economic and Social Life." This 
unit was one of the six comprising the social studies course 
introduced into about thirty Alberta high schools during the 
1952-1953 year on a trial basis and made general throughout 
the province the next year. The experiment was conducted 
during the latter part of November and the month of December, 
1952. 

The teacher who undertook this experiment had been 
teaching the social studies for several years, employing vari¬ 
ous methods and techniques. At the time of the study he was 
teaching seven classes in social studies, four in Grade XI and 
three in Grade XII. It was desired to ascertain whether or 
not one method was more effective than another in presenting 
work to the students. The experiment was carried out with the 
Grade XI students because there was no restriction imposed by 
an external examination. It was possible, under the existing 
conditions, to set up two groups of two classes each, and to 




.: an •: 

t- . . •,0:- ‘ o,nr 

• • ■■■ al: -nhii< •• -.-a ‘lc o- :$oia 

. i : : . ,■ ■ cv t "5 :>1 

. • •. , - ' -■ -i^c; v aro-;: :vt ; ;••• ns 

• ; *'o.'C r . ;■:/ ? K-.-jctJ 

- r ii co ■. . • r . ' '■ :y:ixxu *M.S<y'?r 

< . o a ;• 

. 

an a lo eno oo'a Itmr 

. ;• , . - 

. j ;o: 

, S? 

t. •: • ' v r s ‘ .. Ij\. ‘ .; .j 

■ ■ y ; • ; . • :f 

* 

1 . . ■ ■ ..0'V. o., : ■, .... :v.yyv'X:,;» 

C '■ , ■ 

■ ■ ... ? o i ’ . :. 


2 

teach them by different methods without fear of unfavorable 
consequences to either group. 

In attempting a comparison of two specific methods of 
teaching, one must realize that there are many methods and 
combinations of methods in use at the present time. A century 
ago this was not so. Then textbooks and teachers’ aids were 
few; classes were small; and those students who sought higher 
education attended the classes to obtain the knowledge and 
secure the credits required for the narrow, specialized fields 
which were open to them. The teacher had the knowledge. He 
imparted it to the students by formal lectures and gave credit 
at his discretion. 

Today all this has changed; with the change has come a 
revolution in methods of teaching. Thus it must be clear that 
in making a choice of two methods for the purpose of this ex¬ 
periment, it was necessary to choose those that are currently 
used and held to be desirable by teachers and administrators. 

Furthermore, there were many problems to be considered 
in attempting to arrive at an answer to the question, "Which 
is the better method to use in teaching Unit Two of the Social 
Studies 20 course?" Some of the difficulties arose from the 
differing abilities of the students; the size of the classes; 
the natural abilities and weaknesses of the teacher; his train¬ 
ing and experience; his possible bias in favor of one rather 
than the other method; the time of day when the classes met; 
the length of the lesson periods; the library facilities of 
the school and community; and the experiences of the pupils 
with respect to the two methods being compared in the study. 





.quo* 




. 

- 

: ; 






■ c 

. 

: oi v,{ 0 c $£ ->Q t'lBqml 




: ; v ‘T: s - | 



: 

«• .- 1\ ■ ■ ;• r ' ; J ; 

: vK:o '■ ' i II | 

‘ - ■, ■ ■ , ■ - : ■ , ' ? ;t -; ■ I;';!’? D q 

: 

■ I.: ’■ it.i 









' : ■ - ■ ■... -,j- 




: 






■ 






3 

The most formidable difficulty, however, was that of 
securing a valid measuring-stick for determining the more 
effective method. It was apparent that every lesson taught 
produced its effects, beneficial or harmful, and many of those 
effects or outcomes were not discernible by any objective 
means of measurement and might not influence the pupil until 
long after the experience had passed. It had to be decided, 
therefore, upon what outcomes or results the effectiveness of 
the two methods was to be judged. The following questions were 
asked concerning each method used: 

1. Did it result in the greater acquisition of knowledge 
of certain definite facts or events? 

2. Did it produce the greater reasoning ability? 

3. Did it result in the greater participation by the pupils 
in acceptable group experiences? 

4. Did it produce the greater gain in desirable attitudes? 

5. Did it result in a greater saving of time? 

6. Did it produce a greater retention of knowledge? 

7. Did it give the greater amount of pleasure and satis¬ 
faction to the students? 

$. Did it produce the greater desire to continue the study 
and the search for new experiences? 

These questions are all reasonable and valid, but, 
because some of them could not be answered by any objective 
method devised in this study, the writer decided to deal only 
with those that can be tested objectively and immediately. 

The present experiment, then, dealt with the factors of effec- 








■' f> i;;!•:: - 3 o;;:!;; 8 3 • ' ■ - ''' 8 ' f ' 9 / i • ' 91 Z *T ! 5 0 9 8 
8 ■ ■ ■■ ■ ) , . ■ .■'■■■ ! " . 9 £ 

, . ■. , • ■ ' ' . '• " 9 9 :■ ■’ ' : ■■ :!>;/■-:>'? ■ 

r 0 -T: ,/ri ’.1 Jcr 9 r / Jli -, 898 3 -.■? .9933 V 3 \ o Bit 

- 




irc.CTIJ < 9 9 V 3 ,--; 








r :■ . .9 , 3 ‘x 3,99 . . x 99 

: 81989-9.'' ; 9 .; ;: ■ s8. .03 99:833 

. L :.f 9 . : 1 :■ X 3 - ;>■•■; 98.8' 9 r [ 9 jxv; jX Vi , r 

■ 9 : ’lx " ;n: 93399 8 9 • 

• - '' v 0 o >8 ‘' 78 1 933 ; 33 ;:. 933 9i' 8 ix; ,9 

.. . 

■ ' 9 .V - 9 . ■ 9 . -• r 83:;9 9 . 3 .. - 9 ',: 

'■ : 9 9 : :: 33; • . 8 •.... - 8 '.;. ' „ 9 

’.. 9 ,9- .9 ■ 8 3 .9.3-9 9 r ' 9 9 . 

•• 9" ,3999: -Jr 9.*9 7 .8 

3 

• j 

i. • vr '; ■ x.r v 9 3 ‘ 3 . 9 :t:v.;: 









t 80 Ji J o 9 . 9 ; 

< : • -x wr.: T 


4 


tiveness from the standpoint of (1) gain in factual knowledge 
and (2) growth in reasoning ability. Assumptions or sugges¬ 
tions were also made regarding economy of time and regarding 
pupil preference or pleasure derived from the experiences. 


. 0. '-:v 1 




CHAPTER II 


THE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE SOCIAL STUDIES COURSE 

Before describing the methods used in the experiment, it 
seems necessary to set forth briefly the reasons for including 
social studies in the curriculum. The courses in social 
studies consist chiefly of history but contain also elements 
of civics, economics, geography, science, sociology and anthro¬ 
pology. For this reason the social studies bring to the stu¬ 
dent a picture of the society in which he lives and endeavor 
to trace for him a picture of other societies and of the path 
by which his society arrived at its present state of develop¬ 
ment. The principal purpose of all this is that he may become 
adequately fitted to take his place in his social environment 
and help to shape its course toward ever more desirable goals. 

Specifically, the social studies are intended to give 
the student a knowledge of the historical development of 
nations, especially of his own nation; to increase his skill 
in reading, listening, judging, and expressing his ideas; to 
develop attitudes of co-operation and goodwill; to inculcate 
ideals of reverence for God; and to aid him in forming habits 
of industry and thrift that will make him an independent mem¬ 
ber of society. 

Bining and Bining express the purpose of the social 
studies thus: 

It has been pointed out that the specific aims of the 
social studies should include: 


k d* J$j§- 


... ' ; ' : ’ ; .;.v ■ :: a,au utt.\ ea|IA oi;;-- 

- , .; . ■ : -. ' .' ' r ,1 ,t _ ' : .Id iVi'D 1 ~ 3 d 

' { •; .H J f * i: ‘ / « vOS 

, a.E, ro ^r: ■■■■ ", ■) !d ;:a; E- Eooa 

' 


■ • ;• - ' a Ed '• r ' ' '■ : a aw-; J .J:;. J;a ' ad a * daaja.3' 






i I i iq l . ' 






: t ano 

c ■’“•■’p.- ' < En •’ ; a 1: J < -y ; ' ■ oa. ns 

• ' - : ■' r t j , jr-J-, , '. 

I 


. : 


: V-a: d • • - a 


' 












6 


(1) acquiring of knowledge, 

(2) development of reasoning power and critical 
judgment, 

(3) training in independent study, 

(4) formation of habits and skills, and 

(5) training in desirable patterns of conduct. 

With these aims in mind, the teacher must plan how 
he can best accomplish his work. 


The acquisition of these abilities, habits and attitudes 
would prepare the individual for personal success in life, but 
the purpose of the social studies transcends merely personal 
welfare. The Alberta Curriculum Guide for Social Studies 
emphasizes this point. 

The purpose of the program in Social Studies is the 
development of the characteristics of behaviour essen¬ 
tial for effective citizenship in our democracy. To 
determine the minimum essentials for such a program it 
is necessary to analyze our ideal of democracy in 
order to decide what values are paramount, to consider 
what types of behaviour are necessary to achieve these 
values, and what kind of educational experience will 
develop these types of behaviour. 

Foremost among democratic values are respect for the 
individual, faith in the intelligence of the common 
man to solve social problems, belief in the efficacy 
of co-operative action, and the right of all to equal 
opportunity in the social, economic and political as¬ 
pects of life. The only way in which these values can 
be achieved is through the creative work of individuals. 
Individuals must behave in certain ways in order to 
bring about desired changes in our culture. Our ob¬ 
jective is to develop the types of behaviour which will 
bring about these changes. 

The task is to help each student to develop a clear 
insight into our evolving culture, understand contempo¬ 
rary life, build a framework of democratic values, and 
develop his individual potentialities to the fullest. 

The minimum essentials of our Social Studies program 
include those experiences which are needed to accom¬ 
plish this task. 


1 


A. C. Bining and D. H. Bining, Teaching the Social Studies 
in Secondary Schools , New York: McGraw-Hill Co., 19?27~P^>3 















. ' ' 1: /o ; . . r i 

■ ’ .. . r i ' $ :oj • ( .. 

, CfTi. - 

. hi.;.:. ■' ■ :, . .... -s' ■ 'ri. . : ■*-c J i f , v 

< 7o '' ■ '• . ' ‘. 

. v: •• ■■ " tr: ‘ ct , .• 

. :' <. r.: 

. ■ ■ : .. : r yjc ' ■ 


. 

; ■ ” - •. . "sw 

i :ii‘y ': - 

■ 

' .. ■■ ■ r : , • ' . ■ 

- 

’ •: < : ' ‘ . ! ’ n, : 

? f " . • 

3 

. c * '.y.ir 

1 ■. ■ ■ , ^ni fix 

t t - ‘ : • 

■ ■ - • u ■ : ■ -Ji -j r ' 

. ■ • . * . ■ . 












7 


Social Studies is more than history. It covers a 
wide field. Environment influences mankind and we 
study geography. Business, including buying and sell¬ 
ing, occupies a large part of our time and we must 
attempt to understand economics. Ideals are the most 
potent force in the world when they are put to work 
and we should know how our ideas and ideals have grown 
and changed. Biography will give us an acquaintance 
with the lives of men and women who have changed the 
world for better or for worse. Citizenship demands 
that we learn the ways in which our government func¬ 
tions and the rights and duties under our system. 

These are not isolated facts that we must learn but 
integrated patterns of thought which will help us to 
understand today’s world. 


In summary it may be stated that the objective of the 
social studies course is two-fold: the growth of the indivi¬ 
dual for his own sake and for that of his society. 


2 


Province of Alberta, Department of Education, Senior High 
School Bulletin 2, Edmonton: Queen’s Printer, 1952-53, p.5 







- 

. . 

* 

. 

. 

. 

. . 

, : 










< 

■ :'■■■ : x . ,$ &,l /oc u ( 0 c{ 








CHAPTER III 


A DEFINITION OF METHOD 
AND A DESCRIPTION OF SEVEN METHODS 

The term "method” is generally used to express the way 
in which the teacher directs the activities of the students. 

It has a very broad connotation. One teacher may adopt a 
practice which demands very little physical or mental activity 
of the students; another teacher may follow a plan which con¬ 
sists chiefly of student direction and participation. Both 
are defined as methods of instruction. Edgar B. Wesley de¬ 
fines the term thus: 

In education the word "method" is used to indicate a 
series of teacher-directed activities that result in 
learning by the pupils. Method may be regarded as a 
process or procedure whose successful completion re¬ 
sults in learning, or as the means through which 
teaching becomes effective. 3 

It seems advisable at this point to trace the rise of 
different methods of teaching and the reasons for the interest 
in their development. In the days when there was little for¬ 
mal education, the method used was of little concern. The 
education then consisted of imparting as much knowledge as the 
master possessed concerning the subject, and of learning by 
rote what was required. Printed materials were few and expen¬ 
sive. The curriculum was limited in scope, and the means of 
research were few or were out of reach of the majority of 


3 


Edgar B. Wesley, Teaching the Social Studies , Boston: 
D. C. Heath and Co., 1942, p.445 




















- 




' 


• ... 






- 












. 


■ 

• • 




- 

' * ■ 





. 




' 










- 








9 


students. The few students who desired to become masters of 
the subjects that were offered or required were content to sit 
at the feet of the teacher and learn from him. But people 
generally remained illiterate and took little interest in 
matters pertaining to the education of their children. 

Today all this has changed. The curriculum has become 
greatly enlarged. The advances in science, geography, social 
relations, and in every sphere of human activity have become 
so great that few persons could hope to master the whole of 
these advances in a lifetime. Besides this, the amount of 
knowledge available in any field is still increasing and the 
scientific advances and mechanization throughout our physical 
environment have made the whole world interdependent. Be¬ 
cause of such changes, anyone who intends to play his part in 
the modern world must develop a facility with the language and 
acquire a knowledge of the developments of the modern age. 

Educational advances followed those in science and in¬ 
dustry. From education for the few there came education for 
everybody; from a few subjects there grew a broad curriculum; 
from a system consisting of a pupil and his tutor there was 
expansion to one of large classes in which the teacher gave 
instruction to forty or more students at one time. 

When this change took place in the field of public edu¬ 
cation there arose an increasing emphasis upon method, for it 
seemed advisable that the greatest amount of knowledge should 
be gained by the students in the shortest possible time. In 




* 


. 






* 


. 






c 








. 













































10 


other words, economy of effort and time dictated the movement 
for reform in educational methods. The ideas of educationists 
seemed to lead to the conclusion that T? method is one of the 
most fundamental aspects of education and the central problem 
of teaching”. ^ 


Wesley asserts that to be successful a teacher must not 

only consider methods but use sound methods in his teaching. 

Successful teaching involves the use of sound methods. 
It seems, then, that the good teacher must have a 
method, and the best teacher is bound to be aware of 
his method. He must know not only the materials but 
also the problems of the learner. He must facilitate 
the learning process.5 


Similarly, with regard to the importance of method, 

Bining and Bining state that, 

if teaching is to reach its highest degree of effi¬ 
ciency, it is evident that teachers must be thoroughly 
trained in the materials of instruction in their 
fields and must also possess a broad understanding of 
all phases of method -- including psychology -- as a 
part of that philosophy of education which is essen¬ 
tial to good teaching. 

Teachers constantly feel the need for a better 
mastery of teaching methods. However, the changing 
conditions of American education have from time to 
time brought new fads in teaching procedures, which 
have been given much publicity, only to disappear when 
the craze was over; but they have often left the con¬ 
scientious teacher oppressed with a sense of futility. 
On the other hand, there are many excellent methods 
of teaching which are necessary for the achievement of 
the objectives of the social studies; but they must be 
chosen and used in the light of the general objectives 
of education, the materials of instruction, and the 
ability of the pupils. Methodology should be con¬ 
ceived as a dynamic function of education.and not as a 
static aspect of the process of teaching.^ 


^ E. B. Wesley, op . cit ., p.445 

5 Ibid., p.447 

6 A. C. Bining and D. H. Bining, Teaching the Social Studies in 
Secondary Schools . New York: McGraw-Hill Co., 1952 , p. 46 "" 
























« 

■ 


c 















* 

- 

' 

, 

t 




















* 






11 


Modern methods of teaching may be traced back to philo¬ 
sophers and reformers of two or three centuries ago. Bining 
and Bining make this very clear when they write: 

The origin of modern methodology may be traced to the 
theories of Jean Jacques Rousseau*•*It was not until 
Rousseau wrote his ’Emile 1 that ideas of improved 
methods took root and the foundations of methodology 
were laid. Rousseau provided some of the ideas, but 
others worked them out and put them into practice... 

It is true that Rousseau borrowed many ideas from 
John Locke, the English philosopher, who did much in 
laying the basis for modern scientific psychology, 
which, in time, superseded the philosophical psycho¬ 
logy of Plato and Aristotle* • • 

Many were influenced by Locke’s philosophy and 
psychology, but more were stimulated by Rousseau’s 
educational ideas. Among these was Johann Heinrich 
Pestalozzi, of German—Swiss parentage. He spent most 
of his life working out a theory and method of in¬ 
struction in accord with the natural development of 
the child.. .. 

The new ideas of Pestalozzi changed methods of 
instruction in the elementary schools of Europe and 
America. The old method of memorizing material found 
in primer or text was severely attacked. The idea 
that the duty of the teacher was to hear recitations, 
test memory, keep order, and administer discipline 
was challenged. The new conception of slow, individual 
development demanded subject matter and method suited 
to the pupil’s stage of development. The results were 
many. A science of teaching arose; methodology 
became an important field; pedagogy began to take form; 
and psychology, although still very elementary, be¬ 
came a guide. Normal schools for the training of 
teachers developed in European countries and later in 
the United States* . .Strange as it may seem, however, 
Pestalozzianisra exerted little influence over methods 
of teaching in the secondary schools of this country 
(i.e., the United States). 7 


The greatest development in methodology in the secondary 
school came from the adoption of the ideas of Johann Friedrich 
Herbart. This development took place in America about 1$90. 
Herbart enunciated five formal steps in his theory of the 


7 


Bining and Bining, op . cit ., pp.47-49, passim 


















. * t 

- 

* - * 









* 

. . - - 

- 

. 

* 

, 

' 

C 

- 

. . * 

. . . 






- 


. ■' 













12 


proper method of instruction. These steps were: preparation, 

presentation, comparison, generalization, and application. 

The Herbartian method has been described as follows: 

The Herbartian method of instruction required the 
formal planning of lessons, each lesson proceeding 
from induction to deduction. As a carefully planned 
procedure, it has had an important and valuable in¬ 
fluence on the development of teaching technique. It 
came to be applied, however, to all lessons, even 
where inductive-deductive logic could not function. 
Owing to this and to its abstractness, to the devotion 
to the one method, to the emphasis upon the work of 
the teacher rather than upon that of the pupils, and 
to the rise of new methods, the Herbartian plan as a 
whole has been largely discredited. 8 

The period of Herbartian influence, on the whole, 
was a transitional one. It prepared the way for newer 
and better concepts of education. 

By 1910, Herbartianism as a system of education was 
quite generally criticized. The emphasis upon the 
teacher and upon formal procedure, especially, was 
opposed. A new conception of learning was arising, 
based upon a new psychology and founded upon scienti¬ 
fic procedure. Upon this foundation and in accord 
with our modern knowledge of society, a new? education¬ 
al philosophy is being developed. 

According to this new educational philosophy, 
learning is an active process, ----- a constant pro¬ 
cess of reorganizing and reconstructing experience. 9 


The seeds that Rousseau, Pestalozzi and Herbart planted 
have yielded an abundant harvest. Today there are many 
methods of instruction. However, because the term "method" 
is often loosely applied, it is necessary for one to be speci¬ 
fic in describing any method. Wesley states that when a group 
of sixty seniors were asked to list the methods which they 
knew, they wrote so-called methods to the total of one hundred 
and eleven. 10 


8 Bining and Bining, op . cit ., p.l69 

9 Ibid ., p .56 

10 E. B. Wesley, op . cit ., p.44$ 
















, 










K ■ 

. 

, 

. 

- 

? ■ 



- 








13 


Wesley suggests a classification of methods, and lists 
eleven different methods based upon types of approach, fifty- 
six methods based upon activities. H 

All writers of books dealing with teaching methods do 
not agree on the number of methods in use by teachers at the 
present time. Bossing lists five methods: namely, the lec¬ 
ture, the socialized recitation, the problem, the project, and 
the supervised study methods. 12 

Horn mentions eight methods: the daily recitation, the 
lecture, the Dalton plan, the unit mastery, the laboratory, 
the problem, the project, and the topical methods. 13 

Stormzand and Lewis describe six methods: the workbook, 
the problem, the socialized recitation, the laboratory, the 
textbook, and the lecture methods. 14 

It should be pointed out that all methods possess cer¬ 
tain elements that belong to other methods. No method is 
mutually exclusive. It is the combination of the elements 
into an effective process that makes the method suitable or 
desirable when used by a certain teacher in a definite situa¬ 
tion. 


11 E. B. Wesley, op . cit ., p. 451 

12 N. L. Bossing, Progressive Methods of Teaching in Secondary 
Schools, New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1942. 

13 E. Horn, Methods of Instruction in the Social Studies , New 
York: Charles Scribner 1 s Sons, 1937. 

14 M. J. Stormzand and R. H. Lewis, New Methods in the Social 
Studies , New York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1935* 


























< 














. 












i 


t ■ " ? ■ 













, 










. 





















14 


A DESCRIPTION OF CERTAIN METHODS 

1 — THE TEXTBOOK METHOD 

This method may be defined as that in which the mastery 
of the textbook is the immediate objective. It is assumed by 
those who employ this method that the textbook is the best 
source of the material to be learned; that it contains the 
facts most necessary for an understanding of the subject; and 
that the mastery of these facts gives the student the knowledge 
that is required in order to proceed with his education. What 
is required of the student in this method is not a rote learn¬ 
ing of the text, but an ability to answer certain questions 
pertaining to facts mentioned in the text. 

2 — THE SUPERVISED STUDY METHOD 

The most noticeable characteristic of this method is the 
provision that it makes for study periods under the direction 
of the teacher. It is usual for most teachers to set aside 
some time at the end of the formal lesson for the students to 
carry out some such activity, but in such cases it is not con¬ 
sidered a method of teaching. However, supervised study may 
become a method if the teacher uses it specifically in direct¬ 
ing the work of the students. 

3 — THE PROJECT METHOD 

This method usually indicates an undertaking to perform 
some kind of activity such as constructing, observing, debating 
or collecting. Its purpose is the learning of a significant 
skill or process. The project method demands of the student 














































. 

* 












. 














- 












' 




















. 


. 








15 


something beyond mere mental perception and satisfaction. 
Although the project method is more commonly used in the 
elementary than in the secondary school, there are opportu¬ 
nities for its use in the field of social studies in the 
secondary school. 


4 -» THE PROBLEM METHOD 

The problem method usually indicates a challenge to the 
student to investigate and seek to resolve a doubt, clarify a 
misunderstanding or explain a phenomenon. It may be difficult 
and require long study, or it may be some more or less unim¬ 
portant matter that is easy of solution. The important point 
about the problem method is that it requires mental effort and 
satisfaction. For that reason it may more properly be suited 
to the secondary school. 


5 -- THE LABORATORY METHOD 

Bining and Bining make this comment regarding the labora¬ 
tory method: 

With the increasing number of aids, the idea developed 
of a social-studies laboratory. It was unfortunate 
that the term "laboratory" was used in connection with 
the social studies, for it suggested a link with the 
natural sciences. The term has generally been associ¬ 
ated with the experiment and scientific observation 
which is foreign to the teaching of the social studies, 
at least in the manner emphasized in the natural 
sciences. The connection was unfortunate also because 
some suggested a "scientific laboratory method", which 
they expected would revolutionize the teaching of the 
social studies and overcome the difficulties of the 
old-fashioned methods. Naturally, the sponsors of 
such a procedure were vague in their ideas, except that 
laboratory space and much equipment would be required.15 


15 Bining and Bining, op . cit ., p.145 

























. 



* 


. 



















. 








- 

- 
































* 






16 

The form of the laboratory method is usually a combina¬ 
tion of other methods employed. The task of the teacher 
generally in this procedure is the supervision of the work of 
the class. The pupils have definite tasks to perform, and the 
teacher works among them, correcting errors, making sugges¬ 
tions and giving encouragement. The usual activities of the 
pupils during the lesson consist of drawing maps, making 
graphs, looking up terms in the dictionary, consulting an 
atlas, preparing notes for a report, or solving some problem. 
The method requires careful preparation of problems to be 
solved. These are usually mimeographed and handed out as 
exercises to be done. 

The principal criticism of the laboratory method is that 
the work may become extremely mechanical. The chief danger 
lies in the tendency for it to degenerate into nothing more 
than activity with unimportant results. Therefore, when the 
teacher is using this method, he should continually be asking 
himself, TT What is the educational value of the work my pupils 
are doing and how does it contribute to the objectives I have 
set up? tf 16 


6 — THE LECTURE METHOD 

This thesis deals with an experimental comparison of 
two methods of teaching. One of the methods employed was the 
lecture method. For that reason it is more clearly and com¬ 
pletely described than some of the other methods. 

Bining and Bining, op . cit ., p.154 








. 










5 ' 


. 












■ ' ' ' : ' - ' c- : ■■■ 

. ' ' , s 


- 




. 










■. 




5 

























• 




• 



• ... t 













17 

It should be understood that the formal lecture, so long 
used in the universities, is not contemplated as the method 
compared in this study. In the formal lecture there was little 
place for pupil participation. The activity of the student 
was restricted to listening or note-taking and, because the 
lecture was usually long, the student lost interest in it and 
allowed his mind to wander along other and more pleasant paths. 
Moreover, the lecture frequently consisted of uninteresting 
and unimportant details, and was expressed in language that 
differed from the ordinary speech of the students. For these 
reasons the lecture as a method in teaching students in the 
secondary school fell into disrepute. The formal lecture is 
not ordinarily used in high schools in North America. 

The method described and used in this study was the in¬ 
formal lecture method, perhaps more properly termed the "tel¬ 
ling" method. Whenever the term "lecture method" is used 
hereafter in this study, it refers to the informal lecture. 

The most important characteristics of this method are (1) that 
the teacher narrates, describes or explains the lesson or 
lessons; (2) that textbooks and teaching aids do not occupy a 
central place in the teaching process; (3) that students, in¬ 
dividually or in groups, are not required to make oral reports 
or present information to the class; (4) that the students are 
not required to show that they have read any particular text 
or source book; and, (5) that the responsibility for imparting 
an understanding of the facts and relationships of the lesson- 
material rests upon the teacher. To accomplish this, he may 






























































•< 










- 







































tell facts, give illustrations, question the students regarding 
facts formerly presented; or the students may ask questions of 
him on any points not clearly understood. The student whose 
interest has been aroused may read any book for the purpose of 
satisfying his curiosity, correcting an erroneous impression, 
or solving a problem; but he does not have to do so, and the 
practice does not carry any credit from the teacher. 


In describing various methods of teaching, Wesley makes 

this comment about the informal lecture: 

An informal lecture may profitably be given at fre¬ 
quent intervals. Its use does not necessarily involve 
daily talks, nor does it necessarily involve the use 
of a whole period. A lecture may be interspersed with 
questions, answers, and discussions. It should be 
enlivened by the frequent use of the blackboard, by 
checking a point in the textbook, by reference to the 
wall map, by the use of pictures, and by all the de¬ 
vices that are available to the resourceful speaker. 
The informal lecture will thus become an effective 
method. It must, of course, be used at appropriate 
times and be restricted in length and frequency. 17 


7 — THE SOCIALIZED RECITATION 

The other method of teaching used in the study that 

formed the basis of this thesis was the socialized recitation. 

Concerning it, Bining and Bining state that: 

Socialized recitation may better be called socialized 
discussion. Since the former term, however, has an 
accepted meaning in educational terminology, we shall 
retain it. There is some difference of opinion con¬ 
cerning an exact definition of a socialized recitation. 
Some have held to a rather restricted definition; 
others have been more general in their view. Accord¬ 
ing to the former, the procedure is one in which the 
teacher turns the period over to the class or to a 
committee chosen by the pupils and then withdraws 
entirely from any participation in the activities of 


17 e. B. Wesley, op. cit., p.495 












< t 

: 


. 








. 










. . 






- 






» 




- 

<•. . - ?• 












. 








- 


























19 


the class. Of course, this does not imply that the 
teacher has not taken a hand in the preparation of the 
recitation before the meeting of the class. Accord¬ 
ing to the second view, any class session that ex¬ 
hibits group consciousness and the feeling of indivi¬ 
dual responsibility toward the group is a socialized 
recitation. In this form of procedure, the period 
is not one in which the teacher monopolizes the floor 
but one in which the feeling of co-operation among 
the group in accomplishing the work at hand is dominant. 
There is no need for the elimination of the teacher 
under such a procedure as this. The teacher may be¬ 
come an exceedingly active unit in the group, even 
serving as chairman during the class period. Under 
such a broad definition as this, the procedure known 
as the class discussion is classified within the 
socialized recitation category. 1$ 


There was a very definite reason for the formation and 

introduction of the socialized recitation method in the 

educational system. Wesley states that: 

It was designed to eliminate the formal and stilted 
air that seems to pervade many classrooms and to sub¬ 
stitute a sense of freedom and naturalness. 

The socialized procedure has brought about more 
significant assignments, more pupil activity, and, in 
some instances, a liberalization of school control. 

The socialized procedure can make use of all the 
devices, projects, problems, and activities that are 
available under other methods. For example, the 
pupils may hear reports, hold a convention, --- plan 
an assignment, make a survey, --- have a debate, or 
carry on any one of a hundred activities. 19 


In the operation of the socialized recitation, the 
activity is thrown upon the students rather than upon the 
teacher, who usually becomes a silent witness or a member of 
the class. The topic for study is frequently divided into 
four or more parts, and a leader is chosen for each part. 

With the approval of the teacher, the leader plans and carries 


Bining and Bining, ojd. cit ., p.130-131 
19 E. B. Wesley, op . cit ., p.525 













- 

■ 

' 


■ 






s , 

. . ■ 

. ■ , 

. 










. 

- 

■ • t • • -‘ftfrrcr V—' : ‘"V' t - 

* 

; , , 

■ - , ■ - ■: 





. 





















20 

out his work with his group. During the class period, the 
leader assumes responsibility for the activities of his group: 
reports, questions, discussion, or comments. 




CHAPTER IV 


THE PLAN OF PROCEDURE 

A search of textbooks, educational journals, reports of 
educational committees and of theses on educational subjects 
reveals much concerning the theories of educational methods 
and practices of teachers and educators but little concerning 
research into the effectiveness of specific educational 
methods. 

Of a study entitled,"A Practical Technique for Deter¬ 
mining the Relative Effectiveness of Different Methods of 
Teaching", Lien and Melby reported in the Journal of Educa ¬ 
tional Research . 20 This study was conducted by Ernest 0. 

Melby of Northwestern University and Agnes Lien of the John 
Marshall High School, Minneapolis, in 192£. The purpose of 
the study was to compare the drill (or lecture) method of 
teaching with the project method and to test their relative 
effectiveness on the basis of one criterion only -- that of 
facts learned by the particular group of students taught by 
one or other of these two methods. 

In their study Lien and Melby used the groups of stu¬ 
dents as they existed in the high school but applied a pairing 
process by which they grouped the students, utilizing a three¬ 
fold classification: mental-ages, intelligence-quotients and 
performance-scores. The groups taught by the drill method 

E. 0. Melby and A. Lien, "A practical Technique for Deter- 
mining the Relative Effectiveness of Different Methods of 
Teaching", Journal of Educational Research , Vol.XIX,pp.255-264 












< 

C, ' 





















. 






« 





■ 










c 











' 












. 












22 


were used as the control group and those taught by the project 
method as the experimental group. 

It was found that there was considerable homogeneity 
between the groups under this system of classification. 

In this study by Lien and Melby the following methods 
were used: 

1. The project method or method of class study in which 
there was no lecturing. The teacher used a questioning 
method of approach to arouse interest, and then gave the 
students a certain amount of time to study the lesson 
material. 

2. The drill method in which a teacher who was a strict 
disciplinarian lectured the students, presenting all the 
facts required in the study. 

Two groups or classes were taught the lesson material by 
each method. Records of each group were carefully kept, show¬ 
ing the graphs of the mental ages, the intelligence quotients, 
and the performance scores on the pre-tests and the final 
tests. 


For the final experiment in the study, a test consisting 
of one hundred items dealing with the geography of Great 
Britain was given to all the classes. This was done as a pre¬ 
test, the items on which were unknown to the teachers of the 
classes. These tests were left unscored until the final test 
was completed. 




























- 


















Q 

. 










* 





C 

. 
























* 











23 


After the pre-test was given, the material was taught 
to each group by the method used for that group, and the test 
was repeated. The elapsed time between the tests was two 
weeks. Then the papers of both tests were scored by the 
teacher of the groups concerned, and the results were compared. 

It was found that the experimental group made the poorer 
showing; in other words, they learned a fewer number of facts 
during the study. 

In drawing conclusions regarding the significance of 
this experiment, the editors point out that many implications 
might be drawn: the pupils of the experimental groups may 
have learned as many significant facts as the students of the 
control groups did, but these facts were not brought out in 
the.tests; and there was no opportunity for measuring other 
outcomes besides that of acquiring knowledge. However, the 
editors of the Journal of Educational Research state that, in 
their opinion, the significance of the work done by Lien and 
Melby lay in the evidence of the practicability of the tech¬ 
nique developed rather than in the relative values of the 
methods used. 

PREPARATIONS FOR THE EXPERIMENT 

The plan used in the present experiment was similar in 
most respects to that conducted by Lien and Melby. Prepara¬ 
tions for the experiment were made before school opened for 
the Fall term, and the enrollment for each of the classes was 
limited in order that the four classes might be fairly bal- 











t 





















- 




























•x 








; 






































24 

anced in size. No attempt was made to segregate the students 
or to group them according to mental ages or I. Q. ratings, 
but they were enrolled according to the regular routine of the 
school, that is, they made their choice of subjects and fitted 
these into the regular time-table; therefore, it was concluded 
that each class consisted of a random sampling from a homo¬ 
geneous population. Table I indicates the correctness of this 
assumption. 

For the first two months of the term the four classes 
studied Unit I of the Social Studies 20 course, TT The Expansion 
of Habitable and Productive Areas Since the Beginning of the 
Modern Period/ 1 For this area of the social studies course, 
outlines of the unit were mimeographed and given to each 
student, and the work of the four classes was conducted in a 
similar way for each. The method used for this unit was a 
combination of procedures, partly socialized recitation, 
partly lecture, and some individual study and research. The 
students were required to search through the texts and refer¬ 
ence books in the social studies library at school for material 
applicable to the first unit and to make this material avail¬ 
able to the other students by indicating the sources, subjects 
and chapters. The public library near the school was mentioned 
as an excellent source of pertinent material. At the comple¬ 
tion of the first unit a questionnaire was answered by each 
student to ascertain the amount of reading, the sources, and 
the ability to gather information from the library. Thus the 
preliminary work of preparing for the actual experiment was 
completedo 










. 


























- 

: ' < :' 

. 

. 






















■ 


* 

. 


















25 

The problem of selecting the two groups for the experi¬ 
ment was resolved in the following manner. There were four 

classes enrolled: 

Class A, 2$ students, 35-niinute period, 9*40 - 10.15 A.M. 

Class B, 2$ students, 35-niinute period, 11.25 - 12.00 A.M. 

Class C, 30 students, 40-minute period, 2.00 - 2.40 P.M. 

Class D, 30 students, 40-minute period, 2.40 - 3*20 P.M. 

The writer decided, in consultation with the Faculty of 
Education thesis committee, to employ the socialized recita¬ 
tion method with two of these classes and the lecture method 
with the other two. From a comparison of the classes, it was 
decided to teach A and C by one method and B and D by the 
other. In this plan the factors of enrollment, period-length 
and time of day were most similar or comparable for each of 
the groups, A - C and B - D. Each group consisted of fifty- 
eight students. The mean lengths of the lesson periods were 
equal. Each group consisted of a morning and an afternoon 
class. It should be clear that the classes were taught 
separately, and the members of the classes were not aware of 
any such grouping; but that the data obtained as a result of 
the study were grouped for the purpose of evaluating the 
effectiveness of each method of teaching. 

To determine which classes should be taught by each 
method, the Faculty of Education adviser tossed a coin in the 
presence of the thesis committee and the writer. The result 
was that classes A and C were selected for the lecture method, 
and B and D for the socialized recitation method. This selec¬ 
tion was made shortly before the pre-test was administered. 


C c 
















: t 




* 








* 








. 









' 















• 
























26 

PREPARATION OF THE UNIT OUTLINE, THE TEST MATERIAL, 

AND THE QUESTIONNAIRE 

Unit Two of the Social Studies 20 course was selected 
for the experiment for the following reasons: it was not too 
long; some of the material had been studied by the pupils two 
years previously in Grade IX in their topic on the Industrial 
Revolution, and it was therefore possible to submit a pre-test 
that was valid; and there was sufficient factual material and 
evidence of economic and social changes to test any gain in 
knowledge and in reasoning ability. 

Early in November, 1952, the plan of the unit selected 
was prepared from the Curriculum Guide and mimeographed for 
all students. (A copy of this unit plan is shown as Appendix 
A). This outline enumerated ten suggestions for those study¬ 
ing the unit, expanded the five topics, and indicated the 
textual sources for the topical study. 

A test was then prepared in collaboration with the 
Faculty of Education thesis committee. A preliminary draft 
of the test paper was made by the writer and submitted to his 
faculty adviser. Suggestions were given for improving the 
type and form of questions for greater clarity, adequacy and 
objectivity. The second draft was referred to the committee 
for criticism and suggestion, and was accepted as suitable 
for the experimental study. The final draft consisted of 
eighty-four items, forty-two of which were concerned with 
factual knowledge or retention of facts. An equal number 





















« 


' 












. 













I \ 










- 


'' 




. 

















, 

- 








27 


required reasoning or generalizing from knowledge gained in 
the study. Copies were mimeographed for administering as a 
pre-test and as a final test,(A copy of this test is given as 
Appendix B). 

As a step toward a better understanding of the students’ 
reactions to the unit study and the methods of teaching used 
in the two groups, a questionnaire was prepared and given to 
each student at the conclusion of the final test.(A copy of 
this questionnaire is shown as Appendix C). 

During the course of the experiment, a daily record of 
progress with each group was kept.(An outline of this daily 
record is given as Appendix D). 

Thus it will be seen that, in the preparation and conduct 
of this study, certain definite plans and practices were car¬ 
ried out in order to control, as far as possible, all factors 
and influences that might invalidate the experiment. In 
summary, these practices were: 

1. the balancing or equalizing of the two groups as to 
number enrolled, times of day, and length of periodsj 

2. the teaching of a similar unit to each in order to 
orient the students to the school, the teacher, and the 
course; 

3. the giving of a pre-test to determine the knowledge and 
understanding of each group at the beginning of the 
experiment; 

















- 




















, 

I 








t 




- 


' 




■ 

. 

, 




, 

4 













4. the application of elements of both methods of teaching 
when the first unit of the course was being studied; and 
the questioning of the classes regarding their under¬ 
standing of the use of library material; 

5. the distribution to each student of a unit outline of 
the topics to be dealt with in the unit, and a list of 
source material for each topic; 

6. the writing of a final test under conditions similar to 
those pertaining during the writing of the pre-test. 














: 


* 






















CHAPTER V 


ADMINISTERING THE PRE-TEST 

Through the co-operation of the principal of the high 
school and three of the teachers, plans were made to have all 
the students in the lecture and experimental groups write the 
pre-test during the first period of the day on November 21, 
1952. This was done, with one hundred and fifteen of the 
students present that day* The students were allowed thirty- 
five minutes for the test which was conducted in three rooms 
simultaneously. The teacher undertaking the experiment was 
absent from the classes during both the pre-test and the 
final test periods. The student who was absent on the day of 
the pre-test was given the test on the day he returned to 
school, November 26th, under conditions similar to those ex¬ 
perienced by the other students. Care was taken to see that 
all test papers were accounted for after the pre-test was 
given, and no reference was made to these, nor were any of 
them marked, until after the final test had been administered. 

In arranging for the pre-test, the students were divided 
alphabetically according to their surnames, and assigned to 
the rooms in which they were to write the test. This was done 
on the day preceding the writing of the pre-test, and the 
students were told only that they were being asked to write a 
survey test, and should do as well as they could on it. They 
were told also that the results would not be included in their 















* 

- 


. 

? ; 








30 

regular school progress reports, but that the survey was being 
conducted to find out how much they knew of a specific social 


studies field. At no time were the students told that the 
pre-test would be repeated as a final test. 

At the time of the pre-test, identical instructions 
were sent to each teacher conducting the test in order to 
prevent any errors or irregularities from invalidating the 
experiment. (A copy of these instructions is given as Appendix 

E) . 








* 


- 








































CHAPTER VI 


TEACHING PROCEDURES AS USED IN THE EXPERIMENT 

1 — INTRODUCING THE UNIT 

On November 26, 1952, the first sheet of the mimeo¬ 
graphed outline of the unit was given to each student in the 
regular class period of that day, and an overview of the 
material of the unit was given orally by the teacher to each 
class. Questions by students were allowed, and a brief dis¬ 
cussion of the method that would be used in studying the unit 
took place. 

On November 27, the other two sheets of the unit outline 
were given to each student, and the work of studying the unit 
by the two methods chosen, the lecture method and the social¬ 
ized recitation method, was begun. 

During the course of this experiment, the methods out¬ 
lined were strictly adhered to. No motion pictures or film¬ 
strips or other visual aids were used, as these would prob¬ 
ably have affected the validity of the experiment. Students 
using the socialized recitation method were not prevented 
from bringing any pictures, charts, or other interesting 
materials which they found, but the presentation of the mate¬ 
rial was left to the groups in their reports or in their class 
discussions. 

















- 


' 


t if : |. 






; 













. 




C 







< v; 

t 
















< ’• , 

. 

* 











32 


2 — TEACHING BY THE LECTURE METHOD 

This method was used in teaching the two classes which 
are designated in this study as Class A and Class C. In the 
daily procedure used with these classes, the topics as out¬ 
lined in the mimeographed sheets were followed. The material 
of each topic was presented in detail by the teacher, making 
use of the blackboard as required for presenting names and 
terms. At certain points in the lesson, or at the conclusion 
of a topic or sub-topic, questions were asked of the students 
in order to ascertain their grasp of the facts presented, or 
of their understandings of the significance and relationships 
of the facts to the study as a whole. The students were per¬ 
mitted to ask questions at any time concerning a point they 
wished expanded or clarified. As stated earlier in the des¬ 
cription of the lecture method, the textbook or reference 
book had no significance, and no assignments were made at any 
time concerning any section or material in a textbook. If 
the students were interested and wished to explore any topic 
further by reference to a text, they were free to do so. Each 
student had in his possession the outline of the topic and 
lists of reference books with chapters numbered for each 
heading and sub-heading. 

When the classes assembled each day, a short question 
or review period was held to refresh the students 1 minds con¬ 
cerning the last points or facts studied, and to relate these 
to the new material. In this way the lessons proceeded from 
topic to topic, and from day to day, until the unit had been 













' 

' 
























■ 

. 

. 

< 





. 









. 














< 




■ 








33 

completed. The only requirement of the students individually 
was that each keep some record or notes of the materials or 
facts presented, and hand this record to the teacher for evalu¬ 
ation at the completion of the unit study. The same require¬ 
ment was made of the students taught by the socialized recita¬ 
tion method. 

It should be mentioned that the students of both classes 
were unaware that any experiment or comparison of the two 
methods of teaching was being carried on during this time. 

3 — TEACHING BY THE SOCIALIZED RECITATION METHOD 

The two classes designated as Class B and Class D were 
taught by this method. These classes were held during the 
fifth and seventh periods of the day, one in the forenoon and 
the other in the afternoon. Because these two classes com¬ 
prised what might very properly be termed the experimental 
group, the method used with them is outlined in this chapter 
in greater detail than was the other method. The procedure 
followed during the complete experiment or study consisted of 
the following steps: 

1. the pre-test; 

2. the distribution of the unit outlines; 

3. the overview by the teacher; 

4. the formation of seven committees of students in each 
of Classes B and D; 

5. the choosing of topics for study and research by each 


student-committee; 




: 






- 


















- 







1 








, 




- 








. 

























9 




* 












- 












34 


6. the study sessions under the direction of the group 
leader and the class teacher; 

7. the presentation of reports on facts and generalizations 
by the committee members; 

$. the class discussions of the materials presented; 

9. the writing of notes and records suggested by the unit 
outlines, reports, and discussions; 

10. the presentation of a summary of the unit; 

11. the final test, a repetition of the pre-test; 

12. the answering of the questionnaire by each student; 

13. the checking of both the pre-test and the final test by 
the teacher, and the tabulation of results. 

The first three of these steps have been described al¬ 
ready, and require no amplification here. In the process of 
setting up the seven groups or committees, leaders were chosen 
by the students. Then these leaders chose the members of their 
committees in rotation until all the students had been selec¬ 
ted. When the committees were complete, one member of each 
was chosen as secretary or recorder for that committee, and 
the leader acted as chairman or convener. 

The next step, the choosing of topics for study, was 
carried out in a similar manner. The topics were numbered, 
the numbers being placed on the blackboard. Then the leaders 
of the committees, with the advice of their members, chose in 
rotation the topics for their study, each having his choice in 
turn. The classes performed this part of the organization 
very efficiently, and completed the formation of committees 




c 




- 









* 






- 


e ' '■ .% ■ 

* 

t 







4 


% 












' 


» 








. 










■ 






< 







, 






35 

and the choice of topics during the first two days. Thus they 
became acquainted with the topics of the unit through deter¬ 
mining what they might study for presentation to the class, 
and what they might leave the others to do. 

For the sixth step the students assembled in groups or 
committees to read, study, discuss, summarize and prepare for 
presentation any material they could find dealing with their 
topics. The leader was responsible for having each member of 
his committee choose or accept a part of the work, either to 
find material, write a report, present material to the class, 
prepare a summary, or lead in the discussion. Some of the 
reports were written during the class period, others during 
study periods or as homework. 

While the committees were thus engaged in their study, 
the teacher went about from group to group, observing, helping 
to find suitable material in texts, answering difficult ques¬ 
tions and, by pertinent questioning, leading the students to 
discover the significance of the facts and items relating to 
their topics. The teacher did not lecture the committees or 
volunteer information, but guided them in their investigations. 

The seventh step, the presentation of material by the 
committees, was the most important part of the study. Selected 
members reported and explained the findings of the committee, 
the whole class attending to the lesson. The reports were 
usually brief and pertinent. Each report was followed by a 
discussion period during which students were permitted to 



















■■ ■ ; ' 









tr V ": - 

. ■ :■ : ■■ ■ ■' ■ : 

. 


;.r:- 















■ 

s 

■ 






- 

. 






. 









36 


comment on or question concerning the items presented. No 
time limit was placed on this aspect of the lesson because it 
was considered desirable and necessary for an adequate under¬ 
standing of the topic. The presentation of each committee was 
concluded by a summary or statement of the significant points. 
This was usually written in outline on the blackboard and 
served as a basis for notes and records. After completing the 
presentation and discussion, the students re-assembled in com¬ 
mittees for further research. 

As a final step in the work of the committees, a table 
was compiled by the members and written on the blackboard for 
the whole class to copy into their record books. This table 
consisted of a list of the inventors and their achievements 
in the fields of agriculture, science, medicine, transporta¬ 
tion, communication and industry. 

When all the topics had been completed by the committees 
through reports and class discussions and the summary of the 
unit had been recorded, the final test was written. 
















I 

1 








. 








' 






: n ’ m mm 








■ 

r , : •; r- : ";.r: »f'fl 





CHAPTER VII 


A COMPARISON OF THE I.Q. RATINGS, THE ENROLLMENT 
OF THE CLASSES, THE PROPORTION OF BOYS AND GIRLS, 

AND THE CLASS ATTENDANCES OF THE TWO GROUPS, 

A - C AND B - D 

1 — A COMPARISON OF THE I.Q. RATINGS 

The I.Q, rating for each pupil was taken from the cumu¬ 
lative records in the office of the high school. If no record 
was there, the rating was obtained from the record cards in 
the Examinations Branch of the Department of Education. The 
I.Q. rating for most of the students was that obtained from 
the Henmon-Nelson test. When that rating was not available, 
the most recent I.Q. rating in the cumulative records was used. 

The distribution of the I.Q. ratings is shown in Table I. 
The range in each of the four classes, with but one exception, 
was between the $0 - $4 interval and the 135 - 139 interval. 

The four arithmetic means of the I.Q. ratings for the classes 
A, B, C and D were 107.67, 110.71, 113*$3 and 115.5, respec¬ 
tively. The distribution of the ratings was fairly uniform 
for all classes as is shown by reference to the frequencies 
listed in Table I and the cumulative ratings shown in Fig. 1. 

For the purposes of this study, the data obtained from 
classes A and C were combined, because they were taught by the 
lecture method. These two classes were designated as Group A-C. 
Similarly, classes B and D, taught by the socialized recitation 




























- 






. 




















c 











c 





, . 





3 $ 


method, were designated as Group B-D. When the I.Q. ratings 
for the groups were determined, it was found that Group A-C 
had a mean I.Q. rating of 112.6 and Group B-D, a mean rating 
of 113-4) as shown in Table II. It was desired to ascertain 
whether or not there was any significant difference between 
these I.Q. ratings. The test for the significance of the 
difference between means, called the TT t-test fT , as developed 
by R. A. Fisher and enunciated by Palmer Johnson ^1, was ap¬ 
plied in this case. The result indicated that the value ob¬ 
tained for tT t n was 0.31) and, by reference to the corresponding 
table, it was evident that the value of tT P Tf , the probability of 
error, lay between 0.7 and 0.8. In other words, a conclusion 
that there was a significant difference between the means of 
the I.Q. ratings of these groups would have been in error in 
more than seventy per cent of the cases. The conclusion was 
that there existed no significant difference between the mean 
I.Q. T s of Groups A-G and B-D. Therefore, these groups were 
considered to be homogeneous groups from the same population. 

Fig. 1, p. 41) shows graphically the emulative I.Q. 
rating scores for each group, A-G and B-D. The areas between 
the dotted and the continuous lines indicate the difference 
of the I.Q. scores, which, though slight, was positive for 
Group B-D. Statistically, this difference was not significant, 
as was indicated in the foregoing paragraph. 


21 


Palmer 0. Johnson, Statistical Methods in Research . New York: 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1949? pp. 32, 47) 71-73? 3o0. 






■ 


' 

;■ ; . 

. ' - 

C • 

< 

. 





. 


C 




c 






. . 




' , ■ ‘ 














t t 

1 e 














TABLE I. — DISTRIBUTION OF I.Q. RATINGS OF THE FOUR 
CLASSES EMPLOYED IN THE STUDY, CLASSES A, B, C, AND D 


39 


I.Q. RATINGS, 
SCORE INTERVALS 

CLASS 

A 

CLASS 

B 

CLASS 

C 

CLASS 

D 

145 - 

149 

1 

0 

0 

0 

140 - 

144 

0 

0 

0 

0 

135 - 

139 

0 

1 

2 

1 

130 - 

134 

0 

1 

4 

2 

125 - 

129 

1 

1 

1 

2 

120 - 

124 

2 

7 

5 

6 

115 - 

119 

3 

0 

2 

4 

110 - 

114 

3 

4 

4 

3 

105 - 

109 

6 

3 

3 

5 

100 - 

104 

4 

6 

3 

2 

95 - 

99 

1 

2 

3 

2 

90 - 

94 

2 

1 

1 

0 

$5 - 

89 

1 

1 

1 

0 

SO - 

84 

2 

1 

1 

1 

Totals 

2$ 

2S 

30 

30 

Mean I.Q. 
Scores 

107.67 

110.71 

113.83 

115.50 

































TABLE II.— A COMPARISON OF THE I.Q. RATINGS OF 
THE TWO GROUPS TAUGHT BY THE DIFFERENT METHODS 


40 


I.Q. RATINGS, 

SCORE INTERVALS 

CLASSES A AND C 
FREQUENCIES 

CLASSES B AND D 
FREQUENCIES 

145 - 149 

1 

0 

140 - 144 

0 

0 

135 - 139 

2 

2 

130 - 134 

4 

3 

125 - 129 

2 

3 

120 - 124 

7 

15 

115 - 119 

5 

4 

110 - 114 

7 

7 

105 - 109 

11 

6 

100 - 104 

7 

$ 

95 - 99 

4 

4 

90 - 94 

3 

1 

85 - 89 

2 

1 

80 - 84 

3 

2 

Totals 

58 

"CO 

ur\ 

Mean I.Q. 

Scores 

112.60 

113.40 

























41 



Fig. 1.-- Comparison of I. Q. rating scores of students 
in Classes A and C with I. Q. ratings of students in 

Classes B and D. 


















42 


2 — A COMPARISON OF THE CLASSES ACCORDING TO ENROLLMENT 
AND TO DISTRIBUTION ACCORDING TO SEX 
Table III shows the number of boys and girls in each 
class, and Table IV shows the enrollment in each of the two 
groups, A-C and B-D. There were enrolled in all four classes 
fifty-one boys and sixty-five girls, a total of one hundred 
and sixteen. Of these, twenty-eight boys and thirty girls 
were taught by the lecture method in classes A and C; and 
twenty-three boys and thirty-five girls were taught by the 
socialized recitation method in classes B and D. The total 
number of students taught by each method was fifty-eight. 

Figure 2 shows this enrollment in the form of a bar 
graph, combining classes A and C, and B and D. The only dif¬ 
ference between the enrollment in the two groups was that 
group A-C had five more boys, group B-D five more girls, than 
the opposing group. It was assumed that this difference in 
enrollment of boys and girls would not significantly affect 
the results of the study. 

3 — THE CLASS ATTENDANCE DURING THE STUDY 
In group A-C thirty-three students were present for all 
lessons and only nine of the fifty-eight students were absent 
for more than one period. The mean number of class periods 
missed by members of this group was 0.$4* In the other group 
of students, thirty-six were present for all lessons, and 
only nine were absent for more than one period. In this 
group the mean number of class periods missed was 0.62. This 




' 




-- 


' 


. - 







• -- ' - 1 . ‘ ' ^ r .'. : - - 








- 














- 












. 

* 




— 


' 










. 






, 









43 

shows that their record of class attendance was slightly 
higher than that of the former group. This is shown in 
Table V. 

In concluding this chapter of the study, the writer 
summarizes the points of similarity of the two groups. In 
I.Q. rating scores, enrollment, and regularity of attendance 
there was considerable homogeneity between them. From these 
observations it was assumed that there were no appreciable 
differences that made it possible to predict the outcome of 
the experiment or that invalidated the results obtained in 
the study. 




1 

(, •• : - ■ ‘a L 

1 


i 











44 


TABLE III. — ENROLLMENT PER CLASS ACCORDING TO SEX. 


SEX 

CLASS 

CLASS 

CLASS 

CLASS 

A 

B 

C 

D 

Boys 

10 

14 

IS 

9 

Girls 

18 

14 

12 

21 

Totals 

2 $ 

28 

30 

30 


TABLE IV. — ENROLLMENT PER GROUP ACCORDING TO SEX. 

(Classes A and C, Lecture method; B and D, Socialized Recitation) 


SEX 

CLASSES A AND C 

CLASSES B AND D 

Boys 

28 

23 

Girls 

30 

35 

Totals 

58 

58 


































60 

50 

40 

30 

20 

10 

0 

-g. 


45 


Classes Classes 

A and C B and D 



2o-~ Comparison of the two groups of students 
according to number and sex. 





























46 


TABLE V* — RECORD OF STUDENTS 1 ATTENDANCE AT CLASSES 
DURING THE PERIOD OF THE EXPERIMENT. 


NUMBER OF TIMES 

NUMBER OF STUDENTS ABSENT IN 

ABSENT 

CLASSES A AND C 

CLASSES B AND D 

0 

33 

36 

1 

16 

13 

2 

3 

6 

3 

2 

2 

4 

0 

0 

5 

3 

1 

6 

1 

0 

7 or more 

0 

0 

Totals 

5$ 

58 

Mean Number of 
Class Periods 

Each Student Was 
Absent During Unit 

0.84 

0.62 































CHAPTER VIII 


A COMPARISON OF THE RESULTS OBTAINED ON THE PRE-TEST 
WITH THOSE OBTAINED ON THE FINAL TEST 

1 — THE PRE-TEST SCORES 

The scores obtained by each of the four classes on the 
pre-test are shown in Table VI, and the cumulative scores for 
each group, A-C and B-D, in Table VII. A graph of the data 
of Table VII is given in Figure 3. 

The mean scores obtained on the pre-test by the four 
classes, A, B, C and D, respectively, were 37*32, 40.50, 

40.50 and 41*00. A reference to Table VII indicates that 
group A-C attained a mean pre-test score of 3$*70 and group 
B-D a mean score of 40.7$* The actual area of differences 
between the pre-test scores of the two groups is shown graphi¬ 
cally in Figure 3, P* 50. 

As in the case of the means of I.Q. ratings, the dif¬ 
ferences between the mean scores on the pre-test were small, 
but were positive in favor of group B-D. When these differ¬ 
ences were tested by statistical devices, they were found to 
have no significance. The value of n t TT was 0.903, and the 
probability of error lay between 0.3 and 0.4* It was con¬ 
cluded, therefore, that there was no significant difference 
between groups A-C and B-D on the basis of pre-test scores. 
Therefore the groups were considered to be members of a homo¬ 
geneous population. 











— 

j, .' ■ ' — T 

. i ! i i: - - r ■./ |c 

„ 








. 


- 

- 

. 


















43 


TABLE VI. — SCORES OBTAINED ON THE PRE-TEST 
BY THE STUDENTS IN EACH CLASS 


SCORES OBTAINED 

NUMBERS IN EACH CLASS OBTAINING 

SCORES 

(INTERVAL) 

CLASS A 

CLASS B 

CLASS C 

CLASS D 

60 - 64 

1 

2 

0 

2 

55 - 59 

2 

1 

4 

3 

50 - 54 

2 

3 

0 

2 

45 - 49 

4 

3 

3 

3 

40 — 44 

2 

5 

5 

4 

35 - 39 

4 

6 

3 

7 

30 - 34 

4 

2 

3 

4 

25 - 29 

4 

4 

3 

3 

20 - 24 

2 

1 

2 

1 

15 -19 

3 

1 

1 

1 

10 -14 

0 

0 

1 

0 

Totals 

2£ 

23 

30 

30 

Mean Score 
on Pre-test 

37.32 

40.50 

40.50 

41.00 






































TABLE VII. — SCORES OBTAINED ON PRE-TEST 
LECTURE GROUP (A-C) AND SOCIALIZED RECITATION GROUP (B-D) 


49 


SCORES OBTAINED 

NUMBERS OF STUDENTS OBTAINING SCORES 

(INTERVAL) 

CLASSES 

CLASSES 


A AND C 

B AND D 

65 - 69 

0 

0 

60 - 64 

1 

4 

55 - 59 

6 

4 

\-Tl 

O 

i 

V-Tt 

3 

5 

45 - 49 

12 

6 

40 - 44 

6 

9 

35 - 39 

7 

13 

-4* 

I 

O 

<r\ 

7 

6 

25 - 29 

7 

7 

20 - 24 

4 

2 

15 - 19 

4 

2 

10 - 14 

1 

0 

5-9 

0 

0 

Totals 

53 

58 

Mean Score 

38.70 

40.78 




































SCORES OBTAINED 


50 



Fig. 3.— Comparison of scores obtained on pre-test 













51 


2 — THE FINAL TEST SCORES 

The class scores obtained on the final test are shown 
in Table VIII. The highest class mean, 62.67, was obtained by 
Class C; the second highest, 57*35, by Class A; the third 
highest, 56.$4, by Class D; and the lowest, 55*36, by Class B. 

The mean scores on the final test showed the following 
increases over the pre-test score means: Class C, 22.17; 

Class A, 20.55; Class D, 15.34; and Class B, 14*36. 

The composite scores of the final test for groups A-C 
and B-D are recorded in Table IX. The mean score for the 
former was 60.34 and for the latter, 56.12. 

A comparison of the results of the pre-test and of the 
final test scores for the two groups is presented in Table X. 
The mean score gain made by group A-C on the final test was 
21.64, and by group B-D, 15*34, a mean difference of 6.30. 

A graph indicating the scores obtained on the final test 
by each group is given in Figure 4* For purposes of comparison, 
the pre-test scores are indicated on the same scale. The 
total gain by each group on the final test was that portion of 
the whole indicated by the area between the pairs of similar 
lines. 

Figure 5 reveals the actual gains made by the students 
of each group. These scores were obtained by subtracting the 
pre-test score of each student from his final test score, and 
recording the individual gains of each student. The area on 






— 
















< ' 






* -■ t 


' 









f : 




. 

~~ " i 





. 


















52 


the graph lying between the continuous and the dotted lines 
shows the real difference between the increases made by each 
group as a result of the study. 

An interpretation of these scores is made in a later 
chapter. 




53 


TABLE VIII. — SCORES OBTAINED ON FINAL TEST 
BY EACH CLASS 


SCORES OBTAINED 

NUMBER OF STUDENTS OBTAINING SCORES IN 

(INTERVALS) 

CLASS 

A 

CLASS 

B 

CLASS 

C 

CLASS 

D 

SO - 84 

0 

0 

0 

0 

75 - 79 

3 

0 

3 

1 

70 - 74 

2 

0 

4 

4 

65 - 69 

5 

1 

6 

3 

60 - 64 

3 

6 

6 

3 

55 - 59 

2 

6 

4 

5 

50 - 54 

3 

9 

5 

6 

45 - 49 

7 

1 

0 

4 

40 - 44 

1 

1 

2 

2 

35 - 39 

1 

2 

0 

1 

30 - 34 

1 

0 

0 

1 

25 - 29 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Total 

28 

2^ 

30 

30 

Mean Score 

__-_ __ 

57.85 

55.36 

62.67 

56.84 





















54 


TABLE IX. — SCORES OBTAINED ON FINAL TEST: 

LECTURE GROUP (A-C) AND SOCIALIZED RECITATION GROUP (B-D) 


SCORES OBTAINED 

NUMBER OF STUDENTS 

OBTAINING SCORES IN 

(INTERVALS) 

CLASSES A AND C 

CLASSES B AND D 

SO - 84 

0 

0 

75 - 79 

6 

1 

70- 74 

6 

4 

65 ~ 69 

11 

4 

60 - 64 

9 

11 

55 - 59 

6 

11 

50 - 54 

a 

15 

45 - 49 

7 

5 

40 - 44 

3 

3 

35 - 39 

1 

3 

30 - 34 

1 

1 

25 - 29 

0 

0 

Total 

53 

58 

Mean Score 

60.34 

56.12 


























55 


TABLE X. —- A COMPARISON OF THE SCORES MADE BY EACH GROUP 
ON THE PRE-TEST AND ON THE FINAL TEST. 


SCORES OBTAINED . 

NUMBER OF STUDENTS OBTAINING SCORES IN 

(INTERVALS) 

CLASSES 

A AND C 

CLASSES 

B AND D 


Pre-Test 

Final Test 

jPre-Test 

Final Test 

SO - 84 

0 

0 

0 

0 

75 - 79 

0 

6 

0 

1 

70 - 74 

0 

6 

0 

4 

65 ~ 69 

0 

11 

0 

4 

60 - 64 

1 

9 

4 

11 

55 - 59 

6 

6 

4 

11 

50 - 54 

3 

6 

5 

15 

45 - 49 

12 

7 

6 

5 

40 — 44 

6 

3 

9 

3 

35 - 39 

7 

1 

13 

3 

30 - 34 

7 

1 

6 

1 

25 - 29 

7 

0 

7 

0 

20 - 24 

4 

0 

2 

0 

15 - 19 

4 

0 

2 

0 

10 - 14 

1 

0 

0 

0 

5 - 9 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Total 

5$ 

1 

53 

5 $ 

53 

Mean Score 

3 S .70 

60.34 

40.73 

56.12 

1 

Gain (on mean 



i 

s 

! scores) 

21.64 j 

15.34 






































SCORE GAINS ON FINAL TEST OVER PRE-TEST 


56 



Fig. 4.-“ Comparison of pre-test scores with final test scores 
for groups A - C and B - D. 










SCORE GAINS ON FINAL TEST OVER PRE-TEST 


57 



Pig. 5.— Actual gains made by students on final test. 














52 


3 — A COMPARISON OF THE SCORES ACCORDING TO TWO FACTORS 
OF LEARNING: RETENTION OF FACTS AND REASONING ABILITY 
The purpose of this comparison was to determine the 
relative effectiveness of the lecture and the socialized reci¬ 
tation methods in relation to two factors of learning, reten¬ 
tion of facts and reasoning ability. A study of the test 
paper (Appendix B) will show that questions numbered I and VI 
did not require a recall or retention of definite facts as 
isolated items, but rather the application of principles or 
generalization derived from the study. These questions were 
considered as problems requiring reasoning ability. Questions 
numbered II, III, IV and V required the retention of definite 
facts, such as the scientific inventions and the meanings of 
terms. They were considered as problems requiring factual 
knowledge. In each of the two sections of the paper there 
were forty-two items. 

Table II indicates the factual retention scores of the 
two groups, A-C and B-D. The mean scores of group A-C on the 
pre-test and the final test were 12.17 and 33*42 respectively, 
a mean increase of 15*31 on the final test; of group B-D, mean 
scores of 19*41 and 30.32 respectively, a mean increase of 

10.97* 


The reasoning ability scores for each group are shown in 
Table III. Group A-C obtained mean scores on the pre-test and 
the final test of 21.22 and 27*62, respectively, a mean in¬ 
crease of 6.34 on the final test; group B-D, mean scores of 
21.55 and 26.52, respectively, a mean increase of 4*97* 
























' 




















. 

















- ■ ■ l 
























' 






59 


TABLE XI. — FACTUAL RETENTION SCORES OF EACH GROUP, A-C AND 
B-D, ON PRE-TEST AND FINAL TEST (l * 


Score Interval 

Group A-C 

Group B-D 

Pre-test 

(f) 

Final Test 
(f) 

Pre-test 

(f) 

Final Test 
(f) 

41 - 44 


7 


2 

37 - 40 


15 


7 

33 - 36 


13 

2 

13 

29 - 32 

3 

3 

3 

13 

25 - 28 

8 

7 

4 

10 

21 - 24 

9 

3 

11 

8 

17 - 20 

12 

5 

18 

4 

13 - 16 

13 

0 

13 

1 

9-12 

7 

0 

4 

0 

5 - 8 

5 

0 

3 

0 

1-4 

1 

0 

0 

0 

Totals 

58 

58 

58 

58 

Mean Scores 

18.17 

33.48 

19.41 

30.38 

Mean Increase 
of Final Over 
Pre-Test 

15. 

31 

10.97 


(1) (The scores recorded in this table were those obtained on 
questions numbered II, III, IV and V of the test paper. 


The total number of items was forty-two. The type of res¬ 
ponse required for these items depended upon knowledge or 
retention of facts presented in the study.) 

























60 


TABLE XII. — REASONING ABILITY SCORES OF EACH GROUP, 
A-C AND B-D, ON PRE-TEST AND FINAL TEST t 2 > 


Score Interval 

Group A-C 

Group B-D 

Pre- Test 
(f) 

Final Test 
(f) 

Pre-Test 

(f) 

Final Test 
(f) 

41 - 44 

- 

- 

- 

- 

37 - 40 

0 

4 

0 

1 

33 - 36 

1 

7 

3 

7 

29 - 32 

8 

12 

4 

12 

25 - 28 

11 

17 

15 

17 

21 - 24 

14 

10 

7 

12 

H* 

1 

ro 

o 

8 

5 

13 

5 

13 - 16 

6 

3 

10 

2 

9-12 

6 

0 

4 

2 

5 - 8 

3 

0 

2 

0 

1-4 

1 

0 

0 

0 

Totals 

58 

53 

58 

58 

Mean Scores 

21.28 

27.62 

21.55 

26.52 

Mean Increase of 
Final Test over 
Pre-test 

6.34 

4.97 


(The scores recorded in this table were obtained by groups 
A-C and B-D from the forty-two items in questions numbered 
I and VI of the test paper. These items required reasoning 
on the part of the students.) 








































CHAPTER IX 


A STUDY OF THE RESULTS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE 
WRITTEN AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE FINAL TEST 

The writer stated in Chapter IV that a questionnaire was 
answered by the students after the final test had been written 
(A copy of this questionnaire is given as Appendix C). Certain 
pertinent items from the questionnaire are dealt with in this 
chapter. 


1 — THE TEACHING METHOD AND THE TIME ELEMENT 
In the questionnaire, Question 2 (d) dealt with the 
amount of time required or desired by the students for their 
part in this study. Table XIII indicates the answers of the 
students to the question. It shows that the students of 
group A-C required less time than the students of group B-D 
for the work of the unit. Twenty-nine students in the former 
group indicated that they had adequate time, while only twelve 
in the latter group considered the time adequate. Twenty-five 
in group A-C and forty-two in group B-D required more time to 
complete their work on the unit, but only one student felt 
that the time allowed was too great, and that student was from 
group A-C. Seven students did not express an opinion regard¬ 
ing the time element, three from the former group and four 
from the latter group. 

2 — THE TEACHING METHOD AND THE PREFERENCE FOR THE SUBJECT 
Question 4 (e) of the questionnaire requested that 
students indicate their order of preference for Social Studies 














- 


- ‘V ■; 



. 

. 


O r '. 







- 


, 







' 




. 

■ t 

- 













. 

. 









62 


among the school subjects they were taking that year. They 
were asked to decide their preference from the point of view 
of interest, experience, knowledge of society, and value of 
the subject to them in preparation for a vocation. The stu¬ 
dents’ responses to this question are shown in Table XIV. By 
applying a measuring device which gives six points for a first 
choice, five points for a second choice, and so on until the 
seventh choice counts as zero, it was seen that the average 
placement of social studies was almost identical for both 
groups--being in 3*7^th place for group A-C, and 3 . 76 th place 
for group B-D. In both groups the numbers of preferences in 
each rank were very close from group to group; in fact, in 
each group, four students placed Social Studies 20 in first 
place, eight placed it in second place, and thirteen placed it 
in fourth place. 

It was assumed from the similarity of the responses of 
each group that there was no significant difference between 
them. It would seem that, in the case of these students, the 
method of teaching had no effect upon their preference for the 
social studies course among the high school courses available 


to them. 









. 






_ 









t 

■ ,// : . 

. - 








< : 





















. 

. 








63 


TABLE XIII. — RESPONSES OF THE STUDENTS IN EACH GROUP TO 
THE STATEMENTS REGARDING TIME ALLOWED FOR THE UNIT 


Statements in Questionnaire 

Number of Students Responding 

(i) Too little time was allowed 
for the study of the unit 

Classes 

A and C 

Classes 

B and D 

25 

42 

(ii) The time allowed for the 
study of the unit was adequate 

29 

12 

(iii) Too much time was allowed 
for the study of the unit 

1 

0 

(Answer omitted) 

3 

4 


TABLE XIV. — STUDENTS ? PREFERENCES FOR SOCIAL STUDIES 
IN RELATION TO THEIR SCHOOL SUBJECTS 


Rank of 

Social Studies 

Number of Student s Stating Preference 

Classes A and C 

Classes B and D 

First 

4 

4 

Second 

3 

£ 

Third 

19 

22 

Fourth 

13 

13 

Fifth 

5 

2 

Sixth 

0 

1 

Seventh 

1 

2 

(Preference omitted) 

g 

6 

Totals 

53 

53 







































































CHAPTER X 


CONCLUSIONS DRAW FROM THE RESULTS OF THE STUDY 

1 — THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE EXPERIMENT 
Lien and Melby, in their technique for testing the ef¬ 
fectiveness of two methods of teaching, applied as a criterion 
for determining the degrees of difference between two factors, 
this question: "Do the four groups always achieve in the same 
order as their mental test score medians?" It was assumed 
that a correlation between the I.Q. medians and the class 
score means was indicative of the validity of the testing 
device. 

The accompanying table, Table XV, indicates a measure 
of correlation between the I.Q. rating scores and the scores 
of the pre-test. 


TABLE XV. — A COMPARISON OF THE I.Q. RATING MEDIANS, 
THE PRE-TEST SCORES, AND THE FINAL TEST SCORES 
OF THE FOUR CLASSES A, B, C, AND D 


Factor Rated 

Class A 

Class B 

Class C j 

Class D 

I.Q. score medians 

107.50 

110.71 

113.83 

117.50 

Mean score on 
pre-test 

37.32 

40.50 

40.50 

41.00 

Mean score on 
final test 

57.85 

55.36 

62.67 

56.54 






















6.5 

The table reveals also a measure of correlation between 


the final test scores of Class A and Class C, and of Class B 
and Class D. Ten of the scores shown in Table XV are in order, 
but two are not. The final test scores for Class B and Class 
D are somewhat lower than the other scores would indicate that 
they should be. In Table IX the final test scores for groups 
A-C and B-D were compared, the means scores being 60.34 and 
56.12, respectively. When the difference between these means 
was tested statistically for significance, it was found that 
the value of n t tT was 2.175? and the difference was significant 
at the 0.05 level but not at the 0.01 level. It was assumed 
that the only variable factor relating to this study was the 
difference between the two methods of teaching and, for this 
reason, any significant difference between the means of the 
final test scores is assumed to be the result of the differ¬ 
ence in effectiveness of the two methods of teaching. In 
other words, it is assumed that the lecture method of teaching 
was more effective than the socialized recitation method in 
this particular study and accounted for the difference between 
the mean scores obtained by the two groups, A-C and B-D. 

2 — CONCLUSIONS CONCERNING THE ACQUISITION OF FACTUAL 

KNOWLEDGE AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF REASONING POWER UNDER 
THE DIFFERENT METHODS OF TEACHING 
Table XI indicates that group A-C, taught by the lecture 
method, attained a mean gain of 15*31 points of the forty-two 
items on that portion of the test whereas group B-D, taught by 
the socialized recitation method, attained a mean gain of 












- , 






■ 










. ■ 

. 




, 






V 












- 
















. 











10.97 on the same test. As stated previously, the mean of the 
final test scores for Group A-C was 33*4$ on this portion of 
the test, and for Group B-D, 30.3$. When tested for signifi¬ 
cance, "t TT was found to have a value of 2.475, indicating that 
the difference was significant at the 0.05 level but not at 
the 0.01 level. 

The assumption drawn from this is that probably more 
facts pertinent to the aims and objectives of the lesson were 
transmitted by the teacher in the lecture than were gained by 
the pupils in the socialized recitation method of teaching. 
This does not imply that there were not just as many and pos¬ 
sibly just as worthy facts or items of knowledge gained by the 
students through the socialized recitation. It would indicate 
however, that for tests and examinations demanding a retention 
and exhibition of factual knowledge the lecture method is to 
be preferred. 

Figure 5 shows the gains made by each group, A-C and B-D 
on the final test. The portion between the lines marks the 
greater gain by group A-C. 

On the other hand, there is nothing to indicate that the 
socialized recitation does not prepare the students just as 
well to meet problems and to find solutions as does the 
lecture method. In Table XII it is evident that, although 
group B-D did not retain as many facts required for the final 
test as did group A-C, the former group attained approximately 
equal scores on those items requiring reasoning ability. The 



. ' < 

- 










- 

' 









g 

< 




















. 





























67 


mean scores for groups A-C and B-D on this portion of the 
final test were 27.62 and 26,52, respectively. When these 
mean differences were tested for significance, ff t w was found 
to be 0 . 976 , and there was no significant difference at either 
the 0.05 nor the 0.01 levels. It must be assumed from this 
observation that, in their study of the unit, group B-D gained 
other knowledge and understandings that aided them in the 
reasoning and generalizing demanded in this part of the test. 

3 — CONCLUSIONS REGARDING STUDENTS ! INTEREST 
AND PREFERENCE AS INFLUENCED BY THE TWO METHODS OF TEACHING 

It is generally accepted among educators that students 
make better progress in those subjects in which their interest 
is aroused and in which pleasant experiences are enjoyed. For 
that reason the use of the cane as a means of motivation has 
been outmoded in any modern school worthy of the name. An 
attempt was made in this study to ascertain, if possible, the 
effect of the method of teaching upon the preference of the 
students for social studies in comparison with their other 
subjects. 

As stated previously in Chapter IX, the students of 
groups A-C and B-D stated their preferences for social studies 
in almost the same order for each group, placing that subject 
in 3.7Sth and 3 . 76 th place among their seven subjects. 

Assuming that the past experiences of the students had been 
similar and that they had a comparable attitude toward social 
studies at the beginning of the experiment, it would seem 










< 

. 


















. 



























. 


- ■ 

. 











reasonable to infer that their preference for the subject had 
not been changed in any degree by the use of one method or the 
other in the study. Table XIV shows the range and the simila¬ 
rity of the responses of the students in the two groups toward 
the matter of subject preference. 

As a further indication of the reaction of the students 
toward the methods employed, the reader is referred to Appendix 
F in which excerpts from the questionnaires are recorded. It 
would seem reasonable to assume that a few of the students are 
opposed to one method or the other but that the majority of 
the students accept either method equally well, and that their 
attitude towards a subject is not greatly affected by the 
method employed. 

4 — CONCLUSIONS REGARDING THE LENGTH OF TIME REQUIRED 

FOR AN ADEQUATE PRESENTATION OF MATERIAL BY EACH METHOD 

The length of time allowed for the presentation of this 
unit in its entirety was the same for each group. Both groups 
wrote the pre-test on November 21, 1952, and the final or 
retest on December 19, 1952. In considering the time element, 
one must remember that there can be no valid instrument for 
determining whether or not time is properly used. Certainly 
it is less difficult for one teacher, in presenting a body of 
material, to adjust his timing than it is for a number of 
student committees to adjust theirs. Again, the criterion of 
good instruction is not how much time was saved (or used) in 
the unit, but rather how much worth-while knowledge or ex- 








- 






, 


































. 




* 



. 






. 




- c 











69 

perience the students gained from it, and what desirable 
attitudes were fostered and developed. 

During the unit, the time element was not rigidly con¬ 
trolled. For the socialized recitation group, the students 
were allowed as much time as they wished to present and dis¬ 
cuss the lesson material. In order to prevent time being 
wasted, group discussions wrere not kept strictly to the order 
given in the unit outlines; but, if one group was prepared, 
and the class as a whole was desirous of hearing and dis¬ 
cussing a new topic, the presentation was made, each committee 
relating its contribution to the work as a whole. In this 
way the unit was completed by the committees and the summary 
made by December 19, 1952. As for the group of students in 
classes A and C, taught by the lecture method, the students 
were given material each day comparable in amount to the 
material presented by the groups using the socialized recita¬ 
tion method. It might be argued that time was lost by the 
latter group in setting up the committee organization and 
choosing the topics of study; however, it should be remem¬ 
bered that in doing this, the students were already surveying 
the unit in all its aspects. 

Table XIII shows the reactions of the students to the 
time element in the unit. It should be kept in mind that in 
neither of the methods used was the subject matter dictated 
or written on the blackboard to be copied by the students. 

They were required to make their own notes or records, and 
time for this was not allowed during the regular class period. 











I- < 

( 









I 

■ 

, 

' 

„ 

- 

. 

* 

- 














70 

They might utilize some of the class time for this, depending 
upon their ability or inclination, but much of it had to be 
done in study periods or as homework. Consequently, it is 
assumed that in answering the question, the students con¬ 
sidered the extra time they would have liked for the writing 
of their notes in acceptable form. Remembering that class 
discussion during the unit was not curtailed for want of time, 
one must conclude that those students who indicated that they 
desired more time had such an idea in mind. 

It is shown in Table XIII that half of the students 
taught by the lecture method considered the time adequate, 
most of the others would have preferred more time, and only 
one considered that too much time was given. On the other 
hand, in the socialized recitation group, only twelve, fewer 
than one-fourth of the students, considered the time allowed 
as adequate, and forty-two of fifty-four considered the time 
inadequate. Not one considered it too long. It must be con¬ 
cluded then, that the students taught by the socialized recita¬ 
tion method require more time for the study of a unit than do 
the students taught by the lecture method. It is suggested 
that the reason for this is that the students in the socialized 
recitation group explore more widely in the field, and do not 
make as restricted selection of material as the teacher does 
in the lecture method. This is not stated as a condemnation 
or adverse criticism of the socialized recitation method, but 
rather to point out that, in using this method, the teacher 
would probably not complete, in a given time, a curriculum as 
broad in scope as if he were using the lecture method. 





- 

. 






. 

t 

< 

. 

. 

. 

. 




< 

, 


















71 


5 — OTHER CONCLUSIONS REACHED REGARDING THE STUDENTS 1 
GROWTH IN DESIRABLE RESPONSES AS A RESULT OF THE USE OF 
EACH METHOD OF TEACHING THE UNIT IN SOCIAL STUDIES 
The following assumptions are derived from a considera¬ 
tion of the remarks made by the students on the questionnaire. 
These assumptions are given in the hope that someone will be 
interested in giving them fuller consideration. These assump¬ 
tions are stated briefly below. 

First, the students in a class do not all prefer the 
same method of teaching. Among the answers given to the 
question, "In what way could this method have been improved?" 
some of the students expressed a preference for the method 
being used in the other group, or for some other method such 
as the individual study and report. 

Second, former experiences with one or other method of 
teaching have a strong influence upon the student f s reactions 
to a method whenever he is taught by it. The remark quoted 
here from a student of high mental ability, excellent academic 
achievement, commendable school and classroom co-operation, 
and consistent participation in athletics reveals a bias 
against student direction and participation in the prepara¬ 
tion and presentation of class subject matter. His remark was, 
"A class breaking up into groups and then making reports is 
just wasting time." A girl, also of superior mental ability 
and pleasing personality, wrote, "I did not like having group 
reports." On the other hand, some of the students taught by 
the lecture method wrote, "Have the pupils make reports." 




c 


















' 


■ 




. 






* 

- 






5 











■ 


j. | 









72 

It may well be that these expressions of dislike or bias were 
related to past experiences of these students. 

Third, the method used has little to do with the amount 
of outside reading or research done by the students. The 
view has often been expressed that, if students are allowed 
or encouraged to seek for solutions to problems, they will 
develop a love for reading or form the habit of satisfying 
their curiosity through wider reading and research. This idea 
was not borne out by the responses to the questionnaire. The 
students working under the socialized recitation method did 
not report further study or reading beyond the minimum re¬ 
quired for the topics undertaken; and those under the lecture 
method, with no reports to prepare, did not reveal any desire 
to read more widely for further knowledge concerning the 
events and changes outlined by the teacher. Therefore, it is 
the conclusion of the writer that in the study undertaken the 
method of teaching had little influence upon the students in 
creating a desire for further exploration in the world of 
books. 

6 — A SUMMARY OF THE CONCLUSIONS REACHED IN THIS STUDY 

Among the changes in methodology brought about a decade 
or two ago as a result of the educational research of that 
time were two significant developments, the introduction of 
greater pupil activity and participation in the daily program, 
and the consequent departure from the use of the lecture. In 
fact, so great was the latter change that some teachers felt 
it improper to employ the lecture at all. 















■ 


- 

. 





■ 












. 




. iHi 













73 

In recent times (1954) there has been a reconsideration 
of the stand previously taken, and some educators, while not 
abandoning their insistence upon the necessity and desirability 
of pupil activity in the classroom, have found that greater 
direction by the teacher and more use of the lecture is ad¬ 
vantageous. In this connection Bining and Bining make the 
following comment on the importance and use of the lecture: 

We shall consider it (the lecture) to include any 
talk—planned or impromptu--of the teacher, whether 
it lasts only a few minutes or fifty or more. The 
tendency in school practice today is to put the tea¬ 
cher as far in the background as possible. The pupil 
must find out for himself. This generally goes under 
the name of pupil activity and is governed by a false 
interpretation of the educational maxim "learn by doing". 
Too often an analogy is taken from an activity that 
involves mental responses. A child learns to walk by 
trying to walk; a boy learns history by self-activity. 

It is never made clear how this self-activity takes 
place. In the minds of some educators, if a pupil is 
reading a textbook, it is self-activity; if he is 
listening to a lecture, it is not. Such an assumption 
is foolish. For example, a pupil is studying a prob¬ 
lem in history. To solve the problem, he gets much 
material from the textbook. He also may get other 
material from the teacher through a lecture. The 
question naturally arises why the knowledge acquired 
from the textbook is more significant than that ac¬ 
quired from the lecture. In the one case it entered 
the mind of the pupil by means of the eye from the 
printed page; in the other, it entered the mind of 
the pupil by means of the ear from the lips of the 
teacher. Indeed, the second means might be much more 
significant, for the words have received the warmth 
of a living personality. 

Because pupils are passively seated in a classroom 
listening to a talk, it does not follow that their 
minds are not active. In many such situations, pupils 
have literally been seated on the edge of their seats, 
avidly taking in every idea that is presented. A 
teacher explaining or talking about a problem could 
awaken the interest of the pupils so that, after the 
talk, hands are raised to express comments or to ask 
questions for further details. The teacher might be 
doing most of the talking, but no one could accuse the 
class of being mentally passive. 















' 

. 


















■ 


• 










c 

. 

* 

. 












C • 

. 






i; 














74 


In the social studies, the acquiring and under¬ 
standing of knowledge is important* In choosing 
methods, the teacher has to consider this aim. The 
modified lecture method has a place in the social 
studies above all subjects* Especially is this true 
in the study of history. The reason for this is 
found in the very nature of the subject. History is 
a study of vast content, and the great danger is that 
pupils will become lost in a maze of facts. The 
teacher, by careful planning and telling, may enable 
the pupils to see the meaning of events and their re¬ 
lation to one another and to the larger movements of 
history. 22 


On the other hand, certain people have insisted that 
there should be a curtailing of pupil activity and participa¬ 
tion in the classroom program and a return to the older form 
of teacher-dominated school system, asserting that the pupil- 
activity method is not conducive to pupil progress. 

The present study concerns the relative effectiveness of 
the two methods, lecture and socialized recitation, and is 
pertinent to the problem that is mentioned above. The fol¬ 
lowing statements comprise a summary of the conclusions 
reached on the basis of the present study. 

1. In teaching a body of organized, factual subject matter 
the lecture method was more effective than the social¬ 
ized recitation method. 

2. In developing reasoning ability concerning social and 
economic changes, the socialized recitation was as effec¬ 
tive as the lecture method. Tested statistically, no 
significant difference between the mean scores of the two 
experimental groups was found. 

22 A. C. Bining and D. H. Bining, Teaching the Social Studies 
in Secondary Schools , New York: McGraw-Hill Co., 1952, 
pp.“g^S? 








, 


. 

. 

. 


c 

. 

, 













- 






















- 

■ 









* -.1 


. 

■ 






■ 

. 










- 






■ 









75 


3. The method of teaching did not affect the student T s 
preference for the subject. 

4* In using the socialized recitation method, the teacher 
may have to plan for a more restricted program of studies 
than he would use with the lecture method,, In the for¬ 
mer method the students are likely to explore more fully, 
requiring longer time, and consequently the scope of the 
course may have to be narrower for the socialized recita¬ 
tion. However, in the degree in which the students 
explore beyond the area required, the scope is actually 
broader. 

5. There is no single, isolated method of teaching that is 
better than all other methods. Each method has its 
merits and its special uses; the different methods 
should be used at times for interest and variety. 

Besides this, some teachers are able to use one method 
more effectively than another. The choice of the method de¬ 
pends partly upon the ability and skill of the teacher. Also, 
students differ one from another, and some students make 
better progress under one method than under another. The 
choice of method, then, depends upon the nature of the student. 
As Pearcy points out, "The key to all learning is attention; 
and what you really attend to, you learn." ^ The teacher 
should realize that the method, although important, is only 
the device or medium for arousing the interest and attention 

^ Ivor Pearcy, "In Defence of the Formal Lesson," The School, 

Second Edition, Vol. 36 , Feb. 194$, p.326 
































* 




- 




- 

- 








■ , . 








■ 











76 


of the student; that the method that most adequately brings 
this about is the method to use; and that the method may vary 
from lesson to lesson and from student to student. 








CHAPTER XI 


RECOMMENDATIONS 

This study leaves unanswered many pertinent questions 
regarding the effectiveness of the lecture and the socialized 
recitation methods of teaching, and it also leaves the conclu¬ 
sions to be re-checked. Some of the questions that arise for 
consideration are the following: 

1. Is the socialized recitation more effective than the 
lecture for students of a low I.Q.? of a high I.Q.? 

In this study it may be observed that Class A, the 
class with the lowest average or median I.Q. rating was taught 
by the lecture method, and made the second greatest gain of 
the four classes on the final test. Again, Class D, having 
the highest average I.Q. rating, made the greater gain of the 
two classes taught by the socialized recitation method, but 
did not equal the gain made by Class A. 

2. Is it desirable to have a curriculum as broad in scope 
for use with the socialized recitation method as with 
the lecture method? 

It has been assumed in this study that more subject matter 
can be covered by the lecture than by the socialized recita¬ 
tion. If students taught by the latter method are required to 
complete the programme planned for the former method, will the 
students lose the opportunity to explore more widely in fields 
of their choice, and render useless the benefits thus derived 
from this element in the method? 
















. 







* 



















. ■ 




< 


' 






. 







5 












7 $ 

3. Do students retain as well what they learn by one method 
as by another? 

This investigation would most likely entail the teaching 
of a unit by the two methods during the fall term of the year, 
the testing of these students immediately after the completion 
of the unit, and the retesting of them again at the end of the 
school year, or at some later date. The main problem might be 
the retaining of the students in homogeneous groups for the 
duration of the experiment. 

4. Does the socialized recitation method of teaching produce 
more co-operative and better-informed citizens than does 
the lecture method? 

This study would likely take a long time to complete, and 
would necessitate the employment of many case histories of 
pupils chosen at random. 

5* Are students taught by one method more likely to com¬ 
plete their high school courses than students taught by 
another method? In other words, does the method of 
teaching used contribute in any way to the incidence of 
drop-outs? 

This study, too, would necessitate a number of case 
studies, and would require a considerable time to complete. 























- 

' 

■« 

■ 





























- 






% ■ 




■ 












































79 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bining, A. C., and Bining, D. H. Teaching the Social Studies 
in Secondary Schools , New York, McGraw - Hill Book Co. 

Third Ed. 1952. 350 p. 

Bossing, N. L. Progressive Methods of Teaching in Secondary 
Schools. New York, Houghton Mifflin Co., 1942. 

Douglass, H. R., and Mills, H. H. Teaching in High Schools . 

New York, Ronald Press Co., 194$« 627 p. 

Horn, Ernest. Methods of Instruction in the Social Studies . 

New York, Charles Scribners Sons, 1937* 523 p. 

Michaelis, John U. Social Studies for Children in a Democracy . 

New York, Prentice Hall, 1950. 466 p. 

Morrison, H. C. The Practice of Teaching in the Secondary 

School . Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1931* 6 $$ p. 
Stormzand, M. J., and Lewis, R. H. New Methods in the Social 
Studies . New York, Farrar and Rinehart, 1935* 223 P* 

Swindler, Robert E. Social Studies Instruction in the Second ¬ 
ary Schools . New York, Prentice-Hall, 1933* 34$ p. 

Wesley, E. B. Teaching the Social Studies . Boston, D. C. 

Heath and Co., 1942. 652 p. 

Coutts, H. T. "Techniques in the Teaching and Testing of 

Themes I and V of the Social Studies II Course", M. A. 
Thesis, 1940. (University of Alberta). 

Pearcy, Ivor. "In Defence of the Formal Lesson." The School , 
Second Edition, Vol. 36 , Feb. 194$, pp. 326 - 32$. 

Melby, E. 0., and Lien, A. "A Practical Technique for Deter ¬ 
mining the Relative Effectiveness of Different Methods 
of Teaching ." Journal of Educational Research , Vol.XIX, 
pp. 255 - 264 . 




























































» • • ? * * ■ 1 ? 


5 




, . r « . . ■ , 

- "■ 






* 

- 

- 

. 


. . t . ■ .. v ■ • 

* 

. 

. 

- 

* • : ■ ■ 

■ 

, 




APPENDIX A 


OUTLINE PLAN OF UNIT II, 


SOCIAL STUDIES 20 



Si 


SOCIAL STUDIES 20, UNIT TWO 

UNIT TWO - THE EFFECT OF SCIENCE ON OUR ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL LIFE 

Pointers for our study: 

1# What were the causes of the Industrial Revolution? 

2. What changes were Drought about by the Industrial Revolution? 

3# Hov/ did. technological advances increase the production of goods 
and facilitate distribution of raw and manufactured materials? 

4. What was the effect of these changes upon the wealth of nations? 

5; How did unequal distribution of wealth lead to social problems? 

6, 1/ldiat attempts were made by social and political institutions 
to deal with these problems? 

7, Hov/ has competition among industrialized nations led to inter¬ 
national problems? 

8, In what ways are communities and nations interdependent? 

9 S What are the particular problems of the working classes today? 

10. What attempts are now being made to solve the world 1 s economic 
and social problems? 


CONTENT OF UNIT TWO BY TOPICS 

I* THE DISTINCTIVE INDUSTRIAL, CHARACTER OF MODERN CIVILIZATIONj;. 

This introductory topic will deal with the significant feat¬ 
ures of our present economic system and its effects upon society. 
It will involve a consideration of such factors as the following: 

(a) types of work done in rural and urban areas 

(b) types of machines used in rural and urban activities 

(c) increase in the number of vocations in recent years 

(d) interdependence of urban and rural dwellers and laborers 

(e) interdependence of areas within a country 

(f) interdependence of nations as a result of industrialization 

(g) Advances and developments necessary to carry on the present 
distribution of goods 

(h) the relationship between employer and employees 

(i) the responsibility of the state for the welfare of workers 

(j) recent advances made by the application of scientific 
principles. 


References: 

The Making of Today 1 s World -- Hughes, Chap# XIV 

Modern History -- New and Trotter, Chaps. XV, XX-xXI, XXXII# 

The Story of Civilization -- Seary and Paterson, pp# 96-108, etc 
Social Living,-- Landis and Landis, Chaps# XVI, XXVI-XXVII, etc< 
The Modern World — Mackay and Saunders, Part I. 

The Canada Year Book 


II. sC CS TQ INDUSTRY 

1 • The Agr1 cul. tural JRevpJlui^ijDn: 

(a) Experiments made in agricultural production 

(b) The change from a manual to a mechanized industry 

(c) Agencies that assist agricultural production tnrough 
scientific methods. 

References: _ , 

The Making of Today T s World -- Hughes, Chap XIv. 

Social Living -- Landis and Landis, passim# 






















”* : 




, 






; 

. 

. 

> 3 . ^,4 

. 


. 

t 




8 -eJ,; 



’ 


. . 

’■ £ ^ r : i ! mm 


. 


■ 


! bi. i > ■ 

■ 


? ,... ' -■ i.i i i: :: ;;fi 

•' ■ . 

' 

' 

■ 




' V. •■■■ v' • '■ o ‘• ■■ ..' ■ .i; 

. 




: :o-. r ^ ... 

: n.r r.;:,--.t ; . '±c 


1 0 


( r ) 








■ 


>’Oi'Ai;A'ift ■! 

t .$ 1 


■. .. ) 





_ - ■ ■ 



! (TO .+;■; 

' 

■ ' . J (3/ CUT r.o-'i: ■; l ‘ ■ :. '.; ■ ' : '■ 
















( 


. ...os 

. 

- 






32 


SCCIiiL STUDIES 20, UNIT TWO, Page 2 
2. The Industrial Revolution: 

(a) The inventions that increased production of textiles 

(b) The application of scientific principles to power production 

(c) New chemical processes in textile and metal-manufacturing 
industries 

(d) developments in the processes of mining and metal working 
that made possible modem industrialization 

(e) The apj;lication of science to manufacture of by-products 
from materials formerly considered waste 

(f) The application of the principles of physics, mechanics 

and engineering to new methods of communication and transport 
ation 

(g) The effects of the application of scientific discoveries in 
the fields of health, sanitation and medicine upon the normal 
span of human life. 


References: 

The Making of Today’s World — Hughes, Chap, XIV 
Modem History -- New and Trotter, Chaps. XV, XX, XXI, XXXII 
England in the Eighteenth Century — Plumb (A Pelican Book), 
Part II, Chaps. 1, 2; Part III, bhaps. 1, 3, 

A Social History of England — Guest, Part VI, Chaps. I-V. 


III. THE ECONOM IC PR IN CIPLES OF M ODERN PRODUCTION AI D DISTRIBUTI ON. 

(1) The. factors of production: land, labor, cap it al^ management 

(a) A comparison of these factors under the domestic system 
and under the modem factory system 

(b) Britain’s place in the possession of these factors. 


(2) ^The^ relationship be twee n capita l an d lab or: 

(a) Developments that increased the power of capital, e. g, 
increased money and banking faicilities, 
organization of joint-stock companies, 

and the application of the factory principle. 

(b) Problems that arose from these developments, 
e. g, complications in distribution of income. 

(c) Development of a new class of society through ownership 
of capital 

(d) The introduction of hired managers to replace owner-manager 

(e) Causes of modem tensions between capital and labor,. 
e, g. labor’s interest in wages, capital’s interest in 

profits• 

(f) The results of the contributions of both capital and labor 
in increasing the national income. 


References: 

The Story of Civilization —Seary and Paterson, Part VI, p. 491f. 
Others mentioned previously. 












. 

1 ■ 

■;■■■■■■■ : e:i; 0';'. O.i. i;d X 8 d ' fi.i hUMJB0tO\<J L;:& 1 ■ :uUt> V:SU ( 0 ) 

■ , ■ . -f : ;7 

' .. - I" = ■; v,':^ ■ Slur v ' ■ ■■ t. v*" w - (JH.) 

' ; ' ' i , ■ 

’ 

' ) (' ! 

. ! ? 

1 

■ ■ 

' 

. 

: 

: ' ' . . _ _ . 

■ . ■ 

; t Did ■■ )l . • \h r f <1 . ' D , . ’ ' 0 .. ■ 

; 

, o : j o t f :no.t.'Iv’ i.' ho r. .so;::^o«v e.r’ir' til ooi: ,.!> -a ' iT't (a) 

:-d’ ; i:: i ,■■ !\:r . ' r £S } 

■ -• • '■ . : •' •" ••• (■. ) 

■ 


. (cf,! 

* 

l-o' . 

3 oi ■ ■■ •’ 1 , ) 

?t’ ' r ; ' r>-.. s v = ; •: -; o .-jo • 

. 

: •/. ) 

' 


. 

‘j 0 d'l’’ i‘; r! rf;T c :. 00 ’ i 





33 


SOCIAL STUDIES 20, UNIT TWO, Page 3. 


IV. 


SC.CIil PROBLEI^ .CREATED BY JCHAK GED j LSTHODS OF PRO DUG T ION 
ADD DISTRIB UTION . 

(D The^JFaetor^ System JReplaced the Domestic System: 

(a) The immediate results of migrations to industrial areas: 
slums, poverty, insecurity, etc. 

(b) Working conditions for women and children. 

(2) Mass_ Production _anj^the_ Division of labor: 

(a) "Specialization" in a given task; loss of much of the 

independence of effort by workers as a result of intro¬ 
duction of the factory system 

(b) abandonment of the laissez-faire principle in industry 

as a result of abuses; increasing governmental regulation 
and control of industry, 

(3) T r ade Unions : 


( a.) Formation of trade unions 

(b) Early attitudes of governments toward; trade unions 

(c) Reasons for the formation of trade unions, 

(4) Reforms: 

(a) Social reforms of the 19th century pertaining to 

working conditions, crime, education, suffrage, security. 


References: 

All those mentioned previously 

Also "The Modem World" -- MacKay and Saunders, Part I. 


V. 


T HE APPLICATION T O A M ODER N SITUATION OF THE CONCEPTS LEARNED 
ID T H IS UNIT . 


(1) Improved labor l eg is latio n: 

(working conditions, safety, hours, wage scales, age limits) 

(2) Social Secur ity Measures in C anad a: 

(Unemployment insurance, family allowance, old age pensions, 
health insurance, welfare services, etc.) 

(3) Modern business institutions for organizing and securijig 

capital for purposes of production: 

(e.g. stock companies and banks; government control and 
financing of industry; financing oil production in alberta). 

( 4) Labour Unions in Canada; 

(Important unions in various industries; how unions operate; 
how unions are supported and controlled). 

(5) L abo r - Manag eme nt Relationshi p s: 

(Recent strikes in Canada, and their outcome; 
legislation governing labor - management disputes; 
the need for good labor - management relations). 


Re ferences; 

Those mentioned previously 
^lso: "World Affairs Magazine", 

Recent issues of the Canada Year Book 













t . 




[p'-'P.'JiO YY 

V.. • 




. 


. 

. 

>1 . ' ■ ■ c \ . oH 




V 


j 

■ 

, 






• 

. 

•. i 


. 





it 




\ v C; V/.;. • : .S ■ .s’: 

■ 


. 


- 


* 

. 

• 



. 





• .. 


' 

■ 

. 

i C I 

I • 

* 

' 


’•iO '& /. 








, ■ 


■ 


, ;V> }\ JJ\'\ . :■> 


L !■: 


m>;,m ix.M 


V -mm ■ ■ 




. 






d# j . ■ 






: -) 









APPENDIX B 


QUESTIONS ON UNIT II, 
SOCIAL STUDIES 20, 
BEING THE QUESTIONS USED 
FOR THE PRE-TEST AND 


THE FINAL TEST 




S0CIA1 STUDIES 20 


Name 


35 


GENERAL TEST, UNIT II Period.Reg. Rm 

Directions: Write all answers on the question sheets. 

Do as well as you can. 


I. Read the following statements carefully. Then print the letter 
corresponding to the besjt statement in the brackets after each. 
(Score equals number correct less one-third the number wrong). 

1, The most significant advance in agricultural production 
since 1750 was 

(A) the raising of new types of plants 

(B) the introduction of animals for power 

(C) the use of new agricultural machines 

(D) the increase in the number of farm workers. (_C_) 

| 2, The work of the farm laborer today differs from that of the 

farm laborer of 1750 in that the present day worker 

(A) does fewer kinds of work 

(B) expends less energy in doing his work 

(C) requires less training to do his work 

(D) is exposed to less danger in doing his work. ( £_) 

3. The most significant difference between the daily work of 
an employee in an automobile factory and the work of a farm 
laborer is in the fact that the automobile worker 

(A) enjoys his work more 

(B) repeats the same task more frequently 

(C) suffers more from noise 

(D) has time out for coffee more regularly. 

4. An important difference between an average locality or 
district now and a similar locality in 1750 is that the 
one at the present time 

(A) produces a smaller proportion of the articles it uses 

(B) produces less than the one in former times. 

(C) has people from fewer countries living in it 

(D) has fewer people living in it. ( > 

5. The chief difference between machines in use now and those 
in use in 1750 is that modem machines 

(A) take longer to make 

(B) require more men to operate 

(C) cost more to make 

(D) are more complex in design. \ _E_ ' 

6. The changes in the methods of production since 1750 under 
the factory system have resulted from an application ox 
the principles of 

(A) trade (B) education (C) science (D) finance. (_x—) 

7. The increase in the number of employees in a factory has led 

to the relationship of the employer with his employees becoming 

(A) more impersonal (B) more kindly 

(C) less friendly (D) more exacting. ( ± ) 


( E ) 














' 3 u., 

a . t 


* 


. - . r:r 


; 


X1 01V 3 8 oa. 


rii'TCf ■ 8888 


880 10 i s>£ , 


: . 8 8; O.O'l 33-' 0 8 188 "3; 

io xil'o.fji)03 ' Lrx.at Oro r*i 


■ :':88'3c. -Ar Ov , _0-; 8 .y ooo 

a ol ;x • ■.. xo c-V 3 a ' box a Xb. 7 ... a a oo d ) 


8 8 »X 


. 


■3 " v ; - ••'8'c dl 8,3 •; 




■•"■Or rs« 


)v7 nritti 


• , 8- 


1H8.T ‘t 


8'.i aiiroi) ;• 

.8 80 ;8X 8,:;,8: C! 
38.88 30" BO 838.;:. 


' 

i8£(B 

0 30,1) (A.) 
:8 3uX0 0 


•t 3 38' !J v> V l. to :‘38 : 8. 

..... .... «v. ... ... r . 


L Sc 


r 


bog 0388 


8 ' .: O . ■ 3 

’ • : ■ 


<: -. 3 8 m ■ ' 

3 . 

*i OX QdiS .1, 


3 


08 :• 08; 


0:8 8-3 : 0.38 3t v 3 


(3 ; 


. 3 3-3.. 93> 


38 iO 


8 0.0 •' 


Or 


6Cf , ' • 

■38 3 A : .•.. 3013 81 OB’., 3 , X 33 '■ "X ,3., 3; ) 

o: o .f 8 '/I e 3 o.■; 0 os A 3 ,o o 3 o 


8 f ,j ‘ 


to a;n .;;3B33 v 8-T 8.33.3.-;.3 8 00'... 0 8 3333 

t *iocx«.it rri eno ed& noolt •• ■. \.f aoo.3.ooBO[ 

i@i ; ■ . 8 • ■ ■ . £ 


a) 


. r 


-8' i;. y 11 { 0 0 8 


,f .38 c>3 ?X 31 &QSJ 


( A > 


oJiBiooo at rtav o'jiojvi sb o o ••• • a. f'nj) 

0 Ov BOB 8 8, 8*; (0 ) 

303.18 01) 88 Xe..Ci'8 00 0T0.8 83' { 1.1 ) 


■t8;8r OcjVj 

.. ) : 


88 81 C 


• / 


(,/,} a. 


• < 

3 88 t 

*'3, ..Or' COt 


! 8 3 OBBuBi • :..T 


aCxrao 


10 8 c 


Of 1 


-10 33.83: ■ : 38 8 

•, rr ;r jj j -33 p 







86 


8* During the past century in most industrialized countries a 
significant development has been the fact that the state 

(a) has assigned workers to their jobs 

(B) has insisted upon every worker being trained for his job 

(C) has accepted more responsibility for the welfare of workers 
vD; has insisted that workers have part in management 

of industry. ( q ) 


9* A prime necessity for an adequate exchange of goods 
under our present day production system is 

(A) a large number of needy persons 

(B) an elaborate system of credit 

(C) a satisfied market at home 

(D) a large number of skilled workers to take over factories. 

_ > 

.0. The most important factor in our present day distribution 
of goods is likely to be 

(A) the systems of advertising 

(B) the sound money system 

(C) the many retail stores 

(D) the transportation systems* ( D ) 


Matching Test. 

After each person named in list 2 write the letter from list 1 
that most accurately identifies his contribution to progress 
in agricultural methods or in transportation. (There are more 
items in list 1 than in list 2). 


lis t 1 


list 2 


(A) grain reaper 

(B) crop rotation 

(C) canal building 

(D) steam locomotive 

(E) diesel engine 

(F) early steam engine 

(G) vulcanizing rubber 

(H) seed drill for planting 

(I) improvement of farm animals 

(J) hard-surfaced roads 

(K) caterpillar tractor 

(1) heredity studies in plants 
(M) cotton gin 


Bales we 11 

Daimler 

Goodyear 

MacAdam 

McCormick 

Mendel 

Newcomen 

Stephenson 

Townshend 

Tull 


x 

JL 

_G 

X 

x 

L 

X 

x 

H 


II. Vocabulary Test. 

In the space at the end of each part below, write the letter 
that most clearly defines the term in each: 

laisse z- faire : 

(A) Boor work on account of laziness 

(B) firing the lazy workers 

(C) L policy of non-interference by governments in business 

(D) A policy in which the government enforces 

fair methods in business. ( C ) 






















i" . 

. . 






Fid 0 t 

•i s: sf 

. 


rrxsX 

-x O '' 




(4) 

, 

53 xrf 


.0911 jc. 

Xu Bi'U 8C; 

•■i ciiioi 


vs 


oqix 

ho? a raa i 

e. 

sii 

t S ) 

V;Q\V 

to 

etsllow 9 

;Xf xoi -V,; 

J. 11 XX£,n00'c: 8'I 


v am 

... 


0 £i 

{0 ) 



& ( . .:>Ki , 


■ n;x X‘x«cr 

• 

M 

• 


ew 

d\ 



e.Bif 

(Cl) 

. 

. ) 











.* vd;Xa:ifXfi 

X 

to 




0} ' 

o xiaiXo’TC 



* - 

■ 



tr ; yX 

. 



iiq A 





. 

VE3 

no *.X 

o.u 

OTq 


d* rr ox': s 


o t0-barj 






' 

3*X 


V,t.. 

on 


o •£* 

idl j V 8B‘l 


B 

F A ) 






t. 


■ 

- 

.<■ 

> v 


etoaocXsJ* 



(a) 








CFO 

I 




, Vjj.lQjtf, 



(0) 


odo 

B'i 'XI 

D V 0 Bid 

B d" Ovi 8*X9 

:-vt< 


b 9 

i X i 



0 x . 

■ Ef 



car) 



X.rjcf .r" 

italic 

Y,.bX 1518 X 


'll 



. . 

... 

i i X 

!' C cl lOqcd 


SO 5 

■ ci.nT 












Ou" ' 



1)01 

EJB to 










■ 

rhs to oicic 1 a 


(a) 









xn-c 


■ 0 

,, 0 . 

n 1 .car/oa 


rid 

(X) 










*xoda 


: X C t v ; ns r.c; 


fid 

(0) 







• 


•t 



U.;A 

i *ior[Br;.criit 

i). 


CCE) 













. /-i’ 

Bfi 

ixfod-oji 

X do 


; 

“X Ol X 9 

X .‘Jflfct vtJ. 




XiX 


I) 

' 


do, 


•xodtA 



■D*£CX i 


iXuXti'Xuoo, 



a e 




•’ \;J: C "■ ' .VI \ 



•' d o rid 



13 Cl' 

) 

* , 

q at 




to 



foo. XstlKf* 


o 1: •' 









'ia 


[ 


l 

' X Xai 


at 



•toM 


v. o j vt 


isdii.A 

. 

note o ova :■■ 

_ 

EI;rT 

, ,-o lid do. 








lit mad 



■ 

. 



n ■ .; d, • 

t crooio 

{) 




(D 5 

■ >■ • Oo. ^ 50 : / 


(a) 



loo vid 

/ T” \ 


l; j ' m , od'S 

vX'tXv 0 


0 0 X 

cfx>r at si 


(0) 


■ - Li 

. 

(H) 


Xvvd;v..'r:s 

voTcrai 


!■ 

• 

rwXvdoi 

U) 

; 

, ' ■ 


( :;:i } 

5 

o ii':TX vi- 

.1:5 ot oil 




fXoXd oo 

i 


. 

V'FiIjirXooo? 



■ 

til 


L: 'iS'in :,i id> 

doom & 

•id 


•; rxx l 


■ 

Vo 01c?‘) .i... 


: 

• ' - *T \y-'[ ( A ) 

’ ■ ' v "' tv (X * 

r:--.T . lov -hi ’ i:U: ; ' .. ■ Xlgv ,/ ( t) 

FIS. i <SJ i. at O&Qi'lt ‘"i 1 ' 




-3- 

(Vocabulary test continued) 
d omestic system: 

(A) A system of manufacture for home use only 

(B) A system of manufacture in homes rather than in factories 

(C) A system of manufacture taught by correspondence 

(D) A system of keeping goods from leaving the country. ( B__) 

s lum : 

(A) A low, dirty back street or lane of a city 

(B) A place where excessive drinking takes place 

(C) A place where poor people live 

(D) A dwelling in which many families live* ( A ) 

assembly-line : 

(A) A line of men looking for work at a factory 

(B) A line of men trying to prevent non-strikers from 

entering a factory 

(C) A line of finished products awaiting shipment 

(D) A movable platform carrying machines in various 

stages of completion* ( B ) 

co_llect ive b argaining: 

(A) An agency trying to collect for used goods 

(B) A foreman bargaining for higher wages 

(C) A group of workers 1 representatives making agreements 

for all the workers 

(D) A group of workers bargaining for collection of wages 

that have not been paid on time. ( G _ ) 


tra de union: 

(A) A combination of workmen of a craft for business purposes 

(B) A trade group formed for the purpose of improving the 

quality of the goods produced 

(C) A trade group formed for the purpose of increasing exports 

(D) A group formed to protect the interests of 

the factory owner. (_ t 


craft guild : 

(A) Workers chosen to prevent cheating by employers 

(B) y/orkmen employed in making boats or ships 

(C) Workmen who paint and decorate articles made in a factory 

(D) Workmen who are members of a society in any particular 

vocation. ( B 


closed shop: 

(A) l factory that is shut down for repairs 

(B) A factory that the government has refused to license 

(C) A factory in which only men from a certain union can be hired 

(D) A factory that has adopted a five-day week* ( c _) 


capita l: 

(A) Money or wealth employed in trade 

(B) Money put in the bank at the end of each month 

(C) Raw materials imported to carry on trade 

(D) Money paid out to workers every two weeks. 


















■■ . : ' t 




I 


; '0 :j to 



9; 


. i 



. • - r 

,• V . 


. 



99 ,, la 


. :>v >.ol" 


9;V OJA 




(;.r ) 




3 j) o oa 


v< J 








V ’• 




■ 





"to 




I 




:>‘l< 4 ill 








( , ) 


to ; 




' r io 




■ 1 

0-.'. -V '3 v ?' , ■ [>,■ r . [, • l 



e r n 


i 


( 







4 


88 


(Vocabulary test continued) 

joint-stock compan y; 

(il) L company that has factories in many places 

(B) jL company that manufactures only part of an article or machine 

(C) L number of business men who om the factory and work in it 

(D) L business in which several men have invested money. ^ ^ ^ 

medium of e xc hange : 

(L) L system of trade in which one buys as much as he sells 

(B) L business in which the profits are not excessive 

(C) Paper currency 

(D) The money paid to carry on a business. ( C ) 


IV. Matching Test. 

The following list names men who were masters in industry. Do 
this exercise in the same way as Number II. 


List 1 


List 2 


(**) the "spinning jenny” 

(B) the "mule” 

(C) the cotton gin 

(D) the steam engine 

(E) the flying shuttle 

(F) the steamboat 
(G-) steel-making 

(H) the power loom 

(I) assembly-line methods 

(J) the "water frame" 

(K) the knitting machine 

(L) the sewing machine 

(M) the safety lamp 

(N) the automobile hoist 


Arkwright 

Bessemer 

Cartwright 

Crompton 

Davy 

Ford 

Hargreaves 

Howe 

Kay 

Watt 

Whitney 


X 

G 

H 

B 

M, 

X 

A. 

x 

A 

X 

c 


V. Matching Test. , , 

This list of inventors and their inventions deals with progress 
in communi cations • Do it in the same way as the one above. 


List 1 

(1) the teletype machine 

(2) a chemical battery.to 

produce electricity 

(3) the aeroplane 

(4) the printing press 

(5) photography 

(6) wireless telegraphy 

(7) the phonograph 

(8) the electromagnet 

(9) the telegraph 

(10) the decibel 

(11) the telephone 

(12) the existence of an electric 

current 

(13) the transocean cable 


List 2 
Bell 

Daguerre 

Edison 

Faraday 

Field 

G-alvani 

Marconi 

Morse 

Volta 

Wright 


11 

_J5 

JL 

8 

13 

12 

6 

9 

2 

3 
































. 

■ 

:■< . ■ .. .■ • 

. 

. 

: a 

R. : . . : r y \oy..[ . ... < . 

... (\ •. 

■ ( £:) 


a R iJT 


'..i *V 




'• dl it . R . J R, . ; Ox: 

. 

_ ia;. 

v rl, • s.yvcly ... 




R »... ■: -C. 

t.v) 
i . 

V. 

. ' 




; ■>' ;V ''' *'v i 1 " . , 




% ■ 


la,; ■ v 


,,r V 


• • ! 

■ :R.i.R3' ;,: y-'j 


b.'l-J (R. } 

■ •■■■?•' {0) 
. V ■ . .. {U ; 




{ 2 } 








. 


iV a. 

a - ■ 1 


B : OS 


. . 

' ‘ 

■ 

' 


. 

.' ■ :iR.'i ; IX 
... ...'..: r uj ■ ,;;' n.r 


■ 

, ...: . | 

' 


r i ... } 


- ’• 

o / 


: • -. •. ;.X1 ( >'■ ) 

y;jl:R.rx 50 loilg (8} 


' 


' 

. . ■. 
*. 

■. .'..l-.; ,'J :,o:< ,( 

'' R ; : 

1.0.RRR: X ’ 

‘' U r ■ ,*•. : : iw ' ' t 


■■ ; v > 


,>. 




5 


IVI. Cluster TRUE - FilLSE Test, 

Below.are four suggested completions of each underlined statement# 
By using the letters u T rl and f, F ,r show which completions * in ouch 
instance are true and which are false# (Score, R - V/ ). 

(a) The Agricultural Revolution which took place early in the 
£i glrtejm th^c ent ury~ “ 

(1) resulted in fewer laborers being employed in agriculture(_ r jg ) 


(2) resulted in less crop production than previously (__F ) 

(3) was the result of the application of scientific 

principles to farming methods ( T ) 

(4) began to transform agriculture from a manual 

to a mechanized industry. (__£_) 

b) So me of the pjrincipal_ caus es of the agricultural Revolution were 

(1) the low prices paid for farm products ( F ) 

(2) the importing of wheat from America 

(3) the movement of workers to the factories ( T ) 

(4) the increased demand for food for the cities. ( t ) 


help e d by government agencies i n such ways as: 

(1) teaching farmers how to control pests ( T ) 

(2) telling farmers where to sell their grain ( F ) 

(3) testing plants under "varying conditions of growth (_JC_) 

(4) teaching farmers to maintain soil fertility. ( T ) 

( d ) The Indus trial R evoluti on in En g land began as a r esult of : 

(1) many skilled mechanics to help in the factories ( E ) 

(2) abundant sources of electric po' r er ( E ) 

(3) fleets of merchant ships to take the products 

to foreign countries ( F _) 

(4) trucks to haul the goods to the seaports. ( F ) 


(e) The_ Industrial Revolution_was accompanied, in the _f ieId of .health, 
by devel opments whi ch 

(1) gave men an understanding of the nature 

of the spread of diseases by germs ' 

(2) increased the use of sanitation in cities ( _JT , . ) 

(3) helped men to get immunity from certain diseases (jT ) 

(4) led to an understanding of the use of antiseptics. (, T_ ) 

(f) s ocial result of t he spread of the Industrial Revoluti on 
was the develo pm ent or growth o f _ 

(1) a class which suffered from economic insecurity ( 1' . .) 

(2) unhealthy working conditions for women and children 

during much of the nineteenth cenkufy vJl_) 

(3) a proportionately increased rural population (__F—) 

(4) greater interest and satisfaction on the part 

of most employees in their work. < 





























*■:!' . • ? >■! 


•. ..... :> ::,y 1 100 :c ' 

’ . . 

■ , 8) ■ ■ • 

.. 


. 

: r fX 




' l . i " 

' io:: 1 • ■' . -1 ~ ’ . ' • ■'n {U ) 

: ■ • ' (B) 


t 


. 

;r...r;■ G. •.■S' oC- 

a it 


;.o ia\;r.L‘ 


;>;t i.o 


(1) 


■ - ( .■ ) 


f ■:? \ 

\ V / 


J, ":JJJ L.:0 : J-iy 1C' ' /vGG.r . 

&#c ■ jiacf joo 

■ 

■ ■' ' S. ,rj. . . Ga; , ■ ■ G •: f: ' 1 ; ( ) 

. ' ■' ■■ v..v ■ • i 

. "... ' • ) 

: • • ■ .• :s Sti :4- {C) 

■ . ■ 






. f 


■ . 

. 


iif/nl 

. — rcA -. 

i ■ 


' - ■ j 


... ■ 


u 


' i:.j : if ,r: i ion ;.o :;: ' r ' • . O'x ;j 

: ' . j i!j .''0 3 _ ^ '.1 u ? 

' 


( $ ) 

( l> ) 




t nr 

















90 


- 6 - 

(TRUE - FUSE continued) 

Os) Regarding the pr oblems arising in an iridAxgjbyjLalized country, 
our own government has recentl y ma de laws that 


(1) guar pi tee every worker in an industry the same wage ( F ) 

(2) require an employer to take precautions 

to guard the safety of his workmen ( t ) 

(3) provide a worker with an income if he is not able 

to find work for a certain period ( T ) 

(4) compel the employer to agree to meet the demands 

of his workers, ( F ) 


(h) The problems that ari se betwecn employers and workers usually 

are c aused by the demands of the empl oyer that 

(1) the worker take part of his wages in goods 

produced in the factory where he works ( F J 

(2) the worker put in more hours of work per week ( jg ) 

(3) the worker continue to use older machines 

instead of newer ones ( F ) 

(4) the worker invest a part of his wages in the business, ( F ) 

VII* Re ad the folio win g p as s age : 

Wide Reading in the Social Sc ien c es 

"This problem for consideration in the social sciences is that of 
iwide reading. Many investigators have proved the value of reading 
beyond the textbook for added interest, for a broad background of 
social understanding, and for experiences in living that can be trans- 
'Hated into personal attitudes and social actions. Teachers of history 
commonly reatlize that the facts of the past are pretty lifeless until 
they have been made to live through man as he has travelled down the 
:ages. Hence the student is encouraged to read widely not only from 
informational sources but also from historical fiction, biography, 
essay, and poetry," (T.L, Harris, University of Wisconsin). 

From the foregoing passage prepare an outline showing the main 
ideas and their supporting ideas. Write your outline on this page. 















■J 

■■ 

. 





' 

, 

’ 


cM x%&vjsl 

■ 



. ... ■x (X) 


...• rio IX-'. ... 

> I..:.- 



. Q*x X:- 

■ 



oul Xr 



ox 


• J ;tox 




, ' •'. vv . v ■ • ■..... .. , : ) 


•: i r ~ 






■ 



■ 


...: : j I . 

( 

, 

• 








,. ■ Y •') .. ; ( p.b ■ : * u, X > 


j:".:.,.,. Xpnlb QruPlcfo'iri 

. r - ■- 


.i X'i X :■ ■ ■■:<» 


. 



>>..-X :i.t >' ' 



(x) 



(. ■ 




. 


'J-'fq x l/X'yov' oXX 

(■-,) 


i: Pi:bp,u: 'x i 


' 

) 


bo ro rov-o 

0' x;".' 




X : ni: ■ 3 .• 


■ '"vy :■ .p-j 

{ x) 





v'U 1 


o o ' X '.. 





■..* i XnIx>ox «■ X/ pi :io 


; 

• 


: "■ • ; . : . . - : . >; ‘ ■ . ■ . : : 1 : : . ■/: ...bJ 

' 

. ‘ : ’7 ' . ■ ’b /' rib v ”:.L x ' : ?v-■ v''.« ' X : : yxAxj Solo^C 

; 

tJ'r&r nMvlviXi:! o;, : : dox: qilt Xc :>.:•! 0: odi t At c-tfilas'i 7,lr ttsS] 

. ■ . [i . .■ 

■ 

. t ' :: r • 

;; ■ ■ ... .. ,.. .* 'X 

ii • '' . . . ■ ■ ... ' 

, 












APPENDIX C 

SAMPLE OF QUESTIONNAIRE 
SUBMITTED TO ALL STUDENTS 
AT THE COMPLETION 
OF THE FINAL TEST, 

DEC * 21, 1952. 
























92 


SOCIAL STUDIES 20, UNIT TWO 


NO. OF SUBJECTS TAKEN-. NAME-. 

EVENINGS BUSY PER WEEK (Clubs, jobs, etc.)-. Reg.Rm_ 

MINUTES HOME WORK PER WEEK.MINUTES SOCIAL STUDIES(Week) .. . 


SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE ON UNIT TWO 

ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS AS FULLY AND AS CLEARLY AS YOU 
CAN. THE ANSWERS WILL BE USED TO EVALUATE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF 
THIS UNIT. WRITE YOUR ANSWERS NEATLY IN THE SPACES PROVIDED. 

IF YOU WISH TO WRITE FULLER EXPLANATIONS, USE THE BLANK SPACE 
AT THE END, NUMBERING YOUR STATEMENTS ACCORDING TO THE QUESTIONS. 


1. Regarding the SUBJECT MATTER of this unit: 

(a) Did you find this unit more interesting than Unit One?.... 

Why? ... 

(b) Which topic of this unit did you find most interesting?... 

Why? . 

(c) Which topic of the unit was of least interest to you?. 

Why? . 

(d) In which topic did the material studied refer most closely 

to your own experience, or to the experiences and interests 
of others in whom you are interested? Explain briefly if 
you can.. 

(e) What else would you have liked to study in this connection? 


2. The PRESENTATION of the Lessons of the Unit: 

(a) What did you like about the method that was used in your 

class? . 

(b) In what way could this method have been improved? . 


(c) Which parts of the study did you like best? Indicate your 
preference by using 1 for the part you liked best, 2 for 
the second, etc. 

overview—• • ® •; study—....; presentation—...., writing 
notes-....; outside class reading-....; summary of unit-...; 

t e st — • ... 


























93 


S. S. 20, SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE, PAGE 2 

(d) Check the statement below that you believe to be most 
correct: 

(i) Too little time was allowed for the study of the unit., 

(ii) The time allowed for the study of the unit was adequate. 

(iii) Too much time was allowed for the study of the unit. 

(e) What was the chief difficulty you had in understanding or 

retaining the ideas expressed in the presentation of the 
unit? Why? . 


3. Your STUDY METHODS followed in this Unit: 

(a) Estimate and indicate clearly the reading you did on this 
unit from the following sources: 

(i) School texts-... 

(ii) Public library-.. 

(iii) Encyclopedias, etc.-. 

(iv) What discussions did you have at home or elsewhere about 
the unit?... 

(b) Did you have adequate time for your own assignment or 

Study? . (If not, explain why) . 

(c) How much time outside class did you spend on this unit?... 

(d) In a clear sentence, indicate the method of study that you 

use:... 


4. Results of This Unit Study Regarding Your IDEAS AND ATTITUDES 

(a) How has your attitude toward social and economic problems 
been affected? 


(b) What have you learned regarding these problems? 


(c) Has this study had any effect on your ideas regarding 
vocations? .Explain-. 


(d) What have you learned that you consider will be of perma¬ 
nent value to you? .... 


(e) At the beginning of this questionnaire you indicated the 

number of subjects you are studying this year. In order of 
preference, where among them does Social Studies 20 stand, 
considering it from the point of view of interest, experi¬ 
ence, knowledge of society, and usefulness to you in pre¬ 
paring for your vocation? Indicate by using the number 1, 
2, 3, etc., and placing it in the blank space here- . 

(USE THIS SPACE FOR FURTHER EXPLANATIONS) 


(YOU MAY WRITE ON THE BACK) 

























APPENDIX D 


A RECORD OF THE DAILY PROGRESS 

OF UNIT II, 

SOCIAL STUDIES 20, 

WITH BOTH GROUPS OF STUDENTS 

FROM THE PRE-TEST ON NOV. 21, 1952 

UNTIL 

THE FINAL TEST ON DEC. 19, 1952. 




95 


Date 

Activities Carried on 

With the Two Groups 

November 

1952 

Classes A and C 

Classes B and D 

21 

Writing pre-test 

Writing pre-test 

26 

Distributed first page of unit outline and gave 
overview of unit to both groups 

27 

Distributed pages 2 and 3 < 

of outline to all 


Began lecture method 

Set up Committees of 
four and began choosing 
topics 

2$ 

Taught Topic I, 
finished to I (e) 

Finished choosing topics 
Began study in committee 

December 

2 

Short review 

Taught to I (i) 

Classes working on 
topics, teacher advising 

3 

Finished Topic I 

Taught 11(a) and (b) 

Committees preparing 
work for presentation j 

4 

Topic II, 

Sub-topic 1, all 

Committee reports on 
Topic 1(a) to (f); good 
interest. 

5 

Topic II, 

Sub-topic 2(a) 

Reports and discussion; 
finished I, began pre¬ 
paration of Topic II. 

a 

Topic II, 

Sub-topic 2 (b)-(d) 

Reports and discussions, 
II, 1 (a)-(c) 

9 

Review: questions II, 

2 (e) - (f) 

Committees study, then 
report on II, 2 (a)-(d) 

10 

Finished II 

Began III 

Committees report and j 
discuss II, 2(c)—(g) 

11 

III, 1 - 2(c) 

Group study; report 
and discussion 

12 

Finished to III, 

Sub-topic 2(e) 

Finished reports to 

Topic III, 2(e), except 

1 (b) 

15 

, j 

Finished to IV, 2(a) 

j 

I 

Class reports to Topic 
IV, 3 






























































96 


Date 

Activities Carried 

on With the Two Groups 

Dec. 

Classes A and C 

Classes B and D 

16 

IV, 2(b) to 4 

Class reports and discus¬ 
sion to end of Topic IV 

17 

Taught Topic V 
(Application only) 

Discussion, reports on V 
(Application only; to be 
covered in detail in Unit 
V) 

18 

Summary of inventors 

Committees wrote summary 
of inventors on black¬ 
board 

19 

Final Test 
(9.05 - 9-40 a.m.) 

Final Test 
(9.05 - 9.40 a.m.) 


Answered questionnaires 

in regular class periods 





























APPENDIX E 


INSTRUCTIONS TO SUPERVISING TEACHERS CONCERNING THE PROCEDURE 
TO BE FOLLOWED IN CONDUCTING THE PRE-TEST AND FINAL TEST 


"Mr. McNaught 
Mr. Stratte 
Mr. Olson 


Re General Test in Social Studies 20 


Please allow the students 35 minutes in which to do the test. 

If anyone wishes to hand his paper in earlier, he may do so. 

Please see that every paper is handed in. 

Try to avoid any communication between students about the 
paper or about the meaning of any question. 

Encourage the students to do the best they can, as it is 
important in arriving at a fair estimate of their ability to 
read, to reason, and to remember. 

I wish to thank you sincerely for your co-operation in this. 


L. C. Mix " 


PROCEDURE FOLLOWED IN ASSIGNING STUDENTS TO ROOMS FOR THE 
WRITING OF THE PRE-TEST AND THE FINAL TEST. 


Students 1 Surnames 
(Initial Letters) 


Assigned to 


Supervising 

Teacher 


A to H 


Room 13 


Mr. McNaught 


I to Pa- 


Room 9 


Mr. Stratte 


Assembly Hall 


Pe- to Z 


Mr. Olson 


















' 


- 

- 

- 

or; ■ • /•. t 

. 

c 





r 






■ 
















APPENDIX F 


EXCERPTS FROM STUDENTS T ANSWERS OR COMMENTS REGARDING THE TWO 
METHODS OF INSTRUCTION, AS GIVEN IN THE QUESTIONNAIRE 


(1) From students in Classes A and C 
(Taught by the Lecture Method) 

Question: Tt What did you like about the method that was used 
in your class?” 

Answers: 

”It held my interest and did not get monotonous”. 

”1 could follow it with the outline”. 

”The way we got through it, and it didn’t drag out”. 

”Very concise, to the point, not lingering too long on one 
topic”. 

”The fact that it was explained to us”. 

”1 liked it very much; the lessons were presented, (and) 
you could ask questions”. 

’’Notes were easy to make because of the outline”. 

’’The method used was very interesting and clear”. 

”The teacher giving the unit instead of the pupils because the 
teacher knows how to present the topic”. 

’’The thing that I liked was that we did no work”. 

’’The step by step explanation of this unit”. 

”We took notes we knew were correct because given by the 
teacher”. 

yi like discussion or story telling”. 

’’When the teacher presents the work you are sure all the mate¬ 
rial is covered and it is explained in a way you can remember 
it”. 

”It was interesting and not too much work for each person”. 

”1 thought it was very interesting. I learned a lot through 
listening.” 










. 

■ 

- 

■ 

. ■' • ' ? 

«•' c 

. 

. 

- 

. 

. 

. 


' 

* 

. 

- 





99 


"We seemed to get a clearer picture by this method". 
"Nothing”. 

"Details were explained well". 

"The discussion". 

(2) From Students in Glasses B and D 

(Taught by the Socialized Recitation Method) 

Question: What did you like about the method that was used 
in your class? 

Answers: 

"Good practice giving reports in class." 

"It was interesting." 

"I think the method used was very quick and efficient." 

"It was informal and interesting to do." 

"The way the various topics brought about the interest of 
the class." 

"Each one had to do and give a report, which made it more 
interesting." 

"Short, concise reports made individually." 

"I liked the discussion part very much." 

"It was easy." 

"This is a good method; good practice." 

"It was good speaking and research training." 

"The co-operation between group members." 

"The reports given." 

"The writing of the report." 

"I liked the discussion in our groups." 

"Reports and summary given by the students." 

"I liked the way it was done. We had our choice." 

"You had to look up some of your own material instead of the 
teacher telling you." 







* 















* 


* 












. 





















* 










c'" 

. 











- 


* 

o 

- 







* 






4 








100 


"It gave everybody a chance to work together." 

"I liked the way we were divided into groups." 

"All the students had to do their share of work." 

"One person didn T t have to find information about each topic." 
"The co-operation of committees." 

"I liked working in groups." 

"The reports went quickly." 

"Very little-~I found it hard to understand doing it report 
method." 

"Everybody in the group does not do his part, so I don’t like 
the group method." 

"There are often slackers." 

"I didn’t care for it too much. The pupils didn’t seem to put 
it into your head as well as the teacher might have." 

"I didn’t." 

"I did not like it." 

"I didn’t like it, because in groups where you didn’t work on 
the report you don’t learn much." 

"I didn’t!" 

"Did not like having group reports." 

"Nothing." 

"Nothing—I did not like this way of presentation." 

"Giving reports." 

"I don’t like it. Hard to learn by it." 

"I didn’t like this method." 

"I did not like it too well." 

(3) Suggestions for Improvement in Method 

(a) From students in Classes A and G 

"Have the pupils make reports." 


"More Class drill." 







* 

. 

. 

„ 

- 

. 

* 

■ C ' 

■ 

« 

. 

. 

/ 

- . 

i 








— 






. 

. 




* 

- 















"Give more time." 

"I don’t think it could have been improved." 

(b) From students in Classes B and D 
"More time given." 

"More class discussion." 

"Individual assignments and individual reports." 


"Taught by the teacher." 




















