


0 1620 3416649 4 














































©X MB1IS 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/fourwaysinmodernOOjall 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FOUR WAYS IN MODERN PHILOSOPHY 

A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
m PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


fry 

WILLIAM JALLEP 


EDMONTON, AJjBERTA 


March, 1950 




t 


"Thesis 

\q$so 

ff 


University of Alberta 


Faculty of Arts and Science 
Department of Philosophy 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled 

FOUR WAYS IN MODERN PHILOSOPHY 
submitted by William Jallep, B # A., in partial fulfilment 
of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts* 


Date 




































, , 


















C 0 NT EH T S 


Introduction 

BERG-SON*S CREATIVE EVOLUTION Page 

The Intuitive Method 3 

Intuition of Pure Duration 6 

Intuition of Elan Vital and the 

Meaning of Intelligence 10 

Instinct and Intelligence 15 

Creative Evolution 23 

Evaluation of Bergson 1 s Intuitive Method 26 

WHITEHEAD'S PHILOSOPHY OF ORGANISM 

Whitehead and Bergson 41 

Difficulties in Interpreting Whitehead 42 

Extent and Aim of Whitehead's Philosophy 44 

Critique of the 17th Century 

Science and Philosophy 49 

Underlying Concepts in the Philosophy of Organism 57 
The Realm of Possibility and the Eternal Objects 61 
"Feelings” and Prehensions 65 

Whitehead 1 s Cosmology 71 

Ethical and Religious Implications 77 

Critical Estimate 81 


PRAGMATISM AND THE INSTRUMENTAL METHOD OF DEWEY 
American Pragmatism - Historical Factors 


94 





Reconstruction in Philosophy 99 
Changing Conceptions 105 
Science and Philosophy 118 
Experience and Reason 124 
Meaning of Reality 129 
What is Truth? 133 
Logic, Truth and Morals 136 

PHILOSOPHY OF LOGICAL POSITIVISM 

Historical Factors 147 
Object of Philosophy 148 
Logical Positivism of Ayer 151 
The Method of Philosophical Analysis 163 
The a priori 166 
Interpretation of Ethics and Theology 173 
The Problem of Knowledge 177 
Logical Positivism as a Philosophic Method 179 

DEWEY, WHITEHEAD AHD LOGICAL POSITIVISM 184 






Introduction 

We are living in an age when certainty is 
less certain than it has ever been before# The con¬ 
fusion and crisis in our practical affairs are reflec¬ 
ted in our ways of thinking. The sure facts of science 
are turning out to be only vague generalities; the laws 
are nothing more than mere descriptions. The recent 
developments in our physical sciences have shown that 
the universe can no longer be represented by a* mechani¬ 
cal model. Such models can only represent things as 
being in space and time, but this does not appear to be 
the real nature of the physical universe as seen by 
science. It becomes more and more evident that science 
can never become the study of the so-called realities; 
it can only investigate our methods of inquiry. In 
consequence any philosophy which attempts a finalist 
systematization of all phases of our experience is 
bound to meet with failure and disappoitment. The once 
positive truth of arbitrary authority has dissolved into 
many hypothetical assumptions of science. The purposive 
drive in the philosophic thinking of the past has dis¬ 
integrated into countless trends with no unified obje¬ 
ctive. The result is a certain restlessness of the 











wO,. v - 




.. o 

* 

. 

, 

■ 

, 

.. 

. . 

, 

0 j ■'O' j 1 y • ' 

, 


* 











human spirit, a striving for something which is not 
there; and the motives dissipate themselves in vain 
aspirations and idle fancies. 

It is in view of this distracted state of 
affairs that we should critically siirvey the main 
approaches to philosophical thinking of today, and 
try to discover at least some ideas which may he of 
immediate value in the reorientation of our perspec¬ 
tives. Perhaps these ideas as partial truths may 
eventually serve the purpose of guiding lights in the 
life activities of man. 


March, 1950. 


W. Jallep 






































« 



















3 


BERGSON'S CREATIVE EVOLUTION 
The Intuitive Method 

It is generally admitted that of all the 
thinkers of the present century none had stirred popu¬ 
lar imagination to the same extent as did Bergson. 

Others had, in one way or another, made a great impres¬ 
sion through their influence upon philosophic circles 
or upon individual philosophers, hut only Bergson could 
claim a wide and most heterogenious audience. The popu¬ 
larity of his philosophic method may he attributed to 
its emotional appeal. It is on this ground that Bergson 
has been repeatedly criticized as an anti-intellectualist. 

Having been early influenced by the German 
romanticism, Bergson distinctly shows this influence 
throughout the entire development of his philosophic 
approach. His early studies in psychology and biology 
predisposed him to consider the universe mainly from the 
viewpoint of these two sciences. The early part of the 
century had witnessed great advances, especially in the 
field of biology. Consequently, just as Whitehead in the 
early twenties tried to make sense out of the new notions 
of physics with respect to space, time and matter, so did 
Bergson in the first decade of this century try to make 
sense of the new notions of change and evolution. There 




, 

< • * 

- 

, . 

* 

, 

< 

; 

' 

. 












'4 


was a pressing need for a revision of the general ideas 
of the nature of the universe. This need arose out of 
the rapid development of the ‘biological sciences. His 
object was to carry this revision along the lines of the 
new scientific concepts, and to develop a metaphysical 
■background for modern science. 

Bergson 1 s method is a rebellion against the 
dogmatic rigidity of rationalistic as well as materia¬ 
listic systems. His philosophy of intuition cannot be 
regarded as a system; nor can it be viewed as an exact 
account of the ultimate nature of the universe. It is 
rather a process, a movement. The character of his 
philosophy is the character of the universe which it 
conceive^; a neverending process, a stream of perpetual 
change. A philosophical system as such, forever is, but 
the Bergsonian universe never actually is, but is con¬ 
stantly becoming something else. Therefore his philo¬ 
sophy which explains such a universe is developmental, 
not finalistic. Perhaps this was another reason why 
it had such tremendous appeal at the time when human 
thought strived so much to break away from rigidity and 
finalism. 

Let us now briefly review Bergson’s central 
thesis oefore proceeding with more detailed discussion 













Li v; x r j; v sr;:, $s- v.o ! i . ,■ -Mi4, XMOxxx;,. :vx 

„ 


, 






„ 


; 

t ’"■ 














"... X J 




. : :; .1 : ; :.... / X ' ... •' .. ■■ - < X. ‘ ■■ 








5 


of the intuitive method. In the first place, the only 
reality recognized by Bergson is the flux of change. 

She universe, being a stream of perpetual change cannot 
consist of a 11 something” which changes, for then it 
would remain the same throughout the various states of 
change. Change cannot be conceived as consisting of 
separate phases or states. It is continuous, and in 
so far as matter is concerned it is impossible to arrive 
at something stable of which we could say that it is 
TI something” which changes. Thus, reality does not 
consist of solid matter, nor does it consist of thinking 
mind, as the extreme idealists would have it. It con¬ 
sists of living, creative evolution. 

”In vain, moreover, shall we seek beneath the change 
the thing which changes: it is always provisionally, 
and in order to satisfy our imagination, that we 
attach the movement to a mobile.” (Creative Evolution, 
p. 327) 

Such is Bergson T s conception of the universe - 
one continuous flow in the process of living; and evolu¬ 
tion is the movement of this flow. The universe then 
becomes a vital surge or elan vital, without beginning 
or end. This is the underlying concept in his philoso¬ 
phy. Ho beginning can be assumed, for such assumption 
would contradict the concept of change: a beginning 
would imply something which was before the elan vital, 








i 

c 

: «' 

, 










- 




































6 


that is, something other than change. 

Intuition of Pure Duration 

Bergson T s arguments for the universality of 
change involve the consideration of the function of the 
intellect. It is in this connection that he has been 
often regarded as an anti-inte11ectualist, or as one 
who completely forsakes intellect for a purely mystical 
intuition. Such is not the case, however. He considers 
intellect as having evol/ved in the long evolutionary 
process for the purpose of action which we call life. 

This view in no way depreciates the function of the 
intellect. It merely points out that in order to be 
effective as an instrument in life activities, the intel¬ 
lect, by cutting up the flow of change into apparently 
static objects, misrepresents reality. It is able to 
interpret only the discontinuous and static objects in 
space and time. It is unable to envisage the continuous 
flow of becoming, and therefore represents evolution as 
a series of states. Consequently intellect cannot give 
us ^ true interpretation of life. It has given us such 
products as mathematics and logic, but what do these tell 
us of life? And since intellect is the main instrument 
in our scientific endeavors, science too, cannot tell us 
anything about the living process. 





♦ 

, 

\ 

* 

« 

* 

* 

■ , 

. 

, < 1 

. 







7 


How then can we have knowledge of reality? 
Bergson 1 s answer is that the only faculty by means of 
which we can know reality is intuition. From his 
description of intuition we can see that it is closely 
allied with instinct. Instinctive behavior is such 
that it makes us become one with the changing flow of 
reality. He speaks of instinct as a form of sympathy, 
and intuition is simply instinct which has become aware 
of itself. Intuitive knowledge, therefore, is of the 
nature of aesthetic appreciation, such as one experien¬ 
ces when viewing a beautiful painting or listening to 
a symphony. There is a certain wholeness to this expe¬ 
rience, and one becomes part of it, or one becomes the 
wholeness itself. It is in this manner, through intui¬ 
tion, that we enter into the continuous flow of life. 

Then again Bergson speaks of intuition as a 
kind of knowledge, common in various degrees to all li¬ 
ving things: a simple form of consciousness. This means 
only that from the form of consciousness common to man, 
he infers some form of consciousness in all life. 
However, his logical right to make such an inference may 
be questioned. 

Intellect, as already indicated, is a practi¬ 
cal faculty, and reality as represented by it is not a 






















i 







c 








' o 1 ' 


1 , u 







* 






,1 : 



8 


flux of change, hut a collection of static objects 
extended in space and time. Having evolved as an instru¬ 
ment of action, the intellect serves our practical purpo¬ 
ses by cutting across the living flow of reality and by 
carving out of it material objects. It segments the 
flow of change into separate points, movements and inter¬ 
vals. These segments of space and time do not inform us 
of the real flow of duration. The entire operation 
performed by the intellect is like that of the motion 
picture camera: it takes a vast number of slightly 
varying still photographs irhieh in themselves do not 
show any movement. It is only through Intuition that 
we can become aware of our own participation in the life 
of continuous change. 

Bergson regards consciousness and reality as 

being of the same sort, since both are a continuous 

change. He thus identifies the two. 

"But instinct and intelligence, we have also said, 
stand out from the same background, which, for want 
of a better name, we may call consciousness in gene¬ 
ral, and which must be coextensive with universal 
life.” (Creative Evolution, p. £04) 

Closely bound up with his doctrine of intuition 
is his treatment of time. According to him, the mathema¬ 
tical or scientific concept of time has been imposed by 
the intellect upon material things. It has introduced 





. •• 

« 

0 , 

' 














: 





, 


■ 





* 

t 

X ' 

. 









9 


■units of time in the same manner as it has carved out 
■units of space in the form of objects and distances. 

This sort of time is necessary for the practical pur¬ 
poses of action, but it does not form part of reality. 

The flow of reality knows no such time as that of 
succession of moments. Reality is duration; and the 
intuition of life is the intuition of duration. This 
is Bergson J s concept of time which is an essential 
corollary to his concept of intuition, 

n For our duration is not merely one instant repla¬ 
cing another; if it were, there vsrould never be any¬ 
thing but the present - no prolonging of the past 
into the actual, no evolution, no concrete duration. 
Duration is the continuous progress of the past 
which gnaws into the future and which swells as it 
advances.” (Ibid., p; 7) 

The intellect can know only common-sense or scientific 
time. True duration can be experienced only by intuition. 
When we become one with the universal flow of life, we 
also become one with duration as it pulsates through the 
universe as a whole. Or in Bergson 1 s own words, ”Pure 
duration is the form which our conscious states assume 
when our ego lets itself live, when it refrains from 
separating its present state from its former states.” 

The various states ?/hich are known to the intellect as 
separate and succeeding, melt into each other and form 
an organic whole without any past, present or future. 




10 


It is in memory that duration sho?/s itself 
most clearly, for it is here that the past survives in 
the present. 

"These memories, messengers from the unconscious, 
remind us of what we are dragging behind us unawares. 
But, even though we may have no distinct idea of it, 
we feel vaguely that our past remains present to us. I? 
(Ibid., p. 7) 

Intuition of Elan Vital and the Meaning of Intelligence 

The classical theories of evolution were 
inclined toward scientific materialism; they all con¬ 
ceived evolutionary process on mechanistic lines. Con¬ 
sequently there was no need for these theories to postu¬ 
late the existence of mind or purpose in order to explain 
the reason for the evolutionary process, 

Bergson questions the mechanistic conception 
of the universe. He contends that all biological pheno¬ 
mena, as well as the phenomena of the universe as a whole 
must have a hormic explanation which implies a freedom 
of choice of means by which the end may be attained. 

Mere adaptation to environment and chance survival of the 
fittest are insufficient reasons to explain variations 
and sudden mutations in species. In a sense the universe 
is indeterministic. Evolution is truly a creative process, 
in the sense of an artistic creation: there is an impulse 
or an undefined want which exists beforehand. Nor is 












. 

: •' 

















' 











' 



. J A 









' 






















.. 

■ 








; 








11 


there any definable objective in this process. The out¬ 
come is therefore unpredictable: there is no determinism. 

The question of freedom had always been one 
of most vital interest to all philosophers. Is activity, 
which to us appears free, really free in the sense of not 
being determined? In other words, is there an unpredic¬ 
table element? Approaching the problem from the viewpoint 
of creativity, Bergson shows that the universe is an inces¬ 
sant creation. When we raise the problem about our own 
freedom, we are actually wondering if our activity is a 
process of creativity, or if creativity is impossible. 

The problem of determinism as opposed to free¬ 
dom of the will arises out of our common-sense view of 
reality: a view of objects in time and space. On the other 
hand, when we see that life and consciousness are in dura¬ 
tion and cannot be measured at all, v/hen we see that con¬ 
scious states are qualities and not quantities, not inde¬ 
pendent and distinct from each other, but interpenetrating 
and permeating the living individual, the problem of 
determinism disappears. Then we can see free will as 
the creative power of the individual. The scientific 
view of life as consisting of individual states and actions 
must inevitably lead to the conclusion that these actions 
are determined, either by causality or by teleology. But 
the intuitive view of life shows it as indivisible into 




* ' 

t 

















. 

. . 

» - • t 








12 


states and actions. Therefore when we see it intuitively 
as a unified creative whole, we realize its freedom. 

If adaptation to environment had been the 
principle of evolution, argues Bergson, the evolutionary 
process would have ceased thousands of years ago, for 
even in those remote ages countless species were already 
adapted to their environrnent.Thus he postulates a prin¬ 
ciple which must be driving the organisms to greater and 
greater efficiency. This postulate, however, does not 
solve the problem, for the question still remains; Why 
should a little hydra be tiunhappy” in its present state 
of adaptation? Why must there be greater and greater 
efficiency? Since Bergson claims no beginning or end 
for his creative process, he cannot claim that there is 
any evolutionary change, for the indeterminate elan 
appears to have an objective in this creative process, 
the objective being greater and greater efficiency. 

On the basis of this argument life is a prin¬ 
ciple of chance; the elan vital could as 'well have 
flowered out in entirely differBht forms and different 
channels than the ones it has followed. If it does not 
direct the evolutionary process into definite and deter¬ 
mined forms, it has no bearing on evolution. It is true 
that Darwinian principles do not explain the why of evo¬ 
lution, but neither does the postulated elan vital. 




13 


Therefore, in pointing out the weaknesses in the mecha¬ 
nistic explanation of life, Bergson leaves himself open 
to criticism, for the continuous impulsion of dlan vital 
appears to be in a definite direction. If there is a 
direction, it is to that extent determined. 

It is in his treatment of the self that 
Bergson aims to show the freedom of the will. The intel¬ 
lect views the world as a vast collection of isolated 
objects and events. When science studies physical events, 
it sees them as isolated units which are tied and related 
by external laws of causation. In the same manner psycho¬ 
logy views the self, as a collection of conscious states 
succeeding one another. Scientific interpretation of the 
world is therefore deterministic. According to Bergson 
such interpretation is true only of actions taken in iso¬ 
lation, which is a false intellectual abstraction. The 
life of the individual, however, is not a succession of 
changing states. When it is considered as a continuous 
flow it is seen to be free and undetermined, for there is. 
no action then which comes before, or follows another. 
There is accordingly no enduring self which undergoes 
successive changes. The assumption of an Ego is therefore 
illusory. The Ego and the things in time and space are 
conceptual mechanisms for the purpose of action; in actual 
reality there is only change. 






14 


Bergson 1 s evaluation of science is based 
primarily on his consideration of it as a useful intel¬ 
lectual instrument for the purpose of practical activity. 

It does not furnish us with the knowledge of the reality 
of change. 

"Positive science is, in fact, a 'work of pure intellect. 
... Now, when the intellect undertakes the study of 
life, it necessarily treats the living like the inert, 
applying the same forms to this new object, ...But the 
truth we thus arrive at becomes altogether relative to 
our faculty of action. It is no more than a symbolic 
verity." (Ibid., p. 214) 

One of the basic conceptions of science is that of causa¬ 
lity. But in the nature of life and consciousness there 
is that which is essentially free will; it knows no causa¬ 
lity. Science extends its vie?/ of causality to the living 
world of consciousness, thought and will. But intuition 
shows us an entirely different vie?/ of life; it is an 
incessant becoming in which there can be no prediction, 
because no event is ever repeated - it is a continuous 
new creation. 


It is unfortunate that Bergson has no appro¬ 
priate language at his disposal in order to present his 
views with greater precision and clirity. Por example, 
such terms as "new creation", unless employed in an enti¬ 
rely ne?/ sense, are contradictory of his general position 
of continuity or duration. To begin with, duration does 
indeed imply the appearance of novelty. But besides this 







15 


mere tautology there appears a contradiction in Bergson 1 s 
critique of the scientific view of the world. That which 
is novel intrinsically implies something which is no longer 
novel, something which is unlike the newly created. This 
distinction introduces at once the elements or concepts 
of the space and time of science. Hence, Bergson encoun¬ 
ters difficulties in trying to escape from these scientific 
concepts. 

Instinct and Intelligence 

"Now, since instinct is nowhere so developed as in the 
insect world, ... it may be said that the whole evolu¬ 
tion of the animal kingdom, apart from retrogressions 
toward vegetative life, has taken place on two diver¬ 
gent paths, one of which led to instinct and the other 
to intelligence." (Ibid., p. 149) 

On numerous occasions Bergson seems to intro¬ 
duce a sharp distinction between instinct and intelligence. 
It may be argued from the standpoint of the evolutionary 
process that he has overstated the distinction between 
these two functions. Instinct and intelligence are not 
two entirely distinct psychological functions; they are 
only two aspects in which mental process may be considered. 
All mental functions are both instinctive and intelligent; 
instinctive to the extent that they are determined by 
innate mental structure, and intelligent to the extent 
that they are progressively adaptive to the changing envi¬ 
ronmental circumstances. Man, for example, in whom 






. 

X t 












■ 































• 





. 


* 






16 


intelligence predominates, has not completely abandoned 
instinct; and in the lower animals many types of behavior 
for which no instinctive mechanisms have been provided, 
have to be learned. 

Having separated instinct from intelligence 

on the level of human beings, Bergson proceeds to discuss 

the function of each. From this discussion we learn that 

instinct is very closely related to intuition. In fact, 

intuition is a disinterested self-conscious instinct. 

I? Instinct is sympathy... But it is to the very inward¬ 
ness of life that intuition leads us - by intuition I 
mean instinct that has become disinterested, self- 
conscious, capable of reflecting upon its object and 
of enlarging it indefinitely.” (Ibid., p. 194) 

Instinct and intellect are two modes of know¬ 
ing on the part of living organisms. It is evident here 
that Bergson ! s concept of knowledge is absolutely new as 
compared with those of the preceding schools of European 
philosophy. Can we speak of instinct as a form of know¬ 
ledge, unless by knowledge we mean a form of intuition, 
or a mystic feeling? In animals lower in development than 
man instinct is predominant. It is assumed, nevertheless, 
that there is some lowly form of intellect even in these 
organisms. In the human species, in the process of evolu¬ 
tionary development, instinct gave way to intellect. 

Knowledge which is based on instinct does not 
require experience. We find this condition best exempli- 





17 


fied in insects. For lack of a letter word Bergson is 
obliged to use the word knowledge, but his elaboration 
of it in pointing out the ways in which instinetire know¬ 
ledge differs from intellectual knowledge, still leaves 
one perplexed over what is really meant by instinctive 
knowledge. Bergson calls it intuition, and reiterates 
again and again that intuition is the only knowledge of 
the really real. 

Life is one vast, continuous movement, and the 
only reality is duration - the life itself - which is 
change. Space and inert matter in it, as conceived by 
science, simply do not exist. In this connection his posi¬ 
tion may be justified, for even science has finally reached 
a point where the conception of the solid parts of an atom 
has been replaced by that of electro-magnetic charges - 
"matter” is just not there. In the continuous movement of 
life the intellect turns attention to those phases of the 
movement which are of immediate interest to our action. 

The rest of the movement appears to the intellect as retar¬ 
ding the advance or even falling downward, just as of two 
trains moving in the same direction at diffierent rates of 
speed, the one travelling more slowly will appear to an 
observer in the other to be moving in the opposite direc¬ 
tion. So, carried along as part of this movement of life, 






18 


we view the movement about us and see it as inert matter. 

It is in this manner that Bergson introduces 
us to the notion that intellect does not give us true 
knowledge of reality. It gives us merely a sense of re la- 
tionship between the world and our survival needs. This 
apect of reality implies limitations imposed by the intel¬ 
lect. Only through intuition can we know reality as it is 
Intuition is the consciousness of life that v/e have in 
living; we can know life only by living it, and not merely 
by analyzing it intellectually. Intuition is a method of 
fusing consciousness and life so that they become one. 

The entire problem of instinct versus intel¬ 
lect becomes easier to understand if we approach it by way 
of considering consciousness. Purely instinctive behavior 
presupposes complete absence of consciousness; that is, 
absence of awareness of the self as the subject of this 
behavior and the awareness of the objective world to which 
the self reacts. In other words, consciousness is the 
awareness of, or the insight into the relationship between 
the self and the not-self. Such awareness is most highly 
leveloped in man. However, the general consciousness of 
which Beggson speaks, and 'which is synonymous with life 
itself, is not the consciousness common to each individual 
This general consciousness is instinctive knowledge; it is 




19 


intuition. 

"For want of a letter word we have called it consci¬ 
ousness. But we do not mean the narrowed conscious¬ 
ness that functions in each of us. Our own conscious¬ 
ness is the consciousness of a certain living being, 
placed in a certain point of space." (Ibid., p, 259) 

Thus we see that Bergson regards instinct 
as not entirely devoid of consciousness. Here he employs 
the term in its most general sense, meaning a certain 
amount of awareness. Perhaps man ! s intellect is incapable 
of comprehending the kind of consciousness which is pre¬ 
sent in insects, claims Bergson, Using the common meaning 
of the term, he would say that instinctive knowledge is 
mainly unconscious, but it still remains knowledge. Intel¬ 
lectual knowledge is essentially conscious. 

Why does Bergson call instinct, knowledge? 

He does so because in his philosophy of duration true 
knowledge is possible only when the intellect abandons 
itself to impulse, and thus allows the individual to become 
one with the living flux. This process is a kind of sym¬ 
pathy which issues in an instinctive apprehension of the 
life impulse itself. Hence the criticism directed against 
Bergson as being an anti-intellectualist. 

He presupposes some kind of mentality not only 
in lower organisms, but even in plants. Consequently since 
there is mentality, there must be knowledge, even if it is 
of the lower order of instinct. But by ?rtiat logical reason 




























' 








. 










« 










• 









• 


























. 
























. 


, 

, 






20 


can we endow these lowly organisms with a kind of consci¬ 
ousness of mentality which is entirely human? By clai¬ 
ming that instinct is purely a psychical activity, 

Bergson contradicts his general concept of the flow of 
life. It is neither psychical nor physiological; there 
is no sense in trying to bifurcate the activity. In this 
respect his philosophy may be considered as dualistic, 
with life on the one hand and matter on the other. Life 
is a vast vital impulse which tends upward; matter is the 
residue of the impacts of life - it is a downward tendency. 
There is thus a double movement of ascent and descent. In 
the evolutionary process these two movements meet and 
grapple with each other. At least such is the vie?/ of life 
and matter as they appear to immediate observation. 

The intelligent view of things is a distortion 
of reality. It does not folio?/, hoY/ever, that intelligence 
should be completely renounced. The task of philosophy is 
to bring instinct back to intelligence, and make it function 
as it used to function in the primitive human beings and 
as it still functions in lower organisms. That is, philo¬ 
sophy should make use of intuition in grasping the simpli¬ 
city of reality; it should make it possible for us to live 
life, and not merely to be its spectators. 

The basic question which Bergson asks is the 
same as the one asked by Kant: Is it possible to have a 





SI 


science above all sciences, a science which would give 
us the knowledge of reality in itself? Is it possible 
to have a true metaphysic? Kant J s answer was that such 
knowledge is impossible; it is impossible to know things- 
in-themselves* This conclusion led to the relativity of 
knowledge; and if knowledge is relative, then there is 
no true knowledge. Bergson studied the anomaly of Kant*s 
theory and concluded that a theory of knowledge must be 
part and parcel of the theory of life, for knowledge is 
but the outcome of life, and exists for life. He there- 
fore deviated from TI the Kantian distinction between the 
matter of knowledge and its form”. Nevertheless it is 
possible to interpret Bergson ! s "duration” or ”the process 
of becoming" as just another name for Kant ! s "noumenal 
world” or "the thing-in-itself”. 

Intuition then is the faculty by means of 

which we become one with the moving flow of life, and in 

this manner know life. The best example of intuition at 

work appears in the creations of great artists. Sometimes 

this intuitive element is called genius. 

"That an effort of this kind is not impossible, is 
proved by the existence in man of an aesthetic faculty 
along with normal perception.” (Ibid., p. 194) 

Men of genius have a power of penetrating deeper into 
reality, a power of entering by sympathy into their subject. 
In this connection Bergson cites an example of a symphony. 






























- 












. 










■ 


- 
















- 




, 




, 


, 

' 








; 














22 


When we enjoy a symphony we do so "because we allow our¬ 
selves to enter into it. We experience it as a whole; 
we actually live it. 

"As to the original theme, it is everywhere and 
nowhere. It is in vain that we try to express it 
in terms of any idea: it must have been, originally, 
felt rather than thought ? (Ibid., p. 189) » 

Bergson*s concern with the perennial philo¬ 
sophic problem of knowledge takes him into a lengthy 
analysis of the concept of "nothing". According to him 
this is a false concept. "To represent *Nothing 1 , we 
must either imagine it or conceive it." Since Nothing 
cannot be an image, (for then it would have to be an 
image of something), it must be only an idea, let us 
suppose that the mind represents 

"any existing thing whatever as annihilated; - but if 
the annihilation of anything by the mind is an opera¬ 
tion whose mechanism implies that It works on a part 
of the whole, and not on the whole Itself, then the 
extension of such an operation to the totality of things 
becomes self-contradictory and absurd, and the idea of 
an annihilation of everything presents the same chara¬ 
cter as that of a square circle: it is not an idea, it 
is only a word." (Ibid., p. 305) 

When we try to imagine nothing, what we are really imagi¬ 
ning is the absence of something, but our idea is still of 
that something which we imagine to be absent. On this 
ground Bergson argues that the living reality is absolute, 
and its not-being cannot be imagined. The questions 
about nothingness, creation, etc., which creep into our 




















- 


. 

: 


. 




























23 


thinking, are therefore false and irrelevant; they have 
no answers, 

"Now, if we could prove that the idea of the naught, 
in the sense in which we take it when we oppose it to 
that of existence, is a pseudo-idea, the problems that 
are raised around it would become pseudo-problems. 

The hypothesis of an absolute that acts freely, that 
in an eminent sense endures, would no longer raise up 
intellectual prejudices # n (Ibid,, p. 202) 

If nothingness is impossible of conception then we rid 
philosophy of all tendencies tov/ard dualism. This is not 
an attempt on the part of Bergson to solve the old pro¬ 
blem of dualism; it offers us a point of view from which 
the problem cannot arise, since it is only duration which 
is considered as the final reality, 

"To sum up, for a mind which should follow purely and 
simply the thread of experience, there would be no void, 
no naught, even relative or partial, no possible nega¬ 
tion. Such a mind would see facts succeed facts, states 
succeed states, things succeed things... It would live 
in the actual, and, if it were capable of judging, it 
would never affirm anything except the existence of 
the present." (Ibid., p. 319-20) 


Creative Evolution 

According to Bergson true evolution is creative, 
and time is an essential element in this process. Time, 
however, is not the time of science; it is duration - the 
only reality. From his viewpoint of creativity he criti¬ 
cizes Spencer 1 s system of philosophy which was the outcome 
cf the new science of evolution. Spencer*s system was 


























■ 












, 



















« 










i 













' 













24 


based on classification and generalization. Bergson aims 
at the explanation of the sciences, including the biolo¬ 
gical science of evolution, by showing the genesis of 
matter in the evolution of life. This is an attempt to 
break away from the mechanistic explanation of life, which 
was the underlying principle in Spencer 1 s philosophy. 

"Let us say merely that the usual device of the Spence¬ 
rian method consists in reconstructing evolution with 
fragments of the evolved.” (Ibid., p. 396) 

The mechanistic explanation is the piecemeal interpreta¬ 
tion of the sciences. But 

"the philosopher must go further than the scientist. 
Making a clean sweep of everything that is only an 
imaginative symbol, he will see the material world 
melt back into a simple flux, a continuity of flowing, 
a becoming.” (Ibid., p. 401) 

The vast numbers of living forms are not things 
in the sense of being the ends of evolution; they are ten¬ 
dencies which the impulse of life follows. They are only 
the means by which elan vital pursues the work of constant 
creation. Two of these tendencies which play the most 
important role in Creative Evolution are intelligence and 
instinct. In Bergson T s language the term "mind” is inclu¬ 
sive of these two plus consciousness. The task which he 
sets for himself in his Creative Evolution is to show the 
common genesis of matter and intellect in the single 
reality of life. The object of philosophy should be to 
develop a conception of reality which would transcend the 
intellect. 







25 


Both intellect and matter evolved from some¬ 
thing primordial which contained them "both. They have 
their genesis in a much wider existence. In explaining 
the genesis of the intellect, however, Bergson overlooks 
the fact that it is the intellect itself which is explai¬ 
ning its own genesis. In what marnner can this process he 
accomplished when it is impossible to view the intellect 
from any other standpoint hut the intellectual? But in 
Bergson 1 s view the intellect is only a condensation of 
the much wider consciousness. In the world as seen hy 
science intellect is already presupposed in the things and 
the laws explained. Science, however, does not explain 
the genesis of the intellect itself. It appears, therefore, 
that the intellect is something given and preexisting the 
universe. Thus Bergson arrives at the idea that knowledge 
and existence are synonymous. 

"Knowledge becomes relative, as soon as the intellect 
is made a kind of absolute. -- We regard the human 
intellect, on the contrary, as relative to the needs 
of action... And, precisely because it is not indepen¬ 
dent, knowledge cannot be said to depend on it: know¬ 
ledge ceases to be a product of the intellect and 
becomes, in a certain sense, part and parcel of reality. 
(Ibid., p. 158) 

Bergson T s object is to get rid of the ancient 
dualism in philosophy* notion which he introduces is 

that the intellectuality of the miud and the materiality 
}f things are not due to separate entities, mind and matter; 












26 


they are not distinct movements, hut two processes in a 

single movement, each adapted to the other. 

"Intellectuality and materiality have been constituted, 
in detail, by reciprocal adaptation. Both are derived 
fnyoia a wider and a higher form of existence. It is 
there that we must replace them, in order to see them 
issue forth." (Ibid., p. 205) 

In man, at his present stage of development, 
intuition is an "indistinct fringe" around the intellect. 
It has been pushed out of the centre by the intellect, 
because it is less useful in action. But it has a more 
!important use which makes it desirable to have it back 
in greater prominence. By means of intuition we perceive 
the reality of our life as a pure duration, in which the 
past as memory exists in the present, and in the form of 
our will presses forward into the future. If we force 
back memory and suppress our will; that is, if we concen¬ 
trate on one point of our existence, we get a glimpse of 
true reality into which all actuality is gathered. 

Evaluation of Bergson 1 s Intuitive Method 

Lillie every other metaphysical system, Bergson* s 
philosophy is an expression of the spirit of the times - 
times which were witnessing a rapid growth of disappoint¬ 
ment in the inability of science to explain the ultimate. 
There is thus a certain disregard for positive science in 
Creative Evolution. Science, according to the intuitive 



























« 

« 


< 








* 

. 








« 










27 


method, has a very limited field of operation. Philosophy 
must accomplish what science has failed to do. As conse¬ 
quence of Bergson T s general attitude toward the scientific 
method, he has been variously accused of scepticism and 
nihilism. Despite these accusations, it is not evident 
from his main work that his intention was to replace 
science completely with the metaphysic of intuition. 

From the historical point of view there appears 
to be close relationship between Bergson T s intuitive method 
and the German romantic movement of the nineteenth century. 
The basic idea was that in order to know the really real, 
intelligence must be transcended by a form of feeling or 
intuition. This notion was the outcome of the failure of 
science to explain all life on purely mechanistic basis. 

The general spirit of the age, the spirit which Bergson 
had systematized in his philosophy, was that the ultimate 
being of the universe should be sought in terms of life, 
activity and will; the intellect should be regarded only 
as a guide in attaining knowledge relative to our practical 
needs. Philosophy must be concerned with knowledge of life 
itself, and not merely with the practical side of activity. 

Does the above viewpoint imply that Bergson 
underestimates the value of intellectual knowledge? Not 
at all. It simply means that he surrenders reason to the 
exclusive use of practical man, but he asserts the possi- 








28 


bility of developing a faculty which, has been latent, 
a faculty by means of w£p.eh a philosopher may gain a 
purely disinterested knowledge of reality. He offers no 
logical reasons for his views; first of all, because logic 
plays no part in his philosophy, and secondly, because he 
seems to be convinced that the reader is constantly with 
him in following his poetic style. At the same time, 
although he has in some parts of his system identified 
himself with the pragmatists, he also claims that the 
latter cannot have true knowledge of reality. 

The distinguishing feature of the philosophy 
of intuition is the claim to the possibility of transcen¬ 
ding the purely human point of view. If philosophy must 
be ,T an effort to transcend the human condition™, then 
Bergson has no logical foundation in criticizing the 
idealist theory of the absoliite. 

The object in his Creative Evolution consists, 
first of all, in limiting scientific type of knowledge 
strictly to the mechanical'aspect of the universe, and 
secondly, in making out a case for the possibility of 
intuition. To what extent has he succeeded? To what 
extent does his doctrine lay a foundation for a new 
philosophy? As already pointed out, scientific concepts 
are not true interpreters of reality, according to Bergson. 
They are provisional and symbolic. They interpret the 










* 






c , 































- 

% 















* 










* 














29 


nature of matter only to the extent to which matter satis¬ 
fies our practical needs. From this point of view matter 
and life are known only as they are for us, and not as they 
really are for themselves. It is only in the form of 
mathematical relations that the true nature of matter may 
be expressed. Hence, the intellect is capable of repre¬ 
senting the truth only when it speaks in the language of 
mathematics. In all other sciences the intellect speaks 
in terms of symbolic concepts only,This may be so, but if 
the symbols give us sufficient interpretation of matter 
which satisfies our needs of action, then the assumption 
of any other method of interpretation is superfluous and 
a mere fancy. 

By assigning the function of thought to the purely 
mechanical sphere, Bergson predetermines the form of intel¬ 
ligence by stating that its function is not judgment but 
action. Ee thus imposes an arbitrary limitation upon 
intelligence. Ee presupposes the nature of intelligence 
before setting out to discuss its function in detail. 

Besides this arbitrary limitation of intelligence he also 
introduces another argument in favor of intuition. He 
claims that ”intelligence feels itself most at ease in the 
presence of unorganized matter.” This is ”the portion o f 
the material world to which our intelligence is specially 
adapted.” However, just because intelligence has been 







30 


successful in the field of positive science, does not 
prove its failure as a method in other fields. 

In the first two chapters of his Creative Evo¬ 
lution Bergson offers us a very patient study of the evo¬ 
lutionary process. Here his object is to show that other 
factors than mechanistic are necessary to explain the 
process. He therefore postulates a psychical force, an 
elan, a dynamic principle which is the mainspring of evo¬ 
lutionary progress. But we are still left puzzled about 
the nature of elan vital itself. Gan we detrmine its 
nature by empirical study, or will intuition give us know¬ 
ledge of it? It appears to be the last avenue closed to 
further knowledge. It is the n noumenal n of Kant and the 
Absolute of the idealists combined. In the end we are 
still obliged to rely on the study of the nature of expe¬ 
rience in order to acquire further knowledge of the facts 
of evolution. 

The ultimate kind of knowledge is intuitive, 

- 

says Bergson, not intellectual. It must be recognized, 
however, that the ultimate source of knowledge lies in the 
nature of the self. Therefore, in order that we may have 
intuitive knowledge of life we must turn to the study of 
the processes of thought instead of the processes of orga¬ 
nic evolution. But Bergson turns to the study of evolution 
without recognizing the function of thought and intellect 













* 
















. 






















■ 

1 

, 















' 






- 

' 















31 


in this study. Nevertheless, his consideration of evo¬ 
lution is empirical. His metaphysics and his epistemo¬ 
logy loth depend on this empirical study. However, 
having disregarded the intellect as being of any value 
in arriving at true knowledge, he is left with mere hypo¬ 
thesis of an ungraspable 11 something 11 which can have mea¬ 
ning only when it is interpreted in terms of an elan, to 
be known only by intuition. 

Bergson contrasts instinct and intelligence 
mainly on the basis that the latter concerns iteself 
solely with action. But can the term knowledge be accep¬ 
ted here in the same sense in which he employs it in con¬ 
nection with both faculties? Can instinct be considered 
as knowledge in the philosophical sense of the word? It 
is true that we can speak of instinctive behavior, but 
when we question the n]aiowledge” involved in this behavior, 
we have no right to assume that there is in it any human 
kind of knowledge. Bergson 1 s position is purely anthropo¬ 
morphic. If it is at all possible to attribute knowledge 
to instinct, it must be a sort on Tr unconscious knowledge 11 . 
Whatever this sort of knowledge may be, he ha,s no language 
in which to define it. How can there be knowledge without 
consciousness? "Unconscious knowledge” has no meaning; no 
meaningful proposition can be made about it. We cannot 
escape from our own consciousness, and everything that we 









32 


are capable of knowing must of necessity be known in 
terms of our own self-conscious life. Any critical exa¬ 
mination of knowledge must necessarily be an examination 
of consciousness. 

"Life is a movement", says Bergson; "materiality 
is the inverse movement, and each of these two movements 
is simple, the matter which forms a world being one undi¬ 
vided flux, and undivided too, the life which courses 
through it and carves out in it living beings." According 
to Bergson, matter is an interruption in the pure creative 
activity. There is no explanation offered for this inter¬ 
ruption in the free creativity of the vital force. At the 
same time it is not clear why the movement of matter 
should be in the opposite direction to that of life. Are 
they not both the outcome of the same pervasive elan vital? 
The idea is a fine example of metaphysical speculation, but 
does not advance us in our knowledge of either matter or 
life. The order in matter can be known only by intelli¬ 
gence, which is implicitly contained in the origins,! 
creative force. The creative force is the living impulse. 
Nevertheless, matter becomes somehow opposed to this living 
impulse. 

A very important motive in Bergson! s thought 
is that in order that there be knowledge, mind must become 
Dne with that which it lonows. By identifying subject and 







, 









' 


, 








■ 

. 

_ 


' 




* 



















, 








33 


object he destroys knowledge in the only sense of the 
word in which it has positive meaning. Knowledge involves 
a relationship between the two terms. When we identify 
the terms we are no longer dealing with knowledge, but 
with some mystical faculty. In Bergson 1 s philosophy this 
faculty is intuition. But no matter how hard one tries 
to "enter the stream of life", one T s consciousness and 
the intellect are always on hand to hold one fast to empi- 
rical actuality. That is, there is always some awareness; 
there is always some knowledge, while Bergsonian knowledge 
constantly eludes us. In the process of regression from 
the intellectual to the intuitive knowledge the knowing 
self disappears. What is knowledge then? 

Bergson T s primary object had been to get rid 
of the problems of dualism, but by developing an intuitive 
method he cannot escape dualistic tendencies. This dualism 
appears first in the self as divided between the intellec- 
ting self and the intuiting self. The basic opposition 
between the two selves leads him to a dualistic thinking 
in his entire cosmology. Matter is opposed to spirit, as 
they move in opposite directions; the "homogenous" space 
is opposed to the "heterogenous" duration; science is 
opposed to metaphysics as the only avenue to knowledge. 

It appears that Bergson is led into this dualism by con- 
fusing the empirical "real" with the abstracted "real". 





























. 





























, 






























34 


Space is described as an absolute entity, 
devoid of all qualitative characteristics. It is a 
"reality” not characterized by matter which fills it. 

How it is possible to conceive something'which is real, 
but which has no qualities, Bergson does not tell us. 

If space is a homogenous entity it must be known by its 
qualities; and the only qualities which characterize space 
are material objects. But if this is the ease, space is 
no longer an entity in itself, but merely a system of 
relations among objects. Here it is evident that Bergson 
takes for empirical "real” what is actually an abstraction 
or an ideal. Space is not a reality, neither from mathe¬ 
matical nor from purely metaphysical viewpoint. Whitehead 
points out the above fallacy quite aptly when he writes: 

"For example, it is habitually thought that the certainty 
of mathematics is a reason for the certainty of our geo¬ 
metrical knowledge of the space of the physical universe. 
This is a delusion which has vitiated much philosophy 
in the past, and some philosophy in the present." 

(Science and the Modern World, p. 32) 

In Whitehead’s terms this confusion of Bergson may be- 

called a fallacy of misplaced concretion. 

Space is identified with time in the sense that 

both form a single absolute: space as a homogenous entity, 

and time as duration, Bergson then goes on to criticize 

the function of scientific time in so far as knowledge is 

concerned. 












35 


"When positive science speaks of time, what it refers 
to is the movement of a certain mobile T on its tra¬ 
jectory ... But it always considers moments, always 
virtual stopping places, always, in short, immobilities. 
Which amounts to saying that real-time, regarded as a 
flux, or, in other words, the very mobility of being, 
escapes the hold of scientific knowledge." (Creative 
Evolution, p. 366) 

Just as in space science sees numerical order in things, 
so in time it sees similar order in moments. This aspect, 
according to Bergson, is not the knowledge of real space 
and time. Then he proceeds to empty space of its quali¬ 
fying objects, and time of its moments. The result is a 
homogenous space in pure duration, or a spatialized dura¬ 
tion. This is a meaningless concept, for space and time 
have reality only because of the things which they contain; 
in space it is the things and their relations, in time it 
is change and relative movement of things. In so far as 
human perception is concerned, space and time must remain 
separate. Our perception is based on certain ordering, 
which in space consists of the side-by-sidedness of things, 
and in time it consists of "before and after". 

Duration as described by Bergson is outside 
human conceptual sphere; it is something beyond the limits 
of knowledge, something Y/hich must be felt rather than 
thought, and felt only when the "self lets itself live". 

As a matter of fact, there are no words to describe it. 

The idea may be aesthetically satisfying, but it relegates 







■ 

, 

V . 











36 


philosophy to a sphere of mystic or religiaus experience, 
which is not at all what Bergson intdhs philosophy to be. 
When we regress from the mental life tt cognition and 
intellection to a form of tropismal intuition, we are 
regressing to a life of a protozoan. And why this regres¬ 
sion? In order that we may "know” life as it really is, 
we are told. But however much Bergson would wish us to 
relinquish cognition, feeling, volition and consciousness, 
this we simply cannot do. Should we by some magical means 
grasp life intuitively, then his philosophy will have been 
in vain, for we shall no longer be in a happy position to 
reflect upon it. To know, to conceive, to imagine, to 
interpret and to reason - all these human functions involve 
consciousness. Should we rid ourselves of these in favor 
of intuition, we should no longer be conscious of "pure 
duration" or "the flux of life". Let us suppose that we 
are successful in immersing our individuality in the flux 
of life, what should we gain? 

In the state of Bergsonian pure organic being 
there can be no moral problems, no problems of freedom of 
the will. Freedom involves possibility of choice, which 
in turn requires consciousness, cognition and intellect. 
That is, it is only on the level of the human intellect 
that questions relating to freedom and morality can arise. 
When Bergson speaks of absolute freedom in the intuitive 

















* 



















* 

' 

: 






















' 

' 

■ - 











37 


knowledge of life, he is no longer dealing with human 
freedom, nor with moral problems. He is really speculating 
on the "mechanical necessity" as envisaged by human intel¬ 
lect. The human concept of freedom cannot be meaningfully 
applied to organic evolution or to an act of "a free crea¬ 
tion of a world". 

In his discussion of causality Bergson states 
that the scientific view of nature is always in terms of 
cause-effect sequence. There is no such sequence under¬ 
lying the moving flux of life. He does not stop to consi¬ 
der that from the human point of view - and there is no 
other - causal interpretation is the only one which is 
meaningful. It is absolutely impossible to escape the 
anthropomorphic interpretation of the universe, for 'what¬ 
ever our conception of knowledge may be, it is always know¬ 
ledge for us. 

The problem of causality is related to that of 
freedom. Neither freedom nor causality have any meaning 
outside the sphere of human activity. In the end it is 
always the nature of the self with which we must deal, and 
the self nan never be transcended. It is evident that 
Bergson confuses the moral issue which is purely human 
with a much vaster one which is cosmological. It must be 
admitted that perhaps through his intuitive knowledge the 
universe may be seen as a free agent in its creative 
























■ 

. 

. 


, 































38 


activity, but this knowledge in no way alters the actual 
position of mankind with respect to freedom. Perhaps it 
may be possible to develop the power of intuitive percep¬ 
tion to the utmost degree, but this does not mean that 
the possibility of choice, and the vast number of obstacles 
to action are thereby removed. By solving the cosmological 
problem of freedom Bergson does not thereby solve the 
moral and ethical problem. 


In this critical survey the aim has been to 
show that the intuitive method adds nothing to knowledge 
as -understood in the human, and the only sense of the term. 
It annihilates knowledge, since if destroys cognition and 
all the other psychological factors which characterize 
human experience. Therefore Bergson’s claim that the intu¬ 
itive method will solve philosophical controversies can 
never be verified. To prove the soundness or the truth 
of this method we must always resort to the intellect. But 
once we do this, we are no longer in the sphere of intuition, 
When philosophy becomes a method of intuition, it can no 
longer be called philosophy; it becomes wholly inexpress 
sible. It can deal neither with percepts nor concepts; 
neither can it deal with ideas, for these must be expressed 
in intellectual terms. 

Having sharply contrasted the scientific 


















39 


method of knowledge with that of intuition, Bergson does 
not suggest that science should be completely abandoned, 
Nevertheless, the intellect which underlies the scientific 
method should become secondary and supplementary to intui¬ 
tion, Science as a practical method to serve the purpose 
of action , is alone insufficient to give us knowledge of 
the true reality. From this it would appear that intuition 
is a development of the intellect. 

"That an effort of this kind is not impossible, is 
proved by the existence in man of an aesthetic faculty 
along with normal perception. 11 (Ibid., p. 194) 

It is quite permissible to compare the intuitive method 
with aesthetic perception, but it is not correct at the 
same time to speak of intuition as if it were a higher form 
or a higher development of the intellect. If our main 
objective is to concentrate on intuitive knowledge, it is 
not quite clear why science should still remain an impor¬ 
tant method. 

What then is the difference between the scien- 

- 

tist and the intuitionist philosopher? It appears that 
the philosopher who knows by intuition will never be able 
to express himself in terms of language or in any other 
symbolic form. The scientist, although he may never TI know T! 
in Bergson J s sense of the word, is able to express himself 
in terms intelligible to other minds. This is a very impor¬ 
tant factor, for knowledge is not simply an affair of 










40 


individual human "beings. It is primarily a social 
enterprise. In fact, upon careful consideration we find 
that knowledge is not knowledge at all, unless there is 
communicability. 

Although there are all these difficulties 

involved in the intuitive method, the philosophy in general 

had greatly stimulated the interest on the part of the 

scientific world in what may be called the spiritual nature 

of the universe. It is true that so far the methods of 

science are incapable of dealing with the ”unexplainable 

something”, but, if Bergson be right, some day science and 

philosophy may become a single method (neither wholly 

intellectual, nor yet entirely intuitive), which will give 

mankind a clearer understanding of the nature of life and 

being. It is a possibility of a common objective in both 

science and philosophy that Bergson is trying to grasp. 

What he calls intuition is possibly a more fully developed 

form of intelligence, which may yet be acquired by some 

future generations of mankind. It is with this idea in 

mind that professor Husson, for example, supports Bergson 1 s 

philosophical method by stating that 

"The intuition supposes intelligence to be an effort 
of reflection, which in man is possible only with the 
help of analysis, that is to say that fundamentally it 
is a form of intelligence, in the sense of the word 
which is usually ignored by the critics.” 

(L. Husson: L*Intelleetualisme de Bergson, 1947) 













* 

















• 












. 




* 

) 


















* 

. 


, 

. 







41 


WHISEEHEA3) T S PHILOSOPHY OF ORGANISM 

Whithead and Bergson 

The main theme of Bergson 1 s intuitive approach 
is reechoed in Whitehead 1 s philosophy of organism. At least 
"both philosophers had pursued a direction of thought which 
was a complete deviation from the existing modes of philo¬ 
sophic thinking. In Whitehead 1 s own words: 

"Bergson introduced into philosophy the organic concep¬ 
tions of physiological science. He has most completely 
moved away from the static materialism of the seven¬ 
teenth century." (Science and the Modern World, p. 212) 

The main thesis of both philosophies arises out of the 
problem of knowledge: Man*s relation to the rest of the 
universe consists of many more factors than that which we 
commonly understand as knowledge. From Whitehead 1 s view¬ 
point it appears that such emotional elements as hope and 
fear are also important conditions comprising our broader 
knowledge of the universe. The unfortunate error committed 
by the previous philosophers has been that of abstracting 
knowledge in the sense of sensual knowledge from the other 
primary relations of man to the universe. This idea is 
stressed not only by Bergson, but also by the pragmatists, 
in the sense that knov/ledge is for action. The universe 
is not present only to the immediacy of our senses - it is 
an instrument for our action. On this ground it would 
appear that philosophy is a search for knowledge, but not 
necessarily knov/ledge in the sense of intellectual under- 






























1 ' ' ■ 

; 

- 




flt 




=> 

: 

- 






42 


standing only. The goal of philosophy, according to 
Whitehead, might he the mutual prehension or withness of 
everything in the universe. Outside of the sense of sight 
the other senses may give us a much more intimate idea of 
reality, through, what he calls, causal immediacy. There 
is some resemblance here to Bergson*s intuition. The fee¬ 
ling of substance irrespective of its possible finality, 
is much more real than the logical or intellectual idea 
of it. Having broken away from the school of classical 
empiricists, Whitehead asserts that relations are n inore n 
real than the 11 things” related. It is the felt wholeness 
of relations which is the only reality. 


Difficulties in interpreting Whitehead 

Upon first reading Process and Reality one must 
inevitably conclude that Whitehead takes an entirely new 
approach to metaphysics. There is an apparent attempt to 
eliminate the function of thought and still present a logi¬ 


cally formulated cosmology. It is evident that such an 
attempt would be an absurdity, for, in the first place, 
there can be no philosophy without thought, and secondly, 
no philosophical scheme can be a universal abstraction. 

The removal of the subjective element from any philosophi¬ 
cal scheme would involve the elimination of philosophy. 
This is not Whitehead*s objective, however. But the 




























, 

, 

, 


1 4 ■ < C 






















< 



















43 


novelty of his approach requires a great imaginative effort 
on the part of the reader, since the ideas presented paint 
an entirely new picture of the universe. One is obliged 
to get rid of the existing notions of things, space and 
time. 

When some future generation has clearly inter¬ 
preted our concepts of science which at the moment are Quite 
novel and unusual, Whitehead 1 s philosophy will perhaps be 
accepted as the most logical systematization of these con¬ 
cepts. The present generation is probably not fully pre¬ 
pared to visualize this hew world which Whitehead presents 
to us. To obtain a true appreciation of his philosophical 
system one must be a mathematical physicist or a mathemati¬ 
cian of the rank of Whitehead. To this extent he may be 
right in claiming that the philosopher of the future will 
also be a scientist, and a scientist will of necessity be 
also a philosopher. 

Hence, to understand Whitehead 1 s philosophy of 
organism in all its implications an extensive scientific 
training appears to be a prerequisite, perhaps this condi¬ 
tion should not be considered as constituting the main dif¬ 
ficulty confronting a student of philosophy in his inter¬ 
pretation of 'Whitehead. But there is a real difficulty in 
understanding his language. In order to break away from 
the old ways of thinking one would essentially have to 

















■ 




















- 


, 

, 

, 


t 








* ■ 

, : V l i , , 





44 


discard the old vehicles of thought* To do so completely 
is an impossibility, and Whitehead 1 s attempt to use old 
terms in expressing new relations results in considerable 
obscurity in his writings. Consequently there is bound to 
be some disagreement among those who wish to interpret him 
correctly. 

Extent and Aim of Whitehead* s Philosophy 

!I I hold that philosophy is the critic of abstractions. 
Its function is the double one, first of harmonizing 
them by assigning to them their right relative status 
as abstractions, and secondly of completing them by 
direct comparison with more concrete intuitions of the 
universe, and thereby promoting the formation of more 
complete schemes of thought.” {Sc. and the M.W., p. 126) 

In these words Whitehead states concisely 
what the aim of philosophy should be. And it is this aim 
which his philosophy of organism is to fulfill. Specula¬ 
tive philosophy should concern itself with the framing of 
"a coherent, logical and necessary system of general ideas 
in terms of which every element of our experience can be 
interpreted”. 

Whitehead discards the universe of entities in 
space and time; he eliminates the points in matter and the 
instants in time. In their place he substitutes a ”.proceas 
conceived as a complex activity with internal relations 
between its various factors”. These internal relations 
constitute the very being of all factors in the universe. 

































, 


































































45 


Because of the complex network of relations, science cannot 
give us a true picture of the cosflios by abstracting parts 
of it, and. by dealing with them outside this network of 
relations. 

Concerning the function of reason, Whitehead 
tells us that it is instrumental in attaining new ends. 
Reason, in his sense of the term, does not necessarily mean 
a conscious drive; it is more akin to feeling which cons- 
tantly tends toward fuller experience. In man reason is 
instrumental in Deweyan sense. The feeling as conceived 
by Whitehead is a form of sensitiveness of bodies by means 
of which they take account of each other. It is not an 
intellectual kind of feeling, but is fundamental in the 

process of reality, and common to every part of nature. 

. 

(There is some resemblance between this concept and Bergson T S 
Sympathy”; with the latter, however, it does not extend 
to the entire universe). 

There is another side to reason; it is that which 
seeks the basic understanding of things. It goes beyond 
the particular %nd immediate to discover the intrinsic rela¬ 
tionships and connections. It is in constant search fob 
internal logical consistency. At the same time it is 
reason which must arrive at some form of symbolism which 
would keep our ideas clear and thus prevent ambiguity. 

Reason is the most highly developed form of conscious 






































, 




« 








< 

■ t 
















46 


experience which in turn developed from an unconscious 
experience. It is the latter of which Whitehead speaks 
as TT a feeling for the presence of everything else 11 . It 
may be assumed that on the basis of this viewpoint the 
electro-magnetic activity in physical bodies as described 
by physical sciences is comparable to the emotional acti¬ 
vity in living organisms. There are considerable diffi¬ 
culties involved in his use of the terms "feeling" and 
"pure feeling", but these will be dealt with subsequently. 

It is clear that Whitehead has great respect 
for speculative thought as opposed to practical or common 
sense. Consequently it is his prime objective to bring 
metaphysics back to its time-honored position. Speculative 
reason should be freed from the bonds of practical necessity, 
in order that it may arrive at a system of ideas which could 
be applied to the whole of experience. Thus he defines 
progress in metaphysios as "an asymptotic approach to a 
scheme of principles only definable in terms of the ideal 
which they should satisfy." 

The process of deduction is useless in trying 
to arrive at the "scheme of principles". That is exactly 
where former philosophies have failed, for we cannot start 
with certain elements which are clear and distinct, and 
proceed to deduce the rest of experience from them. It is 
on this account that Descartes 1 philosophic system breaks 

















■ 





■ 

• 




< 




- 





















i 

3 






















\ 



























47 


down. Our experience does not contain any a priori clear 
and distinct elements. The aim od metaphysics should be 

i 

to discover some common features in the confusion of expe¬ 
rience. It should also break away from the dogmatism of 
the philosophic systems. It may be observed, however, that 
any philosophy which proclaims itself to be a system is 
bound to be dogmatic. Such appears to be the case 'with 
the philosophy of organism. Ho?/, Whitehead claims that it 
is only in mathematics that we can start with clear and 
distinct principles, and that this procedure must be avoi¬ 
ded in metaphysics, nevertheless he proceeds to construct 
his organismic scheme by starting with definite categorial 
principles. Essentially there does not appear to be any 
sharp deviation of this procedure from that of the Carte¬ 
sian TT cogito IT . Ho matter how far back we may push the 
process which Whitehead advocates for metaphysics there is 
always a stop at some final principle v/hich the philosophy 
of organism strives to avoid, but fails to do so. It be¬ 
comes dogmatic to this extent. 

For the moment we may overlook the discrepancies 


and certain overstatements, and see what further aims 
philosophy should have. The problem of metaphysics, then, 
is to discover general principles which may be universally 


applicable. Most philosophies have failed in solving this 





, 












, 

. , 




- 




. 


' 

* 






• • 

■ 

* 

- 








48 


problem because they were unable to look beyond their own 
narrow systems of ideas. They failed to notice certain 
relationships simply because they are always present and 
never absent. Consequently they missed essential generali¬ 
zations. Hot only does he criticize Descartes for having 
missed the essential point, but he also contends that Kant 
had deviated from the path of true philosophic endeavor 
which was founded by Plato and Aristotle. 

What should be the true endeavor of philosophy? 

It should consist of a speculative metaphysics whose inquiry 

. 

involves the ultimate problems of Being. The inquiry must 
be steadily directed toward "the ideal opposites, Permanence 
and Flux, the One and the Many". Another characteristic of 
such inquiry is the interest in pure mathematics. Philo¬ 
sophy must return to this main stream of metaphysical spe¬ 
culation. 

"It is its function to harmonize, refashion and justify 
divergent intuitions as to the nature of things. It 
has to insist on the scrutiny of the ultimate ideas, 
and on the retention of the whole of the evidence in 
shaping our cosmological scheme." (Ibid., p. 128) 

When we consider Whitehead in relation to Kant 
we find that his aim y/as to remove subjectivism from Kantian 
philosophy. In the latter philosophy the objective world 
is constructed by the experiencing subject. In the philo¬ 
sophy of organism the subject itself arises out of the 
world which it feels; it constructs its world on the basis 







49 




of this feeling. From this viewpoint neither the subject 
nor the world are absolutely given. Consequently White- 
head questions Kant T s method of beginning with a priori 
categories. The same question, however, may be asked of 
Whitehead. His approach is novel in the sense that his 
categories are no longer of the mind; nevertheless they may 
be interpreted as being a priori in the sense of being uni¬ 
versal and thus preceding the mind. If these categories 
n grow up” with experience, they grow out of something, 
which in Whitehead 1 s terminology is the universal process. 
They are therefore compresent with experience for the 
latter 1 s discovery or prehension. To this extent they are 
T? given” and a priori. 

Critique of 17th Century Science and Philosophy 

Since the philosophy of organism is the direct 
outconie of the most recent concepts of science, it is impor¬ 
tant for us to follow Whitehead 1 s critique of the old con¬ 
cepts and their influence on philosophic thought. The* 
eommon empirical interpretation of our knowledge of the 
universe derives from our scientific ideas. Science regards 
the world as consisting of separate pieces of matter loca¬ 
ted in space. This matter, by stimulating our sense organs 
gives us the sensation of Locke 1 s primary qualities; the 
sensation in turn endows matter with secondary qualities. 

1 














50 


Underlying these orderly related and localized pieces of 
matter there is the causal relationship; causation is the 
"basis of the orderly scheme of nature. Such is the inevi¬ 
table scheme arising out of the concepts of science. 

The appearance of separate objects brings with 
it simultaneously an idea of causality. This relationship 
may be expressed in another way: in order that we may have 
an idea of causality we have to be at the point where the 
world of matter meets the world of mind. If we were cons¬ 
tituted differently than we are, if we were capable of 
experiencing the world as a homogenous continuum, then per¬ 
haps the idea of causality would not appear. This idea is 
therefore a fact and a true one for experience at our level, 
v/here experience consists of separation and individuation 
of events. This same separation seems to require synthesis 
and unification. The underlying factor in this whole pro¬ 
cess of experience is the idea of causality. If human expe¬ 
rience could be removed from the universe - if such possi¬ 
bility could be at all imagined - what would become of 
causality? From such train of imagination it is evident 
that causality is the meeting point of the experiencing 
entity and the entities experienced. The notion of causa¬ 
lity is the outcome of our habitual interpretation of expe¬ 
rience as a subject-object relationship. 










51 


Bergson had expressed an idea that causality 
is a sort of feeling before it becomes an intellectual con¬ 
cept. The origin of many of our ideas in our complex pro¬ 
cess of thinking may be traced back to a kind of primary 
feeling - a feeling coextensive with life itself. White¬ 
head’s viewpoint is that this feeling is immanent in a very 
general way in everything in the universe. This feeling, 
he states, is an expression of that conformity or n witimess” 
of things, which is one of the fundamental elements of the 
universe. It was essential for the philosophy of organism 
to substitute this primordial feeling for causality. 

In dealing with the problem -of causality 
Whitehead proceeds to point out the difficulties involved 
in the scientific conception of the universe. In the first 
place Hume’s criticism of the concept of causality had 
never been satisfactorily met by science or by succeeding 
philosophies. The concept presupposes a cause-effect link 
without which there would only be regularity of sequence. 
Such regularity is by no means necessary. But the intro¬ 
duction of a connecting link involves the rejection of the 
scientific presupposition that nature consists of distinct 
configurations. of matter in space. From our belief in the 
cause-effect chain there arises our belief in induction. 

But Hume’s criticism of ca/usality destroys this belief. 
Science does not justify our belief in causality; nor does 













- 


r 


- 




I 

* 





































* 

















52 


it .justify our "belief in induction. 

Another criticism of science arises out of the 
problem of dualism of mind and matter. The problem was 
introduced into philosophy by Descartes, and it has remained 
a bad influence on all subsequent thinking. Whitehead 
argues that neither nature nor life can be understood unless 
they are fused together. The notion of each should involve 
the notion of the other. So long as we think of mind and 
matter as two.separate substances, initially separate from # 
each other, but later uniting in some unknown relation 
within a living organism, we can never 4 reach any satisfac¬ 
tory solution. And science does not offer any explanation 
of the way in which these substances came together, nor 
how each affects the other. As a result of Cartesian 
dualism, according to Whitehead, 

"science took charge of the materialistic nature, and 
philosophy took charge of the cogitating minds. Some 
schools of philosophy admitted an ultimate dualism; and 
the various idealistic schools claimed that nature was 
merely the chief example of the cogitations of minds." 
(Science and the Modern World, p. 208) 

The history of science has always been hlosely 
connected with that of philosophy. Very often the influ¬ 
ence of philosophy upon science has been such that the 
latter became critical of itself. When philosophers today, 
such as Bergson and Whitehead, criticize science, it is not 
because they tend toward irrationality. It is because of 






























































t 


t 






? 










? 




, , 


. 








- 











53 


the fact that science which constantly aims at the utmost 
precision has reached a point where this precision is not 
attainable. It can no longer satisfy the dems&ls of common 
sense for some finite enduring stuff, the foundation of 
our sense qualities. It cannot discover such stjiff. It 
also eliminates all secondary qualities from the common- 
sense world. With the elimination of these, all values 
must also go by the board. There is nothing good, nor 
beautiful, nor ethical, nor religious in nature. The loss 
of values entails the loss of meaning. And if the world 
has no meaning, there can be no explanation for it. Con¬ 
sequently one is forced into a. cul-de-sac where the only 
meaningful proposition that can be nmde of the world is 
that it is. 

Such is the philosophical implication of the 
position of science. But from the viewpoint of science 
the world has meaning in the sense that there is apparent 
order in the operation of the universal laws. Whitehead 
points out that in order to make science possible, there 
must be more in the world than that with which science 
deals. Whatever this more may be, it adds the element of 
meaning or value. Common sense actually does not accept 
the universe as it is presented to us by science. The 
ethical, religious, moral and emotional factors are just 
as real for us as the n real n things with which science 















T, 



54 


deals. Why should science not offer some explanation for 
these factors? 

"The notion of physical energy, which is at the base of 
physics, must then be conceived as an abstraction from 
the complex energy, emotional and purposeful, inherent 
in the subjective form of the final synthesis in which 
each occasion completes itself. It is the total vigor 
of each activity of experience. The mere phrase that 
physical science is an abstraction 1 , is a confession of 
philosophic failure. It is the business of rational 
thought to describe the more concrete fact from which 
that abstraction is derivable." (Adventures of Ideas) 

It is in this connection that Whitehead intro¬ 
duces his notion of the "Fallacy of Misplaced Concreteness". 
His object is to show that philosophy made a mistake in 
refusing to accept such activities as sensations, conscious¬ 
ness, etc. as concrete actualities. We take only those 
things for real which have been abstracted from reality 
for special purposes by thought. One such abstraction is 
the whole world as conceived by science. It is Whitehead 1 s 
aim to develop a new meaning of reality and "concreteness". 
According to- him, philosophy still tries to "seek the forms 
in the facts", which is the lingering influence of platonic 
philosophy. 

"We are now so used to the materialistic ways of looking 
at things, which has been rooted in our literature by 
the genius of the seventeenth century, that it is with 
some difficulty that we understand the possibility of 
another mode of approach to the problems of nature." 
(Science and the Modern World, p. 62) 

The system of scientific concepts works well 
only for special purposes. But it completely fails to 







* 










t 

, « 

4 








.. 

, T . 

o 

, 




t 

, 






■ 

c 

t 

* 


, 

' 

' 

















55 


account for things as they are. It leaves outside of its 
own pattern of concepts all moral and aesthetic experiences 
which must not be ignored as irrelevant. However, even 
within the boundaries of the scientific pattern there are 
certain concepts which are no longer adequate; and thus we 
see that modern physics is obliged to reject the materia- 
listic concepts of the last century. 

Whitehead is one of the very few modern philoso¬ 
phers who appear to have achieved a conception of what life 
is in its ultimate nature. According to him life pervades 
the universe. There are totalities and prehensions every¬ 
where: universe is an organism. It is from this viewpoint 
that he criticizes Descartes so convincingly. Descartes 1 
two opposed concepts of mind and matter actually negate 
the concept of life. However, the difficulty which arises 
at this point is in the definition of life. Both Whitehead 
and Bergson maintain that life is an organismic totality 
where there is no distinction between matter and form. . On 
the basis of their views we may define life as a kind of 
transcendence, proceeding constantly toward the future and 
outward. The transcendence interrelates the future and the 
outward process of concretion, and makes it part of the 
immediate. 

Whitehead questions the main presuppositions of 











56 


Cartesian space. If we reject Cartesian dualism we must 
also reject the separation of parts from parts, by which 
Descartes 1 space is characterized. A thing cannot be con¬ 
ceded as being in one particular place. If its activity 
is universally interrelated it cannot be localized; it is 
everywhere. 

"To say that a bit of matter has simple location means 
that, in expressing its spatio-te^olFaX^reXartTbhs, It 
is adequate to state that it is where it is, in a defi¬ 
nite finite region of space, and throughout a definite 
finite duration of time, apart from any essential refe¬ 
rence to the relations of that bit of matter to other 
regions of space and to other durations of time.” 

(Ibid., p. 84) 

Thus Whitehead criticizes the theory of unique 
location which is one of the original sins of modern 
philosophy. 

Descartes had excluded qualities from reality; 
for him reality is merely quantitative, and qualities are 
mental. Whitehead criticizes this bifurcation on the basis 
that it has introduced a mechanistic conception of nature 
into philosophy. The philosophy of organism tends to mini¬ 


mize the importance of quantity in favor of quality. Both 
are complementary aspects of reality where each continually 
passes into the other. What he is aiming at expressing is 
that quantity is always a quantity of some quality, and 
that all scientific research begins with the study of some 
quality. Quality, like substance, or like space and time, 




















. 




.V ' 






t 

. 




> <v 


* 

, • 

, 

* 

, 








57 


is another example of misplaced concreteness. Whitehead*s 

point is drought out clearly in the following quotation; 

IT 0f course, substance and quality, as well as simple 
location, are the most natural ideas for the human 
mind. It is the way in which we think of things, and 
without these ways of thinking we could not get our 
ideas straight for daily use ... The only question is, 
How concretely are we thinking when we consider nature 
under these conceptions? My point will be that we are 
presenting ourselves with simplified editions of imme¬ 
diate matters of fact, ... we shalJ. find that they are 
in truth only to be justified as being elaborate logi¬ 
cal constructions of a high degree of abstraction ... 

We have mistaken our abstraction for concrete realities*. 1 
(Ibid., p. 77) 


Underlying Concepts in the philosophy of Organism 

In his Brocess and Reality Whitehead begins 
with a set of categorial definitions which serve as guiding 
principles for the development of his entire scheme. 
According to him, these categories, both those of existence 
and the Categorial Obligations, are permanent characteris¬ 
tics of actuality. Unlike in Kant * s categorical scheme, 
they are not imposed by the mind; they are independent of 
the mind. This is the most difficult notion in his philo¬ 
sophy, for one is naturally inclined to consider the mind 
as that which ’'discovers* 1 and knows the categories. In the 
sense of Whitehead T s universal process, discovery and know¬ 
ledge are an intrinsic part of the universal process. From 
this point of view knowledge is creativity. 

"The creativity is the actualization of potentiality, 


n 























1 

■< 








, 








,,, 

















* . 

. 

■ 























58 


and the process of actualization is an occasion of 
experiencing. Thus viewed in abstraction, objects are 
passive but viewed in conjunction they carry the crea¬ 
tivity which drives the world. The process of creation 
is the form of unity of the Universe.” (Adventures of 
Ideas, p. 231) 

There is an absolute generality 'which must be 
accepted as a final ”given” beyond which we cannot go. 
Whitehead calls this generality the Category of the Ulti¬ 
mate. All metaphysical speculation must come to some 
ultimate irrationality beyond which there is no further 
rational explanation. It is only the philosophy of orga¬ 
nism which supposedly succeeded in attaining the concept 
of such ultimate finality. In former metaphysical systems 
such concept was that of Substance; in Whitehead T s philo¬ 
sophy it is the notion that the universe is One and Many. 
Thus he combines in this idea both monism and pluralism. 

The philosophy of organism is an attempt at analj/sis of 
how TT in their natures, entities are disjunctively imany 1 
in process of passage into conjunctive unity”. This pro¬ 
cess is based on the general creativity underlying nature 
- an urge toward both individuation and unification. 

”The Universe is many because it is wholly and comple¬ 
tely to be analyzed into many final actualities - or 
in Cartesian language, into many res verae. The Uni¬ 
verse is one , because of the universal immanence. There 
is thus a dualism in this contrast between the unity 
and multiplicity. Throughout the Universe there reigns 
the union of opposites which is the ground of dualism.” 
(Ibid., p. 245) 

The universe of Whitehead is a dynamic and 















a 

, 

, 






a 






















* 




t 

' 

• «• 










59 


creative whole, resembling a living organism. The only 
way in which this "whole" differs from the Hegelian 

Absolute is its active creativity. His doctrine of inter¬ 
nal relations contains this concept of activity which is 
a process of taking into relation and not merely a passive 
being in relation. The process is what he calls prehension. 
All entities are what they are because of this mutual pre¬ 
hension. 

The final real things of which the universe is 
made up are actual entities or actual occasions. Tis con¬ 
cept and those of prehension and the Ontological principle 
form the foundation of the philosophy of organism. What 
is the mature of this process which ensues in actual occa¬ 
sions? Is there any permanency in it, or is there some 
underlying thing which in Locke 1 s terms might be called 
substance? In answering this question Whitehead begins 
with an assumption similar to that of Bergson. Intuition 
reveals to us Hature as a process of events extending from 
the infinitesmally small to the infinitesmally large. In 
such an interconnection of actual entities or nexus, every¬ 
thing experiences or prehends everything else. "Experience" 
here does not involve the element of consciousness as under¬ 
stood in human experience. Consequently Whitehead 1 s "real" 
does not necessarily depend on empirical experience. There 
is a much closer relation of this view to the monodology 






















, 





* 




, 

* 

* 


- 












60 


of Leibniz. 

"The event is what it is, by reason of the unification 
in itself of a multiplicity of relationships. The ge¬ 
neral scheme of these mutual relationships is an abstra¬ 
ction which presupposes each event as an independent 
entity, which it is not, and asks what remnant of these 
formative relationships is then left in the guise of 
external relationships," (Sc. and the M.W. , p. 130) 

His doctrine of prehensions is really a more 
fully elaborated doctrine of internal relations. An actu¬ 
al entity is a synthesis of its prehensions of all other 
actual entities; the nature of every actual entity is 
constituted by such nexus of prehensions. Hence, this new 
concept of reality is the outcome of Whitehead*s strong 
adherance tothe theory of internal relations. When we 
speak of reality we usually imply sensible reality. That 
is, on the sense level, the sensible v/orld is real. But, 
according to Whitehead, there are different levels of 
reality: in the world of science, for example, the real 
is not what it is in the world of common sense. Truth 
thus becomes relative to the level from which it is regar¬ 
ded. A color on the scientific level of reality is a com¬ 
pletely different event than it is on the sensible level. 

The problems of epistemology are related to these two levels 
The common sense level leads to the theory of external rela¬ 
tions; the level of science leads to the theory of internal 
relations. It is the latter theory upon which Whitehead*3 
philosophy is based. 


























V- 

- 

, 




, 








< 

, 




















, , 


. 




f ; 






















, 









61 


The Ontological Principle completely discards 

the idea of any universal essences. The reason for the 

actual entities lies in the process of their actualization. 

What we call the laws of nature are not abstract universals 

imposed from outside, but descriptions of actual entities. 

The structure of actual entities is the way in which they 

synthesize prehensions in order to become themselves. This 

is also known as the Subjective Aim. 

TI By this term f aim ! is meant the exclusion of the bound¬ 
less wealth of alternative potentiality, and the inclu¬ 
sion of that definite factor of novelty which constitutes 
the selected way of entertaining those data in that pro¬ 
cess of unification. n (Process and Reality) 

The Realm of Possibility and the Eternal Objects 

Two metaphysical concepts which are characteris¬ 
tic of the philosophy of organism are the "realm of actua¬ 
lity" and the "realm of possibility". The latter consists 
of "eternal objects"; that is, it consists of everything 
that can possibly be conceived. The eternal objects intrude 
or ingress into the world of actuality from the abstract 
world of possibility. It would appear that this world has 
some resemblance to Kant 1 s "noumena". The difference, of 
course, is that nothing can be known about Kant’s noumenal 
world. When the eternal objects ingress into the spatio- 
temporal flux they become concrete occurrences. The realm 
of actuality is therefore a selection from the infinite 


































,, 








. 








* 
















. 

« J: 

, 


, 


* * • » f ’ 

’ 

, 

- 















62 


number of eternal objects in the realm of possibility. 

The world of eternal objects has a very close 
similarity to Plato 1 s world of eternal forms. If we are 
to approach his concept from the viewpoint of Platonic 
forms, then we must admit that Whitehead failed to recon¬ 
cile the element of change with the element of permanence. 
This problem of reconciliation was his original task. It 
is difficult to tell if his imaginative genius is actually 
presenting Plato 1 s forms in a novel setting, or if the 
so-called "universal lav/s" in his philosophy become the 
eternal objects. One can only go by suppositions as to the 
intended meaning of the concept. 

It has already been pointed out that Whitehead 
began his metaphysical speculation by criticizing knowledge 
which physical sciences give us. On the basis of his 
attitude toward scientific knowledge we may assume that 
his concept of eternal objects is related to the universal 
laws of science, which he conceives as being within the 
universal process, and not abstracted from it in the sense 
of Platonic forms. These laws are the ways in which science 
interprets the patterns followed by actual entities in the 
process of coming into being and perishing. What to us 
appears as a thing or an object is a coherent scheme of 
ingressions of eternal objects into the world of actuality. 

"The process of experiencing is constituted by the 


























' 






- 

















*. 


4 


, 

’ 

i 

* 









63 


reception of entities, whose being is antecedent to 
that process, into the complex fact which is that 
process itself. These antecedent entities, thus received 
as factors into the process of experiencing, are termed 
1 objects 1 for that experiential occasion." (Adventures 
of Ideas, p. 229) 

It is possible for us to perceive the actual entities 
because there is an element of permanence in these patterns 
of ingression. 

An eternal object then is something which had 
potentiality for being actualized. Every actual entity is 
an eternal object actualized; every actuality is also a 
limitation among possibilities. YYhitehead calls this pro- 
cess of limitation a "decision". In this whole process of 
selectivity among possibilities there is the final or the 
highest principle of limitation. This principle is White- 
head’s G-od. Since the primordial nature of G-od is the 
selectivity among possibilities to be actualized, He is 
therefore the principle of novelty as well as of limitation. 
In this connection it is difficult to follow Whitehead’s 
idea of novelty, for if G-od is the final principle of selec¬ 
tivity from among the possibilities, all the latter must 
be within His scope, which implies that there can never be 
any element of novelty. His arguments from the Ontological 
principle are contradicted by introducing the concept of 
G-od as the final principle of limitation. There is a fair 
similarity between this concept of G-od and that of Leibniz. 

















, 


. 

% 

r < 





* . . 















, 

' 
















. r 




















' 

















64 


According to Whitehead we proceed from the actuality of 

the world to the idea of a real Being who actualizes the 

possibilities. In Leibniz conception we proceed to the 

idea of a necessary Being who performs the same function. 

"God is the ultimate limitation, and his existence is 
the ultimate irrationality. For no reason can be given 
for just that limitation which it stands in his nature 
to impose/ 1 (Science and the Modern World, p. 257) 

There is a Platonic element in this idea of God, in the 
sense that it appears to be the all embracing Form of the 
Good. In Plato, however, this form is outside the universe, 
whereas in 'Whitehead it is a connecting link between the 
realm of possibility and the realm of actuality. According¬ 
ly there are two ways in whiuh God brings eternal objects 
into relation with the world of actualities: He is the 
principle of transcendence on which the realm of possibility 
rests , and He is also the general urge or f, appetition n by 
means of which eternal objects attain their realization. 

By following this description of the activity 
of God one is led to the conclusion that the universe . 
cannot be made up of mere possibilities, but must contain 
some elements of actuality. The question which one cannot 
help asking is: Why must there be actuality? ?/hitehead 
does not give us an adequate explanation, unless it be that 
experience is founded on actuality. If this be the case, 
then the assumption of the universe of possibilities is 





65 


superfluous and irrelevant to the universe of "prehending 
actual entities' 1 . The intervention of God's activity of 
limitation takes us no farther ahead in our guest for the 
nature of reality than do the abstracted concepts of scienee. 
From this point of view science is just as ultimately irra¬ 
tional as is this principle of concretion and limitation. 


tT Feelings” and Prehensions 

"The doctrine which I am maintaining is that the whole 
concept of materialism only applies to very abstract 
entities, the product of logical discernment. The con¬ 
crete enduring entities are organisms, so that the plan 
of the whole influences the very characters of the vari¬ 
ous subordinate organisms which enter into it. In the 
case of an animal, the mental states enter into the plan 
of the total organism and thus modify the plans of the 
successive subordinate ofganisms until the ultimate 
smallest organisms such as electrons are reached." 
(Ibid., p. 115) 

Scientific concepts came into being simply 
because science absracted only certain aspects of reality 
and neglected others. We have come to accept mistakenly 
scientific abstractions for realities. In this respect 
Whitehead’s argument resembles that of Bergson, who claims 
that the world of science is merely a collection of sfblo- 
lie representations which have been taken for realities. 

The abstraction of objects from their relations with other 
objects, and the abstraction of substances from their Qua¬ 
lities , are two examples of the work of scienee. By intro¬ 
ducing spatial and temporal differences into the objects 











66 

in the universe, science destroys the foundation of any 
concept of the universe as consisting of events interre¬ 
lated and with reference to each other* 

This indictment of the scientific picture of 
the universe is based on the idea that although science 
gives an account of the entities, it leaves out of account 
the prehending activity. That is to say that sciences omit 
the "real internal constitution" of things. This real 
internal constitution of a thing is what Whitehead calls 
its Subjective Aim or its "feeling for" its subjective aim. 
This feeling is perceived by a faculty which appears to 
have some resemblance to Bergson f s Intuition. 

In the philosophy of organism prehension means 
neither conscious awareness nor a mere mechanical link. It 
is a process by mieans of which evry entity appropriates the 
aspects of all other entities in the formation of its own 
nature, or in its self-realization. Each actual entity 
thus becomes a centre of experience. It is to this extent 
that the organismic view resembles the monodology of Leibniz. 
The nature of every actual entity is characterized by the 
way in which it "feels" other actual entities. Therefore 
every event is what it is because of the mutual intercon¬ 
nectedness of feelings or prehensions. On account of this 
interconnectedness an entity cannot be known in abstraction 
from its chain of connections within the universe. 







67 


Every actual entity or occasion is a "concres¬ 
cence" , a process of growing together of feelings of other 
entities into an entirely new unity. As already stated, 
in every such process of concrescence the Subjective Aim 
is an important factor. It is difficult to decide if 
Whitehead has completely divested this term of its psycho¬ 
logical implications. If the Subjective Aim which tends 
toward "satisfaction" be understood from the psychological 
standpoint, then Whitehead 8 s position is not far removed 
from Aristotelian teleology. It Is essential that in this 
case the psychological terms such as this one should have 
an entirely new meaning, otherwise the philosophy of orga¬ 
nism would have to return to the position of a bifurcated 
universe which it aims to unify. It would again necessitate 
the division of the universe into life and matter, which 
would be a contradiction of Whitehead 9 s original position. 

In considering these novel ways in which White- 
head employs old terms, it must be clearly understood that 
by "feeling" he does not imply the psychological factor of 
perception. Feeling is the taking into itself by every 
entity of all other entities, and objectifying themselves 
in them. Therefore it does not consist of physical prehen¬ 
sions only. When it is said that one entity objectifies 

itself in another, what is meant is that it adds something 
to the process of becoming of the other entity. In this 






68 


sense feeling and prehension are prior to consciousness 
and perception. In this manner the philosophy of organism 
gets rid of the subject-object relationship with its narrow 
view of knowledge and perception. 

There is a process of selectivity in prehension. 
Each entity prehends only those features of other entities 
which are in harmony with its Subjective Aim. The subjec¬ 
tive aim is an aim for a subjective form. (Here again we 
are reminded of the Aristotelian "forms"). It is the sub¬ 
jective form of the becoming entity which conditions the 
selectivity of that entity in the process of prehension, 
so that only certain aspects are taken into the new concres¬ 
cence. All those prehensions which become part of the new 
concrescence are said to be "positive" prehensions. The 
"negative" prehensions are those which, being out of harmo¬ 
ny with the subjective form of the entity, are not admitted 
into its concrescence. This process may be ^interpreted 
from the viewpoint that even though there are eternal objects 
which do not ingress into the world of actuality, the mere 
fact that they are excluded from this world gives them a 
certain relationship to it. And since there is a relation¬ 
ship even of this negative form, there is a kind of prehen¬ 
sion involved. Every object "negatively prehends" all the 
potential aspects in the realm of possibility that it might 
take into itself, but actually does not. This is the most 




69 


characteristic feature of the philosophy of organism. 

For example, green is an eternal object. It has no direct 
relationship to white snow; but the mere fact of its exclu¬ 
sion from the actual entity snow is in itself a form of 
relatedness. 

Since all prehensions are forms of abstraction, 
there is thus a scale of abstractedness which runs from 
positive prehension where there is direct ingression of 
eternal objects, to the negative prehension where there is 
absolute exclusion. Consequently since a positive prehen¬ 
sion is a feeling, a negative prehension is said to be 
"eliminate from feeling 11 . But because a negative prehen¬ 
sion has a considerable influence on the becoming of a con¬ 
crescence, a description of an actual entity must involve 
the consideration of both positive and negative prehensions. 
However, when we thus consider an entity we lose hold of 
the process of concrescence. This is what happens in 
scientific analysis where only one-sided description of an 
entity is offered. To grasp the real "internal constitu¬ 
tion" of an entity, it appears that W^tehead must rely on 
some form of Bergsonian intuition, that an actual entity 
is depends on how it prehends the universe. When such 
entity has fulfilled its subjective aim, it is said to have 
attained "satisfaction". This is a stage of actualized 
concrescence in which every element becomes clear because 




70 


of the completed whole. One is here reminded of Bergson’s 
analysis of the intuitive process where reference is made 
to the enjoyment of a symphony. In Whitehead’s terms a 
n concretion rT is a process of organic synthesis in which 
Being and Becoming form part of the same event, and in 
which Being is always a potentiality for Becoming. 

"The essence of an actuality consists solely in 
the fact that it is a prehending thing." Thus according to 
Whitehead a "thing" is a new way of feeling the rest of the 
universe; it is a becoming of a new prehension. Prehension 
and feeling, therefore, seem to refer to the same type of 
activity. In the final analysis essence means experience, 
and experience is some form of feeling. The subjectivity 
of every actual entity consists of its feeling for the ob¬ 
jectivity of all other entities, where feeling does not 
imply awareness in the sense of human experience. This 
subject-object interconnectedness is a certain conformity 
of feelings; and this conformity explains the problem of 
causation. 

In connection with his treatment of feelings 
Whitehead may be criticized on the ground that, knowing 
fully well that every philosophy is of necessity permeated 
with anthropomorphic elements, he insists on building a 
cosmology which could eventually take the appearance of 
something "given". Russell, for example, contends that 







71 


philosophy cannot be anything more than an expression of 
logical and mathematical correlations. The position of 
logical realism is that philosophy has no right to delve 
into the subjective nature of reality. If it does so, it 
is no longer serious philosophy, but shear mysticism. 
Nevertheless we should not dismiss subjective experience 
as irrelevant; it is as much a reality as the so-called 
objectivity of realism. 

Whitehead 1 s Cosmology 

Whitehead, like Plato, approaches the problem 
of cosmology by analyzing the nature of order in the uni¬ 
verse. This analysis leads him to the position that order 
can be explained only on the basis of some primordial prin¬ 
ciple of limitation. This is the origin of his notion of 
the "primordial nature of God". This principle is not 
only the sufficient reason for being, but it also solves 
the problem of causality. The principle of limitation 
operates upon primordial indetermination out of which 
emerge various types of order. In Platonic philosophy the 
various forms are also shown as emanating from the Form of 
forms, which is God. Plato's universal forms are Whitehead's 
eternal objects which ingress into the world of actual enti¬ 
ties. The realm of eternal objects is also referred to as 
the Extensive Continuum consisting of generalities which 






. 

. 

. 


t. 

. 

* 

- 






72 


are really the possibilities of coming into being of any 
type of order. 

"Thus in the process of analyzing the character of nature 
in itself, we find that the emergence of organisms de¬ 
pends on a selective activity which is akin to purpose. 
The point is that the enduring organisms are now the 
outcome of evolution; and that, beyond these organisms, 
there is nothing wise that ehdures. On the materialistic 
theory there is material - such as matter or electricity 
- which endures. On the organic theory, the only endu¬ 
rances are structures of activity, and the structures 
are evolved." (Science and the Modern World, p. 158) 

According to Whitehead the main problem of metaphysics is 
to show the relationship between change and permanence, 
between order and disorder. The philosophy of organism 
merely restates the problem with which Plato had been con¬ 
cerned: Is it possible to find permanence in change, or is 
there a universe of stable forms behind the universe of 
actualities? 

The view accepted by Whitehead is that entities 
are atomic. They come into being and perish, but do not 
change. The universe is thus a "perpetual perishing" where 
each entity has a sort of atomic duration. This is what 
he calls the "epochal theory of time". Every entity requi¬ 
res its own epoch or a period of time to become manifest 
or to become a realization. Through his concept of duration 
ae incorporates the theories of physical sciences into his 
philosophy of organism. The chain of atomic occasions 

which in physics may be conceived as patterned vibrationd, 

In his philosophy they are concrescences in the process of 




73 


■becoming. The permanent elements in this process are the 

ingressing eternal objects and the forms or patterns of 

their ingression. It is through the recurrence of the 

form or the orderly repetition of ingressions of eternal 

objects that there is objectification. 

"Thus a duration is spatialized; and by »spatialized* 
is meant that the duration is the field for the realized 
pattern constituting the character of the event. A du¬ 
ration, as the field of the pattern realized in the 
actualization of one of its contained events, is an 
epoch, i.e. an arrest. Endurance is the repetition of 
the pattern in successive events." (Ibid., p, 183) 

The question which arises at this point is: Why 
should there be any objectification at all? Why must there 
be enduring objects, or actual entities, which, as they 
present themselves to our perceptive activity, show order 
and stability? There is a series of actual entities which 
Whitehead calls a strand, in which every succeeding member 
inherits a common form through the prehension of the pre¬ 
ceding members. Such a nexus of actual entities gives us 
an enduring object - a strand. But the question as to why 
there should be such successive inheritance still remains 
unanswered. Of course, we do not expect Whitehead to resort 
completely to Aristotelian teleology or to Bergsonian elan. 
However, by what appears to be implied, we are obliged to 
read into this theory some teleological notion. 

We must appreciate the language difficulties 






with which Whitehead is confronted in his formulation of 
the concept of organism. Is it possible, for example, to 
speak of an electronic occasion in terms which thus far 
have been applied only to the functions of biological orga¬ 
nisms and expect to be clearly understood? That is, one 
cannot help but ask oneself: Can it really be that White- 
head’s process of abstraction has gone beyond any available 
symbolic form of expression which could be grasped in its 
entirety by his readers? 

"The notions of ’social order* and ’personal order’ 
cannot be omitted in this preliminary sketch. A ’so¬ 
ciety’ , in the sense in which that term is here used, 
is a nexus with social order; and an 5 enduring object’, 
or ’enduring creature’, is a society whose social order 
has taken the special form of ’personal order’." 
(Process and Reality, p. 50) 

In the philosophy of organism the process of inheritance 
is contingent on the factor of relatedness. "Personal 
order" means that an enduring actual entity bears a defi¬ 
nite character throughout the entire historic route of 
actual occasions. In physical actual entities or objects 
such personal order may consist of several strands, to 
which Whitehead refers as a complex nexus. And the only 
difference between organic bodies and physical objects is 
that in the former the nexus is much more complex. Such 
highly complex nexus is then termed a "social order". A 
society which can be analyzed into individual strands is 
said to be a "corpuscular society". 






75 


The recurrence or repetition of actual entities 
involves the inheritance by the entity in question of the 
character of another entity. When this process of inheri¬ 
tance is interpreted on the basis of the Ontological Prin¬ 
ciple it is only another way of describing the process of 
objectification, in which one entity objectifies itself in 
another through "feeling”. 

"The functioning of one actual entity in the self-cre¬ 
ation of another actual entity is the * objectification* 
of the former for the latter actual entity? (Ibid.,p.38) 

The essence of the dynamic character of the phi¬ 
losophy of organism lies in the concept of creativity. In 
one of his shorter essays Whitehead states that "Process 
for its intelligibility involves the notion of a creative 
activity belonging to the very essence of each occasion." 
This creative activity is the process if ingression of po¬ 
tentialities into the world of actuality, and the transfor¬ 
mation or concrescence involves self-enjoyment. Creativity 
entails decision from among different alternatives. The 
decision is accomplished through limitation, which in turn 
means the introduction of order. It may be argued that 
such order is imposed upon the realm of actual entities, 
since, according to the description of the principle of 
limitation there is some arbitrariness involved; but, accor¬ 
ding to Whitehead, the form, which is the expression of 
order, is simultaneous with the process of creativity. 



























.... 

. 


. 

' 

< 

. 






76 


This process of simultaneous coming into being of form %nd 

creativity is best exemplified in artistic creations. 

"Every actual occasion exhibits itself as a process: 
it is a becomingness. In so disclosing itself, it pla¬ 
ces itself as one among a multiplicity of other occa¬ 
sions, without which it could not be itself. It also 
defines itself as a particular individual achievement, 
focusing in its limited way an unbounded realm of 
eternal objects." (Sc. and the M. W. , p. 253) 

When an actual occasion has realized this "particular indi¬ 
vidual achievement”, when it has become fully coherent, it 
is said to fave reached "one determinate integral satisfac¬ 
tion. This means that an addition of any further element 
would make it an entirely different occasion. 

With respect to internal coherence the difference 
between idealism and the philosophy of organism consists 
in this, that idealism accepts reality as a system of 
thought consistent in itself; in other words, it is the 
consistency of ligic which underlies the consistency of 
reality. Whitehead does not begin with logic at all, but 
considers the becoming actuality self-consistent when it 
has achieved its definiteness. Thought does not enter in 
the picture at all, since the actuality does not come into 
being for a special purpose of being thought about and 
understood by the human mind. The conclusion at which one 
arrives from this argument is that Whitehead, in order to 
have remained fully self-consistent, should have spared 
himself the effort of creating his metaphysical system. 







77 


Philosophic systems do not come into being by spontaneous 
generation; theyare the product of the thought activities 
on the part of those who create them. The problem really 
revolves about the following question: Does the apparent 
universal belong intrinsically to the universe, or is it 
an ordering of thought which in turn projects itself into 
the universe? This is the Kantian problem which Whitehead 
sets out to solve once and for all by approaching it in a 
novel way. And the way is through the concept of pluralism. 
Whereas for Idealism the only actual entity is the Absolute, 
for pluralism such as Whitehead 1 s there is a reconciliation 
between the One and the Many. Idealist philosophies con¬ 
ceive the sufficient reason for Being, but this reason is 
not in the realm of actual entities, but in the logical 
systematization of thought. In the philosophy of organism 
the sufficient reason lies in Becoming, and the only way 
in which we can grasp this reason is not by logical analysis, 
but by some form of Bergsonian intuition. 

Ethical and Religious Implications 

"Religion is the translation of general ideas into par¬ 
ticular thoughts, particular emotions, and particular 
purposes; it is directed to the end of stretching indi¬ 
vidual interest beyond its self-defeating particularity." 
(Process and Reality, p. 23) 

On first reading Process and Reality one is left 
wondering as to what role Whitehead*s God plays in his 








78 


philosophy. We gradually realize, however, that Reason 

for him is more than simply a chance adaptation in the 

' 

struggle for survival; it is an intrinsic factor in the 
ordering of Nature. This same ordering of Nature also 
necessitates religious experience, without which the emotio¬ 
nal and the rational sides of our experience are in comp¬ 
lete disharmoiiy. But religion as he conceives it is a form 
of natural theology which prevents the development of both 
mysticism and scepticism. 

Process is creativity which in turn is God*s orde¬ 
ring of possibilities, so that they ingress into the world 
of concrescence with some relevance to each other. In this 
process of concrescence there are two phases to every con¬ 
crete actuality: the physical and the conceptual or mental 

phase. This same duality applies also to God. In the uai- 

. 

versal process, however, there is a difference between God 
as an actuality and the becoming actual entities. Whereas 
in the actual entities the conceptual phase is last in the 
order of realization, in God the mental or conceptual phase 
is first. Whitehead apparently is not confronted with the 
question as to why there should be such juxtaposition bet¬ 
ween these two phases. No explanation is required, since 
the Primordial Nature of God is ”given n . This element of 
givenness is the only formal condition of order without 
which there would be only chaos. It is the only element 



























* 

, 

, 

. 























79 


of stability in the universe. One of the eharaoteristics 
of the primordial nature of God is appetition for actuality; 
this appetition leads to creativity. Whitehead speaks of 
creativity as being the consequent nature of God. The pur- 
posive nature of God* therefore, is to attain complete 
satisfaction through creativity. 

By introducing the notion of purpose Whitehead 
in a way adopts Aristotle S s teleology. There is some dif¬ 
ference, however. For Aristotle the end was given and 
fixed; it was outside the thing and drawing the thing s s 
development toward it. For Whitehead the end is contained 
in the thing; there is an inner urge in the thing - its 
Subjective Aim to become itself. This is what constitutes 
the thing’s unity. It is for this reason that he calls it 
the n Principle of Concrescence”. Since this principle exer¬ 
cises discrimination in selection, it determines the degree 
with which other entities shall be prehended into the con¬ 
crescence of a particular thing. Such is Whitehead’s notion 
of purpose. 

God is not a static principle as conceived by 
Aristotle or by subsequent theologies. He is a principle 
which reconciles permanence with flux. The principle itself 
requires flux for its completion, while the world of actual 
entities requires permanence in the form of the primordial 
lature of God for its completion. God and the universe 
















' 














, 








' 












; 

, 

* 

* 


. - 

. 


- 

* 

. 

* 

■ 







80 


n stand over against one another expressing the final meta¬ 
physical truth that appetitive vision and physical enjoy¬ 
ment have equal claim to priority in creation”. 

Concerning objective immortality, Whitehead 
states that the present is constantly vanishing, but it is 
immortal in the consequent nature of God, who "saves the 
world as it passes into the immediacy of His own life”. 

The immediate present thus acquires a sense of objective 
immortality, and the immediate actuality takes on a value 
beyond itself. Yalue is the final aesthetic characteriza¬ 
tion of the world. 

"Thus value arises because there is now a real together¬ 
ness of the ideal aspects, as in thought, with the actu¬ 
al aspects, as in process of occurrence. Accordingly 
no value is to be ascribed to the underlying activity 
as divorced from the matter-of-fact events of the real 
world.” (Science and the Modern World, p. ) 

Although actual entities come into being and 
perish, the method of their actualization appears in succee¬ 
ding actualities. 

"In the philosophy of organism, it is not 1 substance* 
which is permanent, but ? form f . Forms suffer changing 
relations; actual entities ? perpetually perish 1 subjec¬ 
tively, but are immortal objectively.” (Process and 
Reality, p. 44) 

This is "objective immortality” as implied in the Consequent 
Nature of God. It may be interpreted from the viewpoint of 
prehension as meaning that every actual entity leaves an 
imprint of its pattern of becoming on the whole of the 









81 


universe. This is the notion of order which Whitehead 
incorporates into his ethical and aesthetic concepts. 

Critical Estimate 

In this general survey of Whitehead 1 s philosophy 
of organism only the main concepts have been reviewed. It 
has been shown that the universe as conceived by him con¬ 
sists of an active process in which every event prehends 
into itself all the relevant aspects of the universe. This 
process is regarded as living, and the only difference 
between life and matter is that of degree. By introducing 
the concept of generalized feeling, Whitehead shows us a 
new approach to life and matter - a new point of view which 
does not necessitate bifurcation. His main contention is 
that since the time of Descartes the notion of a divided 
universe has had a disastrous effect on all subsequent 
philosophy. 

The mode of experience which in the ease of man 
involves consciousness, is conceived as belonging to all. 
living things; the events in the universe are occasions of 
experience. There are no two distinct phases, but an intri¬ 
cately interwoven process, neither matter nor life can be 
understood in isolation, as presented to us by science. 

On this view there should really be no intrinsic difference 
between the biological and the physical sciences. Both 
deal with processes which differ in degree only - one 








32 


macrocosmic, and the other microcosmic. 

"The enormous success of the scientific abstractions, 
yielding on the one hand matter with its simple location 
in space and time, on the ’other hand mind, perceiving, 
suffering, reasoning, but not interfering, has foisted 
onto philosophy the task of accepting them as the most 
concrete rendering of fact." (Sc. and the M. W., p. 81) 

Whitehead maintains that the original sin of 
philosophy was the conception of dualism of mind and matter, 
and he tries to break away from this conception. It may be 
argued, hoxvever, that the original sin is not bifurcation 
but anthropomorphism, from which no philosophy can ever 
escape. Bergson’s thesis in this respect makes a logical 
appeal. We may not be able to escape entirely the anthro¬ 
pomorphic view of truth, but such truth may lie closer to 
some form of intuition than it does to reason. If we wish 
to find truth, we must lose ourselves in it and become one 
with it. Consciousness and reason keep us away from it. 

Having argued away Cartesian bifurcation of 
thought and extension, Whitehead replaces it with one of 
his own, namely, that of essence and existence, form and 
concrescence, Being and Becoming. It appears almost impos¬ 
sible to break away from some form of dualism. There is a 
type of conflict in the idea of the Absolute itself. It is 
a conflict between the notion of the Absolute as outside 
the universe, and the Absolute as inclusive; and in turn 
this leads to a conflict between the notions of internal 




























* 


t" * ' ' 

. 


- 

* 

* 





83 


and external relations. The Absolute as transcendent is 
opposed to the absolute as immanent. 

The eternal objects of the realm of possibility 
are not entirely separate and distinct from the concrete 
actualities in flux, even though they are not informing 
this flux and do not come into concretion. Whitehead’s 
concept of "negative prehensions" explains this relation¬ 
ship between the two realms. But if such is the case, 
that is, if there is some relationship, it is difficult 
to understand if he has placed his principle of limitation, 
which is God, entirely outside the "Whole", or merely out¬ 
side the concrete world of flux. If outside the W&ole, 
then, according to his own concept of the Whole, he has no 
logical right to do so. If outside the concrete world of 
flux, that is, in the realm of possibility, then he makes 
the mistake of considering this principle as an eternal 
object which he has already argued into concretion. 

From our consideration of eternal objects we 
find that God is an idea which ingressed into the spatio- 
temporal world. And since in Whitehead’s system ideas are 
| concretions of the same order as the rest of the world of 
actuality, God therefore is a concretion. If so. He cannot 
be the principle of limitatetion and concretion. 










84 


"The primary situation disclosed in cognitive experience 
is*ego-object amid objects 1 . By this I mean that the 
primary fact is an impartial world transcending the 
f here-now* which marks the ’ego-object 1 , and transcen¬ 
ding the ’now* which is the spatial world of simulta¬ 
neous realization. It is a world also including the 
actuality of the past, and the limited potentiality of 
the future, together with the complete world of abstract 
potentiality, the realm of eternal objects, which tran¬ 
scends and finds exemplification in and comparison with, 
the actual course of realization. The ego-object, as 
consciousness here-now, is conscious of its experient 
essence as constituted by its internal relatedness to 
the world of realities, and to the world of ideas." 
(Science and the Modern World, p. 218) 

Whitehead 1 3 view of perception becomes more 
complicated as he unfolds his arguments; and the reason 
for this is that despite his denial of bifurcation, he does 
introduce it in order to explain his concept of "simple 
location". Sense data are explained both as qualities of 
the actual entities and as sensations of the percipient. 
Thus the qualities are considered as actual entities which 
affect the percipient’s immediate environment, which is 
the body. This results in feelings, called "sense-data". 
Then these sense-data are used in turn as symbols to objec¬ 
tify presentational immediacy. By introducing this double 
aspect of sense data, Whitehead is actually falling in line 
with Cartesian dualistic thinking. 

By "objectification" he means the reproduction 
in a particular actual entity of the feelings of another 
entity. From his description of feelings one can gather 















v 




































• 




























, 



' 






















» ■ 


. 

. 








85 


that they apply only to something transient and in the 
present immediacy of an actual entity. But by introducing 
the notion of objective immortality he assumes that the 
same feeling must come into being again. There is thus a 
contradiction in his views. 

There is another category of feelings which 
Whitehead calls "Propositional" feelings. They are enti¬ 
ties halfway between eternal objects and particular actual 
entities. They are classified under a special Category of 
Existence, and no reason is given for such special classi¬ 
fication. They are a meeting ground between physical fee¬ 
ling and conceptual feeling. It appears, however, that 
this is the exact position of the actual entities.. Accor¬ 
ding to WfoLtehead a proposition is not a pure potential, 
but a potentiality for fact, referring to certain definite 
actual entities as its ligical subjects. In Locke’s words, 
"it is an idea determined to particular existences". Pro¬ 
positions which do not refer to some actual entities are 
not propositions at all. 

"Nothing is more impressive than the fact that as 
mathematics withdrew increasingly into the upper regions 
of ever greater extremes of abstract thought, it retur¬ 
ned back to earth with a corresponding growth of impor¬ 
tance for the analysis of concrete fact.” (Ibid., p.48) 

In mathematics as well as in logic if any proposition has 

a certain form, certain other forms of propositions are 

implied in it. As soon as we assign some definite value 






















- 

' 










■ 

' 

- 

. 

4 





, 

' 


* 




■' 

. 

' 




















, 











86 


to the variable the proposition then refers to some actual 

entities as logical subjects, and it presupposes also some 

systematic order in the actual world. This is what White- 

head calls an "indicative system". 

"Every proposition presupposes some general nexus with 
an indicative rational system. This nexus includes 
its locus of judging subjects and also its logical 
subjects. This presupposition is part of the proposi¬ 
tion, and the proposition cannot be entertained by any 
subject for which the presupposition is not valid." 
(Process and Reality, p. E97) 

There is a distinction between proposition and 
judgment. Whitehead’s criticism of the preceding philoso¬ 
phical systems consists in the fact that, as he claims, 
they have treated propositions as if they were true or false 
logical judgments. But propositions cannot be judged as 
true or false; they are merely "lures for feeling", or possi¬ 
bilities envisaged by the prehending subject as having rele¬ 
vance for realization. This also means that no conscious¬ 
ness is necessarily involved in propositional feelings. It 
has already been shown that Whitehead assimilates conscious¬ 
ness to other events of the universe; it is just another 
case of prehension. 

Certain metaphysical propositions may be true, 
but following Whitehead’s reasoning we can say that their 
truth or falsehood depends on our cosmic epoch. All propo¬ 
sitions of mathematics are shown to be metaphysical. If so, 
they should be true for all possible cosmic epochs. Is it 








87 


impossible to envisage a cosmic epoch in which such propo¬ 
sitions may not apply? Thus it may be asked: Is it at all 
possible to formulate a metaphysical proposition? In mathe 
matical propositions such as 1 4- 1 - 2, or in logical pro¬ 
positions such as "man is mortal", we are 

"stating a truth concerning the wide societies of enti¬ 
ties amid which our lives are placed. It is a truth 
concerning this cosmos , but not a metaphysical truth." 
(Process and Reality, p. 302) 

Such is Whitehead’s own admission. It may be added that 
we have no logical right to speak of propositions which do 
not pertain to our cosmos as true or false. If such pro¬ 
positions can be construed they are mere nonsense. 

Something may be said with regard to generali¬ 
zation as it appears in the philosophy of organism. During 
every process of generalization there is always the use of 
present experience. How does Whitehead define metaphysical 
generalization? Having first criticized Descartes for the 
sin of starting his metaphysical speculation from original 
clear and distinct ideas, he states that philosophic gene¬ 
ralization is 

"the utilization of specific notions applying to a 
restricted group of facts, for the divination of the 
generic notions which apply to all facts." (Ibid., p.8) 

What else are the specific notions but original clear and 

distinct ideas? 

Having arrived at a scheme of general principles 
metaphysical speculation must then see if this scheme 














88 


explains our experience. If it does, it "becomes "catego¬ 
rical”. The philosophy of organism is just such categori¬ 
cal scheme. Whitehead claims that the general scheme with 
which he begins his metaphysics is the outcome of his gene¬ 
ralizations which are simply enlarged and discussed in the 
subsequent elaboration. Therefore the method is not deduc¬ 
tive. Nevertheless it may be argued that the method is 
that of mathematics, and that the categories are postulates 
from which he deduces his generalizations. It appears that 
these postulates in so far as Whitehead is concerned are 
nothing else but "clear and distinct ideas". 

Whitehead claims that if induction is to be 
justfied it is necessary to have a metaphysic which would 
show the universe as systematic and divisible into partial 
systems with varying degrees of mutual relevance. Since 
both induction and measurement &re the foundation of science, 
he feels justified in developing his metaphysical system. 

His claim rests upon the argument that since there is obser¬ 
vable and measurable regularity in science, there must be 
similar regularity in nature. This, of course, is an 
assumption which in no way proves that the universe is not 
a chaos. The age old problem as to whether the world is a 
reflection of the mental order, or whether the mind is a 
reflection of some universal order, has not been solved. 
Whitehead is making the same type of assumption which had 






89 


been challenged by Kant, namely, that since there is know¬ 
ledge in the form of order and relatedness, there must be 
a system of order and relatedness in nature. 

He tries to avoid the dualistic impasse of Kant 
by introducing into his philosophy the Ontological Prin¬ 
ciple according to which the n laws of nature” constitute 
an order in the actual entities. These laws are intrinsic 
in the constitution of the actual entities. They are merely 
descriptions of dominant characters of societies in the 
realm of actuality. A set of such dominant characters 
forms a cosmic epoch which comes into being and then decays, 
being gradually replaced by some &ther cosmic epoch. 

"Here the phrase ’cosmic epoch’ is used to mean that 
widest society of actual entities whose immediate rele¬ 
vance to ourselves is traceable. This epoch is charac¬ 
terized by electronic and protonic actual entities, and 
by yet more ultimate actual entities which can be dimly 
discerned in the quanta of energy.” (Ibid., p. 139) 

Thus our epoch is characterized by macrocosMc solar systems 
and by mierocosmic atomic events. 

A society is a nexus of entities enjoying a more 
or less independent existence. The ooject of the philoso¬ 
phy of organism is to explain the unified ordering in their 
existence. The human body which is an example of a society 
has attained a method of ordering through the highly coor- 
linated entity - the brain. This suggests the idea that in 
the human society the most democratic form of ordering or 




90 

control would be the one in which, unlike in the body, 
there is least amount of centralization. The bodies of 
lowest organisms would follow this type of ordering. 

The only difference between organic and inorga¬ 
nic societies is that in the former there is a beginning 
of conceptual feeling or conceptual prehension which ena¬ 
bles the organdie body to prehend its environment in cons¬ 
tantly changing and novel ways. They are not moulded in 
set forms or tied to general patterns in the same way as 
are the inorganic societies. This conception explains 
adaptation and the evolutionary process. However, the 
universal urge to creativity is present in differing amounts 
in both types of society. 

"It is the task of philosophic speculation to conceive 
the happenings of the universe so as to render under¬ 
standable the outlook of physical science and to com¬ 
bine this outlook with these direct persuasions the 
basic facts upon which epistemology must build. The 
weakness of the epistemology of the eighteenth and nine¬ 
teenth centuries was that it based itself purely upon 
a narrow formulation of sense-perception." (Science and 
the Modern World, p. ) 

Whitehead’s philosophy is an opposition to both 
the New Realism and the philosophy of Logical Analysis.. 
Logical analysts, positivists as well as empiricists, refuse 
to deal with existences in their analytic method. Russell, 
for example, argues that metaphysics should not deal with 
sxistence at all. Thus metaphysics becomes a speculation 
about the possible, and should not be considered as a 









91 


philosophic method. But Whitehead, on the other hand, 
insists on existence being a fundamental notion in philo¬ 
sophy. In the process of developing his conception of 
existence he deviates from his belief that pure mathematics, 
for example, are a priori, and claims that the equations 
of pure mathematics cannot come into being without there 
being some form of actual existence. From his viewpoint, 
therefore, if we say that metaphysics deals with the world 
of mere possibility, we are not saying anything at all. 

In metaphysics it must be assumed that "something given 
exists". 

From the viewpoint of logical analysis most of 
Whitehead 1 s propositions, being of metaphysical nature, 
become emptied of meaningfulness. For example, he states 
that "process is the ultimate". One has a perfectly logi¬ 
cal right to make this into a statement such as: The ulti¬ 
mate is process. This proposition is without meaning, for 
by asking the question: What is process? the only answer 
that one reaches at the conclusion of a long metaphysical 
speculation is that process is the ultimate. Being a purely 
analytic proposition, it has given us no new information. 

If A is B, what is B? And the answer is that B is A. It 
must be remembered, however, that the two methods are not 
dealing with this problem on the same ground. 








92 


For Whitehead logical positivism is extreme 
irrationalism; it does not search for reasons, for it does 
not extend to anything beyond mere observation. What then 
should be the aim of philosophy? In answer to this ques- 
tion he says: "Thus one aim of philosophy is to challenge 
the half-truths constituting the scientific first prin¬ 
ciples.” It may be pointed out that the hypotheses of 
science which he calls half-truths are constantly challenged 
without involving any philosophic generalities. It is the 
scientific method of testing and experimentation which 
constitute the constant challenge to "half-truths”. This 
is one of Dewey’s arguments in opposition to Whitehead’s 
metaphysics. 

In concluding this survey it may be stated that 
the tremendous contribution made by Whitehead to modern 
philosophic thinking can be compared only to those which 
Locke, Descartes and Kant made to the general thought of 
their respective periods. As stated in the introductory 
remarks, our age is perhaps not quit© ready to appreciate 
the full significance of his concepts, especially those 
which are entirely novel. What are these main concepts? 
First of all he replaced the concept of "substance" ?/ith 
the concept of "event”. This is the foundation of the 
whole idea of Process. Secondly, there is his concept of 











* 








, 






, 


( 

. 


■< • 

. 

* 

, 







93 


"concrescence” or growth. This notion restores to the 
universe the n soul n which materialism had driven out. 
Finally, he conceived the notion of the interaction and 
blending of the physical and the mental, so that the uni¬ 
verse becomes one creative Whole. 












. 















94 


PRAGMATISM AND THE INSRUMMTAL METHOD OF DEWEY 

American Pragmatism - Historical Factors 

In order to understand Dewey*s contributions to 
modern philosophic thinking and to our cultural life in 
general, it is necessary to review the historical develop¬ 
ments which culminated in his instrumentalist approach. 

We cannot underestimate the tremendous influence that his 
philosophy has had upon all phases of our cultural life. 
Philosophy according to Dewey is an intrinsic part of the 
culture which prevail* during a particular period. There¬ 
fore it can be neither the whole cause, nor the whole 
effect of that culture. Like all other phases of modern 
culture, philosophy should be an element of interaction 
with all these phases. 

Ours is a constantly changing culture. What 
then should be the function of philosophy under such cir¬ 
cumstances? Should it be regarded as the highest possible 
attainment of the mind, or should it be accepted as an 
expression of the material foundations of life? Or should 
philosophy be an intelligent integration of our inherent 
tendencies to look backward for guidance and forward for 
inspiration in the solution of our everyday problems? 

Philosophy interacts not only with the existing 
cultural elements, but also with its own past history. 

As Dewey explains it, philosophy carries out of the past 
its own deadening weight. His object, especially after 






>■ 

- 



' 



- 

« 












95 


1925, was to examine critically this dead material which 
comes to us from the ancient philosophies in variously 
modified forms, and continually clutters up our newer modes 
of thinking. We should analyze the philosophies of the 
past ages on the basis of their relevance to the general 
culture prevailing at the time. Dewey^s thesis aims at 
pointing out that although Greek philosophy, for example, 
had a direct bearing on the interaction of the elements in 
Greek culture, its constant reappearance in varied forms 
in our Western civilisation has had a retarding effect on 
out philosophic intelligence. 

The pragmatic mode of thinking arose in a way 
of protest against Monistic Idealism which dominated philo¬ 
sophical thinking at the end of the nineteenth and at the 
beginning of the present century. The common factor in 
various schools of idealism was the age old search for an 
active mind, which in some way imposes final harmony upon 
the universe. It is true that Whitehead, for example, has 
completely departed from the ancient and classical trans¬ 
cendentalism, but even with him the influence of idealism 
shows itself in the interpretation of the scientific order 
in things. This interpretation tends to point to the 
objectivity of the order. The objectivity is no longer the 
Absolute in the sense of the classic schools of Idealism; 
it has become humanized and made more this»worldly. 





96 


Thefte were a number of important steps which led 
to the development of pragmatism, finally appearing in the 
instrumentalism of Dewey. There was first of all the influ¬ 
ence of the rapidly growing sciences of biology, genetics 
and psychology. The new discoveries in these fields caused 
the empiricists to turn away from the notion of what we 
ought to think and believe to the interest in how we think 
and why we believe as we do. They refused to concern them¬ 
selves with any preconceived validity of our beliefs. Thus 
we can follow this early formulation of the pragmatic view¬ 
point in G.3.Peirce. He proposed the idea that philosophy 
should take on a practical aspect. Validity of knowledge 
may be arrived at by the use of the scientific method; and 
truth is the outcome of the universal agreement among those 
who have found new knowledge. 

The discoveries in biological sciences together 
with new scientific principles and techniques introduced 
into practical problems of our industrial life were reflec¬ 
ted in the growth of the new conception of mind as neither 
a passive recipient, nor an active creator, but a product 
of an interactive process. This conception showed itself 
in a growing tendency to analyze things-in-relation and not 
merely synthesize individual phenomena. A tremendous impe¬ 
tus to this new way of philosophic thinking was given by 
William James when he proposed to make psychology a natural 










. 

■ 


. 

* 




. 

. 












97 


science. The notion that intelligence and morals could be 
treated as subjects for experimental investigation had a 
striking effect on Dewey. It resulted in the basic notion 
that thought could be considered as activity, and that ideas 
are instrumental. The meaning of pragmatism as expounded 
by Peirce involves the modification of existence by the 
application of concepts and ideas to the solution of prob¬ 
lems and thus changing the situations presented to us in 
experience. Dewey’s formulation of the theory is based 
mainly on the idea that thought is an instrument by means 
of which man adapts himself to the environment. 

•The most characteristic feature of pragmatism 
is the "recognition of an inseparable connection between 
National cognition and rational purpose". There nan be 
only one meaning of a word or an idea, and that is the mea¬ 
ning conceived in terms of the bearing the word or the idea 
has upon human conduct and human life as a ihole. 

"It is true that the theory according to Peirce’s con¬ 
ception implies essentially a certain relation to action, 
to human conduct. But the role of action is that of an 
intermediary. In order to be able to attribute a mea¬ 
ning to concepts, one must be able to apply them to exis¬ 
tence. low it is by means of action tjaat this applica¬ 
tion is made possible. And the modification of existence 
which results from this application constitutes the true 
meaning of concepts." (Dewey: Development of American 
Pragmatism) 

The rudimentary concepts of pragmatism which were 
introduced by Peirce, had been extended by James. He claimed 




98 


that every idea which we have of an object is in the final 
analysis an idea of the possible effects the object can 
have on us. The effective meaning of an idea always con¬ 
sists of some particular consequences in our practical 
experience. He had reached this conclusion as a result of 
his psychological consideration of perception. He criti¬ 
cized the atomistic theory of perception which had come 
down to us from the early empiricists sueh as Locke and 
Hume. This theory inevitably leads to a solipsist impasse 
which Kant tried to avoid by endowing mind with a priori 
categories. James argued that experience is not composed 
of distinct and separate sensations which, according to the 
atomists are connected by the intervention of the mind. 
Experience is a continuous process, and the relations are 
as much parts of experience as the things related. The 
mental activity in perception is primarily analytic, not 
synthetic. 

Dewey’s early philosophic enterprise consisted 
in breaking down Kantian dualism between judgments of fact 
and judgments of value. He finally reached the conclusion 
that ideas or univers&ls (as they appear in the philosophy 
of Kant), are an intrinsic part of experience; they are 
functional plans in all human experience. This viewpoint 
places the emphasis on the interconnection and continuity 
between scientific and ethical judgments. The so-called 




99 


universal judgments cannot function apart from the plans, 

habits and tendencies of the one who judges. 

rT I cannot help feeling that an adequate analysis of 
actuality would exhibit the woild of fact and the world 
of ideas as two correspondent objective statements of 
the active process itself, - correspondent because each 
has a work to do, in the doing of which it needs to be 
helped by the other.” (From a letter to William James) 

Nature consists neither of free agents nor of lifeless 
masses; it is composed of processes and movement in con¬ 
stant interactivity. Mind is only one of these interacting 
processes; it must therefore be studied from the viewpoint 
of what it accomplishes in its interaction. Consequently 
Dewey conceives mind as as instrument which redirects acti¬ 
vities according to the anticipation of their consequences. 
In his own words: 

"Pragmatism presents itself as an extension of historical 
empiricism with this fundamental difference, that it does 
not insist upon antecedent phenomena but upon consequent 
phenomena; not upon the precedents but upon the possibi¬ 
lities of action, and this change in point of view is 
almost revolutionary in its consequences.” (Dewey: Deve¬ 
lopment of American Pragmatism) 


Reconstruction in Philosophy 

Dewey®s thinking which had been gradually shaping 
itself and developing a distinct instrumentalist character 
under the influence mainly of Peirce and James found its 
clearest expression in his Reconstruction in Philosophy. 

We may now review the fundamental postulates with which he 
proposes to ■undertake the task of reconstruction. The basic 






100 


postulate is that all problems of philosophy grow out of 
social interaction; these problems undergo modification and 
change with the continuous changes in human life. The pre¬ 
valence of strife and conflict, and the sense of insecurity 
arising therefrom, lead to uncertainty and pessimism. The 
circumstances of the day are bound to have their influence 
on philosophic thought. The tendency therefore is to for¬ 
mulate systems which either have no bearing at all on the 
affairs of the day, or which attempt to establish a philo¬ 
sophic refuge of certainty and security. 

When Dewey criticizes the systems of the past, he 
does so not so much on the ground of their irrelevancy to 
the problems of their age, as on the ground that they are 
of no concrete value to the solution of our own problems. 

In spite of the fact that philosophic thinking has been 
undergoing change and modification, it has not been a change 
which would lead to a philosophy able to deal with the pro¬ 
blems of the day. We must have a philosophy which will do 
for our age and our culture what some of the systems of the 
past have done for their respective cultures. 

We can see from this basic postulate that Dewey 1 s 
philosophy does not for one moment leave the common every¬ 
day world. Many philosophers before had begun with the 

world of everyday experience, but in most cases they ended 
up with a world of their own making, a world to which they 










; C:: 


* 








- ' t - 


. 










' 








* 














101 


were led by their own arguments. Dewey’s arguments, how¬ 
ever, keep us in close touch with the empirical world; his 
is truly the philosophy of experience, for, as he explains, 
there can be only one experience: that of the world expe¬ 
rienced. Experience gives rise to philosophic arguments 
about the world, but no arguments can give rise to the 
world experienced, however soundly they may be founded on 
logic. The most theoretical of scientists, in the final 
analysis, resorts not to argumentation in proving his point, 
but to experimentation which is a highly advanced technique 
in experience. The attitude of those schools of philosophy 
today which still maintain that theory is above practice, 
and that philosophy is a privileged method of discovering 
truth by pure argument - such attitude is an indication of 
the survival of the ancient and medieval beliefs and super¬ 
stitions. 

Why should theory in philosophy be more privi¬ 
leged than theory in science? The test by experience has 
proved to be the only workable kind of argument in science, 
why should it not be applied in philosophy also? Are philo¬ 
sophers specially endowed with some supra-natural powers 
permitting them to attain knowledge of the Absolute in some 
supra-empirical way? To make philosophy an active instru¬ 
ment in the solution of real problems of life, philosophers 
must recognize the fact that they are of this world. The 






















. 




. 


, 

■ 


. 


, 



















102 


reason why philosophy is so slow in becoming a useful tool 
in the hands of man is not entirely due to the stubborn 
attitude of individual philosophers. It is mainly because 
of our culture being so deeply rooted in the traditions of 
the past. The individual philosophers fail to project their 
views into the future, for these views are but a residue of 
the past. Our scientific culture is constantly held back 
in its progress by heavy chains of conservative dogma and 
tradition. And the classic philosophies are the systema¬ 
tised forms of these dogma and traditions. Therefore philo¬ 
sophy should be held responsible at least for still clin¬ 
ging to methods of thinking which science has long ago 
demonstrated to have no bearing on life. Philosophy has 
been evading the real issues under pretense that it had tp 
deal with a greater reality - a reality not of this world. 
Dewey’s object is to rid philosophy of this pretense. 

Intelligence with Dewey takes on a very practi¬ 
cal aspect. It is no longer a special faculty to be used 
in the attainment of truth; it is no longer considered as 
something ready-made and "given”. It bears a generalized 
meaning of a method of "observation, experiment and reflec¬ 
tive reasoning which have in a very short time revolutio¬ 
nized the physical and, to a considerable degree, the phy¬ 
siological conditions of life”. Having proved a very suc¬ 
cessful method in science, intelligence should be more 







103 


fully introduced in the solution of all problems of human 
endeavor# 

Since the ancient and classical philosophies are 
no longer applicable in our scientific age, since they have 
no functional value in our life, we must carry out a recon¬ 
struction in all our concepts which have been handed down 
to us by these philosophies. It is essential, for example, 
that we reconstruct our theory of knowledge; it can no lon¬ 
ger be considered apart from our activity. The theory of 
the so-called empirical knowledge was based on preconcep¬ 
tions which did not arise from any activity of the type 
that goes on in scientific inquiry# 

Philosophy is a human affair; it arises out of 
the needs and activities of human beings# After all, was 
it not the pressure of practical needs and desires which 
prompted the earliest forms of speculation? With respect 
to classical philosophies, they all have one thing in com¬ 
mon: they all arrived at something which was fixed, eternal 
and out of time. This eternal n something" was all-pervasive. 
Such philosophical thinking had arisen out of the natural 
sciences of the day; the latter had assumed certain fixed 
and immutable entities, such as matter or atoms, which 
supposedly were behind the changing reality. The position 
of modern science is different, however. 

"In science the order of fixities has already passed 





104 


irretrievably into an order of connections in process ,” 
(Reconstruction in Philosophy, Intro, p. xl) 

There is therefore a resulting tendency in philosophical 

systems (Whitehead’s, for instance), to think in terms of 

process. 


The classical philosophies, then, searched for 
absolute universality. Now it is commonly recognized that 
there is n such a thing as relative - that is relational - 
universality”. This relative universality as it appears 
in scientific inquiry is not something given by nature or 
fixed by God; it is a system of events taken out of their 
isolation. Whereas classical philosophy as such was a 
search for the immutable and the eternal, science is simply 
a steady process in knowledge. With respect to philosophi¬ 
cal thinking in general there is very little difference 
between a scientific hypothesis and a philosophic specula¬ 
tion. The difference lies in the eventual applicability of 
the two. A hypothesis is an attempt at seeing the world in 
a new way. With its first appearance it is impossible to 
tell if it will fall under the care of science or of philo¬ 
sophy. 

"It is a case of ’science 1 if and when its field of 
application is so specific, so limited, that passage 
into it is comparatively direct - in spite of the emo¬ 
tional uproar attending its appearance - as, for exam¬ 
ple, in the case of Darwin’s theory. It is designated 
’philosophy 1 when its area of application is so compre¬ 
hensive that it is not possible for it to pass directly 
into formulations of such form and content as to be 







105 


serviceable in immediate conduct of specific inquiry. 11 
(Ibid. Intro, p. xviii) 

Changing Conceptions 

In analyzing the changing conceptions of philo¬ 
sophy Dewey takes memory as the principal factor in human 
experience. It is memory and the process of association 
which put man above other animals. They enable him to make 
use of symbols and thus record his experiences. Without 
this possibility of communication and transmission of expe¬ 
riences, man would not be a social being. It is quite evi¬ 
dent that memory has a functional value in man 1 s adaptation 
to his environment. 

"The past is recalled not because of itself, but because 
of what it adds to the present." (Ibid., p. 2) 

In primitive man memory functioned as"vicarious 
experience” without involving dangers and troubles of actu¬ 
al experience. Past experiences in the form of memory add 
interest and enjoyment to the practical endeavors or to the 
leisure of the moment. Consequently such memory experien¬ 
ces in primitive man led to imagination and fancy. Those 
memories which carried the greatest emotional value for the 
solution of the present problem led to the origin of myths 
and folk tales. The far-fetched and other-worldly content 
of these myths is the result of both the intensity of emo¬ 
tion and the inaccuracy of memory in primitive man. But 










106 


these were the elements which in a highly dramatized and 
imaginative form gave him comfort, satisfaction and a sense 
of security as he went out to face the problems of the day. 

It was out of such practical circumstances that 
philosophy arose. Thus Dewey advises us to loolc for the 
origins of philosophy in the factors of memory and drama, 
based on active imagination. The consciousness of man is 
predominantly filled with emotional drives rather than with 
intellectual pursuits. This was primarily so before man 
had undergone a strict form of training in the hands of 
social disciplines. With the gradual process of socializa¬ 
tion he began to check his emotional fancies by comparing 
them with facts. Nevertheless the undisciplined part of 
human nature still predominates. For the most part man still 

"lives in a world of dreams, rather than of facts, and 
a world of dreams that is organized about desires whose 
success and frustration form its stuff.” (Ibid., p. 7) 

The experiences out of which philosophy finally 
emerged are irrelevant to modern science. They are highly 
emotional, symbolic and figurative, and before they can be 
considered as philosophy they must pass through two stages 
of generalization. There is first the consolidation of 
myths and legends - the living over of original experiences 
in dramatization. This is the process of social generaliza¬ 
tion whereby the life of the individual becomes coordinated 
I with the life of the group. We eventually find certain 







. 


. 






. 


- 

. 

. 


. 

' 









107 


traditional norms. By a process of education individuals 
are inducted into these cults, doctrines and traditions. 

With the development of political organization 
the cultural and traditional doctrines become more fully 
consolidated. From the viewpoint of greater political 
power and prestige, it was highly expedient to have the 
maximum consolidation of belief. The social influence on 
the organization of doctrines and cults led to a process of 
systematization of philosophy. And the motive for this 
logical systematization was "the need of reconciling the 
moral rules and ideals embodied in the traditional code 
with the matter-of-fact positivistic knowledge which gradu¬ 
ally grows up.” 

The common beliefs of the community persist for 
a long time side by side with the primitive scientific 
knowledge. There arise many interconnecting links between 
the two. At the same time there develops a distinction 
between two types of activity based on class distinctions. 
All mental preoccupations, such as matters of religion and 
philosophy, become the special fields of activity for the 
ruling classes; the activities related to the matter of fact 
knowledge belong to the artisan class. We see this condi¬ 
tion exemplified in G-reece at the time of Plato and Aris¬ 
totle. The man who possessed practical everyday knowledge 
lacked prestige. Only with the Sophists did philosophy 





108 


acquire a more popular character. 

The separation of "true knowledge" from "matter- 
of-fact" knowledge introduced the greatest amount of confu¬ 
sion into subsequent philosophical thinking. In this res¬ 
pect Dewey*s main contention is that the empirical philoso¬ 
phers from Locke through Hume to Kant have not deviated to 
any great extent from the Greek conception of mind as a 
thing that knows or is capable of knowing. He refers to 
this conception as "the spectator theory" of knowledge. 

The mind is regarded as an outside observer; it does not 
interact with the object of its observation. If there is 
any activity on the part of the mind, it in no way affects 
the thing known, for mind is "pure activity", completely 
divorced from the activity of the degraded matter of fact 
world. This notion led to a complete separation between 
"absolute" knowledge and matter of fact knowledge; the acti¬ 
vity of the mind was regarded as consisting solely of theo¬ 
retical argumentation and logical reasoning. It was con¬ 
ceived that through this form of activity the mind was 
capable of arriving at absolute certainty and truth, and 
thus finally unite with the immutable Being full of good¬ 
ness and beauty and devoid of all earthly evils. 

It was the problem of moral values that kept phi¬ 
losophy and matter-of-fact practical knowledge in constant 
separation. The latter type of knowledge was considered as 




109 


definitely inferior to the knowledge of ultimate ends and 
purposes. Nevertheless the growth of practical or scienti¬ 
fic knowledge was bound to have its influence on the accen¬ 
ted cultural and traditional beliefs of the day. "Tradition 
was noble in aim and scope, but uncertain in foundation." 

The influence of the Socratic school and that of 
the Sophists was of such nature that metaphysics was even¬ 
tually accepted as a coordinator of higher moral values, 
taking place of custom. This was a natural tendency in re¬ 
conciling the two products of mental activity: empirical 
knowledge oh the one hand, and the search for a unifying 
principle or Being on the other. This tendency had persis¬ 
ted until very recent times. At least some of the structure 
of the past had to be saved at all cost before the onslaught 
of the present - the beliefs of the past had to be justified 
in the form of metaphysics. In classical times such justi¬ 
fications used to appear in the form of new schools of phi¬ 
losophy. In Greece, for example, the philosophies of Plato 
and Aristotle were justifications of Greek religious, cultu¬ 
ral and social life. In Germany the philosophy of Hegel was 
a justification of German political institutions; and to 
follow Dewey’s argument to its logical conclusion, in Ameri¬ 
ca pragmatism ought to be regarded as just such justifica¬ 
tion of the "American way of life". 

Another way in which philosophy has been preser- 




no 


ving old customs and traditions has been in the form of 
logic. If old doctrines can no longer be accepted as true 
on the basis of social authority, and if their truth cannot 
be tested by means of empirical methods, they must be proven 
true by means of logical argument. The result of this ten¬ 
dency in philosophy is quite obvious: the aim on the part 
of most schools to demonstrate certainty and ultimate truth. 
Dewey refers to these pretensions of philosophy as being 
overambitious. Nevertheless all classical philosophies drew 
a sharp line of demarkation between twp realms of existence. 
The metaphysical realm consisted of all those elements which 
arose from the original religious, traditional and social 
life of the people. It became ”tft@ world of highest and 
ultimate reality”. On the other hand there was the empirical 
and phenomenal world of everyday experience. This was the 
world of science. Philosophy had claimed the possession of 
a higher faculty of knowledge than that of science. Science 
was prepared to give us only probabilities, but philosophy 
was certain that it could disclose the nature of ultimate 
truth. 

G-reek mathematicians had shown the philosophers 
how the mind knows the Absolute; the immutable Being or the 
imiversal Form becomes as true and certain as the fact that 
the angles of an equilateral triangle are equal. The simp¬ 
licity of the argumant is very striking, and we should not 




Ill 


wonder that it originated with the Greeks, for simplicity 
in everything was their outstanding characteristic. For 
them real knowledge was not of changing world of Becoming, 
but of the permanent world of Being. The only way to such 
knowledge was the way of mathematics and logic - the way of 
pure Reason. 

The earliest beginnings of modern science v/ere 
founded more on Greek logical and mathematical thinking than 
on experimentation. The latter was only a supplementary 
procedure, and besides, it was employed only by the artisans 
and those who, because of their class position, had to deal 
only with bimJbe matter. The scientists who almost wholly 
liberated themselves from the philosophical tenets were the 
ones who descended from these early artisans. And it was 
during the hectic times af the general revolt against autho¬ 
ritarianism that science strode out freely and independently 
into the field of experimentation - the only positive road 
to knowledge. It was the trend toward individualism that 
helped science in its rapid progress. In philosophy this 
same trend became evident in the growth of rationalism and 
empiricism, both extremely antagonistic to the authoritarian 
dogma. 

Dewey 1 s account of classical philosophy rests 
mainly on his view 

"of the origin of philosophy out of the background 




112 


of authoritative tradition; a tradition originally dictated 
by man’s imagination working under the influence of love 
and hate and in the interest of emotional excitement and 
satisfaction." (Reconstruction in Philosophy, p. 24) 

Thus he explains the origin of philosophy not as purely 

intellectual, but social and emotional. His view of the 

historic development of classical philosophy aims at pro- 

ducing a contrast between philosophy and the scientific 

method, at showing the unquestionable superiority of science, 

and at developing new concepts of the function of philosophy 

in harmony with our scientific age. Philosophy should aim 

at clarifying men’s ideas as to social and moral strife of 

their own day. 

The idea which Dewey brings forward in order to 
explain the existing state of philosophic thinking is that 
scientific inquiry has had a tremendous influence on all 
phases of human activity. Science produced a general uphea¬ 
val in our concepts, our beliefs, our political life and 
our morals. Because of the very rapid development of science 
the old schools of philosophy took over the jurisdiction in 
the field of morals and ideals of conduct. This division of 
the scientific world from the ideal world forms the basis of 
our present day problems. 

As the outcome of this division there is a steady 
stream of criticism coming from those who are on the "spiri¬ 
tual" side against the inroads made by science into the 

























' 




























. 

« , 

, 

' 




















113 


fields of human activity over which, according to the cri¬ 
tics, it must not claim any jurisdiction. It is commonly 
contended by these critics that the general condition of 
disorder and uncertainty in the sphere of human affairs are 
the result of science dealing with everything human in the 
same way as it deals with the world of inorganic matter. 

The real issue, however, is that science has not made any 
systematic attempt as yet to deal with human conduct by 
using a truly experimental method. This factor, according 
to Dewey, should claim our utmost consideration in any re¬ 
construction in philosophy. 

Science and philosophy had begun from the same 
point in their search of knowledge, beauty and truth. But 
the farther they progressed, the farther apart they moved. 
The object of their search in the final analysis may be con¬ 
sidered as still the same, but the ways they follow are 
quite divergent. Why are their ways divergent? asks Dewey. 
Like in the days of the Greek philosophers, when science 
and philosophy were born of the single effort, so today they 
both aim at grasping the same reality which the Greeks 
thought they had grasped. The divergence between the two 
methods is so pronounced because what philosophy considers 
as real is not the real of science, For philosophy it is 
still something permanent and immutable; for science it is 
something which is experienced and modified through expe- 






114 


rience. Thus the new science rejected the old philosophic 
concept of the ultimate reality. This was a crisis that 
philosophy could not hear. Science had nothing to say 
about the mind or the soul. Even Descartes’ compromise 
between the ancient concept of the soul and the new trend 
toward empiricism could not produce any lasting harmony 
between science and philosophy. 

It is most logical for Dewey to regard Francis 
Bacon as ”the real founder of modern thought”. Baconfs 
precept "Knowledge is power” may be accepted as the prag¬ 
matic criterion. There is no doubt that his criticism of 
the so-called learning of his day must have tremendously 
influenced all subsequent thinking. He &ad a clear idea of 
the function of knowledge, and did not hesitate to expose 
the contemporary pseudo-knowledge. His critical attitude 
was steadily bent on showing that the true aim of knowledge 
should be the control of the forces of nature. Of course, 
he was in no position to be able to elaborate on the methods 
of such knowledge; he lived before his time. 

Bacon’s criticism was directed not only against 
the cobwebbed scholasticism of the Middle Ages, but also 
indirectly against Aristotelianism which was the foundation 
of scholastic methods. The hair-splitting logic had conque¬ 
red men’s minds, but did nothing to conquer nature. Logical 







. 

. 








* 




f 


• -w . ' « 

- 


♦ 

• ■ 











115 


demonstration had not discovered any new facts or new 
truths. These must he looked for within nature itself. 

Being an ultra-conservative method, the logical web-spinning 
of the day hampered all progress. It promoted the uncriti¬ 
cal acceptance of classical dogma. On the other hand, the 
method of critical scrutiny of nature always looks to the 
future. Therefore Bacon had advised complete break with 
any logic which strives to demonstrate a priori truths. 

"When William James called Pragmatism a Hew Hame for 
an Old Way of thinking, I do not know that he was thin¬ 
king expressly of Francis Bacon, hut so far as concerns 
the spirit and atmosphere of the pursuit of knowledge, 
Bacon may he taken as the prophet of a pragmatic con¬ 
ception of knowledge." (Ibid., p. 38) 

The industrial and social changes which were 
taking place in Bacon’s time had distinct psychological 
influence on the old mental habits and attitudes. The re¬ 
sult was a rapid change in thought and the development of 
new attitudes and new outlooks. 

In analyzing the methods of science Dewey pays 
constant attention not to what scientists think, but to the 
consequences of what they do. In order to evaluate ideas 
it is necessary first to examine the positive results of 
these ideas. This was the original pragmatic aim. For ex¬ 
ample, many philosophical concepts such as the distinction 
between primary and secondary qualities have no valid bea¬ 
ring upon science, for they do not perform any scientific 




116 


work, or have any positive results in science. The contro¬ 
versy between philosophy and science on the question of pri¬ 
mary and secondary qualities, therefore, has no pragmatic 
consequence whatsoever. 

Nevertheless from the time of the Greeks philoso¬ 
phy has been constantly influencing the development of 
scientific theories. One of the philosophic concepts which 
is still exerting influence upon science, is that of "sub¬ 
stance” . The demand on the part of philosophy for a postu¬ 
late of something permanent, of some immutable matter be¬ 
hind change, led science to evolve such theories as that of 
ether, atom, etc. The craving for something permanent and 
immutable had its origin in Greek philosophy. Modern 
science, of course, does not concern itself with any perma¬ 
nent reality, but the Greek influence still persists in cer¬ 
tain constructs, which, although they do not exactly offer 
any idea of finality and absolutism, serve the purpose of 
classical "form”, "substance”, or more recent "matter" with 
its atomic structure. 

The underlying factor in scientific knowledge is 
control of natural phenomena. Thus far this control has 
been applied only to technical and economic changes; it has 
not yet been extended to include all phases of human life. 
The extension of scientific method to purely human and so¬ 
cial factors is the task for a reconstructed philosophy. 




117 


Various political and social events which followed 
in the wake of industrial revolution were at least an indi¬ 
cation of the general direction of social change which must 
be continued in a planned manner in the age of science. The 
growth of political emancipation from the bondage of custom 
and tradition is a clear example of the direction of this 
change. Simultaneously there also began to appear new ideas 
concerning the origin and functions of the state. The old 
theories could no longer give satisfactory explanation for 
the existence of the state. 

With the rapid growth of individualism, both poli¬ 
tical and moral, there was the accompanying disintegration 
of established institutions, In religion the same trend of 
individualism manifested itself in the idea of the sacred¬ 
ness of individual conscience. In turn this also had a defi¬ 
nite influence on political thought. The general attitude 
led t© initiative and independence in all fields, 

n a growing belief in the power of individual minds, gui¬ 
ded by methods of observation, experiment and reflection, 
to attain the truths needed for the guidance of life," 
(Ibid., p. 48) 

As a result of these varied changes there deve- 
Ipped a new concept of truth. It was no longer regarded as 
being of some supra-natural or metaphysical origin, but that 
its origin is in experience, and its value lies in its con- 
sequences. There also developed a new concept of intelli- 














118 


gence itself. Thus Dewey pofts out that all these tenden¬ 
cies have been indicative of the need for a reconstructed 
and systematized philosophy which 

"will regard intelligence not as the original shaper and 
final cause of things, but as the purposeful and energe¬ 
tic reshaper of those phases of nature and life that 
obstruct social well-being." (Ibid., p. 51) 


Science and Philosophy 

Dewey speaks of philosophy as a generalization of 
ways of response to the problems of life as they present 
themselves to man. The progress of science with its new 
techniques and new attitudes required a reorientation in 
the method in which this progress could he generalized; that 
is, it required a new philosophic disposition. 

To begin with, the concepts of modern science are 

in sharp contrast with those of the ancients. 

"The world of modern science is an open world, a world 
varying indefinitely without the possibility of assignable 
limit in its internal make-up, a world stretching beyond 
any assignable bounds eternally." (Ibid., p. 54) 

This is not the world in which, for example, ancient Greeks 

used to live. Theirs was a world in which changes took 

place against a background of something permanent which was 

considered higher in quality than the apparent flux, 

"The inferior was that in which man could foresee and in 
which he had instruments and arts by which he might ex¬ 
pect a reasonable degree of control. The superior was 
that of occurrences so uncontrollable that they testified 
to the presence and operation of powers beyond the scope 
of everyday and mundane things." (Quest for Certainty) 





















. 


* 

> 

. 

« 


* 

- 







119 


It is not difficult to imagine how profound was the 
shock produced upon the old notions of the universe by the 
new discoveries of the astronomers* The heliocentric theory, 
for example, was a heavy blow to the ancient theories of the 
universe* Change as it occurs in the gross material world 
is not worthy of any deep veneration. There is a permanence 
behind this apparent change; that is what we must seek. 

Such was the notion of the ancient scientists. The world of 
flux is predetermined and controlled by the powers which 
represent permanence and fixity. They are the gods, the 
forms or the immutable absolutes, and the permanent world 
behind this flux is the world of final and formal causes 
which are supreme. These were the notions that character 
rized the Aristotelian world. All the characterizing fac¬ 
tors hang close together, and when any one is shaken out of 
its position, they all fall. 

n This is the reason why the intellectual modification of 
the last few centuries may truly be called a revolution. 

It has substituted a conception of the world differing 
at every point." (Reconstruction in Philosophy, p, 60) 

Modern science presents us with a world which 
cannot be formulated into any static finality, or represen¬ 
ted by any simple formula. Science is interested in corre¬ 
lation of changes and not in any changeless forms. It looks 
for constancy in order and not for constancy in forms, cons¬ 
tancy in function and not constancy in existence. 






» 








. : ' ' . . ■ . , . " ; ■: i . . J: ■ i. 

i 

; 

* 












♦ 

. 

, 

- 

- 

» 

■ 3 - ; 1 - ■ 











120 


Classical philosophy with its dogmatic concepts 
of the universe was a reflection of social, economic and 
political organization of the ancient times and the Middle 
Ages, A hierarchical principle of classification was estab¬ 
lished in all phases of life. Dewey calls this principle 
T, a projection of the family principle into the world at 
large”. It is characteristic of the feudal society, and 
despite the influence of modern science we still tend to 
think in terms of projecting social relationships into the 
events of nature. We still think of the laws of nature as 
being external to physical phenomena which they supposedly 
"control”. 

In emphasizing the need for reconstruction Dewey 1 s 
main object is to show how the generalized formula of the 
Greeks had affected both philosophy and science alike. It 
is not only our philosophical thinking which is hampered by 
the ancient dogma, but our science also is full of concepts 
which suggest permanency and static forms. Space, time, 
energy, mass, matter are just such permanent forms. It is 
in this respect that Dewey and ?/hitehead are in perfect 
accord. 

Greek philosophy was dominated by the aesthetic, 
the beautiful and the good. The beautiful and the good rep¬ 
resented something that was finished, completed; it was the 
finite. The infinite was the chaotic and the unpredictable 




121 


- it was the base matter in flux* Today we are no longer 
concerned wholly with the aesthetic; every phase of our life 
is dominated by practical aspects* The Greeks failed to 
develop a truly scientific spirit because of their doctrine 
of final causes, which "taught that the processes of nature 
are held in bondage to certain fixed ends wich they must 
tend to realize". 

With the elimination from nature of fixed ends 
and purposes, it appeared that the ideal and the spiritual 
were eliminated too. Quite frequently the trend of modern 
science has been questioned because it has completely failed 
to attain the absolute. Nature has become but a mechanical 
device, it is argued. It was this fear of losing the spiri¬ 
tual and the aesthetic which prompted the philosophers to 
devise some system by means of which science and the remnants 
of classical philosophy could be reconciled. Hence arose 
various schools of idealism to counteract the effects of 
materialistic science. To an idealist a philosophy which 
deals with the ultimate is essential, for science leaves the 
problem hanging in mid-air. Science, for example, fails to 
explain the problem such as that of secondary qualities. 

If the senses with the aid of scientific instruments cannot 
explain these qualities, then the mind is the faculty that 
can do it. Such was the argument of Berkely and the school 
that followed him. Then we had the attempt of Kant to solve 





122 


the problem by introducing the concept of the noumenal. 

Dewey contends that Idealism had removed the mind 
from its natural surroundings. It placed it above nature 
by attributing to it the power to endow nature with secon¬ 
dary qualities and other spiritual faculties. The object 
of pragmatism is to bring mind bac^ to nature and to have 
it placed in its proper relation with the order of natural 
phenomena. This, according to Dewey, can be done only 
through philosophical criticism. For him reconstruction 
in philosophy consists of a critical analysis of the old 
concepts and a construction of new ones. It is often ar¬ 
gued that Dewey’s is not the first critical philosophy. 

Had not Berkely introduced a critical method? This may be 
true, but his critical method eventually led to the estab¬ 
lishment of notion^ of finalism and absolutism. The latter 
in turn caused a halt in the progress of critical analysis. 
The existing schools of Idealism exemplify the results of 
Berkely’s critical analysis of perception. He did not 
apply his critical method to what Dewey considers as the 
real issues. 

T! The mechanization of nature is the condition of 
a practical and progressive idealism in action. n What we 
must realize is that purposes are human, and not divine. 
Scientific method offers the means by which these purposes 
may be fulfilled. By despising the material and mechanical 











123 


we shall literally "be throwing away the means. The unfortu¬ 
nate outcome of scientific development is that we are talcing 
the means for the end; we are accepting science as the end 
in itself, whereas it ought to be taken only as means to a 
higher moral life of mankind. 

"When we take means for ends we indeed fall into moral 
materialism. But when we take ends without regard for 
means we degenerate into sentimentalism." (Ibid., p. 73) 

Russell regards pragmatism as a philosophy which 
aims at appropriating the prestige of science. Science has 
gained prestige through its usefulness; and the pragmatists 
are trying to win some of this prestige for philosophy. The 
tendency, according to Russell, is to make philosophy use¬ 
ful at the expense of propagating error, and to make it 
respectable by attaching it to science. Although this cha¬ 
racterization may be true of some pragmatists, it can hardly 
be said that it was Dewey’s conscious aim to make philosophy 
respectable at the expense of science. It is more logical 
to regard his instrumentalism as an analitic method appli¬ 
cable in our scientific age. 

Just as the classical philosophies constituted the 
analysis of the practical sciences of the day, so Dewey’s 
philosophy is just such analysis of modern science. He takes 
science as the standard method of knowing. The basic prin¬ 
ciple in this method is experimentalism. Consequently his 
philosophy is really the analysis of this method as it has 




124 


proved to be the only workable procedure in science. His 
main advice to the philosophers is that they go to the 
laboratories of the scientists to learn the method of expe¬ 
rimentation. Introducing this method into philosophy 
would mean getting rid of a lot of classical rubbish, so 
that philosophy would become a living analysis of a living 
process. The great misunderstanding of the philosophers 
as to what scientists are doing, says Dewey, consists in 
the fact that the philosophers, being under the influence 
of the Greek formula, continue to believe that the experi¬ 
mental method of science will eventually lead to the dis¬ 
covery of eternal truths. 

Experience and Reason 

Idealist philosophies have removed reason outside 
the field of human action and placed it in an ideal sphere 
as a supreme controlling agency. Is this the true character 
and function of reason? 

"Must man transcend experience by some organ of unique 
character that carries him into the super-empirical? 
Failing this, must he wander sceptical and disillusioned?” 
(Ibid., p. 77) 

Gan human experience as such progress and enlarge its field 
of operations without the aid of this supra-empirical agency? 

Dewey emphasizes the idea that philosophy is one 

of the phases of human culture. 

"Those who assert in the abstract definition of philosophy 
that it deals with eternal truth or reality, untouched 










, 


■ 


■ 


• . 

. 

■ 

. 

* 












125 


by local time and place, are forced to admit that philoso¬ 
phy as a concrete existence is historical, having tempo¬ 
ral passage and a diversity of local habitations.” 
(Philosophy and Civilization) 

Those who claim that philosophy is the use of reason in 

search of eternal truth fail to realize how firmly it is 

grounded on human existence. It is the meaning of this 

existence that concerns man. Therefore, actually, TT philo- 

sophy is occupied with meaning rather than with truth”. 

It is because of this conception that pragmatism 
has often been regarded as anti-intellectualist. It is 
anti-intellectualist to the extent that it completely re¬ 
nounces the tenets of classical logic and the Idealist con¬ 
ception of reason. Reason is not an abstract faculty, but 
a constituent part of all the psychological factors involved 
in human activity. 

Traditional philosophies stress the argument that 
experience can never rise above the level of the particular 
and the probable. Is it therefore possible to make expe¬ 
rience a guide in the moral life of man? Dewey®s answer to 
this question is in the affirmative, since moral life and 
moral ideals of man are themselves the product of experience. 
All our notions pertaining to the complexity of social inter¬ 
relationships are formulated by our complex social experience 
The generalized and useful ideals are derived by the process 
of trial-and-error from the experience of the particulars. 



. 

. 

> > 

, 

t 


' 


■ 

* 









126 


This is the underlying process in the growth of scientific 
knowledge - the formulation of generalized rule. These 
rules can never 'become absolute certainties, since, being 
the outcome of experience which is in process of steady 
growth, they themselves must undergo simitar change. Thus 
it is experience and not generalized rules that must remain 
the final test of truth. 

The meaning of experience has -undergone conside¬ 
rable change with the introduction into inquiry of new me¬ 
thods and techniques, and with the development of new bio¬ 
logical and subsequent psychological studies. It is now a 
generally accepted view that the mental factor in experience 
is active and not passive. Experience does not consist of 
mere passive reception of stimuli from the environment and 
the necessary adaptation to it. ExperienCi means more: the 
environment is being constantly modified and adapted to the 
organism. Even the lowest of organisms modifies its envi¬ 
ronment to a limited extent. In man this modification is 
accomplished by the most highly organized techniques of 
science. Experience now requires a new meaning - that of 
being active, of being concerned with doing. 

n The senses lose their place as gateways of knowing to 
take their rightful place as stimuli to action. To an 
animal an affection of the eye or ear is not an idle 
piece of information about something indifferently going 
on in the world. It is an invitation and inducement 
to act in a needed way. It is a clue in behavior, a 
directive factor in adaptation of life in its surround tes? 
(Ibid., p. 87) & 






127 


Thus Dewey presents us with the instrumentalist 
interpretation of experience. In a vital sense experience 
means not only reacting but also acting. There is no real 
experience unless there is some sort of doing. The inter¬ 
action of the organism with the environment results in an 
appropriate adaptation in each. A stimulus from the envi¬ 
ronment becomes a clue to an appropriate action upon that 
environment. Stimulus, response, knowledge in pragmatism 
become new concepts which are understood as comprising the 
process of doing and acting. They constitute the process of 
interaction between the organism and the environment. Sen¬ 
sations are now conceived as relative to activity and not 
as elements in knowledge. "Sensations ... are emotional 
and practical rather than cognitive and intellectual." They 
are the result of recurring changes in the environment; 
changes which shock the organism out of its previous adjust¬ 
ment. It was this new conception of experience which led 
Dewey to undertake the project of practical and philosophi¬ 
cal reconstruction in the field of education. 

From the pragmatic viewpoint experience becomes 
a continuous process where sensations lose their atomistic 
character. There is thus no further need to postulate any 
supra-empirical intellect to link the apparent unit sensa¬ 
tions into a continuous chain. Experience does not entail 
a special faculty. 





, 


, 








. 




... . , , 

, 

- 

-4 




' 







128 


"The true 1 stuff 1 of experience is recognized to be 
adaptive courses of action, habits, active functions, 
connections of doing and undergoing: sensori-motor 
coordination." (Ibid., p. 91) 

To the ancients experience meant the living-up 
to the rule-of-thumb regulations of the past, the adherence 
to the customary modes of conduct recognized as right and 
proper. The true scientific method was so slow in progress 
because of this retarding influence of custom which rested 
on set universal principles, or patterns. The object of 
Plato f s Republic, for instance, was to work out a system of 
such patterns, thus making them more permanent; then, in 
acordance with these patterns human conduct could be cons¬ 
tantly regulated. In the age of science, former experience 
no longer serves the purpose of establishing immutable 
patterns, but is employed in working out new methods for 
continued and improved experience. 

As consequence of these alterations in concepts, 

reason is no longer regarded as something eupra-natural 

imposed upon experience. It is part of experience itself, 

through which its validity is tested and through which it is 

employed in furthering knowledge. 

"For reason is experimental intelligence, conceived after 
the pattern of science, and used in the creation of so¬ 
cial arts; it has something to do. It liberates man from 
the bondage of the past, due to ignorance and accident 
hardened into custom." (Ibid., p. 96) 

Reason is the outcome of experience, and its reapplication 





129 


in furthering experience is what may be called intelligence. 
Intelligence then is in a steady process of formation. 

Dewey considers the philosophic forms of ratio¬ 
nalism as leading to irresponsibility, because of the assum¬ 
ption that reason is self-sufficient, Requiring no verifi¬ 
cation from bfcute experience. The net result of this assum¬ 
ption was the disregard for observation and experiment. 
Reason was an efficient instrument used in rationalizing 
old dogma. Kan^s philosophy is an example of intellectual 
justification of the subordination of individual minds to a 
set of a priori principles based on universal reason. 

Meaning of Reality 

The characteristic feature of classical philoso¬ 
phy is its conception of ultimate reality, a purely ideal 
construct. The concept of a systematized ultimate reality 
was an elaborate projection of ±he idealized modes of con¬ 
duct, hopes and aspirations of humanity. Religious ideals 
belong to this category. 

"What are they, these Forms and Essences wnich so pro¬ 
foundly influenced the course of science and theology, 
save the objects of ordinary experience with their ble¬ 
mishes removed...?" (Ibid., p. 105) 

Perfect ideality of philosophy was the opposite of the stre¬ 
nuous and roublesome life in the world of reality. By way 
of idealism philosophy offered a mechanism of escape. The 
ideal and the permanent spelled security in the face of the 






130 


many vicissitudes and uncertainties in the everyday world 

of experience. The only ultimate and true knowledge could 

be solely of this permanent, timeless reality. 

"In contrast with such knowing, the so-called knowing 
of the artisan is base. He has to bring about changes 
in things, in wood and stone, and this fact is of itself 
evidence that his material is deficient in Being." 

(Ibid., p. 110) 

The object of the classical philosophy, therefore, was the 
knowing of this ultimate reality. Through the channels of 
this philosophy and its neo-classic elaborations this the¬ 
ory of knowledge found its way into Christian theology and 
into modern schools of Idealism. 

"There was bequeathed to generations of thinkers as an 
unquestioned axiom the idea that knowledge is intrinsi¬ 
cally a mere beholding or viewing of reality - the spec¬ 
tator conception of knowledge." (Ibid., p. 112) 

In contrast with this theory of knowledge modern 
conception involves the factors of studying the changing 
reality and of inducing change through experimentation in 
order to discover more and more characteristics of what 
science calls the real. The apparent permanence of things 
must be broken down so that their real nature - that is, 
their changing nature - may be better known. Thus knowledge 
becomes purposive to action; it is not just knowledge for 
the sake of knowledge, or at one’s disposal in attaining 
ends which are present in the mind. This is a new concei^t 
of knowledge as active, purposive, and instrumental to 




131 


action; it is no longer contemplative, but practical. 

This concept is one of the most outstanding con¬ 
tributions of pragmatism to present day philosophical thin¬ 
king, Ideas, being the outcome of the active knowing, also 
become instrumental. In classical philosophy an idea stood 
for an absolute reality to be attained. For Dewey ideas 
are instruments for action in the real world here and now. 
Real problems give rise to ideas, but ideas will remain 
mere dreams and fantasies unless they become instrumental 
in solving problems. 

In the world of science knowledge then is no lon¬ 
ger contemplative; "for the experimental sciences, it means 
a certain kind of intelligently conducted doing". Like ge¬ 
neral matter-of-fact knowledge, philosophy must also become 
practical and experimental in order to be of value. 

"It signifies that the prime function of philosophy is 
that of rationalizing the possibiliti es of experience, 
especially collective human experience." (Ibid,, p. 122) 

Thus far such desired change has not taken place in our 
philosophy. It has not yet broken away "from the assumption 
of a merely beholding mind on one side and a foreign and 
remote object to be viewed and noted on the other". If kno¬ 
wing is regarded as an active process, then no epistemologi¬ 
cal difficulties can arise, for we are getting rid of the 
separation between mind and matter, between subject and 
object. It is this same problem of dualism that had troubled 





































- 





. 








4 

f 















132 


Bergson. His solution of the problem is apparently much 
simpler than Dewey's, but is of no practical consequence. 

It is difficult to conceive how the elimination 
of the traditional problems would still leave any tasks for 
philosophy. Philosophy, as generally understood, would be¬ 
come superfluous, for all practical tasks would no longer 
fall under its scrutiny; they would come under various bran¬ 
ches of science. And even if we should eliminate philoso¬ 
phies which deal with the ancient problems of knowledge, 
this does not necessarily imply that the problems would no 
longer arise. The problematic questions would continue to 
arise in the active minds. There are questions which the 
mind cannot expell from its sphere of activity; that of 
absolute knowledge is one of them. Ho matter whether we 
consider knowing as a process of interaction, or whether we 
accept it as a passive receptivity, we are still confronted 
with the question: What really happens when there is know¬ 
ing? From the practical standpoint of pragmatism it must 
be contended that nothing is solved by dismissing the 
question. 

Dewey speaks of the poverty of our w contemplative 
aesthetic appreciation”, and of the fact that until now we 
have failed to reconcile the latter with the attitude of 

practical science. He thus admits that contemplation of the 
beautiful and the good has an essential human value. But 







133 


contemplation is not knowledge in the instrumentalist sense 
of the word. It i 3 a method of the sterile metaphysics and 
a survival of classical philosophies, according to his own 
analysis. Hence, contemplation can never be reconciled 
with science. It is not quite clear, therefore, what Dewey 
means by reconciliation, nor just what it is exactly that 
he is trying to reconcile. 

What is Truth ? 

n B.v their fruits shall ye know them. That which guides 
us truly is true - demonstrated capacity for such gui¬ 
dance is precisely what is meant by truth... The hypothec 
sis that works is the true one; and truth is an abstract 
noun applied to the collection of cases, actual, foreseen 
and desired, that receive confirmation in their works 
and consequences.” (Ibid., p. 156) 

It is evident from the pragmatic conception of 
knowledge and reality that it has no aspirations to attai¬ 
ning absolute truth. However we may interpret truth, it is 
always human truth, changeable and fallible like very other 
human enterprise. What we call truth is purely psychologi¬ 
cal; it is characteristic of our beliefs and not of the 
world of empirical facts. Such is Dewey 1 s basic notion of 
truth. 

Dewey 1 s conception of the activity of the mind is 
very similar to that of Bergson’s. The mind analyzes and 
selects in experience. Its activity is thus instrumental to 

survival; we select those elements in our analyzed expe¬ 
rience which have survival value for us. It is because of 

















. 

, 




' 

, 

, 

. 

, , , i 

4 

, 




. 




. 

, 

* 

. 













134 


this value that we call these elements true. The same ana¬ 
lysis applies to our beliefs. If they are such that their 
consequences have functional utility, then they are said to 
be true. Any belief w&ich precedes experience can be nei¬ 
ther true nor false. Its truth or falsefiood must be estab¬ 
lished by an experiential test. The only conclusion to 
which this conception of truth leads us is that we make our 
own truths in the process of experience. 

We see, therefore, that in pragmatism ideas are 
judged true or false not according to any universal prin¬ 
ciples from which they are supposedly derived, but accor¬ 
ding to their consequences. Consequences are verifications 
of the truth of ideas. We may ask then: How is it at all 
possible for us to form ideas and hypotheses the truth of 
which must be validated in experience? Ho our ideas and 
beliefs not already envisage the truth, even though vaguely? 
And should an hypothesis or an idea prove useful, was it not 
already true before the test of experience? Hoes the truth 
in this sense not precede its own making? From these consi¬ 
derations it appears that it is not the successful functio¬ 
ning of beliefs that makes them true, for if that were the 
case, the question of truth or falsity would not enter at 
all into the belief which has not been tested. In so far as 
the testing of scientific beliefs or hypotheses is concerned 
this conception of truth may be quite admissible, but what 




135 


shall we say about beliefs in moral, ethical and religious 
spheres? How can they be tested? One can only say that 
our beliefs in these fields are as much hypotheses and pos¬ 
tulates as are those in science. No beliefs are absolutely 
true, but they tend to be progressively more so, unless 
proved to be absolutely false. The only difficulty here is 
that we have not yet devised any laboratory methods of in¬ 
quiry for the testing of the postulates pertaining to moral 
and ethical conduct. The assumption that such methods are 
possible is quite warranted, but it is still an assumption. 

For Dewey truth is an intrinsic part of action. 

It has value because it is useful, and its usefulness ensued 
from action, which is the outstanding characteristic of prag 
matism. Before an idea can be proclaimed true or false its 
value must be verified in action. It was James who had 
claimed that a true idea is the one that works, that is, we 
must see our ideas as having some n eash value”. With Hewey 
there is a further elaboration of this notion. Thought 
becomes a tool; it is instrumental in the solution of human 
problems. There is an entirely social implication in this 
concept. When man has learned to face his problems with 
the tools of science and intelligence he will eventually 
solve them more efficiently. 

Since knowledge is instrumental to doing, it 









. 

, 

. 

. • 

. 






* 


■ 

. 




, 






136 


affeets that which is Icnown, And since that which is known 
is known only because it is instrumental to action, it is 
therefore true. Consequently we manufacture the known rea¬ 
lity in the same manner in which we create our own truths. 
Such is the metaphysical aspect of pragmatism. 

"That which may be pretentiously unreal when it is for¬ 
mulated in metaphysical distinctions becomes intensely 
significant when connected with the drama of the strug¬ 
gle of beliefs and ideals," (Ibid., p. 26) 

Logic, Truth and Morals 

Logic "is elevated into the supreme and legisla¬ 
tive science only to fall into the trivial estate of 
keeper of such statements as A is A and the scholastic 
verses for the syllogistic rules." (Ibid., p. 132) 

Logic had been accepted for ages as the science 
which deals with the laws of thought, and since thought is 
the product of the universal reason, therefore Iffigic should 
be capable of arriving at the ultimate structure of the uni 
verse. Today it is regarded by philosophers either as a 
branch of metaphysics or as a branch of persuasive rhetoric 

The foundation of logic is judgment. Judgment, 
however, is personal and psychological; it does not appear 
to have any connection with logic which supposedly deals 
with "universal laws of thought". According to Lewey the 
vast controversial issues in logic are of no practical con¬ 
sequence in experience, unless logic becomes a "systema¬ 
tized formulation of the procedures of thinking" - if thin- 







king is one of the essential ways in which we deliberately 
reorganize experience. The only thing that logic can tell 
ns is how men think; it can never tell ns in what way they 
onght to think. 

Jnst as in logic, so in mathematics there has been 
a tendency to consider proofs and arguments as being based 
on a priori principles, having no direct connection with 
empirical experience. Dewey contends that mathematics is 
as empirical as all other practical sciences. 

"Men began with counting and measuring things jnst as 

they began with pounding and burning them." (Ibid. ,p. 137) 

He does not draw sharp lines of distinction between the ex- 
perimantal method in science and the thought processes in 
mathematics. The so-called a priori truths in mathematics 
are really the result of ages of experience. Therefore, 
both logic and mathematics are founded on experiment and 
experience. They are the formulations and systematizations 
of methods of experience. 

Thinking is a method of meeting difficulties and 
of solving problems with which man is continually confron¬ 
ted in his everyday experience. It begins with problems, 
not with premises. It functions not merely in passive kno¬ 
wing of reality, but what is more important, in altering 
the reality to suit our purposes. Observation and expe¬ 
rience are not prior to thinking, as assumed by the idealist 





138 


philosophies, but are simultaneous with it. It was this 

idealist assumption wich led to a sharp division between 

theory and practice, the latter being looked upon as if it 

were of a lower order than the former 

"It creates a class of thinkers* who are remote from 
practice and hence from testing their thought by appli¬ 
cation - a socially superior and irresponsible class. 
This is the condition causing the tragic division of 
theory and practice, and leading to an unreasonable 
exaltation of theory on one side and an unreasonable 
contempt for it on the other.” (Ibid., p. 140-41) 

Thinking is a method of purposive reconstruction 
of experience. It is a process by means of which relevant 
factors are brought to bear upon the immediate problem. It 
not merely accompanied obseravation, but is, in fact, an 
intrinsic part of it, for it is "a search for evidence” 
which eventually leads to the solution of the problem and 
to the inference of the future possibilities. From this 
viewpoint thinking becomes instrumental in formulating hy¬ 
potheses. 

"Instrumentalism is an attempt to constitute a precise 
logical theory of concepts, of judgments and inferences 
in their various forms, by considering primarily how 
thought functions in the experimental determinations of 
future consequences.” (Development of American Pragma.) 

In somewhat different words Dewey claims that the 
instrumental theory 

"says that knowledge begins with specific observations 
that define the problem and ends with specific observa¬ 
tions that test a hypothesis for its solution.” 
(Reconstruction in Philosophy, p. 148) 







139 


There are therefore two kinds of instrumentality 
in experience, physical and intellectual. The latter in 
its activity goes far beyond any immediate use in practice. 
Consequently can b e employed in solving problems not yet 
anticipated. Such intellectual instrumentalities are abs¬ 
tractions which become applicable to possible problems 
which may arise in the future. 

"Abstraction is liberation. The more theoretical, the 
more abstract, an abstraction, or the farther away it 
is from anything experienced in its concreteness, the 
better fitted it is to deal with any one of the indefi¬ 
nite variety of things that may later present themselves 
(Ibid., p. 150) 

Abstractions and general ideas are useful instru¬ 
ments in classification, which in turn is concerned with 
"successful action for ends". The successful facts of ex¬ 
perience are thus constantly being reduced to meanings 
through the use of abstractions and general ideas. These 
same ideas are then applied again to the solution of newly 
arising problems. 

The test of ideas, conceptions, theories and sys¬ 
tems lies in their effectiveness in the reorganization of 
experience. "If they succeed in their office, they are re¬ 
liable, sound, good, true." Truth then is a relative con¬ 
cept; it consists of positive validity of ideas in recons¬ 
tructing experience. Before we can decide on the truth or 
falsefiood of an idea or a theory we must evaluate its con- 








sequences. This concept introduces one of the most conten¬ 
tious elements into pragmatism. According to logical ana¬ 
lysts, for example, no hypothesis can he absolutely verifi¬ 
able. Therefore no hypothesis can be categorically accep¬ 
ted as either true or false. The validity of hypotheses 
can be determined only on the basis of some validating cri¬ 
teria. And Deweyk criterion of utility as a test of vali¬ 
dity is not sufficiently comprehensive. On the other hand 
we must agree with Dewey that truth is not something ready¬ 
made and absolute; nor is it a property of things. It is 
functional, and changes with conditions and circumstances 
of experience; we must not identify it with authoritative 
dogma. 

"Ethical theory began among the G-reeks as an attempt to 
find a regulation for the conduct of life which should 
have a rational basis and purpose instead of being de¬ 
rived from custom.” (Ibid,, p. 161) 

From the time of G-reek philosophers ethical theo¬ 
ries had been dealing with the search for some final end or 
absolute good as the supreme law of conduct. This supreme 
law had later found expression in such notions as the Divine 
Will, or in such forms as the secular ruler and the prin¬ 
ciple of duty. Among diverse schools which differed in 
minor details, there was complete agreement to the extent 
that they all aspired to some absolute criterion of conduct. 
The numerous moral theories were the product of the age to 






. 


, 





■ 






* 

. 

' 

‘ 

.. 



















141 


the same extent as the general philosophical concepts which 
envisaged a static and ordered universe, "wherein rest is 
higher than motion", 

"After all, we are only pleading for the adoption in mo¬ 
ral reflection of the logic that has been proved to make 
for security, stringency and fertility in passing judg¬ 
ments upon physical phenomena." (Ibid., p. 165) 

But set principles and dogmatic universals continue to hin¬ 
der inquiry into our moral conduct. Instead of using intel¬ 
ligent inquiry we still accept blind rules which have been 
handed down to us by the generations of the past. Many of 
these rules at one time or another may have had practical 
significance, but most of them evidently no longer apply to 
our needs. 

There is no attainable general goodness, for ac¬ 
tion consists of specific instances. Our judgments as to 
specific acts to be performed must also be individual and 
not general. The arguments relating to truth are of the 
same nature as those relating to moral conduct. We cannot 
deal with generalities, for these are only abstractions; we 
must deal with particularities. Generalized rules and ma¬ 
xims are enslaving our conduct. Generalized goods are mere 
classifications which may only suggest to us what to look 
for in the particular cases. 

The belief in fixed moral rules has led to many 

controversial issues, such as those that relate to the ideal 
goods on the one hand and the material goods on the other. 






14 2 


The ideal goods are completely divorced from the practical 
issues in life. The search for these goods has become a 
fanciful pastime for those whose material goods are abun¬ 
dantly supplied to them and for the others who have not yet 
broken away from the ancient spell of some p^manent all- 
embracing form of the good in some non-empirical world. 

"Morals is connected with actualities of existence, not 
with ideals, ends and obligations independent of concrete 
actualities. The facts upon which it depends are those 
which arise out of active connections of human beings 
with one another, $he consequences of their mutually 
interconnected activities in the life of desire, belief, 
judgment, satisfaction and dissatisfaction." (Human 
Hature and Conduct, p. 329) 

Our scientific concepts have not yet become huma¬ 
nistic; the dualism between science and morals still persists 
According to Dewey, inquiry and discovery take the same 
l lace in morals as they do in natural sciences. The process 
of validation becomes experimental, and is based on conse¬ 
quences. Ho purpose can be acclaimed good or bad until the 
consequences of its adoption have been noted. One difficul¬ 
ty which arises from this position is that any form of con¬ 
duct becomes absolutely impossible, for we simply cannot 
tell the consequences until we have acted. How, then, are 
we going to formulate our purposes so that the consequences 
nay be good? For example, at the moment there is a common 
belief on the part of humanity that the purpose behind ato¬ 
nic research is a form of activity - that is, war - the con- 











143 


sequences of which, we commonly agree, are evil. Such being 
the case, the main concern of our governments should be to 
put a stop to all atomic research. But at the same time, on 
the basis of what is known about atomic fission, we can con¬ 
ceive another purpose of this research: much more efficient 
source of energy to be employed in improving our material 
welfare. If war breaks out, and atomic energy is used to 
destroy human lives and the accomplishments of our civili¬ 
zation, we should then say that the purpose behind the re¬ 
search was evil and immoral. If on the other hand it is not 
used for destruction, and we are given the added source of 
energy for our industrial life, we can then proclaim the 
purpose q.s being good. The difficulty consists in that we 
have to wait for the consequences before we can pass our 
moral judgment on the act. Our whole moral life then be¬ 
comes a matter of a long chain of experiments, for we have 
no previously set or fixed ends. ”The end is no longer a 
terminus or limit to be reached. It is the active process 
of transforming the existent situation.” Thus we are dea¬ 
ling with processes and directions, not with ideal limits. 

Happiness and the theories of happiness have been 
occupying moralists for ages. It has been conceived in va¬ 
rious forms, but it has been most commonly represented as a 
bare possession, as some fixed attainment. It is generally 
regarded now - Dewey is quite dogmatic on this point - that 










. , . , 






, 






















. 

, 





















144 


"happiness is found only in success; but success means 
succeeding, getting forward, moving in advance." 

(Ibid., p. 179) 

However, Dewey 1 s use of the terms success and succeeding 
need further psychological exlanation if they are being used 
in a novel sense and not in the common sense of the word. 

The common notion which is the reflection of our material 
life, is that success implies the attainment of social sta¬ 
tus and prestige, and these are in the final analysis mea¬ 
sured in terms of material acquisitions. 

The first to break away from the classic concep¬ 
tion of set moral ends was the utilitarian school. But it 
was still under the influence of some old ways of thinking. 

It overemphasized the so-called instinct of acquisition in 
man, and overlooked the more important one of creativity. 

"In spite of its interest in a thoroughly social aim, 
utilitarianism fostered a new class interest, that of the 
capitalistic property-owning interests, provided only 
property was obtained through free competition and not 
by governmental favor." (Ibid., p. 18£) 

In social philosophy Dewey*s views stem from the 
basic assumptions which are characteristic of instrumenta¬ 
lism. According to him there are only three possible alter¬ 
natives on the basis of which society may function. The 
first of these is that society may exist for the individuals; 
the second, that individuals may exist for society. The 
third, the basis of pragmatist sociolody, is that both indi¬ 
vidual and society are correlative and organic to each other, 







145 


Tt society requiring the service and subordination of indivi¬ 
duals and at the same time existing to serve them." 

It appears that all the notions pertaining to so¬ 
cial organization suffer from the same defect which we en¬ 
counter in classical philosophy as a whole: tiie use of the 
logic of generalized ideas. What we should deal with are 
individual situations and concrete social problems. Our 
notions of these problems consist of^ready-made principles 
to be imposed upon particulars in o&der to determine their 
nature". These principles are general ideas, whereas we 
should have concrete and specific reference to particular 
questions. The strongest argument that Dewey presents in 
this respect is that we are successfully employing the ex¬ 
perimental methods of science in all physical fields of en¬ 
quiry except in the fields of human conduct and social or¬ 
ganization. Here we continue to rely on the ancient method 
of syllogistic argument, refusing to test the soundness of 
our major premises by submitting them to the scrutiny of 
induction and experimentation. 

The organic point of view tends to minimize the 
importance of single problems, since it accepts the proces¬ 
ses in society as parts of more inclusive and "necessary" 
process. "Capital and labor cannot really conflict because 
each is an organic necessity to the other; and both to the 
organized community as a whole." It was by using such logic 






145 


that Aristotle could easily prove that slavery wa 3 loth ne¬ 
cessary and in the interests of the slave class. Thus run 3 
Dewey 1 s criticism of our social thinking. 

"The social philosopher, dwelling in the region of 
his concepts, Solves 1 problems by showing the relation¬ 
ship of ideas, instead of helping men to solve problems 
in the concrete by supplying them hypotheses to be used 
and tested in projects of reform.” (Ibid., p. 192) 

It is persistently believed that individuality 
is ready-made, that it is something given to a person. Such 
is not the case, however; it is something achieved through 
the process of socialization. The self is not a g&ven unity; 
it is built up through the influences of the social environ¬ 
ment. 

"When the self is regarded as something complete within 
itself, then it is readily argued that only internal 
moralistic changes are of importance in general reform.” 
(Ibid., p. 196) 

Individuality is created under the influence of associated 
life. Such terms as "individual”, "social", etc., are gene¬ 
ralized notions, and do not stand for anything concrete, 
but consist of multiplicity of factors, each one of whieh 
must be investigated before we can know the meaning of the 
general concept. 

It was by way of his early considerations of this 
interactive process in the development of individuality and 
the development of the socialized being that Dewey construed 
a new philosophical approach to education. The conception 









, 


, Jr, 

. ... . 




: . 


» 








5 

* 



146 


of education as a process of doing-undergoing, of action 
and interaction, has been exerting continuous influence 
upon the methods, techniques and organization of our edu¬ 
cational procedures. It is unfortunate that through misin¬ 
terpretations , and through overenthusiastic acceptance of 
some of Dewey 1 s postulates unpleasant repercussions have 
arisen and continue to arise in this sphere of our endea¬ 
vors . But this is a subject in itself, and cannot be 
dealt with here. 










147 


PHILOSOPHY OF LOGICAL POSITIVISM 

Historical factors 

Logical Positivism or Logical Empiricism, as it 
is called by Ayer and the Oxford group of positivists, is 
not really a philosophy in the commonly accepted sense of 
the term. It is rather a method of philosophical analysis. 
Prom the time of the famous Vienna Circle of the early 
1920*3 there has developed a sharp divergence between two 
groups of positivists on certain basic issues of philosophy 
and logic. The leaders of the two groups at the present 
time are Carnap of the University of Chicago and Waismann 
of Oxford. Carnap insists on the sharp distinction between 
synthetic or empirical and analytic or a priori propositions, 
According to him synthetic propositions are about matters of 
fact; they are hypotheses which are validated by experience. 
The analytic propositions are s&mply those of logic and 
mathematics; they are certain and necessary simply because 
they malce no assertions about the empirical world, but ex¬ 
press our agreement on the use of symbols in a particular 
way. He also introduced a distinction between object-lan¬ 
guage and syntax language; our inquiry being carried on in 
the former. 

Waismann claims that it is impossible to draw a 
sharp line between empirical and a priori propositions. 

Some propositions cannot be classified as either one or the 





148 


other; they may be halfway between empirical and analytic. 
The Oxford group of positivists consisting of Waismann, 

Ryle and Ayer, are all critical of Carnap T s extreme forma¬ 
lism and complex symbolism. The division between these two 
groups of positivists has been due to the differing trends 
in general philosophical thinking in England and in America. 

The original Vienna Circle was inspired by the 
mathematico-logieal writings chiefly of Russell, Whitehead 
and Wittgenstein. But during the 1930*s the English group 
of positivists was under the great influence of G.E. Moore*s 
ff common-sense” philosophy, while Carnap still derives his 
inspiration from the American mathematical logicians. He 
has also been influenced to a certain extent by Dewey*s 
instrumentalism. However, despite the distinctions in the 
recent trends, there are certain basic methods which give 
logical empiricism its distinguishing character of logical 
analysis. 

Object of philosophy 

The method of approaching philosophy by way of 
language analysis began with a question of doubt: Can the 
speculative enterprise carried on by metaphysicians reveal 
to us the nature of the universe? The doubt raised by this 
question leads to an idea that all mental speculation tells 
us a great deal about the functioning of the mind, but next 






149 


to nothing about the constitution of the -universe. Accor¬ 
ding to the philosophical analysts, the main object of phi¬ 
losophy is to analyze and clarify the meanings of common- 
sense statements; that is, making clear and precise what we 
mean by words when we use them in a significant manner. 

Thus by analyzing language statements we may obtain some 
information concerning the structure of the factual world. 
Consequently Logical Empiricism in its epistemological 
approach is concerned mainly with cognitive meanings. Or 
as Feige explains it: 

"The meaning of words, then, or of signs quite generally, 
consists in the way in which they are used, the way they 
are connected with other words or related to objeets of 
experience. The definition of a term, the declaration of 
its meaning, amounts to a statement of the rule according 
to which we employ or intend to employ the term." 

(Logical Empiricism) 

Strictly speaking philosophical analysis does not 
lead to the discovery of new facts; it does not add to our 
knowledge of the world. The object is to clarify the mea¬ 
ning of what it is we are knowing when we say that we know 
ordinary facts? Just what is it we mean when we assert 
something to be true? Words may have meaning either from 
the grammatical point of view, or they may represent philo¬ 
sophical concepts. The object of philosophical analysts is 
to restate the so-called true statements with greater clari¬ 
ty and precision. The method necessitates replacing of meta¬ 
physics with the scientific method of obtaining information 






150 


about the universe. 

"Much philosophy is worthless because it persistently 
makes use of ambiguous words, and many philosophical 
controversies are unreal because the protagonists are 
using expressions such as space, time, matter and reali¬ 
ty in different senses," (Feige) 

Logical Empiricism introduces a sharp distihQtion 
between the formal and the factual sciences, i.e. between 
logic and mathematics on the one hand, and the natural and 
social sciences on the other. Logic and mathematics do not 
provide us with any information about matters of fact. They 
only make it possible for us to express ideas in more than 
one form. The forms of expression may differ, but the ideas 
remain the same. The inductive process is merely a gui¬ 
dance from premises to conclusions. A system of logic in 
only one of our symbolic conventions in regulating precision 
in meaning. Like mathematics, it is useful in developing 
greater definiteness in our scientific endeavors. 

As a theory of knowledge Logical Empiricism is 

concerned purely with cognitive meanings. Its criterion, 

then, is that of factual meaningfulness. 

"The purpose of this criterion is to delimit the type of 
expression which has possible reference to fact from the 
other types which do not have this kind of significance: 
the emotive, the logico-mathematieal, and - if there 
should be such - the completely non-significant(Feige) 

The so-called metaphysical problems and their "solutions" 
depend on the faulty presumption that the non-cognitive mea¬ 
nings are valid in so far as factual meanings are concerned. 





i 

■ 

- 












. 






















■ 


. 

, 








151 


One class has been usually mistaken for the other. It is 
true that emotive expressions are important in language, 
but they should not be confused with expressions which have 
purely informational function. On the basis of this notion 
all factual knowledge must be confirmed by experience. At 
the same time, all ethical and moral statements being mere 
assumptions expressible only in emotive language, are inca¬ 
pable of test. 


Logical Positivism of Ayer 

n I maintain in this book that it is not within the pro¬ 
vince of philosophy to justify our scientific or common- 
sense beliefs; for their validity is an empirical matter, 
which cannot be settled by a priori means. At the same 
time, the question of what constitutes such a justifica¬ 
tion is philosophical...” (Language, Truth and Logic, 
p. 25) 


This is the thesis which Ayer maintains throughout 
his book. If philosophy is to be an object of knowledge It 
must be clearly distinguished from metaphysics. Metaphysi¬ 
cal propositions are without any meaningful content, for 
they express neither tautologies nor empirical hypotheses. 
What then should be the objects and functions of philosophy? 
What should be its basic method? 

To begin with, all logical empiricists regard phi¬ 
losophy as an activity of analysis. Logical positivists 
represent extreme views in such analytic methods. According 
to them the function of a philosopher in the age of science 





















■ 


. 

■ 








152 


is not to introduce speculative truths comparable to the 
hypotheses of science, but to clarify propositions of 
science by showing their logical relationships and by defi¬ 
ning existing scientific symbols. If philosophy accepted 
these as its objective, it would eliminate controversial 
issues and conflicting "schools". In the final analysis 
all metaphysical systems aim at defining or describing truth. 
But truth or falsehood applies only to propositions expres¬ 
sed in language symbols, and every proposition should be 
verifiable only on the basis of its relevancy to some pos¬ 
sible sense experience. If it cannot be thus verified, it 
is neither true nor false, but simply senseless. 

All metaphysical systems begin with an assumption 
that philosophy gives us ^knowledge of reality beyond 
science and common sense. Every metaphysician, says Ayer, 
begins his arguments in favor of a transcendent reality 
with certain premises from which he deduces his propositions. 
But in the final analysis his premises must be based on his 
sense-experience. We must examine the validity of the pro¬ 
cess by means of which a metaphysician arrives at his con¬ 
clusions about a transcendent reality. The logical positi¬ 
vist would say that nothing outside the empirical can be 
Legitimately inferred from premises not based on sense expe¬ 
rience. Bergson would argue against this position of the 
logical positivists by saying that there is a form of intu- 
















i 


. 




1 






. 

. 

, 

, 

, 

. , ■ • ' * . ■ 

> 

, 






. 











- 






■ 










153 


ition by means of which such supra-sensible knowledge may 
be attained. In this kind of knowledge no sense experience 
need be involved. 

In order to criticize effectively a system of trans¬ 
cendent metaphysics it is necessary to go beyond the mere 
criticism of the way in which such metaphysical system 
comes into being. One must analyze the nature of the state¬ 
ments which comprise the system. Professor Ryle says that 
the task of philosophy is linguistic analysis. "Philosophy 
is talk about talk." It grew out of verbal puzzles of a 
specific kind; metaphysical, ethical and aesthetic proposi¬ 
tions are not necessarily false, but they are literally mea¬ 
ningless , for they are incapable pf being verified 

A statement referring to a "reality" which trans¬ 
cends sense exp@£lence cannot have any literal significance. 
Thus, according to Ayer, transcendent metaphysics becomes 
a hodge-podge of nonsense. However, by proving the impossi¬ 
bility of metaphysics we are not disproving the possibility 
of a transcendent world. By implication our proof is a 
form of limitation; and by limiting we are actually implying 
the possibility of something beyond the limited. Such we re 
the arguments produced against Kant ! s position. The diffe¬ 
rence, however, between Kant and logical positivists is that 
Kant showed the impossibility of transcendent metaphysics a 
matter of fact. Logical positivists show that metaphysics 













154 


has no sensible meaning. But in so far as logical positi¬ 
vism is concerned the above argument has no value, for here 
the problem is not that of the constitution of the human 
mind, as it was in Kantian philosophy, but of the signifi¬ 
cance of language in metaphysical propositions. Metaphysi¬ 
cians fail not in their use of understanding but in the 
form of their propositions to which no literal significance 
can be attached. 

Logical positivism rejects transcendental metaphy¬ 
sics and adopts a criterion of verifiability for testing 
the significance of statements of fact. To this extent it 
is in perfect accord with Dewey’s pragmatic position. 7eri- 
fiability can be practical or in principle. The former re¬ 
quires complete reenaction of sense experience with which a 
given proposition deals, and the latter is accepted on the 
ground that it could be verifiable if the necessary condi- 
tions were available. Thus, a particular statement has sig¬ 
nificance to a given individual if he knows that it could 
be verified in either of the above ways. Such possible veri¬ 
fication obliges him to accept the proposition as either 
true or false. Ordinary everyday empirical testing affords 
examples of practical verifiability. Ayer offers as an ex¬ 
ample a proposition that there are mountains on the other 
side of the moon. There are at present no means by which 
to verify the proposition by actual observation, but we are 










155 


certain that if such observation could be made it would 
prove the proposition to be true. 

There are- propositions however which cannot be 
verified either in practice or in principle. If we take 
a proposition such as, "Instinct is innate knowledge of a 
thing”, we find that it cannot be verified even in prin¬ 
ciple, for the terms of the proposition lie outside func¬ 
tional experience. And therefore, unless the proposition 
is symbolic of some actual or possible experiential occur¬ 
ence, it has no significance. 

Practical verifiability may be considered as con¬ 
clusive, whereas that in principle is only partial. Ayer, 
with some of the other positivists of the Oxford group, 
believes that there is really no proposition which can be 
conclusively verified. This includes even those proposi¬ 
tions which are known as the laws of science, since these 
propositions include an infinite number of cases, and there¬ 
fore there are always cases to which they may not apply; 
there may be cases which these propositions would not cover. 
Consequently it must be concluded that all propositions can 
at the most remain only probable hypotheses, hoes this 
situation necessarily imply that ”it is impossible to make 
a significant statement of fact at all"? Not necessarily, 
for we need not accept the positivist meaning of "fact". 

If no statement can be conclusively verified, it 








. 

, ' > w . - 

, . .. ■■ ■ • < " ■ , 

* 

. ? 

t 

. 

. 










156 


cannot be conclusively confuted. Therefore neither lack of 
definite verifiability nor the impossibility of conclusive 
confutation control the truth or falsity of a proposition. 
Consequently we cannot consider truth or falsity of a pro¬ 
position as being definitely determined by an observation. 
We can only consider to what extent the observation is re¬ 
levant to the proposition in question. 

"For a statement of fact to be genuine some possible 
observations must be relevant to the determination of its 
truth or falsehood." (Language, Truth and Logic) 

The criterion of logical positivism rules out as 
insignificant and even nonsensical certain metaphysical 
controversies which still occupy some schools of philoso¬ 
phical thinking. One of these controversies is that bet¬ 
ween iponism and pluralism where the concept of "substance" 
is involved. From the viewpoint of logical positivism the 
question becomes wholly irrelevant. 

All empirical hypotheses are propositions with 
factual content; they are relevant to some actual or pos¬ 
sible experience. A statement which has no such relevancy 
is not based upon empirical hypothesis and consequently can¬ 
not have factual content. The a priori propositions of 
logic and mathematics are certain and necessary because 
they are tautological, and have no necessary connection 
with the empirical world. A metaphysical proposition is 
neither a tautology nor an empirical hypothesis; it is 







157 


therefore without meaningful significanee. 

The position of Aywr as a logical empiricist to 
begin with, leads him to investigate the origin of metaphy¬ 
sics. How did it come into being? What prompted the for¬ 
mulating of certain metaphysical concepts? A good example 
of such a concept is the one we term "substance”. Our lan¬ 
guage is unable to deal with the names of the properties of 
a thing without creating a name for the thing which suppo¬ 
sedly underlies these properties. It is assumed therefore 
that every name must refer to some real entity for which it 
stands, and that there consequently must be a distinction 
between real entities and their properties. The word "sub¬ 
stance" was introdueed to apply to the supposed real enti¬ 
ties. It is evident, however, that no single name is neces¬ 
sary, for a thing can be just as efficiently described by 
using names which apply to its qualitative appearances. 

"Logical analysis shows that what makes these T appearan¬ 
ces T the 1 appearances of* the same thing is not their 
relationship to an entity other that themselves, but 
their relationship to one another. The metaphysician 
fails to see this because he is misled by a superficial 
grammatical feature of his language." (Ibid.) 

It is the consideration of mathematics which leads 
to metaphysics. An example of this is the concept of Being. 
It arises out of the fact that in our language the gramma¬ 
tical structure of the sentence which expresses existence 

is the same as that of a sentence which expresses an attri¬ 
butive proposition. This leads metaphysicians to assume 






158 


that such sentences are of the same logical type. Ayer 
gives an example of this error by pointing out that in the 
sentence "Martyrs exist", the idea of existence is taken to 
have the same attributive sense as the idea of suffering 
has in the sentence "Martyrs suffer". In the way of criti¬ 
cism, however, it must be drawn to Ayer*s attention that in 
the latter sentence by attributing the idea of suffering to 
the subject, we are implicitly admitting the notion of the 
subject*s existence. But if existence is to be accepted as 
an attribute, says Ayer, then all existential propositions 
become mere tautologies, and the negations of these proposi¬ 
tions would be self-contradictory, which is not the case. 

It is senseless, therefore, to consider existence as an 
attribute. 

Thus it turns out, as shown by Carnap, that the 
so-called philosophical problems are really grammatical. By 
avoiding errors in syntax we either solve these problems or 
prove them to be incapable of solution. Or as Russell points 
out in his theory of descriptions, the problem of existence 
disappears once we realize that existential propositions are 
descriptive; that is, existence can only be asserted of des¬ 
criptive propositions. The fallacy of metaphysical specula¬ 
tion on Being arises from the fallacy of considering exis¬ 
tence as an attribute. We constantly tend to attribute to 
grammatical subjects corresponding real entities which 






159 


supposedly underlie the subjects. If these entities cannot 
be found in the empirical world, they are searched for and 
"located" beyond it. Hence the reason for Plato 1 s Forms, 
rationalist "substance", Kant's noumena, and so forth. 

The main source of metaphysics, therefore, accor¬ 
ding to logical positivists, is linguistic confusion. There 
are those who claim that although metaphysics cannot indi¬ 
cate any final truth or falsehood, it may still be consi¬ 
dered as having emotional and poetic value in the form of 
moral and aesthetic inspiration. This may be true, but the 
difficulty arises out of the fact that metaphysicians aim 
at expressing truth and not merely at composing sentences 
which would appeal to the emotions. A mystic is the one 
who must appeal directly to human emotions. He is thus a 
poet in a way. But whether a metaphysician is a mystic, or 
whether he is being confused by grammar, in either case he 
is expressing nonsense. 

Thus far we have reviewed the positivist explana¬ 
tion of the origin of metaphysics and its fruitless efforts 
in the attainment of new knowledge. How, we may ask, what 
is the function of philosophy from the positivist viewpoint? 
It it the business of a philosopher to construct a deductive 
system beginning with a set of postulated principles? Logi¬ 
cal positivists question the right of philosophy to do so, 

















160 


since, according to them there are no first principles from 
which reality can be constructed. The so-called first prin¬ 
ciples cannot function as the basis for knowledge, since 
they are not derived from experience. Descartes, for ex¬ 
ample, constructed a rationalistic system by beginning 
with his first principle of coglto , but actually he had no 
logical right to deduce existence from thinking. In order 
to be able to use this principle he had to accept causality 
as self-evident. It is true that science makes use of ge¬ 
neral principles, but these have originally been arrived at 
inductively. From these observations of the positivists 
it may be concluded that it is not the business of philo¬ 
sophy to set up first principles upon which to construct 
a system. 

The function of philosophy then does not consist 
in the search for absolute principles, nor for any a priori 
truths to justify our scientific and common sense assump¬ 
tions. It is not its business to test the validity of the 
hypotheses of science. The function of philosophy, accor¬ 
ding to the positivists, should be wholly critical. Its 
object should be to show man how his beliefs and conceptions 
can either be justified or proven false by experience; that 
is, a philosopher can only give us evidence for the truth 
or falsehood of our empirical propositions. In the final 
analysis this evidence lies in the sense experience. 






v . 


- 

, ■ 


•* 

* 

, • 







161 


Philosophers like Bergson, for example, refuse to 
give science full credit for knowledge because they have 
been unable to solve the problem of induction. But there 
is really no such problem. The validity of scientific hypo¬ 
thesis does not rest on any proof of induction. 

"Actually, we shall see that the only test to which a 
form of scientific procedure which satisfies the neces¬ 
sary condition of self-consistency is subject, is the 
tes£ of its success in practice. We are entitled to have 
faith in our procedure just as long as it does the work 
it is designed to do - that is, enable us to predict 
future experience, and so to control our environment." 
(Language, Truth and Logic, p. 50) 

Ayer emphasizes very strongly that philosophy 
does not consist of speculative formulation of truths, nor 
is it a search for first principles, nor is it a systemati¬ 
zation of a priori judgments. Philosophy is analysis of 
propositional statements, and not metaphysical speculation 
as commonly understood. It is for this reason that he dis¬ 
tinguishes between metaphysics and philosophy regarded as 
a special branch of knowledge. It would even be advisable 
to discontinue the use of the term "philosophy" on account 
of its metaphysical implications. We cannot conclude, how¬ 
ever, that all philosophers have been metaphysicians. 

Locke's endeavors, for instance, consisted mainly of ana¬ 
lysis. Hume in the main was an analyst; and Berkeley, who 
is looked upon as an out-and-out idealist, had employed the 
process of analysis to a great extent. It was really Hume's 









\ & « 





j • .. , - 






, 













162 


analysis of propositions purporting to establish causal 
relations which eventually led to the method of logical 
analysis. 

philosophy in the sense of logical analysis is 
wholly independent of metaphysics. Analysis as understood 
by Ayer does not mean analysis in the sense of atomism. 

Nor is it "directly conceriied with physical properties of 
things". In his sense of the term it is concerned only 
with the way in which we speak about things and their pro¬ 
perties. That is, the propositions of philosophy are about 
language and not about facts. Thus philosophy becomes a 
branch of logic. When we are making propositions about 
things we are merely defining them, which in no way modifies 
them in so far as their empirical constitution is concerned, 
whatever that may be. Therefore logical analysis cannot 
interfere with scientific assumptions, for the latter deal 
with empirical facts, whereas the former deal with proposi¬ 
tions about these facts. 

Possible confusions in logical analysis may arise 
out of the fact that propositions which are purely linguis¬ 
tic are usually expressed in such manner as to appear fac¬ 
tual. These linguistic propositions may be dealing with 
symbols or symbols of symbols; and the form in which the 
symbols are put in the proposition may make them appear as 
if they were empirical facts. As Waismann says, "there is 












163 


something unsettled about language". There are certain pos¬ 
sibilities of which under normal circumstances we may not 
be aware. For example, the statement, "Space has three 
dimensions" is of the same grammatical form as the state¬ 
ment, "I have three hats". But when we carefully examine 
these two statements we discover that only the second one 
is factual, for it can be empirically verified. The first 
statement, although it appears to be verifiable in principle 
at least, is not a necessary truth; there is no reason why 
space should not have more than three dimensions. In addi¬ 
tion to this, the terms in this statement are much more 
highly symbolic that those in the second. Waismann places 
such statements halfway between empirical and analytic. 

The Method of Philosophical Analysis 

Philosophy provides definitions of terms; not the 
explicit definitions of the dictionary type, but those 
which are currently in use. An explicit definition consists 
of a symbolic representation of another symbol, both sym¬ 
bols being synonymous. A definition in use does not consist 
of a synonymous symbol; it involves the fact that the propo¬ 
sition in which the symbols are contained is translated 
into a proposition which differs in symbolic content but 
maintains the significance of the original proposition. An 
example of this sort of analysis is Russell 1 s theory of 
descriptions. His type sentence, "The round square cannot 







164 


exist" is equivalent to "No one thing can be both square 
and round". We thus eliminate the descriptive subject whieh 
occurs in the first existential proposition, and still ex¬ 
press the same significant idea. Ayer evaluates this form 
of descriptive analysis by saying that 

"it is the purpose of a philosophical definition to 
dispel those confusions which arise from our imperfect 
understanding of certain types of sentence in our lan¬ 
guage, where the need cannot be met by a provision of a 
synonym,for any symbol, either because there is no syno¬ 
nym, or else because the available synonyms are unclear 
in the same fashion as the symbol to which the confusion 
is due." (Ibid.) 

A language is usually complicated by the ambigu¬ 
ity of symbols. One of such symbols in the European lan¬ 
guages is the verb "to be". In sentences such as, "Watt is 
the inventor of the steam engine" and "Man is a primate", 
the symbol "is" remains the same. But when we translate 
the sentences we find that in the first one "is" means 
"invented", and in the second "is" means "contains". (The 
order of primates contains man.) Thus the verb in this case 
is an ambiguous symbol, and neither one nor the other should 
be confused with "is" signifying existence. 

By employing symbols which denote logical cons¬ 
tructions, we are enabled to make propositions about these 
constructions in a simple form. A name, for example, is a 
symbol for a logical construction which consists of sense 
contents. If it were not for such logical constructions, 















165 


we should not be able to make statements about anything. 

So, in the final analysis, symbols stand for sense contents. 

Therefore, to say anything about a "thing” is always to 

say something about sense contents, 

"By defining the notion of a material thing in terms of 
sense contents we solve the so-called problem of percep¬ 
tion. " (Ibid) 

The problem of perception consists of the ques¬ 
tions about tiie nature of material things. The questions 
are really requests for definitions. They are purely lin¬ 
guistic, and so are the propositions which answer the ques¬ 
tions. They may appear to be factual, but they really 
express relationships among symbols, and not the properties 
of things symbolized. 

Philosophical definitions are not intended to 
reveal meanings of symbols, for two equivalent propositions 
may not always have the same meaning for everyone concerned. 
The psychological effect produced by two equivalent senten¬ 
ces may differ considerably. For example, of the two sen¬ 
tences which state the same proposition: Communists advocate 
violent overthrow of the government, and Those who advocate 
violent overthrow of the government are communists, the for¬ 
mer has a distinctly different psychological effect than 
the latter. Both symbols, "communists" and "advocate" have 
different emotive meanings in these sentences. 


According to Ayer philosophy is not an inquiry 






\ 







166 


into the meaning of symbols. It is not a study of language 
as means of communication through symbols. Its interest in 
language is not as language, but as "a purely logical acti¬ 
vity, and not in any empirical study of the linguistic 
habits of any group of people”. The propositions of philo¬ 
sophy TT are concerned with the logical consequences of lin¬ 
guistic conventions". 

The current trend of the English group of Logical 
Positivists is to center attention on such problems as lin¬ 
guistic reference, the analysis of knowledge and belief, 
the theory of names and descriptions, and analysis of abs¬ 
tract verbs and nouns. Some of the members of this group 
focus their attention on detailed linguistic analyses which 
relate to specific problems of logic and theory of know¬ 
ledge. Their investigations are very closely related to 
psychology on the one hand, and grammar on the other 

The a priori 

Ayer claims that the analytic method in philosophy 
may be regarded as a form of empiricism. Some form of ana¬ 
lysis is implicit in the expositions of the greatest empi¬ 
ricists. Empiricism, however, does not imply that analytic 
philosophers can produce certainly valid propositions about 
life and matter, for their empiricism rests on purely logi¬ 
cal considerations. As empiricists, how can logical ana¬ 
lysts meet the criticism that empiricist principles cannot 








167 


account for our knowledge of necessary truths? Hume had 
pointed out this position of empiricism in his analysis of 
causality. No proposition can ever be proved to be logi¬ 
cally and universally certain. At best even the scientific 
propositions of n truths” must remain only probable and hypo¬ 
thetical. 

An empiricist encounters difficulties in explai¬ 
ning the apparently certain and necessary truths of logic 
and mathematics. These truths must be explained as either 
not universal and necessary, or it must be shown how propo¬ 
sitions without factual content can be true and necessary. 

If this cannot be done, we shall constantly have to revert 
to some form of rationalism. The rationalist position 
breaks down if it can be shown that the so-called truths 
are either not necessary or that they are not truths about 
the world but about thought and reason. 

Ayer insists that logical and mathematical propo¬ 
sitions are independent of experience, and f, do not owe their 
validity to empirical verification”. He rejects Mil^s view 
that these propositions are inductive generalizations. 
Whenever mathematical or logical propositions appear to be 
confuted, it may be found that in such instances we always 
appeal to experience and sense-contents to discover the 
reason for such confutation. But the principles of logic 
and mathematics cannot really be confuted. Being analytic, 










168 


these truths are necessarily universal and unassailable. 

The reason why they are universal is that they are tautolo¬ 
gical. In this case logical analysis accepts Kant's defi¬ 
nition of analytic judgments. These are judgments in which 
the predicate B is covertly contained in the subject A, in 
the statement of the form: A is B. The predicate B adds 
nothing to the subject A, which has not been implicitly 
contained in it all the time. 

Kant was not entirely sound in his presentation of 
examples to distinguish between analytic and synthetic judg¬ 
ments, for his examples were based on two different criteria, 
one psychological and the other logical. Ayer distingui¬ 
shes between analytic and synthetic propositions by explai¬ 
ning that analytic propositions are those the validity of 
which depends on the definitions of the symbols they contain, 
whereas the validity of the synthetic propositions is deter¬ 
mined by the facts of experience. 

"It is to be noticed that the proposition 'Either some 
ants are parasitic or none are 1 provides no information 
whatsoever about the behavior of ants, or, indeed, about 
any matter of fact. And this applies to all analytic 
propositions. They none of them provide any information 
about any matter of fact. In other words, they are enti¬ 
rely devoid of any factual content. And it is for this 
reason that no experience can confute them." (Ibid) 

Analytic propositions, then, do not provide any 
information about matter of fact; being "devoid of factual 
content" they cannot be confuted by experience. Nevertheless 
























: 









* 













. 


- 

. . , 

, 

, 

, 


t . 








169 

this does not mean that analytic propositions are mere 
nonsense. They inform us about the way in which we use 
symbols in linguistic construction. 

The formal logic of the classic philosophers 
produced an effect that it was dealing with matter of fact, 
but actually it was dealing with linguistic usages. Logic 
never describes the laws of thought nor the matter of fact 
world. In like manner, mathematics, being purely analytic, 
give us no information whatever about the constitution and 
the properties of the empirical world. Mathematical propo¬ 
sitions, especially those of geometry, can be used in rea¬ 
soning about physical space, but this does not mean that 
geometry is about physical space, or that it is in some way 
directly based on it. 

It has thus been shown by logical positivists 
that an analytic proposition is independent of the empirical 
world, and that it is also independent of the nature of our 
minds. It is merely an expression of the linguistic use of 
synonymous symbols. All analytical propositions are tauto¬ 
logical, which explanation applies also to all a priori 
truths. 

"To say that a proposition is true a priori is to say 
that it is a tautology". (Ibid., p. 87) 

The Meaning of Truth 


What criterion shall we use to determine the 










170 


validity of empirical propositions? Concerning the "theory 
of truth", logical positivists are not interested in the 
question "What is truth?", for this question does not give 
rise to any real problem. It therefore entails no theory. 
From the viewpoint of logical positivists a theory of truth 
must aim to show how propositions are made valid. Conse¬ 
quently in their analysis of truth they do not deal with 
metaphysical entities, but with propositions and symbols 
which constitute them. 

The terms "true" and "false" function only as 
signs of assertion and denial. Therefore they cannot be 
analyzed in the same manner in which we analyze concepts. 

The philosophers who are concerned with metaphysical analy¬ 
sis of truth are overlooking the symbolic function of this 
term. Thus, according to Ayer, the question "What is truth?" 
is always reducible to the question "What is the analysis of 
the sentence ’p is true 1 ?". The result of sjich analysis is 
the strict adherence to the correspondence theory of truth. 
The coherence theory oh the other hand, arises out of the 
speculation about truth as a quality which applies to some¬ 
thing "real". 

"Thus to say that a proposition is true is just to assert 
it, and to say that it is false is just to assert its 
contradictory. And this indicates that terms ’true* and 
’false* connote nothing, but function in the sentence 
simply as marks of assertion and denial. And in that 
case there can be no sense in asking us to analyze the 
concept of* truth*." (Ibid., p. 88-9) 






171 


The criterion on the basis of which empirical 
propositions are validated is different from that on which 
a priori propositions are validated. Empirical propositions 
are made valid on the basis of being experientially demons¬ 
trable. But even here the only certain validity applies to 
"ostensive" propositions; all others are mere hypotheses. 
Ostensive propositions are those which refer to immediate 
experience, and Ayer argues that even such propositions 
cannot be accepted as certain. According to him they are 
impossible, or if they are expressed, they are mere tauto¬ 
logies and do not contain any new information. 

Propositions which express more that a single hypo¬ 
thesis are referred to as synthetic. Very often these pro¬ 
positions may be mistaken for analytic. For example, it is 
possible to accept such statement as "All men are mortal" 
for an analytic judgment, since the idea "mortal" always 
goes with the concept "man", that is, the latter takes on 
the appearance of containing the former. Therefore, since 
the statement becomes a tautology, it tells us nothing new. 
Consequently it loses its hypothetical value. 

"Thus we create tautologies by a suitable adjustment of 
our definitions: but we cannot solve empirical problems 
merely by juggling with the meanings of words." 

(Ibid., p. 96) 

If such is the case, if there remains a constant possibility 
of statements becoming mere tautologies, then logical pisi- 
tivism leaves all empirical problems unsolved. From the 





172 


above quotation we can see Ayer T s admission that there are 
empirical problems. He must also admit that the method of 
language analysis will not solve these problems. 

Why are we under constant obligation to alter our 
hypothetical propositions? We must first of all realize 
that hypotheses are rules which govern our expectations of 
future experience. They give us some accuracy in predic¬ 
ting our future sense-contents. From the evolutionary 
viewpoint hypotheses are highly specialized adaptations for 
survival. There is hardly any difference between this con¬ 
cept and Dewey's notion of the instrumental function of 
mental processes. 

We derive our hypotheses primarily from our past 
experience. In this sense science becomes a descriptive 
method. And since some hypotheses have been known to break 
down in their efficiency of predictability, we ordinarily 
expect all hypotifses to lie within this possibility. Conse¬ 
quently the constant alteration of hypotheses is done with 
a view that new ones will more efficiently guide us in our 
future experience. With respect to this view, logical posi¬ 
tivism is a reflection of the basic principles of Dewey's 
instrumentalism. 

We do not always accept hypothetical propositions on the 
basis of empirical evidence, however. Our beliefs concer¬ 
ning the hypotheses are not always rational. Rationality 






173 


of our beliefs is a purely relative matter. 

"We trust the methods of contemporary science because 
they have been successful in practice. If in the future 
we were to adopt different methods, then beliefs which 
are now rational might become irrational from the stand¬ 
point of these new methods." (Ibid., p. 100) 

Interpretation of Ethics and Theology 

Ayer ! s object is to justify the positivist view 
that all synthetic propositions are empirical hypotheses. 

To do this it is essential that ethics and theology be 
brought within the scope of his critical analysis. 

Philosophical systems have been dealing with the 
problem of epistemology by considering speculative know- 
ledge as being of two kinds, "that which relates to ques¬ 
tions of empirical fact, and that which relates to questions 
of value". Ayer sets out to show that statements of value 
are in a way scientific statements if they bear any meaning¬ 
ful significance at all. 

Ethical philosophers usually confuse four classes 
of possible ethical propositions. These are: definitions 
of ethical terms, descriptions of phenomena in moral expe¬ 
rience, Statements about moral virtue, and actual ethical 
judgments. By confusing these classes of propositions 
philosophers have confused the issues under consideration. 
From the viewpoint of logical analysis, "it is easy to see 
that only the first of our four classes, namely that which 






174 


comprises the propositions relating to the definitions of 
ethical terms, can be said to constitute ethical philosophy*.’ 
Propositions which belong to the other three classes cah be 
sufficiently well dealt with by psychology and sociology. 

To say that an action is good morally because it 
is generally approved of is self-contradictory. Ayer re¬ 
jects the subjectivist principle of moral judgments, since 
it usually leads to regarding ethical and moral values as 
intrinsic and absolute, hence, not arrived at empirically. 

f, 0ur contention is simply that, in our language, senten¬ 
ces which contain normative ethical symbols are not 
equivalent to sentences which express psychological 
propositions of any kind." (Ibid., p. 105) 

Normative ethical concepts cannot be reduced to empirical 
concepts. Statements of ethical value, therefore, can ne¬ 
ver be verifiable; in the end we are obliged to rely on the 
"intuitive sense" of every individual. But this is no cri¬ 
terion of validity. The "absolutist" theory of ethics be¬ 
comes wholly unacceptable to the philosophy of logical po¬ 
sitivism. 

Ethical statements of value are made on the basis 
of emotions - a purely psychological factor - not on the 
basis of scientific principles. It may therefore be afgued 
that ethical concepts are pseudo-concepts. That is, in 
ethical propositions we make statements of fact to which 
we add a purely personal emotional increment of approval 
and disapproval, or feeling-tone. 





175 


"For in saying that a certain type of action is right 
or wrong, I am not making any factual statement, not 
even a statement about my own state of mind. I am 
merely expressing certain moral sentiments." (Ibid. 107) 

The contradictories to moral propositions rest on the same 
ground. They are either expressions of feeling, exhorta¬ 
tions, or commands. 

The subjectivist ethical philosophers claim that 
ethical statements assert the presence of certain feelings. 
Consequently, according to them, such statements can be 
judged as true or false depending on whether the feelings 
are present or absent. Ayer argues that ethical statements 
are not necessarily accompanied by corresponding feelings; 
therefore their validity cannot be determined. Nevertheless 
it may be contended that whoever may be the author or ori¬ 
ginator of a certain ethical proposition, this proposition 
has or had some corresponding feeling in that individual or 
in other individuals in the present or in some historic past. 

The contradictions in statements about ethical 
and moral values are only apparent. When we dispute about 
moral values we are actually disputing about the facts of 
some particular case. 

"We do this in the hope that we have only to get our 
opponent to agree with us about the nature of empirical 
facts for him to adopt the same moral attitude toward 
them as we do." (Ibid., p. 111) 

There are , therefore, no real disputes, for these can arise 
only from contradictory statements about matter of fact; 





. 












, 






, 






, 


t 

. 

* 

* 

• - * 

« , 









176 


they are the ones that can be empirically validated. All 
moral arguments, to be sensible, must be based on some 
standard of values to give us a criterion on the basis of 
which to judge our statements as true or false. But we can 
never establish absolute validity of the moral criterion 
itself. 

After careful consideration of Ayer T s arguments 
concerning ethical propositions, one feels logically obliged 
to accept his view that ethics is a branch of psychology 
and sociology. There is an apparent influence of recent 
psychological investigations in the sphere of moral conduct 
upon the views adopted by logical positivists. Statements 
pertaining to aesthetic concepts fall in the same category 
- they lie in the sphere of psychological studies. And any 
information that we derive with respect to our moral and 
aesthetic experiences, "is information about our own mental 
and physical make-up". 

If such is the ease in connection with the above 
concepts, then the same arguments must apply to our theolo¬ 
gical notions. According to Ayer, it is impossible by any 
logical argument to prove the existence of a transcendent 
God, or the possibility of religious knowledge. How certain 
are the premises used in the arguments to prove the exis¬ 
tence of God? 

"It is only a priori propositions which are logically 

certain. But we cannot deduce the existence of a god 




177 


from an a priori proposition." (Ibid., p. 114) 

On this ground it is even impossible to prove the probabi¬ 
lity of a god. The proposition "God exists" is a metaphy¬ 
sical proposition, and as has already been pointed out 
previously, such propositions are not verifiable and have 
no literal significance. This view, however, does not 
entail atheism or agnosticism. Logical positivism still 
leaves room for the concept of God to be employed as a sym¬ 
bol for certain empirical processes or facts. Only thus 
can the concept be used significantly in meaningful propo¬ 
sitions. But the symbol must not be taken to stand for 
some transcendent entity beyond the possibility of empirical 
verification. This analysis leads to the position that 
there cannot really be any dispute between religion and 
science, for since religious propositions are of metaphysi¬ 
cal character, they can have no relevance to the empirical 
world. 

The Problem of Knowledge 

The method of analysis which logical positivists 
use in the field of morals and ethics appears also in their 
solutions of epistemological problems. Such terms as "know¬ 
ing" and "believing" are analized through phenomenalistic 
and dispositional interpretations. Mental processes $re no 

longer regarded as a mechanical sort of activity going on 
in various parts of the brain. Professor Ryle, for example, 





178 


explains that 

"Knowing is not a process like humming or digging. It 
is a disposition, like believing, feeling, being clever, 
etc." (Lecture, 1949) 

Ayer agrees fully with this position. 

What is the basis of knowledge? Can empirical 
knowledge be justified only on pragmatic basis? Ayer has 
already shown that all propositions, 

"including the propositions which describe the content 
of our sensations, are hypotheses which, however great 
their probability, we may eventually find it expedient 
to abandon. And this means that our empirical knowledge 
cannot have a basis of logical certainty." (l. T* & ) 

The only certainty is that contained in tautological propo¬ 
sitions. 


The question as to whether sense-contents are phy¬ 
sical or psychological is dismissed as irrelevant. Logical 
positivism deals only with distinctions in propositions, 
that is, with language. There is no empirical test by means 
of which we could solve the problem of "reality". Accor¬ 
dingly a sense-content is defined not as the object, but 
as a part of sense-experience. 

"And from this it follows that the existence of a sense- 
content always entail the existence of a sense-expe¬ 
rience." (Language, Truth and Logic) 

Therefore sense-contents should not be treated as if they 

were material things. 

In the final analysis, the distinction between 
mind and matter, according to Ayer, can apply only to logi- 




179 


cal constructions. The fact that tlfse logical constructions 
are reducible to sense-contents does not constitute any 
problem in so far as the concept of matter is conserned. ’ 

In the words of Ayer, 

"It should be clear, also, that there is no philosophical 
problem concerning the relationship of mind and matter, 
other than the linguistic problems of defining certain 
symbols which denote logical constructions in terms of 
symbols which denote sense-contents." (Ibid., p. 124) 

The apparent problem had arisen out of the metaphysical 

conception of "substances". 

In view of this positivist analysis of knowledge, 
the self, too, must be analyzed only in terms of sense-con¬ 
tents. A sense-experience can belong to a sense-history 
of only one individual self, since all sense-experiences 
are subjective. There are certain difficulties arising out 
of the fact that the self is still considered as some uni¬ 
tary "substance" underlying all sense-experiences. But 
Ayer believes that such an underlying unity is purely a 
metaphysical construction. Like Hume, he rejects the con¬ 
cept of an underlying ego "on the ground that no such enti¬ 
ty was observable". The only observable elements are per¬ 
ceptions of sense-contents. 

Logical Positivism as a Philosophic Method 

"There is a unity of language in science, viz., a common 
reduction basis for the terms of all branches of science, 
this basis consisting of the very narrow and homogeneous 
class of terms of the physical thing-language." (Carnap) 












180 


Ayer's object is to show that the nature of phi¬ 
losophy is such that there should be no disputes leading to 
conflicting schools. Apparent conflicts can be resolved 
if philosophy undertakes to analyze linguistic usages in¬ 
stead of arguing about metaphysical concepts. The primary 
business of philosophy is to deal with logical questions. 

If the questions are not logical, then they can be either 
submitted to the investigation by science, or dismissed as 
senseless. 

The outstanding aim of logical positivism is to 
show the unity of philosophy and science. The scientist 
ultimately deals with empirical facts; the philosophers 
function is merely to classify the symbols which the scien¬ 
tist employs. Considered thus, philosophy becomes a logic 
of science. 

"Thus the philosopher is not, qua philosopher, in a posi 
tion to assess the value of any scientific theory; his 
function is simply to elucidate the theory by defining 
the symbols which occur in it." (Ibid., p. 152) 

By rejecting metaphysical speculation logical posi 
tivism avoids controversial issues. It is only in the 
rationalist and idealist schools that countless controver¬ 
sies arise. Nevertheless, for the very reason that it re¬ 
jects metaphysics for linguistic analysis, it is faced with 
difficulties peculiar to its method. The main difficulty 
is that of verifiability. In order to have significant 
















. '’i' c ;>oX i ' . , . j ; 

’ 




, : ' 

' 

. 

* 





, 

, 








181 


meaning, propositions must be verified by science; they 
must be shown to stand in certain material relation to 
direct observation. But there are metaphysical proposi¬ 
tions which, though they cannot be verified by science, 
neither can they be proven to be wholly a priori. Logical 
positivists begin their analysis with an assumption that 
only propositions of matter of fact or of science are veri¬ 
fiable. Consequently their own propositions employed in 
logical analysis cannot be verifiable. If such is the case, 
logical positivism must be a metaphysical method. It is 
this solipsistic impasse which leads some positivists to 
admit the possibility of propositions which are halfway 
between synthetic and a priori or analytic. 

Another difficulty is that which arises out of 
the analysis of truth. In his criticism of metaphysical 
speculation about truth, Ayer overlooks the fact that be¬ 
sides being an assertive symbol or sign, "truth" may also 
be a symbol for relationships among empirical facts. -The 
problem of truth cannot be completely reduced to the ques¬ 
tion of how propositions are made valid. There still re¬ 
mains the problem of relation of empirical facts to sense- 
contents. 

In the final analysis the meaning of truth depends 
on the meaning of reality. For logical positivism the real 
things are the symbols. But it is just as possible to 






182 


accept symbols as such, and to give reality to relations, 
irrespective of their symbolic expression. Therefore the 
theory of truth may pertain to empirical relations and not 
to propositional statements about these relations. 

The reason why the method of logical analysis 
opens itself to criticism on the ground of being solipsist 
is because of its thoroughgoing phenomenalism. Ayer objects 
to any criticism on this ground, since, according to him, 
there is a high degree of probability in inferring the exis¬ 
tence of others from that of the self. 

"It appears, then, that the fact that a man ! s sense-expe¬ 
riences are private to himself, inasmuch as each of them 
contains an organic sense-content which belongs to his 
body and to no other, is perfectly compatible with his 
having good reason to believe in the existence of other 
men." (Ibid) 

Ayer, however, is doubtful of the validity of his own argu¬ 
ments in this respect, and admits that the objections are 
quite justifiable. There is only one conclusion that we 
must form in order to avoid solipsism. From the comparison 
of the behavior of others to that of our own, we find cer¬ 
tain similarities; and knowing that our own behavior is 
closely connected with our own sense-contents, we must con¬ 
clude that we belong to the same world with others. This 
conclusion forms the basis for our mutual understanding. 

Nevertheless, the problem which positivism sets 
out to solve is far from being solved, for it merely intro¬ 
duces in place of metaphysical speculation the problem of 




183 


"literal significance". What is literal significance? 
Apparently it involves some correspondence between sense- 
contents and our propositions about these. But what do 
sense-contents include? We may answer this question by 
saying that they include everything that goes by the name 
of "experience". If that is the case, then feelings and 
emotions are species of sense-contents. They are thus 
empirical and matter-of-fact, and statements about them 
should be as much verifiable as those about all other sense- 
contents. From this viewpoint Ayer*s arguments pertaining 
to ethical and aesthetic propositions turn out to be quite 
ineffectual. 

It is evident, of course, that his arguments stem 
from his basic assumptions concerning the nature of know- 
ledge. In this connection we may note the basic assumptions 
of some of the main trends of philosophic thinking today. 

"To know is to have sense-contents", says Ayer. Bergson 
argues that "to know is to be one with". Dewey believes 
that "to know is to act". Is there any essential difference 
in these three views of knowledge? In what follows, an 
attempt is made to compare and reconcile some of the basic 
concepts in the leading contemporary trends in philosophic 
thinking. 





184 


DEWEY, WHITEHEAD AND LOGICAL POSITIVISM 

In Irwin Edman l s book, The Philosophers Quest, 
Edward Brodvue falls vistim to philosophic neurosis. He 
develops an urgent compulsion "to have a clear and compre¬ 
hensive view of the world". Fortunately not every philo¬ 
sopher becomes afflicted with philosophic neurosis, and the 
reason is that most philosophers have strong faith in the 
rationality of the human mind. Edward Brodvue had no such 
faith. Consequently he was unable to reconcile the final 
and absolute truths of philosophers. He could not decide 
which of the philosophic systems is the true solution to 
the eternal problems confronting the human mind. 

Of course his search for a final solution was 
bound to be futile, for truth does not lie in philosophi¬ 
zing, but in living. And those philosophies which have 
constructed systems of thought based on the notion of final 
"truth" are but partial glimpses at the totality of life. 
They all exemplify progressively evolving truths. 

It is impossible to imagine complete reconcilia¬ 
tion or unification of the various approaches to philoso¬ 
phic thinking; one would have to imagine humanity as no lon¬ 
ger human if such homogenous state could be envisaged. 
Consequently one must search for most satisfying truths in 
all philosophic systems. In this respect one soon discovers 
that although philosophers speak in different linguistic 






180 


symbols, there is a great deal of similarity in their 
methods. The methods of attaining the object of their 
quest may be predominantly practical, metaphysical, or 
strictly logical. The mere fact however that all are 
engaged in the quest gives these methods certain value as 
useful instruments in the solution of human problems. It 
is with this view in mind that we may now evaluate compa¬ 
ratively at least three of the present day methods in phi¬ 
losophic thinking. We shall try to discover what services 
each may render to a clearer understanding of human problems 

The philosopher*s quest is neverending, for if it 
were, the most primitive being who proffered some explana¬ 
tion of the natural phenomena about him, would have solved 
the riddle of the universe for all time. The quest must go 
on for the simple reason that no explanation, no matter how 
highly systematized and elaborated, is all-inclusive. Con¬ 
sequently, if one were asked to adopt in its entirety any 
of the contemporary systematized philosophic pronouncements, 
one would have to employ the attitude of pragmatism and say 
with Dewey that there is nowhere at any time anything that 
may be accepted as finite and absolute. Those who profess 
to have attained such truth ought only to say that they 
have visions and imaginations, the outcome of man’s desire 
to transcend time and space, the ’now 1 and the ’here’. 

It is in this respect that Whitehead and Dewey 





186 


present us with both a contrast and a similarity. As to 
contrast, the former went beyond the limitations of the 
immediate, while the latter has not gone far enough. As to 
similarity, both philosophies are the outcome of the ana - 
lysis of scientific method. Whereas Dewey 1 3 philosophy 
remains a method of philosophical analysis within the bounds 
of science, thus becoming instrumental in the life problems 
of man, Y/hitehead T s philosophy of organism goes beyond the 
bounds of science by generalizing the hypotheses and the 
so-called laws of science. His tendency to generalize 
makes him underestimate the value of experimentation in 
modern science. This tendency may perhaps be expected from 
any mathematical genius, but he overlooks the fact that 
intelligence was the beginning not only of mathematics, but 
also of experimentation. Dewey 1 s main argument is that 
since intelligence proved effective in science, it should 
prove as effective in philosophy. Man ! s "natural” environ¬ 
ment consists not only of physical things, but also of 
social beings. Therefore scientific method should apply to 
the whole of his environment. There are no fields of human 
endeavor in which knowledge may be obtained through any 
method which is not the method of science. It is at this 
point that Dewey and Bergson part company, although both 
philosophies begin with the idea that life is activity and 
activity is for life. 






187 


In what sense can it be said that Whitehead goes 
beyond the limitations of the methods of science? It is 
well known that scientific methods are in constant process 
of change, both in theoretical objectives and in details of 
research. It is really a history of the constant process 
of change in the methods of inquiry. Science is a method, 
but it should not be regarded as a system, for system imp¬ 
lies rigidity. It implies some underlying plan which at 
times may be conceived as forming a set of immutable laws. 
Such attitude is usually the outcome of the metaphysical 
search for the Absolute. It is in the latter sense that 
Whitehead’s systematization of modern physical sciences 
leads him to postulate a world of "eternal objects". What 
else can this world be but a metaphysical construction? 

His analysis of scientific concepts makes him conclude that 
science is taking on a new aspect which is neither purely 
physical in the sense of Newtonian mechanics, nor purely 
biological in the sense of Darwinian biology. In some dis¬ 
tant future the historians in their analysis of our civili¬ 
zation will speak of our scientific beliefs as having con¬ 
stituted definite impediments to progress. Our scientific 
pursuits are completely outdistancing our critical study 
of scientific concepts and procedures, so that we find it 
difficult to differentiate between scientific points of 
view and those which are strictly metaphysical. 






188 


The most burning questions with which Dewey begins 
his analysis are those which appeared in the mind of every 
philosopher: What is knowledge and how do we come to have 
it? Shall we begin our enquiry by employing the refined 
operations of the mind? Or shall we begin with the lowly 
empirical activity which is so natural to man? Dewey ac¬ 
cepts the latter form of activity as truly leading to know¬ 
ledge. His philosophy then must of necessity be nothing 
else but the analysis of the scientific method of attaining 
knowledge. But it will be claimed that Whitehead*s philo¬ 
sophy of organism is jast such an analysis. It may appear 
so in its general aspect; however, though he begins with 
the analysis of the scientific method, he ends up with a 
form of knowledge which he implicitly claims to be higher 
than the merely empirical knowledge of science. In prin¬ 
ciple it differs very little from Bergsons intuitive 
knowledge. 

The questions with which Dewey begins his analysis 
are in no way different from those which oecured in the 
minds of the G-reek philosophers. But the social and histo¬ 
rical circumstances of the times prompted these philosophers 
to begin their enquiries with the "refined objects of 
thought", In the modem world the general conditions are 
such that not even avowed hermits can successfully survive 
by depending wholly upon this ancient method of inquiry. 




189 


It was during the Renaissance that the empiri¬ 
cal method of inquiry was quickly adopted. The medieval 
scholastic jugglers were soon left far behind the scientists 
in the race for knowledge. Theirs was the method of pure 
logic, just as today we have methods of pure mathematics 
and pure mathematical physics. The excursions into these 
realms are of no harmful consequences so long as one always 
comes back to primary experience for verification. It must 
be said that even Whitehead*s metaphysics does not comple¬ 
tely abandon the world of "direct observation". 

In spite of the fact that it is possible today 
to deal with physics in the form of pure mathematics, it 
was not in this form that scientists had begun to study 
nature. There exists at present a process of integrating 
the experimental procedure with mathematical formulations; 
the latter are really being controlled by the former. The 
successful interaction of the two makes scientific progress 
possible. Neither Russell nor Whitehead can ever succeed 
in separating one from the other. It is only through the 
interaction of theory and practice that theory can be pre¬ 
vented from creating facts. It is in this sense that Dewey 
stops short of Whitehead, that is, he does not allow scien¬ 
tific theories to become absolutes. For Whitehead scienti¬ 
fic concepts and laws are not exactly absolute in the Idea¬ 
list sense of the word, but he does use them to create his 






190 


metaphysical "facts”. Scientific progress, according to 
him, has reached a position where it is necessary that the 
fundamental concepts used in science be reinterpreted. The 
old scientific abstractions are no longer adequate; it is 
necessary to go back to concrete facts and develop new 
abstractions. The basic abstractions upon which he con¬ 
structs his new philosophy of nature are such as eternal 
objects, duration, change, organism, value and interfusion. 

For Whitehead science begins with theory, and the 
latter has its basis in a "metaphysical understanding". 

What can metaphysical understanding mean when in the final 
analysis one is always driven to the observation of brute 
fact? In his philosophy it can only mean a super-structure 
of metaphysics in which an account is rendered for the occu¬ 
rence of the world of actual facts. But this is an under¬ 
estimation of scientific understanding. Dewey*s contention 
would be that Whitehead*s disregard for the value of scien¬ 
tific understanding has led him into an idealist field - 
the search for the immutable and permanent Reason. For 
Dewey scientific understanding is sufficient to explain the 
nature of brute facts. Uo philosopher of science can be 
properly called so if he disregards the facts of science. 

The facts which Whitehead disregards to a great extent are 
those of experimentation; they appear to have no relevance 
to the philosophic understanding of the methods of science. 




191 


Just as in Whiteheads philosophy of organism 
process and continuity are the basic concepts, so in Dewey 
interaction and continuity form the main theme. Whitehead, 
however, arrives at contadictory conclusions, since his con¬ 
cept of continuity derives not from all sciences in general, 
but from the biological sciences which with him carry most 
weight. He constantly looks for relations which are disco¬ 
vered by scientific inquiry, and which are so well exempli¬ 
fied in organismic activity. Dewey looks for interactions 
which scientific inquiry accepts as present in nature, and 
proceeds to explain them by means of experimentalism. 

Every philosophy is an attempt to begin right 
from scratch. It may be said that both Whitehead and Dewey 
are attempting just that. But no "new” philosophy can com¬ 
pletely break away from old ways of thinking. Dewey makes 
an admission of this fact in considering the historical 
factors in his Reconstruction. It is in this connection 
that Logical Analysis merits a great deal of credit, for it 
points out that so long as the process of thinking goes on 
by means of the symbols of language, thinking may appear to 
have a TT new rf character, but it still wears the same old 
garb. The language may be new, but the method will remain 
the same as that of Plato and Aristotle. 

Knowledge is not derived from theories; these are 
simultaneous with knowledge. That is, knowledge to be know- 





192 


ledge, must be empirical. This is Dewey 1 s fundamental 

position. Whitehead, on the other hand, says: 

"Metaphysical understanding guides imagination and jus¬ 
tifies purpose. Apart from metaphysical presupposition 
there can be no civilization." (Adventures of Ideas) 

This is a statement of belief that knowledge is the conse¬ 
quence of a philosophic or logical theory, or even a scien¬ 
tific theory which fell from some metaphysical heaven for 
the purpose of enlightening mankind. Dewey 1 s basic doctrine 
with respect to knowledge is that before it can be accepted 
as knowledge it must have undergone experimental tests. 
Knowledge is but an intrinsic part of all experience. In 
fact, knowledge _is experience. It is a form of interaction 
in the process of "doing-undergoing". Accordingly, the 
scientific method is the product of social interaction. 
General experience which becomes organized into a rational 
system is not a product of observations and experimenta¬ 
tions of one individual, nor is it a product of the mental 
activity of one individual. His entire philosophic thin¬ 
king rests on his conception of socialized intelligence. 

Considering the positivist trends in modern 
philosophy we find, for example, that there is no fundamen¬ 
tal difference between Dewey 1 s instrumentalism and logical 
positivism. In both cases truth must be validated by 
direct primary experience. Both logical positivism and 
pragmatism have a common root in the earliest formulation 




193 


of empiricism. In America this early formulation dates 
back to the time of Peirce and James. It was through their 
influence that the emphasis began to fall on the problem 
of the verification of ideas instead of on the problem of 
their origin. 

The main difference between the two philosophic 
methods is in the meaning given to truth. According to 
Dewey truth is the process of verification; an idea or a 
belief is true if it works in practice. This, however, is 
not a very reliable criterion of truth, for a belief may 
be absolutely false and still have no evil effects in prac¬ 
tice. Many religious beliefs belong to this category. But 
pragmatism would not wish us to interpret its meaning of 
truth in this manner. To avoid ambiguity we must accept 
the relativist meaning of truth; that is, truth is relative 
to the consequences of experience. This is purely an empi¬ 
rical definition. An idea or a belief can neither be true 
nor false until it has been tested in experience. Thus 
truth is the outcome of experience. This definition of 
truth is criticized by the realists and the positivists on 
the ground that the truth or falsity of propositions of 
ideas or beliefs are antecedent to the process of verifi- 
fication in experience. The facts are what they are prior 
to their discovery of being true or false. 

The difficulty confronting pragmatism is similar 




: 

. ' 


, 



V , ? 


• 





' 



. 



* 


; _ 

■ 

, 

. : 

- 

, 

, 







194 


to that which confronts idealist philosophies. Is the 
world of flux really without any distinguishing features, 
thus necessitating the mind to carve out its own objects 
of experience? If so, then it is just a matter of chance 
that the world is carved out as it is. Does the mind deter¬ 
mine its own method of experience? To say that the nature 
of mental activity is such that it experiences the world 
the way it does, still leaves the whole theory in a dilemma. 

If through selectivity the mind determines its 
own world of experience, then things, beliefs, ideas and 
hypotheses must be true, and there as no need of verifica¬ 
tion. Whatever the mind selects must be in agreement with 
human purposes. But by calling upon verification pragma¬ 
tism implies that these purposes are thwarted by other 
facts of experience. However, according to pragmatist 
psychology, the mind selects all facts of experience. There 
thus arises a contradictory position. The facts that we 
know, but which do not serve our purposes are either some 
sort of ingressions from the world of flux, having slipped 
by the mind in its process of selection, or they are not 
leal. Thus we are back in the dualistic world of Idealism. 

The pragmatist conception of truth is simply 
this: We do not believe things because they are true, but 
they are true because we believe them. And we believe 
them because such belief satisfies our emotional desires. 




195 


It satisfied the emotional desires of the medieval school¬ 
men to "believe that the earth was the center of the universe 
tut the belief was not true. It satisfies our emotional 
desire (probably because of fear of insecurity), to believe 
that the ultimate reality consists of solid material par¬ 
ticles; can our belief be true in the light of recent expla¬ 
nations of physics? We also obtain emotional satisfaction 
from our belief in the sincerity of the U.N.O. in its 
efforts to establish lasting peace. But is our belief alone 
sufficient to ensure the truth of lasting peace? it suits 
us in the Western Hemisphere to believe that our policies 
are true. Does this make the policies of the other half of 
the world false? In the final analysis then, truth is 
what each individual makes it to be according to his indi¬ 
vidual desires. It appears from this that Dewey has failed 
to continue his analysis to its logical conclusion. We 
live in a culture in which we manufacture our own truths. 

But at the same time we dislike these truths and constantly 
aspire to better ones. The present truths, which are out 
of harmony with our individual desires, are the outcome of 
our culture. The intelligent thing to do therefore is to 
change the cultural elements and bring them in harmony 
with our ideal truths. The apparent need today is prima¬ 
rily not a Reconstruction in Philosophy, but a Reconstruc¬ 
tion in Culture. In a reconstructed culture philosophy 





196 


will inevitably undergo a corresponding change, for as 
Dewey himself claims, philosophical thinking is a reflec¬ 
tion of the cultural life of an age. 

Dewey presents us with the idea that there is 
such a thing as community of feeling and desire; there is 
also socialized intelligence. From common experience it 
is evident that these social factors envisage truth as some¬ 
thing more permanent than the one described by pragmatism. 
Society at least wishes to see truth in blueprint before 
it is poured in concrete. Therefore, all that we have to 
do in order to make truth universal is to extend the com¬ 
munity of feeling to cover the entire world. But how can 
this be done without changing the cultural foundations of 
human productive activities and the satisfaction of basic 
wants? And to change the latter we must have a community 
of belief credited to be true. Any reconstruction must 
begin with such community of belief. 

As already stated, Dewey 1 s instrumentalism does 
not reach its logical conclusion, but stops with the assum¬ 
ption that the methodology of science has reached its cul¬ 
minating point. However, if experience is a process in 
which science is but one of the phases, then there can be 
no end to the change in the methods of science. And since 
socialized intelligence is the outcome of our scientific 
inquiries, society should be able to formulate truths which 




197 


it desires. Dewey says that the new direction that philo¬ 
sophy must take is to find in the present scientific revo¬ 
lution a constructive significance for the future; it must 
develop a system of belief-attitudes on the basis of our 
scientific resources. The changing of our present belief- 
attitudes must involve a change in our cultural life as a 
whole. The function of philosophy in our scientific age 
should be the furtherance of moral inquiry. This simply 
means that philosophy must develop new moral standards and 
new objectives - new ends - which may be attained by our 
new means. Does this not imply the revaluation of old 
truths and the formulation of new ones? 

The three present day methods of approaching 
philosophical thinking, pragmatic, organismic and analytic, 
are here critically examined as offering some possibility 
of a synthesized outlook simply because all three have their 
roots in science. A particular culture is a reflection of 
the basic activities of man. The basic activities in our 
age are scientific. Consequently philosophy as a cultural 
element in our age is being continually shaped by our basic 
activities. 

Neither pragmatism, nor philosophy of organism, 
nor the analytic method of logical positivism can alone 
soltre the problems or offer a comprehensive answer to the 






-L 170 


questions which constantly arise out of our activities. 
However, since all three are the outgrowth of science, a 
correlated and integrated method may be attempted - a method 
and a view which may contain relevant elements from all 
three. The pragmatic and instrumental methods cannot be 
rejected, for they are not just an accompanying feature of 
the progress of science, but an essential analysis of the 
scientific procedures. The view that knowledge is scienti¬ 
fic knowledge, and that the nature of the world cannot be 
deduced from the nature of knowledge, cannot be disregarded 
without distorting our basic concepts of experience. Thus 
pragmatism has succeeded in introducing some unification 
into philosophy and science. Dewey 1 s analysis points out 
that philosophy must submit its problems to experimental 
verification, and science has to become conscious of its 
philosophical implications. The concepts which can be of 
no use in experimental technique are to be eliminated from 
our philosophic thinking. Out of such early general trend 
there finally developed also an extreme form of radical 
pragmatism - the shift in emphasis from experimentation to 
logical positivism involving the manipulation of our lin¬ 
guistic instruments. 

There are therefore common features in these two 
ways of philosophic thinking, the pragmatic and the analytic. 
First of all, both are based on the psychological theory of 






. 

■ 

. 

. 

. 

, 

. 

.« . 

* 





199 


perception. The correspondence theory of truth is implied 
in both pragmatism and logical positivism. With Dewey 
truth is the condition or thing which corresponds with the 
satisfaction of our desired; with the positivists truth 
consists of the verification of propositions. And in the 
final analysis, what are propositions but symbolic forms 
through which our desired are expressed? 

From the viewpoint of metaphysics the instrumen¬ 
talism of Dewey which makes thought an instrument for ac¬ 
tion, is itself founded on a set of metaphysical assump¬ 
tions. The most important of these assumptions is that 
there is an empirical world in ’which thought operates; a 
world of change, at least part of which may be determined 
and controlled by the use of thought. Whatever may be the 
nature of our activity, in the end it is thought which 
pronounces judgment, whether it be judging action or jud¬ 
ging itself. A theory of action may be regarded to be just 
as metaphysical as a theory of theory. Dewey*s instrumen¬ 
tal interpretation of thought is no less metaphysical than 
Whitehead*s organismic interpretation of the universe. 
Dewey*s criticism of metaphysical speculation is based on 
a perfectly logical viewpoint of a philosopher of science; 
it is a critique of that form of metaphysics which is a 

quest for certainty in ,T a realm of higher Being 1 *. However, 
in the age of science a metaphysical method may not neces- 







200 


sarily involve a speculative quest for some higher form of 
being; it may not necessarily consist in a formulation of 
a theory of reality. The task of a philosophy of science 
such as pragmatism, for example, consists in the criticism 
of the improper metaphysical use of the notions of science. 
It may be said in this respect that Whitehead’s philosophy 
is a reconstruction of metaphysical concepts necessitated 
by the developments in science. 

According to Dewey the entire process of experimen¬ 
talise! is a controlled history of events, and the final con¬ 
sequence is what is "known"; it is what we usually call the 
conclusion. In the continuous interactivity of events we 
cannot separate causes from effects - there is a continuous 
chain of events. This continuous chain in time and space 
may be called an interactive continuum. In this connection 
Dewey’s concept of causality is almost identical with that 
of Whitehead, although the latter employs different mode of 
expression. There is a fundamental general agreement bet¬ 
ween the two on the point of societies within an interacting 
continuum, if we use Whitehead’s terms. 

The process of inquiry is just one of the processes 
of nature; it emerged gradually with the emergence of all 
events throughout the evolutionary history. The interacting 
continuum is a steady process of change because of the entry 
of inquiry into it. Behind the activity of experimental 







201 


inquiry there is always theoretical activity. This acti¬ 
vity leads to further theorizing, which in turn leads to 
metaphysical activity. The philosophy of Whitehead may 
then be taken as the theorizing upon the theoretical, or 
as theoretical activity twice removed. 

One of the contentious problems which have troubled 
some of the philosophers of science (Bergson, for instance), 
has been that the scientific method isolates systems in 
nature. In this connection both Whitehead and Dewey agree 
that by isolating systems we do not remove them out of 
nature. It is only in theory that we can isolate things; 
in reality there is a continuous interaction and intercon¬ 
nection. In Dewey’s view all experimental procedure, inclu¬ 
ding the theorizing activity, forms an inseparable part of 
the whole of scientific inquiry. Whitehead, on the other 
hand, separates the theoretical activities of science from 
those which are purely experimental. This is the basic 
difference between the two philosophers. Actually White¬ 
head’s metaphysical system grew out of this separation of 
the two activities. He has emphasized the idea that it is 
essential for science to have an ideal isolated system, that 
is, to have a metaphysical structure which should act ^s a 
guide to scientific activities. According to him, a great 
scientific civilization cannot be built upon mere macrosco¬ 
pic observation and experiment. 






202 


Whitehead's philosophy of organism may be regar¬ 
ded as a metaphysical justification of the facts of science. 
It is based on a recognition that the speculative activity 
of the mind is a real factor in the world of experience. 

This activity, which Dewey explains as the outcome for the 
search for order, stability and security, cannot be disre¬ 
garded as irrelevant. In the age of science the organismic 
metaphysics satisfies the demand for speculative activity. 

What has Logical Positivism contributed to the 
general philosophical thinking of our scientific age? As 
already explained, its method consists in the analysis of 
language as a symbolic tool in science and philosophy alike. 
Thinking is an intrinsic activity in the human being as a 
social animal. It goes hand in hand with social interaction; 
and its basic instrument is language. Language then is the 
underlying factor in our philosophic thinking. What White- 
head says about the importance of language may be regarded 
as a concise statement of the main objective of the analytic 
method; 

"Philosophy is a difficult subject, from the days of 
Plato to the present time haunted by subtle perplexities. 
The existence of such perplexities arising from the 
common obviousness of speech is the reason why the topic 
exists. Thus the very purpose of philosophy is to delve 
below the apparent clarity of common speech." 

(Adventures of Ideas, p. 285) 

The understanding and proper use of the instrument of lan¬ 
guage are essential in furthering ot methods of scientific 




203 


inquiry and in preventing pitfalls in our thinking. It is 
in this respect that the analytic approach of Logical Posi¬ 
tivism is of tremendous value in our inquiries. 

Important as it is, the analytic method of the 
positivist school cannot be accepted as the only possible 
approach as it is accepted by some extreme follo'ers of 
Carnap. There are certain difficulties which Logical Posi¬ 
tivism cannot solve alone. In considering language as a 
symbolic tool we find that symbols either stand for some¬ 
thing, or their function is meaningless. Logical Positi¬ 
vists deal with symbols to the extent that only those sym¬ 
bolic combinations have meaningful significance which can 
be verified empirically. But by implication, their premise 
is that all symbols represent something. Therefore, accor¬ 
ding to their own analysis, it is quite illogical for them 
to refuse to deal with the so-called metaphysical proposi¬ 
tions. By so doing they are dealing only with a particular 
phase of experience. 

The method of linguistic analysis cannot alone 

constitute an exhaustive philosophy. 

n Language is incomplete and fragmentary, n says Whitehead, 
"and merely registers a stage in the average advance 
beyond ape-mentality. But all men enjoy flashes of 
insight beyond meanings already stabilized in etymology 
and grammar." (Ibid., p. 291) 

Logical Positivism cannot deal with these "flashes of in¬ 
sight", because the symbolic instruments are still lacking, 







204 


and also because the dogma of verifiability does not cover 
such occasions. Pragmatism refuses to deal with these 
occasions because of the dogmatism of scientific methodology. 
Only Bergson makes an attempt at recognition in experience 
of such "flashes of insight". But he oversimplifies expe¬ 
rience by underestimating the relevancy of sense-data. A 
common criticism directed against pragmatism as a philoso¬ 
phy of the scientific method is that it implicitly accepts 
scientific methodology as universal and final. This posi¬ 
tion is based on the acceptance of the doctrine that the 
only avenue of communication between subject and object is 
that of the five senses. This dogma explains sufficiently 
the methodology of science, but it does not explain the 
whole of experience. Thus far science has been rejecting 
certain phases of experience as irrelevant to its practical 
purposes. 

The object of these general observations has been 
to show that it is possible to accept the three approaches 
to philosophy, not in their entirety, but by selecting those 
elements which are pertinent to, and which are the direct 
outcome of the underlying scientific inquiry. Another rea¬ 
son why these three have been chosen as offering such eclec¬ 
tic possibility, is that they have abandoned any claim to 
the dogmatic stand of former schools that philosophy as such 
has a special method of acquiring knowledge. Or as Russell 







205 


expresses the idea when he speaks of the trend of the new 
philosophies of realism: 

"It regards philosophy as essentially one with science, 
differing from the special sciences merely by the gene¬ 
rality of its problems, and by the fact that it is con¬ 
cerned with the formation of hypotheses where empirical 
evidence is still lacking." (Phil, of the 20th Century) 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Ayer - Language, Truth and Logie 
Bergson - Creative Evolution 
Carr - Henri Bergson 
Dewey - Reconstruction in Philosophy 
The Quest for Cerifinty 
Emmet - Whitehead 1 s Philosophy of Organism 
Husson - L*Intellectualisme de Bergson 
Le Roy - A Hew Philosophy - Henri Bergson 
Runes - Twentieth Century Philosophy 
Schneider - A History of American Philosophy 
Wahl - The Philosophers Way 
Whitehead - Science and the Modem World 
Process and Reality 
Adventures of Ideas 












60023758 



