
RIVER AREA 


ALBERTA - BRITiSH COLUMBIA 


C.R. STELCK 


194S 











































Gbc MBRJS 

anwasnajis 

RffiaMiasis 

















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/geologyofpoucecoOOstel 


CL^LOCY OF POUCE COUP.. RIVAL AREA 


ALBERTA AND BRITISH COLUMBIA 


t>y 

Charles Richard Stelck, B.Sc, 
Department of Geology 
UNIVERSITY of ALBERTA 


A Thesis 

Submitted to the University of Alberta 
in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree 
of 

in qqrpi y # ' 


Ed . i'it j ' 


Alberta 


April, 194 









\w 

433 


FRONTISPIECE 

I 



A. View looking east from Pouce Ooupe town 
up the valley of Pouce Coupe river. Wapiti 
sandstone escarpment in distance, right 
center. Pouce Coupe river left center fore¬ 
ground. 





B. Pouce Coupe river in Lsd.9, sec.30, tp.79, 
range 13, W.6, showing outcrops of Pouce 
Coupe sandstone in the north bank; 















































•sc 'sol r osj o'. : :oi i J"3 j~: e gnx^ool W9xV ,A 
' • . vx i oO 9 ojjo 4. lo \slliiv 9f{J qu 

-X d & t I9VXT ©qfcfoD 9 9fro .. .To^neo 



« • •' p .' • rri rj oi r : ouo\ : . .a 

TO.-!'" ' f . t ' £ ,. T 

* fi^ton r; ■;o;'ou:.ra sq^roO 

















Geology of Pouce Coupe River Area 


Alberta and British Columbia 


Table of Contents 

Page 

Chapter 1. Introduction 

Pouce Coupe. 1 

Geographical Position. 1 

Map showing location of area (Fig.l). 3 

Culture. 2 

Field Work. 4 

Scope of the Thesis... 5 

Previous Work..'. 6 

Acknowledgments. 9 

Summary. 11 

Chapter 11. Topography 

Physiography. 15 

Drainage. 20 

Pre-Glacial Topography...... 22 

Chapter 111. General Geology 

Correlation Tables of formations. 25 

General Statement... 25 

Table showing stratigraphical distribution 

of strata. 26 

Correlation Table - Jurassic - Triassic 

Worth to South. 27 

West to East... 28 

Correlation Table - Cretaceous formations 

Worth to South. 29 

West to East.... * 30 

Historical Geology. 31 

Areal Distribution... 38 

Chapter IV. Descriptive Geology 

General statement...... 40 

Table of formations in Pouce Coupe area.41 

Pre-Mesozoic Strata. 42 

Triassic Group... 42 

Schooler Creek and Spray River formations... 42 

Introductory Statement. 42 

lithology... 43 

Origin of Color in ’’Red-Beds”.47 

Distribution.. 49 

Age and Correlation. 52 












































































Jurassic. Femie?. 56 

Introductory statement. 56 

Lithology. 56 

Di stribu tion. 57 

Age and Correlation. 58 

Lower Cretaceous. 60 

General statement. 60 

Lower Bullhead Mountain Formation. 6l 

Blairmore Formation. 62 

General statement. 62 

Blairmore Zone A. Blairmore conglomerate?.... 63 

Introductory statement. 63 

Lithology. 63 

Di stribu tion. 65 

Age and Correlation.. 66 

Blairmore Zone B. Gething. 67 

Introductory statement. 67 

Lithology. 67 

Distribution. 69 

Age and Correlation.... 70 

Blairmore Zone C. McMurray?. 73 

Introductory statement. 73 

Lithology. 73 

Distribution. 74 

Age and Correlation. 76 

Blairmore Zone D. Loon River Shale. 77 

Introductory statement. 77 

Lithology. 77 

Distribution. 79 

Age and Correlation. 81 

Blairmore Zone E. 83 

Introductory statement. 83 

Lithology. 83 

Distribution. 85 

Age and Correlation. 87 

Blairmore Zone F. St. John Formation......... 90 

Introductory statement....... 90 

Lithology. 91 

Distribution. 92 

Age and Correlation. 94 

Upper Cretaceous. 96 

General Statement. •••• ... 96 

Dunvegan Formation. 96 

Introductory statement.... 96 

Lithology. 97 

Distribution. .101 

Age and Correlation......104 

Kaskapau Formation. Lower Smoky River Shales.107 

Introductory statement... 107 

Lithology. 107 




































































































Di stribu tion.Ill 

Age and Correlation. 113 

Baytree conglomerate - Badheart?.115 

Introductory statement.115 

Lithology.115 

Age and Correlation.117 

Upper Smoky River Shales.119 

Wapiti Formation.120 

Cenozoic. 121 

General statement.121 

Glacial and Post-glacial Laking deposits.122 

Recent Deposits... 124 

Chapter V. Structural Geology 

General Statement...125 

Minor structures.125 

Major structures.126 


Figure 3. Sketch map showing position of Pouce Coupeff]2 


Figure 4- Structure Profile section A-B 127a 

Figure 5. Structure profile section C-D 127a 

Figure 6. Subsurface structure section C-D 127a 

Figure 7. Structure shown by well correlation 127b 

Chapter VI. Economic Geology 

Saline Occurrences. 12# 

Gypsum Deposits... 12# 

Road Metal.. 129 

Coal.130 

Placer Gold. 130 

Water Supply...131 

Oil and Gas. 133 

Bibliography. .Appendix 


List of Illustrations. 


Figure 1. Map showing location of Pouce Coupe area...,.,.,.. 3 

Figure 2. Sketch shewing order of precipitation of 

salts from sea water.»» 49 
Figure 3* Sketch map showing position of Pouce Coupe River 

area with regard to major structural features..ffl27 

Figure 4. Structure Profile section north to south A-B.ff 127a 

Figure 5* Structure Profile section v/est to east C-D..ff 127a 

Figure 6. Subsurface structure section C-D.,ff 127a 

Figure 7. Structure as shown by well correlation.,,..,.ff 127b 

Geological Map of Pouce Coupe River District, Alberta and 


British Columbia....in folder at back 





































































List of P hotogra phs 


Frontispiece 

A. View looking east from Pouce Coupe 

B. Pouce Coupe river in Lsd.9, sec,30, tp.79, range 

13, W.6 

Plate I...ff. 15 

C. River valley 

D. Tableland 

E. Cuesta 

Plate II....,. .ff, 92 

F. Basal Dunvegan formation outcropping in roadcut 

on north side of Peace river 

G. Upper St. John formation outcropping on north 

side of Peace river 

H. St. John shales outcropping on the north bank 

of Peace river 

Plate III.,.,,,.,,.,...... ....ff. 97 

I. Dunvegan sandstone outcropping on the north bank 

of Peace river 

J. Dunvegan sandstone outcropping in the Pouce Coupe 

river canyon 

K. Dunvegan sandstone outcropping in the Pouce Coupe 

river canyon 

Plate IV. .f f .111 

L. Pouce Coupe sandstone outcropping in Lsd.4, 

sec.33, tp.79, range 13, W.6 

M. Transition zone between Smoky River and Dunvegan 

formations 

Plate V., ...........f f .133 

N. Northwest well 

O. Guardian Oil Co. well number one 

P. Waterfall about 20 feet high on Saskatoon Creek 
























Chapter 1 


Introduction 


Pouce Coupe 

Pouce Coupe means "cut thumb" and originally the name 
applied to the Pouce Coupe plains. The name is now restricted to 
the town of Pouce Coupe and to a tributary of the Peace, the Pouce 
Coupe river. The Pouce Coupe area is part of the Peace River count¬ 
ry. The history of settlement is no older than some of the people 
that live in the country, and large areas are still relatively un¬ 
known. It is a country of the future. 

The geology of the major part of the Peace River country 
has not been done in detail, but has been known generally from the 
sections exposed, along the main rivers of the area. The valleys 
are on an imposing scale and the early geologists did not do much 
other than river reconnaissance. The writer has had the privilege 
of working in the Pouce Coupe area, and is presenting herein a more 
detailed report on a part of the Peace River country, viz. the 
Pouce Coupe River area which straddles the boundary of Alberta and 
British Columbia along the Pouce Coupe river. 

Geographical Position 

The Pouce Coupe River area as embraced in this report 
lies between latitudes 55°30 ! and 56°30 t , and longitudes 119°30 
and 120° 30*. It is situated on both sides of the Alberta—British 
Columbia border, and south and north of the Peace river. The area 
lies west of the Blueberry Hills and southeast of Fort St. John. 










2 


The map area embraces Townships 75 to 85, Ranges 10 to 18 approx¬ 
imately, W. 6th. 

Physiographically and economically it is a part of Alberta 
as it is east of the mountains and is serviced by railways and roads 
from Alberta. The Northern Alberta railway comes in from the south¬ 
east from Grande Prairie and the end of steel is at Dawson Greek in 
the southern part of the area. Roads link the area with Grande 
Prairie and Spirit River in Alberta. Except for airlines there is 
no regular communication with the rest of British Columbia except 
via Alberta. Locally, however, the region may be considered as de¬ 
pendent on British Columbia, as the main trading centre for both 
sides of the border is the town of Dawson Creek. The position of 
the area is best understood by referring to Figure one. 

Culture 

The chief occupation of the peoples in this area is agric¬ 
ulture, which in all areas except those near the main lines of 
communication, is not very far removed from the ’‘homesteading 1 ’ stage 
On this account the roads are in the greater part still wagon trails 
along the section lines. There are no bridges across the Peace 
River and two ferries operate, one at Taylor landing on the road 
to Fort St. John and one at Cherry Point near the Alberta boundary. 
There are but two bridges across the Pouce Coupe river, one at Pouce 
Coupe itself and one at Landry's crossing near the mouth of Sask¬ 
atoon Greek. The canyon development of the lower Pouce Coupe river 
makes it impossible to cross by vehicle in the Lower part and a like 
condition obtains in most of the creeks north of Dawson creek in 



















FIOURB 1 


Lap shoVin location of tie Pouce Coupe River 
area (crossha tche< in r'ea). >cal ; 17 = ^15 i£les 












.1 I r 


•‘uo'i .3 lo net3pool niworia q/'M 
= 1 -o .(■9i i 09ricJrrlc soio) b®U3 





Fonddu 


F* Vermilii 


,MecKe> 


River 


U Riche 


Edeen, 


Verih ^'® 0 


^«llingh» m (* 


VfilT i 


^Redl 

V\\ ^anna\ 

IWTlO 



\ /fe 



^leich^n 


IByA Z/\ JJJ 

\«1 Jsrb™* 

1 BQmM v, 

JfT^A 


ton jr’witciDn 

?yll Cranbroeti 








































4 


their lower reaches. A knowledge of the roads is essential to any 
worker in the area as the sinuosities of the canyons often compel de¬ 
tours of annoying complexity to circumvent a mere quarter mile un¬ 
abridged. The roads, however, if graded, are practically all- 
weather except for the steep grades into the valleys. 

Only two towns of any size are present within the area. 
Dawson Creek is situated on the end of steel and is the largest 
town in the area and is the main trading center. Pouce Coupe is 
next in size and is the "capital 11 of the British Columbia, Peace 
River Block. It lias all the important government offices and build¬ 
ings. The majority of other "towns" in the area have not much more 
than "store and post office". 

Field Work 

The report on this area was based mainly on the informat¬ 
ion obtained in the field in the summer of 1939 when the writer was 
employed by John 1). Morrow on oil development. Previously the 
writer passed through the area and worked under Dr. F. H. McLeam 
in the summer of 1937, in the area to the west of this, west of 
Hudson Hope, on the upper Peace river. Since then the writer has 
spent summer and fall of 194-0 in the Pine River area, employed by 
the British Columbia Government on oil exploration. During this 
latter period he was granted permission to revisit the Pouce Coupe 
area for the purpose of inspecting the cores and cuttings from the 
Guardian well, that had been deepened during 1940 by the Guardian 
Oil Company. 


The nature of the investigations included examination of 






5 


cores and cuttings of the Guardian well and examinations of the for¬ 
mations in the area by means of traverses. The writer*s personal 
knowledge of the areas to the west end his fortunate personal ac¬ 
quaintance with the former workers in the adjacent areas has given 
the information an importance from a stratigraphical and correlation¬ 
al standpoint. The traverses in the field have added to the paleon¬ 
tological collection from the upper strata and given information as 
to structure, local lateral variations ijn certain formations and dis¬ 
closed glacial and certain other features of the unconsolidated 
strata. 

The maps used as a basis for field work were the Sectional 
Topographic sheets. No. 46l Moberly sheet; No. 511, Fort St. John 
sheet; No. 4&2, Dunvegan sheet; and No. 512, Montagneuse sheet, scale 
l n - 3 miles. Changes have been made to these sheets, in plotting 
them as a base for the map accompanying this report, from later maps 
and personal information as listed in the discussion of the map in 
Chapter 111. 

Scope of the Thesis 

In this report on the Pouce Coupe area the writer has lim¬ 
ited the discussion to the geographic extent of the area except for 
correlational and stratigraphic discussional divisions. The format- 
ional distribution has been treated for northern Alberta and even 
farther where it was possible to add to the knowledge of relative 
stratigraphy for Alberta and Northeastern British Columbia. This 
is particularly so in the case of areas north of the Athabaska river 






















- 6 - 

and the Peace River country. 

The author has made full use of the (published) literature"^ 
on the area, and especially literature on adjacent areas for the pur¬ 
pose of establishing stratigraphic limits where fossil evidence with¬ 
in the area is lacking and, except where personal information has 
shown the literature to be in error, the writer has accepted the pub¬ 
lished information at face value. 

The thesis deals with the topography, the historical 
geology of the area, the correlation, lithology, distribution and 
stratigraphical position of the formations described in detail in as¬ 
cending order, and brief chapters on Structural Geology and Economic 
Geology, A bibliography is included that is numbered in sequence. 
This number is used for reference purposes throughout the thesis. 
Under the title, Previous Work, (ff) a bibliography of the works 
directly on the Pouce Coupe and adjacent areas is given in reference 
form, A map of the areal distribution of the consolidated format¬ 
ions accompanies the report, (in folder at back) 

Previous work 

The Peace River area was known first by traders who 
carried out the original exploration of the area. The most import¬ 
ant of the early explorers is Alexander Mackenzie who in 1793 pass¬ 
ed through the area to make his memorable trip up the Peace and 
over the Divide to the Pacific and return. No geological survey 
was made of the area until 1875 when A.R.C. Selwyn made a reconn¬ 
aissance trip into the area from the British Columbia side. The re¬ 
sults of this trip are embodied in the Reports of Progress of the 










- 7 - 

Geological Survey for 1875 and 1876* (ref.80). He was accompan¬ 
ied by Prof. J. Macoun, who had previously visited the area in 1872 
and 1873 as a botanist, but who refrained from geological invest¬ 
igations until 1875 when accompanying Selwyn. His investigations are 
embodied in the above report also. (ref.80). Several railway sur¬ 
veys were made around this same period, investigating the route 
through the Peace and Pine Passes, but except for establishing cert¬ 
ain levels and latitudes are unimportant. Also in reconnaissance 
manner, G. M. Dawson passed, through the area in 1879 (ref. 18) and 
tells of the Pouce Coupe Plains, named several of the formations of 
the area and made collections of fossil flora and fauna. R. G. 
McConnell although not working in the British Columbia area, or the 
upper Peace, made important studies on the lower Peace river and 
Athabaska, naming several of the formations of the area. This work 
was done in 1888, reported on in 1893. (ref.£6). 

Considerable time elapsed, before the next investigations 
yiere made in the area. F. H. McLearn worked in the Peace River 
area in the years, 1917, 1918, 1920, 1922, 1937, 1938. The Pouce 
Coupe area was included in his work only in 1917 and 1920. Consid¬ 
erable work on oil exploration in the Peace River area was carried 
out by the British Columbia Government in the years 1919 to 1922, 
embodied in the works of J. A. Dresser (ref.26, 27), J. C. Gwillim 
(ref.30), E. M. Spieker (ref.78, 79) and J. S. Stewart (G.S.C. ref. 
83). 

On the Alberta side of the border some work has been 


done under the auspices of the Scientific and Industrial Research 






- 8 - 

Council of Alberta. Since 1921, at various intervals, J. A. Allan 
has visited the Peace River country, and reported on various aspects 
of the geology and resources of the country in the reports of the 
Research Council. Dr. Allan has visited the Pouce Coupe area in 
1921 (ref. 0 & 1) and revisited the area in 1939, on reconnaissance 
both times. In 1929 ft. I. Rutherford made a study of the "Geology 
and Water Resources of Parts of the Peace River and Grande Prairie 
Districts" (ref.75) which is the only paper that attempts to deal 
with the whole geology of a special area of the Peace River district. 
He visited the Rolla-Pouce Coupe area the same year and again in 
1930. In 1929 a soil survey of the area in Alberta west of Dunvegan 
adjacent to the Peace River, was made by 0. R. lounge under the Re¬ 
search Council of Alberta, embodied in Rent. #23, (ref.102)• 

In 1929 and 1930 a resources survey of the Peace River 
area (British Columbia), by the Pacific Great Eastern enabled M. Y. 
Williams to make geological investigations on the British Columbia 
side of the border. The results of these surveys have been filed 
away in documents, except for the brief resume of the geology of 
the Peace River Valley given by Williams and Bocock in the Royal 
Society (ref.101). 

L. S. Russell worked in the area covered by R. L. Ruther¬ 
ford and north, but has not published anything on the area. 

The Paleontology of the area has been done by Whiteaves, 
1892, (ref.96), J. W. Dawson, 1383-1335 (ref.19, 20), McLeam 1919- 
1940 (ref.51, 52, 55, 53, 59, 60, 62, 64 , 65 , 66, 67, 63), E. W. 

Berry, 1926 (ref.10), P. S. Warren 1928-1940 (ref.85, 36, 87, 38, 94), 









9 


W .A. Bell 1932 (ref, 101, p.218 et seq.). 

A bibliography of the work on the Peace River area is con¬ 
siderably more abbreviated than the reference bibliography accompany¬ 
ing this thesis. A Peace River area Bibliography follows in refer¬ 
ence form: Ref. 0, 1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 30, 

34, 46 , 49, 50 , 51, 52 , 53, 54, 55, 58 , 59, 60 , 6l, 62 , 63, 64 , 65 , 

66, 67, 68, 69, 75, 78, 79, 80, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88, 94, 96, 100, 101, 

102 , 

A Pouce Coupe area bibliography follows in reference form: 
Ref. 0, 1, 9, 10, 18, 19, 25, 26, 30, 34, 49, 53, 6l, 62, 64 , 78, 79, 
80, 83, 85, 86, 94, 96, 101, 102. 

Acknowledments 

The writer wishes to acknov/ledge his indebtedness to the 
following: to Mr. John Lund in charge of drilling at the Guardian 
well for the utmost care in taking and storing the cores from that 
well and for his drilling experience that has enabled this "wildcat 11 
well to be the deepest test hole in the northern part of Alberta; 
to the directors of the Guardian Oil company for their invitation to 
study the cores and samples of the Guardian well for 1940; to John 
E. Morrow for the kind permission to publish any of the geological 
information obtained while the writer was in his employ; to L. G. 
Huntley who provided a number of the critical elevations used in 
this paper; to F. H. McLeam who first showed the writer strati¬ 
graphic paleontology in the field, and whose work on the Peace river 
from Mount Selwyn to Vermilion Chutes has made the stratigraphical 
discussions in this paper possible. 






























10 


Many thanks are due Dr. M. Y. Williams, who has spent long 
hours with the writer talking over the stratigraphy and special 
sections of the Peace lliver Block and adjoining areas, and has giv¬ 
en the writer a vast fund of unpublished personal information. 

Especial acknowledgment is made of the co-operation of the 
Department of Geology under whose critical direction and careful 
editing this thesis has been written. Dr. R. L. Rutherford's per¬ 
sonal knowledge of the strata and formations of the Peace River area, 
and his personal knowledge of allied strata throughout the length of 
the foothills of Alberta has provided a basis of comparison that is 
invaluable to a beginner, lacking field knowledge of the comparative 
strata elsewhere. Dr. P. S. Warren's knowledge of the Mesozoic 
paleontology of Alberta and his work on the fossil fauna of the Peace 
River Area, have formed the basis of the stratigraphy of this area. 
His acquaintance with the Spray River formation has made possible 
the correlation of the Lower Triassic, on the basis of undescribed 
fauna from the outcrop areas of Spray River. 

The writer is indebted to Dr. J. A. Allan, under whose 
immediate direction this thesis is written, for the helpful critic¬ 
ism and encouraging guidance during the preparation of this dissert¬ 
ation. This opportunity is taken to record personal thanks for many 
separate kindnesses and friendly support accorded the writer in the 
past, by Dr. Allan. 












11 


Summary 

The Pouce Coupe area lying on both sides of the Alberta— 
British Columbia boundary, south of Peace river, is part of the 
Great Plains of Western Canada* The rejuvenated drainage system, 
(part of the Mackenzie river system), cuts deep canyons across the 
tableland in traverse from the pre-glacial valley systems of the up¬ 
lands to the Peace river. These tablelands produced by the accum¬ 
ulation of glacial detritus and post-glacial lacustrine deposits con¬ 
ceal a buried, pre-glacial, maturely dissected topography. The bur¬ 
ied topography and the uplands are carved from the St, John shales, 
the Dun vegan sandstone, the Smoky River formation and Wapiti sand¬ 
stone all of Cretaceous age. These form the only consolidated strata 
outcropping in the area. The limited range of stratigraphic inter- 

St.John 

val, from Al - bi - an to Belly River age, represented by the outcroppings, 
is a result of the lack of accentuated structures in the area and 
the low dips, all below five degrees. The structures are terrace or 
gentle monoclinal in form along the western side of the Alberta syn¬ 
cline, whose axis crosses the Peace river a few miles below the 
mouth of the Pouce Coupe. The gentle structures are a reflection of 
a geological history of simple diastrophism of uplift and floodings, 
in cycle, with final uplift of the western side of the area in the 
Laramide revolution to form the Alberta syncline. 

This history is obtained from the character of the sedi¬ 
ments that are knov/n from the logs of deep wells in the area, the 
Guardian Oil #1, near Bonanza, and the Northwest Well in the valley 








12 


of the Pouce Coupe river. The record, known within the area, goes as 
far back as Triassic. The Lower Triassic of a micaceous, dolomitic 
fine clastic nature is developed to a thickness of over 841 feet, is 
considered marine, and represents the Meekoceras zone of the Lower 
Triassic, Spray River formation. A stratigraphic hiatus introduces 
the Upper Triassic of the Nathorstites zone of the basal Schooler 
Creek formation time. The sediments of 1,030 feet of Upper Triassic 
marine limestone formation contain thick deposits of gypsum-bearing 
red-beds. The Triassic is separated from the overlying Jurassic 
shales (referred to Femie age) by a zone of white chert, pyrite and 
glauconite that points to an erosional unconformity. These marine 
Jurassic shales of thickness 450 feet are calcareous at the base and 
arenaceous at the top and are overlain by a chert and quartzite con¬ 
glomerate that represents the termination of a stratigraphic hiatus, 
between the Jurassic shales and Cretaceous sandstones. 

This chert and quartzite conglomerate, six feet in thick¬ 
ness, introduces a continental sequence of sandy carbonaceous shales 
which although of thickness only 463 feet are considered an eastward 
expression of the coal-bearing Gething formation. A set of marine 
shales overlying this continental succession is introduced by 85 
feet of loosely consolidated white sands resembling the s tlie er 
residue of the McMurray bituminous sands. The 450 feet of marine 
shales is correlated with the Moosebar, Loon River and Clearwater 
formations which were laid down in the widespread Clearwater sea. 

Two more formations, one arenaceous continental to marine 1,000 feet 
thick, and the St. John formation, 1,275 feet thickness of marine 













13 


shales, complete the picture of the Lower Cretaceous within the area. 

The Upper Cretaceous continental Dunvegan formation over- 
lies the marine Lower Cretaceous, St. John shales conformably with a 
well developed transition zone from the finer elastics to the aren¬ 
aceous basal Dunvegan. In the 750 feet of strata assigned to the 
Dunvegan many marine beds of shale appear and a thick transition 
zone links it with the overlying marine Kaskapau. The Kaskapau is 
considered about 1,050 feet thick in this area ana contains a fairly 
extensive marine fauna. The upper boundary of the Kaskapau shales 
is defined by a thick sandstone carrying a lensing conglomerate, 
best developed south of the post-office of Baytree. The sandstone 
formation above the conglomerate is termed Wapiti but the possibil¬ 
ity of an unconformity eliminating a marine sequence such as the 
Upper Smoky River shales leaves a doubt as to the age, and age re¬ 
lationships of the continental Wapiti. The Kaskapau represents the 
Dunveganoceras zone, the Inoceramus labiatus zone, and possibly the 
Scaphites zone of the Alberta shale, while the Wapiti is considered 
basal Belly River, so the dating of the Wapiti is debatable. 

The consolidated formations have proved of little economic 
value to date. The wapiti provides an aquifer where it underlies 
the area. A gas horizon below the St. John showed a daily flow of 
10,000 M. cu.ft. from the Northwest well. Oil seepages from the 
Triassic in the Guardian well show a small amount of 36.4° A.P.I. 
oil. The unconsolidated gravels provide local aquifers, road metal, 
and a little gold from the bars along the Peace. The flat table¬ 
land clays of the area make some of the finest farming land in the 










Peace River district, which provides the chief revenue of the area, 
































































Chapter 11 
Topography 

Physiography 

The Pouce Coupe area is part of the Great Plains of West¬ 
ern Canada. The area under discussion lies in a region that has been 
modified by glaciation and post-glacial laking from a maturely dis¬ 
sected topography to a youthful topography broken by the highland 
expressions of the former uplands. 

Barring the deep valleys occupied by the drainage system 
the country shows a rolling plain extending south from Peace river 
over the country underlain by the Smoky River shales and Dunvegan 
formations and ending abruptly at the south where the Wapiti and 
Baytree sandstones form an escarpment ridge with the dip slope of 
around 3° to the south and the steep slope facing north. The plain 
lies between 2,000 feet and 2,200 feet above sea-level and the es¬ 
carpment rises 600 to 800 feet above it as the predominating feat¬ 
ure of the landscape. South of the Peace river the entire area may 
be comprehended as a basin with the western rim marked by the water¬ 
shed between the Kiskatinaw and Pouce Coupe drainages, the south¬ 
ern edge by the Wapiti escarpment and the eastern rim by the axis 
of the Alberta syncline. (Blueberry Hills). The entire area may be 
divided into three divisions topographically, the river valleys, 
the plains, and the uplands. 

The immediate valley of Peace river is around 1,000 feet 
deep with rather steep banks, the flood-plain is little developed 
and represented by a narrow bench for the major part of the river* s 










PLAT3 I 



C. River valley. View looking west from 
mouth of Aloes river, toward old Holla land¬ 
ing. Peace river, showing development of 
sand-bars, flowing toward the observer. I 
of Peace river here are approximately 900 
feet high. 


D. Tableland. View looking east across the 
tablelands from the Guardian well. The dark 
patches of brush in the middle distance are 
swampy areas. Foreground under cultivation. 



S. Cuesta,. View of Dawson Greek with Wapiti 
escarpment in background. Looking south. 




AJ_ 



r 8 <vv pnj:stool rexV .^9I1 pv xsvxfl. .0 
r r So '^r- - r •' , t9vit 3 90XA ^to riduorcr 

. 

vrerrfr b-t.r* r otf ^nxwol^ ,siBcf-Jbrsa 

. 


^xrf. .toot 








• 1 r-ibTfu.i orij mor't 8i>rxnl9ldjsd 

©IfcM-m orLt rrj rfauxd c 

■ 





v r ' "o •>.' .oj --v: 

•"' J ' nt ' ' n •*> ' nr ■ '?■■■■ nx dnornqx oae 



















- 16 - 

course through the area, where the sandstone of the Dunvegan main¬ 
tains an abrupt escarpment up from the water’s edge. Near the mouth 
of Pine river broad flood plains and terraces are cut out of the St. 
John shales (Taylor flats). The change in gradient of the Peace riv¬ 
er in passing from the easily-eroded shales to the more competent 
beds of the Dunvegan is shown by the elimination of the terraces and 
gravel bars in the river, below old Kolia Landing near the mouth of 
the Kiskatinaw. Where the valley sides are carved out of glacial 
material, the banks show slumping, especially if north facing. Bench¬ 
es are developed between the more arenaceous strata of the Dunvegan. 

An excellent development of this type of bench is seen at Cherry 
Point ferry crossing where the basal Dunvegan underlies a bench about 
half a mile wide 150 feet above the level of the Peace. 

The majority of the tributary rivers at their mouths show 
a canyon developed, cut from Dunvegan sandstone for the main part. 

In the middle reaches of larger rivers such as the Pouce Coupe and 
Kiskatinaw the valleys of the rivers are at a young stage with in¬ 
cised meanders in the lower part, and in an early middle-age stage 
of development in the upper part with the stream channel meandering 
in the valley and development of oxbows in places. The uppermost 
reaches of these rivers show a development of crooked young valleys 
carved out of the bottoms of definite valley systems, aggraded by 
glacial detritus. The lour stages of the Pouce Coupe river extend 
as follows: canyon - mouth to Doe Creek; incised meanders, canyon - 
Doe Creek to slightly above Henderson Creek; incised meanders - 
young middle-aged valley - Henderson Creek to Dawson Creek; young 
valley - Dawson Creek to Tupper river. 












17 


The Kiskatinaw from near Sweetwater to beyond Fellers 
Heights follows a definite valley system but meanders in the bottom of 
a rejuvenated valley carved out of the unconsolidated material and at 
times the bedrock itself. 

The stream channels of the creeks away from the Peace river 
valley and away from the deeper parts of the main tributary valleys 
are cut in unconsolidated material and an outcrop of bedrock along 
the smaller streams is an exception. 

North of Peace river and on the Alberta side of the bound¬ 
ary, the area is described by Younge as (ref.102, p.l6) "level to un¬ 
dulating plateau. The escarpments of the plateau are rough and brok¬ 
en. That part of the area lying in range 13 lacks drainage and as a 
result is 15 to 20$ swamp and muskeg". Along the Peace River itself 
back from the valley "lies a level tableland......cut up by the wide 

deep canyons extending inland 3 to 5 miles from the Peace River". 
(Eureka prairie, westward extension). This rolling country (undulat¬ 
ing plateau) represents the start of the rough country south of the 
Clear Hills and similar country to this may be traced in a wide arc 
through the Beatton river area, swinging southward, to form the water¬ 
shed between the Kiskatinaw and the Pouce Coupe drainage systems. 

It terminates to the south at the foot of the scarp, west of Dawson 
Creek along the Kiskatinaw. The tableland that lies rimmed by the 
Wapiti scarp and the rough borderland is probably the result of post¬ 
glacial laking, for bedded-clays of lake type underlie all parts of 
the tableland. The tableland itself is usually below 2,200 feet and 
where the tableland gives way to the rolling type of country the 














- 18 - 

elevations are from 150 to 400 feet higher. The tablelands are best 
shoY/n in the country around Bonanza and the northeast of Bonanza 
joining up with the Eureka prairie to the northeast on the north side 
of the Peace. These tablelands provided the low gradient on which 
the post-laking, Pouce Coupe river and tributary streams started 
their meandering pattern. Sudden draining of the Peace river channel, 
considered temporarily blocked, produced rejuvenation by the sudden¬ 
ly increased gradient of drainage and incised the meanders deeply 
into the tableland. The incision cut not only into the unconsol¬ 
idated clays but the bedrock wherever it appeared within the next few 
hundred feet below the tableland surface. This sudden rejuvenation 
of the major tributaries left some of the smaller tributaries hang¬ 
ing and where the sequence of strata was interrupted by a more com¬ 
petent member caused a riffle in the stream bed or a waterfall, as 
on Saskatoon Creek in Sec. 26, range 1 L, where the Pouce Coupe sand- 
• stone forms the competent member. The Smoky River shales themselves 
seem soft enough, that the stream has no difficulty in cutting down 
through from unconsolidated material into the shales. 

Interrupting the tableland are occasional hills that are 
interpreted as of two origins. The more or less individual round¬ 
ed. hills are considered remnants of pre-glacial hills of bedrock 
that have been smoothed off by the action of the ice and stood out 
as islands or shoals in the post-glacial lake the bottom of which 
forms the tableland. The hill near Rolla is considered to have 
been a shoal and therefore would receive a considerable mantle of 
clay. The other type of highland of rough appearance and often 





































- 19 - 

carrying erratics is considered to represent a high in a morainal 
dump and to have subsequently become either an island or a shoal in 
the post-glacial lake. The action of the laking and the aggradation 
of the lower parts to an almost constant level has camouflaged the 
distribution of these moraines, except where the larger erratics 
appear on the rougher highlands or become subsequently exposed in 
stream-channels. 

The uplands south of and including the Wapiti escarpment 
are 600 feet to 800 feet higher than the tableland, and rise to a 
maximum of 2,900 feet above sea-level in the Saddle Hills, in the 
southeast. The course of the escarpment can be traced south of Daw¬ 
son Creek from the Kiskatinaw to Pouce Coupe (Bear Mountain), with a 
break at Pouce Coupe to allow Bissette Creek, Tupper river, and 
Pouce Coupe river through. East of the mouth of Tupper Creek it 
swings northward and northeastward, with the hill directly east of 
Pouce Coupe town forming an outlier from the main body of the sand¬ 
stone. The scarp swings east again south of Henderson Creek and 
roughly parallels it eastward through to the Spirit River country, 
to south of the Ksituan river. Another outlier of the scarp in 
Tp. 79 and 80, range 11, makes a continuation of the tableland poss¬ 
ible only in a northeast direction. This outlier is known as Blue¬ 
berry Mountain and is considered, the axis of the Alberta syncline. 
The scarp here is west facing and Dr. Rutherford states (pers comm) 
that no complementary east scarp is apparent but may be present be¬ 
neath a considerable amount of glacial drift. The scarp faces show 
narrow benches, considered strand-lines of the post-glacial laking. 











. 















'■ 























- 20 - 

The hill east of Pouce Coupe town shows four or five of these strand 
lines near the top, with a width of not more than fifty feet and 
dipping a few degrees away from the hill. The hills v/ithin a few 
miles of the scarp tend to be 11 at-topped with the mesa-cap made of 
the Baytree conglomerate and allied sandstones. Back from the scarp 
the country is "rolling to rough cut by frequent erosion courses" 
(ref.102, p.4) with a very definite valley drainage pattern cut in 
the bedrock that is assumed to predate glaciation. Gently rolling 
country, as around the Sudeten colony near Gundy, occurs in belts 
running more or less east and west and separated by sandstone ridges 
These rolling belts lie on the dip slope (southwards) that have in 
part been aggraded through the disruption of drainage after glaciat¬ 
ion. 

A few minor features of the area should be mentioned. Al¬ 
though the glacial clays stand.up well on south-facing cutbanks, as 
along the north bank of Saskatoon Creek, the other clay bands tend 
to slump and leave a scar on the crest of the valley edge and form 
a small fan delta immediately below. South and west of the big bend 
on Doe Creek the presence of numerous small hills not much over 30 
feet high, setting separately, of dimension not much over 150 feet, 
in cross section all clay, and resting on bedded clay presents a 
form of topography that the writer is unable to explain. 

Drainage 

The waters of the entire Peace river area drain to the 
Arctic Ocean, by way of the Mackenzie river system. The Pouce 










































- 21 - 

Coupe area is drained by streams Howing into the Peace river which 
crosses the area from west to east. Five main river systems drain 
the area. North of the Feace are the Beatton (North Pine), Alces 
(Moose) and Clear rivers. South of the Peace are the Kiskatinaw 
and Pouce Coupe rivers. The Beatton river drains a very narrow area 
of the map sheet as only small insequent streams run into it, in this 
area. The Alces and Clear rivers drain Ranges 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 
with headwaters that find themselves in the muskegs and disrupted 
drainage pattern of the glacial mantle of the southern slopes of the 
Clear Hills. Their channels are considered to be entirely post¬ 
glacial, with no relation to the previous drainage pattern of this 
area. 

The headwaters of the Pouce Coupe are established in what 

is considered by the writer to be a pre-glacial drainage pattern 

that drained the shale belt between the incipient scarp of the Dun- 

vegan rising westwards and the sandstone scarps of the axis of the 

Alberta syncline. This is offered also in explanation of the fact 

that the watershed of the Pouce Coupe and Kiskatinaw is so close to 

the Kiskatinaw. The pattern of the west tributaries of the Pouce 
is 

Coupe river/etched on the dip slope of the Smoky River shales. The 
eastern and southern tributaries are in familiar pattern of the 
drainage of a syncline. The river pattern across the tableland is 
entirely accidental but is now incised. The extreme flatness of the 
tableland has left numerous areas of "sloughs” although actual mus¬ 
kegs are practically non-existent or if present, no great depth of 
plant-detritus is accumulated. Away from the canyons of the main 







- 22 - 

tributaries the land surface has no well developed drainage pattern 
developed on the table land. 

The Kiskatinaw follows a more definite valley drainage 
pattern than does the Pouce Coupe River with the tributaries from 
the east coming in insequent manner from the Dunvegan-Smoky River 
scarp. 

The majority of the streams are seasonal and dry up about 
the middle of summer. The Peace which heads in the mountains is in¬ 
dependent of the amount of water received from this area which, at 
best, is negligible. The larger streams, south of the Peace, that 
flow all summer head back into the Alberta syncline or into the reg¬ 
ion south of the Wapiti sandstone escarpment. Such rivers as the 
Beatton receive their major volume of water from outside the area. 

Pre-Glacial Topography 

The topography of this country before glaciation is con¬ 
sidered to have shown a maturely-dissected upland, valleys still 
young or, young-middle-aged in the case of the larger streams, with 
the topography of the higher interstream areas much the same as now, 
perhaps more abrupt. This pre-glacial surface, that is now hidden 
by post-glacial lacustrine deposits is, except for slight rounding 
of the higher points, assumed to be present in original form. The 
ice sheet approaching its western limit probably rode over its own 
moraine rather than intensely eroding the bedrock. Therefore the 
original valley systems are considered still to be extant below the 
present tableland, and also the interstream areas. One half mile 
south of the Northwest well, the bedrock is within a few feet of 







23 


the prairie sod. At the mouth of Henderson Creek the bedrock is 
below the bottom of the stream bed. At Saskatoon Creek mouth bed¬ 
rock makes up one-quarter to half of the valley wall. Streams like 
Doe Creek show abrupt changes in the nature of their canyon wall. 
West of the big bend on Doe Creek the canyon is cut in unconsolidat¬ 
ed clays, at the big bend the bed-rock makes four-fifths of the can¬ 
yon wall. East of the big bend only the lower one-quarter of the 
canyon wall is bedrock, the upper three-quarters is of unconsolidat¬ 
ed material, with gravels at the contact. 

The old course of the Pouce Coupe river is considered to 
have had a pattern in the upland region south of Pouce Coupe town, 
similar to the present day pattern. North of the town, to near the 
mouth of Henderson Creek it probably followed the present channel or 
a little west of the present channel in Sec. 23, tp. 73, where high 
shale banks appear on the east side. The old valley is assumed to 
have swung in a gentle arc through the lower reaches of Henderson 
Creek, below the mouth of Sargeant Creek and swung east of the 
present course and passed through somewhere in the neighborhood of 
the Guardian well where ithe drift is known to be around 300 feet 
thick. The course after this last point is speculation but it pro¬ 
bably swung eastward to join the Peace much further downstream than 
is the case today. A traverse up Broche Creek would give probably 
some evidence on this point. The old valley of Henderson Creek pro¬ 
bably swings north somewhere in the vicinity east of the present 

road-crossing, north of Baytree, where the valley is entirely cut 
from drift, to join the old Pouce Coupe valley north near the 







24 


Guardian well. 

Except very generally, the buried topography has failed 
as yet to have expression but as the rivers reach grade and start 
lateral planation the old bedrock features will have a pronounced 
effect on the future courses of the rivers. 





























Chapter 111 
General Geology 

Correlation Tables of Formations 
General Statement 

Five tables showing the correlative positions of the form¬ 
ations found within the Pouce Coupe area are included in this chapter. 

The first table shows the stratigraphical distribution of 
the consolidated strata underlying the Ponce Coupe area and the tent¬ 
ative correlation of the strata with faunal and floral zones. 

The second and third tables show the correlation of the 
Jurassic and Triassic formations of the Pouce Coupe area with other 
Triassic and Jurassic formations. The second table shows the correl¬ 
ative strata north and south of the Pouce Coupe from Alaska to Idaho. 
The third table shows the correlative strata east and west of Pouce 
Coupe from central British Columbia to the central and southern plains 
of Alberta. 

The fourth and fifth tables show correlative Cretaceous 
formations north and south of pouce Coupe and west and east of Pouce 
Coupe respectively. The writer adds a column of European Cretaceous 
time subdivisions to standardize the tables but except through 
correlation with the Pouce Coupe section does not attempt to date the 
formations from other areas. The correlations are made with the Pouce 
Coupe area by the writer and the references given for the separate 
areas listed, in the table are the sources for the definition of the 
formations and not for the correlation. 




















- 24 - 


Tablo showing stratigraphies! distribution of stra" 

Pouce Coupe River Area 


Age 


Formation 


Thick¬ 

ness 


Faunal Zone 


CO 

UQ, 

®W 

§S 

S 

O 


Senonian 


Emscherian 


Turonian 


Cenomanian 


CO 

o 

o 

CD O 
OEh 

o 


Albian 


Aptian 


Barremian 


Neoccmian 


Upper 

Jurassic 


Lower 

Jurassic 


Upper 

Triassic 


Middle 

Triassic 


o 


Lower 

Triassic 


Permian 


Wapiti 


B>ytr^g 1 


Kaskapau 


Dunvegan 


St. John 


Blairmore 
Zone E 


Moosebar 


Me Murray? 


Gething 

Conglomerate 


Pennsylvania! 


Mississippian 


Devonian 


Schooler Ck, 


Spray 


ft iver 


65 n 

Scaphites 

ventricosus 

1050* I. lab i at us * 
Watinoceras * 

Dunveganocera^ - 

750* Brachydon^es * 
multilimgera 

Neogastroplites * 


1275* 

1000 * 

450' 

85* 

463* 

6 * 



Jastroplites 

iceras 
arrine 
(Deshayesites) 

Astarte natosini 


^50' 


1030 


Dacnella * 


841V Fleiningites ? * 


a underlying 

Flora 


Sukunka? flora 



Upper Dunvegan 
flora 

U.B]airmore 


Commotion 
Creek flora 

^u.n cl e«cr*6«<fj 

Lower Blairmore 
flora 


* Found within 
map area 


















































































































































I 






































CORRELATION TABLE - JURASSIC - TRIASS1C North to South 



of North America”. Bull. G.S.A. No. 45, 1954, pp. 9u9-936 






































































































































































CORRELATION TABLE - JURASSIC - TRIASSIC West to East 



pa - 
















































































































































CORRELATION TABLE - CRETACEOUS formations North to South 
































































































































































CORRELATION TABLE - CRETACEOUS formations West to East 



Ref .54 p.3 





























































































































































- 31 - 

Historical Geology 

The geological history of the Pouce Coupe area as revealed 
by the sediments and strata has been a simple one of uplift and sub¬ 
sidence with expressions of orogeny only extant in the character of 
the sediments. Since Pouce Coupe is considered to be situated north¬ 
east of the main basin of geosynclinal accumulation thick series of 
sediments are lacking. The area in a broad sense is situated on the 
border line between the protaxis of the Canadian shield and the Cor- 
dilleran geosyncline. However by a "progression of orogenies" the 
geosyncline has moved eastward so in general the change in the nat¬ 
ure of sediment has been from fine to coarser elastics as successive 
orogenies built highlands out of the Cordilleran geosyncline and the 
source of the detrital material moved east toward the Canadian shield. 

The history of the area in pre-Mesozoic time is unknown and 
is briefly suggested by analogy with Warren*s interpretation of the 
history of the Cordilleran Geosyncline (ref.93), and by comparison 
with the sediments of the geosyncline in the Peace River area as 
given by Williams and Bocock (ref.101). (ref.93, p.246) "In Lower 
Cambrian time a great bed of quartzite....(Mount Selwyn formation, 
ref.101, p.200)....was laid down. This demonstrates that sedimentary 
conditions in upper Beltian time continued into Lower Cambrian time". 
It is suggested that the Athabaska sandstones belong to this general 
period and therefore the Pouce Coupe area although not receiving any 
large deposits, being considerably removed from the source of sedi¬ 
ments received at least part of the clastic material from the exten¬ 
sive highlands to the west. Warren continues: (ref.93, p.247) "the 









highland to the west of the trough which produced the great thick¬ 
ness of clastic sediments during Beltian and Cambrian time has been 
base levelled by middle Ordovician time. It remained inactive for 
the rest of the Paleozoic era". This base-levelling allowed quiet 
limestone deposition to go on in the geosyncline and in the epeiric 
seas along the west side of the Canadian shield during Silurian, 
Devonian, and Carboniferous time. The deposition was interrupted by 
minor uplifts in Ordovician times, in Upper Silurian and Lower Devon¬ 
ian time; uppermost Devonian (Exshaw shale); and late Pennsylvanian 
(ref.93, p.248). During the Silurian any earlier Paleozoic sediments 
were eroded at McMurray, leaving the later formations to be deposit¬ 
ed directly on the Precambrian (ref.4#, p.146). The extent of this 
unconformity westward is unknown. The Paleozoic history after Devon¬ 
ian time is recorded west of Pouce Coupe. Thick series of Carbonifer¬ 
ous limestones were deposited in the seaways of the trough with poss¬ 
ibly thinner deposits in the shallower seas along the western edge of 
the Shield, (ref.93, p.248)...."In Pennsylvanian time the withdrawal 
of the sea was more pronounced and a certain amount of detrital mat¬ 
erial was deposited". Williams and Bocock report (ref.101, p.203) 
similar Pennsylvanian from the Pine River area. The writer consid¬ 
ers it unlikely that the Pennsylvanian strata would have an exten¬ 
sion as far east as the Pouce Coupe area. The entire absence of 
Permian strata in the Cordilleran geosyncline reveals a high posit¬ 
ion of the continent at the end of Paleozoic time and probably the 
Paleozoic beds suffered erosion to some extent. 

The Mesozoic history of the area is revealed in the lith- 








ology of the strata known from within the Pouce Coupe area. 

The Triassic was introduced with a general flooding of the 
Cordilleran trough, by an arm of the sea that was restricted to 
of the present position of the front ranges in southern Alberta (ref. 
93, p.249) but in the northern part of British Columbia extended 
east of the mountains as far e aoxi as Pouce Coupe and the writer sugg¬ 
ests possibly as far east as Lesser Slave Lake. The writer suggests 
that the long axis of this Lower Triassic arm of the sea was oblique 
to the present trend of the mountains. The complete section of 
Idaho Lower Triassic (ref.31) and the thick section at Banff of 
Spray River formation (ref.34) suggests that the sea and fauna came 
from the south. The sea way in the Pouce Coupe area was fairly 
shallow, as the sediments show much fine cross-bedding. Conditions 
in the area were stable during the deposition and the Lower Triassic 
shows little change in its micaceous dolomitic siltstone character 
from bottom to top. At the end of Lower Triassic time the sea with¬ 
drew. This may have been a coincidental phenomenon with the Nicola 
vulcanism in central and northern central British Columbia. 

At the beginning of Upper Triassic the sea re-entered the 
Pouce Coupe area with a northern connection. The seaway had a 
southern limit in the neighborhood of northern Jasper Park and the 
southern and eastern part of the seaway (containing the Pouce Coupe 
area) was probably connected with the northern portion by a small 

channel that made the area an effective evaporating basin during 

. 

the lower part of Upper Triassic time. Deposits of gypsum were laid 
down in this basin along with "red-beds". The connection with the 







34 


northern sea was continual as the concentration of the seawater within 
the basin never was sufficient to precipitate sodium chloride in 
large quantities but was sufficient to precipitate gypsum and iron. 

The major basin of deposition of elastics (calcareous) was west of 
the Pouce Coupe area. In Upper Triassic proper the sea Hooded the 
basin of gypsum deposit, and laid down limestones. The seaway did 
not extend much further south than Jasper unless the extreme thick¬ 
ness of Spray River at Banff contains some unidentified Upper Tri¬ 
assic. The " Monotis subcircularis 11 sea concluding the Triassic had 
wide extent over Yukon and Alaska and down through to the Pine River 
area at least. At the end of M. subcircularis time the seaway drain¬ 
ed and the land was elevated sufficiently to allow erosion. The 
Pouce Coupe area lost part of the Upper Triassic and developed a 
limestone surface high in chert with removal of the limestone, by 
solution, and possibly underground drainage. 

In Jurassic time the area was again flooded and black mar¬ 
ine shales were deposited. These shales are considered to be an east 
shore development of a geosynclinal deposit of Feraie shales. How¬ 
ever before middle Upper Jurassic the area was drained again and was 
uplifted. 

n The Lower Cretaceous began with a broad uplift which ex¬ 
pelled the marine waters from the area, and resulted in the format¬ 
ion of an extensive fresh water lake.(from Jasper to Peace River 

Canyon).....This fresh water lake lay at or close to sea-level". 
(MacKay ref.39, p.1316). It is assumed that the Pouce Coupe area 

















35 


was beyond the limits of this fresh water lake, possibly an eastern 
shore phase, since the Lower Bullhead Mountain formation does not 
extend this far east. This lake-basin is considered by the writer 
to be connected to a northern sea and the critical level of the bas¬ 
in for coal formation to have been at this time in the southern end 
of the basin, with a narrow belt of coal forest along the western 
side. 

Following tlie deposition of the Lower Bullhead Mountain 
sandstone in the trough, the highland to the west was lifted deposit- 
' ing a conglomerate of quartzite and chert over the basin, and as far 
east as Pouce Coupe. Subsidence once more took place and coal-form¬ 
ing forests were established along the shores and around the head of 
the basin. This period gave rise to the coal deposits of the Luscar 
and Gething formations. In the Pouce Coupe area a sequence of 
littoral sediments contaminated with plant remains was laid down. 

The position of the Pouce Coupe area could not have been far beyond 
the northeast limit of the coal-forming lagoons and swamps. 

Meanwhile the northern sea was cutting an escarpment out 
of the earlier deposits, forming beaches along the base of the es¬ 
carpment. The continual sinking of the southwestern extension of 
these earlier sediments.was forming a vast homocline dipping to the 
southwest. Erosion to the northeast had exposed the earlier sedi¬ 
ments and white sands were developed by the wave-cutting and rewash¬ 
ing of these earlier sediments. 

This was followed by a general subsidence of the whole 
northeastern side of the Rocky Mountain geosyncline, and the whole 


























36 


northern part to the Arctic. This low area was covered by the Clear¬ 
water sea, and a series of marine shales was laid down. Uplift with 
an accompanying series of oscillations laid down an arenaceous se¬ 
quence with continental to marine characteristies. The climax of 
this uplift resulted in a deposit of grit that was immediately foll¬ 
owed by a coal deposit that has great lateral extent in roughly the 
same stratigraphic position suggesting a low lying swamp-land over 
the uplifted infantile surface of wide coastal plains as the post- 
Clearwater sea retreated. The south end of the old coal basin dur¬ 
ing this time was high and received little sediments except of contin¬ 
ental type. The northern part of the basin was still receiving thick 
deposits and by the end of the Lower Cretaceous had received 1,300 
feet of marine shales of the St. John formation. The basin during 
St. John time included the Pouce Coupe area within the main basin of 
deposition. 

The Upper Cretaceous started with preliminary uplift that 
left continental sediments and grits and conglomerates at this hor¬ 
izon over most of Alberta. In the Pouce Coupe area the sediments 
laid down are coarse but intercalated with marine shales and in 
places with thin coal seams. 

The "Alberta 11 sea flooded the area and the marine sequence 
of the Kaskapau formation was laid down. The "Kaskapau" sea is con¬ 
sidered the last with northern connections. At the end of Kaskapau 
time it is considered that the shore line was approximately within 
the map area and if Upper Smoky River Shales ?/ere deposited they may 
have been eroded at this time by the same river system that lsdd 








37 


down the Baytree conglomerate. Whether Upper Smoky Hiver shales 
were present in the area or not is still unknown but their presence 
in the area to the east suggests that they may have been deposited 
and subsequently exposed to erosion as the land rose and the - - ri,n- 
sea retreated to the south and east of the Pouce Coupe area. 

This last uplift was a general phenomenon all along the 
position of the foothills of Alberta and deposits are continental to 
coal basin type for the remainder of Cretaceous time along the foot¬ 
hills of Alberta. In a basin east of the position of the old Rocky 
Mountain geosyncline the thick series of Belly River, Edmonton and 
Paskapoo formations were laid down with the sea overlapping into the 
basin from the south and east. The writer considers it unlikely that 
thick series of sediments, younger Mesozoic than Bearpaw time were 
laid down in the Pouce Coupe area and that the area was sufficiently 
uplifted to receive little sediment or to undergo erosion. The Lar- 
amide revolution completed the formation of the Rocky Mountains, 
which orogeny was sufficient to raise the western side of Alberta 
and to create a synclinal axis (Alberta syncline) that now traverses 
the north east part of the Pouce Coupe area. 

The building of the Rocky Mountains drained the continent 
and the new drainage system began erosion of the area and deposited 
gravels along the river valleys and stream channels. The uplands of 
the Pouce Coupe area had reached a maturely dissected stage with 
fairly well integrated drainage pattern when the glacial period dis¬ 
rupted the ?/ork of peneplanation. It is not known how many glacial 
advances reached the area but the pouce Coupe area is considered to 






38 


represent approximately the western limit of the Keewatin glacier 
advance, and to be east of the mountain glacier advance. 

•The Keewatin ice reached at least to the tops of the hills 
east of Pouce Coupe but is not considered to have been very thick 
over these hills as the topography of these uplands has not been 
much modified by glacial forms. Morainal material was dumped into 
the Pouce Coupe basin and vast lakes formed in front of the ice 
which blocked the natural drainage way of the area. These lakes 
temporarily obtained considerable depths and etched narrow benches 
around the faces of the higher ridges. For a longer time the lake 
acted as a basin of deposition and completely obliterated the old 
drainage patterns of the lowland by a thick deposit of buff to black 
clays which formed a tableland after the drainage of the lake. Re¬ 
treat of the ice reestablished the Peace river as an agent of eros¬ 
ion and it had no difficulty in cutting down through the unconsol¬ 
idated clays. The steepening of the gradient incised the patterns 
of the tributary streams and they developed canyons, in depth match¬ 
ing that of the Peace, dissecting the tablelands underlain by 
clays. The new pattern of the streams cut through consolidated 
strata as well and exposed sections of Cretaceous rock within the 
area. 

Areal Distribution 

Accompanying the thesis is a map (in folder at back) show¬ 
ing the areal distribution of the consolidated formations within 
the Pouce Coupe River Area. For mapping purposes the consolidated 












39 


formations have been divided into the following units: St. John 
formation; Dunvegan formation; Kaskapau formation; Baytree conglom¬ 
erate and younger formations. 

The boundaries of the formations are delimited as though 
the present topography were based on consolidated strata. Where the 
contact boundary has been personally located or projected across 
short intervals of drift, it is shown by a broken line. If the con¬ 
tact is assumed, by topography outline, or calculation from format- 
ional thickness the contact is shown by a dotted line. 

The maps used for constructing the base map, include the 

following: 

Montagneuse sheet #512, Topographical Survey of Canada, 1” r 3 miles, 

third edition, 1918. 

St. John sheet, #511, Topograohical Survey of Canada, 1” - 3 miles, 

1917. 

Moberly sheet, #461, Topographical Survey Canada, 1” - 3 miles, 

second edition. May 1917. 

Dunvegan sheet, #462, Topographical Survey Canada, 1" - 3 miles, 

provisional edition, 1928. 

Maps used for corrections and additions to the above: 

Soil Survey Map, West of Dunvegan from Saddle Hills to Clear Hills, 
to accompany Rept. #23, Research Council of Alberta, 

1" r 4 miles, 1929. 

Pre-emptors map "Peace River Block", Department of Lands, B.C., 

1" = 4 miles, 1936. 










Chapter IV 



General Statement 

The writer wishes to present here a discussion of the geo¬ 
logical formations as they occur in the Pouce Coupe area, and to 
show their lateral and vertical relationships with the formations as 
they are known in adjacent areas, and in the case of critical hor¬ 
izons to extend that correlation and discussion to more distant sect¬ 
ions and key-beds. 

The only consolidated formations exposed or penetrated by 
the drill in the Pouce Coupe area are of Mesozoic age. The deepest 
borehole drilled in the area is the Guardian well # 1, (Lsd.7,sec.7, 
tp.80, range 12, W.6) which at the end of 1940 when work was suspend¬ 
ed for the winter months had reached a depth of 6,645 feet, without 
penetrating Paleozoic rocks. 

The consolidated surface formations of the area are of 
Cretaceous age and are mostly obscured by glacial drift, that covers 
so much of the bedrock of Alberta. On account of the flat lying nat¬ 
ure of the beds in the Pouce Coupe area, the range of formations ex¬ 
posed at the surface is limited to late Lower Cretaceous and Upper 
Cretaceous age. 

A general summary of the formations known to be present in 
the area is contained in the following table. Formations marked by 
an asterisk are known within the area only from well borings. 
















- 41 - 

Table of formations in the Pouce Coudo area 

Age 

Formation 

Brief description 

Recent 


* ■ ... <m 

Silts and river gravels 

(Quaternary 


Clays, sands and gravels of glacial 
and fluvio-glacial origin. 
Unconsolidated 

Tertiary 


Gravels? 

Upper 

Cretaceous 

Wapiti 

Sandstones and shales of continental 
origin 

Upper Smoky 

River 

Shales marine 

Badheart 

(Bay^tree) 

Sandstone and conglomerate 

Lower Smoky 

River (Xaskapau) 

Shales, marine, some sandstone, marine 

Dunvegan 

Sandstones and shales, continental 
to marine 

Lower 

Cretaceous 

St. John 

Shales, marine 

Peace River x 

Sandstones, shales and grits, 
continental to marine 

Loon Kiver X 

Shales, marine 

McMurray? x 

Sands, loosely consolidated and shale 

Gething x 

Sandstone and shale, sub-aerial 
to marine 

X 

Blairmore cgl? 

Conglomerate and grit 

Jurassic 

X 

Femie ? 

Shales marine and some sandstone, 
little limestone 

Triassic 

X 

Schooler Creek 

Limestone, "Red-beds" and gypsum 

Spray River x 

Calcareous siltstones and dolomitic 
argillites 

Pre Mesozoic 


Limestones? 



































- 42 - 

Pre-Mesozoic Strata 

Pre-Mesozoic strata are unknown from outcroppings or bore¬ 
holes within the Pouce Coupe area. The deepest well. Guardian Oil 
#1, has so far failed to penetrate below the Mesozoic and is in Low¬ 
er Triassic formations. However stratigraphic interest invites a dis 
cussion of such strata here. 

Two hundred and fifty miles northeast of the Pouce Coupe 
area, at Vermilion Chutes on the lower Peace river, Cretaceous rocks 
lie directly on Devonian limestones, (ref.49, p.l6). Approximately 
one hundred miles east of the Pouce Coupe river, wells north of 
Peace River town show Cretaceous formations lying on Devonian lime¬ 
stone. (P.S.W. pers.comm.). Approximately one hundred miles west of 
Pouce Coupe river, on Callazon Creek* a tributary of the Pine, Will¬ 
iams and Bocock (ref.101, p. 203) report Pennsylvanian strata below 
the Triassic. The hiatus associated with the unconformity decreases 
from east to west and since the section of Mesozoic in the Pouce 
Coupe area corresponds more closely to the Pine River section, it is 
suggested that the Paleozoic strata below the Triassic will be Miss- 
issippian or Pennsylvanian in the Pouce Coupe area. 

Triassic Group 

Schooler Creek and Spray River formations 
Introductory Statement 

The formations in the Guardian well between 4,774 and 
6,645 feet are of Triassic age. The age is based on faunal evid¬ 
ence obtained from the cores. The strata between 4,774 and 5,S05 
feet (1,030 feet) are considered to be of the same age and later- 

















- 43 - 

ally continuous in part with the Schooler Creek formation of the 
Peace river section above the Canyon on the Peace. The strata from 
5,804 to 6,645 feet (ij*>41 feet) are considered to be of the same 
age as the Spray River formation of the Banff area of Alberta. 


Lithology 


The section given below is from the log of the Guardian 
well, between depths 4,774 and 6,645 feet. The Triassic group con¬ 
sists of strata carrying a high percentage of carbonates, separated 
from the overlying Jurassic by a contact that shows features of an 


erosional unconformity. The writer considers that the drill has 


not as yet reached the base of the Triassic. (Feb.1941). The foll¬ 
owing section is based on cutting samples taken at five foot inter¬ 
vals and from cores all of which were examined by the writer, 
(drilling depths in feet) 


4,774-4,778 

4,778-4,781 

4,781-4,791 


4,791-4,795 

4,795-4,860 


4,860-4,900 

4,900-4,905 

4,905-4,930 

4,930-4,935 

4,935-4,945 

4,945-4,950 

4,950-4,980 

4,980-5,005 

5,005-5,015 

5,015-5,082 

5,082-5,090 

5,090-5,120 

5,120-5,140 

5,140-5,165 

5,165-5,170 


Limestone, dark grey porous with 10% white chert. 

Shale, dark greenish calcareous with pyrite. 

Limestone, grey finely porous with 15% white chert with 
sponge spicules, some pyrite in shale. 

Shale, dark grey with pyrites nodules and veins. 
Limestone, greenish grey very porous, with a decreasing 
amount of white chert, some calcareous shale. 

Limestone, light brownish grey dolomitic carrying some 
white chert. 

Limestone, light grey porous. 

Limestone, light grey, little pyrite, some chert. 
Limestone, light grey porous. 

Limestone, light grey to light brownish. 

Limestone, light grey to white porous, 3% white chert. 
Limestone, light bluish grey. 

Limestone, light grey to white sugary texture. 
Limestone, light grey brown dolomitic. 

Limestone, grey mottled dolomitic. 

Dolomite, light brown crystalline. 

Limestone, light grey brown dolomitic. 

Dolomite, light brown, and 5% reddish carbonates. 
Dolomite, light brown, and 15% gypsum. 

Gypsum or anhydrite, with some brown carbonates. 













44 


5,170-5,175 

5,175-5,180 

5,180-5,205 

5,205-5,220 

5,220-5,240 


5,240-5,245 

5,245-5,255 

5,255-5,290 

5,290-5,293 

5,293-5,350 

5,350-5,360 

5,360-5,372 

5,372-5,385 

5,385-5,400 

5,400-5,473 

5,473-5,476 

5,476-5,483 

5,4^3-5,500 

5,500-5,510 

5,510-5,523 

5,523-5,535 


5,535-5,545 

5,545-5,570 

5,570-5,595 

5,595-5,720 


5,720-5,735 

5,735-5,749 

5,749-5,770 

5,770-5,805 

5,805-5,825 

5,325-5,856 

5,356-5,866 

5,866-5,970 

5,970-6,215 

6,215-6,285 

6,235-6,345 

6,345-6,370 

6,370-6,335 

6,335-6,440 

6,440-6,445 


"Red beds", shales and carbonates, reddish and gypsif¬ 
erous. 

Gypsum or anhydrite, with pearl grey limestone. 

"Red beds", shales and carbonates, reddish carrying up 
to 30% of gypsum. 

Gypsum or anhydrite, with 30% red shales and carbonates. 
Limestone, blue grey, with anhydrite, and reddish car¬ 
bonates. 

"Red beds" shales and carbonates reddish and gypsiferous. 
Dolomite, brown, carrying anhydrite. 

Limestone, light brown dolomitic. 

Limestone, light grey arenaceous. 

Limestone, light grey brown, with some reddish carbon¬ 
ates. 

"Red beds" shales and carbonates, reddish and gypsiferous. 
Dolomite, brown, and anhydrite. 

Anhydrite, white. 

Limestone grey, and anhydrite. 

"Red beds", Reddish shales and carbonates, gypsiferous. 
Anhydrite. 

Dolomite, brownish mottled. 

"Red beds", shales and carbonates, reddish and gypsifer¬ 
ous. 

Gypsum, and reddish shales. 

"Red beds", shales and carbonates, reddish, with gypsum. 
Sandstone, white quartzitic, with a few chert pebbles 
at the top. 

Shale, dark grey calcareous, silty. 

Limestone, finely arenaceous, with 30% reddish shales 
and carbonates, some gypsum. 

Limestone, grey, with some gypsum? 

Siltstones, dolomitic, with silty limestones and cal¬ 
careous shales, all thin-bedded. 

Siltstones, dolomitic, brownish, thin-bedded. 

Limestone, grey silty, oolitic at top. 

Siltstone, brownish dolomitic, with calcareous shale. 
Siltstone, grey dolomitic thin-bedded. 

Siltstone, grey-brown dolomitic. 

Siltstone, grey argillaceous to dolomitic. 

Limestone, arenaceous, with strong development of sand- 
calcite crystals. 

Siltstone, grey brown dolomitic, with calcareous shales, 
thin-bedded. 

Siltstones, brown dolomitic, with a row of small cherts 
at 6,064. 

Siltstones, grey dolomitic, with 20% silty limestone. 
Siltstone, brown dolomitic thin-bedded. 

Siltstone, grey calcareous. 

Sandstone, very fine calcareous grey, and siltstone. 
Siltstone, grey buff dolomitic. 

Sandstone, very fine grey calcareous, and siltstone. 











45 


6,445-6,535 Siltstone, grey brown dolomitic. 

6,6>35-6,545 Siltstone, grey calcareous, and silty limestone. 
6,545-6,645 Siltstone, grey brown dolomitic. 

6,645- Bottom of Guardian well, Feb. 1, 1941. 

This section suggests a division into several units. An 
upper limestone division from 4,774 to 5,120 feet (346 feet), central 
"red-bed" division (450 feet), and a lower dolomitic siltstone div¬ 
ision from 5,570 to 6,645 feet (1,075 feet). 

The upper division consists of limestone and dolomites with 
various porous horizons as noted above. The contact with the overly¬ 
ing Jurassic bears features of an old erosional surface. Near the 
upper contact the development of chert suggests the percolation of 
waters bearing colloidal silica. The cherts of this upper zone are 
white in color, roughly round and carry sponge spicules. The develop¬ 
ment of porosity and calcite-lined geodal cavities suggests the mig¬ 
ration of waters bearing carbonates. A sample from 4,793 feet show¬ 
ed a porosity of 16.7$ with a permeability of 3.4 millidarceys 

(Gulf Res. Dep*t., Pittsburgh, Pa.) The pores at this horizon are 

■ 

filled with salt water and isolated cavities are filled with an oil 
of medium gravity. Greenish (glauconitic?) shale is developed near 
the upper contact and is accompanied by nodular pyrite. One nodule 
of pyrite from near this contact had a weight of 366.1 grams. An¬ 
other feature of interest is a thin band at 5,086 feet bearing green 
copper stains derived from decomposition of a black copper mineral 
that occurs sporadically in small crystals. 

The middle lithologic zone, 5,120 feet to 5,570 feet 
(450 feet) includes the "Red-beds 11 . The limestone associated with 














- 46 - 

this zone is doloraitic and toward the base it becomes silty. The 
gypsum occurs in two types. Firstly, massive gypsum is present, with 
fragments of dolomitic limestone embedded in it, and the bedding dis¬ 
torted and crumpled. This is typical of many gypsum deposits. 
Secondly, satin-spar occurs as thin veining in the "red-beds" and as 
a fringe around inclusions of limestone, and along the contact be¬ 
tween beds of gypsum and the "red-beds" or between the limestone and 
the "red-beds". The satin-spar occurs as radiating spherical clust¬ 
ers up to one-half inch in diameter at a depth of 5,523 feet. 

There is no evidence to indicate the presence of salt de¬ 
posits, and no pseudomorphs after salt crystals were observed al¬ 
though this latter feature could have been destroyed by the intense 
bedding distortion accompanying the hydration and dehydration of the 
gypsum. 

Although gypsum and some "red-beds" occur between 5,535 
feet and 5>570 feet the gypsum here may have been precipitated by 
leaching from above. The true base of the '’red-bed" deposits is 
considered to be the white sandstone member between 5>523 and 5>535 
feet. That the sandstone could represent a local diastrophism is 
suggested by chert pebbles at the top of the member, with some 
glauconite in the matrix. The sandstone is white in color, fine to 
coarse grained. 

The basal beds of the "red-bed" section carry showings of 
oil and gas but permeability in these beds is destroyed by gypsum 
sealing fracture drainage channels. 

The lower lithologic zone (below the "red-beds") is 
















j'X. ■ 


































- 47 - 

arenaceous (silty) and dolomitic throughout its entire thickness 
from 5,570 to 6,645 feet. Cores show thin-bedded calcareous silt- 
stones and dolomitic siltstones separated by paper-thin impervious 
layers of black shale. There is an increase in content of mica in 
the sediments below 5,300 feet. 

A band of oolitic limestones between 5,735 and 5,740 feet 
should be mentioned. This band is fossiliferous and contains a small 
amount of oil in the interstices between the oolites. From this band 
or adjacent strata, a small amount of oil is seeping into the well. 

The oil from this seep has been examined and found to be of gravity, 
36.4° A.F.I. (W.r. Seyer Provincial analyst, Victoria). Most of the 
core from the lower zone shows either a small amount of gas or an oil 
stain, but the lack of permeability except for the oolite band, and 
bedding plane drainage makes the rock a poor potential oil-producing 
horizon. 

Below the oolitic limestone the beds become gradually more 
arenaceous and the term siltstone seems more appropriate. In out¬ 
crop such beds might be termed "thin-bedded sandy dolomites" or "fine¬ 
grained dolomitic sandstones and shales" depending on the develop¬ 
ment of the rest of the formation as a limestone or as a sandstone. 

Origin of Color in ll Ked-beds 1 ' 

A suggestion is offered for the source of the coloration 
in the "fted-beds". The red color in sedimentary beds is considered 
indicative of a partial lateritization having taken place under 
continental conditions before or after deposition of the sediments. 

The writer considers that, in the case of a deposit containing chem- 









48 


iced precipitates, the red color may originate in the factors nec¬ 
essary to the precipitation of such a mineral as gypsum. The nat¬ 
ure of gypsum as a seal to any porosity present would prevent leach¬ 
ing of this color in the case of flooding. Consideration of fig¬ 
ure 3 (ref. 99, p.113) shows the order of precipitation of miner¬ 
als from sea water to be: 

1. Limestone with limonite (CaCO^ and 2 Fe«0o.3H 0) 

2.5 2 

2. Gypsum (CaSO^.SI^O with a small percentage of limestone) 

3. Sodium Chloride NaCI with some gypsum and traces of 
limestone 

4. Bitter salts (MgSO^, MgCl 2 , NaBr) 

In the case of the gypsum deposits of the Guardian Well, 
action or order of precipitation did not reach as far as the depos¬ 
ition of salt, therefore the critical concentration must have re¬ 
mained around calcite-gypsum-iron precipitation point with the ex¬ 
tra magnesium coming out in the form of dolomite, and the red col¬ 
oration is the normal result of the chemically precipitated iron. 
Under a microscope the coloration seems of this nature. 








49 


•/ 6<a Wmftr 

1.0‘S 09 


1.13/S 


1.2 100 


l.l+loQ 

IlCVQ 


1.3/00 


A 3370 


. CaC0 3 


— 

.0, 

' 


C.950„.lH,0 

- 



A'.C/ 

‘I_ 1 

1 



- 

1 

1 

1 

\ 








I 

1 

1 





f$0 y Ka Afcflri 

- 







- 



Fig. 9L Sketch shovdng order of 
precipitation of salts from sea 
water vdth increase in density, 
(ref. 99, p. 113) 


Distribution 

In the Pouce Coupe area the Triassic formation is known 
only from the log of one well the Guardian #1 (Lsd.7, sec.7,tp.80, 
range 12, W.6), where it is developed to a thickness of 1,871 feet. 
It is assumed to underly most of the area. It is not found in the 
wells drilled one hundred miles east of Pouce Coupe near Peace 
River town. The Cretaceous shales lie directly on the Devonian 




































- 50 - 

(from fossil evidence) and the Triassic is missing. 

The log of the International Oils #2 well in the Lesser 
Slave Lake area (sec.30, tp.75, range 6, W.5) as given by Hume 
(ref. 34 * P-251) shows a section of strata similar to that of the 
Guardian well* The writer suggests that the 488 feet of sediments 
in the International well #2 between 1,932 feet and 2,470 feet are 
Triassic and not Paleozoic as suggested by Hume. We quote Hume*s 
comments, “The top of the Paleozoic is somewhat difficult to deter¬ 
mine. Hard dense limestones occur at 2,000 feet but above this are 
a series of beds containing very dark shales, some sand, and white 

chert.The age of the upper part of the Paleozoic is unknown. 

In the main the sediments of this part are calcareous shales with a 
very distinct contact with limestone at 2,470 feet. 11 He hesit¬ 

ates to correlate this section of sediments with the Mississippian 
since the Mississippian does not occur either at Peace River town 
or in the McMurray area. 

West of the Pouce Coupe area thi» is the interesting de¬ 
velopment on the upper Peace of the Schooler Creek formation of 
Upper Triassic age. In this area the Schooler Creek is about 2,500 
feet in thickness and McLeam describes it, (ref.69, p.66), "It 
consists of calcareous very fine sandstone with smaller amounts of 
calcareous siltstone and less of shelly, crinoidal, partly oolitic, 
argillaceous, and arenaceous limestones". The most easterly occurr¬ 
ence of this formation at the surface is on Peace river on the north 
bank at longitude 122°30 | . The formation is assumed to be later¬ 
ally continuous with the occurrence in the Guardian well. 








51 


In the Pine River area Williams and Bocock (ref.99, p.205) 
report the occurrence of the ,, P6eudomqnqtis n beds of the Triassic 
near the mouth of Mountain Creek. The writer, in the same area, has 
recognized sediments of the Spray River type on Hasler Creek about 
15 miles up from the mouth but no fossils were recognized. 

South of the Pouce Coupe area Triassic beds carrying gypsum 
were reported by Allan (ref. 5) at Mowitch Creek, near the north 
boundary of Jasper National Park. The correlation of this gypsum 
deposit with the "red-beds" series of the Guardian well log appears 
reasonable. The thickness for the Triassic at Mowitch Creek is 
given as 792 feet, divided as follows (ref. 6 , p.625)s 


1. Grey hard limestone and sandstone series. 250 1 

2. Yellow to buff weathering series. 67 ' 

3. Red Bed series. 165 » 

4- Main gypsum series. 220 ' 

Massive buff sandstone.. 


South of this latter occurrence, on Fiddle River, Parejas 
(ref.70, p-64) gives a thickness of 650 feet, to a Lower Triassic 
sequence but mentions no gypsum deposits or red beds. 

The Spray River formation has a maximum thickness of 
around 3,400 feet for the type section of Spray River formation at 
Banff (ref.84, p.39)• In the foothills the formation is seldom 
thicker than around 700 feet. The Femie lie directly on the Paleo¬ 
zoic with no Triassic present south of the Bow River in the foothills 
(ref.34, p.50), and in the Brazeau area (ref.77, p.432). 

The Triassic has not been reported from wells drilled in 
southern and central Alberta plains so the occurrence of Triassic 
rocks developed to such a thickness so far from the mountains in the 

















52 


Pouce Coupe area suggests a widening of the depositional trough 
in this latter area. 


Age and Correlation 


The stratigraphic position of this Triassic, has been de¬ 
termined in part by faunal evidence from cores of the Guardian well 
and by analogy with the known extent of the correlatable formations. 

The following fauna has been obtained from the Guardian 
Well cores, figures refer to drilling depth in feet from surface: 

4,730 - Pterinea? this is a very small pelecypod 

5,523 - Small Pelecypod 

5,528 - Pecten? or small Monotis? poorly preserved 

5.542 - Lingula Cf. selwyni Whiteaves 

5.543 - Lingula? numerous small fragments 

5,624 - Pelecypod small indeterminate 

5,704 - Daonella? small specimens poorly preserved 

5,704 - Daonella cf. nitanae McLearn 

5,737 - Oolites, fragments of ammonites 

Uathorstites mcconnelli Whiteaves? 

Sagenites? 

5,746 - Lingula? 

5,333 - Pelecypod with very fine ornamentation 

5,342 - ? 

5,342 - ? 

6,025 - Lingula? 

6,055 - Flemingites? 

6,132 - Meekoceras? (Flemingites? ) 

On the basis of this fauna the writer feels justified in 
offering a correlation with the Schooler Creek formation and with 
the Spray River formation. By faunal criteria the contact lies be¬ 
tween 5,737 and 6,055 dividing the Triassic into Upper and Lower. 


















. 















- 555 - 

McLearn divides the Schooler Creek as follows: 
(ref.69, p.68) 



Europe 

Ammonoid faunas 

Pelecypod faunas 

Neo 

Triassic 

Rhaetian 

Unknown 

Unknown 

Norian 

Diphyllites 


Monotis subcircularis 

Distichites 

Drepanites 

H 

a 

1 

0 

b 

i 

a 

Monotis alaskana var 

H. cordillerana 
Oxytoraa mucronata 

Kami an 

Stikinoceras 


Lima poyana 

Me so 

Triassic 

Ladinian 


Mahaffy Cliffs 

Red rock spur 

Monotis montini 

Wathorstites 


9 

Grey calcareous sandstones 


The Monotis montini zone of the above table contains a 

pelecypod fauna (ref.69, p.69) 

Hoernsia? woyaniana McLearn 

Daonella flitanae McLearn 

Monotis montini McLearn 

Myophoria ( Elegantinia ) cf,urd Boehm 

Pecten tranguillianus McLearn 

Myoconcha cauriniensis McLearn 

Moaiola ahsisi McLearn 

Lingula cf.selwyni Vvhiteaves. (This is not included 
in the latest list but was used in previous papers) 

The bottom part of this zone carries the ammonite fauna 
including Rathorstites mcconnelli hniteaves. 

Vvhere an identification of fauna is at all possible be¬ 
tween 5,523 feet and 5,746 feet in the Guardian well the fossil may 













































- 54 - 

be referred to a species in the M. montini zone. 

How much of the Schooler Creek is present as far east as 
Pouce Coupe is open to question. The evidence of the unconformity 
suggests that the upper zones of "Schooler Creek" have been eroded 
off. The writer suggests that the zones tabulated as "Red nock 
spur" and "Mahaffy Cliffs" in McLeam* s table above are equivalent 
to the "Red-beds" of the Guardian well log. The Triassic repre¬ 
sented at Pouce Coupe has 963 feet of strata above the Nathorstites 
zone. Identification of the small Pterinea? found at the top of 
the Triassic would help establish the extent of the stratigraphic 
interval. 

The evidence offered by the position of the "Red-beds" 
as Upper Triassic in age indirectly places the gypsum deposits of 
Mowitch Creek in the Upper Triassic or Meso Triassic and not in the 
Lower Triassic as was suggested by Allan (ref.6, p.633). It does 
support the stand that the limestone series above the gypsum is of 
Schooler Creek age. 

Evidence of the presence of the Spray River formation is 
offered by the occurrence of two badly flattened ammonites at 6,055 
feet and 6,132 feet that are similar to undescribed fossils coll¬ 
ected by P. S. Warren from the Spray River section and the tent¬ 
ative reference of the ammonites to genera lound in the Meekoceras 
zone of Idaho established their Lower Triassic age. Warren (ref.84, 
p.4l) quotes Dr. Girty f s reference, of the Banff area Spray River 
formation, fossil collection to the Lower Triassic ( Meekoceras beds) 
of Idaho, Utah, and doming. The Meekoceras zone then would seem 



















- 55 - 

to have a lateral extension north at least as far as latitude 56°. 

The beds between 6,132 feet and 6,645 feet are placed in the 
Triassic on lithologic evidence alone. The continuance of micaceous 
dolomitic siltstones to the bottom of the Guardian well at 6,645 
feet seamed sufficient evidence to include these beds as part of the 
Lower Triassic Spray River formation. 

The actual contact between the Upper and Lower Triassic has 
been tentatively placed at 5,304 feet at a bed containing consider¬ 
able pyrite. Below this the beds take on a slight greenish cast and 
are decidedly siltstones or sandstones. Fossils from 5,333 feet, 
5,342 feet and 6,025 feet should confirm the placing of the contact 
when they are determined. By color change the contact might be 
placed between 5,333 feet and 5,342 feet. 

The stratigraphic position of the Triassic sediments in 
the Guardian well may be summed up as Lower Triassic and Upper 
Triassic with a hiatus between. The lower section from 5,304 feet 
to 6,645 feet is of Spray River age, (Meekoceras) time and earlier. 
The upper section between 4,774 feet and 5,804 feet is of Schooler 
Creek age, of Laainic (Nathorstites ) and possibly Kamic age with 
an unconformity immediately above creating a stratigraphic hiatus 
from Kamic to Jurassic time. The Triassic is overlain by Jurassic 


shales 










- 56 - 

Jurassic Femle? 

Introductory Statement 

Between 4,324 and 4,774 feet (450 feet) in the Guardian 
well there is a series of marine shales, sandy at the top and cal¬ 
careous toward the bottom which is considered to represent the Jur¬ 
assic, They do not outcrop near or in the Pouce Coupe area. This 
formation is considered to be the eastward equivalent of the Jur¬ 
assic shales of the upper Peace river and is referred to the ternie 
formation or a part of the Fernie of the foothills and mountains of 
Alberta, 

Lithology 


This marine formation, 450 feet thick, is known only from 
the log of the Guardian well and the section is given as obtained 
from cuttings. It grades transitionally above into a definite con¬ 
tact denoted by a conglomerate. Below it grades transitionally into 


a limestone formation the contact with which is abruptly marked by 
the presence of white chert. 

The section is as follows: (figures are drilling depths of 


the Guardian well in feet) 


4,324-4,327 

4,327-4,335 
4,335-4,340 

4,340-4,350 

4,350-4,355 

4,355-4,360 

4,360-4,375 

4,375-4,385 

4,385-4,395 


Shale, dark grey sandy, with medium-grained, brown cal¬ 
careous sandstone. 

Shale, dark grey, with 5% olive brown shale. 

Sandstone, medium fine loosely cemented yellowish, with 
30$ dark grey silty shale. 

Shale, dark grey, with a little siltstone and sandstone 
as above. 

Sandstone, fine white, 20% dark grey shale. 

Shale, dark grey, with siltstone and sandstone as above. 
Sandstone, loosely cemented medium fine light grey, with 
30% dark grey shale. 

Shale, dark grey, with 30% sandstone as above. 

Sandstone, loosely cemented fine, 25% dark grey shale. 















. 






























































57 


4,395-4,410 Shale, dark grey, with 20% siltstone and sandstone as 
above. 

4,410-4,435 Shale, dark grey, with 15% or less fine calcareous silt- 
stone, little glauconite at 4,435. 

4,435-4,500 Shale, dark grey, with 10% grey calcareous siltstone, 
and 5% dark brown calcareous shale. 

4,500-4,580 Shale, dark grey, with 10% olive brown shale, little 
siltstone, little glauconite at 4,520. 

4,580-4,695 Shale, dark grey fissile marine, little fine calcareous 
siltstone, little pyrites. 

4,695-4,730 Shale, dark grey fissile marine, with 20% calcareous 
shale. 

4,730-4,740 Shale, dark grey calcareous, with 10% grey limestone. 

4,740-4,745 Shale, dark grey calcareous, with 30% porous grey lime¬ 
stone. 

4,745-4,760 Shale, dark grey calcareous, with 20% grey silty lime¬ 
stone. 

4,760-4,765 Shale, dark grey calcareous, with 35% dark grey porous 
limestone. 

4,765-4,774 Shale, dark grey calcareous, with 30% dark grey lime¬ 
stone. 

4,774- Triassic. 

Distribution 


Shales of Jurassic age are known from Montana to northern 
British Columbia. In the southern mountains and foothills of Al¬ 
berta they are known as the Fernie shale. 

In the Pouce Coupe area they are recognized from the log of 
one well, the Guardian (Lsa.7, sec.7, tp.BO, range 12, W.6) where they 
are developed to a thickness of 350 feet. 

These shales are unknown from the districts east, northeast, 
and north of the Pouce Coupe river area. West of the Pouce Coupe 
area on the upper Peace river above the canyon, McLeam reports the 
presence of Jurassic shales developed to a thickness of 700 feet 
(ref.69, p.71) including "dark partly carbonaceous shale, rare green¬ 
ish, probably glauconitic shale and some bands of sandstone and im¬ 
pure limestone 1 ’. 

Southwards from the Peace river a Jurassic shale has been 









- 58 - 

noted in the Hay and Borland Rivers area by MacVicar (ref.42,p.29). 

South of the Athabaska the Femie formation occurs along 
the full length of the mountains with a thickness up to 800 feet al¬ 
though maximum thicknesses of about 2,800 feet have been reported, as 
cribed by Warren (ref.89, p.60) to duplication or mechanical thick¬ 
ening. 

Age and Correlation 

The age of the shales in the Guardian well between 4>324 
and 4>774 feet, is considered Jurassic because of its position be¬ 
tween overlying continental Lower Cretaceous and underlying Triassic. 

McLeam has found a fauna of marine pelecypods and poorly 
preserved ammonites on the Peace river from shales, stratigraph- 
ically between the Schooler Creek and Bullhead Mountain formation, 
and states that the formation is partly at least to be compared with 
the Jurassic Fernie to the south, (ref.69, p.71). The fauna from 
the Pine River shales at Pass Creek mentioned by Spieker (ref.79, 
p.119) and by Williams and Bocock (ref.101, p.207) is deleted from 
discussion as the writer does not consider the type section of Pine 
River shales to be Jurassic, but possibly much younger. 

According to Warren (ref.89> p.65 et seq) the Femie shale 
contains faunas from early Lower Jurassic to middle Upper Jurassic 
in age. The early Lower Jurassic "Epamioceras 11 fauna has been re¬ 
cognized from Femie, B.C. to Jasper Park. The middle Upper Jur¬ 
assic " Cardioceras 1 * has been recognized from the Femie formation, 
only from Femie district, B.C. The fauna collected from Jasper 
district, Alberta range as high as lowermost Upper Jurassic in age. 
The writer suggests that the Jurassic shales in the Pouce Coupe area 













- 59 - 

would more closely approximate the age of the Femie at Jasper. 

The Jurassic shales in the Guardian aro possibly restrict¬ 
ed to Lower Jurassic, Fernie age, or part of this age. 











60 


Lower Cretaceous 
General Statement 

In the major part of* the foothills and mountains of Alberta 
the Lower Cretaceous consists of a continental, arenaceous secuence 
ol strata. In the southern part of the foothills the Lower Cretac¬ 
eous is made up of the Kootenay (carrying commercial coal seams), 
ana the Blairmore, separated by a characteristic bed of conglomerate, 
placed at the base of the Blairmore and termed the Blairmore conglom¬ 
erate. In the Jasper Park area of the foothills and mountains the 
Lower Cretaceous is made up of the Nikanassin, Cadomin conglomerate, 
Luscar (carrying commercial coal seams), and the Mountain Park form¬ 
ation. In such areas as Marble mountain (ref.91, p.8) and near Nor- 
degg (ref.2, p.43) a conglomerate occurs at the base of the Lower 
Cretaceous section. 

The correlation of the Lower Cretaceous of the Peace river 
with the Lower Cretaceous of the foothills of Alberta is difficult 
as the Peace river section contains marine members. The discon- 
certing lack of faunal evidence from the southern Lower Cretaceous 
has compelled workers to rely on floral data and lithology, in de¬ 
termining age relationships. The western Peace river Lower Cretac- 
eoux is composed of the Lower Bullhead Mountain (continental), Upper 
Bullhead Mountain (Gething member, carrying coal seams), Moosebar, 
(marine). Gates (continental), St. John (marine). The eastern 
Peace river Lower Cretaceous comprises. Loon River (marine). Peace 
River (continental, to marine), St. John (marine). 

In the Pouce Coupe area, the Lower Bullhead is considered 





















61 


absent and the Lower Cretaceous, of thickness 2,276 feet, is referred 
to Blairmore age, and is divided into six Blairmore zones, A, B, C, D, 
E, F, in this paper. There is no known angular unconformity between 
the overlying or underlying formations. There is no apparent strati¬ 
graphic break between Lower and Upper Cretaceous in this area. The 
elimination of the Lower Bullhead Mountain provides a noticeable 
stratigraphic break between Lower Cretaceous and Jurassic. This is 
the more emphasized since the end of the hiatus is marked by a con¬ 
glomerate. 

Lower Bullhead Mountain Formation 

The Lower Bullhead Mountain is not represented in the Pouce 
Coupe area and the succession goes directly from Jurassic to Blair¬ 
more time. The hiatus does represent a time interval of consider¬ 
able extent and for that reason is briefly discussed. 

In the Peace River Canyon, the Lower Bullhead Mountain 
(3,000* thick) is described by McLearn (ref.69, p.71) "fine con¬ 
glomerate, sandstone, some dark carbonaceous shale, and rare, very 
thin coal seams". McLearn suggests (ref.69, p.72) a correlation of 
the Lower Bullhead Mountain with the Kootenay, and with the Nikan- 
assin. 

The age of the Lower Bullhead ?Aouhtain has not been accur¬ 
ately determined. The presence of Aucella (ref.69, p.71) in the 
Lower Bullhead Mountain is considered sufficient evidence of a late 
Jurassic - early Cretaceous age of a part of the formation. If the 
Lower Bullhead Mountain should yield a flora of Kootenay age this 
would give the former formation a long time range as Berry has given 











6£ 


an age as late as Barremian for the Kootenay flora (ref. 11, p.30) in 
the Blairmore area. This long time range would be in keeping with 
the thickness of 3,000 feet assigned to the Lower Bullhead Mountain. 

There is a possibility that the sandy upper portion of the 
Jurassic shales found in the Guardian well, (71 feet thick) might be 
referred to the Bullhead Mountain. The marine character of the in- 
terbedded shales is considered sufficient evidence to separate it 
from a coal-bearing formation, although basal Lower Bullhead Mountain 
carries marine pelecypods (ref.69, p.71). The upper portion of the 
Jurassic shales in the Canadian Rockies usually shows an arenaceous 
character. The arenaceous band below Zone A conglomerate in the 
Guardian well is included in the Jurassic. 

Blairmore Formation 

General Statement 

In the Pouce Coupe area the top of the Blairmore formation 
is stratigraphically y/ithin the Dunvegan formation. Therefore the 
entire section of Cretaceous strata, in the Guardian well from the 
conglomerate at 4,324 feet to the top of the consolidated strata at 
290 feet, is considered Blairmore in age. The discussion of this 
formation will be treated under seven headings as seven separate 
Zones of Blairmore are recognized in the Pouce Coupe area. 

These seven "Blairmore Zones" (A,B,C,D,F.,F,G) of 4,028 
feet thickness in the Guardian well are considered to embrace the 
ages of the following formations: Blairmore conglomerate, Lower and 
Opper Blairmore, of the southern foothills and mountains of Alberta; 
the Cadomin, Luscar and Mountain Park of the foothills and mountains 
















- 63 - 

of west central Alberta; the Upper Bullhead Mountain (Gething), 
Moosebar, Gates, St. John and Dunvegan (lower part) of the Peace Riv¬ 
er Canyon area; the Loon River, Peace River, St. John and Dunvegan 
(lower part) of the Eastern Peace River area; the McMurray, Clear¬ 
water, Grand Rapids and Pelican of the lower Athabaska River area. 

Let it be understood that Blairmore is the equivalent of the above 
lists taken in toto for each area, and the separate lists should not 
be considered as either a complete or continuous span covering Blair¬ 
more stratigraphic limits. 

Blair-more Zone A. Blairmore conglomerate? 

Introductory Statement 

In the Guardian well, there is a chert and quartzite pebble 
conglomerate, between 4,318 feet and 4,324 feet. This conglomerate 
is considered a deposit penecontemporaneous with the Blairmore (Koot¬ 
enay) conglomerate of southern Albertq foothills and mountains, and 
the Cadomin conglomerate of the foothills and mountains of west cent¬ 
ral Alberta, It is not necessarily laterally continuous with any of 
these formations. 

Lithology 

Between 4,318 feet and 4,324 feet in the Guardian well there 
is a conglomerate developed that grades rather abruptly above into a 
fine sandstone and shale sequence and transitionally below into a 
sandy shale and sandstone formation. 

The lithology of this interval was obtained at this point 
by coring. The section of the conglomerate zone from 4,3l8 , -4,324* 

10 n is as follows: (Upper boundary was placed at 4,318 feet at 
point of change in drilling rate). 




















64 


2 feet 


4 inches 

5 inches 
10 inches 

1 inch 
4 inches 

8 inches 


11 inches 
3 inches 

12 inches 


Clear quartz sand and pieces of white chert in the 
cuttings between 4,315'-4,320»; quartz grains to 
3/100 inch in diameter appear in the sample. 

White quartzite pebbles to £ inch in size. 

Grey chert pebbles in a brown grit matrix. 

Medium grained loosely cemented brownish gritty sand¬ 
stone with coarse white calcareous grains. 

Greenish grey chert pebbles in a matrix of above. 
Medium coarse loosely cemented brownish sandstone with 
white calcareous grains and carrying coaly streaks. 
Coarse loosely cemented brownish quarts sandstone with 
white calcareous grains and occasional white quartzite 
pebble to \ inch in size. 

Medium grained sandstone with a little lignitic and 
pyrite material. 

Black chert pebbles and white quartzite pebbles up to 
one inch in size in a coarse brown sand matrix. 

Coarse brownish sandstone, grading to fine carrying 
carbonaceous shale and lignitic material. 


The shapes of the quartzite pebbles are roughly oval with 


the chert pebbles showing a rounded sub-angularity, water smoothed. 

The description above compares favorably with warren’s gen¬ 
eral lithology of the Blairmore conglomerate (ref.91, p.10) "compos¬ 
ed of pebbles of chert and quartzite cemented in a matrix of, usually, 
calcareous sandstone. The chert may be grey, blue or pink in color, 
whereas the quartzite pebbles vary from a white to a buff or yellow 


color.The average size of the pebbles.is about an inch in 


diameter". The lack of induration in the Guardian sample can be 
attributed to the absence of intense structural deformation in the 


area. 


It will be noticed that there is only about thirteen in¬ 
ches total of chert and quartzite pebbles in the six feet plus in 
the Zone A conglomerate from the Guardian Well and yet the size of 
the pebbles is to one inch in diameter. This agrees well with arr- 
en’s hypothesis in connection with the Blairmore conglomerate, that 










- 65 - 

the conglomerate disappears to the eastward by the pebbles becom¬ 
ing fewer and fewer rather than by becoming finer and finer.(ref.91, 

p.10). 

Distribution 

This is the farthest north that this Lower Cretaceous con¬ 
glomerate lias been noted and is unique in its distance from the moun¬ 
tains. This lithologic unit has been traced from the international 
boundary northwards along the foothills for 400 miles with the last 
recorded recognition of this formation in surface outcrop "travers¬ 
ing the Smoky River Coal reserve" (ref.39, p.1317). Although /lacKay 
records the conglomerate as crossing the Smoky River Coal reserve he 
fails to indicate which one of the conglomerates mentioned in Tlac- 
Vicar 1 s report (ref.42) corresponds to the Cadomin conglomerate. 

MacVicar (ref.40, p.39) in the Brule area places a conglom¬ 
erate of 100 feet at the base of the Kootenay. He also mentions 
thinner conglomerates within the coal measures themselves. He re¬ 
ports conglomerates within the "Kootenay" from Berland river (ref.42, 
p.59) and from township 58, range 9, W.6 (ref. 42 , p.6l). 

On Harr away river near the sixteenth Base-line, Evans and 
Caley (ref.29, p.39) report a chert and quartzite pebble conglomer¬ 
ate, fifty feet thick with pebbles averaging one inch in diameter. 
Hone of the conglomerates are correlated with other conglomerates 
further south. 

Conglomerates are noticed in the Bullhead Mountain format¬ 
ion in the Peace River Canyon by McLearn (ref.54, P»4)j a thin one 
associated with the top of the coal measures and many with uhe Low¬ 
er Bullhead Mountain. Ho detailed descriptions of the conglomerates 





























- 66 - 

accompany the reoort and no comparison is made with the conglomer¬ 


ates of the Blairmore region, with which ,'cLearo was familiar. How¬ 
ever in his latest publication (ref. 69 , >.79) r.l<■; r . : . ; v 

zones for the Bullhead Mountain: an upper conl-bearin, • member (Geth- 
ing member) equivalent to the Lower Blairmore, and Luscar; a middle 
zone, conglomerate-bearing, equivalent to the Blairmore and Cadomin 
conglomerates; and a lower sandstone, equivalent to the Kootenay, 
and Hikanassin. He does not define the postulated middle zone as to 
thickness or lithology. 

Age and Correlation 

The appearance of a coarse conglomerate tentatively correl¬ 
ated with the Blairmore conglomerate raises again the question asked 
arren, (ref.91, p.7) "Is the Blairmore conglomerate of ex£ ;tly 
the same age throughout the entire extent of its outcrop, a distance 
of about 400 miles? 11 The occurrence of the conglomerate in the 
Guardian well, extends the distance to around 500 miles and makes 
the question more pertinent. 

As far as investigation reveals there is no determinable 
flora or fauna found in the Blairmore or Cadomin conglomerates. 

The writer agrees with Rose (ref.71, p.110) in placing the 
Blairmore (Kootenay) conglomerate, in the Blairmore rather than as 
the uppermost member of the Kootenay, and if an erosional unconform¬ 
ity is represented by the Blairmore conglomerate, that it represents 








the termination of the period of erosion. 

The dating of the Zone A conglomerate is indirect. Immed- { 
iately below a thin bed of conglomerate in the Peace River Canyon, 
suggested as equivalent to the Blairmore conglomerate by IcLearn 



















. 




















-67- 

(ref. 69 , p.72) dinosaur tracks occur, (ref.101, p.J 

Irenesauripas mcleami S tern berg 
I. occidentails Sternberg 
I. acutls Sternberg 
Golumbosaurious ungulatus Litem berg 
Gypsichnites oacensis Sternberg 
Amblydactylus gethingi Sternberg 
letrapodosaurus borealis Sternberg 
Irenichites gracilis Sternberg 

These vertebrate tracks are little aid as yet in dating of the con¬ 
glomerate. The flora of the Gethlng member is dated Lower Blair.: 
(ref.69, p.72) so the conglomerate is pre-Lower Blairmore. 

The Zone A conglomerate overlies the Jurassic shales and 
is considered post-Jurassic, and early Lower Cretaceous, pre-Gething. 
Blairmore Zone B. Gething 
Introductory Statement 

In the Guardian well there is a series of calcareous to 
argillaceous and quartz itic sandstones and shales carrying percent¬ 
age of carbonaceous material between 3,355 and 4,313 feet. These 
beds are here considered to be an off-shore expression of the Geth¬ 
ing (Upper Bullhead Mountain coal-bearing member) and are referred 
to an Blairmore Zone B. The Gething member was named by McLeam 
in 1922 (ref.54, p.3). The type section is in the peace River Canyon 
above Hudson Hope. Zone B. is considered contemporaneous with the 
formations or parts of the formations following: Lower Blairmore of 
southern Alberta; the coal-bearing portion of the Luscar formation 
(lower Luscar), of central Alberta foothills area; the Gething mem¬ 
ber or coal-bearing member of the Bullhead Mountain of the Peace 
River Canyon area. 

Lithology 

The presence of a shale x^stone sgauencg jias ig 
































' 























- 68 - 

revealed in the Guardian well of 463* thickness below 3,855 feet. 

It grades into a clean sand formation above and rests on the Zone A. 
conglomerate below. The lithology of this 463 -cot has been deter¬ 
mined by cuttings taken at live-foot intervals and by occasional 
cores, that have revealed megascopic features such as disturbed 
shallow-water bedding. 


The section from 3,855 feet to 4,318 feet is as follows: 
(figures refer to drilling depths in feet in the Guardian well) 


3,855-3,875 

3,875-3,885 

3,885-3,895 

3,895-3,985 
3,9S5-4,000 
4,000-4,045 

4,045-4,055 

4,055-4,105 

4,105-4,127 

4,127-4,129 

4,129-4,131 

4,131-4,133 

4,133-4,137 

4,137-4,141 

4,141-4,257 


4,257-4,285 

4,235-4,295 

4,295-4,318 


Shale, hard dark grey, with 35% light grey calcareous 
sandstone. 

Shale, hard dark grey, with 10% fine light grey slight¬ 
ly calcareous limonite stained sandstone. 

Sandstone, dark grey fine limonite stained slightly 
calc, with 30% dark grey shale. 

Shale, hard dark grey, with 10 to 30% slightly calc ss. 
Shale, dark grey, with 15% fine grained calc ss. 

Shale, dark grey, -with 10% olive brown calc shale and 
5% fine grey sandstone. 

Sandstone, very fine grey to light grey calcarious, with 
30% dark grey shale. 

Shale, dark grey, with 10£ very fine grey calc ss. 

Shale, dark grey, with 15% very fine calc to qtzitic. 
thin sandstone. 

Sandstone, grey quartzitic, with carbonaceous material. 
Shale, black carbonaceous, with 20% coaly material, and 
quartzitic lenses. 

Sandstone grey medium fine quartzitic. 

Sandstone, and shale with crossbedding and carbonaceous 
material. 

Shale, dark grey, with coaly material. 

Shale, dark grey, with 10% grey fine calcareous sand¬ 
stone, and a small percentage of carbonaceous material. 

A little glauconite at 4,170. 

Shale, dark grey, with some silver grey shale, with 15% 
light brown grey calcareous sandstone. 

Sandstone, very fine rusty light grey calcareous, with 
40 % dark grey shale. 

Shale, dark grey, with silver grey shale, and 10% light 
grey calcareous sandstone. 


Except for the quartzitic member at 4,127 feet the sand¬ 
stones present in this division are to be measured in inches and 
shale beds of equal thickness alternate with them. The zone is 








- 69 - 

never entirely free of carbonaceous material and a small percentage 
of bentonite can be found at many horizons. Small pyrites are dust¬ 
ed through some of the sandstones. The cores show cross-bedding with¬ 
in the sandstones, due to bottom-current action. Thicker beds have 
a sandstone base gradational upwards into a sliale. 

The lack of thick coal seams is the main lithological diff¬ 
erence between Blairmore Zone B. and the Gething member. The coal is 
not expected in large quantity this far from the mountains in these 
Lower Cretaceous formations and the coaly material in the section 
is considered allochthonous in origin. 

Distribution 

In the Pouce Coupe area Zone B. is known only from the 
cuttings from the Guardian well. However, it is assumed to under¬ 
lie the map area with a thickening to the west and progressive 
thinning toward the east. 

Zone B. (Gething) is well represented to the west in both 
the Pine River foothills area and the Peace River Cenyon area. In 
the Peace River Canyon, McLeam (ref.27, p.4) gives a thickness of 
around 1,400 feet for the Gething member of the Bullhead Mountain 
sandstone. There are about 50 coal seams present in this section. 
Whether the Gething member extends eastward in a wedge without loss 
of representative stratigraphic interval is difficult to determine. 

The Pine River area exposes the Gething member on Hasler 
Creek and the thickness is assumed to be around 1,100 feet compar¬ 
ing favorably with the Peace River Canyon section. 

East of the Pouce Coupe area near Peace River town (ref. 

49, p.20) drilling for oil has revealed basal sandstones in the Loon 








70 


River shales that it is suggested may be in part representative of 
Zone B. of the Ponce Coupe area* r north this entire basal 

Loon River sandstone has disappeared and Zone B. is not present whore 
the Loon River comes to the surface near Vermilion Chutes on Peace 
river. 

South of the Pouce Coupe area the writer assumes represent 
atives of this Zone B. immediately above the Blairmore conglomerate 
along the southern Alberta foothills. To the south wherever the 
coal-formation contains a Lower Blairmore flora, whole or part of 
this Zone B. is considered to be extant. 

Age and Correlation 

The age of Zone B. is determined indirectly as no deter¬ 
minable fossils were disclosed by well-borings. There is a consid¬ 
erable flora associated with the Lower Blairmore, Luscar, and Geth- 
ing. It is known as the “Lower Blairmore flora 1 *. 

In his paper on the Jasper Park Coalfields, MacKay states 
(ref. 39, p.1340) "The flora content of the coal-bearing horizons of 
the Lower Cretaceous of Northwestern Alberta indicated....that they 

correspond in age.with the Blairmore formation (Lower Blairmore) 

..." From Brule coal field, Kindle lists a flora from the Luscar, 
(ref .35, p.191): 

Sagenopteris cf nervosa Fontaine 

Gingko arcticus (Heer) 

Anthrotaxopis grandis Fontaine 

Elatocladus smittiana (Heer) 

In the Canyon of the Peace River the following flora has 
been described by Berry from the Gething member of the Bullhead 



























. 1.7 





































71 


Mountain sandstone (ref.10, p.201-202). 

Oleandra graminaefolia Knowlton 
Oladophlebls sp 

Onychiopsis psilotoides (S & W) Ward 
Dicksoniopsis (?) sp 
Pterophyllum acutipennis (Heer) 

Milsonia nigracollensi s Wieland 
Milsonia sp 

Podozamites lanceolatus (L Sc H) Braun 
Sequoia smittiana Heer 
Inolepsis imbricata Heer 
Torreya dicksoniana Heer 
Ginkgo arctica Heer 

Berry states (ref.10, p.202) that he considers the Bullhead sandstone 
(Gething member) as more likely to represent the Lower part of the 
Blairmore than the Kootenay. 

Williams and Bocock report the following flora in the Geth¬ 
ing in addition (ref.101, d. 209) to the above list. Localities are 
not specified. 

Anthrotaxopis grandis 
Anthrotaxopis grandis (cone) 

Baiera palmata 


The fauna of the Lower Blairmore is scanty. Williams and 
Bocock report an Aucella? Pieuromya? and Belemnites from the Geth¬ 
ing? member in the Pine River area. (ref.101, p.210) 

From 230 to 520 feet above the base of the Blairmore, in 
the Blairmore area, McLeam reports (ref.57, p.92) 

Unio natosin i McLeam 
Unio hamili McLearn 
Gorbula Qnestae McLeam 
Corbula palliseri McLeam 
(Jnio douglassi Stanton 
Campeloma ? sp 
PIanorbis sp 

(ref.57, p.92) "The highest known invertebrate bearing bed is 230 
feet below an occurrence of the upper or dicotyledonous angiosperm 
























































72 


flora and 175 feet above the highest known occurrence. In tills sect¬ 
ion, of the lower or primitive flora, with very rare dicotyledonous 
an^lo sperms. f* (p.93) This fauna “is coeval with the lower r prim¬ 
itive flora". 

MacVicar reports Tancredia sp. (rei.42, p.47) from the 
(Luscar) north of the Athabaska. This betrays the extension of mar¬ 
ine "Luscar" in this area (Tp.57, range 7, W.6). 

The writer has collected a fauna from the upper part of the 
Gething formation in the Pine River area on Hasler Creek about 80 4- 
feet, below the top of the member which includes 

Pecten sp. 

Rhynchonella? sp. 

This restricted fauna has resulted in difficulty in dat¬ 
ing Lower Blairmore. The flora although abundant fails to give a 
proper dating of the formation and according to fAcLeam (ref.6l, 
p.162) "The dating of the Lower Blairmore flora on plant evidence 
alone is not satisfactory. Should the age of the Upper Blairmore 
flora be as old as Albian that of the Lower Blairmore is likely 
as old as Aptian". Considering the evidence offered by the Guardian 
well log the writer in this paper is considering the Lower Blairmore 
flora to be Early Aptian in age. The lower limits are not defined. 
The upper limits of the Lower Blairmore flora however are considered 
to be coeval with the upper McMurray fauna which is considered late 
Barremian — early Aptian. This places the upper limit of the Blair¬ 
more Zone B. close to the Barremian-Aptian contact. 

Blairmore Zone B. is considered to be entirely Gething age. 
Lower Blairmore flora time, and is bounded in the Pouce Coupe area 















- 73 - 

below by the Zone A. conglomerate and is overlain by a formation of 
loosely cemented sand and marine shale, into which it grades without 
any sign of disconformity. 

Blairmore Zone C. - McMurray? 

Introductory Statement 


In the Guardian well a series of loosely cemented quartz 
sands and apparently marine shales occupies a horizon between 3,770 
and 3,355 feet. This series is referred to the McMurray formation. 
For correlation purposes it is called Blairmore Zone C. in this pap¬ 
er. The McMurray was named in 1917 by McLeam ior its type section 
locality (ref.48, p.146). 

Lithology 

Underneath the Pouce Coupe area the Guardian well log has 


indicated the presence of a loosely cemented sand and shale sequence 
85 feet thick grading into a marine shale formation above at 3,770 
feet ana into a sandy formation with littoral aspects, below at 


3,355 feet. The lithology of Zone C. has been determined by cuttings 
taken at five foot intervals. It is as follows: (Guardian drilling 


depths in feet) 


3,770-3,775 

3,775-3,785 

3,785-3,790 

3,790-3,800 

3,300-3,805 

3,805-3,815 

3,815-3,330 

3,830-3,355 


Shale, dark grey with rusty spots with 10$ slightly 
calcareous fine milky quartz sandstone. 

Shale, dark grey with 30$ fine light grey calc, sand¬ 
stone. 

Sand, fine light grey to rust colored, with 30$ dark 
grey shale. 

Sand, fine white quartz, with 25$ dark grey shale. 
Sand, fine white to limonite stained, 10$ shale a few 
glauconitic grains present. 

Shale, hard dark grey, with 25$ fine calc ss 

Sand, medium fine grained white quartz, with 10$ dark 

grey shale 2$ white calcareous grains. 

Shale, hard dark grey with 43$ fine light sandstone 
and loosely cemented sand with little glauconite and 
calcareous grains. 

























74 


This gives eighty five feet thickness for Zone C. However, 
60 feet may be a closer estimate as the unconsolidated sand from 3,830- 
3,355 feet may be from cavings of the upper finer sands. The strik¬ 
ing feature of Zone C, is the unconsolidated or very loosely consol¬ 
idated condition of the sands. The sands themselves are made up in 
the main of clean quartz grains with the occasional small glauconite? 
grain and in the lower zones grains of a calcareous material in 
small percentage. A few of the quartz grains show a frosting effect. 

Unconsolidated sands are rare in the Lower Cretaceous of 
Alberta except for parts of the McMurrav formation known as "Bitum¬ 
inous sands". Except for the impregnation by bitumen of the latter, 
the pure silica sand residue is similar to these unconsolidated sands 
of Zone C. The transition from sandstones to medium-fine-grained 
sands to fine sands to a marine shale above suggests that these sands 
are a transition phase from littoral type sediments to marine condit- jj 
ions. 

Distribution 

In the Pouce Coupe area. Zone C. is known only from the 
cuttings of one well. Guardian #1. The thickness, 60 to 85 feet, 
is sufficient evidence to postulate some lateral extension of the 
Zone in the area. 

East of the Pouce Coupe district in wells drilled near 
Peace River town McLeam reports (ref.49, pp.15 & 20) a basal sand¬ 
stone coming in at the base of the Loon River shales. This section 
of basal sandstone is as follows, 

in Peace River Oils #1, Ls 4, sec.31, tp.85, range 20, .5, and. 

in Peace River Oils #2, Ls 16, sec.24, tp.35, range 21, .5. 










75 



#1 

#2 

shale 

_ 

___ 

Sandstone 

70* 

105* 

Shale 

53* 

14' 

Sandstone 

65» 

95* 

Shale 

12* 

Sandstone 

26* 


Shale with concretions 

51' 



Limestone - 

Peace River Oils number two is south of number one so the 
upper basal sand member thins going northward with the shale member 
becoming stronger. At the "great horseshoe bend" (lat 58) on the 
Peace the basal sand members have disappeared. 

In the Lesser Slave Lake area, in the log of the Inter¬ 
national Oils number 2, in sec.30, tp.75, range 6, W.5, there are 
beds between 1,800 - 1,830 feet (ref.34> p.251) recorded briefly as 
"brown sand with oil". This thin member in this log is considered 
by the writer to represent the Blairmore Zone C. Some or all of the 
grey shale underlying it (150 feet) may belong also to this zone. 

On the lower Athabaska and Clearwater rivers the McMurray 
formation outcrops. The McMurray is described by McLeam (ref.48, 
p.147) as being from 110 to 180 feet or more thick, mainly aren¬ 
aceous massive and cross-bedded, continental in the main with con¬ 
glomerate and more rarely clay and shale at the base; parts highly 
impregnated with bitumen. The formation outcrops along the Atha¬ 
baska river and tributaries from about 34 miles below MacKay settle¬ 
ment on the Athabaska to about 30 miles above McMurray on the Atha¬ 
baska. Seventy miles southwest of McMurray the formation has been 
encountered in a drill hole carrying the "tar sand 11 horizon. 

Blairmore Zone C. has not been recognized south of the 
Pouce Coupe area or west of it or noth of the area. 











Age and Correlation 


76 


f or: ti graphic position of Blairmore Zone C . is dr 
ed indirectly as no flora or fauna were determinable in the well log 
samples* 

There is however an extensive brackish water fauna assoc¬ 
iated with the McMurray formation and near the top a small marine 
fauna is reported* McLearn describes Astarte natos lni (ref.60,p.7) 
from the transition beds at the top of the McMurray formation. 
Russell describes a considerable non-marine fauna from the lower c- 
Murray including (ref.72) 

Unio biomatus Russell 
Murraia Uaiadiformis Russell 
V'iviparus Murrai en sis Russell 
Viviparus sp 

Lioplacodes bitumi nis Russell 
Melania mu1torbis Russell 
Goniobasis multi carinate . Russell 
Melampus athabascensis Russell 

McLearn assigns (ref.6l, p.159) a late Barremian age to 
the Astarte natosini fauna. Russell (ref.72, p.43) compares Unio 
biornatus with Unio haaili of the Blaimiore and Unio couglassi of 
the Blairmore. 

The writer suggests the McMurray formation is equivalent 
to the Upper part of the "Lower Blairmore flora" horizon. In 
support of this McLearn states (ref.57, p.92) the Unio hamili fauna 
of the Blairmore region is coeval with the Lower Blairmore flora 
but places the fauna as coeval with the upper part of the time 
range of the primitive flora. The correlation with the Luscar is 
undefined except the recognition of the Astarte natosini zone with¬ 
in the Luscar in the Bighorn Basin. The writer correlates the Me- 





























. 




























77 


Murray with the uppermoet part of the Gethinr formation in the Peace 
River Canyon area. 

In apparent confirmation of thin correlation with the 
upper part of the Gething formation there is an unique lithologic 
phenomenon. In the Lynn Creek test well north of Hudson Hope, 

Dresser (ref.27, p.J 12) reoorts the o of a two-foot bed of 

"tar clay," about 400* below the top of the Gething. Correlation 
with the Gething in this well is doubtful. 

Stratigraphically the position of Blairmore Zone C. may be ; 
summed up as lowermost Aptian, pre-Clearwater in time, pre-Loon Riv¬ 
er of the lower Peace river, pre-Moosebar, post-lowermost Lower Blair- 
more. 

Blairmore Zone L. Loon River Shale 

Introductory Statement 

Blairmore Zone D. is known in this area as a marine shale 
sequence appearing in the log of the Gua.rdian well #1 betv/een 3,320 
and 3,770 feet and is a westward extension of the Loon River shales. 
The Loon River shales were named, in 1893 b^ McConnell (ref.4&, p.410)« 
Blairmore Zone D. is considered a marine sequence contemporaneous in 
the main part with the formations listed: Loon river formation of 
the lower Peace river; the Moosebar formation of the upper Peace Riv¬ 
er Canyon "type-section”; the Clearwater shale of the lower Athabaska 
. 

river area. 

Lithology 

Under the Pouce Coupe area, a marine shale sequence, 450 
feet thick, sandy towards the top, is bounded on the bottom at 3,770 















- 78 - 

feet by an unconsolidated sand series that grades into the marine 
shales transitionally through a few thin calcareous sandstone members. 
The top of tlie shales is placed arbitrarily at the base of 60 foot 
group of thick re sandstone units. That this line if ’css 

arbitrary is indicated by the presence of a long transition zone at 
the tope of the shales that finally culminates in these massive sand¬ 
stones. A lor of Zone L'. shows the nature of the transition very well 
Lithology of Zone D. is taken from the Guardian well lor (based on 
cutting samples taken at intervals of five feet) 

(drilling depths in feet) 


3,320-3,330 


3,330-3,360 

3,360-3,370 

3,370-3,378 

3,378-3,389 


3,389-3,400 
3,400-3,460 


3,460-3,470 


3,470-3,500 

3,500-3,565 

3,565-3,585 

3,585-3,625 

3,625-3,655 

3,655-3,750 

3,750-3,770 


Shale, dark grey to grey brown, with 25$ light grey fine 
calcareous sandstone. 

Shale, dark grey, with 10$ calcareous siltstone. 
Sandstone very fine light grey calcareous, with 40$ 
dark grey shale. 

Shale, dark grey, with 10$ light grey calc.siItstone. 
Shale, dark grey to olive brown, with 10$ fine green¬ 
ish grey sandstone. 

Shale, dark grey, with 10% fine limonite stained sand¬ 
stone. 

Shale, dark grey fissile marine, carrying a little 
pyrite, and thin calc zones. 

Shale, dark grey fissile, with 30$ grey argillaceous 
siltstone. 

Shale, dark grey fissile, with 10$ grey calcareous 
siltstone. 

Shale, dark grey slightly fissile, with small pyrites. 
Shale, dark grey, with 5$ grey slightly calcareous 
siltstone. 

Shale, dark grey, with 5$ olive brown calcareous shale 
and 5$ calcareous siltstone. 

Shale, dark grey, with 10$ grey siltstone. 

Shale, dark grey hard, with 10$ olive brown calc shale. 
Shale, dark grey, with 10$ very fine rusty grey calc 
sandstone. 


The lower transition zone is around twenty feet thick and 


the upper transition zone showing contamination by sand is around 
180 feet thick. However the shale in all this has a marine appear- 









79 


This lithology is similar to McLeam*s description of the 
Loon River . (rei. ' , .15). "T1 ey consist of dar 

...shale...The contact (oi the Peace River formation) with the Loon 
River shales is arbitrarily chosen being marked by a gradual transit¬ 
ion from bedded sandstone and shale to shale below". McLeam consid¬ 
ers the shale to replace the sandstone at this contact laterally, the 
contact rising stratigraphically, northward. 

Distribution 

The distribution of Zone D. is easily traced eastward and 
to the west and may be traced for considerable distance northward 
but is indeterminate to the south where finer lithologic divisions 
have not been made. 

Within the Pouce Coupe area the formation is known ohly 
from the log of the Guardian well Lsd.7, sec.7, tp.80, range 12, 

W.6 and from the log of the Northwest well, Lsd.7, sec.26, tp.80, 
range 13, W.6. The log of the Guardian has been discussed above, 
and at the Northwest well Zone G. was probably entered at about 
2,733 feet and drilling stopped at 3,057 feet v/ithin the shales. 

East of the Pouce Coupe area at Peace River town the 
Zone has been penetrated by several drill holes where it is kno?m 
as the Loon River shales. About 11 wells have penetrated the shales 
in this area along the Peace river from the town of Peace River to 
Peace River Petroleums #2 and #3 in Lsd.9, sec.28, tp.87, range 20, 

W.5. Further north fhe formation is known by its outcrops along the 
Peace river from lat.57 to Vermilion chutes. McLeam gives it a 
thickness at Lat.58 on the Peace of around 400 feet (ref.49, p«15). 
Southward in the Peace River Oils #1 well Lsd.l6, sec.24, to.85, 














80 


range 21, W.5, he records a thickness of 1,100 feet for the Loon 
River formation. 

Farther east the Clearwater shale represents Zone D. on 
the Athabaska river where it has a thickness of about 275 feet (ref. 
63, p.139). The shales are known in this region from 'loose River neai 
MacKay settlement to Tp. 86 on the Athabaska above McMurray. 

At Pelican Rapids on Athabaska river, sec.6, tp.77, range 
17, W.4, boreholes have penetrated the Clearwater shales and record 
a thickness of around 285 feet (ref.25, p.8l). 

In the lesser Slave Lake area the log of the International 
Oils #2 well, as given by Hume (ref.34, p-2.51) leads the writer to 
postulate a thickness of 210 feet for the Loon River shales in this 
area. 

At Athabaska, sec.21, tp.66, range 22, W.4 the thickness 
of Clearwater shale is given as 279 plus feet (ref.25, P-79). 

Wickenden has found the Clearwater Zone in southern Sask¬ 
atchewan (ref.97, p.192). This is in the Muddy Lake well Tp.39, 
range 22, W.3, and indicates the wide extent of the "Clearwater" sea. 

North of the Pouce Coupe area, Cameron reports (ref.13, 
p.27) "soft fissile dark shales of Cretaceous age are exposed in the 
valley of Hay River at intervals throughout the distance between the 
sixth meridian and Grumbler rapids....closely resemble the Loon Riv¬ 
er shales." The thickness is not given. He calls these the Meander 
shales. 

From the Northwest Territories Warren on fossil evidence 
reports (ref.90) the presence of Clearwater on the Mackenzie River 
four miles south of Carcajou rock below Fort Norman. 






81 


In the mountains on the v/est side of the Peace River Block 
Zone D. represc y the Moosebar shale of BOO feet thickness and 

extends to the south with no diminishing of thickness, in the Pine 
River area on Hasler Creek. 

South of the area and north of the Athabaska there is no 
mention made of this shale member and as far as can be determined 
has not been recognized by any faunal zone. South of the Athabaska 
a like condition obtains. 

Age and Correlation 


The stratigraphic position of Zone D. has been determined 

by correlation with the Loon River and Clearwater formations. 

According to McLeam (ref. 63 , p.139) the fauna of the 

Clearwater has been dated Aptian on the basis of the Deshavesites 

ammonoid. The faunule is entirely marine and contains 

Deshayesites mcconnelli (Whiteaves) 

Deshayesites n sp xxx 
Deshayesites n sp 

Beu dan tic eras affine (Irihiteaves) xx 

Nucula athabaskensis McLeam x 

loldia kissoumi McLearn x 

Inoceramus dowlingi McLeam 

Bntolium irenen se McLeam x 

Pecten alcesianus McLeam 

Camptonectes matonabbei McLeam 

Brachydontes athabaskensis McLeam 

Gonioraya matonabbei McLearn 

Psilomya oeteroondi McLeam x 

Psilomya elongatissima McLearn 

Arctica Limpidiana McLeam 

Protocardia alcesiana McLeam 

Integricardium (Onestia) onestae McLeam x 

Beilina dowlin^i McLeam x 

Tumus lacombi McLeam 

x - occurs also in the lower member of the Peace 
River sandstone 

xx - occurs also in the basal part of the lower 
Peace River sandstone (ref.58, p.6) 
xxx - occurs in the Loon River formation also 












































- 82 - 


The contact with the overlying sandstone rises toward the 
east as well as to the north. The thickening of the overlying sand¬ 
stone in the Fine River area and the thickness of Zone E. in the 
Pouce Coupe area suggests that the upper contact lowers toward the 
west in a faunal sense. Since the Clearwater fauna extends over a 
considerable depositional period it may be assumed that the Zone D. of 
Pouce Coupe area includes only the lower oart of the Clearwater shale 
and in like manner the central part of the Loon River shales. 

The correlation with the Moosebar shale place Zone D, post- 
Gething in age and therefore post-Lower Blaimore flora in age. The 
age of the Moosebar was determined, by its position in its type sect¬ 
ion at Contact Point in the Peace River Canyon, as immediately post- 
Gething in age. The Fine River expression of the Moosebar is slight¬ 
ly thicker but is considered to have approximately the same time 
range. No fossils have been found in the Moosebar shale, proper. 

Further to the south this horizon has not been located and 
as apparently the shale member in the mountain region of the Peace 
River district has a scarcity of fauna, this may be the case also 
further south, and for that reason has not been recognized to the 
south. 

The stratigraphic position of Blairmore Zone D. is summed 
up as Aptian age, pre-Albian (pre -Beudanticeras affine ref.58, p.6) 
and post-Astarte Natosini, pre-Peace River formation, post McMurray 
formation, post Gething formation ana post-Lower Blairmore flora 
time. 












- 83 - 


Blalrmore Zone E. 


Introductory Statement 

A sandstone formation 1,000 feet thick betv/een 2,320 and 
3,320 feet in the Guardian well log is here denoted Blairmore Zone E. 
The author has recognized it in outcrop as a separate formation only 
in one place, viz, Hasler Creek in the Pine River area. This Blair- 
more Zone E. is a sandy marine to continental sequence correspond¬ 
ing more closely with the Peace River formation although the former 
is considered to have a much longer time range. 
lithology 


A thousand foot sandy formation bounded on top and bottom 
by marine shales appears in the log of the Guardian well between 
2,320 and 3,320 feet. It is transitional with the marine shales be¬ 
low as might be expected as the lower part of the formation is marine, 
and has a sharply defined contact with the overlying marine beds. 


The lithology of this Zone is based on cutting samples taken at five 
foot intervals and cores from the Guardian well, and the upper 150 


feet is taken from the Northwest well log. 
(Guardian drilling depths in feet) 


2,320-2,322 

2,322-1,745 

2,345-2,360 

2,360-2,365 

2,365-2,385 


2,385-2,395 

2,395-2,425 

2,425-2,485 


Sandstone, fine grained light grey silicibus. 

Sandstone, light grey argillaceous. 

Sandstone, light grey silicious, with some shale. 
Sandstone, light brown very fine grained. 

Sandstone, fine light brown, with 50% clay shale, dark 
grey. 

Shale, dark grey compact. 

Sandstone, dark brown, with 50% interlensing shale. 
Shale, dark grey to sandy, interlensing and alternating 
with 10% light grey calcareous sandstone, poorly bedded, 
continental looking. 




















































: 


























- 84 - 


2,485-2,520 


amount of sandy 


2,520 

2,575 


-2,575 

-2,590 


2,590 

2,605 

2 , 610 . 


-2,605 

■ 2,610 

• 2,612 


2,612 

2,625 


2 , 678 - 

2,684- 

2,700- 

2,715- 

2,740- 

2,747- 

2,801- 

2,845- 


Shale, dark grey sandy, with a decreasin 
contamination. 

Shale, dark grey soft marine looking. 

Shale, dark grey with pyrites and liraonite stained sandy 
shale. 

Shale, dark grey silty with some siltstone. 

Shale, dark grey sandy with 40% li^ht grey calc sandstone, 
Coal seam, very dirty 26l0»4"-3" dirty coal 

2610*8"- pelecypods and pyrite 
2611*2"- 4" clean coal 
-2,625.5 Sandstone, medium to fine slightly gritty light grey. 
5-2,629 Shale, carbonaceous - Pelecypods and Dyrite at top, 3 n 
of coal at 2628*7". 

Sandstone, medium to fine grained made up in part of 
small greenish chert grains, greenish grey with brown 
grey zone at top, calcareous, with plant remains rare 
shale lenses. 

Sandstone, fine grey, with 50% intercalated dark shale. 
Shale, black, with 10% fine grey siltstone. 

Sandstone, grey calcareous, with 20% interbedded shale. 


2,629-2,678 


•2,684 

■2,700 

■2,715 

-2,740 

■2,747 

•2,801 

•2,845 

•2,865 


Shale, dark grey silty, with a little fine sandstone. 


2,865- 

2 , 880 - 

2,935- 

2,940- 


2,950- 


2,975- 

2 , 980 - 

3,007- 


•2,880 

•2,935 

■2,940 

•2,950 

■2,975 

• 2,980 

■3,007 

•3,015 


3,015- 

3,029- 


■3,029 

•3,037 


3,037- 

3,050- 

3,090- 

3,095- 

3,190- 

3,230- 

3,235- 

3 , 260 - 


•3,050 

■3,090 

•3,095 

•3,190 

■3,230 

•3,235 

• 3,260 

•3,320 


Sandstone, light grey very calcareous, with siltstone. 
Siltstone, and silty shales, a little pyrite. 

Shale, dark grey soft, with some siltstone. 

Sandstone, light grey, with 45% intercalated dark grey 
clay shale. 

Shale, dark grey with some siltstone. 

Sandstone, siltstone and shale in alternating sequence. 
Sandstone, glauconitic slightly calcareous brown. 
Sandstone, light grey fine calcareous, with 20% shale. 
Shale, dark grey, with 15% siltstone. 

Sandstone, fine grey with pyritiferous shale. 

Shale, dark grey silty with 10% siltstone. 

Sandstone, medium grained green grey glauconitic with 
two small rows of black chert pebbles between 3,010 and 
3,011. Upper row pebbles to J", lower row to J". 
Sandstone, calcareous light grey to brown, 5% shale. 
Sandstone, grey argillaceous with carbonaceous shale and 
lignitic inclusions. 

Shale, dark grey with 5% siltstone. 

Shale, dark grey with 35% light grey fine sandstone. 
Sandstone, light grey calcareous with siltstone. 
Sandstone, and shale interbedded. 

Shale, dark grey with 15% fine grey calc sandstone. 
Sandstone, calcareous sandstone with 30% dark grey shale. 
Shale, dark grey to olive brown with 10% siltstone. 
Sandstone, light grey calcareous with shale varying in 
content from 35% to 5% and back to 35k. 














{ 










































a con- 


- 85 - 

This sandstone formation changes in character, from 
tinehtal and littoral appearance from 2,320 to 3,037 feet to a more 
marine development below. There seems to be a marine phase between 
2,801 and 2,880 leet that may extend even higher into the sandstone. 
Many of the sandstones described as "sandstone and shale" are in 
reality a series of beds around 12" thick that have a fine sand base 
and grade upward through siltstone and silty shale to a dark grey 
shale top. 

Distribution 

The term Blairmore Zone E. is used as the formation has 
been recognized only in part in other areas, or is partially elim¬ 
inated by the chsfee from continental to marine depositional condit¬ 
ions with a consequent reduction in the percentage of the coarser 
detrital material. 

The horizon has been recognized in the Pouce Coupe area 
in the logs of two wells, viz., the Northwest well (Lsd.15, sec.23, 
tp.80, range 13, W.6) and the Guardian well (lsd.7, sec.7, tp.80, 
range 13, W.6). There is no change of any import in either thick¬ 
ness or lithology to be noted. The thickness in this area is l,000 f . 

East of this region the sandstone unit thins and at Peace 
River town is known as the Peace River formation. The similarity 
in lithology is shown here. McLearn reports (ref.49, pp.15-16) "the 
formation consists of two sandstone members with an intervening 
shale member....A discontinuous lignite seam is found near the top 
in some localities....The thickness of this upper member (near Peace 

River town) is 130 feet but due to replacement by shale above it 



























. 













- 36 - 


thins northward and near the mouth of Gadotte river is only 90 feet 
thick. At this locality the freshwater sandstone of the south is re¬ 
placed by bedded sandstone and shale with marine fossils....The middle 
shale is blue black friable shales of probably marine origin. The 
thickness is 30 feet. The lower sandstone member (has a) top which 
may be subaerial but the lower part is certainly marine." About Tp. 

96 on the Peace River the thickness of the lower member is about 160 
feet and to the north near Carcajou the thickness is reduced to 
around 20 feet. 

On Hay River a few miles below the 6th meridian Cameron re¬ 
ports the Peace River sandstone to be 25 feet thick (ref.13, p.27). 

On the lower Athabaska river the formation is represented 
in fractional form by the Grand Rapids sandstone which in the upper 
part is non-marine with a discontinuous lignite seam and has a mar¬ 
ine base. A thickness of 280 feet is given for the formation, (ref. 
48, p.146). 

West of the Pouce Coupe area in the Peace River Canyon the 
Zone is present although not recognized in full by McLeam who named 
the very uppermost member of Zone E. the Gates sandstone and gave a 
thickness of around 50 - 80 feet for the formation. This figure is 
assumed by the writer to be in error as later work by McLeam re¬ 
vealed the presence of this Zone strongly developed although McLeam 
himself assumed it to be merely an arenaceous phase of the basal 
St. Joh, i.e., above the Gates. The writer holds that this entire 
phase is below the Gates sandstone. 

In the Pine River area of the foothills this Zone is fully 











- 87 - 


developed to around 1,000 feet or more in thickness where it was 
erroneously considered by Williams and Bocock (ref.99) to be the top 
of the Bullhead formation. It is continental for the upper three 
hundred feet in the Pine River area anc becomes marine below. 

South in the Smoky River Coal Reserve region, MacVicar 
(ref.42, p.34) reports thickness of 3,000 feet for the Sunset sand¬ 
stone. This thickness here may arise from inclusion of this Zone E, 
plus the St. John with the Dunvegan? 

Northward this stratigraphic zone has been shown to be part¬ 
ially present by Warren who reports Beaudanticeras cf affine (Whit- 
eaves) from the north shore of Keith arm on Great Bear Lake N.W.T. 
(ref.90, p.l) and from MacKenzie River four miles south of Carcajou 
roc:: below Fort Norman, N.W.T. From Little Bear River, N.W.T., Hume 
pictures a large Inoceramus ( cadottensis? ) that may also be indicat¬ 
ive of the presence of Zone E. (ref.32, p.4) 

Age and Correlation 

The stratigraphic position of this Zone E. is determined by 
interpolation from the faunal evidence to the east and to the west. 

In the Pouce Coupe area the only fauna collected from this zone 
occurs in the Guardian well at 2,610 feet and 2,621 feet. It is 
Unio sp. and is not diagnostic. 

From the lower Peace river section we have the following 
fauna listed from the Pease River sandstone (ref.60, p.l). 

From the upper Sandstone* 

Gastroplites canadensis (Whiteaves) 

Gastroplites canadensis var.?4cLeam 

Gastroplites allani McLeam 




















- 38 - 


Gastroplites stanton i McLeam 
Gastroplites anguinus McLeam 
Gastroplites spiekeri McLeam 
Trigonia albertensl s McLeam 
Dicranadonta dowlinrj McLeam 
Cyprina sp 
Starfishes 

Inoceramus cadottensis .McLeam (probably) 

From the lower Sandstone member: 

Beudanticeras affine (Whiteaves) 

Beudanticeras glabrum (Whiteaves) 

Pinna curvjmarginata .cLeam 
lellina aowlinri McLeam 
Oxytoma camselli McLeam 
Eemodon mcconnelli McLearn 

On the basis of the above faunule the upper sandstone mem¬ 
ber is dated early Albian (ref.60, p.4). The Beudanticeras fauna of 
the Lower sandstone dates the basal part as late Aptian. Referred 
to Zone E. the lower part of the upper 481 feet is dated early Al¬ 
bian and the bottom 283 feet is late Aotian. 

The fauna of the lower sandstone member of the Peace River 
formation is similar to that of the upper part of the Clearwater 
shale so the lower sandstone of the Peace River formation is assumed 
to be absent in a lithologic sense although present in a shaley facies. 
The Grand Rapids sandstone of the Athabaska area is therefore consid¬ 
ered to be equivalent to the upper member only of the Peace River 
formation, but entirely or nearly so. 

In the foothills and mountains to the west we have evid¬ 
ence of the existence of a portion of the Blairmore Zone D. In the 
Peace River Canyon, McLeam reports (ref.62, p.l) Gastroolites kingi 
McLeam from n the lower part of the St« John shale"• The writer 




suggests that it comes from the upper part of a sandy Zone E. fully 




































- 39 - 


developed in the canyon and below the St. John shales and below the 
Gates sandstone. It is accomoanied in this locality by Inoceramu s cf 
cadottensis McLeam and a starfish. This represents the marine Dhase 
oi the upper yart of Zone £• and the marine phase of the uooer peace 
River sandstone. The continental phase or shore phase of the Upper 
Peace River sandstone is assumed to be present here although it has 
not been recorded. The Gates sandstone in its type section is con¬ 
sidered to be equivalent to the upper 65 feet of Blairmore Zone E 
and to be included in the St. John shales out in the Peace River area 
having wedged out in the next hundred miles eastward. The Lower 
Peace River sandstone fauna has not been recorded from the Canyon area. 

In the Pine River area the author has found a full develop¬ 
ment of the Blairmore Zone E. Below the St. John formation in this 
area there is a strong conglomerate near Commotion Creek. Williams 
and Bocock (ref.37) refer to this as the top of the Bullhead 'ountain 
formation in the Pine River area. The author has collected evidence 
to demonstrate the error of this. This fifty foot bed of chert con¬ 
glomerate is correlated with the massive sandstone between 2,629 
and 2,673 feet in the Guardian well, stratigraphically and lith¬ 
ologically. Above tne conglomerate are a few thin coal seams and 
plant remains which are correlated with iiie coal at 2,610 in the 
Guardian well and with the thin discontinuous lignite seam reported 
at the top of both the Upper Peace River sandstone and at the top 
of the Grande Raoids sandstone. The Gates sandstone is considered 
to be present in the Pine River area as a sandstone band 200 feet 
over the conglomerate (ref.101, p.211). 100 feet below the con- 






























i . ' J 






























- 90 - 


glomerate at Commotion Creek the author has collected Inoceramus cf 
cadottensis l.lcLearn and Gastroolites sp (near sp. kinri ). On Healer 
Creek the base of the Blairmore Zone E is exposed and the total thick¬ 
ness of the Zone here is around 1,000 feet. From the lower bands of 
sandstone near the base the writer collected several pelecypods none 
considered diagnostic. 

To the south the absence of fossils in the Mountain park 
sandstone limits correlations in this direction, but it is suggested 
here that the thickness of the Sunset sandstone (ref.42,0.34) (3,000*) 
is due to the fact that Blairmore Zone E extends into these areas and 
is included with the Dunvegan formation to make an Upper Lower Cret¬ 
aceous sandstone. 

The stratigraphic position of Blairmore Zone D is summed 
up as late Aptian—early Albian, ( Beudanticeras affine-Gastroplites ). 
pre-St. John (of the type section), post-Moosebar (of the type sect¬ 
ion) . 

Blairmore Zone F. St. John Formation 

Introductory Statement 

The St. John formation is the oldest formation that out¬ 
crops v/ithin the Pouce Coupe area. It is designated in this area 
specifically as Blairmore Zone F as a stratigraphic unit for correl¬ 
ation purposes. It was named by C-. M. Lawson in 1893 for its type 
section near Fort St. John, B. C. (ref.18). 

The Blairmore Zone F of this region is a marine sequence 




considered, contemporaneous in part with the following formations: 
St. Join, formation of t m peace river sections. 




















- 91 - 


and the Pelican shale of 
Lithology 


The St* John is a marine shale formation in the Pouce Coupe 

area about 1,300 feet in thickness. It grades rather abruptly below 

into the Gates sandstone and transitionally above through a series of 

siltstones into the overlying Dunvegan sandstone. These siltstones 

in the main are included in the overlying Dun vegan formation as they 

tend to carry considerable carbonaceous material. In logging of 

wells it is a common practice to cell siltstones, sandstones and this 

practice is responsible for the placing of the boundary. The Dunveran- 

St. John Boundary as used in field work is probably slightly higher. 

In the Guardian well the Fort St. John formation is 1,272 

feet thick, in the Northwest well it is 1,275 feet. The following 

description is from an unpublished log of the Northwest well. 

45 feet - Shale, dark grey hard 
20 feet - Shale, dark grey soft 
30 feet - Shale, bluish grey 
10 feet - Shale, blue grey soft 
20 feet - Shale, blue grey hard 
160 feet - Shale, blue grey soft 
40 feet - Shale, dark grey gritty 
40 feet - Shale, blue grey hard 
110 feet - Shale, dark blue grey (easily weathers to clay) 

180 feet - Shale, dark grey sandy 

240 feet - Shale, dark grey,(easily weathers to clay) 

50 feet - Shale, hard, dark grey 
220 feet - Shale, dark grey,(easily weathers to clay) 

110 feet - Shale, dark blue grey hard 

The cross section of the formation shows an upper zone of 

clean shale of 285 feet, with a 40-fcot sandy zone below; a 150-foot 

thickness of shale separates the upper sandy zone from the lower 
sandy belt of ISO feet. The basal member is 620 feet of clay- 















- 92 - 


weathering shale, fair G&n• in outcrop the shales are soft, 
thin—bedded with ironstone nodules and concretions oresent in li r>ri 
and zones. 

Distributio n 

This shale formation is known only from Northern Alberta. 
The St. John shale is not present at Lnite entity in southern 

Alberta and it is suggested that it represents the deposition in a 
boreal sea with no sea-way connections southward. 

The formation is considered to underly the whole of the 
Pouce Coupe area with a slight thinning toward the east. The upper 
part outcrops along the Peace river from the western boundary of the 
map area to the eastern boundary of the map area with the exception 
of a few miles above and below the mouth of Pouce Coupe river where 
the gentle dips along the river have brought the Dunvegan formation 
down to water level exposing only the transition zone. The St. John 
formation is probably cut here by the river channel itself but ex¬ 
cept at low-water is not exposed. The St. John formation is also ex¬ 
posed along the tributaries of the Peace in British Columbia. Less 
than a mile up from the mouth of Alces River the Dunvegan hides the 
outcrops of St. John as the stream bed rises. About ten miles up the 
Kiskatinaw river the southerly dip brings the Dunvegan down to elim¬ 
inate the shale outcrops. Beatton river carries the shale in its 
valley outcrops for its extent on the map area. One other import¬ 
ant outcropping of the Fort St. John formation within the mao sheet 
must be mentioned. This is the occurrence in the upper valley of 
Kiskatinaw river in the south half of Tp. 79 the nortn naif of 







' 


. 









































. 



F. Basal Dunvegan formation, outcropping In 
road-cut on north side of Peace river near 
the rnouth of Alces river. View looking east 
with Peace river in right middle distance. 



G. Upper St.John formation outcropping on 
the north side of Peace river near the site 
of old Fort St. John (range 19) 






H. St. John shales outcropping on the north 
bank of Peace river below the raout; of Cache 
creek (range line 20-21),700 feet expose^. 



.II UTAlH 







.1 

- 9 ; fq c I r ebxs r!j ion no iuo-bjBox. 
- ' nx^CooI well' . :9vii s9olA “lo riiuora srfi 
.eor- bJ-^x ■ #I^bxm id§xx nb T9vxx sobs'! riJiw 



:o M'iccoioluo noil, titoj ftrioL.IB T9gcrU .0 
six s rT^ :.p.en xevxx sobsSE Io sbxs dixon 9db 
(€1 s’gttPT) ndol .18 ixol bio io 



J: r o 09 .C .dp nrioL .13 .H 

; tjor; 9■ i wolocf xsvi’i 90 B 9 SC Io :InBcf 
• ' 'V < • I‘ 8 onxl on.6i) ^ssxo 















- 93 - 


Tp. 78 where a structural high exposes the shales. Large ammonites 
( MeoiLfistronlit.e s?) are associated with this outcrop. (M. Y. W. 

personal comm.) 

In connection with the distribution of outcrops in these 
areas it should be borne in mind that glacial and post-glacial drift 
obscures a large number of these potential exposures of bedrock. 

West of the area the formation distribution is taken from 
Williams and Bocock (ref.101, p.210). "The Pine river valley is main¬ 
ly i n "the shale, (except for) • • •...the vicinity of Commotion Creek, 
and Dunvegan sandstone forms the canyon above East Pine. Moberly 
Lake and the plains to the north and west of Moberly and the lower 
Pine Rivers and the valley of the Halfway River are on Fort St. John 
shales." It is also along the Peace to the Canyon. The thickness in 
the Pine River area is about 1,300 feet. 

East of the area the St. John outcrops to where the Peace 
valley crosses the north boundary of Tp.Bl. The southern dip of the 
strata brings the Dunvegan down to form a hiatus in the outcroppings 
and they reappear on the east side of Range 2 on the Peace, (ref.8). 
From here they outcrop along the Peace to Peace River town and up the 
Smoky river to the center of Township 79 (ref.75, p.l6). North of 
Peace River town the formation rises in the banks and it must be 
considered that a large portion of the plains between McMurray and 
Carcajou are underlain by shales of this age. The thickness as re¬ 
ported by Rutherford on the Smoky is around 600 feet (ref.75, n.17). 

On the Athabaska River the Pelican shales are considered 
the same age as 1 . John shales and here then/ have a thickness 












- 94 - 

of ninety feet (ref.48 , d.146 ). 

South of the Pouce Coupe area on the Wapiti River, Evans 
and Caley report (ref.29, p.40) a band of shales that they refer 
to the St. John formation but give no thickness. 

South of the Wapiti, these shales neither enter the lit¬ 
erature as St. John shales, nor by any other name. 

Age and Correlation 

The age of the St* John shale is determined byfossils, 
found in the upper part of the St. John shale, near Fort St. John, 
British Columbia. 

This fauna includes heopastroolites cornutus (Whiteaves) 
and Neogastroplites selwyni McLearn, considered late Albian in ape. 
McLearn also records Nuculi dowlinpi McLearn and Inoceramus nahwisi 
McLearn and fish scales (ref.60, p.4)• Dr. Rutherford has collected 
marine vertebrate (reptile) remains and fish scales 250 feet up from 
the base of the St. John at Judah near Peace River town (R.L.R.pers 
comm)• The writer has collected only one small pelecypod from the 
St. John (barring the uppermost transition beds) in his studies of 
outcrops of the formation. Fish scales are found in the formation 
at Taylor landing just abfcve the heogastroplites cornutus fauna 
(ref.101, p.218). 

This formation, although considered marine, is very un¬ 
productive of fossil remains. Farther west where the formation con¬ 
tains a higher percentage of coarser elastics the formation is notice¬ 
ably carbonaceous suggesting that the deoosition of this formation 












. 

' 












J 

. 











- 95 - 


may be contemporaneous with continental deposits to the southwest. 
At any rate the disappearance of this formation southward could be 
easily brought about by change of detrital coarseness and the lack 
of fossil evidence would not establish the zone otherwise. 

The stratigraphic position of Blairmore Zone F may be 
summed up as late Lower Cretaceous, late Albian, post-early Albian, 
post-Gates, post-Peace River formation, pre-Dunvegan. 










- 96 - 


Upper Cretaceous 


General ..Statement 

The Upper Cretaceous of southern and central Alberta 
foothills is of two main parts, a lower marine section, the Alberta 
shale, and an upper continental arenaceous group, the Belly River 
and Edmonton formations. The upper 200 feet of the Blairmore has 
been assigned an Upper Cretaceous age and provides an arenaceous 
introduction to the Upper Cretaceous. A similar sequence of form¬ 
ations is found in the Peace River area; an arenaceous base, the 
Dunvegan formation; a marine sequence, the Smoky River formation, 
(composed of Lower Smoky River (Kaskapau), Badheart sandstone, 
and Upper Smoky River shales; and an upper continental succession 
of beds, the Wapiti formation. There is no unconformity with the 
underlying Lower Cretaceous formation, the St. John shales, and 
the boundary is transitional. 

Dunvegan Formation 
Introductory Statement 

The Dunvegan formation is completely exposed within the 
Pouce Coupe area. The basal members are known from outcroppings 
along the Peace and the upper members from the Pouce Coupe and 
tributary canyons. The formation was named Dunvegan sandstone, by 
G. M. Dawson in 1881 (ref. 18, p.H5B) for the type section at Dun¬ 


vegan 



















- 97 - 


The Dunvegan formation in the Pouce Coupe area with limits as de¬ 
fined in this paper is considered to be generally correlated with the 
Dunvegan of the Peace River foothills and the Dunvegan of the Smoky 
river and Dunvegan areas. It has been correlated by McLeam with 
the Pelican sandstone of the lower Athabaska river. 

Lithology 


The Dunvegan is a continental to marine formation with a 
thickness of 765 feet. This figure is an approximation as in no 
place has a complete section been measured and the lensing charact¬ 
er of the sandstones and the lack of definite boundary with the over- 
lying and underlying marine shales make correlations of discrete hor¬ 


izons difficult. The formation thickens westward by a few feet per 
mile.. The section given below is adapted from the log of the Batch- 
ell er well (Sec.24, tp.79, range 12, W.6th) as compiled by the Pet¬ 


roleum and Natural Gas division, Department of Lands and Mines, Al¬ 
berta, (copy to J.E.Morrow) 


Figures below refer to Batcheller well with drilling depths 


in feet) 


563 

563- 

566 

566 - 

580 

580 - 

592 

592- 

605 

605- 

679 

679- 

684 

684- 

723 

723- 

728 

728 - 

778 

778- 

782 

782- 

796 

796- 

806 


Top of Dunvegan. 

Shale, grey, with numerous lenses of grey sandstone, 
traces of glauconite. 

Shale, grey and sandstone lenses with plant remains. 
Shale, dark grey sandy and shale. 

Shale, grey with coarse grained sandstone, plant re¬ 
mains. 

Shale, dark grey marine looking with sandstone lenses. 
Sandstone, fine, green grey little shale. 

Shale, sandy dark grey with alternations of fine grey 
cross-bedded sandstone. 

Shale, dark grey marine looking. 

Siltstones, grey with lenses of sandstone and shale. 
Sandstone, and shale with plant remains. 

Shale, dark grey marine looking. 

Sandstone, grey fine grained with ironstone nodules at 
top. 









PLATS III 



[« >un vegan - nds o > tcropping on the 
north bank of Peace river near the mouth of 
Alces river; a close up of the basal Dun- 
vegan (first escarpment up from river) is 
illustrated in Plate II. V. 


J. Dunvegan sandstone outcropping in the 
Pouce Coupe river canyon, across the river 
from the Northwest Well location. The 
vertical dark streaks show the locations 
of springs from the sandy beds. 



K. Dunvegan sandstone outcropping in the 
Pouce Coupe river canyon. View looking east 
from hill back of the Northwest well location. 








en: no qoiodxr$ moJbMbb nagevnjjCi ,1 
"v. : or. erfd t. on Tsvii 9.0ae c l 10 >Inac/ -rid - ion 

) . ; • 

o r/ .II sd,nH ni: Jbe^a’id’auIIi 






■ 






©rid ni gnxqqoiod'jjo enodabnr© nagevnifCI 

' ll otqb t no o xevxx ecnoO ©olto^ 
rli . noidnool 119 W daewridxoM ©rid moil 
? no Id ©or. I ©rfd Forfa rlaexda ;{x,fb laoidiev 
• a^Brf vbnna ©rid moil agnixoa lo 






in ■ od ■:. • o :■ - /n mj(i .II 
• fiY •novn.'.'o tbvxt eqxroO eonoSi 
r . id lo :-[oacf Iliri moil 





















- 98 - 


806- 816 

Shale, dark grey marine looking, little glauconite 
and pelecypods. 

816 - 846 

Sandstone, and siltstones and shales interbedded coaly 
material 827 - 828. 

846- 901 

Sandstone, fine green grey with siltstones and coaly 
shale at 850, coarse bed at bottom. 

901- 932 

Shale, silty with bands of siltstone, ironstone band 
at 910, plant remains 911, 6" dirty coal at 919. 

932- 934 
934- 980 

Sandstone, medium to coarse green grey pepper and salt. 
Shale, and sandy shales, green to green grey, plant re¬ 
mains. 

980- 981 

981- 1,003 
1,003-1,006 

Sandstone, medium to coarse green grey pepper and salt. 
Shale, sandy green grey, 4 n coal at 983* 

Sandstone, medium-coarse grained green grey pepper and 
salt. 

1,006-1,027 

1,027-1,033 

1,033-1,043 

1,043-1,062 

1,062-1,080 

Shales, sandy green to green grey, little sandstone. 
Sandstone, medium grained green grey cross bedded. 
Shale, soft green grey to grey carbonaceous at top. 
Shale, sandy grey, glauconite and Ostrea.sp. 

Sandstone, fine grained grey and green grey, some sandy 
shale. 

1,080-1,106 

Shale, grey marine looking sandy at top with varied 
pelecypod fauna. 

1.106- 1,107 

1.107- 1,116 
1,116-1,129 
1,129-1,160 
1,160-1,165 
1,165-1,167 
1,167-1,184 
1,184-1,197 
1,197-1,199 
1,199-1,223 

Sandstone, coarse grey pepper and salt with pelecypods. 
Shale, grey to greenish. 

Shale, dark grey marine looking. 

Shale, carbonaceous with plant remains, sandy at top. 
Shale, sandy with fine grained sandstone. 

Shale, carbonaceous and coaly. 

Shales, sandy green grey to grey, plant remains. 
Sandstone, massive medium grained grey. 

Coal seam, 6" clean coal in middle. 

Sandstone, massive medium grained pepper and salt. 

Ower correlates this member with a sandstone at 934 in 
the Guardian well. The writer failed to find this 
“sandstone" in the remaining cores of the Guardian well, 
This correlation agrees with the writer* s correlation 
of the sand above at 1,062 feet in the Batcheller well 
with a sand at 815 feet in the Guardian well. On the 
basis of this correlation the Dunvegan section is con¬ 
tinued from this sand to the top of the St. John from 
cores of the Guardian well. 


continuation (assumed Batcheller well depths): 


1,223-1,255 

1,255-1,270 

1,270-1,283 

? assumed to be sandy shale. 

Shale, dark grey sandy with plant remains. 

Sandstone, grey salt and pepper micaceous medium¬ 
grained. 

1,283-1,325 

Shale, dark grey sandy with plant remains. 


1,325-1,328 Sandstone, fine dark grey argillaceous. 
1,328- Arbitrarily chosen as top of St. John formation. 







- 99 - 

The Dunvegan as shown in the table above is continental 
to marine and brackish water with the continental features of the 
formation predominating. One outstanding feature of the continent¬ 
al members is their coarseness. This not only applies to the sand¬ 
stones themselves but to the shales as well. It should be pointed 
out here that the term “sandy shales" as used in the table is in 
its proper sense as a shale carrying a proportion of arenaceous mat¬ 
erial and not in the usual sense of shales intercalated with thin 
sandstones or siltstones or shales carrying a proportion of silt. 
This character is not an unusual feature of this horizon as the 
Pelican sandstone of similar stratigraphic position is made up of 
coarse elastics with definite conglomeratic phases. Plant remains 
occur from top to bottom of the formation and large collections 
have been made by Williams on the Pine river and by the earlier 
workers in the Peace River Block. Marine fossils corroborate lith¬ 
ologic evidence presented by clean dark grey shales, as to the per¬ 
iodic flooding by the sea during Dunvegan time. 

The vertical distribution of lithologic types is well 
presented by the above log. The lateral extension of the horizons 
in the area are exposed in the canyon of the Pouce Coupe river and 
along the banks of the Peace. The coarse sandstones are found to 
be large lenses, broken by lenses of shale, cross-bedded, with no 
apparent continuity. The individual lenses of sandstone may thin 
and disappear but the horizon itself has a more or less lateral 
continuity since new lenses of similar sandstone keep reappearing 


within the zone 






- 100 - 


A few of the traceable members will be discussed briefly, 
(numbers as given in the table). The basal sandstone 1,270-83 feet 
is a typical sandstone that has fairly wide distribution and is 
used in the field for mapping the base of the Dunvegan formation. 

It is fresh-water in character and does not obviously increase or 
decrease in thickness over short distances. Its character as a 
fine micaceous sandstone is carried as far as the writer has ob¬ 
served this formation and is used in the Pine river area with the 
same fossils as in the Pouce Coupe area to mark the base of the 
Dunvegan formation. It is probably of fresh-water origin as it 
carries no Onio fauna. This member is well exposed on the road 
down to Cherry Point ferry on the south bank of Peace river at the 
base of the last escarpment just above the river flats. This mem¬ 
ber is also exposed in the road cut on the north bank at Cherry 
Point ferry ana in the sides of the canyon of Alces River. 

The massive sandstones from 1,184 feet - 1,223 feet about 
fifty feet above the basal sandstone form the escarpment that can be 
seen in places along the banks of the Peace River from Rolla land¬ 
ing to near the mouth of Pouce Coupe river. They weather into 
distinctive yellowish to grey buttressed and hollowed forms. They 
are strongly lensing in character and their massive nature permits 
of steep cliffs and abrupt escarpments. 

The shale band betv/een 1,080 feet and 1,106 feet carries 
a marine fauna and is definitely calcareous in certain bands. In 
the Guardian well incipient cone-in-cone structure is developed in 
this shale band and the same feature may be noticed in the shale at 






- 101 - 

the mouth of the Pouce Coupe river. The lensing nature of these 
shales is brought out at this latter exposure. 

The sandy members around 816 feet are assumed to be the 
same horizon as the sandstone that outcrops at the Northwest well 
in the stream channel. This sandstone shows cross-bedding and the 
individual lenses are interfingered with sandy shales and with other 
sandstone lenses. The sandstone ?;eathers grey and carries plant re¬ 
mains. Immediately above, brackish water fossils are present. Still 
higher a shale carrying marine " Dunveganoceras 11 appears. A sand mem¬ 
ber (679 - 34? feet) (605? feet) exposed at the crossing on the 
Pouce Coupe river on the north side of Sec. 4> tp. 80, is consider¬ 
ed the top of the Dun vegan proper with beds above it forming a trans¬ 
ition zone. The transition zone with the Smoky River formation is 
divided into Smoky River and Dunvegan formation at a point, above 
which the sequence is considered to be entirely marine. This approx¬ 
imate contact in the field is represented in Doe Creek Canyon by a 
yellovrish marine looking sandstone lense that carries An o mi a aurea 
W & S. The contact is assumed to be within a few feet of the bottom 
of this marine sandstone. 

Distribution 

Within the map area the Dunvegan is known from outcropp¬ 
ings along the Peace and its many tributaries. The Dunvegan sand¬ 
stone succeeding the relatively soft shales of the St. John format¬ 
ion forms the abrupt canyon like features of the lower valleys of 
these tributaries. It underlies the major part of the valley of 

















- 102 - 


the Kiskatinaw and forms the walls of the Kiskatinaw in the lower 
reaches. Along Beatton river, the lower Alces and lower Pouce Coupe 
rivers as well as the total course of the Peace from the junction of 
the Pine to the mouth of Smoky river the hardness of the Dunvegan 
strata causes them to stand out as cliffs in the banks along the 
rivers. In following the course of the Pouce Coupe river, the bun- 
vogan is present along both sides and in the stream bed from Peace 
river to a few miles below the mouth of Saskatoon Creek, with fairly 
continuous exposures in the stream channel. It is also exposed in 
Doe Creek and the lower part of Broche Creek, The bed rock underly^ 
ing the Bonanza area is probably Dunvegan formation. The map does 
not show this as Dunvegan as it is near the Smoky River contact. 

It does however indicate that the areal distribution of the format¬ 
ions as shown is probably inaccurate, as the extreme thickness of 
glacial and fluvio-glacial deposits hides the pre-existing topo¬ 
graphy and at critical horizons the formational contacts are consid¬ 
erably displaced by a hundred feet or more of topographical relief 
in the old buried pre-glacial erosion pattern. 

Outside the areas in which the St. John Formation out¬ 
crops the Dunvegan formation is assumed to underlie the whole Pouce 
Coupe area as a laterally continuous formation as it is known not on¬ 
ly from the west and east of the area but also north of the area and 
southwest of the area. 

If we may assume that the Pelican sandstone of the Atha- 
baska area is the same age then the general distribution is easily 
outlined for northern Alberta. 






- 103 - 

,McLeam (ref.49, p.18) gives a thickness for the Dun- 
vegan of 530 feet on the Peace river below Montagneuse river. Mc- 
leam reports (ref.50, p.3) around 440 feet of Dunvegan on the Smoky 
river. Rutherford (ref.75, p.21) agrees with these figures and post¬ 
ulates a thickness of around 400 feet near the town of Peace River. 

On the Athabaska, McLeam reports the Pelican sandstone with a thick¬ 
ness of 35 feet of ’‘cross bedded sandstone conglomeratic at the top". 
(ref*48, p.146 et seq). In the Lesser Slave Lake area the log of 
International oils shows a thickness of Pelican sandstone of about 
220 feet (ref.34, p.251). 

West of Pouce Coupe area the thickness of the Dunvegan in 
the Pine River area is around 1,000 feet or more, with the increase 
in thickness taking place at the top of the formation rather than 
the bottom. There is a decided increase in the coarseness of the 
members, and thick conglomerates are found in the bottom of the Dun¬ 
vegan sequence. The thickness here is in part attributed to the in¬ 
crease in coarseness of the basal Smoky River transition zone. 

North of the area the Dunvegan has been reported as foil 


ows by Williams (ref.101, p.67) "500 feet of sandstone containing 






thin lignite seams and plant fragments near base" extending from t e 

_T ! 

Fort St. John area to the Liard. 


South of the area the Dunvegan has been recognized by J 
S. Stewart (ref.83, p.3) along the shore of Rocky Mountain Lake 
(Gwillim Lake) where "a continuous section of over 1,000 feet oflP 
massive sandstone with bands of conglomerate varying from thin 
streaks to beds three or four feet in thickness.About 14 


J 


. 


miles north of Rocky Mountain Lake (a section) showed an almost 












- 104 - 

continuous series of sandstone about 1,200 feet in thickness”. 

The Dunvegan appears to be a vast wedge of sandstone ex¬ 
tending towards the north with a base of maximum thickness southwest 
of the Pouce Coupe area. 

Age and Correlation 


The stratigraphic position of the Dunvegan formation has 
been defined by a fairly extensive flora and fauna. The flora deter¬ 
mined by W. A. Bell has been well discussed by Williams and Bocock 
(ref.101, p.219). 

Lower Dunvegan 

Cladophlebis frigida (Heer) Seward 
Cladophlebis arctica (Heer) Seward 
Sphenopteris (Anemia? ) stricta (Newberry) 

Gingko sp 
Podozamites sp 

1 Pseudocycas unjiga (Dawson) 

Elatocladus ( Sequoia? ) smittiana? (Heer) 

Sequoiites concinna (Heer) 

V/iddringtonites reichii (Ettinghausen) Heer 
Dryophyllum n.sp. 

Sass a fras sp. 

Platanus (three new species) 
x Platanus latiloba Newberry 
Magnolia hollicki? Berry 
x Magnolia n.sp. 
x Magnolia amplif'olia Heer 
Laurophyllum n.sp. 

x Pseudoprotophyllum undulatum? (Lesquereus) 

S apindopsis n.sp. 

Grewia n.sp. 

Grewiopsis? sp. 

Aralia n.sp. 

Andromeda n.sp. 

x Dakota forms 
l Upper Blairmore 

Upper Dunvegan 

Tapeinidium?unaulaturn (Hall) (Knowlton) 

Elatoclsdus ( Sequoia? ) smittiana? (Heer) 

Nymphaeites exemplaris Hollick 
Platanus n.sp. 

Platanus sp. 

Credneria sp. 



















































- 105 - 


“It is not perml8sable at the present time to make too 
precise correlation of the Dunvegan formation on the basis of this 
florule with stages of the European section; one may state with con¬ 
fidence that a Cenomanian or a Turonian age is indicated with prefer¬ 
ence towards a late Cenomanian or rather early Turonian age", (ref* 
101, p.219). The collection listed by Williams and Bocock is separ¬ 
ated in this paper into lower and upper Dunvegan as the writer sugg¬ 
ests that the uppermost Blairmore flora coincides with the lowest 
flora found in the Dunvegan and younger species should not be allow¬ 
ed to hide this relationship. 

It is interesting to note the confirmation of faunal and 
floral evidence as to upper Cenomanian age of at least part of the 
Dunvegan. Warren and Stelck (ref.94, p.144) have shown that the 
Cenomanian-Turonian boundary comes within the Smoky River formation 
in this area about 100 feet above the Dunvegan—Smoky River contact. 
This places the entire formation pre—Turonian in age. Since the 
eogastroplites fauna of the St. John formation is considered Albian 
in age, the Dunvegan to Cenomanian and possibly to a very late Al¬ 
bian time. 

The fauna of the Dunvegan, from below the Doe Creek sand¬ 
stone Anomia member of Smoky River Formation down to the transition 
beds of the Dunvegan—St. John includes the following: 

Barbatia micronemia (Meek) 

Yoldia subelliptica Stanton 
x Inoceramus corpulentus McLeam (var a. W & S) 

Inoceramus dunveganensis McLeam 
Inoceramus rutherfordi Warren 
Inoceramus mcconnelli Warren 












J- .■ 













. 















- 106 - 


?x Q strea anomioides Meek 
x Qstrea dunveganensls Warren 
Bxogyra suborblculata Lamarck 
Modiolus sllentiensls McLearn 
x Brachydontes multilinlgera Meek 
Tellina dunveganensis McLearn 
Tellina peaceriverensis McLearn 
Callista orbiculata (H & M) 

Mactra emmon si Meek 
Corbicula doy;lingi McLearn 
x Corbula pyriformis Meek 
x Corbula nematophora Meek 

Psammosolen dunveganensls Warren 
x Unio dowlingi McLearn 

Rhytophorus ? caurinus McLearn 
Dunveganoceras cf. albertense (Warren) 

Those asterisked have been collected from the formation by 
the writer. It should be noted here that the small Unio designated 
dowlingi McLearn by Williams and Bocock (ref.101, p.217-lS) as mark¬ 
ing the basal member of the Dunvegan sandstone is considered by the 
writer to be a new species of Unio . Unio cf. dowlingi McLearn does 
occur in the basal Dim vegan beds and in the transition zone, but 
tends to be rarer, much larger, and has a much thicker shell than the 
Unio that is so plentiful in the basal beds at Cherry Point. 

The extension of the Dunveganoceras cf. albertense (Warren) 
and Inoceramus corpulentus McLearn var.a, suggests that a part of 
the upper Dunvegan may be considered coeval with the "Barren zone" 
of the Alberta shale (ref.56, p.132). Two localities have produced 
Inoceramus corpulentus McLearn and Dunveganoceras sp . from this 
"Barren zone" in the foothills of Alberta, (ref.18, p.147) 

The extremely local nature of the fauna has made it diff¬ 
icult to trace the correlation of the Dunvegan formation. There 
are numerous species undescribed and very little careful zoning 


















































- 107 - 


collecting done. 

The stratigraphic position of the Dunvegan here may be 
summed up as pro-uppermost Cenomanian and post-late Albian, pre- 
Smoky River formation time, post-St. John formation, approximately 
Dakota age. 

Kaskapau Formation Lower Smoky River Shales 

Introductory Statement 

In dealing with the Lower Smoky River shales the writer has 
found it convenient to use the term Kaskapau formation as the lower 
member contains several sandstones near the base and is separated 
from higher formations by a thick conglomerate in the Pouce Coupe 
area, suggesting an unconformity between the upper and lower shale 
members. Smoky River shales were named by G. M. Dawson in 1881 
(ref.18, p.ll5B). The type section is assumed to be on the Smoky 
River near the mouth of Little Smoky river. Kaskapau member was nam¬ 
ed by F. H. McLeam in 1926 (ref.55, p.119). The Kaskapau formation 
is correlated with the lower Smoky River shales of the Peace River- 
Grande Prairie area, with the lower part of the L£-biche formation of 
the Athabaska-McMurray area, and with the Barren, Inoceramus labiatus . 
Prionotropis and part of the Scaohites zone of the Alberta shale as 
defined by Warren and Rutherford (ref.85). 

Lithology 

The Kaskapau formation is considered totally marine, of 
thickness in the Pouce Coupe area of around 1,050 feet. It is un¬ 
derlain transitionally by the Dunvegan formation, the contact being 
defined as the upper limit of continental type deposits. It is 





















• ■■ . - . ; . . ; 


- 




, 





J . 

















- 108 - 


overlain by a massive sandstone carrying a conglomerate of consid¬ 
erable thickness. The upper contact has not been observed, but is 
considered quite abrupt. 

No complete section has been observed and the low dips 
prevalent in the area make it difficult to get a measurable thick¬ 
ness. Detailed work on the Northwest face < r mountain 

scarp should divulge at least a measurable section of the Kaskapau 
formation. The thickness of 1,050 feet for the Kaskapau has beer 
arrived at by additions of the recognizable zones and their post¬ 
ulated extension down dip under the hills south of Baytree. This 
figure may be in error by around 100 feet. 


The section below is given as an aggregate from the diff¬ 
erent exposures. 


250* 


3* to 0? 
250 ' 

50' 

150 ' 

0* to 3* 
150 ' 

6" to 2» 


135* 

15* to 50* 
50» 

0 to 20* 


Sandstone, of the Baytree conglomerate. 

Shales, poorly exposed marine looking carrying thin 
ribbons of siltstone at occasional undetermined 
horizons, small ironstones. 

Sandy shale, and sandstone lenses. 

Shale, mostly concealed but marine appearance where 
noted, carries small ironstone bands. 

Shale, carrying thin bands of cross-bedded siltstone. 
Shale, marine carrying occasional siltstone bands 
and thin bands of ironstone. 

Sandstone, hard black fine, accompanied locally by 
large ironstone concretions at top. 

Shale, marine with thin stringers and occasional 
large nodules of ironstone. 

White gypsiferous bed, carrying large (to 3') oblate 
lenticular yellowish nodules of chalcedony. 

Shales, soft dark marine carrying thin bands of 
ironstone. 

Sandstone, (Pouce Coupe ss) soft yellowish marine 
calc.lensing and consisting of several beds. 

Shales, marine carrying ironstone concretions and 
thin bands of siltstones. 

Sandstone, soft yellowish weathering, calcareous 
(Doe Creek member)• 

Arbitrarily chosen as the top of the Dunvegan. 





c. 

























- 109 - 


The basal bed, fully developed, is known only from Doe 
Creek Sec.3, Tp.8l. The Doe Creek sandstone is a lensinp marine? 
clean calcareous sandstone carrying Anomia aurea Warren and Stelck 
pelecypods and gastropods. 

Excellent sections of the basal beds between the Pouce 
Coupe sandstone and the Dunvegan may be seen on Pouce Coupe river in 
sec. 4> tp. 80, where a continuous sect: , Coune sand¬ 

stone to the first typical Dunvegan member, is exposed. 

A section of the Pouce Coupe sandstone from the waterfall 
gorge on Saskatoon Creek shows: (sec.26, range 14) 


Glacial Clay. . 

Bluish shales... 50' 

Brown sandstone beds (18") with sandy shale... 15* - 20* 

Shale dark grey with coaly material...... 1* 

Brown sandstone beds (18") with sandy shale... 10* 

Massive sandstone.10* 

Argillaceous brown sandstone bedded (2 n ).10* 


The Pouce Coupe sandstone is well exposed along the Pouce Coupe river 
from the Northwest well to must below the mouth of Henderson Creek 
v/here it forms a riffle on its first appearance in the bed of the 
stream. It usually consists of two or three members that aggregate 
from 30 to 50 feet thickness, forming a cliff, as its hardness is not¬ 
iceable in an otherwise soft shale formation. The sand grades from 
massive, calcareous, medium-grained, grey sandstones to very calcar¬ 
eous, loosely consolidated, yellow sandstones carrying a certain per¬ 
centage of granular calcareous material. The surface of the members 
is characterized by the presence of large fish-tail-twinned plates 
of selenite that are developed on bedding and jointing planes, pro¬ 
bably leached Sc om the shales above. Although the members of the 



















- no - 


sandstone are lensing and individually may disappear the unit is a 
practical mappable horizon as it contains a marine fauna that is fair¬ 
ly plentiful. This sandstone has not been reported from other than 
the Pouce Coupe river and its tributaries but it is suggested that as 
workers do more detailed work westward it will be found a very con¬ 
venient horizon marker. It is not recognized in the log of the Batch- 
eller well. It is suggested that the Pouce Coupe sandstone may have 
been formed similarly to barrier beaches and is therefore discontin¬ 
uous and locally distributed for that reason. Some of the sandstones 
show ripple marking and worm trails and carry large ironstone nodules. 

No section has so far been found showing both the Pouce 
Coupe sandstone and the bed carrying the typical light colored chal¬ 
cedony nodules. The interval is assumed to be around 135 feet as a 
minimum. About two hundred feet of the Kaskapau can be seen in the 
big horseshoe bend on Henderson Creek in Sec.15 and 16, range 13. 

The white chalcedonic nodular horizon can be traced along Henderson 
Creek from a mile below the horseshoe to near the eastern side of 
range 13. The nodular horizon is near the base of the section exposed. 

By following along the bed of the Pouce Coupe river up 
from the mouth of Henderson Creek to Dawson Creek an interrupted 
picture of the continuation of the shale section may be seen. 
Correlation with the Henderson Creek section is made by the presence 
of a hard, dark, fine sandstone that appears about 150 feet (approx.) 
above the chalcedony horizon on Henderson Creek and appears also on 
Pouce Coupe river in sec. 22, tp. 73. The presence of Y/atinoceras in 











- Ill - 


thin siltstone bands above the sandstone in both cases strengthens 
this correlation* 

A silty horizon on Dawson Creek exposed at the Rolla road 
bridge is placed about 150 feet above the black sandstone member as 
the section immediately above the black sandstone (100 feet) is 
fairly free from the presence of silty bonds but tends to carry thin 
bands of ironstone instead. The silty horizon is interesting from a 
lithologic standpoint* The siltstones are thin, calcareous and show 
cross-bedding. At one horizon the siltstones contain lenses of 
coarsely granular marcasite, that in weathered surfaces often shows 
as oockets of red ochre* Accompanying this horizon is e considerable 
percentage of charcoal in fairly large pieces. The presence of num¬ 
erous fossils of marine planktonic form suggests a fouling of the 
water at the time this silty band was laid down. It is mentioned 
here as a possible zone of correlation for workers in contiguous areas. 

The remaining 500 (assumed) feet of Kaskapau has not been 
seen except in isolated outcrops with small vertical section dis¬ 
played. However, these outcrops attest to the marine character of 
the sediments and their shaly character. The overlying contact has 
not been seen by the writer but could be placed within 20 feet on 
the east side of the hill directly east of the town of Pouce Coupe. 
Distribution 

The Kaskapau formation underlies, except for the river 
valleys, the major portion of the plains area to the north of the 
sandstone escarpment that form the row of hills south and east of 
Pouce Coupe town. In a region of low dip it is but natural that a 










PLATE IV 



L. Pouce Coupe sandstone (lower sk* ;>au) 
outcropping in Ls r '.4, tp.73, range ; , 

W.6, in canyon of the Pouce Coupe, (close-up 
of oinnacle shown in immediate foreground in 
in illustration M. below. 






















M. Transition zone between Smoky River and Bun- 
vegan formations shown in the Pouce Coupe 
canyon (location the same as for figure L above) 
tfpper escarpment is the Pouce Coupe sandstone. 


•1 iiu.AJ.-i 






enoctaJcmjSB ©quoD eoirc^E . J 
. Y.gtf , *o - 3 « £. ’?• 3 il nx gnxcqoio tfuo 
qu-9^oIo) , eqcioO bouo c Ip no yrBrv rri ,o.W 

’ : * '-"':o s ^J.bx oex'tfx nx rr~ r od& slojsnnxcq-lo 

.wolsr' noxd'BX^auIIi nx 





.one .rioxJ’jsnixol’ nagsv 

. IOX, •'.) I) nOYHBO 
t ran p ^ y nr , 











- 112 - 


formation of 1,050 feet thickness should have a wide distribution. 
The areal distribution within this area can best be visualized by 
referring to the map accompanying this report. A reentrant of Dun- 
vegan should undoubtedly be shown in the vicinity of Bonanza but the 
lack of evidence concerning this reentrant and possibly many others 
like it, hidden by the fluvio glacial deposits, prohibits the proper 
exposition of it. 

The Kaskapau or Lower Smoky River shales and correlated 
Labiche and Alberta shales are known over the greater part of Al¬ 
berta and Northeastern British Columbia, as the lower Colorado sea 
flooded the entire area. East of the area Rutherford reports a 
thickness of #75 feet for the Kaskapau formation in the Spirit River 
area (ref.75, p.26). On the lower Smoky River McLeam assigns a 
thickness of slightly less than 550 feet (ref.50, p.A) to the lower 
Smoky River shale. Williams and Bocock (ref.101, p.215) suggest a 
thickness of around 1,000 feet for the Smoky River formation in the 
Table Mountain (Wartenbe) section and about 800 feet in the Tuskoola 
mountain section. In the Smoky River coal reserve, MacVicar pro¬ 
poses 3,000 f for the thickness of the Berlana River Shales, (ref.42, 
p.34), divided by a bed of sandstone to 100* in thickness. 

Warren and Rutherford give a thickness of around 1,500 
feet for the Lower Colorado shales in the foothills of Alberta and 
another 2,000 feet for the upper Alberta shales above the Cardium 
sandstone (ref.85). The latter contains shales of Montana age as 
well. 

There seems to be considerable thinning of these shales 









- 113 - 


from south to north and locally from west to east. This latter thin¬ 
ning is estimated at around 5 to 6 feet per mile. 

Age and Correlation 


The Kaskapau formation is sufficiently supplied with foss¬ 
ils to facilitate the work of correlation. 

Within the area the following forms have been collected: 

From the Doe Creek member at the base 
Anomia aurea W & S 
Gastropods 
Inoceramus sp. 

From tlie Pouce Coupe sandstone 

Dunveganoceras albertense (Warren) 

Dunveganoceras poucecoupense W & S 
Inoceramus corpulentus McLeam 
Arctica sp. 

From above the Pouce Coupe sandstone and below the chalcedony nodular 
horizon 

Inoceramus sp. 

From above the chalcedony horizon and below the black sandstone 
member 

Inoceramus cf labiatus? Schlotheim 
Watinoceras reesidei V/arren 

From the silty zone on Dawson Creek at the Rolla road bridge 
Watinoceras cf reesidei Warren 
Inoceramus sp. 

About 150 feet below the top of the Kaskapau 
Watinoceras ?? 

The Cenomanian—Turonian boundary may be placed over the 
Pouce Coupe sandstone and below the white chalcedonic member on the 
basis of the above faunal lists. Probably just above the Pouce 
Coupe sandstone (ref.94, p.144)* This places the basal 100 or 150 
feet of the Kaskapau in this area in the upper Cenomanian. Warren 
and Stelck (ref.94, p.147) correlate this lower 150 feet with the 

































- 114 - 


Barren zone of the Alberta shale based on the presence of Dunveya n— 
oceras and Inoceramus corpulcntus McLeam, within this zone at sev¬ 
eral localities and the presence of Watinoceras above. 

The Inoceramus labiatus zone of the Alberta shale is read¬ 
ily recognized as large numbers of Inocerami referrable to labiat us 
are found above and below Hie black sandstone member of the Kaskapau 
in this area. It is very numerous and has been recognized in the 
core of the Batcheller well at 275(, and 282*. No higher zone of 
the Alberta shale has been recognized in this area. The ammonite 
referred to as "Watinoceras n from near the top of the section is 
poorly preserved and may be an allied genus instead. 

Rutherford working in the Grande Prairie area lists in 
addition to the forms mentioned above, the following fauna from the 
Lower part of the Kaskapau. (ref.75, p.29). 

Inoceramus tyrelli Warren 
Inoceramus tenuiumbonatus Warren 
Scaphites sp 
Cyrena sp 
Arctica sp 

Inoceramus allani Warren 

Scaphites aelicatulus Warren 

Selwynoceras ( prionotroois ) borealis Warren 

Rutherford also lists a fauna from the upper part of the 

Kaskapau containing Baculites asper Morton, B.codyensis Reeside. 

B.albertensis Warren, B.boreal is Warren, B.trifido 1 obatv.s . No 

Baculite s has been reported from the area west of this and it is 

suggested here that this zone may not be present within the area. 

West of the area on Tuskoola mountain Williams and Bo- 

cock (ref.101, p.223) have collected watinoceras cf coloradoen se 








































- 115 - 


Henderson, Inoceramus labiatus Schlotheim, Ostrea, Arctica, Pinna; 
from Table Mountain, Llnpula Inoceramus . Legumen sp, Pinna sp. 

This is from near the top of the section and the presence of Watinoc- 
eras cf Coloradoense Henderson suggests that in this area the upper 
Kaskapau may be missing, i.e. the Scaphites ventricosus zone of the 
Alberta shale. 

All the species listed above, below the Bacnlites horizon 
and above the Pouce Coupe sandstone is considered Turonian in age. 

The boundary with the overlying Bnscherian fauna is not delineated 
and the Kaskapau in this area is considered Turonian in age above 
the Pouce Coupe sandstone, with possibly two hundred feet at the top 
referable to the finscherian. 

The position of the Kaskapau formation may be summed up 
as uppermost Cenomanian, Turonian and lowermost Emscherian in age; 
post-Dunvegan; pre-Badheart, Lower Alberta shale - Cardium age. 

Baytree Conglomerate - Badheart? 

Introductory Statement 

The Baytree conglomerate is the name given herein to the 
arenaceous conglomeratic formation that terminates the upward ex¬ 
tent of the Kaskapau shales in the Pouce Coupe area. It caps the 
numerous flat-topped hills in the area and to date no diagnostic 
fossils have bean found in it. The best development of the conglom¬ 
erate is a few miles south of Baytree store where it forms a large 
amphitheatre at the head of Sergeant Creek. 

Lithology 


The Baytree conglomerate varies considerably from place 




























- 116 - 


to place but shows usually a band of conglomerate overlying a mass¬ 
ive sandstone. 

An outcrop in Led.15, sec.22, tp.78, range 13 gives a 


section: 

eroded top of hill 

30' to 25* conglomerate, with boulders of cherty quartzitic 

material to 6" in size. Matrix and lenses of coarse 
calcareous sandstone weathers yellow to dark red. 

2* conglomerate, shall chert pebbles interlensed with 

sandstone. 

1* conglomerate, evenly graded chert pebbles in reddish 

matrix. 

18* sandstone, medium to fine buff to reddish weathering 

slightly calcareous. 

talus covered 

Southeast of this latter outcrop 4*200*, the section which 
is more or less continuously exposed between the two stations shows 
a thickness of 42' of conglomerate with base hidden. The conglom¬ 
erate is interlensed with coarse sandstone and at times carries 
boulders up to 8 n . It shows two systems of jointing, nearly vertical, 
one at N 112° E and the other at N 145° E. It forms a very abrupt 
cliff as the conglomerate breaks off in great angular blocks at the 
joint planes. 

Two thousand feet southeast of the above section in a re¬ 
entrant in the cliff face made by a small spring and stream a sect¬ 
ion disclosed shows: 

drift 

15* conglomerate grey to reddish weathering no large boulders 
noted. Fairly well bedded. 

40 * Sandstone medium fine to fine flaggy yellow to rarely 
reddish weathering. 

Horizon (top of shale?) carrying many springs. 

Northwest 2,200 feet from the exposure in Lsd. 15, s e c 22 








- 117 - 


the exposure on the cliff shows 10* pebble conglomerate overlying 
30* of massive reddish to buff crossbedded sandstone with base con¬ 
cealed. 

On the hill directly east of Pouce Coupe in Lsd.l6, sec.l, 
tp.78, range 1A> a section shows ledges of reddish weathering sand¬ 
stone 100 feet below the top of the hill which is surmounted by a 
thin conglomerate 6 n to 1* thick followed by a grey coarse grit sand¬ 
stone. 

On the top of the hill, directly south of Dawson Creek a 
maximum thickness of 10 1 has been noted for the conglomerate phase 
which here is made up of small chert pebbles to lj". On the south 
face of this hill overlooking Bissette Creek the conglomerate over- 
lies 60 feet of buff colored sandstone. 

The conglomeratic phase has not been observed south of 
Bissette Creek and indeed may be only a local phase of the member. 
Northward the formation has been eroded off and is entirely unknown. 
Age and Correlation 

The position occupied by the Baytree conglomerate is diff¬ 
icult to determine. No fossils have been found in the conglomer¬ 
ate or associated sandstone, within the area and no fossils from 
horizons above it, as the conglomeratic phase commonly caps the flat 
tops of the hills in the vicinity of Pouce Coupe. 

It is post Inoceramus labiatus time and is pre-Wapiti 
formation time* Suggested correlations follow. 

The Spirit River - Grande Prairie district contains an 
upper Cretaceous shale formation made up of the Lower Smoky River 

















- 118 - 


shale, (Kaskapau), Badheart sandstone, and the Upper Smoky River 
shale. Rutherford describes the Badheart member (ref.75, p.27) as 
from 15 to 25 feet thick "medium to coarse grained porous sandstone 

which is dark red in all exposures observed.Occasional bands of 

chert pebbles were observed.the red coloration is one of the 

best guides where surface erosion or road cuts reveal the underlying 
bedrock." This red coloration is found in the sandstones accompany¬ 
ing the Baytree conglomerate as well as the matrix. The presence of 
chert pebbles in the Badheart, the coarseness of grain, the position 
about 1,100 feet above the base of the Smoky River formation compels 
the writer by force of evidence to postulate a correlation of the 
Baytree conglomerate with the Badheart. Since the writer was in 
the area a passable road has been opened between Spirit River and 
Pouce Coupe that should permit a continuous study of this formation 
between the two areas. The Badheart has been dated by its fauna as 
Niobrara in age (ref.85, p.136), the Upper Smoky River shales are 
dated lower Santonian (ref.85, p.118), the age of the Badheart is 
considered upper Emscherian. 

In the Table Mountain (Wartenbe) area on Pine River Will¬ 
iams and Bocock (ref.101, p.115) have collected ..a tin peer as cf 
Coloradoense and Inoceramus labiatus from near the "top" of the 
Smoky River formation. This suggests that the sandy "Wapiti" 
formation includes part of the upper zones of the Smoky River form¬ 
ation. If this is so, the introduction of sandy lenses below the 
Badheart might be assumed and the Baytree conglomerate might repre¬ 
sent a lower formation approximately of the same position as the 
Cardiura sandstone of southern Alberta. 





















- 119 - 


If the conglomerate represents the termination of an un¬ 
conformity, between Smoky River time and Wapiti time, then the con¬ 
glomerate might be as late as basal Wapiti in age. 

The report by Selwyn (rei.18, p.117 b) of Inoceramus altus 
at the top of Table Mountain would suggest that a hiatus in strata 
occurs between Watinoceras coloradoense (Henderson) time and Inocer ¬ 
amus altus . 

Upper Smoky River Shales 

The Upper Smoky River shales were defined by McLeam in 
1926 (ref.55, p*120) as that part of the Smoky River formation ly¬ 
ing above the Badheart sandstone. Badheart type section (ref.55, 
p.119) is along Smoky river from Puskawaskau river to Little Smoky 
river. Ho formation has been found within the Pouce Coupe area that 
might be referred to the Upper Smoky River shales. They are discuss¬ 
ed here in brief as they occur in the adjoining area to the east. 
Rutherford (ref.75, p.28) describes them as "similar to the lower 
shale member, being essentially dark colored thin bedded marine 
shales....the uppermost beds also carry thin sandstone beds. The 
thickness of the Upper Smoky River 350 feet appears more nearly to 
be the correct thickness. This member grades rather abruptly into 
the Wapiti formation and some erosion of the upper Smoky River may 
have preceded the deposition of the basal Y/apiti....". They are 
considered "Montana" in age or Lower Santonian, (ref. 64 , p.118) 

by flcLearn. He also considers the Upper Smoky River to be ore- 
uppermost Labiche formation time. A correlation of this formation 














































- 120 - 


plus Badheart with Sandersons Brazeau—Pierre formation (ref.77, p.436 
is here suggested by the writer. 

The open questions remain. Is the upper shale present? 
Rutherford ( >ers* comm.) failed to find it within the area from Swan 
Lake ( fepiti for Lion) to Pouce Coupe (Kaskapau formation). The 
writer has failed to iind it. The amount of drift presen\ 
easily hide a thin soft marine formation but the topography should re¬ 
veal tell-tale benches in the flat lying sediments. Is the format¬ 
ion present but in different facies? Evans and Caley (ref.29, p.39) 
have found the shale member as far south as the upper . apiti, so it 
is suggested that if present it would be a marine shale. Is there 
indication of an unconformity? The writer holds that this seems the 
most logical answer if subsequent investigations fail to reveal the 
shale within the area. 

Wapiti Formation 

The Wapiti formation was named by G. M. Dawson in 1881 
(ref.18, p.H5b). The typesection is at the mouth of Mountain Greek 
13 miles up from mouth of Wapiti River. 

The southern part of the map area and the southeastern 
area is considered as underlain by the wapiti. Along the line of 
the railroad south of Swan Lake near where it crosses the Alberta- 
British Columbia boundary, the valley of Albright Creek shows a 
series of sandstones and shales of continental appearance. The 
cliffs along the east side of Swan Lake are assigned to this form¬ 
ation. None of these outcrops have been studied in detail and the 
correlation with the Wapiti is made on the basis of the continental 


















- 121 - 


appearance oi the formation. The bottom contact of the formation has 
not been seen or defined, and for that reason, ell beds younger than 
the Kaskapau have been shown in one color on the map. The age of 
tiie Wapiti is assumed to be Belly River in accordance with the pract¬ 
ice followed by the workers in the adjoining areas, although no in¬ 
vertebrate evidence has been found to give a correlation with the 
Belly River itself. For the Wapiti, Rutherf (ref.75, .31) gives 

a thickness of at least 1,100 feet. The basal portions only are ex¬ 
posed in the Pouce Coupe area. The beds on the top of Table Yountain 
assumed Wapiti were reported, to contain Inoceramus altus by Selwyn 
(ref .18, p.H7b). 


In connection with the Wapiti, there is a flora collection 


from the "Sukunka member 11 of the Dunvegan sandstone. This member 
was named by Spieker (ref.79, p.125) for continental beds above the 
Dunvegan on Sukunka river and Gwillim Lake. Whether they are "Wap¬ 
iti” or "Badheart" or "Baytree conglomerate" age is open to question. 
The flora itself is correlated with the Frontier formation flora of 
the United States, by Berry. 


Anemia fremonti Knowlton 
Dryooteris Colorado ensis Knowl ton 
Populus cf . elegans Lescuereux 


Cenozoic 


Gen ere! S tatem en t 

The Cenozoic in this region is represented by unconsolidat¬ 
ed clays and gravels of continental origin. The main components of 
these deposits are those of glacial origin. These deposits have ob¬ 
scured the bedrock in the region and have destroyed to a large ex 4- 4 ' 




















- 122 - 


the pre- lac 1 • 1 t y of tl try. The main deposits were 

laid down in large freshwater lakes that formed in front of the glao- 
inrr as they retreated to ie northeast. ere int« 

ing to speculate on the presence of pre-glacial deposits if this reg¬ 
ion is considered to be about the western limit of the extent of the 
r. If the area was not planed by the glacier but re¬ 
presents the western limit of glacial dump, then it seems safe to 
assume that unconsolidated rubble of pre-glacial time might lie bur¬ 
ied below the glacial drift, and resting on bed rock. In several 
places gravel is reported at the base of the clays, forming conven¬ 
ient water horizons in an otherwise non-aquifer area and the question 
of their glacial origin or otherwise arises. If they are shown free 
of Keewatin material could they be termed Saskatchewan gravels? Ruth¬ 
erford (ref.76, p.93-5) reports "a gravel mantle similar though not 
as yet definitely determined as Saskatchewan type,” overlying the 
bedrock in the Badheart, the Ksituen and Peace River districts. 

Glacial and Post Glacial taking Deposits 

The glacial deposits fall readily into two types. The 
first are those that may be termed morainal. The second those that 
may be termed fluvio-gl&cial. 

The outlines of the morainal deposits in the area has been 
badly obscured by the post-glacial laking that accompanied the re¬ 
treat of the glaciers. This laking by the process of aggrading the 
lower areas destroyed the characteristic pattern of the morainal de¬ 
posits. However, their position may be still determined by the 
presence of large erratics on the surface of the ground and large 










- 123 - 


boulders choking the stream beds where they creeks cut through them. 
These large boulders of Keewatin origin may be seen choking the mouth 
of Bissette Creek at Pouce Coupe River. They also are found in the 
valley eant Cred near its mouth. As individu; 

are found on the surface of the ground in numerous localities near 
lower Saskatoon Creek, on Dawson Creek near the railroad bridge, on 
the slope of the hill west of Pouce Coupe and on thetop of the hills 
east of Pouce Coupe. This drift comprised of Keewatin material, 
Athabaska sandstone boulders, boulders of gneiss, schist, diabase, 
granite, Devonian limestone, and Cretaceous formations, is distribut¬ 
ed generally over the whole eastern part of the area with the west¬ 
ern limit a short distance west of the Kiskatinaw. The pattern of 
the occurrences of these boulders where they protrude from beneath 
the lacustrine deposits would assuredly give the basis for a patt¬ 
ern of the terminal moraines deposited within this ares. 

The lacustrine deposits attain considerable thickness, 
clays at the mouth of Doe Creek show around 300 feet which may be 
in error not more than 50 feet by slumping at the base, concealing 
bed rock. A section of the glacial deposits taken in a cut bank 
of the Pouce Coupe river in Lsd.7, sec.28, tp.77, range 14* shows: 

— black clay covered at top by slump 

12* buff clay 

6 n black clay 

6* buff clay 

12* black shaley clay, when drying curls off in thin layers 

10 1 buff boulder clay with sandy boulder clay 

10* gravel 

60 ’ covered, to stream bed, by slumping 

These beds thicken and thin from one locality to another, 
but the black shaley clay can be recognized at different localities 








- 124 - 

such as the hill on the west side of Landry 1 s crossing where it is 
well exposed in the road cut* In the lower part of Doe Creek canyon 
tile gravels at bed rock are to 40 * thick. The upper clays are well 
exposed at the top of Saskatoon Creek valley where the beds are not¬ 
ed along the north crest to have a lateral extent of at least two 
miles. In sec.35, tp.78, range 14, W.6th, the banks of the Ponce 
Coupe river show a cross section of 150* of the upper clays; with a 
buff weathering boulder clay grading upward into a grey shale clay 
for 50 feet, base covered, overlain by a 15-foot buff clay member, 
in turn overlain by a 50—foot bed of stratified dark grey clay and 
in turn overlain by another thin buff member that is covered by the 
topsoil. This outcrop shows large scale cross-bedding with the 
lenses truncated at the plain level. 

Some old beach lines on the hills south of Baytree have 
left fine clays and in some places fine silts along their old pos¬ 
ition. The fine clay at Baytree and just north of Baytree corner 
is considered to belong to this post glacial.laking period. 

Recent Deposits 

The recent deposits within the area are relatively unim¬ 
portant. They are in the main residual gravels along the rivers 
and stream beds from the working over of glacial boulder clays and 
morainal deposits. The silts forming the lowermost terraces and 
sand bars along the Peace River and the river flats of the upper 
Pouce Coupe river are made of these recent silts. The white clays 
at Dawson Creek town are considered to be leached from the hill 


north of the to?n and are assumed recent in age 












Chapter V 

Structural Geology 


General Statement 

Within the Pouce Coupe River area structures are gentle and 
the strata of the area has suffered little distortion or disruption. 
Dips are slight and the lensing character of the more arenaceous bands 
of strata make it difficult to determine the true strike and dip. 

Minor Structures 

Within the Dunvegan formation, the lensing character of the 
sandstone members give the suggestion of minor folding, locally. Fore¬ 
set-bedding is common in some of the sandstone members of the Dunvegan 
near the Northwest well and cross-bedding is common throughout most 
of the Dunvegan. Minor adjustment breaks of about two feet have been 
noticed within the Smoky River formation, a not uncommon feature of 
thick shale formations. Jointing is evident in the thick members of 
the Baytree conglomerate in sec. 22, tp. 78, range 13, W. 6. It is 
nearly vertical, one set of joints striking N. 112° E and another set 
striking N. 145° E. 

Flat-lying beds hold the anomalous position of being term¬ 
ed "structure" within the Pouce Coupe River area. The flat lying beds 
form a terrace-like structure north and northwest of the Northwest 
Co, well (sec.26, tp.80, range 13). This is the "Pouce Coupe oil- 
structure". Similar terraces occur elsewhere, east of the Alberta- 









■ 





• : 


























- 126 - 


British Columbia boundary on Peace river, and require much detailed 
work to be mapped accurately. 

Major Structures 

The greater part of the Pouce Coupe River area is situated 
on the west limb of the Alberta syncline. The axis of the syncline 
crosses the map area from near the southwest comer to the Alberta- 
British Columbia boundary at the north of the area crossing Peace 
river a few miles below the mouth of Pouce Coupe river. The axis of 
the syncline dips to the south at an angle of around one degree. 

This south dip of the axis is shorn in Figure 4 (ff page) in a pro¬ 
file section taken from north to south through the Guardian Well. 

The east dip of the west limb of the syncline is shown in Figure 5, 
in a profile section taken in an east by northeast direction through 
the Guardian Well. Vertical scales are exaggerated in the profiles 
to show the dip of the strata. 

Within the Lower Cretaceous of the Peace River area there 
is considerable thickening from east to west. At Peace River the 
thickness for the Lower Cretaceous is 1,980 feet (McLeam ref.49)• 

In the Peace River Canyon area the thickness of the Lower Cretac¬ 
eous is over 6,000 feet. This makes a minimum thickening for the 
Lov/er Cretaceous of over 20 feet per mile in a westerly direction. 
The thickness of the Lower Cretaceous in the Guardian Well is 3,276 
feet. From the Guardian Well east to Peace River the thinning in 
the Lower Cretaceous is 13 feet to the mile. From the Guardian Well 
westward the thickening in the Lower Cretaceous is 28 feet to the 
mile. Figure 6 shows the effect of this thickening on an west-east 












*c ’ - c 







- 127 - 


section C-D on the structure at depth, viz. at the top of the Jurass¬ 
ic and Triassic if the thickening in the Lower Cretaceous is assumed 
to be regular. This vast wedging of the sediments is even more pro¬ 
nounced in the Triassic and Jurassic as these formations, that have 
a combined thickness of 3,200 feet in the foothills of Peace river, 
are not present at Peace River town. 

If the thickening of the Lower Cretaceous, Jurassic, and 
Triassic is regular, an extensive horaocline dipping westward will be 
present at the base of the Triassic. If the thickening is irregular 
or disrupted by erosional unconformity irregularities in the sub¬ 
surface formations, then there is the possibility of structures be¬ 
ing present at depth with little or no surface expression. 

The entire Pouce Coupe River area is east'of the gently 
folded belt as outlined by Gwillim (ref.30) and Spieker (ref.79). 

The Alberta syncline was probably formed here with little or no com- 
pressional stress and is the simple expression of uplift of the west¬ 
ern side of the area, relative to the eastern side of the area. 


































3 


tc; 


cd sno;-* inr oo sit ion of Pouce Jnu 


Are?, (sh-.ded , irith regard to major structural feat 




jrcr . 
































































lower smoky rive n 


KASKAPAU 


OUHVEGAKI 


- NORTH TO SOUTH A-B 


EAST 



EAST C-D 


LOWER CRETACEOUS 
JURASS/C 
TRlASSIC. 


EAST. 

D 

--tsoo' 
--looo' 
_ _--ZSO«' 
— 3000 ' 

_ -3Soo' 


D 


ao*k baseline 



U/P r 

C rttatrout 


Lowrr 

CrctmccoMl 


LEC-ENP 

GLACIAL 
WAPITI 
SMOKY RIVER 
DUNVEGAN 
ST. JOHN 
PEACE RIVER 
LOW&cftrACEOUS |" j 
JURASSIC 
TRIASSIC 



VERT I CAL SCALE: U-nck'iSooftct 
HORIZONTAL SCALE’- 1 i-ntk = Sniki 
Dctfu-m - Ntm-n S«o i«»»/ 











































Guardian oil #i. 
3o.c7.Tp.Bo, I«,W« 

2 o 6 o'£/«» 


® A TuhELLCR 
S«c *4.Tp 79.R,. l*,WC 
It+C/ r. 


NORTHWEST c. •»/ 
Sm 2(,r r BO,R*n,.iJw6 
IS SO' £ Im y/mtio-n 


Jit 






r, ^ 


douc 


if 






r 


• 9 » it 

to+y 


—f— >200 

~L 


i, 


, I (««H« »• 

utt r.t. 


itTJ Top »/ Go»S«V 

7=^*^ j. 
r °/» 






i57o ’ Chert Abblti 


Tojf I**" - 


LEGfA/0 


■200 


S770MT RIVER ( | 

DUNVECAM ( 1 

ST. JOHN | | 

PEACE RIVER Q 
LOON RIVER 


SEA LEVEL 


-2of*' 


"‘VJfoii 


-too' 


'too' 


FIGURE 7. 


STRUCTURE AS 
SHOWN 8T 
W£U CORRELATION 


+- 


800 


VERTICAL SCALE: I i ** h • *HK Feet 
HORIZONTAL SCALE: ■»»//«5 


iO'O Cbrrt Abblts 


c/U. tr+t. 


■I £00' 


4 - 












































Chapter VI 
Economic Geology 


Saline Occurrences 

From numerous horizons in the Pouce Coupe area small springs 
depositing a white incrustation upon the shale banks have been notic¬ 
ed. This white material is gypsiferous and bitter to the taste. 
(Pickeringite?). It has not been found in any large deposits but is 
of use in field mapping as the horizons in which springs, carrying 
the saline material, occur are clearly marked in dry weather by a 
white line making the bedding clearly distinguishable from a distance. 

Sandstones carrying a small flow of salt water have been en¬ 
countered in the Guardian well at deptJw 2,630 feet, 3,010 feet, 3,260 
feet. Salt water from the limestone at 4>795 feet in the Guardian 
vrell was analysed by the Petroleum and Natural Gas division, Deoart- 
ment of Mines, Alberta, as follows: 


Parts 

per Million 

Percent 

Calcium 

1,058 

1.5 

Magnesium 

247 

0.4 

Sodium and Potassium 

25,200 

36.6 

Chloride radicle 

39,850 

58.0 

Sulphate radicle 

1,306 

1.9 

Bicarbonate radicle 

1,119 

1.6 

Carbonate radicle 

0 

0.0 

Total concentration 

68,780 



Gypsum deposits 

Gypsum occurs at the surface in crystalline form. Large 
platy crystals of selenite with fish-tail twinning occur on bedding 


























- 129 - 


surfaces of the sandstones within the area and are possibly leached 
from the Smoky River shales, as crystals of the same type are found on 
talus slopes of the Smoky River shales. Gypsum occurs in stout cry¬ 
stals in the boulder clay and weathers out of the clay banks in etch¬ 
ed skeletal forms. 

In the Guardian well, relatively thick beds of massive gyp¬ 
sum were encountered between 5,165 feet and 5,170 feet; 5,175 feet 
and 5,180 feet; 5,372 feet and 5,385 feet; 5,474 feet and 5,476 feet. 
Other thin beds of gypsum were encountered betv/een the limits of 
5,165 feet and 5,476 feet, badly crumpled and carrying many inclus¬ 
ions of limestone, and broken by "red-beds”. The depth of these 
beds from the surface makes it unlikely that they will have any ec¬ 
onomic value. 

Road Metal 

Gravel for surfacing the roads is readily obtained in the 
rougher parts of the Pouce Coupe area where the stream channels have 
cut through deposits of morainal material. Before using these de¬ 
posits, the boulders need to be crushed to an even size and screened 
where excess fine material is present. 

The deposits of gravel lying on bed rock below the glacial 
clay, tend to be difficult of access as they are usually exposed, in 
the more precipitous canyons, although the deposits of this type on 
the upper Pouce Coupe river could be easily reached. Gravel de¬ 
posits of this type would entail considerable stripping to be devel¬ 
oped. 

The gravel deposits along the rivers courses and their 











- 130 - 

immediate channels are being utilized to provide the local require¬ 
ments of road metal. The ballast for the railroad grade however was 
brought in from the large gravel deposits at Watino mentioned by 
Rutherford (ref.75, p.54). 

The nature of the clays underlying the Pouce Coupe table¬ 
lands make good roads when properly ditched and elevated and form an 
excellent base for hard surfacing. These clays are impervious and 
unless badly churned up by heavy traffic during wet weather shed 
most of the water and retain a good ’'bottom”. 

Coal 

Coal occurs in the Dun vegan in thin seams and is usually 
low grade and not clean. A small seam from 6 inches to 1 foot thick 
occurs in the Dunvegan near the mouth of Doe River and has been us¬ 
ed by the local settlers for "blacksmith coal". Coal occurs in the 
Guardian well, in the Dunvegan in thin seams (3") between 650 feet 
and 700 feet; four inches of bright coal is found in the Peace River 
sandstone at 2,611 feet, associated with a coaly zone carrying pele- 
cypods and pyrite. In the Batcheller well, coal is found in thin 
seams at 919 feet, 983 feet and 1,198 feet, all within the Dunvegan 
and not over 6 inches thick. Williams and Bocock report (ref.101, 
p.214) n in the right bank of the Kiskatinaw river about three miles 

above its mouth.a 20 inch seam of coal which is underlain by 

platy Dunvegan sandstone". 

Placer Gold 

A small amount of placer gold is recovered from the gravel 
bars along Peace river but the values are in the main small and the 



































- 131 - 

colors are fine. The gold is assumed to have been brought from the 
headwaters of the Peace river as none of the tributaries of the Peace 
in this area carry any gold values of note and the Colors are finer 
than those found farther upstream. 

Water Supply 

The extent of the Smoky River shales has made the problem 
of obtaining water a difficult one in the Pouce Coupe area. The 
streams of the area provide the source of water for the majority of 
the settlers. Except for the larger streams the streams dry up in 
the summer and cannot be counted on for a permanent supply. Wells 
sunk in the gravels of the stream channel often tap the water flow¬ 
ing underground in the dry season. 

South of Pouce Coupe and Dawson Creek the Wapiti sandstone 
provides an aquifer for the districts south of the escarpment. The 
settlers in the area around Swan Lake, Gundy, and Tupper Creek can 
easily obtain water hy drilling into the underlying Wapiti. The 
Wapiti provides numerous springs where the valleys have etched into 
sandstone down dip and Dawson Creek obtains drinking water from 
springs located on Bear Mountain in the sandstones associated with 
the Baytree conglomerate. 

The sandstones in the Dunvegan and in the basal Smoky River 
are rather poor aquifers owing to their lensing nature. Rutherford 
(ref.75, p.48) studying the water resources of the Grande Prairie 
districts, discusses the possibility of the Dunvegan as a water hor¬ 
izon, and states "A brief visit was made to Rolla district in Brit¬ 
ish Columbia near the west boundary of Alberta.From a brief 




























- 132 - 

survey it appears that water is obtained only at places where massive 
sandstones of the Dunvegan occur near the surface". In a well near 
the Hospital at Dawson Greek, brackish water was obtained from the 
upper beds of the Dunvegan at 625 feet and 920 feet. Fresh water was 
obtained in the Guardian Y/ell from the Dunvegan at 650 feet. This 
latter horizon is correlated with the sandstone outcropping in the 
bed of the Pouce Coupe river near the Northwest well so the water 
this close to the intake (two miles) is fresh. A glance at Figure 5, 
suggests the possibility of an artesian basin below the district 
northwest of Dawson Creek with brackish water at distance from the 
Kiskatinaw scarp and fresh water near the surface outcrops of Dun¬ 
vegan. The Peace river is too low in elevation to provide the source 
of intake but the Kiskatinaw flows over the lower parts of the Dun¬ 
vegan and could provide a source of water for potential aquifers in 
the lower Dunvegan. For this reason any test of the Dunvegan should 
include the basal beds and not merely the upper zones. 

An outline of glacial gravel horizons would possibly pro¬ 
vide some localities with a water supply and the rare wells of the 
Rolla district are located in such horizons. The pre-glacial stream 
channels, if still containing the original gravel beds would supDly 
small water horizons of local value. 

The storage of run-off is the most practical way of ensur¬ 
ing water supply for live-stock, if distant from streams. Scoop- 
outs can be readily made in the clays of the region and these clays 

are impervious enough that the only loss is by evaporation. Scoop- 
outs should be made in cultivated fields near the brink of the deep- 











- 133 - 

er canyons wherever the breaking of the sod has started gullying of 
the tableland. 

Oil and Gas 

The search for oil and gas in the Pouce Coupe area has been 
the prime mover in organizing many of the geological parties that 
have worked in the area or in adjacent areas. The following refer¬ 
ences deal with this subject: ref.25, part 111, McLeam, 1919; 
ref.30, Gwillim, 1919; ref.83, Stewart, 1919; ref.26, Dresser, 

1920; ref.78, Spieker, 1920; ref.l, Allan and Cameron, 1921; 

ref.27, Dresser, 1922; ref.79, Spieker, 1922; ref.56, McLeam and 

0 

Hume, 1927; ref.34, pp.243-250, Hume, 1933; ref.-W, Allan and 
Stelck, 1940. 

At the surface, oil seepages have been reported, from two 
localities, one on Moose (Alces) river about four miles north of 
Peace river (Spieker, ref.79, p.127) and one near the site of the 
Northwest well, and pictured by Allan and Cameron (ref.l, p.191). 
Other seepages have been rumored, but are unconfirmed. Many of the 
"seepages" are bituminous limestone boulders from the glacial drift. 

Drill holes have prospected the underlying strata with a 
view to finding oil. 

Northwest Co., Lsd.15, sec.23, tp.80, range 13, W.6, 
elevation 1,550 feet, was drilled in 1921 to 1923 to a depth of 3,057 
feet and abandoned. Gas shows were recorded at 1,673, 1,697, 2,000, 
2,370, 2,732 feet. These horizons are all within the Peace River 
formation, and the one at 1,673 feet is at the top of the formation. 
This latter gas horizon is said to have yielded 10,000 M.cu.ft. per 



























PLAT3 V. 





N. Northwest '-Veil, ' Irille : 
in 1921-23,to 3,657 feet. 
Lsd.15, sec.23, tp.80, range- 
13, W.6,(Photogr ph by 
Dr.J.A.Allan in 1921.) 



0. Guardi n Oil Co.Well 

numb?' one, starte ^ril- 
’ 

, 45 feet. Lsd.7, sec. 
7, tp.80, range 1 ', W.6. 



P. , ; 20 f< n, on Sask¬ 

atoon creek, sec.^6, range 14, resistant 
ledge forrain member is the Pouce Coupe 
sandstone, blocks of which choke the stream. 



.V STAJe 









£f .0 I r 0 ; i.b ! : rj-' .0 a) 911XI : ) t II9W Js9Wfto ioPI .W 

;-,i - 'Jr t e no daun • Xee't VcO^r oJ V £S-IS£X nx 

.- . . * ’ ll.bs 

' ' 

, . I ■ t t 0< f . .qo ,Y (AlSei «I HBlIA.A.L.xa 





c. r;c r/, J - 9 '- OS juoci.r t iIb'I’IsX.b ;/ • < I 

j . .73X8 f/f . M 9 '52 ft. SI t d *093 <^99T0 nOOXB 

2 i c ci l ;5 fit ftxraiol 9 §b 9 l 

. it i -.t ; .ado rfoxrlv Jo e^oolcf ^noXsbnBS 









- 134 - 


day, with a closed in pressure of 500 lbs. per square inch. 

Pouce Coupe Oils No. 1, Lsd.14, sec.19, tp.79, range 13, 
Vv.6, elevation 1,785 feet, was drilled in 1922 to 1,482 feet. Gas 
was recorded at 750 feet. This horizon is basal Dunvegan. 

Batcheller Syndicate, Sec.24, tp.79, range 12, W.6, elevat¬ 
ion 2,140 feet, was a diamond drill test hole with a core taken of 
all consolidated strata. It was drilled in 1938 to 1,224 feet. No 
gas or oil was reported from this well. 

In 1922, the Great Slave Oil and Refining, drilled a 110 
foot hole in Sec.19, tp.80, range 13, W.6. 

Guardian Oil Co. No. 1, in Lsd.7, sec.7, tp.80, range 12, 
W.6, elevation 2,080 feet, is the only active drilling operation in 
the Pouce Coupe area (present depth 6,645 feet). Gas is reported 
from 933 feet near the base of the Dunvegan, from 2,365 feet at the 
top of the Peace River sandstone, (cased off), and from the top of 
the Triassic at 4,774 feet to 4,795 feet. A little gas is issuing 
from the well at present (March 1941)* There is very low pressure. 
Oil is found in very small quantities at the top of the Triassic, 
and light shows of oil are noted on cores from 5,360 feet, 5,617 to 
5,624 feet, 5,712 feet, 5,735 to 5,736 feet, 5,737 to 5,738 feet, 
5,793 to 5,794 feet, 5,840 to 5,842 feet, 5,846 to 5,860 feet, 5,950 
to 5,954 feet, 5,9-81 to 6,001 feet, 6,046 to 6,066 feet; a small 
amount of gas accompanies these showings and small shows of gas 
occur in cores taken between these oil shows and below to 6,640 feet. 
A sample of oil from the Guardian well between 5,749 and 5,800 feet 














- 135 - 

was examined by the Provincial analyst, Victoria, British Columbia, 
who reports: 

specific gravity at 60° F 0.8426 or 36.4° A.P.I. 
small amount of the lower boiling point fraction, 
bulk of material in light diesel range. Heavy 
ends very low. Has a - -e of light diesel oil 

with small percentage of asphaltenes dissolved in 
it. 36# parafines. Low in lubric. 1- 

atiles. Bonanza oil mostly straight chained. Sul¬ 
phur content 0.36# (very low). Good diesel fuel. 

The above oil is coming from the Triassic and brings to attention 
the possibility of a new potential horizon for oil exploration in 
Western Canada. The horizons carrying oil in the Guardian well lack 
porosity and to even a higher degree they lack permeability. Por¬ 
ous zones below 5,360 feet may show porosity to 15# but the per¬ 
meability is very low. The porous zone at the top of the Triassic 
(depth 4>792 feet) shows a porosity of 16.7# with a permeability of 
3.4 millidarceys (Gulf Research department, Pittsburgh, Pa.) but has 
yielded only a slight scum of oil on salt water. 

So far only two horizons can be classed as ootentially pro¬ 
ductive. The gas sand at the top of the Peace River formation, en¬ 
countered carrying gas, at 1,673 feet in the Northwest well and at 
2,365 feet in the Guardian well, has yielded 10,000 M.cu.ft. a day 
from the Northwest well. The Triassic limestone horizon near 5,749 
feet in the Guardian well has yielded a few gallons a day of light 
oil. 

The results have been rather discouraging for the individ¬ 
ual wells in the area, but encouraging for the possibilities of other 
oil fields within the Peace river area. The exploration of the Tri¬ 
assic strata has shown evidence of considerable oil bearing strata 



















- 136 - 

as potential source beds. Potential reservoir beds are distributed 
throughout the Lower Cretaceous sandstone formations, and throughout 
the calcareous base of the Jurassic, and at the top of the Triassic 
and within the upper two hundred feet of the Triassic and at the 
base of the Upper Triassic. Excellent cap rocks are found in the 
shales of the St. John, the shales of the Loon River, the shales of 
the Jurassic and the '‘red-beds" and gypsum beds of the Triassic. 
Structure is the main lack of the area, but the writer suggests that 
the structures will be found at depth and will be probably outlined 
by seismograph methods even if found by drilling. There is still 
the possibility that deeper drilling into the Paleozoic will re¬ 
veal new porous horizons and potential "oil sands". 

The Guardian Oil Co. is planning on deepening their well, 
and meanwhile the British Columbia government is drilling a well at 
Commotion Creek in the Pine River area to the west. The information 
to be obtained from these two wells is eagerly awaited. 














- ■ • : 









. 

















BIBLIOCRAPH Y 


0 . 


1 . 


2 . 

3. 


4. 


5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 


11 . 


Allan, J. A. ’’Section between Peace River and Hudson Hope” 

S. 4 I.R.C.A. Second Ann. Rept. #5, 1921,pp. 35-38. 

Allan, J. A. and Cameron A. E. ’’Preliminary Report on Pouce 

Coupe Oil Fields” Mining and Engineering Record, 
Vol. 26, #17 * 18, Sept. 1921, pp. 189-192. 

Allan, J. A. and Rutherford, R. L. "Saunders Creek and 
Nordegg Coal Basins Alberta Canada” S. 4 
I.R.C.A., Rept. #6, 1923. 

Allan, J. A. and Rutherford, R. L. "Geology along the 

Blackstone Brazeau and Pembina rivers in the 
Foothills belt Alberta” S & I.R.C.A., Report 
#9, 1924. 

Allan, J. A., Warren, P. S. and Rutherford, R. L. "A Pre¬ 
liminary Study of the Eastern Ranges of the 
Rocky Mountains in Jasper Park Alberta” Trans. 

Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 26, sec. 4, 1932,pp.225-248. 

Allan, J. A. "A new deposit of gypsum in the Rocky Mountains 
Alberta” Res. Counc. Alberta, Rept. #27, 1932, 
pp. 27-29. 

Allan, J. A. "A new deposit of Gypsum in the Rocky Mountains 
Alberta” Trans. C.I.M.M., Vol. 36 , 1933, 
pp. 619-635. 

Allan, J. A. and Rutherford, R. L. "Geology of Central Alberta' 
Res. Counc. Alberta, Rept. #30, 1934. 

Allan, J. A. "Geological Map of Alberta” Res. Counc. Alberta, 

Map #16, 1937. 

Allan, J. A. and Stelck, C. R. "Subsurface formations of the 
Pouce Coupe River district, Alberta” Trans. 

Roy. Soc. Cari., Vol. 34, Sec. 4, 1940,pp.15-21. 

Berry, E. W. "The age of certain Mesozoic Geological forma¬ 
tions in Western Canada” Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., 
Vol. 20, sec. 4, 1926, pp. 201-206. 

Berry, E. W. "The Kootenay and Lower Blairraore Floras - The 
Upper Blairraore Flora” G.S.C., Liis. Bull. #58, 
1929, PP. 28-72. 


j 







ii 


12. Branson, E. B. "Trias-Juras Rad Beds of the Rocky Mountain 

Region" Jour. Geol., Vol. 35, 1927, pp.607-630. 

13. Cameron, A. E. "Explorations in the vicinity of Great Slave 

Lake" G.S.C., Suram. Rapt., 1917, pt. C, pp.21-28 


14. Cameron, A. E. "Hay and Buffalo Rivers Great Slave Lake and 
Adjacent Country" G.S.C., Suram. Report, 1921, 
pt. B, pp. 1-44. 


15. Collet, L. W. "Resultats preliminaires de l'expedition 

geologique, de l'Universite de Harvard danB lee 
Montagnas Rocheuses du Canada (Jasper National 
Park 1929)'* Extrait du Compte Rendu des Seances 
de la Societe de phys. at d'hist. nat. de Geneve, 
Vol. 47, #2, 1930, pp. 80-82. 

16. Collet, L. W., "Sur la presence cu Lias superieur et du 

Bajocian dans lee couches de Fiddle Creek" Compt 
Rendu des seances de la Societe de phys. et 
d'hist. nat. de Geneve, Vol. 48, #1, 1931, 
pp. 14-18. 


17. Crickmay, C. H. "Jurassic History of North America: its 

bearing on the development of continental 
structure" Am. Phil. Soc., Vol. 70, #1, 
pp. 15-102. 

18. Dawson, G. M. "On the Geology of the region between the 54-th 

and 5^th parallel from the Pacific coast to 
Edmonton in Report on an exploration from Port 
Simpson on the Pacific to Edmonton on the 
Saskatchewan and the Peace River Country" G.S.C. 
Rept. of Progress 1879-80, Pt. B, pp. 99-136. 

19. Dawson, J. W. "On the Cretaceous and Tertiary floras of 

British Columbia and the Northwest territory" 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 1, sec. 4, 1882, 

PP. 15-34. 


20. Dawson, J. W. "On the Mesozoic Floras of the Rocky Mountain 

region of Canada" Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol.3, 
sec. 4, 1885, PP. 1-22. 

21. Dawson, J. W. "On the Correlation of Early Cretaceous floras 

in Canada and the U.S." Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., 
Vol. 10, sec. 4, 1892, pp. 79-94. 





5 


( « ! 





ill 


22. Dowling, D. B. "Cool fields of J&sper Park, Alberta'* G.3.C., 
Summ. Rapt. 1910, p. 150. 

23* Dowling, D. B. "Geology of Roche Uiette map area, Jaepor 

Park Alberta 1 * G.S.C., Summ. Rept. 1911, p.201. 

24. Dowling, D. B. "The Cretaceous Sea in Alberta" Trans. Roy. 

Soc. Can., Yol. 9, sec. 4, 1915, pp* 27-42. 

25* Dowling, D. B., Slipper, S. E. and McLearn, F. H. "Investi¬ 
gations in the Oil and Gas Fields of Alberta, 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba" G.S.C., Memoir 116, 

1919. 

26. Dresser, J. A. "Report of Oil Surveys in the Peace River 
district" Dept, of Lands B. C., Summ. Rept. 

1920, pt. R, pp. 1-10. 

27* Dresser, J. A. "Exploration for Oil and Gas in the Peace 
River District" Dept, of Lands, B.C., Summ. 

Rept. 1922. 

28. Ells, S. C. "Bituminous Sands of Northwestern Alberta" Mines 

Branch, Dept, of Mines Can., Pub. #632, 1926. 

29. Evans, C. S. and Caley, J. F. "Reconnaissance Survey of 

Foothill area in Wapiti River Basin, Alberta" 
G.S.C., Summ. Rept. 1929, pt. B, pp. 36-40. 

30. Gwillim, J. C. "Report of Oil Survey in the Peace River 

District" Dept, of Lands B. C., Summ. Rept. 

1919, pt. M, 1920. 

31* Hume, G. S. "North Nahanni and Root Rivers Area and Caribou 
Island Mackenzie River District" G.S.C., 

Summ. Rept. 1921, pt. B, pp. 67-78. 

32. Hume, G. S. "Mackenzie River Area, District of Mackenzie, 
Northwest Territories',* G.S.C., Summ. Rept. 

1923, pt. B, pp. 1-18. 

33* Hume, G. S. "Clay deposits on Athabaska River Alberta" G.S.C., 
Summ. Rept. 1923, pt. B, pp. 16-20. 

34. Hume, G. S. "Oil and Gas in Western Canada" Second Edition, 
G.S.C., Ec. Geol. Series #5, 1933* 




. 


t 


V 




A 




iv 


35. Kindle, E. M. "The succession of fossil Faunas in the 

eastern part of Jasper Park" Am. Jour. Sci., 

Vol. 18, 1929, pp. 190-1. 

36. Lammers, E. C. "The origin and Correlation of the Cloverly 

Conglomerate'* Jour. Geol., Vol. 47, #2, 

Feb.-Mar., 1939, pp. 113-132. 

37. Link, T. A. "Alberta Syncline Canada" A.A.P.G., Bull. Vol. 15, 

No. 5, May 1931, PP. 491-507. 

38. MacKay, B. R. "Brule Mines Coal Area, Alberta" G.S.C., Suram. 

Rept. 1928, pt. B, pp. 1-30. 

39. MacKay, B. R. "Stratigraphy and Structure of Bituminous Coal¬ 

fields in the vicinity of Jasper Park, Alberta" 
C.I.M.M., Trans. Vol. 33, 1930, pp. 1306-1342. 

40. MacVicar, J. "Foothill coal areas north of the Grand Trunk 

Pacific Railway Alberta" G.S.C., Summ. Rept. 

1916, pt. C, pp. 85-93. 

41. MacVicar, J. "Coal Areas Northwest of Brule Lake Alberta" 

G.S.C., Summ. Rept. 1919, pt. C, pp. 8-13. 

42. MacVicar, J. "Preliminary investigations of coal deposits 

on Smoky Hay and Berland Rivers, Alberta" 

G.S.C., Summ. Rept. 1923, pt. B, pp. 21-63. 

43. Malloch, G. S. "Bighorn Coal Basin Alberta" G.S.C., Mem. 

9E, 1911. 

44. Martin, G. C. "Triassic Rocks of Alaska" 3ull. G.S.A., 

Vol. 27, 1916, pp. 685-718. 

45. McConnell, R. G. "Report on the geological structure of a 

portion of the Rocky Mountains accompanied by 
a section measured near the 51st parallel" 

G.S.C., Ann. Rept., pt. D, 1886. 

46. McConnell, R. G. "On a portion of the district of Athabaska, 

comprising the country between Peace River and 
Athabaska River" G.S.C., Ann. Rept., Vol. 5, 
pt. 1, 1890-91, PP. 27-45d, pp. 52-54d. 

47. McEvoy, J. "Geology and natural resources of the country 

traversed by the Yellowhead Pass Route" G.S.C., 
Ann. Rept., Vol. 11, pt. D, 1898. 










V 


48. 

49. 

50. 

51 . 


52 . 

53 . 

54. 

55 . 

56 . 

57 . 

58 . 

59 . 


6o. 


McLearn, F. H. "Athabaska Rivar Section Alberta* G.S.C., 

Summ. Rapt. 1916, pp. 145-151. 

McLearn, F. H. "Peace River Section, Alberta" G.S.C., Summ. 
Rept. 1917, pt. C, pp. 14-21. 

McLearn, F. H. "Crataceoue Lower Smoky River, Alberta" G.S.C., 
Summ. Rapt. 1918, pt. C, pp. 1-7. 

McLearn, F. H. "New Species of Pelecypods from the Cretaceous 
of Northern Alberta" G.S.C., Mia. Bull. #29, 

1919. 


McLearn, F. H. "Three New Pelecypoda from the Coloradoan 
of the Peace and Smoky Valleys Alberta" Can. 
Field Nat., Vol. 36 , #3, Mar. 1920, pp. 53-56. 

McLearn, F. H. "Mesozoic of Upper Peace River B. C." G.S.C., 
Summ. Rept. 1920, pt. B, pp. 1-7. 

McLearn, F. H. "Peace River Canyon Coal Area B.C." G.S.C., 

Summ. Rept. 1922, pt. B, pp. 1-47. 

McLearn, F. H. "New Species from the Coloradoan of Lower 

Smoky and Lower Peace Rivers, Alberta" G.S.C., 
Mis. Bull. 42, 1926, pp. 117-126. 

McLearn, F. H. and Hume, G. S. "The stratigraphy and Oil 

prospects of Alberta Canada" A.A.P.G., Bull. 
Vol. 11, No. 3, 1927, PP. 237-260. 

McLearn, F. H. "Mesozoic Palaeontology of Blairmore Region - 
Cretaceous Invertebrates" G.S.C., Mus. Bull. 

No. 58, 1929, PP. 73-79. 


McLearn, F. H. "Notes on some Canadian Mesozoic faunas" 

Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 24, sec. 4, 1930, 
PP. 1-13. 


McLearn, F. H. "A preliminary study of the Faunas of the 

Upper Triassic Schooler Creek forroation, Western 
Peace River B. C." Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 
24, sec. 4, 1930, pp. 13-21. 


McLearn, F. H. "The Gastroplites and other Lower Cretaceous 
faunas of the Northern Great Plains" Trans. 
Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 25, 8 QC. 4, 1931, PP* 1-7. 







Vi 


61. McLearn, F. H. "Problems of the Lower Cretaceous of the 

Canadian Interior" Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., 

Vol. 26, sec. 4, 1932, pp. 157-177. 

62. McLearn, F. H. "The ammonoid genera Gastroplites and Neo- 

gastroplites" Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 27, 
sec. 4, 1933» PP. 13-24. 

63 . McLearn, F. H. "Pelecypods of the Lower Cretaceous Clearwater 

formation northern Alberta" Trans. Roy. Soc. 
Can., Vol. 27, sec. 4, 1933, pp. 139-156. 

64. McLearn, F. H. "The fossil zones of the Upper Cretaceous 

Alberta Shale" Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 31, 
sec. 4, 1937, pp. 111-120. 

65. McLearn, F. H. "New Species from the Triassic Schooler Creek 

formation" Can. Field Nat., Vol. 51, No. 7, 

Oct. 1937, pp. 95-98. 

66. McLearn, F. H. "Contributions to the Triassic of Peace River, 

B. C." Can. Field Nat., Vol. 51, No. 9, Dec. 
1937, PP. 127-131. 

67 . McLearn, F. H. "Some Neo-Triassic Ammonoid Faunas of the 

Peace River Foothills, B. C." Can. Field 
Nat., Vol. 53, No. 5, May 1939, pp. 70-71. 

68. McLearn, F. H. "Some Species of the Neo Triassic genera, 

Juvavites, etc" Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 33, 
sec. 4, 1939, pp. 51-57. 

69. McLearn, F. H. "Notes on the Geography and Geology of the 

Peace River Foothills" Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., 
Vol. 34, sec. 4, 1940, pp. 63-75. 

.70. Parejas, Ed "Resultats de l'expedition geologique de 

l'Universite de Harvard dans les Montagnas 
Rocheuses du Canada (Jasper National Park 1929) 
Note no. 3* Sur le Trias de la vallee de 
l’Athabaska" Extrait du compte rendu de la 
Societe de phys. et d’hist. nat. de Geneve, 

Vol. 48, No. 1, Jan.-Mar., 1931, pp. 60 - 67 . 

71. Rose, B. "Crows Nest Coalf Field, Alberta" G.S.C., Sumra. 
Rept. 1916, pp. 107-114. 





vii 


72. Russell, L. S. "Molluscs from the McMurray Formation of 
Northarri Alberta" Trane. Roy. Soc. Can., 

Vol. 26, sac. 4, 1932, pp. 37-43. 

73* Rutherford, R. L. "Geology of the Foothills belt between 
McLeod and Athabaeka Rivers, Alberta" S. & 
I.R.C.A., Rept. #11, 1925. 

74. Rutherford, R. L. "Geology of the area between Athabaeka and 

Embarras rivers" S. <3t I.R.C.A., Rept. #15, 

1926. 

75. Rutherford, R. L. "Geology and Water Resources in parts of 

the Peace River and Grande Prairie districts, 
Alberta" S. & I.R.C.A., Rept. #21, 1930. 

76. Rutherford, R. L. "Saskatchewan gravels and 3anda in Central 

Alberta" Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 31, sec.4, 
1937, PP. 81-95. 

77. Sanderson, J. 0. G. "Geology of the Brazeau Area" Trans. 

C.I.M.M., Vol. 42, 1939, PP. 429-442. 

78 . Spiaker, 3. M. "Report of oil surveys in the Peace River 

District" Dept, of Lands B. C., Summ. Rept. 
1920, pt. K, pp. 10-27. 

79. Spieker, 3. M. "The Petroleum Geology of a part of the 

Western Peace River B. C." A.A.P.G., Vol. 6, 
no. 2, 1922, pp. 112-138. 

80. Selwyn, A. R. C. "Report on Exploration in British Columbia" 

G.S.C. Rept. of Prog. 1875-76, pt. IV, pp.28-86. 

81. Smith, J. P. "Lower Triassic Aramonoids of North America" 

U.S.G.S., Prof. Pap. 167, 1932. 

82. Stewart, J. S. "Geology of the disturbed belt of Southwestern 

Alberta" G.S.C., Memoir 112, 1919. 

83 . Stewart, J. S. "Oil and Gas possibilities in Northeastern 

British Columbia" G.S.C., Surnm. Rept. 1919, 
pt. C, pp. 3-8. 

84. Warren, P. S. "Banff Area Alberta" G.S.C., Memoir 153, 1927. 











t 


t 


viii 


85. Warren, P. S. and Rutherford, R. L. "Fossil Zones in the 

Colorado shale of Alberta" Am. Jour. Sci., 

Vol. 16, Aug, 1928, pp. 129-136. 

86. Warren, P. S. "Three new ammonites from the Cretaceous of 

Alberta" Trane. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 24, sec. 4 
1930, pp. 21-26. 

87* Warren, P. S. "Description of new species of fossils from 
parts of the Peace River and Grande Prairie 
districts Alberta" Res. Counc. of Alberta, 
Report $ 21 , Appendix, 1930. 

88. Warren, P. S. "New Coloradoan species from upper Peace River 

British Columbia" Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., 

Vol. 27, sec. 4, 1933, PP. 109-119. 

89. Warren, P. S. "Present status of the Fernie shale, Alberta" 

Am. Jour. Sci., Vol. 27, Jan. 1934, PP* 56-70. 

90. Warren, P. S. "An Aptian horizon in the Cretaceous of the 

Lower Mackenzie valley" Jour. Paleontology, 

Vol. 11, #1, Jan. 1937, PP. 69-72. 

91. Warren, P. S. "The Blairmore conglomerate and associated 

sediments" Trans. Roy. Can. Inst., Vol. 22, 
#47, pt. 1, Oct. 1938, pp. 7-20. 

92. Warren, P. S. "Age of the Selkirk and Rocky Mountain uplifts 

in Canada" Am. Jour. Sci., Vol. 36 , July 1938, 

pp. 66-71. 

93. Warren, P. S. "Sedimentation in the Cordilleran geosyncline 

in Alberta and British Columbia" Proc. 6th 
Pacific Science Congress, 1939, PP. 245-251. 

94. Warren, P. S. and Stelck, C. R. "Cenomanian and Turonian 

faunas in the Pouce Coupe district, Alberta and 
British Columbia" Trans.-Roy. Soc. Can., Vol.34 
sec. 4, 1940, pp. 143-152. 

95. Webb, J. B. and Hertlein, L. G. "Zones in the Alberta shale 

in the Foothills of Southwestern Alberta". 

Bull. A.A.P.G., Vol. 18, #11, Nov. 193*. 

PP. 1387-1416. 

96. Whiteaves, J. F. "Notes on the Ammonites of the Cretaceous 

rocks of the District of Athabaska with 
description of four new species" Trans.Roy. Soc 
Can., Vol. 10, sec. 4, 1892, pp. 111-120. 








k •;/ 

( 


4 




ix 


97. Whiteaves, J. F. “The fossils of the Triasuic Rocks of 

British Columbia'* G.S.C. Contribution to 
Can. Palaeontology, Vol. 1, pt. II, note 3, 

1889, pp. 129-141. 

98. Wickenden, R. T. D. '*Notes on some deep wells in Saskatchewan" 

Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 26, sec. 4, 1932, 
pp. 177-196. 

99. Wilder, F. A. "Gypsum: its occurrence origin technology etc" 

Iowa Geol. Survey, Vol. 28, Ann. rept. 1917, 

& 18, pp. 47-560. 

100. Williams, M. Y. "Reconnaissance across northeastern British 

Columbia and the Geology of the Northern 
extension of Franklin Mountains, N. W. T." 

G.S.C. Summ. Rept. 1922, pt. B, pp. 65-87. 

101. Williams, M. Y. and Bocock, J. B. "Stratigraphy and Pal¬ 
eontology of the Peace river valley of British 
Columbia" Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., Vol. 26 , 
sec. 4, 1932, pp. 197-224. 

F. A. and Younge, 0. R. "Preliminary Soil Survey 
Adjacent to the Peace River Alberta West of 
Dunvegan" Res. Counc. Alberta, Report #23, 

1930. 


102. Wyatt, 




4 




' 

t ♦ • 































1 































































































































































































































' 





LEGEND 


Formations 


UPPER CRETACEOUS 


LOWER CRETACEOUS^&T. JOHN 


(WAPITI I-r 

j UPPER SMOKY RIVER 
(.8AVTRCE —J 

□ 

□ 

n 


LOWER SMOKY RIVER 
< KASM APAU) 


Dun vegan 


Symbols 


GEOLOCI CAL BOUNDARY - DEFINITE E3 
GEOLOCICAL BOUNDARY - ASSUMED 


Outcrop* of POUCE COUPE Sam/itonc. r'V > 


RAILROAD 


DEEP BORE HOLE 


INTERPROVINCIAL 

BOUNDARY 


Structure 

Profile Section 


ENOS of North 
South PROFILE 


unirs ofwat u 

Eat PROFILE 


" ED 

®33 







































































































































































































































































































































































































































829748 


