
For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


'HE TEMPERATURE AND MOISTURE EFFECTS OF CERTAIN 


MULCHING MATERIALS ON WARM SEASON CROPS 


R. NORMAN GIFFEN 


DIVISION OF HORTICULTURE 


DEPARTMENT OF PLANT SCIENCE 


UNIVERSITY 


APRIL 1952 
















(3.V 3UBBIB 












UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
LIBRARY 


Regulations Rog arding I• ies os a na ' iss or tatio ns 

Typescript copies of theses and dissertations for Laster’s 
and doctor f s degrees deposited in the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the . acuity of u-rucVuete Studies, 
may be consulted in the Reference Reading Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit, in the Department under whose 
supervision the work was done. Some epartments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of .alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used onlv with due 
regard to priority rights of the author . Britten permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 
When permission has been granted, credit must appear In the 
pub1ishe d wo rk. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used In accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 
user . 


Please sign below* 


Date 


Signature 


insiitution 



















































University of Alberta 


Faculty of Agriculture 


Department of Plant Science 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled ”The temperature and moisture 
effects of certain mulching materials on warm season crops”, 
submitted by R.N. Giffen, B.Sc., in partial fulfilment 
of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science* 


Date..I]prU . Z X>. '.t^, 


PROFESSOR 


PROFESSOR 



PROFESSOR 











ABSTRACT 


The influence of certain soil mulching materials 
upon soil moisture, soil temperature, nutrient levels and 
plant development was studied during a period from 1949 to 
1951. A series of field trials, using a randomized block design 
and six replicates, was conducted with three warm season 
vegetable crops (tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers) and three 
treatments (asphalt sheathing paper, wood planer shavings 
and no mulch), Soil moisture was determined from tensiometer 
readings, and temperature from recording and direct reading 
apparatus. 

Results indicated that the use of paper mulch 
compared to the bare soil treatment caused a general and stable 
increase at a soil depth of three inches, whereas the no 
mulch and shavings comparison showed as definite a decrease 
in soil temperature, due to the use of the latter material. 

Both increases and decreases were of the order of 10° F.. 

Soil moisture was retained longest under shavings, and in 
general the bare soil lost the greatest amount of soil moisture. 
Hail interfered with plant growth and fruiting records in 
1949 and 1950, but the 1951 records show a substantial increase 
in growth and fruit production on the paper mulch plots. 

Using shavings resulted in a severe depression of growth, 
although no symptoms of plant toxicity were observed. 


It is assumed that the favorable influence of 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/giffen1952 


asphalt paper as a soil mulch is largely due to its dark 
colour and consequent high absorption of solar radiation. It 
is of particular interest that the paper treatment was very 
effective in promoting most rapid growth and heavier fruiting 
during the 1951 summer, which was an unusually cool, cloudy 
season. There was no evidence that either mulch treatment 
affected the maturity rate of fruiting. 




THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE TEMPERATURE AND MOISTURE EFFECTS OF CERTAIN 
MULCHING MATERIALS ON WARM SEASON CROPS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 

OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF AGRICULTURE 
DEPARTMENT OF PLANT SCIENCE 

BY 

R. N. GIFFEN 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


April, 1952 









TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Fage 

Introduction ...... • 1 

Literature Review .... ....... .. 2 

The Effect of Mulch On Soil Moisture .... .. 3 

Temperature Effects . 5 

Effects on Other Soil Properties........ . 8 

The Effect on Growth and Yield of Crop . 14 

Value in Weed Suppression ... 16 

A Comparison of Field Methods of Measuring Moisture.. 16 

Experiment I 1949 ..... 18 

Materials and Methods ..... 18 

Experiment I Results . 19 

Experiment II 1950 ...... 22 

Materials and Methods ..... 22 

Experiment II Results .. 27 

Experiment III 1951 ... •••••••• ... 35 

Materials and Methods .. 35 

Experiment III Results .. 36 

Discussion of Results .... 45 

Mulching and Soil Moisture .... 45 

Mulching and Soil Temperature ... 45 































■ 




























TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued) 


Page 

Mulching and Plant Nutrient .... 46 

Mulching and Plant Development .... 47 

Mulching and Fruit Development ••••••••••••*• . 49 

General Summary and Conclusions ....... 50 

Acknowledgements •.•.... 52 

Bibliography ...... 53 

Appendix 1 ...... i 

Appendix II ... ii 

Appendix III ........ iii 

Appendix IV .... iv 

Appendix V . ................. .. v 

Appendix VI •••....• ..... vi 

Appendix VII .. vii 

Appendix VIII 


viii 





















INTRODUCTION 


Originally, the term tt mulch" meant merely an 

i 

application of manure or other loose material such as straw 
or leaves, spread thickly on the surface of the ground around 
newly planted trees and other plants. Such plants were 
usually of a perennial nature and the purpose of the mulch 
was to protect plant roots from the drying effects of wind 
and sun. In present day agricultural usage, however, a 
mulch may he defined as any artificial modification of the 
soils surface. These modifications include the soil mulch 
achieved hy recommended cultivation procedure, the straw 
mulch of special utility in strawberry culture, mulches laid 
down as winter protection in the colder areas of the world, 
and the impervious paper mulch used in the pineapple industry 
of the Hawaiian Islands. 

Mulches applied to the surface of soil exert effects 
upon the soil environment. These effects are brought about 
by the ability of the mulch to conserve the soil moisture and 
raise or lower the soil temperature. The addition of organic 
matter raises the soil humus content, which in turn effects 
the soil structure. Also, this organic matter decomposes 
in the soil and increases the available nutrients in the soil. 

Investigators have shown that plants vary in their 
















•' ■ ’ ' : . O■ " • ■ 

‘ • • ; • '■ . ; ■: V. : 7 O i : <*:•: 


. 





2 


reaction to mulching. Differential responses have been shown 
to depend largely upon the climatic conditions and the type of 
plant grown under the mulch, as well as upon the physical 
characteristics of the mulch itself. 

The present study is mainly concerned with evaluating 
the effect of certain types of mulches upon warm season crops 
in the north central Alherta area. The successful growing 
of these crops in this area is hazardous even under good 
weather conditions, because of the very short frost free 
season and generally cool nights during the growing season. 

It was thought that mulching the soil with black paper mulch 
might change the soil enviroment enough to have the effect of 
speeding plant maturity. 


LITERATURE REVIEW 

Many different types of materials have been used 
for mulching, including barnyard manure, seaweed, straw, 
wood shavings and sawdust, grass clippings, glass wool, pine 
needles, peat moss and paper. These materials have been 
used successfully on a great variety of plants. Bushnell and 
Weaver (9) have reported the use of straw as a mulch for 
potatoes. Isenberg and Odland (23) used sawdust, cow manure 
and straw on such crops as cucumbers, tomatoes and sweet corn. 
Stewart et al (45) of Hawaii used black paper as a mulch 
for pineapples. Flint (15) used this paper on a 







3 


large number of vegetable crops in the United States. The 
use of straw and sawdust as mulches for strawberries and 
raspberries has been long established as a good practice. 

The Effect of Mulch U^on Soil Moisture 

It would appear that the main object of applying a 
mulch to horticultural crops has been to conserve moisture. 
This influence assures a more constant supply available to 
the crop throughout the season. The ability to do this will 
vary with the different types of mulch materials. Harris and 
Yao (19) found that there was a difference of 54.1 percent in 
soil moisture loss between straw, the most effective material, 
and manure, which was least effective in conserving moisture. 
Wood shavings, grass and hay were found to be intermediate 
in this respect. 

The absorbing power of the mulch material determines 
its ability to withdraw moisture from the soil. This moisture 
is subsequently lost to the atmosphere through evaporation. 

The moisture content held by manure was estimated at 144.7 
percent of its dry weight while the moisture held by the straw 
was found to be 11.8 percent of its dry weight. Therefore, 
an efficient mulch material must be one which does not absorb 
or retain moisture readily and forms practically no capillary 
system within itself. This will explain the reports of Millar 
and Turk (32) that peat had an adverse effect upon moisture 
absorption by the soil because the moisture was taken up or 
absorbed directly from rainfall by the mulch. It was then 















' 











-4 


evaporated to the air before ever reaching the underlying soil. 

The idea of interrupting the capillary pull of the 
surface soil on underlying moisture is the principle involved 
with the dust mulch. However, Shaw (39) has stated that the 
only situation when this type of mulch would be very effective 
in reducing loss of water by evaporation would be when the water 
table was very close to the surface. He suggested that the 
problem under these conditions would be more likely to be 
drainage, rather than conservation of soil water. Further to 
this, McCall (29) reported that the dust mulch has an inhibitory 
effect upon current moisture absorption under conditions where 
individual rains were not heavy enough to penetrate the mulch. 

A good number of mulch materials have proven advantage¬ 
ous in conserving moisture. Harris and Yao (19) have reported 
that an effective mulch of straw one inch thick was capable 
of retaining 60 percent more moisture than the unmulched soil. 
Stewart et al (44) found that a black paper mulch used with 
pineapples in Hawaii conserved a noticeable amount more moisture 
than did the adjacent bare soil areas. Flint (15) suggested 
that the paper mulch distributed the current rainfall moisture 
to the advantage of the plants. The water gained by rainfall 
or sprinkling is carried by the paper directly to the immediate 
plant root area. On the bare soil, a light rain usually moistens 
the whole superficial layer of soil, and this moisture is 
quickly lost through evaporation. Alfred Smith (41) found 
that moisture conservation due to paper mulching did not extend 






:nl : 










■ ; V />K\i 






- 5 - 


below six inches. Magistad et al (28) reported that bagasse, 
which is crushed sugar cane, was more effective in conserving 
soil moisture than was paper mulch under Hawaiian conditions. 
Porous soil mulches, such as straw and sawdust were found by 
Turk and Partridge (47) to facilitate easier infiltration of 
rainfall moisture into the soil. 

Temperature Effects 

The realization that certain types of mulching 
materials made favourable modifications in soil temperature 
levels came with the use of paper mulch on sugar cane in Hawaii. 
Eckart, as reported by Flint (15) noticed a favourable 
growth increase in cane on the mulched rows as compared to the 
adjacent bare soil rows. This was attributed to higher 
temperature and moisture due to the effect of the bla-ck paper 
mulch. Stewart et al (45) did tests itfith pineapple using 
similar black paper. The workers reported, that during clear 
weather, there was an increase in temperature at the four 
inch level under the paper, of the order of four to six degrees F 
Their report also snows that for a short time after heavy 
rains the bare soil had a higher temperature than the mulch. 

This suggests that the temperature difference under the paper 
mulch was directly related to the effect of the sun ! s rays. The 
effect of the sun radiation is well illustrated in a report by 
Flint (15). It was found that the increase in temperature 
of the soil under paper, over the bare soil was ten degrees F. 
during sunny periods, and was three degrees F. without direct 


radiation 







6 


The influence of the colour of the mulch is indicated 
hy the work of Alfred Smith (41). Black paper mulch was 
compared to grey-coloured paper. The black paper was found 
to raise the temperature considerably higher than did the grey. 
Smith suggested that the black paper absorbed the sun’s rays 
more readily. This was further substantiated by McCaila (30) 
who used a bright straw mulch in comparison with a dark straw 
mulch and the bare soil. It was reported that the bright 
straw mulch, which reflects the most light, warmed the least, 
while the bare soil which reflected the least light, warmed 
the most. The dark mulch was intermediate in temperature 
reaction. 

The magnitude of the increase in temperature, due 
to paper mulching, has been shown to vary depending upon 
climatic conditions. Shaw (38) of California, reported that 
the paper mulched soil was warmer 62 percent of the time, while 
the bare soil plots were warmer 28 percent of the time. Alfred 
Smith (41) working in the same general area the following year, 
reported results which differed with those of Shaw. The day¬ 
time average soil temperatures at the three inch level on 
the black paper mulch was 5.4 degrees F. higher than that on 
the bare soil. Night time average temperatures on the paper 
mulch were 6.4 degrees F. higher than the bare soil. At no 
time during the season was the temperature on the paper mulch 
lower than that on the bare soil. 

These differences in results might suggest that the 



- 7 


effect of paper mulch in increasing soil temperature will 
vary from season to season in the same area. Stewart et al(4-5) 
in Hawaii found that paper mulch was warmer than no mulch 
approximately 90 percent of the time during their experiments* 
Most of the mulching materials exclusive of paper tend to 
reduce the temperature of the soil. Isenberg and Odland (23) 
found that such materials as sawdust, grass clippings, cow 
manure etc. lowered the soil temperature below that of the 
bare soil. Also the range of daily maxima and minima was 
found to be much narrower. This indicates an insulating effect 
by the mulch which must be coupled with the observed heat 
absorption or reflection influence. 

Albrecht and Uhland (3) reported temperatures 
which were 10 degrees C. cooler at the two inch level under 
straw mulch than those on bare soil. McCalla and Dujey (31) 
found that the difference between straw mulched and bare soil 
on their plots was from 10 degrees to 17 degrees C. depending 
upon the thickness of the mulch. 

The effect which mulches have on soil temperatures 
may be reflected in good or poor growth of plants. A 
suggestion as to how temperatures affect plant growth is 
indicated by Schroeder (36). It was found that the critical 
temperature for water absorption in the roots of cucumbers 
was between 60 to 70 degrees F. This worker implied that leaf 
and fruit injury in the late season could be traced to a 
water deficiency in the effected parts. Carter (11) found 










f 

. 












: 


I 




. ' 










: 


















' 




' < 



















8 


that the temperatures below 12 degrees C. and above 37 degrees C. 
restricted the production of dry weight material in soya beans. 
These are two instances of many which indicate that soil 
temperature is a major factor in the over-all soil environment 
of the plants. 

Effects on the Other Soil Properties 

The fact that most mulches become incorporated in 
the top soil, suggests that the materials of the mulch might 
exert some effect upon such properties of the soil as structure, 
reaction, fertility and aggregation. Bollen and Stephenson (S) 
working with straw, hay and sawdust mulches reported no effect 
on soil reaction with sawdust. There was some indication 
that the hay and straw might have reduced the acidity of the 
soil next to the mulch* Subrahmanyan (46) reported that 
high moisture contents effected an increase in pH in soil. 

This suggests that the higher level of moisture under mulch 
might have an effect on soil reaction similarly. 

The type of soil aggregation determines the soils 
structure. Anj^thing which affects aggregation formation 
adversely xrilll result in poor structure. This in turn results 
in poor growing conditions even though nutrients are present 
in adequate amounts in the soil. Hubbell and Gardener (21) 
found that a high moisture content in the soil reduced 
aggregation. Alderfer and Merkle (4) stated that manure 
applied to the soil gave the largest number of large sized 
aggregates, follox^ed by sawdust, oak leaves and corn stover 













■ « 








respectively. n owever, these workers qualify their conclusions 
by suggesting that the chief value of these mulches was in 
soil protection rather than any effect there might be in 
changing the fundamental structure of the soil. Stephenson 
and Schuster (42) (43) found that straw increased the water- 
soluble aggregates. This was thought to be caused mainly by 
the increase in organic matter from the rotting mulch. 

Van Doren and Stauffer (48) also reported that straw mulch 
very definitely favoured aggregation of their soil. Baver (5) 
states that one of the agencies in aggregate formation is 
alternate wetting and drying of the soil. There is the 
possibility then, that the action of the mulch in keeping the 
soil moisture relatively constant throughout the growing season, 
could be detrimental to soil aggregation. The paper mulch lias 
not been cited as demonstrating any effect upon soil aggregation 
formation or upon soil structure. 

The presence of nutrients in the soil, in a readily 
available form to support good growth,reflects the fertility 
of that soil. The effect of mulching upon this fertility has 
been studied by a number of workers. Albrecht (2) compared 
tillage to straw mulching in the accumulation of nitrates in 
the soil. The nitrates were found to be depressed by straw 
mulch. Later, Albrecht and Uhland (3) continued this invest¬ 
igation. Consideration was given to isolating the factors 
which caused the relative lack of nitrogen under straw mulch. 

The conclusions were that lower temperature, higher moisture 


















" 5 

, 








' 


. 


. 


■ 














■V 





' ' ' 






1 







» 











10 


and also poor tilth under the mulch, were the main causes. 
Alhrecht (l) quoted Garney and Metzler as saying that the 
optimum moisture for nitrate production in the soil was reached 
when the soil contained approximately 25 to 35 percent of 
the total amount of moisture it will hold. At variance with 
the foregoing were the results reported by Beaumont (6). He 
recorded a larger accumulation of nitrates under straw mulch 
as compared to bare soil, and offered the explanation that his 
soil was loose, light and well drained, as compared to the 
heavy soil used by Albrecht. There xvas, however, no mention 
of how long the mulch was laid down before the nitrates x^ere 
determined. Beaumont and Crooks (7) reported that strax* mulch 
accumulated nitrates slowly during the first three years, but 
in the fourth year after mulching, nitrates xvere accumulated 
in large amounts. 

Lyon and Buckman (27) stated the responsibility for 
the supression of nitrates under mulch lies xfith the nitrogen- 
carbon ratio. The addition to the soil of sugars, cellulose 
or other substances x^ith a xvide nitrogen-carbon ratio causes 
a disappearance, xdiolly or in part, of the nitrates originally 
present if the conditions of decay are favourable. This 
disappearance does not mean that nitrates are not being formed 
but rather that they are being assimilated as quickly as formed. 
The added carbohydrate material supplies energy material for 
a tremendous multiplication of the all-purpose organisms in the 
soil. The synthesis of nex* protoplasm demands nitrogen, so. 



" 






















11 - 


all that is available in the soil is used up by the micro¬ 
organisms % There is little chance of nitrate accumulation. 

Much decay of the material must take place before the nitrogen- 
carbon ratio is again such, that nitrates may be accumulated. 

Moore and Beaumont (34) estimated the percentage 
carbon and nitrogen at the various levels of accumulating mulch. 
A table of their results is presented. 

Table I. C/N Ratios at Different Levels of Accumulating 
Mulch Material. 


Material 

Total C.% 

Total N.$ 

C/N Ratio 

Fresh Mulch 

44.96 

1.20 

37.5 : 1 

Top of mulch 

43.61 

1.72 

25.4 : 1 

Middle of mulch 

37.29 

2.90 

14.9 : 1 

Bottom of mulch 

24.39 

1.72 

14.2 : 1 


This illustrates effectively the difference in the nitrogen- 
carbon ratio between the fresh mulch and decayed bottom layer. 

Turk and Partridge (47) used a number of different 
mulches on orchard soils. These included a gravel mulch. They 
found that this material, which does not add any carbonaceous 
material to the soil, depressed the nitrates. The opinion expressed 
was that lack of aeration was the main factor, with the possibility 
that a lower temperature also had an effect. Mooers et al (33) 
considered that the depressing effect of mulch upon soil nitrates 
was not only due to lack of aeration but also because of soluble 








■ 










• ■ 
























. 




























12 


derivatives leached into the soil from the mulch materials. 

It is obvious from the foregoing that there is more than one 
probable effect of the mulch upon soil nitrates, and that the 
physical nature of the soil itself is an important consideration. 

Paper mulch, which is not usually incorporated in the 
soil, has been reported also to affect the level of soil 
nitrates. Stewart et al (45) found the level of nitrates 
under paper mulch was much higher than it was on the bare soil. 
Flint (15) did soil analyses upon mulched and unmulched areas 
planted to corn. The soil was a clay of poor fertility. There 
were no differences in nitrates in the two treatments. However, 
plant analysis showed the mulched corn to be very high in 
nitrates, whereas the control plants showed no excess in nitrates* 
This would seem to indicate that there were more nitrates 
available for the plants in the mulched soil. Alfred Smith (41) 
found no consistent differences in nitrates between paper 
mulched and bare soil, but made no tissue analyses from plants 
produced under the two conditions. 

Lyon and Buckman (27) state that the most optimum 
temperature for the process of nitrification is from 80 to 90 
degrees F. Russel and co-workers (35) studied the rate of 
nitrification from five degrees C. to 55 degrees 0. They found 
that nitrification was at its peak at 35 degrees C, and at 
55 degrees C. nitrification ceased altogether. Fuller and Jones 
(16) found that although nitrates were reduced by adding 
cellulose to a soil up to a temperature of 20 to 25 degrees C., 










• . .' ' ■ 









13 


above this temperature the nitrates were higher than their 
original level, indicating a speed up of nitrification at these 
higher temperatures. This evidence indicates a positive 
relationship between nitrates and soil temperature, until a high 
soil temperature is reached. 

Such mulches as straw and sawdust, which reduce the 
average soil temperature because of a reduction in absorbed 
light rays, might possibly have a depressing effect on avail¬ 
able nitrogen because of these lowered temperatures. Conversely, 
paper mulch, which has been shown to raise the temperature of 
the top soil under it, should bring the temperature closer to the 
optimum for highest nitrate production. 

Any factors which limit the microorganism population 
in the soil must necessarily limit the production of nitrates. 
Subrahmanyan ( 46 ) found that very high moisture contents in the 
soil reduced bacterial numbers. Eggleson (13) found no 
positive relationship between the number of bacteria present in 
the soil and moisture and temperature variations. It was 
suggested that there might be an indirect effect by the variations 
affecting growth of vegetation which supplies energy materials 
for the microorganisms, dreene (17) has reported that nitrogen 
fixation Azotobacter was greatest at 32.5 degrees C. The 
fixation was much reduced at temperatures below 18 degrees C. 

The availability of potassium and phosphorous in the 
soil is also affected by mulching. Holmes (20) found that 
mulching increased the mineral, especially the phosporous and 


























I’jv • 1 ' : f. 













' 

■ 
















. 


. 






















' 



14 - 


potassium, content in tomatoes. Latimer and Percival (25) 
found that hay mulch increased the amount of available phos¬ 
phorous, magnesium and potassium. Emmett and Ball (14) have 
reported that wetter soils did not favour the availability of 
potassium. The supply of phosphate varied directly as the 
moisture, after the initial supply of phosphate in the soil was 
exhausted. It does seem probable that any modification in the 
soil’s environment which affects one element in the nutrient 
balance will indirectly affect the others also, and will 
certainly affect the nutrient balance. 

ffi he Effect on Growth and Yield of Crops 

Clark (12) used salt hay as a mulch for raspberries. 

He reported significant yield increases for the mulched areas. 
Bushnell and ¥elton (10) recommended the use of a straw mulch 
with potatoes in areas where temperatures are very high at the 
time of tuber set. The increase in yield was of the order of 
50 bushels per acre. Bushnell and Weaver (9) found t at mulching 
potatoes at seeding depressed growth and yield. The mulch 
application applied when the shoots were just up, gave 60 bushels 
per acre increase. Holmes (20) reported that mulches of shaving, 
rye straw and sugar cane improved the content of carotene and 
soluble solids in tomatoes. Latimer' and Percival (25) found 
that hay mulch gave better growing conditions for apple trees 
than did sawdust. Harris (18) found that sawdust gave large 
increases in strawberry yield over no mulch in the second year 
after mulching. This increase x>ras attributed to a favourable 









- 15 


change in the physical condition brought about by the sawdust. 
Isenberg and Qdland (23) working in Pennsylvania, reported 
increased yields of cucumbers, corn and tomatoes with the mulch 
materials straw, sawdust, cow manure and leaves. Stewart et al 
(44) found that the growth of paper mulched pineapples was 
much more vigorous than in the adjacent no mulch plots. Alfred 
Smith (41) reported slight increases in yield on paper mulch 
of potatoes and yalo. Shaw (38) noted that in California there 
was no apparent increase in yield of potatoes, beans and milo, 
bv the application of paper mulch. Flint (15) did experiments 
on a large number of crops with black paper mulch. It was 
found that the mulch gave a favourable increase in yield to the 
majority of these crops. For example, cucumbers, corn and carrots 
on paper mulch gave yields approximately six times those 
obtained on bare soil. Flint also found that a number of crops 
were brought to maturity earlier by this mulch. Leslie (26) has 
reported that such vegetable crops as lettuce, cauliflower, 
cucumbers and melons were benefited by the application of paper 
mulch under Manitoba conditions. Also, it was found that celery 
was affected adversely by this practice. Hutchins (22) 
suggests that although the paper has a beneficial effect upon 
yield in a majority of cases, economic factors narrow down the 
type of crop upon which it may be used commercially. Those of a 
high per acre value and of a warm season type were considered 
by Hutchins to be best suited for this practice. 




1 















16 


Value in Weed Suppression 

BuslineJ1 and Weaver (9) found that 10 tons of straw 
per acre would not keep down perennial weeds. A number of 
workers (15) (45) (38) have found paper mulch to be extremely 
efficient in reducing the labor needed for weeding. Sawdust 
is intermediate between straw and paper unless a coating 
deeper than two inches is applied. 

A Comparison of Field Methods of Measuring Moisture 

The relative merits of the various methods of determining 
moisture levels in the field were reviewed, in order to evaluate 
the reliance which might be placed in the tensiometer method of 
estimation. The gravimetric method was considered most accurate 
by Kelley (24). However, it has disadvantages for field work. 
These are length of time required, labor involved and equipment 
needed. Scofield (37) found that tensiometers gave very precise 
and useful information of the available moisture in the soil. 
Veihmeyer (49) found tensiometer readings paralleled actual 
moisture available to plant life. Kelley (24) reported the 
tensiometer was accurate within its range, but that this range 
was too narrow. These instruments can only measure to 850 
centimeters of mercury. The soil moisture is still relatively 
high at this point. Slater and co-workers (40) found the 
gravimetric plugs best for low moisture content readings. Kelley 
(24) found these plugs unreliable in field practice. Kelley 
also found that the Boyoucos electrical resistance blocks 
were best for tensions above one atmosphere, if there was no 








17 


excess of salts in the soil* Slater (40) found these instruments 
insensitive at higher levels of moisture* 

The general opinion of the workers (24) (49) (37) was 
that no one instrument was good for all moisture levels* 
Tensiometers were found most accurate at high moistures, 
while the Boyoucos Blocks were best of those used at low 


moisture levels 





- 18 


EXPERIMENT I - 1949 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

The tests carried out in 1949 were of a limited 
scope. They were designed to give some indication of the 
effect of hlack paper mulching upon warm season crops in the 
north central Alberta area. 

The following types of mulch were used: 

1. Heavy black asphalt coated building or sheathing 
paper laid down in strips 36 inches wide and 11 feet long 
with "V” shaped cuts for planting of test plants. 

2. Planer shavings laid down at a depth of two 
inches over the whole area. 

3. A check area where no mulch was employed. 

Three kinds of warm season crops were used: 

1. Tomato - variety L3700 strain I 

2t Pepper - variety Windsor A 

3. Cucumber - variety Mandarin 
The cucumbers, peppers and tomatoes were each planted in 
triplicate rows, running right through the areas of no mulch, 
paper and shavings, respectively. 

Soil moisture determinations were made by means of 
vacuum gauge readings on Rogers tensiometers #. One of these 
instruments was placed in a central spot in each of the 
three treatments. Due to late arrival of the tensiometers, 
no readings were taken until the last week in July. Readings 


# - Obtained from Gallenkamp Ltd., Sun Street, London, England. 



































19 


were taken thereafter until the first frost on September 
10th, at bi-weekly intervals. 

The conditions of this 1949 season were generally 
so dry, and the frost free season so short, that it should 
probably have been ideal for a test such as this. However, 
no yield results could be obtained because of the interference 
of a severe hailstorm on July 16th. The storm damaged the 
plants enough to make any yield data taken, unreliable. 
However, rapid plant recovery allowed observation of growth 
differences. 

No thermographs were available for the trial, and 
soil temperatures could not be taken at definite periods 
because of the press of other duties. These were recorded 
irregularly during the month of August by using direct 
reading Taylor dial thermometers. 

An application of 11-48-0 fertilizer was applied to 
the whole area at the rate of 30 lbs. of actual nitrogen 
per acre. This was done to insure an ample supply of the 
necessary nutrients in the soil for normal plant growth. 


EXPERIMENT I RESULTS 

The damage caused by the hailstorm prevented the 
recording of any useful yield results for this season. 
Temperature and moisture differences under the treatments 
were recorded. 

Although the number of temperature readings taken 
was very inadequate. Table II does indicate that definite 



, 











.. 











■ 






' 






■ 

. 

. 













































■ 









20 


differences were observed. 


Table II. The Averaged Temperature Readings for the Month 
of August 1949, in Degrees C., an Average of 
10 Readings, at the 3 inch level, under the 
treatments. 



No Mulch 

Shavings 

Paper 

8 A.M. Readings 

19.2 

16.8 

19.3 

12 A.M. Readings 

24.3 

20.2 

28.8 

3 P.M. Readings 

24.6 

19.0 

29.0 


These data indicate a raising of the temperature by the paper 
mulch. The shavings mulch kept the soil mulch much cooler 
than the other treatments. 

The moisture readings allow an estimation of the 
relative efficiency of the two mulches in conserving moisture. 
These are shown in Table III. 

It was observed that recovery from the hailstorm 
was much more rapid and complete on paper mulch. It was 
also noted that the plants on the shavings mulch showed a 
yellowing which resembled early stages of the chlorosis 
usually associated with nitrogen deficiency. 









Table III 


Moisture Meter Records# in Cm/Kg at 
Five Inches Depth, 


Date - 1949 

No Mulch 

Shavings 

Paper 

July 

25 

5 

5 

8 

July 

30 

7 

7 

7.5 

Aug. 

2 

8 

8 

8 

Aug. 

5 

8.5 

8 

8 

Aug. 

9 

10 

8 

8 

Aug. 

15 

12 

9 

8.5 

Aug. 

23 

19 

9 

9.5 

Aug. 

25 

22 

8.5 

10 

Aug. 

29 

9 

7 

8 

Sept 

. 3 

11 

8 

8 

Sept 

. 6 

13 

9 

9 

Sept 

. 9 

16 

8.5 

10 

Mean 

11.5 

7.8 

8.6 


#--Tensiometer readings and percentage moisture are in 
an inverse relation to one another. 









22 - 


EXPERIMENT II - 1950 


MATERIALS AND METHODS 


In 1950 the trials were made more elaborate and 
the area was increased to three tenths of an acre. Three 
separate tests of identical treatments and equal size were 
involved, differing in the kind of vegetable grown as test 
material. The three vegetables (L-3700 tomato. Mandarin 
cucumber and Windsor A pepper) were treated separately since 
this method allowed a simple variance analysis to be carried 
out for each vegetable. The treatments were: 

1. Asphalt-coated black paper in strips three feet 
wide by 20 feet long. This paper was held in place by 
covering the edges with soil from the "between paper strip" 
area. 


deep. 


2. Planer shavings spread over the plots, 2 inches 


3. Bare soil plots designated as "No Mulch". 

The plots were made 12 feet by 20 feet. Three of these plots 
constituted a block. The treatments were placed in each block 
at random and each block and plot was replicated six times. 

A clear representation of the plot arrangement is shown in 
Figure 1. 

Ammonium nitrate was applied only to the shavings 
mulch plots. This was done to offset the known effect the 
shavings have in reducing available nitrogen for one to two 















































23 



Fig.l, A view of the 1950 experimental 
area, showing the random arrangement of 
the plots. 









- 24 


seasons after application. This fertilizer was applied at 
the rate of 50 lbs. per acre in four equal applications, 
approximately 15 days apart beginning June 15. 

The cucumbers were seeded directly into the slits 
made in the paper and normally, under shavings and no mulch. 
Wax paper hot caps were used to encourage early development. 
The tomatoes and pepper plants were transplanted to all 
treatment plots at normal transplanting time. Although the 
seed bed appeared to be near the optimum for moisture at the 
time of planting, the usual precaution of supplying water to 
the transplants was taken. The three vegetables were set 
in the row at the usual distance recommended for each. The 
rows on the paper were situated midway across the three foot 
width. This gave equal widths of paper on both sides of the 
plants. Planting dates for the trial were June 7 and 8 for 
cucumbers, June 9 and 10 for tomatoes and June 11 and 12 
for peppers. 

Soil moisture readings were recorded three times 
weekly for the months of June, July and August. These were 
obtained from three Rogers tensiometers placed at random on 
one block of tomatoes. The porous cups of these meters were 
placed at the five inch level in the centre of a row under 
each treatment. 

The tensiometers were calibrated for the percentage 
moisture in the soil of the experimental area. This was done 
by removing a section of the soil, in profile, and placing it 













- 25 - 


in a 3 >ecially built box in the greenhouse. The tensiometer 
was then placed in the soil in the box at the same level as 
it was in the field. The soil was saturated with water, and 
then allowed to dry out normally. While the soil was drying 
out, gravimetric soil moisture determinations were taken in 
triplicate, at every change of five centimeters of mercury 
on the moisture meters. The graph of this calibration is 
presented in Figure 2. 

Temperature records were taken by means of recording 
thermographs. These records were limited by the number of 
thermographs available. Soil temperatures were recorded 
on the pepper plots at the three inch level under no mulch 
and paper mulch during the month of July. A record of the 
temperatures in the soil under the shavings mulch was obtained 
during the month of August. In order to supplement these 
records, temperatures were taken on one block of each vegetable 
with Taylor dial thermometers at one and three inches below 
the suifhce of the soil. Air temperatures were also recorded, 
one at ground level, and then, a reading for the whole area 
at four feet above ground. These readings were taken 12 times 
during one 24 hour period in July and another in August. 

This 24 hour period was chosen arbitrarily on such a day as 
gave promise of being a normal summer day for this area. 

Quick soil analyses for nitrates, phosphates and 
potassium were taken at the beginning of the growing season. 


and then again at the height of vegetative growth. Composite 



















' 


















. 




* 


. 


■ 
































20 



Fig. 2. Cfraph representing calibration of Rogers’ Soil 
Tensiometers oo Malmo clay loam. Parkland Farm, University 
of Alberta. 


















- 27 - 


samples of the soil in each plot were gathered and used 

for these tests. The pH of the soils was tested at the same 

time. 

Yields of the three vegetables were to be taken from 
the centre row of each treatment, with the two outside rows 
being left as guard rows. All other pertinent records of 
plant performance were to be done on the same centre rows. 

The plots were kept free from weeds by hand pulling on shavings 
and around the paper mulch, and by scraping the bare soil. 

At no time was weed control a serious problem, except on the 
"no mulch" areas* Careful attention was needed throughout 
the season to k®ep the paper mulch well anchored to the soii t 
Immediately following every rain the soil had to be replaced 
along the edges of many of the paper strips. Other methods of 
anchoring were tried but showed no advantages over the first 
method used. 


EXPERIMENT II RESULTS 

The growing season during 1950, like that of 1949, 
was dry; however, the moisture supply on the plot area was 
good at the time of planting. The plants made good growth 
upon paper mulch and no-mulch plots and did very poorly on 
the shavings plots. Visible differences in plant development 
were noticed between the paper mulch and no mulch plots at 
three weeks from plant setting and germination of the 
cucumber seeds. This was especially evident in the cucumber 























. 










. 




- 

.. 

. 




, 

■ 




• . 

















. 

. ; 






- 

























28 


plots. A very heavy and disastrous hailstorm on July 24 
made yield data very unreliable, in fact, the plants were so 
damaged that no records of harvest were taken. Soil moisture 
and temperature records could of course, still be considered 
valid. Presumably these should indicate some of the notable 
changes in the production environment that were due to, and 
coincident with the mulching practice. 

Table IV. Soil Moisture Ranges from Tensiometer Readings. 

Data as Cm./Hg., and for Period June - August 
Inclusive. 



Shavings Mulch 

No Mulch 

Paper Mulch 

Lowest reading 

2 

5 

7 

Highest reading 

12 

17 

14 


When these readings are applied to the calibration graph 
in Figure 2, it is seen that the moisture percentages for all 
plots varied from approximately 20 percent to 31 percent. 

These figures indicate a fairly high moisture content in all 
plots throughout the season. A comparison of the treatments 
with respect to moisture conservation throughout the season is 
given in Figure 3. The soil temperature readings that 
were taken under paper mulch and no mulch during July 
were compared. The differences exhibited are outlined in 
Figures 4 to 7. It is noteworthy that the soil temperature 







.. 



















. 


-r;, 


















* 














• • • • * ■ 






































. 











35 - 





Q) 

U 

TO 

•H 






_ Shavings 

_ -Paper 

- * No Mulch 


0 


June 

15 



.r 

Augu st 



Fig. 3. A comparison of soil moisture levels, tomato crop 
1950. Data evolved from tensiometer readings. 







Decrees F. Decree 




- 30 - 


100 


90 

: - 

80 „ 
co 

,o |_ 
60 
50 


* 



-No Mill oh' 

__Air 

_- Paper 



40 

■7 ; . . : * if ; •• ! . ’ • i ’ ; ■; • i * y' ! M ■» ' i.i i j I ■ 

■_ Mon . . Tues, Wed. j Thurs. 


Fri. Sat. 


Mil • MM 'j.! 
I ! 


Sun. j 


Fig. 4, Soil temperatures at 3 inch level, and air temperatures, 
for week of July 10 - 17, 1950. 


100 


90 


_ No Mulch 
. Air 
Paper 


R0 


60 




50 




f j[!, j if ? } ; ■ t M I l j f ! ' M , I I J M|i Ml! M i { M UlH ; 4 

Wed. i Thurs. j Fri. i Sat. Sun. 


Fig. 5. Soil temperatures at 3 inch level, and air temperatures, 
for week of Jul 17 - 24, 1950. 


40 

iii if i i i : i) M!iH j f i 

Mon. Tues. 



r 





31 


f 

100L 

90 


_No Mulch 
Air 

_ Paper 





r /0 - /■ V ^' 

tf t f s 

<u 60 J \ 

- i V / 

■ 

50_ 

40 'TTf r f»i, j 11 r i t n nm linri!ii! 

t l 

Mon, j Tues. | Wed, 





inf? t i iu m n t i 

* l 

I Thurs. | Fri 



m i; H if { n iMii ?T!*?i 

, Sat, 5 Sun. 


Fir.. 6 . Soil temperatures at 3 inch level, and air temperatures, 
for week of July 24 - 31, 1950, 


100 

90 


No Mulch 
_ Air 
Paper 



40 


111 ? f rrn f i m s f 11 m f m i f} r f n n * Min /«r r i m n rMMtnn inif imrnifi- 
' ! i i s i i 

Mon. | Tues. j Wed. , Thurs, Fri. 4 Sat. t Sun. 


Fir. 7. Soil temperatures at 3 inch level, and air temperatures, 
for week of July 31 -.August 8 , 1950. 





32 - 


under the paper mulch was always higher than the temperatures 
under no mulch. The difference was as much as 10 degrees F. 
at times. Figure 8 indicates that the differences observed 
during the direct readings were much smaller than those 
obtained from the recording thermometers. The complete table 
of temperature data for the three treatments is presented 
in Appendix I. The level of the soil temperature under 
shavings mulch in one week during August, is illustrated 
in Figure 9. The corresponding temperatures for paper mulch 
and no mulch were spotted on this graph from readings taken 
with the direct reading dial themometers. It was quite 
obvious that the temperature under the shavings mulch was 
much lower than those under the other treatments. Also, it 
was noted that there was little fluctuation in the temperature 
under the shavings mulch from one time of the day to another. 

The quick soil tests at the beginning of the season 
showed that there were no differences in the levels of the 
nitrates, phosphates or potassium found under the different 
treatments. However, the tests taken at the peak of 
vegetative growth exhibited a very definite pattern for 
nitrates. The level of the nitrates under paper was 25 p.p.m. 
or greater, while no mulch readings varied from 10 to 15 p.p.m. 
Soil under the shavings mulch was very low in nitrates. 

In all but three plots, there was just a trace, the highest 
level found was 5 p.p.m. Tables V and VI indicate the average 
levels for nitrate and the other elements at time of the 


quick analyses 
















. 








. 
































• 













■ • 



. 
















. . . 












Deirrees 


- 33 



Fig* 8. Continuous soil temperatures at 3 inches , and air 
temperatures, for week August 8 - 15, 1950. 4 o’clock readings 

under paper and no mulch plots were taken on August 9 and 13. 


A. M. 

no 




Shavings 
No liulch 
Paper 


Fig. 9. Soil temperatures registered by direct reading 
thermometers at 3 inch level on cucumbers, July 21, 1950. 


























- 34 - 


Table V. The Average Values in p.p.m. of Nitrates, Phosphates 
and Potassium Obtained by the Quick Soil Analysis 
on the 18 Plots of Each Treatment at the Beginning 

of Growth 1950. (Spurway technique) 



Paper Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

No Mulch 

Nitrates 

15 

14 

15 

Phosphates 

3/4 

3/4 

3/4 

Potassium 

1/2 

1/2 

3/4 


Table VI. The Average Values in p.p.m. of Nitrates, Phosphates, 
and Potassium obtained by the ^uick Soil Analysis 
on the 18 Plots of Each Treatment at the Peak 
of Vegetative Growth 1950# (Spurway technique) 



Paper Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

No Mulch 

Nitrates 

30 

Trace 

10 

Phosphates 

3/4 

3/4 

3/4 

Potassium 

1/2 

1/2 

1/2 


The pH. of the soil was measured at the same time as the 
quick soils analyses were taken. The pH. ranged from 5.4 to 
5.6 with no change indicated because of the mulching effect. 


















s■ 




. 



























. . . 
































. 

■ 




. 

■ 













- 35 - 


EXPERIMENT III - 1951 


MATERIALS AND METHODS 


The materials used in this year were the same as 
those of the previous year with one exception. The tomato 
variety L-3700 strain I proved to be too irregular in size of 
plant within treatments and also the fruit was very irregular. 
The variety Early Alberta, which had proven to be stabilized 
as to type and vigour during tests at the University in 1950, 
was substituted. The area used for the plots was immediately 
adjacent to that of 1950. 

The same methods of procedure were used as in the 
previous year. Additional data was sought by measurements 
of growth at the peak of vegetative development. 

The weather during this season differed extremely from 
that of 1950. The records from the weather office at Edmonton 
indicated that there were only three occasions during the 
summer months when precipitation was not recorded over a span 
of five days. There was rain almost every day in the month 
of July and up until August 15. 

Temperature records were limited by the unavailability 
of one of the two soil temperature thermographs used in 1950. 
Therefore temperatures were taken with readings from the direct 
reading dial thermometers set on three treatments on the 
pepper trials. These were taken as often as possible and at 
definite times during the day. 









36 


EXPERIMENT III RESULTS 


The readings on the tensiometers mirrored the 
weather during this season. 


Table VII. The Range of Tensiometer Readings in Cm./Hg. 
for June, July and August, 1951. 


Shavings Mulch 

Paper Mulch 

No Mulch 

Lowest Reading 3 

4 

4 

Highest Reading 6 

7 

15 


The readings given in Table VII certainly indicated that 
there was no lack of moisture for crop growth during this 
season. Data showing moisture levels under the different 
treatments are represented graphically in Figure 10. 

The temperature differences recorded during this 
season, meagre as they had to be, indicated a small but obvious 
increase in temperature under the paper as compared with no 
mulch, during those daj^s when sunshine was recorded. The 
temperatures under the shavings mulch were 10 to 15 degrees F. 
colder than the other treatments. Table VIII summarizes 
these temperature readings. 









Moisture 


r 


37 





t 


V O 
O'' 

10 

_ Shavings 

_ _ ~ Paper 

r; - -- NO MulCh 


June , July 

i r> 


August 


i 


Sept.j 

15 


Fig. 10. A comparison of soil moisture levels, cucumber crop 
1951. Data evolved from tensiometer readings. 









38 


Table VIII. Average Soil Temperatures at 3 Inch Level 
for the 1951 Growing Season, in Degrees C. 
Average of 14 Readings. 


Shavings Mulch 


9 a.m. readings 13 
1 p.m. readings 14 
4 p.m. readings 15 
9 p.m. readings 14 


No Mulch _ Paper Mulch 


17 

18 

19 

21 

19 

22 

18 

20 


The quick soil analyses for 1951 again showed that 
nitrates under paper mulch were much higher than those under 
no mulch. The level of nitrates under paper was 30 p.p.m. or 
more, while those under the no mulch were near 10 p.p.m.. 

The shavings plots showed a higher level than the previous 
year. However, a depressing effect was still indicated. The 
averages of the soil analysis results are shown in Table IX. 

Table IX. The Average Levels in p.p.m. of Nitrates, 

Phosphates and Potassium at Peak of Vegetative 
Growth, Season 1951, an Average of 18 Tests. 



Paper Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

No Mulch 

Nitrates 

30 

5 

10 

Phosphates 

3/4 

3/4 

3/4 

Potassium 

1/2 

1/2 

3/4 

































The differences between plant growth on paper and 
"no mulch" were quite obvious with all three kinds of vegetables. 
A pictorial comparison of the differences exhibited on cucumber 
and pepper plots is given in Figures 11 and 12. 

The measurements taken on plant growth were analyzed 
statistically. The averages for the vine length of cucumbers 
are shown in Table X. The complete Statistical Analysis is 
presented in Appendix II. 

Table X. Vine length of Cucumbers in Inches, 1951 seqson. 

The Mean of Six Replications. 


Paper Mulch No Mulch Shavings Mulch 

25.56 18.52 5.63 

F. value for treatments - 112.80. 

Value needed for significance 5% - 4.10, 1 % - 7.56. 
L.S.D.^ - -L 4.26 at the 1% level. 


The results of the analysis of variance show a significant F. 
value well above the one percent level of significance. The 
L.S.D. was calculated to obtain more definite information on 
the differences between treatments. Therefore, by referring to 
Table X it may be said that, if no mulch is used as the normal 
treatment, then the vine length of cucumbers on paper mulch 
and shavings mulch differ significantly from this normal. These 
differences therefore result from the practice of mulching. 


# Least Significant Differences 





' 


^ ... ; . . 









r r 


































. »* 

, 







- 


. 




■ 

.<• ■ * 








■ . 













. ■ 


' '• i 









40 



Fig. 11. Cucumber plots July 1951, showing the differences in 
plant growth between the treatments, paper mulch, no mulch, 
and shavings mulch. 



Fig. 12. Pepper plots July 1951, showing the differences in 
plant growth between the treatments, paper mulch, no mulch, 
and shavings mulch. 













- 41 - 


There were two measurements of growth taken on the 
tomatoes and peppers. These were height and spread. These 
average values are shown for peppers in Tables XI and XII. 

The complete Statistical Analyses are presented in Appendix III 
and IV. 

Table XI. Height of Peppers in Inches, Season 1951. 

The Mean of Six Replications. 


Paper Mulch_No Mulch Shavings Mulch 

6.1 4.9 2.7 

F. Value for treatments - 25.13 

Value needed for Significance 5$ - 4.10,1$ - 7.56. 

L.S.D. - -L 1.55 for ifo 
- = .98 for 5%. 


Table XII. Spread of Peppers in Inches, Season 1951. 
The Mean of Six Replications. 


Paper Mulch No Mulch _ Shavings Mulc h 

8.3 6.2 2.8 

F. Value obtained for treatments - 50.56 
Value needed for Significance 5$ - 4.10,1$ - 7.56 
L.S.D. - 1.78 at the Vfo level. 































42 - 


The L.S.D. shows that the height and spread of the 
peppers on the paper mulch and the shavings mulch differed 
significantly from the no mulch. These differences, therefore, 
result from the practice of mulching. 

Tables XIII and XIV show the mean values for the 
height and spread of tomatoes. The complete statistical 
analyses are presented in Appendix V and VI. 

Table XIII. The Height of Tomatoes in Inches, Season 1951. 

The Mean of Six Replications. 


Paper Mulch No Mulch_Shavings Mulch 

18.3 16.2 9.8 

P. value obtained for treatments - 103.51 
F. value needed for significance •» 5$ - 4.10,1$ - 7.56 
L.S.D. - i.1.93 at. the 1% level. 


Table XIV. The Spread of Tomatoes in Inches, Season 1951. 
The Mean of Six Replications. 


Paper Mulch_No Mulch_Shavings Mulch 

24.7 19.5 10.5 

F. value obtained for treatments - 227.89 
F. value needed for significance - 5$ - 4.10,1$ - 7.56 
L.S.D. - _L 2.12 at the 1$ level. 










43 


The results of the analysis of variance show a significant 
F. value above the one percent level. Both of the L.S.D. 
indicate that the spread and height of tomatoes on paper 
mulch and shavings mulch differ significantly from the 
normal no mulch treatment. These differences are therefore 
the result of the mulching practice. 

Yields were taken on cucumbers, and these were 
limited to those cucumbers which had reached a marketable 
size for this slicing variety. Table XV shows the mean 
yields on the three treatments. The complete statistical 
analyses are presented in Appendix VII. 

Table XV. Yields on Cucumbers in lbs. per Plot, Season 1951. 

The Mean of Six Replications. 


Paper Mulch No Mulch Shavings Mulch 

9.35 3.31 0 

As there was no yield obtained from the shavings plots, 
this treatment was thrown out for purposes of analysis. 
F. value obtained for treatment - 37.80 
F. value needed for significance - 5$ ~ 6.81,1$ - 16.26 


This highly significant F. value indicates that the paper 
mulch yields differed from the no mulch yields. These 
differences, therefore, are the result of the practice of 
paper mulching. 


















■ 








' 

■ 




, 

■ 


.. 

■ 
























t i ■ l> 


















44 


No ripe tomato yields were obtained, owing to the poor 
weather for ripening which persisted during this season. 

Green yields were recorded just before the first frost. Only 
those tomatoes considered marketable in size were harvested. 

The complete statistical analyses are presented in Appendix VIII. 

Table XVI. Yields of Green Tomatoes in lbs. per Plot, 

Season 1951. Mean of Six Replications. 


Paper Mulch 

No Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

20.5 

14.4 

2.8 

F. value obtained for treatment - 

129.8 

F. value needed for significance 

L.S.D. - i 3.82at the 1 $ level. 

-5$ « 4.10,1$ - 7.56 


The F. value obtained is highly significant. The L.S.D. 
indicates that both mulch treatment yields differ significantly 
from the no mulch yields. Therefore, these differences may 
be said to be the result of the mulching practice. 





















' 




. 











. 



; 

. . < 1.1 


■ 

. 









■ 






































45 


DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 


Mulching and Soil Moisture 

The mulched soils were found to be consistently 
higher in moisture content than the bare soil. Especially 
was this so with the shavings mulch, under which the soil was 
sticky wet at all times. The moisture effects of the paper 
mulch and no mulch treatments showed little difference. There 
is a possibility, however, that such differences as did exist 
might have proven to be larger if the moisture determinations 
had been taken closer to the surface of the soil than the 
five inch depth arbitrarily chosen. Smith (42) suggested 
that the paper mulch conserves moisture near the surface only. 
He considered that the paper mulch effect upon moisture 
conservation did not extend below the four inch level in soil 
so treated. During the experiment reported herein, it was 
observed that the plant roots under the paper were very close 
to the surface, and in some instances, the roots actually 
were exposed when the paper was lifted. This is a definite 
indication at least, that the paper mulch kept the soil surface 
moist enough to support root growth. 

Mulching and Soil Temperature 

It was found that the paper mulch increased the 
soil temperature under it, as much as 10 degrees F, above that 
of the bare soil. These increases were shown to be irregular. 














. . . . . . . 








, 














. 
















. 














* 

















46 


apparently being dependent more upon general weather 
fluctuations than upon day and night differences in air 
temperature, the 1950 season was dry, and provided an 
unusual amount of sunny weather. During this summer the paper 
vs. no mulch differences registered were quite large. The 
1951 season, however, had exactly opposite weather trends. 

The increases registered during the latter summer were small, 
and much of the time the soil temperatures, under paper 
and in the hare soil, were almost the same. Only on clear, 
sunny days were there increases under the paper to compare 
with those noted during the previous growing season. The 
shavings mulch plots were decidedly cooler than the other two 
treatments in all three years. McGalla (30) relates this 
decrease in temperature to the reflection of the sun’s rays 
by the light coloured mulch materials. 

The results relating to Mulch influence on soil 
temperature demonstrate the importance of radiations from the 
sun and the efficiency of the mulch material in absorbing, or 
reflecting, heat rays from that source. 

Mulching and Plant Nutrients 

The soil analysis indicated a favourable effect 
upon soil nitrates due to paper mulching (see Tables YI and IX). 
Lyon and Buckman (27) state that the optimum temperature range 
for nitrate production was between 80 and 90 degrees F.. 
Therefore, the nitrate increase demonstrated earlier in this 
thesis may have been the result of more nearly optimum soil 












■ ' 

■' ■ • ■ I WW ■ ' 

■ 

' 






. 
















. 

■ 






. 










































47 


temperatures under paper. The shavings mulch was found to 
depress soil nitrates greatly. A number of workers (2,6,27,33,) 
have considered this effect to be the direct result of adding 
cellulose material to the soil. Turk and Partridge (47) 
however, found that a mulch of gravel also could depress soil 
nitrates. In the trials reported here, moreover, shavings 
were not mixed with the soil but were laid on the surface. 

Thus, it may be that some factor other than the addition of 
cellulose caused the depression of nitrates already mentioned. 

It might be considered that the combined conditions of high 
moisture and low temperature under the mulch resulted in a 
poor physical soil nature. If this is so, the lack of aeration 
might be the main factor causing the nitrate depression under 
shavings. On the other hand, the cold wet environment may 
well have seriously reduced the activity of bacteria responsible 
for nitrification, as is observed commonly in bog areas. 

Mulching and Plant Development 

Obvious growth differences were observed under 
the three treatments. Most noticeable was the very poor growth 
of all three crops on the shavings plots. Unquestionably, some 
factor or factors resulted in soil conditions not conducive 
to normal plant development under this type of mulch. As 
already shown, soil temperatures under shavings were very much 
lower than those taken under the bare soil. The highest 
temperature recorded under the shavings in any of the three years 
was 59 degrees F.. No doubt the lower temperature retarded the 




♦ 








. 

. 


. 




















' 














. 








. 













. 







48 - 


growth processes of these warm season crops. As an additional effect, 
the relatively high surface moisture would reduce aeration and 
generally affect the plant soil environment adversely. 

Several investigators have suggested that wood 
shavings may contain substances toxic to plant growth. In the 
Edmonton trials, although normal vegetative and reproductive 
growth did not take place under shavings, and the plants were 
unthrifty in appearance, they were all living at the end of 
each season and showed no observable symptoms of poisoning. 

Harris (18) used shavings with strawberries, and found no 
harmful effects. Indeed, he reported an increase in growth 
and fruiting in the year following the application. A 
difference in chemical content of shavings from different 
species could, of course, account for differences in apparent 
toxicity where contrary effects are demonstrated. 

In each of the three seasons, observations in the 
field indicated that the growth of plants on paper mulched 
plots was noticeably more vigorous than on either the unmulched 
soil or the shavings mulch. In 1951 the measurements taken at 
or near the peak of vegetative growth were analyzed statistic¬ 
ally. The results of these analyses bear out the indications of 
the visual observations, and differences between all treatments, 
and with all crops, were significant above the one percent level. 

This suggests very emphatically that mulching with black paper 
has had a favourable effect upon the growth of the three warm 
season crops used in these experiments. True, only data for 
the year 1951 is presented, but when it is considered that 

























** ■' ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ • ‘ 

f 
































49 - 


unseasonably cool weather prevailed during the 1951 summer, 
fullest confidence can be placed in the statistical results 
obtained. 

Mulching and Fruit Development 

Cucumbers showed a definitely favourable effect upon 
marketable yield, due to the paper mulching treatment. 

Tomatoes also showed significant differences in yield of w green 
ripe" fruit between treatments. There was no indication that 
any of the crops on paper mulch ripened earlier than those on 
unmulched soil. This is contrary to the observations of Flint 
(15) who reported definite encouragement of early maturity of 
a large number of vegetables by the use of paper mulch. It 
is probable that paper mulching has a complex influence upon 
plant development, only part of which encourages early maturity. 
It may well be, that under different conditions of day length 
hours of sunlight, and levels of air temperature than those 
prevailing in Alberta during the seasons involved, maturity of 
fruits would be advanced by the use of paper mulch. 





50 


GENERAL SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

An attempt has been made to evaluate the general 
effects of mulching three warm season vegetable crops with 
asphalt sheathing paper and wood shavings. Plant and fruit 
development, as well as soil temperature and moisture, have 
been studied in some detail. The results of treatments on 
a randomized block field design using tomatoes, peppers and 
cucumbers as crop plants and continued for three seasons, are 
summarized below. 

The records taken for soil moisture show that 
the shavings mulch kept the soil very moist, and that paper 
mulch was intermediate, between shavings and bare soil, in 
conserving soil moisture in the surface six inches. 

The use of paper mulch stabilized and raised soil 
temperatures compared to those of the bare soil. This was a 
marked effect, which was in obvious contrast to the plots under 
shavings, wherein soil temperatures were stable enough but 
continuously lowest during the growing season. 

The measurements of plant growth in 1951, which were 
analyzed statistically, indicate definitely that there was a 
very favourable effect upon plant growth by the paper mulch, 
and that the effect of shavings mulch definitely reduced 
plant growth. 

Quick soil analyses for soil nitrates, phosphates 
and potassium showed tha.t paper mulching increased nitrates 
considerably while the shavings mulching depressed them to a 







51 


very marked degree* No differences in soil phosphates and 
potassium were noted between treatments. 

Yield data taken from the 1951 cucumber and tomato 
plots show definitely that paper mulching increased the yield 
of both these crops. In most cases, shavings mulching had such 
an unfavourable effect upon plant development, that no yields 
were recorded. There was no indication that the use of paper 
mulch influenced the maturing of cucumber or tomato fruits. 

Generally, the results show that the use of paper 
mulch has a decidedly favourable influence on soil moisture 
and temperature. The combination of higher soil moisture and 
soil temperature might be considered to be the main factor 
causing the increase in available nitrates, and the increase 
in growth and fruiting, which occurred on the paper mulch 
plots during 1951. Conversely, if is suggested that the 
combination of higher soil moisture and lower soil temperature 
on the shavings plots resulted in an unfavourable soil 
environment. An attending result was that soil nitrates were 
reduced and general plant development was greatly retarded. 

No toxicity tests were made with the wood shavings, and no 
symptoms were observed on any plants that would suggest Any 
thing other than poor general environment. 





52 


ACKNOWLEDGHENTS 


This work was carried out while the author 
was a Graduate Assistant in the Department of Plant Science, 
University of Alberta. Funds supplied for this purpose are 
hereby acknowledged. Grateful acknowledgment is also made 
to Dr. R. J. Hilton, Associate Professor of Horticulture, for 
constant advice and direction throughout the progress of this 
work, and for constructive criticism in the preparation of 
this thesis; and to Professor II. R. Murray, Chairman, 
Department of Horticulture, Macdonald College P, Que., 
for the use of the field air thermographs used in this study. 
Thanks are also extended to the following workers at the 
University of Alberta: Mr. A. S. Ward, Department of Soils, 
for his assistance in performing the soil analyses; and 
Mr. ¥. D. Evans, Fruit Research Officer, for his help with 
the statistical analysis of the experimental results. The 
help and encouragement of other staff and student workers is 
also acknowledged with thanks. 






53 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Albrecht, W.A. Nitrate accumulation under straw 

mulch. Soil Sci. 14:299-305. 1925. 

2. Albrecht, W.A. Nitrate accumulation in the soil 

influenced lay tillage and straw mulch. Am. Soc. Agron. 

J. 18: 841-53. Oct. 1926. 

3. Albrecht, W.A. and Uhland R.E. Nitrate accumulation 

under a straw mulch. Soil Sci. 20;253-68. 1925. 

4. Alderfer, R.B. and Merkle, F.G. The comparative effects 

of surface application vs. incorporation of various 
materials on structure, permeability, runoff and other 
soil properties. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. proc. 8: 79-86. 
1944. 

5. Baver, L.D. Soil physics, 2nd Ed. pp. 398, John 

Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York. 1948. 

6. Beaumont, A.B. Nitrate accumulation under mulch. Soil 

Sci. 24: 177-85. 1927. 

7. Beaumont, A.B. and Crooks, G,C, Influence of mulch on 

soil nitrates. Soil Sci. 36:121-3. 1932. 

8. Bollen, C.A. and Stephenson, R.E. Some effects of mulches 

on soil properties. Am. Soc. Hort. Sci, proc, 48: 

37-9. 1946. 

9. Bushnell, J, and Weaver, W.E. Straw mulch for early 

potatoes. Ohio Ag. Exp. Bimonthly Bull. 143:35-7, 1930. 

10. Bushnell, J, and Wilton, E.A. Some effects of straw 

mulch on yield of potatoes. J. Agr. Research 43: 

837-845. 1931. 

11. Carter, J.L. Effect of temperature of the root environment 

on the growth of soya bean plants. Am, Soc. Agron, J 
37:727-35. 1945. 

12. Clark, J.H. Effect of mulching red raspberries on their 

growth and production, Proc. Am. Soc, Hort. Sci. 39: 
604-8. 1940. 

13. Eggleston, W.G.S. Influence of environmental factors on 

numbers of soil organisms. Soil Sci, 46: 351-63. 1938. 

14. Emmett, C. and Ball, F.K. The effect of soil moisture on 

the availability of nitrate, phosphorous and potassium 
to the tomato. Soil Sci, 35: 295-305. 1933, 






54 


15. Flint, L.H, Crop - plant stimulation with paper mulch. 

TJ.3. Dep.Agr. Tech. Bull. 75. Hay, 1928. 

16. Fuller, J.S. and Jones, L.II. Influence of temperature 

on nitrate content of soil in the presence of decom¬ 
posing cellulose. Soil Sci. 34:337-51. 1932. 

17. Greene, R.A, Effect of temperature on nitrogen fixation 

by Azotobacter. Soil Sci. 33:153-61. 1932. 

18. Harris, G.H. Sawdust as a mulch for strawberries. Sci. 

Agr. 31: 52-6. Oct. 1951. 

19. Harris, F.S. and Yao, H.H. Effectiveness of mulches in 

preserving soil moisture. J. Agr. Research 23: 

727-740. 1923. 

20. Holmes, A.D. Effect of different mulches upon the 

nutritive values of tomatoes. Soil Sci. 85:471-75. 

1948. 

21. Hubbell, D.S. and Gardner, J.L. The effect of aeration, 

compaction and water logging on soil structure and 
microflora. Am. Soc. Agron. J, 40:832 - 40, 1948, 

22. Hutchins, A.S. Mulch paper in vegetable production. 

Minn. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 298, Majr, 1933. 

23. Isenberg, F.M. and Odland, M.L. Comparative effects of 

various organic mulches and clean cultivation on yields 
of certain vegetable crops. Penn. State. Agr. Sta. Prog 
report 35. August, 1950. 

24. Kelley, O.J., Hunter, A.S., Raise, H.R. and Hobbs, C.H. 

Comparison of methods of measuring soil moisture under 
field conditions. Am. Soc. Agron, J. 38:759-84. 1946. 

25. Latimer, L.P. and Percival, G.P. Comparative values of 

sawdust, hay and seaweed as a mulch for apple trees. 

Am. Soc, Eort. Sci. Proc. 50: 23-30. 1947. 

26. Leslie, W.R. Superintendents Report. Bom. Exp, Sta. 

Morden, Man, 25-27. 1931 - 37. 

27. Lyon, T.L. and Buckman, H.G. The nature and properties 
of soils. pp. 498, 4th Ed. MacMillan Co.,New York, 1947 

. Magistad, O.C., Farden, C.A. and Baldwin, ¥.A. Bagasse 

and paper mulches. Am. Soc. Agron. J. 27:813-25, Oct. 
1935. 


28 



















' 




. * 

. 


■ 

. 













. 

. 
















































55 


29. McCall, G.E. Soil mulch in the absorption and retention 

of moisture. J. Ag. Research 30: 819-31, May, 1925. 

30. McCalla, T.M. Light reflection from stubble mulch. Am. 

Soc. A ;ron. J. 39:690 - 6. 1947. 

31. McCalla, T.M. and Duley, F.M. Effect of soil residues 

upon soil temperature. Am. Soc. Agron. J. 38: 75 - 
89. 1946. 

32. Millar, C.E. and Turk, L.M. Fundamentals of Soil Science. 

pp. 492, John Wiley and Sons, New York. 1944. 

33. Mooers, C.A., ¥ashka, J.B. and Young, J,B. Effects of 

wheat straw, Pespediza Servieia hay and farm yard manure 
as soil mulches on conservation of moisture and the 
production of nitrates. Soil Science 66: 307-15, 1948. 

34. Moore, J.¥. Jr., and Beaumont, A.B. The relation of C/N 

ratio of a mulch to the accumulation of nitrates in a 
soil. Am. Soc. Agron. J. 26: 252. 1934. 

35. Russel, J.O., Jones, E.G. and Bahrt, G.M, The temperature 

and moisture factors in nitrate production. Soil Sci. 

19: 381-98, 1928. 

36. Scliroeder, R.A. The effect of root temperature upon the 

absorption of water by the cucumber. Mo, Ag. Exp. Res. 
Bull, 309: 1-2 7. 1939, 

37. Scofield, C.S. Measurement of soil water. J. Ag. Res. 

71: 375-402. 1945, 

38. Shaw, C.F. The effect of paper mulch on soil temperatures. 

Hilgardia 1:341-364. 1926. 

39. Shaw, C.F. When the soil mulch conserves moisture. Am. 

Soc. Agron. J. 21:1165-71. 1929. 

40. Slater, C.S. and Bryant, J.S* Comparison of 4 methods of 

soil moisture measurement. Soil Sci. 61:131-55. 1946. 

41. Smith, Alfred, Effects of paper mulches on soil temperatures, 

soil moisture and yields of certain crops. Hilgardia 
6: 159-201. 1931. 

42. Snedecor, G.¥. Statistical methods, pp, 485, 4th Ed. 

Iowa State College Press, Ames, Iowa. 1946. 

43. Stephenson, R.E. and Schuster, C.E. The effect of mulches 

on soil properties. Soil Sci. 59:219 - 230. 1945. 







56 


44. Stephenson, R.E., and Schuster, C.E. Straw mulch for 

soil improvement. Soil Sci. 61 : 219 - 24. 1946. 

45. Stewart, G # R., Thomas, E.C. and Horner, J. Some effects 

of mulching paper on Hawaiian soils. Soil Sci. 22: 

35 - 39. 1926. 

46. Subrahmanyan, V. The effect of water logging on the 

different forms of nitrogen, on the reaction, on the 
gaseous relationships and on the bacterial flora. 

J. Agri. Sci. 17 : 429 - 448. 

47. Turk, L.M. and Partridge, N.L. Effect of mulching 

materials on moisture loss from soils. Am. Soc. Hort. 
Sci. Proc. V 38: 59 - 62. 1941. 

48. Van Doren, G.A. and Stauffer. R.8. Effect of crops and 

surface mulches on runoff, soil losses and soil 
aggregation. Soil Sci. Am.» Proc. 8: 97 - 101. 1943. 

49. Veihmeyer, F.J. The use of Tensiometers to measure the 

availability of water to plants. Plant Physiology 
18: 66 - 78o 1943. 




















i 


APPENDIX I 


Direct temperature readings for the 24 hour period, 
July 21m 1950, at 1 and 3 inch below surface, at surface level 
and at 4 feet above surface on the three treatments in degrees 0. 


Tomatoes 


Time Paper Mulch No Mulch Shavings Mulch Air 



1" 

3” 

Level 

1" 

3” 

Level 

1" 

3” 

Level 

4 f Level 

9 A.M. 

23 

19 

38 

22 


38 

17 

13 

30 

29 

11 

23 

19 

42 

22 

17 

45 

15 

14 

46 

30 

1 P.M. 

23 

20 

42 

24 

19 

40 

16 

14 

44 

32 

3 

25 

21 

37 

27 

20 

33 

17 

14 

27 

26 

5 

25 

22 

19 

24 

23 

24 

17 

14 

23 

24 

7 

25 

22 

19 

22 

22 

22 

16 

15 

21 

21 

9 

24 

22 

14 

20 

22 

20 

15 

15 

19 

18 

11 

22 

22 

14 

15 

21 

14 

14 

14 

15 

14 

1 A.M. 

20 

20 

13 

15 

19 

13 

14 

14 

14 

13 

3 

19 

20 

10 

16 

18 

12 

14 

14 

8 

12 

5 

17 

19 

15 

15 

17 

15 

14 

14 

14 

16 

7 

18 

18 

17 

17 

17 

18 

14 

14 

16 

16 


Peppers 


~rj tt 

24 

19 

39 

19 

17 

40 

14 

13 

40 

29 

ii 

25 

20 

42 

24 

19 

42 

15 

14 

42 

30 

1 P.M. 

27 

21 

44 

24 

20 

42 

16 

14 

44 

32 

3 

27 

23 

37 

24 

21 

28 

16 

15 

28 

26 

5 

27 

22 

24 

23 

19 

25 

18 

14 

25 

24 

7 

26 

23 

22 

22 

20 

22 

15 

15 

23 

21 

9 

24 

22 

18 

21 

20 

17 

16 

15 

17 

18 

11 

23 

22 

14 

19 

20 

13 

15 

15 

12 

13 

1 A.M. 

19 

22 

13 

17 

19 

12 

15 

15 

12 

13 

3 

19 

20 

10 

17 

18 

9 

14 

14 

11 

12 

5 

18 

20 

15 

16 

17 

15 

14 

14 

15 

16 

7 

18 

19 

17 

16 

17 

18 

14 

14 

16 

16 

Cucumbers 











W A'.FT.-- 

22 

18 

38 

19 

16 

42 

14 

13 

40 

29 

11 

22 

18 

44 

19 

16 

48 

15 

13 

43 

30 

1 P.M. 

28 

23 

36 

24 

19 

37 

15 

15 

38 

32 

3 

28 

23 

28 

24 

22 

28 

15 

15 

26 

26 

5 

28 

23 

26 

24 

20 

24 

15 

15 

24 

24 

7 

23 

23 

22 

25 

23 

22 

15 

14 

20 

21 

9 

24 

23 

18 

20 

20 

17 

15 

14 

16 

18 

11 

22 

24 

12 

19 

20 

11 

14 

14 

12 

13 

1 A.M. 

20 

22 

11 

17 

18 

11 

12 

14 

10 

13 

3 

20 

22 

11 

16 

18 

8 

14 

14 

10 

12 

5 

19 

21 

14 

16 

18 

14 

14 

14 

14 

16 

7 

19 

20 

16 

16 

18 

15 

14 

14 

14 

16 













ii 


APPENDIX II 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE - LENGTH OF VINE 
OF CUCUMBERS, 1951. 


Replicate 

Paper Mulch 

No Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

3k. 

1 

30 • 3 *ff 

18.1 

5 

17.80 

2 

26.8 

19.5 

8 

16.10 

3 

24. S 

22.5 

4.45 

17.28 

4 

21.8 

16.65 

3. S 

14.12 

5 

19.7 

15.09 

4.12 

12.97 

6 

29.91 

19.25 

8.28 

19.15 

XT. 

25.56 

18.52 

5.63 



Correction 

factor » (298.25) 2 /18 

» 4941.84 


Summation 

X 2 = 6313.43 





Total sum 

of squares « 6313.43 - 4941.84 - 

1371.59 


Replicate 

sum of squares 

■ 5031.78 

- 4941. 

00 

►A 

18 

00 

CO 

* 

CO 

sA 


Treatment 

sum of squares 

- 6169.11 

- 4941. 

87 = 1227.24 


Error sums 

of squares * 

1371.56 - 

(89.98 + 

1227.24) = 54 

• 

CO 

A 

Source of 

Variance D.F. 

S.S. 

M.S. 

F. 5 % 

ii 

Total 

17 

1371.56 




Replicate 

5 

89.98 

17.99 

3.30 3.33 

5.64 

Treatment 

2 

1227.24 

613.62 

112.80 4.10 

7.56 

Error 

10 

54.34 

5.44 




Least Significant Differences: 

L.S.D. (Treatments) = (1*345)(3.169) « JL 4.26 


§ each number represents 10 measurements on each plot 



























lii 


APPENDIX III 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE - HEIGHT OF PEPPERS, 1951 . 


Replicate 

Paper Mulch 

No Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

XR. 

1 

6.4# 

5.0 

2.2 

4.5 

2 

7.3 

3.5 

2.3 

4.4 

3 

6.6 

5.5 

2.9 

5.0 

4 

4.8 

4.7 

2.6 

4.0 

5 

5.9 

4.8 

2.9 

4.5 

6 

5.3 

6.3 

3.0 

4.9 

It. 

6.1 

4.9 

2.7 



Correction factor » (82) 2 /l8 = 373.56 
Summation = 418.78 

Total sums of squares - 418.78 - 373.56 - 45.22 
Replicate sums of squares * 375.36 - 373.56 » 1.80 
Treatment sums of squares » 409.75 - 373.56 s 36.19 
Error sums of Squares = 45.22 - 37.99 a 7.23 


Source of Variance 

D.F. 

s.s. 

M.S. 

F. 5 % 1 % 

Total 

17 

45.22 



Replicate 

5 

1.80 

.36 

.50 

Treatment 

2 

36.19 

18.10 

25.13 4.10 7.56 

Error 

10 

7.23 

.72 



Least Significant Differences: 

L.S # D. (Treatments) at 1% level =(.49)(3.169) = £ 1.55 
L.S. D.(Treatments) at 5$ level «(.49)(2.000) » T .98 

# each number represents 16 measurements on each plot. 





















\ 








iv 


APPENDIX IV 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE - SPREAD OF PEPPERS, 1951 , 


Replicate 

Paper Mulch 

No Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

XR. 

1 

8.8# 

6.8 

2.9 

6.1 

2 

9.1 

4.3 

2.6 

5.3 

3 

9.1 

5.5 

2.6 

5.7 

4 

7.3 

6.3 

2.7 

5.4 

5 

7.9 

6.5 

2.8 

5.7 

6 

7.3 

7.7 

3.0 

6.0 

It. 

8.3 

6.2 

2.8 



Correction factor » (1G3.2) 2 /18 s 591,68 
Summation X 2 a 694,62 

Total sums of squares ■ 694.62 - 591,68 » 102.94 
Replicate sums of squares « 593.21 - 591.68 » 1.53 
Treatment sums of squares = 683.70 - 591.68 a 92.02 
Error sums of squares * 102.64 - 93.55 a 9.09 


Source of Variance 

D.F. 

s.s. 

M.S. F. 5 % 1% 

Total 

17 

102.64 


Replicate 

5 

1.53 

.31 .34 

Treatment 

2 

92.02 

46.01 50.56 4.10 7.56 

Error 

10 

9.09 

.91 


Eeast Significant Differences : 

L.8.D. (Treatments) -(.55)(3.169) = 1.78 


# each number represents 16 measurements on each plot 










































V 


APPENDIX V 


ANALYSIS 03? VARIANCE - HEIGHT OF TOMATOES, 1951 . 


Replicate 

Paper Mulch 

No Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

JR. 

1 

20.2# 

15.9 

11.8 

15.S 

2 

19.5 

15.1 

10.6 

15.1 

3 

17.5 

15.5 

8.9 

13.6 

4 

18.1 

17.0 

8.6 

14.5 

5 

18.0 

17.7 

9.8 

15.2 

6 

17.0 

16.0 

9.8 

14.2 

XT. 

18.3 

16.2 

9.8 



Correction factor » (267.0) 2 /l8 ■ 3960.50 
Summation X 2 s 4211.36 

Total sums of squares ■ 4211.36 - 3960.50 a 250.86 
Replicate sums of squares = 3968.28 - 3960.50 « 7.78 
Treatment sums of squares = 4192.36 - 3960.50 « 231.86 
Error sums of squares a 250.86 - 239.86 = 11.00 


Source of Variance 

Total 

Replicate 

Treatment 

Error 


D.F. S.S. M.3. F. • 5$ ifo 

17 250.86 

7.78 1.55 1.38 

231.86 115.93 103.51 4.10 7.56 

11.00 1.10 


Least Significant Differences: 

L.S.D. (Treatments) = (.61)(3.169) s l 1.93 


# each number represents 8 measurements on each plot 
















APPENDIX VI 


ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE 

- SPREAD 

OF TOMATOES, 

1951. 

Replicate 

Paper Mulch Nc 

i Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

SEU 

1 

25.8# 

20.3 

13.0 

19.7 

2 

25.8 

18.8 

10.8 

18.5 

3 

23.8 

17.7 

8.0 

16.5 

4 

23.8 

19.8 

10.6 

14.7 

5 

24.1 

20.3 

12.3 

18.9 

6 

24.9 

20.6 

8.6 

18.0 

It. 

24.7 

19.5 

10.5 



Correction factor * (329.0) 2 /l8 - 6013.88 
Summation X 2 - 6659.54 

Total sums of squares a 6659.54 - 6013.88 a 645.66 
Replicate sums of squares ■ 6030.52 - 6013.88 » 16.64 
Treatment sums of squares a 6629.40 - 6013.88 * 615.52 
Error sums of squares * 645.66 - 632.16 - 13.50 


Source of Variance 

D.F. 

s.s. 

M.S. 

F. 

5$ 1 % 

Total 

17 

645.66 




Replicate 

5 

16.64 

3.32 

2.45 


Treatment 

2 

615.32 

307.66 

227.89 

4.10 7.56 

Error 

10 

13.50 

1.35 




Least Significant Differences : 

L.S.D. (Treatments) - (.67)(3.169)= 2.12 


# each number represents 8 measurements on each plot 














APPENDIX VII 


ANALYSIS 

1 OF VARIANCE 

- CUCUMBER 

YIELDS, 1951. 


Replicate 

Paper Mulch 

No Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

3k. 

1 

12.75 # 

2.75 

0 

7.75 

2 

13.31 

5.69 

0 

9.50 

3 

9.75 

5.56 

0 

7.60 

4 

5.81 

2.38 

0 

4.09 

5 

5.50 

0 

0 

2.75 

6 

9.90 

3.50 

0 

6.70 

XT. 

9.35 

3.31 

0 



As there was no yield obtained on the shavings mulch, this 
treatment was thrown out. For the purpose of this analysis, 
only the two treatments, paper mulch and no mulch, will be 
considered. 

Correction factor = (76.0)2/12 « 481.33 
Summation X s a 668.6 

Total sums of squares = 668.6 - 481.33 =* 187.27 
Replicate suras of squares § 544.61 - 481.33 § 63.28 
Treatment suras of squares » 590.77 - 481.33 = 109.44 
Error sums of squares = 187.27 - 172.72 s 14.56 


Source of Variance D.F. S.S. M.S. F.5/> 1 °/o 


Total 

Replicate 

Treatment 

Error 


11 187.27 

5 63.28 12.65 

1 109.44 109.44 

5 14.56 2.91 


4.35 5.05 10.97 

37.60 6.61 16.26 


# each number represents the yield in lbs. from each plot 





















viii 


APPENDIX VIII 

ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE - GREEN TOMATO YIELDS,1951, 


Replicate 

Paper Mulch 

No Mulch 

Shavings Mulch 

Si. 

1 

18# 

13 

2 

11 

2 

26 

16 

3 

15 

3 

18 

14 

2 

11.3 

4 

22 

14 

3 

13 

5 

13 

14 

3 

12 

6 

20 

15.5 

4 

13 

TT. 

20.5 

14.4 

2.8 


Correction factor ® (226 

.5) 3 /l8 = 

2850.13 



Summation X 2 s 3873.25 


Total sums of squares * 3873.25 - 2850.1 a 1032.28 
Replicate sums of squares ■ 2882.42 - 2850.13 ■ 32.29 
Treatment sums of squares ■ 3816.7 - 2850.13 = 966.36 
Error sums of squares = 1032.88 - 998.95 s 33*93 


Source of Variance 

D.F. 

s.s. 

M.S. 

F. 5 % 1% 

Total 

17 

1032.88 



Replicate 

5 

32.29 

6.46 

1.64 

Treatment 

2 

966.66 

483.33 

129.8 4.10 7.56 

Error 

10 

33.93 

3.39 



Least Significant Differences: 

L.S.D. (Treatments) ~ (1.145)(3.169) - l 3.62 


# each number represents the yield in lbs. from each plot 





























































