University of Alberta Library 


307 


0 1620 



294 5 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 

















































For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 




















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/godinhumanexperiOOsimp 


"GOD IN HUMAN EXPERIENCE" 


A Dissertation 

ubmitted to the B. D. Committee of the 
Senate of the University of Alberta 
In candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity. 

Rev. Charles W. Simpson, B. A., 


University of Alberta. 
April 13, 1937. 













BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Barton* George A. 

"The Religions of the World." 

University of Chicago. 1917. 

Caird, Edward 

"The Evolution of Religion." Yol.I. 

James Maclehose. 1895. 

Coe, George A. 

"The Spiritual Life." 

Abingdon ^ress. 1900. 

Clarke, W. IT. 

"The Ideal of Jesus." 

Charles Scribner T s Sons. 1917. 

Suehen, Rudolph. 

"Life 7 s Basis and Life T s Ideal." 

Adam and Charles Black. London 

1912. 

Hastings, James. 

"Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics." 

Vol.VIII 

Hocking, Wm. E, 

"The Meaning of God in Human Experience’. 1 
Yale University ^ess. 1912. 

James,William. 

"The Varieties of Religious Experience." 
Longman. London 1920. 

Jones, Rufus M. 

"The Testimony of The Soul." 

King, Irving. 

The MacMillan Co. 1936. 

"The Development of Religion.” 

The MacMillan Co. 1910. 

Matthews, W. R. 

"God in Christian Thought and Experience 
Harper Bros. 1930. 

Otto, Rudolph. 

"The Idea of t?he Holy." 

Oxford University "Press. 1926. 

Rogers, A. K. 

"A Student's History of Philosophy." 
MacMillan Co. 1925. 

Sperry, William L. 

"Reality in Worship." 

Ma* Millan Co. 1925. 


The Bible, The American Standard Revision 














' 


T 


f 


1 































i 



■ 




? 









Steven, George. 


Tuttle 9 A. S. 
Wright, W. r. 


TTrn he Psychology of The Christian Soul." 
Holder and Stoughton. 1911. 

"Lectures Christian Theology. I" 

TT A Ftudent T s Philosophy of Religion.’ 1 

Holder and Gtoughton.1913-1916. 























r 




















































. 











CONTENTS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

COD IN HUMAN EXPERIENCE. 

CHAPTER ONE. 

COD IN THOUGHT . 

I. The Universal and "’articular. 

II. Transcendence and Immanence. 

III. The Mana Conception. 

IY. The Person and Work of Christ. 

CHAPTER TWO. 

COD IN EMOTION. 

I. Feeling of Dependence. 

II. The Numinous Conception. 

III. The Psychological Conception. 
IY* The Mystical Conception. 

CHAPTER THREE. 

COD IN VOLITION. 

I. 


IT. 


As Expressed In Ritual and Ceremony 
As Expressed in Ethical Diving. 























INTRODUCTION. 


The fact of Cod always and everywhere challenges 
manicind. There is no boundary in time or space that limits 
the thought of Cod. Through all the activities of the 
human race and the wonders of nature. Cod must be recognised 
A truly theistic conception of Cod sees His presence and 
activity, above and beyond, as well as through history and 
nature. That is to say. Cod is transcendent as well as 
immanent, or to state the doctrine in another form, there 
are meta-historical and metaphysical elements, which must 
be recognized in our view of the universe. 

Cod is, as the object of faith, in the field of 
religious experience. This faith is expressed in many 
various beliefs and methods of worship. Nrom the primitive 
religious conceptions, to the highest philosophical thinking 
the Idea of Cod is central. It may not always be expressed 
in the same terms but the experience is vital in all human 
consciousness as a form of unity. 

The purpose in this paper is to show the truth of 
Cod as expressed in human thought, feeling and volition. 

In other words to cover the ground of human thought and 
activity in its response to the object of its faith. Cod 











































' f 








' 






J ' 














' 






f ■ 


' 






* 


( 













- 2 - 


in human experience in this paper is taken to mean 
religious sentiments, beliefs and practices. The treat¬ 
ment will “be largely subjective, being confined to the 
three psychic elements mentioned above. Under the head 
of volition certain aspects of the question such as ritual - 
and worship will receive objective treatment, while the 
three above aspects of the Question will be considered 
separately. We must keep in mind however, that not one 
of these psychic elements functions by itself. There is 
no such thing as a pure intellection or emotion or volition; 
A tinge of emotion is found in every mental act and volit* 
ional act and vice versa, but for the purposes of clearness, 
we think of them separately in this thesis. 










- 3 - 

C HATEH I. 

GOD IN THOUGHT. 


God is essentially rational. Rudolph Otto,whose 
chief emphasis is on the non-rational element in Deity, 
nevertheless makes clear the rational as follows, TT Xt is 
essential to every theistic conception of God and most of 
all to the Christian, that it designates most of all and 
precisely characterizes Deity by the attributes spirit, 
Reason, Purpose, Good Will, Supreme Power, Unity, Selfhood. 
The nature of God is thus thought of as analogy with our 
human nature of reason and personality only, whereas in 
ourselves we are aware of this as qualified by restriction 
and limitation as applied to God the attributes we use are 
T completed f , i.e. thought as absolute and unqualified. 
Now all these attributes constitute clear and definite 
concepts; they can be grasped by the intellect; they can 
be analysed by thought; they even admit of definition. 

An object that can thus be thought conceptually may be 
termed rational."(1) It is perfectly clear that God 
cannot be confined within logical categories. He is 
super-rational but it is also clear, that He is not 
irrational. Man cannot comprehend God but he can appre- 

Otto, "The Idea of The Holy. 


Tf 


( 1 ) 13 . 1 













- 4 - 


hend Him. In order to have any satisfactory experience 
of God, man must have some rational thought about Him. 

That is to say. Cod must be construed in rational concepts 
in order to be a proper object of faith. 

Herbert Spencer makes the claim, that Cod as the 
idea of the Infinite and Absolute is the presupposition 
of all knowledge. This would appear to be a psychological 
necessity, in as much as one cannot perceive any object in 
space, or think of any event in time without perceiving it 
or thinking of it in its relation to its background in 
space, or what went before or came after it in time. Of 
this Infinite and Absolute, Spencer's contention is, that 
they are unknowable. 

Edward Caird combats this position of Spencer's 
that Cod is unknowable. He says, "The first principle 
through which all is known cannot itself be unknowable or 
unintelligible."(1) It is rather absurd to think, that 
which is the basis of all our thinking of self and object 
i is beyond the reach of knowledge. According to Caird 
the root of religion is in the nature of our intelligence. 
The idea of Cod must be linked up with our general con¬ 
sciousness of the objective world and ourselves. "Thus 
all our knowledge of the objective world and all our 

Caird, "Evolution of Religion." Vol.I. fl) p. 109. 

















. 




. 








. 






























T 































. 























. 

„ 








* 









- 5 - 


knowledge of ourselves presuouoses the idea of Ood."fl) 
Caird goes on to show that our conscious life with the 
powers of thinking and willing is defined and circumscribed 
by three ideas closely connected with each other. These 
three ideas are the object or not self, the subject or 
self, and the idea of unity which is fundamental in re¬ 
lating the difference of the self and object as they act 
and react on each other. For the purpose that this 
might be clearer the diagram below illustrates. 





0#<zfcr 


In this diagram the subject stands for the think¬ 
ing conscious being. The object is the world which in¬ 
cludes all objects. How the subject refuses to be con¬ 


sidered a nart of the object and likewise the object has 
an existence outside the subject, thus they stand over 
against each other in opposition, yet in an essential 
relation. In as much as the object has no meaning apart 
from the subject and the subject only comes to self con¬ 
sciousness as it distinguishes itself from and returns 


Caird, "Evolution of Rsligion." Vol. I. fl) p. 85. 



































r 









. 













' 

■ 




























































■ 






. 








. 





















- 6 - 


to itself in the knowledge of the object. This helps 
us to see the principle of unity in relation to conscious- 
ness* Caird T s position is that where you have two terms, 
namely subject and object, standing over against each other 
m opposition and at the same time in essential agreement, 
then you are forced to seek the ground of their unity in 
a third term of which both are manifestations and are held 
together in unity. This third term is the Infinite Beyond, 
in that sense God. 

r e know we can distinguish and relate the object 
only as we bring it back to the unity of self. As is 
known, our whole life of thought and action is contained 
in these ideas that stand in agreement, onposed, not nos- 
stole to identify, yet related. We are forced to think 
of these ideas as rooted in a higher principle, that is 
the source of unity, that transcends opposition of subject 
and object and brings the two together in unity. This 
higher idea that brings unity and is the source of the 
independent existence of object and subject, r is the 
ultimate supposition of our consciousness. f Tf The idea of 
.--oh therefore---is an essential principle or rather the 
ultimate essential principle which must manifest itself 
in the life of every rational creature. Every creature 
who is capable of the consciousness of an objective world 
and of the consciousness of self, is capable also of the 
consciousness of God. Or, to sum up the whole matter in 








































































































- 7 - 


one word, every rational being as such is a religious 
being."(1) These three ideas are in the minds of the 
simplest human being who relates himself to the world yet 
distinguishes himself from it. The reflective conscious¬ 
ness of the object, subject and of God and their relations 
comes only as a result in the process of development. 

The primitive mind is not able to give an intelligible 
analyses of the idea of God. We believe such a mind is 
conscious of self and external world and sees in them 
something which is greater and beyond both. °uch ideas 
are the principles of development of the thought of God* 
that finds a clearer reflective consciousness of these 
relations in Christian thinking* although the germ of the 
idea of God as the ultimate unity of subject and object 
has always been present in every rational consciousness. 

Another category of thought that helps us to see 
the principle of unity in relation to consciousness is 
that of the universal and the particular. "As Socrates 
showed long ago, we always know the particular through 
the universal." (2) The universal is in the particular, 

that is to say, every particular object in the world is 

. 

a manifestation of some infinite and universal principle 
of unity, which gives to each object the only reality it 

Caird, " Evolution of Religion." Vol.I. fl) p.68. (2) p.109 




















. , 


, 









. 

■' ' 














' 










. 












, 

r 





















- 












- 8 - 


possesses, and rules over man T s consciousness of the 
particular. therefore the primitive mind cannot rise to 
a full reflective consciousness of the universal if he 
has anjr, and he can only see the universal in the partic¬ 
ular, hence he finds his object of worshio in the partic¬ 
ular objects of nature. Such a view we think of as 
crude in the thinking: of the primitive mind, yet there 
is present in the dim consciousness of these, that there 
is some power greater than himself and greater than any 
particular and yet so related to the object that he cannot 
avoid it. Applying this general principle to the idea 
of God, interpreted as the infinite and universal principle 
of unity in relation to humanity, it reveals that God is 
present in the course of all men. The universal is in 
the particular and the reason of the particular is sought 
in the universal for ah; infinite unity. 

Another phase of thought in the human consciousness 

l 

is divine transcendence and immanence and its relations 

to the idea of an ultimate unity. There has been much 

divergence in thought as we study progressive religious 

thinking in regard to these truths concerning the thought 

of God. Plotinus said, "The world is waiting for someone 

to put the relation of immanence and transcendence together 

fi) 


Tuttle, "Lectures Christian Theology I. (1) 







. - 






- 





T 

• ' 


- 










' 


„ 
























i 

. 

, 





■ 






■ 




■ r *% 

is 



































































- 9 - 


w atthews states, " The transcendence of God means that 
no aspect or phase, even though fully completed according 
to its order, could fully manifest the Being of God."— 

And correlative with this affirmation is the affirmation 
of immanence with God. There is no level or grade of 
being which is without the presence of God.-And further 

$ 

it is this immanent life of God which furnishes the signs 
and indication of transcendence• 7f (1) A transcendent deity 
alone would be one with whom communion could not be had 
and a purely immanent deity alone would be indistinguish¬ 
able from ourselves. he must affirm that God is immanent 
and that also He is transcendent. This two fold relation 

between God and the world must be held in balanced form. 

In the conceptions of Deity, from the most orimitive to 
the highest, we find the common experience of worship of 
that transcendent above, outside and yet the enjoyment of 
the experience of having such a Deity with them in immanent 
unity. This of course was held very indistinct in the 
savage mind but the principle is there. Dor example, 
the conception of mana, a vague consciousness of something 
mysterious, transcendent and of supernatural power or 
potency beyond yet possible to secure for ones self as an 
immanent power. The highest conception found in Christian 
thought is that of an omnipresent and omnipitent God tran- 

Matthews, "God in Christian Thought and Experience." 

(1) p. 134. 
























. 




























■ 


























t 


r 


' 

t 













iid- 

scendent and yet immanent in the believer through the 
spirit of Christ. We can perceive in this relationship 
of transcendence and immanence the relation formerly given 
under the terms of subject and object, not wholly identical 
n<S>r wholly different, yet related in unity with the idea 
of Cod as transcendent,manifesting Himself in the subject 
and object in immanent relationship. As we have conscious 
ness of the world and of ourselves in distinction from 
and relation to the world outside. Co we have the con¬ 
sciousness of an Infinite or Divine Heing in whom we live 
and move and have our being and exalt such a power and 
assign to it such attributes that are more consistent 
with that conception than we give to self or object. 
Therefore we can see transcendence and immanence in a 
unity. Cod is immanent in all natural processes, present 
in all things but comes to the highest expression in 
conscious beings as we exalt Him in transcendent power. 

The thought of Cod in human experience is that He is 
present in everything, not limited, but above and beyond 
our finite thought, so we conceive of our lives as part 
of a more comprehensive, greater unifying, all embracing 
power; an immanent and transcendent whole. Cod cannot 
be elevated and opposed to finite beings or things. 

Cod who is within and not without or vise versa is no 
Cod at all. 

While it is true that Cod is in the human eon- 





























, 


































_ 






' 





























■ 






; 














- 

















- 11 - 


sciousness in the form stated above, it is also true 
that to the primitive mind he is there, not in a clear 
reflective form, but in a dim and vague way, implicit 
and not explicit. Caird states this clearly, "Religion 
is essentially a consciousness of the infinite presup¬ 
posed in all the divisions of the finite, a consciousness 
which however little it may be understood by him whom 
it inspires, however coarse and imperfect the form in 
which it presents itself, is yet an intergal element of 
man T s mind, of which he can no more rid himself than he 
can get rid of the consciousness of the object or of 
himself. And the true nature of his idea, as it is 
implied in the very constitution of our intelligence, 
continually reacts against the imperfect form in which 
it is presented. In this way it is not unnatural that 
even at the lowest stage of his life, man should be 
visited with occasional glimpses of the highest he can 
ever attain. The human spirit is one in all its dif¬ 
ferences, and in a sense, the whole truth is always 
present in it, if not to it. Tn the consciousness of 
the simplest and most uncultured individual there are 
contained all the principles that can be evolved by the 
wisest philosopher of the most cultivated time; and even 
the rudest religious systems have represented in them-- 

though, no doubt, in a shadowy and distorted way --all 



























' 

■ 










, 





' 

- . 











r 

r 



















. 

■ 












- 12 - 


el aments that enter into the highest Christian worship.”(l) 
Tn as much as man looks out on the outer world because 
he looks to the inner world and to the world above him 
or beyond, and because he only thinks of the above and 
beyond in terms of the particular object in the external 
world. Ke therefore begins to think of Cod as expressed 
in objective and particular forms. This is seen in the 
whole history of religious thinking. What is the nature 
of that Infinite, Eternal, behind beyond and beneath the 
universe as progressive thinking takes its form in various 
religious terms? 

The most primitive form of religious thinking is 
that connected with mana. Bishop R. H. Codrington, a 
great student of anthropology, found among the Melanesian 
islanders the idea of mana. He defines mana thus,”It 
is a power or influence, not physical and in a way super¬ 
natural; but it shows itself in physical forces or in 
any kind of power or excellence which a man possesses, 
j This mana is not fixed in anything, and can be conveyed 
in almost anything but spirits, whether disembodied souls 
J or supernatural beings; have it and can impart it; and it 
| essentially belongs to personal beings to originate it, 
though it may act through the medium of water, or stone, 
or a bone.”(2) Or again he describes it as, ”A form 

Caird, "Evolution of Religion.” (1) p. 201-202.Vol•I• 
Hastings, "Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics.”(2)p.876. 

Vol.VIll. 












- 13 - 

altogether distinct from physical power which acts in all 
kinds of ways for good and evil, and which it is of the 
greatest advantage to possess or control."(l) This 
mana is a mysterious supernatural newer or influence 
that is desired for one T s self, so that this power can 
used when needed* This mana may be conveyed in a 
stone, amulet or tooth or gained by using certain form 
of words as a medium of calling this pov/er. To gain 
mana that will give power, becomes the chief end of this 
primitive religious faith. 

Fimilar conception of power is shown among the 

Horth nnerican Indians. The Algonquins used the term 

"manitou", "An unsystematic belief in a cosmic mysterious 

property, which is believed to exist everywhere in nature." 

f2) The fioux tribe had the prevailing idea of wakonda. 

It is conceived as a power, that may reside in the various 

objects of nature, such as sun, moon, stars, animals and 

man. An object or man believed to possess that -power is 

said to be wakonda. Then among the Iroquois, there was 

the conception of a mystic, supernatural rower in everv- 

body and everything which seemed to have orenda in some 

degree. J. IT. B. Howitt defines it as a "Hypothetical 

potency or potentiality to do or effect results mystically," 

f3) 

i 

Hastings,"Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics,” Vol.vttL. 
King, "The Develop ment of Religion^j -^4 p. 376. 

(3)p.l40. 




























- 14 - 

A good hunter among the Iroquois had a superior newer of 
orenda and the u&j^Sssful hunter was no match for orenda 
in the game he was pursuing. The concent of the primi¬ 
tive minds was that of a mysterious power, of the kind 
referred to among the Indian tribes. ,T A distinct and 
rather abstract conception of a diffused, all-pervasive, 
invisible, manipulable and transferable life energy, or 
universal force. TT --- TT A11 success, strength, or prosperity 
is conceived to depend upon the possession of,”(l) such 
a power in sufficient quantity. Some aspects of this 
mana conception to correspond to the TJniversal Beyond, 
that is to say, the conception of the Unseen Universal 
^ower which he dimly thinks of as existing beyond the 
finite world, but there is also the aspect corresponding 
to the idea of immanence, as for example, in as much as 
he cannot rise to the conception of the universal. In 
his endeavor to secure mana for himself, he must find it 
in particular objects about him. 

A general expression of this is to be seen in 
Animism. Animism is a belief among nrimitive peoples 
that all objects about them are either alive or inhabited 
by spirits and have life energy as they themselves have. 

A tree, stone, mountain, sky or even a blade of grass. 


Tr ing, TT The Development of Religion. TT fl) p. 135 













- 15 - 


are regarded as animate. Not a.l\ of these objects or 
others may have a religious content for the savage. 

When the spirit is distinguished from the material object 
then we find Animism closely knit with religion. If 
these spirits are thought of as possessing mana, then of 
course it is natural for primitive man to seek to get on 
good terms with them, so man will receive mana for himself. 

A more particular form of mana is seen in fetishism, 
^etishism takes its form as a religious faith among rrimi- 
tive people by believing, that in a fetish, an impersonal 
object is supposed to reside, a supernatural rower for 
adverting evil and bringing good to the possessor. Fetish¬ 
es were numerous objects, some of the most popular being:, 
horns of animals or the bones, claws, tails or feet of an 
animal. They are usually associated in some way with a 
god or a spirit and the mana they have, comes from a per¬ 
sonal agency such as a god or spirit. All of these 
fetishes imply the conception of mana and conserve values 
to the native. They were worshiped in the homes and 
later some had temples erected to their fetish with ser¬ 
vices of worship. Some of the fetishes were worn on the 
person or were moved if the native changed his abode. 

There was a general consciousness within the believer of 
some sort of a mysterious impersonal or only imperfectly 
personified force, a dim hardly conscious feeling of the 













' 










r 
























... 


















jp « 






























- 16 - 


presence of something supernatural. Something that is 
not human, material hut which is potent in the life of man, 
for his good if he could secure such power for himself hut 
which if not secured wrought harm, hence the reason for 
exacting religious ceremonies attending the fetish. He 
objectifies this force and thinks of it as existing in the 
external world and projects it into the worship of inanimate 

i 

objects. He thus conceives in a crude and imperfect way 
the transcendent power within him. 

Again in another form of primitive religion, mana is 
objectified in the totem. Totemism is the name given to 
a system of tribal worship denoted by a totem. Totems 
are natural objects, usually animals and sometimes plants, 
recognized as an emblem of a family or clan. Each member 
of the tribe is supposedly mystically united with this 
animal or plant. This totem is sometimes regarded as the 
ancestor of the tribe and is closely related with its deity; 
The nature of this union is not clearly thought through 
by the native, except that he and the plant or animal,that 
the totem denotes,are one. Totemism has its ceremonies 
and taboos. The individual must not partake of its totem 
as food except on rare ceremonial occasions. The totem 
may be personified; perhaps if may be a spirit or god that 
abides in the plant or animal. Eating of the totemic 
plant or animal signifies a participation between the per** 







































.. 















































' 














- 17 - 


son and the god, and so the mana of the god "becomes avail¬ 
able, tf The god is believed somehow to be present in the 
sacred food of the totem, and to eat the food is to become 
more closely unified with the god and to receive mana from 
him. The god, of course, continues to exist outside of 
the food that is eaten and with undiminished power. TT (l) 

So again we see the conscious unity of the thought of God 
in mankind expressed, not in a clear light, but dimly in 
the experience of the believer. 

Thought regarding God has shown a process of 
development in successive stages as represented in differ¬ 
ent religions. There is something common that underlies 
all their principles, the idea of unity in the human mind 
as it seeks the experience of God. All religion involves 
the conscious relation to God conceived in different ways. 
There has been a trend of progress from the thought of 
many gods to one, from particular gods to the sense of a 

I universal god, and from the natural to the spiritual 
emphasis. The results of this long process of the devel- 

i opment of the thought of God, brings us to the fact that 

: 

the only God possible to adore is one, who manifests Him¬ 
self in nature and spirit and clearest of all in the 
highest development of the intellectual and moral life of 
man. 


Wright, "A Student T s Philosophy of Religion.” (1) p. 61 























r 


































t 



, 

■ 










- 
























- 18 - 


Aristotle said, " If you want to understand anything 
you must study it in its highest manifestation." In 

Jesus Christ we find our most perfect satisfying and the 
highest conception of Cod. The Christian faith emphasises 
the truth that Christ and Cod are one. When we think of 


Cod we think of Him in terms of Jesus Christ. Christ 


revealed Cod as not dwelling apart from the universe hut 
interpreting it and implicated in the finite consciousness 
of mankind and in the processes of the world. Hr. 
Fairbairn said, "Since Jesus lived. Cod has been another 
and nearer Being to man." fl) The consciousness of Cod 
possessed by Jesus is the basis of the truly Christian 
conception of Cod. 

A study of the Person and Work of Christ from the 
Cospel writers, gives us different phases of the conscious¬ 
ness of Cod in Christ f s thinking consciousness. There 

' 

is a twofold consciousness of Cod in Christ T s mind that 
| is quite marked • The first one is that Cod is transcen¬ 
dent beyond above, "Our Father who art in Heaven,"(E) "I 
thank Thee, 0 Father, Lord of Heaven and earth",(3) "These 
things spake Jesus and lifting up his eyes to Heaven".(4) 

In Christ T s daily communion with Cod and Conversations 


Barton,"Religions of the World", fl) p. 385. 

')io' Bible. fE) Matthew 6;9--. (3) Matthew 11;85— • 


(4) John 17; 1—. 


( 5 ) Matthew 6 ; 26 --. 




















- 19 - 


about Cod, He exalts Him in transcending power. The 
second fact about Jesus* consciousness of Cod is that Cod 
is immanent in the world and nature, that he cares and 
provides for His creation. "Behold the birds of the 
heaven that they sow not neither do they reap not gather 
into barns; and your Heavenly Bather feedeth them."(l) 

And such references in the same chanter, to the grass in 
the field and the lilies of the field, gives us the insight 
of Cod’s care and presence in nature. Note also the 
energizing principle of Cod’s activity in the world, "Bui 
Jesus answered them, my father worketh even unto now and 
T work."(2) Another phase of this second relationship 
is Christ’s consciousness of Cod in the inner life and 
action of himself. "Believest thou not that I am in the 
Father and the Father in me? The words that I say unto 
you I speak not for myself; but the Father abiding in me 
doeth his works."(3) In harmony with the testimony of 
the scriptures we have an elaboration of this conception 
from Budolph Eucken, "In the striving of humanity and in 
the soul of the individual there is a movement towards 
a world transcendent life, a life that first attains to 

a complete inwardness when it becomes world transcendent." 

(4) 

■ 

The Bible, (1) Matthew 6; 26 — . (2) John 5; 17. 

(3) John 14; 10. 

I 

Fucken, "Lif e ^ ; Bap is and Life 's Ideal.” (4) p, 275. 
















- 20 - 


One of the fundamental facts in Christianity is 
the truth of the Incarnation, that in the minds of believers 
in Christ is fundamental in understanding Cod, The 
Incarnation is the imprisoning of the truth of Cod in 
visible form as a Divine self disclosure of Himself. 

Jesus did not invent the conception of Cod but in Him 
the conception became flesh. William Sperry states, 

"Cod is known by the Incarnations of Himself in the world. 1T 
(1) John interprets with the Logos idea, "And the Word 
became flesh and dwelt among us."(2) The truth concerning 
Cod revealed in Jesus Christ Is the highest expression 
of that truth found in human consciousness. The principle 
underlying this truth is found in all religious thinking 
such as we have discussed in the mana,fetish,totem,spirits 
and is a basis for continued unity of thought in human 
consciousness. In some of the more cultured religions, 
such as Hinduism, in India, we see a much higher concention, 
In this religion, the Brahmans interpret Cod as Vishnu 
and Vishnu incarnate is Krishna. Krishna was, it is 
thought, a real man, a religious reformer. In the course 
of time he was worshiped as the highest manifestation 
of the all gracious, all powerful deity, Brahma. Krishna 
worship tries to satisfy the hunger of the believer for a 
union with a divine being where the worshiper feels him- 

Sperry,"Reality in Worship." (1) p. 137. 

The Bible, (2) John 1; 14. 



















- 21 - 


self inwardly a>in. '"he -principle tenet of Hinduism 
is that there is one Rod above beyond all things whose 
source is the impersonal "Brahma manifested as Vishnu who 
is Frishna incarnate. Christianity gives us the highest 
expression of this desire for unity with the Divine in 
Christ. Jesus Christ is the connecting liiik between Cod 
and man and this fact is seen that Cod is incarnate in 
Jesus Christ in the flesh. John in his interpretation 
of Christ sets out the desire of human consciousness 
to see Cod, when he reports ^hilip as saying, "Lord show 
us the father, and it sufficeth us, Jesus saith unto him, 
T Have I been so long time with you, and dost thou not 
know me, ^hilip? He that hath seen me hath seen the 
father. TT fl) Here we have in one brief utterence, a 
statement of the transcendent and the immanent expressed 
in the highest and holiest man. The importance of the 
Incarnation is obvious in the thought of Cod as revealed 
in Christ and that revelation the final,the complete, the 
absolute and the ultimate. 

Through Christ believers receive the essential 
mana as they are willing to imbibe His spirit. He is the 
great objective of faith that unites Cod T s relations with 
self and the outer world. The universal is revealed in 


The Bible, (1) John 14; 8-9. 


































■ 




. 

■ 

' . 




























* 




















- 22 - 


the particular and again the sense of unity of thinking 
is satisfied as we can know the universal through the 
particular. Transcendence and Immanence are brought 
together in Christ, who in his own consciousness knew 
Cod as transcendent and yet ever immanent in nature and 
the processes of life. Q o in our conscious thinking 
about Cod we must see, that to know anything is to see it 
in relation to the ultimate reality of Cod. 

























- 23 - 


‘CHARTER II. 

GOP IH EMOTION. 

As was mentioned in the introduction, the three 
psychic elements in the religious experience of mankind, 
thought,feeling and will, cannot he separated into compart¬ 
ments and one termed rational and another non-rational. 
Rudolph Otto says, "We have to he on our gaurd against 
an error which would lead to a wrong and one-sided inter¬ 
pretation of religion. This is the view that the essence 
of deity can he given completely and exhaustively in such 
rational attributions as have been referred to above and 
others like them. TT (l) Rational attributes imoly a non- 
rational subject and enlarge the meaning of that subject 
in the mental attitude. There has been a strong tendency 
among religious thinkers to over emphasize the rational 
and under estimate the non-rational. We can observe this 
in the language forms of expositions, creeds and dogma, 
which convey ideas one-sidedly intellectual and rational¬ 
istic. God works through the emotional as well as the 
intellectual. Religious instinctive feeling lies deeper 
than reason and is regarded as a more substantial basis 
for a practical religion. Rufus Jones, a modern nhiloso- 

Otto, "The Idea of The Holy." fl) p. 2. 









~ 












r 


- 






_ 




- 














/ w j Sfc l 




















|H|& 

, 




- 
















■ 

■ 

, 


























- 24 - 


-pher of religion expresses this truth, "Something not 
ourselves co-worlcs with us, as the currents of the ocean 
co-work with the mariner who is traveling in their direc¬ 
tion. Something more than our finite will pushes behind 
our effort. Something large and luminous backs our deeds. 
When we are on right lines of advance the door is open 
before us. We find ourselves in cooperative union with 
a larger mind and a wiser will. We have sound reason to 
believe that what is highest in us is deepest in the nature 
of things. We become organs of a spiritual kingdom and 
stand in vital relation to an Eternal Mind and Heart and 
Will with whom we co-operate."(1) 

Erederiek I). E. Schleiermacher, (1768-1834) who 
was a professor of theology in Germany and was a pioneer 
in the field of religious emotional interpretation, stated 
in his book called "The Christian Eaith" that religion is 
a "feeling of absolute dependence." He states that this 
may be a feeling of awe, fear, love or affection and likely 

may be combined in a sentiment of loyalty and reverence, 

I 

obligation and aspiration, if the source of agency is per¬ 
sonal and with a different attitude of feeling if the 
agency is impersonal. In his view there are no true 
atheists. He attempts to show all self consciousness 3 

Jones, " The Testimony of the Foul," p. 69. 















































, 




„ 






c 


t O . . . t 

















, 






- 















, 










is accompanied by God consciousness. Any awareness of 
self also possesses, even if dim, an awareness of God in 
the mind of the self. Pchleiermacher treats the religious 
impulse as an inherent and necessary quality of human 
consciousness which normally develops along with the mind. 
Religion* he declared, was a kind of a 7T ftelih^ 7 » amplify¬ 
ing it later that it was a "feeling for the infinite", and 
climaxed it as mentioned above, as a "feeling of absolute 
dependence." As a pioneer, he is criticised in some of 
his positions but as a whole the foundation of his theories 
appears to be sound and is so regarded by modern thinkers. 

Bean W. R. Matthews, a modern Christian philosopher 
thinks that Schleiermacher laid too exclusive an emphasis 
upon T feeling 1 and that he did not distinguish between 
f feeling 1 in the sense of pleasure and pain* in the sense 
of emotion and perception. Matthews points out that the 
reaction against the idea of religion, as merely morality 
or dogma in Schleiermacher 7 s mind, led him to the charge 
of neglecting the part of reason and conscience in relig¬ 
ious development. Another criticism that seems to have 
value, Matthews states, "That he conceives the religious 
life too much as passive. The feeling of absolute depen¬ 
dence, taken by itself, seems to rule out the sense of 
cooperation with God which has been an element in some 














- 26 - 


at least, of the most highly evolved religious experience." 

(l) 

Professor Rudolph Otto, in his well known "book, 

"The Idea of The Holy", mentions three criticisms of 
Rchleiermacher T s T feeling of dependences One criticism 
is similar to that mentioned hy Dean Matthews as regards 
using T feeling of dependence 1 as no more than a close 
analogy to other regions of experience, other than the 
religious feeling. Otto states, "His mistake is in 
making the distinction merely that between * absolute T 
and T relative 1 and therefore a difference of degree and 
not of intrinsic quality."f2) Then Otto cites Genesis 
18; 27, as an example as what is * feeling of dependence 1 
and yet something more which he calls r creature conscious¬ 
ness or creature feeling. "It is the emotion of a crea¬ 
ture abased and over whelmed by its own nothingness in 
contrast to that which is supreme above all creatures."(3) 
The second criticism Otto notes, is that according to 
Schleiermacher, the fact of God only comes as a result 
of an inference reasoning, to a cause beyond self, to 
account for ? feeling of dependence T , or in other words, 
that the content of religious emotion is merely a form 
of self valuation, in the sense of self-depreciation, or 
directly a sort of self-consciousiiess of one T s self in 
o 

Matthews, "God in Christian Thought and Experience. TT (1) 

p. 7. 

Otto,-. The Idea of The Holy."j2)p.9.(3) p.10. 













I 


, .y 









' 




' 








’ 


















’ 












T 










































, 




\ 




' 








r 


1 













r 










- 


. Kii 














- 27 - 


ons f s dependence. This, Otto says, is entirely opposed 
to the psychological facts of the case. The creature 
feeling is in itself an effect of another feeling element, 
hut which in itself has primary reference to an object 
outside itself. H'8equotes William J$mes, "As regards 
the origin of the Greek gods, we need not at present 
seel£ an opinion. But the whole array of our instances 
leads to conclusions something like this: It is as if there 
were in the human eonsciousness a sense of reality, a 
feeling of objective presence, a perception of what we 
may call "something there", more deep and more general 
than any of the special and particular "senses by which 
the current psychology supposes existant reality to be 
originally revealed."(1) Otto T s third criticism is this. 






" By T feeling of dependence 1 Schleiermacher means conscious, 
ness of being conditioned fas affected by cause) and so 
he develops the implications of this logically enough in 
his sections upon Creation and ^reservation."f 2 ) 

The sense of feeling of dependence is not in that 
immediate religious emotion, which we have in the period 
of worship, but it belongs to the rational idea of God. 

Otto in showing this difference calls attention to the 
words of Abraham,(Genesis 18; 27) 7 Behold now,! have taken 


James,"Varieties of Religions Experience."(1) p. 58. 
Otto, "TheIdea ofThe Holy " ( 2 ) p. 20. 




























. 






















- 

: 














r 


























































■ 








■ 
























-28 


upon me to speak unto the Word, which am hut dust and 
ashes', and refers to the difference between the feeling 
of dependence of Schleiermacher and that which finds 
voice in Abraham, as that between createdness, the creature 
as the work of the divine creative act and the conscious¬ 
ness of creaturehood, impotence as against overpowering 
might, dust and ashes as against 'majesty 1 . In the 
Translater 1 s Preface of The Idea of The Holy, we have 
a summary of these criticisms. It reads, "Hence the 
author shows that Schleiermacher who d.id so much to 
emphasize the function of T feeling' in religion, is wrong 
in starting his account with f the sense of absolute 
dependence 1 , for that is to start from what is after all 
secondary derivative, the reflection in self feeling of 
this felt presence of the divine. 11 (l) 

William James, a great student of psychology 
with a profound desire to interpret the deep religious 
feelings’ of human nature in rational conceptions, has 
given trie "world a great book, published over thirtyfive 
years ago, known as 'The Varieties of Religious Experience' 
^his was given first in the famous Gifford lectures, 1901- 
1902, at Edinburgh. Numerous statements and testimonies 
are given in the book from different individuals in various 

°tto> "The Idea of The Holy," (1) p.ll, XI. 























forms of world activity, telling of their emotional 
experiences. Some of these seem to he extravagances 

but James explains as choosing these to yield information 

■ 

and leaves the reader to answer for himself as to his 
sense of the proper balance. The subject of conversion 
always conveys the fact of feeling. James speaks of 
conversion as TT The process, gradual or sudden by which 
a self hitherto divided, and consciously wrong inferior 
and unhappy, becomes unified and consciously right superior 
and happy, in consequence of its firmer hold upon religious 
realities. TT (1) James in explaining this process in 
psychological terms, states, that which forms man T s ideas 9 
aims, causes diverse internal groups and systems and are 
relatively independent of one another. Each aim awakens 
an interest and gathers about it certain ideas in subordin¬ 
ation to the principal aim. When one group of ideas 
receives the interest, other ideas may recede from the 
mental field. Whenever one aim grows stable, the rivals 
of that aim are expelled from the individual life. When 
such a change takes place religiously we term it conversion 
The feeling for the divine becomes the habitual centre of 
the personal energy of the subject and the former experien¬ 
ces remain on the peripheral in consciousness. The manner 

TT The Varieties of Religious Experience." fl) n.189.; 


James, 































- 30 - 


of conversion is exemplified in a conscious and voluntary 
way or in an involuntary and unconscious way. ^he con^ 
scious, being a gradual regenerative change and the other 
a self surrender, instantaneous change such as the saying, 
"Man T s extremity is Ood T s opportunity" as used in a relig¬ 
ious sense. Many times these two types are interposed in 
religious experience. James states it symbolically "When 
the new centre of personal energy has been subconsciously 
incubated so long as to be just ready to open into flower, 

T hands off T is the only word for us, it must burst forth 
unaided;"(1). 

In the Conclusions from the "Varieties of Religious 
Experience" there is a summary of James 1 personal observ¬ 
ances, among these he says, "The subconscious self is now 
a well accredited psychological entity-—Apart from all 
religious considerations, there is actually and literally 
more life in our total soul, than we are at any time aware 
of."(2) "But just as our primary wide awahe consciousness 
throws open our senses to the touch of things material, so 
it is logically conceiveable that if there be higher 
spiritual agencies that can directly touch us, the psycho¬ 
logical condition of their doing so might be our possession 
of a subconscioiis region which alone should yield access 
to them. The hubbub of a waking life might close the 

James,"Varieties of Religious Experience". (1) u.210. 

( 2) p.511. 











































• ■ '0‘V 

' f 

. 




m I 



















- 31 - 


door, whioh in the dreamy Sublimal, might remain ajar or 
open.’* fl) 'disregarding the otfer-beliefs and confining 
ourselves to what is common and generic, we have in the 

■ 

fact that the conscious person is continuous with a wider 

. 

self through which experience comes, a positive content 
of religious experience which it seems to me, is liter- 
ally and objectively true as far as it goes,"f2) TTri1 he 
further limits of our being plunge, it seems to me, into 
an altogether other dimension of existence from the sen¬ 
sible and merely ’understandable T world . Name it the 
mystical region, or the supernatural region, whichever 
you choose. No far as out ideal impulses originate in 
this region (and most of them do originate in it, for we 
find them possessing us in a way for which we cannot 
articulately account) we belong to it in a more intimate 
sense than that in which we belong to the visible world 
for we belong in the most intimate sense wherever our ideal 1 
belongs." (3) "God is the natural appellation,for Chris¬ 
tians at leas#, for the supreme reality, so I will call 
this higher part of the universe by the name of Cod."(4) 
From these statements we can judge that Jesus had a real 

conception of the inner-consciousness and the subconscious 
realm and he was able to go beyond the foreground of 

immediate experience and dip down into that curious sense 
of an everlasting Presence, 

James, "Varieties of Religious Experience".(1) p.242 
(2) p.515.(3) p. 515-516. (4) p. 516. 


5 
















- 32 - 


to fret a religious response to Ood. Carlyle r s statement 
lacks this, "There is an Infinite in man which with all 
his cunning he cannot q.uite bury under the Finite." 

Again quoting lames, "He "becomes conscious that this higher 
part is conterminous and continuous with a more of the ,! 

same quality, which is operative in the universe outside 
of him, and which he can keep in working touch with, and 
in a fashion get on "board of and save himself when all 
his lower "being has gone to pieces in the wreck. "(1) 

"We cannot avoid the conclusion that in religion we have 
a department of human nature with unusually close relations 
to the transmarginal or sublimal region."(2) 

Hr. P.udolph Otto is noted for his contribution 
to the world, of the development of his 'Numinous theory. 

The word numinous being derived from the Watin T numem T , 
the most general word for supernatural divine power. 

The natural word in the religious vocabulary is 'the holy T 
or else r the sacred'. To Otto these words are full of 
ethical content and moral meaning but do not convey 
enough of non-rational meaning so the word numinous was 
coined to express this feeling leaving the words 'holy ' 9 
'sacred', 'sanctity', and 'holiness 1 to their more usual 
meaning. "Therefore'Numinous T and 'Numen' will then be 

James, "Varieties of Peligious Experience."(1) p.sag f 2 )p.483j 












- 33 - 


v/orcls whioh bear no moral import, but which stand for the 
specific non-rational religious apprehension and its obiect 
at all levels from the first dim stirrings when religion 
can hardly yet be said to exist to the most exalted forms 
of spiritual experience"(l) " ’Numinous* feeling is; 

then, just this unique apprehension of a Something, whose 
character may at first seem to have little connection 
with our ordinary moral terms, but which later’becomes 
charged’ with the highest and deepest moral significance?^) 
The numinous cannot be strictly defined, only awakened in 
the mind. If we direct our minds to a moment of deeply 
felt religious experience, the numinous is felt as objective 
and outside the self. otto maintains that the root of 
the religious consciousness is to be found in the feeling 
of the’numinousI In all religious experience the numinous 
exists. The primitive mind may sense it as uncanny and 
with dread, and in the highest development of religion it 
is the apprehension of the transcendent "Other". In the 
religion of Primitive Man* there appears crude forms in 
which 7 numinous or awe is prevalent, such as a great 
emotional disturbance in ’daemonic dread 7 , which gives rise 
in the more highly developed form of numinous emotion and 
is a mysterious compelling power. The primitive horror 

Otto, "The Idea of The Holy".fl) deface p.XIII. 

(2) -Preface p.x II# 























- 
















t 














' 












* 
















I 


- 


c 


















, 

’ 





’ 

T 










, 



















- 34 - 


and f shudder*, dread of the uncanny, is a quality that 
seems to he present in the highest worship of Hod, although 
accompanied with a quality of exaltedness and sublimity* 

The elements of the numinous are quite suggestive 
of the overflow of emotional content in human consciousness. 1 
The element of awfulness r tremendum f that incites T Tremor T , 
or in common parlance is fear but when considered in the 
category of the numinous is not mistaken for ordinary dread 
butthat which comes more with T awe f in the religious sense. 
The element of r might T and *r>ower T absolute over powering- 
ness the first element of awfulness may recede, with the 
r overpowering T of which we are conscious as an object over 
against itself, and in which there is a feeling of unworth¬ 
iness or religious humility. Again the element of T Energy T 
of the numinous object, is perceptible in vitality, passion 5 
will, force, movement, but only an analogies to a genuine 
j non-rational aspect of divine nature in T Wrath T or the 
same T energy only directed differently as felt in T Love*. 
The T Wholly Other f that which is outside the realm of the 
usual, the familiar and the intelligible, fills the mind 
with blank wonder and astonishment which we feel, but are 
not able to give clear conceptual expression to. In the 
earliest level of religious experience, the numinous causes 
a chaotic stirring of the feelings, and through the higher 
cultured religions there is the development of mysticism. 










' 








T 
















f 

t k r 

' 








T 








1 1 






; 



























- 35 - 


Another aspect of the numinous experience is fascination. 
The divine object may appear in the mind as an object of 
horror but at the same time be something that allures and 
the creature who may tremble before it, has at the same 
time, an impulse to turn to it even to mahe it somehow his 
own. "Possession of and by the numen becomes an end in 
itself; it begins to be sought for its own sake."(1) 

The creature becomes fascinated, entranced, captivated, 
rising to extreme emotional actions in religious worship, 
as well as the quieter life lived in the spirit with 
exultation. "And this shows that above and beyond our 
rational being, lies hidden the ultimate and highest part 
of our nature, which can find no satisfaction in the mere 
allaying of the needs of our sensuous, psychical or 
intellectual impulses and cravings."f2) Dr. Otto, summing 
up the course of the historical development of the numinous 
states, "That which the primitive religious consciousness 
first apprehends in the form of T daemonie dread 1 , and 
which, as it further unfolds, becomes more elevated and 
enobled, is in origin, not something rational or moral, 
but something distinct, non-rational, an object to which 
the mind responds in a unique way with the special feeling- 
reflexes that have been described. And this element or 

Otto , 


"The Idea of The Holy."(l) p.33.(2) p.36 


















T 

t 




f 


r 




{ 




- 36 - 


moment passes in itself through a process of development 

of its own* quite apart from the other process-which 

begins at an early stage by which it is T rationalize&* 
and T moralised T i.e, filled with rational and ethical 
meaning. Talcing this non-rational process of development 
first, we haire seen how the T daemonic dread T , after itself 
passing through various gradations, rises to the level of 
T fear of the gods 1 , and thence to r fear of 0od T . ^he 
? daemonic power T becomes the divine power; T dread* becomes 
worship; out of a confusion of inchoate emotions and 
bewildered palpitations of feeling grows T religio T , and 
Ox shudder T a holy awe. The feelings of dependence upon 
and beatitude in the numen, from being relative become 
aosolute. The false analogies and fortuitous associations 
are gradually dispelled or frankly rejected. The numen 
becomes Cod and Deity---It is the culmination of a devel¬ 
opment which works itself out purely in the sphere of the 
non-r at j onal. fT (1) 

Rufus M. Jones, a modern philosophical thinker and 
author, mystical as well as practical, in his interpretations 
in speaking of Rudolph Otto T s theory of numinism in the 
interpretation of the basis in religion says,"It breaks 

Otto,"The Idea of The Holy." fl) p. 113. 











- 37 - 


into expression as a state of wondej; mingled with awe and 
reverent fear, ^here is in the religious consciousness 
a mysterious sense of something more than is visible, a 
Presence deeply interfused a numinous Beyond which throws 
the beholder into a peculiar state of mind unlike any other ' 
state, "(1) "The aspect of awe and wonder, of mysterious 
dread and reverent joy in the presence of the Beyond break- ( 
ing in upon the soul cannot well be minimised."( 2 ) Rufus 
Jones, granting the non-rationalistic aspect of religion, 
criticizes Otto in this statement, "The numinous experience 
does not bring the whole of our life into play. It does 
not at once inform the mind, stir the emotional deep in us 
and fortify the will as religion in its fulness should do." 
(3)) A further description of religion as of the numinous 
experience Jones says, "Religion is rightly declared to be 
unique, but in this account of it, it forever remains a 
mysterious experience in the presence of a Something tremen¬ 
dous but unknown; Something awe insniring but inexnlicable. 
So far as we are here told anything explicit, it is in terms, 
of feelings which stir our being. We are thrown into a 
moved state but we know no more about the Object which 
moved us then, than we did before we were moved. It is 

Jones,"The Testimony of The Soul." (l)p.56. (2)p.58.(3) 

P • 59. 


















- 38 - 


and remains a mysterious tremendum. We have felt a 
^resenoe which disturbs us with joy and wonder. But it 
remains an-unknown Beyond. It is wholly other, not re¬ 
vealed or revealable. TT (1) In other words, Jones makes 
clear that the weakness of Otto T s position is that God is 
conceived too much in terms of too much, a Wholly Other 
Transcendent Being. The correction of this is seen in 
the position of Caird who makes the Infinite Beyond the 
principle of unity in all human consciousness, as well 
as in the objective world, that is to say, the Transcendent 
is Immanent; the Universal is in the Particular. The 
Beyond is at the same time within or to paraphrase the 
words of Jones, the Wholly Other is at the same time 
revealed in the inner world of consciousness . Rufus 
Jones substantiates William James in the place of the 
subconscious in Religious Experience, when he says, "All 
creative work which attains a high degree of perfection 
is gestated in the deeps of the subconscious."(2) "Com¬ 
paring in thought he refers to James idea, "That in relig¬ 
ion we have a department of human nature with Unusually 
close relations to the transmarginal or sublimal region, 
---call it by any other name you please to distinguish 


Jones. "The Testimony of The Soul." flip.58. (2) p.179. 




















1 ! 






' 








- f : 













. 




:C 
















- 39 - 


it from the level of full sunlit consciousness.- In it 

also, the fountain head of much that feeds our religion, 

---and this is my conclusion -the door into this region 

seems unusually wide open; at any rate, experiences making 
their entrance through that door have had emphatic influence 
in shaping religious history. ,T ( 1) Quoting a few sentences 
that follow, we can see that Rufus Jones has a real grasp 
of the experience of the Eternal. lT We live out beyond 
ourselves and somehow eternity has got into our hearts. 

We are not set in rigid finite limits; we are finite-infin- 
ite, with "a more yet" beyond every attainment." ( 2 ) "It 
seems to me transcendence belongs inherently to the full 
meaning of a personal spirit."(3) "We carry in the form 
and structure of our inner selves the mark and badge of 
linkage and kinship with a realm that can best be called 
Eternal, since it is real in its own essential being and 
of the same Nature as £od, who is the centre of its life 
and of ours."(4) "Religion must not be reduced to a 
speculation of reason nor to a feeling of dependence, nor 
to a way of life adjustment."f5) "Nevertheless T am firm¬ 
ly convinced that there is an unfathomable depth of inward 
Godlike being at man T s spiritual centre, which is the tap 

James."Varieties of Religious Experience."(1) p. 483-484. 
Jones."The Testimony of The Soul." ( 2 ) r. 113. (3) p. 110. 

(4) p. 70. f5) p. 55. 





- — 

, 

' ■: .■ V : ■: 

„ 

f 

; ( ■ ' { 

* 








, 







- 40 - 


root of human self consciousness and which is unsundered 

< 

from this Overworld which we call Ood.”(l) 

^rom these observations and statements from great 
minds and teachers of the inner realities of religion, v/e 
can see the important place feelings and emotions have in 
the desire of an experience of God. 


TT 


Jones 


The Testimony of The Soul.” fl) p. 208 




































- 41 - 


(TM^ r TffR TTi; 

in vmifrOT, 

’Religion is primarily a matter of activity of 
eome kind or other; it is volitional in its nature, a 
conation, the expression of a desire for some sort of a 
value. It is a mistake to over emphasize the significance 
of the overtly emotional or intellectual phases of religion 
which are all incidental to the carrying out of the endea¬ 
vor . TT fl) Thought and feeling, which have been discussed 
in the previous chapters, are determining factors in con¬ 
duct and activity of the worshinper, as expressed in ritual 
ceremony and ethical "behaviour* ^right’s definition of 
religion, gives a large place to activity as stated, 
"Religion is the endeavor to secure the conservation of 
socially recognized values through specific actions that 
are believed to evoke some agency different from the ordin¬ 
ary ego of the individual, or from other merely human being? 
and that imply a feeling of dependence upon this agency . ,f (2 
The principle involved in this definition is clearlv seen 
from the study of primitive natural religion through evolu¬ 
tion to the higher ethical religions. Natural religious 
values are tangible, practical wants, such as food,water, 
protection from some natural condition, disease, with desire 


fright. "A student's Philosophy of Religion." ( 1 ) p. 43 . 

(2) p. 47. 











- 42 - 


for long life, riches, posterity, information as to the 
future. ^he attitude of the worshipper is often partly 
mechanical or magical. He hopes to get results through 
an agency of some supernatural being, who will be compelled 
to help even if automatically or tries to bargain with 
the spirits or gods with gifts given in humility. The 
values chiefly sought are those that have particular 
welfare for the family or clan, rather than the individual. 
Myths bec6me the forms of explanations of religious matters, 
These are passed from one generation to another with no 
critical examination. The faithful observance of ritual¬ 
istic acts, such as sacrifices and ceremonies, is of great 
importance to the primitive mind. Tn the ethical religion 
we see a development away from seeking material goods to 
the desire for a noble life. Moral conduct becomes a 
real value to the individual. In these religions we see 
the teaching of redemption or some way of salvation, so as 
to enable man to have some way of escape from his sin. 

The individual comes into his own and senses his value to 
others as well as to supernatural power. The religious 
experience of the individual becomes more logical with the 
development of doctrines, creeds and dogmas. 

Wright, in his book, "A Student T s Philosophy of 
Religion,” gives in the opening chapters an interesting 
description of three of the nrimitive religious beliefs 
and practices in Australia, part of Southern India and 









- 43 - 


Central Africa, which are quite representative and show a 
developing process of ceremonial worship. Among the nat¬ 
ives of Australia there is no idea of prayer, neither 
priests nor temples, but the Arunta tribe had a very defi¬ 
nite form of four initiations. One of these takes place ! 
at the age of ten to twelve and through this ceremony, the 
boys are told that growth to manhood will be promoted and , 
in the future they must not camp with or play with the 
women or girls. A second initiation of more elaborate 
detail is that of circumcision when the initiate is impress¬ 
ed that he is about to enter the tribal secrets, and of 
the importance of tribal rules. He was permitted to wit¬ 
ness various ceremonies in which by dancer and pantomine, 
totemic animals are portrayed. After a period of three 
months, the boy is again mutilated, attended by elaborate 
cermony which reveals to him sacred tribal lore. Later, 
when a man is at least twenty-five or thirty years of age, 
he passes through the most elaborate initiation of all, 
called the "fire” ceremony, which climaxes with the initiate, 
having to lie down for four or five minutes upon green i 
boughs placed over a fire of hot embers. 

This initiation of the native Australians gives us 
some of the characteristics of higher religions. Jewish 

youth go through a ceremony that impresses on them their 
relation to their religious forefatherssand the truth 











-44t 


that was taught by th* rabbis. In out Christian faith we 
have many types of the introduction of youth to the teach¬ 
ings of the church through confirmation, baptism which is 
taught to mean to the new member, an enlargement and an 
enhancement of life. Of course the values given are more 
moral and spiritual, and the ceremonies accompanying do 
not inflict suffering or demand insistance upon secrecy, 
and can be understood more clearly by the converts, than 
the dim conception of the savage of his gods and ceremonies 
attending such worship. 

The Todas lived on a high plateau in Southern India 
and their chief food is the milk of the buffalo cow and the 
various products arising from it. Their religion centered 
about this food supply as their chief value. Everything^ 
attached to the milk production was considered sacred. 

°ome of the dairies were looked upon as temples and the 
dairymen as priests. There were special sacred cows which 
were surrounded by a lot of ceremony. Todas prayers were 
recited at certain intervals in service, for the cows. 

These prayers are not addressed to any superior being, but 
might be styled magical because of a mere repetition of 
words. Among the Toda there seemed to imply a Rudimentary 
sacrificial activity attending the fifteenth day, after the 
birth of a calf of a sacred buffalo cow. Mixture of food 
according to ritualistic prescription was thrown partly 
upon a fire and portions measured out to the people gath~ 









- 45 - 


ered. This ceremony more fully developed would involve 
an offering of this food to a supernatural being and the 
consumption of the rest of it by the worshippers. Here 
you have a mystical union for social welfare, so clearly 
the rudiment of a sacrifice. Several times a year a young 
male calf is slain by the priest with ceremonial nerscrip- 
tions, roasted and eaten by him and the people. ""his 
again implies a mysterious power that will "bring desired 
ends. Tn our highest developed religious ideas, we can 
see the importance of a priest giving himself to public 
service, as helrinjg to meet their need and among the 
Hebrews the emphasis was placed upon moral purity in the 
home as represented in the worship of Hestia among the 
Greeks. What benefits are Christians receiving through 
their ministers and priests and their ministrations? 

Only as the people are led to a consciousness of high moral 
living and practice, will the present feligious forms 
satisfy. 

Tn the former chanter, mana was referred to among 

the Melanesians as a belief in some sort of an impersonal 

agency or force that is used, ^his mana seems to be gainec 

even by human sacrifices and bits of the flesh eaten to ob¬ 
tain fighting mana. All Melanesians religions,as far as 

religious practices go in prayer and sacrifices,is to get 

mana for one’s self or get it used for one T s benefits. 

A reference has been made to similar faith among North 






- 46 - 


Amerioan Indians as referred to in Manjtou, Wakonda and 
Oren&a, In the ethical religions the mana loses much of 
superstition and delusion hut has a psychological explana¬ 
tion. In Christian worship, the "belief in Cod places our 
confidence in a power available to men through worship and 
may he attained for their own "benefit as well as the larger 
good to the community. 

The Baganda, a central African tribe, possesses 
different forms of savage religious worship, such as local 
and national gods, fetishes, amulets and ghosts of kings 

and of ordinary people. The national gods of the Baganda 

# 

had temples attended by priests to carry on the worship 

and by mediumfesto reveal the god's will. Fukasa was the 

god of the highest rank who never asked for human sacrifice 

a god of plenty and of healing. His wife was supposed to 

have been a pythoness, possibly a development from totem- 

istic belief. Che had a temple close to her husband, and 

her chief function was to assist women in childbirth. 

Fibuka, the god of war, had prisoners captured in war sacri 

ficed, and sometimes on special occasions, innocent inoffen 

sive people might be captured, being speared or clubbed to 
death 

for a sacrificial offering. There was a god of plagues, 

A 

earthquakes, who were objects of fear and propitiation 
was offered to them and many other gods representing 

different values of the people, were worshiped. 










- 47 - 


T jocal spirits were plentiful. Fverv river and 
many hills were supposed to have spirits credited with 
power for good and evil. 

Fetishes had a strong influence among the Baganda, 
as they believed that fetishes contained mana of the god 
whose name it bore. Some of these fetishes were personi¬ 
fied as gods and had temples and priests as part of the 
religious worship. 

Amulets were manufactured and sold by the medicine 
men. The# - were efficacious to heal or prevent some parti¬ 
cular disease and did not receive offerings or supplications 

Temples were erected to the ghosts of deceased 
kings, whose jaw bones were placed therein for -preservation. 
Mediums were a channel of communication from a deceased 
king to a living being. ^eople were sacrificed so that 
their ghosts might minister to the ghost of the king. 

Ghosts of common people were honored, where relatives 
placed offerings of clothing or intoxicating drink. 

There was a feeling of much assistance and counsel to the 
living as they built these shrines to their dead and paid 
them tribute with offerings. Sacrifices of human beings 
were common, many of these victims died without a murmur, 
believing their lives were being given for the benefit of 
the race. • Here there is a faint glimpse of the execution 
of wrong doers in order to protect the state, although 










- 48 - 


innocent persons were offered where others were not avail¬ 
able . 

Magic was much jn prominence with the skill of 
sorcery and divination. This took form in many ways, 
enemies could he cursed, injured, even killed by use of 
magic. Sympathetic magic was generally used in transfer¬ 
ring disease. There is a close relation of much of this 
magic with religion. If magic were used only for private 
grudge or advantage, it could not be termed religious. 

All cases of magic involve the raana idea, that may be 
handled by correct procedure for the benefit of the user. 

In this brief survey of these natural primitive 
religions, we can see the practice of man;^ things that 
convey certain values and even into the higher ethical 
religion some of these characteristics continue, with of 
course a deep understanding of higher principles in the 
performance of religious duties today. 

Ceremonials often developed around striking events 
of life as birth, adolescence, marriage, death and other 
matters of vital concern which involves anything mysterious 
and unknown. We have seen that the Australian natives 
engaged in religious ceremonials to transform boys into 
men. The Todas engaged themselves in religious ceremon¬ 
ials to promote the v/ej-fare of cows and to gaurantee the 
purity supply• ^he Paganda included a much wider 




































- 49 - 


variety of purposes. The plan of food in its consumption 
"by the savage seemed to involve the sacred and the mana 
within, might do him pood or evil. Religious ceremonies 
became attached to the eatinp of food, even to family 
meals that took on a religious significance. Tn our 
ethical faiths,, even the sacred ceremony gathers around 
the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Water was thought 

i 

to contain mysterious powers and much importance was 
attached, where water was scarce, to build up a religious 
ceremony and put into it a mysterious content. Baptism 
and ceremonial washings take an important place in later 
development of religions, such as in the religions in India, 
also the religion of Judaism and Christianity. Animal 
sacrifices which have grown out of the totem worship are 
quite general through the whole history of religion. 

Blood has always been a form of mana vitally connected 
with life. The drinking of blood and mingling of blood 
had a mystic union conception. Tn later study we see how 
among the children of Israel, sacrifices were required for 
purification purposes and for forgiveness of sins, and in 
our highest ethical faith, Christianity, a very important 
place is given to the sacrificial blood of Christ being 
poured out for the remission of sins. 

When the source of this mysterious power or mana 
is distinguished or objectified as personal in character. 











- 




t 






' 


































' 











■ 






- 50 - 


it is thought of as either a spirit or a prod. i f ost savage 
religions externalize the sources of rnana and then through 
religious ceremonies endeavor to use the power drawn from 
the sources. The Australian native believes that in some 
way, he and the plants and animals of his totem are one. 
hater through developing intelligence the totem may he 
personified. In the eating of the totemic plant or animal^ 
the god is eaten only in the sense as the totemic food is 
sacred and unifies the receiver of the food more than his 
god who continues to exist. Tn a religious faith, where 
man believes he is surrounded by all sorts of nowerful 
spirits, it is only inevitable that he will desire friendly 
relations with them and approach them as his deities. 

Pome tribal deities have arisen through ancestral worship 
where regular domestic ceremonies attend the worship of 
deceased uarents, and in the process of time some note¬ 
worthy ancestor becomes a tribal god and worshiped to a 
larger extent than by the actual, descendents. great 
heros or medicine men may be worshiped after their death 
by those who desire to imitate their power. Homan emper¬ 
ors who had died were worshiped in temples built to there 
honor and became recognized divinities. Tn atheistic 
P.ussia today, we have millions of people who pay tribute 
to the leader Lenin as he reposes in his tomb. The ear- 

liest gods of the Aryan people, among the Qreeks, Pomans 







- 51 - 


and Teutons, lack personal qualities and then go on to a 
development into the personal forms. ^he higher develop¬ 
ment of the thought of deities raises a desire to conserve 
the highest mental and moral qualities in worship. So 
gods who were considered to have the qualities worthy of 
exemplification, were worshiped. It is quite apparent 
how the Christian thought of Cod has become the greatest 
and highest in all the world, as we have the perfect 
revelation of Cod in Christ. 

Sacrifice is the chief religious ceremonial repre¬ 
senting that through some sort of an act or ceremony, the 
worshipper comes into connection with a supernatural power 
to secure a specific value or to conserve the value already 
received. Through various attitudes, this sacrifice may 
be given, for example, one may be to control the super¬ 
natural power, so as to act at the worshipper r s request. 
Magic is often used with magicians claiming the power to 
control the god and in some cases even to strengthen the 
god to do his work. Another attitu.de is that of bargain¬ 
ing. If the sacrifice is pleasing to the god, he will 

give man what he desires in return. Traces of this is 
found in the Old Testament as some of the sacrifices of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and Noah are considered. Then 
there is another conception of sacrifice that implies 
participation or communion with the deity. This form 








: 1 ■ ' 1 I: ■ 








, 

? 

} 

, 

“ 

■ 

f ■. 

■ 







-53 


of sacrifice is very crude in the lower stapes, hut from 
within have developed some of the most spiritual of atti¬ 
tudes towards God in the higher religions. There is 
also an attitude in sacrifice of systematic effort at pro¬ 
pitiation. On the savage level, the god is angry and 
seeks blood, on a higher level, though?still barbaric, 
the god may be angry because a tribal law or custom has 
been violated and it is necessary to propitiate him by 
a sacrifice of an animal or a human being. The sins 
that have afflicted the tribe may be magically taken over 
by the sacrificial victims and be consumed with them in 
the fire, or loaded upon a scapegoat and driven into the 
wilderness. Among civilized nations this conception of 
propitiation takes on a high spiritual nlane . Tn Judaism 
you have the lofty idea of atonement and exuj.ation for 
sin by the sufferings of the nation. Christianity has 
the viewpoint of God himself incarnated in the person of 
Jesus Christ, who made expiation through his death on 
the cross for the sins of humanity. The idea has departed 
to a large extent in the Christian mind of the cross sacri¬ 
fice as a mode of satisfying divine justice, and takes 
on more the fact that the cross experience was a means 
whereby closer communion between God and man, may be 
established and experienced by each individual in his 
own life through private and public worshin. 


































- 53 - 


In the study of some primitive faiths, we see 
that prayer is on a level with a magical spell. Some 
of these petitions were more in the form of commands or 
spells hy repetition of certain words in a ceremonial act. 
Later the thought of coercing supernatural beings by spell 
or assisting them by magical ceremonies, came to an end. 
When man learned that spirits or gods must be greater or 
mightier than he who worships and such divine power needed 
not his aid and could not be forced, prayer then took on 
petitions to the god on account of his superior power to 
grant, if he is so inclined, the favors asked. There is 
in the aim of union through prayer in which man seeks a 
larger fuller life by identification with the divine, 
layers of praise and all prayers of an aesthetic type , 
are manifestations of the desire for divine communion. 

The Hebrews psalms contained many prayers of communion 
and petition. As the later development of prayer is seen 
in Christianity, prayer becomes more ethical and deeply 
thoughtful as men become more feflective and spiritually 
minded. In all these ceremonial rites and practices 
there is the volitional and practical aspect of religion, 
central, revealed and expressed, that is to say the 
devotee by his own activity does something himself in 
order to decure the benefit of religion. 

Mere verbal transmission of religious concepts 
and of performances of religious rites and ceremonies 








- 54 - 


are not sufficient in themselves. To he practical and 
give vital connection with life is the great world 
challenge to religion. There are two tendencies of the 
volitional in religion, one is the priestly emphasis 
linked up primarily with the rites and ceremonies of 
religion, and the other is the ethical and social which 
leads to an emphasis upon the prophetic side of religion. 
Each has its place in the whole of religion, and in this 
section of the paper, the emphasis will he placed upon 
practical and ethical living. E. Stanley Jones, the 
great missionary statesman, recently said, "We must put 
God hack into life." Ethics and religion are related 
to each other as the soul to the body out of which all 
duties spring. life of fidelity to God and to one T s 
self and to his fellow man, calls for a high quality of 
livingdevotion. Our practice is the only sure evidence 

even to ourselves, that we are genuinely Christian. "We 
are never alone when we are striving upwards. T Wl) TLato 
said, TT There is no man that does not desire the good 
and is not unwillingly deprived of it. 

We have a feeling of obligation to an ideal society 

which ought to be, but is not yet. That ought to be, to 
do, is the vision that holds us and moves us in the sphere 

Jones. TT ghe Testimony of The Goul."(l) p.91. 



c 


T 





- 55 - 


of human society in a life of devotion to the ideals of 
the kingdom of ^od. When once we truly see what ought 
to "be and feel its compelling power, other alternatives 
are driven out. Personal righteousness consists not in 
required action, hut in being what one ought to he. 

'Note even in the primitive religions, social and 
ethical values were aimed at and this aspect is more 
evident in the higher religions. The eighth century 
prophets emphasize the ethical value of religion. Amos, 
one of these prophets, gives x r ent to a high idealism. 

"I hate, I despise your feasts and T will take no delight 
in your solemn assemblies. Yea though ye offer me your 
burnt offerings and meal offerings, T will not accept 
them; Neither will I regard the peace offerings of your 
fat beasts. Take those away from me, the noise of thy 
songs for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But 
let justice roll down as waters, and righteousness as a 
mighty stream,”(1) Isaiah stresses the same principle 
when he says, "What unto me is the multitude of your 
sacrifices? saith Jehovah: I have had enough of the burnt 
offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I 
delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of 
he-goats. When you come to apvear before me, who hath 
required this at your hand, to trample my courts? "^ring 

The Bible. (1) Amos, 5; 21-24. 






- 56 - 


no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto 

me ; new moon and sabbath, the calling of assemblies,- 

I cannot away with iniquity and the solemn meeting . 

Your new moons and your appointed feasts, my soul hateth; 
they are a trouble unto me; and T am weary of bearing them. 
Wash you, make you clean, out away the evil of your doings 
from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; 
seek Justice, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, 
plead for the widow."(1) There are many other statements 
of such value found in the later prophets of Judaism. 

Jesus Christ in his ethical teaching, condemns religious 
performances without the attempt to practice the will of 
Cod. The Sermon on the mount is full of such teaching. 
Note one example, "Therefore by their fruits ye shall 
know them. hot everyone that saith unto me, lord, lord, 
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth 
the will of my Father who is in heaven."(2) James the 
practical, in his epistle urges, "But be ye doers of the 
word and not hearers only, deluding your own selves."(3) 
Again we read, "Yea a man will say. Thou hast faith, and 
I have works: show me thy faith apart from thy works and 
I by my works will show ye my faith."(4) One of the 
influential religious bodies in practical idealism and 
practice, is the Friends, commonly termed the Quakers. 

The Bible.9(l) Isaiah 1;12-17.(2) Matthew 7; 20,21. 

(3) James 1; 22. (4) James 2; 18. 








- 57 - 


The { y show little faith in ceremonies and external ordin¬ 
ances hut are (puite active in the fields of humanitarian 
service and for their numbers outstrip other religious 
organizations in the activity of their ethical ideas. 

The Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Heaven, 
interchangeable terms which are found in the scriptures, 
denote the changing and more spiritual conception as 
Christianity develops from Judaism. This kingdom idea 
in the minds of the Jews of the later Old Testament 
History and early Hew Testament History was considered 
as coming in tMofarra of a political setup, accompanied 
by great signs and was to be realized either in the form 
of a ^avidic or apocalyptic kingdom. Jesus came and put 
xorth definitely that the Kingdom of God was not primarily 
a political ideal but an order or method of life, here 
and now, lust where we are, and takes its character from 
His teaching and influential personality. His Kingdom 
was not to be established by force of arms or by spectaculai 
intervention of divine providence, but by the establishment- 
of his rule in men's hearts and lives of love and self 
sacrifice. Jesus taught that it was not the nature of 
God to stand aloof from men in their helplessness, or to 
hold a place above them in a spirit of superiority, or to 
exploit mankind for his own glory. His teaching concern¬ 
ing the kingdom of God revealed that it isevery person's 











-o8- 


privilege to come under the direct leadership of God and 
as a family we were taught to say, "Our Father" and all 
men were to be brethren. The Kingdom of God is a reign 
of mutual service and help with an unselfish devotion to 
others as its impelling power. "Essential nature of Chris¬ 
tianity is a life toward God of filial trust and loyalty, 
in one T s self of genuine goodness and towards men of self 
sacrificing helpfulness, the inner principle being fellow¬ 
ship with God who loves that he may save."(l) 

The greatest principle in this Kingdom of God is 
love and truly the greatest thing in the world and the 
greatest force for Christian living and service. Jesus 
brought to the religious consciousness of his followers 
for the first time in religious history that love was for 
enemies also. "Ye have he^rd that it was said. Thou shalt 
love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy but I say unto you. 
Love your enemies and pray for them that persecute you."^2) 
Jesus taught that God is T Love T and to exemplify that love • 
in our lives was to love God, our neighbors and our enemies. 
"The cross is the culmination of Jesus’ faith that God is 
f Love T and that the expression of love is self sacrifice." 
(3) This of course is the highest of all ethical teaching 

Clarke. "The Ideal of Jesus." fl) p. 270. 

The Bible. (2) Hatthew 5; 33,34. 

Matthews. "God in Christian Thought and Experience." 

(3) p. 65. 












-59t 


and the practice of the same would revolutionize the world. 
Tiove is an active outgoing affection for Cod and service 
for man. .As we put together love to Cod and love to 
neighbor and enemy, we have the utterence of eternal good¬ 
ness offered for imitation to be worked out among Cod’s 
children for a new world order in every branch of life’s 
activity. Chesterton, has said, "Christianity has not 
been tried and found wanting; it has been found difficult 
and not tried." We realize that in individual action 
there is much wanting to show the fullest expression as 
the nature of Cod. Jones aptly says, "We cannot be 
perfect transmitters of such infinitely transcendent 
reality as the nature of Cod. We are bound even when we 
are at our best to distort and color the divine radiance 
which breaks through us as the prism does the beam of 
light. But something of Cod which the world would miss, 
if we did not perform our mission as transmitters, does 
come through."(1) 

Christianity stands out as the most ethical of 
the religions of all time. Its essential nature is a 
life towards Cod of trust and loyalty, and towards men of 
self sacrificing helpfulness as well as the life of genuine 
goodness of self. There have been many earnest Christians 

Jones. "The Testimony of The Boul." (1) p. 54. 










- 60 - 


and there are many today who are endeavoring through 
the personal and social aspects of the kingdom of God to 
change this world order* Abolition of the slave trade, 
orison reformation, straggle for world peace, temperance. 
League of Nations and its commissions, helping in the 
battle against world entrenched evils and many other ideals 
are motivated by Christian forces. TT It is only by this 
volitional and practical endeavor to make religion vital 
in human relationshio that we can have the fullest exper¬ 
ience of God. We can have fellowship with God in the 

inner sanctuary of our being and we also can have fellow¬ 
ship with him where he lives and is active and he is active 
in all the struggles and sufferings $;f humanity and in all 
their endeavor for a better world order. TT (1) 

In this paper an attempt has been made to show 
that religion has to deal with three psychical aspects, 
intellect,emotion and volition* Modern psychology 
teaches us that these various aspects of the psychic self 
do not function independent of each other but that the 
total psychic self moves as one towards its object. Tn 
order to have a full orbed and well balanced religion, 
these &S 7 S@£t r s must function together. 

Caird. 7T The Evolution of Religion. "Vol. I. p. 397. 












' 




'I 


, 













































' i 






j 











- 61 - 


As a matter of fact no hardened rationalistic 
thinker is everfree from some non-rational ©roofio®, and 
that the person who is most subject to emotional reaction 
isnever free from the call to do, and both of these psychic 
elements are subject to, and affected by, rational 
judgment. Thus God is realizEd in human experience when 
mind, heart and will function together in harmonious 
relation and activity. 





































