
For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


RJ1 YTHM 


ITS PLACE IN 
POETRY. MUSIC 
AMD ART. 



R.W. HEDLEY 






































Gfx UBAXS 

iwwmats 

aUBUMIMK 


















' 










RHYTHM 


ITS PLACE IN 


POETRY MUSIC AND ART. 


R. W. H E D L E Y. 


MARCH 


1924 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 




https://archive.org/details/hedley1924_0 



INTRODUCTION. 


By rhythm is meant the harmonizing 
factor, to, external stimuli, in the human organism. Life 
is the general manifestation of an object that may be 
irritated. These irritations in the lower organisms 
come from an external source and provoke somewhat 
similar responses, while in higher organisms, these 
responses are of an exceedingly complex nature. One 
result of these irritations is to produce a feeling of 
pleasantness or unpleasantness. 

These irritations or disturbances may 
be short or prolonged. If short and of sufficient 
magnitude, they produce a f, shock n or general disturbance 
of a sudden nature throughout the organism. If the 
irritations are not so violent and are prolonged they 
tend to produce a decided feeling of pleasantness or 
unpleasantness, If the organism can harmoniously adjust 
itself to these irritations they are pleasant, if not, 
unpleasant in varying degrees, depending on the nature of 
the irritation. One of the leading factors which tends to 
bring harmony within the organism, in response to a prolonged 
disturbance id called rhythm. 

This problem of the underlying nature of 
rhythm in the cellular structure of the organism is one 
of considerable research. The aim in the following pages 
is but an introductory description of the general 



manifestations of rhythm developed from an historic 
view point, which is probably the best line for 
beginning an investigation. 

The study of cellular adjustments in the 
organism which is brought about through rhythm is left 
wholly untoucjed. There is no good analogy in inorganic 
forms that gives sufficient point to ellustrate the 
problem of cellular or atomistic movements in the 
organism. The best that we can suggest is that of the 
movement of a lot of iron filings on a glass plate, in 
the presence of a. steel magnet. Here is a prolonged 
disturbance to which the iron filings make a response 
that might be termed rhythmic. Brass filings make no 
response to a magnet, hence no rhythmic adjustment. Such 
a condition in the human organism would be unpleasant, in 
varying degrees, to irritable in the last degree. Just in 
what manner the cellular structure of the human organism 
is effected in the effort to harmonize itself to a 
prolonged disturbance or irritation is a matter for 
research. Rhythm is one of the leading means to 
attain this harmony. 

The observations in this essay have been 
limited to the field of literature, irusic and art, as 
sources of the stimuli, that react on the organism 
through the senses. The consequences of these reactions 
is that generally a more or less pleasant feeling 



is aroused. as the organism adjusts itself to the 
stimuli, through factors of rhythm. 

This subject has grown and various 
problems that would malce interesting research 
subjects have from time to time suggested themselves, 
but which, for lack of time, could not be attempted. 

No one is more aware of the consequent lack of 
completeness in the investigation, and of its lack of 
continuous thought and clarity of expression, than the 
writer. These problems would thrust themselves into the 
scheme, at first organized, disarranging the line of 
thought and making a clear presentation of the 
original aim difficult. The only hope is that at 
least some general ideas of the character of 
rhythm, as an harmonizing principle in life may 
have been suggested. 

Edmonton, March, 1924. 



CONTENTS. 


page 

1. Rhythmic motion in nature. 1 

2. Art expression of Primitive man. 14 

3. Transition period from primitive 

to modern art. 25 

4. Rhythm in Western and Eastern art, 31 

5. Eastern and Western Religious art. 35 

6. Eastern and Western Landscape art 42 

7. Rhythm and poetry. 55 

8. Rhythm and music, 73 

9. Emotion and rhythm. 84 

10. The intellect and rhythm. 89 

11. Rhythm and appreciation. 94 



Rhythmic 
motion in 
nature. 


Rhythmic motion is the one natural method 
by which the great universe of matter expresses harmony. 

In the courses of the planets, or the comets, or even the 
stars in their orbits, there is a movement that brings 
like situations in a definite interval of time. All 
movements of animate nature about us, which are the general 
methods employed in-going about from place to place, as 
walking, running, flying, or crawling are rhythmic. In all 
work as shovelling or pounding, where skill in movement 
is essential an effort is made to have rhythmic action. It 
is the one kind of movement which is carried on with the 
}.east expenditure of nervous energy. There must be 
elements in it that tend to be satisfying to the organism. 

On further examination into all the move¬ 
ments of an organism we are convinced that there is a 
tendency to make all motion or action rhythmic. The tv/o 
outstanding facts of physical life, that of the beating of 
the heart and breathing have fairly regular recurring 
movements. If for any reason these movements are 
disturbed there is a feeling of dissatisfaction, a sense 
of uneasiness, a consciousness that something is not right. 
In the more obvious movements as walking, or running that 
are controlled more directly by the nervous system, which 
directs certain muscles in the performance of these actions 
the satisfaction is partly d.ue to the rhythmic order of 
movements. If we rmeet v/ith any obstruction in the course 



- 2 - 


which causes a change in the neural action, and the 
consequent moving of the muscles to prevent a fall, there is 
aroused a feeling of disquitude, which continues at least 
until all the parts are moving in rhythmic order again. As 
the muscles are the servants of the nervous system, plainly 
the source of dissatisfaction centres in this part of the 
organism. By experiment it has been learned that such regular 
movements as occur in walking tend to be controlled only by 
the lower centres of the brain, leaving the upper centres 
free for other purposes. When the unexpected situation is 
presented, the upper centres of the brain operate in an 
endeavor to find a solution that is the best under the 
circumstances. Apparently rhythmic motion is satisfying 
for one reason that it makes the least demand on the 
central nervous system. When rhythmic motion is accelerated 
as in running or in a lively dance the heart beats faster 
and the breathing is quicker. This has been explained as an 
attempt on trie part of the lungs and heart to supply the 
necessary materials to the muscles. This is without doubt 
nature’s way of restoring that balance or harmony between the 
parts but harmony may also be said to exist in the harmony 
of movement of the limbs and of the heart and lungs. A long 
distance runner will have a steady relationship in motion 
between these organs and his limbs, otherwise discord and 
weariness will take place. In this manner rhythmic motion 
is nature’s effort at harmony within the organism. 



- 3 - 


Rhytlun 

our 

response 
to nature. 


Rhythm is a means on our part to harmonize 
our being with external nature,; it is the only way we can 
obtain the finest appreciation of nature. What is more 
satisfying than to lie on a grassy slope, beside a brook; to 
watch the tremulous quivering of the leaves, with their 
rhythmic cadences; to see the fleecy clouds rolling past 
us in stately procession; to see the finer undulations 
of the wheat fields; to hear the chirp of the birds, in 
their many modulations; to hear the babbling of the brook; 
to catch the hum of the bee, or the chirp of the cricket. 

And as the rougher conflicting sensations within you subside 
and your whole being becomes attuned to the wonderful rhythms 
of natures symphony, you begin to hear little by little the 
various details of this mighty orchestration. our ear 
begins to differenciate the various rhythms, to hear the 
heavy beat of the wind swaying backward and forward.the 
mighty branches overhead, or the lighter swish of the reeds 
before you, in livelier movement, or the babbling of the brook 
with its quicker repeat, and incomparable daintiness, or the 
hum of the bee , in its almost infinite fineness. Then 
you realize that this is but a part of the myriad of 
syncronizing rhythms of the universe; that great orchestra 
which is trying to still the discordant natures within 
us. Constantly trying to bring our being into like 
rhythm with its cadences, that we too may understand and know 
something of the infinite harmony. And when we realize that 
while there is great harmony, nature seems to vibrate 
both in and out of time; 



- 4 - 


that it is a compound of many rhythms of infinite diversities. 
Then we realize that the master painter with his soul in tune 
v/ith certain rhythms in nature, expresses them on canvas, in 
accordance v/ith his mood. He may see hut the heavy rhythms of 
nature, in the rolling masses of tree , cloud, hill and 
mountain, or he may see the' quiet stretches in 
the great expanse of water, almost still and unruffled. But 
in all these he selects his instruments, and v/ith the skill of 
the master craftsman, he hlends his colors, he harmonizes the 
shapes until you realize that he has produced that which “brings 
the vibrations of your nature into harmony v/ith his and you 
realize that satisfaction which comes only in the presence of 
such a masterpiece. 

Or another hears the babbling of the brook 
v/ith its many rhythms, that make up its wonderful symphony. 

He catches something of this appeal and the rhythms of his 
nature are attuned to the wonders of nature and he produces 
a v/onderful sonata. .And as you listen to this production and 
your whole being synchronizing with the movement, harmonizing 
with the rhythms,now strong and pronounced, now dainty and 
sweet you too catch something of the rhythm of that soul that 
poured forth such harmony. 

Perhaps another catches the rhythm of the 
brook and expresses his feelings in a lyric poem. Having a deep 
sensibility to nature he is able to catch its spirit as it is 
manifested by the streamlet, and to express this in poetic 
form, that pulsates v/ith life, in such a manner that v/e are 
able to catch these rhythms and understand something of his 



- 5 - 


emotions. The poet,through his imagination, presents to us 
beautiful features of the brook, expressed in language finer 
than v;e could hope to do, so that we may in turn appreciate 
these poetic pictures through our rhythmic life. 

Rhythm the Rhythm is the basis for all art appreciation. 

basis of 

art apprec- An artistic creation is generally recognized 

iation. 

as the expression of experience in some definite form, that 
it may have some degree of permanence. It is a synthesis 
ordered and controlled, of the flux of emotions, moods and ideas 
crystallized into some expression that can be shared and 
appreciated by all. It strikes the universal chord of the 
race, magnified because we have the feelings of millions 
past and present fused into it. Our imagination unlocks this 
treasure house of the ages, and yet imagination is the only 
life we have in common. Through sympathetic imagination we 
penetrate the soul of the artist. We enter in and take 
possession, not by force, but only as our being harmonizes 
with the pulse beat of the soul of the creator of the work 
of art. The world we have entered by our imagination is a 
world apart, where action, enjoyment freedom, do not come 
into conflict of competion, and depends upon rights of poss¬ 
ession or mastery. There is nothing of the material world 
about it. In so far as we allow the actual world of matter 
to intrude, just so far is there discord. A work, of art 
must have significance that challenges our inagination, that 
grips us with its pulsating life, that compells our nature to 
be silent, yea further, we then enter into full harmony 
with the rhythmic pulsating life of its creator. Only in 



- 6 - 


Rhythm 
and 

nature. 


so far as such harmony is produced in us do we fully realize 
the beauty of a v/ork of art. ith some works we can never be 
able to tune in fully, there is something lacking in our 
natures or something undeveloped, but in so far as we have 
been developed in whatever line it may be, just in that 
measure do we enter into that harmonic relationship, and 
appreciate the work of art. 

We shall next investigate the discrimination 
of rhythm as peculiarly a human phenomena, and the close 
connection between rhythm and the emotions. Certain animals 
may imitate rhythmic movements but none appreciate rhythm in 
any manner comparable with the human family. Many investigati 
ons, which we shall not relate, have established the general 
truth of this statement. h&t led to the differenciation in 
primitive man, and in what manner did the emotional life 
develope? To what extent did freedom of hands and arms and 
of the organs of speech contribute to the earlier manifest¬ 
ations of primitive rhythm and emotion? How did primitive 
man coordinate the movements of his hands and arms in rhythmi 
movements other than in food getting? In what manner did 
the organs of speech develope and assist in enlarging his 
emotional nature? 

To attempt a careful investigation of the 
oreign and development of the instincts and emotions in 
primitive man is a difficult problem. The period of exper¬ 
imental knowledge is 50 brief in comparison with the 
thousands of years in which primitive man was slowly 
developing t that any definite information of the early 



- 7 - 


periods of man’s existance is unobtainable. However the 
obviously close relationship between primitive man and the 
higher type of animals has through biological science been 
determined. The physical structure, the comparatively 
similar nature of the organs of the body in each, must h, ve 
been brought about by similar reactions to external nature. 

Bo tli acquired a series of instincts or impulses that were found 
to be of great value in the protection of the individual 
and the preservation of the race. Accompaning these 
primitive instincts, as a kind of safety valve to the nature 
were corresponding emotional changes, peculiar to the 
operation of each instinct. Had man possessed a physical 
structure that was capable of meeting any and all enemies 
without any thought of dangef, it would seem that these 
instincts and emotions would never have developed, as there 
would have been no use for them. ut man had a keen 
struggle for existance, in preserving his life from enemies 
and the hazardous work of securing food and shelter, and 
this very insecurity was.a large factor in the development 
of instincts and corresponding emotions. In the light of the 
present day, with its comparative security of life, it may 
be inferred with considerable certainty that the primitive 
instincts and emotions were more prominent in the human 
race at that time than at the present. 

■ But primitive man had other enemies than 
those u.hax were apparent to his senses. Prom his dream- 
life he believed that man had a double, that is, another 
spirit that was present in him at certain times. In his 



- 8 - 


sleep,while his body remained in one place, by this double 
he experienced all the vicissitudes that characterized his 
active life. There was the excitement of the chase, the 
encounters with other men or with; animals as real as any 
active experience. It was but natural that at death, they 
concluded that this double had lost its v/ay, or was unwilling 
to return and so had taken up its abode in some other object. 
Forms of idocy were simply explained that some evil double 
had taken possession. Sickness and death were the work of 
seme demon that had caught the individual and after death 
hovered near the corpse chat it might fasten itself on 
another victim. How was he to meet these unseen dangers, 
which were even more terrible than the dangers from animate 
nature? Instincts so useful in the one were of no value in 
the other. But the dread of these unseen dangers aroused his 
primitive emotions in much the same way as those atoused by 
real enemies. The ability to image these dangers, must 
slowly have developed along with the primitive instincts. 

This imagination was of a concrete type, that is, he probably 
could imagine only real objects. This naturally brought 
about a solution for the protection from these demons or 
unseen enemies. Since he could image these dangers, he 
could image as v/ell a power to meet them. Hence his belief 
in the pov/er of magic, which was simply that he could imagine 
that some charm, a loin-cord for example,which surrounded 
the weaver , made him invulnerable from these unseen enemies. 
Or that if a cord were fastened around a diseased part of 
the body and one end tied to a tree, then the demon v/ould 



-*• 9 - 


Primitive 
imitation 
sympathy 
and 

rhy thm. 


Greign of 
the art 
impulse. 


use this means ot escape to the tree, his flight being 
accelerated oythe wierd noises oi the medicine man. The 
consequence was that we nave a development of primitive 
instincts and primitive emotion and accompaning these primitive 
imagination ana this latter lea nirn to oeiieve that any 
object in nature was the abode of a peculiar spirit. 

Man differs from animals in his ability to 
imitate, that is, to make the same physical movements as 
another that he may have a like experience. It is difficult 
to give any adequate idea of how this ability first developed. 
To a limited degree it is present in anthropoid animals of the 
monkey type, hut the freedom of hands and arms and the power 
of primitive imagination evidently made their contribution. 

If one man found that a loin-cord made him secure from demons, 
it v/as an easy matter tor another to imitate him by tying a 
cord about his person, he thought he would then nave a like 
experience of the presence of this cord. Without attempting to 
enumerate other examples it is natural that this primitive 
imitation led to primitive sympathy or the ability to .put 
oneself in the place of another and feel as he did, through 
the work of the imagination. This ability to take the place 
of another in the imagination and to feel as he felt, that is, 
to have a similar pulsating life within , may be termed 
primitive rhythm. 

man’s endeavor to find an outlet for his 
emotional life; to have emotions of a different type from 
those produced in him by the presence of his enemies,whether 
seen or unseen, may have been the beginning of art. His 



- 10 - 


Primitive 

voice. 


beliel in magic as a means ot warding off unseen enemies and 
his power ot imitation, prooaoiy iea to the art of dancing, 
the one outstanding art of primitive peoples. Physically he 
was well endowed witn a body much more supple than that of 
present day races. The dance was believed at first to have 
magic power in driving away demons,out it also soon developed 
into the cult-dance or community dance where it obviously 
gave rise to pleasure. The similar physical movements with 
a regular time interval was a powerful iactor in the imagin¬ 
ation ana orougnt about a feeling of rhythm. That is, fo have 
had i'he same emotional thrill, generally of a pleasant nature, 
with the same sensations as the other, were the exact require¬ 
ments for primitive rhythm, it required little effort on the 
part of the imagination to think that one would feel as another. 
Thus it seems quite obvious why the art of dancing would 
naturally be the earliest of primitive arts. 

As primitive man had freedom of hands and arms 
and a voice and had deviloped large powers of imitation and 
imagination of the early type, it was only natural that these 
led to the development of the voice as a means of expression 
and of communication. At first by pointing out and later, by 
some graphic imitation of a peculiar characteristic in various 
objects^he was able to communicate his ideas,to a limited 
extent, about these objects. Doubtless this led to his 
utterance of definite sounds in an effort to emphasize the kind 
of object to which he had reference. As man was imitative to 
a large degree, others learned to imitate these sounds and 
soon definite sounds were understood to mean definite objects 



- 11 - 


The cult 
of song. 


Primitive 

art. 


and actions. These sounds were probably similar to the root 
words in a language, the addition of suffixes and prefixes 
and the idee of qualities coming in due time. 

To enhance the emotional nature of the dance 
it was probably accompanied by the cult song. The basis or 
content of this song may have been due to watching some object 
in animate nature but there was little sense to the sequence 
of words. leather the song v/as a succession of v/ordsounds that 
harmonized with the movement of the dance and served to 
accentuate its rhythmic character. The refrain or repeat, 
which v/as a primitive characteristic of songs v/as used to 
particularly enhance the emotionsl nature of the dance. The 
cult song evidently assisted to control the movements of the 
dance, to give an emphasis at regular intervals, so that the 
dance would in turn partake of this characteristic. That is, 
therewas-evidently an attempt to control the movements in 
such a manner , that emphasis at regular intervals v/as a 
prominent feature and this regularity tended to syncronize 
v/ith the pulsating life of the dancers. This gave it rhythmic 
life. 

Early primitive art in all probility had 
its oregin in the imagination and had magical significance. 
Having imagined the efficacy of a loin -cord, as a protection 
against demons, and having found out that a hard substance 
could make a, scratch on a softer substance, it v/as but a 
step to make such forms that would have magic power, on some 
article that could be fastened on the person. The lines 






- 12 - 


Primitive 
stories 
or myths. 


which were scratched were generally oblique and horizontal 

ones and occasionally vertical lines v/ere introduced and later 

short arcs of circles. One of the early forms resemoled a 

triangle, though whether meant as a triangle or as units of 

certain definite lines, with peculiar significance to each, 

is difficult to say. They imagined the lines had peculiar 

magical power in warding off disease. Some of the Indian 

designs of the present day are a survival of this primitive 

art. The Swastika, which is found in many eastern countries, 
to 

and which is ascribed certain favors to the wearer is a 
form that has come down from the distant past. All these 
forms would arouse feelings but these could not in 

any way be described as aesthetic. These feelings 

v/ere aroused partly because these lines or forms had certain 
magical life in them,in the same manner that every article 
in nature possessed life. hile in the dance and primitive 
cult-song there was I'hythmic movement that animated the 
dancers; the presence of such art expressions, as have been 
mentioned^on some article about the person, was sufficient 
likewise to give feelings of renewed life or security, and 
it is from such examples as these that what is now called 
rhythm has originated. Rhythm and life v/ere very closely 
associated in primitive times. 

To further illustrate this statement 
reference may be made to the primitive stories or myths, 
v/hich were of a later time than the dance song. These 
stories arose largely through sympathetic imagination 



- 14 - 


Mental 
develop¬ 
ment for 
primitive 
times. 


xincis of art expression illustrate sufficiently the original 
nature ot rhythm.lt was that factor that gave to any art- 
expression life and movement, that was for a definite purpose 
and which was controlled, and directed. There was at that 
time no great intellectual factors associated with it. In 
following the progress in the development of rhythm, it will 
he found that,as man becomes more a thinking creature and 
higher forms of art are created, the more complex is the 
rhythm. The artist of today must use other methods that 
will give vitalizing rhythm, to his creations. 


CHAPTER 31, 

luring the early period of man’s existence, 
certain instincts or habits that were of value in the struggle 
for existence were developed. Along with these instincts there 
arose some kind of emotional excitement,peculiar to the 
nature of the instinct which accompanied it. These have 
been called primitive instincts and primitive emotions. 

To a certain degree these instincts and emotions are present 
in the higher animals. Por primitive man in his struggle 
for existence met with very similar situations that would 
confront the animal. However primitive .man had certain 
characteristics by which he was different from the animal 
species, viz.- the free use of his hands and arms and potential 
organs of speech. Prom these he developed, on the one 
hand, a high degree of imitation and, on the other, an 
imagination. After long years of slow growth, brought about 



- 1 &- 


The 

affective 

nature. 


by interaction with his fellows, he developed a high degree 
of sensori-motor type of action and the more abstractly 
intellectual mental life.. While this process was going on 
primitive instincts and emotions were pushed farther into the 
background. Only in sudden and unfamiliar emergencies is there 
any evidence of their existence today, as they probably existed 
in primitive times. Even then they are more in evidence in 
men of lower intellectual standing.The hasty action of a mob 
can be explained by a reversion to primitive instincts and 
emotions, but apart from such manifestations, in general, 
instincts and emotions have been modified to auch an extent, 
by experience, that there seems no comparison between these 
in evidence today and those of primitive times. So much so 
that some are attempting to explain away all instincts, as 
being but composite forms of elemental experiences. 

As primitive instinct has a neural 
mechanism which is used every time an instinctive action 
takes place, doubtless these neural tracts afforded the best 
solution of a situation as it presented itself to primitive 
man. i,e had not the ability to analyze situations, but from 
other experiences of like nature, which he had stored in his 
memory, could select the most satisfying solution under the 
circumstances. The presence of an unfamiliar and dangerous 
looking object, led him to make an instinctive response. In 
this response he was aware of one thing at least, his 
physical limitations. Whether his bodily mechanism could 
respond successfully and thus preserve his life was a 



- 16 - 


oatisfying 
and " 

unsatisfy¬ 

ing 

responses. 


serious matter. Sometimes the situation brought on a 
conflict between two impulses, each urging a certain definite 
course, which Drought on a glanular reaction, known as 
primitive emotion. As soon as one impulse triumphed over the 
other, a definite action followed, which of successful,caused 
the emotion to subside. Had primitive man been equipped with 
a perfect physical mechanism, which could cope successfully 
with any situation, there would have been no primitive 
emotion. Liie would have been of the garden of Eden type. 
There would have been no consciousness of the possibility 
of failure. Everything would have been pleasant, though he 
would not have realized it. A situation is pleasant or 
satisfying when we learn to differentiate the pleasat from 
the unpleasant. 

While primitive man had a well developed 
physical mechanism, long before the mental development, as 
found in the average man today, took place, certain 
reactions were more satisfying than others, so he slowly 
changed his more or less instinctive responses to those 
found by experience to be more satisfying. Slowly he 
acquired the power to represent situations and responses and 
to choose the most satisfying. Just in what way this develop¬ 
ment took place is not certain but in all probability, the 
free use of his arms, hands and fingers*. and the impulse 
to imitate and experiment , led to a possibility of a 
variety of responses to a situation. On the other hand he 
began to develope the muscles of his throat and to express 















. 











• 



• 




- 


. . 


■ 




' 

. 






. 



■ 















■ 







■ 








. 
























- 17 - 


Hhythm 

and 

satisfying 

responses. 


sounds and to differentiate these. The interaction between 
the vioce and mental mechanism and the sensori-motor type of 
expression through the hands, no doubt led to a gradual 
improvement in his ability to image situations and determine 
the most satisfying response. 

This feeling of satisfaction that accompanies 
a satisfying response is very similar to that which is felt 
when the whole movement of the physical and mental organism 
are in complete co-ordination. Because of its harmony, there 
is, within the organism,a rhythmic movement that ordinarily 
gives man little concern, but let any one factor get out 

of tune and at once there is an awareness that something is 
wrong. Objects that we like are imitated that they may be 
better understood. The rhythm of the object is acquired and 
that rhythm produces a. feeling of satisfaction or pleasantness 
In like manner, in later primitive life, as the individual 
had harmony within himself, by the rhythmic movements of his 
organism, so did he find harmony in the small social group. 
Adult life today, perhaps aue to a larger influx of intellect¬ 
ual factors, d-oes not give this direct form of automatic 
transmission of the feelings of others. Only as he entered 
into that rhythmic synchronization of his nature with that of 
another was it possible to fully experience another*s feelings 
In this there was very little, if any, intellectual 
content. The sympathetic relationship which was manifested 
between people, was a sort of social resonance. He 
desired that others should partake of his feelings, that 



- 18 - 


The art 
impulse. 


they might be happy if he was happy; that they might be sad 
if he was sad 

There was consequently a retroactive 
tendency in the social group, in which they desired that their 
feelings should be shared by other members of society. Prom 
a longing to imitate another, which in later life was only 
moderately active, there arose a desire that the impulse to 
express himself might be shared by others; that beyond his 
own immediate circle others might share his emotions, and 
partake of that inner elation of the spirit, a rhythmic 
satisfaction that was peculiarly his own. This might be 
termed the beginning of the art impulse. In primitive life 
it was a desire for self expression; but not a desire 
meerly to work off some craving or impulse for its own sake, 
but rather that another might enter into the "holy of holies 
of his feelings. At that time he had two avenues in which this 
desire for expression might be gratified,-language and 
visual art, if the results could be transmitted.. The art 
impulse of the individual may have first expressed itself 
in dramatic dancing in which he attempted to express the 
feelings of another, and to convey these to the group. It 
is evident that this form had a larger intellectual factor 
than primitive imitative dancing. To more fully convey 
these feelings, he later had recourse to language-, and 
in this manner the earliest form of the drama and of epic 
poetry began. During these early periods the folk song 
originated, while music, as such, was used to accompany the 





- 19 - 


dance and folk song. Art forms gradually were shorn of magical 
significance and dejects of "beauty were produced because of 
the pleasure the. man felt in so expressing himeelf. Thus the 
aesthetic value of such a production was gradually the aim 
to be attained. 

It is quite probable that the early forms of 
music and poetry had a large emotionsl content. It is equally 
manifest that strong emotional states, as exalted joy, or 
violent despair, are, at least in external appearance, unrhyth¬ 
mical. If these emotions are subdued until the whole being 
is brought into harmony, even by objective rhythm of his 
being, there results a restraining influence on his excited 
feelings. Music and dance at least may stimulate, and on the 
other hand,they may control, or tend to control, our 
emotions. These may produce a feeling of rest and calm, and 
like the music of leonysus, as he marched from village to 
village giving forth his stirring notes, which produced 
harmony instead oi discord in the minds of his devotees, 
so all art is an expression from a soul, that breathes the 
spirit of orderly sequence and harmony, v/hieh vitalizes with 
like vibrations the chords of the natures of others, who are in 
tune, theu bringing joy and calm in place of turbulance 
and despair. 

Emotional In the early development of language as a 

and 

intellectualmeans of expression, the thought content,in all probability, 
factors in 

art. was secondary to the emotional content, when used as a social 

instrument. Perhaps as stated the earliest literary 



- 20 - 


Source of 
primiti ve 
act rhythm. 


ventures wet< of the nature cl folk song or cult-song 
addressed to demons as a sort of prayer or propitiatiary 
request. In this the emotional content is of a different 
nature. The conflict of impulses reacting towards the demon 
was sufficient to give a high emotional content. There may 
have been no particular rhythmic form, as is so understood 
today,except in the refrain, and the form of expression 
was the work song,which had little thought content. The 
rhythm, that there was, was meant to bring about a harmony 
of effort; to synchronize the movements and did doubtless 
do much to produce harmony of effort. Then followed short 
narrative myths or stories about ancestors who possessed 
strength or sagacity, here the thought factor was more 
pronounced, but behind it was an emotional content in the 
deeds of the hero. In time many of these short narratives 
were doubtless united, the hero became the god, the imagin¬ 
ation endowed him with certain fine qualities and the 
exploits were expressed, by rhythmic melodic forms, assisted 
by a musical accompaniment. In this there was a certain 
thought content but the emotional factor was the greater. 
Between the rhythm of form, and the exciting - nature of the 
thoughtcontent, the emotions of the hearers were aroused. 

The great sifference between primitive art 
and what might be termed modern art, was* in the source of the 
feeling. In the former the source was objective while in the 
latter it is subjective. Bach may have life and movement 
according to the standards of the time, hence rhythm. 



- 21 - 


bjective 
ualities 
f art 
upreme. 


In the primitive, the emotional factors of appreciation predom¬ 
inate, in the modern ,the intellectual are supreme. A few 
illustrations which are taken from the period immediately 
preceding that of modern art will illustrate the distinction. 

In the later primitive age, all art centred 
around the actions of the gods and heroes.: While traces of 
magic art still existed,,this statement is generally true. 

The construction of tombs and temples and statuary, the 
production of such literature as epic, dramatic and hymns; 
and the introduction of pure music are characterestic of 
this period. The gods were ^reat and powerful and the 
leader, who ultimately became a king # v/as endowed with many 
of the characteristics of a god. In expressing their feelings 
in regard to these beings,their art was directed towards 
objective forms. So all their art, as the tombs, temples 
and statues give ample evidence of stupendous achievement. 

To construct a suitable shelter for the ruler, upon his 
decease, years were spent and the tomb was often of great 
dimensions, and of a most enduring type. Witness the growth 
from the small walled tomb, or mastaba, to the size and solidity 
of the pyramids. In like manner the growth of the shelter, 
marking the abode of a god or gods,grew from what was originally 
a simple altar of stone, and a crude image ttr indicate the 
presence of a god, to something similar to the above. Temples 
which took generations to construct, that were of such huge 
dimensions,.and built of large blocks of stone as to arouse 
our wonder and admiration were constructed. Besides these 












, 








temples or sometimes as part of the structure were huge scul¬ 
ptured figures in stone; there was no attempt at showing 
any leading characteristics of a particular personality; the 
chief characteristics of e, ch were their over towering size, 
and monotonous uniformity. These figures are constructed 
almost symmetrically; they face squarely in front and whether 
sitting or standing, rest the soles of the feet flat on the 
ground. In other places were to be found huge figures which 
had their genesis in more primitive ideas; the sphinx and 
similar creations by the Assyrians and Babylonians, which 
consisted of the head'of a man and the body of some strong 
animal are leading examples. 

The leading characteristic of all these 
structures is their huge size. Why was this done? All these 
figures arouse our admiration for the tremendous difficulties 
that must have been overcome, but they do not move us 
aesthetically. Bor us there is no rhythm; they are ,in general, 
cold and expressionless. Hot so to the men of later primitive 
times. The source of the emotion, as was explained, is here 
a purely objective one. As an earlier primitive man might 
have encountered an animal or creature of huge size, which would 
have aroused his emotion of fear, so did these huge creatures 
arouse in the people of the time, emotions of awe; the gods 
were so much greater than themselves as the statues were 
larger than the stature of a man. They thought wholly in 
the concrete and imagined in the concrete as well. To them 
these creations had life,- the characteristic of rhythm in 



any work of art,- and to them this was expressed in its 
awe producing size. In the presence of these creatures they 
realized that they were on holy ground, their feelings were 


aroused, they were in the presence of the diety. 

Objective Their epics and hymns have similar character- 

qualities 

in poetry. istics to that of the art. The source was largely in 

connection with the glorification of their gods and heroes. 
Slowly the heroes occupy the centre of the stage v/ith the 
gods in the background, but who occasionally, when the need 
is greatest, assist the hero in battle. Like primitive 
sculpture the primitive hero was away and beyond in strength 
and sagacity, that of the ordinary man; his deeds were on 
a colossal acale. In some lands, as in the north,the sage 
encounters huge giants, or other fabulous creatures, as the 
dragon , that has been terrifying and destroying the people, 
and a terrific encounter takes place in y/hieh the hero 
emerges triumphant. These stories^perhaps related as 
single deeds of some hero, began to be connected as a 
narrative. And later was arranged metrically that it might 
be accompanied by music. In this manner were the earlier 
or more primitive cult songs and work songs composed, but in 
the later forms the rhythm becomes smoother. In more 
primitive times the dance^by.the use of a mask of some animal, 
was a kind of imitative performance, and in later primitive 
times it became a mimetic play in which the deeds of the 
hero were portrayed by dancing in which his actions in 
some great encounter v/ere imitated. 



- 24 - 


All these were art expressions of primitive 
man and to them they pulsated with life. Great strength and 
sagacity were the things desired in the individual; these 
stories were to them real and living. In modern art they are 
interesting andjto some extent„arouse our natures and their 
heroes are admired hut there is a great difference in the 
attitude of primitive man to these artistic creatures. They 
were in the youth of the race and as the deeds of strength 
of great men will pulsate in the life of the average hoy of 
ten to thirteen years of age, so did the deeds of these heroes 
to the men of that time. What was the source of the rhythm? 

It was in tile primitive imagination, so eminently concrete 
in type, that enabled each individual to see, as it were, in 
his very presence the tremendous encounters of the hero. This 
is purely objective. They did not reflect on these deeds,, or 
as in the more modern imagination, see analogies in every day 
life. The encounter, to them, was real, tremendous, awe 
inspiring but little reflection was evident. 

Digressing for a moment, let us say, it is these 
qualities that will give life to any selection that is to be 
appreciated by the average boy. He will catch the rhythm as 
step by step the actions of the hero lead up to the climax. 

The rhythm is not an arrangement of words but a grouping of 
actions, following one another in a rhythmic sequence, now 
up now down; now strong, now weakening; now a burst of speed 
and. a slowing up as moment by moment the encounter progresses. 
The great teacher of literary appreciation for pupils of 




that age is one who can so visualize and vitalize the selection 
that the rhythms of action can pulsate in the hearts of the 
pupils, carrying along the vicissitudes of the struggle until 
at last, victory achieved, the emotions subside. If a selection 
is so written that this is not possible it lacks rhythm, ho 
matter hew well it is arranged from the standpoint of form 
or composition, if it does not move a boy of that age, in the 
manner described above, it does not possess that primitive' 
rhythm so dear to the heart of the average boy, . 


Transition 

penoa 

from the 
primitive 
to modern 
art. 


•CHAPTER HI. 

Hefore endeavoring to develope the nature of 
rhythm in a work of art that is appreciated by people 
generally, it might be well to study the situation, from 
a general view r point, Wh-i'jU attempting to illustrate the 
subject with more particular reference to arti, literature 
and music. 

The transition from primitive life to that 
of modern civilized countries, lies in the change from that 
when the emotional factors of the imagination predominate to 

them in which the intellectual are supreme. Language developed 

of- eycprG&si _ 

as a means^and ideas rather than actions are a consequence. 

Man had eaten of the fruit of the tree of knowledge and 
he must consequently adjust himself accordingly• 
could not d-iscard his primitive instincts and emotions 
but he could direct them along other channels. They had 
survival value; they were so closely related to his being, 



- 26 - 


to life itself, that to remove them would leave nothing hut 
the shell. As in earlier times man desired to express himself, 
so later, as he emerged into the light of another era, he had 
to adjust his artistic expressions in the light of his 
expanding intellect.. To understand the nature of art 
productions it is necessary.to understand the philosophy of 
life of the time. . rt never was produced hy chance, and 
if we are to feel the rhythmgor the pulsating life of art, 
we must endeavor to place ourselves in the position of the 
life of that time. This, man alone is capable of doing. 

It is not a matter of purely physical or primitive imitation; 
it must be such that by the use of the intellect we can imagine , 
to some extent, the thoughts and feelings generally currant at 
that time. Do not mis-understand; a work of art is great in ... . 
itself; it speaks a universal language; it is an organization 
of a thought such that anyone may feel its pulsating life if 
the inner nature is in harmony.To realize this in a larger 
way, to enter fully into the spirit of the creator, is only 
possible when we endeavor to bring our being into harmony 
with his, and because of the intellectual factors in its 
creation we must in turn have such an intellect that we are 
able to enter into the same thoughts and feelings as 
existed in the creator of the work of art. In using the 
word philosophy above,the word religion is also included. 

The one word is used to imply the whole trend of thought and 
life of the time. Perhaps,as an illustration, the Greek 
conception of the philosophy of life may be expressed as 





♦ 


»a desire for the beautiful and the good*', hut what did the 
Athenian consider the beautiful? There is a long transition from 
the earlier semi-primitive period of the Greeks. Their heroes 
were men of actions and doers of great deeds. In the imagination 
these men were pictured as splendid ath^letes superior to 
the average man. The rhythmic songs about these heroes thrilled 
the people. The hero was emulated by every boy. The desire 
to be a superior athelete, that he might become like his 
hero god, was manifest from his youngest years. 

It is re .Gily manifest why art creations should 
take on a natural form, one tin t was most readily understood 
and one that would appeal to the emotions of the people. It 
was a form where the iryier meaning, the inner consciousness 
of the people could , more easily,be harmonized.It did not 
require the same intellectual transition as if it had been 
a painting. There v/as something that occupied space. Had 
the Greecian art been but an exact imitation of nature it 
would have lacked the pulsating life of rhythm. Hut how 
was this secured? While the artist used his powers of 
intellect to secure fine form and have proportions true to 
nature,in a degree that would not in that way prevent the 
enjoyment of the ooservers, he ? in this v/ay satisfied our 
intellect, bringing it in harmony with his, so that there 
was no conflicting emotion but rather we were in a passive 
or receptive attitude. if these figures had been merely 
pretty likenesses of human form, while it would have 
. satisfied our judgment that it was exact,there . ould have 



"been no emotional content. While the draperies might have been 
sculptured in a natural manner and there might have been a 
harmony of line - largely an intellectual factor- yet there 
might have been no appeal to the emotions. 

The same might be said of poetry during the 
transition stage and early modern times. Reason was beginning to 
assert itself and naturally if judgment is exercised it 
acts against the imagination, reducing all creations to 
scientific analysis. Aristotle quotes some of the rationalistic 
criticisms of his day, to the effect that/Homer wrote v/hat 
was not true; that some things written were by nature impossible; 
that what he wrote was contrary to nature. These criticisms 
indicate that modern times are r at hand; as one writer has 
expressed it, the age of heroes and gods is the art age, while th 
that following, the modern, is called the scientific age. he 
probably means that art creations was not too closely bound 
by scientific lav/ during the former period. Homer should 
not be judged by scientific laws of nature. His creations 
are poetically true, because in the imagination we can follow 
him through the world that is his creation, the ideal that 
gave life to his poetry. There is nothing incongruous in his 
marvellous creatures of gods, heroes and celestial arms, 
because they proceed from a living imagination. He does not 
do it for the sake of the unreal, the wonderful, but he sees 
in his imagination the tragedy of life, universally the same, 
and in his own living v/ay creates his forms, that best 
convey the ideas he desired to express.lt is this life 
which he gives to his poetry that is termed rhythm. 



- 29 - 


lihythra is a difficult word to define, because , 
of all the factors entering into a work of art, it has the 
least intellectual content. It is the "pulse of life in a 
work ox art". How this is not merely a catch phrase. As we 
synchronize with its life so are our feelings atoused and our 
whole being feels the thrill, hut what was characteristic 
of these statues and these epics that made them artistic? 
Emotion was defined as the conflict of impulses or instincts. 
Sometimes we drop the word instincts, because in the long 
period since the time of early primitive man, other factors may 
cloud the primitive nature of instincts. These impulses 
opposing one another create, by this conflict, an emotion or 
feeling. But the difference is that this conflict is not with 
something material but with something universal. It 
contains elements of the pulsating struggle of millions past 
and present. It at once strikes a higher chord. We are not in 
the presence of;..,a piece of material marble, but rather, we are 
confronted by the emotions., of the hundred of hero gods whose 
lives pulsated through the imagination of the creator and who 
were able to transfer ana give life to these feelings in 
this material form. And in literature the HLpics did not 
describe an historical episode but rather the intensive 
struggles of the race in its upward march. They laid bare 
the secrets of life with an unclouded clearness of mind, that 
could thrill the nature of one in tune with the subject. 

The Greek gods were men perfected; perfect in 
form, creatures of wisdom and sagacity, but amenable xo reason. 




A-tO J‘ 
















Consequently the perfection of the human form, that it might 
have l likeness to that of the gods was desirable, io 
make this form the basis of plastic art was only natural. 

'io endeavor to attain to a perfection of this form would not 
therefore make him a skilled craftsman but would indicate the 
ideal that was before him. The athlete had artistic unity in 
his bodily development, no one part was lacking, hence an all 
round training was necessary the t this might be attained. 

They desired not only beauty of form but beauty of pose and of 
motion. How natural that this ideal should be manifest in 
their sculpture, but what, a difficult ideal to attain, 

To portray the..infinite grace, the almost perfect harmony of 
his ideal, was a challenge to his powers. Man is ever 
confounded by his own limitations. If he had the power to 
attain to his highest aspirations without effort there would 
be no emotion. It is this striving this tremendous conflict 
after the unattainable,- that ever unsatisfied feeling,-that 
does much to bring out the permanent qualities of a work of ar 
It produces life. The emotions thus awakened in the 
creator, this tremendous movement in his spirit, is conveyed 
to the plastic form he attempts to create and which,as we 
catch the spirit, gives us sympathetic relation-with him. 

Thus we catch the rhythm of his creation, through line, form 
and grace of movement in the statue. 










Rhythm in 

Western 

and 

Eastern 

art. 


Rhythm in 
Greek and 
Japaneese 
sculpture. 


CHAPTER IV. 

Having endeavored to describe the gradual 
change in primitive art as.it emerges into what may be termed 
modern, through the gradual supremacy of the intellectual 
factors over the emotional ones, and the change of emphasis 
from purely objective reality to subjective ideas about nature, 
it is necessary to more explieitely determine the rhythmic 
qualities in a work of art. Por this purpose the three 
forms of art expression are separated. Because visual art 
was one of he earliest to be perfected it is given the 
first place. Rhythm is the basis of life in art and it is 
interesting; t-o compare the two great streams of life the 
Western and the Eastern as manifested in their art, that the 
underlying principle of rhythm may be the better illustrated and 
explained. 

Compare the Greek Hermes by Praxitiles ,fourth 
century B.C. ( this is selected because it is generally thought 
to be original) and the Japanese Bodhic satewa of the 
Yakushiji Trinity, by Giogi, eighth century A.D. It is evident 
that in general there is considerable similarity, sufficiently 
at least to make comparisons interesting. The Hermes is 
represented as standing in an easy,graceful position, with 
the weight of # the, body resting largely cn the right leg, 
while the IdfJfc one is probably bent at the knee. His left 
elbo rests on a tree trunk, which is partly covered by the 
folds of a garment which hangs from the same elbow. The 




- 32 - 


child figure of Dionysus is seated on the left fore arm. 

The right arm is upraised, probably the hand is holding 
some object which is attractive to the child. The Kwannon 
is in a somewhat similar position to that of Hermes. The 
figure stands on a lotus pedestal, the weight resting on the 
left leg, while the right one is slightly bent at the knee. 

The left hand is upraised in a manner similar to many Buddhist 
statues and probably has some religious significance. While 
the right arm is at the side, the hand open as if repressing some 
desire. The draperies are caught up at the shoulders and also 
at the waist and hang in graceful curves about the limbs. 

Both representations are connected with 
religion, Hermes was the herald and messenger of the Greek 
gods and the protector of youth, the Kwannon was the 
Bodhisalltwa of providence, sustenance and salvation from 
physical dangers, of the Buddhist religion. The one is in 
marble, white and clear, the other is bronze of satiny 
hardness. It is evident that each sculptor was a master in 
his art. The fine reverse curve in the posture of ea,ch is 
graceful in the extreme. The true proportions, the 
graceful figures, and beautiful texture of the rsurface is 
sufficient to convince one of the ability of each artist. 

Wherein lies the rhythm in each? 

Heremes is the protector of youth and the 
artists has attempted to give an ideal form as a representat¬ 
ion of his ideal. The figure is that of a man of the 
highest physical development. This muscular form is 











- 53 - 


eoverec with a flesh apparently so elastic and tell cate, and 
so enhanced by the lay of light and shade in the modelling 
that the vigorous fora cl the muscles is almost concealed in 
the ce of the figure. The drapery hauge in a 
wonderfully realistic manner. The head is that of an ideal 
Greek youth, the heavy bar of flesh over the forehead throws 
the eye sockets more in shadow. The eyes are directs-' slightly 
dovmv* :rd, r,s if ga zing in passive contemplation, • t oder¬ 

at oly distant object. There is a hall thoughtful*somewhat 
unconscious feeling of pleasure in the momentary rest from 
his tasks,which are in no manner weariso/.-e because of 
intflleetual and physical power. Thus the Hhythm is in the 
harmonious arrangement of lines, the graceful posture, the 
interplay of intellectual arid organic forces, and the 
harmony between them. While the figure appears very natural 
and life like there is an idealism about it that raises it 
above any real attempt at natural representation. This was 
a difficult matter, much .mo , that it 1 m* p the impression 
e- later sculptors that objective form, or craftsmanship 
was a most important feature in art. 

It is at once evident that the Japanese 
•artist had an altogether different conception in making 
his Kw&nnon. There is no attempt at an ideal figure; the 
Japanese never had the same reverence for the human form 
as the Greek, and never represented it in the nude, however 
the fora is well expressed, though hero and there ore trans¬ 
gressions in minor details. These however were of no 



- 34 - 


Art a 
convention 
in color. 


particular concern to the artist. He was attempting a 
poetic conception, in which he aimed, to express spiritual 
and emotional impressions. The chest is repressed; the 
expression of the face is calm and contemplative and the 
urapery hangs in graceful folds, nothing in the slightest 
degree out of place. The Eastern,freed from the entanglement 
of naturalism, was able to centre his artistic creative 
ability on an expression of the inner spiritual nature. 

The phenomenal world/which was the natural limitation of the 
Western art ? ?7as transcended in the Eastern, to a purer and 
richer contemplation beyond the bounds of sensuous perceptions 
Its rhythm is different. There is aesthetic life but not 
natural life. Just as true poetry lives in the greatness of 
the universal aspect of life so is the rhythm of this Japanese 
masterpiece. While objectively the lines are harmonious 
and the movement leads gracefully urjward to the chest, the 
Japanese seat of the emotions, yet the rhythm is wholly 
subjective, and is truly appreciated as v/e catch the inner 
significance of the poetic conception of the artist. 

It was natural for the early creators of 
modern art to conceive of beauty in the space arts as existing 
in sculpture. It v/as easier for them to express the great 
life rhythms of their natures in a form that was more readily 
understood by all. Provided the form was satisfying, the 
intellect ha.d no adjustments to make; the intellect had 
little to translate. The whole being could be concentrated 
in harmonizing the great rhythms that truly pulsate 


in a v/ork of art 








CHAPTER V 


- 35 - 


Eas tern 
and 

Western 
Religious 
Art• 


Whatever medium is used, whether canvas or 
paper, on which to place an artistic creation our intellect 
must make an adjustment and our imagination translate. This 
adjustment may he easy for the intellect provided the imagina¬ 
tion has not been overdrawn. This has been amply demonstrated 
in poetry, where figures of speech, often quite strange to the 
cold logic of the intellect, provide a marvellous setting for 
the imagination. So when an artistic production is placed on 
a flat surface there is an enthronment of the general not 
the particular; of the transitory rather than the permanent. 

But the imagination-will leap past these conventions and lift 
us above the material to the more internal values of the work 
of art. 

In all art there must be conventions. Language 
has its conventions, so has music. In fact all expressions 
worthy of the name must have conventions peculiar to itself. 
These conventions are the extra effort by which the artist 
endeavors to convey to us something of the nature and intensity 
of his emotions. A camera may take an almost exact represent 
tat ion of nature but the result may make little emotional 
response apart from the interest in the object itself. But 
the artist sees deeper beauties; not only the ebjective form 
but a deeper significance, which challenges his best 
effort to express. He strives to attain his ideal. Censtantly 
between the two impulses; the desire to attain this almost 
unattainable and the limitations of his nature he adopts 
conventions, that seem best, to meet the situation. 



lie uses factors that are capable of producing the finest 
expression. In art these conventions have largely to do with 
the nature and arrangement of lines, forms and colors. These 
must be placed in the most pleasing arrangement and with a 
technique and style that is most satisfying. Thus brush 
work has conventions peculiarly its own, sometimes by the use 
of heavy masses, and again by the use of line. There may be 
artistic creations where the brush is hardly perceptible or 
again every stroke may be manifest. All space art is a 
convention which employs line and color, forms and proportions, 
and blends these to make that symphonic harmony of the 
truly great work of art. But in all these blendings, the 
supreme factor is the conception, or the soul of the master¬ 
piece. Unless we can see in the forms something that moves 
us, that forces our emotions, through the significance of his 
lines, forms or colors the artist has failed even though the 
conception be great. There must be something impressive, 
something apart, something that has appeal peculiarly its 
own. The masterpiece is truly great, if it takes us away 
from the material surroundings to the pulsating rhythm 
of the universal. 

Background To fully appreciate a work of art that has 

of religious 

art. been produced in the past, it is necessary to understand the 

underlying sources of t»he peculiar trend of art of that time. 
True art is an expression not hap-hazard, but of our deepest 
moods and emotions which are generally closely related with 
the philosophy and religion of the time. The deep ex* 



- 37 - 


experiences of life are very closely related with the inner 
nature, v/hich is the source of all real art. Hence any 
attempt to explain art, in terms of imitation of nature, hy 
the result of a certain technical skill Y/ith the materials 
that are employed, the scope of the colors used and the 
forms employed is but an attempt to pierce no deeper than the 
outer shell. The difficulty has been that the eyes were used 
in general to understand material facts about us, to peer 
scientifically at some object, so that no attempt Y/as made to 
understand the nature of the spiritual will, the creative 
pov/er, that was the oreign of the creation. The powers of 
analysis are so developed, that it is difficult to understand 
the mystery of the forest for the trees. 

There is some truth in a statement by Clive . _ 
Bell, that-”Religion, like art, is concerned with the v/orld 
of emotional reality, and Y/ith material things only in so far 
as they are emotionally significant. For the mystic^as for 'the 

artist, the physical universe is a means to ecstacy- 

Religion as I understand it is an expression of the individuals 
sense of the emotional significance of the universe; I should 
not be surprised that art v/as an expression of the same 
thing.” By this ecstacy is doubtless meant that of the 
philosopher who seeks to push back from the outer reality 
to the inner soul of nature; v/ho merges his consciousness 
with the infinite. In former times all nature v/as personified, 
every object had a spirit peculiar to itself, so that there 
was a feeling of unity v/ith nature. This we have carried 




- 38 - 


over to some extent in poetry through various figures of speech 
hut which has heen largely lost in Western art. 

Renaissance It is interesting,if not very profitable, to 

art. 

specul Cl^0 clO to what might have heen the trend of painting in 
the West, if the Renaissance had been an aesthetic development 
as well as an intellectual one. Medievalism and its tendency 
later to scholasticism had about crushed out any feelings, 
especially with those who had any desire for knowledge. When 
the Renaissance dawned in Italy as a desire on the part of the 
individual for self-expression there was no background along 
this line, hence classic art and literature were studied and 
imitated. The art models were largely sculpture and Byzantine 
mosaics on the walls of many of the early Christian churches. 
With the joy in finding these greek models in sculpture, they 
began to study and to imitate, but unfortunately they had not 
the same viewpoint; they caught the outer form but missed the 
spirit. They saw the wonderful craftsmanship but missed the 
significance in the art of the earlier Greeks. However 
fostered by the church,with its great restrictions, there was 
in religious art at times some spark of the eternal fire of 
genius. 

Perhaps painting in color came as a 
convenient convention rather than as a peculiar means of 
expression for certain art forms. Mosaic work had practically 
ceased, besides it was very costly. Color could be used 
more easily and was less expensive and still was quite 


expressive. 


Hence it was adopted. But the only forms at the 



- 39 - 


time that had any vitalizing power were those of sculpture, 
therefore the artist reasoned that in painting it was necessary 
also to have forms that appeared to be modelled and rounded. 
Figures required a background in painting hence he reasoned that 
he must know how to express this correctly therefore 
perspective was studied. There was no poetic imagination, 
so conventions were used which are described more accurately 
as symbolism. Everything should be clear to the intellect, 
therefore colors should have a meaning. The angels must have 
wings, how else could they be ministering spirits; the halo 
must indicate saintliness etc. 

Italian For comparison in rhythm, Giotto’s "Madonna 

and 

Chinese Enthroned" and Godoshi’s "Kwannon", since there is considerable 
religious 

art. similarity of type, have been selected. The one represents 

Christian art and the other that of the mystical Buddist period. 
Godoshi, a Chinese artist lived during the 9th, century while 
Giotto painted in Italy about the baginning of the 14th 
century. 

In Giotto’s Madonna, the virgin is seated on a 
throne, holding the holy child on one knee. The throne is 
carved after the manner of mediaevil wood carving, while the 
back is rounded to resemble a recess in a wall in which sculptured 
figures are to be placed. On either side of the throne angels 
kneel or stand, while in the background several men, young 
and old are gazing in the direction of the mother and child. 

Turn now to the Kwannon (one of the saints in 
Buddhist hierarchy) a tall figure, covered from head to foot 
with a flowing lace robe, stands in a cloud-like form, from 



- 40 - 


which water is flowing. The clouds above his head have barely 
opened enough for him to descend. The left hand is upraised 
and holds a willow twig while the right carries a basket with 
a fish. Apparently he is deseeding to tv/o youths who are 
playing upon a bright cloud, trying to plant lotus flowers in 
vases. In the lower right, a dark cloud is rolling in towards 
these youths. 

In.many respects these pictures are similar;; 
both have a certain amount of symbolism. The Virgin and Kwannon 
are both larger than ordinary, which indicates their superior 
spiritual worth. The celestial nature of the madonna, is 
indicated by the presence of angels and by the halo of light; 
that of the Kwannon by his position on the cloud, and his tiara 
and robe. In both the child and the youths are represented as 
much older than actual circumstances would warrant. But there 
are certainly differences. The intellect must be satisfied 
in the Madonna; the angels must have wings, how else could they 
transport themselves; the throne must be strong and substantial 
and of the kind that the people v/ere accustomed to see. Both 
mother and child are lothed in the manner of the people of 
the time. The Kwannon on the other hand is wholly symbolical. 

He is clothed in a manner peculiar to his spiritual nature. 

The clouds are not natural looking, and neither is the 
stream of water flowing at his feet. He is meant to be the 
protector of youth, with much the same idea as that of a 
guardian angel. The dragon of evil is not actually represented 
but only suggested by the dark cloud. And the absorption of 



- 41 - 


ihe youths in the "beautiful task of planting flowers, is an 
expression of the religious nature of man. While the figure 
looks down with a beneficient smile, he bears salvation or 
deliverance from unseen dangers. As far as the artist can 
do so, he has kept away from the objective world of reality. 

The long robe with its long graceful lines give an idea of 
calm and inward power. These lines are in contrast with the 
shorter curves of the rolling water and the cloud forms and 
the broken lines of the youths. 

What is the outstanding difference in 
rhythm in these two pictures. That of the first is in the 
mixture of naturalism and symbolism; at one time the artist 
desires that the objects should look natural, then again, he 
reverts to the conventional and symbolic tradition. There is 
a struggle in his nature. He has endeavored to make the madonna 
somewhat natural but he lengthens the nose and points the chin 
which tends to give an aesthetic appearance. The child has 
the appearance of a small man; evidently Giotto had not mastered 
the method of representing the child. In the picture there 
is life and there is a message; The intellect is awakened 
and finding problems to solve. In that conflict of 
impulses we catch the spirit of the artist. We sympathize 
with him. He has not attained but we feel the significance 
of the struggle. 

In the other picture there is a harmony and 
a purpose throughout. The artist has a conception and he 
presents it in a poetical way. There is a rhythm of feeling 
in the sinuous lines and in the tones. The centre of 



Western 

and 

Eastern 

landscape 

act. 


interest has form but not that of an actual person. It is 
rather the idea of form, the inner reality rather than the 
objective reality. The process of abstraction is carried 
farther than the phenomenal world, to that of the poetic 
fancy. There is little concern for actual reality and the artst 
is not between two impulses. Manifestly there is a harmony of 
purpose through out, that of a spiritual expression of the 
Kwannon of Providence. He handles the brush as one composing 
a symphony. Each stroke has a meaning. Nov/ a long decorative 
line is made, now a darkened area or again the sinuousness of 
the flowing v/ater. It is a lyrical poem, unique in its 
conception and playful in its imagination. 

CHAPTER VI. 

Birge Harrison, an able writer on landscape 
painting, introduces a volumn to the reader as follows,- 
"Por some occult reason in which the two factors of race and 
psychology are intimately blended, landscape art in its besti 
expression, is and ever has been, confined within the narrow 
geographical limits of northern and western Europe. Oriental 
art,-the art of Persia, Japan and India has always been more 
abstract and symbolical; and as the art of a people reflects 
the character of the race which gave it birth, v/e may deduce 
with certainty the character of the Oriental from the character 
of his art. By reversing the same reasoning v/e reach the 


conclusion that the simple existence of our Aryan ancestors 
(lived close to nature in the constant companionship of 












































m 






- 





































- 43 - 


Eastern 
cc nception 
of 

landscape 

art. 


elemental things) has found expression in landscape art, of 
^heir remote descendents. The artistic temperment is no 
growth of a day. It has its roots in the far away baginnings 
of a people, and we make no unwaranted presumption in asserting 
that che landscape or marine painter of today is at least 
giving expression to the groping instincts and ideals of his 
cave-dwelling forbears. 1 ' 

"Why do men love landscapes? Because it is 
the place where life is perpetually springing", writes Kakei 
or Hsia Kuei a Chinese of the Sung dynasty who painted 
landscapes. Another authorpEenollosa , writes,--The Sung and 
Tang (Chinese epochs) are,per excellence, the epochs of 
landscape art, No such apotheosis of landscape has ever been - 
voushsafed in the West, Even in landscape poetry we ought 
to note the lateness as well as the thinness of Hie stream 
that began to flow with Wordsworth. The Wordsworths of China 
lived more than a thousand years ago and the idealistic 
"intimations" to which the English bard somewhat timidly gave 
a platonic form only hinted at,instead of unfolding a system. 
The sounding cataract "haunted him like a passion" but what 
did it say to him? In our landscape art we were long 
satisfied with pretty backgrounds for saints; and even in Dutch 
landscape it was rather the peaceful suburbs of cities, or the 
rustic life of farms, that greets us, not the free forms of 
nature in its violence and creative motion. The truth is that 

all through the Middle Ages the dualistic viev/ of nature- 

\ 

wild nature- was essentially evil; the horror of grand rocks 




■ 
















































>s A n? ci 


< 





. 













' 



























- 44 - 


and lonely valleys, the hostility of matter to the heaven- 
directed human spirit, delayed European perception of beauty 
in mountains and storms until the nineteenth century. This, 
too, the desire of man to surround himself with formal gardens 
as far removed as possible from natures compositions; rather than 
any Zen-like recognition that something characteristic and 
structural in every organic and inorganic form is friendly to 
man. and responds gladly to the changing moods and powers of 
his spirit." 

These two quotations give the essential 
difference in the conception of landscape art of the Western 
and Eastern nations. The Western nations lived”close to 
nature in the constant companionship of elemental things”. 

This expresses their view point. Nature was intimate with 
them. They loved the trees, the rocks, the water with its 
reflections and desired to paint them as they were. They 
desired to be truthful and truth to them was exactness 
of form. Matter about them is permanent; at a certain time of 
day it was as painted. They may select and arrange the 
elements of a landscape but they paint it as they believe it 
to be at the time. The production of certain landscape 
artists are spoken of as ’lyric’ or as ’epic’ , but it is 
lyric prose and epic prose that is painted. Hot so the 
Japanese or Chinese landscape painting of the Sung dynasty 
about 1000 A.33. The various parts of a landscape are thought 
of as part of living nature, as Kakki writes,-’’Landscape is 
the place where vegetation is nourished in high and low 





- 45 - 


ground, where springs and rocks play about like children; a 
place where woodsmen and retiring scholars frequent, where 
monkeys have their tribe and storks fly crying aloud their 
joy in the scene." Nature is not personified as with the 
Greeks, who embody their nymphs and satyrs but rather is a 
part of the great- universe of life and the aim of the artist 
is to paint the inner spirit of nature, the "Kokoro". he 
does not attempt to render a certain definite tree but rather 
generalizes and by the skillful use of the brush represents 
the generalized idea of such a.tree. kor example the pine 
tree is often painted by the Japanese. Its strong trunk, and 
knarled branches, have withstood the wintry blasts for centuries 
It embodies their idea of strength and tenacity. So in rendering 
it these qualities are manifest, and a peculiar type of brush 
stroke is used to being out these characteristics. What is 
said of the pine tree might be said of their figure studies, 
there is a certain uniformity of style in rendering a woman's 
face; the eye, for example, is but a convention to them, as 
our attempt to render leaves on a tree is a convention to us. 
Lastly there is no attempt to make a. formal composition as in 
Western art. True, the elements in a picture are generally 
well arranged^but the unexpected happens, a branch of a tree 
will appear in a picture, while the trunk of the tree will 
not be seen; as if to remind us that there are other things 
in nature beyond this view, which is but a, small part of the 
great universe of nature. 



Landscape by Kakei (Hsia Kuei). 
CTune.s^'- 










- 46 - 


Let us compare the two landscape pictures, 
"Evening on the edge of the forest of Eontainbleau? 'by Rousseau, 
19th. century, and'Landscape' 4 ''by Kakei (Hsia Knei) a Chinese 
artist of the 12th century. The one is an evening scene 
(though not manifest in the print). The sun has just set; there 
is a lull in nature, the trees, on either hand^of stout vigorous 
growth are made natural and life-like; the grandeur of the 
evening sky, against which a bent tree is silhouetted, is 
pictured; the cattle are comming home. How intimate all 
these things are; the evening sky^ the cattle, the drowsiness 
of nature. The picture is an objective study of one who 
admires nature. 

In tiie landscape by Kakei,' where, evidently, 
he is watching the tide flow up over the valley and the 
rising mist in the distance, there is an altogether different 
type of picture. It is a philosophical poem on life. The 
following lines of a Japanese poern are particularly applicable 
though not directly intended by the artist. 

"When my pathway, came to an end,by the rising waters covered 
"I sat me down and watched the shapes in the mists that o’er 
it hovered" 

The more youl look at the picture, the more it seems but a 
philosophy of life. The old sage sits on the cliff: below the 
waters of the river, like a great monster rush along, foaming 
and turbulent; the knarled tree,like an old weatherbeaten sailor 
has withstood the storms and torrents and grips the rocky 
cliff with the tenacity of vigorous manhood. The mists 



- 47 - 


conceal the distance but the sage, peering through, sees 
indications of forms beyond, perhaps only momentarily, but 
sufficiently to assure him that in due time there will be 
dispelled the waters of opposition and his course in life will 
be resumed. 

What a difference the two pictures present• 

The one is an endeavor to express the intimate beauty of the 
sunset, the trees, the water and the cattle, in a manner as 
direct and true as he can. . The other, probably } a creation 

partly of fancy. How his brush responds to the moods he wishes 
to convey, every stroke carries the emotions and feelings he 
has in regard to that part of nature he attempts to render. 

Both are epics of nature; the one an epic of 
nature in the evening of life. Nature goes on, the strong trees 
will be there in the morning, the cattle will have disappeared, 
nature will awake to another day. It is a poem for contemplation 
The latter is full ofinner meaning”, the work is condensed 
and generalized; it seems to rise above the particular, the 
intimate and catch something of the universal. All kinds of 
fancies crowd in ones imagination as we see the old sage, 
seated and watching patiently the outcome. One may see an 
illusion of life, another, the comparison of the old sage and 
the tree, while another may see the grandeur of the forces of 
nature, and so on indefinitely. But like a fine poem it is 
to be felt, not interpreted scientifically. 


The rhythm 
in each. 

In what way 


What is the nature of the rhythm in each? 
does each express life; movement? In the first 








■■y 






. 


- 




J'.J V . > 


. * 


. 










- 






: ... i J : 1 . . •; ? .. . ; •• V ;\ : :' 




. 


, 


. 











'#1 








- 43 - 


picture it is brought about by the atmosphere, and the light. 

There are varying tones l from the light of the setting sun, 
touching the tree in the foreground, 

to the deep shadows in the foliage at the top of the picture. 

The rhythm is by planes of light, in an atmosphere that tends 
to dissolve the distant forms, while giving life to the objects 
in the foreground. It is a rhythm of tone and color. In the 
second it is a rhythm of line produced by a wonderful vitality of 
brush stroke. Everything is simplified so as to give 
abstract conceptions to his imagination. These brush strokes 
are the strings of the instrument upon which the' Japanese 
painter produces his rhythm. They are made in a manner that 
brings out the feeling of the artist. Thus the painter could not 
paint unless he was in harmony with nature. All else had to be 
shut out so he could catch the feelings and could render these 
with a few living strokes. Ke freed himself from objective 
limitations and expressed the rhythm of his being in forms as 
abstractions taken from nature. A comparison of the work of 
the Japanese artist with that of a fine lyric poem is manifest. 

In Shelly’s“Skylark” we do not understnad the physical qualities 
of the skyls.rk but we have v/onderful poetic abstractions that 
carries our imagination beyond time and space to the contemplaton 
of the beauty of that creature of his imagination. So with 
the Japanese landscape artist. 



UoKi ai : The Wave. From the ‘ Thirtv-six Views of Fuji.” Diptvch 
■ 











It is impossible to compare all the various 


The 

Northeaster 

by Winslow types of Western and Eastern art but we ask indulgence to make 

Homer and 

the V/ave one more comparison, in the Northeaster by Winslow Homer 

by 

Hokusai. an American artist of the 19th century and the V/ave by 

Hokusai a Japanese artist also of the 19th century. It is 
manifest at a glance that there is a close analogy in subject 
between the two. In the ,, Northeaster ,, the wave is breaking on h 
the rocky coast, while another v/ave following has broken and ii 
the spray is rolling ahead. In the ,, Wave H there too, is a huge 
wave breaking to the left followed by another at the right 
which has begun to break. 

But how different are the two pictures. V/e 
readily exclaim about ^the Northeaster, ! how natural’,-that v/e 
may have seen v/aves roll in like that on the atlantic coast 
on $ust such a bleak rocky shore. What a painter, who could 
render so exactly the appearance of the wave and the magesty 
of those huge billows. V/e almost can imagine the roar and the 
swish of the salty brine. The dull leaden sky seems an exact 

counterpart to the rolling waves. Eev; artists have caught the 

% 

magesty of the sea as did Horner and few could render it more 
realistically. 

A brief examination of the"Wave” by Hokusai 
will reveal the great difference in view point in 

conception from that by Winslow Homer. On the left is a huge 
wave reaching almost to the top of the picture, the crest 
is breaking and falling towards the right, another wave in 
front, and somewhat smaller ; has already broken and 



- 50 - 


The 

contrast 

in 

rhythm. 


partially subsided. But why is this peculiar form underneath 
the wave so dark, and made with bars like a mighty cage? 

Above the spray appears a form like some monster with a thous¬ 
and claws. These fratures would be sufficient to arouse 
emotions different to those from the first picture, but see,- 
to the right are two long Japanese boats, the one in the fore 
part of tile picture is almost engulfed by the smaller wave. 

The further boat is just descending a wave to the right of 
the picture and seems to be sweeping directly into the dark 
prison house, surely drawn in by the terrible claws of 
this giant wave. Could any poetic conception be more 
masterfully conceived? The terrors of those mighty w T aves which 
are probably due to earthquakes, could not be better told in 
poetry than it is in this picture. The movement in the 
light and dark tones, in harmony with the long sweeping Jv'nes 
culminating in the sharp curves of the claw like forms is all 
in harmony with the thought. While the circular drops of 
T/vater, as if thrown off from the shaggy mane of the monster 
give a final touch to the picture. 

The difference in the nature of the rhythm 
is that one is a rhythm of reality, the other of the imagination. 
The one of elegant prose, the other of epic poetry. Both 
have life and movement beautifully expressed in the lines 
and tones, the one in broken parts, irregular masses, 
realistic,description as becomes a fine selection of prose 
describing an Atlantic storm; the other with rhythmic lines 
and movement, all in perfect harmony as if a piece of 



- 51 - 




music, wonderful in its poetic conceptions, as a struggle betv 
bet ween man and the elements. Tasso in his Treatise on the 
structure of Epic poetry, explains the nature of the task,- The 
“Epic poet" he says "has to take into account two contrary 
conditions; first that the reason of the reader postulates in u 
the poetical narrative the appearance of probable truth; 
secondly, the imagination requires the presence of the marvellous 
the supernatural and all the embelishments and fictions which 
this form of poetry is associated." Compare this statement 
with the picture of the "Wave”, the analogy is present in 
every feature. 

In comparing these pictures with the art of 
pre-modern times, where the source of the emotion is purely 
an objective one (p.22) and where the imagination is concrete 
there is manifest a great difference. Cur intellects can 
grasp the truths which the artist wishes to convey, in the 
earlier pictures and anyone can understand the situation* 

because they are able to break through the bounds of the 
phenomenal world. We can reflect, as we look at the Wave 
pictures on one of the gigantic forces of nature, a thing apart. 
The waves in each are not photographically true, but have 
been generalized, ^-nd one has been carried farther than the 
other. Both have form; the one somewhat natural , the other 


conventionalized. But form like that of the human body, the 
outer visible form, is only a vehicle for the indwelling life, 

Life in Poetry, Law in Taste. Courthope, p.34-7. 


- 52 - 


Conclusion. 


Decorative 

rhythm. 


There must he an inner reality, a life, and unless artists 
have this inner perception, this inner eye to catch the rhythmic 
life of the subject, he misses the mark. This was the nature 
of the art of pre-modern times' the primitive artist, could 
not catch the inner vision. . Hence there was no subjective 
rhythm, the essential vehicle of life in art. 

What then is the object of the artist? That 
he may make rhythm perceptible to the individual, for only 
by this means can he give life to his creation. This pictoral 
rhythm may be of different kinds according to the mood of the 
artist and his conception of the subject. If he can bring our 
natures into right relation with his rhythm there is harmony, 
if not, discord and dissatisfaction. Naturally we must feel 
as he feels and see as he sees, which makes it a little 
difficult to appreciate Japanese art. There is no difficulty 
on our part in synchronizing with physical rhythm; nature has 
long provided for that. With subjective rhythm;, where our 
feelings, our natures, our moods, all form a part, the task 
is much more difficult. It is the task of an artist; to express 
it is the criterion of an artist. 

Before leaving the subject of space arts, 
that of decorative art or design is worthy of attention. This 
is a form of art expression tha.t first developed because 
its rhythm is simple. While the early Egyptians were 
struggling with their pyramids and huge sculpture, their 
decorative art reached a high standard. This is true of 
the early decorative art of the Greeks. But the reason is 



- 53 - 


readily manifest. Decorative design has had its source chiefly 
in the smaller things in nature as flowers, birds, insects and 
occasionally small animals and man. The morning flower, 
unfolding shows life and movement, rhythmic and graceful. 

This has been the inspiration of the decorator. Compare the 
lotus borders of the Egyptians and the so called honeysuckle 
border of the Greeks - both like an unfolding flower. Their 
lines are .graceful by what is called measure rhythm; a 
feature on which Hogarth laid much emphasis. It may be 
illustrated as follows- A tangent•drawn- at a point 1. and a 

slight deviation is noticed 
on reaching 2. At 2 another 
tangent is drawn which by 
3. makes the same deviation 
as at 2. Other tangents are 
drawn at 3. 4. 5. On 
careful observation it is 
noticeable that the distance 
between the sections varies 
gradually. It is not sudden and 
abrupt or uncertain. A reverse curve as that in the contour 
of a Greek vase may be analized in like manner and the rhythmic 
nature of the line will be apparent. The rhythmi 2 line 
appears in all the decorative art of the Greeks, that is 
abstract in type. In design, while there is rhythm of line 
there is also a rhythm of shapes or areas. A rhythmic unit 
is one that possesses life and motion -without the actual 













































- 54 - 


necessity of repetition. Units have been classed as static and 
dynamic. The one being heavy, the other suggesting movement. 

An Egyptian Pylon and a Greek Temple front are good examples 
of each from an architectural standpoint. Much interest has 
been aroused recently by the problem of dynamic symmetry in 
decorative art. The aim is an endeavor to give life or 
rhythm through movement and growth. The Greek design was based 
on harmony of proportions; fine subtle divisions and relations 
between the parts and the whole. That the Greeks thoughtfully 
planned every shape, whether temple, vase or design is 
evident. Attempts are being made to put their principles 
into practice and carry them as far or even farther than 
they did. The aim is to give dynamic rhythmic life to 
decorative art. 

In the examples showm there is some indication 
of the basis of dynamic rhythm in design. In the one yj ill be 
found the structional lines on which the design is based. 

The aim is to so divide the area that subtile proportions will 
be attained. A feeling of rhythm is brought about by the 
diagonal lines, While rhythm or movement is brought about in 
this manner and it is perhaps as valuable a method as any so 
far proposed, there is something machanical about it. The 
divisions are generally attained by the use of incommemurate 
numbers as 1 to root of 3 makes a subtile division or proportions 
of an area. By breaking up the spaces in this manner and 
using line rhythm in the outline of the figures an excellent 
border or frieze may be secured from suitable motifs. 




- 55 - 


Rhythm 

in 

poetry. 


Rhytian is obtained by unit repetition as well 
as by shape rhythms in the units. This is mechanical and 
objective and seldom has the life that is attained in fine 
art. For pupils in the schools it is interesting and of such 
a nature that by using a graded series of exercises, fairly 
successful work may be attained by almost the whole class. 

CHAPTER Vll. 

Language as a means of expression differs 
from either art or music, though perhaps literature is more 
closely allied with music than with art, for the reason that 
art deals largely /with one moment of time. Literature is more 
exact than music since it conveys distinct situations, and 
reflections which music cannot. Literature and music and the 
dance were very closely related in primitive tines. Words 
as such, had little signification at that time. There was a 
pleasure in the primitive rhythm of sound as there was in 
musicj a means which was employed largely for giving a * 

regular time interval. Images which words suggest were largely 
concrete and either represented objects or actions. 

As ages passed and the intellect developed 
language began to be a means to convey ideas,in either of two 
ways, by a difinite statement with a succession of ideas 
that followed one another in natural sequence or' as 
suggesting images, allowing the imagination to develop these 
pictures to the mind. This latter would seem to be intermed¬ 
iary between primitive expression and modern scientific 







- 56 - 


language where the ideas expressed are definite and in a 
logical sequence. From primitive words,as simple images of 
objects, to rational thought almost freed from concrete images 
hut presenting a sequence of ideas, is a long distance to 
travel, Literature,as poetryyis a happy balance between these 
two and thus presents elements that are best appreciated by the 
average individual. 

In the previous chapter art was indicated as 
a development from the purely objective source of the emotion to 
the more subjective one. This is equally true in literature. 
Further thoughts or images in man, like features in his 
physical form have been modified during the long ages but 
traces of these primitive states still exist. In early 

years the child thinks in images like primitive man. The 
objective world is alive with creatures of fancy . There seems 
no way to account for this but that man not only inherits 
peculiar instincts and emotional tendencies whether simple 
or complex but also rediments of his primitive*imagination. 

This imagination gave life to all nature and 
without any analysis of caiuse and effect, it built up an 
explanation for the source of all objects in nature, from 
analogies of the actions of men and animals. Mature was not 
only animated, but to a large extent personified. The sun 
and moon, the trees and wincis became personal creatures, 
leading lives similar to human beings and capable likewise 
of being influenced by demons. 



- 57 - 


Had man 'been born with a clear idea of cause 
and effect, so that he would have been above any doubt of the 
causes of events in the world of nature, it is doubtfuIL if 
he would have had any imagination worth the name. It is 
this primitive imagination that gave life to all nature and 
it is the modern form of ideastic imagination that gives 
life to poetry and literature as it exists today. Poetry simply 
folowed the same evolution as was described in art, in pre¬ 
modern times. It was a transition from when the more emotional 
factors of the imagination predominate, to those in which 
the intellectual are supreme. The primitive imagination is 
directed along new channels, instead of objective imagination 
there is' emphasis on immer imagination, the more subjective 
factors •- the inner man- 

The impulse that creates poetry is not a 
conflict with material mature but with the universal spirit 
in nature. He sees and catches the feelings of millions 
past and present* and with a poet*s clarity of mind expresses 
these in poetic language. The primitive bard, too had his 
emotions aroused by the animated and personified forces in 
nature, that were real to him and a constant challenge to 
his nature. He never gets beyond the limits of time and 
space, nor does he see the universal cause and effect of 
forces operating in the world of nature. The modern poet 
not only feels something of the lurking nature of the 
primitive bard in him but the new/ forms or ideas that come 
from the ^universal consciousness that product of long 



- 58 - 


ages of the millions of throbbing natures fused into one. 
With his higher sensibility he has analyzed the universal 
nature and has caught the inner spirit which he endeavors to 
express. If he is successful in making his ideas clear and 
not too engrossed in the form or deess as it were the rhythm 
of his nature is readily manifest and v/e can the more easily 
catch its pulsating motion. We can also sweep away space a 
and time and circumstances and come face to face with that 
universal consciousness and understand something of its 
eternal realities. 

Nature There are many ways in which life or thythm 

personified. 

"The Brook" may be expressed in poetry. One method is by a series of 

pictures in nature as in Tennyson’s "Brook". This is very 
similar to Rousseau’s "On the Edge of the' Forest at 
Fontainbleau". Both are natural and somewhat objective and 
express in a fine way the beauty of the landscape or brook. 

The Brook. 

I come from haunts of coot and hern, 

I make a sudden sally 
And sparkle out among the fern, 

To bicker down a valley. 


By thirty hills I hurry down, 

Or slip between the ridges, 

By twenty thorps, a little town, 
And half a hundred bridges. 



- 59 - 


Shellys* s 
'‘Skylark” 


Till last "by PIilip's farm I flow 
To join the 'brimming river, 

For men may come and men may £9. 

But I go on for ever. 

Life is am ed to the poem by personifying the "brook" by 
which a personal feeling is created. Then too the poet has 
expressed what others are familiar with in nature and has 
reflected on the continuance of nature forms as compared with 
the life of man. By personifying the brook this conparison 
is the more easily understood. The rhythm is also brought 
out in the music of the poem; the music of the words correspond 
closely with the bicker, the babbling, the chattering of the 
water. The poem is appreciated by all who are familiar with 
a brook by the beautiful pictures so well described in 
language and the feelings of familiarity with this manifestation 
of nature. This is one of;the simplest kinds of poetical 
rhythms and is a natural evolution from personified nature 
of primitive times with an affection for nature, the 
product of modern life. 

Compare "The Brook" with "To a Skylark" by 

Shelley. Hail to thee, blithe Spirit. 

Bird thou never wert, 

That from heaven, or near it 
Pourest thy full heart 
In profuse strains of unp remediated art. 

Higher still and higher 

Prom the earth thou springest, 

Like a cloud of fire, 

The blue deep thou wlngest, 

And singing still dost soar, and soating ever singest. 



- 60 - 


In the golden lightning 
Of the sunken sun 
0 ’ev which clouds are brightening, 

Thou lost float and run, 

Like an unbounded joy whose race has just begun. 

The ;pale purple even 

Lelts around thy flight; 

Like a star of heaven 
In the braod dayligilt 

Thou art unseen, but yet I hear thy shrill delight. 

The poet immediately translates us from the real skylark to 

that which is trancendental, a creature of his imagination. 

with. 

The bird we hear is not the skylark -nature^ which we are 
familiar as we were with the Brook, but a delightful 

creature of fancy that requires all the wonderful imagery of 
Shelley to conceive and a clarity of language to express. 

The bird lives in the world of our imagination. While it 
is unwise to ..press analogies too far there is at least some 
similarity with the landscape by Kakei,- “When ny pathway 
came to an end by the rising v/aters covered, I sat me down 
to watch the shapes in the mists that over it hovered. 11 
The natural landscape is lost in the landscape of his reflection, 
the creation of the artist’s imagination. Go it is with 
the poem. It is an abstraction, a thing apart, a synthesis of 
his feelings as he listens to the song of this bird. 

The rhythm here is not a natural rhythm, something seen in 
every day life but the poet here immediately frees himself 
from objective limitations to poetic abstractions, away from 
any limits of time and space as far as it is possiole to do 
so,to the beauty of this creature of . his imagination, and 
in so doing we catch in his rhythm something of the universal 

























* 

. 













. 






. 














. 

' 






































-61- 


spiri t rather than the life of seine objective form. 

Thus in these two poems there is an entirely different rhythm. 
The mechanical rhythm of language is smooth and graceful in 
each but in one we remain on the ground in harmony with the. 
movement,of one of natures, beautiful forms; in the other 
the spirit is carried away to catch the melody of Eternal 
Spirit as portrayed by his imagination. 

Grays ‘’Elegy” is an example of a different 
hind of rhythm than either of the foregoing.We quote the 
1st, 4th, 12th, and 14th stanzas. 

Tine curfew tolls the knell of parting day, 

The lowing herd wind slowly o’er the lea, 

The ploughman homeward plods his weary w T ay, 

And leaves the world to darkness and to me. 

Beneath those rugged wlms, that yew-tree’s shade 
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap, 

Each in his narrow cell for ever laid, 

The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep. 

Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid 
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire; 

Hands, that the rod of empire might have sway’d, 

Or waked to extasy the living lyre: 

Pull many a gem of purest ray serene 
The dark unfathom’d caves of ocean bear: 

Pull many a flower os born to blush unseen, 


And waste its sweetness 


in the desert air 


• W , ,, V"- ^ W4 ■ Y,.v's s 


■«• ,• . 








-v ■ " -• * • ■■■ ■ ’ , • •, - - ’ , • ■ - . .■ - i.- ..... .. •.. 











> ..... : =‘.w. . • • ►. .*. 



• ' 'I - • • ' 





; . ... -• 

‘ 




. 

' 





i: - v >. * J-i. t'. - • 

■?».•■■■ tKr.v; 'V 


■ : ?. 5 . ... 







' : ■ • . 


. ./ j : ■ ■ i it, ; ■ ■ ■ , . 













-62- 


.he eclecticn of words in the first st <iaa 
is unique, “toils* "Jcrusll* “p&rtiug* "slowly* “plods 11 . tow 
the spirit of the reader is eoo® slowed down th. t he any 
reflect, a© the poet does, for example in the thro© at&ng** 
..uotec • «e are aot in a veriv. of ^vur& nor in a world of the 
iiu- 0 ination Out in cue cl reflection* so follow the poet 
re&dily . no n&^ecintec & seething he -- ep oefere -a. Pith me 
ouVi>e ct nia tefioetiea, which i-. turn l*&as to . p a social! w 
of Kindrev reflections, cowing u&cf now then to the 

natural situation* these reflections are so simple •: n* obvious 
-aa --vi no-' no eo^dem-m m i-pch in each cbnomralion* these 
t ru t n s ? ■& e ; > r e aen ta r • v < - $ ok no wl e %ed by m v ; - ry © n e o «X:y h * 

.. @ ei. re o set uifm; po iiet iso re simply and directly th,.-n .w# 
c©«ic hope to ho* in & few the whole rm&m of 

i tut* a « life ten V. >. o , % i nv is u' * f © 14#d* 

ass pf:\tee P-OoM fe# at once bria^? the 
- | - . 0 pi 1 ef — i 

oi I i* i - . , .. - 

mat for C’. f loot ion, ikat ike i & ..., 

' 0F “ ; - -hen cc;\^,,rin & tfeio and oh: t* i- ..'hiu,. Uon or 

vi ® u retire, .. .Quicker rkytta, oo is a; poor 

. 4 aickly, out reflect ion is % slower proses a and thia the 
poet hu u m mil carried out* 

k selection from 4 *fbe herrehont of Venice * 
by Shakespeare illustrates p still hi^hor foa& of ropito* 



-63- 


The quality of mercy is act strained 
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven 
Upon the earth beneath, it is twice blest; 

It blesses him that gives and him that takes. 
’Tie mightiest in the 'mightiest*-. it becomes 
The throned monarch better than hie crown; 

Hie sceptre shows the force of temporal power, 


The attribute to awe and majesty* 

therein dith sit the dread and fear of kings; 


But mercy is above this sceptred sway, 
it is enthroned in the hearts of kings; 

It is an attribute to God himself. 

And earthly power doth then show likest God’s 
When mercy seasons justice. 

The setting of this selection is so well known that no 


reference will be made. The emotion of the poet is aroused 
by an endeavor on his part to adequately express in the 
language of feeling the abstract inea of mercy . He has used 
toms we are familiar with, but bin organisation of these is 
such that we realise, he has presented some absolutely new c 
conception. As in Shelley’s Skylark, the poet has arisen 
above the confines of time or place or circumstances, but 
here he attempts to atouse our feelings with an abstract concept 
of mercy. He has caught the spirit of *Mercy n f a meet difficult 


attainment, and as we follow his language that expresses so 
clearly its transcendent qualities we too catch the spirit. 
The rhythm is of a different nature from that of the 



-64- 


The 

rhythm 
oh Pope. 


the previous examples. We are face to face with some unseen 
reality, something v.e cannot readily image, the universal 
spirit of the race, which unfolds to the sensitive soul of 
the poet a nev/ synthesis on the quality of mercy. We grasp 
the meaning, our natures awake but we are soon conscious that 
this selection is something out of the ordinary; something 
we never thought of before; we never experienced anything 
just of this nature. In this literary expression there is 
life, our thoughts ad visions rise higher and higher until 
it carries us to the very being of God himself* 

All poetry night he divided into many 
classes but the few that have been quoted, are four outstanding 
types, hut the fact remains that in each the rhythm is the 
life giving quality* ihe poets have stripped their thought or 
imagination of all superfluities. fhey see essential verities 
and if the rhythms of thgir poetry catch our natures we 
understand something of the feelings that were theirs as they 
expressed themselves by poetry. Only in this way do we 
enter into full appreciation of a work of art. 

Poetry often expresses.the synthesis of the 
ohouaht of the age. Much of the poetry of lope may be so 
characterized. Like much of Brownings, which is sometimes 
obscure, there is in this kind of poetry a strong philosophic 
cast. Thus it is obvious in reading the following lines 
that there is a difference between this and. any of the precceding. 



-65- 


Honor end shame from no condition rise 

Act well your part, there all the honor lies 

Fortune in man, has some small defference made, 

One flaunts in rags, one flutters in brocade; 

The cobbler api'oned, and the parson gowned, 

The frier hooded, and the monarch crowned. 

’What differ more’, you cey, ’than crown and cowl’ 

I’ll tell you friend, a wise man and a fool. 

You’ll find, if once the monarch acts the monk, 

Or, Cobbler like, the parson will be drunk, 

Worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow; 

The rest of.it is all but leather and prunells. 

To catch the rhythm it is necessary to 
understand the nature of the age in which it is written, 
otherwise it will seem mechanical.Pope tries to combine the 
spirit of the middle ages with the philosophic ideas 
peculiar to the Renaissance and like other poets of his time 
attempts to give his poetry a classic finish in expression. 
Like the spirit of the Renaissance his concept of nature v/as 
"man”; animate nature about man’s environment received 
little or no attention unless, as occasionally in art as a 
kind of background. The study of classics had led to a more 
fully developed English language as a means of expression, and 
Pope uses this v^ith clear logic to expose the indolence and 
follies of his day. Hence it is evident that to fully 
appreciate this poetry requires a different attitude than 
to that of any previous quotations. There is not the same 



-66- 


natural view of nature as in the Brook, which is intimate, or 
of a range of imagination ac in the Skylark or the reflection 
that characterixes the Elegy. The poetry is a kind of 
exposition in poetic form and for that reason it appeals more 
to the intellect than to the imagination. The rhythm there¬ 
fore does not appear so prominent nor does the reader’s spirit 
catch the spirit of Pope so readily. From the standpoint of 
rhythm it is not as high a type as any of the others, Even 
though there is meter to the lines, it is his clarity of 
thought and expression that pleases us and in this respect 
it does not greatly differ from classic prose. The flow of 
language, theismootimess and luciduty of expression, everything 
of an intellectual character is of the ‘best, Tout our own 
vitality is not stimulated, there is no glow of creative energy 
in the poet’s soul, the rhythm is well nigh dead. 

Lyric It would be a large task to examine all the 

poetry. 

various kinds of English poetry alone and classify these 
according to the nature of rhythm. For purposes of appreciation 
some writers have classified poetry as Lyrical, narrative and 
Dramatic. 

Pelgrave in his introduction to his 
Golden Treasury says ’’Lyrical has been held essentially to 
imply that each poem shall turn on some thought, feeling or 
situation”. Success depends on the rhythmic synthesis that 
pulsates in the being of the writer, As a rule the rhythm 
will be of a light type, for lyric poetry does not generally 
deal with the deeper qualities of our natures, although 



-67- 


Epic 

poeti’y. 


although there are some exceptions. Lyric poetry is better 
adapted to express individual ideas of the poet. There is 
to be found the emotions, feelings and experiences of a poet 
in regard to some object or objects in nature, direct or 
indirect. Byron revolts against creeds, customs and institu¬ 
tions of- society and Tennyson gives us reflective analysis of 
the feelings and passions of the mind. The appreciation of 
poetry of this type consists in entering into the feelings 
of the writer, catching the rhythm of the poe$ and harmonizing 
our natures thereto; provided our intellectual nature is 
satisfied with the form and the thought content in the poem. 
Another division of poetry might be called the social type as 
contrasted with the individual type. In this the poet sees 
and feels certain situations in society ?/hich .arouses his 
emotions. He sees some struggle in the race, some conflict of 
right against wrong, some sacrifice for a cause, some great 
adventure by a people or an individual, or other inward 
spiritualization of social life. The poem may centre around 
an individual or a group but there is always the reaction of 
the individual or the group to society. The writer sees and 
feels the struggle that is taking place, by sympathy he 
enters into the struggle itself end he endeavors to express 
his feelings in language. If he can give this life, sponteneity, 
through rhythm, so much does he contribute towards the 
appreciation. 

The name f, Epic” has been given to poetry 
that expresses a conflict in social forces. This struggle may 
be keen and of more or less national significance, as an 



-68- 


as an effort on the part of society to advance to a higher 
civilization. Occasionally the struggle is "between individuals 
in society who differ in ideals and such poetry is sornetines 
called pastoral or romance. The early great Epics were conflicts 
between one civilization and another; at later times the traditions 
of chivalry or the development of Christian ideals were the 
motives. floYne\r x $ Epics are unequalled in the representation 
ofhuman action and character of the Greeks in their struggle 
for a higher kind of ideals. Virgil expresses the statliness 
and essential qualities of human society of his time. Dante’s 
Divine Comedy gives a perfect reflection of the deeper thoughts 
and reflections of - mediaeval society peculiar to his age, 

while Milton in- the glowing spirit of the Renaissance gives 
a sublime contemplation of the moral history of the race 
between the fall of man and the redemption by the Son of God. 

He reflects the conception of religion, philosophy and 
learning of his generation* 

The life of the poem depends not so much on its 
faithful record of the conflict, its climaxes or various 
episodes, but rather on the underlying truth,- the great 
conflict of ideals-, not of any particular life but rather 
in the social spirit of man. If the poet caught this spirit 
and interpreted it in a beautiful language so did he give 
expression to a more powerful Epic; if the conflict was on a 
lower plane, the name ’’romance” or ’’narrative poetry” would 
be a more suitable designation. 

The rhythm of Epic poetry lies in the 
ability to give life to the struggle. In pre-modern times the 




























- 69 - 


life of such hero stories was in its conflict with objective 
nature, but in modern, the conflict lies between the inner 
natures of the social groups. Naturally there is a survival 
in our natures of this pre-modern rhythm,which has a part in 
our appreciation, but if we. catch the pulsating spirit that 
animates the struggle, that rhythm of life, then do we enter 
into the appreciation, of the conflict. 

As stated above it is necessary before hand 
to know the circumstances, the spirit of the times, and to 
be satisfied with the form and general expression of the 
language. When once this is attained we may then be in a 
position to appreciate the conflict in the life giving 
principle of rhythm. If the epic, not only has opposing 
forces in nature, but above and beyond we catch something of 
the universal struggle of mankind after higher ideals; if 
we loose sight of the individuals in the struggle and see the 
type, the . essence of the conflict in the universal spirit of 
the race, then the epic arouses a deeper rhythm. If we ha 
harmonize with the spirit of the writer we feel something of 
the throb of universal emotion through the pulsating movements 
of this universal rhythm. This is the synchronizing force in 
a great work of art. One great difficulty in poetry of this 
type, peculiar to its very nature, is to sustain the 
emotion of the reader. As a rule the story ebbs and flows, as 
the waves of the sea, from climax to climax. This at first 
thought might be a defect but in reality it proves an advantag 
in appreciation. 


Sustained emotion is impossible. 



- 70 - 


Dr amatic 
poetry. 


If the poet can so arrange these periods from climax to climax 
culminating ia the last and greatest,the work will have a 
rhythmic cadence which will carry the reader and sustain the 
interest to the end. 

The drama has been considered the highest 
type of poetry. The difference between Epic and Dramatic 
poetry is that the former presents life socially while the 
latter presents it more individually, with the social world 
of the time more or less in the background. The source of the 
drama is generally some story from the accepted legend or 
history of the race, or some episode where something happened 
when there was a collision of the wills of two or more 
persons. It represents a chain of events, leading on to a 
climax. These events are so clearly linked together, and all 
unrelated matter cast aside., that the reader or spectator 
may easily follow the issue,. The end is such that it seems 
inevitable,as if some power, as fate, slowly enmeshes and 
drags dowm the villain or leader. Aristotle aptly defines 
Tragedy as "an imitation of an action that is serious, complete 
and of certain magnitude, in language embellished with each 
kind of artistic ornament, the several kinds being found in 
separate parts of the play; in the form of action, not narrative 
through pity and fear affecting the proper purgation of these 
emotions . 11 It is interesting, to note the effect of tragedy 
as indicated bj Aristotle. The primitive emotions of fear and 
pity are to be purged from the individual. The excitement of 
the play is such that all these fears are gradually thrown of:f 



- 71 - 


the tumult in the mind at the first slowly subsides. The 
primitive emotions have been changed into higher forms as they 
harmonize with the universal spirit. 

The interesting part of this definition is 
the Clearness with thich Aristotle caught the concept of the 
Greelc drama, which apparently at that time had an ethical 
purpose. Pity and fear have in them much that is coarse and 
brutal, as these were purged away the hearer caught something 
of the reverence for the greatness in humanity. Consequently 
every drama was of the nature of an education in that iifc 
purged the feelings; that were unethical. 

Now the soul of any drama, ©specially of the 
nature of tragedy, lies in the concept of the poet. If he 
imagines the reality of the dramatic situation, sees clearly 
the inevitable collision of natures and breathes life into 
the objects which he creates, just in so far will his 
characters live. Khythm is the synchronizing of all these 
living forces. Thought is very necessary here, perhaps more th 
than in any other form of literary ant, that there may be clear 
ness in relationship of the chain of events and a careful 
plan leading clearly from one action to another to the 
climax. Dramatic poetry in this regard approaches philosophy 
However on examining the plays of Shakespeare we observe 
that he finds the likeness he desires in some well known 
story or history or legend into which he breathes the vitality 
of his own experience. And such is this vitality that 
he conceives of a great number of characters, natural 



- 72 - 


Summery. 


ideal and infuses in them deamatic life and places them in 
hundreds of imaginary situations that arouse the emotions in 
the complexity of opposing impulses. These conflicts are 
more than the conflicts of life. The situations which he 
organized v/ere not only natural in the sense of being quite 
probable, but he caught the universal spirit that operates 
in and through the race. It is this rhythm of the universal 
which makes his characters as of every age. 

The two great factors in poerty are life 
and law. To the latter may be -ascribed those matters of the 
intellect that guide thepoet in correct expression, in suitable 
meter that harmonizes with his concepts. The poet would examine 
and select from nature that which harmonixes with each other 
in the appearance of organic life through the ideal. So 
that the readers judgment is satisfied with the situation 
presented to the mind. True these situations may be 
ideal, or allegorical, or imitative or nature or somewhat 
philosophical, but they must be understandable. 

It is not necessary that there be a science 
of poetry; a. series of principles that must be definitely foil 
followed, that hold logically together. Great art has 
preceeded criticism. It is impossible to make definite 
laws of taste. At the same time there is a broad concept of 
what beauty of form consists. This is the factor that operates 
before any real appreciation can take place. 

On the other hand, is$the life in poetry. 

It is from this that real aesthetic pleasure is derived. 


. 























. 







. . 






V 


1 . 




- 73 - 


The 

place 

early 

music 


If the poet has been successful in matters of form and also 
has made his message live, than we can to that extent appre¬ 
ciate a work of art. Rhythm is this synchronizing factor of 
the life of a poem with that within- us. It is difficult 
to define fully; it must be felt rather than observed; it is 
spiritual, ideal, incapable of analysis. 


CHAPTER VI11. 


RHYTHM AMD MUSIC. 


of 


Of poetry and music the latter has the 
largest emotionsl content. Por ages music was the 
secondary factor in expressing the feelings. In primitive 
times it was the accompaniment of the dance , and of Epic 
and Lyric songs of the Greeks, Prom earliest times it was used 
in religious ceremonies, as well- as in all dramatic 


performances. During the past three or four centuries a great 
advance has been made in pure music, so that there is as wide 
a range in music today as in art or literature. Prom the 
lighter types as in dance music > to the deeper aesthetic 
nature of the symphony there is a wide range. Perhaps today 
no other art makes such a wide appeal,and the advance in method 
of communicating feeling has wonderfully assisted in 
appreciation. If the printing press gave an impetus to lit¬ 
erature and gave it ascendency over art or music, the phonograph 
and the radio and other modern ways of communicating good 
music will perhaps place music in the leading position in 




- 74 - 


satisfying our emotional nature. Until some means has 
been found to reproduce with exactness the best in art, it is 
doubtful if art will play the part it did four or five 
centuries ago,when, especially in Italy, it was the foremost 
of the arts. 

Formalists In regard to the content of literature, 

and expre¬ 
ssionalists . music and art there has "been two opposing schools. These 
ssionalists 

may "be called the formalists and the expressionalists. In 
art the doctrine of the former is "art for art’s sake"; the 
arranging of colors and forms so that a fine arrangement 
will take place regardless of the subject. The other 
school, sometimes called “art for life’s sake”, think of art 
as the expression of the artist. In music the formalists 
look upon the essence of music as the formal play of 
musical notes in the most intricate and pleasing pattern, 
artistically and sensciously pleasing. The expressionalists 
on the other hand, regard music as that which arouses the 
feelings, as the richest and deepest we have. Music as, 

"the language of the emotions" seems to indicate the place 
it fills with the majority of people. In this day of 
intellectual work, that which soothes-our natures, restores 
our flagging spirits, satisfies our inner nature is 
music mote than any other factor; music where rhythm 
manifests itself more than in either art or literature. 

In art irhythm is the most difficult to locate, or definitely 
to indicate. The artist chooses, selects, arranges so that 
the picture may please; that his feelings may harmonize with 



- 75 - 


Rhythm 

and 

neural 

activity. 


ours, but it is difficult to manifest it readily, In 
literature by a wider choice of symbols, of language, the 
rhythm of the artist may be more manifest, while in music 
rhythn is truly the life giving factor. Like radio, active 
energy,it pulsates through our natures with such commanding 
power that few but feel its influence. Such is its effect 
that it can change*our feelings, our innermost natures, 
more than any other art. Music can enliven and it can subdue; 
it can stimulate and it con soothe; it expresses joy and 
sadness, and so quickly can the transition be made that we 
marvel at the wonderful power that is latent in music. 

Physiologically, rhythm is on attribute of 
neural activity#- Primitive man probably found in rhythm of 
movement a unifying factor to coordinate activities, whether 
work or play. Many pf the movements of the body are 
rhythmical. Hence when music with pronounced rhythm is 
heard, the incentive of the recurring beats of slightly 
quicker than the neural rhythm in our systems, tend to 
arouse in us a neural and muscular response that can only 
be restrained by a direct act of the will or inhibited by 
a higher taste, the product of education. Primitive rhythm 
was the strong characteristic of primitive music which was 
of the nature of a monotone, but by changing the time element 
the effect of the rhythm may be such, as to change the 
otherwise peaceful natures, to those, that become the most 
warlike and ferocious. Hot only does rhythm accelerate 
motion but it reacts on the whole nervous system, 







- 76 - 


arousing the emotions to the highest pitch. These man if estations 
have been observed by so many investigators of the reaction 
of primitive people and of children, to music with pronounced 
rhythm the t the results may he taken as conclusive. 

What is the nature of this neural response? 

As previously stated there is probably a strong conflict of 
instincts or impulses on primitive rhythm. In the war dance 
or v/ar music, which was probably also accompanied by the 
repetition of some simple melodic phrase and by short 
sentences or vocal exclimations, the impulse to fight, to 
avenge some wrong, overcomes the impulse for a quiet or 
regular life. In this imaginary conflict the emotional 
nature is aroused as it were to a white heat, largely by r the 
quickened rhythm and the peculiar tonal qualities of the 
music. The aim of musical education today is to take this, 
the most powerful factor in our natures, to repress here, 
to refine there, so that while the life of rhythm is not 
repressed it is redirected into higher channels. As 
education in general is chiefly that the individual may have 
a larger scope for self-realization; not by repressing the 
nature in him, but rather by enlarging his scope through 
redirecting and conscious activity; so in music, the aim 
is to redirect this primitive rhythm and. emotion in our natures 
that it may be responsive to the highest and develop our 
emotional nature, so that it may preserve the balance with 
that which may be termed our intellectual equipment. Not 
that these are separate factors in our natures, they are 



- 77 - 


not "but rather coordinate in each other, so that the finest 
type of life shall toe that in which these two divisions 
in our natures may he fairly balanced. 

Sound ' What is the element or nature of sound 

rhythm. 

rhythm? Let a sound he continuous and. it very sootl produces 
in us a strong dislike. Ho matter how a whistle may he 
tuned, if it gives out :>ne steady note, it soon becomes 
annoying. There must he a break or interval in the sound, 
and this relation of silence to that of sound must preserve 
some balance that is satisfying. When our being is in 
harmony with that of nature, it simply means that there 
is due proportion between movement and silence. This 
connects the individual with nature. (This connects the 
individual with nature^ When further the dynamics which 
constitute our individuality are so synchronized with the 
elements in the finest music, in its mystical and 
impressional nature, these connect the individual with 
the unverse. To tms end the composer of music, A realize 
the possibility of the infinite number and. variety of time 
duration with its consequent result of finer or elemental 
emotions and then mrnsic will be extended into all fields. 
These have been investigated in some directions by 
such a galaxy of musicians as Bethoven, List, Bach etc. 
but few have investigated directly the relation of the 
duration of sound-beats and. the right propor tion of silence 
which in the end may be the leading factor of the two* 



- 78 - 


The higher forms of art, whether as music, 
literature or fine art, have other features that modify 
the freshness, but on the other hand the finer qualities not 
only enhance the rhythm hut have intellectual factors of a 
high order. Man has developed more in his intellectual 
powers than in his primitive emotions. At the same time 
the coordination between these two parts of our nature 
has gone on to the modification of doth. Our sympathies 
are finer on the one hand and the intellectual concepts 
have been more refined. True it might seem contrary to 
cite the awful conflict of the world’s war and the power of 
the intellect to devise new ways of destruction yet behind 
all this was a kindler feeling for a prisoner than was ever 
shown previously. So in the arts of peace, there has been 
a modification of each, though it would seem that since the 
Rennaissance, which Y/as an intellectual av/akening through 
experimental methods directed to the objective v/orld that 
more advance was made in literature, music and fine art than 
ever before, unless with one exception possibly that of 
the Greek in literature and art. The poY/ers of the intellect 
have been directed to investigating many problems in the 
realms of the creative imagination, and in no other has there 
been a higher advance than in the realm of higher music. 

There are many problems that require much more investigating; 
not that it may greatly assist the creative ability but 
rather point out new avenues for the composer. Music has 



- 79 - 


perhaps more, science than either literature or fine art, 
hecause of its elusive character. The science of musical 
sounds or comprehensive laws of harmony and form,of the 
intricate complexity of each measure, all give scope for 
science. The tendency of more advanced music is away from 
the more primitive types of rhythm 

The simple folk song is the original of 
modern music. Lyric poetry and bub ic advanced together until 
a method was devised to record language, when they 'became 
somewhat dissociated. Both expressed feelings; the personal 
feelings of. the author towards nature or the inner feelings 
due to reflection often allied with religion. The folk 
song was made up of a simple melody that v/as appreciated 
by those.who heard it, though it may have been modified 
considerably before it became a permanent contribution. 

As language became more complex, new ways were found of 
stressing feelings on the one hand and thought on the 
other, both however interwoven; the one leading to all 
forms of poetic expression, the other to the more analitical 
prose. So music also grew or expanded, perhaps following 
more closely the analogy of poetry. 

Lyric poetry presents a succession of images 
or situations which amuse our feelings^ there is the 
unexpected, the theme, as in Wordsworth’s H The Daffodils, H 


SONATA 

quasi qua Fantasia. 

Op.27. m 2. 
to the Countess Julie Guicciardi. 
Adagio sostenuto. 

Hi dry* nuorwir* tullo nursto pnio drlirntis«imftmrnlr <■ *nnzf\ sordini. 


173 



























































































- 80 - 


I wander’d lonely as a cloud 

That floats on high o’er vales and hills 

When all at once I saw a crowd, 

A host of golden daffodils, 

Beside the lake, Beneath the trees, 

Fluttering and dancing in the breeze. 

Continuous as the stars that shine 
And twinkle on due milky way, 

They stretched in. never ending line 
Along the margin of the bay; 

Ten thousand saw I at a glance 
Tossing their heads in sprightly dance. 

The unexpected is brought about by the pecture of his 
lonely wandering, as a "cloud" and then suddenly confronted 
with "a host of golden daffodils". This theme developes 
through reflection on the vision of the innumerable stars 
in the milky way, then flashes back to earth.to the ten 
thousand daffodils. Without attempting to continue this 
picture it may be pointed out that emotions are aroused by 
the meeting of the unexpected; the poet presents to us one 
situation after another that does not present any logical 
relation such as prose would require, but situations that have 
some imaginary likeness and yet are different. This play of 
the imagination arouses our emotions and produces the 
feeling, peculiar to appreciation of such poetry. To every 
situation the analogy between the feelings thus aroused and 


1 




















- 81 - 


our .pulsating life is brought out more clearly through 
implicit motor reaction. 

The analogy "between music and lytic poetry; 
such as illustrated above,is very close. In music there is 
a theme or melody. This is often expressed in a simple 
musical phrase, as shorn in R, illustration 3. of the second 
movement of Beethoven f s Sonata No 27, which consists of 
four measures. This theme is an interesting melody and 
becomes the subject of the whole movement, in a manner like 
the situation or view is the subject of the lyric in the 
above illustration from poetry. In the music the 
phrase is repeated, measures 1-9, in illustration 3. 
making 8 measures in all, but the repeat is higher in tone. 
This subject is repeated in C and C eight measures in all, 
but whereas in the subject the accent comes in the first 
note in the measure, it flow comes on the second count. This 
reversal of the natural accent is called syncopation. Now 
follow a slight episode of eight measures, in which are 
changes to a minor key. Then follows in measures 26 to 37 
the repeat of the first subject but in a different 
arrangement of notes. 




















































































































- 82 - 


In this short selection what are some of the 
means to heightan its emotional quality, and therefore give 
it more life and vi^or. First,'the repeat of the first phrase 
in higher notes,- which.tends to heighten the emotional 
quality. Second,by syncopation, or removal of the accent, 
which gives an unexpected thrill, something that was not 
expected. Third,the occasional use of a forced note, sF, 
which by unexpected accent changes the movement in the 
selection. Fourth,by a different ending of a phrase as in 
FI and F2 in the Trio part. There is a recognition of the 
repeat of the phrase and our feelings have become attuned. 
When suddenly the ending is lowered instead of rising to the 
higher note as in the preceeding phrase. Fifth, by the use 
of Fissonance or changing the regular major note to the 
corresponding minor, gives a momentary feeling of depression 
as in A. A. 

In illustrations 1 and 2 The first movement 
of the Sonata, there is a melody running through the main 
parts of the subject and its development. This theme is 
illustrated in 4, on playing it apart,it is found that 
there is no particular melody, that by itself would be of 
ordinary interest, but it is so composed that it presents 
here and there the unexpected, by the use of minor notes, 
by repeat in higher tone, by different phrasal ending 
and other means. This melody is accented in playing, but 
the other notes so clothe the theme that iit seems to 


.ppear outstanding only here and there. 


fffv -rThi— 



^ Igg 1, <JU--WJ 


Si 


3 


' 


§ 


j ji j 




pp 


A A J^V' i| J JJp£g 

,/>,-! ~S±X = ~ 


MM 




=) 



= 


■^fcj -4- 




M 






























































- 83 - 


I.'usic presents a theme or melodic path 
which like the epic poem is for us to -follow through all 
vicissitudes. This path may be very simple like a narrative; 
the melody by association is often endeared to us, as for 
example that of "Annie Laurie". In a Sonata there is a 
vastly different kind of music and reminds one of an exciting 
Epic poem. To illustrate the means the composer uses to 
heighten the emotional effect, we might use the analogy of 
following a winding path through a forest. Prom this path 
there branches off short by paths, showing different views' 
unexpected situations. The main theme may be compared with 
the main path, this is followed a short distance, when 
suddenly we stop and branch off and seemingly go in a 
parallel direction to the first path. Incidental difficulties 
occur in the path* now a slight elevation, now a depression, 
generally these are sudden and unexpected! how a dark spot 
of a minor phrase, now an open space of the major. Dissonances 
as by paths, for a moment, seem to lure us away from the 
main theme. This analogy to a path is sufficient to 
ill'- ■ irate the great adventure of a sonata. The composer 
chooses a definite melodic pat!.., which seems quite simple 
and delightful. By the use of related keys, by dissonance, 
by syncopation, by changing the ending he endeavors to 
heighten the emotional nature of the sonata. Sometimes 
as in part 2. the unexpected changes follow quickly and in 
an unexpected manner and the emotional effect is 

In part 1. there are not so many and the hearer 


intensified. 




- 84 - 


is carried along by the delicacy and beauty of the curroundings 
(in tliis particular- part like the play of mooubearns on 
rippling water). The good composers know how far to go 
in either iirection , when tc calm our emotional natures 
and when to arouse them.. 

This i the life factor in a piece of music. 
Rhythm in music has b-en defined as repetition of accent, 
but this is only a mechanical manifestation-. True rhythm 
is the life factor in music. It is produced by all the 
means mentioned , above each of which heighten the emotional 
effect,but it must be to just the right amount to arouse 
our inner nature, so that we can respond, if such is possibly, 
depending on our mood at the time. Evidently to appreciate 
such music as a Sonata, some training in appreciation is 
necessary. While it is not possible for all to learn to 
play such a selection, it is possible by a study in melody, 
harmony and form,-the intellectual factors,- and with a fine 
sense of rhythm,- a feeling factor,- that such can be 
thoroughly appreciated. 

CHAPTER IX. 

EMOTION AND EHYTHM. 

Of the three,-literature, music and art 7 - 
music more directly arouses the emotions, . Nov/, ejections 
are largely hereditary modes of response in the organism. 

If nature had provided us with adequate means, to meet 


successfully any situation, life would be a perfect calm. 


The intellect and the muscular system would make up a perfect 
machine. It would move with slow monotonous regluarity. 

The rhythm in our nature would likewise he steady and 
uniform. All that makes for change in our response, that 
e^ives us a personality, that makes the prediction of our 
acts more uncertain, would he lost. That which arouses us 
to almost superhuman effort, that makes for great achievement 
that could not he deearned of at the ordinary working level, 
would nevei' take place. He^ice that which stimulates our . c 
activity to the right amount, that makes us feel for others, 
gives us personality, temperment, individuality, and to a 
certain extent makes us more livable, must he traced hack 
to emotional factors, not necessarily primitive, hut trained 
and developed. 

These sympathetic factors are largely 
rhythmic, because they are living and pulsate life through the 
veins of cur nature. They express the life, the fire, that 
fills the otherwise inei't form v\rith the pathos, the sadness, 
or the joy, the hopes, the yearnings, the strivings of the 
soul. These are not something we think through, hut something 
which must he felt to be appreciated. The aim of appreciation 
is. that the reader not only may understand the creation 
hut feeH the emotions that warmed the heart of the creator 
of the art who was thus moved to express them in artistic 
form.. These emotions are not baaed on external forms, 
they are not pleasures hut become a pei’manent condition 
in our being; an integral part or element in our organism. 



- 86 - 


How can the emotions be best expressed in 
literature, music and art? That is, how can the emotions 
of the author be best conveyed to the listener, or the 
reader? It is not the intention go discuss the relative 
value of the intellectual and emotional factors in understanding 
and appreciating art. These can never be separated; they 
are coordinate, but both are of great value. On the one hand, 
there is a. desire to make the thought clear and on the other , 
to appreciate the feelings and thus to enter sympathetically 
into the heart of the author. By the latter we understand 
the impulses that prompted him.to thus express himself and 
by the former to understand what is so expressed. As we 
enter into the thoughts of the writer and catch the feelings 
and rhythmically harmonize them with ourselves, in just 
the extent that this is possible ,do we appreciate his creation, 
Some may prefer Wordsworth to Tennyson simply because they 
can catch the spirit of the one better than the other. 

The rhythms of their natures more nearly synchronize with 
that of the one than the other. If our natures are almost 
wholly intellectual it is doubtful ii we can appreciate 
either of them,in the true sense of the word* 

The purpose of a work of literary art is 
not to instruct but to give scope to the emotions in the 
realm of the ideal and the beautiful. Hence the intellectual 
elements exist, that the mind may the more readily understand 
the author, and with the understanding clear appreciation 
may then ue brought about through the 1 eelings,ine 



- 87 - 


contrary is true in certain kinds of prose. There the argument^ 
the clarity of thought,is More essential and only the emotional 
elements . re . - to accentuate, to Lz nd react on 

our feelings as a reinforcement to the argument. In poetry, 
the feeling may he brought out by inflections of the voice, 
accenting here and depressing there. These are but muscular 
manifestations- of rhythm by the vocal organs. The rhythms of 

speech are only a part of our natures but they are a very 

( 3 ) 

important part. If we can develope not only the voice 
muscles but the whole bodily organism to respond rhythmically 
to the poem, then is full appreciation possible. How this 
development can only be attained by proper education, much 
in the same manner as the muscles of the organs of' speech 
are controlled to express all the varieties of feeling and 
emotion. It is a long uphill road, for through the ages 
there has been a desire to repress all fcodily movement, to 
debase the body,as it were,and rely almost wholly on the 
inflection of the voice. The consequence is that people 
have largely lost the power to appreciate fully. When a 
discussion takes place of the beauty of a literary work ox’ 
of a fine selection of music, or a work of fine art, it is 
almost wholly based on the intellectual character of the 
creation. 3?ew catch the emotional content in such a way 
that it displaces the intellectual factors. The conscious 
rhythm of life is well nigh dead. 

In music and fine art the above is equally 

true. If a selection of music is played with metronomic 

Cl) is tb Hya vo ur(s f-iTtvc© ^ * 




- 88 - 


accuracy of time, or with exact fingering etc. it may he 
smooth and finished hut it may never arouse any rhythmic 
response, naturally the composer of the music makes 
provision for the emotional factors, now accelerating, now 
diminishing the time, now loud now soft, hut the mechanical 
observation of these restrictions will never atouse the 
emotions in the listener as they should he. The player 
must rhythmically enter into the emotional spirit of the 
creator, catch the deeper feelings, that he endeavored to 
express in a mechanical way arid render them with feeling. 

Ke may not he using the vocal muscles sis in a literary express* 
ion, hut he must likewise use the whole muscular system. 

Hot that the muscular movement may fee markedly evident, hut 
sufficient that his whole being pulsates with the rhythm of t 
the composition. Then music will he spontaneous, glow with 
life giving stimulus, pulsate the heart of.the hearers and 
produce a like response in the hearers to that in the artist. 
Today the only muscular response,in most listeners,is one of 
time. There is a desire when a selection of marked tome is 
played to keep step, as it were, with it, -a primitive 
habit-. This is in no way what is meant by muscular 

synchronization of the emotions. It is vastly finer, more 
subtle and more refining,and conveys the nuances of emotions 
more in harmony with those of the composer. 

All works of art .will remain quintescent 
if not dead unless vitalized by rhythm. It is the transferring 
factor of the emotions of the artist to the hearer. By it a 







- 89 - 


connection .is established, that makes the two harmonize and 
synthetically understand each other. The more intense we feel 
the rhythm of a work of art, the more is our nature stimulated 
the more intense our feeling, and the whole work, as it were, 
becomes a living factor in us. It is through rhythm that 
we experience something of the glow of the artist’s soul in 
the creative form. We can share with him the joy of 
creation. 


CHAPTER X. 

THE INTELLECT AND RHYTHM. 

It may he generally assumed that the mind 
during its process of evolution , developed the intellectual 
qualities on a. level, to a large extent at least, with the 
emotions. Intellectual development of the race may he 
measured, by its expression in scientific 

advancement and in the growth and development of the arts. 

In like manner the development of rhythm from the crude 
forms, to the more complex innerstructure has kept pace with 
the intellect. In some individuals the intellectual 
factors are more in evidence than the emotional, and in 
others the reverse may be observed. put in either the 
rhythm may be refined; the one in that it is smooth, 
unruffled, steady, while in the other it is likely to be 
more manifest in intensity. The mind has gradually turned, 
from the more primitive emotions, to the employment of 



- 90 - 


elements that come only by experience, through the analysis 
of situations and by making finer descriTrvrnati 0 : 51 s, that are 
intellectual in character. The stimuli that provokes 
primitive emotion and response have been broken up, analysed 
and the inner meaning has- been determined to a considerable 
ext ent. 

In tracing this development during the stages 
of human progress in all probability the undeveloped mind 
centered its attention upon the stimuli having the 
strongest instinctive basis. In language the nouns and verbs 
were probably 'the earliest forms. In music those rhythmic 
elements with strong accents and regular time would appeal. 
And in art definitejhues and bright colors would provoke 
the needed response. In all these the finer qualitative 
distinctions in language music or att are lost in the 
larger emotional factors of primitive rhythm. 

Intellectual development was carried along . 
as the primitive emotional factors were modified, and the 
instinctive tendencies to action were brought under control. 
The intellect at first was largely passive, but by degrees 
became more active and descriminatively analytic, as 
various experiences provoked reflection. Aental inquiry was 
by no means confined to purely intellectual pursuits - 
perhap^designated today as “scientific enquiry”- but 
extended to all phases of the mind } s activities. In contrast 
to the scientific the two chief fields would be the 
religious and the artistic. Without attempting to trace 
the philosophy of them through the ages, there was a 



- 91 - 


gradual increase of the thought content and a reduction of 
primitive rhythm to intellectual analysis. This process 
was not altogether a conscious one. There may have "been 
no real problem to work out but it was rather an unconscious 
keeping with the natural intellectual development. This 
did not rob rhythm of its rightful place as the life 
giving factor in art, rather it was exalted and made distinctly 
human. 

Reference has already been made to the method 
by which this development has been achieved in each of these 
manifestations of art. In fine art there has been a selection 
and organization of the elements, an arrangement of lines, 
tones, and colors that give it significance. This has been 
carried to such an extent that some assert that these elements 
are the chief formative factors, in rhythm but it is 
doubtful that such a contention, as that these are the only 
factors, can be maintained. A selection.and technique of 
color may elicit admiration. Sometimes a selection of 
unusual elements, treated in a highly artistic manner to 
indicate an unusual professional skill may be admired. 

But these are not elements in rhythm. The true artist has 
a different end in view, that of expressing his feelings 
towards nature and conveying these to us, so that we may■ 
understand the beauty that he saw, rather than of 
exhibiting a fine style, and an exceptional ability in 
technique. Such art has no soul. There is nothing that is 


living in it. These qualities 


are difficult to analyze and 




- 92 - 


define, but are all contained in what might be called 
the intellectual factors as opposed to the emotional factors. 
Only when the artist feels the significance of the subject 
anc can organize it, with all the skill of his intellectual 
nature, although never loosing sight of the elements which 
evoked the emotional response, can there be a true work of 
art.If he has the genius to see the universal heart of 
mankind, the feelings of the race, and can express them in 
the rhythm that makes the creation live and be appreciated 
by all; if he has the intellectual qualities to so 
organize these elements,then there are possibilities of a 
masterpiece. 

The same elements are present in poetry or 
literature, which may be considered as the most intellectual 
of the arts. Meter is an intellectual device in poetry, 
thatfssatisfies our judgment for the moment that it is poetry. 
It was originally adapted, probably, when man memorized and 
transmitted poetry orally, and later was largely perfected by 
the Greeks who saw the beauty of style and form, in meter. 

But besides meter there has been formulated all the laws of 
style and expression that are fundamental in writing, such as 
unity in the sentence or stanza or paragraph, grammatical 
arrangement of words and the rhetorical composition of the 
selection. But without attempting to exjjlain the 
various intellectual factors in poetry, suffice to call 
attention to this one factor that defferentiates poetry 

The outstanding fact in poetry is its emotional 


from prose. 



- 93 - 


unity, that of prose is its intellectual unity. The 
purpose of the latter is to convince the reader by the clearness 
and lo^ic of the argument, that the position is sound; the 
former is to control the emotions of the reader, and all 
figures of speech, all illusions, the images, the whole 
composition is an emotional unit, especially in lyric poetry, 
that we may catch the rhythm and feel the significance of the 
poem. 

Now these intellectual factors by which the 
rhythm of the poem may be appreciated are very necessary. 

The content must have originality and significance and it 
must be expressed in a style that has unity, strength and 
grace or harmony. The thought should be clearly expressed 
without excess of verbiage and figure. Each word and 
sentence should be significant and marshalled in an 
orderly manner. The writer must be master of the subject; 
be able to see the goal and know the clearest, most 
direct method to attain it; and with this mastery, there 
must be that abundance of ideas, that richness of thought 
which prevents over elaboration of style and ornamentation. 

With good taste the writer will express himself in a 
pleasing manner, sensitive to fine shades of feeling and 
elements of beauty. Of all these factors, significant 
truth or content is of greatest importance; this alone 
evidences the work of genius. 

This last gives the important truth of 
poetry. There must be significant truth, fresh and 



- 94 - 


spontaaeous; the vision of the artist. With intellectual 
powers he will then toe able to express this vision, this 
strong impulse, this passion, in a language that will cause 
these ideas to pulsate our natures. That is, the rhythm of 
his language will connect the soul of the lyric with the 
pulsating nature of our nervous systems so that we may feel 
the significance of the thought,, the fine shades .of feeling, 
the grace and elegance of the expression. Above and beyond 
this too will toe caught the finer rhythms that pulsate 
through the cosmic universe. 

CHAPTER XI. 

RHYTHM A1ED APPRECIATION. The Renaissance of Rhythm. 

Since the days of the schoolmen one aim in 
education has toeen to develope the reasoning" powers. 

Much has toeen written about deductive and inductive 
reasoning and it may toe readily admitted that one of the 
aims of education is to develope clear and orderly thinkers . 
But should one regard this discipline as largely the goal of 
attainment in education? This was perfectly true in the 
days of the schoolmgn, when the sum-total of knov/ledge 
was prescribed and it was dangerous to wander far afield. 
Today, however, thinking as a process, has all fields of 
investigation at its disposal. But thinking in an analytical 
way only touches one side of the problem. We may analyze the 
creations of another, tout what about creating ideas? 





- 95 - 


While the reasoning ability is being developed, the imaginatr: 
ion is slowly loosing ground from lack of exercise. We 
can analyze the literature of others but are sadly lacking 
in imagination when an attempt is made to create new 
compositions. Even music is worse by conparison. Many learn 
to play the compositions of some of the ablest masters, but 
how few have any imagination to create music. This is but 
natural since nearly all education is a training in 
analytical thinking. When a series of themes are given to 
the average high school pupils,one or two of which may 
require some original work, _ow few select these in 
comparison with those who select subjects which are based 
on some piece of literature where the only difficulty is 
to analyze the chapter and rewrite in their own language. 

The same difficulty is to be found in 
fine art. Years are spent in perfecting drawing but how 
few fea-y<e ,anj ideas to express. Hence much of 'the art is 
a direct copy from nature with slight analysis and 
selection. To give the average artist a theme on which to 
plan a picture that would have real artistic merit, 
that would suggest new ideas in expression, what trouble 
would arise I They have never worked in that manner before* 
Since the Gothic forms in architecture, how few really 
new creations in buildings have been made, apart from the 
brick and steel structure. Men have analyzed the 
structures of the past, made new arrangements, and 
changes here and there, but nothing radically new in 



- 96 - 


ar chi'Lecture of artistic worth has been created. We can 
analyze and synthasize hut if the imagination is dormant , 
we cannot create. 

Here and there are exceptions but in general 
the truth holds. What then is the source of this difficulty 
and how may a remedy be brought about? In the first place, 
art, literature and music must become a living language, 
a pulsating manifestation of thoughts,and emotions. The 
feeling for rhythm, the creative essence, the harmony 
with nature should be the objective. The.artists 
aim should be to harmonize himself with the theme he 
desires to express in color; to harmonize himself with 
the rhythms of life, which will animate his artistic 
consciousness, giving clarity to his ideas and life to 
his creations. The value of a ?/ork of art is not in its 
display of originality in style, which is wholly an 
intellectual factor, but in the sincerity of the artistes 
desire to express the beauty which is manifest. ,He 
forgets himself, his heart is warmed, he forgets his 
methods, his systems, his analysis and with his 
imagination aflame and heart aglov; and his intellect 
alive he creates that direct,spontaneous, living work of 
art. 

On the other hand what shall be the nature 
of education in appreciation of literature, music and art? 
The life of a ?/ork of art lies in its rhythm and it is 



- 97 - 


along this line that true appreciation should "begin. 

This has "been attempted in our schools in literature hy 
dramatization. But while the thought of the selection, t 
the intellectual content,, is carried out with a 
considerable degree of correctness there is no evidence 
that any preparation is made that the physical movements 
may harmonize with the emotions. This is manifest in a 
recitation by a pupil when everyone is conscious that the 
motions of the body or limbs are mechanical. True appreciation 

of rhythm can only be brought about when true physical 

CO 

intrepretation is possible. When the physical form is . 
trained and the organism awakened by the rhythm, the 
nervous resistance forgotten and the whole system 
coordinated with the feelings, then will appreciation of 
literature take on new life. We are today conscious 
of mistakes in promounciation of words but incapable of 
seeing the incongruities of muscular movements and 

rhythm. Only when gestures, postures and movements of the 
limbs are harmonized and all the motions refined, will the 
acting call up the images in the selection. 

In like manner, music more than literature 
may be best appreciated through the rhythms of the body. 
Musical appreciation should begin before the formal study 
of music is commenced. The child should be trained to live 
music, to make it his own, so that by his movements he 

shall naturally intrepret it. The aim is, that the 

I The 13elr\&vourisHc of- th e tiniby op the or^Q- 

IS l\ere 























::'v '*0 











. **»«:« 


















- 98 - 


eraotions which have inspired the musical rhythms should he 
reproduced in bodily form and the same inward force 
should animate the audible music and the inner rhythm through 
gestures* Then the ear will register sounds, the images 
that follow such registration will develop^ an aesthetic 
activity, when the muscular and neural organization are 
harmoniously developed according to the laws of rhythm. 

This may seem like a retrograde step*for in 
ancient music the rhythmic elements did follow the rhythms 
of the body. In later years, perhaps during the Christian 
era, when the aim was to spiritualize music, by suppressing 
the physical nature, the muscular representations of rhythm 
ww&lost sight of. In due time the body became 
absolutely incapable of response and a purely intellectual 
education in music was developed. We have lost in 
creative ability, in the power to feel the pulse of music 
and to synchronize our natures with it. The ability to 
follow the melody, to give it expression in a somewhat 
mechanical manner has taken the place of the expression of 
rhythm. This is well in its place but it is a one 
sided development. True there has been spontaniety of 
action in the muscular system in play but never as an inter¬ 
pretative or appreciative feature in the arts. 

Our temperment is largely the physical t'hythms 
in our nature. The rhythms of the body are a 



- 99 - 


syncronization of time and space. In music 
the emphasis has been placed on rhythm of time. When 
the true elements, so long divorced,are again united 
then we will appreciate more fully the beauty of a 
work of art. We have had a Renaissance of the 
intellect; we need a Renaissance of the emotions* 










*x 




















