For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


A HISTORY OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
IN MORMON COMMUNITIES OF SOUTHERN ALBERTA 


by 


Dean Cook 
Westlock, Alta. 
April 1, 1958. 


DIVISION OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 




mbbmiemis 










UNIVERSITY OF ILLIRTA 
LJLRaRY 


Regulations Reg-a-ding fee sms a nd iss _£t.iti oris 

[.. s C2 t copies >j tl . £ s a t i; s r t a ti < ■ 1 * for I', a, to r ? s 
and Doctor 1 s dor roes deposited in th.; Uriivor sity of Alberta 
Libi iry, as the fficial Copy of the ''acuity of Grac.uat ti lies, 

13 b - , i 1 1 d In t hi . f r i c 5 a in ■ 1 <>om only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
pupei vi£ ion the worl was c one. Some pai t ^ents are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, ;Jhrough the inrorlibrary loan 
service of th University of Alberta Library. 

These triesos and dissertations are to be used onlg with due 
re ar to priority rights of the author. Lritten permission of 
Cl:; author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages ars used. 

etc aission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
published work. 

This..diesis or dissertation has been usod in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 
user. 


Please sign below: 


Signature 


ins titution 


Date 




























































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/historyofeducatiOOcook 






SYNOPSIS 


The author’s primary aim in this research project was 
to investigate the history of secular and religious institu¬ 
tions of learning in the Mormon area of Southern Alberta, and 
to relate the history of their development, in so far as 
possible, to general movements which were taking place in 
Alberta at the various periods in their growth. 

A minor aim of the study was to examine these institu¬ 
tions in an attempt to determine to what extent they resembled 
the modern school in this province, ^he writer finds that 
there were various elements of the progressive system of educa¬ 
tion present in these institutions. The attempt to put into 
practice ideas similar to John Dewey’s concept of ’’child-centred" 
activities was noticeable in this area from a comparatively 
early period. 


’ 

rx • 

. ■■. . j - ' ' ' ■ ' ' ' 

... y., ........ lov.o ... -ai.. io \a- 0 o oiri ad; 

_ . *. : , . ■ :■ . . . • - ' - t • •’ . <' 

. ' C 


..1 ©?• Ou aBV/ y.ricf ‘ic alia aianiaa A 

i 2fl0i 


. . ...x .: 

^ , >i 1 o 

.... . *. • . ■ . a „■... •. ■' 'i . o' ' ■ b. -a • O'aax.a 


- m ' : ■ a -• a. Xi c 


. ' . , . . . ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ ; : o:aa a. .a..'.r 

•• ' a. V : ? ... ■ . ■■ '■ ' - a • •...•■/• :• a: 

' 


'V.a . 




THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A HISTORY OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
IN MORMON COMMUNITIES OF SOUTHERN ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 

BY 

DEAN COOK 

WESTLOCK, ALBERTA, 


APRIL 1, 1958 













. 


I ~ .. ■ ■ 








: 

! Z ; ' 












ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The writer wishes to express his appreciation for 
the encouragement and the helpful advice received during 
the preparation of this work* He particularly desires to 
acknowledge the helpful guidance given him by Dr. B. E. 
Walker, Mr. W. Pilkington, and Mr. B. Y. Card of the Univ¬ 
ersity of Alberta Faculty. The writer also wishes to 
express his gratitude to the pioneer residents of the 
Cardston, Magrath and Raymond areas for the pertinent inf¬ 
ormation they gave him regarding the early history of the 
Cardston region, to Mrs. Vern Shaw of Cardston for her 
valuable information relevant to the early pioneer teaching 
conditions in Western Canada, and to Mr. Everard Edmonds of 
Edmonton for facts concerning the early development of the 
Cardston school system. 


ii 


1 . . ,. 

ro.Xo.?.XO'^<iOe 3 Id ' 

, 

- 

id . . i s i t ? .■ * i 

• j 'i': „■ ■. \K . f . a: 

- . 

lo >■,£,. y±'U i 
aari ao'i ,r - ' ■ *'-* ;f'i ! 

\y:ii:dvxzed -i. :)•:•■• •.'. o.-U dr, 

' t 

JA i i S £ V , >1 ' * 



;,j Cu; : ■ .Oija X-J' ?*r 
. . ' . ■» 




rid .. Id 

4 ‘‘'i xx'. ■ ri* a ■ 1 

;; - . j. 'V 


• : 1 ' ■ ■'' 

* . • ,i )Oi.i: : d‘ 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. THE STORY OF THE MORMON MIGRATION INTO SOUTHERN 

ALBERTA. 1 

II. THE FIRST PIONEER SCHOOLS IN THE MORMON COMMUNI¬ 
TIES. 9 


Pioneer Schools under Church Control 
1888 - 1897 

Pioneer Schools under State Control after 
1897 

Summary 

III. DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN MORMON 
COMMUNITIES UNDER GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION FROM 
THE TURN OF THE CENTURY UNTIL 1916. 21 

Early Teaching Conditions as Described by 
Pioneer Cardston Teachers 

The Organization of the First Publicly 
Owned School in Cardston 

Mormon Efforts to Staff Their Schools with 
Local Teachers 

Teachers* Salaries and the Rising Cost of 
Education 1915 and 1916 

School Population 

Building Programmes 

Out of School Educational Institutions 

Standard of Instruction Received at Card¬ 
ston 

Summary 

IV. THE CHURCH PRIVATE SCHOOL — THE KNIGHT ACADEMY.. 49 

The Purpose behind the Mormon Private 
School System 

The Academy Building 


iii 









r j. 








' j 7 .71 !ff&r . JU 

■j n -7; v : : .o-* 


: !! i. « .UV .1. 



77 7 


£ ' : 


- > ' 








CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Administration and Curriculum 
Student Costs and Accommodation 
The Curriculum 
Teaching Personnel 
Inservice Training of Teachers 
Graduation Requirements 
Student Discipline 

Student Activity and the Extra-Curricular 
Programme 

Guidance and Personal Development 

Recruitment Programme 

The Academy Closes 

Reasons for Closing 

Summary 

V. THE GROWTH OF GOVERNMENT CONTROLLED SCHOOLS 

1917 - 1956. 88 

Accommodation of Students 1917 - 1936 

The School Population 

Staffing of Schools 

The Curriculum 1917 - 1936 

Extra-Curricular Activities 

Teachers* Salaries 

The Introduction of the Large Unit and 
the Effect on the Cardston Area 

Summary 

VI* CENTRALIZATION FOR EDUCATIONAL ADVANTAGES IN 

MORMON COMMUNITIES... 106 

Concentration of Mormons in Farm Villages 

iv 














- ■ - 1 - ; 





iOOO:K 


lOOl' : o 


- i i ■ 


lUl 


■C)T 



Jo 

■i' .'iij ; 










CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Centralized Control of One Room Rural 
Schools in the Magrath and Cardston 
Regions 

Employment of Circuit Instructors of 
Vocational Courses 

Summary 

VII. THE CHURCH SEMINARY. 121 

The History of the Seminary Movement 

Administration of the Seminary and 
Institute from Utah 

Local Administration of the Seminary 
and Institute 

The Course of Studies and Objectives of 
the Seminary 

The Role of Extra-Curricular Activities 
in the Seminary 

Summary 

VIII. THE MORMON CHURCH AUXILIARY ORGANIZATIONS... 136 
Primary Association 
Sunday Schools 
Relief Society 

Young Men’s Mutual Improvement Association 

Young Women’s Mutual Improvement Associa¬ 
tion 

Missionary System 


IX. CONCLUSIONS. 151 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 156 

APPENDIXES. 159 


v 











j 


: ) ' 


.. .1 



■ ‘T 


J 






.. v ,i o 


■ ! ;i 


£ ' ' to 



. : 


,Dl , *_ 


. 


x j -. 1 : •) 


x ■ j 




J-'vt.Xi j 









INTRODUCTION 


The approach to this thesis is historical. The writer, 
in the first chapter, endeavours to give a brief account of the 
history of the Cardston area which was settled by Mormon pioneers 
in the year 1886, In the second and third chapters he discusses 
the history of the schools in this region which were under Church 
control until about the year 1897* 

The fourth chapter gives an account of the Knight Academy 
which was operated in the town of Raymond for thirteen years, A 
description of the curriculum and the extra-curricular activities 
of this institution gives the reader some idea as to the efforts 
put forth by the Latter-day Saints to develop the student 1 & talents 
personality and character as well as his intellect. 

The fifth chapter deals with the growth of the public 
schools in this area between the years 1917 and 195&, This 
section takes into account some of the general movements which 
were taking place in the field of education in Alberta during 
this period. The Mormon efforts to centralize for social, edu¬ 
cational and religious advantages are discussed in Chapter VI, 

These attempts to centralize are related in this chapter to 
the consolidation movements which were prevalent in the province 
prior to and during World War I, The latter part of Chapter VI 
deals with the organization of the large unit of administration 


vi 



OUO: 










. 


y 


, 

.. ... .;j... . i ‘ ;. • 1 •. . r 1( v; r xcoli: .;.0 

, , . ■ ' ; . - ; ■ 


j 


j , ■i. •Or 


ciT 


; ■ 0 * i i. • L-'.t ‘ L : • \, 1 .D . 




0.i ‘S' )T.i ■: :■>' .0 • j :,.0; o ; r ■ O'. r : »i' f V< _v.0 .to 

... ;) ... j v . : . ■•< o. 


. . 


Ol i\:;,j 'i ' i.it 


j. : -I . ; 


Oti >T3 


JO . 


to 


■-» V 'V 


■ a I 

■ - 


1 


■■ ■ I ., 


■ 




. _ •, .o. 








O':. X 


! i 


V” 


L 


ts 


■ 


■ 






■■nr o,o 





'i c : i , r. .' . -I- 


’ -i i 






l 









vii 


in the Cardston area in 1936 and the expansion of the school 
systems of the larger Mormon communities., 

The seventh and eighth chapters describe the Mormon 
Church organizations which contribute to the "all-round n devel¬ 
opment of the student* In these sections the writer attempts 
to relate the various elements of the Mormon philosophy of 
education to the theories of certain American and European 
educationalists who have exercised an influence on the trends 
towards progressive education both in Canada and the United 
States. 

The writer has endeavoured to relate this study to the 
general history of this region and to certain movements in the 
history of education in Alberta. Local data were obtained from 
old newspapers, bulletins, school board minutes and private 
interviews with several pioneer teachers and residents of the 
Cardston area. 

Information relevant to the history of the Mormon 
Church organizations and their administration was obtained 
from various theses and reference books which are in the 
libraries of the University of Alberta and the Brigham Young 
University in Provo, Utah. 


0 j i 0 -■1 0 . U i 0 j ■ J . >' . 7 ' 7 . ■ - 

. D.de 

* : . 0-10 > : 0 

.... oi.2.1.0 .. ;:*c■ :0i 0! 0.0 10 0, x. J 07; 

.to c, ' . J • d 0.7.o, • ;> '..'0 J-."" o:Lo -i: 

■ 20 7.0.0 0 0.03 000 gx :1 

.. . 1 ' . • h:cLi 


.CvJo . of .ggo c /vsldoeu 

. . 

'20 .. ;..:,... .;0 J 0 ) i • 

. 

.i:joqoJ.. i'■. j. :i/‘: ■' ri .. x x dv. 2 o 

.... . 0 - ..'.. V Li' . . ' ' C 7 7 . 

r. 1 . 10• •: o o. ic ‘ ':t... .<‘ ::>•. 

. 

b<-d !:r*:TJ odd h i 1 ;00 $C ::1: U 0 j . 

■ r|a 1 . . . ... 

. .-j .J 


0- 0 , 7 - 0' 00 j 0.0- 0 {■; 

00’.;.- ;..I ...J liiisvoi- .,.2. 0 1 ;:q;; 

' 70 • 0 ’.V . 0 ..; 000 ! ... ' J. . 0 . 0:170 

- 

t f . ■ . 


- • - n c’ Hu. . ' , Xo 


7.7 J 10 - c. 7 - 7 .. 0 0 . 0 0 !....' . 7 X 011 D 0 0 0 .07 

. . . .... • .0 .00 00I0 7000..': 7...00.0 r . 

• 

0 -- ‘0 Oi'b lx ' 0 ... .;,,:..0 ' .:.u Go 

... 

'j ' • : .-00 01 .).£0 :J J Xitc 0 .XHiidiXG 0.1 

-7 1 ’ -00 .000 0"00:1 •: . 0 00'.; 000, :u: 2 : 

7 - - 0' 0 ■ 0 ;:7 .: i 00 j v i £ .00 0 ■ 0 

. - 0 ; 70. 0. . 0: v 1 c j i j ... ■ Vi : i j: .0 v : 2 0 0: t 


x - L - VJ j ;.vj . \) 7. ..07 ^ 0 . 000 7'V _,i:0.0 Q f'i.J ’.i'O Lo.i’V^ 70..,. 

. • ■: 0 . . 0: 00 vjj, •:. 



CHAPTER I 


THE STORY OF THE MORMON MIGRATION 
INTO SOUTHERN ALBERTA 

Although the main purpose of this thesis is to give an 
account of the development of various religious and secularized 
educational institutions in the main centres of population in 
"Mormon Country", the writer feels that it is necessary to de¬ 
vote some space to the history of the Latter-day Saint migra¬ 
tion into this area. The section of Alberta which is commonly 
known to the residents of this province as "Mormon Country" is 
bounded on the south by the Milk River Ridge, on the west by 
the Rocky Mountains, on the north by the Oldman River and the 
south branch of the Saskatchewan, and on the east by the Cypress 
Hills. 

In spite of the fact that the first Mormon pioneers 
concentrated in this region of the province, and by means of 
irrigation projects contributed much to the development of 
this territory, the term "Mormon Gountry" is somewhat of a 
misnomer when regarded literally. Only one-third of this area 
was settled by the Latter-day Saints. The larger cities and 
many of the towns and villages were populated by pioneers of 
non-Mormon religious sects. 

In Canada and the United States materialistic gain has 
generally been considered to be the motivating factor behind 


/ 





: r 






:u ;>i 


f 




a . 


t 




- 






' 












- 2 - 


the development of a frontier region. However, a student of 
the history of Utah will undoubtedly agree that the Mormon 
migration into this state differed from the ordinary frontier 
movement in the respect that it was motivated by religious 
rather than economic advantage. Similarly the first movement 
of the Latter-day Saint settlers into Western Canada was 
primarily for religious advantages, prompted by political action 
on the part of the American government.^ At the same time, 
however, the movement gave the majority of the emigrant Latter- 
day Saints an economic outlet for expansion, since the frontiers 
of the United States were closed by 1890, and all suitable farm¬ 
land in Utah had been occupied even prior to this date. 

The leader of the first Mormon migration into the Card- 
ston area was Charles Ora Card, a pioneer of Cache Valley, Utah. 
On September 14, 1886> Card left Logan, Utah, to find a new 
home on British soil for himself and his friends. First travel¬ 
ling through Washington, Oregon and Southeastern British 


Joseph F. Smith, Essentials in Church History , Salt 
Lake City, The Desert Book Company, 19^-6, p. 592. 

The Edmunds Bill. 

In March 1882, the American Congress passed a bill known 
as the Edmunds Bill, introduced into the senate by George F. 
Edmunds of Vermont. This measure not only made punishable the 
contracting of plural marriage, but also polygamous living, which 
was designated as "unlawful cohabitation”. The punishment for 
contracting a plural marriage remained the same as in the law of 
1862 — a fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment for five 
years, or both at the discretion of the court. 

Card and some of the early settlers of the Cardston area 
had violated the Edmunds Bill and were subject to prosecution 
south of the Canadian border. 









( 








c 


c 






- 3 - 


Columbia, he proceeded to journey through Calgary on his way 

to Southern Alberta, and on October 24, 1886, he camped at the 

2 

mouth of Lee*s Creek, the present site of Cardston. With 
Card on this early expedition were Bishop Isaac Zundal and 
Elder James W. Hendricks. These men had been advised by the 
President of the Mormon Church in Utah, John Taylor, to seek 
a new haven in Canada rather than one in Mexico. Taylor was 
born at Milnthorpe, England, and he had come to Eastern Canada 
where he lived for a number of years before his conversion to 
the Latter-day Saint Church. Consequently his patriotic sen¬ 
timents toward Britain at this time were still strong. 

Card and his associates, having been guilty of violating 
the Edmunds Act passed by the American Congress in 1882, saw in 
this spot on Lee*s Creek a haven of retreat, where they could be 
free from government prosecution south of the Canadian border. 

In this area they could rear their families in accordance with 
their religious convictions. In May, 188?> Card, Thomas E. 
Ricks, Thomas Smith and Neils Monson took “squatters” rights 
at the present site of Cardston. On June 3> 1887, the main 
company of emigrants arrived — ten families which comprised 
forty-one persons.^ “In this party were Card t s wife, Zina 

2 

Department of Economic Affairs, E conomic Survey of the 
Town of Cardston . Bulletin, Edmonton, 195 T, p. 2. 

3 Ibid. 











- If - 

Young (daughter of Brigham Young who led the Mormons into the 

Utah Valley), his two year old son Joseph Young and stepson 

4 

Stirling Williams"# 

The land was immediately surveyed by E.R. Miles, and re¬ 
surveyed by J.S. Dennis in 1887 . The construction of homes 
began at once# The first home was occupied by Thomas R. Leavitt. 
In later years the possibilities for farming and ranching in 
this area attracted many more Mormon settlers to such outlying 
areas as Hartley, Glenwoodville, Hill Spring, Mountain View, 
Leavitt and Woolford. The community of Aetna, near Cardston, 
was at first settled by Scandinavian non-Mormons, but many of 
these residents later subscribed to the doctrine of the Mormon 
Church# 

The northeastern section of the Latter-day Saint ter¬ 
ritory was settled after the Cardston area; the motivating 
factor behind the migration into this vicinity was economic 

rather than religious# Here the pioneering movement centred 

5 

around the area which is known as the community of Raymond # x 
The growth of the communities of Raymond and Magrath was in¬ 
fluenced by two factors — the discovery of coal at Lethbridge 
and the establishment of the group of Mormon pioneers on Le@ 9 s 
Creek in Cardston# 

^Department of Economic Affairs, Economic Survey of the 
Town of Raymond » Bulletin, Edmonton, 1952, p# 2 






v : s’ ; O •• • L , ■ ; .’■/ A• H i" 


; ; i : v ' : 0< ‘i * ■Lt :> ■' 


U-iJ 


c ’’ • 

■; :ia i t \. r- " ~ 

. ' . . .' . : ' ' , 


. . : . . ■■ 1 

. ; . 

* i 

;■ r O’ 0 ' :'C j / ' . L :t i ' .! 

0.1 aoi-f.ncm'c :; vlou Jo b& 4 X# axo-> 

? ■ c - ‘ ’ - J c • • 

O. 

l , • ■ i I J 

. . . i . a . : . ■ 


... 


:o, 








( . ... 


.' o.’t < ■; - : , roo 

■ 






. ., . . < , ■ ic . ■. ■. 

— 


o. ' • .: 'O'. «; o: '.; '/ I'.u irooj JOi oo.- •: r 






1 


- : ' < : 


t 1 : .. , . .- .. 





- 5 - 


These pioneers had had experience with irrigation in their 
native Utah; and seeing its advantages in this partially arid 
region of Southern Alberta, they were instrumental in drawing 
the attention of the directors of the North West Irrigation 
Company to its possibilities in this area* 

The coal mines were first discovered at Coal Banks, now 
Lethbridge, by Nick Sheron in 1870. Sir Alexander Galt, his 
son Elliot and C.A* Magrath, employee of the Department of the 
Interior and of the future North West Irrigation Company, became 
interested in the coal mining industry in Lethbridge, and they 
were responsible for the first narrow-gauge railway entering the 
Raymond district in 1901* This railway helped to make the region 
attractive to new settlers from Utah and elsewhere, since it 
made connections with the old Fort Benton trail and entered the 
City of Great Falls, Montana* 

The Gaits, along with Sir Clifford Sifton, minister of 
the Interior, proposed to bring about irrigation in the Leth¬ 
bridge district. With the help of C.A. Magrath, for whom the 
town of Magrath was named, a scheme was devised through consul¬ 
tation with the heads of the Mormon Church whereby irrigation 
canal construction could be tied up with land settlement. This 
project was to provide employment for the Latter-day Saint 

£ 

settlers coming into the Cardston, Magrath and Raymond areas. 


6 i^., P . 3 







- 6 - 

In the latter part of 1897 an agreement was reached whereby 
Church members would construct irrigation canals, accepting 
half payment in cash and half payment in land at $3*00 per 
acre. In 1898 work on the canal headwork began at Kimbal, 
near Cardston, and just after the turn of the century, water 
was being spread over farms in the Magrath, Raymond and Stir¬ 
ling areas. These irrigated farms attracted to the vicinity 
additional settlers who made their homes alongside those who 
had been employed by the irrigation company for canal construc¬ 
tion. 

The townsite of Raymond was chosen by Jesse Knight of 

Tintic, Utah. Knight had recently come into possession of great 

wealth in the coal mining industry. In 1901, as he was riding 

over the new railway line with C.A. Magrath, he thought of the 

possibilities for settlement in this region. By August 11, 

1901, Jesse Knight had encouraged about 1?0 settlers to arrive 

7 

in Raymond. Through the investment of part of his money in 
the Knight Sugar Factory in 1902, he provided the means by which 
the group could provide a living for themselves. The town, was 
named after Jesse Knight*s oldest son, 0. Raymond Knight, who 
later became a prominent citizen of the settlement and the 
organizer of the first stampede in Raymond and In Canada. 

^The Jubilee Committee, The Golden Jubilee of the Town 
of Raymond y Bulletin, Raymond, (June 30, 195l57p* 3 

8 Ibid .. p. 11. 











- 7 - 

The town of Raymond grew very rapidly. In Raymond, 
as well as in the Cardston and Magrath areas, the majority of 
these pioneers were born of Anglo-saxon parents, and they had 
the advantage of being able to speak the English language. 

The remainder of the settlers were converts to the Mormon 
Church who had emigrated from Germany and the Scandinavian 
countries. With them they brought industry as a part of their 
ethnic heritage which enabled them to cope with the numerous 
problems encountered in a frontier area. Homes sprang up 
daily, and it was difficult to obtain lumber fast enough to 
meet the demands of the new settlers. A one-room church, which 
was financed by Jesse Knight, and a school house were among the 
first public buildings to be erected. It is to the growth of 
such educational and character-building institutions that the 
remainder of this thesis will be devoted. 


; m $ ' : - 

a 

. . • 

■ 

. oi 

„ ' ■ : ■ • . ■ ■ ■ 
. / ■. • ■ ■ ‘ c , 

f • ■ ■ . • - , .... . ■ 

' ? • 

* 









I 

nomm M&ijoRAftim v:ri akd iwmm utah 



1 war, loop a 




Calvary 


* a deed 

iCar&gton 


i tfpokano 

'^AmmjTon 


.jOupuy® 


-lie team 


ORtiiGrOH 


billon 


Huntington 


ipaion 


mjv AIM 

















CHAPTER II 


THE FIRST PIONEER SCHOOLS IN THE 
MORMON COMMUNITIES 

PIONEER SCHOOLS UNDER CHURCH CONTROL 1888 - 1897 


Documents dealing with the history of the Mormon Church 
point to the fact that within the Church the education of the 
individual played a very important role. Even in the midst of 
confusion during their migration across the "Plains" towards 
the Utah Valley, this phase of their religious and social life 
was not neglected. Stories relating to this period in their 
history give evidence of the fact that classes were conducted 
for the children in covered wagons where instruction in the 
three ”R f s" and religion was given; 

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the glory 
of God is intelligence, and from the organization 
of the Church, schools were conducted for the mem¬ 
bers who were instructed to obtain out of the best 
books ’words of wisdom* by study and by faith. 1 

Teaching Personnel 

On arriving in Southern Alberta in 1887 these early 
pioneers found themselves at a loss without the organized school 
system to which they were accustomed in Utah. However, schools 
were held in this area while the province was still a part of 


1 Joseph F. Smith, Essentials in Church History . Salt 
Lake City, The Deseret Book Company, 19^5, p. 511. 


















or:..- 





! 


, 


•X , s: 


















the North West Territories. Jane E. Woolf, who later became 
Mrs. Bates, was appointed to be the first teacher* Miss Woolf 
kept her school in a room of one of the first log cabin homes 
to be constructed in the community of Cardston. She taught in 
this private home from February 1888 until January of the year 
1889 when the first small meeting house was completed. With 
the construction of this building, which was to serve the resi¬ 
dents of Cardston as recreation hall, church house and school, 
more classroom space was available, and some attempt was made 
by Card and his Church Council to organize a graded school in 
order that a more specialized training could be given to the 
students within the facilities available. Two teachers instead 
of one were now ”call8d and set apart”, as was the religious 
and democratic custom of this people when matters of common 
interest were at issue* 

As more Mormons arrived, the need for additional teachers 
became more pressing as the school population increased. Thus 
Card and his Church Council ”set apart” two additional teachers, 
Stirling Williams and Mrs. Louis Taylor, to fill the new vacan¬ 
cies. The meeting house in which these pioneer classes were 
taught continued to serve as a school until Cardston School 
District No. 457 was organized on September 30, 1897* 

There is very little in the early records of this com¬ 
munity to indicate that these pioneer teachers had had any pro¬ 
fessional training. However, the following passage, dealing 


c ' * . 

* ' ■ .. * -,a.i. 

: 



. 


■ 1 

• 


: ' aU J 1. ■: ; ' r , 1 

■ 

u ? . * . : 


■ 

... 

■... • v . j ' ■ ■. . ■ 

. 

; ' a,],} 

.: ■ - ■ ■ 

■ - .< . • c . ■• . ■ 


■ a; a i: a.i.. a 1 a c, i •. 



' 

) .a ■ : - ai 

’ V. 



a ■ ;.,f -V ■ Mu 


. ■ ■ ■ ;= j ■ ::: 

- . " ; • • : ( 

■ a ;» ‘ ■ :• a /■ •' .... ; .L / ' ..." . : ‘ •. ; .< ,aa ■; a.‘ oti'.y,* f - w '».r,:a 

* 

' • c ' . 

- . : : 

- 

' , . 

- ■ c « 

. 

. ■ • ■ -a ?, l ca .. u 




- 10 - 


with the history of education in Utah, would indicate that 
university and high school education was available in their 
native state long before their migration into Canada. The 
passage states: 

In February, 1850, the legislature of the provis¬ 
ional government chartered the University of Deseret 
(now the University of Utah) somewhat on the lines of 
the University of Nauvoo. In the spring of 1851 2 

district school houses were built in most of the wards 
of Salt Lake City. As the territory in Utah increased 
in population Brigham Young founded a number of Church 
schools. Among these were the Brigham Young Academy 
at Provo, the Brigham Young College at Logan and the 
Latter Day Saints University (now High School) at Salt 
Lake City.3 

Stirling Williams was the only one of the original 
pioneer teachers who remained with teaching long enough to 
secure certification. He attended the Regina Normal School 
where he obtained a certificate which permitted him to teach 
in the schools in the North West Territories. He continued 
to teach for a number of years in Latter-day Saint communities. 

School Programme and Teaching Conditions 


There are scant documents to which the writer could 
refer in order to obtain information relating to the first 
school at Cardston. Conversations with relatives of some 


2 The term “ward 11 refers to a congregational unit of 
the Latter-day Saint Church. A ward usually consists of 
approximately five hundred members. 


3ibid., p. 571 









' / 




; 


( 


. 

/ 









11 


of the pioneer pupils would indicate that the elementary school 
taught by Jane Woolf was conducted similarly to the "dame schools” 
with which, undoubtedly, the Mormons were familiar in the New 
England States where the Church was first organized. During the 
summer months it was only the smaller children who were kept at 
their books. These primary students numbered at the time only 
seventeen. 

There was no regular course of studies published for the 
teacher*s guidance. Each teacher was left to his own devices in 
designing a programme of studies which could be adapted to the 
age level of the pupils entrusted to him. The subjects in which 
instruction was given were: reading, writing, arithmetic, spel¬ 
ling and the fundamentals of grammar. Spelling "bees" as a 
means of entertainment were very popular at this period, par¬ 
ticularly on Friday afternoons. As in all schools under Latter- 
day Saint administration the students received a through training 
in public speaking. This phase of the child's education has 
always been emphasized in the Mormon Church since it is desirable 
that all Church members acquire the art of delivering public 
Church sermons in the ward, as well as in the Mission fields 
both at home and abroad. 

Williams found that in the senior room the classroom 
atmosphere was generally permissive and that the scholars worked 
with much enthusiasm. The enrollment was much higher during the 




: 




. u . 

. 




if c 








. • 'u.': 


. ■ . 






■ ; '.i: 


. 







12 


winter months when inclement weather conditions caused outdoor 
work to be discontinued, thereby making it possible for the 
older boys in the community to attend classes. 

In the senior room discipline was apparently more in¬ 
formal than that in the junior room or readers (the pupils 
were divided into four readers as were the schools in some 
districts of Ontario at this time). The students were required 
to stand when questioned, and whenever a recitation was in 
order, they were likewise required to rise. In this manner 
they were taught respect for authority. Since books were at 
a premium most of the senior classroom instruction consisted 
of informal discussions. The teacher during this free discus¬ 
sion period endeavored to impart what worldly knowledge he 
possessed to his pupils. 

These early pioneer schools in Mormon centres were sup¬ 
ported at first by "good will" offerings which the head Church 
in Salt Lake City matched "dollar for dollar". The equipment, 
compared with that found in modern schools, was very inadequate. 
It consisted mainly of rough tables and benches donated by par¬ 
ents, a small blackboard and a supply of chalk for the teacher’s 
use, ink for the older pupils’ use when they were required to 
write in "copy books", and slates for the diagramming of sen¬ 
tences, making calculations and doing map work. Text books, 
donated chiefly by the parents from their supply brought up 


.. ; ox. '.Xa) aa.a.:a-, -• oiaa.;. x.■ oaia' axuaiax ..a,. a 

, 

. : ; • ,. ..' : • 8. ' a.’. v.c c > [ 

-- 08 0.8 '■ 

12 ■.■ ■. • 2 - • 

.J ... ; . ;• ... as •.•: ... 1 a.: tint XaXxvxo .-sa 

. * • ' 

. a. . . .."... •. ■'...... . ...'J ......... 

• ...".. . .... a 

. ;*x... . a -.. 

a a;.l.aa...oo '.axcaaa.ooa.x aooiaaolo a aax X j *ucn a.oLass s 

• ' . Lie . 

c.i eoXal. aarx .axe a ^ :aa-;; 2 ca aoaoxoaxaix sox a a ■ ao J:c 

■! . a .o' .o:x . a •. ... ax alcoaoc ,.o. a • x -ao.:oe & cola 

. .Xa j .. • • .: C .... <’i . .'.: X .. . .. aX •' 'X .C ' ..... X . •■CO,'" " v u •.'• !...'C O a a- ' 

... t *. t • . ' ' - , . 

::: o a t x . .. . x. o : , . . : a. 

aa .. , :i as a.i, a 2 ax. a a.: a.: vxaJsa,, jooa; ao oo o a I 

. .: a . a .. .0. . .. , >. .X, 

. * . . X .. .... s 

O'. . . : a 

. 

■ -- - . ■ : o a. •.. : . a,._ .. a: ,a; .a:i •.a .‘-a.. loaaoriajj 



- 13 - 


from Utah, were few, but they were supplemented by additional 

books which were purchased in Lethbridge. There were no 

compulsory laws governing the attendance of pupils at school; 

the parents were, nevertheless, encouraged to see that their 

children took advantage of the meagre educational opportunities 

4 

available. 

PIONEER SCHOOLS UNDER STATE CONTROL AFTER 1897 
Political Movements in the West 

Between the years 1897 and 1905* when part of the North 
West Territories became the province of Alberta, some of the 
schools in the Latter-day Saint communities were rapidly passing 
from the first phase of their development in which they were 
dominated by Church control. During this period in their deve¬ 
lopment they were organized into school districts under the 
supervision and administration of the Council of Public Instruc¬ 
tion of the North West Territories. A good portion of the tea¬ 
chers 1 salaries at this period was being advanced by the Territo 
rial Government to help defray the cost of education to the 
pioneer districts. The following passage outlines in a general 
way the manner in which these grants were allotted: 

By the Ordinance of 1888 a definite percentage of 
the teacher*s salary was assured to each school district, 
the grants being distributed as follows: 

(1) To every school having a daily average attendance 

k 

Archie G. Wilcox, The Founding of the Mormon Community . 
(Thesis, March 15, 1951), p7U3. 





















; 












.{ ' 


f .li o 




h( 




c 


f 






x.; <••• 


i r-d 














C 


■ 






- 14 - 


of not less than six pupils there was granted 75 
per cent of the teacher’s salary if the teacher 
held a first class certificate; 70 per cent of the 
salary if the teacher held a second class certif¬ 
icate, and 65 per £ent if the teacher held a third 
class certificate.5 


There was a movement at this time in the North West 
Territories to encourage the hiring of professionally trained 
teachers and to discourage the employment of unqualified teach¬ 
ing personnel in the classrooms. The following passage pertain¬ 
ing to Inspectors Reports states: 


In the intervening years between 1886 and 1890 
perusal of inspectors reports reveals there was an able 
inspector by the name of Rothwell in Assiniboia. He 
recommended more advanced professional training. To 
him the greatest weakness was the habit prevalent among 
school boards of hiring untrained teachers for the 
younger children. He recommended that the Normal School 
courses last ten weeks only, but that there be a written 
examination at the end of that period. He also recom¬ 
mended that there should be an opportunity during the 
Normal School term for practical teaching before approved 
judges . b 


Teaching Personnel 


The movement towards the professional training of 
teachers in the West had its effect upon the appointment of 
teachers in Mormon wards. Passages from booklets dealing with 
the history of this area from 1887 to 1900 indicate that in all 
wards except Cardston the schools were generally staffed with 


^Isidore Goresky. The Beginning and Growth of the 
Alberta School System, "unpublished Master’s Thesis, University 
of Alberta, I 9 M+." p. 51* 

6 

Ibid .. p. 68 
























, ' 

. 




? 






tsf 





- 15 - 


licensed teachers of non-Mormon faith. The following is a 

list of Latter-day Saint communities and the names of the first 

licensed teachers who came frequently from Eastern Canada to 

staff these schools: 

Leavitt — Miss Tracy Ball 
Aetna — A. MacDonald 
Stirling — M. Schutt? 

Magrath — Zebulon Jacobs 

Zebulon Jacobs was the second licensed teacher to be 
recruited from amongst the ranks of the Latter-day Saints. He 
had attended the Regina Normal School where he obtained certif¬ 
ication which permitted him to teach in schools of the North 
8 

West Territories. 

Teaching Conditions 

Until the year 1902 teaching facilities in the public 
schools under state control were no less meagre than those 
found in the earlier religious schools. The first school in 
the Magrath ward was held in the upper story of the Head and 
Harker Mercantile Company store which was later used as a 
livery stable. The teacher*s task was a difficult one, since 
the classroom seated some forty students from six to twenty 

?The Cardston Jubilee Committee, Picturesque Cardston 
and Envi ro nments , Bulletin, 1951? pp. 26 - 32. 

o 

The writer obtained this information from Sylvester 
Low, Cardston, Alberta. 













. u 


■ 




;J ! 


C 


? 




• . i 




• 16 - 


years of age. It had been some time since some of these students 
had had the privilege of attending school, and as a result they 
were not accustomed to the routine of ordinary classroom proce¬ 
dures. The classes in the smaller communities of Leavitt, 
Mountain View, Aetna and Stirling were likewise held in any 
building available such as spare rooms in private homes or the 
upper story of a grocery store. 

During the year 1902 construction plans were underway 
in the two communities of Magrath and Raymond for the erecting 
of two public school houses which could be used solely for the 
purpose of education. In Raymond, that year, a four-room two 
storey building was completed on the east side of main street. 
This building served as a school until the large twelve-room 
brick building was erected in 1910 at which time the original 
frame structure was sold to the Second Ward Mormon Church in 
Raymond. It later became the Buddhist temple when the Japanese 
began to concentrate in this area. 

In Magrath a rather pretentious frame structure behind 
the home of Earl Tanner became the community 1 s first public 
school house. This building provided ample space for some time 
for four classrooms. However, as more settlers began to arrive 
from Utah and elsewhere into the Magrath area, space had to be 
provided for two additional classrooms. Thus two temporary 
classrooms were located on the stage of the First Ward Church 











e 











C ' 




« 






•; ■; 










17 - 


(now the assembly hall). A curtain was drawn between the two 
classes as a means of separating them, and the students were 
housed in this manner until the present public school was erected 
in the year 1909* Magrath was recognized as a school district 
of the North West Territories on July 9> 1901, and was given 
the number 620. This date was one year prior to the date on 
which the neighboring community was recognized as the Raymond 
School District No. 700. 

Igaatetr Supply 

The years 1896 - 190? were a period of rapid expansion 
in the Canadian West. With the great influx of immigrants into 
this region came the usual shortage of teachers which accompanies 
every excessive increase in population. When the Liberal govern¬ 
ment came into office in 1896 the national immigration figures 
for the year had reached about sixteen thousand. By 1905 the 
annual figure was almost a hundred and fifty thousand. A large 
proportion of these immigrants entered the West thereby creating 
new problems. Towns and cities grew up rapidly thus creating 
demands for new schools which lacked teachers to staff them. 

From a total of 564 schools in operation in 1901 in the North 
West Territories the number grew until the total reached 1,459 
regularly formed districts in 1905. Two hundred and thirty- 
seven new districts were formed in the year 1904. The demand 
for teachers to staff these new schools was so great that the 






J 










c 


, 






\j; c : ',;u < 






■ 








;o 








r,. ( 


! ■ 




■ 









18 


Normal Schools were forced to hold two sessions instead of 

one. Even then teachers had to be brought in from other 
9 

provinces. 

An attempt was made by Mormon communities to secure 
fully certified Canadian teachers from the eastern part of 
Canada — mainly from the Maritimes and Ontario. When Magrath 
first became recognized as a school district a principal, Mr. 
Hartley, was secured from Prince Edward Island, and a lady 
assistant, Miss MacDonald from Ontario, was employed to help 
with the instruction of the younger children. The school 
district of Raymond staffed its first four-room school with 
teachers from the Maritime Provinces. The first teachers 
employed by the Raymond School Board were the Misses Middlemiss, 
McLeod and Scott. The first principal was B.F. Keiller. 10 

RELATIONSHIPS EXISTING BETWEEN MORMONS AND OTHER PIONEERS 

Historical accounts show that during the early pioneer 
era there was a great deal of misunderstanding existing between 
the Latter-day Saints and other pioneers of non-Mormon sects 
near MacLeod and Lethbridge. The pioneers of other religious 
denominations were suspicious of the Mormons because of their 

o 

Goresky, op. cit .. p. 84 

^Department of Economic Affairs, Economic Survey of 
the Tom of Raymond . Bulletin, Edmonton, 1952, p. 3<» 









c 


£ 




r 


r 


n 


c 








- 19 


religious and social customs and their so-called method of 
communal settlement. The Mormons in return were at first 
intolerant toward non-members who lived amongst them. This 
misunderstanding made public relations between non-Mormon 
staff members and parents somewhat difficult at first. 

However, excerpts from historical documents point to the 
fact that the process of assimilation between Mormons and 
non-Mormon teachers was gradually improving by 1905* 

Competitive sports have always played an important 
role in Mormon recreational activity. Through sports and 
other community social functions which are so popular in a 
pioneer area, school teachers and the members of the districts 
were gradually brought to the point of mutual understanding* 

Probably the fact that the Latter-day Saint people 
were quick to organize school districts under the supervision 
of the territorial government, and that they generally did not 
resist instruction from certified non-Mormon teachers did much 
to improve the relationships between themselves and other fron¬ 
tier groups of different religious beliefs and social customs* 

The fact that the English language was primarily used as their 
mother tongue in the early pioneer schools has given the 
Mormons a decided advantage in adapting to the Canadian frontier. 
Amongst some of the other ethnic groups of Western Canada, who 
resisted the use of English in their schools, the process of 
assimilation was much slower. 








I 


' 




■ 


u ■: 






. i. 













- 20 


SUMMARY 

As early as 1888 the Mormons had established schools 
in Southern Alberta. These schools were manned by teachers who 
were "called and set apart" by the Church leaders. Although 
the amount of academic and professional training these teachers 
had had is questionable, they w ere able to teach Mormon doctrine 
to the students and to give them some instruction in public 
speaking. These two phases of education are two tenets of the 
Mormon philosophy of education. 

These early pioneer Church schools paved the way for 
the pioneer state controlled schools which were established in 
this area in 1897 under the Council of Public Instruction of 
The North West Territories. The social programme sponsored by 
Mormons and the fact they are English speaking people have 
probably been instrumental in improving relationships between 
themselves and other frontier groups with whom they came in 
contact. 













CHAPTER III 


DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
IN MORMON COMMUNITIES UNDER GOVERNMENT 
ADMINISTRATION FROM THE TURN OF 
THE CENTURY UNTIL 1916 

EARLY TEACHING CONDITIONS AS DESCRIBED BY PIONEER CARDSTON 
TEACHERS 

Although most of the outlying Mormon wards readily 
organized into school districts under the supervision of the 
territorial government, the town of Cardston was at first 
somewhat reluctant to employ licensed teachers in place of 
uncertified Mormon teachers. It was Mr. Haultain, who at one 
time practised law in Fort McLeod, and who by 1900 had become 
the outstanding personality in the struggle for autonomy in 
the West, who stressed the need for licensed teachers in all 
schools of the western Canadian frontier. Haultain had spent 
some time while he was the territorial premier endeavouring 
to secure from the dominion government increased grants for 
education. 

In 1896 a commission was sent out by Haultain to 
review the school situation in the community of Cardston. It 
was recommended by this commission that certified teachers be 
employed in all classrooms of this community. Card, primarily 
because of religious reasons, resisted the recommendation that 
licensed teachers be employed in Mormon schools. Since the 













r 


a! 








' • ■. ■ . • ■ ■ . ,• 

' •: ^ ■* ■ "■ - ,;)TU £).: AAA/v TC 

c A ' ■ ■ "• A ' • , 

• i 

“ 

c '■ ‘ . . r ’ ■: :J •' - 

• ‘ • ■ d * . i;j 

■ ■ c ■ 


' 








a a 


. '. ■ , j • 

' 


•' 1 ’ - . : J.,', r\l /'.ij'l 

■ - ■' ' . 5 T (a ; A:a •; ‘ - ; . •: • I; 

'■ i. ■ ' ■ ■>: ■ :.-u A ■. 






- 22 


year 1888 the Mormons had been employing their own people 
who were able to give religious instruction to the children. 

If non-Mormon teachers were placed in the school, religious 
instruction probably would be excluded from the school prog¬ 
ramme. 

There is also the possibility that Card could have 
objected to a public school because of financial reasons. 

Since the migration of the Latter-day Saints into Canada 
they had been employing uncertified teachers at five dollars 
per week for ten week terms. Teachers of the state schools 
in outlying areas were receiving forty dollars per month, and 
principals of a two or three-room school were paid at the rate 
of ninety dollars per month for a ten month school term. 

The fact that most of the pioneer residents of the 
community were hard-pressed for money can be easily under¬ 
stood. Vern Shaw of Cardston, who was an employee of the 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police force, and who helped to escort 
both Mormon and non-Mormon pioneers to their respective com¬ 
munities, describes the plight of the majority of these early 
settlers as being destitute — "their only goods and chattels 
being a cow or two and possibly a few chickens and pigs". It 
is not unlikely that in a frontier area such as this one any 
proposal for increasing school expenditures would be frowned 


upon. 





















\ ' ' :.*>■ 


. ■; -: o-J : ‘ , ' : 


. 


: - 




1 -■ 




: 


: : ■ c J ■ \ ' . j-u ; • 











/ ' . . £0:0 xj 

: : ■" i .. Ulm ■ ' 













- 23 - 


Card, realizing that the organization of school districts 
under the supervision of the Territorial Council of Public 
Instruction was inevitable, consulted with W. Everard Edmonds 
as to the organization of such a public school, Edmonds, now 
living in Edmonton, was at the time teaching in the district 
school at Mountain View. He had followed William Adams as 
teacher in this school when the latter resigned in June I896. 

En route to Mountain View from Lethbridge he had made the acqua¬ 
intance of Card while passing by stage-coach through Cardston to 
his school. 

Edmonds recalls that Card was extremely jubilant when 
the former told him that the territorial government could obtain 
sufficient funds from dominion grants for education to pay 
seventy per cent of the teachers 1 salaries. He immediately 
organized a school board with himself, H.S. Allen and John Woolf 
as trustees. Edmonds remembers that H.S. Allen at this time was 
business manager of a store in C a rdston. Card, as chairman of 
the school board, asked Edmonds to become the first principal 
of the two-room district school in Cardston. The latter accepted 
the position at a salary of ninety dollars per month for a ten 
month term. 

Edmonds, as principal of the Cardston school, instructed 
in the senior room; he was assisted by H. Noble who took charge 















c 




■ 











c 







c 






; 







- 24 - 


of the junior classes. The larger eight-room frame school 
house on "school hill" in the town had not as then been con¬ 
structed, and the school was kept in the meeting house. The 
classes and curriculum followed an organization patterned 
after the Ontario school system. The divisions were referred 
to as standards, which in the lower age range w ere divided into 
parts with junior and senior classes. 

Edmonds remarked that in his department there was 
an average daily attendance of seventy pupils. The daily 
attendance in the senior department was much smaller than that 
in the junior. Noble had to cope with a daily average attend¬ 
ance of one hundred students in the junior section. With such 
a large enrollment the teacher had but little time to spend 
concerning himself with the "individual differences" of pupils 
about which one hears so much in modern classrooms. Most of 
his time was utilized instructing his classes in the fundamen¬ 
tals in a rather impersonal manner. Edmonds remained as prin¬ 
cipal of the Cardston school until April 1, 1898 , when he 
recalls that he resigned and left for the Klondike. He was 
succeeded by John T. Boss, who later became the Chief Inspec¬ 
tor of Schools for Alberta and who in 1917 was appointed 
Deputy Minister of Education for the province. 

Ross remained in the employ of the Cardston School 
board for two terms. During his period of employment in Card¬ 
ston, Ross was at first assisted by a Miss Martin from OntariOo 
Miss Martin was succeeded in September of 1899 by Margaret 
Franks of Strathroy, Ontario. Miss Franks later became 









- 25 - 


Mrs. Vern Shaw, and at the present time resides in Cardston. 

A conversation with Mrs. Shaw proved to be very 
enlightening to the writer as to the teaching conditions 
existing in the West at the turn of the century. Some of the 
teachers coming from Eastern Canada were trained at the Toronto 
Normal School. Mrs. Shaw remembers that she procured her tea¬ 
ching position through the Regina Agency which at that period 
placed the teachers in the West. There were one hundred three 
Normal trainees in her class, and of these four were placed in 
schools located in the Cardston area. 

Mrs. Shaw relates that she had known of Latter-day 
Saints near Kitchener and London, Ontario, who were members of 
the Reformed Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints refer¬ 
red to by the Mormons as Josephites. It was with some apprehen¬ 
sion that she regarded her new school at Cardston when an elderly 
lady at the Lethbridge Hotel in that city informed her that she 
was going into a Mormon community. The only knowledge she had 
regarding the Mormon religion was that the Church had been 
headed by Brigham Young, and that polygamy was practised. She 
was much relieved, however, when the same woman told her that 
there was a Presbyterian congregation in Cardston under the 
leadership of a Reverend Gavin Hamilton. 

Having been accustomed to the amenities of city life 
in the more densely populated East, Mrs. Shaw found that she 





- 26 


was compelled to adapt herself to many rugged conditions in 
the West. The fifty miles* distance from Lethbridge to Cardston 
was made by stage-coach. The meeting house in which she taught 
school was a log structure where the community centre now stands 
in this town. The hall in the centre of the log structure serv¬ 
ed as the Latter-day Saint Relief Society room. Once weekly the 
pupils* desks had to be replaced by large, rough benches in 
order that religious services could be held in the building. 

There were some one hundred seven pupils enrolled on her regis¬ 
ter in the first three parts, which today would correspond 
roughly to the first three grades. Slates instead of scribblers 
were used, and the readers came from Ontario. The schools accep¬ 
ted beginners of five years of age in those days, and the age 
range in her class ran from five to fourteen. Since the unquali¬ 
fied teachers who had preceded her had followed no prescribed 
programme of studies, the foundation their students had received 
in certain fundamental subjects was very inadequate. Thus boys 
and girls of twelve and fourteen years of age were commonly 
found in the primary grades attempting to gain instruction in 
certain basic principles before they could proceed to a higher 
standard. 

Mrs. Shaw recalls that frequently windows were missing 
from the log structure, and as a result the temperature of the 
room was often much below normal. The rooms were heated by the 






it 


: ' 









' 


I 







- 27 - 


proverbial "pot-bellied" stove. The smaller children did not 
attend school during the colder part of the winter because 
the rude shelter from the weather, provided by the log struct¬ 
ure, was too inadequate. As a result, during the cold part of 
December and January, the teacher in the junior department was 
allowed a winter vacation. When she returned from her first 
vacation to resume the next session in February, a third teacher, 
a Mr. Wright, had been appointed to teach in her former class¬ 
room. Wright took charge of the intermediate students, and she 
was required by the board to teach the younger pupils in a room 
above one of the stores. 

Mrs. Shaw states that she can look back on her year 
on the Cardston staff with a great deal of pleasure. Although 
teaching conditions at this period were difficult, she has 
since received much mental satisfaction from the fact that a 
number of her young scholars have done reasonably well in life. 
Among these, her first students, she mentioned the names of 
J.H. Blackmore, Social Credit Member of Parliament at Ottawa, 
Golden Wolf, a professor of modern languages at the University 
of Utah, Lafayett Hyde, a professor of sociology at the Univer¬ 
sity of California, John Glenn, a successful physician and 
surgeon in New York City, and Seth Nelson, who at the present 
time is practising law in Cardston. Mrs. Shaw remembers that 
the general run of her students from her large, overcrowded 
classroom turned out to be successful ranchers and farmers. 


r: 91 : 

no: 


' E. r 0 1 ; - .U ,T.T 

9 £ 

9 

'•'Tots M 

i 

e.fer sk 

T'90 

T9.: 

nxT °;[.i bo 

j*; 

:&vcc 9 olec 

) eii^ 

ri i j 

• et r; 

T Cl 

- '1 r’ vd' de \1 ■ r c g 


? r - f ^ 


.or! J 

: f t' oeXIoiiE r un eiij 

i T £ ; 0 

■;ICC 



S.fJBS'X fj 


« 9 o 

. ? ocot ' ? ; ‘j: rr 

r .IT; 

^i.cr 

1 9 D 

coini t 


: Torio 

; 

\d X 

( : ; : ' X : 0 . ox c: 

e-T-H 

*X 9fi 

ET -x 

' 

01 

; !B nod 

• 

re zr 

- . :,r 0 . ~rr j; ;■ 9 "-r/T J. j. •, 

. ,-n r., - 

• 

f 

; 

1 

oi 

a uxen o. 

'-iv ! T 9 T c J CT j ..gv 

,sIo 

emc 

,9 “f 

©ri j j ' - . ■■ . : 

c 

: 

■ 

c b r 

? ir. * -• 0 

« 

b j n 9 

. 

8 j . j • . c 


i. o. 

* 

0 ‘T p 

• 

e nl 

rii 

O'UC 

T9;tieg : e;:l 

$ 

dOGeX 

C o 

^UBOI 

©j ' ot.L.: ".)9‘X c :; v .’ 








* 

■ 



no 

TO £9 ?iocl n 

S 0 

8 ; 

:! srtt 

aeXj 

■'.■E E i . ■ 1 ; 

r /;•;+ _T„. 

• 

Tl'B 

o.ol- 1 . 0 © 



s ri 

Xxn ‘ 

< ^ 1 i T . 1 

£ Q - j 

srin 

C 

et X*■'.o ©•rev/ 

i 

8 X . 

■' 

■ aoo gni lo e ' 

' 

CTOS 

‘t 0 . 

' 



•o X 

:•: of. 

1 i ■ T : B 


■ hc’j 9 et: nEcn e a .f ; tsiI 'to lecAtrdsn 

' ■ : : fe : ; Ij f , B« j nc 

- i I‘ - $1 f . H. 

. * f - 

' E f .. 

: : "• ' ,E o, r S.1 ?• ■ *' : T ;U;s 




c riw 

f ■ ; •: l ! - 

t 

■ 

W 

:at • : 

' C’j.E'T 

:GT 


•' ' 

bxi: sD JD 

i. if r 5 J nj c 

:iEl 

0 .be: - ex 

en:x ;t 


■0 , 


OF. 0'-r{ jEr-;' ;; 

.- ' ; 

a T ,: Ti c *:o r 

• 

X ■. 

: sri j 



GET-'-. 

' i £‘[ Je •' ■ f;9 ' 

•; 08 9;. 

r;, Ere : '0 


a cz. T? 

T. - 



- 28 - 


THE ORGANIZATION OF THE FIRST PUBLICLY OWNED SCHOOL IN CARDSTON 

The first Cardston public school was a part of the 
MacLeod inspectorate which was at that period under the super¬ 
vision of Inspector Tom Perrett, who became the principal of 
the Regina Normal School. Prior to 1898 there had been no high 
school courses taught in the Cardston school. John T. Ross, 
during the years 1898 - 1901, taught the first secondary school 
subjects to be offered in this community. Ross remained with 
the Cardston district for a short period after the eight-room 
frame school house was constructed east of the present public 
school in the year 1900o He was succeeded as principal by a 
Mr. Sly. A Mr. Cameron, who at the present time is practising 
law in Lethbridge, followed Sly as the principal of the Cardston 
school. 

In the first publicly owned school house, in which 
these men acted as principals, both high school and public 
school courses were offered. In the building there were eight 
classrooms; four were located on the first floor and the remain¬ 
ing four were on the second. Two of these classrooms were set 
aside for instruction on the secondary level. There were no 
twelfth grade courses taught at this period. Students who desi¬ 
red instruction on this level were obliged to attend the larger 
city high schools where academic instruction was offered for the 
benefit of twelfth grade students. Cardston students usually 








i • • : ■ .. .' 1 ' : 

? :: J ' ' ' • ‘ ■■ ' , B.r.i.... '' O i id : j. v 

. , 

f * *■’ ■■ : •■■■' v. • ‘ . - : 

1 • • p . ■ ■' ... ' .• 

* ■ •' y-^ ■ ' • ' d “' vxT-oJ 

' c . ■ d. 

* 

c • 

j ; 


- 


' 

° 

' 

: 

' 

" , : V., • ' -• ' ; •i.. ' . 


• ' • ~ ’■ ' ■ j : . ■ d 



- 



- 29 - 


attended the Lethbridge and Calgary schools in order to obtain 
their senior matriculation. 

The programme of studies followed by the schools in 
Cardston and other Mormon communities at this period was in 
line with that followed by other schools located in the North 
West Territories. After the old Board of Education had been 
replaced by the Council of Public Instruction for the North 
West Territories the schools were placed under a unified system 
of education. Dr. D.J. Goggin was appointed superintendent of 
education for the territories. All important questions relevant 
to school administration were left in his hands. There was to 
be a common inspectorate, common examinations and uniform quali¬ 
fications for teachers. There was likewise to be an approved 
list of recommended textbooks. The following passage states: 


The first course of studies used in Alberta was 
drawn up in 1902 by Dr. D. J # Goggin, a member of 
the Council of Public Instruction for the North West 
Territories. This programme covered the full range 
of our present system of grades from one to twelve. 
Standards I to V covered the range from Grades I to 
VIII and Standards VI, VII, VIII correspond to our 
present grades X, XI, and XII. Dr. Goggin 1 s system 
of standards was the old Ontario system of five 
classes and five readers in the public school. 1 


In 1905 the province of Alberta was formed from the 
North West Territories. Although the old territorial regime 
passed away, Dr. Goggin*s system remained in effect in the 
new province. The following subjects were offered on the 


^Figur, Berthold, An Historical Survey of Basic Con ¬ 
cepts to Progressive Education in Alberta . (Thesis 1950), p. l4H. 












. 





■ir-; 


i , 






' 

























f 


































- 30 - 


provincial course of studies. In Standard V examinations 
were held in grammar, spelling, literature, arithmetic and 
mensuration, geography, history, algebra, drawing, composi¬ 
tion, British and Canadian history and bookkeeping. Depart¬ 
mental tests were also given in pedagogy. This test was not, 
however, for the ordinary high school student. It was a test 
given to teachers who were permitted to teach on a third class 
certificate or permits and who were desirous of raising their 
teaching qualifications. In Standard VII courses were offered 
in arithmetic and mensuration, geography, drawing, algebra, 
English literature, general history, chemistry and animal 
life. Standard VIII courses included animal life, chemistry, 

history, algebra, English poetry, trigonometry, physical 

2 

science, German, French, and Latin. 

In 1912 Dr. Goggin*s course of studies was rewritten 
by a committee under Dr. H. M. Tory, first president of the 
University of Alberta. 

Under the new system, which was introduced in 1912, 
provision was made for the range of grades from I to XII. 

The average public school student now required eight years 
to complete eight grades instead of five years to complete 
five standards, comparable to what is now eight grades. 


2 The Alberta Star, Cardston, June 11, 1909* 























- 


9 A 


c 


c 


? 


c 


I 





. .■ '.'.i 






- 31 - 


MORMON EFFORTS TO STAFF THEIR SCHOOLS WITH LOCAL TEACHERS 

The point has already been made that the Latter-day 
Saint people preferred their own teachers in their schools, 
since they desired that their children receive religious 
instruction in Mormon doctrine. By 1904 they had succeeded 
in persuading two of their members, Stirling Williams and 
Zebulon Jacobs to attend the Normal School at Regina in 
order to receive certification for teaching in the schools 
located in the North West Territories. In that part of the 
territories known today as the province of Alberta there 
were no teacher training facilities at this early period. 

The following passage refers to the expanding school 
system during the year 190 ?: 


The province of Alberta was formed on September 1 , 
1905. It inherited a rapidly developing system of 
schools in this year — there being some 600 schools. 
The first Alberta government assumed its duties in 
regard to education with zeal and enthusiasm. Within 
the first year 144 new school districts were organized 
and schools built. The province was being rapidly 
settled even though many of the immigrants were of non- 
English racial origin knowing nothing of the English 
language and very little of the British customs and 

traditions.3 


With the rapid organization of more school districts 
came the problem of obtaining sufficient teachers. A Normal 


^Isidore Goresky, The Beginning and Growth of the 
Alberta School System . Thesis (May 1944 )5 p. 99* 





















c 






















■ 







c 













- 32 


School was opened in Calgary in 1906 under the principalship 

of G.J. Bryan. Almost immediately the instructors of the 

Normal School began to press for a longer period of training, 

but this reform did not take place for many years. With the 

scarcity of teachers the Department was not too careful about 

qualifications. Two normal sessions were held during 1907* 

In the next year the Calgary Normal School building was comp¬ 
ly 

leted, and a practice school organized. A new Normal School 
was built at Camrose in 1912, and classes were organized under 
the principalship of Dr. J.C. Miller. As a result of these 
efforts the supply of teachers by 1914 became sufficient to 
meet the demands.'* 

Before the establishment of the two Normal Schools 
in Alberta the Mormon Church in Southern Alberta encouraged 
Utah teachers to come to Canada and staff schools in Latter-day 
Saint communities. Some of the licensed Utah teachers who ac¬ 
cepted these positions in the Cardston area were Robert Nelson, 
Lura Redd and Mary Bhodeback. These two women secured positions 
with the Raymond school board shortly after their arrival in 
Canada. 

After the Alberta Department of Education opened the 
provincial Normal Training School at Calgary, Mr. Wood of Card- 

^Ibid., p. 103 . 

^Ibld .. p. 104. 














- 33 - 


ston began a recruitment campaign among the Latter-day Saint 
youth to encourage young students to enter the teaching field# 

He succeeded in persuading J.W# Low and Wilford Woolf to take 
their Normal training at Regina. With his encouragement Addie 
Robinson, Hilda Peterson and William Smith consented to attend 
the Normal School in Calgary. At this period the Normal stu¬ 
dents entering the school in September attended until the 
Christmas vacation in order to obtain teacher certification 
for the province. Melvin King from Raymond entered the 
Normal School during the same session as that attended by 
the Cards ton group. This group of students received financial, 
backing from loans advanced by Joseph F. Ellison of Cardston. 
Ellison had considerable financial resources, and he was greatly 
interested in the improvement of educational facilities in the 
Mormon area. 

By the year 1914 the province of Alberta was experien¬ 
cing no grave shortage of teachers required to staff the ever- 
increasing number of schools. The minutes of the school board 
meetings for the years 1915 and 1916 indicate that the Latter- 
day Saint communities were also succeeding in training enough 
of their local teachers to man the schools in districts of the 
Cardston area. However, many of these Normal trainees were 
not employed by the larger Mormon districts such as Magrath, 
Raymond and Cardston. The board minutes would indicate that the 
trustees of this region were becoming more aware of the value 










~V - ' 'O ■ ■ 

■. .: . 3 ; ^ ■ ■ ' : c l 

..... j ' ..no.- l ":. ’ ' o * • ' " v °‘ 

* ’ ' ' 

' < ' 1 

. - . ■ C / i' r “i ■ • - 

r... : • -. i - ; 'tjf v -. nx looses ~-u3 ■ aanc: - 

Dili o ■ fi 1 03 ■' • t ■ • 

, , . ; . . " ,nf : ■ ••• '.. . v * : ‘ 

v.-j no on: ;in ; -no ' '; .1 oo fno3 0 .,'v 1 ' 

loo; ■ v * o - 7 J:oO\ o olrroo.'u r lo oooo;‘ vfAJ 
■ ‘ - * 

: . oo:..' : o- ..in no.- 3 : *:r 

. i o ; ;^.i 3 ! 'V L \.v'i i .'.Or ' ■ J r O • - . 

, • ••;, 1 i 0 


fj.o loo. 

:io 

- 



01 • -i r ' 

' 

, jv . 

0 0 .! 

J j 

r 01 

■ 


Jo 

nef 

p. no 0 b 


:TC 

• r £ 



l 

j'cl", 

• 

t 


.fir 0 ; -:o o.nv. .0; o- "1. •. 0 ; Or*'iJ einJ - .. ••• " 7 , 

. . .. .. :J oJa 0 oOO- ! r ( i : .o.es$ Jo - ■ to • ^ ■■ \ '‘o. on: — 0 

. . 

. .j ■ : t ? £Qt bus . • l ■ 

£ • • l . . £ ■ o ' I ' 5 0 

... 03... In " ; l !': 0 ■' '■ "O' O ' ( O.j- F-- - ' ■'■'■7 O-li ' ' O 

' ‘ j , - . 0 •. . t . . 

• •• o . 

• . • n, . , V '- : V. 


1 .. j o n • o . . n ; ...Li ’0 

1 v ‘.O ijfi . 


!.: ' ' ,; C Of-’ :" n 


JO • ,r : J 






of training and experience in their choice of staff members. 

The provincial inspectors were partly responsible for 
urging the school board members to employ only better qualified 
experienced teachers in the larger urban centres. Many of 
these better trained staff members were obtained outside the 
Mormon area. Local normalites usually spent from one to two 
years teaching in one-room rural schools away from their loca¬ 
lities before being accepted by their home district school 
boards. 

The school board minutes of the Magrath School District 
No. 620 indicate that during the school term for the years 1915 
and 1916 the majority of the staff members were local teachers 
who had obtained certification at the Alberta Normal Schools. 

C. Ostlund, who was the principal of the school for the term 
191^ - 19155 had come from Ontario. In 1915 he resigned and 
was succeeded by a local man, Jared Mercer. In succeeding 
years the following local teachers taught at intervals in the 
Magrath school: Sarah Mercer, Ammon Mercer, Annie Hillier, 
Margaret Watson, P.D. Clarke and Donald Holeman. This group 
of teachers were the first students from the Magrath area 
to receive teaching certificates from the newly organized 
provincial training institutions. In addition to the above- 
mentioned staff members, the Magrath school board had solicited 
at this time the services of Leah Davis and Mrs. Lynn Leavitt, 
both from the Cardston area. These two women had gained 



' ' •- ' ■ ; • • . 



■ 










■ 


■’ t 

* 








. 


- - ' ■' . 

♦ 

. . . 

. 

. ■' 1 ' • ' 

.... . .' 

c {? .. . . . 

« . . ? : 

■■ • . . .. • .' •• 


r ‘ 

- ' ’ . ■ p ..' 


* ■ . ■ : . , : V 











- 35 - 


considerable teaching experience in the smaller wards west 
of Cardston before coming to the larger Magrath school. 

TEACHERS 1 SALARIES AND THE RISING COST OF EDUCATION 
FOR THE YEARS 1915 - 1916 

During the years 1915 and 1916 the salaries which were 
paid to teachers in the Mormon area were substantially higher 
than those received by teachers in the same region who staffed 
the schools under the regime of the government of the North 
West Territories. Data point to the fact that with the excep¬ 
tion of the salaries paid to the principal and the vice-princi¬ 
pal, the income received by the teachers on the staff of the 
Magrath school was fairly well in line with that received by 
the teachers on the Cardston staff. The school report taken 
from ”The Globe” for the year 1916 lists the salaries of the 
Cardston public school staff as follows: 


J. W. Low (Principal) 

$ 

o 

& 

H 

G. L. Woolf (Vice-Principal) 

$ 

920 

L. Hyde 

i 

820 

Miss Keith 

$ 

840 

Miss Sykes 

$ 

780 

Miss Hall 

$ 

720 

Miss Steed 

$ 

720 

Miss Anderson 

i 

660 










... 









c 













f} •''/ ■ 












. 




t 


■ . 












Miss Wilcox 


- 36 


$ 660 

Miss M. Stoddard $ 660 

Newel Brown $ 660 

Data taken from the salary schedule in effect in the 
Magrath School District for these same years show the teachers* 
salaries to be as follows: 


Jared Mercer (Principal) 

$ 

1200 

Joseph Earl (Asst. Principal) 

$ 

850 

G. Ostlund 

$ 

850 

Sarah Mercer 

$ 

750 

Margaret Watson 

i 

750 

Miss Parrish 

$ 

750 

Mr. Anderson 

$ 

750 

Leah Davis 

$ 

720 

Mrs. Lynn Leavitt 

$ 

720 

Miss Jessie Redd 

$ 

700 

Mrs. Sarah Anderson 

$ 

690 


It was customary for urban school boards at the time 
specified above to pay teachers newly appointed to their staffs 
a lower salary than that received by staff members who had been 
for some time in their services* This factor still enters into 
most of the salary schedules drawn up for the city schools of 
Alberta. It is interesting at this point to compare the salary 
received by a teacher with that received by other community 
employees. During the year 1916 the constable for the town of 






- 37 - 


Cardston received a salary of fifty dollars per month for a 
twelve month period• The town secretary received a salary of 
one hundred ten dollars per month for twelve months. The 
janitor of the school, who likewise acted as the truant officer 
for the district, was remunerated to the extent of eight hundred 
eighty dollars per annum for the services which he rendered* 6 


The following quotation taken from ’’The Globe" voices 
the editor*s opinion regarding the rising cost of education 
in the community of Cardston during the years 1915 and 1916: 


The school board has asked for $20,000 
to cover the expenses of the year, and as the 
town and school district are only raising by 
taxes $35,000 for all purposes naturally the 
largeness of the amount petitioned for has 
caused considerable comment, more so when it 
is considered that only eight years ago, with 
only one teacher less on the staff and the 
school population within 50 of the present, 
the grant required was only $7,500. However, 
the times have changed and we suppose the 
board will have satisfactory answers.7 


During the period January 1907, to December 1907, the 
cost for teachers* salaries in Cardston amounted to $4,800. 

The lowest paid teacher on the staff in 1916 was receiving a 
salary which was seventy dollars per annum lower than the 
provincial minimum salary considered for urban teachers during 


^The Globe, Cardston, July 13, 1916. 
7 Ibid. 






; 

„ , 

■ 

' 


. 


': 




, v\, fs'L:’.ev 


. 

j 


' ? 





• • , • : c ; 

, • c. - •:? ?. ' o: 

' ■ - . d . ' 1 

X Jx 

: rt d 




. < 












- 38 - 


the year 1918* That year, 1918, the provincial legislature 
considered placing the minimum wage for town and city teachers 
at $70 per month. 

SCHOOL POPULATION 

A comparison of the schools in Magrath and Raymond with 
the one in Cardston at this time would indicate that the school 
population was somewhat greater in Cardston than in the two 
other Mormon centres. The public school at Raymond comprised 
eight classrooms while the one at Magrath contained four class¬ 
rooms. In this community two additional classes had to be 
improvised on the stage of the Mormon First Ward Church House 
in order to accommodate an increasing school population. 

The annual provincial school report for the years 
1905 and 1906 indicates the rapid growth in school attendance 
which was experienced by Latter-day Saint centres. The enroll¬ 
ment for the town of Cardston in 190? was 395* Thirteen more 
were expected the following year which would bring the attend¬ 
ance up to 408. In the town of Raymond for the year 190? the 
school population was 527 * 1906 the attendance at school 

increased to 566. Outside of Edmonton and Calgary only five 
schools had a population greater than these two communities. 

A further report published by Inspector Brown of the 
MacLeod inspectorate comments on the overcrowded conditions 






- 39 - 


existing in the classrooms in Mormon schools at this period* 

The trustees at this time confessed a serious financial dif¬ 
ficulty in furnishing adequate accommodation, mainly owing to 
the fact that it is the custom of those engaged in agriculture 
to live in town and send their children to school, while many 
of their farms are outside the school district. The report 
suggested that some means should be devised in order that 
owners of such farms may lawfully be asked to contribute a 
fair share towards the maintenance of the school at which their 
children were being educated. The parents of these children 
were later required to pay a substantial tuition fee for each 
child in order that the cost of education in these areas could 
be more equally distributed. 

BUILDING PROGRAMME 

Because of overcrowded conditions referred to in the 
above report an extensive building programme was launched for 
educational purposes in these three Mormon communities. The 
building activities took place between the years 1909 - 191? 
bringing the school facilities in line with those of other 
towns of comparable size in the province. 

The school board at Magrath took steps to erect a new 
brick public school house. It contained ten classrooms, two 
of which could be made into an auditorium by opening the 












- 40 


sliding doors which served as a partition between them. The 
building had a full basement, two rooms of which were later 
converted into classrooms to accommodate an ever-increasing 
school population. It was fully modern. The estimated cost 
of the structure was between thirty and thirty-five thousand 
dollars. 

By 1910 Raymond had outgrown the original frame struc¬ 
ture which had been constructed for school purposes in 1902. 

By the end of 1910 this community was accommodated by two 
modem school buildings — one twelve-room public school, com¬ 
pleted of fire-proof brick and containing one of the first and 
largest auditoriums in any Southern Alberta town. The second 
school building was that referred to in another section as the 
Knight Academy which opened its doors under Church sponsorship 
on October 17, 1910. 

Five years after the construction of the three modern 
schools in Magrath and Raymond, Cardston was to begin making 
plans for the construction of a new school building. The old 
frame building which had served the educational needs of the 
community for fifteen years was destroyed by fire in April 
1915* The loss, exclusive of the books and personal equipment 
of the students, was estimated at $12,500. The building was 
insured for only $5>000. 

Plans were immediately under way for the construction 





- 










r • 


C 










( 


r . j: 


? 




■? 


. 










' 


I;'.; ; 





- 41 - 


of a twelve-room modern brick building. The contract was given 
to H, Christenson who agreed to construct the building at a cost 
of $46,250, Debentures were floated at an interest rate of six 
per cent to be paid semi-annually. The board, in discussing the 
desired plans for the new building, at first considered a struc¬ 
ture with all classrooms on one floor, a plan similar to that 
of many modern schools. However, the final decision was reached 
that they would construct a two-storey building; each floor was 
to comprise six classrooms. This building was completed in May 
of 1916. 

OUT OF SCHOOL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 

By the year 1912 there were various "out of school" 
institutions established in some of the Mormon centres to 
supplement the academic training provided by the regular day 
schools under government supervision. The Cardston "Globe" 
notes that at this period there was some agitation in Cardston 
for the establishment of a complete high school® A number of 
the young people were being compelled to attend schools in 
other centres in order to pursue their studies in grades higher 
than those included in the local schools. The Knight Academy 
offered courses on the twelfth grade level, but some of the 
students from the area were still attending high school in the 
city of Lethbridge, 







or; 




• • •'O 1 ' O'- 




ox 

i J;::;. > j.. 


o i r i v 


r 


;* ,-r.iOO 


... . 0 : k : S SO 


i, \ c y n o 




- 42 - 


The academic day schools in this region under the super¬ 
vision of the provincial Department of Education did not offer 
much by way of training in vocational courses. There were 
manual training schools established in Edmonton and Calgary by 

o 

private donation in 1903* The question of adding vocational 
courses to the curriculum of the government schools was a rather 
controversial issue in the legislative assembly at the turn of 
the century. 

The following passages reflect the opinions of some 
of the members of the Assembly at this period: 


Mr. Mowat showed a more progressive bent when 
he made a plea for technical education. He believed 
there was too much useless learning which did not 
fit anyone for life. Mr. Haultain, the premier, 
opposed the idea on the grounds of expense. He dec¬ 
lared that the school was not intended to fit one 
for a particular trade but to give mental training. 
Furthermore he did not know what technical training 
meant. Would Mr. Mowat include sewing?9 


As many of the virtues claimed for manual train¬ 
ing seemed extravagant to Dr. Goggin, he gave some 
room in his report to a treatment of its values and 
limitations. He stated that manual training was 
really not another subject but an added mode of study. 
It was only a further attempt to help the pupils to 
convert thought into action since action tests and 
classifies thinking. The only innovation was in the 
materials used. He divided its supporters into two 
categories. Some advocated the subject for its utili¬ 
tarian value. Others valued it because it revealed 


Q 

°Goresky, op. cit .. p. 82. 
9 Ibid .. p. 80 





a 


o r. 




•; i. .> j , 










- 43 - 


to the pupil hidden aptitudes and Indicated what 
calling the student was fitted for* He condemned 
the extravagant claims made for it* It would not 
take the place of reading, writing or arithmetic* 

Its greatest value lay in correlation of the phy¬ 
sical, the manual and the intellectual. 10 

Although the Knight Academy in Raymond offered courses 
in manual training and home economics in 1910, commercial cour¬ 
ses were not introduced until the year 1916 . By 1912 a commer¬ 
cial school was operating in Cardston under the direction of 
Eva Harker* This school was opened in the community library 
and operated each day of the week except Saturday. Private 
tuition was available in this school in commercial subjects 
such as typewriting, bookkeeping and shorthand. 

The Latter-day Saint Church has always endeavoured 
through its auxiliary organizations to give some training in 
vocal music to the youth desiring such instruction* In spite 
of this fact private music tutors have been reasonably well 
supported in Mormon centres. In the year 1907 there was a 
school of music established in Cardston. Courses leading to 
diplomas were arranged for all desiring to pursue the study of 
music. Competent teachers under the supervision of Professor 
Joseph Banner were arranged for, and the school was conducted 
on undenominational lines. 

examinations in music in this area were under the 


10Ibid., p* 82 





t 


V 






: ■ 



' 


L> 


fl. 





•J. , 


-L X 






;-:,0 


n o 








- 44 - 


supervision of examiners from the Royal Academy and Royal 
College of Music. The Globe notes that in the spring of 1916 
several of the students of Joseph Banner were presented for 
examination. In the Primary Piano Division three children 
presented themselves for examination. One pupil was presented 
in the Elementary Piano Division, two were presented in the 
Higher Piano Division, one was presented in elementary singing. 
One pupil prepared by Lillian Phipps was presented for examina¬ 
tion in the Primary Division of Singing. 

In the spring of 1913, Leo Coombs was employed as a 
circuit instructor of music in the outlying wards in the Card- 
ston area. During part of his time he instructed music in 
the schools in the wards of Woolford, Kimbal and Aetna. The 
remainder of his teaching time was spent in the schools in the 
wards west of Cardston, mainly Mountain View, Hartley, Glen- 
woodvilie and Hill Spring. 

Coombs, a former student of the Cardston School of 
Music, was talented in vocal music. In the year 1916 he went 
to Lethbridge where he taught in the Academy of Music which 
had been established in that city. The Lethbridge Telegram 
made note of the fact that one of his students, Mrs. A.M. Grace, 
after completing a course in vocal under him, left for New York 
City where she resumed her studies in vocal at the New York 
School of Music and Art. 



' 


j'JG 


t 


1 j r * 


>c 


' 




■>0 * ■ c 


t 




:r.;o 


±a 









- 45 - 


Articles appearing in The Globe two years prior to 
the outbreak of World War I in 1914, point to the fact that 
an effective cadet training programme had been introduced 
into the public schools in Latter-day Saint communities. This 
programme, under the supervision of the Department of National 
Defence, was carried on with the aid of the public school tea¬ 
chers and other residents of the communities. In the Cardston 
public school there were two companies of cadets enrolled 
amongst the students. Each company had an enrollment of thirty- 
five members. The officers for the year 1912 for M Company A n 
were: Ed Low, Captain, Burdett Beid and Douglas Stoddard, 
Lieutenants. Fifty rifles were ordered for the purpose of 
carrying on effective drill, and it is noted in The Globe that 
it was the intention of the directors of the programme to order 
more as the enrollment increased. Plans were under way for the 
purchase of a $250 sub-target. Both companies were making ar¬ 
rangements to attend a summer camp at Calgary. The teacher who 
was in charge of the cadet corps in Cardston was Assistant Prin¬ 
cipal Davies, who had succeeded De Voe Woolf as the vice-princi¬ 
pal. In Magrath the cadet training at this approximate period 
was under the direction of Jared Mercer and Ammon Mercer both 
of whom were staff teachers in this community. 

STANDARD OF INSTRUCTION RECEIVED AT CARDSTON 

Articles from The Globe would indicate that the academic 















fJG 



1 










c 


c < 


:;f£ . :/n i ; I 




rco 


.•o 




o 


c 


■ 


. 









r .1 







- 46 - 


instruction offered in the Cardston school at this period 
was of a high calibre. In the school report compiled monthly 
by the principal and published in The Globe, J. W. Low, prin¬ 
cipal of the school, reports that for three successive years 
Standard VII had passed 100 per cent of its candidates at the 
departmental examinations. In the last five years, at the 
time the above mentioned report was published, only three 
students from Standard VII had failed their examinations. 

During the year 1917 one of the students from the 
Cardston public school, Hilda E. Gill, received the Bronze 
Medal awarded by his excellency, the Duke of Devonshire, Gover¬ 
nor General of Canada. This medal was received for achieving 
the highest academic attainment in the Macleod inspectorate 
for the Public School Leaving Examinations held in June 1917• 
The Globe further notes that these same honours had gone to 
Cardston for three consecutive years, a fact which speaks 
plainly for the efficiency of the school staff of this commu¬ 
nity at this period of its development.^ 

SUMMARY 


At the turn of the century the Council of Public Instruc¬ 
tion insisted upon a unified system of education in the territo¬ 
ries. All Mormon districts by 1897 were obliged to conform to 


11 


The Globe, Cardston, November, 1917 







b 


j 






C‘?i 


1 


••••‘V' 




;o ?: 


. 


t 


ol'i) 






- 47 - 


this system by employing licensed teachers in their schools® 

Some high school courses were offered in Cardston by the 
principal, John T. Ross, between the years 1898 and 1901, but 
twelfth grade courses were not offered at this period® While 
the schools in the Mormon area were still under the supervision 
of the Council of Public Instruction of the North West Territo¬ 
ries, they conformed to a pattern of education set forth in the 
year 1902 by Dr. D. J. Goggln, the Territorial Superintendent 
of Education. When the province of Alberta was formed in 1905 
the curriculum of the province was based upon the traditional 
system of education, the organization by standards still prevai¬ 
ling until 1912 when the organization by grades was borrowed 
from the United States. 

The Mormons at first were compelled to hire teachers 
from outside; the majority of these came from Eastern Canada. 

In 1902 several licensed teachers of Latter-day Saint faith 
were brought in from Utah to staff schools in the Mormon area. 

By the year 1912 the Department of Education had established 
a normal school at Calgary and one at Camrose. The Latter-day 
Saints began a campaign to encourage their young people to 
attend these institutions in order to prepare themselves to 
enter the teaching profession. By 1916 the schools in Mormon 
communities were being staffed mainly by Mormon teachers. 


Mormons have always favored vocational education for 









- 48 - 


its utilitarian value. Between the years 1897 and 1916 the 
question of the value of such technical education was still a 
controversial issue in the Legislative Assembly of the Terri¬ 
tories and the provincial government. During this period 
Mormon students could obtain this type of instruction at the 
Knight Academy in Raymond after 1910 , and in private schools 
in the Cardston area. The passages from school reports at 
this period indicate that the standards of academic education 
in Cardston were favourable. 



ol::.iioej .,o " 1: ' V . —; ado 

- , V. ■ 

^ -'OX.... ■.:■•■ ..: a d:a./ -\daa; . r; o.aia:'a./d aoaa o.-i. 

s • • . 

t 

’ 


■ 














CHAPTER IV 


THE CHURCH PRIVATE SCHOOL — 

THE KNIGHT ACADEMY 

THE PURPOSE BEHIND THE MORMON PRIVATE SCHOOL SYSTEM 

From its inception the Mormon Church endeavoured to 
make religion the core of its educational programme. During 
the early years in Utah the leaders of the Church had no dif¬ 
ficulty in organizing their institutions in such a way that 
this objective could be achieved. As non-Mormons, after I 860 , 
began to move into the territory in ever-increasing numbers 
they began to campaign for state-controlled schools to which 
their children could be sent. Thus religious instruction was 
excluded from the system of public education. As people of 
other religious faiths began to penetrate Latter-day Saint 
communities these sects began, in 186?, to establish mission 
schools which were superior to the schools already established 
in the territory. The teachers in these schools were well- 
trained, and many Mormon children attended them and received 
a high level of instruction. The Mormon leaders, however, 
became suspicious of these mission schools. They feared that 
it was an effort put forth by other sects to "reclaim the 

i 

Mormon youth from the faith of their fathers'*. 

^M. Lynn Bennion, Mormonism and Education . Salt Lake 
City, The Deseret Press, 1939, p. 145, 













• J I V. 



: a 




* 




yj X 








•' 




r .1 

Vi . . 






‘ i: /i 


c 


.. . . ' 






/ •.jo. 


1c 


■ 


i '■ v ; '* 





- 50 - 


The need for trained officers and teachers in the various 
organizations of the Church was also a factor in the establish¬ 
ment of Church schools. Moreover, the Mormons felt that their 
children in the public elementary schools should have properly 
trained teachers of their own faith. As a result the Latter- 
day Saint Church, while continuing to support state schools, 
decided to set up some schools of its own wherein the principles 
of the Mormon religion could be taught without restriction. The 
settlers in rural areas were quick to realize the educational 
advantages accruing from the establishment of large schools in 
their midst, and they did not hesitate to seek the aid of 
Church authorities in the establishment of such academies to 
serve their educational needs. 

This building programme continued throughout all Latter- 
day Saint stakes 2 from the year 1875 until 1911. Although this 
general educational policy of the Mormon Church was at first 
applicable only to the Mormon communities in the United States, 
it later effected the establishment of private academies in 
Mormon colonies in Canada and in Mexico. It is to a discussion 
of the private academy which existed in the Mormon colony in 
Canada that the writer will now turn. 

THE ACADEMY BUILDING 

The Knight Academy in Raymond, Alberta, was re-named as 


A Mormon stake is comprised of several congregational 
units known as wards. 













- 51 - 


such in 1911 in honor of the Jesse Knight family who contributed 
a great deal to the economic growth of that community, and who, 
because of their interest in education, were generous benefac¬ 
tors of Church schools both in Utah and in Alberta* When the 
school was first constructed it was named the Taylor Academy 
after the Latter-day Saint Taylor Stake, which had been named 
after John W. Taylor, a prominent Church leader. 

The construction of this Church school was completed 
in October 1910, and it opened its doors for the registration 
of students on Monday, October 17 of that year. The building 
is situated north of the Mormon stake house, which stands in 
the vicinity of the assembly hall, a building in use at that 
time. The academy building, constructed of red rock, was 
considered at the time to be one of the better educational 
structures in Western Canada. It was constructed at a cost of 
forty-five thousand dollars. The interior in 1910 was divided 
into seven classrooms, a principals office, a teachers' room, 
an auditorium, a gymnasium and several other minor apartments, 

ADMINISTRATION AND CURRICULUM 

After the year 1888 the work of all Mormon academies was 
co-ordinated by a General Church Board of Education in Salt Lake 
City. The members of this board are nominated by the President 
of the Church and are sustained in office by a vote of all 
Church members when they assemble for their annual Church con¬ 
ferences. Their term of office is for life unless requested 








.',.. 11 : 




:xed 




VJJ 






i.)-K >0 






. 




t 


IV 


' 

si 


. X 


0 i. 


‘ 


■ ■ u 


■ 




rv 


‘ 


i Xlsjd 


o 


{: c' ■:• j 








.. j. 


o 


t 1 c 


. 


c 


■ 11 : 


.. J 


- s ' 


l: ■ t i ■ 






. , ■ 




' 


O 

t 











■ O 




• . 





- 52 - 


by the President to perform other Church duties* In early 
years much of the administrative work was performed by execu¬ 
tive committees of the board* The superintendent visited 
schools and did the clerical work of his office* Matters of 

policy were determined largely by the board or executive com- 

3 

mittees of the general board*-' 

The local administration of a Church academy was under 
a local board of trustees* Members of this board were the 
presidency of the stake, or stakes, served by the school* The 
Knight Academy served several Mormon stakes in Alberta. There¬ 
fore its local board of administration was comprised of repre¬ 
sentatives from each stake which it served. The local boards 
submitted their business to the general board in Salt Lake 
City through the superintendent* 

During the life of the Knight Academy H.S* Alien of 
Raymond served as the president of the local board of trustees* 
Allen, one of the early Mormon pioneers, had served on the 
first district school board in C a rdston, and he was extremely 
interested in education. He contributed generously of his 
time as well as his material goods to the institution* 


^Harold S. Nelson, Cost in the Senior Seminaries of the 
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . Thesis, Brigham 
Young University, Provo Utah, May 1935, p. 1 6 * 












. 










a i 


j i 


o 







t 


>3 ado 


■j 







:s . ,r { . . j-s • 

< * 


* 

' 




- 


( MT 








- 53 - 


The school was visited frequently by Professor Cummings 
of Salt Lake City, who at this time was superintendent and co¬ 
ordinator of curricula of Mormon Church schools in the United 
States. Since the administration of the school aimed to provide 
the students with university matriculation and entrance to the 
Alberta Normal School at Calgary, the curriculum had to be har¬ 
monized with that of the provincial system of education. On 
November 7> 1910, Professor Cummings and Allen interviewed the 
Alberta educational authorities in Edmonton in this connection. 
They also visited the Calgary Normal School to look into the 
requirements for the professional training of teachers in Alberta 
in order that the curriculum of this educational institution could 
be planned in such a way that prospective teachers could obtain 
the necessary credits for Normal entrance. The school, besides 
being visited regularly by the representatives from Utah, was 
visited by the provincial inspectors who attempted to keep the 
academic instruction in line with that required by the Department 
of Education for the district high schools of the province. 

Although the academy was organized on the same pattern 
as were the combined junior colleges and high schools of Utah 
and of other western states, the administrators were optimistic 
enough to feel that its organization and curriculum could be 
easily adapted to that of the high schools of Alberta. Provin¬ 
cial educationalists in the year 1910 were planning the revised 
organization of the Alberta school system which was to come 
into effect in the year 1912* The following excerpt from 




- 54 - 


the minutes of the Taylor Academy (later to be referred to as 
the Knight Academy) briefly summarizes the results of the 
interview between Superintendent Cummings and the Deputy 
Minister of Education for Alberta: 


November 10 f 1910* 

Superintendent Cummings met with the faculty at 
4 P.M. in the presidents office. The purpose for 
calling the meeting was that the instructors might 
learn what is expected of them by the Church authori¬ 
ties, also to acquaint them with the interview which 
he had with the Deputy Minister of Education at Edmon¬ 
ton in regard to the Church School system. 

He reported that the government is arranging to 
change the school year, making the public school 
course an eightjears* course instead of five as at 
present, and making the high school course cover a 
period of four years instead of three years as at 
present. This new arrangement will, no doubt, cor¬ 
respond more or less with the methods employed in the 
United States, and therefore the Church school course 
can be harmonized with it.^ 

It is interesting to note, at this point, that the 
Mormons were not alone at this period in their effort to har¬ 
monize their system of education with that of Alberta. In the 
same year that the Knight Academy opened its doors the Lutheran 
College was established in Camrose. Both of these religious 
groups had emigrated from the United States during an influx 
of settlers into Canada which began shortly before the turn of 
the century and terminated before the outbreak of the First 
World War. 

The following passage bears out the fact that this 


4 The Knight 


Academy Minutes, 


P. 3. 














:L 


j C J 





- 55 - 


school, as well as the Mormon school —— both of American origin 
-- was attempting to adapt its curriculum to that of the Alberta 
high schools® Both schools had religion as the core of their 
curriculum, and both of them were attempting to train teachers 
of their own faith who could teach their youth according to 
their own religious convictions* The passages read: 

The aim of the Camrose College was first stated in 
an early bulletin as follows: 

Camrose Lutheran College is enlisted in the cause 
of Christian education* Its founders were actuated by 
the conviction that only educational training which is 
secured under the refining influence of the Christian 
religion can be complete or adequate for the purpose 
of life* The general aim of our college therefore, is 
to give young men and women a higher education based 
on the Christian faith as taught in our Evengelical 
Lutheran Church and to foster, encourage and guard the 
Christian life of our students* The college will 
endeavour to give to its students an adequate training 
in the various academic courses outlined, and at the 
same time seek to transmit to them in as large a measure 
as possible the religious and cultural treasures of their 
forefathers 

Another passage quotes: 

During the early years of the history of the Camrose 
Lutheran College, the staff was composed entirely of 
American teachers whose training had been obtained in 
Church schools of the United States* The academic courses 
offered by the college during its first years were perhaps 
chiefly designed to prepare students for the American in¬ 
stitutions of higher learning. 

During the very first year of the college, however, 
there had already been a demand by a small group of 


Chester A. Homing, A Study of an Alberta Protestant 
Private School f The C Q mrose Lutheran College« (May 1942), p* 32 , 












■ >-'• ■' 'i ■■ ■■■ • • ' O, -« . .. 0 . " , .. ± i. , : • t .. . ‘ • 

no -l . . •... . o. ... ■ ;J . ecr 

* ' ' 

. 0 ;? 

* 


' c ■ ■ . y . . to mi. ■ 

: . >.: Hi f i ■ 

i " l £ J ... ‘ten • ieC 

: -* * 

•• ' r ' . : ‘ .'' 
t muV ' r ni • 

. • 

< ' ■ ■■ •' ' • * ' !. 

' ’ l ’ tot ' . d 

I, ■ - 7 -"7 . ;_*j: X : • .. 7 ;. X .. H no 

add . • a K • t ■ 1 t ■ 

, cl 

1 ■ - cl adi ’ ■ u >v 1 

< ' ■ 

■ *. X id ' ■ 1 

1 :c 1 : /r ' 

. • 


: 7 H r• c;", -n-n;. 7:i on. 


o o o 7 ;:a •:0 s- i. X 1 o o d: I . : ■, i 
la vle r ii;J:ro Hr:0770o 
f.i.t ;>:■ nX;.:- j do n-'.'X Inn 

■" ' ‘ • X. . • ; . . 

... o- C\; • .jn .f c ": • 

■ ' ■' . 

< t .1 J. 

io .con IX...-.as \-J 


n..: , .In :•; • ..: •• •.. o: a X 

. t 1 • . 

■ 

Hrj ‘'■o oloonoc XonunX 

• • 

\ ' o:J i .', n • ; H " - v 

lit■ crroci 'I. o.ni;' X.v., on°X.X 



* 

c . 







- 56 - 


students for preparation for the high school examina¬ 
tions conducted by the Department of the Province of 
Alberta and the University matriculation examinations 
conducted by the University of Alberta . b 

From the time the Camrose Lutheran College was first 
established its staff realized that the institution eventually 
must be primarily Canadian. The demand for preparation for 
Canadian higher institutions of learning was welcomed, and the 
curriculum was adapted to meet the need. The content of the 
academic courses offered was adjusted accordinglyIn this 
respect the organization of the Lutheran College in Camrose was 
similar to that of the Knight Academy in Raymond. 

Is is evident from the minutes of the Knight Academy 
that from the very beginning an effort was put forth to carry 
on a system of democratic administration. At the second 
faculty meeting of this institution, which was held during the 
month of November, 1910, staff committees were elected to look 
after the welfare of the students. It was decided that the 
teaching staff should create four groups for this purpose. 

The four committees were as follows: 

(1) A committee to look after the home life of the 
students. 

(2) A committee to regulate amusements and athletics. 

( 3 ) A committee on attendance and preparation. 

(4) A committee on reception and entertainment. 8 


I£id*, P. 35* 

The Knight Academy Minutes, p. 4. 


Ibid . . p. 36 . 









- 57 - 


The president of the institution delegated some authority 
to the staff members, and he endeavoured to share his responsib¬ 
ility with them. He himself was to act as ex-officio officer 
at the head of all committees. Faculty meetings were generally 
held at 4:30 every Friday afternoon, at which time each committee 
was given an opportunity to report. Any problems arising from 
the committee reports were thoroughly discussed by the faculty 
as a whole, solutions were suggested, and motions were presented 
and voted upon by the group. In matters pertaining to attendance 
at school the president did not delegate enough authority to the 
committee on attendance and preparation to turn down pupil 
excuses for absenteeism over his signature. If such excuses 
appeared to be suspicious they were to be submitted to him for 
his approval before they were accepted or openly rejected. 

Since the academy was a Church school, religion played 
a prominent role in the administration of the institution. 

Faculty meetings were at all times opened and closed with 
prayer — any member of the staff could be called upon to act 
in this capacity. In addition to possessing the necessary 
academic, administrative, or vocational qualifications the 
members of the teaching staff were required to be members of 
the Latter-day Saint Church, in good standing with that organi¬ 
zation. Their lives were to be exemplary to their students. 

They were expected to be in harmony with each other and with 








- 58 - 


the Priesthood as well. A tithe of one-tenth of the salary 
was expected by the Church, also one-half of one per cent of 
the salary was required by the administration to be paid into 
an educational fund. Faculty members were required to attend 
Church meetings and to accept only one position in the ward 
or stake as an officer. 

The following passage emphasizes what the administra¬ 
tion required of each faculty member with respect to his 
attitude towards the remainder of the faculty and his work: 

The faculty must be in harmony, and if offence is 
given make matters right immediately, for it is des¬ 
tructive to the system to allow matters like this to 
grow. We must have charity for each other and learn 
to forgive and thereby sweeten our own natures. We 
must not backbite, and if we come to a point when we 
cannot be pleasant, resign for the good of the school. 
Church schools, like any other organizations of the 
Church, must be governed so. We must be worthy of 
our calling as a teacher in our Church school, for it 
is an honor to be thus engaged in the instruction of 
children.^ 

STUDENT COSTS AND ACCOMMODATION 


Board and lodging could be secured by students who 
attended the academy and who came from outlying Mormon centres, 
for four dollars per week. When the enrollment at the school 
was high it was the intention of the administration to construct 


'The Knight Academy Minutes, p. 78. 












- 59 - 


a residence to house the students registered at the institution* 
This plan, however, was never carried to completion because of 
the dwindling attendance* 

The registration fees which were charged the attending 
students were not extremely high* A section from the faculty 
minutes sets forth the scale of tuition fees in the following 
manner: 

Students registering for one or two subjects 
shall be charged a fee of five dollars, for three 
subjects seven dollars fifty cents* For registra¬ 
tion in more than three subjects the regular tui¬ 
tion of ten dollars shall be charged* 10 

THE CURRICULUM 

The point has previously been made that the Knight 
Academy adapted its curriculum to the system of high school 
education in Alberta. In part, the school endeavoured to 
supplement the academic instruction offered in the high schools 
in Mormon communities at this period* At this time the Alberta 
high schools offered instruction through the eleventh grade in 
most of the smaller districts. In city schools instruction 
was offered on the twelfth grade level. However, after the 
Knight Academy was opened, the children coming from the area 
it served were offered instruction in twelfth grade courses. 


10 


Ibid*, p. 81 





< 


t 




Ctd ; ' I 


t 


O O 




< . 1 : 











- 6o - 


Courses were likewise offered in preparatory high 
school, domestic arts, manual training and music* A missionary 
and seminary course was introduced in order to provide the stu¬ 
dents with religious instruction. Although the institution was 
founded primarily to give the Latter-day Saint youth a founda¬ 
tion in religious instruction, and to equip the students with 
training in home-making by means of practical courses in manual 
arts and household economics, a study of the faculty minutes 
would indicate that the academic instruction was not neglected. 

Members of the Mormon Church attending the school were 
obliged to include religious instruction as a part of their 
course of studies. However, in spite of the fact that the 
academy was a religious institution under the supervision of 
the Latter-day Saint Church, it was not exclusively a Church 
school. Its doors were opened to students of non-Mormon faith. 
Non-members attending the academy were not required to study 
Latter-day Saint doctrine as a part of their course of studies. 
“They could devote their time to the regular academic work of 
the standards.” 11 

Under the administration of the first president of the 
academy, Ernest Bramwell, September 1910 to June 191A, no men¬ 
tion is made in the faculty minutes of commercial classes 
being offered at this institution. However, by the year 1915 

^The Globe, Cardston, October 28, 1910. 





SJi II 


■ 


; £i; 


.1 


UO uOJ. 'ti X V*lr: £WS ' 

. lO’XW- iv. 1 - ' Oi. J V ■' 
a ■ ;.o. O. ~ 


"i 3 




o' ea 


■ ; 


noo c o 




: on 


■ 




)C O' 0;ii f i;"i 


! O ■ 






: C <J.O .1. .. - '-O. ■ v llJOO i’v 


t • 




JO: 


; 


. 




« •' ' ■ « ■ 










-61- 


these courses were included in the curriculum under the admin¬ 
istration of the second president, Thomas C. Romney, who suc¬ 
ceeded Ernest Bramwell in the year 1915. The commercial courses 
which were added gave the students a training in bookkeeping, 
shorthand and typewriting. 

TEACHING PERSONNEL 

The majority of the first instructors at the academy 
were appointed from schools in Utah. Wilford Woolf was the 
first Canadian to join the staff of the school. Woolf, having 
been bom at Cardston, received his public and high school 
education in Alberta. He attended the Regina Normal School 
where he received his teacher*s certificate. 

During the first month of the school term when the 
academy began to operate, the faculty was composed of six 
members. The president of the institution occupied a position 
similar to that held by the principals of the district high 
schools of Alberta. The teaching faculty in the year 1910 was 
as follows: 

(1) Ernest Bramwell — B.A., B. Div. President, English 
and Civics. 

(2) Wilford Woolf — Secretary and Registrar, History, 
Geography and Literature. 

( 3 ) O.F. Ursenbach — Director of Music, Band, Chorus 
and Orchestra. 

(4) Vard L. Tanner, B.A., Mathematics and Science. 

(5) Pearl Wright, Matron, Domestic Arts. 

(6) Mrs. Baker, Piano, Voice. 






- 




Qii 


iol 




» 





i 


i 










r 





t. 












* 


* 









- 62 - 


Later in the first school term an additional member, 

L.L. Pack was employed to teach on the staff of the institu¬ 
tion. He remained with the faculty until the end of June 1911, 
when he, along with O.F. Ursenbach resigned. They were repla¬ 
ced in September 1911 by George 0. Nye and Edwin S. Poulson. 

Two new lady teachers were added to the faculty in 1911* The 
appointment of the misses Frances Rasmussen and Charlotte 
Wetzel increased the total number of faculty members from 
seven to nine. With the addition of these two new staff members 
the curriculum offered was expanded to include instruction in 
such courses as elocution, rhetoric, and manual training* 

For further information concerning the teaching person¬ 
nel employed during the time the college was in operation the 
reader will find a complete list of the names of faculty mem¬ 
bers in Appendix A, 

INSERVICE TRAINING OF TEACHERS 

During the terms of administration of the three presi¬ 
dents — President Asael Palmer succeeded President Romney in 
September of 1920 — the faculty members were encouraged to 
keep abreast of the times as to new methods in teaching pro¬ 
cedures which were being introduced, as well as the recent 

policies in school administration which were being adopted. 












rial 








.! o';; 




. 


c 









’ ■ 0 't 




















- 63 - 


Presidents' and principals' meetings were held frequently in 
Salt Lake City. Representatives were sent from the Knight 
Academy to these conventions, and they were required on their 
return to report in faculty meetings for the purpose of keeping 
the members of the teaching staff informed as to the latest 
movements taking place in the field of education. The president 
of the academy was kept informed as to the educational topics 
which were under discussion at special meetings known as prin¬ 
cipals' meetings, which were held in Utah, and which were not 
attended by him. This information was passed on to him by 
means of bulletins and circular letters which were mailed to 
him by Superintendent Cummings and the General Board of Educa¬ 
tion in Salt Lake City. These circulars were read to the 
faculty members in the weekly staff meetings. 

The staff likewise kept in touch with the Alberta 
movements in education. Conventions at this period were 
organized for Alberta teachers under the administration of the 
Department of Education. These were held in Lethbridge during 
the month of November of each autumn. Delegates were elected 
by the academy staff members to attend these convention meet¬ 
ings, and they were required to report to the remainder of the 
faculty members on their return. 

During President Romney's term of administration a 
programme for the inservice training of academy staff members 


vi 

















U 




O 


- 


, ■ 




O 0 






oj '■ 










•O .. i 






' 1 




•c.;.-' -’o.uXo' ni 


IC 


. i ■ i 


.jij -tvj 
















- 64 - 


was rather adequately carried out. Mention is made in the 
documents studied of several books dealing with teaching 
methods and the administration of schools. These books were 
read and discussed at the weekly faculty meetings. Reports 
on pertinent chapters from these books were prepared in advance 
by a member of the faculty. At the weekly assembly of the 
academy instructors the section prepared was reported on, and 
a discussion period followed. 

Some of the reference materials which served as topics 
for informal discussions in the faculty meetings held during 
the school term of the year 1917 are as follows: 

(1) Parker*s Methods of Teaching in the High Schools. 

(2) Educational Hygiene by Rapier, 

(3) Suggested Problems of Secondary Education by Snedden 
(Houghton, Mifflin and Co,) 

(4) Reveries of a Schoolmaster. 

(5) Education and the Rural Life by Cubberly (Houghton, 
Mifflin and Co.), 12 

In the year 1917 the faculty changed the time of their 
weekly instruction periods from Friday afternoon of each week to 
eight o’clock in the morning of each school day. At this time 
discussions dealing with interesting topics on current events 
were also introduced as a part of the daily discussion period. 


12 The Knight Academy Minutes, p. 121 














- 65 - 


GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 

The Knight Academy, during the eleven years that it was 
in operation, was organized on the semester plan* New work was 
covered during the preparatory and the mid-winter semesters* 

Most of the spring term was devoted to the review of subject 
matter and the drill necessary to prepare the students who 
desired to qualify as candidates for the written departmental 
examinations held in June of each year* 

Academy examinations were held at the end of each 
semester, and credits received by the students were recorded 
on a credit card which was filed for each pupil. When the 
student had satisfied the instructors as to the work required 
of him, he was given an academy diploma to designate that a 
certain specified level of attainment had been reached* Be¬ 
cause of the fact that the majority of the residents of this 
area were in one way or another engaged in agriculture, many 
of the students began to attend classes late in the autumn 
after the harvest season was over* These same students left 
early in the spring to begin work in the fields. Only two- 
fifths of the total number of students attending during the 
winter season generally remained to write the provincial depart¬ 
mental examinations at the end of June. The organization of the 
institution on the semester plan thus decidedly worked to the 
advantage of students who were unable to remain at school in 
order to write the final government tests. Under such a 
semester system they were able to write Knight Academy tests 














u 












- 66 - 


and could acquire credits towards the academy diploma. As 
previously mentioned, the primary purpose of the Church acade¬ 
mies was not to matriculate students. According to the Latter- 
day Saint philosophy of education an opportunity should be 
given to the maximum number of students to expose themselves 
to as much cultural and religious instruction as possible 
during the limited time at their disposal. 


The Knight Academy examinations, held at the school in 
May of each school year, were considered to be the "finals". 

The pupil*s rating was not determined entirely by the results 
of one paper. Classwork counted for thirty per cent, note¬ 
books were checked, and thirty per cent of the final mark was 
determined by their condition. The final examination itself 
was weighted at forty per cent of the grading allotted. 


The following marking system, which was used during 
the administration of Thomas C. Romney, gives an idea as to 
what standard of achievement was expected for the granting of 
credit in the courses offered. 


A + =97 C + = 77 

A = 94 C = 74 


A- = 91 


C- = 71 


B + =87 D + = 66 

B = 84 D = 64 


B. = 81 


D_ = 61 
E =s Failure 


9 

■ ' " 


. 

. 

. ' - 

' 

' • ' ' ' 

' 

■;,.' '■ i. ! C i.. o': -■x 

? * ' 

: ' • " ■ V *■./: ■■■ ■ V ; 










, . 



+f$ = 







- 67 - 


In the event of work being incomplete, the mark was to 


be approximated from data at hand, followed by an "i" designat¬ 
ing incomplete (i.e. no grade to be given until the work was 


made up). 


The following quotation taken from the faculty minutes 


during the administration of Ernest Bramwell specifies the 
regulations governing the promotion of students from one grade 
to another for the purpose of securing the Knight Academy 


diploma: 


The committee on examinations and graduation pre¬ 
sented a report to regulate examinations. The report 
contained three clauses, briefly as follows: 

(1) That all students expecting to graduate or pass 
to a higher class be required to take a practical 
written test on the work covered during the term. 

(2) That students be required to obtain not lower 
than 5 °% on each subject and a general average 
of 65 %. 

(3) That students be passed unless they fail in more 
than one subject, and also provided they write 
off the starred subject either at the beginning 
of the next school year, at the end of the first 
semester but not later than the end of the second 
semester. 

Clause one was adopted. Clause two was changed to 
read 1 a minimum mark of , 1 and 1 an average of 75 %* 



and adopted as corrected. 


STUDENT DISCIPLINE 

Although instructions and suggestions regarding general 
policy in the administration of the school were Included in the 


1 3 ibia .. p. 159. 


Ibid. 








r- m 






















- 68 - 


"Guide Book" which was sent by the General Board in Salt Lake 
City to the president of the academy, the faculty of this 
institution were permitted to form their own policy regarding 
the expulsion of un-cooperative students. Any disciplinary 
action taken by the president in this connection was, however, 
subject to a final decision made by the local board in Raymond* 
During the eleven years that the school was in operation there 
is reference made in the minutes to one instance only when a 
student was permanently expelled from the institution. There 
are, however, several instances referred to when delinquent 
students were temporarily suspended for infringements of the 
school rules and regulations* These pupils were always per¬ 
mitted to return after making such amends as deemed necessary 
by the faculty and board* 

There is evidence in the documents referred to by the 
writer that an attempt was made by the instructors to encourage 
"discipline from within" rather than to employ external methods 
of disciplining the child. The students were placed on their 
"word of honour" to refrain from practices which were considered 
objectionable by the faculty and the General Authorities of the 
Church* 1 ^ 

With respect to the general discipline of the school, 


15lbid., p. 106 






"AVI ■ 











- 69 - 


it was frequently the policy of the faculty to share this 
responsibility with the student body officers. Responsibility 
for the maintenance of order in the library was generally 
assigned to a member of the faculty. However, there were 
instances when this responsibility was either delegated to 
the student body officers or to other reliable students of 
the school. This assignment of the duty to the students was 
generally made when the faculty member was unable to be present, 
or when he was overburdened with course work or extra-curricular 
activities* 

The student attending the academy was answerable to the 
faculty for his general conduct out of school as well as in 
class. Such conduct as intoxication, smoking, loitering in 
pool-rooms and attending dances in public halls of bad reputa¬ 
tion, even during the Christmas vacation and other holidays, 
was frowned upon by the faculty and the General Board in Salt 
Lake City. Students attending the institution were placed upon 
their word of honour to abstain from such practices. If found 
guilty of this type of behavior they were at times “brought to 
task" by the student body as a whole. Occasions are referred 
to in the minutes when student conduct lists dealing with faulty 
behavior were read before the students. 

Other problems of general discipline were not solved 
by the president alone. A certain amount of thieving is 



jr; ('t i. 


i,t i'! 


* 


Gw 


. 




J . hki Cf c 




.. 




. X X 


% 



m 



. 


x 


:oi; ; ;r, >.-v " ' x:t 


X 


•i': J 


6 $ 




‘co 











- 70 


generally contended with wherever a large number of students 
are assembled. References to such a problem existing in this 
institution indicate that the faculty members consulted the 
student body, and planned by means of a concerted effort to 
attempt to find a solution to such an objectionable practice* 

The following passage from the academy minutes points 

to this existing problem: 

Conditions in the library and thieving among some 
of the students were next taken up. President Bramwell 
appointed a committee from the faculty consisting of 
Instructors Pack and Tanner to act with a committee 
from the student body,and devise some means of putting 
a check to thieving. 0 

As to the disciplining of students in matters of 
absenteeism and tardiness, much the same routine was followed 
in this institution as is followed in our schools of today. 
The following quotation deals with the procedure followed by 
Bramwell and his faculty in this connection: 

Instructor Tanner, chairman of the committee on 
preparation and attendance, proposed a plan for dealing 
with students. Part of the proposed plan was approved 
and is as follows: 

(a) Excuses shall be required from students who are 
either tardy or absent. 

(b) When tardy, students shall give an oral excuse 
to the teacher at the end of the period; when 
absent excuses must be written, and they must 
be presented before students enter the classes. 

(c) The excuses must be written on neat, white paper, 
properly headed, dated, addressed and signed, 
with the cause for being absent. 

(d) When students are absent from one or more classes 
during the day, the excuses shall be presented to 
the teachers immediately concerned, but should 


16 


Ibid ., p. 7 

















- 71 - 


students be absent for a whole day they shall pre¬ 
sent their excuses to the president for his signa¬ 
ture before they are taken to the different teachers* 
Any teacher reserves the right to require an excuse 
for absence from one class, to be first signed by 
the president. 

(e) All excuses shall be taken up and filed with the 
president where they shall be kept for reference. 

(f) Monthly reports shall be sent to the parents or 
guardians of all students. Among other things 
contained in these reports, the number of times 
students are absent or tardy shall be specified. 
Clauses (e) and (f) were added to the scheme 
originally proposed during the discussion of the 

plan. The committee were also authorized to draft a sui¬ 
table monthly report to be sent to the parents. They 
were also given the privilege of calling to their assist¬ 
ance for this work other members of the faculty. 1 ' 


PUPIL ACTIVITY AND THE EXTRA-CURRICULAR PROGRAMME 

From historical documents available the writer finds 

that the staff and administrators of this school were aware 

at this period of the importance of student activity in the 

teaching and learning situation. During the school*s second 

term of operation Bramwell advised the faculty members that 

the teacher in the classroom was to do very little. ”The 

teachers should have the pupils do most of the work, and they 

1R 

should reproduce the previous lesson”. 

This method of conducting classes x^ras a far cry from 
the teacher centred school which was common under the tradition¬ 
al system of education employed at this period. It was not 

1 7 ibia .. p.26. 1 8 ibia .. p. 4 ?. 















&0f 








- 72 - 


until the year 1936 that the Department of Education prescribed 
a new elementary school programme known as an “activity" or 
"child-centred programme". At the Knight Academy an effort 
to develop the individual by giving him an opportunity for 
"self expression" was not confined to the classroom learning 
situation. Accounts dealing with extra-curricular events and 
the sharing of certa.in responsibilities with the students by 
staff members would indicate that the educational leaders in 
charge of the academy kept in mind the development of the 
"whole child". 

Although the school offered courses which would count 
for credit towards obtaining the Knight Academy diploma, and 
which would at the same time promote the development of the 
social side of the individual, an extensive extra-curricular 
programme was put into effect. Many of the "out of school" 
activities could be closely associated with such credit courses 
as physical training, music and elocution, and they could be 
adequately supervised by the faculty members giving instruction 
in these courses. 

In the planning and carrying out of the extra-curricular 
programme the staff members worked in conjunction with a student 
body council similar in its organization to those existing in 
the high schools at this period, and which today are receiving 
much emphasis under our system of progressive education. The 
academy student body organization was patterned after that of 


ilWOit'A 


o 


I 




fi- 


. o J. V i . 0 $ 


';vi ’ 


,-j r 'xttO 0 c! O I'l 




t 


' X X C. ■ 




o 


1 ri: 


1 • ' c 


II Hi 


JufJO C 


o; ro o 


■) ' 1 . . £Oi 


o f ;o 1 


OX ■ : 


01 j 




t 






O j ji.-'or-iO 




< 


o 




X: 



■ •'; x o 


r l:‘JO 



J \> v ' ... . • • X. X u . J O X,.i [, : ■ 




s i i "i oiiixi-'X'i 


‘K 1 


• 1 .r-o^j o;j h-'X,; o .* .. 




'O': v- d ^O.C'iXU X L'"\: -fx.!O', !-‘>Oui 


• :VX 


j.l 0 X; V . :.'.X XXO 




- 73 - 


the Brigham Young University — a Church university in Provo, 
Utah, organized for the academic, religious and social develop¬ 
ment of the individual. 

Under the administration of Bramwell the choice of 
candidates for student body president was not left with the 
student body as a whole. The following passage taken from 
the academy minutes is indicative of this fact: 

The faculty appointed two candidates for student 
body president, Ellis Heninger and Fred Spackman. 

The student body was privileged to call a vote, ballot 
or otherwise, to see which student should act as pre¬ 
sident. Other officers are to be nominated by the 
president and faculty.^9 

This method of electing student body presidents may not 
be considered the most democratic method — judged by the 
regulations generally governing student body organizations 
today. However, such a method of appointing candidates might 
in some schools be considered wise when the fact is taken into 
consideration that a student body officer exercises considerable 
influence over the student group as a whole. Adolescents, 
because of their immature judgment, sometimes are inclined to 
put values in the wrong place, and in being permitted to make 
their own choice of representatives without staff guidance, 
can very easily choose one lacking in the proper qualities for 
leadership. 

In later years, under the administration of Thomas C. 

19 ibia., p. ih 
















•■O;. 








V ">*'•■ 













- 74 - 


Romney, the faculty members decided that students should be 
permitted to appoint their own candidates and to elect their 
own officers — the president to come from either sex. 

The first student body council of the Knight Academy 
had been completely organized and had begun to act by December 
16, 1910. The officers represented an assembly of some two 
hundred five students. J.W. Evans of Magrath acted as the 
first president, and he was assisted by the following officers: 
a first and second counselor, a secretary, a treasurer, a 
’’sergeant at arms”, an athletic manager and a cheer leader. 

The student body was governed by a constitution which they 
themselves framed. The constitution which was thus written 
provided for a school paper to be published by the students. 
This paper was referred to as the ’’Northern Lights”; a special 
committee was responsible for supervising the publishing of 
the articles which were printed in it. 

It has always been the contention of the Latter-day 
Saint people that the spirit and the moral tone of the members 
can be elevated and maintained on a higher plane if an adequate 
programme for recreational activity can be provided. During 
the life of the academy this fact was kept in mind, and much 
effort was put forth by the administration to occupy the 
minds of the youth with recreational activities. Athletic 
clubs were sponsored under the supervision of the instructor 
of physical training. Although from the first term that the 


sj ■Ji'.i ■■ J . J f- ‘‘• ; : '.. 

ori a: J.:' . i.-:o n 


... ’ ■■ ■: j .1'. J 1 



OiS 


•j. .. ;-o: 

) .. 




; \£ 




K: Cl 


, 








•5V.n. v * ; >j• i 








Ti 




L J. O 




' 


■. - 


8ilJ 


lo .'ooci i.0 






. ..., 'J ; ' : i.. ' i; 8 ' V" J •. 

. ; • , • • C 3 . V: : / . tl/.o 

■ ■ . . , 

' 

■ l I i$ % ' . ' 

■ 1 ' ' ■ ■ 1 

. • ‘ 






- 75 - 


school operated the basketball league received the greatest 
attention, there is evidence in the documents pertaining to 
extra-curricular activities that other games providing physi¬ 
cal activity for the pupils were not lost sight of. Such 
games as baseball, tennis, volleyball, and activities provi¬ 
ding training in track and field events were encouraged. 

The basketball leagues were first organized on an 
inter-class basis only. Later leagues were organized to 
include games with opposing high school teams from the sur¬ 
rounding wards of Taber, Magrath and Cardston. Lethbridge 
was also included as one of the districts against which the 
academy team competed. Although basketball for girls was 
provided for on an inter-class basis, the girls were not, 
at this period, permitted to play against teams from outside 
districts. The ruling that boys must obtain a passing mark 
in all subjects before being permitted to play on the team 
was adhered to. 

The academy students financed their activities from 
the proceeds accumulating from the sale of tickets at the 
door. When such a method of financing the activity failed, 
funds could be drawn from the general student body account. 

Money was frequently secured from the rental of the auditorium- 
gymnasium in the school to other organizations in the community. 
These organizations were often allowed to use the building 
providing their use of the auditorium did not interfere with 
student league activities. 




- 


■ ' 






'. ,i ' 




■ ; : , 






, • • ■ r f: 




~ : '.3 




■ 










j 








‘ 


* 




: :f 






. 

' 


: 

' 






■ , 






- 76 - 


The opera, operetta and the drama were used as a means 
of integrating course instruction with extra-curricular student 
activities* These activities were under the supervision of 
the music and drama instructors, and they provided excellent 
opportunity for the personality development of the student. 

The events were sponsored not solely for the entertainment of 
the student body, but presentations were, on occasion, taken to 
the surrounding Mormon wards of Stirling, Magrath, Cardston and 
Taber. It was the aim of the drama and music clubs of the 
school to prepare and present one major opera, comedy or 
operetta each school year that the academy was in operation. 

The following are some of the presentations which were made 
during the years in which the school was open. 

1910 - 1911 — operetta — "Snow White" 

1911 - 1912 — drama — "The Amazons" 

1912 - 1913 — operetta — "The Peasant" 

1913 - 191^ — comedy — "One of the Eight" 

1915 - 1916 — operetta — "Zami ,f 

1916 - 1917 — drama — "Hazel Kirk" 

1919 - 1920 - opera — "The Eire Prince" 

During the year 1919 the extra-curricular activities 
of the academy student body were somewhat curtailed because of 
the epidemic of influenza which was spreading throughout the 
country at this period. 








- 77 - 


In the educational and auxiliary organizations of the 
Latter-day Saint Church elocution and other forms of self- 
expression in public have received considerable emphasis as a 
means of developing the self-confidence of the child. During 
the first term that classes were held in the Knight Academy a 
debating club was organized for this purpose. When this 
activity was first added to the list of extra-curricular events 
it was organized on an inter-class basis only. However, as 
this club gained in popularity it was permitted to enter a 
debating league. It was on the initiative of two of the staff 
members, De Voe Woolf and Matilda Walton, that the debating 
society of the school entered the debating league. At this 
period debating clubs were organized in the various Southern 
Alberta communities, and it was the custom for debating teams 
to travel from one town to another for the purpose of compet¬ 
ing for the debating trophy. These teams were supported by 
the adult members of the community as well as the school stu¬ 
dents. 

For the purpose of sponsoring seasonal dances and 
parties, the grades in the school from nine to twelve inclusive 
were permitted to take charge. These classes were referred to 
as Freshmen, Juniors, Sophomores and Seniors. Each had a class 
room student council, a special banner and class colors. The 
seasonal extra-curricular parties and dances were generally 
held on Founder’s Day, at Christmas and at Easter. There were 




0 0 0 i. 


' 


. 


1 • .l o 








o c - 








■ 


eonu o 














- 78 - 


generally graduation exercises held on Commencement Day at the 
end of June. The classroom councils could petition the staff 
for permission to hold dances at various intervals throughout 
the school year. These dances were sponsored for the purpose 
of raising money for the general student body fund. 

“Founder’s Day" was generally held on October 17 of 
each year. This day was set aside to commemorate the anniver¬ 
sary of the school, since it was on this day in the year 1910 
that the institution first began to register students for the 
opening autumn semester. This occasion was celebrated by a 
special programme prepared by the student body, and presented 
in the forenoon of this day for the entertainment of parents. 
The afternoon was declared a half-holiday by the board, and 
the day was climaxed by a dance which was sponsored in the 
evening by the students. During the events of this day the 
staff members were given an opportunity to meet with the 
parents of the students to discuss important problems. 

During the last three years that the school was in 
operation special attention was given to music in addition to 
the other extra-curricular activities. During the school year 
1919 - 1920 a course in choir conducting was organized under 
the direction of N. Lorenzo Mitchell, a former faculty member 
who had submitted his resignation from the academy staff in 
June 1917* During this same school term a brass band was 
organized under the leadership of Roy Kimball. 




- 79 - 


GUIDANCE AND PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT 

It would appear from the general tone of the academy 
minutes that every effort was made by the faculty to under¬ 
stand the adjustment problems of the students and to fit them 
into the academic and social situation of the school life. 

This effort on the part of the staff was particularly notice¬ 
able in the minutes of the faculty meetings which were held 
during the years of administration of Ernest Bramwell. During 
the first years that the school was in operation, frequent 
petitions were made by the students to drop courses during the 
school term. These petitions were considered by the staff, 
and they were frequently granted after due consideration had 
been given to them by the faculty as a group. During the 
latter years of the life of the school, under the administra¬ 
tions of Thomas Romney and Asael Palmer, there is very little 
reference made in the minutes to such petitions being presented. 

Various sections from the faculty minutes would indi¬ 
cate that the staff members of the school organized themselves 
in such a manner that some individual guidance could be given 
to the students in their charge. While some of the students, 
no doubt, lived in Raymond, many of them came from the outlying 
Mormon wards extending from the Cardston district to the Taber 
area. Two staff members were given the direct responsibility 
of seeing to pupil welfare. When the academy first opened, the 












• . 




1 ■; »n 


S. U 0 i 


<•> 


X 










r 


r 


■ • 




.1 







' 


1 



. - 








\ 






- 80 


domestic arts instructor was Matron in charge of the girls. 

Since the nature of such a responsibility could be considered 
more or less a religious calling, the theology instructor 
usually assumed the responsibility of supervision of the per¬ 
sonal lives of the boys. The faculty minutes give mention of 
the fact that the remainder of the faculty members were called 
upon to render aid in visiting the wards from which the pupils 
came. In this manner contact could be made with the parents 
of the students attending the institution. 

The extra-curricular activities were adequately super¬ 
vised by the faculty members. In this manner further opportunity 
was given to the staff through the medium of these student func¬ 
tions to see to the social development of the child. Students 
who were incapable of mingling with the crowd were of concern 
to the staff members, and apparently there was some guidance 
given in this connection. One section of the faculty minutes 
quotes: 


A letter was read from Superintendent Cummings 
regarding the statistical reports of the school. 
Growing out of this came a discussion of the conduct 
and the work of various students. Also there arose 
a discussion of 'wall flowers' at our social func¬ 
tions. A motion was made by Mr. Ursenbach and 
Mr. Holmes that a committee of three — one from 
the faculty and two students — be appointed to 
look after this matter. 20 


20 


Ibid., p. 104 






• u, - 








<% 




■ 



rf 


. 




: ,j';. •: ' 1 


, . 


:j i O i I 


fiu 10 


n.vtfK 




L 'V 


c t :• 


'0 '■ • : ! ' Jr 

: , ■. ■ ■ ■ ■ - . • ; ' 

: , 


;\i. y ?j j 

, . .. ■ .. ' 
o i :!J 'io 

■ ' 

. 

o,, Jx.i I:.,- . 




’ -t l • Ji!*' 

• • 

' 


rv/jvt ■ 

' t: *r.*- ' -oci 


















81 


In organizing the curriculum some effort was made by 
the administration to allow for time which could be devoted 
to the personal development and mental health of the student* 

In connection with the seminary course the students were at 
times divided into separate groups — the boys in one group 
and the girls in another. These special meetings were referred 
to as "sex meetings'*• Instruction was sometimes given by out¬ 
side speakers in addition to that given during faculty lectures* 
There are no references available from which the writer could 
gather information relevant to the course of studies followed 
in this health and personal development programme. However, 
by reading the faculty minutes one can conclude that the staff 
put considerable effort into the task of molding the characters 
and personalities of their charges, and that on occasions much 
of their time was devoted to giving individual attention to 
members of the student body who were socially maladjusted. 

A quotation from the faculty minutes of this institution 
points to the fact that the interest which the staff showed in 
the personal development of the student and his home background 
was not entirely without some reward. The passage quotes: 

Teachers were called to report the feeling obtaining 
in homes towards the academy. Reports were all satis¬ 
factory. In the teachers* reports all was encouraging. 

A better spirit is being manifested by students, and 
better results are being obtained in their work*^ 


21 


Ibid., p. § 







' 


o 




c 




.j on 














- 82 


RECRUITMENT PROGRAMME 


It was the aim of the General Board of Education in 
Salt Lake City to interest as many Mormon students as possible 
in attending the academy. However, in some of the wards of 
the Mormon area there was gradually developing a state of 
indifference towards the institution. This feeling of indif¬ 
ference was accompanied by a dwindling attendance. The faculty 
minutes refer to this situation during the administration of 
Ernest Bramwell. The following quotation points to the fact 
that this lack of interest was of concern to the faculty at 
this period. The passage reads: 

President Bramwell welcomed the faculty and 
expressed great appreciation for each member. He 
encouraged us in our work during the coming year. 

The president spoke of the general feeling 
of indifference towards the academy obtaining 
throughout the various settlements, more especially 
in Magrath. The cause of this feeling was attributed 
largely to the irresponsible class of students, 
supposed to be in attendance from there last year. 

The aim this year is to obtain good students, and 
fewer of them if necessary, in order that the school 
might be vindicated. 22 

For the purpose of recruiting the better students from 
those wards teacher visits were planned for these areas in 
order to overcome the growing indifference of Church members 
towards the school. For the purpose of recruiting the young 
people the faculty members were divided into committees whose 


2 2 Ibld .. p. 22. 













- 83 - 


duties were to visit the different districts and encourage 
the better students from the various wards to register* 

It was decided to appoint members of the faculty to 
have charge of the following districts: 

President Bramwell 
Taber 
Leonard 
Grassy Lake 

Instructors Allen and Poulson 
Stirling and Cardston 

Instructors Tanner and Steed 

Magrath. 2 ^ 

THE ACADEMY CLOSES 

During the first years the Knight Academy was in 
operation the institution was supported very enthusiastically 
by the majority of the Canadian Mormon wards. On the first 
registration day the enrollment of students numbered only 
thirty-five. By December 1910 this number had increased to 
a total of two hundred five pupils and an additional forty 
applications of students desirous of enrolling for the first 
mid-winter season were being considered. At one time during 
the administration of Bramwell the enrollment of students 
attending the institution had reached a total of three hundred# 

23 Ibld .. p. 46. 











W00£i0 Vii •• I:' -d:-suo Jxziv od ‘-‘sow ? ^t:,ub 

*1 -;;;.; .-j; '■ •• *• . , V', ■ • . f - ' * ' ' 

O w , s j . ;■ ■').. . i j ', :-, O i » ■V • 0 i l ■ .. • & " : ' ; ( " ■ ’ •• ' & ' '■ ' ■ ' 

: . ... 

li./.o ■ -‘r ;rrj-■ • :.i;ooo 

19CIeT 
:.*!■ •: creed, 
v\ od. £B*tG 

!. .Li. :•‘xodoooo-ox v 
o:odo v/,;o'' : : ""■. ‘ fox id 

• r-na ^91 r.cto. 7 f xdsril 


'• ;■ .• y ; ; d ; 0_ ;2 

V: ; : .. , : o o J \ i..; : : ‘ o r'-".' *“> : -'^'co' ■ 

: ■ ; ox . • ' . oi ; d " ■ - C t ' *x 

t ■ .: , o d, . >, ' 

ol ;7 . : 0* ' 0X0' ‘.00 '-'O d O.U • “770 '^OT . ~ X I.. O £ 0 ■ .Old' 0 S. 087 

• ■ C Edd j .. 0 , * ~ 

oj OC V 1: vm'oJ .*0 : ; 0 O -.LfyOO 0'V.ld €-7JJi'i OV.d i'O loojcd ■ ' 

■ > .• o ■. o' ’in: o.,0 • o.. d o o .;:■■■ 'Vo. ■: :“0 *:, ; :■ ’: : :? % f: :'?■ -ro 300 x:.m''0.,o., ; : 

# ‘ ; V - ■ ~~ 

0 t > 1 X ; ' ) ' ' C:Ll 


< , ' ■ 


X Odroj 





- 84 - 


During the latter years that the school was in operation there 
is evidence from the documents examined that it was being 
supported with less enthusiasm. In June 1921 the adminis¬ 
tration saw fit to cease to operate the school. 

The building was sold to the Raymond School District, 
and until the completion of the new high school building in 
Raymond in the year 1952, it served the community as their 
district high school. In the year 1952 the Raymond School 
Board began to house the students of the intermediate grades 
in this building, and at the present time it is under the 
administration of the Warner County Council. 

During the last year that the academy operated one of 
the special activities sponsored by the students was the pre¬ 
paration of a yearbook which was dedicated to H.S. Allen of 
Raymond. The following quotation taken from this book speaks 
of the esteem in which the Local Board member was held by the 
students of the institution: 

President Heber S. Allen, to whom this book is 
respectfully dedicated, has been president of the 
Knight Academy Board of Education since the insti¬ 
tution was founded. To him, more than to anyone 
else do we owe the establishment of the school. 

Throughout the years he has been its mainstay. A 
firm believer in education, he has given freely of 
his valuable time and of his means, that the young 
might have the educational advantages offered here. 

Not only has President Allen assisted in a 
material way, but his Influence has been of an ines¬ 
timable value. He has championed the cause of edu¬ 
cation in season and out, and he has practised what 
he has preached. 

Truly the school and the students who have come 




















- 85 - 


and gone owe a debt of gratitude to President Allen, 
a debt that can be paid only by^mulating his 
example of service to humanity* 

REASONS FOR CLOSING THE ACADEMY 

The main reason why the Knight Academy failed to 
continue to operate was that it was the general policy of the 
Mormon Church after 1920 to withdraw from the junior college 
and private secondary school field. The property in the 
United States and Canada was transferred to the state-control- 
led school districts* 

After the year 1905 in Utah, and after the year 1917 
in Alberta, the public high school movement developed rapidly* 
During the economic depression following World War I, the 
Mormons began to feel the extra financial burden of supporting 
a dual system of education* The Church found that it was a 
financial impossibility to establish large enough academies 
to accommodate all its members, and it found itself Incapable 
of competing with the public high schools which arose in 
Mormon districts* The General Board found that in most Mormon 
communities the representatives of the district school boards 
were generally Latter-day Saint Church members, and that in these 
communities the high schools were ordinarily manned by Mormon 
teachers, thus ruling out the need for academies* 2 ^ 

2 Jj, 

The writer obtained this letter from the notes of 
Mrs. Elizabeth King of Raymond. 

25 

^Bennion, op . cit .. p. 194. 

26 t 

Ibid *, p. 179. 











- 86 - 


One Mormon ward commented that the high school students 

at that period were much younger than those of a few years 

previous. The parents desired that they be educated in their 

home communities rather than that they should leave and board 

27 

in communities several miles distant. 

The public high schools were in a better financial 

position to equip their schools with laboratory equipment, 

physical training facilities and other properties essential 

to a g?od education. Furthermore there were fewer students 

per teacher in the high schools than in the academies, which 

2 8 

was a distinct advantage in their favor. 

Since the public high school system at this period 
was rapidly expanding, the demand for well-trained high school 
teachers was ever increasing. This demand for high school 
teachers thus placed the burden of Normal training upon the 
Mormon Church, since it desired that its members staff the 
public high schools in Latter-day Saint areas. The Church 
leaders were thus encouraged, not only by their own educators, 
but by public school men as well to transfer high school work 
to the state and concentrate on college normal work. 2 ^ 


2 ? Ibld . 

28 Ibid. 

2 9lbld .. p. 192. 













- 87 - 


SUMMARY 

The academic curriculum offered by the Knight Academy 
was very similar to that of the larger provincial high schools 
established at that period. The former, however, offered ins¬ 
truction in Mormon Church doctrine to Latter-day Saints in 
attendance. A number of vocational courses which attempted 
to train the boys and girls in manual, domestic and business 
arts were offered. Recreational programmes for character 
and personality development were rather abundantly provided 
and adequately supervised. The school, which had religion 
as its foundation, endeavored to maintain a friendly atmos¬ 
phere. 

The school failed to continue operation as a result 
of competition from provincial high schools. The financial 
burden caused by the economic depression which followed 
World War I was a factor in causing the academy to close its 
doors. 








. • ' . ' • : :l : o •', • • : 0.?’ 





•i 'J i ; 

:.' o v/'’ 

: \> ; 


. 

* 


• 

• • 1 ■ 

\J. ' ■, :L; ■ ■ 

- 


oJ.-- i ' o ■' 

' 

■ y 

■ ... 


j ■ v 

«■ • oottj t 

• 

' . ■)j . 


■ ■.. . • , ; ! . .*■ ' . ■ ■ - • / i • ( •• 

•; , ■ •, ■ • ' ' ■: ‘, ■ 00 : « " '■ ■ >•- 

•: . : *. ... .. -I rr: .:CiO L \ : oooieq on,'. 

• j ., t .... ■ 

... ... .. ;• n: ■ 

» 

. l . 0 : 0.0 "r^OO • j : -il ■ ,. J. ". • o IO ■ .*> T.i 

. • . i . 

JO. ' i^o'l q . -0 0 O O • >7.0 1 

.: ■ ; o J. * 1 '.o ( : • ,oJ o'tj'.* *? ■ o . V »tO ,r 

* ■■ - ■ - 







CHAPTER V 


THE GROWTH OF THE GOVERNMENT CONTROLLED SCHOOLS 
BETWEEN THE YEARS 1917 - 1956 

ACCOMMODATION OF STUDENTS 1917 - 1936 

By the year 1917 a complete high school curriculum 
through the twelfth grade was being offered in the schools 
of the larger Mormon communities. At this period, in the two 
communities of Magrath and Cardston, the two school houses 
which had been constructed in the years 1909 and 1916 respect¬ 
ively, provided accommodation for the students of the public 
school grades — now known as the elementary and intermediate 
classes — and the high school students. The pupils in the 
public school grades attended classes on the lower floor, 
while the rooms on the upper story of these buildings were 
set aside for the students from grades nine to twelve inclu¬ 
sive. In Raymond, after the year 1921, the public school 
students were housed in the large brick school house which 
was constructed in the year 1910. 

In the year 1927 the Cardston school officials began 
to separate the public school grades from those of the high 
school. A new school building was erected in which accommo¬ 
dation was provided for seven classrooms. The building was 
modem in every respect. Space was provided for a standard- 
size gymnasium, a science laboratory, and washrooms in which 








- 89 - 


modern facilities were installed. This building is still 
being used to house the high school students, although it has 
been enlarged in order to provide classroom space for students 
taking vocational courses in household economics, manual train¬ 
ing and agriculture, 

A new high school building in the community of Magrath 
was officially opened on May 7, 193°» although classes were 
already being conducted in the building in the autumn of 1929* 
This building was constructed at a cost of $45,000, which sum 
during the years of the depression was a considerable amount of 
money. The school was erected south-west of the public school 
building. When it was first opened four high school teachers 
were employed, and space was provided for four academic high 
school grades. The gymnasium provided for in the building was 
of standard size, and it served likewise as an auditorium where 
student extra-curricular activities could be sponsored. The 
building was supplied with modern plumbing, and the heating 
system provided for in the school was as modern as any which 
could be installed within the limits of the facilities avai¬ 
lable in the community at that period. Although at the time 
manual arts and household economics were not offered in the 
average town high school, the school board provided for unfini¬ 
shed basement rooms in the building. These rooms were to be 
later completed in order to provide classroom space for instruc¬ 
tion in vocational courses when these subjects would be added 
to the curriculum of the town high schools in Alberta. In 












, 


' 


S l • 




t 


_ • ., . „ ' * : ' '' ' °° V ' j 

. 

: . 1 

, < ■■ < 

fl0 . . j©00, ' ■ 0 :■ . ■ 3 1 | -■' 3 '■ o ' . ini i t tn 

■ 

.L ■ - 

1 

.. i, ) . • ■ ■ 

. ■ ... ■ 

. i-j . ■ ' < 

. 

^ . • - - . ' - '■ '■ 

, V ' • :• = ■ 0 ' 0; ,3/ ' i ^ J ! - : ;! ' i: " d " 

: . . ' 

, . ■ • ■ .... :r<v- . . ■ - ,r: -V VX'- ' -" 

_ ■ • ■ : ■ « 1 
... ' : . 

- 

, , :. ; .’K‘l”oo .fJ- uoliso cv cri *©- 

. 




- 90 - 

order to finance the construction of this school building the 
school board found it necessary to float a debenture for the 
amount of $45,000, to be paid in not more than twenty annual 
installments at an Interest rate not higher than eight per 
cent * 

This high school building in Magrath was erected on 
the advice of Inspector Smith who commented in his report on 
the overcrowded conditions of the high school classrooms. With 
the opening of the new school in the autumn of 1929, st fourth 
teacher, Martha I. Houston of Lethbridge, was added to the 
teaching faculty. The school was under the administration of 
Principal Grant G. Woolley. 

THE SCHOOL POPULATION 1918 to 1929 

Between the years 1918 to 1929 the school population 
in Mormon centres remained comparatively unchanged. There 
were generally from eleven to fifteen teachers employed in 
each school to instruct in the grades from one to twelve inc¬ 
lusive. Magrath, for a number of years, employed only eleven 
teachers in the combined public and high school. This commu- 
nity, being smaller than Raymond and Cardston, employed only 
three high school teachers and generally eight public school 
teachers. The larger communities of Raymond and Cardston 
generally employed from three to four staff members in excess 
of the number required to teach in the Magrath school. There 
were years when the school population in the primary grades 








• ; . .. •' ■ OS' ■ f.-’i 


• X \ '• 

!•: :>.$ ■■ ■ - 0-- ■ 

no Ci v j.) ; ‘ i. J■ 

* 

t 

10 J. ■.* :•) •;. i •' : s ; i ■ 


, t 



!Q e SO‘ ■ i ■ 

■ ; ' I.■ ■ . " ■ .: L . yo Ji'iiCj 


. ' .;■... 

' 

- 

t ' < 

• . ’ . ■ ‘ -* ■ •• •' j • . ■ ■ '■ 

■ < • • • ' 1 « • 

. ■ , _L‘ i ;o .. ' ss. W; 




- 91 - 


fluctuated somewhat, thereby making it necessary for the 
school boards to provide for double classrooms in the lower 
age-range levels. These double classes were generally provi¬ 
ded for the beginners. 

STAFFING OF SCHOOLS 

By the year 1918 the towns of Raymond, Magrath and 
Cardston were employing school principals from the local area. 
J.W. Low remained as principal of the Cardston school until 
the year 1926 when he was succeeded by Rulon Hicken. Between 
the years 1918 and 1929 Magrath employed several local princi¬ 
pals. Jared Mercer was replaced in the year 1921 by W.A. Keith. 
Keith was followed by Walter E. Brown of Cardston, Golden Woolf 
of Cardston and Grant G. Woolley of Magrath. Paul Redd during 
this period served as principal of the Raymond school. 

After the year 1918 the majority of the teachers em¬ 
ployed in this area were local men and women who had received 
their high school education and Normal training in the province 
of Alberta. The last teacher from the eastern provinces of 
Canada to be mentioned in the minutes of these school boards 
was a Mr. Harkness from Ontario. Harkness taught on the 
Magrath high school staff in the years 1924 - 1925 . 

THE CURRICULUM 1917 - 1936 


The programme of studies followed by the district 















• ■ 






* 

_ 


t 

. 

* * 

. 

-■ ■ , j. , • . : - * ' 




* ’ 

. 

. 


: • j ' . ' • 


. 


- 

■ • ■ 

;:,rs.t lnnK>X 

. ■ S< - ' . 

. 

. 

- 

. • 





- 92 - 


schools in this area was consistent with the course of studies 
which was followed by other town and village schools in the 
province. Although the system of grades replaced the system 
of standards in the year 1912, no major change was made in 
the curriculum until the mid-twenties. ”At the close of the 
war (1914 - 191S) it was felt that new problems which had 
arisen demanded new emphasis and new procedures”.- 1 - Between 
the years 1921 and 1924 the Deputy Minister of Education, 

Dr. G. Bred McNally, supervised the rewriting of the Alberta 
curriculum. The subject matter in the basic courses was 
modernized. Students who were not adapted for professional 

training were offered a wider range of choice in courses. A 

o 

provision was made for promotion by units or subjects. 

In the larger high schools in the province programmes 
of study were provided for general matriculation and normal 
school entrance. Agricultural, commercial and technical cour¬ 
ses were offered to students who desired a practical education. 

This change in the programme of studies gives some 
evidence of the fact that education at this period in the 
history of the province was beginning to stress the needs of 
the pupils. The trend was to move away from the subject 
centred curriculum. 3 This trend toward activity was further 
emphasized when the curriculum was again revised in 1936. 

^■Bigur, ££. cit., p. 145* 

^Ibid., p. 146. ^ Ibid . 






■ ZaoZiJ.m \ o b«w '.el ' aliiJ ai alooxioa 

... i a:lo;. 

i , 1 d' . .. , : ./J-LCo ... ■ / ." 

ar.: oiUr Ot : b 

' , . * 'v. 

.J; c .. 3 ' .. .iio ' • ' 

■ , ■ : ■ ■■'■ a .■ x - 


.'i, ...... ; " b/.... ^ r :c cxio 

. 

, ' bl. ' . , -o *1.• 


l 73 [1 ;;.;i : r., i ' ©; . h 0 J5 f 1 O' : 0 I; LiO&l e Z>i 

<••••' - • • ' ■■■-* • - -- 

..... 1 -..c { J . . Z 

. JL . Of: o f. "3 ,... j_ i Iff. .SO 

^ t • * 




i , : I " 

4 .. - : 

4 . 

' . ... ''1 ' ■ ... -j : '. ' j’l .L C O' '.01.' ’ .A: X -V. V.V 


,. : 2 i : ....r:c. ■o i: e ...i a so r i... 2 ....'.. co:s 



8J. c ;oo .... •.. v: ; . ./: c 

LOli 

.. 1 •... . .. b,.Z.- Z •, o oito./ \;.ZiZo ...:: 

Iso 1 . ... . it 

. . .. 4 

o j o Z^oloooo ■■■ Zoo..' 

. ...... • 0. ■ If .... J .... LiV .:... O) J L j‘l 0 '1 !'; 0‘XS\7 .. 0 b 

. . Z 

0 .''''ujOii: ©il n2 : 1 j oh.IZ 

ofZi .. c... . . ; ,, , ; 

...jZjioido :Z, o oo../b oiiZ C tc oOil©6I s ;© 

•■•••' 0 O . .... .... 0 ... | 0 U 

u..: eoXi.i: : /cib' s/l u' .to '\^-:oua..L.l 

Zoo oslZ .. o•, 


‘ ■ *J - xvl 

. . 

» '... 

:. onir mul-joho do oii$ i.iorivi bo&i 001 .Z 0 


0 






- 93 - 


Religion at this period was offered once weekly — the 
length of the period for such instruction being one-half hour. 
The period for religious instruction in the Magrath school was 
usually the last half-hour of each Wednesday afternoon. The 
instruction during this period was entirely undenominational 
in character — usually consisting of stories from the Bible 
which could be adapted to any Christian sect. 

Under the traditional system of education there was 
very little noticeable effort put forth during the classroom 
recitation periods to deal with "the whole child". However, 
programmes were planned for such festive occasions as Christ¬ 
mas, Hallowe*en and Dominion Day celebrations when the children 
were given an opportunity to appear before a public audience in 
order to recite poems, tell stories, sing songs, or act in plays 
which were in keeping with the occasion. 

The minutes of the Cardston school board would indicate 
that even prior to 193& music had been generally offered on the 
school curriculum. Mrs. Luella Smith of Cardston was employed 
to give such instruction; she is still employed by the school 
board to render such services in the Cardston community. Mrs. 
Smith is adequately trained to offer instruction in music 
since she has spent some time in New York studying courses in 
voice and instrument for the purpose of qualifying herself 
to offer this type of instruction in the public schools. 







- 94 - 

Reference is made in another section of this thesis to the 
circuit instructors of music who served some of the other 
school centres in the region at this period* 

EXTRA-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 

In the senior grades the high school student body 
councils continued to function as they had done in these Mor¬ 
mon communities during the life of the Knight Academy* Basket¬ 
ball leagues were organized on a competitive basis and then 
as well as today, they played an important role in the student*s 
programme of extra-curricular activities. Special parties were 
held for such occasions as Hallowe*en, Christmas, Valentine*s 
Day and Easter. During the month of May entertainments were 
provided for the alumni of the various high schools throughout 
this area* 

Although there was no provision made on the traditional 
course of studies for credits to be given in physical training, 
the track and field meet was very popular in the Cardston 
region. The events sponsored by the schools were usually 
prepared out of school hours, and they were n run-off w during 
the latter part of May or the first week in June before the 
students began to prepare for the final examinations, which 
usually commenced the fifteenth day of June. Departmental 
examinations at this period were held for all senior grades 
from nine to twelve inclusive# 





. 


' '■■■■- ‘1 ' ■ r: ; : .;•/ .. ;: ’ :.r:.. •; . :: 

• - ' . ' 

Cfi 

, oci h^.ml^tf.00 Bilowsoo I 

* 

: : «' . r 0 : b • 0 e**3V; I II.3Cf 1 

.. • ‘ .1 •. . 

* . - 

< ? . r . . e.' ■ •' ....... 

, • .. . 

. in Jt • 

a 

•. 7 ' •' ..t’. i7fO 

. : I . v *:• oci / o *rcl s 3 .£ 0 /jtf 8 Jo earTJOO 

lo.’j r:';-. •: rtf. *. 'a." ' fiev :• :. 3 1 bl'r-iJ j;tb Xo : f /j 

* 

- < 

'-U: 7 r .:- 3"J X 

^ ■ 

. 

. 







- 95 - 


At this time the literary programmes were an important 
part of the school life of the high school student* These 
programmes were sponsored by the student body council in con¬ 
junction with a staff advisor* The last hour of every other 
Friday afternoon was set aside for the presentation of the 
special numbers prepared for these programmes* In this manner 
the child was given some opportunity to develop self-confidence 
through the effort which he put forth to express himself before 
an audience* The numbers which appeared on such programmes 
were usually of a dramatic or musical nature* Very often pupil 
"gazettes" were prepared by the students, and they were read 
during the programme* Retold stories and recitations gave the 
student an opportunity to develop any talent which he possessed 
along the lines of elocution* 

Since the Latter-day Saint communities are located in 
an agricultural region, the school fair, which was sponsored by 
the community in conjunction with the provincial agricultural 
schools and the Department of Agriculture, was very popular* 

This event was generally held during the early part of September. 
Animals, grains, flowers, vegetables, cooking, sewing, handi¬ 
crafts, and exhibits of school work prepared by the students 
were placed on exhibition. These displays were judged by men 
and women chosen by the schools of agriculture and the academic 
school officials* First, second and third prizes were offered 
for each class of exhibits, and a small monetary award was 







• ' 




fi d 











- 96 - 


given to the student as a remuneration for the effort put 
forth by him in preparing his display. The school fair ceased 
to play an important part in the school life of the student of 
this area during the Second World War, and it has never been 
sponsored in this region since that period. 

In the Magrath high school an oratory contest is 
sponsored annually. This activity has been sponsored each 
year since 1934 through the generosity of a former resident 
of the community, J.F. Gagan. Gagan came into this region with 
the early pioneers. Being greatly interested in education and 
the public speaking programmes sponsored by the community and 
the school, he willed a certain portion of his estate to the 
Magrath School District as a trust fund. The interest from 
this fund was to be used as a monetary award to be given to 
the student winning first place in an oratory contest to be 
held annually and to be sponsored by the high school staff and 
the student body assembly. This contest has continued to be 
an annual event in the life of the high school student since 
the spring of 1934. 

TEACHERS * SALARIES 

The minutes of school board meetings which were held 
in these communities at this period would indicate that teachers* 
salaries were substantially increased after the First World 
War. The salary range generally ran from ninety-six dollars 









- 97 - 


per month for a ten month school term to a maximum of twenty- 
four hundred dollars per annum. The principal of the school 
received the maximum salary of twenty-four hundred dollars in 
some communities, providing he had had the required teaching 
experience with the school board employing him. It is of 
interest to note that at this period no substantial allowance 
was being made on the salary schedules for university credits 
or complete university degrees, although some of the high 
school teachers and the principals held these credentials. 

Until the year 1925 teachers holding the second class 
certificate were being employed as high school assistants to 
teach courses through the eleventh grade. The salary schedules 
generally provided for a higher salary to be paid to the primary 
teachers on the public school staffs than the teachers in grades 
two to seven were receiving. Prior to the year 1928 the salary 
paid to the first grade teacher was generally one hundred ten 
dollars per month for a ten month term. The teachers in grades 
two to seven were receiving approximately one hundred dollars 
per month. The eighth grade teacher because of his additional 
responsibilities as a public school principal, received an 
extra bonus for carrying out such duties. Since the positional 
salary schedule was in effect at this period, the high school 
teachers were generally paid from four hundred dollars to six 
hundred dollars per annum more than the public school teachers 



- Y . 


ned 


LI ' 






- 98 - 


received. The salaries of teachers in this region were consi¬ 
derably reduced after the year 1929* as they were in other areas 
of the province. It was in this year that the general economic 
depression began. 

During the years of the economic depression the public 
school teachers received a salary of six hundred dollars per 
annum. The high school teachers were paid from nine hundred 
to eleven hundred dollars per annum, and the high school prin¬ 
cipal^ salary was dropped from twenty-four hundred dollars per 
annum to approximately fourteen hundred dollars. These low 
salaries in this region obtained until the larger unit of admi¬ 
nistration was introduced into the province in the year 1936. 

Since school taxes were difficult to collect during 
the years of depression, some of the schools in the Latter-day 
Saint area operated for a short period on a system of "scrip'*. 
This was a system whereby the staff members were given coupons 
which could be exchanged at the various business houses in the 
communities for merchandise or other goods required by the 
teacher. The sums advanced by the business houses for this 
purpose were deducted from the property taxes of those firms 
which had advanced the credit. 

The present salary schedules for the C a rdston and 
Raymond areas are in line with some of the better schedules 


, 


. _ - ■ ■ 

■ 


:• "■ ' .1 - ‘V . ■ i>-- U " iO-3 

f •' ' • : :• I- -rj j ( r ' >,.i '' . * 

' ; . , . ' ‘• 

' -M 

: : 


' • ■ »3 ' v . 

: '-r ,r ' 3 ‘■ ~ -J'„ •: • . c 

- • : h-: , • - . ■ • •. f- ■ - vc- 

;u ;,t;f ' , >v u •• V. • :• •' 

■ ;• • • . .S i< •;! ’1 . " V '--J. ’■X iV.n'V C o 

.. :: • . .. ; ■ > ’V ’ 'I • 

. 

- 







- 99 - 


in the province. The range of salaries runs in this region 
from a minimum of twenty-three hundred dollars per annum for 
one year's training and no experience to a maximum of over 
six thousand dollars for six years' training and full exper¬ 
ience (usually fourteen years). Several fringe benefits and 
bonuses for supervision are offered. These bonuses are com¬ 
parable with those offered by many other divisional school 
boards of the province. 

THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LARGER UNIT INTO THE PROVINCE 
AND ITS EFFECTS ON THE CARDSTON AREA 

The provincial election of 1935 gave the Social Credit 
Party a large majority in the legislative assembly. The former 
government had seen a need for a change in the Alberta system 
of education but it had been hesitant about implementing such 
a reorganization. Having just won the election, however, the 
Social Credit members dared to undertake experiments that no 
former administration would have ventured to attempt. The new 
Social Credit Party was composed of men who were fitted for 
the task confronting them. The late premier, William Aberhart, 
was a successful Calgary high school principal and in his party 
were teachers of outstanding ability such as Messrs. Tanner, 
Low, Hook, Ansley and several others of high professional 
standing. 

In the fall of 1935 William Aberhart became a Minister 










Wl 




;Oj t : 





X 


vXI. j cl:.. 




Til 


... n. 








f. ; ry 


ci 


L:x:i 


«J •-< 


"iO 


. 
















- 100 - 


of Education. He announced that as soon as possible the 
government intended to introduce a system of larger units 
into the province. In the fall of 1936 eleven large units 
comprising seven hundred and forty-four school districts were 
organized. The organization of other units progressed yearly 
until by the autumn of 1940 nearly all of the school districts 
in the province were under the large unit of administration.^ 

The rural areas in the Cardston vicinity were among the 
first districts to enter the large unit of administration. At 
first only the smaller one-room rural schools, and the smaller 
hamlets entered the Saint Mary’s River School Division No. 2. 
Gradually the larger communities began to enter the unit. By 
the year 1945 sill of the schools in the larger towns except 
Raymond were under the administration of a central school 
board comprised of five divisional trustees and a board secre¬ 
tary-treasurer. This central board opened its office in 
Cardston, and at the time it continues to operate from this 
point. Zebulon Jacobs, who has previously been mentioned as 
one of the first qualified Mormon teachers to be employed in 
the Cardston area, became the first secretary-treasurer of 
the large unit of administration. 


Isidore Goresky, The Beginning and Growth of the 
Alberta School System, (Thesis, May 1944), p. 144. 





101 


After this area was organized into a large school 
division the schools in the Mormon communities increased in 
size rapidly. The basement rooms which had been provided 
for in the Magrath school were completed, and units in shop 
work and household economics were introduced. Emily String- 
ham of Glenwood became the first home economics teacher in 
the Magrath high school. Lee Leavitt of Cardston was the 
first instructor of manual training to be employed in this 
community. A full time music instructor, Mrs. Lynn Leavitt, 
was engaged by the division to instruct at Magrath. 

After Magrath and Cardston entered the larger unit of 
administration extra classroom space was provided for the 
purpose of offering the students training in commercial and 
agriculture courses. Mew wings were added to each high school, 
and modern facilities were provided in order that instruction 
could be offered in these courses. In the Magrath school an 
extra classroom was provided for a combined library and study 
room. The school board has found no difficulty in providing 
the Magrath high school with an instructor of agriculture 
courses — a new unit which was added after the formation of 
the large unit. Because of the shortage of trained personnel 
in this field the divisional board at Cardston has not always 
been successful in finding such an instructor for the Cardston 
high school. 


O'I a.f. ixxxixx 


iOO'-OP: rr XXL. XL y. XXj XX. CS^.u'; X 

a : n ■ tl i ; 

j,L x . ’ - 

•: Oi: S "■J X. X. / . X . t ‘' -- • 

- . : ...... : . 

. . c t f o ■ < 

ti----* X X h' i.,t; X*I.; . ^ • X 0 o 

b XIiJ rib -X ’ ,Oi. .' X 0 C / . 


: 


• I■ > ‘j • '■ .000i>* •. ' - x . •'.[V , hi ■ ■, 0* i 0 X2 x ‘I O I 

- 0 0;..o.;r:e- tIorls3/.;o.u :rx Jxtew 

..xxx..n : ,.;t xxixoex fro o wets 10 lo rixfi 

■ 


J- 0 S. ■ 


t 


•:S x;:**>:; .■ ... •' 


. ■: 


‘...x Obf:...:.x ■ r i£ L . i ..'J ’ x ■ :• ff 

X, ;i ;/;0 £fl XJXX XX.0 


. 


• ' ’ 

' fj f 

5 . . . x •' 

■: ; ixoxx jx.n. ; . x ;xx ■ v '.xxx -.xixxx xx..ix.. : .ti. .:£>■■ 1 "r:.x xx.x 

C -)r - ■; , . . X * • ' : ■■■'•- 

£ J 0 : 7 1. .•: . X.'. ... , ,00 ■ '1 ■ ;.XO ; 'Xl0 X SxO : - :.,.x. 

: lx ' ■ :• ■: - ' • 

'x.-.x -■■ j;x . xx.x. ixx..x «bxX xxxxl x- xxd' 

or . x: / ■ x / -- ' ; ' 


x.xx; X:,.. "xxx.t xx 


xx. axn rroci a 


XOj •' 


,.x'x : x 

, .; >y-! . j. • X; x. x J: x J.;. 0 c; -J 61 x i X s J: x x i.{ 

.. :X;.X . X Xb'': 1 X XXx X V:%*. ■ 

, 





102 


Due to the Influx of school population which accompan¬ 
ied the entrance of Magrath and Cardston into the large unit 
of administration, the teaching staffs of these schools have 
been greatly increased. Previous to the year 193& there were 
only four teachers on the Magrath high school staff. Today 
this number has been increased to nine. The elementary school 
and the Intermediate school staffs have been increased until 
at the present time there are some twenty-seven teachers emp¬ 
loyed in the community. 

Of the larger Mormon centres in this territory the 
Cardston school system has experienced the greatest expansion 
since the amalgamation of these districts with the Saint Mary's 
River School Division. At the present time the original public 
school and high school buildings are filled to capacity in spite 
of the fact that new wings have been added to both of these 
buildings. Several cottage schools have been moved from rural 
areas in the division, and they have been placed alongside the 
larger buildings. These small school houses are being used to 
accommodate a surplus school population. The largest of the 
cottage schools in this community is the Lee-Side School which 
provides seating accommodation for the pupils of four elemen¬ 
tary grades. Lyman Jampolsky of Edmonton has for the past 
three years served the community as high school principal. 

Grant Matkin at the present time is the principal of the 





r«;X : ..;■■■£- ... V . ".'o U . 

, 

. 

1 wxx 

■ . n / . ' ■ 9 ■ • ■ : : 1 

■ ■ - .. * \ '■ . j . • v i ■ ■ X r 

■ - 

•: ' 1 ■' ••• ' <■ ■■■ 

. . £ <}£< 

. 

• - . . ■ .. t • J i ■ = • •; • ‘ ." ■ i v ' : '' r 

■_r r-J fj’- ' y : .■ i 7. -u :• v,.J 3o.c\I . ooo "to 

* 

* 

i '. i 1 .... v,: r ;• » - >o r.' :;-l r. Loco.^r :■ o :J yoo 

lo ' ■ ' 04 ■ ■ ' ‘ 

* 

■ .. • . • ; ■, ■ •, 


■ 





- 103 - 


elementary school. For a number of years Ora Neilson has 
been the principal of the Cardston intermediate section. 

Because of overcrowded conditions in the schools, 
plans are now under discussion for the erecting of a new school 
in Cardston. It is proposed that this new high school contain 
from eight to ten cla+ssrooms. 

Raymond was the most reluctant of the three Mormon 
centres under discussion to relinquish local control of the 
schools to the administration by a large unit. Refusing to 
enter the Saint Mary*s River School Division when the two 
districts of Kagrath and Cardston amalgamated with the unit, 
Raymond continued to operate as a separate district until the 
year 1953 when the community joined the Warner County. At the 
present time the administration of the Raymond school system 
is under the control of a school superintendent, Robert Kimmitt, 
and the county council which has its headquarters in Warner. 

Along with the districts of Magrath and Cardston the 
Raymond school system has, in recent years, experienced some 
expansion. Liman Jacobs at the present time is the high 
school principal. He is assisted by Orvin Hicken and William 
Nalder who serve the district as principals of the elementary 
and intermediate schools. Some thirty teachers are employed 
by the Warner County to staff the Raymond schools. 

The Raymond schools provide much the same standard of 
instruction as that offered in the districts of Magrath and 





- 104 - 


Cardston. The complete academic programme, as re-organized 
In the year 1936, Is offered to the children of this community♦ 
Vocational courses in household economics, commerce and manual 
training are offered in the Raymond intermediate and high 
schools* There is, however, no course in agriculture offered 
at the present time. Instruction in music is given by a full¬ 
time music teacher, Mrs. Velma Redd. 

SUMMARY 

By the year 1917 it was a general practice throughout 
Alberta for the high schools to offer instruction on the twelfth 
grade level in the larger villages and towns. The traditional 
system of education introduced in the year 1905 was followed 
until the mid twenties. The revision of the curriculum took 
place between the years 1922 and 1924. Further changes were 
brought about under the Social Credit government in 1936. 

The Knight Academy left its stamp upon the schools 
in the Cardston and Raymond areas. Many of the extra-curricular 
activities organized during the life of this private school have 
continued to play an important role in the school life of the 
students in this vicinity. Although the schools of this area 
followed fairly closely the patterns of development in the 
province in general, there was emphasis placed upon such extra¬ 
curricular activities as basketball tournaments, literary and 




t • • 

* .... ■. j • t 

. . . 

m 1 ■ 

< * , n 

* - <' 

'I ' 

i 

j.... •. ' . . 

’ 

' . - . , ' • > ‘ - 

* 

. 

* 

.. ■ .. ... ■'<■■■ . ''i ; ' • ’- U 

... . -j. r 'i 

< , , • i ■. ■ ' : '• r * ■ v ■ ■■ " ■ 0 




- 105 - 


dramatic programmes and oratorical contests. Instruction 
in music and religion was offered in the schools located in 
Mormon communities when the provincial system made allowance 
for such instruction during the mid twenties. During the 
period 1917 - 1956 the schools in Mormon areas were staffed 
mainly by teachers affiliated with the Latter-day Saint 
Church. 

A rapid expansion of the school systems in this area 
followed the organization of the large school divisions in 
the year 1936. Factors such as war conditions, increased 
birth rate, improved roads and means of transportation, 
economic prosperity and the policy of some divisional school 
boards to centralize schools in certain regions have contribu¬ 
ted to this aspect of educational development in this area. 




. 

' 

, . ■ : ' . ' ■' ■:■■■' : 

‘ •• - ' . 

j. : -V . ' > 3 t -i ‘ Y. I ,/l.v; 

. 

! ' t 

' ' ' , ■ 

. , • '■ ' ' ? • 

1, .!;• < :.*: •; -r / ‘ I-" x'" -V •' ', ! *<:. ^.cacb© 

BAG* 1 . ■ : ‘ : 

. 



CHAPTER VI 


CENTRALIZATION FOR EDUCATIONAL ADVANTAGES 
IN MORMON COMMUNITIES 

CONCENTRATION OF THE MORMONS IN FARM VILLAGES 

The Mormon people have sometimes been described by 
social historians as an urban people. An analysis of the popu¬ 
lation in the Cardston area would indicate that the non-Mormon 
residents of this region are generally located on farms sur¬ 
rounding the Latter-day Saint communities, whereas the com¬ 
munities themselves are predominantly populated by the members 
of the Latter-day Saint Church. From the organization of the 
Church it has been the tendency for the Mormons to concentrate 
in these “farm villages”. The plan of such a community makes 
for a scattered town. Often as few as three or four families 
will be found located on a ten-acre block of land, each family 
owning several acres of land on which the home has been con¬ 
structed. The ownership of such a comparatively large tract of 
land in the community made it possible, in the early days of the 
settlement of this area, for the owner to keep several animals 
in the community. From the produce he derived from his live¬ 
stock and from the vegetable gardens, which thrived in this 
irrigated centre, the owner was able to support his family* 
Generally the Latter-day Saint farmers owned land which was 










- 107 - 


in close enough proximity to the community that the owners were 
able to travel back and forth each day during the spring, sum¬ 
mer and autumn seasons in order to care for their crops* 

This manner of settlement in Mormon communities served 
a three-fold purpose. Such a method of town organization made 
it possible for the Latter-day Saints to construct church- 
houses which would be conveniently situated for all members to 
attend services if they so desired. Secondly, this system of 
centralization allowed for an opportunity for all members to 
take advantage of the auxiliary Church organizations and any 
community clubs which made for the social development of the 
child. By participating in these organizations the adults 
were likewise able to employ profitably their leisure time. 

The third advantage offered by such a method of group settlement 
in "farm-villages" was that it was possible for the children of 
the community to enjoy, from the early days of the settlement of 
this area a more specialized training in the educational institu¬ 
tions which were established in these towns and villages. It 
would definitely have been impossible to offer the same type of 
instruction in the one-room ungraded rural schools which were 
prevalent at this early period in the history of the province. 

Reference has previously been made to the fact that in 
the young communities of Magrath, Raymond and Cardston school 
houses had been constructed between the years 1900 and 1910 which 





- 108 


provided for classroom space for from eight to eleven grades. 
Before the movement in the province towards the consolidation 
of some school districts under the Sifton government about the 
time of World War I, many Alberta communities were employing 
only three or four teachers to educate the children of business¬ 
men who were living in towns. Some of these communities may 
have possessed business sections comparable in size with those 
of Mormon communities. However, the schools of such districts 
were smaller, since the farmers who lived on their farms were 
often scattered in rural school districts. In these rural 
schools a teacher was often required to teach the grades from 
one to nine inclusive. Frequently the attendance at the school 
was as high as from twenty-five to some forty or fifty children. 

Undoubtedly the custom which the Mormons had of support¬ 
ing a large public school offered some financial disadvantages. 
Taxes on their farm lands were often paid by the Latter-day 
Saints to support a rural district school which their children 
did not attend. In addition, the town dweller was taxed on 
his residence and other village property which he maintained 
in order to live in the community. Because of the fact that 
the farmers did not educate their children in the rural district 
schools located near their property, the influx of rural child¬ 
ren frequently overcrowded the classrooms of the town schools. 
The financial problem of creating extra classroom space had to 



. : 

' 1 : .• ' ■ ' I 

. • .. .• ■*. .• 

_ 

« * - 

* 

' 

: <■ •. • • \+ * \. J • ; . • •• J • . " ■ 

■ r . - 

• - • ': J • ' * 

• ' • -■ ‘ ■ 1 • ■ • • ’J‘ ' : ' ■■ r ■ ' 

■ - - t: • r.i:?-?-) ‘V.• ' * *: r • ' 

■ 

■ r;_; ‘ ‘ •• r : : 





109 - 


be solved by the town boards, and In the end the financial 

burden had to be shouldered by the farmer himself by means of 

a payment of extra tuition fees. Nonetheless the financial 

disadvantages which were created as a result of this manner of 

settlement were more than offset by the educational advantages 

accruing from the more specialized training which the pupils 

could obtain in the larger graded schools. The Mormons were 

willing to pay the extra taxes and tuition fees in order that 

the youth could receive the religious, social and academic 

1 

advantages offered in a more centralized community. 

In the year 1906 the school populations of the communi¬ 
ties of Raymond and Cardston were among the seven largest found 
in Alberta communities, excluding Edmonton and Calgary. 2 Today, 
because of the fact that the province has gradually been orga¬ 
nizing its school districts into the large units of administra¬ 
tion, many communities comparable in size with the above towns 
have centralized schools which are as large or even larger than 
those found in the larger Mormon centres. As previously mentioned, 
the movement towards the centralization of schools in Alberta 
began in the year 1937 on a small scale. Since that period many 
communities in agricultural centres have enjoyed the same 

^The Globe, Cardston, May 16, 1908. 

2 ibia. 








110 


educational advantages as those offered by the large graded 
schools to the Latter-day Saints who had settled in "farm- 
villages" a number of years prior to this date. 

MOVEMENT TOWARDS CONSOLIDATION OF SCHOOLS IN ALBERTA 

At the turn of the century two important questions 
disturbing the minds of those interested in education were 
those of the consolidation of schools and the addition of 
manual training to the curriculum. The Ordinance of 1901 
offered additional encouragement for the consolidation move¬ 
ment. The government admitted that school districts with a 
limited population could offer only limited facilities in 
education. The annual report, in this connection, in the 
year 1903 complained of the difficulties with respect to 
secondary education in particular. 

There was still much prejudice in the minds of the 
legislature in favor of the smaller area. The report of 
1903 visualized that an increase in the population would 
bring demands for smaller schools rather than larger ones. 

At this time there seemed to be very little evidence of 
much interest or enthusiasm shown in the movement for conso¬ 
lidation of schools.^ 


-^Isidore Goresky, The Beginning and Growth of the 
Alberta School System (Thesis, May 1944), p. 87 . 














- Ill 


In 1912 the interest in consolidated schools was revived 
in a debate in the Legislature• In 1913 legislation was passed 
to allow their organization. The grant for conveyance, however, 
was too small to offer much inducement. In 1917 after crop 
conditions were improved the interest in the consolidation move¬ 
ment was again stimulated. Forty-two such schools were organized 
by the end of the year 1917* 

The officials of the department encouraged the organi¬ 
zation for two reasons. Firstly, greater opportunities could 
be had by the pupils; secondly, it was hoped that it might give 
impetus to an adult community movement whereby community life 
might be made more attractive to the children thus discouraging 
the gravitation towards the larger cities. 14 ' On the other hand 
the officials were cautioned to explain clearly the increased 
expenditure involved in the establishment of this type of school 
so that districts would not blindly venture into this field. In 
1918 the peak of the movement was reached. The majority of 
consolidated schools were found in Southern Alberta. 

The schools generally were of two types; some were 
organized to offer an opportunity for high school to country 
students while others merely united those schools with insuf¬ 
ficient numbers of children to warrant keeping these schools 




Ibid ., p. Ill 






i: - 

I;,. ■"£ v *T : ■»' 3 J 

. . 

" ’ ’ ' 


-» • . ... ■ : .. : .• :• *■ 

■ f - ■ ■' ••'■■■ ‘ 5 ■ ' : '■ ' 

: ’ 

. is. i ' 

. . . , ■ 

V ■ ' ‘ v - : 

. : . . . 


.* •' ■' 

v*/:, 1 ■ oo • J loeiioa >■; 

’ • r a • i. f "J 1 ' ' li! ' : > 

a, ■ - v ; yn:yv:rM o.t norauxifium .tneiojit 










. . 



112 - 


open* The advantages were evident In all districts, but during 
the years succeeding the First World War the economic depres¬ 
sion made them unpopular* Two-room schools were organized in 
the northern part of the province where the population was more 
dense* The organization of the province into large units after 
1936 replaced the need for consolidated schools*^ 

CENTRALIZED CONTROL OF ONE-ROOM RURAL SCHOOLS 
OF THE MAGRATH AND CARDSTON REGION 

When the consolidation movement was at its peak in the 
province there is nothing to indicate in the board minutes 
that any of the smaller districts actually consolidated with 
the large Mormon centres* However, some of the smaller hamlets 
west of Cardston did unite with several of the smaller one-room 
schools in that vicinity. 

Prior to the year 1924 some of the land which was later 
divided into school districts was included in the Magrath School 
District No* 620 . As part of this outlying area became more 
densely populated and the number of school children increased 
in this rural vicinity, the problem of providing school facili¬ 
ties in the district had to be met by the Magrath Board. The 
following excerpts taken from the board minutes of the Magrath 
School District are relevant to the administration of a one- 
room rural school in the area some ten miles south-west of 

^Ibld *. p. 113 . 






















- 113 


Magrath before this district was organized with a school 
board of its own: 


The matter of opening a school room for the 
convenience of school children living near the 
Bradshaw siding was discussed. It was the opi¬ 
nion of the Board that a school should be opened 
at this point. 

It was moved by Mr. Woolley and seconded by 
Mr. Steele that the Board make an Investigation 
for the purpose of finding a suitable school 
building somewhere near the centre of the dist¬ 
rict of Bradshaw, and that steps be taken at 
once for the opening of the school at that point. 

Mr. Woolley reported that the committee 
appointed to investigate the matter of opening 
a school at Bradshaw had made a trip to this 
district and had looked over two buildings which 
were available for classroom purposes. Either 
the building at the Allen farm or the Fellgar 
home could be had, but either one would require 
considerable repair work to put it into shape 
for school purposes. 

It was moved by Mr. Woolley and seconded 
by Mr. Henninger that in following out the sug¬ 
gestions of Inspector Watson that the proposi¬ 
tion of Mr. Allen be accepted, providing satis¬ 
factory arrangements can be made with him in 
regards to the repair of the building and other 
matters in connection with the proposed school. 

It was moved by Mrs. Ririe and seconded by 
Mr. Henninger that Mr. Steele and Mr. Woolley be 
appointed as a committee to oversee the matter 
of the opening of the proposed school at Brad¬ 
shaw Siding. 

It was moved by Mr. Woolley and seconded 
by Mr. Steele that Miss Deloise Bennion be 
employed to teach the school at Bradshaw at a 
salary of $960.00 per annum.7 


Magrath School Board Minutes, April 7, 1924, p. 230. 
7 

Ibid., p. 231. 










114- 


This one-room school was kept for one term in the 
home of John Allen, and it was during that time under the 
administration of the Magrath School Board until the year 
1926* In that year the Bradshaw School District was organized 
with John Allen as the chairman of the board* Alma Brown of 
Cardston was the last teacher to be engaged by the Magrath 
School Board to teach in this one-room school. Brown was 
required to submit his application to Chris Jensen of 
Magrath, Chairman of the Magrath School Board, for his enga¬ 
gement in this school as a teacher. 

There is evidence in the Magrath School Board minutes 
taken at this period, that this larger school district was 
making an attempt to amalgamate with one of the rural areas 
which was not at this time under the control of this larger 
district. The following passage relevant to this matter is 
taken from the minutes of a school board meeting held in 
Magrath at this period. The passage reads: 

A letter from the Deputy Minister of Educa¬ 
tion regarding the amalgamation of the Saint Mary 1 s 
School District and the Magrath School District 
was read. It was moved by Mr. Woolley and seconded 
by Mrs. Ririe that a meeting be arranged with the 
trustees of the Saint Mary's School District in 
connection with the above matter,^ 

The amalgamation of this district with that of Magrath 

^Ibld .. p. 21. 







- 115 - 


was not carried out. The Saint Mary's School District 
continued to operate under its own Board until the orga¬ 
nization of the Saint Mary's River School Division No. 2 
in 1936. In that year this school, along with many other 
rural schools in this area was brought under the administra¬ 
tive control of the Divisional Board at Cardston. 

Articles in the weekly Cardston paper would indicate 
that as early as 1917 some districts in the Cardston area 
were in favour of the consolidation of school districts. The 
following passage from "The Globe" discusses briefly the 
amalgamation of the rual districts surrounding Glenwoodville 
with this larger centre: 

A consolidation school district has been 
effected at Glenwood, and only awaits the 
sanction of the Department of Education before 
the vans commence the work of bringing in the 
children to school. Included in this consoli¬ 
dation is the Hartley District to the west and 
the Wood District to the east of Glenwood.9 

Another item from the same weekly paper would indicate 
that during the year 1917 there were thirty consolidated school 
districts organized throughout Alberta. Because of such a 
progressive step taken in education much praise was given to 
the Sifton government for the interest which it had shown in 
the improvement of educational administration in the province. 

9 

The Globe, Cardston, March 22, 1917. 








- 116 - 


Glenwood, along with many of the outlying rural and conso¬ 
lidated schools in this vicinity, entered the Saint Mary*s 
River School Division when the unit was first organized. 

EMPLOYMENT OF CIRCUIT INSTRUCTORS OF VOCATIONAL COURSES 

As early as the year 1914 there was a tendency on 
the part of some of the leading educationalists in Alberta 
to try to persuade the parents throughout the province to 
accept the idea of introducing some technical courses in 
the intermediate and high schools of Alberta. The following 
article from the Cardston weekly paper gives an account of 
such a lecture favoring vocational courses. This speech was 
delivered before an audience of ratepayers of the Leavitt 
School District which is located in the vicinity of Cardston. 
The passage states: 


Last Saturday night Mr. Ross, Chief Inspector 
of Schools for Alberta, and Dr. Miller, head of 
the technical educational department of our public 
school system, delivered a lecture in our meeting 
house under the supervision of and special arrange¬ 
ments by the Southern Alberta Trustees* League. 

Mr. Ross spoke briefly on the duties that parents 
have towards their children to prepare them for 
useful citizenship. Dr. Miller was the main spea¬ 
ker. He showed in a very clear and able manner 
the necessity of the introduction of manual train¬ 
ing and domestic arts into our public school life— 
particularly in the sixth and seventh grades. *Our 
children*, the speaker said, ‘should be prepared 
in school to meet life in all its phases and have 
developed within them the strong tendencies of 
nature that they may make the best possible success 
in life*. He outlined the policy of the government 











- 117 - 


in its effort to assist in the work of providing 
suitable teachers to instruct the students along 
the above lines. He was listened to by a marked 
attentive audience. Several visitors were pres¬ 
ent from the Glenwood School District including 
Mr. Billingsley and Mr. Edwin Leavitt of the 
School Board and Mr. Osborne Wight, principal of 
the Glenwood School. 10 


The ratepayers of the Cardston area at this period were 
aware of the importance of practical courses on the school cur¬ 
riculum for the development of the "whole child"• This problem 
had been previously discussed in their board meetings. Such a 
plan for the introduction of domestic science and manual arts 
into their school system had been rejected as the following 
passage taken from "The Globe" would indicate. The passage 
reads: 


March 6, 1913* 

School Districts* Meeting 

An adjourned meeting of the Trustees of the 
School Districts in and around Cardston met on 
Saturday last at 1:30 P.M. for the purpose of 
receiving a report of the ratepayers* meetings 
that had been held in their respective districts 
as to the feasibility of organizing circuits for 
the teaching of manual training and domestic 
arts. On a motion of Mr. Stirling Williams, J.M. 
Billingsley of Glenwood was made chairman. On a 
motion of Mr. M.I. Coombs, Mr. G.E. Cahoon was 
appointed secretary. The following districts 
reported: Glenwood and Mountain View were in 
favour of the organization of this area for cir¬ 
cuit instruction. Hill Spring, Beazer, Kimball, 
Taylorville, Jefferson and Woolford voted 
against the movement. The last three voted 
against the plan because of lack of numbers. 11 


1Q Ibia .. April 24, 1914. 
11 Ibld .. March 6, 1913. 























t 

















118 


It sesms quite logical that a plan for the addition 
of such courses to the curriculum of these small high schools 
should have been rejected at this period. The cost of instal¬ 
ling equipment in these small schools, employing an instructor 
and paying his travelling expenses on the circuit would have 
resulted in a considerable outlay of money for the small number 
of students benefitted. Those parents desiring such vocational 
training for their children in addition to the academic still 
had access to the Knight Academy, which, as previously mentioned, 
had been in operation for three years prior to the year 1913* 

There is, however, an indication from available news¬ 
paper items that a plan for the circuit instruction of music 
had been put into effect in the Cardston area at this period. 

The following excerpt taken from The Globe relates: 


May 23, 1913. 

Music in Our Schools 

Mr. Leo Coombs, our talented musician, has 
been engaged to teach vocal music at several of 
the schools throughout the district. On Mondays 
he will travel to Woolford; Tuesdays he will 
instruct at Kimball, and on Wednesdays he will 
proceed to Aetna. The remainder of the week is 
to be spent by him in the west portion of the 
Cardston district. 12 


Coombs was later employed at different intervals to 
travel between Magrath and Cardston in order to give instruction 
in music in these schools. When his services in this area were 
no longer available, he was replaced by a Mr. Hensen of Cardston, 


12 


Ibid .. May 23, 1913 



















- 119 - 


who rendered for a number of years a similar service in these 
schools. 


The following agreement taken from the minutes of the 
Magrath School Board meetings describes the type of contract 
agreed to by the music instructor and the district school 
boards which were included on the circuit. The agreement 
quotes: 


Magrath, Alberta 
October 2 nd, 1925* 

Mr. Coombs is to give at least 30 minutes 
instruction in each room using as an outline the 
course as set forth in the 1 Course of Studies* 
by the Department of Education. The lesson will 
be outlined for the use of the teacher for the 
music period each day. 

The instructor agrees to prepare the pupils 
for and sponsor at least two concerts during the 
year; the entire proceeds of which are to go to 
the school board to assist in financing this 
course. The board will be immediately responsible 
for the payment of one-half of the cost of the 
course payable monthly in the amount of $ 26 . 00 . 

This amount guarantees the immediate out-of-pocket 
expense to the instructor. 

The proceeds of the concerts up to, but not 
exceeding $234.99 are to be paid to the instructor 
for the balance of a nine months* course from Octo¬ 
ber 1925 to June 1926 inclusive. In the event of 
the concerts* proceeds being less than the stated 
amount of $234.00 the board is not liable for any 
further payment other than the monthly payment of 
the proceeds from the concerts exceeding $468.00; 
the amount of this sum is to be held by the board 
for further musical activities in the school here. 


Neither of the above mentioned two men who were empl¬ 
oyed by the school districts of the Cardston area as circuit 
music Instructor was a licensed school teacher. Both were 







{ 

-\ 










. f i; j ■ 























- 120 


residents of Cardston and possessed special musical talents* 
They were employed outside of the salary schedule to give this 
special type of instruction, since school teachers who had had 
special training in this course were difficult to secure at 
this period* 

SUMMARY 


When the Mormons first came into Southern Alberta they 
settled in "farm villages”. This method of group settlement 
gave them religious, social and educational advantages* The 
educational advantages which they experienced were similar to 
those offered to small rural schools by the consolidation 
movement which began in the province about the time of World 
War I. 

Because of small numbers, and probably because of the 
fact that Mormon wards were helping to support the Knight 
Academy, the small communities west of Cardston rejected the 
proposal that they employ a circuit teacher of manual train¬ 
ing. The less expensive proposal that these districts employ 
a circuit teacher of music was supported with much more favor* 






CHAPTER VII 


THE CHURCH SEMINARY 
THE HISTORY OF THE SEMINARY MOVEMENT 

The point has been made that the Interest of the Latter- 
day Church in education is both secular and spiritual. Where 
secular education was not supplied by any other agency the 
Church assumed the responsibility of supplying it to its mem¬ 
bers, and where secular education alone was provided by other 
agencies, the Church endeavoured to provide religious instruc¬ 
tion in order that all members could avail themselves of the 
opportunity for spiritual growth. The Church authorities were 
particularly interested in exposing the youth of the Church to 
this instruction. 

The study of the Mormon seminary in the province of 
Alberta cannot be considered apart from the history of the 
movement in Utah, since the same general policy of the Mormon 
Church effected the growth of this educational institution in 
both of these areas. In the section dealing with the Knight 
Academy the fact was pointed out that in Utah the schools were 
controlled by the Mormon Church until the year i860. In that 
year non-Mormons began to move into the area, and they began 
to clamour for a system of state-controlled schools. The teach¬ 
ing of Mormon doctrine in the day schools was therefore excluded 
from the school programme, as it was in the Mormon area of 







122 


Southern Alberta after 1897. Consequently the academy system 
of education was instigated in Mormon stakes in order that the 
Latter-day Saints could compete with other religious sects 
moving into their midst. As the state of Utah grew and assumed 
the responsibility for providing education on the high school 
level, the Mormon Church found itself financially incapable of 
supporting a dual system of education. Therefore it sought 
some other means than the academy of providing religious in¬ 
struction. It was for this reason that in 1912 the Latter-day 
Saint Church began to experiment in Utah with the organization 
of the religious seminary. In that year the first Church semi¬ 
nary was established near the Granite High School in Utah. 

It was not until the year 1923 that the academy in 
Southern Alberta which provided the youth with religious in¬ 
struction during the school day was closed. The system of state- 
controlled education had begun somewhat later in Alberta than it 
had in Utah; as a result the growth of the system of schools in 
this province had not kept pace with that in Utah. However, as 
previously pointed out, by 1923 the competition from the Alberta 
high school system necessitated the closing of the Church academy 
in Raymond. Three years later the policy of the Mormon Church 
was announced with respect to closing all of its Church schools 
in favour of the seminary and teachers* training colleges — 

“the secular schools still operated by the Church were to be 



•: •' ~ r •. . 

. 

* 

■ . 


. 

' 

' 

i. -,\u J ■ ,'j '?ci' i; Z ?. 'T VB lOOite 2 ilgUl 

. 

■ ‘ ■ ■: ; ;i /r> • . ‘I . .1 . ' a.:O'. : : ' ■ 

1 ]' | f ' - 

, , co .u.xr.c- *': r l 'C>c::\ ■ . 


- 123 - 


abandoned as soon as feasible In order to permit expansion of 

the seminary system ". 1 By the year 1935 there were eighty- 

six seminaries in operation throughout the various Mormon 

stakes in the United States. At the present time there are 

126 in full time operation and 63 in part time operation throu- 

2 

ghout Canada, the United States and Mexico* 

The first religious institute was not established in 
Canada until the autumn of 1952. In that year the General 
Authorities of the Mormon Church saw fit to erect an institute 
near the campus of the University of Alberta in order to en¬ 
courage Mormons from Southern Alberta to attend their own prov¬ 
incial university instead of leaving Canada to attend university 
in Utah, where they could obtain instruction in theology on the 
university level* The institute near the University of Alberta 
campus is under the direction of a full time instructor, a 
graduate from the Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah* 

The seminary movement has now expanded to include the 
Junior and senior high school students of the Cardston, Raymond, 
Taber, Magrath, and Lethbridge areas. In the year 1956 a 

^Henry A* Smith, "The Church and Education", The 
Improvement Era, Vol. 38 , No. 4, p. 224, Salt Lake City, 

April, 1935. 

2 

Linford Christenson, A Study of the Place of the Extra 
Class Activity Programme in the L.D.S. Seminaries . (Thesis, 
Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, August 1954). 














124 - 


seminary building was constructed at Lethbridge to accommodate 
this Southern Alberta area. In this unit daily classes are 
held for senior high school students from the immediate vicinity 
Early morning classes are likewise held for junior high school 
students. These classes are not operated on released time from 
the school day, as are the senior seminary classes; students 
of the junior high school must attend between seven o*clock 
and eight in the mornings. 

The Lethbridge seminary, which is under the direction 
of Phillip Redd of Raymond, also provides for social functions 
which may be attended by junior and senior high school students 
and their friends. The more remote points of the Mormon region 
Cardston, Raymond, Magrath, and the Taber areas are accommodated 
by circuit seminary instructors, who are paid a teaching salary 
by the Latter-day Saint Church in Salt Lake City. These circuit 
instructors fall under the local supervision of the seminary 
unit established in Lethbridge. 

Although the Latter-day Saint institute falls under 
the same administration as the Church seminary system, it is 
not to be confused with the junior and senior seminaries. Where 
as the latter accommodate the Mormon Church members attending 
junior and senior high schools, the institute was organized in 
the year 1926 as a collegiate seminary to provide a social 
centre and religious instruction on the campus for college and 




;.0 


. 




0*3 


d d Sc 

• -vr : ' s 

...•■■ o ]:/ad 












- 125 - 


university students. The junior institutes are built near 
the campuses where two years of university training are 
offered by the colleges; the senior institute is built near 
the campuses of universities which offer a complete univer¬ 
sity education of four years. By the year 195& the Mormon 
Church had established institutes in eight western states, 
and as previously mentioned, one was erected near the campus 
of the University of Alberta* 

ADMINISTRATION OF THS SEMINARY AND THE INSTITUTE FROM UTAH 


All Mormon Church educational institutions were 
combined in July 1953> under one administrator, Ernest L. 
Wilkinson, president of the Brigham Young University. 

Wilkinson in turn is subject to a Board of Trustees for 
the Brigham Young University and a Board of Education for 
the rest of the Church School System. Both of these boards, 
however, consist of the First Presidency of the Church (this 
presidency comprises the president of the Church and his two 

3 

advisors, and the Council of the Twelve.) 

This unification plan of administration also includes 
an executive committee consisting of an administrator and his 
executive assistant, a vice-president in charge of religious 

3 

The Council of the Twelve refers to the Twelve Apostles 
of the Mormon Church who give advice to the First Presidency 
of the Church. 










- 126 - 

education, and a vice-president in charge of finance and 
business administration* The Organization Chart of this 
unified plan of administration is found in Appendix B 
The Duties of the General Board of Education 

The General Board of Education decides upon the 
policies that are to be carried out by the various divisions 
of the Church School System. The board makes up budget ap¬ 
propriations and approves of or rejects operation expenditu¬ 
res; it likewise approves of administrative and teaching 
personnel. 

The Executive Committee 

An Executive Committee is appointed by the president 
of the Board. This committee considers all business presented 
by the administrator, and it makes recommendations for modifi¬ 
cations or approval before it goes to the General Board of 
Education. This committee is responsible for reviewing all 
applications for teaching and administrative positions, making 
interviews with prospective employees before recommendations 
are made to the General Board of Education.^ 

LOCAL ADMINISTRATION OF THE SEMINARIES AND INSTITUTES 

In each stake of the Church where one or more semi¬ 
naries are maintained, there is organized a Stake Board of 

4 

The Handbook for Seminary Institutes of the Church of 
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . Church Department of Educa¬ 
tion, Salt Lake City, 195b, p. 7. 






















, 


♦ 




; _ ■ _ _ ;. . _ „ ; . 

v i: ■> ;uiv f- v ■■. 

. - ; •- r.'JT”',;; .:i ' : : Cj * l ^Xi.'• J 


, 

' 



■ X 1 L ' \ 3 • ' 

» 

; _ •; ' _ _ ■... 



,L_l. . 

, 

' 

. 

. 

.1 ,1 Sv'jc 1 ; ; *y.o .'0 


. 

v.:- ■ ; i J . :■ ■ • \ vol stiQlS*:-C}j:J:'4'i& 


* 

.. - : ■- 'o • c r .. i;-;: ■" J e.”. • r ..'‘x . 

- • - -•••—■ -.-• 



• r ‘ ! ' 


t ' 


o .,' ^ 1 *'.1 : ■ ' 

. i 7 :~< 7 £;! ;r r v ;.. . H . 

, >■ , 


< 









- 127 - 


Education which consists of the Stake Presidency, a clerk and 
other members which the Stake Presidency deems necessary to 
appoint* The Stake Presidency consists of three members, the 
President of the Stake and his two advisors* 

When a seminary serves more than one stake, or where 
there are several seminaries serving students regardless of stake 
boundaries, a District Board of Education is organized. This 
District Board of Education consists of the presidents of all the 
stakes involved, a clerk who is appointed by the board and such 
others, if any, as the stake presidents see fit to appoint* Such 
a District Board would conveniently serve the Mormon area in 
Southern Alberta since the seminary in Lethbridge serves the 
Lethbridge, Taber, Raymond and Cardston stakes. 

If the territory is served by a Stake Board of Education 
the president of the Board is the stake president* If the 
territory is served by a District Board of Education the presi¬ 
dent of the Board is appointed by the General Board of Education 
in Salt Lake City. The seminary teachers and the principals 
are not permitted to serve on the local district or stake boards 
of education. They are, however, invited to attend all adminis¬ 
trative meetings which are called by the boards concerned. The 
principal of a seminary acts in the capacity of an executive 
officer of the local board in seeing that the necessary board 
decisions are carried out.^ 

^Ibid .. p. 9. 




? ... . . ' ' 

'. / . ' ' .. V' 

t ' * 

. 

.. , . 

• ' 

< '<■■■ 

•• • - ■ o .X . :.J : : ''; ?: r O ■ ! " • ?• • - 

* c • < 



Ji ,iO ; eii 


' . . ■.. .. ■ ■; X *7 C . a J X 



♦ 


;-a,; ;v i a O lo di'lX' X1 s 





• ' b-T Vif; i 1 '‘ 

?. 


...•a X- l ': 


- . ,:.il : X X‘i 4 o “ iucr 

7 c Xnci' 



c-v ;.. j- ^ . . •a., 

. . 




J. '--ool 

v«v ■ era- X •: a - 



..'.. ;r-■ 


< « 

c 

* 



.. ; .’ j. -■ ■... a a. . v 1 \ r. ' ■ X i ' .i ' ■c 

- • ■ x 


;.!■ i.X vs* iaopl etlti r io ^::OlVlo 


... . ......... 




' 



128 - 


Duties and Responsibilities of the Stake District Board 

(1) The Stake or District Board of Education is respons¬ 
ible for meeting regularly at a scheduled time and 
place with the seminary principal, or principals, in 
order to discuss problems relating to the seminary 
programme. 

(2) Proper arrangements with the public school administ¬ 
ration for released time and a satisfactory class 
schedule are made by the Stake or District Board in 
co-operation with the school authorities* 

(3) The Stake or District Board is responsible for carry¬ 
ing forward a progressive programme of public relations 
with the public in general. 

(4) The Board maintains a high degree of morale and effic¬ 
iency in the seminary by encouraging, counselling, and 
advising the seminary teachers in every way possible. 

(5) Periodic reports and recommendations to the Administ¬ 
ration of the Church Department of Education with 
respect to teaching personnel, quality of teaching 
done by the seminary teachers and required renovations 
and improvements of buildings and property are made by 
the local Stake or District Board of Education. 

(6) The local board is responsible for fostering the 
Church programme of education by encouraging Mormon 
college and university students to attend the Church 
institute. 











— — 

.. .. 


~ 

• :■ . o , o ‘ 


' 

< . . K 



■ - * ’ • ■ .. .i. ‘. ■ j -i • ' m'o 

~ . 

.. . ■ -vi ri.i '. •> , * : o*r 

- . \ ' ■ 

■“:*£■ . ! .i■; *1 o\ i'iO.t : j y r x 

- 

. .. ■ 


... 


. *1 0 J •: ;. . . •" -• i . 


• . ■ . • 



* . . 

-. . . ■; ' . : 

i. \ . ■■ ■ ’ J' . ’ J r i -0 ' r . i ! ‘ 


• . ,• . 


• . , ' ■ ...' ■ : ' vh. 

- 

■ •> r ■oi i -'■> ' 

. 

■ • ^ '5. ;• yo l 




, '■ . r i 

. • ■ v- - , .. . r. a- r :-,vo-i ;v. 

* • • o ... oo, . . 


.j vo‘X yc"i . 

•, j: ... ::.onS. 


• • 


J V , , .1... 


' 




129 - 


(7) The rental or other use of the seminary building is 
under the direction of the Stake or District Board 
of Education 0 These buildings are for the benefit 
of Mormon people, and should be offered freely for 
stake and ward use provided that there is no possible 
conflict with the progress of the seminary programme* 
Non-Mormon organizations are permitted to rent the 
buildings with the understanding that Mormon Church 
teachings are respected during such rental periods*^ 

THE COURSE OF STUDIES AND OBJECTIVES OF THE SEMINARY 

The Course of Studies 

Four courses of study are normally offered by the 
seminaries* These include: 

(1) Old Testament History. 

(2) New Testament History. 

(3) Latter-day Saint Church History and Doctrine. 

(4) The Book of Mormon Studies* 

These are usually offered to the students of junior 
and senior high school age* A Church graduation diploma is awar¬ 
ded to the student upon completion of any three of the above 
courses* If a student completes the fourth year of the above 
courses he is awarded a special proficiency certificate by 
the Church* 

6 ibia. 









... 




' '■ 7 'lo t f 7.7 (V) 

. • 

* 

■ j ;.:y ,7-- ex. V07oa,u v,- :"..•»•••• o 2 ; a dr 

■ t *.1 ' -■ r-;t 77 



‘ • 








t 




' 

1 : 


c 




. 

• 

7. _:/: 




§4*| : 

r • r.7 uc 

0 *f_(J 07 




: 


. 

£ 



. 






. 






’ 

- 

dctt'u \ 



. 


. -. . J . -• >1 u r. * : r*s.£ ' 78 ill 

.• :: ... 7 ,7: : ' j... ;:;'0 ri:oq;' 7.:r7.!v l : ; i 7d7 "'7/ 

* 

• .-.7:. .'j- o : ;o 7 ■ 7-' ' "d ■•'■r o?. 7e7 7 /: x. el 'Hi ec?e,uco 

. 





- 130 - 


Students of collegiate and university age study courses 
in theology which are non-sectarian in character in addition to 
Mormon doctrine* For those non-sectarian courses, which are on 
a university level, credits equivalent to 18 credit hours are 

7 

granted by some of the universities which the student attends.' 
General Objectives of the Seminary Programme 

The objectives of the Mormon Church seminary programme 
may be outlined as follows: 

(1) To help students acquire skills, knowledge and atti¬ 
tudes in secular and religious fields which aid them 
to earn a living and fit them for a worthy place in 
society. 

(2) To help students acquire a knowledge of God, and a 
dynamic faith in his power and goodness. 

(3) To help students to gain a conviction of the truths 
as taught by the Mormon prophet, Joseph Smith. 

(4) To help students to develop the ability and disposi¬ 
tion to serve the Church in its many functions and to 
bring them to the experience of joy in its service. 

(5) To aid students in arriving at a sound interpretation 
of life and the universe, to understand man's relation 
to it, and to assist in the formulation of a philosophy 
of life built upon this interpretation. 

7 ibia .. p. 15. 












- 131 - 


(6) To foster in students a progressive and continuous 
development of personality and character which is 
harmonious within itself, adjusted to society, to 
the physical environment and to God* 

(7) To fire students with a desire to improve the world 
and to instill in them an appreciation of mankind* 

(8) To develop in students a love for and appreciation 

g 

for the Standard Works of the Church. 

THE HOLE OF EXTRA-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES IN THE 
LATTER DAY SAINT SEMINARY 


In planning their Church seminary programme the Mormons 
have emphasized the principle that learning takes place in a 
student centred activity. Consequently the greater portion of 
the seminary programme consists of those religious and social 
activities which are sponsored by the students themselves. 


Mervin L. Pugh says in his "Survey on the Organization 
and Administration of Extra-Curricular Activities in Senior High 
Schools in Salt Lake City", University of Utah, 19^7 • 


Extra-curricular activities are not by any means 
new. They are about as old as organized education 
itself. Many of them in their modern form were found 


8 Ibld .. p. 14. 

The Standard Works of the Mormon Church are the three 
books containing Latter Day Saint doctrine, namely. The Book 
of Mormon . The Doctrine and Covenants and The Pearl of Great 
Price. 


























- 132 - 


in the ancient schools• For instance athletic 
competition, clubs, debating, student partici¬ 
pation in government, special day celebrations, 
dramatics, music and probably many others re¬ 
sembling these in modern practice were well es¬ 
tablished in Athens and in Sparta* 

The theme of the New Education is the 
'whole child*. It recognizes that when the 
child walks into the school all of him walks in. 

He comes in mentally, physically, socially and 
spiritually. 

The following quotation sets forth very clearly John 
Dewey's concept of the student activity programme: 


The child is the starting point, the centre 
and the end. His development, his growth is the 
ideal. It alone furnishes the standard. To the 
growth of the child all studies are subservient; 
they are but instruments valued as they serve the 
needs of growth. Personality and character are 
more than subject matter. Not knowledge or infor¬ 
mation, but realization, is the goal. To possess 
all the world of knowledge and lose oneself is an 
awful fate in education as in religion. Moreover 
subject matter never can be got into the child 
from without. Learning is active.^ 

According to the above modern concept of learning the 
teacher is not one who designs tasks and dictates that they be 
carried out, but one who directs activity. Consequently the 
more influential part of the seminary programme consists of 
religious, educational and social activities which the pupils 
organize themselves and sponsor under the guidance of the 
seminary instructor. 


9 

John Dewey, The Child and the Curriculum , 
of Chicago Press, 1902, p. 13. 


University 









- 133 - 


Bennion summarizes these activities in the following 


manner: 

(1) The arranging and presentation of programmes and 
worship services in the Church. The programmes 
are generally carefully worked out with students 
participating in a unified programme of music, 
readings and sermons. 

(2) The sponsoring of community projects to aid those 

in need, particularly at Thanksgiving and Christmas. 

(3) The production of dramas and pageants in the various 
communities. These provide religious and cultural 
values both to those participating and to the mem¬ 
bers of the community who attend. Pageants and dra¬ 
mas are common at the Christmas season and at the 
commencement exercises. 

(4) The sponsoring of numerous class projects of educa¬ 
tional and religious nature which become a part of 
the regular classroom activity. 

(5) Sponsoring and conducting group worship services 
as part of the classroom activity. 

(6) Sponsoring trips to places of historical and cultu¬ 
ral interest. 

(7) Sponsoring trips to Mormon temples where work for 
the dead is performed. 

(8) The sponsoring of recreational activities in which 
students are provided social contacts with student 
groups. Seminary parties take the form of hikes, 
home parties, swimming parties, dancing and various 
forms of physical training activities. 10 


The seminary programme emphasizes the fact that the 
experiences enjoyed by a student in company of his fellows are 
the best moral training which can be offered to him. Social 
disapproval or social acceptance does much to define avenues 
of conduct which a child will follow, and are a much more 
powerful influence in his life than formally taught moral 
lessons. The seminary realizes that merely providing extra 

10 Milton L. Bennion, Mormonism and Education . Deseret 
News Press: Salt Lake City, 1939, Chapter 9. 










- 134 - 


class activities for the student does not bring about the 
desired results in the development of the character and per¬ 
sonality of the student. He must be kept busy participating 
in the planning and sponsoring of his activities. These acti¬ 
vities must come about as a result of class work and they serve 
as a rich influence on that class work. 

Activities sponsored by the seminary must be essentially 
religious in nature. They must serve to prepare the student for 
positions of social and religious leadership when he is older. 
They must also teach the student how to participate as a follow¬ 
er in group activities; these experiences will serve to make 
him a worthwhile contribution to a social or Church group in 
later life. Today religious education is similar to the aca¬ 
demic side of a child’s development in that it does not suffice 
to memorize facts. Experiences must be provided which can give 
life and meaning to the facts learned, and which can be trans¬ 
lated into action during the student’s life. 

SUMMARY 

The Mormon seminary was established to provide religious 
instruction for the youth of the Church when this instruction 
could no longer be provided by the Church academies. The first 
seminary was erected in Utah near the Cranite High School in 
1912. It was not until the year 1952 that the Church in Sait 
Lake City saw a need for them in Alberta. The Mormons at the 



i. ; . , . x ggg.: . g x^ x gg.ggq 

v; ' :V\. 0 0 ’ *0 a!;3f;VC IxGV-XjX Oi'lvi' ill: r:b .itiLS)*! he+tl-M-I) 

. . . • 

' ,. * ; .1 x- ....... o ,o . .31 ; . •.' ;i r - 

. , :;■■■ , , 0 ”G\G ... X X : . 0 ‘. 3 C-icS3 G.GGO c .JXi rOGGGGG 

: r . . GO .... : .0/G • 

■ ■.:..... ... ' - ..V :>x, 

.. ix 

.... r: ... o. 

-■■■ ... / . v. . : ,g .:;.3 xjg . . .g . oc' g ..V xioGGo obIg xlxx. ov;; 

\J-J ' 'G'... . : .X. Z . X -G. G -v..'.. G XGV ,X,'B ; . XJ'J..;; ...-. *.X.G 

; ■. . . . X S' i - 

- . .... ' / ■■ . ' ., . ■. , '. . 

. ' ’ . ' ' ' . 

. . • ' .... : . ... .' • * ■ 

: ..0 ■ X : . .. ( ... . ... . * , •»: . ... -J G : '.IX .X 

. x* J. .x.i.Gv. . G..U; gxx xggox . j :l xoJ •.C 

' 

' 

. ' - 

v,..;-.. ,xg .-v'r. .OX- .c'lo-jJ ji.x x9oDuGX. '-. v ; ogjiu;: 

* 

. 






- 135 - 


present time operate a seminary in Lethbridge and an institute 
near the campus of the University of Alberta. Circuit instruct¬ 
ors of religion are provided for more remote Mormon centres in 
Southern Alberta. The Mormon seminary seeks to provide an 
abundance of "pupil centred" activities for the students. These 
experiences are organized in so far as possible around religious 
themes. 



CHAPTER VIII 


THE MORMON CHURCH AUXILIARY ORGANIZATIONS 

The Mormon Church fosters a number of Church auxiliary 
organizations which enlist the services of numerous teachers 
and officers who give freely of their time and talents in 
carrying out various educational and service programmes for 
the benefit of the young and old alike. Each local ward 
organization consists of a superintendent, a first and second 
assistant, a secretary, a librarian, a chorister and an organ¬ 
ist. In addition there are teachers chosen for the various 
departments. 

The ward organizations are given supervision by a 
similar stake organization for each department. The ward 
departments are visited by the stake representatives as often 
as possible. In this manner adequate supervision can be given 
in order that a programme as outlined by the General Board of 
Education in Salt Lake City can be properly put into effect. 
Leaders for these various auxiliary organizations are chosen 
because of their spiritual interests and also because of their 
natural abilities which adapt them for supervisory work. In 
each Mormon ward regular weekly meetings are held in order that 
outlined programmes for each of the organizations can be carried 


out 





- 137 - 


The names of these Church auxiliary organizations are 
as follows: 

Primary Association, 

Sunday School. 

Relief Society. 

Young Men*s Mutual Improvement Association. 

Young Women*s Mutual Improvement Association. 

It is the purpose of this chapter to give the reader 
some idea as to the early development of these organizations 
in the Mormon area of Southern Alberta, and to briefly describe 
the educational efforts put forth by each organization in its 
attempt to aid in the growth and development of the Latter-day 
Saint Church members. 

THE PRIMARY ASSOCIATION 

The first Primary Association of the Mormon Church was 
organized in the year 1878 at Farmington, Utah, under the direc¬ 
tion of the Mormon pioneer Aurelia S. Rogers. In Alberta this 
same association was functioning at Cardston as early as Novem¬ 
ber 20, I 887 , with Sara E. Daines acting as president, and Cena 

2 

Katkin and Mary Elizabeth Farrel as first and second assistants. 

1 

M. Lynn Bennion, Mormon!sm and Education . Deseret News 
Press, Salt Lake City, 1939, p. 241. 

2 

The writer obtained information regarding the early 
organization of these associations in Southern Alberta from 
Mr. Sylvester Low, Cardston, Alberta. 











- 138 - 


This organization enlists the attendance of children 
from four to twelve years of age, and by means of its weekly 
meetings it attempts to give them proper religious training. 

Mrs. Rogers, the pioneer woman who was responsible for the 
organization of this department in the Church, felt that "child- 
ren should be taught to be better helps in their homes, to im¬ 
prove their manners, to learn everything that is good. They 
should also be taught the Gospel of Jesus Christ.”^ The activ¬ 
ities carried out in the first Mormon Primary classes were in 
keeping with the life in a frontier area. They consisted of: 
straw braiding, patch work, drying fruit, making simple articles 
of wood and growing of the various agricultural products. Sum¬ 
mer play periods, picnics, children*s bands and many of the 
children* s outd.oor sports were likewise encouraged* 

The present general administrative head of the Primary, 
Mrs. May Anderson, has worked in this Church organization since 
the year 1890. Mrs. Anderson was one of the leading pioneer 
specialists in kindergarten work in the state of Utah, and she 
possesses much knowledge of the Froebelian principles of kinder¬ 
garten education. Her enthusiasm for Froebelian methods has 
been reflected in the Mormon Primary programme for many years*** 
The organization of the Latter-day Saint Primary Association 

^Bennion, op. cit .. p. 243. 

^Ibid. 







- 139 - 


is described in the following passage: 


The children of the Mormon Primary are divided 
into eleven groups. The religious instruction com¬ 
prises simply told doctrine and the belief as taught 
in the scripture both ancient and modern and eviden¬ 
ced in the history of the Church. These are supple¬ 
mented with lessons on character building, courtesy, 
development of gifts and talents etc. with the prac¬ 
tical application of principles taught. 

Leisure time activities include programmes, 
entertainments, festivals, picnics, nature study 
walks, kite tournaments, pet and hobby shows, the 
preparation of rhythmic ensemble and harmonica bands, 
the making of articles for bazaars, for the homes, 
the wards, and the Children's Hospital which is loca¬ 
ted in Salt Lake City.5 


The part which "child activity" plays in the learning 
and development process of the child is emphasized by the follow¬ 
ing quotation: 


The Primary association, said one of the leaders 
of the Mormon Church, is very much concerned with the 
many-sided development of the child, a development 
which will enable him to meet his needs and desires 
during the various stages of his growth. Little child¬ 
ren will always grow through self-activity. Primary 
teachers are merely directors — suggestors. Character 
is being not talking; it is living not knowing. It 
was upon this principle that the Primary association 
based its work in the beginning, and by the application 
of this principle it has steadily grown.® 


The Mormon Primary has a three-fold responsibility: 
(1) To give week day religious instruction to Latter-day 
Saint children. 


^Ibid .. p. 244 
^ Ibid .. p. 245 









- 140 


(2) To supervise and direct the children*s leisure time 
activities. 

(3) To encourage in the child proper health habits. 
SUNDAY SCHOOLS 


The Utah pioneers held their first Sunday School session 
on December 9, 1849, in Salt Lake City. The first Sunday School 
in Southern Alberta for Latter-day Saint members was organized 
in Cardston on June 5, 1887. John Lane served as the superint¬ 
endent, and he was assisted by J.A. Woolf and Huben Miles of 
Cardston. During the early years the Bible was the chief text 
studied by Mormons in their Sunday School classes. The Sunday 
School classes, however, during this early period did not con¬ 
fine their studies to religious doctrine. "The students read 
round and in some of the schools the alphabet and other funda¬ 
mentals of education were taught as well as the doctrines of 

7 

the Mormon Church". 

The modern Mormon Sunday School is graded on the basis 
of the chronological age of the students attending. These 
classes begin with children of kindergarten age and end with a 
class which is organized to accommodate the pupils of adult 
age. The standard works of the Mormon Church are the chief 


7 Ibld .. p. 247. 









141 


texts which are studies, and the course context is so organized 
to include a history of the Mormon Church* 

A clear description of the academic programme followed 
"by the Latter-day Saint members attending this organization is 
given in the following excerpt. This passage was taken from 
the articles written by Albert H. Reiser, General Secretary of 
the Mormon Sunday School programme, and it reads as follows: 


Step by step through the departments of the Sunday 
School the gospel plan is unfolded. To the children 
in the Cradle Roll class simple songs and stories 
having moral and religious implication within the 
comprehension of children under four years of age are 
offered* To children four, five and six years of age 
the kindergarten department offers lessons and approp¬ 
riate religious activities which emphasize the develop¬ 
ment of primary concepts of the Kingdom of God, the 
personal habits and qualities which the individual must 
possess, and the preparation he must make to be worthy 
of membership therein. The stories are drawn from the 
standard works of the Church. 

The Primary Department (of the Sunday School) is 
designed to serve children seven, eight and nine years 
of age. Here the primary concepts referred to are 
reinforced with stories and activities of a more advan¬ 
ced character. 

Children in the Church History Departments are 
baptized members of the Church, and are just awakening 
to an interest in the organization and their relation¬ 
ship to it. The course of study in this department, 
therefore, is to present stories of Church History and 
subject matter relating to the Church and to induce 
the pupil to explore and to understand the Church and 
its purpose in relation to himself. 

The deacons and girls of the ages twelve, thirteen 
and fourteen in the ‘A* Department are led to continue 
this activity of exploration. At this level the at¬ 
tention is drawn to a study of the principles of the 
Mormon Gospel. The materials used are to be found in 
the standard works of the Church. In the ‘A* Depart¬ 
ment the emphasis is given chiefly to the biographical 
materials of leaders of leaders and hero tales. 






142 


In the *B* Department the ordained teachers and 
girls fifteen and sixteen years of age take up a more 
advanced study of the principles of the Mormon Gospel* 
At this level the distinctive messages of the standard 
works of the Church are stressed. 

In the Gospel Messages or *0* Department the 
particular aim is to show the application of the prin¬ 
ciples of the Gospel to the problems of the modern 
life of young people* 

An intensive review course in the principles of 
the Gospel is offered young people nineteen and twenty 
years of age in the hope of preparing them for the 
active missionary service abroad and for teaching res¬ 
ponsibilities in various Church organizations at home. 
The purpose of the missionary course is first, to lead 
the class members to a deep, intellectual conviction, 
culminating in a testimony of the Gospel; secondly to 
induce a desire to share the blessings of the Gospel 
with others, and third, to acquaint members of the 
class with means and methods of helping others to 
share these blessings. 

The members of the Church over 20 years of age 
study the Gospel doctrine lessons. The courses here 
are varied ere ry year. The aim is to emphasize the 
special opportunities and the responsibilities which 
adults have to apply Gospel principles to the better¬ 
ment of home and community conditions. 


RELIEF SOCIETY 

This association sees to the adult education of the 
Mormon women, and at the same time it concerns itself with the 
welfare of needy Church members. The first Mormon Relief 
Society was organized for the Latter-day Saint women on March 
17, 1842, by Joseph Smith in Nauvoo Illinois. The Mormon 
Relief Society became affiliated with the National Council of 
Women in America in the year 1891. In Southern Alberta the 
first organized Relief Society began to act on November 20, 
1887* The organization of this association took place in 


3 Ibld .. p. 248. 











- 143 - 


Cardston. Mrs. Mary L. Woolf was "set apart" as the president 
of the organization; she was aided by two assistants Mrs. Anna 
M. Lane and Mrs. Mary A. Roberts. 

The objectives of this Church auxiliary organization 
are summarized in the following passage which was taken from 
the early records of the Mormon Church. The excerpt states 
the aim as follows: 


To manifest benevolence irrespective of creed 
or nationality, to care for the poor, the sick, the 
unfortunate, to minister where death reigns, to 
assist in correcting the morals and improving com¬ 
munity life, to raise human life to its highest 
level, to elevate and enlarge the scope of women's 
activities and conditions, to foster love for reli¬ 
gion, education, culture, refinement, to develop q 
faith, to save souls, to study and teach the gospel. 


The women belonging to the Relief Society Organiza¬ 
tion follow a definite programme of studies. The first 
course of studies included gardening, literature, art, 
architecture and genealogy. Some of these subjects were 
optional. The present course of studies is covered in 
weekly meetings. Three-fourths of these meetings are devot¬ 
ed to educational work. The fourth meeting each month is 
set aside for any business which has to be discussed and for 
instruction in sewing. 


There are three departments which are included in the 


9 ibid., p. 252. 








144 - 


Relief Society course of studies — theology, literature and 
social service. The Relief Society magazine, which is published 
monthly contains the lesson material to be studied. An effort 
is made at all times to choose women of ability to act as super¬ 
visors and class leaders to carry forward the educational part 
of the programme. Generally these positions are occupied by 
Church members who have had teaching experience or by those who 
are engaged in teaching at the present time. In connection 
with the class work and as a means of follow-up work, projects 
in home economics, home gardening and clean-up campaigns have 
been established. 

TK5 YOUNG MSN 1 S MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION 

The first Latter-day Saint association for the young 
men of the Church was organized in Utah by Brigham Young on 
June 10, 1875* Shortly after the arrival of the Mormon pioneers 
in Southern Alberta, a similar association was organized in Card- 
ston; with Le Grand Robinson as president and J.W. Woolf and 0. 
Ernest Bates as his assistants. When this association was first 
organized in Cardston on October 16, 1887, it was included as 
a part of the Logan, Utah, Stake. The founder of this organiza¬ 
tion, Brigham Young, sets forth the general purpose of this 
association in the following passage: 

We want you to organize yourselves into associa¬ 
tions for mutual improvement. Let the key-note of 













- 145 - 


your work be the establishment in the youth of indi¬ 
vidual testimony of the truth and magnitude of the 
great latter-day work; the development of the gifts 
within them that have been bestowed upon them by the 
laying on of hands of the servants of God; cultivat¬ 
ing a knowledge and an application of the eternal 
principles of the great science of life. Each member 
find that happiness in this world mainly depends 
on the work he does, and the way in which he does it. 
It now becomes the duty of these Institutions to aid 
the holy Priesthood in instructing the youth of Israel 
in all things commendable and worthy of Saints of the 
Most High God. 10 


The present leaders of the Mormon Church still regard 
this organization as one "to teach the young people to develop 
the gifts within them and to express themselves before the 
puolic". The organization likewise seeks to train the youth 
in everything which is pertinent to religious, moral, social, 
physical and intellectual advancement. 


The Mutual Improvement Association holds its meetings 
each Tuesday evening. During the general assembly of all 
members attending, a brief preliminary programme is presented. 
After the programme the members divide into departments accord¬ 
ing to the following age groups: Scouts age 12-14, Vanguards 
age 15-16, M. Men age 17-23, Seniors 24-25, Adults — all over 
25. The class work which is discussed during the study hour 
offers an opportunity for the study of religious, social and 
industrial questions with respect to the Mormon point of view. 
In addition to the regular graded course of studies the assoc¬ 
iation endeavours to train the individual in music, dramatics, 


10 


Ibid .. p. 255. 





< ' 5 . 


J I 


. ' 


. ■' •) /;; 





* 


i : \J 











- 146 - 


dancing, public speaking and physical sports. It is not the 
aim of the organization to train experts along these lines, 
but the Church feels a need of directing the recreational 
activities of the youth so that the individual may learn to 
properly use his leisure time. The Mutual Improvement Assoc¬ 
iation has a responsibility of training all members over 
twelve years of age, whereas the Primary Association, which 
has been discussed, endeavours to provide a similar programme 
for all Church members under twelve years of age* 

THE YOUNG WOMEN 1 S MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION 

Brigham Young organized this association on November 
28, 1869* In Cardston, November 22, 1887, the officers of the 
first Young Womens Improvement Association in Alberta were 
set apart. Mrs. Zina Young Card became the first president of 
the organization. Her two assistants were Mrs. Annie Cheney 
and Barbara Amunson. Like the first Young Men's Mutual Improve¬ 
ment Association this organization was considered a part of the 
Logan, Utah, Stake. The following passage taken from one of 
the sermons of Brigham Young embodies the ideals of this organ¬ 
ization: 

I have long had it in my mind to organize 
the young ladies of Zion into an association 
so that they might assist the older members in 
propagating, leading and practising the prin¬ 
ciples I have been so long teaching. There is 
need for the young daughters of Israel to get 
a living testimony of the truth* 













- 147 - 


We are about to organize a Retrenchement 
Association which I want you all to Join, and 
I want you to vote to retrench in your dress, 
in your tables, in your speech, wherein you 
have been guilty of silly, extravagant speeches 
and lightmindedness* Retrench in everything 
that is bad and worthless, and improve in every¬ 
thing that is good and beautiful. It is not to 
make yourselves unhappy, but to live so that you 
may be truly happy in the life which is to come. 11 


The members of the organization are given numerous 
opportunities for cultural studies and activities which make 
for character development and a full life* Early in the 
history of the organization carefully graded programmes of 
study were followed; most of them were planned along reli¬ 
gious lines. Studies in home making and literature also 
play an important role in the course of studies followed by 
the young lady members of this organization* This associa¬ 
tion is closely connected with that organized for the young 
men of the Church* It aims likewise to look to the super¬ 
vision of the leisure time activities of the adolescent and 
adult Church members* Recreational activities to occupy 
the spare time of the Church members are promoted. These 
activities include dances, dramas and various types of sports* 


In order to direct and encourage the reading of good 
literature among the Mormon youth, the Mutual Improvement 


11 


Ibid., p. 257 






148 


Association recommends annually a list of carefully selected 
books for its members. The local organization of each ward 
assumes the responsibility of placing these books in the 
Church library where members may go to borrow them in case 
they do not desire to purchase individual copies. 

The Mutual Association Handbook lists the following 
advantages to the individual who holds membership in this 
organization: 

(1) It places one in companionship with the best elements 
in the community. 

(2) It gives many social advantages and provides whole¬ 
some recreation under proper leadership. 

(3) It offers opportunity to express oneself before 
the public which in itself is a valuable training 
for duties in life. 

(4) It enables one to discover one*s possibilities and 
to render service to others. 

(5) It satisfies the conditions and wants usually supplied 
by social societies, literary organizations, and 
private clubs; it teaches young people proper con¬ 
duct at dances and socials. 

(6) It develops the young man and boy in athletics and 
scout craft, and it teaches the girl the essentials 
of home-making. It provides for them both all forms 
of wholesome recreational activities. 




- 149 - 


(7) It affords training in music, drama, dancing, 
public speaking, story telling and other fine 
arts and it helps one to find one*s life*s work 
goodo 

(8) It gives one something to do; it keeps alive the 
ideals of noble ancestors and holds one in 
harmony with the spirit of the Mormon Gospel. 

(9) It offers opportunity for the study of religious, 
social and industrial questions of the day from 

a "Mormon" point of view and under the influence 
of the spirit of the Gospel. It thus prepares 
young men and young women for missionary service 
at home and abroad. 

(10) It makes one proud to belong to an organization of 
more than one hundred thousand working for the 
spiritual, social and intellectual advancement of 
its membership. 

MISSIONARY SYSTEM 

Although the Mormon Missionary System is not 
generally classed alongside the Church auxiliary organi¬ 
zations, it is of great educational value and may be men¬ 
tioned in this section. The work of the missionary is 
carried on both at home and abroad. A missionary is 






■. i. 3 o 


:.i- 





.> 


Sit 


' • ' $ to 






a • >. *io 


.. 






n 







» 











- 150 - 


called into the mission field by the Presidency of the 
Church, and he usually spends from two to three years in 
this service. The missionaries are grouped into missions 
which are presided over by a man of administrative exper¬ 
ience, who directs their work and to whom they report 

12 

frequently for guidance. 

From their observations abroad these young people 
gain a rich store of knowledge and an insight into the 
cultures of foreign countries and the way of life of the 
people. In many of the foreign mission fields the young 
man is permitted to study a new language which he uses as 
he studies it. This direct method of learning a language 
puts into practice the utilitarian principle of language 
study which is emphasized by the Mormon system of educa¬ 
tion. These young people on their return from foreign 
countries, are able to add much from their store of exper¬ 
ience to the educational advancement of the communities in 
which they reside. 


12 


Ibid .. p. 266 






CHAPTER IX 


CONCLUSIONS 

A study of the documents which are relevant to the 
early Mormon educational institutions — both religious and 
secular — bears evidence of progressive elements in the Mor¬ 
mon philosophy of education. Although Joseph Smith, the founder 
of the Mormon Church, laid down the policy which guided Mormon 
leaders in their attempts to promote schools, Brigham Young, 
because of his position as leader of the Church and his domin¬ 
ant personality, was actually responsible for directing this 
policy on the early Utah frontier. In spite of the fact that 
a number of the early Mormon educationalists had received a 
classical education, either in Europe or in the New England 
States, it was from a smaller but more influential group that 
Mormon education received much of the utilitarian stamp which 
chars,cterized it on the Utah frontier and in the Latter-day 
Saint region of Southern Alberta. The Mormon advocates of a 
practical education to serve the needs and circumstances of a 
people striving to carve an economy from an unfriendly frontier, 
had received very little formal education under the traditional 
system. Brigham Young, the most dominant of the group, had 
attended day school for only eleven days during his childhood. 


The n classical controversy" for sometime divided Mormon 



- 152 - 


leaders. Dr. Karl Maesar, a Mormon convert from Germany who 
later became the first president of the Brigham Young University, 
favoured the return to the traditional classics. Brigham Young 
maintained that "education is life" and that, therefore, the 
schools of the Mormon frontier should prepare the people to 
cope with their immediate problems which are conditioned by the 
environment in which they live. He was not opposed to a classi¬ 
cal education in its time and place, but he saw no need to cham¬ 
pion its cause amongst his followers since tradition had for 
many years firmly entrenched it in the curriculum of the New 
England States from which the Latter-day Saints had migrated. 

The utilitarian purpose of education was reflected in 
the early Mormon schools in Southern Alberta. The vocational 
courses offered in the Knight Academy as early as the year 1910 
aimed to train the students to find a place in industry, to 
cope with domestic responsibilities, and to render community 
service. If the day schools of the area did not provide in¬ 
struction in certain practical courses, such instruction was 
sometimes given by private tuition. The private commercial 
school which operated for a number of years in Cardston offered 
such instruction. 

In the Mormon region of Southern Albertaagriculture is 
the chief industry. The Church academy in Raymond for a period 




- 153 - 


was geared to meet the educational needs of the farmers of 
this area. The semester system of administration employed 
at this institution permitted the students engaged in agricul¬ 
ture to attend school for part of the term when the harvest 
season was over. The modern two-way method of graduating 
students allowed such pupils to accumulate Knight Academy 
diploma credits instead of working towards University matricu¬ 
lation and Normal entrance intended for the full-time students. 
In the district schools of this region advantage was taken of 
the school-fair as a means of stimulating the child*s interest 
in agricultural pursuits. This type of an activity permitted 
the child to actively participate in a useful project. 

The early Mormon educational institutions were modern 
in the respect that they recognized the need for training the 
child in “self expression” by means of public speaking courses 
and extra curricular activities. At the same time this phase 
of Mormon education served a utilitarian purpose. If Latter- 
day Saint organizations were to be properly directed they had 
need of teachers who could express themselves before the public 
in the English language at home and in foreign languages abroad. 
From the inception of the Church, Mormon institutions have en¬ 
deavoured to train the members to fill such a need. 

Although at first the Mormon system of education in 
Utah was the handmaid to industry and religion, and therefore 
gauged to satisfy the physical wants and spiritual needs of the 


. 

•- 

■ 



. 

r. '. 0 5 


- 

* 

:li: 1 ■ v:Usluak'0^4 zil. 





-. . • ’ : ■ ' 




1 


. 


* 


. 





.... . . 

. 

. 

if. 

- 

• 


. 

. 'r: f i ■ io 

■ 


, • 



* 

■ • 

• t .' . V- ' ’ ' ' • 


- 154 - 


pioneers, the aesthetic and social aspects of education were not 
entirely lost sight of. The facts stated in the documents refer¬ 
red to for the purpose of writing this thesis, reveal that as 
soon as the economic position of the Mormon pioneers was made 
secure, they organized auxiliary associations which served to 
foster the "many-sided" development of the individual. The 
mutual and self-improvement of the Latter-day Saint adult mem¬ 
bers, as well as the development of the "whole child" by means 
of child-centred activities, integrated around a central religious 
theme, are encouraged in Mormon Church organizations. These tenets 
of progressive education are emphasized in the modern school. 

The communal settlement of a frontier area by an ethnic 
group serves to lift the morale of settlers and to lend them 
the optimistic enthusiasm essential to the development of a 
pioneer region. Such a method of settlement in "farm-villages" 
used by the Mormons in Southern Alberta gave the Latter-day Saint 
pioneers of this area the social and educational advantages of 
centralization which permitted a system of graded schools in 
their communities. 

By the year 1918 the Mormons had almost succeeded in 
their efforts to staff their schools with certified teachers of 
their own faith. They had likewise at this period assimilated 
with the surrounding areas, populated by other religious sects, 
to the extent that some Latter-day Saint teachers were being 


~ - 


~ . J ... • OL r. 1 

« 


- 


' ' 

' 

< 

- .r. 

« 


t - ■ 


4 



• ' 


. 


" 


- 

< 


- 



• 

‘ 

„ 


■ 




. 


, 

' 





- 155 - 

employed by the school boards of these non-Mormon areas. The 
factor which mainly contributed to this rapid assimilation is 
that the English language is spoken in their homes as well as 
in their schools. The language barrier still stands as an im¬ 
pediment to the assimilation of some of the other ethnic groups 
of Western Canada. 

Since World War I the pattern of education followed by the 
public schools in Mormon communities has conformed to that of the 
provincial system of education. Although the Latter-day Saint 
people preferred teachers who were affiliated with the Mormon 
Church they have never been successful in staffing their schools 
entirely with members of their own faith. Some of their members 
probably prefer to teach in larger non-Mormon communities with 
which they have assimilated. 

Since World War II there has been a rapid expansion of the 
school systems in the larger communities of this region. Although 
the programme of studies followed by the schools in Latter-day 
Saint communities is prescribed by the Alberta Department of Educa¬ 
tion the Mormon Church still endeavours by means of its auxiliary 
organizations to emphasize the "all-round" development of the in¬ 
dividual. The Mormon seminary programme which was introduced in 
the year 1952 has replaced the need for the half hour religious 
instruction which was introduced in the mid-twenties. 

From his examination of the facts dealing with the history 
of education in Mormon frontier areas the writer concludes that 
from a very early period the Latter-day Saints have striven for 
the education of the "whole-child" through carefully organized 
programmes which are carried out by members of the "whole- 


community 




-• jU 

‘ ;; 7: -. '. 7< ., Vr.J •. J 7'o ;■.£ ..V i i;L. ‘"7X7; ■ 




. ti 


, 




o 




Vt 




C J j 0 o' /10,7 '' o 0 




; •• •.. ':- o . 7.7. ' . ;X7i j oon : :7, 

{. 7 . 7 . .. 7 077 j 7..u .7 :7 'O.. i.v o -.•. ?: j; £lco£io7 o Lion:, 

. ' J - - * .7 

,. 7c:. ‘ 7,77 ■-.) I. \ ::o . 

..... 0 v o,R . < 0' v: ’Vo I.. v:7 7 ;£v;:- ji\7 

•> ' , ' ... s/ ...oi... 

, . E . . . , 

. 

• • . ■ ’ . . ... . 7 ' . .7 

o a':,... 77 ■ 7 7\: : ‘' J .':3 J £.. ... -£7 ‘','.7 lioc!'.:.. o-xr. 71 aoi;o.*:.nau;i70o o.-ilot; 

-j . . . ; • v..jov .j ■■■■.. :i.d., a'i;vxo77 o.lc -io J: 

- 7. ■ ■ 8. ... 

* 

.. .'. o. £ •: i;. . t^ o;77 7707.7" 7 . ■' :7.7:7 C 7..u;, or 77 

* , .7. : . . ■ . • 7. .7 . / . o :.r t. . .... 

. . . ■- .. ..... v. ..v., .. a.. M.) IJ ■ v. . . -. ■■•. v. ....... . . • v./. -! ■.- ■ • 

7. • :. ■ 7 o: ■. o J‘7.-...; ' ' ..••...7 .j 4 .:.. i:c.:.zc : .7. no 1730777 o 

. 

• , . ■ . : . . . 

.. . 7: . ■ •. 7 ". • : . ■ , 7 7: ,'C i 7 ■. , 7.. 7. .7, Q Oi'o 

•••' .... 7 : . : .7.:.,.7.. ... 7 ,7.:.j l o ;.7. r :.. ; .7^7307 

* 



C 


- 156 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

BOOKS 


Bennion, Lynn M. Mormonism and Education , Salt Lake City, 

The Deseret Press, 1939. 

Butts, Freeman R« A Cultural History of Education , New York, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc*, 1947. 

DeTocqueville, Alexis, Democracy in America , Edinburgh, R. & R 
Clarke, Limited, 1946• 

Dewey, John, The Child and the Curriculum , Chicago, University 
of Chicago Press, 1902. 

Knight, J* William, Jesse Knight and Family , Salt Lake City, 
Deseret Press, 1939. 

Mort, Paul R. Principles of School Administration , New York, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1946. 

Smith, Henry A. n The Church and Education , }f The Improvement 
Era, Vol. 38 , No. 4 , Salt Lake City, April, 1935. 

Smith, Joseph F* Essentials in Church History , Salt Lake City 
The Deseret Book Company, 1946* 

Wiles, Kimball, Supervision for Better Schools , New York, 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1950. 


THESES 


Christenson, Linford, A Study of the Place of the Extra Class 
Activity Programme in L. D. 3. Seminaries , (Thesis, 
Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 1954) • 

Figur, Berthold, An Historical Survey of Basic Concepts to 

Progressive Education in Alberta, (Thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1950). ~~ 

Goresky, Isidore, The Beginning and Growth of the Alberta 

School System , (Thesis, University of Alberta, 1944). 
























































- 157 - 


Nelson, Harold S. Cost In the Senior Seminaries of the 
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, 

(Thesis, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 1935)• 

Ronning, Chester, A. A Study of an Alberta Protestant Private 
School . The Camrose Lutheran College , (Thesis, University 
of Alberta, 1942). 

V/ilson, Archie G. The Story of the Mormon Community . (Thesis, 
University of Alberta, 1951). 


BULLETINS 


Department of Economic Affairs, Economic Survey of the Town 
of Cardston, Bulletin, Edmonton, 1952* 

Department of Economic Affairs, Economic Survey of the Town 
of Magrath . Bulletin, Edmonton, 1952* 

Department of Economic Affairs, Economic Survey of the Town 
of Raymond . Bulletin, Edmonton, 1951* 

The Cardston Jubilee Committee, Picturesque Cardston and 
Environments . Bulletin, Cardston, Alberta, 1951* 

The Jubilee Committee, The Golden Jubilee of the Town of 
Raymond . Bulletin, Raymond, Alberta, 1951* 

The Department of Education, The Church of Jesus Christ of 

Latter-day Saints, The Handbook for Seminary Institutes 
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . 

Salt Lake City, 1956• " 


WEEKLY PAPERS 

The Alberta Star . Cardston, Alberta, years 1906 to 1910. 


The Globe . Cardston, Alberta, years 1910 to 1919. 
























































. .,. :.J..i..:,. i. 


. 


J'. 






, _ _ . . * < < 

. . 5 . 

, t . J*} 1 : O 

,...;■ , . .. . ’ 


T 3 J 




' rv;co c Jt 


, 


V* : - ■ ' . " ’ 1 

~... ‘.. ' V':“ ■■ ,• . -a. 




r. : o. ■ r 'to rr -•vjT'". c 

. ' t • t ■ t .... J.. 

_ • . / . . _ ; ■.; ; :: j;... < - •* ■' ; '' " r ' : 

c c , n l 

i 

. ; ; ' < 


* " lo C* /• "■ J 0 :’- - ! -~ 


' .... < 

- . - a; 




; * , ' 


. « 


OIV 01 










- 158 - 


SCHOOL BOARD MINUTES 

The Cardston School Board Minutes , years 1923 to 1938* 
The Knight Academy Minutes . Raymond, years 1910 to 1921* 
The Magrath School Board Minutes , years 1913 to 1936. 

The Raymond School Board Minutes , years 1936 to 19 ^ 0 . 






















APPENDIXES 
















APPENDIX A 


KNIGHT ACADEMY FACULTY 1910 - 1921 


Allen, Hazel, 

1913 

- 

1921 

Allen Heber F., 

1913 

- 

1915 

Allen, Miralda, 

1912 

- 

1913 

Anderson, Sara H # , 

1920 

- 

1921 

Baker, M«, (Mrs*) 

1910 

- 

1911 

Bennett, A. F., 

1920 

- 

1921 

Blackmore, J # H., 

1915 

- 

1919 

Bramwell, Ernest, 

1910 

- 

1915 

Brandley, Louis, 

1919 

- 

1921 

Cazier, Maydell, 

1912 


1916 


1919 

- 

1920 

Coffin, Earl, 

1917 

- 

1919 

Fenton, V« E., (Miss) 

1920 

- 

1921 

Holmes, Ellen, 

1919 

- 

1920 

Holmes, Myron, 

1915 

- 

1919 

Mitchell, N. Lorenzo, 

1915 

- 

1921 

Nye, George 0., 

1911 

- 

1915 

Pack, L. L., 

1910 

- 

1912 

Palmer, Asael, 

1918 

- 

1921 

Poulson, Edwin S*, 

1911 

- 

1915 

Rasmussen, Frances, 

1911 

- 

1913 

Redd, Paul, 

1919 

- 

1921 


- 159 - 














- l6o - 


Robbins, Archie, 

1914 

- 

1920 

Romney, Emma, 

1915 

- 

1920 

Romney, Thomas C., 

1916 

- 

1920 

Skouson, Don P., 

1919 

- 

1920 

Smith, Hyrum, 

1914 

- 

1916 

Steed, Merlin, 

1912 

- 

1914 

Stott, Edgar, 

1917 

- 

1920 

Tanner, Vard L*, 

1910 

- 

1915 

Ursenbach, 0. F., 

1910 


1911 


1916 

- 

1917 

Walton, Matilda, 

1913 

- 

1916 

Wetzel, Charlotte, 

1916 

- 

1917 

Woodbury, E. L*, 

1920 

- 

1921 

Woolf, De Voe, 

1914 

- 

1915 

Woolf, Wilford, 

1910 

- 

1912 

Wright, Pearl, 

1910 

- 

1912 






- 


t 


i f>' 


<■: - o: 


rro; t. 


< 


'■ d - 


t 


>f£,T- 


! TO' Ci £ 


< 


: . 


* 


eoV 


t 


) 0 






- 


— 














APPENDIX B 


ORGANIZATION CHART OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF MORMON SEMINARIES 



- l6l - 













































1C *X ' * 

'!>: J: r f i ’io ■ •• • o 


7 -.M. . 1*1 


i 


v :->• -• 


J / ; : . O . 


A , 


to *1 

-o ‘•■•i'.c 

' ' 


o 

aaeni ; : > m ■ 
rroi i: ib 


- - 

: 11 

' l 

■ i ; ■ 


. 




/ 


V ( 


108 i 


c 


• • ' ' 




■ 


.lb l 










APPENDIX C 


Salary Schedule of the Magrath School District No. 620 
taken from the School Board Minutes for the year 1928 * 


Step 1 
# 1 , 000.00 

# 1 , 200.00 

#1,500.00 


Grade Teachers 

Step 2 Step 2 

$1,125.00 $1,190.00 

Grade VIII Teachers 

$1,300.00 $ 1 , 400.00 

High School Assistants 

$1,600.00 $1,700.00 


Step 4 
$1,260.00 

$1,500.00 

$ 1 , 800.00 


Principal of the High School 
$2,200.00 $2,300.00 $ 2 , 400.00 


( 1 ) Salaries may begin in grades V, VI and VII, at 

$ 1 , 060 . 00 . 

( 2 ) Two years* experience may be given one year*s 
credit on the schedule. 

(3) Once a teacher is placed on the schedule he or she 
can not be advanced more than one step each year. 

( 4 ) A teacher receiving two successive inspector*s 
reports graded below "good" will have his yearly 
increase discontinued until such time as the 


- 162 - 





















I 



f 



u.id' ri oun ltdivi M-VJ.I 







- 163 - 


grading received reaches "good” or better than 
"good". Upon receiving two such unsatisfactory 
reports the teacher may be asked by the Board 
to submit his or her resignation, 

(3) The teacher must agree at all times to teach the 
grades assigned by the principal. It is further 
agreed that if the teacher has been assigned to 
grades II, III or IV and prepares to remain in 
those grades after being requested by the Board 
to take a higher grade, he or she shall not 
advance to the maximum salary as stipulated in 
the schedule, but shall remain at the pleasure of 
the Board at the salary at which he or she is at 
the time the request was made. 




APPENDIX D 


SEMINARY SAMPLE BUDGET 
FOR TWO ROOM SEMINARY 
ENROLLMENT - 275 
MAY - 1935 


ESTIMATED REVENUE 


# 1 , 500.00 
#1,500.00 

ESTIMATED EXPENDITURES 


From Stake Budget 
Total 


A. 


For Local Stake Seminary Board 

(1) Janitor #40 per month for 9 months 
#15 per month for 3 months 

(2) Coal, 20 tons at #10.50 

(3) Light, #7*50 per month for 9 months 

(4) Telephone, #4.50 per month for 
9 months 

(5) Water 

(6) Library 
Sub Total 


36O.OO 

45.00 

210.00 

67.50 

40.50 
25.00 
50.00 

798.00 


- 164 - 










B. For Expenditures Shared by Stake Board and 


Department of Education (Church) 
Repairs and Renovations 


(1) 

Repairs to roof 

$ 85.00 

(2) 

Repairs to chairs 

25.00 

(3) 

Repairs to front door 

15.00 

(4) 

Paint for 2 classrooms 

165.00 

(5) 

Paint, building (outside) 

95.00 

(6) 

Renovation, basement room 

225.00 

(7) 

Shrubbery 

45.00 

(9) 

Miscellaneous 

45.00 

New 

Equipment 


(1) 

Typewriter I 

145.00 

(2) 

Duplicator 

205.00 

(3) 

Ten student chairs at $13.50 

135.00 

(4) 

Record Player 

219.00 


Sub Total 

|1,404.00 

! Church Department of Education Share $ 0 % 

702.00 

; Stake Boards Share $ 0 % 

702.00 

Total Expenditure from Stake Budget 

|1,500.00 


Grand Total 

$1,500.00 


- 165 - 




APPENDIX E 


PERSONS INTERVIEWED BY THE WHITES 

FOR RESEARCH DATA 


Brown, W. E., 

Magrath, 

Alberta 

Edmonds, W* Everard, 

Edmonton, 

Alberta 

Hinman, Andrew, 

Cardston, 

Alberta 

Jacobs, Lyman, 

Raymond, 

Alberta 

King, Elizabeth,(Mrs.) 

Raymond, 

Alberta 

Low, Sylvester, 

Cardston, 

Alberta 

Nelson, Seth, 

Cardston, 

Alberta 

Rollins, Le Roy, 

Cardston, 

Alberta 

Shaw, Vern, 

Cardston, 

Alberta 

Shaw, Margaret,(Mrs.) 

Cardston, 

Alberta 

Steele, John, 

Magrath, 

Alberta 

Smith, John, 

Cardston, 

Alberta 

Woolf, Delia, (Mrs.) 

Raymond, 

Alberta 

Woolf, Golden L., 

Provo, Utah, U.S.j 


166 






APPENDIX F 


BRIGHAM YOUNG*S UTILITARIAN CONCEPT 
OF 

EDUCATION 


Brigham Young*s concept of education, in part, is 
set forth in a religious sermon delivered by him in the Mormon 
Tabernacle in October of the year i860. The sermon reads: 


A great share of our attention is given now to 
educating our youth — and how? I would not have to 
go far in the state to find an example. In the early 
days we owned lots in the ten acre field, in the five 
acre plot and in the city plot. We paid taxes on them. 
By and by harder times came; taxes increased and we 
sold the ten acre plots to pay the taxes on the others. 
Then the five acre lots went, and by and by the city 
lots began to go. Here is the case of a badly balanced 
estate, plenty of realty but no cash to keep up the 
current expenses. 

That is the condition of our educational affairs 
at the present time. We educate one side of the indi¬ 
vidual, and the other side remains unimproved. Why 
do I say that? Because all that goes to make up the 
foundation of life that builds up a country and that 
develops the mines, agriculture, and the factories is 
left out of education. It is all letters 1... 

I believe today that God intends that this people 
take hold of the mining and manufacturing institutions 
and put their sons and daughters to such labour as is 
suited to them. Educate them in these things as well 
as in letters. If we do not do this, where shall we 
draw from for men with the capacity to build up Zion 
and make it a perfect home? 

It has been stated that Utah includes within her 
borders all that is necessary to make her people 
wealthy. But we are neglecting the very means that 
God has put into our hands to educate our people in 
the right way. In my opinion the time has now come 
when our schools, instead of having so much in the 
line of gymnastics, should give good manual training. 


- 167 - 










- 168 - 


Gymnastics are good to develop the muscles it is true. 

If the youth developed them with the hoe, or the axe, 
or the plow — something that is useful — it would do 
them good. If we could have our farms, our blacksmith 
shops, our turning lathes, our carpenter shops and our 
factories, and educate our children in these things as 
they go along, we should turn out men who could be moul¬ 
ded and used for the benefit and upbuilding of the Zion 
of our God. Zion has to be built up, and we want men who 
are capable of superintending in charge of every depart¬ 
ment. God designs that men should be educated for this 
purpose. 


‘Bennion, op. cit., p. 101 




































