


















For Reference 









T, B. L." THESIS 


THE HISTORICAL AND PERMANENT ELEMENTS 


in 


RELIC ION 






THE HISTORICAL and PERMANENT 
ELEMENTS IN RELIGION 



As an introduction to our study it might he 

I 

well for us first of ail to define what we mean by 

religion. We are very often told hy writers who have 

sought to give a definition of religion that its mani¬ 
fold and widely different historic forms present a very 


serious difficulty, e.g., the primitive nature relig¬ 

r 

ions and Buddhism are separated by such a wide gulf 

: 

f;sbphy of 
lion, p.183 

that it is not very easy to bridge this in a sentence 

(1) 

or two. Galloway points out that TT a definition of 


religion should bring out the genetic principles or 

motives which underlie the development of the religious 

, do. p.184 

I 

consciousness.” With this in mind, he offers the 

(la) 

following as a tentative definition of religion. 

”Man T s faith in a power beyond himself, whereby he seeks 

to satisfy emotional needs and gain stability of life. 

;ory of 
.gions p.2 

and which he expresses in acts of worship and service.” 

(2) 

Professor Hopkins of Yale says "Religion is 

squaring human life with superhuman life”. He 

” p . 6 

(3) 

therefore goes on to say that the "history of 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 



https://archive.org/details/historicalpermanOOuniv 


rigin & 

3 of Life 
[Jniv.Lib.) 


religion is simply the story of how different commun¬ 
ities have succeeded in adjusting their lives to 
what they have believed to be a living power, not 
identical with their own power, but superhuman, even 
if they themselves may expect eventually, when they 
too have become more than human to obtain a similar 
power or become identified with it.” 

In each of these definitions the permanent 
elements are seen to have been a recognition of the 
unseen, the superhuman, and the attempt or effort to 
establish friendly relations with such spiritual powers. 
The historical elements are simply the different ways 
in which people of all ages from the primitive savage 
to the most enlightened of our modern scholars have 
sought to express this recognition and effort. As 
we trace out the evolution of religion it will be seen 
that the historical elements have changed with the 
changing cultural ideas and growth of intelligence,but 
the recognition of the superhuman and the attempt to 
win the help and favor of the unseen are the elements 
that remain unchanged in every age of human history. 

To q.uote Professor Benjamin Moore of the Univ- 

( 4 ) 

ersity of Liverpool, England "But the eternal truths 
of science and religion were the same one hundred years 






ago as they are today and as they will he a hundred 
years hence, hoth realms of knowledge as w r ell as our 
inhorn desires to penetrate their mysteries are a part 
of the great pla.n of creation, and in their intrinsic 
laws remain the same "yesterday, today and for-ever". 

It is our knowledge and powers of conception that 
have changed and not the eternal verities." 

As illustrations of the permanent and histor¬ 
ical elements referred to above we w r ill examine the 
various phases of religion as revealed in the world T s 
history. The first stage of religion of which we 
have any trace is largely Animistic, in which a vague 
aweof the supernatural prevailed, an awe in which fear, 
wonder and reverence were mingled. Animism, is a belief 
in a spirit or life existing in everything even in¬ 
cluding natural phenomena such as mountains, rivers, 
etc. Some of these were kind and helpful hut others 
were most harmful and had to be carefully guarded 
against. As the primitive savage believed he was 
continually surrounded by such powers he felt it very 
essential that he should establish friendly relations 
with them. 

In the early stages of Animism the life or 
spirit was bound always to its object, but gradually 




































. 


. 


















- 4 - 


there developed the idea of the soul or spirit being 
liberated at times from its object and moving about 
freely at will. Eventually the good and powerful 
of these spirits developed into gods as is seen am¬ 
ong the early inhabitants of North and South America 
and other lands. Most real to the native of South 
America is Nature Worship, because his fears or hopes 
are based on a belief that natural phenomena have the 
power, and will do him harm or good as they feel so 
disposed. 

Also there arose after the separation of the 
spirit from its object, the phenomena of shadows ac¬ 
companying man and then mysteriously disappearing, and 
along with the phenomena of dreams this led to a be¬ 
lief in the spirit of one ! s dead ancestor returning to 
visit on the earth, which later gave man his belief 
in immortality. 

Here in the most primitive peoples we have 
this recognition of spiritual or unseen powers accom¬ 
panied by an effort to win their fairor. Sven the 
religious apparatus for worship is seen in the circles 
of memorial stones of the Druids as found in different 
parts of England, these representing our modern church 
buildings of today. 

Following this we have Fetishism, Mana and 



- 5 - 


St .0: 
p.18 


Taboo, all very directly connected with Animism. 

There was always a utilitarian value attached to the $ 
fetish and the savage used it to control the spirits 
for his own purposes, revering or ill-treating it 
accordingly as it worked or failed to work towards 
his ends. The primitive savage treated his spirits 
exactly as he did his human neighbors. When he wanted 
a thing, he got it either by coercion or propit A ion, 
whichever seemed better, using precisely the same meth¬ 
ods as in dealing with his human neighbors. 

(5) 

Rel. "But", says Hopkins "the object to wiiieh his 

vague mumblings of hope and fear are directed is neither 
god nor devil nor a power of any sort as a person; it 
is rather a potency called mana or orenda." But we 
must not think of the savage as regarding the mana or 
orenda as one universal pow r er of which he and his ri¬ 
val and his object of devotion each have a part. His 

mana is his own as is that of the chief or animal 
theirs, just as each has his own strength. Mana was 
an inherent potency which the savage believed existed 
often in things not living or moving, e.g., that which 
CJave a person poisaon from the stagnant waters of the 
jungle, also which gave spring to the tiger and venom 
to the snake, and which walks abroad in the terrible 
form of cholera, smallpox, and other deadly diseases. 









- 6 - 


Everything mysterious, dangerous and not understood 
was treated as taboo, whether religious or not. And 
many of our social customs today, such as the wear¬ 
ing of black clothes at funerals, etc. may be traced 
to a belief in taboo. The distinct element in taboo 
was that it marked the awe of the man in the presence 
of what he conceived to be the supernatural. 

From this very crude and irrational belief 
we can see faint beginnings of morality and civilized 
society. The morality was chiefly negative, but it 
would seem that the moral sense, the knowledge of 
right and wrong emerges historically out of the pro¬ 
hibitions "thou shalt not" i.e. the feeling that 
certain things were taboo because in the first place 
they were dangerous and therefore wrong. 

We have the same idea in the earlier Genesis 
story of creation; the great fact in this beautiful 
picture being the dawning of the moral sense in the 
tree being regarded as taboo. We see therefore that 
these germs, planted in the soul of paganism, grew 
into lofty moral idealism, and found their ripest 
fruitage in Judaism and Christianity. 

While in their expression many things which 
because of ignorance and hardness of heart were ir- 






rational, unnatural, even inhuman, and which seemed 
to impede human progress, yet the inner urge behind 
the thing itself was divine, and without it the 
growth of such conceptions as immortality would not 
have been possible. The strange power or potency 
residing in the object is very much akin to that con¬ 
stant factor which has persisted all down through the 
ages regarding the mysterious spiritual energy behind 
material forms and which even modern science does not 
deny, but rather supports, and which even the highest 
form of religion asserts. 

ist.of Bel. (6) n The highest religions become fetishistic 
p .38 

when a power is supposed to inhere in a material ob¬ 
ject though will power is no longer imagined in it", 
says Hopkins. "Thus a piece of the cross or Koran in¬ 
vested with miraculous power for good is practically 
a fetish." The great difference between the idol and 
the fetish is that the idol usually serves the group 
whereas the fetish works alone for its owner. Fetish¬ 
ism is rather the expression of a mental attitude than 
a religion, but there is nevertheless the recognition of 
the unseen power. Taboo is the religious expression 
of fear and fetishism of hope. The word fetish as 
originally applied to the talismans of Portuguese 




Instead 


-a- 

sailors signified a charm to "bring luck, 
of merely possessing a spirit the fetish is a 
spiritual power and itself possesses the mysterious 
power or potency. 

Totemism marks a stage in advance of taboo 
because the totem was not merely an individual affair 
but reverenced by the tribe or clan, and treated as a 
member of the clan. But the chief element in Totemism 
again as in all forms even of primitive religions is 
the recognition or consciousness of possessing a sup¬ 
ernatural ally who is friendly and if approached in 
the proper manner will give aid. The historical 
elements are seen in the crude forms and practices which 
in our modern religions are replaced by love of and 
service for humanity with a universal God as Our Father. 

In order to establish more amicable relations 
with the deity animal sacrifices were instituted. The 
idea of such sacrifice in the first place was to please 
and pacify the god, the worshipper enjoying communion 
with the deity in a fellowship meal, when some parts 
of the animal were roasted and eaten by the worshipper 
after other portions had been offered as a sacrifice 
to the god. Through union with the god the worship¬ 
per gained deliverance from threatened evil and also 











- 9 - 


st. 
p.48 


possession of coveted good. Later came the idea of 
the god participating in the sacred meal as well as "being 
worshipped at it. 

Then, as a further development the animal 
came to be offered as a sacrifice for the sins of the 
clan, the animal being a scapegoat or a substitute for 
the human being who ought to have been slain. From 
such crude practices came the Christian idea of the 
atonement in Jesus Christ, and thus again and again 
we have this idea illustrated of the higher religions 
resting upon a very savage and lowly, though none the 
less solid foundation. Once more it is the recog¬ 
nition that remains permanent whereas the expression 
of such a belief is the historical element and this 
changes according to the stage of civilization a people 
has reached. Religion, as someone has said, is like 
a tree whose roots lie deep in the darkness of primi- 
tivity. 

of (7) 

"The savage is usually a practical man, and 
his religion usually consists" says Hopkins, "in making 
the best of his unavoidable neighbors." Because of 
this, mythology which requires imagination is not at 
all well developed among the savages. The Alnus, who 
were hairy savages in Japan in the middle of the nine- 







































































. 






- 10 - 


teenth century according to Rev.Mr.Batchelor, one 
of the early missionaries, had neither gods,priests 
nor temples, but they saw the hand of God in every- 
t hing. 

Hopkins points out that Totemism in America 
is of secondary character and offers no solution of 
the problem of its origin. Also he regards The Great 
Spirit of the American Indian, as well as that of the 
African natives, as a product of the Christian missionary 
rather than a native idea. There was, however, with 
the Indians a semblance of the priesthood, ranging 
from the medicine-man to the chief pontiff and the 
most universal elements in the cult were the prayer, 
smoko, sacrifice, fast, bath and dance. The soul of 
most Indians is "shadow” or "breath" but vital forces 
were often multiplied. In all these very primitive 
ideas as also in the practice of scalping carried on 
by the Indians, wnere the soul-strength was believed 
to be carried away in the hair, we see this permanent 
element of religion in the recognition of some mys¬ 
terious spiritual supernatural power. We must ad¬ 
mit that even the rudest religious systems have 
represented in them, no doubt in a shadowy and dis¬ 
torted way, all the elements that enter into tne 









. 






































. 



























-li¬ 
very highest forms of our modern religions worship. 

Other examples of this primitive form of 

recognition of the supernatural are seen in the 

Celtic religions. The Celts were great believers 

in magic. The priesthood was drawn from the youths 

( 8 ) 

Hist, of of the nation who elected their own chief. "If w r e 
p .125 

seek as indicative of Celtic character the most 
widespread phenomena", says Hopkins, "they are the 
worship of a few r great gods over a wide area, the 
employment of magic, the influence of the priesthood, 
and a general but localized belief in special terres¬ 
trial divinities, silvani, animals, rivers, springs, 
etc." The druids resemble in many ways the Brahmans 
of India and have been regarded by some as pre-Aryan 
magicians. They were arbitrators, and judges like 
the early Roman priests. 

With the Baltic group of people their wor¬ 
ship in general was offered to heavenly phenomena, 
especially the sun, moon, star of the morning and 
dawn. The remains of genuine Slavic religion are 
scanty and not very satisfactory for the interpre¬ 
tation of primitive religious notions. There is no 
clear division between the Teuton and the Celt. The 
Germans have always been notorious for their super- 
















■ 















stition, egotism and tribal self-centredness, and 
these characteristics had a great influence on their 
"belief and outward form of religion. They had gods 
of peace and gods of war and they believed in a 
here-after, as is seen by their custom of bringing 
horses and men along with a dead chief. As well 
as a Fire-Cult, their chief gods were Mercury or 
Woden, the Wind or Storm God> Hercules or Thor, the 
Home-loving or Domestic God; and Mars, Ziu or Zeus. 
The older mermans deified man in ancestor-worship 
rather than humanized God. The Teutonic religions, 
we may say, combine crude belief and crude cult, but 
again we find the recognition of the unseen even 
though expressed in such crude forms. 

This is also seen in the earlier religions 
of India where the aborigines had forms of animism, 
totemism and also of nature worship. They were 
agriculturists and each village had its own Great 
Mother Spirit. The invading Aryans brought in an 
T aristocratie cult 1 in the Vedic religion. It has 
a complicated ritual though is a very crude form of 
religion. It endevaored to consolidate the gods 
rather than to exalt any one of them. The common 
people largely remained Vedics, undisturbed by mysti< 
The Jains founded a religion of salvation through 











. 
























. 








' 











- 13 - 


faith in the founder Jina, or conqueror. This sect 
has existed for 2400 years, especially in South and 
West India and has established many monasteries and 
nunneries. 

Again in China prior to oonf'ucius the re¬ 
ligions were chiefly foims of Ancestor Worship, 

Animism and a great Exclusiveness; and until Buddhism 
entered there was neither priesthood nor mythology. 

The earliest Japanese religion was a pure Eaturism, 
w r ith practically no ancestor worship nor any form of 
priesthood. A religion of loyalty rather than filial 
piety was advocated. 

In the great national religions such as 
Shintoism, Taoism, Buddhism, Zoroastrianism, Moham¬ 
medanism and Christianity we have illustrations of the 
two distinct elements in question. Shintoism "the 
way of the gods" is the old native religion of Japan. 
In the main it is a worship of nature, and we find 

Tv 

three successive stages of the coseption of divinity 
in nature, according to Dr.Aston, a writer in Hastings 
Sncyclop. of Religion and Ethics. First the fetish 
idea of a natural object such as the sun is regarded 
as sentient and worshipped as god. Secondly the god 
is thought of as an anthropomorphic being and thirdly 
it is conceived not as the natural object itself 





- 14 - 


[astings En- 
lop. of 
r igion & 

.ics Vol.IV 

. 6 / 18 


or its presiding deity, but as a spiritual emanation 
from him which resides in his temple on earth and other¬ 
wise exercises a spiritual influence there. Although 
as a religion it is practically extinct and has given 
way to Buddhism and Christianity the recognition of 
the divine as seen in this case in Mature, is an ele¬ 
ment common to all religions and one which we regard 
as permanent. 

In the sixth century B.C. two great relig¬ 
ions leaders arose, Lao and Confucius. Lao was a 
mystic and has been called the "Wizard of the West". 
Orderly goodness, Lao declared, is the natural state 
of the universal and a cultivation of Tao, the con¬ 
troller of the universe, is man's duty. One was 
to be emptied of worldliness in order to be filled with 
the "Spirit",^ There" is c e rta i nJysTTe?in i t e recog¬ 
nition of some mysterious supernatural power, the 
belief being just the same but the expression vary¬ 
ing with the type of people holding the belief. 

Confucius was a practical statesman and stood for 
morality rather than religion. 

Mr.1.0.Walshe says of the religion of Con- 

(q> 

fucius "Heaven^ might commission men to perform 

certain tasks, and protect them whilst in the execu- 

































■ 
















, 

. 






- 15 - 


tion of them, but, for the carrying out of those 
commissions, man must depend upon his own unaided 
abilities, upon that "nature ,T , predisposed towards 
goodness, which heaven had conferred on him, and to 
which he himself must allow its full development, in 
harmony with the observed course of Mature and the 
examples of the great sages of the past. "Rest in 
the highest or "Cease only when the acme is reached", 
is the keynote of the "Gr&at Learning" of Confucius. 

His religion is held by the learned class but Taoism 
for many centuries was the accepted state religion 
of the Chinese. 

Buddhism was founded by Guatama, a reputed 

k 

prince of a Ssrakya clan, living north of Benares in 
the sixth and fifth centuries B.C. When about 29 
years of age he became a.practical pessimist, disgusted 
with the rotation of life and death. After much fruit¬ 
less study of philosophy for seven years, one day while 
sitting under the Tree of Enlightenment he became by 
intuition The Enlightened or Aw r akened. There is little 
known of-his sect until about the third centtify B.C. 
but it was founded on Grief, with four great basic 
truths. 

(1) Birth and death are a grief. 





16 - 


(2) 

Grief 

of 

existence is due to desire. 


as with e 

.g. thirst. 

(5) 

Grief 

end 

s when desire ends. 

(4) 

Desire 

is 

extinguished by the following 


eight rules - Right belief; resolve, act; word; 
life; meditation; effort and thought. Nirvana was 
the extinction of all desire. 

There was' no soul, no physchology no psyche 

but T ’each for himself" was the primitive Buddhist 

creed; But there was nevertheless this belief in 

some power outside of self and it is this recognition 

that is the abiding element in all religions. 

Sncyclop. (JO) Zoroastrianism was rooted In the old Aryan folk 
tl ft 11th 3d. 

1041-2 religion, but the founder seems to have been a "man 

of highly speculative turn". Two spirits he believed 
to have existed at the beginning.of things, repres¬ 
enting good and evil, and both possessing creative 
power, but the ultimate triumph of the good spirit 
Ormazd is an ethical demand of the Zoroastrian relig¬ 
ion. Zoroaster was the prhphet sent to establish the 
way of salvation from sin. His temptation and that 
of Jesus are very close parallels, also like John 
the Baptist Zoroaster believed that the fulness of 
time was near and the kingdom of heaven was at hand. 
There is a distinct historical connection between the 








- 17 - 


Zoroastrian and the Christian faiths hut the belief in 

a supreme power is common to all religions, 

(/') 8 

cylop.Britt. "The Mahommedan religion is generally known as 

1th Ed. 

ol.l7 Islam.- the name given to it by Mahomet himself - and 

.417 

meaning the resigning or submitting onself to God." 
Islam is the latest of the so-called world religions 
| and the prophet no doubt was influenced in some of 

his doctrines and practices by the contemporary rel- 

I 

| igions then practised in Arabia including heathenism, 

Judaism, Christianity and Zoroastrianism. God is one 
and universal from the beginning, his unity being em¬ 
phasized in opposition to the mistaken conception of 
the Christian Trinity and later the name Allah which 
seems to have belonged to prevailing heathenism was 
taken over and identified with Mahomet's god, in the 
first part of the later Moslem creed which annonnces 
"there is no god but Allah". Mahomet maintained that 
God had revealed himself to man by writings and Proph¬ 
ets. Just as he had given the Law to the Jews, and 
the gospel to the Christians so he revealed to Mahomet 
the Koran. The prophets to the different peoples in¬ 
cluded according to the Koran Moses to the Jews, 

Jesus to the Christians and Mahomet "the seal of the 
prophets to the Moslems. 











- 18 - 


Fear of the judgment of God's will was a 
motive of action, followed by repentance and 
turning to God. Military methods of propaganda were 
adopted, their opponents being reduced to taxpayers, 
and "submission” rather than mission was the watch¬ 
word. The historical element is seen in its borrow¬ 
ing from contemporary religions, especially that of 
Christianity, but the recognition of God as a power 
greater than man is the abiding element which is 
common to all religions. 

The religions of Israel are largely tradit¬ 
ional before David. Many Old Testament stories are 
found in Babylonian traditions, such as that of the 
flood and others. The Priestly Code comes from an 
agricultural and not a nomadic people. The prophets, 
with Amos in the van as the first monotheist, empha¬ 
sized a national, ethical, moral and individual relig¬ 
ion. Jeremiah bridged the gap between the prophetic 
and legalism. Later we have a reaction against 
legalism as seen in the mysticism of Christianity. 

With reference to Christianity the account is 
too near the event to justify doubt of its historicity 
but there are many influences of contemporary religions 
evident in the development of Christianity. The resur¬ 
rection story resembles those of the mystery cults. 





ibrews 1, 
1-2 


- 19 - 

But the evolution of Christianity has seen a great 
tendency to depart from the religion of Jesus, and 
even Paul must "be regarded as the founder of Christ¬ 
ianity, rather than of the religion of Jesus. There 
has Been so much tacked on by the Christian Church 
throughout its struggles during the last nineteen 
hundred years that today when w r e examine the religion 
of Jesus and compare it with the modern interpreta¬ 
tions of orthodox Christianity it is quite difficult 
to reconcile the tw^o at all. This has led many of 
our present day scholars to advocate a return to the 
original religion of Jesus and a shedding off of all 
the extras that have "been added during the history 
of the Christian church. 

The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews 

opens his letter with worsts that point out the per- 

(Q 

manent element in Christianity. "God, who at sundry 
times and in divers manners spake in time past unto 
the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days 
spoken unto us by his Son." The different ways 
of interpreting the life and teachings of Jesus have 
multiplied tremendously in the intervening nineteen 
hundred years, and represent the historical element, 
but the recognition of Jesus as the revealer of 







- 20 - 


the unseen is the permanent feature for in this 
respect He is the same yesterday today and forever. 

This is a very brief sketch of the historical 
development of religions, but we can trace with 
careful observation a distinct process of evolution 
in the growth of religion from that of earliest prim- 
itivity to the present wonderful and almost extrava¬ 
gant display of our twentieth century religions. It 
is our purpose now to endeavour to point out what there 
is in all these religions that has not changed but 
which we may regard as permanent elements. 

All religions are grounded in the spiritual nature 
of man and therefore to get at the ultimate in relig¬ 
ion our study must be along psychological lines. To 
begin with, let us get a psychological basis for 
religion. There are three determining factors in the 
religion of the race and of the individual, (a) the 
principle of environment, which would include educa¬ 
tion and social influences. Some people hold that 
this is the chief if not the sole determining factor, 
but such cases as Saul of Tarsus, Jesus of Hazareth and 
the many instances of individual transformations re¬ 
ported by our large City Missions all tend to con¬ 
tradict this view, (b) The second factor is that of 
heredity, and this also has been declared to be the 





















- 21 - 


sole determining factor, whereas in truth these 
two factors merely co-operate with another force 
lying behind and which is the explanation of the 
spiritual nature of man. (c) This is the power of 
a World Consciousness or Cosmic Consciousness, the 
independent spiritual life of the world, to put it 
in philosophic terms. Speaking theologically or 
religiously we might say God in relation to the Uni¬ 
verse and Human life. 

It is a well recognized fact of psychology 
that something does arise out of the deep and affects 
profoundly our ordinary conscious activity. We all 
must recognize this world ground which has its own 
way of imparting itself to us. It functions not 
only religiously hut in a multitide of forms. The 
actual concrete "my" is thus conjunct in its inner¬ 
most nature w r ith the more than my", and the Sub¬ 
conscious has become an every day affair in all our 
lives. 

Therefore, in order to find the key to the 
interpretation of religion we must study the motive 
which prompted man to be religious,i.e. the feelings, 
impulses and ideas which conspired to bring about in 
man that state of mind which we call religious. 




- 22 - 

This provides as with a common ground on 
which there is a unity which links the modern man 
with the most ancient primitive savage. Intellect¬ 
ually, man has made great progress hut behind the 
intellectual are the fundamental feelings and im¬ 
pulses which have persisted through all stages of 
development. These instinctive sentiments of the 
human soul, functioning religiously led man to seek 
helpful relationships with powers higher than himself. 

Of course they were colored very largely by the environ¬ 
ment in w r hich they found expression and which also acted 
as a stimulus in calling them forth, but the life and 
driving power behind them all was the divine urge, the 
Spiritual Life of the World, the power of a World Con¬ 
sciousness, or God in relation to the Universe and 
Human life. 

We have seen the different expressions of this 
universal element in all types of humanity in our 
references to Animism, Fetishism and Totemism among 
the most primitive people and also in the more modern 
national religions such as Taoism, Buddhism, Mohammed- 
ism and Christianity. The inward urge and the reach¬ 
ing out for something or Someone greater than self was 
the same in all and may be regarded as common ground 




i:'?e 


23 - 


IbUjUk 


for all these different forms of religion^or belief 
differed according to the stage reached intellectually 
by the worshippers. 

PhillipsBrookes tells us regarding Helen 
Keller, that most remarkable woman though blind and 
deaf, that when she was told by her teacher about 
God she replied, "Oh, I knew him all the time but I 
didn f t know His name." 

In our study of the psychical life we might 
use the threefold division most commonly recognized, 
that of feeling, thought and will, but in every psychic¬ 
al process all of these three elements are involved 
only with one or other of them usually predominating, 

But it is the cognitive or intellectual element which 
distinguishes even the most primitive savage from the 
beast of the field, and which makes religion possible. 

To sum up then, religion is the outcome of 
our total personality in which feeling, thought, and 
will are insensibly and inseparably blended, crossing 
and re-crossing each otner like subtle threads in a 
complex web. In examining the history and develop¬ 
ment of religion we have to admit that religion ante¬ 
dates the recorded history as it was a factor in pre¬ 
historic days. 


Hume stresses fear as the motive responsible 

















. 




- 24 - 

for religion and goes to primitivity for his argu¬ 
fy 

ment. Schliejnacher claims that religion arises out 
of the feeling of absolute dependence. But such 
views rest upon a defective psychology and ignore the 
fundamental law of the unity of the human mind, sup¬ 
posing that one element may function apart from the 
whole. These feelings of fear and dependence are 
present in the origin and growth of religious senti¬ 
ment, but they never operate alone. Religion is a 
life and wherever you find life you find growth, and 
continuity and change are essential to this growth or 
evolution. There has been a process of evolution 
going on continually in the history of religion,even 
though this has been occasionally stimulated by revo¬ 
lution. 

There has been a continual change in the 
evolution of religion but nothing absolutely new was 
ever introduced into it. What we call new was orig¬ 
inally germinated in the old and comes out according^ 
to the law of growth through the principle of contin¬ 
uity and change. Socrates always declared that 
"in embryo the truth is there” even in the most ignor¬ 
ant slave. 

There have been three main tendencies in 







- 25 - 


religion which, broadly speaking, correspond to the 
three main functions of personality: the mystical - 
having to do with the feelings, the practical - related 
to the will, and the speculative - having reference 
to thought. The Mystical tendency grows out of the 
emotional depths of the human spirit, which depths 
may be semi-conscious or sub-conscious, but there is 
no outstanding man in history in whom the mystical 
element has not been a great factor. We cannot al¬ 
together eliminate the mystical element from religion. 
The Practical tendencies grow out of the Will to believe 
to do, to protect one T s self, to grow and make the 
best of one's self. The Speculative tendencies arise 
from man r s rationality and include a desire to know, 
to look before and after. The mystical and practical 
tendencies appear first and manifest themselves in 
a religious cult. The speculative tendencies follow 
in due time to interpret this cult and to fit it into 
a rational view of the world. The Speculative in its 
earliest stages finds expression in Mythology. Myths 
are inevitably universal, and in the absence of science 
they are the most natural things in this world. Man 
is so constituted that he must have some philosophy 
of life, some explanation of the world. In a word 
















- 26 - 


Mythology is primitve man's science of philosophy. 

Our primitive ancestors knew nothing about laws of 
nature and therefore had an unlimited cc^£.city for 
fancy and belief. The only force they knew of was 
that of which they were directly conscious,me. the 
force of will. They accordingly imagined all the 
outer w'orld to be endowed with volition and personi¬ 
fied everything. Even the cultured Greeks addressed 
the Sky as a person, praying to it for rain, and Anax¬ 
agoras almost lost his life just because he spoke of 
the moon as a lifeless piece of matter. Curiosity and 

istic 

credulity are characters of tlie savage mind. But 
Mythology is not necessarily religion although relig¬ 
ion may manifest itself through mythology. This we 
saw r in our reference to the different creation stories 
of the Indo-European peoples. They differ according 
to the difference between the religious beliefs of 
the different peoples. The Hebrew accounts reveal 
a much more dignified conception of God and man, and 
a poverty in mythological material, but a wealth in 
religious poetry. 

Magic stands in very close relation to an¬ 
cient religion, yet it does not form a normal nor an 
essential part of it. It may be defined as the 









special and abnormal agency whereby superhuman powers 
are constrained either to create evil or to avert 
baiucful effects. 

There are three distinct stages in the evo¬ 
lution of religion, viz., tribal, national and uni¬ 
versal. Primitive or tribal religion might be called 
natural religion. In the growth of nationhood three 
economic and political forces were in operation which 
all to some extent influenced religion. With the 
change from a hunting, fishing, nomadic people to an 
agricultural race there were different material needs 
arose and tnese demanded a new god. Also there came 
a desire for self-protection which in its turn neces¬ 
sitated a War God. Finally the dominance of a power¬ 
ful tribe over surrounding tribes led to the god of 
the conquering tribe becoming a Supreme Deity. 

With increased culture and wealth came a 
desire for higher and more cultured forms of the deity 
as the crude deities of the savage were no longer ap¬ 
preciated. We see illustrations of these changes in 
the character of the gods in the Hebrew conquest of 
Canaan and the Norman conquest of England. Civiliza¬ 
tion is a good thing if the foundations of religion 
can be saved i.e. brotherhood, goodwill etc. otherwise 







it is a curse. 


Just as primitive religion develops into 
national religion with the coming of new social and 
political needs, as a result of the transition from a 
tribal to a more civilized stage of society, so nat¬ 
ional religion develops into universal religion, when 
the new social and political needs arise as a result 
of widening of international relationships and further 
refinement and culture and a deepening and enriching 
of personality. When through increased facilities 
of travel and trade the whole world lives a life in 
which each nation is depending upon intercourse w r ith 
and the goodwill of every other nation, a universal 
deity is necessary to meet the needs of such a race. 
These might he called the economic and political forces 
at work. 

These different stages in the evolution of 
religion are hut further illustrationsof the way in 
which the permanent element - which is the recognition 
or belief in a pov : er greater than man and an effort to 
establish friendly relations with the same, has changed 
in its form of expression during the various stages of 
the economic and political development in the world T s 
history. 

Again, if we study the progress of religious 





- 29 - 


reforms we find they have been largely the work of 
individual men of clear vision and strong personality 
who are the lonely solitary souls who, while they 
live in close touch with their times are Sufficiently 
detached and isolated to live above the confusion of 
their day. These men in all ages have been seers and 
have surveyed the past and the future, ever seeking to 
establish relations with the Infinite suited to the 
times in which they lived. The Hebrews were particu¬ 
larly rich in such men of insight and religious gen¬ 
ius, but other peoples have not been without them. 
Isaiah had Zoroaster as his contemporary in Persia, 
while in the Orient and at Rome there were leaders 
doing the same thing, as seen in such men as Buddha, 
Confucius and Epictetus. Such men of the watch- 
tower type saw beyond their own little boundaries and 
country, and got the vision of a world-need. Then 
as they looked deeply into human life they identified 
the needs of human life with those of the world be¬ 
cause they sawy the world was akin, all the offspring 
of God being made of one common moral and spiritual 
constitution. They, therefore, set forth a recog¬ 
nition of one common Maker and Father of all mankind. 

It is through the exalting of the individual:, therefore, 

















































' 


. 









- 30 - 


that universality of religion has received its im¬ 
petus and dynamic. As Tennyson writes in his Locks- 
lay Hall "the individual wdthers and the world is 
more and more"; the emphasis on the individual "being 
that which supplies the dynamic for world vision and 
movements. 

It was this insight and profound knowledge 
tohich made Jesus the Guide for all time in such matters 
Jesus discovered the individual and thus supplied the 
dynamic for all the political and social reforms of 
the centuries intervening since His day. At the same 
time He w r ho thus exalted the individual proclaimed a 
universal brotherhood and also a world religion. His¬ 
tory has proved the necessity of religion establishing 
a cult in order to preserve its life. While religion 
must be individual, a purely individual religion is 
valueless. The Christian Church sprang up spontaneous¬ 
ly after Christ 1 s going aw^ay. It was the most natural 
thing in the world that those who had common sympathies 
common interests and a common goal should meet to¬ 
gether for counsel, fellowship, and the worship of 
a common God and Father. 

Before finally summarizing the permanent 
elements in or the essence of religion we might 











- 31 - 


state that no matter what field we take, whether it 
he the study of Matter, of Life, or of Mind, we 
can only go So far before we enter the realm of the 
metaphysical. The geologist takes us back a long, 

>VL 

long way, and to the uni^tiated makes most wonderful 
statements with reference to the evolution of this 
earth of ours, but although going back millions of 
years he begins with a period which he classifies 
"The Unrecoverable Beginnings of Earth History". 

storical As Professor Schuchert of Yale puts it "Finite, 

ology 

405 circumscribed, and weak though man is he yet attempts 

to fathom the meaning of himself and likewise of all 
that is about him. He sees the moon, the sun, the 
myriads of stars in all the glistening splendor of 
their orderly array, and like the babe that reaches 
out and longs for the object appearing before his 
vision, so man through his mental aye, aided by the 
instrument of his own invention, wanders out into the 
vastness of space, ever observing, ever asking: What 
is the meaning of all this? Whence has it come? 

Though he stand face to face with the immutable laws 
of nature and with eternity itself, his questioning 
mind still seeks to overstep the boundaries of its 
finite-ness and strives to comprehend the infinite." 











- 32 - 


1?.412 


Again in regard to the origin of life we all 
think we know what it is or at least we all see its 
various manifestations. But its nature and origin 
are most baffling. On the basis of established facts 
in Biology it can be said that we know nothing of a 
positive nature as to the origin of life. It is the 
greatest of the unsolved problems concerning man. 
Schuchert quotes from Schafer giving his opinion in 
191£ as follows: "Looking at the evolution of living 
matter by the light which is shed upon it from the study 
of the evolution of matter in general we are led to 
regard it as having been produced not by a sudden al¬ 
teration, whether exerted by natural or supernatural 
agency, but by a gradual process of change from mater¬ 
ial which w r as lifeless, through material on the bor¬ 
derland between inanimate and animate to material 
which has all the characteristics to which we attach 
the term f life 1 TT . 

Again when w r e consider the study of the Mind 
we find the psychologist goes only as far in an exam¬ 
ination of mental states as the physicist does in the 
material realm. He never reaches the ultimate reality 
but merely gives a scientific description of the coming 
to pass of thought, always accepting uncritically some 









- 55 - 


hypothesis. He describes the process of thought 
rather than the real nature of thought. Smmanuel 
Kant pointed out that there were two elements or 
factors in knowledge, that furnished by sensation 
and also that derived from the intellect; the senses 
furnishing the materials of knowledge, and reason the 
cement needed to unite them into concepts. Knowledge, 
therefore, according to Kant, is a product of ration¬ 
ality and sensibility or vice versa. But the essence 
of the world itself is the result of the combined in¬ 
tellectual functions of our faculties and a something 
we know not what which arouses them. Reason therefore 
knows only the phenomena and not the thing in itself 
which may be really the cause of perception and reality. 
Reason, according to Kant, w T e may regard as regula¬ 
tive rather than creative. Will and not Reason be¬ 
comes the basis, and this is the source and guardian 
of our religious faith. 

In the final stages of a fully developed 
mind we have clearly diffeJTentiated subject and ob¬ 
ject, but back of the question as to how the mind 
comes to know 7 is the question as to how the mind de¬ 
velops so as to be capable of knowing objects. Know¬ 
ledge is something which springs out of life, the 



- 34 - 


will to know growing out of the will to live. This 
is in harmony with Bergson's Vitalism, 

These observations give us a point of con¬ 
tact between the study of the scientific and the re¬ 
ligious. In both cases the Real Object is beyond sense 
perception and can never be perceived alone by the 
senses. Hegel says we get in the appearance a mani¬ 
festation of reality. Is this not also true of God 
and the soul? They are known by their manifestation. 
"Who by searching can find out God?" Yet w r e have the 
appearances of God in the progress of history, the 
moral order, and in the mind and heart of humanity 
as well as in the world of nature. To the extent to 
which these are known, i.e. the world, history, man, 
Jesus Christ, and the written record, to that extent 
is God known. 

Finally, to sum up in conclusion, we will 
endeavour to point out what there is in religion that 
may be regarded as permanent or in other words the 
essence of all true religion. We gain our knowledge 
of this essence from history and religious conscious¬ 
ness. Religion must be reviewed in a twofold aspect, 
inner and outer. Both aspects are really one; they 
are unified in their depths and both grow up out of a 







- 35 - 


' 


1 S) Life's 
$asis & Life f s 
tdeals, 

: p .8£ 


fife) p.41 


(17) p.4E 


common soil and both are nourished from the same 

infinite and eternal sources. The inner experience 

has been called a state, an attitude of mind heart 

and will. The outer is the suitable expression of 

this inward grace and spiritual disposition. A 

frequent definition of religion is the life of God 

inthe soul of man. The inw’ard has been called the 

root and the outward the fruit. 

(1$) "Such an inner spiritual experience has 

evolved through the whole of history", says Eucken, 

"and transcends all forms of life organization: it 

is impossible to explain it away." 

nfe) 

"If mankind- had possessed no spiritual 

energy, we should still be following the w^ays of Ab 

the Caveman". So says Shailer Matthews in his 

"Spiritual Interpretation of History." This writer 

goes on to point out that there is a "plus element" 

in humanity which has caused man to rise away above 

(l?) 

the beasts of the field. "Nature and animals 

are today essentially as they were ten thousand years 
ago", says Matthews, but "man has changed". It is 
human personality that has been the great creative 
factor in these changes, the writer points out; it 
has not by any means remained passive. When we com¬ 
pare primitive society with our modern universities 

















- 36 - 


(iS) 

Present Day 
Ethics p.46 


(1G) 
p .49 


(£ 6 ) 

p .60 


and the great mass of culture which we take as a 
matter of course we have to admit that surely man 
has made wonderful progress within, or in the realm 
of the spirit. 

(isT 

"Nothing therefore remains", says Eucken, 

"hut to acknowledge in this inward tendency a movement 
of the universe - a movement in which man is privi¬ 
leged to participate, hut which he could never engen¬ 
der from out of his own nature." Confirming what we 
have already quoted from katthews, Eucken goes on to 

(l<j) 

say: "For it is the working within us of some 

spiritual force that exalts us above the animal world 

to the status of numan heings." 

(i6) 

2.0 1f The movement towards spirituality" again 
quoting from Eucken "is not a mere negation, hut leads 
to an affirmation founded on tne basis of negation. 

Once man has found the right plane of life and has 
acquired a new individuality the gulf between him and 
the universe is bridged over. Man can then come 
into inner relation with reality, and can take possess¬ 
ion of the infinite. This is the meaning of Goethe»g 


lines: 









- 37 - 


*Till thou hearest the behest - 
”To die for a re-birth!” 

Thou are but a dreary guest 

Upon the gloomy earth. 9 r> 

The element which we have seen in all forms 
of religion from the animistic conceptions of primi- 
tivity to the lofty ideals of Christianity and which 
we regard as permanent is the belief in a mysterious 
spiritual force transcending the material world in 
which we live but nevertheless a power v T hich should 
be sought as an ally in the great struggles of life. 
The historical is seen in the expression of this be¬ 
lief and the great progress made from that of the 
primitive savage who propitiated or coerced his god 
in the hour of need to that of the worshipper of to¬ 
day who leaves the comforts and often the luxury of 
good home to carry out the will of his Heavenly 
Father in the heart of Africa. The belief in the 
supernatural remains the same, but the expression 
has changed with the evolution of civilization. 

To have value a religious conception must 
proceed from an emotion and give an impulse to the 
will. A direction of the will is essential to 
piety otherwise the emotion will die. The feeling 
element was strong in primitive religion. This is 





-3d- 


essential to all true religion but feeling never 
functions alone in religion and should not be allowed 
to assume a dominant place. All the psychical elements 
are involved in the essence of religion and religion 
cannot maintain its character in the absence of any 
one of them. The entire personality moves forward 
in its totality towards the religious goal, and the 
rationalizing and moralizing of feeling is the whole 
movement of a fully developed religion. 

There are many paths to God-consciousness, 
varying according to the peculiar temperament of 
different personalities. God-consciousness comes to 
one person more readily through one faculty than 
another and vice versa. Every man should start out in 
the quest for God on the path that lies nearest to 
him, but he should, in order to save himself from 
abnormal religion, strive to strengthen the weak 
places so that in time he may develop a full-orbed 
religious life. 

2.1 The following quotation from Whet ham's 

(352-) (IS) 

p.£65 "Science and the Human Mind" we think will serve 

as a fitting conclusion to our discussion of the 
historical and the permanent elements in religion. 










' 















- 39 - 


"It is probable that* when the significance of 
the new knowledge of Comparative Religion is grasped 
by the world at large, men undeterred and unwarned 
by experience will feel their faith in,, danger and 
the foundations of the deep unloosed upon them. When 
they find how many cherished doctrines and how 7 much 
beloved ritual arose from magic and nature worship 
and w r ere common possession^ of many faiths, when 
they see that on those rites and doctrines Christian¬ 
ity was merely grafted to supply a new interpretation 
of the mysteries, they will feel religion itself is 
crumbling before their eyes. Yet in truth it is 
but the old story of the sun's place in nature, and 
the old story of evolution. When Natural Selection 
gave a comprehensible theory of the method of creation 
some men rushed to the conclusion that life and all 
existence were but the by-play of materialistic 
mecnanism. Slowly they came to see that things stood 
much as they were save that a fresh revelation of how 
had been given to mankind. 

So in this new field of knowledge, a revela¬ 
tion of the method and process of the development of 
the religious experience of mankind does not alter 
the fact of its existence nor make shallow the depths 

















- 40 - 


of the soul's sea of awe and reverence for its own 
life and its intuitive apprehension of the divine. 
The kingdom of heaven is still within." 






BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Galloway 

Hopkins 


philosophy of Religion" 
"History of Religions" 


Prof.Moore "Origin and Nature of Life 

(Univ.of Liverpool) (Home Univ.Lih) 


Hastings 

"Encyclop. of Religion and Ethics" Vols.IV & XI 

Shinto and Confucius 

Encyclopedia Brittanica 11th Ed. Vol.£8 - Zoroastrianism 

Vol.17 Mahommedanism 

Holy Bible Hebrew I - Christianity 

Schuchert Historica 1 Geology 

Eucken Life's -oasis and Life's Ideals 

" Present Day Ethics 

Shailer Matthews,Spiritual T Interpretation of History 
Whetham Science and the Human Mind 


Principal Tuttle - Lecture Notes on Philosophy of 

Religion. 














