For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


THE HISTORY OF EDUCATION IN CALGAR Y 


by 


Phyllis Ellen Weston, B* A 









@Jt IIBBI* 

mmesiwis 











SPECIAL COLLECTIONS 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA LIBRARY 


REQUEST FOR DUPLICATION 


I wish a photocopy of the thesis by 


(author) 


entitled 


The copy is for the sole purpose of private scholarly or scientific study 
and research. I will not reproduce 9 sell or distribute the copy I request 
and I will not copy any substantial part of it in ray own work without per¬ 
mission of the copyright owner. I understand that the Library performs 
the service of copying at my request 9 and I assume all copyright responsi¬ 
bility for the item requested. 


Date_Name and address_Pages copied_Signature 



if fa 







bo Av'gr 

_ 


F. 236 


September 1975 

























Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/historyofeducatiOOphyl 


THE UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 


Faculty of: Arts and Science 

Department of: History 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for accept¬ 
ance, a thesis entitled: 

THE HISTORY OF EDUCATION III CALGARY 

submitted by 

Phyllis Ellen Weston, B. A., 

in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts* 


Date 


Professor 

Professor 

Professor 









SYNOPSIS 


The thesis, The History of Education in Calgary, includes a 
treatment of the development of the Calgary Public School system. 

An attempt has been made to show that this system has grown with the 
community, thab people with foresight have guided its growth, so that 
the direction of development has taken into account the needs of the 
community and the changing times. For this reason, the Calgary School 
Board has sometimes acticipated developments in the provincial field 
of education, and has accomplished much in the difficult task of car¬ 
ing for the individual needs of children. 

The development of the Calgary Separate School system has also 
been dealt with. Here again, growth has kept pace with the community. 
An attempt has been made to show that the smaller system has some 
disadvantages; tha,t a single school system would give greater benefits 
to all, and that since a measure of co-operation has been effected by 
the two School Boards, a single system Is not impossible to achieve. 

The history of Calgary private schools has been traced here. 

It has been shown that the initial demand for an English type of pub¬ 
lic school has almost entirely disappeared. The private schools in 
existence today provide for the expression of individualistic tenden¬ 
cies on the part of a very small minority of the population. The only 
private school established before World War 1 which is still in op¬ 
eration has adapted itself to the changing needs of the community. 

In tracing the history of the relations between the University 
and Calgary, an attempt has been made to show what difficulties have 
stood in the way of the establishment of a bona fide university here, 
end what attempts have been made to overcome those difficulties. 







■ 










' 










- 

















■ 










■ 






THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE HISTORY OF EDUCATION IN CALGARY 


A dissertation 

submitted to the School of Graduate Studies 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree 
of Master of Arts 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY 

PHYLLIS ELLEN WESTON 


Edmonton, Alberta 
April 1951 






















































. 




























f 


























\^S\ 

AB 


HISTORY OF EDUCATION IH CALGARY 
Table of Contents 


Chapter 1 Page 1 

Education on a Frontier 

(a) Calgary before the first school was established. 

(b) Early schools — Boynton Hall, Calgary School District 
Ho. 19, the Central School, the Ward School, the 

Lacombe Separate School, Bishop Pinkham*s Parochial School, 

(c) Developing a school system — The Calgary School Board 
feels its way, the first Teachers 5 Institute, the first 
high school and music departments. 

Chapter 11 Page 20 

The Public School System Crows with Calgary (1S93 to 1935) 

(a) Municipal growth. 

(b) Hew schools. 

(c) Manual training and domestic science, 

(d) Development of the Commercial High School, 

(e) Incorporation of Crescent Heights and Hose Creek School 
Districts. 

(f) The Prevocational School. 

(g) Development of high school facilities. 

(h) Special classes for subnormal pupils. 

(i) The sight-saving class. 

(j) Changes in primary room facilities. 

(k) Some highlights of the Years 1S93 to 1935 




















2 - 


Chapter 111 


Page 3S 


The Calgary Separate Schools 

(a) How the Faithful Companions of Jesus came to Calgary, 
(h) Roman Catholic Separate School District Ho. 1. 

(c) Construction of school "buildings. 

(d) The Public and Separate School Boards co-operate. 

(e) Special departments in the Separate Schools. 

(f) The teachers and School Board. 


Page 4g 


Chapter 17 


The Private Schools 

(a) Before 1914 — St. Hilda 8 s College, Western Canada 
College, Bishop Pinkham College, Mount Royal College. 

(b) After 19 IS -— The Montessori School, the Strathcona 
School for Boys, St. Hilda*s School for Girls, the 
Mount Royal Junior College. 

(c) Private denominational Schools today — the Hebra; 
School, the Seventh Day Adventist Elementary School. 


Page 72 


Chapter 7 


Calgary and the University 

(a) Calgary College. 

(b) The Institute of Technology and Art. 

(c) The Calgary Branch of the Faculty of Education. 












- 3 - 


Chapter VI Page 94 

The School Board and the Staff 

(a) Growth of the Public School system. 

(b) The School Board Offices. 

(c) The Building Department. 

(d) School Board-Teacher Relations. 

(e) The Health Department. 

(f) Other special services — the Attendan.ce Officer, 
physical training, and music. 

(g) The Superintendent of Schools. 

(h) School Board night classes. 

(i) The School Board ~ Trustees. 

(j) The Staff — political activities, the Alberta Teachers 9 
Association, Home and School Association, Curriculum 
building, the French section of the Banff School of 
Fine Arts. 

(k) Financing the Public School system. 

Chapter VI1 Page 121 

Recent Developments, 1935 - 195Q 

(a) Calgary Junior and Composite High Schools. 

(b) The hard-of-hearing and speech cla.ss. 

(c) The Guidance Department. 

(d) Public School kindergarten classes. 

(e) Hew school buildings - 

(f) Junior High School library service. 

(g) A visiting teacher for sick children. 










BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Primary Source Material 

Records of the Calgary School Board 1S84 to 1950. 

Calgary Municipal Manual 1949* 195^ • 

Calgary Herald Piles. 

Calgary Albertan Files. 

Historical Notes sent to the writer By: 

Cannon, R. A., Superintendent Calgary Separate Schools. 

McRae, Dr. A. 0., former Principal Western Canada College. 
Pinkham, Miss M. 

Collett, W. J., Vice-Principal Mount Royal College, 1950* 
Historical Notes in the possession of Dr. ¥. N. Sage, former lecturer 
at Calgary College. 

Alberta School Act, Revised Statutes of Alberta 1942, Chapter 175- 
Preliminary Announcement of Calgary College, Library, Institute of 
Technology and Art, Calgary. 

Calendars of Calgary College, Dr. W. N. Sage, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, 3. C. 

Annual Announcements of Institute of Technology and Art, Calgary. 
Interviews! - Mrs. Sylvester MacDonald, W. J. S. Walker, H. A. Leishxaan 
McNeill, Miss 1. 1. Cook, Miss K. Lowrie, G. R. Cell, 

Dr. F. G. Buchanan, Mrs. A. M. Curtis, Mrs. M. Potts, 

Miss 1. Leak, Mrs. A. Clarke, Miss E. Carson, Miss C. 
Barclay, Mrs. H. Riley, Mother Euphemia of the Sacred 
Heart Convent, Mrs. E. A. Dunn, Rabbi Marc Liebhaber, 

Rev. Mr. A. G. Streifsling. 

Secondary Source Material 

Mariannals 1949 (Year Book, St. Mary 8 s Girls 1 and Boys* Schools) 

The Ammonite 1945 (Year Book, St. Hilda*s School for Girls) 








CHAPTER 1 


EDUCATION ON A FRONTIER 

In 1884, Calgary, North-West Territories, was a typical front¬ 
ier town, characterized "by dirt roads, wooden sidewalks, frame build¬ 
ings, and one main thoroughfare — Stephen Avenue (now Eighth Avenue). 
After the founding of the small North-West Mounted Police post in 
1875, Calgary had grown slowly because of the isolated position of 
the fort. Traders brought their goods by ox train from Port Benton 
in Montana. The vanguard of the pioneers found good land for ranching 
and farming but the local market was small and distant markets im¬ 
possible to reach. In 1881, when Major Rogers, the engineer-in¬ 
charge of the Canadian Pacific Railway survey, announced that the 
railway would follow the route of the Bow River Valley and Kicking 
Horse Pass, he also assured Calgary of a future. The southern 
ranchers thereby obtained access to markets for their stock. Calgary 
would be the natural shipping and distributing centre for the 
territory south to Macleod, north to Edmonton, and west into the 
mountains. The railway crossed the Elbow River on August 12, 1883. 

ly 

On August 31, the first newspaper, the forerunner of the Calgary^ 
Herald, appeared. The prairie settlement had acquired means for more 
rapid transportation and communication, but one other difficulty 
remained to be settled. 

The location of the townsite became the subject of a quarrel. 
Section fourteen, immediately east of the barracks and the junction 
of the Bow and Elbow rivers, attracted the first-comers. However, as 
homestead land it had already changed hands twice and the title of 
ownership was not established. In the meantime, the land was in the 
hands of pioneer real estate dealers who were unwilling to come to 

























2 


terms with the railway company. In 1883, the C.P.R. made arrangements 
for the sale of lots on Section fifteen through the North-West Land 
Company. By December the company had received a number of applications 
for land which was apportioned by lot in the order of sale. To en¬ 
courage quick settlement, a rebate of half the price was promised if 

1 

buildings were erected and occupied by April 1, 1884. Mr. J. Banner- 
man, who kept the Post Office, moved to the new townsite where he re¬ 
ceived two free lots. The settlement of the townsite dispute and the 
inducements offered to settlers had a salutary effect on the growth of 
the town. 

By late fall, 1883, the settlement had a population of four to 
five hundred people, but it had no local government. A number of press¬ 
ing questions — the building of bridges, the incorporation of the town, 
representation on the North-West Council, and the establishment of a 
school — demanded some form of organization for co-operative action. 

At a public meeting the residents decided to elect a Civic Committee 
of seven members. On election day, January 7, 1884, Major James Walker, 
a retired superintendent of the North-West Mounted Police who had come 
to Calgary to operate a, sawmill, headed the poll and became the chair¬ 
man of the Committee. 

When the Honorable Bdgar Bewdney, Lieutenant-Governor of the 
North-West Territories, visited the town latter in January, the Civic 
Committee was ready to discuss its problems with him. Concerning ed¬ 
ucation, he pointed out that the Council of the North-West Territories 
had just passed an Ordinance providing for the erection of school dis- 

1. Herald Piles, 1883. 






■ >• ' o • :• . 













3 


tricts in those communities where ten children, between the ages of 

2 

five and twenty years, would be found. If they wished to engage a 
teacher at a salary not exceeding $600. per annum, the Territorial 

3 

Council would pay half of the sum. 

The Civic Committee lost no time in acting upon this inform¬ 
ation, A resolution was passed to call a public meeting in the Opera 
House one week later. On Wednesday, February 6, the meeting was con¬ 
vened with Major Walker as chairman and Mr. T, Swan as secretary. The 
motion to establish a school was carried unanimously, while Messrs* H. 
Douglas, A* McNeil, and W* N, Costello were delegated to canvass for 
contributions, procure a suitable room, and engage a teacher as soon 
as possible. These three men who were chosen to act as trustees of 
Calgary*s first school were all vitally interested in the development 
of the town* Howard Douglas operated a stage coach line between Mac- 
leod and Sdmonton via Calgary. Mr. McNeil was the government fruit 
inspector and W. N. Costello a local lawyer* At the meeting they 
collected the first subscriptions which amounted to $125* The cit¬ 
izens of the community felt sure that they could carry on until a 
bona fide school district should be established* 

On Wednesday, February 13 5 there appeared in the Calgary 
Herald the first Public School Notice! 

**The trustees beg to inform the people of Calgary and sur¬ 
rounding district that they have secured a building for school pur¬ 
poses, convenient to the barracks, and hired a teacher. The school 
will be opened on Monday, 18 instant, and will be free to all chil¬ 
dren in the town. 

2. Calgary School Board Records, 1884. 

3» The Calgary Herald, January 23, 1884. 

















4 


"All parties having subscribed for the support of the school, 
or desirous of doing so, will kindly send in their subscriptions to 
H. Douglas, Sec.-Treas., or the Trustees. 

H. Douglas 

A. McNeil 

W. N. Costello 4 

(Trustees) w 

The bitter cold of that Monday in February did not deter seven¬ 
teen pupils from putting in their first appearance at school. The log 
school house stood on the bald prairie as it was the only building be¬ 
tween the Mounted Police Barracks and the first Canadian Pacific Rail¬ 
way station. The Barracks were situated at the junction of Bow and 

Elbow Rivers, and the station at Ninth Avenue and Centre Street. Mr. 

T. U)- 

Costello, the first teacher, had obtained a first-class teaching 
certificate in Ontario before he came west as a pioneer. As he was on 
the spot and willing to accept the position, the trustees engaged Mr. 
Costello at a salary of fifty dollars a month, the highest amount they 
could pay and receive the full benefit of the Territorial grant. 

The first Calgary school, which to begin with was really a 
private school, changed its status to that of a public school on March 
2, 1885, when the Calgary School District No. 19 was organized by 
order of the Executive Council of the North-West Territories. The 
placing of the school on a sound financial and scholastic footing was 
as much the work of Col. James Walker as was its inception in the first 
place, for he undertook to circulate the petition to have the school 
district established legally. The first regular election of trustees 
took place on April 11, after which Stephen N. Jarrett filled the 
office of chairman, C. W. Peterson that of secretary, and J. A. 


4. Calgary Herald, Feb. 13, 1884, 





' 







5 


Lougheed became the new treasurer. 

Today nothing remains of the modest log building with the pre¬ 
tentious name, Boynton Hall, which actually housed Calgary*s first 
school. Situated near Second Street Bast between Seventh and Eighth 
Avenues, it apparently served its educational purpose for so short a 
time that even the fact of such use fell into oblivion, and the school 
building on Hinth Avenue near Fifth Street East, still in existence, 
came to be referred to as Calgary*s first school. 

This small frame structure stood, until the autumn of 1950, a 
little less than the ragged beggar of Whittier s s poem. Its education¬ 
al identity lost, it has at various times echoed to the joys and 
sorrows of a large family of negroes and breathed forth the steaming 
atmosphere of a Chinese laundry. In 1950 the City building inspector 
condemned it for further use and ordered its demolition. The work 
squad had torn down one wall before the citizens were aware of what 
was happening. Mr. J. B. Cross of the Calgary Brewing and Malting 
Company came to the rescue. As a result of his efforts the former 
school was removed to the company*s property in East Calgary where it 
will be restored to serve as a museum for Calgarianai 

However, after the organization of the Calgary School Dis¬ 
trict, the so-called original premises were to prove adequate for 
some little time. Spencer Douglass^who had succeeded Mr. Costello as 
teacher in the private school^continued to guide the affairs of the 
public school, which numbered thirteen pupils at the time of its open¬ 
ing. As the town had not yet started its westward movement, most of 
the pupils had a long walk from east of the Elbow River to the school. 
Since calisthenics and organized sports had not yet figured with any 












6 


prominence in the program of studies, this exercise provided a welcome 
change from sitting. Indeed, the schoolroom possessed little if any 
comfort or attractiveness to compensate the pupils for their loss of 
freedom. Desks and benches were made locally with the adjustability 
of the Procrustean bed. Books and maps were conspicuous by their ab¬ 
sence. The slate and squeaking pencil constituted the only essential 
equipment of the student, young or old. 

Those early school days, however, sometimes attained a level 
of excitement which is foreign to the modern youth in spite of the 
greater variety offered In curricular and extra-curricular activities 
today. On one occasion the quiet of a small group of students pro¬ 
saically engaged in eating luch was shattered by the entrance of three 
half-breed boys. The knives they carried might have suggested a scalp¬ 
ing expedition, but they turned their attention to some loose stove 
pipes which they evidently intended to carry off as loot. The prospect 
of a fight in which they had the advantage of numbers gave the pupils 
the courage to make a stand with the result that the would-be thieves 
were ignominiously put to flight. 

The establishment of the School District was not the only event 
which made 1885 an important year for Calgary. The completion of the 
first transcontinental railway gave the town greater prominence as a 
shipping centre. The Canadian Pacific Railway Company proceeded to 
build a permanent station to the west of the Hbow. Businessmen, pre¬ 
viously reluctant to leave Section fourteen, moved to the new townsite 
without more ado. Newcomers attracted to the town increased the 

5 

population to more than five hundred. 


5. Calgary Municipal Manual, 1950, P. 74, 









. 













7 


School enrolment Increased rapidly, too. It was necessary to 

open an additional room to accommodate new pupils. For this, use was 

made of the upper part of a two-storey "building owned "by I, S. Freeze 

and situated on Eighth Avenue between First and Second Streets East, 

6 

The town now boasted a. school population of seventy. 

The year 1886 saw further changes which were signs of growth. 

The Board appointed Thomas Bruce as janitor of the two rooms at two 

dollars a week. Non-resident pupils, whose numbers had increased, 

were charged a fee of five cents a day. The school tax was set at 

five mills on the dollar, an increa.se of one mill over the previous 

year. The first annual meeting of ratepayers of the Calgary School 

District attracted very little attention, however, as the three Board 

7 

members were the only people present. 

The same year Mr. J. 1. Boag became principal when Mr. Spencer 
Douglass resigned on March 31* The first inspection of the Calgary 
School District followed shortly after the new appointment. The Rev. 
John McLean, a. Methodist missionary and clergyman of Macleod, held 
the position of inspector. Although he spoke with warm praise re¬ 
garding the enthusiasm and progress of the pupils, he did not hesitate 
to criticize the physical properties of the school. Mr. McLean con¬ 
cluded his report with a. brief but careful statement of the diffi¬ 
culties under which the teachers and pupils were laboring. 

fl .The school building is in poor condition, lacking 

proper arrangement, suitable location and the necessary warmth in cold 
weather. These hindrances will, however, when a new school building 

6. Calgary School Board Records, 1885. 

7* Ca2ga.ry School Board Records, 1886. 






























8 


is erected, be eliminated. Several additions are necessary to com¬ 
plete the school apparatus, that the teaching staff may more effici¬ 
ently do its work. Pupils who have not attended school for years, and 
many who are just commencing to study, have introduced an element that 
materially hinders rapid advancement, H 8 

As the inspector pointed out, makeshift accommodation accounted for 
some of the problems. Besides, expenditures could he for minimum re¬ 
quirements only, because of the low rate of assessment. The latter, 
in turn, was consistent with the general living standards of that time 
In 1887 acute overcrowding resulted in the decision to erect a 
four-roomed school. Debentures amounting to $8,000. were issued for 
the building of the southern half of the old Central School. The 
debenture issue, purchased by the Canada Life Assurance Company at par 
bore interest at six per cent per annum and was repayable in fifteen 
years. The contract for building the school was awarded to McCoskin 

9 

and Kemp. By November, 188?, the four new rooms were in operation. 

In September, 1888, Calgary boasted 177 Pupils, the second largest 

enrolment in the North-West Territories, exceeded only by that of 
10 

Regina with 186. 

A year later, when the number reached 24o, the old story of 
overcrowding was repeated, as it often has been since. In fact, 
Calgary*s first experience of boom conditions made it impossible to 
anticipate accommodation requirements. In the closing months of 1889 
one room in the Central School housed 113 children in charge of one 

8. Calgary School Board Records, 1886. 

9* Calgary School Board Records, 1887. 

10. Calgary Herald, Sept. 19, 1888. 







9 


heroic woman. Then the School Board rented the Basement of Knox 
Presbyterian Church for school purposes. The Church was situated at 
the corner of Centre Street and Seventh Avenue where the York Hotel 
stands today. Miss Florence Brown undertook to teach fifty-three of 
the youngest scholars in these temporary quarters. The subterranean 
room was large and lofty, although somewhat lacking in adequate light¬ 
ing and heating arrangements. The impermanency of the arrangement 
was emphasized by the use of ordinary chairs instead of regular desks 
and seats. Fortunately, all phases of the growth of the school sys¬ 
tem were not as difficult to cope with as was the enrolment. 

In January 1889, James Short was appointed headmaster of the 
school at a salary of $1,200. a year. Although Mr. Short was prin¬ 
cipal for only three and a half years, his connection with the Board 
lasted much longer. After his resignation as principal in 1892, James 
Short practised law in Calgary. Prom 1893 to 1904 he was Secretary- 

Treasurer of the School Board. During that time he received $150. a 
11 

year for his services. After he relinquished this position, Mr. Short 
served on the Board as a trustee from 1905 to 1914, and as Chairman in 
1908 and 1909. A short slight man with a moustache and a Vandyke 
beard, James Short had a twinkle in his eye and a ready smile. As his 
record shows, his interest in education never flagged. When the old 
Central School was re-named James Short School in his honor in 1938, 
his message to the boys .and girls stressed the idea that the secret of 
success is to keep on studying. Indeed, that had. been his motto when 
he came to teach in Calgary. 

11. Calgary School Board Records, January, 1893* 














10 


In 1889, the Calgary school had been in operation for five 

years. Some strident s were ready for and were carrying on studies at 

the high school level hut no special provision had been made for this 

work. Through Mr. Short’s efforts the high school work was properly 

organized. The Board authorized the expenditure of nearly two hundred 

12 

dollars on hooks for the high school library. Shakespeare and other 
English poets, English histories, and dictionaries were a welcome ad¬ 
dition to the few standard text hooks. The Board also appointed a 
male assistant, W. A. Milne, his duties to begin in January 1891, in 
order to permit Mr. Short to devote his time to the high school work 
and to his duties as principal. Early in 189^, the school authorities 
provided apparatus so that practical work in physics and chemistry 
could supplement text hook study. At this time the only other high 
school department in the Territories was at Regina. 

After the building of the railway and with the development of 
agriculture, local industries sprang up. Transportation, farming, and 
manufacturing affected each other in turn, and stimulated the growth of 
the community in general. As early as 1883, George Murdock’s Harness 
Shop ma.de leather goods for farmers and ranchers. The Imperial Bank 
and the Bank of Montreal established branches in the town in 1886. 

The following year the Bell Telephone Company of Canada provided its 
services for some thirty subscribers. Distribution of water by a pipe 
system and lighting by electricity were added to the amenities of the 
town in 1889* Patrick Burns (letter Senator Burns) built the first 
slaughter house in Calgary in 1890. This small business wa.s the fore- 


12. Calgary School Board Records, August, 1890 

















11 


runner of the extensive meat-packing industry of today. In 1892 the 
Robin Hood Flour Mills began operations in a building on the corner of 
Third Street West and Ninth Avenue with a maximum daily production of 
160 barrels of flour. That same year A. E. Cross and a group of as¬ 
sociates organized the Calgary Brewing and Malting Company. Between 
1891 and 1893 two branch lines of the C*P*R. started operation, the 
one between Calgary and Macleod and the other from Calgary to Edmonton. 
Increased railway activity resulted in David Souter’s blacksmith shop 
becoming the Calgary Iron Works in 1895* With these developments 
marched an ever-expanding school system* 

In 1891 the School Board rented severs,! additional rooms to 
care for the increased enrolment. After they had obtained a room in 
the old Methodist Church, the demand for more space could only be met 
by an invasion of the Town Hall. Here, Miss J. S. McIntyre carried on 
the task of teaching some eighty children in a small room, whose im¬ 
perfections were not mitigated either by its location above the mal¬ 
odorous police cells or by the sunshine which streamed in through its 
unshaded windows. However, by June the Board had reached two decisions, 
to build an addition to the Central School, and in the meantime to rent 
the Curling Rink in place of the rooms in the two churches and in the 
Town Hall. The advantage of greater space afforded by the rink was 
somewhat offset by the fact that the rooms, one above the other, were 
separated in a physical sense only by a single layer of boards. But 
relief was in sight, as the School Board called for tenders for the ad¬ 
dition and alterations to the Central School. The contract for the 
four-roomed addition was awarded to J. W. Seeley. With the project ap¬ 
parently well in hand, the School Board was beset by problems of another 








,' „ •; -v ■- ; 
















- 




' 


■ ' 

:> . 






- 

: 





















' 




■■ -j 


















... 






• o ' 



































12 


nature. 

For the first six years the School Board had Been feeling its 
way. In some respects this was not surprising as the Territorial 
government added clauses to the School Ordinance as new needs arose. 

In financial matters, although the Calgary school system had more than 
quadrupled in size, the making of estimates and keeping of accounts 
were characterized by an informality which was no longer satisfactory. 
When A. L. Sifton audited the School Board accounts in 1891* the !, books H 
consisted of a bank book and a record of checks issued. When funds 
were low or the territorial grant was late in arriving, the School 
Board waited upon the town council and applied for a grant usually for 
one thousand dollars, regardless of the immediate or anticipated de¬ 
mand for school monies. When the need arose again, the request would 
be repealed. However, a financial question of a more serious nature 
led to a change in the organization of the Board. 

Mr. J. W. Seeley, the contractor in charge of building the ad¬ 
dition to the Centra,! School, had not included in his estimate the 
cost of alterations to the original building. It was claimed that 
there was a tacit understanding with respect to this expense, but when 
Mr. Seeley presented his bill, .the Board felt the charge to be exor¬ 
bitant. A law suit during 1892 resulted in a victory for the contract¬ 
or and a determination on the part of the Board and citizens that there 
must be no recurrence of such haphazard business methods. When the 
newly-elected Board came into office in January, 1893» & division into 
committees was effected at once. Finance, school management, school 
building, property and supplies came under the supervision of separate 







■ 


y ' ' ■ 


















13 


13 

groups for the first time. 

Lack of a definite policy in regard to School Board dealings 
with teachers, pupils, and parents added other storms to make 1892 a 
tempestuous year. In the first place, trouble arose over the 
question of corporal punishment. Reference to the School Ordinance 
"brought out the fact that it was the duty of the individual School 
Boards to formulate a policy covering this controversial subject. 
Having failed to anticipate the need for such regulation, the School 
Board was in a quandary. The whole affair wa.s aired at a public meet¬ 
ing a,t which teachers, parents, and even pupils expressed and defended 
their respective attitudes in the case under discussion. Shortly 
afterwards the School Management Committee began to draft a list of 
rules and regulations, which have been collected in the H Blue Book 11 
of the Calgary schools. A clear statement with respect to dis¬ 
ciplinary measures has contributed to good relations in the community. 

Two other public meetings occurred in the same year to em¬ 
phasize the need for regulating school matters and relationships with 
greater dispatch and order. One concerned a criticism of the teaching 
staff which had resulted in the dismissal of one of its members. The 
secretary-treasurer of the Board, Mr. R. A. Janes, was the author of a 
letter which questioned the competence of the teachers and even their 
qualifications. Principal Short spoke at the meeting with dignity and 
conviction of the difficulties under which the staff was laboring. 
Overcrowding in the Junior departments meant forced promotions and 
these in turn resulted in a higher percentage of failures among those 

13* Calgary School Board Records, January, 1893* 






















writing the entrance examinations. Irregularity of attendance — the 

14 

average was less than fifty per cent — was not conducive to the "best 
results. Hie charge concerning the qualifications of the teachers was 
refuted “by the reading of these to the meeting. The inspector’s report 
which was also read culminated with the words, ’’The year’s work has 

15 

"been efficiently done.” 

The last meeting of the kind was to thresh out complaints con¬ 
cerning the conduct of Mr. J. McLochlin who had 'been engaged a,s head¬ 
master of the public school. W. A. Milne, who had held the position 
of male assistant since January, 1891? and Mr. James Short "both re¬ 
signed from the teaching staff at the end of the summer term in 1892. 

Mr. D. P. McColl succeeded Mr. Short as principal of the high school. 
There seems to have been some ambiguity with regard to the seniority 
of the two new principals. Was each autonomous in hie own sphere, and 
if not, which was the senior? Mr. McLochlin interpreted his position 
to include the supervision of the public school teachers. He apparently 
combined officiousness with facetiousness in a way which offended the 
lady members of the staff. On the one hand he failed to knock on the 

door to announce his entry into a room. On the other, he had a ’’playful 

16 

habit of regaling them with his full family history”. The climax came 
when he dropped hints of unsatisfactory work and predicted future 
changes. Once more a public meeting was held at which charges and 
counter-changes were made and refuted. 

14. Calgary Herald, March 11, 1892. 

15* Calgary Herald, loc. cit. 

16. Calgary Herald, Oct. 6, 1892. 






15 


Although the investigation was closed and Mr. McLochlin con¬ 
firmed in his position of principal, a feeling of disquiet remained 
regarding the condition of the school system. The matter was well 
aired in the press. Mr. McLochlin, feeling the pressure of public 
opinion, resigned in favor of Mr. McColl, who was henceforth to com¬ 
bine his duties of principal of the high school with those of super¬ 
visor of the school system as a. whole. 

January, 1893, saw a shake-up in the School Board which re¬ 
sulted in Mr. Janes' withdrawal from his position as trustee. Another 
change was the advent as secretary-treasurer of Mr. James Short, who 
was to continue his connection with the administrative side of educa¬ 
tional affairs in Calgary until 1914. With dissensions ironed out and 
acrimonious voices stilled, a new era approached. The School Board was 
meeting regularly in the library at the Central School on the first 
Thursday of each month. A deeper sense o(° responsibility v/as engendered 
by the feeling that Calgary, a city less than twenty years old and still 
destined to grow rapidly, would need careful planning in education. 

While the Central School was experiencing growing pains, 

another Calgary public school was making somewhat slower progress. In 

September, 1891, the residents-east of the Elbow River donated six lots 

1 ? 

of thirty-three end a third feet each for a school site. The follow¬ 
ing January the Board engaged Mr. W. B. Briggs as teacher for the new 
last Ward School, as it v/as called. The building, which had only one 
room, occupied the site of the present Alexandra School. Mr. Briggs, 
in charge of it until his resignation in January, 1893, was instruct- 

1?. Calgary School Board Records, September, 1391. 













. 









































16 


ing some twenty-seven pupils. Miss Annie Foote from Flora, Ontario, 
the teacher who succeeded him, was to teach in Calgary until her re¬ 
tirement in 1912^after which she "became the first woman member of the 
School Board. 

The Public School system which was taking form during the 
first two decades of Calgary’s growth did not provide the only educa¬ 
tional facilities available to the children of the town. Hear the 
site of the present Sacred Heart Convent on Nineteenth Avenue and First 

Street West was the original Convent School. The old building, con- 

18 

structed in 1885, was not torn down until 1924. A private school, it 
drew its pupils from every denomination. Presided over by Mother 
G-reene, the school gave instruction in the classical and mathematical 
subjects which at that time were considered to be the best educational 
fare. In December, 1889 , the sixteen boys and girls of the high school 
division displayed their accomplishments in the customary public ex¬ 
amination. In addition to answering questions in algebra, history, 
geography, literature, Latin and French, four lads "described problems 

19 

in Euclid on the blackboard very correctly". The smaller children 
made a contribution in reading, simple arithmetic, and recitalion. The 
Calgary Separate School District was established in 1885 and the school 
then became known as the Lacombe Separate School. 

Bishop Pinkham’s Parochial School, a seminary for young ladies, 
was also established to meet an urgent need. Among the pioneer 
families were those who desired to give their daughters the advantages 

18. See Chapter 111, below. 

19• Calgary Herald, Dec. 23, I 889 . 








































17 


of a finishing school without sending them to Eastern Canada. This 

school opened on May 1, 1890, under the principalship of Miss M. 

Crawford, the daughter of the head mistress of Coligny College for 

ladies at Ottawa. By 1892, however, the school, which had been held 

in the tiny frame hall next door to the Church of the Redeemer, en- 

20 

countered financial difficulties and closed its doors, to reopen later 
as St. Hilda’s College. 

A few brief glimpses of the school life of the day may serve to 
emphasize both differences from and similarities to modern institutions. 
The public examinations which were held twice yearly supplemented the 
written exercises which determined the pupils 5 grades. Results of the 
latter were published in the daily newspaper, but the pioneer \tfas a 
rugged character and did not appear to question these ordeals to which 
the sensitive and insensitive were alike subjected. 

There we re signs even in I 89 O that the curriculum \fas felt to 
be lacking in practicality. The Board of Education, Regina, in March 
of that year added two new subjects to the examinations for candidates 
for third class teaching certificates. These were single entry book¬ 
keeping and English literature of the Fifth Read_er. Heedlework, knit¬ 
ting, and calisthenics were to form part of the course of studies in 
all schools. Trustees were warned to engage teachers competent to in¬ 
struct in these fields. 

The Teachers* Institute for the Alberta Territory which opened 
in Calgary on May 12, 1893> did not differ greatly in objectives or 

20. See Chapter IV below. 









18 


21 

achievement from the present day convention. Mr. (later Dr.) David 
J. Goggin, Superintendent of Education for the North-West Territories, 
in speaking about "The Recitation", favored the Socratic or dialogue 
method, which he claimed was adopted by all good teachers. Professor 
Fenwick, singing teacher in the Calgary schools, not only included re¬ 
marks on breathing in his talk concerning voice culture but when asked 
to illustrate his observations he did so to the satisfaction of all 
those present. Mr. J. Hewgill's "Jottings from an Inspector's Note¬ 
book" emphasized the importance of neat blackboard work in the teaching 
of writing. Mr. John Hewgill was inspector for the southern Alberta 
district from 1892 to 1894. Miss J. S. McIntyre of Banff spoke of 
ethics as the keystone of the educational structure. The only address 
which might not find a place in a similar program today was Mr. James 
Short’s succinct dissertation entitled "My Object in Teaching Grammar". 

Although the vogue for specialization was to await the new 
century, one special department was added to the Public Schools under 
novel circumstances. Professor Fenwick, a large and pompous gentleman 
whose dignity transcended the use of Christian names even in written 
records, was choirmaster and organist at the Knox Presbyterian Church. 
Having prepared the school children for a musical festival which was 
presented at Christmas time in I 89 I, the Professor made application to 
the School Board for the position of music teacher. He asked for a 
yearly salary of three hundred dollars. In return for this he would 
not only carry on regular classes but present two festivals a, year, the 
proceeds from these to be shared by himself and the Board. There was 


21. Calgary Herald, May 17, 1893 




• 0 ' 


' 



















19 


much discussion regarding the effect of public appearances and late 
hours on the younger pupils, hut the two successful performances of 
the first festival in the Opera House carried much weight. The Pro¬ 
fessor was engaged on his own terms. Thus the Calgary schools ac¬ 
quired their first music supervisor. By l893> with the larger school 
and a broader curriculum in operation, the educational world of 
Calgary stood upon the threshold of a future filled with promise. 














. 




' 

■ 

































CHAPTER 11 


THE PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM GROWS WITH CALGARY 

Between the years 1893 and 1918, Calgary changed from a pioneer 
town to an industrial city of growing importance. Hot only was Cal¬ 
gary the centre of a prosperous farming community, hut as the region 
was settled the discovery of other natural resources increased the 
possibilities for industrial growth. In 1910 began the development 
of an extensive scheme for producing hydro-electric power. Oil was 
first discovered in the Calgary district in October, 1913* Natural 
gas replaced coal as fuel. The C.P.R. began the construction of ir¬ 
rigation works east of Calgary as early as 190^. The census taken in 

1 

June, 1916, showed a population of 56*302. At the same time Calgary 
began to play a leading role in western education. 

Progress in educational matters marked the year 189^* By the 
fall term, Calgary*s third school, the South Ward School, was ready 
for use. This first stone school, a two-roomed structure, may still 
be seen on the grounds of Haultain School. Like many of the larger 
schools built at a later dale, it was constructed of native sandstone. 
The quarry used at that time was near the Elbow River south of the 
C.P.R. tracks. Another feature- of 189^ was the introduction of 
teacher training in the city. A room above Jacques 3 jewelry store 
served for the instruction of the Normal students at that time. The 
Calgary High School broadened its base by the installation of a science 
laboratory. Chemistry and physics apparatus, in the hands of in¬ 
structor and pupils, enlivened the routine of text book study. 

1. Calgary Municipal Manual, 19^9* P» 7^. 























































■ • -rs •: • CJ 















.. 






























SOUTH WARD SCHOOL 


CALQARY'S FIRST SCHOOL 

































I 




21 


Evidence of growth was also seen in an enrolment of 36 Q for the month 
2 

of November. 

The turn of the century saw no cessation of the introduction 
of what were felt to he necessary innovations. New ideas in educa¬ 
tion expressed by such men as Friedrich Froebel in Germany and Herbert 
Spencer in England were beginning to find practical expression. The 
need to provide for individual differences in children, the value of 
utilizing children’s interests to motivate learning, and the desir¬ 
ability of developing motor as well as intellectual expression were 
all helping to bring about changes in school curricula. In January, 
1901, manual training became a part of the curriculum in Calgary. The 
money for the new venture came from the Macdonald Manual Training 
Fund. The donor, Sir William Macdonald, a Montreal philanthropist 
and tobacco magnate, was inspired by Dr. James Robertson, Commissioner 
of Agriculture in the Dominion government and father of the manual 
training movement in Canada,. The local School Board supplied the 
accommodation and janitor service for three years while Sir William 
Macdonald provided teachers and equipment. The teachers were im¬ 
ported from England as trained men were lacking in Canada. H. M. 

Snell came to instruct in the Calgary Manual Training School (now 
the Haultain bungalow school). Froml904 on, the Calgary School Board, 
realizing the value of the work, met all the expense. Later, in 1909 » 
the Board appointed T. B. Kidner, another of the teachers brought 
from England under the Macdonald scheme, as director of technical 
education for the city. These efforts were all for the boys, but, in 


2. Calgary School Board Records, No. 1894, 



. 




22 


the fall of 1901, the women teachers introduced classes in domestic 
science to make education for young girls more practical. 

Construction of the first large school, made of sandstone 
from the McArthur quarry north of the Bow River, "began in 1903• The 
contract was awarded to Addison and Bavey for the "building of this 

3 

new Central School which was to cost $59,713* Two years after the 
laying of the cornerstone, the school was opened on May 24, 1905* An 
assemblage of persons of note in the Territories attended the ceremony. 
Among those who spoke on this occasion were Premier Haultain, R. B. 
Bennett, the Calgary member of the Territorial Legislature, Mayor 
Emerson of Calgary, and the chairman, of the School Board, R, J. Hutch¬ 
ings. 

That familiar stone building still stands on Fourth Avenue be¬ 
tween Centre Street and First Street West. Today, the contrast be¬ 
tween this school and those built in recent years is very great. Pre¬ 
senting an appearance somewhat like a 1 castle, its dim halls and steep 
stairways have echoed to the feet of succeeding generations of school 
children. Because of its convenient location in the centre of the 
city the old school has served for a variety of purposes and thus has 
played a special part in the development of the school system. From 
1905 to 1911 the School Board Offices were located there. For one 
year, 1931-*32, it housed the sight-saving class. During the next six 
years the Central School was the home of the Commercial High Schools 
Since 1936, James Short School, as it was renamed in honor of Calgary*s 
first high school principal, has accommodated a special class for 

3* Calgary School Board Records, December, 1903* 



I 



23 


pupils who are hard of hearing or have speech difficulties. The old 
school^ usefulness, thus, continues to transcend its physical draw- 
hacks and present unfashionable appearance. 

During the period from 1900 to 1905> when the first large 

school wa,s completed, the school population more than doubled. In the 

4 

former year the enrolment was 739> whereas in the latter it was 1,571* 
Accommodation was still inadequate and the Board provided for the 
building of two similar schools, Haul tain and Alexandra,, which were 
completed in 1906. It is not surprising that the same year the School 
Board decided that a Superintendent of Schools was needed to super¬ 
vise and direct education in Calgary. To the small western city came 
Dr. A. M. Scott, a graduate of the University of Toronto, who had 
earned the degree of Doctor of Philosophy at Goetingen, Germany, in 
the field of science. Before coming to the West, Dr. Scott had 
lectured in the Universities of Toronto and Hew Brunswick. He now 
assumed the duties associated with the administration of some thirty 
gra.de school classes and three high school rooms. Prom his office in 
Central School and in his official visits Dr. Scott carried on his 
tasks indefatigably. In the classroom and on public occasions he was 
dignified but never dull. When .the superintendent entered a class¬ 
room, the children sat a little straighten and answered at their 
readiest, not only out of respect for officialdom but with the hope of 
pleasing the man for whom they grew to have a personal liking. 

In 1906, also, the Provincial Department of Education increas¬ 
ed the facilities for teacher training in Calgary by building the 
4. Calgary School Board, Annual Report, 1949, P* 34. 










' 







24 


Normal School on Fourth Avenue between Sixth and Seventh Streets 
West. This building was a welcome addition to elementary school ac¬ 
commodation as the Board signed an agreement with the Department of 
Education for the use of eight classrooms which would serve for prac¬ 
tice teaching purposes. The Provincial Government used the structure 
until 1922 when the Institute of Technology and Art was completed and 
ready to accommodate teachers in training. Thereupon the Calgary 
School Board purchased the old Normal School which today serves the 
double purpose of elementary school and School Board Offices. In re¬ 
naming it McDougall School, the Board honored one of the well-known 
families of the pioneer West. It Is a fitting monument to the P.ev. 
George McDougall and his son John, Methodist missionaries who founded 
Protestant schools in the Territories as early as i860. 

During the years from 1895 to 1907 > high school enrolment grew 
more slowly than did that in the elementary grades. The increase was 

5 

only from 59 to 75* The obtaining of a high school education was not 
traditional, and work which did not require such training was plenti¬ 
ful. However, a change was coming. It appeared in the spring of 1907 
that a larger number of students intended to continue their studies in 
the higher grades. The site for Central High School was obtained on 
Twelfth Avenue at Eighth Street West. Here the Board had a temporary 
frame building erected ready for the fall term. In the meantime, the 
contract for the building of an eight-roomed stone high school was a- 
warded to McDonald Roy at $68,600. Opened in September, 1908, with 
A. C. Newcombe, a graduate of McMaster University, as Principal, it 

5* Calgary School Board, Annual Report, 1949, P. 34. 













0 , 0 • 


: 












25 


was to prove inadequate three years later and so additions and alter¬ 
ations had to "be made. Indeed, the period of prosperity and unpre¬ 
cedented growth from 1910 to 1913 was to make it difficult to provide 
sufficient accommodation for the school population during the inter¬ 
vening years. The influx of immigrants following the introduction of 
the Dominion immigration schemes as well as the growth of the city re¬ 
sulting from industrial development naturally affected school enrol¬ 
ment. 

The new high school building made possible pioneer activities 
in still another field. The Board introduced a. commercial department 
in 1908, to meet the needs of those students who wanted a high school 
education before entering the business world. It was not until 1912 
that the Department of Education recognized these courses by paying an 
annual grant for the operation of the room. E. M. B. Dykes, the hea.d 
of this department at the Central High School, persevered in setting 
up and attaining standards during the preliminary years. So popular 
was this work that limited accommodation never did squeeze it out. In 
1919 a move was made to the Blow Block on Eighth Avenue West. Seven 
years la.ter the Commercial High School, as it wa,s called, moved east¬ 
ward to the Travellers' Building.. A sojourn in the Central School com¬ 
menced in 1932. Finally, in 1938, this important part of the high 

6 

school was transplanted to the Western Canada buildings. 

The geographical moves have not been the only changes experi¬ 
enced in this branch of studies during the years. Prior to World War 
11 the school admitted students who had completed Grade Till, and 


6. See Chapter IV below, 











■ 



i 3 ' 




1 ' O. 








o.. v 




! 













2 6 


taught them not only typewriting and shorthand, hut business English, 
spelling, and penmanship. After 193S» students, having fulfilled the 

7 

Grade IX requirements, might enter the Composite High School. Here 
they studied general courses in English, Social Studies, Physical Ed¬ 
ucation, and Health. The business courses were classified as options. 
The Commercial High School with specialized functions had ceased to 
exist. It will be interesting to see whether this is the result of 
prosperity, or whether the Composite High School has evolved naturally 
from earlier forms of commercial and technical education. 

The Commercial High School staff has not been recast so fre¬ 
quently nor so completely as has the setting. Mr. George Cromie, 
principal since 1922, is now vice-principal of the Composite School. 
Other members of long standing include Mr. C. Maberley and the Misses 
Miriam Smith, Helen Tait, and Isabel Breckon. 

During these years of economic expansion the city of Calgary 
extended its boundaries to include outlying districts which had devel¬ 
oped their own educational facilities. The latter were, as a result, 
brought into the Calgary system. Across the Bow River from Calgary 
and up a steep hill lay the village of Crescent Heights. With a scat¬ 
tered farming population as a nucleus, this community developed slow¬ 
ly, and Alberta had become a province before any pressing need for 
community services was felt. In 1907 j the first school was opened in 
the little frame Baptist Church on the north-west corner of First 
Street and Eleventh Avenue. Here came as teacher of the sixteen pupils 
Miss Katherine Lowrie, newly graduated from the Calgary Normal School. 

7» See Chapter Vll below. 













? 


'n ' 








* 

















•j — i • * : • 














































27 


Two years later, when the village Board had. erected a four-roomed 
school on the property where Balmoral School stands today, Miss 
Lowrie continued her duties in the new "building, of which V/. T. Broad 
was the principal. This structure (now known in affectionate humor as 
,,r fhe White House"), having "been set "back in a corner to make way for 
a stone "building, still accommodates four elementary grades. From the 
large eighteen-roomed school the pioneer teacher retired in 19^8 with 
the remarkable record of a life-time spent in one school if not in one 
building. 

One of the most interesting of the early educational ventures 
was the one-roomed school built at Hose Creek. In 1895 the half doz¬ 
en families in the vicinity organized the school district. The small 
building which they erected was soon a recognized community centre. 
Hon-denominational services held by Divinity students cared for the 
religious needs of the neighboring farmers. Taking advantage of the 
Dominion Manual Training Fund as early as 1902, this was the first 
rural school to provide instruction in woodworking. At the same time 
the district distinguished itself by paying higher salaries than did 
the adjacent city. Teachers were scarce and the city had attractions 
which the country lacked. Besides, the pupils had earned a reputation 
for being somewhat difficult to manage. Miss E. Maude Keen, who later 
became Mrs. Harold Riley the wife of one of Calgary 1 s pioneer bus¬ 
inessmen, was teacher at the school in 1904 for a few months prior to 
her marriage. Since its absorption into the Calgary district in 1911, 
a new two-roomed structure bears a less picturesque name — the North 
Calgary School. 

When the city extended its boundaries in 1911, the Crescent 





I 








28 


Heights and Hose Creek Schools were the only actual buildings taken 
over by the Calgary School District. However, the city limits were 
now on Thirty-Seventh Street West, and some pupils of the West Calgary 
School District Ho. 209 became Calgary students. 

As the city grew, the School Board accelerated its building 
program. The Trustees decided to have the former Crescent Heights 
School moved and to build Balmoral School on the same grounds. Other 
large schools built before the First World War included Riverside, 

Mount Royal, Hillhurst, Earl Grey, King (George, King Edward, Stanley 
Jones, and Colonel Walker. These buildings marked an advance over the 
earlier ones toward the modern streamlined edifices. Rectangular 
sandstone structures, they have stood the test of time, and lent them¬ 
selves readily to schemes for interior redecorating and remodelling. 

In some districts bungalow schools provided adequate accommodation. 

In 1913> the School Board turned its attention to a problem 
which has not yet been solved satisfactorily — that of the adolescent 
neither ready for a job nor suited to pursue an entirely academic pro¬ 
gram in the higher grades. Robert Massey, principal of Balmoral School, 
was interested in trying to find a solution. Beginning with a survey 
of students from Grades Vl to 7111, he discovered the pupils 1 plans for 
their future occupations. The questionnaire also revealed that in the 

grades covered 169 mrpils had dropped out of school between June and 

8 

September, 1913* Of the 216 children attending Grades Vl and Vll in 
the latter month, only thirty-six intended going to high school. At 
the same time the economic boom had given way to a minor depression 


8 . Calgary Herald, Oct. 16 , 1913 







29 


and it was harder for young, inexperienced people to find work. The 
conclusion was that some system of intermediate education must he 
found in order to prolong school life, to assist those intending to 
engage in a trade, to modify the curriculum for those not intending 
to complete high school and yet to make it possible for them to change 
their minds later on, and to find a satisfactory place for the over¬ 
age student. The Prevocational School, already finding ardent ad¬ 
herents in the United States, seemed a promising avenue for research 
and experiment. 

Mr. Massey, T. B. Kidner, Director of Technical Education in 
Calgary, Assistant Superintendent of Schools J. A. Smith, and Mr. S» 

Y. Taylor, Public School Trustee were selected by the Board as a com¬ 
mittee to attend the Prevocational School Convention to be held in 
Michigan in October, 1913- They also visited Eastern Canadian and 
American centres for intermediate technics.! education. Having re¬ 
turned with a report which was satisfactory to the School Board, Mr. 
Massey was appointed director of the Calgary Prevocational School 
which was to open in January, 191^. 

The School Board chose Victoria School on Twelfth Avenue be¬ 
tween Third and Fourth Streets East as the location of the Prevoca¬ 
tional School. In addition to the prescribed academic courses, in¬ 
struction was given in household and manual arts, shorthand., type¬ 
writing, and printing. The Board, bought a printing shop end engaged 
a part-time instructor in order to launch the initial program in its 
entirety. Much of the work done by the students was for their own 
school, and some for other Calgary schools. Repairs, partitions, and 
blackboard apparatus were made by the woodworking and metal classes. 


- 



: ; . 





















30 


At one time Ramsay School placed with them an order for a full set of 
window "boxes. The annual report of the Prevocational School was 
regularly set, urinted, and hound hy the pupils themselves. In 1915* 

9 

l4l children at the intermediate levels were enrolled in the school. 
This number compared favorably with the size of the group who had left 
the school system two years earlier. This type of intermediate edu¬ 
cation continued to be offered at Victoria School until 1930 when it 
was transferred to the Western Canada High School. 

During the years betv/een 1918 and 1934, the enrolment in the 

high school grades increased at a greater rate than did that in the 

public school. The latter mounted from 8,342 to ll,o6o, whereas the 

10 

former went from 876 to 3*9^0. Prosperous times had come to Canada 
with increased industry and trade during the war, and they carried 
over into the post-war period. More immigrants arrived from overseas 
to increase the working population. On the local scene, the develop¬ 
ment of the Turner Valley Oilfield gave a great impetus to industrial 
expansion. In 1922, the Imperial Oil Company began the construction 
of a large refinery in Calgary. People were anxious to prolong their 
children’s education and could afford to do so. Consequently, al¬ 
though some fine brick public schools, such as Elbow Park and Bow View, 
were built during the twenties, School Board concern was directed more 
towards the provision of high school facilities. In 1922 , Colonel 
Walker School, which had been loaned to the Provincial Government as 
a Technical Institute, became East Calga.ry High School. 


9 . The Calgary Albertan, May 10, 1916. 

10. Calgary School Board Annual Report, 1949, P. 34, 










31 


Four years latter the Board made a fortunate purcha.se which 

gave the city an excellent site for another large secondary school. 

11 

In 1926, Western Canada College was for sale for $36,000. with the 

stipulation that the property should continue to he used for educa- 
12 

tional purposes. The College also held land at Shouldice, hut as the 
Board could not possess property heyond the city limits this could 
not even he accepted as a gift. It was decided to place the outlying 
parcel of land in the hands of a trust company to he disposed of, and 
to accept the school buildings and premises at the figure quoted. 

Some delay was caused hy the senior students petitioning the Old Boys 8 
Association to make a further effort to maintain the original institu¬ 
tion. However, the post-war costs of operating the private school re¬ 
sulted in a persistent failure to meet current expenses; and the sale 
was carried through. Subdivided, the eleven acres on Seventeenth 
Avenue would have fetched a. much higher price, hut the creation of the 
property into an educational trust in 1920 precluded this, as under 
the act the entire investment was set aside in perpetuity for educa¬ 
tional purposes. The School Board in obtaining this valuable property 
had acquired a most desirable site for the technical high school 
facilities which were to blossom into Calgary ! s first Composite High 
School. 

The School Board lost little time in expending the facilities 
of the new Western Canada High School. In September, 1929> three new 
units were ready for use. These comprised the last Wing containing 

11. See Chapter IV below. 

12. Calgary Herald, May 29 t 1926. 








32 


twenty-one classrooms, the West Wing with Physical and Chemical Lab¬ 
oratories, and the Technical High School Shops and Power Plant. The 
school attracted students from all parts of the city and even from 
other parts of the province. The spirit and purpose of the institu¬ 
tion can perhaps "best he captured from Dr. Scott*s words when he said, 
"The Technical High School is not a refuge for poor students, nor is 

13 

it a trade school". The superintendent went on to say that in combin¬ 
ing practical with academic work the student learns the important re¬ 
lation between them. With a broader understanding of the meaning of 
industry, these young people would have an opportunity to develop into 
citizens having a knoxvledge of their work in life and a comprehension 
of its theoretical side as well. 

Children on the North Hill needed a larger high school, too. 
Prom September, 1915> Balmoral School had served as a secondary school 
in the community. Sven before the Board put its plans for the West¬ 
ern Canada High School into action, a fine building was rising on the 
site of the little church which had housed the first school on the 
hill. The opening of Crescent Heights High School, as it was named, 
took place on January 7, 1929. Its modified Collegiate-Gothic arch¬ 
itecture not only made a pleasing appearance but gave the utmost in 
utility to the 84o students it was designed to accommodate. An 
auditorium which could be divided into two gymnasiums, shower baths, 
a full-sized stage, modern stage lighting, accoustic-celotex for the 
ceiling, 400 set-in steel lockers — these were some of the features 
which made Crescent Heights High a satisfactory school to attend and 

13* Calgary Herald, Sept. 16 , 1931* 























33 


in which to instruct. 

Although educationists were becoming more acutely aware of in¬ 
dividual differences in children, classrooms were too large to permit 
much use to he made of the knowledge. However, in many schools there 
were a few subnormal pupils whose education created a special problem. 
The Calgary School Board chose the term immediately following the 
First World War to inaugurate what were known as special classes for 
pupils who were unable to keep the pace set by the average group, 

Mrs. S. E. Houston of Vancouver was in charge of the first of such 
classes in Calgary, in the Sereni Cottage School not far from Stanley 
Jones School. One year later, in 1919> Miss Jessie Errol became the 
teacher of the class, A special short course at Harvard University 
had given her an insight into the needs of such pupils. Hot only was 
the curriculum adjusted to their abilities, but a variety of handwork 
was taught as well. Many boys and girls who have attended these 
classes have become self-supporting because of the special attention 
given to their individual problems. This was partly ma.de possible by 
keeping the number in each room to a maximum of eighteen. 

When the Stanley Jones district again required the Sereni 
Cottage School for regular classes, two schools, Mewata and Tuxedo, 
were devoted to the use of special- classes for subnormal children. An 
extra class was also opened in Ramsay School to serve the souith-east 
section of the city. There was, however, one objection to such in¬ 
stitutions. They removed the pupils from the ordinary school environ¬ 
ment and isolated them in a. way to which the parents, not unna.frurally, 
objected. To overcome this, Dr. Buchanan, successor to Dr. Scott, 
disbanded the classes which were held in separate buildings. They 





....... ... , . ■■ 



























34 


were re-organized as b. part of several of the larger schools in such 
a way as to make their service available at convenient points through 
the city. Today there are four Junior Special Classes as well as a 
Senior Boys 1 and a Senior G-irls * group. One of the pioneer teachers 
in the field was Miss Evelyn Carson, who returned to the Elementary 
division in 1947 after some twenty years devoted to the work with sub¬ 
normal pupils. Other teachers who have brought their particular train¬ 
ing and infinite patience to this type of teaching are Miss Helen Arm¬ 
strong of King George School, Miss C-. B. Palmer of the Ramsay School 
staff, and Mr. H. J. Roberts of Victoria School. 

Prom 1931 to 1934 the public school population suffered a 
steady decline. During the depression some families left the city 
where work became scarce to eke out a living on the land. But even in 
those doldrums of the thirties when there was little groifth of actual 
buildings, a steady advance was ma.de towards a well-rounded education¬ 
al system. One of the most interesting and worth-while projects under¬ 
taken by the Board at this time was the introduction of a. sight-saving 
class. In the bungalow on Central School grounds a room was furnished 
and provision made for conserving the children's vision and aiding 
those retarded through poor eyesight. The pupils* special tools in¬ 
cluded cream drawing paper with green lines ruled three-quarters of 
an inch apart, thick soft-leaded pencils, sign-writers* pens and India 
ink, and white chalk an inch in diameter. All were taught to use the 
typewriter by the touch method. The text books were American publica¬ 
tions using large type on rough paper. The room had cream walls with 
a soft grey trim and double Tontine blinds which admitted light with¬ 
out brilliance and excluded snow glare. All wooden surfaces had a 






















35 


dull finish. A small darkened room was available for any child re¬ 
quiring a rest period during the day* 

The first class of this kind in Canada, was established in 
Halifax in 1919 for the children injured in the disastrous explosion. 

By 1929 there were some half dozen such classrooms throughout the 
country hut still no special teacher training in the Dominion. Miss 
Elsie Leak, who had expressed an interest in the work, was asked by 
Dr. Scott to study the methods of the Vancouver class before taking 
over similar duties in Calgary. The ten children in her charge ranged 
from Grades One to Seven. To ensure normal all-round development the 
pupils took oral classes with their own grades in the large school. 

It was several years before the class found a permanent home. When 
the commercial classes moved from the Travellers’ Building to Central 
School, the sight-saving class took up its abode at McDougall School. 
Crowded out by the School Board Offices, the small group finally went 
to Haultain School. Here, each year, from ten to sixteen handicapped 
children are enabled with special assistance to hold their own in the 
world of school. 

In 1931, further interesting and valuable experiments were con¬ 
ducted by the Board. Realizing the importance of environment at school 
as well as at home and following the lead of Vienna in kindergarten 
work, the primary rooms at Upper Hillhurst and Rideau Schools under¬ 
went a metamorphosis. In order to bridge the sudden gap which start¬ 
ing school made for the six-year-olds, it was decided that the home 
must reach into the school. Equipment was made flexible so that the 
novice was no longer tied to his desk. Pastel colors for walls and 
the small furniture gave a cheerful post-nursery atmosphere. A wash 





















, . . ' ' f L 






36 


”basin and individual towels made easy the continuous practice of 
habits of cleanliness not yet firmly established. Separate drawers 
helped little people to learn to be tidy and to respect each other*s 
property. Miss Jean G-reig and Miss Eleanor Glasford, in charge of 
the rooms, taught happy children to read and print through the famil¬ 
iar objects around them, including favorite toys which found their 
way to school. 

Some of the highlights of these years added to the prestige 
of Calgary as an educational centre. In 1913 the Calgary team of 
High School Cadets, in open competition with their fellows from all 
over the British Empire, won the King's Cup at the Canadian National 
Exhibition at Toronto, Hie people of the prairies, Captain A. H. 
Ferguson, the boys' instructor, and the boys themselves shared in 
the signal honor. One of the events of 191^ was the production by 
high school students, under the direction of Mr. and Mrs. J. J. 

Baker, of a pageant of the French period of Canadian history. It was 
claimed that this was the first attempt of its kind in the West. 

There was further evidence in school musical activities that interest 
in the arts was keen. Miss K. Ramsey of Alexandra School had trained 
a choir for the provincial musical festival to be held in Edmonton in 
1926. The problem of raising funds to defray travelling expenses 
was solved by the presentation of a play, "Why Peter Believed in 
Fairies", in the Paget Hall, under the direction of Miss Ramsey and 
other members of the school staff. Again, in 1929, through the ef¬ 
forts of the school it was made possible for children to have group 
piano lessons at a reasonable price. Throughout the depression this 
was a boon to music-loving students and to hard-pressed music 

























37 


teachers, too. 

By the middle thirties the scorpion depression had lost its 
sting. The period since 1893 had, in all, been marked hy a steady 
progress in educational affairs of which the city could he justly 
proud. Although once more war was to follow close upon the heels of 
a depression, 1935 and the following years may he regarded as a turn¬ 
ing point in the local field of education because of the great efforts 
put forth to adjust the school to the demands made upon it hy an in¬ 


creasingly complex world, 









CHAPTER 111 

THE CALGARY SEPARATE SCHOOLS 

The beginning of Separate School education in Calgary was not 
far behind the opening of the first public school. The circumstances 
attending the introduction of the Roman Catholic school system, how¬ 
ever, reached out into the wider history of Western Canada, with the 
thrill of adventure and heroism which is so often associated with 
pioneer times. On July 2 6 , 1885, there stood on the wind-swept plat¬ 
form of the Calgary railway station a small group of sisters belonging 
to the Order of the Faithful Companions of Jesus. Assigned to mis¬ 
sionary and teaching work in the Dominion just two years earlier, ten 
of these women had come from England with high hopes and a brisk de¬ 
termination to serve the new West. 

A journey by ox-ca.rt brought the sisters west from Winnipeg — 
some to Prince Albert and the remainder to St. Laurent. For the group 
of women the usual difficulties of establishing a mission among 
s avages were enhanced by the threat of rebellion, which flared into 
action on the banks of the Saskatchewan River in 1885» Finally, pro¬ 
vided with a. safe-conduct by General Middleton, the dauntless women, 
following the instructions of Bishop Grandin, proceeded to the safety 
afforded by Calgary, which at that time had no Roman Catholic school. 
Father Lacombe was one of a welcoming committee representing the vari¬ 
ous religious denominations of the small town. Mother Greene and the 
group of sisters in her charge lost no time in commencing the duties 
to which they had been assigned. With the exception of one brief 
interval, the excellent superior pursued her work in the foothill city 
until, in 1933 > she died at the age of ninety-one. It is from her 
diary that we are able to reconstruct the early history of Roman 




1 ' . . 









39 


Catholic education in the Calgary district. 

Members of the Oblates of Mary Immaculate, the Roman Catholic 

missionaries par excellence of the West, made way for the new Order 

by retiring from the log cabin, which they had built on the banks of 

the Elbow River, to a nearby stable. The log building was enlarged 

and ready for classes in September, 1885* This first day school, 

known as St. Mary*s, consisted of some twenty pupils, among whom were 

several Metis who spoke neither French nor English. 

At the same time work was commenced on building a convent so 

that pupils could have boarding accommodation. The original Sacred 

Heart Convent on Nineteenth Avenue and First Street West was con- 

^ ST*fii~B£fiT 

secrated Dy Bishop Grandin, the As^ekpishop of Wes4“T^rrr^- 

on October 3» 1885. Rapid growth necessitated expanding 
facilities so that in 1893 the cornerstone of a grey stone structure 
was laid. Ready for use the following year, it is still the scene of 
labors of the Order. In 1924, the wooden buildings were demolished 
to make way for an addition in stone. An average of sixty to seventy 
boarders is at the present time accommodated there. 

Mother Greene established a tradition of high qualifications 
for the teaching sisters which has been well maintained. Although 
she was a well-educated woman when she arrived, she later took the ex¬ 
aminations to meet the requirements of the Department of Education. 
Today several of the nuns hold college degrees. Of the thirty-five 
sisters in residence in September, 1950, twelve were teachers, eight 
in St. Mary 1 s Girls 1 School and four at St. Anne f s. In the course of 
their teaching the sisters have prepared pupils for university en¬ 
trance. Their school of music was designed to comply with both Royal 
Academy and Toronto Conservatory regulations. 
















40 


In 1885 steps were taken to incorporate the Separate School 
District of Calgary, The first of its kind in the Alberta Territory, 
it was known as the Lacombe Roman Catholic Separate School District 
No. 1, thus honoring the missionary who had done so much towards mak¬ 
ing the Vest safe for white habitation. The name Calgary was sub¬ 
stituted for that of Lacombe in 1910 because there was some confusion 
with the town of the latter name. The sisters who had started the day 
school carried on the instruction after the district was established. 

T. u). 

Mr. - tfg-T fc Costello, who had taught the Public School for the first 
few months in 1884, was a member of the first Catholic School Board 
and inspector of the school. 

The Separate School experienced much the same financial diffi¬ 
culties as did the Public School at the same period. The low mill 
rate and rapidly growing population meant that expenses outstripped 
resources. By 1897 there were four teachers in the school. Although 
their salaries were meagre, no money remained for the heating, equip¬ 
ment, and rent for the buildings which were the property of the teacb- 
ing Order. The secretary-treasurer of the School Board received five 
dollars a month for discharging his duties. 

With a school uopulation of 120 in 1901, still more teachers 
1 

were needed. In 1907 it was decided to organize a boys 5 school to re¬ 
lieve the congestion in St. Mary’s School, whose enrolment had risen 
2 

to 175* The old St. Mary 1 s Hall which is noif the Canadian National 
Railway Station wa.s used for this purpose. The original idea was to 

1. R. A. Cannon, Superintendent Separate Schools, Calgary, 1950* 

2. Calgary Municipal Manual, 1949, P. 67 . 









provide a Catholic education for boys from points outside the city as 
well as for the children of Calgary residents. This was accomplished 
in 1913 when Bishop McNally inaugurated St. Mary’s College. The 
buildings west of the rectory of St. Mary’s Cathedral were remodelled 
for classrooms and living quarters, and boys at the high school level 
were admitted. Fathers Cameron, Csrew, and McAdam were in charge of 
instruction. Damaged by fire in 1921, part of the building had to be 
abandoned. The school utilized the rear of the rectory building for 
a time. The Calgary Separate School Board then took over the boys* 
school which they named St. Mary’s Boys’ School. 

The present St. Mary’s G-irls’ School on Nineteenth Avenue and 
Second Street West was built in 1909» It was not long before it was 
necessary to build schools in other sections of the city, too. The 
first of these was St. Anne’s School in Bast Calgary built in 1912. 

St. Joseph’s, Sacred Heart, St, John’s, and St. Angela’s were built 
within the next four years to serve the west end and the various parts 
of the north hill. St. Mary’s. G-irls * School still accommodated the el¬ 
ementary pupils of the Cathedral Parish as well as all of the girls, 
and when necessary the boys, of the high school division. Later, when 
the senior boys had a school of their own, it was possible to expand 
facilities for the older girls. In 1930, 'fche School Board made use 
of space in the second floor corridor of the G-irls’ School for a 
library. A partition in the Assembly Hall permitted the introduction 
of commercial subjects and yet left ample room for classes in Physic¬ 
al Training, Music, and Dramatics. 

St. Mary’s Boys’ School on Eighteenth Avenue and Second Street 
West, built in 1927, accommodated boys in the intermediate and high 










42 


school grades. In 1933 the members of the clergy on the staff were 
replaced "by six members of the Basilian Fathers of Toronto. Mr. J. 
English who joined the teaching body in 1922 is at present the only 
lay member on a staff of nine. The school has been very proud of 
the record of its graduates, some of whom have entered the priesthood, 
others the various professions. An Honor Roll of those who served in 

3 

World War 11 bears 474 names. 

The building of additional schools paralleled the periods of 
growth of the city. In 1919 > Holy Angels* School was built on Twenti¬ 
eth Avenue and Five A Street West. In this school and the Sacred 
Heart, the Ursuline Sisters of the Calgary convent shared the task of 
teaching with the lay members of the staff. At the same time a new, 
modern building, St. Joseph*s, replaced the school which had been con¬ 
ducted in the basement of the church of that name. After World War 11 
the Separate School Board was anxious to provide educational services 
in outlying districts so that the smaller children would be spared a 
long journey to school. To this end they purchased two cottage scho¬ 
ols from the Public School Board in the Glengarry and Manchester dis¬ 
tricts. These they renamed Holy Name and St. Anthony*s, respectively. 
Two other educational institutions, St. Peter*s in the north-west 
section of the city and St. Paul 1 s in the north-east, were ready for 
use in the fall of 1950. These two structures and that of St.Joseph*s 
embodied many of those features which today make school surroundings 
healthful and pleasant. 


3* Mariannals, Year Book St. Mary*s Boys* and Girls* Schools, 1949* 

P. 7. 










43 


The twelve Separate Schools comprise seventy classrooms which 

4 

house a population of almost 2,000 students. Continued growth is 
anticipated in plans for the erection of still another school, this 
one to he in the Knob Hill district of South-West Calgary. Mr. R. A. 
Cannon, the present superintendent of the Separate Schools, has ex¬ 
pressed the policy of the Board in these words, 11 The Board will con¬ 
tinue to adhere to the ideal of providing the best possible school 
premises, the most modern equipment, and the most experienced and 

5 

highly-trained staff in keeping with the finances available 11 . How¬ 
ever, with a small school population scattered throughout a large city, 
the cost of actual buildings has been disproportionately high. 

Separate School enrolment is now approximately one-seventh 
that of the city Public Schools, and the tax receipts are in pro¬ 
portion. How, education is like insurance in one respect; more bene¬ 
fits accrue when the costs are spread over a larger number of people. 

A single school system would, in this way, benefit both groups, the 
smaller and the larger. Nor is this idea as chimerical as it may at 
first appear. Hot only have very cordial relations existed between 
the two School Boards, but they have arrived at satisfactory working 
arrangements when the need arose. The Roman Catholic Board, lacking 
facilities for technical education for its students, has made mone¬ 
tary provision for their attendance at the Western Canada- Composite 
High School. Again, where small children could be sparred a long 
journey to school by making reciprocal arrangements, this has been 
done. 

4. Calgary Separate School Board Records, September, 1950. 

5* Cannon, R. A., Superintendent of Separate Schools, Nov., 1950. 











:: 3 



' ’ "i > 



) * 





44 


Since 1909 the Public School Board has shared the services of its 
Truant Officer with the Separate School Board. Also, the Provincial 
Government, in framing the School Act, made possible the erection of 
school districts which would serve both religious groups. 

When the Province of Alberta was formed in 1905* the alterca¬ 
tion concerning the educational system , which nearly succeeded in 
splitting the Dominion Liberal Party, was settled by a compromise. 
Because of this the Separate School System, provided for in the Al¬ 
berta School Act, was not as distinct as the name implied. Roman 
Catholic Schools operate under the directions of the Provincial De¬ 
partment of Education. They use the same text books and follow the 
same courses of studies as other schools. It is true that they have 
the right to teach the Catholic religion to the children enrolled in 
their institutions. But the right to provide for regular daily re¬ 
ligious instruction is embodied in the Alberta School Act and applies 
6 

to all schools. Moreover, such teaching is restricted to a period 
at the end of the school day. A single school system could care for 
such special instruction, even along denominational lines. There 
would probably always be individuals who would prefer to be excused 
from such classes, but the Act makes provision for them in Section 
158. Supervised study periods could well occupy the time of those 
pupils who did not wish to take part. The difficulties illicit in 
such a plan need not be insurmountable. Roman Catholics may feel, 
not entirely without reason, that the underlying philosophy of edu¬ 
cation falls short of what they regard as the ideal. An improvement 

6 . Alberta School Act, Section 1 57, 1942, c 42 s 5 . 















45 


in this respect could very well he one of their contributions to a 
single system. Here is an opportunity awaiting citizens and educa^ 
tionists in the city to he pioneers in a movement towards a national 
educational' system. 

A limited purse has affected Separate School education in sever¬ 
al ways. It was not until September, 1938, that courses in Household 
Economics and Industrial Arts were introduced into the system. At 
that time a centre was opened in the Holy Angels 8 School. Classes 
from the different schools were scheduled to use the manual arts facil¬ 
ities at regular times. Mrs. Mary Mooney, in charge of the girls 8 work 
since its inception, is at present enjoying a year 8 s leave of absence 
in Edmonton with her father, Lieutenant-Governor Bowlen. Mr. T. E. 
Barry was the first instructor in the shop work. When he left to fol¬ 
low a business career, his brother Walter Barry succeeded him. Stu¬ 
dents and parents alike expressed enthusiasm for the innovation. At 
present there are tentative plans for opening an additional Manual 
Arts centre in the near future. 

Nearly a decade passed before the next two new features were 
added to the Separate School educational system. It was not until 
the fall term of 1946 that the School Board instituted a supervisor 
of schools apart from the office of superintendent. John V. Van 
Tighem, a native of Strathmore, Alberta, was appointed to the position.. 
He had completed undergraduate studies in Arts and Education at the 
Universities of Manitoba and Alberta. Previously, Mr. Tan Tighem 
taught in Alberta schools and at Loyola College, Montana. The follow¬ 
ing year, 194?, the Board created a special department of music and 
drama. They placed in charge of it Miss Isabelle Kennedy, who was a 
graduate of the Calgary Normal School and a student of modern tech¬ 
niques at the Bremner School of Music in Vancouver, B. C. 








46 


The office of superintendent of the Calgary Separate Schools 
was created in 1912. Since then the position has been subject to 
evolutionary changes. First to he appointed was Dr. MacDonald, a 
priest at St. Mary*s Cathedral, whose achievements were in the schol¬ 
astic field as well as that of religion. In 1913* John 3T. Kinahan 
came to Calgary to take up the reins. A high school teacher from 
Ontario, he had the advantage of recent experience with teaching prob¬ 
lems and contact with children in classroom situations. Mr. Kinahan 
was sincerely regretted when he died at Kamloops, B. C. at the end of 
the summer holidays in 1940. His successor, R. A. Cannon, was neither 
priest nor teacher. A graduate of Gsgoode Hall, Ontario, Mr. Cannon, 
after abandoning his private law practice, came west to Edmonton as 
an employee of the Dominion Department of Labor. He assumed his 
present duties, which include those of secretary-treasurer of the 
Separate School Board, in the fall of 1940. The conception of the 
superintendent as a business manager is quite often found in large 
school systems. It is perhaps explained In the instance of this com¬ 
paratively small system as a means of achieving economy by combining 
two offices. 

How have School Board policies and the smaller unit affected 
the teaching staff of the Separate Schoolsf It has already been noted 
that the teaching Orders of the Roman Catholic Church have played an 
important part as employees of the Board. Among Catholic teachers, as 
is the case with skilled artisans in Canada, there has been the prac¬ 
tice of keeping aloof from the general professional organization. In 
January, 1914, the Calgary Catholic Teachers* Association was formed 
with George J. Connolly as president. Even the strength gained 





















47 


through, organization was insufficient to raise Separate School 
teachers' salaries to the level of those in the Public Schools. When 
the Provincial legislature passed an Act in 1936 granting Alherta 
teachers professional status and making membership in the Provincial 
Alberta Teachers' Alliance compulsory, the situation remained the same. 
There were possibly two reasons for this apart from the amount of the 
available budget. Lay teachers could always be replaced by members 
of the teaching Orders if undue pressure for higher salaries were ex¬ 
erted. Also, the Separate School teachers continued to have their own 
local group ih the larger teachers' organization, and still subscribed 
to the philosophy which has created a chasm between Catholic and Pro¬ 
testant ideas in the trades union movement throughout Canada. 

The Calgary Separate School Board consists of five members. 

Pred Kenny was the chairman in 1950, and A. T. Kloepfer the vice- 
chairman. Mrs. A. U. MacDonald, James Rooney, and Thomas Sutcliffe 
were the trustees. As has already been mentioned harmonious relations 
have existed between this group and the members of the Public School 
Board. The two Boards have either initiated or given their support to 
the co-operative action which has been achieved so far. The teachers 
employed by the Boards have made it a prentice to join in the annual 
local Teachers' Convention. In regard to the student body, in the 
senior high school division interschool competition in various sports 
has been a feature. Otherwise there has been a complete isolation of 
the students with respect to school life. Expediency has brought 
about joint participation in limited phases; existing good feeling 
gives hope of closer relations in the future. 











CHAPTER IV 


THS PRIVATE SCHOOLS 

The development of private schools in Calgary has tended to 
he sporadic and limited to small institutions. The reasons for this 
may he found more in the characteristics of the community than in 
the schools themselves, which have had a definite place in the gen¬ 
eral educational scheme. Like the Public and Separate Schools, those 
of a private nature had their beginnings in the early history of the 
city. 

As early as 1889 there was a popular demand from members of 
the Anglican Church for a G-irls* High School. Among the pioneer 
families was a considerable element of those accustomed in the Old 
Country both to the segregation of the sexes for purposes of educa¬ 
tion and to the influence of the church being extended into what was 
felt to be a closely related sphere of cultural life. As a result 
of two public meetings, a Board of Management for such a school was 
constituted with the Right Rev. Cyprian Pinkham, first Anglican 
Bishop of Calgary, as president. Arrangements were made to use the 
Parish Hall of the Pro-Cathedral Anglicax$ Church as temporary 
quarters. The Board of Management engaged Miss M. Crawford as prin¬ 
cipal of the school, which opened in May, 1890. Thus began the first 
Protestant G-irls* School in the Territories. Lack of capital caused 
the school to close its doors after a brief existence of less than 
two years. However, it was soon to appear that the idea had not met 
the same fate as had its first tangible realization. 

In 1905 a G-irls* Boarding and Day School, erected on a site 
bought by Bishop Pinkham in 1888, was opened by Mrs. G-errie Smith. 

As principal she signed a three-year contract to operate the school. 











49 


Mrs. G-errie Smith and her daughter had come to Calgary from Toronto 
with the object of institilting a resident school for Protestant girls 
as, in 1904, no such school existed in Alberta. Mrs. Smith conducted 
”The Bow Valley School” in a rented building, but as property sold 
readily, moves were frequent. The opportunity to rent the Girls * 
Boarding and Day School under the patronage of the Church of England 
came as the fulfilment of a, dream. The school was soon making rapid 
strides with the original building requiring extension. The ancient 
convent at Whitby, England, inspired Dean Paget of the Pro-Cathedral 
Church to name the girls 1 school ,! St. Hilda*s College”. 

Some intimate glimpses of life at the school also reveal in¬ 
teresting phases of local life in the early days. The buildings, 
situated on Twelfth Avenue near Eighth Street West, were on the out¬ 
skirts of the city. Indians, encamped where the residential district 
of Mount Boyal is today, could be seen across the intervening open 
prairie. The school bus spent many a half hour sunk in the mud of 
the unpaved streets. The students, instructed by English school¬ 
mistresses, played field hockey as well as the American baseball and 
basketball. 

During the heyday of the school a large attendance facil¬ 
itated the provision of a diversified and specialized program as 
well as the prescribed course of studies. In 1906 Mrs. Glen Broder, 
for many years prominent in Calgary musical circles, joined the staff 
of the school. The school celebrated the opening of its new gym¬ 
nasium that year by the presentation of an operetta ”The Moon Queen”. 
In 1908 Miss Laura, Shibley became the new principal. Two years 
later the enrolment wa,s nearly eighty, thirty of the girls being 

































50 


"boarding students. In the fall of 19H> twenty music pupils were 
successful in their examinations, one receiving the degree, 

Licentiate of the Associate Board of the Royal College and School of 
Music, London, at that time a rare distinction In Western Canada,. 

The full matriculation for entrance to McGill University was com¬ 
pleted by one senior pupil in June, 1912. 

Physical improvements in the school were keeping pace credit¬ 
ably with scholastic growth. The grounds were improved, heating and 
plumbing installed in the building, the ventilation renovated, and 
fire escapes added. In 191^> along with many other Gaigary resid¬ 
ents, the school*s occupants were able to enjoy the boon of heating 
with natural gas. 

In 1916, two years after the war had started, the situation 
had changed drastically for St. Hilda*s College. Less than forty 
girls were registered, and only ten of these were resident students. 
As the two similar schools for boys in the city were suffering a like 
diminution of numbers, the reasons for the change are all the more 
worth investigating. To base the explanation solely on the effects 
of war conditions appears to be an over-simplification. Private ex¬ 
penditures are not so subject to war-time revision a,s are those in¬ 
volving public monies. Again, the depression which preceded the war 
was over before the extreme decrease in enrolment occurred. Other 
factors seem to throw more light on this phase of the educational 
scene. The families of the generation which had felt the private 
school to be an urgent need had, for the most part, grown up. 
Laurier's immigration policy had brought to the West a large middle- 
income group. They could neither afford nor did they want private 






51 


schools. Besides, co-e&ucational institutions were coining to he ap¬ 
preciated as providing a natural association of hoys and girls. An 
increase in the variety of religious sects contributed to the trend 
toward non-denominational schools. The public schools were a part of 
the democratic way of life which was dominant in the West. Finally, 
the public institutions had improved, and the people had faith in 
them. 

St. Hilda. 1 s College struggled on, but the difficulties in¬ 
creased. The frame building was getting old and in need of repair. 
The once new gymnasium floor slivered easily, and when the rain was 
heavy pans were set nicely under the weak spots in the roof. Some 
public-spirited citizens and parents associated with the school came 
to the rescue, but re-organization was necessary to ensure stability. 
Incorporated under the Societies Act of Alberta in June, 1924, the 
college became a non-denominational private institution, St. Hilda f s 
School for Girls. J. S. A. MacLeod, K. C,, was chosen chairman of 
the Board of Governors, a position which he retained until the school 
finally closed its doors in 1949. 

The new arrangements made it possible to opera/te the school 
successfully for another quarter of a century. Indeed, a new build¬ 
ing costing $28,000. was erected in 1928 on Eleventh Avenue West 

across the lane from the original structure, which, however, was not 
1 

abandoned. The school weathered the depression of the thirties and 
the Second World War. But the early post-war period again witnessed 
a declining enrolment. This, together with a change in school policy 


1. The Calgary Herald, June 18, 1949 













■ 









52 


imposed by the Provincial Department of Education, proved to be the 
death-knell of the school. Fundamental modifications in secondary 
school requirements in 1935 bad resulted in the discontinuance of De¬ 
partmental examinations for Grades X and XI. St. Hilda's School, 
which had hitherto drawn its staff from teachers who had trained else¬ 
where and had not obtained Alberta teaching certificates, now found 
that all its teachers must possess provincial qualifications. In¬ 
ability to compete with Provincial School Boards in the matter of sal¬ 
aries was the final stumbling block. The school closed in June, 19^9® 

The question which arose here, however, should not be lightly 
dismissed. The issue of the competence of the teachers was never raised. 
In fact, Provincial inspectors visited St. Hilda's School for Girls 
regularly. Miss Beatrice Shand, headmistress of the school for the 
last twelve years of operations, and her assistants gave a yearly ac¬ 
count of their work in this way. It was rather the 51 closed shop" 
principle which has come to be widely accepted in many fields of work. 

In the case of the teaching profession, should this policy of job 
protection be considered as a survival of medieval parochialism hamp¬ 
ering the diffusion of educational talents? Or would the recognition 
of teaching qualifications obtained outside the province create a 
form of competition which would depress salaries and work a hardship 
upon those who have spent their lives in such service in the prov¬ 
ince? Although this is a matter which comes under provincial juris¬ 
diction, the personnel of an educational unit the size of Calgary 
might well contribute to the crystallization of public opinion on the 
question. 

Western Canada College, the first private school for boys in 





53 


Calgary, opened in 1903* Entirely undenominational, it was still de¬ 
signed to afford for youths something more than, the secular education 
of the Public and High Schools. The moving spirit was the Rev. J. C. 
Herdman,minis ter of Knox Presbyterian Church at that time. But the 
founder was Dr. A. 0. MacRae, Ph. D., also a Presbyterian minister, 
whom Dr. Herdman induced to come to the city for the very purpose of 
organizing such a school. Dr. MacRae and his staff planned a curricu¬ 
lum based on a sound general education with emphasis placed on the 
spiritual and ethical. Poliowing the tradition of Upper Canada College 
and the English Public Schools, the institution also prepared boys 
for university entrance. 

The school was never intended to be a business venture, buty, 
local citizens who provided financial backing naturally expected that 
the institution would pay its way. Turner Bone, William Pearce, 

George Hope Johnstone, as well as a number of other business and pro¬ 
fessional men were interested enough to give substantial support. The 
C. P. R. Company donated twenty acres of land between the present site 
of Western Canada High School and Pifth Street West. Although this 
real estate was to be used for school purposes only, the lots along 
the eastern boundary of the property were sold during the building 
boom which began in 1910, and the proceeds were used towards the up¬ 
keep of the school. 

Fifty boys, some day scholars, some boarders, had soon enrol¬ 
led in the school. Their three instructors included The Principal, 

Dr. A. 0. MacRae, a graduate of Dalhousie University, Hova Scotia, 
who also held a post-graduate degree from Leipzig, Germany. The 
pupils of Western Canada College donned no uniform; but the blue col- 




54 


lege cap with, the rising sun crest and the motto n Luciat Lunam H "be¬ 
came a familiar sight in the city. 

2 

At its height the school boasted an enrolment of 125 "boys. 

For them three "buildings were constructed in all. The old "brick 
schoolhouse is today the library of Western Canada High School. A 
gymnasium of more modest proportions was erected where the modern one 
stands. A three-storey barn-like dormitory occupied the present site 
of the East Wing. 

That the school fulfilled the function for which it was created 
cannot be questioned when the record of achievement of former students 
is scanned. Four hundred of the Old Boys enlisted in the First World 
War. Ho school of its type in Canada had a greater if as great a re- 

3 

cord of man-power contribution. Three air pilots, ex-students, Donald 
McLaren, Alfred Carter, and Harold Carson, later founded and still 
carry on the institution known as Air Cadets which gives preparatory 
training in aviation to boys in the city. Former students have gained 
prominence in business and professional circles in the West. Instruct¬ 
ors who taught in the school have also distinguished themselves in 
their later careers. Dr. Ramsay Armitage became principal of Wycliffe 
College in Toronto. The Vancouver School Board has appointed H. N. 
MacCorkindale, M. A., as Superintendent of Schools. W. A. Patterson, 

M. A., has filled a prominent place in the newspaper world as an ex¬ 
ecutive officer of the Daily Times of Victoria. The old students have 
invariably given high praise to the school and to Dr. MacRae, whose 

2. McNeill, H. A. Leishman, Western Canada Old Boy. 

3. McRae, Dr. A. 0., Notes. 







55 


strong personality and fine principles pervaded their educational at¬ 
mosphere. 

But there came a time when disturbances were in the air. En¬ 
rolment declined during the war years, and costs of operation climbed. 
An educational trust was created in 1920, and the agreement reiterated 
that the property was destined in perpetuity for educational purposes. 
The reorganization had hardly become effective before other blows fell. 
In 1923 Dr. MacRae resigned to take charge of the University School in 
Victoria, B. 0. His successor, T. J. Williams, was an Old Boy of 
Western Canada College and a graduate of Toronto University. The 
school was still well-staffed, but the withdrawal of a strong influ¬ 
ence was felt. Finally, a fraudulent secretary-treasurer left the 
school without funds for current expenses. A valiant effort on the 
part of students and Old Boys to save the institution failed, and in 
1926, the Calgary School Board bought the land and buildings for a 
price which covered the school ! s indebtedness. The agreement of sabe 
included provision for the erection of a memorial to the ex-stu&ents 
who gave their lives in World War 1. The stone cairn stands in the 
central foreground of the Western Canada High School grounds. Changes 
in population and the growth of the Public School system were undoubt¬ 
edly contributory factors in the death of Western Canada College, as 
in the disappearance of other private schools. 

Another attempt to establish a. private school for boys in Cal¬ 
gary, stemming from somewhat different motives, was even more short¬ 
lived than Western Canada College. The organizing force in this case 
came from the Anglican Church. As the population of Alberta was in¬ 
creasing rapidly, it was felt that Church people should be encouraged 


- 


■ 








56 


to have spiritual ambition for their sons. At the same time, by mak¬ 
ing it easier for young men to enter the ministry, the Church in the 
West would become self-reliant. Mr. E. E. Riley, local real estate 
man and a member of the Provincial Legislature, donated the site for 
the Anglican College in 1908, and promised a sum of money when the 
building was started. He also stipulated that the name Bishop Pink- 
ham College should be used in honor of Calgary*s first Anglican Bishop. 

The school, which would prepare boys for university entrance, 
was organized with the Bishop as Ex-officio Warden and the Rev. Canon 
d^asum of St. Barnabas* Church as Sub-Warden. A council consisting of 
a number of prominent Anglicans was appointed. It was decided to 
launch the divinity students into their work without wa.iting for the 
erection of the college building. A syllabus was prepared, and 
lectures began on October 18, 1908, in a room in the Sub-Warden 1 s 
house. Canon d^asum and other Anglican divines gave their services 
and also conducted a. correspondence course for boys outside the city 
who would enter the school when it was ready. Unfortunately the 
Rector of St. Barnabas left Calgary a year later. His leadership in 
the venture wa,s sadly missed. 

However, the autumn of 1910 saw the beginning of building op¬ 
erations at Eighth Avenue and Thirteenth Street North-West. The cor¬ 
nerstone was laid by Bishop Pinkham on May Jl, 1911 • In the follow¬ 
ing September the day school department opened under the principalship 

of the Rev. A. P. Hayes, B. A. Porty-one pupils registered the first 

4 

year. Dormitory accommodation was ready the following year. Por a 
4. Pinkham, Miss M., Notes. 















57 


time supplications for admission came in thick and fast so that they 
had to he set aside "until the available room was increased. The An¬ 
nual Keport of the Board of Governors for 1913 said of the College, 

"Its loftiest ideals are being worked out, and we are sure it is 
worthy of taking rank among the leading schools of this kind in Eng¬ 
land and Eastern Canada”. 

Indeed, the College ms.de great progress from 1912 to 191^. 
Cambridge University granted the Principal^ request that Bishop Pink- 
ham College should be the centre for the local examinations of the Eng¬ 
lish University. This was regarded as an important step as this affili¬ 
ation gave added prestige to the boys 8 school* The first Cambridge 
examination was held in December, 1913* As a. result three boys gained 
Junior Certificates and three others Preliminary ones. In order that 
the physical education of the boys should receive its proper emphasis, 
a gymnasium was built in 191^* Adequate equipment was provided for 
this through the further generosity of Mr. E. H. Riley* 

On the crest of the wave of progress came the war. The Bishop 
Pinkham College Cadet Corps was gazetted, and instruction in military 
drill was soon under way. There is evidence that this new activity 
interfered very little with scholastic achievement. Some students were 
now preparing for the Matriculation examinations of Canadian universit¬ 
ies. Some succeeded in fulfilling the entrance requirements of McGill 
University, and others were making similar preparations to enter the 
University of Alberta. By 1916 the enrolment had dropped to the point 
where the College was forced to close. Every student of age and med¬ 
ically fit answered the call to arms as a volunteer. There seems 
little doubt that the prolonged course of the war was an important 




58 


factor in the dissolution of Bishop Pinkham College. The fine "brick 
"building in Hillhurst which once housed the Anglican College has since 
"been taken over "by the Salvation Army and adapted to their needs as 
the Grace Maternity Hospital. 

A co-educational institution, which also had its "beginning 
prior to World War 1, followed a different pattern to those previously 
described and, partly for that reason, is alive and thriving today. 
Mount Royal College was first an idea in the mind of the Rev, George 
W. Kerby, minister of the Central Methodist (now Central United) 

Church. He saw the need for a residential school for young men and 
women in Western Canada. The support of public-minded citizens was 
considerably strengthened in the case of Mount RoysJL College by the 
co-operation of the Alberta Conference and the General Council of the 
Methodist Church in Canada. Incorporated by the Alberta Legislature 
in December, 1910, the College opened with Dr. Kerby as its first 
principal. Instruction in public and high school subjects, commercial 
courses, household science, music, elocution, and fine arts were in¬ 
cluded in its program. An L-shaped building in brick was erected on 
the corner of Eleventh Street and Seventh Avenue West to accommodate 
both classrooms and dormitories. 

The regularity of financial contributions by the religious 
organization is of interest here as it may be compared to the annual 
grant with which the provincial, government supplements local school 
taxes. The Methodist Church Council contributed substantial, sums on 
a yearly basis from the time of the founding of the College until 1938, 
when the progressive effects of the depression made this impossible. 

Por the next fourteen years no such assistance was available. In 1950, 



59 


5 

a token grant of $150. was received for the year 19^9* By the time, 
however, that such outside support ceased the College had not only 
been established on a firm foundation, but had made important adjust¬ 
ments to meet changes in the educational requirements of the community. 

A momentous year in the history of the College was 1930, the 
year it was granted affiliation as a junior college by the University 
of Alberta. This enabled the institution to offer courses in the 
first two years of university work. The success of this widening of 

function was almost a foregone conclusion. The University of Calgary, 

6 

it is true, had met an untimely end, but not because there was lack¬ 
ing a demand for higher education in a southern Alberta centre. After 
the Junior College had proved itself, indeed, the public school gra.des 
and domestic science were discontinued so that the academic work at 
University level might be expanded. 

Enrolment statistics suggest that these changes were by no 
means fortuitous. At no time did the number of pupils registered in 
Grades 1 to Till justify the use of more than one room for their ac¬ 
commodation. This meant that elementary school work at Mount Royal 
College had similar drawbacks to those of a one-roomed rural school. 

On the other hand average enrolment in G-rades X to XI1 in the past 
two years, which are also representative figures for previous ses¬ 
sions, told a different story. 


5. Collett, W. J., Vice-Principal Mount Royal College, 1950. 

6. See Chapter V below. 








6o 


Average Enrolment 

& rad_e 194-9 and 1950 

X 50 

XI 4o 

XL1 92 

Bridge (Grade Xll and University) 9 

Petroleum Engineering 31 

7 

Arts and Science 30 


The past decade has brought changes to the College, not of a 
fundamental nature hut rather an expansion of the Junior College* 

When service men returned after World War 11, enrolment in the Junior 
College increased to such an extent it was necessary to provide extra 
accommodation which was accomplished by purchasing six army huts. 

These we re equipped an classrooms and laboratories • Poliowing a de¬ 
mand for greater specialization in the engineering department, two 
years of work in Petroleum Engineering were added to the courses 
offered. Affiliation with the University of Oklahoma made possible 
the giving of standard credits for this work* Pine Art courses were 
discontinued in 1946 in order to offer subjects which were in greater 
demand. Two years later, an Evening College, consisting of courses in 
adult education, was inaugurated^ These changes have been carried out 
under the leadership of the Rev. Dr. John H. Garden who succeeded Dr. 
Kerby as principal in 1942. The new principal wan the first student 
to be registered at Mount Royal College. Until Dr. Kerby 1 s death in 
1944, the latter was Principal Emeritus of the institution. 

The use of army huts was not intended as a, permanent solution 

7. Mount Royal College Records, 1949 and 1950. 














61 


to the housing problem of the College. After Dr. Kerby's death, the 

Board of Governors decided that a new modern college building would 

be a suitable memorial to the lives and work of the former principal 

and his wife. Viscount Bennett, visiting Calgary for the last time, 

gave the first and largest single donation to the Kerby Memorial 

Building Fund. The amount was equalled by the joint contributions of 

the Board of G-overnors. During the winter of 19^4 and 19^5> the fund 

was augmented by additional sums given by the general public. Two 

years ago, 19^9, the structure was conroleted at a total cost of 

8 

$262,000. The additional accommodation included seven classrooms, 
three laboratories, and two rooms for instruction in commercial sub¬ 
jects as well as a library and a gymnasium. The official opening and 
dedication took place on June 12 of that year. 

The Board of Governors of the College held their annual meet¬ 
ing for 1950 on November 2^> At that time the building fund lacked 
$37,350. which the governors decided to solicit through subscriptions 

9 

so that they might liquidate the debt within three years. They also 
laid plans at the meeting to inaugurate a summer session in 1951 * 
Students lacking senior matriculation standing will thereby be enabled 
to make up their deficiencies and proceed with higher education with¬ 
out delay. 

The future of the Junior College would appear to be secure. 
Having adapted itself to the educational needs of an expanding com¬ 
munity, Mount Royal College has broadened its foundations substanti- 

8. Mount Royal College Records, 19 ^ 9 . 

9* Calgary Herald, November 27, 1950. 







62 


ally. The presence of the Calgary Branch of the Faculty of Education 
has not affected the College Decause the former is a specialized de¬ 
partment of University work and the two currents do not cross or 
mingle. Indeed, they have not "been allowed to do so, for registra¬ 
tion in Arts courses at the Faculty of Education has "been limited to 
those seeking a degree in that faculty. If other branches of univer¬ 
sity work develop beside that of teacher training, the picture may be 
altered. One question suggests itself! ha.s the presence of a private 
junior college militated against the extension of the University of 
Alberta in Calgary? 

The years following World War 1 saw the development of other 
private schools in Calgary. In many ways they presented a sharp con¬ 
trast to their predecessors. The Montessori School of Progressive 
Education, founded by Mr. and Mrs. William S. Potts, was the first of 
the new ventures. Mr. and Mrs. Potts, who were graduates of the Dur¬ 
ham Teacher Training Centre in England, came to Calgary in 1911. They 
prepared for a scholastic career in the province by taking the one 
month ITormal School course offered to British teachers. Although they 
both spent some time teaching in public schools in and near Calgary, 
they cherished the idea of introducing the Montessori method of educa¬ 
tion in the city. Imbued with these educational doctrines during the 
course of their studies at Durham College, Mr. and Mrs. Potts never¬ 
theless gave themselves time to acquire an understanding of Canadian 
conditions before embarking upon the venture. 

In 1919 Mr. and Mrs. Potts opened their school for day pupils 
and boarders in its present building at 3^36 - 7 Street, West, Calgary. 
At first instruction was given to thirty-six pupils ranging from 






63 


Grades 1 to Vl. Additions and improvements to the "building made it 
possible to increase the enrolment and extend the grades taught to 
Grade IX, then later to Grade Xll. Since Mr. Potts' death from heart 
trouble in 19^7 > the senior high school work has been discontinued. 
After the school had expanded, the enrolment remained fairly constant. 
Seventy pupils constituted the yearly average which increased to 
ninety in 1950* 

The methods used accounted to a large extent for the success 
of the school. According to the Montessori tradition, physical 
apparatus is used so that the children help to teach themselves. 

Small classes have made possible the individual attention which is an 
essential part of the method. The belief that every child is gifted 
in some way is one of the tenets of the followers of the system. When 
the assigned task is completed, the child expends his energy on his 
chosen hobby. The proponents of the method claim that behaviour prob¬ 
lems are virtually eliminated in this \^ay. 

Prom the beginning the heads of the school made their position 
secure in relation to the educational regulations of the province. 

Mr. and Mrs. Potts employed only teachers with Alberta certificates, 
with the exception of instructors in charge of special departments such 
as music and dancing. The inspector for the Calgsny Rural School Div¬ 
ision has visited the school regularly and given satisfactory reports 
on its work. At present six teachers conduct classes in the school. 
Mrs. Potts devotes her own time to work in the first three grades. 

Although the private school has appeared to have but a tenu¬ 
ous position in the local educational field, Mrs. Potts has found here 
a satisfying scope for the application of her training and experience 





64 


in a special type of teaching. Nor has she confined her activities 
entirely to Calgary. In 1923> the Montessori Internationale Associ¬ 
ation appointed Mrs. Margaret Potts as its Western Canadian represent¬ 
ative. Since that time she has trained more than one hundred fully 
qualified teachers in the methods of the school, especially those re¬ 
lating to the teaching of reading. The directress of the Calgary 
school has also taught at the British Columbia and lew York summer 
schools for teachers. In 1935-1936> Mrs. Potts spent six months in 
London, England, lecturing to teachers from fifty-seven countries who 
were taking the course offered by the Montessori Internationale. 

Prom where has the Calgary Montessori School drawn its pupils? 
Parents whose work has taken them away from the city for an extended 
period of time have felt that the school provided an answer to their 
particular educational problems. The same might be sa.id of children 
for whom physical disabilities have made participation in the life of 
large public school units difficult or frustrating. Some families 
have felt that such a school offers wider opportunities to the speci¬ 
ally gifted child. A measure of constancy in the size of enrolment 
would indicate that the demand for this type of private school is 
fairly stable. 

The Montessori School was a co-educational school founded 
upon a special pattern. By 1927, this and two of the private schools 
which were established at an earlier date were still in existence — 
Mount Royal College and St, Hilda*s School for Girls. The two boys 3 
schools had fallen by the way. However, before the depression of the 
thirties, another English couple attempted to establish a private 
school for boys. 








I 













65 


Mr. and Mrs. C. Taylor came to Calgary in 1928 to open a 
private school for hoys. Mrs. W. Sellar advised the couple that 
there was some demand for a hoys* school in the prairie city. Mrs. 
Iris Taylor had received her training at Cheltenham Ladies 1 College, 
England, which gave a three-year normal school course. In the base¬ 
ment of the Public Library on Twelfth Avenue and Second Street West, 
she taught the six little boys who first attended the school which 
she and her husband opened in Calga.ry. Poliowing the English tra¬ 
dition, the boys wore a uniform. This consisted of a tweed suit and 
a blue and white cap and tie. Although the school grew slowly and 
changed directors several times, the name Strathcona School for Boys 
and the original uniform have continued to be used. 

In the fall of 1928 the school had twenty-six pupils so the 
Taylors looked around for more commodious quarters. These they found 
at 2215 Hope Street. Prom then on they included a few boarders among 
their students. Miss Marion Robb, M. A., Lalhousie University, had 
just completed an eight months course in normal school training in 
Calgary when she met the Taylors through a mutual friend. They en¬ 
gaged her as an instructor to release Mr. Taylor, who was not a. 
qualified teacher. The latter then devoted himself to the organiza¬ 
tion of and instruction in sports which have continued to play an im¬ 
portant part in the school’s program. However, the modest success of 
their project did not satisfy the directors of the school, and they 
decided to return to England. 

The Taylors sold their interest in the school, which in 1931 
numbered twenty-eight pupils, to Major M. A. Ellison, M. C. The 
latter had attended Malvern Public School in England when he was a 



66 


"boy, and since the war had been on the staff of Shawinigan Lake School 
for Boys in Eastern Canada, He moved the Strathcona School to a house 
at 7*K) Fifteenth Avenue West, which he rented from Dr. D. S. Macnab, 
who from then on took a kindly interest in the hoys® school. Major 
Ellison undertook the operation of the institution as a "business ven¬ 
ture, hut he was not a trained teacher himself. The first Alberta— 
trained tea.cher whom he engaged was Mrs. E. A. Dunn, a graduate of Lon¬ 
don University. Mrs. Dunn accepted the position in 1932 and in 1950 
was still a member of the staff. From 1932 until 1938* during the de¬ 
pression, the school virtually stood still, hut it managed to continue 
in existence. 

More prosperous times brought an increase in enrolment. Three 
schoolrooms were necessary to accommodate the hoys, and more dormitory 
space for the twenty-two hoarders. Major Ellison bought the property 
at 1232 River dale Avenue which not only had a larger building hut also 
grounds covering twelve city lots. Adjacent vacant fields added to the 
possibilities for sports. Mr. (now Dr.) Cooper Johnson, son of a doc¬ 
tor employed at that time by the Calgary School Board, joined the 
staff of the Strathcona School, which appeared really to thrive for the 
first time. 

Two years later World War 11 attracted Major Ellison away from 
his school. At the same time young Mr. Johnson resigned in order to 
avail himself of the free medical training offered by the Dominion 
Government in 1939* Dr. F. G. Buchanan, Superintendent of Schools in 
Calgary and a former provincial school inspector, recommended Alfred 
Howard of Drumheller to Major Ellison, who engaged him to help oper¬ 
ate the school during his own absence. Mr. Howard and Mrs. Dunn had 
power of attorney jointly and conducted the institution together. A 








67 


succession of young men occupied the position of third teacher in 
turn. It was difficult to hold youths in teaching positions during 
the war years. 

In 1945, Mr. Howard and his "brother John "bought the property 
and interest in the school from Major Ellison. The "brothers took 
turns in teaching and operating their Alberta farm, so that one of 
them was always in attendance at the school. In recent years average 
enrolment has been fifty pupils. The grades taught have ranged from 
one to nine. Small classes have meant individual attention for the 
students, who have attended the school for reasons similar to those 
which have attracted pupils to the Montessori School. 

However, the two schools are not similar in other ways. The 
Strathcona School still bears the stamp of its English public school 
foundation impressed upon it by the Taylors. Team games, especially 
soccer, are a strong point for the sake of their concomitant learn¬ 
ings of fair play and co-operation, as well as for their physical 
benefits. The boys spend two or three hours a week at their game 
practices. Instruction in Latin and French begins in Grade V; Eng¬ 
lish grammar is taught thoroughly. The teachers have a good deal of 
leeway in trying out new methods. As yet they have not introduced 
the enterprise method in which a central unit in Social Studies is 
used as a core for the integration of other subjects. 

In 1941, the School Board extended its facilities for manual 
training to the Strathcona School boys in Grades 711, 7111, and IX. 
The city has also granted property tax exemption to the school. This 
seemed reasonable since the boys* education was not an expense to the 


municipality although many of their fathers paid property taxes. Like 








68 


the Montessori School, it has held, its own in a community which has 
grown less private-school-minded with the years, chiefly because the 
school has catered to individualistic tendencies in the local demand 
for educational facilities. 

The individualism of minority groups has found expression in 
the founding of educational establishments. Two religious denomina¬ 
tions have established private schools in Calgary in the past quarter 
century. The Hebrew School, the older of the two, began in 1925* Al¬ 
though the synagogue, the House of Israel situated at Eighteenth 
Avenue and Centre Street South, has given the school space, the Je\f- 
ish community as a whole has provided for its operation. 

The moving spirit and financial backing for the venture came 
from such men as J. Dubisky, Rabbi Smolensky, S. Jaffe, J. Bercuson, 
and E. Walker. For the first year the Calgary Public School Board 
loaned a room in the Central School for the class. The next tempor¬ 
ary quarters were in a building on Pifth Avenue between First and 
Second Streets East. Since the completion of the basement of the 
large synagogue in 1939 > it has accommodated the school. 

In setting up their own institution, the Hebrew people had no 
intention of founding a parochial school. They felt themselves to be 
a part of the whole city community and did not wish to impose a perm¬ 
anent isolation upon their children. At the same time they knew the 
Public School system of education to be inadequate to fulfil their own 
special aim of a good grounding in knowledge of the Bible and the He¬ 
brew language. For this reason many adherents of the Jewish faith in 
Calgary gave their support to the school which provided instruction in 
the first four elementary grades. 
























69 


The founders of the school obtained a charter from the Prov¬ 
incial Department of Education. They undertook to engage Alberta 
qualified teachers and to give instruction according to the prescribed 
course of studies. The inspector of the Calgary Rural School Division 
has made an annual visit of inspection. The school has charged a fee 
of ten dollars a month for each child. Transportation to and from 
school and a noon lunch have been provided for the children. 

A day and a night school are at j/resent in operation. There 
are two day school teachers for an enrolment of fifty-five pupils. A 
third teacher holds a kindergarten class on a half-day basis for 
twenty-eight children. Instruction in the Hebrew religion and lang¬ 
uage forms a part of the daily time table. When the children in the 
day school reach Grade V, they enter the Public School system. The 
Hebrew School conducts night classes for some eighty-five of these 
older students. The subjects taught include Jewish history, customs, 
holidays, and prayers, as well as synagogue laws. 

The local. Hebrew School is pant of a world-wide educational 
system. Teachers have come from distant centres to offer the ad¬ 
vantages of their training and experience to this small school. Rabbi 
Marc Liebhaber came to take over the duties of principal of the school 
in September, 1950. He had studied at the Universities of Warsaw and 
Munich before the war. His previous teaching experience had been in 
Hebrev/ Schools in Warsaw and Hew York. This may appear to be a great 
expenditure of effort and money to be taken for so small a group, but 
Calgary’s second private school conducted by a religious group is even 
smaller. 

In 1944, the Seventh Day Adventist Church in Calgary opened an 




70 


elementary school in the "basement of the church on Fourth Street and 
Fourteenth Avenue West. Some sixteen pupils learned their lessons in 
a classroom on the lower floor of the small stucco "building. This 
accommodation sufficed for two years after which the church officials 
acquired a frame "building on Sixteenth Avenue and First Street North- 
East for school purposes. Since the move the yearly enrolment has 
averaged twenty-two children. 

The school is part of a unified scheme which embraces the 
United Stales and Canada. The principles of education adopted by the 
members of the church were first formulated in 1886. Mrs. Ellen G. 
White, an American tee,cher and one of the founders of the religious 
sect, wrote many articles to set forth and expand what seemed to her 
a desirable educational pattern. Being in radical disagreement with 
the regular educational system, especially regarding neglect of the 
Bible and over-emphasis on sports, the group proceeded to build its 
own curriculum. Gradually they have established elementary schools, 
academies, and colleges. All personnel of their educational institu¬ 
tions are employees of the Church. A uniform wage scale obtains 
throughout the two countries. Although the teachers* salaries are 
generally slightly lower than those paid by the Public School Board 
of the locality, the sect has so far been able to attract qualified 
teachers through a comprehensive hospitalization and medical scheme 
as well a.s with rent and married status allowances. 

The Seventh Day Adventist School in Calgary is another in¬ 
stance of an institution established by a minority group whose wishes 
would otherwise be swamped in the regular educational system. The 
private schools of the city, exclusive of the Junior College, draw 
somewhat less than 300 students from a school population of nearly 



71 


20,000. The tendency since the founding of the city has "been for the 
private school to decline in importance while the institution known 
as the public school system has grown in strength. 





CHAPTER V 


CALGA RY AND THE UNIVERSITY 

The establishment of a university in Calgary has been a re¬ 
current educational aim ever since the founding of the Province of 
Alberta in 1905- When Edmonton became the capital of the province, 
the citizens of Calgary expected their city to be chosen as the seat 
of the provincial university. However, the honor fell to Strathcona, 
now incorporated in the city of Edmonton. The loss of the institution 
of higher learning as well as of the seat of government no doubt rank¬ 
led all the more as Calgarians knew their city to be the larger and 
felt their geographical position to be the more favorable of the two. 

In 1912, in the midst of a major building boom, the citizens 
of Calgary felt the time ripe to plan for a university of their own. 
Although the movement received its impetus from a group of prominent 
citizens, the municipal government stood firmly behind the venture. 

Two of the outstanding leaders were Dr. T. H. Blow, a well-known 
physician and real estate owner, and ¥. J, Tregillus, President of 
the United Farmers of Alberta. The latter offered a. site for the 
university in the foothills to the west of Calgary. The subscription 
lists bore the names of many prominent people who pledged substantial 
sums towards the founding of the University of Calgary. Lord Strath- 
cona donated $25,000. to the cause. The Calgary municipal council 

passed a by-law which authorized a grant of $150,000. for the construc- 

2 

tion of the first building. R. B. Bennett (later Prime Minister of 
Canada and Lord Bennett), a partner in a local law firm, obtained the 
passage of a provincial statute incorporating Calgary College. The 

1. Sage, Dr. W. N., Notes on Calgary College. 

2. Sage, Dr, V/. N., Notes on Calgary College, 

















73 


general satisfaction with a promising start was marred slightly "by 
an amendment to the hill which denied Calgary College the right to 
grant degrees. 

Since the College could not grant degrees, the Board of 
Governors sought affiliation with an accreditied university. McGill 
University had established 'branches without degree-conferring powers 
in Vancouver and Victoria, while McMaster University had accorded an 
Affiliation to Brandon College, Brandon, Manitoba. The Governors of 
Calgary College petitioned for a similar understanding with Queen’s 
University at Kingston, Ontario. The eastern institution after due 
consideration refused the request. However, the founders of Calgary 
College did not regard this failure as an insuperable obstacle and 
pushed forward their plans. 

Calgary College found temporary quarters in the new Public 
Library in Central Park. Lectures started in October, 1912, Arts and 
Law courses being offered at that time. The lecture hours were in 
the late afternoon and early evening in order to attract teachers and 
office workers. Dr. 1, E. Braithwaite received the appointment of 
Dean of the Arts Faculty; and Mr. Kent Power, an outstanding Calgary 
lawyer and a graduate of Dalhousie Lav; School, became head of the 
Faculty of Lav;. 

The ’’Preliminary Announcement of the University of Calgary” 
appeared in July of the opening year. A study of this booklet re¬ 
veals a l blending of the practical and the visionary consistent with 
the union of high aims and sound common sense. In the section en¬ 
titled ’’Purpose and Plan”, the founders started their reasons for be¬ 


ginning with a strong Arts course to ensure a well-balanced university, 





74 


"There can "be no higher education in the true sense without special 
training of the mental faculties such as is best secured through this 

3 

means". They did not wish to invite the charge of unfitting students 
for the practical duties of life so the early addition of other de¬ 
partments was mentioned. The authors of the pamphlet stressed the 
efforts to obtain professors of outstanding ability, acknowledged the 
importance of fine buildings, but felt that these were of secondary 
importance. They made much of the fact that the institution was a 
private foundation free from political and sectarian influences. 

The booklet presented an apologia for the establishment of the 
institution in the face of serious obstacles. It emphasized Calgary’s 
pre-eminence in the West as the largest city between Winnipeg and 
Vancouver. Hamilton, Ontario, was the only other comparable city 
without a university. Whereas Hamilton was only forty miles from 
Toronto, Calgary was six hundred miles from as large a city. (Ham¬ 
ilton has since become the site of McMaster University). Statistics 
were cited to supply proof of Calgary’s growth over an eight-year 
period. The financial statements for a shorter time showed an even 
more phenomenal advance. 


Population 
190410,543 
1908 — 29,096 

1912 — 6l,34o 

3ank Clearings 

1910 — $150| million 

1911 — 21&J million 

1912 (6 mos.) 128J- million 


Building Permits 

1910 — $5t million 

1911 — 13 million 

1912 (6 mos.) 8-|- million 

Customs Receipts 

million 

— 1-J- million 

— 1 million 4 


3. Preliminary Announcement, University of Calgary, July 1912, P. 5® 

4. Preliminary Announcement, P» 12. 















t 










' 








75 


The final argument set forth made subtle reference to the possible 
results of the influx of foreign immigrants which the West was experi¬ 
encing at that time. How better could their assimilation be assured, 
Empire ties be maintained, and Anglo-Saxon civilization be perpetu¬ 
ated in Canada than through the establishment of institutions of high¬ 
er learning which would supply qualified and educated leaders for the 
task? 

The Brochure also included names of the various College of¬ 
ficials, The composition of the Board of Governors indicated the 
support given the venture by business interests. Dr, T. H. Blow was 
chairman of the Board; W. J» Tregillus was the secretary, Five menv- 
bers and ten advisory members completed the Board, A large majority 
of both groups were real estate men and lawyers. Indeed, Calgary 
College wa„s often referred to as the 5, real estate universityHow¬ 
ever, a Senate largely composed of academic men provided a counter¬ 
balance for the preponderance of businessmen on the Board, Dr. A. M. 
Scott, Superintendent of Calgary Public Schools, was its chadrman. 
Other members included the Eight Rev. Cyprian Pinkham, D. D., Anglican 
Bishop of Calgary, Rev. J. A. Clark, B. A., Minister of Knox Presby¬ 
terian Church, the Very Rev. E, C. Paget, M. A,, D, D,, Dean of the 
Pro-Cathedral Church of the Redeemer, G. D. Stanley, M. D., of High 
River, and Judge Noel, B. A., of Edmonton. The Lieutenant—Governor 
of Alberta, the Hon. George Hedley Vicars Bulyea, B. A., LL. D,, was 
the Visitor of the College, There was no Chancellor. 

The members of the two faculties, Arts and Law, comprised a 
notable group. Originally there were five members of the Faculty of 
Arts. Dr. 1. E. Braithwaite had pursued his studies at outstanding 



















■ 







76 


universities in Eastern Canada, Germany, and the United States, Ur. 
Frank H. Macdougall, Professor of Chemistry and temporarily at the 
head of the Mathematics department, was a graduate of Queers and of 
Leipzig. Dr. C. F. Ward of the Language department had carried on his 
post-graduate studies in Chicago. Mack Eastman, B. A., Toronto, was 
in charge of History and Political Science. The Faculty of Law was 
entirely separate from the Faculty of Arts. Although the former was 
under the University of Calgary from 1912 to 191^, it was then taken 
over by the University of Alberta and bwcame the Calgary Law School of 
that institution. In addition to the Acting Bean, W. Kent Power, 
lecturers in law in 1913 included a number of prominent Calgary law¬ 
yers. 

The University of Calgary issued only two calendars. The Pre¬ 
liminary Announcement served as a syllabus for the first session. The 
first Annual Calendar appeared before the 1913-191^ session. In the 
second, published in 191^, some faculty changes appeared. Dr. F. H. 
Macdougall was Dean and Acting President; Rev, A. Macwilliams, B. A., 
was Registrar. Dr. E, E. Braithwaite had severed his connection with 
the University. Two new appointments were Dr. R. A. MacLean as Pro¬ 
fessor of Classics and Lecturer in Philosophy, and W. H. Sage, B, A., 
Toronto and Oxford, as Lecturer in English and Economics. Dr. Mack 
Eastman, Ph. D., Columbia, held the position of Professor of History 
and Politics. Changes in the Faculty of Lav/ reduced the number of 
lecturers by tv/o. 

The University of Calgary lasted for three years. For the 
first session, 1912-1913, 125 students registered in Arts and thirty- 
five in Law. In 1913-191^, the numbers had increased to 21? in Arts 







77 


5 

and. fifty-one in Lavr. Although figures are not available for the 
third session, the numbers had decreased slightly. The outbreak of 
World War 1 meant a call to arms to which several students responded. 
The College closed in the spring of 1915* 

Several causes contributed to the early demise of the Univer¬ 
sity of Calgary. Financial difficulties were undoubtedly responsible 
to some extent. These were attributable to the collapse of the real 
estate boom in 1913* As a result, gifts of land received by the Col¬ 
lege failed to realize the expected returns. The advent of war also 
had an adverse effect on the infant University. These, however, were 
temporary setbacks. The remaining contributory causes appeared to 
cast a permanent blight upon the establishment of such an institution 
in Calgary. The failure to secure degree-granting powers was the thin 
edge of the wedge. Then, in 1915? a Royal Commission was appointed to 
consider the question of higher education in the province. Sir Robert 
Falconer, President of the University of Toronto, President Walter 
C. Murray of the University of Saskatchewan, and President A. Stanley 
MacKenzie of Dalhousie University constituted the Commission. In its 
report the Commission favored a technical institute rather than a, 
second university for Alberta. The members supported their decision 
with two arguments. The province was not large enough to support two 
universities of the conventional kind. The time had come rather to 
establish an institution for a newer type of higher learning — educa¬ 
tion in the skills necessary for the development of Alberta f s natural 
resources, both actual and potential. The Royal Commission also 
found Calgary College to be bankrupt. It was quite apparent that the 
University, as it was then constituted, could not open for a fourth 


5. Sage, Ur. W. IT., Rotes 








78 


session. In view of the findings of the Commission, it was extremely 
unlikely that the Provincial Government would come to the rescue. 

The University of Calgary had come to an end, hut it was soon 
apparent that the idea had not died with it. In attempting to re¬ 
establish the College, the citizens of Calgary showed a genuine in¬ 
terest in higher education and an equally commendable perseverance in 
the face of difficulties. As soon as the report of the Royal Commiss¬ 
ion became public, on March ?, 1915» two hundred people gathered in 
the council chamber of the City Hall to discuss the findings and recom¬ 
mendations. After hearing the report, Ur. George W. Kerby, Principal 
of Mount Royal College, formulated a resolution that the report be ac¬ 
cepted, and that a committee be appointed to explore the immediate 
possibilities of the situation and confer with representatives of the 
Provincial Government. Ur. A. 0. MacRae, Principal of Western Canada 
College, seconded the motion. However, the motion which was passed 
was the v/ork of J, E. Woods of the Calgary Herald and P% Harcourt 0 s - 
Reilly. The acceptance of the Commission^ report was deleted in 
this final wording. Within a week the committee was ready with its 
proposals with which a second general meeting concurred. 

In order to arrive at concrete suggestions, the interested 
parties had effected a compromise. There were three groups inter¬ 
ested in the future of higher education in Calgary. The academic 
group, represented strongly by former 'members of the Board of Gover¬ 
nors of Calgary College, favored a bona fide university but would ac¬ 
cept a technical institute provided such an institution also offered 
two years of university work. The representatives of business felt 
attracted to the technological school but would support the Technical 





79 


Institute-cum-Univer sity to present a united and strong front. Both 
of these schools of thought envisaged a sharing of costs by the prov¬ 
ince and the city, A third group accepted the compromise hut would 
prefer an institution supported outright hy the Provincial Government, 
However, with apparent accord a formidable delegation left for Edmon¬ 
ton. They carried the resolution, endorsed hy the citizens of Calgary, 
that a Technical Institute and University he established in their city. 

The delegates represented educational, business, and municipal 
interests. Dr. G. W. Kerby, Dr. 3?. M. Macdougall, Mr, T. B. Kidner, 
and Dr. A. 0. MacRae; Patrick Bunns, A. H. Clank, K. C., Clifford B. 
Reilly, and George J. Bryan; Mayor M. C, Costello and Alderman Jenni- 
son were outstanding members of the committee, which was a-ccompanied 
by Dr, T. H. Biow, T. M. Tweedie, M. P. P., and S. B. Hillocks. 

The Premier, A.L. Sifton, and the Cabinet received the dele¬ 
gates who were introduced by Dr. Blow, A. H. Clark was the spokesman 
for the group. In concluding his address the latter presented the 
citizens* resolution which, in effect, asked for two institutions, 
Calgary College to be maintained by the citizens of Calgary, the 
technical institution by the province. The Premier interpreted this 
as a request for a single institution with a dual purpose. He advised 
that a smaller group wait upon the Kon. J. R. Boyle, the Minister of 
Education. 

The Hon. Mr. Boyle heard the sub-delegation, also headed by 
Mr. A. H. Clark. The Minister of Education took the stand that the 
report of the Royal Commission did not justify the delegation 1 s applic¬ 
ation for the inclusion of two years of university work. The Univer¬ 
sity of Alberta would give credits for technical courses where the 




80 


work was the same as that offered by the Edmonton institution. Other- 
wise, the province would go as far as possible in establishing means 
for higher education in Calgary without any unnecessary duplication of 
University facilities. The Minister hastened to add that his Depart¬ 
ment was prepared to assume its share of the obligation at once. He 

estimated that the immediate cost to the provincial government would 

6 

be at least $250,000. The City of Calgary should look for a suitable 
site for a combined Technical Institute and Normal School. Neverthe¬ 
less, the members of the delegation passed over the prize held before 
their eyes and continued to press their request for two years of uni¬ 
versity work. 

Before the meeting ended the Minister of Education and the 
Calgary group found a modus vivendi. It was decided that a. Junior 
Arts College could be a part of the Technical Institute. The Premier 
also thought this proposal more reasonable than a separate Arts De¬ 
partment affiliated with the University of Alberta. Mr. Clark took 
the amended suggestion back to Calgary for further consideration by 
the interested groups® 

The analysis of the interested groups given above showed the 
academic group to be the one to which the merger would be least likely 
to appeal. The members of the Board of Governors of Calgary College, 
however, accepted the proposed changes but wished to make some stipu¬ 
lations with regard to the appointment of the governing body of the 
Institute. They felt that if the former Calgary College had suffici¬ 
ent representation on the new body, it would prevent provincial or 

6. The Calgary Albertan, March 25, 1915* 








31 


municipal politics from interfering with the effective control of the 
new institution. Since it did not rest with a Calgary Meeting to de¬ 
cide the composition of the Board, a committee of three was appointed 
to interview the Hon. Mr. Boyle and supervise the drafting of a char¬ 
ter. On this committee Mayor M. C. Costello represented the City; 
George J. Bryan spoke for the Board of Governors of Calgary College, 
and A. H. Clark for the "business interests. 

In the meantime, the Calgary School Board, feeling itself also 
to be representative of educational interests in the city, made an in¬ 
dependent move. Five weeks had passed since the first mass meeting. 

The members of the Board felt that the session of the Provincial Legis¬ 
lature might end without any concrete achievement towards higher educa,- 
tion in Calgary. At a special meeting, held on April 12, 1915? the 
Board appointed a small committee to carry on negotiations with the 
province if the City group should fail to attain its purpose. This 
sub-committee went to Edmonton at the same time as the official dele¬ 
gation. Although the eventuality for which the former group was pre¬ 
pared did, in fact, take place, the Minister of Education declined to 
consider proposals proffered by the unofficial group. The latter had 
thus served only to emphasize disunity. The legislative session did 
indeed end with the matter still unsettled. 

Early in 1916, when the conflicting opinions still were unre¬ 
solved, Mayor M. C. Costello took a firm stand. Calgary must have the 
Technical Institute, at least. He headed a small delegation appointed 
by the City Council which went to Edmonton to interview Premier A. L. 
Sifton and the Hon. J. B. Boyle. This time the joint conference pro¬ 
duced definite arrangements. The City of Calgary was to bean half the 




82 


cost of the site and the new "buildings to be erected. Thereafter, the 
government officials agreed, the province would be responsible for the 
cost of maintenance. Municipal and provincial representatives had 
come to this understanding by the middle of February, 1916. No mention 
was made of the extension of university facilities to the proposed 
institute. 

Further delays awaited the actual inauguration of the new in¬ 
stitution. The city fathers had difficulty in choosing among several 
suggested sites. In the end they arranged for the loan of Col, Walker 
School in Fast Calgary as a. temporary base for the establishment. The 
provincial government then provided for the foundation of the Instit¬ 
ute of Technology and Art by order-in-council. 

The Minister of Education and Dr. J. C. Miller, Director of 
Technical Education for the province, came to Calgary to secure estim¬ 
ates of the cost of equipping and maintaining the school. The old fire 
hall and police station across the street from Colonel Walker School 
provided space for machine shops. Before the end of June, 1916, crews 
of workmen installed the machinery. The Technical Institute opened 
formally for the fall term of that year. Dr. J. C. Miller directed 
the Institute during its first year. 

The organization of courses was based upon a survey of busi¬ 
ness and industry in the province in general, and in C BJLgexy in par¬ 
ticular. Dr. A. M. Scott, Superintendent of Public Schools in Cal¬ 
gary, urged the local Board of Trade to support the new institution 
through publicity. He suggested tha,t juniors in business firms and 
industries be permitted to take part-time or short courses, also that 
the firms offer prizes, scholarships, and positions to graduates. 













83 


The Superintendent of Schools pointed otit that industry would benefit 
in obtaining better-trained i^orkers. Such schemes would give an im¬ 
petus to the establishment of a more permanent institution. During 
the initial year the .Institute offered courses in engineering and ac¬ 
countancy. The scheduling of some classes in the evenings helped to 
increase the school’s meagre capacity. The choice of Calgary as a 
site for the Institute soon appeared to be justified. Of the 813 stu¬ 
dents who registered for the first year, thirty-one per cent came from 
the city. 

The provincial authorities established the Technical Instit¬ 
ute to meet an educational need. The developments of the mechanical 
age were a challenge to the youth which they could meet only through 
training in the industrial skills. Besides high school graduates who 
were interested in technical work there were young people who posses¬ 
sed manual skills but had not the academic ability necessary to com¬ 
plete the courses of the senior high schools. Bor this reason the In¬ 
stitute established no rigid entrance requirements. In fact the only 
requirement was one of age which was set at sixteen years. There was 
no definite period within which a technical course must be completed. 

A student who could not afford to finish the required subjects might 
return at any time. Practical instruction was the keynote of the in¬ 
stitution. The establishment of the Institute of Technology and Art 
was really an affirmation of faith in the coming era of provincial de¬ 
velopment. 

The problem of the rehabilitation of returned soldiers had 
been a factor in the need for technical, instruction. In 1917 the 
Soldiers' Civil Re-establishment Board took over the Institute as a 






84 


training school for ex-soldiers. When the Dominion Government re¬ 
leased the building in 1920, D. W. Campbell, who had succeeded Dr. 

Miller as Provincial Director to Technical Education, became the head. 

By that time the pressing need to reserve the school entirely for re¬ 
turned soldiers had passed. 

In 1920, J* H. Ross, who later became principal of Calgary ! s 
first Technical High School, was appointed Acting-Principal of the In¬ 
stitute. In some ways, at this time, the Teclinical Institution was in 
an anomalous position as it lacked a permanent site. This was a serious 
handicap as in the East Calgary situation expansion was impossible. 

Even after the war ended the selection of a location still hung fire. 
There were four pioneer families who would have liked their property 
to be chosen. However, Premier Charles Stewart and the Minister of 
Education, the Hon. G-eorge P. Smith, insisted that the land be ample 
to house the Technical Institute and the Normal School in one building, 
and that it be at a convenient distance from the city. In the end the 
two provincial government officials decided on the E. H. Riley site, 

7 

110 acres in North-West Calgary at the price of $63,000. They ma.de the 
decision in the fall of 1921. The building, of brick with stone fac¬ 
ing, was ready for use for the fall term of 1922. Mr. Ross continued 
to direct the Technical and Art Departments until 1924. 

Dr. W. G. Carpenter left his position as Superintendent of 
Schools in Edmonton to accept the principalship of the Institute of 
Technology and Art in 1924. At the same time he also became Director 
of Technical Education for the province. Dr. Carpenter had had a wide 

7. Calgary Herald, November 26, 1921. 







85 


experience in educational affairs in Alterta since his arrival in the 
province in 1909• After two year's as science instructor at Central 
High School in Calgary, he had assumed a similar ^position on the staff 
of the Calgary Formal School. In 1912 he accepted the position of 
principal of the Victoria High School in Edmonton. Two years latter he 
became Superintendent of Schools in the capital city. He held his 
position as principal of the Technical Institute until his retirement 
in January, 19^. In August, 19^5* the retired principal died. Dur¬ 
ing the twenty years that he directed the affairs of the Institute a 
great expansion of technical education took place. There was, too, 
some further effort to acquire University recognition for some of the 
work of the Institute and the Normal School. 

When Dr. Carpenter came to Calgary to assume his duties at the 
Technical Institute, the Hon. Perren Baker, Minister of Education, 
visited the city in order to introduce the new principal. At the 
Board of Trade rooms a group of local businessmen gathered to meet Dr. 
Carpenter. At this time an effort was made on the part of citizens 
of Calgary to use the Technical Institution as a lever to gain conces¬ 
sions towards university status. ¥. M. Davidson .and Captain Robert 
Pearson, both members of the Provincial Legislature, gave their sup¬ 
port to the movement. They argued that the offering of advanced 
technical and applied science courses would add to the prestige of the 
Technical Institute generally. Also, in November, 1923> extension 
classes in such university subjects as Education and G-eneral Psychol¬ 
ogy had been offered at the Normal School to Calgary teachers. Re¬ 
quests came that more Arts courses be presented in this way. However, 
neither the Minister of Education nor Premier Herbert Greenfield 



86 


favored the Calgary proposals. They "based their opposition on the 
contention that elementary education was the chief concern of the Prov¬ 
incial Department of Education. The refusal was not entirely reason¬ 
able, nevertheless, as the Institute necessarily offered courses sim¬ 
ilar in content to some given "by the University. 

A year later, in 1925, the Department of Education conceded to 
the Institute the right to grant credits for such courses and provided 
for the standardization of certain subjects to that end. The Tech¬ 
nical Institute became affiliated with the University of Alberta and 
gained representation on the Senate of the latter institution. 

The popularity of the school continued to grow. In 1925 en¬ 
rolment was highest in the electrical courses. In 1928 the govern¬ 
ment comnleted a $50,000. extension in order to offer instruction in 

8 

the use and repair of farm machinery. The following year, 1929, the 
Institute rounded out the original plans for the school by adding an 
Art Department. A. C. Leighton, Member of the Royal Society of Brit¬ 
ish Artists and already well-known in the West for his mountain land¬ 
scapes in water color, became Director of the new department. In 
November, 1929, the class commenced with an enrolment of eight pupils. 
By March, 1930, the number had increased to fifty-eight. The Art 
branch of the Institute has continued to attract outstanding men as 
instructors, H. G. G-lyde and then J. W. G. MacDonald, formerly of the 
extension department of the University of British Columbia,, held the 
post in turn, to be succeeded in 19^7 by Illingworth H. Kerr, a Saska¬ 
tchewan artist. Since Mr. Kerr*s assumption of his duties, students 


8. Calgary Herald, May 25, 1926, 











87 


of the art classes have begun the task of decorating the walls of the 
Institute with murals depicting the life of Alberta pioneers* 

The syllabus for 1930 introduced among other new courses, 
those of the aeronautical department* This instruction was in keep¬ 
ing with technical developments in the world at large* In the coming 
air age a province which possessed large areas of fairly level land 
and whose remoteness could be overcome by air transportation would gain 
immensely from establishing such educational facilities* The inclus- 

9 

ive fee for the eight-months course was thirty-five dollars* In 1948 
the Calgary Institute was the only school of its kind licensed to 
overhaul aircraft and plane engines* Students taking the advanced 
course prepared for the examination for admission to the Associated 
Fellowship of the Royal Aeronautical Society* This gave a, standing 
equivalent to that obtained with a Bachelor of Science degree from the 
University. 

In 1940 the exigencies of war necessitated a temporary move 
for the Institute of Technology and Art and for the Formal School. 

The Royal Canadian Air Force took over the Forth Hill buildings for a 
wireless training school, which was a part of the British Commonwealth 
Air Training Plan. Dr. Carpenter and his staff put the school on a 
f, war footing 11 and made plans for the removal of tons of machinery and 
e<luipment to the grandstand at the Victoria Park Fair Grounds. Ply- 
board partitions, erected over-night, transformed the interior of the 
grandstand into a series of shops, lecture rooms, offices, and store 
room. Those engaged in art, dressmaking, and girls 1 work in general 

9* Calgary Herald, September 25, 1946. 





' 


88 


found temporary quarters in the old Coste home on Amherst Avenue. The 
Calgary School Board loaned King Edward Public School in South Cal¬ 
gary to house the Normal and Practice Schools during the war. 

Of these three temporary accommodations, the significant move 
was that of the Art Department to the Coste House. Eugene Coste, a 
pioneer in the discovery of natural. gas in Alberta, "built the house in 
1913. English architectural influences had not yet disappeared from 
the West, and Mr. Coste carried on the tradition of the Tudor style in 
brick and stone. Dr. Carpenter and Mr. Clyde saw in the spacious 
rooms and hallways the means to realize their hope of founding a com¬ 
munity art centre in Calgary. A beginning was made with the war-time 
use of the house. After the Institute returned home in 1946, the 
Coste House became known as the Allied Arts Centre, supported by an¬ 
nual membership fees, charges for instruction in the various branches 
of the fine arts, and the efforts of organized groups interested in 
this phase of Calgary’s cultural development. The opportunity to 
learn handicraft skills, music, dancing, and art has added appreci¬ 
ably to the educational facilities of the city. Members of the Tech¬ 
nical Institute staff made this possible through their foresight. 

When Dr. Carpenter retired as principal of the Institute in 
1944, James Powler (now Dr. Fowler) succeeded to the position. Dr. 
Fowler’s connection with scientific education was of long standing. 

A graduate of Edinburgh University, he came to Western Canada in 1913* 
From 1921 on, he was head of the Science Department of the Institute. 
In 1929 1 Dr. Fowler became vice-principal when J. H. Ross resigned. 

In 1949> when Dr. Fowler had been principal for five years, the prov¬ 
incial University honored him with the degree of Doctor of Lav/s. 







89 


Following the return of the Institute to its own premises in 
1946, the school has continued to grow. In the fall of that year 

I, 560 students registered, 922 in day classes, another 392 in evening 

10 

courses, and 246 as correspondence students. The year before the 

11 

total enrolment had been 1390. In 1946, a $100,000. provincial grant 

had made possible the purchase of equipment for a new machine shop 

12 

and the re-equipping of the old one. One of the hutments inherited 

from the R. C. A. F. provided separate accommodation for the work in 

carpentry and drafting. In 1949, a $40,000. paint and auto body re- 

13 

Pair shop was added to the technical facilities. Enrolment climbed to 

14 

2,003 in September, 1949. 

In the machine shops the work has ranged from the fashioning 
of simple ash trays to the rebuilding of intricate machines. Outside 
jobs for which the customer paid only the cost of materials have sup¬ 
plemented the work provided by the school. In an age characterized 
by increasing job Specialization, the founding of the Institute was 
an outstanding feature of educational development. In addition, its 
location in Calgary was largely due to persistent local demands for 
government-supported educational facilities beyond the grade school 
level. 

10. Twenty-eighth Annual Announcement, 1947-1948, P. 

II. Twenty-seventh Annual Announcement, 1946-194?, P. 104. 

12. Calgary Herald, March 5> 1946. 

13. Calgary Herald, October 24, 1949* 

14. Thirty-first Annual Announcement, 1950-1951, P* 10 6 . 







90 


On the other hand, the Normal School, housed in the west wing 
of the Institute since 1922, has grown up with the city. Teacher 
training has occupied a place in the local educational scene since 
1894. Like the Technical Institute, the Normal School is operated by 
the provincial Department of Education, hut local conditions have not 
influenced the older institution to the same extent. Its presence in 
Calgary was largely a matter of expediency from the beginning, hut the 
nature of the school has kept it a provincial institution rather than 
a municipal one. However, recent organic changes — it is now the 
Calgary Branch of the Faculty of Education -— have reawakened local 
interest in the \miversity question. 

The metamorphosis took place in 19^5 when teacher training be¬ 
came a-department of the provincial University. Dr. M. E. LaZerte, 

Dean of the 3Pa,culty of Education in Edmonton until his resignation in 
the spring of 1950, wa.s one of the leaders in the movement towards 
such a change. Recent curriculum trends have stressed the inculcation 
of habits of critical thinking above the mere acquisition of facts. 

New courses for elementary and senior pupils, or a changed approach to 
old courses, have necessitated the widening of the scope of the teach¬ 
er l s knowledge. Educationists in Canada and the United Stages have 
felt that teacher training should include studies in the liberal arts 
which were beyond the scope of the traditional Normal School course. 

The creation of the Faculty of Education has made it possible for would- 
be teachers to combine their own higher education with professional 
training. As Calgary possessed a Normal School, the city acquired a 
branch of the University as it were over-night. 

Calgary citizens were not slow to realize the possibilities 









91 


implicit in the change. In 19^5 a group of people organized a com¬ 
mittee to press, once more, for the establishment of a university in 
Calgary. Severed, of them had approached Dr. F. G-. Buchanan, Superin¬ 
tendent of Schools, and Mr. W. F. Beid, Chairman of the School Board, 
and urged upon them that the time was ripe to carry on negotiations 
to that end with the provincial government. Five hundred people at¬ 
tended the general meeting held in Western Canada High School audit¬ 
orium. The results of the meeting were a resolution requesting the 
government to establish a university in the city, and the appointment 
of a committee to carry on an active campaign. The group chose Mr. 

Beid as chairman, and Mr. G-. B. G-ell, Secretary-Treasurer of the Cal¬ 
gary School Board, as secretary. 

Although no regular monthly meetings have taken place, the com¬ 
mittee has carried on its work of waiting upon members of the Prov¬ 
incial Cabinet and urging its cause. Some twenty local organizations 
have supported the endeavor by sending representatives to the special 
and annual meetings. Service clubs, Property Owners * Associations, 
the University Women's Club, and the Burses* Alumni have helped to 
show that the project has strong support. Bor have the committee*s 
activities been fruitless. The Department of Education enlarged the 
teacher training program offered in Calgary under the Faculty of Edu¬ 
cation to include the two-year as well as the one-yea,r course. They 
have also added first year Arts and Science courses for those working 
toward.s a Bachelor of Education degree. The committee has expressed 
a. desire that this be extended to include the second year. At a 
meeting in November, 1950, the group made arrangements to lease 200 
acres of land in the extreme north-west section of the city as a site 



92 


for a future "branch of the University of Alberta. 

Such plans may suggest an overly-optimistic outlook. However, 
two factors would tend to indicate a successful outcome. The Calgary 
University committee has included only modest and apparently reason¬ 
able demands in its objectives. They have not asked for the estab¬ 
lishment of faculties which would involve the purchase of expensive 
equipment on a large scale such as that for medical, dental, or engin¬ 
eering departments. Rather, they have urged the inauguration of 
facilities which would make possible the attainment of degrees in such 
branches as Arts and Science, Commerce, and Education. Besides, the 
Board of Governors of the University ofrAlberta has shown its approval 
by setting up a fact-finding committee to examine the claims of the 
Calgary group. The latter presented a brief to representatives of 
the University at the meeting held in November, 1950. The next move 
made was to arrange for Mr. Reid to visit Edmonton to obtain informa¬ 
tion about the number of University students from Calgary and the 
southern part of the province in relation to those from the Edmonton 
region. A fact to be noted in this connection is that the Edmonton 
enrolment has grown to the point where an extension of existing 
facilities is needed. The unwillingness of the Cabinet members to 
sanction any duplication of expense has been the chief stumbling block 
in the way of success® In the long run, it may be no more expensive 
to extend facilities in Calgary than in Edmonton. The existence of 
the Mount Royal Junior College need not be an insurmountable barrier, 
as an amalgamation could probably be effected. The progress already 
made in the enlargement of the Faculty of Education in Calgary has ac¬ 
ted as a spur to the committee in continuing its efforts. The old 




93 




dream has certainly come nearer to realization in 1950 than ever 


oeiore< 








































- 

. 















CHAPTER VI 


THE SCHOOL BOARD AND THE STAFF 


Until 1893 the School Board had been feeling its way. Dur¬ 
ing the preceding year a court case which was decided against the 
hoard, and other unpleasant if less costly incidents, led to a great¬ 
er degree of organization. The division of the Board into committees 
and the arrangement for regular monthly meetings produced a feeling 
of competence and efficiency. 

In 1893> when Calgary obtained a city charter, the school sys¬ 
tem still was small. The School Board minutes for August of the fol¬ 
lowing year contained for the first time a full statement of assets 
as follows: 

Heal estate owned by the School District: 

Lots 7 - 14 and 27 - 34 Block 23 (Central) $ 4,200.00 

Lots 1 - 15 and 26 - 34 Block 101 (South Ward) 6,050.00 

Lots 30 - 35 Block 6 (East Ward) 600.00 


$10,850.00 


Buildings owned by the School Districts: 


Central 

$10,000.00 

South Ward 

2,000.00 

East Ward 

1.000.00 

Equipment; 

$13,000.00 

Central 

$ 1,100.00 

East Ward 

200.00 

South Ward 

2QQ.QQ 


$ 1 , 500.00 


1. Calgary School Board Records, August, 1894. 










95 


The school tax rate for that year was set at four mills on the dollar. 

2 

The enrolment was 533; the number of teachers employed was ten. In 
January, 1895, "the School Board calculated its first annual estimate 
which was for the sum of $13,310.43* It set the demand on the city 

3 

at $9,000.00. 

Since those years the Calgary Public Schools have grown to be 

a very large system. In 1949 there were fifty-eight school buildings 

for a total enrolment of 15,089 children. There were 501 teachers in 

the employment of the School Board. Capital assets had increased to 

$3,925,698.20. Total expenditures that year reached the sum of 

4 

$2,407,083*28. The levy upon the city amounted to $2,117,765.00. 

5 

This was raised by a school mill rate of 31*52 mills on the dollar. 
This tremendous growth has been gradual and has been accompanied by 
many other developments. 

Ever since the building of the original Central School, the 
School Board has been a property owner. Prom time to time the Board 
has purchased land from the city as the building program required it. 
The price has varied with the size and location of the property. 

After the depression of the thirties the School Board bought parcels 
of real estate for sums equal to arrears in taxes. In 1946 the City 
of Calgary instituted a new system whereby the Board made a token pay¬ 
ment of one dollar regardless of the size or value of the allotment. 

2. Calgary School Board Records, December, 1894. 

3* Calgary School Board Records, January, 1895* 

4. Calgary School Board Annual Report, 1949. 

5. Calgary Municipal Manual, 1949, P. 84. 





96 


To arrive at this common sense arrangement has simply required time. 

The School Board Offices, the business centre of the School 
District, developed from quite an insignificant beginning. From 
January, 1892, the trustees used the library in the Central School 
as a Board Room. Dr. A. M. Scott, the first Superintendent of Schools 
had an office in the same building. In September, 1906, when he had 
been on duty for a month, the Board authorized the purchase of a type¬ 
writer for his use. They also had a telephone extension installed in 
the Superintendent’s bedroom where he dispatched the business con¬ 
nected with calls for substitute teachers of whom there were only four 
In those early days Dr. Scott not only visited schoolrooms and acted 
as good-will representative of the Calgary schools, but he decided on 
styles and designs of new equipment and inspected damage to property 
before repair men were called in. 

However, in 1910 a separate department was established to be 
in charge of the erection and maintenance of school buildings and 
equipment. The first Building Superintendent was Hugh McClelland. 
William A. Branton, the present head of the department, became Assist¬ 
ant Building Superintendent in 1911 and succeeded to his present 
position in 1919* When Mr. Branton was first an employee of the 
Board, his department had no other permanent employees. The Build¬ 
ing Department hired carpenters, plumbers, and other workmen when 
there was work to be done. Although extra men are still employed for 
seasonal work, this Department has increased its personnel to ten men 
who are busy all year round keeping buildings and equipment in good 
repair. Close co-operation between the Superintendent of the Building 
Department and the Superintendent of Schools has helped to give the 


' r - > 








" 














97 


children of Calgary the advantages of well-planned schools. The Board 
did its share in providing the opportunity for the two department 
heads to visit other educational centres before new building programs 
were embarked upon. Dr. Buchanan and Mr. Branton made such a tour of 
inspection of modern school buildings in British Columbia and the West¬ 
ern United States in the summer of 19^8. 

It was not until May, 1911* that the School Board Offices were 
really organized when they obtained more commodious quarters in the 
City Hall. During the years of World War 1, temporary accommodation 
was found in the Douglas Block on Eighth Avenue and Third Street 
West. Then in 1935 when the City and School Board Medical Depart¬ 
ments amalgamated, the School Board acquired the east side of the 
ground floor of McDougall School for its purposes. Miss Edith Mc¬ 
Lean, the senior member of the office staff, entered the employ of 
the School Board in 1922. At that time there were four secretaries 
and stenographers in all. The growth of office personnel was not 
noticeably rapid until 1945. This was partly because of straitened 
financial circumstances during the depression, followed by difficulty 
in obtaining competent office workers during the years of World War 
11. Since 1945 the number of office employees has risen to seventeen, 
six of whom care for the increased clerical work of the Junior and 
Senior High Schools. 

In I 896 the Board first adopted a regular salary schedule for 
teachers. Although actual figures then differed widely from 1950 
salaries, the principle followed in establishing a sliding scale has 
changed very little. Gradations were based on experience and position 
which, with the inclusion of qualifications, wan still the case in the 





98 


"basic salary schedule proposed and accepted for September, 19^7. 
Although the Calgary Council of Alberta Teachers' Association ap¬ 
proached the Board in 19^8 to have the positional difference paid to 
junior and senior high school teachers removed, the trustees did not 
favor such a change. 

On the whole, relations between the School Board and the teach¬ 
ing staff have been traditionally good. In 1920, however, feeling ran 
high over the question of salaries. On that occasion the Board was 
disposed to stand firmly against the requested increase. The teach¬ 
ing personnel threatened to go on strike. Although the strike did 
not materialize, the teachers gained a part of their objective. 

Again, during the depression of the 'thirties good relations were 
strained because of repeated salary cuts. The teachers based their 
case on two arguments. The first was that, even though salary re¬ 
ductions did not lower annual payments appreciably below the 1929 
level, that level had been inordinately low when considered from the 
viewpoint of pay for comparable work in prosperous times. They also 
maintained that other ways of curtailing expenditures should be con¬ 
sidered along with salary cuts. The Board effected a compromise by 
abolishing Cadet training in the schools (not entirely for the pur¬ 
pose of reducing expenditures) and discontinuing Manual Training and 
Household Economics in the senior high school grades. It also re¬ 
duced the work done by the School Dental Clinic. In addition to a 
sliding scale of salary reductions the teaching body then agreed to 
forego a month's salary in 1933» The Board closed the schools for a 
three-month period, June 16 to September 18, instead of the usual two. 

A new salary schedule offered by the Calgary School Board for Sept- 




99 


ember, 1935, did not actually go into effect until January, 1936, as 
monthly reductions continued until then. The Board and its employees 
thus weathered the depression without the temporary ill-feeling de¬ 
generating into bitterness. 

Indeed, the School Board has treated those in its employ in 
a liberal fashion quite in keeping with modern ideas of social re¬ 
sponsibility. In accordance with the regulations of the Alberta 
School Act, the authorities have made it a practice to allow teachers 
sick leave with pay for twenty school days a year. Naturally many 
teachers did not need to avail themselves of this privilege. The 
Board recognized the mutual benefit of such savings, and in 1932 made 
sick pay cumulative, the new provision being retroactive to January 
1, 1927. Again, before the Alberta Teachers 5 Association introduced 
its pension scheme, the Board granted a pension allowance of fifty 
dollars a month for three years, and also lowered the retirement age 
from seventy to sixty-five for those teachers who desired or needed 
such an adjustment. In November, 1937^the Board reduced the retire¬ 
ment age of women teachers by another five years, and increased to 
forty-eight the number of months for receiving post-retirement pay. 
These changes were to go into effect January 1 , 1933. Since 1938, 
the School Board has given its co-operation to facilitate the opera¬ 
tion of a group health insurance scheme offered to the teachers by a 
life insurance company. The office has deducted the necessary monthly 
payments for approximately seventy-five per cent of the teaching staff. 
In 1938 the School Board also adopted the practice of granting sab¬ 
batical leave to teachers who had been on the staff for twelve years. 

At first the monthly payment to such teachers was related to the 




100 


salaries of those availing themselves of the privilege. Since 19^5 
the Board has paid all teachers on sabbatical leave one hundred dol¬ 
lars a month. Each year from six to ten teachers have been enabled 
to use this time to pursue their studies, to recuperate from illness, 
or to travel. The results measured in terms of renewed vigor and en¬ 
thusiasm and in good-will have been appreciable. 

School Board concern for the health of the pupils started as 
early as 1912 when the first school nurse, Miss S. Cruikshanks, was 
engaged. At the same time the school authorities appointed Dr. T. G. 
MacDonald and Dr. Evelyn Windsor as School Medical Physicians. Rout¬ 
ine examinations and treatment of minor ailments and injuries con¬ 
stituted the work of the new Medical Department, which had no office 
but visited each school in turn. However, the staff of three soon 
proved inadequate, and the Board increased the number of school nurses 
to five in December, 1913* Unfortunately, the depression and unsettled 
times resulted in a cessation of these activities early in 191^» 

During the war years the physical fitness of men registering 
for enlistment came in for a good deal of publicity. Interest broad¬ 
ened to include the health of the nation at large. Governmental 
authorities realized that health standards could be raised only through 
public schemes, either national or local. In March, 1915> the City of 
Calgary, through the School Board, assumed a large measure of respon¬ 
sibility for the health of the school children. The Medical In¬ 
spection Department, organized by Dr. Evelyn Windsor, included a Dent¬ 
al Laboratory and an Eye, Ear, Hose, and Throat Clinic. Cases re¬ 
ferred to the department received treatment the cost of which was 
covered by an allocation from the city taxes. The City Hall housed 






101 


the Medical Department. As the Clinic widened its scope and as the 
school population grew, the city fathers continued to allot more space 
for the work. When Dr. Windsor went overseas at the end of 1915, Dr. 
Geraldine Oakley became head of the Health Department. When the City 
and School Health Departments joined forces in 1935* Dr. Oakley ac¬ 
cepted the position of Assistant Medical Health Officer for the City 
of Calgary. Her dteath occurred in 19^8 while she was still in office. 
While Dr. Oakley was in charge, visiting health officers from other 
cities spoke highly of the School Clinic here. 

As with other departments of the Public School system, periods 

of expansion of the Medical Department have alternated with those of 
curtailment. In 1933> when the depression in the West was at its low¬ 
est, the Dental Clinic reduced its services. The expense continued to 
weigh heavily upon the School Board, but it was felt that more drastic 
reductions would be more costly in the long run. At that time, the 
City Health Department operated a Pre-school Clinic which entailed 
some duplication of office work and personnel. Consequently, on May 
1, 1935, the City and School Health Departments amalgamated. 

The phenomenal post-war increase in school attendance has 
necessitated some further changes. The Dental Clinic which previously 
attended to children until they left the Junior High School (Grade IX) 
has confined its services to those in Grades 1 to 7111. However, 
the Medical Clinic has continued its practice of examining each 
school child once every three years. School nurses have supplemented 
this service by reporting for examination any child in need of im¬ 
mediate attention. Since World War 11, the problem of meeting the 
cost of expansion has been no more difficult than that of finding 
trained personnel for the work. The School Board, at all 








102 


times, has kept in close touch with the City Health Department 
through members appointed as representatives on a joint Board. 

There are at least three other special services supplied by 
the Board which have grown with the school system. Although some 
children might disagree, the work of the Attendance Officer must be 
included among these three. R. L. Barker held the position for 
thirty years from 1905 to 1935* His first position with the School 
Board was as drill instructor in 1898. For the next seven years Mr. 
Barker*s duties multiplied until he was fulfilling those of drill in¬ 
structor, janitor at the Central School, and attendance officer. By 
1905 the latter position occupied all his time in school hours. In 
those days the truant officer was a young and handsome man, but many 
people today remember him only as a man with white hair and piercing 
eyes in a weather-beaten face, before whose quiet voice and maimer 
the most audacious truant quailed. Mr. Alan Munroe, who holds the 
post at present, has a similar presence to that of Mr. Barker. Since 
the introduction of this office attendance percentages have never 
dropped as low as the fifty per cent which characterized the early 
1890*s. 

The physical education of Calgary school children has also 
undergone many changes through the years. When Mr. Barker was drill 
instructor the training for the boys was purely military, and was 
really an extra-curricular activity. Captain A. H. Ferguson, who 
came into the employ of the Calgary School Board in September, 1910 , 
carried on Cadet Training for the boys. The following year, 1911 # 
physical training became a part of the curriculum with a regular time 
devoted to it. Then Captain Ferguson supervised such work for the 
girls as well. The physical training supervisor, as he was called 





103 


was a tall fine man of a distinctly military "bearing. A Scotsman who 
had seen service in India and South Africa as a ’’soldier of the Queen”, 
Captain Ferguson came to Canada after his retirement from the British 
Army. Although he quickly won the respect of hoys and girls alike, 
he also soon earned the nickname of ’’Fergy”, which remained with him 
during the thirty-four years of his service with the Calgary School 
Board. During those years physical training assistants came and went 
hut Captain Ferguson was always there to give the work continuity. 

Until Cadet Training disappeared from the schools in 1931 > he did ex¬ 
cellent work in teaching the hoys rifle shooting. He was prominent 
in city sports, and promoted hockey, football, and soccer in the 
schools. From his first year in Calgary, Captain Ferguson was con¬ 
nected with the annual Herald Road Race. ”Fergy” died while he was 
still Physical Training Supervisor in 19^-. 

Although Captain Ferguson changed hut little during his long 
years of service in Calgary, physical training was undergoing a great 
change. Educationists who studied children engaged in physical 
activities were discovering that concomitant lessons, such as fair 
play and co-operation, were acquired along with skill in games. 

Fnysical Education replaced the old P. T., and curriculum builders 
increased the time allotted to such work. The Calgary School Board 
appointed Ward Steckle, a graduate of Brigham Young University who 
had majored in Physical Education, to succeed Captain Ferguson. Mr. 
Steckle, a young man whose skill and agility the hoys and girls ad¬ 
mire, has introduced a modern program of physical education into the 
Calgary Public Schools. 

Provision for the teaching and supervision of music in the 




104 


schools has heen an important feature of School Board policy. Al¬ 
though the august Professor Fenwick had taken some trouble to estab¬ 
lish himself as music teacher for the Calgary schools, he soon left 
the position and Calgary in the summer of 1893* The post then remained 

vacant until 1903 when Mrs. Hedwick Booth was engaged at a salary of 

6 

$600^ per year. The Board appointed Miss Edith A. Comben, again as 
music teacher, in January, 1908, following Mrs. Booths resignation 
the previous December. The outbreak of World War 1 saw the curtail¬ 
ment of several special departments,one of which was music. In fact, 
the music department ceased to exist from 191 ^- to 1918, apart from the 
work carried on by classroom teachers. Then Dr. J. E. Hodgson filled 

7 

the position of music supervisor at a salary of $2,700. per annum. 

By this time the total number of teachers employed by the School Board 

was 255 so that the work of the music department had changed to that 

8 

of supervision rather than teaching. There- was another interregnum 
in the music department between 1923 and 1926 when times were diffi¬ 
cult and money was scarce. In 1926 Mr. H. S. Hinton assumed the 
position. Mr. Hinton, in carrying out his supervisory duties, institu¬ 
ted the custom of the School Music Demonstrations. These were held 
annually on a non-competitive basis and have given pleasure to hundreds 
of Calgarians as well as to the participants. After Mr. Hinton*s 
resignation in June, 1950, the Board accepted the application of Mr. 
Cyril S. Mossop to fill the vacancy. The latter is also organist and 
choirmaster at Knox United Church, and was director of the Conservatory 

6. Calgary School Board Records, June, 1903* 

7. Calgary School Board Records, September, 1918. 

8. Calgary School Board, Annual Report, 19^9, P* 3^* 











105 


of Music at Mount Royal College. The successful operation of this 
special department has depended to a large extent on the work of 
classroom teachers. 

Changes in the office of Superintendent of Schools may also 

he regarded as a barometer of the times. In 1906, when Dr. A. M. 

Scott assumed his duties, there were thirty-four teachers and 1,593 
9 

pupils. There was hardly a phase of school life or business about 
which Dr. Scott was not consulted. Even when the School Board Offices 
became an institution in 1911> Dr. Scott continued to attend to the 
posting of substitute teachers for another two and one-half years. 

With the economic boom at its height in 1913* the Board saw fit to 
appoint an assistant to the Superintendent, J. A. Smith, who was pre¬ 
viously principal of Central High School in Calgary. The School 
Board even marked this period of affluence by engaging a chauffeur to 
drive Dr. Scotty car. However, these last two innovations disap¬ 
peared in October, 191^, when the School Board felt obliged to re¬ 
duce its services with the outbreak of World War 1. 

The next assistant superintendent, l¥ank 0. Buchanan, M. A., 
received his appointment in 1929* Dr. Buchanan has the distinction 
of being a pioneer as his father, a Methodist minister, brought his 
family to Calgary in 189^. The former also taught in the schools 
which he later came to supervise, first as principal of Victoria 
School, then as classical master at Central High School. The Depart¬ 
ment of Education appointed Dr. Buchanan as a school inspector in 
1913* For the last seven years before he became assistant superin- 


9. Calgary School Board Annual Report, 19^9> 3^ 
















■ 














• 

. 




' Y ' " ' 


■ ' ■ . ■ ' 


' 









. 


. 

' 

- 






" 








: ' ' ■ ••• 







DR. A. M. SCOTT 





DR. F. Q.&UC HAN AN 
















10 6 


tendent his inspectorate was the Calgary district. Character, train¬ 
ing, and experience all fitted him for the position of Superintendent 
of Schools which he accepted itfhen Dr. Scott retired in June, 1935* 

At its fall Convocation in 19^7> the University of Alberta honored Dr. 
Buchanan with the degree of Doctor of Laws. For the occasion the 
teachers and Public School trustees of Calgary presented the Superin¬ 
tendent with a red and white gown. Miss Isabel Breckon, Vice-Presi¬ 
dent of the Calgary Council of the Alberta Teachers 1 Association, who 
presented the gift expressed the opinion and sentiment of the group in 
these words, H Br. Buchanan has at all times shown a genuine interest 

in the welfare of the students, and a sincere understanding of the 
10 

problems of teachers”. 

For seven years after Dr. Scott’s retirement Dr. Buchanan 

carried the burden of supervision without assistance. Then, in 1942, 

when the school enrolment had reached 13*324, the Board appointed 

11 

L. A. Daniels, B. A., as assistant. Mr. Daniels has supervised the 
work of the elementary grades since that time. With Dr. Buchanan’s 
retirement approaching, a new assistant, Mr. Robert Warren, M. A., 
also a former Provincial School Inspector, was named to the admini¬ 
strative staff in September, 1950. Thus the School Board has followed 
a consistent policy of giving an opportunity for the one who holds the 
chief administrative post to become well acquainted with the duties 
before assuming the sole responsibility for their discharge. 

Throughout the years, indeed, a deep sense of responsibility 

10. Calgary Herald, October 7, 19^7* 

11. Calgary School Board Annual Report, 19^9> 34. 










I 








. 


'V 






107 


towards the community lias actuated the Board at all times. No "better 
proof of this can he found than in the provision of educational 
facilities through night classes for both youths and adults. In 1911# 
interest in technical education resulted in the beginning of evening 
instruction in handicrafts under T. B. Kidner, Director of Technical 
Education for the Public Schools. At the same time, with many non- 
English-speaking immigrants attracted to Calgary, the School Board 
hastened to organize classes for their Instruction in English, Canadi¬ 
an history, and citizenship. The discontinuance of all night school 
work marked the outbreak of war in 191'^, but that has been the only 
inactive period of the evening school institution. Since World War 
11 a minor influx of displaced persons has again resulted in efforts 
on the part of the School Board to aid in their assimilation. Statis¬ 
tics for December, 19^9# showed that the night school facilities have 
been designed to cater to a wide variety of needs and interests. 


Courses Enrolment 

Grade XI1 Academic (maximum of three subjects) 56 

English and Citizenship (displaced persons) 1^9 

Public Speaking and Economics (Labor groups) 19 

Typing and Shorthand 72 

Teclinical (woodwork, sewing, leathercraft) 155 

12 


The total staff in that year was twenty-one and the enrolment ^51* 
Much has been said here of the School Board as an entity, 
little of the individuals who have composed it. The membership of 
this body, in number and personnel, has been subject to many changes 

12. Calgary School Board Annual Report, 19^9# P* 21. 














■ 








- 


) 









108 


during the years. When Calgary Public School District, No. 19, was 
organized in 1885, there were three members, one of whom acted as 

secretary-treasurer. In 1890 the Provincial Legislature granted per¬ 

mission for the number of trustees to be increased from three to five. 
This request came from the School Board in 1889, as they felt that 
their small number not only excluded capable men from such service, 
but also militated against any specialization of function within the 
Board. It was not until 1892 that the position of secretary-treasurer 
was no longer synonymous with that of trustee. That year the trials 
which the Board underwent pointed the way to a fairly high degree of 
differentiation of duties so that in 1893 committees for Property and 

Supplies, Finance, Buildings, and School Management were set up. The 

appointment of a permanent secretary-treasurer did not take place un¬ 
til September, 1911, when A. T. Jewett assumed the position at an an- 

13 

nual salary of $1,200* In 1915, with a city population of nearly 
56,000 and a school enrolment of 8,002, the Board was enlarged to 

14 

seven members. 

Until 1914 the Board had no women members. Miss Annie Foote, 
who taught in Calgary from 1893 until her retirement in 1913, became 
the first woman member of the Calgary School Board. Various women*s 
organizations in the city worked for the passage of a bill in the 
Provincial Legislature to make this possible. Miss Foote was a Public 
School trustee from 1914 to 1917* In recent years Miss Jennie Elliott, 
after retiring as a teacher from the Central High School staff, served 

13* Calgary School Board Records, September, 1911* 

14. Calgary School Board Annual Report, 1949, 3^* 











I 






109 


as trustee for three terms from 19*^ to 19^9» Miss Amelia Turner, 
prominent in the local Labor movement, was chairman of the Board in 
193^. At present three of the seven Board members are women, Mrs. 
Nettie Mowers, Mrs. M. A. Hart, and Mrs. E. P. Scarlett. 

Throughout the years many public-spirited citizens have served 
the community as members of the School Board. The school system in 
every phase of its growth has testified to the earnestness and success 
of their endeavor. Business and professional people and housewives 
have shared in representing the citizens of Calgary in the capacity 
of trustee. Among these Clifford Jones, Thorns Underwood, Dr. George 
Kerby, W. M. Davidson, J. T. Shaw, Dr. W. E. Spankie, Mrs. William 
Carson, and W. F. He id are only a few of the names which are recalled 
with respect and gratitude by Calgarians. Some gave ungrudgingly of 
their services over a long period of time. Col. James Walker who was 
the moving spirit behind the organization of the first Calgary School 
was trustee for twelve years, during four of which he was also chair¬ 
man. Mr. James Short*3 record of service has already been mentioned. 
The present members of the Board are P. P. C. Haigh, Chairman, Mrs. 

E. P. Scarlett, Mrs. N. Mowers, S. J. H el man, Mrs. M. A. Hart, A. 
Edwards, and Dr. F. S. Morley. 

Citizens have also shown their interest in the school children 
in other ways. Patrick Burns and Viscount H. B. Bennett both institu¬ 
ted scholarship funds which have helped many Calgary students to con¬ 
tinue their education beyond the high school grades. 

As the school system has grown there has naturally been an in¬ 
crease in the number of permanent employees of the School Board. 

Since 1911 the position of secretary-treasurer has been one of the 


















Q 






no 


most important of these. Mr. G-. R. G-ell has held this post since 1942. 
His connection with the Board, however, "began in 1915 when he was en¬ 
gaged as accountant. In 1949 the total number of permanent employees 
was 612 . The number of janitors has gradually increased to seventy- 
five. The remainder of the non-teaching employees numbered forty-three, 

15 

leaving a teaching staff of 494 members. 

To the large army of men and women who have taught school in 
Calgary the tribute of % job well done” should be paid. Individually 
it would be impossible to do them justice. As a group, their work 
speaks for them. Long records of service have been the rule rather 
than the exception for teaching in the Calgary Public Schools has had, 
and continues to have, many advantages. The senior member of the teach¬ 
ing staff, Miss Uspeth E. Cook of Connaught School, has been with the 
School Board since 1905* Since 1933 a considerable roster of the names 
of those noted for their length of service could be made. Such a list 
would include L. F. Harrop, Miss Rachel Coutts, Miss E. Martin, Miss 
M. J. Campbell, S. C. Stood!ey, T. E. A. Stanley, Miss A. Rath, Dr. J. 

M. Hutchinson, Miss Annie Campbell, W. H. Poster and C. E. Leppard. 

Many Calgary teachers have distinguished themselves beyond 
their own sphere as well as in it. Their contributions in the poli¬ 
tical field have ranged from the local to the national scene. Miss 
Edith Patterson was a city alderman for five years between 192? and 
1932. Mr. William Aberhart, principal of Crescent Heights High School 
from 1915 to 1935, was the originator of the Social Credit Movement in 
Alberta and provincial Premier and Minister of Education from 1935 "un¬ 
til his death in May, 1943* Douglas Harkness, Member of the Dominion 


15. Calgary School Board Annual Report, 1949, 32 





























■ 




■ ■ 


























. 
































Ill 


Parliament since 19^5> was formerly a teacher at Crescent Heights 
High School. A member of the Western Canada High School Staff, P. H. I?* 
Morrison, has been an alderman on the municipal council since 1946. 

Mr. Fred Parker, retired principal of Earl Grey School, is now serv¬ 
ing as a member of the city council for the second consecutive term. 

Calgary teachers have also played a prominent part in the 
chievement of professional organization in Alberta. Before 1917 the 
Department of Education was a paternalistic group whose officials pre¬ 
sided over the spring and fall teachers 5 conventions as well as ad¬ 
ministering the School Act in all its ramifications. Those attending 
a convention listened respectfully to speakers and presented petitions 
which were usually forgotten as there was no continuity of business 
from one meeting to the next. However, before the close of the Easter 
Convention which took place in Calgary in 1917> the teachers took steps 
which resulted in the formation of the Alberta Teachers 1 Alliance. 

The meeting appointed G. D. Misener of Edmonton as acting 
president and C. E. Leppard, Principal of Ramsay School in Calgary, as 
vice-president. The former prevailed upon John W. Barnett to act as 
general secretary-treasurer of the new organization. Even then the 
hardest work lay ahead. Many teachers required persuasion to become 
members. However, Calgary was one of the four city locals organized 
during the first year. In 193^> when William Aberhart was Minister of 
Education, the passage of the Teaching Profession Act made membership 
in the Alberta Teachers 1 Association compulsory. F. J. C. Seymour, 
Tice-principal of Rideau Park Junior High School in Calgary, has oc¬ 
cupied the position of president of the provincial organization since 

19 ^ 9 . 




112 


Another movement with whose origins Calgary teachers have been 
concerned was the Parent-Teachers or Home and School Association. In 
the fall of 1913 Miss M. R. Willetts, a primary teacher on the staff 
of Connaught School, returned from a holiday in Brantford, Ontario 
where she had observed the activities of a local Mothers* Club. She 
was keenly interested in the possibilities of such a means for pro¬ 
moting co-operation between the home and the school. With the support 
of the principal, Mr. L. H. Luck, whom she later married, Miss Willetts 
was instrumental in organizing a Mothers’ Club in Connaught School. 

In January, 1914, following the lead of London, Ontario and other East¬ 
ern Canadian cities, the Connaught group became a Home and School As¬ 
sociation under the presidency of Mrs. A. M. Curtis whose children at¬ 
tended the school. 

Mrs. Curtis, a former teacher, then gave her assistance to 
other city schools in the formation of similar* groups. Between the 
years 1923 and 1931 she was a member of the Calgary teaching staff, 
during which time she carried on her Home and School Association 
activities. The movement, as yet stronger in the East than in the 
West, developed a National Federation. When Dr. C. W. Kerby, Principal 
of Mount Royal College, became president of the National body in 1927, 
there was no provincial organization of the kind in Alberta, to sup¬ 
port him. He therefore asked Mrs. Curtis to extend her organizing 
activities in that direction. The Alberta Federation of Home and School 
Associations became an accomplished fact in 1929 under the aegis of 
Calgary teachers. 

Recent contributions of Calgary teachers in the educational 
field have included the work of curriculum building. In 19^5 Mr. 






















































113 


Morrison L. Watts,Principal of Colonel Walker Junior High School in 
Calgary, received the appointment of Director of Curriculum under the 
Department of Education* One of his first tasks was an evaluation of 
the junior high school program, introduced in 1935* and plans for its 
revision. Previously, Department of Education members such as inspect¬ 
ors and Hormal School instructors were in charge of this work. Since 
19^5 the Director of Curriculum ha,s asked teachers to take part in the 
revision of courses. A number of Calgary teachers have been active on 
curriculum committees. Mr. Hugh Bryan, Principal of Balmoral Junior 
High School and Orville Kirk of the Colonel Walker Junior High staff 
have helped to compose a handbook for intermediate grades in the pro¬ 
vince. Dr.H. Miller of Connaught School contributed to the new sci¬ 
ence course for the same grades. At the same time, Mr* John Bryne, 
now of Western Canada High School, Mr. Wallace Harper of the Univer¬ 
sity Demonstration School, Mr. Floyd Wilcox and Miss Phyllis Weston, 
both teaching at Balmoral Junior High, have been largely responsible 
for a revised Social Studies program and the integration of that work 
with the language courses for Grades Vll to IX. Teachers and depart¬ 
mental officials have so far found this new approach to curriculum 
building satisfactory. 

In connection with French, one of the optional or exploratory 
courses of the high school programs, Calgary teachers have made a very 
significant contribution. The revision of the Alberta school curricu¬ 
lum begun in 1935 did not reach the Grade Xll level until 19*K)* In 
the intervening years there was a growing conviction among the teachers 
of French in Calgary schools that if they didn ! t improve their com¬ 
petence in speaking the language, there was little use in pressing for 








improvements in the course which would involve more time spent on oral 
work. In 1937 the French teachers, with that end in view, organized 
the Calgary Association of teachers of French. Miss Catherine Barclay, 
one of the group, asked the School Board for leave of absence for a, 
year to go to Paris where she pursued h£T study of the language as one 
of a group organized by Professor Alfred L. Cru, the head of the 
French Department of the Teachers 1 College at Columbia University, 

New York. Another Calgary teacher, Miss Mary Clark, did similar work 
at the University of Paris in the summer of 1938* The French 
Teachers* Association then felt ready for action. 

In 1939 the group asked Miss Barclay to write to Professor 
Cru and invite him to come to Western Canada in 19^K) to conduct a sum¬ 
mer course in Oral French for teachers. Twenty Alberta teachers prom¬ 
ised to attend the course and to share the expenses. As yet they had 
no location for the summer session. The presence of the University 
School of Fine Arts in the town of Banff prompted the group to seek a 
solution to their problems in that direction. They made arrangements 
for board and room accommodation at the Y. W. C. A. and in private 
houses respectively. Then Mr. Donald Cameron, Director of the Banff 
School of Fine Arts, offered a room in the school for lecture purposes. 

Thus, Professor Cru conducted the first summer session in 
French at the Banff School in 1940. For three years the Calgary group 
was solely responsible for the arrangements. In 19^3 the University 
of Alberta took over the administrative work connected with the course. 
Three years later the University assumed complete responsibility on 
the understanding that the Calgary group would continue to act in an 
advisory capacity. One of the duties of the Calgary Association of 



.' - 



t 





















115 


French Teachers has been connected with the enrolment in the course. 
They have been charged with keeping the numbers from growing beyond 
what the staff can care for. Individual members of the Calgary As¬ 
sociation have also helped local students to attend the Sumner School 
by offering them financial aid. 

In 19^0 the Calgary Council of the Alberta Teachers 8 Associ¬ 
ation also became interested in the place of the French language on 
the curriculum. They felt that prospective teachers with a special 
aptitude for the language should be given some incentive to pursue its 
study further. Therefore, the Calgary Council organized a Student Ex¬ 
change Committee with Miss C. Barclay as convenor. Each year the Com¬ 
mittee has arranged for one Calgary student to spend the summer in 
Quebec studying French. Financial assistance has come from the Cal¬ 
gary Cercle Francais and the French Teachers 8 Association. Although 
$ 3 

it was not a genuine exchange as It did not operate mutually, two 
students from Quebec did come to the West in 19^9 and one in 1950. 

The Committee is at present engaged in improving arrangements to facil¬ 
itate the mutual operation of the scheme. 

One of the major aspects of School Board business has been the 
financing of the Public School system. Apart from the provincial 
grant, amounting to an average of 6.39 per cent of total expenditures 
between 1920 and 19 ^ 5 , the municipal property tax has provided the 
necessary funds. The demand upon the city has naturally increased as 
the school system has expanded. However, a comparison of the school 
mill rate with the total levy on real property points to conclusions 
worthy of study. 




116 


Year 

Total Mill Rate 

School Mill Rate 

1 

1885 

10 

4 

28.57 

1892 

13 

2 

11.11 

1896 

20 

6 

30 

1905 

22 

7.5 

34.09 

19x3 

18.75 

3.03 

16.16 

1920 

44.7 5 

13.93 

31.14 

1930 

46 

24.32 

52.87 

1933 

50 

19.23 

38.46 

19^0 

46 

24.41 

53.07 

1944 

42.5 

24.92 

58.62 

194-9 

59 

31.52 

53.43 

1950 

58.5 

29.75 

50.85 


The years for which the data are given were critics.! years in 
which the mill rate experienced a distinct rise or fall. From 1920 on, 
the high rate of taxation was consistent with the relatively high cost 
of living. Between 1930 and 1950, on an average, the relationship of 
school tax to total tax was slightly over fifty per cent (51.22$). 

Since the general mill rate fluctuated considerably during that time, 
it is evident that educational costs have a direct and important 
effect on municipal expenditures. The maintenance of a fairly consist¬ 
ent average percentage cost over a twenty-year period, from 1930 to 
1950, would also indicate that the municipal authorities feel that they 
cannot devote much more than fifty per cent of their budgets to educar- 
tional purposes. However, the high mill rates were associated with 

16. Sell, 0. R., Secretary-Treasurer, Calgary School Board. 





’ 







117 


expanding facilities for the high schools where continued expansion is 
indicated. This may "best he seen from a consideration of the per 
capita costs of education in the Calgary Public Schools in recent 
years. Hence, the School Board and other interested bodies have be¬ 
come more insistent in their demands that the provincial government 
assume a greater share of the cost of education. 


Western 


Year 

Public 

Junior High 

Senior High 

Canada 

1946 

$ 96.72 

$127.21 

$135.88 

$175.00 

1947 

no. 64 

161.63 

160.96 

213.17 

1948 

121.39 

121.09 

203.21 

219.07 

1949 

124.84 

179.45 

255.15 


The figures for two of the years for which data are given 
(Footnote 16) were inconsistent with the general pattern — that is 
1933 and 1944. In the former year the depression reached its nadir. 
High relief costs pushed the mill rate up, but, for the same reason, 
educational expenditures were disproportionately low. The year before 
World War 11 ended the mill rate was comparatively low. The city had 
reduced its spending program because of the difficulty of obtaining 
materials for construction and repairs. As the levy for education re¬ 
mained fairly stable, the percentage jumped to an all-time high. 

The percentage distribution of School Board expenditures gives 
another view of the financial scene in education. Here again a re¬ 
markable consistency will be noticed. During the four years quoted 
Teachers* salaries, which have not soared inordinately, accounted for 
nearly two-thirds of total disbursements. Under the heading Classroom 


17* Calgary School Boar*d Annual Reports, 1946 - 1949 










~ l n ' •, • 






118 


and Pupils — Supplies and Equipment, the cost hovered "between 3i and 
4|-$ of the total. The School Board has supplied students* materials 
including text "books to the elementary grades and Grades 711 and 7111 
since September, 1915* and to Grade IX since 1945* Therefore, these 
figures mean that the expenditure on other classroom equipment — maps, 
globes, library books, scientific, musical, and audio-visual materials- 
has been comparatively small. These facts have further bolstered the 
argument in favor of greater provincial aid to education. 

Per Cent of Total 



1946 

1947 

1948 

1949 

Debenture Payments 

10.51 

9.61 

11.23 

12.24 

Administrative 

expenses 

2.12 

2.00 

2.14 

2.14 

Teachers * Salaries 

62.75 

65.08 

64.68 

64.10 

Classroom and pupils - 
Supplies and equipment 

3.74 

3.42 

3.57 

4.28 

Janitors* Salaries 

6.23 

5.96 

6.05 

6.o4 

Janitors* Supplies 

.39 

.47 

.39 

• 38 

Maintenance of Buildings 
Wages and Materials 

3.91 

5.84 

4.71 

6.17 

Fuel 

1.93 

1.59 

1.56 

1.48 

Water, Light and Power 

1.14 

.97 

.92 

.89 

Insurance and Taxes 

.76 

.67 

1.00 

.75 

Cost of Living Bonus 

1.97 

— 

— 

— 

Miscellaneous 

4.55 

4.39 

3.75 

1.53 


Although a number of organizations interested in education have 
sent resolutions to the provincial government urging the payment of 


18. Calgary School Board Annual Reports, 1946 - 1949. 








' 





:o 


















119 


larger grants to school districts, the most persistent pressure has 
come from the annual meetings of the Alberta Public School Trustees * 
Association. The members of the Calgary School Board have heartily 
endorsed such pleas. During the last three years included in the 
following table, some increased aid has resulted from these efforts. 


Year 

$ of Provincial Aid 

1920 

5.8 

1925 

5.83 

1930 

6.5*4 

1935 

7.27 

19*40 

6.87 

19*4-5 

6.03 

19*4-7 

9.78 

19*48 

10.05 

19*49 

19 

10.09 


A glance at total expenditures for education bears out the 
conclusions already reached. The increase in costs from year to year 
has been uniform and consistent with the expansion of the school sys¬ 
tem. Any deviation from this pattern was a reflection of a depression 
in the total economy or of the effect upon it of war. 


19* G-ell, &. R., Secretary-Treasurer, Calgary School Board, 









120 


Year 

Total Expenditure 

Total Enrolment 

1905 

$ 39,842.06 

739 

1910 

142,388.53 

3,056 

1915 

599,614.71 

8,002 

1920 

1 , 053 , 629.51 

10,337 

1923 

1,186,512.05 

12,179 

1925 

1,096,118.37 

12,730 

1926 

1,154,560.00 

13,002 

1930 

1,515,743.70 

14,973 

1933 

1,253,517.09 

15,187 

1935 

1 , 262 , 156.72 

14,823 

1936 

1,312,375.64 

14,652 

1940 

1,370,986.89 

13,657 

1941 

1,315,904.39 

13,526 

1945 

1,526,941.84 

13,348 

1947 

1,890,090.65 

13,712 

20 

1949 

2,407,083.28 

15,089 

20. 

Calgary School Board Annual Report, 1949. 













■ 


' 




;> • 


















CHAPTER Vll 


RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 

The years between 1935 and I 95 O have been chiefly notable for 
the introduction and extension of the Junior and Composite High School 
departments in the Calgary Public School system. The idea of the Jun¬ 
ior High School originated in the United States where the six-three- 
three plan had crystallized by 1900. This meant reducing the element¬ 
ary division to six grades and introducing three years of Junior High 
School between the elementary and a three-year senior high division. 

The aim was to hold more pupils in school and to make vocational pro¬ 
vision for those who would go from school to work without attending a 
technical institution or a university. The new arrangement was also 
an attempt to bridge the wide gap between elementary and high school 
by introducing^ measure of departmentalization at the intermediate 
level. In addition it proposed to offer a wider variety of explor¬ 
atory subjects so that pupils could base their choice of high school 
courses on personal experience. Time was required to work out plans 
for operation and methods to be used. However, in 1909 the School 
Board at Berkeley, California, established the first Junior High School. 
Development after that in the United States liras fairly rapid. 

In Canada, British Columbia and Manitoba led the way with the 
organization of Junior High Schools in a few communities in the early 
1930 9 s. The Department of Education in Alberta was also investigating 
this type of intermediate education by 1933* Provincial inspectors and 
Normal School instructors began the task of reorganizing the curriculum 
in order to implement the changes of which the Department approved. It 
soon appeared that although the new Junior High School program would be 
ready for use on an experimental be^sis by September, 1935* the diffi- 






























122 


culties involved in adjusting the Senior High School system would 
require somewhat longer. The latter program must provide for a 
majority of students who would not proceed to higher academic in¬ 
stitutions, hut it must also maintain the necessary standards for a 
minority who would. 

However, Dr. Buchanan, Superintendent of Schools in Calgary, 
who had also studied the development of the Junior High School and ap¬ 
preciated its possibilities, felt that its gradual introduction into the 
Calgary School system might well begin at once. The School Board ac¬ 
cepted his recommendations and the work of reorganization started in 
193^- Three Junior High Schools were set up in Calgary — King Edward, 
Bideau Park, and Langevin. The latter school served entirely as a 
Junior High School while the other two also accommodated Grades 1 to VI. 
The three units comprised twenty-three classrooms with an enrolment of 
S6b pupils. 

Although the new Provincial Program of Studies for these inter¬ 
mediate grades was in operation in less than one hundred classrooms in 
Alberta in September, 1S35» the Calgary School Board had practically re¬ 
organized its whole school system. Two more of the Junior High Schools 
— Hillhurst and Colonel Walker — started operation that fall. Sunalta 
and Balmoral Schools had undergone a similar conversion by September, 
193^i when the new Program of Studies was finally launched. About 
sixty-five per cent of all Grade Vll, Vlll, and IX pupils were now at¬ 
tending these departmentalized schools. The Junior High Schools made 
it unnecessary to continue the Prevocational School which was therefore 
closed in 1935- In. addition, Western Canada High School, the home of 
technical education under the Calgary School Board, became the Composite 

High School, thus anticipating the changes in the senior high school 












■ 
















123 


program which were not completed until 19 J -tO. Students attending West¬ 
ern Canada Composite High School could now combine technical studies 
with general courses in academic work. 

How did the community react to the reorganization of the school 
system in the city? There was an expression of satisfaction with the 
general plan which brought education more in line with the children’s 
needs and interests. However, there was onfcexception. Colonel Walker 
School had been used as a high school since 1922. There was an outburst 
of indignation in the Bast Calgary district over the proposed conversion 
of the building to junior high purposes. A meeting to protest the com¬ 
ing changes was held in St. John’s Church Hall in June, 1935- Dr. Buch¬ 
anan attended the meeting to outline the system and explain the changes. 
He pointed out that it was no longer advisable to prepare all students 
for matriculation. At that time seventy per cent of Calgary students 
were talcing such courses, but only five per cent were actually going on 
to university. He also showed how a more diversified program in the 
intermediate grades would lead high school students to pursue studies 
for which they had discovered an aptitude. As for the loss of the senior 
high school facilities to their district, Dr. Buchanan told the people 
that Western Canada High School with its possibilities for expansion was 
the logical place for such an institution. Colonel Walker was the small¬ 
est high school, and even so, many students travelled some distance to 
attend it. On the other hand, as a Junior High School it would serve 
several public schools which were fairly close at hand. So reasonable 
was the Superintendent 1 s presentation of the case that no more was heard 
of the protest. 

The Public School District seemed to be in very fortunate cir¬ 
cumstances in the summer of 1935 * ^ ne reorganization was proceeding 


























124 


smoothly; the few dissenting voices were stilled. Ho problem of over¬ 
crowding had reared its head, nor seemed likely to. There were sixty 
schools in an area of thirty-eight square miles, an average of two for 
each square mile in the city. Calgary School District celebrated its 
fiftieth anniversary that year and rejoiced over its many achievements. 

The following year, 193bf au adverse fate seemed to conspire 
against the schools. On Saturday, November fth, fire from an unknown 
cause broke out in the new Western Canada High School Auditorium. The 

building burned to the ground, the resulting total loss being $33*000* 

1 

Fortunately the insurance covered $27,300. of this amount. When the 

School Board awarded contracts for the erection of a new structure, the 

2 

cost, exclusive of gymnasium and dramatic equipment, came to $30»2.24. 
Less than two weeks after the fire occurred, a very strong gale which 
blew over the city damaged eight other schools. The wind blew part of 
the roof off the comparatively new Crescent Heights High School. How¬ 
ever, the monetary loss from damage by fire and wind was scon forgotten, 
and people were thankful that no one was injured in either accident. 

In 1937, the School Board added to the special classes already 
in operation one for children who were hard of hearing or who had speech 
difficulties. Several requests for such a class had come from parents 
whose children stammered or had difficulty in hearing. Mrs. Annie 
Clarke, the widow of a local doctor, approached Dr. Buchanan because she 
was interested in that work. In England she had had some training in 
the foundations of speech. Dr. C. Bland, minister of Wesley United 
Church, recommended Mrs. Clarke to the Superintendent. Dr. Bland’s 

1. Calgary School Board Records, November fth, 193 b - 

2. Calgary School Board Records, December 28>th, 193b. 












125 


wife, who was very deaf, could put aside her pencil and pad and under¬ 
stand Mrs. Clarke very well. On condition that she undertake further 
studies, the School Board appointed Mrs. Clarke to teach the class for 
the hard-of-hearing and pupils with speech defects. Two courses, 
Teaching of Speech to the Deaf and the Jena Method of Lip Reading, 
taken at Michigan State University Summer School, prepared Mrs. Clarke 
to embark upon the new venture in teaching.. 

For one year, 1937 - ’3^» the hearing and speech class had a 
room in Connaught School. It then moved to James Short School where 
it has remained. An average of fifteen students has attended the class 
each year. Children from Grades 1 to VI have teen admitted. These 
handicapped children sometimes met with misunderstanding if not per¬ 
secution in an ordinary school environment. Within their own group a 
strong "bond of sympathy has created an atmosphere of tolerance and 
kindliness so that the pupils have learned to help each other. As 
with other special classes operated by the Calgary School Board, the 
children in this one are supplied with the cost of their daily tran¬ 
sportation to school and cocoa with their noon lunch. They have taken 
only a short noon recess, and Mrs. Clarke has used the half hour from 
one to one-thirty to work with the children individually. Otherwise 
the usual school curriculum has occupied their time. 

How then can this room he described as a special class? The 
equipment used to help the handicapped children has differentiated it 
from an ordinary classroom. The Calgary Hard of Hearing League gave 
the class a present of a group hearing aid. The teacher could thus 
talk through a microphone while the children listened with individual 
receivers. Attention given to careful articulation has helped the 
children with speech difficulties. Results have well justified the 







. .. 











126 


provision of a special classroom for these pupils. 

The gift of another machine has made possible the screening of 
city pupils for hearing deficiencies. The Calgary Kinsmen’s Club sup¬ 
plied an audiometer which is used to test the degree of hearing loss 
in each ear. Each year when a new group of children has reached Grade 
IV, Mrs. Clarke has visited the schools in turn and tested the hearing 
of these pupils. In this way pupils needing the benefit of special 
attention because of poor hearing have been discovered at quite an 
early age. Thus, in spite of large classrooms, means have been found 
to give individual attention to one more group of children. 

However, there was one group which increasingly absorbed the 
attention of educationists. As time went on, the Calgary School Board 
along with others in Canada and the United States discovered that the 
new junior and composite high schools did not provide answers to all 
the problems of the adolescent. The complexity of modern life with 
its many standards of behaviour continued to be confusing to the youth. 
Reorganization did not mitigate the faults of mass education, one of 
which was that the individual was often forgotten. Vocational and 
other guidance could not be handled entirely in a classroom situation. 
Then the war came in 1939 taking fathers away from sons who missed 
their advice and help. Moreover, examinations of soldiers revealed 
that in many cases the adolescent who had not solved his problems did 
not become a well-adjusted adult. Departments of Education and School 
Boards directed their energies towards the organization of a guidance 
program. 

In Edmonton at the Summer School Session in 19^1, the Depart¬ 
ment of Education offered a course in guidance to teachers. The di¬ 
rectors engaged Dr. M. ¥. Wilkins, Professor of Psychology at St. Louis 



















12? 


University, St. Louis, Missouri, as lecturer. The Calgary School 
Board felt that some special effort should he made to encourage teach¬ 
ers to take such a course before introducing a guidance program in the 
schools. Therefore, the Board paid the expenses for a group of ten 
teachers to take the course. 

Among the ten was Harold E. Panabaker, Principal of James 
Short School, who became particularly interested in this phase of 
education. However, Mr. Panabaker enlisted in the army in 1942. 

Since he became educational Officer of Military District 13, he was 
able to study at first hand the educational needs of young adults. 

In the meantime the group that had attended the Summer Session 
course in 194l formed a committee for further study. At their request 
Dr. Wilkins was asked to come to Calgary in the summer of 1942 and 
give a series of lectures on guidance to teachers. A large number of 
Calgary teachers attended the lectures so that a. good many of the City 
staff gained an acquaintance with the objectives and methods of a guid¬ 
ance program. However, the launching of such a program was deferred 
until after the war. 

In September, 1945, Mr. H. E. Panabaker received the appoint¬ 
ment of Supervisor of Guidance for the Calgary Schools. As a pre¬ 
paration for his duties, the School Board then paid his expenses to 
take a special course at Chicago University. Early in 1946 the Super¬ 
visor began the task of introducing the guidance program. This in¬ 
cluded provision for the counselling of students. On each Junior High 
School staff at least two teachers, a man and a woman, were asked to 
carry out this phase of the program. The counsellor interviewed each 
student who thereby had an opportunity to talk confidentially about his 






. 





128 


problems. Sometimes the classroom teacher would refer a pupil to a 
teacher-counsellor. A steady increase in the number of such referrals 
has indicated their value. 

In-school training has enabled Calgary teachers to meet the 
challenge of this new type of work. They have attended evening classes 
in guidance methods conducted by Mr. Panabaker. As Supervisor of Guid¬ 
ance he has kept in close touch with teachers by means of individual 
interviews. In addition, teacher-counsellors have organized a com¬ 
mittee which has held monthly meetings to discuss common problems. 

In a similar way, in l^HS, a group of primary teachers undertook the 
study of the principles of play therapy. 

The guidance program also included the giving of mechanical 
and written tests to Grade IX students. Results of these tests have 
helped boys and girls to select senior high school courses in line with 
their aptitudes. Vocational guidance for the same grade level has been 
expanded to include talks by experienced people on various types of 
work, visits to industrial plants, and surveys of local occupational 
opportunities. The local Kiwanis Club has given its assistance in 
carrying out the latter. The senior high school students have also 
found this service very useful. A panel of outside advisers composed 
of business and professional men has made much of this phase of the 
work possible. 

Although the School Board introduced its guidance program in 
the intermediate grades, it was found that problems which became acute 
there had often developed earlier. Counsellors also soon discovered 
that many difficulties of students grew out of their home relationships. 
From the beginning, Mr. Panabaker gave some of his attention to child- 







129 


ren in the elementary grades who had trouble in adjusting themselves 
to school life. But, in 19^+7» the Board extended the services of the 
Guidance Department by the appointment of a part-time visiting teacher. 
Miss Marion Sutherland. One year later Miss Sutherland was released 
from classroom duties to devote all of her time to work with pupils and 
parents. The Board authorized the appointment of a second visiting 
teacher at that time. An appeal through advertising failed to find a 
suitably qualified person so Miss Margaret Marshall, a teacher-counsel¬ 
lor at Sunalta Junior High School, was asked to go to the University 
of Toronto to take a one-year course in child guidance. The Canadian 
Council on Mental Hygiene gave assistance by making the necessary fin¬ 
ancial arrangements. Since September, 19^9, Miss Marshall has carried 
on the duties of a visiting teacher. 

There have been some changes in the guidance program since its 
inception. In 19^7 Mr. Panabaker outlined a course in Occupations 
which the Department of Education approved as an additional Grade IX 
option. In the meantime the Department had undertaken the revision of 
the junior high school curriculum to bring it still closer to the in¬ 
terests and needs of the children for whom it was designed. An enlarged 
Health and Personal Development course replaced the former units of 
work on health. This new course included a study of vocations for 
Grade IX students and so superseded the Occupations course. A second 
change involved the administration of the program. With the extensive 
post-war increase in school buildings and enrolment, the work of all 
supervisors increased. As a result, in 19 4S, Mr. Panabaker 1 s duties 
were modified to those of Supervisor of Junior High Schools and of all 


special classes. 








. 














■ ■ 



















) 




. 

, 














* 










130 


This same period witnessed the introduction of kindergarten 
classes by the Calgary School Board. The developement of this work 
grew directly out of the needs of a thickly populated district in the 
centre of the city, and indirectly out of a project conducted by a 
group of unemployed girls during the depression. These girls were on 
relief, but they wanted something to do. The Sereni Cottage School 
near Stanley Jones School was vacant so that in 193^ the girls ob¬ 
tained permission from the School Board to use it as a Club House, 
under the auspices of the Y. W. C. A. They decided to open a small 
kindergarten and thus do useful work in helping mothers of small 
children. Local firms donated wood for tables; orange boxes, sawed 
and painted, made very good kindergarten chairs. When the girls fin¬ 
ally obtained work, their sponsors from the Y. W. C. A. felt the 
furniture was too good to waste. 

Some of the leaders of these girls were interested in kinder¬ 
garten work for underprivileged children in downtown areas. Pour 
young women, Mrs. G-. Withell, Miss Eileen ITiblett, Miss Dorothy 
Sneller, and Miss Mary Duncan, obtained the loan of a small room where 
they looked after thirty children of pre-school age who lived in crow¬ 
ded quarters in city apartments and lacked adequate space for play. 

The equipment for this enterprise came from the Sereni Cottage School 
Club House. During 193^ the Tom Thumb Kindergarten, as it was called, 
was open three afternoons a week and operated entirely by voluntary 
workers. In the fall of 193^ when they could no longer use the room 
because it was rented as an office, Dr. 0. H. Patrick and the City 
Council came to the rescue. The former was in charge of the old Civic 
Flayhouse building on Seventh Avenue east of Centre Street. The City 












131 


paid the ten dollars a month required for rent there and supplied 
the utilities free. However, September 30. 1939. was the deadline 
for their eviction from this building. Their needs for the coming 
winter included ten volunteer helpers and cheap or free warm quar¬ 
ters. Fortunately, when September 3° came, a solution had been found. 

The operators of the small school obtained accommodation in the 
basement at 130 B Uinth Avenue West, for which the City Council con¬ 
tinued to pay the rent. Further aid cane from members of the Stagette 
Club, a service club for young women. Through donations of money and 
voluntary workers, they improved the facilities of the kindergarten. 
The number of children increased to forty but still many eager young¬ 
sters of pre-school age had to be turned away. However, more per¬ 
manent arrangements were in the offing. 

The Calgary School Board, faced with proof of the usefulness 
of a kindergarten in the central downtown area, at last found it 
possible to devote a room in James Short School to the purpose. As 
a result, the first Public School kindergarten opened September 1, 
19^1. Children came to it from the district stretching from Fourth 
Avenue to the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks between Third and First 
Street East. There were some eighty children so that both a morning 
and afternoon class were organized. 

People in other parts of the city immediately shov/ed a keen 
interest in the innovation. Several communities petitioned the Board 
to extend kindergarten facilities to them. On October 1, 1944, three 
more such classes were in operation at Ramsay, Haultain, and River¬ 
side Schools. As has happened before, the Board established the new- 
type of classroom in response to the educational demands of the local 


















132 


community. 

The teachers of these classes have prepared their own program 
of work. Tor the fall of 19^8 they had ready a thirteen page booklet 
describing the objectives, the use of materials, and the classroom 
procedures approved in the Calgary School Board kindergarten classes. 

The Faculty of Education at Edmonton offered courses in this level of 
work for the first time at its 19*+7 Summer Session. The Board en¬ 
couraged the attendance of Calgary teachers by special grants in their 
assistance. Since then most teachers bf these pre-primary classes 
have taken advantage of the opportunity for specialized study. 

The number of kindergarten classes in operation in Calgary has 
varied according to the school population. In some schools overcrowd¬ 
ing has meant a temporary withdrawal of this service. However, in 19^9 
there were twenty-four such rooms with an average enrolment of thirty 
children. Thus the Board has provided kindergarten accommodation for 
about one-third of the children in the city between the ages of four 
years seven months and five years seven months. 

In the years between 1935 £^d 19^5 while the school program ex¬ 
panded, construction almost stood still. June, 1937» saw the completion 
of the new Western Canada Gymnasium and Auditorium which replaced the 
one that had burned to the ground less than a year before. In 19^0 con¬ 
tracts were awarded for the construction of auditoriums for Central 
High and Colonel Walker Junior High Schools. The Board had also pro¬ 
vided for the remodelling and enlarging of several school stages and 
modernizing the electric light systems in the older schools. This work, 
commenced in 1933* was finished in 19 ^ 1 . While school accommodation was 
adequate the time seemed ripe for bringing existing equipment up-to-date. 













133 


The building of auditoriums and improving of stages was also a part of 
the modern trend towards using city schools as community centres. 

However, during the years of World War 11 the need for new school 
buildings arose again. This was not because of an increased total en¬ 
rolment. In 1935 the school population was 14,823. The numbers de¬ 
clined gradually to 13*092 in 19^3* Work was plentiful in those years; 
pay was good; and the armed services offered a great attraction to the 
youth of both sexes. Nevertheless, the city population grew rapidly. 
Dominion Census statistics showed this. Wartime 


Year Population 


S3.304 
38,904 4 

1946 ioo,o44 



industrial expansion and an influx of servicemen, especially in the 
Air Force, accounted for the great increase. The City fathers author¬ 
ized the subdivision of land on the outskirts of Calgary, and new 
districts sprang into being. These suburban areas needed schools, 
but with building materials at a premium the School Board was obliged 
to postpone its construction program until the war was over. 

However, plans for post-war building requirements were care¬ 
fully prepared beforehand. The School Board, Dr. Buchanan, and Mr. 

W. A. Branton, Building Superintendent, drew up a program which would 

5 

involve the expenditure of $1,011,335- * n November, 1943* the Board 
submitted the plans for approval to the Provincial Subcommittee on 

3. Calgary School Board Annual Report, 1949* P. 3^- 

4. Calgary Municipal Manual, 1949* P. 

5 . Calgary School Board Records, November, 1943* 








































. 
















' 










. 

































134 


Education and Vocational Training, of which Dr. E. E. Newton, Pres¬ 
ident of the University of Alberta, was chairman. Yfhen the war ended, 
the program was ready for immediate implementation. The first part 
of the plan to materialize was the addition of eight rooms and an 
auditorium to Glengarry School on Twenty-Ninth Street West. Started 
in 19^6, the new structure was formally opened on September 1, 1947. 
Erom then on the erection of new schools proceeded apace. 

The rate of building in the years between 1947 and I 95 O was 
reminiscent of that which took place during Calgary*s first economic 
boom from 1910 to 1913 * The type of school naturally had changed a 
great deal. Consisting of one-storey and built of brick and stucco 
with a multitude of windows, these new structures have been described 
as stream-lined. Interior innovations were perhaps even more strik¬ 
ing. The newest type of lighting, pastel-colored walls, floors cover¬ 
ed with heavy linoleum, and a profusion of built-in cupboards and 
bookcases removed these new structures from the class of the tradition¬ 
al schoolhouse of the earlier period. 

The first of the new schools to be built under the program was 
the Manchester School on Fifty-fifth Avenue South-West. This was a 
four-roomed school with an auditorium which was ready in September, 
194g. Plans for each new structure, large or small, have included an 
auditorium and other facilities for using the schools as community 
centres. An addition to Bow View School, and the new Mount View, 
Qpeen*s Park, and Richmond Schools have completed the program up to 
September, 195°• 

One district in Calgary which has grown enormously in recent 
years is the residential area for personnel of the Currie Army and Air 














135 


Force Barracks in South Calgary. In 194b the School Board supplied a 
teacher for the one-roomed school which was held in temporary quarters. 
Although no permanent Building has Been erected, the school has in¬ 
creased to eight rooms accommodating children from kindergarten to 
Grade Vlll. The Federal Government in 1949 conferred with the of¬ 
ficials of the Barracks and with the School Board regarding plans for 
the erection of a large modern school. In the fall of 195 O the con¬ 
struction of the Building Began. The eighteen-roomed school, to Be 
ready in 1952 * will house all children of kindergarten to junior high 
school age of the Currie Barracks personnel. 

In the post-war Building program elementary school accommodation 
received the lion's share of attention. But not all of it. In addition, 
new units have Been added to Crescent Heights High School which has 
thereby Become Calgary*s second composite school for senior students. 
The North Wing, housing home economics, typing, shorthand, and music 
rooms, was opened in September, 195^« Industrial arts shops, an au¬ 
ditorium, and a cafeteria will occupy the South Wing, for which plans 
are already under way. Immediate plans also include nw structures 
for the accommodation of the grov/ing junior high school population. 

The first of these will occupy the land adjacent to the Bow View ele¬ 
mentary school Building. For the first time the Building Department 
has asked representatives of the teachers to make suggestions with re¬ 
gard to the plans for the junior high school structure Before carrying 
them into effect. 

There is little likelihood that the pressure for ns^ Buildings 
will lessen in the immediate future. In September, 195°» three Public 
School classes found accommodation in neighboring church halls. In 


























136 


the Upper Hillhurst district, St. Alban*s Anglican Church and Parkdale 
United Church were made available for two Grade 1 classes. The North 
Hill United Church on Sixteenth Avenue and First Street North West has 
relieved the crowded Balmoral Junior High School of a Grade V/ class¬ 
room. One room opened in the old Sereni Cottage School lessened the 
congestion in the nearby Stanley Jones School. Plans for the next Wo 
years, 1951 - 1 5^» have been made so that these districts will acquire 
adequate accommodation for their school population. 

Enrolment statistics for the seven years after the low figure 
for 1943 showed a steady annual rise. With an 

Year Enrolment 

1944 13.134 

1945 13.3% 

194b 13,527 

1947 13,712 

194s 14,314 

1949 15.0S9 b 

1950 (Nov.) lb.bSb 

average enrolment per room of forty pupils, the total increase for the 

period would require eighty-nine new classrooms. Then in January, 

1951» came a request for school accommodation from another quarter. 

The Windsor Park rural district south of Calgary was incorporated into 
the city. The education of sixty pupils who have been attending rural 
schools thus became the responsibility of the Calgary School Board. 

At present the Hon. Ivan Casey, Provincial Minister of Education, is 
conducting negotiations for the inclusion of an area beyond Windsor 
Park in the Calgary School District. In view of actual and antici¬ 
pated growth the School Board has shown foresight in planning another 
building program to cover the next three-year period to 1953 - 

b. Calgary School Board Records, December 1944 to November 195^* 














137 


Absorption in building plans has not excluded other advances in 
the post-war years. Since 191*+ the Calgary Public Library has co-op¬ 
erated with the School Board in supplying a library of forty books to 
each elementary classroom above the Grade 11 level. After the junior 
high schools were organized, teachers found the departmentalized sys¬ 
tem did not lend itself to the use of a small library of free readi ngj^ 0o ^ s 
in each room. In 194-4, upon request from the School Board, the Library 
Board agreed to place a larger collection of books in a central library 
in each school. The latter also provided the services of a visiting 
librarian to assist in circulating the books. 

When the Library Board protested that this encroached too much 
upon the time of its staff, the School Board decided to appoint a full¬ 
time librarian to be in charge of libraries for the large junior high 
schools. In 1945, Miss Allison Seymour received the appointment. For 
a year she spent part of her time at the Public Library learning the 
work. The School and Library Boards have shared the expense of these 
school libraries. For every two dollars spent by the School Board 
for such books, the Calgary Public Library has contributed one dollar. 

Miss Seymour has done much more than circulate the books. With an ex¬ 
cellent knowledge of the stories and of teen-age reading tastes, she 
has guided the pupils' reading into desirable as well as pleasant 
channels. 

September, 1950, saw the introduction of a service which was a 
further illustration of the School Board’s policy of not only keeping 
abreast with current educational trends but also with community needs. 
During the summer of 1950 the City Health Department reported that 
twelve children in Grades 1 to IX were unable to attend school because 





138 


of physical handicaps. Dr. Geraldine Oakley had long urged that pro¬ 
vision he made for the education of such children. In September, 195O, 
the Board appointed a teacher to visit these children and instruct 
them in their homes. Mrs. H. E. Purdy, the teacher, visited each child 
twice a week. The Board also supplied school materials and library 
books to these extramural pupils who have shown appreciation for the 
opportunity thus offered to them. 

In 1950 9 Calgary Public School District, Humber 19 , was sixty- 
five years old. In that time it has grown from one room to 470, from 
seventeen pupils to l6,bS6. Many worth-while developments have ac¬ 
companied this great physical expansion. What the future holds in 
problems or achievements lies beyond the present via*. However, the 
record of accomplishment for the first sixty-five years has made a 
firm and fine foundation to build upon in the years ahead. 










