

For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


( 3 .\ MBBIS 

TOJBSim® 

aiBBMimsis 













Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https ://arch i ve. o rg/detai Is/h isto ryof ru ral h iOO mcca 






THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A HISTORY OF THE RURAL HIGH SCHOOL 
IN ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE RETIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 
DIVISION OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 


w 

Ralph Lewis McCall 


JSdmonton , Alb er ta 


Sep teirib er, 19 56 








ii 


ABSTRACT OF THESIS 

Following World War I, there was a general demand 
in rural areas for schools which would offer secondary- 
education* The elementary consolidated school and the two- 
room elementary- school both gave some high school instruction, 
but the successful operation of these schools seemed limited 
by peculiar conditions common to certain areas of the 
province. Therefore, in 1921 the Secondary Consolidated 
School Act was passed to permit two or more local school 
districts to share the cost of forming a centralized high 
school. 

However, in spite of generous Government grants, only 
nineteen Rural High School districts were formed. Most rural 
people chose the less expensive high school instruction 
offered in the one-room school. 

Rural High Schools were located mainly in villages 
or towns. Only two consolidations were truly rural, and 
one of them, Angle Lake, v/as soon forced to discontinue 
operation. 

The Rural High Schools that were organized gave a 
valuable service to their areas, nevertheless, in 1936 
the compulsory divisional system with its more efficient 
methods of taxation and administration replaced the need 
for the secondary consolidated school type of organization. 

By 1946 all Rural High Schools had been included in divisions. 











iii 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I. DEFINITION AND PURPOSES. 1 

II. SOURCES AND METHODS OF GAINING INFORMATION ... 3 

III. RURAL EDUCATION BEFORE THE RURAL HIGH SCHOOL . . 6 

Organization of schools. 6 

Events leading to the Secondary Consolidated 
School Act. 8 

IV. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF RURAL HIGH SCHOOLS.11 

Obstacles to formation of districts ..... 11 

Formation of districts ..14 

Location of districts .18 

V. SCHOOL FACILITIES ................ 22 

Types of schools ............... 22 

Classroom equipment . .. 24 

Accommodations for students .......... 25 

¥1. THE SCHOOL BOARD, TEACHER, AND PUPIL ...... 30 

The school board ............... 30 

The teacher ..33 

The pupil ............ . • 38 

VII. FINANCING THE RURAL HIGH SCHOOL ..40 

Local taxation ................ 40 

Government grants ..* * • 47 

Tuition fees ..48 

Cost of operation ..32 






























.. 0 


















iv 

CHAPTER PAGE 

VIII. THE DISCOITTINUAT1 OH OF THE RURAL HIGH SCHOOL . 56 

Background of the division.. . . . 56 

Joining the division. 61 

IX. AN EVALUATION OF THE RURAL HIGH SCHOOL 

EXPERIffiNT .................. 65 

BIBLIOGRAPHY .. 70 

APPENDIX A. An Act to amend the School Ordinance -- 
1921 — Secondary Consolidated School 
Districts . .. 71 

APPENDIX B. Questionnaire .. 77 

APPENDIX C. Letter to the ratepayers of the 

Rockyford Rural High School District . . 78 

APPENDIX D. Public Notice Vote on consolidation — 
Rockyford Rural High Consolidated 
School District ..... . 80 

APPENDIX E. C.R. Walrod answers the charges of the 

Landseer District ... . 81 

APPENDIX F. An Act to amend the School Assessment 
Ordinance — 1921 -- Secondary 
Consolidated School Districts . 83 

APPENDIX G. C.R. Walrod explains the organization 

of the Rockyford Rural High School ... 85 












. ) 


, 










V 


LIST 0? TABLES 

TABLE. PAGE 

I. Sources of Information about Rural High 

Schools . 4 

II. Statistics on the Rural High School ...... SI 

III. Statistics from Term Returns -- 1936 ...... 37 

IV. Valuation of Land and Assessment for 

Rural High Schools -- 1929 ..43 

V. Financial Summary of the lima Rural High 

School (1925 - 1935). 54 

VI. Comparative Cost per Pupil According to 

Average Attendance . ..... 55 


LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure Rage 

1. Alberta Rural High School Districts . 19 














CHAPTER I 


DEFINITION AND PURPOSES 


On April 19, 1921, the Legislature.assented to the 
Secondary Consolidated School Act . This Act stated that: 

Two or more adjoining school districts of any kind 
may consolidate ... by the formation of a new 
district for the purpose of establishing and main¬ 
taining therein a school or schools for the education 
of pupils who have completed Grade YII or Grade Till 
of the Public School Course as classified by the 
regulations of the Department of Education, and a 
district so formed shall be known as a secondary 
consolidated school district. 1 

Subsequently the Secondary Consolidated School became common¬ 
ly known as the Rural High School. 2 

Although there was a definite need for rural educa¬ 
tional facilities on the secondary level during the period 
after World War I, no widespread movement took place to 
remedy this situation. The Secondary Consolidated School 
Act of 1921 offered considerable financial assistance for 
high school work, however only nineteen such districts were 
ever formed. 

The purpose of this study was to ascertain (1) the 
influences behind the establishment of the Rural High 


•‘• Statutes of Alberta , 1921, p. 233. For a full text 
of the Act see APPENDIX A. 

a Ibid ., 1922, p. 249. 
























' 

















































2 


School, (2) the reasons for the general lack of implementa¬ 
tion of the plan, (3} the degree of success of the districts 
formed, (4) the reason for their discontinuation, and (5) 
the effect, if any, on those who advocated school divisions* 




CHAPTER II 


SOURCES AND METHODS OF GAINING INFORMATION 

Although the Rural High School existed within com¬ 
paratively recent times, a great deal of primary source 
material is no longer available. Most of the files at the 
Department of Education have been lost or destroyed, and 
the same is true at many school division offices. Minute 
books from the two Rural High Schools of Splan and Spruce 
Grove provided an incentive to continue the study. 

During the year 1955 letters were sent to superin¬ 
tendents or divisional secretaries in the districts under 
study explaining the project and asking for their assistance. 
In some cases minute books and similar records were located, 
and for the two Rural High Schools of Kathyrn and Roekyford 
an extensive set of files w r as obtained. In addition, a 
number of significant Department of Education pamphlets was 
discovered. One pamphlet dealt solely with the Rural High 
School movement. Some people who had been leaders in their 
areas provided information by means of interviews or ques¬ 
tionnaires, and these personal accounts of the movement gave 
more meaning to the study. APPENDIX B contains a copy of 
the questionnaire. 

Teachers and pupils of former Rural High School 
districts were often helpful in locating informed persons. 






















4 


When modern day divisional authorities were mystified by the 
knowledge of the existence at one time of a Rural High School 
at Angle Lake, a teacher in that locality gave information 
that led to an interview with the former secretary-treasurer, 
now a resident of Edmonton. Y/here other means failed, 
exploratory trips into the districts of the old school sites 
were necessary. This method was particularly fruitful in 
the case of Bow Slope School. For a summary of the infor¬ 
mation gathered see TABLE I. 

TABLE 1 

SOURCES OF IHFORMATIOH ABOUT 
RURAL HIGH SCHOOLS 


Source 


Ho. 


Former secretary-treasurers (questionnaire; ...... 8 

Former trustees and others (questionnaire) ..... 22 

Interviews. 4 

Minute books... 7 

Sets of files ..... . ........ 2 

School and other records . 1 


Perhaps the best supplement to the source material 
noted above was the information contained in the Annual 
Report Of The Department Of Education . These reports 
contained an accurate statistical account of the Rural High 
School and also statements from various government officials 
explaining the general reactions of the rural population to 






























i 
















. ■ 






. 






■- . 






































5 


3 

the high school plan. The Goresky thesis was valuable for 
background material, while newspaper clippings and the 
Statutes Of Alberta for 1921 supplied information concerning 
the formation of the Rural High School. The various changes 
in organization and administration through the years were 
traced in the School Act and its supplementary acts. 


3 I. Goresky, The Beginning And Growth Of The Alberta 
School System . 















CHAPTER III 


RURAL EDUCATION BEFORE THE RURAL HIGH SCHOOL 

The system of education in western Canada was largely 
borrowed from Ontario* Rural school districts were limited 
in area by the walking ability of younger children. Most 
school districts in Alberta serviced an area of approximate¬ 
ly sixteen square miles. With the multiplicity of school 
districts, teachers were not always plentiful, and many of 
the teachers in the rural areas had only minimum teaching 
qualifications. High schools were located mainly in the 
larger towns and cities. As long as young people could be 
absorbed by their rural communities and felt no pressing 
need for an education, there w T as little demand for secondary 
schools. The period after World War I began a new' era in 
industrialization and social thinking which left its mark on 
rural society. 


Organization Of Schools 

Previous to 1918, few rural schools offered instruc¬ 
tion above grade YIII. Villages and towns usually taught 
some high school, and sometimes these school districts 
would be enlarged by consolidation. Consolidated schools, 
which included all grades, had been in existence since 1913. 




7 


The increased benefits of centralization were offset some¬ 
what by the regulation which stated that pupils must be 
provided with transportation. Transportation costs took 
a large share of the tax dollar and officials helping to 

form consolidated districts were instructed to warn districts 

4 

of increased costs. As a result consolidation was not 

immediately popular, for grants were not large enough to be 

encouraging. However, the prosperous war years revived 

interest, and by IS18 consolidation had reached its peak in 
5 

southern Alberta. In central and northern Alberta the 
severe winters and inadequate roads were deterrents to 
consolidation. 

The more populated rural areas, particularly east of 
Edmonton, took advantage of extra grants by establishing 
two-room rural schools. The generous grant for the two- 
room schools was to attract better teachers, particularly 
for the upper room. The division of grades was of great 
advantage to rural students wishing some instruction on the 

f* 

secondary level. The Minister of Education reported in 
1921 that tf in the last two years there had been an additional 
fifty-two of these two-room rural schools established and 

^Ibid ., pp. 112-113. 

5 m. 

6 Ibid. P. 121. 











j .. . 


























8 


all but two of them were in successful operation.” 

Events Leading To The Secondary Consolidated School Act 

Although many rural students took advantage of 

consolidation and the two-room elementary schools, a large 

part of rural Alberta was left without high school facilities. 

To alleviate some of the costs of sending pupils away to 

school, the Government in 1919 increased grants to high 

schools, but abolished the school districts 1 rights to charge 

8 

fees to students from outside districts. However, as yet 

there was no real solution to the problem. Deputy Minister 

John Boss reported to the Minister that ’’more and more 

farmers are agitating for a rural high school in order that 

their children might secure secondary education within reach 
9 

of their homes.” 

As early as 1920 the Minister of Education reported 
to the Lieutenant-Governor: n Plans are no?/ complete for 
providing for rural high schools, or ’secondary consolida¬ 
tions f as they will be called, and this policy is being 
received with enthusiastic approval.Educational 

7 Report of Honourable G.P. Smith’s speech in the 
Legislature, Edmonton Journal , March 17, 1921. 

^ Statutes Of Alberta , 1919, p. 213. 

9 G.P. Smith, Speech in Legislature, Edmonton Bulletin , 
March 18, 1921. 

10 G.P. Smith, Report to Robert G. Brett, Annual Report 
Of The Department Of Education , Alberta, 1921, p. 2. 
















9 


literature published at that time did not reveal the 
origin of the Rural High School plan, but certainly no 
similar plan had been implemented on the prairies.^ It 
seems probable that Alberta educators simply tried to pre¬ 
serve the advantages of a consolidated school while avoiding 
the criticisms of consolidation. The Rural High School pro¬ 
vided no transportation because, under consolidation of 

elementary grades fi the cost of conveyance increased taxation 

12 

from double to treble sometimes of the ordinary district.” 
High school students were thought to be old enough to provide 
their own means of travel. Furthermore, the expense of send¬ 
ing children away to school would not exist, and more import¬ 
ant, pupils would remain under parental guidance during their 
rather unstable adolescent years. Some of the members of 
the Legislature foresaw the need of boarding places or 
dormitories in larger Rural High School districts, but no 
general criticism was made of the plan. ° There was undoubt¬ 
edly a feeling of skepticism in the Calgary Albertan*s report 

-^Letter from the Department of Education, Manitoba, 
March 2, 1955. 

Letter from the Department of Education, Saskat¬ 
chewan, March 10, 1955. 

l2 G.P. Smith, 0 £. cit . , Edmonton Journal , March 17, 

1921. 

•^Reports of debate in the Legislature, Edmonton 
Journal, March 21, 1921. 

















10 


that "the department is attempting to carry the high school 
to the country* That is a good move if it can be done."^ 


■^Comment on recent Government legislation, 
Calgary Albertan, April 23, 1921. 





CHAPTER IY 


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF RURAL HIGH SCHOOLS 

The Rural High School seemed to provide an answer 
to problems of rural secondary education. The scheme had 
shortcomings, but seldom were they vital to the success of 
the plan. The Rural High School plan was rejected by the 
taxpayer even though the expense would not be great, and 
generous grants were forthcoming. 

Obstacles To Formation Of Districts 

Any new scheme may expect opposition. Sometimes 
Department of Education officials were charged with being 
too conservative and not encouraging the formation of Rural 
High Schools. Certainly there seemed to be good reason to 
discourage sparsely settled districts and those with geo¬ 
graphical handicaps. In many eases, children would have had 
to travel long distances or find accommodation near the 
school. However, Haco and Bow Slope were reasonably success¬ 
ful districts in spite of being sparsely settled areas and 
prone to drifting snow during the winter. 

Some parents who sent their children to city or town 
schools opposed the establishment of a local high school. 

But the main opposition stemmed from fear of increased tax¬ 
ation. Taxpayers, particularly those without children, 







. :•'!> •••• 
r . " .■ ,* ; V ' ■ ' • Oj \ • : 




































. 




■ .. 






■- 


















■ 


• ) cl 





12 


opposed paying for high school facilities from public funds. 
The high school inspectors 1 report of 1922 stated: 

In some centres the provision of free education 
beyond Grade VIII is being seriously questioned, 
and the claim is made that the State and the rate¬ 
payers in general have done their duty when they 
have provided free educational facilities to the 
end of the so-called Public School Course.*^ 

A "fear” campaign started by the opponents of the 
Rural High School was not uncommon. The following excerpt 
from a letter to the Deputy Minister of Education from the 
secretary of the Kathyrn School indicates the methods used. 

A petition ... signed by quite a number of resident 
ratepayers and others in the Balroy District was 
forwarded to your department shortly after the vote 
was taken, charging certain irregularities in con- 
nection ?/ith the conducting of the poll. The Officers 
in charge of the meeting have already taken an affidavit 
as to the regularity of the poll, and again wish to 
state that all matters pertaining to the advertising 
of the meetings, the taking of the vote, was done in 
strict accordance with instructions from your Department 
and the School Act. 

The main reason that the above referred to petition 
was so largely signed even by some ratepayers who had 
voted in favor of the formation of the High School 
District, was because the parties responsible for the 
petition said they had proof that if the district was 
formed, the tax would be at the lowest $30.00 per 
quarter section; also that the District had to pur¬ 
chase a $2000 laboratory equipment before they could 
obtain the Government Grant. ... The statements they 
have made when getting signatures to their petition 


15 J.A. Smith - G.A. McKee, Report to the Minister, 
Annual Report Of The Department Of Education , Alberta, 
1922, p. 16. 





















13 


1 A 

are absolutely absurd. 

The truth of the matter was that costs generally ran to 
about five dollars per quarter-section, and there was no 
stipulation as to how much science equipment should be 
purchased. 

However, the greatest obstacle to the Rural High 

School movement was unexpected. Shortly after the spring 

session of the Legislature in 1921, an election was held in 

which the Liberals were defeated and the united Farmers of 

Alberta became the new Government. In the second session 

of the Legislature within the same year, the Farmers* 

Government wished to give further aid to rural education, 

and thus passed an amendment to the Schools Grant Act 

offering n an additional sum of 50 cents per day to each 

district operating only one room if instruction is given 

therein in grades above the eighth by the written authority 

17 

of an inspector of schools." 

This suggested a much cheaper alternative to the 
Rural High School. Admittedly, inspectors protested that 
teachers would be unable to handle satisfactorily the 
increased teaching load, and most rural people were 

^Letter from 1. Corbett to Mr. Ross, Kathyrn 
Rural High School files, August 6, 1927. 

•^ Statutes Of Alberta , 1921, p. 230. 













) . 








































14 


probably aware of that fact, but the cheaper product was 
too attractive. In 1922 the Deputy Minister of Education 
wrote to the Minister: 

Three years ago it was a rare thing to find a 
one-roomed rural school where grades above the eighth 
were taught, while for the term ending June 30, 1922, 
a total of 286 one-roomed rural schools were carrying 
on the work successfully and receiving the special 
grant of fifty cents per day from the province.-*- 8 

Department of Education records and letters from 
files indicate that through the years a large number of 
districts had investigated the Rural High School plan, but 
were frightened of the additional costs. 

Formation Of Districts 

When the Department of Education received a request 
for the organization of a Rural High School, an inspector 
of schools was appointed to meet with the board of trustees 
of the districts to be included in the proposed consolidation. 
This committee was responsible for preparing a map or plan 
of the proposed consolidation showing the boundaries, the 
residences of children of school age, the number of children 
from each residence, travelled roads, bridges, and any 
geographic obstacles to transportation. The plan, together 
with a detailed report, was then submitted to the Minister 

18 J.T. Ross, Report to the Minister, Annual Report 
Of The Department Of Education , Alberta, 1922, p. 11. 













































































15 


of Education for approval. If the proposal was sanctioned, 
the ratepayers of the proposed consolidation were permitted 
to hold one or more meetings with a representative of the 
Department in attendance to answer questions. Following 
a successful meeting, the Minister approved the boundaries 
of the consolidation and called for a petition to be signed 
by at least twenty-five per cent of the resident ratepayers 
of each district requesting a Rural High School. If the 
petition had the necessary number of signatures, a vote 
was taken over the petitioning districts as a whole, except 
for village and town districts. Only a majority vote was 
required to decide the issue. 

If the rural districts voted in favor of a Rural 

High School, a village or town school board within the 

proposed consolidation merely passed a resolution approving 

or disapproving consolidation, and gave public notice 

thereof. Any twenty-five resident ratepayers of a town or 

fifteen resident ratepayers of a village could petition 

that a vote be taken. Once again only a majority vote was 

19 

needed to support or defeat the proposal. APPENDIX B 
contains a more detailed account of the procedure followed 
in forming a Rural High School. 

Correspondence in the files of the Rockyford Rural 


^-9 Rural High Schools In Alberta , pp. 13-14. 













. . . ' . v 




. 






v v . ■" . : :, >. 


■' - . '. • - : • 








■ 




















. ' ' 




l > ' . •> . t0-.: 


' v 






































16 


High School revealed a more vivid picture of steps in 

consolidation. Early in 1925 letters were written to the 

secretaries of the Rural High Schools at Irma and Fleet 

asking for detailed information about the functioning of 

the schools there. On August 29, 1925 a statement supporting 

a Rural High School in Rockyford was sent to the ratepayers 

of the various school districts in the proposed consolidation. 

APPENDIX C contains the text of the statement. Meanwhile 

for the fall term of 1925 D.L. MacDonald came to teach in 

the Rockyford Public School after failing in an attempt 

20 

to establish a Rural High School at Islay. With 
Mr. MacDonald’s previous experience and the assistance of 
F.G, Buchanan, Inspector of Schools and champion of the 
Rural High School movement, proceedings took place for the 
calling of a meeting of ratepayers. On September S, 1925, 
the first public meeting was held with G.R. Walrod, later 
secretary-treasurer of the Rural High School, elected chair¬ 
man. Members of the various districts expressed support 
of the scheme, but one speaker thought a dormitory would be 
needed. The meeting concluded with a resolution passed 
unanimously to ask the Government to circulate petitions in 
the area. The following excerpt from a letter of October 51, 
1925, from the chairman to the Department of Education 


^D.L. MacDonald was a brother of Angus MacDonald, 
one time Premier of Nova Scotia. 








17 


indicates the precarious position of the scheme. 

Owing to the unsettled state of the weather, the 
fact that only a small percentage of the threshing 
in this district is finished and the pessimism pre¬ 
vailing among the farmers because of these conditions, 
the committee wish to request that the meetings 
proposed to be held during the second week in November 
be postponed indefinitely. The reason for this is 
that the Committee considers the present time most 
inopportune for bringing any question which involves 
the possible raising of taxes before the people if 
we are to hope for any great measure of success. 

As soon as the threshing is finished and prospects 
appear more favorable we shall again take the matter 
up with you and we trust that we may be more success¬ 
ful.^ 1 

Conditions in the community must have improved, for 
a vote in the rural areas took place January 9, 1926. 

The final count showed fifty-three votes for consolidation, 
twenty-three opposed, and three spoiled ballots. APPENDIX D 
is an original copy of the public notice calling for a vote 
in the Eockyford Rural High School District. 

Sometimes the presence of separate schools within 
the area complicated matters, although the different districts 
might work together. Eockyford was limited in area by both 
a Catholic separate school district and a Butterite school 
district. 


21 Letter from C.R. Walrod to the Department of 
Education, Eockyford Rural High School files, October 31, 
1925. 
























■ 

. ..:■■■ 

. 

. 

. . ' j 7 h 


■ 

■ ■ 1 

' ' . 











18 


Location Of Districts 

Strangely enough, of the nineteen Rural High Schools 
organized only the two Rural High Schools of Angle Lake 
and Splan were entirely rural. The Kathyrn School was 
situated some distance east of the village, but the village 
was included in the area. The plan seemed to work best when 
the central district in which the school was located was 
a more heavily populated area. Often the village or hamlet 
would have had to do without a high school if the surrounding 
districts had not cooperated. An ezcerpt from the minute 
book of the Beaverlodge Public School three years before the 
Rural High School was established there gives an insight 
into just such a situation. 

After the board had decided to discontinue High 
School several parents from outside districts came 
in to see if some arrangements could not be made to 
carry on. So, after some canvasing and the promise 
of donations from parents and pupils and others 
interested in the school, the board decided to carry 
on high school for another year. 22 

FIGURE I shows the location of the Rural High 
Schools provineially. A study of these locations suggests 
that the schools could function successfully in almost any 
type of area. Some of the districts were near cities or 
larger towns, while others such as Naco and Bow Slope were 


1927. 


22 Beaverlodge Public School minute book, August 8, 







19 



FIGURE I 






20 


relatively isolated. The only obvious conclusion that 
might be reached is that the Rural High Schools were no 
challenge either to the elementary consolidation of southern 
Alberta, or to the two-room schools. 

TABLE II indicates the time-span over which the Rural 
High School districts operated, and also the number of local 
districts involved in each consolidation at the time of 
their formation. A few local school districts expressed a 
desire to join a Rural High School district and others wished 
to withdraw', but the Department seldom found these appeals, 
warranted a change in the boundaries of the Rural High School. 
Fairview, however, grew from its original eight local school 
districts to contain eleven local school districts. 

Two interesting changes of Rural High School districts’ 
boundaries occurred at Waterhole and Spirit River. In 1929 
the northern Alberta Railroad extension to Hines Creek 
missed the site of Waterhole by four miles, and thus the new 
site of Fairview r was established near the railway. All 
buildings at Waterhole except for an old log shack were moved 
to the new site within a few months. The new local district 
of Fairview was added to the High school district and in 1937 
the name of the consolidation was changed to Fairview Rural 
High School. In 1938 Rycroft District broke away from Spirit 
River Rural High School District to form its own consolidation. 










































21 


TABLE II 


STATISTICS ON THE RURAL 
HIGH SCHOOL x 


District District Year Number of Year 

number name estab- local dis- dissolved 

lished tricts then 
established 


1 

• 

• 

Irma .. . . 

1921 

• 

• 

• 

6 

• 

• 


• 

1940 

2 

• 

• 

fleet . 

1921 

• 

• 

• 

5 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1939 

3 

• 

• 

Roekyford ..... 

1926 

• 

• 

• 

6 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1945 

4 

• 

• 

Dalemead . . 

1926 

• 

• 

• 

4 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1939 

5 

• 

• 

Naco . . . 

1926 

• 

• 

♦ 

7 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1945 

6 

• 

• 

Angle Lake ..... 

1927 

• 

• 

• 

2 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1933 

7 

• 

• 

Kathyrn ...... 

1927 

• 

• 

• 

3 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

1939 

8 

. 

* 

Kingman ...... 

1927 

♦ 

• 

• 

4 

• 

• 

• 

9 

1938 

9 

. 

• 

Waterhole (Fairview} 

1927 

• 

• 

♦ 

8 

• 

• 

• 

* 

1944 

10 

• 

• 

Berwyn. 

1928 

• 

• 

9 

5 

• 


• 

* 

1944 

11 

• 

• 

Bow Slope . 

1929 

• 

• 


3 

• 


• 

• 

1939 

12 

. 

• 

Splan . 

1929 

• 

• 

• 

4 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1939 

13 

• 

• 

Spirit River .... 

1929 

• 

• 

• 

5 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1945 

14 

. 

. 

Beaverlodge . . . . 

1930 

• 

• 

• 

6 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1946 

15 

• 

. 

DeWinton . 

1930 

• 

• 

• 

4 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1939 

16 

* 

• 

Duchess . 

1930 

• 

• 

• 

4 

• 

• 

• 

9 

1944 

17 

• 

• 

Spruce Grove . . . . 

1933 

• 

• 

• 

5 

• 

• 


• 

1939 

18 

• 


Ribstone ...... 

1935 

• 

• 

• 

3 

• 

• 

9 

• 

1939 

19 

• 

• 

Rycroft . 

1938 

• 


• 

4 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1941 


x Information from Alberta Gazettes . 





























) 














CHAP IE R V 


SCHOOL FACILITIES 

Few demands were made on a Rural High School at its 
inception. Department officials were very lenient in 
their definition of what were adequate buildings, furnishings, 
and equipment. Expenses were kept as low as possible until 
a community became accustomed to the advantages of secondary 
education and was willing to share the costs of improvement. 

Types Of School 

The temporary quarters of many Rural High Schools 
were greatly varied. The pioneer schools at Irma and 
Fleet operated for several years in makeshift rented build¬ 
ings which probably prompted a high school inspector to 

report that n some schools should be forced out of temporary 
23 

quarters. ,f A new school was built at Irma in 1925 and 
at Fleet in 1927. At Rib stone the Rural High School func¬ 
tioned in a building on main street until it was included 
in the lainwright School Division. There was no provision 
for playgrounds. Other schools spent shorter periods in 
temporary buildings. Spruce Grove rented a church building, 
Angle Lake and Waterhole used community halls, Bow Slope 


S3 J.A. Smith, Report to the Deputy Minister, Annual 
Report Of The Department Of Education , 1926, p. 13. 












23 


renovated an old house, and Kathyrn occupied a C.P.E. bunk- 
house for a short time. Only Angle Lake became discouraged 
by their poor accommodations. Their cooperatively built 
hall made of local lumber proved too cold for habitation 
during the winter. A tarpaulin was used to partition the 
big room to conserve heat, but the experiment failed. 

Building a new school seemed too large a project for this 
small consolidation of two local districts, and the whole 
plan was abandoned. Thus Angle Lake Sural High School 
operated only four months in 1927 although the district was 
not officially dissolved until 1933. 

A number of Bural High Schools were fortunate enough 
to find accommodation in an extra room of a public school. 
Until 1923 the Government had given liberal grants to schools 

2A 

with an extra room for community purposes, and in some cases 
the Rural High School made this room its permanent home. 
However, several districts built one or two-room schools in 
the manner specified by the Department of Education. The 
one-room schools were designed to allow for a future addition. 

The buildings were usually one story frame structures 
of board, stucco, or brick exteriors with full basements. 
School rooms were generally large enough to accommodate 
thirty to forty pupils. Costs for the one-room school varied 


24 I. Goresky, op. cit., 


p. 128. 

























24 


from $3500 to $4500 depending on the year in which it was 
built. Although most of the Rural High Schools remained 
one-room schools, two rooms were established at Waterhole 
in 1932, Beaverlodge 1934, Irma 1935, and Berwyn 1936. 


Classroom Equipment 


Classroom facilities at the beginning of a Rural 
High School T s operation were often as inadequate as the 
school buildings. In 1925 the secretary of the Fleet 
School described in a letter the equipment secured at the 
school's inception. 

This school (at Fleet) was opened in 1921 when 
prices were much higher than at present. The board 
rented a building for the school and the owner got 
a big heater and put some sheet zinc around it so 
that it heated the room quite a little like a Waterbury 
Heater. 

They had the desks built locally at a cost of a 
little over $6 each. At that time the school desks 
were quite expensive. Bach pupil provided his own 
chair. I am not sure who supplied the black boards 
but I believe it was the owner of the building. 

Then I think they got about $100. worth of laboratory 
supplies and hired the teacher. 

The procedure at Fleet was similar to that at other 
schools. A limited grant was given by the Government for 
library and science equipment, but the process of building 
adequate facilities was slow% In some areas libraries were 


25 Letter from G.R. Davey to D.L. MacDonald of Rocky- 
ford, Rockyford Rural High School files, September 11, 1925. 












25 


increased in size by donations of books or money by local 
citizens. Although a library and science room appeared on 
the different Department drawings of a model Bural High 
School, most of the schools T facilities consisted of a cup¬ 
board for the books and science equipment, and a table for 
conducting science experiments. On the other hand such schools 
as Bockyford, Kingman, and Waterhole had special science rooms 
and ample equipment. The Waterhole minute book reveals pur¬ 
chases of a microscope, electrical supplies, and agricultural 
equipment for teaching courses. In later years domestic 
science was taught at Waterhole. Most districts had a few 
maps, a dictionary and sometimes a piano. As the period of 
operation of the school progressed, classroom equipment 
compared favorably with schools of similar size and grades. 

Accommodations For Students 

The size of Bural High School districts and the 
distances pupils had to travel varied. Pupils in a few 
districts had extremes of ten miles to travel, but Waterhole 
reported twelve miles and Beaverlodge sixteen. Most of 
the students who travelled long distances came from homes 
outside of the consolidation. The farthest average distance 

Oft 

a student travelled to school was seven or eight miles. 


^ Rural nigh Schools In Alberta , p. 19. 
















j 



26 


Students used various means of travelling to school. 
Some pupils walked, but the majority of them rode horses. 
School boards often borrowed money to build barns even 
though the school buildings were inadequate. At Spruce 
Grove, students were charged sixty cents a month per horse 
for space in a rented barn. 27 A few students travelled to 
school in cars, although this type of transportation was 
expensive. Usually parents would cooperate by taking turns 
providing conveyance for a group of pupils. 

Many pupils who lived a considerable distance from 
school would stay in the village during the winter months. 

Some would find places to room and board, and others would 
rent a vacant house and cook their own meals. These rented 
houses often became popular gathering places for young 
people. At Naco several parents, who were usually wheat 
farmers only, coped with the transportation and parental 
problem by moving to the hamlet with their children. Portable 
M bunk-cars tf and H cook-shacks t? became dwellings for the winter. 

Still the need for dormitories or conveyances was 
often expressed in reports to the Department by those people 
administering Rural High Schools. The cost and need for 
further administration were the main deterrents. Occasionally 
lack of accommodation would produce threats of withdrawal 


27 Spruce Grove Rural High School minute book, 
August 1, 1935. 





■J >• : J 




j ; 






: - 




















27 


from fringe districts of the consolidation. The following 
is the body of a letter received by the Deputy Minister in 
1931. 


I have been instructed by our school board to ask 
you if there is any way possible for our district 
to withdraw from the Bockyford Rural High School 
District. 

We find that because of the distance from Rocky- 
ford and the inability to procure boarding and rooming 
facilities in Bockyford it is very inconvenient for 
our High School students to attend. One student 
travels eleven and one-half miles, four travel ten 
miles and it will be necessary for other students 
living in the district to travel as much as twelve 
and one-half miles. 

The roads have been open the last two years for 
driving, a very unusual situation - when the roads 
become blocked, as they usually are, it will be 
necessary for the children from this district to 
attend High Schools where there are boarding and 
rooming facilities. 

We find it too much of a hardship on the students 
to drive these extreme distances and to do their work 
properly. 28 

When a copy of this letter was sent to the secretary of the 
Bockyford Rural High School he claimed the letter was an 
exaggeration of the circumstances. He stated that the 
furthest distance travelled at present by a student was 
nine and one-half miles, that no support was given to the 
proposal of a boarding house, that the children were 


28 Letter from the secretary of Landseer School District 
to the Deputy Minister, Bockyford Rural High School files, 

March 5, 1931. 

APPENDIX D shows the location of the Landseer District. 























serviced by a main trunk road, and that the root of the 

grievance really concerned social events in the school. He 

further warned the Department that should they take the 

application seriously: "Our beautiful and efficient little 

High School will degenerate into the club house for which 

29 

the Coxy’s Army from Landseer is now clamoring." 

APPENDIX E contains the full text of this letter. 

Dormitories, where established, were successful. At 

Rockyford, the Catholic convent made provision for some 

students from distant points, and at Eycroft the Sisters of 

Service provided living accommodation for "any boy or girl 
SO 

of school age." But the only dormitory actually operated 
by a Rural High School board was at Duchess. After some 
difficulty, adequate accommodations were found for two 
dormitories, one for girls, and one for boys. Mr. Fred Betton 
in ansv/er to a questionnaire motet 

The dormitory was most satisfactory. A matron- 
cook was employed to live with the girls, I super¬ 
vised the boys. The cash required per pupil was 
$2.00 a month. All food was brought in from the 
home. In the K.I.D. pastern Irrigation District} 
vegetables, fruit, and meat were plentiful and 
almost without value. 31 


29 Ibid ., Letter from C.R. Walrod to the Department of 
Education, March 20, 1931. 

30 Letter from Jim McBride, Eycroft, August 4, 1955. 

31 Letter from Fred Betton, Cluny, August S, 1955. 

Mr. Betton helped father the plan for a Rural High School at 
Duchess. 













29 


At Brooks, where Bow Slope Rural High School sent 
their grade twelve students, the dormitory costs were 
seven dollars a month. Except for the usual discipline 
problem there were few hindrances to establishing a dormitory. 

Dormitories were later established at Spirit River 
and Kathyrn, but not until after these schools had joined 


divisions. 



CHAPTER VI 


THE SCHOOL BOARD, TEACHER, AND PUPIL 

No historic research can he complete without some 
study of the problems of the people who took part in the 
movement* The school board had to administer a new plan, 
the teacher had to cope with teaching many grades, and the 
pupil had to prove that a Rural High School could be a 
worthwhile institution. A study of these three groups 
provides a more intimate understanding and appreciation of 
what was accomplished. 

The School Board 

According to regulations, within fifteen days after 
a Rural High School was officially formed, the board of 
each rural and village district was to appoint one (in the 
case of a town, two) of their number to represent them on 
the board of trustees of the secondary consolidated district. 
The trustee so appointed held office during his term as 
trustee on the school board of the local district. If only 
two districts were represented in the consolidation (Angle 
Lake was an example) the two appointed trustees would 
appoint an additional trustee agreeable to both parties. 

In practice the chairman of the local district usually 
became the representative on the Rural High School board. 

















31 


Often the dominant figure on the board was not the 
chairman but the secretary-treasurer, who was appointed 
by his fellow trustees. The secretary-treasurer was 
generally chosen for his acquaintance with business proce¬ 
dures and his ability to express himself. Frequently he 
had been a leader in organizing the formation of the Rural 
High School, and he seldom had difficulty in being re-elected 
to office. As a result the secretary was almost a permanent 
member on many boards. His dominant position was sometimes 
challenged by a fellow’ trustee, usually without success. 

The secretary received a nominal sum of thirty to fifty 
dollars a year for his efforts. 

Problems of the board consisted of everything from 
very important financial matters to petty details which 
v/ere no less annoying. The feuds that erupted between the 
Rural High School board on the one hand and one or more 
local districts on the other ware particularly disturbing. 
Perhaps the best example of such disputes was the quarrel 
between the Kathyrn board and the Dalray local board. 
Beginning in 1927 with the petition to withdraw from the 
Rural High School, differences continued. In February of 
1929 a letter from the local district advised the central 
board that school regulations called for the maintenance 
of a classroom temperature of seventy degrees and that 
this regulation was not being followed. The suggestion was 





32 


made that there was "a tendency on the part of the management 
to economize on fuel, even during severe weather. M Mean¬ 
while in the same year the Dalroy District refused to pay 
its tax requisition, and court procedures were taken by the 
Rural High School board to recover the money. The case was 
finally settled out of court. (Chapter YII contains more 
complete details.) In 1932 a resolution from the same 
local district asked that the board pay less salary to the 
teacher. In 1935 the Dalroy District demanded the right 
to teach grade IX in the local school, and refused to pay 
tuition fees for grade XII students in the Rural High School. 

Although some Rural High School boards did not deal 
with such major community disagreements, similar problems 
were not uncommon. The school board often dealt with 
complaints about teachers and subjects taught, and they also 
dealt with diverse situations such as student misdemeanors, 
cattle dirtying the school grounds, and controversial 
literature in the school. J.PI. Coldwell, the secretary- 
treasurer at Kathyrn, wrote to the Department objecting 
to a booklet distributed to schools by a private source 
entitled Canada and Her wheat Pool . Deputy Minister J.T. 

Ross answered; 

I read the booklet and find that the whole tenor 
of it indicates that the writer has endeavoured to 


^Kathyrn Rural High School files, February 11, 1929. 






i 



















) 




r : 


0 . » .. : • 









33 


make as strong a ease as possible against the Wheat 
Pool. 

The Department of education had no knowledge that 
this booklet was sent to the secretary-treasurer of 
each school district, and I consider that you did 
right in holding it, as it is not literature that 
should be used in any way in a school room. 

I am sorry to learn that the enemies of the Wheat 
Pool are endeavouring in such a subtle manner to 
discredit the administration of the Wheat Pool in 
Western Canada. 33 

Christmas concert dates created a minor problem ?/hen 
the Rural High School concert date conflicted with that of 
a local district school. Many school districts wanted to 
have their concert the last school day since their school 
would be in no condition for classes the following day. 
Parents and children often attended all the concerts. The 
week before Christmas was a round of gala events. Contro¬ 
versy also arose from the restriction of the school building 
for pupil or adult social events during other times of the 
year. 


The Teacher 

The teacher in the Rural High School was generally 
well qualified. Schools near cities had numerous applica¬ 
tions from teachers with degrees, and most schools had 
teachers of lesser qualifications simply because that was 


33 Ibid ., Letter from J.T. Ross to J.H. Coldwell, 
November 28, 1930. 














1 





34 


their choice. For the period 1930 to 1937 inclusive, only 

two teachers with less than first class certificates taught 

34 

in Rural High Schools. Official records did not give an 

accurate account of teacher qualifications since many 

teachers with degrees simply indicated they held first 

class certificates. School policy in some cases was to 

35 

hire only teachers with degrees. 

An analysis of the maximum qualifications of teachers 
applying to the Kathyrn Rural High School hoard for the 
term beginning January 2, 1930 is revealing. One applicant 
had a second class certificate, two had first class certif¬ 
icates, five had Bachelor*s degrees, five had Master*s 
degrees, and one had a Doctor*s degree. 

The Kathyrn School is situated about twenty-five 
miles from Calgary, and undoubtedly the beginning of the 
depression years influenced more people to seek jobs, 
preferably near the city. Nevertheless, the qualifications 
of the applicants are imposing. Furthermore, many of the 
teachers had considerable experience and a few as principals 
of large schools. A closer scrutiny of the applications 
reveals some interesting details. 

Most of the applicants included copies of inspectors* 


34 Term Returns on file at the Department of Education, 
1930-1937. 

35 Splan Rural High School minute book, July 29, 1932. 



.-Vv & : ‘ /.. 

■ y, ... ; f ; . .... • -. 


.. : i j. , . ... .. • •>. ■ 

> ! . ■> .1- • . : 

. 

• . •. ; o .1 . 

■ 

■ ; ; ' ‘v-. -• ■ . . . •>.;... ".i* i-. - .. l . 

■ 

. .. 














35 


reports and many sent numerous testimonials. Letters of 
recommendation or statements of character came from former 
school principals, Department and university officials, 
prominent business men, and clergymen. One applicant in¬ 
cluded ten pages of duplicated typewritten material. An¬ 
other teacher stated that his reasons for teaching were 
mercenary since he needed money to complete his medical 
doctor’s degree. A lady with her Master’s degree had previ¬ 
ously spent three years lecturing at the. University of 
Wisconsin. Other applicants had university degrees from 
Scotland and Lngland. Many teachers assured the board of 
their good moral character, as did the applicant who stated: 

I am a married man of strictly temperate and moral 
habits. Use neither intoxicating liquors nor tobacco 
and consider the development of a strong manly or 
womanly Christian character in mv pupils the main 
object of my work as a teacher.^ 0 

The teacher with the second class certificate stated, n I 

37 

am an experienced qualified second class teacher. ?! A 
young lady with a Bachelor’s degree obtained the position. 

The school board’s choice of teacher was not always 
the wisest choice. Those boards paying the lowest salaries 
seemed to have more difficulties, presumably because their 
teachers were not so well qualified academically and they 
lacked teaching experience, however, in some cases the 

3 ^Kathyrn Rural High School files, November 29, 1929. 

37 Ibid., December 21, 1929. 








1 ' ■’ * . 






36 


teachers with degrees were the least successful. A teacher 
specialized in a few fields often had difficulty teaching 
a variety of courses. Some boards were willing to tolerate 
incompetent teaching if the teacher would take a reduction 
in salary. See TABLE III for the salaries paid in Bural 
High Schools in 1936. (See also TABLE V in Chapter VII for 
variations of salaries paid at Irma from year to year.} 
Teachers were also required to teach a number of 
grades. Although the teacher in a one-room school could 
not satisfactorily teach grade XII, where there was a low 
attendance or a great demand for the grade it was often 
taught. Teachers could not normally find time for all the 
grades, and as a result some grade XII subjects were taught 
before the regular school time or after school. Several 
schools paid their teachers extra for this burden, but others 
did not. The high school inspector had the right to forbid 
the teaching of grade XII; but when the teacher was willing, 
consent was usually given. Two-room schools taught the 
complete grade XII course. 

Dissatisfaction with the teacher stemmed from such 
causes as lack of discipline in the classroom, poor showing 
of pupils on examinations, and inability to teach certain 
subjects. One ratepayer wished to change teachers because 

rZO 

the present one could not teach German. ° 

38 Splan Rural High School minute book, June 27, 1934. 





) 




: •. 








. 


) 










37 


TABLE III 

STATISTICS FROM TERM RETURNS 
1936 

Rural high Teacher’s Pupil s ’ Grades 

school annual average represented 

salary attendance 

Irma - Room 1 # 900 . . 84.51 • . . IX, X 

- Room 2 ... . 1,200 . . 20.33 ... XI, XII 

Fleet ........ 1,000 . . 18.16 ... IX, X, XI, XII 

Rockyford. 1,500 . . 20.08 ... X, XI, XII 

Dalemead. 1,200 . . 11.36 ... IX, X, XI, XII 

Haco.. 900 . . 18.12 ... IX, X, XI, XII 

Kathyrn. 1,000 . . 11.1 ... IX, X, XI, XII 

Kingman .. 1,100 . . 20.39 . . . IX, X, XI 

Waterhole — Room 1 • 950 • • 33.72 ... IX, X 

- Room 2 . 1,050 . . 28.71 ... XI, XII 

Berwyn . 1,350 . . 31.79 ... IX, X, XI 

Bow Slope ...... 900 . . 10.48 . . . IX, X, XI, XII 

Splan. 1,000 » . 20.55 . . . IX, X, XI 

Spirit River .... 1,400 . . 28.83 ... IX, X, XI 

Beaverlodge - Room 1 850 • . 21.4 ... IX, XI 

- Room 2 1,200 . . 24.88 ... X, XII 

DeWinton. 1,000 . • 16.19 ... IX, X, XI 

Duchess. 1,100 . . 25.86 ... IX, X, XI 

Spruce G-rove .... 1,000 . . 19.8 ... IX, X, j'JJ. 

Ribstone ...... 925 . . 14.87 • . • till, IX, X, XI, XII 































38 


Some ratepayers complained that there was too much homework 
for their children, while others complained that there was 
not enough. In either case the child's final result from 
examinations was expected to be good. Many teachers expected 
children to do at least two hours of homework per day. 

Teaching in a Rural High School was not always short¬ 
term employment. Several teachers gave many years of excel¬ 
lent service. A number of these teachers are prominent in 
educational circles today. 

The Pupil 

The pupil of the Rural High School was perhaps a bit 
more conscientious than his urban counterpart, but the ways 
of youth were common to both. Misdemeanors dealt with by 
the rural board consisted of such things as destruction of 
school property, ungentle manly behavior in the classroom, 
creating explosions in the laboratory, and writing uncompli¬ 
mentary remarks about the teacher on the v^alls of the girls 1 
lavatory. Suggestions were sometimes made that the village 
should have curfew laws to keep the student at home at night. 

In 1935 many boards threatened to take action on the Government 
proposal to charge fees to students spending more time, than 
was necessary to complete high school. The reason for this 


59 The School Act, Alberta, 1935. 


































































39 


action was that students with no academic ambition were remain¬ 
ing in school because they could not find employment. Some 
students were expelled from school. 

Nevertheless, many students appreciated their educa¬ 
tional opportunities. This was particularly true of students 
from outside districts whose parents paid fees to the Rural 

High School. Rockyford had pupils from such distant points 

40 

as Mi chichi, Rumsey, New Norway, Hesketh, and Caroline. 

If grade XII was not offered in a school, the Rural High 

41 

School board usually paid fees for correspondence courses. 

The same was true for students going to technical school. 

The Department’s policy of limiting examination centres 
forced many Rural High School grade XII students to travel 
considerable distances. When June rains made roads impassable 
and students were unable to write the examinations, the 
Department came under a scathing attack from both school board 
and pupils. 


4G Rockyford Rural High School files. 

^Correspondence courses were introduced in Alberta 
in 1924. 





) 




~ 




, ■ : > ' 









; 













CHAPTER VII 


FINANCING- THE RURAL HIGH SCHOOL 

Financially, the Rural High School hoard was con¬ 
fronted with many problems. The mill rate had to be kept 
as low as possible, taxes and fees had to be collected, and 
finances had to be administered in an efficient manner. 
Sometimes stern measures had to be taken. 

Local Taxation 

An amendment to the School Assessment Ordinance in 
1921 outlined the procedure to be used in a Rural High 
School district for collection of taxes. APPENDIX F con¬ 
tains a copy of the Ordinance . 

The Rural High School board budgeted for the year 
and then requisitioned each local school district according 
to its assessment. Rural tax was levied on land valuation, 
while town or village tax was levied on both real and 
personal property. The assessed value of land in the 
rural districts was accepted as the same as that for pur¬ 
poses of the Supplementary Revenue Tax, but the town or 
village district which was part of the consolidation had its 
property assessed by the Rural High School board. The boards 
assessment was subject to appeal. 

The exact procedures outlined by the School Assess - 















41 


ment Ordinance were not always followed. A number of 
districts operated for the first few months on a flat rate 
system that in the rural areas was usually based on acreage. 
For many years Rockyford continued to use the acreage 
system of taxation in the rural areas and the assessment 
system in the village. Naco, which included seven school 
districts, gave a reduced rate to areas outside a ten mile 
radius of the school. There was considerable agitation 
in many consolidations for taxes to be based on the number 
of children attending school from each district. One 
correspondent in speaking of the assessment principle wrote; 
"This method of distribution caused more dissatisfaction 
than any other matter, Rural districts preferred distri- 
bution per capita of attendance,"^ However, a per capita 
system of taxation w T as never implemented. 

In most districts the tax levy was seldom more than 
two mills, although in lower assessment areas such as Haco 
and Bow Slope the tax went as high as four mills. Of 
course, the more districts included in the Bural Hig h School 
the lower the tax rate was likely to be. The large consoli¬ 
dation of Waterhole seldom had a tax rate much more than 
one mill and never more than two. During the depression, 
operation costa, were cut to a minimum. In 1933 the mill 


^Letter from Fred Betton, op . cit 








42 


rate at Splan dropped to seven-tenths of a mill, and in 
1934 the mill rate at Kingman dropped to three-quarters of 
a mill. TABLE IY shows the assessed valuation of land and 
the mill rate for Rural High Schools in 1929. 

Collecting taxes was sometimes difficult. The dispute, 
previously mentioned, between the Kathyrn Rural High School 
District and the Dalroy District spread into the taxation 
field. ?/hen the Dalroy District refused to pay its 1928 
requisition, the Kathyrn District took legal action to re¬ 
cover the money. The secretary of the Rural High School 
sent a letter of inquiry to the Department of Education 
and received the following answer: 

I am in receipt of your letter of the 26th ultimo 
in which you state that the law firm you have con¬ 
sulted suggested that they interview the Department 
of Education with regard to the procedure they 
should take to collect the amount of the requisition 
made by the Kathyrn Rural High School from the 
Dalroy School District. 1 cannot understand why the 
legal firm should delay in taking action against 
the Dalroy Board, as the amount of the requisition 
should be collected without delay. 

The members of the Board of Trustees of the Dalroy 
School District sent their resignations to this 
Department, and were advised that as they were 
elected by the ratepayers of the Dalroy School 
District, they should send their resignations to the 
Secretary with instructions for him to call a meeting 
of the ratepayers for the purpose of either accepting 
their resignations and electing a new Board, or 
deciding not to accept the resignations. If the 
ratepayers decide to elect no trustees it is very 
probable that they will request the Department of 
Education to appoint an Official Trustee for the 
District, but in the meantime the local board is 
responsible for the administration of the affairs 





48 , 


TABLE IV 

VALUATION OF LAND AND ASSESSMENT 


Name ofTotal assessed Mill rate” 

district _ valuation ____ 

Irma. 11,009,620.00 . . 2 5/8 

Fleet. $ 675,947.70 . . gf 

Rockyford. Operating on . . $5.25 per quarter 

an acreage section plus 20% 

basis additional assess¬ 

ment for debenture 
payment 

Dalemead. #1,009,630.30 . . 2 

Naco. # 698,573.00 . . 3f 

Angle Lake (Not operating) 

Kathyrn ...... # 826,552.00 . . 2 

Kingman ...... § 573,730.00 . . 2 

Waterhole (Fairview) #1,057,860.00 . . 1-J 

Berwyn. # 134,568.00 . . If 

Bow Slope. | 184,822.00 . . 4 

Splan. | 995,940.00 . . 1 

Spirit River . . . #1,000,000.00 . . 1 

Beaverlodge ... § 607,327.00 . . 2 

DeWinton. § 762,132.00 . . 2 

ic All figures are taken from Rural High Schools in Alberta, 
pp. 17-18. 


























• )' 















44 


of the Dalroy School District, and will be respon¬ 
sible until either their successors are appointed 
or they have requested the Minister to appoint an 
Official Trustee.43 

Subsequently the legal firm had a Statement of Claim served 
on the Dalroy District’s secretary-treasurer. Realizing 
the vulnerability of its position, the Dalroy board settled 
the case out of court. 

Previous to 1931 the local school districts collected 
their own tazes and the School .assessment Act read: 

It shall be the duty of the boards of each of 
said districts to pay to the board of the secondary 
consolidated school district on demand the amounts 
required from time to time for school purposes. 44 

However, in 1931 the municipal district council was 

given the authority to collect school tazes in its rural 
45 

area. The shortcomings of this new legislation in reference 
to the Rural High School was voiced in the following letter: 

At the time this district was formed, provision 
was made in the Act for payment of requisitions 
against the districts comprising the consolidation 
On Demand. Now, there is apparently no provision 
made which enables a Rural High S.D. to collect its 
accounts against the individual districts of which 
it is composed. 

Sub-section (3) of Section (47) of the School 

Assessment Act of 1931 says in part, . 

and the board of each of such districts shall cause 


43 Letter from J.T. Ross, Deputy Minister of Education, 
to Messrs* iford, Miller, and Harvie, Kathyrn Rural High School 
files, January 4, 1929. 

4 4 Statutes Of Alberta , 1921, p. 229. 

45 Ibid., 1931, p. 319. 












• ■ • 


j.: i 












i ; 


■ 













* 


















45 


such amount to be raised by taxation on the assess¬ 
able property in the district in the same manner as 
other school taxes.* 

This gives the local districts power to collect 
our taxes for us but gives us no power to collect 
our taxes from the local districts. Our experience 
indicates that when, as occurs in some instances, a 
local district has difficulty in collecting from a 
municipality, it is inclined to follow the line of 
least resistance and rather than insist on full 
payments by the municipality, they continue to 
operate their own local schools on our money. This, 
of course, hampers our plans and we wish to know 
what avenue of recourse is open to us. 46 

After further correspondence Deputy Minister J.T. 
Ross proposed the following change in the Act : 

The board of trustees of each district within 
a rural high school district shall pay to the board 
of trustees of the rural high school district the 
amount requisitioned pursuant to the provisions 
of subsection (3) hereof in quarterly instalments 
payable on the last day of each of the months of 
March, June, September, and December, and the amount 
of any instalment if not paid when due shall become 
a debt due, o?*fing and payable by the board of 
trustees of the high school district, which may be 
recovered by suit at law, if permission to enter 
such suit is granted by the Minister.47 

Mr, Walrod expressed dissatisfaction with the amend¬ 
ment because the municipal district did not pay the requi¬ 
sition directly to the Rural high School district, and thus 
the local district could still divert the use of the funds 


^Letter from C.R. Walrod to the Department of 
Education, Eockyford Rural High School files, October 25, 1933. 

4:7 Ibid., Letter from J.T, Ross to C.R. Walrod, 

November S,"T933. 

























46 


if it so desired. The discussion was finally brought to 
a close with the following letter; 

I regret to report that the Minister was not 
favorably impressed with our proposal to modify 
the Act in such a way as to safeguard payments to 
the Rural High School Board. I think he felt 
that anything of the sort would tend to complicate 
matters and might have only an effect of drawing 
attention specifically, in some districts, to the 
fact that much needed revenues for local purposes 
were being devoted to the Rural High School. He 
was of the opinion also that the situation is, 
more or less, due to the prevailing disturbed con¬ 
ditions and that it would all have a tendency to 
right itself as soon as there is a general 

improvement. 48 

Upon further investigation the Rockyford secretary- 
treasurer discovered that the local school district was 
divided between municipalities. The one municipality had 
paid the requisition while the other had not. Therefore, 
what funds were available were being used to maintain the 
local school. Action thus had to be taken against the 
municipality. 

The tax collecting problem at Rockyford was not just 
peculiar to that district. Mr. G.R. Davey of Fleet reported 
that “the debenture debt weighed heavily during the thirties. 
Some of the member school districts would not demand enough 
money from the municipalities and some of the municipalities 
did not have the money.” 49 


48 Ibid., Letter from Mr. Gorman to C.R. Walrod, 
January 25^1934. 


49 Letter from G.R. Davey, Fleet, May 26, 1955. 















47 


Government Grants 

Government grants to the Rural High School were 
generous. An amendment to the School Grants Act in 1921 
stated that a grant of four dollars per day would he given 
for each day the high school room operated provided the 
school maintained an average attendance of fifteen pupils. 
Non-resident children who applied for entrance were to he 
admitted without fee. The four dollar per day grant re¬ 
mained the same until 1936, in spite of the tendency from 
1920 until 1935 for reduction in grants. 50 In 1933, as a 
result of the depression, grants were paid for not more 
than 180 days, instead of the usual two hundred days, and 
in 1936 the figure of two hundred days was restored hut the 
grant per day was reduced to three dollars and sixty cents. 
The requirement for an average attendance of fifteen pupils 
was maintained throughout the period of the Rural High 
School. In practice, when the average enrollment dropped 
below fifteen, a partial grant was paid through an order-in 
council. The grant per day was in the same ratio to four 

dollars that the average attendance for the school term was 
51 

to fifteen. In addition, the Government paid a grant for 
science equipment and library facilities. The science 

50 I. Goresky, Q£. cit . , p. 130. 

^Kathyrn Rural High School files. 








48 


equipment grant remained for many years at fifty per cent 
of the board's expenditures on such equipment to a maximum 
of one hundred dollars. The library grant was limited in 
1923 to the first six years after the organization of the 
school, and the paying of the grant was based on an inspector's 
recommendation. 

The Rural High School with small attendance often did 
a great deal of manipulating to keep its grant as large as 
possible. TABLE III indicates this relationship between the 
low average attendance of Dalemead, Kathyrn, Bow Slope, and 
Ribstone, and the large number of grades taught in each school. 
The Rural High School with a low attendance frequently com¬ 
plained when an inspector would permit a local school district 
in the consolidation to teach grades YIII or IX. On the other 
hand, the fringe districts wished to save the younger children 
from having to travel a considerable distance. 

Tuition Fees 

In 1919 the Government abolished the payment of fees 
for non-resident pupils in grades above the eighth, and in 
return gave high schools a special grant of one dollar and 
fifty-cents per day. 52 School boards accepted the grant, 
but chose to ignore the relationship it bore to non-payment 


^Statutes Of Alberta , 1919, p. 213. 
















. 




. 
















i; { • 







. 

, 



* 













■ 






t ■ 








c : . : 








49 


of fees. Therefore, in 1922, as a result of agitation 
from trustees, the Government gave permission to school 
boards to charge a three dollar a month fee for students 
in grades IX, X, and XI, and a four dollar a month fee for 
students in grade XII. The school board was responsible 
for pupil’s fees in grades below XI, and parents or pupils 
were responsible for fees in grade XII. A school board 
did not have to take responsibility for payment of fees if 
a student could have received the same grade of instruction 
in his home district. 

The Department now received complaints from two 
sources. The Rural High School boards still maintained that 
non-resident pupils vrere not bearing their share of school 
costs, and inspectors reported that many children were not 
going to high school because parents could not afford to 
pay fees. The following excerpt of a letter from a parent 
of a non-resident pupil to the secretary of a Rural High 
School, supports the latter group's contention. 

In reply to your statement of tuition due. I 
hardly know what to write you in regard to this. 

Due to the summer frost and dry weather, I only had 
120 hu. of wheat last year and practically no feed 
and we have sold off to keep going until now there 
is nothing more to sell. I will not be able to 
do my summer fallowing until I collect for some 
road ?/ork that I will begin this week. Mrs. G. has 
put in most of the crop this spring while I worked 
at I. & B. but a dollar a day doesn’t buy necessities 
for a family. 

I want to do the right thing by the H.S. district 
as we are mindful and appreciative of the benefits 




50 


to the girls, but I cannot see how I can raise any 
cash at present. I would like to hear from you again. 

I may be down this week, but I try to avoid losing 
any time. 33 

As in the case cited, some parents could not afford 
to pay fees, and a number of school boards did not bother 
trying to collect these debts. In a few instances the 
parents hauled wood to the school or clipped the hedges in 
payment of fees. Nevertheless, there were parents who the 
board felt could pay the charges, but would not. Sometimes 
the board would retaliate by using such methods as demanding 
that pupils pay fees monthly, visiting the parents personal¬ 
ly, and threatening to use the legal powers of collection 
permitted in the School Act . Results were still not satis¬ 
factory. 

Other tuition problems arose when no school district 
would accept responsibility for the children of transient 
workers, or a pupil would enroll in the Rural High School 
when he could have been instructed in the same grade in 
his home school district. However, a more common problem 
was the apportioning of responsibility for payment of fees 
when a student was taking courses in both grade XI and XII. 
No official ruling was given in the School Act , but in 1934 


33 Kathyrn Rural High School files, June 24, 1935. 





























51 


the Department stated: 

The ruling has been that the district furnishing 
the instruction is entitled to receive a fee of 
|>4*00 per month, payable with regard to the Grade XI 
subjects by the home district of the pupil, at the 
rate of 400 per subject per month, and the balance 
is payable by the parent or pupil.54 

For a student who was taking fewer than ten subjects the 

parent received the larger share of the cost. 

In 1935 an amendment to the School Act gave the 

Chief Inspector the power to fix the amounts chargeable 

to the parent when students were taking courses in both 

grades. The new scale provided for a fee of ten dollars 

for the first unit in grade XII, and five dollars for all 

subsequent units in either grade XI or grade XII. The 

55 

maximum charge for fees was forty dollars. 

Not all Rural High Schools accepted the principle 
that grade XII was their responsibility. Some boards 
attempted to collect tuition fees from resident pupils 
enrolled in this higher grade. However, legally any 
payment on the part of the parent was purely voluntary. 
One irate taxpayer who objected to this extra fee for 
grade XII wrote: 


54 Letter from I.H. Mann to J.H. Coldwell, Kathyrn 
Rural Rural High School files, December 19, 1934. 

55 The School Act for 1936 contains a table of fees 
for non-resident pupils partially in grade XI and partially 
in grade XII. 











V, 


















52 


Finally, on principle I may say, and to prevent 
this charging of fees to resident pupils, in order 
to extract illegal levies from such, from becoming 
a precedent, I hereby strongly object to this prac¬ 
tice, I would refuse to pay such a levy and would 
recommend all others to do likewise — and this, 
even though the Minister of Education ruled other¬ 
wise, It is simply a legal question and would have 
to be decided by a court. If the board are in need of 
more funds as a corporate body, it can raise more 
money on the mill rate -- but not by private and 
illegal action contrary to the school act. 5 ° 


Cost Of Operation 

The estimated cost of operating a Bural High School 

in 1929 was, on the average, twenty-four hundred dollars. 

If the school was open for two hundred days and maintained 

a minimum attendance of fifteen, the grant was eight hundred 

dollars. The other sixteen hundred dollars came from 

taxation. The average annual tax in the rural areas was 

five dollars a quarter section, or expressed as a mill rate 

57 

the tax was from one to three mills on the dollar. 

The greatest single expense was the teacher T s salary 
which was usually more than one-half of the total cost. 

Where a great deal of money was spent on school buildings 
and equipment, the debenture debt was also a large item. 

The low mill rate of Splan and Kingman, cited earlier, was 


^^Letter from T. Davis to J.H. Coldwell, ICathyrn 
Rural High School files, December 4, 1935. 

5y Rural High Schools In Alberta , p. 12. 





































i: ■ 









53 


largely due to the fact that these two schools rented 
classrooms. During the depression when funds were lacking, 
the debenture debt was the last to be paid. Other items 
of expense were for such things as caretaking and fuel, 
school equipment, and insurance. TABLE V is a financial 
summary of the Irma Rural High School District for a ten 
year period which includes the depression years. 

There was no other type school that operated in the 
same manner as the Rural High School. The nearest similar 
types of schools were the consolidated school and the village 
school. However, in both cases these schools included 
children who were also receiving instruction in elementary 
grades. The cost of educating children in the lower grades 
was not as great as in high school, mainly because the 
teachers of the lower grades received less salary and 
usually had larger classes. Also, the town and village 
schools would likely have more pupils per room which would 
decrease the cost per pupil. Nevertheless, bearing these 
facts in mind, TABLE VI is some indication of comparative 
costs of high school education. 





54 




w 














0 














0 














<+H 














0 fl 

o 

O 

O 

O 

02 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 



O O 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 



Pi -H 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 



0 £3 -P 

CO 

LO 

o 

'sH 

to 

o 

cO 

o 

LO 

CO 

CD 



PJ O -H 


o 

02 

02 

02 

CD 

i—1 

02 

O 


CD 



•H Jh 0 
pH <+-t "P 


1—1 

i—1 


i—1 


02 

i—1 

i—1 

02 




1 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

O 

02 

LO 

'sH 

O 



Sh 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

CO 

02 

LO 

O 



Ph -P 

• 

• 

# 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 



0 -P d 

xt 1 

02 


03 

cO 

cO 

o 

CO 

cD 

LO 

CO 



f> d 0 

o 

CD 

o 

o 

CD 

CD 

pH 

CO 

rH 


o 



o 0 fH 

CO 

D- 

CO 

co 

D- 

O 

CO 

co 

CO 

O* 

o 



dJ £ CiD 

*©9* 









+3 

w d 

cO 

O 

CD 

o 

02 

to 

cd 

o 

o 

LO 

02 



o o 

o 

to 

02 

co 

£N 

CO 

CO 

o 

o 


CO 



O -H 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

a 



<p -p 

o 

tN 

02 

CO 

CO 


pH 

LO 

CO 

CO 

§3 


h 

•P O 0 

H 

to 

02 

£N 

cO 

•sH 

CO 

LO 

CD 

02 


o 

o ?H 

CD 

02 

CO 

02 

LO 

LO 

H 

o 


o 

CO 


o 

0 0 












Ph W 

M Ph 

to 

CO 

co 

CO 

CO 

to 

CO 

CO 

02 

02 

H 


o o 

pq O 













03 H 














Pi HH LQ 














<S C5 co 

d 












> 


i>> 0 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

CO 

cD 

CD 


§|lj^ 

Ph ,d 

o 

o 


sH 

o 

o 

02 

02 

02 

cD 

LO 

a 

P ^ 

CO H 8 

0^0 
r! *H 0 

CO 

CO 

CO 

o> 

o 

o 

CD 

CD 

in 

02 

H 

pq 

, < 1 

0 0 0 

HI 

1—I 

H 

pH 

02 

02 

H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

<S 

p « 

CO PH+ 3 

*©9* 











Eh 

<5 0 in 














M 

O os 

0 













iSiSs' -1 

gs 

m 

0 


02 

cd 

CO 

to 

o 

O 


o 

O 

O 


0 d 


02 

02 ■ 

CD 

cO 

to 

CD 

cO 

o 

o 

O 


H M 

Ph 













pH 

d o 

O 

cD 

CN 

pH 

o 

to 

CD 

02 

to 

rH 

LO 


PI 

■P -p 

LO 

lO 

ib 

CD 

CO 

CD 

cd 

02 

CO 

CD 

CN 


Pi rO 

02 

cD 

co 

O 

CO 

cO 

CD 

Gi 

CD 

D- 



Eh 

0 0 
rQ "0 

LO 

CO 

LO 

LO 


CO 

02 

rH 

pH 

rH 

H 



0 Pi 

««9* 













P3 -h 

CO 




CD 









rH 0 














H -P 

i—! 




to 


hJ02 


h|o2 





*rl 0 


H|02 


H[03 


COlvjH 



H|H? 




02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

rH 

rH 

rH 

H 




CO 


LO 

LO 

o 

O 

O 

LO 

LO 

o 

H 



d 


02 

cd 

LO 

02 

02 

LO 

£N 

CO 

CO 

cD 



nd O 

02 

H 

o 


to 

CO 

to 

LO 

pH 

Gi 




0 -H 

0 -P 

CO 

CO 

'sH 

CD 

IN 

Gi 

LO 

CD 

00 

£>* 

i — 1 



0 0 

D- 

CO 

co 

cO 

o 

O 

rH 

Gi 

CD 

CD 

CD 



0 0 

o> 

o 

CD 

cd 

o 

o 

O 

CO 

CO 

CO 

co 



0 r—1 


»» 




** 

<r> 







0 0 
<3? > 

■m 

H 



rH 

rH 

rH 







Ph 

lO 

CO 

o 

CO 

cd 

O 

rH 

02 

CO 


LO 



0 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

CO 

CO 

CO 

to 

to 

CO 



0 

o> 

cd 

cd 

cd 

CD 

cd 

G> 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 




!—! 

H 

i —! 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

i —i 


i The above information is from the Annual Financial Statement and Auditor 1 
Report. 





























55 


TABLE VI 


COMPARATIVE COST PER PUPIL 
ACCORDING- TO AVERAGE ATTENDANCE x 


School year 

Town and village 
schools 

Consolidated 

schools 

Rural High 
Schools 

1934-35 . . 

$58*85 . 

, $84.98 . . . 

§87.79 

1935-36 . . 

60.08 . 

86*57 . . . 

81.14 

1936-37 . . 

60*58 ... 

91.57 . . . 

86.12 

1937-38 . . 

62.25 .. 

88.84 . . . 

82.67 


x The above information is from the Comparative Cost Tables 
of the Annual Report Of The Department Of Education for 
the years indicated. 

















CHAPTER VIII 


THE DISCONTINUATION OF THE RURAL HIGH SCHOOL 

Only one Rural High School, Angle Lake, discontinued 
operations for reasons other than the coining of the school 
division. Proponents of the Rural High School often voiced 
strong opposition to the division, as well as did most rural 
trustees, but the movement could not be halted. 


Background Of The Division 


Department officials were perturbed by the lack of 
response to the Rural High School plan since previous to 
1926 only the two schools at Irma and Fleet had been formed. 
Furthermore, these two schools had financial and adminis¬ 
trative limitations. G.W. Gorman, Chief Inspector of Schools 
in 1926 proposed that: 

The high school problem might be met at once by 
organizing the rural municipalities into High School 
areas, and charging each municipality with the 
responsibility for high school instruction for the 
pupils of all resident parents. This could be 
financed with a municipal rate, supported by provin¬ 
cial assistance, and the administration might be in 
the hands of a municipal board or committee of all 
the school boards of the several districts in the 
municipality. 58 

In the following years, Mr. Gorman continued to express 
concern about the number of rural children who were being 


SSg.W. Gorman, Report to the Deputy Minister, Annual 
Report Qf The Department Of Education , Alberta, 1926, p. 41. 





















r 


O . 











■ -v ; 











-. j 
















57 


deprived of an opportunity for an education, and lie became 
a strong advocate of the large unit of administration to 
include all grades. 

Mr. G-orman was not alone in his efforts. The Minister 

of Education, Perren Baker, as early as 1925 had proposed 

to the Legislature a provincial w r ide levy of three mills in 

aid of school districts in weak financial condition. Although 

this bill was rejected, the Minister.continued his campaign. 

In 1928, he was again unsuccessful when he introduced a bill 

calling for rural areas to be divided into twenty divisions 

59 

with a provincial wide mill rate. Still undaunted, Perren 
Baker published a pamphlet in 1929. which outlined the method 
whereby large divisions would solve many of the unsatisfact¬ 
ory conditions in education. In reference to the Rural High 
School, he stated that they tf meet the need fairly well in 
the localities where such consolidations have been formed. 

But, being a voluntary association, it is difficult to 
effect. tf 60 In 1930 a new bill before tbe Legislature pro¬ 
vided for the large units of administration, but no mention 
was made of a provincial wide tax and a vote of the rate¬ 
payers was permitted. Once again the bill was rejected. 

Ooresky, 0 £. oit ., pp. 144-145. 

^Perren Baker, Rural Education In Alberta , p. 

61 1. Goresky, op,, cit. , p. 146. 


4 








58 


The opposition to the Honourable Perren Baker T s 
plan for education also came from the taxpayers. In 1929 
the Rockyford taxpayers after discussing the pamphlet 
Rural Education In Alberta submitted a brief to the Leg¬ 
islative Assembly. Speaking of secondary education, the 
brief maintained that: 

So far as secondary education is concerned, 
considerable benefit could be derived if more gen¬ 
eral advantage were to be taken of our Rural High 
School scheme which is very creditably supplying 
a long felt need and which is not burdensome on 
the taxpayer. In this connection, we would respect¬ 
fully suggest that an effort be made to simplify the 
erection of these districts as our present system is 
most unwieldy and cumbersome. It requires an endless 
amount of determination and perseverence to put the 
idea into operation and it is possible that commu¬ 
nities with the best of intentions would become 
frightened or discouraged at the multitude of ob¬ 
stacles placed before them which have no apparent 
value. 

In reference to the proposed provincial levy which would 
make the rate of taxation more uniform, the brief agreed 
that: 


We are also in favor of any scheme that will 
f effect a fair distribution of the cost* but in 
arriving at what the Hon. Hr. Baker considers a 
fair distribution it might be well to investigate 
the possibilities involved. The Hon. Mr. Baker. 
is apparently shocked by the startling realization 
that" school districts vary in assessed valuation 
from §5,000.00 to #400,000.00 and that while the tax 
in a given year falls as low as 5 mills in some 
districts it rises to 80 mills in others. 80 mills 
on a #5,000.00 assessment would bring in.only #400.00. 
Just what could anyone expect of a district ox this 
size, and who is to blame lor sucn an appalling) 
condition? Surely not the legitimate and well in¬ 
tent! one d settler who has taken up land in some 
other part of the province. If a settler chooses 













' 0 ,.r. 






'.co ' 

.J, ii . i;; j . 





. 






> 


) J . 





/ . : i :h . 













c 


J 


: 



/) 




59 


to file on a mountain top or an island in the center 
of a lake are the taxpayers of the province expected 
to educate his children? If so he has a similar 
right to demand a road to his place as the Act says 
roads must be opened to all schools. If these 
residents are marooned in a desert it would appear 
to be profitable investment for the province to 
move them to a more reasonable location. 

Finally, in referring to the effect of increased costs if a 

provincial levy was imposed, the brief pointed out that: 

This system has a tendency to eradicate all but 
the best farmers as the operation costs together 
with the high taxes, are too heavy a drain on the 
proceeds of the crops to allow for any incompetence 
or waste. The man who is fortunate enough to own 
his farm can get along but the best type of new¬ 
comer is finding the overhead expense too great and 
if interest and tax charges are very materially 
increased he will ultimately be driven off the land 
as no good farmer can afford to spend his life work¬ 
ing for someone else without hope of profit for him¬ 
self. This will force the valuation of the land 
down but would it not be much wiser to set the taxes 
on this land at a reasonable rate and encourage 
thrifty and industrious farmers to live on the land? 
Will the Hon. Mr. Baker or someone else tell us 
where they can possibly see justification in penal¬ 
izing one section of the province and subsidizing 
another section. It is but the Irish Home Buie Bill 
in another guise being foisted upon the people of 
Alberta to the detriment of the few unjustly assessed 
municipalities. 

The amendment to the School Assessment Act of 193.1, 
which made the municipality the collection agency lor rural 
schools, was the only statutory progress towards the idea 
of large units that Perren Baker achieved. In 1934 a 
committee of the Legislative Assembly undertook a study of 


SSprief to the Alberta Legislative Assembly, 
Bockyford Rural High School files, February 2, 1929. 









60 


rural education, and in 1935 the report was submitted with 
a recommendation that some form of the large unit of admin¬ 
istration be established. 

In the summer of 1935 the Social Credit party swept 
into power under Mr. Aberhart who as Minister of Education 
put into effect the dream of his predecessor Perren Baker. 

5oilowing a study of the report of the Legislative Committee 
on rural education, the Legislature empowered the Minister 
of Education to set up divisions without a vote of the rate¬ 
payers. In 1936 eleven divisions were formed. 

Although the Government had passed a bill for the 
formation of school divisions, not all the public were 
willing to accept the statute. Fairview Rural High School 
seemed to have good reason for submitting the following 
resolution which stated that: 

Whereas, it is the policy and the intention of 
the Alberta Government to establish larger admin¬ 
istrative units, known as School Divisions, through¬ 
out the Province, and 

Whereas, in the Peace River area some divisions 
already established, and others in the process of 
formation, include an organized municipality and a 
large area of newly settled territory in local im¬ 
provement districts, whereas very little revenue 
is raised for the support of schools, and a great 
many of the residents are on relief, and whereas, 
many of the people in these improvement districts 
came to new homesteads from the drought area with 
the assistance of the Federal and Provincial govern¬ 
ments, and have been kept on relief for years by 
these same governments, and the type of land 
occupied by most of these homesteaders would in¬ 
dicate that they will be unable to produce more than 

























0 T - 
















61 


a subsistanee for many years to come, and whereas 
it is definitely the responsibility of the Province 
as a whole to provide education for these newer 
areas until they are self supporting. 

Therefore be it resolved that we, the trustees 
and ratepayers of Fairview Rural High S.D. No. 9, 
representing ten rural and one village school districts 
in the municipality of Fairview registers our op¬ 
position to, and hereby protest against the formation 
of a School division by uniting Fairview Municipality 
with adjacent Local Improvement Districts, as the 
establishment of such a division would simply mean 
that the Province would be shifting its responsibility 
for education and the burden of costs onto one 
municipality instead of spreading it over a larger 
area; and 

Be it further resolved that the Department of 
Education, and the Alberta School Trustees’ Asso¬ 
ciation send representation to the Howell commission 
on Dominion Provincial relations when it sits in 
Edmonton to impress on that body the seriousness of 
the school problems in Alberta, and the fact that 
the cost should be spread over the Dominion instead 
of concentrating on one municipality. 63 


Joining The Division 


When a school division was formed the rural area 
was automatically a part of the unit, but a village or 
tom had a choice. The following excerpt of a letter 
states the three possible solutions for a Rural High 
School district. 

The best method of dealing with rural high school 
districts within divisional boundaries, when a 
village district is included, is to have the village 
enteT’ the division. There is sometimes a difficulty 


6o Fairview Rural High School minute booh, January t1, 


1938. 












62 


here in that the village district may not wish to 
be included in the division. We are finding, how r ever, 
that in a great many instances villages do wish to 
be included in divisions, since then they are likely 
to continue to be high school centres or to be 
established as high school centres if this has not 
already taken place. 

A second plan is to have the village school 
district continue to operate the rural high school 
as a part of its own organization. The divisional 
board can then enter into an agreement with the 
village board for the education of the pupils attend¬ 
ing, or wishing to attend, from the adjacent rural 
districts. The divisional board can agree to pay 
a lump sum to the village board or pay fees at a 
certain rate for each pupil in attendance from its 
districts at the village school. 

A third plan would be that of having the divisional 
board operate the rural high school and of having 
the village board enter into an agreement with it 
for the payment of a lump sum or fees for the village 
pupils. This plan cannot work satisfactorily if 
suitable arrangements cannot be made for a school 
building, naturally a divisional board cannot go 
into a village district not included in the division 
and build and equip a school there. A divisional 
board, if it is required to build, would want to 
erect a school in a district included iii the division. 4 

The first proposal was the logical choice for Rural 
High Schools that could not operate independently. Only 
larger villages or towns that were natural population centres 
could remain outside of the division, and force the larger 
unit to sign an agreement for the education of rural pupils. 
This was particularly true of the schools in the Peace 
Elver area, except for Rycroft which was near the larger 


64 Letter from E.L. Puller, Chief Inspector of Schools, 
to l.E. Frame, Inspector of Schools, Rockyford Rural High 
School files, December 5, 1938. 












63 


town of Spirit River. Some villages, such as Duchess, 
lost their opportunity to become centralized schools because 
they remained outside the divisions too long. Kathyrn, 

Bow Slope, and Ribstone entered divisions almost immediately 
and were probably quite content to do so since these schools 
had trouble maintaining attendance. Of the three schools, 
only Kathyrn became a centralized high school. Although 
such schools as Fleet, Kingman, Splan, Spruce Grove, and 
Dalemead soon entered divisions, centralized high schools 
were established elsewhere. 

Naco, another Rural High School with a low attendance 

record, found its rural districts divided between Acadia 

and Neutral Hills School Divisions;: and as a result of Naco's 

remote location, both divisions continued to send pupils 

to the school. When the school population could not be 

maintained, the high school was closed and the Acadia School 

Division made the ruling that ”the high school students will 

be given the opportunity to attend one of our high schools 

in the Division or attend Consort H.S. and the Board w r ill 

65 

pay an allowance of #1.00 per school attendance day." 

Bockyford Rural High School suffered perhaps the 
strangest fate of all. Upon Rockyford refusing to enter the 
Wheatland Division, the divisional board came to an agree- 


65 Letter from C.G. Peterson, secretary-treasurer 
of Acadia School Division, August 4, 1955. 










■ j 


■ 














’ 







64 


merit with the Rockyford village school and with the Catholic 

separate school to share the cost of operating the Rural 

High School. Later when Wheatland complained of bearing an 

unfair share of the costs, the separate school established its 
66 

own high school. Soon after, Rockyford joined the Division, 
but two high schools in a small village proved too much, and 
the public high school was discontinued. 



65 Rockyford Rural High School files, 1938-1945. 








' - 























CHAPTER IX 


AH EVALUATION OF THE RURAL HIGH SCHOOL EXPERIMENT 

Although only nineteen secondary consolidations were 
ever formed, the Rural High School plan can not be branded 
a failure. Graduates of these schools today include research 
chemists, lawyers, doctors, superintendents of schools, and 
teachers, as well as hundreds of others whose lives were 
enriched by a high school education. The fact that Rural 
High Schools operated during the depression years when most 
parents could not afford to send their children away to 
school, enabled these schools to render a more valuable 
service than otherwise would have been possible. An inspector 
in referring to the Kingman Rural High School pupils said: 

”1 estimate that not more than 10$ of them would have found 

it possible in 1931 to.have received high school privileges 

67 

except in this school. ft 

Individual examples of students who acquired their 
education under conditions of extreme hardship are by no 
means rare. Some students travelled long distances on foot 
or by-horse through severe winters, while in other cases 
parents went to considerable effort to keep their children 

67 J.W. Russell, Report to the Chief Inspector of Schools. 
Annual Report Of The Department Of Education , 1931, p. 63. 








in school. In spite of their early difficulties, many 
former Rural High School pupils have become some of our 
noted public leaders today. 

Another feature of the Rural High School was the high 
quality of leadership that it produced in the community. In 
his historical research, Isidore Goresky found a great deal 
of incompetence among trustees and secretary-treasurers of 
the rural school, but such were apparently not the condi¬ 
tions in the Rural High School. The influence of the leaders 
of the Rural High School upon Department officials was very 
much greater than the number of schools formed would indicate. 
This strong leadership close to the community generally 
promoted greater community interest in local educational 
affairs than does the present division. A former secretary 
expressed this feeling when he said of the Rural High School: 

All the school 1 s problems were definitely the 
problem of a local people, not a job to be passed 
up by some one a million miles away as far as his 
knowledge or responsibility to local conditions 
is concerned. 

For a number of reasons (convictions, sentiments, or both) 
many officials of the Rural High School never accepted the 
idea of the superiority of the divisional system. 

There was no intrinsic reason why the Rural High 
School should not have been successful in most rural areas 

68 I. Goresky, o£. clt ., p. 118. 

^Letter from G.R. Davey, Fleet, may 26, 19o5. 





















































67 


of Alberta. Those educators who attacked the plan did so 
not because the scheme was of little value, but mainly 
because it allowed for a "voluntary association" of school 
districts. In 1935 a publication authorized by Mr. Aberhart, 
said of the Rural High School: "These consolidations have 
met a real need, but as they are purely voluntary organi¬ 
zations their development has been slow." 7 ^ Certainly there 
was a "real need" for rural secondary schools, for the same 
publications stated that "in at least 50% of our ungraded 
schools there is no way by which boys and girls who have 

completed G-rade ¥111 can have access to high school in- 
71 

struction." Although the Rural High School, if compulsory, 
could have largely solved the rural secondary educational 
problem, the larger unit had certain advantages. 

For any system to be accepted, it must have some 
advantage in the taxation field, dust as the proponents of 
the Rural High School had emphasized the economy of a larger 
district, so the proponents of the division applied the same 
reasoning to an even larger unit. With centralization 
there would be more pupils in fewer classrooms and thus a 
financial saving would be effected. In addition, a school 
could offer a more diversified program of studies. Also, 


70 What Is And What Might Be In Rural Bducation in 
Alberta, p. 13. 

71 Ibid ., p. 3. 











) 



















68 


with the division the irritating problems that the Rural High 
School had collecting fees and bickering with local districts 
about grades taught, and grants received, would be overcome. 

The Rural High School was burdened with an awkward 
supervision system when it was situated in the same building 
or the same school grounds as a public school. What authority 
did the high school teacher have over children in the lower 
grades? If the high school teacher acted as principal who 
paid him for the job? When two teachers shared teaching 
grades seven to twelve, how was the responsibility for pay¬ 
ing salary apportioned between the public school district 
and the Rural High School;; and in administering grants were 
there two high school rooms in operation or one? APPENDIX G 
tells how the Rockyford Rural High School settled just such 
a complex problem. Under a system of divisions these problems 
would not occur. 

Further advantages of the large unit of administration 
included less duplication of office administration, and the 
less likelihood of personal reasons affecting the hiring and 
firing of teachers, However, the use of dormitories or 
conveyances to make education more accessible to rural 
pupils could have been applied to either a Rural High School 
system or the divisional system. 

The main value of the Rural High School was that it 
bridged a gap between the more advanced thinking of a few 


. ■/' 




> 








69 


educational leaders, and the time when revolutionary changes 
could be effected. In 1921 the need for rural secondary 
education was obvious, but not the method to be used. By 
1935 the large unit had become recognized by many as the 
answer to rural education. Progress had brought better 
roads and better means of transportation; thus the large 
centralization of all grades, typical of a division, was 
now more practical. In 1936 with the enaction of legis¬ 
lation providing for the formation of divisions, the second¬ 
ary consolidation, had served its purpose. The era of the 
Rural High School was over. 






70 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Alberta Gazettes , 1920-1946. 

Annual Reports Of The department Of education. Province of 
Alberta, 1920-1946. 

Goresky, I. The Beginning And Growth Of The Alberta School 
System . Unpublished Master 1 s Thesis, university of 
Alberta, 1944. 

Rural Education In Alberta . Report submitted by the 

Honourable x^erren Baker. Edmonton, King r s Printer, 19 29. 

Rural High Schools In Alberta. Edmonton, King’s Printer, 

1930. 

Report Of The Legislative Comraittee On Rural Education ♦ 
Edmonton, King’s Printer, 1935. 

The School Act, The School Assessment Act, The School Grants 
Act, 1920-1945. 

Statutes Of Alberta , 1921. 

What Is And What Might Be In Rural Education In Alberta . 
Edmonton, King’s Printer, 1935. 

Collected newspaper reports of legislative activity, 1921, 
to be found in the Library of the Alberta Legislative 
Assembly. 

Piles of Rockyford Rural High School No. 3, and Kathyrn 
Rural High School No. 7. 

Minute books from Rural High Schools at Splan, Spruce drove, 
Kingman, Waterhole, Kathyrn, and Rockyford, and from 
the Public School at Beaveriodge. 

Letters of information from various sources containing 
information about the Rural High Schools. 

School records from Irma Rural High School Eo. 1. 

Term Returns from Rural High Schools, Department of Education, 
Province of Alberta, 1930-1937. 























































.) 






71 


APPENDIX A 


AN ACT TO AMEND THE SCHOOL ORDINANCE 
(ASSENTED TO APRIL 19, 192L) 


Secondary Consolidated School Districts 


tf 4Ox, Two or more adjoining school districts may 
consolidate in the manner hereinafter provided by the 
formation of a new district for the purpose of establishing 
and maintaining therein a school or schools for the education 
of pupils who have completed the work of Grade VII or 
Grade VIII of the Public School Course as classified by 
the regulations of the Department of Education, and a district 
so formed shall be known as a secondary consolidated 
school district. 

t? 40y. The provisions of this Ordinance relating to the 
formation and establishment of a consolidated school district 
shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the foimation and estab¬ 
lishment of a secondary consolidated school district except 
as otherwise herein provided. 

t? (2) If rural districts only are included within the 
proposed secondary consolidated school district, then upon 
the approval of the boundaries thereof, and upon the pres¬ 
entation of a petition in the form prescribed signed by at 
least 25 per cent, of the resident ratepayers of each district 
therein, the Minister may authorize a vote to be taken of 
the resident ratepayers of the total area included within 
the proposed secondary consolidated district on the question 
of consolidation as nearly as may be in accordance with 
the provision of sections 40c and 40d hereof. 

11 (3) If there is a village or town district together with 
one or more rural districts within the proposed secondary 
consolidated school district, then upon the approval of the 
boundaries thereof and upon the presentation of a petition 
in the form prescribed signed by at least 25 per cent, of the 
resident ratepayers of each district therein, the Minister 
may authorize" a vote to be taken of the resident ratepayers 
of the area comprising the said rural district or districts 
on the question of consolidation as nearly as may be in 
accordance with the provisions of sections 40c and 40d 
hereof. 





72 


"If the majority of the votes cast in the area com¬ 
prising the said rural district or districts be in favour of 
consolidation the Minister may thereupon direct the board of 
such village or town district to pass a resolution approving 
or disapproving of the proposed consolidation, and there¬ 
after the procedure in respect to such resolution, and a 
demand for a vote on the question of consolidation, and the 
taking of the vote, if demanded, in such village or town 
district shall be the same as nearly as may be as provided 
in subsections 2 to 6 inclusive of section 40e hereof. 

"(4) If there are two or more village or town districts 
together with one or more rural districts in the proposed 
secondary consolidated school district, then upon the 
approval of the boundaries thereof and upon the presentation 
of a petition in the form prescribed signed by at least 25 
per cent, of the resident ratepayers of each district 
therein, the Minister may authorize a vote to be taken of 
the resident ratepayers of the area included in the said 
rural district or districts on the question of consolidation 
as nearly as may be in accordance with the provisions of 
sections 40c and 40d hereof. 

"If a majority of the votes cast in the total area 
included in the said rural district or districts be in 
favour of consolidation the Minister may then direct the 
board or village or town district within the proposed 
secondars? - consolidated district to cause a vote to be 
taken on the question of consolidation and said vote shall 
be taken in each of such village or town districts as 
nearly as may be in accordance with the provisions of 
subsection 6 of section 4Qe hereof. 

"(5} If the proposed secondary consolidated school 
district contains village or town districts only, then upon 
the approval of the boundaries thereof and upon the pres¬ 
entation of a petition in the form prescribed signed by at 
least 25 per cent, of the resident ratepayers of each of 
such districts, the Minister may direct the board of each 
of such districts to cause a vote to be taken on the question 
of consolidation, and said vote shall be taken in each of 
such districts as nearly as may be in accordance with the 
provisions of subsection 6 of section 40e hereof. 

lt (6) Any district w T hich has been declared a village 
district under the provisions of section 95 of The School 
Assessment Ordinance for the purposes of assessment and 
taxation may be deemed a village district for the purposes 
of sections 40x to 40z inclusive of this Ordinance, if the 
Minister so decides, and the decision of the Minister as to 






i ' 












1 









<j 















73 


whether such district shall be deemed a village district 
under this subsection shall be final. 

tf 40z. Upon being satisfied that all the requirements with 
reference to taking the vote have been substantially com¬ 
plied with, if a majority of the votes cast in the total 
area of the proposed secondary consolidated district have 
been in favour of consolidation when there is no town or 
village district therein; or if there is a town or village 
district in the proposed secondary consolidated district and 
a majority of the votes cast in the remaining area have been 
in favour of consolidation, and the board of such town or 
village district has by resolution as provided in subsection 
2 of section 40e hereof approved of the proposed consol¬ 
idation, or in the event of a vote in such town or village 
district having been demanded, and a majority of the votes 
cast are in favour of consolidation; or if there are two or 
more village or town districts either with or vat hour one 
or more rural districts in the proposed secondary consol¬ 
idated district and a majority of the votes cast in each of 
such village or town districts as well as in the area 
comprising the rural district or districts (if any) are in 
favour of consolidation, then the Minister may by order, 
notice of which shall be published in the official gazette, 
erect such school districts as are included within the 
boundaries of the proposed consolidation into a secondary 
consolidated school district. 

ft 40aa. Every secondary consolidated school district 
foimed as hereinbefore provided shall be entitled T The . . 
....... Secondary Consolidated School District No. 

. .... of the Province of Alberta, 1 and shall be given 

such name as the Minister shall designate in the order 
forming the same. Such secondary consolidated school 
districts shall be numbered consecutively, the first of such 
districts to be established to be assigned the number 1, 
and the Minister shall have power to change the name of any 
secondary consolidated school district in accordance with 
the provisions of section 35 hereof. 

n 4Gab. After the erection of a secondary consolidated 
school district the Minister shall have the power to alter 
the boundaries hereof by adding to or taking from the area 
of any district which forms a part of the secondary con¬ 
solidated school district. 

«40ac. The Minister may authorize notices to be posted 
and a vote to be taken in any district as nearly as may be 
in accordance with the provisions of sections 40c and 40d 






74 


he ^°L lf such district is a rural district, or in accordance 
with the provisions of subsection 6 of section 40e hereof 
if such district is a village or town district, for the 
purpose of ascertaining if the majority of the resident 
ratepayers thereof are in favour of the union of such district 
with an adjacent secondary consolidated district. If a 
majority of all the votes cast have been in favour of such 
union or consolidation, and if the same has been approved 
by the board of the secondary consolidated district then the 
Minister may by order, notice of which shall be published 
in the official gazette, unite such district with the 
secondary consolidated district. 

fl 40ad. The publication in the official gazette of the 
notice of the order erecting any school districts into a 
secondary consolidated school district or uniting any 
district or districts with an existing secondary consolidated 
school district or altering the boundaries of a secondary 
consolidated district by adding to or taking from the area 
of any district which forms a part of the secondary con¬ 
solidated district shall be final and conclusive evidence 
that all matters required preliminary to such order have 
been complied with. 

ri 40ae. The board of trustees of a secondary consolidated 
school district shall consist of one trustee for each district 
in the secondary consolidated school district, except for a 
district therein containing a town, for which there shall be 
two trustees. 

"Within fifteen (15) days after the erection of a secondary 
consolidated school district the board of trustees of each 
rural and village district therein shall appoint one of their 
number, and the board of trustees of each town district 
therein shall appoint two of their number to represent such 
district or districts on the board of trustees of the secondary 
consolidated district, and the trustees so appointed shall 
constitute the board of the secondary consolidated district 
and shall hold office during their terms of office as trustees 
of the districts respectively represented by them, and shall 
within ten (10) days after the appointment of the last 
of them as aforesaid as trustees of the secondary consoli¬ 
dated district take the declaration of office and meet to 
organize the board in accordance with the provisions of 
this Ordinance, and to transact such other business as may 
be necessary. 

"Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the board of trustees 
of a-secondary consolidated school district it shall be 
filled as above provided. 



"(2) Upon the union of any district with a secondary 
consolidated school district in accordance with section 
40ac hereof the board of trustees of such district uniting 
with the secondary consolidated district shall forthwith 
appoint one of their number to represent such district on 
the board of trustees of the secondary consolidated district, 
and upon taking the declaration required by this Ordinance 
such trustee shall become a member of the board of the 
secondary consolidated district. 

"40af. In the event of a secondary consolidated school 
district being formed by the union of only two districts 
neither of which contains a town the tw r o trustees appointed 
by the boards of such districts as trustees of the secondary 
consolidated school district, after taking the oath of 
office, shall forthwith under their hand appoint an additional 
trustee who shall hold office until the next annual meeting 
and henceforth after the completion of all other business 
at the annual meeting the two trustees shall in like manner 
select an additional trustee, and in the event of the two 
trustees appointed by the boards of their own districts 
being unable to agree as to the selection on an additional 
trustee as aforesaid such trustee shall be appointed by 
the Minister. 

**40ag. An annual meeting of the ratepayers of a secondary 
consolidated school district shall be held not later than 
the twentieth day of January in each year commencing at 
two o T clock in the afternoon, standard time, and the business 
thereat transacted as nearly as may be in accordance with 
the provisions of this Ordinance respecting the annual 
meetings of consolidated school districts, except that no 
trustees shall be elected at such meeting. 

n 40ah. The trustees of every secondary consolidated 
school district shall be a corporation under the name of 

T The Board of Trustees of . Secondary Consolidated 

School District of the Province of Alberta, and shall 
have the same powers and duties as are conferred and 
imposed by this Ordinance upon the trustees of consolidated 
school districts, except that provision shall be made by 
such board for the education only of pupils who have 
completed the work of Grade VII or Grade VIII of the Public 
School Course as classified by the regulations of the 
Department of Education, and except as otherwise in this 
Ordinance provided. 









76 


,! 40ai. The board of trustees of every secondary consoli¬ 
dated school district shall cause to be apportioned annually 
among the school districts included in such district the 
amount required for school purposes during the current 
year as provided in the School Assessment Ordinance. 

tt 40aj. The provisions of this Ordinance respecting the 
conveyance of pupils shall not apply to a secondary 
consolidated school district.” 






77 


APPENDIX B 


QUESTIONNAIRE 


Rural High. Schools of Alberta 

1. What influenced your district to form a rural high school? 

2. What problems hampered the formation of such a district? 

3. On what basis did each school district concerned share 
the costs of education? 

4. Were there any particular problems in financing the school, 
and if so, what were they? 

5. Did any problems arise from inadequate teaching facilities, 
and if so, please explain? 

6. Generally speaking, were the qualifications of teachers 
in your rural high school satisfactory? 

7. Was a dormitory operated in connection with your rural 
high school, and if so, did it prove to be satisfactory? 

8. Do you feel the number of graduates from your high school 
justified the establishment of a rural high school? 

9. Why was your rural high school district discontinued? 

10. Do you know of any additional' information that might be 

of value to this research? 

Did you have any official position in connection with the 
Rural High School, and if so, please state? 


11 . 
















' 










. . . . ''' , - 

• . 1 , ■ • 







78 


APPENDIX C 


LETTER TO THE RATEPAYERS 
RURAL HIGH SCHOOL 


OP THE ROCKYPORD 
DISTRICT 


Rockyford, Alta., 
August 29, 1925. 


To the Resident Ratepayers of the 
School Districts in the vicinity of 
Rockyford: 

There has been considerable agitation during the 
past few months concerning the lack of educational facilities 
in this part of the country for students who have passed 
the eighth grade or public school examinations. In many 
cases these young people are being sent away to other 
communities where it is possible to attend high school and 
in other cases the parents are moving to the cities to 
enable them to continue the education of their children. 

In the former instance the children are usually sent to 
live with strangers at a time when they most need the 
influence of their own homes and in either case their 
education is carried on at tremendous expense to their 
parents or guardians. Worse still, perhaps the larger 
number of these students are compelled for pecuniary or 
other reasons to leave school altogether and this at a time 
when their unfinished educations are insufficient to earn 
for them a livelihood and their youth prevents them from 
earning a living by manual labor. Some will say, as they 
have said since the beginning of time, that what was good 
enough for the parents is also good enough for the children 
but people who adopt that attitude are not usually the ones 
who are responsible for the advance of civilization and 
it is to the credit of Canada that these people are very 
much in the minority at the present time. 

The value of a high school education.is a subject 
that has been worn somewhat threadbare but it is none the 
less important and we hope to make it the foremost thought 
in the minds of the ratepayers of this community for the 
next few days at least by making an organized drive for 
the establishment in Rockyford of a Rural High School. 

Full provision has been made in the School Ordinance 
of the Province (sections 56 to 69) for the formation of 
a Rural. High School district and the Department of Education 
is wil 1 ing to do all in its power to assist in the organ¬ 
ization. °The Government grant is very liberal but in ad- 



79 


dition to the regular grant they will contribute a high 
percentage toward supplying the necessary equipment. The 
cost of building and operating a High School of this kind 
is indeed moderate so far as the individual taxpayer is 
concerned owing to the fact that it is borne by a much 
larger community than that comprising the ordinary public 
school district. 

Each separate school district desiring to join the 
proposed H.S.D. must submit to the Department of Education 
a petition signed by not less than 25 fo of the resident 
ratepayers in that district asking the Department to 
authorize a vote to be taken. For this purpose, blank 
petitions have been furnished to interested parties in the 
various school districts who will undertake to secure the 
required number of signatures. If a sufficient number of 
districts are interested the Department will send a repre¬ 
sentative into the community to explain the Act governing 
the formation of the Hural High School District and will 
furnish all necessary figures to show what will be the 
probable rate of taxation. 

The vote will be taken over the petitioning districts 
as a whole and not as individual districts except that 
G-iennan S.D., in which Bockyford is situated, will not be 
allowed to vote until the outlying school districts have 
voted in favor of the scheme. If a majority of the votes 
in the outlying districts are in favor of the High School 
then G-lennan S.D. will be allowed to vote separately. 
Provided the votes of Glennan S.D. show a majority in favor 
of the High School it is only necessary for the Minister 
of Education to approve of the scheme and determine the 
boundaries. 



a 

J 


z 


j 

0 

D 

U 


o 

H 

< 

Q 

O 

c/3 

Z 

o 

u 


UJ 

H 

O 

> 


.03 O 

Q ® 
^ *Q 

1 & 
m a 
00 © 
T3 ■£* 


n3 O 

O T3 
co © 
0 Cl 
o ca 
D ® 

T3 


*$ a 
6Q S3 

•H O 
tsj rQ 


d +, 

S.s 

fdc=! 


© 


W3 ^5 

o S 

0,0 


v t 

+4 § 

«j Eh 

»i—I 

R .§ 


. fi 

o o 
Cl u 


•d %> 

« _- 
d .s 

M | 

IS 
* 1 
i| 



This Notice is given by authority of the Minister of Education. 

J. T. ROSS, 











































































































81 


APPENDIX E 


C.R. WALROD ANSWERS THE CHARGES 
OF THE LANDSEER DISTRICT 


March 20, 1931. 


Department of Education, 

Edmonton, Alta. 

Gentlemen; 

The Board of Trustees of this district met yester¬ 
day and referring to the application of Landseer S.D. 

No. 3960 for permission to withdraw their support from 
the High School district have instructed me to write to 
you and point out that the statements made by them in 
their application are not supported by facts or necessity. 

Firstly, the most distant pupil attending our 
High School from a point within the district is but slightly 
more than nine and one-half miles. 

Secondly, no consistent or responsible attempt has 
ever been made by the parents of Landseer S.D. to provide 
living accommodations for their children in Eockyford. 

On the contrary, all efforts made by other parties to 
provide that accommodation have failed through lack of 
support. Naturally, a boarding house cannot operate without 
boarders. There are several empty houses in Rockyford at 
present of all kinds and sizes and no attempt is being made 
to have one opened for students, even though we have a 
very capable lady in town who would be glad to take charge. 

Thirdly, the Landseer S.D. is connected with Rocky¬ 
ford by the best road in this part of the country and no 
child lives more than a mile from this main trunk road. 

Fourthly, their final paragraph is an appeal for 
sympathy and we must admit that it is just cause for the 
most profound grief that these poor, helpless, little 
children (from sixteen to nineteen years of age] are 
compelled to enter a closed car and travel from fifteen to 
twenty minutes over a trunk road in order to reach the 
protection of their parental domiciles. 




82 


Mr. H.A. Huppe is chairman of the Landseer 3.D. 
and is their representative on our Board. He admitted 
in the meeting of our Board that this action was being 
taken by them because they were not getting as much 
consideration as they claim is due them. They have a 
representative on the Board and no other district has any 
more. They favor certain types of social events being 
carried on in the High School building with which the 
Board hesitates to agree. This claim of their T s is 
inconsistent with their statement that '’these extreme 
distances” impose a hardship on the pupils as the parents 
have voiced no objections to their children staying out 
until midnight or even later. 

The whole argument would be petty and even 
ludicrous were it not for the fact that other rural districts 
in the consolidation have been paying taxes for years and 
in some cases sending no children of their own in order 
to make it possible for the children from Landseer, of whom 
they claim there are now six attending, to obtain Grade XI 
standing. These districts have long felt the drain and 
would have welcomed dissolution at the beginning of these 
hard times but their public pride and interest would not 
allow them to make such a selfish suggestion. Now, however, 
if this application is to be seriously considered by the 
Department, another sheaf of applications will soon be in 
the mails and our beautiful and efficient little High 
School will degenerate into the club house for which the 
Coxy T s Army from Landseer is now clamoring. 


Tours very truly, 
Hoekyford Hural High School District No. 3, 


per 


Sec f y-Treas. 




83 


APPENDIX F 


AN ACT TO AMEND THE SCHOOL ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE 
(ASSENTED TO APRIL 19, 1921) 


Secondary Consolidated. School Districts 


4. Section 90a is added to the said Ordinance as follows: 

tr 9Qa. (1) (a) The board of trustees of every secondary 

consolidated school district shall cause to be apportioned 
annually among the school districts included in such district 
the amount required for school purposes during the current 
year. 

n (h) If rural districts only are included in the secondary 
consolidated district there shall be apportioned to each of 
such districts such portion of the said amount as the assessed 
value of the land liable to taxation for school purposes in 
such district bears to the total assessed value of the land 
of all the school districts included in the secondary con¬ 
solidated school district, and the assessed value of the land 
in each of the said districts as fixed for the purposes of 
the Supplementary Revenue Tax shall be taken as the assessed 
value for the purposes hereof. 

«(c) If the secondary consolidated school district contains 
a viliage or town district or districts or a district which 
has been declared a village district under the provisions 
of Section 95 of this Ordinance then the amount to be 
apportioned to each district therein shall be arrived at 
and determined as follows: 

"The board of the secondary consolidated school district 
shall appoint a valuator who shall before the 31st day of 
December in each year make a valuation of all the real and 
personal property in each district within the consolidation 
of such districts which is liable to assessment and taxation 
in village districts under this Ordinance; provided that 
in arriving at the valuation of the land exclusive of_ 
buildings or other improvements thereon in each of said 
districts the assessed value of said land for the purposes of 
the Supplementary Revenue Tax shall be taken as the 
valuation of the land for the purposes hereof. 

tt The board of the secondary consolidated school district 
shall before the 15th day of January in each year notify in 
writing the board of each district included within the 













84 


consolidation of the valuation placed upon the real and 
personal property in such district as above provided, and 
the board of each of such districts may within ten (10) 
days after the receipt of said notice appeal against such 
valuation to the board of the secondary consolidated school 
district by giving notice in writing of such appeal, setting 
out the grounds on which the appeal is made. The board of 
the secondary consolidated school district shall within ten 
(10) days after the time fixed for receiving notice of ap¬ 
peals, and upon giving five (5) days T notice to the boards 
of the districts affected, meet to hear and determine 
all appeals of which notice has been so given, and for 
such purpose may take evidence on oath, and at the close of 
such hearing either allow or disallow such appeals in whole 
or in part, and the decision of the board thereon shall 
be final. 

“After all appeals (if any) have been heard and dealt 
with-as aforesaid there shall be apportioned to each of 
such districts such portion of the amount required for 
school purposes for the current year as the valuation of the 
real and personal property in such district bears to the 
total valuation of the real and personal property of all 
the districts included in the secondary consolidated school 
district and determined as aforesaid.- 

“(2) (a) The board of a secondary consolidated school 
district shall on or before the 15th day of February in 
each year transmit to the board of trustees of each district 
in such secondary consolidated school district a certified 
statement of the amount to be paid by each of such districts 
during the current year, and the said boards of trustees 
shall cause the same to be raised by taxation on the taxable 
property in such districts in the same manner as other taxes 
for the establishment, support and maintenance of the 
schools therein. 

fi (b) It shall be the duty of the boards of each of said 
districts to pay to the board of the secondary consolidated 
school district on demand the amounts required from time to 
time for school purposes, provided, however, that the total 
amount demanded does not exceed the total estimate 
transmitted by the board of the secondary consolidated 
school district to the board of each of said districts as 
above provided. ft 




























. 






« ' 




















. 

























. 




- 























. 
































. 














■ . 


























85 


APPENDIX G 


C.R. WALROD EXPLAINS THE ORGANIZATION 
OF THE ROCKYFORD RURAL HIGH SCHOOL 

October 18, 1933. 


Mr. E.L. Fuller, 

Inspector of High Schools, 

Edmonton, Alberta. 

Dear Sir; 

We wish to acknowledge receipt of your report cover¬ 
ing the Rockyford Rural High S.D. No. 3 and to thank you 
for your careful survey of the equipment, teachers and 
activities as well as for your suggestions which will enable 
us to increase the standard of efficiency. 

We wish, however, to call your attention to the 
paragraph under the heading, of n General Organization 51 
which could conceivably interfere with the payments of 
grants. It is apparent that you did not fully understand 
the agreement between the two school districts and I am 
writing to attempt to correct your impressions. In the 
first place, Miss Korczyneski is hired by the Rockyford 
Public School District No. 3317. Her salary is all paid 
by that district, but the payments made by them for the 
last half of the school year are refunded to them by the 
Rural High S.D.. In addition to these refunds, all 
operating expenses such as fuel, janitor’s services, etc; 
are also paid by the Rural High S.D.. The grants are 
paid to the Rockyford Public S.D. No. 3317 by the Department 
but turned over by them to the High School District as 
per terms of the agreement. I refer to the grants paid 
on the senior Public School room of which Miss Korczynski 
is teacher. The agreement between the districts provides 
accommodation for the junior high school pupils in HNss 
Korczynski’s room and because of this, it is considered 
advisable for the Rural High School teacher, Mr. Bradwell, 
to exercise a certain amount of supervision over this 
room. It also causes the High School Board to take a 
special interest in the choice of teacher to be employed 
by the Public School Board for their senior room. The 
Rural High School could not draw grants for the room taught 



















. 















86 


by Miss Korezynski unless special arrangements were made 
with, the Department and it is much easier to operate 
strictly within the Act. 

The Rural High School employs only one 
teacher, Mr. Chas. Bradwell, and draws only one grant, 
namely, $4.00 per day. 


Yours truly, 


Sec’y-Treas. 






































