


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 



HISTORY 

OF THE FEDERAL INCOME TAX 
IN CANADA 

***#*************-«**-*t-**-*f*****-*i-'Jt>**‘*f-**********#* 

PAUL H A L J A N 


Ms 


y vV<. ‘ 

llifeii 

tomoBfa 


i.l m\\W 




V®?"' 


®ns * f * v>\ a ffs W$ >. iS* 
$hY * 4V--W /’ 

f ^ ^v4 y\ : ''' 




















&X liBBIS 
aras)iBSiiftSi$ 





















UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 
have read and recommend to the School of Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled 
11 A History of the Federal Income Tax 
in Canada 11 

submitted by Paul Hal j a n 

in partial fulfilment of the requirements for 

the degree of Master of Arts* 


PROFESSOR- 

PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 


Edmonton, Alberta, • AjRTAik 








































. 

























' 







THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A HISTORY OF THE FEDERAL INCOME TAX IN CANADA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

by 

PAUL HALJAN 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
APRIL 3 , 1954. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/historyoffederalOOhalj 


A SYNOPSIS 


This study surveys the development of Dominion income 
taxation against a broad social, economic and fiscal back¬ 
ground* 

Chapter I furnishes a brief review of the main currents 
of federal fiscal policy since the establishment of the 
Dominion of Canada in 1867 up to the present time. Emphasis 
is put on the gradual change in the structure of the Domin¬ 
ion revenue system which in time developed from a rather 
simple one based on indirect taxation into a modern and ef¬ 
fective arm of the government. 

Chapter II is devoted to the very beginnings of direct 
taxation on the federal level which are coupled with the 
rise of the agrarian class. The British and American influ¬ 
ence is recognized. Direct taxation and income tax became 
a political issue between progressive farmers and the manufac¬ 
turing class prior to World War I. During the war, the far¬ 
mers, with the help of war finance, succeeded in compelling 
the Conservative government to accept their proposals. 

Chapter III traces the development and growth of the in¬ 
come tax during the inter-war period. An account is given of 
the renewed opposition to the income tax, of Dominion-provin¬ 
cial frictions over the distribution of revenue fields, and of 
the role of income taxation during the Great Depression. 

Chapter IV covers the events influencing the development 
of income tax during World War II. The fundamental social 





• ' 




. 







. 
















♦ 

/: r : &| 

. 






























. ' - / 















. 















ii 


changes brought about by the economic crisis of the thirties, 
followed by the rapid economic growth of the forties, pre¬ 
pared Canada for the break with the past which occurred around 
the beginning of the past decade. This new departure was al¬ 
ready discernible during World War II, after the Dominion 
government decided to put the income tax Into full operation 
for v/ar purposes. The tax helped to finance war costs and to 
check the upsurge of the domestic price level. 

Chapter V gives but a brief account of postwar develop¬ 
ment in the income tax field. Reference is made to the Dom¬ 
inion-provincial tax agreements, and the movement for income 
tax reform Is briefly described, ho attempt is made to evalu¬ 
ate the events nor to consider eventual economic affects of 
the tax upon the national income. 

Chapter VI is devoted to some specific aspects of Cana¬ 
dian income taxation, in particular to the Canadian concept of 
income, personal exemptions, tax rates and tax administration. 













_ 

. 

. 

. 






















- 


. •• 






' 

' 































- ill 


PREFACE 

The history of Dominion income taxation has attracted 
relatively scanty interest from either historians or econo¬ 
mists. Save the chapter on background and development of 
corporate income tax in Dr. Petrie’s treatise The Taxation 
of Corporate Income in Canada , little has been written on 
the subject. Therefore this thesis is an incursion into a 
terra nova in public finance undertaken by a recent new¬ 
comer to Canada. 

The thesis is hardly more than an introduction to the 
whole topic. As my research work progressed I realized more 
and more that the subject deserved more comprehensive treat¬ 
ment than a master’s thesis could provide. For this purpose, 

I have concentrated my attention more on the early period, the 
very beginnings of the agrarian income tax movement, and on the 
developments during the twenties and thirties. 

In preparation of this thesis I was fortunate to have 
very helpful assistance from the Department of Finance whose 
library I was permitted to use freely, from the Library of 
Parliament, from the Public Archives, and from the Dominion 
Bureau of Statistics, which I gratefully acknowledge. My 
particular gratitude goes to the Canadian Tax Foundation for 
the award of the M.L. Gordon Junior Fellowship for the cur¬ 
rent academic year and the assistance attached to It, wiih - 
out which I could hardly have been able to undertake a study 















. 








' 


* 







- 










; 





























. 


























- iv - 


trip to Ottawa. Th© letters I have received from Mr. Mon- 
teath Douglas, Executive Director, and life*. J.H. Perry, th© 
Director of Research, were encouraging and instructive. 

I am greatly indebted to Professors E.J. Hanson, H.3. 
Mayo, T.F. Wise and W.D. Gainer, of the Department of 
Political Economy of the University of Alberta for the aca¬ 
demic assistance I have received during my university 
studies. Above all, I owe most to Professor Hanson who 
suggested the topic and who was most generous in giving me 
his advice and help during the time of writing. My appreci¬ 
ation is due also to Mss Muzyka who found spare time from 
her daily duties to type the thesis. 

My final word of thanks belongs to the people and the 
government of Canada. Without the privilege of sharing 
their freedom and their institutions this work would never 
have come into existence. 


P.H. 


Edmonton, March 1954* 



CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. THE CHANGING PATTERN OF FEDERAL PUBLIC 

FINANCE - INTRODUCTION 1 

II. THE INCOME WAR TAX ACT 26 

III. THE INTER-WAR PERIOD 89 

IV. INCOME TAX - A MAINSTAY OF CANADIAN WAR 161 

FINANCE 

V. TOWARDS A BETTER INCOME TAX LAW 202 

VI. SOME ASPECTS OF DOMINION INCOME TAXATION 224 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 245 

STATISTICAL APPENDIX 250 



. 

- 






. 


- 




- 

. 







. 






























LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE 


PAGE 

I. 

A Summary of Long-Term Borrowing of the Federal 
Government during the Years 1915 - 1920. 

63 

II* 

A Summary of Revenues, Debt, and Expenditures, 
Dominion of Canada, 1914 - 1920. 

65 

III. 

Income Tax Paid by Individuals and Corporations 
by Occupational Groups. Fiscal Years, 1921-22, 
1922-23. 

111 

H 

<J 

• 

Personal Income Tax at Various Income Levels 
in Selected Years. 

147 

V. 

Relationship between Personal Income Tax, 
Corporation Income Tax and Total Income Tax; 
Income Tax per Taxpayer. (Fiscal Years,1929- 
1939.) 

148 

VI. 

Income Tax Collections according to Occupations 
for Selected Years. 

150 

VII. 

Total Income Assessed and Income Tax Yield as 
Percentages of National Income, 1929 - 1938* 

153 

VIII. 

A Summary of Dominion Wartime Expenditures, 
Revenues, and Public Debt, 1940 - 1945. 

165 

IX. 

Income Tax Payable under the Rates of 1939 
and 1940 on Selected Incomes. (Married Person 
with no Dependents.) 

177 

X. 

Personal Income Tax Payable at Various Income 
Levels in 1940,1941 and 1943 Taxation Years. 
(Persons with single and married status, no 
dependents.) 

191 

XI. 

Gross National Product, Net National Income, 
Personal Income,and Income Tax Collections. 

196 




. 

t . ' 

? . 


*>&»<■> orrX .i-i,CK. r.7.sV *ts xe'-- sitioorT Imvi caxxx 

* . ■ ." •.-:•• 

< 

'.■■■■ .7 .... o: x' ,‘x . ■' 

", 

■ •“.••'* 0* c. ' : 77.... '. 7; C ' / ;'(/ . •- . 

. 

. 

• < 

t ;•. •• 

* t , 


, 









a , 





. 

' 











fj 

* 


e 









LIST OF CHARTS 


CHART 



PAGE 

I. 

Cost of Living Index and Wage Index, 

1913-1921. 

67 

II. 

Percentage Distribution of Total Tax Revenue 
Among Various Tax Sources. (Fiscal Years 1926- 
1939.) 

144 

III. 

Percentage Distribution of Dominion 
1940 - 45. 

Revenues, 

167 

IV. 

Cost of Living Index, 1914-1920 and 
1945; Wage Index, 1939 - 1945* 

1939 - 

197 

V. 

Components of Corporate and Personal 
1939 - 1946. 

Income, 

198 

VI. 

Canadian, British and American Income Tax 

Rates Compared. 

199 














i . 

• "c ■ ‘10 : L ; • 1*1 ■' : . ~ 

• ii 


. 

- 
















t ‘ ‘ >’ .. j: 

. 

I ,f f : I . : ■ . ; %: &■ 

; 

' 

. 

: :->o 



. 

. 


. 




CHAPTER I. 


THE CHANGING PATTERN OF FEDERAL PUBLIC FINANCE 
INTRODUCTION 

Canada 1 s participation in the last two World Wars had 

a profound impact upon her economy and institutions. The 

federal government, faced during World War I with the serious 

risk of financing the avalanche of war expenditures and 

unable to borrow extensively abroad was compelled to revert 

to its domestic sources. As a consequence, the government 

had to broaden the revenue system, to increase its yield, 

and to start borrowing on the domestic money market. Vi/hen the 

war ended the federal government was collecting a substantial 

revenue from the income tax field, and about f 2.1 billion of 

1 

its funded direct debt was payable in Canada. 

This situation represented a revolutionary change in the 

government’s finances. Prior to the war, customs and excise 

duties comprised practically the entire government’s tax 

revenue and the occasional loans on the domestic money market 

never exceeded the amount of $5 millions. In 1911}. the Canadian 

public held a little more than one-tenth of one per cent of 

2 

the entire Dominion debt. But the most important result of 


1. Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial Relations, 
Report , I, p. 105. 

2. Buck, A.E., Financing Canadian Government, Chicago, 

1939, P. 172- — ■" 








i 1 ■'( Q1 

, .. X- X ..X-L.-X o:X X Xi..,. 1 ... :■ /(.; 

■ 

• XX . : ' , .... . ... • . 1 ;X . X . . J w . . •. o; ; : 






< o . . : : ...... ..... 1 . r . :.f : - X . 

.... X : . .. ■ ...;... : /•, \ r \: ; ' o;J ..r.X. 

• • .X ‘; ■ ’ .. :;X X X:o - X . . X .c;- 1 :,> ;X..:: : )X s o;t ;.>£iX 


... :: X • -. X." : ... • X ' r: ' X > ; '. .- .' 

. . . ... i ; ■. • . '“. 


... • ' LrX ' 

’ 

■ 

. 

. . ' : . ; . ,. . 1 . /• i ; 

~ ■ - • ' i ....... ... 

, ■ . i.. • XX :X I 










- 2 - 


those war changes v/as that Canada discovered her own economic 
power • 

The enactment of the Business Profit Tax Act in 1916 and 
the Income War Tax Act in the subsequent year marked a turn¬ 
ing point in the development of the federal revenue system. 

It Initiated the drift from indirect towards direct taxation 
which, though somewhat retarded during the inter-war period, 
gained momentum in World War II, and has not yet terminated. 
Because of its constitutional aspects, the sphere of direct 
taxation became a major cause of Dominion-provincial frictions, 
the more so since the twenties and thirties were the lean 
years of economic activity bringing along the serious problem 
of mass unemployment. Provincial governments, constitution¬ 
ally responsible for social welfare, and restricted to direct 
taxation found it very difficult to raise enough tax revenue 
needed for fulfilment of their responsibilities. 

As will be seen, the federal income tax, the history of 
which is the subject of our study, affected Canadian public 
finance very materially. Therefore it seems to be worthwhile 
to devote some space to the preceding history of federal 
public finance which, we expect, will enable us to grasp better 
the profundity of its influence upon the Canadian economy and 
its institutions. 

Revenue System at Confederation 

The establishment of the Dominion of Canada was largely an 







outcome of political and economic exigencies the gravity of 
which far surpassed the limited abilities of the young 
agricultural economies of the British North American colonies* 
The political and economic vacuum created in British North 
America by the decline of British imperial policy and accen¬ 
tuated by expansionary ambitions of United States called for 
an expeditious decision v/ere the provinces to remain under 
the British rule. The pressure of circumstances and, later 
on, of the Colonial Office in London, made the Fathers of 
Confederation produce a compromise which the Imperial Parli¬ 
ament immediately embodied into the British North America 
Act of 1867. 

The Canadian Constitution in its original form bears 
an indelible stamp of its period and environment. Conceived 
and elaborated in the time when Gladstonian eloquence and 
J.S. Mill*s political and economic philosophy dominated the 
British mind it could not escape the influence of these last 
two great liberals. Curiously enough, the popular liberal 
slogan u the less government the better 11 , as applied to the 
Canadian constitution, favoured the centralization of power 
in hands of the central government restricting the former 
provincial governments to local affairs and making them mere 

3 

safeguards of minority rights. If the allocation of 


3 . Cf. Creighton, D.G., British North America at C on¬ 
fe deration , Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial Relations, 
Appendix 2, Ottawa, 1939. 
















- 4 - 


responsibilities between the federal and provincial authori¬ 
ties might seem ambiguous in Sections 91 an(i 92 of the B.N.A* 
Act, the distribution of taxing powers and fiscal arrange¬ 
ments at Confederation expose quite clearly the idea of 
federation which the founding fathers intended to establish* 
Under the terms of the B*N.A. Act the federal govern¬ 
ment was given unlimited authority of raising money by any 
mode or system of taxation, whereas the provinces were res¬ 
tricted to sharing the field of direct taxation within their 
prospective boundaries. In fact, the second paragraph of 
Section 92 of the B.N.A. Act contains a triple limit upon 
the provincial taxing authority: the limit in mode, in ter¬ 
ritorial extent, and in purpose. A^ the Quebec Conference, 
it was generally assumed that direct taxation would play but 
a minor role in fiscal revenues of both provincial and federal 
governments, and that a tax upon incomes was not feasible 
under the economic and political conditions of that time. The 
representatives from the Maritimes and Lower Canada therefore 
argued quite effectively that even the limited governmental 
responsibilities of the provinces would become illusory unless 
they were given revenue sources adequate to meet their respon¬ 
sibilities. The Conference weighed two possible solutions: 
either extending the provincial tax authority to some kind of 
indirect taxes or assuring provinces a revenue from the federal 
treasury in the form of annual grants. Their choice of the 
latter, as instituted by Section 118 of the B.N.A. Act, was of 



- 5 - 


historical importance. 

If the allocation of tax powers decidedly favoured the 
fiscal supremacy of federal government, the adoption of the 
device of federal annual subsidies for support of provincial 
administration did solidify it. Although it may be argued 
that the founding fathers adopted the idea of federal assist¬ 
ance as a lesser evil, yet the truth remains that they were 
meticulously careful in avoiding any curtailment of federal 
fiscal authority. In other words, the task of the time was 
to establish a federal authority strong enough to fulfill 
the great expectations rather than to devise a subtle federal 
scheme with all possible checks and counterbalances between 
the two levels of governments. Thus the founding fathers 
vested the Dominion v/ith fiscal authority that was nothing 
short of fiscal sovereignty. 

I n deed, such wide fiscal powers were conceived in view 
of the vast and heavy responsibilities imposed upon the Domin¬ 
ion. It was to assume the sole responsibility for defence, 
to further the economic development of the country, and it was 
to relieve the provinces of their burden of public debt total¬ 
ling $88.6 millions. The federal government was pledged to 


4* The subsidies* provisions represent an integral part 
of the Canadian constitutional scheme. They interpret the 
broad lineaments of Sections 91 and 9 ^, and in the light of 
this interpretation the Canadian constitution moves closer to 
the federal - if not unitary - scheme than to a confederation 
as some are inclined to believe. 








. 






: •: 




■ 




' • v 


. 


» 





, - 'j v .:.. • 













- 6 ~ 


improve the existing transport system, to build the Inter¬ 
colonial Railway, and to open the western frontier. Each of 
these undertakings, taken by itself, would call for a full 
effort of the Canadian economy over a considerable number of 
years. 

The Dominion left unexplored the broad base for its 
revenue system for over half of a century. Prom the very 
outset of its functioning the federal government followed 
fairly closely the revenue pattern set up by the old provin¬ 
cial governments* In fact, during the first years of Confed¬ 
eration the Canadian taxpayer was paying virtually the same 
amount of taxes as he did prior to its establishment, although 
he was supporting two separate governments. The smooth 
transition from the old provincial to the new Dominion tax 
administration was mainly due to the foresight and statesman¬ 
ship of Alexander Tilloch Galt (later Sir), the last finance 
minister of the Province of Canada. An expert of calibre in 
fiscal matters, he anticipated the possible difficulties that 
might arise during the early stage of Confederation and en¬ 
deavoured to eliminate them in advance* In his provincial 
budget of 1866 Galt effected changes in the most important 
revenue source - the customs duties - that mad.e the Canadian 
tariff nearly identical to those employed by the seaboard 

5 

provinces. This move, originally intended to woo the Maritimes 


5. Creighton, op. cit ., p. 7I4.. 








- 7 - 


into Confoderation, not only eliminated the fears of the Mari¬ 
time provinces, more sensitive to high taxes, but, above all, 
it spared the Dominion parliament the arduous task of equali¬ 
zation of tax rates which might easily become the first apple 
of discord among the provincial factions in parliament. 

The provincial pre-confederation revenue systems to¬ 
gether with the Dominion fiscal structure of the early period 
exhibit a striking simplicity in composition and restraint in 
volume. All of them rested upon one chief revenue source, 
namely, the tariff, that provided the treasuries with 60 to 
80 per cent of current revenues. In the fiscal years ended 
1866 the customs duties yielded 60 per cent in the Frovince 
of Ganada, 80 per cent in Nova Scotia, and in New Brunswick 
78 per cent of total receipts. Only the Province of Ganada 
levied excise duties and collected $1,889,000, or 16 per cent 
therefrom. The remaining one-fifth encompassed a variety of 
non-tax revenues, like proceeds from sales of commodities and 
services (9 to 12 per cent), public domain (7 to 8 per cent), 
interest, premium and discount (1 to ij. per cent), and licenses, 
permits, fees, etc. (1 to 2 per cent). The combined current 
revenue of the three founding provinces came to $15 million 
in the same fiscal year, indeed, a mere trifle when compared 
with the billion dollar provincial revenues of today. The 
burden of taxation per capita fluctuated around $5*50, whereas 
the costs of government services per capita were slighly higher. 






- 8 - 


6 

about $lj..65« 

The federal fiscal system reflected largely the more 
advanced revenue pattern of the Province of Canada. Customs 
duties retained the prominent place among revenue sources, 
yielding about 64$ of total federal revenues during the first 
seven years. The excise levied upon the manufacture of beer, 
spirits and tobacco hit the 2 h,% peak in the fiscal year 
ended 1874* rounding out the share of indirect taxation in 
the federal budget close to nine-tenths of current income per 
year. The additional one-tenth was derived from non-tax 
sources; sales of commodities and services (8$), interest, 
premium and discount, and public domain. The Dominion derived 
practically no income from items like licenses, permits, fees, 
etc. The current revenue of the Dominion stood at $15 .... 
million in the first fiscal year, but after the first seven 
years of functioning it passed the $20 million mark. This 
25$ increase in revenues was mainly due to the territorial 
expansion and buoyant economic activity which accompanied the 

7 

first steps of Confederation. 

The conspicuous absence of any direct tax in both provin¬ 
cial and federal revenue schemes may be justified only in view 
of the simple economic conditions prevailing in Canada at the 

6. See ibid ., p. 62 ff. 

7 « Ibid ., p. 94 . 







: 


' 










■ 










- 9 - 


time of union, The population of 3 1/2 million, scattered 
over a vast territory, were grouped in tiny settlements con¬ 
nected by primitive or no transport facilities. Municipal 
organization, unknown in the Maritimes, was in its infancy 
in Upper and Lower Canada. Agriculture employed over half 
of the whole population, while manufacturing was just estab¬ 
lished in sectors that required but little capital invest¬ 
ment and little specialization. Woollen mills, clothing and 
furniture and shoe factories, breweries and distilleries 
orienting their production to the local market enjoyed more 
a transport than a tariff protection. Indirect taxation was 
well-fitted for such an economic set-up. It represented a 
simple and inexpensive mode of collecting revenue. Concen¬ 
trated virtually to ports of entry and places of production 
it required a small administrative machinery to reach every 
taxpayer. Furthermore, the costs of government services were 
not high and thus the government was free to explore fully the 
tax-sources that were politically most expedient * 

The Tariff Era of Federal Public Finance . 

The extensive capital investment program pursued by the 
Dominion government from the beginning partially generated 
the first boom that was considered as a lucky omen of Confed¬ 
eration. The substantial increase in public debt during the 
first seven years reflected the volume of foreign capital that 







7 

- 

' ' 

j • .11' o f #£<. /./ 0 !;l .1 o. 

. . . 

r j . . v, t ‘. •. ■: 


■.- V : V £ V; •: o 



: ' : ...... 


.. v . r ; ■ ■ - 
,L0 .. fi ■ ’ .. : 




. ■ ; - ,; ' . . $ t 

; • ,‘ r ' 


0 


. 


I 







a, c • ..Vi \vVV 


. 








- 10 


entered into Canada mostly in the form of goods, and through 
the tariff favourably influenced federal revenues. The inter¬ 
posing of the Americ a n market between the British investor 
and Canadian creditor accentuated the revenue effect of British 
investment. Most of the goods, paid for by British funds, ori¬ 
ginated in United States and were subject to higher tariff rates. 
The close interdependence between borrowing abroad and federal 
revenue produced the peculiar cyclical movements that charac¬ 
terize the first thirty years of Canadian economy. 

The construction of the Intercolonial Railway together 
with improvements of the St. Lawrence canal system stimulated 
the economic activity which created a mood of general optimism. 
The induced increase in the volume of foreign of trade, 
especially, in imports, doubled the customs revenue within 
seven years without any significant increase in tariff rates. 

The federal government, encouraged by this trend, pursued a 
strong national policy and was ready to undertake the costly 
task of opening the West. In 1870 it acquired from the 
Hudson*s Bay Company the North-Western territory and immedia¬ 
tely created the fifth province of Manitoba. In the sub¬ 
sequent year, British Columbia joined the Dominion on very 
generous terms which included the federal commitment of 
construction of a Pacific railway, and the dream of a realm 
from sea to sea became a reality sooner than one could have 


f " . : '■ : : . ; •: - ' ' : ’ 

' ' 

: ..'• f:i ••o " e-'iS ‘ :• yx!:aoq 

■ - -. wax/d >o . ■ • :■ 

* ' : 

i . \X •:•••'. ::: i !:/ 

c:' f k• • f f-.rfT 
'• >v : •; ■ , r . £o oo:U;jc'r e- j.i 


. l ’ ; .. a £ ;f" • i u 


>- i.Qi<h J•- f*r:.-I ■■■j/.iI ecit 7o Kol;ioo c iJ kisqo v s / 4 X s 

\ ' - yo'i ' ■ ! - 

' ?• ■I'opj&'s.D xfolrj-yf pl:iO:} l r?oo tr'.o 



f ■ J: a£ . : e 



* "■ , ''•( • -'[• 'Y"'.' j ■; 

V ' ' : o j‘ I :• } f : r * . V ; ■ j .-v'.r :• 

• ' J .:.o ' ■ r ? :.yH 


-■ u - , l ’ /'• J.'} ; :j ■ - ■■ Co '• 

. 











» 5 • ■ 



11 


expected. In 1873 the Province of Prince Edward Island found 
her way into the federal fold, where she expected to be 
relieved from public debt incurred in financing her railway 
development. By the same year the Dominion completed its 
first obligations: the Intercolonial Railway and a deepened 
St. Lawrence seaway had been put into use. 

Unfortunately, the end of the first spur of economic 
development coincided with the economic depression abroad, 
consequences of which were soon felt in Canada. The initial 
optimism was dissipated entirely toward the end of the seven¬ 
ties. Falling price levels at home and abroad brought about 
a decrease in foreign trade, and as a further consequence, 
a decrease in federal revenues. G-alt’s tariff based on ad 
valorem rates proved to be failure as a secure source of 
government revenues. Although Francis Hincks, the Minister 
of Finance in MacDonald 1 s cabinet raised the spectre of 
direct taxation as early as 1370 , no attempt was made to widen 
the federal tax base. Instead, the seventies marked an exten¬ 
sive debate on tariff policy which finally resulted in defeat 
of the Liberal government of Alexander Mackenzie in 1878, and 
in adopting of the Conservatives 5 program known as ’’National 
Policy”. 

The four years preceding the election in 1878 represented 
the formative period of fiscal and commercial policy that 
dominated in Canada until the depression of 1930 ® Gait*s 










r 


"j C 







J" i; ; 

■ 

. : . O ' ' , 

;; • ■ ' 




- 




* t; ' 






j Jj i . ■ , • 


; > 

.v.': : . ; ' - •/ 

• 





s 




. - ■ 


r 




c r: 




1 ' O'". 




•I • } 


V' 



' 

















- 12 


doctrine of a revenue tariff with incidental protection as 
espoused in his budget speech in 1866 was not seriously chal¬ 
lenged during the years of prosperity. Though the refusal 
of Washington to renew the reciprocity treaty in 1869 aroused 
random demands for a retaliatory tariff, the feeling across 
the country was still opposed to high customs duties, Sven 
the moderate increase (2 l/ 2 $) in the general tariff enacted 
under serious revenue exigencies in I87I+ elicited consider¬ 
able antagonism* But, by this time, the worsening economic 
conditions began converting public attitudes. The case of 
protectionism was taken up by Ontario manufacturers who 
established in the same year the Manufacturers' Association 
of Ontario for the purpose u to secure by all legitimate 
means the aid of both the public opinion and governmental 

policy in favour of the development of home industry, and the 

8 

promotion of Canadian manufacturing enterprise 11 . The move¬ 
ment gained momentum by political action, MacDonald's Con¬ 
servative party, whether from political opportunism or from 
a serious concern with the economic situation or both, made 
protectionism a political issue of paramount importance in 
the election campaign of 1878. Apart from dramatization and 
rhetoric that chaperoned the presentation of National Policy 
to the electorate, it was economically sound and politically 

8 . Clark, S.D., Canadian Manufacturers' Association, 
Toronto, p. 5. 




■ 










o ... 














■ 






■ 














: J' 








X: 1 









- 13 - 


well timed. 

In the short rim. It offered a remedy for fiscal exi¬ 
gencies of the federal treasury, and in the long run it 
substantiated the cause of Confederation and its aims. Had 
Canada followed either of reciprocity or u Zollverein u , 
foreign interests may have reaped most of the fruits from 
Canadian soil. There was a bit of truth in Sir Leonard 
Tilley*s remark made in his budget speech in 1879 ? n The 
time has arrived when we are to decide whether we will 

9 

simply be hewers of wood and drawers of water* 1 . 

The 9 * 11 National Policy 11 programme of the Conservatives 
aimed at building Canada as a balanced economic unit by 
means of an extensive railway system and a protective tariff, 
oriented to European markets rather than to the United States. 
Sir Leonard Tilley replaced the old ad valorem principle by 
a scheme of specific rates high enough as to protect domestic 
production. The upward revision of tariff rates improved the 
financial position of the treasury. It checked, for the time 
being, at least, the shrinking customs revenue and stabilized 
the excise yield. By 1883 the treasury enjoyed a substantial 
surplus on current account. However, the public investment 
and favorable terms of trade played an important role in this 

9. McDiarmid, O.J., Commercial Policy in the Canadian 

Economy , Cambridge, Mass., 1946 , p. ldl. “ The quotation is 

from Debates of the House of Commons , 1878, p. lj.29. 







■ 


, • a '' 








. . . • . ; : . i ■ 








c 


■ •. ^ 1 - . ‘. 


. • 








■ 




■ 

. 











I r V. 




. » 0 " 




. 














second upswing as well. After completing the Pacific rail¬ 
way project the government, apprehensive of rising debt 
charges, restricted its borrowing abroad and cut the devel¬ 
opmental programme to a minimum. 

The second spell of recess that followed was even more 
serious than the first one, and furthermore, it lasted 
longer. Tariff revenue fell sharply again despite frequent 
increases in tariff rates while expenditures moved slowly 
upward. Recurrent deficits became unavoidable and discour¬ 
aging. The discontinuance of a domestic investment programme 
limited the possibilities of recovery to external events, 
which did not come until the end of the century. But, when 
the delayed recovery arrived, Canada had a new government, 
a new leader, and a new period of prosperity ahead. 

The wheat boom easily solved many pressing problems of 
the federal government. With rising revenue, Laurier’s 
ministry possessed the means to realize the plans of the 
founding fathers and to fulfill the expectations of the Dom¬ 
inion. After the Liberals stepped into office, their poli¬ 
tical platform accepted at the Ottawa Convention in 1893 

aroused some fear that they would dismantle the protective 

10 

walls of National Policy. This was soon dispelled. The 
government decided to preserve the basic principles of Nat¬ 
ional Policy and confined themselves to eliminating what they 


10 . lbid », p. 203* 








■ 




t ' ; - ■■ ■' 1 ■ '• ' 







. 

•. • ' " ■ ■: * -• ' 








■ 




‘ t v ■: ■ ■ .V : ' 



* 

1 ' • .. c . • . • 

: : ; l 





- 15 - 


had labelled as monopoly and class favoritism in the election 
campaign. So for fifteen years of Liberal administration 
the Canadian economy prospered and expanded at a tremendous 
rate under the roof of the National Policy and state pater¬ 
nalism. 

The development of the West attracted huge quantities 

of foreign capital, mostly from the London money market, 

which entering Canada in the form of goods, induced a rise 

of tariff revenue to dimensions hitherto unknown. 'Between 

1896 and 1913 income from custom duties jumped from $20 

million up to $111 million while excise revenue rose from 

11 

$8 million to $22 million. The government, encouraged by 
recurring surpluses, launched a developmental program that has 
hardly been surpassed in its relative size. The settlement 
of the Prairie Provinces, construction of railways, and in¬ 
vestment in public domain occupied first place on the expen¬ 
diture list. During the first decade of this century the 
Dominion expended about one and a half times more on capital 
account than it did during the preceding thirty years. Gross 

direct debt increased by $150 million reaching the level of 

12 

$512 million. Aside from development the more significant 
items on the expenditure side were defence and statutory 

11. Canada Year Book , IgijD. 

12. Ibidem. 























o ; 


; 
















. O . 



























C 


‘ 






. • 










<r 












subsidies. The latter was due to nev/ fiscal arrangements 
between the Dominion and provinces agreed upon in 1907 * and 
to establishment of the provinces of Alberta and Saskatche¬ 
wan in 1905* 

The prominence of the tariff as the chief revenue 
source remained solid. It provided* together with excise 
revenue, 80 to 85 per cent of total revenue receipts, des¬ 
pite some downward revision of rates. However, by this time, 
a new opposition to the protective tariff was gaining momen¬ 
tum in the West, where farmers, never in love with government 
high tariff policy, were rapidly becoming a force in Canadian 
politics. The Western farmers 1 associations at their conven¬ 
tions held early in 1910, demanded a removal of duties on 
farm implements and supported a reciprocity treaty with the 
United States. Later on, they started pressing for the in¬ 
troduction of an income tax that should replace customs 
duties in the federal revenue structure. They found allies 
in the Liberal Party, and with the help of war events that 
followed, finally succeeded. But they failed to secure 
their main objective, tariff reductions. 

During the first fifty years of its existence the feder¬ 
al system rested almost exclusively on indirect taxation. 

The simple combination of customs and excise duties bequested 
to the Dominion by the old provinces supplied the federal 
treasury with 80 to 90 per cent of its current receipts 



- 17 - 


throughout; the whole period with relatively great success. 
Inasmuch as the chief source of revenue came from tariffs, 
the revenue yield largely depended upon the cyclical move¬ 
ments of foreign trade. The Introduction of National 
Policy might have proved successful in checking the cycle 
if the government had adopted a higher level of its invest¬ 
ment, The first years of National Policy indicate such a 
possibility. Federal revenues had shown a remarkable upward 
trend during the wheat boom, but their base failed to expand. 

Several factors accounted for the reluctance of the 
government to introduce an income tax. Firstly, the judicial 
interpretation of the B.N.A. Act impaired the exclusive 
authority of the federal government; secondly, the provin¬ 
cial governments started imposing direct taxes as early as 
1873; and thirdly, during the wheat boom, customs and excise 
duties provided the treasury with a satisfactory inflow of 
income, Y/hich made a nev/ tax unnecessary* Furthermore, 
federal expenditures were dominated by a single factor, ec¬ 
onomic development, which could be easily adjusted to the 
size of revenues.- Prior to World War I the Dominion was 
relieved from excessive defence spending and the social ser¬ 
vices did not require any substantial outlays. Once those 
items became a necessity, the readjustment of the revenue 
system was unavoidable * 























. 













» 




, . ' • ‘ j 








■ 




. 






. . . 










’ :: . • •• ‘ 







. 


, ; ' r : l 






























- 18 - 


Direct Taxation in Federal Revenue System 

The year of 19II closed the tariff era of federal public 
finance. The federal elections of that year revived the old 
issue of National Policy versus Reciprocity, and the final 
results brought defeat to Laurier T s Liberal government. 

However, with Sir Wilfred had gone a half century of Dominion 
history. When the flag-waving quieted dov/n and the Conser¬ 
vatives assumed power, v/orld events turned upside-down many 
plans and many expectations. Y/ithin two years a war broke 
out that did not leave out the Canadian community. To the 
detriment of Canada the new government was not prepared for 
such a serious assignment. Fifteen years of opposition did 
not augment their administrative experience, and, as the 
elections indicated, they were looking back to the eighties 
of the past century rather than ahead. The new Minister of 
Finance, W. Thomas White (later Sir) was homo novus in poli¬ 
tics and in parliament as well. Furthermore, Canada had not 
been involved in a conflict for over a century and lacked 
experts to call upon for advice. Perhaps, here lies the ex¬ 
planation of maladjustments that had roots in the war economy 
and that exerted an adverse influence long after the war was 
over „ 

The War Cabinet of Sir R.L. Borden employed chiefly three 

instruments in financing the mounting war expenditures, borrow- 

13 

ing, taxation and monetary expansion. One of their first 


13 • See Chapter II. 









. . ' 














'■ J '• • O 


i) 



.); ■ 








’) o 













- 19 


moves was a substantial revision of tariffs. The rates were 
increased by on the British preference and by 7 l/ 2 $ on 
the immediate and general tariff, while the list of dutiable 
goods was expanded. Loans to finance war expenditures were 
contracted in the London and New York money markets. But in 
1915 ? Britain had closed her money markets which compelled 
the Dominion government to revert to its domestic sources. 
Following the marked success of the first domestic loan in 
the same year, the government borrowed about $1,200 million 
at home. In the taxation field the government moved slowly 
and with much apprehension. In 1915 new internal taxes were 
imposed on bank circulation, telegrams, cablegrams, railway 
tickets, postal cheques, post cards, etc., and on the income 
of certain insurance, loan, and trust companies. In the sub¬ 
sequent year the business profits war tax was introduced, and 
by the end of 1917 a n income tax was in force. 

Both direct taxes employed very moderate tax rates, to¬ 
gether with'large exemption clauses, thus making their anti- 
inflationary effects negligible. Ho?/ever, the very fact of 
inception of direct taxation on the federal level surpassed 
all other fiscal developments, It opened a new period of 
fiscal expansion and prepared the Dominion for the fateful 
events that were to folio?/ in a distance of twenty years. 

The aftermath of the v/ar necessitated a further broaden¬ 
ing of the federal financial tax base. Under the pressure of 



r 


. 


0 




; . > 



- 20 - 


large deficits Sir Henry Drayton, the Minister of Finarc e 
in the Union government, ushered into the federal revenue 
system a novel indirect tax, known as the general sales 
tax. The discontinuance of the business profits war tax in 
the following year has modified the federal tax system for 
peace-time purposes. 

Government expenditures rose during the war period to 
unprecedented heights. Net debt charges were raised to the 
second power between 1915 and 19^1, exceeding the total 
ordinary expenditures of 1915 "by §54 million* New expen¬ 
ditures had to-be undertaken to defray veterans’ pensions 
and after care. Some items, hitherto unimportant, required 
substantial outlays, and the higher price and wage level 
swelled the expenditures on current account to $554 million 
as against $118 million of 1913. About half of this amount 
consisted of transfer payments which yielded no immediate 

14 

services. 

The inter-war period left unaffected the federal revenue 
structure per se . The volume of tax revenue followed the ups 
and downs of the level of economic activity, altering the 
relative importance of individual tax sources. 

The numerous amendments to tax acts need not be discussed 


l 4 * Cf. Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial Rela¬ 
tions, Report , I, p. 106 , Table 2 J. 








- 21 


here* However, there have developed two movements that, 
later on, influenced fed.eral taxation. The first movement 
was strictly an affair of Canadian federalism. The pre¬ 
carious balance between responsibilities and tax powers of 
the Dominion and provinces established by the founding 
fathers had been impaired by judicial interpretations of 
the B.N.A. Act. Enlarged responsibilities of provincial 
governments were not paralleled with a similar development 
in the allocation of revenues. It was, therefore, one of the 
main purposes of the Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial 
Relations to survey the whole field of allocation of respon¬ 
sibilities and revenue sources between the two levels of 
government and to propose solutions. Curiously enough, the 
recommendations of the Howell-Sirois Commission do not differ 
much from the decisions made by the founding fathers some 
seventy years before. In other words, the Commission recom¬ 
mended a restitution of the original principles of the 
Canadian federation. The second movement that originated 
in the serious economic consequences of the world-wide dep¬ 
ression led to a reconsideration of the role of public 
finance in economic policy. Incepted by Sir John Maynard 
Keynes during the thirties, the theory of the relation of 
fiscal policy to the working of national economy has made 
great strides, particularly, during the past war and there¬ 
after. The pervasiveness of this theory in Canadian public 






- 22 - 


finance is more than striking. 

From the very outset of World War II the national govern¬ 
ment embarked on a strong fiscal policy with a firm determin¬ 
ation to curb all the adverse effects which a war economy 
always brings with it. It relied heavily upon taxation to 
freeze price and wage fluctuations, to curtail inflation, 
and thus to eliminate, to the greatest possible degree, the mis- 
allocation of resources. The income tax served a twofold 
purpose. On the one hand, it provided the bulk of war revenue 
[ 6 kfo in 19llU)> and on "the other hand, it sterilized the effect 
of government large-scale war expenditures* Accordingly, the 
tax rates were raised to a level that was the highest in the 

15 

world for incomes in the middle brackets. The adoption of 
a pay-as-you-go policy necessitated over-all increases of tax 
rates and broadening of the tax system. New taxes on gasoline 
and other products were levied; the inheritance and gift 
tax, together ?/ith the excess profit tax were introduced to 
supplement the effects of income taxation. In 19)41, the Min¬ 
ister of Finance requested the provinces to vacate the income 
tax field for the duration of the war and offered them a 
compensatory payment amounting either to their collections 
from those fields in the preceding fiscal year or to their 
debt charges. Provincial governments responded favorahLy and 


15 • Of• Higgins, B.H., Canada*s Financial System in 
War , National Bureau of Economic Research, New York, i9lj.I1., p. 

10. 








;' 




o . ■ ’ ' i>Xl£ 


" ( 





1 




- 23 - 


signed the War Rental Tax Agreements in the following year, 
thus enabling the Dominion to make a full use of income 
taxation. The bold use of income taxation by the federal 
government during the war was aptly described by J.R. 

16 

Beattie as u the backbone of the governments policy 11 . 

The fiscal measures adopted during the war were deemed 
to be extraordinary and temporary provisions, conditioned 
by special war circumstances. However, before the war 
ended the government made it plain that it was determined 
to carry on most of the war legislation, on a lower scale, 
after the cessation of hostilities. Behind this decision 
was a fear that there might develop a serious economic 
slump as an aftermath of war. In 1945 the Dominion-Provin¬ 
cial Conference on Reconstruction convened in Ottawa, but 
due to strong opposition of the Provinces of Ontario and 
Quebec to tax agreements it failed to succeed. The partial 
solution that followed has been a peculiar feature of the 
Canadian fiscal system up to the present time. Since last 
year*s renewal of tax agreements the Province of Quebec alone 
has been in opposition to any fiscal arrangements on grounds 
of constitutional prejudice. 

On the whole, the federal fiscal system has undergone 


16 . Beattie, J.R., ” Canadian War Finance", Industrial 
Canada . Feb., 1943 ,p. 43. 























O .. 


. 










. - - . ■ I . 

- ' ■ ■ 

. . : ; • . ■ -'.V •; / 1. ;i 

■ 


. . ■ 


J . 1 ilJj) 




■ 






■-•O ? I \ 

- . ... 






. ■■ .: - •: -. - 1 . i 




... 


' ‘ lid . . ■ 
















■ 












- 24 - 


a great transformation since World War I. It has been en¬ 
larged and deepened. The ushering in of direct taxation 
into the family of federal taxes brought about a new line 
of development that has been significant particularly for 
two effects. On the one hand, the tax actualized the latent 
constitutional crisis of Canadian federalism, and, in the 
final end, it contributed to re-affirming the constitutional posi¬ 
tion' of the federal government. On the other hand, the fis¬ 
cal system was gradually converted into a more productive as 
well as progressive scheme favoring lower income groups. But 
the traditional objective of Canadian public finance as in¬ 
augurated by the national Policy programme in 1879 has hardly 
been changed. 

In his budget speech on May 18, 1948, D.C. Abbott, the 
Minister of Finance, restated it as follows: 

11 1 believe that all parties in this Parli¬ 
ament and most Canadians share the view that 
the national budget is no longer merely a mat¬ 
ter of the government accounts that should be 
balanced every twelve months on some financial 
rule of thumb. We view the national budget now 
as an integral part of the nation’s business, 
influenced by and having influence upon the 
state of employment, income and prices. I think 
we should all agree that in times of widespread 
unemployment and insufficient demand for goods 
and services our expenditures should be increased 
in order to support employment and incomes, and 
that they could and should exceed our revenues 
under such conditions.' 5 17 


17• Debates , Budget Speech , May 18, 1948, p. 40&5 





• . . . 

■ . ... , . .. ■ i • . ■ • 'v ■ v,.:"' 





; :: ' • V • - . : ' , ' 

- „ . 

, • . ' , : , ' - . . ■ : . ■■ - ■' • -V > r - 0 . 


' 


' 

• * 

: r> 

■ 











- 25 - 


Perhaps, a new terminology, a new colouring, but it was 
still the same profound determination of the government 
to serve the country at its best* 




CHAPTER II 


THE INCOME WAR TAX ACT 

The Case for a Federal Income Tax 

During the first fifty years of the Canadian federa¬ 
tion the income tax attracted little or no attention from 
all levels of governments. Although it is true that some 
provincial and municipal governments adopted some sort of 
a tax upon incomes, the measures in general were too im¬ 
perfect and too leniently enforced so that they could hard¬ 
ly be subsumed under the term of an income tax as we under - 
1 

stand it today* Reference has been made to the reasons 
responsible for this attitude, particularly, the nearly 
universal detestation of direct taxation in Central Canada. 

Both national parties ?/ere tariff parties, differing 
more in degree than in principle. It v/as therefore quite 
easy for the Canadian Manufacturers * Association, the most 
influential class organization outside politics and a stal¬ 
wart of protectionism, to build up for its members from 
protection a privileged position in the nation. The influ¬ 
ence of the association was strong enough to prevent the 
Liberal Party, which stepped into office after the 1896 el¬ 
ections with a pledge of doing away with the protective 
tariff, from fulfilling its promises given to the farming 

1. Cf. Vineberg, Solomon, Provincial and Local Taxa¬ 
tion in Canada , He?/ York, 1912, p. 65 ff. 







. . 








. 

■. . C •. ■ . : . , ■: r-;;; : 


. .. . . 




O o v 


.... 




....... C ' 

r .... : ,■ rJ <■ . s ,. r ' .; . /!. - •• . . 

, . . • • • • ,.T 

. •. 


IMj: 


cJl 

. f 




. 


. 

* 












. . 

■ i .. f 


■ 






< l . . 









- 27 - 


electorate. However, the wheat boom changed the social and 
economic conditions of the country and brought the agrarian 
class to the fore. It prepared the ground for introducing 
the income tax into the federal revenue system. 

In contrast with the history of income tax in Great 
Britain where the tax was originated and developed by Chan¬ 
cellors of the Exchequer, in Canada the demand for fiscal 
reform came from the ordinary taxpayer who had to push his 
Finance Minister instead of being led by him. Hot discoun¬ 
ting the influence of war conditions which accelerated the 
Canadian income tax movement, it may be said that the adop¬ 
tion of a federal income tax measure in 1917 was largely 
the outcome of the strife bet?/een the protectionist manufac¬ 
turing class and the free trade farmers, an example of shift¬ 
ing the burden of taxation between social classes. 

Farmers* Opposition to Tariff Policy 

Canadian farmers, after a short honeymoon with National 
Policy, soon began to realize the adverse impact of the high 
tariff upon their economies. Discontent, denunciation and 
opposition were not uncommon among farming groups during the 
eighties and nineties of the last century. Some presentations 
submitted to the federal government in this matter by the 
Dominion Grange and Patrons of Husbandry found a deaf ear in 
Ottawa. However, the persisting economic stagnation gradu¬ 
ally decimated the fighting spirit of the farmers and also 








. ' . V '• 















. 

» 

‘ J' - • or ‘ r ‘.t 

: • . • ' ' . 
r 

, 

. t 

• • • ' > : ■ 

- 

n . 

v. ’c . , • .. 7. . /•. •’ . '• o ' r: r<7 

• , - : .7; . 

• ; o.: J .7 .J ' • ; 7 • 7 7 o .<;* 




■ 

' 

. . ‘ v., , '7 

. 7 ... 7. 

... 

.. ...... 7 . 




. 




• 7 , 77 • ;7 






- 28 - 


disintegrated their organizations. When the prosperity of 
post -1896 began, the Canadian farmer was ill-prepared for 
the coming events. With the opening of the new century he 
witnessed a reorganization of the Canadian Manufacturers 1 
Association in 1900 which enlarged its membership and es¬ 
tablished a permanent Tariff Committee in order to be better 

prepared to deal with the all-important tariff problem from 

2 

the manufacturers viewpoint. Shortly afterwards the 
nationalist elements of Canadian labor established a new, 
purely Canadian labor organization, the Canadian Federation 
of Labor, which has practically in all cases supported the 
Canadian Manufacturers’ Association’s requests for higher 

3 

protection. 

At the same time, when industry and labor had well- 
nigh completed their organizational work, and the Canadian 
Manufacturers’ Association was already pressing for a general 
revision of tariffs, the agrarian class just began setting up 
its organizations on a regional or provincial level. In 1902 
the Dominion Grange revived its activities along with the 
establishment of the new Farmers’ Association of Ontario. In 

2* For a detailed study of C.M.A. see Clark, S.D., The 
Canadian Manufacturers’ Association , Toronto, 1939• 

3. The other national labor organization, the Canadian 
Trades and Labor Congress supported at times the free trade 
programme. Cf. Logan, H.A., Trade Unions in Canada, Toronto, 

!9i*8. - ~ 








o 


c. : ' > h r 'S'L [ 




{ 






: 


• r 




; •; . o 




■ 


u 


















- 29 - 


the same year the farmers of the North-West Territories found¬ 
ed their Territorial Grain Growers 1 Association, which was 
followed by the Manitoba Grain Growers 1 Association in the 
subsequent year. As the settlement of the West progressed, 
and the rift between farmers and industry deepened, the far¬ 
mers 1 organizations were reorganised and consolidated. This 
organizational process culminated in 1909 * with the estab¬ 
lishment of an all-Canadian institution, the Canadian Council 
of Agriculture, which until the middle of the tv/enties re- 

4 

mained the spokesman of the farming interests in Canada, 

It is interesting to note that the rise of agriculture 
as a distinctive Canadian social class during the first 
decade of this century, aimed at the same problems from the 
opposite angle, and indeed as the manufacturing group did 
about thirty years before. From the onset, the farmers 1 
associations followed the traditional Liberal tariff policy 
and readily supported the party in all federal elections. 

The controversy which was aroused between the farmers and 
manufactures during the hearings conducted by Fielding 1 s min¬ 
isterial commission in 1905 - 6 , was in the main an eastern 
affair. Both Ontario organizations, the Dominion Grange and 
the Farmers 1 Association of Ontario, played a major role in 
presenting the agrarian viev/ to the commission, while the 

4 • Cf. Wood, L.A., A History of Farmers 1 Movements in 
Canada , Toronto, 1924* 





- 



' 

' 




"r '..l i 








. 

' ' - ' Ifv: - l 


■ 

. 

. . : . .. ■' f ' . ■ • ’ V ;i £ Si i 


: V < i f 


' 






f 






. , • *o c fo 

. 

■ 

/ ~ 1 






























• 










! 




: . . • 







. 

* 






- 30 - 


western groups satisfied themselves more or less with re¬ 
cording their opposition to the high tariff. 

Ontario farmers defended the farmers* case so effec¬ 
tively that the government, taken by surprise, was reluc¬ 
tant to follow a straight manufacturers* line. Fielding’s 
tariff reform, introduced towards the end of 1906 , although 
being intended to please both sides, effected the exact 
opposite, and to a great extent widened further the rift 
between both groups. The C.M.A.*s officials complained 
that u the proposed tariff will not encourage either the es¬ 
tablishment of new industries or the development of that 

5 

already established”, and made it plain that they intended 
to press for further changes. The agrarian groups also 
expressed their disappointment and vigorously attacked the 
manufacturing industry. The Legislative Committee of the 
Grange, in its report submitted to the amalgamating conven¬ 
tion of both Ontario organizations in September, 1907? voiced 
a strong resentment against the C.M.A. which, they believed, 
secured more than the farmers in the tariff reform, and 
accused it of having broken the truce in the battle for reason¬ 
able fiscal legislation. 11 The pulling infant”, the Report 
said to the convening farmers, H that asked for temporary and 
moderate protection thirty years ago is now a giant demanding 


5* Wood, Op. cit ., p. 251 







* 





- 31 - 


that practical prohibition of foreign competition in manu¬ 
factured goods should be the permanent policy of this coun¬ 
try, This demand must be met by the counter demand that the 
protective principle should be wholly eliminated, and the 
tariff reduced to a purely revenue basis.” The bounty system, 
reintroduced by the government, was termed as ll a gross mis¬ 
appropriation of public funds, and should be unhesitatingly 

condemned by the farmers of this country on whom the chief 

6 

burden of the cost will fall 11 * 

The improvident utterances made in public by disgruntled 
business men and the gale of mergers that swept the country 

. 7 

during the years 1906-1910 were pouring oil into the fire. 
Farmers, discovering step by step the links between the Ot¬ 
tawa government and manufactures, became painfully aware that 
their resolutions and petitions were made in vain unless they 
broke the privileged position of industry protected by the 
government’s fiscal policy based on indirect taxation. The 
small nation that settled down on the western prairies during 
the wheat boom, included many British and American immigrants 
who had brought along with them not only their capital and 
skill but also their political ideals. Particularly the 
British could recall the fiscal reforms and the effective 


6 . Wood, Op. Git ., p. 252 . 

7. A good account of mergers which occurred during this 
period is given in Edward Porritt's The Revolt in Canada, Lon¬ 
don, 1911 , Ch. IV. 






. 




>. .. 












. 


n. '• 






i. 


C *j OO 


C . i 







i 


. r 




c 








: • 






T 








- 52 - 


working of the income tax in the old country, which suggested 
a similar solution for their difficulties in Canada. In the 
federal elections of 1908 the West sent a slate of able men 
to the House of Commons. Among them was Dr. Michael Clark, 
elected on the Liberal ticket in the constituency of Red 
Deer. Dr. Clark was a distinguished English immigrant and he 
undertook the task of converting Ottawa to direct taxation. 

But soon afterwards the agricultural West was also af¬ 
forded an opportunity to present its grievances and ideas 
directly to the Prime Minister. In the summer of 1910 Sir 
Wilfred Laurier suddenly decided to tour the West. The of¬ 
ficial reason given for this tour was that he wished to get 
an insight at first hand into the progress and conditLons of 
life in the western part of the country. 

Although the trip proved to be a great personal triumph 
for Laurier, he soon noticed that he had stepped on a hot 
ground. About five months before, the secretary of the Cana¬ 
dian Manufacturers 1 Association, G-.M. Murray spoke in Win¬ 
nipeg, and to the astonished western farmers declared that 
f, the reorganized Canadian Manufacturers 1 Association is like 
a young giant ignorant of its own power. By the exercise of 
these powers it could, if it choose, bring several millions 

of people to the verge of starvation, or paralyse the industry 

8 

of the whole Dominion 11 . This thoughtless and astounding boast 


8 . Porritt, Op. cit ., p. 174-175. 




' : • oc 




' . I • , 

• ; . : 1 


... 


... 


' 

' 

: 




u ■■ 


















; .. ( , 


c . ».: :. ' 




. : . . 

ft 

. 

: 

C e.: r 'a 


. 


- 33 - 


evoked such indignation among the western farmers that it 
spurred their opposition to the utmost. The Grain Growers 1 
Guide aptly remarked; 

w We wish that every one of the 800,000 
farmers in Canada could have this statement 
made by the Secretary of the Manufacturers’ 

Association, to consider. It will be well 
to have it printed in flaming letters and 
hung in every farm house in Canada, from the 
Atlantic to the Pacific. It would be an in¬ 
teresting thing for the farmer and his family 
to read whenever they purchased a binder or a 
plough or a carriage or other manufactured 
articles, the price of which was enhanced by 
a high tariff. Then the farmer would consider 
what keeps the tariff up and who benefits by 

the tariff.” 9 

The tense atmosphere was maintained by the vigorous assail¬ 
ing of the tariff in the farm press that followed this event, 
and it is rather surprising that the Premier’s visit passed 
without any incidents. 

Laurier’s tour in the West is a significant point in 
the history of Canadian fiscal policy. In the cartload of 
petitions and addresses which Laurier and his suits harves¬ 
ted on the Prairies frequent reference was made to the British 
fiscal system as a model for modern taxation policy. In 
Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Edmonton, Red Deer, to mention some of 
his stops, the premier and farmers* delegates were touching 
upon the question of federal direct taxation. 

The tenor of the grain growers’ case was set out in two 


9* Grain Growe rs’ Guide , Feb. 9* 19101 See also Porritt, 
Op* cit ., p* 1757 







- 34 - 


memorials prepared for the premier by the Manitoba Grain 
Growers 1 Association and presented to him at Brandon by a 
mass delegation, representing all the local associations 
in the province* The first memorial notified the Premier 
that ”of the many economic questions which engage the at¬ 
tention of Western farmers none is regarded with so much 
disapproval as the protective tariff... not because they were 
unwilling to pay their full share of the cost of government.” 
What they rebel against, the memorial went on, ”is the ele¬ 
ment in the customs tariff which compels them to contribute 
a large percentage of the products of their labor to the 
privileged and protected classes ... Nor do they look with 
favour on any fiscal or preferential tariff that will have 
the tendency to enhance the cost of living to British arti¬ 
sans and labourers, but rather that every possible facility 
be given for the free exchange of the food products grown 
on the prairie farms for the product of Britain’s congested 
factory districts’ 1 • Then the memorial reminded Laurier of 
his speech in Winnipeg, delivered in September, 1894* in which 
he denounced the policy of protection as bondage and slavery, 
and particularized the burden the tariff imposed on the far¬ 
mer. The second memorial stated that ’’whereas the prices for 
farm products are fixed on the world markets by supply and 
demand and free competition, the supplies for farms are pur¬ 
chased in a restricted market where the prices are fixed by 





- 55 - 


combinations of manufacturers and other business interests 
operating under the shelter of a protective tariff. u Owing 
to those conditions, the document went on, n the farmers 
strongly urge that such a change be made in our fiscal pol¬ 
icy as will give them a square deal 11 . Then the memorial 

recorded the western support for the reciprocity with the 

10 

United States. 

Similar demands for a no?/ commercial and fiscal policy 

were reiterated by all farmers’ delegations of the three 

prairie provinces which met the Premier. In his replies to 

the farmers Laurier endeavored to pour oil on troubled waters. 

The audience in Saskatoon was told that tf to abolish the tariff 

at one stroke vjo uld create a financial crisis. It is impos- 

11 

sible for us now to raise revenue as in England.” In Kegina 

he warned In his reply; n Changes must be gradual. It would 
not be possible for us to raise our revenue by direct taxa¬ 
tion. If we did, the first party to suffer would be the set¬ 
tlers, and the first goal to be set before us is the settle- 

12 

ment of thos e enormous prairies* 1 . The solid and unified 
stand of the West was impressing Laurier. To the Liberal 
Association at Moose Jaw he stated that Bright and Oobden were 


10. The Grain Growers ’ G-uide , July 27 , 1910 . 

11. The Globe , Toronto, July JO, 1910. 

12. Weekly Phoenix , Saskatoon, August J, 1910. Quoted 


by Porritt, Op.cit. , p.200. 










.. ■ . ; - 


^ ; 

: 








( 








■ ■- ' - ' .. o: 

■- ... ■ - 

l * ’ . o 


i 




- 36 - 


his models as to the fiscal system, ’’But we cannot today’’, 
he emphasized, ’’give you the full policy of Britain, The 
Motherland is a nation made, Canada is a nation in making. 
But we can give you trade. We have given you free trade, 
and mean to give you free trade, and I don f t think it is 
going too far to say that the Government will give you still 
freer trade. ,fl 3 

An unexpected endorsation for the grain growers f move¬ 
ment was given at Moose Jaw by the Associated Boards of 
Trade of the West. President Saunders, manager of the Bank 
of Commerce who led the deputation consisting of bankers, 
businessmen and manufacturers urging government assistance 
to the Canadian Exhibition in the West, was interviewed by a 
member of Laurier f s suite as to the feelings of the Associa¬ 
tion and its members in regard to the farmers 1 free trade 
propaganda. His answer was: 

”We absolutely exclude party politics from 
our organization, but there is a general and 
strong sentiment in favour of a material reduc¬ 
tion in the tariff. While we are leaving the 
grain growers to present their own case, the 
sympathy of the Boards of Trade, the business 
men, and even the manufacturers, is unquestion¬ 
ably with them. As a matter of fact, there are 
no party politics in the West, as we know them 
in the East, no hidebound allegiance to politi¬ 
cal names. The West is more concerned over 
policy than party, and the dominant policy at the 
present time is tariff reduction.” 


13* The Globe , Toronto, August 6, 1910 




. , . r 



yov c v 


xpiB o-rf 


brtB Iia itX oi 


. ' . : ' Cl , 

bli 1 » : ^ ‘ - ' . - V.’; r. r ’ B ■; bfIB 

■ 1 

' 

- '' , : V .. 

; 1 : v- •' ■ :: a •• o J: 7 b ?,<o bn o b •;" q b ■ ; : <;■: :ns 1 1 r 

• '; I ) l zb 

, ; A; : ' .>'t r 7 .;, 3 ., . ‘ a; 

: o 0 ' iq 

• v ;n . a ■ ■, 

e : . / 

: ' ' •• ' " • T ' ’ ' r '.V, 

f i-.‘ '■■ ‘'c 4 :cbnb rr,J:3 


m-y si IT 




7 a bzjioz*;’ 9 7" 



m /•/ ijb} 

. . 


A>/.':r ; vlbb 

■ . 


. 





' 

zrt Xba 


ed - L 


. V: 




- 37 - 


As the correspondent of the Globe added to his dispatch, 

1 unquestionably the Premier struck a responsive note in 

111 

his reference to the British free trade policy 1 . 

The denunciation of the protective tariff, manufac¬ 
turers, and monopolies, and the critique of Liberal fiscal 
policy was continued with no less vigour also in Alberta* 

At the Red Deer meeting, J* Speakman, a director of the 
United Farmers of Alberta delivered a very effective and 
well-documented address on the regressivity of tariff taxa¬ 
tion* He estimated that for every dollar of duty going into 
the revenue, about three dollars were taken out of the pocket 
of the people, due to the cumulative effect of the tariff, 
which imposed an extra burden per capita of $20, or per family 
of $100. On his homebound trip Laurier made a last stop at 
Lethbridge where a deputation of the southern associations 
awaited him and reiterated the farmers* views for the purpose 
of showing the Premier that the farmers of the north and 
south were united in their demands. In his reply to the ad¬ 
dress Laurier again touched upon direct taxation. ’‘Personally/* 
said the Premier, n he v/as a free trader, and wished they could 
have a free trade as they had in England. But that was im¬ 
possible. In England, where there were large estates, incomes 

14. Ibidem . A good description of Laurier*s western 
tour may be founci in Porritt, Op. Git ., pp* 184-221 





!> : 0.L • b 


.!;> : ol' Vo :.'.u:O,00 CO./:o; \Oo''0 



1 


' 


t . 

■ 

, 

• . . 

■ '■ 


. . ' . • ■ ■ . •' ' ' : Ol ' 

■ 

. '■ , 




■ 



be: 

. . 

* 




' 


• 





■ 


■ ■ V : ' ' 


« 

'' ' 


. 








-38- 


and land monopoly, they were able to raise their revenue by 

direct taxation. In Canada they had few inillionaries, and, 

thanks to God, no land monopoly, so were compelled to raise 

15 

revenue by means of customs duties. 11 

, 16 

Laurier s comment on his trip may be well applied to 
farmers of the Prairies as well. They learned from the best 
authority of the difficulties the Government had to face and 
struggle through when framing its budget policy. The other 
side of protection was the question of a sufficient revenue base 
warranting the huge developmental programme of the government 
carried on, chiefly in the West. It had become clear to them 
that their arguments for lower tariffs were archaic in view of 
heavy govermental expenditures. To make their demands acceptable 
to the government they had to to suggest an alternative source 
of revenue which would provide for the loss incurred by a 
substantial tariff revision. In December of the same year, 
direct taxation was proposed to the federal government as a 
solution by farmers' representatives from all provinces, and 

since then it became a lively political issue. 

L 

The "Siege" of Ottawa . 

The wide publicity afforded the Premier's tour of the 

115• Daily Herald . Lethbridge, Sept. 1, 1910. Quoted 
by Porritt, op.cit ., p.223. 

\16. "I do not know that I ever enjoyed a trip more. It 
has been like a revelation and an education". Laurier at 
Golden, B.C., Aug.15, 1910. Quoted by Porritt, op. cit . t p.176. 







•:; . : ; • ■ < • • •/' . . . ' ' . v;It ■ c ■ ; r. f; I - r 


. . 

' 



« ■ 






. 




• /• • t 

. : : i«.t ;^:r-xeV 

. . t 

' 0-.-. 'v J.\ f T •• ■'■Oi ■ M ; ’ J ’uSa 

- 






■’ - ‘ r -. j::-' - 1 " " ' l--' 




■ •* cfnemn-! 








■ 


v ' ii. 














. 




. 




. 


. 


j 

, . ,. .. 





39 - 


.West by the Canadian press could not escape the attention of 
the protectionist interest* The annual convention of the 
C. M. A*, held in Vancouver, B.C., three weeks after Laurier f s 
trip ended, was seized upon by manufacturers to defend their 
case. The temper of manufacturers was up, and many of them 
availed themselves of freedom of speech. The most fiery cri¬ 
ticism of farmers * demands came from that influential Toronto 
group which, ten years afterward. Col. J.B. MacLean of The 
Financial Post described as “a clique of third and fourth rate 
men, several of whom were failures in their undertakings”. * 1 ^ 

The convention went on record for all-out support of protection 
and voted the establishment of the Tariff Education Fund to po¬ 
larize the propaganda for free trade and reciprocity. 

The reaction of farmers was immediate and inciting. The 
Grain Growers f Guide ran an editorial, “Manufacturers Throw 
Down Gauntlet”, in which the C.M.A. T s resolutions were called 
a contempt for the will of the people and added: ”The Van¬ 
couver convention of the manufacturers should prove to be the 
greatest blessing to the farmers of Canada that has fallen 
upon them. The farmers will not sit under the system of the 
legalized robbery and allow manufacturers to hurl such a chal¬ 
lenge into their teeth. The farmers are aroused, they now 
see the danger face to face.”**'® T he Weekly Sun , the Ontario 


17. The Financial Post , May 29th, 1920. 

1 8. Grain Growers 1 Guide , Sept. 28th, 1910. 








-■ : . ... .. Jl ; c i".' . f ' %<> tfaelJ 

; r • . ' "V ■ . ' ■ 0 .■ ' " 

...... 

£*xs 

. : . « ■ 

, . - 

: , .■ ' :■ v 1 •: ''V. : 0i ■ 

. . - . r 

< ■ -J ‘ -■ 1 ■ I •?> ■ !}. ■ >, ; •>:. 'lit 1 

■ 

i .. . . ) 049 

oj "iv.. . • •. ,:vv vi b.a,.e 

* 5 »•. • : C‘.,‘V y ■■ V:, .-7 ■ S. 

' ■. 1 .-V/.. . . • - : r n - 

„ y . . .; ■ : ■ v '■ •> '. 

" L '• a . i . . ' . . ! 7 ; ,, '..! V ;i cj 

■ >;J *- J - r - 1 ' v : ■ rj«-.as vvi-*. :> vifco 

■ 'v '• ■ • 1 ■ v. V; 7 v.7v 30 1: 7 ; . *1 > 

■ , 7 V 

■ ' ■ 5 • ; v. i \/i : - . 7/ ■. v.\ • y..i‘f>., \ *’ .r 

. V. • ”, .. 7 if 1 

. . ... ..v.i . :. r •„ ) »,• v , • o 


V . ' ' * 









- ho - 


farm paper, suggested, a mass delegation of farmers from all 
parts of Canada to go to Ottawa which were to prove to the 

19 

Government that the Western farmers did not stand alone. 

The Canadian Council of Agriculture seized upon the sugges¬ 
tion, and assumed the responsibility for carrying out the 
plan. On December 16 , a mass delegation (over eight hundred 
members) presented a list of resolutions to Parliament. 

The Farmers 1 PIatform , as the brief was henceforth 
called, referred for the first time to direct taxation. The 
fifth point of the platform stated that n the farmers of this 

country are willing to face direct taxation in such a form as 

20 

it may be advisable to make up the revenue 11 . Albeit the 
point or the address did not specify the form of direct taxa¬ 
tion, it fulfilled one of its purposes: the ice of Eastern 
opposition to direct taxation had been definitely broken. 

The farmers 1 w sle.ge M of Ottawa started one of the most 
■turbulent political fights in Canadian history. The controversy 
over the tariff flared up in the House of Commons and was car¬ 
ried to the electorate in the fall elections of 1911, which 
ended with a disastrous defeat of the government. Even the 
farmers 1 forces in the West did not stick to their demands. 

The Province of Manitoba went Conservative with a majority of 


19. At this time the negotiations on reciprocity between 
Ottawa and Washington were satisfactorily proceeding. 

20 . Siege of Ottawa , Pamphlet published by Canadian Coun¬ 
cil of Agriculture, Winnipeg, 1910* 






;• j t : ; o; ... ; . - • =. r 

. •. ' ... *' v 

■ 

-... . ... : ... .. .; V; ■: i . ; . :.1 ; 

' • ■ ' ... ■■ , «■ ■ 





- 

. 


;. 1 ; 

j§ 





- i •' 


t ■ r .. 1 

. 


u ... 


■ 


.... 

. 



- ' . ... 

■ 





. 








' 

' 

. 


. . ■ . 

■ 




>i... 

. ' 

■: ' • 


j: • j; ! ■:: w 









• 


• 


. ■ 



- ! ■ . , • i J 


t .. . 

...... 

- - . ' V 





- 4i - 


21 

nearly 6,000 votes. 

Were the Farmers 1 Demands Justified ? 

Although it is not our intention to evaluate the events 

and issues which brought about the fall of Laurier’s Ministry, 

one question presses for an answer: Was Canada economically 

22 

mature at that time for a federal direct tax? The answer is , 
by all means, in the affirmative. The spectacular growth of 
agriculture during the wheat boom was well matched by the in¬ 
dustrial expansion concentrated in the Provinces of Ontario and 
Quebec. Whereas the total capital invested in agriculture rose 
from $7^0 millions in 1896 to $1,705 millions in 1913? the total 
capital employed in manufacturing jumped from $447 millions to 
$1,248 millions, and the net value of products of manufacturing 
industries rose from about $215 million to $564 million. The 
merger fever between 1904-11 led to the establishment of some 
forty-one industrial corporations that absorbed 196 separate 

smaller companies, and boosted their capitalization from $125 

2h 

million to $355 million. 

Under the fiscal system based on indirect taxation the profits 


21 . Cf. Wood, op. cit ., p. 270. 

22 . Here we mean exclusively the personal and corporate 
income tax. 

23. Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial Relations, 
Report , Book I, pp. 73-76. 

24 . Monetary Times , Toronto, January 6, 191 R. Also 
MacDiarmid, op. cit. , p. 244 * 












- U2 - 


from such a huge industrial investment practically escaped 
taxation, which, in turn, created a serious disparity as to 
the impact of the average burden of taxation on various oc¬ 
cupational groups. The complaints of the farmer of being 
over-taxed on account of industry were wholly justified, and 
the situation could have been remedied only by introducing 
an income tax. But the cry of the farmer, even carried by 
himself to the Parliament, v/as misunderstood by the govern¬ 
ment as well as by the opposition, which in addition did not 
hesitate to hold the side of vested interests not only during 
the election campaign, but also afterwards. 

Direct Tax Movement at a Low Ebb 

The new Conservative Ministry led by Sir Robert L. Borden 
buried all hopes for a radical remodeling of the Dominion fis¬ 
cal system. The new Minister of Finance, Mr. T. White was 
trapped betv/een the Scylla of public opinion and the Charybais 
of his conservative friends, and provided but a weathercock-like 
leadership in fiscal policy. 

The income tax movement, after the unsuccessful bid for 
power in 1911 , marked a low ebb in the years immediately pre¬ 
ceding the outbreak of war. The Grain Growers* Guide kept the 
flame alive commenting on the American moves for a federal in¬ 
come tax, and the G-ladstonian Liberal, Dr. Michael Clark, 
ploughed his lonely furrow, to use A. Meighen’s allegory, in 
the House of Commons. A creeping depression and worsening 




) .... .i • ' • l. 




■.' . x.l 




. 














• ' '• : 








(3 i 


















M 








i 


> ;■ ‘ o 


. j . ■-*. 




















I: 




o 




i ) 






- 43 - 


international situation overshadowed the tariff issue. 

The adoption of income tax in United States together with 
an insistent pressure of military men for increased defence 
spending gave new momentum to the movement. In June, 1914 > the 
Grain Growers Guide came out with an open demand for an income 
tax in Canada. In an editorial, ’’income Tax”, the editor 
wrote: 


11 The advocacy of a Free Trade is never complete and 
convincing unless it is supplemented by a sound and 
practical plan for the raising of revenue which would 
be lost by the abolition of tariff taxes. Among the 
alternatives perhaps which appeals strongly to the 
majority of the people is the income tax, which in the 
main source of revenue in Great Britain ... 11 

After a good account of the British income tax history 

and American legislation, the editor asked; 

’’Now, is there any reason under high heaven why an 
income tax should not be introduced in Canada? We 
have never heard it mentioned except in whispers at 
Ottawa, but if the progressive elements of the Domin¬ 
ion are wise they will advocate it with stern persis¬ 
tency from this time forward.... the sooner the leaders 
of progress begin to advocate its institution the 
better for their hope of eventual political success. 

They might actually be surprised to find how popular it 
was with the mass of the electorate.” 

The editor also called for compelling ’’the class of rich 
shareholders to take up their proper share of the national bur- 
Gen” and for imposing a heavy super-tax upon ”our plutocracy’ 1 . 
It would be of much Interest to follow the path of a fight for 
an income tax in Canada, which would undoubtedly evolve from 


25. Gra 1 n Growers ' G-uide , June 24 , 1914 ? P* 7&9 


















=: 




• . r . / ' r< ; .' ; ? • : ' ;o f? 

. 


: r- 




i 










- 44 - 


this battle cry. However, the war events intervened and gave 
an entirely different course to the movement, effacing con¬ 
siderably its class character. 

Fiscal Controversy During the War . 

When the war broke out, the immediate problems and dif¬ 
ficulties were more of monetary than of fiscal character. The 
financial panic which seized, first Toronto and then Montreal, 
and threatened to deplete the gold reserves of banks, neces¬ 
sitated the suspension of gold payments. The banks were 
authorized to pay off their liabilities in their own notes 
and the public ?ras informed that the government was prepared 

to use all existing powers to prevent any interruption of bus- 
26 

iness conditions. Parliament was summoned to a special 
session in the second half of the month of August to deal with 
the whole situation. 

Since the British government was willing to provide the 
necessary funds through the Bank of England for financing the 
Canadian war expenditures at the early stage of war, the Minister 
of Finance was not compelled to introduce any major fiscal 
measures to the sitting House of Commons, and he satisfied him¬ 
self with an increase of tariff rates on such reliable revenue 

27 

producers as tea, cocoa, coffee, sugar and tobacco. There were 

25. C-r a in Gr ow ers 1 Guide , June 2 lj., 191k, p. 769. 

26 . A moratorium was considered, but later on found unnec¬ 
essary, 

27. Statutes of Canada , 5 Geo. V., c. 5. 







. . .. ,• ' ■ . ' e.V r d 

' ( " ; • ‘ ■ 

. ■ \ . 

o 0&J 

■ ■ . . 



. 



a...;; 





•, ;.; J’ .•>;. i;« / D.nB 


. • • 



, .; . . 





o u 


•• ■ • i; - . a.: . "'o ' . ' : •: 





, • . • . - .' 'i<: V t •'. 


• 



. 

: c, . .. • ... I s: . •: ■ -> ■. :; ecJ esaea 

...... 

: . v ... . ■ •:: Ci'K) 

■ . r . ■; ■ , . . , :j • ■ P. • (.■ . aO. J; 

- , . •. L: 

. ; • : ;■ . '. , r ' : 







- 1*5 - 


hardly any critics of the bill except Mr. Clark. Albeit 
pledging his support to the bill he disliked the idea of 
beginning to impose the war burden from the bottom. In the 
course of his speech he pointed out: 

H ... that it would have bees a most fortunate 
moment for the government to have tried a little 
incursion into the realm of direct taxation. That 
should have been a triumph of the abnormal in 
Canada. Instead of increasing the duties which 
bear upon the poor, they could have had the great 
mass of the people of this country behind them if 
they had put a good fat tax upon all incomes above 
$l,500a year. I offer that suggestion to him (the 
Minister of Finance) and to the Government as one 
well worthy of their consideration.* 1 28 

Clarke proposal of an income tax got but scanty attention 
from the press. Both Liberal and Conservative newspapers com¬ 
mended the measures introduced by Sir T. Y/hite, and expressed 

29 

the opinion that the time was inappropriate for any innovations. 
Perhaps at this particular point it would have been difficult 
to follow Mr. Clark 1 s advice, for nobody could foresee what 
part Canada was to play in the conflict, and, as a consequence, 
what sacrifices she would have to make. The general attitude 
was antimilitaristic across the country, and in the absence of 
any signficant military force Cana da T s role seemed to be limited 
to some kind of economic support of the Mother Country. It was 
therefore wise to avoid anything that could shake an economic 
system still tormented with a depression. 


28 . Debates , 1 9I4 , Special Session, p. 

29. Cf. The Financial Post , August 22 , 19 l 4 > The Globe , 
Toronto, August - 21, 1914; The Gazette, Montreal, August 21 , 

1914. ■ 










o • x: 




. 


















. 


•• ) ' 0 


C 


Cw 




' 


, 


- 






- 46 - 


However, as the war progressed, the problems of war fin¬ 
ance became more acute and more discussed. The income tax 
put forward by Mr • Clark to the Government and to the public 
started to get attention. As may have been expected, the 
West was in the van of the drive, The conventions of the 
provincial farmers 1 bodies adopted resolutions in favor of a 
graduated income tax, during the early months of 1915* At 
the annual convention of the Manitoba Grain Growers 1 Associ¬ 
ation held in January, 1915 > an address was delivered by A.B. 
Clark, Professor of Political Economy at the University of 
Manitoba, on ^Canadian Fiscal Policy 11 . Professor Clark bit¬ 
terly attacked the government and said that n under the shelter 
of the high ideals of National Strength we have, in fact, 
revived on behalf of the combines the old right enjoyed by the 
feudal barons of the Middle Ages - the right of private taxa- 
tionJ 1 He remarked; 

M I have been told that the idea of an income tax 
is not popular in Canada, None of us keenly desires 
to have our incomes taxed. But if we look below 
the surface we see at once that, by means of high 
prices of necessaries such as clothing and the in¬ 
struments of production, the present system levies 
really an exorbitant tax, and an unequal tax on 
incomes, and more expecially on the income of the 
farmer ♦. . ♦ The institution of the income tax would 
mean the speedy end of a system under which fiscal 
legislation is manipulated in the interest of special 
classes, and the substitution of legislation in the 
interest of the nation as a wholeJO 


50 * Manitoba Grain Growers* Association, 12 th Annual Con¬ 
ference held at Brandon, Jan, 15 - 15 * 1915 * Minutes of Proceed¬ 
ings, p. 26 ff. 






t 






Ou i 


' 


; ■ 






{■ 


J ( .. 




i 






r 



( 








' 






Similar demands and suggestions as to what taxes he should 
introduce to meet the additional expenditures were forwarded 
to the Minister of Finance but most of them were amateurish 
advice lacking wholly in adequacy to meet the situation. 

The country awaited the war budget with much attention. 

It was the first time in the history of the Dominion that the 
Minister of Finance was called upon to mobilize the nation f s 
economy for war purposes, and the general feeling prevailed 
that the budget would introduce sweeping changes in the gov¬ 
ernment’s fiscal policy. However, the budget speech as 
delivered on February 11 , 1915 9 exposed helplessness, instead 
of leadership, and hardly pleased anybody but big business. 

To finance the war the government decided to adhere to the 
principles of National Policy reinstated a year ago, viz., 
higher tariff rates and larger borrowing, supplemented with 
some ancillary direct taxes limited in yield and duration. 

The great engine of war finance, the income tax, was left out 
as an insufficient instrument. Accordingly, the Budget 
introduced an over-all increase of tariff rates, 5 P er cent 
under the British Preference, 7 l /2 per cent under the inter¬ 
mediate and general schedule, plus a host of direct taxes on 
consumption and financial companies. 

The Minister of Finance, speaking for the proposed measures, 
reminded the House that the tariff was the mainstay of the 
Dominion revenue system, and the government had to look to this 






- 48 - 


instrument for relief of fiscal conditions* He believed that 
the increased customs duties would bear upon all classes of 
the community making every member feel that he was to that 
extent contributing to the defence of the country. The prop¬ 
osed new direct taxes were designed to levy an additional 
burden upon those taxpayers who were best able to sustain it. 
Expecting criticism from income tax supporters, he felt it 
necessary to make clear the position of the government on the 

31 

matter. He listed three main reasons against the income tax; 
(1) the administrative difficulties, including evasion; (2) 
its small fiscal yield; and (J) the impact of a federal income 


31. ”lt will be observed that I have omitted income tax 
upon individuals, about which there has been some discussion 
since the outbreak of the war. The matter has had the con¬ 
sideration of the government and it appears clear to us that 
such a tax is not expedient, at all events, for the present.... 
In order to bring into force an income tax the government would 
be obliged to create machinery for assessment, revision and 
collection. This would involve a heavy expenditure as compared 
with the amount wiich would be realized. Taking the income tax 
of the United States as a basis it would appear that it could 
hardly expect to derive from a similar tax a sum in excess of 
two million dollars, from which would have to be deducted the 
heavy expense connected with its administration. My chief 
objection, hov^ever , to an income tax is the fact that several 
provinces are also likely to be obliged to resort to measures 
for raising additional revenue, and I am of the view that the 
Dominion should not enter upon the domain to which they are 
Confined to a greater degree than is necessary in the national 
interest. There is another feature of income tax which makes 
it unsatisfactory for the purpose of the Dominion finance. T 
refer to the length of period which must elapse before it be- 
comss productive. In Britain, where the tax is the chief source 
of revenue to the Imperial Government there is no municipal 
taxation upon incomes. There is also the important difference 
that in Britain taxable incomes are derived largely from in¬ 
vestments. They have therefore a settled character, are ascer¬ 
tainable with fair accuracy and are capable of being levied upon 
at their source. With us this is not the case.” (Sir T. White, 
Budget Speech , Feb . 11 , 1915, p. 86) 










c ;• . ux 






.. C 0 


' 


■ 










.. . ■ c; : ■ 


' 

. •:. ‘ : : ■ -y 

. . • ' . l . - ; : . : .,.o ■ y 

.. ' .. ■' • 

■ 

. 









0 ! 


;; ; 



. 











- 49 - 


tax upon the provincial revenues. By all means the last 
point was the strongest one. The Minister had accurately fore¬ 
seen the difficulties which arose ten years later and prevented 
the Dominion from employing the tax to tie fullest extent until 
the World War II. 

The most alarming feature of White ! s budget was an implicit 
admission of the government that it was not able to frame a 
positive fiscal policy needed for the prosecution of the war. 

The Minister of Finance, by ruling out the income tax from 
federal fiscal instruments, stultified his whole fiscal policy. 
The restricted scope of taxation could by no means guarantee 
the revenue needed to meet the mounting war expenditures plus 
the capital investment ’which the government intended to carry 
on. Evidently, it counted heavily upon extensive borrowing. 

But the only Canadian source of loaned funds, the British mar¬ 
ket, was also under a heavy strain, and the government itself 
was impairing this source further by imposing prohibitive 
tariff rates on British goods, thus defeating its own plan. 
Hitherto, C a nadian securities were practically unknown to the 
American investor, and the domestic market was an unexplored 
frontier, so that the government could rely upon those sources 
at that stage only to a very limited degree. The choice between 
an income tax and inflation, as it stood implicitly before the 
government, was decided in favor of inflation, and the Minister 
deliberately enhanced it to a considerable degree. 




0 '■ 










r: . rv 

*.• ■ 


P f ' 


o 


:..;' o 


■ 


, V - ’ ' 

: ■ : . .. '■ , ■ ; ' .■ - .■ ' •/ 
, ... . : ” . ■::> ; . • ' • . " : ■ • 






... i) ■: 




4 




v.; 










- 50 - 


The opposition showed no less confusion than the govern¬ 
ment during the budget debate. Indeed, they had broken the 
party truce and seriously criticized the budget. The debate 
was conducted along the standard lines of government waste 
and high tariff policy, and the official spokesman of the 
opposition, Mr. A.K, MacLean refrained from taking up the issue 
of the income tax with the Minister of Finance. The champion 
of income taxation in the House of Commons, Dr, Clark spoke 
in eloquent terms on the matter, yet he was not equipped to 
refute the specific objections against the tax made by the 
Minister. What he and the country needed was an expert and 
unbiased view on Canadian fiscal policy void of political, 
regional, or class flavour. 

It is quite dubious what turn Canadian public finance 

would have taken during the subsequent war years, had Dr. 

Skelton of Queen*s University not intervened with his small 

32 

but classic study on federal fiscal policy, in which he ex¬ 
posed the defects of the whole Canadian fiscal structure, and 
stated in a very forceful manner the case for the introduction 
of an income tax into the federal revenue system. After the 
Keynesian-like outline of the functions of public finance in 
the nation*s economy he surveyed all the possible fields of 
taxation listing their pros and cons, and arrived to a conclu¬ 
sion that from all the medley of taxes the income tax and 

32 . Skelton, 0 .D,, Federal Finance , I, Bulletin of the 
Department of History and Political" and Economic Science in 
Queen*s University, No. 1 6, Kingston, Ontario, 1915 - 






, ■ ,. X ■ ' ■ • • ■ t 

' . - . • '• 

i; r-fO t ■ ■ - f 

V’ .. ■ 

. * , t 

. r 0 .• .. : J. ‘ :■ X u- C w \;o 

. : * . -.' ■ ■ 

. ■ .■ ' „ ■ , > ' . 1 - . :• : t 

. .. ' ai .. :■ t i ... { z p.Ij ■. 

. ’ . ' / • . . ; ' : / 

!o *:.o t J. 

■ X 

r ■ 

■ • • .; : ;• JI ' 2». 


’ . X,' •' / ' 


, ' 





.,'.'0 .'I.!.- 




f. : 

• ;•{ ' : .!: X : j '.a '.. 

■ ?: rX . ' o ; i ' 6 u{.i 






... .: ■ s :. ; h \ o 


...... ; ' . ■ v :: •. , ! ' . c ■ 

.... ■ • • X . .XX XXXxatf 

J .c : ; X r.::; .; erf noX'X 


« .. • p ». 

■’ ' ' : ' 

r . .XX. ... X .■■■ ■. 



- 51 - 

succession duties represented the best form of taxation* Their 
adoption into the federal system he deemed too obvious to be 
discussed under the existing war conditions. He entirely dis¬ 
agreed with Mr, White that the objections raised by him in the 
budget speech were so serious as to make the tax unacceptable 
to the Dominion government, 

Skelton estimated in his study, that an eventual yield 
of a federal income tax would amount to about $37 million as 
against Mr, White 1 s estimate of two million dollars, basing 
his calculations on more exact figures of British income tax 
and Wisconsin tax yields. As to the impact of a federal income 
tax upon provincial finances he saw a clear advantage in such 
a tax which could serve as a uniform measure for both the 
Dominion and the provinces in levying a tax upon incomes. He 
did not deny the serious administrative problems in Canada, 
but they were common in each state and everywhere they have 
been successfully overcome. And referring to the objection 

55 

raised, by the editor of The Gazette he indignantly wrote that 
^anyone who fears to adopt an income tax solely because of the 
risk of evasion must believe either that Canadian citizens are 
liars beyond all other men or that Canadian statesmen and offi- 

3h 

cials are incompetent beyond all others, 

35• n Mr. White acted wisely in not resorting to an income 
tax, though he will be blamed by those who regard it as the 
best and surest way of making the rich pay their share of the 
national burden, especially if it is a graduated or progressive 
one... Of tbe whole category of imposts none is more easily 
evaded. n The Gazette , Peb. 12, 1915« 

34• Skelton, Op. cit ., p, 34* 














. 


■; . 


■ 


' 




- 


i 




' i : 


r. \;o 










:' « u 


. 






:oU 


■ 


) 




9 r i ■ ' ■ 












: 




'O 
















52 


Skelton’s concise study exercised a distinctive influence 
upon the future course of federal finance. Ke armed the sup¬ 
porters with an authoritative documented paper, and also con¬ 
verted many broad-minded men to a fiscal reform. When subsequent 
events , particularly the closing of the British money market 
endangered the position of the treasury, even Mr. White had 
two measures drafted, one imposing a tax upon excess profits 
and the second, an income tax bill. But sticking to big business 
gospel that the income tax was not suitable for financing the 

war, Mr. White declined to introduce the income tax bill, and 

35 

put through only the Excess Profits Tax Act. 

In his budget brought down early in February, 1916, The minis¬ 
ter avoided discussion of the income tax, stating that his views 
had not been changed. However, the Liberal Opposition went all-out 
for support of its introduction. Mr. McLean, the official spokesman 
of the opposition, incorporated Skelton’s arguments into his 
speech and addressing the House on the budget proposals, he said : 

”ln view of the fact that hereafter In this country 
we shall for many years require more revenue than we can 
possibly secure from customs and excises, we might as well 
begin now and adopt a broad system of taxation based 
upon incomes, which would reach all persons in equitable 
proportions and. without any discrimination. By such 
a method we should reach every business concern which 
the minister is attempting to reach by his proposals 
but in a much better and more just manner. The minister 
will probably find that next he will have to invoke 
some system of direct taxation.” 36 


35. The Act taxed profits in excess of 7% of the paid- 
up capital at the rate of 10 % and. 25% in the case of an unincor¬ 
porated and. incorporated business respectively.Enterprises 
with the paid-up capitall less than $50,000 were exempt save 
those manufacturing war supplies and ammunitions. 


36. debates , 1916, p. 902 




v ' ' •■■■ 

. 

' '.tr- i . . j ' c - a., rfJ l\i s^e&<ico 

¥ 

\ ' ' ' • : t Vv 

: . • 

. C , ■; 

' . < 

. 

, 

i 

. 

' /* ■' ."ji <: v.c V- ? t ry-; •; i:<c< ac 3n&- he 

■ ' " ‘ • VI ■ . - -• 

. 

* 


. 

■ v '■ ■"! he hshla&o cu 

* • •. ; • 

* 






- 55 - 


Mr. MacLean did not share the view of the Minister of Finance, 
that the provincial income taxes posed any serious obstacles 
to a federal tax for, in his opinion, the income tax was in 
operation in some of the provinces. It was only levied in 

57 

theory; generally speaking, there was no income taxation. 

It is also worthwhile to note that the only Labor member of 
the House, Alfonse VervUle, followed the Liberal line urging 
direct tax a ^i°n beginning with parliamentarians’ salaries and 
indemnities. 

Toward the end of 1916 the country was practically con¬ 
verted to inc ome taxation except for a small group of well- 
to-do people who feared that the tax would take too much from 
their incomes. It was therefore rather surprising that the 
federal government hesitated to impose heavier taxes albeit the 

58 

fact that two subsequent domestic loans and other events were 
indicating that the nat ion reacted more than favorably to any 
appeal for funds, and that the financial position of the country 
was generally underestimated. While the public, instead of 
complaining of being overtaxed, demanded more taxation, the 
government was borrowing at home and abroad. The farmers* 
organizations, v/hich were answering every call for support and 
sacrifice from a government, they disliked as much as the tariff, 
grew dissatisfied with the government’s protection of the group 

37 • lb id ern. 

38. The farmers’ locals in the West pledged their members 
to support the Imperial cause by free contributions of wheat 
and other agricultural products. 







- 54 - 


they called profiteers and speculators. 

There were again signs of political activity among far¬ 
mers around this time. The Canadian Council of Agriculture 
promulgated a revised Farmers 1 Platform which embodied the 
former demands of the agrarian class in a more specific form. 

The Platform called for a direct tax on improved land values, 
including all natural resources, a sharply graduated tax 
upon all incomes over $4,000 a year, a heavy graduated inher¬ 
itance tax on large estates, and a graduated income tax on 
profits of corporations over ten per cent. 

The borrowing policy inaugurated by the government during 
1916 , viz., issuance of tax exempt bonds, signalized the in¬ 
come tax for 1917 . The bill had been drafted v/ith the Excess 
Profits Tax Act, and even the backers of the Finance Minister 
were expecting it. However, the mysterious Mr. White of whom 
later Dr, M. Clark remarked that u no reed which ever shook its 
slender tip in a summer wind could compare with the Ex-Minister 
as an emblem of instability n , had another surprise in store for 
forecasters. In his third war budget speech of April 2l|, 1917 , 
the Minister told the House that the income tax was not well 
suited for financing the war as far as Canada is concerned. To 
a certain degree he took issue with Dr. Skelton's arguments in 
favor of a tax upon incomes as put forward in the paper men¬ 
tioned. Passing on the proposition that Canada should follow 
Great Britain and the United States by imposing a tax upon in¬ 
comes beyond $1,000 or $^ 000 , Mr, White stated that a comparison 







■ • 1 l. 


u 


r - 




■ 







: ' : : •: 


. ) :■). 


- t 





- 55 - 


of Canada with either of those countries was fallacious. Ee 
listed the following reasons to support his stand: ( 1 ) that 
Canada was not a country of large accumulated wealth and in¬ 
comes derived from investments; ( 2 ) that the maximum amount 
which could be obtained from such a tax in Canada would, in 
terms of Dominion finance, be comparatively snail, and its 
administration would require almost a second civil service 
sufficient in number to cover every municipality, rural and 
urban, throughout the Dominion; ( 3 ) that the costs of the levy 
would be proportionately heavier than in England or in the Uni¬ 
ted States; (ij.) that some of the provincial and municipal gov¬ 
ernments were already taxing incomes; (5) that the larger in¬ 
comes derived from holdings in joint stock companies were mean¬ 
while subject to the Business Profits War Tax Act; and ( 6 ) 
that the Canadian public voluntarily was supporting the Cana¬ 
dian Patriotic Fund, Red Cross and other funds, and the amount 
contributed annually to these funds was much in excess of the 
amount likely to be realized from any income tax. But above 
these reasons he added that n if such a tax is to be imposed, 
it seems to me that so far as the great ira jority of Canadians 
are concerned, it might be better to be levied in time of peace 1 
At the same time he proposed substantial increases in the rates 
of the Excess Profits War Tax Act. 

It would hardly be of much avail to discuss anew the Min¬ 
ister^ objections to an income tax. There is ample evidence 


59 


39 * Budget Speech , 1917, p. 719 ff. 







B 


U 


•. . 


■ 


O 


u . i 


( ‘ i 



t 


r 


. 


, . ■ 






( 


\.o t 




, i u 






, 






. O *' 




! . 












- 56 - 


Uo 

that he did not believe in them, the more so that three months 
later he introduced the tax despite the strong obje ctions he had 
heaped up during the previous two years. 

The budget elicited a wave of criticism from all corners 
of the country. Tl© attacks from income tax supporters were 
to be expected. But to his surprise his own political backers 
rebelled against the heavy and discriminatory taxation of 
selected profits of business enterprises. About three weeks 
following the budget speech The Financial Post , which was de¬ 
fending Mr. White ! s policies during the war and before, stated 
editorially: 

n In his tax on profits the Minister has gone too 
far in one direction. He must modify it before it 
is too late, and if he finds it necessary to replace 
some revenue which he thinks is going to be lost 
thereby, then put some tax upon those articles, the 
consumption of which should be restricted in Canada 
today. Put some tax on great incomes — ranging from 
$100,000 to .$1,000,000 a year -- which are drawn by 
people who have their investment in bonds and mort¬ 
gages •— much of whose money was made in real estate 
and other speculation — and who are themselves tak¬ 
ing no risk and contributing nothing by their enter¬ 
prises or ability to the production in the country 1+1 

The year of 1917 was, perhaps, the most critical period of 

the war. The nation felt the full impact of the war burden and 

the government was clearly failing to give a leadership the 

country needed in such a trying hour. The Prime Minister faced 


1+0. In the realm of finance, the sentiment of the public 
v/as reflected in a desire for heavier taxation. This was 
partly caused by the failure of some well-to-do people to con¬ 
tribute as generously as they should have to the patriotic and 
other war funds. Sir Thomas White, The Story of War Finance , p.55* 

1+1. The Financial Post , Editorial, May 19, 1917• 







. . 


Of 


: 


• . . 







.. • ■ ■ 



: r: : i, 




J-ff’. " : :;. r . .^Of r f '% 



. .. . • . ■ •; ■ x 

: . • ... : 





■ .! * ■ i a 









o* 




; : g : 

. Z O •' o fJ 




V 


; „ . 

, 

■ , 

. 




■ <: 








o 


u 




. 




. » . 






• . • 

- 

-f f - . ::... ;.. o T.'&O 

; f ... . \ •- " Cf 






- 57 - 


the nation with the necessity of further sacrifices in man¬ 
power and wealth but he did not unfold a program for meeting 
the situation. He let the issue of conscription get out of 
the hands of the government which, thrown into the political 
arena, could cause only serious damage and weaken the country. 

Vi/hen the budget speech exposed the helplessness of the 
government, public opinion was turned not only against the 
government but also against the whole parliament. The demands 
for removal of some cabinet members and even calls for a new 
leadership were appearing in the press. 

The conscription issue elicited an agitation for u con¬ 
scription of wealth 11 in the West and in Ontario. It was in 
the farming communities that the catch-phrase attracted most 
attention. They conditioned their consent to the conscription 
of men with a conscription of wealth, which in essence meant 
adopting a good stiff income tax. The Canadian Council of Ag¬ 
riculture at its meeting held in June manifested agrarian feel¬ 
ings by dropping from its platform the minimum exemption of 
$4*000, thus indicating that the farmers were willing to do 
their share and support the Imperial case. The Guide in its 
editorial advised the government that it n v/ill find that a great 
deal of the opposition to conscription of men will disappear if 
a heavily graduated income tax is adopted and more of that op¬ 
position will disappear if further taxes are imposed so that 

42 

every man who is not fighting will be forced to do some paying 11 * 

42. The Guide , June 20, 1917* editorial. 
















' 


. 






, 




• ) 


. 


J; 








• * 



J * - . l '£ .. .£.. ■ , ;U 







' t 

























- 58 - 


Indeed, similar demands for a fair distribution of the war 
burden were voiced by other members of the community as well. 

It is worthwhile to record that the Montreal Board of Trade 
some days before the Income Tax Bill was introduced in the 
House had sent a deputation to Ottawa to request the government 
to do something whereby every citizen would, proportionately 
to his means, share the nation’s burden. When asked what they 

1+5 

would suggest, they pointed to the income tax. 

Sir Robert Borden and his party, assessing public opinion 
in view of unavoidable federal elections, which seemed to sig¬ 
nalise defeat, decided to woo the farmers and compelled Sir 
Thomas White to denounce his fiscal heresy. When he rose in 
the House of Commons on July 25> 1917* to lay before the House 
the Income T a x Bill, repudiated three months before, he was 
definitely a beaten man on the issue. Instead of being a 
master of events he had become an instrument of the irony of 
fate which not for the first time played its Delphic game with 
politicians. 

At this point, a historian of the Canadian Income tax, 
eager to parallel the eloquence of Pitt, Peel, Gladstone or 


li.?* 11 1 was the spokesman of the deputation, and when Sir 

Thomas White asked me what we would suggest I said we were 
not there to suggest, but to lay the facts before him and 
leave it up to him. So he insisted so much upon me saying 
something that I said? ’Well, there is the income tax, you 
know, and you might possibly use it l He said; ’That goes to 
the privilege of rights’. I said; ’Maybe so, but then find a 
new law by which every man will come in and do his share accor¬ 
ding to his revenue 1 . u (Mr. Zeph. Herbert, Citizens* Research 

Institute of Canada, Convention Proceedings, Canadian Tax 
Conference , Montreal, Oct. 17-lb, 1929, p• •) ' 







. 






c 






< . 


t ; .! 














O' 









1 


i 


r 


n 


. . ) 


- 



*1 


■ 











- 59 - 


other great finance ministers with the rhetoric of Sir T. White 
must save space. His speech for the bill was cool and indif¬ 
ferent. He substantiated the introduction of the bill by the 
expected increase of military expenditures connected with uni¬ 
versal military service and maintaining the credit of the Dom¬ 
inion. He added; 

Apart from this necessity from a financial 
standpoint there has arisen, in connection with 
the Military Service Bill, both in this House 
and in the country a very natural and, in my 
view a very just, sentiment that who are in the 
enjoyment of substantial incomes should substan¬ 
tially and directly contribute to the growing war 
expenditures of the Dominion. In view of this 
consideration I desire today to lay before this 
Committee proposals for a national measure of in¬ 
come taxation. I may say that the adoption of 
such a measure is a distinct innovation in federal 
fiscal legislation.... As I have stated, the 
provinces and the municipalities are confined to 
direct taxation, and I have not regarded it exped¬ 
ient, except in case of manifest public necessity, 
such as I believe exists at the present time, that 
the Dominion should invade the field to which the 
provinces are solely confined for the raising of 
their revenue. 11 I4I4. 

As we have pointed out above, the objection of aggravating 
Dominion-provincial fiscal relations was a weighty one. 

Despite its very mild form, the income tax was accepted by 
the opposition and-the country with much relief. In fact, it 
was a victory of the joint progressive forces of the country, 
but particularly of the “West. And if there is only a bit of 
truth in the eulogy of Gladstone on the income tax, then the 
West deserves the credit for its introduction into the federal 


Debates , 1917 , p* 57^0. 




















60 - 


fiscal system and the "red” Michael Clark, the Gladstonian 
Liberal the honours. 

Influence of War , 

Hitherto we have followed the broad social currents 
which were instrumental in persuading the Minister of Finance 
to usher into the federal fiscal system the Income tax* It 
has, however, been pointed out that the exigencies of war 
speeded up the fiscal metamorphosis, and therefore a short 
account of Canadian war finance is in place* 

The outbreak; of hostilities had caught the country en¬ 
tirely unprepared and in the midst of an economic slump* The 
obsolete fiscal system, fostered by the party in power, the 
lack of any comprehensive plan, and last but not least, insuf¬ 
ficient economic data, prevented the government from employing 
the latent powers of the country in full within a short time. 

It was bound to improvise at the outbreak of war, and the first 
measures adopted in the summer of 1914 were unavoidable* 

Due to the arrangements with the Imperial government, which 
assumed responsibility for the maintenance of Canadian forces 
on the front, the Dominion government was in a comparatively 
comfortable position since the whole problem of war financing 
depended upon its ability to secure the necessary funds in Great 
Britain which was readily arranged with the Bank of England. 

From this source were met practically all expenditures for that 
purpose amounting to | 60 million. The problem of financing the 
capital outlays and the deficit on current account was solved 



Oc 


' ' ' ' ■: ■ 

■ I;.-* • - , : 


. 

r i r. I o'* e• b s' ? ' .■ i .. . :fo ill 

■ r-J ;:s. .3 J .1 • C..." " U S'lO'B rfoJtfl*? 

. ■ -- -■ ' ' ' • : • •; •' :i; s 

: ’’ . -• \ o j > j ' ; ; c \ , . ■ . • ■ . 

. • • 

* ‘ ■. li ■- ■ * • c j 

- • . i'w . ,r. • .$ • f .c. aaj:. x : v. ■■■:*..: J ■ rv ; : 

'■ ' i ' •: .;i•- ■ . : : s, 

■- - - • ’’ ' ■ • • eo , /, Ic -n, - lose, o 

i 

■- - * . ■' -is;:! yi'-oo c.cici; zl'i 

. 

*. ■ '■ ' • ' ■ . ■ rj ■;J { 


* ■ ■ ' ' . " ; • i r n :z'iuz sc 

* • ' - " ?. r. j ■ j e- r • 

•... ®1 i cfla a, j z & 

' ' ■ ' ■ : f !;'■ \j ... [ J 

‘ J lr eo Jr , . c Icfsc c;.^. cso 


1 • W8 o, tJ . tdB dl ; 

B£ ■ 

'j f lq vr ;; -;.l. -J O0‘ ! 0;;C SlnC3' 1110 *?$ 

- .o: , t ' qicjq 

cclc-) 


- 6l - 


by an additional loan in Great Britain, $1|0 million in total, 
and by a fiduciary issue of Dominion notes in an amount of 
$39 million and a small short term loan from the Bank of Mon¬ 
treal . 

The budget message of 1915 was prepared under the optim¬ 
istic impression that the existing arrangements would continue. 
The Minister of Finance argued quite carefully that the Cana¬ 
dian economy was not sufficiently developed to bear the burden 
of war costs, and that therefore they had to be shifted to 
future generations which would be in a better position to sus¬ 
tain the load,’ He satisfied himself with minor taxes and an 
over-all increase of customs duties which were to cover the 
expenditures on current and capital account. 

When pressing war conditions compelled the Imperial Gov¬ 
ernment to terminate any foreign borrowing, the Dominion 
government was thrown upon its own resources, and the Minister 
of. Finance was faced with the task of securing $l 60 million 
for the direct war costs of the Dominion plus additional funds 
to finance British purchases in Canada were they not to be 
seriously curtailed. In August he successfully arranged a short 
term loan from a Hew York investment house, and in November the 
first domestic loan was floated. The tremendous success of 
this loan surprised many, but mainly the Minister, who felt 
greatly relieved. The loan called for $50 million and twice 
as much was offered within a few days. The loan by itself 
proved that Canada ! s economic potential was greatly underesti- 


- 






. •. il . 




c. c 


© o i : 


c 


( ■ . 


. : 0 


! ' C • 


ft 


. ' •. 1 : rUj ... •:. 


'( . . :V • 






uj r:\iG \ 


• . - 


■ ' ■ • 

■... 'VI ‘ c) 


■ .. * ( ©r;r/u'X o;s 

. ... . . 

IS V . ■ ; 

i. > v x . ‘ 1 


, r" 


B- 


'J : ... Xx:; ’ 



- 62 - 


mated, and that she was able to carry her load alone. Cana¬ 
dians were willing not only to support their government but 
also subscribed to the British-French loan and the Russian 
loan selling in New York which made the Minister of Finance 
issue an appeal asking the Canadian public to preserve the 
funds for the needs of the country. 

Although the marked success of the first loan furnished 
clear evidence of favorable conditions for heavier taxation. 

Sir Thomas White anew refused recourse to income taxation and 
pursued a vigorous borrowing policy to meet mounting war costs. 
After negotiating a loan of $75 millions on the Ne?ir York mar¬ 
ket, which was more or less a refunding operation, he decided 
to tap domestic sources. In September, 1916, the second 
domestic war loan was floated and then in March, 1917? the third 
war loan was offered. Both loans were enthusiastically accepted 
by the public and heavily over-subscribed, although the govern¬ 
ment was asking for $250 millions in total. To be sure, the 

45 

terms of securities offered were more than favorable as to 

make the investment attractive. As Skelton pointed out, later, 

it did not require a miraculous amount of patriotism to accept 

5 l/2 per cent interest for one ! s money on an absolutely safe 

security, when at the same time U.S. securities were offering 

1+6 

but 1+ l/2 per cent interest. 

I 4.5 • See Table I. 

1 + 6 . Skelton, D.O., Federal Finance II , Bulletin of the 
Departments of History and Economic Science, %ueen f s University, 
No. 29 , Kingston, 19 I 0 . 




■■ , ' • 

■ . V . ‘ . / •> ' o ■.... : . orr u x *;i> t 

» ■ .. . .. ■ * . .... - > ■ \>, '■) 1 5 ■.. 

■ . •. .' / ' : V ;, .. : ; : .. ' . • r . 


: v : .. •. ; >. r ' ,, 

g v r g 


' 

. ■ 






si:: /:■ . 


■ 

J.1 r- *io r ~ ,0 0 

r • 

■: :c 

• . 



xi.‘un;'o r ‘[ . '. • ■ 0« ‘ t 

■ ' 0 : ' -• ; ; • • ;J‘‘X 

< ' v . ■' ' ' ; P j; 

. ■ ’ .0 c. r *;•; v.” 


. ..' - r- ■' . •... . f: ■ :■ . xD : 

r . . . H 

■ ( •. ■ : .• :. Vg . 'X&3 

- ‘ g:'.v 

. .. ' n : • .* 7/; •: or: i>jjh i 1 


a ' ' ■ ' ' • ... 












- 




. 





TABLE I. 


A SUMMARY OP LONG-TERM BORROWING OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 
DURING THE YEARS 1915-20 

1 . Loans floated in the United Kingdom: 


March, 1915 , 4 1 /^% 9 at 99 l/ 2 , maturity 

5-10 years 

#25,552,500. 

Loans floated in the United States; 


August, 191 5, 5 f°y on0 year notes at 100 , 
two year notes at 99 1 / 2 * less commission 

45,000,000. 

March, 1916, 5 ^>* 5 ~ 1°~15 years at 99 * 56 , 
99.12 and 94.94 

75,000,000. 

August, 1917 * 5 /^* two year notes at 98 

100,000,000. 

Loans floated in Canada; 


November, 1915 5 5 $* 10 years at 97 l /2 
(24,862 subscribers) 

#100,000,000. 

September, 1916, 5 % 9 15 years, at 97 l /2 
(34*5^6 subscribers) 

100,000,000. 

March, 1917 * 5 $* 20 years, at 96 
(41,263 subscribers) 

150,000,000. 

November, 1917, 5 l/ 2 % 9 5 - 10-20 years, 
at 100 

(602,000 subscribers) 

4.00,000,000. 

November, 1918 , 5 1 / 2 $, 5 “15 years 
(1,064,497' subscribers) 

600,000,000. 

November, 1919 * 5 l/ 2 $, 5“15 years 
(830,602 subscribers) 

600,000,000. 


Sources: Budget Speeches , Canada Yearbook , and The Canadian 
Annual Review ~ 1915 - 19 ^ 0 • 








i;r: ,;o'. 


r 




















O 


o 




- 6k - 


While the borrowed money was pouring into the treasury, 
the tax revenue moved but slowly upward. The special war 
taxes yielded a negligible amount prior to the introduction 
of the business profits tax, which yielded $l 6 millions in 
1917 * a very modest amount indeed. But the total receipts in 
current account, which passed the $200 million mark during the 
fiscal year 1916-17, were used up by requirements on the cur- 

1+7 

rent and capital account. Although in 1917 the government 
was able for the first time to transfer the amount of $> 4 l mil¬ 
lions to its war account, it could not affect materially the 
over-all financing. The apprehensiveness of the Minister of 
Finance in his tax policy may be aptly illustrated by parallel¬ 
ing his borrowing and taxation legislation. The first domestic 
loan, subscribed by big business enterprises induced the busi¬ 
ness profits tax. Then the second loan, doubled in amount, was 
followed by a substantial increase in rates of the same tax. 
Finally, the third loan, which due to its larger number of sub¬ 
scribers, might be termed a M popular” loan, led to the income 
tax, equally a ”popular” tax. Hence, the fiscal policy of the 
government ensued from its borrowing policy, even though in a 
much milder form. 

The effects of the unbalanced fiscal policy began showing 
up in the second h&lf of 1916. Banks, being freed from any 
checks on the ir credit policy by the Finance Act of I9I4* 


47 . See Table II 





















■ 


■ ' 




■ 0 






' > 


. 




t ■ 


m 









c • . 






£ 
















o a ::i :j o :{d 


. 






TABLE II. A SUMMARY OF REVENUES, DEBT, AND EXPENDITURES 



o 

0J 

I 

ON 

H 

ON 

H 


ON 


CO 

&i 

H 


NO 

H 

! 

LTN 

H 

ON 


LfN 


ON 


T* 

KN 

5l: 


in-co 

ONCTn( 


o LfN NO 

■onco N-_ft- 

1N-NO O LT% O- 

CO OJ C\J KN ON 
No_q-co ON_j- 
H OJ KN 


ON CM O-ON o- 
NO _zj* IN-CO _zt 
rH KNHNO ON 

*k 1 *s «\ 

IN* O VO KN OJ 
_Zj*KN LfNKN H 
rH CM KN 


KNGO ONh ON 
IN-NO D—OJ C— 
rH r—j KN D C 


LfNVO O 
_zt OJ CM ON VO 
rH rH OJ 


IN- H 
KN KN 
KN O 

•» 

-=f NO 

in- qo 

NO IN- 


NO CM 
-ft" _zf 

NO O 

CM C— 
CO On 
KN NO 


IN- O 
ON NO 
NO NO 

•s «\ 

CM NO 
H IN- 

KN LTN 


-ZtCM CM CO H 
-=fr H O LfN O 
0_Zj*KNC— IN- 
•* ** •>, *» 
_ut_ztNO_rt CM 
KNOJ rH IN-KN 
H H OJ 


C^co H IN-CO 
-Hr CM OJ no _zt 
NO _H~nO nO H 

*v 

CO OJ KN-ZfcM 
ON oj CM IN- 


ONCO « 
IN-ON, 


ON KN 
'IN- 1 . . 

CN_zj* LTN O 

«•. •*. «\ 

LfNrH IN- KN 

IN-OJ ON KN 

H 


rH OJ KN_Zj* 
ON LTN _Zt IN- 
NO-Z+ H H 

•» ** i ** *> 

—H rH NO KN 

O CM CM NO 


O KN 
KN O 
O OJ 

_zt GO 

NO ON 
OJ -Zj- 


O CM 
CO O 
IN- IN- 
*» »\ 

LIN ON 

NO KN 

H rcN 


ON GO 
IN- ON 
KN O 

•v *V 

^ CO 

H -Zt 
rH OJ 


co 

0 CO 
•H © 
-P *H 
Hi -P 

n ft 

p 

© 

ft © 

o © 

-P *H 
w o 
ft * 
o m 


OJ 

§ 

a 

© © 
ft > 
ft © 
© PH 

© tJ 

« § 
© K Cl, 
© 05 
X EH • 
05 rH 
EH H o 

CS5 © 
ft -P ft 

CO o o 

is EH o 


LfN r-i 

ON 

NO OJ 

«■> 

H NO 
OJ CO 


•P 

ft 

© 

Q 

O KN 
-P 


£3 

O 

-P 

•H 

ft 

ft 

<U 

-p 

© 


KN KN 
VO LfN 

*\ *> 

NO_Zj- 

IN-IN- 

VO LfN 

CM rH 


K\-Zj- 
KNCO 
KN CO 

•» ** 

KN H 
NO ON 

CO rH 


KNNO 

o co 

O rH 

OJ ON 
CO IN- 
KNCO 


IN-NO 
CO LfN 
CNH 

»> 

NO LfN 
KN r~! 

ON VO 


KNVO 
IN- N- 
—zf KN 
*> *\ 
O On 
O -zj- 
N--H* 


rH IN- 

ON ON 
KNON 

9\ 

J-Lf\ 
-ZtKN 
LfN KN 


-P 

ft 

© -P 

Q ft 

© 

© 9 
© 

O +3 
ft © 
P £3 


KNHOJ 
J-OHIC 

00 KNvOO 

KNONVONC 

ono_zjco 
KN KMN 


HHONCM 
KNKN,H_ft 
IN-O LTNC 

•H •» « 

OJ LfNvOIN 
KNOJ-Zj-O 
OJ -CNC 


-ZtHNOO 
COrHKVO 
OJ HCONC 

< 

CO KNKNNC 
IN--Zi-_ztlN 
H KNIT 


ONOOOK 

LfNcoooo 

LfNco_zltM 

•» *v « 

CO NO VDCC 
-ztoJ oG 
H KYzi 


hndin-cm 
irxo onq 

KNLfNp-l N 

•» *K »\ 

OCONOO 
KNf'CNvOK 
H HK 


KNN-OCC 
CM-H'KNO 
LfNzj'iN-C 

Wk *v < 

OH OCC 

kvzKo. 

rH Oj 


-H-O 
COCO 
KNH CM 
*> | 

IN-IN- NC 
OJ KN CO 


ft 


KN 


CO 


ft *p 
MTJ ft 

© p- 

i—i ft^< 

-ppq 

•H 

ftft < 
C55 C5 E" 
C 
E- 


O 

Hi 

rH 


O |Eh 


eh 


r 0 PH 
03 


ft g 
&0O 

a 

•H ft 

ft! © 
ft rft 
•H -P 
CO O 

© © 
© © 

ft ft 

rH rH 

O O 

ft ft 
H H 


H OJ KVft- 














































" 66 - 


expanded the money supply by well-nigh $300 millions within 
about six months 1 time. As Chart 1 shows, the cost-of-living 
index surged upward sharply, about 31 per cent above the 1913 
level, whereas the wage index rose only by 25.6 points. The 
ensuing redistribution of money income in favour of the weal¬ 
thier class augmented their savings which in turn became 
available for further government borrowing. True, the gov¬ 
ernment was able to borrow large sums for war purposes, but 
in the end, it was the wage earners and individuals with fixed 
incomes who were paying the war costs and who found their con¬ 
sumption restricted. 

The fiscal situation became exceedingly critical during 
1917 * anc ^ ^' aQ government had recourse again to the issue of 
paper money. The government put into circulation $60 millions 
of Dominion notes, thus increasing the fiduciary issue up to 
$90 millions. Evidently, the income tax was bound to come, 
even without the pressure from public opinion, unless the gov¬ 
ernment was willing to destroy its monetary system. 

The Minister of Finance arrived at the income tax by 
trial and error, and finally conceded its necessity. H e nce Dr. 
Michael Clark, M.P., hit the nail on the head when, commenting 

I4.8 . During the latter part of 1916 and early in 191? 
the banks advanced to the Imperial Government $100 millions for 
-purchases of ammunition,"plus a revolving account of $20 mil¬ 
lion for v/heat purchases; they supplied the Dominion government 
with 100 millions against treasury bonds; and they increased 
business loans by $73 millions. Cf. Royal Commission on 
Dominion-Provincial Relations, Report , Book I, p. 99* 


















■ 


i* ■ ; :cq i 

■ , r 


*. . : : ' ‘ ■ J 'V : ■ •£e/.s .■ 






-V 






.> 

‘ " ' 






1 • " • y. . 4 :i rr Vi ;o 






, VI c 






■ 






; ' ■ : ‘ :dC: 






• : V 


= ; t yi : :X' | 

. 

. 

' . . , 

■ ‘ 4 • c a r :;c . u 2 ■ a lo*xu< 


; . . .u r : 

v 7 44 ;7 * vo'* ftitfcF 

• ~ . " 






- 67 - 


CHART I. 


COST OF LIVING INDEX AND WAGE INDEX 

1913 - 1921 1 



1. Source : The Canada Year Book,1921* 




































































- 68 - 


on the proposed bill, he said: u The war, however, has been a 
great fiscal school master, as well as a great schoolmaster 

.A 9 

along other lines.” 

White ! s Income War Tax Apt . 

The bill, as introduced in the House on July 25, 1917 * 
was passed with minor amendments. The House lowered the basic 
personal exemption for single persons from $2,000 to $1,500 
ard the Senate inserted the term n net l! into the definition of 
income. The bill became law on September 29, 1917 with retro¬ 
active force as of January 1 , 1917 * bearing a title: An Act 
to authorize the levying of war Tax upon certain incomes (7-8 
Geo. V. Chapter 28 ). 

The Income War T a x Act as assented to was a modest piece 
of legislation. It comprised, on the whole, 24 sections, of 
which only five dealt directly with the tax liability. The 
remaining 19 sections regulated administrative and related mat¬ 
ters. The evident omission of comprehensive rules in respect 
of deductions, etc., from the act, was supplanted by wide author¬ 
ity vested in the Minister of Finance who, in fact, was granted 
the powers to levy the tax upon incomes without any checks at¬ 
tached * 

Persons Taxable . 

The Income War Tax Act levied a tax obligation upon: 


49 • Debates , 1917 * P* 4 ^ 4 ° • 









- 69 - 


(1) every person resident or ordinarily resident in 
Canada or carrying on business in Canada in respect of his 
entire net income derived from whatever source (Sec. Ij.( 10 )) • 

( 2 ) non-resident persons carrying on business in Canada 
in respect of their net income arising in Canada, the mean¬ 
ing on net income being restricted to the net profit or gain 
from a business of such a person in Canada (Sec. 5 ( 3 ) )• 

The definition of the term n person ,t was satisfactorily 
broad so as to include individuals, corporations or any body 
politic or their legal representative, in which respect the 
Act adopted the American pattern. However, the Act was some¬ 
what vague in imposing the tax upon non-residents who could 
easily escape from taxation. 


Taxable Income . 

Section 5 of the Act contained a positive definition of 
income in the following words: 

”... income means the annual net profit or gain 
or gratuity, whether ascertained and capable of com¬ 
putation as being wages, salary, or other fixed 
amount, or unascertained as being fees or emoluments, 
or as being profits from a trade or commercial or 
financial or other business or calling, directly or 
indirectly received by a person from any office or 
employment, or from any profession or calling, or 
from any trade, manufacture or business, as the case 
may be; and shall include the interest, dividends or 
profits directly or indirectly received from money 
at interest upon any security or without security, or 
from stocks, or from any other investment, and, whe¬ 
ther such gains or profits are divided or distributed 
or not, and also the annual profit or gain from any 
other source; including the income from but not the 
value of property acquired by gift, bequest, devise 






* 




- 70 - 


or descent; and including the income from but 
not the proceeds of life insurance policies 
paid upon the death of the person insured, or 
payments made or credited to the insured on 
life insurance endowment or annuity contracts 
upon the maturity of the term mentioned in the 
contract or upon the surrender of the contract'* 

The definition of incomes, as outlined above, was based 
on the American concept of income but deviated from it on two 
major points. Capital gains were excluded from the scope of 
the Act, and further it did not contain rules for ascertain” 
ing the taxable income beginning with the gross income and 
going down to the net taxable income. Since the definition 
did not distinguish between different sources of income the 
taxpayer was allowed to deduct losses incurred during the tax¬ 
able year from the whole amount regardless of the source with 
which the loss was connected. Without going into details of 
the complicated question of what constituted income, it may be 
pointed out that income in kind, e.g., the value of farmers’ 
products consumed by him or his family, was somewhat vaguely 
defined, and it may be assumed that the Act implicitly excluded 

them from taxation although the Minister held such income as 

50 

assessable. 

Special treatment was afforded to income received in the 
form of dividends, and to undistributed profits. The Act 
exempted the dividends from the normal tax but they were to be 
included in the taxable income for purposes of super-tax, which 

50 . Gf. Plaxton, C.P # , and Varcoe, P.P., Dominion income 
Tax Law , Toronto, 1921, p. 149 * 












- 71 - 


taxed also the shareholders share in the distributed profits 
of the company above a reasonable level fixed by the Minister, 

Deductions . 

Two kinds of deductions were allowed under the terms of 
the Act: those from the tax payable, and those allowed in 
computing the net income. As to the former, the Act permitted 
deduction from the amount of the tax the vki ole sum which would 
be otherwise payable under the Special War Revenue Act, 1915, 

51 

Part I, as well as the tax payable under the Business Profits 
Tax Act, 1916, subject to certain limitations. As to the latter, 
the Aot followed the British practice, omitting the enumeration 
of allowable deductions. Generally, the taxpayer was permitted 
to deduct from his gross receipts all the necessary expenses 
incurred by him in earning those receipts. The Minister was 
empov/er.ed to allow a reasonable amount for depreciation, and 
for depletion in the case of mining, oil and gas enterprises, 
and in addition to these also a reasonable amount for u any ex¬ 
penditure of capital nature for renewals or for the development 
of a business 1 * (Sec. 3 (a)). Due to the similarity with British 
rules in this matter, the English decisions as to the ascertain¬ 
ment of net income became applicable to the meaning of the Dom¬ 
inion Act* 

Exemptions . 

A personal statutory exemption was fixed for single persons, 

51 * This deduction affected banks and insurance companies. 





I 


' ' i ; 





o 












•* 72 - 


widows or widowers without dependent children at $ 1 , 500 . and 
for all other persons at $ 3 , 000 * the corporate bodies inclu¬ 
sive. No exemption was allowed for dependents, but by virtue 
of section I 4 . (la) widows and widowers with dependent children, 
were permitted to claim an exemption for married persons. The 
statute exempted expressis verbis the income of the following 
persons from tax liability: The Governor General of Canada; 
consuls and consuls-general, providing they were citizens of 
the country they represented and were not engaged in another 
business or profession; persons who had been on active service 
overseas, in respect of their military or naval pay; and fur¬ 
ther , Crown companies, religious, charitable, educational, agri¬ 
cultural institutions and societies, fraternal and the like so¬ 
cieties; mutual corporations; some insurance, mortgage and loan 
associations operating for the benefit of farmers, as well as 
the income derived from bonds and securities of the Dominion 
of Canada issued under such a stipulation. 

Tax Rates . 

The Dominion Act of 1917 imposed a flat rate of i| per cent 
upon all incomes over and above the statutory exemptions, and 
in addition thereto a graduated supertax on incomes over $ 6 , 000 . 
was imposed according the following cumulative schedule: 

Over $ 6,000 to f 10,000 2 per cent 

" 10,000 - 20,000 5 per cent 

20,000 - 30,000 8 per cent 

” 30,000 - 50,000 10 per cent 

" 50,000 - 100,000 15 per cent 

" 100,000 - 25 per cent 








iTcdVieoe. 3nod 


*.1.0 ^VO'C'lw 


, 

, , ■ v: • #er.r :3 

cooc- ' c-;,! jr-r (& I) A rvjiloez lo 

, •: ..... . ■.. •. •* ■ .: . *. ::«■ ■ : . . ■■ :■ c 1 ' - . 11 v>\ o*xew 

. * . . '. 

■, * . t • . ' • ■ ■ 

■ .. >as;; ~ • • o .,o ■ - 8 Sju a «noo 


• ( 


1 




• * 

Lijuri ~Z£ii 


£ 

■J . :• , ; : :: 

•: * S£ , o-v-toi 1 ., f 'iea&d 

J:v::o '1 fedJ lo coll I'isjoao ur 


- 

. . . -• 

■:. i v-: ' 11: 

' 

I 

I 

1 > . t- . n ' " obeasD lo 


oectef ..obT 


fci: , H1 


0 -7 OC:.& • 's. 


rij 


i a if 


. •... ; . jj v oo ' : olao©,dl ,aoxilt>i>j3 ni 

: 1’ .. "J, ‘Ov‘)i 1)0 2. ,;l ..ill :i.' •>;' 


* 


. J 


, )S 







- 73 - 


Corporations and other business enterprises paid the 
flat tax of per cent upon the income exceeding the exemption 
of but were exempt from the super-tax. The statute 

did not discriminate between earned and unearned incomes. 

The principle of stoppage at the source was applied to 
normal tax only. The taxpayer was obliged to fill an annual 
return before the end of February stating his income and ex¬ 
emptions claimed* and furnish upon the request of the Minister 
any information in respect of his income. The Minister then 
assessed the tax in each particular case, which was to be 
payable within a month from mailing the assessment notice. 

The taxpayer* when dissatisfied with the assessment of the 
Minister* could appeal to the Board of Referees, and further 
to the Exchequer Court. 

The administration of the income tax was vested in the 
Minister of Finance. Although there were established district 
offices across the country, their authority in income tax mat¬ 
ters was limited to collecting tax returns and amounts assessed. 
The assessment procedure* however, was concentrated in Ottawa 
in the hands of the Commissioner of Taxation. 

On the whole, the Income War T a x Act was a peculiar blend 
of American and British principles. Its scheme and the basic 
philosophy Is American. Ind.eed, there are some important devi¬ 
ations from American practice in favor of British experience, 
like- the treatment of capital gains, or business deductions, 
which have saved the Act its distinctive independence. Thus, 







> 








' J 


O 0:i>y V . VC 

















- 74 - 


from its beginning Canadian income tax practice, albeit 
drawing heavily upon both the American and the British sys¬ 
tem, has not followed slavishly either of them, and, in a 
sense, it erected a bridge between those two great systems. 

The Fjrst Three Years . 

The hasty move of the Minister of Final ce to suspend 
the higher business profits tax on account of the new and lower 
corporate income tax was strongly criticized in the press, and 
when the charges were heard in the House, the Minister assured 
the members that the matter would be reconsidered if the fiscal 
necessities of the country Y/ould require it. Nonetheless, his 
shaky stand on such important fiscal matters nourished the 
controversy between the staunch supporters of steep progres- 
sivity and advocates of low personal exemptions, which v/ent on 
for some time even after the adoption of the measure. But the 
coming federal elections with all their political consequences 
quieted down the polemics, and put both sides into one nest. 

The Unionist government was more favorable to tax reform 
than the old Conservative Ministry. It included a representa¬ 
tive of western farmers in the person of Mr* Crerar, and the 
official financial critic of the previous opposition, Mr. Mac- 
Lean, both firm supporters of the income tax. When the latter 
in his capacity of Acting Minister of Finance delivered the 
budget speech on April JO, the new attitude was clearly 

discernible. His amendments to the Act broadened and deepened 
the impact of the income tax in accord with public demands for 






- 75 - 


higher taxes. 

The basic personal exemptions were lowered to the $ 1,000 
and $ 2,000 level for single and married persons respectively, 
but for the first time a deduction for dependents of $200 was 
introduced for every child under sixteen years of age depend¬ 
ing upon the taxpayer for support. The definition of persons 
taxable was slightly improved, and the previous tax rates were 
substituted by a new, substantially increased schedule. The 
amending law ( 8-9 Geo, V. c. 25) imposed three different taxes: 
a normal tax, supertax and surtax. The normal tax consisted 
of two flat rates: a 2 per cent rate was imposed upon the income 
in the $1,000 - $1,500 and $2,000 - $5?000 brackets of single 
and married persons respectively, and a higher rate of !{. per 
cent upon the entire income above the upper levels. The gradu¬ 
ated supertax began at $6,000 with a rate of 2 per cent and 

continued upward up to the $ 1 , 000,000 with a rate of 50 per 

52 

cent over this level. In addition to both normal tax and 
supertax the law levied a surtax which was graduated according 
to the size of income, but calculated on the basis of the tax 
payable thereon. It charged the income between $ 6,000 - 
$ 10,000 with a rate of 5 P©n cent; then for the brackets of 
$10,000 - $100,000 and $100,000 - $200,000 the rate was 10 per 
cent and 15 pen cent respectively; and income over $200,000 
was charged with 55 per cent of the normal tax and supertax 


52 . See Appendix, Table E 






:o.. e-., 


o 


0 .; 


- 


; . : 


r.oq;/ 


Xi 


c. 



• ' 


t ) , i i . : 






. I 








- 76 - 


payable thereon. The rate of corporate income tax was raised 
from I4 per cent to 6 per cent, but the statutory exemption 
remained unaltered. The income of an incorporated company 
whose business and assets were carried on entirely outside of 
Canada were exempted from the tax liability. 

The amending statute repealed the principle of stoppage 
at the source, and substantially improved the rule of informa¬ 
tion at the source. During the two years 1918 and 1919 th-0 in¬ 
come tax attracted a great deal of public interest. The kal¬ 
eidoscope of views and opinions ranging from a sober critique 
of the Act to the political agitation which found its way to 
the press will here be accounted but briefly. 

The economic consequences of the governments excessive 
borrowing were fully felt by the nation toward the end of the 

53 

war. On the one hand prices and the cost-of-living were 
jumping upward by leaps and bounds, pressing on the average man; 
on the otar hand the exemption clause of a large number of 
governments securities was establishing a group of privileged 
income receivers, and endangering the market of the securities 
of all private companies. It was especially The Financial Post , 
which at that time was in its circles as radical as the farmers, 
that vigorously attacked the government, and demanded that the 
exemption provision should be abandoned for the future. 

The question of tax free securities grew in seriousness 
since the government was compelled to have recourse often to 


53 . See Chart I, p. 67 




Q , 


i t ,.(; u 




i ; ) 


i'.IVi, 


Q ' . i c ■ . 0 






,;o 


.{ . f i 






- 77 - 


the domestic money market in order to secure necessary funds 
for the enormous war expenditures, and later on, demobiliza¬ 
tion expenditures. The public debt passed the billion dollar 
mark in 1918, and was expected to rise. Although the gov- 
ernment was willing to follow Skelton 1 s advice to extend 
taxation policies, it was not prepared for such a task. The 
administration of income tax lacked an experienced staff, 
and consequently was far from satisfactory. People were not 
accustomed to the new tax, and the average man felt embar¬ 
rassed by the returns he was required to submit to the Min¬ 
ister. Western farmers 1 organizations forwarded many a 
resolution to the Minister demanding simpler forms and in¬ 
structive literature. Evasion was quite common. In the 
East it was done on such a scalo that, as it was estimated, 
in the cities of Toronto and Montreal alone more people eva¬ 
ded the tax than paid it in the whole of Canada. But apart 
from these general defects, unavoidable as they were, the 
administration of the income tax was entrusted to a former 
head of customs and excise administration, Mr. Breadner, who 
shared the class bias of his Minister. While the assessment 
of the corporation income tax was treated very lightly, many 
assessments being postponed to an indefinite future time, the 
farmer was the fellow whom the income tax administration was 

54- In his second paper on public finance Q.D. Skelton 
urged strongly the government to use more taxation and less 
borrowing. Cf. his Federal Finance II , Kingston, 1918. 




f 


0 











o 


r: o 










c. 






- 78 - 


55 

after. Improvements could come only gradually as the ad¬ 
ministration stopped flirting with politics and devoted 
more attention to increasing its efficiency and to elimina¬ 
ting loop-holes in the Act through which the big fellow or 
more influential man could easily escape. 

On the political scene, the income tax had come again 
to the fore. The farmers 1 organizations, indignant and dis¬ 
satisfied with the government, reverted to political action. 

On the morrow of the war truce the Canadian Council of Ag¬ 
riculture published a redrafted ’’Farmers 1 Platform” under 
the striking title The Now national Policy in which it re¬ 
iterated the former demands of farmers for tariff reduc¬ 
tions, and came out with a surprisingly well rounded proposal 
for a revenue system based on direct taxation, viz. income 
tax and succession duties. The Progressive Party which was 
established soon afterwards adopted the New National Policy 
as its political platform, and faithfully supported the in¬ 
come tax in the parliament. 

The fiscal necessities and pressure from the public 
pushed the government more and more closely to income taxa¬ 
tion, for it represented the only source of revenue adaptable 
to further increases without evoUng much criticism. The 

55. The Commissioner of Taxation boasted before the 
convening Dominion Association of Chartered Accountants in 
Montreal on Sept. 18-20, 1918 : u The farmer is required to add 
to his income the value of goods that he and his family have 
consumed. And I want to say here that there have been hundreds 
of assessments made against farmers. The other day an assessment 
of nearly $5,000 was made in respect of 1917 income against the 
farmer .” 









- 79 - 


last budget of Sir Thomas White, delivered on June 5 * 1919* 
tasted more of politics than of economics. Tailored for 
consumption in the West, it cut down the tariff rates of 
the British Preference to their pre-war level, and intro¬ 
duced significant alterations to the income tax lav/, in 
respect to its incidence and applications. 

Firstly, the amending law included explicitly sala¬ 
ries and indemnities of the members of the House of Com¬ 
mons and the Senate, as well as the salaries and remunera¬ 
tion of federal and provincial civil servants, judiciary 
inclusive, into the definition of income, thus eliminating 
whatever doubts there v/ere as to their tax liability. The 
taxation of judges 1 salaries was, however, contested in the 
courts later on. 

Secondly, the allowance for dependent children was 
extended as to apply to all dependents under 18 years of 
age. 

Thirdly, the income tax law was given again a new set 
of tax rates applicable to individuals. Sir Thomas White 
considered the triple tax rates of the previous year too 
complicated, and returned to his original scheme of a normal 
tax and a surtax. Leaving the statutory personal exemptions 
of the previous legislation unaltered his law levied income 
tax liability upon incomes of individuals according to the 
foilowing sche dule j 

Normal Tax* 4 per cent rate on excess over $1,000 up to 





- 80 - 


$ 6,000 of single persons, or over $ 2,000 up to $ 6,000 of mar¬ 
ried persons, and 8 per cent rate over h? 6,000 of all persons; 


plus Surtax; 


over $ 5,000 but not over $ 6,000 

n 6,000 but not over 8,000 

8,000 but not over 10,000 
u 10,000 but not over 12,000 



and so on 1 per cent added for every additional $ 2,000 of in¬ 
come up to $ 100 , 000 , then 


over 

$100,000 

but 

not 

over 

$150,000 

52^ 

u 

150,000 

but 

not 

over 

200,000 

56$ 

w 

200,000 

but 

not 

over 

500,000 

G°% 

u 

500,000 

but 

not 

over 

500,000 


H 

500,000 

but 

not 

over 

1,000,000 

6 k% 

M 

1,000,000 







Fourthly, the rate applicable to corporations and joint 
stock companies was raised from 8 per cent to 10 per cent, and 
at the same time the basic exemption was lowered to $ 2 , 000 . 

The depreciation and depletion allowance as granted in the 
original lav/ to mining and oil businesses was extended so as 
to apply to timber limits. Further, a special provision was 
made regarding the taxation of dividends and shareholders* 
bonuses in the hands of stockholders earned prior to January 
1 , 1917* but distributed thereafter as follows: 

^Dividends or shareholders* bonuses paid or 
credited to its shareholders by a corporation on 
or after the first day of January, one thousand 
nine hundred and seventeen, shall be taxable as 
income of the shareholder in the year in which the 
same are received or credited unless paid exclus¬ 
ively out of a surplus or accumulated profits on 
hand prior to the first day of January, one thou¬ 
sand nine hundred and seventeen* No dividend or 
shareholders bonus shall be deemed to be paid or 
credited out of surplus or accumulated profits on 
hand prior to the first day of January, one 











- 81 - 


thousand nine hundred and seventeen, if the earn¬ 
ings of the corporation since the beginning of the 
accounting period which ended in the year of one 
thousand nine hundred and seventeen are sufficient 
to provide for the said dividend and other taxable 
dividends paid or credited since the said date *’ 1 
(Section 3 ( 3 ), as added by Sec. 2 (i|), of Chapter 

55 , 1919 ). 

By the same Act a deduction from the tax payable was 
granted on account of income taxes paid to Britain or her 
colonies or dependencies, and to any,foreign country providing 
that the country allowed the same privilege to Canadian com¬ 
panies, and that the amount deducted was not exceeding the 
amount of the tax which would be otherwise payable under the 
Canadian statute. 

The deplorable state of business management of a big 
majority of Canadian,companies induced the Minister to impose 
a statutory obligation upon every taxpayer, chiefly companies, 
to keep adequate records and books of accounts for income tax 
purposes. 

Fifthly, a set of fines and penalties was inserted into 
the income tax lav/ to assure compliance with its provisions, A 
penalty of 25 per cent of the tax payable was imposed for not 
making a return in the case of a taxpayer, and a fine of $10 for 
each day during which the default continued in the case of other 
persons required by the statute to file a return on behalf of 
third persons. The failure to pay the assessed tax within a 
month from the date of notice was subject to a penalty of 5 per 
cent of the assessed tax plus one per cent thereof for each 









o 














:o; 









- 82 - 


month during which the default continued. The default in 

keeping adequate books of accounts was charged with a fine 

56 

of $100 for each day during which the default continued. 

The effects of these amendments were noticeable when 
the returns for the 1919 taxation year began coming to the 
Department. The amount of tax collected jumped from 
$9,000,000 to $20,000,000. The personal income tax netted 
over $!j. millions more than in the previous year, whilst the 
corporate tax yield increased from $1*3 millions to $7 mil¬ 
lions . 

The income tax, although intended as a war measure by 
the Minister of Finance was gradually gaining ground and re¬ 
cognition. The complaints coming from the public at large 
reflected more or less the initial difficulties which the 
administration had to cope with, but by no means aimed at the 
tax p er se . The changing attitude was, perhaps, most remark¬ 
able with the former opponents of income taxation. They 
recognized the fact, that the tax exercised indirectly favor¬ 
able influence upon the economy and business practices. As 
the Journal of Canadian Bankers 1 Association stated editori¬ 
ally: 

H The income and profit taxes which have been the 
distinctive feature of war finance bid fair to work 
a revolution in business accounting practice. Income 


56. The budget of 1919 reintroduced the business profits 
tax and at the same time altered the rates on excess profits. 









: . , ... ' 

* 

‘ 











, •' • ■ ' ' ■ ' 


. ■ 





. 






■ 













- 83 - 


tax assessors declare they have been amazed to find 
how few business men operating a moderate capital 
really know their exact financial position* Only 
rudimentary accounts are kept, or the books are not 
closed, or stock is not taken, or no outside audit 
provided. The law’s compulsion is bringing about 
what the banker’s urging too often failed to se¬ 
cure - the adoption of modern and accurate account¬ 
ing methods. The advantage to the business man 
himself, and incidentally to his banker, will be very 
great.... 

Another result, which might more easily have been 
anticipated, is that in the balance sheets of the 
larger corporations the demand of the conservative 
accountant are heeded at least. The adequate allow¬ 
ance made for depreciation, obsolescence or amorti¬ 
zation, the vigilant pruning of inventory totals, 
the strict valuation of ’souvenir 1 assets, and the 
prudent provision for probable liabilities, produce 
a balance sheet which.... is a joy to behold. M 57 

Evidently, we could refer to more similar references to 
prove that the skeptical and apprehensive opposition to income 
taxation was gradually fading away during the first three or four 
years of its existence. By all means, the tax had come to stay 
not only because of fiscal needs, but also because the majority 
of the tax-paying public was favoring it. However, the question 
of its exact place and its relative importance in the federal 
revenue system were yet left open, and the tax had to go a very 
long way till it became a chief and permanent factor in Domin¬ 
ion public finance. - But this brings us to another chapter of 
the history of income taxation in Canada. 


A Resume . 

We endeavored in this chapter to frame the early history 


57* The Journal of Canadian Bankers’ Association, Vol. XXVII, 
October, 1$19, p. 19~ 











-84- 


of Canadian (federal) income taxation into the broader line¬ 
aments of the social and economic growth of Canadian society. 

But having singled out some peculiar characteristics of this 
development we have deliberately refrained from drawing defin¬ 
ite conclusions, for such an attempt would have led us into 
an extensive study, transgressing the borders of a limited 
treatise on public finance. Indeed, this is not to say, that 
a comprehensive study of the subject matter could neglect these 
aspects. May we frankly admit here that the peculiar association 
of the agrarian class with direct taxation, characteristic to 
both, the Canadian and American history of income taxation, led 
us to a careful reconsideration of various theories of social 
and economic development. 

As a thesis we have deliberately put the Conservative Nati¬ 
onal Policy Program, and then we followed the development of the 
antithesis - the agrarian opposition to this Program. At the early 
stage the farmers’ reaction was more or less negative, namely, 
they strove for removing the injustice of the existing fiscal 
system. Only when the Laurier Ministry failed to fulfil its 
promises, did the farmers revert to a positive action which 
gradually culminated in adopting direct taxation - an anti¬ 
thesis - as their idea of a just fiscal system. During this 
fermenting stage, marked by a lively controversy between the 
farmers and the industrial capitalist class, a strong influ¬ 
ence of British and American fiscal ideas is clearly discernible. 

58. The terms of the Hegelian concept of social develop¬ 
ment are used here strictly as an easy mode of illustration, and 
by no means do they indicate our adherence to this philosophy. 



/ ■ 

. • . ' ; - ' -•••■ ■ A . ... .:i f'i'Jy: , r ' 

■ 

iAryyy .1: : • y -yr 'y.y ;AI t r.f:c ! y.. y.cc s 31 

: , . . ... A : ■„ . ■ ■ t A ’ A - : ■ 

, . * ■ ■ 

: zi 2 

r.y- - y A, A. yy- .■ , A t r;o AJ; yyyA A y y x A ;'.vaw h A A f. yyy syv ,y a Ac- 

■ ■ , ■ ; ..-y- 

[ • y ; .;:yyy'yy ; nr 'io yc-AA y3yuy.; - yy; ^..A. y ;, >- 0 y- o$ BU 

* • ... / ' y 

„• .A ;,yy. AJ j - ^ y .I' :A 5 i' 'A - S.A " 

y , yyy A. ■: .Ay .... ;y A A... yy . A y:y- t y?.,y ;" ■[rJ.lc-'L Ayc.o 

c ■" . . I 

t ’ , - .' • : • 

r -f . y Ac y ' y;A.. yA yAA AaivA;:,^; yy.A: oxyviAa A —A- 

* 

AoA Ay n; A_- •; ■ ,vi: .. ' ..; y - : Ay'.;'-., yy yyy :■ AJ -Ai.. A. t yyy..uy oyq| 

.ry - ,-)C .A ■■ A jr A • A . y/ A. A . I . ■; -A*..vy A 

: 

. 

A""' y.y •, yy r. y A .y.A A 

3 « Ao Jsi A ■ 

.i •, : r ,: yyyyj. j. yyaiA n.AAAyyA j?:x r r 3 i\TIrrS Ato BOtxB 

* 

. ■-.<■ A - ••■cf A-: : iy ; y A.." A 

. 




i 85 - 

A specific reference must be made to the support given to 
the Canadian free trade movement by the writings of Edward 
Porritt, a British Cobdenian Liberal. 

The year of 1910 witnessed the first break with the 
past. The farmers 1 revolt against the tariff and their 
decision !, to face” direct taxation in whatever form was, 
in a way, a revolutionary act. What they understood under 
the term of direct taxation amounted more to a land tax of 
Henry George *s type than to a graduated income tax, although 
the latter was not explicitly ruled out. Only after the south¬ 
ern republic adopted a graduated income tax did the progressive 
western forces come out with a clear demand for such a measure. 

In the meantime, the war developed a nd by exposing the short¬ 
comings of a one-sided fiscal system, played into the hands 
of the agrarian income tax movement. 

The indifference of the Conservative Party, then in power, 
towards any fiscal reform drove the agrarians into politics. 

Dr. Clark *s persistent proposals of a federal income tax recei¬ 
ved a marked support from the Canadian Council of Agriculture 
which in 1916 published a redrafted Parmer * s PIat form whereby 
the agrarian demand for a progressive income tax was explicitly 
stated. Three years afterwards the same demand became a major 
plank of the Progressive Party established and fostered by 
agrarian interests. 

The war, however, focused the interest of Canadian scholars 
of economic science on public finance, and to nobody f s surprise 



:i v; doo b;,lj " cofy ,,o 0.5box c c' doro I. o.B-voy:o abb boo a k 

> ' ' C? J • - 




* 

: <so: 

r* , odd ./•! 


; ; r o ad! 

d:Br'.;;B.ijdo• a b ob bo OBboo 



; fd '.Li 

b V r .‘'iad box 

■ 

oro *d 


f 

‘I-: V 6 7 ' J. i 1 

f t - So $ob ' >4 

" o:oi o toe5 

‘I 

J J 

r xe him \edS 


, ; ob. 

‘ i: :> ' a d 

i hn&I 

B 07 :j ; oont 

d oo ikroBiB noxoo :-:b 4 J oo ■'5: b b 

< 



er.-xodiil boo 

0 .-y n.obb ;>b: y y d o\. 

•xoeO 'fonaH 


e ie J‘Xn 

;J.: , , bo 

1 ..... | 

oo IdB I or r d 



bl;b xob £.«oo/i£ b bo>xb ub> a t : b bod boob ox 

1 

Beni js 

rloifH 

: iol briorxoB) 

IBS Id b rid 1 jr do.ro omoo aeoo 

.O irOO j 30V 


< f 

.. i ■ . la ■ - - 1 , : 

* 7: ' ■■ . ■ ' a b 

la . .• " ■ ■ I 

>o. : \ . 1 ‘I.;, .£0 . ■' 

• 7 ‘X .* llnnx?o0 oyoL ■. 7 rob ■' i ^ <y,- w •- boybxoin: e bev 

’ ■ 1 . ; 

tol 1 itf ! ! s *j *xq t Bn ■■.■■■■■• 

' 

• •- • '■ , ' f ' •: • . • •. ■ ,o oxo bo :VioI 

♦ - 

4 a s > ■ I , 

■! f . ■ . i '5 L .i 7 .. ■: ■ ;: ?: ’ oi ' i i •;') > 










86 - 


they supported the progressive ideas of the agrarian class. 
Professor A. B. Clark of the University of Manitoba, and Dr. 

0. D. Skelton of Queen*s University publicly backed the drive 
for a federal fiscal reform. By this time, the question of 
income taxation attracted supporters from all strata of Cana¬ 
dian society, businessmen, farmers, scholars and politicians, 
so that the Minister of Finance was compelled to defend his 
fiscal policy in each successive war budget. But while agree¬ 
ing in principle with advocates of an income tax, he adhered 
to the easy mode of war financing, namely, borrowing, which 
was well fitted to please his protectionist and profiteering 
followers. 

The first concession mad© to public criticism was in the 
form of taxing the excess war profits. This opened the door 
to the introduction of a graduated income tax, and everything 
signalized its incorporation into the budget of 1917* The 
failure of the Minister of doing so was more or less attribu¬ 
table to the influence of big business which feared the tax 
for obvious reasons. Only when the conscription issue necess¬ 
itated a federal election and the government anticipated de¬ 
feat, did the Minister reconsider his stand and finally in¬ 
troduce the tax in order to woo the farming electorate. 

The adoption of the tax, even in a mild form, prepared 
the ground for the Unionist government, and by all means re¬ 
presented a victory of the progressive forces. Here we have 
the synthesis of the preceding development, which, perhaps 







• u ai 


. 

' * - , ■" 

' 

e . ..... i 

k.- v : ■ ,s'j r r„ ortJ: 

t - '■ .. 'i 

! . • - . ■; ’ •' ' . ' ■ .. ' 'J, b 0 -5 . 

* v [ . 

4 

v. e:: b ?,-;*■/ I. tor ssw 

* . .. 

j I • JJ o ^ ! ' • 1 

. • ■ " . . ■ ' j ■ ; o : j t 0$ 

, 

' v. ■ . ; • • [, : : of . • .C:'■x.joe'T : be •/£•?.'& 

- : '.. .■ -b 

«. ■' : r e ; ■ ‘i - '- ' j v : :. :yjb0*1 J' 

■ ■'!'* r<9.v*!> , - ■ ■ J ; i: -7^ ^PT* 

. •.w .— j- s ■; ~ \ e/iv 

♦ ■ • 

* v w ^ r.. ■> oredv 



- 87 - 


was best expounded in the New National Policy Programme , adopted 
by the Canadian Council of Agriculture in 1919, 

During the first three years of its existence, the income 
tax convinced many of its former opponents of its favorable 
effects and greatly dissipated the apprehensiveness of unin¬ 
formed business circles# Even the Conservative party, which 
at the beginning, considered the tax to be its unwanted child, 
changed its attitudes in the postwar period, and looked at it 
with a more favorable eye. 

The great metamorphosis which the federal system of taxa¬ 
tion underwent during the first two decades of this century may 
be, perhaps, best illustrated by the stand taken by Sir George 
Poster, the co-author of Conservative National Policy. After 
about forty years of its existence. Sir George evaluated the 
change as follows: 

"We have had two systems of taxation, one al¬ 
most predominantly up to the present time, 
and that is the method of indirect taxation, 
by which the people paid heavily and did not 
know when they were doing so....I doubt if 
that system of taxation, altogether imposed 
upon a country, is a good schoolteacher to 
that country and does eventuate in what is 
best for the interest of the people....Now 
we are working up along the line of direct 
taxation every year a little further and yet 
not by too violent advances that would pro¬ 
duce - I would say a revolution, but that 
word does not convey my meaning - but a reac¬ 
tion against that principle of taxation." 59 

Definitely, the Canadian system of taxation underwent a 

fundamental change within the first two decades of this century. 

The forces which brought about this change originated in the 

great social and economic upheaval which spurred the whole 


59. Debates, 1920 . p. 25ll*-l^ 






* - 


jitX 


... . ;•: - , ■ 'X -ft' •ft ;;v :.7 :: .- 31 bo -ft 

£' i '■ 

: . .. ' ... ft : o•.-C -. czooi 1 Belli ©dX on! ziox 

: .j) v :-:i '■■■ ■ ;o -ft -i-:-'s. • •: 1 do • - :i: -■ — ;r; I: ‘ : ^ 

. . 0 0 

,CJ • - 3 : 




••,. : *:' :.•>o ■: ■:/ zcft «•: : o’ os'ie no nr 


■•t.iij-i ♦ocizoo Zft.ftvXocz" iftOft oz 


8 


■3 0 


¥ ' v 1 ■ ft ■ .• ■ Xft. 

: r; ■ 1 X r- B 3 y ft: .ft e 3fieri 0 

- .ft. • 7 -ft ' . 

0 . ’ J j?e '■ 

ft - • 7^0ftneo >>;:t land 1 77 ft ■:d , 7? 7, .ft" ft.: ft ft-ft: .ft’ rtol d 

' . 

ft ft ftft. ft " ' 7 7 ft ft'ft'- ft ’"ft ' .ft' ' 7 ft ■ '7 7 7 . ■ f -ftftft yft/ft. 

-;.r r o 77 -;ce■ ; -.d .-ft:" .. ft' ft "ft ftftl 'xo 7 ft. 0 ..". x;X-7ftX XirBci’o 

: . 4 : ■ ' £ ' 


. 

. , ft :' J f ■: 7- ■ :.. . . O-ft 7 7 ft , ;; ; , ■ ■ 0 . ft/.' 

f ftft ft ft-;.: "ft/.ft.ft ft : ftOJo'..': -ft ' .' ft'ft 7 ft. ' ft Iftftift 

J. 7 ft : ' e.. ■ o ft 

' • '• ; ft/ft*. ■ 'n 


- f ft ft ... 

XooxiOB ooox ft* 


I© 7 ; V .: . , ■ : 7 

7 .:-: i 7 " " ft .7'ft ftft Xftzl ,• 

. ' ■ t i'i 3 7 ? . . • - 7 . 7.'7 '■ i I [ ft 

it ; . ' . i X t1 ■' . ■ © r 

ro 7'.:. 7 .. • .r: o.i. : XXX ..• 737 ^ vo:'" ft', ft: ft ft 7... ;X 


■ 7 ; X *. 


■ 


7 , •■• ft- .ftft - ft: 7 ft d. --7 

■ ' - ’ ft : o ;on 

ci a :\js 3 X, o © lei 0r 1 1 :*xo ’ X 0 : ' X 3ft 3 -.a. 


V‘ 3 on 

- 

■ 




aefisoe? 




77 , ■ 77 . ? ft ' , 7. 737 3 0 ■ 

0.11 ©J X . £ l .‘77 

*IC .. S 0 7 

. : ' , _ 7 ■ .ft - 7. ’ ' T ’ 7 7 i '7 -■ *" 7 7*-1) ‘7 'ft 


, 









- 88 - 


Western civilization from a liberal democracy to an egalitarian 
democracy staffed with all the socialist or welfare institutions 
which are a vogue in to-day's politics* The progressive income 
tax prepared ground and became one of the mainstays of this new 
political system. 


88 




- . . . ' . - ' ■ d tl l 3 i I - - ■ © ■ " ■ ■ 

- .. ... . J: 5 c I .-DlJllor; s» ;; 'J ill ^.ov C - ■ 0 ■ - *' 

= 

*■; . ■■; • : : ■ 11 - :/ 





CHAPTER III. 


THE INTER-WAR PERIOD 

Drayton*3 Income T&x Legislation . 

The last budget of Sir Thomas White served as cause for 
western agrarian members of Parliament to break with the 
Unionist government and to cross the floor of the House. The 
augmented opposition as well as the repeated criticism iri the 
press of white*s irresponsible and discriminatory financial 
policy induced a switch in the portfolio of finance. In the 
fall of 1919 Sir Henry Drayton was commissioned by the Prime 
Minister to a difficult task; to repair past mistakes and to 
pilot the country ! s economy during the period of adaptation 
to peace-time conditions. 

The country soon noticed that it had a capable Minister 
in charge of its finances. The third Victory Loan was floated 
without the bait of tax exemption, and the first budget of Mr. 
Drayton, brought down in May, 1920, mar Iced a definite break 
with the recent past. n The duty of today,” Mr. Drayton told 
the House of Commons, w is to carry on the government of the 
country without any additbns to the debt, but on the other hand 
to promote measures which will reduce the country* s obligations” 
which indicated that the government had abandoned the easy wav 
of procuring funds and that it intended to rely upon taxation. 
Accordingly, the minister introduced a new tax on consumption - 


1. Debates, 1920 9 p. 247&. 















> 












' 






.. ■ •. ■; , ./ ,, ' '. 1 

. 




. 


. 








, 



' • 

















< 



. 








- 90 - 


The General Sales Tax - and proposed sweeping amendments to 
the Income War Tax Act and Business Profits Tax Act. 

He was aiming at the core of the problem when he stated 
that under the existing acts the system of assessment and col¬ 
lection of taxes was entirely unsatisfactory, and was causing 
vexatious delays. Although in the amendment of the acts he 
proposed an over-all increase of tax rates, it was chiefly 
designed to secure the revenue the Treasury was entitled to, 
and to eliminate the widespread evasion and avoidance of the 
tax. 

The most significant innovation was the new system of 
assessment. Under the original law the taxpayer submitted 
to the minister a statement showing his net income for any 
particular year, and waited with payment of the tax until the 
department sent him the official assessment. Drayton’s law 
made every taxpayer his own assessor in the first instance. The 
return forms were furnished with tables of tax rates for each 
income bracket as to enable the taxpayer to compute his tax 
liability, 25 per cent of which became payable on mailing the 
return to the district taxation office, and the rest to be 
defrayed by three subsequent instalments. 

The effectiveness of this system was guaranteed by drastic 
penalties for a misstatement of income. If the underestimate 
did not exceed 10 per cent of the net income, the taxpayer was 
charged with a penalty of 10 per cent of the omitted amount; if 
the omission was over 10 per cent but less than 20 per cent. 


. ■ ■ • ■ : 

' 


■ 


' 




* 








: 


. 






. 










' 




. 














' 










- 91 - 


the penalty amounted to 50 per cent of the hidden sum, and an 
understatement of 20 per cent or over was charged with a 100 
per cent penalty of the omitted income. Perhaps nothing bet¬ 
ter proves how the taxpaying public had been nursed by the 
previous minister than the necessity to impose such numerous 

and drastic fines which, when added to the existing ones, made 

2 

the Act look like a penal code. 

The definition of persons liable to tax was entirely re- 


2. A book of instructions issued by the Royal Trust Company 
of Canada for its clients described the duties and penalties of 
the Income War Tax Act as follows; l, The citizen must not wait 
till he is asked for his tax; nor may he leave the calculation 
of this amount to the officials. He must calculate it himself and 
pay it without being asked. Along with the form showing his 
income for 1920 he must send in (by April JO, 1921) at least 
one-fourth of the actual tax which he reckons himself liable for, 
the rest being payable later with six per cent interest in three 
monthly instalments. 

If he puts the figures too low he becomes immediately liable 
to several penalties, even if error is unintentional.. 

For instance: if he underestimates his income by a trifling 
amount, up to one-tenth, he must pay income tax on the deficiency 
with ten per cent interest* If he underestimates his income by 
more than ten and less than twenty per cent, the fine is one-half 
the amount of the income omitted - not merely one-half of the tax. 
If the deficiency is twenty per cent or more the whole of the un- 
reported income is taken. Thus if he states his income as 

when it is $5>65°> he is fined $1,150, besides of course, 
the unpaid tax. 

If he is late in sending in his return twenty-five per cent 
is added to his tax. 

If he pays less than a fourth of the tax as estimated by 
himself to begin with, or less than the proper amount in the case 
of later instalments,twenty-five per cent, of the deficiency 
(and in no case less than $5*00) is added to his tax. The same 
penalty is prescribed for not paying within thirty days any sum 
demanded in addition to the tax as estimated by himself. 

If he is asked for further information and is late in sen¬ 
ding it, or if he fails to keep such adequate records and ac¬ 
counts as the Finance Minister may prescribe, he may be fined 
$100 a day for his default; and a false statement may be punished 
with a $10,000 fine and six months in jail. 11 (Quoted by Mr. Field¬ 
ing in his budget reply. Debates, 1J21 , p. J1J48.) 































■ 




' 
































1 









.. 



















■ 








- 92 - 


drafted. The statute imposed a tax upon every person: 

1. residing or ordinarily resident in Canada; or 

2. who remains in Canada during any calendar year for 
a period or periods equal to 135 days; or 

5. who is employed in Canada; or 

4. who, not being a resident in Canada, is carrying 
on a business in Canada; or 

5 . who, not being resident in Canada, derives income 
for services rendered in Canada to any person 
resident or carrying on business in Canada.... 

Resident persons were charged with a tax upon their entire in 
come irrespective from whichever source derived, while non¬ 
residents were obliged to pay the income tax only upon that 
part of their income which originated in Canada. The statute 
defined in detail the duties and obligations of trustees, as¬ 
signors, executors, and like persons in respect of their mak¬ 
ing up returns and paying the tax on behalf of third persons. 

Drayton 1 s amending law introduced three alterations re¬ 
garding the computation of net income. Firstly, stock divi¬ 
dends became explicitly taxable income; secondly, the income 
from an estate or an accumulating trust was liable to tax for 
the first time; and thirdly, the deduction granted under the 
original law for contributions to the Patriotic Fund or other 
war funds was repealed. 

The structure of tax rates remained unaffected, but the 
amount of tax payable was increased by 5 P©** cent on incomes 

5 

exceeding $5,000. 

Despite the drastic penalties the amending Bill was adop 
ted without any significant criticism from either side of the 


5. Gf. Statutes of Canada, 10-11 Geo. V., c. 49 . 


























i) : 









- 93 - 


House, and having been put into effect it did fiscal wonders. 
The revenue from the income tax field multiplied by 80 per 
cent as against the previous fiscal year. The personal income 
tax yielded $ 32.5 millions (an increase of $ 12.5 millions), 
and the corporate income tax netted $ 13*8 millions, $ 6.8 mil¬ 
lions more than in the preceding year. 

However, opposition to the income tax was in the making. 
The inquisitorial methods of assessment and collection aroused 
a wave of protests not only from members like Mr. Currie who 
placed himself on record as being entirely opposed to the in¬ 
come tax, but also from the staunch supporters of the tax. Mr. 
Fielding, speaking for the opposition, took strong exception 
to the methods employed by the Minister in collecting the in¬ 
come tax revenue. In his reply to the Budget Speech in May, 
1921 , he stated that: 

l} The complaint of today with most of the people 
paying the income tax is. not with the tax itself. 

The tax has to be paid, although it is a burden. 

But the penalties which my hon. friends are impos¬ 
ing in their efforts to get money are the cause of 
much vexation, and give just cause for complaints. 

I recognize the fact that the Minister of Finance, 
like any other creditor must... exercise a little 
pressure... but I do not think he is justified in 
out-shylocking Shylock by charging 60 per cent in¬ 
terest to the poor devil who fails to pay promptly...* 1 ^ 

Similar protests were voiced throughout the spring session of 
parliament from both sides so that Mr. Drayton under such pres¬ 
sure and in view of coming elections felt compelled to smoothen 


4 . Debates, 1921, p. 3147• 












* 9k - 


the progressivity of tax penalties. Toward the end of the 
session he introduced a bill which imposed a floor on the 
penalties enacted a year ago. 

From a strict economic viewpoint Drayton»s fiscal mea¬ 
sures would deserve some criticism, if not for the fiscal 
necessities which chiefly dictated their course. The govern¬ 
ment was raising the tax level in a period of decreasing eco¬ 
nomic activity, and in addition to that, the strict penalties 
put business and enterprise under the tax press in respect of 
both current taxes and arrears, in some cases as far back as 
1916. This probably influenced the economic slump which hit 
Canada towards the end of 1920. 

Indeed, the serious efforts of the Minister of Finance 
to liquidate the over-due taxes backfired during the election 
campaign. The famous Riordon case weakened the Conservative 
platform of economic nationalism, and the opposition was given 
mighty arguments of governments favoritism of big business. % 


5* The Riordon Company, which was in the public spot¬ 
light in 1920 when they completed a spectacular merger and re¬ 
organization, was assessed in 1921 for all the previous years 
back to 1916. On account of financial difficulties the company 
offered the government a promissory note in lieu of a cash 
payment of all due taxes amounting to | 800,000. Mr. H. M. El- 
lard, progressive candicate in Wright County, fired the first 
shot at the government in a letter addressed to the Prime Minister, 
asking if similar privileges would be afforded to every taxpayer 
who happened to be in financial difficulties. The case became 
an election sensation of major dimensions, and to a great degree 
influenced the electorate against the government. 



bOBo-o' 


%o or:-: 
c, no •: 




03 0 .DO 3 000x1 


x :■ X V I,, ;u-> x; xs -X ‘X o X X ;Io s *ox c-q eiict 

5eo ■ Dll ■■ .1 3©8 

# o. 


0 - ■ ■ 

• .. ; • ; ' , : ' o f - o . '* " X BX X 

■ ; , : ‘ .. ' . "O i . ” 1 ’ O X ■; . i 

: *i r ' ojtSBcOXOOjD ‘10 BOJoISO .0 £\X. OLO'OaX X&3 30 X -oj. OBBB OBIT 406I3 


-X s .... : t i o, : r o' oox !* ' o oX Vo.- t v- ob.no ct 

Xo ■ ... ■. ox: oox o , X 9- - xx ; q-ono o-o _ ;C . ■: iooa ck/q 


* o,x „ X X: ■ o: • x ,x X . ...o. .. o ;X • .* X 

’ • 

♦ ': o . o''-: :• .-: r : - o r 'BOo'J 

‘ . c o X x . '... . '1 •' : ..., o. :.. r „ . .. .. o 

XXo. ... i o • • ;r o. ■' :o.J ,:>"v.oo o.‘X.:c .O'X --';o,o.o'- x Xx. X-l;;o ll oo 


O'. 


. . ... X .o :: •’ .. '.X-'.o: o. ox .■ X: ooo - ■- . oo xkek I : 

. . . ..*. .. . : - ' X : . . o. i ,o: .O' 1 ’ ox-oOxx 






* 

: ' v r x . ; 

, 


. 

3ii or: x o ... 




* 

OX.; O'. 0- 00'. - 0.; OO'Xoo OCX 

o oxo o m . i.,o.o *1 o viiarr'^aq 


, 






’led 'jo 




i t i ■ . 
... r »,-* ?- 


e-Ji 


00- JO 


■ 


■3 ctj 

' 

-oxxoq qo.X orxo 




- 95 - 


The consolidated Income War Tax Act represented quite an 
achievement. Income taxation reached its peak as to rates 
and to income radius, for the whole period between 1917 and 

1955. 

The Income Tax Under the Liberal Administration . 

History teaches us that we have to distinguish between 
the Liberals in opposition and the Liberals at the governments 
reins. Prior to 1896 they bitterly attacked the National Pol¬ 
icy, then for fifteen years followed its line. The situation 
repeated itself also in the case of Income taxation. When 
they were on the left side of the House, Parliament heard many 
able speeches on the income tax. However, once they assumed 
power the income tax was in peril. Around 1 927 -28 the King 
Ministry made no bones about their willingness to abolish the 
tax entirely, after they had reduced it almost to a nominal tax 
by systematic lifting of the level of the tax-exempt income. 

The first step in this direction was taken by the old and 
now the new Liberal Minister of Finance, W.S. Fielding, in 
1922. The allowance for dependent children was raised from $200 
to fJOO, and married persons supporting a parent, sister, daugh¬ 
ter or son received an additional exemption from the normal tax 

6 

only up to $2,000. The allowances for dependent children were 

7 

further increased up to $5^0 in 1924* Economically speaking, 

6 . Statutes of Canada , 12-13, Geo.V, c. 25 . 

7. ibid. , 14-15 Geo. V, c. 46. 

























, 






. 






























, , ■ ■ ' 






. 




. 













. 

, 




























- 

■ , , ■ ► 









- 96 - 


these steps were justified. The government aimed during the 
slump to provide relief to persons particularly in the lower 
brackets, and by exempting incomes of larger families it 
favorably influenced the level of consumption, and thus em¬ 
ployment . 

Drayton*s income tax statute did not eliminate the wide 
possibility of tax avoidance, and it was left to the new ad¬ 
ministration to cope with the problem. The amending legis¬ 
lation introduced in the 1925 session contained some new im¬ 
portant provisions. Firstly, it inserted a regulation into 
the statute providing that M in any case the income of a tax¬ 
payer shall be deemed to be not less than the income derived 
from his chief position, occupation, trade, business or call¬ 
ing... and the Minister shall have full power to determine the 

8 

chief position, occupation, trade, business or calling... 11 
This amendment restricted the freedom of the taxpayer to charge 
losses, expenses or other deductions against the whole amount 
of income as allowed under the original White law. Consequently, 
the Y/age and salary receivers could not make any other deduc¬ 
tions from their incomes save those allov/ed by the statute. 

The wave of bankruptcies and business failures betv/een 
1921-23 entangled the collection procedure considerably, and 
in some cases the treasury lost potential revenue. The govern¬ 
ment decided to protect the public interest and effected a 


8 . ibid., 13-14 Geo. V, 0 . 52 . 







.iso ■ -;o ■ ■ v ' ’ . 
















- 97 - 


drastic measure which was met with similar opposition as 
Drayton*s penalties. The statute of 19^5 made the tax li¬ 
ability a prior secured lien on the real property of a tax¬ 
payer. It meant that the tax debt had priority over all 
other liens attached to the real property and followed it 
even ?/hen it switched hands. The measure curtailed the bor¬ 
rowing on real property so considerably that the government 

9 

felt it necessary to repeal it in 19 2 5 « 

The third important amendment affected .the appeal proce¬ 
dure. The provision regarding Boards of Referees was never 
put into operation, and in 1$)25 was repealed. The taxpayer 
was, however, allowed to demand a review of his assessment 
by the Minister, and if still dissatisfied, he could appeal 
directly to the Court of Exchequer. 

The income law was f'arther altered in 19^4, the tain 
provisions being concerned with inter-company transactions, 
partnerships, the income of non-residents arising from partial 
carrying on of business in Canada, and the undistributed income 
of wound-up companies. 

According to the amending statute of 1924 the inter-com¬ 
pany transactions were to be valued at the fair market value, 
and the Minister could determine the fair price at which pur¬ 
chases were to be taken into the accounts of the company. 
Secondly, the income of partnerships became liable to tax in 


9. The prior lien regulation was in force after Jan. 1, 
1924 for a little over a year. 











• n 













- 98 - 


the hands of partners in the year in which it arose irrespec¬ 
tive whether or not it was distributed among them. In the 
case of husband and wife being partners in any business the 
minister had full discretionary pov/ers to rule how such in¬ 
come should be treated and taxed accordingly. Thirdly, the 
income arising partly from carrying on business within Canada 
(e.g. a non-resident company operating a mine in Canada, but 
processing the raw material abroad) was liable to tax in a 
proportion as the minister deemed to be a true part earned in 
Canada. 

Prosperity was in full swing in 1926 so that the govern¬ 
ment deemed it desirable to give way to the insistent demands 
for tax reductions. J.A. Robb, the Minister of Finance, refer¬ 
ring to these demands stated that M happily, our financial and 
commercial position now enables us to make very substantial 
reductions in the income taxes.... The Act is now presented in 

a new and less complicated form, one which ?/ill make it easier 

,|10 

to calcinate, and, we believe, easier to pay. 

The salient feature of Robb*s amendments was the remarkable 
shift of the tax burden from individuals to corporate profits 
or business profits. Individuals were granted wider exemptions 
and lower tax rates, and, at the same time, incomes from per¬ 
sonal and family corporations became taxed more heavily, the 
principle of double taxation introduced, and a host of other 
amendments made tax avoidance a much more strenuous pastime. To 


10. Debates, 1926 , p. 2457 











. 

. 

' 

■ , ■ ' ■ ■ ' 

■* * 

. 

■ 




, 

.... 

, 

. 

. 

. 




- 99 


be sure, the corporate tax rates were reduced as well. 

The statutory exemptions jumped from $1,000 to $1,500 and 
from $2,000 to $3,000 in the case of single and married persons 
respectively. The allowance for dependents remained unaltered. 
Married status was broadened as to include an Individual (l) 

"who at his own and sole expense maintains a self-contained 
domestic establishment employing therein a full-time house¬ 
keeper or servant, or (2) who maintains a self-contained estab¬ 
lishment and who actually supports and maintains therein one or 
more individuals connected with him by blood relationship, 
marriage, or adoption". Husband and wife with separate in¬ 
comes in excess of $1,500 could claim the $1,500 exemption each, 
and they also could arrange between themselves the exemptions 
for dependents. 

Mr. Robb repealed the old rate structure along with the 
5 per cent additional tax, and introduced only one mildly 
progressive rate schedule. It was designed to ease the total 
tax liability as well as to simplify its computation. 

The new tax rates applicable to individuals ran as follows! 


On the first $2,000 or any part thereof 

amount in excess of 

2% 

$2,000 

but 

not 

in 

excess 

of 

$3,000 

y/° 

3,000 

but 

not 

in 

excess 

of 

4,000 


4,000 

but 

not 

in 

excess 

of 

5,000 

5% 

5,000 

but 

not 

in 

excess 

of 

6,000 

6 ;% 

6,000 

but 

not 

in 

excess 

of 

7,000 

n 

7,000 

but 

not 

in 

excess 

of 

8,000 

&% 

8,000 

but 

not 

in 

excess 

of 

9,000 

9 :% 


and so on adding 1 per cent to the preceeding rate for each ad¬ 
ditional margin of $1,000 up to $20,000; then for each additional 






' ' 

..... ;■.%/ t in, £■:< oJ ' • ■ a~ a ' .. inliaJ a an' 

i -;X 1 r • lc na ■■ o a: r a ')0C t a c a Q00,2C iTfOit 

# 

; * j; r !.; i J. .6-^- >'■ : : " ‘ a an rni.tptfa 

-Ilia;: a r ha-iia j ; : ,ni-o.rca 


■; J a.:-::- *- a , a --.'a: ...a,a fc; -, a ,K. ---aa ao aaareox 


o 

. • Cal.. 

_ 

[ ? tsXi ■ 0 I 

f ■ a C? 




■a. •: I a -r ■ . ai :: a, a / ' a r: ,""p a . ; ?-c o < « r. a a J iu o wq a: 

: ‘ 

. 

/ 

‘ ■■ a a ■ ■ I ' a a : ' '-a a a; ■'- r ' 

. .■' . C: ' a- : i... 

■ c f .a*' aran- - a'a;t ra 










,n a : a a f a • • ' . 

■ , iO a-: • • : 

. > ■ • r 

■ f -■ ; .,. 

« • 

J r ' ?>a 

. . •• : : 













100 - 


margin of $> 5*000 up to $ 100,000; and on the amount in excess of 


#100,000 

but 

not 

in 

excess of 

#110,000 

37$ 

110,000 

tt 

tt 

n 

tt 

tt 

120,000 

38 % 

120,000 

r» 

tt 

tt 

tt 

tt 

130,000 

39 % 

130,000 

Tt 

tt 

« 

n 

tt 

l4o,000 

ko% 

1^0,000 

tl 

It 

tt 

n 

tt 

150,000 

41$ 

150,000 

ft 

tt 

tt 

tt 

tt 

175,000 

1 + 2 % 

175,000 

tl 

tt 

tt 

tt 

tt 

200,000 

43$ 

200,000 

tt 

ft 

n 

n 

tt 

250,000 

kh% 

250,000 

tl 

tt 

tt 

n 

tt 

300,000 

45$ 

300,000 

tt 

tt 

t« 

it 

tt 

350,000 

46$ 

350,000 

tt 

ft 

tt 

it 

tt 

4.00,000 

47$ 

too,000 

ft 

ft 

tt 

tt 

tt 

450,000 

48$ 

45o,ooo 

tt 

tt 

tt 

tt 

it 

500,000 

49$ 

On the amount in 

excess 

of 

#500,000 

50$. 


The progressivity of the tax was further smoothed by 
the rearangement of income brackets. For example, the tax 
liability of a single person receiving income of §8,500 amoun¬ 
ted to # 290 , or about Lj .,1 per cent of the taxable income Cor¬ 
porations and joint stock companies paid a 9 per cent tax rate 
on their income in excess of #2,000. 

Robb f s amending statute of 1926 explicitly stated that 
dividends, income of personal corporations and family corpora¬ 
tions were taxable in the hands of shareholders. But share¬ 
holders of a family corporation were allowed to elect by notice 
in writing to the Minister to be assessed either as a corpora¬ 
tion or as a partnership. Since company earnings were subject 


11 . The computation of the total tax liability on an in- 


come of § 

|8,500 of a single person was as 

follows: 


Exempted income 

# i,5oo 



Taxable income 

# 7,000 


On 

the first $ 2,000 

2 $ 

i 4o 

On 

additlonal 1,000 

3 $ 

30 

tt 

" 1,000 

4$ 

4o 

n 

" 1,000 

5$ 

5o 

tt 

" 1,000 

6 $ 

60 

tt 

" 1,000 

7 $ 

70 

Total taxable income $ 7,000 

Total Tax 

#290. 






eon no Ono \ 


jQ I 


■ „ ■■ i 'J ' : : ' ■ ; *. 


O ■ ft I 'O ‘XB.vK 


a .Of 

o 

. 

<* 

' 




i. 0 ' J 00. ; o 

0 

) ■ . 0 0 
" o;0O , 1 

■» . ) 
v v ;.. Jo X 
■ . ' V 

000- 0)0 
: 0 0*Ofo 


Jr 


u* u 


0 o noo 


- 

, ' ..m oO- , ■ j . > : o • 1 ‘.0 

■ ) T V Or; , I. ‘ 0 '■ V • ! ' 

■ 0 . n. • ... ’.x'. * - >■- 

j . r , • . ; . t3 ! >4 '• l 


$nssoi'' ■■ " r J 

■ ' on-:; e:1f 
la / n. 

■ 

t : . ■ : J b o 


j : ■> f .... ;. oe o ■ ■ ■ ' 1 * :L 


.0. • : Care 000 0 V 0 J 0’J '' J 3 


1 


: . ' ) t 

, , o. L . v, . ; I . o : ' f : •, . Oo • OOO.dJ 

o • i: ;.j Jay-jol i nrI;aooo.-vioo 

- - a :d Oo nonoo no :>j ‘irO:o,*.to J. ord; of of ooi:oa al 


J J. 0 J i.J J 


... ' . £ J 


Ol d. :. O •: .00 ,.i: .)O v IOO; O L. 
.) )’ a X ,, of ip on' ' 








I do 


1 i , J • . ..■ :l 

: ), i' i; onoJ J .' :d> ' no 

if 


o,; f l 

)oo|i 

. 

. : . .0 Of ; ) 1 , , 90100' ti elcfj 


J 


- 101 


to corporate income tax, and when paid out to shareholders 
they were liable to the personal income tax, the problem 
of double taxation became for the first time of importance 
in Canadian income taxation. It was done so on purpose in 
order to tax investment income more heavily than earned in¬ 
come, which definitely represents an interesting argument 
in favour of double taxation. 

The problem of how to catch into the tax net the various 
forms of corporate dividends has kept busy the ministers of 
finance since the days of Sir Henry Drayton. As may be rem¬ 
embered, he introduced a provision of 1920 making stock 
dividends subject to tax. Since then the hide-and-seek play 
between the administration and the taxpayer has continued, 
which, as Dr. Petrie remarks, was never entirely successful 

from the former*s viewpoint, and resulted in a considerable 

12 

complication of the tax law. 

Sir Henry Drayton drew to the attention of his Liberal 
successor that the problem of personal corporations was be¬ 
coming of concern to him during the latter part of his adminis¬ 
tration and urged the new minister to introduce legislation 
on the matter. The question was taken up partially only in 
1921}. when the Acting h Sinister of Finance, Mr. Robb, added a 
section to the tax lav/ providing that n on the winding up, dis¬ 
continuance or reorganization of the business of any incorporated 

12. Petrie, J.R. The Taxation of Corpora t e Income in 
Canada , Toronto, 1952, p. 54* 






*: 

' 

• • ‘ - ; • r -C- •’ ' 

„ 



... . 1 

; .; , . ... ' • , , ■ 

■ 

* 

• ;• -■ r . .. . . ... < . . ' ‘ ■ - ’ •• ' ; •’ ’ Cl 

. <;• /' . ' t V 7 v 7 •' • r 

. 

i • • ■; •.... < v • > ■: >' ' s • ‘ : 

.... ■ ■ x . • ■ - 1 ■ ■ 

-! .{-o' S'£■ ■ ■ v’ .. . ■ ‘ ’ ' . . . . - • -• 11 i -- L •' J 

/: •' .. : • .• . ' . u - '■ ;7 ■ •' ■' y' *'' ' • • -V • : :: i ;:; 

- 

1 f ( . r • ' V 

, • v i. • :.v .*x • ■ r. J , *. au • $o* : & 













, '.: : ■ .■ ,c -v *:o ,< ' ' : u;. c- 


. . 




- 102 


company, the distribution in any form of the property of the 
company shall be deemed to be payment of a dividend to the 
extent that the company had on hand undistributed income” . 

This section solved only a small part of the problem, and 
v/as more or less intended to counter the decision of the 
English Court of Appeal ( Inland Revenue Commissioners v . Bur¬ 
rell ) that undistributed income allotted to shareholders on 
the winding up of a company represented a distribution of com¬ 
pany* s capital, and as such was not taxable. 

The Minister did not touch the problem until 1926, when 
at on© stroke he made the variety of shareholder’s receipts 
subject to income tax, save the inter-company dividends. To 
eliminate this avenue of avoidance the statute had a specific 
provision in respect of holding companies as follows: 

“Where a person owing shares of a corporation 
transfers shares or a portion thereof to a second 
corporation acting as his agent, trustee or at¬ 
torney or promoted at his instance or controlled 
by him, which second corporation subsequently 
receives a dividend from the first-mentioned cor¬ 
poration and applies the income thus received in 
whole or in part, directly or indirectly, 

(a) in payment of the shares purchased by the 
second corporation from such person; 

(b) in discharge of any liability incurred to 
such person by reason of and in connection with 
the purchase of such shares; or 

(c) in the discharge of a loan obtained by the 
second corporation for the purpose of paying for 

such shares, then such person shall be taxable in 
respect of such dividend as if he had received it 
in the year that the first-mentioned corporation 





• ' . ' 

... i ' 

■ • ' : ■ • ' • tt 

' 

" ' ■' ' ' ‘ 

l; LI: : 


’ ■ ■ 



■ 

> <’■/ 1 

. 

;1 : or aw/ ik>;i£V-siii 

... 

• 



’• 

v/. . E i * 



... 

t 0 


..... : • . . -. i- * . I ■' * 

.• ' ... .. •. .-? 

■ . , 

“ - ■ 

' 

■ , . ....... .. . • . 


* ' • - ' r :'OC >1 ' • 

■ 


.: • . :. . , - ■ - 

• ■ '...O i 

- ., ' J ■: 





- 105 - 


declared dividend. n l 3 

To block tax avoidance by means of various forms of 
recapitalization of the company, the law of 1926 incorpora¬ 
ted specific provisions in respect of taxation of undistri¬ 
buted income. Section 8 instituted that any distribution or 
advance from a company to a shareholder, whether in the form 
of readjustment of capital stock, or capital stock reduction, 
or stock redemption at premium, if the company had undistri¬ 
buted income on hand, was subject to tax in the hand of the 
shareholder to the extent of the amount of undistributed 
profits. The dividend became taxable in the year during which 
the company either reduced its capital stock or redeemed its 
shares at premium. Further, when a company loaned money to a 
shareholder, except if such a loan was made incidental to the 
business of the company or it was its chief business, the 
advance was deemed to be taxable as if it were a dividend. 

Another three smaller provisions were enacted in 1 J 2 . 6 . 
First, carrying charges or expenses of unproductive property 
or assets acquired for the purpose of business or liability 
not incurred in connection of earning income were not deduc¬ 
tible. Second, the ire ome of non-resident operators of ship 
or aircraft were exempted from the tax liability providing that 
the country of their residence granted similar exception to 
Canadian citizens. Thirdly, any transfer of property between 

15. In the original budget proposal this provision was 
to be limited to the first three years. 









- 


. 

• . . *: : --A ■ ' ■■ ' ' - : ' f ^ 

_ . _ ‘ t A'O ',u ...- •• - , 

■ • ■■ 

. • ■ 

f 

; \ ... ; ' 

; - ... ‘ - ■ • ■ ■' ‘ • ■■ ’ - : 

' ’ ; ' o I 

- 

■ .. ■ . . • > . : ' 

‘ ’ . ■ . ' ' . .... : • ■ ■■' ■ - • 

' 

■ . c . : • • v ' ' - : ■ t 

: . • rq ; - k; s • , .:o 

I ■ ’ : ' " • 

- - 

-. , r : : • •.. -o.. c . • • : ;i 

. • 

. • . . » ; • • ' 










iJ •*. ' ■ • 







- 104 - 


parent and child or husband and wife did not exclude the tax 
obligation of the transferor in respect cbf income arising 
from the property, unless the Minister was satisfied that 
such a transfer was not made for the purpose of tax evasion. 

The Revision of the Income Tax Law . 

In 1927 the Income War Tax Act of 1917 was entirely re¬ 
arranged and rewritten, although without any material change, 
and appeared as Chapter 97 the Revised Statutes of Canada . 
The la?/ contained 82 sections divided into eleven parts and 
two schedules. The titles of the parts ?/ere as follows; I- 
Taxable Income; II- Excepted Incomes; III- Charging Provisions; 

IV- Special Provisions Relating to the Incidence of the Tax; 

V- Returns; VI- Payment of Tax; VII- Assessment; VIII- Appeals; 
IX- Remedies of Crown to Recover Taxes, etc.; X- Administration 
XI- Offences and Penalties. The first schedule comprised the 
tax rates applicable to individuals and corporations as well; 
the second schedule prescribed the form of the notice of appeal 
from an assessment by the Minister of National Revenue. 

A parallel of the revised statute with the original White 
Act reveals the immense progress that marked income tax during 
the first decade of its duration. Albeit the basic features 
and the original structure of the law were hardly affected, it 
had been greatly deepened in detail and refined in wording. 

The incidence of the tax v/as gradually shifted more to invest¬ 
ment income by eliminating the loop-holes through which some 





. 

■ 

- : 

' ' - . - ' • : ; ' 

. .. „• .. 0 V v, ' : : 

... . ; j. :: .J 1 . ' ‘ ' o - " ■ V . •'• • ’ 

' , . ■ ' 

- 

o - . y; jj - o .'Jr ... ■ r .•■■■-. r ooc i-»c ■ v&L oil*. 

* 

. * 

. : > '■ • • 

■ . > i ' 


, 

. 

■ ; ■ Jo • , .■ ■ ■ ' ' 

, ■ ... . f% J , ' ; • . .. ■ 

. • . - . . J .: .* -.V i J• J . -- l 

..■■■ ... ■' '• ' ■ 




' 


- ' 





forms of corporate distributions escaped; non-resident per¬ 
sons were subjected to tax obligation; and the administration 
of the Act noted some improvements as well. However, there 
were yet many shortcomings awaiting consideration. They were 
dealt with during the subsequent decade. 

The last three years of the twenties did not bring any 
material changes in the law. The tax rates were cut by a flat 
10 per cent in 1927 and then again in 1928, when the allowance 
for dependents was also extended as to apply to dependents over 
21 years of age if they were incapable of self-support on ac¬ 
count of physical or mental infirmity. In the corporation tax 
a provision was adopted permitting a split of the depletion 
allowance in cases of mines, gas, oil wells and timber limits 
between the lessor and lessee. In 1929 no changes occured. 

A New Administrative Agency . 

Until 1924 the Minister of Finance exercised the administra¬ 
tive authority over the income tax. In that year the adminis¬ 
tration of all revenue acts was concentrated into one agency, 
the Department of Customs and Excises. Three years thereafter 
the Department was thoroughly reorganized and assumed its 
present name, the Department of National Revenue. This reorga¬ 
nization effected a switch in the position of the Commissioner of 
Taxation: Mr. Breadner was transferred to customs division and 
his successor became Mr. C.S. Walters, former head of the 
District Taxation Office in Hamilton, Ontario. 

Mr. Breadner's ten years of administration of the income tax 



■ ; ; .:,c ; c j V IT' c 

, .:■■ •< r o i- \ : ■- ^ ' i : ‘ 

: 

,?-7 -C'v. ss^ -j d: ' 

. 

■ , s . r ■ I r/ ' ' . V"- - - ^ - ■ 0 .f 

• j;c 3 T3-; Xi: 2 :;^ :‘:o. yt$\*x 

■ 

• ;:J; . t ■: : . •' • * Cj I \ 

.... . : . ,. 

- • • .■■;■■ ‘ - 

. 

, • . : : •• ? ' r - '■ ;"'OS J 

. ■ 

V.: 

- . 

’ ' ‘ 






. 








. ' 


: .,>.‘>0 ■ r /' : .. ; 0 0JJ£ 












- 106 


law were hardly satisfactory. Criticism ana complaints not 
only from the taxpaying public but also from the expert 
professions heaped up year after year. The wide discretion¬ 
ary powers and the supercautious secrecy became the most 
criticized features of the law. Discrimination in favor of 
wealthier taxpayers was noticeable from utterances of the 
Commissioner and from the amendments affecting appeal pro¬ 
cedure as well. The provisions respecting the Boards of 
Referees and publication of regulations remained a dead let¬ 
ter, and the former were repealed in 1925 • Instead, the tax¬ 
payer was granted the dubious privilege of having his assess¬ 
ment reviewed by the department upon notice, and then he could 
contest the assessment before the Court of Exchequer, and the 
Supreme Court of Canada. But due to the considerable expenses 
involved, very few taxpayers used this legal remedy. 

Between 1$>21 and 1926 the income tax amendments were not 
announced in the budget speech of the Minister of Finance, as 
has been customary with all fiscal proposals. Every year, 
a few days before the close of parliamentary session, as the 
Editor of the Chartered Accountant complained early in 1925 , 
when legislators vwre tired and perspiring, a batch of minor 
amendments appeared In the form of a Bill, and these went 
through - as was doubtless the intention - without time being 
allowed for examination by those most coneerr® d, namely - the 
suffering public. 1 ^ Furthermore, there was a serious lack of 

14. Cf. The Chartered Accountant, vol. XIV, January, 1925 , 

P. 257 . 





' 

. "■ . ■ ■ ; , ' t. ■: 

' 

' C . ■■ . : : ' • . ' 

, ' • ' . .. . : ■ 

.. •. : i - ■ ' 

• .. ■ • • ...:; ' .. “: ■; ' \ - ■ -v ' C 

- ;; : . . •' . r ■ ^ 

~ u v . ; /. ; , •; j 7/ • \ V / •.:*'{ ' .'O 7 h ;? • ./ i'. : 1 7 H 

, 

■ 

. 

/. V.. w.c -v; ; ■ V.;; rru:oa;ia ,| 

. ■ . • • . ' 

v 

, . . : .. . ■ 

: , . :• ;■■':= ’ J* .70 -A r 

' . ■ . • ■ ■ . ■ • • E 

■ 

: 7 : O : " 7.70 7C • . 7 v/o T !“B 

. 

. 



- 107 - 


any clear income tax policy, the amendments being more or 
less dictated by special cases as they had arisen, or by 
the demands of the public at large. 

The situation concerning the departmental rulings and 

regulations was likewise deplorable. Despite the fact that 

at each subsequent annual convention the Dominion Association 

15 

of Chartered Accountants and the Citizens* Research Insitute 

16 

of Canada passed resolutions demanding the publication of 
regulations in income tax matters. The Commissioner of Taxa¬ 
tion disregarded these demands, and established that auto¬ 
cratic administrative tradition which characterizes the whole 
period of Income War Tax Act. 

The Committee onPublic Accounts held some hearings in 
1925 on tH 0 administration of income tax under the pressure 
of Progressive PUP*s. Although the Commissioner revealed to 
them some disturbing facts, the parliamentarians were not per¬ 
mit-bed to look behind the curtain of secrecy, and they found 
out that neither did the Auditor-General enjoy the confidence 
of the Taxation Division. . W.C. Good, a Progressive, at¬ 
tempted in vain to secure assent from the House of Commons 
for the Committee on Public Accounts to investigate the admin¬ 
istration of war taxes. In June 19* 19^5 he Introduced a 
resolution in the House of Commons in this repeat, and substan¬ 
tiating its necessity, he vigorously attacked the Commissioner 


15. Ibidem . 

16. Gf. Minutes of Proceedings , Citizens* Research Institute 
of Canada, Annual Conventions, 1925-1931* 







- 






„ • . 

; ' - 

- : *;■ ;■ j; . , , d V. O .. • • •. . f: dd 

v .... t, .■ j f. .. r., :..r ^ - 'dd .. d ; 

■ 


}■ . ■■ ; * • ' ; ;; .■ ,! •'d d.-d ' 

I 

d' L«. ■ d " 

. ' ’ 

.d ' , . f ' dvd. 3 

- 

... • ' • ‘ • 

. 

. . 

. ■ d , . i. d .;. d‘. . ■ • orf j 

• r • ' 

' 

. . . 

' 

; 

. - - 

. 


■ 


. 




- 108 - 


of Taxation and the whole set-up. In particular he made the 
following charges; (l) that the Commissioner of Taxation 
was formerly a tariff officer of the Canadian Manufacturers * 
Association; (2) that not a single one of some 50,000 assess¬ 
ments made under the Business Profits Tax Act had been pressed 
in appeal; (5) that no member of parliament nor any committee 
of parliament had had the privilege of examining any original 
assessment or any modification thereof; (4) that the Commis¬ 
sioner under pressure from the public for hearing befbre the 
Board of Referees made representations to the government to 
have the board abolished; £5) that all the officers were out¬ 
side of the Civil Service Commission, and even the practice 
of advertising for applications was not followed; (6) that 
there was a considerable dissatisfaction with the administra¬ 
tion; and (7) that the assessment and collection tinder the 
Business Profits War Tax Act was not completed until 1925. 

Then he continued; 

f, The Commissioner has also admitted and defended 
deliberate delay in issuing the final notice of as¬ 
sessment in some cases where firms ?/ere in financial 
difficulties. By reasons of such delays there have 
been unknown and indeterminable losses of revenue; 
either by loss of interest or due to intervening 
bankruptcies # tt 

Despite his very sane proposal that the Auditor-General should 
have a power to audit the Taxation Division, the resolution 
was killed in the House, for, neither Conservatives nor Liber¬ 
als wished to have such an investigation carried into effect* 
The big scandal in the Department of Customs and Excises, 




~ 


. . ' • : ' ... 5 : - 

A • :< A ' ■ ■ 


. . 

, • • , , „ ■ 






* ■ 

■ £i f , ■ ■. ■ i£V::l J 

{ ' A ■ . ... .. ' ' < '■ 0 

: ’ • ■ - r ' A .•> *: ' . a ■' ’ 


a-; 


diA ‘;::o 




. • . ■ 

I i •. A A. : ;• ■ .. AwA V ■ e ; : A i u 


A 


• i ' d 

.. ' V 0 , I . £ 

: '.A' ■ 1> OiA ../odA 


'. u, ... .. c A -A/ ■ : ....:■ - 

■ 

■ 

; .. • ■ ■« 

., a ; ;; •' ■: d.-iA .; A; y A;t aa .aavaa aa 

.. 






.: '. l; 1 O ' o 








- 109 - 


divulged by Conservatives in the subsequent year, together 
with growing dissatisfaction over the income tax administra¬ 
tion, necessitated a complete reorganization of the existing 
agencies collecting revenues. The Department of National 
Revenue came into existence, having the authority to admin¬ 
ister all federal revenue acts, the income tax act inclusive. 

The Income Tax Controversy Goes On , 

The clamor of industry for cuts in war taxes which later 
wound up in a straight demqnd for abolition of income taxes 
was stimulated more by non-economic than economic aspects. 

The total revenue from war taxes exceeded the customs and ex¬ 
cises revenue only in 1922, that is, after the introduction 
of sales tax which was welcomed by bus5_ness and industry and 
lauded as superior to the income tax. The benevolent admin¬ 
istration of both major war taxes, the income tax and business 
profits tax, removed any hardships which the taxes could effect, 
if administered rigorously. Albeit it is true that the Cana¬ 
dian fiscal system as a whole was becoming rapidly a serious 
problem to the taxpayer, the income tax per se did not hold 
at that time such an important place as to cause any serious 
hampering of economic activity. 

The explanation of the opposition toward the income tax 
during the twenties on the side of business and industry rests, 
perhaps, with the unsettled social and political conditions at 
home and with the commercial policy of the United States. On 


















■ 

. 

0 

' 






, 

. 

■ 


. 


. 


■ 




■ • ' . • ' r - : 


* 





, 




. 



' 


. 





110 


the one hand, the income tax represented a major plank of 
the fast-rising Progressive Party, which swept away the old 
political parties from the provincial scene in Ontario and 
in the West. After the federal elections in 1J2± it became 
a balancing force in the Dominion Parliament, threatening 
the walls of protection. At the same time, the Canadian 
businessman looked with envy to the south, where the new 
Republican administration was favouring his fellow- entre¬ 
preneur and competitor with tax cuts and highly protective 
tariffs. Small wonder that he expected a similar treatment 
from his government. 

In 1921 the drive for tax reduction was well under way. 

The Canadian Manufacturers’ Association waited upon the Dom¬ 
inion Government towards the end of February and submitted 
numerous recommendations in respect of the government’s fis¬ 
cal policy. It demanded in particular that the duplication 
of taxation between the Dominion and the provinces should be 
avoided as much as possible, that the income tax should not 
be collected from farmers, and repealed as regards to corpora¬ 
tions. They also proposed an increase of the sales tax as to 
make up for the loss of revenue. Similar demands were reitera¬ 
ted by a joint conference of the Dominion Retail Merchants’ 
Association, the Canadian Credit Men’s Trust Association, the 
Wholesale Grocers’ Association, and the C.M.A* held a month 
later in Toronto. But they achieved very little, for* the gov¬ 
ernment, expecting elections, did not want to introduce any 


« 

. ■- . > •. • : v . v. 

. 

:■ • •. • ■ 

. 

■ 

* 1*80 ‘ 

' 

J . - 

- , . ■ • . b«> ;,>JL0V S) 

■ • ; ,, ; , • ; . 1 

■' 

^ ... ‘ ■ . - , ' 

. . . , ■ 

■ 



- Ill 


major fiscal changes, and they had to satisfy themselves 
with the termination of Business Profits War Tax Act, 

The abortive suggestion to replace corporate taxes by 
an increase of sales tax was met with the opposition of the 
farm press. The pre-election and election controvery as to 
who does pay taxes, and particularly income tax, became a 
favorite topic of The Financial Post , and one of the arguments 
against the income tax, repeated year after year, when the 
budget v/as brought down. Behind the argument was the implicit 
invective that the agrarian group defended the income tax 
from purely egoistic reasons, for it fell mostly on other 
classes. 


TABLE III. 

Income Tax Paid by Individuals and Corporations 
by Occupational Groups, Fiscal Years 1921 - 22 , 1922 -J 


Occupational 

1921-1922 

1922-1925 

Group 

Ho. of 

Taxpayers 

Amount 

Collected 

Ho. of 

Taxpayers 

Amount 

Collected 

Individuals: 





Farmers 

Professionals 

Employees 

Merchants 

Ma nuf acturers 

All others 
Unclassified 

18,81)1 
17 A 59 
207,263 

23,716 

1,629 

21,966 

1,299,104 

2,642,585 

17,123,446 

7,140,101 

2,472,549 

9,084,549 

824,788 

8,220 

19,023 

208,360 

21,168 
1,732 
22,661 

473,049 

2,663,900 

15,529,949 

5,474,256 

890,261 

7,355,971 

Total 

290,584 

40,471,007 

281,164 

51,689,393 

Corporations 

Less Refunds 

8,286 

38,863,758 

994,458 

6,010 

28,022,145 

MET TOTAL 


78,684,355 


59,711,538 

Source: D.B.S., 

Income Tax 

Collection Statistics. 















0 . 




Q 




0 












112 


As Table III shows, the bulk of individual income tax 
revenue came from the incomes of wage and salary earners, 
simply because their incomes were reported to the govern¬ 
ment, and fully assessed. In all other occupational groups 
tax evasion and avoidance must have been a common practice, 
for there is no other explanation for the exceedingly low 
number of merchants, professionals, and farmers as well, pay¬ 
ing the tax. Evidently, the argument used against the farmers 1 
representatives was one-sided, and might have been applied to 
the protectionist business group as well. 

The simple evidence of tax evasion was often used by the 
opponents of Progressives who defended the tax against their 
suggestions of increasing the tax revenue. The editor of the 
Financial Post wrote in May, 19^55 

u The graduated income tax has been one of the 
most equitable of all forms of taxation. No doubt 
it is - in theory. But it is one thing to impose 
the tax and another to collect it. And this is 
particularly the case where every man is his own 
assessor.... As a matter of fact, experience in 
Canada Is showing that when it comes to a conscience 
tax, the average conscience is a pretty conventional 
affair.... A great deal is heard from farmers and 
more from the politicians who cater to them about 
the tariff and other tax burdens but the figures 
indicate that the wage and salary earners are really 
paying the levy and making no fuss about it. They 
and the corporations are supplying the great bulk 
of the tax funds to finance the country... Canada 
v/ants a tax which will be equitable in operation as 
well as in theory. The income tax as it is now opera¬ 
ting is not such a tax. 11 17 

Along with these popular objections to the income tax, 
there v/ere from time to time echoed more specific strictures. 


17 . The Financial Post, May 4, 192 ^ 










- 113 - 


as to its adverse economic effects. Mr. John C. MacFarland 
of Canadian Electric Co., Toronto, contended in his address 
before the Second Canadian Tax Conference in 1924 that the 
income tax represented double taxation upon those businesses 
already subject to sales tax legislation, that it discrimina¬ 
ted between types of corporate enterprise, that it lacked 

provisions for averaging of business losses and profits, and 

18 

that the administration was very imperfect. But the best 
arguments against the tax were put forward by Mr. E.B. Ryck- 
man. Conservative member of parliament, during the budget 
debate of 1923 * At that time, the Progressive Party, dis¬ 
satisfied with the cuts in customs duties, proposed an amend¬ 
ment to the budget in respect to tariff reductions and suggested 
a readjustment and extension of income tax as to bear more 

19 

heavily on unearned incomes. Mr . Ryckman adopted the arguments 
advanced against the income tax by Mr* Otto Kahn, a New York 
banker, namely, that the tax drives capital out of constructive 
use, lessens the incentive to venturing, restrains prosperity 
and expansion and reduces saving, and he added to them its ad¬ 
verse effects upon production and employment. In his belief 

20 

the income tax was just an “intolerable nuisance”. 

The income tax would not have suffered much from its 

18 . Canadian Tax Conference, Second Annual Convention held 
under the Auspices of the Citizens* Research Institute of Canada, 
Montreal, Sept. 10 - 12 , 1924. Minutes of Proceedings . 


19 * See Mr. Forke’s amendment. Debates, 1923 9 p. 2781. 

20. ibid., 1923, p. 2913. 






. 

;.o' f ' '/..si' '• ■j :: c , ,^iv n-iCi^cf 

ii • t 

. ■ . . ... ' ...... . • " • 

. ■ 

■ . ...... ... • ■' • ' a: :£ £ 

. 

. 

. 

t 

. . ■ : ' ", ' * < 

■ . Cy ! « € '■ 

. 

» ' 

■ ' . . > ' 

....... ... M 

X ; ■ - 1 

. 

jj.y • , n■■.; ; .£■ .. • .■ '■«■. yK- yzS' 

4 

• 5 . : .. a ., .vy- ;($ : 

. . . , ' ■■ 




- n4 - 


critique. Many defects could be easily corrected or elimina¬ 
ted by more efficient administration and by enactment of 
similar provisions to those already in force in the United 
States. But serious danger was coming from the general 
complaints of heavy taxation and nearly a popular demand for 
an over-all reduction of taxation. The Progressive Party was 
demanding reductions in customs duties, and every year gained 
some relief from the Liberal government dependent upon their 
support. The other parties again urged cuts in direct taxes, 
and the Minister of Finance was compelled to give up some 
ground, too. To be sure, the Progressive members of parli¬ 
ament also spoke in favor of extension of personal exemptions 

21 

and allowances for dependents, and due to gradual exceptions 
of incomes of persons in the lower brackets the tax was losing 
its universal character. In 1926 only 209#500 persons paid 
income tax as against 290,000 in 1922 . The amendments of 1926 
exempted another 90#000 taxpayers so that in the subsequent 
year the number of taxpayers hit its lowest mark, a total of 

1x6,029. 

The agitation for lower tax rates, stimulated by two sub¬ 
sequent revisions in the United States, remained until 1926 
of no effect. Mr. Joseph E. Howes of Toronto complained at 
the second Canadian T a x Conference that the high rates deterred 
the flow of capital into Canada because of lower rates in the 

21 . The most outspoken advocate of high personal exemptions 
was Joseph Archanbault, member for Chambly and Vercheres, Que. 




: ' ; ~ ' ' 

" 

. 


• . : ■ J ri ■ 

. , ; • I ' ' ' 

- 

:. * • .. ■ *v :: ■ • 


. t 

• c 




, .• • .. 



- 115 - 


United States, and the Conference went on record in favor 
of reducing the Canadian rates to the American level. 22 
However, the reduction of the t&x rates represented a dan¬ 
gerous point in view of the avowed opposition of the Pro¬ 
gressive Party, and the Ministers proposal in this direction 
could easily have meant an end of the government. Only when 
the Progressive Party was fading away during the short-lived 
fifteenth parliament, the Minister of Finance decided to in¬ 
troduce a revamped scale of tax rates. In fact, it was done 
as a gesture to the business strongly lobbying abolition of 
the tax. 

During 1926 an obscure organization styling itself the 
Retail Trade Bureau of Canada, a dissident group of the larger 
organization, the Retail Merchants * Association of Canada, was 
in the vgn of a vigorous and persistent campaign for the repeal 
of the income tax, and the bureau had won some influential 
people in parliament. The editor of The Financial Post , who 
usually correctly voiced the opinion of business interests in 
Canada, did not go as far as the Bureau, but reminded the Min¬ 
ister there was a very widely held opinion that nothing would 

benefit the nation as a whole, more than a big cut in the sur- 

23 

tax now charged on large incomes in Canada. 


22. See footnote 18. 

23. The Financial Post . March 26, 1926, 





- cl I - 

. 

r;. •.*. •. :. • ■ 

■ . -s, . 1 ■ V ■' 

■ ■ ■ • ' ■ 

• ' • ■ • • r ■ 

. •; ’ - ' 5 

i .5 . ■> ■ r • . : ' 

: : / .. . • :/ ' ■ / ; : .■> • .. i ' :" V ' >! --' 

v;i>noolo R8*": i.‘. u/v, oci 000,1003 b oo 

-ild 

‘i.[ 03 vl : C ,.0 . .o ;lo o 1:1 v o ‘Ju 0 C o u :! olaPI \Iii oliO 

; ‘ 3 

1 ; ' i ’ t • * '*i ‘ 

1/ o:'■ ■ v f > n too * i. o on mo-. y- 1 •“ ■ iu nov odd al 

' * 

r 

, . ' " ' ‘ •: 1 4 ” c 

' . i) ■ ■ fBU 

• •-.*'• - ir.Mi-j xa.Ztt±:;/> i. X-fl vfo ooeil 

, 

n , ■:»; O' • ■ . :> :: ■> vO ii OOJ 

• - • 

* 

* , ' "iO.:" •: . 6 ■ Vi 


1,0 1 Oi i.ki> UlVv S/fT 





- 116 - 


When the new pates were announced, the Progressive group 
through their leader, Mr, Porke, expressed definite dissatis¬ 
faction. He warned the government that despite the lobbying 
against the tax carried on in the lobbies of the parliament 
during the budget debate, he and his followers were firm 
believers and supporters of the income tax. Their resentment 
of the budget proposals was indirectly instrumental in ending 
the Liberal Ministry. 

At the time, when the sixteenth parliament assembled the 
Progressive Party was gone. Some of its members joined the 
ranks of the Liberals, some were defeated, and only a small 
group of the representatives of the United Farmers of Alberta, 
since then known as the Ginger Group, survived, and carried on 
the doctrinaire part of the Progressives’ programme. The 10 
per cent cut in the tax rates introduced in 192? evidenced a 
new attitude of the government. The tax was seriously chal¬ 
lenged by most influential opponents, foreseen by Sir Thomas 
White, namely, the provincial governments. 

Early in November, 1927, the first post-war Dominion-Prov¬ 
incial Conference convened to discuss and to reassess inter¬ 
governmental relations in all avenues of their activities. Fis¬ 
cal matters occupied one of the prominent places on the program 
of the conference. Since the war the provincial governments 
were continually called upon to provide new services in the 
fields for which they were constitutionally responsible. The 



- 117 - 


governments struggled with serious difficulties in obtaining 
necessary revenues, for their taxation field was not only 
restricted by the letter of the B.N.A. Act but also by the 
extensive direct taxes imposed by the Dominion Government. 

During the discussion of the fiscal affairs the Province of 
British Columbia and Manitoba made a strong plea demanding 
the Dominion Government to vacate the field of income tax in 
favour of provinces. Oddly enough, the case in this matter 

24 

Y/as presented by the Premier of Manitoba, Mr. John Bracken, 
who, in a way, was a product of the western agrarian movement. 

The move of the provinces against the income tax stimula¬ 
ted the campaign of its opponents from business ranks in the 
same direction. The Retail Trade Bureau of Canada intensified 
its agitation for the abolition of the tax with hearty support 
of all those who believed that the state could be min with one ! s 
neighbor * 1 2 * 4 5 s taxes, and kept on repeating the old objections 
against the tax. It put forward that the tax forced Canada 
into competition with other countries v/here no income tax ex¬ 
isted, or where the tax was light; it was omy on© of nine 


2k. Mr. John Bracken, Premier of Manitoba, submitted to 
the Conference the following five propositions: 

1) that tho provincial revenues are inelastic; 

2) that the entry of the Dominion government into the field 
of direct taxation increases the difficulty of the provinces; 

5) that there is urgent need for more clearly defining 
the poY/ers of the provinces to impose taxation and the taxes 
they can impose; 

4) that Section 92 of the B.N.A. Act should be amended in 
order to assign specifically certain taxes either direct or in¬ 
direct 5 

5) that the payment of increased subsidies should be provi¬ 
ded for, or some percentage of the Dominion receipts from the 
income tax should be paid over to the provinces. 







. 









I. • ■ 





r 





- 118 - 


sources of government tax revenues; it placed a double tax 
on dividends; it discouraged investment of capital; it pena¬ 
lized personal enterprise; it lent itself to evasion; it 
taxed profits and allowed nothing for losses; it opened the 
way for corruption. The propaganda became so intensive that 
some businessmen felt necessary to counter it. The Montreal 
Board of Trade in November 19^7 unanimously reaffirmed their 
belief after very careful examination of all methods of taxa¬ 
tion that the income tax was socially just and economically 

26 

sound. The Financial Post ran an editorial in February, 1928, 
censuring the campaign of the Trade Bureau, and defending the 
tax. The editor v/arned that u the campaign for the abolition 
of the income tax may do more harm than good,” and then he 
continued; 

*The income tax has become part of our tax system 
during the war and is to that extent a war measure. 

Some day when Canada has practically recovered from 
the financial after-effects of the war it may be pos¬ 
sible to drop the income tax entirely. But although 
the war is over, we are still paying for it directly 
in annual payments of $ 125 , 000,000 a year for interest 
on war debt and pensions, and indirectly in other gov¬ 
ernmental expenditures. The signing of armistice did 
not make it possible to end war taxation... 11 27 

Dismissing the charges of the Retail Trade Bureau with a 

brief remark that they wo uld apply to any fcrm of taxation. 


25 . Cf. The Financial Post , Feb. 10, 1928 . 

26. Cf. Citizens* Research Institute of Canada, Canadian 
Tax Conference, 19^9, Minutes of Proceedings , p. ij.7• 

27 . The Financial Post, February 10, 1928* 











• I, ■ 

■ ' 


' l 3 t 

?; • ■ : < ■ 


a ,u ' o rt .,, 


; .-ii . v;.;: , nlnrorf n ■ o; ; h 

* 

' : ■ • \ . ■ 

■ ■ 7<~ ' • ' "' : 

T.Zfs 1o i J *:i ' • iv ' ' 

■ 

, • • *:■ ' ' : ■ 

• ' ■ t ■. • ;[j [ . 


wj 


' or:.: on 

■ 




i r , v. • / ’ o 


. ' : ,,:r v 

:' r : ■, .1V o; [ 




r '■ 


_ 

• ; r . • ' - 

, 

r 

■ 















- 119 - 


and. that they affect chiefly the administration, which could 
and should be improved, the Editor concluded: n The Minister 
of Finance will not now abolish the income tax, but he will, 
if business demands it, further reduce it and improve its 
operation." 

The combined pressure of the provim es and some business 
groups induced the government to put the question squarely 
before Parliament and the country. Mr. Robb, the Liberal 
Minister of Finance, delivering his budget message on Feb¬ 
ruary 16 , 1928, introduced the income tax reductions with the 
following words: 

n As an added encouragement to business, as a 
measure of relief to taxpayers, and to ihose prov¬ 
inces where local income taxes are levied, it is 
proposed that the Dominion shall continue gradually 
to lighten the load in the income tax field. Today 
we are able to go a step further and to propose 
that the income tax payable by individuals be re¬ 
duced by an additional ten per cent.... In the case 
of corporations and joint stock companies it is 
proposed that the tax be eight per cent. 1 * 28 

It is rather doubtful, if the government expected the re¬ 
action with which the proposal was met in the Parliament as well 
as in the country. The ensuing budget debate made it abundantly 
clear that if there were any differences in regard of income 
tax, they pertained more or less to the details and imperfec¬ 
tions of the law, but definitely not to the principle per se . 

It is worthwhile to point out that the Conservative opposition, 
although censuring the government for a rather light treatment 


28. Debates, 1928 , p. 511 














* 

' i' 




•or: ;i 













- 120 


of tax evasion always supported frankly the amendments intro¬ 
duced by the minister* Mr. R.C. Matthews, Conservative mem¬ 
ber of parliament for Toronto East Centre, in a constructive 
critique of the income tax clarified explicitly the position 
of his party when stating: n We have not asked for its abo¬ 
lition, but we submit that its application should be fair, 

29 

effectual, and equitable.” What the Conservatives advocated 
amounted to retaining the tax with lower rates and lower per¬ 
sonal exemptions as to eliminate the charge against it being 
a class levy. In this point they mainly differed from the 
Progressives and some Liberals. 

The governments intent to drop the tax, however, alarmed 
most the remnants of the Progressive party in Parliament. 

They spoke at length to the subject during the preceding 
debate on the Address from the Throne, when they got even with 
strictures of the Retail Trade Review . But when they heard 
the passing-bell of the income tax, they rallied to its de¬ 
fence regardless of party lines. Mr. A. Speakman (Prog., Red 
Deer) delivered an eloquent defence of the income tax on behalf 
of the ”Ginger Group” of the U.F.A., and doing so, he lived up 
to the tradition of his predecessor. Dr. Michael Clark. After 
having rejected the invectives of the press and of some members 
of parliament that they ob jected to income tax reductions because 

29 . ibid. , 1928 , p. 789* Mr. Bennett (later Viscount) the 
leader of the" Conservative opposition, took strong exception to 
double taxation of dividends. As a firm proponent of the turn¬ 
over tax, he considered the income tax to b© a colossal failure 
in Canada. (Cf. ibid., 1928 , p. 1250 . 











’ll ' 




, 






ax- a 


. r,:: a 










t.i-J ' 




■ 




OY. .. 

' 


« ; <. . 

* 



- 121 


they and their constituents did not come within its scope, 
he went on to speak for the tax on its fiscal merits. He 
pointed out firstly, that the country had yet to pay for 
the war expenditure in the form of debt interest, pensions 
ani aftercare of returned men which amounted to a $l61j. million 
annual liability. Touching upon the old spirit of National 
Policy he reminded the government of its duty to carry on 
the country 1 s development, particularly in the West, which 
was to be abandoned due to the lack of necessary funds, and 
charged that it forced the western farmer, afflicted by 
drought, to contribute their share of carrying on the affairs 
of the country. ”Eow will they look”, he asked, n at this 
reduction in the tax that brings no hardship to anyone?” And 
then he addressed himself to the Liberal government benches; 

”Year after year we have heard that the Liberal 
party is the party of low tariffs, and that one of 
their missions is to strike from the limbs of this 
nation the shackles of undue protection and to save 
us from the commercial interests which might exploit 
us.,.. If you eliminate the income tax and. reduce 
the sales tax, you are driven more and more to this 
position from which you cannot escape - that to carry 
on the affairs of the country, you must maintain a 
fairly substantial tariff or customs tax; there is no 
alternative. What then of policies of the Liberal 
party? Are they prepared to accept that as the 
logical outcome of the attitude taken by the party as 
a whole?.... Yet that is the logical and inevitable 
result of this reduction and the eventual elimination 
of any alternative form of taxation.” JO 

Fr. Fansher (Prog. Lambton) moved a subamendment to the 

budget, seconded by Mr. Evans, that ”the government proposes 


30 . ibid. , 1928, p. 63k « 





















- 122 - 


further reductions in the income tax, thus making a serious 
departure from the principle of direct taxation; that the 
proposed revision of customs tariff is inadequate to bring 
effective relief to the consuming public, and that the sales 

31 

tax on the necessaries of life has not been eliminated 11 * 

Like arguments in favor of income tax and against the revoca¬ 
tion of it were echoed by Progressive and Labor representa¬ 
tives throughout the debate. 

The Liberal-Progressives felt quite uneasy because of the 
allocutions of their former fellow-in-arms. Mr. J.L • Brown (Lib, 
Lisgar) frankly admitted that it was a matter of great re¬ 
gret to him when he heard it announced that the income tax 
was to be reduced. n I have expressed myself 11 , he stated, n on 

that matter in no uncertain terms in the past, and I have not 

52 

seen fit to change my mind” . 

Although w© do not intend to survey the kaleidoscope of 
public opinion which more or less closely reflected the speech¬ 
es in the House of Commons, we may single out two stands 
taken by financial journals. The Financial Post supported 
the government*s move to leave the personal income tax to the 
provinces, but strongly recommended to keep the corporation tax 
in the Dominion fiscal system. The Financial Times , on the 


31 . ibid., 1928, p. 705 ® Hote the different attitude of 
both progressive speakers toward the sales tax. 


32 . ibid. , 1928, p. 1037 











■ - 



i'j 




«. \ l . ■ • • • 0 • 

; 


t • ' -n 


: . orfI ■ ‘ ' - : 


,.•» i rfc 


a; v; 


V>v:i. ■ .i. ........ , 


?■'£ . . : ■ ' 




. 


/ , i i ;. 




C : • ; 


'• ' ' 

■ ' ‘ - ' 

* ... . ;■ t;'. ‘ ... v ; V:a:L' ;ij 

".. . , ..... ' . .v ! ' 

■.. •.. ' : ' • ' t 

' i , g 


. ' 

S if i 


a ' 


- 









-123- 


other hand, stood for a federal income tax as it was, saying 
that the tax was wholly suitable for Canada, and censured 
the governments policy of leaving this field io the provinces. 

The last v/ords of the debate were those of the Prime Min¬ 
ister himself who was bound to clear up the governments stand 
on the income tax. After a long review of its fiscal history 
under his ministry he admitted that the government was in¬ 
clined to drop the tax on personal income. However, in view 
of the preceding debate he felt it necessary to assure the 
house that such a plan had been now entirely abandoned. n I may 
say”, he emphasized, u that if we ever entertained an idea of 
giving up the individual income tax to the provinces or for 
any other purposes, certainly the discussion that has taken 
place in the house during this debate will preclude anything 

33 

of that kind for the future 

Thus, the budget debate of 1928 has definitely solved the 
place of the income tax in the federal revenue sys tem. Hence¬ 
forth the attention of the Ministers of Finance has been con¬ 
centrated on ensuring its effective functioning, which in¬ 
cluded, among other things, the elimination of duplication of 
Dominion and provincial or municipal income taxes. This prob¬ 
lem played a prominent role in its further development during 
the thirties, and it has remained open up to th© present time. 


33* Ibid, , 


1928 , p. 1281 









- 12k - 


The Fiscal and Economic Aspects of the Income Tax During 

the Twenties"" 

Despite considerable criticism of its adverse effects 
upon the nation*s economy, the income tax hardly exercised 
any such influence during the twenties. The short-lived 
primary postwar depression between 1920 and 1921+ was more or 
less brought about by the dislocation of the world economies 
consequent upon the war. Albeit it might be argued that the 
rigid penalties, coupled with an increase of tax rates which 
were introduced in 1920, accentuated the slump through their 
influence upon business expectations, the magnitude of this 
impact seems to have been almost negligible as compared with 
the external, non-fiscal factors. 

After the deliberate introduction of a double levy upon 
dividends in 1926 the manufacturing interests repeated year 
after year that the tax discouraged the volume of investment - 
domestic as well as foreign - in Canada. But a glance at 

34 

Table J reveals that the amount of dividends paid either to 
non-residents or to Canadian investors increased considerably 
between 1926 and 1929. The argument was later dismissed by 
Mr. Bennett, one of its chief proponents in parliament stating 
that n in other countries where the argument has been disregar¬ 
ded there has been no such result. People continue to invest 
where they think it safe and where they can secure under 


34 - See Statistical Appendix, p* 268 . 





r 


. : : 






V 


froLiih: m 




r 




' 


r 




/X ' X . t i 
l:J. ■ ' 


• • ' 


; 


a o. 




.0 


• . . . - • t : . ’ - - ' : •' ' 

\ o 6S; .1' . X ' C-'\x - ‘ • ' -x:-:; 'ICiTrB 

: . • ■;; . - .. ■ ; , ' ., .. > ■ :: ■ ’• X ' '•• • * '■ ■■ : 

. . 




0 • 0jtO 




' • ■ r c. 




( , a ; ' . • 



. ' ' < 












- 125 - 


reasonably sound conditions the largest income. 11 

The fiscal importance of the tax presents a slightly 
different picture. After the first two rather discouraging 
results of 1919 192.0 the combined yield of the personal 

and corporate income tax was $46 millions in 1921 ($64 mil¬ 
lions inclusive business profits tax). In the following year 
it hit the high mark of $78 millions ($101 millions business 
profits tax inclusive) which remained unsurpassed until 1937* 
Despite the liberal exemptions granted year after year during 
the latter period the tax maintained a relatively stable 

yield - around 15 per cent of the total tax revenue, stick- 

^ 36 

ing closely to an average of $ 5 ® millions. In fact, the 
revenue from income tax which stood in 19^7 at tbe $4? million 
level was increasing steadily since then until it has reached 
the present billion dollar average. 

It was rather unfortunate that the Liberal government 
did not seize upon the opportunity after 1925 to consolidate 
the heavy public debt, when all conditions favored such a 
move. The economy would easily have sustained considerably 
higher income taxes, which could have helped to retire the 
nation*s obligations, and a skilful refunding of the rest, ad¬ 
vocated by the Conservative opposition, would have prepared 
the country for the great depression which fell upon the naticn 


35 • Debates , 1934 » P» 4131 • 
36 . See Appendix, Table B . 










j 


i 1 


r: ;r U 


rj ■;IT 






- 126 - 


as soon as the new decade began. 

The Income Tax During the Period of 1950 - 1939 » 

The time-honoured tradition of bringing down a budget 
with a wide range of tax cuts was upheld by the Liberal gov¬ 
ernment also in 1930 * Mr. Dunning, who assumed the finance 
portfolio after the death of J.A. Robb, announced in his 
budget speech a host of exemptions from the incoma tax 
designed to ensure the return of the government. Firstly, 
the allowance for dependents ($500) was granted in respect 
to all dependent parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, 
sons and daughters incapable of self-support on account of 
mental or physical infirmity, and not otherwise provided 
for. That put on an equal level all persons supporting 
close relatives with single persons and widows and widowers 
maintaining a self-contained domestic establishment. 

Secondly, donations to churches, schools or hospitals 
in Canada operated as such and not for private benefit or 
gain became tax free up to 10 per cent of a taxpayers 1 in¬ 
come • 

Thirdly, the income of cooperatives was exempted regard¬ 
less if they were marketing produce of their members or pur¬ 
chasing supplies and equipment for them, provided that the 
value of merchandise sold to non-members did not exceed 20 per 
cent of the value of goods sold to members. 

Fourthly, the government and other like annuities were 







' 






' : ‘ . 1 . > ; ; ' •: . • ! •* ■ 1 ' "/ 


: i ■ ■ 

1 

. 




1 : ... o 




• ■. ■ .' : . . 

■ 


. 


‘ • . , . • 

. . • • ' - i . ■ I V 

. ‘ . ' v’,. / .: . ■' • ‘. ' . ; ' ; • ' .• . 








■ ■ / * . . .. : ■ 

. 




- : 


■ ! ■ • ■. ■ ■" .: .. , -■ •:: 


« 


' 






' 

* 

. 


■ 








. ..... > < 


' 








' • ' 

■ 

. 



- 127 - 


made tax free up to $5>000. 

In addition, the amendments included some provisions res¬ 
pecting the corporate tax. The dividends paid to the parent 
company became tax exempt, provided that the tax was paid by 
the subsidiary company, and that the subsidiary was not ter¬ 
minating its business* In the case of the winding up of a 
subsidiary, the undistributed profit on hand was subjected to 
the tax. Family corporations v/ere permitted to elect within 
thirty days after incurring tax liability to be taxed either 
as corporations or as a partnership, but with a proviso that 
the corporation irrespective of its election became liable to 
the corporate tax upon the share of its non-resident members* 
This provision was inserted into the law in order to block tax 
evasion in cases where one member of the family directed the 
affairs of the company, and paid taxes on his share, whereas 
other members could escape the tax by acquiring non-resident 
status. Similarly, the non-resident directors, officers or 
employees of a company carrying on business in Canada, who 
owned or controlled a majority of Its voting stock, ?/@re liable 
to tax upon their dividends and interest, as well as upon their 
salaries. All amendments became effective as of January 1, 

37 

1929 . 

At this time the Minister of Finance cautiously evaded any 
extensive discussion of the unemployment problem. Prior to 

37* Statutes of Canada, 20-21 Geo. V, c. 2J4. 






- 128 - 


his budget message, the Premiers of Manitoba and Alberta 
made some representations to him demanding the government 
to vacate the income tax field as to enable the provincial 
governments to meet the rising costs of unemployment relief, 
but the federal government could hardly risk a similar move 
in view of near general elections. Even the moderate in¬ 
crease of tariff rates on steel and iron which was proposed 
as to protect the iron industry elicited criticism from 
western progressives. As W. Irwin (Prog,, Wetaskiwin) poin¬ 
ted out, judging by the budget proposals the people of Can¬ 
ada were only to decide in the approaching election v/hether 
they considered either Mr, King or Mr. Bennett as the better 
man to carry into effect the same protectionist policy in 

38 

the Dominion. 

Generally, the unemployment problem was belittled in its 
early stages, and particularly the opposition believed that 
a good dose of protectionism could solve the crisis. Mr. 

R.B. Bennett was lavishly giving pledges that, if elected, 
he would end unemployment and restore business confidence. 

59 

Since the Liberal party could not advance anything better, 
the bewildered nation decided to follow the impressive leader 

38. Cf. Debates, 1930 . p. 181*1. 

39. The intent of Mr. Dunning to transfer the income tax 
field to the provinces, if effected, would have had similar 
adverse consequences as did the Conservative tariff policy. 






, A 




. ' 


or:-. v o; 
P l .: :o 


V o 


0 c; 


p 






' 


c i :.: a . . . 




- 


• i r ■ , 


./< c , v 


poo 






i •; .. 




on:: :c 




- 129 - 


of the Conservatives. 

Income Tax under the Bennett Regime . 

Bennett misjudged the possibilities of protectionism as 
well as the peculiarities of Canadian economy and its instru¬ 
ments. Protectionism, if applied to a young economy during 
the upswing, may stimulate establishment of new industries 
and strengthen those already established. But during the down¬ 
swing its effects upon the distribution of national income 
cannot be outweighed by the size of employment it ensures in 
sheltered industries. This was the ease in Canada during the 
depression. The secondary industries of Central Canada 
shifted the burden of the depression to the primary industries, 
mainly agriculture, wood and pulp, and fishing, located in 
the West or in the Maritimes, which suffered most. Due to 
their key position in the economy, they carried with them 
the creditors, and the rest of the economy as well, into the 
depths of depression. 

During the crisis the federal government Y/as faced with a 
twofold problem. On the one hand there was the necessity of 
countering the doY/nswing in general, and on the other hand 
there was the secondary problem of distributing the load of 
depression more equitably among the various sectors of the 
economy. Both of them required bold economic and fiscal poli¬ 
cies, which the rank and file as well as the government of the 
Conservative party were considering as too risky. They preferred 






- 150 - 


to stick to the orthodox line of balanced budgets, low gov- 

4o 

eminent expenditures, and a "sound" money policy. These 
principles were adhered to even after the rest of the world 
departed from them, and only in 1955 , when there were already 
signs of an upswing, the Prime Minister surprisingly reverted 
to the ^Roosevelt line 11 . 

It must be admitted that the Dominion government was handi¬ 
capped in meeting the crisis. The question of constitutional 
responsibilities for unemployment relief rested with the prov¬ 
incial governments. The absence of an effective central bank¬ 
ing system discouraged adoption of inflationary measures out 
of fear that they could become uncontrollable. The tax system 
had been impaired by the previous administration by shifting 
the emphasis to indirect taxation. In removing these defects 
the Bennett ministry were successful and strengthened the 
economic and political instruments of the Dominion. The Stat¬ 
ute of Westminster, the establishment of a central bank, and 
strengthening of the position of the income tax in the federal 
revenue structure represent positive achievements of Bennett’s 
era. 


40. The Financial Post, was very critical of the views 
of J.M. Keynes. For~exampie, in the issue of April 2, 1931# 
it referred to him as follows; u John Maynard Keynes, the 
British economist, has succeeded in maintaining himself in the 
spotlight ever since the end of the war. On some occasions 
he has done it by imaginative thinking lacking in soundness. 
Kow he has given the public something to talk about in his 
statement that when a man saves five shillings he robs another 
man of a day’s work. 









■ r 






■ < 






3 ": 



! ' 




' ■. : 11 B 




■ ■ ■ 


o 





- 151 - 


Mr* Bennett, who assumed the portfolio of finsnce in ad¬ 
dition to his duties as Prime Minister, soon found out that 
the high tariff policy neither solved the economic difficul¬ 
ties nor ensured the inflow of revenue to the treasury. In 
his budget message of 193 ^ b. 0 was compelled to revert to the 
inland revenue sources, and particularly to the income tax. 

To fulfill his ambition of giving Canada a modern fiscal sys¬ 
tem he introduced a redrafted income tax bill elaborated by 
the Commissioner of Taxation and his staff which, as its name 
indicated, were to become a permanent part of the federal fis¬ 
cal system. The resolutions increased the tax rates. The 
corporation rate went up to 10 per cent, and the personal rates 
were graduated from 1 per cent on the first $1,000 of taxable 
income up to 25 per cent on incomes in excess of $25,000. The 
bill contained some improvements, especially in taxation of 
corporate incomes* However, the bill was Y/ithdrawn later on, 
and only the increase in corporation tax rate ?/as put into 
force. 

The opposition parties bitterly attacked the budget, and, 
as the debate proceeded, the strictures v/ere assuming a form 
of personal invective. The seemingly low rate on higher income 
brackets was the centre of interest. Hr. King compared the 
principle with feudalism when the seigneurs were exempted from 
all public tributes save the feudal aids, and Fernand Rinfret 
(Lib. St. James) accused the Prime Minister of endeavoring to 



- 132 - 


41 

detax his fortune, W.R. Motherwell, the former Minister of 
Agriculture in King’s ministry, fingered to the government 
benches: u Here v/e have the government which admittedly in¬ 
cludes at least four millionaires, possibly multimillionaires, 
sitting around the council tables and trying their best to 

withhold millions from the treasury by lo?/ering the income tax 

42 

on multimillionaires. n 

The result was that when the bill came into the Committee 
for the first reading Mr, Bennett, deeply hurt by the invec¬ 
tives, v/ithdrew the resolutions save the increase of corpora¬ 
tion tax rate . 

Under the impact of depression the government revenues suf¬ 
fered considerably, and the percentage ratio was shifted to 
internal taxes. In 1934 the revenue from customs duties ap¬ 
proached the lowest point since 1910 , netting $66 millions, 
only five millions more than the sales tax or the income tax. 
Both internal taxes were altered frequently during the depres¬ 
sion which prevented their yield from falling. Mr. Rhodes, 
who relieved the Prime Minister in the portfolio of finance in 
1932 , introduced many amendments during his tenure of office 
which affected all important factors of the income tax. The 


lil. The Prime Minister promises anything; he promised moon¬ 
beams and prosperity for this country, so I say if instead of 
doing that he had told the people....*In my first budget to 
the house I shall tax fuel, I shall tax tea, I shall tax oranges, 

I shall raise the sales tax, I shall put a tax on small cheques, 

... and when I have don© all that andhave received from the 
humble people of the country more money than I need I shall de¬ 
tax myself by 25 per cent of my income. n Debates, 1931 » p*2278 ff.) 


42. Debates, 1931 , p. 2622. 







o 





6 'J r il 0 : 




') •;> 






O ‘ 








■ua J; 






o. 




- 135 - 


following is a summary of his alterations. 

In 1932 * the personal exemptions were lowered to $ 2,400 
and $1,200 for married and single persons respectively, and 
the allowance for annuity income was cut from $5,000 to 
$ 1 , 200 . In the case of personal incomes, the deduction of 
20 per cent from the tax granted in 1927 and 1928 was re¬ 
pealed and an additional surtax was imposed on net incomes 
in excess over $ 5 * 000 . The corporation tax rate was increased 
to 11 per cent. These amendments were applicable to 1931 
incomes * 

The resolutions announced in the budget speech in the fol¬ 
lowing year ( 1933 ) broadened the tax further. Personal exemp¬ 
tions were reduced to $2,000 for married persons or those with 
equivalent status, and to $ 1,000 for single persons. The 
basic exemption of $2,000, hitherto allowed to corporations, 
was repealed. The dependent’s allowance was reduced to $ 400 . 

The first schedule of the income tax was substituted by a new 
one which increased the rates on personal incomes throughout. 

The graduated rates started with 5 per cent on the first $ 1,000 
of taxable income and progressed upward by one per cent for 
each income bracket ($1,000 up to $20,000, then $5,000 up to 
$100,000, then $10,000 up to $175*000, then $25,000 up to 
$400,000, the highest bracket being $25,000 going up to $500,000), 
until it reached the upper limit of $500,000 with a tax rate of 
56 per cent on incomes in excess of that amount. The surtax of 
5 per cent on incomes over $ 5,000 was continued. Corporations 


3 Uii 



- 134 - 


and joint stock companies were allov/ed, for the first time, 
to file consolidated returns. Consequently two rates were 
introduced, 12 1/2 per cent for companies filing ordinary 
returns and ly 1/2 per cent for consolidated returns. In 
addition to these changes in tax rates the amending lav; of 
1933 imposed a special tax (withholding tax) of 5 P er cent in 
respect of all dividends, interest and royalties received by 
non-residents from Canadian debtors, and the same rate was 
levied in respect of interest and dividends, paid by Canadian 
debtors to Canadian creditors in currency which was at a pre¬ 
mium in terms of Canadian funds. All provisions were applic¬ 
able to 1932 income save the withholding tax Y/hich came into 
force on April 1 , 1935 * 

No changes were effected in the schedules of tax rates in 
1934* but the budget speech forecast some minor alterations 
designed to remove the inequalities in the operation of the 
tax. Most of the amendments introduced later during the ses¬ 
sion dealt with the tax liability of non-residents. The law 
affected interest paid to non-resident parent companies, exemp¬ 
tion of dividends received by similar company, advances to non¬ 
resident corporations, the taxation of personal corporations in 
respect of non-resident interest, non-resident beneficiaries, 
and it redefined the term of ^carrying on business in Canada” 
by non-residents. The law also made taxable periodical receipts 
like rents, royalties and annuities. It allowed deduction of 
interest on succession duties, and more specifically regulated 



■ o 




ononr c,:' no,: 






C 


i 3 






' 


j 


o 


“O . O'. O V bOit^'yl 


c<: 


, 


j i 









- 135 - 


the computation of income from estates and trusts. Sections 
17 (redemption of shares at premium) and 19 (distribution of 
winding-up or reorganization) of the Act were streamlined 
more. And to conclude* the 5 P er cent tax on interest and 
dividends payable between Canadian debtors and creditors in 
currency at a premium in terms of the Canadian dollar was 

43 

retained for another year. 

The success of Roosevelt’s administration in the United 
States stirred the imagination of Mr. Bennett who early in 
1935 announced a w New Deal Programme n for Canada in his radio 
speeches. It covered such wide fields of Canadian life as 
social security* reorganization of Cabinet portfolios* reforms 
of the Criminal Code* revision of the customs act and income 
tax, so that it looked as if a social revolution for Canada 
were in the making. Some of the proposed reforms he was able 
to put through the parliament before the election, but most of 
them have remained just a guidebook for the subsequent Liberal 
ministries. H His n Minister of Finance, Mr. Rhodes introduced 
in the budget speech of 1955 ^ wo significant innovations in 
respect to the income tax. Firstly, the principle of differen¬ 
tiation between earned and unearned incomes was adopted, and 
secondly, an entirely new tax - the gift tax - was imposed for 
the first time. 


43- Cf. Statutes of Canada, 22-23 Geo. V, c. 43 (1922 ); 
23-24 Geo. V, c. 41 (1953); and 24-25 G©o. V, c. 55 (1934). 





- ; - 



. 

■ ; ■' ■' ‘ '■ ' - ■' ; 

. :• >' o " /: 

' ’ . : . ■ ■: o . x '1 c ■:) | 

T . . • u S • 

■ 

' 

,0 o o 0: :: 0 / 

• 

.. o v ,:-,oo c 0 

o: O.o:. ' : £ .v. Ui to ‘ c ■ o.y Oo 0 ■ ■ 

V c o ■ ;t to . o ;;tto .. n 0 YTo 0 Tq| 

• 

. •. • 

... 0 0 . .0 T.O . TOT. . <■) iu . ' :. . • 0 s : J 

n‘: ic a ... J ,tse/i ■, 

»• 0 o -0 t' . 

• : / O . T >0 . 0 : ; ; 0 ;,. ; 0 

t"... i C '.. 0... . • •• 'OO 

, 

,c0 c *1 . bcytyO.-OYo £ ..a.”; 

.. , 1 .; to ' 0 :r.‘: .o • c. o',: , 0\o; 0.0' o, o. 

r. o .. :: • 0 i ... : .. o: ':... 

o to "to \ . o . j. ;; •' ;..'. o.,. c O'.' 0 

1: T.O . TO*. 00 JO VO*' 

0 . . • t : , j 


;: o ... . . - 


:. : " . .0.. o• ■ 0 • • 

<;■' • '.0 :i v o ;;JoOo;o ; ;; O.O' i o,'ii.o.o.o;lo ;0; cO | 

... ' . • 

T- . v 0. . ■ " O OTTO OTTO f;Y Oil 

0 


r 

n.‘. o.: 0 00,. , o 0.0 • . 0 

.. ■ o . ; :< ' . ; - ■' 

. •. o.o ■ Oo ; .0 - O' 

f O . ’ . 

: ' „.. • J v - ■ o . . ..O' o". •: 


.. 

■T. o f - ■ o ■ ; 


* - 

: - t 

. ^ .. ; 





- 13 6 - 


Introducing these amendments Mr. Rhodes dutifully referred 
to the broadcast of the Prime Minister of January 2, 1935: 

”ln an address delivered a few weeks ago the Prime 
Minister made certain references to the necessity of 
changes in our income tax structure. It was pointed 
out at that time that incomes may be regarded generally 
as falling into two categories, which may be described 
broadly as earned income and investment income, and 
that this distinction which is recognized in the tax 
systems of other countries might fajbiy be held in mind 
when the question of distributing the burden inciden¬ 
tal to providing increased social security was being 
considered. 11 

Passing to gift tax he stated: 

n It is particularly expedient to introduce this meas¬ 
ure at this time in view of the higher rates of taxa¬ 
tion provided for in the new surtax on investment in¬ 
come. Hot only should this tax put our tax structure 
on a more secure foundation but also it should operate 
in a like manner with respect to succession and inheri¬ 
tance taxes levied by the provinces. t! 

In defining the earned and unearned income the Minister of 
Finance took a very conservative estimate as to what comprised 
either of them. According to the amending law of 1955 (25-26 
Geo. V, c. !{.Q) the definition of earned income ran as follows: 

’’Earned income means salary, wages, fees, bonuses, 
pensions, superannuation allowances, retirIng allowances, 
gratuities, honoraria, and the income from any office 
or employment of profit held by any person, and any in¬ 
come derived by a person in the carrying on or exer¬ 
cise by such person of a trade, vocation or calling, 
either alone or, in the* case of partnership, as a part¬ 
ner actively engaged in the conduct of the business 
thereof, and includes indemnities or other remuneration 
paid to members of Dominion, Provincial or territorial 
legislative bodies or municipal councils, but shall not 
include income derived by way of royalties, or any in¬ 
come, irrespective of the source or combination of 
sources from which it may be derived, in excess of f our- 
teen thousand dollars.” (Section 2, paragraph m)• 

As may be readily seen, the definition comprised two limits. 













- 157 - 


firstly, a limit as to ‘the source of income, and secondly, a 
limit as to its amount. Income not falling within those two 
limits was, by definition, investment income. 

In computing his investment income tax liability, the 
taxpayer was allowed a basic exemption whichever was the most 
favorable from the three following exemptions: either $5,000 
of investment income, or $14,000 of earned income, or an 
amount of income equal to the sum of the personal exemption 
and allowances for dependents to which he was entitle d under 
the provisions of the Act. For example, if the total of per¬ 
sonal exemptions exceeded the exemption granted in respect of 
investment income he could claim the former one. 

Due to these new differentiations of taxable income the 
taxpayers in the higher brackets paid a triple tax: a normal 
tax graduated according to Schedule n A ,f , and additional 5 per 
cent rate on incomes over (Schedule n B w ), and a surtax 

on investment incomes computed in accordance with the follow- 

44 

ing table : 


u 0n investment income included in any income exceeding 

$5,000 but not exceeding #10,000. 2$, 

investment 

On income included in any income exceeding # 10,000 
but not exceeding #14,000. 5$, 

or 

on income over $ 14,000 but not over #20,000 5 $ 

20,000 50,000 

50,000 50,000 5 fo 

50,000 75*000 6% 

75,000 100,000 7% 

100,000 150,000 8$ 

150,000 200,000 9$ 

on income over 200,000 10$ 


44 . 25-26 Geo. V, c. 40 






- 


0 : 1 ' 





> .' e l 


i ■: o 


!■ 



< 


& 
























- 138 - 


It must be noted, however, that the additional 5 per cent tax 


45 


applied to both the general tax and the surtax as well. 

The gift tax provisions (section 88 ) charged with a tax 
liability any individual residing or ordinarily resident in 
Canada in respect of any property (whether situated within 
or outside of Canada) transferred directly or indirectly, in 
trust or otherwise by way of gift or donation. The following 
transfers were exempted: any gift not exceeding $ 4 > 000 ; 
transfers by devise, bequest or by intest#|y; gifts to char¬ 
itable or educational institutions or to the Dominion of 
Canada, its provinces or other political subdivisions; and 
some inter-family transfers. The tax was payable at the 
time when the transfer was effected, and both the donor and 
done© were jointly liable thereof. 

The schedule of tax rates Imposed a 2 per cent rat© on 
gifts over | 4>000 up to $ 20,000 and then it progressed by one 
per cent up to 10 per cent, which rate was chargeable on gifts 
over $ 1 , 000 , 000 . 

Corporations were excluded from the tax liability on 


45 * The computation of total tax liability of a married 
person with no dependents, receiving an income of $ 20 , 000 , 
all earned, was as follows: 


General tax on $ 18,000 
5 $ additional tax 


$2,070.00 

105>50 $ 2 , 173.50 


Surtax: 

Exempt $ 14,000 
$14,000 to $20,000 at 3$ 
5 $ additional 


180.00 

9.00 189.00 

““ * 2 , 352-50 


Total tax payable 












t 






- 139 - 


investment income, but the tax rates applicable to thenr in¬ 
comes were further increased to 15 per cent and 15 per cent 
in cases of normal and consolidated returns respectively. 

Dunning*s Amendments of the Income Tax . 

The general election of 1955 returned the former Liberal 
Minister of Finance not only to parliament, but also to his 
Cabinet post. During his absence the tax underwent a marked 
metamorphosis, and its revenue function was fully recognized. 
Since the scope of the tax was materially broadened, the in¬ 
cidence improved and the rates increased, Mr. Dunning confined 
his attention more or less to the refinement of the law par¬ 
ticularly in the sphere of corporate income taxation, and to 
its administration. Increased taxation of non-residents ! 
income m y be singled out as a specific feature of Mr. Dunning * s 
legislation. 

Prior to the 1955 taxation year, investment corporations 
were taxed under the provisions applicable to all companies. 

But in 1956 , the Minister of Finance following the example 
of the U.S. legislation of 195 U» introduced a measure which 
singled out non-resident-owned investment corporations (n.r.o. 
companies) for a special treatment. The n.r.o. corporation had 
to fulfil certain requirements in order to qualify for separate 
taxation. It had to be incorporated in Canada; secondly, 95 
per cent of its assets (issued shares, debentures, securities 
or evidences of funded indebtedness) had to be owned by non¬ 
residents of Canada, or held by trustees for their own benefit 





- 140 - 


or for that of their unborn issue; and thirdly, its gross 
revenue was to be derived either from ownership or dealing 
in bonds, shares and. similar securities, or from lending 
money, or from any right, title or interest in or to any 
estate or trust. Such a corporation was allowed to elect, 
either to be taxed as an ordinary corporation or at one-half 
the rate of the normal corporate tax rate subj ect to certain 
restrictive provisions which pertained to computation of in¬ 
come and deductions. In the subsequent year the companies 
dealing in small loans (up to $5^0) were excluded from the 
privilege granted to n*r.o. companies. 

Since the 1955 taxation year the exemption afforded to 
Canadian companies with assets wholly situated outside of 
Canada was restricted to investment companies whose shares 
had been offered for public subscription or were listed on a 
recognized stock exchange, and companies whose business opera¬ 
tions are of an industrial, mining, commercial, public utility 
or public service nature. However, their obligation to-file 
annual returns and to pay an annual filing fee was preserved. 

Other important amendments exempted the income of metal¬ 
liferous mines coming into production between May 1, 1956 and 
January 1, 1940 in its entirety from the corporate income tax. 

The amending law of 1956 inserted into the Act new provi¬ 
sions in respect of payment of tax and interest thereon, pay¬ 
ment of gift tax, and empowered the Governor-in-Council to make 
arrangements with provincial grants for collecting the provincial 










- lip. - 


income taxes by the Department of National Revenue, The cor¬ 
porate tax rate was increased to 15 per cent and 17 per cent 
on 1935 incomes for normal and consolidated returns. 

In 1937 no significant amendments were effected, save 
the provision interpreting the tax liability incurred under 
the old Business Profits tax Act, 1916* 

The provisions adopted in 193$ (Copter 48) exempted 
from the corporate income tax the dividends received by 
Canadian corporations from their subsidiaries located abroad. 
They allowed as a deduction a lump sum payment made for the 
establishment of employees* superannuation or pension fund; 
and the same treatment was accorded to royalties paid abroad 
which originated in Canada. The regulations against tax 
avoidance either by way of arrangements with non-residents 
or upon distribution of company*s assets were stiffened. Due 
to a restrictive interpretation of the meaning of annuity 
income by the courts, the law was amended to make taxable all 
annuities derived by beneficiaries from estates irrespective 
whether or not they contained a part of the property of the 
estate. 

As to the gift tax , the amending statute of 1938 in¬ 
creased the gift tax rates ranging from 5 P er cent to 15 per 
cent on the same brackets as before, and limited the amount 
exempted from the tax to one-half of a taxpayers income less 
income tax otherwise payable thereon. 



0 


; ■ ' . 


D 


i 

. 


4 . 




: 






6 















- 142 - 


Amendments of 1959 * 

Mr*. Dunning kept his assurance given to mining interests 
in 1936, and, as his last budget indicated, the Liberal govern¬ 
ment pursued steadily the policy of furthering the industri¬ 
alization of the country. An outstanding feature of the 1939 
budget was a capital allowance granted to all industries, where¬ 
by a taxpayer was permitted to deduct from his tax an amount of 
10 per cent of all his capital costs expended within the fol¬ 
lowing year on construction, installation, manufacture, better¬ 
ment, replacement or extension of buildings, machinery or equip¬ 
ment, provided the assets were to b© used in earning income of 
the taxpayer. However, the allowance was limited only to those 
improvements of earning assets which were located in Canada, and 
it did not include excessive costs. The deduction was charge¬ 
able against the taxes payable within three subsequent taxation 
years. 

Alluding to this measure the minister expressed a belief 
that it would promote employment in the construction, machinery 
and equipment industries, and that it should help to place all 
industries on the modern and up-to-date basis, and thus to enable 
them to cut the costs and to compete more effectively on both 

i|6 

domestic and world markets. 

The three-year exemption of income of new metalliferous 
mines was extended as to apply to all such mines which would 


U6. Cf. Debates, 1959 , p. 5151 







u.i iiv.o.". 




C 











- 143 - 


com© into operation during another three year period ending 
January 1, 1943* 

Furthermore the amending statute exempted dividends of 
companies which did not pay corporate tax on account of al¬ 
lowances granted to metalliferous mines or capital cost 
deduction. The less important amendments dealt with tax 
evasion and avoidance, rental payments on motion picture films, 
salaries paid abroad, and adapted the definition of ”taxpayer” 
to that of ”person”, 

During the second session of parliament in 1939 there were 
further alterations introduced under the impact of war, which 
will be discussed in the following chapter. 

The Income Tax in a Depressed Economy , 

The Great Depression refuted at one strode both Canadian 
classic doctrines of fiscal policy, viz., the Conservative 
”tariff for protection” and the Liberal !t tariff for revenue 
only”. Bennett’s tariff of 1930* which would have pleased the 
staunch protectionists at the outset of this century, neither 
protected the Canadian economy against the crisis nor assured 
sufficient revenue to the treasury. The crisis slipped in 
through the unprotected channel of export trade, and the customs 
revenue kept falling despite the many increases of tariff rates. 
The old quandary of opposite trends in expenditure and revenue 
became once again actual, and the same party was called on to 
its solution. During the first World War it tried borrowing, 
and was criticized and thrown out of power, so under Bennett’s 



















• • ■: 




, ■ ■ 





)( 



o'l 


. ? 


. i.j U ;. O ' ■ 





. iJ 


.. ; ■ 








- ihk - 


leadership it tried taxation with a similar aftermath. Twenty- 
years have almost passed away since then, and the party has 
not been able to cross the floor of the House of Commons. 

The failure of tariff as a revenue producer induced Mr. 
Bennett to employ both major inland taxes, the sales tax and 
the income tax. But as Chart II shows, the Conservative Gov¬ 
ernment relied more on the sales tax than on the income tax 
in its revenue policy. The combined effects of the weakening 
yield of customs duties and total tax revenue in absolute 
terms together with sharp increases in sales tax rates (from 
1 per cent in 1950 to ij. per cert in the subsequent year and 

Chart II. 

Percentage Distribution of Total Tax Revenue 
Among Various Tax Sources. 



Source: The Canada Year Book . 

















































- 145 - 


further to 6 per cent in 1932 ) were chiefly responsible for 
the steep enlargement of the sales tax share in the federal 
tax revenue. In fact, this tax made up the proportional loss 
of customs duties, and prevented any significant shifting of 
the proportion from consumption taxes to direct taxes. 

In absolute terms the volume of federal tax as well as 
of total revenue suffered materially despite feverish upward 
revisions of all tax rates. It followed inevitably the sliding 
course of business activity, and at its deepest point in 1933 > 
the anount of total revenue fell to the lowest mark of the whole 
inter-war period, providing only $3ll#7 millions. The current 
account had to be balanced by borrowed money. Small wonder, 
that the Conservative financiers demanded that the government 
cut its expenditures (specifically the transfer payments) in 
order to balance the budget, perhaps not realizing that a bal¬ 
anced budget might be a result of, but definitely not a cause, 
of favourable economic conditions. When the necessity of 
federal assistance to the provinces became more pressing the 
government was bound to revert to borrowing on a larger scale. 
Indeed, despite the increase of $1.1 billion in gross Dominion 
debt during the thirties it involved but a negligible rise of 
the interest charges. The per capita ratio of interest charges 
were lower in 1939 ($ 11 * 31 ) than in 1931 ($ 11 * 91 ) because of 
a successive conversion of existing debt to lower interest rates. 
Most of the borrowed funds went into finaneirg unemployment 
relief and subsidizing crippled national railways. 








- Iu6 


Turning now to the specific problem of incidence of the 
income tax upon the crisis - stricken Canadian economy, it may 
be pointed out first of all that the hasty recourse of prov¬ 
incial governments to this source of revenue restrained the 
federal authorities from pursuing a more vigorous income tax 
policy. Nonetheless, the government did not hesitate to tap 
the sources hitherto considered as untouchable, like the in¬ 
come flowing abroad in the form of dividends and interest pay¬ 
ments. The withholding tax, the gift tax and finally the dis¬ 
crimination against investment income stand as outstanding 
features of income tax development during the thirties. Here, 
although being entirely in accord with the general criticism 
c£ the ill-devised taxation policy of the federal government 
during the depression, we do not subscribe to the idea that 
during the slump the tax on capital income is more harmful 
than a taxon labor incomes, if levied on net income accretion. 

A s may be recalled, the rate schedule applicable to per¬ 
sonal incomes was in 1952 restored to its original level and 
then submitted with a slightly increased one. As Table IV 
shows, the real effective progressivity was very mild in all 
income brackets, despite the fact that it was well-nigh doubled 
for incomes between $4*00° and - $ 100 , 000 . Even the discrimina¬ 
tion against investment incomes - more precisely higher incomes- 
applicable to 1954 incomes did not increase the progressivity 
to desirable dimensions. The higher rates on investment income 
entailed the following increment of the total tax liability on 
incomes over $5*000 shown in Table IV : 












TABLE IV. PERSONAL INCOME TAX AT VARIOUS INCOME LEVELS 

IN SELECTED YEARS. 


Oj 

nn 

On 


c— 

CM 

03 CT\ 
Eh Hi 


03 LfN 
P Oi 
Eh On 

<3 iH 

Eh 

03 


ON 

r~i 

a > 
H 


Ov 

H 








V*. 


*83= 


V*. 








O <H 

<D 

M ,Q 


O UNKNOvO UNKN 0-CO KN 

*♦♦•••«#«# 

H H C\l KNKNUNCJNO D—VO 
C\J CM KN 


UN O O O O H VO KNvQ O 
H KN O-CXJ CO-40vvO_4vO 
=t@* HH4tOi KNCO vO 

•v ^ 

H O 14 OJ 

H OJ 14 


-4*00 H-4NO KN o UNO 

• ••••••«• 

O o H H OJ UN_4 ON VO 
H H OJ 


I I 


I 1 


O r--4KNOj H-4H 

H H OJ 4*00 O I0-VO 
OJ OJ KN 


O O O 0-00 0N(4 (4 
kn 4 oj _4oj VO-4CO 
H KNOJ 0-4*H 

•» *> •» •» 

H O E4oj 
H OJ 14 


-4*nOno 01-4H 0- 

• ••#••• 

I O o H-rtKNCOLON 

r—I rH OJ 


co ,_4_4oj _4oj no vo oj 

OJ -4140 CJNH ONH 

«73 

Eh 

no oj co oj -4-4 vO 

Pi 

H KNOJ KNONO ON 

OJ 0-0-40 

pq 1 

1 1 HNO 140-4 

O-ONOJ 

§ 

•V n •» 

VO ON _) 

H UN 

pq 

PH 

§ 

0 

H UN 

UN 0-4*00 OJ NO NO _4 UN 

UNOO O KNCO 00 Ol 

• •••••« 

0 H H H KNvO 0--40J 

P 1 

1 9 O O OJ UN VO KN OJ 

H OJ KN 


H OJ KN 

O O UNO UNO O O UN 

m 

< 

Eh 

OOOOOOO 

H KNUNONUNONO-O-H 

03 

OJ -4"N0 ONO0 KN 14 

OJ ONO-KNO 

9 

9 1 H 4-KNCO KN 

•* 



CO _4 UN 

9 

CO KN_4 

OJNO 

pq 

Ol vO 


H 

4 

4 



KNO OOOJ H UNUNOjNO 

• •••«*•••• 

H OJ O! KNKNUNCOCO H^O 
H KN-4 


oooooooooo 

(tl -4 CO OJ NO H C—KNKNKN 
H H-401 OJ Ol Ol 

*i «« » 

H ON HI KN 
KN ON 


O O UNOO 0-00 NO CO °N 

HOJOJOJKNUNO-4H 
r—I rH OJ 


ooooooooo 

OJ vO 0-4-0 c—oj OJ OJ 
H H KNOO KNOQ CO 

UV4 KN 
rH -4* 


OOOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOOO 

UNO oooooooo 
H OJ K\4*UNC0 UNO o o 


s i 


KN 0,4-NO OJ -401 VO 

H OJ OJ -4*C0 CO H VD 

H KN _4* 


EH 

8 

o 

t/3 

4 


oooooooo 

I _4*C0 Ol IN-KN ON on on 
H KNO! HHH 

*t ti *t 

H Onh KN 
KN ON 


o vo o 4 *uNr— on 

• •••••* 

9 9 I H H KN UN 0 -4 H 

H H OJ 


OOOOOOO 
I _4*OD 4* H vo vo vo 
Ol CO OJ D— D— 


UN.4KN 

H -4 


OOOOOOOOOO 

oooooooooo 
UNO oooooooo 

H OJ KN_4UNCO UNO O o 
=6©: H UNO O 

H OJ 


Source: Dominion-Provincial Conference on Reconstruction, Reference Book 

Personal Income Taxes . 






















■ 

I 



i 



















- 148 - 


Income 

Tax before 
discrimina 
ti on 

$ 

$ 

8,000 

1+09 

15,000 

1,491 

50,000 

11,959 

100,000 

32,749 

200,000 

86,451 


When compared with the ris 
were doubled (8 per cent in 1Q2. 


Tax 

Increase 

% increase 

h 

0.8 

265 

1.6 

1,890 

3-7 

5,302 

5.5 

14,227 

7-1 

in corporate 

tax rates, v/hich 


, 15 per cent and 17 per cent 


for consolidated returns in 1935 ) during the crisis, the per¬ 


sonal rates limped far behind. Consequently, the percentage 
ratio between the respective yields from personal and corporate 


tax shows a marked prevalence of the latter. Table V reveals 


Table V - 


Relationship Between Personal Income. Tax, Corporation 
Income Tax and Total income Tax: Income Tax Per Tax 


Payer. 

(fiscal years 1929 - 1939 ) 


Year 

ended 

March 

31 

1 

Income 

Total 

2 

Tax 

Perso¬ 

nal 

3 

Corpo¬ 

rate 

4 

Ratio 

( 3 ) 

to 

(2) 

5 

Ratio 

( 4 ) 

to 

(2) 

6 

Number of 
Taxpayers 

7 

Ratio (7) 
to (5) per 
Taxpayer 

8 


$ 600,000 

$000, 

000 

$ 

% 



1929 

59.9 

24.8 

35*1 

41.4 

58.6 

129,653 

191 

1930 

69.2 

27.2 

42.0 

39-3 

60.7 

142,154 

190 

1931 

71.1 

26.7 

44.4 

37-6 

62.4 

143,601 

185 

1932 

61.5 

24.8 

36.5 

40.5 

59-5 

133,6a 

184 

1933 

62.2 

26.1 

56.1 

42.0 

58.0 

166,972 

155 

1934 

61.4 

54 . 0 # 

27.4 

55.4 

44-6 

203,954 

143 * 

1935 

66 .8 

31.0# 

35-3 

46.4 

53.6 

184,195 

137 * 

1936 

82.7 

40.2# 

42.5 

48.6 

51.4 

199,102 

1 6 6 -:;- 

1937 

102.4 

44 . 4 # 

58.0 

43.4 

56.6 

217,049 

163 * 

1938 

120.4 

50.6# 

69.8 

42.0 

58.0 

237,064 

171 * 

1939 

142.0 

56.8# 

85.2 

40.0 

60.0 

264 , 3 o 4 

176* 


n Non-Resident tax excluded. 
# Inclusive Non-Resident tax 













' ). 









I 

















J 











- 149 - 


that the share of personal income tax had been continuously 
below that of corporate tax by 10 to 20 percentage points, and 
only in the 1933-54 taxation year it netted more in both 
absolute and relative terms. The same applies to the place of 
income tax in total tax revenues collected during the thirties 
where the proportion of corporation tax was steadily enlarging. 

The incidence of the personal income tax upon various 
occupational groups is illustrated by Table VI. The agrarian 
class, although the largest in Canada, practically disappeared 
as an income-tax paying group during the depression. Only 262 
farmers paid income tax amounting to $22,085 In 1934 ? on in 
other words one of every 900 taxpayers was a farmer. The load 
of the tax rested on the shoulders of salaried employees, par¬ 
ticularly those employed by financial institutions who were 
least affected by the depression. From the business sector the 
manufacturers represented a very small group as to the number 
of taxpayers and the tax paid as well, and together with retailers 
and wholesalers comprised a highly fluctuating source of income 
tax revenue. 

The effects of lower personal exemptions are exposed by the 
rapid expansion of the number of employees falling within the 
scope of the tax. In 1930 only 104,000 employees paid the tax, 
whereas in 1959 over 200,000 of them filled income tax returns. 

The withholding tax on non-residents which became effective 
on 1933 incomes contributed $4*3 million to the government coffers 
for that year, and its yield rose steadily from year to year. 



























’u 







TABLE VI. INCOME TAX COLLECTIONS ACCORDING TO OCCUPATIONS 

FOR SELECTED YEARS 




vO 

(ft 

vo 

O 

ON 

rH 

KN 

UN 

N- 


GO 



KN 

vo 

o- 

oo 

KN 

UN 

ft 

UN 

KN 


GO 



co 

KN 

KN 

LfN 

ON 

Cft 

00 

ft 

O 


oo 





•4 

•4 

•4 

•4 

•> 

•4 

•4 

1 

•4 


-JO 

-ft- 

H 

CM 

LfN 

KN 

ON 

UN 

KN 

rH 


UN 


C] 

c\i 

(ft 

O 

ft 

IN- 

H 

IN- 

O 

ft- 


co 


p'd 

<H 

vo 

ft 

OJ 

ft 

KN 


ON 

ft- 


H 

CT\ 

O *H 


* 

•4 

•4 




«4 

•4 


•4 

KN 

El co 


(ft 

vo 

rH 




LfN 

ft 


LfN 

ON 

._l 

<4 ft 



rH 





H 



00 

1 

—— 

ON 

oo 

IN- 

ft 

rH 

ft- 

VO 

VO 

ON 


ON 

co 

£ 

o 

H 

UN 

LfN 

ft 

00 

rfN 

ON 

ft 

I 

o 

KY 

© 

KN 

co 

KN 

O 

O 

IN- 

OJ 

IN- 

vo 


co 

ON 

Pi K 


% 

•4 

•4 

•4 



•4 



•4 

H 

O © 

rH 

o- 

LfN 

ON 

H 



LfN 



KN 


ft 



H 





rH 



rH 


• M 



(ft 










O 03 













S Eh 














ON 

LfN 

-ft 

Cft 

00 

-ft 

ON 

rH 

ft 

IN- 

rH 


-p# 

o 

KN 

ft 

CO 

00 

H 

UN 

CM 

KN 

ft 

IN- 


5-1 

VO 

O 

co 

IN- 

ON 

O 

LfN 

VO 

rH 

CM 

ON 


p tJ 



•s 

•4 

•4 

•4 

•4 


•4 

•4 

•s 


9 , #r ** 

NO 

I s - 

ft 

OO 

00 

ft 

rH 

rH 

KN 

rH 

CO 


C3 

-ft- 

NO 

IN- 

ft 

rH 

VO 

ft 

KN 

KN 

KN 

rH 

vO 

<4 ft 


ON 

-ft 

IN¬ 

KN 

rH 


ON 

ft 


UN 

kn 



•» 

•4 





•4 

•4 


•4 

ON 

I 


H 

(ft 





00 

ft 


CM 

H 

X 



rH 








ft 

3 

03 












UN 

EH 

-ft' 

ON 

OJ 

IN- 

(ft 

EN~ 

UN 

UN 

co 

ft 

o 

KN 

CO 

ON 


c- 

rH 

KN 

ft 

UN 

ON 

KN 

rH 

r^_ 

ON 

Pi ?h 

VO 

LfN 

ON 

ft 

00 

UN 

rH 

ON 

UN 


L 

ON 

H 

O © 


*4 

•k 

•4 




*4 





ft 


NO 

ON 

vo 




CM 



«4 


• © 



LfN 





H 



o 


O ft 



rH 








rH 


-p^ 

KN 

H 

O 

KN 

KN 

03 

ft* 

KN 

CM 

LCN 

vo 


cj 

00 

r— 

rH 

ON 

KN 

IN- 

rH 

IN- 

ON 

rH 

CM 



o 

-ft 

O 

vO 

CM 

ON 

UN 

ft 

ON 

vo 

vo 


O »H 



•4 

•k 

•4 

•k 

•4 

•4 

•4 

•4 

•4 


a 03 

cm 

co 

o 

IN- 

IN¬ 

ON 

H 

CM 

co 

ft 

oo 


<4 ft 

cm 

o 

ft 

(ft 

CH 

OJ 

rH 

rH 

VO 

LT\ 

00 




o 

KN 

LfN 

CM 

rH 


LfN 

ft- 

KN 

ON 

KN 



* 

•4 





•4 

*4 

•4 

*4 

ON 

1 


(ft 

rH 





IN¬ 

CM 

rH 

IN— 

H 

X 



rH 








CM 


© 












KN 

Eh 

CM 

iH 

IN- 

O 

LfN 

IN- 

N- 

KS 

CO 

VO 

KN 

KN 

00 

VO 

ft 

KN 

vo 

IN- 

VO 

ft- 

UN 

rH 

in- 

H 

ON 

ft £ 

(ft 

ON 

o- 

ON 

LfN 

ft 


ft- 

VO 

un 

GV 

rH 

O © 


•4 

•4 





•4 


•4 

•4 


ft 


LfN 

IN- 

ft 




rH 


rH 

CO 


• a3 



VO 



1 


rH 





O ft 



H 










52! 














ON 

LfN 

vO 

IN¬ 

VO 

vo 

IN- 

IN¬ 

ft 

oo 

r "‘j* 



o 

IN- 

rH 

IN- 

CM 

OJ 

ft- 

CH 

O 

KN 

CM 



ON 

VO 

—ft 

(ft 

IN- 

UN 

VO 

KN 

CM 

rH 

CM 



*4 

@4 

*4 


•4 

•4 

•4 

•4 

*4 

•4 

•4 


3 ^ 

KN 

VO 

vo 

CO 

ft 

KN 

ON 

ft* 

ft 

rH 

KN 


O »H 

CM 

rH 

KN 

ft 

VO 

vO 

ft- 

00 

i-1 

O 

00 

O 

S © 

H 

tN- 

KN 

(ft 

ft 

CM 


o 

VO 

00 

IN- 

KN 

<£j PH 


*4 

•4 

•4 




•4 

•4 

<3S 

*4 

ON 

H 



H 

CO 

H 




ft- 

KN 

rH 


I I 

X 












ON 

CNJ 

CO 

Eh co 

vO 

ON 

oo 

ON 

O 

rH 

KN 

KN 

CM 

ON 

IN- 

ON 

£ 

C\J 

KN 

OJ 

OJ 

o 

O 

ft 

ft 

rH 

CM 

UN 

l—1 

ft © 

VO 

ft 

KN 

(ft 

UN 

O 

CM 

UN 

ON 

H 

ON 


O ft 

•4 

•4 

•4 

•4 

•4 

•4 


•4 


•4 

•4 


© 

CM 

IN¬ 

LfN 

ON 

H 

rH 


ON 


KN 

IN¬ 


• ft 



ON 










O 











TO 


ft 





© 






© 







H 






TO 






H 

© 


ra 




TO 






•H 

V) 


© 










03 

© 


o 




£ 

P-1 





-P 

H 


B 


• 


•rH 

cC 



TO 


© 

O 

© 

P 


ft 


TO 

£ 



rH 


« 

ft 

£ 

o 


£ 

• 

P 

o 



P 



s* 

© 

© 


O 

ft 

CQ 

•H 

ft 


ft 


1 

i 

£ 

© 


o 

£ 


-p 

p 

to 

O 

to 

03 

© 

P 

ft 

rH 


O 

© 


o 

ft 

•H 

© 

-P 


-P 


© 

i—! 

O 

-P 

P-i £ 

© 

© 

© 

£ 

£ 

O 

rH 

•H 

© 


© 

H rH 


© 

ft 

CO 

© 

© 

C3 

O 

£ 

I>5 

£ 

© 


ft 

© 

o 

ft 

ft 


£ 

£ 

o 

H 

O 

© 


© 

Pi 

rH 

O 

o 

P 

P 

© 

w 

•H 

ft 

o 


ft 

O 

Ph 

Pi 

£ 

£ 

-P 

£ 

£ 


£ 



bO 

ft 


© 

S 

© 

© 

•H 

© 

© 

O 



<U 

PH 

a 

S 




ft 

ft 

ft 

O 


Sourcej D.B.S., Income Tax- Collection Statistics 



















! 


















- 151 - 


Due to the large proportion of foreign capital in Canadian 
investment (40 per cent during the thirties) this tax was 
fully justified. Hitherto a considerable part of Canadian 
national income was flowing abroad without much contributing 
to the government expend!tures. The Financial Post estimated 
in 1951 * when the levy was for the first time proposed, that 
only 20 per cent of the $555>000,000 of ordinary stock of 
Canadian Pacific Railway was held in Canada, the majority of 
the stock of International Nickel Co. was held in the United 
States and Great Britain, and $18 million of shares of Imperial 
Oil Ltd. was in the hands of Standard Oil of New Jersey, to 
mention just a few examples. As the editor figured it out. 
Imperial Oil, paying a 50 per cent dividend on its shares, ad¬ 
vanced every year $9*4 millions to its parent company, which 
amount was let out tax free prior to the imposition of the with¬ 
holding tax. 

In fact, the 5 per cent tax was exceedingly low, and def¬ 
initely did not curtail the inflow of foreign capital into Canada. 
Besides that, the foreign investor, usually a resident of Great 
Britain or of the United States, could claim tax credit from 
his government on account of taxes paid in Canada. In this con¬ 
nection it may be noted that the tax treaty with the United States 
government, ratified in 1957 > greatly eliminated duplicate tax¬ 
ation on incomes earned under their jurisdiction. 

The incidence of the income tax upon corporate taxpayers 
varied. Companies whose production was chiefly oriented to 
foreign markets or producing investment goods, like the pulp 








- 152 - 


and wood Industry, construction, tool and machinery industry, 
suffered heavy losses which in turn eliminated them from tax 
liability. Secondary industry, manufacturing for domestic 
production, which in addition to its natural protection was 
shielded by high tariffs, bore the burden of income tax, and 
contributed by far the greatest part of the yield. 

The number of companies subject to income tax during the 
depression is somewhat misleading since the repeal of the basic 
$2,000 exemption in 1953 boosted considerably i±e number of 
corporate taxpayers by adding many small concerns with incomes 
below that ceiling. For example, in the taxation year 1955-6, 
from 10,970 corporate returns 6,306 were filed by corporations 
earning less than $ 2 , 000 , and the tax assessed amounted only 
to $ 51 + 7 > 271 , whereas 773 corporations with income over $ 50 >°Q 0 
paid $ 56 , 169*253 out of total $ 42*5 millions of corporation 

47 

tax collections. 

Despite the fact that the chief cause of the depression 
was the breaking down of the international credit system, Can¬ 
adian financial corporations, banks, and insurance companies 
weathered the crisis with comparatively small losses, maintain¬ 
ing their tax contributions on a fairly constant level. 

The gift tax adopted as an ancillary income tax measure 
in 1935 did not possess any significant revenue productivity. 

It netted $194,8145 in that taxation year, and the total 

1|7• Cf• Department of Trade and Commerce, D.B.S., Income 
Assessed for Income War Tax Act , 1936 . 






o 










- 153- 


Table Vll. 


Total Income Assessed and Income Tax Yield 
as Percentages of National Income 
(1929 - 1938) 


Year 

Income 

Income Tax 

Pers. Income 

(Taxation) 

Assessed 
as % of ! 

Yield as % 
N.I. of N.I. 

as % of Pers 
Income 

1929 

27.6 

1.5 

1 

0.60 

1930 

29.6 

1.6 

0.61 

1931 

29.8 

1.7 

0.67 

1932 

35.8 

2.1 

0.86 

1933 

33.8 

2.5 

1.02 

1934 

32.0 

2.3 

0.80 

1935 

33.6 

2.6 

0.99 

1936 

30.9 

2.6 

1.00 

1937 

26.2 

2.9 

1.00 

1938 

28.0 

3.5 

1.10 

Source: 

The Canada 
Income and 

Year Book, B.B.S., 
Expenditure, 1926 

National Accoui 

-Tor 


Disp 


Collections for the three pre-war years amounted to slightly 
more than one-half of a million dollars. 


As may be seen from Table Vll the income tax brought within 
its scope less than one-third of the national income throughout 
the thirties, save the year of 1932. Apart from tax evasion 
and tax avoidance, it reveals that the national income was 
mostly distributed among income receivers below the personal 
exertions which would have justified radical downward revision 
of all statutory exemptions. As a consequence, the total in¬ 
come tax took but a small slice from the national income. The 
same may be said of the personal income tax in respect of per¬ 
sonal disposable income. The failure of the government to 
induce any material income redistribution left the community 
entirely at the mercy of the crisis, and by imposing regressive 






- 154 - 


’consumption taxes even worsened the lot of the unemployed, 
farmers and their creditors. A well-balanced account of 
economic consequences of goverinent fiscal policies during 
the depression is, of course, given in the Rowell-Sirois 
Report, which is a reliable guide for a traveller on the 
avenues of Canadian economic and social history. 

The Constitutional Aspects of Income Taxation . 

Following the course of federal income taxation during 
the inter-war period only a scanty reference was made to its 
constitutional aspects which, as the years progressed, were 
becoming more acute. For, since the World War I, the field of 
direct taxation has been shared by both the Dominion and the 
provincial goverments which enjoy considerable jurisdictional 
independence in fiscal matters under the B.N.A. Act. The great 
social and economic metamorphosis of the Canadian community 
incident upon the first world war entailed considerable in¬ 
crease of provincial expenditures and compelled the provincial 
treasurers to look for augmentation of underdeveloped provin¬ 
cial revenue sources. The field of income taxation offered it¬ 
self to their attention as soon as the financial difficulties 
had arisen. 

During the twenties Manitoba joined the provinces im¬ 
posing a provincial income tax ( British Columbia and Prince 
Edward Island ) partly under the pressure of fiscal difficulties 
and partly because of demands of its electorate. When the 



. :/ - . .J :C . ' '-0 13 J- - o 

. - •- ■ . v Ml . v " : . . o ’ ‘ c ■" a ao " "• ' C0-; X 

! ;■■■■• v • ' - a. • ■■ .i ' c 1 - oo 

■ • : - v t o < •: r.o '‘so.-avise 

: . ; ! ■ f ' v !' ' t 

. 

* 

. : ; '■ . j* - .('■ : jj. : . • • : - - 'CO 'e oj .Tv . 

.-■.ftw o-v- • -c-Xu e vjf'COd c •.:;/£*c r'c.a-a 

■?,T. c a " t : ■ i . C ■ c J -i C 1 .C I'-iJ j ccc 4 

, f - ■ 

; . ,<■'■... . ../ ■'.. ci - v; . - f;. ' .’• ■ ■ >. .. c ■ ■ -nib 

; * • . Or. :■ . : r i' 

. . . . 

• ,i.M •; i : , . ... • Ad J c r Li. c ' ■ ?; a : s:c o /• -o.; o . ' c c f.wicOS : 

-• " . ■. • ; j .t -‘.. ■■ r ■ ■ ■ c o . 1 :o ' i 

) a :c IXcci;, od nics c - a: '. ;a 

7 c ‘; c :i c. r f . j J .. ■ r . , . : : . c mm oi? •: • c.t ; 

. 

■' X *:■ ■ , ' ..... ecu. '! C c , : . • .;j . 

. 

- • - ' ' ...c * ■ c ^ c : : . ,. ■ o PufC ■ 

■ 

-■c.;. . : c c. i c,:j- \c aocuccc io ; -c c.. r jc:cc ; .< r.c 





- 155 - 


question of limping provincial finances was on the agenda 
at the Dominion-Provincial conference in 1927 the Premiers 
of British Columbia and Manitoba demanded in all earnestness the 
Dominion government to reconsider its entry into the direct 
taxation field, it?. Bracken, Manitoba Premier, did not go as 
far as Mr. MacLean, the premier of British Columbia who de¬ 
manded a complete withdrawal of the Dominion from income tax 
field, but suggested that in lieu of increased federal sub¬ 
sidies the provinces should receive either some percentage of 
the Dominion receipts from the income tax or should be allowed 
to levy 11 supplements H to the federal tax, and in that case 
the Dominion government should fully cooperate with the Prov¬ 
inces to the end that there might be a saving in the expense 

48 

occasioned by the duplication of services for collection. 

The Conference did not arrive at any definite conclusion, 
and the problem was left for further consideration. The King 
government was ready to quit the income tax field toward the 
end of the twenties, when the secondary postwar boom flooded 
the treasury with revenue from customs duties and excises, but 
the proposition encountered considerable opposition in Parlia¬ 
ment and in the country as well. 

In the meantime the crisis developed, and the idea of ex¬ 
clusive provincial Income taxation would have done more harm 
than good due to the uneven impact of the depression upon the 


48. Cf. The Canadia n Annual Review , 1 927 - 28 , p. 33. 







- 


' 




cy\ 






■ 






Of.- O 




r-3( 












- 156 - 


regional economies. The simple fact that the federal government 
had to advance much greater amounts to the Prairie Provinces to 
alleviate their fiscal difficulties than it collected from their 
residents in the form of income tax payments suffices to prove 
the dubious value of exclusive provincial income taxation. 

However, the depression played havoc with both Dominion and 
provincial revenues, and fully exposed the defects and the in¬ 
adequacy of the whole Canadian financial system. If there was a 
need for an overhaul during the twenties, after the depression 
it became imperative. In 1932, Alberta and Saskatchewan began 
levying a tax upon incomes, being followed a few years later by 
Ontario and other Provinces. Hot only this scramble for revenue 
failed to secure any substantial revenue to the respective gov¬ 
ernments, but also effected complete chaos in the income tax 
field, putting an undue burden of compliance on all taxpayers 
obliged to pay a triple income tax In some provinces. 

This deplorable state of affairs as well as the adverse 
effects upon the economy, were recognized by the federal govern¬ 
ment which in 1937 appointed a Royal Commission to survey the 
whole problem of allocation of constitutional responsibilities 
and tax powers, and to propose solutions 

The Report of the Roweil-Sirois Commission, which represents 
a cooperative work of seasoned Canadian experts reaffirmed the 
basic idea of federation of its originators against the Haldane 
concept. As to the public finance, it went somewhat further. 

It recommended another restriction of provincial authority to 






■ .. r j e 

) .. 


c 





■Q i- ,::i ,:.i 


r 




- 157 - 


impose direct taxes to those incorporated into the B.N.A. Act* 
Let the Commission itself speak: 

11 the Commission recommends that the provinces 
should withdraw entirely from the following tax fields: 

(a) Income taxes (with an exception for'premiums 
for social insurance within provincial juris¬ 
diction) ; 

(b) Corporation taxes as defined in detail above; 

(c) Inheritance (or Succession Duty) taxes*..* 

The Commission^ recommendations in these respects 
are based on two grounds. (l) The withdrawal of the 
provinces from these fields is an essential feature 
of its Financial Plan.... (2) The transfer of these tax 
sources to the Dominion and their use by one single 
jurisdiction is essential, both for reasons of equity 
as between provinces, and for assuring that these tax 
fields will be exploited with least harm to the 
national income. 11 1+9 

To argue the desirability of this recommendation would 
amount to carrying owls to Athens, for both sides of the point 
were extensively exploited. Furthermore, subsequent war fin¬ 
ance documented abundantly the advantages of a streamlined 
fiscal system. However, in a democratic society, where the 
opinion of the least is to b© weighed, great reforms proceed 
sometimes at a slow pace. This has been the fate of the prop¬ 
ositions of the Report of the Royal Commission on Dominion- 
Provincial Relations. Although most of the provinces accepted 
the partial solution of Tax Rental Agreements, only recently 
the Province of Ontario joined the u new financial federation 11 
with the Province of Quebec still to come. 


1+9. Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial Relations, 
Report 5 Book II, p. 121. 












c 















- 1 5 8 - 


The C.C.F. and the Income Tax . 

This study would b© incomplete without at least a short 
note on one undercurrent of Canadian political life. We have 
traced the fight of farmers for an income tax up to the end 
of the twenties* It is necessary to round out this picture. 

The doctrinaire remnants of the Progressive Party, the 
U.F.A. representatives in the House of Commons found in 1932 
a common platform with Labor members, and established a new 
political party, the Cooperative Coimtion?/ealth Federation, a mod- 
ley of various dissident farm and labor groups, which in time 
evolved into a definite socialist party. In the following year 
in Regina, Sask., the convention of the C.C.F. party published 
a manifesto which formulated its views on all subjects of the 
nation*s life. Although they went all out for support of 
direct taxation, particularly for income tax, they did not 
fail to state that **in the type of economy that we envisage 
the need for taxation, as we now understand it, will have 

50 

largely disappeared.** Direct taxes were to them only a lesser 
evil during the transitory period from capitalism to socialism* 

Resume 

The inter?/ar period witnessed a serious onslaught of the 
provinces on the presence of the income tax in the federal' 
revenue structure. While the federal government was tossed 


50* Quoted by Mr. Woodsworth in his speech during the 
budget debate of 1934* Of. Debat es, 1954 * P• 2447* 





















.. 




'.'.C 


r 




.;:,o J a 





i 









Oi 


u 


r -- 









- 159 - 


about by recurring political crises, the ordinary citizen was 
looking to his provincial government for help in his every day 
needs* Ascendance of provincial authority carried along with 
it an abvious necessity for expanding revenue sources. The 
provinces almost succeeded in driving the federal government 
from the direct tax field toward the end of the twenties. 

The gradual retreat of the federal government was reflected 
in the development of federal income taxation. During the twen¬ 
ties the revenue yield and the incidence of the tax shrunk con¬ 
siderably, making it more or less a nominal levy on the richer 
class. Small wonder that various groups of income taxpayers 
joined the provinces in demanding its complete abolition. How¬ 
ever, when the government announced its intent to honour these 
demands the supporters of the tax rallied to its defence, and 
although being mostly on the left side of the house, induced the 
government to abandon its original proposal. 

The thirties played havoc with both federal and provincial 
finances. The scramble for more revenues brought about by econ¬ 
omic crisis disrupted the Canadian fiscal system seriously. The 
federal structure, having been remodeled by judicial decisions 
against the plans of its original framers, did not weather the 
first storm. After the crisis was over, it was too obvious that 
Canada had to revamp her federal system were she to be prepared 
for a similar situation in the future. To this end the Rowell- 
Sirois Commission received a mandate to investigate the past and 
to recommend solutions. In essence, they confirmed the federal 



; , : ' i. . 

c V t . . . ■ <:• * ■ - ■ ' V 

■ ■ ■ . ■ . ■ . 

."‘ l . v - 'ju ;..i- . '• 

• : 

. 

. " ■ C ; 

c . 1 ■ ' . - 
. t '■ ' ’ 

■ 

, 




- i6o - 


principles of the founders of the Dominion, save their taxation 
arrangements* Here they advised further restrictions on prov¬ 
incial taxing authority* The income tax and death duties were 
to be levied exclusively by the federal government whereas the 
increased provincial share in the total revenue should come 
from federal subsidies. But before the proposals were made 
public another war broke out which gave a new course to future 
developments. 






- ■ 






j j 



. - . 

- 

* 

■ 



• : . .. ; 





• 

>' : .. ... ■ 

(: ' v 


I 



"... . . ; . 

i V. • 

. 




. 

\ & 

■ c \i ■: ... a . 



* 

. . 





■ • _ f ■ 


1 









- 161 


CHAPTER IV. 

INCOME TAX - A MAINSTAY OF CANADIAN WAR 
___ FINANCE _ 

The outbreak of hostilities in Europe in 1939 a nd ensuing 
Canadian intervention on the side of Great Britain interrupted 
the lively debate of intergovernmental fiscal problems which 
was going on during the hearings of Rowell-Sirois Commission. 

The bitter reality of war necessitated the strong leadership 
of the federal government regardless of the results of the Com¬ 
mission^ investigation which were at that time in statu nas - 
cendi and were published only toward the end of the first 
war year. 

In contrast with the situation created in the fateful year 
of 1914 ? this time the federal government was far better prepared 
in every respect to meet boldly the events as well as to keep 
the situation well under control from the very beginning of the 
war. First of all, it could draw upon a costly experience of 
the past war; secondly, it was in charge of a more developed 
and diversified economy, having at hand a well organized admin¬ 
istrative machinery, and, needless to say, it disposed of excel¬ 
lent experts in every branch of economic science within and with¬ 
out civil service* Furthermore, the extensive research work on 
Canadian economic history done by the staff of the Rowell-Sirois 
Commission furnished an excellent point of departure for such a 
colossal undertaking as World War II* 

To be sure, the grasp of the problem by the federal authori¬ 
ties played a major role. Here both Liberal Ministers of Finance, 

















- 162 - 


Mr. J.L. Ralston and Mr. J.L. Ilsley displayed unusual ability. 
Instead of the fruitless debating of the problems of war fin¬ 
ance of Sir Thomas White during the past war, they invited the 
best brains of the country to do their share in framing the war 
economic policy and in carrying it into effect as well. The 
achievements of Canada during the war and the smooth transition 
to peace-time economic conditions speak for themselves. 

Oddly enough, in 1939 the federal government was faced for 
the second time with a basically identical task, namely, to 
convert a depressed economy into a war economy, which to a cer¬ 
tain degree eased the initial steps. An idle labor force of 
1 

considerable size could be steered into war production without 
impairing rolling industries, and without necessity of regula¬ 
ting any sizeable reallocation of resources. Only later on, 
when the point of full employment was reached, was it imperative 
to put into operation all necessary brakes as to prevent bottle¬ 
necks and inflation. 

The situation was perfectly assessed by the government, and 
the finance policy inaugurated in the first war budget was 
designed to facilitate, first, the transitory stage and then to 
maintain rigid controls over consumption and prices as to insure 
a bigger slice of G.H.P. for war purposes without incurring 
dangers of inflation. In short, the policy aimed at an adequate 
credit expansion through government borrowing at the first stage, 

1. A.F.W. Plumptre estimated that the number of unemployed 
at the outbreak of war was 600,000 or 20 per cent of the total 
working force, agriculture exclusive. Gf. his Mobilizing Canada*s 
Resources for War, Toronto, 191+1, p. 13* 













f 










- 163 - 


and, as soon as the point of full employment was reached, it 

was proposed to adhere strictly to a pay as you go fiscal 

policy. This policy was repeatedly reaffirmed in each war 

2 

budget and on other occasions, and, perhaps until I 9 I 4 . 2 , it 


2. Cf. Debates, 1939"45 * The most comprehensive formu¬ 
lation of wartime finance policy was set forth by Mr. J.L* 

Ilsley during the debate on the Speech from the Throne in the 
fall of 19 l| 0 . Answering the strictures of Social Greditors 
and C.C.F. members he summarized the government policy as 
follows % 

n The principles of our war finance policy have been stated 
before but will bear repetition. Briefly summarized these prin¬ 
ciples are; 

1. That in real terms, that is to say in terms of loss 
to the nation of the production required for war purposes, the 
war is paid for substantially while it is in progress. 

2. That the limits of what we can devote to war purposes 
are not financial but, as previously stated in this house, are 
physical, mental and moral, that is to say, the physical limits 
of our resources and the mental and moral capacity of Canadians 
to bear burdens and make sacrifices. 

5 . That the task of finance is not to provide the funds 
which are used to pay for the v/ar services but more fundamen¬ 
tally for economic resources in order that they will be avail¬ 
able to the defence or supply department when required. 

4. That in discharging this function, finance must keep 
in step with the defence and supply programme. 

5 . That for this purpose, taxation, as far as practicable, 
is a better method than borrowing because it is fairer and 
final. 

6 . That taxation should be imposed upon a basis of equality 
of sacrifice, having due regard to ability to pay. 

7 . That there are practical limits beyond which taxation 
cannot be carried, so that the government must also do some 
borrowing, which should be as far as possible out of voluntary 
public savings. 

8 . That the third method of war finance, namely, infla¬ 
tion, is the most unfair, the most uneconomical and the most 
dangerous of all methods of financing the v/ar. 

9 . That in the early stages of the v/ar, some expansion 
of credit is often possible without inflation,. 

10. That later, as the resources of the country become 
fully employed, monetary or credit expansion necessarily brings 
about inflation unless offset by strict counter measures, such as 
severe taxation. (Debates, 194Q> Second Session , p. 28l.) 






















- !6U - 


constituted the most impressive feature of Canadian war fin¬ 
ance. However, when the war costs reached colossal sums in 
terms of Canadian possibilities, the government was bound to 
employ borrowing on a more extensive scale. But it was done 
largely from the general public in order to preclude the in¬ 
flationary tendencies which would have resulted were the 
funds obtained from commercial banks. This is not to say that 
the government did exhaust every possibility of securing rev¬ 
enues for war purposes by means of taxation, but rather to 
emphasize the lesson that a total war cannot be financed solely 
from tax revenue, as heavy as it may be, and that it conditions 
using up existing savings. 

The inauguration of a pay-as-you-go policy envisaged a 
full application of income taxation for both fiscal and anti- 
inflationary purposes. The Minister of Finance lived up to 
his promise and developed the tax into a mighty financial in¬ 
strument which ever since has maintained its prominent place 
in the federal revenue structure. 

Financing the War . 

To set a background for our discussion of income tax dev¬ 
elopments during the war it will suffice to review briefly in 
terms of dollars Canadian contribution to the allied cause as 
well as her mode of paying for it. 

Table VIII portrays the steeply rising war costs during the 
war years, which toward the end reached the stupendous amount 
of # 5.3 billion, wherefrom 80.2 per cent went to direct war 




, €•• J ' I ' 









: . ' 

• ■ ; ■ 0 0 


. U ' - ’ • ■ 

D. . ...: ■ • ;>itC Clr. i 0 *C&WC - ' ' • ' 













tn 

B 

!2S 

m 

> 

p 

ps 

m 

pq 

p 

Eh i/a • 
h4tI 
Q GANA 
pH 
P i Pi 
H O O 
^ P 3 
ov © 
H 53 

S cH. 




EH EH P 
PS CQ £ 

P 

3 

SO 
OHO 
H P JH 
P CQ 

M P H 

^ P 03 
O O 

P Q © 

fh *H 

<S 

O 

>H 

9 


a 

CT\0 ON 

-pH CTncm MD CM 

NA LCA 

OvP* 

LTV 


<1 

XL*! 

nanavo 

OVNACO LCANAO 

coco 

NO CM 

-P 


n 

<o 

ON 00 o- 

NAKA_p 

H-P 

Op- 

HVO 

rd 


w 
r a 


♦i *v n 


•\ *> »\ 

•* 

*> ®k 

•k *k 

•k 



P-naoo 

CM H H 

LT\ 

pav 

H O 

00 




—1 1—1 





H 



LT\ 

co t —ltn 

CO VO VO F—GO LCA 

cr\_p 

KAO- 

co 

i—1 CM 

-P 


H CM ~P 

VO C—vO H CM LCA 

H 0- 

H CO 

LP\ 

CM H 

ON 

_PG0 CM 

C"-CM _p 

LTV 

00 NO 

NAvO 

LT\ 

-p O- 

H 


•k •> 



•V 

«s 

•> 

•k 

•k #k 


-P LTv 



H 

CM 

CM 

CM 

NMOk 










H H 

-P 


o-ltmaj 

CO H ON lTnCO h 

VO [>- 

00 ltn 

D— 

CO Ov 


CO NACM 

OVH CM H CM CO 

UANA 

CM vO 

ir\ 

GALTN 

CTn 


LfNQ—K\ 

VO KVp- 

-P 

CT\_p 

KV C— 

LTN 

CM NO 

H 


•i *S 



•> 


•» 

•k 

•v #i 


p LT\ 



H 

CM 

CM 

CM 

H CM 










H H 

NA 

p-rOD— 

-POO LCANACQ CO 

GA|>- 

NOO 

S- 

OCO 

-P 

CM vo CO 

CQ-pNA H CM O 

LCAV0 

00 LT\ 

NA 

~P CM 

On 


C—vO NA 

pmp 

NA 

0-0 

H CM 

H 

O-CM 

H 


*s *> 



•> 

w> 

•k 

*k 

•k 



NA _p 



H 

CM 

CM 

CM 

co ax 

CXJ 


O LTMTv 

VO vO LtAf>-00 CM 

OOH 

I>-G0 

O- 

naoa 

0L 

1 P-.P-C0 

OVCO NA 

CM LCA 

O VO 

CM 00 

bv 

C0-P 

On| 

1 

XMfXO 

CM H H 

vO 

O-NO 

H _p 

NV 

H vo 

i rH i 


•» "V 




•k 

n 


•k *t 

1 * 1 l 

i 

1 

1 

H H 




H 

H 


vo vO 

r~! I 

i 

CM C'-CN 

K\CM-P* I 

NACM 

vO CO 

-PCM 


avco 

J3- 


LfAOV-p 


O NACM 

H C- 

o o- 

0VJ>- 

c- 

-pH 

ON 


C^-p'CM 


H H 

CM 

LT\ C—• 

co 

NA 

vo O 

rH 


<*> 







•k «k 

i 


rH 







NA LIA 

i 

i o 

1 

! CO KVH 


LCAoQ 8 I 

H-P 

-PcO 

-PCM 

ON 

H CO 

I p. 


HvOCO 


Pt>" 

H NA 

rcovo 

GWO 

H 

C—CM 



H CTWO 



H 

AP 

LTN 

H 

CM O 

H , 









•k *k 

NA_p- 






© 

03 









© 

© 









X 

X 









CO 

03 © 


P 




© CO 


X X 

EH 

EH 3 


P 




© pq 


as co X 


SI 


© 




3 PS 


EH EH CO © 

-p 

P © 


P 

P 



WPS 


Eh © 

o 

o > 



p 



©•PH 


© • vH 

© 

© © 

© 

O 

p © 



ill »H H 


S Si © p 

3 

Si PS 


P 

p p 



S P P 

•• 

O M P 3 


•H 

S3 © 


© 


CO 

P S3 P 

© 

a dp 

P 

r d X 

© S> 

SI 

P o 


pq 

•h © pq 

© 

Si Si (+H 


SI CO 

> SI 

o 

•H 


cq 

P PH 

X 

•HOOSl 


H EH 

© © 

•H 

O H 


P 


CO 

•H in O 



Ph > 

P 

•rH p 


£ 

© pq Pq 

EH 

H -P Ph *H 

3 p 

P P 

© 

•H 

H 3 


H 

P 

M 


CO CO W 

© «3l 

<u <H 

X PS 

P 

p Ph 


P 

K 3 P 

R 

-p 

S S W w xl Eh 

Eh Eh 

as 

P 

3 


ip 

pq CO <tj 


o 

o O Xf! © 

P O 

O O 

Eh P 

<I| 

Ph © 


Eq 

i: Eh 

pq 

© 

© & © o O Eh 

Eh Eh 

I ^ 


© 



fn PO 

> 

3 

3 S O O 



SI Eh 

P 

P O 



CO O EH 


•H 

©0X3 



O O 

0 

® s 


0 

& P 


P 

PhO(x]CO 



P Eh 

S3 



O 

O 

PQ 

3 

CO 

© 

© 

p 

CO 

S3 

CO 

o 

J3 

Eh 



























I 


i !• 






■ 





























- 166 - 


costs* Taking into consideration a total federal outlay dur¬ 
ing the six years* war period we get a sum of $20.5 billion 
in which is included the financial assistance to Britain of 
$1.5 million (one billion dollar gift and the assistance under 
the Mutual Aid Act exclusive); non-war expenditures amounting 
to $3.8 billion and comprising the ordinary expenditures and 
other charges; and $13 billion of direct war expenditures. The 
magnitude of those numbers may be better understood when we are 
reminded that the overall total of federal expenditures for the 
period between 19 lil ~1939 did not reach the amount expended 
solely for war purposes between 1939 and 1945 > or that the war 
aid demobilization costs of World War I represent only one- 
nin&h of the straight war costs of World War II. 

Prom the $15 billion expenditure, about $1*7 billion was 
advanced to allied countries during the second half of the war 
in the form of food,ammunition and war equipment. Besides 
that, Canada made a gift of one billion dollars to Great Britain 
to enable her to finance her purchases in Canada, part of which 
was forwarded through the British government to other Common¬ 
wealth countries, and also to Soviet Russia. Thus Canada became 
the only belligerent country on the side of the Allies which not 
only did not receive any aid from the United States under Lend 
Lease, but also, like her southern neighbor, provided assistance 
to her partners in arms. 

It must however, be borne in mind that the figures given in 
Table VIII are bookkeeping figures arrived at after all adjust¬ 
ments were made, and therefore they do not express exactly the 






actual cash requirements of the government during the war years. 
For example, the financial assistance to Great Britain during 
the first three war years had to be financed from Canadian cash 
requirements, although the British government was paying for 
it by Canadian securities. In other words, the Canadian govern¬ 
ment had to provide funds for the purchase of those securities 
which on the government’s balance sheet were registered as 
assets and consequently reduced the over-all total of budgetary 
deficit. 


CHART III. 


Percentage Distribution of Dominion Revenue, 1930-i|5 
(Fiscal Year ended March 31) 


$ 


O OQ' O 






t*i CO M £ TfiX 

Corpora rtoN i. £.P. Tav. 


Orn£A Ta\£s 

DfA/c/r 


Source : Based on Table VIII. p.l65 
































































V O 







, 






iU 

















:? 

i 
















■ 

. 











- 168 - 


Chart III, together with Table VIII, illustrates the trend 
of government revenue during the year. The most striking fea¬ 
ture of this trend is given by the rapidly increasing propor¬ 
tion of ihcome tax in the volume of tax revenue. At the out¬ 
break of World War II the income tax yielded about half of the 
revenue derived from combined consumption taxes, whereas at the 
end of the war this ratio was practically reversed. Equally 
interesting is the relationship between the total revenue and 
borrowing which was kept well under control throughout the war.. 
The budgetary deficit exceeded only in the last war year the 
amount of total revenue by a small margin of 0.6 per cent, while 
in the preceding years it was steadily below the 50 P er cent mark 
of total revenues. 

In the field of consumption taxes the government introduced 
comparatively minor increases. The sales tax remained at the 
pre-war level of 8 per cent throughout the war period, the tariff 
was readjusted upward but slightly, and the foreign exchange levy 
was introduced., more or less in order to reduce imports from 
dollar countries and thus to alleviate the shortage of U.S. dol¬ 
lars. More significant were the increases of excise duties on 
liquor and tobacco. New taxes were imposed on gasoline, chew¬ 
ing gum, radios, clocks, watches, luggage, jewellry, cameras, 
toilet soap and travel tickets, automobiles, home appliances, 
etc. The total revenue from consumption taxes which by tradi¬ 
tion could be designed to match the ordinary expenditures of the 
federal government sufficed for this purpose, and even contributed 
about one billion dollars for direct war costs. 


■ 








■ ■ ■ 


,:o ; 

' i : o/.' 


i 




- s 




!:. ti v O J 







- 169 - 


The bulk of federal funds for war financing came from in¬ 
dividuals either in the form of direct contributions or in the 
form of borrowing. Personal income tax, which netted in the 
1959 taxation year only $45 million, bettered its yield after 
each successive upward adjustment of rates so that in 1945 it 
contributed the huge amount of $768 million. Similarly, the 
revenue from the corporation income tax jumped from $78 million 
up to 1742 million, the bigger part of which came from the ex¬ 
cess profits tax. As will be seen later, these sums were col¬ 
lected after very sweeping changes in tax rates and exemptions 
were adopted, putting the number of taxpayers in 1945 above 5 
million. 

After 1940 the government began tapping the savings of the 
general public. The organizational task was entrusted to the 
National War Finance Committee in 1942 when the canvassing job 
required a nation-wide organization. The N.W.F.G. succeeded 
or absorbed two special Committees, the War Savings Committee 
and the Victory Loan Committee which for the preceding two years 
organized the sale of war savings certificates and stamps and 
marketed the first Victory Loan. Ail in all, the Dominion 
government augmented its net debt on account of war costs and 
demobilization from $5,152 million to $13,421 million, a four¬ 
fold increase. Although this sum might seem very excessive and 
burdensome, the annual interest charges rose only two and a half 
times, while the average interest rate fell from 5 * 5 2 P er cent 
to 2.54 P er cent, and taking into account the increase of revenue. 










- 170 - 


the debt, despite its size, imposed a relatively smaller bur¬ 
den upon the economy than did the increase during World War I. 


Gradual Expansion of Federal Income Taxation, 


The enunciation of a pay-as-you-go policy for financing 
the war represented a marked departure from the traditional 
Canadian fiscal policy. It required an extensive use of direct 
taxation by the Dominion government which not long ago was a 
cause of serious frictions between federal and provincial gov¬ 
ernments. Therefore, Mr. Ilsley introducing the first war bud¬ 
get in his capacity of Acting Minister of Finance on September 
12, 1939 9 devoted considerable time to justifying this policy. 
After reviewing past experience in war finance, he assured the 
House that past mistakes would, be avoided. Alluding to direct 
taxation as the most ideal method of distributing the war burden 
according to the principle of equality of sacrifice or of abi¬ 
lity to pay, he stated that the government was aware of its 
limits. In particular he said: 

H We shall not, of course, be able to meet all war 
costs by taxation, because... there is a limit to the 
taxes that can be imposed v/ithout producing ineffici¬ 
ency, a lack of enterprise and serious discontent... 

W© cannot carry taxes beyond the point where they ser¬ 
iously interfere Y/ith production. But we are not pre¬ 
pared to be timid or lighthearted in judging where 
this limit lies. What we cannot meet by taxation, we 
shall finance by means of borrowings from the Cana¬ 
dian public at rates as low as possible. 11 5 

As the Minister pointed out, this principle was a long-range 
view. The immediate situation called for a mild expansion of 


Sept. 12 , 1959 , p. li| 0 . 


3 • Debates , 










i 


f 







O 0 










- 171 - 


credit and consequently the government was prepared to meet 
the first costs by means of short borrowing from the banking 
system. Such a solution had also the advantage that it did 
not entail a retroactive revision of income tax, for the gap 
between the rate increase and collection of tax revenue was 
thereby filled, and also it enabled the government to await 
the final recommendations of the Commission on Dominion-Prov¬ 
incial Relations. 

The budget contained the following amendments in respect 
of income tax: firstly, personal incomes were made liable to 
a flat war surtax of 20 per cent of the tax payable; secondly, 
the corporation rates were increased from 15 per cent to 18 per 
cent and from 17 par cent to 20 per cent on incomes of corpora¬ 
tions filing normal and consolidated returns respectively; and 
thirdly, patriotic donations up to 50 per cant of net taxable 
income were allowed as deduction. 

The Minister also introduced the excess profits tax on war 
business profits effective from that date. Business concerns 
were allowed to elect to be taxed on either one of two bases, 
namely, either on the basis of a graduated scale of profits on 
capital employed, or on the increase in profits over the average 
of the past four years. Under the first alternative, a business 
concern was obliged to pay a 10 per cent rate on profits ranging 
from 5 per cent to 10 per cent of capital employed, 20 per cent 
on a 10#-15$ range, 50 per cent on a 15^-20^ range, 40 per cent 
on a 20^-25$ range, and 60 per cent on profits in excess of 25 
per cent of employed capital. Under the latter alternative, the 









- 172 - 


rate was 50 per cent of the profits in excess of the Ibur-year 
average. The corporate income tax was allowed as an expense 
in calculating the amount of excess profits for tax purposes. 
However, the law was repealed in its entirety in the subsequent 
year and supplanted by a new law. 

D 0 spite the substantial rate increase, the revenue yield 
of the income tax slid down by $8 million, mostly due to the 
business activity in 1959 9 which did not pick up until the end 
of the year. 

The first spell of heavy income taxation approached in 
the second war budget. The general economic conditions had im¬ 
proved more rapidly than was expected, which in turn made pos¬ 
sible the imposition of further burdens upon the economy in the 
form of taxation. During the next ten months about 100,000 un¬ 
employed were put to work, and business activity was humming 
due to large orders of the Dominion government and British gov¬ 
ernment . Farmers harvested in 1959 a Heavy wheat crop, thus 
bettering their share in the increase of national income. 

The budget of 1940 was delivered late in June, when the 
nation was already prepared psychologically also to accept heavier 
taxes. The income tax amendments were, of course, the highlights 
of the budget speech. The scope of the tax was m terially broad¬ 
ened by drastic reductions in personal exemptions, rates in¬ 
creased, and a new tax, the National Defence Tax, introduced. 

Amendments affecting Personal Income Tax . 


Statutory exemptions granted to individuals were lowered to 








- 173 - 


$ 75 ^ anc ^- §1>500 f° r single and married persons respectively, 
while the allowance for dependents remained unaltered and 
was extended as to apply to children evacuated from Great 
Britain under a governmental scheme. 

All existing tax rates applicable to individuals were abo¬ 
lished and replaced by new schedules. The normal tax was re¬ 
placed by the National Defence Tax, which will be discussed 
separately. The uniform graduated tax imposed on all incomes 
in excess of personal exemption started with 6 per cent on the 
first $250 or any part thereof. The income over $250 but not 
over $ 1,000 was charged with an 8 per cent rate, plus $15, which 
then steeply progressed up to 78 per cent plus $504*7^5* that 

4 

being the tax on incomes in excess of $ 5 ^ 0 , 000 . Ho special 
tax rate was imposed on investment income. All residents of 
Canada were liable to a 5 per cent rate in respect of income 
from interest and dividends received in currency which was at 
premium in terms of Canadian dollars. Further, the withholding 
tax rate was increased to 15 per cent of the net income of non¬ 
residents received for services rendered in Canada, whereas their 
income derived from royalties, rentals and similar payments was 
charged with a 5 P er cent rate upon the total amount. 

National Defence Tax . 

The amending statute (4 Geo. VI 0 . 54 ) inserted a new Part 
XV into the Income War Tax Act, 1927, which charged all indivi¬ 
duals with a new National Defence Tax. The basic personal exemptions 

4 * For details see Statistical Appendix, Table E. 




r: : wt 


■ ■ i 


O '.?• 


. . i 


>... v- 





- 171]. - 


were fixed at $600 for single persons and $1,200 for married 
persons, hence substart ially below the exemptions granted for 
graduated income tax. Single persons were liable to a 2 per 
cent rate in respect of income in excess of $600 but not in 
excess of $1,200, and to a 3 per cent rate on income above 
the latter limit. Married persons and persons having similar 
status paid a straight 2 per cent rate on all net income in 
excess of the basic exemption. Inasmuch as the tax had to be 
deducted at the source, the lav/ imposed an extra levy upon those 
incomes where the tax was not so deducted. If the tax was 
over $25 but not over $100 an extra levy of one,dollar v/as added, 
for the tax up to $200 the levy was #3. It was then increased 
by additional three dollars until it reached $21 which was to 
be added to the tax in excess of $ 7 ^ 0 . A deduction of $8 was 
allowed from the tax in respect of dependents. Specific prov¬ 
isions exempted from tax liability corporations and joint stock 
companies, all persons exempted from the income tax, municipali¬ 
ties, and military personnel. The statute provided further 
that the Hational Defence TLax must not reduce the income below 
the basic exemption; in other wards, if the income of a single 
taxpayer was $610, he v/as obliged to pay only $10 instead of 
the full liabLlity of $12*20. 

Amendments Affecting Business . 

The 3 per cent increase in corporation tax rates applicable 
to 1940 incomes v/as preserved, but the 12 l/2 per cent withhold¬ 
ing charge on income of non-resident corporations derived from 











. . 

■ 

' 

. 

' 

, 

, 

■ : r , c • ■ * 

. 

■ '.'■■■ .. , " > ' . ' 

. 

. ■ 

• ; .. 

; ' = 1 ■ • • : ' ' , : ^ 




, 


* 



















, 















- 175 - 


royalties, rentals and similar payments was increased to 15 
per cent of gross receipts. Partners or proprietors of a 
business enterprise paying Excess Profits Tax were allowed 
to deduct a proportionate part thereof from personal income 
when computing personal tax liability. 

Sundry Provisions . 

The amending law eliminated the statutory exemption of 
$ 1,200 granted to Dominion annuities and like annuity contracts 
entered into after June 25 , 194 ^, or to enlargements of exist¬ 
ing contracts, but the exemption granted to existing contracts 
was preserved. Distributions of the income of family corpora¬ 
tions became taxable if effected after December 51 , 194 ^* The 
law contained further provisions designed to prevent tax eva¬ 
sion which need not be discussed here, save one. In 1940 , the 
Treasury Board was empowered to make rulings in respect of the 
tax liability of any transaction which was effected for the pur¬ 
pose of tax avoidance or reduction of tax liability. This 
provision in amended form was also later incorporated into the 
present Income Tax Act. 

Excess Profits Tax . 

Since business profits were taxed chiefly during the war 
under the Excess Profits Tax Act, a brief reference to this Act 
seems to be in place. As we have mentioned earlier, the Act 
adopted in 1959 was repealed and substituted by a new one. The 
Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940 , followed in its principles the 
British practice. It levied a tax of 75 P 0r cent on the excess 







- 176 - 


profit of the 1936-39 average with a proviso that the minimum 
tax could not be less than 12 per cent of total annual profits* 
Small business with profits below $ 5 , 000 , n.r.o. investmert 
companies, personal corporations and professional businesses 
were exempted. 

The final decision as to the average profits rested in 
some cases with the Minister of Finance, and in certain cases 
with a Board of Referees instituted by the Act. The determina¬ 
tion of taxable profits for the purposes of Excess Profits Tax 
was based upon the same principles as for the purposes of nor¬ 
mal corporation tax with certain deviations. For example, a 
corporation was allowed to make a reasonable deduction for a 
reserve for future depreciation of inventory values, or in case 
of proprietors or partnerships an allowance not exceeding $5*000 
was permitted in lieu of salaries paid to the proprietor or to 
the partner working full time. Also, the corporation tax paid 
on the excess profit was made deductible as to eliminate double 
taxation. The Excess Profits Tax was applicable to profits 
earned since January 1 , 19 i |0 and thereafter. 

The impact of the aforementioned revision of personal tax 
rates is illustrated on the accompanying Table IX. 

The most substantial increases were those affecting the 
low and middUe income brackets, where the tax was raised several 
times. A s has been pointed out earlier, in Canada there are 
relatively few income receivers above the $ 25,000 level. There¬ 
fore, the Minister had to bring within the scope of income tax 
primarily those below that level, were the tax yield to increase 




- 177 - 


Table IX. 

INCOME TAX PAYABLE UNDER THE RATES OP 1939 and 19 l |0 
ON SELECTED INCOMES. 

(Married person with no dependents) 


Income 

Income Tax 
(1959 rates) 

Income Tax 
(1940 rates) 

U.K. Income T* 

1 = $ 4*45 

#1,500 

a. 

130 

#141 

2,000 


75 

328 

3,000 

$36 

195 

703 

4,000 

8k 

355 

1,078 

5,000 

lkk 

555 

1,453 

10,000 

781 

2,170 

5,550 

15,000 

1,789 

4,530 

5,993 

20,000 

3,112 

6,530 

8,715 

30,000 

6,51k 

11,200 

14,796 

50,000 

14,351 

21,610 

26,943 

100,000 

39,299 

51,520 

66,547 

150,000 

70,043 

84,475 

108,265 

200,000 

103,698 

119,430 

150,765 

500,000 

334,653 

357,235 

405,765 


Sources Budget Speech , I9U0. 


substantially. However, it must be borne in mind that Canadian 
taxpayers were subject also to different provincial and munici¬ 
pal income taxes which somewhat increased their over-all tax 
liability. The Minister of Finance estimated in his budget 
speech that a resident in Ontario would pay about 90-98 P® r cent 
of the British levy on his 1940 income in the aggregate of Dom¬ 
inion and provincial income taxes. 

Alluding to the chaotic situation in the income tax field 
across the country, the Minister saw in it the chief obstacle 
to any sane federal fiscal war policy, for it not only precluded 
adoption of adequate income tax e© asures on the side of federal 
authorities but also it distributed the tax burden in a very un- 








. . 




t 











■ 


: 




' ( 




,, Vi ' 





i 


C 










- 178 - 


even way among various parts of the country. Since the Rowell - 
Sirois Report was at that time made public, and the federal 
government was about to call a Dominion-Provincial Conference 
to deal with its main recommendations, the solution of over¬ 
lapping income taxes was postponed until the next year when 
the position of the provinces on the Sirois Report was expected 
to be clarified. 

Unfortunately, the Conference, convening in Ottawa early 
in 19^1? collapsed after two days since some provinces refused 
even to discuss the proposals of the Royal Commission. Mr. 
Ilsley, who in the meantime succeeded Mr. Ralston in the finance 
portfolio, approached the question of overlapping income taxa¬ 
tion from an entirely different angle. In his budget of 1941 
he proposed a federal tax on incomes calculated on the assump¬ 
tion that the provinces were not in those fields, and proposed 
as a temporary expedient, to ask the provinces to vacate the 
income tax field. As a compensation to each agreeing province 
he offered to pay for the duration of war either (a) the revenue 
which the province and its municipalities actually obtained from 
these sources during the fiscal year ending nearest to December 
51, 1940, or (b) the costs of the net debt service actually 
paid by the province during the fiscal year ending nearest to 
December 51, 19)40, (not including contributions to sinking 
funds), less the revenue obtained from succession duties during 
that period. The Minister gave the provinces a solemn assurance 
that the question of the Sirois Report would not be reopened 









- 179 - 


until after the end of the war, as well as that the plan out¬ 
lined above was strictly a war expedient and would be discon¬ 
tinued within one complete fiscal year after the termination 

5 

of hostilities. 

On this basis of n give and take u the provinces entered 

6 

into tax agreements with the Dominion, thus freeing the fed¬ 
eral authorities to devise and impose a federal income tax as 
they thought fit into their fiscal policy. 

The budget resolutions, besides including a further rise 
in income tax rates and in the gift tax rates, introduced for 
the first time succession duties into the federal revenue scheme 
on a basis akin to the existing provincial inheritance levies, 
completed the long process of transforming the federal fiscal 
system along the lines of direct taxation, which has remained 
unaltered up to the present time. 

Amendments Enacted in I9I4I in Respect of I«W.T .A . 

The more important amendments affected the distinction be¬ 
tween earned and investment income, personal tax rates, National 
Defence Tax, gift tax, and the withholding taxes. 

The flk ,000 limit imposed upon earned income in 1935 was 
abolished, leaving the source of income as the only dividing 
line between earned and investment income. According to the new 

5. Cf. Debates, 19 Ul , p. 23 UU* 

6 . The amount paid by the Dominion to the provinces under 
the Tax Rentals Agreement Act, Ijk 2 -, totalled $86 million a 
year. 








- l8o - 


provisions, investment income comprised any income which could 
not be explicitly subsumed under the definition of earned in¬ 
come* The alternative exemptions granted in the previous law 
were restricted to either investment income up to $1,500 or to 
the total personal exemptions allowed on account of personal 
statutes and dependents, whichever was higher. The old gradu¬ 
ated surtax on investment income was repealed and substituted 
by a flat Ij. per cent levy* 

Tl© rates applicable to individuals were further increased. 
The new schedule imposed a 15 per cent rate on the first $ 1 , 000 , 
20 per cent plus $150 on the additional $1,000 and so up to the 
$500,000 income which was charged with $558*580 plus 85 per cent 

7 

on incam in excess of that bracket. The withholding tax 

charged in respect of non-resident individuals in receipt of 

8 

interest, dividends, rents, royalties, etc. was put on a 15 per 
cent basis so that all income going abroad was subject to a 
uniform rate. Certain alleviations were however, granted regard 
ing payments for motion picture films and interest on provincial 
b onds . 

The national defence tax was markedly increased as well. 

The low rates of 2 and 5 P Qr cent applicable since June 50 , 1940 
were raised to 5 PQ r cent on income between $660 and $ 1 , 200 , and 
to 7 per cent above the latter in the case of a single person, 
and to 5 P er cent upon income in excess of $ 1,20 0 in the case of 

7 * See Statistical Appendix, Table E. 

8. Rentals from real estate were taxed on the net income, 
whereas other income was taxed on the gross income. 





)•;, * r --i. ;W Oxtll 





- l8l - 


married, persons or having similar status. The tax credit for 
dependents was fixed at $ 1 |. for I9I4.O, at $ll| for the year 19I4.I, 
and at $20 for 19income and thereafter. The provision 
that the tax must not reduce the basic income remained unal¬ 
tered. The extra tax imposed when the national defence tax 
was not deducted at the source amounted to one dollar if the 
tax was over $25 but not over $ 100 , and 3 per cent thereof 
if the tax exceeded $ 100 . As might have been noted, the basic 
personal exemption for single persons was raised to $ 660 , for, 
as the minister stated, the heavier rate was too heavy right 
at the bottom in cases of single persons living away from home. 
Further provisions regulated the residence requirements, taxa¬ 
tion of income from trusts, allowance for Excess Profits Tax, 
and the time of filing returns. 

The corporate tax remained unaltered save the N.R.C. com¬ 
panies which were made subject to 22 1/2 per cent rate instead 
of the previous one-half of corporation rate. 

Other provisions were adopted, which, reduced the amount 
of donations deductible to 10 per cent and 5 P© r cent of taxable 
income of individuals and corporations respectively, ana removed 
the tax exemption from payments from superannuation and pension 
funds over 5 P er cent of the total amount. The tax credit for 
taxes paid to foreign countries v/as also changed. Some changes 
were made in gift tax rates. 

Excess Profits Tax. 


The minimum tax on total profits of 12 per cent for the 





- 182 - 


period January 1 , 19)40 - December 31 , 19I4.O, was increased to 
22 per cent in the case of corporations and to 15 per cent in 
the case of all other businesses effective as of January 1, 
1941 . The maximum tax on excess profits remained unaltered 
at a 75 P er cent rate. 

There were numerous changes adopted regulating in detail 
the standard period, standard profits, deductions, exemptions, 
credit for taxes, depletion and depreciation, inventory res¬ 
erves, etc. They were chiefly designed to remove the rigidity 
of the original law, particularly in respect of depressed bus¬ 
iness . 

The 1942 Amendments . 

The upward trend of war income tax revisions reached its 
culminating point in 1942 when the Minister of Finance imposed 
the highest rates in Canadian income tax history. The rates 
became applicable to 1942 and subsequent incomes, but because 
in 1945 half of the 1942 tax was forgiven in connection with 
adopting a pay-as-you-earn plan of collection, they remained 
in force for the only year of 19455 which became the most try¬ 
ing year for the Canadian taxpayer in the whole history of 
the Dominion. 

The adoption of such heavy imposts is explained by two 

developments. Firstly, all provincial governments accepted 

the offer of the Minister of Finance, and vacated the field 

of income taxation for the sole us© of the federal government. 
Secondly, the war entered its fourth year with undiminished 






xO 




i 








o. 



< :■ 






.0 


e 




. 






. 



V. : t 






■ < 







o 



■! •. 





\.C) Q.J' 


J 




K ■ - ~ 









- 183 - 


destructive power, and the heavy losses of European Allies 
necessitated heavier contributions of overseas countries, in 
both manpower and in materials. Since October, I9l}-1, the 
country lived under over-all controls of prices, wages, and 
consumption, and to prevent the spread of black markets it 
was deemed necessary to reduce the purchasing power in the 
hands of public by means of heavier taxation and borrowing, 
and thus to counteract the development of inflation. 

After reviewing the 1941 financial situation of govern¬ 
ment accounts and expected further increases in war expendi¬ 
tures, Mr. Ilsley went on in his budget speech: 

"From what has been said it is evident that fiscal 
necessity forces us to look again to the income tax 
on individuals, or some similar device, for a large 
amount of additional funds. In devising measures to 
meet this need I have had to keep in mind three other 
important considerations - the need for equity, for 
incentive, and for savings.” 9 

What a change against the past! In 1915, Sir Thomas White 

alluded in very similar terms to the customs duties,which 

until the beginning of the war 11, were the chief source of 

federal revenues. In the 1940-41 fiscal year the income tax 

was already the second most important source of revenue, and 

since the fiscal year now -under review it has become by far the 

most important revenue producer in the federal revenue system. 

Income Tax Amendments . 

The salient features of the 1942 changes in the income tax in- 


9 . Debates , 1942 , p. 3579 ff. 
10. Cf. Chapter 11, p. 47 • 





r-s. 


: ' . . • ' 

J ^ J j ' ■ 

.. . • ... '■ ‘ ”i ’ ♦ 0. J • ■ - ’ 

. ' • ‘ r v 1 • 

- d ■ 

. ti ■; • 00 or o 1 •o^.;..'00' or ' o; o •. •. ■ '.rM-.r-: r >: ooo 

I ■ . C ' 2 l ■■ . 1 

. ' . j 0 ■ i :J u • . . v Ino . • . our.: 

- ' .• J ' ' J 1 ■ ■■- 

-Xbnaq^o a.31; .ox soo0.00.0n:l 0:00001;':; ''ocos';xe (nm ,0 • Irxe.aij 

: v - ju . ./ 1 .. . ' ' • "• r .11 *•:; . :... 1 .... 

b j ' is a n ■ 1 ' 1 

:::.o; eo; .-o .. 1 0 ni.00 00 1U10X .0: .0 0 r.. .vdlsoooon 

1 0 - o . io 7 i 

- j .0 ■ :o ■ \ , • ;• : ' ' : ;• o' 1 ' * 

r X .'1 • -sooo'.' ; .0 0 .. 0 jl o,G.o oro i o lo-O' • 1 • :• o' 00 

, 00.I >-: .0 J.,/ 0 o*.* J !o‘i 1 : 

* , os: : ’. 

Lei Id 1 

, J 1 : .' i h 

' O . • . • oil;. 1 0 . 0 ,11 0. ' ; ■ 1. 1 011 1 •••<.." 0 ,:O. lioiiX.v/ 

:ct * ■ - • 

. © 6 * jn ; : >noo 

. ■. I > ■ 5 

,.: J o: ... o 

. 

: ■ ■ retj ■ ■ .: 2 Ibb 

, 1 ?r ' . 5 i.li J" ^i:.:o.;i....... * p 

»' . , , 1 ' . . 1 








- 184 - 


eluded a nev; schedule of rates, a new method of allowances 
for married status and dependents, adoption of a refundable 
tax, pay-as-you-earn plan of tax collection, and an upward 
revision of gift tax rates. 


New Tax Rates Adopted . 

The national defence tax was discontinued as a separate 
levy and instead of it a "normal tax" with higher rates was 
incorporated into Schedule I* 

The graduated tax upon net incomes of all persons other 
than corporations and joint stock companies was levied accor¬ 
ding to the following schedule: 

On the first $500 of income or any part thereof 30 $ 


H50 and. 

33$ on income over 

$500 but not over 

$1,000 

515 

37$ 

1,000 

2,000 

685 

Ui% 

2,000 

5,500 

1,300 

45$ 

3,500 

5,000 

1,975 

5 °$ 

5,000 

8,000 

5,475 

55 $ 

8,000 

13,000 

6,225 

60$ 

13,000 

20,000 

10,425 

65$ 

20,000 

30,000 

16,925 

70 $ 

30,000 

50,000 

30,925 

75 $ 

50,000 

70,000 

45,925 

80 % 

70,000 

100,000 

69,925 

85$ on income over 

100,000 



For purposes of normal tax only the amending law (6 Geo .VI, 


c.28) granted $660 and $1,200 as a basic exemption for single 
and married persons, whereas for purposes of the graduated tax 
the basic exemption was $660 for all taxpayers regardless of 
status. 

The previous system of deductions from net income on account 
of status and dependents was substituted by a new scheme based 









. •- 1 - 







{/ o zii 




c 


' 


; 0 





■ ■ 




t 


t 


i ■ ’ 


0 





' 


t 



o 




■) 


4 . 
































- 185 - 


on fixed deductions from the tax payable. The taxpayer in 
computing his normal tax liability was allowed to deduct $28 
from the normal tax for each dependent, child, parent, or as 
the case may be. Prom the graduated tax he was permitted to 
deduct (a) $150 on account of married status; (b) $80 on 
account of dependent child or grandchild under 18 years of 
age (under 21 years of age in the case of students, and above 
this limit in the case of a dependent child incapable of self- 
support), and for each child supported under the co-operative 
scheme sponsored by the governments of the United Kingdom and 
Canada; (c) 20 $ of the graduated tax but not exceeding $400 
for grandparent, brother or sister dependent upon the tax¬ 
payer. Together with the provision that the aggregate of 
both taxes must not reduce the basic income of the taxpayer, 
the ^freezing 11 of personal deductions gave some alleviation 

to lower income receivers, but somewhat stiffened the tax li- 

11 

ability in the higher brackets. Since the personal deduc¬ 
tions from net income were abolished, investment income was 
made taxable in excess of $1,500 regardless of personal status 
at the old flat rat© of 4 P Qr cent. 

A specific feature of 1942 legislation was Part XVII 
providing for refunding a specified amount of tax paid under 
the changing schedules of income tax law at certain dates after 
the end of the war. In essence, the total tax included the 

11 . The deductions from the tax on account of dependents 
were calculated on the basis of a $3*000 income of a taxpayer. 
Thus those below this average gained somewhat, and those above 
it paid somewhat more. 










- 186 - 


absolute tax plus the refundable portion called also ^minimum 
saving requirement”. The refundable portion amounted to 8 
per cent of the tax or $800 whichever was less in the case of 
a single person, and 10 per cent of the tax or $1,000 in the 
case of persons having married or equivalent status, plus 
either one per cent or $100 for each dependent. The govern¬ 
ment stipulated it would pay 2 per cent interest on these 
amounts until their refunding. Persons over 65 years of age 
were exempted and could deduct the proper amount from the tax 
otherwise payable. Also payments for superannuation or pen¬ 
sions, life insurance premiums, annuity premiums, principal 
payments on a mortgage or agreement for sale of a taxpayers* 
residence effected prior to June 25, 1942, were offsets to the 
minimum saving requirement and a taxpayer could claim these as 
a deduction from the tax up to the limit of the whole refund¬ 
able amount. 

Further provisions granted an additional deduction from 
net income for medical expenses exceeding 5 P er Q©nt of the 
net income provided that the maximum amount deductible should 
not exceed $400 in the case of a single person and $600 in the 
case of married persons plus $100 in respect of a dependent 
with a limit of $400 for all dependents. Section 9 B (income 
of non-residents) was extended as to make the gross amount 
paid to non-residents in the form of salaries, wages, and other 
fixed and determinable incomes liable to tax, so that income 
of non-residents of whichever form was charged on its gross 




- 187 - 


rather than net income. A complete tax exemption was granted 
war pensions and workmen’s compensation receipts, and a limi¬ 
ted exemption to certain classes of military personnel. Fur¬ 
ther amendments were effected in reppect of taxing pension 
funds, deduction of business losses, and certain amounts paid 
under the Excess Profits Tax Act. 

A marked innovation was adopted in respect of tax col¬ 
lecting. Heretofore the discontinued national defence tax was 
the only levy to which applied the statutory obligation of 
withholding the tax at the source. The other tax levies, al¬ 
though permitted to be paid in advance by way of instalments 
since the preceding taxation year, regularly became due only 
after the return had been filed. The 194 ^ amending law in¬ 
augurated a general system of withholding of all income tax 
levies at source all regular and fixed incomes. Beginning with 
the taxation year 1943 $ employers were required to file on or 
before October 15, information returns of salaries and wages 
paid to their employees, and beginning with September 1 , 194 ^, 
to deduct from salaries and wages, and remit to the Receiver- 
General such percentage as the regulation would state. After 
the end of a fiscal year, a taxpayer was therefore liable only 
to the excess over the amount paid by instalments. The advan¬ 
tage of this system was twofold: on the one hand, it assured a 
steady flow of income to the treasury, and on the other hand, 
the taxpayer was fulfilling his tax obligation as the income 
accrued to him. As to the tax incidence, it removed the time 







- 188 - 


lag between the earning process and assessment, thus strength¬ 
ening the good as well as bad effects of income taxation. 

Excess Profits Tax . 

A similar drastic upward revision of taxrates was effec¬ 
ted also in the excess profits tax. The former 22 per cent 
minimum tax was divided into two parts: a 12 per cent rate 
applied to the total profits irrespective of the extent to 
which they might have increased, and the remaining 10 per cent 
was used as the alternative minimum rate applicable to excess 
profits. The maximum tax rate previously at 75 P 0r cent was 
fixed at 100 per cent. To alleviate the tax burden the businesses 
paying a 100$ tax on their excess profits were allowed, firstly, 
to deduct a proportionate part of corporation income tax and 
the basic excess profits tax (12$) from the additional tax pay¬ 
able (100$), and secondly, the taxpayers enjoyed the privilege 
of obtaining a 20 per cent refund at a specified date after the 
termination of war. The amount to be refunded was defined by 
Section 18 as being 20 per cent of profits above the point at 
which the alternative minimum and maximum levys were equal, viz. 

above the point where profits were equal to 116.66$ of the stan- 
12 

dard profits. 

Other provisions of the law dealt with standard profits, 
deductions, profits of small business, and particularly the old 
principle of exempting new raining companies for three calendar 

12. 10$ of $116.66 is equal to $ 16.66 minus $5.00 (being 

30 $ of $ 16 . 66 ). For companies filing consolidated returns the 
point was fixed later at 117*22 per cent. 








- 189 - 


years from tax liability was extended for the third time.^-3 
Gift Tax. 

The schedule of tax rates applicable to gifts adopted 
in the previous year was revised upward in 19t2* It was carried 
unaltered into the Income Tax Act, 19W, and has remained in 
force until to-day. Both schedule are reproduced below, ^-t 


Section 88 of X.W.T.A. charged gifts with a tax as follows: 


Taxation Year 

19l£ 191+0 

On gifts up to and including $ 5,000 10$ 7$ 


On gifts over 

I 5,000 but not over 
10,000 
20,000 
30,000 
to,000 
50,000 
75,000 
100,000 
150,000 
200,000 
250,000 
300,000 
too, 000 
500,000 
600,000 
700,000 
800,000 
1,000,000 


10,000 

11# 

8$ 

20,000 

12 

9 

30,000 

13 

10 

£.0,000 

i£ 

11 

50,000 

15 

12 

75,000 

16 

13 

100,000 

17 

It 

150,000 

18 

15 

200,000 

19 

16 

250,000 

20 

17 

300,000 

21 

18 

£ 00,000 

22 

19 

500,000 

23 

20 

600,000 

2k 

21 

700,000 

25 

22 

800,000 

26 

23 

000,000 

27 

24 


28 

25 


The tax became due on April 30th of the succeeding year, 
and bore interest at 8 per cent, 2 per cent higher than the normal 


income tax. 


13. A brief summary of successive Excess Profits Tax 
amendments may be found in CCH Canadian Ltd., Income War Tax Act , 
19t6 . Toronto, 19t&« 

li|.. Cf. Statutes of Canada, c. 18, 19t0-tl, and c. 28, 








. 

. 

. .. I . •: . • ■ : :• x ,i v • > :; 

■ ■ ; 

• !•: ; .. - , . >: • arjjB 

. .. • : c . ' “r A. 


b nzr 


lx- bo-rrmd-. 


391 n< 

J'ipl 


si 

ri 

.11 

II 

<) I 

Y’ r 
ii 
p 1 
01 
XI 


I ip 1 


f X 

4 x 

o i 
dl 
•r.I 

i i 

o £ 

01 

II 


, y,b y ;\ c. n: ; ;> .• j : 
Ic o‘ion ell r r-,.X 


. 


. 

. 

) 

t 

- 

■■ 0.1 

. 

= ■ ■ , X 

, 

. 

- 

■ t ; 

. 

* 


If, ill 0 f llYcaa 


• . 


:.u'X : Y'U J.XI.Y O' ( .'0 X ,i A X 


nO 


X) ; ;x.f 


.): .i" 


'?o xXll • nO 


o r 


0 £ 

o5 

' 

001 

11 j: 

oos 

' , ■' ' 

•, - 0 “ 

) cl 

>5 


x : o 


1 , 

X .\Y -X xX ' , J X 1 . 

: 1 a !• ■ 1: e v xo<l .l:r 

, .ci a:'(Do 1 /1. 


'): :U 


.x X;. Y.a,?0 100 rxl r .r •’/ e-X 

A i io r 


I 

i 


1 r 


; 3 XXF ,0 10 VYJYTJ 







- 190 - 


The heavy income tax elicited some murmurings of being 
too burdensome, and as Table X indicates, the personal income 
tax was more than quadrupled in the low brackets between 1940 
and 19 i| 2 , while in the upper brackets the increase was percen- 
tually less steep. It was the labor and farming groups, falling 
into the low income brackets, who were complaining most. Mr. 
Ilsley was perhaps best aware of the burden he had imposed upon 
the taxpaying public. He admitted in his budget speech that the 
taxes v/ould reduce the standard of living of all Canadians, but 
he said n the war will be not won by disputing as to whether 
labor or agriculture or employer or employee should get a lar¬ 
ger share of a swollen national income n . It will be shown later 
that Canadian tax rates were highest in the middle brackets, as 
compared with those employed in Great Britain, and the U.S.A. 
during the same period. However, since then each successive 
year brought gradual alleviation of the tax burden and thus 
reduced the strictures of the public. 

Lessening the Tax Burden . 

Since 1943 the government gradually has reduced the tax 
load by means of extended deductions. In 1943 the Minister 
announced forgiveness of a half of the tax payable on 194 ^ in~ 
comes in connection with putting the system of tax collection 
on a comprehensive pay-as-you-earn basis. The regulations 
governing the deduction at source was published late in 194 ^, 
and employers would have had to deduct in the 1943 taxation year 
both the overdue payments on 194 ^ income as well as the deduction 



-u..;;v . ' o 


;j;. £ 


i 






r .: o 


. ; ; ) 





TABLE X, Personal Income Tax Payable at Various Income Levels 

in I 9 I 4 O, 19^1 and 1943 Taxation Years. 

(Persons with single and married status, no dependents) 


o 


©' 
© 
-p 
ctJ 

CM 

£ 

H 

S3 


KV 


ON' 

H 


H 

H 


O 

H 


© 

£ y? 
O r d 
«h"-' 
© £ 
rQ O 
•H 
© 43 

§ & 
G © 


UNO UNCO VO KNONKNH 

^J-O UN ON CM CO UNO CO 
CM KN KN KN_£--£- UNCO CO 


{OH-£--£-C0 UNONO—£* 
vo Ovo ON cm vo t —kn o 
KNvO O UNHCO KNKNKN 

=£©= -V * 

H H CM KNCO O VO 
CO O- 


vo O UNCO UNKNUNUNO- 


vOCMC—H^tOOONIN- 
H CM CM KNKN_£”UNC'-00 


KN UN UN r-J vO ^4 ON CM H 
• ••«••••• 

KN H 0\_£’0--£"CM CO vO 
H CM CM KN KN_j* UN 0-00 


O H-^tPd-CX) UNONO-_rt 
O KNCO UD IN- UN CM 00 UN 
CM-Zj-CO KNO0 UNCJN H H 

H H KNC—CO CM 
0 - 0 - 


O-UNUNH UNO-CM CM NO 


VO H ON-^-o-^cNO IN-UN 
H H CM CM KV^TO-CO 


lN-HPM-^j*CQ UNONO-_rt PO H-zj*_rt00 iaCnoJ 
-rfPTCXS O-CM CM CN-KN O OO KNCOvO O-UNcM CO UN 


CM -£*CQ CM r—CM UN UN UN 

©H CM UN ON KNO-ON r-l H 


S\ % •» *k 

£S3= 

«\ ♦> »i *\ »> 


H r l rCNt>-ONUN 

© 

H CM vO IN- H 


IN- IN- 

P» 

o-o- 


iH 

T{ 

H 



©^ 



LfNO [N-ONvO ONCO UN UN .HUNOJ CO-j-UNO-O LCNo- 

«•••«••«« Jlj| <& » » . « <# a • • 

CM UNCO H-^S*0 ONHOO ShKNIN-H U^.CO UN'vO ON vO 
H H H OJ CM KNKNvO vo ctf H H H CM KN UNvo 


0-0 CM UN CM O 0 - 0 - UN 
CO O vO O-KN C—IN—-It ON 
H KNUNco CM -£■ On UN ON 

*©3» •»**•'* 

H CM UNH vO 
VO KN 


H 0- KNVO CO NO CO CM KN 

UNVO ONH KN ONCO H ON 
H H H CM UNUN 


CM UN UN UNUN O O UNO 

UNj^-UNH CM NO o 0-0- 
4@= H KNVO ONQjj- UN_£- 

*» *i «» •> 

CM LCNONKN 
UNKN 


O IN- UN ONH CM uj* KNVO 

H CM UN 0-0 vovo OCO 
H H CM UNUN 


o-uno uno r— o-o- cm 

O- KNCO VO ONvO CM ON UN 
^&r-{ CM _zj-NO UN KN-H NO 

•i »4 ^ 

H_£HCO 

UN H 


UN UN UN UN UN UNO O O 
H UNVO H O ONVO O H 
H KN UN CM ONKNCM 

H KNO O- 
UNH 


500000000 
>00000000 
NO o o o o o o o 

4 CM KVzfUNQO UNO O 
* H O O 

H CM 


G G 

ooooooooo 
ooooooooo 
UNO o o o o o o o 

H CM KN_d-UNcO UNO O 
4©* H O O 

H CM 


^|CM 

o x> 

UN 
PQ KN 


A 


© 

G 
rj 

© 

£|CM 
© -£• _ 

©N[ 

© H 

pcj 

« 
w 
© 

£ © 

O 

»H © 

£ o 
£ © 

+3 H 
W OS 
£ 

o © 

G © 

© C Q 

£ • 

O UN 
CM 
© I 

G_j- 
£ CM 
© 

£ • 

© Pi 

£ 
o * 

o © 

© 

H X 
cO as 
•H Eh 

§ © 

>H £ 

> o 

O G 
£ £ 
jPh M 

I 

£ iH 
O aS 
H 
£ 

H 


CO 

S £ 
o © 
Q P« 


O 

O 

£ 

© 

> 

£ 

O 

© 

P* 

1 

43 

o 

Pi 

© 

G 

G 

£ 

•H 

© 

H 

H 


OS • 

s 

O 

© 

£ © 
© © 
o 

O 

£ 

H 

> Pi 
£ 

O £ 


-£-P. 

ON 

£ 

H K 
£ 

£ 

as 

£ 43 
•H 

£ 

43 O 


Pi *4 


© 

■£ 

G © 

X g 


© O 


G 


“ £ 
TZ 

« 

1 43 

s: 

O £ 

£ 

o © 

o 

£ n 


♦H 43 


43s: © 

£ £*P © 
O O £ > 
Pi *H © £ 
43 

© £ 43 
rH O M © 

,0 Pt © r© 
P > 

■£ © £ o 

£ H «H43 

ZrO=: 

Sh c& 

© © 
P3 £o ^ 

r £ UN © 
4h © 
bO © go tJ 
£C£ © 

•HS: © 

tJ tS as 
£ bO © ^ 

H £ £ 

G vH © O 
£•£ TSO 
•H £ .H O 
© 



43 G £-£- 

•• 

O £ OH 

© 


G 

£ 


£ 

o 

as r© G 

GQ 

——" 















- 192 - 


on 19U5 incomes. This would cause serious hardships for all 
but the high income receivers. The relief applied in full to 
the tax on earned incomes, and investment income up to $5>000, 
while investment income above this level remained liable for 
the full amount with a proviso that a half of the tax payable 
became due only after the death of the taxpayer, and then it 
was to be paid from his estate, or it could be defrayed prior 
to April 50 9 1944 a ^ a discount. This privilege did not apply 
to revenues paid to non-resident persons, as well as to gift 
taxes• 

Further, the ceiling regarding n basic income* 1 in the bottom 
brackets was somewhat extended. Single persons having an income 
up to |820 or married persons up to $ 1,570 were required to pay 
only the maximum of two thirds of the amount by which the total 
income exceeded the basic exemption. Some relief was given also 
to military personnel and to receivers of Dominion government 
annuities• 

More favourable treatment was afforded to business and farm 
losses, and costs incurred by prospectors for strategic metals, 
oil and natural gas. 

Section 32A, vesting discretionary powers in the Treasury 
Board, was further amended extending the discretion of the 
Board to transactions involving inter-company distribution of 
dividends and stock conversions. 

The income of employees of Canadian firms temporarily 
sent abroad, per diem allowances, and profits realized from 
sale of assets subject to an accelerated depreciation were made 


: ■ . , Ui 


:o ;'o 


oi 


/0- 


o 


. j \. 


J ... \>.C. 


O'.:;; ' 


;oi. ! 




- 195 - 


taxable. Indeed, the amendments extending the method of tax 
collection were of prime significance. In addition to further 
changes in the rules applicable to the income of wage and sal¬ 
ary receivers and the income of non-residents, a provision was 
adopted requiring farmers to pay two-thirds of their tax calcula¬ 
ted any time up to December Jl, on the basis of a rough guess, 
and the balance when they filed the annual return. It was estima¬ 
ted, that since 1945 the pay-as-you-earn method covered about 
95 per cent of all collections. 

The budget of 1944 continued the downward revision of the 
income tax. Presentations were made to the Minister of Finance 
that heavy income taxes exerted an adverse effect on production, 
particularly that they increased absenteeism, curtailed the 
willingness to do over-time work, and thus induced employers 
to use various devices to provide wage increases. Mr. Ilsley 
therefore proposed further tax relief in his budget speech of 
June 26, 1944 5 deliverance of which iras evidently timed with its 
proposals. Firstly, the saving portion of the tax for individuals 
was terminated effective June 30 5 and persons reaching the age 
of 65 years could claim immediate refunds if their income was 
less than $5,000. Secondly, medical expenses incurred abroad 
became deductible as if they were incurred in Canada, and the 
maximum amount deductible was increased by one-half in each case 
and the 5 per cent limit was put at Thirdly, the definition 

of n dependent child” was extended as to include an illegitimate 
child, and the alimony paid pursuant to a divorce or separation 


V.JO 








n 



- 194 - 


decree or to similar arrangements were permitted as a deduction 
from payor*s income. Fourthly, a taxpayer was allowed to re¬ 
duce his income for income tax purposes by a straight cash 
donation to the Dominion government within a specified period 
of time. This provision was inserted in order to grant some 
relief to husband and wife v/here either of them had a small 
investment income above the basic personal exemptions. 

In the spin re of the corporation income tax and the excess 
profits tax a marked innovation was introduced in the form of 
carry-over of business losses (three years) and carry-back of 
expenditures incurred for repairs and maintenance (as far back 
as December 51, 1942). Similarly, expenditures on research 
of a current nature became deductible expense in the year of 
expending, and expenditures of a capital nature were deductible 
over a period of three subsequent years. The allowance for 
costs of prospecting Ysras also broadened. 

The steep increase of income tax rates exposed the ine¬ 
qualities of treatment of different kinds of incomes. Taxation 
of co-operatives, credit unions, of distribution of earnings 
of closely held companies accumulated prior to 1939 posed serious 
problems to the administration,over-loaded with v/ork, which could 
not devote much time to their revision. Consequently, Mr. II- 
sley announced in his budget speech in 1944 that those special 
income tax problems would be subjected to an exhaustive study 
by two Royal Commissions. Soon afterwards the government ap¬ 
pointed a Commission, headed by W.C. Ives, to inquire into the 
taxation of annuities and family corporations, and another with 



.. : f 


, o 


(I . ' 


V : .. 


vo 



- 195 - 


Mr. E.M.W. McDougall as a chairman to investigate the taxation 
of co-operatives. Of course, this was just the beginning of 
a close scrutiny of the workings of the Income War Tax Act, 
which was carried on by different public bodies and which 
finally resulted in adoption of a new income tax law in 1949 . 

With the budget of 1944 war finance*was in a sense con¬ 
cluded. In the next year hostilities ended, and budget of 1945 
was not brought down until late in the fall, when the new prob¬ 
lems of reconstruction and adaptation to peacetime conditions 
came to the fore. This period will be reviewed in the next 
chapter, but before we would focus our attention to the postwar 
years, it is necessary to devote some space to the broad economic 
aspects of war taxation. 

Income Tax as an Anti-inflationary Instrument . 

Prom the very beginning of the war the government pursued 
two main objectives in its finane3a 1 policy. First, it v/ished 
to secure as much revenue as possible for financing the war 
costs from taxation and secondly it wished to use heavy taxes 
as a check on the price level. The first aspect we have dis¬ 
cussed at the beginning of this chapter, and it was asserted 
that the government was definitely successful in attaining this 
objective. Now we are about to answer the second question, viz. 
how effectively did the taxation policy work in checking infla¬ 
tion? 

It must first of all be pointed out that taxation policy 
was by no means the sole check, but rather a complementary 





.. ,V •' B 




.0 


■ 


C, Oii : . V 




L 




- twMrsm:' 


l r . 


c r 2;j o v f, co 


'•U - 


t 


no 






c 


t 


> ■ O ■ 



- 196 - 


device employed together with borrowing policy and over-all 
regulation of prices, wages, and production. Taxes and bor¬ 
rowing were absorbing excessive purchasing power in the hands 
of consumers, and balanced the demand for goods and services 
to their supply which war industry could produce for civilian 
consumption. 

Table XI. Gross National Product, Net National Income, 

Personal Income, and Income Tax Collections, 

1939-45. 

(In Millions of Dollars) 


Year 

GNP 

NNI 

Personal 

Income Tax 

Personal % Ratios 





Income 

Collections 

Income 







Total 

Tax 

573 

5/2 

6/4 

1 

2 

.... 3 

. 4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

1939 

5,707 

4,373 

4,320 

261 

46 

5.9 

4.8 

1.07 

1940 

6,872 

5,263 

4,947 

398 

71 

7 a 

5.7 

1.44 

1941 

8,517 

6,563 

5,896 

736 

226 

11.2 

8.6 

3.84 

1942 

10,539 

8,337 

7,475 

1,061 

432 

12.7 

logo 

5.64 

1943 

11,183 

9,043 

8,176 

1,270 

630 

14.0 

11.3 

7.64 

1944 

11,954 

9,826 

9,002 

1,209 

711 

12.2 

10.1 

8.56 

1945 

11,850 

9,940 

9,235 

1,332 

733 

13.3 

10.7 

7.98 


Source: D.B.S., National Accounts, Income and Expenditure . 
1926-gO. Tables 5. IB and 38. — 

The increase of GNP during the war years was chiefly attri¬ 


butable to the fuller use of the existing capacity, prior idle, 
to the establishment of new plants, and also to extended work¬ 
ing hours of the labor force. Canada was able to expand her 
output of goods and services by such speed that the needs of war 
exercised considerably smaller pressure on civilian consumption 
which, despite war conditions, rose. Perhaps here lies the major 
reason for the small changes in the wholesale price index which 








1. X'J 


■ > 

| 


• 

>i . ooo y.b : •!:. 

' , :X ; ) 00 

. : 


>3 a id %d { .^iuq e 

5 ') 

. ) 

- 

'1 ol ■ >'1:0 .! V: 

3.rl.X 3)0 a 1 

viol 11 -rlo 

'IV.- sD 0 • f D D*X 

h I;.i (.>:•’ V 3/ j 3 

n ■ 

, ■ ■ 

iXo/i: W: l 

. ■ 

oo ■ i ■ ■ 1:■ 

. ‘J 

X X : i • ‘i 


•v- I 

„ 

- .> r -> r 




i ob,.bXI *7 

3 3 I'.i . 

it v) 


> -3 ; ^ 

;tlcH oVfe euao : ;>ni 


*3 


. C;0 3- i /ill 00 


3 0.t 

:.v «v 



V. 

...._ :> . 


I;3no*:.-'X: 

eooooal 



\1 X.V. fD- ! 'tOO ; IB0 i\3>3 < IO 1 

?,n • .V os* IX V ofrroocfl 
IXVV 1 . 



IX < '13 V 



„r 


; « 


* 


,IrV:i 

. 




" ; o> : 

1 , 

... 

VII 

o SS 

' n V* 

' ; c s 

. • 

*• 

T.:-M 

Sf ;i . 

11) 1 

% 

. 

} , ./ 

VV 

or.. 


. 

• 

IX V 

?,r. 



. ;; 

C c '•:* 



■ 



OfO l 

. 

r. v %x- ■ 

,'X 

rx>i 

3>'\ 


■ p 

a t 

• 

, 

. v= 

j c » • r 

X I? I 

‘ <;-• r n 

.■ . 

* 

. 

f d? I 

3 

• y 

. 



. . . ■ . • ••* * : ■ J ■ : 

. . . ' 3 ... 

-VuV : 033. . • X •) OoXo- oV . - * 2' • : o.,o3 XO 

, J 3 .>io . ; J X j o< • ■ j . : ’ ■’ '■ ■ ‘i ‘ 30■" 

- ,o > M . ■ * . •’ X ' !' •: - ' o .o'- 


* 

,;03i Vi/; ::3- 

3- :/ el 3; -i/oj 

. -0-3 

j •' 3. 3 0. Oili 

‘i.V.-J 

X .. . 

3 v. ££■ V baet:'C : U)3i3.:i 

\ro oX t 

333 ' OB . Xo vf >j C{-ji’JG 

acl: 

;j . ( J ' / • 3/3 

I 

• X [ 

. ■ . X ■ • >e ' 3) 0 ' 3" 

33.) i. 3 

o 1 o c l X r> 

. BV 

t 

■ o.i- ; -.V. 



3 ;e!o 

.33 0,3 it ’ 

Xo -3.1.•3,303 30 0. O’. X n-J 3 .0 3' 











- 197 - 


moved upward from 75.4 points in 1939 to 103.6 points in 1945 
when it more or less returned to its 1926 normal level. Sim¬ 
ilarly, the cost of living index jumped by only 18 points dur¬ 
ing the same period. The largest increase occurred during 
I 94 O-J 4.2 when neither economic controls nor taxation were put 
into full operation. But although Professor Higgins pointed 
out in his study on Canada 1 s v/ar finance, that price indexes 
and cost-of-living indexes are not very reliable guides when 

1-5 

judging the inflationary trends during a war, nonetheless they 
may reveal the relative effectiveness of a governments measures 
adopted to counteract such trends. 

In the immediate postwar period both indexes rose sharply, 
as controls were removed, the liquid assets accumulated during 
the war spilled over Into the market for goods, and income 
taxes were lowered. In I 9 I 1 . 7 , the wholesale index number reached 
CHART IV. 

Cost of Living Index,1914-1920, and 1939-1945; Wage Index, 
1939-1945. ( Yearly averages.) 



15. Higgins, op. cit », p. 3* 



































; Z • ' 1 .V . ' ■ - - •> 




o, 





T 




..V 


V O 




<J *. 


q ri" 






VO 


f 








1 






- 198 - 


the height of I 29 .I and the cost-of-living index 155*5 points 
and still kept on rising, 

CHART V. 


Compononents of Corporate and Personal Income , 



The corporate income tax and excess profits tax exercised 
a much stronger influence upon corporate earnings than on per¬ 
sonal incomes. Chart V indicates that the total amount of cor¬ 
porate undistributed profits and dividends was kept almost on 
the same level during the war by means of heavy taxes v/hich ab¬ 
sorbed more than a half of total profits. In the case of indivi¬ 
duals the picture is less impressive, particularly for the last 
part of the war. As long as the government was adhering to the 

\ 



























































. 3 i.: 




■xoo xQ /' 

















:i o .*■ .1 .•• o ;• o ;T 

o J jo ■ . 




■ 




.* ) o/tT 

• • r: ■ ' Id ' t 

I 

' ■ ' :' ■ ■ ' 




.,T . .0 1 •. 


, 




l . i. 


■ , ; ■ ; < B 

: ■ r 

,.;V ‘:..0 , 












- 199 - 


pay-as-you-go policy, the expenditures on goods and services 
reflected the general trend of increasing economic activity. 
However, since 1943, when the first tax relief was granted, 
the volume of personal expenditures was rising steeply. In 
this connection it may be of interest to note that the an¬ 
nouncement of the Minister of Finance in his budget speech on 
March 2y 9 1944 ? that the deadline for payments of the final 
Instalment of 1943 income taxes would be extended from April 
30 to August 31 entailed a big buying boom right af terwards. 

CHART VI. 

Canadian, British and American Income Tax Rates 

n Compared. 

Peace a// 



Source: Reproduced from Higgins, op.cit .,p,12. 


As the Financial Post pointed out, the upsurge was noticeable 

16 

in some parts of the country on the very next day. 


16. The Financial Post , April 1, 1944- 




































_>C <'•' u 


u ; c 


; 



0'. : : f. o ' o 




, 7 /a 




■ 

































- 200 


Chart VI gives us a different look at the impact of in¬ 
come taxation upon various income groups. Taxpayers in the 
middle brackets (between $5,000-$20,000) contributed more 
heavily than the same group either in Great Britain or in 
the U.S.A. and bore the brunt of the Canadian income tax. 

The low brackets, the largest as to the number of taxpayers, 
were afforded more favorable treatment than their counterparts 
in Great Britain, although their tax load was well above that 
of the American income tax. 

Different devices used during the war to alleviate the 
tax burden in the very low brackets, coupled with lighter rates, 
brought about a definite re-distribution of national income in 
favor of low income receivers, who somewhat intensified the 
pressure on the level of consumption, and it may be theoreti¬ 
cally argued that, at the bottom, there was some room for either 
higher rates or a higher ^minimum saving requirement”♦ 

On the whole, the Dominion Income tax despite its short¬ 
comings as to the equitable treatment of different kinds of in¬ 
come, as to Its administration, and clarity of the Act, served 
Canada well during the ?!orla War II. It had been developed 
into a mighty fiscal instrument and a fair check against infla¬ 
tion. Its defects, which became too obvious, once the rates 
were substantially raised, were recognized by its administra¬ 
tors and the taxpaying public. But the chief interest was con¬ 
centrated all the more on framing an equitable income tax policy 
for the postwar period. 



. 


o.a 


i 






O:. 






, . ' . 





OT 



- 201 


The art of public finance made great strides during war¬ 
time along the lines of general economic theory. The level 
of government spending and taxation was recognized as one of 
the major factors influencing the general level of employment. 

The government, fearing a postwar economic slump, began 
preparing for the transitory period, which among other things, 
included a general revision of the income tax law. The appoint¬ 
ment of two Royal Commissions to investigate certain income tax 
problems were just a beginning of a thorough study of all as¬ 
pects of income taxation. 

Wise management of financial affairs of the country through¬ 
out the wartime period effected results which were aimed at by 
ministers of finance since the previous war. The federal fiscal 
system was rounded out by adding an inheritance tax. Perhaps 
the achievement was best characterized by its chief engineer, 

Mr. Ilsley, who in his budget speech of 1945# delivered after 
cessation of hostilities stated; n It is a matter for great 
thankfulness that we have accomplished the task and that we can 
now confront, in good order and in good heart, a future which 

1 ? 

is filled with problems and difficulties but also with promise.” 


17. Debates, l c jh5 , P- 997 • 






- 202 


CHAPTER V. 

TOWARDS A BETTER INCOME TAX LAW 

During the war, and particularly thereafter, two more 
significant trends have influenced the development of Canadian 
income taxation. The first trend fails within the scope of 
fiscal theory, which since the appearance of Lord Keynes 1 
famous treatise The General Theory of Employment, Interest 
and Money in 1936, has been greatly modified. There has bean 
a growing understanding among economists of the uses of fiscal 
policy as an instrument for mitigating fluctuations in economic 
activity. The shadow of the possibility of a postwar economic 
slump made the Canadian governmental and academic economists 
and fiscal experts discuss plans for such an eventuality well 
in advance. Already during the war considerable time was spent 
on drawing up plans along Keynesian lines to assist in smoothing 
the conversion of the economy from war to peacetime conditions. 
Most of this planning was done on the official level in the com¬ 
mittees of the Parliament and the G-overnor in Council. It re¬ 
sulted in the preparation of an official document, the White 
Paper on Employment and Income which was submitted to Parliamaat 
by the Minister of Reconstruction in April 1945> and in which 
the federal government committed itself to the maintenance of a 
stable level of employment and national Income. 

Such a bold commitment presupposed certain adjustments in 
Dominion-provincial fiscal relations, particularly in the field 
of direct taxation, which under the impact of war were effected 









O . 1 * 




- 205 - 


on a temporary basis. Proposals in this respect were embodied, 
among other things, in official publications prepared for the 
announced Dominion-provincial Conference on Reconstruction, 
where the Dominion government suggested continuance of wartime 
fiscal arrangements under terms more favourable to the provinces. 
However, the provincial governments were reluctant to adopt the 
Dominion proposals as a whole, as the proceedings of the Con¬ 
ference convening in Ottawa in 1945 revealed. In the subse¬ 
quent year the Conference collapsed entirely. The federal gov¬ 
ernment had to revert to a piecemeal realization of its original 
plans, which may have served Canada better than a rapid jump 
into a large-scale experimenting. Furthermore, it has given 
more time to the federal government to perfect its chief in¬ 
strument of taxation policy, the income tax, which was long 
overdue• 

The second trend has been strictly confined to the income 
tax lav/. The structure of the Income War Tax Act remained al¬ 
most unaltered after its revision in 1927* Numerous amendments, 
especially during the war, rendered the statute ambiguous and 
cumbersome, and the administration still enjoyed vast discre¬ 
tionary powers. The necessity of a general overhaul was clearly 
recognized, and as soon as the v/ar was over the Minister of 
Finance announced in his budget speech in October , 1945* that 

1. The federal government offered to pay for their with¬ 
drawal from the tax fields concerned to the provinces an uncon¬ 
ditional subsidy of not less than $12 per capita of their popu¬ 
lation in 1941 with a provision for upward revision if the 
national product per capita would increase. 



) si 



, 


0 


Q 




> 



70 








- 20k - 


necessary steps would be taken in order to replace the exist¬ 
ing statute with a modernized and improved measure. Although 
the preparatory work was mostly done on the interdepartmental 
level, the public was given ample opportunity to state its 
views and to suggest improvements. After three years 1 exten¬ 
sive work Canada was given a new Income Tax Act, which marked 
a definite advance over the pre-war legislation. 

Tax Rentals Agreements 

After the collapse of the Conference on Reconstruction 
at the beginning of May, 1946 , the Minister of Finance found 
himself in the same situation as he was in 1941 - Not only was 
he., unable to plan his budgeting for longer periods than a 
year but he also had to look for remedies to avoid a reversion 
to the pre-war chaotic situation in the income tax field. This 
would have been intolerable in view of the large expansion 
of income tax during the war. In his budget speech delivered 
late in June, Mr. Ilsley reviewed the his tory of the Conference 
on Reconstruction and stated the unpleasant situation resulting 
from the lack of accord. He told the House that the Dominion 
government could not stand aside and allow such a situation to 
develop. It would seriously impair the capacity of private en¬ 
terprise to provide high and expanding employment, ana it would 

2 

weaken or perhaps destroy the federal system. To preclude it, 
he announced, that he was forwarding by letter new proposals to 


2. Cf. Debates, 194^ > P* 2909 . 









JB 



. 









- 205 - 


the provincial premiers in respect of renewal of Bominion- 
provincial tax agreements on a voluntary basis. 

The federal government was ready to pay annually to each 
agreeing province for withdrawal from the triple direct tax 
field (the personal income tax, corporation tax and succession 
duties) $15 per capita of the 19Ul or 19^2 provincial popula¬ 
tion in which sum was to be included a 5 P©r cent tax on cor¬ 
poration profits levied on the same basis as the Dominion cor¬ 
poration tax by the agreeing provinces, and collected by the 
Department of National Revenue. The provinces might retain 
the right of imposing succession duties. The federal government 
promised to grant a 50 P QI> cent deduction from its levy on ac¬ 
count of provincial tax, but the annual rental payment would be 
reduced accordingly. 

In respect of non-agreeing provinces the Minister announced 
that after the expiration of the tax agreement the federal gov¬ 
ernment would aliow a 5 P er cert reduction from personal income 
tax payable on account of a similar provincial levy, and the 
same rate on account of provincial corporate tax* 

During the negotiations following the budget offer the terms 
of agreement were altered by Mr. Abbott, who relieved Mr. Ixsley 
in the portfolio of finance, and in 1947 the Dominion government 
entered into new tax agreements with all provincial governments 
save the government of Ontario and Quebec. Although both central 
provinces were free to levy personal and corporate taxes of their 
own, after the termination of the war tax agreements they imposed 


O IS 


'i o 




i. 


I 



' 


■ 


. 


0 3 ff 


■ 


- 206 - 


only a corporate income tax of 7 per cent plus minor business 

3 

taxes on various bases. According to A.M. Moore and J.Ii. 

Perry these provincial levies totalled 8 1/2 per cent of cor¬ 
porate income, putting the over-all corporate tax liability 

in Ontario and Quebec 3 l/2 per cent above that in other prov- 
4 

inceso This situation continued until 195 2 when the 1947 agree¬ 
ments expired, and a new scheme for compensating the provinces 
was adopted. 

Under the terms of 1952-56 rental tax agreements the 
provincial governments were required to stop levying the ad¬ 
ditional 5 per cent corporation tax without losing the refund, 
and corporations residing in the only non-agreeing provirc e 
of Quebec (the Province of Ontario joined the scheme late in 

5 

1952) were granted a tax allowance not more than 5 V QV Gent 
from the Dominion corporation tax against the taxes paid to 
the province. The 5 P er Gent tax credit for provincial personal 
taxes was retained, and will be in operation since the Province 
of Quebec has recently adopted a personal income tax. 

The Dominion income tax was given a satellite in 1952 in 
the form of an old age security tax. The Old Age Security Act 
requires every person liable to income tax to pay 2 per cent of 

3. Both provinces refrained from imposing personal income 
taxes, but continued levying succession duties. 

4. Gf. Moore, A.M. and Perry, J.H., Financing Canadian 
Federation, Tax Paper Ho. 6, Canadian Tax Foundation, Toronto, 
Mar oH7T^53. 

5. The amending statute of 1953 granted certain corpora¬ 
tions a 7 per cent offsetting allowance. 










! 




o 



. 





- 207 - 


his taxable income but not over |>60 dollars in addition to his 
income tax, the same rate being applied also to corporate tax¬ 
payers without the $60 ceiling. 

Income Tax Reform . 

The period between 1944 an< ^ 194^ ma y be properly described 
as a period of the income tax reform not only because the old 
Income War Tax Act was replaced by a new statute, but also be¬ 
cause during this period there were added many significant 
amendments giving the tax a new meaning and a new structure. 
However, this is not to say that the innovations inserted into 
the tax law v/ithin this period were unknown to Canadian tax¬ 
payers or that they were not pressed for before. It might be 
recalled that the averaging of income of farmers was advocated 
and suggested as early as 1J22, that the Dominion Association of 
Chartered Accountants throughout the whole period of the exist¬ 
ence of the income tax fought the discretionary powers of the 
minister or that the Citizens 1 Research Institute recommended the 
carry-over and carry-back of business losses during the late 
twenties. However, because the federal government was not entirely 
sure about the future of the law, many useful propositions were 
passed over. ?/e may also recall the attempt of Prime Minister 
Bennett in 19J1 to remove the enigma of impermanence from the 
title of the tax law, which, taken together with many other 
proposals, witness the lively interest of the Canadian public 
and federal authorities in the income tax law, and particularly 
in its fair application. 


















- 208 - 


The process of remodelling the Dominion income tax law 
began in November, 1944, by appointing the Royal Commission 
on the Taxation of Annuities and Family Corporations (Ives 
Commission) and the Royal Commission on Co-operatives (McDou- 
gall Commission). Both Commissions completed their investiga¬ 
tions during the subsequent year and submitted reports to the 
Minister of Finance prior to his budget speech. However, the 
report of the McDougall Commission reached the Minister too 
late when the preparation of budget was well advanced, and con¬ 
sequently he postponed the decision on its recommendations 
until the next budget. 

The budget proposals regarding the income tax announced 
on October 17 9 1945* already bore the marks of peace-time bud¬ 
geting, In response to a general demand for tax cuts, Mr, II- 
sley proposed a flat 16 per cent cut in the personal income tax 
effective immediately (4 per cent for the whole 1945 taxation 
year) as well as m terial relief for corporations from the excess 
profits tax. These measures also fitted into the broad framework 
of the adopted compensatory fiscal policy freeing purchasing 
power in the hands of public and thus increasing consumption. A 
smaller relief was also given in the form of broadened allowance 
for medical expenses. 

The highlights of the budget were, besides the mentioned 
relief, the amendments based on the Ives Commission Report. The 
commissioners recommended that the capital element in a contrac¬ 
tual annuity should be exempted from the tax and only the portion 




:o 


i.- / o'. 


.o 



« 


■ 








- 209 - 


representing accruing interest should remain taxable, and that 

6 

a similar method should also be used in taxing life annuities. 
Further, they recommended that annual periodic payments under 
trusts and wills should be taxable to the extent only that they 
were paid out of income of the estate or trust* 

With respect to pensions, the Commission reversed the cur¬ 
rent taxing method. It proposed that pensions should be taxable 
in the hands of recipients or their dependents while the pay¬ 
ments into approved pension plans should be allowed as a tax 
deduction in full. Certain minor recommendations dealt with 
elimination of injustice in cases where previous practice de¬ 
parted from these principles. 

The government adopted the Commission 1 s proposals with one 
change, namely, a ceiling of $900 was imposed on all contribu¬ 
tions to approved pension funds* 

The method of taxing the accumulated earnings of family 
corporations, as proposed by the commission, was accepted save 
the proposal to grant 20 per cent reduction in cases of winding- 
up, dissolution or reorganization of the company, which was not 


6. Under the original law Dominion annuities and similar 
income was exempted from income tax liability by virtue of 
Section J. In 1929 the Exchequer Court in the case Kennedy v. 
The Minister (1929, Ex. C.R. 36) impaired this provision 
so that the government felt necessary to counteract it. In 
1930 a provision was inserted into the law exempting income 
from Dominion and like annuities up to $5,000. Following the 
decision of the Supreme Court in the Shaw case (19395 S.C.R. 
338) a further amendment was adopted to tax contractual annui¬ 
ties according to the British practice, viz., to tax only the 
income element. 





' • • ••r. , ; 





- 210 


recommended, by all three Commissioners* The earnings accu¬ 
mulated by a private closely held company during the period 
1917-39 were na de tax free in the hands of its shareholders 
if the company paid a tax thereon according to a graduated 
schedule which began with an 18 per cent rate on the first 
$25,000 and then went upward by an additional 3 per cent for 
each added bracket until it reached 30 per cent on profits 
between $ 300,000 and $ 400 , 000 . The profits over this limit 
were subject to a tax of $99*75° plus 53 per cent on the ex¬ 
cess of $ 400 , 000 . In addition, the company was allowed to 

pay the tax in four instalments, and it could use the priv- 

8 

ilege of election until the end of 1947* 

Brief reference may be Made to the method adopted to 
reconciliate the payments under the Family Allowance Act, 1944 * 
with deductions for dependent children under the income tax lav/. 

Every taxpayer claiming deductions for dependent children 
eligible for family allowance was required to pay an additional 
tax calculated on the basis of his marital status, taxable in¬ 
come, and number of dependent children. In general, a single 
person having an income of $800 paid 10 per cent tax on the 
amount of family allowance received. If he earned an income 
of $1,600 or over he paid a 100 per cent tax or the whole amount 

of family allowances. In the case of married persons the ad¬ 
ditional tax liability started at $1,200 with the 10 per cent 

7 . Dr. D.A. MacGibbon abstained. 

8. For details see The Royal Commission on the Taxation 
of Annuities ard Family Corporations, Report , King’s Printer, 

1945 * anci Budget Speech , Oct. 17 , 1945 * 












1 





- 211 


rate and progressed up to 100 per cent of the family allowances 
if the taxpayer had an income of $3,000 or over. Needless to 
say, such a method was extremely complicated, and was aban¬ 
doned in the following year. 

Corporate taxpayers benefited chiefly from cuts in the 
excess profits tax .Be ginning with the x date of the budget speech, 
corporations with profits of $5,000 or less were liable only to 
a flat rate of 12 per cent upon their total profits, and com¬ 
panies with profits over that ceiling paid 22 per cent of their 
total profits plus an additional 20 per cent of the excess 
profits in lieu of the previous 100 per cent tax. The corpora¬ 
tion income tax rate remained unaltered. 

Following the budget speech an incident occurred which 
spurred the Senate into setting up an investigating committee 
and which influenced the future fate of ministerial discretion¬ 
ary powers. According to Mr* Ilsley ! s announcement the lower 
rates of the personal income tax were to have an immediate ef¬ 
fect, and employers were to begin employing a new scale of 
deductions at the source, as soon as the new tables were pre¬ 
pared. However, Mr. C. Fraser Elliott, the Deputy Minister of 
Taxation, made a statement on the following day that employees 
would have to wait for lower deductions until the end of the 
month of April of the next year. The incident attracted such 
wide publicity that the Prime Minister himself intervened, and 
stated in the House of Commons that the reduction would take 
effect immediately.9 

9. Cf. The Financial Post , October 20, 1945. 







r 


V 


.0 














- 212 


Shortly afterwards the Senate appointed a Special Com¬ 
mittee to examine the provisions and workings of the Income 
War Tax Act ^!nd the Excess Profits Tax Act. The committee 
became during its sessions the most appropriate place for 
ventilating public criticisms of both Acts and their adminis¬ 
tration. The Committee heard briefs from various organiza¬ 
tions ranging from the Income Taxpayers 1 Association to rep¬ 
resentative national bodies, like the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture, labor organizations, the Canadian Manufacturers* 
Association, etc., which provided the senators with a good 
picture of Canadian public opinion on income tax matters. The 
expert critique came from the professional organizations of 

chartered accountants, of members of the bar, and other indivi- 

10 

duals qualified on tax matters. 

Criticism was directed to all aspects of the income tax 
la?/, but in particular to the appeal procedure then existing 
under the terms of Income War Tax Act. This was also reflected 
in the final report of the Committee which strongly recommended, 
among other improvements, establishment of a Board of Tax Ap¬ 
peals and a complete rewriting of the taxing statute. 

The great bulk of new amendments were introduced and en¬ 
acted during the 1946 parliamentary session, which were intended, 
as the Minister stated, to bring about a radical revision and 

10 . The Committee, particularly benefited from the briefs, 
or information submitted by Mr. M.L. Gordon, C. Frazer Elliott, 
and Mr. Ch. Oliphant from U.S. Treasury Department. 







. 




r;.': ci; 



c. 







- 215 - 


simplification of tlie tax and to offer an instalment in the 

11 

process of rewriting and clarifying the legislation itself. 

They affected practically every major part of the income tax 
statute; personal exemptions, tax rates, deductions, taxes 
on co-operatives, corporation tax, appeal procedure, and the 
discretionary powers of the Minister. Most of these amend¬ 
ments were applicable to 1946 and subsequent taxation years. 

1. Personal exemptions v/ere increased from $660 to $750 
for single persons and from $ 1,200 to $ 1,500 for married per¬ 
sons. Husband and wife who both had income over the basic 
exemption became taxable as single persons, the previous pro¬ 
vision granting married status to a husband and single status 

to his wife, if she was employed in war industry being repealed. 

The former allov/ance for dependents from the tax payable v/as 
replaced by allowances from taxable income (the prev;ar system). 

The taxpayer was permitted to abate his income by $500 for each 
dependent not eligible for family allowance, and $100 for each 
child eligible for these allowances. 

2. For the first time farmers and fishermen v/ere allowed 

to compute their taxable income on the basis of a three-year moving 
average beginning with the 1948 taxation year. 

5. The complicated system of tax rates applicable to per¬ 
sons other than corporations and joint stock companies was re¬ 
placed by one unified graduated tax rate. The initial rate was 


11* Budget Speech, June 27, 1946* 





U ■ t 









- 214 - 


22 per cent on $2^0, the next rate was 25 per cent on the 
following #750, the next rate was 28 per cent on the addi¬ 
tional $1^000 and so on up to 85 per cent on the excess of 
$250,000, 

4* -h 0 Minister introduced numerous minor alterations 

affecting mainly the tax liability of pensions received from 
pension trust funds, of lump-sum payments from superannuation 
funds and other payments received on retirement or for loss 
of office; tax liability of incomes received from sale of 
literary or similar artistic work; the method of taxation 
of persons residing in Canada only for a part of the taxation 
year; and the tax liability of members of provincial legisla¬ 
tures with respect to their indemnity and expense allowances, 

5, The recommendations of the McDougall Commission on 
Co-operatives and like non-profit organizations. The Commis¬ 
sioners’ proposals called for the abolition of the existing 

, 13 

treatment of co-operatives under Section i|(p), which - as 
they believed, could not survive the attacks made upon it. It 


12, See Statistical Appendix, Table E. 

lj. Under the original statute of 1917, cooperatives and 
non-profit organizations were exempted from income tax liabili 
ty. In 1929 the Supreme Court held income of some cooperative 
marketing societies liable to tax ( Fraser Valley Milk Produ ¬ 
cers 1 Association v. Minister of National Kevenue , "i'9‘2"9 » S.'C.R 
14.35)$ and to remove the injustice in cases where it was deemed 
beneficial, parliament adopted Section I4(p). During the war 
the v/estern wheat pools were doing a profitable business but 
claimed tax exemption. This situation was strongly criticized 
which finally led to the appointment of McDougall Commission. 








- 215 - 


It recommended to put on the same footing all business enter¬ 
prises affording privileges of patronage dividends to their 
customers. Accordingly, every business, whether cooperative 
or not, should be allowed to deduct from its taxable income 
the amount effectively paid to its customers in the form of 
a dividend. The Minister of Finance accepted this proposal 
in principle, but he correctly pointed out that a general ap¬ 
plication of it would introduce a rule contrary to the spirit 
of the tax law: namely, it would permit tax-free distribution 
of business profits, which the Commission itself explicitly 
admitted. Therefore, the government's proposal contained a 
limitation on the principle. No company or association would 
be allowed to go as far in its distribution of tax free patron¬ 
age dividends as to reduce its taxable income below a reason¬ 
able return on capital employed (5 per cent) including borrowed 
capital less interest. To become eligible for this treatment 
an association or business enterprise was required either by its 
by-law or by a public advertisement to state well in advance 
its intention of granting patronage dividends. 

Specific provisions were adopted in respect of allocated 
but not distributed patronage dividends in years subsequent to 
1Q)|1 j and in respect of taxing the western wheat pools on their 
profits made during the war. 

A complete tax exemption was granted to new cooperatives 
for the first three years, but the law contained stiff rules 
defining such a co-operative in order to preclude tax evasion 









- 216 - 


by other businesses or cooperatives already established. 

The tax free status of credit unions was enlarged as to apply 
also to such credit union members of which there were other 
cooperatives, religious, educational and non-profit organiza¬ 
tions • 

The last class of mutual organizations dealt with in the 
1946 proposals were the mutual insurance companies. Beginning 
with January 1 , 1914 ?* the tax position of these companies was 
as follows: firstly, mutual fire and fire insurance companies 
which derived their premiums entirely from the insurance of 
churches, schools and other religious or welfare institutions 
were not subject to tax; secondly, other mutual and casualty 
companies were taxable with respect to th9ir income not paid 
out or credited to their policyholders; thirdly, all other 
insurance or casualty companies carried tax liability as before 
fourthly, life insurance companies, as a rule, were exempted 
from tax liability, but they had to pay the tax on that part 
of their profits which was not credited to the shareholders* 
account• 

6. In view of an early discontinuance of the Excess Pro¬ 
fits Tax Act, the- corporation tax was materially amended as to 
take care of the some of the provisions of the excess profits 


14. (a) The governing law (charter, by-law, etc.,) of 

the coop, must offer the right to patronage dividends; (b) 
one member, one vote; (c) only individuals could be menfoers 
and each of them could hold not more than 5$ of total capital; 
(d) non-member business could be not over 20 % of the total 
business per year; (e) interest or dividends on subscribed 
capital should not exceed 5 %; (f) the business should not be 
a continuation of a previously established co-operative. 



•>.. . o .. ; o: oo; • : <. f : - 


0 a a f O; . 

•.: o UiT-f ' ~u Xror ul'ua^-o Vo ru/;.: u bo *>;•: * '.V: - • >'• 

Lt o 0‘ . f C : 

f-,-',; oou.VVv oo'Bioi ao .. :c V:,: ; v;.o ; .oo ..jub go m/;,; 

- a. o. . ; . 1 •. 

- , ' . .r V. ' . , O - t 0 ' /:■' .a ■ o: 


ciki' til jUI .V* > 

< :o ,;; ' ' ■' -'~ ,r 

* . V 

; 0 ■ ‘ 4 G 0 L S. 

..... o 1 < 0 ■ 

:f : o aox.Viod :o V B..* :: , V ‘'bobov, ’ V; 

■B-hiBo ioo o 

, •. • V'V '.. . oVur 1 .'V o.'.V. : vo r o o oo 

1c ■ o&tix* o; S . l 

j ' ' V’ ’) - .. 

GfiOlB Od .Vi 0:0 V < 0 

■ ;; : J: . . o ■ BOB : V o V o ,oo. ja;\or '■ 

I. Oxic. G o loGB 

..; ;; : ■ ■ t : • ... ; :. t V V ■ < ■ ' o b;;': g nf 

.IVioKT JO:l BOG:. Bj 

B.B'uV o;J ;i b b •: rr ' i . ■ iS. o: ; : -V ■. \.r:\i b ,bo..B; 1 O 3 

- . < J 

'.'B B J -. “ i, r i ’ B.1. 'v.! V ;iG ..it' 1 . '-i-0 d i-J 0 

"O’iOd . B > i a'U : 

_“;.C •jB.b'b/ :;-c ViBOO,.J o ;:g l ;o •..b:,; B 


uior qorooo bobbb 5* boo ■' o. r ■ ;■ a: ;: o; ' - - -'-r-■ ' - • 


d’lBq B Brio i£C> i 

« . ■ ' *■ ; * -t' ... v --b r - s' - ■... 

_... :.v. ■. t > . • - - k - 


0 ' . ■ c J i / i .. r -lO ■ : ' o O' " . .:'. 0 • 

■ ft 

- ■. . £oQ0 C ( 

‘ .. ■ r ' ■ : E ■ ; i ■' ' ' ' 

• •; CB i/C>' . ■> .. 


< {J 

, • x- ■; a ■ i - ■ ' 



,' . 

. ' r . 

\.:on .or.: vj'o;: f: r. ■ o bo • • or l>ne . 

■ . - 

or o' ' * ■ : c. - ■■ ■ : • • ■ ■ •' ■ ^ 






- 217 - 


tax, so that since 1947 corporations and joint stock companies 
paid taxes chiefly under the income tax law. The corporate 
tax rate was raised to ^0 per cent and ^2 per cent in cases 
of non-consolidated and consolidated returns respectively, 
the n.o.r. investment corporations paid henceforth a 15 per 
cent tax rate (7 l /2 per cent reduction), and certain provi¬ 
sions were transferred from the excess profits tax to the in¬ 
come tax. They included the exemption granted to new mines 
coming into operation, and the exemption from the tax liability 
of a new class of corporations, the diversified investment 
corporation. To be ehgible for tax exemption an investment 
corporation or joint stock company had to comply with Section 
4 (w) which provided that the capital of such a company had to 
be invested in securities, bonds, stocks, or held in cash to 
the extent of 80 per cent or more; that 95 P Qr cant of its 
income had to be derived from such investments; that not more 
than 10 per cent of its capital was invested in securities of 
any one corporation or debtor save the Grown or Canadian muni¬ 
cipality; that the number of shareholders was at least 50 or 
more of whom none held more than 25 per cent of the total capi¬ 
tal stock; that the company distributed a minimum of 85 per 
cent of its taxable income to shareholders within 185 days after 
the end of the taxation year, ana that it had not any outstand¬ 
ing securities or debentures. Minor amendments were put for- 
Y/ard in respect of depletion, deferred maintenance and repairs 
and tax credit for provincial levies paid by mining and logging 
companies * 






- 218 - 


The excess profits tax was restricted as to apply only 
to corporations and joint stock companies at a 15 per cent 
rate on their profits in excess of 116.66 per cent of standard 
profits ♦ 

7. A marked departure from past practice was made in 
the adoption of a new appeal procedure. In accordance with 
the recommendations of the Special Senate Committee the gov¬ 
ernment introduced provisions creating two appeal boards, the 
Income Tax Appeal Board and the Income Tax Advisory Board. 

The former has been empowered to hear and decide all questions 
of law under a tax assessment, whereas the latter was to ad¬ 
vise the Minister on proper exercise of his discretionary 
powers. The Appeal Board has remained a permanent and conven¬ 
ient instance of the Canadian income tax appeal procedure. 

The second Board disappeared with the coming into force of 
the new income tax law. 

The 1946 amendments of the Income War Tax Act marked, in 
effect, the winding-up of its development. During the next 
two years only minor alterations were introduced, confined 
more or less to the scaling down of tax rates. The chief at¬ 
tention of the Minister of Finance was concentrated on pre¬ 
paration of the new statute which was completed near the end 
of the 1947 session of Parliament. A revised Income Tax Bill 
(ho. 454 ) was presented to the house and given first reading. 
This arrangement v^as made for the purpose of holding over te 
bill for the next session and to give opportunity to the members 







- 219 - 


and interested public to study the bill and suggest improve¬ 
ments. Many constructive suggestions were received by the 
Minister himself and the Standing Committee on Banking and 
Commerce, which brought about the necessity to redraft the 
bill in its entirety. This was done during the early months 
of 1948 a nd ■fche amended Bill No, J88 was passed and put on 
the statute books on June JO, 1948 , as Chapter J 2 . 

Although it was contemplated to make the new Income Tax 
Act applicable to the 1948 taxation year, this was abandoned 
due to its late enactment, Instead a separate amending Act 
(C.53* 1948) was adopted which put into force provisions 
applicable to the current taxation year. They included, be¬ 
sides a further tax reduction, numerous minor alterations of 
the Income War Tax Act. 

Abbott 1 s Income Tax Act . 

The Income Tax Act, being the result of four years of 
penetrating work, represents a marked improvement over the 
past, not in the basic philosophy, which was hardly affected, 
but in its structure, clarity of meaning, and elimination of 
obsolete H souvenir-* provisions. The positive definition of 
income which was more an ornament of the old law than an ef¬ 
fective rule, was replaced by a flexible descriptive scheme 
enumerating the general sources of income, deductions allowed 
and disallowed In computing taxable income, and the treatment 
of special cases in an appropriate manner. The discretionary 
poY/ers of the Minister were either transferred to the C-ovem or- 







C 0 Y 7 


f.i UiC 


iO J 



oil 


o . . 


, 



or- 



.{10 


t 


:o 


o; 


e. 


n e. 


... l 



i ill O & 


l i ■ 



Oj 


i . 


lio o a' to i: 1 


‘lonl; 



: 



?C ?? 


lo coi-ci ‘Ojo'i ’io . c-c.. 


r 


; 


( 


,; o' ': i 



:t.O 


: o . 11 ; 




or 





;( 


•o j j.. o /{'! o 


n o 


r ? i i.o . : 


l 7 


■- .f T- 


,ov 


r,.,. r 



il.r c- • J ; •/ 1 "; 


ci *:? o 


j 




c 





; 


C: ;u coC.LO 


0 




i. o 





- 220 


General-in-Council or converted into a rule of law. These two 
innovations draw perhaps the most significant dividing line 
between the past and present system. 

As to its form, the Income Tax Act, 19I4.8, was divided 
into seven Parts: Part I - Tax on Income of Residents; Part 

II - Tax on Income from Canada of Non-Resident Persons; Part 

III - Gift Tax; Part IV - Administration and Enforcement; 

Part V - Tax Evasion; Part VI - Interpretation; and Part 
VII - Transitional Provisions. 

Part I and Part II comprised the main body of the tax 
law. In detail, it differed from previous statutes in grant¬ 
ing an additional exemption of $5 00 to persons of 65 years 
of age, in inserting a new rate schedule ranging from 10 per 
cent on the first $ 100 , up to 80 per cent on the excess over 
$250,000, and in new provisions affecting co-operatives, non¬ 
life insurance 'companies, averaging of farmers income, tax 
liability of non-residents, dealings between persons at arms- 
length, deductions for depreciation and obsolescence, appeal 
procedure, payment of interest on tax due, corporation tax 
rates, investment income exemptions, and the structure of the 
Tax Appeal Board. Most of these amendments were applicable to 
the 1948 taxation year. 

The adoption of the Income Tax Act, new by name and new 
by its objectives has set a significant milestone in the his¬ 
tory of the development of Canadian income taxation. It has 
wound up not only the era of war measures, but even more it 


•O V 




X •: - c' . . 


: o; 


OO 


(. - 







'• .Cli'UVO:";' 







v- : 


. : i 


0 ' X . 


i \« 



i ■' ; ■ 


X.O •• o 


I ■ 0 - - h ; ■ ■... - ’ . ■ 5 


a..: 


- 


0 u > ' 


X 




1 . 0.1; .. 


lordoT X 0 Xo Xxoo’Tocf vO: 


>./ >- 


.? 


;0 


Xi f X K-C’XX XX 1 \X >■’ X '■ - - 0.3 OK i>K v.’i ■ ' 

. ;• C C.0 C ; X9 »i X XO d IXX X d £ : C 

c: ;. t . XX- xo X'.. ~ ! 0 ' - 

::. X , •-. * o x,; X r •: X ■ . 0 , ' ..: ‘.,, x 

■ /:« ,no X > \ a t ’ L'd< 




■ - ■ 

. - ; X X XO : 

. - ■■ , / , X 


: . < 


... 


- 


X • • * ■ : 


r;c 


-O .' : ■’ ■ 




'C/XYO. ■: 


X: i ■ 


X.O 




& 


• XXX.*; I ;■ :c ix, xv„ XX o. uO 



i: 




• 




x:x: 1 ; c ’ ■ :x' 


■ X.-,X: X 





- 221 


ended the second transforming spell of Canadian public final ce. 

The absence of provincial income taxes and the chief reliance 
of the federal government upon this source of revenue indicate 
distinctly new lines in the future course of Canadian feder¬ 
alism. Mr. Abbott, in announcing the introduction of the 
first draft of the income tax law in his budget message, stated 
that the government did not consider that the measure, when 
enacted as la?/, would constitute the final word. A historian, 
having taken a glance on the past, stops for a while, and asks 
himself what will be the final word? 

Despite the continuous scaling down of tax rates, the in¬ 
come tax has kept its prominent place among federal revenue 
sources. Taking the fields of income tax, excess profits and 
succession duties together, they contributed in the postwar 
period more than ^0 per cent of total federal revenues. In 
absolute terms, the amount of collections never fell below one 
billion dollar mark, and, be it added, without any encroachment 
on the normal course of the nation 1 s economy. During the three 
fiscal years, free of direct war expenditures, (19I4.6-49 )» the 
Minister of Finance was able to retire over |l 1/2 billion of 
public debt and still maintain the federal expenditures at 
the $2 billion mark, a high level for peacetime. 

A Note on Recent Developments . 

There is a good rule that a historical study should not 
reach very far into the present lest it would lose its histori¬ 
cal character. The Issues are too fresh to be properly evaluated 





, 





1 


<y 


o 


c 




1 




V Gj. »0 


i::; #. ..'. ~i • 





- 222 


in the light of tie past. Therefore, we may confine our¬ 
selves to a brief review of more important developments in 
Canadian income taxation since the adoption of the Income 
Tax Act, 

The Act has been revised and amended year after year, 
not only to adjust its impact to changing economic conditions, 
but also to improve its incidence. Personal exemptions were 
raised to $1,000 and $2,000 for single and married persons 
in 1949. Further increases have been resisted stubbornly. 
Similarly, the exemption of $2,k00 or of total personal ex¬ 
emption in respect of investment income together with the 
special rate of 1* per cent on this sort of income remained 
unaltered. The personal and corporation rates have been 
changed steadily* The capitalization of undistributed profits 
was partially solved by Section 95^* and its subsequent amend¬ 
ments. An attempt has been made to eliminate double taxation 
by granting exemption to dividend income, and to solve the 
problem of taxing small business by means of a progressive 
corporate tax rate. The problem of taxing irregular incomes, 
of income splitting between husband and wife, of double taxa¬ 
tion, of reconciling business income with taxable income still 
attract considerable interest as the Proceedings of the recent 
Canadian T a x Conferences of the Canadian Tax Foundation indi¬ 
cate. In the administrative sphere of the income tax, a def¬ 
inite tendency towards decentralization may be recognized. Per¬ 
haps here, there is more room for improvement and for reducing 


ov,' . • • • < 

,o;./-_.Xo.; , ■■.-O': to v/oloovo I/.:o n oo ao^Ioc 


‘.':o ;•« go go . s •;. or o-crr„a< • ■ 


■.'■.'.< ^O;.: 00 .00 ■ ' 

. ;/ • .'. :; 1 

^ . ■ . • , • , . ,, ; ... 0 G 0 Li'. - ■ v) .. 

. . : : ' 1 ' : ■ ■ ' ■ ■ 

G .. O ■ •' ■ . '. . . . - • ' * ‘ , • 

s 

- r •. •. . ;; x... *. ■■ ■ c a ; , .. '. c .- :■ - ■' r ;o:c o' , . . o > 

■ o.ooj .tX; / ■ ooo.;. ! ,o,’ e- ■.. o: o'; X :o, ot, ..v; o': oo oogo xor o •: ooj oo :. o 

X cn.‘:o.co; ' ' o oi ! : ; o. a.'; X t:o ooo. o ox; ,i .0 e- x: -oO::,o'. - 

. 0 . . X; o' . . . ■ ■ " ' ' «■ : 

uriOXaO X oloo, go., . :og . - ■' oo.o.o . ;; o - > l< ,v/ 

ju::..ooX uqu-j ,c j g:Xo: X.o u o...-.o. r .'■’o -go -= ■ ■.■■•'• o..-. 

Grit 0 :,0 ;OG .00 * O u :.o'. ... -■ •- . ' r • o ' O'.O..: j 

V.'; ;■ o 00 • ■ 0 to .:ii::Q r ’X OX; GO. .0 ...0-000 j.JXO,- •'. ; C; ! oo .... aO *b{ ; 

. .. X .■ .. : • > I ' . ■' > - v - : 

n . 0 ,.. > \-.t , : -nn .. .: '• o ' o • .. o to o. o. -o:o: : 

...;..t. -o , ■: o.. o, : .’ ... - o'. . : :.. ■ -O f ; ■: o 

■; '.,.o o ;o: :..h. .. fOiX o ; ...vco"; ... ’..gL o oog,u o,oo 

. X • ; 0 ..' 0 ;. . ;..gX j ..O: fOC) Gi tf t.O Li 0 ;:r' 0 '..o o- 0.0.v 1 O;.'3XO>Bn0O; 

- . ,j , , ,. 1 /■ iy ■, ■.:: ‘ ,c> 0 o; o:?. .'. .1, i i•- ■ . c >•' o:X• ? c4 1 '' oj 

O' .'.to .t'.ooX'"..»■ i’ . ■■ o,' o. ! 0 ';:o .00 o 

'■; \ „ ■ G O 


1 ... ■ JO 


G O.'J 0; UjOiO G‘.: 



- 223 - 


the costs of the taxpayer ! s compliance with the tax law. 

Resume . 

In the post-war period, there have been two currents 
influencing the development of federal income taxation in 
Canada* On the one hand the federal government has been con¬ 
tinuously striving to avoid duplication of provincial and 
federal income tax, and to that end the war-time experiment 
of renting the provincial income tax field has been twice 
repeated; in 1947 and- 195^ but with limited success. On the 
other hand, the general dissatisfaction with the income tax 
statute during the war brought about a complete and thorough 
investigation of the workings of the statute which finally 
resulted in the adoption of a new statute drawn upon previous 
experience and modern income tax standards* This process has 
been in continuance ever since and only lately the Income Tax 
Act has bean again revised and consolidated. The present law. 
Chapter l4? of R.S*C. 195 2 > together with Income Tax Regula¬ 
tion comprise the current Canadian Income Tax Code. 



-• 


- 224 “ 


CHAPTER VI* 

SOME ASPECTS OF DOMINION INCOME TAXATION 

On the preceding pages we have discussed the development 
of Dominion income taxation more or less chronologically, and 
from a political, economic and fiscal viewpoint. Only frag¬ 
mentary reference was made to the income tax theory, and the 
treatment of major components of the tax was, of necessity, 
interrupted. It is desirable, therefore, to present in our 
study also a cross section of the past by tracing separately 
the development of some tax concepts. 

Defining Income for Tax Purposes . 

From the very beginning the Canadian practice has been 
to tax only those receipts which are effectively received, 
anticipated and expendable. Accordingly, such items as capi¬ 
tal gains, gifts, and the rental value of residential property 
were excluded from tax liability, although they were taxed 
either in the United States or in Great Britain on whose sys¬ 
tems the Canadian law was patterned. 

The original Act of 191? introduced a positive definition 
of income which, by and large, included only the net annual 
profit from property, business and employment. Subject to cer¬ 
tain modifications we may say that this definition of income 
remained the most stable part of the Income War Tax Act. Perh^p s 
v/e could list only two departures from this principle. Firstly, 
a shareholder was subject to tax on a proportionate part of 















r t 





■ 


; 




no I'M 2n.V\oo o v 





- 225 - 


those undistributed profits of a corporation which were above 
a reasonable level in the opinion of the administration, 
though he had not received the payment. Secondly, since 1920 
the income of a trust or any estate was to be calculated on 
the accrual basis. Other amendments added to the definition 
of income more or less restated or clarified the meaning of 
the lav/. For example, the addition of salaries of judges 
and Crown employees, and the sessional indemnities of the 
members of parliament effected in 1919, or redefining of the 
term n stock dividends- 1 as to include capital stock dividends 
hardly affected the strict meaning of the definition of in- 
c ome. 

A major departure from the original concept of income 
occurred only in later years. In 1955 a special tax on gifts 
was inserted into the income tax statute, and during World 
War II the Dominion adopted for the first time a succession 
duty. Both taxes have been levied according to their own 
rules and according to an entirely different schedule of rates, 
so that they may be regarded as complementary levies to the 
income tax rather than as amending features. 

Inasmuch as the test of what constituted income rested 
in the first and last instance v/ith the administration until 
I9I4.9, it is extremely difficult to ascertain the practice 
followed by the Taxation Division during the past thirty years. 
Each case was decided on its own merits and according to the 
principles favored by the administration. It would therefore 



- 226 - 


be more appropriate to say that the definition of income 

was governed more by the ideas entertained either by Mr. 

Breadner, or Mr. Walters, or Mr. Elliott than by the rule 

of statute or decisions of the courts. 

The new income tax law adopted in 1948 ended much of 

the uncertainty. The positive definition of income has 

been substituted by a definition by enumeration, that is 

to say, the new law puts more emphasis on itemization of 

receipts which are to be included or excluded from the cora- 

1 

putation of income for tax purposes. However, the basic 
concept of income has been preserved. 

From the intricate problems involved in determining 
income for tax purposes only one will be singled out for 
special reference. The divergence between the business in¬ 
come and taxable income, which was of much concern in bus¬ 
iness circles prior to the adoption of the present law, 

2 

largely disappeared after the end of the last war. More at¬ 
tention has been concentrated on the problem of capital gains. 


1. Section 5 merely states that n the income of a tax¬ 
payer for a taxation year...is his income for that year from 
all sources inside and outside Canada, and without restrict¬ 
ing the generality of the foregoing, it includes income for 
the year from all(a) business, (b) property, and (c) office 
and employment. 

2. Only recently Mr. A.K. Eaton, Assistant Deputy to the 
Minister of Finance stated that n the most striking fact that 
emerges to me in comparison of the business income concept 
with that of taxable income is the very close correspondence 
between the two. By and large, year in and year out, for 
most firms they pretty much coincide t! . - Business Income ahd 
Taxable Income, an address delivered at the Seventh Annual 
Tax’Conference of the Canadian T a x Foundation, Report of Pro ¬ 
ceedings , Winnipeg, Nov. 23-24, 1953* P« 21. 























- 227 - 


Her© we may refer to two specific controversies. 

In dealing with borderline cases the courts apply 
” intent ion 11 as the principal test in deciding whether a 
receipt in question is of an income or capital nature* In 
very rough terms It means that a gain arising from the sale 
of property would be treated as a capital gain whenever .the 
taxpayer can prove his intention of holding the property 
for investment purposes. To what extent this yardstick co¬ 
incides with the economists concept of capital gain, must 
be left to the lawyers. Keynes, Hicks and Seltzer consi¬ 
dered expectation as the main criterion for distinguishing 
be ween income and capital gain. In Seltzer’S words u an 
expected rise in the price of any asset is ordinary in- 

5 

come; an unexpected rise, a capital gain 11 • 

The second development was incepted by a remarkable 
statement of Mr* Perry at the Sixth Annual Tax Conference 
in 11 A corporation”, he stated, n by definition, cannot 

make a capital gain; that its very nature is such that every 

u 

transaction that it enters into produces income.” Similar 
principles are well established and sanctioned by the law in 
European countries having the commercial law based on German 
commercial lav/. There might be some doubts raised, however. 


5* Seltzer, L.H., The Nature and Tax Treatment of 
Capital Gains and Losses , How York, 1951* P* 47* 

!{,. Perry, J.H., Identifying Income, Report of Proceed ¬ 
ings , Sixth Annual Tax "Conference of Canadian Tax Founds^ 
tion, Montreal, Nov. J-lj., 195 2 > P* 3 2 » 










ft 

























- 228 - 


in cases v/hen a corporation disposes of its capital assets. 
Incidentally, the Supreme Court of Canada in the Sutton 
Lumber & Trading Co. Ltd , case decided recently in favor of 
the corporate taxpayer, declaring profits made on sale of 
timber limits as capital gains. 

In respect of differentiation among various kinds of 
income, the Canadian practice employed for the first seven¬ 
teen years only one specific rule. It taxed the Income in 
kind of farmers who were required to include In the net in¬ 
come the value cf goods produced and consumed on the farm. 
Surprisingly, the rental value of residential property which 
by its nature is of similar character was never subjected to 
tax. In 1955 'fck 0 discrimination against Investment income 
was introduced and to that was added diring the war special 
treatment of irregular income. In fact, we may say, that 
according to the present Canadian law almost every kind of 
taxable income is afforded some kind of averaging. Farmers 
and fishermen are allowed to average their income over a 
period of five years, while business losses may be carried 
over and back within seven years. If we look at the method 
of stoppage at source as a splitting of the tax over smaller 
periods, v/e may say that the taxpayer is allowed to average 
his income over a period of one year. The averaging of in¬ 
comes, although seemingly one of the better ways of spreading 
the tax burden more equally among various groups of taxpayers 
has serious disadvantages. It contradicts the principle of 









r ' 













- 229 - 


simplicity and extends the taxation period, which in turn 

impairs control, and it returns the system to the old prin¬ 
ce 

ciple of taxating historical income." 

We have to pass over various other forms of income which, 
being of a quasi-rent nature, are not included in the defi¬ 
nition of income, and merely attract the interest of some 
writers. 

Traditionally, the Canadian concept of income has re¬ 
mained in between the American and British concepts, the 
exemption of capital gains from taxation, in principle at 
least, distinguishes the Canadian concept from that employed 
in the United States. On the other side, in contrast with 
the British concept it includes the corporate income as a sep¬ 
arate tax be.se. The same inference may be made on its relation 
to the better known economic definitions of income. The Canadian 
prentice has adhered to none of the economic definitions, and, 
in our opinion, this method has its own merits. The economic 
definition of income should be broader in scope, for the econo¬ 
mics deals with every phase of economic activity. The taxable 


5. John Willis suggested considerable extension of the 
averaging principle for various fluctuating and irregular inco¬ 
mes. As a principle, we favor much more granting relief in the 
form of lower rates rather than in the form of spreading the 
income over years. The gradual refinements of the method of 
computation of the tax liability are getting too complicated, 
and may lead to the defeat of the whole system. For detailed 
treatment of various averaging methods see Willis John, 

The Mitigation of the Tax Penalty on Fluctuating or Irregular 

Incomes . Canadian Tax Papers, No. 2, Canadian Tax Foundation, 
Toronto, September, 1951* 







iTi 




c I c 


c t . 




1 • i ■ , : ! - 

: • J '-'ft. ■ t 


n.- I ,-!/ : "T..-': •t- : r wr. t '■ 

•o : . ,tr:i ' ■? f -T^. - , 


Si/C ;* ’..'-O 


• • . - . 


I 








■' k ■■ ‘ '■■ : ■ .i • • ■ : '■ ' ' ' - 


. t ■ : 


.-.-.I * ' t V* : —- 

-r:.'..®-". n &ol 4r - w.? £-cT fii 

J ‘I' gn'.U^ j\ ■:$ C : tC- v : i 
' . . . 

4 : 

,: f 5 ; j; ' r.’.r-'. ' SJ'.l'U 

-■ - ■, ■ * CXt 




8 ,'vi 9 q 


::0 


' . \ ■ 

•; ■ . ;,T , , OC : 0 ,: i •in ' ::C ; rJ ' ' ' 

, ■ r 


. 


rC'i! • ./■ 'i 

r . t .i ■ L 




'cf 2- ?j-- *'.u n 




< . 


j '' ■ • 

; i. ; v ■ ; & VV I 1 : « t j " r 

„ 

< t 

. 









- 250 - 


concept of income is strictly a matter of practice and above 
all of expediency, 

6 

Tax Rates and Exemptions , 

During the past 56 years the Canadian administration 
tried practically all forms and methods of tax rates and 
personal exemptions. To a certain degree, the changes in 
both reflected the economic situation of the country. When 
the times were good tax rates and exemptions remained rela¬ 
tively stable, and again in trying years they were changed 
almost from year to year. To be sure, since the inaugura¬ 
tion of the compensatory fiscal policy tax rates have been 

t 

continuously adapted to over-all governments economic 
policy. Perhaps there is no need to emphasize the close 
relationship between tax rates and the definition of income. 
Under low rates the definition of income plays but a minor 
role, and it does not matter much whether the concept of in¬ 
come relates to gross or net income. However, once the rates 
represent a sizeable part of one 1 s income complaints, liti¬ 
gation, evasion and all sorts of difficulties begin mush¬ 
rooming* 

Apart from the original lav; of 1917, continuous practice 
in Canada employed four factors in determination of the prog¬ 
ressive tax liability: family status, number and age of persons 


6* This section should be read in connection with Tables 
E,F, and G of the Statistical Appendix* 



















- 231 - 


dependent on the income, the volume of income, and the na¬ 
ture of income. Whereas the first two factors determined 
the zero tax rate, the latter two conditioned its progres— 
sivity. 

The Act of 1917 established the upper limit of per¬ 
sonal exemptions for single and married persons, namely, 
$1,500 and $ 3 >000. However, these exemptions were in the 
subsequent year replaced by a lower set of $1,000 and $2,000 
which remained unaltered until the amendments adopted in 
1926. The allowance for dependents introduced into the law 
in 1918 was originally applicable'only to dependent children. 
It amounted to $200 for each child under 16 years of age, but 
this limit was gradually raised and the applicability exten¬ 
ded as to apply to dependent children regardless of age if 
they were incapable of self-support due to mental or bodily 
defects. During the early twenties this allowance was gradu¬ 
ally raised to $400 and $500. 

Sir Thomas White inaugurated in his first law a compos¬ 
ite structure of tax rates, namely, a flat rate'called “nor¬ 
mal tax“ and a graduated tax called “surtax’ 1 . The latter rate 
was mildly progressive ranging from two per cent to 25 per 
cent.The tax rate introduced in 1918 and applicable to the 
second taxation year included three different levies: a normal 
tax, a supertax graduated from 2 per cent to 50 per cent by 
successive brackets, and a surtax also graduated but com¬ 
puted as a percentage of the two former levies. In 1919 the 


■ ? ‘ '• t 

' • • 

■ ■ i-i- : \ r 0‘’ , 

- 

_ 

. 

. 

■ 

* 

. 

' 

- >ti n , ' 

• ;• - j ■ ■ * --3 : ; ; '* " ; ■ •• = : ~ ■ i 

. 

■ 

... • • - - . . •'■■ , v • .. " .. ' ... ' i ■ ■«: ' 

.. 1 .. - ., 

•. ■■ . : 

■ ‘ < 

■ • ' ■ : , ■ ' ' ' 

. 




- 232 - 


rates were simplified and increased. The normal rate went 
up (4% and 8%) and the graduated tax ran from 1% up to 65 % 
on income "brackets ranging from $1,000 to $1,000,000. This 
structure remained in force until 1926 with an additional 
5 % of the total tax imposed since the 1919 taxation year. 

r y lr. Dunning revamped the structure of personal exemp- . 
tions and tax rates in 1926 (effective for 1925 taxation 
year). The personal exemptions moved upward to $1,500 and 
$3,000. The new law imposed only one graduated tax ( 2 %> - 
50%) on the same cumulative principle as before, but the 
brackets were somewhat narrowed. The next two years brought 
successive cuts in the schedules so that in 1928 the effective 
graduated tax ran from 1.6% to 40% for the same brackets. 

Mr. Bennett’s proposals in 1931 for a simplified tax 
structure were later called off, and it may suffice to men¬ 
tion that they included a graduated tax (l% - 25 %) on incomes 
between $1,000 and $24,000. If effected it would have meant 
a clear departure from the established system of bracketing 
the whole tax base. Mr. Bennett’s successor as Minister of 
Finance established the present system of tax rates. It 
includes a dollar rate for the amount below the bracket and 
a percentage rate for the particular bracket. The advantage 
of this tabulation is obvious. Under the previous method the 
taxpayer in the highest bracket had to run through the whole 
tax schedule to figure out his tax liability. Under this sys¬ 
tem he simply adds to the dollar rate the necessary percentage 


. 

; - , .. o ; s • ■: "Jd (• 

• - : ; r ■ P irj ■ : , ,■ ; P . { \ .. •. POP' :r.H> aP 

. 

; J .r . 





ho u:d5 


. 


8w a .io C’iJ' 


* JOJ ■ 


l aaeooHS 

. 

' r i . a ia :. j : a .1 . , 04 

, 




' 

- 


»n V :, P .• /PpK* ■ ■ ■ ,:T; Pt./* <:r.u, i: a r.n, ?? -JaaP PaiPi:' aoLj aaraia 

,, f- 1 ( __ .... _ : vjt j o e 09 £ Hi ' -•'.‘-t j.,' .Id -nc.-td’ 

. 

pr ' IS : . VP P .1 • •• ' 0 ' 

, 

, 



• 


■ 

• *10 J' f'J'OH P> J'-.. 3*1 sr B 



- ?: j 

* 






: .. 


. 



-,-fr.- ■' ; (‘j y r nbViiO!* < \ J 







- 253 - 


on the remainder in whichever bracket it falls . 

During the depression fiscal necessities brought about 
further adjustments in personal exemptions and tax rates. 

In 1932 exemptions were lowered to $1,200 and $2,400 and tax 
rates were increased by 25 per cent, inclusive of the relief 
granted in 1927 and 1928 . The budget of 1953 brought fur¬ 
ther downward adjustments. It set the personal exemptions 
at $1,000 and $2,000, the dependent allowance at $4o0, and 
the new rate schedule ran from 2 per cent on the first $2,000 
up to 56 per cent on the bracket over $ 500,000 plus additional 
5 per cent thereof. This arrangement continued in force until 
the beginning of World War II. 

War conditions necessitated drastic changes. The first war 
years saw a gradual downward readjustment in personal exemp¬ 
tions so that in 1942 only one flat exemption of $60 was 
allowed for each taxpayer irrespective of his status. The 
allowance for dependents ($ 80 ) was transformed into abate¬ 
ments from the tax and included a new deduction of $150 on 
account of marital status. 

The previous two taxes on taxable income (national defence 
and income tax) which employed separate sets of exemptions and 
tax rates were unified into one levy consisting of a normal 
tax and graduated tax. The normal tax was moderately graduated 
( 7 $- 9 $) i n case of single persons but married persons paid only 
a 7 per cent flat rate. The graduated tax ranged from 30 per 
cent on the first $500 and moved steeply upward up to 85 per 




..... o ... 


, ! If 


• r 





- 231+ - 


cent on incomes in excess of $100,000. Prom the total tax 
liability the taxpayer was credited v/ith a certain amount, 
called the saving portion (maximum $ 800 , $ 1,000 and $100 for 
single, married persons and dependents respectively), which 
became repayable in the postwar years. 

When the war ended the administration reintroduced the 
old scheme of tax exemptions and tax rates. Personal exemp¬ 
tions were fixed in 191+6 at $750 and $ 1,500 for single and 
married persons, the allowance for dependents represented an 
amount of $100 for children eligible for family allowance 
(first introduced in 1945 ) or $300 for all other dependents. 
Finally, in 1948 they were raised to the present level, viz., 
$ 1,000 and $ 2,000 for single and married persons, and $150 and 
$400 for children eligible for family allowances and other 
dependents. 

The Dominion income tax law has afforded since its in¬ 
ception a special treatment to investment income in different 
forms. In the early years dividends were exempted from normal 
tax, being subject to supertax only. In 1926 the government 
deliberately introduced double taxation of corporate incomes, 
for under the system then adopted the dividends would otherwise 
have escaped tax entirely. The second break came in 1935 when 
the discrimination against investment income was enacted. Since 
then unearned income has been subject to an additional levy 
governed by separate rules in respect of exemptions and rates. 
Firstly, investment income up to $5,000, or the whole of personal 





t 


o 



r 



- 235 - 


exemptions, was exempt, but earned income over $ 14,000 was 
treated as investment income. Secondly, rates applicable 
to investment income over the basic exemption moved upward 
on a mildly graduated scale ( 2 $ to 10 $) according to income 
brackets. To be sure, this levy was further increased by 
the 5 P er cent additional levy, and by the normal tax applic¬ 
able to all incomes. 

This scheme of taxing investment income remained in force 
until 19 Ul* when because of material increases in the general 
income tax, only one flat rax rate was imposed ( 4 $) on invest¬ 
ment income in excess of $1,500. While the rate has contained 
in force up to the present time, the basic exemption was often 
altered. In the subsequent year it was cut to $1,200, and since 
then by gradual increases, it has reached the present level 
of $2,400. To be sure, the privilege of using the total of 
personal exemptions, if higher, was also reintroduced after 
the war. 

The income of non-residents originating in Canada was leav¬ 
ing the country tax free until 1955* In that year a flat rate 
of 5 per cent was levied on all interest and dividends (inter¬ 
est on bonds issued or guaranteed by the Dominion government 
or issued by provincial governments was exempt) paid by Cana¬ 
dian debtors to foreign creditors. During the war this rate 
was raised, to 15 per cent subject to certain specifications, 
and in the course of the postwar amendments it was differentiated 
so that at the present time it varies from 5 per cent to 15 per 






) 


..o ax 






r 






o 




- 236 - 


cent depending on the nature of the payment. 

The developments in the corporation tax will be re¬ 
viewed but briefly here. The early practice was to grant 
a basic exemption to corporate taxpayers which for the 
most years represented an amount of $2,000. It was discon¬ 
tinued in 1935 "but corporations were permitted to file 
consolidated returns at a slightly higher rate. The tax 
rates moved gradually upward from a low 1| per cent rate 
introduced in 191? U P to 20 per cent on income not over 
$10,000 and 50 per cent on the excess now in force. The 
differential rate for consolidated returns rose from 1/2 per 
cent to 2 per cent during the thirties and became a rule until 
1952 when the privilege of filing consolidated returns was 
withdrawn. 

To sum up our remarks, it may be pointed out that the 
federal authorities employed chiefly 11 double-decker” schemes 
of income tax rates in respect of personal incomes. It was 
either in the form of a normal tax and graduated tax or in 
the form of a graduated tax and additional tax. Prom the 
inception of income discrimination up to the postwar period 
a supplementary tax on investment income was levied, so that 
the taxpayers having investment income was subject to a triple 
levy. But in the postwar period the administration has stuck 
to a single graduated levy on earned incomes and a flat tax on 
the unearned incomes. As a rule the exemptions varied accord¬ 
ing to the levies employed. Veiy seldom have the same set of 





<* 









- 237 - 


exemptions applied to the zero point of all rates. 

The selection of graduation curves depended entirely 
upon political considerations in the earlier period. They 
followed a rather mild upward trend, not transgressing the 
50 per cent ceiling. In war time the graduation trend moved 
steeply upward, but recent rates adopted considerably modi¬ 
fied the progressivity of the tax. However, the author was 
not able to ascertain if, and to what extent, the Depart¬ 
ment of Finance employs mathematical formulas in selecting 

7 

tax rates, or if they subscribe to Dr. Vickrey 1 s opinion 

that H it cannot be pretended that the exact adherence to any 

such formula is of vital importance, however. The special 

properties of the formula, while interesting, carry only the 

8 

most tenuous evidence of any relation to general welfare* u 


Administration of the Income Tax . 

The income tax was put originally under the administra¬ 
tive responsibility of the Minister of Finance who administered 
all special war taxes introduced during World War I. In 1918 
a special division of taxation was established within the 


7 . To the author’s knowledge only the Italian income tax 
employs a mathematical formula for devising the tax rates. 

It is based on Pareto’s form of income distribution (x=aN k ), 
and runs as follows: 

Y = o.04l86x 0 * 5 ^ 7 8 

where Y is the amount of the tax, and X is the taxable 
income. (Gf. Neumark, F. Theorle and Praxis der Modernen Bin - 
kom m enbesteurerung , Bern, 19I4.7", P* 391 *) 

8 . Vickrey, W., Agenda for Progressive Taxation, Hew York, 

1947 , P . 376 . 








- 238 - 


ministry to administer both the income tax and excess profits 
tax, and the former head of the Department of Customs, Mr. 
Breadner, was put in charge of it. The tax remained within 
the jurisdiction of the Minister of Finance until 1921*, when 
it v/as transferred to the Department of Customs and Excise, 
which three years later was thoroughly reorgnized and re¬ 
ceived the present name of the Department of National Revenue. 
The permanent head of the division bore the title of The Com¬ 
missioner of Income Tax until 19U5 when he assumed the present 
name of the Deputy Minister of National Revenue for Taxation. 

Prior to the last war the Taxation Division was of far 
lesser significance than it is today. It employed about 1,200 
employees in 1957 > who that time were entirely outside the 
authority of the Civil Service Commission. However, during 
the war and in the postwar period the Division augmented its 
number of employees and after the reorganization of I 9 U 6 its 
staff was put under the same rules as other civil servants. 

The first Income War Tax Act inaugurated the principle 
of stoppage-at-source similar to that used in Great Britain, 
but in the subsequent year this was abandoned and replaced 
by I nformation-at-the-source method. The assessment was done 
by the Head Office in Ottawa during the first three years, 
which, of course, protracted the assessment procedure and 
impaired the collection of the tax. In 1920 the whole system 
was overhauled due to the introduction of the principle of 
self-assessment. The taxpayer was required to compute his 


x 





- 239 - 


tax liability and to pay the tax accordingly, thus relieving 
the tax administration from much clerical work which could 
concentrate more on checking the returns. However, the as¬ 
sessment became closed only by issuance of the assessment 
notice by the Taxation ^ivision. The method of self-assess¬ 
ment was further strengthened by putting the collection of 
the tax on an almost complete pay-as-you-earn basis in 19 i| 2 . 
Both usthods have remained permanent and outstanding features 
of Canadian tax administration, and it must be admitted that 
in this respect Cam da is far ahead. 

The edge of criticism and dissatisfaction with the fomier 
Income War Tax Act was directed chiefly against the wide 
discretionary powers of the Minister and his Deputy, and 
against the lack of proper legal remedies. Indeed, the wide 
ministerial poY/ers under a system of centralized administra¬ 
tion tend to cause hardship to the taxpayer. In a way, they 
presuppose the infallibility of the officer exercising them. 
Many of the complaints would have been removed, had the early 
administration established an appeal procedure within its 
framework. This would have called for a wide decentralization 
of the whole assessment procedure, even on a larger scale than 
in the present system. As we see the problem, the basic prin¬ 
ciple of either judicial or administrative process is that the 
affected party must have a legal remedy against the final deci¬ 
sion handed dov/n in the first instance. Under the Income War 
Tax Act It would have been quite simple to have established 


. . j 








- 240 - 


the District Taxation Office as a court of first instance 
by vesting ail necessary powers in the head of the office. 
Then the Taxation Division could perform the functions of 

9 

an appellate administrative court. 

Prior to the establishment of the Appeal Board the tax¬ 
payer, if dissatisfied with the assessment, could file a 
notice of appeal with the minister upon which the assessment 
was reviewed and either affirmed or altered. Only then was 
the taxpayer free to appeal the assessment to the Exchequer 
Court. The costs of appeal were so high that they deterred 
many taxpayers from having recourse to this legal remedy, 
particularly if the assessment was below The position 

of the taxpayer was also worsened by deliberate refraining 
of the Taxation Division from publishing its rulings on mat¬ 
ters subject to ministerial discretion. The taxpayer simply 
did not have any reliable guide when he figured out his tax 
liability as to what position the tax administration would 
take in a particular case of his concern. At least one ex¬ 
planation of this peculiar polic}?- was recorded by Dr. Petrie 
in his doctoral thesis. M It has been the policy” , he wrote. 


9. This is the established administrative procedure 
adopted in European countries. The local taxation offices 
perform all duties, which are here in Canada divided between 
the head office and the District Office. The taxpayer is 
allowed to appeal the assessment firstly to the Ministry of 
Finance and then to the Supreme Court for administrative 
cases. 









6 ; 


U i'i i ( . ; Vi 



r 


: 1 










- 241 - 


u to avoid as much as possible formal regulations that might 

be binding. The obvious danger of such procedure is that 

an inefficient or corrupt administration could use the wrong 

kind of discretion, with disastrous results to the equity of 
10 

assessment,” The storm of protests presented to the Special 
Senate Committee in 1946 in this respect seem to indicate 
that the taxpaying public disagreed with the official prac¬ 
tice . 

Since 1946 many of the administrative defects have been 
eliminated. Firstly, the Appeal Board was instituted to hear 
appeals on the first instance. Secondly, an Advisory Board 
was added to the Taxation Division to advise the Minister on 
exercising the discretionary powers, which, of course, disa¬ 
ppeared after the present law was put into force. The necessa¬ 
ry - flexibility of the law is assured by powers vested in 
the Governor-in-Council to regulate certain matters whose 
decisions are made public. Furthermore, there is a definite 

tendency towards decentralization. Under Part IX of the In- 

11 

come Tax Regulations the Director of Taxation in a District 
Office is empowered to exercise certain powers vested by the 
law in the Minister of National Revenue. As a rule, the 
assessment procedure is completed in the District Office, 
since only special cases go to Ottawa. The taxpayer, if 

10. Petrie, J.R., The Tax Syst ems in Canada, McGill Uni¬ 
versity, 1940 , a doctoral thesis, (not publishedT, p. 1073 * 

11. Order in Council, P.C, 647P> December, 1949* as amen¬ 
ded by Order in Council P.C. 4443 > August 29 , 195 2 -* 







- 2l+2 - 


dissatisfied with the assessment may appeal to the Appeal 
Board, then to the Exchequer Court, and finally to the 
Supreme Court* 



- 243 - 


Conclusion , 

The history of the federal income tax in Canada trans¬ 
gresses the narrow limits of a financial history. The tax 
has been in turn a political programme, a constitutional is¬ 
sue, and only recently has it assumed great importance in the 
fiscal and economic affairs of the country. Hardly any other 
institution reflects more closely the spectacular growth of 
Canada>s economy and its changing social environment during 
the past fifty years. 

On the morrow of this century the income tax issue grad- 

°f / 

ually evolved into a major driving force/the agrarian movement, 
which in a sense heralded a new partner in the federation, 
namely, the agricultural west. As we have seen, it was the 
two younger prairie provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta 
where the tax found the most staunch supporters. This, to¬ 
gether with other factors, laid foundations for the two dis¬ 
tinctive political philosophies prevailing at present in both 
provinces. 

After its introduction into the federal revenue system 
during World War I, the income tax was predestined to influence 
further the evolution of the Dominion federal structure. The 
twenties and thirties ?/itnessed a lively debate on the con¬ 
stitutional division of taxation rights between the Dominion 
and the provinces, and finally led to a searching investigation 
of the whole problem. Here again the income tax v/as given 





1 






O' 




, 9.f . : 











f - ’, t 


< 



- 2i|i| - 


prominence, for the core of the recommendations of the Row- 
ell-Sirois Commission pertained to direct taxation. Al¬ 
though the proposals of the Commission elicited a strong 
opposition of the original partners of the federal contract, 
the course of events necessitated at least an ad hoc solution 
in the form of tax rental agreements. 

During this fermenting period the income tax did not 
play any significant role in the Dominion finances. Its 
fiscal yield did not amount to much in terms of dollars col¬ 
lected, and was surpassed by other revenues derived from 
standard indirect taxes. This picture was radically changed 
during the past war, when for the first time the income tax 
was called upon to do its full share in financing the war. 

Its impressive service is still fresh in the memory of Cana¬ 
dians, and need not be emphasized. 

Looking back into the past and comparing it with the 
present, it must be admitted that the income tax has represen¬ 
ted a major factor in Canada* s development. It helped to bal¬ 
ance the country*s political institutions; it taught Canadian 
businessmen to economize and to calculate; and in the present 
time it gives everyone a fairer proportion from the nation*s 
cake, and thus a greater feeling of security. And in doing so, 
the tax helps to bring closer to reality the dreams and visions 
of the founding fathers. 




' 



■ 

• c .•' r 





: c 


o 


' 






- 245 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Government Documents 


Canada, Debates of the House of Commons, Queen 1 s Printer, 

Ottawa. 

Canada, House of Commons, Standing Committee on Banking and 
Commerce, Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence . 

Session 19l|7“44 , Queen^s Printer, Ottawa. 

Canada, Senate, Report to the Honourable Speaker by the Parli- 
amentary Counsel relating to the Enactment of the 
British North America Act, 1867 ( O’Connor Report ), 
Session 1939 5 Queen 1 s Printer, Ottawa. 

Canada, Senate, Special Committee on the Income War Tax Act 
and Excess Profits Tax Act, Proceedings , Nos. 1-6, 

I 9 I 45 , and Nos. 1-13, I 9 I 46 , Queen’s Printer, Ottawa. 

Statutes of Canada , Queen’s Printer, Ottawa. 

Statutory Orders and Regulations , Canada Gazette, Part II, 
Queen’s Printer , CVbawa * 

Department of National Revenue, Taxation Division. Taxation 
Statistics , Ottawa Queen’s Printer. Annual, 

Department of Trad© and Commerce, Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 
The Canada Year Book , Annual. 

Department of Trade and Commerce, Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 
Incomes Assessed for Income Tax in Canada, 1934~194,3. ♦ 

(Mimeo.), Ottawa.' 

Domihion Bureau of Statistics, National Accounts, Income and 
Exp enditur e, 1926-195° * Ottawa, 

Dominion-Provincial Conference on Reco nstruction. Reference 
Books, (Green Books ), Ottawa, 1945• 

Royal Commission on Dominion-Provincial Relations. Report 

(N.W. Rowell, J. Sirois, Chairmen), King’s Printer, 
Ottawa, 19 J 4 .O. 

Royal Commission on the Taxation of Annuities and Family Cor¬ 
porations. Report (W.C. Ives, Chairman), King’s Printer, 
Ottawa, 1945* 

Royal Commission on Co-operatives, Report (E.M.W. McDougall, 
Chairman), King’s Printer, Ottawa, 19U5* 
























* 


r 


' 



t 




- 2 l |.6 - 


Books, Monographs and Pamphlets 

Allen,^E.D. and Brownlee, O.H., Economics of Public Finance. 
Prentice-Hall, New York, 19487 ~ ~ 

Ammon, Alfred, Grundsaetze der Flnanzwissenscha ft. 2 vols., 

A. Francke, Bern,'1947 and 1953. “ 

Bates, Stewart, Financial History of Canadian Governments . 
Research Study Prepared for the Royal Commission on 
Dominion-Provincial Relations, Ottawa, 1939. (Mimeo.) 

Beattie, J.R. "Canadian War Finance”, Industrial Canada, 
February, 1943, p. 43* 

Blakey, R.G. and G.C., The Federal Income Tax , Longmans, 
Green, New York, 1940. 

Buck, A.E., Financing Canadian Government , Public Administra¬ 
tion Service, Chicago, 1949* 

Canadian Council of Agriculture, The Siege of Ottawa . The 
Grain Growers 1 Guide, Winnipeg, 1910. 

Canadian Tax Foundation, Reports of Annual Tax Conferences 
and Special Studies , Toronto. 

Citizens * Research Institute of Canada, Reports of Annual Tax 
Conferences, 1923-32 , Toronto 

Clark, S.D., The Canadian Manufacturers* Association , Univer¬ 
sity of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1939. 

Creighton, D.G., British North America at Confederation , A 
Study Prepared for the Royal Commission on Dominion- 
Provincial Relations, Ottawa, 1939* 

Dawson, R.M., The Government of Canada , University of Toronto 
Press, Toronto, 1947• 

Due, J.F., The General Manufacturers Sales Tax in Canada , 
Canadian Tax Foundation, Canadian Tax Papers, No. 3, 
Toronto, Oct. ljjth, 19^1. 

Eaton, A.K., Business Income and Taxable Income , Report of 
Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Tax Conference of 
Canadian Tax Foundation, Toronto, 1953* 


Ellis, H.S. (Editor), A Survey of Contemporary Economics , 
The Blakiston Co., Philadelphia, 1949• 

























.•..;.:i 


■ j r 




■ 


. * ;\” \ , . ' '' ' ' ■ - ’O' ; l 


; , ■■ >: ■ 




. ■ 

X©jrt J". 1 oxxlv ': *7 : J ~£i o £ .t Xii iO' 


:• ...• :... v ■ : . •) 


♦ . * t 

. 


, • .. ■ : : ' .' 


* . . . t . ' 
. 


, . 

/xoJhd:- 


. 




,.;v ,'• 


nociss , t "1-: : ' ’ J 


' 


>r-Xa-J-.)' XC : j 


. i ■ 


Oo 


' .. tUO'Z L '.X;- r £p.l i I : ) 

H 




. j, 

?> £ • 




?• ' , 


t .... J 


. r , : o ■ -:c- 1 


•.ro\ II £ j , O'XjlO I J ■) 


.. 7 v ’ . ’ ■ ’ " ’■ '. 1 


, ' ; ' i- .- ‘ Ot; .1 

.- 

. . 


oS IX O. 


ri ,T*XOi ? i 01 ■ 1 0 


.»J ■"/: ■:> \ J 


' f. ■ , •/: JO 

’ : 


. > . I '. 


- 

, ; ■ ; * . a j • ' 


... ■ 




. 


. * . • 

' ir.1 ■; • . I ■ j ri, u vO . c : :1 1 " " / ‘. ■ 


. * 


: i v> ■ . , ' • 


. : '■ . ; .. .. ■ r ■■ 















- 247 - 


Gordon, M.L., Digest of Income Tax Gases of the British 

Commonwealth of Nations and Principal Subdivisions thereof . 

King’s Printer, Ottawa, 1939. 1937 to 1939. Age Publi¬ 

cations, Toronto, 1940. 1939 to 1942 . Toronto,1943,(published 
privately). 1942 to 1945. Mundy-Goodfellow Printing Go., 
Toronto,1947# 1945 to 1947 . Goodfellow Printing Go., 

Toronto,1949. 1947 to 1949 . Goodfellow Printing Go., 

Toronto,1950. 

Groves, H.M., Financing Governmen t.Henry Holt and Co., New 
York, 1945. 

.. Postwar Taxation and Economic Progress . McGraw-Hill 

Book Go., New York7~1946• ~ 

Haley,B.E., (Editor), A Survey of Contemporary Economics II . 

The Blakiston Co., Philadelphia,1953* 

Hansen, A.H., Economic Policy and Full Employment . McGraw-Hill 
Book Go., New York,1947. 

- Higgins,B.H., Canada’s Financial System in War . National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Occasional Paper No. 19, New York, 
April, 1944. 

Keynes,J.M., The General Theory of Employment. Interest and 
Money . Harcourt, Brace and Co., New York, 1936. 

Labrie, F.E., The Meaning of Income in the Law of Income Tax . 
University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1953* 

Logan, H.A., Trade Unions in Canada . MacMillan, Toronto, 1948. 

Mackintosh, W.A., The Economic Background of the Dominion - 
Provincial Relations . A Study Prepared for the Royal 
Commission on Dominion-Provincial Relations, Ottawa,1939. 

Magill, Roswell, Taxable Income . Ronald Press, New York,1945* 

McDiarmid,0.J., Commercial Policy in the Canadian Economy , 

Harvard University Press, Cambridge,Mass., 1946. 

Mehring, Otto von, Shifting and Incidence of Taxation , The 
Blakiston Co., Philadelphia, 1942# 

Moore,A.M., and Perry, J.H., Financing Canadian Federation . 

Tax Paper No. 6, Canadian Tax Foundation, Toronto, 

March, 1953* 


Neumark, Fritz, Theorie und Praxis der Modernen E ink online ns - 
Besteuerung , A. Francke, Bern, 1947. 


































248 - 


Perry, J.H., Taxation in Canada * University of Toronto Press, 
Toronto, 1953* 

. " Identifying Income 1 ’, Report of Proceedings of 

the Sixth Annual Tax Conference, Canadian Tax Foundation, 
Toronto, 1952. 

Petrie,J.R., The Tax System in Canada . ( doctoral thesis ) 
McGill University, Montreal, 1940. Not printed. 

The Taxation of Corporate Income in Canada . 
University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1952. 

Plaxton, C.P. and Varcoe, F.P., Dominion Income Tax Law , 

The Carswell Co., Toronto, 1921 and 1929. 

Plaxton, H.A.W., Dominion Income Tax Law . The Carswell Co., 
Toronto, 1939. 

. The Law Relating to Income Tax and Excess 

Profits Tax . The Carswell Co., Toronto, 1947. 

Plumptre, A.F.W., Mobilizing Canada’s Resources for War . 
MacMillan, Toronto, 1941. 

Porritt, Edward, The Revolt in Canada Ahainst the New Feudalism . 
Cassel and Co., Landon, 1911. 

Samuelson, P.A., Economics , McGraw-Hill Co., New York, 1951. 

Seltzer, L.H., The Nature and Tax Treatment of Capital Gains 
and Losses , National Bureau of Economic Research, New 
York, 1951. 

Simons,H.C., Personal Income Taxation , Chcago University Press, 
Chicago, 1938* 

Skelton, O.D., Federal Finance I , Bulletin of the Departments 
of History and Economic Science in Queen's University, 

No. 16, Kingston, July, 1915. 

.. Federal Finance II , -Bulletin of the Departments 

of History and Economic Science in Queen's University, 

No. 29, Kingston, October, 1918. 

Vickrey, William, Agenda for Progressive Taxation , Ronald Press 
Co.,New York, 1947* 

Vineberg, Solomon, Provincial and Local Taxation in Canada , 
Longmans, Green and Co., New York, 1912. 

Willis, John, The Mitigation of the Tax Penalty on Fluctuatin g 
or Irregular Incomes , Tax Paper No. 2, Canadian Tax 
Foundation, Toronto, September, 1951. 













































- 249 - 


White, Sir Thomas, The Story of Canada's War Finance , 

Montreal, 1921^ (published privately)* 

Wood, L.A. A History of Farmers* Movements in Canada , 

Ryerson Press, Toronto, 1924. 

Tax Services 

Income Tax Regulations . Ottawa, Queen's Printer. 

Canadian Income War Tax Act. 1946 . CCH Canadian Ltd., 

Toronto,1946. 

Canadian Income Tax Act . CCH Canadian Ltd., Toronto, published 
annually. 

Dominion Tax Cases . CCH Canadian Ltd., Toronto. 

Journals . Periodicals . Daily Papers ( Editorials, Unauthorized 
Articles). 

Industrial Canada . Toronto. 

Canadian Chartered Accountant , Toronto. 

The Financial Post . Toronto. 

Grain Growers 1 Guide . Winnipeg, 1909 - 1925* 

Journal of the Canadi an Bankers' Association . Toronto, 

Volumes XXI - XXVII. 

The Montreal Gazette , Montreal, 1910 - 1920. 


The Toronto Globe ,Toronto, 1910 - 1920 


























SIATISMCA L APPENDIX 





251 


TABLE A 

TOTAL FEDERAL REVENUES, EXPENDITURES, AND NET DEBT, 

1914 - 1952. 

( $ 000,000 ) 

; 


Fiscal 

Total 

Total 

Total 

Budget 

Net 

Year 

Tax 

Revenue 

Expendi¬ 

Surplus 

Debt 

Mar.31 

Revenue 


tures 

-Deficit 


1914 

126 

163 

186 

23 

336 

1915 

98 

133 

248 

- 115 

449 

1916 

125 

172 

340 

168 

615 

1917 

175 

233 

498 

266 

879 

1918 

197 

261 

577 

- 316 

1,191 

1919 

224 

313 

697 

- 384 

1,575 

1920 

294 

350 

786 

- 436 

2,249 

1921 

369 

436 

528 

92 

2,341 

1922 

320 

382 

464 

81 

2,422 

1923 

335 

403 

434 

31 

2,454 

1924 

342 

407 

371 

36 

2,418 

1925 

294 

352 

351 


2,417 

1926 

328 

382 

355 

28 

2,390 

192? 

347 

400 

359 

42 

2,348 

1928 

365 

429 

379 

51 

2,296 

1929 

396 

460 

389 

71 

2,226 

1930 

379 

453 

405 

48 

2,177 

1931 

296 

357 

442 

- 84 

2,262 

1932 

275 

335 

449 

- 114 

2,375 

1933 

254 

311 

533 

- 221 

2,596 

1934 

271 

325 

458 

- 133 

2,730 

1935 

304 

362 

478 

- 116 

2,846 

1936 

317 

373 

533 

- 160 

3,006 

1937 

386 

454 

532 

- 77 

3,084 

1938 

448 

516 

534 

18 

3,102 

1939 

435 

502 

553 

- 51 

3,153 

1940 

468 

562 

680 

119 

3,271 

1941 

778 

872 

1,250 

377 

3,648 

1942 

1,361 

1,489 

1,885 

397 

4,045 

1943 

2,067 

2,249 

4,387 

- 2,138 

6,182 

1944 

2,437 

2,765 

5,322 

- 2,557 

8,740 

1945 

2,155 

2,687 

5,246 

- 2,558 

11,298 

1946 

2,202 

3,013 

5,136 

- 2,123 

13,421 

1947 

2,428 

3,007 

2,634 

374 

13,047 

1948 

2,452 

2,872 

2,196 

676 

12,371 

1949 

2,436 

2,771 

2,176 

595 

11,776 

1950 

2,323 

2,580 

2,449 

132 

11,645 

1951 

2,785 

3,113 

2,901 

211 

11,433 

1952 

3,658 

3,940 

3,733 

248 

11,185 


Source : The Canada Year -Book, 1951 ; Public Accounts 


of Canada, 1955 









TABLE B . 


ENERAL STATISTICS - 

NUMBER OF 

TAXPAYERS 

AND 

KTCOME TAX 

PAID FOR 

FISCAL YEARS 1919 - 

1950. 

Fiscal 

Individuals 

Corporations 

Year 

No. of 

Tax 

No. of 

Tax 

Mar.31 

Taxpayers 

Paid Taxpayers 

Paid 


000 

$ 000,000 

000 : 

| 000,000 

1919 a 

15 

7.9 

1 .6 

1.4 

1920 a 

92 

13.1 

2.2 

7.- 

1921 

191 

32.- 

3.7 

13.8 

1922 

291 

39.8 

8.2 

38.9 

1923 

281 

31.6 

6 -“ 

28.- 

1924 

239 

25.6 

5.5 

28.5 

1925 

226 

25.1 

6.2 

31.- 

1926 

210 

23.8 

5.7 

31.7 

1927 

116 

18 .- 

5.7 

29.3 

1928 

122 

23.2 

6 .r 

33.3 

1929 

130 

24.8 

7.4 

34.6 

1930 

142 

27.2 

7.9 

41.8 

1931 

144 

26.6 

7.6 

44.4 

1932 

134 

24.8 

6 .- 

36.4 

1933 

167 

25.9 

6.5 

36.1 

1934 

203 

29.2 

8.9 

27.4 

1935 

184 

25.2 

10.4 

35-8 

1936 

199 

33.- 

10.9 

42.5 

1937 

21 ? 

35.4 

12.1 

58.- 

1938 

237 

40.4 

13.9 

69.8 

1939 

265 

46.9 

13.8 

85.1 

1940, 

300 

45.4 

17.6 

77.9 

1941° 

871 

104.- 

15.9 

131.6 

1942 

1,781 

296 .- 

9.1 

165.8 

1943 „ 

2,163 

534.- 

9.9 

348*- 

1944 0 

2,254 

813.- 

20 .- 

311.4 

1945 

2,254 

768 .- 

21.3 

276.4 

1946 

2,353 

692 .- 

23.6 

217.8 

1947 

2,366 

695.- 

27.2 

196.8 

1948 

2,689 

763.- 

28 

351.5 

1949 

2,231 

622 .- 

28.6 

488.5 

1950 

2,374 

652 .- 

31.2 

602 .- 


Source ? 


D.B.S♦ Incomes Assessed for Income War 
Tax in Canada, 1955- 5.9• T he Canada Year 


Book, Department of National Revenue 

Division) Taxation Statistics 


a * Statistics taken from D.B.S. Income Assessed 
for I.W.T.A. 

b. Statistics for years 1921-40 taken from 
The Canada Year Book , and for years 1941-50 
from Taxation Statistics . 

c. Taxation Statistics. 














- 253 - 


TABLE C 


COLLECTIONS UNDER THE INCOME TAX ACT, 1919 - 1952. 
( For Fiscal Years Ended March 31 ) 

( $ 000,000 ) 


Indivi¬ 

Corpora¬ 

Tax on 

Non- 

Total 

duals 

tions 

Undistri¬ 

Resident 

Income 



buted 

Income 

Tax 

Tax 

t 

$ 

t 

* 

$ 


1919 

8 

1 



9 

1920 

13 

7 



20 

1921 

33 

14 



46 

1922 

40 

39 



79 

1923 

32 

28 



60 

1924 

26 

29 



54 

1925 

25 

31 



56 

1926 

23 

32 



56 

1927 

18 

29 



47 

1928 

23 

33 



57 

1929 

25 

34 



59 

1930 

27 

42 



69 

1931 

27 

44 



71 

1932 

25 

36 



61 

1933 

26 

36 



62 

1934 

29 

27 


5 

61 

1935 

25 

36 


6 

67 

1936 

33 

42 


7 

83 

1937 

35 

58 


9 

102 

1933 

40 

70 


10 

120 

1939 

47 

85 


10 

142 

1940 

45 

78 


11 

134 

1941 

104 

132 


13 

248 

1942 

296 

186 


28 

510 

1943 

534 

348 


28 

910 

1944 

813 

311 


27 

1,152 

1945 

768 

276 


29 

1,673 

1946 

691 

218 


28 

938 

1947 

695 

197 

42 

30 

963 

1948 

660 

352 

13 

36 

1,060 

1949 

763 

489 

3 

43 

1,298 

1950 

622 

602 

1 

47 

1,273 

1951 

652 

712 

88 

62 

1,513 

1952 

776 

1,118 

15 

55 

2,163 

Source 

: Department of 

National 

Revenue ( 

Taxation 


Division) Taxation Statistics,1952 . 






TABLE D 


TOTAL ANNUAL COLLECTIONS UNDER THE INCOME TAX ACT, 

THE EXCESS PROFITS TAX ACT, AND SUCCESSION DUTIES ACT; 
COST OF COLLECTIONS, 1917 - 1952 


( $ 000,000 ) 


Fiscal 

Total 

Total 

Percentage 

Year 

Annual 

Annual 

Cost of 

Mar.31 

Collections 

$ 

Cost 

Collections 

%, 

1917 

13 

0.058 

0.46 

1918 

21 

0.1 

0.51 

1919 

42 

0.5 

1.17 

1920 

64 

1.1 

1.78 

1921 

87 

2.0 

2.24 

1922 

102 

2.3 

2.24 

1923 

73 

2.0 

2.80 

1924 

59 

1.9 

3.28 

1925 

59 

1.7 

2.87 

1926 

57 

1.7 

3.04 

1927 

48 

1.7 

3-58 

1928 

58 

1.9 

3-39 

1929 

60 

2.1 

3-55 

1930 

69 

2.1 

3.10 

1931 

71 

2.1 

3.03 

1932 

61 

2.1 

3.48 

1933 

62 

2.0 

3.16 

193^ 

61 

1.9 

3*12 

1935 

67 

2.0 

2.95 

1936 

83 

2.1 

2.56 

1937 

102 

2.1 

2.08 

1938 

120 

2.3 

1.87 

1939 

142 

2.4 

1.70 

1940 

134 

2.5 

1.85 

1941 

272 

2.9 

1.06 

1942 

652 

3.8 

0.59 

1943 

1,378 

5.4 . 

O .39 

1944 

1,635 

8.0 

0.49 

1945 

1,556 

9.9 

0.64 

1946 

1,453 

11.8 

0.81 

1947 

1,435 

13.7 

0.96 

1948 

1,318 

19.6 

1.49 

1949 

1,368 

28.0 

2.05 

1950 

1,301 

28.1 

2.16 

1951 

1,557 

25.1 

1.62 

1952 

2,204 

21.9 

0.99 


Source : Department of National Revenue ( Taxation 
Division ) Taxation Statistics, 1952, 

TaLle B. 




- 255 - 


TABLE E - I 

INDIVIDUAL GRADUATED RATES, 1917 - 1952 d 
(Taxation Years 1917 - 192l|.) • 


Brackets: 



Taxation Years 


Taxable 

Income 


a 


b 

over 

not over 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1 eee 

$ 000 

% 

% 

% 

% 

6 

8 

2 

2.1 

2 

2.1 

8 

10 

2 

2.1 

3 

3.15 

10 

12 

5 

5.5 

4 

4.2 

12 

14 

5 

5.5 

5 

5.25 

14 

16 

5 

5.5 

6 

6.3 

16 

18 

5 

5.5 

7 

7.35 

18 

20 

5 

5.5 

8 

8.4 

20 

22 

8 

8.8 

9 

9.45 

22 

24 

8 

8.8 

10 

10.5 

24 

26 

8 

8.8 

11 

u.55 

26 

28 

8 

8.8 

12 

12.6 

28 

30 

8 

8.8 

13 

13.65 

30 

32 

10 

11.- 

14 

14.7 

32 

34 

10 

11.- 

15 

15.75 

34 

36 

10 

11.- 

16 

16.8 

36 

38 

10 

11.- 

17 

17.85 

38 

40 

10 

11.- 

18 

18.9 

4o 

42 

10 

11.- 

19 

19.95 

42 

44 

10 

11.- 

20 

21.- 

44 

46 

10 

11.- 

21 

22.05 

46 

48 

10 

11.- 

22 

23.10 

48 

5o 

10 

11.- 

23 

24.15 

5o 

52 

15 

16.5 

24 

25.2 

52 

54 

15 

16.5 

25 

26.25 

54 

56 

15 

16.5 

26 

27.3 

56 

58 

15 

16.5 

27 

28.35 

58 

60 

15 

15.5 

28 

29.4 

60 

62 

15 

16.5 

29 

30.45 

62 

64 

15 

16.5 

30 

31.5 

64 

66 

15 

16.5 

31 

32.55 

66 

68 

15 

16.5 

32 

33.6_ 

68 

70 

15 

16.5 

33 

34.65 

70 

72 

15 

16.5 

34 

35.7^ 

72 

74 c 

15 

16.5 

35 

36.75 

74° 

76 

15 

22.- 

36 

37.8 

76 

78 

15 

22.- 

37 

38.85 

78 

80 

15 

22.- 

38 

39.9 

80 

82 

15 

22.- 

39 

40.95 

82 

84 

15 

22.- 

4o 

42.- 

84 

86 

15 

22.- 

4i 

43.05 

86 

88 

15 

22.- 

42 

44.1 

88 

90 

15 

22.- 

43 

45.15 


X - 


: . ■ i 

! 

OZ x. . If. A Sf J. A T, 1VIv l til 

. , .' ' J - 

5PI 




., .. /v ,,, 



' 

vc:.o;v. 





>fsfOOC:d f 

■:Xf' v;:.:r;: 

Off I 

PIP I 

3 IP I 

Yi? r 

n:VO fen 

■ 



V 


000 

V.O 

I. . 


* 


D 


. 


! 

s 

o X 






.01 

01 





,I.r 

SI 

* 

o 



a i 

j r 

.. 

* ; 

Y 

* 


81 

a i 




o 

Q f 

81 

* 



•) 

If .f 

os 

• 

01 


8 

elf. 


» 

. II 



O' j 

is 

s f r 

o r 


o 


<3.0 

. 

• I 

• 


Of, 


v. u: 

• 1 

... ^ : ?' 

01 


Of 

. 

51 


01 

. {■-' 

Qf ■ 

, I 

i j: 


• I. 


If 

. 

VI 

r £ 

ox 

• I P 

Of 

g . j; 

?■> I 

■ - * 


3jI 



> r 


01 

i 

. 08 

fo 

OS 

... ^ 

/) r 

44 

C f 


IV 

— m 

01 

a 0 




i 

o i 




c Q 

. ■ 

01 

0c 

8-1 


’J .:s 

f o r 

Si 


oS 


v ! c 

# 

51 





v i , ■■ r 

51 

\f 

IS' 



# 

.; r 

o p 


• 




oa 


, • 

9S 

* 

Si 

V r 

so 

u 

Do 

* 

Of 

If 

* 

o r 

.jJO 

a a 

40 

* 


. ! 

SI 

80 

00 



, r 

SI 

Of 

80' 


■(V 

, i 

S i 

• V 

OY 


So; 

* -I 

Si 

4t 

sv 


0 f 

. + 

SI 

av 


* 



M 

8 V 

0) Y 

■ 



Si 

08 


‘ 1 Vi 

! 


Si 

S8 

08 

. 

).ji 


si 

45 



r J 

• • ^ 

Si 

88 

, IQ 

, 


9 

Si 

88 

\ O 

| 

f i 

• * 

SI 

QO 







- 256 - 


TABLE E - 1 (Continued) 

INDIVIDUAL GRADUATED RATES, 1917 - 1952. 
(Taxation Years 1917 - 1921;). 


Brackets 

• 





Taxable 

Income 

Taxation Years 


over 

not over 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

$000 

$ 000 

fo 

% 

% 

% 

90 

92 

15 

22.- 

44 

46.2 

92 

94 

15 

22.- 

45 

47.25 

94 

96 

15 

22.- 

46 

48.3 

96 

98 

15 

22.- 

47 

49.35 

98 

100 

15 

22.- 

48 

50.4 

100 

150 

25 

28.75 

52 

54.6 

150 

200 

25 

28.75 

56 

58.8 

200 

300 

25 

40.5 

60 

63 .- 

300 

400 

25 

40.5 

63 

66.15 

400 

500 

25 

47.25 

63 

66.15 

500 

600 

25 

47.25 

64 

67.6 

600 

800 

25 

54.- 

64 

67.2 

800 

1,000 

25 

61.75 

64 

67.2 

1,000 

m. 

25 

67.5 

65 

68.25 


a. Inclusive surtax imposed as follows: 

§ 6,000 - | 10,000 $% 

10,000 - 100,000 10# 

100,000 - 200,000 15 # 

200,000 - 35# 

b. 5 # surtax inclusive. (Enacted in 1920). 

c. Read "75" for the column "1918". 

d. Source: The Income War Tax Act, 1917. and 

subsequent amending Acts. The Income 

Tax Act. 19k8. and subsequent amending Acts . 

(See Table K). 







1 J 


< 


') 









' f 



< , 0 ' L 


6 I 



,[p 

,l\Q 

■ 


OCX 


i ! 0 0 

oor 

' J Qli 

! 0<J 
")Od 
008 
) 


ooo 

OOF 

00 , 1 : 



O0O 





. : ' , ’ : 



I .L i •:.. 




257 - 


TABLE E - 2 

INDIVIDUAL GRADUATED RATES, 1917 - 1952. 
(Taxation Years 1925 - 1931). 


Brackets: 


Taxable 

Income 


over 

not over 

1926 

$ 000 

1 000 

% 


2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

4 

5 

5 

5 

6 

6 

6 

7 

7 

7 

8 

8 

8 

9 

9 

9 

10 

10 

10 

11 

11 

11 

12 

12 

12 

13 

13 

13 

14 

14 

14 

15 

15 

15 

16 

16 

16 

17 

17 

17 

18 

18 

18 

19 

19 

19 

20 

20 

20 

25 

21 

25 

30 

22 

30 

35 

23 

35 

40 

24 

40 

45 

25 

45 

50 

26 

5o 

55 

27 

55 

60 

28 

60 

65 

29 

65 

70 

30 

70 

75 

31 

75 

80 

32 

80 

85 

33 

85 

90 

34 

90 

95 

35 

95 

100 

36 

100 

110 

37 

110 

120 

38 

120 

130 

39 

130 

140 

40 

140 

150 

41 

150 

175 

42 

175 

200 

43 

200 

250 

kk 

250 

300 

45 

300 

350 

46 

350 

4oo 

47 

400 

45o 

48 

450 

500 

49 

500 

- 

50 


Taxation 

years 


1927 

1928 

1932 

% 

% 

% 

1.8 

1.6 

2.1 

2.7 

2.4 

3.15 

3.6 

3.2 

4.2 

4.5 

4.- 

5.25 

5.4 

4.8 

6.3 

6.3 

5.6 

7.35 

7.2 

6.4 

8.4 

8.1 

7.2 

9.45 

9.- 

8.- 

10.5 

9.9 

8.8 

11.55 

10.8 

9.6 

12.6 

11.7 

10.4 

13.65 

12.6 

11.2 

14.7 

13.5 

12.- 

15.75 

14.4 

12.8 

16.8 

15.3 

13.6 

17.85 

16.2 

14.4 

18.9 

17.1 

15.2 

19.95 

18.- 

16.- 

21 

18.9 

16.8 

22.05 

19.8 

17.6 

23.1 

20.7 

18.4 

24.15 

21.6 

19.2 

25.2 

22.5 

20.- 

26.25 

23.4 

20.8 

27.3 

24.3 

21.6 

28.35 

25.2 

22.4 

29.4 

26.1 

23.2 

30.45 

27.- 

24.- 

31.5 

27.9 

24.8 

32.55 

28.8 

25.6 

33.6 

29.7 

26.4 

34-65 

30.6 

27.2 

35.70 

31.5 

28.- 

36.75 

32.4 

28.8 

37.8 

33.3 

29.6 

38.85 

34.2 

30.4 

39.9 

35.1 

31.2 

40.95 

36.- 

32.- 

42.- 

36.9 

32.8 

42.05 

37.8 

33.6 

44.1 

38.? 

34.4 

45.15 

39.6 

35.2 

46.2 

40.5 

36.- 

47.25 

41.4 

36.8 

48.3 

42.3 

37.6 

49.35 

43-2 

38.4 

50.4 

44.1 

39.2 

41.45 

45 

40 

52.5 






- 258 - 


TABLE E - 3 

INDIVIDUAL GRADUATED RATES, 1917 - 1952. 
(Taxation years 1932 - 1941) 


/ 

Brackets: 


Taxable 

over 

Income Taxation Years 

not over 1932-39 a 1940 

1941 

1 000 

$ 000 % 

% 


- 

.250 

6 

15 

• 250 

1 3 

8 

15 

1 

2 4 

12 

20 

2 

3 5 

16 

25 

3 

4 6 

20 

30 

4 

5 7 

24 

33 

5 

6 8 

27 

36 

6 

7 9 

30 

38 

7 

8 10 

33 

40 

8 

9 11 

35 

42 

9 

10 12 

37 

44 

10 

11 13 

39 

47 

11 

12 14 

39 

47 

12 

13 15 

39 

47 

13 

14 16 

39 

47 

14 

15 17 

39 

47 

15 

16 18 

39 

50 

16 

17 19 

39 

5o 

17 

18 20 

39 

5o 

18 

19 21 

39 

5o 

19 

20 22 

39 

50 

20 

25 23 

41 

53 

25 

30 24 

41 

53 

30 

35 25 

44 

55 

35 

40 26 

44 

55 

4o 

45 27 

47 

57 

45 

5o 28 

47 

57 

5o 

55 29 

50 

59 

55 

60 30 

5o 

59 

60 

65 31 

50 

59 

65 

70 32 

50 

59 

70 

75 33 

50 

59 

75 

80 34 

53 

63 

8o 

85 35 

53 

63 

85 

90 36 

53 

63 

90 

95 37 

53 

63 

95 

100 38 

53 

63 

100 

110 39 

56 

67 

110 

120 4o 

56 

67 

120 

130 41 

56 

67 

130 

140 42 

56 

67 

140 

150 43 

56 

67 


i. X''l 


* ;• s ■■ yi : r t ., ... 

,, L * ■ I - ; i :• ’• CP : V'S 0 CX, .£ \ 1') 

* r Sp S'VVO:! 



' 

■ i .. ■ 

PjPO or: I 

; ■ 

■, !. r 

; V,;" ..l 

0 dp x 

: ?S ~M.d X 

*xo .*r lea. 

■ 

5 x 

'Q 


joo o 

os;. 

0;.V » 

5x 


... 

i 

• 

ox 

i 



X 


d I 



s 

Of 

OS. 

d 

• 


f f 


T 

v. 


of 

1 


d 


Be 


■? 


d 

S 

c c 

v.v 

OX 


Y 


cp 

XI 

0 

; 

44 ■ >. 

• 

\c 

SI 

01 

o 


P F ' 

x r 

IX 

' 01 


p r 

...dl 

SI 

xx 

/ . 

. ys 

5.x' 

1 f 1 

. 

T-ii 

or 

di 

pi 

r x 

V0 • 

9t 

SI 

5 X 

dX 

) 


■; r 

■\r 

' 

0? 

O c 

9I 

YX 

6 1 

o§ 

p f 

r, ■ 

3 X 

s r 

o5 

pc 

If 

pi: 

01 

i' 

"Of 



9 L 


r p 

C ,.’j 


OS 


IS; 

1 . 

, Q C 

c* X 

45 

' -d-B 

C<-3» 


()r 

c‘ c 



- 1 ' i 

p c 

Tc 

T-s 

Yd 


QjS 

fd 


0 

>5 

5 |i 

Pp . 

Oc. 

> 

' 

)5 

■ 




'■••O 


u< 

o x 

) . 

ex 

?5 

s 



Go 

O X 

o< 

" Q C 

i 

5d 

op 


r r 


o y 

f 6 



ad 

5.T 


,« ■ 



Q0 


v , C. 







) 

58 


■ 

Yd 

po 

os 

r 6 , 

• C ds 

4.. , 


no j 

Oo 


o cj, 

PS 

0 I I 

001 



0-ji 

OS I 

OXX 

p.A 



os X 

■ 051 

, 


0 ii 

0;il 

OS X 

’ 

o c 

eX 

05 X 

Jill 



- 259 - 


TABLE E - 3 (Continued) 

INDIVIDUAL GRADUATED RATES, 1917 - 1952. 
(Taxation Years 1932 - I 9 J 4 -I) 


Brackets: 


Taxable Income Taxation Yegr 


over 

not over 

1932-39 a 

1940 

1941 

1 000 

1000 

% 

% 

% 

150 

175 

44 

59 

70 

175 

200 

45 

59 

70 

200 

223 

46 

63 

75 

225 

250 

47 

63 

75 

250 

275 

48 

63 

75 

275 

300 

49 

63 

75 

300 

325 

50 

67 

80 

325 

350 

51 

67 

80 

350 

375 

52 

67 

80 

375 

400 

53 

67 

80 

400 

450 

54 

72 

80 

45o 

500 

55 

72 

80 

500 

- 

56 

78 

85 


a. Plus 5% of the amount of tax on incomes 
exceeding $ 5,000. The first war budget 
of 1939 added 20% of the amount of tax 
on all incomes. 



( Vx jyrS: J a > 0 f. - o VOxx T 


! - <; . j;.. .. ... i ax j. £ \ iv.....:. 

. i ■- \L - ■ V" .1. xxxo:: "y . X vx:;;.x x) 


> ■. 



OB ,‘ X 

in i 

©Koonl 

xldx xxV 

XjI?! 

I 

, oe vOf; 

• ■ ■ ' 

X.- V' o 




000 ,v 

000 T 

• OV 

0 ?c 

SO 

OTI 

1 


> o. 


000 

' T ;X 


ea • 

a. 

c o 

K .1’t 

.'DO 

l 

' ea 

■ 

l ciso 

, vOS 

0 , \ 

c.a 

B’i 

c Vo 

)TS. 

> 

, 

cB 

? ;.i 

000 

. 

08 ;: 

TO 

TV 

SOT. 

v 0 

Oo 

To 

.., -■ XV 

Ocf 

c-SO 

OB 

■va 

Oc 

■ 

Oc.C 

oO 


' 1 

i 

004 

<yc 

Oo . 

\ 

■ 

i 0: v 

I )0'.1 

OB 

ov 


) oB 


SB ; • 

37 

£>c 

- 

005 . 


; d i 1 > < ■ 1 i * ■ 

0 ■ •' ; .... ’ ; d X ", X.OT . ; . ■ '. ■ :V'v 

X :,/ ;• dii.'.fX,. : j '1 0 ■' Ox n-, : : .)K‘. ;y F° ' 0 X 

* ■ > v ■ : c aj 



260 - 


TABLE E - 4 

INDIVIDUAL GRADUATED RATES 191? - 1952, 
(Taxation Years 1942 - 1946) 


Brackets: 

Tax, 

Taxable Income 

Rate' 

over 

not over 


$ 000 

$ ooo 

% 

- 

0.5 

30 

0.5 l 

33 

l 

2 

37 

2 

3 

41 

3 

5 

45 

5 

8 

5o 

8 

13 

55 

13 

20 

60 

20 

30 

65 

30 

50 

70 

50 

70 

75 

70 

100 

80 

100 


85 

The 

tax rate represented 

a gi 

The 

net tax was equal to 

the 

following items: 


1. 

Abatements from the 

taxj 


is the 


i. #150 for dependent wife; 

ii. 80 for each person wholly dependent; 

iii. 20$ of the amount expended for support 

of a partial dependent, but not over 

$400. 

11* Savings Portion (refundable at a later date): 


w Single Person” 

i. Half the total 
taxpayable; or 
ii, 8$ of taxable in¬ 
come plus 1$ for 
each dependent; 
or 

iii. $800 plus $100 
for each depen¬ 
dent. 


"Married Person” 


i. 


ii. 


iii. 


Half the total 
tax payable; or 
10$ of taxable in¬ 
come plus 1$ for 
each dependent; 
or 

$1,000 plus $100 
for each dependent, 


111• Subsequent Tax Adjustments : 


For 1942 taxation year 50$ of the total tax 
payable; for 1945 taxation year \\% and for the 
19q-6 taxation year 16$ of the total tax payable 










261 - 


TABLE E - 5 

INDIVIDUAL GRADUATED RATES, 1917 - 1952. 
(Taxation Years 191+7 - 194-8). 


Brackets: 


Taxable 

Income 

Rates for 

Taxation 

over 

not over 

1947 

1948 

$ ooo 

i 000 

% 

% 


.1 

16 

10 

.1 

.2 

17 

12 

.2 

.25 

18 

14 

.25 

.3 

19 

14 

.3 

.4 

20 

16 

.k 

.5 

21 

18 

.5 

l 

22 

20 

l 

2.5 

24 

20 

2.5 

3.5 

25 

20 

3.5 

4.5 

26 

22 

4.5 

5 

28 

22 

5 

6.5 

30 

26 

6.5 

8.5 

34 

30 

8.5 

io.5 

38 

35 

io.5 

n.5 

40 

35 

11.5 

13 

43 

40 

13 

14 

45 

40 

14 

17 

47 

45 

17 

18 

5o 

5o 

18 

25 

52 

5o 

25 

30 

55 

55 

30 

5o 

57 

55 

50 

70 

62 

60 

70 

75 

65 

60 

75 

100 

67 

65 

100 

i5o 

72 

70 

150 

250 

77 

75 

250 


82 

80 





262 - 


fABLE E- 6 

INDIVIDUAL GRADUATES RATES, 1917 - 1952 
(Taxation Years 1949 - 1952,) 


Brackets: 


Rates for 

taxation 

Taxable 

Income 

year 


over 

not over 

1949-51 

1952 

# 000 

$ 000 

% 

% 

- 

1 

15 

17.5 

1 

2 

17 

19.7. 

2 

4 

19 

22.4 

4 

6 

22 

25.7 

6 

8 

26 

30.6 

8 

10 

30 

35.5 

10 

12 

35 

41 

12 

15. 

40 

46.5 

15 

25 

45 

52 

25 

35 

5o 

57.5 

35 

40 

50 

60 

ko 

50 

55 

63 

50 

60 

55 

65.5 

60 

75 

60 

68.5 

75 

90 

60 

71 

90 

100 

65 

74 

100 

125 

65 

76.5 

125 

150 

70 

79.5 

150 

225 

70 

82 

225 

250 

75 

85 

250 

400 

75 

88 

i|00 ■ 

- 

80 

91 


a. including old age security tax, { 1% or sj 


i 30 . ). 






- 263 - 


TABLE P 

PERSONAL EXEMPTIONS FOR INDIVIDUAL INCOME TAX, 

1917 - 1953. 


Taxation 

Single 

Married 

Depen¬ 


Year 

Person 

# 

Person 

$ 

dent 

$ 


1917 

1,500 

3,000 

nil 

( Enacted 1917). 

1918-24 

1,000 

2,000 

200 

In 1923 the allowance for 
dependent was raised to $ 300 , 
and in I 92 I 4 . to $ 500. 

( Personal exemptions enacted 
in 1918). 

1925-30 

1,500 

3,000 

500 

( Enacted in 1926). 

1931 

1,200 

2,400 

500 

( Enacted in 1932). 

1932-39 

1,000 

2,000 

400 

( Enacted in the session 

of 1932-33). 

1940 

750 

1,500 

400 

-for purposes of the gradua¬ 
ted tax. 

1941 

600 

1,200 

28 

-for purposes of National 
Defence Tax. ( Allowance 
for dependents deductible 
from tax payable). 

0 0 
lA'-O 

1,500 

1,200 

400 

28 

- as above. 

1942-46 

660 

660 

150 

80 

20$ 

28 

- for both normal and gradua¬ 
ted tax. 

- for dependent wife. 

- for each dependent. 

- of amount expended for 
support of a partial depen¬ 
dent. 

- for each dependent deduc¬ 
tible from normal tax only. 

1946-48 

750 

1,500 

100 

300 

- for dependent eligible 
for family allowance; 

- for other dependents. 

1949-53 

1,000 

500 

2,000 

500 

250 

150 

400 

- for dependent eligible 
for family allowance; 

- for other dependents. 

- in addition to basic exemp¬ 
tion for persons over 65 yrs 
of age. 

- in addition in case of 
employed wife earning over 
$ 1,000. 





„ V X ’■ -■ 5 j 

i.:/.; ooixi will • all ? i?i ill' 

: ■ ; j ■ . ) 

* 1 .. . . . ■ X ' : l • 


iXXiL . X , :•) } 

. 

. ! ' J: X X • ' ■ - J Oi/i ) 


, . t ■■■■' 


•: ; ; 


-.fei'-lx v a' i x •;) 331 x , m: 



) .; 

li ■ 'X .131 "ll 3 0 .i ,1 13/ 1 ; 

i ' ' - 

: . . '1 • Oil, -l 

. J ; 1 ■' ■ 

Hit 

. .' i- v. : 1 

, ;oi 

11 - 


'• : ; IX, XI1: j 1 .1 1 . 

j ) 

1 , - 

. 

1..‘ V 

101 

, X L • v ii \: j 

eh 

i. X: - 

, .. > .1 ; - " > 

0.88 

01 '. - 

‘io'l ii briiiMo dxr 

J jUi 

' 

■a 0 qo h £ x 1: i 11 q 1 X. : 

\ > 

' !■' X 




~OX.r.i>e.i •ill'll - . x F ) : ' 

0 26 

XXxX - 

. ibi ') 1.1.' 1.3:1.iXXi I'll 

' . ilvfXX 

OidXix Xcjrio: 11 


1 . 1 . - 

■ ••) •. • 1 X I * v;I 1: 


. 

„ -xii - .. 


XXX'A - 

.' 'll • X X:. :• •; 

■ 

liXi - 

; 0 :x . : : i ,■; ' ■ XX: 


• ■ 

v : ■ 

>: xio 

0 - 


- • me :. ■ •: > 1 i 3 d o v a .; x o X: h bo ax - 

> . ■ i ■ t 1. d 

« ■ 

li li J. X.J i 1 . lX - 
'18 vo ",'11,..' ; iiiBi o'l.i - .by/ -1 ,1 .110 


uAbvd. V 1:1 .>X X 

XlOI XliiXx ill 

■■•I S'".. X 1 

. 



■ ■ 

diie.b xiix''iii 

X [I 

i.iByaX 

X ;X.:Xl 

1 it ■ 


1 

V iP X 

>os 


.; i:X -8.r? I 


00 c. 

* 

, ' 

) 

) 0 i 

' f 

t 

IX;X I 

oo.d 

1 x. 

) 1 ■ 

Xi~ii o.r 

:) 0 ..d 


")HT ■ 

Odi' I 

Or. { 

oil, r 

00a 


, 00 ,d 
8 s' 

0 

• j X, 

>XY 

r I;5,?1 



Odd 

Mm- 

or- j: 




' 

iRos 




JS 




C) t 

, 

oiyi 

r11 

‘ :) ' 

D i 

000 1 ■ 

' x) 1 , " : - 

c —oiic 

10 :.: 

0 f<i 

')()X 



Or ’0 




264 


TABLE a 

THE INCOME TAX ACT - NORMAL RATES, 1917 -1053. 


Taxation 

year Rate 

% 

1917 4 


1918 

2 

- on income over $ 1.000 but not over 
| 1,500, and over $ 2,000 but not over 
$ 3,000 of single and married persons 
respectively. 


4 

on income exceeding # 1,500 ( single 
person) and $ 3,000 ( married person). 

1919-24 

4 

- on income over | 1,000 but not over $ 6,000 
and over $ 2,000 but not over $ 6,000 
of single and married person respectively. 


8 

- on income exceeding $ 6,000. 

1924-59 

nil 


1940 

2 

on income between $ 600 -Jl,200 of 
single persons, and over $ 1,200 of 
married persons* 


3 

- on income over $ 1,200 of single persons. 


1941 5 

7 


as above. 


1942-46 

7 

8 
9 


Single persons: 

on income between, § 660 - f 1,800 
on income between | 1,800 - | 3*000 
on income exceeding | 3,000. 


Married persons: 

7 on income exceeding | 1,200. 
1946-53 nil 





- 265 - 


TABLE H 


SUMMARY OF RATES AND EXEMTIONS FOR FEDERAL CORPORATION 
INCOME TAX,1917 - 1953. 


Taxation 

Income 

Rate of 


year 

exempt 

$ 

tax 

% 


1917 

3,000 

4 


1918 

3,000 

6 


1919 

» 

2,000 

10 

-when taxable income was less 
than | 5,000 

i 

1924 


10.5 

-when taxable income was over 
| 5,000 ( 5 % surtax was added 
in 1920 effective 1919). 

1925 

2,000 

10 

In 1926 the 5% surtax was repealed 
effective 1925. 

1926 

2,000 

8.1 

The effective rate was 9 % but 
in 1927 it was reduced by 10%. 

1927 

2,000 

8 

Adopted in 1928* 

1930 

2,000 

10 

Adopted in 1931* 

1931 

2,000 

11 

11.55 

- when taxable income was over 
| 2,000 but nor over $ 5,000. 

- when taxable income was over 
| 5,000. ( In 1932 the old 

5 % surtax was reintroduced, 
effective 1931.) 

1932 

nil 

i2i 

i3i 

on not consolidated returns; 
on consolidated returns; 

( Adopted in 1933). 

1934 

nil 

13 s 

15 

on consolidated returns. 

Adopted in 1935- 

1935 

nil 

15 


1 

1939 


17 

- on consolidated returns. 

( Enacted in 1938). 

1940 

nil 

18 


i 

1946 


20 

- on consolidated returns. 

( Enacted in 1939). 





266 - 


TABLE H ( Continued ) 

SUMMARY OF RATES AND EXEMTIONS FOR FEDERAL CORPORATION 
INCOME TAX , 1917 - 1953. 


Taxation 

Income 

Rate of 


year 

exempt 

1 

tax 

% 


1946 

nil 

30 


1 

1947 


32 

- on consolidated returns 
( Enacted 1946). 

1949 

nil 

10 a 

- on the first $ 10,000 

I 

1 


33 

on taxable income exceeding 
$ 10,000 

1950 


2 

- on consolidated returns in 

addition to above mentioned rate 

1951 

nil 

15 

45.6 

2 

- on the first 10,000 

-on taxable income exceeding 

4 10,0000. 

for consolidated returns. 

1952 

nil 

20 b 

50 

- on the first § 10,000 

- on taxable income in excess 
of | 10,000* 

( The right to file consolidated 
returns was repealed effective 
January 1,1952. 

1953 

nil 

18 

4? 

-- on the first f 20,000 
- on taxable income exceeding 
| 20,000. 

a. 

The lower 

rate applied to one of a group of 


related companies. 

b. Effective 1952 corporations pay 2 % old age 
security tax. 



- 267 


TABLE 1 

NATIONAL INCOME, PERSONAL INCOME, PERSONAL DISPOSABLE 
INCOME, PERSONAL EXPENDITURES AND SAVINGS, 1926 - 1950. 

( # 000,000 ) 


P e 

Year National Income 
Income 


w sp 


1926 

4,185 

4,092 

1927 

4,417 

4,305 

1928 

4,832 

4,618 

1929 

4,789 

4,657 

1930 

4,238 

4,363 

1931 

3,333 

3,692 

1932 

2,630 

3,065 

1933 

2,452 

2,843 

1934 

2,897 

3,153 

1935 

3,188 

3,337 

1936 

3,487 

3,577 

1937 

4,062 

4,042 

1938 

4,018 

4,090 

1939 

4,373 

4,320 

1940 

5,263 

4,947 

1941 

6,563 

5,896 

1942 

8,337 

7,475 

1943 

9,043 

8,176 

1944 

9,826 

9,002 

1945 

9,840 

9,239 

1946 

9,821 

9,761 

1947 

10,985 

10,390 

1948 

12,560 

11,943 

1949 

13,194 

12,757 

1950 

14,406 

13,417 


s o n a 1 


Dispos¬ 

able 

Income 

Expendi¬ 

ture 

Savii 

# 

t 

$ 

4,039 

3,687 

352 

4,246 

3,919 

327 

4,559 

4,194 

365 

4,589 

4,393 

196 

4,292 

4,204 

88 

3,629 

3,646 

-17 

3,001 

3,108 

-107 

2,774 

2,887 

-113 

3,089 

3,077 

12 

3,293 

3,243 

50 

3,482 

3,457 

25 

3,930 

3,777 

153 

3,975 

3,815 

160 

4,280 

3,904 

304 

4,808 

4,399 

409 

5,600 

5,053 

547 

6,980 

5,514 

1,466 

7,478 

5,720 

1,751 

8,164 

6,187 

1,977 

8,430 

6,811 

1,619 

8,965 

7,977 

988 

9,599 

9,173 

426 

11,121 

10,112 

1,009 

11,968 

10,963 

1,005 

12,682 

11,862 

820 


Source : DBS, National Accounts. Income a nd Expenditure 
1926 - 1950. 




1 &a: ' 


.. j .■, i * 

# , , . . . : - v. , . ■ . 

■, ■ 4 ■ ■ ) 


, ■ 

) 




* 


X $ ££ O 

~ ?. 


■ >j X £ ■ 

B:j.OO.u1 


\ - 

dpi 


£.££ 

XI 


v' -W 


- 

t 

• • 

v :£. 


f 

, 

I : £ 


, 

a V.' j . I 


- 

. 

j 

! 

c ■ . " 

. 


* 


Oivr 


r 


. 

. 

t 






c : 


; . 
- 


» 

- 


40 c 

; 

. 


■ c i r r 

ooo 

i 

r 

: t 



, 

. 

t 

. 

. 

. 

v-O 


. 

, 

■ < 

3T44T 

) T£ , 


, 

- 

v'X J , • 

. 

. 

xi.. . : 

1 ■ 


. 

- 

. 

- 


lb \, ■•» 

• 




: ' " , 0 £ 

. : 

. 

■ ’. . ■ . : 

^ £0l]r r 

4 X- t / I 

' ' . .. : 

4.0.4 x 

, 

. 

■ 


oso 

ooOVxi 

, L 

■ V ■ 

• 


\ X 

f3 f 

v p r 

If ° I 

sr°x 

itoi 

v>X 

8? 91:' 
2191 

Qji9 X 
i 

X ,jp r 

£ • '-X - 1 

rXD £ 
0 4? J 

;P ' '-» £ 

0£9 X 


.une 


« 


i ' ? XXO'. : 

5T "J.Xxfxj . 






.TABLE J 

NATIONAL INCOME - SOME COMPONENTS OF BUSINESS 
OPERATING ACCOUNT, 1926 - 1950. 

( $ 000,000 ) 


Year 


1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 

1939 

1940 

1941 

1942 

1943 

1944 

1945 

1946 

1947 

1948 

1949 

1950 


Corporation 

Profits 

Dividends 

Undistri 

before 

after 

paid 

to 

buted 

Taxes 

Taxes 

Non- 

Residents 

Canadia- 

dians 

Profits 

i 

$ 

$ 

1 

# 

403 

369 

95 

91 

179 

456 

418 

106 

91 

217 

530 

485 

115 

102 

263 

530 

482 

158 

108 

211 

315 

275 

177 

95 


159 

126 

150 

93 

119 

119 

15 

130 

25 

172 

128 

91 

98 

68 

77 

287 

235 

104 

82 

47 

338 

274 

120 

82 

68 

465 

382 

161 

78 

139 

590 

489 

166 

100 

218 

499 

405 

175 

118 

108 

689 

574 

177 

119 

272 

836 

509 

182 

157 

I63 

1,108 

598 

168 

147 

273 

1,292 

663 

170 

126 

355 

1,267 

627 

156 

139 

320 

1,221 

623 

153 

118 

341 

1,226 

627 

138 

128 

349 

1,455 

801 

205 

173 

411 

1,800 

1,099 

248 

215 

619 

1,955 

1,270 

249 

211 

788 

1,906 

1,175 

317 

228 

607 

2,300 

1,399 

404 

244 

72 6 


Source : DBS, National Accounts . Income and 
Expenditures,1926 - 50. 






- 269 - 


TABLE K 


STATUTES OF 


1917 , 

1918 , 

1919 , 

1920 , 
1921 , 
1922 , 

1923 , 

1924 , 

1925 , 

1926 , 

1927 , 

1928 , 

1930 , 

1931 , 

1932 , 
1932-33 , 

1934 , 

1935 , 

1936 , 

1938 , 

1939 , 

1939 , 

1940 , 
1940-41 . 

1942- 43 , 

1943- 44 , 

1944- 45 . 

1945 , 

1946 , 

1947 , 
1947-48 , 

1949 , 

1950 , 

1951 , 

1952 , 
1952-53 


CANADA, ACTS PERTAINING TO THE INCOME 
TAX, 1917 - 1953. 


c. 

28 



c. 

25 



c ® 

55 



c. 

49 



c. 

33 



c. 

25 



c • 

52 



c. 

46 

9 

(37) 

c. 

46 



c. 

10 



c. 

31 

9 

(34) 

c. 

12, 


30 

c. 

24 



c. 

35 



G . 

34 

9 

44 

c. 

14 

9 

15 

c. 

19 

9 

55 

c. 

22 

9 

40 

c. 

6 

9 

38 

c. 

48 



c. 

46 



c. 

6 


( 2 se; 


c. 
c . 
c. 
c. 
c. 
c. 
c. 
0 . 
c. 
c. 


34 

18 

28 

14 

43 

23 

55 

63 

52 

25 


( 2 sess.) 



sess.) 


c. 40 
c. 51 
c. 29 
, c. 40 




















5 

1 

' 

i 







4 

« 

, i 

% 

'i 

i 
1 ! 

3 


t 


~ 

t ~ 

-C 












—a 







; : "'..V''!^Cfv , ' x ‘^, :,'• .«*, - f - v f "' V M ' '} 

,%'Hf &$&£ s v-;^. > tzCs 

S H- ''“V 

V ?t ' /4 mS; JwNV* i f!JK 7, r^ r 


m 


Wvt ** r ' Fl^illr^lv i ''i’v<f‘4»>' 

**r a ■: v *^vf. •' 

■»* J %|Psfp 


■111 


x .v^^'.n. -■ ft -' , r*l | $$ *j| 

wtwtt 4 mEto^P^®p 


W*£\l 


■apspniip 

"■llE 


mm 


■\. ‘ •/ v a Hi ' -. <. i* v • I|k|* : r VJ%kV ' 

' 

■■ ., - ■■ '/ 
rv y^-lAvfi .<V»*c 


mmm> 


£ar 

J 


Vsi■»¥'-f*'-' • '■ ^ ; 'lK^rV §''' '■ ' 

" 'fa %-ri' : '1>»;Ki H " ;, w 

$wn. 

: VIS Y^kjK;** ** V'* ,Vv *“ * ^ "• •*• • 


vmm 

W£’w- i 






*(,*! 




Si 


•••*■-/, 


^ In 

''V' . V* '/',■ | s 

Cv- ■ 

•, '> •■«; •'. •». ' - ? y# 

■„’v- s v ;. ;; i- ,; j Avv * ’ 

'•v.> «Sa iM'MMSii.’mpc: w ;,. * 


!.«?v \ ^-^. 


‘ '■"* X Hi 








