
•;s^ 



























(3x iSBEIS 

TOMBSIIMIS 



















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 




https://archive.org/details/historyofcrowsneOOwill 




THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A HISTORY OF THE CROW’S NEST PASS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY 

by 

WILLIAM JAMES COUSINS 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 
APRIL, 1952*. 



' , ■ ' jc.r.t • ' ' C • [ ■ 

. y V-;r 


v. c ' : . . : ... 

■ ■ ■ . 




: ( ! • ! " ■ *■ • 


' ' ' : ' ■ 





ABSTRACT 


A HISTORY OF THE CROW T S NEST PASS 

BY 

WILLIAM JAMES COUSINS 

An e^:aminati m of the development of an 
important coal-mining areas in Alberta and. 
British Columbia from the discovery of the 
na^-s to the ^resent. The thesis gives an 
account of social and economic development 
based on government reports, newspapers, 
the writer's personal knowledge and inter¬ 
views with residents of long standing. 


























■ 




















TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 1 THE PASS TODAY. 1 

CHAPTER 2 THE EXTENT OF THE PASS. 14 

CHAPTER 3 PLACE NAMES. 21 

CHAPTER 4 THE DISCOVERY OF THE PASS. 26 

CHAPTER 5 THE COMING OF THE RAILWAY. 43 

CHAPTER 6 THE FOUNDING OF THE TOMS. $1 

CHAPTER 7 THE END OF THE BOOM AND READJUSTMENT. 75 

CHAPTER 8 LIFE IN THE EARLY PERIOD . .. 84 

CHAPTER 9 THE PASS FROM WORLD WAR I TO THE DEPRESSION. . 94 

CHAPTER 10 THE DEPRESSION AND WORLD WAR II. 107 

CHAPTER 11 ACCIDENTS AND CATASTROPHES. 122 

CHAPTER 12 THE FRANK SLIDE .. 134 

CHAPTER 13 INDUSTRY, OTHER THAN COAL MINING . .. 142 

CHAPTER 14 COAL MINING. Igl 

CHAPTER 15 MINERS 1 UNIONS AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS ... 169 

CHAPTER 16 THE PEOPLE. 177 

CHAPTER 17 THE PRESS. 193 

CHAPTER 18 THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE. 200 

APPENDIX ......... . .... 206 

BIBLIOGRAPHY..... 212 





















LIST OP ILLUSTRATIONS 


Page 

MOUNTAINS AND COAL . . . . .. la 

THE EFFECT OF WIND. 4a 

POLICE FLAT . . . . .. • 4a 

D COMPANY N.W.M.P.« 41a 

WEST FERNIE BEFORE 1908 . 51a 

COAL CREEK MINES ..... . 51a 

N. AT AL-MICHEL ... 57 a 

BLAIRMORE ................. 63a 

BELLEVUE ........ . . . 63a 

SULPHUR SPRINGS AT FRANK .......... 84a 

MEETING THE TRAIN AT FRANK ......... 84a 

THE GAP..... 94a 

VIEW OF FRANK LOOKING NORTH . .. 94a 

FRANK BEFORE THE SLIDE .......... 134a 

TURTLE MOUNTAIN BEFORE THE SLIDE . . 134a 

MAIN STREET, FRANK,AFTER 1903 ....... 142a 

SITE OF FRANK IN 1951 . 142a 



















' 

.... 

.... 


Coleman, Alberta 



Crowsnest Mountain with the surface plant of the 
International Coal and Coke Co* An infra-red photo 
used by the National Film Board to symbolise the 
Crow’s Nest Pass* N.F.B* photograph. 















A HISTORY OF THE CROW'S NEST PASS 


CHAPTER I 
THE PASS TODAY 

The Crow's Nest Pass is the most southerly of the three 
passes through the Canadian Rockies which are used by railways 
and has an altitude higher than the Yellowhead but lower by almost 
nine hundred feet than the Kicking Horse.^ It runs at distances 
varying from twenty-five to forty miles north of the International 
Boundary. The Crow's Nest railway line is not used for transcontinental 
traffic but was built to develop the resources of the pass itself and 
the minerals of the East Kootenay just beyond it. It was many years 
before the railway was continued through the Kettle Valley to the 
coast. 

The Crow's Nest Pass is the only pass which does not contain 
a national park and is consequently the route for all heavy truck 
transport which is not permitted through the parks. Because the 
communities lie reasonably close together throughout the pass and the 
Kootenays , the road is kept open at all times. Consequently, the 
Crow's Nest Pass affords the only road connection between the prairies 
and the Pacific coast in winter. 

1. The altitudes are as follows; 

Yellowhead 3729 feet; Crow's Nest \\k$0 feet; 

Kicking Horsb 5339 feet. 






'w-rul virc' . 

* 

. ' ' ' 

,-v;. V . • ♦ 


. 

1 

' ' ' 

. 






. 

• : -• » 


: * 

' 


- ' ■ 


<■ ■ , • j - ; If- v ’ f : ' " 

• ‘ 

■ 


* 

h-:i ' of.. ' ' 

■ r • ■ 


f V 

■ f 

' 

: * 



2 


The pass itself is one of the greatest centres in Canada 
for the production of coke and steam coal.*** It has an estimated 
reserve of over six billion tons of easily obtainable coal and has 
produced, when the demand has been great enough, over three million 
tons per year* Each part of the Pass — the Alberta section and the 
British Columbia section — is the leading coal producer in its 
respective province* 

A mining area, the Crow’s Nest Pass has a cosmopolitan 
population and has achieved a reputation as a rough, tough area with 
considerable drinking and brawling. The Pass transcends provincial 
limitations, so that residents of Blairmore, Coleman and Femie 
consider themselves as inhabitants of the same district. From Calgary 
and Medicine Hat to Nelson and Trail it is known as "The Pass' 1 , as 
if it were the only pass in the mountains. Beyond these cities it is 
not so well known, being merely one of three passes through the Rockies. 
Outsiders often designate it as ,J The Crow” but that name is usually 
reserved by the local inhabitants for the little railway divisional 
point, Growsnest, which has been a rendezvous for thirsty miners from 
the time the railway was built. 

The communities are all called “towns” or, more rarely, 

“camps” but only a few of them are actually incorporated. At one time 
there were over fifteen but now there remain but seven. Except for 
the city of Femie, all the towns have a typically mine-town appearance 

1, See appendix Table VI. It ranks next to Sydney. 


'\ ■' ■ wv/\; 


. '■ " > 


J « 




' • ' " ' 


. l 

■ : c '' 


* 

: ■ j - r . ~ r V-"-. 




in. rev.a 


1 •, t ' 

. . • • . . •: r : ' ’ ' ■■ ; ' 17 ' 

, . ■ • ■ • • * 

• <; i Jii X' : ■ : ’ " : ' '• ' : n ' 

:: , !i r. OiiT t! a>:oru ■ ■: '-X‘X- 

' * 

.. * 


■ ! fTt 


' ■ . 

X ' 

.. ‘ 

■ . t . 

. V • ; • • ■ > W • . ,1 JD • : ‘ tXno 

v '/ i'itr: Cf/C f'-." '■ ; ' 

• ' ■ , . 


a ■ 


»X 


3 


and perhaps this has prevented the Pass from becoming an important 
tourist centre, although in the early days, the many people who came 
to fish and hunt described the surrounding country as a paradise. 

Supporting between fourteen and sixteen thousand people, 
the Pass has been an important factor in the development of the Canadian 
economy. Its lumber is to be found in many homes in southern Alberta 
and south-eastern British Columbia, its coke is used to smelt practically 
all the ore of the western province and its coal has driven locomotives 
from Vancouver to the head of the lakes. Through the Pass has come the 
wealth of British Columbia and in return vast quantities of prairie 
farm produce have come to feed the miners and lumbermen of the mountain 
region. 

Less than one mile to the west of the little hamlet of 
Lundbreck, the diaracter of the countryside changes abruptly from 
bare, rolling prairie. Stunted lodgepole pine and Douglas fir straggle 
over the tops of the hills, while long ridges of limestone outcrops 
not more than a foot or two high run along from north to south, dipping 
into the earth sharply to the west. These outcrops become larger as 
one proceeds westward along the highway through the Grow % s Nest Pass, 
so one may consider that the Pass starts at the point where the outcrops 
commence. 

The present highway winds along gravel shelves which are a 
characteristic of the Alberta side of the Pass; a phenomenon deemed 









4 * 



The Effect of Wind 
Lodgepole pines at Bur- 
mis in an exposed pos¬ 
ition. Probably the 
most photographed trees 
in the Pass. 


Police Flat 
The site of the first 
police post in the 
Pass. The buildings are 
all that remain of the 
surface plant of the 
Leitch Collieries. 












u 


noteworthy by the geological survey in 1885*^ For a number of miles 
the road rises sharply as it follows the Crowsnest River after 
crossing it at Lundbreck Falls* It is obvious that terrific winds 
must blow in this part of the country, for many of the trees are 
gnarled and stunted, twisted into bizarre shapes and leaning towards 
the east. The road shortly descends to a gravel flat upon -which are 
a sawmill of fairly recent origin and a railway station. This is 
Burmis, the first community listed as having an altitude of over 
U,000 feet. (hOOh ). A short distance to the south-east is Lee Lake 
(or Lees Lake), an important landmark for early travellers. 

The general direction of the pass from this point to well 
into British Columbia is north-westward and as one proceeds in this 
direction one notes such signs of former coal mining activity as 
roadbeds of black coal shale from which the tracks have been removed 
long since. A little farther on, there is a sudden dip into a small 
almost round valley with a grassy bottom, known as Police Flat from 
the fact that the post of the Crow’s Nest Detachment of the North West 
Mounted Police was established there shortly after the police arrived 
at Fort Macleod. Here can be seen deserted coal mine buildings and a 
row of ruined coke ovens. This was the property of the Leitch 
Collieries upon which the town of Passburg formerly depended for its 
existence. Until the depression of the nineteen-thirties, this plant 
remained as it had been when closed down — even to a locomotive 

1* George M. Dawson, Report of Geological Survey of Canada 
(Ottawa: King’s Printer 1885) p. 66b 


r, 


. 






f-'; 


r£V' 




r 




-- 




5 . 


rusting in the yard. Passburg, standing on the hill behind, 

now has but one or two buildings and is scarcely even a ghost town* 

A mile or two to the west, signs of real mining activity 
are apparent. Roads of black shale, well worn, mark the path taken 
by trucks from the Adanac mine to the south, hauling coal to the 
tipple in Bellevue for processing. Then the snowsheds and tracks 
of the Hillcrest-Mohawk Company are seen. 

Dozens of shacks and houses, many unpainted and others dingy, 
mark the beginning of Maple Leaf, formerly the townsite for the 
Maple Leaf mine but now considered part of Bellevue. The latter 
place is officially a hamlet in a local improvement district but 
having a population of over fifteen hundred, it is one of the larger 
"towns” in the Pass. Bellevue^ business section has an "old west" 
look from its false-fronted stores, many of which are as old as the 
town itself. Although still not in the Rockies, this is definitely 
a mountain community, being right on a rocky shelf in the shadow 
of the peaks. Its altitude is h092 feet. 

To the south across the valley is Hillcrest, or as shown on 
most maps, Hillcrest Mines. This community now has no mines of its own 
but most of its men work in those of neighboring towns, transported 
there by buses. In the valley between this town and Bellevue lies the 
railway station of Hillcrest, near which passes the road connecting 
the two places. 

To the west of Bellevue lies the first range of the Rockies. 
Livingstone Range ends some miles to the north but a continuation of it 
goes southward as a series of more or less disconnected mountains 



' 


. 

. ■ 

* ' 


■ ' r /Vi -'artv;:;.' 




f. r,',/ '.-u 






' 



■ 




' 

■ 

■ ' ■ ■ ■ ■ ' . • 

% 


i , . 






■ 


■ •,y.t' ' 



6 , 


known officially as Blairmore Ridge, consisting of Grassy Mountain 
(at Lille), Bluff or Goat Mountain, Turtle Mountain and Hill crest 
Mountain. The passage between Turtle and Bluff Mountains is the lowest 
and through this run road, railway and river at a point where the 
width is not greater than a few hundred feet. Between Bellevue 
and this opening, variously described as the “Gap“ or “Gorge 11 by 
earlier writers, lies the famous jumble of broken rock known as the 
Frank Slide. The highway traverses the slide, emerging from it at 
the present village of Frank, on the north side of the railway. The 
old town, now vanished, occupied the flat area immediately south of 
the track. Frank was once the metropolis of the eastern end of the 
Pass and the railway sheds and roundhouse for the yard engines are still 
here. Only the railway provides employment within the village. Most 
of the inhabitants work elsewhere. Turtle Mountain Playgrounds, a 
modern play area and swimming pool, marks the spot where early 
westerners foresaw another Bath. The Sanatorium Hotel has vanished 
and the sulphur springs lie unused across the railway track. Traces of 
the old smelter may still be seen, but even the bricks of the coke ovens 
have been taken away for other use. Just north of the railway station 
may be seen the old railbed of the Frank and Grassy Mountain Railway 
which connected the former community of Lille with the Canadian Pacific 
at Frank. 

The highway proceeds through the gap and in a distance of 
less than a mile reaches the town of Blairmore. The valley widens here 
into a large open area extending to the main range of the Rockies about 


: ' : 



7 


twelve or fourteen miles away. This is the Crowsnest Trough, About 
half way lies a comparatively low range of tree-covered hills 
running parallel to the mountains, consisting of Willoughby, Ash and 
McGillivray Ridges and Ma Butte. These are noteworthy because they 
comprise the Crowsnest volcanics. This upthrust of volcanic rocks 
through the limestone ranges is unique in western Canada. Blairmore, 
at an altitude of U 23 $ feet, is situated in an extremely beautiful spot 
at the foot of the less precipitous western slopes of Bluff and Turtle 
Mountains. It has a long main street with all the buildings on one 
side and the railway on the other. The business places are generally 
lower than those of the other towns and are mostly of brick. This town 
has replaced Frank as a centre, for the police barracks, customs office 
and Reserve Army headquarters are located here. 

A little more than a mile west of Blairmore is the new 
municipal hospital — an imposing building placed in this isolated 
position because Coleman and Blairmore could not agree to build in 
either one of the two towns. 

Coleman, the last town before reaching the British Columbia 
boundary, is about two and a half miles west of the hospital and 
is U3H feet above sea level. The river bottom is not as wide here 
as it is at Blairmore and what flat land there is, is taken up by the 
surface plant of the International Coal and Coke Company. The business 
section adjoins this, making Coleman unique in having a mine tipple 
practically in the heart of town. There is a large bank of coke ovens 
south of the railway, only a few of which now bum. These are the only 
coke ovens in operation in Alberta. 



' 


tv: 




■ 




■ 


. fj , ' ; ' 




•: • 








... •• 




; , . 1 - 


r. 


, ■ . • 


i • 








■ 






BOi F. ' '■ 




' . 




. . ' : 

. ■ ■ ■ ■' ■■ 

. 

. ■ 

, • . 


, 


8 


Because of the lack of room, the town has spread over a 
series of gravel terraces, so that many houses appear to be perched 
precariously on precipices# Yi/hen the National Film Board wanted a 
n typical n mining community for a film on the coal industry during the 
last war, these houses were photographed as "Goaltown", although the 
'•miners 11 in the picture were Blairmore men. Coleman was less 
"fortunate” than Blairmore in regard to fires and has the same "old 
west" look as Bellevue. The last link with the old days of parades and 
celebrations was removed in 19U9 when the balcony of the Coleman Hotel 
was taken down. Old pictures show many such balconies and this was 
the last. 

About a mile west of Coleman the highway crosses the 
volcanic ridges and then there are no more coal mining towns until 
Michel-Natal is reached, eighteen miles away. 

North of the highway and a few miles west of Coleman, towers 
Crow 1 s Nest Mountain — quite separate from the Rockies. It dominates 
the Pass towns and is always the bond of union for the Alberta side 
and until the plate was destroyed by fire in 1901* the Femie Free Press 
used a cut of the mountain as its symbol. Gift pictures in the Alberta 
towns are always of the "Crow" while all other peaks are practically 
ignored. 

Crowsnest Lake, about four miles west of Coleman, is the 
dividing point of the two different ranges of mountains forming the 
Rockies. The one to the south forms the Flathead Range, while that to 
the north is called High Rock Ridge. Between the two is a large 




t rr.Bi f ' ■ c> ~ 







9 


mountain known locally as the Sleeping Giant, but more correctly 
Mount Phillipps. There are three possible ways through. One of these, 
Phillipps Pass, was for many years the Crow’s West Pass but now 
both road and railway go around Crowsnest Lake so the former trail 
is known as "the old road over the summit". Even after traversing 
these passes there were three choices of route, so the Alberta-British 
Columbia Boundary Commission named the whole group "the Crowsnest 
series of passes". In the three British Columbia passes roads have 
been built at one time or another. Ptolemy Pass to the south once had 
a wagon road leading through the Flathead to the International Boundary, 
while the original road through the Crow’s Nest Pass followed Tent Pass 
directly to Femie. The present road follows the railway north-west 
to Michel and Natal before entering the Elk Valley. 

At the eastern end of Crowsnest Lake is the coal-operated 
emergency plant of the East Kootenay Power Company. Originally 
intended to work in times of water shortage, it has operated full time 
since the war. A little farther up the lake is the cave, called the 
"source of the Old Man River" on an adjacent signboard. It is 
accessible only from the railroad so is hardly ever seen by visitors. 

At the western end of the lake is the Summit Lime Works, which supplies 
much of Alberta’s lime products. 

A second lake farther west is characterized by a quite 
noticeable island. Island Lake appears on most old maps, usually with 
a dot in the centre. This lake and Crowsnest or Glacier Creek, which 













lv TQO 


r 



10 , 


empties into it, drain into Crowsnest Lake and hence are in Alberta. 
The Crow ! s Nest Pass is unique in the large amount of territory west 
of the mountains drained by streams flowing eastward. 

The little community of Crowsnest, hhSO feet high, at the 
top of the pass and right on the Alberta-British Columbia boundary, 
is one hundred miles from Lethbridge and. so is a divisional point 
complete with roundhouse. Everything here depends on the railway 
and although a few of the buildings are in Alberta, the hamlet is 
under British Columbia administration. 

Beyond Crowsnest the road runs over a rocky shelf to 
Summit Lake, a small body of water which drains into the Columbia 
River and the Pacific* The !! shelf” in early automobile days was a 
hazard, for two cars could not pass on it. VJhen Alexander Creek 
coming in from the north joins the overflow of Summit Lake and both 
are joined by Michel Creek from the south, a sizeable river is 
• formed. Here the valley becomes so narrow that there is scarcely 
room for creek and road so that highway building becomes an expensive 
project. As the road goes down, the railway continues to rise for 
some miles, forming a loop around Loop Ridge before it meets the road 
again where Michel Creek comes in from the south. McGillivray Siding 
is on this loop and is notable as the point at which Gorbin coal was 
brought to the Canadian Pacific down the company’s own Eastern British 
Columbia Railway. From this point, the character of the vegetation 
changes and more birch and larch (tamarack) trees are to be seen. The 


* 


L„ t 


. 






. 




' 

< 


•. • 









11 , 


lacy leaves of the larch give a touch of green in spring not seen on 
the eastern side of the Rockies. The valley continues narrow until 
it suddenly widens out when Michel Creek flows into the Elk River. The 
“twin” communities of Michel and Natal are strung out along the length 
of this narrow way. 

Michel* which has an altitude of 3860 feet* is a n company” town 
consisting of rows of similar houses of the same colour, built according 
to a unique plan which has been a source of some amusement to other 
residents of the Pass, because the back sheds of one row of houses have 
been built right before the front doors of the row behind. Between 
Michel and Natal is the Michel plant of the Crow*s Nest Pass Coal 
Company, probably the most modern in the country, having the only 
by-product coke ovens In the west, besides a long row of beehive ovens. 
Almost under the tipple is dingy Middle Town, consisting of a 
monotonous row of almost identical n cottages”, long unpainted but always 
occupied as the inhabitants seem quite attached to them* 

Natal is an open town and more closely resembles the towns 
to the east in variety of buildings. The school for both places lies 
between them but closer to Natal. So closely are the communities 
associated that the names Natal and Michel are used for both towns 
indiscriminately by the people of the neighboring towns. 

Shortly after leaving Natal, the narrow valley opens into 


the wide Elk Valley which runs almost directly north and south, nearly 
at right angles to the Michel-Natal valley. The ranges on the west 
















12 


side of the Elk mark the Elk River Trough between them and the Rockies, 
and the range contains many peaks as spectacular as those of the main 
chain* A road runs north through some ranching country but leads 
also to the favorite fishing area of the district. On turning south one 
is surprised by the sight of some very beautiful modem houses in 
clearings cut in the panes. This is the Sparwood development of the 
coal company, which is trying to encourage a programme of more 
permanent building away from the grime and crowding of Michel. 

Most of the way down the Elk to Femie, the road follows the 
abandoned roadbed of the Great Northern Railway. Along the east side 
of the valley is a line of fairly low ridges — Sparwood, Femie and 
Morrissey ridges, while on the west side are more distinctive peaks 
such as Mounts Hosmer and Femie, as well as Femie®s beloved Trinity 
Mountain, which is rugged and high. 

Hosmer, with an altitude of 3U56 feet, is now but a hotel 
and a house or two. It was once a bustling town and the remains of 
the mine tipple can be seen back against the hill to the east. A few 
miles to the southward on a broad flat by the river is the city of 
Femie, which has the lowest altitude of any community in the pass —— 

3313 feet. Femie is the most distinctive of all the “towns’ 1 in the 
Crow*s Nest Pass. It is the only one that has the appearance of 
permanence. Its business section consists of solid brick and concrete 
buildings — now a little shabby from the trying years of the thirties — 
and a paved main street. The tree-planted side streets, clean from the 






• . £ 

• ■ 

* 

a.:: ac-a^on rmbo;-; lir'iitf. 

. 






..• '\JMO :n';..co6'i, r o^ 

• • ■ ■ 

■ , ex ' • 

' • 

* 

■' * • - t 

' ■ 


. • ■ r;/{ 


Si'.tc, , ; T:i ; V' Oii>. ' -S'— 

l 

’ 


si ' 


• .v;_ rsi,-:' . T: r -. '.J : it ' *"■''■■ 

.. • . . ' ' 

, ;i. V , • ••.. ' no ;■ ’ ••.■r: 

t 

„ 

* 

• ■ • ■ ‘ ' 

. :.,C ;£i; \V- -:U‘ '*•: v ■ ■ - •- ' '. 

at • ■ . ■ 

. ■, . L ' 


'oynov. 


* 


;.o • ••' f- 


-■ ■ ■ 


, ■ 




13 


lack of coal mines in the immediate vicinity, make the city look like 
a prosperous farming centre. The coal upon which the city depends 
is found a few miles east, formerly at Coal Creek but now a little 
closer at the Elk River Colliery. Only the derelict coke ovens not 
far from the main street betray Femie 1 s dependence on coal. 

As it leaves Femie, the road again follows the roadbed of 
the Great Northern. It is rather a scenic highway, being carved from 
the rocky wall and passing through a tunnel on the way. The valley 
narrows again to a ’’gap” from which one emerges into a large open area 
near Elko. The Pass has obviously ended. Formerly the road was on the 
east bank of the river, ascending, near the abandoned town of Morrissey, 
a steep hill, which was a legend in the early days of automobile travel. 
The coal measures end near Morrissey so that the pass and the coal end 
together. Hence coal and the Crow 3 s Nest Pass are synonymous. 


ft - '1 


, 




. ■ 


. . 


, 






. Li 


: • f 


: i 


hi 


r 


j ; 




. 


c f ■: fc n 






















: 

• , ■ ■ 

■ - 

[ : 





CHAPTER 2 


THE EXTENT OF THE PASS. ITS GEOLOGY AND CLIMATE 

Almost every person writing about the Crow's Nest Pass has 
set different limits to it, varying from a large but vaguely 
defined area to the one just described. Captain Thomas Blakiston 
mentioned seeing a trail coming down from the pass at a point 
probably between Cowley and Lundbreck and stated, "We know only • •. • • 
that its eastern entrance is on the river of the same name, while it 

emerges in the vicinity of the 'Steeples* or Mount Deception. 

2 

The writer has been unable to locate Mount Deception but The Steeples 
is a rocky range somewhat like Femie*s Lizard Mountains, situated 
about half-way between Femie and Cranbrook in direct line, some 
miles north of the present community of Bull Paver where the Bull 
River joins the Kootenay. This is over thirty miles beyond the 
present limits. Blakiston helped to define the pass because when he 
crossed the North Kootenay Pass he emerged at a point near Elko, so 
it may be assumed that the two passes meet there and hence mutually 
terminate each other* 

George M* Dawson, conducting the first geological survey 
in 1883, considered that the "Crow Nest Pass may be said to terminate 

1. Thomas Blakiston^ Further Papers p. 60; included in the 
Report of the Palliser Expedition* 

2* A map accompanying A^Stavely Hill's From Home to Home 

(London: Sampson Low, 1885) shows Mount Deception to' be in a 
range midway between the Elk and Kootenay Rivers about 15 miles 
south of 5Cr N* Latitude and far from the Crow's Nest Pass* 









~v V 


! ' •. * . • 




:.:a :^ryh,: ■: 


. : : ■ 


'' Cil 




!J- 




c : iy- id: i.y h\ r £ 



i . 






• f 

. : .' 

. 

; 

....... : • 

, 

... 

... •' ■ ' 

0 ... . 


* 

'• .;,f; . a v;a ... 



15 


at the bridge (over the Elk River) inhere the description of the 
North Kootanie Pass .... also ends.””*' 

Other writers have not been nearly so definite. One writer 

2 

extended the pass to Wild Horse Greek. The ranchers of the 
Pincher Creek-Macleod area were equally careless. Any area in the 
mountains in the general direction of the pass was called the 
Grow*s Nest Pass in most newspaper reports. However, the tendency 
today is to limit the pass to the Cretaceous coal-bearing area which 
starts near Lundbreck, Alberta, and aids just beyond Morrissey, 
British Columbia# 

The two troughs, the Elk and Growsnest, contain mostly 
Cretaceous rocks. The coal is found in the Kootenay formation. 

The coal formation is overlain by the barren Blairmore strata and 
underlain by the Femie soft marine shales* The deposits in British 
Columbia were formerly part of the Lower Cretaceous basin of 
sedimentation and u were uplifted and eroded, becoming separated from 
the inner foothills belt of Alberta by an intervening belt of 
limestone. On the Alberta side of the Crow 1 s Nest area the measures 
consist of a series of westerly dipping fault blocks on a north- 
south strike.The Growsnest Volcanics are of great geological 

1. Dawson; op. cit. p. 78b. 

2. Geo. H. Johnson, paper, in files of Calgary Historical 
Society, Public Library, Calgary. 

3* Ignatieff, A. et al Conditions and Occurrences in the 
Canadian Coal Mining Industry , Canadian Mining Journal , 
("Ottawa, 1951) voi. ?£, October 1951# 















■ 






- 







' 






Yj.'.. z • v iX.i; 


, . 


: ■ ■ • . 







' ■ • 




! . ' ' • , ' • • 









16 , 


interest and several brochures have been written by Canadian 

geologists upon the subject* One of the types of rock found there 

has been named Blairmorite.^ 

Dawson noted a curious phenomenon* He stated that he 

believed that there was a great fault near the volcanic ridges and 

that the surface sandstone rocks between them and the main range of the 

Rockies were lower strata than the coal-bearing rocks and he forecast 

that no coal would be found in the area* This was borne out by later 

developments and has had the effect of dividing the Crowds Nest Pass 

into two parts, — the Alberta coal-mining district and the Femie-MLchel- 

Corbin coal basin, with a gap of about eighteen miles between* The 

coal formations reappear just west of the main range and some of the 

coal on the Alberta side of the border is now being strip-mined but 

there is no community, except the little railway hamlet of Crowsnest, 

between Coleman and Michel. The only gold mine noted in the Crow*s 

Nest Pass was discovered in the coalless area and although Henry 

Kountz* gold-platinum mine came to nought, it lends some credence to 

the legend of the Lost Lemon Mine, which would likely be found in a 

2 

similar formation some distance to the north. 

The coal seams in the eastern zones are broken so that they 
appear as outcrops with the coal pitching to the west with varying 
degrees of slope. In the western zone the coal is found near the bases 

1* Museum Bulletin h No* l45>9-19lU« Geological Survey, 

Department of Mines, Ottawa. 19Hw 

2. Robert E. Gard, Johnny Chinook (New York: Longman*s, 19h$) 
recounts this legend. 




1 



Yi.: ;:f,c 


itr 










. 


1 


J/'l'C 


• ■ t 


a 


. 













17 


of plateau-like mountains and may be said to have no well defined 
pitch, although some seams have faulted a great deal, as at Corbin 
where they appear to be standing on end* 

The two factors of altitude and varying degrees of mountain 
protection produce a somewhat different type of climate from that of 
the prairies, while the main range of the Rockies causes different 
weather on the eastern slopes from that on the western side. KLakiston, 
approaching the mountains west of Fincher Creek in 1858, noted that 
15 in the middle of the afternoon it blew a fresh breeze ... with usually 
some cumuli over the mountains which disappear before reaching the 
plains.This is still a familiar feature of the eastern slopes. 

The mountains are often swathed in clouds for days, while the prairies 
east of Burmis lie in bright sunlight. These cloud formations often 
cause light rain to fall even in the depths of winter, especially 
during Chinooks. Frequently, squalls of blizzard ferocity blot out 
the land for periods of fifteen or twenty minutes at a time even 
during late spring and early summer. 

Perhaps more notable than cloud formations are the terrific 
winds that blow through the eastern part of the pass. Although the 
effect of the winds is frequently noted as far west as Natal, there is 
normally little wind west of Crowsnest. The winds seem to blow 
downwards from over the Rockies and gain great speed. They do 
relatively little damage to buildings, perhaps because they are blowing 


1. KLakiston, op.cit. Appendix II p. 6?. 



' l: 





> .*;i : 


. 





18 , 


downwards, although Father L-ajat 5 s first church in Frank was blown 
off its lofty position on a hilltop* The winds continue eastward 
as the famous prairie Chinooks, which are somewhat less gusty. 

Certain points along the road are noted for their vdnd* The road near 
Police Flat, the outskirts of Bellevue and a point in the Frank slide 
are notable. Coleman f s windy "bluff u is a local tradition, while the 
wind at the turn in the road under Mount Sentry along Crowsnest Lake 
will rock an automobile. This latter spot is the point where most 
of the blocking of the road leading to British Columbia takes place 
when snow begins to drift. Almost all travellers in the area mention 
the wind. In 1886, John E. Craig came upon some prospectors who were 
travelling westward to the Kootenays. Their covered wagon had been 
blown off the trail and only some trees had prevented it from 
rolling down a steep hill at a point near the present town of 
Blairmore.^ 

There is only one wind besides the west wind and that is 
from the east. North and south winds are unknown. Quite the 
opposite of the Chinook, the east wind is usually light, except where 
it funnels between Bluff and Turtle Mountains at Slairaore, bub even 
here it has little resemblance to a prairie "norther"• Lacking proper 
meteorological equipment, the residents have no really accurate picture 
of their weather, but by comparing radio reports from Calgary and 
Lethbridge over the last few years with local weather, it would appear 

1. John R. Craig. An Excursion into the Crowds Nest Pass , 
included in his book. Ranching with Lords and Commons. 
(Toronto: Briggs, 1903) p. 269.' 




r 


cr 


. 



i 



r : iff: rA • 







i 




19 


that the mountain winters are milder, for the Chinooks come 
sooner and last longer even though the temperatures during cold 
snaps may be somewhat lower* In summer, however, the reverse is true, 
for the altitude keeps the temperature down especially at night 
so that frosts may occur in any month of the year. This accounts for 
the lack of any but sub-marginal farming in the eastern part of the 
pass. From Bellevue east there is less frost and there are a few 
farms, but these lean heavily to cattle raising* Rainfall seems to 
be a little less than on the neighboring plains but winter snowfall 
appears to be heavier. 

The climate on the western side is more characteristically 
British Columbian. The Elk Valley is noted for the depth of its 
snowfall but owing to the lack of a violent west wind it does not 
pile into the rock-hard mountainous drifts of the eastern slopes, nor 
does it melt to any extent in winter. Michel seems to be much like 
the eastern side, with greater precipitation. In early spring the 
road from Natal east may be clear of snow while cars may have to bounce 
through rutted, hardpacked snow westward to Femie and beyond. Most of 
Femie * s "weather” sweeps down the Elk Valley with blizzard-like force 
but the temperature does not go quite as low as on the .Alberta side. 

In summer, with a lower altitude and greater rainfall, the Elk Valley is 
much more suited to farming. Spring may come a little later because 
of the lack of the Chinook but it comes along faster and perennials and 
shrubs bloom a week or two ahead of those on the Alberta side. Fernie 
is definitely the "flower garden" of the pass* 


l ; ■ , / ■ . • . C ,'i ' 

- ■ ■■ ■ • • 

A ‘ '• : " ' '"' ‘ lr ' 

. A . ]. ■ :■ 'A ARAl r 3* l’ ilC‘ -J ^rVOJfsf.. f'A'T'l 

» ' ' ’ \ • 

• - 1 tl . ' • 1 ■ ■ ■ ■ 


: : L‘ ' 


f > J ■"' • ■ . 1 ' 

, . . : ; ; . ■■ ’ ' r ‘ 


. 


. . • ' csIJ< 


:• ■' > - F : ,i fc : : . ‘‘ •- 

- 




— • 


• ■LA. Qv. F ... : ' 


, 




:'vJ,;; 






.• . ' • ‘ • ■■ -■ ; ' r ‘ ' ' * ' ’’ ' ' ‘ 

• ... . • ■■ . . . : . . :: a : ; 'A ; ■ ‘ 

. 

. 

- 

. 

■ .. j ■ : KF- /• :.■■■ > ' a. a . ;V . 

■ • ■ 



20 , 


In 1883, Dawson noted a decided difference in the 
lushness of the vegetation as he descended the western side of the 
divide. This is still true but there have been frequent periods of 
drought that have resulted in many disastrous forest fires. Just 
as frequently there have been periods of mountainous snows or 
sudden floods. 


■■ • f-; : ! r : '>".0 :>fJ t' ' ■ r : '-- 

ui 10 ni i - ' ; ■ ' 1 ’ : ' ' 

, ■ ’ 

. '1 .’O V: f-V> Y.V.-XT l! OY&li O'l ' ' X ' C 

i.Sf.;OoJ 



21 


CHAPTER 3 
PLACE NAMES 

Few districts in Canada can engender the same heated 
discussion over place names and their origins as this mountain 
area. Names have often been chosen and fixed by surveyors from 
Ottawa with little consideration for local names, and as these 
names were buried in maps not readily available to the general 
public, the old names and spellings tend to persist. Further, 
different maps from Ottawa frequently carry different names for the 
same place. As an example, the mountain, known locally as the 
M Sleeping Giant* 1 , (from a fancied profile of a person in repose) 
was originally called Mount Wilson, and although the British Columbia- 
Alberta Boundary Commission decided to call it Mount Phillipps, the 
name Mount Tecumseh appears on their maps as the name had not been 
changed in time. 

The name of the pass for this work has been chosen as 
"Crow’s Nest Pass* 1 in spite of the fact that the Canadian Board on 
Geographical Names insists on the form "Crowsnest 11 in all connections. 
But, popular usage, as much national as local, decrees that this 
cannot be. It may be Growsnest, B.C.; the Crowsnest River; Pincher 
Creek-Crowsnest constituency or Crowsnest Ridge but the pass itself is 
always Crow’s Nest Pass. There is the Crow’s Nest Pass Coal Company, 
Crow’s Nest Pass Railway and Crow’s Nest Pass freight rates. The 
abbreviation is always C.N.P. and the innumerable leagues and 










22 


organizations always use the name Crow’s Nest Pass as their 
designation of locality. Therefore* although Crows* Nest Pass might 
be grammatically more correct and Crowsnest Pass legally more correct* 
the name must be Crow’s Nest Pass, for the people will spell it 
no other way. 

Earlier writers have had other variations. Blakiston in 

1858 called it Crow Nest Pass* Crow nest Pass and Crow nest River. 

' 1 

In the same volume Palliser has Crow River and Lodge des Gorbeaux. 

2 

Dawson called it Crow Nest Pass* while Hill in 1881 called the 

3 

mountain Crow’s Nest Hill. The same man called the river the Old 
Man coming down from the Crow’s Nest Pass. As a matter of fact, for 
years and still to some extent locally the Crowsnest river was called 
the Old Man or the FdddLe Fork of the Old Man or just Middle Fork, 
while the present Oldman was the North Fork and once the Belly River. 

This confusion is reflected in Place-Names of Alberta^ which agrees 
that the northern branch is the main stream of the Oldman River* as the 
area around the source of this river is known as the Old Man’s Playing 
Ground by the Indians. "Hence 11 concludes the author* "the cave from 
which the stream emerges is known as the Old Man’s Cave" — but the 
only cave is the one on Crowsnest Ridge from which the Crowsnest 
River flows. 

1. From maps accompanying the Palliser Report. 

2. Dawson op.cit. p. 6!jb. 

3. Alexander Stavely Hillj op.cit. p. 37. 

k* Geographic Board of Canada (Ottawa: King’s Printer,1928) pamphlet. 



! 




23 


More contentious still are two other points. What is the 
origin of the name and which is the original Crow’s Nest Mountain? 

The early ranchers of the Fincher Creek district vouch for 
various versions of a story which appeared in an article in 
McLean’s Magazine in the issue of June 1, 1928. It states that some 
time about 1852 or 185U, a party of Blackfoot Indians managed to cut 
off a group of raiding Crow Indians who tried to escape westward 
through the pass in question. They were cornered and slaughtered at 
the base of a mountain which was called Crow’s Nest In memory of the 
occasion. The article precipitated quite a dispute, culminating in a 
letter from R. Douglas, secretary of the Geographic Board of Canada, 
enclosing a statement on the origin of the name by James White 
published in the Lethbridge Herald July 12, 1928. White quoted 
Palliser and Blakiston as using a name which was quite current before 
1858 and further stated that the Rev. John McDougall, the missionary 
to the Stoney Indians, had said in November, 1909, that the name came 
from a crows’ nest beside the trail* Most of the arguments used in the 
article could be disputed but the following (point number seven in the 
letter) seems to be particularly reasonable: 

11 The Handbook of North American Indians published by the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, states that the Blackfoot 
name for the Grow Indians is ’I-sa-poa’. Crow (the 
bird) in Blackfoot is ’Mih-sto*. No one could mistake 
a reference by a Blackfoot Indian to the ’nest’ of 
’I-sa-poa’ for the reference to the nest of a * Mih-sto».»(!) 


1. This does not deny the occurrence of the battle but merely 
implies that the pun was obviously possible in the English 
language only. 







! 





2k 


The Blood Indian name for the mountain is ’’Ma-sto-eeas” 
and the similarity to the Blackfoot word is obvious. Several 
fanciful accounts of Indian legends have been published in the 
press referring to love and Indian maidens but these sound too much 
like the romantic ideas of the white man. 

The same article from McLean*s Magazine also states that 
the Indian Crow*s Nest Mountain was in reality Turtle Mountain. 

In disputing this statement, James Tftiite told of a statement made 
by R. N. Wilson, who had been an agent on the Blood reserve for many 
years. Wilson was speaking in 1918 of a time twenty-two years 
before when Chief Ermine Horses of Blackfoot-Old-Woman led him to 
a ” crow*s nest 11 which turned out to be a 

”...high isolated and prominent hill standing between 
the Porcupines and the Rockies, and some few miles north 
and east of the eastern entrance to the Crow*s Nest 
Pass. He said *This is what the Indians called the 
Crow 9 s Nest* (literally speaking the raven’s home). When 
asked about the present Crow’s Nest he said *That perhaps 
is the white man’s talk. We Indians know but one Crow’s 
Nest and this is it. 111 (1) 

Wilson further stated that this hill was known locally as Antelope 
Butte and is so named on some government maps. This might explain 
why Hill referred to it as Crow’s Nest Hill (page 22 above) in 1881. 

On the other hand those who named Turtle Mountain as the 

2 

peak in question are just as strong in their argument. F. W. Godsal 


1. The article referred to ( Lethbridge Herald July 11, 1928) 
deals further with this conversation. 

2. Letter by F. W. Godsal, Calgary Historical Society files, 
dated April 2, 192lu 




■*: i 


i 













25 


tells of talking with two Indians who said, M It was under that 

mountain (Turtle) we killed the Crows (Indians), that"*" is what we 

call Crow’s Nest Mountain• " "These men' 1 , says Godsal, ”claimed 

actually to have taken part in the fight themselvesGodsal adds 

that W. S. Lee was a witness to this conversation and that the Frank 

Slide now covers the spot. It might be opportune to mention that 

Turtle Mountain was not named by the Indians, who had no word for 

!l turtle”, but probably, as Godsal suggests, by Louis 0. Garnett, whose 

ranch was near Lee’s ranch where the Crowsnest and Oldman Rivers join. 

From the foregoing it can readily be seen that no definite 

conclusion may be reached about either the site or the origin of the 

name Crow’s Nest Pass and mountain, for after all if it is so 

2 

obviously named after an actual nest, why did Dr. Hector place 

"Lodge des Corbeaux" Instead of "Nid des Corbeaux" on one of the maps 

3 

in the Palliser Report? — and further, if the site were a mere hill, 
why should he have starred on the same map "The Grow’s Nest" so plainly 
as a large peak standing out from the main range of the Rockies?^ 


1® The quotation was punctuated as written. 

2* Apparently the only copy of the Palliser Eaporfc in Southern 
Alberta is the one in the Palliser Hotel in Calgary. 

3* Blakiston, from a point southwest of Pincher Creek, described 
Crow’s Nest Mountain as seen from that point. However, he did 
not recognize it, for he concluded from its perfect dome shape 
that it was Gould’s Dome — a peak twenty-five miles farther 
north which is invisible from this place. (This was checked 
carefully by the writer.) 

U* Some Peigans were queried recently on the above naming of 
Craw’s Nest Mountain but they knew less about it than the 
questioner did. They showed little interest in their own lore. 




■ y. : 










26 


CHAPTER U 

THE DISCOVER! OF THE PASS 

There is one claim to discovery about which controversy 
has raged and because it has been widely publicized by press and 
radio and stated in books intended for use in Alberta schools, it is 
necessary to discuss it here® 

In August 19U1 there appeared in the Lethbridge Herald an 
article by Freda Graham Bundy, entitled r, A Link With The Past”, which 
told of the discovery of a small lead plaque with the following 
inscription on it* 

ANNO XXVI REGNI LUDOVICI XV PROREGE ILLUSTRISSIMO 
DOMINO, DOMINO MARCHIONE DS BEAUHAHNOIS M)CCXXXXI. 

PETRO GAULTIER DE LAVERENDRIE POSUIT. 

On the reverse face was a roughly scratched message - - 

Pose par le chevalyer de Lav 
to St. Louy 1a. Londette, A. MLotte 
le 30 de Mars 1?U3 

Mrs. Bundy had purchased a box containing odds and ends at 

1 

an auction sale at Drewry*s Glen Ranch on Todd Creek, near the mouth 
of the Crowds Nest Pass. This box lay unused and neglected until 1935 
when quite by accident the plaque was discovered in it. Mr. Drewry was 
dead by this time but his brother thought that the lead plate might 
have been dug up with some other relics when the basement of the house 
was excavated about 1915. This spot had always been a favorite 
camping site for Indians as artifacts had been turned up there several 

1. The spelling appears as ,5 Tod n and iJ Todd H on different maps. 


•- ■’ 




- 





27 


times before and since* Mrs. Bundy brought her plaque personally 
to the Public Archives of Canada, but had heard nothing further from 
them, although some readers of the 19bl article had written to the 
press to say that they had similar plaques which were souvenirs. 

The present writer decided to follow up the story. The 
original La Verendrye plaque was discovered at Fort Pierre, South 
Dakota, in 1913, and from his own journal it would appear that 
La Verendrye placed only one plaque and that in the area near 
Fort Pierre. The Public Archives sent the writer photographs of 
both the Drewry and Fort Pierre plaques, while a rubbing was obtained 
from a known replica left by the late Judge Howay to the Library 
of the University of British Columbia. The Howay plaque had printed 
upon it| 

Columbia River Historical Expedition 

July 1926 

Compliments of the Great Northern Railway 
The Drewry plaque had no such inscription. 

Inquiry at the Great Northern Railway public relations office 
revealed that they were reasonably certain that the inscription 
was put on all plaques that they issued. Dr. William Kaye Lamb, the 
Dominion Archivist, who has shown considerable interest in the discovery, 
found that replicas were also struck in 1925 in connection with the 
Upper Missouri Historical Expedition. It was his surmise that the 
plaques were made in two series — one with and one without the Great 
Northern Stamp. Dr. Lamb compared the rubbing of the replica with the 





■ 


, : ' i.’ ! .-l\ ! I ■ 

..... £; . ■' -■ - ‘ : i; ' - 

, • 




i •• 


: " : ■ 


. ’.a t vi ' . ■ 

■" ; C 


. # ■ , . , ■ • • ' 

- - ' ■ 

• . /■. ; ' ■ . , • ■ . ' : ' •:•••"' - l ' ' ' • ’ ' ' 
;;,i V ' v ‘ / ' • ' ’ ' ' ' 

. ■ i ■ 

0! U 

: j; 






• • 





:j. r r • 







. 




1! 

r . ! 

■ 


' 

' 




. , • 




■ * 



: 



■ 


• 







t 











. 


‘ ■ 



■ 



' - 









• ■ 



■ 

■ ■ ■ - ■ 




' 



* 




' 



:.T.\ 1 

, : . ... 0 : • i . 

■ 00 


.. •. 


‘ 





' 

i ■ ‘ 

.0 

. . i % 

■ 

■ 

' 

* 





28 


Drewry plaque and arrived at the following conclusions: 

”(1) The back of the two plates are absolutely identical 
so far as the ordinary eye can see. 

(2) The inscriptions on the front are likewise identical 
but in order to leave room for the Great Northern 
Railway inscription* the railway company placed the 
whole inscription slightly higher up on the plaque.” 

2 

In a later letter Dr. Lamb concludes* ”... I have hunted 
up an early description of the original plaque and I find that it 
measured by 6§ inches* If the Alberta plaque Q>% by 2j) is 
genuine, we must assume therefore, that La Verendrye not only 
duplicated his rough inscription with uncanny accuracy, but 
accomplished this feat while at the same time greatly reducing the 
scale of the copy* This seems to me a most improbable feat and makes 
it all the more certain that all the small plaques are merely modern 
copies.” 

If the plaque had proved to be an original, it would have 
been a fine starting point for this chapter, but it does not seem to 
be so* Also, much to the chagrin of the citizens of the Growls Nest 
Pass, it became evident that early travellers had little regard for 
the pass which became so important later. However, an easy passage 
free from obstructions was of more importance to men who travelled on 
horseback or on foot than mere low altitude, which only became of prime 
importance in the days of railway construction* 

1* Letter from Dr. Lamb November 16, 19it9. 

2* Letter from Dr. Lamb November 23, 19U9• 









- . . 



. 






' 











.,0 


. . i . . ■ 




29 


The first white man to come near the Pass, of vrtiom there is 

any record, was Father Jean de Smet* In 18U5 de Smet was a missionary 

among the Kootenay Indians in the Tobacco Plains section of southern 

British Columbia and northern Montana* He travelled extensively in 

the area around his mission and in 18U5 made his epic journey to 

Rocky Mountain House to persuade the Blackfoot to make peace with the 

Kootenays, who were in a state of great fear after numerous clashes* 

It has been stated that de Smet chose the western end of the Crow*s 

Nest Pass for the first part of the trip, but since it has been 

established almost certainly that he went through Ihite Man Pass,^ 

this is scarcely likely* However, there is other evidence that he 

2 

visited the valley of the Elk several times* In a letter he said, 

“The fine river Des Chutes comes roaring down and crosses the plain 
before it joins its waters to the McGillivray (Kootenay)^ ••• and 
having remarked large pieces of coal along the river, 1 am convinced 
that this fossil could be abundantly procured*” He is obviously 
referring to the Elk River, the only one noted for coal in those parts. 
Hence, de Smet was both the first known traveller in the Pass and the 
discoverer of its coal. 

The Pall iser expedition in 1858 first gave recognition to 
the Crow*s Nest Pass by that name* Lieutenant, later Captain, Thomas 

1* Dawson op.cit. 1885. See footnote on Ihite Man Pass section 
where Dawson discusses this* p. 112b* 

2* Chittenden and Richardson; The Life and Travels of Pierre 
Jean de Smet (New York: Francis flarper^”T.9®) 

3* ibid, p* 959 ”*..the large river called indifferently the 
Kootenie, the McGillivray and the Flatbow,” 








I 



f' . 






o 








: 0 


L’ftO £Tl 


J it! 



’ 



> . 


of 


30, 


Blakiston had been charged with exploring “Kootonay” Pass to see if 
it lay in British territory. Blakiston, after a dispute with 
Palliser, went off from the main party, and his account appears in the 
section of the Palliser Report known as “Further Papers”. He listed 
the pass as a known pass at k9 degrees U0 minutes North Latitude and 
called it the ‘Crow Nest Pass”. The (North) “Kootonay” was given as 
h9 degrees 3b minutes. Travelling southwards between the Livingstone 
Range and the Porcupines, which was considered safer because of the 
danger of Indian raids, he passed across the mouth of the Crowds 
Nest Pass. Referring to this pass his report states, “of the first 
of these Qpasses) we know only that its eastern entrance is on the 
river of the same name, while it emerges in the vicinity of the 
“Steeples” or “Mount Deception”^. Further on we read, “By report of 
the natives it is a very bad road and seldom used.” There was, however, 
a well defined path when he crossed it in August and he ” ... observed 
the old trail coming in from the plain©s (sic) on the left bank of the 
Crow-nest River.” It would be interesting to know which of the Crow ! s 
Nest series of passes liras followed by the Indians, who were almost all 
Flatheads or Kootenays and who would have turned south as soon as 
possible to reach the Tobacco Plains. Ihen Michael Phillipps came 
through about fifteen years later there was no sign of a trail along 
the route now travelled by the road and railway* 


1. Palliser Report. Further Papers p. 60. 










: ' 






31 


Michael Phillipps is, by all available evidence, the first 
white man to traverse the Crow*s Nest Pass* He had been a 
factor in the Hudson *s Bay Company posts in Montana and Idaho and when 
all posts in the western part of the United States were sold, 

Phillipps* post at Tobacco Plains was among them. Being free for 
a time he decided to go northward to do some prospecting. In 1873, 
in company with John Collins, a trapper, he started north up the 
Elk Valley. No fire had then swept the valley and although there 
were no trails the going was comparatively easy. They camped a few 
days at the place where Femie was later built, then moved north and 
rediscovered an old camping site near some hotsprings where Michel 
Creek comes into the Elk. Phillipps stated that he had been there with 
Peter Boyle in the l860*s. They saw many of the elk to which the valley 
owes its name. They decided to follow up Michel Creek and, after 
travelling through heavy timber for several days, found large trails 
which were certainly not elk trails passing out towards “the lake**. 
Phillipps writes, “We found trees covered with Buffalo hair and it was 
evident to both of us that we had passed through the Rocky Mountains 
without going over any range. This is the first trip ever made by what 
is now known as the Crowds Nest Pass.’ 1 Phillipps realized the importance 
of a pass with no mountain to go over, so he decided to work for a trail. 

1. Michael Phillipps; Memories of Thirty Years Ago , published 
in a special edition of the Femie Free Press In 190?. All 
of the following narrative is from this account. There are 
few of these books left since the fire of 1908 but Mr* 

Wallace of Femie, formerly of the Free Press, has one. 




32 


His account is somewhat vague for he gives no details of the 

route he took or to what lake he was referring or why it took 

several days to go not more than ten miles or even hoy/ the hotsprings 

became moved about twenty-five miles to the south. Neither does he 

mention meeting any white settlers in the area. Mr. W. S. Lees 

was already settled by the lake which bears his name and he claimed 

that In the same year (1873) he travelled from his ranch up to where 

Frank stands today and discovered the sulphur springs there. He said 

1 

that it was the year before the police came to the country. 

In the summer of 18?U Phillipps returned with "Woods, William 

2 

Saunders and Jim Morrissey (a miner)»" They found and named 
Morrissey Creek and took out some coal. They named the next large stream 
Coal Creek. Phillipps continues, "We could find nothing but coal 
and coal everywhere." Next they named Lizard Creek from some green 
"lizzards" they found there. Jim Morrissey complained bitterly about 
finding only coal, but it was not until they went up the Bull River 
two years later that they found anything else. They were more taken 
by the iron and gold they found here than by the vast coal deposits of 
the Elk Valley. 

Phillipps was able to persuade the British Columbia government 
to grant him a small sum to define the trail. According to Phillipps, 

1. Macleod Gazette , November 1, 1888. Account by Editor C. E. D. 
Wood of a tripinto the Groves Nest Pass. The police 
arrived in 18?U* 

2. Phillipps op. cit. (no page numbers) 







. 

. 

“ 

■ ■ 

. 

' 

. 

■ • 


• . . ‘ , 

; ;• . • ■ : ..4 








■ 






■ 




. 

„ 




■ - 






. 




33 


Gold Commissioner William Femie opposed this plan, saying, “The 
Indians say there was no such pass and there is no use wasting the 
money.” However, Phillipps and a Mr. Ridgeway blazed the path through 
and the trail was made. 

There is a rather curious fact here which needs explaining. 

Phillipps* narrative describes the route now traversed by the railway 

and one would conclude that the trail went that way. Yet in 1883, 

Dawson followed the well-defined road which went directly from Island 

Lake through Tent Mountain Pass and southwestward to Coal Creek and 

then into the Elk Valley.' 1 2 ’ He mentions no other trail, yet Phillipps 1 

account does not seem to have been challenged in 1905 by men who were 

2 

perfectly aware of this. 

In speaking of the Dewdney Trail (the Hope-Princeton-Wild 
Horse Greek trail) Gibbon says, ”Peter Femie continued the trail 
westward from the Kootenay River through the Crowds Nest Pass in 1879. M ^ 
Perhaps this might have taken a somewhat different route. 

In the same article Phillipps tells of sending Dr. Dawson a 
sample of coal and a rough pen sketch of the Elk River, using his own 
names. This probably explains why local names and government names are 
more in accord on the west side of the Pass. 

1. See p. 35 below for G. M. Dawson*s account. 

2. W. R. A. Wallace of Femie spoke in 1 9k9 about walking to 
Bullhead or Bull*s Head (Crowsnest) by this route. See map. 

• J. M. Gibbon; Steel of Einpire (Indianapolis; Bobbs, Merrill, 
1935) p. 3U0. 


3 






I 


3U, 


Once the Pass had been opened, it was soon one of the main 

connections between the Kootenays and the plains and became one of 

the most used summer trails in the country, with horses and cattle 

from as far as Kamloops being driven through it. It became a matter 

of intense interest to the ranchers of the Pincher Creek and Macleod 

district and is mentioned quite frequently in the early newspapers. 

The stories of the Lost Lemon Mine refer to large gangs of 

prospectors meeting at Crowsnest Lake and going northward in their 

search for the lost lode very shortly after 1873 although the dates 
1 

are rather vague* 

In 1881, the Canadian Pacific Railway made an exploratory 

survey of the Crowds Nest Pass but the Canadian government, ! *for 

military reasons”, opposed any main line so near the International 
2 

Boundary* In the same year, Alexander Stavely Hill went through 
Garnett’s ranch to the mouth of the Pass and tells of a settler who 
had tried ranching well up into the valley but now had settled near 
the mouth of it* In 1882, John Craig went from the Oxley ranch at 
Granum on a quick dash up into the Pass but mentions no settlers at all* 
Stavely Hill was unable to find a police post that he thought 
was at Police Flat in 1881^ which suggests that a temporary station 
might have been placed there about that time* In 1883, because of the 

1* Gard; op.cit. Senator Riley’s account is referred to* 

2. Gibbon; op.cit. p. 3lpL* 

3* Craig; op.cit. p. 55* 

U. A. Stavely Hill; op. cit. p. 223. 





I>n, 



j x 


.<■'' ■ i. 


i 




: 





i 



35 


increase in cattle rustling through the Pass, a permanent post was 
established with two men in charge. Fairly substantial log buildings 
were erected there in 188? and the following year the mud roofs were 
replaced by shingles.^ Although referred to as the Crow*s Nest 
Detachment at “The Gap", it was actually in the little valley now 
called Police Flat in which now lie the derelict coke ovens of 
Passburg. 


In 1882, George Dawson made his first visit to the area and 
explored up to the entrance of the pass, discovering two coal seams of 
three feet and three feet six inches in the river bank a few miles 
below the falls (Lundbreck) on the Middle Fork. He was more 
excited about the prospect of going up into the pass the following year. 


"The most interesting feature of the explorations 
was the discovery that in the region of the Grow 8 s 
Nest Pass wide valleys based on Cretaceous rock 
occur west of the first range which is formed of 
Paleozoic limestone and that in the Cretaceous 
rock an important intercalation of volcanic material 
appears in which traces at least of copper ores occur. 
It is possible that in some of the now isolated troughs 
of Cretaceous rocks coal beds may yet be found in the 
heart of the range. The existence of a seam was indeed 
reported about twenty miles west of the summit of the 
Crowds Nest Pass, but the locality has not yet been 
examined. 11 (3) 


1. Turner, J. P. The North West Mounted Police (Ottawa: King , s 
Printer, 1950) vol. 2, p» 227 

2. ibid. vol. 2, p. 3^0 and p. U 03 * 

3* G. M. Dawson; Preliminary Report of the Geological Survey. 
Department of Mines, Ottawa, 1882, p. 3b. 






« . 

■ 

J.0 

' 

■ ! . ■ , 

' 

■ . ., ■ v. ry. - : ■ '■ ■ f in.i.m ' 

. 

. ' *• 

: v> ? ' . 

V » ' . ■ 

.i X : • ' X • ■ ' ' ' 

' 

; ; ■ •. ' : j.. 7 

« " ■ - 

.7 ' . 

■ 


T • _ - • * ♦ - 


7# lo -r:. 





36, 


In 1883 he changed the name to Crow Nest Pass, when he 
entered it for a minute geological examination* The area was 
well travelled and a practicable trail had been cut out and bridges 
built over several of the larger streams by the government of British 
Columbia'!' He commented on the number of horses and cattle driven 
eastward over the road. He stated that the road in his day did not 
correspond to any known Indian trail. The Indians still preferred 
the North H Kootanie H Pass because it was more direct. The map 
accompanying the report shows the pass with two summits going from 
Island Lake across Michel and Marten Creeks to Coal Creek and into 
the Elk Valley where Femie is today* 

The passage between Turtle and Bluff Mountains he called 
n The Gap n , a name which now is used for the opening in the 
Livingstone Range where the Oldman (North Fork) flows. 

1 

Although there were some signs of forest fires even that 
early, most of the hills were covered with thick forest. He was 
interested in determining how far north the Crow * s Nest Trough extended 
but found the forest so thick that he was forced to return after 
covering only a few miles and injuring one of his horses. Mien a 
highway was built north of Coleman along this route in ±9k9* the area 
had been both burned and logged over and the small pines of from 
fifteen to twenty feet high that barred the way were easily removed 
by bulldozers. 


1. See above p. 33 in the reference to the Dewdney Trail. 


novo 



37. 


Dawson found the valley quite attractive and suggested 

that the name was taken from the Cree »Kah-ka-ioo-wut-tshis-tun u ,~ 

He evidently considered that Blairmore Ridge was part of the 

Livingstone Range and from his description it would appear that 

the first coal found in the eastern end of the pass was near 

Blairmore — just inside the Gap, He found seams about two feet 

2 

thick and good coking quality but rather high in ash (22.bX%)* 

West of the main range he explored to the south into Ptolemy Pass 
and discovered the glacier which is the source of Crowsnest Greek, 
known locally as Glacier Greek, He noted that this pass led into 
the Flathead country. 

There is some disagreement among the residents of the Pass 

as to how the original road got around the barrier of Growsnest Lake, 

Did it follow the route now taken by the railway or did it go through 

Phillipps Pass or, as the local inhabitants say, 11 over the summit”? 

3 

According to Dawson, “the old trail, turning to the north at the 
east or lower end of the (Growsnest) lake ran westward nearly 
parallel to it in a narrow dry valley, A better track has lately 
however been found along the north shore of the lake itself. 11 He also 
describes “a remarkable spring which may be designated as the source of 
the Middle Branch or Grow Nest River,” This is the first recorded 
mention of “The Cave”, from which still gushes a large stream of 
ice cold water, 

1. Dawson; op. cit. 1885. The ”Kah-ka” suggests a bird rather 
than a tribe of Indians, p, 60b. 

2. ibid. p. 6Ub ~ not unusual in outcrop coal. 

3. ibid. p. ?0b. 




r.hJ.& 



* 



■ ri 



i .T.,/ v u 


■ m : • "■ ' ‘ 





'i-fi ';>? ru;.i 


i.o 


O'o;-' 


/. ,vv; : <; > -o ^*v;-u.3^ eir vp mmj 'avwj 

■• i ; I 


J : A 


. ' ■ ' ' Ui ’ 


■.(+?, ii-; nnl-'h\ 


- 

, uc; r do ‘ . 1 ■ 'O';* 


i-.i.o::' 






38 


Dawson was not impressed by the western side of the Pass, 
which he called “extremely desolate, .... the forests... having been 
almost completely destroyed by repeated fires which have swept the 
region since the Crow Nest Pass became a travelled route. 11 This had 
happened in a space of less than ten years. 

The valley of Coal Creek is described as monotonous and 
plateaulike in outline. He believed that the coal-bearing horizon 
here was the same as that east of the volcanic ranges. He named the 
Lizard Mountains from the creek which came down from them. 

Dawson was not the only notable visitor to the Pass in 1883. 

Mr. George Hope Johnson, later of Calgary, tells of making the trip 
with the Hon. F. W. Aylmer. Johnson wrote“Where there are now 
thousands of men from Michel down the Elk River, up the Kootenay 
and down the Columbia to Golden, there were in the winter of 1883-188U 
about twenty-five white men and three white women mostly farther 
down around Wild Horse Creek.” 

2 

In 1886 John R. Craig of the Oxley Ranch made an “excursion" 
into the Crow*s Nest Pass, accompanied by his wife, sons and daughters. 
These are the first white women of whom there is any record entering 
the Pass. Graig wrote a description of the country hoping that some day 
it might have some historical value. This account is more interesting to 

1. Paper, Calgary Historical Association 1925* 

2. Graig published an account of this trip in his 
book cited above. 


* 




■ D 









i r- 


Vr 



39. 


the modern resident than that of Dawson because it is less 
concerned with geology and more with the notable surface features. 
Craig considered that civilization ended at the ranch of John Lees 
(others say Lee) but up at the sulphur springs he found a pioneer 
in a log cabin who proposed to build a sanatorium there The 
visiting rancher called Bluff Mountain "The Lion", and described the 
Gap as a narrow gorge. He noted that the road was "incredibly bad", 
needing six fordings of the "Old Man River" from the springs to the 
lake. Vehicles could go no farther than Crowsnest Lake, the balance 
being but a rough trail. Even though this trail was precipitous, it 
was "comparatively a very good trail to what it was before being 
improved through government aid." The area was densely forested and a 
game paradise, while fish were abundant. They encountered a party of 
Stoneys who apparently hunted regularly in the district, but were 
appalled by the destruction by the Indians of more game than they 
could possibly use. 

9 

A similar account by the editor of the Macleod Gazette 
ran as a serial feature in 1888 and added a few points of interest. 

He noted two trails from Pincher Creek to Lee ! s "ranche". One went 
via the falls on the "Middle Fork of the Old Man 1 2 s River", while the. 
other passed the ranch of the Garnett brothers and was a better trail. 
By this time, the ranchers of the Pincher Greek district had made use 
of the narrow gap between the present communities of Frank and 

1. Craig$ op. cit. p. 263. 

2. Macleod Gazette , November 1, 1888. C. E. D. Wood, Editor. 














r 

. W . V ' : '• ‘‘ 1 • • ■ 1 : l 





jV: 





rjj-1 







Blairmore and by means of several spans of wire they impounded 
the bulls of the area in the lush grasslands to the west during 

the time of the year when breeding would have caused calves to be 

1 

bom in winter* Mr. Lee at his own expense had improved the road 

to the springs, while the ranch itself showed much building and was 

already a “guest” ranch. As for the sulphur springs, they were 

colder than those of Banff but were “stronger and effected more 

rapid cures”, including one on Mr. Lee himself. Thomas Watson was 

2 

then in charge. There were large deposits of sulphur along the 
stream and this was used to strengthen the water when it was 
heated in cauldrons for the treatment of patients* 

The trail stayed in the valley for five or six miles until 
Rocky Point was reached (probably about a mile west of Coleman on 
the volcanic ridge) and then it was a mere pack trail over a 
succession of steep grades until it was a thousand feet above the 
river. The editor noted that the “wagon road” ended at the lake. 

It was earlier in this same year that the worth of the Pass 
as a means of travelling with a large group from British Columbia to 
the plains was established. ”D“ Division of the North West Mounted 

1* Another gate in Phillipps Pass blocked the western 

entrance, which probably accounts for the name Bull Head 
or Bull’s Head given to that place during construction 
days* The gate was still there in 1901. 

2. There is no such deposit today. 







■ 




10 



i;: V ’ Oi h. 




, ■ : ■ 


" 



MO' 





a..: uoi.. 


. 




) 0 £: 


i ) 


id7i X 



■ . 


you. 




. , « , 









4 - 1 « 



F(_Gaciy for-tha-rriAPc-h out of Kootanay VIA 

tf>z Crocus Nest f^ss 1888 R.Cit P photo 








I 


Ul 


Police made its famous 11 March Out of Kootenay" to prove that the 
Crowds Nest Pass was the best route to move troops* This group 
had been stationed at Kootenai (Fort Steele) and were to have 
made their trip in July, but delayed until the settlement of the 
trouble which had flared up between the Flatheads and the American 
government* 

The trail was cleared and caches laid over the summit as 
far as sixteen miles east of the lower lake. This was probably 
as far as the Grow f s Nest Detachment post at Police Flat. Constables 
Waite and Eales were dispatched over the mountains to request that 
wagons be sent from Fort Macleod to "Old Man’s Lake" in the Crowds 
Nest Pass. The troop, sixty strong, under Superintendent S. Steele 
and Inspectors Wood and Huot, was soon on its way. They went up the 
Elk as far as "Femey’s" (Coal) Creek, where they noted a cabin, and 
a little farther on they passed Colonel Baker’s coal claim on Marten 
Creek. These were the only inhabited spots until they reached the 
springs. They continued until they reached the Crow’s Nest 
Detachment post and then stopped there and at Lee’s ranch and later 
continued to Fort Macleod* The Macleod Gazette announced, on August 23, 
that the troop had passed through the mountains in eleven days without 
incident. Mrs. Wood, who was to have accompanied her husband, 
turned back and went out via Golden and the Canadian Pacific 


1. Report of Commissioner of N. W. M. P. (Ottawa: King’s 
Printer Ibbbj p TBIT T . 













'V 


a r **. 


. 




Railway, arriving in Macleod from Calgary by wagon* 

Inspector Wood was enthusiastic — "♦••there is the pass 

and the richest country on the face of the earth awaiting 
2 

development*" Superintendent Steele was no less so. He says, "In 
my report to the Commissioner ••• I laid particular stress upon the 
value of the coal lands in the pass, its suitability as a railway 
route and the lightness of the work in comparison with that of the 
Kicking Horse Pass." ^ 

In the meantime, at the other end of the pass, William 
Fernie of Fort Steele and Lieutenant-Colonel Baker, then a member 
of the British Columbia legislature, acting on the information 
supplied by Michael Phillipps, began prospecting in the Elk Valley in 
1887. Every summer until the railway was built they took men out of 
Fort Steele to prospect the out crops 4, and succeeded in forming a 
syndicate in Victoria to develop the coal lands. This was followed 
by the organization of a company to build the British Columbia 
Southern Railway, which also took over the interests of the coal 
syndicate. Little progress was made, however, until the formation of 
the Crowds Nest Pass Coal Company in 1897. 

1. Mrs. Wood is usually credited with being the first woman to 
go through the pass, but a series of notes in the Macleod 
Gazette shows that this is not so. The editor, C.E.D. Wood, 
was a relative so he gave the Woods full coverage. See the 
Gazette for September 13, and later, 1888. 

2. Macleod Gazette , September 6, 1888. 

3* S. B. Steele; Forty Years in Canada . (Toronto; McClelland, 
Goodchild and Stewart, 1915} Steele made the date 188? 
obviously in error. 

U. Fernie Free Press Souvenir Edition, Fernie, B.C. 1907. 


















■v. 


:■ r,. 











I 


i:- •; 




. ■ 













. 

. ; . . • . J : . . . ■ 1 W ' • : • v 

♦ ’ 

, 

, „ - = - ' i ■ 

" ” • ' ' _ *' 

. . 

, e * ■ •• • 


ISflSI 




U3 


CHAPTER 5 

THE COMING OF THE RAILWAY 

There were two sources from which agitation for the 
building of a railway through the Crow 1 s Nest Pass originated# 

One was Victoria and British Columbia in general, for the mining 
development of the Kootenays in the seventies had been northward 
from Montana and Idaho, while the people of the coastal area had 
been cut off from their own hinterland. This draining of wealth 
southward seemed as if it would increase as the Great Northern was 
being built westward. James J. Hill planned feeder lines north 
into Canada, so Colonel Baker and his company led in agitation from 
the British Columbia side to cut off Hill’s tentacles® 

The other centre of agitation was the ranching area 
around Macleod and Fincher Creek. The possible market for ranch 
cattle was one factor, but fear of being left at a dead end was 
obviously another, especially after the building of the Canadian 
Pacific through Calgary and the apparently dead stop of the line 
from Medicine Hat at Goalbanks (Lethbridge)® Every bit of 
publicity favorable to building a railway through the Pass was 
published. Violent arguments were printed refuting the claims of 
those who favored Howse Pass^ (also called Tete Jaune in the same 
article) and setting forth the merits of the southern pass. It 

1® Macleod Gazette August 30, 1888 quoting the Y/innipeg Gall. 



■ 

■ ■ ■’ ’ • • ' 

• - : \ . ‘ 

.. : • ' . : ■ : ' • ■ ^ .! ‘ , ' ■ • • ' ‘ ; ' ‘ ' 

• ' 

. * • 

i ' ' f. ' :i:. ■ i' 




f. :.tv\ x r.. 




■") ’ ■ ! , 






• • 

' 

. 


. n; • ■ 




• • '• ^Jioi 


■ r,.' x 6 o^x-x) 

' ~ . - . • 


. ■ v ; ■ • 


reads strangely like the arguments used in 19U9 to influence the 
Canadian and Alberta and British Columbia governments in the 
building of a proposed Trans-Canada highway. 

There were rumors of Canadian Pacific surveyors being 
in the Pass in 1888. A "coal-oil spring 11 was discovered by I. S. 
Lee "in the Pass" which was later proved to be "true petroleum, 
purer than Pennsylvania oil." In 1889 it seemed certain that the 
line would be built in 1891 • Notice was taken of the fabulous 
silver ledges in the Kootenay and of Colonel Baker* s holdings near 
his home in "Cranbrooke" and of his trip to Britain to try to gain 
support there. 

In the meantime, John Nelson, a North Fork rancher, 
discovered "genuine coking coal" along the Middle Fork near the 
falls and set about forming the Alberta Coal and Coke Gompany. 
Reports of the progress of Baker * s *Crow * s Nest Coal Company” were 
given frequently. By 1890 several railway charters had been 
applied for, Galt*s North West Navigation and Coal Company being 
one applicant. This company was granted 381*0 acres of land by the 
government for the project. It was reported in 1891 that the 
Prime Minister, Sir John A. Macdonald, had delayed the line because 
the route was "too important to hand over to a company."^ So the 
years passed with one disappointment after another, but in spite of 
companies sparring for time the settlers went ahead hopefully. 


1. Macleod Gazette July 16, 1891. 







' 


1 






: v ; • r . 












. 


' 

. ) : t£ 

.'\.o ' t:: 


- ;■ i; ,• o ' 

v; w": • ■ ' "V: J 

■ , • ' ' 

bu £ ‘to . ■ 

■ 


v. 




• . 

’ 

.' 

. 


, • 


* 

. 






H. D. Freemantle advertised coal from the Spring Creek mine on the 
Middle Fork and a company was formed to develop the “ Kootenay” 
oil spring* 

Finally in February, 1896 it was announced that the 
Alberta Railway and Coal Company, which had held the charter for the 
Crow 1 s Nest Railway for the previous four or five years, now had 
the money to proceed and agreed to lease the line to the Canadian 
Pacific when completed* The route was to be via the Growsnest River 
and "Michael* 1 Creek to the Elk River and across the plateau to 
the Kootenay River, passing Cranbrook but missing Fort Steele* A 
proposal to grant a loan of $20,000 per mile to help construction 
was defeated by what the Macleod Gazette called an “obstructionist“ 
opposition at Ottawa* A charter was granted by the dominion govern¬ 
ment and subsidies and land grants arranged* Although it was called the 
British Columbia Southern Railway Company it seems to have been but a 
subsidiary of the Canadian Pacific, for the former name was used 
only on maps® 

Early in 1897 a Mr. McGready^* from Golden arranged with 

Peter McLaren to supply ties, while the Winnipeg Free Press 

published the first map of the proposed line. Mr* P* Burns, a 

2 

‘•West Kootenay Butcher 11 , was prepared “to buy all the cattle in the 

1® The first names of McGready and Lumsden not given in Macleod 
Gazette from which above information was obtained* 

2. This shows how little was known of the man later so 
well known® 




' 

v ... . ■. I) r .nv ";hv ■■ u / hftc : v r I >; 


• ■ ' • 


• ni . 


i: ri:; 'V; • 


. 


i 




r 




• : . C ' ; ■ 

■ 

. ■ V 

•, • . . •, ; , :■ :T 'O 

. . . • ' . . • :■ • 

f, t,U '' ■ ' • 

*.. 

. 

'. ■ 

. J,Q ■ ' - ' 1 ;; 

' 0 / . Q ■ - 


* 

' 


• ■ 

' . ■ • ■ . . 

*' 



1 * 6 , 


country’ 1 . The price was forty dollars a head for three- or four-year 
old steers. By July, Macleod was made construction centre under 
M. J. Haney and a Mr. Lumsden. By the end of 1897 two news items 
appeared which set the pattern for many later press releases from 
the Crow’s Nest Pass. The first stated that Mr. C. E. D. Wood, who 
was magistrate, had left for Crow’s Nest Lake — a new ’’town” along 
the line — to prosecute, before Inspectors Sanders and Cuthbert, 
a man named Luce for selling liquor without a licence. The other item 
told of a rumor of labor troubles in the Pass which were said to 
have led to the resignation of Mr. Haney. 

The N. W. M. P. were in charge of policing the line during 
construction and were sworn as special British Columbia police 
officers to give them full authority in that province. They‘d 
reported 3,£00 men employed in construction. There was not too 
much lawlessness considering that ten thousand dollars 1 worth of 
liquor was imported each month, which was sold at twice that much to 
the workers. However, one or two murders were committed during the 
two years of construction, for many people, like Luce, followed the 
men with illicit liquor. Old construction workers stated that the 
hotel at Crow’s Nest Lake had a barrel of whiskey on the counter at 
all times for self-service — at seventy-five cents per glass. 

1. Report of Commissioner N. W. M. P. 1898. 

(Ottawa: King’s Printer, 1898). 






1 > v ' '' 


■ 


, t I L VI t. 




n 


. 

■ I ij ■..> 4 , v 

>:'• - fun: 

, 


' Uu .. 911,1 


t 


... ;r 


, 

• ' 


» ‘ 

• ■ ■■ ' ■' ' :: - r 

' 1 v'; ' v 

• . - _ 


< ’ 






H7 


Labor troubles were inevitable, for the investigation 1 
into construction, following the death of two workers, 
revealed deplorable conditions in the camps* It also gave a 
graphic picture of the Pass in those days. 

The farthest west camp daring 1897 was Mann * s, at a 

point a little to the east of the present Fernie, while others 

were strung out along the line to Seventh Siding near Fincher 

Creek, which was the end of steel in December. The bunkhouses in 

all camps were unsanitary and overcrowded. Wages were $1.75 a day 

while board cost about 75$• There were doctors in two districts, 

2 

Dr. Roy in Alberta and Dr. Gordon on the British Columbia side 
under the general supervision of Dr. F. H. Mewbum. Crowds Nest 
Lake, just east of the cave, was a very large camp from which the 
blasting work around the lake was directed. Joe Bricker and Henry 
Johnson Sr. had a store there and a Mrs. Taylor ran a boarding 
house. Dr. Roy 5 s headquarters were here also* Not mentioned in 
any reports were such establishments as that of Fat Alice, which was 
ostensibly a restaurant but well remembered for its more illicit 
activities* 

1. Report of the Commission Inquiring into the Death of 

McDonald and Fraser of the Crowts Nest Railway . 

R. C. Clute, Commissioner. 1899 Ottawa. Sessional Papers 
No. 70 Vol. 33 No. IJ 4 .. 

2. Names as given in Clute report except where local citizens 
could recall the proper first names. Probably the two 
doctors were Dr. Phillippe Roy (later a we.ll-known 
Canadian diplomat) and Dr. A. J. Gordon of Calgary* 






iodi‘,1 


f •; ■ ■■' 


' - 

• • 


- 

* 


■ ♦ 

■\ ■ < i ► . » •’ I • '- - v • 

... ’ ' " • * ' ' ' - • ' ‘ ' :i -• - 
• ' ; ‘ . ; ■ 




• . . : ■' ' 

,y' v : •. . ' :Jx \ -O 


• - i ■ a* 




•T . i. O'.', ■' -r ‘ .v? v'KV 

. 

* 


. 

* 

. . ' ; , \ 

;; O' . ' 






U8. 

About five miles west of the main centre was Bull Head, 
or Bull*s Head, which was probably near the site of the present 
Crowsnest. John Bidgood was reported to have a "place” at the Loop 
while east of the lake Douglas Allison*s ranch was noted. Sherman 
Paris or Parrish was also located there at the time but was not 
mentioned in the Clute Commission report. However there was a 
McGillivray living where the town of Coleman now stands. At the 
springs was a man called Willoughby (who was a son-in-law of W. S* 
Lee), whose home was now a "hotel" for trappers and prospectors. 
Water from the springs was piped to "baths" across the railway 
right-of-way and while the "baths" were often rented to others, 
Willoughby always kept control of the water supply and was known 
on occasion to cut off the flow of the healing fluid whenever he 
became displeased with the renters. The agent at Seventh Siding 
was Reuben Steeves, who was later a prominent citizen of Frank, 
and owned the Imperial Hotel. 

By the spring of 1898, Crow*s Nest Lake was a ghost town, 
and nothing much is left today to mark the site but a few 
mouldering logs. The rather extensive graveyard was left unmarked, 
but by 1906, when the graves had sunk in, a group of men from 
Coleman came and filled the depressions. Other such places have 
been obliterated by time. In 1899 the Feraie Free Press published 
a list of names of men buried in a little forgotten cemetery which 
a resident had discovered accidentally. 






■m 






h9 


In spite of a statement that the maximum gradient of 

the pass was only H one foot in a hundred",'*’ the actual maximum was 

two percent and until quite recently a stretch of road near 

Hillcrest had a two and a half percent rise* The steepest grade 

on the west side was between Crowsnest and Michel, where there was 

a 1.2 percent grade. The only tunnel on the line was along this 

stretch but this was eliminated in 1950 when the railway was 

2 

rerouted around the hill. 

The road cost nineteen million dollars to build, but this 
was reduced by a subsidy of $3*381*000 from the Canadian government. 
A grant of six square miles of coal lands was also made and the 
company chose the area around Hosmer. This was later developed 
by the Canadian Pacific Railway Company. 

One of the conditions for the aid granted in the building 
of the railway was the well known Crowds Nest Pass freight rate 
agreement, whereby special lower freight rates for certain western 
goods were set by act of parliament. Although this had very little 
to do with the Pass itself, the attendant publicity has made the 
name a household word in Canada, even though most Canadians might 
not be too sure of its location# 

1. Gibbon; op. cit. p. 3^0. 

2. Railwaymen report that the tunnel had become unsafe. 






• I i 



50 , 


The railway did nob cross the barrier of Kootenay Lake 

for many years but the Spokane International Railway^ 

connected by a branch south from Xahk to Kingsgate became the way 11 out 1 " 

for the residents of the Pass. The Spokane Flyer became the main 

"express 11 train through Lethbridge and the Pass and it was 

considered a point of honor if the new towns could persuade the 

railway company to have the Flyer stop at their stations# By World 

War I the Kettle Valley line was completed and the cars were 

ferried across Kootenay Lake so that direct access to Vancouver 

2 

was possible and the Spokane Flyer disappeared. As Calgary 
grew it became more important to residents of the East Kootenay 
from Cranbrook east. At present the Crow*s Nest Pass line is more 
important for its freight than for its passenger service, but has 
proved to be a very valuable alternate route when the main line of 
the Canadian Pacific is blocked by the not infrequent snow and 
mud slides. 


1. Completed November, 1905. Operates 10| mile branch 
from lahk to Kingsgate for the C. P. R. 

2. No. 7 and No. 8, the passenger trains, called the Spokane 
Flyer from Minneapolis to Portland, Oregon, ceased running 
on February li|, 1911w Jimmy Wallwork now of Lethbridge 
was the engineer on the last run. Nos. 11 and 12 were 
popularly called the "Flyer" by Pass citizens for some 
years afterwards. 



? .[r:\7c j 



: • ' ■ 




■ 


.it 




■ 


. r 




• i. 


■4 


. ' 


' 


* S( ■ 


■ 



,v.r 

: *■' ' r • ' ' ' 

tfal -‘.to wort : . 

■ 

■ 


O oj 
Srs.X f 


' 

« ■ . : - ■_ r J ' . ; ' ; 

' '■ ' 

■ : . : ‘ - 




5U 



Pictures taken before 1908 

The photograph above shows West Fernie. The bridge in 
the background is that of the Oreat Northern Railway. 

Spalding photographs 



















51 


CHAPTER 6 

SETTLEMENT AND FOUNDING OF THE TOWS 

Because its mine at Coal Creek was already developed* 
Femie was the first settlement to spring to life when the 
railway arrived and in a very short time' the low log huts of 
1897 became known as “Old Town“. A map^" will show that apart 
from the Canadian Pacific*s six square mile grant and two government 
blocks of 5,000 and U5j000 acres, all the coal measures from Elko 
northward up the Elk Valley for about sixty miles and through the 
Crow*s Nest Pass to the Alberta boundary belonged to the Crow*s 
Nest Pass Coal Company. This fact had an important bearing on 
the nature of the communities which grew up in the area. The 
company obviously intended that all the commercial activities of 
the British Columbia zone were to centre on Femie, which was 
located on a wide flat along the Elk River. There were no coal 
mines near it and except for the period when coke was manufactured 
there, Femie has never had the appearance of a mining camp as all 
the other communities have. The mines were at Goal Creek, six 
miles east, at Morrissey, seven miles south, and at Michel, twenty- 
five miles north-east, and were to have been linked by the 

1. See Mining Pitching Seams in North-West Canada 

by T. H. Wilson in I 9 W Goal Mine Modernization Year Book 
(no publisher given). 













■ 








i 




oiit: r 






; I;' . 



H ' 







; ■ . ' 


. . ■ 










52 


Morrissey, Femie and Michel Railway. * At first, therefore, 

Femie was the Crow*s Nest Pass and many of the original 
settlers of the other pass towns came directly to Femie and 
from there moved to the other places as they opened up* 

In the spring of 1899, Femie had two hotels but the 
illicit liquor business by the shack town bootleggers remaining 
from construction days was very great. The re was no school 
although it was estimated that there were over one hundred children 
of school age in the place. By March, a Board of Trade, led by 
H. Bentley and G. S. Henderson, editor of the Free Press, and a 
provisional school board led by Wm. Blakemore, the general 
manager of the coal company, had been elected. A Catholic church 
was ready by Easter (April 2), while the Anglicans opened a 
temporary church, called by the newspaper a n vestry”, shortly 
afterwards. The Presbyterian Church had been active since 1898 
when the Rev. Mr. Oliver held services in a log shack in the Old 
Town. In May, the Salvation Army appeared in Femie. A waterworks 
had been installed the year previously but it had frozen during the 
winter. Wooden sidewalks were built in 1899* 

In June of 1899 a school was opened under a Mss 
Lawrence in the Presbyterian Church and sixty children attended. On 

1. Apparently there was some connection between the granting 
of land and the building of railways. The M. F. & M. R. 
is now only four miles long and is claimed to be the 
world®s smallest completely equipped railroad. 


1‘XI • 


!. 

. 

' 

* • ' ' ■ ' 

I,; * ■ 

i • .■ ■ - > 

' ■ • .. * •• ' ’ ' 

' ■ 

► ' 

, ' 

. 


. 


C 


j, . 

• . ,W\ 


* ? 

: : ,,.' , , • ■ 


& rsj’ro : ■ .. / 


. 


■ 


\ . 




* 






* 


. • 




■ • • : 1 ■■ \ ■ ! ! 

t T • • ' 








■ • , . J • ■ : : ■■ • : ' ■ ; " ■ : 1 

■ 

■ :.r. . ■' : :■ ■ ■ ; : ' 


August 21, two qualified teachers, F. J. Watson and Miss Annie 
Doran, took over the school at monthly salaries of $65 and $U5 
respectively. There were 10? pupils by August. 

In a "Review of Progress" in 1900 the Free Press reported 
125 buildings in the "old town" and 29 cottages for miners in 
Femie in addition to twelve double houses at the mines (Coal Creek), 
the last two groups built by the coal company* The same year saw 
another schoolroom opened and a new Methodist Church under the 
Rev. F. B. Stillman. It is interesting to note that Femie with 
273 had the largest number of voters of any town in the East 
Kootenay in the provincial election of 1900* 

The Board of Trade pressed for incorporation but the 
company, owning all the land, opposed this. However the company 
did install electric lights and new waterworks* 

The census of 1901 showed that there were l61j.0 people 
in Femie and U76 in Michel. There were 202 pupils in five 
schoolrooms, counting 6U at the "mines"* 

The company agreed to the laying out of a townsite and 
lots went on sale in July, 1901. Even the terrible explosion^ 
in Coal Creek on May 22, 1902, which killed 128 out of 800 men 
who worked there, did not stop the expansion, for the mines at 
Morrissey were opened the same year. Fernie ! s first strike 
occurred this year when a dispute between the company, represented 


1* See below, p. 129. 









> > 














. 

• . \ * 5 : 


■l 


1 

~ 








by the general manager, a Mr. Tonkin, and the men, broke out 
over hours of "work. Tonkin also became involved with the 
merchants of Femie when he opened company stores in the closed 
towns of Morrissey and Coal Creek, although the merchants had 
been promised no competition. The disagreement ended in the 
formation of the Trites-Yvbod Company, which has operated stores 
in all the towns opened by the Crow*s Nest Pass Coal Company 
down to the present. 

On April 29, 190U, Femie, then a canmunity with ten 
hotels, had its whole business section practically destroyed by 
a fire which started in Richards* General Store. Six complete 
blocks were wiped out. 

The company finally agreed to allow incorporation of the 
city if the coke ovens were not included in the limits, and the 
Corporation of the City of Femie came into being on August 19, 190U, 
with Alfred Stork as mayor, and six aldermen; A. H. Cree, A. B. Trites, 
A. C. Liphardt, P. R. Lundie, Thomas Beck, and J. A. McLean. A city 
school board was set up, headed by J. C. Hutchinson and having 
T. H. Ttlftiite and George Cody as trustees. There was also an 
attendance officer to enforce the compulsory school attendance 
act, which required attendance of all children from seven to twelve 
inclusive. Coal Creek was set off as a new school district* 

The Great Northern Railway*s subsidiary, the Crow*s Nest 
Southern Railway, which had come to Morrissey earlier In the year. 








■ '• 


'"■L.i- f: 




- 


j ..lO K 








i , ■ 

. 








1 - r; 






. >J 


• ( 


. 


n ■. ■ 





fo:'. J- v . 




;i ; . , : • v. ; ;;: 


• a 


r' ■ • I ■ 




: :: : , . ’ • 


. : ■ 

i.;r ^ r 




... • • r ■: \*10 Aw. C >■*"" 

■ ' 


i vv: & r r .:±:K ‘J ■ 


. 


' ' ' 


z ! : i' ■ ■' 




55 


continued to Femie and the first Great Northern train steamed 
into Femie on December 15, and afforded another outlet for the 
coal of the pass. An additional area, known as the Annex, 
was added to the city in 1905, and a telephone system was 
installed. Another fire spreading from the forests outside the 
city burned down several more blocks which had just been 
rebuilt, but the expansion was greater than ever. In 1907 the 
streets were lit by electricity and sewers (the only ones in the 
Pass right to the present) were laid. A fine new covered rink 
was opened in March, 1908, and then on August 1, the whole city 
was destroyed by a forest fire, except for tw> buildings, one of 
which was the company*s office. Damage was so great that all 
Canada sent aid to the inhabitants of the stricken city. News¬ 
paper accounts stated that ten people had died but there was no way 
of knowing with any certainty. 

Fernie people immediately started rebuilding, for the boom 
days were still with them and the numerous smelters were crying 
for more and more coke. As the company built new coke ovens to 
meet the demand, the people went ahead and rebuilt the eleven hotels, 
the brewery, the schools, the business blocks and the homes. All 
new buildings had to be of stone, brick or concrete. Although 
permits for temporaiy buildings were granted, the law was strict, 
and these were not allowed to clutter the streets for long. 1 In fact, 

1* The Free Press suggested a speed law for '’peripatetic 1 * 
bull dungs. 





.ft,' 




■ 

i ■ ' ■ ' 

; * 

ui liilI > 

* 

v.V:o ' !<’■, ■ ■ ’ WK -' < f ‘ f 



y/ ri: ... 


. 




.f -. ■ 




. 




tit 




; Oil '/) 


• 






■ • : ■. ' 




v ! : 

. 

. 


■ ■ 


■ . 

■ 

- 



. 

* 

•, .:v ,U ■ 



... ' ' ' - • ' 

■ 

■ - 

. 

' 

. 

' 

W i'i 





. ■ * ’’ ‘ ' ' * 


. ■ " • 

, 


■ 

. 


* 

■ 



, b 1 ' : '■ 1 


: : 









56 


the rebuilding caused a small boom of its own* for the Femie 
Brick Company was turning out twenty thousand bricks a day, 
while two hundred and fifty carloads of cement were brought in. 

The sawmills up and down the valley were working full blast with 
a great deal of the lumber being used locally* 

There was only one small cloud in the sky of prosperity 
for the n Pittsburgh of Canada”, as the Free Press called Femie, 
and that was the cessation of construction of the railway up the 
Elk Valley when Guthrie and Company withdrew their equipment 
’’owing to temporary financial stringency in the United States”."*" 
However, other developments in the district more than made up 
for this. 

Besides opening up Coal Creek, which had become a 

separate community by this time, the Crow * s Nest Pass Goal Company 

had developed properties to the north and south. Carbonado 

Collieries was opened on Morrissey Creek on a spur of about four 

miles in length in 1902 although development work had started 
2 

earlier, Morrissey started hopefully and even had a newspaper by 

September, 1902, but the opening of the Tovmsite was a disaster 

3 

to a town of ’’but two dozen houses”, .Another little town site 

1, Free Press | December U* 1908. 

2. Morrissey was a confusing medley of townsites. There was 
Morrissey at the junction, Morrissey Townsite where the 
coke ovens were built, and Morrissey Mines which was 
farthest up. Tonkin was in addition to this. 

. Morrissey Miner ; April 23, 1903. 


3 











% 






; 







i ' • 




' • •- 

■ . ' 


C> ' : .‘, i ;; 










■ 




. . . .t> i' 


. 






, 

• • ' ... 
, ' * 

' ■ '■ 







5 7a 



Natal-Michel, looking east. 

Natal is nearest the camera, with the smoke of 
the coke ovens in the middle distance and Michel 
beyond. Note the narrow valley. 

Photo -- courtesy Department of Mines, Ottawa. 




57 


called Tonkin appeared in which the general manager of the mines 

had some interest. Lots were sold in competition with the 

company townsite. At Morrissey Mines there were twenty-five 

cottages and two hotels in 1902 and a one-roomed school was opened. 

The company controlled the issuing of liquor licences here, but 

when the townsite was opened in September, there were ten 

applications for hotel licences and all were granted — for a 

population of about one hundred. There was only one store, which 

belonged to the company, and the miners complained of its 

exorbitant prices. A four-roomed school was ready by the fall 

term in 1903 for the children of the two hundred men employed* 

A short note in the Fernie newspaper telling of the difficulty 

of igniting Carbonado coal indicated that Mforrissey f s life might 

be short. The mines closed in 1905* reopened in 1907* and 

finally closed altogether in 1909 ‘'because of dangerous workings". 

Some of the buildings were cut in half and taken to Goal Creek, 

where they still stand. The rest were tom down after being sold 

1 

for small sums, and the lumber used in houses in the other towns. 

The third effort of the Crow*s Nest Pass Coal Company, at 
Michel about twenty-three miles north of Fernie, has been probably 
the most successful of all. It started almost immediately after 
Coal Creek and has produced continuously since 1899* The distance 


1. Jack Hughes; A History of lining in the East Kootenay 
District of British Columbia. (U. of Alberta) p. 90. 


• ■ . ‘ v, 


ill, 


* 




... • S 

•• .. . ' • ‘ 

. • 


m. .. > n* ■ v' > s .i t - 

• . a : ■ 


c . ■ . 






■ 

.. ; ':; . ■ -.0 '• ■!' ■ ; r; 

.; IB. 

# 

• • ' 

. , ■ ” : ■ ' ■ ' ' ^ ' ' ■ ' ~ - ■' ' ‘ ; " 

... . . v.\ f:io: cio.i t, 

' .1 








■ ... 

i :ii>; ■ , V /’il it:. o:<l 

’ l 'j , • UXd 

T . • f-. • . : • ' • •' '■ 


n i c - 


. 


.. 


. ' 

v '• : ' • •' ' '• 

■ : ... : . . . • : . , ' ’■ - 

' 

’ 



58, 


from Femie was too great to make Michel a u feeder" for the 
former town, even although the company obviously intended such 
a plan, and there has always been a quasi-independence movement 
on the part of the Michel-Natal inhabitants, expecially as the 
Michel mines have since 1903 employed more men than Coal Creek. 
Being somewhat closer to the Alberta towns, the twin communities 
have had more dealings with them than with Femie. Michel itself 
has always been a company town and has the character of such a 
town today, with its rows of identical houses. Twelve of these 
cottages were built in 1900 and shortly afterwards there was a 
hotel and a store, all company owned. The coke ovens were 
built the following year. A school was opened almost immediately, 
but owing to some dispute, the school board was inactive until 
about 1902. About half of the town was destroyed by a bush fire 
in June 1902. The town experienced its first mine explosion in 
January, 190U, when seven men were killed. A two-roomed school 
was built in August 190U. 

A new townsite was opened about three quarters of a mile 
west of Michel in September 190? and lots went on sale for an 
"open" town. In March 1909, the Great Northern Railway made 
this New Michel its terminus. A newspaper, the Michel Reporter, 
existed for a short time in 1908 and 1909 and in a special issue 
noted that the town was served by three railways (counting the 
Femie, Morrissey and Michel Railroad). There was a branch of the 








’ ' ■ • 

, . • • ■ ■ - ■ ■ ' • i ' 

. no 

■ • 

■ . . ' r, (• 


. 

rcv'-n 'A: 


■ ; - 




■ ■ ■. f 


i 


■ 


..... 


A , 






. . . , . . .. . . • - . : : - . ' : 

. . 

■ ’ 

;.:j; rvr.JojMd eav fr-tot 

rM dm 

n/: :ioJ:vo£abtt sn.Ar A t‘:x kA : : 

- 




. • ' • " 

. 


. r.-rr . 


- 




lJa? ' » a* 


A Cfr^iU; 8.AA £• 


, ; rt kh i 


• . ■ 

, • L* ' 


r •' ■ • . .. : ..'■■■■' 

, . . ■ : ...: •• . . ■■■ ‘ : r '■ 

. 


Cvi'j ' nJ:dnv >c) 




' ' ■ 




59 


Imperial Bank in each of the towns, three churches — Roman 
Catholic, Anglican, and Methodist — and nine stores* There 
were two schools; one with two rooms in Old Michel and the other 
with one room in New Michel, as the town was called when a post 
office was opened there in April 1909* "Not Newton, Newtown 
or New Townsite but New Michel 1 M said the Reporter * Its joy 
was short-lived, for the Canadian Pacific, seeking a name for its 
new station, struck on the name "Natal”, which was highly 
unpopular. Some people wished to boycott the name but the town 
is still Natal. 

The Canadian Pacific Railway chose its section of the 
coalfield, in accordance with the government grant, a few miles 
north of Femie, and by 1908 coal was being produced at Hosmer. A 
very elaborate coal cleaning system was installed and 2b0 beehive 
ovens were built. The company, the Pacific Coal Company, built 
a number of fine cottages and workmen soon flocked to the town. 

By 1910 there were three hotels, a Bank of Montreal branch, and 
a Methodist church. The Anglican congregation met in the Opera 
House. Mr. A. A. Davis was principal of a two-roomed school which 
had 73 pupils. Lacking civic government, the people organized a 
Board of Trade, which, as its first job, equipped a volunteer 
fire brigade. The town was very fire-conscious as only a miracle 
had prevented its destruction in the forest fire of 1908. 

About the same time D. C. Corbin of Spokane became 
actively Interested in his holdings in the Flathead area, which is 




Ijj 


ft 




- .» 

, ? ; ' ; 



60 , 


not part of the Elk Valley field but is, however, part of the 
Crowsnest coal basin. The Eastern British Columbia Railway was 
built twelve and a half miles from McGillivray siding, east of 
Michel, to the twenty-four square mile coal area. This was called 
Corbin townsite, while another townsite was laid out about 
thirteen miles farther south, known as Flathead townsite. 

However, although a little prospecting was done, few buildings 
were erected and the railway did not go past Corbin. 

The seams of coal at Corbin are almost legendary. Names 

such as “the mountain of coal” and 11 the world*s thickest coal 

1 

seam ,! have been applied to it. This phenomenon was due to a 
tremendous twisting of the strata so that many of the seams were 
standing on end. rather than in the trough-like formation of 
those of the Elk Valley. The Mammoth seam in Coal Mountain has 
been measured at a point where it was 180 feet thick, but some 
engineers have estimated that at some parts it may be U$0 to 
600 feet thick. The only road into Corbin was the one built by 
the government of British Columbia from Crowsnest through Tent 
Mountain Pass into the Flathead and down to the international 
boundary. This was a very rudimentary road and lack of 
convenient transportation tended to keep Gorbin in the backwash 
of life in the Pass and very few of its teams appeared in the 

1. B. R. Me Kay 5 Gorbin Coalfield, Canadian Mining and Metallurgical 
Bulletin . Montreal, November, 1931, pi 1273. 







61 


various Crow * s Nest Pass sports leagues* Corbin was a 

n closed” camp and the miners accused the company stores of 

2 

overcharging their customers. 

The eastern side of the Pass was not as tightly 
controlled by one company as was the western side. Consequently, 
swarms of prospectors swept over the area during the 
construction period and immediately afterwards. Because the seams 
are of short fault formation, they outcrop for miles to the north 
and so-ath, while the distances between outcrops are only a mile 
or two* As the outcrops are more accessible than many, discoveries 
were made by different men along the same seam. Thus the York 
Creek property, International Coal and Coke Company, and 
McGillivray Coal and Coke Company are all strung out along the 
same seam at Coleman. This led at first to a large number of 
mines and consequently of townsites. Only those properties with 
easy access to the railway, however, developed into important mines* 
The coal back from the valley is still practically untouched. 

There was a large number of "towns" at first —■• ten in a distance 
of less than fourteen miles. Five have survived to the present. 

The same desire as in British Columbia, to manufacture 
coke to supply the demands of the many smelters of the coast 

1. It is interesting to note that Corbin was on Pacific 
standard time when all the other pass towns were on 
Mountain time. 

2. The Femie District Ledger stated in 1912 that prices were 
20 % above those of the surrounding towns© 

















»: ' 






..v ,X. • 


■ r > ra [: '' - V r 1 C2«> ■■ fi ’ X 1 'OD Xll-d': :> 

. 

* 

. . . . ' • ' - ' ■ ■ ' 

-f n h X ;v 

— $<r.. 

, . ; , . *; ■ • ■ ■" .cr'■ ’ - 

x ' i ■ % f ■ 

* 

i : ■. ". - : ' ' ' 

. ‘ > 

* - I.. .■ 













62 


province and Montana, motivated the founders of the Alberta 

mines. Thus, early reports stressed the building of coke 

ovens as the mark of progress* 

Blairmore was the first community in this section of 

the Pass although it was nothing more than a section house and 

a freight car station. It was first called Tenth Siding but 

later was given the name The Springs. On November 15, 1898, it 

was given its present name in honour of two contractors, Blair 

1 

and either More or a name ending in -more, when the operating 
department of the railway took over from the contracting firmso 
H. S. Lyon, the agent, and Felix Montalbetti, the section 
foreman, were the first settlers. Both erected cabins in the 
spring of 1899• Mr. Lyon opened a store in 1900 and R* S. 

Fishbum and T. G. Proctor acquired coal properties to the north 
and south of the railway. When Frank mine opened in 1901, 

Blairmore boomed and was declared a village on September 3, 1901. 
Three hotels and several other buildings went up. The land now 
had value, so both lyon and Montalbetti claimed to have squatters 1 
rights to it. When Malcolm McKenzie bought out Montalbetti 1 s 
interest, a long litigation ensued which almost ruined the village, 
for no one could get a clear title to land in it. Because of this 

1. The name was coined as Lundbreck was made from Breck- 

enridge and Lund, contractors who built much in the pass, — 
e.g., the Mcrrissey spur. Other sources say the name came 
from that of the Minister of Mines Blair. 







t 


•. '> 


0 


) 




7 ; ■. 


r 






' ' 

' 




43 * 



Above. Blairmore, looking westward from Turtle Mountain across 
the Crowsnest Trough. Mt. Phillipps at left and Crows- 
nest Mountain at right. This area was the bull past¬ 
ure of the eighties. 

Below. Bellevue business section, looking towards Turtle 
Mountain and the Frank slide. 


Alberta Government Photographs 















63 


uncertainty workers and businessmen preferred to build in 
Frank, where the ownership of the land was not in doubt# 

Fortunately, the West Canadian Collieries located its 
headquarters in Blairmore and, although they at first developed 
properties in Lille and Bellevue, they evidently expected that 
Blairmore would serve as a central city as Femie had in the 
Elk Valley# It was just chance that the West Canadian Company^ 
biggest mine should later be developed at Blairmore. 

By 1907, when the litigation was settled, Blairmore had a 
two-roomed school# In 1906 the Rocky Mountain Cement Company, 
formed by W. J. Budd and W. M. Alexander and others, located in the 
town and commenced construction of a fine plant, boasting coal, 
shale and limestone, all in a radius of one mile# It was in 1908 
that the plant commenced operation# 

W. A. Beebe was prominent in civic government from early 
times, being both village overseer and chairman of the school 
board in 1905. In 1910 a group consisting of Thomas Frayer, Louis 
Dutil and J. A. McDonald acted as a council with W. A# Beebe as 
secretary and led a movement to incorporate the town* On November 1, 
1911, with H. E. Lyon as mayor, the town of Blairmore elected as its 
first councillors, L. Dutil, J. H. Farmer, Archie McLeod, Gharles 
Chestnut, D. A. Sinclair and J. G* Smith# 

A great deal of building went on at this time and the 
West Canadian took over the mining property, south of the 





■ • 





6U 


railway, which had been developed by Mr. Chestnut, and the mine 

to the north of the town, prospected by R. E. Fishbum and 

T. G. Proctor. The latter deal proved so profitable that the south 

mine was closed and the Greenhill Mine working No. 2 seam became 

the mainstay of the town. One hundred and fifty buildings were 

erected in little over a year and there were six rooms in the school 

by 1912. Henry Pelletier that year opened a brickyard which was 

taken over by the cement company. An '‘opera 11 house was built 

through the efforts of Mr. W. A. Beebe and his “boosters” club and 

an open air rink was in operation by winter. Sven a brewery was 

started but this ran into financial difficulties and never went 
1 

into production. When the customs office was moved from Frank 
to Blairmore and the Alberta government telephone service was 
centered there and the railway company decided that the Spokane 
Flyer would stop at the new station, it seemed that Blairmore was 
well on its way to becoming a large city and would merit the 
title bestowed upon it by the Blairmore Enterprise — “The Eldorado 
of the Golden West”. 

In the meantime the council set the pattern which has 
given Blairmore publicity, both good and bad, throughout the 
nation, and made it the best known town in the area. As if the 
litigation over the ownership of the townsite had not been enough, 
there were soon other battles which were quite as fierce while they 

1. The Blairmore Enterprise files supplied material for 
most of the above. 








;.fOO‘ 






65 


lasted. In 1908 Joe Little was granted the title to the quarter 
section which contained the graveyard and even though Mr. Little 
turned back the plot to the town, the papers raised a storm and 
charged the Liberals with dirty politics. Then there was a 
dispute over the choice of lots for the fire hall and a split in 
the council over the dismissal of the chief of police. This did 
not hinder the growth of the town in any way. 

Much of Blairmore 1 s prosperity came from the activities of 
the coal company which had its head office there. The first effort 
of the West Canadian Company was at Lille. J. J. Fleutot and C. 

Remy, two representatives of Gold Fields Limited of British Columbia, 
hearing of a coal mine at Frank, came down and prospected Gold Creek 
for gold.’*' In 1901, they worked up towards Grassy Mountain and 
started to work the coal seams there. They established what was 
called 11 French Carap ,, that year. The pack trail became a wagon road 
by 1902, while a railroad was started and built to Number 1 camp in 
the same year. Fleutot organized the West Canadian Collieries 
Limited, an English company with French capital, on April 2, 1903. 

The company received a bad setback at the end of April, 
when the Frank landslide covered half a mile of its connecting 
railway, necessitating the building of a switchback to gain the 
required elevation over the rocks. The railway was completed by 

1. Much of the information on the West Canadian Collieries 
was supplied by W. H. Chappell of Blairmore, who is 
compiling a history of the company. 




* 


, ' . ■ j • :■ . V 

■ 

■ 

' 

. . ■ : 





' 

• > . • 

■ 

. 



. 

,~r v \ 0 • i • 

! • 

* 

• ' ! 


. 



«• • * 

' 

• 

' , - 


• 

• • 

: . • 

■ ; ■' . • : .. ' - 


• 

. 


. 

' 

' 

. 

• 

•- . .. ... v' v 

. 

- ■ ; ' ■■ ' '■ 


• . • • o ■ 

. 


’ ■ - ; 

- 






' . . TV 

DfU Oi 

'.. .• '■ ' ’ 

t . • v 

■ 

•. ...' • ■' : 






. 

, 





66 


autumn and production started. Fifty Bernard-type coke ovens 
were put in by a Belgian company. Houses were built and a school 
opened with thirty pupils. C. Faure opened a 11 commodious" hotel 
which was owned by Fleutot and Dr. Thomas 0 1 Hagen set up a fifteen 
bed hospital. In 190U the village of Lille was established. 

0. E. S. Whiteside took over as manager in 190U and by 1907 the 
daily output was seven hundred tons of coal. A tipple was built 
and a wet-type washer put in to clean the coal intended for the 
ovens• 

In the meantime, Fleutot had bought the j^yron Greek 
coal property and the Bellevue‘S prospect which opened right onto the 
railway. At first Bellevue had only temporary surface structures 
for the mine but fifteen cottages and a hotel (under the same 
auspices as the Lille Hotel) were built. Neither Bellevue or 
Lille had wash-houses in 1906. Bellevue mine was idle 78 days 
because of a railway car shortage in that year, so things did not 
look too bright for Bellevue as a town, but in 1907 the Maple 
Leaf Coal Company was formed by Spokane interests to develop another 
seam nearby. Lots were put on sale by the West Canadian Company 
after Robert Connelly had surveyed the townsite, while Maple Leaf 
was opened by Jacob (Jake) Whiller in September 1909 and buildings 

1. It was Mr. Fleutot who is reputed to have said 
"Quelle belle vuel" after which expression the 
town was named. 


.. .. y • , ; -- . ' «. • ' ' ' • ? ‘ ‘ '• ' A ■ 

.itt • • ' 

: . . 1 . : • 

■ ... 

' 

... ■ ' ' 1 


. 


rrJ .v: isir-■ 


S v ■ . no / ." ■ • ; • ’ 


. 

. JVoo 

. 


: .. . > ■ 


' 


. • * ■ 

. 


,• ) J ;• :• - '• - 

. 

, ,, , r ... ... -• - . • •, V, • 0 ( 


... i . ; ' - 




a.."in . ao.>. /. ■ : v C”.. 

' It ■ c ■ 


- 


‘i • . £ct 1 h 


. 


. ■ • 


' '■ •' ’ 
... 



67 


went up "like mushrooms" • In the same year the West Canadian 

Company erected a large tipple and the community of Bellevue 

was well established. An attempt was made to incorporate the 

1 

area about 1915 but the plan came to nought. 

The first serious mine explosion in the Alberta section 
of the Pass took place in Bellevue in 1910, when on December 9* 
thirty men were killed* 

The village of Frank had probably the most auspicious 
start of any town in the Pass, Coal was discovered in Turtle 
Mountain in 1901 by Henry S. Pelletier, W. S, Gebo, who had been 
working the "Burmiss" properties, bought him cut and interested the 
Hon, H. L, Frank, of Butte, Montana, in the mountain seams. They 
formed the Canadian American Company and started immediately to 
develop the coal deposits. On September 10, 1901, there was a 
public opening of the townsite with special trains running from 
as far west as Cranbrook. Sven the Hon, F. G. Haultain, Premier 
of the North West Territories, and his Minister of Public Works 
were in attendance. 

Lots were priced high to discourage shack building. 

There were twenty-five company cottages, a large boarding house 
and a post office in Frank before the official opening in 
September, and the population was estimated at 300. By 1903 the 

1, A movement instituted in 1950 looks as if it might 
succeed and Bellevue may yet be a town. 











68 


town was well built up. Mr. Gebo acted as overseer when the village 

was organized and was then elected to the same post in 1902 and 

1903. He was followed by J. H. Farmer, the bank manager, who 

acted until Alberta's Village Act came into effect in 1907. There 

were high hopes for a population of 2,000 by the end of 1903, but 

the terrible landslide of April 29, 1903 checked the growth 

for a tine. However, the slide itself was not so disastrous to 

Frank as is often believed. The mine surface property, which 

had been practically destroyed, was rebuilt within tvro months, 

2 

while production of coal was resumed by the end of May and slowly 
increased thereafter. 

In 1905, a new tipple was built and with it a washhouse. 

A new shaft mine was opened to the north away from Turtle Mountain. 
The coal company bought the "sanatorium” at the springs and built 
a hoteL on the site which became one of the finest hostelries in 
the country. An ornate stage coach carried the guests the half 
mile from the railroad. Charles Sartoris, a prominent Blairmore 
businessman, was for a number of years the proud driver of this 
conveyance. 

About the same time (1905), the Canadian Metal Company 
erected a zinc smelter in Frank, proposing to haul ore from 
Slocan, British Columbia. Coke ovens were built and several test 

1. The slide is dealt with below. - Chapter 12. 

2. From an article by Mark Drumm in the Feraie Free Press 
special edition 1907. Drumm was Secretary-Treasurer of 
the Canadian American Company as well as editor of the 
Frank Paper . 




. 






C; r .-'' ? a • n;.V .• 


' 

: \ t it V 1 .. t ' 


. 

r. ' ■. i i 



i ■ 


■ ■; 


% 

■ _ ■ 

. 




-- ■ • 1 ■ 


' :/ i 

i 

' 

, 



69 


runs were made at the plant, but no commercial production took 
place owing to unsuspected difficulties and the company was on 
the vex-ge of financial collapse. 1 2 It was taken over by the New 
Canadian Metal Company and its manager, Samuel S. Fowler, closed 
the works in 1906# 

All the expansion, coupled with the fact that Frank was 
the junction point for Lille, tended to make the village the 
bustling centre of the pass# Blairmore residents walked the mile 
into town, while Coleman people often went down by train to shop. 
Even the government order in 1911 to move the town from the menace 
of another slide might not have been a fatal blow to the village 

had conditions in the mine kept up to their early promise. 

2 

Had Charles Plummer Hill been able to make up his mind, 
Hillcrest would probably have been the first town to be founded, 
for Hill had prospected the whole area in 1900 and it was he who 
first got Gebo, Frank and Senator Cai*ter interested in the Burmiss 
(Burmis) properties. They, in subsequent trips, discovered other 
seams along the valley. Among these was the prospect at McLaren 1 s 
Camp on Goleman J s outcrops and the Greenhill deposits which were 
discovered by Joe Little. The coal on the boundary between Alberta 
and British Columbia was also investigated by this group. 

1. Hughes op. cit. p. 8iu 

2. Not related to James J. Hill as far as can be learned. 


nc ::-ve \;rr; ; 


t • 






, - . 




DJ L’A 


70, 


Hill decided that the Hillcrest area was best but it was 
January, 1905, before he was satisfied and the Hillcrest Coal and 
Coke Company was incorporated. Hill was managing director with full 
rights to keep Hillcrest a closed canrp. The town had high hopes 
in 1907, for it already had a station and a post office as well as 
the usual small school. 

Somewhat to the east of Hillcrest, the Leitch Collieries 
opened in 1907 with two mines, one to the north of the river and 
the other to the south. The tipple and railway connections were 
finished in 1908 and by 1910 a hundred coke ovens had been built in 
the nearby Police Flat. L. H. Hamilton was manager and first 
reports suggested that the town would be named after him but 
Passburg was the title finally chosen. The community was on the 
hill just west of Police Flat. A hotel, the New Passburg, was put 
up in 1910 and from the advertisements appearing in the newspapers 
of the other towns, there seemed to be a good number of business 
establishments. The Union Bank had a branch there and several 
churches were constructed. A school opened with thirty pupils, while 
the company built the apparently customary twenty-five cottages. 

By 1912, J. Kerr and A. P. Hughes took steps towards incorporation, 
but this never came about. 

All the mines in the aforementioned towns are within a mile 
or two of each other, but west of Blairmore, the only seam of 
importance west to the Rockies is the one which runs north and south 


. 

. 


- 

/: < ■ -v' 

. . • • 0 '' vr . v ;; . 


. • ■ . • ■ ’ 

• 

o hn . ... . • ' 


: ■ 

. 

■•••• t • ' • 1 

... : ' .'j,. , -ii'y > > •" v " . . ' ! • 

u • 

, . ' . * . . ' • • • 

. ; V • v'. • < • • 

.. ■ , r • i >J _ ae i‘ if" h: .i’Jt ' t 


jJ " * ■ "■ 1 ; ? ■■ 

-i j x 


d :c . ■ c 

...... * ' ' ■ 

’ 

■ ■ '« ■ > 

ry-.6>L:;'U/G lo 

■ , .. : • ' : ' 

f. ‘tl'VOi Ji'l :• : 

■ ' ’ - ■ » - f - 1 : 


. j . ■: ■ • * ; ' - 

- - 


, ■. • t r ■ 

. . . ■ ■ • • * * 

, 

: .• \ ■ rs.'/v 

„ > :■ J ■. ‘ 1 . 1 ■ 


. • • • 


71 


through Coleman, which is over four miles from Blairmore. Because 
of this, the town has developed independently, and, while Blairmore 
and Frank alternated as shopping centres for the other towns, 

Coleman went its way alone and soon boasted the largest population 
of any centre on the Alberta side, although the figures were 
usually exaggerated. 

Several men had prospected the seam near McGHlivray 1 s 
Hill, the most important being P. A. Paulson, probably in 
conjunction with Joe Little, The prospect at Paulson*s camp, as 
it was called, was north of the river on Nez Perce Creek, This 
was developed by means of horse-drawn cars running down a track 
to the present railway station. The ties still remained when the 
first hotel was built, as the railway from the mine ran right 
through what is now the centre of town. 

In 1903 the International Coal and Coke Company bought 
out Paulson and developed the section south of the river as the 
Dennison Collieries, although no one ever calls it anything but the 
International Mine, On October 22, 1903, lots went on sale but the 
inhabitants lived in tents most of the year or stayed at hotels in 
Blairmore. By Christmas the Coleman Hotel opened and it still stands 
today practically unchanged. In 19 0)4 E. E. Reynolds came as mine 
superintendent and much development took place. The population was 
,, estimated n at £00 by the end of the year. As the area was part of 
Blairmore School District the townspeople had to arrange with the 



' • 

:' ’ • ' • , 
: ' ' 






. 




C . i. 


' ■ 


:u. CK>' 






:• ’ 


, . • . • ■ ... • ? ' : ■■■ ' 

' . ' 


, ■■ • r , \ .'•il 7'/ ■ - ; - f; '• ' 

7 w'iU 


; •• v. J ' ^ '• ‘ • ' ' • ' ' * * 

' 

. 

, . : . t f . - ; ■ 


■ 






• • ’• 1 V; : 


Jl. 


72 


Blairmore trustees to open the first school, which was held in the 
Anglican Mission hall with Miss Nettie McIntyre as teacher. The 
school district was organized in 190^ and, after moving from one 
hall to another, the school children were finally housed in a new 
school at the end of the year and there were three rooms in 
operation by 1907* Alexander Cameron, F. G. Graham and the Rev* 

R. A. Robinson were the first school trustees* 

G. M* Tripp was the first village overseer in 1903, followed 
by D. J. McIntyre, who served until 1907 when, under the provisions 
of the new Alberta Village Act, a council consisting of A* Cameron, 

F. G* Graham and D. F. Hughes, was elected. The early town leaders 
were very active and had water, electric light and telephone 
systems Installed by 1905* 

Rev. R. A. Robinson led his Anglican congregation into a 
new chapel in 1903. The other two churches were opened under quite 
distinguished auspices. Rev. T. M. Murray opened an Institutional 
(Presbyterian) church in April, 1906, to which Rev. C. W. Gordon 
(Ralph Gordon) had contributed a sum of money. Ihen the Roman 
Catholic Church, opened in 1906 under Father Lepine, was dedicated 
in November, 1910, Father Laeombe was present at the ceremony and 
gave a crucifix to the church* 

The International Company went ahead building surface 
works and especially a battery of 216 beehive-type coke ovens to 
supply the smelter at Greenwood, British Columbia* 











. 


. 


. 


. 


tv 


: .: ' ' .V.. ' : : 1 . ' < 

• • - .• ; . .• > ' ' ‘ 

; ; : j. - . •. ■ 

5. Ov-i rt 

' 

r : : \ • : .. , ■■■•.' ?■ ' 

. 

■ 

l • ■ 

vao.'rc'xco e 






. 


C..H j.n 




'T ' afi,;-0 v S 


, 


■ 


* 






• ,) 

• I 


■ 


A vO . 


■ ; u d i> • ; ■ 

: C-’-"Vy - \ 1,U.L • 1 > ; ; j 


ut ylcr f" 


73 


In December*, 1908, a new company known as the 
McGillivray Coal and Coke Company was formed to take over the 
seams to the north of the railway. With J. K. Crane and J. F. Povah 
in charge, the output was about 150 tons a day by 1910, when a fine 
steel tipple was erected. The company opened a townsite called 
Carbon dale but although some houses were built there, most of the 
workers continued to live in Coleman. 

Coleman grew rapidly but a post office was not opened 
for some time because the government would not at first accept the 
name, which was taken from that of Florence Coleman Flummerfelt, the 
daughter of the president of the townsite company. The postal 
authorities finally relented and acceded to the wishes of the 
townspeople. Coleman was not a closed town but the company 
reserved the right to control the sale of liquor for fifteen years. 
This was challenged by a Coleman resident but the courts upheld the 
company. 

Because of its hilly nature, Coleman, more than any other 
town in the Pass, seems to fall into several natural areas, each 
rather limited in size. Consequently, when the village was formed, 
only part of the residential area was taken into it. Slavtown, 
separated by a rock bluff, and Bushtown and Graftontown, would be 
something like ’’tax colonies’ 1 around a large city, paying (apart from 
the school levy) nothing but nominal taxes to the Local Improvement 
District. Several attempts were made to include these areas as well 


(v;'J •.>/. v- j Od rbfi'iTiiyi u.fe ^ vrf '^j^cD ■cWipO 



: • 


! cuic <fo o . 


[ . : I ; 


; i 




,'j •: 


: '■ ! ■ ' . ! 


«fU. 




. 


L d sd 


, 


d.0 ar d' r . c! "• 


■ v ' • \f • ■ - 

. 


v. < -J. 


i r i, :: a .!., 

let LX/..-.£iw 


■ . • : : 




■ - * ' 

■ , . .. . ..j. ■- r *■ ' '■ • tv: rtsfot- 

. ■ • ' 1 ' ■■ ' 

<■ • • ■ 

. . ■ ■ - ■ • 




,, . ■■ ■/. ■ ' ■>” : "'■' :U 


V- 


■ 


■ ' ; ■ ■■ ' ' ' ' ■ ■ ' 
;; .. : ' • ‘ ' : ■' ; ' ’ ' ’'' 


as the mine property in the village limits. In 1910, after much 
negotiation, Slavtown joined Coleman and was henceforth known 
as West Coleman. At the same time Coleman became a town with 


Alex Cameron as its first mayor, 



75 


CHAPTER 7 

THE END OF THE BOOM AND READJUSTMENT 

The opening of the McGillivray mine marks the end of 
the period of expansion, for no other large mining companies came 
into the area after this. In fact by 1911, a turning point could 
be noticed. The development had corresponded fairly closely to 
the filling up of the prairie country following the increase in 
prices after the Klondike discoveries in 1898 and to the 
railway expansion of Laurier 1 s time. As 1911 marked the end 
of the Liberal regime in Canada, so did 1911 put an end to the 
long list of companies floated on the strength of Crow*s Nest 
Pass coal. First, the capital, which had been so easy to obtain, 
now seemed to disappear. Millions of dollars had come from 
France, Belgium and other countries almost for the asking. The 
promoters had. often used pictures of tipples of established mines 
to put on prospectuses of unproven properties. Some of these 
frauds were exposed and money became difficult to get. People who 
lived in Frank at the time have stated that the building of the 
smelter there had not been carefully considered beforehand, 
resulting in an enormous expenditure for a plant that did not turn 
out anything but a few souvenir ounces of zinc.^ In fact the whole 

1« Hughes (op. cit. p. 67) states that the Frank retort 
actually bankrupted.the company. 









, - 




: . . y- ■ . ' ••• ■■■'-■' ' • ■ * 

* • * • 

. ' 




76 


smelter business in British Columbia had been overbuilt, resulting 
in the closing of all but the one at Trail, so that one after 
another, the coke oven batteries at the various mines were closed. 
By the end of the first World War, only Michel and Femie were 
producing coke and Femie for only a short time, Lille, Passburg, 
Coleman, Frank, Morrissey and Hosmer had all produced coke at first 
and seemed to be unable to keep up with the demand in the early 
years of the century. 

The mines producing for the railways and for domestic 

use had worked erratically for a number of years. In fact the 

editor of the Frank Paper noted in 1909 that there had been 

n two periods of prosperity and two of the opposite,'®^ i,e, in a 

period of eight years* Mach of the idleness, (apart from the 

2 

frequent strikes) was due to shortages of boxcars. In a 
provincial government survey in 1907* it was shown that Bellevue 
had lost 78 days from this cause alone. However there was no 
pessi m ism resulting from these stoppages for they were considered 
to be more irksome than dangerous. In the general election of 
1911 5 the question of the tariff, which shut off the American 
markets for coal and coke, was one of the local issues, 

1, The Frank Paper , March 18, 1909. 

2, Although there are special coal cars, most coal is 
shipped in boxcars. The tendency is to call all 
cars boxcars. 






. i 


on 




: 




■ 









77 


■When the United Mine Workers of America called a strike 
in 1911, the shortage of orders was more of a factor to be 
considered . Consequently, the operators did not surrender quickly 
to the demands as they often do on a buoyant market. The strike 
dragged on for eight months with increasing violence. Many men 
did not belong to the union and the number of 11 scabs” who went 
back to work increased until the union was forced to give way. 

This is one of the few strikes in which the union has been 
completely defeated. 

However, some people did not realize that the boom was 
over for a positive land boom started in 1910 and carried on into 
1912. Hew towns it es were surveyed and lots put on sale. In 
Coleman alone four separate areas were platted.*^ Besides Bushtown, 
which was laid out by Alex. Morrison and renamed East Coleman, and 
Graftontown developed by G. Grafton and J. H. Farmer, there was 
Carbondale, put on sale by the McGillivary Creek Coal Company, 
and two miles to the south-east a townsite was surveyed for the 
York Creek mine which was operated by the International Company* 
West Blairmore and Burmis were also subdivided and sold as lots. 
Probably the strangest location was at Crowsnest Lake, where Lake 
City was staked out by the Cyr, Matheson, Pelletier group with no 
other prospect than the hope that a newly discovered bed of clay 
might be developed. This whole trend was very likely a 

1* This word seems to be standard in newspaper reports and 
means T, laid out in plots or plats”. 






. 


V. ■'■'.O' 






i E • 




. ■ . 


; 


* l n 


, ■ D 


■ ' ■ . • ; I 


■ 


1 • 






: . ■ 


>' /.'ole; 


■ i 


,l fl KlU 



78 


reflection of similar acts on the prairies, but no other 
townsites were laid out in the mountains after 1912# 

1912 was a bad year in which the government was 
obliged to give some assistance in the form of bridge and road 
building projects* A road was built around Coleman*s bluff with 
the miners getting a few days work each, 1913 was a better year 
and with all mines now well developed, the largest amount of coal 
to that time was produced. This represented peak production 
for many years. Not until machines stripped coal from the surface 
in World War II was this mark surpassed. 

In 1912, the unemployment had been made worse by the 
first real setback that the Pass had received. Lille mine ran into 
trouble when the coal began to get dirty in pockets. Operation 
costs were high and with the collapse of the coke market, the 
company decided to close the mine, which was abandoned in 1913* 

Frank mine had also been having a great deal of trouble 
producing cheap coal. Now that competition Yias getting keener, 
marginal mines were having a difficult time. A series of faults 
in the mine and a fire in the workings led to several idle periods 
until the Canadian Coal Consolidated Company'*' went into liquidation 
in 1913* Reorganized as the Franco-Canadian Collieries, the mines 
reopened in 191U. HoYrever the fire reappeared and set off a gas 

1. The name had been changed from Canadian American when 
H. L* Frank sold out his interest some time after the 
slide. 


. . 






: " 



79 


explosion in 1917 which led to the closing of the mine 
permanently. So disappeared the only shaft mine in the Crow's 
Nest Pass. 

In June, 19lU, the Canadian Pacific Railway found that 
their property at Hosmer was unprofitable through dirty coal of poor 
quality and characteristically closed the mine without delay. 

The coming of the first World War brought about a 
definite depression in its first two years and real distress was 
evident. In December, 19l5> the Leitch Collieries in Passburg 
were late in meeting their payroll. No taxes had been collected in 
the place the previous year and in September 1915 the schools were 
closed with the teachers unpaid. Blaimore had almost as much 
difficulty and in April, 191?) cut the teachers' salaries^ and 
prepared to seize property for non-payment of taxes. By November 
there was danger of the schools closing altogether. Coleman 
dismissed the entire staff of its school to rehire at lower 
salaries. A drop was noted in the school populations of all the 
towns. Femie felt the pinch also, having sixty-eight men on 
relief. 

The Hon. Charles Stewart visited the district and promised 
aid to the depressed coal industry. However, in quick succession 
Leitch Collieries and the Maple Leaf Mining Company ceased operation. 

1. The principal's salary was reduced from $1300 to $1100 
and the teachers' salaries from $800 to $650. 




, V 


-• " 

d - . • • *xi:oi c 



... . : v • C , " > 

■ 

•: ; d ■' • X~. r '' bfi -" v . ■ v v .. 

■ • •; •; • d/. x r" ' 

J- t 






;■ ' , ■ ■ f ctu' 

.... , : • .I' i*i; :■ W * ' 


. , : . V -.1 ; ' ' ' • ! 1 : * • • • 

. 

. 


■ 

■ ■ nib • ■■ ■ ' - ' d 

• ; . • , /; • •, ■ . r ; 

' 

j’.jV, V o :.-iOV J’/T-no- L <>. ■ ■ ■ r-iv 

■ 


. 

■ . ■ ■ 

. 


■ ■ ... 

, 

■ :{ t ■' C : ' 

||S 

1 

•. •: ' •" X ill'- 



80, 


People who had but recently moved in from Lille or Hosmer 
were once again in search of homes* The name of the Davenport 
Coal Company at Burmis disappeared from the list of working mines in 
the report of the Alberta Mines Branch in 1915 and in 1916 its equipment 
was moved to a new mine at Wayne, Alberta. In spite of a terrible 
explosion,'*' one of the greatest in Canadian history, Hillcrest 
mine continued in operation, but the accident itself helped depress 
an already gloomy population. 

When the war prosperity made itself felt in 1916, the 
demand for coal also went up, so that those companies which 
survived until that time became more or less permanent industries. 

In 1911, the Canadian government, following an investigation, 
ordered the village of Frank moved from the shadow of Turtle 
Mountain. A good part of it had been moved before the mine 

2 

company began to get into difficulties, so that today a sizable 
village persists north of the railway. When the mine closed, there 
was no immediate exodus, for with Blairmore only one mile away and 
Bellevue but three, the men walked to work in these places and only 
gradually did the population disperse. The Canadian Pacific kept its 
roundhouse and engine sheds in Frank so that there was always a small 
population of railway workers. Many of the buildings were tom down 
or moved whole to neighboring towns, particularly Blaimore. The 

1. See below p. 130. 

2. The population of Frank in 19Ul was 20U. 


........ . . Vu; f, . .00 • !' « oif. ' looo : 

■ : I M \ ' 0 : " ; 


’. • • -r:i fceC 

• ■ ’ 1 


0.1. 

, '.,0 . '. 0 nC 

. 

,1 


• ... 



... 

l ' C 




. 

■ 




. 

' 

: ■ J. IU 



. ' ■ : ;".0\. 0. ’ 



■ 

' 

, . o'.. 1 


* 


; 

. ^ . . . » ■ ‘ - ^ 




■ j'rvi'V 

•• a;;: • 

■ ' ' 

■.. . : c t ■ ■ 0>. ! - • i 

. • m . ■ ■ ' J ■ • - ■ 

U) I . L-.f ' ; •..■. ■- -i-- 

. , ' , roo • i:’.:.• ■ ' •• ™ 


' ■ 

• o'. . 


■....; .i..T...v.J: :./X-.o.rr : n r ■: : ' ; ;i; 

f ; 3 , . ■ - - ■ CItv sriJ ; :o;>.o 

>03 J * 

• •• • •'•:•(; X n ' 7rr;T: ° 0 

o, ; , s.czw c^olliv 

0 - ... '. • o'.. , ot: 

J-,,-.ijV.v; -mi:; s;li , 32 'uti Jircf sjovsIIsE 

.- ... . o on .. :o: ooo;o. ■■' ;:w0!liw0 '' 

■ ■ ' ' ' ' ' 

. m .... ■ . ' ■ ■ 

* 

■■■■■'•■■ ' L ' : - ’ 




81 


great hotel owned by the coal company also declined in use when 
the vogue for sulphur baths passed and it served first as quarters 
for the 192nd Battalion and then as a hospital for tuberculous 
soldiers* The structure stood unused for a number of years and 
about 1928 it was tom down by Joe Michalsky, who built a number of 
houses from it. The same man purchased the brick from the coke 
ovens at the old smelter and used many of them to build the Polish 
hall in Coleman. 

Passburg buildings were soon taken away, mostly to 
Bellevue, and today but one or two buildings remain. The mine 
plant was left for years as on the day of closing until the demand 
for scrap-iron became great enough to cause the material to be 
moved. The ruined coke ovens and a few gutted stone and concrete 
buildings are all that remain today. 

Hosmer remained intact for a few years. Then, many of the 
houses were moved to Femie. In 1922, John S. D 1 Appolonia and Alex. 
M. Morrison of Coleman bought a number of the mine cottages, 
sawed them in half, loaded them onto flat cars and shipped them 
to Coleman. They were reassembled along the street behind the 
main street, replastered, refinished outside, and then sold or 
rented at a good profit. 

Lille remained a real ghost town for many years as it was 
difficult of access. “When a flood washed out the railway bed in 
1923, the only means of visiting the town was by a logging road 


1 




■ 

■ ■. - ■; v ! jj ;!■ ' ' 


■ 




r j :'o \ c-neyo 




V v; • : 


• 

* 

. 

. 




. ■ 


d'?;s • ' 

‘ 

... • 

c, r o !->: 

£ 


• . > 

. 


. ■ 






J ' ' O' '. 



- 

. 




. . : 


. 

' 

* 


< . ' ■ ; ‘ 

, 

V'f- • • 

‘ 




82 


from Blairmore on the west side of Bluff Mountain. It was a 
favorite goal for hikers for years. Although some of the houses 
were taken away as soon as the mine closed, many buildings were 
left for many years. As late as 1930* the hotel still stood 
with its huge verandah sagging badly. The four-roomed school was 
still there with doors sagging, windows agape and pupils 1 excuse 
notes scattered all over the floor. The tipple and railway 
rolling stock remained, while in the level place where the cottages 
had stood, fire hydrants stuck up through the long grass marking 
the location of the streets. In 1950 almost everything had 
disappeared but the hydrants were still to be found lying In the 
grass, having rusted off at ground level. 

About the time the first war began, a commission 
11 to delimit the Boundary between the Provinces of Alberta and 
British Columbia 11 began its operations in the district. The 
commissioners, R. W. Cautley, J. N. Wallace and A. 0. Wheeler, were 
required to make an accurate survey because in the area of Alberta 
west of the main range, the Tent Mountain Coal Company of Alberta 
was prospecting and its coal seams ran into those of the Crowds 
Nest Pass Coal Company along the boundary. The Crowsnest series of 
passes was examined carefully and many of the surface features 
renamed 1 or named for the first time. One rather interesting name 
was that of Andygood Creek, named after Andy Good, the proprietor 

1. e.g. Mb. Tecumseh was changed to Mt. Phillipps. 


. . y. ci ■ 





■ ■ o o. n ■' r; o ■ \ :voo Lv - v ' ■ Vi. w 

dooJk Jj - 

. . ?-. r . 

•; .. Co Oil.: 


;■ ■<; t 

, ' V 


} . ■■ ■ \ . > C. ; ■- ' :■ 


. r ■ •, : ' i* ■ o r . : ;v \ v. 

t ■ ' ■ - 

v. ! : 

one) i'L*. : \ { jJ: (. f 'ni 

. . ■ . < ■ . : 

' 

' 

• .0. Lj LOLLCLl.il 

.' , • . ■ , ■ i x. ■ 

■ 

v .'„o or, J- i'L: ? rx . j.,« vG'o fui ■ :.'L ■ ,f.\sXo J.*iS 

. \ 

. • 

.;••• rc LO pa ll c 

: . ' • 


■; vV: ■ . • ' : 



nitil ■ . 


. • ' — 

•: e: 

*j r ','0 : .OHO \;j'. IVx iVlPfi .LiL' OLIO 3 8.$q 

■ -vTi : : 

r. 

* 

• e 

; > _■ ' ' q-L, . 0 L : ' .. t L. ’ ■ ■ 1 ’ yvi ,i ■ • - J : 


« ’ , * 


83 


of Crowsnest’s only hotel since construction days. He was a 
colorful giant of a man who was widely known for his zoo of 
native animals, his guided hunting trips and his boast that rain 
falling on one side of his hotel roof ran into the Pacific, while 
that which fell on the other side ended up in the Atlantic. The 
combining of the two names into one word makes it conform with the 
Ottawa dictum that two word names were to be avoided. Another 
interesting point in the report of 1911; was the dispute as to 
whether the little lake in Phillipps Pass, which had no outlet 
other than a subterranean one to the Oldman Cave, was a water¬ 
shed or nob. The point was decided in favor of Alberta, proving 
that subterranean streams cannot be considered as watershed 
streams. The commissioners further noted that a road was being 
built around the south side of Crowsnest Lake to replace the one 
then going ’’over the summit 1 ’ through Phillips Pass,^ which 
usually became blocked by snow in the winter. 


1. The commission actually gave this formerly nameless 
pass its present title. 


: «... : r i. 

' ' ' - - 
. 

' 

. Oi ' 

. • ' ■' ■ • : ' ' ■ " ' •' ' ;::j 

'• ' : ‘S'lO'ZtS- - Ci.il r:.:; ^: ;...L 

• . ’ ' ' 

-• r . - . . : .--l ./ ' 0 < -T - : - ' ' 4’JS i -■ ^ ; 

• * '■ ■' 

■V r ■ . ; ■ • ; .1;.:. ’ ' ■ ‘ • ’ ' ’■ ; ' : i'v 

' 

. ■ ' '■ ' ' ' ; • ' < 

: i' 4 y :-;i \ 7 ,v ' • ; • ' vr. . 1 < vo I; . : 7 rtr»V 


' 

.... 




84 -« 



Above. The sulphur springs at Prank as they 
are today. 

Below. Meeting the train at Prank in the days 
before the large station was built. 

Photo. F.Graham E. Gushul 
















8U. 

CHAPTER 8 

LIFE IN THE EARLY PERIOD 

The year 1916 marks the beginning of a new era. 

Old timers are those who can remember the prewar period of 

the founding of the town and the rugged life of the early days. 

It is difficult to picture adequately the roughness of life in the 

days v/hen most of the towns were camps or little better. 

Occasional paragraphs in the newspapers give a glimpse of the 

differences between then and now. In 1900, the editor of the 

Femie Free Press wrote an editorial condemning the action of 

Principal F. J. Watson, who sent home boys who came to school 

barefooted. He stated that that was the right of all schoolboys. 

In the first issue of the Blairmore Enterprise in 

1909, the following notice appeared 

REWARD. Twenty-five dollars will be paid to 
anyone giving any information that will lead to 
the arrest and conviction of the low-bred 
individuals who make a practice of spitting 
tobacco juice on notices that are posted 
around town in connection with municipal work. 

L. Dutil Sec. of School Board. 

The above examples are amusing but the picture one gains of the 
morals of the time is not. As early as 1899^ illicit liquor 
trade was noted as being bad. Besides two hotels there were 


1. Femie Free Press March 9, 1899 








iJriAS 




, 

n < 1 

... ; , . i.M ■' - S - • - : £•“*'«. ' '■ *-'• 

'■ ' ' - ' • ’ 

. ■ .. . : ' ■ " 1 . 

* 

' . ...■' 

x V , * ‘ ' £ ■;^ i;! ^ 

■■ •. . ' • >■ ’ * ‘ . 1 

V .i • ■ " 


* 

, • cj; rj . ftOj\ 4 $mcftcdfc ' 

* 

: • 

„ • '■ ' ' ; ' : 

. 

. ' ■ ' 

* 

' 


85 


numerous "shack" bootleggers in operation from construction days. 

Yet, in 190U, the same paper blamed the increase in crime over 
the "good old days" of 1 2 98 and *99 on the number of hotels (10) 
opened since that time. No hotel could be opened without the 
consent of the coal company but this was rarely withheld. 

Breweries appeared in Femie, Morrissey and Blairmore and others 
were planned. Speaking in 1910*^ of the early days an "old timer" 
said, "In those days the principal occupation in the Pass was 
dodging the police ... and furnishing coffin varnish for the 
thirsty inhabitants." The editor of the Frank Paper was appalled 
by the drunkenness in the town and suggested the abolition of 
the holiday on the day following payday. So much was spent on 
liquor, that merchants complained about the miners being unable 
to pay their bills. An early resident tells of the "mounties" in 
their red uniforms riding their horses down the main street of 
Frank and firing their revolvers into the air to break up the mob 
that poured from the saloons at closing time on paydays. 

With the drinking went the "red light" district. These 

were more or less open and were constant targets of the clergy of 

2 

the Pass towns. The Hosmer Times records a strange incident. The 
"red light" district had been reopened. At once a public, indignation 
meeting was called by ministers under the leadership of Rev. D. L. 

1. Blairmore Enterprise 1910. 

2. Hosmer Times March 31, 1910. 







„ • \ . ' - , ' • \ ■■■.' • - ■ ' - ! • ’’ K. ' 


■ . -• ‘ ■ ' r ■ 

■ 


' 


r-M'drs b;,j'tM(TO 

. Jto ■ ' ■ : n o 

7/ 7 . - . : . i -A ; ■'. S ' - i? ■ ' 



. 

. •• ■ - /:-• '■ : • < ' ‘ ^ • 

: ■ v. 


:!:.y rrrivt - :.d,; d.oo 




V: .1 no.Ufxi’odju. 

j:';i. • - •- vv 

. 

a:- i ..d 

. Ci- ' ■ . v • • t 

^ * - 

o*" !: * ■ 

. • •- 

;ioJ us : o‘ iT-. -x.- ■ ■ : 

• ■ 

ci ■ ■ : : ■-./ ' ' - -xy ■ ■■ ‘ . . ... 


. 

• 


. 

) vyi olo oiid: l.o d-n&tan-r-d ©w 



. 

, ■ _ * 

■ , ! '■ J ■ “ V ‘ ' 



. 

. 

* V 

* 



86 


Gordon of Fernie. Arguments we re heard on both sides and 
then the question was put to a vote. A slight majority was 
recorded in favor of the reopening. Mr. Gordon left the meeting 
in disgust. 

At about the same time the ministers on the eastern 
slopes led a campaign to close the "disorderly houses" which had 
been established in "restricted districts", but with little 
success. It is small wonder that Ralph Connor, in his books, 
speaks of the ministers as "going up into the Pass" or "coming 
down from the Pass" as if it were a place that one entered and 
left as quickly as possible. 

Linked with liquor is the question of the well known 
lawlessness which had been noted since the building of the 
railway. Undoubtedly the liquor trade, especially the illegal 
part, was at the back of most of this. In 1899 the Free Press 
complained of a shortage of constables. Following the murder of 
Constable Wilmett by an unknown assailant,^ the Coleman Miner 
concluded that the Mounties had too much work and too little pay. 

The Alberta government was also blamed for paying too little to 
those conducting cases. The paper claimed that the prosecutors 
were incapable and a laughing stock. However that may be, bank 
messengers travelled armed, sometimes with a police escort. Mr. 

J. H. Farmer used to tell of standing by with revolvers ready as the 

1. Solved by the confession of M. Jasbec in 1911. 




. 


:fe.rla 


ilel 






• 'i\ J': " ' : ■ 

. ■ 


. • 

nab an- i J'b.n.n cl * 


a roam 1.1r-c cflv lo i 
. Io iJ : ' 

: : .. L rj. : < - : : • 


. . ■ . tb ■ ■ 

a..;...,. ■■ nil ■■ -ill Iie.si.CBlo '?:sq&q 

* ' 

u . : ■ .' 


■ _ 

■ . • * 

\j- xo lco*~ : lo' loco and' 1b csyw 

... • . ■ ■ 

> a..: nnbnn \T : b-.nn rll 

...> 1 y : c ■ : 1:C. a: >' • b vbj o^bi 

a£o ■jcLc cbc/ ' Incittfic'y o:';. abnaa,, 

■ 

" • i a van>.? ; 


i (v: o bo 




rs . ■ 

■ 

b 

f a 
ftbad 

ixv-ob 


: ’ • 

‘ 

o 

tfSHOO 

; • • -.too 

.sso&t 


87 


tellers handed out the pay to the miners and of having to 
fire into the floor on one occasion in Lille to foil an attempt 
to steal the money being paid out to the workers. The bank 
staffs took regular target practice with revolvers. 

Probably a more important factor in the lawlessness 
even than magisterial inefficiency was the very large proportion 

of single men, away from the restraint of family or village, who 

1 

constantly drank and fought. The non-British element, which 
has never experienced any prohibition movement, behaved similarly 
and for the same reasons. A great " stone and bottle" battle was 
noted in Coleman 1 s Bushtown in 1908. Most of the major crimes 
of the district at this time can be traced to this wildness and 
excessive drinking. 

The other pastimes which occupied the miners were 
bowling and pool and its related games. A considerable amount 
of gambling went on with these games as it does to the present day. 

For those who wished it, there were many other forms of 
amusement. Hockey and football as well as baseball flourished 
right from the start. The first hockey game was played on 
January 21, 1901, when two Fernie teams clashed. Leagues were 
formed, and each town at some time or other had its team declared 
"Champion of the Pass". Skating rinks appeared early. Fernie had 

1. An influx of single men from Nova Scotia after 
1 9k5 produced a similar type of brawling. 


t • • . V.J rul 



•: j . 

> ’ . 

..... . ’• 

>•••• nuC s..'v wi/ 1 ! ii -Cc-.T ■;i ■; 


* • .. . . V 

• • ■ ■ . • 

' : 

■ 

‘ s' .'ill ■ 'V 0.:V 

■ 

■ •./ / er-\. .* -.. v 

‘ 

■ 

• t 1 ' •• VO C ■ • 

. v i : •. ; •; . ' 


. 

' 


v • 

. 


• .. r, xwo 

. 



. . 

: 

r.aartb Lb ; si 

. 


' 


. . •. 

. s';:. 

. 


. 

. 

j vj ■ : . 


, 

.O s f J 1 V : 




: ii.cC SHOO 

■ - 


• 




. 


' 

. 




, 

■ ■ ■. 

sic:, :His, .t. Vi,..:,.,), 




. ■ * ' v. * 

. 


■ it 


. . • : ■ ■ ’ 






* • 






88 


a covered rink before the big fire of 1908 and by 1910 every 
town had at least an open air rink* The crowds followed 
their teams by sleigh to the nearer towns and by train at 
n club rates”, often in special coaches over longer distances* 

The fanatical support of the home teams so noticeable today 
was even greater in the early days of heavy betting* Boxing 
matches with local champions were very popular at one time but 
now have practically vanished from the memory of all but a few 
of the older men. 

A little slower to appear was curling, but Femie had 
its n First Annual” bonspiel in 1910* This sport became very 
popular as the first generation grew a little older and is 
still a number one pastime. Football (soccer) came in with the 
British miners and was a tremendously popular sport as long as 
fresh material came over from Britain but almost disappeared 
when this stopped* The native bom turned to hockey, which has 
remained the characteristic sport of the area. 

Lodges took up the attention of many. The Oddfellows, 
Masons, Knights of lythtas and Eagles were particularly active. 
Fancy dress balls and masquerades both in halls and on ice were 
very popular, .Almost all organizations had an annual ball to 
which many people went, usually in some gay costume* The Firemen ®s 
Ball seemed to be most popular. Ifnist-drives soon were organized 
and were a favorite Saturday night pleasure of the older folk 
for many years. 




rd ; 

U'X' Xn..';£ £ 

. -IX,/.. " './ 



ir^jo !.,'".o oC£ c 'I br X rnr/oo 

J. • ax.f.^.ct ;.ixr 'O, 


eX 

' . *2 '' i ■ 

. : i-.r> , . ~.L< \ ■: f v ■ -v ; 

• 


ru.’ i"! c Xo f< ''fiBwVi -djurXr- *■ 

,X sXdMC'DUon ob . 

J - < 


' ,r , * v:‘ XX: X. bb? 

. 

", • ... j-h *• 


id: \ ■ • itcvL tu'Y. 

,Jora,- oao cX> • /./'/■<>• 'v; 

'j. V 

' ■ i 

■ ■ , ' : 

JX 



• ■ . n 

. 



. . 

. , .':■£/ / v/; . ' • 



;v-->».:•. cX,-/ i:X A 

■ . v . ; : . ■ ■ 

, 


• 

J: .on.:!- toXIo -A.. ; .. " 

' 


; ,■ ;..o :.[jrr 

,i.v:\av- err. a:xo X&ooos) 

: . X ; ; ;.'i 

. 

II • clffili*! . : ' t ■ " ■ 

■ i£ ; a ' t 

t j‘ ; xrdibnr- 

; r. ‘ / 

. X ' • 

X • ... '• . r i:.b X.vuX 'UQ 

n ' ■ ' ' 


Li0O\ 

OKU .iloX '•: i";-: : 0*.: l‘.J 

. r 


. : \ • : / :'.£Xv; 

. 

■ 



. . 



- , ' 0,1 

* . ’ • 



• 

l‘Ji 

ei 


' 


* 

. » > . . ! - <• : 

• ' — : ' ■' . V ' ; ' X",. - •' /- r ' ’ ’ ? ? ‘ “ ' 

' ’ ’ ' ’ — ' ' ' ' 


89 


The custom of Charivari was also widespread but 
behavior at these functions became extremely bad. It was “positively 
obnoxious and nothing short of hoodlumism“, one editor stated in 
1907. 1 

A nobler sport was that of horseracing. Each town had 
its racetrack and heavy betting led to the practice of “importing” 
better horses. The Pass Plate was called the “Classic Turf Event 
of Southern Alberta“ in its 190? advertisement. Blairmore 1 s race¬ 
track was spoiled when the mining company straightened the very 
crooked river in West Blairmore so that the stream ran right 
through the centre of the track. Coleman 1 s racetrack was soon 
built over by the expansion of the town northwards. 

The “opera 11 houses throughout the pass were the scenes 
of other entertainments — the travelling shows with their plays 
and revues. Femie was always a stopping point, while Frank ! s 
schoolhouse was used for these shows and was usually crowded. 

Coleman (1908), Blairmore (1910) and Hosmer (1910) were soon added 
to the list when they opened opera houses. 

The churches also had their organizations and suppers 
which were very popular, but these were overshadowed by the 
great revival meetings which were common. A “vast throng” saw the 
evangelists off on the train at Femie in 1909. 


1. Frank Pap er May 9? 190? 





* 















\ 





















•.: a. : c 


'■■l i 






. 





90, 


Very soon, signs could be noted of two phenomena which 
would destroy much of the entertainment mentioned, for the movies 
and the automobile began to appear. "Magnificent electrical 
representations of the latest tragedies" were shown for prices of 
ten, fifteen and twenty-five cents in Femie in 1909* Movies were 
shown nightly for ten and fifteen cents in 1912 while early in 
the first war, the subscription price for a month was but fifty 
cents in Coleman. There were three movie houses in Femie in 19lU. 
By 1920 most theatres charged fifty cents a night with seventy-five 
cent admissions for special pictures. 

In 1909, the Wolstenholme brothers brought a two- 
cylinder automobile into the Pass at Blairmore for milk delivery. 

In 1910, two other men had an auto livery, while in the same year 
Femie passed a speed law for automobiles. In that year also a 
road was completed so that it was "possible" to motor from Femie 
to Lethbridge and two years later a reasonably good road was 
opened. In 1913 > the Mayor of Blairmore, H. E. Lyon, was fined 
for driving an auto without a licence. 

The homes of the area were, on the whole, poor. With 
the exception of Femie, which was forced to erect fireproof 
buildings and which had early installed a sewer system, the houses 
of the towns of the Pass were of wood, resting for the most part 
on wooden blocks, which made them easy to move when the mines 
closed down. The outdoor privy was the only "plumbing" in what 


' • ' 

r!* i 

;• ' . ■■ '*■ ; 

•- •' '■> -<"• ‘V'vS'VV *' , . S> '<■>'... ':^ ’, L "- ; v .i.0 l; f VjJ. dito 

■ , ■ • - — " * - ■ 

-vf- ' . . 'l " fnwjte 

J, ■ • ■ ' ' • ' ' 

* 

-i: v ‘.i i> r.;, .. Sf Oliyi: '{a 

. 

. ; .. ■ : :S.Oi \ ‘ ' - 


fr •. ■ ,' . • 


■ 

too 

- 

. . * O'J ’ 


- 

. J. ■- ■ 

. 



. • .. ■ ■ 



: 8 • ■ ■ 

;. 

, 

; •. .- 


• 

. 

' 

, . * b 



v'. .C 

‘ 


■ ‘ „• . ■ t ; . ' • . . : *.■ ' ■ "" ; ' ' ; '■ 

V 0,-: J. o.' ' 4 :: •. ■ -■ ' - 

■ ■ t ; .8 

. .... •.. ' : ■: , (M ' ’ ■ ' •' : ;;; - v ' ' ' ' ‘ ’ 

' 

* 




91 


were called the miners* 11 cottages" and this is dbill true to 
a greater extent than most residents v*rould wish. Only a few of 
the better houses had bathrooms and solid foundations. The areas 
occupied by the non-Anglo-Saxon group were often filthy* These 
thrifty people nearly always kept pigs or cows near the houses as 
they had in the old country, but as the houses were closer together 
in Canada, the results were unwholesome. The Free Press' *’ complained 
of the crowded unsanitary conditions among the "Russians" and thought 
that some action should be taken to improve things. The situation 
was much the same in Bushtown in Coleman and the riverbottom at 
Bellevue until late in the 1920*s. The "bachelors" who lived in 
these shacks often entertained their friends and in West Coleman 
a man of Slovak origin had asked some of his friends to come to 
dinner. As the guests entered the dwelling, they were greeted by a 
terrific explosion which spattered the partly cooked food all over 
them and blew them out of the house. No one was seriously hurt. 

In those days the miners looked after their own dynamite for blasting 
and as it was useless if it became wet it was usually kept in the oven. 
The host had forgotten to remove his dynamite before starting 
the fire. 

The soft heart of the miner is also well known. It is 
not surprising to learn that when two nuns went through early in the 
century they made a fine collection for their charitable works. The 

1. April 30, 1910. Actually there were very few Russians. 



• • l i •' ■ 


■ : 


■ 


' 1 ; ' V 




J: . : ■ - 








, ...... . ■■ • 

ns ’ 1 

/> jnv .ir.ev; v/- rtmc. •. V. * - 1 ^ 1 


■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ 

.. f 

. ’ • \ :C . 

: . ■/ ■ 1, • : •' 

*;• no:: 

• j ;Jm: ■ :r vv 

;.f: , V.'.' •• 

. ■ V-o rrn s: 


, • ■ . . , . • ' ' ; : 

. 

■ 

■■■• V> Ll,! JiVJi-I ctfi 

_ L i-_ i.‘ ik/. * c;j^v;£ o» c! n^'iUv ofcfW 

. 

* 



92 


miners were irked to find somewhat later that the "mans" had 
been two men who had found a profitable money-raising enterprise* 
Fires were very common. The newspapers list a large 
number of hotel fires, while houses often burned in blocks.*^ 
Consequently the towns were very fire conscious. Fire brigades 
were organized and firehalls were among the first buildings that 
newly incorporated communities built. The firemen trained 
faithfully and often held firemen ! s sports days in which the main 
events were hose-laying races and ladder climbing events. These 
were sports highlights of the season and were very popular. Most 
of the souvenir editions of the newspapers proudly display 
photographs of new firehalls or fire brigades in action. Where 
there was no organized government, boards of trade were formed 
which dealt with such matters as getting together firemen and 
supplying them with hoses and other equipment* Most of the money 
from the popular Firemen*s Balls was used to buy hoses and carts. 
One feature of the towns which has since disappeared 
was the butcher chain stores of the IpL Ranch Company and P* Bums 
and Company. Many young people are at a loss when some older 
person refers to a butcher shop in Coleman as the H ijl Meat Market 1 ®, 
for it has not had that name for over thirty years. The sign still 

lo There seems to have been a strange correlation 
between hotel fires and rumors of mines closing* 

Hotels usually burned about a day or two before the 
announcement of closing came* 



9 wioo 

■ r ■ ■ . 

.. ' V ■ 

,, 


. 



r: r: o.-w 00 

' V i.jx r::r -■. 
)■ • '.;o • 

■: r: - £ 1 

V . . • 


■ V 


■ ■; . ... [’■>' 







* 






* 

: :> hll\ SCoO.l . 

i •. 8 ' ■ • ■' 

- ■ " 

■ dI.o •■■ ■' 


■ 

■ 

■ , . 

, O.! ■ ■' : '. 1 ■ J • : 


:w - w..L ... 

: 'i ;/•' 

• ■ ■ v 

'ZUtn'x off) 

. 






r:; XoO nX qatie 


. ; ■ w... v • •• r : 

•; ;,V \), Oii -a * •• 


0 

■ 


93 


remains on the wall of a store in Femie but the building now 
houses a bakery. The P. Bums stable is used as a house in 
Coleman at the present time and is still not the least bit 
dingy in appearance. 


■ ' ' : • 

, ■ - . s 'm ILL ' ?i n emL ' • 



*: - t' 1 .- 

c : ?, rex rad 

. 

/t. C 
iti 


94"a 



The M Gap n . Turtle Mountain on left. The springs 
are across the railway just beyond the farthest 
railway cars. 

Below. View of Prank looking north from the bal¬ 
cony of the bank. Taken after the landslide, this 
shows many buildings already moved north across 
the railway. Photo -- P•Graham-E. Gushul. 






















9U 


CHAPTER 9 

THE PASS FROM WORLD WAR I TO THE DEPRESSION 

Uy 1916, the rising demand for all goods, coupled with 
the increasing manpower shortage, made conditions much better in 
the mining industry. There was a series of short strikes by 
which wages were forced up until eventually they were about double 
what they had been before the war. The highest daily wage listed 
in the agreement following the 1911 strike was $3*65 and boys* 
wages were a little over one dollar. In 1919 the wage scale 
graduated from $ 7.50 for men who worked at the face to for 

boys, A further indication of prosperity was the reopening of the 
Maple Leaf mine under the name of the Mohawk Collieries, 

The people of the Pass were much affected by the war, 
many men serving in the armed forces. The volunteers were 
largely of British, French and Belgian origin with a somewhat 
smaller proportion of other nationalities. This does not 
necessarily mean that the other groups were less patriotic but 
that many of those of Slavic origin were uncertain of their 
status. Some Poles and Ukrainians were considered Russians and 
therefore allies, while some of their friends, speaking the same 
languages were classed as Austrians and therefore enemy aliens. 

The local lack of knowledge about central European peoples 
confused things still further. Many people were arrested and 
interned, 306 persons being held in the Femie-Michel area 


' ..T £,".\ 


'.5-'': J 


' 


t.-') ' i 
h\ 


>. ;;; w ft 



95 , 


alone* In the Alberta part of the Pass the 192nd Battalion 

was formed which took over the Sanatorium Hotel in Frank as its 

headquarters* The equivalent unit in Femie was the 107th East 

Kootenay Regiment from which drafts were sent to units on active 

service* All the activities associated with the war such as 

local Red Cross drives, knitting, sewing and raising money for 

war charities were as evident here as in any other part of Canada* 

There was very little shortage of consumer goods and taxes did 

not take any great proportion of the miners’ wages. The number 

of casualties was not excessive and to most people the war 

seemed rather remote after the initial excitement had died down. 

However, the one effect of the war which was felt was 

the epidemic of influenza in 1918* In November, the number of 

cases was so great that special ’’hospitals” were opened. In 

Coleman, the school was soon filled with the sick. In Femie the 

Napanee Hotel and the Canadian Temperance Hotel were used to 

house the victims of the disease. The other towns were equally 

affected but the sick were generally cared for in their own homes. 

The influenza was much worse than the war because from two to three 

2 

times as many people died of the sickness as were killed overseas. 
Other things, considered by some as more important than 
the war, soon occupied the minds of many of the residents of the 

1* Blairmore Enterprise, May 28, 1915* 


2. A Coleman oldtimer stated that twenty-three died of the 
’flu compared to about six or seven killed in action. 




. ; ■ f \ ■ 



' .. ’ ■ 


: . ’ 



BL(y 



* 


, 


. 

* 

:p-p ■■ pv • \ ■ 

pIp..0 •:/ ' - ' "•*' ^ 

* 






i; ;• P -p, • ■ 

. 

. 




•, P. - . ' 


* 


' 



r •••: ;n ; y 




.-'■a 




PP V :: 



■ 


0 

; • • ' '■ 




. ! 




96 


Pass, for, on Jane 30, 1916, the prohibition era commenced and 
until the early twenties, the Crow's Nest Pass became notorious 
for lawlessness throughout Canada. It served as a local example 
of the much larger crime wave of the United States. 

When, in July, 1915, the majority in Alberta voted for 
prohibition, the whole Pass section of the Rocky Mountain 
constituency voted "wet”. When the act prohibiting the sale of 
liquor was but one year old in 1917, the local newspapers were full 
of stories of raids on laundries, cafes and other business places 
by the police who were looking for bootleg whiskey. Poolrooms 
seemed to be particularly popular drinking places, perhaps because 
they were open so late. So notorious did the poolrooms become 

that the editor of the Coleman Bulletin wrote a strong editorial 

1 

about the abuse of the poolroom licences. In the same issue 

there were paid advertisements by four men who were applying for 

such licences. The present town lias only two poolrooms for a 

larger population. One month later the same paper showed that 

prohibition worked little hardship on the population, for every 

2 

month 1,500 to 2,000 packages of 11 joy juice’ 1 2 passed through the 
Dominion Express office. No package contained less than a quart, 
so the total was greater than had been sold in the hotels in 
11 wet 11 days. 

1. Bulletin ; June 27, 1917. 

2. The words are the editor's. 






. 


■ i O • ■ • ' • u;! - •- ; t~ •• t 

:' ! . . ‘ ■ >■' * O : '■ Ou ‘v ‘ 0 O-.c- livCl). 1 

j ■ , ■ . n ■ • 1 • 

„ . , , ; ■ ■ ' • : 

a <■;;* o' r. .. Jy;± % x Sj;7 > ;r[ ' *o~ nV; 

; ' • 

• . ; ; : ; , ' ' / ’ , ! ^ ,00h • ' 0- ! /->O,0 V "000000 

r r:.•. r. ■„> • 1 t , ; . ' i ■■ . • ; 0 ^ v - 

;; • .... \ : . j . oi:: : f' ' , : n •> ■ o.v i ■ > obi: o. o'K: 

' • • ' ■ • ' • ' ' ■ ’ ■ ' ‘ : V 

r ' ;' ::o‘ \ . ' ' bo "o * : ' ' v ; ; 

• • . • 5 ' ' 

• 

moo* • 

.. . • V • . .'I . v ■ ' : ■ ' ' • ■ 

■; . v: ; "'jO . ' . . / b , f ’ ' ' ' ! '' • ^ ' '' C ' -- 

V' . V. -o'. t '' > Of.,:: HO qi:.ic/’v;;::' cX-i '$). 'OO/.yo O' •-•'OVJ 

■ . < ’ 

, • . : . , ... . : ' ' ' ' ' - 

:.o :,o, bLrc .o/oci x.hm‘.' o..'..: ooooo • -■ ' ■ ' 0;; 

.... --0, 

. ;; . v . o : _ * 

„ ; ; 


97 


When the importation loophole was stopped by 
legislation in 1921, other means were found. Shacks were built 
back in the hills for the making of "moonshine* 1 but most of the 
supply for the thirsty populace came through other channels. 
Packtrains came over the little used mountain trails. Doctors 
were supplied with books of special prescription forms for liquor 
for medicinal purposes and few failed to use all the blanks. A 
veritable parade trooped into the drugstores'^ near the end of 
every month. The established liquor interests did not lose touch 
with the business. Femie became the centre of supply not only 
for the Albertans but also for the apparently thirstier 
neighbour to the south — the United States. The traffic grew to 
such proportions and affected so many people that the details 
of the methods used cannot be discussed at the present time 
without embarrassing many people still living in the area. Almost 
everybody needed for the conveying and marketing of liquor seems 
to have cooperated and there is little doubt that some members 
of the police forces were involved. 

2 

Crime, for which the area had always been known, 
now be cane much more sinister. It could not now be put down to 
mere drinking or lack of community restraint. It became a 
matter of organized gangs, sometimes with a fierce rivalry 

1. The writer worked in a drugstore at the time. 

2. See below p, 86. 



i. • •• • ;• di 0 v ■' •- . d; ; '/'S d ■ 

i/ii"*Vv r r '.y. : 

'• Y d ’' 

■ 

' 


* 



. 

v. • d r •. : .( d : ■ 

• : ■ i'. . • v ; ' .. ' . ' • .. 

*: .di,.. b ' d 

.■ .! ... - 

; .' ; ,:••• ' 

v ■. .. 1 . . ■ d ■ v 1 ■ . ■ d ; C,V 

lipjJQ, ' 1 - ■ - • 

. ■ • . • ; ' 

f: ;o don vix{qi;c 

• 


c,-v \.o. o-':...'- > r:^. dY -bd '-O'l 

r:.;' v : . ob'lbi--...,; &lii 

1 ' .. 1 i I 


d v ■ ' ’ ■ I i■ - r no S^-.-.-rwr fSW /2 

j oii- : T*.. 1 " . 

. v; . : • •. . ■. . • ■ u ' ■ ■. • ■'d• ■ 

■ 

: b ' d' ; \ r;. ; / cd r ”0; e ssod<’■/:>*'■ 

5 ( i]tCB ‘lOtfp.t.L ’10 ' a.'- 

..n-, / \ n • ‘.v '*•.>! \d od \.\.rvo 


, ,,, JCxob IS,.,', U. : ' ■ boo n^cqo’.'O -vwti oo 

* . ' : 

" , ; "w '•• ' ■'■•'■ ; ' ■ ‘ ' ■ 

. ■ . : ■ • • ’ " ■■■ : " ' J ' 


£080 * . 


. . 

. , . d .' . ■ ,v ' - c ' ' '• *■ ■ 

* : 

1 w-,, 

* ■ 

- 

a , ! * 


98 


developing in the rush to get rich quickly* Gangs often 
informed on one another so that the police made great hauls 
when tipped off. The possibility of good detective work must 
not be overlooked of course. 

The first really sensational crime was a train hold-up 
at Sentinel on August 2, 1920.^ Local tradition has it that the 
hold-up men had thought that "Bnperor” Snilio Picariello, the 
best known liquor dealer in the Pass, was on the train. The 
three men involved were Tom Bass off, George Arkoff and Aubey 
Auloff, men originally from Trans-Caucasian Russia. They were 
disappointed because “Pic 15 was not on the train and got a very 
little money* Five days later the police were told that two of 
the men were in a cafe in Bellevue. Three policemen entered 
the restaurant but in the shooting which followed. Constable 
Bailey of the Alberta Provincial Police and Constable Usher of 
the R. C. M. P. were killed. They had succeeded in killing 
Arkoff but Bassoff escaped with a slight wound. He was later 
picked up near Pincher, tried, and hanged on December 22. Auloff 
was arrested a few years later at Butte, Montana, and sentenced 
to life imprisonment. He died within a few months of silicosis* 
Though revolvers had rarely been seen in the Pass, these men were 
heavily armed, Bassoff carrying two pistols. This indicates that 
crime had become well organized and that arms to carry out the deeds 
were readily available. 

1. Provincial Police Report, 1920. Alberta Sessional Papers. 


. ' • , I 

r;]';/;:•/( . . r-v, ;V . &ij o& •...rJoi: wo a:> besr.o‘Jnt 

• • ■ • 

- 

. r• . • '■ :* •' * " - r • Jvil'.L 1 r.V 

* - 

■ „ . • ■ ' . j. / ■. : ■ ■ . v . ■ h ' at ; c / U’orl 


. , ■ j_> . ; . Vn . • n . ■ ' • v; b v ' . 

. . ' ■ • • - « 

-v\ • v £ w'O" ^ i £.*:.• nn o'on cnvr hy-£r£orrq&n£b 

• • 

vf • ,:;V- '..'V 

• • . ' ■ • ' ! ti fi. • I • i • ^ ■ 

* * 

■ 

■ dmot ■ ■ - • ' 

.... . 

^ * 

^ ^ 11 fVJ.' 0 K fICvSG £' -■ •• < WXuV’w 1 J. i ./ > Oi 1 i 

* ' ~ f ' 

• . ■ . . I ■ I ■ ■ 

«- L ■ ' '■ : ' : • 

: r: • • : ; ■ ' ' • • - ■ * ' 



99 


There were other crimes, usually knifings or 
bludgeonings to replace the n stone and bottle fights" of older 
times. However, it remained for Picariello himself to bring 
the whole crime wave to its peak. In 19lU, in the advertisements 
in the Fernie Free Press, Picariello is seen as a respectable 
businessman, who owned a macaroni factory and also manufactured 
and sold cigars. Seven years later he had moved to Blairmore, 

♦ was the owner of the Alberta Hotel and did an extensive trade in 
liquor both as a legitimate importer and as a supplier of 
bootleggers. He still had connections in Fernie and received much 
of his contraband from that point. He was considered to be veiy 
rich, owning a number of the fastest cars available and hiring a 
mechanic to keep the automobiles in first class condition. 

In September 1922, one of these cars had brought in a 
big load of whiskey from Fernie but the police came to know of it 
and planned to raid the hotel. Constable Steve Lawson of the 
A. P. P, had apparently been sent back to Coleman on a train that 
was just leaving Blairmore in case an attempt should be made to 
run the liquor back to British Columbia. When Steve Picariello, 
Snilio 1 s son, came driving his car at full speed along the Coleman®s 
main street, Lawson shouted a warning and then fired his revolver. 
The car continued on its way and Steve arrived at Michel with merely 
a bruised finger. The distorted stories which reached the father 
caused him to come, accompanied by a young woman, to Lawson®s 


• o v. i • ■ i V 

■; - ■. : ■. ' ; . .. ' >• ' : ' '■ 

. . - 

‘ v. / ■. ' . . ' * f " • ' . •' ■ • • 1'' '■ ■' ; > ■ • '■ 

•; . I il . V. ! ■ ? ' \ ■ ’ ' ‘M "■ ■ ' ' ■ '••• O..:'. 

: - ; . . .!. •. ■ . v ' . - --. n '.V. . ' . : o’, u'O 

• ,• v.'.wd . ;. . . V ■ . v : r.,r- t-iiv erivi' z&k 

.0 1 ’ i ■' M' • 

- • • • .. - , • ' 

• • . .. ■ !• ; i■ - 

, ’ ' ' ' ' 

v.''V v - U 

; ',o.K : v ..0 1 ' ■' - •' > . ■ 'r\.:iV 2 \: ‘ .1 J • ■... C.. 1.0 

. . . ■ ... : . . •' - ' n 

. . ■ ■■*'*♦ 

jj'i;.'; i: v „ ,\L rofis C u C fl : oilHD £tl C‘ioa.1;- or;L'f. g£W 

, i.A . -0 . ■: V :: 0\ ' I.'i. . - ‘ ' ' • ' ■ '■ ; •• -• k ' - 

t : r . , ■ noj:r: J • o ' i-- vnLV.c'ifc r t ncm a*o±. ! : 

• . • ' c l ■ 

.., . L v,. ; v ■ .)■ , : . • . V; ' ' i: ' 

. . - . ■ ■ ^ ' * 

I : ■ ' c: J ; iJ. V - V hc.xi—rmooDF, , ■ o:‘f r.l. 


100 , 


house in Coleman just at sunset and to shoot the constable as 
he stepped towards the car. 

Picariello and the woman, Florence Lassandro, were 
arrested, tried and executed in 1923. The case shocked the whole 
country, for it seemed that Alberta had suddenly copied the worst 
features of American gangsterism. This is the crime most people 
think of when reference is made to the prohibition era in Alberta. 
The two sensational breaches of the law coming so closely 
together have fixed in the minds of people the impression of 
extreme lawlessness being prevalent in the Pass even though there 
has been very little of a criminal nature in the area that could 
not have been duplicated in half a dozen other places with an 
equal population. The writer believes that the passing of the 
Alberta Liquor Act in 192U was due in a large measure to events 
in that small area in south-western Alberta. 

For some time after the conviction of Picariello, the 
police maintained road barriers to stop all road traffic, first 
at a narrow spot through the volcanic ridge at Star Greek, a mile 
and a half west of Coleman and later at Coleman *s western limits. 
Even with these precautions, there was no shortage of liquor. A 
cartoon in the Calgary Eye-Opener at the time made sport of the 
whole barrier idea by showing two policemen complaining about the 
lack of business while packmules were shown going up and down the 
hills in all directions. Actually the liquor came in with much less 




; 



»' ■ : : r • . 

■ . . * ' 

. t 

■' ■; ■ • ' ' ' * r ' • ' : ' 

k ■ ■ I, : ' ■ ' .. . ■ ■ ‘ r.;* ■ n c r : ‘i( w *urJ; s'l 

• 

vXf'GO.I.'v or •••iiX.-’i J. '■ iio • •': >. no rc. f .mS ert'S 

-o' . 1 . !. ■> v.i..’ r . v:. or r: or 

r;-. , , . . . : ’’ 

V X ' ■ ■ V •• • ■ ■ • - 'V - i 

v ; «-;■.. i ;u‘;o irso: r ;Jvii ax hrtroX Ktmh used evart Son 

;' ' • • . ' •• ■ 


; ■ j fi; '/o O, C-:V r. i IS 2!Sv OV-V' .X f£■: vi'02. r .t0xrpx.-l .•,d‘.V---'C;J.i; 

, • i ! : . 




. ■ bjKO* 

, . . . > . ' 

. • on X:.,v . • v , :uio';c'r ! - r. /v: . '::t 

■ •. ■: ■ : • . ■ i:r v-vo 1 '>• - \' ■ '■ ■ ' 1 -- r: ' ■ v " • r 


(did. 1 : tf.o J* ' ■ ’ ' 

: ' 


* : ■ : 1 ' 11 • . '' 


101 


difficulty than that* The hamlet of Crowsnest became a favorite 
rendezvous of Pass drinkers and because of the somewhat different 
serving hours in British Columbia from those of Alberta, it has 
remained a favorite haunt. 

Although one might conclude that the Crowds Nest towns 
were very dangerous places in which to live at that time, 
actually the reverse was true. There was much less public drunk¬ 
enness than there is today because most of the drinking was 
done in secret and only those taking part in it became involved 
in the fights. For most of the people, the bootlegging, raids 
and fines were things that one read about in the papers. An 
interesting case that gained public attention was one in which 
a man charged another with stealing liquor from his basement* 

The judge dismissed the case stating that one cannot steal what 
a person does not, according to law, possess. 

Some of the younger people started carrying metal pocket 
flasks — even, occasionally, to school, but this was more in 
imita.tion of the American “flaming youth” as it was depicted in 
the movies. After 192lj, bootlegging gradually decreased until it 
amounted to little more than a supply for after-hours drinking or 
in gambling houses and houses of ill fame. 

The second building boom in the history of the Pass took 
place in the immediate post-war period. Although in 1920 the mining 
companies went out searching for men and in some cases paid their 




' . y ry.i • • <<'. - 

yy , . )/',‘"yv ' "I 

. 


<;£>'<i ■)£■' ^ r £CyUidll) 


_ . ■ t 

• ■ ■ ■ , y , 

' ■" 


• ; ; 1 '. v - 




• ' 

rtd'dsiJzy- £>/k* ’.v> <. • >i 
J;c.v.Lo-v C : .-w-b , * J'i ^ ' d ' * 
• ■ v . 

« 

, ■■ !!■:'. - ' ' r 

# 

v (h ■. ■ ■ 


. k o i - y y : .. 

’ j ' 

i a ? ■' 

-j ... y• iLoi'y 

. 

.... ■ al% 

• •. o ' d c/icdnd 

•. . >•; •. or ■ ••... ;lo i:i ' & 

■ 


, O' ' : '■ •' ,1 (r _ - • 


,;\v. l '. •'. 


• . ( 

. 



yy ,y:y. - ;,y , y ; ' \ ' 

' 


o rtoxJr,i:d 

CiJ: O’.dTt'.r !. ••. ".••••' •. : •' fo \.l 

. 


. 


r y: i. . ■ • y 


COT! ‘ffUs 

. 


: . - y 1 

' 


- 

: y m 



. 

’ , ' : ■ *. " - fi: h £ ' ' ' 


102 


transportation to the mines, by 1921 there was some 

difficulty in obtaining work even for experienced miners* 

However, in spite of this there was reasonably regular work so 

that there was a rather prosperous period in the early ‘twenties* 

Except for the One Big Union strike in 1919 > there was no real 

bitterness"** in any of the strikes which generally started in the 

spring, lasted through the summer and ended in the early autumn* 

The men vrould go off and obtain work on the farms, stay at 

2 

home and hunt and fish or work on their homes. If the strikes 
lasted long enough many would return to the prairies to help 
with the harvest. 

In the strike of 1922 many new houses were built or 
moved in from the ghost towns, and more important still, the 
shacks were enlarged into decent houses. The miners, who were by 
this time mostly married men with families, felt that there was a 
reasonable amount of permanence in the mining towns. So, houses 
were jacked up from their rotten wooden supports, basements were 
excavated and concrete poured. An increasing number of furnaces 
appeared in the new basements replacing the old heaters. Bathrooms 
in most of the towns require cesspool drainage and septic tanks 
which vie re dug by the men themselves during these slack periods. 

1* The issues were serious, but there was little tendency 
to the violence that had marred the 1911 strike. 

2. Always very popular pastimes in the Pass. 



•. > 

4 " ’ . * ‘ • ' • . - ■ ' : . r> 

- 

*r. .1 ' Li..- r.,' ■; ■ •\ \ £ v‘-.xit 

• . . . ■ ' 

'• ; ' ■ .; v : . \jsp- ii.:: r o/:'.j 

. ■ ■ - . • ' . . .. • ■ n 

• .... 

• ... '. . ■ •..' ... . .■. r : U:i 

o«t z:\b«.Cr-%:x :io oj , ■ •• oJj. o"v: ' >.r T.noi 

* 

• 

• ■. .. -Jr, : t 1 >; vo 5 

; G 

...... i . ; . . i. : ; .. ' CS^iV'X .Li J‘ 

, , . * : v«xi . . ... , .• .) •:.:-jomB ■ I( n 

. . : , • ' ■ ., . • ■„ .*. > ■ <0.: I 0^.0’,V 

■ 

, . . U i ;J ■. . i' ; • ' • ■ ■ 'i- : : : ' 

: x r?r; x.3'1;:) I v*") 0‘iiupci; vwrocf ond' _o cfeon n.i: 

I 

tf ■ . : : :. • ' \ . V., : ififg £isl' ■ tort 6 .... ■ ' xi •' ■ 

■ ' \ ‘ ■' ' ; '. o.f ■ ■ ' ' m : !: * 

* • :/■ . ■■■■•,'. ;I ■' . :■ 

„ ■ • 


103, 


However, the number installed in the early twenties was rather 
small* Any new houses in this period were placed on concrete 
blocks or foundations* 

The building of schools, which had stopped in the 19114- 
depression and during the war, now started again* Bellevue 
enlarged its school and built another at Maple Leaf. Hillcrest 
also built a new school and Blairmore added to its central school. 

A small school was erected in West Blairmore, by the West Canadian 
Company, which was taken over by the school board at a later date. 
Coleman built its Cameron school in 1920 and two years later 
attached two more rooms to the central school. Three neighboring 
houses were purchased later and turned into classrooms. Femie 
opened its large school in 1923 and near the end of the period 
of prosperity in 1928, Michel-Natal built its greystone school. 

In 1922, the East Kootenay Power Company put through a 
line bringing hydro-electric power to the mines and towns. Some 
communities such as Coleman, which had been using 220 volt circuits 
changed over to the standard 110 volt wiring. The mines took such 
large quantities of power that the company built a coal-burning 
plant at Crowsnest Lake in 192? as an emergency source of power 
for times of low water, but it was soon running all year round to 
supply the demand* 

Not many new business establishments were built although 
in Blairmore a series of fires swept through a large number of the 


vrnvol: 

. . V ■ •. • : 

■ .. A A. t ‘ : < 

. - > •. . . . ' i " ■ 

. ••;•••.. A . ' - • >: • . ■ ■ >OiA*’A ' • 

4 r. ■ ' \ ■ • A A/C or:A ■ 

• ; . . . . • ' . . ■ ■ •' • r;. . • o■' X a A 

„ . .. • ■ ■■; >.■•••’ • ■ • ■ 1 . ■'••••’••' «A'.' r;0 ’ : ' ?Cv; 

■ , ; ■ • t r j ■ - . . ■ ' ; acc'C.cXi 

. 

. i ■ • . ' A:J ' • 

• ...... ' .. .. ■’ ••••• WHO 

„ • . ~ • ’ ' '' ' ' °'"' T J ‘° 

.. .i A. . ■ «■ ■ • • 

. , ^ ; ■ ;A ■' • - a - ' ' a:V ;Xaa ■ ll :.:: 

■ -Jr,-, X CC. .X C. , A '-'A . CiA ’ . ‘ J " ■ 

. 

■ 

■ ' ' ■ 

u ■ • ■ . • • • ' t 

, 

jA-a $j 'A : -A'.AA cv a. .' "A 

; ■ ■ v '' 





ion, 


two-story shops and these were replaced by the one-story brick 
buildings which give Blairmore its distinctive appearance* New 
hotels appeared in the Alberta towns as the new Liquor Act called 
for certain high standards before licences could be issued* The 
Grand Union Hotel was built in Coleman, the Greenhill Hotel was built 
by the West Canadian Collieries Company in Blairmore and the Bellevue 
Inn was rebuilt* Only one hotel, the Venezia in Natal, was erected 
on the British Columbia side, for Femie had a surplus of such 
buildings from the boom of 1908* 

Another sort of building that was constructed at the 
Alberta end made quite a change in sports in the Pass* First, 

Bellevue in 1922, and then Blairmore and Coleman in 1923, raised 
money by popular* subscription and built large ice arenas which 
ushered in the era of "big-time” hockey* Femie ®s closed-in ice 
sheet v/as rather small, and Michel-Natal did not build a covered 
rink at all. Thus, with one exception, hockey was a sport that 
was entirely Albertan* The exception was Femie * s famous women *s 
hockey teams particularly the "Swastikas" which gave their town a great 
deal of publicity. However, the imported teams of the eastern slopes 
made the names of Bellevue, Blairmore and Coleman well known to all 
who were interested in sport* 

The teams were supported with tremendous enthusiasm, 
while the coal companies supplied "jobd 1 for the players, who 
were all "amateurs".^’ Although never winning national honors, 

1* Both words in quotation marks are highly inaccurate* 


* 

. , i. -w •" • ' - -v. 

. ' ■ ' nipll 

. . ' ' 

J .f.j. ... .A < A. .AAA:,;- I?:J-o--. u A:;Ci An^.A; 

, , , , 1 r .1 :A v.ii ~ • A;\.:- AA. of) nilJrU^K AoxA ori.t vd 

. , ■ . . ' - ’ ■ • • 

* i.; A.-. ;;.r ; ;j?.. • v. r>./0 ■ >. * : X*. l hi 

' ' ■::A A: 'A' 


• ■.A > jjoAoiXXX ; :: ho v :',A. A > A'/' O '; Of: ' - j i o OAIA 


• ;:A ; . . ■ ■' • A : o. A A- A '■ • • •• A • o.-. ■ '•' • yi - • ; • 

; ' O ’ 1 ■■> A : . V- 1 •'• 

...A Ay : i » A *■ A: “ A '■ ' ■ • . -A ft. AcA.-:;' 

A v . , ■ • , A. . A. : A I ■■ A ■ - ' A: . o: , ' o ■... • AAox rjy.; Ao-ifo 


> t ■ ‘ •• 

i 1 *ib 

.. '.A ■ f V " 8 ' ' ' >■ : i 


. A A' ‘ . A , ■■ ■ A • A A ' 

-A. :V.. O '■ -A ' A-iO ■. • . ) ; A < ."'.'A' A 


. 


. . 

- 

, , ■ : Am '• ■ o A A ( ■ A. ■ • A v; 

, ' ' ' ■- '• ~ ; '- r - ;r -' ! 

: ' '' ' 



10 $. 


teams from the Pass won western and provincial championships 
on a number of occasions* The people of Corbin and Michel flocked 
to the Alberta hockey games while the Femie residents showed more 
interest in the fortunes of the Kimberley teams* The importance 
of this hockey must not be underestimated, for losses would 
precipitate large scale battles and cast a pall of gloom over the 
losing town for days* Victories would make the townsfolk 
delirious with delight* 

The quality of the hockey was good and many major league 
stars first scintillated on Craw’s Nest Pass ice* However, the 
area was really too small to finance such enterprises adequately 
so there were often lulls in hockey after splurges had piled 
up hopeless debts* In these periods the local boys would 
gradually work up teams of good calibre which would take the 
place temporarily of the higher priced senior teams* Blairmore 
and Coleman developed several good intermediate teams which won 
provincial and western championships* Generally the quality of 
the teams was a measure of the prosperity of the district* 

Femie and Michel continued with football and baseball, 
but Michel turned to basketball for a winter sport, using the 
abandoned Great Northern Railway station for a hall* Femie 
supplied the only competition, for the Alberta towns either had 
no suitable halls or the hockey fever was too strong to allow any 
other sport to develop. When the Knights of Columbus took over 


■ , ... ....... a . • 

' .. - * 

'•VJ,. r./- • •. ; ■' . v\ o : - • ^ { - eilu oJ 

■ * . ; ‘ . .. . ^ ' '.i; ‘ • ->n • ’• V- 

, • • . 0 ' ... •' ' :'■■•.■. • ■ ' 

: ■ - 

v '. ■ ' \ ■ ■ 






.. 


.. o -j; !: C. : ' . -• :» . : 








o-.\\ \SSr>vi z 

. O i ) ■. 


; • 


o ■>o ; r - 1 


oh IckTO. I fjjs 

' 


■ 




. . , , • -• • ’ v 

)■:. wb ■/. o . - ■. ‘ •- - " ■ 

. r ; . . - . :v 

, :■■■ . . . > • ' • ' • ' - ■ ; : ■ : 

■ ' ■■ 

■ ! ' . ■ ' ' " ' 

n ° ; ' Js 

j '■ ■ ■' "i U: ’ " 1 ' ' q “" 

j'i.u; , - . ;..... v v V- ■■ : * > r;Xfe! ‘ ' i ‘. : on 






106 


the Opera House in Blairmore and renamed it the Columbus Hall, 

Father Harrington, the local priest was able to develop quite an 

interest in basketball on into the depression years. 

In 1922, when the Canadian Pacific Railway closed its 

mine at Bankhead, many of the miners and their families moved 

into the Crow*s Nest Pass towns, most of them becoming permanent 

residents. This was the last displacement of population to have 

1 

any notable effect on the towns. 

The automobile became increasingly important during this 

period and with the opening of a new road out of Corbin in 1928, 

that town took a more active part in the life of the Pass. In 

1921, British Columbia changed its highway act so that vehicles 

in that province would keep to the right as those of Alberta did* 

Accidents had been frequent along the narrow shelves of the British 

Columbia side of the Pass because of the confusion arising from the 

different provincial road rules. From this time on, every period of 

regular work would bring forth a flood of new cars. The tremendous 

2 

optimism of the miners was such that a period of good "pays'* 
following long period of very low ’’pays" would be all that was 
necessary to bring about an increase in the purchase of automobiles* 

1. The closing of Corbin and Hillcrest mines did not have 

any noticeable effect on the population of the other towns* 

2. Local term for the amount of money received on a payday. 
Miners* activities are greatly influenced by paydays so 
that these are often used to indicate periods of time. 



... • . 

. 3 ■ . ' ' • 

i < -- i'l.L 

: - ' • > , - ■ ■' i\; ' ' • ' : '■ ■ j : 

. 

‘ 

‘ J • . ■ 1 ■ ' - ■■ 

• ’ •• V • • : • t • .. : - 

. • , . . . ■ ■ ' ■ . • ' ' • . ■ 


ri > 



': ■ 

■ • ' / :s '-'.n ■ i 

' ' : " ■ 

' 


: ■ ■ ■ ■ 


' ■ . ■ 

• . ':b 

. 



... 

h yy^, '±o l 


\ ; ' : Y V 

: : ’. :-;o 


„ ' 

* • ' " ' ■ ' 

1 

, ' . ' . ' - ' '■ ■ 


107 


CHAPTER 10 

THE DEPRESSION AND WORLD WAR II 

The mining industry* had been weakening for a year or 
two before the great depression following October, 1929, began. 

In 1926, the Great Northern Railway, which had been a heavy 
buyer of Femie coal and which had been experimenting with oil¬ 
burning engines, decided to abandon its line from Elko to Michel, 
They entered into a contract with the Crowds Nest Southern Railway, 
a subsidiary of the Canadian Pacific, for the joint use of 
trackage from Elko to Femie, The Great Northern line had been 
losing money on operations and, when the depression was deepest, 
in 193U, it was decided to abandon the whole railway from Elko 
to Rexford, Montana, The removal of steel was completed by 1936, 
This loss of a main market explains why Femie suffered so 
severely during the thirties. 

The Canadian Pacific had been cutting down on its coal 
purchases as did the smelters, which suffered from the prevailing 
low prices for base metals. The increase in the use of oil for fuel 
and the development of hydro-electric power probably caused a 
decrease in coal purchases, but no one was sure of the cause. The 
British Columbia Department of Mines blamed the poor prairie wheat 
crop for the drop in coal sales in 1929. When the effects of the 
depression began to be felt, the miners were already down to a few 
shifts a week. By 1932, the mines were often working but one shift 


• • <•'*“ ' ' o'] ■ . ; \ '•!" i .. Li.-'- •• 1 . ' ' • L J txn.,>l f -i -l 

. - . -. .. .• ■ • •; ■ " • ' ' ■ ■ 
r • ; ; .i'kV ' '■ v ■ • ' • \:Y f .f •• '» 

'' ■ •; \v.fi ‘ >i-y r . >: oi.x;:?' 1 : 


, ’ 

V. -J ' r-J. ■: i'> ' 1 ; rV '"'' " 



:.Ol O v\- 7 • 




t J : : ■ ■ .: . ... ' 

• 


•?.no •. 

, . , • ; ) ' ’ ) ' ' 0 j 

• i .n. Yi ypwS 

•- 


' 

• 

* 



* 

, ' 

os ■ ;.*8 

■ .'.it... •; ■ 

f r XC 


' 


'• • 


• : - ■. • . ; • ■ •' f , ■ •■■■ i : : r '"‘ 

- . . ■ 

■ -• ■ 

* 1 * 

I /.• - 10 ' • J-'d ' 

at qcrzb 

■ ■ ■ ’ - 




u: . ;.; 



108 


a week or three shifts in two weeks. For many of the contract 
miners the paucity of shifts was not such a great handicap, for 
if they had reasonably good "places"* 1 2 3 " they could often get by. 

The younger men were on "company shifts" which paid from $U»U5 bo 
$U#95 per day. This meant thirty to forty dollars per month for 
these men many of whom were married. There was no hope of them 
ever becoming diggers because there were more than enough qualified 
miners. Sven the actual number of days the mines operated, does 
not give a complete picture because all men were not called out 
on all working days as a "stagger" system was devised to spread 
the employment more evenly and to avoid laying off any more men. 

The situation became such that older men continued to work, while 
the young men had no jobs at all. Many of the youths reached 
their twenties without having worked a day, a condition which 
made many of them an easy prey to radicalism. With the young 
married men barely able to keep their families alive and older 
men forced to work to support their grown-up sons and daughters, 
it is little wonder that the communists found fertile ground 
for their propaganda® 

The chief agent of communism was an organizer who took 
2 

the name of Harvey Murphy. Taking advantage of the weakness of 

1. The section of a mine allotted to a group of miners 
is called their "place". 

2. His real name is not immediately available, but it 

is a name of central European origin* 


' 

■ \ , *> v'Sv: -:-' -tor? v: . rijli:de lo Y&fcottBe; e ‘c tstenxm 

^ . ••• . 2- , ; '•' • ; ■. 1 1 . > >■ ■ -n z ■ ■ b : .f{ - 

.vt - ■. • r; >' 

, i; r . m;:l fix •' 1 Xc ‘ ; /• ‘ X ■ 'T(L'!;ior9f' r .:^v:; 

«■ '• ■ 

. i■. • . • • v : • ■ ' v ..: r'oit 

■ > CVS • : e >3 Wiow Ili 

# ■ ! ■. . / ' '! V' C '. ' ' > ' '£ ? pi ' f.' 

' . / imxvtno: • Xo < < h ' 

. . . ' 

; ‘ ' .' 

_ ■- • - . . • S , 

- 1 ■ 

• ■ ■ ■ . i ■ 

• .■ ;; : . • . f . r. '“'••• ''-i.; .' •. 

, : 

s 

o O", X xxm o lo e :: f ■ 



109 


the unions, which, since 192U, had been mere local unions 
as far as wage contracts were concerned, Murphy was soon in 
control. Through his Workers* Unity League, -which promised 
large union strength again, he was able to oust the executive 
of the Mine Workers* Union of Canada and replace it with men of 
his own choosing. 

The Soviet Union and its successes now became the main 
theme. At miners* and public meetings the Russian experiment was 
held up as the shining example. Although the men in general were 
not communistic and disavowed any Russian affiliations, the 
terminology was definitely that of communism. “Workers’* slates 
were put up and many candidates were elected to school boards 
and town councils. Coleman and Bellevue had communist members 
on their school boards. Blairmore elected a “Workers” council 
and gained nationwide notice by renaming its main street "Tim 
Buck Boulevard"^* after the national secretary of the Communist 
party and installing a shower in the school basement which was 
called the "Tim Buck Baths". All occasions called forth "mass 
meetings" or "demonstrations" of solidarity. Parades were held 
and soviet-style banners carried. All were encouraged to give 
speeches which were liberally sprinkled with party line phrases and 
ideas. Often twenty-four hour sympathy or protest strikes were 

1. The rebuilt street had light poles and grass plots 
down the centre of the street, which have since been 
removed. See McLean *s Magazine, April 15, 1935* 



cojurt 


* ■- 

- c .■ , ■ . - l . •>;. . . . 

1 . ' v ' ... . , ; i. : ■ . .. i . ‘1<J i: 

. 1 • ■ ' * 

t : I.-' • ■ •: 11 . f ' 

.V .• : ■ , • c. ; ail. aid lo 

ft.las: odd aaioed vou a^;a:ran, r: v.dd. brm nuirfi deivoB erfT 

' 1 . '■' J . v;•> 

•: \ .. v ‘ - : a rJ:nn< aoo don 

■ ■ : .« ’ ' • 

.... . • • ■ . • : 

. ' ■ .:. ■■ : > dn, 

/.l: c : ' ■ ‘ a a ~ ) 

■■‘ !i v : » :• f ' .. ' .' ; f ' S sd.O 0,1 :. ISlOt I di.S'J .(,;: •••• 

, ■ . , . ' . ■ ' t X • ■ ■ 

oh i . - . ' • >. ' 



.br.r[, 

• ' 

» 



• 

t 

; 1 ;■ -J >s.es i; 


OY.Z[ Od ;• ■ 


« 

■ . . . CI « , 


ass • iq . 

%d 'inq i) 


. • 1:1 9' ■ 

' '■ 

sco-i 



■. - . \ ' ■ - 



« 

, . . . : : • ■ 


no. 


called, with picket lines to turn back any who attempted to 
go to work. These strikes were more annoying than dangerous as 
so few shifts were worked in any case that each strike merely 
postponed the day*s work* 

The big strike called in February, 1932, will serve 

to show how serious the situation became. Coleman, Blairmore 

and Bellevue came out chiefly for union recognition* Many miners, 

particularly in Coleman and Bellevue, were opposed to the action of 

the union. The number who did not support the union in Blairmore 

was too small to have much influence, but the men in the other 

towns were able to make their ideas known. They were mostly men 

who had favoured the defeated executive of the Mine Yi/brkers * 

Union of Canada against the Unity League. Known as the Moderates 

in the press, they were anything but that in their opposition to 

Murphy. On May 2, and 3* a group of seventy men attempted to return 

2 

to work under police protection. The striking miners opposed this 
and recruited pickets from the other towns, many of them women* 
lYhen the men fought to get through the lines, the struggle was 
frightful, especially with the women screaming and clawing at the 
M strikebreakers” • So serious was this clash that the attempt was 
called off as the company and police feared n another Estevan” .* 

1. Lethbridge Herald , Sept. 7* 1932. In just such a 
clash in Estevan, Saskatchewan, a short time before, 
three strikers and a police officer were killed. 

2. At the Bellevue mine of the West Canadian Collieries Limited. 



* 



• • .. r ;.. .' u. : ■ : • : , •» 

t..: ' " ^ 

* 

- 0 - • • 

' .■ '.. 1 • "> ‘ T ’■ " C ■’ ; ■ ! ' <•- ■ f) 

4 • f V ' ' 

• 

t; r. . r 1 ^ r> v- c- rl'? 

. ■ •• ... : 1 . .■ ' • •- 

' 

r.-'. i.c-'' ■ ' ; vo ‘ voar od 

t a - 


,0 it: '■•TO' •. • 

■ ■ 


. .' *■ : 

: i:T it ;• ! 

,j . -• f, O/J .’V;'. - ■''• OOo ’,V:Vf 

fi • •',. 1 :' Cv;-):, l" i ‘ • ;■•:*• 

' ■ ‘ ' 

ix o. c/i±;' 

. J OV.'-’I liPii 0:lvr 

' 3CK ,‘-0 : : • • •' -■ 

- , • . . :■ : " ’.T) a .':.; • 

oj J• iOl -• •• o ■ i'J' 

■ - V 

oj ho d' f ; i. { . c 'r 

• 

: :iic •••) : 


* 

• 

vt; r>'l- ' .-'-rd:.: ■ : - 

•• ; . ■ • r,,T ; : V « • ■ >... • ,r -- 

i d • - ' - 1 : 

rj : : ->X ■ :V ! - '' :?r ' -t ■* '' ■ ' 

vT'T C. • cb. 

* ' 

« " 

. '■ • - ■ ' ; w - - ■ • 


. ..... ' 

. 

. 

suo 


• ■ ■ 


Ill, 


On May 26, in Coleman, the moderate, group gained enough 
power to defeat a motion in a union meeting in the Miners* Hall 
(Opera House) and the meeting broke up in a terrific fist fight* 

The Coleman miners returned to work but the discrimination was 
the greatest ever seen in the Pass. Anyone who was suspected by 
the companies of favouring communism was not rehired. All members 
of the Ukrainian Farmer-Labor organization were included in this 
group. There was much unfairness, for many were rehired who 
should not have been and many were jobless who had had little to 
do with union activities. 

The strike dragged on in Bellevue and Blairmore until 
September ?♦ Most of the trouble was at Bellevue, for the 
Moderates continued active there. They booed Murphy and Murphy*s 
supporters retaliated by booing and shouting whenever the 
Moderates met. Every tactic known to the communists was used* 
Women were organized, a Youth Section was formed and even the 
children took part in the parades. One of the dailies reported 
a Youth Section band of boys singing to the tune of Mademoiselle 
from Armentieres, 

“The police are having a —— of a time 
Taking the scabs up to the mine • n (1) 

Little children carried banners with signs such as "Down With 

Yellow Scabs 11 • Violence again flared up when the miners 

attempted to stop the firebosses producing coal for sale, which was 

1. Lethbridge Herald July 13, 1932* 



in 


- • . • ■ ••f' \Lz: , ■ •: *£ 

I . v : j; ■ . • ia nc,; r- . ''c nocro^ =■ d^-eiy • ' ' 

. • • • • • • . ■ frj, • <r I t?.f{ 

- ' . * ■ • • - " 1 


. 


ij'itz (• ,;;o ; i :yjf>CfOj 
r,' : i: .f. : riT 


-, c ; i); r, sw o:u ' wwjlti 

* 

r?./: a hi X. :/ :i ■ 

■ ''. ' i £ 1 • J £ ' - 

. 

Xr: ;yoy:i:£ O' ayy : :W-.X. ' 

■ , •. . ■ , 

- ! • " 


1 : ■.'.■vy one•"' ^ >• 

. ■. ' • ' ' ■ - 

- 

< ; <i * j.7. r,n sv v ;t oon u J. 

, 

■ . . ' ■ 

, - , * \ : ■- !’« 

. y • y : r.r • ",'zho 

i . ■ ■ ■ *' * ' 

' ■ ' ' : ' • ' : : ' 

, . ml ■ ' . ' »« ■ ■ • ' ' v ■ 8rI0W ' * 

■ 

: . : / I " ■ i'iniu we : 

, ■ y. • f " r - : ’• 

-■ 

• ■; a t A: ,■ A- ' ' • ■ ■■ ' rJ - 

' 

■ •... . A a ' A. A ■ ■ Aa >h-.. ’ ■■ ■■ - ' A' ' A - ' 


. 




112 


not part of their normal work* Nearly seventy people were 
arrested on various charges, including assault* 

After seven months, following conferences between 
Premier Brownlee and the parties involved, the strike was settled 
without discrimination or ousting of the union* The miners protested 
all through this period that they were not '’reds 1 ' but workers 
fighting for a decent living* 

There had been opposition to the communists all along* 

The newspapers, especially the Coleman Journal , kept up a biting 
attack on Morphy, who called the weekly, " Halliwell* s dirty 
yellow scandal sheet"* Coleman people formed a Citizens’ League 
which put on a tremendous campaign and succeeded in defeating 
the communist supported candidate for mayor in one of the most 
exciting civic elections ever held in the town. Crowds thronged 
the fire hall until the ballots had been counted to find out 
who had won* This was something that had never been experienced 
before and has not occurred since* 

An organizer of the Ku Klux KLan appeared in the Pass, 
but apart from a "fiery cross" which burned on a hill south of 
Coleman one evening, there was very little other evidence of 
KLan activity. In any case it did not have much effect on the 
activities of Harvey Murphy,**' for in 193U he turned his attention 

1. John Hladun in "They Taught Me Treason" (McLean’s 

Magazine, Toronto, Oct* - Nov. 19ii7) tells how he and 
Murphy operated in the area* 






. 


. « 


- 




y r 


* 


Xiiaacc 


cii 


• ' 


ewsseJ 




■ ■ • ' ■ 

C'C9;.:i C'ilv'- iO a/.p ■■'■''■ O'caa.... 

cn/o bni:a oo" ix-vift/oo nos»a aa-ii 

r..:. a. • ■ o 'a ■ • ‘ - : ‘ : i;i -- ' 

« 


• . ao ,a i c - .. 

• j , { ' ' - t 

.■; noJ;uosXe oJfcvio ; jitcjicc.'$» 
■ sr cl 1 

* 

• ' V. £ 


. i.:-' n.t :r~ '■ - ^ - ; - 

' 

' - ■ 

01 U ■ - ' 11 3 ' '■ ' 

ar:.r,:'af:..;'c ; '^ c.’:a an ik v 


i 


■ 


■ ■ 

i . ■ . '■ ■ 

* 

a - - ’ ‘ 


.. ! • , v ’noa 

■ ■ ... 


■ 



,f; . 1 1 i ; 

t . . ' ' ' 





113 


to Corbin, whose mines had been working more regularly than 
those of the other towns* Because of frequent fires in the 
underground workings, the company had had difficulty in keeping 
the mines safe enough for the men to work in. So, they 
attempted, with trucks and steam-shovels, to work the “Big 
Showing 11 as a strip mine. With the same zeal as early weavers 
destroyed the job-taking textile machines, the enraged "workers 
and their wives' 1 '*' stopped the trucks and manhandled the drivers. 
This action caused the company to suspend operations early in 
1935* leaving the whole town without means of support. For 
some time the people lived in their town on relief as there was 
little work available in the other mines of the area. Gradually, 
the people moved away, very many of them to the west coast and 
other occupations. Today, very little is left of Corbin and but 
one man lives there eking out a precarious living with a store 
that serves the truck drivers who occasionally haul coal from 
the "Big Showing". 

Fernie was hard hit by the depression and Coal Creek 
mines, with greatly reduced crews, worked but 77 days in 1932, 

90 in 1933 and an average of 1$0 days in the next three years. 

The people and the coal company appealed to the C. P. R. to give 
some of its coal orders to Fernie. The railway company replied 

1. Many of the pickets were the people who had appeared 
in the same role in Bellevue in 1932. 


: 


II . : • • C' JJ 


10 


' ' z > 

. ' • 


- ; 




r j0 ■ bit ; 10 •:> . ■ /? f-v. 

X".OC j.J J.".- V u- 

:-?.ccoO XooO bn-. jco'ocooiqob 
. rn . ' b«. • 






.... 


• J o ■ ■ ' a v ! .vi ■ 

. • ; i . . ■ ' 

- . ■ y Y;r*. j i \ > C ..L" fO C0‘ '. j . X 
■ ■ *;.• i •> 

• CW.' ' f:.-.'. . f. O > 

. . • • ■ U 

. 

. iii I • ©irrio 

. • .: . - 
i„ ;! r . . v,’ J„l.i - C- •' ' - - 


C : ■ - ; 


■' 1 ■ ' 


bf-cr.:^:c b: ■ r{ o ... r orroor.*; o:- ocao . •: 

- iV ' 


■ ■ ■ • 


that its locomotives were designed to use the coal of the 
Alberta side of the Pass and could not use that of Femie.'*' 

Michel with its high grade coal and its coke production had 
more employment than Coal Creek, never having fewer than 159 
and always over 200 days from 1933 onwards. Consequently, when 
practically the whole of Femie was on relief, Michel merely 
suffered hard times* 

In August, 1932, Femie called its city employees 
together to arrange lowering of salaries to save the city $217 
a month and at the same time Mayor Douglas announced that all 
relief work would cease because of lack of funds. The bank 
promised to finance the city until December but was uncertain 
whether it could carry on beyond that date. The province 
of British Columbia finally had to come to the aid of the city. 

In 1933, a commissioner, J. V* Fisher, was put in charge and he 
remained in control until 19U5 when a council was again elected. 
Thomas Uphill who has been M. L* A, for the district since 1920 
has acted as mayor from that time until the present. 

In the other towns, in addition to those already jobless, 
the breaking of the strike produced much greater numbers of 
unemployed who had not been rehired by the companies* The councils 

1* The C. P. R. claimed that the Femie coal had a 

low clinker point and was not suitable. The railway 
used a great deal of Femie coal during the wartime 
shortage without much complaint* 







•xjX-u' ' w. 


* ' ■ ' ‘ A ' ' ' 

. 

■jjt'i'.o.o. in itix$£ ■' J-.x 


' - r - ' 

' ■ ' • 


sr 


n rtja 




■ ■ ’ DO • ' 

■ ■ . . . ' . v o' 

; nil v vL 0 rfei^ttf ‘to 

• at I ■ 


• . ' 


.Ft: : 0 Cl - 


•or. hr.:i 


■ 



* 

’ 

■ 

. : ■ • 


» 

a':.fv wo1 
r t • w " ■■‘w. 





115 , 


soon realized that they could not cope with the situation, 
and called on their respective provincial governments for 
assistance. Road-building projects supplied work and many 
sections of the highway were straightened or re-routed. Several 
curves were cut out near Michel, the rocky shelf near Crowsnest 
was widened, a piece near Coleman was straightened and a whole 
new section was built between Blairmore and Frank eliminating 
one bridge with its dangerous approaches. All this work was 
done with picks, shovels and wheelbarrows on the basis of about 
ten days a month to each man. 

When the Federal government entered the picture, work 
camps were built and major projects were -undertaken. An 
emergency landing field for aeroplanes was built just west of 
Coleman by digging boulders from a rocky field and wheeling 
them away in wheelbarrows. Other camps, located near Michel, 
Femie and Elko continued the roadwork on a larger scale. Two 
camps at Belle vue and Frank housed the men who built a new road 
through the Frank Slide. Hand drilling and blasting supplemented 
the wheelbarrows and picks of the workers. The men were given 
their board and clothing and about twenty cents a day. Drillers 
received a dollar a day and the work was eagerly sought by the 
young men, many of -whom were working for the first time. 

The communists violently opposed such regimentation and 
did everything possible to discredit the whole scheme. However, 


.. .’fu : .. . 

■ i noo 


• 


- ■ (ii 


■ ' ■ ■ ■ s ■ ■ 

Plp;.vi. ii:; her 

• 

' - .r : \ r ■ '■ P- 

' 

. . . • ■ ■ 

:( . ■ • ' .‘..i l - - 

f I -0 j:y 

; t- -- ' 

•7 V : . ' \ r '.X b f. 1 v j iOii 

. 

ar • • . ■ - hnr. riled 




;■ ; • • . ■ •. • . hX o. ' it : ; 1: . VP iry-P.oO 

. . • r- . . d ' 

• ■ , . * \ y ‘ 


■ 

■ 

, j: ■ l t •. :.T JJa£ -i C(p a 

. . j. ; p-U 

, ' ■ ' ' 

iv m cnx 

■ 

• 

: it l i ; i;Tu ^rM^oIo des M.Bod •;.b.',uo- 

edd W V—p;' 

■ 


. . v. \nc\'..y • •' " 

' 

- vi . ei ' ■ • ■' .)<•'- ‘ ■ ■■ ’ ’ ,J ' ■ S 



116 


their arguments were of no avail and the camps continued 

until improving conditions caused the absorption of the men 

into the mining industry* The married men, working under 

provincial and town relief schemes, did not stay at the camps* 

In the meantime, Coleman began to manufacture coke in 

a few ovens in 1932 and by 1933 the full battery was in operation 

to supply the Trail smelter* It bad been rumoured that the 

Canadian Pacific had bought a dominant interest in the Coleman 

1 

mines to control the coke output for its smelters* This was not 
so, but the two companies were operated under the same management 
in order to secure greater economy* The addition of the coke 
ovens meant an extra shift a week for the miners besides supplying 
work for many hands at the coke ovens. This made Coleman the first 
town to shake off the effects of the depression and the other 
towns followed as the market for base metals expanded and 
business took a swing upwards. Coal Greek was the exception, 
not working 200 days a year until 19Ul* 

The depr ession period had a curious effect upon the people 
of the Pass. There was so little moving around that everyone came 
to know everyone else and if anyone moved, it was to other mining 
towns such as Drumheller, Lethbridge, Canmore, Nordegg or Cadomin. 

1. The Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company, a 
Canadian Pacific subsidiary actually took over the 
mines in Coleman together with the Mohawk Company 
of Bellevue to form Coleman Collieries Ltd. in 1951* 


. 

■ • ; • • : • , : 

' 

• ■ 

* 

’ ■ ' ■ ' ’■ ■' 

■ 

- 

•v.acl-0 :PV: .— " - ^ m, ° J 

# 

■ 

, 

. . : ,■•■■■ ■ , • 

. 

, 1 ; 

$ 

, . • 










117 


This static condition developed an insularity in the generation 
growing up which was almost like that of remote hill settlements 
of the United States. The young people were convinced that 
their towns were the centre of the world and that the rest of 
civilization surrounded them like a fringe. "When work became 
more plentiful, there was an epidemic of marriages, nearly 
always to people from the neighboring towns. 

Even the crime of the period took a different turn. 

There were few major infractions but an unusual number of 

juvenile breakings and enterings. Coleman, Blairmore and Bellevue 

were equally affected by candy store, hardware and railway car 

burglaries and for several years in the early thirties 51 led” the 

province in this regard. There were two possible reasons for 

this. One was the general shortage of spending money for children. 

The other was the peculiar reaction of some of the second 

generation children against parental restraint. The children of 

non-English^ speaking parents in their eagerness to be recognized 

as real Canadians often discarded more of the ideals of their 

parents than was good for them. They often defied their parents 

who in turn were baffled by the way children behaved 11 in this 

country’ 1 2 . In a number of cases this defiance ended in clashes 
o 

with the law."" When these children grew up they stood 

1. There is no implication that only children of 
non-English speaking parents were involved. 

2. The contemptuous term n Bohunk n (Bohonk” in the Pass) 
was much more frequently used thirty and more years 
ago than it is today. Sensitive children would do 
almost anything to avoid being called that name. 


. 

> ./ ■:;' h::CQ.t&\C'b C : \tr.\+3 e/A'J 

■ : ■ 

„ 

: ( / r-,;o ■! :■ ;\-i \,.o c s::i r -. :> pfid e'lev. 1 psi uj rJ.^nct 

, 

„■ ' •' ■ ■■ 

■ ■ • • • 

, 

■■■ /: . ■- • , • 

„ 

, ' ‘ v.. \i . r i ■ ■ •' • ■ • 

• „ ' - 

. . ,i r ; :- .. - / i ' ; •' f V ' :. 

• 5 > ■ • ■ tBi : 

* 

" • IT 1 * ' ' ' 

■» ‘ 

* 

, ” 

t 

* 



118 


for no such nonsense from their children for they were well aware 
of what was required of Canadian children in regard to respect 
for parents and for law. Of course there is no shortage of 
pocket money in the Pass at the present time either. 

It is worth noting that the people did not quickly 
recover their optimism about the future of the mines and very 
little public building went on. Coleman, in 1938, was practically 
forced to build another school but even the speeches at the 
ceremony of the laying of the cornerstone warned against 
building such an expensive building (estimated cost — $ 30 , 000 ) 
in any place as insecure as a mining town. Blairmore built 
itself a fine technical school only to have it bum down when 
it was almost completed, never to be rebuilt. Fernie also 
built itself a "tech 11 in 1937 which was modest compared to what 
early Fernie residents might have built. 

The building of homes was resumed in the period just 
before the war and although no mortgages could be obtained in the 
mining area, the Home Improvement Plan loans were available and 
many houses were improved by this means. Nearly all the new 
houses were of bungalow style and cost between two and three 
thousand dollars. However the number built was small compared 
with that of the boom in the twenties. 

The strange thing about the whole depression was that 
only one mine closed down in the period and that (at Corbin) 


. : : 

' - ■ '••• • 

■ 

* - l ■ 

Jx: ; < ■ . ' ' > • ■ 

,y,r . r. J. ..C ' • :/ ■ W Ti .U-C *T '0 'V -iVO 0 £>" 

- 

... '. .....' O'..' 1 . 

- 

■ ...)• • . ' f- '■■■■ ’ - : 

; • . ■ . - ■ ; . ■ . 

' 


c/jjnJ: xhnoi: o Mtl SlsC oiT 







. 

. t-TBI. as;:,. ,u 

' 

, 

, . . . ■ :■■■• - ■■■ - - ;r - / -' r :ir : 


119 


was certainly not caused by a lack of orders# However, when 
the slump seemed to be over in 1939, Hillcrest Mines ceased 
operations and went into receivership. The mine surface plant 
was removed and the Mohawk Coal Company took over the land and 
worked it from their side of the seam as the Hillcrest-Mohawk 
Collieries* 

The people of Hillcrest remained in their town. The 
men were soon at work in neighboring towns to which they were 
transported by bus. The little hamlet is far from being a ghost 
town for very few houses are empty. Bellevue School District took 
over the school which now operates as part of the Bellevue- 
Hillcrest School District* 

The Second World War stimulated the demand for coal 
and shortly the mines were working more regularly and wages rose. 

At first the wages were adjusted by mutual agreement in 
relation to the government cost-of-living index but soon a 
series of strategic strikes, some of them in defiance of the law 
(as in 19U3), caused wages to rise to the point where the common 
laborer (the lowest paid employee) was earning $10.07 a day and 
the work week was reduced to five days. 

Men flocked to join the forces and as the old system of 
local recruiting had been abandoned, the men served in the 
regiments of their military districts at Vancouver or Calgary. 
Quite a large number served as engineers, the branch for which 


. . -■, o vvv "v- ‘ ' 1 

.'.-.-.I • •: '.: • ' . ‘ :'VO : O -- 

• • ‘ . 

■- ,1 - ■ v ■' - ; . ' .■ : . v i. k WTw 










■ : •' : ■ v ‘ i. VO 


. ' ■ 

. - ■ 


- r i'. r V.> V..’ .'V o 
no L'-o wft«< &*'.i ; • -• I'v. v cv.v * 


, • • • .. t£{ : 

■ . , Or'-'V- V 


V; . * . ’ ■ - - ' ' ' ' '• :K ' '■ 

• ■ >'• 

■: ■ j: ; : .. :: ; •: ' : '■ '. "' ■ - - .^ 






: v:- : :■ ■ , ' ■: -- ■ ' 

■ .. •. V - • ■ . • . V v.-r' 







120 , 


they were best suited. Later, the younger men joined 
the navy and airforce. 

The demand for coal was very great and as the men went 
away, a shortage was soon noted so that miners were ”frozen” in 
their jobs and eventually no miners were called up under the 
provisions of the National Resources Mobilization Act. Many 
actually returned from the services to the mines on special 
miners* leaves. 

There was very little panic or internment and little 
but support for the war effort. When a shortage of beer 
developed there was a cry of ”Mo Beer — No Bonds” but it was 
not serious, for all bond drives were well organized and 
tremendously successful, always surpassing the quotas. The 
communists opposed the war at first by surreptitiously distributing 
pamphlets calling on the workers to boycott the ”imperialistic” war 
but when Russia was attacked they were in the van in promoting 
the war effort. Russian films were shown and received with 
great enthusiasm. When Russia cried for a second front, the Pass 
communists demanded a second front. After the war, a little Russian 
town was ”adopted” by the Alberta Pass towns to aid it in its 
rehabilitation. However, the communists did not increase their 
following to any extent and were far from the powerful influence 
they had been in 1932. 

The attitude of the Pass during the war may be judged 
by its record. Large numbers served in all forces even though 


. 

. i . 

. 

o. r . • .• . .. • y. ■ v : . >:-■ .• 

' • . ■ 

i < .■ --.re- : .. - V, ■. . :'/ r -><l r ‘ 

. • ' 

Xoioey \ z>i C otic! ry-y v'it,e c. ■ stml mrmtm xLUwdon. 

1 

uX,r ].;/■(£. J;?: ...it \ O f I i’JLi. J'.L ghVi f&'j&IlT 

. ^ 

. ; . ; y ? - . .. . ' • > ■ ' 

■ • . . 

. • ' . .... 0 ... : :. • •.. ,■ - '••••'*•• ’• ' 

■ 

y,. •. V... ■; !v . ^ •• i yulluo iycJ.Xqiyy 

f; it tii ’ ' ■ > . ■■• 

: ‘ • ' - X.. ■ •' -■ 

* 

, ; y. ; y ; •: v -MV- 7 ':, , ; .\.C' V'/ ’’.L/,:'qOi^X’ -V. 

• , : ' ■ . ■ - ■ * - - ' '' 

. 

. ; . ■ • ' • •• •. • ; • 

* 



121 


they might have remained in jobs classed as essential* The 
bond drives were well supported and always oversubscribed, 
even when the quota was raised each time* The members of the 
Canadian Legion, remembering their own plight in the first war, 
worked diligently and collected large sums of money, usually 
at the banks on paydays, to send cigarettes monthly to the boys 
overseas*^’ Even the heavy taxation and rationing were taken as 
well as in most parts of Canada although some absenteeism was 
noted when it was considered that money earned above a certain 
amount would be taxed away* 

War casualties were numerous, but as in many other 
areas they were among the young boys who joined up a year or two 
alter the beginning of the war* This was particularly true in 
regard to those who joined the airforce but applied to the army 
as well* Those men who enlisted early in the war were stationed 
in Britain and did not see action until the invasion of Italy* 

Many Pass servicemen were decorated for gallantry and their exploits 
were given wide publicity* 


1* The number of men served averaged from 125 to 200 
in the Alberta towns* The B* C* figures were not 
obtainable but should be proportional* 


« 

t 

. 

r:\; .V . 5; ■ •• • ■ - ’’ • i '— ’ ■ 

• . • • • i •’ “■ 

■ 

;'t ... : V \ & : W ' . A •' ' 


■ • ; •; >: " V ■ 

t ‘ • ■ . .•• v 




' ■ • ■' 

■ ... : t < ■ ■ 

r s . SJ; List bsioj 

, 


• : i Jo • a ' .... .. ’ '■ • - '■ ;; '' *• '• 

... :. .V . V -’ e ' m 

: ' ' • ' ' 

■ . 

v! ' ’ 

..... : i.C, ... ' nr^aivtoa aaai X™* 

. • . 





- ■ .... * 

, 


♦ 

ni. 

rc *;■> 0 .. 1 r..' cx'o 





122 


CHAPTER 11 

ACCIDENTS AND CATASTROPHES 

Almost every conceivable type of disaster seems to 
have occurred in the Crow»s Nest Pass. For these, both na,ture and 
man must share responsibility. There have been avalanches, 
landslides, mudslides and floods. There have been forest fires 
and other conflagrations and, in addition, numerous mine 
explosions. 

In a narrow valley such as that of the Crowds Nest Pass, 
a heavy fall of snow, especially if accompanied by any great 
wind, can isolate the towns completely. The communities live 
from hand to mouth so that if the railways, (and in later years the 
roads), become blocked, there will be no fresh food, particularly 
meat, within two days. This is particularly true of the eastern 
towns which have no farms near them. Femie, however, has by 
far the most snow and on several occasions food supplies have 
run a little low. In 1911,” for instance, Canadian Pacific trains 
were stranded in Fernie and it cost the railway company five 
hundred dollars a day to feed the passengers. Food was getting 
scarce before relief trains got through. However, there was no 
danger of starvation at this time for a herd of elk was stranded 
in the valley-also. One of the animals died from the effects of 

1. Called “the heaviest snowfall in living memory' 1 by 
the Free Press. February 11, 1911* 







V 

■ 




■ t ■ 

.. v v b < 

' 

' 

■ . 

« 

. 






. .v. i! ;r: n 

. 

. 

' 

. 


. 

. • ■' ' , ' 

. 

' 

' ' ' ‘ ‘ 

• .. ■ ■ • .. ■ ■ i ■ 








o‘:b 0 ■ r-': 


. ssvr :U.o *xo t\<Ml \i 


' . • • • ' 




> c. ‘ ' cr : Ac* 

* 





123 


running away from the people who came out to see the creatures 
after whom the valley had been named. :The winter of 19U9-50 
brought record snowfalls, deeper than anyone in the Alberta 
section could remember, but it was pointed out in Femie that 
the total snowfall of fifteen feet six inches was still sixteen 
inches less than the snowfall of 1915-16*^ 

The railway companies and the highway departments of 
the two provinces have always been able to stave off any real 
suffering, but, paradoxically, the heavy snows have frequently 
caused sone concern because of the difficulty of getting coal to 
the homes with four or five feet of snow blocking the alleys* 

The miners have always been improvident in laying in stocks of 
coal for the winter* 

The heavy snowfalls are the cause of the spring floods, but 

fortunately not many of the floods have occurred in the years of 

heaviest snow. The flooding results rather from conditions in 

the spring -which cause a large amount of snow to melt at once* 

2 

In 1897, Superintendent Steele reported floods causing heavy 
damage in the Pass* In June, 1899, the Elk River wrecked the 
Canadian Pacific sawmill* Another flood was reported in 1909 but 
with less damage. On the whole, the western side has not 
suffered so much from floods as has the eastern side. Even the 
great flood of 19U8 which inundated parts of Michel and Femie, 

1* From records kept by the Crowds Nest Pass Coal Company. 

2. S. B. Steele, op. cit. p. 260. 


' 

» ■ ! ' , " ' ' 

' 

■ ■ . :® • ■ ■ ■ : 

* 

. ■ ■■ 

, 

' . • ' 

„ . , . . 



12U, 


wreaked most of its damage by washing away bridges, which, 
according to residents who appreciate the fine bridges that 
were built to replace the old, was hardly a great catastrophe# 
However, Coleman, Blairmore, Frank and the Bellevue 
Riverbottom^ are directly in the path of a rising Crowsnest 
River, for the land upon which they are built was the slough 
which served as a bull pasture sixty years ago. Consequently, 
inundations are more numerous and damaging in these towns# 

Bellevue proper and Hillcrest have been safe on their lofty 
eminences. In 1908 and again in 1909, the road between 
Blairmore and Coleman was impassable for several weeks, houses 
in Frank being flooded at the same time# 

However, no serious floods occurred until 1923# On 
May 31* long after the snow had left the valley and the trees 
were in leaf, a warm two-day rain, following a cool spring, 
turned every creek into a torrent. Coleman was the worst hit town, 
for its two creeks came from the north around Crowsnest Mountain, 
which had been swept by forest fires the two previous summers# 
McGillivray Creek overflowed its culverts and made West Coleman 
and Italian Town into two lakes, while Nez Perce Greek swept 
through the heart of the town, flooding every building in its 
path# The river, aided by the creeks, washed away railway tracks, 
dropping loaded boxcars into the river bed# The East Coleman 

1* Local name for flats along a river in a narrow valley. 


V ..... : . l'.. .77,.' v.-; 7^ , a«i. 7 lo •:< 9o;i* .bf 

... ■ ' ' ' 

,. •■.:■ , : ' ',.r ' X ; ' •' 1 ‘ r- 

. t ■ ' * 

• . • ' ' ‘ '•• • •• 

Lj d t ' 

; . . . ■ 

* > ; ' r . ’ '. . 

t&ii* ■ ■ : •: • ' 


. i r. ’ 7 

• 


7 : 

7 7,7.,'7 ■ t ■■■ ' : :. . 7. 



. ; ; ,j , • -7 7, ')7 ■ 7J 


* 


; . ' . 7 

* 


• ■ t 

■ 7:77 oU 

7 ■ ' > '7':.-.«J 1 1 7. 

.. 7 . 77 . V '7-77 7 ....7 .7)7,7 


, 

t - . . ' 7. - 

• 


■ 

7.tu .77 .•» •' 977; VJ- 

. 


• 7 .7,:: 7 -7 7-' it .77 




; • • 7 , 7 ■ 

..... 


' 

, 

•7,. . 9. .■ . ‘ . . 7 : ) 

■ 

' 




7' 79;7 7 ' 7.7, ' 7 ;9 

*: 77 , ■-) 7 . 


I i . .7 7 

’ 

. 


ss ■ > 


• : - 

... •' 


* 

•. > ■ . • 


, • ... . ' ■. .. ■ .7 . ■ ■ - ' . ■■ ' : ‘ ' ! 1 


125. 


bridge collapsed and one home was swept out into mid-stream. 

Iyon and York Creeks at Blairmore and Gold Creek at Frank also 
did considerable damage, flooding the lower portions of the 
towns and washing out bridges and railway tracks. Bellevue*s 
low section was flooded and highway bridges were washed away. 

The railway bridges resisted the force of the waters better but 
were greatly weakened. Crowsnest (Glacier) Creek washed out a 
long section of track and the Pass was isolated as effectively 
as by any winter snowstorm. There were few casualties, no one in 
the Pass proper losing his life. The homeless were cared for by 
the more fortunate residents of the towns concerned until the 
receding waters allowed them to return to their homes® 

The Alberta^ government and the councils of the towns 
did a great deal of work following the flood by dredging and 
cribbing the creeks and river and replacing the bridges with 
stronger structures. However, nothing further was done so that 
when nineteen years elapsed 'with no floods, conditions were pretty 
much the same as they had been in 1923. 

In 19U2, following a backward spring that had melted 
very little snow in the hills, a warm rain caused the rivers and 
creeks to overflow again but this time at the beginning of May 
(May 2). There had been no forest fires in the few years 
preceding, so all creeks were equally affected. Blairmore seemed 


1® The floods of 1923 and 19U2 did not affect the 
western slopes to any extent. 





oj if; o. 




' 


! 










bb O' jKtp 














, 


s't or,i r 




: 


- 

i: V ;■ 1 • ■ xl. • Xu..: "■ ‘..i'‘‘i 

£ 


: ■ : j V 




ny..bo 






/ 


5 



. :: it i', , i : ' ii {'• 





* ■ : - ■ - 




- 


: ■' . ' . % 




; [.bn i lV. ' .1 

■ 




126 , 


to bear the brunt of this flood but the same areas in 
Coleman were again lakes — Italian Town (Second Street) and 
West Coleman. The dredging following the flood of 1923 
prevented as much damage in Bushtown (East Coleman). 

York and lyon Creeks in Blairmore rushed down with 
tremendous force, washing out their banks, undermining houses and 
taking out culverts and bridges. The low places were flooded and 
basements were filled by water rising through the subsoil. A 
coal refuse dump on the Greenhill mine was practically washed 
away. The deposits from this waste heap were blamed by many 
residents for the way in which the water spread through West 
Blairmore. The western end of the village of Frank and the area 
around Turtle Mountain Playground were flooded and Gold Creek 
again blocked its culvert and washed across the railway# 

Following this occurrence more work was done to prevent 
damage from subsequent high water. The Alberta government sent 
in power machinery to dredge the river through Frank and 
Blairmore. Government engineers found a way to allow the overflow 
of McGillivray Creek to pass beneath the railway without flooding 
West Coleman. The town councils of all towns were alert after 
19U2, clearing out culverts every spring before the flood waters 
arrived, so that when the third flood came in the middle of May, 19U8, 

I# This corresponds to the great Fraser R iver flood 
which did so much damage in British Columbia# 


• ' ' 

' 

‘ ■ .. ■ - • •' ■ • ■ v ' 

■ 

. ! ' • > - ' t. 

* 

■ . • . V . v-c 

■ ■ ■ • fi r/r . • . J 

■ ' - , ■ . • - j' • ■ ■ , ; • ; . ‘ . 

. \ : , r .:\ ;/• 

r . ■ ii ; ■ : 

* 

. / . . • .' ■ : ' ; - ■ ■ ■ : 

■ . • ; ■ • ‘ ' •• • ■ ' V •' 


127 


the work crews were able to prevent any extensive inundation. 

The river was very high and two small bridges were washed out 
in Blairmore while a railway bridge collapsed near Burmis causing 
a freight train to drop into the gully killing two of the crew. 

The only indication that this was as great a run-off as in the 
previous floods was the track washout near the plant of the 
Summit Lime Works, where Crowsnest (Glacier) Creek did more 
damage to the railway than in any previous flood. The great 
snowfall of 19U9-50 which had caused much trepidation, ran off 
without any trace of flooding. 

If the British Columbia side of the Pass was not so 
liable to flooding, heavy rains periodically brought on another 
phenomenon — the mudslide. The heavy clays on the hillsides 
have often oozed down when sodden with rain, blocking roads and 
railways. 7/hen Feraie*s business section burned in April, 19 OI 4 ., 
the city was isolated for a day or two because of slides along 
the railway. Another started down on part of Femie in 19lU but 
stopped just short of the first houses. As recently as 1950, the 
highways were blocked for a day or two by sliding mud. Avalanches 
are uncommon in this area but in December, 1912, a mass of rock 
and snow slid down at Coal Creek, damaging mine property and killing 
six men. 

Forest fires have been a menace to the whole area until 
quite recently. Half of Michel was destroyed in 1902 by a fire 


* 

,;/. xvnr?-w r.o;. 


v/f; „; ? "1- ' • W-":0 •"•'.rOV* (<ru 

"j on s' i v• r e/Jtiw> r Aonn.fceJQ 


. 

■.. : • ^ r:r ' ; 

. 

. n , ' • ■■■.' ^ - ^ ' • ■ ' ■ ~ 

‘ 


o'". 'c:" -• ' 

no < ■ 

■ I . i ■ vl 

. • . 

. • ' 

•' r \Q:. "C: ”...■"> : • 


; ; ; j ' . 

: i r - c.v-; rlo'r.j:X 

. 

f ' u i." «' ..."•■ 

. • ’ ' 4 
n 10 ' ■ •• ' ' ' 




i- V ‘ 




, 


, 

O' ' ' . ' ' ‘ ' ■ t • •' ,f.‘ 1 ( : : 

joi fa a ■ ■ nl 


•; . V.o 'm . . d p; .oj^TOon 

: . -I' r-.r :zlnoXu ' s v ” : 

• ■ • : 

. •, o • ■: ( > ' " oil J 


, 


. . : . ^ ' 

' 





128 


started by careless workmen. In 190l|, after Femie*s first city 

fire, a forest fire, following a three month dry spell, spread 

from the Great Northern Railway right-of-way and ravaged the 

whole Elk Valley. This fire raged through the hills around 

Michel and the Loop to Crowsnest and into Alberta. The 1908 

fire which destroyed Femie, also burned a few houses at 

Hosmer and wiped out the sawmill hamlet of Sparwood. In 1910, the whole 

area north of Blairmore and Coleman was devastated by a fire while 

another blaze raged near Passburg and Burais. 1920 and 1921 

saw fires sweep across from north of Michel through Deadman 

Gap and rage around the foot of Crowsnest Mountain. These fires 

were a contributing factor in the closing of MacLaren 1 s sawmill, 

which had stood between Blairmore and Coleman since the railway 

had been built. Corbin was threatened by fire about 1930 and 

numerous fires occurred in the depression years, possibly set 

to obtain the work which resulted from the firefighting. Most of 

1 

the fires in the last twenty years have been brought under control 
quickly because of the determined efforts of Canadian and 
provincial governments to protect the watersheds which supply 
the irrigation water for the prairies. The highway from Coleman 
north to Kananaskis was built by the Eastern Slopes Conservation 
Board in 19U9 and 1950 for purposes of fire protection In the 
Crowsnest and Bow River forest reserves along the Crowsnest trough. 

1. Alberta*s Forestry Branch reports no major fires 
since 1937* 


r . . * 1 1 

t ' • • 

. ; . . V. ■: v. r l.. 

, 

, . v.'.-i • C,.:' ... ' ■ • • : : ■ t : " : ' -- 1 

. 

,, ; • :■/ '}£•,;■ , « ■ ■. . 

, 

• I ■. ; . . • 1 ' ’ " r ' 


. 

, v; r >i 




. 

‘jC-noo P.Y H: y. ; '• 

. 1 :■ ' ; 
Y .; ' V ', ju: ' i ' ' ' " : ' 

■ r. > ’ . ' ^ yy. f ' v : : ^ : 

- 

• ‘ - > l > 1 ' ' 1 : 


! ■ ■ • • • ' 

# ' 

• - - • •; - 

, ... ■ 

. 

* 

• • ■ f C ' 

£ . i£ l: ■7. r 

• ‘ O oa.:i oov *•;; L a/p 

rii: ■ ■ 

P 7 7r; ;; Y <T.rO 

' 1 - 

. ■ ' 





129 


Industrial fatalities are another common factor in 
Crow» s Nest Pass towns* Only Blairmore, of all the towns 
remaining after the depression of 191U, has escaped a major 
disaster. The first great explosion was at Coal Creek on May 22, 
1902, in the "deeps" of No. 2 mine. Over 125 men were killed. 

This is listed in miners 1 handbooks as one of the great mining 
catastrophes of the world but very few people in the Pass today 
are aware that it occurred. Even people who worked in Femie 
at the time had to be reminded of the event by the writer before 
they could recall its extent. Perhaps the reason that it did 
not have the same impact upon the minds of the later inhabitants 
is that it happened when most of the men working were either 
single or had left their families behind while they sought homes 
for them. The possibility of an explosion had probably not been 
seriously considered up to that time and few precautions had 
been taken, for apparently many of the men smoked in the mine — 
one of the greatest offences in modem times.^ Measures were taken 
later to prevent the recurrence of such a disaster. 

Michel was the next mining town to experience an 
explosion when on January 9, 190i* 5 seven men were killed by what 

1. Probably a technical term. Used in reports for "depths". 

2. The B. C. Mines Department report gave the number as 125 
in 1902 but the Free Press reported some bodies found 
later bringing the total to 128. Free Press Feb. 12, 1903. 

3* Smoking had been illegal and some fines had been levied 
but apparently with little effect. 




id: ■ ■ 
















: 




I 




i 


■ . fti ■ 
o ".r >'. c • \;i 

•* v 

c -on %. r . ;-s • 

■ . \ ex • ii 


,j.,i bthni ■ e - i-srf adi. te 

, 

■ 




:■ ■■ 


'/>■* eriV 








: • '.v, o ' '• - 

cr ' • ' 

■ ■„ . • !.■ [. - r • OiiJ : • 




• ■ . ' - ': ■ 


HA • V 




:ov ; 








, 

■ • 

. 

i 




130, 


was believed to be a gas blast, Coleman had its first explosion 

on April 3, 1907, in which three men were killed in the 

International mine by the resultant after damp« 

The second major disaster, however, was at Bellevue, 

when an explosion on December 9, 1910, killed thirty men — a 

terrible blow to the little town. One of the memorable points 

about this blast was the death of Fred Alderson, who had come 

down from Hosmer with the Draeger apparatus as there was no 

mine rescue equipment in Alberta, His kit proved to be faulty. 

Being a mine official and not legally employed in Alberta he 

could not be considered as coming within the scope of the 

compensation laws of that day, so a fund had to be raised by 

public subscription to assist his family. 

Of all the mining disasters ever to take place in Canada, 

the one at Hillcrest in 1914 was the most terrible. The explosion 

took place on June 19, when a full shift was in the mine, and of 

235 men, 189 were killed. For days, Hillcrest was a place of horror 

as bodies were brought out of the mine and laid in rows in the halls 

in the town. One hundred and fifty bodies were buried in a common 

grave two hundred feet long. By this time many of the workers had 
1 

families so the loss of the men was much more disastrous than in 
1902. The situation was worsened by the fact that the company had to 

1, Over half the dead were family men. Lethbridge 
Herald June 19, 19lU* 




< 

• ■ : ' 5 

. 

t -v. • :■ « iio/v.oS. : :■ w a Hw 

. . '■ : -- ' ’ " r 
, ■. . ■■ - V n . .V JV : r . ; ■ 

. ■ . ■ £(i : 


. 

'::.o 'o£jo:n: ''' ." 1; ’ 

' • 

. 

. 

. ■ ' , ■ • 

' 

£ 

' 

• . • 




131 


be proved negligent in a court of law before compensation could 

be paid* This explosion had a great effect on the residents 

of the Pass and its events are recounted over and over so that 

there is little likelihood of anyone living in the Pass for any 

length of time without hearing of it* 

In 191$ an explosion took place in the B North mine 

in Coal Creek but as there was no one in the mine there were no 

fatalities but four men just entering were injured. The mines 

inspector, Evan Evans, was killed by the after gases when he 

went in to inspect the damage. On August 8, 1916, an explosion 

occurred in No. 3 East mine at Michel at the height of a 

thunderstorm. Twelve lives were lost but no satisfactory cause 

of the blast was found. The suggestion that lightning might 

have been a factor was discounted at the time* 

Less than a year later on April 5>, 1917* No. 3 mine in 

Coal Creek was the scene of another disaster in which 3k were 

killed. The people of Femie had reason to believe that their 

1 

town had really been cursed. 

For almost ten years the Pass was free of explosions, 
but, in 1926, two occurred in the Alberta section. Hillcrest mine 
was hit again on September 19 and McGillivray mine at Coleman 

1* Femie, according to an old story, was cursed by the 
mother of the Indian wife of one of the Femie brothers 
when she was sent back to her people by her husband in 
the early days of prospecting the mines* 


I ' [ • ■ ' c ■ ■ • '. . : 

. 

■ . ' : i 

• . • • V ' [lev . ) ' : 

* 

• . . . 

, d i ... • • rci 

' 

< ' , ' / i : . ■' ’ ‘' 

. . , • • - " 

' ; o 

. ' • * 

■ t ' • . <:J.b * &o ■) • 

* ' . ' 

, ■ : ’1 : o’.i 0 -t ‘ r,(-d '.Lv; • v-j. 

: • : jl.-l: t CiU' ' : f >' ' ■ e 

' 

' 

, - • : : 



132 


had its first misfortune on November 23. Both explosions 
happened on the night shift when few men were working. Only 
two men were killed in Hillcrest but there were ten fatalities 
in Coleman. The latter situation cast a pall of gloom over 
the town because the mine, which had caught fire, had been 
flooded to prevent the spread of the flames, and consequently 
it was some months before the bodies were recovered* 

The last explosion in the Pass was at Michel on July 5, 
1938, again during a thunderstorm. The mine was idle that day 
so only five maintenance men were in it, three of whom were 
killed. The measures taken by the management as a result of the 
lessons learned from previous explosions localized the blast 
and there was clear evidence of lightning skipping down the 
rails to the danger spots in the mine* All railways into the 
mine were grounded immediately* 

There have been no explosions since and none which were 
the result of internal conditions have occurred since 1926, so 
there is hope that this great enemy of the miner has at last 
been controlled.^" 

It would be a fine thing to note here the individual 
acts of heroism in all these horrible events, for many men risked, 
and sometimes lost, their lives to try to save their fellows. The 

1* For measures to control explosions see 
Chapter lh below* 



„ 

. 

. • : :• : ... ■ - i-'i ■' ' - - ■ • ' ; ' 

■ : J, , : ; ■ , , 




, , ■ , •. • •; l.:. • ■ . a 




.) .. ■:,; •. .• «• 


. 



• •; t iv . X <:x£Oi;tel 

. . J 


. ■ ' 1 ' . • i > -■ ii. .< 

V • - .- :• ’■ :. ; 

. 






r 

' 





. 












133 


newspaper accounts tell of men dragging out fainting comrades 
or of men being found dead over the bodies of those they were 
trying to rescue. However, it would be too difficult to 
recount the real acts of heroism and many of the men who are 
still alive would be embarrassed by it. 









■ . • J ■> ; . : ■ ; ■" ■ '0 ; rV: -'L - 00 ■' ■ 

; , - , l ■ ' ' 

f 

■ 





„ 



154-4 



Prank before the landslide. Above -- the town as 
seen from Turtle Mountain, The railway, lower 
left, is that leading to the mine. Only the part 
of the town in the lower right ( between the ar¬ 
rows) was affected by the slide. The present 
village occupies the area covered by the smoke, 
which seems to be coming from near the sanatorium. 
The lower picture shows the business section in 
the right foreground. The buildings at the extreme 
left of this picture were not affected by the 
slide. Photo -- F. Graham and E. Gushul 

















13U. 


CHAPTER 12 
THE FRANK SLIDE 


There is scarcely a person in Canada who has not 
heard of the great landslide which took place at Frank in 
1903^ for the catastrophe received wide publicity. Unfortunately, 
most of the stories circulated have either been exaggerated 
or are completely false. 

In 1921 ““ only eighteen years after the disaster — 
many people living within five miles of Frank had the idea 
that the bank had been buried, even though it had been less than 
ten years since the bank building had been moved to Blairmore^" 
and many inhabitants of the area at the time had been residents 
of Frank during the slide. Many people today are astonished 
to find that all the inhabitants of the town had not been killed, 
except of course, the one highly publicized little baby found 
among the rocks 0 Mr. John Kerr of the Turtle Mountain Playgrounds, 

#10 collects all possible information on the slide, has published 

2 

a pamphlet which is intended to correct much of the misinformation 
which has been current. Even the sign placed by the Alberta 
government at a viewpoint in the slide states 11 .... and destroyed 


1. Now the home of Henry Zak in Blairmore. 

2. The Story of the Great Landslide at Frank in 1903 . Undated 
and no author given. Obtainable from John Kerr, Frank, 
Alberta. An article The Romance and the Tragedy of the 
Crowds Nest Pa ss, in the Canadian Citizen , Calgary by Mrs. 
T. E. Mu dim an is also a good source. - (Aug. 7, 19h7) 






•ton ami oil?. its X£u.-::'if>q & xXbo^bob e.t i> r i0fiT • 

•;■ • • . :. ' • • ■ ‘ o - V. :" fi 

t * •-■■-> 

: i : . • . .. J - ' •'' > ! 

. 

' 

' ii ' . ‘ • ' n.‘ s. r ■ r 'nr ; ”rr.: i 

: < ' / " .r J. > ■■ 1 - v ' ' ' 1 • ‘ ■ : ^*•' 

c •; :> •.If Ovi arid •'. - '■!':/ ■ 'x': snsa s Ss> s s. cxxv iss 

■ ■;St : •- - i • ^ ; : ■ - • ’x n 

«- - 

- ■ 

« * 

■ ; '• T 1 . . • ' \ '• ■ 

. ' ' : : ; 

. , „ . : ' 

* 

» ' * 

* ' 

. • "" ‘. •_ ..... . 

» * ' » 










135 


the town of Frank." This is not true, for only a small portion 
of the village was buried. However, since all the buildings 
have been moved away, it is easy to believe that the town lies 
buried beneath the pile of rocks* 

On April 29, 1903, shortly after four o 1 2 clock in the 
morning, a huge wedge of limestone slipped from the face of 
Turtle Mountain, struck the bulging lower part of the peak, 
smashed into the valley and drove up the other side for two 
miles. About 7,000 feet of Canadian Pacific track was buried 
but no trains were damaged, one freight having just gone through 
while the passenger train had not yet arrived. The brakeman of 
the freight train, Sid Choquette, would certainly be the first 
man to cross the waste of rocks for he is reported to have 
struggled back over the rocks to flag down the passenger train.^ 
Estimates of the size of the rock mass which fell vary 
greatly. A story in a magazine in 1903 stated that half a 
billion cubic yards had fallen. This would be over a billion tons, 
but by 1910 the National Geographic Society^ had scaled this down 
to forty million cubic yards. The average estimate today is between 
seventy and ninety million tons which is close to the 1910 figure* 

The original wedge of rock is considered to have been 1300 feet 

1. Mrs. F. 0. Bundy of Pincher, Alberta, tells of seeing a gold 
watch presented to Mr. Choquette forlhis feat. 

2. Canadian Magazine , Toronto, Vol. 21, 1903. 

3* National Geographic Magazine , Washington, D.C. Vol.21,1910. 




' - 


* 

r: f rxv niJ c io 

, ' t "v : •••' ■' ‘ ' >.i 

v: r. i’V j 

, 

{■■,(■•■ <(, b::m 

. . ; ■ - : : ■ • - ' - , . I , 



■ 

, 

. ; 

> ■: v y, ■ ■ . •: ; rs ' r - o 

' 


. 


■ 

. 

;• « •' d sS.b'h-; 

' . ' ' 

, 


■ 

, • ? ... • • V - . r * ;-.n‘^C 


• • \ l' dol:nw 'v/a • ' • ■ 



. 

. 

’ 




* 

■ ■ • 

,. ■ j: • 

yjoxlit bn.’-.? ■"/v ; Ti:::.ven 

ifsist OC£J. ii-"-oo ! rvf:d ©>t hwjsbtvnop 

' 

. ■ 



' ■ 

. *: * . . . 


136 


high, U,000 feet wide and £00 feet thick at its thickest 

1 

point. This mass is now spread over 3*200 acres. 

Not much of the town was actually buried although the 
rock lies one hundred and fifty feet deep in places. "Before” 
and "After” pictures show that one row of cottages had disappeared 
at the south-east end of the community, but loose rocks caused 
damage to houses not actually under the main slide. It was from 
one of these houses that Mr. and Mrs. Sam Ennes and their four 
children were able to crawl, although badly scratched by nails 
and splinters. Their baby found in the soft mud was at first 
thought to be dead but later proved to be unharmed. 

The most famous person associated with the slide is 
Marion Leitch, now Mrs. Lawrence McPhail of Nelson, B.C., the 
daughter of a storekeeper who lived a few houses along the 
street from Sam Ennes. She is often thought of as being the 
only survivor of the village of Frank. Mrs. J. H. Earner, 
whose husband was bank manager in Frank in 1903* states that 
although the parents were killed and the two boys crushed almost 
beyond recognition, the three girls, Jessie, May and Marion 
were practically unharmed. The upper part of the house in which 
their bedroom had been situated was pushed off the lower part and 
carried forward by the sliding rocks. The children stayed with 
Mrs. Farmer for a few weeks until each girl was taken by a 


1. From the Alberta Government sign at viewpoint in slide 



' 

oil' : 

. 

>:• ao:; r.a 

. 

i U■' ' 'r'.;v 




- 

, • , • 

i ' . ' . ' ■ • ■ ' J . XJ ' H ; V.OS. ’’ CTX 

" ' ’’ f ' : 

..." • ’ *•' 

. 

* 

. • 

■ . • ■ ■ 

• ' ■ - 

; , ... ; ' \ ■' . .. ' ' £ • > ‘ : r - J 

. 

v J;*vr. f . ii-.M .aa:o axv; hnec'rirrf ©eaffcr- 

- ra. a sr!;i oaf or x l Li tr+ow • cn -o:. : v Oi'J if* c/Oftf Ib 

, . , r ■r,- f a:.-' • -;.: 1 . :?:■ •>. ' - a V :T ^' :Cr ■ 

- - 

... • 

■ ' , ' 

• ' ' * 

. - / ’ • : ’*■ 



137 


different uncle to homes scattered through Western Canada# 

Jessie is at present a nurse in Vancouver, B. C#, but the where¬ 
abouts of May cannot be immediately determined# 

Another story, that Mrs. Farmer stated was cited in 
medical journals, was that of a man named Johnson whose side was 
pierced by a board which had first passed through a feather 
tick. The doctors spent hours picking feathers from the wound 
before it could be closed and Mr. Johnson survived his strange 
experience. 

Estimates of the number of dead range from sixty to 
seventy.^ - No accurate count could be made because of the 
unknown number of men in a construction camp farther down the 
valley which was completely buried# 

The mine property was severely damaged and most of the 
surface plant was destroyed. The mouth of the mine was buried 
but the entombed miners of the night shift dug their way out 
through another tunnel many hours later# 

For some weeks the Mounted Police patrolled the valley, 
but people soon returned to their homes. The mining company was 
back in business by the end of May. In two years a new shaft 
mine had been opened and the community faced the future with 
high hopes. Until 1911, the village stood with all its business 
places as they had been before the slide. The bank was on the 

1# The population was probably over six hundred. 


. 

- 

bn ow slit flKfri 



. 

■ 








■ ■ 


■ 


' 

Oiivf la ; •]'£ - 

■ i ' ■ 

; ■ : ■■ 


r 

V 

•j; V.'J fMQjX'UuV 

;; - -io J T. -.v 

r ( < ■ , ;; r. V; J ft; L- 

* 

l /;r I . ■ 

■-:.v Ix-lrt :> ; • ■' -w ' to ^ 

■ • ; ; 

■ : . ' ' ' 


1 > h'.OV 


' 


■ ' f. 




■ 11>;v : : -'B.Ll...V-' 

* 

' 

/ ' ‘ '■ ^ ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ’ ' ' 

: . : *i • ' - ' ' : ' " 


. • 


* 



138 


main street just behind the railway station/ No one seems to 
know how the buried bank story started but it is certainly 
widely believed. One may step from the station platform and 
walk across to the basement of the bank and see that it is a 
good distance from the nearest rocks. 

The river, which had been dammed by the slide, backed 
up when the run-off waters came down, flooding parts of Frank 
and Blairmore* A channel had to be dynamited through the rocks 
to relieve the situation. 

The Canadian Pacific Railway set to work immediately 

and built a new road over the rocks and as the years went by, rock 

was taken out to ballast bridges from the prairies of Saskatchewan 

to the interior of British Columbia, until today the railway 

runs along the original earth surface. No road was built 

immediately but a trail from Bellevue to Frank was cut out on the 

hills north of the slide and used as a road until a new highway 

was built through the rocks south of the railway in 1906. In 

improving this road in the nineteen twenties, a construction gang 

uncovered one of the houses. A few skeletons were discovered and 

2 

buried nearby with a sign to tell the story. About 1932 a new 
road was built through the slide north of the railway and the 

1. The large station which was built just after the slide 
was destroyed by fire in 1950 and not rebuilt. 

2. Believed by Mrs. Farmer to be the remains of a family 
named Clark. 


' . . ■ "1“ '• 

■tj.f. v ■. oJ: ,•/ i;.r: v .v ' ■ ' w: ■ >1‘- . \ • ' on i . 

4 bsvei 

;i.'. X ;0' ..ft- ; J f.- iX.O M.O Ja!. o',; OC •' s '<'•>*. O..L>w 

* 0 . ' • ■ 

> .• tile - v . o*>rrr;;..- - • ' J '• oJT 

V > : . • - /jo ooJJ t iv: 1 ' 0 ■ v ■ .. l‘.i. ' •• ■' •" 

■ . . • 

. ’ 

-y / , ' ■ ' ’ ' : ■■••••• ' • - 

c \x: J iXOV? Vib&X V- 7\ Dw'i 

, ■, , • j 0 ; ' ' ■ ; • ' ; 

. 

... . ' ■ ■ 

• ' ■ " 

.• . : - - ' 

- 

. . , - ' ' 

* • ' ■ ~ 

• . ■ m > ’ -■ * • ' ' 

9 

■ 

* ' 


139 


little graveyard has not since been cared for, as the bridge 
across Gold Creek leading to it has been removed. 

The highway north of the railway was built by men 
from the relief camps during the depression and later paved to 
make a good highway, but it remained dangerous because it was 
bounded by jagged rocks along most of its length. It has been 
rumored that a new highway to be built in 195>2 may follow the 
original trail, completely away from the slide in the interest 
of greater safety. 

The Dominion government was quick to send men in to 
investigate the landslide. R. G. McConnell and R. W. Brock of 
the Geological Survey reported as early as June 12, 1903, on 
the danger of further slides. Examinations from 1903 to 1910 
caused other warnings to be given until a commission of two 
geologists and an engineer, R. A. Daly, W. G. Miller and G. S. 

Rice, was sent out to make a recommendation. Their report found 
no single cause for the landslide but showed that the mountain 
itself had been very unstable, with extremely contorted rock strata. 

A slight earthquake in the area in 1901 might have had a further 
unstabilizing effect but undoubtedly mining at the base of the 
peak had been a major factor in causing the whole structure to 
collapse.^* By a study of cracks in the rocks near the summit of the 
mountain, which we re becoming wider, they concluded that another slide 

1. Explosives were used excessively in early mining 
in the Pass. 


i ' 

r.-.'J: ; 




, 




.. 

' 

, 

; • , / • l : fl 

. . ii ' • • « :j - ' • 






■ 




; ,.x.. " 




. 

: .: : . . ';.Vi . 'V: !" 

■ 

■ ■ ' . . ' ' 


'.- 

J. . • •' r • • 


„ 


• ' .. 

. 

e ■ . , ii 


Xr.oxgo D ■ . 

* 

• • ,■ ‘ Vi >'■ 


' • vvuvo hv fkco 

♦ . . 



t ' 


d ' ' ■ Hi ■ [? ca itt 

: 

\ ;V '• •• h&d 


1 , 5 • 




■ -' . ■ Tls nisi; < • U 

V ' 

■ -' • 

Id ■ ■ xO 

- ' 

l 

. ' ’ «. ■ 

■ 

* 


„ ■ 




was probable. It was on the recommendation of this commission 
that the government ordered that the village be moved to a 
safer area north of the tracks. As the commissioners pointed out, 
although the coal company could in no way be blamed for the 
original slide, they most certainly could be held culpable should 

a further slide result from continued mining at the base of 

1 

Turtle Mountain* 

Most of the buildings had been moved by the time the 

mining company got into difficulties in 1913 owing to the 

impossibility of producing coal cheaply enough to meet competition. 

Ihen the mine was finally closed, in 1917 , the remaining houses 

were taken to the neighboring towns. There is no doubt that the 

Frank Slide was not the sole reason for the village of Frank 

shrinking to a population of a little over two hundred requiring 

but one school room. Had the coal seams proved profitable, Frank 

might still have been the metropolis of the Crow*s Nest Pass. 

Further investigations carried out for the Alberta 

government by Dr. J. A, Allan of the University of Alberta in 1931 
2 

and 1932 showed that there was danger of a landslide developing 
from the south peak of Turtle Mountain, this time towards 

1. Report of Commission to Investigate Turtle Mountain , 

Frank, Alberta. R. A. Daly et al. King ’ s Printer, 

'Ottawa,1911. p® 10. 

2. Annual Report of the Research Council of Alberta, 

Edmonton, 1931 > 1932 Numbers 28, 29, 30 . 




' ' ' • KJ ' 

' 

* 


jbsmr Xc; vr «; r n± bln 


: XdB 


t 


■lily-bio 



Xf T. cMXs \ niicbjj/j. £ 

\ ' ' 1 '" 



-fir 6 f.rjjf 


Vo 


ii. ‘ ‘ 


lO 


I • I ' 


7 ' : " ) 






Id xlXj&ii-t' 


sill riorfV' 


;V;;,iX v. •' 0/i ‘ ■ 


-.rv 

I".'.-. , . 

r 


• • ’ ■ J ■' 5<i ' 

. , ' ■- sbi . i Am :1 

x • ni; ■ 

t':Hd GV.Gii X LiXi'C 


hG-ibnml •.•■-vo silt.!. 

I&dX'Io'ia bin^nc; • :x -■ &>' ,J ■ 

! . r r';: V o nXIo •: Xx ; Pfli G 

. , h ) ' CfS. t ' ' 

v .1 * 

;V; i^VVO:'i:X 'VV'-!- bilD 

- r . ,/ ■ 


c.i.. o; •; x ' >■ ■ 
f iifc *3: 0 ‘%d'X3V 

■ : • X { ■ S: ' ' &t 

orb ..-t ' . tiiJis-xxii 






Hillerest station, near the eastern end of the slide• Residents 
of the area near the derelict lime kilns were ordered to move 
by the provincial government*^ Most of the people transported 
their houses to safer places but one or two hardy families 
have chosen to remain* In spite of all the apparent danger of 
further slides, nothing untoward has yet occurred* 


l.o This report probably influenced the decision of the 
government to build the new highway to the north of 
the railway in 1932* 



- 

■ 


o.C£J 

. 

' 

: ■ ' w 



• 

■ I '• 


• ■ 

* 

f ‘x e o*i 

; ■ V 


. J ■ 

, 

nt&L’iio ev'-ii 

• » 

• . • 

■ i ■ 

. ' 










■ : • • ■ ' ' ’ 



' 









142 * 



Main Street, Prank, in 1903 and 1951 
The bank, often thought buried, is the sixth build¬ 
ing along the street (with the balcony). The hyd¬ 
rants, if not the same, are in the identical spot* 

Photo -- P. Graham and E. Gushul 




















1U2 


CHAPTER 13 

INDUSTRY, OTHER THAN COAL MINING 

Perhaps the first industry in the Crow*s Nest Pass 

was ranching. From the bull pasture in the care of “Dutch 

Charlie” Weigert, who rode his range with frontier model Colt 

revolvers at his hips, grew many ranches. On the Alberta side the 

first ranchers, Douglas Allison and McGillivray^ raised horses 

for railway construction. Sherman Parrish, the Good brothers, 

A. P. McDonald and others continued with fine saddle horses and 

2 

horses for the many conveyances of the day; but, with the coming 
of the automobile, these ranches became unprofitable and one by 
one they disappeared. Only Parrish persisted and he eked out a 
meagre existence from the few cattle he could raise until his 
death in 19U8. 

However, on the western side, the Elk Valley ranchers 
concentrated on cattle raising. The wetter summers produced better 
pastures and hay could be made easily. As the valley was logged 
over, more land was thrown open for preemption and cattle raising 
flourished. The formation of agricultural associations "... has 
meant a great improvement in the breed of stock raised. Femie 

1* Although Me Gillivray 1 s name appears both in the press 
and government reports, his first name is not given. 

2. They raised horses for all purposes, but their 
specialty was light horses. 



, s ' 


I 




, ' > • ' 






SBf 




>a c':b 


y.jr ri0c.ro- fivrcmi* 


,V; frfXB'I 


0VO 

r‘r 






(L s*> iff 


. 


er!vt■ ft:' ncfod crfBsqqn 

' • /'' t-; >, ■ > v■:■' • 


‘ ^OO'^XIC 


v..tJ o; 

• ■ 




1U3 


and Elko have become centres for these associations in recent 

1 

years and fairs are held periodically." Hughes states further 
that on one occasion 5>27 head of cattle were sold in Femie* 

For many years lumbering rivalled coalmining both in 
output and in the number of men employed. There were sawmills in 
the Pass as early as 1887, but there was no great production 
until the railways came. In 1907, besides sawmills belonging 
to the Canadian Pacific Railway and the Crow’s Nest Pass Coal 
Company, the Femie Free Press proudly told of fifteen operating 
sawmills producing lj.0,000 board feet of lumber each day. There 
were nine mills along the Canadian Pacific line and six along the 
Crow’s Nest Southern. Near the city were the Elk Lumber Company, 
the Femie Lumber Company Limited and the North American Land 
and Lumber Company. McNab and Company opened a mill in 1908. 

The North American Company had steam locomotives and a bush 
railway to haul the logs out. The camp at Sparwood was large 
enough to ask for a school by 190H* 

However, large forest fires between 190U and 1910 and 
intensive cutting soon made lumbering an industry of secondary 
importance in the Elk Valley. Mills at Femie and Sparwood and 
Knight’s Mill between Michel and Crowsnest are still in operation. 
These were first supplied by flumes from the farther hills but, 
since the advent of power road-building machinery, by truck. 


1. Hughes ; op. cit. pp. h and $ 



■: . £ ■■ f ■ '■ 'c ■"£. r. l o ■ on:- 

•. ■*■» T.'.-omrr. zti*" rtt ha .s d^o'.ix/O: 


• * 

. ; ■ :n\ 

■ 

y • 

, 


. 


; ■ \ . ■ . > ’ ' - 



* 

. 

. : ■ o>l ’ ■ ' > ■ l 

<• - vfttvl.br;, 

■ ■ . ' 

I)a:4 OjVr /hrv:: i iO^T *^v V*' Wi «» 



' . no;H?£ 

' 

r\t al: >t :>: :£>j ‘xox£n..£ 

.; > :ti XX.W:, 

. 1 

- 

* j , • • 

* ■ 

D U 


„ 




In the area east of the divide, Peter McLaren (later 
Senator McLaren) who had received the contract to supply ties 
for the railway through the Pass, built a mill near Blairmore 
across from the present site of the Crow>s Nest Pass Municipal 

Hospital, He had his choice of land and picked that south of 

the railway and north of Sentinel around Crow’s Nest Mountain. 

By building flumes to the river and putting in a dam to raise 

the water level in Crowsnest Lake he was able to transport his 
logs for about twenty miles* His mill was a large one and for 
many years he employed Hindus in its operation but they have 
since left the Pass, The fires of the early twenties caused the 
mill to close down for the lack of good sawlogs* 

About 1905, two other companies operated in areas north 
of Coleman and Blairmore. The Carbondale Lumber Company had 
had a small mill north of Coleman and the Pelletier Company had 
one about two miles west of McLaren ! s. Pelletier flumed his logs 
down from the valley that the new forestry highway follows* 

Recently, Charles Sartoris, owning a mill near the site of McLaren*s 
mill, has been sawing much lumber from logs which have come by 
truck from areas around the Elk Valley* The Burmis Lumber Company, 
another recent arrival, obtains its logs from mountain areas south 
of the Pass and closer to the North Kootenay Pass* These last two 
companies have the area almost to themselves, as the fires of 1910 
put the Carbondale Company out of business and the Pelletier plant 


■ 

: ■ -\rJ •- -p /. h? ■:■ , . V 0117 ^ Fit- 

. 


r.r :; , . 

s \ 


, 1 ar»i ; ’ t \ & ft:o' z\ s s ; yoB 


' 


. 

- : 

Xerdvi'ai.-c; ‘ 

,> /Ij'uk':: bff£ \b?jJ erij 


. ... . ' • ■■ ■' : ■ ■ ■■ *■'" 

• ' ■ • ■ 

. . . 1 c ■ •„ r . : ' . ts >< ' ■■ • ■ ' : 

OV. -.L r.c r -' : vi- 'C-V '' n 

* 

' ' - -t ' 

; ■. ' ■ 
yv; ; .U'v J 'v-,'-; Oil / !»• ■ i '.r %Cl il^OOl. J. > £ Ul)ti 

■ o V ■ '■ • • ’ ' ' 

rrv. : 

I ■ ■ ■ ' . r ' . ' ' - ' ' ’ J ' ' 

■ ... ; ■■ ' ' ' " ' " - ; <■ : - 

• ' ' 

... : ■ ■ ■ ' ■■ ,r '-- 

... ; . , - - . ' ■ '■ 

;>r:-X lo »rii :-iU u£ o,1 JbocIs ims sttt BVfid EPifS.'-.amco 

■ umiooo 10 S"0 ol 6 bn'X'J.<' 00* , iiq 




1H5 


ran out of logs in the early twenties. Numerous small companies 
continue to operate camps to supply timber for the mines. 

The woods on the Alberta side were made part of the 
Crowsnest Forest Reserve, first under the Dominion government and 
later under the provincial forestry branch. Because the eastern 
slopes are so necessary to supply water for prairie irrigation, 
the timber is 11 farmed” very carefully by the forest rangers and 
certain areas are logged each year by companies which put in 
bids and are, because of the limited quantity of timber, small 
operators. Experiments in reafforestation have been made and 
are still being carried out and close control is kept over 
travel in the forests during dry seasons. There have been very 
few fires in the past fifteen years and the lower slopes have 
a much greener look than they had thirty years ago. 

There have been quite a number of smaller industries 
in the Pass during the past fifty years, nearly all of which have 
disappeared. The many breweries have all vanished with the 
exception of the Femie Brewing Company, which has had a busy 
life since Sick and Mutz started it in 1901 as a branch of the 
Fort Steele Brewing Company. 

Numerous brickworks appeared in the area in the days 
preceding 19lU# In May, 190U, a brick making plant was operated 
by Wriglesworth and Bullock an Fernie and after the fire of 1908 
the Femie Brick Company was turning out 20,000 bricks per day 


. 







• 


. : '.i; - 


• 

, 

■ 

; 


. viu'. - :• • :■ '■ 



■ 


. : 

: ■ ' : y . . • 1 .. -.i 

t ' 



• ■ 




dm ■ 

■ ’ < ■ ■ 1 

■ ■ 

• t \ . ■ - : 


. ■ 


. 

. ' . 


• 

• ' : we ■ ' 

. . • 

' • 

■ - 


'• ■ 

■ 

* - 


oum ' 

. . 

. . , 

'V' 


: • 

■ ■ i 

- 

' 

■ vyyh as fay..a tuU' j 


■ ■ . ■' ' . ■■ • ' ■ ' . & > 

. 


, • ■ msi: r 

SiUO'\ 




1U6. 


for local use. Reuben Steeves operated a plant in Frank 
in 1907 but when the council objected to his taking day from 
one of the streets and some housewives complained about the 
smoke smudging their washing, he moved his plant to Lundbreck. 
There was an Austrian Brick Company in Blairmore in 1908 and in 
1909 the Pelletier Brick Works was employing twenty men. In 
1910, W. J. Budd of the Rocky Mountain Cement Company took over 
Pelletier*s company and operated it in conjunction with the 
cement plant. By 191U* all these companies had ceased operations 
because of lack of markets. 

Because of the nature of the rocks nearly all the 
lime producing works were in Alberta. In 1909, Joe Little of 
Blairmore bought a large area of land in the Frank Slide for 
the purpose of producing lime from the rocks. The Winnipeg 
Fuel and Supply Company bought the site from Little and built 
kilns which were operated under the name of the Frank Lime 
Company. Thirty-six men were employed at the peak of production 
but by 1923, when the plant closed, only ten men were employed, 
George Pattinson, who later served as mayor of Coleman, was 
the manager during the last few years of operation. The houses 
were moved to Bellevue about 1932 but the giant kilns may still 
be seen at the eastern end of the slide. Perhaps, aside from 
poor markets, the lack of uniformity of the rock of the Frank 
Slide was a cause of the plant closing. A small kiln was once 


' 

, ■ . ;::;r >n onot. '• V \o end 

: • ' - 





rv. « • * ' 

• 

: • 

' • ■■ 

• .Cl : vfv 1 

, • • • ' 

■ ' 

■■ - ■ ' . : >0 . . ' i'! 

. , • i • • • - ■ ' 

• •. ' ' - ■ 

■ - . - 

• 

' • • . ■ /' ’ 

i:lv( r»!t; ■ c- . 

, ■ ■ : r ' L: 

• 

. . • • ' ' 0 ill 

■ ■■ . ) ■ lo | • ■- 

• ■ : 

'• •y'f'")j";. ■;.) m- ■" n v 

■ .C: , , ■ 

: .. . :■ ■ i‘ • 

. . 

. 

’ « 


. :r :v; : , ■ -.'i f.vv; 


- . ' ■ 


• 

! ■ ■ ' ' ' ' - 

.. ' : " ' ■ ■ 





1U7 


operated near Blairmore^ east entrance by Mr, Pozzi, a contractor 
of that town, but it has not been used in the past twenty years 
although it still stands* 

Perhaps the most successful industry in the area and 
at the same time the least known, is the Summit Lime Works 
Limited, Although the head office is in Lethbridge and the plant 
address given as Crowsnest, B, C., the kilns are actually in 
Alberta, at the western end of Crowsnest Lake and two miles 
east of Crowsnest station# For a time the children attended 
school at Crowsnest, but when that school closed they were 
transported to Coleman schools, Coleman School District was 
extended to include the area in 19^0. 

Some old style pot kilns had been operated at this spot 
on Crowsnest Ridge before 1903 by a number of Italians but Mr# 

E. G. Hazell bought them out and formed the Summit Lime Works 
Limited in that year. The family still controls the plant# 

During World War I the employees were almost exclusively Chinese 
who remained until the early twenties when they were replaced by 
Europeans, mostly of Slavic or Hungarian origin# During the 
period following 19U1* a group of people of Japanese origin v/orked 
there after their evacuation from British Columbia, These people 
still work there and have revived the sport of baseball in 
Coleman by forming practically the whole team, A few Displaced 
Persons have been employed of late. ''/Then the mining companies 


... - 

, 

. , . : . : . : .. .. •"'••• v ■ ■ ■- 

' 

• ' ‘ . - - ■■ • ■" • ■ • i:; : - ;j - ■ 

. 

' 

• ' . ■ ' . , ! ' 

• . . . • : *. ■' 

f 

■ , j. 

* ' ■ 

.. * xs £bo Ju . . ' ■ 

' ■ 

* : ' • 

. 



began using large quantities of powdered limestone for rock 
dusting"^ following 1926, the market was assured and in 193? 
machinery was installed which did away with much of the hand 
labor* The company quarries about ?0,000 tons of rock annually, 
using about U,000 tons of coal and over half a million 
kilowatthours of electricity from the East Kootenay Power 
Company* Sugar factories and glassworks in Alberta form another 
important market for the lime products. The building trades 
take large quantities of lime and recently a growing trade is 
being developed in agricultural limestone preparations. 

Phosphate rock, a product used first for smelting and 

then for fertilizer, is found in some quantity throughout the 

Pass, mostly on the western side, but it is of such loir grade 

that it cannot be transported as far as Trail and still compete 

2 

with the high grade rock from Montana* However, for a time 
in the late twenties, the Consolidated Mining and Smelting 
Company operated a mine just west of Crowsnest, which was closed 
down in 1931 when the seam proved to be of a lower grade than 
was first expected. 

Another industry which might have been important was 
the cement industry. Although several plants were planned, only 
one was built. This is the one mentioned in connection with the 

1. See below Chapter lU. 

2. Hughes, op. cit., p. 6. 










■ /. v • ■- 





. 




. - 

• . . • v /. fi ■ r . . . 0-1 

; 


, 






■ 






v.,; v'- or: 


i 




• ; ii’, *» 

< ,iJ ■:/J,' ^ 

. vrol iSr>U: 

1 -. V, 






, 

:r./S‘: 'To r j. .ae/i* 

- . 

■ 9c> . j o d 1* 

• ■ . ■ ’. 


. i ■ •. ■ ; ■ . i ■ ■ : 

. 


; . _ + ;- : . j-iorj T ' ■ ■ >"- • 

- 






. 


ViO [c C (■ ' i, 

' 


: f' 





1U9 


founding of Blairmore which was operated by W. J. Budd. A 

kiln eight feet by one hundred feet was opened in 1909^ and 

a second one added two years later* The depression of 19114- 

hit the plant badly and in 1916 there were strong rumors that 

2 

it was about to close* As the company supplied electricity 

for the town of Blairmore, it continued to operate the power 

plant even when no cement was manufactured. I/'/hen West Canadian 

Collieries took over the town lighting, the plant ceased work 

completely. After the Canada Cement Company purchased the 

factory in 1919 no further product was put out and the plant was 

left as it was until the period just before 1939 when all the 

3 

machinery was taken out and scrapped. Today, a large quarry 
and some gutted buildings mark the site of what was one of the 
most promising industries in the Pass. 

Half a mile north of Burmis station lies one of the 

u 

most important deposits of iron ore in Alberta. About 1910, 
sink holes were put down to explore the ore deposits and several 
claims were staked somewhat farther north along Cow Creek. The 
seams are of magnetic shales from five to ten feet thick. The 
samples analysed ranged from forty to sixty percent iron but 

1. Newspapers report the plant in operation in 1908 but 
the Canada Cement Company gives the date as 1909. 

2. Coleman Bulletin , July 19, 1916. 

3. The company has no record of the exact date. 

U. Allan, John A., First Annual Report of the Mineral 
Resources of Alberta, Edmonton, 1920, p. 62. 
















rt 




■ 


:• >r 




■ 


■ ■ ' ’ 





■ , ■ J i "• 

. ':r 

j •- ' !' 

■ , a d' « 10 W. 

■ ' 

' ' : ' 

■ t ' lo o*ro BASSOS 


' 


[ ’ '■ 3 





~ 

* 

' ' 



• C 







150 , 


because of a 5.5 percent content of titanium, the ores were 
considered refractory and consequently useless, although 
W. W. Leach of the Geological Survey (1911) thought that some 
means of concentration might be devised to reduce the titanic 
acid content and simplify smelting. Since coke can be 
produced within five miles and titanium now has a high 
commercial value there is some hope that this deposit may 
some day be utilized. Deposits of iron near Jaffray and Kitchener, 
British Columbia, may also serve to create a demand for coke for 
smelting from the Fernie area fifty miles away. The iron deposit 
contained in the slag heap at Kimberley is also a potential 
source of iron ore, which might revive the once important coke 
industry. 






151. 

CHAPTER Ik 
COAL MINING 

The coal of the Crow's Nest Pass is practically all 
found in the Kootenay formation although some broken seams of 
Belly River formation have been worked on a small scale at the 
base of the main range of the Rockies# The coal is ranked as a 
medium volatile bituminous coal and is useful for both coking 
and steaming* Not all seams are good for the making of coke# 

In some mines, two contiguous layers may be entirely different, 
one being of good coking quality and the other not. This coking 
quality has no relation to the amount of carbon but to the 
,, caking n nature of the coal, i#e# its ability to form lumps 
strong enough to withstand the weight of the smelting charge 
without crumbling* Nearly all Pass mines have some good coking 
seams# 

The coal of the Pass has a greater amount of heat 
than the domestic coals of the prairies, averaging lij.,000 B.T*U#'s 
to the pound as compared with 9,000 to 10,000 B.T*U*'s for that 
of Druraheller# This is what makes the mountain coal an ideal 
steaming coal. The industry in the Pass developed almost equally 
for the two types of product required. In 1906, half the coal 
produced was used for coking and 1128 ovens were in operation by 
the Craw's Nest Pass Coal Company alone to supply the many smelters. 1 


1# Hughes, op. cit# p# 93 





' 

. ' , ■. ' 












i . 




• a. jboo; 




.! V. 


■ - 





J 




•. . I 


1 • '..'••.-•‘I. ;; 

: v r ' . 1 ' • .. *1 




■ ■ 




■ 




. . 


■ • . ' ■ ’ i\i ; I ■ • 

1 . • • 

> 

' 

- 

. , ' J..... ' fttloXS V) V .">D 1.0 C-D 




f ■ . ’ . , 






152 


When the smelter boom was over, the coke ovens were of much 
less importance. In 1950, not more than 150,000 tons of coke 
was produced out of over two million tons of coal mined. 

Only the coal bordering on the railroad has been 
developed and large amounts lie untouched back into the mountains. 

The upper Elk Valley has a particularly large reserve which has 
been untouched, although easily accessible, while the new 
forestry road north of Coleman has caused some development of 
previously untapped coal seams as far as twenty miles back from 
the railroad. The Crow’s Nest Pass Coal Company estimates that 
it has a reserve of over six billion tons of coal in seams 
over three feet thick with less than 2500 feet of cover. The 
Alberta government estimates that there are over five billion 
tons of coal in an area of lUO square miles in its side of the 
Pass. 

Without attempting to make a technical treatise on 
mining, one may make note of three very definite trends in the 
industry through the years. The first is the continuous striving 
toward greater safety on the part of companies, miners and government 
departments. Measures for safety were sometimes advocated by the 
unions and at other times introduced by the officials or the mine 
branches. The miners often resisted vigourously changes which 

1. The smelter industry had been greatly overdeveloped so that 
when prices for base metals became depressed about 191U* 
most of the smelter companies collapsed. 


c;i. 


; ' .v.- :■ ■■ ■ 

• - • ■ , .. ■.! ■ . ■ : , ? 

Ji 1, , ‘ • ;; > • • V ;? . • :• , r . > / U ': 

: .i. auri bi'o*x f.us'i Ut rt : I.6oo ■ •••' A;XnO 

•• ■■■■<!,: , ,; ... q.n '• ; c • 'S. Kq.. 1 m L> 

; ' . . , V. \ L \J r ' • 1 ’ V: ; J '' '\ ' >' ’ • - ' ■' r :' f '- r 

a i ■ ■ ■ : - 

•• V. •• :j.:. ■ -..... n::: q • . ' ■ : i ;v: v' 

r;'. ;v . a.-o sv •.!" y> Vi rw ■: n 3. 

o - ■ • ■ ■ . , : : vq 

sxXi ' ■■ ■ ■ ' ■ ■ .' ■ : 

i \ ;.v 1 '. r '.TV r r , Q fl'- ii. ; ' l-'.CO lO ?.KOi J 

. 


no ...r? y-r , : " ■■ : ‘ ■' ‘ •v.C- - - •' • - " 

; : ■ • ’ ' ■ ■ v : : ‘ v ’ ' : 

• ' ' - ■ * ■ ' ‘ ‘ ' ■ 

. . ' ' ' ' ' ' 

. • 

■ ■ ■ bt ■ ■ i ' ' • 

* . • 

♦ ' ' ;• ■ 


153 


later became universal practice among the workers* The second 
trend is the constant effort of the companies to produce a 
better product as competition became keener and, third, at the 
same time to increase the number of tons of coal per man 
employed per day* 

In the field of safety, until recently, British Columbia 
generally led because of the early establishment of a mines 
department in a province in which mining was an established 
industry before the coal measures of the Pass had even been 
prospected. In recent years the two provinces have kept pretty 
well together in any changes in safety regulations. 

The annual reports of the mines branches of both 
provinces show that little care was taken to enforce rigid 
safety precautions in the early years of the century* An act 
to set qualifications for officials and miners came into effect 
in British Columbia in 1902 but had had scarcely any time to 
sho w results before the great explosion took place at Coal Creek. 

A commission investigating the disaster^ found a great disregard 
for the most elementary rules of safety in bituminous mines* 

Many of the men had carried matches and tobacco and others had 
homemade keys for lighting their own lamps. It was recommended 
that all shots be tamped with clay (not with coal-dust or dirt) 
and that only certain permitted explosives be used. Shots were 


1. Report of the Minister of Mines (Victoria, B. C. 1903) 



' . ■ ; j 


■ r 


i- -. *; • ; [> ; 


■ 




; ■: 






. 




J 




h < 



.iC c- 


v ■ : 





r ■ - ‘ 




: '■ I 


. .. 0 1 

/ .. x, * ' • y* ■ ■ ‘ *■ 

• • r rf-vt i ' 


_ 

. i : ' - ' 




i „ 








S 





15U. 


to be fired only by qualified shotlighters. It was further 
recommended that those who could not read instructions in 
English be excluded — something that has not come to pass even 
to the present. Smoking in the mines stopped abruptly although 
in the following year or two many fines were levied for talcing 
matches into the mines. 

There was some dispute and confusion about whether coal- 
dust itself could initiate an explosion or whether gas exploded 
first igniting the coal-dust. However, copious watering was 
recommended to keep down dust. This was not very practicable 
and rather messy so the rule was not universally observed. The 
3onnetted Clanny lamp used was considered unsafe and mines 
reports show the gradual replacement of these by the safer 
Wolfe lamp. In mines where safety lamps had not been used 
there was great opposition to these lamps on the part of the 
miners. By 1918, however, the mines were using the Edison 
electric lamp almost exclusively, the safety lamp being used only 
by the firebosses for testing for gases in the mine. In the first 
year that safety lamps were required by law in Alberta, the 

number of gas bums to miners was cut from twenty-six to 

1 

thirteen. 

In British Columbia, a new Mines Act came into force in 
1910 prohibiting the employment of women and girls in the mines 


1. Report of the Mines Branch, (Edmonton, Alberta, 1907.) 



, 




l)i l :> 


f 


■fij ■ 












(•• v 





' 





155 


and setting the age limit of boys employed at fourteen years 
for surface work and fifteen years for that underground. However, 
no birth certificates were required so that many a lad who was 
twelve or thirteen when school closed in June would be fifteen 
and working underground by the time school opened in September. 

At the same time greater stress was laid on individual 
safety and mine rescue work. Draeger equipment was supplied and 
first aid classes were organized in 1910. In 1912 a Mine Rescue 
station was established in Femie. The St. John’s Ambulance 
Association became an important factor in the lives of the miners 
from this period onwards. Hundreds of men spent their Sundays 
attending first aid classes and mine rescue and first aid 
competitions were held throughout the Pass. The first large 
competition was held at Femie on July 1, 1916, with over five 
thousand people attending. Many Pass teams later took part 
successfully in Dominion first aid competitions. It was considered 
that, apart from its practical value, the teaching of first aid 
had the further effect of making the men safety conscious — an 
important factor in the prevention of accidents* 

The Bellevue explosion in 1910 served to show how Alberta 
had lagged in safety. Although the cause of the explosion was 
in doubt, it was suspected that the initial blast might have 
been caused by matches found on the body of the most badly burned 
miner.^ No mine rescue equipment was available in Alberta, 


1. Alberta, Report of Mines Branch, (Edmonton, 1910) 





; ' • ■ ' fi 

„ 

. 

, 


!‘H., ..I 1 


. . 


° ... 

■ 




I ;• 5 .' . 

. j '1 






., Oft/ 






... ■ . • , 

7 




* 

■ 

* 




: • • • no’7:i 

■ 


- . . . . i ■ ' - 


. 

' 




:oi; I 




1 • 






0*7 .Oi.» 






. 


■ • 

( ; r:‘ ?: 7-; < \ : ; v 

. 




“ 


. 








. 






; ' QCi - ' 


. 


156 


necessitating teams of “Draegermen" from Hosmer. Apparatus 

was supplied in Alberta after this and in 1913 a railway car 

was equipped as a mine rescue car and was moved around from 

town to town to enable the teams of miners to receive 

1 

instruction in mine rescue work. 

A steady decrease was noted in the quantity of 
explosives used in the Pass area and lists of “permitted ” 
explosives were constantly revised. 

The Iiillcrest explosion showed that mining men were 
now more than ever acutely conscious of the function of coal-dust, 
at least in the "propagation” of explosions. Incombustible dust 
shelf barriers were ordered installed in the mines to prevent 
this “propagation”, especially when it was shown that the dust 
in the mines was of an explosive character. 

The explosions in Femie and Michel in the war years from 
1915 to 1917 showed that the coal dust menace was far from 
conquered. Out of these came further watering of dusty places 
and the spreading of coal ashes to dilute the dust. So important 
was the dust that it masked the real cause of the first Michel 
explosion. It took another explosion, which was localized by 
other means, to show that lightning could skip down rails into 
the mine and ignite gas or dust. 

1. This car is still in use but is “dismounted 1 and 
fixed at Blairmore. 






."•of- •. 

* 

.. o' ’ Oi o r- • 

■ 5 

'lO C.TO 

- 

o 

; 

c.. v o 


f . 1 

' 

' ' 




■ 



.. • .. ... . . ■ ■ •_ ■> ; J ■ i: i f. ■ f»v ff • ' - ' 

# ■ • ■ • ' ■ 

‘ .O -To lXr" k'lfp s ":£* 

.,‘ L - ' . o-- •{ or.l sir. Lwts <'■ 


. • . .. i ' ! '' ' '■ 

, J• •• 

• io o n 

.... 

;.o oic oout (tf 


. , ’ . ; ... o' .'j 

■ ' • ■ ' - 

, . , ; 

.. ... ' ,, :: ; :: ■ 0'T : 


.. ■ .. i r ■ I ■ > 

■ 

• . ■ ■ • " ;; n 
<o 1 ‘ 

. ■ ■ • "■ 

::i . . . tirif-L. -n/.r-c:- :±: V o v:o;.fe v 

; ■ ' 

* • 


157 


The explosions in Hillcrest and Coleman in 1926 have 

proved to be the last that have occurred which are attributable 

to actual mining causes. The steps taken following these 

disasters were the result of experiments carried out in Europe 

and by the United States Bureau of Klines on the explosive 

character of a critical mixture of coal-dust and air. These 

agencies found that non-explosive dusts mixed with coal-dust would 

prevent dangerous concentrations. Finely powdered limestone was 

spread in all dusty areas, especially in the main roadways. 

This system is now standard practice in all the bituminous 

mines and the only explosion since, at Michel in 1938, rather 

proved than disproved the efficacy of the rock-dusting. There 

were only five men in the mine at the time and the two survivors 

were able to testify to seeing lightning running along the rails 

into different parts of the mine. The resultant explosion was 

1 

localized by the limestone dust. All rails were grounded 
immediately and it appears that at long last some measure of 
control has been gained over the greatest danger the miner faces. 
However, with increasing mechanization, has come increased 
dustiness. The workings are watered copiously when coal conveyers 
and other machines are used in dry places. 

Two other phenomena which took heavy toll of lives through 
the years, especially in British Columbia, were gas '’blowouts” and 


1. B. C. Report of the Minister of Mines,(Victoria, 1938). 


; v ,; ; r a. r-j. O/i/i ; . ' tl: )J>:: r :> 0*iV. 

■ ■ ■ ■ ■ : 

« 


t :• 




. 


. ' . . 

■ ' 


t : • 


■;.« v ■ \h hGVO'.O'T 

' ' "■ 

/ ■: . te O' . 

; ' : • ■ { OC S.U OOl 


► 

airoiiirLod-xd oriw 

;.:o:ovi:v .','0 ow4 90’^ *jio> or.to 

■ •; i : i . ’I i • ■ 

, 

* 

.;:-v , . r ^ ■ ' bwt 'ildi 

. 

■ • ■ : . • : . ■ ■ :' ' t ■ 

. . 

• aVCVn' 5 C' i'j’OXlw X-< 0«rf. r ‘-> 

^ . • 

. , ■ f * •' ■. ' ■ : - 

■ ■ . " ' 

. • " * 


- 



158 . 


"bumps"* "Blowouts" were caused by pockets of gas under 
tremendous pressure pushing out coal with explosive force as 
the miners dug closer to them. When six men were killed in 
Fernie in 1928 from this, the Department of Mines announced 
that this was the first time in ten years that lives had been 
lost from this cause, because the number of "blowouts" had 
been decreased by boring twenty feet ahead into the face. As 
this had not been done in the case mentioned, it was then made 
mandatory to bore ahead in all places. Somewhat less trouble has 
been experienced since, but "blowouts" have continued in some 
degree to the present. 

The cause of "bumps" has been a point of dispute for 

many years They usually occur in areas where there is a heavy 

overburden such as in the Elk Valley. Hammerlike blows, often 

2 

of earthquake intensity, shudder through the mine, knocking out 
props and caving in the roof over a large area. They are 
believed to be caused by rigid strata of rock far above the 
coal seams remaining intact when the rocks immediately above 
the seams settle with the removal of the coal. Later pressure 
from above causes these rock seams to shatter with a force 

1* The Canadian Department of Mines and Technical Surveys 
has a team of scientists making an intensive study of 
"bumps" and related subjects in the Pass at present. 

A report should be available shortly. 

2. Seismographs in Spokane were affected by a "bump" 
in Femie in 19U2. 



• ' 








o.r; 












• ' ' ■ . 

■ ' i J.r: • > ■ '■ ' •. • . • ' l :j. ► 

, 

: 

■ 

: . : • , . • . ,, • ■ ' ' • ' 1 ■’ - ' - ' ■■ ‘ • r - 

« 

. 

v.v Vv.v . - v- ••• • ; >‘- T ; ' 

hi; 

■ • • • ' 0 

. 

■ . . ■ ■ ' ' ' ■ " 

* 

. 

: ' ' ' 

* 


. 

• • ,-CiO? ' ■ 




159 


that shakes the whole surrounding area. At first it was 

believed that careless mining was the cause but it is now 

thought that, where there is more than 2,500 feet of overburden, 

"bumping 11 is likely to occur. From the first one in 1906, 

"bumps" have occurred at Coal Creek with monotonous regularity. 

In the early- years it was stated that a "bump" in No. 1 East 

mine could be felt in Femie, Morrissey and Hosmer. Again 

in 1921 the British Columbia government reported that " ^umps 1 2 

2 

merely blew out a few hundred feet of roadway." Finally in 
1935* following two "bumps", the inside part of the No. 1 East 
mine was abandoned and only the outside portion worked. In 
I9I4I, seventeen "more serious" bumps were recorded so the 
company decided, in 19U2, to open a new mine, the Elk River 
Colliery, one mile west and to abandon No. 1 East as the new 
mine developed. The new tunnel is much higher up the mountain 
and to the present time, no "bumps" have occurred, giving 
support to the theory that great depth rather than poor mining 
practice is the cause. 

No "bumps" have occurred in the short-fault mines of the 
Alberta side, but as these mines attempt to extract coal at 

1. Called "violent relief stresses" in Conditions and 

Occurrences in the Canadian Coal Mining Industry , 

A. ignatief et al. Canadian Mining Journal” Ottawa, 

Vol* 72, October 1951« 

2. B. C., Report of the Minister of Mines, (Victoria, 1921) 








. 

1 













.. » ■ ■ 1 


: • •• • nl 

. 


■ 

1 ■ 

• 




• 

■ . . . 

- 

. • O'.- , .!?/■;. : : 


• r-.. / SQ 


•' O ’ ‘l ' 



• . v : : t 

- 

■ ' 

* 





* 


M 

• • / . , • t 

• x l ’ ' ' * 

• 

or-, ■' i r’j Oij- t} r :o r ? r ;:.r o 


* 


'i . ' .0; ' >: ' 




v.' • ;: L- rrc-’o- < 



; 

. " ' V:i ' ' 

... 

* * » 

. ‘ 




160 , 


new deep levels it will be of interest to see whether ’‘bumping' 1 2 

1 

will occur, Michel has experienced but one “bmp” and that 
in 19U8* 

In considering the accidents which can happen, it is 

worth noting that fires, usually of spontaneous origin, have 

occurred in the mines without explosions resulting. From 1913 

on, Corbin was fighting constantly to keep ahead of fires, 

Mien the property was closed, several of the mines had already 
2 

been abandoned. A fire broke out in Coal Creek mine in 1918, 
but it was soon checked. Michel was forced to seal off an 
abandoned mine Y/hich started to burn in 1937* Not long after 
this, flames burst out on a main slope in the International mine 
at Coleman while the men were on shift, necessitating the 
flooding of a considerable portion of the mine. Blairmore had 
a similar experience when a fire broke out in the Greenhill 
mine near the surface in October, 1 9k3* The area was sealed off 
in April, 19UU* after attempts were made to choke off the fire 
with dry ice. Although none of these fires proved disastrous there 
was great danger in each case of the loss of the whole mjne had 
the fires been uncontrolled. 

1. The International Mine in Coleman has vrorked down 
pitch to a cover of 2300 feet, the deepest in Western 
Canada at present. 

2. No. k was closed in 1917 and No. 6 in 193h* 











*'f 0 














v 


■ 


: : 


* 

I 


. 




. 





. . . 

4 

; ■ " ... 

vU£:u .:: 


. ' •; n^nreloO 

.1.. : i ... V'iU.-.'i M /UlH)OOI‘X 


OOCD ! ) 




l . > : 


ion 









, . : . :. • ■ ■ 











ft a > 

ff-; r o «.tQSR|^0i 



■ 

... ■ ' - 

,. 

. 





161 


Meanwhile, the mines departments were constantly 

stressing safety in other ways and, as the miners had opposed 

the use of the Wolfe safety lamp, so did they resist attempts 

to make them wear safety helmets (which all miners now use), when 

they were introduced in 193U# It took persistent propaganda on 

the part of the officials to convince the men that these hats 

would save lives. The same opposition occurred when goggles, 

knee caps and hard-toed shoes were advocated® The miner is a 

practical man who does not like to have anything heavy on his 

head or limbs when he is working and is also somewhat conservative 

in his resistance to n new-fangled" ideas. Proof was not long In 

1 

coming that these new ideas were worth while® 

The mines inspectors and management have tried to cut 
down accidents in many ways. All through the reports of the mines 
branches of both provinces runs a story of accidents followed by 
attempts to remove the cause. More and more of these recommendations 
were incorporated into the respective Mines Acts, including 
regulations on blasting, ventilation and testing for gases. On 
haulage particularly, there are many rules, for most of the 
accidents occur in that branch of mining. There were also rigid 
regulations on hours of work and many other seemingly ordinary 

1. One mining company hung a crushed helmet in the 
lamp room with a notice telling the miners how 
one of their comrades had been protected by it. 






V •, :J ' ) ' 1 - v .' 

ru. .... C v\ ' ■< 






. 










. 

■ 




■ 


- «' • ..v: • iv:: :•• '•••: ; 

: V-.O : : ' - •' 

, ■ . :: . 

: ’ ' ' 

V ■ • - 

, 




, 1 tooqf/: ' ■ ' ’ ■ • 

■ I - - ' • ' ■ 

! : ' < - ■ • ' 

. .. ;i : C. ‘ ^ ^ ^CWjj 

. ' . \ j_ . . • ■■ • , • ' • ~ •- ' ’ 


. 

• ■ 0 


. 



' 


’ 


* 

, • .... -kt ' ' ' " ' ' m 





162 


acts of mining. The miners themselves have forced a goodly 
number of these regulations on the official or have negotiated 
them in the agreements. However, when pressure is great, many 
of these rules are disregarded, especially by the younger men 
who would rather do a job the quickest rather than the safest 
way. This is why the death and accident rate is greater on the 
haulage than in other occupations in the mine, for most of the 
young men are employed here. Regardless of what ^precautions 
may be taken to prevent accidents, mining will remain a hazardous 
business as long as men must go into the earth to extract coal* 

The first step in reducing the cost per ton is 
generally the introduction of coal-cutting machinery. Because of 
the steep pitch of many of the mines, coal was rather easy to 
extract by the use of chutes for loading, so that coal-cutting 
and loading machinery was much later in appearing in the Pass 
than on the flat seams of the prairies. This does not mean that 
coal-cutting machinery was not known in the area, but that its 
actual use in day to day mining dates from but a few years back* 
Perhaps part of the reason was the difficulty of working with 
machines on the pitch, where gravity tends to pull the cutters 
back from the face. 

However, certain types of machines were used early* 
Compressed air engines or "dinkies” were in operation in nearly 
all mines between 1906 and 1916 for hauling coal cars, while 





. 

_ 


, 


3 'j'f- 




o 




;•/, i £ r ' 


i 0 


::a' i-.'ij;.- :;'> / rX''T • 

>i «& n:b’>! s^*x li 

■■...■ • • 


' 


• 'i f: <■ 


■ 

( ' • . 

■ 


* ■ 

■ ; ’ >;, • : . » - 
n(V : r; 

■- .J;J,.v; t . ■: ='i ; - '• ; " ru 

. 


. 'ifjrti: 

. 


• o-x I r ::r,2% v,sx r, -i/c,. 

■ 


- 

• '. • " ' - ' 

■ • tiro* 

■ •»*'• <ao,I/ JjjJ/vt'OB 

: o ..'-r •• -sxi 


. ■ ■ oe •. ' - : 


■ 



163 


large electric hoists were used for bringing cars up the slopes. 
Attempts were made to use coal-cutting machines in British 
Columbia, especially at Michel in 1913 9 and airpicks were used 
in Hosmer. There were only five cutters in Femie and Michel 
by 1923 and none at all in 1927- Apparently they did not pay 
their way. Corbin used devices called Shuveloaders in 192iw 
No machines for cutting or loading were employed on the eastern 
side which had the steepest pitch in 1913 but by 192U airpicks 
were common and Blairmore and Coleman were using conveyors. 

In 1931 and subsequent years, the Crow*s Nest Pass Coal 
Company embarked on a large scale switch to mechanization. This 
included coal-cutting machines, loaders and conveyors along the 
face and was tried, first at Michel and later at Coal Creek. The 
changeover also entailed training the miners in a new type of 
mining. In 1938 it was noted in the report of the inspector of 

1 

mines that great difficulty was being experienced in this training. 

The saucer-shaped seams of the Elk Valley were much 
better adapted to mechanization than the steeply pitching seams 
of the Alberta mines. However, the seams of the Adanac mine 
south of Bellevue averaged only about ten degrees of pitch, a 
fact which. influenced the West Canadian Collieries to try 

1. 3. C. Report of the Minister of Mines. Many old miners 

considered the new method of a single row of props 
behind the machines to be too dangerous© 


i . ' {.; •: ' > • ' 


: ■ : • 




. ■ 


' 


' ' . ■ 

'>o !;■; ::ivo v. J 9.fr -B al. 


. . . • 


ml ' ■ • ' ■ ' ' ' - ' ■ 

... ! . .. •' 

■ - ■ ■ 


• .. v . : : *: 




■ 


lj •' J ' ' - • • " ■' ■ ' 


. ■ ■■ ' ’ - 

■ 


S 



machinery there first. Loaders were introduced in 19UU and by 
19 U7 duck-bill loaders, hoists, cutters and conveyors were in 
full use. 

Another development which tends to increase production 
is strip mining. At first this was attempted only at Corbin*s 
Big Showing. In 1912 an attempt to take off the overburden 
with water from hoses failed but a more successful attempt was 
made in 191? when a steam shovel was used for loading. It was 
an attempt to use gasoline shovels and 'White trucks in 1932^ and 
after, that set off the strike which ended in the closing of 
the mine. In 19b3, when the demand for coal was great, the 
Consolidated Fining and Smelting Company hired Frank 0* Sullivan 
of Lethbridge to mine the Corbin outcrop, and, with the machinery 
then available, roads were built, the overburden removed by 
bulldozers and the coal, after being blasted, was loaded by 
giant Euclid loaders into trucks which hauled it to the railway. 
Later, the Fred Mannix Company, specialists in this type of 
operation, undertook the work at Corbin and at other places where 
stripping was practicable. In 19ii5, stripping operations were 
commenced at Blairmore and in 19U7 at Michel. By 19U7 Blairmore 
was working the outcrop seams of the old Lille property on 
Grassy Mountain while both Coleman companies were stripping to the 
north of McGillivray mine and along York Creek. The Hillcrest 


I. In former attempts, coal cars on rails were used, 




1 . . 

. ■ 

a ' ■ • ■ 

. 

„ 

>'.>•: ' ' c v 1 ■■ : Oi" - ' - ! ■ ■ ‘ 

lo ^nxR.olD eric* tfi 

1 

• - 

vc : .j: v > - .!iCfio on^ . ;; 

• r 

„ 

'.■O : ;V> ; ; ' 

) 

t. 


. , • •.: •) <’ V; 

- 

* 

♦ . 

■ ■ 

... . . v:7 U > 

: • .. .. . ' - O'/r; • - > 

4 . * -, ' * 

• • .... ' . O-i. > 

- 

■ .■ . ■ ■ sofaJ 

. , . ••••: - 

. 

■ ' 


J .0. .O.V. W ; ;:o 

- 

.... .0 



16 ? 


Mohawk Company started a strip mine high on Tent Mountain near 
the British Columbia boundary and are at present hauling the 
coal from this Glacier Strip by highway to Bellevue, twenty- 
five miles away. 

Coming from an outcrop, strip coal is not of the 
cleanest. So, when orders are short the surface activities are 
curtailed. Consequently, there has hitherto been little labor 
opposition to the development. Because of the nature of the 
seams with their steep pitch, stripping cannot be carried on 
profitably at any great depth. Deeper coal must be mined as 
before. 

All companies have made great changes in the methods of 
preparing coal for the market in the past fifty years. Tipples 
were built almost as soon as the seams were prospected. The 
first structures were mainly of wood and were merely devices to 
facilitate loading into railway cars of what amounted to "mine-run” 
coal. It is rather an odd fact that no matter how bad the future 
of the industry appeared, the companies never lost faith and 
continued to spend huge sums in the improvement of their plants 
even in such apparently hopeless times as the depression. Tipples 
would be burnt down only to be rebuilt, always on a grander scale 
with more elaborate equipment. 

In order to produce coal clean enough for coke-making, 
both Lille and Hosmer used "wet" washers, i.e. those using the 



' 













■. • t ■ ■ • 1 : 



i 


' *10 

: J. • *1 '• ■ 

■ ■ j 

. ri < • 

iLs i ' 

. 

. : • 1 : ' 

. liQJJ 

L 


' ' ' 

■; ■ 

■ 


- 

. ' • x i ! • 

n ■ 









166 


principle of flotation in fluids, but this was only for slack 
coal, and both plants disappeared with the closing of their 
mines. Mine reports and prospectuses always mentioned new 
tipples, usually with statistics on the number of tons of coal 
that could be handled per hour or shift. Amount and not quality 
was the requirement of the early days because the railways 
accepted “mine-run" coal. Up to World War I, the improvements 
in coal processing virere generally in screening it to several 
different sizes. Rock was picked out by hand as the coal 
passed over picking tables. This process was used in Bellevue*s 
new tipple in 1908 and generally in all mines by the war*s end. 

In the period between the wars ’’dry" washers were 
introduced which cleaned the coal by air blast. Blairmore’s 
Greenhill mine installed one in 192k, McGillivray in Coleman in 
1926 and other mines in quick succession afterwards. The towns 
were soon practically smothered in coal-dust. This caused 
citizens to petition the companies to find some way to keep the 
dust out of the atmosphere, but nothing was done."*" 

The "wet" washer may be recognized in the reports by 
reference to "jigs”, the name given to the actual washing device. 
Mr. Vissac, formerly of the West Canadian Collieries at BTairmore, 

1. Coleman and Michel suffered more than the other towns 
because the residential area is close to the plants but 
recently, the Blairmore council made representations to 
the West Canadian Company with a similar negative result. 


'10 




lcao:chiso 


loo- 


J.VXJ}.*' V? >'• I. vw V *•*•'• 

, rxnvfXXo-x en- 
0 jaoino'v nxcoi: ■?** 
InxovGG po dr 


t r i 


' 

C.VBh V\H‘"X9 

jl r iCK- o«t qU 


■ ■ 


$n-: n: 


i3 "Cirro-G 


. 


f.- J • /v; r ; v ' • ; \ XX I : ; ' lx ‘ ' ' - 

ri ,,\?ib n • r.xnw CM..j neev/jed box-isq 
f>:: : iv • I:.;.: Togo God' benxelo id: 

' 

, r n .) Xx.onoo.- ^oixrp n.c. ggig 

... 


g:!: rnriolcb ni* 


ori'd nonX ort oxor 9 Kk>3 


: o . ; 


1*0x1 id; >a dxj( 


VGG 




v'6 e^ioq&’i Grid' nr 
«.nx'-rr; pnbu3xvr 

, . - : 


ixtMod GG.d'TO 9dd nxn 
Jg/c sdxxla odd* o.t ggo 
: ■ ■ ■ ' ; 

1 '• - : - 


IXonnoo xiorx/..cxiX 
:e x xIXxg: ns 


b ns . ol 

9 


167 


devised a jig which was very successful in washing Crow^ Nest 
Pass coal in order to cut the percentage of ash down to the 
maximum permitted by the railways at the present tirne,^’ 

The new tipple started in Corbin in 1926 housed one 
of the most modem wet washing plants. When the plant was 
burned down just as it was completed in 1928, the job had to be 
done all over again. In 193U* wet washers were in operation at 
Blairmore and Coleman with Vissac jigs and English Baum jigs. 

In 1936 a Vissac jig was put into the Mohawk plant in Bellevue, 

The British Columbia coal is somewhat cleaner than that 
of Alberta so the company delayed the installation of cleaning 
machinery until 1932, when Michel installed a dry washer. The 
low clinker point proved to be a blessing, as it made Michel 
coal particularly useful for automatic stokers. The manufacture 
of stoker coal was probably one reason why the air cleaning 
plant was purchased. In 1936 three Vissac jigs were added and 
when the tipple was burned down in 1937, the whole plant was 
rebuilt with the latest in wet washing equipment. The new Elk 
River plant was built with the most modem wet washing jigs 

in 19U3* 

The Michel mine had ten by-product ovens built in 1938 
and ten more were installed a year later. The only product saved 

1. 15%. There are many difficulties associated with coal 

washing which are too technical for discussion here. 


! ,, ' *' if: ■ r.i'-UX v'JU ■ ■■ i tu 1 


• i,,; i ; . or i.'. ‘10 i; v > rf.:. ■ ■ ■•" i fsii.'f Ji;.i 


, I'd , 

■ 

.. - 

. 

, 


,s buB.i:vsb. 

• .. 

. . ' \ , ■ ■ £ ■ - 5 

■ • r r .\r;; ' > 

■ ;;y, ■■ -o ■) j; , fiv.ub Jb ?irrsid 

. 

c i i:. p; r'' -l ■' •• bo:! n! 








■ ' .v 


: 

* 




I P . . . £ • , ' 

, ’ ; c • : ■ '' 

: : ... ;v-y •• .■ ' j-fii or ■ xroL 

' 

, ■ ■ . ■ J,; ; • ' . - • - : ' ' ' '• >r ' " 

. ' . 

' - ' D ' 1 

s 

; , : ■ :• , ' . • :• v • ' : • ' ' ' " 1 ’ ’ ' ' 

* 

: ■ •• . 


. > 1 ■ -e ; ■ ' ■ 

■ 


• * 

» ■ ■ ' - ■■ ■ ■’ ■ : ■■ - ■ • " ■ " 






168 


was the tar, which was sold for road building. The coal gas 
was used at first as fuel for Buick engines which operated 
the machinery, but, proving corrosive, it is now used only 
to preheat the ovens. 

With the demand of the railways for less and less 
11 fines" in their coal, the problem of securing a market for the 
very fine coal washed out as a soupy mud called "slurry”, became 
quite a pressing one. Coleman and Michel used some of it for 
coking, but the rest, and that from mines with no coke-making 
facilities, was pi3.ed in great heaps* The slurry is useful for 
steam plants utilizing pulverized coal, but the cost of drying 
is excessive and it is permitted to dry in the open. With the 
windy weather common in the Pass it takes little imagination to 
realize that the dust of the dry washers now has competition. 

Dry washers worked in shifts but slurry piles were available 
twenty-four hours a day. Blairmore experimented with briquettes. 
Taking this fine coal and mixing it with oil the company pressed 
it into lumps of nut size. Since 19U7, the plant has been 
turning out large quantities of a product for which there is a 
good market. The West Canadian Company is the only one at 
present producing briquettes in the Pass. 



' ' ‘ . 

• ■ • ■ ' 

' ' ' - ’ ’ 

' ' • 

■ ■ ■ ■ • - ■ ■ • - 

. . : 

. ; . : • . ' ' '• ' ■ : ■ 


- :- '■t c .U : -• ■ o. 

, \ . . - 

. i . I ' : 


. ' ’ 

91 A J . 

. ■ 


■ ' : ■ • ' ' ' ■ ■ ’ 

,/ ! - . » :yT - - :i • • 

-x B ::■/ r:--SK rJ: ruri 



169 


CHAPTER 15 

MINERS* UNIONS AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 

Being the only large industrial body in Alberta 
that is widely distributed and yet capable of being organized 
into a tight union, the coal miners have always been in the 
forefront of the fight to improve conditions of work and living. 
Although this is not so true of British Columbia,"*" the coal 
miners there have played an important part also. Miners* unions, 
by virtue of the fact that they are often the first to fight on 
certain issues, have always been looked upon as excessively 
radical by the people in general. Yet many of these same people 
have benefitted by the advances of the miners, as any gains are 
nearly always granted to other industries once the principle has 
been accepted. Consequently, the miners can point proudly to the 
achievements of organized labor and show that they have been first 
to set the pattern in such issues as union recognition, collective 
bargaining, improved conditions of work and other things.- The 
Mines Acts, which are the rulebooks of mining, are in large part 
the list of demands made originally by the miners. 

Union leadership has often been unreasonable and far too 
radical but the operators themselves have not always been above 
reproach. If the miners of the Crow’s Nest Pass were responsible 


1. The metal miners have dominated the scene in B. C. 



* , r 


170, 


for causing the passing of the Lemieux Act dealing with industrial 

relations in 1907,^ it was the Hill crest Goal Company which was 

first fined under that act for an illegal lockout in 1908. It 

was General Manager Tonkin who in Femie in 1902 added the number 

of those who did not vote to those who voted against an eight 

hour day clause in order to get a sufficient number to overcome 

the majority which had voted in favor. He said that those who 

did not vote were evidently satisfied with the situation as it 

was. In 1909 the United Mine Workers of America was bitterly 

denounced by the press and all 11 decent citizens” for passing a 

2 

"remarkable resolution" permitting Asiatics to join their union. 

Unions were not encouraged by the companies but local 

unions managed to appear very early in Femie. The Western 

Federation of Miners, which had been formed for the metal miners 

at Rossland in 189?, expanded into the eastern British Columbia 

coal area in 1902, forming District No. 7# When the United Mine 

Workers of America appeared they claimed the coal miners and 

3 

organized District 18 in 1903. The W. F. M., which became 
extremely socialistic, was soon involved in a bitter juris¬ 
dictional fight causing the strike of mines and railways which 

1. Logan, H. A* History of Trade Union Organization in 
Canada (Chicago: U. oT~Chicago Press, 1928). This“ 
book and idem, cited below supply most of the 
information for this chapter. 

2. Fernie Free Press Feb. 13, 1909. 

3. Femie was the first local of the U.M.W.A. in Canada. 









f' • ■ / 


IT. 









• . . . . 





171 


led to the passing of the Lemieux Act* The W. F. M. was so badly- 
weakened by the strike that it agreed in 1908 to leave the 
coal mines to the U.M.W.A. but continued to function in the 
metal mines* 

An even more radical organization, the International 
Workers of the World, threatened the U.M.W.A* just before the 
war of 191U, but its power declined as a result of its 
disastrous Grand Trunk Railway strike in 1913 and it was banned 
in 1918 because it was controlled by a foreign-bom executive, 
some members of which were enemy aliens* This union made a 
strong bid to oust the U.M.W.A. following the eight month strike 
fiasco in 1911, but the original union weathered the storm and 
was instrumental in negotiating the high wage awards of the war 
period. 

In 1919 the One Big Union appeared. This was a class 
union opposed to production for profit and favoring the Russian 
"social experiment"When District 18 went on strike against 
a wage reduction in May, 1919> the O.B*U. became active and the 
whole of District 18 changed allegiance so that the U.M.W.A. 
charter was revoked. The new District No. 1 O.B.U. found the 
companies aligned with the U.M.W.A. and wage increases of 13 
per cent were given to those who returned to work and signed 
the check-off for dues to the U.M.W.A.. By August, several locals 


1. Logan, op. cit. p. 190 













^tS-CT 







172 


had rejoined District 18. There was tremendous bitterness and 

much intimidation, but one wage increase after another, up to a 

total of $2*50 a day by October, 1919, finally caused the defeat 

of the O.B.U.,^ but at great expense to the U.M.W.A.. There was 

wholesale discrimination and many of the O.B.U. supporters 

were forced from their jobs* 

The operators, once the menace of radicalism was 

removed,, regretted their generosity and tried to force wages 

down. A strike in 1922 staved off a reduction but another strike 

followed further demands by the companies in 192U. The demand had 

been for a fifty per cent reduction but the union settled for a 

fifteen per cent decrease* However, the Crow*s Nest Pass Coal 

Company kept its Coal Creek mines closed until the miners accepted 

a further fifteen percent cut and broke with the union. Michel, 

Blairmore and Coleman followed suit and the United Mine Workers 

retired from the field with a badly depleted treasury. "The 

defection from the international was engineered by the communists 

capitalizing on the general unrest and dissatisfaction, but 

basically the cause of the trouble was wage reduction imposed 

upon men whose union had coached them well in holding the line 

2 

but had not prepared them to stand with it in compromise. 11 

1. Logan believes that the 192U defection was the 
settling of old scores from this strike. 

2. Logan, H. A. Trade Unions in Canada (Toronto: MacMillan, 
19U8), p. 197. 




. d ' 


,-u J/'-r. • ( 



lira 














173 


The miners in each of the towns set up their own unions 
which were much too weak to deal with the operators successfully. 
In 1925, the Mine Workers Union of Canada was formed with the 
idea of giving Canada a national union and the locals of the 
Crow's Nest Pass were soon affiliated with it. Because it was 
not recognized by the operators as a bargaining agent the M.W.U.C. 
benefitted the miners little. In 1931, the Workers' Unity League, 

"the general representative in Canada of the Red International 

1 

of labor unions with headquarters in Moscow", gained control of 

the M.W.U.C. and precipitated a series of strikes to force its 

recognition in the Pass. The lack of any marked success along 

this line caused many M.W.U.C. locals to rejoin the U.M.W.A. 

when the Alberta Federation of Labor called a conference in 

Calgary in 1936. Coleman, which had split from the union in 
2 

1932, rejoined the International in 1939. Throughout the second 
war the U.M.W.A. was in control, generally following the pattern 
set by John L. Lewis in the United States, in defiance of the law 
occasionally, but usually was more moderate than its U. S. 
counterpart. 

The list of gains made by the miners in the fifty years 
of union activity is impressive and in most of these they were the 
pioneer industry. The eight hour day was fixed shortly after 1902 

1. ibid. p.3Ul. 

2. See above p. 108 



17U. 

in British Columbia and in 1909 in Alberta. By 1911 the 
checkweighman or checkmeasurer was accepted as was the 
"make-up" principle.^ 

The constant battles of the coal unions were instrumental 
also in getting the Labor Acts passed in the two provinces, which, 
while laying down procedure for bargaining, ipso facto accepted 
the principle. Conditions of picketing, striking, negotiation, 
arbitration and other labor matters were set out so that other 
industries would receive the benefits of the precedents set 
by the miners. 

One development unique in the Pass is the Pit Committee. 
Acting as a grievance committee, this group irons out small 
matters with the management so that they do not become union 
issues. Because of these committees, walkouts of single mines 
or short strikes for trivial reasons have been practically 
non-existent since 1932. This does not hold for the lignite 
fields of Alberta. 

Probably one of the most important reforms growing out 
of the persistent efforts of the miners was that of workmen*s 
compensation. From the earliest times negligence had to be 
proved on the part of the employers in courts of law before 
workers or dependents could sue for compensation for injuries 

1. Checkweighmen are men paid by the union to ensure honest 
weighing of coal, while "make-up" is a type of minimum 
wage for contract miners. 



' . ' ' . ' •• • 

t> ... ■ n ■ .v •' Ik-. oil vv ' ■ !:•.&* > t £*?•;{ .U.; 

: ; n.>i: :r- i. •h- r 'h.; ha ' h-h < C'ri'X 

.0 ' • i j. ■ 

, . • . -m, • ' . ' '■ ' 

. . • 

or-ifk/o • • iid iip, v u 1 

. ■ . 


: , . V - V . .v: : • 

X - .. > ' '• 

: ■ ' 


, : •' . . i i 


oj* 




cfX i i ■ v .. 


; * ■ 

: Io:h - - » " •' **■ ' ■ • ' 1r ,J '' :0U;:; * K> 

. . .. ' , . ■ >‘. 


• • J *X fid X 

• ! - • j ■. ; • ■ ; ■ ' ' ■ ' ■ ' 

. : - * 

i--,o'.r.:.d v. V> hn.ur>ahh: r■w^olqrie arid *Xo 6 */.zq bAS.* 

, ' '• ' : - ; ' : h ; 


:t ; I 

N.f-.Tl/Ii'iar'lOO 
no bovcm? 

■ ■. 


h,,onon ■:on ono on hh'; 

: :? .hi;: ho :'h • c-c’ 

. 


■ 

t X 

, o . oh l.o o'- h f : 





175 


or death. As the workman concerned or the widow would be 
least able to take such action, the unions very early fought 
the cases for them. Each award given as a result of the Hillcrest 
explosion of 19lU was a separate court order. 

The commission investigating the depression in the 
coal industry in 1907 considered that this condition was 
intolerable, but the situation was not changed until the Workmen*s 
Compensation Acts were passed in 1917 in British Columbia and 
in 1918 in Alberta. For disability pensions and compensation 
the companies were assessed according to their accident rate, 
thus encouraging the promotion of safety measures by the 
employers. The cost of medical aid in the treatment of injuries 
was at first met by a small levy on the miners but this was 
added to the operators* costs in 19hh in Alberta and in 19)46 in 
British Columbia." The acts have been broadened greatly since 
their introduction and about 19)40 silicosis v/as recognized as 
ccmpensatable in Alberta and the existing law on that disease was 
extended to coal mines in British Columbia in 19)43* The unions 
continue to press for more extensive coverage and higher 
disability pensions. 

The second world war saw further improvement in the 
conditions of work. In 19U3j the five-day week was inaugurated, 

1. Canada, Report of the Commission on Coal Justice 
Carroll et al. '(Ottawa/ Kingfe Printer, 19U6) 
shows these costs to be 11$ of the payroll 
compared to $\% in Nova Scotia, p. 29U* 







■ 


. 


C.i » i’\ 






* 

9fi.’ fu' • -•?) . v in - • rr 




. 

n ■v,. •• 1 >’ • 

. \r< l 

z:o.b:M',iis.. la c ■ !-?>."... r :>.' i 


, . p _ X , 1 :: 

■ 

. 

■ . . . , £ mo: ■ 


;; ; , , ;r,! •:/. ; , I ' rv i ■ - ’ ' - ' * 

, •. 04 : ni . • ■ -■ . ’ ' ' 

■ .... . ■' ' ' ■ 

. ■ . • ■ ' ' ' 

. 

, 

. t 

' ’ ■ • 

;■ > „.k : - ;: : • •' :: 

* ' • 



176. 


following a strike which won the wages of six days for the five 
to be worked* In 19U6, a welfare fund was set up by union 
agreement to pay a pension to those incapacitated by non- 
compensatable injuries or illnesses by means of a levy of a certain 
sum for each ton of coal mined# The miner who is "burnt out" before 
reaching pensionable age under the Old Age Pensions Act is given 
a pension and those unable to-work, but with a small compensation 
allowance, have their pensions made up to the full sum. In 1950 
this was $75 per month. 

The most recent advance for the miners was the granting 
of two weeks holidays with pay, which was quickly followed by an 
Alberta act making holidays with pay standard in all Industries. 

The idea was not new but had been put forward by miners for many 
years. In fact, the reports of the British Columbia Department 
of Fines in the early twenties carry a suggestion by one of the 
Crow’s Nest Pass mines inspectors that holidays with pay would be 
a good way to cut down absenteeism by giving the men something 
to work for.'*' 

Perhaps it may appear that the unions have advanced too 
quickly and demanded too much, but past experience has shown that 
the miners are merely ahead of the times — as the Chartists 
were over a century ago. 


1. The agreement has a clause requiring that a certain 
percentage of shifts be worked before the holidays 
are granted. 



177 


CHAPTER 16 
THE PEOPLE 

Of all the towns in the Crow’s Nest Pass, only Femie 
is predominantly British in origin. A close study of the school 
population was made by the writer, through the cooperation of 
the principals of the schools, in order to determine the per¬ 
centages of the different national groups in the general population. 
It was assumed that the relation between the national origins of 
the children would give a reasonably accurate picture. The 
calculation was made more difficult by the amount of inter¬ 
marriage and in order to avoid confusion, the original nationality 
of the father (or his father if the former were Canadian bom) 
was noted. The origin of the mother was not considered. 

The survey through the schools was necessary because 
the census figures do not give a true picture.'*’ For example, the 
census lists a great number of Austrians when there are really 
very few. The people generally classify themselves according to 
the language they speak rather than by the nation controlling 
their home area. A person speaking the Ukrainian language might 
have been successively Austrian, Romanian, German or Russian 
while another speaking the same language might be called Polish. 
Czechs and Slovaks also consider themselves as distinct 

1. See Appendix Tables I, II and III. 





; i : 


. . • 1 ’ . i • ' ' ' 

- 

.. • • 






* • • • ■ • • • ' V ' ■ 

. . . 


: 


S> . 


rj • 

• ' . ■ 


■ ■ ' 

, 

\v. : v ■ 

' ' ' ■ • ' 

■ . 


. 


. 








1 , .-:o‘ ■ ■ 

* ' 

. ’ ' ' 


■ 


. 


; 




■ 











178 


1 

nationalities although the children become confused occasionally* 

Furthermore, because the districts around the towns as well 

as the unorganized communities are all lumped together into one 

district, it is almost impossible to get any idea of the population 

of places like Bellevue and Michel* The schools in each town 

2 

accommodate the children of the surrounding “tax colonies" and 
a relation between towns including these places may be seen by 
considering the size of the school enrollment* 

Two large language groups dominate the Pass towns* The 
Slavs, consisting of Russians, Poles, Ukrainians, Yugo-Slavs, 
Czechs and Slovaks are the largest group, while all the people 
originating from the British Isles together with Americans and 
Eastern Canadians, form the other* The Italians form a sizeable 
proportion of the population in all the towns* There are many 
other nationalities represented* In fact, the census taker in 
Blairmore in 19l*l stated that there were at least 33 nationalities 
in that town alone* 

The English-speaking population is made up noticeably 
of those who came from raining areas* The Eastern Canadians are 
largely from Nova Scotia, the Welsh from South Wales, the English 
from Lancashire and Yorkshire and the Scots from Stirlingshire and 

1* One girl claimed Czech origin while her brother 
said that he was a Slovak* 

2* These little unorganized sections which are "of the 

town but not in it" are characteristic of mining towns* 

See below p. 18U* 


* ' ■ • • ' 

’ 

I , • 4 

. 


■ 


■we ode % 

■ • .r ■ :;■{=.+ -.'.T 



■ 

■ ' ‘ 

* 


• 


, ... V. • ' • 



■ ; . 1 • 

, • - ; ■ 

■ 


, . ' 

, : *r. -i-J. - 



: ; VO. 1 ! . ' • ; - : taG 

.'.my: tie iv 

- v: 


■ ' . i ti ' ■ > 

ricui i' m’Jiol r.Li J :l 

, 1 c ... 

. 

- 

* 



• • ■ . > no • 


t 

. 

•v r; :lvri.K) 


JB ' •‘Anr. 

Jiifi 

b’-'doCTH .iV^.r j 




* ■ ■ 


,• ■ : V . .. . . ■ ■ - ' - • ■ '■ ^ : 

. , v; ’ !'-OV : " V ' : 

• • ' • . • • ■ ' ■ 

■ 

* 

„ \ ' ' ‘ 

' ■ ' • 


179 


Fifeshire — all coal mining areas* The French and Belgians 
conform to this pattern also but the other peoples do not* 

Although many of the Slav people lived near mining areas, very 
few of them ever worked in mines before coming to Canada.. Most 
European immigrants are of peasant stock. 

These European peoples are prone to stay together in 
groups. There are large Polish and Ukrainian groups in Coleman 
and small ones in Blairmore. There are a few Czechs in Coleman 
and a larger number in Blairmore and Frank. Michel and Bellevue 
have a large Slovak group while Hillcrest 1 s population shows 
quite a concentration of Ukrainians. Most Italians are found in 
Coleman, Femie and Michel, while, because of the French origin of 
the West Canadian Company, most of the French and Belgians live in 
Blairmore. These national groups are not only from the same country 
but very often from the same part of it. A map made by some 
students a few years ago shoY/ed that almost all of the Slovak 
people in Coleman came from two small areas in Czecho-Slovakia.^ 
Until the arrival of the Polish Veterans and Displaced Persons 
following 19U5, there were very few persons from eastern Poland 
in the Pass* Younger people of Polish origin, who spoke only a 
dialect, had much difficulty in understanding the new arrivals. 

The larger the group, the more likely the people are to 
live in close proximity to each other. Coleman vras unique in this 

1. Under guidance of the writer as a social studies 
project. 






. 










V 1 f( 


. 


■ * : ’ 


■ 






yf 

■ ■ : 


- •;: ' 11 ’ v ! 


I ■ >; ■ ■ ' 


■ 


1 




: fi , <3 


* 






180 , 


regard. West Coleman was "Slavtown", Second Street was 
"Italiantown" and East Coleman was the home of most of the 
Poles and Ukrainians. SLairmore's "Cement-town” was the home of 
most of its Italian population. This zoning is not nearly as 
distinct as it was twenty-five years ago as second and third 
generation couples move into the better, less crowded 
residential areas. 

Many of the old timers believe that there were very few 

"foreigners" in the Pass in the early days and lists of school 

children published in the early newspapers seem to bear this 

out. However, when John Buiko formed his Canadian Uniori^ in 1909, 

a list of members, mostly Slavic, was published in the Coleman 

Miner . It shows many of the names so common today in the Pass. 

In fact the Coleman publisher put out a short-lived newspaper — 

2 

Slavok Canadie , printed in Slovak to appeal to the foreign bom. 
Many issues of the Pass newspapers contained appeals in French, 
Italian or Polish to get the "issues" before the people* 

Probably the reason the non-English-speaking group did 
not make much of an impression at first was their habit of 
coming singly, in contrast to the more English method of 
immigrating as a family. Consequently, on examining the school 

1. This attempt to form a national union was not 
important but the list of members was complete 
and is of value in this connection. 

2. The spelling varies from issue to issue in the 
Coleman and Blairmore newspapers. 






. 

- 


■ 1 • 1 


■ ■■ 

. 

’ : . \ ; 


• 

L 

' • ; > ■ 


' 


: • -V,. ■ , . n .. v, ■ :';f- j'.' . ’& Li , 



, 

. - . xi 




, 




• 






'iiiCO o<3 : 


• ' ■ 

■ 







. 

» 

rJ: xnbo;> ro> o 





. 


<rs:j < • 


, ' ■ ' t . ' ■' - ' 

v r:,'v !•■ • ■ 1 



• 


* . 


. , : . • .. . ; V / • V ■ : :X . • ' j: • ' >'i- 


J t 

X -ft 

• 


. 




■ 

•' ' O ' , 


r; . ■ ■ ' ' 

* 

. d’ / .'XcfiiiOD rv;• v.. 4’^xX^prW &wS 

g 

' 

t-;' 


181 


lists in the earliest days, one would find the British element 

predominating, but by 19lU a greater number of names of 

continental origin began to appear in the lower grades. The 

’’bachelors” sent to Europe at first for old sweethearts or 

’’picture brides”, but later many of them married second generation 

girls often as young as thirteen or fourteen. 

Compulsory school attendance in British Columbia (I 9 OI 4 .) 

and Alberta (1911) brought many more of the children into closer 

contact with the Canadianizing process,"^" In 1923 in Coleman 

there were no children of non-British parents in Grades ten, 

eleven and twelve but in 1950 the percentages of the various 

origins were almost the same in the high school as in the elementary 
2 

school. This would indicate that these people are now assimilated 
into the school system in the same proportion as their ratio to 
the general population. 

The attitude of the English-speaking people was not 
very friendly at first. In almost the first issues of the Femie 
newspapers there was much condemnation of ’’Dago and Slav” 
immigration. The danger of forest fires was considered great in 
1901 because of the carelessness of Slavs and Italians, The 
shacks occupied by the ’’Russians” were considered by the editors 

1, Inspectors* reports in B. C. in 1903 and in Alberta in 
1910 showed that forty-four percent attendance was 
common. 

2. See Appendix Table IV. 





j : . -;‘.V bL.rx; C.z 


O !. 




■ ' • 


' : 6 c 





• * • . • 











oc 


•< ! .i' Vf j. • 

, : yr. , , : -;r,Y; -n.':- V:0 

* • . ' • • 

. 





182 


as being unfit for human habitation. The Coleman Miner "blamed" 
the election of Socialist O’Brien in 1909 on "illiterate Slavs 
and Dagoes” who should never have been allowed to vote. 

There was a strong feeling of "white superiority” 
too among the miners. Ihen, in a story on the escape of the 
miners from the Frank mine following the landslide, the Frank 
Paper stated that several men had collapsed, there was an angry 
denial, in a letter to the editor, that any such thing had 
happened. However, a few "foreigners”, they admitted, had 
given up, while the others were trying to dig a hole through 
and were lying down, hopelessly awaiting death. The implication 
was plain. 

In the stories of the Femie fire of 1908, there was 
surprise that the foreign element had not become panic-stricken 
but had behaved admirably — almost as well as the segment of 
population that could be depended upon to behave in that manner. 

Gradually this resentment was broken down as many of the 
abler men of the first generation made a success in business 
life. Slav citizens, shortly began to play a part in the 
political life of the towns,'*' especially when, being multi¬ 
lingual, some of them achieved distinction in union affairs. 

As the unions began to play an important role in civic government, 
many first and, later, second generation new Canadians served 
ably on councils and schoolboards. 

1. Councillor S. Leoski was elected in Coleman in 1913. 




. 


. 

" :[■■■< X SA u. 


:or I <i r.i: : iV ! ' <-,.c 

' ' ' • ; 

• ■ hSjroaiL octi v : 


f i id V‘ t o' . r>?.s c no .( 

. a ■ •' c r ■ ‘ 


, . n.. 

• ■ i i'o't. ■ 

. 

. r ... 


-fi':" pfw r>\' 

\ . : 


y 




„ 


a: a.. .. rloil v od \r.\ ao aav; 

. • • : 4 / ■ t • : • 

* > 

■ • ; ; .• . . ' •/ • ' O'- • n" 

: rr .f.. . v ,V. /Bar :< ;) 'Ut OT/ci 


OX.’ \ ■' E • 


i.{- j: - ,;:.: o '• a 

r.O VfSiil C.C >nVO.ij i 

i ' i . 


' •• ; : 0( ' • -' >■ ■ ’ I' 5 

I 

: B . c tic: • a: - -a ; X* c via. = 

. . * • ■ Cob 


ere nx o': 


i.' : eye (v: bo - • Ci*LOt 


- 


• I • £ 


. ■ o ■' - . : : ' • : ' t • ;;; 


. -: ' • 


i .1: 




; V 0 ‘ C ... \ ..0 £t.i BJ./B... o'XIB 0 0 O’ ;B.:. BV 

* ' ' ’ 





183 , 


The term "Bohunk” is not nearly as much used as 
formerly, as there is an increasing tendency to consider each 
other as equals, although occasionally there appears to be some 
feeling of inferiority on the part of those few who consider their 
non-British origin a handicap* However there has been very 
little changing of names other than occasional simplification 

of spelling or adopting of a more phonetic pronunciation from 

1 

an English point of view. The amount of intermarriage has been 

very large. Because of this, it is becoming increasingly 

difficult to label anyone with any particular nationality — 

other than Canadian. In some cases there are four-way combinations 

of national origins. So, for statistical purposes all that can 

be done is to assume that a Polish name means that the person 

is of Polish origin and hope that errors in the other directions 

will even up the figures. An attempt to classify the origins of 

both parents amongst children in school produced a hopeless 

jumble, especially among the younger children, who are nearly all 
2 

third generation.* 

Racial origin seems to receive little consideration in 
marriage, although religion sometimes acts as a deterrent as 
between Catholic and Protestant, but even here it is hardly an 
important barrier. The number of Roman Catholics bears the same 

1. Nearly all the languages of central Europe use 
alphabets that are almost perfectly phonetic. 

2. See Appendix Table III. 






: Ic'»C ; | f 

• • • 


; OB ©<' • ' i 

- .. i '• ' 

’ 


; ■ - • ■ . • 



' . • •. • 



* 




■ ‘‘ .« ■ 

1 ' :: . 1. ■ j.:. 




rtf: 


' 

' 



■ 


■: i y : . : 

• 


■V 

; 

• 


« 





XX ■ . ■ 

r..*o v. ' -v.-■ 


■ 

, 

.: , s • i: XX -tcriX o 

o XI . ■ • 


' 

. 

rj . v ±*xp .un co 

- it;j■ : j .• X. v : 




l :rj X r.i oaob CO 

: .1 < ■ • : ' . i ■ ’ 

nJ 

/o'l'is vtr-iio 


■ ■ • c ■ • ■' 

z‘a : : ‘: 10 ?i : v v;‘lbiF 


, ' : . •• . ; 

. 

: M 

> 

■ 

■ 

• 

... . ilO'Od 

r 


i! ■ i\n ’ 

. 

« 


4 . ' 

l: ■; :, j v Me • • "• V • ■ • v • • - i:.-'. • ' < 

....... • ■ ■ ' 

' ' 

* 

: 

. ... . 



18U, 


ratio to the number of Protestants as the number of non- 
British bears to British because what decrease is caused by 

the Greek Orthodox or non-Catholic Europeans is made up by the 

1 

number of English-speaking Catholics• 

The question of just how many people have lived in 
the Pass towns through the years has been rather a vexing one, 
particularly on the eastern side where census figures have 
never told a very satisfactory story# All towns are quite 
distinct but many of the residents live outside the town limits# 
This may sound odd, but East Coleman, Carbondale, and Graftontown 
are all definitely part of the to?m of Coleman for shopping and 
education and all miners are employed at one or other of the two 
mines# The same is true for Blairmore and Femie. However, the 
population of these outlying places in Alberta is counted in with 
that of Hillcrest and Bellevue and any other people who happen 
to live in between the towns. This whole area is officially 
Local Improvement District No# 71# There has, therefore, been 
considerable guessing, generally very liberal, as to the actual 
population. The situation has been almost as bad on the British 
Columbia side. At present there are only two large communities in 
the British Columbia area, incorporated Femie and unincorporated 
Michel-Natal« The other communities are so small that one may 
arrive at a fair estimate of Michel-Natal by assuming that most 

1# This was proved true for Coleman and assumed 
for the other towns# 


w • ‘ • 


, . , QJ ' ' 

■ 


'.0- •. 7> ’ • ■*>0 77’.'' ; 

; : • ; •' : ■; -• ' .Li.;-re; 

• .i '■ ' : S 

■ ■ ■ 


; ), ' ; ; V ' ‘ . ■ I : Kj . "[ ' 

o\ 'direr ^ 

' ; . ' TAX - 

■: ■ : ■ , •• 


. 




;I j.r d:i0b 


■ . . . ■ 1 

■ 

U ■: 1 i ' ' ' ■' « 

;r ;: ■ - L • i t rij ' ' 7" '7 f ' • - . . - ! 

' 

, ■ 

• ' 

’ 

* 

■ ; - 

1 

/ - ) ' t ; -i • .-Ir ■ vc .•.' ■'i.-'. 0 . . ■ -v.X *■’ • ■ - 


' ; L : it. ' 


jj ' ; V l -rii.-'. 7i77' 


l) ■ , : 7 . • 

/ ' 


• ?r • 

. ■ VS 

' 

i 

, ■ 

£„ 


j ■ 

. 



. 


185 


of the inhabitants of the unincorporated district live in 
that community. 

In 1901 Femie had 16U0 people and had reached 3lU6 
1 

by 1911# Michel had hi 6 inhabitants in 1901, when Frank had 
19 and Blairmore 2U3* By 1911 Coleman had appeared with 1557* 
while Blairmore had grown to 1137* In the same year Coleman 
estimated its population as 2350 in the Alberta Gazetteer and 
Directory while Blairmore had claimed only 1,000. In 1921 
Coleman had but 1590 to Blairmore ! s 1552 but L.I.D. No. 71 
was given a population of 3*856 with no clue given as to how 
this figure was arrived at. Femie had dropped to 2802 and 
Michel was indistinguishable in a new federal census division. 

It v/as thought by the writer that some sort of picture 
might be obtained if the figures for the number of ration 


books issued during the second war were used. The numbers 
for the British Columbia towns are as near as the issuers 
could remember them, while the Alberta numbers are the actual 


published figures. 


Range from 


Femie (including Morrissey, Coal Greek, Hosmer) 

Natal - - - --------- 

Michel - - - --— ------------ 

Coleman (including Sentinel and Lime Kilns) - - 

Blairmore - - - --- - - ----- 

Frank - -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Bellevue ------------------- 

Hill crest---- ■----«— - - -- 

TOTAL ------ - 


3230 to 3250 
1750 to 1785 

800 to 800 
3067 to 3169 
1996 to 2162 
215 to 226 
1621 to 1980 

7U2 to 853 * 
T3U51 toT£22F 


1. The Michel figure was published in the Free Press possibly 
from information available then. All other figures except 


where otherwise stated are from the Dominion Census. 


* The 19U1 census figures give lU*5l5 for a slightly 
larger area. See Appendix Table VII. 


















it , ■ , . • - : ■ ■ 

j•. .. . ■ .it.; .. . O^y.ixbxi.'l ' ;::?j 1 • . f ■ 

, 

. 

. • ■ ; ’ . ■' ‘ . - 


•:* * 








> 




■ 


* 

.... 


. . . 

1 ■ .’ 

. - •• •’ - -■ :;:: - 

' V.. ' ' • 






!;• ’1) ■ 


■ 



' 











■ 

. 



■ .' 















•:*C' 

’WU. 


* 

. 

. 

.IIV ! xi 


• v.k 

i: ' / ' - '. ■ ' '• 

. , , ‘ . , • < ' ’■ : ’ -X • ■ 

. . • ‘ ' ’ ' ' 

.. v .~ .~ 

. . ...... 

. . . f j 

. ..... ... * 

' 

... i; 




186 


There were between one hundred and one hundred and fifty- 
men on military service from each town during this period but 
this was more than made up by the influx of strangers, mostly 
from farming areas, to work in the mines. The war period saw the 
first large migration into the Pass since the last years of 
extensive immigration from Europe in 1925 and 1926. 

Following 19U5* large numbers of displaced persons, 
mostly single, have come into the area. The largest group 
consisted of the veterans of General Anders 1 Polish army, 
which had disbanded in Italy. These men, taken in as boarders 
by the Polish families, supplied needed workmen without further 
taxing the housing accommodation. 

There are some factors which tend to make the Pass a 
unit and others that tend to divide it, especially along 
provincial lines. It is well to note that separate schools 
are not important as almost all towns have a Catholic majority 
and no move has ever been made towards establishing separate 
Protestant schools under the provisions of the Alberta 
constitution regarding religious minorities. In British Columbia 
separate schools may be opened on a voluntary basis. So, in 
1922, a small parish school was opened in Femie and a new 
building was erected in 1926. At present about seventy pupils 
in the lower grades attend this school. The older children 
attend the public school for their higher education. When all 



- 

■ 

.> 

. ,, r \ ; ; ' ■ • ’ ■ ' - ’ <•. 

. 

, , • . : ; . »■ ' 

oo tu n r , 

;Y o, fi?oY‘ • ■" 


r > i 


• ■ 


. 

• , c i - 

' 

. s :: ■ 

.... ' ' •;• J Y ; /. « > - u.V: Cij.lUJ 

* 

.. s' e 

; ■, c ■ vorj on .'<i 

■ • ‘ 


■ 

, : £ 'J:o ' no/ 

. ' ‘ ■ ' ' ■ ' ' " ' ’ ' 

■ - 

• /. ) ■ : o V/...’ ■ : ^ ■ ' ; , v ; ' ° j: ' 

. . . . ' - ' ' ■ ' 1 ' ' ''' 


187 


children attend the same school there is no noticeable 

cleavage along national lines and the "melting pot" is enabled 

1 

to do its work of assimilation more easily. 

Because the Crow ! s Nest Pass lies in two provinces, 
provincial laws tend to keep both sections of the area distinct. 

With two different school systems, there is very little meeting 
of students or teachers except for occasional sports events. 
Qualifications for miners and officials are different so that 
there is not as much interchange of miners between Blairmore and 
Michel as there would be between Blairmore and Cadomin, the 
latter in Alberta but over four hundred miles distant. 

The unions, however, have always considered the Pass 
as a unit and worked accordingly. Thus, in union matters, especially 
as regards wages, there is a close liaison between the two 
sections. Dominion government bureaus such as the Post Office 
Department and the National Employment Service always consider 
it to be one district. Wholesale houses in Femie serve Alberta 
while those from Blairmore often ship their goods to Femie. At 
one time Femie bakeries have supplied the Alberta towns and at 
another the reverse was true® 

In sports, especially the summer sports, the Pass has 
always been one area although there has been a tendency of late 
for Femie to play a less important part. Michel, being only 

1. A Catholic separate school was built in Coleman in 
the period immediately preceding 19lU but was 
never used because of the Alberta law. 


' 


: : -.r . on ; ' • • u; bit -■ 

• • ■; '■ . : : '••••?. •: ' ■' ' : vb or;-v 

. ’ ' 

„ • ■ ■ ■ ' ■ ■ ■ ■ • •• ' T ; ' 

. - ne 

, . - , • 1 

;.J oo vt ; ol-a • 

! o .£ ; C: • {iStWCtecf 'd'l VlltM ‘XO ^ ! : : ■' K ‘'' >r " 

■ . o; f : i ■ .. ■ ■ r ' 

.. . ■ k- 
' i : . . - • * 

' . v t 

ry a - f i ' " • ' • : 

f • ■ b , : 0 • • ' • ■ • ’ ' ' 

. r • . . If ' I ■ m b - , • ' ■: 

* 

. f ' l • ©initf eno 

. J- ) ' ' b . i •• - •' x"' ' ' ■ •’ '■ • 

, -:;o:o ;• X , if oo r:.o;i ot.oab rr<:> no-: 

. 

* 

b • 

. . ■ ' ' 


188 


eighteen miles from Coleman, with all the other Alberta towns 
within a further ten miles, seems to be drawn more and more 
into the Alberta orbit. With the completion of the new covered 
rink in Natal for the season of 195>0-195>1, it is expected that 
the keen competition of the summer will be in future extended 
into the winter. Femie is also going ahead with plans for a 
new arena so perhaps the Pass may soon be plunged into a frenzy 
of hockey from one end to the other as it was in the earlier days. 

On the side of culture, music has been one of the chief 
unifying factors of the whole Pass. Blairmore*s musical festival, 
started as a Sunday school festival in the early twenties, 
received entries from all over the southern part of both provinces. 
Femie*s band and school choirs were almost as familiar to the 
audiences as were the local West Canadian Collieries band and 
the school entries from Coleman, Blairmore, Hillcrest and 
Bellevue. On special occasions, bands were formed in which 
Michel, Goleman, Blairmore and Bellevue bandsmen formed one 
great aggregation, sometimes under the name of one town and 
sometimes another.^ 

It seems that each town has developed a different 
personality. Femie is the city, quietly aloof and superior, 
but with the look of the past about it. Michel-Natal is much 
less glamorous but more aggressive. The twin communities seem to 

1. Coleman Miners* Band at the Calgary Stampede at 
different times has been just such a group. 


r it ' 

P : ■■■ : ■ V 1 ; ;■ 


, ' • 1 r ’ , '■ 

■ • , ■■ , . : ' . i 

• 

‘ 

P • . ■ ( 

. 


P ■ . :r : 

• 





: 


, p ■ ■ r’3 « P- • 


■ • . ' . 




he: lm c. ':P : 

■ 3 fJE 


? ■ P P n P ,'P !) .)P:>: v ^if.V 


. . . &■ - 

; : ■ :"..:-P PP i-’P 1 

. '.P P , ■ . : •' ■ t P 'P- : 


- • • • '■ ■ p.p 



* • ■ • ' 

. . P ■ 



. . *P‘. 


8 

. 

r 

■ ... ‘ p 




189 


feel that, like Australia, they have no history. They are 
keenly conscious of Fernie, resenting being considered an 
adjunct of that city, especially since their mines have employed 
more men and worked more days for many years past. Coleman 
is the ’’big town'* * It has consistently overestimated its 
population in every claim ever made* It probably has been the 
centre of senior hockey for more years than any other town. Its 
resentment is against Blairmore which, by virtue of being central, 
gains most government buildings such as telephone and customs 
offices and the courthouse and army barracks. Only by building 
the municipal hospital between the two towns could the consent 
of Coleman people be obtained, and even then the necessary 
two-thirds majority had to be made up by the almost unanimous 
votes of the other towns. Blairmore has been by far the most 
colorful town in the Pass, and has the faculty of making the 
headlines very often. In addition to the crises mentioned in 
connection with its early history, it received wide publicity by 
discharging its whole teaching staff in a feud with the Alberta 
Teachers’ Alliance in 192$. Twice in recent years its high 
school has come out on strike — the only Pass town to achieve 
this distinction.^" It received national attention when it built 
its Tim Buck Boulevard in the communist thirties. 

1 0 The most recent strike was to draw attention to the 
deplorable condition of the school and led to 
the forming of the first Home and School Association 
on the eastern slopes of the Pass. 


. 


* , ■ ■ * 

' , 

.: ■ ■ . ■ • ' ■ ■- - 

1 h ■ 10; '■ 


' >. ■ ■ o • ■ ’ . ; ■ 

. 

• • i ■ : ■ < ; 

v X r:->rccr; p.?d ... 

. ■ 

. f* • 

■ . i: nos. i y [0 

. i 


• .. 4 • , ‘ . , 



• 

y SO X ' ■ 

;!a ojId ij.U(on v.n-oi o J oifd mor-lrci I... 

irui 


■ d > g ' - f ■ I )0. - > 



' ‘ ' ’ 

• 

‘ 3i'k« xG OCCCV 

i , ,! • -.:.0 . — ■ ' ' ' ^ ■ - 1 

, [il -• a/no J'.'j'.V 

* 

,-ilo • . : 1 


■ • lot 


' nlz^isdoi t 

* 

■ ■ ■ . ■ 



.riei ■ : 1 • : ■ 


. 

■ 

. , ■ ' ■ 1 ' ;■ 

; 1; ■ ■ • 

« 

• 


o ■ . • 

( 


190 


Bellevue is a strange community. With one of the most 
public-spirited groups of people in the Pass and some of the 
most sagacious businessmen, it did not even consider incorporation 
until 1950. 1 Bellevue had the first covered rink on the eastern 
side and the first "big time 11 hockey team and is the only town to 
the present with artificial ice facilities. A Bellevue theatre 
owner gained control of theatres in every Pass town but Femie. 

Its bakery and dairy practically cornered the trade of the Pass 
but Bellevue still remained a hamlet in a local improvement district. 
This has been unfortunate, for, lacking organization, the community 
has not been able to exert the influence upon Pass affairs that its 
population merits. 

When Hillcrest had its own mine it was a particularly 
lively community, > very interested in sports and music. The 
Hillcrest contingent was one of the most ardent in its support 
of hockey teams, especially those of Bellevue in the twenties 
and of Coleman in the thirties. It could be depended upon to 
arrive regardless of the weather. 

The homes of the people of the Crow's Nest Pass have 
continually been improved. The miners did not live too long 
in the shacks which characterized the early days, but sufficient 
of these abodes remain to remind the inhabitants of the past. 

The houses improved as the families grew. It is difficult to 

1. A plan for incorporation is now being considered. 










'-v; r "r - 

: ; ;j ft: • ?!qo~cr-l.o ;: • • • *.: > bo4^'ix ; ‘''C~:>xId!Lrrr 

’ • ’ . ' 1 ' '' ' ' :: • '' ' 

* 






■. i . ■ 

th Simmy t 

- 


', r ■■; aih r f j\ . r:\:::xS :vI 

. 




4 

0 ■' : 




r.u 




, • / • v : oo v i/ : v.c! 

v v > o .> cr^oJj’xK 

. . . 'i.O 

. 

' 

; , . . ; , ■ : ' t 

' 

. ' ' • ' ' ' 

* 

■ 


191 


look at Coleman ! s Bushtown today, with its neat blocks of 
rather attractive houses among many trees, and realize that 
twenty-five years ago it was a jumble of crooked lanes , shacks 
and bams® Femie people look with wonder at pictures of the 
low log shacks of the "Russians' 1 which existed before the fire 
of 1908. The improvements of the twenties continued into the 
thirties and the war period, mostly along the line of adding 
furnaces and bathrooms* To gain some idea of the extent of this, 
a count^ was made along a street of about fifty houses in West 
Coleman (old Slavtown) now having a mixture of nationalities* 

It was found that about 90% of the houses were owned by the 
occupants, 70% of the houses had furnaces and 38 $ had bathrooms* 

It was interesting to note that no house with a bathroom was 
without a furnace, not because the miners are dirty but all the 
mines have washhouses and the need for a bathtub does not seem 
to be so urgent as the need for better heating. The percentage 
of bathrooms and furnaces is greater in the less crowded parts 
of town, but West Coleman would probably give a better picture of 
the average of the whole area. Bathrooms are increasing in number 
and all new homes are fully modem, but the war period (1939 to 
19U5) and the period since have not seen any great spate of 
building such as the prairie towns experienced. The need was 

1. Made by students of Coleman high school as a 
social studies project. 


! j.'. : . L:Oi • • 1 ’ v'->. 


. . ■ £ ' 

• » 

■ J ; ' ■> ' t ' : ' 



* 


• ■ ; • : 

. 

■ • 


\X. . 

, \ ■ ■ J o ' ) 

, 

: .'■ - ; "• • .. , : 


■. 

■ . 0 n: '-:X :) 

odd bt*mvo s*xo 


« 

• • . - ' - . , d- - 

. 

■ 

o/.J S. ■ ■ Jr i 

j ' , ■ ■;,: •_ " • > O • 

>Vo: tfOOO rod.. 

. 

d • ■. 

, ■ • . - ■ ■ V i- d'fr: O' O ; l 0 / J 

:..d‘.; 0 'T rv;o o • • ; 

. . ;• ' d: : V.. boo- o: oro oi ‘.do 


•; , : ; d - d r ,'d > 

■ 

, 

■ 

■ . .. d/ ■ , ■ , • ■ V L-. ' ■ '• ■ 

v.o O' Jo vi.coor ■ 

■ • • ■ . ■ ■ ■ 


' - 

* 


192 


just as great but the people seemed to have lost faith in 

1 

the future of their towns* Blairmore probably had more new 

2 

houses than any other town (apart from Sparwood), but nothing 
approaching a building boom has been experienced* 

One way in which the Pass lagged badly for an industrial 
area was in the construction of hospitals. One would have 
imagined that in an area of many accidents, the best of hospital 
care would have been available, but as far as the Pass towns 
were concerned this was not true. In the Alberta area only 
Coleman had anything that could be classed as a hospital. This 
was but a wooden building put up by the miners and not much 
bigger than a large house. Additions had been made to it from 
time to time but it was still much too small for the need. The 
other towns had less than this. Femie’s first hospital v/as much 
the same. One somewhat larger was built after the fire of 1908 but 
it still was insufficient to serve the area properly. A doctor 
returning from China in \9h$ stated that the industrial concerns 
in China had much better hospitals for their coolie laborers. 

However, the situation was improved in 19U8 and 19h9 by the construction 
of two municipal hospitals. Femie ! s Memorial Hospital and the 
Crow*s Hest Pass Municipal Hospital between Blairmore and Coleman are 
as modern and well equipped as any in the country for communities of 
their size® 

1. A plan for building cheap houses was sponsored by the 
C.N.P. Coal Company in Femie which was so successful 
it is being studied by the other towns. 

2. See below p. 202. 











; 


. o • . r 


' 




' 




. 'ztl 


. 


. 




. 

' . ' i 

. . 

;• ' \ • . ■ ■ ■ 


• • . • 

I 


■vr.. ■ , . r .:■) ' -- - 

8 ■ - • ‘ 


. . • 





\ ’i- f. '' c " • ’* 

! 

* 

a:.'- ■' 



. 


• ■ 


- 



. 







. 


: 


■ , ' ' 

■ ■ 

, ' • x: >V• ' • O'LT.i oiYsT 

. 

• .VxifRl’:V- - " ‘ 

' 

. 


* 







193 


CHAPTER 17 
THE PRESS 

There is only one newspaper actually publishing 
regularly in the Crowds Nest Pass at the present time. (195>l)^ 
That paper is the Femie Free Press , which was also the first 
publication to appear after the building of the railway* The 
first issue was put out on January lUth., 1899, and the Free 
Press was a vigourous newspaper right from the start* G. S. 
Henderson was its first editor but it changed hands several 
times in a few years, having in succession A. K* Cameron, 

A* S. Hacking, H* G* Watson and Geo* L. Pedlar as editors* 

Mr. J. R. A. Wallace, who joined the staff in its first year, 
finally took over the paper in 1905. He remained as publisher 
and later as editor and publisher for forty years, until 
May 1, 19U5, when he sold out to Victor W* R. B. Ball who had 
published weeklies at various points in Alberta. Mr. Wallace 
is now living in retirement at Femie. In spite of illness 
he was able to provide much material on the history of the 
town he loved so well* 

The Free Press, like many papers of that time carried 
telegraphic news stories as well as local news and very early 

1. A small bi-weekly mimeographed sheet, the Pass Herald, 
is published in Blairmore but in spite of considerable 
circulation and advertising it is not a newspaper. 











■ 


or;.!: 






i '■ r 


• ; , <. , « — 


CU r . 


■ 


' 






■ r aer:<;ff;«bnoH 



5 


Ji) 




c . 




' ii 2 \: ; ;\b siti: 


/« ■ . ‘ ; .. 


s ,nr ,: .i tic D ryccrc cry; chrv'nr rice err ed 


„ 




19U. 


was illustrated by remarkably clear cuts. The news of the 
city and district was printed in detail, and several of the 
editors took an active part in the life of the community even 
to serving on the city council. The paper did not fail to 
fight on many issues from a clash with the school principal 
over whether the schoolboys should wear shoes to differences 
with the M fighting”'*' ministers over the sinfulness of hotels. 

In keeping with the times, the early Free Press , like most papers, 
was strongly political, favoring the Conservatives, especially 
when other weeklies such as the Femie Ledger espoused opposite 
causes, i/tfhen the opposition journal ceased publication in 
1919, the Free Press endeavored to give freedom of expression 
to all parties in its columns. It was burned out three 
times, in 190I4., 1905 and 1908, losing everything including 
its files in the last fire. The files for this paper are 
complete at the Legislative Library in Victoria. 

Other newspapers appeared in Femie from time to time. 

The first was the Ledge , later the Ledger , in January 1905* 

The Ledge had been published at several points in the Kootenays 
by a colorful character named R. T. Lowery, who took the Slocan 
Ledge to Femie and then dropped the first name* Mr. Lowery 
had a reputation in British Columbia as an unorthodox newsman 

1. The early ministers of the west were often given 
this epithet because of their belligerent attitude 
towards those whom they considered to be evil. 










■ a 






■ >r 







f. 


o 











: ... . ii' 


. 

, - 




' , 








: . . 

* 


■. .. > ■ V : 


. < ~ 

. ' ■■ 

-J "... £' ^ : : /•- ° J 

...... 

■ : . ' ■ ■ ' - ■ 

. . . . • ' ' ‘ ; '• ' 

. 

' ' •: noi ' 


■ 




195 


much as Bob Edwards of Eye-Opener fame had in Alberta* Many 
references to him appear in the other newspapers of the time* 
Later, in 1905, D. V. Mott took over the Ledge as the Femie 
Ledger and a Mr* Johns became editor briefly in 1907* He 
printed a short-lived paper of his own as John^ Newspaper 
two years later. In 1908, the U.M.W.A. took over the Femie 
Ledger re-naming it the District Ledger and from that time 
it was a bitter union organ. W. S. Stanley was the editor during 
the last few years until it ceased publication in 1919. 

There is reference to three newspapers in short-lived 
Morrissey, the Mention (1902), the Miner (1902) and the Despatch 
(1903). M* Hockendorf, the editor of the Miner , was the only 
editor among those whose papers are on file, who announced the 
demise of his little sheet on April 23, 1902* 

The Hosmer Times , begun in 1908, ran until the end of 
1910 before going out of business* It was a very good paper 
giving excellent coverage of the news of its district. There 
was no masthead in the weekly stating who the editor was* 

The Michel Reporter , starting somewhat later in 1908, 
was an aggressive newspaper attempting to show up the advantages 
of the twin communities, and to shake off the shackles of 
Femie. George G. Meikle, the publisher, vfas as convinced of 
the great future of Michel and Natal, as the editor of the 
Free Press was that Femie would be a western Pittsburgh. 


















' 


r 





.00 !•; 


t 










: 







! 

v 


bh 


■ ' : 













196 


On the other side of the Pass, there was just as much 
activity in the press field* The Frank Sentinel appeared 
in 1901, moved to Blairmore as the Blairmore Times , in 1903 
and was still being published in 190$, but no record can be found 
pf it after that* The Frank Paper , "Just a Newspaper, made by 
Mark Drumm”, was first published in 1905 and was a very 
interesting journal* It was consistently moderate in its politics, 
rising only occasionally to the continued jibings of the Coleman 
Miner , but always strong in advancing the village of Frank* 

Mir* Drumm was lacking in a sense of humor but not in business 
sense. He characterized as a coarse joke the following quotation 
from his paper printed in a London newspaper; ”the manager of the 
rink has his bottom in good shape and should have skating any 
day now,"”*" but he could not resist the opportunity to show 
the wide circulation of his weekly effort* Letters to the 
editor were always accepted — as paid advertisements. Drumm 
ceased publishing the weekly in November 1909, but whether he 
had sold out to the Coleman Miner is not clear, as he announced 
the week before the last issue that the deal had fallen through. 

The biting Coleman Miner first appeared in April of 1908 
and was more vehement in its political attacks than any other 
paper. The editor, H. S. French, was a Conservative and damned 
all things Liberal* He was chiefly to blame for the storm 

1. Frank Paper March 19, 1908. Mr. Drumm now lives in 
retirement in California* 











. 

... 


, •• • " ‘ '• ' '■ • ■ • 

. • . , 

j; 0: J- V.o . V, :i JX ' ■ .i ■ •' Ki- • v' ■ 



• 

. 

. 


• 

• • ia >r . J ! ’ ■ ■ .. i 1 S', i . > fxi: h 

fjFiq 5. . . '. '■ 


t at 

. • ■ : 

•?> < .; »'•/ . i : :: . .,-m v:;.L> 

...... . ■ . 

iuh i • ■ ■ ' • : d 

. 

• ' ■ ■ . • • 

•; •. .Li' r ' ) .. >' . Or?. V .. .-'I.'. "■-.J-' ' 

' 

, lea 

. - • ' ; _ . . ' : 

. , . . . vj. j;.[ i’-'jii'I 

. A ■ 

| •. ' . .. 

■ 



s 

• 

. 

J .. .u: • ' y ■ 

. 

. • 

* 

* 







197 


raised over Joe Little’s homesteading of Blairmore’s graveyard 

site.^ J. D. S. Barrett took over the Miner near the end of the 

year and with W. J* Bartlett, J. A. McDonald, and T. B. Brandon 

set up the Foothills Job Printing Company which aimed to serve 

the whole pass exclusive of Femie • They bought out the Michel 
2 

Recorder in 1909 and apparently the Frank Paper * The result 
was the printing of the Blairmore Enterprise and Frank Vindicator 
as one newspaper and the Bellevue Times in 1910 as a separate 
paper with nothing changed but the title* This ambitious attempt 
to form a newspaper chain failed and ended with Blairmore 
Enterprise alone in the field after the Coleman Miner was seized 
by the sheriff during the strike of 1911. W. J. Bartlett stayed 
with the Enterprise becoming sole owner in 1935? and was quoted 
far and wide for his trenchant wit. As time went by, the paper 
carried less and less news, and although the editor’s fish stories 
received wide mention, the Enterprise ceased to be a real newspaper* 
Yftien Bartlett died in lay, 19U6, his wife carried on for a time 
but sold out in August to J* R. McLeod who had been printer for 
Bartlett. The name was changed to the Blairmore Graphic , but 
although the printing office still operates, no newspapers 
are issued* 

1. See above p* 65. 

2. The Recorder succeeded the Reporter but no issues 
of it are on file. 



















198 


In March, 1912, W. S. Stanley (later of the Femie 
District Ledger )started the Coleman Bulletin , which ran until 
November, 1918, when it too failed. In 1921, the Coleman Journal 
appeared, with V, C. Dunning as editor, but J. D. S. Barrett 
returned to the scene with E. F. Gare and bought out Dunning, 

In I 92 I 4 ., Barrett sold his interest to Gare who in turn sold out to 
H. T. Halliwell in 192?* Mr, Halliwell remained in charge in 
Coleman for almost twenty years and built the paper up into a 
fine publication. In 19i|l^ Mr, Halliwell moved to Macleod to 
publish the Gazette as well. In 19U6, he sold the Journal to 
two younger men, Alexander Balloch and Thomas Holstead, who had 
grown up with the paper, Balloch left in December, 19U8, and 
Holstead published alone until June, 19U9> and then stopped 
publication although he continued the job-printing business. 

Today, only the Free Press remains of all the weeklies, 
but is now changed to a smaller paper which makes no attempt to 
cover world news or change the political structure of the 
dominion, and which is highly regarded in the district for its 
interest in advancing the cause of its city. 

The newspapers had many things in common. They were all 
dedicated to the n Boost, Do Not Knock 11 principle. For weeks the 
papers would carry banner heads on the mere hope of some new 
industry being located in their towns but would not mention 
the closing down of an established industry except by casual 
reference some time later in connection with another matter. 









, 












O'. 


hsi c ’o 


r. 


r 



■ . ■ 

: , a£ .'-.C'. 








' ' 

■ - ■■■■■■'■ ■ : ■ 

V. 

■ ' ■ U ! Ji: :• t '' 

• ,/ ' . s' ‘ ■ o ■ V • ■ : " • • ’ • ' ; ’ • ■ ’ ' ' • • : ' J 












199 


All tried to mould opinion by their editorials and were staunch 
supporters of either the Liberal or Conservative party* All 
were courageous and attacked what they considered wrong* The 
Femie Ledger was fined for attacking a legal procedure in a 
case that was sub judice in 1909; the Blairmore Enterprise was 
sued for remarks about the manager of the Cosmopolitan Hotel 
in Blairmore in 1911, whose hostelry the editor had considered 
a disgrace, and the editor of the Coleman Journal was forced 

to sell out in 192? because of his insistence that the town 

1 

should publish its financial reports* H. T* Halliwell, who 
had so violently opposed communism, shared the award given 
by the Trustees of Columbia University for meritorious service 
in combatting the attempts of the Social Credit government to 
control the press of the province in 1937* However, none of the 
papers (until the Blairmore G raphic and Coleman Journal were 
taken over by men brought up in the area) ever had any understanding 
of the miner and his problems and very rarely took the side of the. 
unions on any issue. They obviously did not lack the courage, 
but could not find themselves sympathetic to the miners* views* 


1* The town council cancelled all its job printing 
orders as' a reprisal for Gare*s attacks and made 
business unprofitable for the newspaper* 








:'\ 0 


































200 


CHAPTER 18 

THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE 

At the present time there is great uncertainty in the 
mining industry. No real optimism has been evident since the 
depression, except in the building of the two hospitals. The 
lack of house construction between 19U0 and 1950 was not due to 
any excess of accommodation for there was a real shortage. Rather 
it was caused by the lack of confidence of the inhabitants in the 
future of their occupation. Even the reasonably steady work of 
the period since the beginning of the Korean war has not given 
rise to anything but the feeling that once the emergency is 
over the work will slacken off again. 

The use of oil as fuel by the railways has been a threat 

1 

to the coal mines since 1912* In that year the Canadian parliament 
passed a law making the railway companies responsible for forest 
fires caused by their locomotives. It was found that oil burning 
engines caused fewer fires than those burning coal. With the 
discovery of oil at Leduc in Alberta in 19U8 the railways were 
certain of an adequate supply and consequently accelerated the 
conversion from coal to oil-burning locomotives. Perhaps the 
cruellest blow of all was the fact that the railway through the 
Pass was one of the first lines to be converted to oil-burning. 

The residents, therefore, can see the danger to their livelihood 
1* Justice Carroll et al. op, cit. p. U52. 










* 






. 

. 

. 




/ v'v C| 




r , , . V. v 

' 






' 

' 

■ 


. 

• • • : ' 











, 

. 



. . 


* 




201 


@.t first hand* The railways drastically cut back their orders 
early in 1950 and Coleman, which depended almost entirely on the 
railway for the sale of its coal, suffered its first really slack 
time since the war boom* The preparations for defence have given 
increased work since* In the last few years the coke orders 
from Trail have been cut back'*' so that Coleman at present has only 
a handful of ovens operating, although Michel is still in full 
production* 

A third factor is the danger of coal markets being cut 
by the export of Alberta natural gas into areas in British 
Columbia and the north-western states which now form a market 
for much Crow ! s Nest Pass coal* The Alberta mining towns have 
protested the proposed export in no uncertain language* The 
constantly rising freight rates on coal to Ontario also threatens 
to narrow the market. 

It is thought that the oilfields are not likely to produce 
so abundantly in ten or twenty years and coal will then come into 
its own. The real danger is that the miners will leave the mines 
and when established elsewhere may not be easily persuaded to return 
to them — as has happened in Britain. The coal companies are more 
optimistic, basing their hopes on a turbine engine using pulverized 
coal Y/hich is now being developed. This engine would be much 

1* This was due in part to a surplus of coke built 
up by the smelter, but also to the poor quality 
of Coleman coke in the year or two preceding. 



. 

• . . •• J ‘ r: 70 ’L-, he '■ 

r 

. 

. ■ ! • . • ' ‘ 


, ' ' 


; ■ ■ 

4 


"h .hr- i".;<J : v.'./i .hh'rh . 

. 

. 

. 




Ci'. 'i:h :' 7 ! (ih r or ■ ' 

• L ;. j . • • h. e-iiw V' 

. 

■ . . .. . trJ ' i 

' • > • • 

* 


... ■ )t ■ 

’ ■ ' ' ■ 

'■070' Vh .j.o X,, J ' ■ n: ro.-, oh.h Jo. 

• 

■ ■ ” ' 

■ h ,.hh; hjeoo, ’ Y <'- 


* 


• ; / • : h- h ,.) h.I"' ; ; ■>'!; : r .: • . ■ ! ir 

- 


h ' . 

■ 

: .... ' 

. ' 

• *io • 

■ 

• 

. 

... . , r o," :. h<; :• o 




202 


cheaper to operate than oil-burners or the newer diesels• The 
defence plans of the Canadian government will undoubtedly cause 
an increased demand for both coal and coke, at least temporarily, 
which may make up somewhat for the inroads of the oil industry and 
possibly overcome the bad effects of increased freight rates. As 
the chemical industry based on natural gas develops, there may 
also be an outlet for the by-products of coal which are not now 
used. The experiments in the United States on the manufacture of 
motor fuel from coal are being watched with interest. 

Probably, the most optimistic "town" at the present time 

is Michel-Natal. It has this year (1951) built a large covered 

rink at the west end of Natal. The Crow ! s Nest Pass Coal 

Company plans to increase the number of by-product ovens and to 

do this needs the space now occupied by Michel. A few years 

ago the company laid out lots for building just beyond Natal 

1 

in the open space of the Elk Valley. Some modem houses were 
built there. Lots were offered to Michel-Natal residents at 
nominal prices, with the stipulation that good quality houses 
be built. At first the plan did not have much success but lately 
there has been a notable increase in building. In the meantime, 
as houses become vacant in Michel, the company sells them for a 
small sum on condition that they be tom down or hauled away. 

As part of the large school district centred at Femie, the 

1. This new area is called Sparwood after the former 
sawmill village at that place. 


o rtBjfiu 


r< \..l r.-,. r:feay. ... • - d rrrr.-^ >;* 

• 

... O’Orr.d' dr: ' d '• c/ dr . r ■ .id.- n id v •. 

9 i 

• . -:r. :d. Jd ■ odd V r: d vi d •• . , \"d., . ; a, 

r ■ i. r £ : r . ~ / ; 0 do - dr ■ 

. ‘ d . ' 

; . -.7 d dr ' 07 

.< ' . 

' .rrrrr loo d' r a srut 

r ■■ v > ' ' • ' r " " 

.. . d , r; ).. 


• 

. 

• 1 ;rr.d. Id l/l *'.LOJ OI'l 


f■ r d ; j 


* 

, • 

! ■ 


r . . vr> dr - • • ■ ‘ ; 

, • : >d . r:rt Jd. Ya ? .>qriroO 

• : 

<77 77,; rdr Of[ O.lO id O f) 

7 : ' ; ' ' 

... . ... 

- 

• 

^ ■ . ■ ' . . - ' '' " 


. f u ' 

■ Jid- .. d dr , oodooy ddrd;;vr: 


- 

, * ' 

, . r 4 

• t 

J ; v •; : : : v -r :: P.If ■ . ' > 

• : r : “■ ■ r ■ ■ '■ ' ; / 

, ■ 

. 

Ij 77 r ; •; • 1 . Oil'd do d'700' 71 

• ' 

• ' ' 

• 




203 


Sparwood-Natal area may have a new school built, in which case 

there is every possibility that a town may finally be incorporated* 

Interest in self government has increased recently* 

Bellevue citizens met in 1950 to make application for incorporation 

as a village and ? after one year as a town* The town limits were 

set to include the river-bottom but not Hillcrest, which will 

however remain as part of the Bellevue-Hillcrest School District, 

Early in 1951 a group of East Coleman (Bushtown) residents 

approached the tovm of Coleman with the intention of applying for 

permission to join that community* It was interesting to note 

that every name but one, of the leaders of the movement, was non- 

British in origin, showing a uniform spirit of leadership in the 

second and third generations. The taxes of the improvement 

district have increased gradually until they have reached the 

point where there is not a great difference between them and those 

of the town. The tax money of the improvement district is spent with 

2 

little reference to the wishes of the taxpayers. Perhaps also the 
democratic ideal of self-government is coming to have more meaning 
to the residents of the Pass. 

A further movement which is being actively promoted by 
the Alberta government is an attempt to form one large school 

1* Femie also hopes to have new schools built 
under the same scheme. 

2. There is no implication that the money is 
improperly spent. 





, • ' 

' 

. ’ ■! ;r. . c^ 










1. > C-'-‘ 


Jrti- 


■■■ , 


■ .... .r ■ ; r . - 

> ■ ‘' - 4 ■ - • 

— . f _ fJiii'w-v > 1-i .. - 

uV : •. : ; ■. ' •' u '. • / ' ' • r 1 ' ' ' 

, . i .• .1'-' /..i: bw* ' ■" 

cr:,:; J,:,aa,..:v -\;;o LlOnr vJX'u^Z her: -V 

■ : .. , :: , : . r ' ' r “ V . / ' ' ‘ ‘ 

■ 

» . ' 

' 

'' 


a-. ■ v‘ ‘ • . ' --'f : v - '•• rr - 

• ■ lo ' ' ' : ' ' 




.. Cl ■ « m ■ ■ 

■ „ ' =. ‘S' 

■ 

ai: v:)h v .- 




20U, 


district or school division, as has already been done in the 
British Columbia towns. It will be interesting to see if the 
towns will be able to forget their animosity towards each other, 
especially when a strong civic government in Bellevue will be 
able to exert pressure* 

The Alberta government is at present building a first 

class paved highway through the Pass towns* The British Columbia 

government is doing the same, having concentrated thus far on 

building fine bridges across' the many streams. Perhaps, after 

almost a century, the expression coined about the Crowds Nest 

Pass by Blakiston, u a very bad road and seldom used", may become 

an interesting but highly inaccurate statement. The road north 

of Coleman to Kananaskis may be extended southward to Waterton 

Park so that the Pass may yet become the tourist centre that 

1 

early travellers believed it would be. Then, perhaps, the 
people will become conscious of their mountains and come to know 
them better, for now very few people know the names of the peaks 
and in fact many prominent peaks have no discoverable names at all. 
The boards of trade of the Alberta towns have been making some 
effort in this direction in the padb few years, but not sufficient 
to create any great interest. A skiing club formed in the Pass a 

1. The towns have such a bad inferiority complex about 
their attractions, that a hotel in Coleman, a town 
surrounded by beautiful peaks, has on its walls large 
pictures of mountains in Banff National Park. 




' ' - 

. 

l , • . . ■ ■' 

. 

r (. 11.. : :.'V \ • 

. 

. ■ . v 1 h&Y&i ao/llo 


. 




. ■ : . • 


. ■ - ’ ■ 1 ’' ’ ; ' 


♦ 

• 

J c lc-v lo 

. . ■ ■ • t - ' ■ 

: r-iio .lie Id 03 frjsfl 

-• t 

C ' . V 

0(t 

• 

■ ; . V ; * ' .. >• : - 

101 ,’ICN ■" ' 


-[Ml.. 


• ' : \ 

[C j v.<.*. SJ -. w () 1 '' >./1" ; ; - ‘ 


; ; , f . ' 


' 

. • • : ■ ' t ' 

n 

f 

' 


205 


few years ago has made some progress, having a fine ski-slide 
at Blairmore where it conducts annual competitions* Skiers 
from Lethbridge have already chartered special trains to take 
them to ski on this slope* Perhaps the Pass may someday become 
one of the great tourist centres of the west, for it is the 
site of one of the most spectacular and storied landslides in 
the world. 

The people of the Pass may feel a sense of foreboding 
over the immediate prospects of the main industry, but they 
do not lose their love of their rugged home nor their faith 
that the coal reserves of the Crow’s Nest Pass will eventually 
become of great importance to Canada. If use is ever made of 
the iron resources of the west, whether it be at Burmis, 
Kitchener, Kimberley or the Pacific coast, the Pass will benefit, 
for the two sections are and have been for years, the main 
centres of coking and steam coal, in their respective provinces. 




. . • C ••••-: 


. 'j.i ‘ : ' • r . \ ' ; ' ' ; 






, :f *:;o i ’ io r va< 





yj.r. 



■ 






• 


\ 



■ 



• 




■f..,-.,' Me 

1 no 

.' : 


* 

• 





■ '• 




• 




* 












■ 

. ‘ :> 


•i ■ y 


•j.hi i'T‘1 raj 

















iiij 

eixfier 


* 




* : 


; lo sm 

• 



« 





• . • 


. V’ t V 







•" u - 




























206 


Appendix 

Table I 

National Origins of School Children Based on Origin of gather 





Brit. 

Ukr 


Slov. 

Ital 

.Polish Belg. 

Dut 

Coleman 

Gnades 2-12 


159 

49 


27 

59 

50 

.10 

7 

Blairmore M 7-12 


58 

5 


13 

17 

5 

5 

2 

Fernie 

All Grades 


487 

21 


- 

52 

29 

- 

- 

Bellevue 

Grades 4-12 


90 

18 


30 

22 

15 

5 

- 

HillcrestGrades 4-12 


40 

9 


9 

18 

4 

- 

- 

Michel-Natal All Grades 

159 

22 


—* * 

79 

9 

- 

- 

Cole. 

Czech Scand 

. Russ. 

French Fr 

.Can. 

Germ. 

Misc 

• 

Cole. 

9 

10 

20 


8 


15 

1 

8 


Blair. 

12 

8 

- 


8 


5 

1 

5 


Fernie 

- 

7 

21 


9 


- 

10 

38 


Belle. 

4 

3 

5 


2 


- 

5 

5 


Hill. 

8 

5 

1 


2 


- 

7 

3 


Mich.Natal - 

12 

12 

10 


- 

20 

85 



Michel-Natal probably shows Slovaks as Miscellaneous. 

Among the miscellaneous are such groups as Romanian, Yugo¬ 
slav, Chinese, Japanese,Lithuanian, Latvian, Austrian, Hungarian, 
Swiss, Spanish, Creek, Syrian and others® 


Table II 

Percentages of pupils of British origin in the various towns 
as shown by the figures in Table I. 


Coleman 159 British of 506 pupils 31.4$ 
Blairmore 58 British of 144 pupils 40.2$ 
Pernie 507 British of 704 pupils # 72.0$ 
Bellevue 90 British of 206 pupils 43.6$ 
Hillcrest 40 British of 106 pupils 37.7$ 
Michel-Natal 159 British of 408 pupils 39.0$ 


* The 70 pupils of the Catholic school in Fernie were added 
to the total in Table I and fifty were assumed to be non- 
British to give a better picture. Exact figures were not 
available for the Catholic school. 

Because the smaller children were not included for Blairmore, 
Bellevue and Hillcrest, the percentages may not be accurate. 
See TablejIV below 




















, .v : . 

< **• 






























. 





* 




. *, 








a 


• 


„ 






l, ; 






•. 







* 




* 






. 






B ~ "''!V ;'i ’" ‘l-i .. 






£ 



■ 








































207 


Table III 


National origins of 

both parents of one elementary grade in 

Coleman to 

show the 

extent of intermarriage 

of national groups. 

Number of 

children 

in the class -- 38 


Father 


Mother 

Number 

British 


British 

11 

Slovak 


Slovak 

4 

Polish 


Polish 

2 

Ukrainian 


Ukrainian 

2 

French 


French 

1 —total 20 


Intermarried 


English 


Czech 

1 

English 


Polish 

1 

English 


Yugoslav 

1 

English 


French 

1 

Welsh 


Italian 

1 

Irish 


German 

1 

Ukrainian 


Polish 

1 

Slovak 


Finnish 

1 

Slovak 


Ukrainian 

1 

Italian 


Slovak 

2 

Czech 


German 

1 

Italian 


English 

1 

Ukrainian 


Slovak 

1 

Czech 


Slovak 

1 

Polish 


Scotch 

1 

Polish 


English 

1 

French 


Irish 

1 --total 18 


Table IV 

To show the relationship between British and other national 
groups in d ifferent school divisions. Coleman only* 

Elementary Grades (2-6); 85 British of 289 pupils 29.4$ 

Intermediate Grades(7-9);43 British of 130 pupils 33.0$ 

High School Grades (10-12);31 British of 87 pupils 35.6$ 

Whole School 159 British of 506 pupils 31.4$ 



























■ 





















































,-r , • ,, r- . i 
























. 








. 


, 

'• ■■ : ■ 

. 

, 


. 




















208 


Table V 

The number of Men Employed and the Total Coal Production in 
the Crow’s West Pass Mines during Certain Years 

x 

Number of men employed Production in tons 


Year 

B.C. 

Alta. 

Total 

B.C. 

Alta. 

1901 

989 

—* 

- 

390,000 

- 

1902 

1192 

- 

- 

394,000 

- 

1907 

2290 

- 

- 

877,000 

- 

1908 

2524 

- 

- 

883,000 

- 

1910 

3111 

- 

- 

1,365,000 

1,608,000 

1912 

2401 

2261 

4662 

1,261,000 

1,525,000 

1913 

2669 

2331 

5000 

1,333,000 

1,849,000 

1914 

2397 

2047 

4444 

955,000 

1,240,000 

1918 

1317 

1721 

3038 

731,000 

1,601,000 

1919 

1369 

1935 

3304 

559,000 

1,188,000 

1920 

1582 

2219 

3801 

847,000 

1,776,000 

1921 

1774 

1825 

3599 

760,000 

1,272,000 

1922 

1538 

2080 

3618 

554,000 

1,027,000 

1924 

1147 

2023 

3170 

274,000 

913,000 

1927 

1494 

1801 

3296 

908,000 

1,443,000 

1928 

1621 

2029 

3650 

1,001,000 

1,639,000 

1929 

1503 

1863 

3366 

887,000 

1,553,000 

1930 

1252 

1960 

3212 

689,000 

1,134,000 

1931 

1211 

1715 

2926 

661,000 

952,000 

1932 

1001 

1612 

2613 

587,000 

714,000 

1933 

698 

1615 

2313 

477,000 

876,000 

1936 

606 

1888 

2494 

470,000 

1,310,000 

1938 

693 

1885 

2578 

434,000 

1,275,000 

1941 

921 

1903 

2823 

1,026,000 

2,021,000 

1945 

1067 

2122 

3189 

880,000 

1,856,000 

1948 

1264 

2474 

3738 

1,290,000 

1,917,000 


X B.6. figures are long tons(2240 lb.) Alberta figures are 

short tons ( 2,000 lb.) 

* Figures not given for this area in Mines Branch reports 


Table VI 

Comparison of Crow’s Nest Field with the Sydney Field in 
Nova Scotia (the largest eastern coalfield).Dominion Bureau 
of Statistics 



Production in 

Short Tons 

(2,000#) 


Coal District 

1941 

1943 

1945 

1947 

Crow’s Nest Field 
Sydney Field N.S. 

3,170,334 

5,384,375 

3,001,292 

4,435,018 

2,830,547 

3,688,657 

3,115,811 

3,071,135 
















* 



* 





i 







1 



t 

t 

• * 

t 







" 





, 

. „ ; ; i 

■ , ; V- " ;: V 

■ - ' . ■ ■ . : , : . ", 















209 


Table VII 


The Population of 

the Crow 

f s Nest 

Pass — 

Dominion 

Census 

Town or District 

1901 

1911 

1921 

1931 

1941 

Blairmore 

231 

1137 

1552 

1692 

1731 

Coleman 

- 

1557 

1590 

1704 

1870 

Frank 

19 

806 

401 

268 

204 

Lille 

o 

- 

303 

- 

- 

- 

L.I.D. No. 71 

- 

1770 

3685 

4282 

4149 

Fernie 

•z 

1640 

3416 

2802 

2732 

2545 

O 

Elk-Flathead 

476 

4812 

6074 

4814 

4016 

Totals 

4,267 

12,901 

16,104 

15,429 

14,515 


1* Added to Local Improvement District No.71 for later censuses. 

2. L.I.D* No. 71 includes everything in Alberta from Burmis to 
Crowsnest, not included in Coleman, Blairmore or Frank* 

3. This is the whole area east of the Elk River and north of 
49 degrees latitude. Known as Fernie District until 1911, 
it was changed to the present district and name for the$L921 
census® In 1901, Fernie District was probably Michel only* 


Table VIII 




ExolOsions 

in the Crow 1 s 

Nest pass. 


Town 


Date 

Number Killed 

1 . 

Fernie 

1902 

May 22 

128 

2. 

Michel 

1904 

January 9 

7 

3. 

Coleman 

1907 

April 3 

3 

4. 

Bellevue 

1910 

December 9 

30 

5. 

Hillcrest 

1914 

June 19 

189 

6 • 

Fernie 

1915 

January 2 

1 

7* 

Michel 

1916 

August 8 

12 

8. 

Fernie 

1917 

April 5 

34 

9. 

Hillcrest 

1926 

September 19 

2 

10 

•Coleman 

1926 

November 23 

10 

11 

.Michel 

1938 

July 5 

3 


Total 

killed 


419 























• X 13 .t 


t 

x . 


‘..si 




. X 


■ ■ * • t 

. * 




‘ 


. . 


' 

■ 


• ■> 

















ix .. 






x x 




L* 


- 

>1 : ’ : 



■ 





•; , 


t 

x - ., - " ' v* v x 



• 

* 



* ■ . . 


or m Dr:. ? 

.?■: i';< >*x0 


* 


* . - 



L ■; :■ i-3 ri 'j.v- >X 

r Xt 



« ' 



' .T; Y.:x/-x ; 


■ ■ . >•;: ■ 't--' : 






* . 


••‘.f. r XOXX 

o■ *. 


: : x;.-.',v ;x x r. 

* 



■ X X. ;'v . X 



' 



• ■ 






. 


■ 

. 



• 


- 

' . : 
















210 


Table IX 

Origin of Names of the Communities of the Crow's Nest Pass 


Bellevue 

Blairmore -- 
Burmi s 
Coal Creek-- 
Coleman 

Corbin 
CroY/snest — 

Fernie 

Frank 

Hillcrest — 

Hosmer 

Lille 

Michel 

Morrissey — 

Natal 

Passburg -- 
Sentinel 
Spar wood 


Named by J.J.Fleutot of West Canadian Coll¬ 
ieries from "belle vue" (beautiful view);a 
descriptive term. 

Named for railway contractors Blair and More 
or a name ending in -more. 

Compounded from Burns and Kemiss, early pros¬ 
pectors of the area. 

Named after the creek originally so-called by 
Michael Phillipps for its coal outcrops. 

Named after Florence Coleman Flumerfelt, the 
daughter of the president of the townsite 
company. 

Named for D.C.Corbin of Spokane, the first 
president of the company developing the area. 
Named by the Canadian Pacific Railway Company 
for the pass upon whose height of land it Is 
situated. 

Named in honor of the two brothers William and 
Peter Fernie who first did extensive develop¬ 
ment of the mines there. 

Named after the Hon. H.L. Frank of Butte, Mont¬ 
ana, who formed the Canadian American Company 
to develop the mines there. 

Named for C.P.Hill who organized Hillcrest 
Mines Limited, and from its position atop a hill. 
Named in honor of Charles R* Hosmer of Mont¬ 
real, a director of the Canadian Pacific Railways. 
Named by West Canadian Collieries Limited 
after the city of that name in France. 

Named after Michael Phillipps, the discoverer of 
the pass who was often knoY/n as "Michel". 

Named for Joe Morrissey who explored the Crom» # s 
Nest Pass with Phillipps. 

Named by the Canadian Pacific Railway, probably 
for Natal in South Africa. 

So named because it stood at the eastern entrance 
to the Crow's Nest Pass. 

Formerly Sentry, from Mount Sentry (or Sentinel) 
on the south shore of Crowsnest Lake. 

Named by Canadian Pacific Railway engineers 
because the trees in the vicinity were suitable 
for spars for vessels. 













Cl* ; 0 hOEt& 


. 


a 

•). : 
. 1 

iz 

■ 

. ‘10 ' 
















211 


Table X 

1 

Dates of Establishment of Accounting Post Offices 


Bellevue 


Blairmore 


Coal Creek ... 


Coleman 


Corbin ... 


Crowsnest ... 


Fernie • ., 


Prank 


Hillcrest ... 


Hosmer 


Lille 


Michel 


Morrissey ••• 

in 1903 

Natal 

(New Michel) 
Passburg 



1, Canada; Reports of Postmaster General, Ottawa 

1898-1908. Sessional Papers. Dates from the first 
oJ? fifteenth of the month following the opening of 
an accounting office. 





















■ 


l 









212 


Bibliography 

Abel, P.M., The Crowds Nest Pass Agreement (Country Guide, 
Winnipeg),May, 1950 

Chittenden,H*M. and Richardson,A.T„, The Life and Travels of 

Pierre Jean de Smet (New York:Francis Harper,1905) 
Craig, John R., Ranching wit h Lords and Commons including An 
Excursion i nt o the Cr ow’s-Nest Pass (Toronto: 

Briggs, 19037" 

Fleming, Sanford, Report of the Canadian Pacific Railway 1880 
(Ottawa: McLean,Roger and Co* 1881) pamphlet. 

Gard, Robert E., Johnny Chinook (New York:Longman 1 s, 1945) 
Geographic Board of)6anada, Place-Names of Alberta (Ottawa: 

King’s Printer, 1928) pamphlet 

Gibbon, J,M., Steel of Empire (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1935) 
Gibb on, J•M., The Romantic History of the Canadian Pacific 
(New York: Tudor, 1935) " ' 

Green, Raoul and Chappell W.H., A History of West Canadian 
Collierie s (Blairmore, Alberta, unpub1ished]P* 

Hladun, John, They Taught Me Treason ( McLean 1 s Magazine, 

Toronto, Oct.1,15 and Nov.l, 1947T 
Hughes, Jack, History^of Mining in the East Kootenay District 

of British Columbia ""(ThesTs, University of Alberta, 

Edmonton,' 1944) 

Ignat!eff, A. et al, Conditions and Occurrences in the Canad ian 
Coal Mining Industry ( Canadian lining Journal , 

Ottawa,Vol. 72, October, 195T) " 

Kerr, John, The Great Landslide at Frank (Frank, Alberta: 

Turtle Mountain Playgrounds, no date)pamphlet. 

Logan, H.A., The History of Trade Union Organization in 
Canada (Chicago: U. of Chicago Press, 19287 
Logan, H.A., TradeT Unions in Canada (Toronto: MacMillan, 1948) 
Macoun, John, Autobiography of John Macoun (Ottawa: Field 
Naturalists Club, 1922) 

McKay, B.R., Corbin Coalfield ( Canadian Mining and Metallurg ¬ 
ical Bulletin ,Montreal, November, 1931) ~ 

McTavish, P.D,, Ascent of Crow’s Nest Mountain ( Canadian 
Alpine Journal ,Montreal, 1907T) 

Miles, F.E., Is This a Soviet? (McLean’s Magazine, Toronto 
April 15, 1935) 

Mudiman, Mrs•T•E., The Romance and the Tragedy of the Crow’s 

Nest Pass ( The~~ Canadian Citizen ,Twentieth Century 
Publishing Co. Calgary, Aug. 7, 1947) 

Phillipps, Michael, Memories of Thirty Years Ago (published in 
a special edition of the Fernie Free Press , 

Fernie, B.C. 1905) 

Stavely Hill, Alexander, From Home to Home (London; Sampson 
Low, 1885) 

Steele, S.B. Forty Years in Canada (Toronto; McClelland, Good- 
child and Stewart, 1915) 



























































213 


Bibliography continued 

Turner, J.P., The North West Mounted Police (Ottawa: King's 
Printer, 1950) 

Wallace, J.N., The Passes of the Rocky Mountains along the 

Alberta Boundary( Calgary Historical Society,1927) 

Wilson, T.H., Mining Pitching Seams in Northwest Canada (Re¬ 
print from Coal Modernization Yearbook, n.p.1949, 
obtainable from the Crow 1 3 Nest Pass Coal Co. Pernie) 
--- Encyclopedia of Can ada, vol.2 (Toronto: University 

Associates of Canada Limited 1935) 

- Proceedings of the Calgary Historical Society. 

(Papers in the Public Library, Calgary) 

— The Frank Slide ( National Geographic Magazine 

Washington, D.C. vol.21 1910) 

- The Frank Slide(Canadian Magazine,Toronto, vol.21 

1903) 


Government Reports 

Great Britain 

The Journals...by Captain Palliser... of British 
North Jmerica... During the Years 1857, 1858, 1859, 
1860. j The Pal User ReportJ (London: Eyre and Spottis- 
woode/the Queen’s Printers, 1863) 


Canada 

(Justice) Carroll et al. Report of the Commission on Coal 
(Ottawa: King's Printer/lsdPs) " 

Cautley, R.W. et al. Report of the Commission to Delimit the 

Boundary between the Provinces of Alberta and Brit ¬ 

ish Columbia.(Ottawa: King 1 s Printer, 1914) 

Clute, R.C., Report of the Commission Inquiring into the 

Death of McDonald and Fraser on the Crow's Nest 

Railway (Ottawa: King“'s Printer, 1899) 

Daly,R.A* et al, Report of the Commission to Investigate 

T urtle Mountain, Frank, Alberta .(Ottawa: King y s 
Printer, “1/911] 

Dawson, G.M., Report of the Geological Survey of Canada 
(Ottawa: King’s Printer, 1882, 1885, 1886) 


Alberta 

Allan, J.A., Annual Report of the Research Council of Alberta 
Nos. 28/29,30. (Edmonton/ "King 1 s Printer, 1951,1932) 
Allan, J.A., First Annual Report on the Mineral Resources of 
Alberta , Department of Lanas and Mines (Edmonton: 

King's Printer, 1920) 

Sifton, A.L. et al. Report of the Commission on the Coal 
Industry in the Province of Alberta (Edmonton: 
King's Printer, 1907) 




































214 


Bibliography continued 

Stirling, J.F. et al, Report of the Commission on the '-cal ¬ 
cining Industry ' (Edmonton": King ! 3 Printer, 191 9 ) 

- Report of theCommissioner of the Alberta Provin - 

cial'Police'{T ing f s Printer, Edmonton, 19SO, 192l, 

19221 " 

-— Report of the lines Branch (Edmonton: King 1 s Printer 

1906' to 1948 inciusiveT* 

British Columbia 

— Re port of the minister of lines (Victoria: King 1 s 

Printer,1901 to 1948 inclusive) 

Letters 

Dominion .Archivist, Dr. Wrn* Kaye Lamb, Ottawa. 

Public Relations Department, Great Northern 
Railway, Minneapolis, Minn. U.S.A. 

Canadian Pacific Railway, District Offices, 

Calgary and Lethbridge. 

Provincial Departments of Mines, Alberta, British 
Columbia. 


Newspapers 

Prom the files of the Legislative Libraries at Edmonton 
and Victoria and offices at Fernie, Coleman, Blairmore, 
Lethbridge and Macleod. 

Blairmore Times ( quoted in other papers) 

Blairmore Enterprise 
Blairmore Graphic 
Bellevue Times 
Coleman Miner 
Coleman Bulle tin 
Coleman JourriaT " 

Ferni e Free Press 
Fernie District Ledger 
Fernie Ledger 
Frank Paper 
Frank Vindicator 

Hosmer Times 
Macleod Gazette 
Michel Reporter 
Morrissey Miner 
Lethbridge Herald 






























. 

' 

.* . c.. 

. * , , . ■ , 

; ■ . * : • ■ - . ' : '• ’ / • 

. •• 





• - lor • 








, ' . . •' *i • . -:rc- ■ V 

» ' ' • .. 

3 1 ■ o ■: 1 • L. 

~ 0\. ' \ 

. 

• " r *:. f •.o 

•. .-v cv’: 

) ■ - . ■' 0 ; 
















DCClL^ 
J miles - J 





» "JtSrJ vJWJj' 

-yA /f 

\ 1 1 

r i s h 


Jo L U\M B 1 A fv- ' 




J 

\«. VA ^5 

\c \*5 

^ r 


- -/ 

« 

! 


s^jf* '- 

rP~s\ ' »»• i 

r 

# 



\ ^L_ 


V 


* 

’?» Luntlajj^ 


















































































































































