For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


























Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/historyofminingiOOjhug 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 
(Department of History) 

A THESIS 

A HISTORY OF MINING 

IN THE EAST KOOTENAY DISTRICT OF BRITISH COLUMBIA 
Submitted in partial fulfilment 
of the 

requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts 

—By— 

J. Hughes 


Edmonton, Alberta* 


July, 1944* 






















* 





























I 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Map of the Southeastern Part of the 

Kootenay District of British Columbia..facing 1 

I. The Kootenay Country. 1 

II. The Indians. 8 

III. The Fur Traders. 16 

Map of the Northwestern United States and 
Southwestern Canada, showing the American 
Mining Advance...facing 20 

IV. The American Mining Advance. 20 

V. Some Important Karnes in Pioneering Times. 38 

VI. The Era of Placer Mining. 45 

VII. Lode-Mining. 63 

VIII. Smelting. 78 

IX. Coal Mining. 86 

X. Transportation. 99 

XI. The Development of Subsidiary Industries. 118 

XII. The Prairies and the Kootenays. 124 

Appendlx-“List of Tables. 132 

References. 150 


Photostat Map of the Kootenay District..back page 






' 







, 

- 

. 















The Southeastern Part of the Kootenay District 

of 

British Columbia. 


(to face page one.) 


1 


r. THE KOOTENAY COUNTRY- 

The name "Kootenay" is one of obscure meanings and 
varied spelling. It probably originated from the 
Indian name "Kootenuga", although many prefer the 
derivation "Co", water, and "Tinneh", people.(1) Sixty- 
one ways of spelling the word are extant(2) ranging 
from Coutanie, Kootanie, Kootenay, Kootonay and Kootanie 
(3) to Kutunas, Kooenuha, Kutnehas, Kutonas, Goutanies, 
Cotonoi, Kitunhas, and Kootenuha.(4) Official maps 
issued by the Surveyor-General of the Dominion Government 
read "Kootenay" and the United States Government uses 
"Kootenai" in maps of Idaho and Montana. This would 


seem authority enough to employ the former in designating 
the British Columbia portion and the latter for the 
United States part. 

The Kootenay district is roughly an isosceles 

triangle in the south-east corner of British Columbia 

with its base on the forty-ninth parallel and its apex 

at the Big Bend of the Columbia River. The eastern 

Tl) BAILLIE-GROHMAN, W. A., "Fifteen Years Sport and Life 
in the Hunting Grounds of Western America and British 
Columbia," p. 226. Horace Cox, London, 1900. 

(2) THRUPP, SYLVIA, "A History of the Cranbrook District 
in East Kootenay," quoting WHITE, "Handbook of the 
Indians of Canada," p. 258. Univ. of B. C. thesis, 1929. 

(3) These are the spellings used in PALLISER, CAPT- JOHN, 
"Explorations of British North America 1857-1860." 

(4) BAILLIE-GROHMAN, op. cit., p. 226. 











. 






















































' 


. . \ 

. 


, . 








. 











2 


boundary, the Rocky Mountains, extends as far as the 
fifty-second parallel of north latitude and the boundary 
to the west is the Monashee Range of the Selkirk 
Mountains which forms the western watershed of the 
Columbia River* The southern boundary extends from the 
114th* to the 118th* meridian of west longitude, along 
the 49th. parallel, a distance of approximately 180 
miles, and the greatest distance north and south is 
roughly 205 miles. The area of the whole district is 
17,290,420 acres.(5) 

Lofty mountains, quiet valleys and noble rivers 

make up the surface features. The triangle is divided 

into two fairly equal parts by the Purcell Rfjnge of 

the Selkirk Mountains, thus forming the districts of 

East and West Kootenay. The East Kootenay District, 

which is the subject of this study, is thus an extensive 

area comprising the eastern slopes of the Purcell 

Mountains , the upper portion of the Columbia and 

Kootenay River Valleys and the western slopes of the 

Rocky Mountain Range. To the east of the Purcell Range 

is the Rocky Mountain Trench where the Columbia and 

CrOBNELL,” R. E., "The Year Book of British Columbia,* 1 p. 
405, 1914. This author on page 97 of the 1897 Year Book 
also cites the fact that the Hudson 9 s Bay Trader, Mr. 
yiacKay, preferred the derivation "Co**, water, "Tinneh", 
people. 


(5) 





















. 






. 







3 


Kootenay RiversValleys find a convenient path for their 

respective northerly and southerly courses. The latter 

rises in the lofty peaks of the Rockies, entering the 

trench just one and a half miles from the Columbia Lake 

and flowing southward across the international boundary 

line. After forming a giant horseshoe in the United 

States it again crosses the 49th. parallel, widening out 

into the Kootenay Lake, before flowing westward and 

southward to become a tributary of the Columbia. It is 

held by some geologists that the Columbia River for its 

first hundred miles once flowed southward into the 

Kootenay.(6) Be that as it may, at the present time 

Columbia Lake, the source of the Columbia River, is 

eleven feet lower than the Kootenay and in high water 

it is quite probable that at one time part of the 

Kootenay flowed northward through the Rocky Mountain 

Trench making Windermere Lake deeper than it is at 

present and the rapids of the Columbia more awe-inspiring 

than they now are. At the Great Bend the river flows 

southward for many miles widening into the picturesque 

Upper and Lower Arrow Lakes, and having received the 

waters of the Kootenay, the Columbia crosses the 

boundary line to proceed on its way to the Pacific. 

W) ELLIOTT, T. C., ”In the Land of the Kootenai,** p. 

280. Oregon Historical Quarterly, Vol. XXVII. 












. 








s 


" 










. 

' 














'i 






























4 


These mountains, rivers and lakes all have their 
influence on the climate, The westerly winds deposit 
much of their moisture on the higher peaks so that the 
rainfall varies greatly even in short distances, but 
drier regions get an abundance of water from the rivers 
and creeks in this superbly well-drained area and 
irrigation is easy. In the foothills of the Rockies 
the snowfall is uncommonly light and below zero weather 
lasts, as a rule, for only a few days at a time. Generally 
the weather changes sharply in severity with altitude. 

In climate and physical character the East Kootenay 
is suitable for both grazing and tillage. Cattle can 
be grazed without undue suffering during the whole of 
the short winter, except in the upper reaches of the 
Rockies, Agriculture can be carried on profitably in 
the river bottoms and bench lands of the Purcells and 
the foothills of the Rockies, The land is not so fertile 
as the prairie soil but it is well adapted, with irrigation^ 
to truck farming and fodder crops. The shallowness and 
stony nature of the soil required fertilization as well 
as careful tillage for these small crops. On the average 
the grass is abundant and nutritious making it a good 
ranching country in places where fodder and other small 
crops cannot be raised. The advent of agricultural 













































. 































5 


associations, especially in the East Kootenay District, 
has meant a great improvement in the breed of stock 
raised* Fernie and Elko have become centres for these 
associations in recent years and fairs are held period* 
ically. These places have too great an altitude for 
fruit raising, but Just twenty-four miles from Elko 
is a fertile valley bordering on the international 
boundary line, where all kinds of apples and small fruits 
can be grown profitably for sale in the neighboring more 
populated centres* In general this is true of the whole 
foothill area, especially in the north near Windermere 
and Columbia Lakes where the altitude varies from 2600 
to 2800 feet above sea level* However, the small scale 
development heretofore has not sufficed to fill the needs 
of the local market* 

Forests are abundant even after many years of 
lumbering. Much of the Spruce and White Pine of the 
higher altitudes near Fernie (3304 feet) has been cut 
out but the lower lands still have an abundance of 
Yellow Pine* Cedar posts are still sold to the farmers 
of the prairies. The halcyon days of the lumberjack 
with his picturesque vocabulary, his roaring ways, and 
large bankroll have passed never to return. The 
large mills, monument to his skill, have been taken 




















. 








. 












; ' 




. 











































I 






. :: ■ 

















6 

down long since to supply the Japanese with scrap 
metal. The portable mills saved the Kootenay after 
the most accessible timber had been cut out and today 
prosperity has come to the small owner who employs 
six to fifteen men moving his sphere of operations 
after two or three years and transporting his equipment 
to a point where larger timber is more abundant. Roads 
can be built easily in these bench lands § trucks and 
driving skill carry the lumber to the nearest railroad 
station. 

Without minerals the agricultural and £>rest wealth 
of the area would have been valueless, since by themselves 
they can support but a meager population and the 
incentive to development would have been lacking. 

Though the coal of the Rocky Mountain area is of greatest 
value from the standpoint of permanent development, the 
placer gold of the Purcells and the lower reaches of the 
Rockies was first exploited and has been of greater 
historical importance. Silver, lead, copper, and zinc 
stand midway in the story of Kootenay®s progress. 
Phosphate, in the Rockies, doubtless has a future value, 
but at this date the beds, situated near Fernie, are of 
such low quality that they cannot be transported as far 
as Trail to compete with that from Montana. Also of 











7 


slight economic value are the signs of oil in the extreme 
south-east corner at Sage Creek, although in 1936 these 
wells yielded as much as two barrels of crude oil per 
day, and according to reports twelve men were employed 
in the fall of that year* Talc, gypsum, clay, mercury, 
slate and magnesite are present in some quantity. There 
is little doubt that these will be developed in the future 
when more accessible deposits have been depleted. 

The Kootenay country waited long for development 
jmainly because of its inaccessibility. Its forest 
resources could be exploited only superficially without 
I adequate transportation to the great potential markets 
; of the prairies. Its gold, silver, lead, zinc and coal 
were valueless until the enterprising Americans pushed 
development into this extension of their own frontier 
and made it virtually a territory of their own. The 
Igovernment of British Columbia could hardly be blamed 
for its lack of initiative in the early days for 
|geography conspired against all efforts to make it more 
truly a part of British Columbia. After all, the markets 
for these minerals were to the south of the international 
:boundary line and it was logical that the easier north 
and south communication lines should develop first. 




































' Jhl 




■ 






■ 




■ 

























8 


II. THE INDIANS’. 

In the East Kootenay the Indians inhabit chiefly 

three regions: the Upper Columbia River, the Upper 

Kootenay River, and the Elk and Flathead Rivers. The 

latest census returns give 123 , 172 and 88 for the 

respective populations of these areas making a total of 

383.(1) All the Kootenay Indians belong to the Salish 

Nation, the Upper Kootenay Indians being in general 

the chief inhabitants of East Kootenay. These live for 

the most part at Columbia Lake, St. Mary’s and Tobacco 

Plains. They were the most manly of all the branches 

of the Kitunahan family, numbering some 300 in 1869.(2) 

The Lower Kootenays, often called the Flatbows, were 

looked down upon by the Upper Indians, as being the 

most inferior of all branches of the Kitunahan family. 

They numbered 397 in 1848; 157 in 1883 ; 162 in 1896 .( 3 ) 

They sometimes came up the Kootenay River as far as the 

IT) CENSUS RETURNS, 1931, Vol. II, p. 103, These 
statistics are lacking in the available 1941 census 
pamphlets. The Department of Indian Affairs gives a 
population of 638 for the Kootenay agency in I 892 . This 
includes all the five bands of the Kootenay. GOSNELL, op. 
cit., p. 178, gives a total of 582 for the Kootenay 
Indians, ail Roman Catholics, taken from the 1891 Census: 
UPPER KOOTENAY FLAT BOY/ SHUSWAPS 

Columbia Lake 78 Flat Bow 162 Kinbaskets 51 

St. Mary’s 187 
Tobacco Plains 84 

(2) BALL, H. M., "Report of H. M. Ball to the Colonial 
Secretary," Dec. 28, I 869 . 

(3) BAILLIE-GROHMAN, op. cit., p. 300. 






























9 


Kootenay Falls but seldom proceeded higher. The only 
direct evidence to support the contention that the 
Kootenay Indians once lived on the Plains is the assertion 
made by the trader, Alexander Henry, that he found 
remains of their lodges on the eastern slopes of the 
mountains.(4) If they had ever any kinship with the 
Blackfoot tribes it was at a period far removed from 
recent times for tradition chronicles nothing but dire 
enmity. 

Their economy was necessarily simple. The Upper 
Indians lived chiefly by hunting while the Lower Indians 
found their chief sustenance from the abundant fish 
supply of the Kootenay River and the Kootenay Lake. 

When game became scarce it was customary to journey over 
the mountains to the buffalo herds of the Plains. Wild 
berries and roots of the more luscious herbs provided 
some variety to their diet. 

The Indian tribes had frequent contacts with each 
other. The Shuswaps often journeyed as far as Lake 
Windermere and Tobacco Plains. When Father Coccola came 
into the area in 1887, he was guided by this tribe to 
Lake Windermere where the Upper Kootenays took over and 
conducted him to the St. Eugene Mission. The trading 
14) THRUPP, op. cit., p. 12. 







. 




, 














. 












. 































10 


post at Tobacco Plains was also a centre of trade for 
these Indians, as it was they who guided James Manning 
to their winter quarters not far from Finlay Creek in 
the fall of 1863•(5) The frequent incursions of the 
Blackfoot Indians from the Plains, after the gold rush 
of 1864, with the loss of cattle involved, so angered 
the Kootenay Indians that they joined the Spokane 
Indians and the Flathead Lake tribe in a great council 
of war at Tobacco Plains with the intention of taking 
the offensive against the Blackfeet. The possibility 
of waging a successful war with these powerful clans 
numbering in all about 2350 men(6) was slim indeed. 

In 1869 a two-day fight took place at Three Buttes, 

Elk River, when the Kootenays were driven back with 
twelve men killed and a large number wounded, besides 
the loss of all their buffalo meat, hides, baggage and 
most of their horses* The victors pursued them right 
to the Kootenay mines and captured some twenty more 
horses, including five belonging to the Hudson 8 s Bay 
Company*(7) Their war parties, usually consisting of 
fifty or sixty men, disturbed the peace of the Kootenays 
15) THRUPP, op. cit., p. 19. 

(6) ROBERTSON-ROSS, P, "Reconnaissance of the North 
West Provinces and Indian Territories of the Dominion of 
Canada,” p. 116. Dorn* Sess. Papers, Vol. 6, No* 5> l8?3» 

(7) COLONIST, Aug. 20, 1869* 

































































' 








11 


until Indian reservations were established. 

The first contacts of the Kootenays with white 
men took place at an early date. Even before 1800 they 
had appeared on the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains 
of Canada to barter with the traders of the Saskatchewan. 

(8) Often for fear of the Piegans and Blackfoot tribe 
of the prairies they went to Kootenay Plain in the 
Rockies just west of Rocky Mountain House and the traders 
gladly journeyed there to meet them. As early as 1800 
freemen and trappers were sent by the traders of the 
Saskatchewan to spy out the land. For the next five years 
these penetrated both the Canadian Kootenay and the 
American Kootenai among the Saleesh, Kullyspell, 

Skeetshon and Spokane tribes.(9) No written record 
remains of these visitors but tradition and local 
nomenclature well attest their presence. The Catholic 
missionary, Father De Smet, visited the Kootenay Indians 
in 1841, 1845, and 1859 and had great success in 
converting them. Robertson-Ross noted the civilized 
attitude of the Kootenay Indians a s contrasted with the 
animal-like habits of life of the Cree and Blackfoot.(10) 
Sir George Simpson, however, thought them a miserable 

set of dirty and decrepit beings.(11) In the early days 

18)" ELLIOTT, op. cit., p. 280. 

(9) Ibidem, p. 281. 
































. 

■ 











► 







12 


prospectors found the use of the Indians as guides 
very much to their profit,. 

Contact with white men was on the whole advantageous 
to the Indians. The trader Berland helped to encourage 
them in their religious pursuits after the visit of 
Father De Smet in 1841 to such good purpose that the 
good Father was pleasantly surprised to find in 1845 
that the results of his first visit still continued, A 
little log chapel had even been built on Tobacco Plains. 
Father Fouquet arrived with Brother John Burns in October* 
1874* and founded the St. Eugene’Mission* six miles from 
where the St. Mary f s River enters the Kootenay River. 

Even in 1883 a writer of the time found them of all the 
Indian tribes of North America, except the Alaska 
Indians* still most unspoiled by the presence of the 
white men in close proximity. They were what De Smet 
had found them in 1845* still scrupulously honest* but 
gambling had increased to a dangerous degree.(12) The 
fur trade affected their ordinary life favourably 
inasmuch as it rendered it more comfortable and clothing 
more plentiful. Their food still remained largely what 

Tl5) ROBERTSOH-ROSS, op. cit., p. 119. 

(11) SIMPSON, SIR GEORGE, "A Narrative of a Journey 
Round the World," quoted by THRUPP* op; cit.* p. 15. 

(12) BARNEBY, W. H., "Life and Labour in the Far, Far 
West," p. 419, Appendix C. Cassell & Company, 1884. 













- 






\ 






* 











































13 

they secured by hunting and fishing, but Father De 
Smet h a d successfully introduced agricultural pursuits 
among the Flathead tribes, and the Indians of the 
iTobacco Plains had been induced to raise some cattle. 

The Lower Kootenay Indians, however, by 1883 had become 
so discouraged by the constant flooding of their lands 
that they gave up farming in disgust and gambled away 
all their once numerous stock of cattle and horses. 

Father Coccola replaced Father Fouquet in the fall of 
| 1887 and for twenty years he was the guide of the Indians 
in agriculture as well as in religion. He taught them 
to plant fruit trees, the first in the Kootenay 
District. Shelter still remained largely the traditional 
tee-pee until reserves were established. 

Governmental action to this end was finally made 
necessary by various grievances. The most serious was 
the arrest in 1887 of the two Upper Kootenay Indians, 
Kapla and Young Isadore, for the murder of two miners 
named Kemp and Hylton between Wild Horse and Golden in 
1884. Aided by a numerous band Chief Isadore released 
the prisoners and insisted on their innocence. The 
smallness of the reserve allotment had also been 
causing dissension for some time as well as the question 

of St. Joseph's Prairie. Colonel Baker had bought this 











14 


piece of land where Cranbrook now stands from John 
Galbraith and had ordered the Indians to move away from 
the spot as he wanted to fence it. They were in the habit 
of camping here, as it was free from mosquitoes, and 
they refused to move. The braves decked themselves out 
in war paint and the murmurings became so ominous that 
Major Steele was sent with a detachment of one hundred 
men to found Fort Steele in 1887. During the following 
year the Indians accused of murder were acquitted and 
the reserve question was settled by increasing the 
area of the reserves and apportioning to the Indians 
better land in the south. When the detachment left in 
August, 1888, all danger of trouble had been removed 
by the diplomacy of Mr. Farwell, Judge O’Reilly, Dr. 
Powell, Colonel B a ker and Major Steele and the Indians 
were so well satisfied with the arrangements that from 
that time on they have lived in peace. 

The mark of the Indian on the development of the 
Kootenay has been often forgotten. None the less it 
was very real. Many of the trails of the early days 
followed the paths of Indians. They had frequently 
used the Crow’s Nest Pass as a route to the prairies 
on their buffalo hunting expeditions, although they 

preferred another route immediately south of the 49th. 


















' 1 



















* M 








■ 





- • 







■ 









































15 

parallel. They proved excellent guides both to the 
prospector and the fur trader. It was information 
derived from Indians also that lured the prospectors 
northward into British Columbia.(13) Even as long ago 
as the beginning of the 19th. century the Indians used 
to melt the rock of what is now the Blue Bell Mine on 
Kootenay Lake to make their bullets. They communicated 
their knowledge to trappers and hunters of the Hudson 8 ® 
Bay Company. Chik Min Peter was the Kootenay Indian 
who brought in a sample of clear galena ore to Father 
Coccola which resulted in the location of the St. Eugene 
Claims in 1893® It was the half“breed son of David 
Thompson 1 ® servant* Jaco Finlay* who first discovered 
the gold on Finlay Creek in 1863 which led to the rush 
to Wild Horse Creek in 1864. An Indian named Skookum 
Joe led Mr. George Cowan to an important gold quartz 
ledge on Wild Horse Creek in 1889. (14) It Is probable* 
though not authenticated* that the Indians first 
discovered coal in the Grow 8 s lest Pass. 

(13) HICKARDjT. A.* 8, Indian Participation in the Gold 
Discoveries* 81 B. C. Historical Quarterly* Yol. 2* 1938* 
p. 4. 

(14) COLONIST* Dec. 2?* I889, p. 4. 






















' 

























. . 


. 






» 






. 
















. . . - . 















16 


III. THE FUR TRADERS. 

The history of the fur trade in East Kootenay 
begins with David Thompson. He had left the Hudson’s 
Bay Company and entered the Northwest Company in 1797 
and three years later we find him at Rocky Mountain 
House. His first attempt to cross the Rockies in 1801 
was a failure.(1) In the spring of 1807, however, he 
crossed Howse Pass, came down the Blaeberry River, and 
ascended the Columbia River about one hundred miles 
to Lake Windermere. Near the source of the Columbia, 
about one mile northwest of what is now Athalmer and a 
quarter of a mile north from the mouth of Toby Creek, he 
built his permanent Kootenay House, the first trading 
post established west of the Rockies. Here he spent 
the winters of l807~C8 and 1808-09. During the first 
winter the Piegans from the Plains came to attack the 
fort, but its strength discomfited them. When they 
returned with a big war party Thompson appeased their 
chief ’’Kootenay Apee f ® with presents. Up to the summer 
of 1811 his explorations, always accompanied by the 
erection of trading posts at advantageous points, covered 
all trading areas in Eastern British Columbia, Montana, 
Idaho, and Eastern Washington. 

(1) THRUPP, op. cit., p. 2. 




















. 







17 


Jaco Finlay, Finnan McDonald, and James McMillan 
were able henchmen of the explorer. Finlay opened up 
trade for Thompson in western Montana. Jocko Creek, 
in Missoula County, still preserves his memory. At 
Spokane House, built by him in l8l0, he was a resident 
until 1826 when it ceased to be the fur emporium for the 
Upper Columbia, Kootenay and Flathead trade, giving 
place to Colville. Finnan McDonald was the advance 
agent developing routes and depots, the ,f avant courier” 
among the Indians to the south. In all probability he 
was the first white man to descend the Kootenay River 
to Lake Kootenay, and the first to traverse the trail 
across the bend of the river from Bonner f s Ferry to 
Cranbrook and Fort Steele. His great strength is still 
a legend among the Flathead tribes near whom some of 
his descendants, from a Kulluspell Indian wife, still 
live. James McMillan, a clerk of the Northwest Company, 
crossed the Rockies on snowshoes with dog sleds and some 
goods to trade, and joined McDonald above Kootenai 
Fglls, Montana, in 1808. Closely associated with 
McDonald, he spent twenty-one years in the Spokane, 
Flathead and Kootenay districts. 

The conduct of the fur trade involved great difficult 
ies. In the years from 1807 to 1812 Fort William was 









. 


































Hi 


















18 

the commercial base. Goods for the Indian trade had 
to be transported thence in packages of ninety pounds 
in canoes upon the streams and on the backs of men over 
portages to the headwaters of the Saskatchewan. By 
pack horses over the Rockies to the Columbia, by canoes 
one hundred miles upstream to the Columbia Lake, by 
portage to the Kootenay, the goods finally reached 
the Flatheads, near Jennings, Montana, and the Kulluspell 
and Spokane tribes at Bonner®s Ferry were supplied by 
Indian trails leading from the Kootenay River. 

A more direct route to Kootenay House was soon 
discovered. This was by way of the Bow River and 
Simpson and Vermilion Passes, to the Columbia a few 
miles below Lake Windermere. This was a shorter route 
to Oregon in the fur-trading days as compared with the 
canoe route by the Athabasca and Columbia Rivers. Sir 
George Simpson used the route in 1841, as did the British 
army officers, Warre and Vav a sour, in 1844, and Pierre 
De Smet, Jesuit missionary, in 1845* The route was 
also of value to bands of miners and packers hurrying 
to the Kootenay gold fields in the sixties. Thompson 
and his lieutenants have been given scant credit for 
their discovery of the best routes. The route from 
Walla Walla by the Moyie River to Skirmish Creek was one 













. 

. 
















■ 





























19 


often used by Thompson himself, as well as by McDonald, 
after whom the Moyie River was first named. Skirmish 
Creek was the Wild Horse Creek of the placer discoveries 
and the same route was used by prospectors and miners 
in the gold "rushes’®. 







NORTHWESTERN UNITED STATES AND SOUTHWESTERN CANADA 










Depicting 

The American Mining Advance 


(to face page twenty.) 


20 


IV. THE AMERICAN MINING ADVANCE. 

The American mining advance into the East Kootenay 
was a product of many factors, not the least of which 
was the discovery of gold in California in 1849 and at 
Colville in 1855. The California "rushes" developed a 
nucleus of experienced miners and prospectors always 

ready to avail themselves of new opportunities® The 

traffic 

finding of gold at Colville helped to start steamboat A 
on the Columbia River and as the miners discovered that 
deposits were small and superficial they heeded the 
advice of Angus McDonald, chief clerk of the Hudson 8 s 
Bay Company at Fort Colville, that better prospects 
would be found farther up the Columbia River® James 
Taylor and a small party struck across the Okanagan 
Country and penetrated as far as the Thompson River. 

By March 1, 1856 McDonald was able to write to Governor 
Douglas that gold had been found in considerable 
quantities on the Columbia River within British 
territory® In 1857 adventurers from Oregon and 
Washington Territories made their way into the country 
on the Upper Fraser and found several rich bars. It 
but remained now for Colonel Wright to bring his stern 
measures to bear on the Indian menace, to clear the way 
for a substantial advance of the mining frontier. By 























- 

' 










21 


March, 1858, miners on the Fraser and Thompson Rivers 
were making $8 to $50 per day and conditions in 
California were favourable for a great exodus of 
population to a promising field. Between 1853 and 1857 
there had been a decrease of $8,354*000 in the gold 
export and by this time capital was necessary to develop 
the deep diggings. The miners disliked working for 
wages and believed that the deposits would become richer 
towards the north. The Fraser River gold "rush” broke 
the way for an important overland trade in cattle 
between Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, 
besides bringing in prospectors who pushed farther and 
farther into the interior towards Cariboo and Kootenay. 

The Fraser River deposits yielded one and a half 

million dollars in 1859(1) but the fate of the Colony 

of British Columbia hung upon an extension of the gold 

discoveries. The Colony was saved by the Cariboo gold 

fields which proved one of the most remarkable in the 

whole history of mining. The flood tide of the movement 

thither took place in the years 1862 and 1863, 4000 men 

being at work in the latter year. Another important 

area of expansion lay west of the Cascade Mountains 

near the international boundary line along the Similkameen 

(1) TRIMBLE, W. J., "The Mining Advance into the Inland 
Empire," p. 46. Univ. of Wisconsin, Bull. 638, 1914. 












































. 


• . 










. 




















22 


River and Rock Creek* There mines had been discovered 
by soldiers of the B oundary Commission in the fall of 
1859* and in the spring of i860 large numbers of men 
from the Dalles, Walla Walla, the Sound, the Willamette 
Valley, and from northern California came into the 
district.(2) The diggings were found to be rich but 
not extensive, so the energies of these men were soon 
available for other "finds**. 

The discovery of the Comstock lode of silver in 
Nevada and the stampede to Pike*s Peak in Colorado in 
1859 brought about a great advance of the eastward 
moving frontier of the United States. The Comstock 
Lode also centered attention on the W a shoe mines in 
Nevada but these were outshone in the public eye by the 
Pike f s Peak deposits. The antecedents of these discoveries 
go back to 1849 when, as a result of the California 
"strikes", large numbers of prospectors got the habit 
of a roving life and spent their lives prospecting the 
mountain valleys with a pick and pan, a burro, and a 
few camp tools. Some thousands of these "fifty-niners" 
stayed in Colorado to help set up a state, a smaller 
number remained in Nevada for the same purpose but many 
thousands of men ranged the mountains both north and 

(2) TRIMBLE, op. cit., p. 42. 






















. 
































_ 










. 










23 


south always subject to the hypnotic influence of gold. 

Thus discoveries in Arizona, Idaho, Eastern Oregon, 
and Montana were a logical outcome of the activities 
of these prospectors. The "finds** in Arizona were at 
first the product of the Civil War and the march of the 
California volunteers to the Colorado valley, but the 
prospectors soon widened the original discoveries 
and hundreds of miners were attracted to the south¬ 
western fields. In Idaho "rushes** occurred to the Nez 
Perces mines, Salmon River, Warren*s Diggings, Boise 
and Owyhee; in eastern Oregon, to John Day River and 
Powder River; and in Montana, to Grasshopper Creek, 

Alder Gulch, and Last Chance. 

These movements to the southward were largely 
contemporaneous with movements in British Columbia 
from i860 to 1866. Both drew multitudes from the West 
Coast and started large migrations from Pike*s Peak 
and the East. There were constant migrations between 
the various camps which political boundaries did not 
seriously interrupt. In May, 1862, the San Francisco 
"Bulletin** estimated that some 30,000 people had 
departed from San Francisco, Utah, the "States**, and 
the Canadian Provinces for these northern mines.(3) 


(3) TRIMBLE, op. cit., p. 71. From San Francisco alone 
38 OO departed. 

































n 




. 

















* 


« 





24 


Most of them went to the Salmon River mines in Idaho. 

The fact that no mining camp flared up more suddenly 
or flickered out more quickly had some effect in 
pushing forward the development of mines in the East 
Kootenay when gold was discovered there in 1863. 

Since access to the East Kootenay was much easier 

from the south it was logical that American prospectors 

should be the first to penetrate to the promising fields 

in this region. The gold "rush" to Wild Horse Creek 

took place in 1864 and in rapid succession "strikes** of 

some consequence were made on Finlay Creek and Toby 

Creek, near Wild Horse, and at the Big Bend of the 

Columbia River in 1865. The continued activity of these 

brought 

experienced prospectors,^ "rush" to Perry Creek in 
I867. The centre of this new mining district was Wild 
Horse Creek where Fisherville arose In sight of Mount 
Fisher as the chief camp. After it was pulled down 
for the highly remunerative operation of mining the 
ground on which it stood Kootenay Camp emerged as the 
chief centre of population on Wild Horse Creek. 
"Kootenay 91 was the centre from which the gold 
commissioners wrote their reports. On the Upper 
Columbia, French Creek became the camp possessing 
attraction for the largest number of the adventurers. 



































■ 




. 



















25 


"Old Town" on Perry Creek resulted from the first 
inrush of miners* 

To give a correct estimate of the "takings" from 
these mining camps when they were practically one 
hundred percent American is well-nigh impossible. The 
new export duty on gold caused the miners to falsify 
their yields, but it was the general opinion of miners 
and traders that about one million dollars of gold of 
the best grade, worth eighteen dollars an ounce, was 
taken out in 1865.(4) The Colonial Secretary of 
British Columbia, A. N. Birch, on his return from a 
visit to the Kootenay in October, 1864, took with him 
seventy-five pounds of government gold to New 
Westminster.(5) The gross revenue for 1865 from the 
Kootenay mines was estimated at $75*000. The movement 
to the Upper Columbia was relatively insignificant 
except as a factor in attracting American prospectors 
from the south and thereby causing the adjacent country 
to be searched for gold and other valuable minerals. 

The total yield for Big Bend in 1865 was only $40,000 
from nearly 1000 diggings.(6) 

14)THIMBLE, op. cit., p. 58. 

(5) Report of the Colonial Secretary, A. N. Birch, to 
Governor Frederick Seymour, Oct. 31, 1864. 

(6) RICKARD, T. A., "The Kootenay Region," Canadian 
Mining Journal, May, 1943, pp. 285-295. 















. 



' 





- 



' 


































. 














. 






' 




« 



















26 


The real importance of the Kootenay mines in the 
mining history of the "Inland Empire"(7) arose from 
their location. They were remote from the governmental 
centres of the British colonies and easily accessible 
from the territories to the south. As early as April* 
1864, pack trains left from practically all of the 
northern American mining states for the new Eldorado at 
Wild Horse Creek. The Americans from Colville, 
Washington, even constructed a road into the British 
Columbia camp, with no assistance from the government, 
thus shortening the distance by some two hundred miles. 
(8) All the waggon roads and trails led south and this 
being the case the district could be little else but 
American. Physiographic conditions kept the region 
largely American until long after the peak of production 
had passed. Lewiston was only 342 miles distant, 

Walla Walla 408, and Umatilla Landing 453, whereas 
Hope, the nearest village in British Columbia, was over 
500 miles away. 

The Columbia and Missouri Rivers were important 

avenues in developing transportation into the Kootenay 

region and keeping the trade American. The Oregon 

I?) This term is often used to include the southern 
interior of British Columbia, eastern Oregon, Washington, 
western Montana, and Idaho. 

(8) COLONIST, June 20, 1864, quoting the "Columbian." 














. 





, 

K I 

. 










. 















27 

Navigation Company monopolized the heavy traffic on 
the Columbia. In the three years 1861-64 it transported 
to the Upper Country of the "Inland Empire" 60,320 
tons and nearly 100,000 passengers. In the year 1864 
alone it took into the area about 22,000 tons and 
36,000 passengers.(9) Until the opening of the Northern 
Pacific Railway in 1882-83, the Missouri River also 
played some part in taking miners and supplies into 
the Bitter Root Valley in Montana. Many of the miners 
went later into the Kootenay. 

In these early days both railway facilities and 

financial investments came largely from the United 

States and greatly stimulated development. The coming 

of the Northern Pacific Railway to Sandpoint, on Lake 

Pend d 8 Oreille, in Idaho in 1883 provided a more 

attractive route from Walla Walla to Sandpoint, thence 

165 miles up Moyie Valley to either St. Joseph®s Prairie 

or Wild Horse Creek. Before this the pack route from 

Missoula, Montana, through Tobacco Plains and thence 

by a trail on the eastern side of the Kootenay River 

to Wild Horse Creek was much used. The railroad progress 

followed closely the gold activities. These made 

possible the Oregon-California railroad project of Ben 

(9) SCOTT, LESLIE M, "The Pioneer Stimulus of Gold," 
p. 156, Oregon Historical Quarterly, Vol. XVIII. 






















































1 

' 









, 


























28 


Holladay who began construction in the Willamette Valley- 
in 1868 , the first railroad project of the North Pacific 
Coast, except for the portage railroads at Cascades and 
Celilo. The construction of railways in the North¬ 
western United States during the early eighteen-eighties 
also gave a great impetus to prospecting* In 1896 the 
Americans owned and operated three railways in British 
Columbia, at the very time when Canada was hesitating 
about providing a line of the Canadian Pacific through 
the Crow*s Nest Pass into the Kootenays.(10) 

The erection of smelters on the American side of 
the boundary line at an early date was another reason 
why trade remained American* In 1887 a smelter was 
built in western Montana ready to take British Columbia 
ores as soon as they were discovered. Practically the 
entire output of mines in the West Kootenay went to 
Tacoma, Helena, or Butte. Because East Kootenay coal 
was lacking in the nineties the first smelter built at 
the mines imported United States coal as well as 
equipment.(11) The Pilot Bay Smelting Company 
incorporated in 1894 was largely owned in the United 
States, but in 1896 a large smelter was erected at 

TT5TBESCOBYrISABEL, "Some Social Aspects of the 
American Mining Advance," p. 59« U. B. C. thesis, 1935* 
(11) B. C. SESSIONAL PAPERS, 1892, p. 537. 




















■ 




. 


. 









' 















. 







29 

Nelson by a London, England^ company* The growth of 
coal mining in the Crow*s Nest Pass encouraged the 
development of smelters at the mines. It is interesting 
to note that all of the 8561 tons of zinc ore shipped 
from British Columbia in 1905 went to the United States. 
(12) Even in 1929 Reece H. Hague in the Vancouver 
"Province” decried the fact that American smelters were 
still treating a considerable part of Canada*s ores.(12a) 
The Kootenay mines also helped to develop American 
agriculture. Even in 1865 settlers in the vicinity of 
Colville, Washington, found a profitable market for 
their produce in the East Kootenay and the Big Bend 
mines on the Upper Columbia River. The Portland 
"Oregonian” commented at this time on the fact that 
these mines would figure largely In the history of the 
Pacific Coast. The rapid settlement of Spokane Prairie, 
near Spokane, Washington, was certainly partly 
attributable to the Kootenay mines, more especially 
those on Perry Creek, since the large influx of settlers 
coincided with the peak of production there in J.869 and 
1870.(13) Fertile areas in the interior grew in 
usefulness and productivity with mining development. 

(12) Report of the Zinc Commission for Canada, p. 13* 1906< 
(12a) PROVINCE, newspaper, July 10, 1929* p. 21. 

(13) COLONIST, newspaper, Aug. 16, 1870, quoting the 
Walla V/alia "Union" of Aug. 6, 1870. 








30 

Payette and Boise valleys in Idaho, the Bitter Root 
and Gallatin valleys in Montana, contributed farm 
products and livestock to the Kootenay as well as to 
the settlements south of the international boundary 
line. 

Since the period of rapid development of many 
American centres coincided with the Kootenay mining 
advance it is a fair assumption that the Kootenay mines 
contributed in some degree at least to the growth of 
American towns and cities. Missoula, Montana Territory, 
shipped in supplies to the Kootenay mines in 1873 and 
living there was made very cheap thereby because it 
was much closer than Walla Walla, Walluia, or the Dalles. 
These American centres had experienced great growth at 
the height of the gold "rushes 81 into the Kootenay and 
the Upper Columbia. Portland grew from a population 
of 2917 in i860 to 6000 in 186? and 17,578 in 1880, 
but of course the major part of this growth was caused 
by the mining progress in Idaho, Montana, and eastern 
Oregon. Helena, Montana, was founded in the very year 
of the Wild Horse gold "rush". Umatilla Landing, laid 
out in 1863, where the "freighting” road to and from 
Boise and Owyhee mines joined the Columbia River, became 
a large town especially after the Kootenay ’’strikes 8 ** 










' 











■ 







. 





• 














■ 









. 
























31 


Even in 1885 goods were still largely brought in from 
American centres. In 1883-4 John Galbraith transported 
supplies for the building of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway from Walla Walla via Lake Pend d®Oreille in 
Idaho, and thence to Y/ild Horse Creek and St. Joseph®s 
Prairie. 

Trade remained American until long after the peak 
of production had passed. Until 1900 not less than 85$ 
of the Kootenay trade went south of the American 
boundary line instead of west or east to Canadian cities. 
(14) YJhen the main line of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway was completed in 1885 supplies from nearby 
states were fresher and cheaper than distant Canadian 
products; nor could Vancouver and Victoria merchants 
compete in such products as were brought in from 
eastern Canada. The merchants of Victoria and Vancouver 
made no effort to get business in the mining camps 
preferring to let it go to Winnipeg or to the "States*®. 

When British or Canadians attempted to participate 
in the trade in the early days the lack of good trails 
discouraged them. The trail from Hope, the nearest 
village to the Kootenay mines In British Columbia, to 
Fort Sheppard was fairly passable but it was very bad 
Il4) BESCOBY, op. cit., p. 48. 









32 

from there to Wild Horse Creek* In 1864 one of the 
Hudson's Bay Company's trains was fourteen days in 
making the trip and lost six horses in doing so. If 
the British wished to compete with their more 
enterprising neighbors in Oregon and Washington they 
would have to push the Hope waggon road through and 
improve it down the Similkameen and Kettle Rivers to 
Fort Colville or Sheppard and thence' to Kootenay. 

Meetings of the merchants were held in New 
Westminster, Lytton, and Yale to discuss this improved 
way to the Kootenay mines. Finally Dewdney's Trail 
was completed in 1866 to satisfy the clamour, only to 
be pronounced a great blunder very shortly after its 
completion. Geography conspired against the British 
Columbia merchants. The turbulent rivers required 
many bridges whereas the grant made by the legislature 
only sufficed for a small number, so that the road was 
only passable at low water. 

Some British Columbia packers, however, did attempt 
to trade with the Blackfoot mines in Montana. The 
Victoria "Colonist" reported in 1866 that two of these 
men started out with a cargo of 16,000 pounds from 
Wild Horse en route to the Blackfoot mines, for which 
the carriers were to get carrying charges of 19£ per 

















































































33 


pound. Near Flathead Lake United States officers 
seized all their goods and animals and demanded $1700 
and four horses as the price of their release. This 
was done before the packers had reached a customs station 
and consequently before they had had an opportunity of 
paying the duties.(15) The same newspaper bemoaned 
the fact that our goods paid about five times as much 
as our charges on American goods. 

One of the most important reasons for governmental 
inaction in improving roads was the attitude of some of 
the newspapers in British Columbia. Reports in American 
journals were received with suspicion especially by 
the Victoria "Chronicle”, as propaganda to draw 
population away from the Cariboo. These reports in 
such newspapers as the Walla Walla "Statesman", the 
Boise "News", and the "Golden Age" of Lewiston, were the 
main source of information about the Kootenay mines. 

The editorial advice in the Victoria "Colonist" to the 
effect that British Columbians should take early steps 
to develop the Kootenay so as to prevent the supply 
business from passing to the traders of Spokane, 

Colville, and other American centres passed unheeded 
for the most part. 

(15) COLONIST, Jan. 15, 1866, quoting a letter from 
Fort Sheppard dated Nov. 27, lo65. 

























. 


























































. 

























34 

Thus conditions were not improved by 1869. No 
attempt was made to get the trade which resulted from 
the success of the Perry Creek mines, which in this 
year caused the withdrawal of seven trains from the 
Blackfoot route to be placed on the road from Walla 
Walla to Kootenay* It was estimated that already one 
million pounds of goods had been imported to Perry 
Creek from Portland, Oregon, and all this trade might 
have gone to Victoria were it not for the shockingly 
bad state of the roads and the necessity of a detour 
through American territory. The Victoria "Colonist” 
calculated that the amount of money which had found its 
way into the pockets of foreigners in a single season 
would have sufficed to open such easy means of 
communication as would have enabled our own people to 
command the entire trade.(16) 

Not until the l890 9 s was any marked change 
discernible in the direction of trade. By 1897 or 1898 
the initial large profits had been made and the 
Americans were content to sell to British or Canadian 
investors and retire to their own camps. The English 
investor would rather pay a half million for some 
property which would produce a good annual rate of 
(l£) COLONIST, newspaper, Aug. 22, 1869* 






















- 










. . 

. 

. 












, 

' 1 


. 



















35 

interest than embark a comparatively small sum in a 
promising venture.(17) It was not until 1896 that the 
Kootenay began to be preferred to the western United 
States by British investors, and since the boom was 
over by 1898, they did not reap the huge profits that 
the Americans had gathered earlier. 

The rivalry of the Great Northern Railway and the 

Canadian Pfcific Railway was keen, being most marked 

during the years from 1898 to 1906. James J. Hill, 

head of the Great Northern, had made his policy one of 

building feeders north from his main line towards the 

international boundary, all these lines in this section 

draining towards Spokane. In 1897 the Great Northern 

announced from its western headquarters at Spokane 

that two railroads would be built in British Columbia 

that year. In 1899 D. C. Corbin, who later started 

the Corbin mines in the East Kootenay, sold out his 

interests to the Great Northern. It was he who first 

grasped the importance of Spokane as the strategic 

centre for the immense resources of the Inland Empire, 

and his faith was amply justified in the expansion of 

the Great Northern. The American lines fought the 

Canadian Pacific successfully for the lion's share of 

(17) MINING REPORT, Minister of Mines, B. C., 1893, 
extract from "The Western World. fl 





































. 









- . 






. 











36 


the trade of the Kootenays and Southern British 

Columbia. The people of the Boundary country were 

patriotic Canadians only as far as they could afford 

to be and the bulk of the freight to this region 

was consigned to local storekeepers via Marcus over 

American railways. By 1906 agreements were made between 

the Canadian Pacific and the Great Northern fixing the 

amount of ore and bullion to go by each line. The 

major pull was still southward, however. Winnipeg was 

too far aWay and Calgary was unable to compete 

effectively with Spokane(18) Spokane was the most 

convenient large centre fully equipped to supply the 

needs of southern Alberta ranchers. The Great Northern 

built a line from Rexford to Fernie and thence to 

Michel and controlled the Crowds Nest Pass Coal Company 

which provided the Granby smelter with coke; hence all 

coke was hauled to Grand Forks by the Great Northern. 

By 1920 most of the less profitable lines were abandoned 

by the Great Northern and the Canadian Pacific was left 

in virtual possession of southern British Columbia. 

Today the excellent grade of the Great Northern Railway 

from Fernie to Elko is used as a government highway. 

Tl8> HOWAY, F. W., SAGE, W. N., ANGUS, H. F., "British 
Columbia and the United States—the North Pacific Slope 
from Fur Trade to Aviation," page 257. Ryerson Press, 
Toronto, 1942. 
































. 
































“ ' - •« 






• . 























. 





37 


The influence of the United States is still strong 
in the Kootenays. The interest taken in American 
politics and in Fourth of July celebrations would imply 
that its origins have not been forgotten. Although 
British and Canadian capital gradually displaced 
American and the leading economic institutions became 
Canadian-controlled many of the miners and prospectors 
I remained to perpetuate an influence which still affects 
social as well as economic institutions. 









. 

. 













. 




































38 


V. SOME IMPORTANT NAMES IN PIONEERING TIMES. 

Sufficient has been said already to give some 
idea of those brave spirits who dared to face the 
many difficulties of early trails in the Kootenay. 

The prospectors followed the paths blazed by the fur 
traders, but many of them ceased to be prospectors and 
settled in the district to play their part in the 
gradual development of the area. The placer miners 
initiated the first period of pioneering activity. 

The construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway brought 
the second period, and the third period began with the 
quartz miners, following closely on the heels of railway 
building. These miners were the real pioneers of all 
southwest Kootenay, although they were often considered 
"greenhorns 91 in southeast Kootenay. 

An old miner named Robert C. Dore was among the 

first to start for Finlay Creek in the spring of 1864. 

He recorded the first claim, the "Dore", on Wild Horse 

Creek which produced $521,700 in three years.(1) He 

was also the first white man to put in an hydraulic 

plant on Wild Horse Creek. It was a hose similar to 

that used in fire engines but six inches in diameter, 

and reinforced with hegvy rope so that it could 

(1) SMYTH, F. J., "Tales of the Kootenays," p. 56. 
Cranbrook Courier, Cranbrook, B. C., 1942. 








. 









' 










. 










- 



. 



■ 


. 




■ 

• 






















39 


withstand a pressure of 250 pounds to the square inch. 

Dore estimated the amount of gold taken out of Wild 

Horse Creek at $15*000,000. Since he had water rights 
had 

to sell he.more knowledge than even the gold commissioners 
of the correct value of gold obtained. The number 
of inches of water purchased by miners would vary 
somewhat with the amount of their yield, and to him 
they would be more truthful than to the gold 
commissioners, to whom they often handed falsified 
reports to avoid payment of the gold export tax. He 
died on August 31, 1907, at the St. Eugene Hospital, 
Cranbrook, one of the very last of the Wild Horse 
pioneers. 

Dave Griffiths was another old miner who arrived 
at Wild Horse Creek late in 1864. He tells of many 
who f, cleaned up” $40,000 to $60,000 in 1865. He and 
his two partners that year had returns running from 
$1000 to $1500 per week. Year after year he carried 
on operations expecting to find the original and oldest 
channel of Wild Horse Creek, but at his death, just a 
few years ago, his hope was still unfulfilled. 

Nor must we forget the band of early Chinese miners 
on Wild Horse and other creeks, some of whom spent 
almost their whole lifetime along the paystreaks. In 














* 
























, 








































■ 










« 























40 


1902 nine of them went back to China, each of whom 
was said to have in his possession not less than 
$15>000,(2) Lee Jack died on Wild Horse Creek in 1930, 
having spent more than sixty years in the quest for 
gold. Ban Quong, now a resident near Cranbrook, is 
probably the sole survivor of this group of Chinese 
miners. 

The placer activity brought the gold commissioners, 
important as keepers of law and order as well as for 
informative reports. As early as November, 1863, Mr® 

J. C® Haynes told the Colonial Secretary of British 
Columbia that gold had been discovered in the Kootenay, 
and on receiving an order to proceed to Wild Horse 
as gold commissioner, he left Osoyoos, in the Similkameen, 
on July 20, 1864, with Constable William Young and 
an Indian. He went by way of American territory 
through Fort Colville and Spokane, reaching Wild Horse 
on August 10th., and was immediately called upon to 
quell an putbreak of lawlessness. His stern measures, 
and their strict enforcement also by Mr® P. O^eilly, 
who followed him the next year, laid the foundation 
for the tradition of law and order in the rather 
turbulent camp® The work of Gilbert Malcolm Sproat, 


(2) SMYTH, op. cit®, p® 55 











41 


who became gold commissioner in 1886, was chiefly- 
centered in the West Kootenay, but his influence was so 
wide that he became known as the Father of the Kootenay* 
(3) His activity in the founding of Revelstoke, Sandon, 
New Denver, and Nelson had important repercussions on 
the East Kootenay as we shall see later. 

Turning from law and order to transportation we 
find that A. B. Fenwick, Dan Drumheller, and Robert and 
John Galbraith were closely connected with the carrying 
trade of the placer fields. The first ran one of the 
largest pack trains in the early days, when that was the 
only means of bringing in mail and supplies from 
Sandpoint, Idaho, to Bonner f s Ferry, Idaho. His chief 
interest centered on the development of Fort Steele, 
since it was just south of here that he built up a large 
stock ranch. Dan Drumheller, the drover for Freeman, 
the cattle king of the placer period, tells of running 
a pack train between Walla Walla and Wild Horse in 1864. 
He followed the Mullan Road to the neighborhood of 
Spokane, then by way of Sandpoint went by a trail to 
Bonner®s Ferry where he crossed the Kootenay River. 
Keeping to the eastern bank of this river he came to 
Cranbrook and just before reaching Wild Horse he crossed 


(3) B. C. HISTORICAL QUARTERLY, Vol. I, 1937, p. 29, 
article by T. A. Rickard. 







. 

■ 










. 








- ■ 

















. 


. .■ 











42 


the Kootenay River again at Galbraith*s Ferry, now 
Fort Steele. The Galbraith Brothers had business and 
bank connections with several Walla Walla firms in the 
early days. At Galbraith*s Ferry they owned a store 
as well as the ferry in the early years, reaping a rich 
harvest in the gold "rush” of 1864. At this place the 
toll for crossing the river in this year was five 
dollars, which works out at about six cents a yard. It 
was John Galbraith who was elected in 1866 to the 
provincial legislature by a majority of thirty-nine 
over his opponent, Mr. John Duncan. 

Michael Phillipps was the last factor of the Hudson*s 
Bay Company at Fort Steele. In 1865 he was at Fort 
Kootenay, Tobacco Plains, where Mr. Linklater carried on 
business for the Hudson 9 s Bay Company. Linklater was 
the man who showed the gold from Finlay Creek to Mr. 

James Manning of Colville which led to the rush to 
Wild Horse in 1864 and incidentally to the opening up 
of southern British Columbia. Phillipps made his 
noteworthy trip through the Crow*s Nest Pass in 1872, 
when he discovered some of the coal seams. From him 
we learn of President Van Horne 9 s visit to the area a 
few years before the building of the Crow 8 s Nest Pass 
Railway. Van Horne came from Bonner*s Ferry to the 










































. 

. 

. 






















. 







1 








43 


then mud flats at Kootenay Landing on one of the small 
steamboats plying the Kootenay Lake at that time* The 
dismal mud flats and gloomy mountains were of no 
interest to the President of the Canadian Pacific and 
the Kootenays seemed to him the last place for profitable 
railway construction* Phillipps died on his ranch on 
the south side of the Elk Canyon in 1916, after serving 
as Indian agent on the Tobacco Plains reservation for 
some years* 

William Fernie has been given undue credit in 
connection with the discovery of the coal beds* 
Nevertheless his importance in subsequent development 
was great* He was foreman in charge of the workers 
on the part of the Dewdney Trail east of Fort Sheppard, 
an unsuccessful gold seeker in the Big Bend "rush", a 
Perry Creek stampeder in 1868, constable of the 
Kootenay District after 1871, and successor to Cornelius 
Booth as gold commissioner in 18?9. His acquisition of 
coal lands after 1887 led to the development of the 
; seams in the Crowds Nest Pass* He died in Victoria 
on May 15, 1921* 

There are many others who had something to do with 
the development of the country in these pioneering times® 

Some of them will be spoken of in subsequent chapters, 
others have already been mentioned. Men of the stamp of 







. 











. • 

. 



































■ 


















- 








44 


the Reverend Henry Irwin, affectionately known as 
Father Pat, have their names written in the annals of 
the Anglican Church, and Catholic chronicles record 
the achievements of Fathers Fouquet, Coccola and Welch. 
The day of the old time prospector has long since passed 
but there is still a place for men possessing his 
essential stamina and willingness to live a hard life 
and do hard work. The opening of new mining areas will 
be speeded only by a new type of pioneer, trained in 
geology and to the use of maps, and with financial 
support sufficient for thorough testing. 

































. 



























n 







45 


VI. THE ERA OF PLACER MINING. 

The situation and the geology of the placer fields 
of British Columbia have been well treated by many 
writers.(1) Physiographically they are situated in the 
Central Belt of the Cordillera of Canada, usually in 
topographical areas transitional between plateaus and 
typical mountain ranges. The great period of mineral¬ 
ization was in Jura-Cretaceous times following the 
melting of large irregular masses of igneous rock which 
forced its way into the strata. The quartz veins of the 
placer fields stretching from south-east Kootenay to 
the Yukon were formed in this way.(2) A period of 
erosion in the late Cretaceous and Tertiary periods 
resulted in the formation of a number of rich and 
continuous placer deposits in the stream-valleys,(3) 
with nuggets being formed as a result of the deposition 
of gold from solutions.(4) The arrival of the glacial 
age, however, meant the admixture of so much barren 
gravel and such widespread transportation of the placer 
gravels that most of the original placer fields became 
of no economic value. The rock formations of the 

(1) See’GALLOWAY, J. D., "Placer Mining in B. C.," 1931, 
AND MEMOIR 149, Geol. Survey of Canada, 1926. 

(2) GALLOWAY, op. cit., p. 11. 

(3) MEMOIR 149, op. cit. 

(4) FORTURA, ROCCO R, "Placer Mining in Canada," p. 3* 
Dept, of Political Economy, Univ. of Toronto, 1929. 





. 







* 















. 







































' 


' 

. 

' 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. . 

. 







46 


Central Belt were not actively eroded during this 
period and to this is due the fact that there are many 
placer fields in the region* A lack of knowledge of 
glaciation, the most important feature of placer geology, 
is the reason why so many ill-advised placer ventures 
have been attempted with consequent financial failure. 

Gold was first discovered in the East Kootenay at 
Finlay Creek in 1863 . It was found that most of it lay 
too deep for ordinary small-scale placer operations and 
the creek was soon abandoned to await the large 
machinery of the 1890*s. 

Many of the miners of Finlay Creek decamped to the 
more promising prospects of Wild Horse Creek. This 
creek was a small tributary of the Kootenay River coming 
from the main Rocky Mountain Range about fifty miles 
north of the international boundary line. Thompson had 
given it the name of Luissier on his map of the region, 
but the miners called it Stud Horse, then later Wild 
Horse. The mines had the advantage of being lower and 
more southerly than those of the Cariboo. Thus they 
were more conveniently situated for being worked the 
greater part of the year and they were more easy of 
access for those who were dissatisfied from time to 

(5) MACFIE, M, "Vancouver Island and British Columbia," 
p. 253. Longman*s Green, London, 1865. 









, v 
















■ 

. 

, ' 

■ 

■ 









. 





. 

- 

. 



























*7 


time with the mines of Boise in Idaho.(5) All the ranges 

of Wild Horse showed the presence of gold and the blue 

slate formation encouraged high hopes. The "Colonist 11 

newspaper speculated as to whether these mines were a 

continuation of the auriferous range of the Cariboo in 

which case it was hoped rich diggings would be found for 

a distance of from 300 to 400 miles which would be 

capable of supporting a population of a million or morel 

There were other reasons for the development of 

Wild Horse. Plenty of good agricultural land, an abundant 

supply of water, and the fact that no quicksilver was 

needed to retrieve the coarse gold, were all forces 

drawing miners to the region. The miners of the Boise 

Basin, especially, were forced out largely because of 

the failure of a supply of water, and the new field 

appeared as a heaven-sent boon to these experienced miners® 

The diggings were shallow but rich, paying as high 

as thirty dollars a day to the man.. On July 11, 1864, 

the Victoria "Colonist" reported miners earning ten to 

thirty dollars a day with the crudest of implements.(6) 

It was officially estimated that claims on two miles 

of the creek yielded twenty to thirty dollars a day to 

~(5») MACFIE, M, "Vancouver Island and British Columbia," 
p. 253. Longman 9 s Green, London, 1865. 

(6) COLONIST, Jan. 6, 1865. 


















* - - : •; 
















- 




. 








* 




, 








' 
















■ 















48 


the hand in 1864.(7) The product of its first two 
summers was $600,000.(8) Dr. Dawson estimated that 
the yield from 1874 to 1888 was $582,878.(9) 

The high cost of living in the early years was due 
chiefly to the great expense of bringing in supplies. 
During the first winter at Wild Horse in 1863 flour was 
$2.50 a pound and tobacco $15.00 a pound, while for 
"fancy" smokers, opium was worth $190.00 a pound or its 
weight in gold.(10) At first everything was packed in 
from Colville, Washington, and Hell Gate, Montana. Ho 
supplies were brought from Tobacco Flains for less than 
28^ a pound. The beginning of the winter of 1864-65 
found food plentiful with the following prices prevailing 
butter $1.50 a pound, flour 40£, bacon $1.00, beans 5C¥, 
sugar 70£, coffee $1.00, tea $2.25, beef 30^, lard 8C$, 
and tobacco $2.25 a pound. As the season of 1865 
advanced labourers’ wages were $7.00 a day and the prices 
of provisions allowed them to live for $1.50 a day since 
many of the miners had left for the Big Bend, thus 
leaving quite a surplus of supplies, with resultant lower 
prices. The rates for regular boarders averaged $14.00 
to $18.00 a week. Charges for packing now ranged from 
17) GOSBELL, op. cit., p. 162, 1903. 

(8) ATKINS, op. cit., Province, newspaper, Feb. 18, 1922. 

(9) Ibidem. 

(10) ATKINS, op. cit., Province, Feb. 11, 1922. 






* 

* 




















- 

. 

























- 


. 












. 

' 









. 

. 








49 


20£ to 240? a pound. (11) Prices dropped considerably in 
succeeding years. Cattle were driven in from Utah and 
other points as the trails improved and the price for 
beef fell to as low as 5£ a pound in the autumn of some 
years. 

The population of Wild Horse in these early years 
fluctuated a great deal. In 1864 approximately 1500 
men came into the district. From the gold commissioner *s 
report of 1864 we find that there were 1000 men on Wild 
Horse Creek in September; miners, shopkeepers, and 
labourers.(12) On October 31, 1864, Mr. Birch, who had 
been sent to the mines by the government of British 
Columbia, reported to the Colonial Secretary of British 
Columbia that 700 were present at the mines with 300 
more out prospecting. During the winter only 400 miners 
remained on the creek but considerable mining went on. 

By May 15* 1865* the population had declined to 800 or 
900. By the end of October there were only 500 miners 
at work, largely because the Big Bend excitement had 
drawn the rest away. In August, 1866, when Mr. P. 

O'Reilly visited V/ild Horse he noted a population of 700, 
about half Chinese. By January 17, 1873* gold commission¬ 
er A. W. Vowell reported that the population had dwindled 

(11) MACFIE, op. cit., p. 258. 

(12) Haynes to the Col. Sec'y. of B. C., Sept. 6, 1864. 
























. 

. 





. 


























. 

► 







f 


. . 







50 

to just a few Chinese. Robertson-Ross on October 4, 

1873> found 25 to 30 white gold miners and 100 Chinese 
miners, not making more than five or six dollars a day. 

He stated that the population of the Kootenay District 
consisted of 85 white men, 200 Chinese, and 400 or 500 
Indians.(13) 

Small scale operations were the rule until the 

1890*s. Gold commissioner Haynes in September, 1864, 

gave an account of ten outstanding claims, employing a 

total of 114 men, which of late had been producing, on 

the average, no less than $4,308 in gold per day. These 

claims were chiefly operated by small companies varying 

in size from four to seventeen men. Mr. Birch in his 

report to the Colonial Secretary of British Columbia 

dated October 31, 1864, noted that there were fifty 

sluice companies at work in all, with from five to 

twenty men employed in each. He mentioned the Gold Hill 

Company as taking out nearly as much as an ounce to the 

hand per day. Messrs. Dore, Reece, Pindale and a few 

other miners constructed the Victoria Ditch in 1865 at 

a cost of $25,000. It was capable of carrying 2000 ins.(14] 

"(13) ROBERTSON-ROSS, op. cit., p. 120. 

(14) Water was measured in Miners* Inches, which varied 
somewhat in different districts. A miner 8 s inch is the 
volume of water flowing in one minute through a standard 
vertical orifice of one square inch under a head at its 

centre of inches. The volume of water equals 1.53 cubic 
feet per minute. 








■ 




























. 








. ' 

. 

■ 





51 


of water, and of affording facilities for working more 
than 100 claims which hitherto had been idle. This was 
one of the larger undertakings, for the capital invested 
in most companies was small. In 1865 Commissioner 
0*Reilly reported on the companies operating on Wild 
Horse Creek. The Brady Company with eighteen men and 
the Lloyd Company with eight men averaged twenty ounces 
for the former and sixteen to twenty ounces for the 
latter per day. The Keenan Company produced three to 
five ounces a day on the average for all hands. The 
Fisher Company of thirty-one men took out 324 ounces 
during the week ending June 6th. The "Great Britain" 
had drilled a shaft almost ninety feet and expected to 
strike bedrock within a few days. This was a new 
method of mining in the area, but the disappointment 
at the comparatively small yield which rewarded the 
efforts of this enterprising company caused similar 
operations to be postponed until the *90*s when improved 
roads and trails permitted the importation of large 
machinery. In 1872 a Mr. Woods sold his bedrock flume 
to a Chinese Company for $3000, and its workings were so 
good that fourteen men could be kept at work all making 
fair wages. In the same year the five hands of the 
Montgomery Company were making $1000 to $1500 a week 


























. 


■ 








« . 


- 

. 



• 


1 




. 





■ 

. 

■ 



















52 


since they commenced sluicing* 

Large scale development began in the 1890*s when 
large pump machinery was installed. For the first 
quarter of the present century there were spasmodic 
attempts to work the claims with varying success as can 
be seen by examining Table I of the Appendix, In 1919 
the Gamble Mining Company started operations to sluice 
out an old channel parallel to Wild Horse Creek. The 
Wild Horse Dredging Company in the same year commenced 
to drain the creek with the object of getting at 
bedrock. From 1919 to 192? there was a revival of 
interest in hydraulic mining, but since operations have 
been left once again largely to the Chinese. 

The rush to the Big Bend depopulated Wild Horse in 
1865. The new mines there were discovered by a 
government survey party seeking a route from the Coast 
into the Kootenay mines in 1864. The finds were greatly 
exaggerated and even while Wild Horse Creek was actually 
producing gold in large quantities men hurried into this 
region of the Columbia, Large crowds gathered at 
Colville in the spring of 1865? in haste to construct 
some craft whereby the two hundred miles to the new 
gold region might be navigated. Stories from the fur 
trading days of the dangers of Death Bapids were either 











. 


. 




















































. 







, 

. 
















. 











53 


forgotten or disregarded and many lost their lives in 
a vain attempt to reach the hoped-for riches. 
Transportation companies reaped a rich harvest for 
twelve months. The governments of Vancouver Island 
and British Columbia pushed forward vigorously the 
Canadian routes from the Coast while Portland advertised 
the overland routes by the Okanagan and Kettle Valleys. 

Money, machinery, science, and system were lacking 
to unlock the secret of the Big Bend. None of the 
placer miners had these keys. Unless the diggings 
would yield ten dollars a day to the hand they were not 
white man's diggings. The high water in the narrow 
confined creeks during the summer prevented high wages 
without heavy pump machinery to combat the rise. Then 
it was discovered in 1867 that the workings were not 
shallow but deep and the 1000 men who had been in the 
mines in 1866 departed for more lucrative deposits. 

Many of them returned to Wild Horse, but the operations 
there and in the vicinity never recovered completely 
from the depopulation of 1865. 

In 1867 Frank Perrieur, Dan Kennedy, and Little 
Sullivan discovered gold on Perry Creek, just twenty 
miles from Wild Horse Creek. These men had been sent by 

a group of miners at Wild Horse to do some prospecting 
















•' si . ' j 






































. 




. 


. 

. 


54 


for them and to make locations on their behalf. At the 
end of the season of 1868 the deposits yielded generally 
an ounce per day to the man. In 1869 a silver-lead 
vein was found, but none of the 150 miners then present 
had the capital to develop the lead. However six 
companies had been formed to wash the gold from the 
gravel and were making eight to fourteen dollars per 
day to the hand. An attempt to pierce the bedrock of 
the creek in order to work the stratum of clay underneath 
ended in failure because of the lack of heavy machinery 
to pump out the water. Many of the diggings were 
abandoned to await better transportation facilities in 
the *90's. The yield varied from $4,750 in 1878 to 
$2000 in 1882, $1500 in 1886, $6500 in 1889 and $3000 in 
1892.(15) 

Large scale operations were carried on 
intermittently at Perry Creek, following much the same 
pattern as at ?/ild Horse Creek. The Perry Creek Gold 
Mining Company hired Mr. Billsland as foreman in 1877. 

He was an old Cariboo miner of large experience who 
succeeded in putting down a shaft fifty feet where others 
had failed. Again the lack of a waggon road on which to 
haul the machinery for the large pump needed to combat 


(15) MIKING REPORTS, B. C., 1878, 1882, 1886, 1889, 1892 

















55 


the water menace forced temporary abandonment in 1888. 
Boyel*s claim in 1877 yielded $600 a week. In 1903 the 
East Kootenay Placer Company secured leases about four 
and a half miles above the falls of Perry Creek, and 
installed a steam shovel for lifting the gravel into 
sluice boxes. Thus the work went on, capital making a 
fair return on the investment when conditions were such 
that it could be persuaded to enter the field. Side 
by side with this development the patient Chinese 
continued to get a return from the washings of old 
diggings. 

Other discoveries of lesser worth were numerous. 

In the winter of 1864 occurred the rush to Canyon 
Creek some 200 miles from Wild Horse. Deposits on 
Weaver Creek were discovered in 1869, giving employment 
to fifty men. Its yield varied from $1000 in 1882 to 
$500 in 1888, $2000 in 1889, and $200 in 1892.(16) 

Good prospects were also found by the packer McGraugh 
on the divide between the Kootenay and the Pend d®Oreille 
Rivers, and in 1869 a new camp was located on the Moyie 
River, a stream running parallel to Perry Creek and 
emptying into Peavine Prairie Lake. 

The population of the East Kootenay fluctuated 
U6) MINING REPORTS, B. C., 1882, 1888, 1889, 1892. 




, 






1 


■ 







, 

* 

, ' 

, 






. 


. 









56 


markedly with the production of gold, especially in the 
years before the 1890*s. In 1875 the district yielded 
only $41,000 from bench and creek diggings of which 
two-thirds was from Wild Horse Creek. The remainder 
came from twenty-eight claims at Perry, Weaver, and 
Mootsai Creeks, worked by a mining population of forty 
white men and fifty Chinese. The low yield in 1876 is 
accounted for by the fact that most of the white miners 
had left the district since by this time the mines were 
not paying enough to satisfy them. In 1877 there were 
twenty-five claims on Wild Horse, Perry and Palmer Creeks, 
chiefly Chinese, which gave $37*000. In I879 sixteen 
claims employed thirteen white men and thirty-two 
Chinese earning respectively about $4.00 and $3.50 each 
a day. The high prices of provisions prevented many 
small diggings from being worked until men could live 
more cheaply. By 1882 the population had dwindled to 
eleven white miners and a few Chinese in the whole of 
the East Kootenay. From 1884, however, the claims 
were being worked with renewed vigour, as Table I of 
the Appendix shows, and by 1886 there were 36 names on 
the voters 1 list. In 1889 there were 216 voters in the 
West Kootenay and 374 in the East Kootenay. By 1894 
there were 445 on the voters* list in the North Hiding 



















, 

- 

t 






♦ 

. 











. 

' 















57 


and 862 in the South Riding of East Kootenay*(17) 

Of community life there was little in the early 

placer mining camps* The representative citizen of 

Fisherville was the American gambling "dandy" who had 

turned prospector, but even these citizens could build 

a five-mile road for themselves from Galbraith*s Ferry 

to Wild Horse Creek* This no doubt hastened the erection 

of a brewery in the fall of 1864. A number of "hurdy- 

gurdy** girls earned their living by dancing in the 

saloons of the mining camps in their heyday and some 

of these provided wives for the miners as the settlement 

grew* However these women were much less numerous in 

the Kootenay than they were in the Cariboo, since the 

mines in the Cariboo were easier of access* On Hew 

Year’s Day, 1877, a band was organized at the Kootenay 

mines on Wild Horse Creek but whether it survived long 

to enliven the drab lives of the miners is not known* 

As in all early mining camps the saloon was the community 

centre* Paddy Quirk, a miner of the early days, reported 

spending $50,000 in one year for whiskey, maccaroni, 

lobsters and other delicacies. The numerous saloons 

proved one of the chief factors in making the maintenance 

TI 77 "SESSTOHUTPAPERS, B. C., pp. 600, 724, for year 1890 
pp. 1560, 1568 for yee r 1894* See Table XIII of the 
Spp'finfllX last Kootenay population. 




> 

' 












. 


■ ■ 








58 


of law and order difficult. 

Before law and order officially arrived in the 
persons of the gold commissioners the miners called a 
meeting and the claims were assigned to the original 
sixty miners under their own rules, American fashion. 

This was not to the liking of the Columbia-Spokane 
brigade from Walla Walla and on August 9? 1864, the day 
; before Commissioner Haynes arrived, strife disturbed 
the camp and murder was committed. One man, Tommy 
Walker, was shot dead and four others were wounded. In 
all the mining camps of the day faction was often strong 
and each desperado had his following. Walker*s friends 
raised a mob to hang Yeast Powder Bill and Overland Bob, 
who were believed to be guilty of the murder. Fifteen 
hundred men were under arms when Commissioner Haynes 
arrived with one constable. In the trial which was held 
immediately the murderers were acquitted because of 
contradictions of evidence. It says much for the character 
of Haynes that the miners accepted the verdict and 
that law and order were established among these pistol- 
flourishing cutthroats of California and Montana. 

The administration of justice was practically the 
only element that was British in the society of the 

• ’* - *? ... ■■ f 

Kootenay. The majority of miners came to British 






































. 
















. 

. 




' 

























59 


Columbia expecting to find law and order and they were 
not disappointed. While it was directly from American 
territories that miners went to Wild Horse Creek, they 
had had contact with other American miners and merchants 
who had experienced British mining camp life. The 
prospector wintering in the south had reported the 
firmness and impartiality of the British law. In the 
United States there no such officials as the gold 
commissioners, who centered in themselves the powers of 
the American mining camp and the British magistrate. 

The American camp had a greater degree of self-government 
and usually worked under rules drawn up in a miners* 
meeting. When they found themselves in an isolated 
district where no provision had been made for the 
regulation of public affairs, they arranged temporary 
measures themselves.(18) Gambling and drunkenness 
were almost absent from the placer camps of the Kootenay, 
and crime was remarkably small. This was largely due 
to precedents established by the first two gold 
commissioners, Mr. Haynes and Mr, 0'Beiily. 

It was left for all the early miners of the district 
to contend against heavy difficulties by the power of 
cooperation. The ”lone prospector” during the period of 
(18) TRIMBLE,"op. eit., p. 101. 



















, 










. 







60 


discovery and extension of placer mining was largely 
a myth* The prospectors worked in groups as a rule. 

Some of them made fortunes by becoming miners, but the 
vast majority gathered little or nothing, frequently 
not even a bare living. Their implements were the pan, 
the rocker and the sluice, each for eliminating matter 
from the gold particles by washing. The miners often 
sent out prospecting parties to search for better 
diggings and at times the government aided with a grant*. 

The discovery of gold dispossessed the fur trader 
in the East Kootenay as elsewhere. The cosmopolitan 
immigration which it brought began the evolution of that 
varied economy which was necessary for the growth of the 
country. The fur trader led the way in discovering 
routes and his part should not be disparaged, but it 
was the mining camp that placed a distinctive mark on 
the life of the Kootenay. 

The rapidity of new discoveries and the continual 
"rushes” from one stream to another is characteristic 
of early placer mining in all places. "Poor man’s 
diggings" were sought by a heterogeneous population 
often lured by the very remoteness and inaccessibility 
of the country. This entrance of the prospector into 

the northern region brought about the extension of 






















. 















. 












, 


















61 

placer mining into the Yukon, and this penetration 
commenced with the discovery of gold in the East 
Kootenay and the Upper Columbia. 

Placer gold also brought the isolated little colony 
of British Columbia into prominence and created a 
clearer impression of the value of the region. It 
caused the Dominion Government to send Dr. Dawson to 
investigate the mineral wealth. Although his report 
came after the peak of placer gold production had been 
reached and all placer gold had been prospected, it was 
important because it brought to light the other mineral 
resources to which the placer miners next turned their 
attention along with the other settlers who came in.(19) 

In our own day dragline gold dredges are giving 
new life to some of the old placer fields. Companies 
in both California and Oregon have used them for some 
years with considerable success. The placer gravel is 
brought to a hopper by means of a dragline bucket and 
washed in the usual manner, and in places where the 
gold is not too deep the method has proved successful. 

In the gold bars of the Fraser River the dragline has 
met with some success, and within a few years it will 
be used more widely in the richer fields of British 
U9) FORTURA,"op. cit., p. 12. 










- 


















































62 


Columbia.(20) Some of the old camps in the East 
Kootenay are adapted to these dredge operations and no 
doubt dragline methods will retrieve some of the gold 
remaining especially in the Wild Horse Creek region 
if they are undertaken on a sufficiently large scale. 
(20) VANCOUVER SUN, newspaper, November 13 9 194-1, p.3# 











63 


VII'. LODE-MINING. 

Scientific knowledge, capital, and transportation 
facilities were lacking in the sixties to enable the 
men of ordinary intelligence, who became the expert 
placer miners, to undertake regular operations on veins 
and lodes. Quartz deposits were a puzzle to these miners 
in all the placer mining camps and usually they were too 
busy to solve the problem or lacked the interest to 
seek advice when wealth in placer deposits was so 
readily available. Single placer claims could be 
developed by the private capital of the miners themselves 
but the heavier lode-mining of the nineties demanded 
large-scale development. Until adequate transportation 
facilities were also provided neither knowledge nor 
capital was sufficient for development. Two years after 
the completion of the main line of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway silver-lead to the value of $26,54? was mined 
in British Columbia.(1) The high cost of transporting 
machinery had been a major cause of tie failure of the 
boom in quartz mining in the Cariboo in 18?6. 

The transition from placer to lode-mining in 
British Columbia began in the Kootenays. This started 
the real revival of mining which was somewhat retarded 


(1) ATKINS, op. cit., Province, newspaper, Mar. 20, 1922. 




































. 

■ 

. 

■ 

4 

. 










64 


by slowness in amalgamating and incorporating the 
smaller claims* American capital soon began to develop 
the mines when it was found that the mineral belts of 
the Selkirk range in the Kootenays were direct extensions 
of those in the more prosperous districts of Idaho and 
Montana * 

It was late in 1886 that the Hall brothers, along 
with two companions, Winslow and Oakes, all from 
Colville, stumbled on a promising mineral field on Toad 
Mountain near Nelson* By September, 1887, Montgomery, 
a storekeeper from Colville, reported that there were 
thirty men in camp. During 1888 the large-scale 
development around Nelson went on apace and a period of 
activity for inland British Columbia was initiated , the 
East Kootenay feeling its effects almost at once. 

The discovery of the Blue Bell mine had a 
considerable effect on the progress of East Kootenay, and 
the romantic story of the mine, while not altogether 
typical, is worth recounting. It was located on the 
east side of Kootenay Lake on the Riondel Peninsula 
almost opposite Ainsworth. Whether or not David Douglas, 
the botanist, discovered it in 1825 is uncertain, but 
the Indians and fur traders were using its lead for 

bullets about this time. A veteran employee of the 






























. 











. 



' 




• 




















65 


Hudson*s Bay Company testified that the trappers used 
to talk of lead that they obtained here and were wont 
to complain that it was so hard as to scour their gun 
barrels.(2) Some of their old hand drills were found 
lying on the deposits by prospectors in 1863. 

The authentic story of this vein of silver-lead 
began in 1864 when a prospector by the name of Doan 
persuaded the noted American mining investor, Senator 
George Hearst, to bring a Scotch open hearth furnace 
and an assay plant to the mine. He was accompanied on 
this ”wild goose chase” by Captain Pingston and an 
assayer by the name of Meyers, as well as the prospector* 
Hearst soon found that only adequate transportation 
facilities would make it possible to mine profitably 
this immense low grade deposit. He was so angry at 
being led to think that it was high grade that he 
threatened to leave Doan on the peninsula, but the 
intervention of Captain Pingston saved the prospector. 

His only punishment was the surrender of the $1000, or 
rather what was left of it, which had been paid to him 
on a $10,000 bond at the beginning of the journey. 

In 1878 an American, R. E. Sproule, located all the 

12) HICKARD, T. A., "The Blue Bell Mine, Riondel, B. C," 
Vol. 113, Mining and Scientific Press, San Francisco, 
1916. 





1 

. 

* 






























66 

available ground about the mine to the amount of 130 
acres. According to law it was necessary to work one 
day in three on each claim. This Sproule neglected, 
and an English engineer, Thomas Hammill, filed counter 
claims on some of Sproule®s locations in 1882, on behalf 
of the Ainsworths of Portland. Sproule took the dispute 
to the courts and won the case, but he was assessed the 
costs amounting to $3000. When this amount remained 
unpaid for some time, one third of the Blue Bell was 
sold and Hammill purchased it for the Ainsworths. In 
1885 Sproule recorded the Blue Bell in his own name, 
taking advantage of the law which made a yearly recording 
necessary. Hammill did the same, but when he attempted 
to work the claim he was shot dead by Sproule. 
Intervention by the American Congress did not prevent 
him from being hanged at New Westminster for the murder. 

The subsequent history of the Blue Bell is quite 
similar to that of the Sullivan in later years. The 
Ainsworths forfeited their interest from the neglect of 
their attorney to redeem a $3000 tax-claim levied by 
the sheriff, and it passed into the hands of Dr. Wilbur 
A Hendryx and Company. When Hendryx’s smelter at Pilot 
Bay failed there were no facilities close enough for the 
low grade ore of the mine and it passed into the hands 








- 









i 1 


. 








■ 












■ 

■ 


■ 




. 










. 

































■ 

. 

















67 

of the Bank of Montreal, one of Hendryx's creditors. 

The bank sold it to the Canadian Metal Company which 
became financially embarrassed because of the failure of 
its zinc retort at Frank, Alberta. The New Canadian 
Metal Company was formed with Mr. S. S. Fowler as 
manager in 1906 and in ten years this company was 
operating at a profit, the Blue Bell proving an important 
source of its income. 

The North Star mine possesses none of the romance 
of the Blue Bell, but nevertheless it really began the 
quartz excitement in the Kootenay when it was discovered 
and developed in 1892-3. Messrs. Bourjouis and Langill 
located the claims on a gently sloping mountain one mile 
south of Mark Creek, and twenty-three miles by waggon 
road west of North Star Landing on the Kootenay River, 
six miles above Fort Steele. Bourjouis had already 
attained fame as the discoverer of the War Eagle, the 
Centre Star, and the Lily May of Rossland. It remained 
East Kootenay*s largest mine until about 1900, when the 
St. Eugene began to block out its big ore quarry. 

It early passed into strong hands and its favourable 
situation aided development. The property was bonded to 
Messrs. Woods Bros, of Montreal who transferred four- 

fifths of their interest to Mr. D. D. Mann of Montreal 




. 


























■'r> 






' 




. 








. 




, 






' 

, 


- 











68 


in 1893. Subsequently a company under the name of the 
North Star Mining Company was organized. At first 
shipments of ore were made via the Kootenay River and 
Jennings, Montana, on the Great Northern Railway to 
smelters in the United States. In 1897 the North Star 
suspended shipments until the completion of the Crow’s 
Nest Railway. In 1900 the eighteen-mile railway from 
Cranbrook to Kimberley was completed and an aerial 
tramway joined the mine and the railway. Improved 
transportation played a large part in the total of 
$600,000 profits reported from the mine up to March, 
1902.(3) By 1904 the mine was said to be worked out but 
the cleaning-up of deposits lasted until 1908 in which 
year it shipped 3000 tons. It was shut down in 1910 
but was opened up later, shipping 7121 tons in 1919.(4) 
This material consisted mostly of lead carbonates, much 
of it being taken from the mine, the dump supplying only 
a small part. 

The St. Eugene, which succeeded the North Star as 
the most important mine of the East Kootenay, was 
discovered in 1895. It was a large low grade galena 

(3) PROVINCE, newspaper, March 9, 1902, p. 2. 

(4) ATKINS, op. cit., PROVINCE, March 25, 1922, p. 32, 
quoting the Mining Report, B. C., for 1919® 







. 










, 



. 

, . .. ' : "■ 



* 

. 




















, 















69 

deposit located on the summit of a hill near Moyie 


Lake. It brought the town of Moyie into existence on 
the eastern shore of the more southerly of the Moyie 
Lakes in 1898 , and it began to ship ore in 1899. An 
aerial tramway conveyed ore to the concentrator which 
had a daily capacity of 400 tons.(5) By 1905 it was the 
greatest lead mine in British Columbia with a production 
of 150,000 tons of ore, yielding 900,000 ounces of 
silver and 36,500,000 pounds of lead. In 1910 the output 
fell off and the town of Moyie declined with the mine, 
until the construction of a 500-ton concentrator in 
1926 to extract zinc from the tailings of the old mill 
caused a revival of prosperity for some years. In 1937 
the St. Eugene Extension Company commenced to pump out 
the water from the old St. Eugene Mine, the programme 
including the driving of a tunnel under Moyie Lake. 

An adjoining mine, called the Society Girl, was also 
opened up to take out the ore known to remain in the 
old workings.(6) 

The Sullivan Mine has had a more chequered career, 

V5r MINING REPORT, B*. C‘., 1901, p. 794. 

(6) SCHOFIELD, S, J., f, Geology of the Cranbrook Map Area,” 
p. 119, Memoir 76 , Geol. Survey of Canada, 1915* gives 
the total production of the SJ. Eugene since its discovery 
to September 30, 1913 as 1,017,106 tons of ore containing 
5,365,232 ounces of silver and 229,305,721 pounds of 
Lead having a value of $10,626^,608. 

SEE TABLE II OF APPENDIX FOR ANNUAL PRODUCTION’. 





























■ 










. . 

- 












■ 

. . 

























70 


although it is now established by competent opinion as 
having a probable large scale production of close to 
half a century, Pat Sullivan, John Cleaver, E, C, Smith, 
and W. C. Burchett discovered it in 1892, and bonded it 
to Colonel Redpath and Judge Turner of Spokane in 1896 . 

The mine was situated just two and a half miles by road 
north of Kimberley, In 1903 this company, known as the 
Sullivan Group Mining Company of Spokane, commenced 
building the Marysville Smelter some four miles from 
Kimberley, in an attempt to solve the problem of the low 
grade ore. The smelter was remodelled In 1904, and was 
finally closed down in 1907, partly as a result of the 
decline in the prices of lead and silver in the depression 
of that year. The Sullivan Mine was also closed as the 
company was unable to raise fresh capital and it was 
bought at a sheriff’s sale in July, 1909, by the 
Guggenheim Corporation, When in 1910 Mr, Brownell of 
the Guggenheim Corporation offered the mine for sale to 
Mr, Aldridge of the Canadian Mining and Smelting Company 
he thought he was unloading a ’’metallurgical lemon,” 

The next few years witnessed a struggle to evolve a suit¬ 
able method to smelt the very ’’zincey” ore of the 
Sullivan. The high prices of metals during World War I 

made it an economic proposition to treat Sullivan ore 
running from 2 % to 1 % zinc. After the War cheap 





... * 

» 
































. 

















71 


power and a cheaper process would alone make It possible 

to work the mine profitably. The first was secured in 

1916 when the West Kootenay Pov/er and Light Company 

was acquired by the Consolidated Mining and Smelting 

Company and arrangements were made for its expansion. 

The second was much slower in being accomplished. In 

March, 1920, a flotation plant was established to parallel 

the 600-ton magnetic separation plant, and it was 

apparent that the flotation process would render 

obsolete the magnetic separation method, and the 600-ton 

magnetic plant was remodelled to enlarge the flotation 

operation. By August, 1920, the first lead concentrate 

by differential flotation was made. This made possible 

the building of the Kimberley concentrator with a 

capacity of 3000 tons a day in August, 1923. Today the 

concentrator has a capacity of 6500 tons daily. Thus 

was it made possible for the Sullivan to retain to the 

present day the distinction, won in 1914, of being the 

largest lead producer in Canada.(7) 

Of the other mines, the Monarch Mine, near Field, 

was the most important. Discovered in 1884, it was 

purchased from the Coffman Brothers by the B. C. Smelting 

Company in l887> and by 1888 more than 600 tons of the 

XT) SEE TABLE II OF THE APPENDIX FOR PRODUCTION OF THE 
MINE*. 






















' 





















. 




. 




























72 


best silver-lead ore had been shipped to smelting works 
in Vancouver. The residue was concentrated so as to 
make it possible to dispose of it profitably. In 1890 
terms were arranged to supply the Hevelstoke Smelter 
Company with 200 tons of ore per month. Although the 
supply was apparently inexhaustible only 2,420 tons of 
ore were mined from 1884 to 1910.(8) The long haul to 
the smelters and the necessity of shipping only the 
richest values because of costs of transportation had 
kept down production. However, the mine is still being 
worked with encouraging results.(9) 

Another promising ledge was struck at a creek 
flowing into the Columbia Hiver just a short distance 
north of Lake Windermere, called Toby Creek. About 
1884 there had been a local rush to the creek when 
comparatively unskilled miners had taken out a 
considerable quantity of gold.(10) H a d the Golden 
Smelter been a success Toby Creek would have become 
undoubtedly one of the leading centers in rich mineral 
ores in the East Kootenay since the creek emptied into 

THJ MINING REPORT, B. C., 1935, p. E13. 

(9) MINING REPORT, B. C., 1931, p. A138 gives following 
YEAR TONS SILVER(02.) LEAD(lb.) ZINC(lb.) 

1926 42,246 64,427 8,977,319 228,000 

1929 1,730 1,419 396,231 

1930 75,054 61,217 12,084,062 11,180,379 

(10) MINING REPORT, B. C., 1888, p. 308. 















■ 






' 

* 














■ 








. 


. 








■ 

. . ■ . . 









73 


a section of the Columbia River where steamboats plied 
in the summer months, enabling the miners to get in 
supplies and forward ore to Golden at a cheap rate. 

When Messrs. Cochrane and Brady, in 1888 conveyed 
their rights to a company formed in London, England, 
Finlay Creek once again came into the news.(10a) Both 
silver-bearing and gold-bearing quartz seemed to abound 
throughout the district. All that was needed was experts 
to prove the worth of the deposits and capitalists to 
develop them. For several years the Finlay Creek 
Hydraulic Company reaped a rich harvest in their large 
scale project and attracted additional capital to the 
ledges also as their work progressed. 

To enumerate all of the minor developments of the 

time would take more space than they deserve. The 

Spillimacheen locations made in 1884 had a favourable 

position about forty miles from the railway at Golden, 

and four miles from the Columbia River. Here again the 

failure of the smelting works at Golden militated against 

the development of this huge low grade deposit.(10b) 

Wild Horse Creek again received attention by the 

discovery in 1888 of five quartz claims showing a fine 

(10a) This was the creek where gold had been discovered 
in 1863. See page 46. 

(10b) The failure of these smelting works is discussed 
in Chapter VIII below. 










. 

















- 












. 





















. 

> 






. 



, 











, 
















74 


grained galena assaying from twenty to eighty dollars 
to the ton in silver. The Albion Iron Works of Victoria 
supplied the East Kootenay Exploration Syndicate with 
additional equipment in 1893 and a fair profit was 
reported in the ensuing years. Other discoveries in 
mineral and quartz were made on the various forks of 
St. Mary's River and Wild Horse Creek in 1894. As in the 
case of discoveries of gold quartz veins on Perry Creek 
these were overshadowed by the silver-lead development® 
Prospectors in search of placer gold in 1896 made many 
locations of gold quartz claims on Perry Creek. With 
these low grgde veins careful working would bring some 
success. The copper-gold deposits of the Cranbrook 
area are similar in being low grade, but their extent and 
character will no doubt give them value in the future 
when the improved methods now in use in other locations 
have been introduced. 

All these indications have had social Implications 
even in regions where government reports have shown the 
veins to be secondary deposits. The lust of discovery 
and exploitation has seized upon the population. 

Prospects have been pushed forward at great expense in 
the urge to strike the main lead and the earnings of many 
months as well as unending labour have been expended in 








































' 1 :■ 






. 

. 

. 

































75 

vain efforts to push forward a tunnel to strike the 


vein where the ore would be present in sufficient 
quantities to make it a commercial proposition, A 
winter*s wages at a lumber camp would disappear in a 
few weeks for powder and food, and the optimistic 
prospector would keep on for years driving a narrow 
tunnel two or three miles into the heart of a mountain. 

In the Roosville Valley nine miles east of the Kootenay 
River, on the international boundary line, Commissioner 
J. F, Armstrong reported as early as 1901 that there 
was a rich sulphide of copper ore with black oxide 
lying between syenite and porphry walls,(11) In 1923 
the main lead had not been found and most of the 
inhabitants had some interest in one or more of the 
numerous prospects dotting the sides of the mountains, 
still hoping for the magic "find**. In 1944 the discovery 
had not been made, and most of the original tunnels 
had long since caved in and the owners died or moved 
away. 

The numerous labour strikes in the Crow*s Nest 
field had also an important effect on lode-mining since 
the lack of coke meant the closing of smelters. This 
became so serious as time went on that the Consolidated 


(11) MINING REPORT, B. C., 1901, p. 1005 





. 


■ 
















' 























76 


Mining and Smelting Company changed its source of coke 
supply from the Crow’s Nest Pass Coal Company to the 
International Coal and Coke Company at Coleman, Alberta. 

A considerable share of the stock of this company was 
held by the smelting company and a steadier supply of 
coke kept its properties operating at fuller capacity. 

Since all the output in the early days found its 
way to the United States smelters at Tacoma, Great Falls, 
Helena, Denver, or Omaha, the tariff was also important 
to British Columbia miners. In 1891 a tariff of $30 per 
ton was placed on lead ores by the American Congress. 

This had the effect of establishing smelters on the 
Canadian side of the line and after the construction 
of the Crow’s Nest Railway in 1898 with its transportat¬ 
ion facilities making available the coal and coke of 
the Crow’s Nest area a great development both in 
smelting and lode-mining took place.(12) The total 
production of placer gold, silver, copper, lead and 
zinc for the East Kootenay for the period from 1900 to 
1938 was $403,104,260.(13) 

Tl2) H0WAY,”p7 cit., Vol. II, gives figures showing the 
development from Year Book, 1903, p. 137% 1911>pp.178-180# 
TOTAL VALUE OF GOLD, SILVER, LEAD, COPPER. 

1894-1398 $20,964,000 (PROVINCE) $ 493,000(EAST KOOTENAY) 

1901-1905 63,950,000 " 5,857,000 ” « 

1906-1910 75,974,000 « 9,338,000 « « 

(13) MINING REPORT, B. C., 1938, p. A21, IX, E. 
























' ^ 


' 
























1 



















- 






- 












77 

The development of lode-mining brought in the 
most stable and permanent type of mining community. 
Instead of the careless haphazard development of the 
early placer years we find a scientific progress of 
well-surveyed mining properties; not a group of needy 
adventurers, but an organization of wage-earning 
labourers; the beginning of permanent settlement based 
on several primary industries instead of a boom society 
sustained by gold fever* It is true that “ghost towns” 
abound in the south-eastern interior of British Columbia 
but most of these were not abandoned until after some 
years of production and new centres arose to take care 
of the shifting population. Lode-mining speeded the 
construction of the Crow*s Nest Railway, aided in 
opening the coal fields, and brought in a numerous 
population to serve as a market for subsidiary 
industries.(14) 

(14) See Chapter XI below. 



























- 





. 

. 










. 

1 




, 






















78 


VIII. SMELTING. 

The lode mines of the area never could have 
developed to their fullest extent without the growth of 
smelting facilities near the scene of the lode deposits. 
When the ore was sent to smelters in the United States 
only the ore highest in silver and lead values could 
be freighted because of transportation charges. The 
zinc content of the ore, too, was looked upon as without 
value and often refractory ores with a high zinc content 
were rendered valueless because of the expense of getting 
them to the smelters. British Columbia lode miners 
lacked foresight with regard to zinc although as early 
as 1885 American mining men were preserving zinc dumps 
with the hope of using them in the future. It was long 
after this that the same idea occurred to British 
Columbia mining men. The higher price of zinc during 
World War I and its great usefulness as a war material 
spurred on the development of smelting methods designed 
to utilize this ^zincey” ore and to make it possible to 
smelt it sufficiently cheaply to render it a profitable 
source of income. 

The first smelter in the East Kootenay and the 
first in British Columbia was a small iron and stone 
affair built on the south side of the Spillimacheen Biver 




79 


near its junction with the Columbia River. Constructed 
in 1883 by John McRae it was intended to smelt the 
silver-lead ores of the neighboring Jubilee and 
Spillimacheen Mountains. It still remained in 1939 as 
a monument to this pioneer prospector, but it was then 
dismantled to supply stone for the piers of a new bridge 
across the Spillimacheen River, 

The second smelter, often claimed to be the pioneer 
smelter in British Columbia, was built in Vancouver 
between the years 1885 and 188? to smelt the ore from 
the Monarch Mine in East Kootenay. Its life followed 
the traditional chequered one of the early smelters— 
prosperity and continuous operation when prices were 
high and partial operation or non-operation when prices 
dropped. By 1891 the Monarch Mine was supplying some 
ore to a smelter built by an American concern at 
Revelstoke, B. C. But both smelters were too small to 
compete with those south of the boundary line. Smelting 
methods were crude and the output still had tariff and 
railway charges to pay before it reached a refinery. 

As in the case of the Golden smelters they were 
foredoomed to death by starvation. 

The smelters at Golden were "children of ill-conceived 

(1) S. S'. FOWLER, "Early Smelters in B. C.," B. C. 
Historical Quarterly, Vol. 3, 1939, p. 200. 











* 














* 














. 



. 





















80 


enterprise.**(1) The first smelter was built by a 
Calgary Syndicate consisting of J. A. Lougheed, Mr. 
McCarthy, and H. B. and George Alexander in 1891. One 
lone carload of ore from the Monarch Mine was received 
but no other ore ever reached the smelter. In 1896 
Golden*s high hopes were doomed when an English 
Syndicate, toying with the idea of developing the 
Monarch Mine on an extensive scale, decided against it. 
Most of the other mines in the immediate vicinity of 
Golden were also low grade and would have had to be 
pushed forward very vigorously for the smelter to 
survive. Even the richer deposits had transportation 
difficulties to surmount and at this time most of the 
available capital was going into the Toad Mines at 
Nelson and others in its vicinity. Negotiations for the 
sale of the smelter in I898 and 1900 were unsuccessful 
and it was left to be torn down mostly by transients 
who were in the habit of using its boards to make 
themselves a fire under the smelter roof. The second 
smelter was built in 1903, a mile northwest of Golden 
on Hospital Creek, by **The Labourers* Co-operative Gold, 
Silver and Copper Mining Company.” It was purely a 
selling inducement in connection with a stock promoting 
scheme. In the fall of 1905 the company operated their 




> . . ■ 

, 










- 

























» 






















































. 


















■ 



* 


























, 







81 

smelter for one evening, but did not even remove the 
slag. The machinery was sold for old iron in 1937 at 
a Provincial Government tax sale. The closing of the 
Marysville Smelter in 1907 brought to an end the attempts 
to develop smelting in the East Kootenay. 

Thus the smelters of East Kootenay met with little 
success, and it remained for those of West Kootenay to 
bring in improved processes which would make it possible 
to smelt the low grade ores of many East Kootenay mines. 
These smelters had a history dating back to 1887. In 

that y e a r the Le Roi mine at Rossland completed its 
contract with Mr. Heinze's Trail smelter and the owners 
of this mine erected their own smelter at Northport, 
Washington, near the forty-ninth parallel, in an effort 
to secure cheaper smelting charges. When the Canadian 
Pacific Railway Company bought out Mr. Heinze*s smelter 
and tram and added a lead stack to the smelter in 1898 
Slocan and East Kootenay ores were brought to it. In 
1900 ores from mines in the Boundary country were sent 
to the improved smelter and since its increased capacity 
gave lower smelting charges Northport was forced to 
give up. In 1897 the Hall Mines smelter blew in at 
Nelson giving a market which helped coke production 
in the East Kootenay when the Crow's Nest Railway was 
















. 




. - 
















r 


































■ 










• 




























. 







































82 


completed in 1898, The Pilot Bay smelter, some eight 
miles down Kootenay Lake from the Riondel Peninsula, 
was opened in 1895 and operated for about two years. 

The property passed into the hands of the Canadian 
Metal Company of Frank, Alberta, who planned to 
recommence operations in 1906 but their financial 
difficulties prevented them from doing so. 

The development of the Trail smelter had the 
greatest repercussions on the East Kootenay mines. In 
1906 the Canadian Pacific Railway combined its smelter 
interests with a number of mining interests to form 
the Canadian Consolidated Mines, Limited, later changed 
to the Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company of 
Canada, Limited. The resources of this large company 
made possible the greatest development of East Kootenay 
mines. Research, foresight, and its confessed policy 
of having a new mine ready when the old one was y/orked 
out brought steady progress until in 1942 the company 
had a total of 1698 employees in East Kootenay and 5184- 
in its smelter at Trail, The smelter aided coal mining 
in the south-east Kootenay until strikes forced it to 
look for a steadier source of supply at Coleman, Alberta, 
The operations of the smelter at Greenwood and the 

Granby smelter at Grand Forks in the Boundary Country 



■ 




- 









■ 












. 
















♦ 




















83 


were both handicapped by uncertainty in the supply of 
coke. In 1911 strikes in the East Kootenay mining field 
forced the two smelters to import coke from Pennsylvania 
at a price of $10.55 a ton. Further strikes, combined 
with reduction of copper recovery and increased mining 
costs, brought a great lowering in the amount of ore 
handled in 1917 and continued strikes in 1918 further 
limited operations. On June 18, 1919? the Granby 
Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company closed its 
Phoenix mines near Grand Forks in spite of the fact that 
mining operations could have been continued indefinitely 
and profitably and at the same time the company also 
closed its smelter. Copper prices had fallen at the 
end of the Great War and the lack of a sure and a cheap 
supply of coke caused the Granby Company to concentrate 
its capital on the development of the Anyox mine on the 
Portland Canal, northeast of Prince Rupert. A new 
smelter had been built at the mine in 1914 and this 
was now enlarged. A certain and cheap supply of coke 
was assured from the Vancouver Island mines. The British 
Columbia Copper Company at Greenwood closed their 
smelter for essentially the same reasons, although the 
main lead in the mine of the company near Greenwood had 
just been discovered. 













- 

. 

* ' 

. 






. 















84 


The only smelter ever built in Alberta had a 
history just as discouraging as that of the smelters of 
East Kootenay. The Canadian Metal Company had two 
considerations in mind in constructing a smelter at the 
Frank mines. The best practice in the world required 
1.75 tons of coke to each ton of ore, and the zinc 
smelting process required ore concentrated to a high 
grade. Therefore it was cheaper to take the ore to the 
coal, especially as the company had a nine-foot seam 
at Frank which could be mined at $1.00 per ton whereas 
the Crow’s Nest Pass Coal Company charged $2.00 for 
mine-run coal at the mines. The Canadian Pacific 
Railway set the freight rate at $ 2.50 per ton from 
Slocan to Frank so in November, 1905* when the smelter 
was still under construction, it would seem that 
conditions were good for success. It is interesting to 
note that clay for the zinc retort manufacture was 
obtained from St. Louis. However, unsuspected 
difficulties were encountered in smelting the zinc and 
soon the company was on the verge of financial collapse. 
The New Canadian Metal Company, formed with Samuel S. 
Fowler as manager, finally closed the Frank works in 
1906. 

The many experiments pointed to the impossibility 










' 

* 

* 








* 











. 




, 


. 






















85 

of smelting on a small scale. The large-scale Trail 


smelter, however, has been able to expand its operations 
and has long remained the only smelter in the whole of 
the Kootenays. The results which accrued to mining as 
the smelting facilities expanded have already been 
pointed out and the effects of smelting on the growth 
of population can be seen by examining the census 
returns.(2) Without the ore of the East Kootenay the 
smelting operations would have been enormously curtailed, 
and the population of both East and West Kootenay much 
reduced. Thus the progress of mining in the East 
Kootenay closely parallels the expansion of smelter 
facilities. 

12) SEE TABLE XIII OF THE APPENDIX'. 




















4 


, 

' 






, 









86 


IX*. COAL MINING'. 

The coal measures of the Crow's Nest Pass were 
known at an early date. In the fall of 1845 Father 
De Smet passed through the district and noted the 
existence of coal in his journal. In the seventies 
Michael Phillipps and a Mr. Woods made a journey through 
the Crow's Nest Pass, solely for the purpose of 
exploration and discovery, and gave some publicity to 
the presence of the coal seams. L a rgely through their 
representations and the activities of R. L. T. Galbraith, 
M. P. P. for Fort Steele, the Dewdney Trail was built 
through the Pass and opened in 1879. Even in 1873 the 
Legislature at Victoria voted a sum of money for 
prospecting on the Elk River, an important tributary of 
the Kootenay River flowing from the north-east, but no 
doubt this was mainly with the idea of discovering 
gold.(l) In 1875 that great empire builder James J. 

Hill made a survey of all available sources of coal 
supply and formed the Northwestern Fuel Company destined 
to have great importance in opening up these coal 
measures and supplying markets. In 1887 William Fernie 
formed a company composed of Colonel Baker, Ned Bray, 
Peter Fernie, and himself to exploit the coal. In June, 
Tl) COLONIST, newspaper, June 15, 1873# 








- 













• 





, . * 








, , . . 


* 


' 



. 












• 

■ 





















87 


1887* the company staked 10,000 acres and for the next 
ten years William Fernie spent his time in opening and 
tracing these coal seams destined to be one of the 
largest coal deposits under one management in America.(2) 

When the coal beds were examined in the summer of 
1891 by the geologist, Dr. Selwyn, and his conservative 
estimate gave an extent of 144 square miles with an 
available tonnage of 24,976,000 long tons per square 
mile, William Fernie*s faith was justified. Mr. McEvoy, 
another mining engineer, said the coal measures extended 
over 230 square miles with ICO feet of coal capable of 
being mined giving a total tonnage of 22,595*200,000 
long tons as against Dr. Selwyn*s estimate of 3*596,544*000 
long tons.(3) 

In 1909 Or. Dowling of the Geological Survey 
divided the area into the southern and northern sections* 

In the former, 230 square miles in area, of which Fernie 
was the largest shipping point, the length north and 
south was about thirty miles and the maximum width 
twelve or thirteen miles. Twenty-two seams were present 
with a depth of coal equal to 216 feet, 100 feet of 
which was available, giving 22,600,000,000 long tons. 

(2) ATKINS, B. R., ,5 Some B. C. Biographies—Robert 
Galbraith of Galbraith*s Ferry,” PROVINCE, newspaper, 

July 22, 1922, p. 13. 

(3) Coal is usually measured in long tons of 2,240 pounds. 
















- 



























, 
















„ 






















. 

■ 

. 


















. . 


. 














88 


In the latter 140 square miles were coal beds, with a 
maximum width of seven miles and a length of forty miles, 
extending from a point twenty-four miles north of Michel 
Creek to the height of land at Kananaskis River. 
100,000,000 tons of coal were available per square mile, 
giving a total of 14,000,000,000 long tons for the 
section. Thus the total tonnage available in the whole 
area was 3&,800,000,000 long tons.(4) 

For the most part the coal was found in Cretaceous 
rocks which had assumed the form of a flat-bottomed 
basin except in places where faults had destroyed the 
regularity of this arrangement. The fact that the coal 
beds were at the base of elevated plateaus made it 
impossible to reach the coal except through the outcrop. 
The Coal Creek seams were located advantageously for 
cheap and economical working since they were situated 
just five miles east of Fernie at an elevation of 
approximately 500 feet above this centre. 

These were the original seams opened in 1897 when 

twenty men were employed bringing out a supply of coal in 

readiness for the completion of the Crow*s Nest Railway 

to Fernie. Pending the arrival of the railway machinery 

(4) D0WLING7 "The Coal Fields of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, 
Alberta and Eastern British Columbia,"cited in Gosnell, 
Year Book, 1911, pp. 188-9. 




































' 










. 



















89 


was first brought in by waggon road largely through the 
efforts of Mr* W. Blakemore, general manager, and Mr. 

Frank Smith, the mine manager. Later a short line was 
built connecting the mines with the railway and under 
these conditions a production of 9*334 long tons was 
achieved in 1898 with a working force of 123 men. 

Improved facilities in 1901 made possible a tonnage of 
322,245 long tons from 820 employees. The coal found 
an outlet largely at centres on the lines of the Great 
Northern and Northern Pacific, in Montana, Idaho, and 
Washington, and the coke was used at the smelting centres 
of West Kootenay. The peak production of these mines 
was 825,185 long tons of coal and 157*905 short tons of 
coke in 1913* from which the coal production declined with 
spasmodic recoveries, to a low of 53*874 long tons in 
1933•(5) By this time the depth of workings and the 
greater expense of mining the coal, combined with low 
prices and sparse markets, had been keenly felt and 
energies were bent to develop the seams where more 
economical working was possible. 

This was now possible at the Michel Mines just 
nineteen miles from Fernie on the Crow*s Nest Bailway. 
Michel was opened up to prospecting workings in 1898 
(5) Coke is usually measured in short tons of 2000 pounds. 


























































< 


































90 

£nd by 1900 it had produced 9*966 long tons of coal* 

Its peak year was in 1942 with a production of 868,080 
long tons of coal and 85,855 tons of coke, of which 
latter product 36.4$ was sold in the United States. 

Other mines in the district had an unfortunate 
record. The Carbonado Mines were opened by the Crow’s 
Nest Pass Coal Company, the owners also of the Michel 
and Coal Creek mines, in 1902. They were situated about 
four miles from the Morrissey Station on the Crow’s 
Nest Railway and some twelve miles from Fernie. Up to 
1909 the output of coal varied from 41,332 long tons in 
1902, to a peak of 136,750 long tons in 1903, a low of 
220 long tons in 1907, and a final production of 32,287 
long tons in 1909*(6) Dangerous workings, gas outbursts, 
and "bumps” led the company to close the mines in 1909 
and a population of more than 1,000 was forced to seek 
employment elsewhere.(7) Today most of the buildings 

(6) SEE TABLE VIII FOR COAL AND COKE PRODUCTION(1898-1942) 

(7) "Bumps* 1 are believed to be caused by the subsidence 
of the roof in certain areas under rigid rocks leaving a 
great unsupported span of rock stratum. ??hen one of 
these has given way, it means the hammerlike blow of. 
thousands of tons striking on the immense roof or flexible 
stratum overlying the mine, which imparts the blow 
downwards, breaking timber, causing extensive falls in 
the mine, and sending rock tremors through the strata. 
"Bumps* 1 are not related to gas outbursts, but elay-Biey 
they may occur, as in the State of Washington and Great 
Britain, where overlying rocks are rigid and there is 
great weight of cover, and when mining has either 

extracted too much coal in advance mining or it has not 
been taken out completely starting from the outcrop. 




. 








■ 

♦ 










. 








■ 


. 












* 




h 

■ 


8 

1 1 

. I 

' 




















91 

have been removed or torn down for rough lumber by 
contractors who purchased them for small sums. 

The Canadian Pacific Railway was chiefly instrumental 
in opening the Hosmer Mines, seme seven miles from 
Fernie on the Crow's Nest Railway, under the name of 
the Pacific Coal Company. The history of these mines 
was almost identical with that of the Morrissey Mines, 
except that the mine was much superior and the equipment 
more elaborate. Starting in 1908 with an output of 
2,627 long tons of coal and 771 tons of coke it reached 
a peak production of 217*528 long tons of coal and 
59*671 tons of coke in 1913 and discontinued operations 
about the middle of 1914. The coal was found to be of 
poor coking quality and inferior to other coals in the 
neighborhood for steam purposes. 

The Corbin Mines had a more satisfactory record. 

D. C. Corbin formed the company to run the mines which 
became noted for the largest per capita production of 
any field in the East Kootenay.(8) In 1918 the output 
for each man underground was at the rate of 2066 tons 
for a year of 291 days. The highest output per man 
underground in the Coal Creek Mines was 1355 tons in 
1941 and for Michel 1544 long tons in 1942.(8) In the 
(8) See Table I X of the Appendix. 







' 

' 












. :v. • . ^ ' 

- 

* 

. 

. 

. 




\ 







92 

years from 1918 to 1939 the highest tonnage per man 
underground was 919 in 1939 in Coal Creek and 1140 in 
1934 for Michel.(9) In Corbin the coal was close to 
the surface and large steam shovels could be used 
together with coal-cutting machinery, whereas in the 
other two fields coal-cutting machines were not being 
used to any considerable extent until about 1939* The 
Corbin Mines produced mainly a steam coal, its production 
reaching 280,691 long tons in 1932. Repeated strikes 
and expensive transportation finally impelled the 
company to abandon operations in 1935« At the present 
time most of the steel equipment has been sold for scrap 
metal and another camp has joined the legion of "ghost 
towns" in the south-eastern part of British Columbia. 

Today coal mining is exceptionally prosperous. 

After some trying years increased output in adjoining 

mines meant a large increment in the number of miners 

required and the population of Corbin was absorbed. A 

new coal area has been opened about two and a half miles 

from Fernie which is to have at the end of 1944 a 

production of 4000 tons a day. This Elk River Colliery, 

as it is called, is only two miles from the Coal Creek 

Mines and the coal will be brought from these mines by 

T9) Table IX gives figures for all years for which they 
are available in the annual reports of the Dept, of Mines. 










. 










































b 

3 




' 




















93 


a system of electric hoists to the new Colliery. The 
improved transportation facilities added to the very 
efficient tippling and washing arrangements which will 
be available by the fall of 1944 at the Elk River 
Colliery will greatly cheapen the costs of production 
and will give a nev/ lease of life to the Coal Creek 
Mines. 

One of the most important economic effects of 

coal mining was the lowering of the costs of smelting 

in the Kootenays. This made possible the reduction of 

low grade ore which required as much as twenty-five 

tons of coke to each hundred tons of metalliferous rock 

and thus the way was paved to a great development in 

other industries and an increase in population, not only 

in the Kootenays but also in Idaho and Washington. The 

importance of coke making was shown by the fact that 

by 1906 about half the output of the Crow’s Nest Mines 

was converted into coke and by 1907 the Crow’s Nest Pass 

Coal Company owned 1,128 beehive ovens with a daily 

capacity of 4000 tons.(10) Morrissey Mines produced 

13,072 tons of coke in its short life and Hosmer 

215,989 short tons. The International Coal and Coke 

Company at Coleman produced in 1908 about 2000 tons of 

(10) INNIS, H. A., "Settlement and the Mining Frontier," 
p. 306, MacMillan, 1936. 





, 

. 












. 


* 

* 


.. % • i 





94 


co a l per day of which one-half was sold to the Canadian 
Pacific Railway for locomotive use and the remainder 
converted into coke for sale to the British Columbia 
Copper Company at Greenwood. 

In 1944 coke ovens are in operation only at Michel 
and Coleman in the whole of the Crow’s Nest Pass region 
and the long lines of ovens at Fernie stand in silent 
testimony of man’s inhumanity to man, for labour 
troubles were chiefly responsible for most of the ills 
of the Kootenays. The strikes in the coal mines in 
1902 prostrated business from Michel to Grand Forks. 
’’Following strike troubles in the Crow’s Rest Pass, 
production is resuming normal proportions—marked 
improvement in metalliferous mining.”(11) These remarks 
made by the Honourable William Sloan in 1919 in his 
capacity as Provincial Minister of Mines may be applied 
with slight reservations after all the labour troubles 
in the East Kootenay. Between the years from 1902 to 
1924 only the years 1904, 1905, 1908, 1910, 1912-15, 
1918, 1920, 1921, and 1923 were free from strikes and 
even in some of these years lay-offs were frequent. 

The entrance of the United Mine Workers of America into 
the district in 1902 brought on the strike of 1906, 

(11) COLONIST, newspaper, Oct. 17, 1919, p. 14. 









































. 















- 








, 





































95 


which resulted in the passage by the Dominion Government 
of the Industrial Disputes Act. Even while the board 
of arbitration, provided by the act, was being 
constituted in 1907 another strike was called and this 
disregard of legality was typical of succeeding strikes. 
The instability and irregularity of employment explained 
the lack of peaceful relations between the company and 
its employees especially in the later years when the 
over-development of the mines and insufficient 
safeguards made the mines a dangerous place in which to 
work. This added danger seemed to imply that higher 
wages than were paid in other mines were necessary. In 
the early years the United Mine Workers® Union called 
strikes in order to secure recognition and in those 
years the lack of competition from oil, as well as 
from other coal mines on the Alberta side of the Crow 9 s 
Nest Pass, made conditions more favourable for a 
satisfactory settlement. When markets became more 
distant because of the increased production of the mines 
of the Crow®s Nest Pass Coal Company, and the opening of 
mines at Corbin, Coleman, Hillcrest, Blairmore, and 
Frank, and the profits were correspondingly reduced, 
the various mining companies resisted the demands of the 

miners with greater vigor. 







































































. 








- 











96 

There were other important social and economic 


effects of the coal mining industry. All occupations 
were marked to a greater or less extent by the.instabil¬ 
ity of the basic industry, and a fluctuating population 
was the result. The outbreak of World War I meant 
prosperity and new development but this well-being was 
only secured at some danger to the future since it meant 
exploiting mines which could hardly stand greater 
production than heretofore without sacrifice of lives. 

The explosion of 1902 in No. 2 Mine at Coal Creek was 
caused at least in part by over-development in the 
effort to secure great production at the earliest 
possible date. Improper mining in this same mine was 
the cause of "bumps” in 1907-08 and in turn the subsidence 
over this area affected the strata higher up which 
caused the occurrence of the phenomenon in other mines. 
(12) Safety measures applied since the first World War, 
and increased knowledge, will no doubt lessen the danger 
of over-development caused by the present War but old 
mines are still being worked and "bumps" are still 
common, the reason for them not being fully known even 
at this date. As long as there is uncertainty as to 
markets Just so long will these harmful social and 
Tl2MJ0L0NIST, newspaper, Sept. 8, 1917, p® 7® 













. 







- 


. 












































" 






























. 























97 


economic effects remain in the industry. The development 
of new mines and the continued abandonment of old 
workings is one answer to the dangers involved. In 
times of prosperity the various companies can afford 
this but in times of depression it is expensive to close 
lucrative mines especially as new development seems an 
unwise expenditure to the shareholders. 

Many and varied have been the solutions to the 
recurrent depressions which have affected coal mining 
in the past, and no doubt some of these will be brought 
into practice in the course of the next quarter of a 
century. The question was asked in the Victoria 
Colonist of November 26, 1927 whether the next five 
years would see the production of liquid fuel on a large 
scale by low temperature carbonization of various 
grades of coal. The depletion of oil reserves will 
doubtless bring an answer in thirty or forty years. 
Government aid for prospectors will help in the 
discovery of new mines and research will find ways of 
using coal hitherto undreamed. All producing areas in 
the East Kootenay were discovered without exception more 
than forty years ago and the enormous beds known to 
exist await only greater uses for coal to spur on 
development. 









* 




. 

. 

- ' 











98 

Professor Griffith Taylor in a recent article 
pointed out the importance of coal in the coming 
industrial age.(13) He envisaged Lethbridge and 
Drumheller as the Pittsburghs and the Buffalos of the 
west within a century when Albertans would emulate what 
the Russians have done in carrying iron from their 
deposits in the Ural Mountains to their coal fields in 
Kuznetsk, 1,200 miles to the east. Or, lest the 
transportation problems involved in this scheme be too 
great, the coal could be gassified right in the mines 
and piped out to generate steam which would in turn 
be used to supply electrical power. With the huge coal 
reserves of the East Kootenay and a vast lake of iron 
pyrites only eighty miles away at Kimberley, the next 
century should see great development in this area. 

Il3) CALGARY HERALD, newspaper, January 8, 1944. 
















• * 





. 















99 


X. TRANSPORTATION'. 

Prior to 1865 roads and trails to the East Kootenay 
led wholly from American territory. The route from 
Victoria was by steamer to White Bluffs on the Columbia 
River via Portland; then by land to Colville, 

Washington, and on by waggon road, opened in 1864, to 
Lake Pend d*Oreille in Idaho. A safe and well-defined 
trail then led to Bonner’s Ferry where travellers 
crossed to the east bank of the Kootenay River proceeding 
to Galbraith’s Ferry through fairly open country by a 
narrow trail. From Galbraith’s Ferry the trail led west 
of the Kootenay River to Wild Horse Creek. Constable 
William C. Young used the latter part of this trail 
through Washington Territory on his journey to Wild 
Horse Creek in 1864 because very unfavourable reports 
had reached him about the condition of the trail from 
Hope to Fort Sheppard.(1) 

Dewdney’s Trail was built in 1865 in an attempt by 

the British Columbia merchants to get a share of the 

trade then monopolized by the United States, The trail 

began at Fort Hope on the Fraser River. Passing down 

the Columbia River to Fort Sheppard it came into the 

East Kootenay by way of the Moyie River and Cranbrook 

Tl) W. C. YOUNG to A. Birch, Col. Sec’y, Aug. 30, 1864, 
Victoria Archives. 






* 







1 






, 

' 


. 

♦ 









■ 








* . 1 * 





100 


to Wild Horse Creek* The trail was built largely by 
Chinese labour at a cost of $74,000 which included such 
prices for provisions per pound as tea $1*90, flour 420, 
bacon 700, sugar 650, coffee 650, and rice 600* Shovels 
were $36.00, picks $45.00, and axes $42.00 a dozen, 
and the wages for graders and choppers were $75*00 per 
month.(2) By the middle of September pack trains were 
able to make the trip from Fort Hope to the Kootenay 
diggings across British territory, but the season was 
too far advanced to allow the British merchants to get 
very much of the trade. 

It was only by the application of more money and 
greater intelligence that the Government of British 
Columbia could hope to triumph over the geographical 
obstacles which impeded access to the Kootenay. If a 
roadhouse relay system had been built along the Dewdney 
Trail as in the Cariboo, Victoria and New Westminster 
would have been able to compete with Fort Colville, 

Walla Walla and Fort Benton. This alone, however, would 
not have sufficed, for the total absence of bridges 
would have remained a fatal handicap, because in the 
summer months many streams were flooded and difficult to 
cross and the Salmon and Kettle Rivers became quite 

unfordable. Deep snow in the winter and the flooding of 



. 

* 

■ 











• 






























« 

























' 













101 


low-lying stretches along the Kootenay River in the 
summer were still further impediments. As a result 
travellers were often obliged to make a detour of 160 
miles to the south of the border through Colville and 
Spokane Prairie, effecting a junction with the Fort 
Sheppard Trail about sixty miles from the mines. Under 
these circumstances the customs duties which the 
American traders had to pay were more than balanced by 
the higher costs of transportation by the Canadian route 
and Victoria and New Westminster remained unable to 
compete effectually with their American rivals. 

Communication was still by southern American trails 

right up to the l880*s. In the days of the gold rushes 

Bonner established a ferry on the Kootenay River and 

made a large fortune in one season. A narrow Indian 

trail was the only access to the Kootenay mines in 

these years. The trail northward from Bonner*s Ferry 

to Lake Windermere became the artery between Upper and 

Lower Kootenay. An enterprising Walla Walla firm used 

camels in the year 1866 or 1867 but was forced to 

abandon them because they stampeded the horses and 

mules. In 1869 when the Perry Creek mines were showing 

increased activity there were only three trails by 

(2) E. DETONEY~to the Col. Sec’y of B. C., June 29, 

1865, original MS. in Victoria Archives. 















. ' 


' 










, 

. 

. 












102 


which goods could be imported into the Kootenay country: 
by the Tobacco Plains on the Kootenay River, by the 
junction on the Moyie River, and from Colville and Fort 
Sheppard. All these trails converged about twenty miles 
from the mines. The Galbraith Brothers constructed a 
forty-two foot ferry on Tobacco Plains for the 
accommodation of travellers from Montana to Perry Creek. 
In 1875 it was estimated that the Americans carried on 
trade valued at $15,000 to $20,000 over this route. 

The portion of the trail from Fort Sheppard to the head 
of Kootenay Lake was unusable for eight months in the 
year because of the swampy nature of the land in the 
spring and summer and the snow in the winter. After the 
building of the Northern Pacific Railway to Sandpoint 
in I 883 the forty mile trail to Bonner®s Ferry was 
greatly improved and this road into the Kootenay 
country became the best one for travellers. Before 
this there had been no railway within 500 or 600 miles 
of the Kootenay District. 

One of the most important waggon roads was built 
in 1887 . This started at a point known as Steamboat 
Landing on the Columbia River, about fifty miles south 
of Golden, and thence ran south to the heart of the 

East Kootenay, a distance of 140 miles. The Canadian 














. 











' 





















, 




. 











103 

Pacific Railway passed through Golden and a regular 

steamer service went from Golden to the starting point 

of the road so that a moderately cheap means of 

transportation was furnished from the railway to within 

road 

a short distance of the American boundary, The, s assisted 
to an incalculable degree the future development of 
mineral and other resources in the East Kootenay 
district and particularly aided the Finlay Creek Mining 
Company when the company built nine miles of road for 
the purpose of connecting its mines with the main road 
at the Upper Columbia Lake, 

As the 1890®s approached and the revival of placer 
mining and the beginning of lode-mining went on 
communication by roads and trails was much improved. By 
1896 a good waggon road extended from Golden to Fort 
Steele, whence roads radiated to Wild Horse Creek, Perry 
Creek, and St. Mary*s River, North Star Mine, Cranbrook, 
Tobacco Plains and across the border to the south. The 
Toby Creek Trail started a few miles north of Windermere, 
crossed the Columbia, then went up Toby Creek to the 
divide, thence down Hammill Creek to Argents on the 
north end of Kootenay Lake. The Moyie Trail ran from 
Cranbrook southwest past the St, Eugene Mines on Moyie 
Lake, to the landing on the Kootenay River, where steamers 



. 








■ 



















* 






* 

' . 







104 


in the Kootenay Service stopped once or twice a week. 

Mark Creek was reached by a waggon road from North Star 
Landing on the Kootenay River. This road also served 
later as an outlet for many small silver-lead-zinc 
claims. When navigation stopped in the autumn a weekly 
stage ran between Golden and Fort Steele carrying the 
mails. 

This was in marked contrast to the mail service in 
the early days. In 1845 Father De Smet's letter to the 
Father Superior of his Order took from fifteen to 
eighteen months to reach him; today less than fifteen 
days is required for mail from London, England to the 
Kootenay River. In 1865 one William Read received $300 
a trip for a monthly mail service between New Westminster 
a nd Kootenay. In 1866 responsible persons were offered 
a sum of $150 for carrying mail to the Kootenay, but 
despatches were so infrequent that residents of the 
Kootenay engaged a private express and sent their mail 
through Walla Walla.(3) During the summer there were 
but four expresses to bring them news while in the 
winter the mines were quite isolated. In 1876 mail came 
regularly every two months. 

Packing charges were lowered as transportation 
improved. In 1864 it took twenty-five days for pack 

























. 












- 



















■ 

. 






. 






10 ? 


trains to make the trip from Walla Walla to Wild Horse 
but large profits were made since goods were carried 
at the rate of 75 $ a pound. The time taken for the 
distance of about 535 miles from Hope to Wild Horse 
Creek was one month including five days delay for resting 
the horses, and in 1869 the freight charges from Hope 
were 16^ a pound and from Walla Walla 10 $ to 12 $ a 
pound. One merchant in June of that year had 200,000 
pounds of freight on the way from Portland, the charge 
from Wallula to the Kootenay mines being 11^ a pound. 

The supplies came chiefly from Walla Walla in the summer 
months although the Hudson 1 s Bay Company supplied their 
posts partially from British Columbia according to the 
time of the year. In 1870 the average packing rates 
from Walla Walla were 12^ a pound, although Robert 
Galbraith contracted with Walter Moberly to bring in 
supplies for his survey party from Spokane Bridge at 10 $ 
per pound. 

Cheaper carrying charges and more abundant supplies 

lowered the prices of provisions as time went on. On 

April 3, 1865, twenty pounds of Hudson 8 s Bay rope tobacco 

sold in ten minutes at $12.00 a pound. On May 4, 1865, 

when the roads were still not open properly for packers, 

(3) DEAVILLE, "Colonial Postage System," p. 132, quoted 
by THRUPP, op. cit., p. 40. 



























































.• 


' 










- . * . . ■ . 







106 


beef and mutton were selling at 50# a pound, rabbits at 
$1.50 and martens at $3.00 each for food. A woman 
offered $100.00 for ten pounds of flour and could not 
get it at that price.(4) By September, 1865, the market 
at Wild Horse was well supplied with flour at 23# to 24# 
a pound, bacon 75#> beef 25# to 30#, sugar 75# and other 
staples in proportion, but liquors and other luxuries 
were enormously dear.(5) In June, 1869, at Perry Creek 
flour was $15.00 per hundred weight, beef 20# per 
pound, ham 50#, bacon 40#, sugar 50#, tea $2*00, coffee 
75#, and $1.00, butter $1.00, fruits 62^#, beans 30#, 
leather boots $9.00 a pair, and gum boots $12.00 per 
pair. In 1873 flour was brought in from Walla Walla 
and sold at 6-J# a pound; bacon was a drug on the market 
at from 18# to 20# a pound; fresh meat sold from 8# to 
10# per pound, and other prices were proportionately 
low. 

One of the most important reasons for cheaper goods, 
especially in the later years, was the development of 
steam navigation. The competition of routes became 
especially active during the Big Bend excitement in 1865 
and 1866. Astoria and Portland vied with Victoria and 
New Westminster for the trade of the mines. Navigation 

(4) COLONIST, newspaper, June 19, 1865, p. 3. 

(5) BALL, H. K., letter to Col. Sec*y., Oct. 21, 1869. 






107 

was possible on the Columbia River from Revelstoke on 
the north to Korthport in Washington, a distance of 250 
miles. On the Kootenay River navigation was feasible 
for light stern wheelers for nearly 100 miles at certain 
seasons between Tobacco Plains and the junction of the 
river with Finlay Creek which comes in from the west, 
near the mother lakes of the Columbia River. However, 
this navigation was impeded by drifts and shallows and 
was never important economically, although just before 
the building of the Crow*s Nest Railway there were 
steamer connections between Fort Steele and Jennings, 
Montana. From Bonner*s Ferry sixty miles down the 
Kootenay River to the British boundary and thence farther 
down the river to Kootenay Lake, navigation was good 
for vessels of any size, the low soft banks being 
favourable for steamboat landings almost anywhere. 

The first steamer to ply the Columbia River or any 
inland waters of British Columbia was Captain White*s 
steamer the ”Forty-nine ,f . It was built in August, 1865* 
at Little Dalles, Washington, to ply from there to 
Death Rapids. A company was at once formed in Oregon to 
run stages from Priest*s Rapids or White Bluffs to 
Little Dalles, a distance of 150 miles, to connect with 
Captain White *s steamer. Commissioner O e Reilly in 1866 





















, 






• 











■ 




. 













, 













. 

















* 










108 

arranged with Captain White to carry mail to the Big 
Bend Mines for $75.00 per month. It is interesting to 
record the fact that the Hudson*s Bay Company put the 
steamer "Marten" on Shuswap Lake when the "Forty-nine" 
was making her fifth run. Captain White cut his rates of 
$50.00 per passenger and freight rates of $200.00 per 
ton in half to retain the trade. In 1869 the steamer 
made two trips per season and in 1871 Walter Moberly 
commissioned her to take supplies to his Canadian 
Pacific Railway survey camp at Big Eddy. 

The Kootenay River and Lake were rather late in 
assuming any importance in steam navigation. In 1884 
the steamer "Midge" became a historic craft by being the 
first to navigate the Kootenay River or Lake. By 1894 
the Kootenay Lake was as great an inland shipping artery 
as the Columbia River. The Columbia and Kootenay 
Steamboat Navigation Company purchased the "Kootenai" 
from Messrs. Sanborn and Logan of Little Dalles, 
Washington, to carry freight and men for Canadian Pacific 
Railway construction in the Selkirk Mountains. In 1886 
Captain F. P. Armstrong built the steamer "Duchess" and 
when it sank in 1887 he had Mr. Watson of Victoria build 
two new boats, the "New Duchess" and the "Marion". At 
the close of the season of 1888 , these two boats h a d 







■ 























. 















. 


■ 

. 


. * 









■ 










» 




li.L 


**■ 








109 


carried to southeast Kootenay, 870 tons of freight and 

685 passengers. For ore $1.00 a ton was charged from 

any river point on the Upper Columbia to Golden Landing. 

In 1888 either the "New Duchess" or the "Marion" ran 

twice a week between Golden and Columbia Lake, about 

113 miles, making stage connections with Fort Steele, 

Wild Horse and Cranbrook.(6) The "Galena", the "Lytton" 

and the "Columbia" were three other of the many 

steamboats which helped the development of southeast 

Kootenay. The last two, besides bringing in running 

material for the Columbia and Kootenay and Nakusp and 

Slocan railways, carried to Canada large numbers of 

American settlers from the Colville and Falouse portions 

of Washington State attracted by the Columbia route as 

a means of reaching quickly the Canadian Prairies. To 

Mr. Hanson of Wasa, twelve miles above Fort Steele, is 

due the credit of bringing the first steamboat up the 

Kootenay River to Columbia Head in 1890. Captain 

Flowers of the vessel the "Lily", made his first trip 

in April, 1895, from North Star Landing, and in May of 

the same year another boat the "Gwendoline", came into 

service. Thus when the North Star mine was ready to 

ship ore there were two steamers the "Lily" and the 

(6) ATKINS, "Columbia River Chronicles," op. cit., 
PROVINCE, newspaper, April 1, 1922. 













. 













, 






. 






. 














no 


"Annerly” waiting to take its ore south to Libby or 

Jennings, Montana, while the "Gwendoline” was prepared 

to convey it to Golden,(7) 

The building of the Crow's Nest Railway meant the 

decline of steam navigation. In I896 a steamer of the 

Upper Columbia Navigation and Transportation Company 

left Golden every Tuesday morning when navigation was 

open to run south up the Columbia River to Mud Lake 

Landing, a distance of 113 miles. Here passengers and 

freight were transferred by horse tram a distance of 

four and three-quarters miles to the Upper Columbia 

Lake where another steamer ran to Canal Flats, about 

fifteen miles. Baillie-Grohman®s Canal was designed 

to give a connection from Canal Flats to the Kootenay 

River by steamer, but its failure meant that travellers 

had to go by stage to points of destination in the south, 

except in times of high water when steamers ascended 

as far as Fort Steele on the Kootenay River and 

sometimes to within about four miles of the steamer 

landing on the Columbia River. In this same year the 

Columbia and Kootenay Steam Navigation Company was 

absorbed by the Canadian Pacific Railway. The formation 

(7) ATKINS, opT cit., collection of clippings in the 
Provincial Archives at Victoria. 




- 

, 

, 

■ 

. 

. 








Ill 


of the International Transportation Company by Jim 
Wardner and Captain Armstrong in 1898 at the time when 
Wardner, about thirty miles south of Fort Steele, was 
booming because of the construction of the Canadian 
Pacific Railway, ended in failure when both of its boats 
were sunk.(8) The organization of another company and 
the building of another boat came too late. The water 
in the Kootenay River had fallen, the boom in building 
lots was over, and Jim Wardner sacrificed his stock 
and went to the Klondyke. At the present time no boats 
ply either the Kootenay River or the Columbia River. 

The Canal Flats Reclamation Project was another 

scheme ending in failure. Baillie-Grohman, an Englishman, 

formed a company in 1882-3 to turn the Kootenay River 

into the Columbia Lake at a point where the river was 

only one and a half miles away from the lake, with the 

purpose of reclaiming the rich swampy land where the 

Kootenay recrossed the boundary just before it widened 

to form the Kootenay Lake. A. S. Farwell was sent by 

the British Columbia Government to report on the project 

and in 1884 a reserve of 48,000 acres was made, comprising 

all the land in the Lower Kootenay between the boundary 

(8) WARDNER, J, "Jim Wardner of Wardner, Idaho, by 
Himself," Chapter XXXV. Anglo-American Publishing 
Company, New York, 1900. 











' 

















. 
















. 

’ 

' 




* 


< 












* 


















112 


and the Lake. By this time, however, the railway right 
of way was running just above high water mark and it 
was feared that all the melting snow turned into the 
Columbia River would wash out the railway grade. Then 
again the Provincial Government had no jurisdiction 
over canals and therefore had no right to make an 
allocation of land. 30,000 acres were finally set aside 
in the Upper Kootenay on condition that a canal with a 
lock be constructed on plans of the Dominion Government. 

The Canal, 45 feet wide and 6700 feet long, took 
two years to build and such details were insisted on by 
the Dominion Government that the future use of the canal 
as a navigable connection between the Kootenay and 
Columbia Rivers was rendered very problematical. It 
would not help in the reclamation of land in the Lower 
Kootenay because the gates could not be kept open in 
high water, and the cost was twenty times as much as 
the former scheme. Only three boats ever navigated the 
canal and finally the Department of Public Works of the 
Provincial Government voted $2500 to close it.(9) 

The Kootenay region owed a great deal to the 
shortest practicable route of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway through the Kicking Horse Pass. In 1885 there 
79 ) BAILLIE-GROHMAN, op. cit., p. 264. 









* 










* 

. 






- 










. 








. 

. 















113 

were 7000 men employed in railway work and many men 
came into the area because of the improved facilities 
for prospecting* Heavy machinery could now be brought 
in more easily for the diggings where the water menace 
had required large pumping machinery* Then, too, 
settlers found the route from Golden less arduous and 
much shorter than the southern routes, although at this 
time the dispute with the Indians in regard to the 
allocation of lands, tended to deter incoming settlers, 
as well as capital* So the East Kootenay did not benefit 
as much as one might suppose since the adjustment of the 
Indian land question was only accomplished after railway 
expenditure had ended. 

Americans contributed greatly to the construction 
of railways to serve the Kootenays. James J* Hill had 
an important part as a member of the original syndicate 
of the Canadian Pacific Railway. He was one of the 
first to recognize that coal would eventually displace 
wood entirely for locomotive use and with this in mind 
he got control of important coal areas, some 10,000 
acres, at a point about twenty miles north of Blairmore, 
Alberta. From 1893 onward he made every endeavour to 
tap southern British Columbia by branch lines and all 
the facts of geography aided his efforts. D. C. Corbin 




114 


was another American railway man whose name was chiefly 
connected with the opening of the Corbin Mines in the 
East Kootenay. In 1905 he began construction of the 
Spokane International Railway from Spokane through the 
Panhandle of Idaho to Eastport, Idaho, and thence to 
connect with the Canadian Pacific Railway at Yahk, B. C., 
about ten miles by the railway line from the 
international boundary. 

The projected Crow’s Nest Pass Railway centered 
attention on the passes through the Rockies. Captain 
Blakiston, connected with the Palliser Expedition, had 
gone through North Kootenay Pass just eighteen miles 
south of Crow’s Nest Pass in 1858 and had pronounced it 
a good one for a railway. It was Michael Phillipps, 
however, who made a trip through the Crow’s Nest Pass 
and proved it a feasible route for a railway in 1872. 
Colonel Steele in 1888 went through the pass on his 
195-mile trip from Fort Steele to Macleod with his "D” 
division of Mounted Police and mentioned it in his 
report as a first class one for railway purposes.(10) 

Negotiations over a seven year period finally 

brought about the construction of the railway through 

the Crow's Nest Pass. The original name of the B. C. 

(10) STEELE, COLONEL, report in Appendix G, p. 89 of 
Dominion Sessional Papers, Vol. XXII, No. 13, 1889. 







V 




' 




* 









































115 

Southern, promoted by residents of Wolf Creek in the 
Kootenay District, was the Crow's Nest and Kootenay 
Lake Railroad Company, and as such it was first 
incorporated by the Legislature of British Columbia in 
1888. In 1891 it was reincorporated as the British 
Columbia Southern. In the ensuing six years the mineral 
discoveries in both East and West Kootenay aided the 
efforts of Colonel Baker and Mr. Howland of Toronto in 
getting the project started. In 1897 the Canadian 
Pacific bought the line from Dunmore Junction to 
Lethbridge from the Alberta Railway and Irrigation 
Company and work was commenced from Lethbridge to the 
Crow's Nest Pass. In 1898 the British Columbia 
Southern was leased and the whole line to Kootenay 
Landing was opened to traffic in the same year. The 
water gap between Nelson and Kootenay Landing was closed 
in 1932. 

The building of the Crow’s Nest Pass Railway Line 

had marked results. The silver-lead production of the 

Fort Steele Mining Division in 1900 eclipsed that of the 

Slocan.(ll) By bringing cheap fuel it meant a great 

development of the smelting and reduction industries and 

a corresponding increase in mine production.(12) It cut 

Tllj GOSNELL, op. cit., p. 163 , 1903. 

(12) ATKINS, op. cit., PROVINCE, March 20, 1922. 



























. 

* 

1 . 

» 

. 






. 

* 








. 

r 












116 

the freight and smelter costs for Rossland mines from 
$10,00 and $14.00 to $7.00 and less per ton.(13) Not 
all the effects were salutary, however. Golden had 
been the point of access in the early days for Canadians 
planning on making homes in the East Kootenay, and Fort 
Steele, since it was on the direct route, had become by 
1897 a thriving centre of about 2000 people. When 
Cranbrook, some twelve miles away, became the divisional 
point of the railway Fort Steele lost its strategic 
importance and today it is a straggling village of 
fewer than one hundred inhabitants. 

Extensions to the railway were made as time went 
on. In 1900 a branch line was built from Cranbrook to 
Kimberley on Mark Creek. In 1899 Dr. Hugh Watt had 
proposed a line to be known as the Fort Steele Central 
Railway but it was not until 1903 that the Dominion 
Government voted a subsidy for 186 miles of railway 
from Golden to Colvalli Junction where it joined the 
Crow ! s Nest Line. 

Thus the whole district was placed in a very 
favourable position for marked development. The Great 
War of 1914-18 prevented a large inrush of new capital 
immediately but the foundation had been well laid for 
Tl3TlNNIs7 op. cit., p. 314. 


























- 


























. 

. 









































117 

the widespread working of rich prospects hitherto too 


isolated for profitable mining. By 1939 conditions 
were such that a great impetus could be given by the 
demand for base metals because of the War, and a great 
era of prosperity opened for the whole of the Kootenay 
District. 




118 

XI. THE DEVELOPMENT OF SUBSIDIARY INDUSTRIES. 

The livestock industry was established before 

farming in the interior of British Columbia. Rare 

natural advantages were present in the East Kootenay 

District to make the industry profitable. The 

nutritious bunch grass on the Upper Kootenay River made 

that section of the district particularly favourable, 

and even in early times the Indians of this part of the 

country had large herds of horses which they sold to 

the miners. Cattle and horses wintered well towards the 

headwaters of the Columbia River, and in all valleys 

in the East Kootenay the Indians regularly made no 

provision for wintering their livestock, although this 

was desirable, especially in the Tobacco Plains region. 

In 1865 upwards of 200 cattle perished on Tobacco Plains 

because of the particularly severe winter.(1) In 1883 

a Canadian Pacific Railway survey party wintered their 

pack-horses to the east of the lower mother lake of the 

Columbia River and their animals were "hog-fat" in the 

spring. During the exceptionally severe winter of 

1880-81 when 200,000 cattle died in Wyoming, Utah, and 

Colorado, the lowest temperature recorded in the East 

Kootenay was fourteen degrees below zero. The regular 

Iiy^YOUKG^to John Haynes, April 3 , 1865, MS. in the 
Victoria Archives. 







119 


winter snowfall began about Christmas, and by February 

there was a snowfall of two feet which disappeared about 

April 1st. From 1859 to 1870 approximately 22,000 

cattle were driven into the country but most of these 

were used as food by the population.(2) In 1872 there 

were about 1300 beef cattle in the Kootenay and 2000 

Indian and 300 other horses.(3) 

Progress in the livestock industry was slow largely 

because of the uncertain future of the mines. In 1874 

a Mr. Ellis sold his sixty-six cattle to a Victoria 

dealer,(4) but by 1884 the industry was more backward 

than ever, there being only about 500 cattle in the 

whole Kootenay country and most of them owned by Indians. 

(5) Hov/ever the late l880's saw renewed interest in 

ranching brought about by the improved position of the 

mines, and the increased prospects of capital 

investments. As the population increased the East 

Kootenay District came into its own, although it was not 

until the 1920's that Breeders' Associations were formed 

to any considerable extent. The Waldo Stock Breeders® 

Association was one of the many concerned with bringing 

J2) LAING, F. ¥/., "Some Pioneers of the Cattle Industry," 
B. C. Historical Quarterly, Vol. VI, 1942. 

(3) COLONIST, newspaper, Oct. 13, lc72, p. 3 . 

(4) COLONIST, Aug. 9, 1874. 

(51 SPROAT, G. M., "Report on the Kootenay Country," page 
315> B. C. Sessional Papers, 1884. 









‘ 


. 




- 



















. 






; 

. 



















120 


in purebred stock to the area. In 1942 Fernie shipped 
527 head of cattle and was the centre of a district 
where a total of 614 head were sold for home 
consumption.(6) 

Agriculture on a small scale was carried on from 
the first years of placer mining. Good agricultural 
land abounded on Wild Horse Creek and in 1866 enough 
wheat was grown to satisfy the needs for flour of that' 
season. On the low flats of the numerous large creeks 
and rivers there were many acres of arable land, but the 
great differences of climate caused by variations from 
prairie to alpine altitude created problems for the 
agriculturist. 

Farms were taken up very slowly. A number of land 
claims were recorded on Wild Horse Creek in 1865* but in 

1866 on the Upper Columbia River only the Hudson 9 s Bay 
Company of all the purchasers of land paid the second 
instalment when due. In the same year there were three 
rural land pre-emptions taken out in the district. In 

1 867 the Hudson’s Bay Company gave up business in the 
East Kootenay and their agent, Michael Phillipps, applied 
for a pre-emption of ICO acres between Galbraith’s Ferry 
and Wild Horse Creek. Mr. Galbraith bought some land at 
(£) PROVINCE, newspaper, July 1, 1943 , p» 20. 












. 






















. 

* 






; 














■ 

' 

, 















121 


$2,50 per acre about the same time. The next year seven 
pre-emption claims were recorded in the Kootenay 
District, but in 1869 only two were taken up, these two 
farms supplying the miners with vegetables at 1% to 20£ 
a pound, and grain, probably wheat, at 14^ a pound* 

Messrs. Shaw, Marzan, and Taylor were making preparations 
to farm on an extensive scale during the spring of 1870 . 

(7) In 1876 the "Colonist” asserted that a few farm 

hands could find employment in the Kootenay country.(8) 

The demand for labour in the development of mining 

prevented the rapid growth of agriculture in the East 

Kootenay. At a later date the competition of the prairies 

to the east of the Rockies had the same effect for 

settlers often worked for small stakes in the mines and 

then moved on to take up homesteads on the prairies. 

There were only fifteen or sixteen settlers at the 

Columbia Lakes in 1885 but after the completion of the 

Canadian Pacific Railway new settlers were constantly 

coming in and taking up land on the Columbia and Kootenay 

Rivers. Delegates of the East Kootenay Colony were sent 

to Vancouver in 1901 in search of desirable settlers.(9) 

At this stage settlement was in advance of mining in the 

T7T”C0L0NXST, newspaper, April 20, 1870, quoting the 
Walla Walla "Union." 

(8) COLORIST, Nov. 29, 1876 . 

(9) PROVINCE, newspaper, Feb. 9, 1901, p. 6. 







* 

« 













' i . 






> 










122 


districts close to the transcontinental line with the 
result that the lack of a home market militated against 
prosperity. 

Today agriculture is a thriving industry. The large 
land reclamation scheme at Creston meant shipments in 
1942 of sixty-two carloads of wheat, fifty-one carloads 
of peas, and sixty-six carloads of hay. A total of 
91,994 boxes of apples were grown and 35,000 tons of 
creamery butter were shipped from Creston in the same 
year.(10) Truck farming near the larger centres is 
carried on in all parts of the East Kootenay but the 
products are almost entirely for local consumption. On 
the whole there are relatively small areas suitable for 
the production of crops and this division of the Kootenay 
district is far from self-sufficient. 

Lumbering found a large home market in the mines 
and was successful from the beginning. A small -sawmill 
was established as early as May, 1866, by a Mr. Romano 
at the Big Bend of the Columbia River and lumber was sold 
at $12.50 per hundred feet.(11) In 18?4 the Galbraith 
Brothers built a sawmill at St. Joseph*s Prairie. Mr. 
Baillie-Grohman brought in his big 5000 pound sawmill 
boiler on the steamer "Cline” for his Canal Flats project 

(10) PROVINCE, newspaper, June 1, 1943, p. 20. 

(11) ATKINS, op. cit., "Columbia River Chronicles." 






* . 

, • 




' 

. 

- 

■ 

. 

• " 

♦ 

, , ■ 

1 


























123 


taking twenty-three days to make the 100-mile trip from 
Golden. In 1887 three sawmills were erected in the 
Crow’s Nest Pass. The first permanent mill was built 
by Mr. A. Leitch on St. Joseph's Creek, Cranbrook, in the 
summer of 1897* In 1903 there were twenty-four sawmills 
employing 1800 men in operation in the East Kootenay.(12) 
In 1904 lumber to the amount of 11,101 tons was shipped 
from twenty-one stations.(13) The huge increase in 
the industry was due largely to the enormous demands of 
the coal mines which probably used the product of 66,000 
acres in 1915. With the closing of the large mill at 
Lumberton, which had the distinction of having the 
largest flume in North America to carry logs to the 
mill, the old era passed away. Portable mills have now 
revolutionized the logging industry in the East Kootenay 
cutting as much as two million feet of lumber in 1937® 
(14) 

(12) INNIS, op. cit., p. 307. 

(13) Ibidem, p. 307. 

(14) CRANBROOK CODRIER, Sept. 1, 1938. 




















. 



• 



. . 

* . 






• 


. 


. 





' 






1 



- 


















* 











124 


XII. THE PRAIRIES AND THE KOOTENAYSv 

Before the l880*s a trail had been cut by the 
British Columbia Government to connect Kootenay with 
Fort Macleod and to open a path through regions where 
gold had previously been found. Sir James Douglas had 
had a plan for the construction of a waggon road to 
connect British Columbia with the Red River Settlement 
but the Colonial Office did not approve* Robertson- 
Ross in 1873 advised the building of a military post and 
Customs House at Porcupine Hills to the east of the 
Rockies some six or seven days journey on horseback from 
Fort Edmonton and fifty or sixty miles from the Kootenay 
Valley* He thought that frequent intercourse and an 
active trade would result between the Kootenay District 
and the Saskatchewan country by the establishment of 
this post and that the Indian trade, then tapped by 
smugglers from the United States, would remain with our 
own c ountrymen♦(1) 

The Canadian Pacific Railway attempted to develop 
agriculture in Southern Alberta and concentrated on the 
development of the mining industry in British Columbia, 
in hopes that these industries would assist in bringing 
about a larger transcontinental traffic in machinery and 
71) ROBERTSON-ROSS, op. cit., p* 123* 









. 








- 

, 

■ 

- 

. 

''hi. 

* f . 

. ' - 












125 

supplies* However, transportation costs restricted 

shipments from Alberta before 1898 , especially from 

Edmonton. Trade in hay would have meant a loss of $1.50 

a ton at the current prices. In dressed meats the 

freight charges were $2.25 per hundred pounds to New 

Denver in the West Kootenay District, so at this rate 

it paid better to sell hams for the same price as long 

clear bacon and ship them north.(2) 

Manitoba was also interested in the Kootenay market. 

Railway transportation costs were kept down by the 

competition of the Great Northern and the Northern 

Pacific with the Canadian Pacific Railway and oats, 

butter, beef and pork could be sold in the same market 

with Southern Alberta products. Even in 1898 Manitoba 

was selling oats in the Kootenay in rivalry with Edmonton 

oats although the distance was about twice as great. 

Evidently the Great Northern had cut rates greatly to 

get the Manitoba trade.(3) 

Nevertheless in 1896 both Ontario and Alberta 

supplied many products to the Kootenay market. Ontario 

supplied poultry and eggs because there were no nearer 

T5TENGLI3h 7~R7~E•, "The Influence of Some Economic and 
Social Factors in the Development of Northern Alberta," 
Univ. of Toronto, M. A. thesis, 1933? quoting the 
Edmonton Bulletin newspaper, Nov. 9* 1896 . 

(3) EDMONTON BULLETIN, newspaper, Dec. 15, 1898 . 




, 

■ 

, 

. 

. 

- 

.* 

, 


* 






: * 


. 












126 


supplies available in sufficient quantities. Grain, 
flour, livestock, meat and dairy products were sent from 
Alberta. Even vegetables were in lively demand.(4) 

The farmers on the Calgary to Edmonton line no longer 
complained that they had to sell their butter at five 
or six cents a pound, eggs at eight cents a dozen, or 
oats at twelve cents a bushel.(5) The Okanagan Valley 
and other British Columbia points also competed with 
hay, potatoes, and other vegetables. 

It is interesting to note that some investors from 
the Prairies were interested in the development of 
mining in the East Kootenay at an early date. A private 
bill was brought into the British Columbia Legislature 
in 1886 asking that certain privileges be granted to 
Messrs. Cochrane of Calgary, N. W. T., and James Brady, 
a mining engineer of long experience in California, 

Central America, and other mining centres. The Bill 
asked for a lease of twenty years on eight miles of 
Finlay Creek, about 130 miles south from the Kicking 
Horse Pass. Some Calgary investors were also interested 
in the ill-fated Golden Smelter.(6) 

The total trade east of the Rockies prior to 1897 
)INNI37 ~o p • cit., page 308. 

(5) Ibidem, p. 308, quoting Dorn. Sess. Papers, 1897, No.11. 

(6) See above, page 80. 













- 

* 























■ 

, 



■ 









, 




I % 

. 








127 

was rather limited, consisting largely of cattle and 
farm products. The imports into British Columbia from 
Eastern Canada in 1896 were about $7,000,000 in value. 

(7) In 1890 a market was opened for Alberta livestock, 
one firm shipping 400 head per month in 1896. In 1897 
Pat Burns was killing 600 head per month for the market 
in southern British Columbia. The revision and reduction 
of rate structures on February 1, 1897, helped the trade 
greatly, especially with Edmonton. Hates on grain, 
flour, hay and similar products were reduced in amounts 
ranging from 10£ on some products to as much as 30^ on 
other items per hundred pounds to twenty-one Kootenay 
points. Rates on butter, cheese and eggs were reduced 

by amounts from 15^ to 6% per hundred pounds. Reduced 
blanket rates were also given to all Kootenay points on 
dressed poultry, meats, hogs, packed and frozen fish, 
and packing house products.(8) 

The building of the Crow*s Nest Railway was of the 
greatest importance to the Alberta and Kootenay trade. 
Directly and indirectly it aided agricultural production, 
especially in Southern Alberta.(9) It gave employment 
to men and horses that would otherwise have been idle, 

77) GOSNELL,~op. cit., 1897. 

(8) INNIS, op. cit., p. 308. 

(9) Ibidem, p. 309. 







. 

4 






. 








, 

. 

, 

' 

' • , 

* . . . ' . , 








128 

and a large amount of money was put into circulation.. 

A report from Pincher Creek in 1899 pointed out the 

incalculable benefit of the railway to that area. Five 

thousand men and five thousand teams began construction 

on July 13, 1897, the contractors bringing in many 

horses from the East. Heavy horses between thirteen 

hundred and sixteen hundred pounds sold for seventy-five 

and one hundred dollars each.(10) A sure indication of 

the pulse of the horse market was the fact that large 

numbers of horses were stolen, thieves keeping as 

delicate a finger upon the strengthening throb of 

business as the legitimate dealers.(11) It was largely 

because of the Kootenay trade that P. Burns and Company 

were able to make a fortune in their meat business. 

Soon shops were established from Alberta to the coast 

and on up to the Yukon. Only prime "tops" were shipped 

east off the cattle ranches as all the "rough" cattle 

went into British Columbia points. Old, fat and inferior 

steers easily drew twenty-five to thirty-five dollars 

and the ranchers cleaned out their herds.(12) The period 

of depression which had begun with the British embargo 

TIO) KELLY, L. V., "The Range Men," p. 311 . Wm. Briggs. 
Toronto, 1913« 

(11) Ibidem, p. 316. 

(12) Ibidem, p. 311. 










' 

. 






























. 

' 

. 


, 

■ • ■ ' ' ■ !:, 
























129 


of 1892 was ended.(13) From cattle shipments of 
practically nothing in 1897 the number grew to 6,627 in 
1901 and 8,093 in 1904.(14) 

The Crow's Nest Pass Rates Agreement further aided 
the rapid expansion of Western Canada. The subsidies 
paid by the Dominion Government were definitely linked 
to lower freight rates. Edmonton now had an advantage 
over Winnipeg of 40^ in less than car lots and 25£ in 
car lots for the following products: butter, eggs, 
cheese, dressed poultry, dressed meats, dressed hogs, 
pickled and frozen fish, bacon, hams, beef, pork and 
lard. The result was the building up of a thriving 
trade in farm products between Edmonton and the East 
Kootenay as well as the West Kootenay. By 1904 the 
Kootenay had become the chief Edmonton market. 

The building of the Crow's Nest Railway placed 

Edmonton under at least one disadvantage. The coal 

business was hit heavily by the development of mines 

in the East Kootenay. Edmonton coal was frozen out of 

TTJT DILLER, DOROTHY, "The Early Economic Development 
of Alberta—Previous to 1905," p. 106. U of A thesis, 
1923* The 1901 Census gave for N. W. Territory 591*739 
cattle; 176,462 horses; 237$ increase in sheep over last 
recorded figures, those for 1892 . 

(14) Ibidem, p. 103* The Report of the Dept, of 
Agriculture, North West Terr., 1904, page 47 gives 
Livestock, Cattle Shipments, South Alberta to B. C. ass 

1901 -6,627; 1902———7,505; 1903-6,447; 

1904———8,093* 





















. 
























' 




















* 

’ 










J 






* 

, 














130 

Calgary, the only outside market it had, and this in 

spite of the fact that Edmonton was closer to Calgary 

by twenty-four miles than Crow's Nest.(15) 

The demands of mining stimulated many industries. 

The success of the flour-milling and the pork-packing 

industries of Calgary and Edmonton was in large part 

the result of the Kootenay demands.(16) The dairy 

industry and more especially creameries and cheese 

factories grew up largely in relation to mining. In 1900 

a creamery at Yorkton, Saskatchewan, shipped most of 

its production of 25*000 pounds of butter to markets in 

British Columbia.(17) Eastern firms established plants 

for the manufacture of explosives and chemicals nearer 

the region where they would be used. The assured success 

of the mines was now a great inducement to immigration 

since the by-products of the farm were certain of a 

market. The demands of the local market were responsible 

also for the gradual development of agriculture in the 

Kootenay itself and the limitations which its geography 

placed upon it hastened specialization in such products 

Il5) EDMONTON BULLETIN, newspaper, Dec. 29, 1898. 

RATES! Crow's Nest, 210 miles to Calgary $2.10 

Edmonton, 186 " " " 2.25 

Galt, 145 " " " 1.90 

Anthracite, 77 " " " 1.65 

(16) INNIS, op. cit., p. 309. 

(17) Ibidem, p. 309. 










* 



* 

. 

1. 


! 













131 


as fruits and vegetables which soon found a ready market 
in the Prairie Provinces. A large fruit farm existed 
near Grand Forks as early as 1902. From 1911 to 1916 
shipments of fruit and vegetables from Kootenay points 
increased from 400,000 to 1,500,000 pounds.(18) The 
magnificent crops of the Canadian West in 1915 and the 
high prices of grain during the war years helped to 
bring about a revival of the timber industry in the 
early years of the Great War.(19) 

The fertilizer industry marked yet another stage 
in the contribution of mining. The first plant of the 
Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company for the 
manufacture of fertilizers was erected in 1930 some two 
miles from Trail on the road to Rossland and by 1931 
“Elephant Brand 11 fertilizer was being sold on the 
Prairies. The wheel has now come full circle, new 
wealth is being returned to the soil through this 
important industry, and as the expansion of the production 
of wheat goes on the fertilizer business will assume 
important dimensions. 

(18) INNIS, op. cit., p. 312. 

(19) COLONIST, newspaper, December 15, 1915, page 13. 





































. 

















4 






















APPENDIX 


132 


TABLES 

(All figures are from the Annual Reports of the Minister 

of Mines, British Columbia, unless otherwise stated.) 

I. Placer Gold:, Comparison of Yield for East Kootenay 
and Province (1874-1939)* 

II. Mine Production: St. Eugene and Sullivan Mines. 

III. Mines Shipping Ore: Tonnage and Men Employed, 

East Kootenay (1901-1925). 

IV. Production of Gold, Silver, Copper, Lead, Zinc, 

East Kootenay (1895-1939). 

V. Value of Production of Gold, Silver, Copper, Lead, 

Zinc, East Kootenay (1895-1939). 

VI. Total Value of Production of Gold, Silver, Copper, 
Lead, Zinc, East Kootenay and Province (1887-1939). 

VII. Total Value of Mineral Products, East Kootenay 
and Province (1895-1938). 

VIII. Coal and Coke Production of the East Kootenay 
Mines (1898-1942). 

IX. Number of Days Worked and Output per Man of East 
Kootenay Coal Mines (1918-1942). 

X. Men Employed in East Kootenay Coal Mines (1897-1942). 

XI. Output and Per Capita Production: East Kootenay 
Coal Mines and Province (1907-1942). 

XII. Coal and Coke Production, Sales in the United 
States and Canada--East Kootenay Coal Mines (1898-1942). 

XIII. Area and Population of East Kootenay. 










V 




* 




. 

* 

t 

. 






. 




- 

- 

, 

, 

■ 

, 





YEAR 

1874 

1875 

1876 

18 77 

1878 

1879 

1880 

1881 

1882 

1883 

1884 

1885 

1886 

1887 

1888 

1889 

1890 

1891 

1892 

1893 

1894 

1895 

1896 

1897 

1898 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

1914 


TABLE I . 133 

PLACER GOLD: COMPARISON OF YIELD FOR EAST KOOTENAY 
AND PROVINCE (1874-1939) 


PROVINCE 


1,844,618 

2,474,004 

1,786,648 

1,608,182 

1,275,204 

1,290,058 

1,013,827 

1,046,737 

854,085 

794,252 

736,165 

713,738 

903,651 

693,709 

616,731 

588,923 

490,435 

429,811 

399,526 

356,131 

405,516 

481,683 

544,026 

513,520 

643,346 


1,344,900 

1,278,724 

970,100 

1,073,140 

1,060,420 

1 , 115,300 

969,300 

948,400 

828,000 

647,000 

477,000 

540,000 

426,000 

555,000 

510,000 

565,000 


EAST KOOTENAY 

$ 

50,000 

41,890 

25,000 

37,000 

25.400 
19,000 
19,500 
25,000 

29.500 

29,100 
60,826 
76,650 

58.500 

37.900 

37,612 

36,300 

37.400 
28,550 
29,700 
19,700 

24.900 
17,575 
21,076 

12,000 (Estimated) 
17,000 (Estimated) 
10,000 (Estimated) 
10,300 

13.400 
33,000 
20,000 
21,000 
15,160 

10.400 

10,000 

3,800 

3,000 

3,000 

3,000 

2,000 

2,000 

1,000 






YEAR 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 

1939 

1940 

1941 


134 


TABLE I (CONTINUED) 


PROVINCE 

EAST KOOTENAY 

$ 

$ 

770,000 

15,000 

580,500 

4,000 

496,000 

2,000 

320,000 

1,000 

286,500 

1,000 

221,600 

3,500 

233,200 

3,600 

364,800 

3,000 

420,000 

2,000 

420,750 

5,200 

280,092 

4,489 

355,503 

721 

156,247 

2,499 

143,208 

391 

118,711 

510 

152,235 

119 

291,992 

3,079 

395,542 

9,333 

562,787 

11,866 

714,431 

14, 841 

895,058 

19,144 

1,249,940 

19,474 

1,558,245 

24,804 

1 , 671,015 

28,208 

1 , 478,492 
1 , 236,928 t 
1 , 385,962 I 

19,824 


1 Only figures for the Province are available after 

1939. 





YEAR 

1894 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 


TABLE II . 

MINE PRODUCTION: ST. EUGENE AND SULLIVAN MINES 
(1894-1937) I 


ST. EUGENE MINE 

SULLIVAN MINE 

(Short tons Ore) 

(Short tons Ore) 

313,416 


84,066 


127,645 

85,406 (1900-07) 

155,419 


155,668 


114,136 

6,704 

47,705 

34,065 

13,460 

21,189 

1,826 

41,284 

1,217 

30,919 

169 

44,841 

746 

91,129 

1,698 

135,254 

1,191 

104,758 

3,178 

176,970 

938 

259,814 

80 

298,384 


360,844 


452,252 


996,260 


1,119,885 


1,115,387 


1,272,217 


1,571,931 


1,865,247 


1,924,017 


1,621,143 


1,447,448 


1,413,418 


1,748,331 


1,861,245 


1,898,099 


2,218,364 


135 


H Figures taken from "The Story of the Consolidated 
Mining and Smelting Company of Canada, Limited,"page 5. 













































YEAR 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

19111 

1912 

1913 

19141 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 


136 


TABLE III -. 

MINES SHIPPING ORE: TONNAGE AND MEN EMPLOYED 
EAST KOOTENAY (1901-1925) (1) 

Tons ore Mines Mines MEN EMPLOYED 
shipped Shipping Shipping 


over 




100 tons 

Below 

Above 

Total 


8 

5 

192 

70 

262 


5 

2 

53 

25 

78 

1,744 

6 

3 

72 

41 

113 

77,260 

7 

3 

218 

84 

302 

170,299 

9 

3 

281 

80 

361 

180,279 

9 

3 

314 

101 

415 

155,027 

8 

3 

312 

118 

430 

166,027 

7 

5 

364 

139 

503 

149,700 

4 

2 

232 

150 

382 

115,815 

6 

3 

235 

88 

323 

30,543 

4 

3 

134 

6 7 

201 

50,310 

4 

4 

117 

43 

160 

42,626 

4 

3 

69 

113 

182 

36,384 

2 

2 

32 

76 

108 

49,928 

4 

3 

69 

96 

165 

101,029 

14 

8 

125 

186 

311 

116,745 

6 

7 

148 

243 

391 

141,570 

9 

5 

154 

196 

350 

147,736 

10 

5 

199 

251 

450 

269,358 

9 

6 

144 

244 

388 

298,956 

6 

4 

161 

183 

344 

361,707 

3 

3 

205 

226 

431 

491,212 

8 

3 

250 

273 

523 

1,035,127 

7 

3 

4 77 

446 

923 

1,118,891 

5 

2 

612 

489 

1,101 


(1) Figures for other years are not available in the 
Annual Reports of the Minister of Mines. 

I These figures are for the Fort Steele Mining Division 
only. The figures for the Windermere-Golden Mining 
Division are not available for these years. 















YEAR 

1895 

1896 

1897 

1898 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

191 c 

1911 

1912 

193-3 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 


PRODUCTION OF GOLD SILVER COPPER LEAD ZINC 137 



EAST 

KOOTENAY 

(1895-1939) 




TABLE IV 



Placer 

Lode- 

- Silver 

Copper 

Lead 

Zinc 

Gold 

Gold 

(OOO's 

(lbs.) 

(OOO's 

(OOO's 

(ozs.) 

(ozs 

) OZS.) 


lbs.) 

lbs.) 

878 






1,054 






600 ( 1 ) 






850(1) 


70 


2,287 


5oo(i) 


35 

397 

904 


53-5 


963 

2,147 

38,575 


670 


753 

3,272 

29,964 


1,650 


142 

8,048 

3,223 


1,000 


88 

2,730 

1,669 


1,050 


611 

5,472 

21,472 


758 


1,155 

10,606 

48,399 


520 


1,072 

6,910 

44,655 


500 


825 


37,600 


190 


644 


30,563 


150 


580 


27,024 


150 


501 


23,941 


150 


330 


17,158 


100 


384 


20,487 

143 

100 


367 


21,020 


50 


492 


24,863 


750 


482 


26,798 

492 

200 


539 

9,054 

24,727 

15,050 

100 


260 

22,319 

15,772 

20,733 

50 


353 

1,768 

20,955 

26,705 

50 

* *2 

275 


12,388 

46,461 

175 


416 

1,953 

28,021 

42,881 

180 


566 


38,452 

49,319 

150 


983 


58,560 

51,673 

100 


1,222 


86,800 

51,945 

260 


2,856 

68 

161,500 

73,384 

264 


3,133 

1,696 

228,060 

92,165 

42 

321 

4,962 

9,516 

252,441 

127,767 

147 

941 

5,126 

128 

270,758 

132,306 

23 

734 

5,614 

283 

293,127 

168,400 

30 

229 

5,059 


290,998 

162,904 


(1) Estimated. 

























I 




















1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 

1939s 

1895 

1896 

1897 

1898 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 


138 


TABLE IV (CONTINUED) 


Pla cer 

Lode- 

Silver 

Copper 

Lead 

Gold 

Gold 

(000*s 

(lbs.) 

(OOO's 

(ozs.) 

(ozs.) 

ozs.) 


lbs.) 

7 

4 

5,219 


313,959 

181 

• • • 

4,206 


246,228 

549 

♦ • • 

4,419 


251,308 

698 

12 

4,976 


261,177 

873 

• • • 

6,546 


341,898 

662 

676 

• • • 

• • • 

6,719 

7,068 


336,267 

360,362 

862 

975 

65 

79 

8,267 

8,012 


405,374 

406,222 

667 

83 

7,976 


372,991 


Zinc 
(000's 
lbs.) 


230,171 

204,252 

190,427 

186,388 

237.817 

222,835 

232.818 
266,176 
267,766 
228,104 


S Owing to the War figures for districts are not given 
after 1939. 


TABLE V. 


VALUE OF PRODUCTION OF.GOLD SILVER COPPER LEAD ZINC 
EAST KOOTENAY (1895-1939) 


Placer Lode- 
Gold Gold 

($) ($) 

17,575 . 

21,076 . 

12 , 000 ( 1 ). 

17 , 000 ( 1 ). 

10,000(1). 

10,300 . 

13.400 . 

33,000 . 

20,000 . 

21,000 . 

15,160 . 

10.400 . 

10,000 . 


Silver Copper 
(OOO's ($) ' 
$) 


70 . 

39 . 

20 69 

562 348 

421 527 

71 936 

44 361 

326 701 

662 1,654 

680 1,332 
512 . 


Lead Zinc 

(OOO's (OOO's 
$) $) 

*••••# •«•••• 

_84 . 

82 __ 

78 .. 


1,643 

1,157 

118 

64 

833 

2,052 

2,273 

1,805 


(1) Estimated. 







































































1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

193 

1939 


139 


TABLE V (CONTINUED) 


Placer 

Lode- 

Silver 

Copper 

Lead 

Zinc 

Gold 

Gold 

(000's 

($) 

(000's 

(COO's 

($) 

($) 

$) 


$) 

$) 

3,800 


324 


1,155 


3,Q00 


284 


1,040 


3,000 


255 


958 


3,000 


167 


683 


2,000 


222 


824 


2,000 


208 


826 


1,000 


256 


870 


i5,'ooo 


228 


1,117 


4,000 


336 

2,463 

1,526 

1,637 

2,000 


401 

6,067 

1,248 

1,569 

1,000 


325 

435 

1,424 

1,853 

1,000 

41 

289 


642 

2,899 

3,500 


398 

341 

2,006 

2,796 

3,600 

20 

336 


1,583 

1,948 

3,000 


631 


3,022 

2,511 

2,000 


754 


5,677 

2,919 

5,200 


1,812 

9 

11,769 

3,957 

4,489 


2,173 

238 

17,898 

7,274 

721 

6,636 

3,082 

1,313 

17,043 

9,467 

2,499 

19,452 

2,290 

17 

14,231 

8,196 

391 

15,173 

3,266 

41 

13,412 

9,251 

510 

4,733 

2,682 


14,697 

8,774 

119 

83 

1,991 


12,330 

8,286 

3,079 


1,256 


6,673 

5,217 

9,333 


1,400 


5,312 

4,581 

11,866 

248 

1,882 

• « • 9 f 

6,421 

5,984 

14,841 

379 

3,107 


8,329 

7,239 

19,144 


4,353 


10,535 

6,906 

19,474 


3,190 


14,101 

7,718 

24,804 

2,274 

3,7ll 


20,715 

13,048 

28,208 

2,779 

3,484 


13,584 

8,228 

19,824 

2,999 

3,230 


11,820 

7,001 




























































YEAR 

1887 

1888 

1889 

1890 

1891 

1892 

1893 

1894 

1895 

1896 

1897 

1898 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 


TABLE VI' . 140 

TOTAL VALUE OF PRODUCTION GOLD SILVER COPPER LEAD 
ZINC: EAST KOOTENAY AND PROVINCE (1887-1939) 


PROVINCE 
(000's $) 
27 
105 
54 
74 
4 

100 

297 

781 

2,343 

4,257 

7,052 

6,529 

6,752 

10,070 

13,268 

11,101 

11,571 

12,309 

15,180 

17,484 

16,217 

14,477 

14.191 

13,229 

11,454 

17,663 

17.191 
15,225 
19,992 

31,483 

26,788 

27,590 

19,750 

19,444 

12,920 

19,232 

25,347 

35,538 

46,200 

51,508 

44,977 

48,282 


EAST KOOTENAY 
(000 1 s $) 


25 

17 

154 

164 

133 

66 

2,215 

1,593 

223 

127 

1,181 

2,731 

2,965 

2,327 

1,483 

1,342 

1,221 

853 

1,057 

1,037 

1,128 

1,416 

3,506 

3,025 

3,604 

3,831 

5,204 

3,861 

6,166 

9,352 

17,543 

27,349 

29,601 

25,339 

25,944 
















YEAR 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 

1939 

YEAR 

1895 

1896 

1897 

1898 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 


TABLE VI (CONTINUED) 


141 


PROVINCE 
(OOO's $) 

51,175 

40,915 

22,536 

19,700 

25,007 

33,896 

40,598 

43,666 

62,913 

53,877 

53,522 

EAST KOOTENAY 
(OOO's $) 

26,157 

22,608 

13,149 

11,301 

14,299 

18,690 

21,813 

25,028 

37,500 

25,327 

22,074 

TOTAL VALUE 

TABLE VII 

OF MINERAL PRODUCTS EAST KOOTENAY AND 
PROVINCE (1895-1938) 

PROVINCE 
(OOO's $) 

EAST KOOTENAY 
(OOO's $) 

18 

7,508 

10,455 

10,907 

12,393 

16,345 

20,087 

17,487 

17,496 

18,977 

22,461 

24,981 

25,883 

23,851 

24,443 

26,377 

23,499 

32,441 

30.296 

26,389 

29,448 

42,290 

37,010 

41,782 

33.296 

35,543 

28,067 

154 

164 

161 

524 

2,856 

2,747 

1,477 

1,951 

3,211 

5,339 

5,171 

5,549 

4,803 

4,766 

6,122 

2,475 

5,723 

5,948 

4,704 

4,654 

6,811 

5,057 

7,260 

6,613 

9,429 

7,653 






I 



TABLE VII (CONTINUED) 


YEAH 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 


YEAR 

1 898 

1899 

1900 
1901 
1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 


PROVINCE 
(000's $) 
35,163 

41.304 
48,705 
61,492 
67,189 
60,729 
65,373 
68,245 
55,392 
34,883 
28,798 
32,603 

42.305 
I 48,821 

I 54,082 
I 74,476 

U 64,486 


EAST KOOTENAY 
(OOO's $) 

8,931 

13,018 

18.885 
31,597 

33.886 
29,915 
31,333 
31,624 
29,487 
16,654 

13,853 

16,381 

21,403 

23,599 

27,102 

39,524 

27,294 


142 


I Canadian Funds. 

TABLE Vlir . 

COAL AND COKE PRODUCTION OF THE EAST KOOTENAY MINES 


CORBIN 

Coal 




( 1898 - 1942 )( 1 ) 

COAL CHEEK 

MICHEL 



Coal 

Coke 

Coal 

Coke 

9,334 

361 




102,610 

29,658 




196,837 

65,915 

9,966 



322,245 

111,683 




238,776 

78,490 

113,853 

29 , 

347 

215,776 

84,321 

235,347 

64, 

818 

345,901 

118,551 

235,256 

95, 

685 

425,493 

123,593 

309,505 

124, 

705 

426,793 

93,171 

273,497 

96, 

214 

522,783 

88,775 

353,728 

117 , 

766 

441,003 

102,322 

412,185 

131 , 

776 

379,968 

117,268 

390,462 

106 , 

174 

622,564 

78,420 

457,581 

95, 

239 

206,556 

28,519 

114,384 

25, 

641 

696,844 

148,924 

253,862 

70, 

030 


4,111 

60,824 

. 26,851 

81,718 


SEE END OF TABLE FOR PRODUCTION OF CARBONADO AND HOSMER. 
(1) Long tons of 2,240 pounds—Coal; Short tons—Coke. 























YEAR 

1913 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 

1939 

1940 

1941 

1942 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

1914 


TABLE VIII (CONTINUED) 

COAL CREEK MICHEL CORBIN 


Coal 

COKE 

Coal 

Coke 

Coal 

825,185 

157,905 

216,224 

68,469 

72,788 

577,299 

143,460 

201,104 

56,406 

74,312 

511,904 

147,129 

278,124 

93,292 

62,544 

569,131 

123,020 

244,119 

112,101 

69,020 

323,561 

75,187 

127,125 

54,312 

101,065 

402,463 

85,730 

206,412 

78,350 

123,989 

306,191 

13,494 

172,868 

43,573 

79,747 

431,783 


264,592 

67,792 

151,014 

413,523 


278,301 

59,434 

67,931 

291,671 


216,668 

41,400 

46,022 

433,836 


258,429 

58,919 

48,266 

98,025 


147,805 

30,615 

27,688 

464,133 

28,850 

321,535 

46,335 

68,812 

366,054 

35,011 

363,795 

58,435 

118,599 

420,706 

32,346 

356,696 

52,726 

130,117 

462,733 

21,985 

359,547 

39,385 

179,243 

376,304 


342,143 


168,259 

210,262 

28,042 

265,262 

37,768 

213,412 

156,708 

28,263 

247,515 

37,137 

257,203 

92,879 

11,840 

214,305 

17,705 

280,691 

53,874 


206,591 

5,444 

217,212 

91,604 


292,027 

22,178 

243,988 

86,879 


310,258 

24,168 

9,973 

91,645 


378,961 

30,366 


111,265 


347,871 

43,209 


105,736 


328,332 

48,751 


103,375 


458,583 

51,205 


123,963 


652,555 

59,788 


174,813 


851,240 

83,954 


179,633 


868,080 

85,855 


CARBONADO 

HOSMER 



Coal 

Coke 

Coal 

Coke 


41,332 





138,750 

625 




81,528 

4,621 




96,934 

7,826 




20,159 





220 





23,279 


2,627 

771 


32,287 


60,324 21,575 




158,123 42,037 




39,399 11,845 




188,243 45,379 




217,528 59,671 




102,468 34,711 



143 






YEAR 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 

1939 

1940 

1941 

1942 

YEAR 

1897 

1898 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 


144 


TABLE IX '. 

NUMBER OF DAYS WORKED AND OUTPUT FER MAN OF 
EAST KOOTENAY MINES (1918-1942) 


COAL 

CREEK 


MICHEL 


CORBIN 

Per 

Per 

Days 

Per 

Per 

Days 

Per 

Per Days 

Man 

Man 

Worked 

Man 

Man 


Man 

Man 

Below 



Below 



Below 


Ground 


Ground 




816 


274 

791 


299 

2066 


497 


200 

542 


205 

1225 


408 


279 

782 

/ i 

281 

1987 

291 



20 7 



222^ 





150 



158 



776 


209 

795 


252 

1027 

141 

271 


58 

417 


118 

266 

90 

741 

536 

2C5„ 

891 

592 

248 

1976 

878 244 

810 

594 

250-J 

899 

585 

248£ 

1131 

735 289, 

820 

606 

282 

757 

540 

247, 

1572 

928 278^ 

666 

518 

217 

812 

585 

214j 

1295 

881 261 

590 

444 

155 

700 

503 

178 

1088 

847 238 

436 

330 

118 

738 

539 

167 

1196 

928 225 

362 

269 

76 

760 

565 

159 

1131 

1013 250 

485 

376 

90 

930 

684 

202 

1149 

858 189 

789 

614 

150 

1140 

818 

232 

1363 

983 267 

724 

564 

147 

1007 

799 

211 

53 

36 15 

790 

603 

165 

1104 

834 

240 



919 

713 

174 

1020 

737 

226 



826 

622 

171 

968 

627 

230 



915 

680 

158 

1079 

793 

244 



1059 

789 

181 

1507 

1136 

276 



13 55 

987 

258 

1364 

1144 

293 



1342 

1014 

274 

1544 

1263 

299 




I No figures available in Mining Reports. 


TABLE X-. 

MEN EMPLOYED IN EAST KOOTENAY COAL MINES(1897-1942) 
COAL CREEK MICHEL CARBONADO 


Under 

Above 

Under 

Above 

Under 

Above 


20 





74 

49 





274 

97 





330 

65 

52 

30 



670 

150 

117 

52 



451 

110 

158 

62 

156 

47 

353 

88 

363 

161 

231 

75 







YEAR 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 

1939 

1940 

1941 

1942 


TABLE X (CONTINUED) 


145 


COAL 

CREEK 

MICHEL 

CARBONADO 

HOSMER 

CORBIN 

Under 

Above 

Under 

Above 

Under 

Above 

Under 

AboveUnder 

Abo- 

610 

137 

372 

103 

167 

48 





530 

210 

319 

211 

166 

54 





799 

318 

400 

228 







814 

378 

672 

383 

41 

2 





669 

268 

729 

348 

66 

29 

239 

122 

43 

11 

658 

262 

657 

323 

47 

21 

256 

145 



.027 

307 

776 

244 


• • # 

394 

145 

177 

41 

991 

311 

265 

115 


• • # 

239 

143 

90 

43 

881 

312 

341 

124 


• • • 

329 

150 

129 

44 

.131 

347 

301 

130 


• • • 

460 

173 

73 

51 

907 

293 

329 

129 


<* * ® 

452 

185 

63 

41 

740 

311 

418 

199 


• t « 



25 

55 

733 

285 

363 

203 


• • • 



29 

61 

598 

267 

289 

172 


• • # 



57 

98 

493 

218 

261 

171 


• • • 



60 

124 

616 

156 

319 

164 


• • • 



65 

49 

648 

201 

338 

243 


• • • 



76 

76 

702 

207 

415 

305 


• • • 



90 

55 

641 

171 

360 

253 


• • • 



62 

51 

575 

184 

336 

257 


• • • 



47 

35 

430 

143 

301 

169 


® « • 



66 

38 

549 

211 

362 

220 


• • • 



78 

46 

494 

188 

408 

206 


• • • 



60 

75 

519 

189 

399 

210 


• • • 



115 

62 

564 

199 

475 

190 


• it 



114 

79 

565 

163 

421 

163 


• • • 



130 

61 

356 

118 

379 

147 


• • • 



196 

56 

359 

116 

335 

124 


• • • 



215 

62 

256 

89 

282 

97 


• <• • 



214 

63 

111 

32 

222 

80 


• • • 



189 

64 

116 

33 

256 

101 


# 9 • 



179 

69 

120 

34 

308 

80 


• • • 



186 

91 

116 

36 

343 

111 







121 

35 

341 

131 







128 

42 

339 

184 







113 

39 

425 

154 







117 

40 

433 

141 







129 

48 

624 

120 







134 

43 

562 

125 








H All figures are taken from Mining Reports. 



















YEAR 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1912 

1911 

1913 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 


TABLE XI . 14 6 

OUTPUT AND PER CAPITA PRODUCTION: EAST KOOTENAY 
COAL MINES AND PROVINCE (1907-1942) 


Gross tons 

Total 

TONS 

No. of 

Tons 

of coal 

number 

of coal 

men 

of coal 

mined 

employees 

mined 

employed 

mined 

during 

at 

per 

underground 

per 

year 

producing 

employee 


underground 

876,731 

mines 



employee 

2,290 

383 

1,527 

574 

2,219,608 

6,059 

366 

4,389 

506 

883,205 

2,524 

350 

1,746 

506 

2,109,387 

6,073 

347 

4,432 

476 

923,865 

2,427 

380 

1,737 

532 

2,400,600 

6,418 

374 

4,713 

509 

1,365,119 

3,111 

439 

2,374 

575 

3,139,235 

7,75 8 

404 

5,903 

532 

1,261,212 

2,410 

523 

1,780 

708 

3,025,709 

7,130 

424 

5,275 

574 

442,057 

2,197 

201 

1,585 

272 

2,297,718 

1,331,725 


^ 4 o 

I'M 


2,570,760 

6,443 

399 

4,830 

532 

955,183 

2,397 

399 

1,749 

547 

2,166,428 

5,732 

379 

4,267 

508 

852,572 

1,748 

488 

1,183 

721 

1,972,580 

4,978 

396 

3,695 

534 

882,270 

1,674 

527 

1,125 

784 

2,485,580 

5,060 

491 

3,694 

673 

551,751 

1,481 

372 

944 

584 

2,485,580 

5,170 

463 

3,760 

638 

732,864 

1,327 

552 

814 

900 

2,578,724 

5,427 

475 

3,658 

705 

558,806 

1,369 

409 

1,000 

559 

2,408,948 

5,966 

404 

4,145 

58l 

847,389 

1,582 

536 

1,062 

798 

2,696,774 

6,349 

425 

4,191 

643 

759,755 

1,774 

428 

1,207 

629 

2,569,639 

6,883 

373 

4,722 

544 

554,361 

1,538 

360 

1,063 

521 

2,580,915 

6,644 

388 

4,712 

547 

740,531 

1,434 

516 

965 

7 67 

2,542,987 

6,149 

413 

4,342 

585 

273,518 

1,147 

238 

797 

343 

1,987,533 

5,418 

366 

3,894 

510 

854,480 

1,466 

582 

989 

864 

2,444,292 

5,443 

449 

3,828 

639 


Figure for East Kootenay given first. 
Figure for Province given second. 










YEAR 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1931 

1932 

1933 

1934 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 

1939 

1940 

1941 

1942 


TABLE XI (CONTINUED) 


147 


Gross tons 

Total 

Tons 

No. of 

Tons 

of coal 

number 

of coal 

men 

of coal 

mined 

employees 

mined 

employed 

mined per 

during 

at 

per 

underground 

undergrou: 

year 

producing 

mines 

employee 


employee 

848,448 

1,431 

592 

962 

881 

2,330,036 

5,322 

437 

3,757 

620 

907,519 

1,494 

607 

1,033 

876 

2,453,827 

5,225 

469 

3,646 

673 

1,001,523 

1,621 

617 

1,153 

886 

2,526,702 

5,334 

473 

3,814 

662 

886,706 

1,503 

589 

1,116 

794 

2,251,252 

5,028 

447 

3,675 

612 

689,230 

1,252 

550 

931 

740 

1,887,130 

4,645 

406 

3,389 

55 6 

661,426 

1,211 

546 

909 

727 

1,707,590 

4,082 

419 

2,957 

577 

587,875 

1,001 

587 

752 

781 

1,534,975 

3,608 

425 

2,628 

584 

477,677 

698 

684 

522 

915 

1,264,746 

3,094 

408 

2,241 

564 

627,619 

754 

832 

551 

1,139 

2,347,090 

2,893 

819 

465 

2,050 

657 

407,110 

497 

614 

663 

1,187,968 

2,971 

399 

2,145 

554 

470,606 

606 

77 6 

459 

1,025 

1,346,741 

2,814 

478 

2,015 

668 

459,136 

628 

731 

462 

972 

1,444,687 

3,153 

458 

2,286 

632 

434,068 

693 

626 

467 

972 

1,309,428 

2,962 

442 

2,088 

675 

561,958 

731 

768 

538 

1,044 

1,477,872 

2,976 

496 

2,167 

682 

776,518 

731 

1,062 

550 

1,412 

1,667,827 

2,874 

580 

2,175 

766 

1,026,053 

921 

1,114 

753 

1,632 

1,802,353 

2,723 

662 

2,229 

808 

1,047,713 

864 

1,201 

696 

1,505 

1,938,158 

2,360 

821 

1,892 

1,024 





















































































































































• 
























YEAR 

1898 

1899 

1900 

1901 

1902 

1903 

1904 

1905 

1906 

1907 

1908 

1909 

1910 

1911 

1912 

1913 

1914 

1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 

1920 

1921 

1922 

1923 

1924 

1925 

1926 

1927 

1928 

1929 

1930 

1 931 

1932 

1933 

193 4 

1935 

1936 

1937 

1938 


TABLE XII . 14 8 

COAL AND COKE PRODUCTION, SALES IN THE UNITED STATES 
AND CANADA—EAST KOOTENAY COAL MINES (1898-1942)1 


Coal 

Coal Sold 

To. 

Coke 

Coke Sold in 

Production 

United States Canada 

Production 

. United State; 

9,954 

37 

9,297 

361 

39 

102,610 


62,338 

29,658 

5,750 

206,803 

7,968 

92,926 

65,915 

38,958 

369,355 

72,862 

121,645 

111,683 

32,121 

393,961 

101,776 

111,701 

107,837 

26,764 

589,888 

146,010 

173,949 

149,764 

27,758 

662,685 

118,188 

168,980 

218,857 

97,690 

831,933 

246,002 

148,939 

256,125 

113,337 

720,449 

230,863 

150,793 

189,385 

53,400 

876,731 

291,410 

218,221 

206,541 

59,890 

883,205 

266,829 

200,908 

234,869 

34,196 

923,865 

353,389 

136,406 

245,017 

40,478 

1,365,119 

751,087 

182,578 

215,696 

8,730 

442,057 

209,894 

95,139 

66,005 

1,267 

1,261,212 

551,742 

231,076 

264,333 

50,257 

1,331,725 

527,620 

287,410 

286,045 

50,626 

955,183 

389,383 

140,094 

234,577 

54,313 

852,572 

370,020 

82,594 

240,421 

24,597 

882,270 

386,953 

75,319 

240,121 

34,377 

551,751 

225,847 

73,797 

129,499 

12,711 

732,864 

342,218 

77,642 

164,080 

17,404 

558,806 

373,348 

65,927 

57,067 

8,134 

847,389 

479,342 

205,076 

67,792 

31,718 

759,755 

495,331 

104,261 

59,434 

18,092 

554,361 

333,451 

138,735 

41,400 

15,524 

740,531 

353,725 

236,796 

58,919 

23,564 

273,518 

70,674 

128,861 

30,615 

8,232 

854,480 

249,436 

431,206 

75,185 

21,936 

848,448 

197,233 

418,724 



907,519 

271,955 

445,478 

61,370 


1,001,523 

240,023 

587,548 

13,902 

886,706 

231,655 

474,607 



689,236 

76,752 

456,933 

65,810 

22,672 

661,426 

43,023 

481,051 

65,400 

16,672 

587,875 

27,665 

466,126 

29,545 

12,855 

477,677 

18,588 

409,237 

5,444 

4,455 

627,619 

23,532 

505,079 

22,178 

6,609 

407,110 

23,091 

338,200 

24,166 

15,563 

470,606 

38,565 

362,210 

30,366 

14 ,686 

459,136 

43,018 

319,318 

43,209 

24,079 

434,068 

47,400 

293,364 

48,751 

23,531 


1 Coal: tons 2,240 lbs. Coke: tons 2,000 lbs 






































. 


































































































































YEAR 

1939 

1940 

1941 

1942 

YEAR 

1875 

1891 

1901 

1911 

1921 

1931 

1941 

1890 

1901 

1911 

1921 

1931 


TABLE XII(CONTINUED) 


149 


Coal Coal Sold To.. Coke 


Production United States Canada Production 


561,958 

776,518 

1,026,053 

1,047,713 


57,820 384,706 51,205 

74,690 548,412 59,788 

84,632 731,015 83,954 

126,580 719,333 85,855 


Coke Sold in 
United States 
21,970 
21,575 
29,737 

31,224 


TABLE XIII . 

AREA AND POPULATION OF EAST KOOTENAY 


EAST KOOTENAY FERNIE 
144(estimated) 

CRANBROOK 

AREA OF EAST KOOTENAY 

3,405 




8,446 

1,640 

1,196 


22,446 

3,146 

3,090 


19,137 

4,343 

2,735 


22,536 

2,732 

3,067 

13,367.11 sq. miles(1) 

21,345 

2,545 

2,568 



H Taken from Dominion Census returns. The other figures 
are taken from the Manual of Provincial Information, 1929, 
and the Year Book of B. C. by ,R. E. GosneR (1914). 

(1) Manual of Provincial Information, Province of B. C., 
1929, page 55. The area of the Kootenays in 1911 was 
given by GOSNELL, R. E. : “Yearbook of B. C. ,! ,1914, 
page 405, as 17,290,420 Acres or 27,016.28 square miles 
and the population as 50,772 in 1911. 

The Census returns of the Dominion Government 
give the following figures for West Kootenay’s population: 

2000(estimated) 

23,5 l6 
28,373 
30,502 
39,943 
















REFERENCES. 

(Major References are marked 1) 


150 


i 


ATKINS, B. R. : ’’Some B. C. Biographies—Robert 

Galbraith of Galbraith's Ferry.” (Daily 
Province, July 29, August 6, 21, 1922) 


1 


: "Columbia River Chronicles.” A series 

of fifteen articles in the Vancouver 
Daily Province: Dec. 1921 to April 1922. 
(scrapbook in Victoria Archives.) 


H BAILLIE-GROHMAN, W. A. : "Fifteen Years Sport and Life 

in the Hunting Grounds of Western 
America and British Columbia.” 

(London, Horace Cox, 1900) 

I BALL, H. M. : "Report on the Kootenay District." 1869* 

"Letter to the Colonial Secretary." 

Oct. 21, 1869. 

BANCROFT, H. H. : "History of British Columbia." 

(History Company, San Francisco, 1887) 

Barbeau, MARIUS: "Indian Days in the Canadian Rockies." 
(Macmillan, Toronto, 1923) 


1 


BARNEBY, W. H. : "Life and Labour in the Far, Far 
West." Appendix C—pp. 399-424. 
(Cassell & Company, London, 1884) 


BEGG, A: "History of British Columbia." 

(Wm. Briggs, Toronto, 1894) 


BESCOBY, Isabel: "Some Social Aspects of the American 
Mining Advance into Cariboo and 
Kootenay-" (U. B. C. Thesis, 1935) 


BLAKISTON, CAPTAIN: "Exploration Report on the 

Kootenai and Boundary Passes of the 
Rocky Mountains in 1858." Pp. 237-254. 
(Pa lliser Expedition.) 

BOLTON, GEORGE: "Reminiscences." Original MS. in 
Victoria Archives.(1935-1937) 


1L 


BRITISH COLUMBIA HISTORICAL QUARTERLY: Vols. I-IV(1937- 
1940). Volume VI (1942) 

(Archives, Victoria, B. C.) 









151 

BRITISH COLUMBIA—THE MINERAL PROVINCE OF CANADA, 
(Victoria, 1904) 

CHACKO, C. J. : ’’The International Joint Commission 
Between the United States of America 
and the Dominion of Canada.” Pp. 307-314. 
(Columbia University Press, New York, 
1932) 

COCKBURN, G. H. : "An Essay on the Source Material 
of British Columbia Church History." 

(MS. U. B. C. Essay, 1934) 

COLUMBIA RIVER EXPLORATION, 1865-1866—Moberly, Green, 
Turnbull. (Govt. Printing Office, New 
Westminster.) 

CORBIN, D. C. : in "Dictionary of American Biography." 

Volume IV. (Charles Scribner’s Sons, 

New York, 1930) 

CODES, ELLIOTT: "The Manuscript Journals of Alexander 
Henry and David Thompson, 1799-1814." 

DEWDNEY, E: "Report to the Colonial Secretary, June 
29, 1865." 

DILLER, DOROTHY: "The Early Economic Development of 
Alberta-Previous to 1905." 

(U of A Thesis, 1923) 

T. C. : "In the Land of the Kootenay." 

(Oregon Historical Quarterly, Vol. XXVII. 
Pp. 279-291) 

: "The Discovery of the Source of the 

Columbia River." (Oregon Historical 
Quarterly. Vol. XXVI, No. 1, pp. 23-49, 
1925) 

R. E. : "The Influence of Some Economic 

and Social Factors in the Development 
of Northern Alberta." 

(University of Toronto. Thesis, 1933) 

ARTHUR K: "Pioneering in Kootenay." (Letters 
and Papers, July 14, 1940, Victoria 
Archives.) 

« Discovery of Wild Horse Creek."(Archives) 
"Indians in the Kootenays in the 80's." 


ELLIOTT, 


t! 


ENGLISH, 


FENWICK, 

n 

it 












■ • 











' 



.. 

















. 





















152 


I FORTURA, ROCCC R: "Placer Mining in Canada." 

(Dept, of Political Economy, University 
of Toronto, 1929.) 

I GALLOWAY, J. D. : "Placer Mining in B. C." Bulletin 

No. 1, 1931. (Dept, of Mines, Victoria) 

" : "Lode-gold Deposits of B. C." Bull. 

No. 1, 1932. (Dept, of Mines, Victoria) 

GOSNELL, R. E. : "The Year Book of British Columbia." 

1897, 1903, 1911. (Victoria, B. C. ) 

GOSNELL, R. E. and SCHOLEFIELD, E. 0. S. : "A History 
of British Columbia—Sixty Years of 
Progress." (B. C. Historical Association, 
Vancouver and Victoria, 1913) 


GRIERSON, ANNE: "Stray Horses and Toad and the Busy 
Town of Nelson." (Daily Province, June 
4, 1931) 

HARRIS, T. H. : "The Economic Aspects of the Crow's 
Nest Pass Rates Agreements" 

(Macmillan, Toronto, 1930) 


¥ 


HAYNES, J: 


"Report to the Colonial Secretary." 
(August 30, September 6, 1864.) 


HIGGINS, D. W. : "The Passing of a Race and More 
Tales of 'Western Life." 

(Wm. Briggs, Toronto, 1905) 


HILL, J. J. : "In the Dictionary of American Biography." 
Vol. IX. 


I HOWAY, F. W. : ""British Columbia—The Making of a 

Province." 

(Ryerson Press, Toronto, 1928) 

" : "British Columbia--From the Earliest 

Times to the Present." Vol. II. 

(S. J. Clarke Pub. Co., 1914) 

I INNIS, H‘. A. : "Settlement and the Mining Frontier." 

Vol. IX in Canadian Frontiers of 
Settlement Series. 

(Macmillan, 193&) 

INVESTIGATIONS IN ORE DRESSING AND METALLURGY, 1923. 

Pp. 139-141.(Dept, of Mines, Canada,1925) 





- 

' 


. 

, 

■ 

. 




■ 








































153 

JOHNSON, R. BYRON: "Very Far West Indeed." (1872) 

JOHNSTON, G. H. : "Early Days in East Kootenay." 

Calgary Herald. (Victoria Archives, 
Scrapbook. Vol. 103, 1897-1923) 

KELLY, L. V. : "The Range Men." 

(Wm. Briggs, Toronto, 1913) 

LEES , J. A. and CLUTTERBUCK, W. J. : "B. C.~1887." 

Fp. 203-351. 

MACFIE, M: "Vancouver Island and British Columbia." 

(Longman's Green, London, 1865) 

MACINNES, C. Ms "In the Shadow of the Rockies." 

(Rivington*s, London, 1930) 

MACKENZIE, J. D: "Geology of a Portion of the Flathead 
Coal Area, British Columbia." 

(Memoir 87—C-eol. Survey) 

MACNAB, FRANCES: "British Columbia for Settlers, 

Its Mines, Trade and Agriculture." 
(Chapman & Hall, London, 1898 ) 

MCKELVIE, B. A: "Early History of the Province of 
B. C." 

(Dent and Sons, Ltd., Toronto, 1926) 

MANUAL CF PROVINCIAL INFORMATION—PROVINCE OF B. C. 

(Provincial Bureau of Information) 

MINING REPORTS: "Annual Reports of the Minister of 
Mines." 1874-1942. 

(Minister of Mines, Victoria, B. C.) 

MOIR, GEORGE T: "Early Railway Days in Kootenay and 

Slocan." (Original—Archives, Victoria) 

MORICE, A. G., REV. 0. M. I: "History of the Catholic 
Church in Western Canada, 1659-1895.” 
Vol. II. (Musson Book Co., Toronto,1930) 

NATION, Major H. T: "The Dewdney Trail." 

(Fourth Report of the B. C. Historical 
Association, pp. 30-33, 1929) 











, 






! 




















- 












154 

NELSON, DENYS: "The Life and Work of the Rev. Father 
Nicolas Coccola, 0. M. I." (MS. in 
Victoria Archives, 1924) 


I 

1 


I 


S 


NEWSPAPERS: 

COLONIST: The Daily Colonist, Victoria. 

(as cited in the text) 

CRANBROOK COURIER: Pioneers Reunion 

Supplement. Forty Years of Progress. 
Sept. 1, 1938. 

CRANBROOK HERALD: Files 1900-1908. 

EDMONTON BULLETIN: Editorial on "Kootenay 
Trade." Oct. 29, 1896 . See text. 
EVENING SUN: The Vancouver Evening Sun. 

(as cited in the text) 

NEWS HERALD: Vancouver. 

PROVINCE: The Vancouver Daily Province. 

(as cited in the text) 

SUN: The Vancouver Sun. Mar. 20, 1930, 

page 23; Feb. 4, 1935? page 18; Jan.11, 
1936, page 16; July 19, 1937, page 14; 
Mar. 22, 1938, page 18; Dec. 23, 1940, 
page 24: Nov. 13, 1941, page 22; 

April 18, 1942, page 6. 

TIMES: Victoria Daily Times. Feb. 11, 

1916, page 13; Oct. 9, 1916, page 2; 
Dec. 1, 1916, page 3; April 17, 1917, 
page 7; May 26, 1919, page 1; May 27, 
1919, page 3; Nov. 11, 1920, page 1; 
Jan. 10, 1920, page 7; April 12, 1921, 
page 15; May 29, 1925, page 18; Aug. 

25, 1925, page2; Feb. 7, 1928, page 5; 
Sept. 18, 1937, page 3; March 17, 1939, 
page 13^ Sept. 24, 1940, page 11; 

June 20, 1942, page 25. 


I O’HARA, EDWIN V: "De Smet in the Oregon Country." 

(Oregon Historical Quarterly, Vol. X, 
No. 3, Sept. 1909) 

1 O’REILLY, P: "Reports ss Gold Commissioner." See 

Text. MS. in Victoria Archives. 


1 


PALLISER, CAPTAIN: "Exploration of British North 

America 1857, 1858, 1859, i860." Section 
by Capt. Blakiston and J. W. Sullivan. 


RATTRAY, A: 


"Vancouver Island and British Columbia." 
(London, 1862) 






- 




. 

• • 










, I 




* 




















































. 

. 










. 
















155 

REPORT OF THE COMMISSION APPOINTED TO INVESTIGATE 

THE ZINC RESOURCES OF BRITISH COLUMBIA 
AND THE CONDITIONS AFFECTING THEIR 
EXPLOITATION. (Mines Branch, Dept, of 
Interior, Ottawa, 1906) 

REPORT ON THE MINING AND METALLURGICAL INDUSTRIES OF 
CANADA. (Government Printing Bureau, 
Ottawa, 1908) 


U RICKARD, T. A: "The Blue Bell Mine, Riondel, B. C." 

(Vol. 113 Mining and Scientific Press, 
San Francisco, 1916) 

" : "The Kootenay Region.” Pp. 285-295 

Canadian Mining Journal, May 1943. 

ROBERTSON-ROSS, P: "Reconnaissance of the North West 
Provinces and Indian Territories of the 
Dominion of Canada." (Dominion Sessional 
Papers, Volume 6, No. 5? 1873) 

SAGE, W. N: "Sir James Douglas and British Columbia." 

(University of Toronto Press, 1930) 

H SCHOFIELD, S. J: "Geology of the Cranbrook Map Area." 

(Memoir 76 , Geol. Survey, 1915) 


1 SCOTT, LESLIE M: "The Pioneer Stimulus of Gold." 

(Oregon Historical Quarterly, Volume 
XVIII, No. 3? Sept. 1917) 

SELEKMAN, BEN M: "Postponing Strikes." 

(Russell Sage Foundation, New York, 1927) 

SHINN, C. H: "Mining Camps. A Study in American 
Frontier Government." 

(Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York,1885) 

1 SMYTH, FRED J: "Tales of the Kootenays." 

(Cranbrook Courier, Cranbrook, B. C., 
1942) 


SPINKS, WILLIAM WARD: "Tales of the British Columbian 
Frontier." (Ryerson Press, 1933) 


I 


SPROAT, G. M: 


"Report on the Kootenay Country." 
(B. C. Sessional Papers, 1884) 













156 

ST. BARBE, CHARLES: "A History of Nelson and West 
Kootenay." 

(Nelson, B. C. Sept. 14, 1897) 

" : "The Kootenay Mines." (Miner 

Print and Pub. Co. Ltd., Nelson, 1895) 

STEELE, S. Bs "Annual Report as Superintendent of D 
Division of the R. N. W. M. P." 

(Dominion Sessional Papers Volume XXI, 

No. 17, 1888; also Vol. XXII, No. 13, 
1889) 

" : "Forty Years in Canada. Reminiscences 

of the Great Northwest." Pp. 245-256. 
(McClelland, Goodchild and Stewart, 1914) 

THRUPP, SYLVIA: "A History of the Cranbrook District 
in East Kootenay." (University of 
British Columbia M. A. thesis, 1929) 




TRIMBLE, WILLIAM J: "The Mining Advance into the 

Inland Empire." (University of Wisconsin, 
Bulletin 6 * 8 , 1914) 


TRUEMAN, JOHN STANLEY: "Placer Gold Mining in 

Northern British Columbia, 1860-1880." 
(U. B. C. thesis, 1935) 




WALLACE, 


J. 


N: 


"The Passes of the Rocky Mountains 
Along the Alberta Boundary." (The 
Historical Society of Calgary, April 
1927) 


WARDNER, JIM: "Jim Wardner, of Wardner, Idaho, by 

Himself." (Anglo-American Publishing 
Company, New York, 1900) 

WHEELER, A. 0: "The Selkirk Range." Volume I. 

(Govt. Printing Bureau, Ottawa, 1905) 

YOUILL, ROBERT: "Early Days in Kootenay." 

(Nelson News, June 10, 1935.) 


YOUNG, W. C: "Report to John H s ynes, Gold Commissioner." 
(Dec. 1, 1864; April 3 , 1865.) 




















„ 




■ 

































, 





















* 





















& pi1 


Little 


.i^ruuii 


tom 





W 

7 \ ^r 


\ 

- \\ -VJ 

r \ T 


\ .fj 

Ilfl/U 111 ^ 1 

1 TV 

\l i, 1 


V t* ), 

pW 

l H, nf$ 1' a 

































































































S CtD CtDqCO CD) OD 


TEMPORARY REPRINT ISSUE 

Post Offioes and Railways corrected to Jur 


Railways 

Railways (under constructs 


Inter-Provincial Boundc 


Boundar 


(uncompleted 

/completed 

luncompleted 


Trunk Highways 


Park Bour 


jhweys 


Railway 




Customs 









































































































i Hal 'ajCpp/ [ 


:rmrsTZNA 


■'It. VI 





/b _ 





\ \ 

fe 

\ 

V H- 

JnjScaass^ 

,*1)5 \ 































































































[COLUMBIA 


— 5(' 




^ i ----- ____ 




X 


\y 

V 

t- 












































































































