
Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


McKinlay, Clare Mary 

The Honorable Irene Parlby 


History Department 






Gtx IIBBIS 

bmwssiotk 

mbotmemijs 










































. 













Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/honorableirenepaOOclar 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE HONORABLE IRENE PARLBY 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS 


BY 

CLARE MARY McKINLAY 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


April, 1953 



UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 
have read and recommend to the School of Graduate 
Studies for acceptances a thesis entitled 
rt The Honorable Irene Parlby 11 , 
submitted by Clare Mary McKinlay, B.A., in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts, 


Profess 

Professoi 

Prcfesso: 

_ Professo 
Date r?. I 



Professo 













iii 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


A study of this kind is dependent in 
its preparation upon many people. The writer is 
under obligation to all those who permitted per¬ 
sonal interviews, wrote letters, made accessible 
numerous articles, booklets,and newspapers, and 
gave helpful counsel and encouragement. 


Grateful acknowledgment is expressed in 
particular to the staff of the Alberta Legislative 
Library, to Mr. and Mrs. Humphrey Parlby, to Mr. R, G. 
Reid, Mr. J. E. Brownlee and Mr. J. F. Lymburn, and to 
Dr. R. W. Collins and Dr. F. D. Blackley, Department 
of History, University of Alberta. Among others who 
gave valuable assistance are staff members of The Ed ¬ 
monton Journal s The Calgary Herald , The Country Guide < 
The Western Producer , The U.F.A. Co-operative, Ltd., 
and officials in the Departments of Health, Welfare, 
and of the Attorney-General, Government of Alberta. 


Finally, the writer wishes to express her 
gratitude to Mrs. Irene Parlby, whose kindness and 
infinite patience made possible the completion of 
this work. 















' 














■ 












. 

„ • 






i 

.' . . 




! 













































iv 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

INTRODUCTION ...... 1 

CHAPTER ONE: 

Early Years in India 

and England I868-I896 ... 2 

CHAPTER TWO: 

Early Years in Canada 1896-191^ ........ 8 

CHAPTER THREE: 

The United Farm Women of Alberta ....... 27 

CHAPTER FOUR: 

Minister of the Crown 1921-1935 . 49 

CHAPTER FIVE: 

Other Interests and Activities ... 83 

CHAPTER SIX: 

Retirement 1935 — .. 98 

APPENDICES . ... .. 103 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


121 































































V 


PHOTOGRAPHS 

1. The Cabin at "Dartmoor", 1901 

2. Mrs. Parlby and Her Son 5 1901 

3. Mr. and Mrs. Parlby in England, 1910 

4. A Corner of the Living Room at "Dartmoor", about 191*+ 

5. Mrs. Parlby During the Early Years of the U.F.W.A. 

6. Minister Without Portfolio 

7. Parlby Lake 


8, Mr. and Mrs. Parlby, 1951 




vi 


FOR WORD 


Whether the subject is worth all the 
patience, diligent research, and perseverance 
which Clare McKinlay has put into the writing 
of this thesis, is for others to say. 


It does perhaps show that like Ulysses 
and most other humans, "I am a part of all that 
I have met* 1 , and that while I have not accomplished 
all that I would have wished during my eighty-five 
years, it has been given me to pass through that 
’’Arch of Experience” so that as I near the last 
horizon I can say again with Ulysses; ’’Much have 
I seen and known; cities of men, and manners, 
climates, counsels and governments.” 


All of these many experiences have 
added much to the enrichment of my life, the 
greater part of which has been spent on a Western 
farm in my adopted country of Canada, a country 
which has given me much happiness and many friend¬ 
ships. 


(sgd.) Irene Parlby 






























■ 

; 

' 




. 














■ 









1 


INTRODUCTION 

For over half a century, Mrs. Irene Parlby 
has lived in Western Canada, and during that time 
she has made notable contributions to the life of 
the province of Alberta. She was one of the founders 
of the United Farm Women of Alberta, a member of the 
legislature, a Minister of the Crown, and a delegate 
to the League of Nations. Not only was she in the 
forefront of the movement that brought about improved 
health and welfare services and a higher status for 
women, but she was a homemaker, a writer, and a 
well-known public speaker. As the years went by, 

Mrs. Parlby became one of Canada*s best-known and 
most distinguished women. 

This thesis is an attempt to give some 

account of her life and achievements. In her own 

words: "Sometimes ... it is well to turn our eyes 

backward over the road travelled, remind ourselves 

of the dangers and difficulties conquered, and pay 

generous tribute to those who guided our footsteps 

1 

and set them on the right way." 


1. Parlby, Hon. Irene; "A Backward Glance", 
THE U.F.A. , Dec. 1, 1927. 


in 







2. 


CHAPTER ONE 

1 

Early Years in India and England 1868-1896 

Mary Irene Marryat was born at 75? Eccle- 
ston Square, London, on January 95 1868. Her parents 
were Colonel Ernest Lindsay Marryat, R.E., of the East 
India Company, and Elizabeth Lynch Marryat, formerly 
of County Mayo, Ireland® She was a great-granddaughter 
of Joseph Marryat, Member of Parliament for Horsham 
Surrey, and a great-niece of the well-known writer 
Captain F. Marryat, R.N. Her father was engaged in 
civil engineering in India where most of his work con¬ 
sisted of the construction of railroads. Her mother, 
who had come to England for the birth of her daughter, 
returned to the East in the spring. 

For six of the next sixteen years the 

family lived in India, from 1868 to 1871 and from 

1881 to 1884. Then Colonel Marryat retired from his 

work in India and returned to England where he became 

an official in the London office of the Bengal North- 

2 

Western Railway and the Delta Light Railway. 

Of India, the Marryats had happy and vivid 
memories. They lived for most of the time at a 




























• 



































~ 

















. 



























3 


military station at Rawalpindi in the Punjab. At 

the beginning of the hot season they moved to the 

mountain resort of Murree in the Himalayas. The 

children always had a M nanny” and a governess, and 

numerous playmates from other British families in 

3 

the colony. Irene who owned her own pony became a 
rather expert horsewoman. She recalls that one time 
when her father was the manager of a railroad from 
Lahore to Peshawar she went with him on an inspection 
trip which took them close to the famed Khyber Pass. 

She was sixteen when Colonel Marryat retired, and 
she left India with many regrets. 

In England, the Marryats lived in the 
country. They had a large house in Lympsfield, Surrey, 
from which the father commuted to London. The family 
increased steadily to include eight children, of whom 
Irene was the eldest. The five girls were educated 
at home by governesses| they studied literature, 
history, French, arithmetic, drawing, and music. The 
boys went to private schools as soon as they were old 
enough. When Irene was almost seventeen she spent 
six months with some English friends from India who 
were living in Freiberg, not far from the Black Forest 


















. 











, 












, 


. 

? 

. 

; 













in Germany. There she studied music and German, 
but she remembers that she was much more interested 
in enjoying herself than in doing lessons. Her for¬ 
mal education ended that year. Recently she wrote: 
”Now seeing all the opportunities modern girls have 
for education and careers, how I wish I had been born 
thirty or forty years later *— and in Canada.” 

Life in Surrey was rather charming. The 
Marryats were not rich, but even with a large family 
and home, they lived very comfortably. Friends were 
nearby, and relatives were not too far away in other 
parts of England, and in Ireland. In common with 
the times, social entertainment was almost entirely 
at home, where activities included teas, dances 
and the staging of private (and original) theatri¬ 
cals. Then there were sports such as tennis, 
cricket, skating, and field hockey which Irene en¬ 
joyed greatly. Occasionally there was a trip to 
London, and once or twice the family went abroad. 

As Irene grew older, she began to think that her 
way of life was rather aimless. f, It was just filling 

5 

in time.” She felt the need of doing something more 
useful, and perhaps she had too much spirit and 



5 


curiosity to remain satisfied in Victorian England*s 
polite upper middle-class society. Once her father 
asked her if she was interested in studying medicine. 
She was not; she wished to study acting or writing. 
But the stage was not considered quite respectable 
and her desire to write was not encouraged. 

When she was asked recently if she could 

recall some of the early influences of her life, 

Mrs. Parlby mentioned her father. Colonel Marryat 

was ahead of his time in some ways: for example 

he approved of women going to college and entering 

6 

some of the professions. He was a Unionist, and 
he may have passed on to his eldest child some of 
his interest in public affairs. Other influences 
may have been the countryside which she loved, and 
reading, for which she acquired early a deep and 
lasting taste. Perhaps the memories of India which 
occupied a special place in her mind and heart, and 
which were in marked contrast to the tranquil Britain 
that she knew, had aroused within her an interest 
and a desire for a new way of life in a completely 
different environment. 



















- : 




















„ 














, 











* 

■ * 










. 





















6 


In 189^5 after some months of indifferent 
health, Irene Marryat went to St, Moritz in Switzer¬ 
land. There she spent the winter resting, enjoying 
the climate, and liking immensely the friendly people 
and the quaint Swiss chalets. She returned home feel¬ 
ing much better physically but with as much inner dis¬ 
satisfaction as before. Then in 1896 a friend came 
to Surrey on a visit from Canada. This friend was 
Mrs. Charles Westhead who, with her husband, had left 

England about two years before to ranch in the Buffalo 
7 

Lake district of the then North West Territories, 

She had invited one or two people to visit her. Did 
Irene wish to go too? Colonel Marryat received the 
suggestion with some enthusiasm and it was arranged 
that she should go to Canada for a year. 

She left England in May, 1896 . 


1. Nearly all the information in Chapter One came from 
interviews with Mrs. Irene Parlby who is the only 
member of Colonel and Mrs. Marryat*s family in the Alix 
district, and with Mrs. Parlby*s son, Humphrey Parlby, 
who recalled what he had heard from his grandparents 
and others. 

2. The Delta Light Railway was an Egyptian company. 

3. Irene is pronounced I-reen-ee. 


















’ 

' 

. 

■ 

* 

. 

■ 

. 














; 



- 







) ) 















, 
















7 . 


b. Parlby, Mrs. Irene: Unpublished letter, Aug. 1, 
1952. 

5. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, Aug. 12, 1952. 

6. The Unionists were the Liberal opponents of Irish 
Home Rule who formed themselves into a party 
against Gladstone. Eventually they joined the 
Conservatives. 

7. Appendix Dl, p. 119. 

Buffalo Lake is approximately eighty miles south¬ 
east of Edmonton and almost mid-way between the 
Red Deer and Battle Rivers. Its name was given 
to a large district which surrounded it. 


. . 

* 


. 






> c ‘ 






. - 


, 1-3 

- 






















8 . 


CHAPTER TWO 

1 

Early Years in Canada 1896-191 1 * 

The journey to Canada took thirteen days. 
For most of the time the seas were rough and the trip 
was far from pleasant. The calm waters of the 
St. Lawrence River were a welcome relief, and Quebec 
City was a fine introduction to Canada. In the old 
capital, Irene Marryat and Mrs. Westhead enjoyed two 
days of interesting sight-seeing. Then came the long 
transcontinental trip to Calgary. There the Westhead 
party had to spend a few days at the Alberta Hotel 
while awaiting the twice-weekly train to Edmonton. 
Calgary was a small cow-town at that time but it was 
lively and picturesque, especially to someone from 
far-away Surrey. On the way north the visitors were 
guests of the Honorable Charles Mackintosh, the 
Lieutenant-Governor of the North West Territories. 

At the tiny settlement of Lacombe from where they 
had to travel about twenty-eight miles eastward to 
the Buffalo Lake Ranch, they were met by their host, 
Charles Westhead. 

The party set off in a democrat. Behind 
them came a baggage-laden wagon driven by an unusual 
and colorful old-timer called Jim Gadsby. That was 











. 

. 


. 




0 - 

. 



. 





9 . 


a drive to remember! It was June and the country 

looked beautiful, "But the trail! — we tumbled out 

of one deep mud hole into another, Jim would unhitch 

his team of mules, yoke them onto our democrat and 

pull us out. Then someone said that the creek ahead 

was flooded and the bridge was floating. I wondered 

nervously about that! We couldn't so much as see the 

bridge but the men seemed to know where the poles 

ought to be. We plunged in and the team got us 

across .... The Westhead ranch which we reached 

about Hr 30 at night \tfas a surprise; the two-storey 

log house was big and inviting, and the wood fire, 

blazing on the hearth of the living room made us 

2 

forget somewhat the hazardous ride." Such was 
Irene Marryat ! s real introduction to pioneer life. 

Soon the young Englishwoman was absorbed 
in the general activity of the ranch. She helped her 
hostess, and for the first time in her life learned 
to keep house and to cook. She had always liked using 
her hands, and now she had much occasion to do so. 

She went riding, and loved the rolling parkland in all 
its lush beauty. f, I was never homesick”, she often 
said later. 












«. 

, 






. ■ 

. I : ■ • : 








.... 

























♦ 









. 








. • 




10 


Neighbors were few and generally far be¬ 
tween, Among them were the Parlby brothers who lived 
three miles away. Edward Parlby, but recently married, 
had come from England to Ontario in 1886, after which 
time he went to Calgary, then north to the Ponoka area 
where he took up ranching. In 1890 he was visited by 
his older brother Walter who had spent the three pre¬ 
vious years tea-planting in Assam. Walter®s visit 
became permanent. He said long afterwards that he 
disliked the country at first, was persuaded to remain 
another fortnight — and then stayed the rest of his 
life. When the brothers heard that a railway was to 
be built from Calgary to Edmonton and would likely 
interfere with their ranching, they decided to look 
for land somewhere else. One week-end, after due 
preparation, they set off on horseback to the south¬ 
east toward the Buffalo Lake area some thirty miles 
away. About two days later they came upon extensive 
hay flats, not far from a lake and a fair-sized creek, 
and near good shelter. This was an Ideal location 
for stock-raising. They homesteaded there and were 
the first white settlers east of Lacombe, 

The Parlbys were sons of Reverend John 
Hall Parlby, J.P., of Manadon, Crownhill, Devon, 
not far from Plymouth. Their people were of the landed 




















- 





' 




■ 




. 










* 





















































. 

; • . • 

. 










3 


11 . 


gentry of England. Walter had attended Oxford where 
he received a Master of Arts degree and was known as 
an outstanding athlete. He had hoped to study theo¬ 
logy hut he changed his mind when his father disapproved 
strongly of the High Church tendencies of the college 
he wished to attend. After a few years in Assam he had 
come to Western Canada. He was a good friend and a 
frequent guest at the Westhead ranch. 

In 1896 when Walter Parlhy met Irene Marryat, 
he was thirty-four years of age. In appearance he was 
hazel-eyed, dark-haired, tall, and very lean. His 
friends knew him to he quiet-spoken and witty. Miss 
Marryat discovered soon that he liked ranching, horses, 
shooting and riding, and that he was a scholarly man 
who read his Greek Testament every day and the classics 
when he could. She too loved hooks and riding and the 
out-of-doors. Almost from the first the two were at¬ 
tracted to each other, and hy early autumn they were 

4 

engaged to he married. 

A good deal of planning and work was done 
in the next few months. A kitchen was added to 
Walter Parlhy 1 s ranch cahin. Irene sent home for 
a trousseau and some linens, and kept herself busy 
with what she called her ’’domestic education”. In 
















* 

: t ' 










* 

' 

. 



12 . 


due course Colonel and Mrs. Marryat made the proper 
announcements from Lympsfield, Surrey. The ceremony 
was planned for the following March at the Lamerton 
Mission Church of Saint Monica's which the Parlhys 

5 

had helped to build in the summer of 1895® 

The engaged couple had a long, cold ride 
to Lacombe where they met Bishop Pinkham, a personal 
friend of the Westheads, who had come from Calgary to 
officiate at the ceremony. The return trip was one 
of the coldest that Irene was to experience for a long 
time. Then a heavy snowfall came which prevented the 
wedding party from reaching the church eight miles 
away. The marriage took place at the Westhead home 
on March 15 ? 1897® 

Among the wedding gifts were a silver tea 
set from the groom's parents in Devonshire, china from 
the Edward Parlbys nearby, a sewing machine, an attrac¬ 
tive picnic basket, and books. (One friend sent a 
complete and beautifully-bound set of Thackeray). 

Most of the presents were cheques, some of which were 
used by the newly-married couple to buy a piano for 
the cabin which was' their first home. 




. 











. 


































































* 




























; 













■ . 
























13. 

Walter Parlby's ranch was called Dartmoor n 
aft ertke, well-known moor in England' close to which his 
father’s home had been built. It was less than a mile 
from Edward's Long Valley Ranch. The land owned by the 

30 - 

brothers surrounded Parlby Lake, ^named by government 

6 

surveyors in 1893 , and which, from that time 
has been a sort of private bird, sanctuary. The cabin 
was located higher than the other buildings on a 
gentle rise along the north shore with protecting 
trees behind. It had two fair-sized rooms at the 
front with a small kitchen at the back. The parti¬ 
tioned but unfinished attic served as guest rooms 
when the occasion demanded. The main items of furni¬ 
ture were a stove, a bed, an armchair, a large book¬ 
case, and home-made things such as a kitchen table 
and chairs, a bench or two and a cupboard. These were 
supplemented by the wedding presents mentioned earlier. 
At once the bride set to work to make the best of the 
materials available. She found the sewing machine very 
useful because she had learned at home how to sew. 
Gradually, by work of loving hands, the rude prairie 
house was changed into a cozy dwelling. Chintz and a 
beautiful set of Fores prints made for color and 
gaiety. Later on, articles such as china, books, and 
more pictures were brought or sent out from England, 
and Timothy Eaton's in Winnipeg was a good source of 
supply. 






. 

- - 

. 






. 

. 

; 




















, 




. 








, r 
















. 

. 

. 

- 

. 





Ik. 

Mrs. Parlby had begun at last to live in 
earnest. She recalls that very little in the West was 
what she had anticipated, but that did not disturb her 
unduly. She was now a wife and a fellow-worker in 
the building of a Canadian farm home, and the urge 
within her to experiment and to acquire new knowledge 
became more intense and enthusiastic. With native 
thoroughness and ingenuity, she continued the education 
begun at Mrs. Westhead*s. She baked and sewed, and she 
learned from her husband how to cultivate a vegetable 
garden. She raised some chickens and succeeded in 
making butter. She wanted flowers, so she coaxed the 
men to build a picket fence near the small house to keep 
out farmyard intruders® Then she raked and cleaned 
the slope to the lake, put in a bit of hedge and 
planted a few maples. The next year her flower garden 
was started. ff Pleasant places make pleasant people,** 
she said years later. 11 If you want to accomplish 
sweetness, serenity, graciousness, these things must 
find their source in your home life and surroundings, 
and no home is really sweet or gracious or pleasant 

7 

which has not some kind of a flower garden around it.” 

Cooking presented a problem. Most of the 
supplies came twice-yearly from the Hudson*s Bay 










. 


















* 


' : ‘ . - . : '.n - 




' 1 , 






. 















- 




















. 












15 


Company*s store in Calgary. These included dried fruit, 
tea, coffee, sauces, and some tinned goods such as 
salmon. Flour, as well as sugar and oatmeal were 
bought in Lacombe. When the wild fruits were in season, 
the Indians would come round with pails of raspberries 
or gooseberries to sell or trade for something they 
wanted. The vegetables, eggs, milk, and butter from 
the farm were of much help, while game and fish were 
usually plentiful. Unpleasant memories are those of 
beef pickled In brine, and dry, salt bacon. 

The men did practically all the outside work. 
Walter was helped by a hired man as well as by one or 
two boys who had come from England to learn about 
ranching. The settlers at that time were engaged 
chiefly in raising cattle and breeding horses. In 
spring and summer they were busy sowing oats for green- 
feed, rounding up the stock on the open range, repair¬ 
ing and putting up buildings, and making hay. Sometimes 
the Indians, whom most of the white people liked, did 
some brushing and cutting. The winters were less 
strenuous except in severe weather when feeding and 
watering the stock took up most of one*s energy. 

Almost without exception the neighbors were 
kind and helpful. The nearest ones were the Edward 












. 

’ t : ? - 

- 

• . 
















' 

. 










, ' . 

• . < 



. 

! 








, 



16 . 

Parlbys who lived to the west along the lakeshore. 

Further away were the Westheads, the Trevennens, and 
the Hills. A Scottish couple named Hutchison ran a 
post office and small store at Lamerton (now Mirror) 
which was eight miles north-east. Others included a 
Mr. Roberts whose ranch along the Red Deer River was 
near that of^Oliver Howard, a son of Lord Carlisle. 

All these people were of similar background and out¬ 
look who tried as much as possible to retain a number 
of Old Country ways. This not only made life pleasanter 
but it deepened that sense of comradeship which flour¬ 
ishes where people are few and dependent upon each other. 
Jim Gadsby of whom mention was made earlier, lived with 
his Indian wife on a small place nearby. The Westheads 1 
hired man was ’’Tip’ 1 Willet who left in *98 for the gold 
rush, and was one of the few adventurers who reached 
the Yukon by way of the Peace River Country. Much 
further to the south were other settlers whom the 
Parlbys knew. In those days when the country had so 
many wide-open spaces, people who lived fifty miles 
away were often looked upon as neighbors. 

In spite of work and the lack of conveniences, 
there was time for leisure and all-round enjoyment. 
Friends visited, enjoyed private dances, went riding, 


0 " 

. 

■ 

. 






■ 

* 

. 

, ' ■ . ’ . 








, 


. 


17 


boating, and picnicking. Most of the men belonged to 

8 

the Haunted Lakes Polo Club which Walter Parlby had 
organized. In the winter, field hockey was a favorite 
sport; it was played on Parlby Lake by mixed teams of 
men and women who used willow branches for sticks. 

During the long evenings people often wrote to relatives 
and friends "back home", or they read or just talked. 
Generally speaking, the circle of friends was small, 
and remained rather exclusive even when the population 
of the settlement increased after 1900. 

Occasionally the Parlbys went to visit friends 
named Hickling who lived at the Beaver Dam near the 
location of present-day Carstairs. On one occasion when 
they were driving there they had to camp overnight. No 
sooner were they settled for sleep when they were shocked 
by the discovery that the tent had been pitched over a 
gopher colony. There was no rest for some time after 
that. Now and again they went to Calgary where they 
visited and shopped. Frequent travel was out of the 
question for the railway was thirty miles to the west 
and roads in any direction were merely trails. 

Naturally there were many discouragements 
and not a few harrowing experiences. Stock diseases, 
early frosts, hail, and fire were ever-present threats. 




. 

























. 





































' 








■ 


















. 












' 










18 


Dollars were scarce and there was much "doing without" 
because there were no telephones, hospitals, or doctors. 
The lack of medical aid was a special cause for anxiety 
particularly for families with children. Many are the 
tales of rude remedies that were conjured up in moments 
of need, Mrs, Parlby told of an encounter which her 
husband and brother-in-law had with a very sick man 
whom they found in an isolated cabin. The settler was 
hemorrhaging and was in great pain. Walter had read 
somewhere that vinegar was good in just such an emer¬ 
gency, so he seized a bottle which happened to be 
amongst his stores and poured some of the contents 
down the man’s throat. The bleeding stopped, and after 
a few days the man was back on his feet. At times of 
course, nothing availed but that occurred in surpris¬ 
ingly few cases. Neighbor helped neighbor and never 
was aid for the sick or injured refused. 

Naturally most of the pioneers remember the 
best of those times. The kindness of memory has blurred 
the heartaches and the worries. It was a "young 
people's" country which made for optimism and buoy¬ 
ancy. Many of the settlers had come from comfortable 
homes, and in the valor of ignorance had plunged into 
a life of loneliness, discomfort, and hardship. Yet 
most of them enjoyed it and seldom regretted the move 


. 
















, 


■ 



























. 






: 








* 







































. 

. 



19 . 

they had made. They had an entirely different view¬ 
point from that of a brakeman on the Calgary and 
Edmonton Railway (C. and E.) who stood by listening 
to a group of men on the train discussing the beauties 
and opportunities of the West. At last, unable to hide 
his feelings any longer, he burst out with, ’’Well, damn 

any man I say who wants to live in a country where dried 

9 

apples are a luxury!” 

As was to be expected, a few of the new¬ 
comers were misfits in a strange land. Others left 
in discouragement while some trailed off in search of 
further adventure. Mrs. Parlby tells of a young 
Englishman who had agreed to look after Dartmoor while 
the owners were in the Old Country one winter. The 
Boer War broke out however, and one fine day the hired 
man, a rather crusty old Dane, came in for his noonday 
meal to find this note on the table? ’’Gone to South 
Africa. Your dinner in the oven”. It seemed that a 
friend had called in the morning, and together, the two 
had decided to enlist; with them went several of the 
young Britishers of the district in search of action 
somewhere else in the world. 

There was no lack of individuality among the 
pioneers. Wherever they came from, they had strong 






















' 





































, 









- 


























' 


















. 












20 


personalities, and sometimes a few of them were eccentric 
or just a little unusual• There was one old bachelor 
who had come to the district from the American West. 

He ran a horse ranch on the Bed Deer River, and had very 
definite ideas on various subjects. For example, he 
refused to have a lamp in the house, and the only light 
he would allow was a bit of rag in a saucer of melted 
bacon or other fat. The only book he had on the pre¬ 
mises was The American Horseman > from which he would 
read aloud to visitors or hired men. Any other book 

that turned up was promptly thrown into the stove to 

10 

the accompaniment of colorful language. 

Years later in a radio broadcast, Irene Parlby 
summed up her own feelings about living in a new land. 

She said* "First of all I think came the exhilarating 
feeling of living where the world was really young, 
where there were no people crowding in on you with their 
miserable, silly little conventions and pettinesses and 
prejudices, and all the other barnacles people grow 
when they congregate together in a community. The 
freshness, the spaciousness, the extraordinary quiet¬ 
ness of an unpeopled land; the absence of all compli¬ 
cations, stresses, worries, and what-not of such a life. 

I feel so sorry for the later-comers who had not that 
11 

experience." 





21 


In the fall of 1899? Mr. and Mrs* Parlby went 
to England, There in London on November 15, 1899? their 
son, Humphrey Marryat Hall Parlby,, was born. They re¬ 
turned to Canada in the springtime accompanied by 
Gladys Marryat, a sister. The following year Colonel 
Marryat, who had wished for a long time to see Canada, 
came for a visit. In fact he had almost come to Manitoba 
in 1884 but his railway appointments had changed his mind. 
Like that of his eldest child, his enthusiasm for the 
West was almost unbounded. He went home, settled his 
affairs, and in 1904 returned to Canada with his wife 

and the majority of his family. He bought land near 
12 

Haunted Lakes where he built a picturesque home 
similar to a Breton farmhouse he had once seen and liked. 
The Marryats were a welcome addition to the settlement, 
not only because they intended to remain permanently 
but for the social and cultural influences they exerted 
in the district. For example, they became the nucleus 
of a drama group who for years aided community projects 
by staging plays that ranged from Shakespeare to Japan¬ 
ese comedy. The youngest of the family was a girl named 
Sheila, who was the first woman to graduate in agricul¬ 
ture from the University of Alberta and who became widely 
known in the province as the secretary of Radio Station 
C.K.U.A., Edmonton. 





























' 

* 






































































'. s 






■ 














22 


Gradually the Buffalo Lake settlement expanded. 
The tides of immigration began to touch the farthest 
prairies. Some of the newcomers travelled east from 
Lacombe along the trail that passed directly in front 
of the cabin at "Dartmoor/ where they often stopped for 

13 

help or advice of some sort. For the most part they 
were Americans, Scandinavians, Eastern Canadians, and 
some Britishers. Little shacks began to dot the hori¬ 
zons, and the old unwritten law against squatting within 
a certain distance of an already-established settler be¬ 
came obsolete. More immigrants came when the Canadian 
Pacific Railway built a branch line east of Lacombe. 
Walter Parlby ! s diary relates that the first train came 
through on September 2, 1905. The new station was 
named Alix in fulfillment of a promise made by Sir Wil¬ 
liam Van Horne to Mrs. Westhead: he would give her name 

to a station if ever the C.P.R. built through that part 
14 

of the world. 

With the increase of population, ranching 
began to decline. Cattle roaming had to be restricted 
as the range was taken up by homesteaders. Some of the 
pioneers left because they hated the loss of the old 
peace and freedom. They disliked too the worries, 
discordances, and variety of standards that came with 
the large influx of settlers. A few remained and ad- 













23. 

justed themselves to changing conditions, and very 
often they helped in some way to direct the course 
of subsequent development and progress. 

One might ask at this point: why were 
the pioneers important? Of what significance were 
the Parlbys and other early-comers? Surely the 
answer is, that they helped to open up the country 
for settlement, and they set a standard that influ¬ 
enced the community in which they lived. As mentioned 
earlier Walter Parlby aided in planning and building 
St. Monica*s Church, one of the earliest Anglican 
churches between Edmonton and Calgary. In 1910 he 
helped toward the establishment at Alix of St. Pan- 
eras* Church where his family continues as active 

15 

members. At about the same time he was a strong 

supporter of the United Farmers of Alberta on whose 

Provincial Board he served for a time. Later on he 

acted as Justice of the Peace and game warden at Alix, 

and was an original member of the Alberta Wheat Pool 

16 

and the Central Alberta Dairy Pool. Mrs. Parlby 

assisted in the formation in 1913 of a women’s club in 
17 

the district. As secretary of the club, she was in¬ 
strumental in starting the first library in the settle¬ 
ment. She wrote a letter to The Spectator ^ requesting 

























. 










. 










' 




1 . 














1 

„ 
















. 


■ 








\ 










. 




























2k. 

donations of books from interested readers. The res¬ 


ponse was splendid; a few books came from such unex¬ 
pected places as Japan and South Africal That first 
little library was burnt when a fire destroyed the 
U.F.A. hall, but the women started over again, helped 
this time by small grants of money from the village 
council and the provincial government. From that small 
beginning a community library, complete with a chil¬ 
dren’s section, has developed, and is a source of 
V 

pride to the F.U.A. which owns and runs it. 

In the early fall of 1905? the provinces of 
Alberta and Saskatchewan were carved out of the North 
West Territories. For the inauguration ceremonies the 
Parlbys went to Edmonton, partly because the Haunted 
Lakes Polo Team had been invited to take part in a 
tournament which had been planned especially for the 
occasion. This was Mrs. Parlby’s first visit to Edmon¬ 
ton. She recalls that Lord Grey and Sir Wilfred Laurier 
delivered speeches, that she and her husband stayed at 
the Cecil Hotel, and that the ball at the Thistle Rink 
was a gala affair. Little did she dream that someday 
she would help to administer the affairs of the young 
province, and become known far beyond its boundaries. 

At "Dartmoor"the busy years hurried by. The 


' 









• ... 

..... 

. 

: 

, ,■ . 

, 

* 

■ 

. 

. 


. 







25 . 

cabin was enlarged and remodelled. The Parlbys went 
to England in 190*+ and 1910 and brought home many 
things: brassware which had come from Assam, athle¬ 
tic trophies, china, pictures, and more books. Some 
furniture came from Edmonton. The household for a 
few years included a governess who taught the young 
son but the latter, at the age of nine, went to Western 
Canada College in Calgary. Photographs that were taken 
in those pioneer days show that Mrs. Parity had changed 
little. She was straight and slender 5 her medium- 
brown hair was piled high on her head and her hazel 
eyes looked candidly at the world. 


As yet she had made no debut in public life. 
That was to come shortly through an organization known 
as ff The United Farm Women of Alberta”. 


1. The information concerning pioneer times in the 
Buffalo Lake District was obtained from Mrs. Irene 
Parlby and her son, and from her nephew, Mr. Jack 
Parlby. 

2. Parlby, Mrs. Irene: Unpublished letter, April 10, 

1952. 

3. Burke* s Landed Gentry , 1937 edition, p. 175*+. 

*+. The writer did not feel free to enquire too closely 
into personal details because of Walter Parlby’s 
recent death. 

5. Larnerton was the old name for Mirror (See Appendix 
D2) and was in the Buffalo Lake District. Austin, 
the Rev. F.C.: Unpublished letter, March 17, 1953* 
Mr. Austin, who is the present rector wrote: ’’The 
Parish of St. Monica was actually formed on January 
29, 1895 .... 







26. 

On the 29th of July, the building was opened by 
Archdeacon Cooper of Calgary, assisted by the 
Reverend H. Goodman .... 

”About the time the church was built the Dominion 
Government was making grants of land to new mission 
churches . . . Walter Parlby made application for 
the grant on May 29 5 1897? and the grant was conceded 
in July. It comprised 4o acres, surrounding the 
present church property. As a direct result of the 
land boom that flourished just prior to World War I, 
land values around Lamerton . . . suddenly shot up, 
so most of the 40 acres was subidvided, and 115 lots 
sold to one Charles H. Wisenden over the period 1911- 
1913« This gave the church an endowment of $11,500 
which is now administered by the Diocese for the 
benefit . . .of the churches comprising the present 
Lamerton Mission.” 

6 . Kenway, C.B.; Unpublished letter, March 20, 1953. 

See Appendix Dl, p. 119. 

7. Quoted from ”The Countrywoman” in The Grain Growers 1 
Guide , May 15? 1918. 

8 . See Appendix D2. Haunted Lakes is approximately 
five miles southeast of Dartmoor. 

9-10. These stories were told to Mrs. Parlby by her 
husband. 

11. Parlby, Mrs. Irene; ”X Shall Never Forget”, a radio 
broadcast given over Radio Station C.J.C.A., Edmon¬ 
ton, February, 1938. 

12. There is an old Indian legend connected with the 
name of the lake. According to the story, the 
spirits of some natives who were drowned in a cer¬ 
tain spot appear at the same time each year. 

13. See Appendix Dl, p. 119. 

l*f. Parlby, Mrs. Irene; Unpublished letter, April 10, 

1952. 

15. Austin, The Rev. F.C.s Unpublished letter, March 30, 

1953. 


16. The Alix Free Press , January 2h y 1952 

17. Chapter Three, pp. 32, 33. 




. . • . 

- . . . ' 
■ . 

. 

. . . 

, 

, . , 

' 






. ; . . ' . 

. 

. 


. 

. 

. 


, . 


, 


; . 










. • • 

, 






. 


. 








27- 


CHAPTER THREE 

The United Farm Women of Alberta 

About the time that the Province of Alberta 

was created in 1905, movements toward organization 

began among some of the settlers. These were good 

omens, for "not only was Alberta relatively backward 

as a wheat-producing province, but it also lacked as 

representative and as coherent a provincial farmer*s 

organization as that of the Manitoba or Saskatchewan 

1 

Grain Growers 9 Associations. 99 The Canadian Society 
2 

of Equity was formed in 1905 by settlers who had 
recently migrated to the Edmonton district from 
Dakota and Nebraska, where they had been members 
of the American Society of Equity- This was followed 
in the same year by the Alberta Farmers 1 Association, 
some of whose members had belonged to the old Terri¬ 
torial Grain Growers* Association in the district of 
Alberta. From 1905 to 1908, both organizations 
worked to extend their membership and influence 
throughout the province- Efforts toward unity began 
as early as 1906, and in January, 1909? the two 

groups amalgamated to form n The United Farmers of 

5 

Alberta; Our Motto, Equity. 99 The Grain Growers * 








































. 



























. 

■ 


































28. 

6 

Guide was adopted as the official organ of the new 

7 

body. Almost at once, the U.F.A., as the organiza- 

<Xi> 

tion became known', increased its membership and in¬ 
fluence. It was interested chiefly in economics and 
politics where the interests of the farmers were most 
involved and It exerted what pressure it could on the 
provincial and federal governments. "From the outset 
. . . the provincial government was always ready to 
listen to its executive, and at least one provincial 
cabinet minister usually attended the annual conven¬ 
tion to explain and defend the governments policy. 
Federal authorities were equally ready to recognize 
its role as the official organ of rural demands. When 
Laurier made his famous tour of the West in 1910 he 
held an interview with James Bower, president of the 

U.F.A. and the acknowledged spokesman for the organ- 

8 

ized farmers of Alberta." 

In common with other grain growers* organi¬ 
zations, the U.F.A. attempted to impress upon the 
Dominion Government the need for tariff reduction, 
passage of the Canada Grain Act, and financial aid 
for livestock marketing. In the province it was in¬ 
terested in the introduction of direct legislation 
that included the initiative and the referendum; it 




















• * 




■ 






* - 




. . 


. 


♦ 














































. 










. 









29. 

wanted hail insurance, more rural credit aid, and a 

co-operative elevator company. In 1912 it passed at 

its convention a resolution in support of women’s 
9 

suffrage. It continued a program of education or 
indoctrination by which it endeavored to convince rural 
people that organization was the key to an improved 
economic status for farmers. 1 ** 

It should be mentioned at this point that 
the United Farmers of Alberta, in common with all 
Western Canadian farm organisations, had a dual back¬ 
ground. In it was a general intermingling of the ideas 
of American agrarianism with those of British liberalism 
and co-operation. The assessment of the influence of 
the one as against that of the other remains an inter¬ 
esting and provocative field of discussion. For example, 
one might ask: whence came the idea of women’s parti¬ 
cipation in Canada’s western farm associations, and 
especially in Alberta? Was it from America or from 
Britain? The writer does not know but a few facts are 
worth recording. 

In 1873j according to the constitution of the 

11 

Patrons of Husbandry (or the Grange), provision was 
made for the inclusion in the organization, with full 



1 













. 






























a 


- 






. 









* 














■ 










30 


membership rights, of the wives and unmarried daughters 
12 

of farmers. Likewise, when the Order came to Canada 

and a Dominion Grange was formed, the declaration of its 

principles stated that sex distinctions were to be 

wholly eliminated and that one of the aims was ”to 

inculcate a proper appreciation of the abilities and 
13 

sphere of women”. Though the Grange was declining 
fast by 1900, it may have had a widespread influence 

lb 

because it had had branches in many parts of Canada. 

15 

The Patrons of Industry and the Farmers’ Association 
16 17 

of Ontario as well as the United Farmers of Ontario 

left women out of their memberships until 1918. Not 

so on the prairies. By 1912 the Crain Growers’ Guide 

began to tell farm women to organize for the betterment 

18 

of themselves and the farming industry. Two years 
later the Saskatchewan Women’s Grain Growers’ Associa¬ 
tion was formed, the first farm women’s organization 

19 

of its kind in Canada. In 1913 the United Farmers 

of Alberta amended its constitution so that women 

20 

could enrol on equal terms with men. Consequently, 
a sprinkling of women attended the next annual conven¬ 
tion, and in 1915? when a larger group put in an ap¬ 
pearance, the fifty-eight women delegates present 

formed The Women’s Auxiliary to the United Farmers of 
21 

Alberta. The first slate of officers consisted of 

















' 








■* 










































. ' 










. 
















31. 

the following: president, Miss Jean Heed of Alix; 
vice-president, Mrs. C. Rice-Jones of Veteran; 
secretary-treasurer, Mrs. R. W. Barritt of Mirror; 
directors, Mrs. H. C. McDaniel of Whitla, Mrs. J. A. 

22 

Davis, Sr. of Acme, and Mrs. 0. S. Young of Lacombe. 

The Alix club became Local Number One, which it remains 
23 

to this day. 

Mrs. Parlby indicated that, in her opinion, 
some of the credit for the sympathetic attitude to¬ 
ward women should go to the prairie people themselves. 
Many of the men must have had a real appreciation for 
their womenfolk who had come with them into the wil¬ 
derness, and endured more than their share of priva¬ 
tions. The women, in turn, deserved this appreciation 
because of their endurance and courage. She once 
wrote: "Perhaps the greatest and most illuminating 

thing which I found (in the West) was that women were 

24 

useful and important." Here, in a new environment 
she had found for the first time, a feeling of partner¬ 
ship and equality. 

From 1909 on, Mrs. Parlby heard much about 
the United Farmers of Alberta; her husband and father 
were enthusiastic from the beginning. She recalls that 












: ' . - 
- 












< • 










) 

















i ‘ • 

. 

. 





32. 

Colonel Marryat had strong convictions about the ad¬ 
vantage of co-operative effort. ”X always remember 
that soon after he came out here, he remarked that he 
could not understand why the farmers did. not get to¬ 
gether and co-operate. I think that it was chiefly 
owing to him that the first U.F.A. local in our dis- 

” 25 

trict was formed. She could have added that her 

husband, who always took an interest in local affairs, 

26 

was the first president of the Alix group. A few 
years later some of the women in the community began 
to think of an organization for themselves. The 
story of their first club is as follows. 

Women had become numerous in the Buffalo 

Lake District. Many of them remained partial strangers 

to each other because they had to work hard with little 

time for relaxation or opportunity for getting together. 

Farms were scattered; the village was small and except 

for a couple of stores had little to offer in the way 

of a meeting-place when families drove to town in wagon 

or buggy, therefore, when an Englishwoman who was 

visiting my sister Sheila at Haunted Lakes, suggested 

the formation of some kind of women 1 s club, several of 

”27 

us thought it a fine idea -- and set to work at once. 

The Englishwoman was a Miss Mitchell who had come to 




















. 








' 






. , . 














































. 


















, 

. 

-- 




















33. 

the Marryats* after having made a tour in Saskatche¬ 
wan observing women’s clubs. The first meeting, which 
was held in the parish room of the Anglican Church in 
Alix in the spring of 191*+, was rather small. The 
next one was much larger. The women decided to meet 
once a month from then on, and named their gathering 
’’The Alix Countrywomen* s Club”. The president was 
Mrs. R. W. Barritt of Mirror, the secretary, Mrs. Walter 
Farlby. The programs were not exciting but they were 
satisfying; they dealt with feminine things, and over 
the cups of tea warm and lasting friendships were made. 
The next year when the U.F.A. convention was held in 
Edmonton, ’’The Countrywomen’s Club” sent two delegates 
who became president and secretary-treasurer of the 
Women’s Auxiliary to the United Farmers of Alberta. 

(Mrs. Parlby was ill and unable to attend). The Alix 
club affiliated itself with the new organization and 
as stated earlier, became Local Number One. 

In January 1916, Mrs. Parlby went as a delegate 
to the U. F. A. convention in Calgary. There to the 
Auxiliary she read a paper entitled ”Women’s Place 
in the Nation” in which she emphasized that woman’s 
chief role is that of homemaker. Later than week, to her 















'' 














■ 


' 




















. 

. ■ 


. 0 , 




■ 



— ■ 



, 


- • ! 




. 






. 












. 


, 

















34 . 

surprise and somewhat to her consternation, she was 
elected provincial president. In this way, and all 
unwittingly, she made her entry into public life. 

Mrs. Parlby set herself an immediate task. 

She had never liked "auxiliaries" so she attempted to 

change the status of the organization of which she was 

now the head. When successful, she was happy to see 

the association renamed "The United Farm Women of 
29 

Alberta". She points out that "the change did not 

occur as a natural sequence of events nor as a part 

of ordinary procedure, but required a great deal of 

persistence and patience on the part of the Auxiliary 

before the men realized the value of accepting the 

women*s branch as an integral part of their organiza- 

30 

tion with equal privileges", including those of 
conducting its own affairs, setting up its own local 
unions, and of its executive members having a place 
on the U.F.A. Board, Mrs. Parlby remembers with ap¬ 
preciation the advice and encouragement given to the 

37 

women by Henry Wise Wood who, that same year, had been 
elected as president of the "United Farmers", 

In June of 1916, Mrs. Parlby and Mrs. Barritt, 
the secretary-treasurer, undertook their first organi¬ 
zation tour. Previous to this, they and other members 


































. 



















































, , . 





















. 




35 


of the executive had sent out letters through the 
U.F.A. locals urging women to organize. In addition 
they had sent notices and news items to the Grain 
Growers 1 Guide , They went where requested by people 
who were interested in forming locals. They travelled 
to Calgary, Nanton, Macleod, Craigmyle, Delia, and 
Stettler. Often they had difficulties, but nearly 

32 

always they were rewarded by enthusiasm and kindness. 

It is regrettable that stories and records of some of 

the early incidents did not find their way into the 

. . , oftLu.ewj. , , t 

original files, A or have been lost by the passing of 

a number of pioneer members. Later, other officers 

and many of the rank-and-file did further organization 

work. Generally speaking, however, the leaders were 

Mrs. Parlby, Mrs. Barritt, and Mrs. H. E. Spencer, 

who was vice-president in 1916 and a prominent U.F.W.A. 

33 

worker. Steadily the branches increased though there 

was no ^mushroom growth”. In 1918, the membership 

3>+ 

stood at about 1450, and in 1920, 4-004. 

From the outset, the association had broad 
foundations. Its aims were educational and social. 

It meant to increase and broaden the knowledge of farm 
women, to meet the pronounced need for social contact, 
and to co-operate with the U.F.A, on all matters 
affecting the welfare of rural people. In 1916, once 










. 
















/ 










' 












■ 










. 

- 

. 














• 44 








36 


the status of the U.F.W.A. had been definitely estab¬ 
lished, the first committees were formed to deal with 
Health, Education, and Young People*s Work. In the 
next two years, additional committees were set up on 
Legislation, Horticulture, Social Welfare, Home Econo- 

35 

mics, and Co-operative Effort. In 1920, the pro¬ 
vincial conveners of the various committees prepared 
bulletins which were sent every month to each local 
in order to ?, better acquaint members with important 

issues of the day, and to serve as a basis for in- 

36 

telligent discussion. tf 

A year or so after its beginning, the U.F.W.A. 

played a prominent part in activities that resulted 

in the building of municipal hospitals, the appointing 

of public health nurses, improvements in child welfare, 

37 

and revisions of the courses of study in education. 

For example, the Municipal Hospitals Bill, assented to 

in April, 1919? was drafted by a group that met in the 

iCing Edward Hotel, Edmonton, and included Mr. Lamb, 

later Deputy Minister of Health, Mrs. Parlby, Mr. H. W. 

38 

Wood, Mr. Pace Sheppard, and Mrs. Barrltt. Mrs. Parlby 
who was, for several years, the health convener of the 
U.F.W.A. (as well as president) was a diligent 
leader in the agitation that led to the introduction 


1 ■ - 

, 

i ,'. \ )0 

■ 

• . 

. 

■ 

. 

.... 



37 


of obstetrical nursing in outlying areas where no 

39 

doctor was available to women during childbirth. 

After every convention a delegation from the U.F.W.A. 
waited upon the provincial cabinet before whom they 
placed their requests and resolutions. 

To the Department of Extension, University 

of Alberta, and especially to Mr. A. E. Ottewell, the 

director, and to Miss Jessie Montgomery, the librarian, 

the members of the U.F.W.A. ox^ed much. Both were 

enthusiastic from the first c\>oat the new venture and 

40 

sent out extensive program material. Mr. Ottewell, 

in August, 1916, had organized at the university the 

first rural leadership conference, "for teachers, 

ministers and leaders of rural community organizations 
4l 

of all kinds”, and when the U.F.W.A. began to dis¬ 
cuss plans for the formation of junior groups, he was 
deeply interested. From its first years, the women’s 
organization had encouraged junior activities; it had 
helped with school fairs and community clubs, and it 
was anxious to make things more interesting for farm 

b2 

young people. Finally in 1919, at the joint annual 
convention, the Junior United Farmers of Alberta was 
organized, which became a recognized part of the whole 
movement with its own officers and programs. The 




■ 


.... 

. 

. 

- . * . ' " ' ‘ ‘ .. . r ■ 

, 

















. 






.... 








. 

' 









. 





38. 

first convener was Mrs. R. B. Gunn, an able and en¬ 
thusiastic worker from Paradise Valley who worked hard 
in the establishment of branches throughout the province 
An interesting phase of junior activities was the Farm 
Young People*s Week held each summer at the University 
of Alberta, Edmonton. For this, Mrs. Parlby deserves 

*+3 

most of the credit. She was convinced that an annual 
conference at the university would have tremendous value 
After receiving the approval of the U.F.A. Board, she 
interviewed university authorities, who were delighted 
to co-operate. The Farm Young People*s Week, first 
held in June, 1919? has continued to the present, and 
has gained a very definite place for itself in almost 
every rural community in Alberta. For the university 
this is a fine thing. "Hundreds of young people who 
would have had no opportunity of ever getting to the 
university, are brought into contact with a new world. 
They . . . build up a spirit of good-will towards the 
university which could be built up in no other way." 

For the boys and girls the conferences have educational 
value, and by establishing contact with the university, 
arouse the desire within some of them to return to study 
for a degree. 

The United Farm Women of Alberta attained 
recognition nationally as well as provincially. Its 












. 












. 


. » 






. 












fc 



. 





. , . 


. 






























39 . 

president, Mrs, Parlby, was called upon to engage in 
a rather wide field of public work which included: 
attendance at a Dominion conference of women held in 
Ottawa in February, 1918 at the Prime Minister's re¬ 
quest in order to further war work; giving to the 
federal government at their request, advice on the 
question of women's immigration; membership on the 
Board of Governors of the University of Alberta; and 
official positions on the Canadian Council of Agri¬ 
culture and in the Alberta Red Cross Society, 

Mrs. Barritt served on the National Council of Edu¬ 
cation, and Mrs, Gunn, who later succeeded Mrs. Parl¬ 
by on the Board of Governors, represented the Canadian 
Council of Agriculture at the Pan-American Congress 
of Women held in Washington, D.C. Other farm women 
served on various boards throughout the Province and 
Dominion. 


Something needs to be said of the social 
side of the organization which may have been as impor¬ 
tant as anything else within the U.F.W.A. Out on the 
homesteads and farms there was monotony and isolation, 
with restricted opportunities for recreation and the 
development of social activities. Women needed to 
get together to talk over problems, to relax over 
cups of tea, to help in community activities, and to 
















, ' 
























■ 











, 


























.... 
























40 


feel they were part of something worthwhile. The 
U.F.W.A. met these needs. By its monthly meetings and 
other social and cultural get-togethers, it lessened 
in part some of the loneliness that was common to 
farm life. Moreover, by providing outlets for creative 
talents, it brought to the front a surprising number of 
fine and capable people. It must be emphasized that 
the rural associations in their local communities made 
deep and lasting impressions on the ordinary lives 
of their members. 

The annual convention was the highlight of 

45 

the year. Apparently, each one was carefully planned. 

It was held for a week in January either in Edmonton 

or’^Calgary and in conjunction with that of the men. 

It might be interesting to note a few agenda. In 

1918, in addition to official addresses, there were 

papers on rural schools, social service, and young 

people’s work. In 1926 some of the reports were about 

the organization and work of the League of Nations, 

child welfare clinics, the Provincial Training School 

at Red Deer, the Mother’s Allowance Act, and immi- 
46 

gration. The convention of 1932 heard addresses 
that dealt with pre-school education, changes in the 
Old Age Pensions Act and the Child Welfare Act, the 
success of the Northern Dairy Pool, horticulture, and 





Canadian art. Each year the executive arranged for 
prominent speakers, including a representative of 
the government, to address the delegates. Entertain¬ 
ment in the form of dinners, musicales, and the like 
provided pleasant diversion. 

In a hook which outlined the history to 192*+ 
of the various farmers 5 movements in Canada, the 
author wrote in complimentary terms of the work of 
the women*s organizations in the West. His words are 
especially applicable to the U.F.W.A.: "From the 
outset . . . their achievements have been noteworthy. 
In the wider field of endeavor their best work has 
probably been done in connection with questions of 
public health and rural education. When the women*s 
organizations arose, facilities for procuring medical 
aid in many parts of the grain country were of the 
scantiest, a situation which has been vastly remedied 
through their efforts. . . . Again, with tangible 
results they have advocated the institution of child 
clinics, medical inspection in the elementary schools, 
and segregation of the mentally defective. On account 
of the alleged tendency of doctors to throng to the 
cities, the public health committee of the Alberta 
section have even suggested a nationalization of the 


. 

. 

. 

' 






. 










. 

' 






, 


. 










, . . 

' 












■ 

■ 






























medical profession. . . . They have striven to secure 

more highly qualified teachers .... Moreover the 

women 1 s section has "been in the vanguard of the forces 

fighting for the temperance cause. They have . . . 

taken a strong stand in defence of the property rights 

of women .... Many of their locals have embraced 

the advantages of having travelling or permanent 

libraries; some have engaged in co-operative trading; 

others have been busy fostering community effort; 

while all have supplied their farm women members with 

*+7 

programmes of an . . . inspirational value.* 1 

In 1920, Mrs. Parlby resigned as president. 
She said: "The organization has reached a stage when 
its own momentum will help to carry it along, the 
difficult days of arousing interest and establishing 
the position of the organization are over, and I feel 
I can . . . leave all active work in it to those who 

48 

are more capable of carrying on than myself." Per¬ 
haps better than anyone else, she knew that there was 
much talent among the membership at large; she had 
been thrilled over and over again by the eagerness 

and efficiency of many farm women with whom she had 

49 

worked. As for herself she would continue to belong 
to her own local and help there whenever she could. 












.... 

. r 


. 












■ 

0 , . , 

■ p, " • 














... 
















. 


. 


* 0 . 

She had contributed a great deal to the 
U.F.W.A. which, in turn, had done much for her. It 
had brought her out of a sheltered home life where she 
had been content with her family, books, and garden; 
it had brought to light some of her fine gifts, es¬ 
pecially those of public speaking, writing, and a 
capacity for leadership and organization. Furthermore, 
it permitted her to know many people whom she might 
never have known in any other way. Most of all, per¬ 
haps, it made her feel that she had contributed in 

a meaningful way to the development of Western Canada 

50 

which she loved. Someone who knew her well pointed 
out that Mrs. Parlby became president when the farm 
women were timid and unsure of themselves, and her 

51 

confidence and poise encouraged and inspired many. 

Her culture and charm were valuable assets in the new 

organization where she worked hard and imparted to 

52 

others her enthusiasm and faith. After she was 
elected to the Legislature in 1921, she was chosen 
as a cabinet minister chiefly because she was one of 

53 

the best-known women in Alberta. 

After the political victory of the U.F.A. 
in 1921, the women*s organization continued to expand. 
It had wise and capable leadership under Mrs. M. M. 
Sears, Mrs. R. B. Gunn, Mrs. Amy War f, Mrs. R. Price, 










, 










' 











, 





1 . - 































. 


r 






. 








54 


44 . 

Mrs. Winnifred Ross and others. In 1936, the United 
Farmers of Alberta left the political field, but 
remained keen and progressive in all its other acti¬ 
vities. Finally, in 1949, it agreed to amalgamation 
with the Alberta Farmers* Union under the name of the 
Farmers* Union of Alberta (F.U.A.); the women’s sec¬ 
tion is called the Farm Women’s Union of Alberta 
(F.W.U.A.). The present total membership is appro- 

55 

ximately 21,000, of whom about 3?100 are women. 

While there is less need for social activity, since 
a good deal of the rural isolation is gone, there 
remains much to be done in the fields of education 
and promotion of co-operatives. 

Thus the work that began in 1915 continues 

to this day. The farm people can take pride in the 

history of their organizations, and many of the 

women remember Mrs. ^arlby and other founders with 

56 

deep appreciation. 


1. Patton, Harold S.s Grain Grow e rs* Cooperation in 
Western Canada ? Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 
1928, p. llT. 

2. The original name in early 1905 was The American 
Society of Equity; this was changed toward the 
end of the year. 













45 . 

3. Patton, Harold ,'S.: Grain Growers 8 Cooperation in 
Western Canada ^ p. Il4. 

4. Ibid ., p. lib , 

Wood, Louis Aubrey: A History of the Farmers * 
Movements in Canada , Toronto, Ryerson Press, 1924, 
p. 17** and p. l8l. The Territorial Grain Growers’ 
Association originated at Indian Head, in the dis¬ 
trict of Saskatchewan, in December, 1901. It 
spread westward into the district of Alberta and was 
an influence in the formation in March, 1903 of the 
Manitoba Grain Growers’ Association. 

5. Ibid., p. 201. 

6. The Grain Growers’ G uide , published monthly in 
Winnipeg appeared in June, 1908. It was the 
official organ of the Manitoba Grain Growers’ 
Association, but it .was financed and managed by 
the Grain Growers’Company. The latter, which had 
been organized in Winnipeg in July, 1906, was a 
grain-marketing co-operative owned and operated by 
western farmers® Ten years later it amalgamated 
with the Alberta Farmers’ Co-operative Elevator 
Company to form the widely-known United Grain 
Growers, Ltd. 

The Grain Growers* Guide, as the official organ of 
air Western farm organization, was perhaps the best- 
known publication among the rural people of the 
prairies. It became a weekly in August, 1909® Its 
name was changed to ’’The Country Guide” in 1928, and 
it is yet the official mouthpiece of the United 
Grain Growers, Ltd® 

7® Grain Growers’ Guid e , June 26, 1918. 

8. Ralph, William Kirby: Henry Wise V/ood of Alberta ^ 
University of Toronto Press, 1950. p.32. 

9. Ibid ., p. 46. 

10. Sharp, Paul F.: The Agrarian Revolt in Western 
Canada, Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 

p. w. 

11. Wood, Louis Aubrey: A History of the Farmers ’ 
Movement in Canada * pp. 21-28. The Patrons”"of 
Husbandry was formed in Washington, D.C., on 
December 4, 1867. In 1872 it began to sweep 



























46 . 


through the United States where it extended into forty- 

one states, and penetrated into Quebec by way of Vermont. 

It seems to have been the most powerful of American agra¬ 
rian movements, even though it was non-political. 

12. Ibid ., p. 28 . 

13. Ibid ; pp. 40-49. The Dominion Grange was formed in 
London, Ontario, in June, 1874. It was the first 
strong Canadian farmers’ organization. 

14. Ibid ; p. 69 . 

15. Ibid ; pp. 109-112. The Patrons of Industry which 
was chiefly an agrarian organization with political 
and economic aims, was founded in Michigan in 1887 
from where it entered Canada in 1890 . 

16. Ibid ; pp. 148-149. The Farmers 1 Association of 
Ontario was founded in Toronto in September, 1902. 

17. Ibid ; pp. 273-276. The United Farmers of Ontario 
began in Toronto in March, 1914; it was a successor 
to associations which were in a state of decline. 


18. Ibid ; p. 296. 

19. Ibid ; p. 297. 

20. Carter, Eva: Thirty Years of Progress , Calgary, 
U.F.A. Co-operative, 1944, p. 19. 

21. Ibid ; p. 20. 

22. Ibid . 

23. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 12, 1952. 

24. Parlby, Mrs. Irene: ’’The Milestones of My Life” 
Canadian Magazine , June, 1928. 

25. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 13, 1952. 

26 . Interview with Humphrey Parlby, April 15? 1952. 

27. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April l4, 1952. 


28. The full account is found in a pamphlet issued by 
the organization and called Reports and Addresses 
























. 





yrri 

' 


















47 . 


of the United Farmers of Alberta January, 1916. 

29. "The United Farm Women of Alberta” soon became 
known as the ‘’U.F.W.A.” 

30. Carter, Evas Thirty Years of Progress , p. 23. 

31. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, November 10, 

1952. 

32. Information about organization work came chiefly 
from interviews with Mrs. R. B, Gunn and Mrs. Irene 
Parlby. 

33* Interview with Mrs. R. B. Gunn, February 10, 1952. 
Mrs. Gunn, herself a prominent member of the U.F.W.A. 
emphasized the fact that the three women mentioned 
were the real founders of the organization. 

34. These figures came from pamphlets entitled Reports 
and Addresses of the United Farm Women of ATFertaV 

19167“ 1917 , 1918, 191971920. 

35. Information about the initial work of the U.F.W.A. 
was obtained by interviews with Mrs. R. B. Gunn 
and Mrs. Irene Parlby, and by use of the pamphlets 
mentioned in the previous reference. 

36. Carter, Eva: Thirty Years of Progress , p. 29. 

37. Interviews with Dr. M. R, Bow, August 4, 1952, 
and with Mr. R. G. Reid, July 16, 1952. 

38. Carter, Eva: Thirty Years of Progress , p. 26. 

39- Interview with Mrs. R. B. Gunn, February 10, 1952. 

40. Ibid. 


41. Cameron, Donalds History of the Farm Young People 8 s 
Week at the University of Alberta ^ Department of 
Extension, University of Alberta, 1932, p. 2. 

42. Interview with Mrs, R. B. Gunn, February 10, 1952. 

43. Cameron, Donald: History of the Farm Young People 1 s 
Week at the University of Alberta , p. 3* 


44. Ibid: 


p. 7. 


















* 


' . 




48 


45. Information about conventions was taken from 

the pamphlets Reports and Addresses of the United 
Farm Wome n of Albert a, 191& - 1934. 

46. At this convention, Mrs. Parlby, then Minister 
Without Portfolio, spoke on the topic "Education 
for Peace". 

47. Wood, Louis Aubrey: A History of the Farm Movement 
in Canada , pp. 298, 299. 

48. Reports' and Addres ses of the United Farm Women of 
Albert aT 1920, p. B¥. ‘ 

49. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 12, 1952. 

50. Interview with Mrs. R. B. Gunn, February 10, 1952. 

51. Spencer, Mrs. H. E.: Unpublished letter, August 5> 
1952. "Mrs. Spencer was a prominent U.F.W.A. worker 
for many years. 

52. Ibid . 

53. Interview with Mr. J. E. Brownlee, January 2, 1953* 

54. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 13? 1952. 

55* -be information regarding membership was obtained 
from the F.U.A. office in Edmonton. 

56. Interview with Mr. Henry Young, September 15 ? 1952. 












CHAPTER FOUR 


Minister of the Crown 


From its inception, the United Farmers of 

Alberta was interested in politics as well as in 
1 

economics. Its representatives often discussed rural 

problems with members of the provincial government, 

and co-operated with those of other farm organizations 

on the prairies in exerting pressure upon the Dominion 

2 

cabinet for tariff and grain-marketing reforms. The 

U.F.A. belonged to the ’’Canadian Council of Agriculture ’ 1 

which, since 1909 ? co-ordinated and publicized the 

activities of Canadian farmers from Ontario to the 
3 

Rockies. In 1912 it saw clearly the value of organ¬ 
ized political pressure when, chiefly as a result of 
agrarian demands, the Conservative Government in Ottawa 
passed the Canada Grain Act 5 the Act was a landmark 
in Canadian agriculture because it created a Board of 
Grain Commissioners to supervise and regulate the grain 
trade. In Alberta there was a ’’tacit alliance” be¬ 
tween the organized farmers and the Liberal adminis- 

5 

tration. For example, the provincial government in 
1913 passed laws which set up the Alberta Co-operative 
Elevator Company, and permitted the initiative and 
referendum; in 1915 it enacted a Hail Insurance Bill 








- 

* . . 


















' 




. 








50. 

followed the next year hy acts establishing female 

suffrage and liquor prohibition; from 1917 to 1919 

it passed measures which dealt with the formation of 

rural credit societies to handle short-term loans, and 

6 

brought into being a Health Department. All this 
legislation was connected directly with requests which 
the farmers had been making since 1909. 

During World War I, agrarian discontent 

spread slowly across the prairies into Alberta. It 

had been present in Manitoba since 1900 when the farmers 

complained bitterly about the inadequacies of transpor- 

7 

tation facilities and grain marketing methods. It was 
aggravated by the defeat of reciprocity in 1911? Borden 1 s 
continued hostility to rural demands for freer trade 
with the United States, and the increasing costs of 
farm agricultural production which were out of propor¬ 
tion to the rise in farm income. Gradually? the con¬ 
viction grew among the western farmers that "federal 
political parties were run for the benefit of the 

privileged few"? and that it was hopeless to look for 

8 

reform from either the Conservatives or Liberals. The 
alternative, in the minds of many, was political action 
by the grain growers, an idea which was opposed by 
Henry Wise Wood? president of the U.F.A. since 1916? 






















































ft ■' 


•• : r 




























51 


who believed that the strength of the farmers lay 

in organized co-operation through which economic 

reforms, the primary aim of the wheat producers, 

9 

might come the sooner. Mr. Wood's convictions 

found favour with the United Farmers which set to 

work with a will to increase its membership. Then, 

in July 1916, in Swift Current, Saskatchewan, the 

politically-inclined Non-Partisan League was organized 

10 

and within five months had moved into Alberta. "The 
sharp class-consciousness of the League, and its advo¬ 
cacy of public ownership of essential agricultural 
services, such as elevators, and of the agricultural 

processing industries, such as flour mills, recommended 

11 

it to many farmers." The League made rapid headway 
in southern Alberta, and when in October 1917, a pro¬ 
vincial election was held, two of its candidates, 

Mrs. Louise C. McKinney of Claresholm and James Weir 
12 

of Nanton won seats by substantial majorities. It 
was apparent that among some of the farmers, the 
desire for more political action was increasing. 

After the end of the war, the wide disparity 
between prices of farm products and of manufactured 
goods continued. As rural indebtedness increased, 
western farmers grew more restless and discontented. 





52. 

At the U.F.A. convention in Calgary in January, 1919, 

a resolution in favour of political action in the federal 

field was introduced and passed unanimously. It provided 

for the calling of conventions hy the locals in each of 

13 

the twelve federal constituencies in Alberta. The 
resolution was hacked strongly hy the United Farm Women 
of Alberta which was convinced of the need for more 
political activity. The Grain Growers’ Guide which 
reported the constituency political conventions of that 
summer, noted that nine of the twelve vice-presidents 
elected at U.F.A. constituency conventions were women, 
among whom was Mrs. Parlhy. The paper stated: "Mrs. 
Walter Parlhy needs no introduction . . . for she is 
perhaps the most devoted exponent of the farmers 1 move¬ 
ment that the whole movement possesses. Until the last 
convention (January, 1919) when the U.F.A. decided to 
take an active part in political affairs, politics were 
distasteful to her. At that time she said: f If our 
political movement is to he a success, we must hold our 
ideals high, we must eliminate self-interest and put in 
its place self-sacrifice; we must eliminate the place- 

seekers, office-hunters, and grafters within our own 

14 

ranks, and only he satisfied with the best.* " 

In July, 1919, a provincial hy-election was 
called in the Cochrane riding where, for the first time, 












v- v ' 


'■ l 






■ 


■i. --cio‘.v/.' - m: . 




. 


‘ 

, - 


. 

. ":r, •• i- v^-^: 

: ' 

. 



53 . 


the Liberals and leaders of the U.F.A. came into 
open conflict. The agrarian candidate, Alexander W. 
Moore, defeated his Liberal opponent, and brought wide 

15 

publicity to the farmers’ unrest in Alberta. The 

U.F.A. however, had not formally endorsed political 

action on a province-wide basis; this was done at the 

annual convention in 1921, when a resolution was carried 

declaring ’’that this convention ... do recommend the 

adoption of this (political) action in every provincial 

16 

constituency.” 

That summer, in June 1921, a federal by-election 

took place in Medicine Hat. The U.F.A. nominated 

Robert Gardiner who defeated his Conservative opponent 

17 

so decisively that the latter lost his deposit. 

Mr. Gardiner was the first of a group of capable men 
who represented Alberta in the House of Commons for 
fourteen years and included among others, H.E. Spencer, 
E.J. Garland, Alfred Speakman, W.T. Lucas, G.G. Coate, 
and William Irvine. 

Before the Medicine Hat campaign was over, 
Premier Stewart called a provincial election for July 
11. The U.F.A., which had established organizations 
in only sixteen of the sixty-one provincial ridings, 






■ 

. , , 








* . . 


. 

. 

. 












. . 




* 




, 

. . 




. , 




. 




9 *. 


hurriedly set in motion plans for completing the organi¬ 
zation of the rural constituencies. By nomination day 
in July, the farmers had placed forty-eight candidates 
in the field, and in the election shortly afterward, 
surprised all of Canada by winning thirty-nine seats 
in a House of sixty-one. 

As mentioned earlier, the rural women were 
keen for political action. Mrs. Parlby, whose constit¬ 
uency was Lacombe, planned to help in any way she could. 
One day in June she was called to the telephone and 
someone asked her if she would stand for nomination. 

She wrote about it afterwards: "I did some hard thinking. 
Had I the right to let down the women who had worked so 
hard for equal political rights with men? I decided it 
was my duty to allow my name to go up, if only to make 
the men realize that women are, after all, a fairly 
important section of our population. And, there was the 
comforting thought that the matter would end there. My 
name might be put up, but one of the men would receive 
the nomination of course. When the final vote was 

taken I found myself the farmers’ candidate for my con- 

18 

stituency. I didn't know whether to laugh or to cry.” 

Throughout most of the province, the campaign 
19 

was strenuous. The Liberals reminded the rural elec- 














. r ' 










, 








































































torate of the impressive list of provincial acts 
which had been passed at the request of the farmers’ 
associations. The premier himself was personally 
popular with the farmers who did not oppose him in his 
own constituency. Government supporters pointed to the 
development of Alberta since 1905 ? and stated? with 
some justification? that this development was due in 
large measure to the policies of the provincial admin- 
istration. The Conservative party was split into two 
factions and had disintegrated to such an extent that 
it ran candidates in very few constituencies. The 
U.F.A. did not assail greatly the government’s record. 
It stressed the need of economy in administration? the 
abolition of the patronage system? the extension and 
improvement of educational facilities especially in 
rural areas? a stricter enforcement of prohibition? 
stronger attempts to obtain control of the natural 
resources, and encouragement of co-operative efforts 
in handling farm products so as to reduce the costs of 
production and distribution. It favoured the setting 
up of a Highways Commission to look into methods of 
establishing a sounder policy with regard to provincial 
roads, and. it stated its belief in proportional repre¬ 
sentation and the preferential ballot as well as in 
direct legislation such as the initiative, referendum, 
and recall. A fact that cannot be stressed too empha- 














. 














. 












. * . 


















- 




. 














■ 
















. 





56. 

tically is that the United Farmers of Alberta had no 


vision of winning the election in 19215 it hoped that 
its supporters would elect a number of farmer repre¬ 
sentatives who would express in the Legislature the 

needs of rural people more sympathetically and forcibly 

20 

than had been done before. Henry Wise Wood had pre¬ 
dicted that his party would win approximately twenty 
21 

seats. 

In Lacombe the campaign was bitter. The 
Liberal candidate in the two-way contest was William 
F. Puffer, a rancher and business man, and an exper¬ 
ienced politician. He and his adherents fought hard; 
not only did they stress the achievements and platform 
of their party, but they dealt in personalities as well. 
Mrs. Parley recalls that the Liberals tried to raise 
doubts about her patriotism by pointing out that in 
1899 she had gone to England for the birth of her son. 
She remembers further that she was opposed chiefly on 

the ground that as a woman, inexperienced in politics, 

22 

she was unfit to legislate. She was aided immea¬ 
surably by the U.F.A. constituency association in the 
Lacombe riding which planned times and places of 
meetings, and took care of local advertising. In 
addition, she received general counsel and support 
from her campaign manager, Mr. C. Wolferstqn of Alix. 













■ 


















. 




■ 




















































. 

. 
















• 































. 





. . . 
















57. 


The central U.F.A. office in Calgary arranged for 
speakers from other parts of Alberta, as well as for 
campaign literature. Perhaps the hardest part of the 
whole election was the necessary travelling from one 
country point to another because the roads were very 
inadequate, especially in the rural districts. Some¬ 
times, meetings were unavoidably late; one time 
Mrs. Parlby arrived at a country schoolhouse after 

eleven o’clock to find the building filled with loyal 
23 

farm people. She was encouraged (and at times sur¬ 
prised) by the extent of rural enthusiasm. She found 
to her relief that making numerous political speeches 
was not as strenuous as she had expected. Because of 
her long residence in the province and her work in the 
U.F.W.A. she was well-known in the majority of communities 
in her constituency. Her expenses were met chiefly by 
donations at meetings, picnics, and the like; there 

24 

were no U.F.A. campaign funds at that time or later. 

Mrs. Parlby must have been a somewhat unusual type of 
candidate in that her British reserve prevented her from 
being hearty or mingling easily with all classes of 
people. At any rate, she defeated Mr. Puffer and thus 
began a political career which continued until 1935. In 
1926 she was opposed again by W. F. Puffer ; and ; in 1930 
by J. A. Mackie, who was backed by the Conservatives 
and Liberals. 


































■ 






t 

























, . * 

, 



, , 



























58. 


After the election, the U.F.A. members of the 
provincial house met in Calgary with the executive of the 
organization for the purpose of choosing a premier. It 
is likely that Henry Wise Wood who had not contested a 
seat, but who had been the dominant and best-liked figure 
among the farmers since 1916, was the first choice of 

25 

the caucus. According to a recent book, Mr. Wood de¬ 
clined the premiership which was then offered to Herbert 

26 

Greenfield, the member for Westlock. Mr. Greenfield 

accepted, and began immediately to select members of his 

cabinet amid dire predictions in the press that the 

farmers "would lead Alberta into financial ruin and into 

27 

political sovietism." On August 13? 1921, when the 
new government took over, the cabinet appointments were 
as follows? Premier, Provincial Treasurer, and Provin¬ 
cial Secretary: Herbert Greenfield; Attorney-General: 
John E. Brownlee; Minister of Public Works: Alexander 
Ross; Minister of Agriculture and Health: George Hoad- 
ley; Minister of Education: Perrin Baker; Minister 
of Railways and Telephones: Vernon Smith; Minister of 
Municipal Affairs: Richard G. Reid; and Minister With¬ 
out Portfolio: Mrs. Irene Parlby. 

Mrs. Parlby accepted her appointment in much 
the same spirit in which she had accepted the U.F.A. 
nomination in Laeombe: it was her duty to the women of 
the province and especially to those with whom she had 
















. 










. 








- 







' 



























. 









































* 












, 













59. 


worked, to take an active part in public administration. 

She thought too, that in the cabinet she could exert 

her influence to further legislation relating to social 

welfare, education, and health, which she had stressed 
28 

in the U.F.V.A. When Mr. Greenfield had asked her to 

become Minister Without Portfolio he had stated that 

if she were given a portfolio she would have to go back 

to her constituency for re-election, and since she had 

experienced a hard campaign, he did not want her to go 

29 

through that again. He wished her to be in the cab¬ 
inet because of her proven ability as an organizer of 

the U.F.W.A., her wide education, and her prominence 

30 

among the women of Alberta. Perhaps if Mrs. Parlby 

had been A aggressive she might have been offered a 

portfolio. T^at may be wishful thinking, however, for 

in 1921 the women of the province had had the franchise 

but five years, and even today it is unusual for a 

woman to reach the best positions in almost any line 

of endeavour. Then, as always, Mrs. Parlby was deeply 

attached to her home. Had she taken upon herself the 

administration of a department, she would have had to 

live in Edmonton, perhaps over the protests of her family. 

Recently she wrote: n I am not at all sure I would have 

sacrificed our home life for the sake of a portfolio . . 

. . However I did not have the necessity of facing that 

31 


problem.” 








■ 

■ 




' 








. , . 








- 




,, .» , t , . 








. 










: 


, 










, 












, . 

. 








60. 

The year 1921 was a busy and exacting time. 

In her new position in the government, Mrs. Parlby was 

expected to attend all important cabinet meetings. This 

necessitated a good deal of travelling between Edmonton 

and Alix. In the fall of 1921 “Dartmoor M was rented and 

32 

a smaller farm named ’’Manadon" was bought. Though 
the new place, which was nearer the village, was managed 
more easily and efficiently, it lacked some things which 
the family missed very much: the lake, the birds, and 
the seclusion. Throughout the constituency Mrs. Parlby 
met delegations, spoke at local meetings, and listened 
to numerous requests, chiefly for roads. After every 
session of the legislature she travelled over the 
riding, explaining what had been done and indicating 

33 

what was planned for the future. 

As her experience and knowledge of government 
increased, so did her value to the cabinet. Since she 
was chosen n primarily as representing the women of the 
province and to bring the woman*s viewpoint to the dis¬ 
cussion of governmental affairs”, she was consulted on 
all important matters affecting women and children or 

any other business in which it was known she was deeply 

3*+ 

interested. Thus, In the shaping of policy she must 
have played a part out of proportion to her status as 
a minister without portfolio. Those of her cabinet 












' 



















*• 


. 

























' 


• 
















' 





















* 









• • ' > i ] 


61 . 

colleagues whom the writer had opportunities to inter¬ 
view, spoke with appreciation of her calm, balanced 
judgment, her well-informed mind, and her liberal 
humanitarian attitude . They mentioned that never was 

she domineering or verbose, and always she was regarded 

35 , 

as an f, equal among equals”. l/itn her position in the 
government, however, Mrs. Parlby was not always con¬ 
tent; she was often lonely and frustrated because she 
felt she had lost the independence of a private member, 

and in loyalty to the cabinet, she was at all times on 

36 

the defensive for the administration. 

The U.F.A. government directed the affairs 
of Alberta from 1921 to 1935? during which time it had 
to contend with generally harsh economic conditions. 
’’The decade of the twenties in Alberta was marked by 
a sharp and short downturn in prices, income and. un¬ 
employment in 1921; by several years of depressed 
economic activity until 1925? broken by one good crop 
in 1923? and by intermittent and unspectacular re¬ 
covery until 1929. After the setback of 1921, Alberta 

largely marked time until the middle of the decade and 

37 

prosperity was not sustained when it did come.” In 
1930 when the ’’great depression” arrived, the province 
was hit hard by declining prices and increasing unemp- 





‘ : Y Y '• 
















. nrf L - 




. f: it • r. 1 i - v 


* 




vvvtv,' e ,am - vo;;» 

■. ta 1 


. 






t v" I,-vo : .V: 










..... , ; . 




> . . )J ’ J , .L L > v •.•4./)/; i '•'> \j ’J .) 

•~ 1 -'U J...*. ■’i.i. "r\i h-j.i _ 1 Ojji}. O'* r 

■ ’ - ' : • i ii* .v : - . .1 ■■ . - •;,* j 


■ ■ ' v , * ■’' i • ■"•• .• ; •. .r- ) ~ t 




. 


J L- : >J ; .[ ■ L. j . . A JiVJ.J J 








\ r 


r . :-„C j 


* -- »,'i) iu.L J . £ 












:,i u <■■. : ja -. 0; % 






62. 

loyment. Only in 1936 were there definite signs that 
conditions were improving, hut by that time the U.F.A. 
passed from the political scene. 

From the outset when it found it was faced 
with M uncontrollable expenditures", such as ’’interest 
on the debt, advances to railways for the purpose of 
maintaining service . . . and the completion of public 
works projects begun in previous years’’, as well as the 
implementation of seed grain acts and relief acts be¬ 
cause of low prices and the drought, the new government 

38 

was forced to adopt economies. This policy was a 

disappointment to many rural supporters of the U.F.A. 

administration which one author describes as "competent’ 1 

39 

and "increasingly conservative". Since this thesis 
is not primarily concerned with the U.F.A. administra¬ 
tion, references to legislation should be brief and 
general. Over a period of fourteen years some good 

Concerned vji 

laws were passed; most, however, were^problems of 
everyday business. The outstanding achievements seem 
to be the followings Natural Resources Act, 1930; 
sale of the Alberta Government Railways, 1929; Debt 
Adjustment Acts, 1923 to 192*+; Wheat Fool Act, 1924; 
Public Highways Acts, 1924 to 1935; Government Liquor 
Control Acts, 1923 to 1934; acts relating to health, 








' . i : J 














. 























. ' 














. . . 





























, 










. 

■ 










63. 

welfare, and the status of women, and the reorganiza- 
tion of accounting techniques and procedures. 

The transfer of the natural resources from 
the Dominion to the Province was made by an agreement 
of December, 1929. It was the result of protracted 
negotiations begun years before by the Liberals, and 
it met with general approval. Though financial returns 
were not large for some years, the recent widespread 
oil and gas discoveries have pointed up the importance 
of the transfer. 

The sale of the provincial railways in 1929 
to the Canadian Pacific and Canadian National railway 
companies enabled the government to get rid of a huge 
provincial burden, and to secure money which eased con¬ 
siderably the financial strains of the depression. The 
purchase price was i25,000,000 o 

The Debt Adjustment Acts were protective 
measures aimed at keeping the farmers on the land at a 
time during the depression when many grain growers were 
faced with loss of their holdings. They were the first 
of their kind in Canada, and proved a success chiefly 
because, as a result of the acts, voluntary agreements 
between creditors and debtors give many a farmer a H new 


lease on life.” 










? 

' ' 

. 


* . 


' 






■ 













■ : 

. 



































64 . 

By the Wheat Pool Act of 1924, the govern¬ 
ment incorporated a new producer co-operative, the 
Alberta Co-operative Wheat Producers, Ltd., through 
which some 29,000 farmers that year contracted to sell 
their wheat. Today, the Pool operates 488 elevators 
and is owned by its 55jOOO members. The Highways Act 
laid the groundwork for a long-range system of main 
and secondary roads, in spite of the economy and re¬ 
trenchment. By the Liquor Control Acts that were passed 
as a result of a referendum in December, 1923, in which 
a majority of Albertans voted against liquor prohibi¬ 
tion, the sale of intoxicants was placed under provin¬ 
cial administration. By these acts, the government 
hoped to lessen the immorality and lawlessness that 
stemmed from the illegal manufacture of liquor. Any 
financial gains that accrued went into the provincial 
treasury. In 1924 the government instituted a re¬ 
organization of accounting techniques and procedures. 

The system that was evolved proved so successful that 

it became a model for public accounts in other pro- 
42 

vinces. 

Mrs. Parlby was in favour of all the above 

43 

legislation which she considered sound and progressive. 
Though she took an active part in cabinet meetings, pro¬ 
posed legislation which interested her most, was re¬ 
lated to public health and welfare, education, and 






- 











■ 

. 






















. 

j :•» j r, s 











• 









. 






















, 















" 
























• 



























65. 

protective laws for women and children. Her views on 
such matters were considered carefully and she consul¬ 
ted often with the attorney-general and the ministers 
of health and education. 

In the legislature, nearly all the hills 
were introduced hy ministers of specific departments. 
Therefore, Mrs. Parlhy did not sponsor many measures. 
Newspaper reports concerned with the Alherta sessions 
of 1921 to 1935 did not mention her frequently. As 
a rule, the premier, ministers of departments, and 
opposition leaders were the ones who made the headlines. 

The Honorable George Hoadley, Minister of 
Health, brought in numerous bills whose aim was to 
increase health services throughout the province. 
According to an official of the department, now re¬ 
tired, Mrs. Parlby was a ”tower of strength” to 
Mr. Hoadley whose proposed legislation she supported 
strongly. By a series of Public Health Acts from 
1923 to 193^5 travelling and operative clinics as 
well as dental clinics were established in eleven 

Were 

rural districts, the public health nursing services A in- 
creased, and the first Health Districts at Red Deer and 
High River were organized; pre-natal clinics and men- 





















. 












■ 












. 
















* 










66 . 

tal health clinics were instituted; health education 
services were expanded to include films, radio talks, 
and lectures. In 1923, the Ponoka Mental Hospital 
was the first institution of its kind in Canada to begin 
treatment of general paralysis of the ‘insane by inocu¬ 
lating patients with malaria. In 1925? the Central 
Alberta Sanitorium of Calgary came under provincial 
control and stimulated anti-tuberculosis work. The 
next year, Mr. Hoadley introduced an amendment to the 
Medical Profession Act designed to prevent medical 
practitioners from setting themselves up as specialists^ 
unless fully qualified as such in the opinion of the 
University of Alberta, This law has aided in raising 
the qualifications generally of Alberta doctors. Sev¬ 
eral Mental Defectives Acts provided for additional 
accommodation at mental institutions, more humane treat¬ 
ment for patients, and a start in post-discharge inspec¬ 
tions. A highly controversial bill was the Sexual 
Sterilization Act which applied to certain types of 
insane persons. Mrs. Parlby remembers that she heard 
from scores of people who had strong views about the 
bill’s morality. Municipal Hospitals Acts encouraged 
the establishment of small hospitals by permitting, for 
the first time, the imposition of a special tax for the 
support of small hospitals In rural districts. Mrs. 
Parlby had a genuine respect for Mr. Hoadley whose 


. 

































' 








. 

■ 








- 


















. 
























67. 

vision and perseverance she admired. She feels that 
much was accomplished from 1921 to 1935 in health ser¬ 
vices, and that more would have been done were it not 

46 

for the financial strains of the depression. 

Numerous hills pertaining to education came 
before the legislature. The long list of amendments to 
The School Act implies that the Honorable Perren Baker 
was an industrious official. Among some of the improve¬ 
ments and innovations were: the extension of teacher 
training, the establishment of the first rural high 
schools, and the beginning of correspondence courses 

1+7 

in public school subjects. In 1929 the Minister of 
Education introduced a new School Act which was a 
radical departure from anything done before in the 
province. The bill provided for the equalization of 
taxes and a fixed schedule of salaries in afllarge divi¬ 
sions comprising a number of districts. It was with¬ 
drawn because of the clamour of opposition from school 
trustees and others who resented any loss of local 
autonomy, and was not made law until the U.F.A. had 
passed from office. Mrs. Parlby gave the bill her 
support; as a matter of record the U.F.W.A. at one 
of its conventions in the early 1920‘s, had advocated the 
need of large administrative units for the operation of 

48 

schools. Not only was she concerned with the improve- 



























< 












* 








' 




. .. ' •: >r 













68 . 

ment of education facilities generally, she was hope¬ 
ful that because of better schools in rural areas, 
more young people would remain on the farms. 

The story of legislation affecting women and 
children in Alberta goes back to the time of the Liberal 
administration which passed female suffrage and dower 
acts. From early years, the U.F.W.A. and other interes¬ 
ted groups stressed the need for additional laws to in¬ 
crease the legal rights of women and the protection of 
children. Generally speaking, the men of the province, 
and especially those in the U.F.A. were sympathetic 
with these wishes 5 thus, it is not surprising that the 
farmers' government passed numerous laws which not only 
benefitted minors but helped to equalize the status 
of the sexes. Mrs. Parlby took a leading part in the 
enactment of such legislation. In 1922 she introduced 
a bill requiring minimum wages for women which was the 
first of its kind in Alberta, and though withdrawn, was 

the forerunner of a broader and fairer bill three years 
1+9 

later. The following session she sponsored the 
Children of Unmarried Parents Act which permitted an 
unmarried mother to obtain financial assistance by 
legal means from the father of her child. The bill 
aroused furious debate especially among the opposition, 
but it passed easily and became a landmark in social 






























. 






















. 






, 

... 










... 


















■■ 

■ 




































■ • 

■ 












50 


69 . 

Other welfare measures which 


legislation in Alberta. 

Mrs. Parlby supported were the Child Welfare Acts, the 
Official Guardian Act, the Alimony Orders Enforcement 
Act, the Domestic Relations Act, and the Maintenance 
Order Act. She spoke on behalf of Amendments to the 
Dower Act which the attorney-general introduced in 
1926, whereby a wife was guaranteed the use of a home¬ 
stead during >herhusband 1 s lifetime, and the ownership 

51 

of furniture and other chattels after his death. 

She defended strongly the Sex Disqualification Act which 

increased the security and bargaining power of women, 

52 

married or single. Additional welfare measures were 
the Mothers’ Allowance Act, Old Age Pensions Act, and 
the Unemployment Relief Act, which, though not as 
generous as hoped for, were helpful in bringing a 
measure of relief to the needy. It is interesting to 
note that among thirty-two acts (in 19*+5) which affected 
women and children in Alberta, eighteen had been passed 

53 

or amended by the U.F.A. government. There is little 
doubt that in the enactment of most of these bills, 

9* 

Mrs. Parlby was an effective and consistent advocate. 

Every session of the legislature was livened 
by good speeches from both sides of the House. Apparently 
there was no dearth of good debaters. The member from 
Lacombe spoke rarely and only when she felt she had 




70 


something definite and relevant to say* Whenever she 
did take the floor she was listened to with interest 

55 

and respect. In 1922 a newspaperman wrote: "If all 

orators spoke with the culture . . . and sincerity of 

the Honorable Irene Parlby, the world of public affairs 

would be the better off . . . . she is in every way a 

56 

rare treat to listen to.'* On the few occasions when 
she participated in debate, she sometimes surprised her 
listeners by sharp and forceful criticism. During the 
session of 1927? Mr* Joseph T. Shaw, the Liberal leader, 
attacked the government severely; among his remarks 
were acid comments about the travelling clinics, the 
Committee on Women’s Rights (of which Mrs. Parlby was 
the chairman) and a text book authorized by the Depart- 
ment of Education. Mrs. Parlby replied:. She referred 
sadly to Captain Shaw as a Sir Galahad in whom she once 
had high hopes but who had returned to the same old 
fold (Liberalism), saying the same old things. She 
wished to assure him that the Committee on Women* s 
Rights had not been "wasting its time and the country’s 
money basking in the sunshine of the Pacific Coast under 
pretense of bringing back brand-new legislation from the 
United States”, that the members ’’did not pursue the 
glorious abandon of the Liberal Party with regard to 
the provincial treasury”, though it was her opinion 
that ’’the women of the province were as worthy of 











' 






. . : V' :‘: r: ,; 

. 




» 







' 




. 




: 


: - :; / 









* 










* 









. 




















■ 









■ 



, ’■ 



• 




71. 

governmental expenditures as grain and livestock upon 
which no government hesitated to spend freely.” She 
had noticed that the honorable member had given the 
Liberals credit for aiding women, yet ’’they (the Lib¬ 
erals) had waged a political campaign against a woman 
on the one and only ground that the candidate, being 
a woman, was neither a responsible citizen nor a fit 

57 

representative of the people.” As for the criticism 

about text books, she questioned the sort of Canadian 

patriotism which ’’shudders when it reads ’The Star- 

Spangled Banner* in a Latin text used in Alberta -- 

always provided anybody could recognize 'The Star- 

58 

Spangled Banner* in Latin, which is doubtful.” One 
reporter said that ”her words tinkled like hailstones 

59 

on a metal roof;” another stated that ’’she adminis¬ 
tered rebuke enough ... to last the member from Cal¬ 
gary the remainder of the session”, and that ”she 

opened a broadside which for intense brevity and point 

60 

has seldom been equalled.” Outside of the legislature 
she tried, as much as possible, to form public opinion. 
With this view she spoke to service clubs and other 
organizations where she came in contact with many 
people who were not connected in any way with her own 
political faith. Her work in Edmonton was lightened 
by close friendships she had made, especially in pro¬ 
fessional and university circles. 
































. 


' 

■ r 


- 


1 




* 1 • 








, . . 





























. 

. 






. • * ■ . 















72 . 


In addition to her cabinet duties, Mrs. Parlby 

undertook other activities on behalf of the government. 

In 1924 she went as an observer to a conference of the 

International Council of Women in Washington, D.C., in 

order to obtain information about women 1 s activities in 

many parts of the world. In 1928, when the premier knew 

she was planning to visit England, he requested her to 

visit Denmark and Sweden with the purpose of studying 

the administration of co-operatives and the methods of 

61 

education in the folk-schools. Mrs. Parlby spent 
several weeks in Scandinavia where she was deeply im¬ 
pressed by the efficient, country-wide administration 
of the Danish dairy and poultry co-operatives. She 
interviewed officials and obtained a great deal of In¬ 
formation which she used to advantage later in lectures 
and articles in Alberta. Co-operation was a subject in 
which she had been very interested from the early U.F.A. 
days, and her experiences in Denmark added to her en¬ 
thusiasm. Upon her return to Canada, she was a speaker 
in Regina at a meeting of the Co-operative Societies 
and the members of the Scottish and English Co-opera¬ 
tive Wholesale Societies who were there as visitors. 

She remembers saying that she f, envisaged the time when 
we would not only be marketing our grain and livestock 
through c o-operative organizations, but we would be 
milling the grain into flour in our own co-operative 


* 

• 4 

• • 

1 

. 

. ■ 

- 

■ i:-‘ ■: ' 1 \ ;'■ ' ■ ■■ ■ ■■ 



: v* i r ' "-' c : {!■■■:■ i: ^ IJ / 





. 









! 



. 

■ 


. 

. 






73. 

mills, processing our livestock in our great packing 

plants, eventually selling these products in our own 

stores, and even sending them across the seas to foreign 

markets in our own co-operatively-owned ships,' 1 She 

addeds "We have a long way to go yet before that 

vision comes true, but I feel it will come in time. The 

prairie farmers who had the courage and initiative to 

start their own elevator system, later their Wheat Pool, 

the chain of co-operative dairy pools, and livestock 

marketing organizations, will eventually cover the whole 

field of their activities .... When consumers in the 

cities become more enlightened as to the advantages of 

the co-operative principles from the consumers’ point 

of view, they will set up their own wholesale houses and 

stores. Then we shall have gone a long way towards a 

62 

’Co-operative Democracy’," 

Her report to the government and her addresses 
to the U.F.W.A. and others interested in forming co¬ 
operatives were an impetus to the growth of co-operative 

63 

organizations in Alberta. She had also been impressed 
by what she had seen in the Danish folk-schools, and as 
a result became an early advocate of a more progressive 

6h 

type of education. 

In 1930, Mrs. Parlby was appointed as a Canadian 
delegate to the Assembly of the League of Nations meeting 















65 


7 ^. 

in Geneva. Afterward, while on a visit to England 
after leaving Switzerland, she became seriously ill. 
Though she recovered sufficiently to return to Canada, 
she suffered a relapse in Montreal where she was forced 
to remain for weeks in a hospital. Doctors advised her 
to give up all government activities. When she informed 
Premier Brownlee of this, she was asked to defer a final 
decision until she returned to Edmonton. Later, she 
agreed reluctantly to continue as a member of the legis¬ 
lature and a minister of the cabinet, but she knew she 

could not campaign again or continue much longer in 

66 

public service. She rested at ’’Manadon” but she was 
unable to attend her son’s wedding in January or to be 
present at the 1931 session. The next year she was 
again in the House, carrying on as before, but conserving 
her strength when she could. In July, 193 1+ 9 when the 
Lacombe Constituency Convention met, she announced that 
she would not stand for nomination, that the state of 
her health no longer allowed her to carry heavy duties. 
She said, n I will continue to be a member of the organi¬ 
zation ... as long as I live. My whole-hearted support 
of and sympathy with the U.F.A. movement is not a whit 
diminished by my intention not to again seek nomination 

67 

as a U.F.A. candidate.” The Edmonton Journal , seldom 
a U.F.A. supporter, commented as follows: ”She had to 
shoulder a heavy burden. She was expected to watch all 






75 


legislative and administrative development closely with 
a view to safeguarding the particular interests of her 
sex* This she did most faithfully, and the measures that 
she herself introduced have had a large influence. 

"She has set a high standard in every way for 

Canadian women engaging in political careers to follow. 

It must mean a great deal to have had a pioneer in this 

68 

field of the character of Mrs. Parlby.” 

That summer when Premier R. G. Reid re-organ- 

69 

ized the cabinet after J. E. Brownlee had resigned, 

Mrs. Parity was persuaded to remain as Minister Without 
Portfolio until the election of the next year. In the 
campaign of 1935 she helped when she could, though she 
was not well enough to speak and write as much as she 
wished. She was unaware that the U.F.A. was so close 
to the verge of defeat. 

In Alberta, as in the rest of Canada, economic 
distress was widespread. The depression was then in its 
sixth year. To many people, the U.F.A., which had been 
in power since 1921, seemed incapable of finding a 
satisfactory solution to the difficulties of the province. 
The new Social Credit Party under Mr. Aberhart, with its 



, . 

- 

, 


. 





, 










. 

. 

. ♦ « ' 1 • .. ' S' ^ ■' - 














76 


denunciations of financial interests, its economic 

theory of a "just price", and its promise of a monthly 

dividend, offered hope to a public weary of hardship. 

In vain did the government stand on its record. Social 

Credit swept the province so effectively that not a 

single U.F.A. candidate was returned. In September 

Premier Reid resigned and Mr. Aberhart took office. 

The United Farmers’ participation in politics was at 
70 

an end. 


Mrs. Parlby was content to rest at home, 

surrounded by her family. As she thought over her years 

of service in the government, she hoped that here and 

there she had made some worthwhile contributions to the 

life of the province where she had lived so long. A few 

months before, in May, 1935? the University of Alberta 

had conferred upon her the honorary degree of Doctor 
71 

of Laws. At that time, President Wallace had said: 

"In shaping of the policies in one of the great social 
movements among women in our country, Mary Irene Parlby 
has played a leading part. As second president of 
the United Farm Women of Alberta, she stressed the 
importance of education as the fundamental basis on 
which the social and political structure must be laid. 

As a member of the government, her concern has been 
with social legislation which might achieve a more 



77 . 


equitable distribution of the burdens of life. 

M As the representative of the women of Canada 
at the assembly of the League of Nations, she gave of 
her great abilities in the cause of peace among nations, 
a cause of which her name has become known throughout 
our land. 


"Mr. Chancellor, in presenting Irene Parlby 

as the first woman to receive the degree of Doctor of 

Laws from the University of Alberta, we honour one who 

has already won the high esteem of all men and women 

72 

in the province which she has so signally served." 


1. Rolph, William Kirbys Henry Wise Wood of Alberta ^ 
Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 1950, pp.31-32. 

2. Sharp, Paul F.: The Agrarian Revolt in Western Canada ^ 
Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 19^8; ch.3. 

3. The "Canadian Council of Agriculture", formed in 1909* 
was made up originally of the executive officers of 
the three prairie farmers 1 2 3 4 5 6 associations and the Domin¬ 
ion Grange of Ontario. Later it included also the 
executive officers of the farmer-owned grain companies, 

' The Grain Growers 5 Guide , and the United Farmers of 
Ontario. 

4. Rolph, William Kirbys Henry Wise Wood of .Alberta * p.4l. 

5. Ibid., p. 52 

6. Ibid ., ch. 3* 
















- 









































. 



' 



















78 . 


7. Wood, Louis Aubrey: History of the Farmers * 

Movements in Canada , Toronto, The Ryerson Press, 

1924, pp. 169-177. 

8 . Rolph, William Kirby: Henry Wise Wood of Alberta , 
p. 36. 

9. Ibid., p. 52 

10. Sharp, Paul F.: The Agrarian Revolt in Western 
Canada * pp. 77>78"*" " The Non-Partisan League was 
an agrarian socialist party which was formed 
first in North Dakota in 1915. 

11. Morton, W.L.: The Progressive Party in Canada* 
Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 1950, 
pp. 46,47. 

12. Ibid .* p. 48 

13. Wood, Louis Aubrey: History of the Farmers 1 
Movements in Canada , p. 338. 

14. The Grain Growers 9 Guide* September 17? 1919. 

15. Rolph, William Kirby: Henry Wise Wood of Alberta , 
p. 86. It might be interesting to state that 
during the Cochrane by-election Mrs. Parlby made 
her first political speech. 

16. Rolph, William Kirby: Henry Wise Wood of Alberta * 
p. 96, 

17. Ibid .* p. 98 

18. Parlby, Irene: f5 A While Ago - and Today' 1 , in 
The Canadian Magazine , July, 1928. 

19. Information about the election platforms came chiefly 
from The Edmonton Journal s The Edmonton Bulletin and 
The Grain Growers 8 Guide * June and July, 1921. 

20. Interviews with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 11, 1952, 
and with Mr. R. G. Reid, April 9, 1953. 

21. Rolph, William Kirby: Henry Wise Wood of Alberta * 
p. 101. 

22. In actual fact, Mrs. Parlby had returned to the 
Old Country because of poor health and upon the 






























■» 






■ 

. 

• . • ...... 


■ 






* 

< t . • 


















79 . 


advice of physicians. 

General information about the Lacombe campaign 
came from interviews with Mrs. Parlby, April, 1952, 
and from T he Lacombe Western Globe , June, July, 1921. 

23. Interview with Mr. Humphrey Parlby, April 13, 1952. 

24. The writer received this information from all the 
U.F.A. supporters she interviewed. 

25. Rolph, William Kirby: Henry Wise Wood of Alberta , p.102. 

26. Ibid ., p. 102 

27. Sharp, Paul F. s The Agrarian Revolt in Western Canada * 

p. loo. 

28. See ch. 3 . P* 38. 

29. Statutes of Alberta , 1932, ch, 4s an amendment to 
the "Legislative Assembly Act" in 1932 eliminated the 
necessity of ministers of departments going back to 
their constituencies for re-election. 

30. Interview with Mr. R. G. Reid, July 16, 1952. 

31. Parlby, Mrs. Irenes Unpublished letter, April 10, 1953. 

32. "Manadon" was named after the Parlby home in Devon, 
England. 

33. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 12, 1952. 

34. Brownlee, J.E.s Unpublished letter, August 5, 1952; 
interviews with Mr. R. G. Reid and Mr. J. F. Lymburn, 
July and August, 1952. 

35. Interviews with Mr. R. G. Reid, July, 1952, with 
Mr. J. F, Lymburn, August 1952, and with Mr. J.E. 
Brownlee, January, 1953. 

/Vf r5 . 

36. Parlby,^Irenes Unpublished letter, April 10, 1953. 

37. Hanson, E.J.s A Financial History of Alberta* 1905- 
1950 * a dissertation submitted to Clark University, 
Worcester, Mass., 1951- p. 220. 

38. Ibid., p. 234 

39. Sharp, Paul F.s The Agrarian Revolt in Western 
Canada * p. 166. 































' 








» 




























, 






* * 
















































80 . 


40. For detailed information regarding the acts men¬ 
tioned here, the reader can refer to Statutes of 
Alberta , 1921 to 1935; the tables found in the 
pink section of Statutes of Alberta , 1935? will 
give the location of each act. A further reference 
is E. J. Hanson’s Financial History of Alberta, 190 5- 
1950 , chapters 6 and 7. 

41. Interview with Miss J. McCallum, April 8, 1953. 

42. Hanson, E.J.: A Financial History of Alberta , 
1905-1950 , p. 95; interview with Mr. J. E. Brown¬ 
lee, January 2, 1953* 

43. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 13? 1952. 

44. Interview with Dr. M. R. Bow, April 7? 1953* 

45. Additional references regarding health legislation 
are found in the general summaries at the beginning 
of each Report of the Public Health Department , 1921 
to 1935* These were made available to the writer in 
the office of the Deputy Minister of Health, Govern¬ 
ment of Alberta, Edmonton. 

46. Parlbyf Brener Unpublished letter, April 3? 1953® 

47. Interview with Mr. E. C. Stehelin, May 10, 1952. 

48. Reports and Addresses of the United Farm Women of 

Alberta , January, 1921. ~ 

49. Minimum Wage Act, Statutes of Alberta , 1925? ch. 3® 

50. Interview with Mr. Charles Hill, April 8, 1953. 

Mr. Hill told the writer that Mrs. Parlby often dis¬ 
cussed with him legislation and other matters in 
connection with welfare conditions in Alberta. 

51. The Edmonton Journal , March 30, 1926. 

52. Interview with Mr. J. F. Lymburn, August 11, 1952. 

53® The writer received a copy of ’’Legislation Affecting 
Women and Children in Alberta” which was prepared in 
1945 by the Attorney-General’s Department, Government 
of Alberta, Edmonton. 

54. The opinion expressed here developed from interviews 
with Mr. J. E. Brownlee and Mr. J. F. Lymburn, with 



















81 . 


members of the opposition including Mr. J. J. Bowlen 

and Mr. F. R. Falconer, and with Mr. T. A. Mansell and 

Mr. W. Norman Smith, who reported many of the sessions 

of 1921 to 1935. 

55 . Ibid . 

56. The Edmonton Journal s February 10, 1922. 

57. This referred to the election campaign in Lacombe 
in 1921 and 1926. 

58. The Edmonton Journal s February 15, 1927. 

59. Ibid ., February 15? 1927. 

60. The U.F.A ., February 23, 1927. 

61. At this time there was widespread interest in 
Alberta regarding co-operatives. The U.F.A. 
government encouraged and aided the establishment 
of numerous co-operative ventures. 

62. Parlby, Mrs. Irene; Unpublished letter, April 9, 1953* 

63 . Interview with Mr. Norman Priestley, January 2, 1953* 

64. Mrs, Parlby*s report concerning education in Denmark 
was re-printed in The Alberta Teachers* Magazine , 
March, 1929. 

65. See ch. 5, p* $r. 

66. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 13, 1952. 

67. The Edmonton Journal * July 24, 1934. 

68. Ibid., July 26, 1934. 

69 . Premier Brownlee was a defendant in 1934 in a 
seduction case. He resigned in July of that year 
and was succeeded by the provincial treasurer, 

Mr. R. G. Reid. 

70. Information relating to the Alberta election of 1935 
was obtained from The Edmonton Journal and The Edmon ¬ 
ton Bulletin of June, July and August, 1935, and in 
the columns of The U.F.A. 





















82 . 

71. Similar degrees had been conferred upon Premier 
J. E. Brownlee in 1928 and upon Henry Wise Wood 
in 1929. 


72. The Edmonton Bulletin , May 15? 1935* 











83 . 


CHAPTER FIVE 

Other Interests and Activities 
In reminiscing about her girlhood Mrs, 

1 

Parity once said, ”1 seemed to enjoy everything”. 

That statement reflects something of the varied acti¬ 
vities and interests that have engaged Mrs, Parity*s 
time since 1897. In addition to her work in the "United 
Farm Women of Alberta”, and in the government of the 
Province of Alberta, there are other sides to her 
career that deserve special mention. 

Her chief interests have always been her 

home and family. Of necessity the first years at 

Dartmoor were very busy: she had much to learn about 

running a household and trying to be a successful farm 

wife and mother. She had to use her imagination and 

ingenuity to bring some semblance of comfort and 

attractiveness into the small dwelling. Over the years 

she succeeded in making the cabin, which was enlarged 

2 

gradually, a place of charm and friendliness. After¬ 
wards, when public service beckoned, she tried to 
ensure that her work did not affect the ties that 
bound her to her home. It may be significant that her 
first public address to the "United Farm Women” was 
entitled "Woman’s Place in the Nation”, in which 





























■ 

























. 


, ? v. 













* 






84. 

she emphasized the important role of wives and mothers 

3 

as homemakers and character builders. People who had 

seen Mrs. Parlby in the Legislature and then had occasion 

to visit“Manadon"were often surprised to find that the 

Minister Without Portfolio was hapuiest. in the midst 

4 

of family and garden. 

For fifty-five years, Mrs. Parity’s chief 
hobby has been gardening. In 1897 she sent to England 
for seeds and books and by the following summer had the 
beginnings of a garden on the south slope to the lake. 

She recalls that everyone did not take kindly to her 
effort st one hired man thought she was wasting her 
time. ’’What's the use of it?" he demanded. Since the 
men were too busy to help her, she had to learn by 
trial-and”error, and from knowledge gained through 
reading articles and books about horticulture. Grad¬ 
ually, as her skill developed she became something of 
a local authority. She thinks that it was around 1920 
when she began writing articles about gardening for 
The Grain Growers 1 Guide , She continues even now to 
fill scrapbooks with interesting clippings concerning 
gardening hints. A garden always meant more to her than 
just a piece of ground where one can grow things. Years 
ago she copied a few lines that expressed beautifully 
what a garden could give hers "Everybody needs beauty 





* • 






* 

' 














' 

- 























. 








. 














- 








85 . 


as well as bread, places to play in and pray in, where 
nature may heal and cheer, and give strength to body 

5 

and soul alike.” Each spring and summer her gardening 
occupies much of her time and continues to bring her 
pleasure and relaxation. 

Another hobby is writing. As early as those 

far-off days in India, Irene, with the help of a few 

other teen-agers, edited a small magazine ”just for 

fun”. Not long after she settled in Canada, Mrs. Parlby 

wrote a letter to an English periodical in reply to an 

article which criticized young British immigrants in 

Ontario, To her surprise she received a five-pound 

6 

cheque from the editor as payment. While she was 
helping to organize the U.F.W.A., her first articles 
on gardening appeared in The Grain Growers 8 Guide . 

She wrote about other things as well, such as current 

7 

affairs, homely philosophy, the values of co-operation. 
She alsowote for The Canadian Magazine , The Nor ! -West 
Farmer , The Family Herald and Weekly Star , and The 
U.F.A . Generally, she addressed herself to women, 
though her articles on politics and co-operatives were 
of equal interest to men. In the opinion of Amy J. Roe, 
Home Editor of The Country Guide , ”She (Mrs. Parlby) 
typified and expressed ably the need for beauty in the 


























































• ; . 





















- 














, 






















































... 



















86 


home,. Her idealism, tolerance, and good humour make 

8 

her a valuable spokesman for rural women." Another 

person remarked that "hers was one of the forces that 

9 

kept idealism alive in the farmers' movement." 

In a previous chapter mention has been made 
of Mrs. Parlby's ability as a speaker. Previous to 
1916, she had little idea that she could speak effec¬ 
tively in public. Practise came with work in the U.F.W.A. 
and in the government. Her speeches read more seriously 
than many of her articles, especially when she felt 
deeply. Sometimes she spoke outside of Alberta and. on 

a few occasions when she v/as abroad she addressed 

10 

meetings in the Old Country. Once, while visiting in 
Britain in 1928, she was asked to describe her tour of 
Sweden and Denmark to a Conservative farmers' rally. 

After she had finished her talk one of the officials 
on the platform suggested that she remain in England? 
they might like her to be a Conservative candidate'. 

Her radio work began when she made occasional 

broadcasts, chiefly to farm people, over C.K.U.A., the 

11 

University of Alberta station. In February, 193^? 
she spoke over a nation-wide radio hook-up on the topic? 
"What Might Happen to Canada If the Collective System 
Were Abandoned" in which she discussed the possibilities 






• . 

*. 
































87 . 


of a closer union with either the United States or the 

12 

Commonwealth if the League of Nations were to fail. 

In February, 1938, she took part in a Canadian Broad¬ 
casting Corporation series entitled "I Shall Never For- 

13 

get”, when she told of pioneer days as she knew them. 

The next month she participated in another series called 

"Whither Democracy"; at that time she differed sharply 

with Premier Aberhart of Alberta who was on the same 

ik 

program. Her listeners were divided in their reac¬ 
tions. The General Manager of the C.B.C. wrote her 

15 

personally to compliment her. Others felt she had 
spoken too strongly against the Alberta Government. 

One man from Toronto who said that he often listened 
to Father Coughlin and Huey Long, was convinced that 
Social Credit was the correct solution to the world’s 
ills and requested additional propaganda. It was 
apparent that he had written to the wrong speaker. 


Later that year on December 11, 1938, Mrs. 

Parlby appeared on a radio forum which discussed "The 

16 

Position of Women in Canada", B, K. Sandwell, dis¬ 
tinguished editor of Toronto Saturday Night presided, 
while the other speaker was Madame Therese Casgrain of 
Quebec. In the Alberta election of 1940 Mrs. Parlby 
made her last political broadcast in support of the 






v « " : v r \ 


» 

t , 


» ■ , 





■ 

. 




: r r.?‘ •„ - ■■,; i - f W 1 '■ 

‘ ' 

• V 

i ■ ' r 

/ -(> .i • iiL 

: i • ■ 

i'iir. 

’ 

•• ® & ' ■' ”'.r 

' D : 

' 

' ' '• 







88 


’’Independent Citizens’ Association”, which was opposed 

to the Social Credit Party. In March, 1952, while 

visiting in Edmonton, she spoke over Radio Station 

C.F.R.N. to the farm women of Alberta in response to a 

18 

request by the Canadian Federation of Agriculture. 

Again one heard the clear, rich, well-modulated voice, 
and many a person must have been carried in memory to 
years gone by. 

Apparently her radio work met with considerable 

approval. One letter from a prominent business leader 

mentions one of her broadcasts as ”most admirable in 

form, matter, and delivery . . . made a great impression 

19 

on everyone who heard it.” Another referred to her 

20 

presentation as ’’logical, reasonable and dignified.” 

Still another from a man well-known in radio work, had 

this to say: ”Your all too rare broadcasts in the past 

have given so much delight that everyone who has heard 

21 

you is anxious for you to speak again.” Mrs. Parlby 

enjoyed receiving letters including those which expressed 

disagreement with her views, and she tried as much as 

possible to answer requests for information, or to 

22 

elaborate further on a controversial point. In her 
writing, speaking, and broadcasting, she received help 
and encouragement from her husband who read her work 
carefully and was a constant source of suggestion. 








. 








* 








. 




' 

. . . * 

* 


















• . : • I 

- 

: f . . . . 

u 







89 


She wrote and rewrote whatever she was preparing 
because she seldom felt satisfied with the first few 
attempts. 


In August, 1927? Mrs. Emily Murphy, a police 
magistrate in Edmonton, invited four women to her home. 
Her guests were Mrs. Louise McKinney, ex-M.L.A., Mrs. 
Henrietta Edwards, author of a book entitled ' Laws 
Relating to V/omen f Mrs. Nellie McClung, a well-known 
writer, and Mrs. Irene Parlby. Mrs. Murphy felt that 
it was time for the Canadian Parliament to decide whether 
or not women could be appointed to the Senate. The 
feeling in Ottawa was to the effect that women could 
not, that the word ’’persons” in the clause in the 
British North America Act dealing with Senate appoint¬ 
ments, referred to men only. Mrs. Murphy had found out 
that any five people, British subjects, could petition 
Parliament for the interpretation of any act. Accor¬ 
dingly, she requested her guests to sign a petition 
with her. She felt that she had chosen four of Alberta’s 
best-known women whose prestige and ability would help 
in interesting the general public in the interpretation 
of Clause 2b of the B.N.A, Act. The petition, duly 
signed, went to Ottawa where on April 2*+, 1928, the 
Supreme Court of Canada ruled that women were ineligible 
for Senate appointments since, in the opinion of four of 


















. 





















♦ 



, 

. 






. 




i ''' - . ■ ! •:' • * .. -J 







. 



90. 

the five judges, women were not "persons”. Shortly 

afterward, the five Albertans appealed to the Privy 

Council, where the case was heard in October, 1929* 

Alberta which was the only Canadian province to aid the 

five women, sent its Attorney-General, Mr. J. F. Lymburn, 

to assist Mr. N. W. Rowell, the chief counsel. On 

October 18, the Privy Council gave its decision: it 

overruled the Supreme Court of Canada and declared that 

23 

women could be appointed to the Senate. On that day 
The Edmonton Journal ran a headline which read: "They're 
All 'Persons' Now", under which were pictures of 
Mrs. Murphy and her four co-appellants. 

On June 11, 1933? a memorial plaque donated 
by the Business and Professional Women of Canada, was 
unveiled in the lobby of the Canadian Senate. It was 
placed there in honour of the five Albertans who "caused 
steps to be taken resulting in the recognition by the 
Privy Council of women as persons eligible for appoint¬ 
ment to the Senate of Canada." 

Mrs. Parlby is emphatic in saying that her 
part in the now famous case was small and that the credit 
is Mrs. Murphy's. However, since the result was a mile¬ 
stone on the road toward greater political equality of 




. 







. 






' : : . .. . • V. 


j 






■ 











. 










- ' ... . ■ 






' 

' 1 



















' ‘ . 




















91 


the sexes, each signatory of the petition deserves 
recognition from the women of Canada. Mrs. Parlby 
regrets that Mrs. Murphy was not appointed the first 
woman senator and that so few of her sex have reached 
the Upper House. She is rather disappointed that 
Canadian women in general have taken little advantage 
of the opportunities offered in the political field, 
but for this she thinks there are several good reasons: 
the comparatively short time that women have had the 
franchise, the emphasis that so many women place on 
their domestic and social life to the exclusion of 
wider interests, the difficulty of obtaining strong 
support from women for those of their sex who do try 
to attain public office, and the small encouragement 
given to women by so many men who appear to regard the 
political field as their own "private preserve". She 
is hopeful that in the near future more Canadian women 
will awaken to political consciousness and take their 
places in greater numbers in the councils of their 
nation. 


Another memorable occasion in the life of 
Mrs. Parlby was her appointment as a delegate to the 
League of Nations. One summer day, August 13, 1930, 
she received a telegram from Prime Minister R. B. Bennett 
which read: ”1 would be greatly pleased and I believe 








■ 





■ 


- 






















■ 

. ' 







. 












92 . 


the Canadian people would be gratified if you could 
permit me to name you as one of our representatives 
at the Assembly of the League of Nations which convenes 

25 

on September Fifth . . . Mrs. Parlby at once Communi¬ 
tyis, 

cated with^Honorable George Hoadley, Minister of Health 

and Acting Premier, who advised her to accept. This 

she did with a great deal of pleasure. Her appointment 

met with general approval. She heard from Sir Robert 

Borden who was chief delegate; his letter read in 

part: "I learn from the Press this morning that you 

are to be one of the Canadian representatives at the 

approaching meeting of the League of Nations Assembly, 

It gives me great pleasure to know that you will be 

26 

one of the party.” The Vancouver Provinc e of 
August 15, 1930, in commenting upon the selection of 
delegates, stated: “Premier Bennett*s appointment of 
Mrs. Parlby is a gracious gesture which will certainly 
do him no harm in the goodwill of his early days of 
office. It is a good appointment on its merits; it 
is a compliment to the women of Canada ... it is 
evidence that the Prime Minister is strong enough to 
go outside the ranks of his own party to find the 
right choice for the right occasion.* 1 The Edmonton 
Journal spoke of her appointment as a “well-deserved 
honour”, mentioned her “unique position in public 
life”, said that she was a “close student of interna- 












. 


















' 

















93 . 


tional problems’ 1 , and that ”of her qualifications 

27 

for the duties she is undertaking there is no doubt.” 

The Alberta Cabinet was especially pleased as were the 

28 

farm organizations in the province. 

On September 7? 1930, Mrs. Parlby was in 

G e neva where she joined Sir Robert Borden and the 

other delegate. Senator Joseph Chapais, The three 

substitutes were Honorable Phillippe Roy, Canadian 

Minister in Paris, Dr. Walter Riddell, Canadian Advisory 

Officer at Geneva, and Colonel George Vanier, Canadian 

Representative on the Permanent Advisory Commission. 

Altogether, fifty-two nations sent representatives to 

the Assembly which met for the first time in its new 

c 

quarters in the Bailment Electoral. Mr. ‘Zumeta of 
Venezuela, President of the Council, presided over the 
first meeting and delivered the opening address. Among 
the delegations were some of the foremost men in inter¬ 
national affairs whom Mrs. Parlby observed with intense 
interest. She was impressed most of all by Premier 
Aristide Briand of France, Sir Eric Drummond, Secretary- 
General of the League, and Lord Robert Cecil of Great 
Britain. Some of the other personalities she remembers 
particularly are Eleutherios Venezelos of Greece, 

Count Albert Apponyi of Hungary, Dr. Julius Curtius 




















' 

































, 

■ 
















' 

, : 








9 ^. 


of Germany, Nicholas Titulesco of Rumania (who was 
elected President), and Susan Lawrence, Arthur Hender¬ 
son, and Hugh Dalton, all of Britain. The work of the 
Assembly was divided among six committees which were 
set up shortly after the president i^as chosen. Sir 
Robert Borden was elected chairman of the Sixth Com¬ 
mittee, which dealt with political questions. Mrs. 
Parlby sat on the Fifth Committee which was concerned 
with social questions, and the First Committee which 
dealt with legal and constitutional problems. To her 
regret she did not speak in the Assembly but she made 
an address in the Fifth Committee. As she heard reports, 
and listened to debates and discussions, she was im¬ 
pressed by the amount of work which the League was 
attempting to do. She began to appreciate the scope of 
the tremendous difficulties that stood in the way of 
international trust and co-operation. Yet she felt that 
little by little the League of Nations was building 

machinery for the prevention of war and the easing of 

29 

tensions throughout the world. 

Mrs, ^arlby states that her experience in 
Geneva was one of the highlights in her life. As she 
saw people from many nations trying to solve common 
problems she thought she glimpsed the beginnings of 
real world government and the working out of a great 




















* 

. 

■ 








. 






■ 













































95 . 


ideal. Afterwards when she was home in Canada she 

spoke whenever she could before clubs and over the 

radio about the achievements and hopes of the League 

of Nations, and the need for collective security and 

30 

international goodwill. 


1. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 12, 1952. 

2. See photograph No. 4. 

3. Reports and Addresses of the United Farmers of 

Alberta , 1916T ' “ 

4* The Edmonton Journal , June 5? 1926. 

5. The writer found these lines in an undated article 
entitled "Gardener's All " among Mrs. Parlby's 
personal papers. 

6. Mrs. Parlby thinks that the periodical to which she 
wrote was the National Review ^ published in London, 
England. 

7. Some representative titles are: "In the Legislative 
Mirror", May 10, 1922; "Fireside Garden Philosophy", 
March 1935; "The Great Adventure", April 1, 1927? 
which dealt with co-operation. 

8. Roe, Amy J.s Unpublished letter, August 7? 1952. 

9. Interview with Mr. Norman F. Priestley, January 2, 

1953. 

10. Mrs. Parlby remembers speaking in Winnipeg upon her 
return from attending the International Council of 
Women in 1924; she also spoke in Ottawa while on 
her way to Geneva in 1930. 

11. Radio Station C.K.U.A. began operation on a small 
scale in 1923. 




















96 . 


12. The Edmonton Journal s February 19, 1934. 

13 . Murray, Gladstone: Unpublished letter to Mrs. 

Irene Parlby, December 6, 1937* 

14. The Edmonton Journal 1 March 28, 1938. 

15. Murray, Gladstone: Unpublished letter to Mrs. 

Irene Parlby, March 30, 1938. The letter reads: 
“Permit me this note of special congratulation 

on your splendid broadcast on Sunday night. Every¬ 
where I get the same enthusiastic opinion,“ 

16. Buchanan, D. W.: Unpublished letter to Mrs. Irene 
Parlby, October 19, 1938, in which arrangements 
for the broadcast were outlined. Mr. Buchanan 
was a program director for the C.B.C, See Appen¬ 
dix A, p. 103. 

17. Interview with Mr. J. Percy Page, September 20, 1952 

18. See Appendix C, p, 116. 

19. Milner, H* R.: Unpublished letter to Mrs. Irene 
Parlby, March 31, 1938. 

20. Roberts, W. R.: Unpublished letter to Mrs. Irene 
Parlby, April 3, 1938, 

21. Brockington, Leonard W.: Unpublished letter to 
Mrs. Irene Parlby, November 28, 1938, 

22. Mrs. Parlby gave more broadcasts than those men¬ 
tioned here, but the records are not available for 
all, since radio stations seldom keep files on 
their speakers, 

23. Mrs, Emily Murphy was known more familiarly to 
Canadians as ,f Janey Canuck”. She was Canada* s first 
woman police magistrate and a well-known suffragette 
Cleverdon, Catherine Lyles The Woman Suffrage Move ¬ 
ment in Canada , pp. 145-155, 

24. Parlby, Mrs. Irene: Unpublished letter, April 4, 
1952. 

25-26. The original telegram and letter are also among 
Mrs, Parlby*s personal papers. 









. 





97 . 


27. The Edmonton Journal s August 16, 1930. 

28. Interviews with Mrs. R. B. Gunn, February 10, 1952 
and with Mr. J. F. Lymburn, August 11, 1952. 

29. Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, April 11, 1952. 
Parlby, Honorable Irene: "The Great Adventure of 
International Co-operation", an address delivered 
to the United Farm Women of Alberta, January 1932. 

30. At the present time Mrs. Parlby is a staunch sup¬ 
porter of the United Nations Organization. 





98 . 


CHAPTER SIX 
Retirement, 1935 —. 

In the autumn of 1935? Mrs. Parlby began 

to experience, for the first time in several years, 

a feeling of relaxation. Perhaps she had not realized 

before how much she had needed some relief from her many 

duties. She seemed content to have left completely 

1 

the activities of public service* Now and again she 

had a sense of loss for she had enjoyed working and 

meeting with government officials and others in political 
2 

life. However there was much to do on the farm, and she 
hoped to write an occasional article, spend extra time 
with her small grandson, and keep up more easily with 
correspondence. 

The family circle was smaller. Her parents 

had died years before, her sisters had moved away, and 

only one of her three brothers remained at Haunted 

3 

Lakes. Her son with his family lived in the neighbour¬ 
hood as did the Edward Parlbys who had kept their Long 
Valley Ranch along the lakeshore. 

In Western Canada economic conditions improved 
somewhat but not to any large extent. In Alberta the 



















. 






* 

. 






. 


, 










. 




. 














- 


- 


















99 . 


new administration tried to cope with provincial 
problems, and though it disappointed the hopes of 
some of the people, it seemed to retain considerable 
support. Mrs. Parlby continued to belong to the farm 
women*s organization which, though divorced from poli¬ 
ties, remained interested in rural affairs. She found 
time to resume writing, and, as mentioned earlier, 
made some broadcasts. 

During World War II Mr. and Mrs. Parlby ; in 
common with most Canadians, had an anxious time. They 
were concerned about relatives and friends in the Old 

gfbaut 

Country, and,their son,who had enlisted in the King*s 
Own Calgary Regiment and had gone overseas. In 19^5 
when the management of the farm became too heavy, they 
sold rt Manadon ,/ and moved into Alix where they stayed for 
four years. They were not happy in the village for 
never before in Canada had they lived anywhere but in 
the country. 

After the war was over, Humphrey Parlby 

returned from abroad and decided to rehabilitate“Dart- 
n 

moor where the family had not lived since 1921. The 
old house was torn down and replaced by a new building 
on the same location where the original cabin had been. 

k 

There he settled with his wife and two sons and there 

























. 

- 











c r 





, 



. 








. 


























■ 






















100 . 


in 19*+9 he was joined by his parents. 

Walter Parlby who had been in failing health 
for a few years, died in January, 1952. His brother, 
Edward, had predeceased him by six months. Both had 
made their homes in the district since 1890 and had 
lived to see many changes in their adopted country. 

The house at H Dartmoor fl is full of family 
history. Among other things are old photographs and 
miniatures, Oxford rowing trophies, English willow- 
ware, a few pieces of antique furniture, and many books. 
Upstairs in the guest room is a writing desk which 
Mrs. Parlby gave her husband on their wedding day, 
and in a comfortable corner of the large living room 
are the beautiful Fores prints. The wide windows look 
out over the lake which from spring to fall is a safe 
home for the wild birds. Except for the sight of auto¬ 
mobiles along the distant highway, and the sound of an 
occasional aeroplane, the scene is much the same as it 
has always been. Off to the southeast and rising over 
the treetops is the tower of an oil derrick. Perhaps 
a new age has come to the Buffalo Lake District! 

^ j 1 

Mrs, Parlby is happy at Dartmoor among her 
own people. Sometimes old friends visit her and once 












■ t B t 


- 









. 




















. 


. 






, 











101. 


in a while she travels to Edmonton. Since her health is 
quite good she does most of her own housework and con¬ 
tinues her gardening. Her eyes are remarkably young and 
clear, and her mind is excellent; she reads extensively 
and keeps abreast of current news. Once she said, 

"Books and garden seeds are my extravagances.” Her life 
has been full and satisfying, and in the opinion of the 
writer, her achievements and personal qualities merit 
the esteem in which she is regarded. From all those who 
were interviewed came expressions of admiration for 
Mrs. Parlby and her work. Surely it is unusual to hear 
such widespread approval of someone who spent so many 
years in the public eye I Her appointment by a Conser¬ 
vative prime minister as a delegate to the League of 
Nations, and the award to her of an honorary degree by 
the University of Alberta were tributes to the worth of 
the services she rendered. 

Many years ago, when she was thinking about 
the pioneers of the West, she wrote? m We have travelled 
a long way. We have blazed a trail, and we have built 

5 

a road for those who come after us.” These words can 
be applied to Irene Parlby’s own achievements, and to 
those of others like her, who gave generously of their 
talents to the development of Canada. 










> 




. ' 

■ 






■ 




. 









1 . !. 











■ 




















Interview with Mrs, H. Parlby, July 19, 1952. 

Interview with Mrs. Irene Parlby, July 19? 1952. 

Mrs. Parlby*s brother, then living at Haunted 
Lakes was Ulric Marryat, who died in 1950. His 
family has remained in the district. 

Mrs. Parlby*s daughter-in-law is the former 
Beatrice Buckley whose father was the Member for 
Gleichen and the U.F.A. whip in the Alberta Legis¬ 
lature for many years, 

Parlby, Mrs. Irenes *’A While Ago - and Today*. 11 in 
The Canadian Magazine , July, 1928. 


—oo0oo-» 







103 . 


Appendix A« 

THE POSITION OF WOMEN IN CANADA 

Copy of an address given 
by Mrs. Irene Parlby over 
Radio Station C. J 0 C. A., 

Edmonton, December, 1 9 3 8. 

I wonder if you will agree with me, that 
one of the most exasperating characteristics of human 
beings, male or female, is the complacent way in which 
they take things for granted? Most of the worth while 
things in life such as freedom, justice, civil and 
political rights, progress in various fields of social 
betterment, have been won only through years of struggle 
and conflict. The heirs to these things however accept 
them, take them for granted, give them no more thought, 
than they give to the air they breathe, or the sun which 
lights and warms their world. Moreover the majority 
of these complacent people feel neither personal res¬ 
ponsibility for guarding that \Hiich has been won, or 
for working for further progress. 

In Western Canada many rights have been won 
for women over the years. They were won mostly by the 
quiet steady work of the few, aided by the different 
womens organizations which have come into being through 
the last quarter of a century. Because there was no 
such spectacular fight here, as for instance took place 
over the granting of the franchise to women in Britain, 
the winning of these various rights has been perhaps 
accepted in rather casual fashion. The women of the 
West would be astounded hox^ever if they woke up one day 
to find that they no longer possessed civil or political 
rights; that they could not vote in their local or 
provincial government elections, could not hold public 
office of any kind as members of school boards, munici¬ 
pal councils, or legislative assemblies; were debarred 
from equal educational opportunities with men in the 
Universities; found the professions of law, medicine, 
and other avenues closed to them on account of their 
sex; found that as married women they were unable to 
hold property in their own right, control their own 
earnings, or make contracts, that they had not equal 
guardianship rights over their own children, found 
themselves back in fact in the position of inferiority 
and inequality which used to be considered the rightful 
place for their sex. All these things were freely given 


* A 




, 

. 




; 

■' / ’ ", 

’■ o'er. : • - j; : 

, :' ■:: > •>:' .i - i;f 

' . 

. 

■ 




: 

' > 

r . • 


.Trr*v' ' • ••••.' 

■ 








. 








- •' ' 

.' '■ ' 








■ . 






. 










104 . 


or remedied for the women of the West. With regard 
to political equality agitation commenced in Manitoba 
around 1912; the other provinces followed; women’s' 
organizations took the question up, petitions were 
circulated, governments were interviewed. The trumpets 
sounded and the walls of Jericho fell! Since that time 
in Alberta at least, there have always been at least 
one or two women in the legislature. 

The progressive Farm Womens organizations 
in the three prairie provinces, from their inception 
took a strong stand on such questions as the position of 
women, Public Health and Education. The work they car- 
ried on in helping to educate public opinion played a 
large part in the establishment of rural Municipal 
Hospitals, Public Health work such as Child Welfare 
Clinics and Travelling Clinics, the establishment of 
Public Health nurses and especially that splendid Public 
Health District Nursing Service for the fringes of set¬ 
tlement, whose valiant work is far too little known 
except by those who benefit from it. It was to a great 
extent due also to the agitation of women’s organiza¬ 
tions that the public health work of the Province of 
Alberta was finally taken from its rather ridiculous 
position In the Department of Agriculture and dignified 
by a department of its own. 

British Columbia and Alberta Legislative 
Assemblies have recognized the injustice of discrimin¬ 
ating against woman on account of her sex and have 
passed Acts, entitled "The Sex Disqualification Removal 
Act 1 * which provides that H A person shall not be dis¬ 
qualified by sex or marriage from the exercise of any 
public function, or from being appointed to or holding 
any civil or judicial office or post, or from entering 
or assuming or carrying on any civil profession or 
vocation, or for admission to any incorporated society.” 
In these two Provinces also women are eligible for jury 
service. 


In all the western provinces there is of course 
much legislation of a protective character for women. 
Dower Acts giving a wife a life interest in part of her 
husband 1 s property, and in the three prairie provinces 
the right of equal guardianship and control of their 
children in the absence of a court order to the contrary. 






. 






; ■ 




. 





' 



1 


















« 










1 






' 






' 







. 






' 



' 













■ 










■ 






. 





? 

yy. 








At 










■. r , ■ 


r- .. r 








, 















• 



4 





















- 


JL 




. 





v; 


! 








- 










, 



















105 


Altogether I think we may say that the 
position and influence of women in Western Canada 
had advanced considerably over the years. There is 
of course still discrimination, conscious and uncon¬ 
scious. It is very rarely that you find a woman, 
however great her qualifications, in the higher paid 
jobs in the business world, in the educational field 
or in employment generally, and it is certainly a 
difficult thing for a woman to get a nomination at a 
political convention. 

However these fields have belonged unchallenged 
to men for so many centuries, that it will naturally take 
women some time to reach a real equality; they have at 
least broken into political and other lines of endeavour, 
and as a result we have had for years at least a few 
women in legislatures, occasionally a woman police 
magistrate, juvenile court judges, justices of the 
peace, aldermen and women members of school boards. We 
have women practising as lawyers and doctors, women in 
business and some outstanding press women and writers. 

Eternal vigilance of course is needed if women 
are not to lose some of the things they have gained; 
they need indeed to stand on guardl There are still far 
too many women whose mental horizons are bounded by the 
four walls of their homes and their little social acti¬ 
vities. There are still too many who would like to keep 
them content within those boundaries, as a brake on human 
progress. But time and events move on in spite of them 
and gradually more are coming to see that those who would 
stultify the lives of women by holding them to an inferior 
position in civil and political life are doing an ill 
service to society as a whole. 

I wonder if anyone reads "Benjamin Kidd" these 
days. In one of his books published at the close of the 
World War in which he deals with the failure of western 
knowledge and the gathering of world revolutionary forces, 
he develops a theme which should be a great inspiration 
to women to train and qualify themselves to be of greater 
service in the cause of civilization. 

It is impossible in a few words to adequately 
present the argument of his whole book "The Science of 
Power". But roughly, and I quote his own words as much 
as possible - "Man is essentially a fighting pagan who 
has evolved a civilization based on force; that into 




* 

" ■ 

' 

' 

. 

. 

■ • . ■ 

l 

. 

, 

. 

: 





106 . 


all the institutions he has created he has carried 
the spirit of war and the belief that force is the 
ultimate principle of the world. For this reason, in 
the interests of civilization the future centre of 
power must rest not in the fighting male of the race 
but in woman. Man, he contends, despises "the emotion 
of the Ideal, and does not recognize that this great 
force alone is capable of firing a people’s imagination 
to build a civilization not resting on force. The par¬ 
ticular qualities of Woman’s mind, her greater recog¬ 
nition of the power of the ideal and her influence over 
the young make her peculiarly fitted for becoming this 
new centre of power, and he further declares that "the 
type of civilization which first organizes itself around 
this central capacity of woman’s mind will have a stupen¬ 
dous advantage over all others in the coming struggle 
in the world”. 

As women we have achieved an improved status 
in many ways. We have largely taken that status for 
granted. We have not fully made use of it; we have 
not realized our power as a group; nor have we to 
any great extent qualified ourselves to use it for the 
benefit of civilization. 

That great task is still before us. 




Appendix B. 


107 . 


A WHILE AGO — AND TODAY* 
fron T~Oanadian Magazine, July y 1928 
By The Honorable Irene Parlby, M.L.A. 


New ways! New thoughts! New achievements! 

New trails to break for the pioneer! 

Yes, the onset of civilization called for 
different qualities from those needed by the early 
settlers who sailed up the St. Lawrence, r, a while ago”. 

There were still unknown trails to travel; 
there were still adventures for the adventuresome - 
but they were now chiefly adventures into the realm 
of ideas, rather than the blazing of a trail into the 
wilderness. Cultivation of the land must be followed 
by the cultivation of a worthy social and economic system 
of living. 


As settlement increased, and the purely pas¬ 
toral life gave place to a more intensive agriculture; 
as the cattle were driven further and further into the 
foothills, and great fields of golden grain covered 
their old stamping grounds, a new spirit crept over the 
land. 


The old, careless freedom departed. Men grew 
suspicious, less friendly, and there were murmurs of 
exploitation and of rank injustices to the farmer. 
Underground rumblings of discontent were heard, and then 
outspoken words, and spasmodic attempts at organization, 
indifferent and more-or-less isolated parts of our 
Province of Alberta, small and rather vague beginnings 
of organization, but the erstwhile incoherent ideas 
gave way to more definite plans. And so began the 
organization of that powerful group known today 
throughout the length and breadth of Canada as the 
United Farmers of Alberta. 

To our men must be given the credit of 
starting out upon this new adventure. But, just as the 
women had never hesitated to follow their men into the 
wilderness, to share with them its hardships and pri¬ 
vations, so they were equally ready to take their part 
actively, in the new work to be done. Then, too, the 






, • - - ■ ' •’ <; " " 

? ' 1 . - - * . ' *' 

. ' Y:' 

:■ 

' 

" '■ - • : - ■ 


» 

. 

; C .' 









108 


women were feeling the need of organization quite as 
keenly as were the men. For the same, and for yet 
more reasons, such as the need for closer intercourse 
with one another, they wanted a common meeting-ground 
to discuss co-operative effort, for the benefit of 
home and community life. 

The men met over their business, occasionally, 
shipping stock, hauling grain to the elevators, taking 
various trips to the nearest town upon business con¬ 
nected with their work. But the women, busy "Marthas" 
"burdened with many cares" which demanded the utmost 
of their physical strength, had little time or inclina¬ 
tion, in those days (when the automobile was still un¬ 
known), to take long, tedious trips to town. 

Why should they? Why waste the golden hours 
in which work might be done? And what was there to do 
when they got there, save wearily stand and wait, while 
the men discussed their business, and the affairs of 
the nation, with their fellows? So, they mostly stayed 
at home, unless there was a sick neighbor to be nursed, 
or a baby to be helped into the world; and they re¬ 
mained, to a large extent, strangers to each other. 
Organization, they knew, would mean mutual interests 
and less loneliness. 

I realized all this, yet, for myself, I was 
an "Old-Timer". Long years of scant settlement had 
made me very independent of people other than my own 
family. I found happiness in a sunset, or a rainbow. 

I had my family life, my books, and my garden. I found 
content - even excitement - in learning, little by 
little, how to grow, in prairie soil, the flowers which 
I had loved in England; in teaching them to adapt them¬ 
selves to their new environment, as we human settlers 
from the Old Land had learned to do. 

Thrones might totter in Europe; gigantic 
upheavals, physical or human, might take place, but 
I was much more interested in the task of bringing 
safely through the Winter, some perennial sent from 
home to make some corner of my garden "forever England". 
But however selfishly one may love the peaceful security 
of home; however remote one may feel from the world; 
it may happen as it did to me that "some fell clutch 
of circumstance" will reach out and drag one, willy- 
nilly, into a new and strange life and work. 












. 




‘ 




' ‘ 






■ . SJ- 




: ' ' 

•> <; •/ ■ 

t 






. 

: • . 

- 

* 




. 










. 

: ■ ' - • ■ ■ 

; { 

‘ 

' " ‘ .. ' ' : ' • ■' ’ n ■; 

■ 






■ 

; ? 








' 






109 . 


It is amusing, in these days of the over¬ 
organization of women, to think hack to the days when 
we started our first little club, to gather farm women 
into closer contact; amusing in these days of remark¬ 
able university extension service, travelling libraries, 
of radio, lectures, to think of our first attempt to 
secure reading matter for our members. I wrote a 
letter to the London "Spectator” asking readers to 
send us crumbs for their overabundance. What excite¬ 
ment we felt, when bundles reached us from every part 
of the world - England, South Africa, America - even 
Japan! Ye gods! What a varied and fascinating assort¬ 
ment of books and periodicals! 

They brought pleasure to many a home during 
the empty years until the university extension service 
came to fill a great need. Our programmes were not 
exciting; they dealt, at first, with purely womanly 
things; friendly gatherings over our cups of tea, and 
we laid the beginnings of some warm friendships that 
have lasted through the years. How important I felt, 
when I was made secretary of that little club! With 
what care I wrote minutes and kept accounts! It was 
my first experience of organized activity, and I 
revelled In it with a joy which has sometimes been lack¬ 
ing in the various broader activities to which it 
finally led me. 

The year 1916 found me on my way as elected 
delegate from my little local club, to the annual pro¬ 
vincial convention of the "Women’s Auxiliary to the 
United Farmers of Alberta" in Calgary. Quite a small 
gathering of women, as compared to our huge conventions 
of today. 


Picture our absurd nervousness when we rose to 
give our reports, or offer suggestions. Where was the 
courage of the pioneer? We were scared to open our 
mouths; afraid to frame or move a resolution! Shaking 
knees! Trembling voices! But, before the close of the 
meetings, there came a greater poise, as the conviction 
grew that we had a service to perform, a contribution to 
make, not alone to the communities from which we came, 
but to the farmers’ organization and to our provincial 
life. 


We were groping blindly, at those first 
meetings, toward a vision but dimly discerned; a 
vision which was to be made clearer to us as the years 
went on. 



fed , 

- 

. » . ’ V:iu[ c i. ■ - 

i ■ 

■ 

» ' : o:' - 

. 

: 

: • ‘ 

l 

l 

■ 1 ' ' ’ '■ vV ■ ■ i : . »x 

. . f '.=J XV/ : 



t ' 









■ 

: 



' 

- 







... 






. 

.. 








, 

- $ . ' . ' : 

■ 

. 

- 


. 







110 . 


I was elected president, with the gigantic 
and rather terrifying task of building up a provincial 
organization, of evolving policies, and fixing a goal 
toward which to work. We had no money to work with, 
no prestige, and were to co-operate with the men’s group 
which, while outwardly polite, would not, at first, 
realize the added strength which the women would lend 
to their own movement. 

It was my first introduction into life other 
than the sheltered home life which I had always known. 

I learned much in those years of my presidency, of human 
nature. I am still learning! ’’The greatest study of 
mankind is man!” (and the most illuminating, Mr. Pope!) 
It is a study which gives one, at times, the most intense 
pleasure and surprise; at other times, the grief of 
horrible disillusion! 

I have "seen red” sometimes, in discovering 
injustices between men and women; injustices against 
women in man-made legislation, and injustices as between 
rich and poor. I found crude, wicked things; fighting 
against joy, and beauty, and high faith. 

However, the convicion grew, with knowledge, 
that organization was needed to help l? high faith” in 
the struggle to fight these ugly things which reared 
their heads in the outside world; to right wrongs which 
had become established, and to hold before the people a 
vision of 11 the New Community” toward which they might 
turn their eyes. 

Our activities ranged themselves from the 
beginning, along certain practical lines of Public 
Health, Education, and Legislation respecting women 
and children. We strove for legislation to bring in 
our present Municipal Hospital system; we strove for, 
and obtained also, a certain number of highly trained 
maternity nurses for the outlying districts; for Public 
Health nurses who could inspect rural schools and hold 
clinics. Many of the policies which we advocated are 
to be found today embodied in our statutes. Yes, we 
have travelled a long way along the trails, since the 
days of 1896. 

Four years of the provincial presidency of 
the United Farm Women of Alberta; four years of hard 


; 

? ' 

■ 

: ; 


! 





- 


* 


* 

■ r ■ 




• 

- 

* 


. 









' 


. 




n i J 













- ' 

■ 

. 









111 . 


work, with moments of hideous discouragement, yet with 
many pleasant memories, too - memories of finding, in 
remote and unexpected places, the pure gold of wonderful 
souls, of finding keen intellects lying dormant until 
the organization awakened them to the realization that 
they might serve their fellows, (yes, to find idealism 
in human nature, leave the crowded market places of the 
city, and travel the highways and the byways of the 
country-side). 

At the end of four years, with the organization 
acknowledged as an important part of the U.F.A., its use¬ 
fulness established, I told myself that it was permissible, 
without shirking, to return to the quiet life in which 
it was possible to forget "the world and its fretting". 

My home and garden, my music and books, and leisure to 
enjoy them to the full again, seemed the most desirable 
things in the world. 

In 1921, a variety of circumstances combined 
to bring about the decision of the farmers' organization, 
to enter the political field. One day the telephone 
rang: "Will you accept a nomination?" 

What a bolt from the blue to be hurled at a 
poor woman! Time was short in which to make a decision. 

I did some hard thinking. Had I the right to "let down" 
the women who had worked so hard for equal political 
rights with men? I decided that it was my duty to allow 
my name to go up, if only to make the men realize that 
women are, after all, a fairly important section of our 
population. And there was the comforting thought that 
the matter would end there. My name might be put up, 
but one of the men would receive the nomination, of 
course. 


When the final vote was taken, I found myself 
the farmer^ candidate for my constituency! (I didn't 
know whether to laugh or cry!) 

That election was a bitter fight; fought 
principally by my opponents on the ground that I was 
a woman; therefore, totally unfitted to represent the 
people in such a serious business as that of legislation! 
But the farm people thought differently. I was elected 
with a comfortable majority; elected, not by i^omen as 
a women’s representative, but by those people, men and 
women, who felt that I understood something of their 
problems; something, also, of the ideals for xtfhich 
they stood. 

























112 . 


So began my political life as Minister 
Without Portfolio in the Provincial Government. 

Of my work as a woman-Cabinet Minister, I shall not 
write at length; it is too long a story. However, 

I will answer here some questions which, most fre¬ 
quently, have been put to me as a woman in public life. 

"Now, Mrs. Parlby, to be perfectly frank; 
do you really consider politics a woman's job?" 

Perhaps the only answer to that is, that I 
have all the courage of my constituents' convictions I 
You see, in 1926, we had another election campaign, 
and I was re-elected, with a good majority, on the first 
count, over both Conservative and Liberal men candidates. 
Is that not sufficient justification for this particular 
woman in politics? 

It is a comparatively simple matter - the 
election of a man. He may not be a particularly good 
man (I speak in the social sense); he need not even 
have unusually good judgment, or business acumen, but 
he is a man among men, nevertheless, and can generally 
rally enough voters to elect him. 

The time, however, has not yet come when a 
woman will be elected, as a woman among women; where 
men will stand like a solid phalanx behind a man, for 
party reasons, perhaps, or because he is fighting a 
woman nominee, will stand behind him (whether they 
admire him personally or not), women will not stand as 
a solid unit behind a woman. So, if women claim politics 
as their due, in consideration of the fact that they 
number approximately half the population, they must, then, 
realize that they must stand for those things which are 
of vital interest to the electorate of men as well as 
of women. 


For my own part, I say most emphatically that, 
if politics mean, as I take them to mean, the effort to 
secure, through legislative action, better conditions 
of life for the people, greater opportunities for our 
children, and other people's children (through more 
forward-looking educational and public-health activities, 
general social legislation for the more-unfortunate among 
us, regulation of those powerful enough to exploit our 
people, and general leadership in ideals of progress); 
then, it is most assuredly a woman's job, just as much 
as it is a man's job*. 










! 






113 


I do not say that it is every woman*s job, 
any more than it is every man's job. As time goes on, 
certain qualifications will be recognized as necessary, 
by a more highly-educated electorate, whether the 
Legislator be man or woman. Today, women are on trial 
in the political field; very few have entered it. 

Every false step they take, every little remark which 
may sound foolish, is eagerly discussed and widely 
heralded abroad, with the cynical sneers “What else 
can you expect of a woman?'* ! 

Men act and speak foolishly, sometimes, 
blunder with disastrous results. Yet, have you ever 
heard man or woman comment upon their mistakes thus: 

"What else can you expect? He's a man!" Yes, I affirm 
that it is a woman's job - for some women, just as it 
is for some men! 

Another question which is frequently hurled 
at me is this: "Does the woman's point of view have any 
influence in the Legislature?" 

I think that a woman, as a woman, has no par¬ 
ticular influence here, any more than has a man - as a 
man. If she has common sense and good judgment, and 
speaks only when she has something of constructive value 
to say, she will receive due consideration. As to woman's 
point of view, I frankly confess that I have never found 
out what it is. I find that a certain type of man sees 
things from much the same point of view as the same type 
of woman. The socially-minded man and woman will think 
almost identical thoughts on subjects of social welfare. 
One might classify humans with various points of view 
quite accurately, but I fail to see that the sex of the 
individual would enter largely, if at all, into their 
classification as humans. Either man or woman may have 
either a constructive or destructive influence in either 
public or private life. 

This does not say, of course, that because the 
mind has no particular sex, the same may be said of tem¬ 
perament. I have worked now in association with men in 
politics for a considerable number of years, and while, 
at times, I have "raged as furiously as the heathen", 

(have raged inwardly, knowing that if I raged outwardly, 

I might be sorry, afterwards) I have at all times found 
qualities in men which I admire and envy, for women. 










- 


. 








; 






! 


•' ' 






, 


-[I . 5 : 

V ' • • r 

' 


l: 

' 


















■ 

: ' • ■■■ » f ' 






. 

. 

. 
























Qualities, such as the ability to "scrap" 
mercilessly, and then shake hands and forget it; and 
the courage to stand up on their feet and say what they 
want to say, whether or not they know how to express 
their ideas in academic English. Self-forgetfulness. 

I do not say that women are altogether lacking in these 
qualities, or that all men possess, but that we women 
should do well to foster them in ourselves. 

Women, too, have certain qualities which men 
may well envy and strive fori An intuitive sympathy 
which helps them to judge clearly of the motive which 
has prompted a certain course; a greater sensitiveness 
to character, making them more frequently keen and 
accurate judges of men and women. Women are sometimes 
possessed, too, of a quicker reaction than a man, to 
unexpected situations; that reaction resulting in a 
tact and diplomacy which saves them, often, from blunders 
into which many a man would unwittingly fall. 

So much for women - and men - in political 
life. What of women and men who are, each in his or 
her own workaday life, building Western Canada, building 
well, in united effortl 

The trail reaches out. The horizon is ever 
widening. Our pot of gold at the foot of the rainbow 
has not yet been reached, but we are travelling toward 
it. I remember the incoherent efforts, the difficult 
articulation of twenty years or more ago, the vision 
"seen, as through a glass, darkly", a vision clarified 
today, showing us as a result of those early strivings, 
a,great co-operative movement, an expression of our 
Canadian democracy which has brought forth, once again, 
some of the old pioneer qualities of courage, of self- 
help, of the spirit of adventure. 

One recognizes today a higher faith in the 
industry of agriculture, a recognition of its basic 
importance to the nation, as the solid foundation of the 
structure upon which our national life must be built 
if we would achieve a mighty nationhood. One sees 
growing in the farmer*s heart, a sense of the high 
dignity of his calling, and a desire to perfect and 
protect that dignity. 

All these things, and the success of the 
farmer as a builder of Canada and the Empire, is shaking 
the drowsy lethargy of the people of the Old World. 











- 

- 

. 










’ ? ■ , - J ? 

i 

ioL r 

•:•' 

- j :- • 

•IJjC c ' 

- ' -jC • . . ? •; ' : ‘ ' - ‘-T 

■ ; *: " •. , : . ■ ' 

: I'll 

. 

r 

' ' 

*. ' “ '■ 

; : ■ • : ’ : . v 

• : . 

, 














f 

- 






■ 


• 

- 












« 





. 

V. 





' 










, ■' 









* 










115 . 


There is a Spirit moving among the dead bones’ 1 . The 
men of Devon and the men of the North feel the spirit, 
and hear the voice of their forebears who sailed the 
Seven Seas, calling to them to follow the old trail West, 
across the grey waste of waters. 

Up the smiling St. Lawrence they sail once 
more; mighty ships bearing the men and women of the 
British race to make their home in this, our land, 

”sandalled with loam; helmed with sun*.” 

Again, as when I began to write of these 
memories of mine, my thoughts go back to Canada as 
I first saw it, thirty-two years ago. The Land of 
Promise l We have travelled a long way. We have 
blazed a trail, and we have built a road for those who 
come after us. The road grows broader, less stony, 
every day, and each day it leads farther toward the 
goal of which we dreamed. Some unknown pioneer has 
expressed the thought which is in my heart today, as 
I, yet, cry a welcoming hail to the newcomer to 
Canada: 


...’’The Road is ours, as never theirs. 

Is not one joy on us alone bestowed? 

For us, the master-joy, oh Pioneers, 

We shall not travel, but we make the Road*.” 




116 . 


Appendix C. 

Address of Dr. Irene Parlby 
given over C.F.R.N., Edmonton 
and C.F.C.N., Calgary, "On the 
Farm Front" daily broadcast of 
the Alberta Federation of Agri¬ 
culture, Edmonton, March, 1952. 

I appreciate very much the invitation of 
the A.F.A. to give a few words of greeting to the farm 
women of Alberta while in Edmonton. It is a very long 
time since I have had the opportunity to make contact 
with you, and many of my old friends among you have 
left the province, or passed on. It is hard to realize 
that it is about seventeen years since I retired from 
all public activities, to the sanctuary of my home and 
family life. But in those fifteen years, how much has 
happened! 


Our farm women*s organization came into being 
amidst the strains and stresses of the First World War. 

We had hardly recovered from that when further trouble 
arose, with the rise of Hitler and Mussolini to power, 
followed by another global war. 

I think we all realize by now that we are 
passing through one of those volcanic revolutionary 
eras which have occurred at different periods through¬ 
out history, though on a more restricted scale than the 
present one. We in Canada have been very fortunate, 
for although we took our part in fighting the evil forces 
let loose on the world, at least our country was neither 
devastated nor over-run, as were other countries nearer 
the firing line. That fact, however, should not en¬ 
courage us to retire into our individual ivory towers, 
filled with complacency, and the belief that in any 
future struggle, we may be equally Immune. 

The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse are still 
abroad, and preparing for a greater catastrophe, unless 
they can be halted. The Russian volcano is still spewing 
forth its deadly flow of lava, which has engulfed one 
free country after another, destroying their liberty, 
enslaving their people, destroying all our concepts of 
justice and civilized living. That flow has already 
reached the Asiatic shores of the Pacific - the waters 
of that green ocean stand between it and our Western 
coastline. What of the future? 



, . , 0 

.... 

- . : ' . / ■ : '■ *. 

■ 

■ o i 

. 

■ 

r- r 

: 

? • . 1. .r •; ■; ■ : 

: 

r e V: \ • v . "• •- 


. 







117 . 


As individuals, I know how impatient we 
feel as we ponder these great international crises. 

But as individuals, we have a definite part to play, 
by holding on to steadfastness, by helping to form a 
wise, sane public opinion, through study of what is 
happening throughout the world, by understanding those 
forces that are deliberately stirring up confusion, 
dissention and hatred in every continent, for their 
own ends. Even the farm organizations on this contin¬ 
ent are not immune from their meddling interest I 

In a most interesting book I read some time 
ago, by an intelligence officer, it told of the keen 
interest Moscow authorities are taking in the various 
North American farm organizations - apparently as a 
useful field for their further endeavour. 

So we have a definite part to play, also, 
in guarding our farm organization - not with hysteria, 
but with alertness, and a keen interest in the type of 
individuals we help to elect to our Boards and Execu¬ 
tives. Our Canadian people at the moment, are passing 
through a very difficult time, with hundreds of acres 
of grain still under the snow, and with markets closed 
to our stock on account of the foot-and-mouth disease. 

We may need the help of governments in meeting some of 

these problems. We need, also, the help and under¬ 
standing of the consuming public. It is important to 
further our own interests, if for no other reason, that 
we do not alienate or antagonize either group, by things 
we say or do, often without thought, in moments of ex¬ 
asperation. We expect courteous consideration from 
governments, of the problems we lay before them, and 
if possible, action to solve them. But we are prone 
to forget, sometimes, that governments also, sometimes, 
have a right to courteous and reasonable presentation 

of the facts we wish to bring to their attention, and 

also, that as representatives of all the people, we 
have to survey the good of the whole, as well as the 
interests of any particular group. 

Women should remember that they are the 
guardians of the intangibles of life; they may not be 
called upon to play any spectacular part, but their 
quiet influence in maintaining the finer attitudes 
toward life can, and does, influence human society. 







V.. ' " 






■ 

: - 




t 

















' t 


: 




- 

* 










: 

■ 


- 

■ ■ ■ - ' - ' '■ ■ ; ' ;■ , ■ ; ; 7 ; o ; 

■ ' 















; 

*: ■ '■ i - '.'''' 5 - 'p? :.;i r. ;C.:':: . 3. • :;.r ; ■■; 

3: ■ : : 










- 

• ''.r-" . . . v 















Good-bye for now. I wish you the best 
of luck for 1952. May the weather-man be kinder 
to us than he was last year, and may the cattle and 
hay industry be salvaged from its present plight. I 
know the splendid courage of the farm people of the 
West, and I know that courage will never fail you’. 


-- 00 O 00 — 









- - 

. 

. 

j.v . .• o '>0 ■ • *As-w:,:r- I 













— -x -- 


























































APPENDIX Dl. Map of Township 40 


(Contained in envelope inside back cover). 




120 . 


APPENDIX D2. Map Showing Buffalo Lake. 


(Contained in envelope inside back cover). 




121 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


A. Primary Sources 
1. Interviews: 

Dr, M. R. Bow, Edmonton, formerly Deputy 
Minister of Health, Government of Alberta. 

Honorable J. J. Bowlen, Edmonton, Lieuten¬ 
ant Governor of Alberta, formerly a Liberal 
member of the Alberta Legislature. 

Mr. J. S. Brownlee, Calgary, formerly 
Premier and Attorney-General of Alberta. 

Mr. Donald Cameron, Edmonton, Director of 
the Department of Extension, University of 
Alberta. 

Mrs. Eric Cormack, Edmonton, a former resi¬ 
dent of the Alix district and a friend of 
the Parlby family. 

Mr. F. R. Falconer, Athabasca, Alberta, 
formerly a Liberal member of the Alberta 
Legislature. 

Mrs. R. B. Gunn, Paradise Valley, Alberta, 
long a prominent worker in the United Farm 
Women of Alberta. 

Mr. Charles Hill, Edmonton, Superintendent 
of Child VI el fare, Government of Alberta. 

Mr. J. Russell Love, Edmonton, formerly a 
U.F.A. member of the Alberta Legislature and 
Provincial Treasurer of Alberta. 

Mrs. Vera Lowe, Namao, Alberta, a prominent 
worker in the Farm Women’s Union of Alberta. 

Mr. J. F. Lymburn, Edmonton, formerly 
Attorney-General of Alberta. 

Mr. T. A. Mansell, Edmonton, on the staff 
of The Edmonton Journal. 




















, 


, 






























. 

. 


. ; , 




. 

. 




122 . 


Mr. A. M. Matheson, Edmonton, formerly 
U.F.A. member of the Alberta Legislature. 

Miss J. McCallum, Edmonton, Law Librarian, 
Department of the Attorney-General, Govern¬ 
ment of Alberta. 

Dr. J. M. McEachern, Edmonton, formerly of 
the Department of Philosophy, University of 
Alberta. 

Mr. J. P. Page, Edmonton, Progressive Con¬ 
servative member of the Alberta Legislature. 

Mrs. Irene Parlby, Dartmoor Ranch, Alix, 
Alberta, formerly Minister Without Portfolio, 
Government of Alberta. 

Mr. and Mrs. Humphrey Parlby, Dartmoor Ranch, 
Alix, Alberta, son and daughter-in-law of 
Mrs. Irene Parlby. 

"Mr. Norman Priestley, Calgary, formerly 
secretary of Alberta Co-operatives, Ltd. 

Mr. R. G. Reid, Edmonton, formerly Premier 
and Provincial Treasurer of Alberta. 

Mr. Elmer Roper, Edmonton, leader of the 
C.C.F. party in Alberta and a member of the 
Alberta Legislature. 

Mr. W. Norman Smith, Calgary, editor of The 
Western Farm Leader , and formerly editor of 
The U.F.A . 

Mr. E. C. Stehelin, late of Edmonton, formerly 
Superintendent of Schools, Department of Edu¬ 
cation, Alberta. 

Mrs. R. B. Wells, Edmonton, a close friend 
of Mrs. Irene Parlby. 

Mr. C. Wolferstctn, Alix, Alberta, a U.F.A,. 
campaign manager in the Lacombe Provincial 
Constituency, 1921 and 1926. 

Mr. Henry Young, Millet, Alberta, President 
of the Farmers* Union of Alberta. 





- 




. 












♦ 










.. 




. 




, 














* , 








. 

. 


























.. . 





















123 . 


2. Correspondence of the author with: 

The Reverend F. C. Austin, rector of 
St. Monica*s Church, Mirror, Alberta. 

Mr. J. E. Brownlee, Calgary. 

Mr. C. B. Kenway, Librarian, Department of 
Lands and Forests, Government of Alberta. 

Mrs. Violet McNaughton, Women*s Editor, 

The Western Producer , Saskatoon. 

Mrs. Irene Parlby, Alix, Alberta. 

Miss Amy J* Roe, Home Editor, The Country 
Guide , Winnipeg. 

Mr. B. K. Sandwell, Toronto. 

Mrs. H. E. Spencer, Comox, B.C. 

3. The unpublished letters and papers of Mrs. Irene 
Parlby, in the possession of Mrs. Irene Parlby. 

*+. Some of the unpublished files of the U.F.A. and 
U.F.W.A., at the U.F.A. Co-operative Store, 
Calgary, Alberta. 


B. Secondary Sources 

1. Printed Books: 

Burke *s Landed Gentry , London, 1937 edition. 

Cleverdon, Catherine Lyle: The Woman Suffrage 
Movement in Canada , Toronto, University of 
Toronto Press, 1950. 

Moorhouse, Hopkins: Deep Furro ws, Toronto 
Winnipeg, George J. McLeod, Ltd., 1918. 

Morton, W.L.: The Progressive Party in Canada , 
Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 1950. 

Patton, Harold S.s Grain Growers* Coopera ¬ 
tion in Western Canada , Cambridge, Harvard 
University Press, _ 192^. 




































. . 


' . . 


1 c 

■ 7 , 

, 

... . 

■ 

. uA, c 







. . . ... * 

* 






. 


• . 

. 

' < . 






124 . 


Rolph, William Kirby: Henry V/ise Wood of 
Alberta < Toronto, University of Toronto 
Press, 1950. 

Sharp, Paul F.r The Agrarian Revolt in 
Western Canada . Minneapolis, University of 
Minnesota Press, 1948. 

Wood, Louis Aubrey: A History of the 
Farmers 8 Movements in Canada. Toronto, 
Ryerson Press ////I-. 

2. Newspapers and Periodicals: 

The Alix Free Press, Alix, Alberta. 

The Calgary Herald , Calgary, Alberta. 

The Canadian Magazine , Winnipeg, Manitoba. 
The Edmonton Bulletin „ Edmonton, Alberta. 

The Edmonton Journal , Edmonton, Alberta. 

The Grain Growers 8 Guide , Winnipeg, Manitoba 
The Lacombe Globe , Lacombe, Alberta. 

The lacombe Western Globe , Lacombe, Alberta. 
The U.F.A. , Calgary, Alberta. 

The Vancouver Province , Vancouver, B.C. 

3. Statutes, Reports and Sessional Papers: 

The Canadian Annual Review of Public Affairs 

1921=1935/' 

Reports and Addresses of the United Farmers 

of Alberta - , 1916-1921. 

Reports and Addresses of the United Farm 

Women of Alberta,’~1919-193^* 

Reports of the Public Health Department , 

Government of Alberta, 1921-1935* 



























. 

* 







• ' 1 


. . 




- 






■ 

* 


















125 . 

Sessional Papers . Government of Alberta, 
1921-1935. 

Statutes of Alber ta, 1921-1935. 

4. Pamphlets: 

Cameron, Donald: History of the Farm You ng 
Peopled Week at the University of Alberta , 

Department of Extension, University of 
Alberta, 1932. 

Carter, Eva: Thirty Years of Pr opress , 

Calgary, U.F.A. Co-operative, I 9 W. 

5. Theses: 

Han son, E.J.: A Financial History of Alberta , 
1905-1 950, a Ph.D. dissertation, Clark Univer- 
sityf 1952. 

Thomas, L, G.: The Ranching History of Southern 
Alberta , a Master’s dissertation, University 
of Alberta, 1935. 

6» Miscellaneous: 

’’Legislation Affecting Women and Children 
in Alberta”, Department of the Attorney- 
General, Government of Alberta, 1945. 


-- 00 O 00 —■ 






















, 

























r - ' 








. 




. 

. .ft 


















. 







■- 







































APPENDIX Di: 


Map of Township 40 


APPENDIX D2: 


Map of Buffalo Lake District 


PHOTOGRAPHS 












