


@jc mmw 

aiBBailMiS 












UNIVERSITY OF ILL 5RTA 
LIE'. 1 : i 1RY 

Regulations h,. > ^ a? J Ing Te e sea c ,n c_ ‘las er t; -it ions 

• > ( fc copies >j ;h©£ s i l disse tati 1 oi i\ iu t .1 ! s 

and toe tor’s degrees deposited In the University of Alberta 

, u the ff i< ] C,, >f t . ic ul ty 01 G 3 uiit St . i s, 
Lte< In th( fei ence I 1 .. I <- ... 1 y. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
. . sion th worl w as c 02 le . Some it t ei 1 ts ai e v«’I Hi ng to 

loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of Alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used onlg with due 
re§ ir to priority rights of the author. dritten permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 
When permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub1ished work. 

This diesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library Is obligated to secure the signature..: of each 

user. 


Please sign below 
Date 

A4v. /Hf, 


Signature 



































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/hortie1952 







THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF CERTAIN PHYSICAL 
AND MINERALOGICAL FEATURES OF 
GREY WOODED SOILS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
PARTIAL. FULFILB/lENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF AGRICULTURE 
DEPARTMENT OF SOILS 


W 

PI. J. HORTIS, E. Sc. (Alta.) 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 

APRIL, 1952 





































. 

' 























ABSTRACT 


Certain physical and mineralogical characteristics 
of the Cooking Lake and Breton grey wooded soils v/ere 
investigated* Physical analyses revealed little difference 
between the textures and porosity of these soils. Petro¬ 
graphic examination of'the coarse and fine sand fractions of 
these soils showed no differences worthy of note. X-ray 
analyses of the clay fraction showed that the dominant clay 
minerals in these soils are montmorillonite and illite. The 
investigation suggests that the separation of these soils 
into different series is not justified. 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

Introduction ... 1 

Review of Literature . 3 

Origin of the term M Grey Wooded Soils ' 1 . 3 

Distribution of grey wooded soils in Alberta.... 4 

Climate under which development of grey 

wooded soils takes place..... 4 

Vegetation . 5 

Soil parent materials . 7 

Eorphology of Breton and Cooking Lake grey 

wooded soils .. 9 

Porosity on pF measurements ..... 10 

Petrographic methods as applied to soil mineral 

analyses .. 11 

Clay minerals and their occurrence in soils .... 21 

Outline of Investigation ..*.. 32 

Description of the sample areas ... 33 

Plan of investigation .. 33 

Materials and Methods .. 34 

Sampling ........ . 34 

Preparation of samples . 35 

Preparation of composite samples .. 36 


























..* r 








... , . o 






: 













































Page 


Physical Analyses . 36 

Determination of apparent specific gravity. 36 

Determination of real specific gravity . 37 

Determination of per cent pore space .. 37 

Mechanical analyses .. 37 

Determination of pF . 39 

Mineralogical analyses of the soils . 41 

Results . 44 

Discussion of Results . 79 

Summary ... 86 

Acknowledgements ••••••• .. 88 

Bibliography 


89 


































......... ; 




INTRODUCTION 


The classification of soils into different series is 
a problem which often confronts the soil surveyor* Under 
field conditions a situation may arise where such differentia¬ 
tion is extremely difficult due to dominanoly similar 
characteristics in two soils 

In Alberta, the grey wooded soils cover a large 
portion of our surveyed areas* In the Peace Hills sheet 
located in central Alberta, Bowser et al. (8) mapped grey 
wooded soils and separated them tentatively into different 
series* These are termed the Cooking Lake and Breton series* 
The separation was made because these soils were thought to 
have developed over different parent materials* Slight 
differences were noted in the B horizon structure and labor¬ 
atory analyses revealed the Cooking Lake had a higher 
magnesium content than the Breton soil. 

Although the problem has not yet presented itself, 
it is realized that it would be virtually impossible to 
separate these two series in an area where they were inter¬ 
spersed* The U.S*B*A. Soil Survey Manual (61) defines a soil 
series as having soil horizons similar in differentiating 
characteristics and arrangement in the soil profile, except 
for the texture of the surface soil^and developed from a 



. 







1 








" 






- 2 - 


particular type of parent material. 

This report is the result of a preliminary study 
carried out to determine whether or not the separation of 
these soils into different series is justified. Any 
physical differences which exist between these two soils 
should be reflected in the morphological characteristics 
of the soils. Therefore certain physical analyses are to be 
carried out to ascertain whether such differences exist. It 
was hoped in this investigation to find an index mineral 
which would characterize the parent material of its origin. 
The recognition of such a mineral would assist in classifying' 
not only these grey wooded soils ? but also soils in the black 
soil zone which have developed over the same parent materials 
as those being investigated. 





































-3- 


Review of Literature 
Origin 01 the Term 11 Grey Wooded Soils 1 * 

At the first International Congress of Soil Science, 
Wyatt and Newton (65) in discussing Alherta soil profiles 
described ’’wooded soils” as being “podzol like*” The soils 
are acidic down to the upper 3 horizon ana the B horizons of 
these soils have a higher nitrogen content than the A 2 horizon. 
Joel (31) described similar soils in Saskatchewan as being 
“grey bush” soils. He found a similarity between these soils 
and the podzols described by Glinka. He noted that they 
differed in 'Chat the grey bush soils had a definite zone of 
calcium and magnesium carbonate accumulation. Wyatt and 
Doughty (64) refer to a soil profile as being “Grey (wooded) 
soil". Wyatt et al. (63) in describing wooded soils in the 
St. Ann sheet of central Alberta, stated that the loam soils, 
whether burned over recently or not, show on ploughing a 
greyish white appearance characteristic of the Ag horizon of 
the wooded soil. It is undoubtedly due to this appearance 
that the name “Grey wooded” soils evolved. 

Moss (45) in discussing' the morphology and composition 
of Saskatchewan wooded soils, states that they do not fit into 
any of the great soil groups as defined but may be regarded as 
a branch of uhe Podzol family. Williams and Bowser (62) 
describe these soils as having developed in calcareous drift 
in a sub humid climate belt under a mixed conifer and hardwood 


forest 








I 







. ) 


o':'. 1 c .j 1 Cv 




■ O . v y 






* 


... . 




. ... ‘-Js ... 




. 



. v >i'J 'J ' \t v, ; , u 



. 










. 


u 








Distribution of Grey Wooded Soils in Alberta . 

Newton et al. (48) estimate that the grey wooded 
soil zone covers about two-thirds of the province of Alberta* 
In the explored region of this zone, the authors estimate 
there are fourteen million arable acres. 

Climate under which development of gTey wooded soils takes 

Place : 

Bowser and Erdman (8) and later Bowser and Peters 
(9) report that these soils are formed under sub humid 
conditions, that is, moderate rainfall and a low rate of 
evaporation. They report that the average annual precipita¬ 
tion over most of the Grey Wooded Zone is about nineteen 
inches, while the average annual temperature is about 35°F. 
Odynsky and Newton (49) mapped these soils in an area where 
the precipitation varied from 14.01 inches to 22.16 inches 
and they report that 34.3°F. is a fairly representative 
annual mean temperature for the area. 

Williams and Bowser (62) note that grey wooded soils 
developed in Alberta and in the state of Montana, did so 
under sub humid climatic conditions. 

Newton et al . (48) have reported that soils belong¬ 
ing to the wooded group have been produced at Fort Vermillion 
in Northern Alberta, where the mean annual precipitation is 
less than 11 inches. They submit that the development of 
such soils is due to the cooler climate and lower evaporation 
rates. 

Ellis (17) states that these soils developed in 









c 


■ 



.... ■ , . , * - '■> 















. * .. . ..... .. ; r'i,-. ......' 


. 


.. 


. 


2 » ■ ■ • . 


fJ . ) 0 \ 


... ,/ 


... . 


lo 


■ ’ . v . 


.... 


.... 70 i i.0.u J 

. 

. . ... . .. 0 '... J 

... .... 


. ....■ .. ..,. ... . . 


.. . , . 


. . 1 . , 








‘•v.<.. J - OX: 








. 




■ J - A-' .. J ... ,-V V .. 



... ./ i 




. .. « ci >,4 i o v,. ; . iiiliii * z j /, 




j 



- 5 - 


Manitoba under the influence of more moist conditions in 
the surface two feet of the soil than in the black earth 
and northern black earth regions. Williams and Bowser (62) 
note that Columbia Falls, Montana where the mean annual 
precipitation is about 20 inches and the mean annual temp¬ 
erature 44°F. is within the grey wooded soils belt. 
Vegetation 

Bowser et al. (8) state that under heavy woods in 
the Peace Hills sheet area, a grey soil develops. They list 
the dominant vegetation in the grey wooded soil zone as 
follows: 

Trees and Shrubs 


Common name 

Scientific name 

as pen poplar 

Populus tremuioides 

Balsam poplar 

Populus balsamifera 

White Spruce 

Picea glanca 

Dogwood 

Cornus stolonifera 

Willow 

Salix spp. 

Currant 

Ribes spp. 

Honeysuckle 

Lonicera involucrata 

Hose 

Rosa spp. 

Cranberry 

Viburnum pausi florum 

Raspberry 

Ribus strigosus 






.... 

.... >,j .. 






- 6 - 


Native Grasses 


Common name 


Scientific name 


Slender wheatgrass Agropyron pauciflorurn 
Bearded wheatgrass Agropyron subsecundum 
Thickspike wheatgrass Agropyron dasystachyum 


Redtop 

Bluejoint 


Agrostis alba 
Calamagrostis canadensis 


Odynsky and Newton (49) discussing grey wooded 


soils state that the native cover consists of aspen poplar 
in which there are variable proportions of black poplar, 
spruce, willow, alder, birch and various shrubs. Leahey 
(39) states that there is evidence to verify the suggestion 
that spruce is the climax type of vegetation where grey 
wooded soils have developed. 

Moss (45) states that while wooded soils studied 
in Saskatchewan are found under a mixed forest cover, the 
dominant vegetation is P. tremeloides and P. balsamifera. 
Further to this he notes that where spruce trees predomin¬ 
ate, the soil is peaty in nature and of the poorly drained 
podzolic type. 


Glassey (20) in discussing soils and vegetation 


in southwestern Wyoming, differentiates between podzol 
soils covered with a mixed growth of conifers and aspen 
trees and podzols developed at lower altitudes in small 
areas of aspen groves. He attributes the formation of the 
latter to extra water where snow drifts have accumulated 










- 7 - 


on these slopes. 

Ellis (17) is of the opinion that the original 
vegetation under which grey wooded soils developed in 
Manitoba was spruce and allied boreal forests. However, 
due to forest fires, etc., the present vegetation is 
dominantly broad leaf trees which have become well estab¬ 
lished. 

Williams and Bowser (62) state that grey wooded 
soils have developed under moderate to heavy stands of 
mixed conifer and deciduous forest, including poplar, 
spruce, fir, larch and ponderosa pine. Associated with 
the above is an undergrowth of shrubs and woody plants 
and a ground cover of creeping vine-like plants. 

Dr. Kellog, who in 1951 visited the grey wooded 
soil areas in Alberta, reveals in a recent communique 
that he is of the opinion that aspen poplar is the climax 
vegetation of some of these soils. 

Soil uarent materials 

Bowser et al. (8) state that Breton grey wooded 
soils are developed on parent material of Paskapoo form¬ 
ation origin. According to the above authors, the glacial 
till formed from the Paskapoo formation is brown in color, 
gritty and has a medium to medium high lime content. 

Allan (2) describes the Paskapoo formation as being lower 
Tertiary in age, a fresh water deposit, composed chiefly 












of soft, grey, clayey and calcareous sandstones of 
soft shales and clays* 

Bowser et al. (8) differentiated between the 
Breton and Cooking Lake grey wooded soils on the basis 
of structure [in the B horizon and the different origin 
of their parent materials* The CookingAL ake g rey 
wooded is of the Edmonton formation origin. Allan (2) 
states that the Edmonton formation consists largely of 
sediments deposited under fresh and brackish water 
conditions* The formation is composed of fine grained 
sandstones, highly calcarious sandstones, sandy shale, 
bentonitic sandstones and shales, bentonite, ironstone 
bands, carbonacious shales and coals. Bentonite prevails 
through the whole series of beds, which vary greatly 
both laterally and vertically. 

Since this work deals specifically with the 
Cooking Lake and Breton grey wooded soils, it is felt 
that the above sufficiently describes the parent mater¬ 
ials and the parent rock of these soils* However, it 
should be noted that grey 'wooded soils have developed 
on material other than till, for example on outwash and 
lacustrine deposits and on other parent rocks as described 
by Odynsky and Hewton (49). According to Williams and 
Bowser (62) all of the drift area in Montana and Alberta 
where these soils have developed is of the Wisconsin age. 


w :>,v : . 




j v :. 1 v't 





Idorpliology of Breton and Cooking; Lake grey wooaed soils 

Bowser and Erdman (op cit.) describe the 


Breton profile as follows: 


1-3 inches Aq Leaf mat 


1-2 

4-7 


A^ Dark brown loam 

Ao Light grey brown, platy loam to 
sandy loam, easily crushing into 
small irregular fragments. 


1-2 


A s Brown, porous, firm, breaks into 
nuc iform fragin ent s • 


10-20 


10-20 


Bg Brown to dark brown clay loam to 
^ clay, medium nuc if orm to blocky. 

B 3 Brown medium nuc if orm but less 
well defined than Bg • 


■' Ga At average of 48 inches from the 
surface, often spotted with.lime. 

G Fairly uniform brown sandy clay 
loam to clay till. Highly 
siliceous. 

The above authors also describe the Cooking Lake 


solum characteristics as being very similar to the Breton 
grey wooded solum, the main differences being that the B 
horizon is more strongly stained and more blocky than in 
the Breton profile. Also, as has been previously mention¬ 
ed, these soils are developed on different parent materials* 
Williams and Bowser (62) give the chief characteristics 
by which these soils may be recognized: a platy Ag, grey 
in color; a nuciform or blocky Bg which is well developed 
structurally, having its aggregates stained or glazed with 












. 

. 






J ' 


. ■■ ■ • 

J ■ , . . J ... , .. 

' " ■ , ' 

; ... ... ... . ... .. | . . 






. 

























. ;'A. 

















- 10 - 


brown or dark brown colloidal organic matter; a solum 
seldom over four feet thick, having a horizon of lime 
carbonate accumulation and developed over calcareous 
material. 

Porosity on vF measurements 

Nelson and Baver (47) in a series of 
experiments using a number of different size grades 
of sand, were able to show that drainage of such a 
porous system was determined by the size of the neck 
between the individual grains of sand. Curves relating 
pF to moisture content were plotted for the various 
grades of sand and compared with sized aggregates of 
different soils in an attempt to determine the size of 
the non capillary pores. Learner and Shaw (40) studied 
large numbers of soil samples, measuring the capillary 
porosity using a blotter apparatus to determine the pF 
values. Smith, Browning and Pohlman (58) studied the 
percolation through undisturbed soil cores. The cores 
were saturated and then subjected to a desired tension. 
The volume of water removed was used to determine the 
pore size distribution of the soils. 
















. 



w- V ... 




- '. 


V 1 '-' ■ • 








J 










. 


, _U, • - v V 


- 


. ■ .. .. V. ' 

. . . . J 








- 11 - 


Petrogranhic Methods as Applied To 

Soil Mineral Analyses 


Soils are basically composed of the disenteg- 
ration and decomposition products of rock, plus organic 
matter. If the organic matter is removed from the soil, 
the residue may be expected to be composed of common 
rock forming minerals and their decomposition products* 

Fry (18) outlines the use of petrographic 
methods as they may be applied to soils minerals, 
quantitative methods are applied to the mineral determin¬ 
ations of sized soil separates* 

Hart (22) carried out a detailed study of soil 
minerals over a region of diverse rock and found that a 
similarity could be established between the parent rock 
and the drift over-lying the rock; only rarer minerals 
were derived from external sources. The varied nature 
of the parent material evidently gave rise to varied 
textures in soils. Hart, discusses in some detail, the 
work of Plall and Russel, who in a survey of tlie soils of 
Kent, Surrey and Sussex, found that their soil type 
boundary coincided with the boundaries of the geological 
formations. However, texture is the main point considered 
as they state, "All of our experience in the field goes 
to show that each geological formation in the area under 




... i 


■ .-V? y 


■ . .. • 


:c.,; 




. . i j 


, 





V ! ri'U- 


, J 






.); 0 xj.U:.l . <: 



! 






• • - , • ........ 


... . . . . •: a ■ ■ - ■ - . - ■ 


: j ,:. 


'J j >... d'X 


r.;> 'vo CC,.:. ,i 


: - 






- 12 - 


consideration gives rise to a distinct soil type 
characterized by its mechanical analysis 11 . 

Hart (22) found that soils could be related 
to underlying rock through the drift, except in cases 
where outcrops at right angles to the direction of ice 
movement are narrow and the drift is thick. He suggests 
that a determination of the mineralogy of the matrix 
of the drift is useful in determining the distribution 
of the drift and in forming a basis for the grouping of 
soils. 

Hendrich and Hew lands (25) compared soil 
samples from certain localities in England with samples 
from H.E. Scotland. Using heavy liquids and an electro 
magnet, the soil minerals were divided into three groups: 
1 . orthoclase, 2. quartz and '3. ferro silicates. The 
soils examined were of glacial origin and differed in 
mineral content according to the nature of the parent 
rock from which the drift was taken. Soils from sediments 
were almost entirely quartz, while soils of parent rock 
which were of basic igneous origin were very low in quartz 
and high in ferro silicates. 

Carroll (14) carried out a study on the 
mineralogy of west Australian soils and concluded that 
the character of the heavy residue of the soil often 
gives a clear indication of the nature of the parent 


,1 w' 








J 


J 




' v . o.... 


■J. 


.. I.:s. 











rock. Secondly, that the diagnostic value is enhanced 
by the amount of heavy minerals, by distinctive features 
of a mineral species and by the amount of magnetic 
material present. The soils studied were formed in situ 
by weathering of underlying rock. 

Kruger (35) is of the opinion that few mineral 
species are diagnostic of any one drift sheet. He states 
that the drift sheets of Minnesota have been re-worked 
and therefore their mineralogy has been complicated. The 
distribution of heavy minerals in all the drifts is 
similar to their distribution in freshly crushed granite. 
This fact suggests leaching and weathering are slight; 
the only suggestion of weathering was an abundance of 
hydrated oxides of iron and few varieties of some mineral 
species. 

Goldthwaite and Kruger (19) examined the heavy 
mineral distribution of fresh and rotted parent rock, the 
till and the sola developed over the till. They found 
that the till is uniform in fresh abraided rock. The 
clean appearance of some of the minerals suggested that 
they were derived from fresh rock rather than weathered 
rock. The authors suggest that interglacial weathering 
took place to a greater extent than during the post 
glacial period. 

Buckhaman and Ham (11) carried out mineralogical 


. 


c 




. 


. 






L £ 




. . . - . . - 


.> -j i ., 





-■ o 












.'t./ 











- 14 - 


studies of soils and their parent materials in Central 
Oklahoma. They found the presence or absence of certain 
heavy minerals valuable in identifying parent materials, 
where terraces have been obscured and origin cannot be 
determined by texture or consistency. These differences 
had been noted in the heavy mineral suite of sediments 
which were possible parent materials. 

Allen (3) made thin sections of desired horizons 
of a soil sampled in a columnar unit. The soil was 
impregnated with kollolith and then ground to the desired 
thickness. The study of these thin sections revealed a 
definite weathering of feldspar, hornblende and epidote 
to produce beidellite. It was indicated that under good 
drainage conditions, the clay produced from 'weathering 
in the upper horizons is translocated and deposited in 
lower horizons. 

Jeffries and White (28) carried out a mineralog- 
ical analysis of the very fine sand separates on four 
podzolic soils developed on different parent materials. 
The very fine sand was separated into three groups by 
the use of heavy liquids. The heavy group including 
minerals heavier than specific gravity 2.70, the quartz 
group with a specific gravity less than 2.65 but greater 
than 2.55 and the felspar group with a specific gravity 
less than 2.55. The heavy and felspar groups were 








3 


j 


. Ju. ....... 


... j 




W 


.. j' 




. ju 







- 15 - 


studied microscopically to determine and compare 
minerals in the different soil profiles. The above 
authors found that quantities and kinds of minerals 
were typical of a profile. Each profile had some 
outstanding mineral characteristics which distinguished 
it from the others. They suggest that these differences 
were due to differences in parent materials and as such 
should prove useful for correlation purposes and soil 
clas sific ation. 

Jeffries (27) has outlined a procedure for the 
study of the mineralogy of the fine sand separates of 
some Pennsylvannia soils. The fine sand was separated 
into three mineral groups by the use of heavy liquids 
and a specially designed separatory funnel. These were 
heavy mineral, quartz and felspar groups. He concluded 
that the mineralogical composition of the very fine sand 
se£)arates varied considerably in amounts, but little in 
variety of mineral species. Outstanding minerals of 
general occurence in the soils are useful for purposes 
of correlation, comparison and as an aid in soil class¬ 
ification. The mineral contents of the parent rock and 
soil developed on carbonate rocks from four locations 
were studied by Jeffries and White (29). They studied 
the very fine sands of a hydrochloric acid insoluble 
residue of the parent rock and horizons of the different 
soils. In addition, thin sections were made of the 
parent rock. The sands were separated into three fractions 




- 16 - 


by methods previously outlined by other authors. 

Three different types of parent rock were determined: 
limestone, chemical dolomite and clastic dolomite. 

In general it was found that minerals ^present in the 
very fine sand separate of the parent rock were 
reflected in the soil developed over them. However, 
in the case of the soil developed over a clastic 
dolomite, minerals were present in the soil which 
could not be accounted for in the parent rock. The 
authors suggest that this may be due to the manner of 
formation of the clastic dolomite. Using the variations 
in proportions of v/eathered and fresh felspar, a zone of 
intense weathering was indicated which is adjacent to 
the parent rock. Although the type of felspar gave 
different relationships, the same trend was apparent. 

Cady (13) carried out investigation on two 
soils in the Central Adirondack section of Hew York. 
These soils were: (a) A podsol soil developed under 

a spruce hardwood cover. 

(b) A brown podzolic soil develo]?ed 
under a hardwood cover. 

The two were interspersed on the same (glacial till) 
parent material under identical climatic conditions. 
Eight profiles were selected and samples of the sand 
fraction size 0.044 to 0.015 mm. were examined petro- 




















- 17 - 


graphically. All of the grains in the C horizons were 
clear, sharp and unaltered* Quartz was the most 
abundant, followed by felspars* Of the heavy minerals, 
the most abundant was hornblende, followed by magnetite, 
garnet, hypersthene and augite. In the A horizon of 
the podzol soil, there was a marked decrease in the 
hornblendes and other easily weathered species* In the 
brown podzolic A horizon minerals were found in similar 
amounts and proportions to the G horizon. Although some 
etching was noted in the hornblendes and felspars, Cady 
noted that green hornblende was an excellent indicator 
of the intensity of podzol weathering* The heavy fraction 
containing a large proportion of ferro magnesian minerals, 
increased under brown podzolic weathering. Cady concluded 
by suggesting that on the basis of his v/ork, the establish 
ment of a new great soil group, the brown podzolic was 
justified. 

Richard and Chandler (53) studied three profiles 
located in Eastern Quebec. These profiles were mature 
podzols developed on till of schist and sandstone parent 
rock. The fine sand fraction was used for mineral 
analyses and two separations were made, quartz and 
felspars and heavy minerals. There v/as a definite and 
intense weathering of the schist fragments in the A2 
horizon which decreased with depth. Of the heavy minerals 



J 









- 18 - 


hornblende and hypersthene weathered rapidly in the 
Ag horizon as compared to slight weathering in the 
parent material. The relative amounts of garnet and 

zircon increase in the A 2 horizon since other minerals 

* 

have decreased, actually the garnet-zircon ratio is 
approximately the same in the A and G horizons* Both 
minerals are highly resistant to weathering. 

Matelski and Turk (44) divided two podzol soils 
in Michigan into two groups. One group supported a 
hardwood forest and the second a pine forest cover. 

They corroborated the fact that hornblende (dark green 
variety) was the easiest-weathered mineral, followed by 
opaque minerals and garnets. Relative resistance to 
weathering varied within the profile; generally greater 
mineral decomposition was noted in the B horizon than 
in the A and C horizons. The intense brown color in 
the B of soils supporting a hardwood cover is thought 
to be due to inorganic colloids. The authors suggest 
that this may be explained by the greater original 
content of opaque and ferro magnesian minerals and 
subsequently more intense decomposition. The soils 
supporting a hardwood cover contain a greater quantity 
of calcium carbonate and heavy minerals in all horizons 
than do soils supporting a pine cover. 


Haseman and Marshall (24) outline a semi- 









- 19 - 


quant it at ive method for using presence of heavy minerals 
to identify parent materials. They conclude that the 
origin of soil is reflected in the kinds and amounts of 
heavy minerals present. They suggest that a qualitative 
determination of the heavy minerals is sufficient to 
indicate the origin after the kind and abundance of 
these minerals have been determined in possible parent 
materials. It is of considerable importance that, in 
making heavy mineral comparisons between soils and 
parent materials, the same size fractions be used. The 
authors found that differences in the origin of parent 
materials at different depths are readily shorn by 
heavy mineral analyses. Again hornblende, because of 
its wide distribution and moderate resistance to weather¬ 
ing processes, is a good comparative mineral in estimating 
the weathering in different horizons of the soil. 

Marshall and Jeffries (43) explain in detail 
mineralogies! methods for correlating soil types and 
parent materials. In the method outlined the authors 
use the very fine sand and silt soil separates. Using 
tetraDromethane and nitrobenze for making liquids of 
varying' densities, the separates are divided into three 
groups. These are: 

Heavy mineral group S.G. 

Mica group S.G. 

Felspar and quartz S.G. 

group 


2.95 

2.95 - 2.70 

2.70 





















- 


•si 


.. J j 


h 


;V 









- 20 - 


A number of special centrifuge tubes designed for this 
work are illustrated by the authors. The minerals are 
mounted on a gelatin slide and determined using 
standard petrographic methods. In concluding, the above 
authors suggest that three size fractions should be 
examined separately and together due to the eventuality 
that a mineral may weather out of a finer before dis¬ 
appearing from a coarser fraction. 

Rice and Atkinson (5) analyzed three Canadian 
soils for mineral content: Regina clay, Rideau clay 
and North Gower clay. The authors explain that this 
work was exploratory. However, in their findings 
orthoclase was found to be much more prevalent in the 
Regina clays. It was felt that this factor may be 
associated with the greater proportion of clay in the 
Regina clays. The above authors carried out a detailed 
study of eight horizons of a brown podzolic soil from 
Quebec. Approximately sixty-eight minerals were 
identified in the heavy fraction. Hornblende, zircon 
and garnet had accumulated in the Ap horizon due to the 
disappearance of less resistant minerals. The ig horizon 
had an accumulation of ferro magnesian materials due to 
the weathering of brown hornblende. In the B and C 
horizons the authors suggest that the accumulation of 
less resistant materials was due to less weathering or 



. 






- 





... . • . , . ■ ... . .... . , ... ; ' ... . ... ..; J • ■ y'' 

... v -1 j !■ 'J j •-/ . j . ■■ . .. w... . .v v'. r. ; i .— ■ - : 

.. ■ ..■ .. 1 . 




















- 21 - 


their translocation from upper horizons. 

In that fraction of specific gravity 2.95 - 
2.66 plagioclase accounted for 50 percent of the total 
and considerable muscovite was present. The fraction 
with specific gravity less than 2.65 was very small, 
with a small mineral suite. 


Clay Minerals and Their 

Occurrence in Soils 

The clay fraction of soil differs from silt 
mineralogically, in that it consists of the secondary 
products of weathering which are not found in unweathered' 
rock. According to Russell (55) these secondary clay 
minerals rarely occur in particles larger than two 
microns and are much more resistant to weathering in 
the soil than are rock minerals ground to a comparable 
size. Grim (21) states that in defining the term clay, 
three implications must be considered. These are; 

(1) A natural material with plastic properties. 

(2) A material having very fine size grades. 

(3) A material composed of crystalline 
fragments of minerals that are mainly 
hydrous aluminum silicates and occasionally 
hydrous magnesium silicates. 

Grim reports that kaolinite, illite, montmorillonite 


















- 22 - 


and sometimes halloysite, have been found in soils. 

These clay minerals are all similar in 
crystal structure, being composed of layers or sheets 
of oxygen, silicon and aluminum atoms. Two types of 
layer lattices have been recognized, that type which 
is associated with kaolinite and the type common to 
montmorillonite. Montmorillonite may be described 
as having a 2:1 lattice crystal structure, that is, 

2 silica sheets to 1 alumina sheet. It has an expand¬ 
ing lattice and is thought to be mono clinic with a 
probable composition of ( 0 H )4 AI 4 Sig OgQ xHgO. 

Kaolinite has a 1:1 lattice, that is one alumina sheet 
to one silica sheet. It has a non expanding lattice. 
Kaolinite is thought to be mono clinic with a composition 
of (OPl)g AI 4 Si 4 Oiq. Illite has a structure similar 
to montmorillonite, a 2:1 lattice. Ho?/ever, about 15 
per cent of the silicon atoms are replaced by aluminum 
atoms. The excess charges are satisfied by potassium 
ions which, it is considered, act as a bridge between 
the layers and prevent expansion of the lattice. Illite 
is thought toMnono clinic and has a general formula of 
( 011)4 Ky (AI 4 Pe 4 H &4 Mg6) Sig-y Aly O 20 . Halloysite 
is very similar to kaolinite in crystal structure, 
composition and properties. Kaolin is-white in color, 
while illite and montmorillonite may be white, yellow, 


















- 23 - 


green, or pink* These are the common clay minerals 
found in soils, they are all thought to be monoclinic 
and exhibit good basal cleavage. Montmorillonite and 
kaolinite are commonly formed by soil forming processes 5 
illite is seldom formed in this way* Montmorij-lonitic 
and kaolonitic soils may be formed from illitic 
material and kaolinitic soils from rnontmorillonitic 
parent material* The author states that there is no 
unquestioned example of a rnontmorillonitic soil that 
has developed from kaolinitic parent material. 

Nagelschmidt (46) studied the mineral constit¬ 
uents of the colloidal fraction of red and black earths 
developed on the same parent materials from Hyderabad, 
India. Both of these soils occurred in the same field 
and were derived from the same parent rock materials, 
a coarsely crystalline granite or gneiss. The clay 
fraction was divided into three fractions, these were: 

Coarse clay 1.4 - O.lu diameter 

Fine clay 0.1 - 0.06u « 

Super fine clay under 0.06u r * 

The author found that the red clay contains predominantly 
kaolinite or halloysite. He suggests that these minerals 
were formed under acidic or neutral conditions. 
Beidellite, a member of the montmorillonite group, was 
dominant in the black clay and according to the author, 













-24- 


forms under alkaline conditions. Hagelschmidt is of 
the opinion that topography is the main factor 
associated with the difference in minerals in these 
soils. 

Kelley et al* carried out extensive studies 
of the colloidal constituents of California soils. 

These were formed on two different parent materials, 
alluvium, developed from sedimentary and igneous rock 
and a residual material, developed on igneous and 
sedimentary parent rock. The author states that every 
colloid studied is definitely crystalline and composed 
chiefly of clay minerals of definite types. It was 
possible to determine the cla 3 ^ minerals present in the 
soil colloids by comparing the x-ray diffraction 
patterns with those of known minerals. Such determinations 
are facilitated by x-raying the samples at widely varying 
moisture contents. Kel3.ey was able to show that certain 
of these soils were predominantly high in one of three 
clay minerals: montmorillonite, kaoUnite and a mineral 
he called x clay mineral, thought to be illite. In 
addition to the clay minerals, quartz, rutile and zircon 
were also present. The profiles of several American 
alkali soils drawn from different localities in Western 
United States were studied by Kelley et al. (33). X-ray 
investigation revealed that the white-alkali soils 























-25- 


contained a mixture of rnontmorillonitic, kaolinitic 
and mica-like clays. The mica-lilce clays predominated 
in the black alkali soils. The soils showing solonetz 
structure had clay minerals which were predominately 
mica-like. The authors state that considerable 
variation seems to be characteristic of the mica-like 
clays and suggest that such may be due to variations 
in the type of mica in the parent rocks of the soil 
materials. Kelley is of the opinion that clay minerals 
found in alluvial alkali soils have been inherited as 
constituents of the alluvium and are not necessarily 
pedogenic in origin* Coleman and Jackson (15) studied 
the mineral composition of twelve representative soils 
of the Coastal Plain and adjacent soil regions of south 
eastern United States. X-ray diffraction patterns were 
obtained of the coarse clay (0*2u to 2.0u) and the fine 
clay (less than 0.2u). Montmorillonite was found to be 
abundant in the majority of the fine clay fractions and 
was present in the coarse clay fraction. The only 
exceptions to this were two highly weathered soils in 
which kaolinite was dominant in both the coarse and fine 
clay fractions. Illite was present in the coarse and 
fine fraction of most soils. Quartz constituted 


■ 






. . ' . 






-26- 


approximately fifty percent of the coarse clay except 
in the highly weathered profiles, where it did not 
exceed ten percent. Quartz constituted less than five 
percent of the fine clay in these soils. The authors 
concluded that the clay fractions of these soils are 
usually mixtures of three or four mineral components 
with montmorillonite considerably more prevalent than 
was previously thought to be the case. Kaolinite, 
while predominant in the highly weathered soils, is 
present in lesser amounts than had been expected in 
soils of rather wide occurrence in this region. 

A solodic soil profile from Wilkin County in 
the Red River Valley, Minnesota, was investigated by 
Brown and Caldwell (10). This soil was developed on a 
lacustrine deposit under arid and semi-arid climatic 
conditions. The authors found that montmorillonite was 
the dominant clay mineral in this soil. Illite was 
noted in the A horizon and possibly kaolinite in the 
parent material. Quartz was present in all horizons. 

They suggest that the dominance of montmorillonite in 
this profile indicates that it has developed under arid 
and semi-arid conditions. The characteristics of the 
clay fractions of pianosol and chestnut soils taken 
from eastern Nebraska, ’were studied by Larson et al. (36). 
These soils were developed in sub-humid and semi-humid 




J 









. 

i J J 

• ... ’ J,’' ' ' .. . Y, ■' 

... . . . . 






. ' % 

















- 27 - 


areas where the processes of weathering and soil 
development were less intense than in humid areas. 

The authors found that the clay fractions from all 
horizons where weathering would be expected to be 
more intense are similar to clay fractions from deeper 
and presumably less weathered horizons. This indicated 
that the clay forming processes have been similar through¬ 
out the entire development of these soils. An increase 
in the clay content is not accompanied by a notable change 
in clay mineral content. Since kaolin was not identified 
as being present in these soils, apparently it is not 
produced by weathering of loess or the calcareous till 
under conditions in eastern Nebraska. The authors found 
the iron rich member of the montmorillonitic group of 
clay minerals to be dominant among materials containing 
basic constituents. There appeared to be an indication 
of weathering of coarse clay in the surface horizon with 
a subsequent increase in quartz content. 

Alexander et al. (1) studied mineral constituents 
of soil colloids from a group of United States soils 
including red podzolic, grey brown podzolic, prairie 
chernozem and desert. In general the colloid studied 
was from the Bg horizon of these soils. Montmorillonite 
was identified only in the chernozem and prairie soils. 
These soils are developed on till. The authors state 


. 






. 



. 




/ 








- 28 - 


that the results obtained indicate prominent differences 
between colloids from B horizons of different soil 
groups. The data obtained revealed that the red podzolic 
soils contain kaolinite as the dominant component 
accompanied by large amounts of hydrous oxides and free 
oxides of iron. The grey brown podzolic has both 
kaolinite and hydrous mica as prominent components, 
accompanied by an appreciable amount of free oxides and 
hydrous oxides of iron. 

Peterson (52) studied the relation of parent 
materials and environment to the clay minerals in a group 
of soils along the lower Des Moines river in Iowa. The 
author found that Iowa soils with parent material of 
pleistocene origin are characteristically high, in raont- 
morillonite. However, the proportion of montrnorillonite 
to kaolinite varied according to climate, vegetation and 
source and age of parent materials. Generally in soils 
on older pleistocene materials, this proportion is lower 
in both A and B horizons. This shift is greater in 
podzolic soils than in prairie soils. There is evidence 
that there is an increase in the amount of montmorillon- 
ite in clay in the B horizon in areas of greater rainfall. 
Soils developed from glacial till, residual materal, 
terrace and bottom land in Union County, Pennsylvania, 
were investigated by Jeffries and Yearick (30). The clay 





• 








.. 











* 






« . 

• * • • • . W . * i i 


■ 


■ 


















- 29 - 


minerals were found to be essentially chlorite and 
hydrous mica with a trace of quartz* The authors 
concluded that the differences in these soils in the 
distribution of these minerals were due to depositional 
processes and material of preglacial origin. This was 
concluded from the sharp differentiation between the 
clay mineral patterns of the A ana B horizons in some 
soil profiles and the absence of such differentiation 
in others* Two processes of deposition were traced to 
account for such differences. 

Pearson and Ensminger' (50) reported on twelve 
Alabama soils which represented the following physio¬ 
graphic regions: the Coastal Plains, Piedmont, Black 
Belt, Limestone Valley and Appalachian Mountain area. 
The soils could be divided into two groups: those 
containing no detectable amounts of montmorillonite and 
those in which montmorillonite was dominant. The 
authors found that the concentration of montmorillonite 
has no apparent relationship to the soil pH# The 
kaolinitic soils contained relatively large amounts of 
iron oxide, and quartz and kaolinite increased in 
concentration from the surface to the weathered parent 
material in every case. Quartz occurred in greatest 
percentage at the surface said decreased sharply with 
depth. Very little mineralogical variation was noted 



$2:.i L 




Q > J 









- 



















iy 







in the raontmorillonitic soils with depth. 

Buehrer et al. (12) studied the principal soils 
under cultivation in Arizona. The dominant clay minerals 
were montmorillonite, illite and kaolinite. In these profiles 
montmorillonite tended to increase with depth. The authors 
noted that poor structural characteristics were associated 
with soils high in montmorillonite. 

Peterson (51) has shown in laboratory experiments 
with synthetically produced soil aggregates that kaolinite 
is associated with platy structure in soils. Using mixtures 
of commercial montmorillonite, kaolinite and sand, Peterson 
duplicated the platy soil structure that is often apparent 
in podzolized soils. Studies of the clay minerals of field 
soils substantiated his findings. Peterson states that “from 
the data obtained it may be surmised that platy structure in 
soils can be expected to devgLop within comparatively shallow 
depths of the profile in layers containing kaolinite without 
abundance of montmorillonite, in the absence of appreciable 
amounts of humus, calcium and iron oxides and in a zone free 
of extensive root activity such as would be found under a 
native prairie sod". The author noted that in general podsol 
soils showed a higher proportion of kaolinite in the A horizon 
and a higher proix>rtion of montmorillonite in the B. The 
oldest soils studied, that is soils developed on Kansan or 
Nebraskan tills, show a much higher proportion of kaolinite 
than do other Iowa soils. The X3laty A horizons show a marked 






:-v- 


. . . 


' 


: 








' 

. 




















,..v y.\ ■■ v. • v . .-■ -...i y .• * ^ 








» 



























- 31 - 


increase in kaolinite. Peterson states that it is quite 
possible that the high amount of kaolinite in these soils 
of earlier glacial periods may be characteristic of the 
parent material rather than of pedogenic processes. If the 
shift in favor of kaolinite has occurred since the deposi¬ 
tion of the original material it may indicate either the 
formation of kaolinite as a weathered product or the loss of 
montmorillonite through decomposition or elluvi&tion* 

Bidwell and Page (7) studied the dominant soil 
catena of the west central Ohio, late Wisconsin, glacial 
till plains. These soils, derived from similar parent 
material, a high lime glacial till, differ largely because 
of drainage as influenced by topography. The soils were 
formed under forest vegetation. The illitic type of clay 
mineral was dominant in every profile investigated. The 
presence of this mineral in the parent materials of each of 
the profiles studied, indicates that a large part of this 
type of mineral occurring in the solum, may have been 
inherited from the parent material and is not of pedogenic 
origin. In the less well drained members of the catena, 
there was evidence of montmorillonite in the B horizons 
which seems to indicate that soil formation processes have 
caused production of this mineral since deposition of the 
till. There was little evidence, however, to show 7 that the 
different internal drainage conditions under which these 





soils are found have produced any appreciable amounts of 
different types of clay minerals in the dilxerent proxiles. 

Rice and Atkinson (5) have carried out some 
preliminary studies of Canadian soils. Three clay soils 
used were: Regina clay from Saskatchewan, Rideau clay from 
Ontario, and north Gower clay from Ontario. Also investigated 
was a brown podzolic soil from Quebec. The results obtained 
suggest that Regina clay is high in montmorillonite. The 
North Gower clays and Rideau clays show the presence of 
illite, with some indication of montmorillonite; kaolinite 
was also suggested as being present in the Rideau clay. In 
the brown podzolic profile, four horizons were studied. 
Montmorillonite and illite were shown to be the predominant 
clay minerals. The authors suggest that illite in the profile 
may be derived from the micas in the parent material, or as a 
result of soil development processes. 

/ OUTLINE OF INVESTIGATION 

This work involves a comparative study of two grey 
wooded profiles: the Cooking Lake grey wooded, which is 
developed on material of Edmonton formation and the Breton 
grey wooded, developed on material of Paskapoo formation. It 
is also thought that Bearpaw shale may be mixed with the 
parent till of the Cooking Lake grey wooded soil. 

Information at the present time suggests that these 
two soils should be differentiated on the basis of their 
parent materials, plus slight differences in profile 



~ 








. . . . ■« 














■ 


■ 








j 
































- 33 - 


characteristics. While this work involves only the grey 
wooded soils, these parent materials occur in the black soil 
zone and therefore the same problem arises there regarding 
series separation. 

In this investigation it is hoped, if possible, to 
determine whether there are sufficient differences in the 
parent materials to justify placing these soils in separate 
series. 

Description of the sample areas 

The sample area for the Cooking Lake grey wooded 
soil lies approximately twenty miles east and southeast of 
Edmonton in the Beaverhills moraine. The sample area for 
the Breton grey wooded lies approximately forty-five miles 
south west of Edmonton, betv/een Pigeon Lake and the town of 
Breton. This area may be considered a part of the Duffield 
moraine. The topography of the sample area is morainal, 
swell and swail. The vegetation and climate under -which these 
grey wooded soils were developed has been previously 
discussed and applies to the sample areas. 

Plan of investigation 

The soils were sampled during the summer of 1950. 

Three locations in each area were sampled. They were then 
returned to the soils laboratory at the University of Alberta 
to be prepared for investigation. It was thought that physical 
and mineralogical analyses would indicate whether the parent 

















. 


■ 

_ 








. 






, 




. : 




• • 




... . .. 








’i 























- 34 - 


materials and soils developed over them were sufficiently 
dissimilar to warrant a series separation. The information 
obtained may also aid in interpreting certain physical and 
fertility aspects of these soils, which is of utmost 
importance to the soil surveyor. 



Sampling 



As much as possible, all locations that were 
sampled, were identical with respect to topography, vegetation 
and climate. The samples were taken on a northern exposure, 
with a slope of approximately three percent. The sample 
locations were relatively the same position on the slope. 

Six horizons in each profile were sampled: these 
being the Ag, AB, Bg, Bg, Be a and parent material (P.H.). 

The parent material samples were taken well below the 
horizon of lime accumulation, where it was thought the least 
amount of weathering had taken place. The specific locations 
of the samples are listed below. 

Cooking Lake grey wooded 


Location no. 1 


H.W. 7-51-21-4 


Location no. 2 


S.v;. 30- 52 - 23 -4 


Location no. 3 


N.E. 22- 51 - 22 - 4 





-35- 


Breton grey wooded 


Location 

no. 

1 

N.E. 10 

- 47 - 2 - 5 

Location 

no • 

2 

N.E. 33 

- 46 - 3 - 5 

Location 

no. 

3 

i; . — i . 2o 

- 47 - 4 - 5 


The morphological characteristics of these soils 
have been discussed in detail previously in this work. The 
description may be applied to the profiles sampled above, so 
that it does not seem necessary to go into further detail 
regarding these samples. 

Soil cores were taken of the Parent materials of 
these soils at locations one and two. The cylinders were 
forced into the soil to a depth of 4 inches and then dug 
out. The excess material clinging to the cylinder was 
carefully removed. The core was then placed in an air 
tight container and returned to the laboratory and v^axed to 
prevent drying out. 

Preparation of samples 

The samples were spread out and allowed to become 
air dry, at room temperature, in the laboratory. From each 
of the air dry parent materials samples, a number of clods 
were removed and set aside for volume weight determinations. 
The air dry samples were then passed through a screen with 
openings two millimeters in diameter. The material which 
passed through this seive was bottled and stored for future 
analysis. 










-36- 


Preparation of composite sam les 

It seemed likely that any physical and mineral- 
ogical differences in the two soils under consideration 
would he most likely shown in those horizons where the 
morphological characteristics were dominant. These horizons 
in both soils under consideration were Ag 5 Bg* Be a and the 
parent material. It was therefore decided to make composite 
samples for each of the above horizons from the Cooking Lake 
and the Breton soils. 

One hundred grains of slaved soil were taken from 
each of the above horizons from the three locations in 
Cooking Lake and Breton sample areas. The three hundred 
grams of soil were then thoroughly mixed. 

The resulting composite samples of the Ag>- Bg? Bca 
and parent material for each of the two soils were bottled 
for future analyses. 


Physical Analyses 

Determination of apparent specific grav it y 

The apparent specific gravity was determined using 
the paraffin immersion method as outlined by Shaw (57), 
Lauritzen (38) and Lauritzen and Stewart (37). The workers 
listed above used clods under field conditions. In this 
work, structural units taken from the profile v^ere oven dried 
first (110°C.), then the apparent specific gravity determined 









- 37 - 


by the method they outline. Nine determinations were made 
on the parent materials from each location. The average 
figure for these determinations was taken as a representative 
of the apparent specific gravity. 

Determination of real specific gravit y 

The real specific gravity of the parent materials 
of these soils was determined by means of a pycnometer. The 
procedure followed is outlined by Lyon and Buckman (42). 

Three determinations were made on the parent material taken 
from each location. The average figure for these determin¬ 
ations was taken as representative of the real specific 
gravity. 

Determination of percent pore space 

Baver (6) gives the formula used in determining the 
percent pore space of these parent materials. The values for 
A.S.G. and R.S.G. used in this formula were obtained by the 
methods previously outlined. 

Llechanical analyses 

The mechanical analyses of these soils was determined 
by the pipette method. The procedure followed was in general 
the same as described by Kilmer and Alexander (34) differing 
in pre-treatment with HC1 and removal of the dissolved mineral 
matter as follows: 

(1) To the 10 gram sample of air dry soil sufficient 
H 2 0 was added to bring the sample into suspension by stirring. 
Sufficient IN. HC1 was added asu/as necessary to adjust the pH 


















... 








































. 










- 





' 





• • * 

' 

. , 

* : . : ; 




■ ; . 




























- 38 - 


of the suspension to 3.5 (spot plate test, bromphenol 
blue indicator). The organic matter was removed according 
to the procedure outlined by the above authors. 

(2) Following the hydrogen peroxide treatment, 
the soil was removed from the beaker to a 100 ml. centrifuge 
tube using a rubber policeman and a strong jet. The suspen¬ 
sion in the centrifuge tube was brought up to 90 ml. by 
adding distilled HgO. The pH of the suspension was adjusted 
to 3.5. ihe tubes were then centrifuged until the supernat¬ 
ant liquid v/as clear. The supernatant liquid was removed 
using suction. The soil was washed in this manner six times. 
Following the last washing, the supernatant liquid was re¬ 
moved and the soil transferred to a 50 ml. beaker using a 
rubber policeman and a strong jet. The beaker was then dried 
on a steam bath and placed overnight in an oven at 110°C., 
cooled in a dissicator and then weighed to the nearest 
milligram. The weight of the oven dry organic-free sample 
is used as a basic weight for calculating the percentages 
of the various fractions. The procedure from this point on 
followed that of Kilmer and Alexander. 

Pipettings were made at 10 cm. depths for 20u, 5u 
and 2u particles. The settling times v/ere determined from 
Stokes’ law as shown by Baver (op cit.). 

In addition the clay fraction less than 0.2u v/as 
determined using the centrifuge method outlined by Steele 
and Bradfield (59). 



. 











. 






. 






















< 























■ 













-40- 


Diagram I 


Apparatus for determination of soil. pF* 










































-39- 


The mechanical analyses described above were 
carried out on each of the composite samples from the 
Cooking Lake and Breton soils. In addition, mechanical 
analyses were carried out on samples of the A 2 , B 25 Bca 
and parent material horizons for each of the three loca¬ 
tions in the two sample areas. 

Determination of -pF 

The apparatus used for the determination of soil 
pF was similar to that used by Lutz and Learner (41) and 
I'Telson and Baver (op cit.) The vacuum pressure control 
apparatus built in the physics laboratory at the University 
of Alberta was similar to that described by Richards (54). 
Diagram 1. shows the apparatus. The vacuum control permits 
adjustment of the tension to any desired level. The surge 
tank prevents fluctuations in pressure. The amount of 
water withdrawn from the saturated core at each tension 

was measured by means of a graduated cylinder. From this 
is calculated the amount of pore space filled with water at 

each tension. The total pore space has been previously 
discussed. The volume of the soil core was determined and 
the percent water by volume was calculated from the volume 
of water removed from the core at each applied tension. The 
different tensions used were converted to pF values by 
taking the common logarithm of the manometer readings 


















■ 

































. 

. . ■. .. . - . ^ 






. 






- 41 - 


(expressed in centimeters of water) and graphed as is shown 
in Fig. 6. 

Mineralogical analyses of the soils 

The Ag, Bg, Bca and P.M. composite samples of the 
Cooking Lake and Breton grey wooded soils were selected for 
mineralogical analyses. 

The procedure followed in preparing these soils for 
mineral analyses is outlined by Jackson et al. (26). In 
order to ensure having a sufficient amount of clay, 60 grams 
of soil were used from each of the Ag samples, while 40 grams 
were used from the B 2 , Bca and P.M. samples. 

The sands obtained from the parent materials of 
these soils were sieved. Of the sieved material, the coarse 
sand (1.0 - 0.5 mm.) and the fine sand (0.25 - 0.1 mm.) were 
used for mineralogical determinations. These sands were 
separated by using heavy liquids at a specific gravity of 
2.95. A method for such separation is described in detail 
by Marshall and Jeffries (43). The separates were then 
analysed by standard petrographic methods. It was believed 
that any differences in the mineral content of these soils 
would most likely be indicated in the parent materials where 
the mineral fraction was least subject to weathering. There¬ 
fore it was not felt necessary to make a petrographic study 
of the mineral fraction of the other horizons. The clay 
present in the samples was divided into two fractions, coarse 




O'lj'. 


0 



. . ' 


"j 


o j 


O lU' 








- 42 - 


clay (2.0u - 0.2u) and fine clay (0.2u ana less). The 
separation of these two fractions was accomplished by 
using a centrifuge. The length of time required for 
centrifuging was determined from the formula given by Steele 
and Bradfield (op cit.). The two clay fractions were then 
removed from the centrifuge tubes. The clay suspension was 
condensed into a smaller volume, ready for x-ray analyses. 

The petrographic and x-ray analyses of the sand 
and clay fractions of these soils was carried out under the 
direction of Dr. H.J. Atkinson, Head of the Soil Chemistry 
Unit, Science Service, at Ottawa. The following' description 
of the method used was forwarded by Dr. Atkinson. 

U A Philips 1950 x-ray spectrometer and large cameras 
were used with CuKe* and FeIC ^radiation. Smears were made 
from the sample suspensions, using microscope slides. The 
smears were then x-rayed with CuK^ radiation and Mi-filter 
at 40 KV, 20 MA and spectrometer rate meter settings of 
4-1-8 and 8-1-8. 

Ten-milliliter samples of the suspension were kept 
in reserve and the remainder taken to dryness at 80°C. The 
dry samples were analysed with CuK^ radiation, Mi-filter and 
a spectrometer setting of 4-1-8 at 1°20 under the following 
conditions. 

(1) Dry sample - general run, CuK , Hi , 40 KV 

20 MA. 



, . . • * 

























■ J -j. . , ' 
















0 ^ .J 






0 

















.v -. w'c j .; . x/. 

- 

- 

■ 


















- 43 - 


(2) Ignited to 350°C« for hour to check for 
sepiolite and treated as in (1)* 

(3) Ignited to 600°C. for -g- hour to check for 
the kaolinite group and treated as in (1). 

(4) Ignited to 700°C. for 4 hours to check for 
vermiculite and treated as in (1). 

Dry samples were treated with ethylene glycol and 
x-rayed in large cameras with FeK<^ and Ma filter at 45 KV 9 
10 MA for 20 hours and used for the estimation of montmoril- 


lonoids.’ 1 





-44- 


RESULTS 

Table I shows the apparent specific gravity of 
the parent materials of the soils under consideration. The 
average figures for the three locations of each soil series 
indicate that the Cooking Lake has a highef apparent 
specific gravity than has the Breton parent material. 

Table II shows the real specific gravity of the 
Breton and Cooking Lake soil parent materials. The average 
figures for the three locations of each soil series indicates 
that there is little difference between the two -parent 
materials. 

Tables III and IV show the per cent pore space of 
the parent materials of these soils. The pore space is 
determined for each sample location in the two soil series. 
Cooking Lake parent material is shown to have a much lower 
per cent pore space than the Breton. 










- 45 - 


TABLE I 

Apparent specific gravity of Cooking Lake and 
Breton grey wooded soil parent materials from 
three locations as determined by the paraffin 
immersion method. 


Cooking Lake 



Site 1 

Site 2 

Site 3 

Depth 

80" 

60" 

72" 


1.82 

2.03 

1.94 


1.93 

2.21 

1.95 


1.91 

2.01 

2.05 


2.01 

2.09 

2.13 


1.99 

1.91 

2o09 


2.01 

2.09 

2.13 


1.99 

1.91 

2.09 


2.01 

1.95 

2.07 


2 o 06 

1.83 

1.84 


2.09 

1.97 

1.83 


2.15 

1.97 

1.84 

Average 

2.00 

1.99 

1.97 


Breton 




Site 1 

Site 2 

Site 3 

Depth 

84" 

102" 

108" 


1.97 

1.77 

1.98 

1.78 

1.78 

1.84 

1.82 

2.02 

1.82 

2.22 

1.80 

1.82 

1.78 

1.82 

1.86 

1.77 

1.75 

1.81 

1.75 

1.67 

1.75 

1.74 

1.73 

1.76 

1.70 

1.71 

1.71 

1.84 

1.78 

1.81 


Average 




























TABLE II 


Heal specific gravity of Cooking Lake and Breton 
grey wooded soil parent materials from three 


locations 

as determined by 

the pycnometer 

method. 


Cooking Lake 



Site 1 

Site 2 

Site 3 

Depth 

80" 

60" 

72" 


2.61 

2.66 

2.73 


2.66 

2.65 

2.67 


2.65 

2.65 

2.68 

Average 

2.64 

2.65 

2.69 


Breton 



Site 1 

Site 2 

Site 3 

Depth 

84" 

102" 

108" 


2.68 

2.71 

2.71 


2.64 

2.73 

2.68 


2.69 

2.74 

2.70 

Average 

2.67 

2.73 

2.70 
















'CC 










- 47 - 


TABLE III 

Per cent pore s^ace of the Cooking Lake grey 
wooded soil parent material. 


Location 

Depth 
in inches 

R.S.G. 

A.S.G. 

% Pore 
Space 

Average 

No. 1 

80 

2.64 

2.00 

24 


No. 2 

60 

2.65 

1.99 

25 


CO 

• 

o 

£3 

72 

2.69 

1.97 

27 

25% 


TABLE IV 


Per cent pore space of the Breton grey wooded 
soil parent material. 


Location 

Depth R.S.G. 

in inches 

A.S.G. 

% Pore 
Space 

Average 

No. 1 

84 

2.67 

1.84 

31 


No. 2 

102 

2.73 

1.78 

35 


No. 3 

108 

2.70 

1.81 

33 

332 
























■ 















- 48 - 


Table V and Fig. 1 show the per cent sand in the Breton 
and Cooking Lake grey wooded soils. These are analyses 
of composite samples. The results were obtained by talcing 
the average of duplicate analyses. 

The following observations may be made: 

1. The Cooking Lake soil has a higher total 
sand c ontent in all horizons than the Breton 
soil. 

2. In every horizon of the Cooking Lake soil, 
each size fraction in the sand content is 
generally greater. 

3. In both soils the fine sand is the largest 
size fraction present. 

4. The sand fraction in the Cooking Lake soil 

is largest in the Ag horizon, decreases in the 

Bg and Bca, then increases and levels off in 
the P.M. In the Breton soils the Bg has the 

least sand and the P.M. the most 




' 

.. 







■ 







.. - . . . V' * ■' 


■ 

, - • ♦ 








- 49 < 


TABLE V 

Per cent sand separates of Breton and Cooking Lake 
grey wooded soils (composite samples) as determined 




by the 

pipette method 



Horizon 

%Sand 

%v.e.s« 

. 5SC.S. 

%M.S. 

%F.S. 

%V.F.8' 

C«L• Ag 

48.99 

2.42 

6.41 

8.06 

18.57 

13.49 

Br. " 

32.64 

0.78 

2.70 

4.75 

12.88 

11.52 

C .L. Bg 

29.16 

1.51 

4.67 

7*20 

15.38 

10.41 

Br. " 

27.07 

0.34 

1.97 

3.89 

11.88 

9.04 

C «Xj . B c c\ 

39.20 

1.87 

5.18 

6.86 

14.72 

10.57 

Br. " 

34.52 

0.46 

2.22 

4.89 

14.54 

12.40 

C.L. P.M, 

► 42.12 

1.65 

5.10 

7.80 

16.27 

11.29 

Br. 11 

36.46 

0.51 

2.28 

5.06 

16.09 

12.48 










PER GENT 


- 50 - 


Figure 1. 


Sand Sex:>arates 
Cooking Lake and Breton 
Grey Wooded Soils 



VC 2.0 - 1.0 nun. 

C 1.0 - 0.5 

M 0.5 - 0.25 

F 0.25- 0.1 

VF 0.1 - 0.05 


HORIZON 























































... ... '* 


. 







v |u<.. 





jfjl 




K 



' '■ 




- 51 - 


TABLE VI 

Per cent silt separates of Breton and Cooking Lake grey 
wooded soils (composite samples) as determined by the 


pipette method 


Horizon 

% Silt 

% C .Si. 

% F. Si. 

% V.F. Si 

C *L. Ag 

38.49 

15.00 

20.38 

3.11 

Br. » 

54.55 

22.41 

28.89 

3.25 

C • L • B g 

21.36 

7.88 

11.30 

2.18 

Br. 11 

32.18 

9.24 

19.93 

3.02 

C.L. Bca 

28.68 

12.26 

14.35 

2.06 

Br. « 

38.84 

14.69 

20.84 

3.31 

C.L. P«M« 

28.68 

9.97 

14.94 

3.77 

Br. » 

38.12 

12.03 

22.64 

3.45 
















-52- 


The per cent silt in the Cooking Lake and Breton soils is 
shown in Table VI and Fig. 2. The per cent coarse silt 
was determined by difference. In this work the various 
silt fractions are as follows: coarse silt - 50u to 20u, 
fine silt - 20 u to 5u and very fine silt - 5u to 2u. 

The following observations may be made: 

1. The total per cent silt is higher in the Breton 
soil in all horizons than the Cooking Lake soil. 

2. The coarse silt and fine silt fractions are 
higher in all horizons in the Breton than in the 
Cooking Lake soil. 

3. 'There is little difference in the very fine silt 
fraction in these soils. 

4. The fine silt is the dominant fraction in both 
soils and in all horizons. 

5. The coarse silt fraction is highest in the Ag 
horizon, decreases in the Bg horizon and increases 
slightly in the Bca and P.M. The total silt 
fraction shows the same trend. 


i, l u '■ 'P ■ 






PER GENT 


-53- 

Figure 2. 


Silt Separates 



HORIZON 


VF 5 u - 2u 

F 20u - 5u 

C 50u -20u 









































. 

. 

.... . .. .. 























J 0 











- 54 - 


Table VII and Fig* 3 describe the clay content of the Cooking 
Lake and Breton soils. In this work, fraction size designa¬ 
tions were as follows: coarse clay - 2u to 0.2u and fine clay 
- 0.2u and less. 

The results suggest the following observations: 

1. In both soils the Ag horizons were considerably 
lower in clay content than other horizons. 

2. The coarse clay is the dominant size fraction 
in both soils. 

3. The per cent fine clay fractions is low in the 
Ag horizon but remains fairly uniform in Bg 5 Bca 
and P.M. 

4. The per cent clay content is low in the Ag 5 
increases considerably in the Bo (from 12% to 40% 
in the Breton soil), decreases in the Bca horizon 
and decreases slightly again in the P.M. 





-55- 


TABLE VII 

Per cent clay sex)arates of Breton and Cooking Lake 
grey wooded soils (composite samples) as determined 
by the pipette method 


Horizon 

Total 

Coarse 

Fine 

C «L• Ag 

12.52 

8.84 

3.67 

Br. “ 

12.81 

9.14 

3.68 

C.L. B 2 

37.30 

21.03 

16.27 

Br. " 

40.76 

26.82 

13.94 

C *L • Bca 

32.13 

21.70 

10.43 

Br. “ 

26*65 

20.39 

6.25 

C.L. P.M. 

29.11 

22.64 

6.47 

Br. “ 

25.43 

15.08 

10.34 







J 


J 

















PER CENT 


- 56 - 


Figure 3* 

Clay Separates 
Cooking Lake and Breton 
Grey Wooded Soils 



A 2 Bg Be a P*M« 


F# 0*2u and less 

C. 2u - 0.2u 


HORIZON 








































« * a 














- 57 - 


Tables VIII and IX show the sand fractions present in 
Cooking Lake and Breton soils from three different sites 
and are included here for the purpose of showing the 
variations between the different locations. The composite 
samples previously discussed were made up of soil from 
these locations. Fig. 4 shows the total sand fractions 
present in each of these soils from three different samjjle 
areas. 

The silt fractions and clay fractions from the 
three different locations of each of these soils is shown 
in tables X and XI, XII and XIII respectively. Fig. 5 
depicts the total silt and clay fractions present in each 
of these soils, located in three different sample areas. 

The above tables and figures show in general the 
same trends as were previously observed in discussing the 
composite samples of these soils. While samples from the 
different locations showed variations it would seem safe 
to conclude that the large differences between the composite 
samples were actually significant differences and not merely 
due to sampling error, j-ny differences which are shown in 
the composite sample are in most cases present in the 
individual samples which made up the composite sample. 

Mechanical analyses show that there is little 
textural difference in these soils*. In the U.S.D.A. guide 
for textural classification triangle (60) the soils were 
found to be as follows: 





-58- 


Horizon 

Breton 

Cooking Lake 

A 2 

Silt loam 

Loam 

B 2 

Clay loam 

Clay 

Bca 

Loam 

Clay loam 

P.M* 

Loam 

Clay loam 


The greatest difference in the above textures was in the 
Ag horizons* In the other horizons, the textures were very 
close, usually lying in adjacent positions and separated by 
the line which placed them in different textural classes. 



-59- 












- 60 - 


TABLE VIII 


Per cent sand separates of Cooking Lake grey wooded soils 
from Locations 1, 2 and 3 as determined by the pipette method 


Horizon 

£ Band 

% V.G.S. 


% M.S. 

% F.S. 

% V.F.S 

1 

58,19 

2.37 

8.45 

11.29 

21.79 

14.29 

2 Ap 

45*93 

2.35 

5.12 

6.83 

16.88 

14.75 

3 

54.18 

1.47 

6.65 

10.15 

21.04 

14.89 

1 

37.08 

1.48 

4.25 

6.49 

14.23 

10.63 

2 B 2 

39.19 

1.27 

4.66 

7.46 

15.64 

10.17 

3 

39.90 

1.03 

4.60 

7.53 

15.54 

11.21 

1 

41.88 

1.54 

5.53 

7.58 

15.96 

11.28 

2 Bca 

40.05 

1.28 

5.01 

7.84 

15.56 

10.34 

3 

33.48 

0.95 

4.21 

5.51 

12.88 

9.91 

1 

42.28 

4.54 

5.07 

7.32 

15.22 

10.12 

2 P.M. 

42.74 

1.28 

5.52 

7.55 

16.21 

12.17 

3 

43.00 

1.47 

5.09 

7.51 

16.59 

12.34 


TABLE IX 

Per cent sand separates of Breton grey wooded soils from 


Locations 

1, 2 and 

3 as det 

ermined by the 

pipette method 

Horizon 

% Sand ; 

l v.c.s. 

% C.S. 

% M.S. 

. % F.S. 

% V.F.S 

i 

33.27 

1.15 

3.55 

5.44 

13.32 

9.80 

2 A 2 

28.45 

0.37 

2.07 

4.01 

10.72 

18.67 

o 

31.44 

0.38 

1.86 

3.85 

11.24 

14.11 

1 

14.43 

0.13 

1.09 

2.18 

6.41 

4.63 

2 B 2 

25.89 

0.53 

1.87 

3.93 

11.39 

8.16 

3 

36.44 

0.36 

2.02 

4.68 

15.84 

13.54 

1 

35.09 

0.50 

2.39 

5.00 

14.75 

12.44 

2 Bca 

34.66 

0.32 

2.32 

4.90 

14.35 

12.77 

3 

34.58 

0.61 

2.15 

4.90 

15.24 

11.77 

1 

64.32 

0.44 

3.83 

9.90 

30.82 

19.32 

2 P.M. 

37.70 

1.10 

2.75 

5.32 

16.23 

12.31 

3 

39.11 

0.62 

2.81 

5.72 

18.63 

11.31 





















. o 











' 61 - 


TABLE X 

Per cent silt separates of Cooking Lake grey wooded soils 
From Locations 1, 2 and 3 as determined by the pipette method 


Horizon 

% Silt 

% Cs. Si. 

• 

•H 

m 

• 

T -i 

V.F. Si- 

1 

35.94 

16.59 

16.00 

3.35 

2 Ap 

43.89 

17.90 

21.81 

4.18 

3 ^ 

37.35 

15.94 

17.87 

3.54 

1 

26.76 

10.80 

13.14 

2.82 

2 B 2 

29.23 

7.14 

16.42 

5.67 

O ^ 

O 

24.70 

10.75 

12.99 

0.96 

1 

27.89 

11.84 

13.63 

2.42 

2 Bca 

28.61 

13.39 

15.22 

0.00 

3 

30.06 

10.75 

18.72 

0.59 

1 

26.31 

3.26 

21.02 

2.03 

2 P.M. 

25.62 

8.42 

15.00 

2.20 

3 

26.32 

10.76 

13.01 

2.55 



TABLE 

XI 



Per cent silt separates of Breton grey wooded soils from 


Locations 

1 ? 2 and 

3 as determined by the 

pipette method 

Horizon 

% Silt 

% Cs. Si. 

% F. Si. 

% V.F. Si. 

1 

57.04 

21.74 

30.85 

4.45 

2 A 2 

59.71 

24.74 

31.23 

3.74 

3 

60.02 

26.89 

30.14 

2.99 

1 

29.46 

8.13 

18.09 

3.24 

2 B 2 

42.70 

20.39 

20.53 

1.78 

3 

33.83 

10.60 

21.61 

1.62 

1 

41.04 

21.84 

18.95 

0.25 

2 Bca 

38.66 

12.23 

24.14 

2.29 

3 

38.46 

14.16 

20.11 

4.19 

1 

17.91 

0.67 

15.34 

1.90 

2 P.M. 

37.75 

13.57 

20.68 

3.50 

o 

O 

34.60 

6.78 

26.79 

1.03 





















- 62 - 


TABLE XII 

Per cent clay separates of Cooking Lake grey wooded soils 
from Locations 1, 2 and 3 as determined by the pipette method 


Horizon 

Total % Clay 

% Coarse 

% Fine 

1 

5.87 

5.19 

0.68 

2 Ap 

10.18 

9.50 

0.68 

3 * 

8.47 

6.68 

1.79 

1 

36.16 

17.08 

19.08 

2 Bp 

31.58 

19.76 

11.83 

3 ^ 

35.40 

16.60 

18.80 

1 

30.23 

20.38 

9.85 

2 Bca 

31.34 

20.40 

10.94 

3 

36.46 

26.29 

10.17 

1 

31.41 

19.29 

12.12 

2 P.M. 

31.64 

20.84 

10.80 


:ent clay separates 

,ions 1, 2 and 3 as 

TABLE XIII 

of Breton grey 

determined by 

' wooded soils from 

the pipette method 

Horizon Total % Clay % 

Coarse 

% Fine 

1 

9.69 

7.78 

1.91 

2 A 2 

11.84 

8.78 

3.06 

3 

8.54 

7.42 

1.12 

1 

56.11 

43.70 

12.41 

2 Bp 

31.41 

19.86 

11.55 

3 

29.73 

18.64 

11.09 

1 

23.87 

18.74 

5.13 

2 Bca 

26.68 

20.78 

5.90 

3 

26.96 

21.21 

5.75 

1 

17.77 

14.02 

3.75 

2 P.M. 

24.55 

18.68 

5.87 

3 

26.29 

21.02 

5.27 















PER CENT 


- 63 - 


Figure 4. 

Sand separates as determined in three 
locations on Cooking Lake and 
Breton grey wooded soils 



Location No, 1 
Location No, 2 


Location No, 3 

































PER CENT 


- 64 - 


Figure 5. 

Silt and Clay Separates as determined in three locations 
on Cooking Lake and Breton grey wooded soils 



HORIZON 



Cooking Lake Breton 

Location Ho, 1 mtmm Location Ho. 1 

msam Location Ho, 2 m&mm Location Ho. 2 


Location Ho. 3 


Location Ho. 3 































































. 








—65— 


The pF curves for the Cooking Lake and Breton 
parent materials are shown in Fig. (6). The curves 
represent the Breton P.M. sampled at locations one and 
two and the Cooking Lake P.M. sampled in dujDlicate at 
locations one and two. In both soils there was considerable 
variation in the tension at which they drained. There was 
as much variation between duplicates and between locations 
as there was between parent materials. In both soils the 
slope of the curve from zero tension to the flex point is 
steep with relatively little difference in degree of slope 
for the parent materials from different locations. This as 
pointed out by Baver (op cit.) would indicate similar 
permeability rates. The volume of water removed from the 
soil core from zero tension to the flex point was small in 
both soils. The flex point of the curves was higher in all 
samples of Breton than in Cooking Lake. However, with so 
much variation it x would not be logical to draw any sound 
conclusion from this difference. 














■ . 


. 



. 









- 66 - 


Figure 6 • 


pF curves for Breton and Cooking 
Lake parent materials 




Per cent HgC by Volume 




















- 67 - 


Table XIV shows the mineral count of the coarse sand 
(1.0 mm. to 0.5 mm.) and the fine sand (0.25 ram. to 0.1 mm.) 
from the Cooking' Lake and Breton parent materials. Some 
general observations may be made regarding this table 

1. The fine sand fraction shows a much greater 
number of minerals than does the coarse sand 
fraction. 

2. There is little difference in the dominant 
minerals present in either soil, but there is 
a difference in the amounts present. 

3. Of the more abundant minerals counted, olivine 
and andalusite are present in the Cooking Lake 
and absent in the Breton P.M. 

4. In nearly all cases where the mineral is present 
in both the coarse and fine sand fractions, there 
is a sharp increase in minerals counted with a 
decrease in sand size fraction. This is most 
noticeable with the minerals amphibole and 
felspars• 

5. The mineral count suggests that there is more 
weathered material in the Breton parent material 
than the Cooking Lake parent material. 


- 68 - 


Table XIV 


Sample 


Cooking Lake 

Coarse Sand 

< 2.95 
> 2.95 

Fine Sand 

< 2.95 
>2.95 

Breton 

Coarse Sand 
4 2.95 
>2.95 
Fine Sand 

<2.95 

>2.95 


o ■d 

v 

fn C 
C <H 

■e e 


49 

150 


264 

292 


51 

170 


248 

301 


18 

1 


76 

1 


26 

10 


42 

13 


40 


20 


6 14 


24 


9 

20 


20 35 


16 


„ .. „ . materials of the Cooking Lake and Breton series 

Minerals In sand fraction from parent e r 


14 

66 


21 * 

8 


36 


135 97 


52 


8 


136 50 

+ 

(30 altered) 


1 

1 5 


Dumortierite 


















Andalusite 



© 


N 

CCS 

ft 

o 

EH 


© 

-P 


(—I 

o 


o3 

£ 

o 


© 

S3 


o 

Sh 

© Sh 
> O 


2 

2 

I 13 4 ;3 13 

II 3 12 


4+ 

1 1 22 

1 1 6 3 5 8 1 60 

5 2. 9 29 


^Numerous (hundreds) of tiny 
collophane grains 










- 69 - 


Table XV shows the minerals present in both of these 
parent materials in amounts in excess of one per cent* 

The minerals present in both parent materials in greatest 
quantity are felspar, quartz and the opaque minerals. In 
the Cooking Lake material, these are followed by garnet 
and the amphiboles, while in the Breton P.M. pyroxine and 
mica are the next in order of dominance. 

Table XVI shows the minerals present in the coarse sand 
fraction of Cooking Lake and Breton soils' parent materials 
in amounts in excess of one per cent. Collophane is the 
dominant mineral in both of these parent materials. In the 
Breton P.M. a lower percentage is noted than is actually 
present in this parent material, (see note table XIV). 

Cooking Lake P.M. is slightly higher in quartz content than 
Breton P.M. The percentage of opaque minerals, chlorite, 
calcite, argonite and mica is higher in Breton than Cooking 
Lake P.M. while per cent felspars are higher in the Cooking- 
Lake than the Breton P.M. 

Fig. 7. shov/s the heavy minerals present in the fine 
sand fraction in excess of one per cent. The minerals having 
a specific gravity less than 2.95 are shown in Fig. 8. The 
latter shows that there is more felspar and less quartz in 
the Breton than in the Cooking Lake P.M. There is very little 
calcite in this fine sand fraction of Breton P.M. About the 
same amount of micaceous material is present in the two fine 
sand fractions. 



"3 c 





- 70 - 


TABLE XV 

Minerals present in the fine sand fractions of Cooking 
Lake and Breton grey wooded soil parent materials, expressed 
as a percentage of the total number of grains examined* 


Minerals 

Cooking Lake 

Breton 

Felspars 

25.0 

32.0 

Quartz 

18.0 

9.3 

Opaque 

13.8 

10.0 

Garnet 

7.1 

4.3 

Amphibole 

6.1 

3.6 

Calcite 

3.9 


Pyroxine 

3.6 

6.4 

Mica 

3.6 

5.3 

Kyanite 

2.3 

1.1 

Olivine 

1.8 

_ 

Andalusite 

1.4 

_ _ 

Anhydrite 

1.4 

- - 

Epidote 

1.3 

2.9 

Barite 

1.1 

- _ 

Tourmaline 

- - 

1.8 

Cordierite 

- - 

1.6 

Haematite 

- - 

1.1 

Weathered and 

coated material 4.5 

16.2 


The following minerals v/ere also recognized in amounts less 
than one per cent of the total grains counted* 

Cooking Lake parent materials: 

Chloritic material, collophane, galena, spinel, 
argonite, ankerite, dumortierite, dickite, 
gibbsite, gypsum, spodumene, tourmaline and coraierite. 
Breton parent materials: 

Analcite, calcite, anhydrite, ankerite, corundum, 
barite, sericite, illmenite, topaz, chiastolite and 
zircon. 














71 - 


TABLE XVI 

Minerals present in the coarse sand fraction of the Cooking 
Lake and Breton grey wooded soils parent materials, expressed 
as a percentage of the total number of grains counted. 


Minerals 

Cooking Lake 

Breton 

Collophane 

40.0 

13.0 

Quartz 

30.0 

23.0 

Opaque 

9.5 

16.0 

Felspar 

4.5 

1.4 

Analcite 

4.0 

- — 

Axinite 

• 2.0 

- - 

Garnet 

3.0 

- - 

Chlorite 

1.0 

6.3 

Olivine 

1.0 

- - 

Apatite 

1.0 

- - 

Calcite 

- ~ 

16.0 

Argonite 

- - 

7.2 

Mica 

- - 

2.7 


The following minerals were also identified in amounts less 
than one per cent of the total grains counted. 

Cooking Lake parent materials: 

Mica and amphibole. 

Breton parent materials: 


Analcite and cordierite 










Per cent of the indicated minerals 


- 72 - 


Figure 7. 

Cooking Lake and Breton grey wooded 
parent material mineral content 

of the fine sand (0.25 ram. to 0.1 mm.) 




0 

GQ 

-P 

d 


0 

•H 

l—1 

d 

i—1 

o 

d 

erf 

rO 

erf 

P 

♦H 

CJ 

d 

£ 


d 

Ph 


o 

g 






Breton 


o 






0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

d 

•P 

-p 

-P 

d 

•H 

•H 

o 

•rH 

•H 

X 

d 

T3 

W 

> 

o 

erf 

•H 

d 

•H 

d 

r's 

p, 

rH 

I — 1 

!» 

w 

w 

erf 

d 

o 

P-. 


□ 


0 

4-3 

0 

-P 

•H 

0 

0 

0 

•H 

-P 

-P 

-P 

d 

d 

erf 

•H 

•H 

cr 

0 

g 

d 

d 

erf 

•H 

0 

erf 

nd 

A 

Trf 

d 

PQ 

h 

o 

d 

O 

O 

(-H 


•a 






















































» ) 

■ ■ -■ • 


, 





■ 















- 73 - 

Figure 8. 

Cooking Lake and Breton grey wooded parent 
material mineral content of the fine 


sand (0,25 mm. to 0.1 mm.) 



CO 

Nl 

© 

U1 


-P 

-p 

ctf 

erf 

u 

•H 

o 

ft 

a 

o 

•H 

CO 

2 

1 — 1 

§ 

i — 1 

O’ 

cti 


© 


o 


ft 



























- 74 - 


Tables XVII and XVIII show the minerals present in the 
coarse and fine clay fractions of the two parent materials* 
The table indicates that the dominant clay minerals in the 
parent materials are the montmorillonite group and illite, 
with kaolinite occuring to a much lesser degree* 

Generally, in both of these soils montmorillonite 
appears to be in largest quantities in the fine clay fraction 
In the Cooking Lake profile, illite is in larger quantities 
in the coarse clay fraction in the A 2 and B 2 horizons, while 
in the Bca and P.M. horizons, it is in largest quantities in 
the fine clay fraction. In the Breton profile, illite is in 
larger amounts in the fine clay fractions of the A 2 and Bg 
horizons, while in the Bca and P,M, horizons, it is in 
largest quantities in the coarse clay fraction. 

In the Cooking Lake profile, montmorillonite appears 
to be present in greater quantities than illite in all 
horizons. 

In the Breton profile, illite generally exceeds 
montmorillonite in the Ag and B 2 horizons, while the reverse 
is true of the Bca and P*M. horizons. There is little 
difference in the amount of montmorillonite and illite in 
the parent materials of both of these soils. However, 
considerable differences exist in the A 2 , B 2 and Bca horizons 
The kaolinite present in the Cooking Lake soil shows a 
tendency to increase with depth, reaching a maximum in the 





















- 75 - 


parent material. In the Breton profile, kaolinite is 
higher in the Ag horizon than the Bg or Be a and in amounts 
similar to the Ag horizon in the P.M. 

Felspar present in the clay fraction remains fairly 
constant in all horizons in the Breton profile, while in the 
Cooking Lake profile, there is a definite tendency for the 
felspar to increase with depth. 

In both profiles quartz appears to be associated 
with the coarse clay fraction. Quartz appears in similar 
quantities in the Ag and P.M. horizons and in smaller 
quantities in the Bg and Bca horizons. 

The largest concentration of chlorites appeared in 
the fine clay fraction of the Bg horizon and the coarse clay 
fraction of the Bca horizon of the Cooking Lake soils. The 
parent material of this soil showed the least accumulation 
of chlorites of the horizons examined. In the Breton profile, 
chlorites were concentrated to the greatest extent in the 
coarse clay of the Ag horizon and the fine clay of the B 2 
horizon. In the remaining horizons of this soil, chlorites 
appeared in similar amounts in all size fractions with the 
exception of the coarse clay in the parent material where 
only a trace of this mineral was reported. 

Muscovite was found in similar amounts in both clay* 
fractions of all horizons of the Cooking Lake soil, v/ith the 
exception of the coarse clay of the P.M. 


where greater 







I 








0 $ ■■ 


j 





concentrations were found. Muscovite in the Breton profile 
in greatest concentrations was confined to the coarse clay 
of the Bg horizon and both clay fractions of the Bca horizon. 

Apatite was present in all horizons of the Cooking 
Lake profile, while in the Breton profile it is present only 
in very small amounts in the B 2 , Bca and P.M. horizons. 

Gypsum was found in largest accumulation in the 
fine clay fraction of the Bca horizon in the Cooking Lake 
soils. This mineral was absent in all horizons of the Breton 
soils. 

The remaining minerals reported in these two tables, 
are not present in sufficient amounts to compare differences 
in the two soils, or differences in horizons of either soil. 

The method of determination was qualitative and 
comparison of minerals present in minor amounts without 
further analyses would probably be in error. However, it is 
worth noting that the minerals reported present in minor 
amounts are generally concentrated in the upper horizons of 
these two soils. 

On ignition of the clay samples of these two soils, 
the Cooking Lake sample gave a white to creamy residue, 
showing a lack of iron compounds, while the Breton samples 
were quite red, indicating a high percentage of iron bearing 
compounds. The iron bearing minerals shown in the table do 
not indicate any reason for this difference. 


-y t- 

Table XVII 


Minerals in the clay 
Group 1 


Horizons 


Group 2 


fractions from Cooking Lake profile 


Ih -p 
o o 

bO M 
•H !>> 
■P fn 
C Si 
< O 


3 I 

K § 

c!> pq 




15. A2 <0.2u 

40 

6 

5 

6 


Pr. 

Tr. 

Pr. 

Tr. 

2-3 

Pr. 

++ 


Tr. 




Tr. 

2+ 

Tr. 

Tr. 


Tr. 

Tr. 

16,A 2 (2-0.2)u 

30 

12 

8 

Tr. 

23 

Pr. 

3 


Tr. 

Tr. 

?¥* 

Pr. 


Pr. 

Pr. 


5 

Tr. 


Tr. 

Tr. 



11.B2 <0.2u 

30 

17 

5 

16 


Pr. 

Tr. 

Tr. 

Tr. 

Pr. 2+ 

Pr. 

++ 

Pr. 

Tr. 

Pr. 

Tr. Pr. 


2 

Pr. 


Tr. 

Tr. 


Pr. 

12. B 2 (2-0.2)u 

40 

24 

7 

Tr. 

13 

Pr. 

5 


Tr. 


Pr. 

Tr. 

Tr. 

Tr. 




Tr. 

Tr. 

Tr. 

Tr. 



'i'.Bca <0.2u 

40 

27 

8 

7 

Tr. 


Tr. 


Tr. 



??* 



5 


2 





Tr. 

Tr. 2+ 

8.B c a(2-0.2)u 

40 

24 

9 

10 

11 


2 


2+ 






Pr. 









3.P.M. ^0.2u 

45 

28 

17 

Tr. 

5 


5 











Tr. 

Tr. 





4.P.M. (2-0.2)u 

20 

21 

18 

Tr. 

20 


5.5 


5 

Tr. 







5 

Tr. 


Tr. 
















Tr. 

Tr. 

Tr. 

Pr. 


Group 1 contains no iron compounds 
with the exception of the chlorite 




Pr. 


group. 


Pr. 

Tr. 

Pr. 

Tr. Tr. 

Group 2 contains only iron-bearing 
compounds. 





Tr. 

Tr. = Trace - very small amounts, 
probably less than 1 %, 

Tr. 

Tr. 2+ 


Pr. 


Pr. ■ Present - compounds for which 

no pure standards were available 


and may represent amounts vary¬ 
ing from less than 1 % to 10$. 

Pr. 








■ 78 - 


Table XVIII 


Group 1, 


Minerals in the cslaj 


fractions from Breton profile 


Horizons 


■p i—i 
•H *H 
U -P 
o o 
&0 W 
•H 

■P Sh 
S3 43 
C O 


-P 

1 

■S 


(O 

o 

w 

c 

P4 

^0 


, A2 <0.2u 

20 

22 

8 

Tr. 


Pr. 

2+ 


T] 


Tr. 

?¥• 

Tr. Pr. Pr. 


Tr. 

, A2(2-0.2)u 

15 

12 

9 

12 

17 




Tr+ 


Pr. 

Pr. Pr. Tr. 

Pr. 


B2 <0.2u 

20 

30 

8 

11 



Tr. 


Ta 


Tr. 


Pr. 

2 


2 2+ 

, B 2 (2-0.2)u 

15 

24 

7 

Tr. 

13 

Pr. 

Tr. 


1 


Tr. 



Tr. 



Bca <0.2u 

45 

19 

6 

5 


Pr. 


Tr. 

2- 

-3 

5 


Pr. 

Tr. 

Pr. 


B ca (2-0.2)u 

15 

27 

8 

9 

8.4 


Tr. 

Tr. 


5 | 



Pr. 

Tr. 


Tr. Tr. 

P.M. <0.2u 

50 

24 

7 

7 



2+ 


1 

Dr. 




Tr. 



P.M.(2-0.2)u 

20 

25 

9 

Tr. 

14 





2 


Pr. 

Pr. 

Pr. 


Tr. Tr. 


Tr. Pr. 

Tr. 2 Pr, 

2 Pr. 

2 Pr. 

Tr. 


Tr. 


Pr. 









^0 


Tr. 


Pr. 


Group 2. 



Pr. Tr. Tr. Pr. 


Tr. Tr. Pr. 

Pr. 


Notes 


Group 1 contains no iron 
compounds with the exception 
of the chlorite group. 


Group 2 contains only iron¬ 
hearing compounds. 


Pr. 1 Tr. Pr. 


Tr. =» Trace - very small 
amounts, probably less than !%• 


Pr. Pr. 

Pr. 


Pr. Pr.j 


Pr. • Present - compounds for 
which no pure standards were 
available and may represent 
amounts varying from less than 
1% up to 10%. 


Tr. 




















-79- 


DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 


The Breton parent material has a slightly higher 
real specific gravity than the Cooking Lake parent material. 
However, the variation of both soils is within narrow limits, 
approximately 2.6 to 2.7. The narrow limits of these results 
are worthy of note since it was found in the mineralogical 
analysis that felspar and quartz make up the majority of the 
minerals present in the parent materials investigated. 

The Cooking Lake parent material is shown to have 
a higher apparent specific gravity or volume weight than the 
Breton parent material in each of the sample locations. The 
volume weight differs from specific gravity in that it 
compares the weight of the dry soil to the weight of water 
of the same total volume, that is, the space usually filled 
by soil particles, soil air, and soil water. It might be 
concluded therefore, that the Cooking Lake P.M. is compacted 
to a greater degree than the Breton P.M. Lyon and Buckman 
(op cit.) state that very compact soils regardless of texture 
may have volume weights in the neighborhood of 2.0. Cooking 
Lake P.M. as observed in the field, does appear to be more 
compact than Breton P.M., a fact which was taken into consider¬ 
ation when these soils were classified. 

The amount of pore space in a soil is determined by 
its structural conditions, that is, by the inter-related 
influences of texture, compaction and aggregation. Lyon and 
Buckman state that in a compact subsoil the pore space may be 






• . 


' 






. . - . 


' 

. , 


• . 'I 


. , ■ 

• ■ ; ,^' r ;’ 3 










- 80 - 


as low as 25 or 30 per cent. In the Cooking Lake and Breton 
soils, the parent materials approximated these values, Cooking 
Lake being 2o per cent and Breton 33 per cent x^ore space. 

These values for pore space represent the volume percentage, 
but do not characterize the size of the pores. This indicates 
that the Cooking Lake P.M. is compacted to a greater degree 
than the Breton P.M. and has a lo er per cent pore space, as 
would be expected. 

The mechanical analyses of these soils revealed 
little differences in .he horizons examined, with the exception 
of the A 2 horizons, where the Breton soil was found to have a 
higher ]per cent age of silt and a lower percentage of sand than 
the Cooking Lake soil. 

The B 2 horizons in both of these soils were shown to 
have a higher percentage of clay than all other horizons. The 
Ag horizon was shown to have a very low percentage of clay 
X^resent, while the clay content of the B ca and P.M. horizons 
were about the same in both soils. The high percentage of clay 
in the B 2 horizons suggest that eluviation of the A 2 horizon 
has taken place with a subsequent accumulation of the clay in 
the B 2 horizon; since the clay present in the B 2 is in 
greater quantities than could have been inherited from the 
parent material. This is characteristic of the grey wooded 


process. 



- 81 - 


The variation in the curves obtained for the Breton 
p.M. and Cooking Lake P.M. sampled in the same locations 
indicate that to ascertain any degree of accuracy for pF 
values of these soils a far greater number of cores would be 
needed. However, the curves do indicate certain character¬ 
istics of these parent materials which have been observed 
under field and previous laboratory investigations. The 
steep slope of the curves for both soils indicate a uniform¬ 
ity in the size of the pores. 

\ 

Volume weight determinations indicated that both 
of these soils were compressed to a considerable degree. It 
is obvious that compaction tends to decrease the amount and 
size of the larger pores in clay soils. The small amount of 
water withdrawn from zero tension to the flex point of the 
curves might indicate a system of small pores which require 
a high tension to move a small volume of water through them. 

The higher flex point of the curves for Breton P.M suggest 
that the pore size of this P.M. is smaller than that of the 
Cooking* Lake P.M. However, the variation in the curves of 
both soils does not allow us to conclude whether this is 
actually the situation or not. 

The mechanical analyses of individual soils taken 
in the different sample areas indicate that the differences 
found between the composite samples were real differences 
since they were much larger than the differences between 
samples from the same area. 

The mineralogical analyses of the coarse and fine 
sand fractions of the parent materials of these soils indicated 
















. ... 

, 
















- 82 - 


that there is little difference in the kind of minerals 
present, but considerable differences are apparent in the 
quantities in each soil. These results indicate that there 
is no mineral or minerals present in sufficient quantities 
in either parent material to differentiate them on a 
mineralogical basis. 

• However, it should be noted that olivine, andalusite, 
barite and anhydrite were present in the Cooking Lake material 
in excess of 1 per cent and absent in the Breton parent 
material. Similarly tourmaline, cordierite and haematite 
were present in the Breton parent material and absent in the 
Cooking Lake parent material. These differences in mineral 
content could not be interpreted as being characteristic of 
either soil unless they were also shown to be xoresent on 
examination of the very fine sand fraction (0.1 mm. to 0.05 mm.). 
It is in this fraction that the greatest variety of mineral 
content would most likely be present. 

Sanderson (56) examining thin sections, found the 
Edmonton sandstone to be characterized by a preponderance of 
felspar grains over quartz. One sample of Paskapoo sandstone 
was examined and had a much higher percentage of quartz than 
felspar. In each sample he noted that a high percentage of 
the felspar present was weathered. The dominant minerals in 
both of the fine sand fractions are the felspars, followed 
by quartz and opaques. The felspars are readily weathered 







. 


. 







if 








. 

' 

. 


■ . ' • ... ..... . i . , ’ V '■ .- - - ' ■. 'Jt 

■ 

» 

■ 







o o 


—oo— 


and this is observed by their high concentration in the 
fine sand fraction and low concentration in the coarse 
sand; while quartz, which is highly resistant to weathering, 
occurs in considerable amounts in both the coarse and fine 
sand fractions. The mineral collophane is confined to, the 
coarse sand fraction in considerable amounts suggesting that 
under pedogenic processes the mineral is resistant to weather¬ 
ing. 

The high amounts of weathered material, weathered 
felspars and the possible presence of broken-down collophane 
in the Breton parent materials suggest that this parent 
material is weathered to a greater degree than is the Cooking 
Lake parent material. 

Workers in the United States, Coleman and Jackson 
(op cit.), Caldwell (op cit.) found montmorillonite to be 
the dominant soil clay mineral . Coleman and Jackson reported 
kaolinite to be predominant only in a few highly weathered 
soils in south eastern United States. 

X-ray analyses of the Breton and Cooking Lake soils 
showed the montmorillonoids and illite to be dominant clay 
minerals in these soils. Kaolinite was noted only in small 
amounts. There is no apparent difference in the content of 
the montmorillonites in the different horizons of both soils. 
In the Breton soil the increase in illite in the B 2 horizon 
over the amount present in the P.M. is possibly due to leached 



- 84 - 


material from the An horizon accumulating in the B 2 horizon 
of this soil* There is a greater concentration of illite 
in the B 2 than in the A 2 horizon of the Cooking Lake soil. 
However, the amount of illite in the B 2 horizon does not 
exceed that present in the P.M. and is therefore probably 
inherited from the parent material. KaoUnite, while 
present in the A 2 horizons of both of these soils, is also 
present in the parent materials. It therefore seems unlikely 
that the small amounts present in the A 2 horizon could have 
resulted from pedogenic processes. It is doubtful whether 
the platy structure described by Peterson (op cit.) and 
found in the Ag horizons of these soils could be due to the 
small amounts of kaolinite present. 

The relatively high percentage of felspar i^resent 
in both clay fractions indicates the degree of weathering 
of this mineral in these soils. The increase in this mineral 
with depth in the Cooking Lake soil suggests either a 
decreased weathering with depth, or an intense weathering in 
the upper horizon and subsequent accumulation in the lower 
horizons. 

In view of Sanderson f s (op cit.) findings, it is 
also possible that considerable weathered felspar was present 
in the parent materials of these soils when they were 
deposited and weathering has continued. The relative 
abundance of minerals of clay fraction size concentrated in 





the Ag and Bg horizons of both of these soils suggest that 
in these horizons are accumulated the mineral products of 
the soil pedogenic processes. The physical analyses carried 
out show that the only appreciable difference in these 
parent materials is the higher volume weight of the Cooking 
Lake soil. This is probably due to greater compaction of 
this material. The mineralogical analyses, both petrographic 
and x-ray, showed little difference between the tv/o soil 
parent materials and although the mineralogical analyses 
were qualitative in nature there is evidence to suggest 
doubt as to whether or not these two soils should be separated 
into different series. 



- 86 - 


SUIvlIARY 


1. The physical and mineralogical characteristics of 
the Breton and Cooking Lake grey wooded soils have 
keen investigated• 

2. There appears to be little difference in the physical 
characteristics of the parent materials examined* 

Cooking Lake parent material is thought to have been 
compacted to a greater degree than Breton -parent 
material* 

3. pF curves determined on Cooking Lake and Breton soils 
suggest that both of these soils are uniform in size of 
pores . 

4. pF values indicated that both soils were compact, with 
a probable low percolation rate. 

5. The variation in the results of pF determination indicate 
that to interpret results of this nature with any degree 
of accuracy large numbers of cores must be used. 

6. Petrographic examination of the coarse and fine sand 
fraction of the parent materials did not indicate any 
characteristic mineral in large quantities that could 
be associated with either parent material. 

7. X-ray analyses showed the dominant clay minerals to be 
montmorillonite and illite in these soils. 

8. The higher percentage of illite present in the B 2 














































. 












- 87 - 


horizon of the Breton soil indicated that translocation 
of the mineral had taken place from the Ac horizon. 

9. There was no apparent difference in the dominant clay 
minerals in the parent materials of these soils. 

10. This investigation suggests that the differentiation of 
the Breton and Cooking Lake soils into different series 
on the basis of differences in their parent materials 
is not justified. 



- 89 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. ALEXANDER, L.T., HENDRICKS, S.B., NELSON, R.A. I.Iinerals 

present in soil colloids: II Estimation 
in some representative samples. Soil 
Sci. 48: 273-279. 1939. 

2. ALLAN, J.A. Geology. Res. Coun. of Alberta Rpt. 34. 

1934. 

3. ALLEN, V.T. Petrographic studies bearing on the 

genesis and morphology of Illinois soils. 
Proc. 2nd Inter. Cong. Soil Sci. 3:113-117. 
1932. 


4. ATKINSON, H.J., RICE, H.M. Soil mineralogy. Chemistry in 

Canada. 2: 29-33. 1950. 


5. _Soil mineralogy II preliminary 

results in mineralogical investigations of 
Canadian soils. Scientific contribution. 
18o• Div. of Chem. Sci. Service. Ottawa. 
1950. 

6. BAVER, L.D. Soil physics, pp. 1-398. John iley and 

Sons, Inc., New York. 1948. 

7. BIOTELL, O.W., PAGE, J.B. The effect of weathering on the 

clay mineral composition of soils in the 
Miami catena. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 15: 
314-318. 1950. 

8. BOWSER, W.E., ERDMAN, R.L. , WYATT, F.A., NEV/TON', J.D. Soil 

survey of Peace Hills sheet. Univ. of 
Alberta. Bull. 48. 1947. 


9._, PETERS, T.W. Soil survey of Red Deer sheet. 

Univ. of Alberta. Bull. 51. 1951. 

10. BROWN, A.L., CALDWELL, A.C. Clay mineral content of the 

colloidal material extracted from a solodi 
soil profile. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 

11: 213-215. 1946. 

11. BUCKHANNAN, W.H., HAM, W.E., Preliminary investigation of 

heavy mineral criteria as an aid in the 
identification of certain soils in Oklahoma. 

Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 6: 63-67. 1941. 































* • - . * 




. 






■ ; . ■» 





-DO- 


12. BUEHRER, T.I 

M, ROBINSON, D.O., DEMXHG, J.L". The mineral 
composition of the colloidal fraction of 
some south western soils in relation to 
field behavior. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 

13: 157-165. 1948. 

13. CADY, J.G. 

Soil analyses significant in forest soil 
investigations and methods of determinations: 
3. Some mineralogical characteristics of 
podzol and brown podzolic forest soils. 

Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 5: 352-354. 1940. 

14. CARROLL, D. 

Heavy mineral assemblages of soils from the 
Gold Fields of western Australia. Geo. Mag. 
73: 503-511. 1936. 


15. COLEMAN, R., JACICSON, M.S. Mineral composition of the clay 


16. D^-iN a, E.S. 

fraction of several coastal plain soils of 
south eastern United States. Soil Sci. Soc. 
Am. Proc. 10: 381-391. 1945. 

A textbook of mineralogy with an extended 
treatise on crystallography and physical 
mineralogy, pp. 1-851. John Wiley and Sons, 
Inc., New York. 1948. 


17. TITil.IS, J.H. The soils of Manitoba. Manitoba economic 


18. FRY, W.H. 

Survey Board, Winnipeg. 1938. 

Petrographic methods for soil laboratories. 
U.S.D.A. Tech. Bull. 344. 1933. 


19. GOLDTHWAIT, d.W., KRUGER, F.C. Weathered rock in and under 



drift in New Hampshire. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull. 
49: 1183-1198. 1938. 

20. GLASSEY, T.V 

/. Notes regarding soils and vegetation of south 

west Wyoming. Am. Soil Survey Assoc. Bull. 
15. 1934. 

21. GRIM, R.E. 

Modern concepts of clay minerals. Ill. State 
Geol. Survey Report. 80. 1942. 

22. HART, R. 

A detailed study of a region characterized 
by diverse rocks and partly covered by 
glacial drift. Jour. Agr. Sci. 19: 90-105. 
1929. 
















* 



,- 91 - 


23. HART, R. Soils of south eastern Scotland. Jour. Agr• 

Sci. 19: 801-313. 1929. 

24. HASEMAN, J.F., MARSHALL, C.E. The use of heavy minerals 

in studies of the origin and development of 
soils. Mo. Agr. Exp. St a. Res. Bull. 387. 1945. 

25. HENDRICH, J•, NEYtfLANDS, G. The value of mineralogical 

examination in determining soil types with a 
method of examination and a comparison of 
certain English and Scottish soils, t^our. Agr. 
Sci. 13: 1-17. 1923. 

26. JACKSON, M.L., WHITTIG, L.D., PENNINGTON, R.P. Segregation 

procedure for the mineralogical analysis of 
soils. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 14: 77-81. 

27. JEFFRIES, C.D. The mineralogical composition of the very 

fine sands of some Pennsylvania soils. Soil 
Sci. 43: 357-366. 1937. 

28. ___, WHITE, J.W. Mineralogical soil analyses as 

an aid in soil classification. Soil Sci. Soc. 

Am. Proc. 4: 364-367. 1939. 

29. _____Some mineralogical character¬ 

istics of limestone soils of different localities. 
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 5: 304-308. 1940. 

30. __, YEARICK, L.G. The essential mineral content 

of the principle soil series of Union County, 
PennsyIvannia• Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 13: 
146-152. 1948. 

31. JOEL, A.M. Predominant Saskatchewan soil profiles correlated 

with soil development factors in Northern 
latitudes. Proc. First Internatl. Cong. Soil 
Sci. 4: 200-222. 1927. 

32. KELLEY, W.P. , DORE, W.H. , WOODFCRD, A.D., BROWN, S.M. The 

colloidal constituents of California soils. Soil 
Sci. 48: 201-255. 1939. 

33. __ . _, PAGE, J.B. The col3.oidal constit¬ 

uents of American alkali soils. Soil Sci. 51: 
101-124. 1941. 

34. KILMER, V.J., AIEXAJTDER, L.T. Methods of making mechanical 

analyses of soils. Soil Sci. 68: 15-24. 1949. 












- 92 - 


35. KRUGER, F.C. A sedimentry and petrographic method of 

certain glacial drifts of Minnesota. Am. 

Jour. Sci. 34: 345-363. 1937. 

36. LARSON, W.E., ALLAWAY, W.H., RHOADES, H.F. Characteristics 

of the clay fraction of various horizons of 
Scott silt loam and Pawnie silt loam. Soil 
Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 11: 443-447. 1946. 

37. LAURITZEN, C.W., STEWART, A.J. , Soil volume changes and 

accompanying moisture and pore space relation¬ 
ships. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 6: 113-116. 
1941. 

38. _, Apparent specific volume and shrinkage 

characteristics of soil materials. Soil Sci. 
65: 155-179. 1948. 

39. LEAKEY, A. Leaching of mineral matter in some Alberta 

soils. Sci. Agr. 13: 7-15. 1932. 

40. LEAMER, R.W., SHAW, B. A simple apparatus for measuring 

non capillary porosity on an extensive scale. 
Jour. Am. Soc. Agron. 33: 1003-1008. 1941. 

41. LUTZ, J.F., LEAMER, R.W. Pore size distribution as related 

to permeability of soils. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. 
Proc. 4: 28-31. 1939. 

42. LYON, L.T., BUCKMAN, H.O. The nature and properties of 

soils, pp. 1-499. The Macmillan Co. New York. 
1943. 

43. MARSHALL, C.E., JEFFRIES, C.D. Mineralogical methods in 

soil research: The correlation of soil types 
and parent materials with supplementary 
information on weathering processes. Soil 
Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 10: 397-405. 1945. 

44. MATELSKI, R., TURK, L.M. Heavy minerals in some podzol soil 

profiles in Michigan. Soil Sci. 64: 469-487. 
1947. 

45. IOSS, H.C. The morphology and composition of Saskatchewan 

podzolic soils. Sci. Agr. 18: 708-718. 1938. 

46. HAGELSCHMIDT, G., DESAI, A.D., MUR, A. The minerals in the 

clay fractions of a black cotton soil and a 
red earth from Hyderbad Deccan State India. 
Jour. Agr. Sci. 30: 639-653. 1940. 










,>*v , • 



- 93 - 


47. KELSON, W.R., BAVER, L.D. Movement of w^ter through soils 

in relation to the nature of the pores. Soil 
Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 5: 69-76* 1940. 

48. NEWTON, J.D., WARD, A.S., BENTLEY, G.F. Wooded soils and 

their management. Univ. of Alberta. Bull. 21. 
1948. 

49. ODYNSKY, W., NEY/TON, J.D. Soil survey of the Rycroft and 

Watino sheets. Univ. of Alberta. Bull. 53. 
1950. 


50. PEARSON, R.W., ENSMINGER, L.E. Types of clay minerals in 

Alabama soils. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 13: 
153-156. 1948. 

51. PETERSON, J.B. The effect of montmorillonite and kaolinitic 

clays on the formation of platy structures. 
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 9: 37-48. 1944. 

52. ___ Relation of parent materials and environment 

to clay minerals in Iowa soils. Soil Sci. 

61: 465-475. 1946. 

53. RICHARD, J.A., CHANDLER, R.F. Some physical and chemical 

properties of mature podzol profiles. Soil 
Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 8: 379-383. 1943. 

54. RICHARDS, L.A. Low vacuum pressure control apparatus. Rev. 

Sci. Instr. 2: 49-51. 1931. 

55. RUSSELL, J.E. Soil conditions and plant growth, pp. 1-635. 

Longmans, Green and Co. Toronto. 1950. 

56. SANDERSON, J.O.G. Criteria for determination of Alberta 

sandstones. Msc. Thesis, University of 
Alberta. 1923. 

57. SHAW, C.F. A method for determining the volume weight of 

soils in field condition. Amer. Soc. Agron. 

9: 38-42. 1917. 

58. SMITH, R.M., BROWNING, D.R., POHLMAN, G.G. Laboratory 

percolation through undisturbed samples in 
relation to pore size distribution. Soil 
Sci. 57: 197-212. 1944. 

59. STEELS, J.G., HRADF3ELD, R. The significance of size 

distribution in the clay fraction. Am. Soil 
Survey Assoc. Bull. 15. 1934. 











- 94 - 


60. U.S.D.A., U.S.D.A. guide for textural classification. 

Bureau of Plant Industry, Soil and Agricultural 
Engine er ing • Y/ashingt on. 1948 • 

61. U.S.D.A., Soil survey manual. Handbook IS. Washington. 

1951. 

62. WILLIAMS, B.H., BOWSER, E.W. Grey wooded soils in parts 

of Alberta and Montana. Paper to be presented 
to Soil Sci. Soc. Am. 1952. (unpublished.) 

63. WATT, F.A., NEWTON, J.D., MATHER, T.H. Soil survey of 

St. Ann sheet. University of Alberta. Bull. 20. 
1930. 

64. _, DOUGHTY, J. The sulfur content of Alberta 

soils. Sci. Agr. 8: 549-555. 1928. 

65. __, BEWTOU, J.D. Alberta soil profiles. First 

Internatl. Cong. Soil Sci. 4: 358-366. 1927. 




; 










S8 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


The writer wishes to express thanks to Dr. J. A. 

Toogood, Professor of Soils, University of Alberta, for his 
encouragement and valuable advice throughout the course of 
this investigation and for making facilities of the department 
available• 

Thanks are extended to Dr. J. D. Newton, Head of the 
Department of Soils, for helpful suggestions at all times 
and for criticism of the manuscript. 

Thanks are due to Dr. H. J. Atkinson, Head, Chemistry 
Unit and Mr. H. M. Rice, Associate Chemist, Science Service, 
Ottawa, for their very valuable assistance in this investigation. 

Thanks are extended to Mr. W. E. Bowser, Senior 
Pedologist, Dominion Soil Survey and Mr. T. W. Peters, Dominion 
Soil Survey, for their helpful suggestions and for assistance 
in the collection of samples. 

The author is indebted to the Department of Veterans 1 
Affairs for assistance during his term of post graduate studies, 
and to the Dominion Soil Survey, Department of Agriculture, 
by whom he was employed during the course of this investigation. 







' 




« , '■ * ; 

■' ' - ;c .'•■■■■. - , ' ■ : - .' 


xij .... * 

: ■ 4 . . t c: 

.. *' ■■ -/r ■ 

' • i *1 »■ 

■ 1 ! ,. o.' 

, ■ 

, ,v * * ;• c ■ s 4 2 :• . •:•; r"i 

■ •: r . . « ■ ■ : ' , , ' ' * . ! A e 

* 

. ? ' oj t r : «. 'i; 

• -, v ■ ; 8 ■■ *iol : : ■- ‘ -A 

^ J \ : ' . ' • ;oQ: o.d- ••••-' 

j; i * :,i>A n vb'usov e.rU bQ-vjoJL*.- e.Btv erf. ororlw \rtf 











