

(3x MBBI* 

tojbswwis 

ajamramsB 






UNIV ORSITY OP IL1 U 
LIBRARY 


Regulations Ra gar Ling T ae so s_and “ Is s :■ r ta tio ns 

Typescript copies of theses and dissertations for Master’s 
and Doctor’s iegrees deposited In the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the Paculty of Graduate Studies, 
m&y be consulted In the Reference Rea Ln^ Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supervision the work was done. Some Departments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries:, through the inter library loan 
service of the University of Alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used onlp with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. dr itten permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended, passages are used, 
when permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub 1 i s he d work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been,used In accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated .to secure the signature of each 
user . 


Please sign below: 


Date 


Signatur e 


Ins tifcution 






















































THE, UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


AN INVESTIGATION OF THE BACTERIA ASSOCIATED 
WITH THE HORN FLY, SIPHONA IRRITANS . 

AND THE METABOLIC BEHAVIOR 
OF THE INDIVIDUAL ORGANISMS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 

OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF MEDICINE 
DEPARTMENT OF BACTERIOLOGY 


by 

George William Schwindt 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 


SEPTEMBER, 1952 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/investigationofbOOgeor 


S' 




University of Alberta 

Faculty of Medicine 
Department of Bacteriology 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance , a thesis entitled l# An Investigation of the 
Bacteria Associated with the Horn Fly, Siphona irritans, 
and the Metabolic behavior of the Individual Organisms 1 * 
submitted by George William Schwindt, B* Sc<>, in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
of Master of Science, 


PROFESSOR 

PROFESSOR 


Date . 


PROFESSOR 


























, 


■ 

< ' 












■ 








. 






















ABSTRACT 


This work was undertaken as part of a larger project 
which comprised an investigation into the biology and 
behavior of the horn fly, Sjphona irritans . The main 
project arose from the desirability of controlling the horn 
fly population on range cattle* One of the chief problems 
to be considered was the difficulty of rearing horn flies 
in captivity in order to study their biological activities 
more adequately. The purpose of this work was to investigate 
the bacteria associated with Sjphona irritans in its natural 
environment and from this, determine the importance of these 
bacteria to the fertility of the horn fly* 

The present thesis is a systematic account of micro¬ 
organisms and particularly bacteria associated with wild 
and laboratory reared horn flies. Organisms were isolated 
from the external surfaces of wild flies, from their crushed 
bodies after the external surfaces had been disinfected, 
and from their intestinal tracts after dissection. Limited 
studies were made of ova, larvae, and pupae of wild horn 
flies and of the skin and faeces of cattle. The conclusion 
drawn from these studies is that the bacterial flora of the 
horn fly is derived from its environment and directly 
related to it. 

Curing this project several interesting observations 
were made. Although in general the intestinal bacteria of 
the horn fly appeared representative of its environment 


























- 





, 











. 

















































, 

















yet they were obviously influenced by some unknown 
endogenous factor. Early season flies were found to contain 
mainly Gram positive cocci whereas in late season flies small 
Gram negative rods predominated. Although some degree of 
mutual antagonism was shown to exist in strains of intest¬ 
inal bacteria the change in bacterial population cannot be 
ascribed to this. Nevertheless this antagonism is probably 
associated with the relative proportions of individual 
strains at any one time. 

During this investigation it was found that the fertility 
of Sjphona irritans is not determined by any factor directly 
derived from its intestinal or invironmental bacteria. A 
study of the nitrogen metabolism of the bacteria derived 
from the intestine of the horn fly showed that certain 
strains were capable of synthesizing a number of amino 
acids. This raises a new hypothesis, that such bacteria, 
although apparently not related to a fertility factor, may 
yet play a vital role in the insect’s metabolism. 

Much work was done on the elaboration of techniques 
necessary to handling, rearing, sterilizing and dissecting 
horn flies and these methods have been described in detail. 

It is hoped that later workers who may wish to pursue further 
investigations in this practically unexplored field may be 
saved much time and trouble by consulting the descriptions. 







, 






■ 














. 








• 

















c t 



. 


























' 










A CKNOwL&D G&C-NT 


The writer wishes to thank Dr* Jo H. Stirrat, 

Associate Professor of Bacteriology, for his invaluable 
guidance and criticism of the work and presentation of 
this thesis. 

Appreciation is also extended to Dr* R. D. Stuart, 
Professor of Bacteriology and Director of the Provincial 
Laboratory of Public Health for his generous assistance 
and advice. 

I wish to thank Miss R. E* Yanda for her invaluable 
assistance in regard to the analysis of amino acids* 

I also wish to thank members of the Provincial 
Laboratory of Public Health and of the Department of 
Bacteriology of this University for their cooperation. 

The author is indebted to Mr. Tats Yamamoto who 
made the photographic plates* 

The fiitQnciql assistance given by the Division of Entomology* Oomi 
Department of Agriculture, and the cooperation of members of the 
Lethbridge Livestock Insect Lnbarqtory* Oepartmenf of fjgricu/ture, 
are hereby gratefully acknowledged. 





































• 


< 








































. 

. ■' 








* 

■ 


, 









. 

































TABLE QF CONTENTS 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 

OUTLINE of MAIN PROJECT and SCOPE of PRESENT THESIS 

Outline of Main Project and Scone of Present Thesis,.. 1 

Some Entomological Considerations.... . 2 

Life History and Habits... 3 

INTRODUCTION .. ......10 

The Importance of Microorganisms in Animal Nutrition .11 

MATERIALS and METHODS ............. .13 

Collection, Handling, and Rearing of S. irritans..19 

Isolation of microorganisms from the External surfaces 

of S, irritans......23 

Selection of a suitable Disinfectant for the external 

surfaces of S. irritans.......25 

1 he use of Thioglycollate Medium to detect possible 

flaws in the Disinfectant procedure...23 

Further problems in Disinfection of the External 

surfaces of S. irritans... ...31 

Isolation of Microorganisms from the Interior of 

S. irritans......33 

Dissection of S. irritans.................34 

A Method for the Rapid Removal of Intestinal Tract....36 

Preparation of Faecal D m ears... ..3$ 

Preparation of Histological Sections... .....39 

Testing for Antagonistic action among organisms 
isolated from S. irritans ... .41 






































TABLE OF CONTENTS cont'd. 

PAGE 

Isolation of Microorganisms from the Natural 

environment of S. irritans...... 4$ 

Classification of Microorganisms.... 50 

Some Tests used in the Identification of bacteria,. ♦ 54 
Experiments in which Bacteria were fed to S. irritans56 
An Experiment in which flies were fed on a calf..,,. 59 
A Study of the Amino Acid Metabolism of the Normal 
intestinal flora of S. irritans.. 61 

MICROORGANISMS ISOLATED DURING the PRESENT PROJECT and 

their METABOLIC BEHAVIOR , .. 63 

Fungi, leasts, and Molds associated with S. irritans 64 

Bacteria associated with S. irritans.... 66 

Bacteria Isolated from the faeces of cattle......... 75 

Bacteria Isolated from the skin of cattle........... 77 

Bacteria Isolated from the external surfaces of wild 

S. irritans....... 79 

Bacteria Isolated from the interior of wild 

S. irritans.... $1 

Bacteria Isolated from the intestinal tract of wild 

S. irritans.. S3 

Bacteria Isolated from the Interior of ova, larvae, 

pupae, and unfed flies..... $6 

Bacteria Isolated from laboratory reared flies fed 
M. flavus.. &9 























































TABLE;, OF CONTENTS cont'd. 

PAGE 

Amino acid Metabolism of Normal Intestinal bacteria 

on Complex and Simple Media. . 90 

SUMMARY and CONCLUSIONS .... 104 

Summary. 105 

Conclusions .. 106 

LITERATURE CITED ... 108 

APPENDIX .... 115 

















































OUTLINE OF MAIN PROJECT 


and 

SCOPE, OF PRESENT THESIS 
































Outline of Main Project and Scope of Present Thesis 


^his work was undertaken as part of a larger project 
which comprised an investigation into the biology and behavior 
of the horn fly, Siphona irritans . 

As a cattle M pest” the horn fly has few if any equals; 
in parts of the United States (California) it is regarded as 
the most serious one encountered. The horn fly is of com¬ 
paratively recent introduction into North America from Europe 
where it has long been recognized as an important cattle pest. 
According to the United States Bureau of Entomology it was 
first reported in 1$$7 in Camden, New Jersey; by 1$92 it was 
found over the entire continent from Canada to Mexico and 
from the eastern sea-board to the Rocky Mountains. In Alberta 
the flies are found mostly in the southern half of the province 
where they appear early in the spring and become most abundant 
in late summer and autumn. Cattle are the principal hosts 
of the horn fly and the dark coloured breeds are said to be 
attacked more than are the lighter coloured breeds (Marlatt, 
1910; Bruce, 1940). Observations made by McLintock (1951) 
in southern Alberta and Hammer (1941) in Denmark indicate 
that horn flies are more abundant on bulls, while on cows 
the short-haired breeds and individuals are preferred. 

Hammer (1941) concluded that temperature and colour played 
little part in the attraction of the host. Horses, mules, 
sheep, goats, dogs, and man are attacked occasionally 






2 


(Howard and Marlatt, 1&$9; Marlatt, 1910; Bruce, 1940; 

Hammer, 1941)* The damage caused by the horn fly is brought 
about chiefly through irritation and annoyance of cattle in 
pasture. This results in disturbed feeding and improper 
digestion, which in turn leads to loss of flesh in range cattle 
and reduction of milk in dairy cattle. The loss of blood must 
be considerable when thousands of these flies attack any one 
animal. Laake (1946) showed the extent to which flesh produc¬ 
tion was reduced by the horn fly among cattle in Kansas. 

Three herds of cattle were sprayed with 0.2$ DDT suspension. 

For every pound of insecticide applied, these herds registered 
weight gains of 1202, 12^5, and 2306 pounds more respectively 
than comparable untreated herds. Calves gained 96, cows 46 , 
and mixed herds 30 pounds per head more than in control herds. 
In Ontario and Quebec the loss of meat and milk through horn 
fly infestation was estimated by Fletcher (1$92) to be as 
high as fifty per cent. In southern Alberta, due to the 
apparent preference of flies for bulls, the ranchers claim 
that the attacks of this fly also reduce the calf crop. 

Some Entomological Considerations 
The horn fly derives its name from a practice which 
the fly sometimes has of clustering at the base of the horns 
of cattle. According to Howard and Marlatt (1$&9, l£S9a) and 
Marlatt (1910) the horn-clustering habit is only noticed in 
the spring and early summer when the flies are very abundant 
and averaging more than 100 flies per animal. But in Haiti, 









. 
























• 



•• 

• 

. 

' 











. 


* 











































































. 














- 3 - 


Myers (193$) observed the horn clustering practice only 
when the flies were least abundant (50 to 100 per animal) 
and usually in cool misty weather or on chilly shaded slopes. 
To the authors knowledge the horn-clustering practice has 
never been observed in western Canada. But when large 
numbers of flies are collected and placed in a flask consider¬ 
able condensation is formed and the flies tend to cluster 
in a ball on the bottom of the flask. These observations 
suggest that clustering is a reaction to high humidity. 

Life History and Habits 
Little was known about the life history of the 
horn fly until Howard and Marlatt (l£$9, l$$9a) and Smith 
(l$&9j 1$90) published the results of their observations 
made in the eastern United States. These observations have 
been widely quoted and, together with the summary published 
by Marlatt (1910), have formed the basis of text book 
descriptions ever since. In a series of papers published 
between 193$ and 194$ Bruce contributed additional facts 
regarding the life history and habits. Other observations 
have been published from time to time, those on the horn 
fly have been included with muscids or dung-breeding flies 
in general or as incidental observations in control studies. 

Of these the most extensive work is that of Hammer (1941) 
on flies associated with pasturing cattle and that of 
Mohr (1943) on the ecological study of cattle droppings. 




- 4 - 


That the horn fly is an obligate blood-sucking 
parasite of cattle is agreed by all observers. While 
resting the fly chooses locations on the body of the host 
which cannot be reached by its head or tail. These are 
areas slightly behind the shoulders, at the base of the 
horns, middle of the belly, and low on the hind legs. 

In general the insects appear to seek the shaded and sheltered 
places on cattle (Hammer, 1941)* For feeding, the back, 
flanks, legs and dewlap are favorite sites, or the thigh, 
back belly and udder when the cow is lying down. Hammer 
(1941) believes these are the places with thin or short 
hairs. Observations by McLintock (1951) in southern Alberta 
agree fairly closely with those of Hammer in Denmark. The 
feeding and resting postures of the flies are characteristi¬ 
cally different. At rest, the wings lie nearly flat along 
the back and overlap at the bases, the proboscis is held 
nearly horizontal, and the legs are not widely separated. 

When feeding, the fly burrows into the hair, the wings are 
slightly elevated and held out from the body at an angle of 
60° to the abdomen (Howard and Marlatt, 1$$9, l$$9a; Marlatt, 
1910). The legs are spread widely and the proboscis, held 
perpenticularly, is inserted into the hide. From 10 to 25 
minutes are required for the fly to engorge itself fully 
(Herms, 1939, p. 339); during this time the fly withdraws 
and reinserts its proboscis many times with a pumping motion. 
Much undigested blood is discharged from the anus of the fly 
while in the act of feeding. The flies are intermittent 








. 















■ 






















. 













. 





. 






. 


. 



























■ 




- 5 - 


feeders (Bruce, 1942) and in the laboratory must be fed at 
least twice daily (Glaser, 1923). Neveau-Lemaire (193&) 
states that with higher temperature more blood is required 
by the flies. 

The horn fly is about four millimeters long 
(Figure I), that is, about half the size of the common house¬ 
fly. The mouthparts (Figure II) are essentially the same 
as those of the stable fly, Stomoxys calcitrans . Coloration 
and wing venation are much the same as that of the stable 
fly. Horn flies confine their attentions almost exclusively 
to cattle on which they remain night and day with the excep¬ 
tion that at intervals gravid females dart down to freshly 
deposited cow dung for the purpose of oviposition (Glaser, 

1924). The mating habits of the fly have received scant 
attention in the literature. Bruce (1940, 1942) states that 
mating has been observed as early as two days after emergence. 
Objects such as a lonely bush, a cart, stile, cows, or human 
beings were observed by Hammer (1941) to be the sites chosen 
for mating. The specific stimuli which induce egg deposition 
are unknown. The freshly passed droppings attract the flies 
but the attraction is not spontaneous for flies under the 
belly of the cow or those on the lower hind legs, when the 
air temperature is very high (McLintock, 1951). Mohr (1943) 
found that, of all the insects attracted to cow droppings, 
the horn fly was the only one not highly dependent upon the 
wind and perhaps upon odour — for its direction of approach. 





6 



antenna- 


maxillary palpi 
proboscis —— 


Figure I 
The Horn Fly 


Figure II 

Mouth Parts of the Horn Fly 












- 7 - 


He believes this is due to its close presence at the time 
of dropping and to its conditioning to the movements of 
its host. 

Estimates of the preoviposition time from emergence 
range from three days (Bruce 1940, 1942) to 17 days (Glaser, 
1923). The eggs are relatively large, from 1.3 to 1.5 
millimeters long, but since they are reddish brown in color 
they are not easily seen on the cow dung. At a temperature 
of 25° C the eggs hatch in 24 hours (Herms, 1939, p.33$). 

The larvae burrow beneath the surface of the droppings reaching 
full growth in from three to five days. They then crawl into 
the drier parts and pupate. The pupal period lasts from 
six to eight days. The entire life cycle from egg to adult 
requires from 10 to 14 days at a temperature of 25° G (Figure 
III). 

The main project arose from the desirability of 
controlling the horn fly population on range cattle. One 
of the chief problems to be considered in the general investi¬ 
gation was the difficulty of rearing horn flies in captivity 
in order to study their biological activities more adequately. 
Until now it has been impossible to rear these insects beyond 
the first generation of adults, by any known methods of 
artificial feeding. Observations on the habits of the fly 
in its natural environment suggested that the skin of cattle 
and/or their freshly passed droppings played some part in 
the fecundity of the insect: this lead to the suggestion 
that ingested bacteria might be essential to development 




' 











, 







■ ' 






























- 8 - 



Figure III 


Ovum, Larva, and Pupa of the Horn Fly 




















- 9 - 


and egg production. 

The purpose of the present project is to investi¬ 
gate the bacteria associated with Siphona irritans in its 
natural environment. From this it may be possible to deter¬ 
mine the importance of some bacteria to the life cycle of 
the insect. The amount of investigation which could be 
carried out, however, was determined largely by the supply 
of flies available during the limited horn fly season. 












- 
















- 






























- 10 


PART I, INTRODUCTION 




























- 11 - 


The Importance of Microorganisms in Animal Nutrition 

Just after the beginning of this century it was 
discovered that all kinds of microorganisms (bacteria, fungi, 
protozoa, spirochaetes, rickettsiae, and viruses) could be 
carried and transmitted by arthropods. This early work was 
concentrated on microbes of medical importance but during 
such investigations entomophilic microorganisms, unrelated 
to disease, were also observed. The possible importance of 
these organisms in the economy of insects has now become of 
increasing research interest. 

The symbiotic relationships between mammals and 
microorganisms are especially important to man’s economy. 
Symbiosis may be defined as living together and usually carries 
the implication that each unit concerned in the relationship 
derives benefit from and is necessary to the continued 
existence, in nature, of the associated units. No mammal 
is known to produce an enzyme that will change cellulose 
and lignin into soluble compounds, but microbes found in 
the rumen of cattle (Hungate, 1944, 1944a), can produce 
enzymes that attack these compounds and prepare them for 
absorption in the digestive tract. It is commonly supposed 
that such enzymes are formed in excess of the needs of the 
microorganism concerned and that the excess of the decom¬ 
position products, such as glucose from cellulose, are then 
available to the animal. It is possible, however, that the 
host has the opportunity to use these compounds corning from 



























- 











. 











. 

























- 


■ t 


















. 





























- 12 - 


the degradation of cellulose in the form in which it is 
built into the microbial cell. The result is the same, so 
far as the host is concerned, for in either case whether 
the enzymes are of intrinsic origin or are formed by 
bacteria on the material ingested the food is prepared for 
absorption, Lardinois et al (1944) showed that the following 
B vitamins were formed in the rumen of the bovine: thiamin, 
riboflavin, nicotinic acid, pyridoxine, pantothenic acid, 
and biotin. If the animal flourishes on food not containing 
the full complement of vitamins then one must suppose that 
the deficiencies are made good through elaboration of vitamins 
in the digestive tract (Hastings, 1944)* Products of bacterial 
metabolism are also important in the nutrition of other 
animals. Bowland (1950) showed that the addition of anti¬ 
biotic supplements (aureomycin plus vitamin B]_2) bo the diet 
of weakly young pigs greatly enhanced their appetite, efficiency 
of feed utilization and weight gain. Dam et al (193$) found 
that Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli provided vitamin 
K when administered to chicks fed on diets deficient in 
vitamin K. It has been shown by Butt and Osterberg (193$) 
that the vitamin K of human faeces is derived from the activity 
of its contained bacteria. Coates et al (1951) showed vitamin 
b 12 activity of an extract of calf faeces was approximately 
equal to the vitamin B]_2 content in the Escherichia coli 
cells harvested from such faeces. 

Microbes found in insects may be present by chance 
or they may be highly specialized and capable of living only 














. 






' 










































. 























. 






' 















. 

. 





















- 13 


in association with the insects concerned. The microbes 
may cause disease or they may benefit the insect by serving 
as a source of food or accessory food substances. To some 
extent the type of association or relationship involved 
determines the location of the microbes with respect to the 
insect. According to Weber (193$) the leaf-cutting ant 
builds a fungus garden in which to raise its young. Usually, 
however, there is no such freedom of choice for the insect. 
Microbes may be found in the interior of the insect or on 
its chitinous covering. Internally the microbes are found 
extracellularly in the alimentary tract or in the haemocoele, 
or they may live intracellularly within the epithelial lining 
of the alimentary tract, Malpighian tubules, salivary glands, 
or in the cells of other tissues of the insect’s body. 

One of the most interesting aspects of the relation¬ 
ship between insects and their symbiotes is the mode of trans¬ 
mission of these microorganisms from parent to offspring. 

An outstanding example of the perpetuation of extracellular 
bacteria through successive generations has been described 
by Petri (1909, 1910) in the olive fly, Dacus oleae . The 
bacterium Xanthomonas savastonoi , occurs in the digestive 
tract during all stages of the insect’s development. When 
the olive fly deposits its egg in the fruit of the olive a 
quantity of bacteria from the special structures in the base 
of the ovipositor are also introduced and infection takes 
place when, upon hatching, the young larva swallows some of 
the surrounding bacteria. Similarly ingeneous methods of 
























































. 

































































' . 









- 14 - 


transfer occur with intracellular organisms but the modes 
of transmission are generally more complicated. In most 
cases the egg becomes internally M infected tf before oviposition 
by way of nurse cells. For example, in the bedbug (Cimex) 
and in certain weevils ( Apion ) the symbiotes invade the 
nurse cells and are carried by them to the oocytes. 

During the present project cultivation of intra¬ 
cellular microsymbiotes was not attempted. To date there 
are no adequate methods of culturing intracellular organisms 
from insects and it seems likely that if intracellular organ¬ 
isms were essential to the horn fly they would be inherited. 

Some saprophagous insects such as the cockroach 
and the pomace fly depend upon a variety of fungi, yeasts, 
and bacteria for accessory growth factors and, in some 
instances at least, for their entire food supply (Brues, 

1946, p.194)• Within the order Diptera the fungus-gnat, 
Boletina, is mainly mycetophagous. Other families of Diptera 
( Syrphidae . Berberidae , Helomyzidae ) have a similar fondness 
for fungi. Many such insects feed also on decaying plant 
and animal materials so that their diet invariably Includes 
bacteria. The larva of the lamellicorn, Potosia cuprea , 
lives in the mound of the wood-ant, Formica ru.fra . The 
mound comprises pine wood and pine needles rich in cellulose 
which are gathered by the ants. The hind gut of Potosia 
contains many microorganisms, especially Bacillus cellulosam 
fermentans * These bacteria are thought to be of importance in 
the digestion of cellulose. Werner (1926) kept a lamellicorn 
larva alive half a year by feeding it filter paper and 




















- 15 - 


expressed the belief that the cellulose must have a more 
important function than in building cell walls. 

Roubaud (1919) asserted that the adult tsetse 
fly was exclusively haemophagous. The blood ingested by 
the fly was digested only in the middle section of the gut 
where the epithelial cells included symbiotic organisms. 
According to Roubaud, these organisms play an important part 
in the digestion of the blood. Wigglesworth (1929) states, 
however, that there is no evidence that these organisms play 
any part in the digestion of blood. It was pointed out 
independently by Wigglesworth (1929) and Aschner (1931) 
that symbionts occur only in those blood-sucking insects 
which feed solely on blood at all stages of their life 
cycle; these authors offered the suggestion that micro¬ 
organisms might furnish their host with some accessory food 
substance comparable or possibly even identical with the 
vitamins necessary for mammalian growth. Evidence for this 
hypothesis has been accumulating. It has been shown that 
sterile blood is an insufficient diet for mosquito larvae, 
but that it becomes adequate if infected with bacteria 
(Aschner, 1931* Rozeboom, 1935). Aschner (1932) showed 
that if the louse, Pediculus , is deprived of its symbionts 
by operative removal of the w mycetome ls which contains them, 
its nutrition and reproductive capacity are greatly impaired, 
and that this impairment can be made good, to some extent 
at least, by the addition of yeast extract to the diet 
(Aschner and Hies, 1933; Ries, 1933). Hobson (1933) proved 

















• 































































'• 

























































- 16 - 


that sterile blood is an inadequate diet for the larvae of 
the blow-fly, Lucilia . but that it can be made adequate by 
the addition of vitamin B-^ plus autoclaved extract of yeast. 

It has been demonstrated that bacteria or bacterial 
products may be important for the continued existence of 
many insects throughout their entire life cycle. Bacteria 
can produce proteolytic, lipolytic, saccharolytic and other 
enzymes which have considerable influence on the digestion 
of the insect harboring them. Petri (1905) was the earliest 
to assign bacteria a definite role in the digestion of an 
insect. He found that the bacteria, constantly in the caeca 
of the olive fly, produce lipase. Brown (192$) found that 
most of the digestive enzymes of the honey bee, Apis me11ifera , 
were also produced by the microorganisms present in its 
digestive tract. These enzymes included invertase, both 
peptic and tryptic proteolytic enzymes, and a lipase. In 
addition to this effect on the nutrition of adult insects 
bacteria and their products may play an important part in 
the continuation of an insects life cycle. Hinman (1930) 
found that the larvae of the mosquito, Aedes aegypti , failed 
to develop in sterile synthetic media or in autoclaved water 
taken from the normal breeding places. Certain bacteria added 
to the water made it suitable for larval development. 

Rozeboom (1935) found that some bacteria used to feed the 
larvae of the mosquito were more suitable than others. 

Organisms found in the normal breeding places were the most 
suitable: Bacillus subtilis . Bacillus mycoides , Escherichia 












, 


: .. 














* 













. 












* 














. 




































■ 

. : • 










- 17 - 


coli, Aerobacter aero.genes , and Pseudomonas fluorescens 
were of equal value but Sarcina lutea was negligible in 
its effect. On the other hand organisms such as Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa rapidly killed the larvae. Glaser (1924) 
suggested that the growing larvae of the housefly, Musea 
domestica . was dependent upon accessory growth factors from 
bacteria and yeasts, but later demonstrated that this depen¬ 
dence was not absolute. In 193$ be succeeded in raising 
houseflies on nutrient medium,free from microorganisms. 
Drosophila and other fruit flies, living in an environment 
heavily populated with yeasts, bear these minute plants 
abundantlv on their bodies. There is a constant relation¬ 
ship between the presence of yeasts and the development of 
the flies eggs. Apparently the yeast fermentation is of 
importance in providing a suitable food supply for the larvae. 

In this portion of the thesis, an attempt has been 
made to review selectively some of the more important reports 
indicating the undeniable significance of intestinal micro¬ 
organisms in the nutrition of the host. 

This recorded data favors the hypothesis that 
bacteria, and particularly enterophilic bacteria, may have 
some influence on the fertility of Siphona irritans . The 
difficulties of rearing horn flies in artificial conditions 
may be related to the absence of some factor, possibly bacterial 
In origin, supplied under natural conditions from the flies 
environment. 

























. 
















. ' 

. 




























. 

I 





















































' 

































PART II, MATERIALS AND METHODS 





- 19 - 


Collection, Handling, and Rearing of Siphona irritans 

Wild horn flies were collected from cattle at 
the Lethbridge Stockyards, from cattle at the Lethbridge 
Experimental Station, and occasionally from herds at different 
localities in southern Alberta, The flies were caught by 
sweeping the backs or bellies of the cattle with a net and 
transferring them to cotton plugged Erlenmeyer flasks. 

Early in the investigation the flies were caged and shipped 
alive to Edmonton on the same day that they were captured, 

^ater, when laboratory reared flies were required at Lethbridge, 
the wild flies were placed over fresh cow manure in battery 
jars for 24 hours. No food was supplied to the flies and 
during the 24 hours their eggs were deposited on the manir e 
and around the walls of the jars. At the end of the 24 hours 
those flies which had survived were shipped to the Department 
of Bacteriology of the University of Alberta in Edmonton. 

For shipment to Edmonton the flies were transferred by means 
of an aspirator to cylindrical wire cages. These cages were 
5 1/2 inches high and 4 l/2 inches in diameter, with the 
wall made of 20-mesh galvanized iron screen. One end of the 
cylinder was covered with light cotton and the other end was 
closed with a light cotton sleeve. In transit or storage 
the sleeve was tied into a simple knot to prevent the flies 
from escaping. Before each shipment of flies the cage was 
autoclaved to prevent contamination from earlier batches. 

Each cage received up to 675 flies. For shipment a card- 



. 









■ t . 




























































. 

, 






































- 20 - 


board carton five inches square and six and a half inches 
high lined with heavy waxed paper was used. A pad of moist 
cellucotton was next pla ced on the bottom of the carton and 
the cage placed on top of the pad. The carton was then closed 
and sealed with kraft tape. The cartons were shipped the 
340 miles to Edmonton by railway or air express. Only an 
occasional fly was dead on arrival at Edmonton. 

In the Livestock Insect Laboratory at Lethbridge 
flies were reared from eggs obtained from the wild females. 

If the manure used appeared to be very wet, a two-inch layer 
of sand was first placed in the bottom of the battery jar 
before themmanure was added. When the manure was comparatively 
dry no sand was used. Eggs which were laid on the manure by 
the wild females were left undisturbed to hatch and the larvae 
allowed to complete their larval development in the jars. 

Eggs which were laid in the Erlenmeyer flasks were washed 
out with water and transferred to the filter paper in a 
Buechner funnel. After the excess water had been drawn off 
by suction the eggs were brushed onto the surface of fresh 
manure in battery jars. These battery jars with their 
contents were kept in a cabinet at about 25° G. At this 
temperature the eggs hatched in less than 24 hours and the 
larvae completed their development in about six days. When 
sand was used in the battery jars the puparia were found in 
the sand and could be removed by adding the sand to water 
and stirring. The puparia floated to the surface of the 
water and could be removed with a small strainer. When no 





21 


sand was used the puparia were found in the drier parts of 
the manure just under the crust. The crust was removed and 
the manure underneath, slightly moist and caked, was emptied 
from the battery jar and broken into a Waring blendor. Water 
was then added and the whole agitated slowly. After the 
manure settled the puparia were removed with the strainer. 
Washing the puparia in water was also necessary in order to 
remove parasitic mites. The puparia were distributed in 
Petri plate covers which were placed in the bottom of a cage 
described by McLintock (1952) where the flies were allowed to 
emerge. At 25° C emergence began in about five days after 
formation of the puparia. Since the females began to emerge 
first, the flies were not removed from the emergence cage 
until a day or two had elapsed since the beginning of the 
emergence. 

The flies, in groups of 50, were then placed in 
sterile lantern chimneys. The top of each chimney was closed 
with a single layer of surgical gauze and each chimney set 
on an inverted Petri plate cover. Daily the flies were given 
a single meal of defibrinated beef blood containing approxi¬ 
mately 2 .5°/o sucrose added as a 10fo solution. The blood and 
sugar mixture was offered to the flies soaked up in thin, 
sterile, gauze pledgets about one inch square. These pledgets 
were placed on top of the gauze covering the chimneys and each 
covered with a sterile watch glass. It was impossible to 
follow a strict sterile technique in administering the diets 
but a close watch was kept to insure that contamination was 
at a minimum. Two experiments, employing the above described 




. 




. 






■ 


' 




. 
















. 







, 

















• - '• 










. 


. 

• '• . 

■ 

. 

, 
















22 - 


feeding method plus specific bacterial organisms added to 
the diet were carried out; these experiments will be des¬ 
cribed in a later section. 

On their arrival in Edmonton wild and laboratory 
reared flies were counted and divided into lots for experi¬ 
mentation. Bacteriological examination began on the same 
day the specimens arrived at their destination. The flies 
were transferred to a large sterile test tube by placing the 
open end of the tube into the cage through the untied cotton 
sleeve. Horn flies are attracted to light and this photo- 
tropistic response was used in removing the flies from the 
cage. The cage was covered so as to darken the interior 
and a bright light placed against the closed end of the 
test tube protruding from the sleeve. When the desired number 
of horn flies had been attracted into the tube it was with¬ 
drawn and plugged immediately with sterile cotton. The cotton 
sleeve was then retied. Living flies were removed from the 
test tube one at a time with the aid of sterile forceps. 
k red hot needle was placed against the head of a fly killing 
it almost instantaneously. By this method wild and laboratory 
reared horn flies were prepared for the examinations which 
will be described subsequently. 












. 








. 















« 





























. 




. 


• 






. 






































- 23 - 


Isolation of Microorganisms 
from the External Surfaces of Siphona irritans 

Seven lots comprising a total of 72 wild horn 
flies were examined for external microorganisms. The number 
in each lot varied from 5 to 27 flies with four lots contain¬ 
ing five flies each. Each lot of flies was placed in a test 
tube containing about five milliliters of nutrient broth 
(see Appendix) and incubated at room temperature or at 
37° C for 2 4 hours. The resulting bacterial growth, as 
evidenced by clouding of the broth, was subcultured onto 
nutrient, enriched, and selective media. The inoculum was 
distributed evenly over the surface of each medium, contained 
in a Petri plate, with a sterile glass spreader. The media 
used for isolating microorganisms from each broth tube were: 
one nutrient agar plate incubated at room temperature: two 
blood agar plates incubated at 37° C for 24 hours, one plate 
aerobically and the other anaerobically in a McIntosh and 
Fildes* jar: one MacConkey ! s agar plate incubated at 37° C 
for 24 hours: and one Littman’s agar plate incubated at 
room temperature for one month (this medium is for the isola¬ 
tion of yeasts and fungi). Each colony of microorganisms, 
on each of these plates, having a morphology distinct from 
the others present was picked to a nutrient agar slant. 

Each colony that produced haemolysis on blood agar was 
picked to a Loeffler f s serum slant. The composition of all 
the media mentioned above is described in the Appendix. 








.' ( 




*> •/ l 


■■ >. 0 . 








- 24 - 


A smear of each colony of organisms was made immediately 
after the organisms were picked to a slant. The material 
was suspended in a drop of sterile water and spread uniformly 
on a clean glass slide. The smear was then fixed in a Bunsen 
gas flame and stained by the Hucker modification of Gram’s 
stain (Manual of Methods for Pure Culture Study, p. I^51-$)* 
Storage of the pure cultures was in a refrigerator at 6° C. 
Identification of these organisms and tests on them were 
carried out at a later date. The above described procedure 
for the isolation of microorganisms was employed throughout 
the entire project. 



- 25 - 

Selection of a Suitable Disinfectant 
for the External Surfaces of Siphona irritans 


In order to study the microorganisms solely within 
the fly it was necessary to eliminate microorganisms on the 
outside of the fly. Two chemicals, merthiolate and bichloride 
of mercury, were tested. Each was prepared in a 1:500 solu¬ 
tion —- the former in 50$ ethanol and the latter in 70$ 
ethanol. A 1:1000 solution of each disinfectant was obtained 
by making appropriate dilutions. The fly was left in the 
disinfectant for 15 to 30 minutes and then washed in sterile 
physiological saline (see Appendix) for two ten minute periods. 
Washing the fly in saline served to remove the disinfectant. 

The treated flies were placed In test tubes containing 
nutrient broth in lots of five to ten flies and incubated 
at 37° C for 96 hours. At the end of this time bacterial 
growth was evidenced in clouding of the broth. From Table I 
it will be noted that the disinfecting action of bichloride 
of mercury was variable. This may be explained, in part, 
in that the disinfectant was restricted from penetrating 
Into the tracheae, due to increased surface tension, thus 
allowing some of the microorganisms present there to escape 
the action of bichloride of mercury. Merthiolate gave variable 
results with the number of flies tested. It is probable that 
the tracheae also harboured a number of organisms untouched 
by the merthiolate. Since one disinfectant seemed as effective 
as the other merthiolate was employed during the preliminary 










■ 

















■ 


, 




















































, 



















' 












- 26 - 


work because of the short period during which wild flies 
were available and the urgency of other experimental work. 
During the first experiments it was observed that Orvus, 
a detergent, when added to the merthiolate solution seemed 
to be of value in decreasing surface tension on the fly. 

The merthiolate solution was saturated with the detergent. 
Flies treated with the detergent were observed under a bin¬ 
ocular microscope to have a decreased number of air bubbles 
on their surfaces. The merthiolate could then act on a 
greater surface area of the fly. 





- 27 - 

Table I 


Testing Bichloride of Mercury 
and Merthiolate as Disinfectants on Horn Flies 


Disinfectant 

No. of flies 
treated 

Minutes in 
Disinfectant 

Minutes in 
phys. saline 

No. of 
colonies 

Bichloride 

10 

20 

1-2 

444 

of mercury 

5 

30 

30 

4 


5 

15 

1-2 

O 

Merthiolate 

8 

20 

1-2 

*4=4 


8 

30 

1-2 

44 


s 

30. 

1-2 

4 


10 

25 

25 

44 


Symbols: 


w ++t t» re p re gents a large number of colonies and 
w o 1f represents the absence of colonies on a streak 
plate subcultured from the broth. 























- 23 - 


The use of Thioglyeollate Medium 
to detect possible flaws in the Disinfectant procedure 

The purpose of this portion of the investigation 
was to determine whether or not the technique of rinsing 
the mercurial solution from the fly with physiological saline 
was adequate. If the disinfectant was not removed from the 
fly during the rinse it could act upon organisms liberated 
from the interior of the fly when it was crushed for culture. 
The disinfectant might exercise a bactericidal or a bacterio¬ 
static effect on the internal organisms but in neither case 
would they grow in culture. Brewer (1939) suggested that 
the addition of sodium thioglyeollate to media interfered 
with the bacteriostatic action of mercurial disinfectants 
and allowed those organisms which were not killed to resume 
growth. Nungester, Hood, and Warren (1943) demonstrated 
that the optimum concentration of sodium thioglyeollate for 
inhibiting the bacteriostatic effect of mercurial compounds 
was between 0.10$ and 0.05$. In this investigation Q.Q$5$ 
sodium thioglyeollate was added to nutrient broth. The 
mercurial compounds tested were merthiolate and bichloride 
of mercury, both in concentrations of 1:500 and 1:1000. 

An intact fly was placed in 20 milliliters of disinfectant 
contained in a sterile Petri plate. After 15 minutes the 
fly was removed from the disinfectant with a pair of sterile 
forceps and placed in a physiological saline rinse for two 
ten minute periods. The fly was then transferred to a test 








, 

































- 29 - 

tube of nutrient broth containing 0.0^5% sodium thioglycollate. 
Another fly, which had been exposed to disinfectant and rinsed 
in the same manner, was placed in a test tube of nutrient 
broth as a control* Both tubes were incubated at 37° C for 
96 hours. The results summarized in Table II indicate that 
the percentage of positive growths was essentially the same 
whether or not sodium thioglycollate was used. From this 
it may be assumed that the physiological saline rinse was 
removing most of the mercurial compound or that it was at 
least reducing it to a non-inhibitory concentration. 




- 30 - 

Table II 


Tests to Determine the adequacy 

of the Physiological saline rinse 





No. with positive growths 

Disinfectant 

Concen¬ 

tration 

No, tests 

Sodium thio- 
glycollate broth 

Nutrient 
broth control 

Merthiolate 

1:500 

31 

2$ 

30 


1:1000 

31 

29 

31 

Bichloride 

1:500 

31 

16 

21 

of Mercury 

1:1000 

31 

19 

19 



















- 31 - 

Further Problems in Disinfection 
of the External Surfaces of Siphona irritans 

When sterilizing the external surfaces of the 
fly it was necessary to prevent the disinfectant from coming 
in contact with the inner organs of the insect* For this 
reason it was necessary to kill the fly and yet keep its 
body intact. At the beginning of this investigation a living 
fly was placed directly into the disinfectant. By this method 
the fly was killed either by the toxicity of the disinfectant, 
or by the inability of the fly to obtain oxygen through the 
tracheae because of blocking by the fluid, or a combination 
of toxicity and smothering. The fly often struggled for a 
long period of time when placed in the disinfectant and it 
was apparent that portions of the fly, especially the dorsal 
surface, were not receiving disinfectant adequately. The 
activity of the fly was reduced considerably when the wings 
were clipped off at their bases with a pair of scissors but 
this method was time consuming and therefore was not used 
extensively. An alternative method of killing the fly with 
a red hot needle was found to be the most suitable and it 
was used the most often. After the fly was killed it was 
transferred immediately to the disinfectant and left there 
for 15 minutes. It was unlikely that the disinfectant pene¬ 
trated into the inner organs through the small rupture in 
the cuticle of the head. If any disinfectant did pass 
through the rupture it seemed unlikely that after death any 
further adsorption would take place. In the experiments 























- ■ 












- 




































■ 




































- 32 - 

described subsequently no evidence was obtained of any inter¬ 
ference with the viability of internal microorganisms. After 
treatment with the disinfectant the fly was rinsed in physio¬ 
logical saline for two ten minute periods. With this tech¬ 
nique there was no evidence that the disinfectant penetrated 
into the deep organs or affected microorganisms which might 
be present there. 



- 33 - 


Isolation of Microorganisms 
from the Interior of Siphona irritans 

The external surfaces of the fly were sterilized 
by the method described (page 31)* The insect was then 
transferred aseptically to a test tube containing nutrient 
broth and the whole incubated at 37° C for 96 hours. If 
there was no bacterial growth, as evidenced by the absence 
of cloudiness in the broth after incubation, the fly was 
crushed against the side of the tube with a sterile glass 
rod. The broth was incubated at 37° G for 24 hours and the 
bacterial growth subcultured on solid media (page 23 ) in 
order to obtain individual strains of bacteria. Bacteria 
isolated by this method were assumed to be largely from the 
digestive tract but one cannot overlook the fact that a number 
of organisms in the tracheae undoubtedly escaped disinfection. 
A more detailed study was made on bacteria obtained directly 
from the dissected out lower digestive tract as shown in 
the next section. Organisms were also isolated from the 
interior of ova, larvae and pupae by the method described 
above. 


































. 







































. 






































• 

" 

























- 34 - 

Dissection of Siphona irritans 


The dissection of Siphona irritans was necessary 
in order that a microbiological examination of the intestinal 
tract and interior of the fly might be made. The exterior 
of the fly was sterilized with 1:1000 merthiolate solution 
or a 1:^00 bichloride of mercury solution as described (page 25) 
and an aseptic technique was employed during dissection. 

After removal from the saline rinse the fly had 
to be dried externally so that it could be properly embedded 
in wax. No one method seemed best but immersion in ether or 
alcohol followed by rapid passage through a flame, offered 
the most rapid method when a small number of flies was being 
prepared for dissection. When large numbers were dissected 
the flies were placed on sterile blotting paper in a Petri 
plate. Drying by this method took approximately 45 minutes 
during which time it was necessary to replace the blotting 
paper two or three times as it became moist. When each fly 
was dry it was embedded in melted paraffin wax, contained 
in a Petri plate, in such a way that the fly could be dis¬ 
sected from the ventral surface; that is, it was embedded 
dorsal surface down with one half of the body above the 
surface of the wax. Before embedding, the paraffin was 
heated for 15 minutes to destroy contaminating microorganisms. 
After the fly was embedded and the paraffin allowed to harden, 
a sufficient amount of Ringer’s solution (see Appendix) was 
poured into the Petri plate to cover the fly during dissection. 



























































. 


























. 






' 

i 









' 










































- 35 - 

This solution was used to help maintain the osmotic pressure 
of the cells and to prevent the tissues from drying out 
during dissection. For actual dissection a Bosch and Lomb 
low power binocular microscope, a good source of light (100 
watt white light lamp), and dissecting instruments were neces¬ 
sary. The latter consisted of sharply pointed forceps, a 
pair of fine scissors, scalpels, and needles. A dissecting 
needle consisted of a fine needle bent in the middle at a 
90° angle and fixed into a glass rod handle. This needle 
was found most useful because of its manoeuverability and 
because the operator could steady his arms on the bench 
during dissection. The abdomen of the fly was opened on 
the ventral surface by making an incision from the constric¬ 
tion of the thorax to the anus with a scalpel and a pair of 
fine scissors. The abdominal viscera were extracted through 
the cuticle with the forceps and transferred to nutrient 
broth for culture. When the digestive tract alone was to 
be removed the abdomen was opened as described above and two 
dissecting needles used to tease away the viscera so as to 
lay the gut bare. The upper intestinal tract was removed 
from the thorax by holding the ileum with a pair of forceps 
and pulling the gut down. An incision through the constricted 
portion of the rectum was made to detach the gut from the fly. 
The gut was then transferred with forceps to a test tube of 
nutrient broth and the gut crushed against the side of the 
tube with a glass rod. The broth was then incubated at 37° C 
for 24 hours and the resulting growth subcultured on the solid 
media described (page 23 ). 








. 








. 


. 











. 

















































. 


ik>. j 




















































, 











' 

































- 36 - 

A Method for the rapid removal of Intestinal Tract 


The large number of flies to be examined in the 
course of this work necessitated the search for a technique 
both simple and quick. After considerable trial the following 
technique was adopted. A living fly was killed with ether and 
placed dorsal surface downward in melted paraffin contained 
in a Petri plate. The paraffin was about one-sixteenth of 
an inch in depth which left the ventral surface of the fly 
exposed above the surface of the wax. When the paraffin 
hardened 1:500 bichloride of mercury solution was poured 
into the plate and allowed to act from one to five minutes. 

The disinfectant was poured off and the flies rinsed for 
two ten minute periods with physiological saline. During 
dissection under a binocular microscope the flies were 
covered with Ringer T s solution. The microscope was swabbed 
with 1:500 bichloride of mercury solution just prior to use 
and the dissection was carried out in a room where air currents 
as a source of contamination were negligible. Dissecting 
instruments, scalpel and sharply pointed forceps, were steril¬ 
ized in a boiling water bath for twenty minutes just before 
use and were returned to the bath during dissection when not 
in use. To remove the viscera ar incision was made with a 
scalpel from the constriction of the thorax and abdomen t o 
the anus. The scalpel was then slipped through the anterior 
portion of the incision, under the exoskeleton, along the 
left side of the abdomen and down under the viscera. The 









. 
















. 

. 






. 






. 
















' 

. 








: 







. 







. 


























- 37 - 


scalpel was then raised so as to remove the viscera from 
the abdomen. An incision through the rectum and oviducts 
or vas deferens freed the viscera from the fly. Fat bodies, 
ova, and other internal structures were teased away from the 
intestinal tract with two sterile dissecting needles. The 
tract was then transferred with sterile forceps into a tube 
of nutrient broth and crushed against the side of the test 
tube with a sterile glass rod. The broth was used to wash 
the material from the side of the tube. 






- 3S - 

Preparation of Faecal smears 


Faecal smears were made in order to determine 
whether or not all organisms present in the gut of the fly 
were growing on subcultures and also to increase the certainty 
that the organisms appearing on subculture were derived from 
the gut. Living flies captured in their natural habitat were 
transferred from the wire shipping cage toalarge clean test 
tube. The test tube was plugged with cotton and five milli¬ 
liters of ether pouTid into this plug in order to kill the 
flies. After five minutes the plug was taken out of the 
tube. Flies were removed singly from the tube with a pair 
of sterile sharply pointed forceps and placed on a clean 
glass slide with the ventral surface of the fly downward. 

The slide and fly were placed under a low power binocular 
microscope. The forceps were then placed along the abdomen 
of the fly with each arm of the forceps lateral to the abdomen. 
The abdomen was squeezed gently with the forceps until the 
watery faecal material passed from the anus. A sterile 
platinum wire was then used to spread this material uniformly 
over the slide in an area of from five to ten millimeters in 
diameter. The smear was then fixed in a Bunsen flame and 
stained by Gram’s method. 











■ 











■ 
























■ 


































































- 39 - 

Preparation of Histological Sections 


Histological sections of wild horn flies were 
made in order that a microscopic examination could be carried 
out for microorganisms which might be present within the fly. 
Of 45 flies selected at random during the fly season and 
intended for sectioning eight were finally suitable for 
microscopic examination. The reason for the small number 
of suitable flies obtained will be described subsequently. 
Multiple pricks, employing a fine needle, were made in each 
fly before it was placed in Carnoy’s fixative (see Appendix) 
and before introduction into each of the solutions thereafter, 
in order to allow the penetration of fluid through the chiti- 
nous exoskeleton. Only those flies which settled to the 
bottom of the fixative solution and the following solutions 
were sectioned; flies which remained at the surface of the 
fixative or any one of the following solutions were discarded. 
This explains the small number of suitable flies finally 
obtained. For fixation the fly was placed in Carney’s fluid 
at approximately 50 to 55° C overnight followed by two changes 
of absolute ethanol in five hours and two changes of chloro¬ 
form in three hours. The flies were then left overnight in 
chloroform and paraffin (1:1) at 50 to 55° C and then changed 
in paraffin three times in six hours and finally embedded 
in paraffin blocks. Serial sections cut with a microtome 
at six microns and stained by the Glynn modification of 
Gram’s method (Glynn, 1935) were found to show up internal 
structures satisfactorily. Microscopic examination of the 















. 






















. 















































■ 


, 
















. 




























- 40 - 


serial sections revealed that bacteria were present only 
within the lumen of the lower digestive tract. No special 
cells resembling mycetomes were seen. The numbers of 
organisms present varied but the guts of all of the flies 
examined contained either small Gram negative rods or Gram 
positive cocci in clusters, or both together. 






- 41 - 


Testing for Antagonistic action 
among organisms isolated from Siphona irritans 

As the bacteria present in the intestine of wild 
horn flies were isolated and identified it was apparent that 
certain genera, namely Achromobacter , Alcaligenes , and Micro ¬ 
coccus were the organisms appearing most consistently. Out 
of this arose the suggestion that bacteria comprising the 
normal flora of the intestine (page $3 ) might exert an anta¬ 
gonistic action on other organisms occurring there fortuitously. 
To test this hypothesis representative organisms isolated 
from the gut of the fly were selected. Organisms representa¬ 
tive of the normal flora of the gut included: genus Achromobacter 
(four strains were employed), genus Alcaligenes (two strains), 
Micrococcus candidus , Micrococcus epidermidis „ and Micrococcus 
flayus . Adventitious organisms (page£ 3 ) occurring in the gut 
were: genus Bacillus (two strains), Bacillus brevis , and four 
unidentified organisms. In testing for antagonistic action 
the following technique was employed. An organism of the 
normal flora was inoculated on a nutrient agar slant and incu¬ 
bated at 37° C for 24 hours so that actively growing young 
organisms could be obtained. The organism was then inoculated 
diametrically across a blood agar plate in a single streak. 

The plate was then incubated at 37° C for 24 hours. Individual 
streaks of adventitious organisms, also young and actively 
growing, were then made perpendicular to the first streak 
and the plate incubated at 37° C for 24 hours (Figure IV). 







































. 




































42 



Figure IV 


Antagonism of Micrococcus epidermidis against adventitious 

organisms isolated from the digestive tract of the horn fly. 













- 43 - 


Any evidence of growth inhibition was checked by a repeat 
test before being accepted as authentic. From Table III 
it can be concluded that M. eoidermidis and M. flavus exert 
a pronounced inhibitory effect on the growth of most adven¬ 
titious organisms occurring in the intestinal tract of the 
fly. One bacterial strain in each of the genera Achromobacter 
and Alcaligenes exerted variable inhibitory actions most of 
the adventitious organisms. 

Tests were made to determine whether organisms 
comprising the normal intestinal flora of Siphona irritans 
have an antagonistic action on each other. The technique 
employed was the same as that described (page 41) • The 
results of these tests are shown in Table IV. Culture B^g^k 
of the genus Achromobacter had an inhibitory action on the 
growth of culture of the same genus, and a less inhibi¬ 

tory action on M, epidermidis and M. flavus . Culture B^^a 
of the genus A lea: 1 igene s had a slight inhibitory action on 
culture B^yc and B-^^b of the genus Achromobacter . M. epi ¬ 
dermidis had a pronounced inhibitory action on culture B-^^b 
of the genus Achromobacter . All results were confirmed by 
repeated tests. From Table IV it can be concluded that there 
is weak antagonism among some organisms comprising the normal 
intestinal flora. This suggests that the intestinal organisms 
of the horn fly tend to keep their own numbers in check by 
a weak antagonistic action. 

Toward the end of the 1950 fly season it was 
observed that an increasing number of Gram negative rods 


















. 



























































, 

5* < 4 a 




































■ 










- 44 - 

appeared in cultures made from wild horn flies. This altera¬ 
tion in intestinal flora coincided with the decreasing activity 
of flies toward the end of the season and might even have 
been contributory. No evidence of this nature can be pro¬ 
duced, but it seemed interesting to find out if the change 
was due to any endogenous bacterial activity. A tentative 
experiment along the preceding lines showed (Table V) that 
Escherichia freundii exerted an inhibitory action on all 
the cocci except M. epidermidis . This antagonistic action 
was very weak. Among the other organisms tested there was 
no evidence of antagonism. The Gram negative organisms 
tested did not significantly inhibit the cocci and the altera¬ 
tion in bowel flora was not caused by any new and potent 
bacterial antagonism. 
























' 


















. 


. 












. 









- 45 - 


Table III 

Antagonism of organisms comprising the normal intestinal 

flora of S. irritans against adventitious organisms . 


Normal flora 
organism 

/ 

/ Adventitious organism 

% 

t—\ 

CQ 

10 

3 

H 

•H 

O 

CQ 

Bacillus Bp^b 

Bacillus brevis B^a 

c6 

!>- 

-4’ 

pq 

6 

10 

•H 

§ 

to 

u 

0 

<D 

•H 

•H 

43 

S 

5 

a 

Unidentified organism B^gb 

Unidentified organism B/,Ba2 

0 

sO 

a 

pq 

g 

•H 

§ 

bO 

U i 

0 

Xf 

<D 

•H 

§ 

3 

C 

t3 

Achromobacter 

Bi 25^ 

0 

4 

44 

444 

44 

0 

444 

Achromobacter”” 

j B-J p^C 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Achromobatter 

B-j 99 a 

0 

0 

0 

6 ' 

0 

i 0 

0 

Achromobacter 

-at- h?5 b . 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

TLIcciXlgenes 

B 27 b 

0 

0 

6 

4 

0 

4 

4 

"ICThali genes 

B 163 a 

4 

+ 

4 

4 

4 

6 

d 

M. canaTdUs^ 


0 

0 

O 

0 


0 

M. epidermidis 

444* 

444 

444 

4444 

44+4 

4 

444 

M. flavus 


44 

444 

4 444 

4444 

44 

4444 


Symbols: 

w o ,f indicates the absence of antagonistic action against 
an adventitious organism 

indicates a high degree of antagonism against an 
adventitious organism and 11 - w a low degree of anta¬ 
gonism. 

^Unidentified organism No. B^y a is a large Gram 
positive anaerobic rod; B^gb and B 4 &a 2 are large Gram 
positive aerobic rods; ana Bij^c is a large Gram negative 
aerobic rod. A further description of each of these 
unidentified organisms is givenfpage 72 ). 






































— 4.6 — 

Table IV 


Antagonism of organisms comprising the normal 

intestinal flora of S. irritans on each other.* 



Organism Tested 

C\2 

rH 

PQ 

U 

© 

4* 

O 

cO 

XI 

§ 

U 

o 

< 

Achrornobacter B127c 

n$ 

ca 

cn 

rH 

CQ 

U 

© 

43 

O 

cd 

rQ 

§ 

8 

js 

o 

< 

Achrornobacter 

o 

C"- 

c\i 

pq 

w 

© 

a 

© 

to 

•H 

rH 

(d 

O 

rH 

< 

cd 

<r\ 

HD 

H 

Q 

© 

© 

8 

W3 

•H 

rH 

cd 

D 

rH 

<c; 

Micrococcus candidus 

Micrococcus epidermidis 

Micrococcus flavus 

Antagonist 


Achrornobacter 
Bl25b . 


+ 4” 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

+ 

Achrornobacter 
Bl27c 

0 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Achrornobacter 
Bi32a . 

0 

0 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Achrornobacter 

Bl35b 

0 

4 

0 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Alcaligenes 

B?7b 

0 

4 

0 

0 


0 

0 

0 

0 

Alcaligenes 

3163& 

0 

4 

0 

4 

0 


0 

0 

0 

M. candidus 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 


0 

0 

M. epidermidis 

+ 4 44 

0 

0 

0 

0 

o 

0 


o 

M. flavus 

0 

0 

0 

o 

0 

0 

0 

0 



❖The symbols used in Table IV have a similar 
connotation to those used in Table ill. In each case they 
indicate the effect of the "antagonists on the test organism. 










































- 47 - 

Table V 


Antagonistic action between Gram negative rods 

and Gram positive cocci isolated from S. irritans.* 



Organism Tested 

M. caseolyticus 

M. epidermidis 

M. flarvus 

M. luteus 

E. coli 

E. intermedium 

E. freundii 

to 

© 

rj 

© 

hi) 

O 

U 

© 

c6 

< 

•r! 

U 

© 

to 

-p 

•p 

© 

JL) 

P* 

Antagonist 


E . coli 

0 

0 

0 

0 






E . intermedium 

0 

0 

0 

0 






E. freundii 

+ 

0 

4> 

+ 






A. aerogenes 

0 

0 

0 

0 






P. rettgeri 

0 

0 

o 

0 






M. caseolyticus 





... 0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

M. epidermidis 





0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

M . flavus 





0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

M. luteus 





0 

0 

0 

0 

0 


*The symbols used in Table ¥ have a similar conno¬ 
tation to those used in Table III. In each case they indicate 
the effect of the ”antagonist” on the test organism. 








































































' 






























- 4 $ - 

Isolation of Microorganisms from 


the Natural Environment of S. irritans 


In its habits the horn fly, Siphona irritans, is 
distinct from all other blood-sucking dipterawhich attack 
cattle in that it remains almost constantly on its host. 
Because of this habit it was suggested that the skin of 
cattle played some part in establishing the insects fecundity 
and it was considered necessary to make a study of micro¬ 
organisms on the skin of cattle. Accordingly swabs were 
taken at the Lethbridge Experimental Station Dairy Barn and 
submitted to Edmonton by rail and air express. The hide 
surfaces swabbed were those covering the pastern, hock, and 
pin bones {Sisson, 1914, p.$9$). Horn flies are often seen 
to rest on these areas, particularly just before they move 
to droppings to deposit their eggs. The pastern is defined 
as that part of the foot of the horse and allied animals 
between the coffin joint and fetlock. Swabs were taken from 
the flexor surface of the pastern. The hock is defined as 
the tarsal joint in the hind limb of cattle corresponding to 
the ankle of man, but elevated and bending backwards. The 
swabs were taken at the point of the hock. Pin bones are 
defined as the hip bone or innominate bone of animals such 
as cattle. Swabs were taken from the area between the pin 
bones. Swabs were taken from six cattle in September, 1951, 
and shipped to Edmonton on nutrient agar slants and in special 
anaerobic transport medium (see Appendix). Two swabs were 











• - . , . ..... 


























. 

























. 

. . 

. 














































































- 49 - 


also taken from the hide on the back of a calf on which 
laboratory reared flies had been fed. These flies had shown 
considerable development of ovaries. Each swab was used to 
inoculate solid media and organisms were isolated as described 
(page 23). 

The fly leaves its host only for a matter of minutes 
to deposit its eggs on freshly passed cow dung. In doing so 
it moves over the surface of the fresh cake. This suggested 
that fresh cow droppings played some part in establishing 
the insect 1 s fecundity. Faecal samples and perianal swabs 
were collected in June, 1950, at Lethbridge and submitted to 
Edmonton by railway and air express. Twelve stool specimens 
and four perianal swabs were examined bacteriologically. Each 
of the specimens was plated and organisms isolated by the 
method described (page 23). 











































. 


















































- 50 - 

Classification of Microorganisms 


The criteria for fungi, yeast, and mold identification 
are based on the recommendations of Engler and Prantl (1900), 
Thom (1930), Gilman (1945), and Thom and Raper (1945). 
Identification was restricted to morphological characteristics 
on nutrient agar and is therefore only tentative. 

The criteria for bacterial identification are based 
on the recommendations of Bergey’s Manual of Determinative 
Bacteriology, 194$, Sixth Edition. The recommendations 
include a detailed study of an organism in regard to its 
morphological, cultural, physiological, and pathogenic 
characters; but such completely detailed studies were not 
considered necessary to identify organisms isolated during 
the present project. Only significant characters which could 
be used to identify with accuracy the organism as far as 
genus, or genus and species, were studied. The composition 
of each of the media employed is given in the Appendix. 
Observations on inoculated media were made after 24 , 48 
hours, 1, 2, and 3 weeks incubation. Examples of the method 
of classification are given below: 

An organism which is a Gram positive coccus liquefies 
gelatin slowly, acidifies litmus milk, produces nitrites from 
nitrates, usually does not haemolyze blood, and grows well 
aerobically at 37° C is identified as Micrococcus enidermidis 
according to the classification on page 236 of Bergey f s 


Manual. 











. 






. 




























. 















. 




. 















































- 51 - 


An organism with the dry and wrinkled colonial 
morphology of a spore bearer but showing no spores in the 
original smear was inoculated into nutrient broth and incu¬ 
bated at room temperature, 25° C, from five to seven days. 

A smear was made, stained with methylene blue, and examined 
for spores. All the spore bearers were found to be catalase 
positive and were classified into the genus Bacillus , Some 
of these organisms were classified into species with the aid 
of certain biochemical tests listed on pages 706 and 707 of 
Bergey’s Manual. 

A Gram negative organism was inoculated into peptone 
water, and sugar broths (lactose, dextrose, sucrose, and 
mannite). If the organism produced acid and gas from lactose 
and dextrose within 24 hours at 37° C it was classified into 
the Tribe Bschericheae. It was then classified into genus 
and species according to the cultural characteristics listed 
on pages 444 and 445 of Bergey’s Manual. An organism which 
did not ferment lactose and dextrose within 30 days at 37° C 
was inoculated into urea medium. The organism was classified 
into genus or genus and species according to the cultural 
characteristics listed on page 4$6 of Bergey’s Manual. 

A Gram negative organism which did not decompose 
urea within 4$ hours was inoculated into nutrient broth and 
incubated at 30° G for 24 hours. A test for motility was 
made either by the hanging drop method or by placing a drop 
of the 24 hour broth culture on a clean glass slide and 
placing a cover slip over it. Motility was observed with the 











. 















■ 











. 















- 













































. 









- 52 - 

high power dry objective of the microscope. If the organism 
was motile it was inoculated into a test tube containing 
soft agar (see Appendix) to obtain organisms with good flagellar 
structure. The test tube contained a glass cylinder five 
centimeters long with a four millimeter bore. The soft agar 
had a depth of about 25 millimeters and the glass cylinder 
stood perpendicularly in the test tube with about 25 milli¬ 
meters of it above the surface of the soft agar. The motile 
organism was inoculated into the medium within the cylinder 
and incubated at 30° C for 7 to 4$ hours. The most actively 
motile organisms moved down the cylinder, through the opening 
at the bottom of it, and up to the surface of the surrounding 
medium. When the organism arrived at the surface of the medium 
it was ^picked 11 and then inoculated onto a nutrient agar slant 
and incubated at 30° C for IS hours. Kirkpatrick’s method 
(Browning and Mackie, 1949, P.7S6) was used in preparing and 
staining a smear of the organism. Microscopic examination 
revealed that all the organisms had four or more peritrichous 
flagella. These motile organisms and other non-motile organisms, 
not belonging to the groups previously described, grew on 
MacConkey’s medium. They produced little or no acid in 
litmus milk medium. Some organisms exhibited yellow chromogenesis* 
The organisms were classified into the Family Achromobacteriaceae. 
Their cultural characteristics on agar, litmus milk, and sugar 
broths were used to classify them into the genera listed on 
page 412 of Bergey’s Manual. 

A number of small, moderate, and large size Gram 











. 

















■ 








. 










■ 


















, 


• • ' 





. 




. 




















■ 





- 53 - 


positive and negative rods which were not found to belong 
to any of the above described genera were isolated. Their 
cultural, physiological, and morphological characteristics 
are given (Part III). 







- 54 - 

Some tests used in the identification of Bacteria 


For the composition of media and reagents mentioned 
below consult the Appendix. 

An organism,being tested for its ability to produce 
acetylmethylcarbinol, was inoculated into buffered dextrose 
broth and incubated at 37° C for 24 hours. One milliliter 
of this was pipetted into another test tube. Four drops of 
4C$> NaOH and 12 drops of alpha-naphthol solution were added. 

The whole was shaken well and allowed to stand 20 minutes. 

The development of a rose colour indicated the presence of 
acetylmethylcarbinol. In the methyl red test a few drops of 
methyl red indicator were added to the remainder of the 
buffered dextrose culture. A red color indicated an acid 
pH, that is a positive M.R. test. 

An organism being tested for its ability to produce 
catalase was inoculated onto a nutrient agar slant and incubated 
at 37° C for 24 hours. A few drops of fresh hydrogen peroxide 
solution were then placed on the culture. Effervescence from 
the bacterial colonies indicated the presence of catalase. 

An organism being tested for its ability to produce 
nitrites from nitrates was inoculated into nitrate medium and 
incubated at 37° C for 24 hours. One ml. of each of Solution 
A and B was added. A red color indicated that nitrites were 
produced from nitrates. 

An organism being tested for its ability to produce 
indole from tryptophane was inoculated into peptone broth and 









. 

.• ,• • ; 















































. 


























. 































- 55 - 


incubated at 37° C for 24 hours. One ml. of ether was added 
to the culture and the whole shaken gently. Then one ml. of 
Ehrlich 1 s reagent was introduced into the culture tube gently 
and allowed to collect between the medium and the ether. A 
pink color developing at the junction of the ether and the 
reagent indicated the presence of indole. 






- 56 - 


Experiments in which Bacteria were fed to Siphona irritans 

To investigate the hypothesis that bacteria play a role 
in the development and continued existence of the horn fly 
the following experiments were carried out. Five bacterial 
cultures ( Bacillus megatherium (two strains), Micrococcus 
epidermidis , Micrococcus flavus , and Micrococcus luteus ) 
isolated from the interior of one lot of ten wild horn flies 
and one bacterial culture ( Bacillus brevis ) isolated from the 
combined intestinal tracts of two wild horn flies were selec¬ 
ted for investigation. These were shipped to the Livestock 
Insect Laboratory at Lethbridge on nutrient agar slants in 
August, 1950. The surface of each slant was scraped with a 
sterile platinum loop and the scrapings suspended in each of 
six tubes containing ten milliliters of sterile distilled 
water and each culture was fed to one lot of flies. The 
laboratory reared flies (page 19), within twelve hours of 
each other in age, were placed in groups of 50 (25 males and 
25 females), in seven lantern chimneys. Each test was run in 
duplicate so that in the 1A chimneys 700 flies were used. 

These flies were fed by the method described (page 21) but 
after the first day and for the following six days (this was 
as long as the ten ml. of bacterial suspension lasted) 
bacterial suspensions were fed in the mornings and the blood 
and sugar mixtures in the afternoons. In the seventh, set, the 
controls, the flies received sterile distilled water only in 
the mornings and the blood and sugar mixture in the afternoons. 
Thereafter, all flies received a single daily meal of the 































' 




. 


. 

■ 


. 
















■ 











. 




























































- 57 - 


blood and sugar mixture until the end of the experiment. 

The flies in each set of chimneys received only one bacterial 
suspension. The bacterial suspensions, water, and blood and 
sugar mixture were offered to the flies soaked up in gauze 
pledgets (page 20). On the twelfth day of the experiment 
some fresh cow manure was placed in each chimney and fresh 
manure renewed each day. On the thirteenth day of the experi¬ 
ment, eggs were deposited by flies receiving Micrococcus 
flavus, eight eggs were found in one chimney and one egg in 
the other. No eggs appeared in any of the other chimneys. 

By the time this experiment was completed it was too late 
in the season to obtain a sufficient number of flies of uni¬ 
form age for a repeat experiment. The experiment was repeated 
in 1951 in order to confirm the positive result. 

In August, 1951, tkr§e feeding experiments were 
started. The first an exact duplicate of the experiment 
which gave positive results in 1950; the second similar to 
the first except that no cow manure was placed in the test 
chimneys; in the third M. epidermidis was suspended in sterile 
nutrient broth. These four experiments were completed with 
negative results. After the sixth day of the experiment the 
ovaries of each dead female were examined but there was no 
evidence of significant growth and no eggs were laid. Two 
more feeding experiments were started in August, 1951, 
employing the six bacterial cultures used in the 1950 fly 
feeding experiments and two strains of M. epidermidis 


isolated in 1951. In the first experiment the cultures 












... 












- 




















. 








: 





















. 



. 













* 













- 5S - 

were suspended in sterile distilled water and in the second 
in sterile nutrient broth. Both bacterial suspensions were 
prepared in concentrations higher than those used in the 
previous experiments in 1951. Results of these experiments 
were also negative. Experimental conditions were as close 
as possible to those of the original experiment but conditions 
did differ from the original in that the temperature conditions 
were not identical and the bacterial cultures used in the 
reneat experiments had been maintained on artificial media 
from the preceding summer. 

The organisms tested do not appear to provide the 
growth factor or factors necessary for the development of the 
reproductive organs of the horn fly under laboratory conditions. 





- 59 - 

An experiment in which flies were fed on a calf 


Concurrent with the feeding experiments employing 
bacterial cultures, attempts were made to obtain egg-laying 
by laboratory-reared flies fed on a calf. No one has reported 
feeding laboratory-reared Siphona on its normal host. Some 
difficulties were encountered in handling the flies but after 
a few abortive attempts the method finally adopted was as 
follows: 

The flies were confined in lantern chimneys as in 

other feeding experiments. But the gau^e covers were made 

secure by adhesive tape instead of elastic bands. This 

prevented the covers from coming off during the extra handling 

which the method entailed. A Holstein calf about three months 

old served as host. The hair was clipped from an area about 

six inches square on each side of the middle of the back of 

the calf. Two chimneys of flies were placed on the calf at 

« 

each feeding. Just before each lantern chimney was placed 
on the calf the Petri plate base of the chimney was removed 
and the chimney placed on a thin metal disc about the same 
diameter as the Petri plate. The chimneys and discs were 
then placed on the clipped areas of the calf and held in position 
by a harness. After the chimneys were securely in place the 
metal discs were pulled out from under the chimneys. When 
the feeding period was over the metal discs were slipped 
carefully under the chimneys, the harness loosened and the 
chimneys removed. In this way the flies were fed for two 
















. 













: 

























, 






“r 
















































. 





























■4 














- 60 - 


one-hour periods each day. A n occasional fly escaped when 
the chimneys were transferred to and from the metal discs 
and Petri plates. At first the calf was tethered outside when 
flies were being fed but the heat of the sun was apparently 
too great, for most of the flies died while they were on the 
back of the calf, ‘^hereafter the calf was tethered in the 
laboratory during the feeding periods. 

In these tests the chimneys contained 25 to 50 
flies each, i'he flies in two chimneys were fed on the calf 
while in two other chimneys the flies were fed only on citrated 
beef blood to serve as controls. Two experiments were carried 
to conclusion. In one of these the controls and the test 
flies when not on the back of the calf, were kept at room 
temperatures. In the other experiment they were kept at 
25° C. Ho eggs were laid by the flies in these experiments 
but there was a pronounced increase in the amount of ovary 
development in the flies which were fed on the calf. The 
largest oocytes seen in some of the females were 0.50 ml. long 
and almost all of the females showed some development of 


ovaries. 



- 61 - 


A study of amino acid metabolism of the normal intestinal 
flora of S. irritans using paper partition chromatography 

The amino acid metabolism of the bacteria comprising 
the normal bacterial flora of Siphona irritans was studied 
employing one dimensional paper partition chromatography. 

The same basic method of paper partition chromatography described 
by Consden, Gordon, and Martin (1944), with some modifications, 
was employed. A rectangular glass tank *— one foot wide, three 
feet long, and two feet deep — was used. It had a rubber- 
stripped plate glass lid which was weighted down to maintain 
airtight conditions. Several inches from the top and running 
the length of the tank there were four glass rods. The two 
lower ones supported a glass trough 2 & inches in length. The 
two other rods slightly to one side and above the first two 
were for the support of filter paper which passed over them 
from the trough. The filter paper was suspended vertically 
and held in position by a glass weight. Solvent used was that 
suggested by Proom and Woiwod (1949), 4n-butanols 5 water: 

1 glacial acetic acid (all parts V/V). After separation in 
a separatory funnel the top layer was put in the trough and 
the bottom layer in the bottom of the tank. Ninhydrin, 0 * 1 % 
by W/V, (triketohydrindene hydrate) was added to the top layer 
and acted as a developer of amino acid spots in the chromatogram. 
Several days were required to bring the tank to equilibrium 
by saturation of the atmosphere inside the tank with the 
solvent. Standard size sheets of Whatman No. 1 filter paper 












- 62 - 

(22,5 x Id.25 inches) were marked in pencil with a series of 
dots each at a distance of three inches from the longer edge* 
These dots were placed one inch apart and labelled with an 
appropriate bacterial culture number. On each spot was placed 
five microliters of the material to be examined using a 0.2 
ml. serological pipette. The sheet was then air dried. 

The sheet was then suspended in the tank for one 
hour to saturate it with the atmosphere prevailing, before 
placing the edge, containing the material to be examined, 
into the solvent in the trough. After immersion in the solvent, 
the lid was put on, and the chromatogram was allowed to form 
by a downflow of the solvent — descending chromatography. 

After 36 hours the paper was removed from the tank and suspended 
in an oven at £0° C. for approximately one-half to one hour 
until dry. ^he oven contained a pan of steaming water; the 
steam quickened the appearance of the amino acid spots, 
intensified their color, and made them more permanent. 
Chromatograms were read with the aid of a 11 sheet-illuminator”. 

This consisted of a wooden box, lined with white paper, and 
containing a source of light (a 60 watt, white light lamp). 

Sheets were placed over the open end and the light that passed 
through tended to make the spots more distinct. Organisms 
were grown in peptone water, nutrient broth, citrated sheep f s 
whole blood, and in special media of known amino acid composition. 
Incubation was at 37° C for ten days. Five microliter aliquots 
were taken from each tube after 24 , 4$, and 72 hours, seven, 
and ten days incubation. The culture filtrates were examined 
by the technique described above. 




■ 












■ 











■ 










• 









































. 



























■ 






















PART III. MICROORGANISMS ISOLATED DURING THE 


PRESENT PROJECT AND THEIR METABOLIC BEHAVIOR 


















' 






■ 












. * 








































' 








- 64 - 

Fungi. Yeasts, and Molds associated with S, irritans 


A tentative identification of fungi, yeasts, ahd 
molds associated with wild and laboratory reared horn flies 
was carried out. Out of twelve specimens of cattle faeces 
two contained the genus Asoerigillus . three the genus Cladosoorium . 
and one each the genera Geotrichum . Penicillium . and Oidium 
(or Oosoora ). From 66 swabs made from the skin sweat gland 
areas of cattle were isolated two organisms in the genus 
Trichothecium and one in the genus Thamnidium . Genus Asoerigillus 
was isolated from the skin of a calf, from the area under a 
cage which was strapped to the animals back and which contained 
laboratory reared flies. From the external surfaces of seven 
lots comprising 72 wild flies one lot comprising five flies, 
harboured an organism in the genus Cladosoorium . No other 
fungi were isolated from the external surfaces of wild flies. 

From nine lots comprising 117 treated and crushed wild flies, 
two lots comprising five flies each contained an organism in 
the genus Penicillium : one lot comprising 25 flies contained 
an organism with the morphology of an Actinomvcete . From 28 
lots comprising the intestinal tracts of 72 wild flies were 
isolated from each of six lots comprising 10 intestinal tracts 
the genus Asoerigillus : from each of five lots comprising 13 
intestinal tracts the genus Penicillium ; from one intestinal 
tract the genus Kormodendrum : and from each of two tracts the 
genus Pullalaria . An organism in the order Phomales was 
isolated from one lot of 32 ova which were treated and crushed. 
































. : 


















* 






















■ 

. 






















- 65 - 

No fungi were isolated from the interior of larvae or pupae. 
An organism in the genus Pullalaria was isolated from one lot 
comprising five unfed laboratory reared flies. 

Since fungi associated with horn flies did not 
appear consistently or in large numbers in cultures they were 
not studied further. 







- 66 - 

Bacteria associated with S. irritans 


Criteria for bacterial identification are given 
below. In general they are based on the recommendations of 
Bergey ! s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology, Sixth Edition, 

194&, and are confined to identification by morphological and 
biochemical characters. The organisms are listed alphabetically 
in order of their generic names. 

Genus Achromobacter . Medium size rods of uniform shape. 

Gram negative to Gram variable. Peritrichous flagella or 
non-flagellate. Growth on nutrient agar was moderate, transparent, 
non-pigmented, and the colonies low convex. Litmus milk was 
unchanged. No acid or gas were produced from lactose, sucrose, 
maltose, or mannite. Activity on glucose was variable; one 
culture produced acid within 24 hours at 37° C. Gelatin was 
not liquefied. Urea was not decomposed within 4$ hours at 
37° C # On blood agar one culture produced true haemolysis 
in 24 hours. 

Aerobacter aerogenes . Small size straight rods. Gram negative. 
Growth on nutrient agar was abundant, thick, white, moist, 
glistening, and spreading. Litmus milk was acidified and 
coagulated but not peptonized. Acid and gas were produced 
from lactose, glucose, sucrose, and mannite. Gelatin was not 
liquefied. Methyl red test was negative and acetylmethyl- 
carbinol was produced. Sodium citrate was used as a sole 
source of carbon. Hydrogen sulfide was not produced in 
Kligler f s medium. 














■ 

1 

. : ’V y '. , 

' 









' 





. 



* 



























- 67 - 


Aerobacter cloacae . Small size straight rods. Gram 
negative. Growth on nutrient agar was white, smooth, glistening, 
and spreading. Litmus milk was acidified, coagulated with 
gas production and was slowly peptonized. Acid and gas were 
produced from lactose, glucose, and sucrose. Gelatin was 
liquefied and glycerol not fermented. Methyl red test was 
negative and acetylmethylcarbinol was produced. Sodium citrate 
was used as a sole source of carbon. Hydrogen sulfide was 
not produced in Kligler’s medium. 

Genus Al caligenes . Medium size rods of uniform shape. Gram 
negative, Peritrichous flagella or non-flagellate, Growth 
on nutrient agar slants was moderate, thin, transparent, and 
with a low dull margin. Nutrient broth was turbid. Litmus 
milk became alkaline and some strains produced a soft curd 
and peptonized the litmus milk. No acid or gas were produced 
from lactose, glucose, sucrose, or mannite. Acetylmethyl¬ 
carbinol was not produced. Some cultures liauefied gelatin 
others did not. No odor was produced from nutrient broth. 

Urea was not decomposed within 4$ hours at 37° G. No haemolysis 
was produced on blood agar. 

Bacillus brevis . Medium to large size rods with endospores. 

Gram positive. Diameter of rods was less than 0.9 microns. 
Sporangia were distinctly bulged. Nutrient agar colonies 
were smooth, moist, spreading, and grey-white. Catalase 
positive. Sodium citrate was used as a sole source of carbon. 
Acid was produced from glucose and gelatin slowly liquefied. 

Genus Bacillus . Medium to large size rods with endospores. 









- 




















•.: .'»i. : 0 






















, 












. 






. 















■ 



















- 6S - 


Gram positive. Diameter of rods was variable.. Growth on 
nutrient agar was rough, wrinkled, opaque, dull, and slightly- 
spreading. All cultures were catalase positive. 

Bacillus cereus var. mvcoides . Medium size rods with endospores. 
Gram positive. Diameter of rods more than 0.9 microns. 

Growth on nutrient agar was thin, rhizoid, greyish, and 
spreading. Motile in nutrient broth. Catalase positive. 
Acetvlmethylcarbinol was produced. Acid produced from lactose. 
Sodium citrate used as sole source of carbon. Gelatin was 
liquefied slowly. 

Bacillus megatherium . Medium size rods with endospores. 

Gram positive. Diameter of rods more than 0.9 microns. 

Sporangia were not distinctly bulged. Nutrient agar colonies 
were large, soft, convex, entire, opaque, and creamy-white. 
Catalase positive. Acetylmethylcarbinol was not produced. 
Bacillus subtilis . Medium size rods with endospores. Gram 
positive. Diameter of the rods was less than 0.9 microns. 
Sporangia not distinctly bulged. Growth on nutrient agar was 
abundant, rough, wrinkled, opaque, dull, and slightly spreading. 
Catalase positive. Acetylmethylcarbinol was produced. Gelatin 
was liquefied. Nitrites were produced from nitrates. 

Bacillus subtilis var. niger . Medium size rods with endospores. 
Gram positive. Diameter of rods was less than 0.9 microns. 
Sporangia not distinctly bulged. Growth on nutrient agar 
was rough, finely wrinkled, opaque, dull, slightly spreading, 
with a brownish tinge. Catalase positive. Acetylmethylcarbinol 
was produced. Gelatin was liquefied and acid produced from 




























. 


. 







. 









- 

■ • 

. 


. 


, 


. 













- 69 - 

arabinose with ammoniacal nitrogen. Black pigment was produced 


from tyrosin medium. 

Escherichia coli. Short rods with rounded ends. Gram 
negative. Growth on nutrient agar was grey-white, moist, 
and homogeneous. Acid and gas were produced from lactose, 
glucose, and mannite. No acid or gas were produced from 
sucrose. Methyl red test was positive and no acetylmethyl- 
carbinol was produced. Sodium citrate was not utilized as 
a sole source of carbon. Hydrogen sulfide was not produced. 
Escherichia freundii . Short rods with rounded ends. Gram 
negative. Growth on nutrient agar was smooth, grey, shining, 
with a buttery consistency. Acid and gas were produced from 
lactose, glucose, and mannite but not from sucrose. M ethyl 
red test was positive and no acetvlmethylcarbinol was produced. 
Sodium citrate was utilized as a sole source of carbon. 

Hydrogen sulfide was produced. 

Escherichia intermedium . Short rods with rounded ends. Gram 
negative. Growth on nutrient agar was smooth, white to grey 
in color, raised, and buttery in consistency. Acid and gas 
were produced from lactose, glucose, mannite, and sucrose. 
Methyl red test was positive and acetylmethylcarbinol was not 
produced. Sodium citrate was used as a sole source of carbon. 
Hydrogen sulfide was not produced. 

Genus Flavobacterium . Medium size rods. Gram negative. 

Growth on nutrient agar was yellow to orange in color, shiny, 
convex, and non-spreading. No acid or gas were produced from 
lactose. Some forms produced acid from glucose. Acid was 






















• . -.. ' • ■ 

. 




' 

. 













■ 



. 




■ 

■ 


. 




< • 

. 

, 
























:■ * • 













- 70 ~ 

produced from mannite and sucrose. Urea was not decomposed 
within hours at 37° C, 

Micrococcus aurantiacus , Spherical cells occurring singly 
and in clumps. Uram positive. Growth on nutrient agar was 
smooth, glistening, entire, and yellow to orange in color. 

Litmus milk was acidified and coagulated. Gelatin was liquefied. 
Nitrites were produced from nitrates. Ammonium phosphate was 
not utilized as a sole source of nitrogen. Blood was not 
haemolyzed. 

Micrococcus Candidas . Spheres less than one micron in diameter 
occurring singly. Gram positive. Growth on nutrient agar 
was moderate, transparent, cream in color, and glistening. 
Nitrites were not produced from nitrates. Ammonium phosphate 
was not utilized as a sole source of nitrogen. Litmus milk 
was unchanged. Gelatin was hot liquefied. Acid was produced 
from glucose in 24 hours at 37° C. No acid or gas were produced 
from mannite. True haemolysis was produced on blood agar. 
Micrococcus caseolvticus , Spheres less than one micron in 
diameter occurring in groups. Gram positive. Growth on 
nutrient agar was moderate and white in color. Nitrites were 
not produced from nitrates. Ammonium phosphate was utilized 
as a sole source of nitrogen. Litmus milk was acidified, 
coagulated, and peptonized. Gelatin was not liquefied. No 
acid or gas were produced from mannite. 

Micrococcus conglomeratus « Spheres 0.S microns in diameter 
occurring singly and in groups. Uram positive. Growth on 
nutrient agar was abundant, golden in color, moist, and opaque. 
















■ 





- 71 - 


Nitrites were produced from nitrates. Ammonium phosphate 
was utilized as a sole source of nitrogen. Litmus milk was 
unchanged. Gelatin was liquefied slowly. No acid or gas 
were produced from mannite. 

Micrococcus eoidermidis . Spherical cells occurring singly 
and in clumps, ^ram positive. Growth on nutrient agar was 
moderate, white, and opaque. Nitrites were produced from 
nitrates. Ammonium phosphate was not utilized as a sole 
source of nitrogen. Litmus milk was acidified, coagulated, 
and peptonized. Gelatin was liquefied. Acid was produced 
from glucose in 24 hours at 37° G. No haemolysis was produced 
on blood agar. 

Micrococcus flavus . Spheres 0.9 microns in diameter occurring 
in groups. Gram positive. Growth on nutrient agar was scant, 
golden in color, and raised. Nitrites were not produced from 
nitrates. Ammonium phosphate was utilized as a sole source 
of nitrogen. Litmus milk was unchanged. Gelatin was not 
liquefied. Acid was produced from glucose and mannite. No 
haemolysis was produced on blood agar. 

Micrococcus luteus . Spherical cells occurring singly and in 
groups. Gram positive. Growth on nutrient agar was scant, 
yellow in color, and raised. Nitrites were not produced from 
nitrates. Ammonium phosphate was utilized as a sole source 
of nitrogen. Litmus milk was unchanged. Gelatin was not 
liquefied. Acid was produced from mannite. 

Genus Proteus . Straight rods. Gram negative. Growth on 
nutrient agar was dull, opaque, spreading. Litmus milk acidified 
















' 





















« 


. 


















. 

* 

. 

. 






• 

• 



. 











. 









- 72 - 


and coagulated. No acid was produced from lactose and sucrose. 
Acid and gas were produced from glucose and mannite. Urea 
was decomposed within 4& hours at 37° C. Most strains were 
actively motile at 25° C. but weakly so at 37° C. 

Proteus rettgeri . Small rods. Gram negative. Growth on 
nutrient agar was moderate, greyish, opaque with even edges. 

No acid or gas were produced from lactose, sucrose, or maltose 
with the exception of one strain which produced acid from 
maltose. Acid was produced from glucose and mannite and 
slowly from glycerol. Acetylmethylcarbinol was not produced. 
Urea was decomposed within 4$ hours at 37° C. Sodium citrate 
was used as a sole source of carbon. Hydrogen sulfide was 
not produced. Indole was formed. 

Genus Streptococcus . Spherical cells in chains. Gram positive. 
Under anaerobic conditions growth on blood agar was scant, 
translucent, shiny, entire and greening haemolysis was produced 
in the surrounding medium. 

Unidentified bacteria . By the process of elimination the 
following organisms have been excluded from the preceding 
genera and species: 

Medium size aerobic rods. Gram positive. Non-sporing 
Within the group colonial morphology was heterogeneous. No 
acid or gas were produced from lactose, glucose, or sucrose 
except for three cultures which produced variable fermentation 
reactions on these sugars. Their action on litmus milk and 
gelatin was variable. In nutrient broth at 30° C some were 
motile. The motile organisms possessed peritrichous flagella. 








. 

. 



































. 







. 



















































































- 73 - 


Medium size aerobic rods. Gram negative. Within 
the group colonial morphology was heterogeneous. Acid or acid 
and gas were produced from lactose, glucose, sucrose, and 
mannite slowly. Their action on litmus milk was variable. 

Large size aerobic rods. Gram positive. Non-sporing. 
Within the group colonial morphology was heterogeneous. 

Lactose, glucose, and sucrose were not fermented except for 
four strains which produced acid from glucose and sucrose. 

Anaerobic cocco-bacilli. Gram positive or Gram 
variable. Growth on nutrient agar was abundant, greyish-white, 
and raised. Acid and gas were produced from lactose, glucose, 
sucrose, and mannite. Nitrites were produced from nitrates. 

Methyl red test was positive and acetylmethylcarbinol was 
produced. Sodium citrate was not utilized as a sole source 
of carbon. Hydrogen sulfide was not produced. Gelatin was 
liquefied slowly. 

Small size anaerobic rods. Gram negative. Within 
the group colonial morphology was heterogeneous. Acid was 
produced slowly from lactose but rapidly from glucose, sucrose, 
and mannite. Litmus milk was acidified and some cultures 
produced coagulation. 

Medium size anaerobic rods. Gram positive. Non-sporing 
Within the group colonial morphology was heterogeneous. Lactose 
was not fermented. One strain produced acid from glucose 
and sucrose. Action on litmus milk and gelatin was variable. 

Large anaerobic rods. Gram positive. Non-sporing. 
Growth on nutrient agar was moderate and dry. Lactose, glucose, 























. 

. 


* 

. 














































- 74 - 

sucrose, and maltose were not fermented. Litmus milk became 
alkaline slowly. Gelatin was liquefied slowly. Non-motile 
at 30° C. 





- 75 - 


Bacteria Isolated from the faeces of cattle 


Sixty-five bacterial cultures were isolated from 
cattle faeces and perianal swabs. These included the genera 
Achromobacter, Alkaligenes, and Bacillus, E. coli, E. intermedium, 
M. aurantiacus, and three unidentified organisms (Table VI). 

A similar pattern of bacteria was obtained by Yanda (1952) 
in a study of 25 freshly passed cow droppings. Similar methods 
and materials were employed. This evidence tends to support 
the original findings. It seems unlikely that there will be 
much variation in faecal flora if one considers the digestive 
tract a true organ. Constancy characteristics, such as even 
temperature and pH, aid in maintaining a constant type of 
microbial population. It seems unlikely that bovine faeces 
form a large part of the food of the adult horn fly since it 
is only the female that is in contact with faeces and this 
is for a brief period only. According to a number of investi¬ 
gators, however, microorganisms present in faeces are good 
sources of vitamins (page 9)* These vitamins may be available 
to the fly through ingested bacteria taken up during the 
developmental stages of the fly. 








■ 









■ 













. 







. 




. 

. 

















Bacteria Isolated from Cattle Faeces 


76 


! Unidentified 1 


l 0 

€ 
J h 

Large 

Gram (-) 

rH 

! 

O 

0 

•H 

.O 

O 

U 

© 

flfl 

s 2 

0 


H 

.j. 

IP 

i ”* 

O 

m 

i 

■p 

0 

u 

ft 


j 

rH 

| 

O 

| Micrococcus 

m 

I 

1 

6J] 

I 

ri 

O 

A 1 

© »rf i'i 

gH 

H 

O 

Mi 

4 

1 

0 

«=|- 

rt 

A a 

3 6 

U to 

3 * r ' 1 

CO 4-J 

iH 

ft 

1 

0 

3 

14 

TJ 

© 

-p 

L 

i 

! 

OJ 

I ! 

° 1 

Escherichia 

£| i 

0 ) *H 

-H'd 

S3 © 

•h a ^ 

ft 

1 

O 

•HI j 

H 

0 

0 

v£> 

O 

I 

Bacil¬ 

lus 


in 

O 

Alda*- 

ligines 


aj 

m 

1 u 

0 © 

is 


h- 

rH 

to 

§ 

_ 60— 

tk 

© 

© 

§L 

m 

r-t 

O 

O 

•P 

Bi 

© 

1 

_S3_ 


o 

o 

3 

© 

> 

*3 

-p 

J§ 

-p 


© 

© 

© 

u 

ft 

© 

s 















































- 77 - 

Bacteria Isolated from the skin of cattle 


One hundred ninety-eight cultures of bacteria 
were isolated from 66 swabs of the skin sweat gland areas 
of cattle. These included the same genera of bacteria as were 
isolated from cattle faeces but in addition Aerobacter aerogenes « 
Escherichia freundii , M. epidermidis , genus Proteus « and two 
unidentified organisms were isolated (Table VII). A comparison 
of Tables VI and VII shows an equivalent bacterial flora. A 
number of microorganisms must reach the skin from faeces because 
cattle often lie on soil contaminated with their own faeces. 

It is probable that the microbial flora of skin is less 
constant than that of faeces because the skin is exposed to 
seasonal and daily fluctuations in weather. Variation within 
the bacterial flora, however, is probably within comparatively 
narrow limits because some factors, such as temperature and 
food supply, are constant particularly next to the skin and 
in the deeper layers of sweat glands and hair follicles. 

Six bacterial strains were isolated from the skin of 
a calf on which laboratory reared flies were fed. These 
included E. coli, E. intermedium and the genera Bacillus and 
Flavobacterium . In female horn flies feeding on this calf 
there was considerable development of ovaries on dissection. 




















































, 

■ 






. 

. 

. 



















. 


































Bacteria Isolated from Skin Sweat Gland Areas of Cattle. 


78 


% 

•H 

1 

*d 

3 

t> 

[anae¬ 

robic 

■H >f 

*3 § *d 

a o 

iO ci> h 


o 

cy 

l o 

t , 

o 

1 

§ 

• A 

f? P r cf 
d p o 
h? e> f, 

| o 

H 

o 

. O 

t 

o 

A 



* 

1 

HI 

.4 

o 


Q 

1 | 
C; 

o 

1 

HI 

o 

o 

© 

s 

o 

§ 

e 


i 

© Vi i 

r C* i-i 1 

*H r O 1 

Pi *H i 

® Ei 

1 

m 

O 

J cy 

o 

O 

•rt 

a 

.§! 

i 

o 

O 1 

| cy 

m 

o 

43 ! 

i« 1 

cu 

o 

1 

H 

o 

A 

8 © 
111 


VO 

m 

VD 

Hi 

© 

3 

V 

■H 

gj 

J=! 

O 

© 

i..-. § 

© *H 

S'* 

•h a 

r-4 

o 

H 


•H 

•H 

ft 

HI 

© 

O 

hS 

•H 
r ■* 

O 

o 

HI 

o i 

OJ 

h! 

Basil- 

lus 


VO 

-4* 

VD I 

! 

rl 

i © 

■4J 

,ti *h 

3 2? 


m 

in 

m 

O 

Aero* 

bacter 

i ra 

6 © 
p n 

© © _i 

r4 

-4 

o 

o 

Achromo- 

bacter 

'Ci SaD 

in 

in 

VO 

o 

Genera 

■ 

to 

© 

•H 

© 

© 

P« 

© 

1 

4» 

W 

&„■ 

* 

M 

© 

« 3 

«H O 

a x* 

© 

Vi A 

13 


i .1 

1M1 

SS u 0 

| 
-o S 

r\l 

* ! 

(N 

*1 

H-\ 

-A 

- 1 


a 

8 


v» 


H 


to 

$ 

m 

© 

•H 

o 

© 

I 

© 

u 

o 

© 

© 

s 

**D 


© 

4» 

© 


u 

o 

•H 

•a 


I 


© 


w 


the cattle; for example epidermidis was isolated from the pastern area of the six cattle examined 
































































- 79 - 

Bacteria isolated from the 


external surfaces of wild S. irritans 

Fifty-seven bacterial cultures were isolated from 
the external surfaces of seven batches comprising 72 wild 
horn flies. Essentially the bacteria were the same as those 
isolated from the skin of cattle but did not include E. freundii , 
M. aurantiacus , M. flavus, and the genera Flavobacterium and 
Proteus; on the other hand, M. caseolyticus and an unidentified 
organism were isolated (Cable VIII). Bacteria present on wild 
horn flies may have as their origin cattle faeces, having 
been n picked up f1 when the fly emerged or when the female 
deposited her eggs on cow manure, or from the skin of cattle 
where both male and female remain almost constantly. It is 
probable that any variation in the bacterial flora of the 
external surfaces of wild horn flies can be correlated with 
a change in skin flora of cattle. 















, 







■ 

. . 











- 

: 




















. 








































Bacteria isolated from the external surface© of wild S. irritans 


80 


© 

1 - - Jl 

✓-v 

a 


•rt 

*H 

•H 

1 


1 

rri 

J*f 

CM 

V 

■a 

& 

*j; *• 

S © 



w 



2 



1 

■3 

CM 

m 

g 

0% 

ft 

© 


<1 Igft 


O 

O 

8 g 

£J3 -—A 

R 

8 



2 




m 

£ 



2 

pfnl 

CM 


1 

O 



l | 

m JPi 


HI 

1 

•H 

U 

s 

#% 

5 1 

HI 



U 

a 

*rt 

£ 

HI 


© 


€0 



1 



«rt 

1 


8& o 

m 

k 1 


IA 

f y w 

HI 



Achromo® 

bacter 




CM 

«d 

1 

© 

d) 


w 

•H 

8 

A, 


w 

_&a_ 

HHI 

CD 1 
















































Bacteria isolated from the interior of wild S. irritans 


Of 20 lots comprising 243 treated and crushed wild 
flies, nine lots comprising 117 flies were found to contain 
internal organisms. Bach lot contained from 1 to 25 flies. 
Sixty bacterial cultures were isolated. No organisms were 
isolated from the remaining 11 lots coimorising 126 flies. 

In order of frequency of isolation the organisms were S. coli, 
from 4 lots (60 flies), P. rettgeri from 4 lots (100 flies), 

M. euidermidis from 3 lots (51 flies), B. subtilis from 3 lots 
(35 flies), E. intermedium from 1 lot (25 flies), genus 
Achromobacter from 1 lot (1 fly), genus Bacillus from 1 lot 
(l fly) as shown in Table IX. These organisms must represent 
the bacteria of the digestive tract and trachea. Borne of the 
above mentioned bacteria were also isolated from the digestive 


tract alone 














Bacteria isolated from the interior of wild S* i it itans 


82 


0 

S 

1 

rettgeri 


i 

o 

8 

© 

O 

s 

epidermidis 


Bacillus 

•H 

HI 

•H 

! 




Escherichia 

£ i 

® *rt 

fl-s 

•rt S 

HI 

coii 


9 

§ g 
1 ! 


HI 

83 

I 

specie© 



a 







































- S3 - 

Bacteria isolated from 


the intestinal tract of wild S. irritans 


Of 57 lots comprising the dissected out intestinal 
tracts of 106 wild flies, 2 $ lots comprising 72 flies were 
found to contain organisms. Eighty-seven bacterial cultures 
were isolated and identified. No organisms were isolated 
from the remaining 29 lots comprising 34 intestinal tracts. 

In order of frequency the organisms were M. epidermidis from 
11 lots (23 flies), genus Achromobacter from 10 lots (26 flies), 
M. candidus from 3 lots (7 flies), M. flavus from 2 lots 
(6 flies), genus Alcaligenes from 2 lots (10 flies), genus 
Bacillus from 2 lots (21 flies), B. brevis from 1 lot (2 flies), 
and 4 unidentified organisms from 3 lots (11 flies). In 
many instances more than one kind of organism was isolated 
from the same lot of flies. Each lot contained from 1 to 20 
flies. The unidentified organisms in the genus Bacillus 
are thought to occur in the digestive tract adventitiously. 
Evidence to support this is found in 41 direct faecal smears 
examined. No organisms resembling spore bearers were seen. 
However, 37 of these smears showed either or both Gram 
negative and Gram positive cocci in large numbers. It has 
also been shown that the above mentioned organisms have a 
strong antagonistic action on the adventitious, organisms 
in vitro. Observations also revealed that there was a mutual 
though weak antagonism among intestinal organisms themselves. 

It may well be that by this weak antagonistic action a 










































. 


«■ • 






. . . 






. 

■ 




























. 































— $4 — 

balance is maintained among organisms comprising the normal 
intestinal flora. It was found that certain of the organisms 


of the normal intestinal flora are capable of fermenting 
glucose, the blood sugar, within 24 hours at 37° C. The 
organisms were M. epidermidis « M. flavus . M. candidus . and 
an organism in the genus Achromobacter . The latter two organisms 
produced true haemolysis on blood agar, the Achromobacter 
organism markedly. In citrated whole blood M. epidermidis 
and M. flayus produced a soft clot in £> hours at 37° C. 

Organisms comprising the normal intestinal flora may be of 
benefit to the fly by playing a role in the digestion of the 

fly. 













Bacteria isolated from the intestinal tract of wild S. irritans. 


- 85 - 


JO ✓»>* 

O g S 
u p w 

© -h a -d 
a o 


all 

3 so 


o i 

«rt ® 

.a CtiO a 'd 

° a s s 

»h a 

W 

-W 


ro 


a 

© 

s* 

© 






r-« • 

•H h (Dl 

£ g 5| 


OJ 


a d 

M tt 

3 2 1 




O © 


q as 
*<S & 









































- S6 - 


Bacteria isolated from the 
interior of ova, larvae, pupae, and unfed flies 

Ova . Of & lots comprising 56 ova of wild horn flies, 2 lots 
comprising 33 ova were found to contain internal organisms 
when crushed* Four bacterial cultures were isolated. No 
organisms were isolated from the remaining lots. The organisms 
isolated were genus Bacillus from 1 lot (1 ovum), and two 
unidentified organisms from 1 lot (32 ova). The origin of 
microorganisms found inside intact eggs appears to be one 
not easily explained. In chickens if the egg is formed in 
an infected ovary, or passes through an infected oviduct, or 
if other parts of the egg are formed in infected organs, then 
it is not difficult to account for the presence of bacteria 
in newly laid eggs. Solowey et al (1947) showed that Salmonella 
pullorum could occur in eggs and food products made with these 
eggs and so cause outbreaks of the disease. In the horn fly 
It may be that a few bacteria enter the oviduct during copulation 
and so reach the inside of the egg with the entry of the sperm. 
After the egg has been laid on manure entry of the bacteria 
may occur through the micropyle. It is unlikely that microorgan- 
ismsplay an essential role in the maturation of horn fly eggs. 

If they were essential one would expect them to be isolated 
consistently from specimens; this has not been the case in 
this series. It may be concluded then that a few organisms 
occur in the ova adventitiously. 












. 

. 





■ 

. 




* 














- 


- 




















•. '■ 






■ 

























- S7 - 


Larvae. Of 45 lots comprising 45 first instar larvae 42 
lots contained organisms. No bacteria were isolated from 
three lots. The organisms were genus Achromobacter (from 
each of 22 larvae), genus Escherichia (from each of 12 larvae), 
genus Bacillus (from each of 7 larvae), and a medium size Gram 
negative rod (from 1 larva). 

Of four lots comprising B third instar larvae, two 
lots comprising two larvae were found to contain organisms. 

Two bacterial cultures were isolated. No organisms were 
isolated from two lots. The organisms were E. freundii and 
E. intermedium . The feeding habits of larvae make it almost 
certain that bacteria will gain entry into their intestinal 
tracts. Glaser (1923) found a high incidence of bacteria in 
the larvae of the horn fly. He concluded that the larval stages 
of these flies are dependent upon certain accessory growth 
factors which must be ingested with the food. He also stated 
that microorganisms might be one of the principal sources of 
the accessory growth factors of some larval flies found 
breeding under certain conditions in nature, but did not go 
on to prove this statement. 

Pupae. One strain of freundii was isolated from one lot 
of 50 crushed pupae. Glaser (1923) found that horn fly pupae 
contained very few bacteria and suggested that the bacteria 
are probably inhibited and destroyed as the insect transforms 
and assumes adult life. However, Leach (1933) found that 
bacteria survive in the lumen of the mid-intestine and to 
some extent in the cast-out linings of the fore- and hind-intestine 


































' 




' 








, 







. 








. • 




■ 














of the seed corn maggot, Hylemia cilicrura . It may be that 


bacteria survive in the gut of the horn fly by one or both 
of these methods during the development of the insect. 

Unfed flies . Seventeen bacterial cultures were isolated from 
24 unfed laboratory reared flies. The flies were in four 
lots. The organisms included A. aerogenes, A. cloacae , E. coli , 
E. intermedium , M. candidus , and M. epidermidls . From this 
it is evident that some bacteria are capable of survival in 
the fly through the developmental stages to the newly emerged 
fly. Some organisms present in the intestinal tract of wild 
flies may persist there from the larval and pupal stages. To 
some extent the variation in the flora of the intestinal tract 
of wild and unfed laboratory reared flies may be accounted 
for by the fact that the environment of each group of flies 
was different. 



















- 39 - 

Bacteria isolated from 


laboratory reared flies fed M. flavus 

From a preliminary feeding experiment three lots 
comprising eight laboratory reared flies fed M. flavus were 
found to contain internal organisms. Twenty-one bacterial 
cultures were isolated and identified. The organisms isolated 
were A. cloacae from two lots (7 flies), the genera Achromo - 
bacter, Bacillus, Streptococcus , and M. aurantiacus from one 
lot (three flies), B. cereus var. mycoides and two unidentified 
organisms (one Gram positive to Gram variable cocco-bacillus, 
and one medium size, non-sporing, Gram positive rod) from one 
lot (four flies), and M. epidermidis from one lot (one fly). 
From a duplicate experiment in which M. flavus was fed to 
nine lots comprising 39 flies one fly contained two Gram 
positive cocci, M. epidermidis and M. candidus . Forty-four 
bacterial cultures were isolated, however, Gram positive cocci 
were the only organisms identified, the majority of the 
remaining organisms being small Gram negative rods. In 
neither experiment was there any evidence of the persistence 
of M. flavus. It may be that this organism is digested by 


the insect 








































. 






. 






















. 




































- 






























- 90 - 


Amino acid metabolism of bacteria 
comprising the normal intestinal flora of the horn fly 

Utilization or production of an amino acid was 
indicated by the diminution or increase, respectively, in 
intensity of its chromatographic ff spot n in comparison with a 
control. Production of a polypeptide was indicated by the 
appearance of a new n spot !S , in the shape of an inverted l? V n , 
in comparison with a control. In this way the amino acid 
metabolism of the normal intestinal flora of Siphona (page $3) 
was studied in simple media of complex amino acid composition, 
and in special media of known amino acid composition. 

Amino acid metabolism in media of complex protein composition . 

Tryptophane assay medium (Difco) plus tryptophane was used 
at the beginning of experimental work because it contained 
amino acids which could be easily separated and identified 
by paper partition chromatography. Similar results were 
obtained with media such as peptone water, nutrient broth, 
and citrated whole blood, 

M. epidermidis . One strain was examined. From Table XI 
it may be seen that the basic group of amino acids was not 
utilized in any of the media except whole blood. Aspartic acid 
was utilized extensively in all media except whole blood 
where it was used sparsely. Serine and glycine were utilized 
in all media to a variable degree. Glutamic acid was utilized 
in all media except Medium I which was unchanged. The amino 
acids threonine and alanine were metabolized as follows; they 









- 


■ 












. 


. 

. 













♦ 



















, 






■ 










































- 91 - 

were unchanged in Medium I; threonine was sparsely utilized 
in peptone water but later a large amount of it and a small 
amount of alanine were produced; both threonine and alanine 
were used extensively in nutrient broth. Threonine, alanine, 
methionine, valine, phenylalanine, isoleucine, and leucine 
did not appear in filtrates of blood examined chromatographically. 
A small amount of methionine was produced in peptone water 
but was later utilized. None of the other amino acids 
contained in the media was visibly metabolized. 

Genus Achromobacter . Four cultures were examined. Selection 
was on the basis of different biochemical activity of each 
strain. From Table XII it may be seen that the basic group 
of amino acids was not visibly metabolized except in Medium 
I where it was utilized sparsely. Aspartic acid and serine 
were utilized and/or produced depending on the bacterial culture. 
Serine in whole blood was unchanged by all cultures. Glycine 
was utilized to a variable degree by one culture (B125b) 
except in blood where it was unchanged. In whole blood 
incubated for 24 hours this culture produced a M polypeptide n 
between glycine and glutamic acid on the chromatogram but was 
utilized in 4$ hours and did not appear again after this time. 
Glutamic acid was, utilized sparsely by this culture in all 
media, and produced by two cultures in whole blood. Threonine, 
alanine, methionine, and valine were metabolized to a slight 
degree depending on the culture. Phenylalanine, isoleucine, 
and leucine were not visibly metabolized. 












■ 












. \ 














' 

, 


I t 








- 






, . 












































. 










. 

















- 92 - 


M. candidus . One culture was examined From Table XIII it 
may be seen that in all the media tested the basic group of 
amino acids was not visibly metabolized. Aspartic acid was 
produced in all the media except whole blood. In blood it 
was not visibly metabolized and in peptone water aspartic 
acid was utilized. Serine was sparsely used in Medium I and 
unchanged in the remainder. Glycine and alanine were not 
visibly metabolized. Glutamic acid was used sparsely in 
nutrient broth and a small amount was produced in whole blood 
but later utilized. Threonine was utilized sparsely in peptone 
water. Methionine was utilized sparsely in peptone water and 
valine sparsely in nutrient broth. 

M. flavus . One culture was examined. From Table XIV it may 
be seen that the basic group of amino acids was not visibly 
metabolized except in whole blood where it was utilized to 
a large degree. Aspartic acid and serine were utilized exten¬ 
sively and glycine utilized to a lesser degree. Glutamic acid 
was utilized sparsely in Medium I, was produced to a small 
degree in peptone water but was later utilized to a large 
degree, and was utilized to a large degree in nutrient broth 
and whole blood. Threonine and alanine were metabolized 
variably. Methionine, valine, phenylalanine, leucine, and 
isoleucine were not visibly metabolized. 

Genus A1calIrenes . One culture was examined. While genus 
Alcaligenes was not isolated from the horn fly with the same 
frequency as other intestinal bacteria it is included in these 
amino add studies because of its close taxonomic relationship 































* 










1 


. 


. 












■ 












. 







































. 






. 



♦ • 


. 






















- 93 - 

to genus Achromobacter . From Table XV it may be seen that 


the basic group of amino acids was utilized sparsely in 
Medium I, and not visibly metabolized in the remaining media. 
In the media tested aspartic acid and serine were metabolized 
variably or not at all. Glutamic acid, was utilized in 
Medium I and in peptone water, was not visibly metabolized 
in nutrient broth, and was produced in considerable amounts 
from whole blood. Alanine, methionine, isoleucine, and 
leucine were metabolized sparsely. Phenylalanine was not 
visibly metabolized. 

Of the four media used, metabolism seemed most 
extensive in nutrient broth, peptone water, and whole blood. 
Growth in Medium I (Tryptophane assay medium plus tryptophane) 
was somewhat retarded. 

Amino Acid Metabolism in Media of known Composition . The 
purpose of this portion of the investigation is to gain 
additional information regarding the amino acid metabolism 
of the normal intestinal bacteria of the horn fly. The medium 
(Medium III) in which the Micrococci were grown is based on a 
special medium devised by Fildes and Richardson (1937) devised 
for the cultivation of Staphylococci . The Gram negative small 
rods, namely the genera Achromobacter and A1 .callgenes , were 
grown in a special medium (Medium II) found by Yanda (1952) 
to contain essential amino acids for supporting the growth of 
certain Gram negative rods (Paracolobactrum). 

M. epidermidig . From Table XVI it may be seen that aspartic 
acid was utilized sparsely but was later produced to a small 





















. 























. 




. 







. 


* 












' 












■ 

. 









- 94 - 


degree. Methionine was produced in considerable amount 
but was later utilized. The remaining amino acids were 
not visibly metabolized. 

Genus Achromobacter . Two cultures were examined. From Table 
XVII it may be seen that both cultures produced aspartic acid 
to a variable degree but that the aspartic acid was later 
utilized by both. The remaining amino acids were not visibly 
metabolized. 

M. candidus. From Table XVI it may be seen that aspartic 
acid was produced first, utilized later, and finally produced 
again. Methionine was produced but later utilized. The 
remaining amino acids were not visibly metabolized. 

M. flavus. From Table XVI it may be seen that aspartic acid 
was utilized sparsely. Methionine was produced. The remaining 
amino acids were not visibly metabolized. 

Genus Alig.aligenes * One culture was examined. From Table XVII 
it may be seen that aspartic acid was produced but was later 
utilized. The remaining amino acids were not visibly metabolized. 

Amino acid metabolism in media containing certain 
amino acids was not so extensive as that in complex amino 
acid media. The pattern of amino acid metabolism also varied 


in some instances 









. 

. 

- 

. 

« 














Table XI 


Amino acid metabolism of epidermidis in complex protein media. 


Medium 

Time 

Amino acid metabolized 


Incubat ed 

B 

As 

S 

G 

<?A 

T 

A 

M 

V 

P 

L 

I 

24 hrs. 


XX 











48 hrs. 

- 

XX 











72 hrs. 

- 

XX 











10 days 

•* 

XX 

X 

X 









24 hrs. 


X 










Peptone 

4S hrs. 

mm 

XX 


X 

mm 

- 

- 

4 

- 

co 

mm 

Water 

72 hrs. 

- 

X 











7 days 

- 

X 

- 

X 

- 

X 

- 


• 

- 

- 


10 days 

"" 

XX 

X 

XX 

XX 

44 

4 


• 

M 

» 


24 hrs. 


XX 

<sa 

059 

X 

m 

m 

am 

mm 

an 

so 

Nutrient 

4S hrs. 

- 

X 










Broth 

72 hrs. 

* 

XX 

XX 

XX 

99 

XX 

- 

mm 

m 

mm 

«* 


7 days 

«*> 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

« 

mm 

mm 

• 


10 days 


XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 



*• 

*• 

Cit rated 

24 hrs. 

X 

mm 

X 

XX 

XX 







Whole 

48 hrs. 

XX 

mm 

XX 

XX 

XX 







mood 

72 hrs. 

XX 

X 

XX 

XX 

XX 








Amino Acids 


Symbols 


B - basics (lysine, arginine, histidine) 
As - aspartic acid 
S - serine 
G - glycine 
GA - glutamic acid 
T - threonine 
A - alanine 
M - methionine 
V - valine 
P - phenylalanine 
L - isoleucine, leucine 


xx - complete or apprec¬ 
iable utilization 
x - slight utilization 
- * not metabolized 

4 - slight production 
44 - appreciable production 


These abbreviations and symbols have 
the same connotation for Tables XI to 
XVII. 



































- 96 - 

Table XII 


Amino acid metabolism of genus Achromobacter in complex protein media.* 


Medium 

Time 

No. 

Culture 













Incubated 

Cultures 

No. 



Amino acids metabolized 





Tested 

Reacting 

B 

As 

S 

G 

GA 

T 

A 

M 

V 

P 

L 

I 

24 hrs. 

4 

B 125 b 

X 

CM 

wa 

X 

X 

mm 



wo 

MB 

_ 




B 127c 

B 132a 

X 









» 

«• 




B 135b 

*» 

+ 

X 

a® 









4S hrs. 

4 

B 125b 

m 



Mi 

mm 

mm 

tm 

m 

m 

to 

«* 




B 127 c 

• 

* 


- 

++ 

- 

mm 

mm 

- 

m 

• 




B 132a 

• 










• 




3 135b 

X 


*• 

•* 

mm 

*• 

mm 

mm 

•» 

m 

*» 


72 hrs. 

4 

B 125b 



X 

X 

SB 

BB 

m 

wm 


m 

m 




B 127 c 

- 


m 

- 

m 

MB 

m 

m 

H 

m 

• 




B 132a 

- 

- 

m 

- 

— 

- 

wm 

- 

M 

m 

«• 




B 135^ 

- 

• 

m 

•• 

wo 

no 

mm 


• 

m 

m 


10 days 

4 

B 125 b 

X 

XX 

XX 

XX 

X 

X 

X 


X 

to 





B 127c 

wm 

* 













B 132a 

« 

X 

« 

m 

- 

- 

Mi 

CM 

m 

mm 

m 




B 135b 

** 

+ 

m 

m 

X 

• 

X 

•• 

•* 

mm 

WO 




All 












Pep tom 
tfater 

24 hrs 

4 

Cultures 













48 hrs. 

4 

B 125b 

B 127c 

B 132a 

- 

XX 

- 

wm 

- 

- 

- 

4 

- 

mm 

- 




B 135b 


«• 

• 

mm 

MB 

** 

« 

MB 

** 

m 

Mi 


72 hrs. 

4 

B 125b 

mm 

XX 












B 127a 

*• 

** 

wm 

m 

m 

m 

- 

«• 

• 

to 

• 




B 132a 

m 

- 

m 

m 

see 

m 

« 

WO 

- 

- 

- 




B 135b 

*• 

• 

m 

wm 

m 


** 

X 

m 

«» 

m 


continued on page 97 





























































- 97 - 

Table XII 


ijnino acid metabolism of genus Achromobacter in complex protein media 

(cont *d.) 


Medium 

Time 

No. 

Culture 













Incubat ed 

Cultures 

No. 



Amino 

acids metabolized 





Tested 

Reacting 

B 

As 

S 

0 

GA 

T 

A 

M 

7 

P 

L 

Peptone 

7 days 

4 

B 125 b 


XX 

X 

XX 

X 

X 

XX 

cm 

cm 

(M 

wt 

Water 



B 127c 

- 

■H 













B 132a 

m 

H 













31353 

m 


*• 

• 

m 

• 

X 

•• 

cm 

* 

M 


10 days 

4 

B 125b 

m 

XX 

m 

XX 

X 

X 

XX 

■a 

mm 

m 

OS 




B 127c 

B 132a 

mm 

m 

m 


m 

m 

m 


m 

m 

m 




B 135 b 












Nutrient 

24 hrs. 

4 

B 125b 












Broth 



B 127c 

3 132 a 

mm 

m 

me 

** 

V 

m 

am 

** 

me 

m 

m 




B 135* 

•• 

** 

X 

X 

X 








48 hr®* 

4 

B 125 b 

m 

XX 

X 

X 



X 

cm 

m 

m 





B 127c 

B 132a 

«e» 

m 

m 

m 

mm 

m 

m 

m 

09 

m 





B I 35 * 

• 

* 

m 

■mm 

m 

mm 

am 

cm 

m 

cm 

• 


72 hrs. 

4 

3 125b 

m 

XX 

mm 

X 

mm 

mm 

X 

m 

as 

cm 

» 



B 127 o 

mm 

* 









«• 




3 132a 


* 

m 

m 

m 

• 

cm 

am 

« 

W 

as 




3 135b 

** 

* 

mm 

mm 

m 

* 

m 

am 


am 

«* 


7 days 

4 

B 125b 

am 

XX 

X 

X 

cm 


X 

m 

w 

aa 





B 127c 

B 132a 

3 135* 











<a» 


10 days 

4 

B 125* 

m 

XX 

X 

X 

am 

am 

XX 

m 

cm 

m 





3 127 c 

B 132 a 

B 135* 













continued, on page 




















































- 9« - 


Table XII 


Amino acid metabolism of genus Achromobacter in complex protein media 

(cont*d.) 



*PP - polypeptide formation. The biochemical composition of this 
polypeptide was not investigated. 
































- 99 - 

Table XIII 


Amino acid metabolism of candidus in complex protein media 






































- 100 - 

Table XIV 


Amino acid metabolism of flams in complex protein media. 


Medium 

Time 

Incubat ed 



Amino , 

acid metabolized 




B 

As 

S 

G 

GA 

T 

A 

M 

V 

P 

L 

I 

24 hrs. 


+ 

X 



X 

X 


mm 

mm 

mm 


4S hrs. 

mm 

mm 

mm 

X 

X 








72 hrs. 

m » 

XX 











10 days 

■* 

XX 

X 

X 








Pept one 

24 hrs. 


XX 










Water 

4S hrs. 

«• 

XX 

X 

— 

m 

» 

* 

- 

m 

mm 

m 


72 hrs. 

- 

X 

X 










7 days 

OS 

X 

X 

X 

4 

X 

<*» 


mm 


mm 


10 days 

mm 

XX 

X 

XX 

XX 

+* 

4- 

m 

mm 

mm 

** 

Nutrient 

24 hrs. 


XX 

X 

m 

mm 

X 

a. 


m 

m 


Broth 

4S hrs. 

- 

X 

m 

X 

X 

X 

X 

- 

m 

■* 

*» 


72 hrs. 

• 

XX 

XX 

XX 

«• 

XX 

« 

** 

m 

aa» 



7 days 

- 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

w 

m 

*» 



10 days 

X) 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

XX 

«• 

mm 


mm 

Citrated 

24 hrs. 

mm 

X 

mm 

X 

XX 







!?hole 

48 hrs. 

XX 


XX 

XX 

XX 







Blood 

72 hrs. 

XX 

X 

XX 

XX 

XX 





































101 


Table XV 


Amino acid metabolism of genus Alcaligenes in complex, protein media 


Medium 

Time 

Incubated 



Amino 

acid metabolised 




B 

As 

S 

G 

GA 

T 

A 

M 

V 

P 

L 

I 

24 hrs. 

mm 

4 











hrs. 

- 

4 

4 

• 

mm 

- 

• 

4 

- 

as 

4 


72 hrs. 

- 

XX 











10 days 

X 

XX 

X 


X 


X 

** 

* 

mm 

JW> 

Peptone 

24 hrs. 


X 

mm 

m 

m 

pm 

w 

MS 

m 

mm 


Water 

48 hrs. 

tm 












72 hrs. 

- 

44* 

m 

m 

as 

«* 

m 

mm 

** 

mm 

• 


7 days 

<* 


mm 

as 

X 

X 

- 

m 

as 

m 

m 


10 days 

m 

* 

m 

• 

m 

m 

«• 

m 

O 

«* 

mm 

Nutrient 

24 hrs. 

mm 

mm 

m 

a 

m 

m 




«• 

m 

Broth 

48 hrs. 













72 hrs. 

mm 

4 

X 

X 









7 days 













10 days 

m 

X 

mm 

as 

m 

m 


m 


*• 

m 

Git rated 

24 hrs. 

9 m 

M 


mm 

mm 







Whole 

4S hrs. 

mm 

• 

• 

44 

44 







Hood 

72 hrs. 

m 

** 

as 

XX 

44 
















































102 - 


Table XVI 


Amino acid metabolism of Micrococci in Medium III 






































- 103 


Table XVII 

Amino acid metabolism of the genera Achromobacter and Alcalig&ae8 

in Medium II 


Organism 

Incubation 

Culture 

Amino Acids Metabolized 

Time 

Ho. 

B 

As 

s 

GA 

A 

V 

L 

Achromobactex 

24 Jars. 

B 127c 

m 

mm 


«* 


mm 

m 



B 135*> 

*» 


mm 

** 

- 

m 

mm 


4g hrs. 

B 127c 

m 

mm 

mm 



mm 

m 



B 135t> 

mm 

•H* 

m 

• 

mm 

* 

m 


72 hrs. 

B 127c 

m 

+ 

mm 


mm 

Ml 




B 135* 

mu 


*• 


mu 

«* 

mm 


7 days 

B 127c 










B 135*> 










B 127c 

9 m 

mt 


mm 

m 


M 



B 135b 

wm 

m 

* 

* 

mm 


— 

Alkaligenes 

24 hrs. 

B l6> 

- 

■H* 

mm 

. 

- 

- 

- 


48 hrs. 

B 163a 

- 


- 

- 

- 

«N» 

- 


72 hrs. 

B 163a 

n 

4+ 

mm 

- 

9m 

•9 

- 


7 days 

B 163a 









10 days 

B 163a 

- 

m 

- 

- 

- 

- 

mm 




































104 


PART IV, SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 










- 105 - 
Summary 


Because no evidence has been accumulated in favor 
of the original hypothesis a discussion of the role of 
bacteria in the continued existence of S. irritans is ommitted. 
The present thesis is a systematic account of microorganisms 
and particularly bacteria associated with wild and laboratory 
reared horn flies. Work was carried out over a two year 
period and organisms were isolated from the external surfaces 
of wild flies, from their crushed bodies after the external 
surfaces had been disinfected, and from their intestinal 
tracts after dissection. Limited studies were made of ova, 
larvae, and pupae of wild horn flies and of the skin and 
faeces of cattle. Organisms isolated from cattle fell into 
a pattern similar to that isolated from wild horn flies. 
Microorganisms were also isolated from fed and unfed laboratory 
reared flies. The inevitable conclusion is that the bacterial 
flora of the horn fly is derived from its environment and 
directly related to it. 

During this project several interesting observations 
were made. Although in general the intestinal bacteria of 
the horn fly appeared representative of its environment yet 
they were obviously influenced by some unknown endogenous 
factor. Early season flies were found to contain mainly 
Gram positive cocci whereas in late season flies small Gram 
negative rods predominated. Although some degree of mutual 
antagonism has been shown to exist in strains of intestinal 


















. 
















. 








■' 

. 













- 106 - 


bacteria the demonstrated change in bacterial population 
cannot be ascribed to this. Nevertheless this antagonism 
is probably associated with the relative proportions of 
individual strains at any one time. 

A study of the nitrogen metabolism of bacteria 
derived from the intestine of the horn fly showed that certain 
strains were capable of synthesizing a number of amino acids. 
This raises a new hypothesis, that such bacteria, although 
apparently not related to the fertility factor, may yet play 
a vital role in the insect f s metabolism. 

Much work has been done on the elaboration of 
techniques necessary to handling, rearing, sterilizing, and 
dissecting horn flies and these methods have been described 
in detail. It is hoped that later workers who may wish to 
pursue further investigations in this practically unexplored 
field may be saved much time and trouble by consulting these 
descriptions. 

Conclusions 

1. The fertility of Siphona irritans is not determined by 
any factor directly derived from its intestinal or 
environmental bacteria. 

2. The microorganisms associated with wild S. irritans are 
represented by a relatively small number of genera. 

3. The normal intestinal bacteria of S. irritans are represented 
by the genera Achromobacter , Alcaligenes , and Micrococcus . 

4. The normal intestinal bacteria of S. irritans exert a 
mutual but mild antagonism* 













- 107 - 


5. Internally, ova harbour a few adventitious bacteria. 

6. Bacteria are capable of surviving in the gut during the 
developmental stages from larvae to newly emerged flies. 

7. The bacteria on the external surfaces of S. irritans fall 
into a pattern similar to the bacteria on the skin and in 
the faeces of cattle, that is, the bacteria of the fly’s 
natural environment. 

$. Some of the normal intestinal bacteria are capable of 
synthesizing certain amino acids. These may play some 
part in the nutrition of the insect. 
















LITERATURE CITED 






- 109 - 

Literature Cited 


^schner, M., (1931) ^ie ^akterienflora der pupiparen 
(^iptera). Z. Morph. Oekol. Tiere, 20:36$-442 

Aschner, M., (1933) Experimentelle untersuchungen uber die 
symbiose der kleiderlaus. Naturwissenschaften, 

2£: 501-504. 

Aschner, M., and Ries, (1933) Das verhalten der kleider¬ 
laus bei ausschaltung ihrer symbioten. Z. Morph. 

Oekol. Tiere, 26: 529-590 

Bergey, D. H., (194$) Bergey T s Manual of Determinative 

Bacteriology, Sixth Edition. Baltimore, Williams and 
Wilkins Co. 

Bowland, J. P., (1951) Vitamin B 12 and antibiotic feeding 
supplements for growing and fattening swine. In : 

Ann. Feeders 1 Day, June. Dept. Animal Sci., University 
of Alberta, 23 pp* 

Brewer, J. H., (1939) The antibacterial effects of mercurial 
compounds. J.A.M.A., 112 ; 2009-201$. 

Brown, F. M., (192$) Enzymes and bacteria in the honey-bee. 
Amer. Mus., Nov., 304- 

Browning, C. H., and Mackie, T. J. (1949) Textbook of 

Bacteriology, Eleventh Edition of Muir and Ritchie f s 
Manual”. London, Oxford University Press. 

Bruce, W. G., (193$) A practical trap for the control of 

horn flies on cattle. J. Kans. Ent« Soc., 11: $$-93. 

Bruce, W. G., (1939) Some observations on insect edaphology. 
J. Kans. Ent. Soc., 12: 91-93. 




















- 110 - 


Bruce, W. G., (1940) The horn fly and its control. U. S. 

Dep. Agr. Leaflet No. 205, 5 pp. 

Bruce, W. G., (1942) The horn fly. In: Keeping Livestock 
Healthy. U. S. Dep. Agr. Yearbook of Agr., pp. 626- 
63 O. G. Hambidge, editor. 

Brues, C. T., (1946) Insect Dietary, Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 5$2 pp. 

Butt, Ho R., and Osterberg, A. E. (193$) Distribution of 
vitamin K in biologic materials and its probable 
physiological significance. J. Nutrition (Suppl.), 
l£s 11. 

Coates, M. E., et al. (1951) Vitamin Bq_2 activity for chicks 
and different microorganisms of gut contents and faeces. 
Biochem. J., 4 2 : Ixvii. 

Consden, R., Gordon, A. H., Martin, A. J. P. (1944) Qualitative 
analysis of proteins; a partition chromatographic method 
using paper. Biochem. J., J3$ : 224-323* 

Dam, H., et al. (193$) Studies on the mode of action of 

vitamin K. Scandinav. Arch. f. Physiol., 72? 121-133* 

Engler, A., and Prantl, (1900). Die naturlichen planzen- 
familien, Teil I, Abteilung I: 1-570 Leipzig, V/ilhelm 
Engelmann. 

Fildes, P., and Richardson, G. M. (1937) The nutrition of 
Staphylococcus aureus : sulphur requirements. Brit. 

J. Exptl. Path., 1&: 292-304* 

Fletcher, J. (1$92) The cattle horn fly ( Haematobia serrate . 
Robineau-Desvoidy). Can. Dep. Agr. Spec. Bull. 14* 









■■ 


- 










- Ill - 


Oilman, J. C. (1945). A manual of soil fungi, Ames, la., 

The Collegiate Press Inc. 

Glaser, R. W. (1923) The effect of food on longevity and 
reproduction in flies. J. Exptl, Zool., 3&3-412. 

Glaser, R. W. (1923) The survival of bacteria in pupae and 
adult stages of flies. Am. J, Hyg., 2 : 469-4&0. 

Glaser, R. W. (1924) Rearing flies for experimental purposes 
with biological notes. J. Econ. Entomol., 17: 4^6-496. 

Glynn, J. H. (1935) The application of the gram stain to 
paraffin sections. Arch. Path., 20: $96-899* 

Hammer, 0. (1941) Biological and ecological investigations 
on flies associated with pasturing cattle and their 
excrement. Vidensk. Medd. Dansk natur. For. Kbenhavn, 
105 : 141-393. 

Hastings, E. G. (194&) Significance of bacteria and protozoa 
in the rumen of the bovine. Bact. Rev. 8: 235-254* 

Herms, W. B. (1939) Medical Entomology. The Macmillan Co., 
New York, Third Edition, 5$2 pp. 

Hinman, E. H. (1930) A study of the food of mosquito larvae 
( Culcidae ). Am. J. Hyg., 12: 23&-270. 

Hobson, R. P. (1933) Growth of blow fly larvae on blood and 
serum. I Response of aseptic larvae to vitamin B. 
Biochem. J. 27: 1899-1909* 

Howard, L. 0., and Marlatt, C. L. (1889) The horn fly 

( Haematobia serrata , Robineau-Desvoidy). Insect Life, 

2: 93-103* 

Howard, L. 0., and Marlatt, C. L. (l$$9a) The horn fly 




















- 112 


( Haematobia serrata , Robineau-Desvoidy). In: U. S. 

Dep. Agr. Ann, Rep, for 1#£9, pp 345-34#. 

Hungate, R. E, (1944) The culture and physiology of an 
anaerobic cellulose-digesting bacterium, J, Bact., 

4#: 499-513. 

Hungate, R. (1944a) The culture and isolation of cellulose- 
decomposing bacteria from the rumen of cattle, J. 

Bact,, 631-645. 

Laake, E, W. (1946) DDT for the control of the horn fly in 
Kansas. J, Econ. Entomol., ^2(1): 65-6#. 

Lardinois, C. C, et al. (1944) Rumen synthesis of vitamin B 
comples as influenced by ration composition. J. Dairy 
Sci., 22: 579-5#3. 

Leach, J, G. (1933) The method of survival of bacteria in 

the puparia of the seed-corn maggot ( Hylemyia cilicrura 
Rond.). Z. angew. Entomol., 20 : 150-161. 

Marlatt, C. L. (1910) The horn fly ( Haematobia serrata , 

Robineau-Desvoidy). In: U. S. Dep. Agr. Bur. Entomol., 
Circ. No. 115, 13 PP* 

McLintock, J. J. R. (1951) Personal communications. 

Mohr, C. 0. (1943) Cattle droppings as ecological units. 

Ecol. Monographs, 13 : 275-29#. 

Myers, J. G. (193#) Report on the natural enemies in Haiti 
of the horn fly ( Lyperosia irritans) and the green 
tomato bug ( Nezara viridula ). J. Council Sci. and 


Research, 11: 35-46. 
































- 113 - 

Neveau-Lemaire, M. (193&) Traite de Entomologie Medicale 
et Veterinaire. Vigot Freres, Paris, 1339 pp, 

Nungester, W. J., Hood, Mary, N., and Warren, M. (1943) 

Use of thioglycollate media for testing disinfectants* 
Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med., 52: 2B7-2B9. 

Petri, L. (1903) Ulteriori richerche sopra i battri che 

si travano nell T intestino della larva, Mosea olearia . 
Atti Reale Accad. Lencei, 8 : 560. 

Petri, L. (1909) Richerche sopra i batteri intestinali 
della, Mosea olearia . Mem. Staz. Patol. veg. Roma, 

A: 1-130. 

Petri, L. (1910) Untersuchungen uber die darmbakterien der 
olevenfliege. Zentr. Bakt. Parasitenk., 26: 357-367. 

Proom, H., and Woiwod, A. J. (1949) The examination, by 
partition paper chromatography, of the nitrogen 
metabolism of bacteria. J. Gen. Microbiol., 2 : XIV-XV. 

Ries, E. (1933) Endosymboise und Parasitismus, Z. Parasitenk., 
6: 339-349. 

Roubaud, E. (1919) Les particularites de la nutrition et 
la vie symbiotique chez les mouches tsetses. Ann. 

Inst. Pasteur. 33 » 4$9-536. 

Sisson, S. (1914) The Anatomy of Domestic Animals, Second 
Edition. Philadelphia, Saunders, 930 pp. 

Smith, J. B. (1SS9) The horn fly ( Haematobia serrata ). 

New Jersey Agr. Coll. Exptl. Sta. Bull., 62, 40 pp. 

Smith, J. B. (1B90) Notes on the structure and history of 
Haematobia serrata . Psyche, j>: 343-347. 












' 






% 







■ 



, 





























■ 






- 114 - 


Solowey, M., et al. (1947) Microbiology of spray dried 
whole egg. Am. J. Pub. Health, J7 : 971-9$2. 

Thom, C. (1930) The Penicillia, xiii. Baltimore, Williams 
and Wilkins Co., 644 pp. 

Thom, C., and Raper, K. B. (1945) Manual of the Asperigilli, 
ix. Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins Co., 373 pp. 

Weber, N. A. (193$) The sporophore of the fungus grown 

Atta cephalotes and a review of other reported sporo- 
phores. Rev. Entomol., 8 : 265-272. 

Werner, E. (1926) The nutrition of the larva of P. cuprea . 

A contribution to the problem of cellulose digestion 
in the insect larvae. Z. Morph. Oekol. Tiere, 

6 ( 1 ): 150 - 206 . 

Wigglesworth, V. B. (1929) Digestion in the tsetse fly: 

a study of the structure and function. Parasitology, 

2: 2&S-321. 

Yanda, R. E. (1952) Personal communications. 

Yanda, R. E. (1952a) The application of paper partition 

chromatography to the study of amino acid metabolism 
within the genus Paracolobactrum. Thesis submitted to 
the University of Alberta, 93 pp. 







APPENDIX 








- 116 - 
Appendix 


Nutrient Broth 

Peptone (Difco) 

NaCl 


1.0 gm. 

0.5 


Beef extract (Difco) 0.5 
Distilled water 100.0 ml. 

Adjust the pH to 7.6 with N NaOH. This and all 
subsequent media were autoclaved at 121.5° C at 15 pounds 
pressure for 20 minutes unless otherwise mentioned. 


Nutrient Agar 

Nutrient broth 1.0 1. 

Agar (Difco) 20.0 gm. 


Blood Agar 

Nutrient agar 1.0 1. 

Sheep’s blood (citrated) 50.0 ml. 

Blood was added aseptically to sterile nutrient 

agar. 


Alpha-naphthoi Solution 


Ethyl alcohol (absolute) 
Alpha-naphthol 


1.0 1 . 
5.0 gm. 









- 117 - 


Ammonium phosphat 

e Agar 

Agar (Difco) 

1.5 gm. 

Ammonium phosphate 

0.1 

Glucose 

1.0 

Potassium chloride 

0.02 

Magnesium sulphate 

0.02 

Brom-cresol purple (1 °jt) 

1.0 ml. 

Distilled water 

100.0 ml. 

Buffered Glucose 

Broth 

Peptone (Difco) 

5.0 gm. 

Glucose 

5.0 

k 2 hpo 4 

5.0 

Distilled water 

800.0 ml. 

Sterilization without pressure for three 


days. 


Carnoy ! s Fixative 

Ethyl alcohol (absolute) 

60 ml. 

Chloroform 

30 

Acetic acid (glacial) 

10 

Citrate Agar 

Ammonium sulphate 

1.0 gm 

Magnesium sulphate 

0.2 

Dipotassium phosphate 

1.0 

Sodium citrate 

3.0 


continued on page ll£ 








- nd - 

Citrate Agar (cont’d.) 


Sodium chloride 

5.0 gm. 

Agar (Difco) 

20.0 

Phenol red 

0.012 

Distilled water 

1.0 1. 


Adjust pH to 7.0. 


Gelatin Medium 


Gelatin 

50.0 gm. 

Peptone (Difco) 

10.0 

Disodium phosphate 

2.0 

Glucose 

1.0 

Sodium thioglycollate 

1.0 

Distilled water 

1.0 1. 

Glycerol Broth 


1 % glycerol in nutrient broth 


1 % Andrades indicator 



5 ml. in culture tube containing inverted Durham tube 


Ehrlich’s Reagent 


Para-dimethyl-amino-benzaldehyde 

5 gm. 

Butyl alcohol 

75 ml. 

HC1 (concentrated) 

25 ml. 










- 119 - 

Kligler’s Iron Medium (Difco) 


Beef Extract 

3.0 gm. 

Yeast 

3.0 

Peptone 

15.0 

Proteose peptone 

5.0 

Lactose 

10.0 

Glucose 

1.0 

Ferrous sulphate 

0.2 

Sodium chloride 

5.0 

Sodium thiosuophate 

0.3 

Agar 

2.0 

Phenol red 

0.024 

Fifty-five grams of this material was dissolved 

in one liter of distilled water, tubed in 5 ml. amounts and 

autoclaved. 

Littman’s Oxgall Agar 

(Difco) 

Peptone 

10.0 gm. 

Glucose 

10.0 

Oxgall 

15.0 

Agar 

20.0 

.Crystal violet 

0.01 


Fifty-five grams of this material and 30 units of 
Merck’s Streptomycin (calcium chloride complex) were 
dissolved in one liter of distilled water and autoclaved. 










- 120 - 


Litmus milk 


Skimmed milk 

100.0 ml. 

Brom-cresol purple (1$) 

1.0 

Sterilization without pressure for one hour < 

three successive days. 

Loeffler's Serum 

Slants 

Human Serum 

450 ml. 

Nutrient broth 

300 

Glucose 

3 gm. 

This material was tubed 

in 5 ml. amounts and 

inspissated at $5° C for 1 hour on 

3 successive days. 

MacConkey’s Agar 

(Difco) 

Peptone 

17.0 gm. 

Proteose peptone 

3.0 

Lactose 

10.0 

Bile-salts (No. 3) 

1.5 

Sodium chloride 

5.0 

Agar 

13.5 

Neutral red 

0.03 

Crystal violet 

0.001 


Fifty grams of this material was dissolved in one 


liter of distilled water and autoclaved 








121 - 


Medium I 


Tryptophane Assay Medium (Difco) 

11.25 gm. 

DL Tryptophane (NBC) 

0.11 

Distilled water 

300.0 ml. 


Autoclaved at 121,5° C at 15 lbs. for 15 minutes 

Medium II 


L Arginine monohydrochloride 

0.22 gm. 

L Histidine monohydrochloride 

0.14 

DL Lysine 

0.33 

DL Aspartic acid 

0.22 

DL Serine 

0.26 

L Glutamic acid 

1.21 

Beta-alanine 

0.11 

DL Tryptophane 

0.11 

DL Valine 

0 • 44 

L Leucine 

0.26 

DL Isoleucine 

0.26 

Glucose 

12.0 

k 2 hpo 4 

0.3 

kh 2 po 4 

0.3 

MgS0 4 

0.012 

NaCl 

0.006 

FeS0 4 

0.006 

MnS0 4 

0.006 

Sodium acetate 

6,0 

Distilled water 

300.0 ml. 


continued on page 122 






- 122 


Medium II (cont f d.) 

The pH was 7*4* This medium was tubed in 5 ml. 
amounts then autoclaved at 15 lbs. for 15 minutes. 

Medium III 


DL Threonine* 

0.025 gm. 

DL Serine 

0.025 

Beta-alanine 

0.06 

DL Valine 

0.075 

L Leucine 

0.0S5 

Glycyl glycine 

0.025 

DL Proline 

0.035 

Hydroxyproline 

0.04 

DL Aspartic acid 

0.09 

L Glutamic acid 

0.045 

DL Phenylalanine 

0.04 

DL Tyrosine 

0.025 

L Arginine 

0.025 

L Histidine monohydrochloride 

0.025 

DL Lysine 

0.045 

Glucose 

10.0 

- NaH 2 P0 4 

0.03 

Na 2 HP04 

0.03 

MgSC>4 

0.012 

NaCl 

Sodium acetate 

0.006 

0.6 


Distilled water 300.0 ml. 


continued on page 123 






. . 

, 



























. 










■ -* 



. 

































. 

































- 123 - 

Medium III (cont f d.) 


The pH was 7.4* This medium was tubed in 3 ml, 
amounts and autoclaved at 15 lbs, for 15 minutes. To each 
tube 2 ml. of the following medium was added aseptically. 
after it was passed through a Seitz filter. 


Thiamine hydrochloride (BDH) 

0.0016 gm. 

Nicotinamide (Eli Lilly and Co.) 

0.0610 

DL Methionine 

1.4921 

DL Cystine 

0.400S 

DL Tryptophane 

0.10211 

Fe(NH 4 ) 2 (S0 4 )2 

0.006 

NaNOj 

0.006 

*A11 of the amino acids used were manufactured 

Nutritional Biochemicals Corporation, 

Cleveland. 

Nitrate Medium 

Tryptone (Difco) 

20.0 gm. 

Na2HP0 4 

2.0 

kno 3 

1.0 

Glucose 

1.0 

Agar (Difco) 

1.0 

Distilled water 

1.0 1. 

Nitrate Solution A 

Sulphanilic acid 

$.0 gm. 

Acetic acid 5N 

1.0 1. 









. . 






. • 




. 

. 





. 

* 



' 












- 















































- 124 - 

Nitrate Solo^Lion B 


Alpha-naphthylamine 5.0 gm. 

Acetic acid 5N 1.0 1. 

A few drops of each of these reagents (Nitrate 
Solutions A and B) were run into the broth culture to be 
tested. A distinct pink color indicated the presence of 
nitrite. 


Peptone Broth 

Peptone (Difco) 15.0 gm. 

NaCl 7.5 

Distilled water 150.0 ml. 


Physiological Saline 

NaCl 9 gm. 

Distilled water 11. 


Ringer T s Solution 

NaCl 

CaCl 2 

KC1 

NaHC0 3 

Distilled water 


0.65 gm. 
0.012 
0.014 
0.02 

100.0 ml. 


Soft Agar 

Nutrient broth 
Agar (Difcb) 


1 1 . 

3 gm. 








- 125 - 

Special Anaerobic Transport Medium 


A quantity of 200 ml. was found convenient to 
prepare at one time; 190 ml. of previously autoclaved 0.3% 
agar (Difco) in distilled water was melted and 0.2 ml. of 
thioglycollic acid (BDH) added. Sufficient N/l HC1 was 
encorporated to bring the mixture to approximately pH 7.2, 
and then 10 ml. of 20% sodium glycerophosphate in distilled 
water was added, along with 2 ml. of a similar 1% solution 
of calcium chloride. The medium was mixed thoroughly, and 
while still hot was titrated to pH 7.4 with M/l HC1. Then 
0.4 nil. of methylene blue (0.1% in water) was added to give 
a final concentration of 1 in 500,000, and the medium placed 
in flowing steam for a few minutes before distribution in 
1/4 oz. screw cap w bijou w bottles, about 7 ml. in each. The 
bottles with the medium were sterilized for one hour in 
flowing steam. 

Sugar Broths 

Lactose, Glucose, Sucrose, Mannite, and Maltose 
1% sugar in nutrient broth 
1% Andrades indicator 

Lactose and glucose were run without pressure for 
one hour on each of three consecutive days in the autoclave. 
Sucrose, mannite, and maltose were autoclaved at 121.5° C for 
15 minutes at 15 lbs. pressure. 






. 

. 

■ 


. 




♦ 




- 



. 







■ 


































, 
























- 126 - 

Tyrosine Medium 


Nutrient agar 1 1. 

Tyrosine 5 gm. 

Autoclave at 15 lbs. pressure for 15 minutes 


Urea Medium 


Peptone (Difco) 

1.0 gm 

NaCl 

0.5 

Monopotassium phosphate 

2.0 

Phenol red 

0.012 

Agar (Difco) 

20.0 

Distilled water 

1.0 1. 


Autoclave at 15 lbs. pressure for 20 minutes. 


Add 0.1% glucose and 2% urea — the glucose solution autoclaved 
at 15 lbs. for 20 minutes and the urea solution passed through 
a Seitz filter. 


































