Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Grant, E. J. 


An investigation or some arsono 
derivatives of diphenyl ether... 


1933 













































©X UBBIS 












333 

5 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 

FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, this dissertation on ”An 
Investigation of Some Arsono Derivatives of Diphenyl 
Ether 11 and M An Investigation of the Bactericidal Power 
of Some Mono-Mercury Derivatives of Halogen Compounds 
of Fluorescein”, submitted by Edward James Grant, 

B. Sc., in partial fulfilment of the degree of Master 
of Science. 










AN INVESTIGATION OP SOME ARSONO DERIVATIVES 


OP DIPHENYL ETHER 

and 

AN INVESTIGATION OP THE BACTERICIDAL POWER 
OP SOME MO NO-MERCURY DERIVATIVES OF HALOGEN 
COMPOUNDS OF FLUORESCEIN 


by 

EDY/ARD JAMES GRANT, B. Sc. (OHEM. E.) 

DEPARTMENT OP CHEMISTRY 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A THESIS 

SUBMITTED TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE 
STUDIES, UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA, IN 
PARTIAL FULFILMENT OP THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE DEGREE OP MASTER OP SCIENCE. 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April, 1933 







TABLE OP CONTENTS 


PART 1 


PAGE 

INTRODUCTION I 

OUTLINE AND DISCUSSION OP INVESTIGATION 27 

EXPERIMENTAL PART 40 


PART II 


DISCUSSION AND RESULTS 


49 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/investigationofsOOgran 




ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


The investigation described was carried out in 
the Department of Chemistry of the University of 
Alberta. 

The author wishes to express his gratitude to 
Dr. R. B. Sandin for his helpful suggestions and 
assistance during the carrying out of this research, 
and also to Dr. R. M. Shaw of the Department of 
Bacteriology for placing at his disposal the neces¬ 
sary bacteriological equipment. 





















„ 







, 


' - ' • ? 






























































PART I 


AN INVESTIGATION OF SOME ARSQNO DERIVATIVES 

OF DIPHENYL ETHER 


INTRODUCTION 

There has been a great effort made in recent years 
to decrease the incidence of syphilis and this can be 
most effectively accomplished by adequate treatment 
early in the infection. This is an instance in which 
curative medicine is the best means of prevention of 
the disease. In other words the best way to prevent 
syphilis is to render the patients non-infeetious in 
the shortest possible time. Fortunately synthetic or® 
ganic chemistry has put into our hands some excellent 
new curative agents to bring about this result, as we 
shall presently see. Preventive medicine is often 
represented as more important than curative medicine; 
as a matter of fact in many cases they are so closely 
interwoven that it is impossible to separate them and 
this is pre-eminently true in the case of syphilis. 

The incidence of syphilis has been much discussed. 
It may be conservatively stated that ten per cent of 
the community has a syphilitic taint. The economic 











:/t.' 

hi 


' ' - ' 

• , . " -r>J 

, ' v ■ ' 

: ! . ; ■ 


- 






- 2 


loss due to the disease from the standpoint of decreased 
earning power, cost of hospitalization, medical care, 
as well as premature death, is exceedingly difficult 
to estimate and we must therefore be content with the 
bare statement that it is enormous. 

Modern Chemotherapeutic Work on Syphilis 

This phase of the work had to wait upon the devel¬ 
opment of producing the disease experimentally in anim¬ 
als. Metchnikoff first succeeded in infecting apes, 
with syphilis; later a method of infecting rabbits was 
devised and the rabbit has remained the principle 
animal for the work on experimental syphilis. It again 
emphasizes the tremendous importance of animal exper¬ 
imentation in all medical advance. 

The term 11 chemotherapy” is somewhat difficult to 
define. It was introduced by Ehrlich and the defini¬ 
tion and field of work indicated by the term can be 
best illustrated by the work done in Ehrlich*s labor¬ 
atory on syphilis and trypanosomiasis. Chemothera¬ 
peutic work on syphilis was an outgrowth of the work 
on trypanosomiasis, and for this reason we must brief¬ 
ly discuss trypanosomiasis at this time. Under the 
term ”trypanosomiasis” we include a series of diseases 
of man and animals which are produced by organisms 






- 

■ 

" • • 

. ' : ‘ : 

; ■ . . : 51 

* 

: 

• : .. ' : ■ : ; J . : . : 

- • it-i'vr 

, . . : i J 0 






- 3 - 

related to the organism causing syphilis. These diseases 
such as African sleeping sickness are of tremendous 
importance in the world and will be referred to later 
on in this paper. Trypanosomal infections are of im¬ 
portance in connection with the chemotherapy of syph¬ 
ilis because they can be given to animals very readily, 
and the animals die promptly unless effective remedies 
are administered. Thus, the duration of life in rats 
in many forms of trypanosomiasis is only three to nine 
days, whereas experimental syphilis runs an extremely 
chronic course. 

Ehrlich*s views regarding chemotherapy were based 
on the general proposition that certain organic chemi¬ 
cals have a specific affinity for certain living cells, 
and the term was an outgrowth of Ehrlich* s views regard¬ 
ing the nature of immunity. We would define chemo¬ 
therapy as that phase of pharmacology which deals with 
the relation between the chemical structure of thera¬ 
peutic agents and their effect on living things. 

Ehrlich used the term only in reference to infectious 
diseases but there is no reason why it should not in¬ 
clude all types of substances used in therapeutics. 

In practice, work in this field has always started 
with a fortuitous discovery that a given organic 



' 













- 4 - 


chemical has a certain specific pharmacological 
action. Following this lead, various derivatives of 
the drug are then prepared in the hope of finding a 
substance which is less toxic to man and more potent 
in the desired type of pharmacological activity than 
the original substance. The production of derivatives 
is not done in a routine or haphazard manner. We have 
accumulated a certain body of fact regarding the biol¬ 
ogical effect of certain groupings and the derivatives 
are made in accordance with past experience. In the 
case of the materials used in the treatment of in¬ 
fections, chemotherapeutic studies are directed towards 
the production of substances highly toxic to invading 
parasites and of low toxicity to man and the higher 
animals. The whole field of chemotherapy is one of 
the most promising for medicine of the future. It 
is on the border-line between chemistry and medicine 
and requires the cooperative effort of chemists, 
bacteriologists, pharmocologists and clinicians. The 
particular phase of chemistry concerned in most cases 
is synthetic organic chemistry and the work must be 
carefully coordinated in order to be successful® 

The Earlier Arsenicals: - 

In 1863^ ^Bechamp prepared a substance by the 
action of arsenic acid on aniline which he thought 











He also pre- 


- 5 - 

to have the formula, CgH g NH. AsO (OH)g. 

pared several salts of this acid. The sodium salt 

( 2 ) 

was first used therapeutically by Schild and Kionka 

in 1902 and the first animal experimentation with the 

( 3 ) 

substance was done by Biumenthal in the same year. 

They were interested in the sodium salt of this acid 
from the standpoint of general arsenical therapy, 
and not from the standpoint of the treatment of syphilis 
or trypanosomiasis. Biumenthal found it much less 
toxic to animals than the inorganic forms of arsenic 
and this relatively low toxicity caused the adoption 
of the name 11 Atoxyl ,f for the substance. 

The early literature of the last century contains 
references to the clinical use of arsenic in inorganic 
form in the treatment of trypanosomiasis. Laveran 
and Mesnil, in 1902, studied the action of inorganic 
arsenical compounds in experimental trypanosomiasis 
and found them somewhat effective in that they checked 
the infection but never cured the disease. (4)Thomas 
in 1905 first studied the action of atoxyl in exper¬ 
imental trypanosomiasis and found it to be an effective 
curative agent. ^^Robert Koch in 1907 showed that in 
clinical trypanosomiasis, atoxyl causes the organisms 
to disappear from the blood stream, and from that time 




' 


■ 


■ 






- i- 






; 

















6 - 


up to the present atoxyl has continued to be used 
clinically in the treatment of trypanosomiasis in 
the human. 

k 'Ehrlich began his chemotherapeutic studies on 
the arsenic compounds with atoxyl.- In the beginning 
he studied the effect of atoxyl on trypanosomes in 
the test tube and found it was not effective ; even in 
high concentrations it did not kill the organisms* 

For this reason he temporarily discontinued work with 
it. Later Ehrlich again studied the action of atoxyl 
in the living animal infected with trypanosomes and 
confirmed the observations of Thomas that it is very 
effective. Several investigators have shown that 
blood or tissue extracts, when treated with atoxyl, 
yield a substance,that which kills trypanosomes in the 
test tube. It was evident therefor© that atoxyl has 
to be altered in the body before it is capable of 
destroying these organisms. Following the atoxyl lead, 
Ehrlich and his co-workers prepared a very large 
number of derivatives of atoxyl. So far a complete 
list of these substances prepared and studied by them 
has never been published. Ehrlich and Bertheim later 
made a study of the structure of atoxyl and found that 
instead of being of the nature of an anilide, it is 























: ; 

• , 

. \:i ■ . : : . 

. ' ' ■) ■; : ' ■ . ’ r ■ . 

* 

* ■ • 

. • 

* • 

* 




- 7 - 


really para-amino - phenylarsonic acid 



In their monograph on chemotherapy Ehrlich and 
Hata mention specifically relatively few compounds. 
It soon became evident from, clinical work on atoxyl 
that the drug produces serious injury to the ©yes in 
a considerable number of cases, occasionally causing 
complete and permanent blindness. The first attempt 
to modify atoxyl and to reduce its toxicity resulted 
in the production of its acetic acid derivative, 
arsacetin, 

CHCO.HNj/ /As=0 

3 \_/ N OH 


This substance continued to be used clinically In the 
treatment of trypanosomiasis for many years, although 
it had just as severe an effect on the optic tract as 
atoxyl and possessed no advantages over it. 

Among-the large number of derivatives produced 
by Ehrlich and' very extensively studied by him and his 
co-workers was arsenophenylglycine 


HOOC-CHzNH 


As=A^ 


NHCHgCOOH 















. . 

: • 



. . - ’ 

* 

: • ; ■ : • 




. • 

■ ! 0 : • 

■ . j .... .. : ■ ..'?o . ; 

: , C , :j 

. - ' 

’ 









8 


Ehrlich regarded this substance as highly satisfac¬ 
tory in the treatment of trypanosomiasis. The basis 
for this statement was that animals were cured of try¬ 
panosomiasis by a single treatment with the drug. 

Arsphenamine (Salvarsan) or ”606 ™ - Ehrlich had 
the dream of M therapia sterilisans magna” - ie., a drug 
which would produce a complete sterilization in a 
single dose both in syphilis and trypanosomiasis. In 
regard to syphilis, certainly this dream has never been 
realized, and in regard to trypanosomiasis it has only 
been realized in the case of the smaller animals such 
as the mouse, rat and rabbit. There are three types 
of organic arsenicals which have been studied especially 
in syphilis and trypanosomiasis. They are (1) the arsonic 
acid, (2) the arseno and (5) the arsinoxide types. 

All three types of compounds may be illustrated with 
the arsphenamine nucleus, as follows: 



(l) /Arsonic. Acid 


( 3 ) Arsinoxide 









. 




* 

- 

. 

' 







' 


* 






* 





' , 











9 - 




NH, 


OH OH 

(£) Arseno form (Arsphenami ne ) 

Arsphenamine was finally accepted by Ehrlich as 
the most favorable of all the compounds which he stud¬ 
ied in the treatment of syphilis; no subatanc© approach¬ 
ing it in value has been since discovered, Ehrlich 
was so pleased with its effects and so convinced that 
the new drug would be the salvation of mankind by 
destroying one of its greatest scourges that he named 
the drug M salvarsan’*; it also became known as " 606 " 
under which name it was recorded in Ehrlich 1 s laboratory 
in the long list of arsenicals prepared for study# Its 
pharmacopoeial name is arsphenamine. The substance 
was placed on the market in vacuum sealed ampules in 
the form of the dihydrochloride in 1910. Very remark¬ 
able clinical effects were reported at once and the 
discovery startled the world; it was thought that this 
dread disease had been vanquished by one stroke. Many 
cases of syphilis with most distressing lesions* which 
had received mercury and iodides* yielded immediately 
to arsphenamine and healed. It was soon found* how¬ 
ever, that one treatment could not cure and that It 


requires great persistance to effect a cure of syphilis 


















' 

. 







' 


, 















. 


■ 



















10 


in man in most cases* This compound is readily 
soluble in water but on account of its acidity is 
unusable in this form. Pour equivalents of caustic 
soda must be added before it is ready for injection 
into the vein in the form af a solution of the di¬ 
sodium salt. To inject the uneutrali z ed material 
into the vein would cause almost instant death. 

The most striking improvements in arsphenamine 
have been in methods of making it more easily soluble. 
Thus Ehrlich 1 s laboratory also produced neoarsphenamine 

N«0S0CHjmC t H 3 (0H)As= A s C 6 H 3 10H) HHCH t 0S0Na 

a product of the action of sodium formaldehyde sulph- 
oxylate on the amino group of arsphenamine. It is a 
great improvement from the standpoint of convenience 
to the physician because it is unnecessary to neutralize 
the product prior to injection. The contents of the 
ampule are simply dissolved in distilled water and may 
be injected directly into the vein with the use of a 
hypodermic syringe. Neoarsphenamine can also be given 
in a more concentrated solution than arsphenamine. 

It has certain advantages and certain disadvantages. 

It is less toxic than arsphenamine and less likely to 
produce severe reactions. It also has the advantage 

that it effects a more prompt healing of active 



















, 























„ 

. 

■ '. ■ - 







« 
















11 - 


syphilitic lesions* Apparently the reason is that the 
substance is less colloidal, it penetrates into the 
tissues more readily, and it seems to increase the 
resistance of the tissues to the presence of the 
treponema pallidum. Its disadvantages are that it is 
less treponemicidal; it is more unstable chemically; 
it is not such a definite chemical substance on account 
of the indefiniteness of the formaldehyde sulphoxylat© 
group, and a larger dose is required than of arsphen¬ 
amine, although the margin of safety, i.e. the thera¬ 
peutic index, is at least as great. 

Ehrlich was the first to introduce the term 
”therapeutic index” and by this term he meant the ratio 
of the toxic dose to the therapeutic dose. It should 
be pointed out that the therapeutic index as determined 
from experimentation with small animals often does 
not hold for man and the larger animals. Thus Bayer 
205 a non-arsenic containing product offered for sale 
under the name of ,f Germanin !! , has been a great dis¬ 
appointment in the treatment of human trypanosomiasis 
in spite of the fact that it has a very high thera¬ 
peutic index in trypanosomiasis in rats, but it is of 
no value in the treatment of human trypanosomiasis. 

Another closely related derivative of neoarsphen- 
amine is a preparation called sulpharsphenemine pro- 









■ 

, 


1 ■ 






. 




, , 

' 

, 


. . 








■ 

XI 




. 

, 




. 






-In¬ 
duced by ^Voegtlin, Johnson and Dyer in the Hygienic 
Laboratory of the U. S. Public Health Service, It has 

the following structure: 

NaOiSOCH t NHC t H 3 DHW s=As Q H 3 (0H). NHCH t 0S0 ; N* 

This product although very similar chemically to 

neoarsphenamine, differs from it somewhat in its bio¬ 
logical effects and may have advantages over it in 
the treatment of certain syphilitic lesions. 

As stated previously, Ehrlich observed that atoxyl 
does not destroy trypanosomes in the test tube. He 
also observed that the arsphenamines are not effective 
in the test tube. On the other hand, the arsinoxid© 
compounds corresponding to these substances are effec¬ 
tive outside the body, Voegtlin and Smith showed 
that when the arsonic acids or the arsphenamines are 
injected into rats whose blood swarms with trypanos¬ 
omes there is a certain latent period varying from on© 
to three hours before the trypanosomes begin to dis¬ 
appear from the blood. On the other hand when the 
arsincxides are administered the trypanosome count 
begins to be reduced at once. They very logically 
conclude from this work that both the arsonic acid 
and the arseno types of compounds have to be changed 
in the body into the corresponding arsinoxides before 



. 

' 

* 

, 

. . . 

. 

■ 

- 

, 

. 

, 

■ . 











13 


they become effective. The latest period observed 
before the organisms begin to disappear can be mos t 
readily explained as due to the time required to build 
up an effective concentration of the arsinoxides. It 
has been found by all investigators who have studied the 
question, that in therapy the arsinoxides cannot be 
used as successfully as the other types of compounds® 

The relative parts played by the parasitic organisms 
and by the cells of the host in the reduction of the 
arsonic compounds, or in the oxidation of the arseno 
compounds, may account for the fact that the drugs 
can best be administered in the inactive forms and 
permit them to be activated by the living body. 

Stovarsol is the acetyl derivative of the arsonic 
acid corresponding to arsphenamine® It has the 
formula: GH 3 GONH. G 6 H 5 (OH)® AsO (OH)g 

It was prepared by Ehrlich and his collaborators® 

This drug has been used extensively in Franc© in the 
tofeatment of syphilis and is undoubtedly far less effec¬ 
tive than the arsphenamines• The increase in syphilis 
which has bean noted in France during the last few 
years has been attributed by some writers to the fact 
that Stovarsol has been very largely substituted for 
the arsphenamines, with the result that the patient 



, 

: 

. 

■ 


- 

. ;■ N.... 

, 

. 

■ 

- 

, 







■ 




. 








- 14 - 

remains longer in a state in which he can infect others. 

It seems highly probable that other drugs might 
be found which, would be more effective than arsphen¬ 
amine in the treatment of active syphilis. The drugs 
sometimes produce very disagreeable and occasionally 
even fatal disturbances and, in the opinion of the 
writers, work should continue in an effort to find 
still more effective drugs in the treatment of the 
various manifestations of acute syphilis* 

Syphilis of the Central Nervous System 

General Paresis - Tryparsamide, General paresis is one 
of the most distressing and fatal forms of mental dis¬ 
ease. In the treatment of this condition, the arsphen¬ 
amine s proved themselves to be of very little valiie* 

In a systematic study of the chemotherapy of neuro¬ 
syphilis by Lorenz, Loevenhart, Bleckwenn and Hodges, 
it was determined to study the action of drugs in the 
treatment of this condition irrespective of their 
effectiveness in the earlier stages of syphilis. Among 
the substances studied by them was tryparsamide, 

h 2 ngogh 2 nh. c 6 h 4 aso (qh) 2 

This substance is the amide of the arsenic acid 
which had been previously studied by Ehrlich in the 
arseno form; viz., arsenophenyl glycine. It was first 







. 

. 








' 

’ 

, 

. 

■ 


. . 




■ 




■ ■ ' 




- 




, 







- 15 - 

produced at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical 
Research by Jacobs and Heidelberger and studied exper¬ 
imentally in animals by^ Brown and Pearce in the 
same Institute, It was found by Lorenz and his co¬ 
workers that drug is exceedingly effective in the treat¬ 
ment of general paresis and resulted in the mental 
restoration of 40^ of the patients who had been com¬ 
mitted to state institutions, enabling them to return 
to their families and to resume their work, often 
with increased earning capacity. This important result 
has been comfirmed by a large number of investigators® 
Tryparsamid© has a remarkable tonic effect and the pa¬ 
tients frequently gain from ten to thirty pounds In 
weight during the treatment® 

Tryparsamid© also has the disadvantage that in 
one to two per cent of the cases, especially where 
there is involvement of the spinal cord there occurs 
a more or less serious impairment of vision which has 
to be carefully watched® It is in this regard in 
particular that there is a necessity for finding a 
better drug than tryparsamid©® 

Other Drugs Used in the Treatment of Syphilis® 

Mercury and iodides continue to be valuable ad¬ 
juncts in the treatment of certain types of syphilis. 




lr- :'h 



- 


r ( >r f ti 







■ 

. 

■ 





: 



* 


■ • 













. 








16 - 


There has been no great improvement in the use of 
these drugs. A great deal of work has been done on 
the chemotherapy of mercurial compounds but no prac¬ 
tical advance has thus far been made, although the 
synthesis of new mercurial compounds offers a very 
promising field in the treatment of syphilis® Various 
compounds of bismuth have recently been introduced 
and they are undoubtedly of value in the treatment of 
syphilis, especially in cases which have a peculiar 
sensitiveness to the arsphenamines but bismuth compounds 
are by no means as effective as the arsphenamines® It 
is possible that bismuth compounds may In the future 
replace mercury to a certain extent® 

The arsphenamines have been found to be exceed¬ 
ingly useful in the tropical disease known as fram- 
besia or yaws , which is very prevalent In certain 
districts® It seems as though this disease could be 
completely wiped out by the extensive use of arsphen¬ 
amines. Arsphenamine is also valuable in the treat¬ 
ment of relapsing fever and has also yielded favorable 
results In the treatment of Vincent ! s angina. The 
organisms responsible for these conditions are more 
closely related to treponema pallidum than to trypan¬ 
osomes • 

Trypanosomiasis - African Sleeping Sickness - 


Tryparsamide 





















17 


Trypanosomiasis still presents a great world 
problem. Approximately one million square miles of 
equatorial Africa is affected by trypanosomal diseases, 
which in man cause the African form of sleeping sick* 
ness, and in animals cause the disease known as nagana. 
African sleeping sickness is an entirely different 
disease from encephalitis lethargica * the so-called 
w sleeping sickness'* occurring in this country. The 
African disease has at certain periods caused the 
majority of deaths in certain regions and has decimated 
the population. It also attacks all of the domestic 
animals. Tryparsamide was shown by Brown and Pearce 
to be exceedingly effective in the treatment of exper¬ 
imental trypanosomiasis, and Pearce showed that it is 
the most beneficial drug known in the treatment of 
human trypanosomiasis, especially in the later stages 
where there is involvement of the central nervous 
system. Investigators have found tryparsamide to cause 
the same remarkable mental restoration that had been 
previously noted by Lorenz and his co-workers in general 
paresis. The work of Pearce has been amply confirmed 
and there is no doubt that it represents the greatest 
advance in the treatment of human trypanosomiasis that 
has been made thus far. Here again it has been ob¬ 
served that tryparsamide, in a certain percentage of 


i 







’ 

. 

- 

. 




* 






: 













. 








■ 







IB - 


the cases, deleteriously affects the vision, and it is 
especially from this standpoint that further work needs 
to be done to develop drugs which are safer from this 
view-point. It has been found that tryparsamide Is 
not so effective in the treatment of the form of South 
African sleeping sickness caused by Trypanosoma rhodes - 
iense. The more common form which yields to tryparsam¬ 
ide is caused by Tr.gambiense. The drug has also been 
found to be quite ineffective in the treatment of 
certain forms of trypanosomal disease attacking horses 
and cattle, such as the disease known as surra,which is 
prevalent in the Philippine Islands and causes enormous 
economic loss® 

Experimental trypanosomiasis, it is seen, has 
played a great role in chemotherapeutic studies of 
syphilis. It should be pointed out, however, that 
there is by no means a parallelism bet?/een these two 
diseases; since drugs are known which are very effec¬ 
tive in syphilis and totally Inert in trypanosomiasis, 
and the converse is also true* 

Only the briefest outline of the combat against 
syphilis, has been given, but it shows a most hopeful 
outlook for ultimate victory,over the disease and, in 
time, possibly Its complete suppression. This great 
















■ .• ' 

* 


. 

' : 









- 19 - 

advance in the treatment of the disease would not have 
been possible without the aid of creative chemistry* 

So great indeed have been the results of the co-oper¬ 
ation of medicine and chemistry in this field that the 
workers against other diseases have been heartened and 
encouraged to follow the plan of campaign that was 
initiated by Ehrlich* 

Pharmacological Actions 

The mechanism of the pharmacological action of 
these drugs has been extensively studied. Ehrlich noted 
atoxyl and arsphenamine did not destroy parasites in 
vitro but the corresponding arsinoxide compounds were 

( 9 ) 

effective. Voegtlin and Smith * showed that there is 
a latent period after injection of arsonic acids or 
arsphenamines before the trypanosomes begin to dis¬ 
appear from, the blood of the affected animal. On the 
other hand when the corresponding arsinoxides are ad¬ 
ministered the trypanosome count begins to be reduced 
at once. The logical conclusion therefor© is that the 
arsonic acids and arseno types of compounds have to b© 
changed in the body to the arsinoxide form before they 
become effective. The latent period is due to the 
time required to build up an effective concentration of 
the arsinoxides. However, investigators have shown 













■ 






■ ' 


, 










- ' 






' '• 





' • 

* 













- 20 - 


that the arsinoxides cannot be used as successfully as 
the other types of compounds in therapy• The organisms 
or cells of the host probably play a specific part in 
the reduction of arsonic acid compounds or oxidation 
of arseno compounds and this may account for the fact 
that drugs can be best administered in the inactive 

forms and activated in the living body. 

( 10 ) 

Voegtlin supposes the arsinoxide derivative 
once it is formed reacts with reduced glutathione of 
the tissues. 



Trypanosomes have been shown to contain -SH groups 
(nitroprusside test) similar to those in reduced 
glutathione. Voegtlin’s hypothesis apparently assumes 
that trypanocidal action is due to a combination of the 
arsinoxide with these sulfhydryl groups. In other words 
the -SH group acts as a chemoreceptor for the arsenic. 

In the more recent work on organic arsenical com¬ 
pounds Cohen, King and Strangeways^^have contributed 
a considerable part. Their work on the velocity of 
oxidation of arylarsinoxides offers an explanation for 
the variation of the therapeutic effect of the differ¬ 
ent arsonic acids. They consider the therapeutic 











■ 


s 

. 



' 

' 

' 











- 

. 

■ 

. ‘ ■ 

* 

■ - 

... • ■ 

• • ... 












. * 







21 


value of different arsonic acids may depend on the 
speed of reduction of the pentavalent acid to the 
trivalent arsinoxide. Their work has been done in 
two main directions: (a) the determination of oxi¬ 
dation-reduction potentials of various arsonic acids - 
arsinoxide systems, (b) studies of velocities of 
oxidation of various arsinoxides. The former method 
considers the arsonic acid-arsinoxide system similar 
to the ferrous-ferric iron system, but up to the present 
time it has failed to yield definite results* How¬ 
ever, considerable progress has been made with the 
velocity of oxidation method* The determination of 
the velocity of reduction would b© a more direct method 

_ ____.■ ~~ i ——— i 

but it involves a lot of experimental difficulties® 

The oxidation method is feasible and optically active 

( 12 ) 

cystine is used as the oxidizing agent.' 

PA^° H S-CHtCHlHHzlCOOH QH 7 ; 

K A5 ^0H * S- CH z CH(NH t ]COOH 

R. As 0 Z + 2SH'CH 2 CH(NrtX00H 

The arsenicals can be classified by their ease of 
oxidation, according to the bimolecular velocity 
constants. Cohen and his co-workers assume that the 
increasing order of velocities of oxidation of a series 
of arsinoxides towards a common oxidizing agent is the 
reverse of the order of the velocities of reduction of 





























* 

• ' 

. 

, 


























: 

- 

■ 


















1. 





22 


the corresponding arsonic acids, considering the arsonic 
acid - arsinoxide system is reversible. They follow 
the reduction of cystine polarimetricalling the specific 
rotation of cystine changing from 104° to -3° as 
cystine is reduced to cysteine. 

They found that as primary arsonic acids are re¬ 
duced to arsinoxides the toxicity to the host is 
greatly increased. The toxicity to the host may be 
used as a measure of the amount of reduction by the 
tissues since reduction must take place before the 
compound can exert trypanocidal activity. It is found 
however, that the direct administration of the arsin¬ 
oxides doesn’t give rise to the same toxic effects as 
the use of the corresponding arsonic acids. Other 
factors such as the rate of excretion may mask the 
relationship between the ease of reduction and toxicity. 
Voegtlin and Smith' ' showed that 80^ excretion of 
arsonic acids from rats occurred in 6 hours. Thus the 
amount of arsonic acid available for reduction in the 
tissues must be a very small percentage of the amount 
administered. Relationship between the ease of reduc¬ 
tion and curative action is not easily discernible 
since curative action is measurable only within the 
limits of non-toxicity to the host. Cohen, King and 















* 

- 

. 

- 

* 

. 

1 

’ 

♦ 


* 





25 


Strangeways conclude that neither from the curative 
action nor the toxicity to the host can any deduction 
be made as to the rate of reduction in the tissues. 
This rate is only one of the many factors determining 
the activity. 


(14) 

Sulphur Derivatives : The remarkable affinity 

of arsenic for organically linked sulfur and the fact 
that such sulfur occurs in the tissues, lends consid¬ 
erable interest to the study of thiolarsenic compounds. 
Thioarsenites are substances with trivalent arsenic 
linked through sulfur with organic radicals. The 
first compound of this type to be prepared was, 
arsenic trithiolacetic acid AsfSCHgGOOH)^ by Rosen¬ 


heim and Davidsohn 


Friedberger^"^obtained a 


compound with trypanocidal activity from a reaction 

(17) 

postulated to be as follows by Bertheim • 

5CH 2 COOH 

R.As 0 3 H,. ^».<"1 RA5=0^^R.A5( st:HtCO0H 

The product is di(carboxymethyl) 4-amino-phenylthio- 

arsenite. Kharasch^patented a method for the pre¬ 
paration of water soluble organo-metallic compounds 
according to the reaction. 


ArAs c\ z + Z 5HCH 2 C00K /Am A s' 


5 CH 2 COOH 


SCHjCOOH 

Trivalent arsenicals are insoluble in water and behave 
as weak acids. Condensation with thiol compounds 









24 


containing carboxyl groups made such oxides effective 
for uses similar to those of pentavalent arsenicals. 

In 1928 Parke Davis and Co, were granted a paten^*^ 

—? 1 

for new pentavalent derivatives which were claimed to 


be increased in toxicity to spirochaetes. They were 

NHt_ 

As(SCH,C00Ma) 4 . 


of this type: 


NaO 


(20) 

Voegtlin, Dyer and Leonard observed tervalent 


arsenicals in the same way produced compounds v/ith less 
toxicity than the parent compound. 

( 21 ) 

In 1929 Barber, May and Baker Ltd, 1 patented 
a process for the preparation of thioarsenite deriv¬ 
atives from one mole of arsonic acid and four moles 
of thiol compound (2 moles used for reduction and 2 
moles for condensation): 

ArA s <4"* 4 R5H- A rAsC SB -R-5-S-R-3H 2 0 

The thiol group of thiol acetic acid for example 

reduces the pentavalent arsonic acid to the trivalent 

state and the product reacts with the excess reagent 

to the compound produced above. 

( 22 ) 

Barber also introduced thiolacetamide as a 
reagent for the indentification of arsonic acids 


according to the reaction: 

Ar As<o° H , -45HCH 2 C0 NH 


OH 


* 3 H 2 0 + 


Ar A,' SCH z C0NH* 
' SCHiCO-NH* 


H,N'C0'CH z 5-5- CHjCO-NH 







































: . 


; • 




. 


. 


- 




■ 










25 


The di( carbamylmethyl) arylarsenite produced has 
a definite melting point. 

Barberreported no hydrolysis of thiolarsenites 
by alkali and got an intense nitroprusside test from 
the intact thioarsenites. 

(14) 

Cohen, King and Strangeways found a partial 
hydrolysis in weak alkali or aqueous solutions with a 
weak or negative nitroprusside test in a NaHCQg solu¬ 
tion whereas the parent thiol aliphatic compounds give 
a strong test. Solution in N/10 NaOH results in an 
intense nitroprusside test. This infers the solutions 
of thioarsenites have the intact molecule in equili¬ 
brium with the hydrolytic products. With strong alkali 
there is considerable hydrolysis but -little with 
NaHCO^ as follows: 

R-AsCsJ + RA*(0tt) t .+2RSH 

These workers observed alkaline cystine and an arsin- 
oxide develops an intense nitroprusside reaction 
indicating cysteine: 

i 

RAs-0+ +2V\ Z 0-^ RAs0 3 H z + 2H5R' 

They say the inability of thiol compounds and arsinoxides 
to condense and thiol compounds to reduce arsonic 
acids in alkaline solution invalidates Barber f s mechan¬ 
ism (loc.cit.). In solutions near neutrality an 







26 


.5 R 

U- 


_ 5 « 

2 R-A5C. sr / 


(24) 


arsonic acid combines with four moles of the thiol 
compound forming a tetrathioarsonate, as an inter¬ 
mediate and then two thiol alhyl groups are split off 
to link with each other: 

RAsO(OH) z +4 HS-R'—» R As(5R') 2 . ♦(■5R , ) z 

The intermediates have not been isolated as yet, thus 
the Parke Davis tetrathioarsonates are really mixtures 
of thioarsenites and disulfides. They postulate also 
the reduction of a disulfide by an arseno compound in 
alkaline solution* 

R -As 

II 

R ■ As 

Therapeutic Results; Rosenthal and Voegtlin 
showed glutathione inhibits the toxic action of an 
arsinoxide on trypanosomes in vitro in the proportion 
of 10:1 of glutathione to arsinoxide. Glutathione 
combines with the arsinoxide forming a dithioarsenite 
and the excess reducing the dissociation of the complex 
to a minimum. This supports the claim that the toxic 
activity of thioarsenites on trypanosomes is not a 
property of the intact molecule but of the hydrolytic 
product, arsinoxide. 

Cohen and his colleagues summarize the theory on 

the mechanism of the lethal action of arsenicals on 

(25) 

trypanosomes. Ehrlich' 'expressed the view that 








27 - 


the toxic action of arsenicals might lie in their 
affinity for the thiol groups of tissues. Voegtlin 
has also adopted and expanded this view regarding 
glutathione as the main arsenic-receptor and considers 
the reaction with glutathione interferes with the 
respiration of the living cells. 

In conclusion, the view of Cohen, King and 
Strangeways^^is that the remarkable affinity of 
arsenic for organically bound sulfur as demonstrated 
in their experiments justifies the hypothesis that 
lethal action of arsenicals on living tissues is a 
chemical action on thiol groups especially occurring 
in glutathione. 

Outline and Discussion of the Investigation 

Because of the importance of the diphenyl ether 
group in such compounds as thyroxyin and its deriv¬ 
atives it was thought that this group may have a 
marked chemotherapeutic effect, especially when coupled 
with the arsono group. Furthermore diphenyl ether 
is no?/ readily, available as an industrial by-product. 

Up until the present time no work has appeared in the 
literature on the preparation of arsenic derivatives 
of diphenyl ether. 








28 


The starting point in the preparation consists 
in a coupling reaction between a nitroarylhalide and 
the potassium salt of a phenol. The reaction. 


) oiBZcg / ) 

is extremely difficult to carry out but a reaction 
such as no z 

< >a r^ 

or _ NOi 

{ ) o lw Cil{ ) NO I 

is readily carried out. When a nitro group is present 
in the arylhalide in the ortho or para position the 
reaction goes on readily due to the activating effect 
on the halogen by the nitro group. 

For example: 

( > ci - 1 < >° H 

This reaction proceeds only in a solution of NaOH at 
a temperature of 350°. But with picryl chloride the 
hydrolysis to picric acid can be accomplished by hot 
water. NO*. no x 





According to the theory of Kharasch^ 26 ^ the 
introduction of the nitro group in the ortho or para 
position to the halogen tends to make the phenyl 
group less electronegative. The strength of the bond 
































- 29 - 


between the halogen and the phenyl group 13 weakened 
due to the shift of the pair of bonding electrons away 
from the phenyl group. It follows that because of 
this weakening the hydrolysis reaction takes place 
much more readily. 

The following ethers were prepared by means of a 

condensation such as the one described above: 

4 - nitrodiphenyl ether 
2 - nitrodiphenyl ether 
2,4, - dinitrodiphenyl ether. 

The 2,4 - nitrodiphenyl ether was synthesized 
according to the method described by Raiford and 
Colbert^in 1926. Nitrochlorobenzene was added to 
a potassium phenolate solution. The phenolate was 
prepared by adding the alkali to an aqueous solution 
of phenol. The mixture was then refluxed on an oil 
bath at 150° for several hours. A large excess of 
phenol was used and so a negligible amount of nitro¬ 
chlorobenzene was left. Thus there was no necessity 
for steam distillation to remove the latter. Alkali 
was added to remove the excess phenol from the reaction 
solution and the ether crystallized out at this point. 
The supernatant liquid was decanted off and the 
residue washed with water. The ether was recrystallized 
from ethyl alcohol. 





, 







. 

■ 

. 

" 

■ 







30 - 


For the preparation of the 2 and 4, nitrodiphenyl 
ethers a slightly different method was used following 
the procedure reported by Henley^ 28 The method was 
very similar, but 1 mole of the chloronitrobenzene 
to 1,75 moles of phenol and 1.25 moles of potassium 
hydroxide were condensed. Only 0.1 mole of water 
was used and the mixture was heated for one hour at 
200 - 210°. The ethers were recovered in the same way 


as above. 

The next stage was the reduction of the nitro 
groups attached to the ethers. 

( )-o-( )no,— t ( > 0< )Ntig 

__ NOz ,_^ NH-z 

OKJ D * (_)'° / 

The procedure described by Suter^^in 1929 was used. 

The reducing agent was zinc dust and dilute ethyl 
alcohol in a slightly acid medium. Calcium chloride 
was used to adjust the acidity. This reduction 
works very smoothly and good yields were obtained. The 
mechanism of the reaction is as follows: 

Zn -* Zn ++ + 20 

-m° Q + 6© — 9 ~ 

The hydrogen atoms required were supplied by the re¬ 
action of the zinc with the water in this manner: 


3Zh 


3 H 


U ZnO 


3 Zn +£H 2 0 































31 


The reaction was carried out on a steam bath and the 
amine was recovered by diluting the solution. 

A different procedure was necessary to reduce the 
2, 4 - dinitrodiphenyl ether, 

< > ° <~~ < > » <" > °* 

The reducing agent in this case was stannous chloride 

in alcohol saturated with hydrogen chloride. This 
reaction although appearing fairly simple presented a 
great deal of difficulty and a considerable loss of 
time. Using a solution with a low hydrogen ion con¬ 
centration resulted in nothing but a tarry mass. 
Attempts were made also to use acetic acid as a solvent 
but met with no success. With a greater concentration 
of acid and using stannous chloride in molecular pro¬ 
portions good results were obtained. The stannous 
chloride solution was added slowly from a dropping 
funnel to the dinitro ether dissolved in alcohol. 

The temperature of the reaction was kept down using a 
cold water bath and the mixture was stirred constantly. 
Alkali was not required to liberate the amine; it was 
found that just by dilution with water the salt was 
hydrolysed and the amine separated out. 

This reduction reaction is especially interesting, 
since it is an excellent example of the specificity 












~ 




. 














■ 







V'- -j-alrr: -;:k; r-;.?,; 

■ . ■ 1 . . . ' . '■ ■ 

^iToIXoo.^ tzz ui: cM; oc 




32 


of stannous chloride as a reducing agent in the step¬ 
wise reduction of polynitro compounds. The earliest 
known example of this property of stannous chloride, 
is the reduction of dinitrotoluene in this manner: 

oV )ch 3 +3S n Cl z +6HCI 3SnCl 4 ^H 2 0 + o/ 

N -no 3 x -NK Z 

ie. the nitro group closest to the side chain is re¬ 
duced while the other nitro group remains unattacked. 
Similarly in the case of 2, 4 - dinitrodiphenyl ether 
the nitro group closest to the phenoxy radicle is the 
one to be reduced. 

Another good stepwise reducing agent specific in 
its action is ammonium sulfide, 

0f( )ch 3 +3(NH 4 ),S —t 35 + 6 NH 3 +zH 2 0 h/*( )ch 3 

X -" / N0 Z N0 t 

This ammonium sulfide has selective action on the 

nitro group farthest removed from the side chain. It 

would appear highly probable that this reducing agent 

has the same action on the 2, 4 - dinitrodiphenyl 

ether, reducing the nitro group in the 4 position. 

The structure of 2, 4 - dinitrodiphenyl ether 
was investigated and the proef of the amine group be¬ 
ing in the 2 position was verified in two different 
ways. First the amino group was removed and the nitro 
compound compared with a similar compound prepared by 
direct condensation. The amino group was diazotized 











' 







33 


in alcoholic solution, in the presence of sulfuric 
acid. The solution was then warmed until no more gas 
came off and the nitro compound then was recovered by 

J\0 t tfO t 

dilution. 


Ntt' 


HNO t> 



CH 3 

+ \ +N.^HCi 
c- o 1 

l 

H 


This is a case of intermolecular oxidation and reduction. 

It was found 4 - nitrodiphenyl ether prepared by 
the condensation of potassium phenolate with nitro- 
chlorobenzene had a melting point 57°. The ether pre¬ 
pared by alcoholic diazotization had a melting point 
of 58°. A mixed melting point determination gave a 
result, 58°. This is direct proof that the amino 
group is in the 4 position. 

For further verification a diphenylene oxide was 
prepared. The nitro amino ether was diazotized and 
the diazonium solution was poured into hot 50 % sulfuric 
acid. The following reaction took place: 

—0—.X'v—o o 

> r h ct-N 


UT 



HO 


rfOj. '' TfO*. ^ NOi H* 0 *. 

The 3-nitrodiphenylene oxide is volatile with steam and 
was removed by steam distillation. This is a standard 
procedure for the preparation of substituted diphenylene 












































34 - 


oxide compounds• 

The next step in the procedure was the intro¬ 
duction of the arsono radicle. This could have been 
accomplished in either of two ways: 

(1) Directly by the use of arsenic acid, in a similar 
manner to direct nitration, sulfonation, etc. 

(2) By Bart f s Reaction. 

The latter is a general method for synthesizing aromatic 
arsono compounds developed by Bartf 30 ^ in 1912. The 
amine is diazotized, coupled with sodium arsenite and 
warmed to remove the nitrogen gas. Metallic salts in 
an alkaline solution catalyse the reaction. 



The method used was a modified form of the method 


described by Saunder and Hamilton^ 31 '. The nitro amino 


compound was dissolved in hydrochloric acid and dia¬ 
zotized. The cold diazonium solution was poured into 
a solution of sodium arsenite in concentrated alkali. 
Copper sulfate was used as a catalyst and the mixture 
was kept cold by the addition of ice. It was stirred 
vigorously until the evolution of gas ceased and then 
allowed to stand for several hours to insure complete 
coupling. The solution was then warmed and filtered 
and the arsono compound liberated by the addition of 
hydrochloric acid. Since the coupling takes place in 








- 




. 






^ * 




















. > 

. 

- ■ ; ■ . 

■ 






' 


■ 
















35 - 


concentrated alkali the anti-diazotate must be formed. 
This is contrary to coupling reactions in general, 
where the best coupling takes place with the syn isomer 
in the presence of dilute alkali. The mechanism of this 
reaction is as follows: 


OOr 


♦ cone 


• alhafi 


x 


X 

N OfJ a 


Anti-No di|}h«nfl efh«r dift2c>r«te 



( 



oNa 

+ A S^OKo 


- - 

ox: 


N 


ON* 

♦ 


,ort 


\ a *° 

J ''OH 

An intermoleeul&r oxidation and reduction is involved. 
The arsenic atom is oxidized thus, 
and the terminal C atom on the ether is reduced. 
Similarly 2 - arsonodiphenyl ether and 2 - arsono - 4 - 

nitrodiphenyl ether were prepared, 

^ ) o ( y and ( \o / \n0 


The latter compound was of great importance since the 
nitro group could be reduced to an amino group. It is 
the arsono amino grouping which causes the therapeutic 
activity in the various synthetic organic arsenic com¬ 
pounds. The reduction of the nitro group caused con¬ 
siderable difficulty because it was difficult to pre¬ 
vent the reduction of the arsono group also, to an 


arseno compound or an arsinoxide 

































36 - 


A series of reducing agents were tried: 

(1) Alkaline ferrous chloride, 

(2) Alkaline glucose. 

(3) Sodium hydrosulfite. 

(4) Sodium amalgam. 

The first two reducing agents gave no definite results 
and (3) was too vigorous. It probably gave the di¬ 
phenyl ether derivative of salvarsan 

GHjOHjN QH 3 A5=A 5 QH 3 NH,0QH s 


However, using sodium amalgam a successful reduction 
was carried out, 

d> 0 -( VS/ V °<Z> 

As=o H As--°o H 

OH 

The arsono compound was dissolved in methyl alcohol 
and a 4$ amalgam was added carefully with shaking and 
cooling. The solution was decanted from the mercury 
and the alcohol distilled off till a small volume 
remained. Water was added and the solution filtered. 
It was made acid with hydrochloric acid and again 
filtered. Alkali was added to the filtrate until a 
maximum precipitate appeared. 

An attempt was made to acetylate the amino group 
in order to lower the toxicity of the compound. 


00 ^ 0 “ 0 '" 


W-oAc 


As-o 
^ OH 


s oh 








































. 




* 







. 

, 

* 


















37 


This was done by refluxing the amino compound with 
acetic anhydride but the attempt was not successful. 

The arsono compounds can be readily characterized 
by a method reported by Barber^for preparing solid 
crystalline derivatives with definite melting points, 
using thiolacetic acid as a reagent. The derivative 
was prepared according to this reaction in a NaHCO^ 
solution: 


( ) o ( ^ AsOaBi + 4 SCH Z CQ 0 H -> 

/-\ /-n. S-CHxCOOH 

< >0< >AsC +H00cCH,-S-S-CH,C00H+3M I 0 

V_/ \-/ 5CH Z C00H 1 2 

Pour moles of thiolacetic acid are required for this 
reaction; two moles reduce the pentavalent arsenic to 
the trivalent state and the excess thiol compound 
combines with the trivalent arsenic to give the deriva¬ 
tive. The difearboxymethyl) diphenyl ether thioarsenite 
is crystallized from dilute acetic acid and can b© 
analysed by direct titration with standard iodine solu¬ 
tion. 


At As(SR) z + 3H z 0 - 2l 2 -»ArAsO(OH) t MHhR-5-5-R 

Because of the difficulty in getting this type of 
compound to crystallize the above compound was the 
only one of its kind prepared. It may be noted by 
reversing the procedure using a known arsono compound 

















QO 


0 



) 








38 - 


this method would serve for indentifying mercaptans. 

The method used for the estimation of the arsenic 
in the various compounds was the one described by 
Morgan^A small quantity (.l-.2g) was washed into 
a 300 cc. Kjeldahl flask. Ten grams of potassium 
sulfate and .2g of starch was added. Twenty cc. of 
concentrated sulfuric acid was next cautiously added 
and the mixture digested, a low flame being used until 
the frothing ceased. The digestion took about four 
hours and was complete when the liquid turned colorless. 
After cooling, the contents of the flask were washed 
quantitatively into an Erlnmeyer flask and alkali 
added until the solution was just distinctly alkaline 
to litmus. After cooling it was brought back to the 
acid side and saturated sodium bicarbonate added until 
the solution was alkaline and 5cc excess was present. 

Two cc. of a fresh 1 % starch solution was added 
and the arsenious acid present was titrated with a 
standard iodine solution, the end point being the 
characteristic blue of the iadin© in the presence of 
starch. The iodine solution was standardized against 
standard arsenious acid solution. The latter was pre¬ 
pared from sublimed C.P., As 2 0 3 . The oxide was dissol¬ 
ved in a neutral solution prepared by the addition of 













: 






y. ■ ■ ..r ; "J-G.:.; ■ ... 

. 





39 


sodium bicarbonate and a little acid to bring it to 
neutrality. The arsenious oxide was used as a primary 
standard and weighed out analytically. The solution 
was titrated with the iodine solution, 

1 cc. of I 2 solution « 0.002186 g of As. 







40 - 


EXPERIMENTAL PART 

(27) 

. Preparation of 2, 4 - Dinitrodiphenyl Ether 

One huhdred grams (.5 mole) of nitrochlorobenzene 
was added to a solution of potassium phenolate. The 
latter was prepared by dissolving 94 grams of phenol 
in 100 cc. of water containing 28 grams of potassium 
hydroxide. The mixture was then heated under a 
reflux condenser on an oil bath at 150° for 9 hours. 
The product was a dark colored solution. Dilute 
alkali was added to remove the excess phenol and then 
the ether crystallized out. The supernatant liquid 
was decanted off and the residue washed several times 
with water. The crude ether was recrystallized from 
ethyl alcohol and came down as coarse yellow crystals 
having a melting point of 70°♦ 

/ QO \ 

Preparation of 4 - Nitrodiphenyl ether v 

Seventy grams (1.25 moles) of potassium hydroxide 
was added to 2 cc. of water and the mixture fused. 
Seventy grams (1.75 moles) of phenol was added to the 
potassium hydroxide and the mixture was heated until 
all the solid had dissolved. One hundred and fifty- 
seven grams (1 mole)of p-nitrochlorobenzene was added 












v i,* % 












41 - 


and the mixture refluxed for about an hour at 200 - 
210°. it was then diluted with water and shaken with 
dilute alkali until cold* A crystalline meal separated 
out. The supernatant liquid was decanted off and the 
residue washed with water. The ether was recrystallized 
from ethyl alcohol and the melting point was found to 
be 60 - 61°. 

Preparation of 2 - Nitrodiphenyl Ether. 

This ether was prepared in the same manner as 
the one described above. Seventy grams of potassium 
hydroxide was fused with seventy grams of phenol. To 
this mixture was added 157 grams of o-nitrochloro- 
benzene. The mixture was refluxed and dilute alkali 
added to remove the excess phenol. The alkaline layer 
was separated and the ether was recovered from the 
other portion by distillation in vacuo. 

Preparation of 2 - Amino - 4 ° nitrodiphenyl Ether. 

One hundred and thirty-six grams ( .6 moles) of 
stannous chloride was added to 240 cc. of ethyl alcohol 
in a litre flask. The flask and its contents were 
then weighed. A steady stream of hydrogen chloride gas 
was bubbled through the mixture until a gain in weight 
of 56 grams was recorded. During the addition of 











■ 




, 






42 - 


hydrogen chloride the stannous chloride went into 
solution. The alcoholic stannous chloride was then 
added slowly by means of a dropping funnel to 52 grams 
(o.l mole) of 2, 4 - dinitrodiphenyl ether dissolved 
in 240 cc. of alcohol. During the addition the red¬ 
action mixture was stirred rapidly. The temperature 
was kept below 50 - 60° by cooling the mixture in a 
bucket of water occasionally. After all the stannous 
chloride had been added the solution was left standing 
for an hour to complete the reduction. It was then 
diluted with a large volume of water and left for 
several hours. During this time the 2-amino-4- nitro- 
diphenyl ether separated out as dark red or brown 
leaflets. It was filtered off and recrystallized from 
ethyl alcohol. The purified ether was in the form of 
golden brown crystals. Thirty*-two grams of crude amino 
compound was recovered from 52 grams of the parent 
material. After crystallizations 10 grams of pure 
material was left; yield 69$ (crude material); m,»p. 
109.9° Anal. Calod. for C 18 H 10 N g 0 3 . N> 12<3 

Pound: N, 11.95 and 11.95. 






* 













. • 








43 - 


( 29 ) 

Preparation of 2 - Aminodiphenyl ether 

To a well stirred mixture of 80 grams of zinc 
dust and 20 grams of calcium chloride in 75 cc. of 
water and 200 cc. of 95% ethyl alcohol, on a steam 
hath, was added slowly 43 grams (o.2 mole) of the 
nitro compound. The reactionw as fairly vigorous. 
After an hour the mixture was filtered to remove zinc 
oxide and unchanged zinc. The amine was recovered 
by diluting the solution with water and recrystallized 
from alcohol; m.p. 44-45° # 

preparation of 4 - Aminodiphenyl ether. 

This compound was prepared in a similar manner 
to the 2- aminodiphenyl ether. Forty-three grams 
(0.2 mole) of the 4 - nitro compound was reduced by 
an alcoholic zinc dust mixture and the ether recovered 
as described above; m.p. 83.5°. 

Removal of the Amino Group from 2-Amino-4-nitro- 

diphenyl Ether. 

Four grams of the ether was dissolved in alcohol. 
To this solution was added 5 cc. of concentrated 
sulfuric acid. Two grams of sodium nitrite was 
added and the solution warmed until all the gas 
(acetaldehyde and nitrogen) ceased coming off. The 
















44 - 


solution was diluted with water* and an oily tar 
separated out. It was cooled in the ice box over 
night and the supernatant liquid decanted off. The 
residue was recrystallized several times and the melt¬ 
ing point determined; m,p. 58°. The melting point 
of 4-nitrodiphenyl ether was determined as 57°. A 
mixed melting point of the two compounds was found to 
be 58°. 

Preparation of 5-Nitrodlphenylene Oxide. 

Ten grams of 2-amino-4-nitrodiphenyl ether was 
dissolved in 200 cc. of 6N hydrochloric acid. To 
this solution was added 6 grams of sodium nitrite, 
the temperature being kept below 5°. The diazonium 
solution was poured into a hot solution of 200 cc. 
of 50$ sulfuric acid. The diphenylene oxide was 
removed from the solution by steam distillation and 
recrystallized several times from alcohol; m.p.154.3 0 
corr. 

(31)/ 

preparation of 2-Nitro-4-arsonodiphenyl ether ' 

Twenty grams of 2-amino-4-nitrodiphenyl ether 
was dissolved in 400 cc. of HC1 (1 cone. HClilHgO) by 
boiling. The solution was decanted off from the tar 
formed and cooled. The amine hydrochloride was 









45 - 


diazotized by adding a solution of 10 grams of 
sodium nitrite in a hundred cc. of water. The 
sodium nitrite was poured in slowly and the temper¬ 
ature was kept below 5°. The diazonium solution was 
added to a cold solution of sodium arsenite. The 
sodium arsenite solution was made up as follows: 

50 grams of sodium arsenite and 100 grams of sodium . 
hydroxide was added to 400 cc. of water; 2 grams of 
copper sulfate was added as a catalyst. Cracked ice 
was added to keep the temperature down. The mixture 
was stirred until violent evolution of gas ceased 
and then allowed to stand over night. It was then 
warmed and filtered. The filtrate was made acid to 
litmus with hydrochloric acid and the precipitate 
that formed filtered off. The precipitate was 
dissolved in a sodium bicarbonate solution and boiled 
with charcoal. It was then filtered and acidified. 
The precipitate was recrystallized from a glacial 
acetic acid, the arsono compound coming down as brown 
crystals. This compound does pot melt below 250°. 
Eleven to fourteen grams of crude arsono compound 
was obtained from twenty grams of the parent compound 
yield, 41$. 

Anal. Calcd. for G^^H^AsO^: As, 25.45. 

Pound: As, 25.40 and 25.40. 






' 













■ . 




, 

" ' \ . ■ ; : or; 

' 

. 

_ 


















46 - 


Preparation of 2 - Arsonodiphenyl ether. 

This compound was prepared from 20 grams of 2 - 
nitrodiphenyl ether in the manner described above. It 
was purified by boiling in a solution of sodium bicar¬ 
bonate with bone black and recrystallized from acetic 
acid. It is a white powder definitely crystalline. 

This compound is more soluble in various solvents 
(HgO, acetic acid, etc.,) than the para isomer. 

The melting point is 175.4 - 177.4° corr. 

Anal, calcd. for c i2 H ii As0 4 5 ’ 26 * 45 

Pound: As, 25.40 and 25.42. 

Preparation of 4 - Amino - 2 - Arsonodiphenyl ether. 

Nineteen grams of 4 - nitro - 2 - arsonodiphenyl 
ether was dissolved in 500 cc. of methyl alcohol and 
placed in a stoppered flask to facilitate shaking. 

Two hundred and twenty-five grams of 4$ sodium amalgam 
was added with continual shaking and cooling. The 
solution was then decanted from the mercury and the 
methyl alcohol distilled off until a volume of about 
50 cc. remained. The solution was then diluted with 
water and filtered. Excess hydrochloric acid was 
added to the filtrate which was then allowed to stand 
for several hours and then it was filtered again. 






■ 









, ■ 













• 

;v :- f » 



















47 - 


This removed any excess nitro compound. Sodium hydrox¬ 
ide was then carefully added to the filtrate until a 
maximum filtrate was formed. The precipitate was filtered 
off and recrystallized from dilute ethyl alcohol. Five 
grams of light brown crystals were recovered; yield, 

29%. 

Anal. Calcd. for c 1 2 H 12 NAs0 4 : As ' Z4 21 

Found: As, 23.99 and 23.94. 

Preparation of the monosilver salt of 4 - Arsono¬ 

di phenyl ether. 

When the precipitate of 4 - arsonodiphenyl ether 
was being washed free from chlorides, a solution of 
silver nitrate was added to the filtrate. A precipitate 
formed which was dissolved in nitric acid. A quantity 
of this precipitate was prepared and washed and dried. 

Anal. Calcd. for G^gH^G^As Ag : Ag, 26.70. 

Found: Ag, 26.60. 

The structure of this compound is as follows: 



Preparation of 2 - lodo - 4-n itrodiphenyl Ether. 
Ten grams of 2 - amino - 4 - nitrodiphenyl ether 
















’ 


. 




' 

1 

- 














- . . • _ . 

- 














48 


was diazotized in the usual way. The diazonium solution 
was poured into a litre flask and a solution of 25 grams 
of potassium iodide in 50 cc. water, added. The mixture 
was allowed to stand for several hours immersed in cold 
water. Then it was gently heated on a water bath 
until the evolution of nitrogen ceased. Sodium bisulfite 
was added to remove the excess iodine. The iodo com¬ 
pound crystallized out. It was filtered and recrystal¬ 
lized several times coming down as white crystals; 
m.p. 58.6° corr. 

Anal. Calcd. for 0^gH Q N0^I : I, 57.24 

Pound: I, 37.26. 

Preparation of Di(carboxymethyl) phenylthioarsenite. 

Three grams (.1 mole) of 4 - arsonodiphenyl ether 
was dissolved in sodium bicarbonate and 4 grams (0.04 moles) 
of thiolacetic acid was added. Dilute acetic acid was 
added until the solution was definitely acid. The deriv¬ 
ative came down as a liquid and only crystallized after 
long standing; m.p. 104.7 - 107.7° corr. The compound 
was analysed by direct titration with iodine using 
dilute acetic acid as the solvent. 

Anal. Calcd. for C-igH^gO^AsSg : As, 17.50 

Pound: As, 17.10. 











* 

. 











, 




> 














49 - 


PART II 


An Investigation of the Bactericidal Power of Some 

Mono-Mercury Derivatives of Halogen Compounds of 


Fluorescein* 


A series of compounds reported in a thesis by S* G* 
Lynn (University of Alberta) 1932, was investigated. 
These compounds were: 


(1) Monohydroxymercuridichlorofluorescein, 

(2) Monohydroxymercuridibromofluorescein, 

(3) Monohydroxymercuridi-iodofluorescein. 


The structure of these compounds may be shown graph!c- 


X 


ally as follow-*** 



where X stands for the halogen substituents. 

The chloro compound was prepared from monochloro- 
resorcinoi which was obtained by treating resorcinol 
with sulphuryl chloride. Dichlorofluorescein was 
prepared by allowing one gram molecule of. phthalic 
anhydride to react with two gram molecules of mono- 































- 




. 

■ . 








' 













■ 







50 


chlororesorcinol. The latter was converted to the 
diacetate and saponified for purification and then 
heated to 300° transforming the light-colored lactord 
modification to the darker quinoid modification. 

The reactions in brief are: ^ ^ 

o 


Hor^S 

o + 

■< 


Oh 


^yc\ 

OH 



Arc 

> 


OH 


o 

x 


The dichlorofluorescein was mercurated by treatment 
with mercuric acetate in a solution of glacial acetic 
acid. 

The bromo compound was prepared by the direct 
bromination of fluorescein to give dibromofluorescein. 

The latter was then directly mercurated as described 
above. 

The iodo compound was prepared by the direct iodi- 
nation of fluorescein and subsequent direct mercuration. 

It was decided to investigate the bactericidal 
activities of the three compounds and see how the 
chemical constitution influenced their activity. The 
procedure followed in the investigation of the bacter¬ 
icidal action was a modification of the Rideal-Walker 
method for determining phenol coefficients. 























' 


* 






















. 


■ • 


* 

- 

> 









51 - 


Preparation of Broth. 

7.5 g. sodium chloride 

7.5 g. Lemco Meat Extract 

15 g. Peptone Siccum 

1500 cc. distilled water 

The above ingredients were mixed in a large flask 
and autoclaved to get complete solution. The broth was 
then neutralized with .IN sodium hydroxide and the pH 
adjusted to 7.2 using bromthymolblue as the indicator. 
The solution was again autoclaved. The precipitated 
phosphates were filtered off and the solution put up in 
10 cc. portions in 5 x 3/4” broth tubes. After auto¬ 
claving the tubes they were ready for use. 

Preparation of Solutions of the Fluorescein 

Derivatives. 

A 1 g. portion of the fluorescein derivative was 
weighed out into a beaker. The theoretical amount or 
a little in excess of standard sodium hydroxide was 
added from a burette. The solution was rinsed out into 
a volumetric flask and made up to 100 cc. 

The next step was to prepare the dilutions. The 
dilutions of 1:100 prepared as above, were used as 
stock solutions and dilutions were made up immediately 









52 - 


before use, A calculated volume of stock solution was 
transferred by means of a pipette to a sterilized 
medication tube. By means of another pipette sterilized 
water was added to make up the volume of the particular 
dilution to 5 cc. 

Organism. 

The test organism was a strain of bacillus typhosus 
obtained from the Provincial Laboratory. The organism 
was grown in the broth culture and transferred 24 hours 
before being used and incubated at 57° C. 

Procedure, 

A series of 4 dilutions of the disinfectant was 
placed in plugged sterile medication tubes in 5 cc. 
portions, for each run. The solution of greatest con¬ 
centration was placed on the left, the concentration 
decreasing towards the right. The 5th tube contained 
a dilution of carbolic acid to serve as a control. In 
the first runs on the disinfectant a ranging test was 
made with widely separated dilutions. Then when the 
killing range was established a series of dilutions 
was made in this range. Starting at zero time 0.2 cc 
of the culture was added from a pipette to the left 
hand medication tube. This tube was flamed and after 
inoculation the contents were shaken to insure mixing. 
















- 53 


The time was checked with a stop-watch. Thirty seconds 
after the addition the next tube was inoculated and so 
on until all dilutions were inoculated with the culture 
of B. typhosus. Thirty seconds from the last addition 
(i.e., 2-g- mins, from zero) a loopful from the first 
tube was transferred to a flamed broth tub© numbered ,, 1 M . 
A platinum loop was used. After another 30 second 
interval a loopful was transferred from the second 
medication tube to a broth tube numbered M 2 tt . This was 
continued, working left to right until twenty-five 
broth tubes were inoculated in this manner. The tubes 
were incubated for 48 hours at 37° C and examined for 
growth. An opalesence of the broth indicated B. 
typhosus. 

It will be seen that from each dilution loopfuls 
were withdrawn at intervals of 2^, 5, 7j, 10 and 12-| 
minutes and placed in the broth. 

The platinum loop was flamed before each inoculation 
to insure complete sterilization. Cotton plugs were 
kept in all broth tubes and medication tubes, being 
replaced after all inoculations. The Rideal-Walker 
method recommends 5 cc. of broth but 10 cc. quantities 
were used. This was to prevent the bacteriostatic 
action shown by many disinfectants in low concentrations. 







.... ■ ■ ' 

* 

. 

■ 










54 


This results in very little or no growth although the 
organisms are still living. Using 10 cc. portions, 
the dilution should be great enough to prevent this 
action. 

Results: 

The results are summarized as follows, the minimum 
fatal dose being reported: 

(1) Monohydroxymercuridichlorofluorescein: 

In dil. 1:1000, growth up to X2j mins. 

In dil. 1:800, growth in ?■§ mins., no growth in 

10 mins. 

In dil. 1:500, growth in 2j mins., no growth in 

5 mins. 

(2) Monohydroxymercuridibromofluor escein. 

In dil. 1:2000, growth up to 12§ mins. 

In dil. 1:1500, growth in 10 mins., no growth in 

12-| mins. 

In dil. 1:1000, growth in 2% mins., no growth in 

5 mins. 

(3) Monohydroxymercuridi-iodofluorescein: 

In dil. 1:2000, growth in 10 mins., no growth in 

12j mins. 

In dil. 1:1500, growth in 2j mins., no growth in 


5 mins 















. 

♦ 












: 






. 














... : , . : 


* 














, 







- 55 


In dil. 1:1000 no grov/th in 2j? mins. 

The relative bactericidal activity of the three com¬ 
pounds may be compared by considering their action in 
a dilution of 1:1000: 

(a) Dichloro compound, 1:1000 - growth in 12^ mins 

(b) Dibromo compound, 1:1000 - growth in 2i mins, 

but no growth in 5 mins, 

(c) Di-iodo compound, 1:1000 - no growth in 2\ min 

It is thus seen the bactericidal action depends on 

the halogen substituents and increases in the order, 
chlorine, bromine and iodine, following the order of 
the elements in the periodic table. 

The phenol coefficients of these compounds were 
not determined since their structure is not similar 
to phenol. The literature reports the bactericidal 
power of compounds of this type*not in terms of phenol 
coefficients but in the manner expressed above. 




REFERENCES 


(1) Bechamp, Compt. rendu., 50, 870 (1860) 

(2) Schild, Bar. Klin. Wochschr., 1902 (279) 

(3) Blumenthal, Med Woche, (1902) 163. 

(4) Koch, Deut. Med. Wochschr., 33, 1889 (1907) 

(5) Thomas and Breinl, Mem. (XVI), Liverpool. 

School of Trop. Med. (1905) 

(6) Ehrlich and Hata, Die Experimentelle. 

Ohemotherapi© der Spirillosen, Springer (1910) 

(7) Voegtlin and Johnson, J.A.C.S. 44, 2573 (1922) 

(8) Brown and Pearce, J. Exp. Med., 30, 417 (1919) 

(9) Voegtlin and Smith, J. Pharm. Exp. Ther., 1920 15 

(475) — 

(10) Kahn, Chem. Zeit, 1099 (1912) 

(11) Cohen, King and Strangew&ys, J. Chem. Soc. 2866 (1932) 

(12) ” tt M M J. Chem. Soc. 3048 (1931) 

(13) Voegtlin and Smith, J. Pharm. Exp. Ther. 20 91 (1922) 

(14) Cohen, King and Strangeways, J. Chem. Soc. 3043 (1931) 

(15) Rosenheim and Davidsohn, Z. anorg. Chem., 1904, 41 

231. 

(16) Friedberger, Berl. klin. Woch., 1908, 1714. 

(17) Bertheim, Berl. klin. Woch., 1909, 494. 

(18) Kharaseh, V.S.P. 1, 589, 599/ 1924. 

(19) Parke Davis and Co., E.P. 331, 195. 

(20) Voegtlin, Dyer and Leonard, U.S. Public Health 
Rep., 1923, 38 1911. 






. ■■■> 

; 









(21) Barber, May and Barber, Ltd., E.P. 331, 869. 

(22) Barber, J. Chera. Soc. 1024 (1929) 

(23) M " '* 1020 (1929) 

(24) Rosenthal and Voegtlin, J. Pharm. Exp. Ther. 

(1930) 39 347. 

(25) Ehrlich, Ber., 1909, 42, 42. 

(26) Kharasch and Plenner, J.A.G.S. 54, 674 (1932) 

(27) Raiford and Colbert, J.A.G.S. 48, 2659 (1926) 

(28) Henley, J. Chem. Soc. 1224 (1930) 

(29) Suter, J.A.G.S. 51, 2585 (1929) 

(30) Bart, D.R.P., 268172. 

(31) Saunders and Hamilton, J.A.G.S. 54, 636 (1932) 

(32) Morgan, Organic Compounds of Arsenic and Antimony, 

p. 348. 








