AN {'NYES'B.GA.'iOT 

io msco?Eii the wmmmmm 

OF mOHBBAeKS M A. 


Ak OTOE IN TBS BIIINTICIN 

kiymwmimi staff h 

OFNTlAlIEiB SCHOOLS 




Fred Eugene Worger 







Sx JJBBIS 

awmisMis 

aiBmxiMis 



University of Alberta 
Printing Department 









Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/investigationtodOOworg 













THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


Thesis 


AN INVESTIGATION TO DISCOVER THE EFFECTIVENESS 
OF TEACHERAGES AS A FACTOR IN THE RETENTION 
OF ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF IN CENTRALIZED 
SCHOOLS 

A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 

by 

FRED E. WORGER 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
SEPTEMBER 3, 19 5 S 


























r 
























. 
















Ill 


A SYNOPSIS OF AN INVESTIGATION TO DISCOVER THE EFFECTIVENESS 
OF TSACHERAGES AS A FACTOR IN THE RETENTION 
OF ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF IN CENTRALIZED 
SCHOOLS 

The purpose of this thesis is to discover the extent 
to which teacherages are important factors in the obtaining 
and retention of administrative staff in centralized schools 
of six rooms and larger. 

Data were gathered in three ways: (a) by research 
into the Annual Reports of the Department of Education; 

(b) by personal interviews with superintendents and 
secretaries of divisions and counties; and (c) by the use of 
questionnaires which were mailed to principals and vice¬ 
principals of schools included in the divisions and counties 
used in this study. 

The findings of this study indicate that housing is 
the second most important factor influencing job acceptance; 
that the lack of suitable living accommodation makes it 
difficult to retain married teachers; that the provision of 
teacherages for administrative staff is on the increase; and 
that adequate teacherages are an effective force in 
attracting and retaining administrative personnel in 
centralized schools. 















* 






' 

' 






* 




















Is. 










* 





















TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. PROBLEM AND PROCEDURE. 1 

Importance of Housing Accommodation for Teachers 

in Centralized Schools . *. 1 

Origin of This Study,. 2 

Definition and Delimitation of Study . 6 

Related Literature . . • ... . • . «, 6 

Procedure Followed in Carrying out the Study . 11 

II. HISTORY OF TEACHERAGES IN ALBERTA. 16 

Sources of Information ... . . , . 16 

Annual Reports of Department . .. 17 

Need for teacherages. 17 

Appearance of teacherages . 21 

Location of teacherages . 24 

Opposition to teacherages . 25 

Strong support of teacherages . ... 27 

Engaging a teacher ,. 2$ 

Grants for Teacherages .. 31 

Grants .. 31 

III. ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF TEACHERAGES IN EIGHT ALBERTA 

DIVISIONS AND COUNTIES ..... . 35 

Size. 35 

Age. 36 























Y 


CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Heating..... 

Plumbing Facilities . 

Number of Occupants.. . . . . 

Rental ...... . . . 

Summary... 

IV. THE IMPORTANCE OF iCl : I 3 

OPINIONS RECEIVED FROM SECRETARIES AND SUPERIN¬ 
TENDENTS OF SELECTED DIVISIONS AND COUNTIES . 


V. 


Supply of Teacherages for Administrative Staff 

Lack of Teacherage Brings Refusals . 

Teacherages Essential for Retention of 

Administrators .... . 

Summary ... . 


H I . r 3 ' Cl : 3 f . 1 . DN Ni 

OPINIONS RECEIVED FROM PRINCIPALS AND VICE¬ 
PRINCIPALS IN SELECTED DIVISIONS AND COUNTIES 


Present Housing: Single Persons . . , . 

Present Housing: Married Persons . . . 

Suitable teacherages: Importance in Job 

Acceptance * . . ....... 

VI. SI Y, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS . . . . 
Response of Principals at 1956 Leadership 

Course . . .......... 


37 


3 $ 

39 

40 

41 


42 


43 

45 

4 $ 

51 


52 

52 

54 

56 

59 

59 













: 





vi 

CHAPTER PAGE 

The Jonason Study of 1940. 59 

The Superintendents T Survey of 1954. 59 

Annual Reports of the Department of Education . 60 

Information from Superintendents and Secretaries 
of Eight School Divisions and Counties ... 62 

Information from Principals and Vice-Principals 

of Eight School Divisions and Counties ... 63 

Recommendations ..... . 64 

BIBLIOGRAPHY . 65 

APPENDIX A. Questionnaire to Members of Principals 1 

Leadership Course, Edmonton, July, 1956 6$ 

APPENDIX B. Summary of Superintendents 1 Reports on 

Teachers 1 Living Accommodation 1953-54 • 69 

APPENDIX C. Superintendent and Secretary Interview 

Sheet and Check List.. . 70 

APPENDIX D. Questionnaire to Principals and Vice- 

Principals . ...... ?1 

APPENDIX E. Letter from Mr. A. Bredo, Administrative 

Accountant ...... . 73 










f 













LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Teacherages Built, Purchased, oved, and Sold 

in Alberta School Districts, 1926 to 1953 • • 34 

II. Supply of Teacherages for Administrative Staff 44 

III. Showing Need for Added Housing. 46 

IV. Number of Principals and Vice-Principals who 
Refused a Position because of no Teacherage 

Accommodation . 47 

V. Number of Teacherages which are Essential for 

the Retention of Administrative Staff .... 4$ 

VT. Have Teacherages Attracted Administrative 

Staff to Certain Schools .. 49 

VII. Personnel Changes because of Lack of 

Teacherages. 50 

VIII. Marital Status and Number of Dependents of 

Eighty-one Principals and Vice-Principals . . 53 

IX. Housing Accommodation of Eight Unmarried 

Administrators . 54 

X. Housing Accommodation of Seventy-three Married 

Administrators .. 55 

XI. Beliefs of Nineteen Dissatisfied Married 

Administrators with Respect to Need for 

Adequate Teacherages . . 55 

XII. Rank Order of Importance of Five Factors in Job 
Acceptance to Eighfy-one Administrators . . . 


53 















, * 

. , 






LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Classification of Alberta Teacherages in 1954 

According to Their State of Repair . 12 

2. Classification of Alberta Teacherages in 1954 

According to Number of Rooms. 13 

3. Classification of Principals’ and Vice-Principals 1 

Teacherages in 1957 According to Number of 

Rooms. 35 

4. Classification of Principals T and Vice-Principals’ 

Teacherages in 1957 According to Age. 36 

3. Classification of Principals’ and Vice-Principals’ 

Teacherages in 1957 According to Heating .... 37 

6. Classification of Principals’ and Vice-Principals’ 

Teacherages in 1957 According to Plumbing 

Facilities . ....... 3$ 

7. Classification of Principals’ and Vice-Principals’ 

Teacherages in 1957 According to Number of 

Occupants... 39 

3. Classification of Principals’ and Vice-Principals’ 
Teacherages in 1957 According to Rent Paid per 

Month ..... . ........ 40 






















c- . . 

. • . 





CHAPTER I 


PROBLEM AND PROCEDURE 

Importance of housing accommodation for teachers in 
centralized schools. The centralized school is the present 
day answer to the problem of supplying'public school educa¬ 
tion to the rural pupils of Alberta. No claim is being 
made that the education offered in such a school is the 
best the pupils could possibly receive, but it is pointed 
out that it is the education that rural Alberta pupils are 
going to receive for many years to come. Such central¬ 
izations will attract administrative staff with experience 
and training. These teachers will be mature and in the 
majority of cases married men with families. For a school 
to function to the best advantage for the pupils the staff 
must be relatively permanent and settled. To obtain these 
conditions the principals and vice-principals have to have 
living accommodation which is adequate for their needs. As 
in many cases private rental or personal purchase is not 
feasible as a method of providing such housing, it may be 
argued that teacherages are the answer. On the other hand 
teacherages may not be the answer. It is the purpose of 
this investigation to study the problem of housing accom¬ 
modation for principals and vice-principals in centralized 









































- 












































- 




. 



• • -■ • '• V 














• •• 










0 ' 















2 

schools with particular reference to the effectiveness of 
teacherages in securing and retaining the services of such 
principals and vice-principals. 

Origin of this study . When the writer decided to 
return to the teaching profession in 1953, it seemed that 
salary would be the only consideration, until several 
applications were written and acceptances received. While 
salary ruled out four of the six available positions, the 
remaining two were fairly equal in that respect and also 
in respect to position offered. The deciding factor proved 
to be the availability of a teacherage. 

One place had a teacherage while the other had a 
private house for rent. The teacherage was far from adequate 
when judged on the basis of size and facilities but its rent 
was twenty-four dollars per month plus utilities while the 
private home offered fully modern facilities at fifty dollars 
a month rent plus utilities. The total housing cost in each 
case was estimated at fifty-four dollars for the teacherage 
against ninety dollars per month for the private home. As 
the position with the available teacherage offered a gross 
of fifty dollars per month advantage in pay, it was accepted. 
In addition, some assurance was given that the teacherage 
would be modernized by the addition of a sewage disposal 
system and bathroom facilities within a few months or a 













• 


■ 


. 






■ 

















* 

. 











' 
























t 










3 


year at the most. 

At the end of two uneventful years in the unimproved 
teacherage the writer moved to a position in a center where 
teacherages were non-existent. Other available housing was 
almost non-existent too. Finally a modern house was rented 
at sixty dollars a month. Utilities added an additional 
forty dollars per month to the cost. 

The writer’s experiences with the teacherage and the 
house for rent prompted inquiries into the possibility of 
purchasing a home under the provisions of the National 
Housing Act. When a house plan was chosen and a contractor’s 
estimate obtained, an official of the Central Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation calculated that the mortgage available 
on such a structure in that area would be in the neignoor- 
hood of thirty-seven hundred dollars short of the cost price 
as estimated by the contractor. That meant making a down 
payment of roughly four thousand dollars on a house which 
in a city would require tw r o thousand dollars or slightly 
less. Therefore some better answer to the housing question 
had to be found. 

By now, the other factors which had influenced the 
writer’s acceptance of previous positions had faded into 
comparative insignificance. School plants, for example, 
differed somewhat in layout but not at all in equipment and 




■ 

















0 ■ • 






. 






. 

' 
































* 


. 




• f a 










4 


other facilities for instruction; salaries varied somewhat 
from division to division but annual increases were always 
received; sociability experienced in various districts was 
uniform. However, the acquiring of suitable, acceptable, 
comfortable housing at a reasonable cost did vary from 
place to place. This factor, next to the salary offered, 
became the deciding factor. 

Following these experiences, the writer began to 
wonder whether others were encountering similar problems. 
Perhaps the provision of adequate teacherages was the 
solution to the housing problem for administrators. Con¬ 
sequently, the opinions of principals attending the 
Principals’ Leadership Course at Concordia College in 
Edmonton in July, 1956, was sought. 

A questionnaire^ was used for this purpose. Later 
it was found that as the course included administrators from 
schools other than centralized ones some of the completed 
questionnaires did not properly qualify. Fifty-three 
questionnaires in all were completed and returned. Of 
these, eight were rejected because of the reason just 
mentioned. 

There were three.parts to the questionnaire. The 
first two were designed to discover the factors which were 

^Appendix A. 





, 






















. 








* 








' 

































5 


considered most important by administrators when seeking 
positions, first by having them rank in order of importance 
a list of factors, and second by having those who had been 
offered positions and declined to accept them list the 
reasons why such refusals had been made. In that way it was 
hoped to determine whether or not the housing factor was an 
important one in job acceptance. In so far as possible the 
topic of housing was not emphasized in the first two parts 
of the questionnaire as the aim was to obtain an unbiased 
statement of the relative importance of the various factors. 

The third part of the questionnaire specifically 
asked for information on housing, marital status, type of 
school and its location. Here the teacher was to indicate 
whether he owned his own home, lived in a teacherage, or 
rented from a private party. It was hoped that enough 
replies would be made by renters to justify accepting the 
rating of the factors from the first part of the question¬ 
naire as being a reasonably representative reply of all 
administrators throughout the province. 

When the forty-five completed questionnaires were 
examined it was found that the factor of housing received 
the first and second vote of over 53 per cent of those 
replying. It was surpassed only by salary with first and 
second votes of 69 per cent and followed by school plant 
which received the first and second vote of 31 per cent of 






















. 





























* 

' 







• 








- 




. 









6 


those replying. This established the housing problem as the 
second most important factor. Next in order of importance 
were sociability of the district and challenge of the job. 

The second section of the questionnaire relating to 
reasons why proffered positions had been refused, was 
tabulated. Sixteen persons indicated that they had been 
offered at least one position which they had refused. 

Housing was given as a reason five times, followed by salary 
four times, and religion, school plant and satisfaction with 
present position, three each. 

From the third part of the questionnaire it was found 
that twenty-four owned their own homes, and twenty-one were 
renting. 

Definition and delimitation of study . It is the 
purpose of this thesis therefore, to discover the extent 
to which teacherages are important factors in the obtaining 
and retention of administrative staff in centralized schools 
of six rooms and larger. 

By administrative staff is meant the principal, 
the sole administrator in some smaller schools, and the 
vice-principal, or vice-principals where the size and com¬ 
plexity of the school plant and curriculum warrant the 
employment of more than one of these officials. 

A centralized school, as the term is used in this 







■ 




. 
























. . 








' 




* 














r 
















7 


study, is a school serving pupils from more than one rural 
school district. The school-van is used extensively to 
transport the pupils to the central location where they 
attend classes. 

The principals and vice-principals contacted were 
employed during the 1956-57 school year in centralizations 
in the following school divisions and counties: St. Mary T s 
River School Division Number Two, Foremost School Division 
Number Three, Lethbridge School Division Number Seven, 
Foothills School Division Number Thirty-Eight, Wheatland 
School Division Number Forty, Vulcan County Number Two, 
Newell County Number Four, and Warner County Number Five. 
These school divisions and counties were chosen for study 
because their administrative offices were relatively close 
to the writer’s place of residence, making it possible to 
contact the secretaries and superintendents on Saturday 
mornings. 

Before proceeding with the study, it was necessary 
to determine what a teacherage is. There are to be found 
in school districts' buildings which are designated as teach- 
erages. However, when these buildings are examined they 
are found to differ in very many respects, going from one 
extreme to the other in matters of size, age, state of 
repair, and facilities offered for convenience and comfort. 

to obtain, if possible, some idea of what might be 




- 








' 

. . 





o 











c ; 


. 

. 

' 


. 







. 

* 















■ 

> 

* 
































considered to be a typical teacherage, two surveys of 
teacher housing accommodation were used. One was a report 
by the Superintendents of Schools in 1954 and the other was 
the present one of housing of principals and vice-principals 
completed with the aid of the secretaries of the divisions 
and counties chosen for this investigation. The results of 
the latter are given in Chapter III. 

Related literature . The main source of data on 
teachers 1 living accommodation, insofar as Alberta is con¬ 
cerned, was found in the Annual Reports of the Department of 
Education from 1906 to the present day. These data are con¬ 
tained in reports of the Deputy Ministers, the Chief 
Superintendents, the Superintendents, and the reports of the 
Debentures and Building Branches. Information is given on 
the planning, financing and erection of teacherages. These 
data are included in Uhapter II of this 'thesis. 

In 1940, J. C. Jonason completed an .A. thesis, 

!, A Survey of Grounds, lants, and Teacherages in Eighty 
Schools in Central and northern Albert a.This source 
provides a glimpse not only of the teacherage sixteen years 
ago, but also of some of the weaknesses evident in teacherage 
policy at that time. 

Nineteen out of the eighty schools surveyed had teach- 








9 


erages.^ Thirteen of these nineteen teacherages were in use* 
One was empty because the accommodation was poor and the 
five others were unused because the teachers preferred to 
live elsewhere. Teachers in fifteen of the sixty-one 
remaining schools indicated that they wished to have teach¬ 
erages. Jonason concluded that there were sufficient teach¬ 
erages to take care of normal demand. 

Teacherages were located on or near the school 
grounds. The rents charged were found to be in line with 
the average capital costs of teacherages and furnishings. 
However, the proportion of married to single teachers was 
found to be one to eight. The reasons for this proportion 
were given as low salaries and poor accommodation offered in 
the teacherages. 

While Jonason T s study was a survey only, he does 
bring out the fact that married teachers require and demand 
adequate housing if their services are to be made available. 
This does not imply that single teachers are in any way 
inferior in teaching ability to married ones. It does imply 
that married personnel will be more difficult to hire in 

2 

J. C. Jonason, A Survey of urounds , Plants , and 
Teacherages in Eighty Schools in Central and Northern 
Alberta , (unpublished Master T s thesis, The University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, 1940), p. 3&* 
























































' 




* 






































r.. 

c ■ t . . 







10 


districts lacking suitable housing. 

Jonason f s suggestions regarding future teacherages 
are interesting and pertinent to the question of obtaining 
and holding staff. He states first that teacherages are 
essential if experienced teachers are to be employed. He 
then recommends building with full basement, kitchen, living- 
room, bedroom, closets, front and rear exits. The minimum 
size advocated is two hundred square feet. The cost of such 
a building in 1939 was between six and nine hundred dollars. 

The rent was to be ten per cent of the cost. Fur¬ 
nishings were to consist of a range, heater, table and 
chairs, blinds, screens, screen door, bureau with a good 
mirror, bath tub, bedstead, spring, mattress and pillows. 

Cost of plumbing was set at $171.75* 

Because the centralized school has replaced the one- 
room schools of 1939, Jonason recommended that apartment- 
type housing replace the small teacherage. This present 
study includes a survey of teacherages of administrative 
personnel as they are today. 

Teachers 1 Living Accommodation was the topic of reports 
submitted to the Department of Education in 1954 by thirty- 
eight Superintendents of Schools in Alberta. A summary 
of the information contained in these reports appears in 
Appendix B. 

In all, the reports listed 943 teacherages in forty- 

















* 









< 




• 








' 

. 

















- 

'• < • • 





11 


one school divisions and counties. Seven hundred seventy- 
four teacherages were reported on with respect to their 
condition of repair. Five hundred twenty-six teacherages 
were reported on with respect to size. 

As there was no uniform method used by the super¬ 
intendents in reporting on condition, the writer established 
an arbitrary rating scale; and estimates of the state of 
repair were made for each building from comments made by 
the superintendents. Figure One indicates the per cent of 
the buildings which fell in each category A, B, or C. A 
rating of A indicates a building in good condition, B in¬ 
dicates a building in fair condition, and C is a building 
in poor condition. 

Figure Two shows how many of the 526 teacherages 
reported on as to size were two, three, four, five, or over 
five rooms in size. 

When we combine the information contained in Figure 
One and Figure Two, we arrive at the conclusion that the 
typical teacherage in Alberta in 1954 was’a two-roomed 
building, and that two out of every five of these teacher¬ 
ages were in good condition. 

Procedure followed in carrying out the study . Four 
major steps were ts:ken in carrying out this study. The 
first was the preliminary questionnaires which were submitted 












- 













■ 



• 

• 
























* 










< ■ < . 




. 


. 





















W W 4. 




12 


to the members of the Principals 1 Leadership Course. The 
details of what was done here have been given in an earlier 
section of this chapter. 



CLASSIFICATION OF ALBERTA TEACHERAGSS 
IN 1954 ACCORDING TO THEIR 
STATE OF REPAIR 

The second step, research into the related literature, 
was a continuing step in the solution of the problem. The 
sources have been mentioned previously under Related Lit¬ 
erature. 

Interviews held with the secretaries and superin¬ 
tendents of the divisions and counties used in this study 
constituted the third step. Five separate trips were made 
on consecutive Saturday mornings between January 19, 1957, 











































13 


and February 16, 1957. On three of these mornings the 
itinerary included two calls each, and on the other two 
mornings one call was made each trip* 

N t 300 


200 


100 



5 over 3 


Number of rooms 
FIGURE 2 

CLASSIFICATION OF ALBERTA TEACHERAGES 
IN 1954 ACCORDING TO 
NUMBER OF ROOMS 


A prepared questionnaire, (Appendix C), was used in 
each instance to ensure uniformity of coverage of the topics 
discussed. Past and present policies with regard to teach- 
erages, their supply and modernization, were investigated. 

It was hoped to gain evidence of the trends in teacherage 
building which would illustrate concretely whether or not 
the school boards and committees felt teacherages were 

























14 


necessary for the securing or retention of administrative 
personnel. As the erection of a modern teacherage involves 
the outlay of public funds, with the possible loss of the 
interest on such an outlay over the years, the school boards 
and committees are duty bound to give careful consideration 
to the matter. Boards and committees must try to avoid 
having housing in one center with few or no teachers 
requiring it, and no housing or inadequate housing at other 
centers. 

For step four, the writer prepared questionnaires^ 
addressed to principals and vice-principals. These question¬ 
naires were designed to discover two sets of information. 

One was the present living accommodation of the person 
questioned and the other was the conviction of the person 
questioned with respect to the need for a teacherage in his 
present location. 

The names and addresses of these principals and 
vice-principals were obtained through the cooperation of 
the secretaries of the school divisions and counties. A 
list was sent to each secretary naming the accredited 
secondary schools in the division or county, as obtained from 
a Department of Education list entitled Accredited Secon- 

3 

Appendix D. 











< 
































. 







. 




■ 


















































> 









15 


dary Schools in Alberta, December 1, 1955. In addition, 
this list named the principal who had been in charge of 
each such school in the fall of 1955. The secretaries were 
requested to indicate the number of rooms in the schools, 
ana to provide the name of the current principal and vice¬ 
principal with their addresses. In addition the secretary 
was asked to add the required information with respect to 
any centralized schools of six rooms or larger which were 
not secondary schools. The data from the answers to these 
questionnaires is presented in Chapter V. 

In evaluating the information on the questionnaires, 
factual and opinionative answers were separated. By factual 
replies are meant those which could be given by any person 
in possession of the facts; for example, !T How many principals 
and vice-principals moved within or out of the division 
or county within a certain period? ,T This is a question to 
which only one reply is possible. Opinionative answers 
depend more on interpretation than observation of facts; 
for example, ?, 0f those principals or vice-principals who 
moved, how many do you think did so because of lack of an 
adequate teacherage?" This is a question which could have 
a different answer from each person to whom it is addressed. 
















. 



































' 





































' 

























CHAPTER II 


HISTORY OF TEACHERAGES IN ALBERTA 

Sources of information . There are two sources of 
historical information on teacherages. These are the 
Annual Reports of the Department of Education of Alberta 
from 1906 to the present day, and the School Grants Act, 

1944. With but few exceptions, the Annual Reports, from the 
first Report in 1906, contain references to the problem of 
securing suitable living accommodation for teachers. The 
School Grants Act of 1944 contains specific reference to 
grants available for building teachers 1 residences, subject 
to the approval of the Minister, 

References to teachers 1 residences were made in the 
reports of the Inspectors of Schools in the Annual Reports 
of the Department of Education, From 1906 to 1918 the 
Inspectors for the province submitted annual reports which 
were printed individually in the Annual Reports of the 
Department. From 1919 to 1925 the Chief Inspector of Schools 
combined excerpts from the School Inspectors 1 reports into 
his report, under headings such as "Classroom Instruction, 11 
and "Teachers 1 Residences, 11 

While the reports of the Chief Inspectors continued 
after 1925, specific mention of teachers 1 residences ceased 
to appear thereafter. However, for the years 1926 to 1929, 

























. 









* 









C 




« • ! -V'» I . <<U. 











17 


the Manager, Debentures Branch, reporting on additions and 
alterations, mentions the number of teacherages built where 
debentures were issued for that purpose* 

A record of the number of teacherages built from 
1930 onwards appears in the Annual Reports under the Report 
of the Buildings Branch. After 1933 and until 1941 teacher- 
ages were listed together with barns, with no distinction 
made between them. In 1942 teacherages built and purchased 
were listed separately from other buildings. By 1949 the 
influence of the centralization of schools is evident in the 
reports of the number of teacherages, as listings show some 
having been sold and some moved, probably as the result of 
the closing of small rural schools. 

I. ANNUAL REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT 

Need for teacherages . Inspector G. E. Ellis of the 
Edmonton Inspectorate in 1906 made the first mention of a 
need for teachers 1 residences. 

Another serious drawback among the Galicians and 
Russians is the impossibility in some instances of 
securing a boarding house for the teacher .... In 
such cases the trustees should be encouraged to build 
shacks for the teachers . . . .1 

^Annual Report of the Alberta Department of Education 
for 1906, p. 53. “ “ ” “ 





























' 


*• 






. 




















■ 


. 



. 



















16 


Another inspector noted the fact that the teacher 
needed a residence of her own in foreign-speaking districts. 
His comments indicate that in 1920 there were a considerable 
number of teacherages available in the territory included 
in his inspectorate. 

A teacher 1 s residence is an absolute necessity in a 
non-English district, and it is very desirable in many 
others. Two of the residences in this inspectorate 
have three rooms, eleven have two rooms, and seventeen 
have one room.2 

Mr. Robert Fletcher, Supervisor of Schools among 
Foreigners gave a report in 1915 on teacherages at schools 
under his supervision. In addition to indicating the size 
and furnishings of such teacherages, he makes them sound 
attractive in appearance where suitable effort had been put 
into their beautification. 

. . . , teachers 1 houses have been built. These are 
frame structures usually about fourteen feet by eighteen 
feet, although some are much larger. They are furnished 
with a table, bed, cook stove and cooking utensils. In 
nearly all cases there is a plentiful supply of drinking 
water on the school premises. Where the teacher is at 
all handy and is able to enlist the co-operation of the 
School Board, the teacher T s house and its surroundings 
are made quite comfortable and home-like indeed.3 

The inspectors of the Department of Education noted, 
during a period of economic prosperity, that such prosperity 
made it difficult for teachers to find boarding places. This 


^Ibid, for 1920 , p. 80. 
hbid . for 1915, p. 80 . 







19 


was due to several causes; the amount of board money received 
by the farmer was too small to be attractive when financial 
returns on agricultural produce were good; the homes of the 
farmers were not large enough in many instances to accom¬ 
modate a boarder without some considerable inconvenience to 
the family; or the farm wife was frequently required as a 
regular hand to do chores and so was unable to give the 
attention to caring for a boarder that was demanded of her. 
From the south part of the province came the reports of 
inspectors in the Macleod and Lethbridge inspectorates: 

The improvement in financial conditions has not 
solved the problem of the rural schools, and in some 
cases it has increased the difficulty of securing a 
suitable home for the teacher. This will necessitate 
during 1917 considerable attention to providing small 
residences for teachers, as a number of applicants for 
positions in this inspectorate have expressed a prefer¬ 
ence for schools making such provision for the teacher.^ 

The boarding house problem becomes more difficult as 
the farmer becomes better off financially .... A 
few districts have provided teachers 1 residences. These 
are very convenient for male teachers and for ladies of 
mature years who do not mind the isolation. Districts 
having these residences seldom have trouble in securing 
teachers and in retaining them.5 

And from much farther north in our province came 
reports suggesting the need for teacherages where boarding 
places were scarce. One such report is as follows: 


^Ibid. for 1916, p. 61 
5Ibid, for 1917, p. 60 































r 

.... 

* 

' 














- , 




. 












20 


The teacher’s house is an aid in solving the difficul¬ 
ty of accommodation, but, as yet, few of the districts 
have one. Four residences for teachers were built 
during the year, and these are occupied by teachers.° 

One inspector is outstanding for his reports on 
teacherages. Between 1911 and 1920, Inspector J. C. Butchart 
of Vegreville Inspectorate made eight reports on the 
provision of houses for teachers. Most of these reports 
were identical in construction but they serve to indicate 
the presence of teacherages in the early history of the 
province, and in two instances the remarks indicate the 
usefulness of such accommodation in attracting an adequate 
supply of qualified teachers. The entry for 1914 is charac¬ 
teristic of the one given in 1911 and repeated with little 
variation in the years 1912 to 1917: 

Nearly all the school buildings are good and are very 
well equipped. Nearly all have two acres of ground and 
many have stables and small houses for the use of the 
teacher.7 

Commenting at some length on the value of teacher¬ 
ages in helping to solve the problem of a shortage of 
qualified teachers, Inspector Butchart says: 

Several districts have built teachers’ houses under 
the legislation of the last session and the prospect is 
that during the coming year many more will take advan¬ 
tage of the generous assistance provided. Living 


^Ibid. for 1916, p. 71. 
' dbid . for 1914, P. 91. 







. 





















* 













* 






. 


{ • 







21 


conditions must be improved if we are to have an adequate 
supply of properly trained and equipped teachers in 
these schools. Experience and permanency of tenure are 
necessary to success, especially in non-English schools. 
When these schools have a house and grounds that can be 
made a real home one of the chief difficulties in con¬ 
nection with this phase of educational work will have 
been overcome. 

Between the time that Inspector Butchart wrote the 
above report and the next year, his predictions apparently 
were fulfilled regarding the number of teacherages which 
would be built, for he noted in 1920 that 

Several districts have taken advantage of the assis¬ 
tance offered in the erection of residences for teachers. 
. . . This should make it easier to obtain teachers 
and retain their services permanently.9 


Appearance of teacherages . In the reports of inspec¬ 
tors during the infancy of the province occasional glimpses 
are given in word pictures of the appearance of the teacher¬ 
ages. Later Annual Reports carry photographs of teacher¬ 
ages, and in some cases, floor plans and elevations. These 
apparently were the “approved" plans prepared by the Depart¬ 
ment of Education for the guidance of school boards in 
erecting teacherages. 

In some instances, the quotation reveals more than 
just how a teacherage appeared to the eye. In one teacher- 


8 Ibid. for 1919, p. 62. 
9 Ibid . for 1920, p. 79. 








































- 


■ 


■ 

* 











* 



















22 


age the lady in charge provided service to the pupils some¬ 
what beyond what was actually required by the terms of her 
contract. 

In another (Roman Catholic) school I found a teacher 
in charge of twenty pupils for whom she provided dinner. 
She, with the help of the pupils, cut all the firewood 
used. Her living room was a small lean-to at the end 
of the school and her bed-room a loft above the class¬ 
room. 10 

While this type of teacherage--the lean-to and the 
loft--was found in many places, the scxhool inspectors were 
pleased to note improvements in the buildings erected in 
their inspectorates. In reporting on improvements of 
buildings within the inspectorate, F. L. Aylesworth of Olds 
Inspectorate notes that, 

Innis Lake built a neat smart looking little teacher 1 s 
residence,!! 

Three other inspectors noted similar improvements in 
the buildings and furnishings which were being provided for 
teachers 1 use: 

Dwellings erected for the use of teachers are on the 
increase, and are well constructed and comfortable. 
Fairydell School District shows active leadership in 
improvements in school surroundings. The teacher T s 
house is the best- yet visited in the inspectorate.!^ 

Readymade Consolidated School District built and 


10 Ibid . for 1913, p. 74. 

11 Ibid. for 1917, p. 109. 

•^ Ibid . for 1917, p. 65 . 




















, 













? . 




• 














. 


t 


. 


* 


























: 





■ 







c 



















• 


. 

. 





r-r 

• 





23 


furnished during the past year, a modern five-roomed 
teacher T s residence. In connection with this residence 
a teacher T s garden of five acres of irrigated land has 
been secured. The providing of comfortable teachers T 
homes will undoubtedly tend to attract and retain a 
better type of teacher in our schools, and through these 
homes a more permanent school community life will be 
established.13 

Many districts have a one or two-roomed house for the 
teacher; these have usually been built for summer use 
only, but a number of them have been occupied this 
winter.1^ 

in his report for 1920 the Deputy Minister added his 
approval of the general improvements shown in teacherage 
construction. 

There has been a considerable demand for this type of 
school from married teachers who wish to obtain a position 
in a rural district where there are greater prospects for 
permanency of contract as teacher, and it would appear 
from evidence on hand that the securing of these 
teachers will assist in solving the rural school problem.15 

Pictures of some of these teacherages are included 
in the Annual Report of 1920*16 

In the Annual Reports of 1920 and 1921 there appear 
additional pictures and floor plans of teacherages. The 
floor plans are for three and four room buildings and one 


13 Ibid. for 

1919, 

P* 

57 

-^Ibid. for 

1919, 

P. 

60 

~^Ibid. for 

1920, 

P. 

10 

-^ibid. for 

1920, 

P. 

11 











picture is given of the "Typical Teacher’s Residence."1? 

There is a lack of detail to indicate clearly the 
accommodation offered by the teacherages of this time, but 
two or three reports give hints of the potentialities of the 
houses and their surroundings. The provision of teacher- 
ages for shelter only was giving way to houses built for 
comfort, and in some cases this added to the status of the 
teacher in the community. Inspector Scott of Hardisty 
summed up the situation in 1920: 

The question of the erection of real residences for 
teachers is being considered by districts in all parts 
of this inspectorate .... Poplar Dale school district 
has erected a substantial residence with stable and 
garden. This has resulted in making the teacher a real 
resident and citizen of the district. Other school 
districts are arranging to follow this example. 

It has been mentioned previously that the Department 
had plans prepared for use by school districts in building 
teachers 1 residences. Reference to the use of these plans 
is made by Inspector Fife, in 1920: 

In nine districts new teachers’ residences have been 
built in accordance with plans approved by the Depart¬ 
ment of Education.-*-9 


Location of teacherages . As has been seen from the 


-^ Ibid . for 1920, p. 96. 


l&Ibid. for 1920, p. 96. 
19 Ibid . for 1920, p. 80. 























. 


25 


views expressed in the reports of inspectors, there was 
considerable support for the building of houses for teachers. 
However, the problem of loneliness on the open prairies and 
in the bush country had to be considered when placing 
single teachers far from other habitation. The solution was 
to build the teacherage near a farm, or better still, erect 
a movable residence which could be shifted to a spot of the 
teacher’s own choice. Inspector McLean had this to say in 
1917: 

... * The number of teachers’ houses is steadily 
increasing and where there is a farm house near at hand 
or where the house is to be occupied by a married teacher, 
they are an advantage.20 

In 1913, Inspector Thibaudeau noted that: 

Several teacher’s movable residences were built 
during the past year. They were placed near a farm 
house. In this way the teacher avoids the loneliness 
consequent on the residence being placed on the school 
grounds, and yet she has the comfort of being free from 
interruption in the evenings to prepare her school work 
and keep up her professional reading. Of the three 
stationary teacherages which were in the inspectorate 
only one is now used as a teacher’s residence, the 
otners having been disposed of.21 


Opposition to teacherages . The first opposition was 
expressed by an inspector who saw many of the teacherages 
for what they were, mere shacks lacking appeal to most 


20 

Ibid , for 1917, p. 81. 
21 Ibid . for 1918, p. 38. 


































































•___- 


r ' 

















26 


teachers• 

Residences, or rather small shacks on the school 
ground, are not and never will be a satisfactory solution 
(to the problem of lack of accommodation) for the very 
obvious reason that few teachers will consent to reside 

in them.22 

Departmental plans did not always meet with whole¬ 
hearted approval and in many instances were not followed, 
for although such a course meant forfeiting the grant, 
districts were not prepared to meet the requirements of the 
grant regulation, preferring to build less elaborately and 
more cheaply on their own. In 1921, and again in 1924, 
expressions of dissatisfaction with departmental plans were 
made: 


The project of building teachers 1 residences according 
to the Departmental plan has not met with much success. 

It seems to be the idea that the scheme is too elaborate 
and expensive for the use that will be made of the 
residence since many teachers prefer to board. 23 

In twenty-three districts teachers 1 houses have been 
built, but in only two of these had the former require¬ 
ments for a grant been met with. It seems that the old 
policy of the five acres of land and the thousand dollar 
house did not meet with the ideas of the people in this 
housing scheme, and they preferred building according to 
their own views and doing without the Government grant.24 

In a very few instances teachers registered dis- 


2? 

Ibid , for 1918, p. 65. 

23 Ibid . for 1921, p. 67. 

2 hbid . for 1924, p. 70. 
























. 





J, . i 















« 
























c 


* 

- 

- , 

- 






27 


approval of the teacherages and indicated that they pre¬ 
ferred to board: 

With a very few exceptions teachers have expressed 
themselves as being comfortably located in their boardirg 
places; where the reverse has been the case there has 
been some difficulty in keeping teachers for any length 
of time. But conditions appear to be improving and, in 
one district where there has been continual trouble in 
this respect, a comfortable little residence has been 
erected. 5 


Strong support of teacherages . The majority of the 
remarks in the Annual Reports concerning teacherages have 
favored them. From the viewpoint of this investigation it 
is interesting to note that the officials of the Department 
of Education have more often advocated the provision of a 
teacher’s residence than not. The reasons for such support 
are much the same in each instance—the provision of a 
teacherage makes the securing and retaining of a teacher’s 
services much easier. Four typical reports have been chosen 
to illustrate this point: 

If trustees would undertake to provide reasonably 
comfortable boarding quarters and would notify teachers 
to that effect, they would be more successful in their 
attempts to secure qualified teachers.^ 0 

I notice that those districts that have available a 
teacher’s residence have least difficulty in securing a 
teacher. In passing I might add that the most satis- 


2 '’ibid, for 1924, p. 68 . 
2 6 Ibid . for 1911, p. 69. 
































■ 

. 




c 

* 








. 






1 




* 
























' * L£ 

: 






















23 


factory residence seems to be one of the portable type, 
such as is found in the Crowfoot S. D. #2393. The house 
may be moved about the district to suit the convenience 
of the teacher, after boarding accommodation has been 
secured*^? 

The teacher’s house is beginning to receive attention. 
It is noted that a good teacher can be retained only at 
places where a comfortable, well-furnished teacher’s 
house is provided. A couple of cases may be cited: 

The Wostok School District has provided a comfortable 
three-roomed teacher’s house. This district has been 
able to retain the services of good teachers for a 
number of years in succession .... The Shandro 
School District has been able to retain the services of 
an efficient and well qualified teacher for six successive 
years. 

Inspectors appreciate the value of the advanced and 
enlightened legislation which sets out the policy of the 
department relative to the inducement to school districts 
to provide teachers’ homes. This policy is fortunately 
finding strong support in the growing conviction on the 
part of the great body of ratepayers that consistent 
progress in the schools depends very largely upon the 

on of the services of a good teacher from year to 



Engaging a teacher . There were three other problems 


noted by department officials in respect to securing a 
teacher. The first was that of securing a man teacher, 
usually married, as such a teacher would likely remain longer 
in one locality, if the available housing was attractive. 

Mr. J. A. Fife, writing for the Annual Report of 1913, said: 


27 Ibid . for 1917, p. 121. 

O & 

Ibid , for 1917, p. 101. 
2 ^ Ibid . for 1919, p. 50. 






















































. 


. 

















29 


The building of comfortable teacher ! s homes on the 
school grounds and the payment of salaries sufficient 
to induce good men to make teaching their life work 
would, I believe, do a great deal towards retaining the 
services of desirable teachers in rural communities .30 

Mr. X. P. Crispo verified Mr. Fife T s supposition 
when he wrote in 1919: 

The Champlain S. D. #1776 was the first in this 
inspectorate to take advantage of the generous teachers T 
home grant, offered by the department, and as a result 
has at present a cottage for its teacher built at a 
cost of thirteen hundred dollars. In consequence this 
district has been able to secure the services of a 
married teacher, and has solved the problem of frequent 
change of teachers, which has so retarded its pupils.31 

Inspector Gaunt of Athabasca came to the same con¬ 
clusion regarding married teachers and tenure: 

The problem of a teacher T s residence is a pressing 
one in most rural localities and the lack of a suitable 
boarding place will account in many instances for the 
continual change of teachers. One solution is the 
resident married teacher of whom there are ten in this 
inspectorate all doing good work .... Teachers 1 
residences are also a distinct aid in securing 
permanency but the most effective thing is the growing 
realization that consistent progress is only made by 
retaining a good teacher year after year .32 

The second problem which faced departmental officials 
who were concerned with obtaining teachers to staff the 
schools was the dissatisfaction shown by teachers with 
certain boarding houses. The unsuitability of boarding 


30 Ibid . for 1918, 
31 Ibid . for 1919, 

32 Ibiri . for 1919, 


p. 40. 
P. 61. 

P. 61. 



















c 



■ 





' 

: : 1 : 

i. 

. 








, . ... >X-\ 






'■ .. -)0 

D-'i ‘ 

. 













30 


places was frequently advertised by outgoing teachers, and 
therefore the schools proved difficult to staff. The problem 
was voiced by several inspectors: 

In many instances I observed a change of teachers 
during the year . . . the cause can very frequently be 
traced to difficulties encountered, and the impossibility 
of securing comfortable and conveniently located board¬ 
ing places, not too far distant from school. The 
question of securing suitable abode for the teachers 
has not, as yet, been seriously considered by the majority 
of school boards, and until some definite effort is made 
to overcome this difficulty, the question of extended 
service, on the part of teachers in a district, will 
remain a serious one. There are a few districts in 
which teachers 1 houses have been provided, and in cer¬ 
tain cases advantage taken of them, but the remoteness 
of the school, in certain districts, from an established- 
home acts as a barrier. 33 

Reference is again made to the departmental help 
that was made available to school districts wishing to 
build a teacher T s home: 

One encouraging feature is the new departmental 
regulation offering assistance to school boards that 
wish to construct a good type of teacher ! s residence in 
connection with their school. This will meet the 
difficulty of unsuitable and inconvenient boarding 
places which is often the reason that no certificated 
teacher can be induced to teach in the district. 3^ 

There was a third influence tending to persuade 
boards to build teacherages besides the wish for less 
frequent changes in the teaching personnel. It was the hope 
that with attractive housing, teachers could be encouraged 


33 Ibid . for 1918, p. 68. 
3 ^Ibid, for 1919, p. 59. 







' 


. < I 

... 

„ f 


















f 

- c. 


? 




. 


. O ■ 1 

■ 
























. 

















>K 










31 


to stay for a longer period of the year than they had and 

thus enable a district to lengthen the school year. 

Inspector Gray holds out this hope when he says: 

They (the trustees) must be brought to see that in 
the long run it will be economical to erect a warm 
stable, ... to build a teacher T s home where the need 
for one is plain, and to operate school from September 

to June. 


II. GRANTS FOR TEACHERAGES 


Grants . Reference has been made in the quotations 
given thus far to grants by the Department of Education 
to aid in the construction of teachers 1 residences. 

J. T. Ross, Deputy Minister in 1919 has left a complete 
account of the purpose and conditions of this grant: 

In older and more wealthy districts, the farmer may 
have the accommodation, but is rarely able to secure 
the necessary help in the home which would enable him 
to board the teacher. For the purpose of overcoming 
this serious obstacle, and assisting trustees in retain¬ 
ing the services of teachers for a longer period, the 
government has provided that each district that erects a 
teacher 1 s residence, from plans prepared by the Depart¬ 
ment of Education, at a cost of not less than $1,000, 
and provides approved furnishings and maintains the 
residence and furnishings ana five acres of ground 
appurtenant to such resiaence, satisfactorily to an 
Inspector of Schools, shall receive a grant equal to 
one-third of the total cost of such residence and 
furnishings. Many boards of trustees have taken advan¬ 
tage of this liberal grant, and are building teachers 1 
homes^near the school-house, and a number of teachers 
with families have made application for the position of 


35 


Ibid , for 1919, p. 54 








32 


teacher in these districts. If such teachers are ap¬ 
pointed, there will be more permanence, and continuity in 
the work of the school, and more substantial progress 
made by the pupils. 36 

It was twenty-five years later, in 1944, that the 
legislature again made provision for grants to aid in the 
construction of teachers 1 homes. Once again many boards 
took advantage of the offer of a grant and many teacher- 
ages were built. The evidence shows up in Table I, 
Teacherages Built, Purchased, Moved, and Sold, in Alberta 
School Districts, 1926 to 1953, as the increase in 1944 over 
any other years reported is substantial. The exact 
provisions of the grant are quoted from the Grants Act, 1944: 

(1) The Minister may authorize payment of a special 
grant to the board of a rural district or to the 
board of a school division to enable such board 
to erect a teacher T s residence or teachers 1 
residences. 

(2) The Minister may authorize payment of a special 
grant to any board to assist such board to erect 
any building to be used for school purposes. 

(3) Every teacher 1 s residence referred to in sub¬ 
section (1) and every building to be used for 
school purposes referred to in subsection (2) 
hereof shall be erected according to plans and 
specifications approved by the Minister, and the 
board shall contribute such portion, being not 
less than twenty per cent, of the cost, as may 
be determined by the Minister. 


36 


Ibid , for 1919, p. 11. 


^ School Grants Act, 1944, Sect. 27a. 










* 

* 


- 








: , '.§*■ 















. 


* 

: ‘ c l v . , vc ■ t f. 

. 




. 






















r ' 

, ; ' 












. . 























"In 1945 the Legislature did not renew the 
appropriation and the assistance was discontinued and has 
not been used since. rt ^ 


A. Bredo, Administrative Accountant, Department 
of Education, letter, February 6 , 1957, Appendix E. 










34 


TABLE I 


TEACHERAGES BUILT, PURCHASED, MOVED, AND SOLD 
IN ALBERTA SCHOOL DISTRICTS, 1926 to 1953 


Year 

Number 

built 

Description 


Value 

Number Number 

purchased moved 

Numb el 
sold 

1926 

1 



$ 800 



1927 

3 

Department plans 


3238 




3 

Special plans 


1800 



1928 

6 

Department plans 


4664 




1 

Special plans 


500 



1929 

4 

Department plans 


3966 




1 

Special plans 


1000 



1930 

6 



6084 



1931 

5 



2337 



1932 

2 



514 



1933 

3 



2125 



1934 

12 

Residences and barns 



1935 

11 

tt tt 

tt 




1936 

10 

tt tf 

tt 




1937 

16 

tf Tt 

tt 




1939 

21 

tt tt 

tt 




1940 

47 

tt tt 

tt 




1941 

3$ 

tt tt 

tt 




1942 

40 

Teacherages 



16 


1943 

3$ 

tt 



27 


1944 

106 

TT 



14 


1945 

$7 

tt 



41 


1946 

9& 

tf 





1947 

97 

Teacherages completed 



1948 

76 

5 one-roomed 






1949 

1950 

1951 

1952 

1953 


35 two-roomed 
9 three-roomed 
19 four-roomed 
7 five-roomed 
1 eight-roomed 


2 

10 

19 

10 


6 

3 

7 

35 

23 


(FROM ANNUAL REPORTS, 1926 to 1953) 

















. £ 









































- 




. 




























CHAPTER III 


ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF TEACHERAGES 
IN EIGHT ALBERTA DIVISIONS 
AND COUNTIES 


With the help of the secretaries of the school 
divisions and counties contacted in this study, the writer 
completed a survey of the teacherages provided the adminis¬ 
trative staffs of the centralized schools in their terri¬ 
tories. A summary of this survey is found in Appendix C. 
The information has been included in six Figures, numbered 
3 to £♦ 


Size . Figure 3 classifies these teacherages accord¬ 
ing to the number of rooms contained in each one, and shows 
that the number of rooms per teacherage varies from one to 

eight, with the large majority having five rooms. 

23 


N t 


20 


u e 
m a 
b c 
e h 
r e 

r 10 
o a 

f g 
e 
s 


1 

1 


10 


■ 


number of rooms 


FIGURE 3 

CLASSIFICATION OF PRINCIPALS' AND VICE-PRINCIPALS' 
TEACHERAGES IN 1957 ACCORDING TO 
NUMBER OF ROOMS 














Age . Figure 4 classifies these teacherages according 


to their age. While a quarter of them have been completed 
in the last five years, the majority are from sixteen to 
twenty years old or older. 


N" t 20 
u e 
m a 
b c 
e h 

r ® 10 

o a 

f g 
e 
s 


1-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 

Number of years old 
FIGURE 4 

CLASSIFICATION OF PRINCIPALS’ AND 
VICE-PRINCIPALS * TEACHDRAGES IN 
1957 ACCORDING TO AGE 


20 













37 

Heating . When the method of heating tne teacherages 


was investigated, it was found that there was little or no 
difference in the number which were heated by propane, 
coal, oil, or gas. The fuel used least was coal, followed 
by propane, oil ana gas in that order. Figure 5 shows these 
figures. 


N t 20 r 


u e 
m a 
b c 



Goal Pro- Oil Gas 

pane 


Type of heating 
FIGURE 5 

CLASSIFICATION OF PRINCIPALS 1 AND 
VICE-PRINCIPALS* GES IN 

1957 ACCORDING TO HEATING 












Plumbing facilities . Figure 6 reveals the infor¬ 
mation that plumbing is in use in fully seventy-five per 
cent of the teacherages. water is available in about 
seventeen per cent more and neither running water nor 
sewerage is installed in seven per cent of the homes. 


N t 
u e 
m a 
b c 
e h 
r e 
r 

o a 

f g 
e 
s 



ing only 


Plumbing facilities 
FIGURE 6 

CLASSIFICATION OF PRINCIPALS T AND 
VICE-PRINCIPALS * TEACHERAGES IN 
1957 ACCORDING TO PLUMBING 
FACILITIES 














Number of occupants . As Figure 7 indicates, the num¬ 


ber of occupants in the teacherages varies from one to six, 
with four persons being the median number. An almost equal 
number of the teacherages have five persons living in them. 



FIGURE 7 


GLASSIFICATION OF PRINCIPALS ! AND 
VICE-PRINCIPALS 1 TEACHERAGES IN 
1957 ACCORDING TO NUMBER 
OF OCCUPANTS 
















40 


Rental , The amount charged for a month T s rent 
varied a great deal. Some teacherages rented for as little 
as ten dollars per month ana two rented for over sixty-one 
dollars per month. Figure $ shows that the rent most 
frequently charged was between thirty-one dollars and forty 
dollars per month, and that this was paid by the occupants 
of sixteen houses. 


N t 
u e 
m a 
b c 
e h 
r e 
r 

o a 

f g 
e 
s 



Dollars rent 
FIGURE 8 


CLASSIFICATION OF PRINCIPALS T AND 
VICE-PRINCIPALS 1 TEACHERAGES IN 
1957 ACCORDING TO RENT' PAID 
PER MONTH 


















u 


Summary . The following conclusions are reached con¬ 
cerning the principal's or vice-principal's teacherage: 

(a) it is a five room house; 

(b) its age is seventeen years or more; 

(c) the heating is by any one of coal, oil, gas, or 
propane; 

(d) plumbing is installed; 

(e) there are approximately four persons per house; 

(f) the rent paid is thirty-five dollars per month, 
not including utilities. Utilities are paid for above this 
rent. 

On the surface, this type of house supplied, to the 
administrative staff appears to provide reasonable living 
quarters. However, living quarters must provide more than 
shelter to be acceptable and comfortable places in which to 
reside. Size, attractiveness of layout, convenience, and 
finish are important factors in making a house a desirable 
home. The convictions of the principals and vice-principals 
with respect to the adequacy of the housing they presently 
occupy, and what they feel is needed in their present 
locations to retain staff, will be dealt with in Chapter V‘. 






CHAPTER IV 


THE IMPORTANCE OF TEACHERAGES: INFORMATION AND OPINIONS 
RECEIVED FROM SECRETARIES AND SUPERINTENDENTS 
OF SELECTED DIVISIONS AND COUNTIES 

Step three of this study, as outlined on page twelve 
of Chapter I consisted of a series of interviews with the 
secretaries and superintendents of the eight divisions and 
counties. The tables presented in this chapter have been 
compiled from data collected on a prepared questionnaire 
used at these interviews. A copy of the questionnaire is to 
be found in Appendix C. In the tables, the divisions and 
counties are not referred to by name or number, but have 
each been assigned one of the letters A to H by which they 
are identified. 

Some of the questions which were asked required 
factual answers, while the remainder called for opinions of 
those questioned. An example of a question whose answer 
is factual is, n In how many instances, in the past five 
years, has the board felt it necessary to provide a teacher- 
age to secure or retain the services of a principal or vice¬ 
principal for a centralization?" A statement of opinion is 
given in answer to, "In your professional judgment have 
teacherages attracted administrative personnel to certain 
positions?" Questions numbered one, two, three, four, six, 







c 

* 

:« 









. 






; 




c 

( 

■ 






■ 






43 


seven, nine, ten and twelve, all call for factual answers, 
while numbers five, eight, eleven and thirteen call for 
opinionative answers. 

As the purpose of this study is to determine how 
effective teacherages are in the recruitment and retention 
of administrative staff in schools of a specified size, 
frequent reference will be made to evidence which points 
to this purpose. 

Supply of teacherages for administrative staff . Table 
II shows the current situation with respect to the supply 
of teacherages for administrative staff. Twenty-eight of 
the forty-seven principals, or 60 per cent, have teacherages. 
Fourteen of the thirty-six vice-principals, or 39 per cent, 
have teacherages. This is an overall average of 50 per cent 
for both principals and vice-principals. This means that 
teacherages for administrative staff are very common as, on 
the average, one in every two of such personnel has a teachep- 
age supplied. Further inquiries revealed that 33 per cent 
own their own homes and 17 per cent rent from private parties. 

With the increase in the number and size of central¬ 
izations has come the need for additional housing for teachers 
to staff these schools. In many cases adequate staff could 
not be hired or retained in certain localities until 
teacherages were provided. Table III shows that of the 









• e 1 






. 

- 





















■c 

- 

, 

■ - . 

. 












. 




■ 









44 


forty-two teacherages available for administrative staff, 
nineteen, or 45 per cent of them, were built specifically 
for the purpose of securing or retaining a principal or 
vice-principal. This building has taken place within the 
last three years. 

TABLE II 

SUPPLY OF TEAGHERAGES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF 


Unit, div¬ 
ision or 
county 

Number 
of cen¬ 
traliz¬ 
ations 
of six 
rooms 
and 

larger 

Number 
of prin¬ 
cipals 
with 
teacher- 
ages 

Number 
of vice¬ 
principals 
employed 

Number of 
vice-prin¬ 
cipals with 
teacherages 

A 

6 

4 

4 

2 

B 

3 

2 

2 

2 

C 

6 

5 

4 

2 

D 

5 

3 

6 

2 

E 

2 

1 

3 

1 

F 

12 

7 

10 

2 

G 

7 

2 

4 

1 

H 

6 

4 

3 

2 


47 

23 

35 

14 


















The building program planned is also shown in 
Table III. Ten new teacherages for administrative personnel 
are to be built this year at a total cost of $61,000. This 
will be an increase of almost 25 per cent in the number of 
teacherages. 

The following comments made by secretaries and 
superintendents indicate how important the building and the 
renovation of teacherages are considered to be: 

,T This division spent $75,000 last year on teacher¬ 
ages- -borrowing from the Department of Education on a twenty 
year repayment plan.” 

"Facilities in teacherages are improving, and county 
council intends to continue improving existing teacherages.” 

"Four new teacherages were built last year at a cost 
of $7500 each. Old teacherages are no inducement." 

"All teacherages were modernized fully last year at 
a cost of $30,000, to keep them on a comparative level with 
other housing in the same districts. 

Principals and vice-principals do their own decor¬ 
ating with materials supplied by the division." 

Lack of teacherage brings refusals . Secretaries 
and superintendents were asked how many principals or vice¬ 
principals had refused, in the three previous years, to 
accept posts in schools because of a lack of a teacherage. 















. 



, 

I 

. 


. 

. 




•- 































TABLE III 


SHOWING NEED FOR ADDED HOUSING 


Unit, div¬ 
ision or 
county 

Number 
of admin¬ 
istrative 
teacher- 
ages 

Number of 
teacherages 
built spe¬ 
cially in 
last three 
years to 
secure or 
retain the 
services of 
principal 
or vice¬ 
principal 

Number of 
dollars to 
be spent 
this year 
for teacher- 
ages for 
administra¬ 
tive person¬ 
nel 

Number of 
teacherages 
to be built 

A 

6 

3 

115,000 

1 

B 

4 

1 

0 

0 

C 

7 

6 

0 

0 

D 

5 

4 

0 

0 

E 

2 

0 

40,000 

5 

F 

9 

0 

0 

0 

G 

3 

3 

0 

0 

H 

6 

2 

26,000 

4 


42 

19 

■§37000 

10 















Table .IV gives the information that a total of five had 
refused. 


47 


TABLE IV 

NUMBER OF PRINCIPALS AND VICE-PRINCIPALS 
WHO REFUSED A POSITION BECAUSE OF 
NO TEACHERAGE ACCOMMODATION 


Unit, div¬ 
ision or 
county 

Number of 
teacherages 
built in 
last three 
years 

Number of 
administrative 
personnel who 
refused a 
proffered job 
because of a 
lack of a 
teacherage in 
the last three 
years 

A 

3 

0 

B 

1 

0 

C 

6 

3 

D 

4 

0 

E 

0 

0 

F 

0 

1 

G 

3 

0 

H 

2 

1 


19 












T eacherages essential for retention of administrators . 
Table V contains the answers to the question, fT 0f the number 
of teacherages provided, how many do you feel are essential 
for the retention of the principals and vice-principals in 
those centers?" Of the forty-two teacherages, thirty-nine, 
or 95 per cent, were considered necessary for this purpose. 

TABLE V 

NUMBER OF TEACHERAGES WHICH ARE ESSENTIAL FOR 
THE RETENTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF 


Unit, division 
or county 

Proportion of teacherages 
needed to retain administrative 
staff in present positions 

A 

6/6 

B 

2/4 

C 

7/7 

D 

5/5 

E 

2/2 

F 

8/9 

G 

3/3 

H 

6/6 


39/42 























49 


As is indicated in Table VI, five out of eight 
answered "yes" to the question, "Have teacherages attracted 
administrative staff to certain schools?" The implication 
is that in instances where positions of approximately equal 
attractiveness were available, an applicant had chosen the 
one with a teachera e in preference to one without, in a 
majority of cases. 


TABLE VI 


HAVE TEACHERAGES ATTRACTED 
ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF 
TO CERTAIN SCHOOLS 


Unit, 

division or 
county 

AnsW' 

A 

Yes 

B 

Yes 

C 

No 

D 

No 

E 

Yes 

.F 

No 

G 

Yes 


H 


Yes 













50 


Table VII shows the proportion of total moves of 
personnel caused by lack of adequate teacherages, in the 
opinion of secretaries and superintendents. Out of forty- 
four changes in administrative staff in the past three years, 
seven moves were the result of lack of adequate teacherages, 

TABLE VII 

PERSONNEL CHANGES BECAUSE OF LACK 
OF TEACHERAGES 


Proportion of admin- 
Unit, istrative staff who 

division or have moved in last 
county three years because 

of lack of adequate 
teacherages 


A 


B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 

H 


1/4 

0/4 

1/7 

0/2 

0/5 

0/4 

1/5 

4/13 

7/44 
















51 


When asked to express an opinion on the importance 
of teacherages in the retention of administrative personnel, 
seven of the eight replies were "very important"; one was 
"fairly important". Such replies show conclusively how 
important the provision of a teacherage appears to officials 
concerned with the staffing of schools. 

SUMMARY 

In summarizing this chapter, the following points are 
listed as clear evidence that the provision of an adequate 
teacherage is an effective means of securing and retaining 
the services of administrative personnel: 

1. Building of teacherages for administrative 
personnel is on the increase, 

(a) Fifty per cent of principals and vice-prin¬ 
cipals are now living in teacherages. 

(b) Forty-five per cent of these teacherages were 
built within the last three years. 

(c) A twenty-five per cent increase in the present 
number of teacherages is planned in the near 
future. 

2. Opinions of officials responsible for hiring 
teachers indicate that more and better teacherages are being 
built because they are needed to secure and retain the 
services of administrative personnel. 









' 













. 























. . 




e 




. 
















' 

. 
















CHAPTER V 


THE IMPORTANCE OF TEACHERAGES: INFORMATION AND OPINIONS 
RECEIVED FROM PRINCIPALS AND VICE-PRINCIPALS IN 
SELECTED DIVISIONS AND COUNTIES 

Eighty-five principals and vice-principals in the 
eight selected school divisions and counties were sent 
questionnaires with a request that they fill in the required 
information. Eighty-one or 95 per cent of those questioned 
sent replies to the writer. A copy of the questionnaire 
appears in Appendix D. 

Seventy-two of the questionnaires were completed by 
married persons. One was completed by a widower with one 
dependent. This makes a total of seventy-three persons 
classified as married with dependents, bearing out the 
assumption made on page one of this study that the majority 
of the administrative staff of centralized schools of six 
rooms and larger are married men with families. The average 
number of dependents of married persons is three. 

Table VIII contains the number of persons who an¬ 
swered the questionnaire, their marital status and the 
average number of dependents of the married persons. 

Present housing : single persons . Three of the eight 
unmarried teachers have teacherages. Two of these indicated 


















-• •) ■ ' 






. 

* 








, 








♦ 

- 

.. 

. 




, 








53 


that they were adequately accommodated. Four of the five 
remaining single persons are not satisfied with their present 
living quarters, and three of the four believe that an 
adequate teacherage is needed if qualified administrative 
staff is to be retained in their situations. The one person 
who indicated satisfaction with his present living quarters 
believed a teacherage would be necessary if he were married. 

TABLE VIII 

MARITAL STATUS AND NUMBER OF DEPENDENTS 
OF'EIGHTY-ONE PRINCIPALS 
AND VICE-PRINCIPALS 


Number of prin- Number who Number who are Average number 

cipals and vice- are single married of dependents 

principals 


Si 8 73 3 


From this very limited sampling of the opinions of 
single personnel, it is evident that the majority (62^ per 
cent) believe that adequate teacherages are needed at their 
schools. Table IX summarizes the above points. 

An analysis of the answers to questions by married 
persons follows. After this is completed, several other 
analyses will be made using the answers to other questions. 
In these, no distinction will be made between the answers of 
single and married persons, as the purpose of this study is 

























O ■ • ■ 































5k 


to determine the effectiveness of teacherages in attracting 
and retaining administrative personnel, irrespective of their 
marital status. 


TABLE IX 

HOUSING ACCOMMODATION OF EIGHT 
UNMARRIED ADMINISTRATORS 


Number with 
teacherages 

Number 

satisfied 

Number without 
teacherages 

Number 

satisfied 

Number who 

believe 
teacher¬ 
ages neces 
sary 

3 

2 

5 

1 

c 


Present housing : married persons . The number of 
married teachers with teacherages is forty-one and the num¬ 
ber without, thirty-two. Of the number with teacherages, 
tw T enty-ni.ne, or 71 per cent, find them adequate to their 
needs. Of the thirty-two teachers who are not in teacherages, 
twenty-five, or 7$ per cent, are satisfied with their housing. 
Table X contains this data. 

Where the teachers registered dissatisfaction with, 
present housing, the indications were that of the twelve in 
teacherages, ten believed that an'adequate teacherage is 
necessary if qualified staff is to be retained in those 






























. 

. 






< 



r 












- 














55 


locations; of the seven not in teacherages, four believed 
that a good teacherage is needed. In each instance, the 
majority believed that teacherages are necessary. This 
information is given in Table XI. 


TABLE X 

HOUSING ACCOMMODATION OF SEVENTY- 
THREE MARRIED ADMINISTRATORS 


Number with 

Number 

Number without 

Number satisfied 

teacherages 

satisfied 

teacherages 


41 

29 

32 

25 


TABLE XI 

BELIEFS OF NINETEEN DISSATISFIED MARRIED ADMINISTRATORS 
WITH RESPECT TO NEED FOR ADEQUATE TEACHERAGES 


Number with 
teacherages 

Number who believe 
teacherages needed 

Number without 
teacherages 

Number who 
believe 
teacherages 
necessary 

12 

10 

7 

4 


The reports from the nineteen dissatisfied teachers 
appear to warrant the conclusion that unless adequate 
teacherages are provided in these areas there will be fre¬ 
quent changes in administrative staff with resulting loss 
















' 

„ 











































56 

of efficiency in the scnools. A few comments from the 
questionnaires amplify this point: 

!f . • . shabby, unpainted teacherages show clearly 
to the pupils how much thought is given to the comfort of 
people in this work . • . w 

T? In most cases teacherages are too small for a family, 
hence are only adequate for a couple just starting out in 
the teaching profession. n 

" ... it is cold and costs over thirty dollars a 
month for fuel." 

,r I picked this school rather than T A T because of 
the teacherage, yet ! A T has a hard top highway right to ! B T 
(a nearby city). We have fourteen miles of rough gravel 
road. n 

!, I am leaving to go to California because of this 
specific issue. If I have to purchase a home in order to 
live decently, I T 11 do so where the home has a re-sale 
value • u 


Suitable teacherages : imnortance in job acceptance . 
Questions numbered five and six were intended to discover 
the importance of a suitable teacherage in the acceptance 
of a position. In number five the teacher was to list the 
provision of a teacherage as being very important, fairly 
important, or not important as a factor in choice of 








. 

« c ' . . . • ■ 

: « « .* 












1 x ' 
























- 

■ 








57 


location. Fifty-four answered "very important", nineteen 
answered "fairly important", and eight answered "not impor¬ 
tant". Again, the provision of an adequate teacherage is 
seen to rank very high in importance when the locale of a 
job is being considered. 

Question six required the teacher to indicate the 
order of importance of five factors influencing his choice 
of a job. Salary received the largest number of choices, 
fifty-three; then came challenge of the job with fourteen 
first choices, school plant with six, and sociability of 
the district and teacherage with four each. 

Calculations of the per cent of votes cast shows 
that 97 per cent of the teachers placed salary first, 
second or third in importance; 74 per cent placed a suitable 
teacherage first, second, or third; 46 per cent placed school 
plant first, second, or third; 45 per cent placed challenge 
of the job in this order; and 36 per cent listed sociabil¬ 
ity of the district as their first, second, or third choice. 
From these figures it is evident that a suitable teacherage 
is second in importance only to salary when a new job is 
contemplated. Table XII records the number of votes cast 
for each factor influencing job acceptance. 

The answers to question eight are significant in that 
they show that thirty-persons, or 37 per cent, have at some 
time refused to accept a proffered position because accom- 















• 


. 









' 





























. 









■ 





- '■ 

■ -t 


• * r-; 


















!"*r: r . ; . «T 



modation was not available. This finding further confirms 
the conclusion that a suitable teacherage is an effective 
factor in attracting and retaining administrative staff. 


TABLE XII 

RANK ORDER OF IMPORTANCE OF FIVE FACTORS 
IN JOB ACCEPTANCE TO EIGHTY- 
ONE ADMINISTRATORS 


Factor 

Number 

one 

Number 

two 

Number 

three 

Number 

four 

Number 

five 

Salary 

53 

20 

6 

1 

1 

School 

plant 

6 

10 

21 

27 

16 

Challenge 

of the job 

14 

6 

16 

22 

22 

Sociability 
of the 
district 

4 

9 

17 

15 

35 

Suitable 

teacherage 

4 

36 

20 

15 

6 









CHAPTER VI 


SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

It is the purpose of this thesis to discover the 
extent to which teacherages are important factors in the 
recruitment and retention of administrative staff in cen¬ 
tralized schools of six rooms and more. 

The findings of this study are presented under six 
subheadings: 

Response of principals at 1956 Leadership Course . 
."embers attending the Principals 1 Leadership Course in 
Edmonton in July, 1956, were queried to determine whether 
the problem of adequate housing was a factor influencing 
their acceptance of.a job. Their replies showed, as one 
might expect, salary was first; nevertheless, housing was 
the second most important factor in job acceptance. 

The Jonasori study of 1940 * J. C. Jonason in his 
M. A. Thesis, T, A Survey of grounds, Plants, and Teacherages 
in Eighty Schools in Central and Northern Alberta, 11 completed 
in 1940, pointed out that the ratio of married teachers to 
single ones was one to eight in the area he surveyed. This 
low ratio was ascribed by him to the lack of adequate 
teacherages for a family. 

The superintendents 1 survey of 1954 * In 1954, Alberta 

















60 


superintendents of schools made a survey of teacherages in 
the province. Their findings were in general agreement with 
Jonason f s findings; namely, that small teacherages and lack 
of facilities made it difficult to retain married men with 
families. 

A further fact revedled by the superintendents 1 
survey was that teacherages in 1954 had, on the average, 
two rooms. According to the superintendents 1 descriptions 
of buildings, only about 40 per cent were in good condition. 
The remaining 60 per cent were described as being fair or 
poor. 


Annual Reports of the Department of Education . The 
Annual Reports of the Department from 1906 to 1953 contained 
many references to teacherages. From these references a 
short history of teacherages in Alberta was prepared. A 
summary of the main points discovered follows: 

(a) Teacherages were considered by the provincial 
inspectors as a necessity in the early years of the province, 
particularly in "foreign settlements." The main reason was 
that boarding places were not available. 

(b) In prosperous times teachers often had difficulty 
finding boarding places because many farmers did not wish to 
be bothered providing lodging. Good returns from farming 
made it unnecessary to supplement income by boarding the 







' 






















« 






. 











• 
























































, 




61 


teacher, 

{c) Inspectors frequently urged school boards to 
erect teacherages, thus ensuring a more permanent staff in 
the schools and greater progress for the pupils. 

(d) Where teacherages were erected and improved, 
inspectors reported that schools were more easily staffed, 

(e) In 1919 the Department of Education provided 
funds and approved plans for teacherages, in an attempt to 
raise building standards. Although many districts took 
advantage of this offer, there were others that preferred 
to forego the grant so that they could build cheaper build¬ 
ings using their own plans. 

(f) In a very few instances it was mentioned in the 
inspectors 1 reports that some teachers had indicated that 
they did not wish to use a teacherage as they preferred 
boarding to keeping house. 

(g) Inspectors urged the provision of teacherages 
in an effort to obtain married men to staff the schools 
and to enable the school districts to lengthen the school 
year by making housing close to the school available to 
the teacher so that he would stay throughout the winter 
months. 

In 1944 the Department of Education made available 
to school districts funds with which to build teacherages. 
The record of the number of teachers 1 houses built that year 





















« 






















































. 


' - .! -•' ■ •<) I : • in ' 












62 

and for the next year or two indicates that many districts 
took advantage of the offer. The grant was discontinued 
after one year. 

Information from superintendents and secretaries of 
eight school divisions and counties . The secretaries and 
superintendents of the eight selected divisions and counties 
aided the writer in preparing a survey of the teacherages 
in use by principals and vice-principals at the present 
time. The typical teacherage appears to be a five-roomed 
house, seventeen years old or older, heated by any one of 
coal, oil, gas, or propane. It has plumbing installed. The 
house is occupied by four persons, and rents for thirty- 
five dollars per month with utilities paid for in addition 
to the rent. 

Teacherages are available for 50 per cent of the 
administrative staff. Forty-five per cent of the houses 
have been built within the last three years, specifically 
for the purpose of securing or retaining the services of 
an administrator. The superintendents and secretaries 
questioned believe that 95 per cent of the teacherages are 
necessary to retain the principals and vice-principals in 
tneir centers. Another conclusion is that in the majority 
of instances the teacherages provided have been instrumental 
in attracting personnel to certain positions. It was found 























, 












• 














t 











1 , 






■ t . 




■ 








, 








. 












r 

. 














63 

that 16 per cent of the moves of administrators in the last 
three years is attributed to a lack of adequate teacherages 
in their districts. Seven out of the eight superintendents 
questioned feel that teacherages are very important in the 
retention of administrative personnel. 

Information from principals ana vice-principals of 
eight school divisions and counties . Eighty-one principals 
and vice-principals answered a questionnaire sent to them. 
This was 93 per cent of those solicited. 

Seventy-three of these people were married and the 
average number of their dependents was three. 

Five out of the eight single persons believed that 
teacherages are necessary to retain staff at their schools. 
Only three of the eight have teacherages where they are now 
located. 

Between seventy and eighty per cent of the married 
persons are presently satisfied with their housing. Forty- 
one of the seventy-three have teacherages. The majority 
of married personnel who are dissatisfied with their present 
housing believe that a teacherage is necessary if qualified 
staff is to be retained in those locations. 

When the factors which influence the acceptance of a 
job were considered, the provision of a teacherage ranked 
very high, being second only to salary. Thirty of the 






















64 


persons questioned have on at least one occasion refused 

a proffered job because of the lack of an adequate teacher- 
age. 

In general, the evidence gathered by this study 
seems to warrant the conclusion that the provision of a 
teacherage, adequate for accommodating a family, is a 
significant factor in attracting and retaining administrative 
personnel in centralized schools. 

Recommendations . As a result of the findings of this 
study, the writer wishes to make two recommendations. The 
first recommendation is directed to school authorities and 
the second is for students who are seeking topics for in¬ 
vestigation in the field of educational research. 

Local school authorities are advised to assess the 
adequacy of present housing for administrative staff in 
centralized school communities. Where this housing is 
found to be inadequate, the authorities should plan a short 
term building program to remedy the deficiencies discovered. 

To the student undertaking research in the field of 
teachers 1 housing it is suggested that there is a need to 
study the quantity and quality of housing which is available 
for teaching staffs, other than principals and vice-prin¬ 
cipals, in centralized schools. 





':•: O CO 


) ftp {' v: d 


1 • 


. o : ■. ..£ fx. 


i. • 0. J, >,. 



• • 


' ' ; 


/" 


no/. 


i j . : . UP ol 0;j 0 o \i ,i 


>: " : . ■ ■ . 


Pno :.)/"< : : ' iJ. ', Ct j:ik'oi 




: '..o > r .1LV■ • r ; .V . ■; > • 5 .r d ; r. a ■■■ v.0 n 

..... ':) .' > ■ ' '.'o' : 00 : : .:; 

. . ., .. ' . - . . ' . . . 

: ; .oorco,- Aooyoo 00 •' < • tv - ."••••> .0 vO\*.f 

— ‘... ) V. ’• 'o' Ov'i y'j','- od . •. •' •. 0 . ■ 1 '.’O ., • V. •'J OC P '' •. 0 

• - :r, :: ■ ‘ : : *■/r . :d n. ; ■ »■. o: . :■ ■■' / 

o;i OvdJd /00 00 > ", / ’' ... do. o« ±0 • m; £ : 0:7 \ 

ror ddod-, -ov d ,’do ■’.d" do 1 '<>d dfro : ' v t do do. ‘do • 

: 00X0.:. . d O;, .. f V-fO '.O , . 0 ■ , ' ."id .-O 

.i' r ::n.tia o jt'-J".- MpO'd?, : i:; v r - r U\ . udduj-x) ■ •: od • ■ ! Ix-uKdi, I 

„ ; . :: -T. - ' ■ ^ "V..' ' 

i; j . . r a : . dry. >y;r ; '• ti. ; o; ■ > . j ' 

■ '■ -r r -. :• 

do v.y : ::y r:;!; i-- ■■■.-.r eri.j ; 

- • ’/ ; ~ :) i; •/ i t.: • ' ' • r .. . !\ ■ . ‘' ■ '■ ‘ > 

. ' ' i O ' : A J 






65 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 









66 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Jonason, J. C. n A Survey of Grounds, Plants, and 

Teacherages in Eighty Schools in Central and Northern 
Alberta.” Unpublished Master’s thesis, The University 
of Alberta, Edmonton, 1940. 

Province of Alberta. Department of Education , Annual Report: 
1906 to 1953 . Edmonton: King’s Printer. 

Province of Alberta. Department of Education , School Grants 
Act : 1944 . Edmonton: King’s "Printer. 



















67 


APPENDIX 








APPENDIX A 


QUESTIONNAIRE TO MEMBERS OF PRINCIPALS’ LEADERSHIP COURSE, 

EDMONTON, JULY, 1956 

To: Practising or prospective principals or vice-principals 
of centralized schools in Alberta* 

I am attempting to determine the relationship between 
your accepting a position or remaining in a position and the 
factors which influence your decision in the matter. 

To rank the importance to you of these factors 
influencing your decision to accept a specific appointment, 
will you please indicate in order of importance what you 
believe are the most important considerations in making a 
decision? 

Some suggestions are given. Please rank them in 
order of importance with your suggestions. 

Influencing Factors Rank 

SALARY. 

PLANT.. . 

HOUSING... 

NEARNESS TO LARGE URBAN CENTRES . 

ENTERTAINMENT . . . 

SOCIABILITY OF THE DISTRICT . 

If you have ever been offered a principalship or vice- 
principalship and have declined to accept the appointment, 
please state the reason or reasons why you declined: 

(1).........(2)........ 

(3)...•••C4) .... 

One specific factor on which I wash to get additional 
information is housing. Will you please complete the fol¬ 
lowing information? 

NAME..PRESENT POSITION... 

(optional) (in school) 

MARITAL STATUS: Single.Married.No. Dependents. 

(living with you) 

SIZE OF SCHOOL: # Rooms.Grades. 

LOCATION IN PROVINCE: Northern.Central.Southern..... 

POPULATION OF CENTRE WHERE SCHOOL LOCATED..... 

HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: 1. Own home.2. Rented (other than 

teacherage).3. Teacherage.....4. Details of housing: 

No. rooms.Bathroom?.Full cement basement? ..... 

Furnace?.Running water and sewage disposal?. 

Ele ctricity?.Gas.Oil. Coal..... 

Rating: Good.Fair.Poor. 




































t? 





c 


































69 


APPENDL 


SUMMARY OF SUPERINTENDENTS* REPORTS ON TE 

ACCOMMODATION 1953-54 


CHERS T LIVING 


Boards 


Number of actively Number of Total 

division interested buildings number of Size in rooms Condition 























70 


APPENDIX G 

SUPERINTENDENT AND SECRETARY INTERVIEW SHEET AND CHECK LIST 

1. How many centralizations of six rooms or larger are there 

in the.School Division/County? 

2. How many principals of these centralizations have a 
teacherage provided? 

3. How many vice-principals are there in these schools? 

A. How many vice-principals have teacherages provided? 

5. Of the above number of teacherages provided, how many do 
you feel are essential for the retention of the principals 
and vice-principals in those centers? 

6. In how many instances, in the past five years, has the 
board/committee felt it necessary to provide a teacherage 
to secure or retain the services of a principal or vice¬ 
principal for a centralization? 

7. If the board/committee is convinced of the need of 
teacherages for the administrative staffs of centralized 
schools, what building program do they plan over the 
next 3 years? 

Number of dollars to be spent. 

Number of administrative teacherages to be 
built with this money. 

£. In your professional judgment have teacherages attracted 
administrative personnel to certain positions? 

Yes.No. 

9o Teacherage survey: 

# Rooms Age Heating Plumbing Family Size Rent 

10. Housing policy: 

Teacherages provided administrative personnel..... 
Gentleman f s agreement. 

11. Of administrative staff who moved out of the 
division/county, or moved to another school within the 
division/county, in the last 3 years, what proportion do 
you feel moved because of lack of adequate teacherages? 

12. How many instances have there been in the last 3 years 
where lack of a suitable teacherage has influenced a 
prospective principal or vice-principal against accepting 
a proffered position? 

13• In your professional judgment how would you rank teacher¬ 
ages as a factor in the retention of administrative 
staff? 

Very important. 

Fairly important. 

Not important. 

















71 


APPENDIX D 

QUESTIONNAIRE TO PRINCIPALS AND VICE-PRINCIPALS 

Topic: To discover the effectiveness of teacherages as a 
factor in the retention of Administrative Staff in 
centralized schools. 

Addressed to. 

Questions: Comments: 

1. Do you have a teacherage provided you? 

Yes.No. 

2. If so, is it adequate to your needs? 

Yes.No. 

3. If you do not have a teacherage, are 
you accommodated to your complete 
satisfaction? 

Yes.No. 

4. If your answer to jf 2 or #3 is No, 

please indicate whether you think an 
adequate teacherage is needed to 
retain the services of qualified 
administrative staff in your present 
position. 

Yes.....No . 

3. How important a factor would the 

provision of an adequate teacherage be 
in influencing your decision to 
accept an administrative position at 
another centralized school? 

Very important. 

Fairly important. 

Not important. 

6. Please rank in order the following 
factors to show how important they 
are to you in deciding whether or not 
to accept a position? 

Factor Rank 

Salary 

School plant 

Challenge of the job 

Sociability of the district 

Suitable teacherage 

7. Are you married?.Number of dependents 

living with you?. 

£. Have you at any time decided against 

accepting a position because accommodation 
was unavailable? 

Yes.No. 










. 






O') 






























. 




































. 















*■* 7 






















72 


APPENDIX D (continued) 

9. Check list for present teacherage: 

Size of house.x. 

Number of rooms. 

Basement--full.part.none. 

Heating--coal.oil.propane.gas. 

Cooking--coal.oil.propane.gas.electricity 

Is there running water? Yes.....No. 

Is there plumbing? Yes.No. 

Is there electricity? Yes.No. 

Are there clothes 

closets? Yes.No. 

What house furnishings are provided? 


10. Please add any comments which you wish re this problem 






















73 


LETTER FROM MR, 


APPENDIX E 

BREDO, ADMINISTRATIVE ACCOUNTANT 

Edmonton, Alberta 
February 6, 1937. 


Dear Sir: 

Your letters of January 20 as addressed to Queen’s 
Printer and to Mr. Wetter of the Department have been 
referred to this office for reply. 

The sorts of acts and regulations about which you 
inquire are not now available. A search of the statutes 
has been made and we find that grants were paid on teacher- 
ages on two occasions. For a period of about ten years 
terminating May 1, 1923, there was a section in the School 
Grants Act which made it possible to pay grants on teacher- 
ages under certain conditions. Although no new approvals 
were apparently permitted after May 1, 1923, the section was 
carried on the statutes until 1936. This was presumably 
done to permit payments respecting those teacherages that 
were built by debenture financing. 

The matter of grants for teacherages appeared again 
in the Grants Act about 1944. For that year the Legislature 
voted an amount of $100,000.00 for assisting in the con¬ 
struction of teacherages in rural areas only. This amount 
was distributed on a sliding scale determined on the basis 
of assessment, the Department paying from fifty to eighty 
per cent of construction. Plans and costs had to be approved 
by the Department before proceeding with the erection of 
the teacherages. 

In 1945 the Legislature did not renew the appropri¬ 
ation and the assistance was discontinued and has not been 
used since. Because the grants were in effect for only one 
year we cannot, after so many years, find a detailed formula 
or regulations giving the exact basis of distribution. Also, 
we are unable to give you the exact number of teacherages 
assisted or the exact final figure of the total assistance. 
We were able, however, to discover that the following school 
divisions did qualify for the assistance indicated: 

Berry Creek School Division No. 1 1 teacherage $ 542.12 

Neutral Hills School Division No. 16 1 teacherage 769.13 

St. Mary’s River School Division No. 2 2 teacherages 4440.25 






c 




































. 

t 

. 

< 


























. 


. 

. 

- 











74 


APPENDIX E (continued) 

Since regulations, as we stated above, are not 
available, we have made copies of the two sections to which 
we made reference and are attaching these for your infor¬ 
mation. 

Yours very truly 

A. Bredo 

Administrative Accountant 


Mr. F. E. Worger 
34 Chancellor Way 
Calgary, Alberta 

Section 3(1)(m) 

To each district that erects a teacher T s residence of not 
less than $1,000*00 in value according to plans approved 
by the Department of Education and provides approved fur¬ 
nishings ana maintains such residence and furnishings and 
the grounds appurtenant to such residence to the satisfac¬ 
tion of an inspector of schools - 

(i) A grant equal to one-third of the value of such res¬ 
idence, grounds and furnishings when the same have been 
provided without the issue of a debenture. 

(ii) A grant equal to one-third of the value of such res¬ 
idence, grounds and furnishings together with the de¬ 
benture interest accruing due during the first one- 
third portion of the total period the debenture has to 
run when a debenture has been issued to provide such 
residence, grounds and furnishings, and said grant 
shall be payable in such annual amounts during the 
first one-third portion of the period the debenture 
has to run as may be determined by the Minister. 

27a. (1) The Minister may authorize payment of a special 
grant to the board of a rural district or to the 
board of a school division to enable such board 
to erect a teacher ? s residence or teachers* 
residenc es. 

(2) The Minister may authorize payment of a special 
grant to any board to assist such board to erect 
any building to be used for school purposes 

(3) Every teacher*s residence referred to in subsection 
(1) and every building to be used for school 
purposes referred to in subsection (2) hereof 
shall be erected according to plans and specifi- 




APPENDIX E (continued) 


cations approved by the Minister, and the board shall con 
tribute such portion, being not less than twenty per cent 
of the cost, as may be determined by the Minister. 







' . 















































