For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


AN INVESTIGATION OE STEAM CUEING OF CONCRETE AND 
ITS EFFECT ON COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH 

fey 

D.A. BERNARD 



vjs •' /r. ; 




I V • <'* jv' v V ;v ’/ ./ 

■v'M'p If £ ■' t; 

i ■ s/' ( M V 




















&X ISBBW 








UNIVERSITY OF ALBDETA 
LIB ’ v ARY 

Regulations Imp. n Jinn Inoses a iid_ iss3rtations 

Typescript copies of thes s anc disse t itic foi Ha: ter 's 
and doctor's degrees deposited in the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the Faculty of Graduate Studies, 
>n ulted in the Reference Reading Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
sc ei vision the work was done. Some spart ents are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service d 1 the University of Alberta Library. 

These theses ana dissertations are to be used only with due 
regarc to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 
When permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
published work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user . 


Please sign below” 

Date ' Signature __________ Ins tl tut i on 







































































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/investigationofsOOdabe 







THE UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 


AN INVESTIGATION OF STEM CURING- OP CONCRETE AND 

ITS EFFECT ON COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ENGINEERING 
DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 


b 7 


D. A. BERNARD 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 

19 5 1 
















UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ENGINEERING 
DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies 
for acceptance, a thesis entitled AN INVESTIGATION 
OF STEAM CURING OF CONCRETE AND ITS EFFECT ON 
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH submitted by Donald A. Bernard, 
B.Sc., in partial fulfilment of the requirements for 
the degree of Master of Science. 


Date 









ACKNOWLEDGEMENT S 


Professor 


Mr • L • E« 


The author extends his appreciation and gratitude tos 


L. A. Thorssen for his guidance, constructive criticisms 
and encouragement throughout the investigation# 

Fead and Mr. C. Malmberg, Laboratory Technicians, for 
their technical advice, aid and co-operation in keeping 
the equipment functioning properly throughout the 
investigation. 


















































CONTENTS 


Page 

Synopsis 

Introduction 1 

Part I — Thermodynamic and Other Considerations 

Pertinent to Obtaining a Proper Atmosphere 

for an Accelerated Curing Process with Steam 4 

Part II — Laboratory Equipment 

Chapter I — Steam Curing Cabinet 

Introduction 12 

Procedure and Design and Construction of a 
Steam Curing Cabinet 13 

Method of Operation and Use 25 

Conclusions 28 

Chapter II - Ancillary Equipment 

Laboratory Concrete Mixer J1 

Load Testing Machine 31 

Hot Water Tank 33 

Moist Room 33 

Concrete Cylinder Molds 3 6 

Miscellaneous Equipment 36 

Part III - Heated Mold Curing Investigation 

Introduction 37 

Procedure and Layout of Investigation 

Section I — Constant Temperature Curing 40 

Section II — Varying Temperature Curing 4l 

Aggregate Test, Materials and Mix Designs 

Section I —» Constant Temperature Curing 43 

Section II — Varying Temperature Curing 43 

Data and Results 47 

Test Results and Discussions 

Section I — Constant Temperature Heated Molds 4? 

Section II — Varying Temperature Heated Molds 49 


Summary and Conclusions 


66 















' 

' .1 .. 













. 





























. 




















■ 








CONTENTS 


Page 

Part IV — Steam Curing Investigation 

Introduction 6 ? 

Layout of Investigation 69 

Procedure 72 

Aggregate Tests and Materials 7^ 

Mix Designs 73 

Data and Results 80 

Explanation of Tables and Figures 80 

Discussion of Results 

Control Strengths 111 

Cure Cycles 111 

Comparison of Cycles, I, II and III 113 

Summary and Conclusions 116 

Part 7 — 

Application of Results to Practice 11? 

Suggested Further Investigations 117 


Bibliography 



INDEX TO PHOTOGRAPHS 


Photo Page 

A Front View of Steam Kiln 18 

B Steam Inlet - End View of Steam Kiln 18 

C Outlet End View of Steam Kiln 19 

B Top View of Steam Kiln 19 

AA Interior View of Steam Kiln 20 

E Lancaster Concrete Mixer 32 

F \ Cubic Foot Tilting Drum Mixer 32 

G Baldwin Testing Machine 3^ 

H Testing Head of Baldwin Testing Machine 3^ 

J Hot Water Tank 35 

K Molds and Miscellaneous Equipment 35 

















INDEX TO TABLES 


Table No* Page 

1 Physical Properties of Aggregates 

(Heated Mold Investigation) 43 

2 Sieve Analysis of Q.E. Construction Co., 

1« Gravel 44 

3 Sieve Analysis of Elk Island Sand 

(Heated Mold Investigation) 44 

4 Concrete Mix Data - Heated Mold - Constant 

Temperature 51 

5 Strength Results - Heated Mold - Constant 

Temperature 54 

6 Concrete Mix Data - Heated Mold - Varying 

Temperature 59 

7 Strength Results - Heated Mold - Varying 

Temperature 60 

8 Physical Properties of Aggregates 

(Steam Cure Investigation) 75 

9 Sieve Analysis of Alberta Concrete Products 

l n Gravel 75 

10 Sieve Analysis of Alberta Concrete Products 

Gravel 7 6 

11 Sieve Analysis of Elk Island Sand 

(S^eam Curing Investigation) 77 

12 Concrete Mix Data - Steam Cure Investigation 85 

13 Strength Results - Moist Cured Control Cylinders 

(Steam Cure Investigation) 8? 

14 Strength Results - Cure Method A - Steam 

Cure Investigad ion 89 

15 Strength Results - Cure Method B - Steam 

Cure Investigation 


92 





INDEX TO TABLES 


Table No# 

1 6 Strength Results - Cure Method C - Steam 

Cure Investigation 

17 Strength Results - Cure Method D - Steam 
Cure Investigation 

Strength Results - Discarded Mixes - Steam 
Cure Investigation 


18 




1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 & 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 


Pag 

6 

16 

1 ? 

24 

53 

57 

58 

63 

& ( 

82 

83 

34 

88 


INDEX TO FIGURES 


Thermodynamic Properties of Moist Air 
Front View of Steam Kiln 
Plan View of Steam Kiln 

Schematic Diagram of Remote Control Device of Steam 
Kiln 

W/C versus Compressive Strength - Control Cylinders 
Heated Mold - Constant Temperature 

Compressive Strength versus Cure Temperature for 
Heated Mold - Constant Temperature 

Compressive Strength versus Preset Period for Heated 
Mold - Constant Temperature 

Compressive Strength versus Cure Temperature for 
Heated Mold - Varying Temperature 

Comparison of Varying Temperature and Constant 
Temperature Results for Heated Mold Investigation 

Temperature versus Time for Cycle I for Steam 
Cure Investigation 

Temperature versus Time for Cycle II for Steam 
Cure Investigation 


Temperature versus Time for Cycle 111 for Steam 
Cure Investigation 

W/C versus Compressive Strength of Control Cylinders 
for Steam Cure Investigation 

Compressive Strength versus Cure Temperature for Cycle 

I of Steam Cure Investigation 

Compressive Strength versus Cure Temperature for Cycle 

II of Steam Cure Investigation 



■ 


' 




























INDEX TO EXCUSES 


Ei^ure 


Pa^e 

17 

Compressive Strength versus Cure Temperature for 

Cycle III of Steam Cure Investigation 

103 

18 & 19 

Compressive Strength versus Cure Temperature for 

Cycles I, II and III of Steam Cure Investigation 

io4 & 105 

20 & 21 

Compressive Strength versus Cure Time Compared to 
Standard Moist Cure 

106 & 10? 

22 

Temperature versus Time for Discarded Mixes Subjected 
to Extreme Temperature 

110 






SYNOPSIS 


This paper presents the results of an investigation of 
the effects on the compressive strength of 4" x 8° test cylinders 
of normal concrete mixes subjected to curing temperatures from 135 
degrees F. to 200 degrees F. for 24 hour periods, and subsequent 
storage periods. Two methods of application of such elevated curing 
temperatures were used; (a) Concrete in sealed molds immersed in 
heated water maintained at constant temperatures, and concrete in 
sealed molds subjected to various steam curing cycles, (b) Bare 
concrete cylinders subjected to saturated atmospheric pressure steam 
curing cycles. 

Also presented is the design, construction and operation of 
a steam curing kiln which is equipped with various control mechanisms 
capable of producing, and reproducing a large number of saturated 
atmospheric pressure steam curing temperatures and cycles. 

The results indicate that while 0 Thermal Shock 1 * and excessive 
temperatures have adverse effects on the compressive strength, under 
properly ^controlled conditions 0 high early strengths result. 

However, the later age strengths can be expected to be less than those 
for the corresponding standard moist cure. Also indicated are the facts 
that; (a) Preset periods from 2-6 hours are beneficial, (b) Subsequent 
moist curing has some slight advantage, especially at the lower 
temperatures used, (c) Strengths are affected to some extent by the 


type of curing cycle 




■ 






■ 






: 








' 

' * 
































t ■ 

- 







■* 















INTRODUCTION 


In the modern production of concrete products it is frequently 
desirable to hasten the curing process. This necessity arises generally 
for two reasons; firstly to release molds and pallets as quickly as 
possible, and secondly to put the finished article on the market as soon 
as possible, and so avoid having to provide continuous storage space. 
Although some acceleration of setting and hardening can be achieved by 
chemical means, steam curing is more effective and more susceptible to 
accurate control. 

There are many references in published literature to experiments 
in steam curing, but the results are in some respects contradictory, and 
are not easily applied to commercial practice. 

The main processes in general use may be conveniently divided 
into three classes! high pressure, low pressure continuous, and low 
pressure intermittent* 

The high pressure process requires an especially constructed 
steel chamber or autoclave and since the chamber is steam tight a 
continuous program is not possible. Control is achieved by regulation 
of either pressure or temperature alone since excess water is kept in 
the chamber. Pressures up to 200 pounds per sq. in. and temperatures 
of 155 degrees C. are obtained and the steaming period is comparatively 
short. For the high pressure process, the following results are 
obtainable!^ 

T ‘ ’ ' 

Taken from a progress report by the ACI Committee 716 . 

April 1944 pp 409-16 (? 40) 




















■ 


' ! 


■ ■ - 




■ 
















■ 
















•2 . ■ •• .■ j ' ■ s-s\ .' •• v 

* . .-in 

' 

t . - 

■ • • 

« 














. , ' ' , 

: 






. 







2 


1. A rapid increase in strength results due to the 
higher temperatures; and the units are suitable 
for use within 24 hours after molding, and the 
high early strength is permanent* 

2. With certain aggregates a lime-silica reaction 
may take place between the cement and aggregates, 
and strengths in excess of that predictible from 
the effect of increased hydration may be developed. 
Reduction in initial drying shrinkage and the 
reversible wetting and drying movements occur. 

4. An increased resistance to sulphate attack is 
obtained. 

5- The product is in a substantially drier condition 
and lighter in color than moist cured concrete. 

6 . Lower bond stress between steel and concrete is 
obtained. 

Factors such as size and shapes of units, aggregates, and 
methods of racking, consistency of mix, age of molded units before 
being exposed to steam pressure, time required to raise steam pressure 
and temperature to maximum from atmospheric, and time required to 
release temperature and pressures to atmospheric, may have considerable 
influence in determining the proper economic pressure, temperature and 

cycle of steaming. Various cycles have been outlined in published 

2 

articles. 

2 -—-—-—- —- 

Studies of High Pressure Steam Curing by J.G. Pearson and 
E.M. Brickett. A.C.I. Proceedings, Vol. Ill, 1932, pp 537 • 

The Effect of High Pressure Steam on Crushing Strength of 
Portland Cement Mortars and Concretes by 2.J. Wig. A.S.T.M. 





' 





















* 





t 






' ' t ' 















3 


Owing to the high capital cost of equipment, high pressure 
steam curing is recommended only where it is important to reduce 
shrinkage or to increase sulphate resistance, or where the early 
maximum strength is desired* 

Low pressure continuous steam curing is hest suited to mass 
production. There are generally two methods used, and temperatures 
are limited to 100 - 200 degrees F. 

In a short high temperature kiln, the units are loaded on 
trucks. The kiln is fitted with doors, and the haulage is intermittent, 
usually one truck advancing into the kiln, and one truck moving out at 
the same time. 

A long tunnel type kiln may “be designed to have a temperat\ire 
gradient formed at each end. Luring the steaming operation doors are 
left open, and haulage is usually continuous, the rate depending on the 
time-length of steaming allowed. 

The spacing of the units may or may not “be important, and 
depends on the method of heating. 

The low pressure intermittent process is carried out in 
“batteries of curing chambers, at temperatures also “below 200 degrees F. 
The “batteries are sometimes designed to take a day f s output and steaming 
commences at the end of the day. The steam is usually cut off during 
the night so that kilns may “be drawn at the “beginning of the next day® 
Here agin, spacing of units may or may not “be important. 

In the United States and Canada the Low Pressure Intermittent 
process is favoured, and several different cycles of steaming are used. 


The one most favored is as follows! 



4 


Immediately after being molded, the units are placed in the 
kiln and when the kiln is filleo. the doors are closed. A 
waiting period of 2 - 6 hoars permits a partial set of the 
concrete. The steam is then turned on and the temperature 
raised to a maximum value, predetermined by tests to give 
best results. (The rate of temperature rise usually is 
limited to a maximum of 1 degree F. per minute.) When the 
Maximum temperature has been reached the steam is cut off 
and the kiln is allowed to cool down. This period is called 
a "soaking period", and is maintained as long as possible. 

It is followed by a further period of drying to remove 
moisture from the unit, so that it will pass the A.S.T.M. 
Moisture Specification of less than 40 percent of the total 
absorption. The kiln is then unloaded and is ready for 
another run. 

At least two companies in the United States have developed 
kilns with good automatic control devices to make each steam¬ 
ing cycle easily reproducible*^ 


3 

"Curing - Most Efficient Methods Determined by Tests" by George A. 
Mansfield. "Hock Products" Journal February 1947* 

"Curing - A Problem in Thermodynamics" by George A. Mansfield 
"Hock Products" Journal August 1948* 

"High-Temperature. High-Humidity" by Bior Hordberg. 

"Hock Products" Journal January 194?• 








, 

. 














5 


PART I 

THERM OP OAKI C AND OTHER CONSIDERATIONS PERTINENT 

TO OBTAINING A PROPER CURING ATMOSPHERE FOR AH 

ACCELERATED CURING PROCESS WITH STEAM 

Concrete when properly cured at normal atmospheric 
temperatures results in a tough building material, but so often con¬ 
crete masonry cured at high temperatures is brittle and subject to 
breakage during handling, though still satisfactory when considered 
in the light of strength and moisture specifications as designated by 
A.S.T.M. This brittleness can be attributed to the fact that the 
binding material, Portland Cement, has been damaged during the curing 
process. Where the product has been cured by high temperatures it can 
be concluded that there was not a sufficient quantity of moisture in 
immed.ia.te contact with the cement mortar, and hence the normal products 
of hydration were not able to develop. 

Prom thermodynamics, it is indicated that equilibrium 
temperatures below 212 degrees P. are impossible at atmospheric 
pressure without having a mixture of steam, water, and air. 

In terms of Phase Language, the variance of a system is given 
by: 7 = C / 2 - P 

where, 

7 is the variance or degrees of freedom 

C is the number of components 

P is the number of phases 

Por a system of steam and water C is equal to 1 and P is equal 
to 2, and thus V equals 1, which means the system has but one degree of 






. 

... « , 

« 















* 

. ... ' .... ■: '. . 



* • 










: ' ■ 


■ 





6 


freedom. Thus for atmospheric pressure there is a unique temperature 
for a condition of saturation, viz; 212 degrees F. at normal 
atmospheric pressure. 

How if air is also added to the system, the C is equal to 2, 

P is equal to 2, end V equals 2, indicating two degrees of freedom, 
viz. we may arbitrarily fix the pressure and temperature, arid obtain a 
condition of saturation. 

A study of air at various temperatures, will indicate the 
difficulties in maintaining a moisture condition in contact with cement 
during a curing cycle. Thermodynamics show that the higher the dry 
hulh temperature, the greater will he the grains of moisture or pounds 
of water per pound of air required to maintain a condition of 100 per¬ 
cent relative humidity. The data, given in figure I, are taken from the 
table of w Thermodynamic Properties of Moist Air H contained in the 
American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineer 9 s Guide, 19**6, and 
indicate the amount of moisture necessary to maintain 100 percent 
relative humidity. From this it is seen that for a system having a dry 
bulb temperature of 130 degrees F., (that is to say, 100 percent 
relative humidity) 0.081 pounds of moisture per pound of dry air is 
required. If the dry bulb temperature is increased to 180 degrees F. 
without an increase in pounds of moisture per pound of dry air, the 
wet temperature will be 132*5 degrees F. with a resultant humidity of 
29»5 percent. This physical phenomenon clearly indicates the need for 
a greatly increased moisture content at higher temperatures. The amount 
of moisture required is 2.295 pounds per pound of dry air for 100 percent 




i 







THERMODYNAMIC 

M O l ST AIR 


PROPERT IE S 


TEMP 

Moisrore 

Soto ration 

0T.U 

(5 T U of 

De^rees 

lbs //b 

Pressure 

per ID. 

SatoraT / on 

Fa hv\ 

d r<y a / r 


dr^ Our 

Morsture 

70 

O.Oi 6 

0.3 6 

/ 6T9 

33. 96 

So 

0 022. 

0.5/ 

iS.zz 

43. 69 

eo 

O.o 3/ 

0 70 

Zi. 53 

53 70 

too 

0.0*3 

0.95 

2403 

7/.73 

11 o 

0.05 9 

/. 27 

2640 

9/86 

1 zo 

0 08/ 

/ 69 

28 84 

//9 ■ 54 

/ 30 

O /// 

2 22 

31. ZO 

/54 93 

/4o 

O./ 53 

2 89 

336 6 

205. 66 

/50 

0.2/ / 

372 

3fc> 0£ 

2 73.1 9 

;6 0 

G 299 

4 74 

35-47 

3 762 7 

no 

O 433 

S' 99 

40.8S 

531.58 

/SO 

O 65g 

75/ 

43 29 

79/.78 

t 9o 

1083 

9.34 

45. 66 

(285.37 

2oo 

2.2 95 

//• 53 

45/2 

2(>77<2 





4 £ D 


t 90 

1 40 

I 30 

I 2 o 

I I o 

< OO 

90 

80 

70 

eo 

so 

40 

30 


k 

o 

8 


13 

C 

0 

Q 


o 

p- 

3 

a: 


£ 

C 

13 

O 

E 


Q) 

JZ 

zo F 


/a 


7o 8o 9C 10 G I/O 120 130 740 /SO /60 /70 /&Q 130 ZOO 

Temperature °F 

Cu ri/e /\ - represents Temperature ratios 

Curve [3 ~ moisture rgcjuirements for dry a/r $a.TuraTed 

- C urve C Snouts p r o<j r e ss t v e / y increasing so.Turo.fion pressures 
Curve D md/cafes heat conTent of dry air 

- Curve t ~ heat Content of moisture m c/ry a/r Saturated 

Fiq 1 








































































8 


relative humidity at 200 degrees F*, and 0*653 pounds per pound of dry 
air for 180 degrees F. 

There is some doubt that 100 percent humidity is necessary for 
proper curing from a moisture standpoint. However, when we consider the 
vapor pressures of the moisture at various temperatures, it is seen that 
130 degrees F. the vapor pressure of the water vapor is 2.22 pounds per 
square inch; for 180 degrees F. it is 7*51 pounds per square inch, and 
at 200 degrees F. it is 11*53 pounds per square inch. Since there is 
initially at least, free water in the concrete units, there will be equal 
vapor pressures, provided that the kiln atmosphere is fully saturated. 
However when the kiln atmosphere is not fully saturated, there will be 
developed a pressure differential tending to move the water from the 
unit to the surface. For example, if a 50 percent relative humidity is 
existing in the kiln atmosphere with both the kiln atmosphere and block 
at a temperature of 180 degrees F., the vapor pressures in the concrete 
unit and the kiln are 7»51 pounds per square inch, and 3«75 pounds per 
square inch respectively. For the same temperatures and 90 percent 
relative humidity in the kiln atmosphere, the vapor pressures are re¬ 
spectively 7*51 pounds per square inch, and 6 . 75 pounds per square inch. 
From these figures it is seen that unless 100 percent relative humidity 
is maintained, the moisture required for hydration will be removed from 
the concrete mass and so injure the quality of the concrete. 

In fact even with 100 percent relative humidity the adiabatic 
heat produced by the chemical reactions of hydration is sufficient to 
raise the temperatures inside the block, so that a pressure differential 
will exist, and over a period of time cause a removal of water from the 


concrete mass 















9 


The pressure differentials produced by the partial vapour 
pressures will he evident between kiln atmosphere and the outside air, 
and thus will also tend to cause moisture to move from the inside of 
the kiln to the outside. This necessitates extreme care in kiln con¬ 
struction. For example, if the kiln is operating at 170 degrees F., 
the partial pressure of the saturated vapour is 12.203 pounds per square 
inch. If at the same time the air outside the kiln is saturated at 70 
degrees F. the vapour pressure is 0.739 pounds per square inch. If the 
outside air were at 50 percent relative humidity, then the pressure 
differential is further increased. Kilns operating at higher temperatures 
would still further increase the pressure difference. 

A graphical picture of the relative amount of moisture, amount 
of heal required, and saturation pressure, is provided by the curves in 
figure 1, page 7* These curves are taken from reference number 3 , and 
are established by plotting each teruodynamic property from 70 degrees 
to 200 degrees F. in 10 degree increments, and expressed as a percentage 
ratio to the condition at 70 degrees F. Curve B A W represents the 
temperature ratios and is, naturally, a straight line. Curve H B R ex¬ 
presses the moisture requirements for saturated dry air, and forcibly 1 
illustrates the progressively increasing demand for moisture to main¬ 
tain total saturation as the temperature is increased. Curve R C R por¬ 
trays the progressively increasing saturation pressures, and although 
it is not as pronounced as Curve ,, B H it distinctly shows the difficulty 
of holding the atmosphere at a proper curing condition in the kiln. 

Also included in figure 1 is the B.T.U. requirement to heat dry air. 




10 


Curve W D U is identical to temperature increase Curve ”A H . Curve W E H 
shows the B.T.U. requirement ratio to heat totally saturated air, end 
indicates the accelerated heat requirement necessary for increasing the 
temperature of a saturated atmosphere. 

Carhonation of the concrete is also an important factor that 
must be considered in the curing of concrete masonry. By carhonation 
is meant the absorption of carbon-dioxide from the kiln atmosphere when 
there is not sufficient moisture present during the curing process. 
Carhonation can be beneficial or detrimental depending on when it occurs. 
If it occurs before the period in which the Portland Cement hydration 
compounds are being formed, it is detrimental. However, if it occurs 
after the hydration it is beneficial. 

The detrimental effect of carhonation is the -tendency to pro¬ 
duce a brittle product, although strengths may be favourable. In view 
of this harmful effect of carhonation during hydration, caution must 
be observed in the selection of curing methods, particularly with a 
system using txie products of combustion as part of the kiln atmosphere. 

In the process of fuel combustion free oxygen of the air combines with 
fuel carbon to form carbon-dioxide, as well as some carbon-monoxide. 

When these products of fuel combustion become part of a kiln ©atmosphere, 
and the atmosphere is not changed, high concentrations of carbon-dioxide 
and carbon-monoxide can occur, with harmful effects on the concrete 
products, as well as possible detriment to the efficiency and health of 
the employees of a concrete products plant. Care must also be exercised 
in limiting the amount of carhonation, even after hydration, due to the 





! i. it 


i 





















11 


subsequent shrinking caused by formation of calcium carbonate. This 
shrinking can cause fine cracks in shells and webs, if the surface 
drying is more rapid than that of the interior. 

The fact that a vapour pressure differential within the 
interior of concrete units exists when the kiln atmosphere is not 
saturated, or at a lower temperature, can “be utilized to remove excess 
moisture from the product at the end of the curing process by deliberately 
creating the necessary atmosphere. Care must be exercised in doing so, 
to be sure that ”thermal shock 11 and excess stresses capable of producing 
hair cracks are not produced. Also when temperatures in excess of 105 
degrees C. or 221 degrees F. are maintained, the chemically compounded 
water is driven from the hydrated cement, which tends to destroy the 
cement gel. Therefore temperatures in excess of 200 degrees F. are not 
advisable for atmospheric pressure curing or drying of the concrete 
products. 

From the principles outlined in the former pages it is poss¬ 
ible to design two tentative curing cycles of 24 hours* duration and 
having the following characteristics! 

1. A gradual and constant time-temperature gradient maintained 
over a period of 9 hours to reach the maximum temperature required. 

The same time-temperature gradient maintained from the maximum tempera¬ 
ture to room temperature. The 6 hours immediately after mixing is used 
for an ,f initial set f! period. 

2. A 6 hour 9 initial set H period is provided immediately after 
mixing, followed by a rapid heating-up period to a temperature 20 






. 

- 











* 





12 


degrees F. below the maximum temperature. This is then followed by a 
gradual rise in temperature over as long a time as possible to reach 
the maximum temperature required, followed by as rapid a cooling down 
period as possible. (The gradual temperature rise portion of the 
cycle is designed to keep temperatures in concrete units equal to or 
less than kiln atmosphere temperatures at all times.J 

These two tentative cycles plus a third cycle, consisting 
of a 6 hour waiting or initial set period, followed by a rapid heating 
up period to the maximum temperature, and at the end a rapid cooling 
down temperature, to complete the 24 hour time limit, will be used in 
this investigation. Each cycle will operate at three different 
temperatures of 135 degrees F., 160 degrees F. and 185 degrees F. 
respectively, giving 9 different cycles of curing conditions* 


. 









. 
















13 


PART II 

LABORATORY EQUIPMENT 
CHAPTER I 

STEAM CURING- CABINET 

INTRODUCTION 

The conditions of heat transfer to concrete units in steam 
curing chambers or kilns are complicated* Heat may be transferred 
by radiation from walls, ceiling and roof, by convection of heated 
air and steam, and by condensation of steam on the surface of con¬ 
crete and molds* The heat thus transferred heats the interior of 
the units by conduction* 

The heat supplied to the chambers, and the heat generated 
by the chemical action of hydration is expended, in heating the con¬ 
crete to the desired temperature, as heat losses to the atmosphere 
from the chambers, as well as heat removed in the concrete when taken 
from the chamber* Heat losses to the atmosphere from the chamber may 
be reduced by the use of thermal insulation of walls, roof and floors* 
The latent heat in the units can be utilised by cutting off the heat 
some time before the chamber is to be discharged* 

The method of heating affects the distribution of temper¬ 
ature throughout the kiln. In one form of kiln the walls are heated 
by steam pipes, and only sufficient live steam and water are injected 
into the chamber to maintain a saturated atmosphere* In this type 
the spacing of units is quite critical* 

In others, heating is produced by injection of steam, water 
and air* The principle method of heating is by condensation, and 






uniform temperatures can be more easily maintained because condensation 
takes place more rapidly on the cooler units* The water is added 
usually in the form of fog spray to ensure saturated conditions and the 
air is added to ensure adequate mixing and movement of atmosphere as 
well as to obtain a stable saturated atmosphere. 

In the design of the steam curing cabinet used in this in¬ 
vestigation, the latter method of heating is used, since it is the most 
practical and lends itself to accurate control. 

Procedure and Design and Construction of a Steam Curing Cabinet 

The tentative requirements of a steam cabinet suitable for the 
aims of this program are as followsl 

1. To maintain a saturated or very near saturated condition of 
atmosphere at temperatures from 100 degrees F. to 200 degrees F. 

2 . To provide a means of weighing at least one specimen during a 
curing cycle, so as to aid in ascertaining some indication as 
to type of atmosphere being produced. 

3* To maintain a required temperature with as small a temperature 
differential as possible over considerable lengths of time, as 
well as being capable of wide ranges of temperature change with 
time. In addition to give a large number of possible proced¬ 
ures and to be capable of closely reproducing such procedures 
at will. 

4. To be as simple and economical in operation as possible. 

In part I page 5 it was indicated that it is impossible to 




* 

■ 


* 
















. 





































■ 









15 


obtain equilibrium temperatures of from 100 - 200 degrees F. with com¬ 
plete saturation, at atmospheric pressures, without having a system of 
steam, water and air. 

Therefore, it was decided to introduce steam, water and air 
first into a mixing chamber before they entered the kiln. Further, 
water would also be added directly to the atmosphere inside the kiln. 

The air and water would be supplied at a constant rate, and the steam 
varied, by a thermostatic regulator valve, as required to maintain 
temperatures. The atmosphere produced in the mixing chamber, or valve, 
would be introduced at one end of the kiln at mid-height, distributed 
by a baffle screen, to give an even flow across the curing chamber and 
passed through a second baffle, before being discharged through a pipe 
at the opposite end. The condensed or excess water would be removed 
by a floor drain, connected to the discharge pipe, outside the kiln. 

From a. consideration of loading and unloading, a rectangular 
cabinet 5 feet long, 2|- feet ifide and 3i feet high, was decided upon as 
being the smallest practical size that could be used. This would give 
a maximum capacity of 20 - x 8 11 standard concrete test cylinders, or 
12 - 6 B x 12® standard concrete test cylinders when divided into a top 
and bottom compartment by an open type shelf, and was considered adequate 
for this investigation. 

Wherever possible use was to be made of standard building 
materials and plumbing fixtures such as pipe, valves, tubing, etc. 

It was decided to use as a steam supply the steam radiator 
heating system, using exhaust steam from the University of Alberta 





. 

. 




. 

. 












c 



. ■ . 





16 


power plant supplied at 3 -4 pounds per square inch and a quality of 
0.95, since it was the most readily available. 

A "Powers’ 1 type "T" direct acting air operated, thermo 
regulator, and J" valve capable of delivering 88 pounds of steam per 
hour at a pressure of 4 pounds per square inch, was selected as the 
smallest size of valve that could practically be used. 

Due to a shortage of space, the cabinet was placed in one 
corner of the Testing Laboratory in the Civil Engineering Building, 
as close as possible to a radiator steam supply line. This necessi¬ 
tated pipe lines of diameter pipe to bring air and water to the 
cabinet, and in addition made a 140 foot ij" discharge pipe from the 
cabinet to a waste water sump necessary, as it was not possible to 
exhaust to atmosphere, either inside or outside of the building. 

Consequently a rectangular cabinet 5® x 2 8 x 3’-6" with a 
one brick thick side wall, and 2” thick concrete floor and roof slabs, 
reinforced with chicken wire, was built on a wooden base 6 9 x 3 f » of 
2” x 10” planks. The interior was divided into a top and bottom sec¬ 
tion by an open shelf of 2” x 4” slats supported on aluminum x ij" 
angle frame. Access was provided by a 28” x 28” square door, in the side, 
with refrigerator type seals. The inside surface of brick walls was 
coated with an asphaltic type kiln liner compound, kindly supplied by 

the Edmonton Concrete Block Company, Edmonton, Alberta, to make a 
4 

tight vapour seal. 


4 

The kiln liner is sold by A.G. Horn - 821 Queen St., E.» Toronto 8, 
under the trade name "Horn Kiln Liner". 













) : T r 




- 





























STEAM KILN 
FRONT VIEW 


4 1 - 




■ 






































































































































































































Photo B - Steam inlet - End View of Steam Kiln 






















20 




Photo D - Top View of Steam Kiln 


kfeMi 












21 



Thoto AA - Interior View from Loading Door 

of Steam Kiln 











22 


Two baffle screens of thick transit hoard, with 150 - -J- H diameter 
holes, were placed 8 n from either end of the kiln. The discharge or 
outlet pipe was 1-| H diameter, placed at mid-height in center of the 
end of the kiln, and a -J” diameter pipe drain for condensed water 
placed in the floor, below the transit board baffle screen, and conn¬ 
ected by a rubber hose to the discharge line outside of the cabinet* 
Also placed at the discharge end of kiln was a W U M type water-filled 
manometer, with the pressure tube leading inside the end wall to 
measure total pressures inside the cabinet* At the other end of the 
cabinet a 1° diameter entrance pipe was placed at mid-height leading 
from the mixing valve or chamber, which consisted of a X M diameter 
standard 4-way pipe fitting. Into this fitting was led a diameter 
pipe from the regulator valve, a l 55 diameter pipe from a manual by¬ 
pass valve connected to main steam supply, a fog nozzle of type used 
in air conditioning systems and rated at 0*65 gallons per hour at a 
pressure of 40 pounds per square inch, connected to the domestic water 
supply, and an air inlet connected to the air supply line delivering 
air at 25 pounds per square inch* (See photo B.) On the top of the 
cabinet was placed the thermo regulator of the ^Powers’ 1 regulating 
valve with the thermostatic temperature rod extending into the cabinet 
through a hole provided. In addition one fog nozzle was extended 
through the roof slab, so that it would introduce water spray directly 
to the atmosphere inside the kiln. ,! Saran !! tubing of 3/l6 w diameter 
was used to connect water and air supply to the mixing valve, fog 
nozzles and thermo regulating unit respectively, with brass screw 
valves placed in the lines so that regulation of each could be ob¬ 
tained as desired. Also placed on the top of the cabinet was a small 




23 


"beam type balance, with a scale pan suspended on a wire extending through 
the roof by a small hole provided, so that variations in the weight of a 
specimen during curing operations could be obtained. Temperature records 
were provided for by thermocouples placed at strategic points inside the 
kiln, the lead wires extending through a hole provided in the roof slab 
to a "Brown" Strip Chart Temperature Recorder unit suspended over the 
cabinet. (See photo A, C and D)• 

At this stage of construction, the kiln was operated to test 
the variation of temperatures within the curing chamber as well as the 
quality of atmosphere produced and pressures obtained, during operation. 
The relative humidity of the atmosphere was measured by a thermocouple 
hygrometer, of the wet and dry bulb type, which consisted of a glass 
beaker for a water reservoir, into which a flannel wick surrounding 
the wet bulb thermocouple extended, the dry bulb thermocouple was 
placed one half inch immediately above the wet bulb thermocouple. 

The temperature variation of 20 - 25 degrees T. was found to 
be far from satisfactory. The resulting wet and dry temperatures 
indicated that a high relative humidity could be maintained quite 
easily at all temperatures when steam, air and water were introduced 
into the kiln. In the absence of air, and/or water, variations of wet 
and dry bulb temperatures indicated that high relative humidity was not 
obtained. The water manometer indicated that pressures during opera¬ 
tion, even with full steam supply pressures did not increase by more 
than ij inches of water, and for all practical purposes could be ass¬ 
umed equal to atmospheric pressure (viz: ij" water represents an in¬ 
crease of 0.055 pounds per square inch.) 



. 

- 

- 


* 




: 












5c_h f A- rye F?£MOTl ' 7 - 

3rt >" C / /4-A- — 



F~IGJ.SE 


Coot i■■■ a- ■ c te * e i ■'<=>•£> 

5 /> r-s.. 


A 


(//V(/5£C 




/^•ja nv as 




7 


£ 

/ - 


R/ra- ^^r/.vs- 

AS - /? /<?£ 








Cgmstamt Sr /, - « ' - -•*-• 

a.e> 


f 

f 

/ 

// 

./ *, 

V 


/+hKS 


F/g 4 












































25 


The variation in temperatures inside the kiln was believed due 
to insufficient mixing of the atmosphere* In order to obtain better 
mixing it was decided to use a steam manifold leading from the mixing 
chamber and running along the floor of the cabinet. Small holes were 
drilled in the manifold so that the curing mixture would be discharged 
downwards at a 45 degree angle. The small holes give considerable 
velocity to the curing atmosphere entering the kiln and thus produce a 
rolling action and provide better mixing. A slat type platform or 
floor was constructed above the manifold, to support the concrete 
specimens. The manifold was made from 1 H pipe with two rows of 7 holes, 
3 / 32 w in diameter, spaced at 7 inches center to center, the rows of 
holes were at an angle of 90 degrees from each other. With this method 
of injecting atmosphere it was found that much better control was avail¬ 
able at all temperatures. The temperature differential in any case was 
not more than 7 degrees S’. Thermocouples placed at the floor level, 
indicated that there was no appreciable increase in temperature caused 
by the jetting action of the curing atmosphere through the manifold 
nozzle holes. 

In order to fulfill the requirement outlined in Section 2 
it was decided that some system of remote control mechanism, would be 
most economical and practical. A schematic sketch of the principle of 
such a remote control mechanism is given in figure 4, and the actual 
mechanism details are shown in photo D. A specially shaped cam, which 
operates a rack and pinion, rotates once per cycle, (Once per 24 hours,) 
The pinion is connected to the temperature control valve as indicated in 
figure 4(b). 



26 


The cam is so designed as to give a predetermined cycle of temperatures; 
a heating up period, constant temperature period, and cooling down 
period. The cam drive shaft is geared so that it will rotate 330 degrees 
per 24 hours, and a movement of 3»75 inches of the cam follower is re¬ 
quired to obtain the complete range of temperatures from 100 degrees F. 
to 200 degrees F. In order to obtain a resulting incline on the cam 
of less than 45 degrees, when operating at a maximum time-temperature 
gradient of 1 degree F. per minute, a diameter of 20 inches is required 
for the high lobe portion of the cam. Adjustments of the actual move¬ 
ment of the regulator valve are made on the cam follower push rod. This 
system allows for an accurate reproduction of any cycle. It also permits 
a wide range of temperature control because it Is merely necessary to 
substitute a different cam for a different cycle of operation. The 
principle is simple and relatively foolproof and allows for a complete 
cycle, without need of control by the operator. 

METHOD OF OPERATION AMD USE 

To put the kiln into operation the procedure is as follows? 

1. The kiln is loaded with specimens, spaced within in such a 
manner that there are equal distances between them. One speci¬ 
men 4 W x 8 11 cylinder or equivalent sisse may be placed on the 

suspended scale pan, when variations in weight with changing 
moisture conditions in the kiln are required. 

2. The wet and dry bulb hygrometer is checked for sufficient water 
in the reservoir, and the relative positions of the fermo- 
couples, and then placed as close to the middle of the kiln 
volume as possible. 













if. 




27 


3# If a record of specimen temperature is desired the Ihermocouple 
leads connected to thermocouples placed within the specimens 
are run through the hole provided in the roof, and connected to 
the H Brown” temperature recorder, and the Recorder put into 
operation# (The procedure of operation of the H Brown w Tempera¬ 
ture Recorder is completely and fully outlined in the ^Manual 
of Maintenance and Operation” supplied with the instrument.) 

4. The air and water supply valves are turned on and the fog 
nozzles checked to see that they are operating properly# (Due 
to chemicals in the domestic water supply the fog nozzles must 
he cleaned regularly for proper operation*) 

5* When the remote control mechanism is desired, the wooden cam 
shaped to the required cycle is placed in position and rotated 
until the mark n St art 11 is opposite the cam follower, and the 
spindle plate nut tightened sufficiently so that the cam will 
not slip when being rotated by the drive shaft# The cam drive 
motor is started, after ensuring that it is properly lubricated* 
6# The kiln door is closed tightly, and the main steam valve is 
turned on# (For the remote control cycle the manual by-pass 
valve must always be closed.) 

7* When a specimen is placed on the suspended scale pan, the seal© 
is balanced in such a manner that a range of plus or minus 150 
grams may be obtained, and so that periodic readings of the 
weight during the cycle of operation may be taken# 




28 


For a record of kiln atmosphere temperatures, 8 thermocouples 
placed at the eight comers of the kiln volume are connected in a 
"parallel hook-up", to the number one junction point of the "Brown 
temperature recorder. This gives an arithmetical average of the eight 
temperatures indicated by the thermocouples. The wet and dry bulb 
temperatures of the hygrometer are recorded by the numbers 2 and 3 
junction points of the "Brown" temperature recorder respectively. 

When a cam for a new design curing cycle is desired for the 
remote control mechanism, it can be manufactured by the following 
procedures 

On a suitable piece of thick plywood enscribe a 20" diameter 
circle, and mark off an angle of 30 degrees. The arc subtended by this 
angle is the unused portion of the cam, since the cam drive shaft turns 
a total of 330 degrees per 24 hours. The arc subtended by the 330 
degree angle is then divided into 24 segments, and numbered in a clock¬ 
wise direction. Each of these segments represent one hour of time. 

The positions or times at which changes in the time-temperature gradi¬ 
ents are required for the designed cycle, can then be marked on the 
circumference of the circle. The distance that the cam follower moves 
must be obtained by actual measurements when the kiln is operating at 
the specified temperatures. These distances are then plotted on the 
radial lines at their corresponding time-points on the cam. The curves 
joining the points are then plotted using principles of geometry. (For 
constant time-temperature gradients, the curve is a logarithematic 
spiral that can be approximated closely enough by arcs of a circle, pro¬ 
vided the time elapsed from point to point is not greater than 4 or 5 
hours. Where time elapsed is longer, 2 or more centres must be obtained 


• . ■ 








• j • id ",::' 


. ■ 










. 


« 


■ 








- - ( 

' - ' . . ' ■' r 


* 
















■ 


, .' l 




‘ 








■ . ■ ' i 

' 















29 


to approximate the logarithmatic spiral curve by use of arcs of 
circles.) The cam can then he cut and sanded to the desired curves, 
a diameter hole drilled in the centre and the cam put into operation. 


Conclusions 

The results of the investigation indicated that the steam 
curing atmosphere created was suitable for properly curing concrete, 
as evidenced by a comparison of the results from bare cured cylinders 
and cylinders cured in sealed molds. In all cases the bare cylinders 
directly exposed to the kiln atmosphere obtained strengths equal to 
or greater than the strengths obtained by the sealed molds. (See re¬ 
sults of cylinders D9 # DIO, Dll and D12 of each mix.) 

Other evidence of the production of a proper curing atmos¬ 
phere is provided by the results of record of changes of weights of 
cylinders suspended on the scale pan during curing treatment. Such 
records were taken at random during the investigation and results are 
given for three mixes. 

Mix No. ID - Tvoe I Curing Cycle - 115 degrees 3T. mix temperature 


Date 
Jan. 15 


Time 


Change in Weight fans) 


Jan. l6 


3.00 p.m. 

0.0 

3.30 

/9.5 

3M 

/13.5 

4.10 

/1Q.5 

4.30 

/ 8.3 

500 

/ 8.3 

8.00 a.m. 

/13.5 

8.4© 

/13.5 

9.15 

/ 8.3 






. 













" 

. 







30 


Mix No. ID - Cont’d 


Date 

Time 

Change in weight (gns) 

Jan. 1 6 

9 . 3 O a.m. 

/ 7.2 



11.00 

/ 2.0 



11.45 

- 5.0 

end of cycle 

Mix No. 

5D - Type I Curing Cycle - 

180 degrees F. mix temperature 

Date 

Time 

Change in weight (gns) 

Jan 22 

3.30 p*m* 

0.0 

start of cycle 


5.45 

/ 11.0 


J an * 23 

9»30 a.m. 

/ 18.0 



11.30 

/ 18.0 

end of cycle 

Mix No. 

7D - Tyne II Curing Cycle 

- 185 degrees F. mix temperature 

Date 

Time 

Change in weight (gns) 

Jan. 25 

3.20 p.ro. 

0.0 

start of cycle 


3.35 

ytu.o 



9.15 p.ro. 

/ 18.0 


Jan. 26 

8.03 a.m. 

/ 18.0 



10.00 

/ 18.0 



11.25 

/ 19.0 

end of cycle 


The remote control mechanism worked quite satisfactorily in 


all cases* Inherently the mechanical remote control required adjust¬ 
ments for each change of temperature range, and where such steam cycles 
would he employed in commercial kilns, an electronic control would he 
much more satisfactory* 

The results of this investigation indicated that a proper 
curing condition could he maintained hy the kiln for any desired 
temperature between 100 degrees F. and 200 degrees F. 










r 







* 



v. 




? 5 ' ' 


« 




. ■ 


a r 







31 


CHAPTER II 
ANCILLARY EQUIPMENT 

Laboratory Concrete Mixer 

Two types of concrete mixers were used in this investigation! 

- A l-g'" cubic foot 11 Lancaster” Mixer, type - SKG Serial No. 303# 
manufactured by Volta Manufacturing Company, Limited, Welland, Ontario. 
(See photo E.) This mixer is designed for laboratory work, and has an 
open circular removable type drum in which the concrete is mixed. 
Vertical mixing blades rotate in an opposite direction to the drum and 
can be raised vertically to allow removal of the drum. The mixer is 
powered by a 3 horse power Wagner Electric Motor and is operated at a 
speed of 30 revolutions per minute. 

- A 0.5 cubic foot mixer of the tilting drum type, which was de¬ 
signed and built at the University of Alberta as a scale model of the 
type of mixer used on the construction of the Grand Coulee Dam in 
Colorado. (See photo P.) The mixer is powered by a l/3 horse power 
motor and is operated at 20 revolutions per minute. 

load. Testing Machine 

The load testing machine used in the laboratory for compress¬ 
ive strengths is a 53 Baldwin Southwark Tat e-Emery 11 Testing Machine. (See 
photos G & H.) It is a hydraulic, reaction type, load testing machine 
of a maximum capacity of 200,000 pounds load. The loading is indicated 
by a pneumatic load indicator, having 3 scales as follows? 

0 - 10,000 pounds - low seal© 

0 - 50,000 pounds - medium scale 
0 -200,000 pounds - high scale 





..:ri ' i ; ■ 0 ; ; '-U ■ V ^ 


.... v •. / ! • . ■ ■■■> |J ir ■- ; 


:• 



. 

.. ■ 7 1 > ' ” ' .'■> : 

i ;.o \ ■: 

* - r r 1 ■ 


* ; . 

■ 

.. . ' ' ... ' . -V • • . ‘' ■ ■ ■' '■ 

• 

' 

‘ 1 ■ < i'\ :" - • j '‘ J C> u ii» t“; * f j-vfH M ■. a « t 


r v : ■ (* i 

, r 0'<0 , 

■ •. ‘.j ■ ■ ! ‘ •:■■■■ ■' \ -> 

' ' ~ ■■■ , . r -■ • 


■ ! «.. V 


e • 








32 




Photo S - Lancaster Mixer 














33 


This allows for a choice of loading range so that maximum de¬ 
flection of the needle, is obtained and thus greater accuracy in load 
values. The machine also has a load pacer which enables an adjustment 
of rate of loading to any desired number of pounds per second. 

Hot Water Tank 

This is a small electrically heated copper tank x 21” x 
18”, surrounded by a galvanized metal box 16” x 28 H x 25 ,J . The water 
is heated by means of 6 - 110 Yolt ”clamp-on”, resistance type strap 
heaters connected in series, to be used with a 220 Yolt outlet. The 
temperature was controlled by a liquid bulb-type thermostatic control 
switch. During use, however, this temperature regulator failed, and 
due to delay in replacement, a temperature sensitive liquid mercury ”J B 
tube circuit breaker was used in conjunction with a relay switch. The 
”J” tube was found to give much better controlled temperatures, but 
inherently required more attention by the operator, since it was necess¬ 
ary to replace the temperature sensitive liquid for a change of tempera¬ 
tures. The unit is at present still equipped with this type of tempera¬ 
ture control. (See photo J.) 

Moist Room 

The moist room available for moist curing is a cement plaster 
lined room 10® x 10* x 8®. Access is provided by a standard size door, 
and angle iron shelves provide storage space for cylinders. The 
temperature and humidity are maintained by regulation of hot and cold 
water lines leading to the vaporizer unit. 












' 







* 













" v;:i >• •. : v.'- A ; 


■ - o , - ' ■ ' 

, 

' t • .‘ ’ ♦ • 

nil * ■ 

, 

■ 








34 


















55 




Photo K - Molds and Miscellaneous Equipment 































3 6 


Concrete Cylinder Molds 

The concrete molds used were 4 M x 8 n metal cylinders, with a 
split wall, compressed together by a circular clamp, to make a tight 
joint. A metal base plate, sealed to the cylinder with molten sulphur, 
completed the units. (See photo K.) 

In addition sealed molds were made by using a top and bottom 
plate with the standard cylindrical mold. The unit was clamped together 
by 4 - — H bolts at each corner of the plate. A seal on each end was 
obtained by using a steam rubber gasket slightly larger than the mold. 
Sulphur was also used to seal the longitudinal split, after the mold 
was compressed together, filled with mortar, and sealed by the base 
plate and top plate. (See photo K.) 

Miscellaneous Equipment 

1. Standard slump cone and bullet shaped rod. 

2. Shovels. 

3. Trowels. 

4. Laboratory balance scales. 

5« Drying ovens. 

6. Various types of pans for weighing, drying, etc. 

7® Electrically heated sulphur melting pots and molds for 
forming caps on the test cylinders. 







/' i : p rZf/-. ■ 

• 

?• m; ■ r r r. : f 



j: ; .:,v 

s >; v : j . . r :\ ' ., \t ■ ■■ 't 


: ;.o* m .. ' , 

r 



• ' >v . ; ' : CIX " . ” 


a 


* 



\ 1 

- 




* r ■. ’ ■ . ; r ' ■ ■ /“■ 4 j' v '■ 


' ' ' 




37 


PART III 

HEATED MOLD CURING INVESTIGATION 


Introduction 

In concrete manufacturing plants, precasting of concrete units 
are widely used for such construction units as floor beams, joists, 
bridge floor sections, concrete pipe, conduits, etc., with either pre¬ 
stressed or normal reinforcement. 

Many such units are made in a “loaf 11 type mold, and when cured 
in a steam kiln would be heated on only 2 or 3 surfaces. (See sketch of 
a typical method of molding a probable section.) 



There would be temperature gradients within the concrete, as 
the interior parts of the molds can only be heated by conduction through 
the concrete. A considerable advantage may result when such molds are 
heated internally, by such means as hot water or steam pipes. 

There are several ways in which such a system could be used. 

1. The top of the concrete in the mold may be exposed to a humid 
atmosphere in a steam curing kiln, and the mold heated as the 
temperature is raised in the kiln. 


















p f _ ■ • j r ' .f - • -0. ■■ 

t v • • V- •. r ■' . •>. ■■ 

c t t ' e ; » ■ 



* f; ' " 3 .. '.lO 0 • v 3 3". 3 

■ ' '■ 

l 


■ ■ : 


; - Vvi‘ u:* J " * -1 33 

s 


0: ' ■ ' 

* : 


t 

CcrittVTr ; . yy" ' flO l r ^ ill «lfOW ©T* 

• { c: -y J 3 ■, X r ' 3o. 3.0 

, 





38 


2* The top of the concrete in the mold may he exposed to kiln at¬ 
mosphere and the mold maintained at a constant temperature, 
before and after placing of the concrete, and for duration of 
the curing period* 

3* The mold may be sealed tight so as to retain water present in 
the mix during the complete curing period, with temperature 
being slowly raised to a maximum value in the same type of 
cycle as a steam cure method* 

4. The molds may be sealed tight as in 3, but maintained at a con¬ 
stant temperature before and after molding the concrete, and 
for the duration of the curing period* 

The first method would present no major difficulties provid¬ 
ing there is a suitable curing atmosphere in the steam kiln® The vapor 
pressures of atmosphers in kiln and concrete, will be substantially the 
same if the mold heating does not raise the temperature of the concrete 
above the kiln temperature®^ 

The second method is obviously an impractical one unless 
mold temperatures are kept exceedingly low, since water would be re¬ 
moved from the concrete during the heating-up stages of the curing 
period by differences in vapor pressure resulting from a higher con¬ 
crete temperature® 

The third and fourth methods could have considerable merit, 
even when not used in conjunction with steam kilns, as the water pre¬ 
sent initially in the mix is prevented from being removed. 

This investigation was made to explore the effect of heat 
applied to sealed molds and was carried out in two parts, firstly 
using constant temperature, and secondly using the same temperature 


3 - 

Part I, page 8 



' 


© 7 ' ' ' ' ' 




» ■ ' ’ i ’ 

; ;■ :: ? X;.a£> V/7v 7 iW, yyx/x?':'; . 

* 7- ;.y, ■ : ■' 7 7 . :. 

: 'fit lax£?:-£€: 'r.-. i -'v iijxxje-y. o? ? v c 

* 

'33?/..; .• : : : J ' ' t X 7- ■ ' ' 

’' 

J 

o ' r.l 

77:c:.v 'J.'dC £3 ;,. iad" 

' 


:.r • ■xxax 

; ; /-^ 7 ,*y ':lv7 :<l o.: 7 xu'..: 

7 07 ns l ".' 7 7< y 

■ - v '. : 3 -r. : . 

• ... *.7 

•. r\* ' ■ • i ' ’ 

.7 

■; £ 1 ■ ■■ 

■■ ’ - 

7jr.. ; : . . 77, ; / f 737 { .7., r 0x X 1 . "'7 

' ■* -■ 7 

V,» 


• 

'3 7< th : t X 77X77 j'c; C-x! ?*"£,*?, B &X& 7577,' ■. :D £ i'X.X 

' • • ... g • ■ :: 

. e;ra ? tDi|C3Si mo : %x 

xxy v i-.; ;■ : -oittfx/x'x y-yi r)0,te>.T 

, 

X--0.:7 : 7l'Bi7 i.^XXOl'' AJ77 .33 ' :y 3 7',clj: 


.•• x '." fit} j: j .7 ■ ■ i .' jj 7 * 3,7 .; 3 a. r;. fN ■■ "■ vr» 

, ■ 

V hi r 0’t " ’ ’ '■ " - t - 




■j yv cx! ohfm &.w g-M* 


r£• 7• ! : : 7 : ; 

■. : ■:■ , '0 3 ■ ' 3 r ■ ' ■: '-7 1 ■: 7 l r ."'< ;; ' 

: 7 ' 7 ■'*. « 3; « : • ' : ’7 • ... : : : ■ 

•, ' ■„ 33 , 7X7 7e j 37. 3 t.? , . ^ 7;.. .’. : 1 • 


gradients that were used in steam curing cycles 




» 



40 


Procedure and. Layout of Investigation 

Section I - Constant Temperature Curing 

The first part was ‘begun in September arid continued until De¬ 
cember. It was designed as a preliminary to the actual steam curing 
investigation, to investigate the effect of concrete placed in preheated 
molds at various temperatures, as well as the effect of a waiting period 
before quickly heating the molds. 

To simplify the apparatus and procedure, it was decided to 
utilize the hot water tank as a heating medium. The concrete would be 
placed in the sealed molds, described in Part II, and the molds heated 
by immersing them in the water tank. Since the capacity of the hot 
water tank was three sealed molds, the procedure was as follows? 

Five cylinders were cast at each mix; three sealed molds to be 
cured by heat, two open top molds for control cylinders to be cured 
in moist air in the moist curing room. Of the sealed molds, one 
was placed immediately in the hot water, one after a two hour wait¬ 
ing period, and the final one after a four hour waiting period. The 
water was maintained at a constant temperature. Twenty-four hours 
after mixing, the concrete cylinders were tested for compressive 
strength, which required that they be removed from the water tank 
one hour before testing time. One control cylinder was tested at 
7 days and one tested at 28 days. 

The temperatures of the water was maintained at 130, 150, 1 65 * 
180, 190 and 200 degrees F. Four mixes were made and cured at each of 
these temperatures, except for 180 and 200 degrees F., where only two 
mixes were made. This represented 20 mixes, or 100 cylinders cast and 


tested 




' " ' ' ; •' ' v ' ' 

* 

,, ' < 

, 


- 





■ 

. 

f, « 

' 


. •. : ; ' M t": : : •" 

, ■ r 


. 

, ' tu 

( 

: « • • • 




» 


* 

; 




. '• • 


' 


The mix was designed for 0.60 water ratio and a 2 n slump. The 
aggregate used was M Elk Island Sand H and "O.K.” Construction Company 1 M 
gravel. Standard Exshaw Type I Portland Cement and ordinary domestic 
tap water were used. Moisture contents were obtained for sand and gravel 
immediately before mixing, so that the mix could be altered as required 
to obtain the 0.60 water cement ratio. Further moisture content samples 
were obtained from sand and gravel used in the mix, so that the actual 
water cement ratio could be computed. 

The 0.5 cubic foot, tilting drum type mixer described in Part 
II, page 31 was used, with an 8 minute mixing time, measured after the 
mixer was charged with all the materials. The mixing procedure was to 
charge the mixer with sand, gravel and cement, and dry mix for one min¬ 
ute before adding the mixing water. Immediately after discharging the 
mixer a slump test was made by means of a standard slump cone, using 
three lifts rodded 25 times each. The slump was recorded, as well as 
descriptions of rodability and worability. 

During each curing period a record of wafer temperature and 
one cylinder temperature were obtained by the use of thermocouples and 
the w Brown H temperature reccrd.er. 

Section II - Varying Temperature Curing 

The second part was carried out in conjunction with the steam 
curing investigation. Tv/o sealed molds were cast from the mix used in 
that investigation. They were subjected to the same waiting time and 
the same curing cycles. (See Procedure and layout of Investigation, 

Part IV.) After the steaming cycle, the molds were removed and concrete 
cylinders stored in the laboratory air for thirteen days before being 





. 


‘ ■ 










* 

' 


■ 




•« 


■ ' ' « 
■ 












■ 










. 

- 


, 














. 

- ■ 

• '• ■: ■' .t •> . «) . ■ ' 7 

■ • 






'• > 




■ 




' 

r ' ■ ‘X ' ; . ' ■ r ‘ • . 

, . - : ( " • ■ ' • -■ 








42 


tested for compressive strength. Moisture contents were obtained, for 
one cylinder of each pair, at the time of the compressive strength test. 

The mix, as described in Part IV - Aggregate Tests and the 
Design Mix, was for 0.50 water cement ratio with a 3" slump. The aggre¬ 
gates used were Elk Island Sand, Alberta Concrete Products l fl coarse 
aggregate, Alberta Concrete Products aggregate. Exshaw Type I Port¬ 
land Cement and normal domestic tap water were also used in the mix. 

The Lancaster type mixer was used with a five minute mixing time meas¬ 
ured after all materials of the mix were introduced, and a slump test 
taken immediately after completion of mixing time. 

This phase of the investigation was designed to compare re¬ 
sults with those of the constant temperature cure method, to compare 
results with those of the steam curing investigation, and possibly to 
indicate the effectiveness of the curing atmosphere in the kiln. For 
a complete description of procedure of mixing and curing, aggregate 
tests and design mixes see Part IV - Steam Curing Investigation. 

The compressive strength testing procedure was identical for 
both parts and was performed as follows $ 

The cylinders were capped with a sulphur and fire clay mixture to 
ensure square and level surfaces for uniform bearing pressure. A 
crossectional diameter was obtained by averaging two diameters measured 
at right angles to each other near the specimen midheighth. The load 
was applied at a constant rate of 20,000 pounds per minute. 

Aggregate Tests. Materials and Mix Designs 

The aggregates used in this investigation were obtained 
locally from stock piles in general use in the Edmonton area. 








. 



T , 



'i'S-j i I li : ;; iy... »■;■... 1 > ,-i r 

' 

" r; V 'i.-J ,r 

' 



' "f.j ■ J y J.~: : r.r 

3- >o 

. ! : 







5 Jj'w 

■' 'Ur 7 


1 l " ; > <>,l' ■ 




- 

■ • i 

z s;;;' - 

: 

' '1' 1* J ‘V . r 4 ; & -.'V; 


. - . ■ 




43 


Section I - Constant Temperature Curing 

The coarse aggregate used was that of O.E. Construction Com¬ 
pany with a grading up to 1 inch. The physical properties of the 
aggregate are given in Table I and the grading is given in Table II. 

The fine aggregate used was Elk Island pit run sand. The 
physical properties of the sand are given in Table I and the grading 
is given in Table III. 

The cement used was Standard Exshaw cement Type I as supplied 
by Gormans Limited, Edmonton, Alberta. 

Ordinary domestic tap water was used for mixing water. 

Section II - Varying Temperature Curing 

The aggregates, cement and mixing water used in mixes of Sec¬ 
tion II - Varying Temperature Heated Mold Curing, are completely de¬ 
scribed in Part IV - Aggregate Tests and Design Mixes. 




TABLE 

I 




Physical Properties 

of Aggregates 






Phvsical Properties 


Material 

Absorption 
(24 Hr) 

$ by weight 

Bulk 

Sp. Gr. 

Specific Gravity 

Apparent 

Sp. Gr. 

Bulk 

Sat. & Surf, dry 

Coarse agg, 

. 0.90 

2.51 

2.59 


2.54 

Elk Island 

1.0 

2.60 

2.66 


2.62 


Sand 














' 








■«-0 It 



4 * • 

' ■ " : ■ ■ • . ' :: 

■ ' 

- I t 

, ■ f ■' 

' • • 

' 

■» ' ' ■ ■ • • 1 4 ■ ■:"[ ■ • • ■ .,. 7 


■:; 









, 









r r,.. . ;; .,r: r,,N r 






■ r 






TABLE II 


Sieve Analysis of Coarse Aggregates 
(O.K. Construction 1 H Gravel) 


Sieve Size 


Wt. 

Retained Gms< 


$ 

Retained 


Cumulative $ 
Retained 


1 1/2" 

0 


0 

0 

1» 

418.0 


2.7 

2.7 

3/4" 

5375.0 


34.2 

36.9 

3/8" 

7610.0 


48.5 

85.4 

#4 

2040.0 


13.0 

98.4 

Pan 

270.0 


1.6 

100.0 

Total 

15713.0 


100.0 



TABLE III 




Sieve Analysis 

of Fine Aggregates 



(Elk Island Sand) 



Wt. 

Sieve Size Retained Gms. 

$ 

Retained 

Cumulative fo 
Retained 

A.S.T.M. 

Standards 

#4 

20.76 

3.8 

3.8 

0-5 

#8 

51.48 

9.5 

130 


m 

65.55 

12.0 

25.3 

20-55 

#28 

113.70 

21.1 

46.4 


m 

198.49 

36.6 

83 .O 

70-90 

#100 

66.8 5 

12.3 

950 

90-98 

Pan 

23.84 

4.7 

100.0 


Total 

531.75 

100.00 

267.1 


Fineness 

Modulus - 2.67 




















r 






* 


r, ■ 










45 


$ material passing #2C0 sieve - 2*8$. 

Organic impurities - #2 color - (good for most concrete work) 
Mix Designs 

Section I - Constant Temperature Heated Molds 

All mixes used in this portion of the investigation were 
designed for a water cement ratio of 0.60 (5i hags of cement per cubic 
yard.) The slump was designed for 2 M . 

Materials 

Cement - Exshaw Standard Portland Cement Type 1 
specific gravity 3 * 13 * 

Sand - Elk Island (4l$ of total aggregate) 

Specific gravity 2.62 - absorption - 1 . 0 $ 

Fineness Modulus 2.6? 

Gravel - O.K. Construction 

Specific gravity 2.54 - absorption - 0.9$ 

Maximum size l f! 

Cement content - 5j bags per cubic yard 
Slump - 2 inch 

Determination of Trial Mix Proportions 

Water content - 290 pounds per cubic yard 
Cement content - 290 Z 484 pounds per cubic yard 

o.6o 

■ 5*52 bags per cubic yard 

Absolute volume of water and cement - 291 / 484 - 

62.4 3.13 x 62.4 

4.68 / 2.48 = 7*15 cubic feet per cubic yard. 

Absolute volume of total aggregate ~ 27 - 7*15 * 19*85 cubic 


feet per cubic yard. 





: 




■ . . ■ x 

• . 




:: 







46 


Absolute volume of sand = 0.4l x 19*85 = 8.14 cubic feet per cubic yard 

Absolute volume of gravel = 19*85 - 8.l4 = 11.71 cubic feet per cubic 

yard 

Sand content = 8.l4 x 2.62 x 62.4 = 1290 pounds per cubic yard 
Gravel content = 11.?1 x 2.54 x 62.4 = 1850 pounds per cubic yard 

Total Mix Proportions 

290 pounds water; 484 pounds cement; 1290 pounds sand; 1850 pounds 
gravel: 

290 . 484 . 1290 . 1850 
484 * 484 ’ 484 * 484 

0.60 : 1 : 2.67 : 3*83 (by weight) 

Mix Pro-portions for 50 pound Batch 

cement - 6.20 pounds 

water - 3*^8 pounds 

sand - 16.63 pounds 
gravel - 23*91 pounds 

Section II - Varying Temperature Heated Molds 

For complete details of mix design used in this section see 
Part IV - Steam Curing Investigation - Aggregate Tests and Mix 
Designs. 

The mix used was for 7 bags of cement per cubic yard and a 
water cement ratio of 0.50 - with a 3 n slump. Alberta Concrete Products 
1 H max. size aggregate and maximum size aggregates, and Elk Island 
sand were used. 





- 


■ a. .7 . 





r 


'$ 

. *i 



, 



r ,r \ 








.-o j 



















4 ? 


Test Results and Discussions 

Section I - Constant Temperature Heated Molds 

The concrete mix data for 7 and 28 day moist cure compressive 
strength results are given in Table IV* The strength values are of a 
single cylinder tested from each mix. 

Figure 5 is a plot of water-cement ratio versus 7 day com¬ 
pressive strengths and 28 day compressive strengths. An examination 
of Table IV and Figure 5 shows that there is very poor correlation 
between the water-cement ratio and compressive strengths for 7 days 
and 28 days as well as between 7 and 28 day strengths. Two factors 
are believed responsible for such discrepancies. Firstly the small 
tilting drum mixer was constructed and operated in such a manner that 
material piled up on the mixing shelves or blades. This material con¬ 
sisted mainly of a cement and water mixture and thus tended to give 
variations in cement content from mix to mix. In addition, the mix¬ 
ing action is not believed vigorous enough. Secondly large variations 
in test values are believed due to improper technique in testing, in 
that a separate self-centering steel block was not used in conjunc¬ 
tion with the large ball and socket jointed bearing plat© incorporated 
in the crosshead of the testing machine. When the 4 x 8 standard test 
cylinders are tested without using a separate self-centering ball 
block, eccentricity in loading is possible, since considerable effort 
would be required to align the bearing block of the crosshead with 
the top of the test cylinder, due to the large diameter of the ball 
and socket fitting. The eccentricity is believed by the writer to 




' 




' 


:■ . 



- 



. 






. 





. 

• ' 

. r°'- 

* 

... 

■ ■ . ' ' \ ' ' . r - ...■'I , f • • v, 

•' < ' • - '■ • . /•:/ •: •: ;jv 

■ 


. 


' 

' 



■ 

. 


■ 

, 



; 





■ ■ ■ 

. 





48 


be the major factor causing the very poor correlation between water- 
cement ratio and compressive strengths. Unfortunately this effect 
was not realized until after the testing procedure was completed. 
Eowever in subsequent testing, a self-centering ball block was used 
on top of the test cjrlinders, and much better correlation in strength 
results was obtained. (See results Steam Cure Investigation Part IV). 

The 24 hour strength results of cylinders cured at various 
temperatures and preset periods are given in Table V. For each cur¬ 
ing temperature and. preset period the individual strength value, and 
its percentage of 7 and 28 day moist cure strengths, is given. The 
average strength expressed as a percentage of 7 and. 28 day moist cure 
strengths for each curing temperature and preset period is also given. 
In this manner variations in strengths due to variations in computed 
water-cement ratios is minimized. 

The average compressive strength versus curing temperature 
plot of the preset period of 0 hours, 2 hours and 4 hours is given in 
figure 6. 

Figure 7 is a plot of average compressive strength versus 
preset period time for the temperatures of 130 , 150 , 165 , 180 , 190 
and 200 degrees F. 

A comparison of 7 and 28 day moist cure results for both 
figures 6 and 7 show a variation due to variations in strengths as 
shown in figure 5* Generally both figures indicate an advantage in 
allowing a preset period before curing at higher tenpenatures. This 
is to be expected since the preset period allows the hydration process 
to begin before application of heat. Another general trend is also 




' J 




v 


1 ' : . 

(■; j r ;■ ;• ' ’ . 




r ■ '/ ; • 


,-3.,,,,, ,. : v;v- . ,, 


: \ 0 v . 




i 

■ ■" - 3 , 

fi.r • ■ ' 

r • 0 JU '"if j’ ■ 


■s v^xvo-r.r. 


0 


■ 




d v v* 






49 


indicated by the figures 6 and 7* in that for a given preset period 
the resulting strengths increase slightly for an increase in cure 
temperature up to about 185 degrees F., after which there is no gain 
in strengths. An interesting feature is indicated in figure 6, in 
that strengths for curing temperature of 165 degrees F. are consider¬ 
ably lower than other temperatures* While an accumulative effect of 
erroneous values could cause such a result, the writer believes that 
it does not explain the phenomenon, because it is doubtful tha,t four 
mixes would have such extremely low values, especially since two of 
the mixes were made 30 days after the other two* 

The rapid initial heating up and final cooling down when the 
sealed molds were immersed in the hot water bath at start of curing 
period and removed at the end of the period probably tended to exagger¬ 
ate the variation in strengths* 

Section II - Varying Temperature Heated Molds 

Table VI is an abbreviated table of concrete mix data for the 
sealed molds and compressive strength at 7 and 28 days for the moist 
cured control cylinders. For a more detailed table of mix data see 
Table XIII - Steam Cure Investigation, where also given is figure l4 
the water-cement ratio versus compressive strength plot for the mixes* 
Table VII gives the strength results of the sealed molds for 
3 curing cycles and 3 temperatures. The results are given as actual 
numerical values as well as percentages of 7 day and 28 day moist cure 
strengths. For a definition of the three curing cycles I, II and III 
see Part IV - Steam Curing Investigation. 



.0. imm- r - W 

■ ft ; v\ • t . ■ > ft’ 'ft- ft "ft ‘ . - Vi *ft) 

■ ' 


' 

■ ■ 

< t ■ 

• 

0 

' a/: ; 

' 

' ■ ■ r .. V,:: j : ' ft'.!;- 'ft;. > ft, ft ,'ft ft’ft’ ft ftftft '..'"’'ft' ft £ ftft 




: 

VO ■' ' ' 

ft '■; 1 , ■ • .■*'• r ■ ft" ■r; ' ' ft; ft-"'”' 'ftft -ft 

' 

• v ;; - f 


■ 

‘;; ■ - . * ' j ' ■ • ■' . ' ‘v. 0 

■ . ■ " ' " r 

ft " ft, . :ft ft .ft>ft7rftft-ft ftftftft 

. 

i-j :■ • V . ft v'r.yy 

. 

’ :> ■ ' ,ft .. ft ' ! :y : ft : : :v ; 

j.-. xor” 1 j '.o '3: ;■ ftft 




l’ V OXJ/’XX'-' S 1 fy.oTl-: . 

• ,. 4 ft. ; - , ft . ft, ■ "'.ft' ft ■ ' — • '■ 

"'tftj ft,oft softo ftt-ft.-,: 

' 

M -.ft ft); ftftlftftft ha r ftftft ft.J Ift 

' - ' , 


■ 4 



- E >o 11 , ' O ' 

■ 

' 


■ 


50 


Figure 8 is a plot of the l4 day compressive strengths (24 
hours steam and 13 days laboratory air) expressed as percentages of 
7 and 28 day moist cure strengths versus curing temperatures. These 
curves indicate that where steam treatment was followed by 13 days 
storage in laboratory air, the curing temperature and type of curing 
cycle employed, have relatively little effect on the resulting 
strengths except at the higher temperatures where slight decreases 
can be expected. This effect results from the fact that at the higher 
temperatures, adverse conditions affecting hydration, tend to reduce 
the subsequent potential strength gains during storage. 

Figures 8 and 9 give comparisons of Constant Temperature 
and Varying Temperature Heated Mold Curing conditions, expressed as 
percentages of 7 and. 28 day moist cure strengths respectively* 


} ■ ' . " : ' 4/ fc : ■ ' £ ■ 

:■ :ir •■;. ; f r . 7'"' ' . : ■ r -?•■■■ .:x:’ ' 

. ;; V •' > ; . ■ ■ •... ' ' r -■ ' ;h; , ;- : 'Z . : ■' 

-7:, j 7 72 7'..-.' sr-Tls/r 

... t 

■ . ■: v ' .. • ‘ . ' ,.h.- .•'■■■■■' r :: ;t ?; " ' ■ .*> / 1 ■ • t '■. - . ' / / ■'> ‘:*I r rJv. 

. . . . jd^V - '' 

' ■ . - ' •: ■■■ i 7/ . ■ ' . ' ' • ' ' i: p ■ V : " :° rr 

, - . 1 ■ " ,'"t: ;; r; 7;i ■?-. :h. : 0,f r :- 

hue o r£ 

■ , ■ r : 

» ' ■ ■ ■ 





CONCRETE MIX DATA - HEATED MOLDS - CONSTANT TEMPERATURE 


51 


cd • 

O 

o 

o 

XA 

o 

O 

CM 

00 

'A 

3 


00 

VO 

CM 

3 

CA 

oo o +> 

CM O CO 

CM 

CM 

ca 

CA 

CM 

• 






u 






P 






>»co 

CO 

O 

O 

o 

O 

O 

00 

OV 

00 

Ov 

3 

Pi 

a- a 

VA 

VO 

00 

VA 

ON 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

o 






o 






>> 






P 






*H 






rH 






•H 






■3 

ci> 

cS 

pR 

C±> 

pR 







p 






o 












& 

s • 

VA 

XA 

XA 

'A 

XA 

3 co 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

rH P 

co n 

ca 

CA 

CM 

CA 

CM 

o 

rH 

o 

XA 

CM 

CM 


VO 

00 

00 

O 

A- 

S5 

VO 

VO 

VO 

A- 

VO 


• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

p • 

<D CO 

ON 

00 

o 

00 

3 


rH 

CM 

(A 

CA 

CM 

Cd rH 

CA 

(A 

<A 

CA 

CA 

»H 






© • 

O 

o 

O 

O 

CM 

£> 6) 

VA 

CM 

CA 

CM 

CM 

CO rO 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

fj rH 
ci> 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


O 

o 

CO 

XA 

04 

• 

g “ 

8 

00 

CM 

A- 

CM 

A- 

CM 

CO 

04 

co p 

CO rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

• 






CO 


n|re 

h|w 

hJcvj 

HjW 

p Cd 
<D & 

xa 

XA 

'A 

XA 

a 

© 

O • 






CO 

r> 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

rH 

00 

3 

$ 

00 

3 

00 

3 

5 


CM 

A- 

CX) 

o 

CA 

0) +3 

P CO 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

CM 

cd cd 

P 

+3 

P 

P 

P 

P o 

O 

O 

o 

O 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

• 






o 

S3 

a 

3 

$ 

3 

<u 

a- 


s 


o 

O 

O 

XA 

O 

O 

O 

O 

VO 

3 

CA 

XA 

5 

O 

00 

O 

o- 

CM 

VO 

CA 

rH 

XA 

rH 

CM 

CA 

CM 

CA 

CM 

CA 

CM 

CA 


XA 

O 

o 

o 

XA 

O 

VA 

XA 

A- 

O 

CA 

a- 

i 

XA 

VO 

A- 

XA 

3 

XA 

XA 

Ov 

A- 

00 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

rH 

rH 

CM 


Ci> 

pR 

pR 

C!5 

ci> 


CtJ 

C!J 



XA 

XA 

XA 



XA 

XA 

XA 

A- 

CM 

CM 

XA 

XA 

A- 

• 

• 

• 

0 

• 

• 

• 

0 

(A 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

cn 


O 

o 

o 

3 

CM 

rH 

CM 

XA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

A- 

A- 

A- 

o 

00 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VQ 

vo 

A- 

VO 

• 

• 

» 

0 

• 

• 

• 

• 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 


3 

O 

O 

VA 

3 

CA 

CO 

O 

o 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 


VA 

O 

VA 

O 

CM 

O 

O 

O 

VA 

VO 

XA 

CM 

CA 

CM 

CM 

CM 

oo 

00 

CO 

00 

00 

00 

CO 

00 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

«H 

rH 

rH 


S8 

O 

CM 

O 

O 

O 

xa 

O 

A- 

A- 

00 

00 

A- 

A~ 

A- 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

«H 

rH 

rH 

rH 


Hire 

Hjre Hire 

Hre 

H(re 

Hire 

h|oj 

Hire 

xa 

xa 'A 

XA 

XA 

XA 

XA 

xa 


CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

S 

S 

3 

$ 

$ 

3 

3 

3 


3 

VA 

VO 

A- 

O 

rH 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CA 



P 

P 

P 

P 

P 

P 

> 

> 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 

o 

S3 

S3 


<3 

< 

< 


PQ 

PQ 

© 


00 

ON 

O 

rH 

rH 

CM 

CA 

3 

VA 












Mix Pro-portions per cuMc yards 


52 


cd • 

xi • 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

g Fh 

nj- 

00 

VA 

CM 

rH 

3 

CA 

o 

ao o -+-> 

iH 

NO 

VA 

VA 

CA 

*?v 

00 

NOW 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

• 

u 









-»-> 









CO 

O 

'A 

VA 

O 

VA 

O 

O 

O 

c6 * 

rH 

CA 

nj- 

rH 

-3- 

NO 

NO 

VA 

nb P4 

(V 

00 

O 

Hi- 

ON 

IV 

ON 

ON 

a 

rH 

rH 

CM 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

tv o 









o 



























•H 









rH 









•H 









r° 

a 

cb 

P* 

c!> 

PH 

PH 

c!> 

ci> 

c b 

H 









O 


















Pi • 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

O 

VA 


a co 

iv 

CM 

(V 

CM 

CM 

VA 

EV 

VA 

p P 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

« 

rH H 

CO 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

o 

CM 


CM 

CO 

00 


O 

o 


3 

CA 

CM 

CM 

3* 

rH 

rH 

Is' 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 


• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


O 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

p • 

© CD 

o\ 

VA 

o 

CM 

CM 

o 

n}- 


-p ,o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

rH 

On 

Cv3 rH 

(A 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CM 

CM 










rH 

0) • 

VA 

O 

'A 

O 

O 

VA 

VA 

O 

t> CO 

3 

VA 

-3- 

VA 

VA 

nt 

VA 

NO 

cd ,o 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

co 

SH i—i 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

nb • 

o 

O 

O 

SA¬ 

rH 

tv 

O 

O 

d SQ 

On 

On 

On 

GO 

ON 

GO 

ON 

ON 

CO rO 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CO rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

(0 

W) 

h!« 

h]oj 

h|cq 

H|02 

HfcY? 

HfW 

hJcm 

hJoj 

-*-> cd 

va 

V\ 

\A 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

P 

© 

S 

© • 

o to 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

rO 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

3 

rH 

nj- 

nfr 

nj- 

nfr 


Hi- 



ca 

O 

CA 

-P- 

NO 

IV 

o 

rH 

© 43 
-P © 


fH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

CM 

cd cd 

> 

> 

> 

> 

> 

> 

J> 

> 

p o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

O 

o 

O 

53 

53 

53 

$3 

53 

53 

53 

53 

• 

o 

53 

H 

01 

o 

CM 

O 

CA 

o 

h3~ 

o 

VA 

$ 

o 

IV 

§ 

•H 















vt 


























































































































































































































































































































































































TABLE V 


54 


STRENGTH RESULTS - HEATED MOLD - CONSTANT TEMPERATURE 

(24 Hour) 

CURE A - (0 hrs preset period) 



Specimen 

Comp. Str. 

i 7 Day 

$ 28 Day 

Temu. 

Number 

(usi) 

Cornu. Str. 

Cornu. Str. 

130° F. 

1C1 

1110 

65.0 

52.0 


2C1 

1380 

75.3 

51.5 


501 

1000 

51.5 

30.0 


6C1 

980 

55.6 

28.2 


Avenge 

1120 

61.8 

40.4 

150 0 f. 

3A1 

893 

56.5 

31.9 


4A1 

893 

52.8 

34.0 


3C1 

1230 

60.0 

48.8 


4C1 

1140 

80.8 

32.4 


Average 

101 ■; 

62.5 

36.8 

165° F. 

5A1 

975 

51.8 

29.5 


6ai 

1020 

64.3 

29.6 


7C1 

890 

45.4 

26.0 


8C1 

1250 

64.2 

32.9 


Average 

1035 

J56.4 

29.5 . 

180° F. 

7A1 

1380 

71.2 

59.0 


3A1 

940 

59.6 

34.0 


Average 

1160 

65.4 

46.5 

190° F. 

9A1 

1200 

86.0 

37.0 


10A1 

1730 

113-0 

67.0 


3B1 

1165 

60.0 

37.6 


4B1 

945 

53.5 

36.6 


Average 

1260 

78.1 

44.5 

200° F. 

1B1 

1330 

84.8 

39.7 


2B1 

1200 

58.6 

45.5 


Average 

1265 

71.7 

47.6 
































; 


; 












TAELS V - Cont *d 


55 


STRENGTH RESULTS - HEATED MOLD - CONSTANT TEMPERATURE 

(24 Hour) 


Cure B - (2 hrs preset period) 



Specimen 

Comp. Str. 

Tl Day " 

28 Day 

Temp. 

NumLer 

(psi) 

Comp. Str. 

Comp. Str. 

130° P. 

1C2 

1290 

75.5 

60.3 

2C2 

1110 

60.3 

41.5 


5C2 

1085 

55.8 

32.8 


602 

1255 

71.3 

36.0 


Average 

1185 .. 

65.8 

42.7 

150° p. 

3A2 

1080 

68.5 

38.6 


4A2 

1140 

67.4 

43.5 


3C2 

1320 

64.5 

51.8 


4C2 

1330 

94.3 

37.8 


Average 

1220 

. 73.7 

.-.42.9 

165° P. 

5A2 

995 

62.5 

30.3 


6A2 

1175 

74.0 

33.2 


702 

1080 

55.2 

31-5 


802 

1675 

86.0 

44.0 


Average 

1230 

69.4 

24.8 

180° E. 

7A2 

1300 

68.0 

55.6 


8A2 

1100 

70.0 

40.0 


Average 

1200 

69.0 

“47 .'g 

190° P. 

9A2 

1400 

100.0 

43.2 


10A2 

1293 

84.6 

48.2 


3B2 

1215 

62.3 

39-2 


4B2 

8?0 

49.3 

33.8 


Average 

1200 

74.0 

41.1 

200 c P. 

1B2 

1400 

88.3 

41.8 


2B2 

1220 

59.6 

46.2 


Average 

1310 

—23sS 

~~WV.o 



























56 


TABLE V - Coat'd 

STRENGTH RESULTS - HEATED MOLD - CONSTANT TEMPERATURE 

(24 Hour) 

CURE C - 4 hrs preset period 




Comp. Str. 

$ 7 Day 

i 28 Day 

Temp. 

Number 

(psi) 

Como. Str. 

Comp. Str. 

130 ° E. 

1C3 

1160 

67.8 

54.2 


2C3 

1290 

70.4 

48.2 


5C3 

1185 

61.0 

35-4 


6C3 

1280 

72.8 

36.8 


Average 

1230 . 

68.0 . . 

43.6 

150° F. 

3A3 

920 

58.3 

32.8 


4A3 

1200 

71.0 

45.8 


3C3 

1510 

74.0 

58.2 


403 

1325 

94.0 

37.6 


Average 

1240 

. 74.3 

43.6 

1 65° F. 

5A3 

1100 

58.5 

33.6 


6A3 

1050 

66.0 

29.5 


?C3 

980 

45.4 

26.0 


8 C 3 

1360 

69.7 

35.8 


Average 

1125 

59.9 

31.2 

180° F. 

7A3 

1720 

88.6 

73.5 


3A3 

1099 

69.9 

40.0 


Average 

. 1410 

79.2 

56.7 

190° F. 

9A3 

1240 

88.6 

38.3 


10A3 

1550 

101.0 

59.0 


3B3 

1100 

56.5 

35.5 


4B3 

1145 

65.0 

44.5 


Average 

. 1260 

77.8 

44.3 

200° F. 

1B3 

1300 

83.0 

38.8 


2B3 

1120 

54.8 

42.4 


Average 

i m 

68.4 

_ 

































































5 


< 












j 










□ 








i 

1 










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































58 


trr 




L W&ATfra Mold 
CoVSTA/VT 1 7kMPEfiATVft& * Ll 
JjUK/PS7V 3AT/Q/V 

CfiMrntssive Stk&umh *s Ajssbt/^a. 


o 


J&0 

/3P°£ Cure T<?/rt/>rrqfVre 
/So*f: Cura 7&/n/wwfure 
/£&*? Csre Ti^&rtfTure 




■ 






. 


trr 







































































































































































































































































































59 


TABLE 71 

CONCRETE MIX DATA - HEATED MOLD - VARYING TEMPERATURE 


(Abbreviated. Prom Table XII - Steam Cure Investigation) 


x - average of two cylinders 


Mix No. 

Date 

Cast 

w/c 

X 

Slump 

7 Day 

Comp. Str. 

X 

28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

ID 

Jan 15 

0.528 

3 H 

2195 

3730 

2D 

Jan 1? 

0.507 

3" 

2965 

4355 

3D 

Jan 18 

0.512 

3" 

2785 

4365 

4D 

Jan 19 

0.504 

2 3/4" 

3235 

4785 

5D 

Jan 22 

0.510 

3“ 

3015 

4245 

6D 

Jan 24 

0.505 

3 1/2" 

2705 

4085 

7D 

Jan 25 

0.510 

3" 

2625 

4270 

8D 

Jan 26 

0.495 

2 3/4" 

3360 

4855 

9D 

Jan 27 

0.500 

3" 

3380 

4915 

10D 

Feb 1 

0.498 

3" 

2750 

4900 

11D 

Feb 2 

0.495 

2 1/2" 

3165 

4995 

12D 

Feb 5 

0.500 

2 3/4" 

3225 

5210 

13D 

Feb ? 

0.498 

2 1/2" 

3210 

5200 

l4D 

Feb 8 

0.510 

2 3/4" 

3045 

4900 

15D 

Feb 9 

0.505 

2" 

3310 

4635 

16D 

Feb 12 

0.508 

2 1/2" 

3275 

4730 

17D 

Feb 14 

0.506 

1 3/4" 

3510 

5275 

18D 

Feb 15 

0.498 

2" 

3470 

4885 

19D 

Feb 16 

0.513 

2 1/4" 

3200 

4550 

20D 

Feb 19 

0.505 

2 l/4" 

3305 

4710 

21D 

Feb 21 

0.502 

2 1/2" 

3170 

4780 

2 2D 

Feb 28 

0.498 

2 1/4" 

3495 

5200 






; ; r , ; 
tm'Q 


m-r 


00 

&py. 

oo:;:£ 
u 0 


f 

















60 


TABLE VII 

STRENGTH RESULTS - HEATED MOLD - VARYING TEMPERATURE 

CURE METHOD D - (sealed molds - 24 hrs. steam & 13 days lab. air) 
(age at test - 14 days) 

CYCLE NO. I 


Max. 

Temp. 

Specimen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

% 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

$ 7 Day 
Comp. Str< 

135° r. 

22D11 

- 

4480 

86.5 

128.0 


22D12 

- 

4225 

81.2 

121.0 


3D11 

3.0 

3320 

76.0 

119.0 


3D12 

- 

3210 

73.5 

110.0 


Average 


3810 

79.3 

H9.5 

l60° P. 

2D11 

2.5 

3770 

86.5 

127.0 


2D12 

- 

3730 

85.5 

125.8 


4D11 

2.3 

3650 

76.2 

113.0 


4D12 

- 

3370 

70.5 

104.0 


Average 


3630 

79.7 

117.4 

185° F. 

5D11 

2.3 

3430 

81.8 

113.8 


5D12 

- 

3100 

73.2 

103.0 


6D11 

1.9 

3140 

76.8 

116.0 


6D12 

- 

2700 

66.1 

100.0 


Average 


3090 

74.5 

108.2 






















TABLE VII - Cont *d 


61 


STRENGTH RESULTS - HEATED MOLD - VARYING TEMPERATURE 
CURE METHOD D - Cont»d 


CYCLE II 


Max. 

Temp. 

Specimen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

$ 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

io 7 Day- 
Comp • Str, 

135° F. 

12D11 

2.6 

4100 

78.6 

127.1 


12D12 

- 

3870 

74.3 

120.0 


13D11 

2.6 

4l6o 

80.0 

133.5 


13D12 

- 

3820 

73.^ 

131.0 


Average 


3990 

76.6 

127.9 

l6o° F. 

9D11 

2.4 

4150 

84.4 

123.0 


9D12 

- 

4000 

8I.3. 

115.4 


21D11 

3.8 

4220 

88.3 

133.0 


21D12 

- 

4l6o 

87.O 

131.0 


Average 


4130 

85.2 

126.3 

185° 7. 

7D11 

2.4 

3330 

78.0 

126.8 


7D12 

- 

3100 

72.6 

118.0 


8D11 

2.3 

3620 

74.5 

107.8 


8D12 

- 

3600 

74.2 

107.0 


Average 


3390 

74.3 

114.6 


















TABLE VII - Cont'd 


62 


STRENGTH RESULTS - HEATED MOLD - VARYING TEMPERATURE 
CURE METHOD D - Cont*d 

CYCLE III 


Max. 

Temp* 

Specimen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

% 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

1o 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 

135° T. 

19D11 

3-0 

3900 

85.8 

107.0 


19D12 

- 

3920 

86.2 

144.6 


20D11 

3.6 

4l60 

88.4 

126.0 


20D12 

- 

4l4o 

88.0 

125.6 


Average 


4030 

87.I 

125.8 

160° T. 

17D11 

2.5 

4480 

83.2 

127.5 


17D12 

- 

4200 

79.7 

120.0 


18D11 

2.3 

4020 

82.5 

115.8 


18D12 

- 

4060 

83.O 

117.0 


Average 


4190 

82.1 

120.1 

185° F. 

14D11 

2.1 

3610 

73.7 

118.3 


14D12 

- 

3720 

75.8 

122.0 


15D11 

2.2 

4290 

92.6 

129.3 


15D12 

- 

4430 

96.0 

134.0 


Average 


4015 

84.0 

126.0 



























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































64 



(BWfiD J.9fOW A*<7/ 




rT 







... 

b. 



_ 



' 1. ; 


-I--4 



L— 

-4- 







































































































































































































































































































































































































































65 























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































66 


Summary of Conclusions 

1. Generally there is an advantage in allowing a preset period of 
2-6 hours "before subjecting the fresh concrete to a curing 
program* 

2* A slight increase in 24 hour strengths is obtained as the cur¬ 
ing temperature is increased until a temperature of about 180 
degrees F* is reached* 

3* The temperatures used during a curing program have little effect 
on the resulting strengths when a subsequent storage time of 13 
days is employed, except where temperatures are in the vicinity 
of 185 degrees F., where slight reductions in resulting strengths 
can be expected* 

4. Too rapid time-temperature gradients during curing probably have 
adverse effects on the resulting strengths* 




PART IV 


67 


STEAM CURING INVESTIGATION 


Introduction 

This investigation was designed to explore the effect of temper¬ 
ature on the compressive strength of concrete, during elevated temperature 
curing, by subjecting test cylinders to three different steam curing 
cycles, operating at three different maximum temperatures. 

The major factors affecting compressive strengths of concrete, 
when cured by elevated temperatures are: 

1. Water content in pounds per cubic yard, 

2, Cement content in pounds per cubic yard, 

3* Strength properties of materials used in the concrete mix, 

4, Time elapsed at time of test. 

5* Moisture content of concrete at the time of test. 

6. Type of Curing - which is affected by: 

(a) moisture conditions of curing atmosphere. 

(b) rate of temperature rise, maximum temperatures obtained 
during curing period and time elapsed before application 
of heat. 

In order to study the effect of temperature during curing, one 
must reduce the effect of all the other factors on the compressive 
strength to a minimum. 

The first two factors can be combined together and expressed as 
the water-cement ratio. It has been shown, and is a well known fact that 
H Eor plastic mixtures using sound and clean aggregates, the strength and 
other desirable properties of concrete, under given job conditions vary 
inversely as the net quantity of mixing water used per sack of cement H 



J 81 ' 




•t 5fs.tr* 




rsv'-iv 


f 0 ’ 


» i 




68 


Thus for a given water-cement ratio, given total quantity of cement per 
cubic yard, and given aggregates, the compressive strength will he constant 
when cured and tested under given constant conditions. If then concrete is 
produced with a water-cement ratio held constant, using materials each from 
a single source and Job lot, and cured under constant moisture conditions, 
hut with various time and temperature treatments, the resulting variations 
in compressive strengths can he assumed due to the conditions of time and 
temperature. 

This assumption is the basis of procedure and layout in this 
part of the investigation. 


6 

The Water-Cement Ratio - Compressive Strength Law, 
First enunciated by D. Abhrams. 



■ «: ' : . . ' ' ' • ' 7 

■ : t 

■ . n • •• • 

v : '' • ; \ : . ‘ ‘Xci ' • e \ : i , 

' ' ; '■ : ■ • ’ ' . • : ' ' ■ ' ‘ ' : ‘ ! x ■> 

r. ■ 7 ^ 7 . 7 i c7 <7 i; 7 <7.7-i 17 r o i*:u*v .Kv '‘Jivcf 


J j ■■ v ■■, 7 a^'.o o^B'i.r 77 i 5 7-7 ,t; 7 D ^71^777770 & o:.t 

* 











69 


Layout of Investigation 

In this investigation nine conditions of steam curing were used* 
They consisted of three basic types of curing cycles (as outlined in 
Fart II, page 10), each operated so that maximum temperatures 135. 160 
and 185 degrees F. respectively were obtained. A presetting or waiting 
period of approximately five hours after mixing was allowed before con¬ 
crete cylinders were subjected to the steam cure* An outline of each 
cycle and the three temperature ranges is given below* 

Cycle I 

135 Degrees F* - a constant time-temperature rise from 75 degrees 
to 135 degrees F. over a period of 1 hour - followed by a constant 
temperatxire of 135 degrees F* maintained, for 16 hours - a constant 
time-temperature drop from 135 degrees F* to 75 degrees F. over a 
period of 5 hours. 

l60 Degrees F* - a constant time-temperature rise from 75 degrees F. 
to 160 degrees F. over a period of 1-J hours - followed by a constant 
temperature of 160 degrees F* maintained for 15 hours - a constant 
time-temperature drop from l 60 degrees F* to 75 degrees F. over a 
period of hours. 

185 Degrees F* - a constant time-temperature rise from 75 degrees F* 
to 185 degrees F. over a period of 2 hours - followed by a constant 
temperature of 185 degrees F. maintained for 13 hours - a constant 
time-temperature drop from 185 degrees F. to 75 degrees F. over a 
period of 7 hours. 

Cycle II 

135 Degrees F* - a constant time-temperature rise from 75 degrees F* 


to 135 degrees F. over a period of 11 hours - followed by a constant 











' . ;p '■ ■ P ■ i; 

i ■ 


















■ 



* 


■ "tr : ' 

' . - ;; Q. f ‘( f 


- 






70 


time-temperature drop from 135 degrees F. to 75 degrees F. over a period 
of 11 hours. 

l60 Degrees F. - a constant time-temperature rise from 75 degrees F. to 

160 degrees F. over a period of 11 hours - followed by a constant time- 

temperature drop from 160 degrees F. to 75 degrees F. over a period of 
11 hours. 

185 Degrees F. - a constant time-temperature rise from 75 degrees F. to 

185 degrees F. over a period of 12 hours - followed by a constant time- 

temperature drop from 185 degrees F. to 75 degrees F. over a period of 
10 hours. 

Cycle III 

135 Degrees F. - a constant time-temperature rise from 75 degrees F. to 
115 degrees F. over a period of 1 hour - followed by a constant time- 

temperature rise from 115 degrees F. to 135 degrees F. over a period of 

17f- hours - followed by a constant time-temperature drop from 135 de¬ 
grees F. to 75 degrees F. over a period of 3i hours. 

l 60 Degrees F. - a constant time-temperature rise from 75 degrees F. to 
140 degrees F. over a period of 1 hour, 10 minutes - followed by a con¬ 
stant time-temperature rise from 140 degrees F. to 160 degrees F. over 
a period of 15j hours - followed by a constant time-temperature drop 
from 160 degrees F. to 75 degrees F. over a period of 5 hou]% 40 minutes. 
185 Degrees F. - a constant time-temperature rise from 75 degrees F. to 
165 degrees F. over a period of !•§• hours - followed by a constant time- 

temperature rise from 165 degrees F. to 185 degrees F. over a. period of 

14 hours - followed by a constant time-temperature drop from 185 degrees 
F. to 75 degrees F. over a period of 7 hours. 









r 0'.:' ‘.‘V , v' /. ■ .-‘T 

: , • “ '■ v ■ ■ 










o. 







t ' 









17 tr 


, 









71 


Each cycle was operated at a condition of 100 percent relative 
humidity and atmospheric pressure. 

Figures 11, 12 and 13» page 82, give the temperature versus time 
plots for each of the cycles and temperatures. The graphs were pre¬ 
pared from values obtained from the temperature record ma.de for each 
curing treatment, with the ,, Brown n temperature recorder. 

Hereafter in the tables, charts and discussions, the cycles 
will be referred to merely as Cycle I, Cycle II and Cycle III and their 
maximum temperatures. 

Two mixes of 12 cylinders each were made for each of the 
cycles and the three maximum temperatures. This represented a total 
of 18 mixes or 2l6 cylinders tested. Of each mix 4 cylinders were 
used for control (i.e. subjected to moist curing only), 2 tested at 7 
days and 2 tested at 23 days for compressive strengths. 

The 8 remaining cylinders of each mix were steam cured and 
tested in the following manners 2 tested at 29 hours (i.e. immediately 
after steam treatment); 2 stored in moist curing room for 6 days and 
then stored in laboratory air for 13 days and tested at 14 days; 2 
stored in laboratory air for 13 days and tested at 14 days; 2 which 
were cured in sealed molds, stored in laboratory air for 13 days and 
tested at l4 days (these cylinders and results were used for the Heated 
Mold Investigation, Part III - Section II - Varying Temperature Heated 
Molds, as well as this investigation). 

The concrete used was of one design mix of 0.5 water-cement 
ratio and each mix was altered as required by moisture condition of 
the materials to obtain a mix as close tc the 0.5 water-cement ratio 


as possible 



ox:) t wob .1 




-■ J 


o 






\r 1 - y l 






j 


1x1 ..)•//••.■Jr 






- J • . ■ ' br " : . . v; o fr• 



' 


&e 




o.s© 


O',;' 


3 i : 


* : 









Procedure 


72 


Handling and Preparation of Materials 

The aggregates used in the mixes were stored in bins of 2 
cubic yard capacity and fairly large changes in moisture contents were 
allowed. To overcome this the aggregates were brought out of tne bins 
in 500 pound lots. Sufficient water was added to obtain a moisture 
content of 4 to 5 percent and aggregates were hand mixed thoroughly 
and placed in steel containers with tight fitting lids. Moisture con¬ 
tent records of the aggregates were kept daily, and amount required 
for each mix taken from the containers immediately before mixing. In 
this way the moisture contents could be determined quite accurately 
and allowed good control of the concrete mix. 

Batching 

Bach mix was made in the morning at approximately 9*00 to 
10.00 a.m. Materials required for the mix were computed and weighed 
to the nearest ounce. The mixer used was the Lancaster* 1 described on 
page 32, and 4 minute mixing time was allowed. The method of charging 
the mixer was to add sand, gravel and cement and dry mix for 1 minute 
before adding the mixing water. A slump test was made using the stand¬ 
ard A.S.T.M. slump cone immediately after completion of mixing time, 
and observations of rodability and workability of the mix v/ere made at 
the same time. 

Molding of Cylinders 

The 4 H x 8 n steel cylinder molds described on page 36 were 
used - 10 of them were open topped and 2 were sealed. The concrete was 
molded in 3 layers, rodded 16 times each with a 3/8 diameter bullet¬ 


nosed rod. 











































73 


Curing: of Cylinders 

After molding, the cylinders were left in the laboratory air 
for a presetting period of 5 hours. At the end of this time, the 4 
control cylinders were removed to the moist room. The remaining 6 open 
top molds were removed from the cylinders, and the bare cylinders 
placed in the steam kiln along with the 2 sealed molds preparatory to 
steam curing. The steam kiln was then put into operation, as de¬ 
scribed on page 25* using the proper curing cycle. At the completion 
of the steam curing cycle, the cylinders were removed from the cabinet 
and given appropriate indentification numbers. The cylinders not 
tested immediately were stored in appropriate places until the time 
to be tested. 

Testing of Cylinders 

The test procedure was identical for each cylinder as follows? 
They were capped with sulphur and fire clay and tested in the 
Baldwin-Southwark Emery-Tate testing machine. The loading rate 
was 20,000 pounds per minute. 

An auxiliary ball block was used between the loading plate and 
cylinder top to remove any eccentricity in loading. This was found 
necessary in order to obtain consistent strength values, since the 
diameter of the ball and socket of the regulator loading plate was 
too large to allow free movement under the ultimate load values of the 
cylinders. 

Moisture content of one cylinder of each pair cured under 
identical conditions was taken immediately after the compression test® 






. j' • « 

. r > • 

.. : ' r 

, • 

■ • >; : £ ;k h ' & , : 

S * 

■' • .7 : ' ■ . ■ ■ ■ ' . V . ‘ '■ \ - ‘ ' v: ■ "" ■, r 1 . , .7 . . \ ■ • 







" 

V 

..... ■ £ , ti:.f - .■ . 

.' ■ ■ 

. £ • ' 

*. s- 7 -'; r,c:o ... r -.to :r ■/I ■ 'i ; (<$' Jo ::iMd v>.® »k:h 7 ,,.f j*is#'' sjiifrt "i;o ia;j\- : 

. . ■ ' ml 


■ ','7 7,17 ". V: j 7■ Ti.7 0 .m V,5.0H 

' 




74 


Aggregate Tests and Materials 

The aggregates used in this investigation were obtained 
locally from stock piles in general use in the Edmonton area. 

Two coarse aggregates were used in the mix, namely Alberta 
Concrete Products 1 H max, size gravel and Alberta Concrete Products 
max. size gravel. The physical properties of these aggregates are 
given in Table 71II and the gradings of each are given in Tables IX 
and X. 

The fine aggregate used was Elk Island pit-run sand. The 
physical properties of the sand are given in Table 71II and the grad¬ 
ing is given in Table XI. 

The cement used was Standard Exshaw Cement Type I as supp¬ 
lied by Gormans Limited, Edmonton, Alberta- 

Ordinary domestic tap water was used for mixing the samples® 












: 

. 

. c :<V r> 

" :/ • ' . ' 1 ' ' „ •• • 

. * 

: 




^ 1 .- 2 *.>/. •£: . -1 l ;'i . r ,r I . r> ? r. •. '";t V ^'::v 

I1■.. '-.I - ■ • • ;• - r - ; 




; - I 1 t 






- T ' 


;;,a v •\ >v...r.- 


■s 








75 


TABLE VIII 

Physical Properties of Aggregates 


Material 


Physical Properties 


Absorption 
(24 Hr) 

$ by Weight 


Specific Gravity 

Bulk Apparent Bulk 

Sp. G-r. Sp. Gr. Sat. & Surf, dry 


1 ” agg. 

1.0 

2.60 

2.65 

2.62 

i" 

1-3 

2.61 

2.70 

2.65 

Elk Island 

1.0 

2.59 

2.66 

2.62 


Sand 


TABLE IX 

Sieve Analysis of Coarse Aggregates 
(Alberta Concrete Products l n Agg.) 


Sieve Size 

Wt. 

Retained (lbs.) 

$ 

Retained 

Cumulat ive 
/£ Retained 

2 " 

0 

0 

0 

1 1 / 2 " 

0 

0 

0 

1 " 

3.81 

9-1 

9.1 

3/4" 

13-81 

33-0 

42.1 

1 / 2 " 

16.87 

40.4 

82.5 

3/8" 

3.81 

9.1 

91.6 

#4 

3.12 

7.5 

99.1 

Pen 

0.37 

0.9 

100.0 


Total 


41.79 


100.0 



















76 


TABLE X 

Sieve Analysis of Coarse Aggregates 
(Alberta Concrete Products J- w Agg.) 


Leve Size 

Wt. 

Retained (lbs.) 

2 

Retained 

Cumulative % 
Retained 

i * 

0 

0 

0 

l/2" 

1.74 

6.1 

6.1 

3/8“ 

5.35 

18.8 

24.9 

#4 

15.40 

54.0 

78.9 

#8 

1.68 

5.9 

84.8 

m 

0.?1 

2.5 

37-3 

#28 

0.57 

2.0 

89.3 

#48 

1.85 

6.5 

95.8 

#100 

0.56 

2.1 

97.9 

Pan 

0.56 

2.1 

100.0 


Total 


28.44 


100.0 












77 


TABLE XI 



Sieve Analysis 

of Pine Aggregates 




(Elk Island Sand) 




Wt. 

* 

Cumulative $ 

A.S.T.M. 

eve Size 

Retained Gms. Retained 

Retained 

Standards 

# 

31.1 

6.2 

6.2 

0-5 

# 8 

41.2 

8.4 

14. 6 


# 14 

83-5 

16.7 

31.3 

20-55 

# 28 

109.5 

22.0 

53.3 


# 48 

202.5 

40.5 

93.3 

70-90 

#100 

23.5 

4.7 

98.5 

90-98 

Pan 

8.2 

1.6 

100.1 


Total 

499.5 

100.0 

297.7 



Fineness Modulus 2.93 


$ Material Passing #200 Sieve s 1.1$ 


Organic Impurities - #2 color - (good for most concrete work) 














r 


(hs& 













r 




( 











78 


Mix Designs 

All mixes used in this investigation were designed for 0*50 
water-cement ratio - (7 bags of cement per cubic yard) with a slump 
of 3 H . 

Materials 

Cement - Exshaw Standard Portland Cement Type I 
Specific gravity 3 .13 
Sand - Elk Island 

Specific gravity 2.62 - absorption 1*0$ 

Fineness modulus 2.98 

Gravel - 1" max, size - Alberta Concrete Products 
Specific gravity 2*62 - absorption 1.0$ 
max. size - Alberta Concrete Products 
Specific gravity 2.65 - absorption 1.3$ 

Cement 

Content- 7 bags per cubic yard 
Slump - 3 inch 

Determination of Trial Mix Proportions 

In order to obtain the best aggregate grading without re¬ 
sieving the l 11 aggregate, -J-” aggregate and sand were combined in 
proportions of 40$, 20$ and 40$ respectively, 
water content - 305 pounds per cubic yard 
cement content - 221 Z 610 pounds per cubic yard 

0.5 

- 6.97 bags per cubic yard 

absolute volume of water and cement - 

305 / 610 - 4.8 9 / 3J4-r 8.03 cubic feet per cubic yard 

62.4 3.13 x 62.4 

absolute volume of total aggregates - 27 - 8.03 = 18*97 cubic feet 

per cubic yard 










: ; ■; v:sz\ oi' : 0 *v ':.v *V : -' \) ~ jfii-x 


# 15 


I :.t ,;T w.*avo*..' o-<. :'>i\-zO - jnsxxoQ 

■ ’ • 

», r it( ' j '»o ; ;:. / , ■ ■■ ' •' 

•• j . 0 ■" - ■ f < r - r 

: * r r>■ 


jyz. 




/ 


.. : .. ■ ... 

i I : f. ; » ■ 

• -■ ■'? . '*■;. v r ;; t..., ! ^ 

. r.:.-; 

jy-WZ 'i.cSyo :: :; 07 tastfaoo T9J.">V 

h v r>.Y, 'x;,).' 01. j z .- SaecYoi) Jnsw&s 

* 

■“* ■. X, . 0 :.; V<n "f j■ x":;r r ,-7 -vj? J>, 

•«.. 'r„ ,, ,4 . 

' .. 

’* ~ ' 7 • r ..'J v ' . 

!vc..y<r, oxOjso *recr 





79 

absolute -volume of sand - 0.40 x 18*97 = 7«57 cubic feet per cubic yard 

absolute volume of 1 H aggregate - 0.40 x 18*97 - 7*60 cubic feet per 

cubic yard 

absolute volume of -J- n aggregate - 0*20 x 18*97 = 3*80 cubic feet per 

cubic yard 

Sand content - 7*57 x 2.62 x 62.4 = 1236 pounds 
1 M aggregate content - 7*57 x 2.62 x 62.4 = 1240.pounds 
aggregate content - 3*30 x 2.65 x 62.4 = 628 pounds 

Total Mix Pronertions 

305 pounds water; 610 pounds cement; 1236 pounds sand; 1240 pounds l n 

aggregate; 628 pounds aggregate. 

305 ; 610 : 1236 ; 1240 ; 628 
610 610 610 610 610 

0.50 ; 1 S 2.02 5 2.04 1 1.03 







80 


Explanation of Tables and Fibres 

Figures 11, 12 and 13 are plots of temperature versus time 
for each of the three cycles, and the three maximum curing temperatures 
used. Also shown are corresponding cylinder temperatures for a sealed 
mold cylinder and a bare cylinder. The curves were plotted from data 
obtained from the "Brown" Temperature Recorder. 

The concrete mix data and. averages of 7 and 28 day moist 
cured control strengths are given in Table XII for each mix. The 
strengths listed are averages of two cylinders. Table XIII gives the 
detailed results for the individual control cylinders tested. 

Figure 14 is the water-cement ratio versus average moist 
cured control strengths plot for each mix. 

The strength results of Steam Curing for the three curing 
cycles and. the four curing procedures are given in Tables XIV, XV, 

XVI and XVII. In all cases the strengths are expressed as a percent¬ 
age of the corresponding average 7 and 28 day control strengths, as 
well as the average for each cycle and curing method. 

Figures 15* lo, 17* 18 and 19 are obtained from values given 
in tbe above tables and are self-expiatory. 

Figures 20 and 21 give compressive strengths versus time 
curves as compared to a standard moist cure, for each of the three 
cycles and the three tmperatures. The compressive strengths are 
shown as a percentage of the corresponding 28 day moist cured control 
strength. The standard compressive strength curve is obtained by 
averaging the 7 day moist cured strengths expressed as a percentage 
of the corresponding 28 day moist cured strengths* 







S' 


id* do 




•i &' 














,i J • iy, iV'X 

















S' ■”;' 




■■ • / • 





81 


Table XVIII lists the results of four mixes which for various 
reasons (as listed in the table) were not included in the previous 
tables and figures. 

Figure 22 is a plot of the kiln temperature versus time for 
two mixes (included in Table XVIII) which were cured under extreme 
temperature variations resulting from inadvertant operation of the kiln. 














B.O0 &,00 /O'OO //.0O /ZOO 


































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































83 










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































84 













































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































X 



. 

P 












+a 
© to 
p 

O 

VA 

VA 

VA 

va 

VA 

O 

VA 

VA 

O 


• 

CA 

VA 

VO 

00 

d 

00 

A 

VA 

rH 

O 


CD P 4 

A 

CA 

CA 

A 

CM 

O 

CM 

00 

Ov 

On 


k w e 

CA 

-d 

d 

-d 

d 

-d 

d 

-d 

-d 

d 


0 












0 












. 












p 












>i -H 












© to 












p 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

O 

0 

O 


• 

ov 

VO 

€0 

(A 

1 — 1 

O 

CM 

VO 

00 

VA 


H N ft 

rH 

Ov 

A 

CM 

O 

A 

VO 

CA 

CA 

A 


6 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CM 


O 












O 

as 



as 


as 


as 




P 

CM 





CM 


-d- 
















§ 

rH 



CA 


rH 


CA 




rH 


s 

25 


— 


s 


s 

t: 


to 

(A 

CA 

CA 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CM 

CA 

CA 



00 

A 

CM 


O 

VA 

O 

VA 

O 

00 


O 

CM 

O 

rH 

rH 

O 

rH 


O 




'A 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 


J3 

• 

• 

• 

« 

. 

• 

. 

• 

. 

. 



O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 


P • 

© (0 

CO 

O 

CA 

A 

CM 

A 

rH 

rH 

vO 

CA 


4-> ,0 

O 

rH 

rH 

O 

rH 

O 

rH 

O 

O 

O 


I- 1 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

'Ki 












u 












© 













0) • 


00 

O 

rH 

O 

VA 

-d 

VO 

00 

VA 


N CO 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CA 

VA 

CM 

CA 

CM 

W 

0 

•H rO 

d 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

•H 

10 rH 

VO 










,0 











P 

«H as 











O 

© h}W 











P 

© 











© 

p © 











P 

ON* 












♦H CO 

A 

O 

VA 

O 

S 

O 

00 

VA 

VA 

VA 

CO 

03 ,0 

CA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VO 

.d 

-d 

-d 

d 

d 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

0 

as 

rH 

sH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

•iH 

rH 























P 












O 












P 












O 

• 











u 

'CJ W 

CM 

O 

VA 

O 

O 

* 


VA 

va 

O 

Ph 

d rO 

-d 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

va 


3 |H 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

H 

CO 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

jH 

rH 

1 —i 

rH 

rH 













s 

CO 

VO 











ftp 

M 

VO 











d ■“ 

VO 

A 

A* 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 


© 

a 

© • 

0 to 

d 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 


rO 

00 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

iH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

VA 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 




A 

00 

ON 

CM 

d 

VA 

vo 

On 

rH 



VA 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 



© -H 
+» CO 

rH 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

*0 


© © 

d 

3 

© 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

© 


P 0 

4 

*“3 

•-3 



*-3 

•-3 

*-3 

£> 



K • 

•H O 

p 

p 

P 

p 

p 

P 

p 

P 

p 

P 


S 525 

j H 

CM 

CA 

-d- 

VA 

VO 

A 

00 

ON 

rH 


85 


11D Feb 2 610 7 1242 1250 62? 302 0.495 2 l/2" 3165 4995 






?- ? 

• • '■ : Oi c\. I 



i; ' \ 


I 













f 


i 










86 


# 

U 


© 


p 

• 

0 

O 

O 

VA 

O 

VA 

VA 

0 

O 

O 

d 


CO Ph 

rH 

O 

O 

CA 

CA 

A- 

8 

VA 

1 —1 

CO 

•H 


HNS 

CM 

CM 

ON 

VO 

A- 

CM 

VA 

A- 

IV 

rH 


O 

vn 

VA 

4 

4 

4 

VA 

4 

4 

-4 

4 

> 


O 











0 













0 













> 













+-> 


• 













P 











'h 


4-> 











0 


CO 











m 


& . 

VA 

O 

VA 

O 

VA 

O 

O 

O 

VA 

0 


a 


p p 

CM 

rH 

3 

rH 

£V 

rH 

A- 

O 

O 

IV 



6 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CM 

VA 

1a 

CM 

CA 

rH 

u 


HNO 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

(A 

CA 

CA 

<D 


O 











> 













© 













1 



_ 

s 

s 


s 

s 


s 


s 

X 


P 

,4 

CM 

4 


CM 

-3- 


4 

4 

CM 



& 













3 

CA 

•H 

CA 


rH 

CA 


rH 

rH 

rH 

{25 


rH 




X 



ss 




O 


CO 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

n 













EH 


























Ct> 













H 

PH 


O 

O 

CO 

O 

VA 

CO 

VO 

CO 

CA 

VA 

CM 


CO 



O 

ON 

«H 

O 

O 

O 

OV 

rH 

O 

O 



Is 

VA 

4 

VA 

VA 

VA 

VA 

4 

va 

VA 

VA 




• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 




O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

hH 













Tj 















ryi 


p • 











+J 

On 


© w 

VA 

O 

CM 

tv 

O 

ON 

CA 

CA 

c- 

vO 

d 

k-\ 


+> »Q 

O 

rH 

O 

rH 

O 

O 

rH 

0 

O 

c 

0 


d rH 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

c 

5 













►H 

1 EH 

•d 












IH 

1 CO 

p 













1 1 

I 

Z 

® 

to 











££ 

•H • 


O 

IV 

VA 

A» 

CO 

O 

V- 

CO 

CM 


1 <i 

O 

K 0) 


CA 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CM 

CM 

CM 

« 

1 eh 

•H 

p 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

«! 

<*5 

4 

s» rH 

VO 










EH 

1 P 

P 

rH rij« 












O 

© 













> 











»H 

P 

© © 











s 

<D 

P N 












P 

Ct> *H • 

CM 

VO 

CM 

VO 

$ 

co 

Ov 

CM 

S 

co 



W © 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

-3” 

•4- 

-4 

E-i 

05 


CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

S 

CJ 

O 

= rH 
rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

O 

♦H 












Si 













O 

p 












O 

0 













p 













0 

• 












p 

«d © 

VA 

O 

O 

O 

* 

VA 

O 

\o 

VA 

*> 


P 


CA 

4 

4 

4 

CA 

4 

CA 

CA 



R5 rH 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 


M 

CO 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


•H 













s 

© 

KA 













si 

IV 

IV 

A- 

A- 

A~ 

A- 

IV 

A** 

A» 

fV 



© 

S 

© • 

O © 

O 

O 

O 

0 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 



& 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

sH 

rH 

rH 

rH 



rH 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

vO 

VO 



© H-> 

VA 


CO 

Ov 

CM 

4 

*A 

VO 

Ov 

fH 



+> m 
cfi © 

P O 





rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

uH 

CM 



& 

& 

& 

rO 

rQ 

& 

& 

& 

rO 

r© 



© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 











pq 





K • 

•H O 

9 

R 

§ 

ft 

ft 

& 

ft 

§ 

§ 

P 

rH 



S Si 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

fH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

CM 


22 D FelD 28 6 lO 7 1234 1246 633 304 0.4Q8 2 1 / 4 " 3495 5200 






I 








TABLE XIII 


87 


STRENGTH RESULTS FOR MOIST CURE CONTROL - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 


Mix No 

. w/c 

7 Day 
Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

28 Day ? 

Comp. Str. (Dev.) 
(psi) x 10-^ 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

1 D 

0.528 

2220 

4.8 

3700 

1000.0 

6.2 



2170 

- 

3760 

885.0 

- 

2 D 

0.507 

2770 

6.3 

4390 

96.1 

14.8 



3160 

- 

4320 

144.4 

- 

3 D 

0.512 

2790 

6.3 

4200 

250.0 

6.3 



2780 

- 

4530 

289 .O 

- 

4 D 

0.504 

3420 

7.8 

4740 

1.6 

6.5 



3050 

- 

4830 

16.9 

- 

5 D 

0.510 

3110 

6.4 

4120 

336.4 

3.9 



2920 

- 

4370 

108.9 


6 D 

0.505 

2700 

6.0 

4060 

409.6 

8.1 



2710 

- 

4110 

348.1 

- 

7 D 

0.510 

2560 

5.5 

4150 

302.5 

6.9 



2690 

- 

4390 

96.1 

- 

8 D 

0.495 

3440 

6.7 

4960 

67.6 

7.3 



3300 

- 

4750 

2.5 

- 

9 D 

0.500 

3300 

6.0 

4940 

57.6 

7.3 



3460 

- 

4890 

36.1 

- 

10D 

0.498 

2740 

7.1 

5260 

313.6 

8.0 



2765 

- 

4540 

25.6 

- 

11D 

0.495 

3180 

7.6 

5360 

115.6 

5.9 



3150 

- 

4630 

4.9 


12D 

0.500 

3220 

6.3 

5160 

211.6 

12.0 



3230 

- 

5260 

313.6 

- 

13D 

0.498 

3190 

6.9 

5210 

260.1 

6.7 



3230 

- 

5180 

230.4 

- 

14D 

0.510 

3070 

7.7 

4770 

4.9 

6.2 



3020 

- 

5030 

108.9 

- 

15D 

0.505 

3280 

4.8 

4720 

.4 

5.3 



3340 

- 

4550 

22.5 

- 

16 D 

0.508 

3230 

8.3 

4730 

•9 

6.8 



3320 

- 

- 

- 

- 

17D 

0.506 

3500 

6.0 

5020 

102.4 

6.5 



3520 

- 

5000 

90.0 

- 

18D 

0.498 

3670 

6.6 

4740 

1.6 

5.3 



3260 

- 

5030 

IO 8.9 

- 

19 D 

0.513 

338 O 

6.7 

4550 

22.5 

6.0 



3320 

- 

- 


- 

20D 

0.505 

3370 

7.5 

4540 

25.6 

6.2 



3240 


4875 

30.6 

- 

21D 

0.502 

3145 

8.2 

4700 

0.0 

6.6 



3200 

- 

4860 

25.6 

- 

22D 

0.498 

3440 

5.2 

5230 

280.9 

6.0 



3550 

- 

5170 

220.9 

— 





197.355 

7040290.0 





Average 

4700 

167.630.0 



Standard Deviation 6jj6.u = 410 

Coefficient of Variation = 410 = 0.08? = 8.7# 

470o 







C%,) OtJ.’VU UA/31^3') &31VM 

JP/S e> _ ot?v sos i - 































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































89 


TABLE XIV 

STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 
CURE METHOD A - (24 hours steam - age at test - 24 hrs.) 
CYCLE NO. I 


Max. Specimen 

Temp. Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

$ 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

% 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 

135° F. 22D5 

5.10 

2780 

53.5 

79.0 

22D6 

- 

2830 

54.5 

80.6 

3D5 

6.85 

2030 

46.5 

73.0 

3D6 

- 

2020 

46.4 

72.5 

Average 


2415 

50.2 

76.3 

l60° F. 2D5 

4.3 

2820 

64.6 

95.0 

2D6 

- 

2460 

56.4 

82.8 

4D5 

4.2 

2185 

45.6 

74.2 

4d6 

- 

2660 

55.6 

89*7 

Average 


2530 

55*6 

85-3 

185° F. 5D5 

5.45 

2400 

56.6 

79.7 

5D6 

- 

2430 

57.3 

80.6 

6D5 

4.3 

1990 

48.7 

74.5 

6d6 

- 

2070 

50.6 

76.8 

Average 


2225 

53.3 

77.9 














90 


TABLE XIV - Cont*d 

STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 
CURE METHOD A - Cont»d 

CYCLE NO. II 


Max. 

Temp. 

Specimen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

$ 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

i 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 

135° T. 

13D5 

6.4 

1935 

37.2 

60.4 


13 D 6 

- 

1900 

36.6 

59.2 


12D5 

6.4 

1980 

38.0 

61.4 


12D6 

- 

1915 

36.7 

59.5 


Average 


1930 

37.1 

60.1 

l 6 o° F. 

9D5 

4.6 

2560 

52.1 

75.9 


9D6 

- 

2300 

46.8 

68.0 


21D5 

3.8 

2165 

45.2 

68.5 


21D6 

- 

2400 

50.0 

75.7 


Average 


2355 

48.5 

72.0 

185° F. 

7D5 

7.1 

1900 

44.5 

72.4 


7D6 

- 

1890 

44.4 

72.0 


8D5 

5.1 

2130 

43.8 

63.3 


8D6 

- 

2240 

46.2 

66.7 


Average 


2040 

44.? 

68.6 





















91 


TABLE XIV - Cont *d 

STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 
CURE METHOD A - Cont'd 

CYCLE NO. Ill 


Max. Specimen 

Temp. Nuinber 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

$ 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

% 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 

135° T. 19D5 

6.5 

2210 

48.6 

69.1 

19D6 

- 

2290 

50.5 

71.6 

20D5 

6.0 

2570 

54.5 

77.6 

20336 

- 

2620 

55.5 

79.2 

Average 


2425 

52.3 

74.4 

l6o° F. 17D5 

5.2 

2660 

53.2 

76.9 

17336 

- 

2760 

55.0 

78.6 

18335 

5.8 

2750 

56.4 

79.5 

18D6 

- 

2650 

54.4 

76.4 

Average 


2705 

54.8 

77.8 

185° P. 14D5 

6.3 

2490 

50.8 

81.8 

i4d6 

- 

2510 

51.2 

82.4 

15335 

5-8 

2830 

61.0 

86.5 

15D6 

- 

2845 

61.5 

86.5 

Average 


2170 

56.1 

84.3 































TABLE XV 


92 


STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 

CURE METHOD B - (24 hrs. steam, 4 days moist cure & 7 days lab. air) 
(Age at test - 14 days) 

CYCLE NO. I 


Max. 

Temp. 

Specimen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

$ 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

$ 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 

135° r. 

22D7 

4.6 

4630 

89.2 

132.5 


22D8 

- 

4900 

94.2 

140.0 


3D7 

7.4 

3830 

87-8 

137.4 


3D8 

- 

3870 

88.6 

139.0 


Average 


4560 

89.9 

137.2 

l6o° F. 

2D? 

3.2 

3530 

81.0 

119.0 


2D8 

- 

3500 

80.0 

118.0 


4D? 

2.4 

4280 

89.6 

132.5 


4d8 

- 

3870 

81.0 

119.8 


Average 


3800 

82.9 

122.3 

• 

O 

in 

00 

pH 

5S7 

2.3 

3510 

82.8 

116.5 


5D8 

- 

3650 

85.0 

121.0 


6d? 

2.7 

2920 

71.4 

108.0 


6d8 

- 

3150 

77.0 

116.5 


Average 


3310 

79.0 

115.2 















4 . V*. I \ ■% ty'xa?) j&tm & :.r 





93 


TABLE XV - Cont'd 

STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 
CURE METHOD B - Cont»d 

CYCLE NO. II 


Max. 

Temp. 

Spec linen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

$ 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

i 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 

135° F 

12D7 

3-9 

4790 

91.8 

148.5 


12D8 

- 

4900 

94.0 

151.8 


13D7 

4.0 

4840 

92.8 

150.5 


13D8 

- 

4540 

87.1 

141.4 


Average 


4770 

91.4 

148.0 

i6o° F. 

9D7 

3.5 

4750 

95.8 

140.5 


9D8 

- 

4810 

98.0 

142.4 


21D7 

2.6 

4700 

98.4 

148.0 


21D8 

- 

4580 

95.8 

144.5 


Average 


4710 

97.0 

143.8 

185° F. 

7D7 

2.8 

3160 

74.0 

120.2 


7D8 

- 

3630 

85.0 

138.0 


8D7 

3.3 

3750 

77.7 

112.5 


8D8 

- 

3930 

81.0 

117.0 


Average 


3625 

79.4 

121.9 



















TABLE XV - Cont*d 


94 


STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 
CURE METHOD B - Cont*d 

CYCLE NO. Ill 


Max. Specimen 

Temp. NumLer 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

JS 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

% 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 

135° F. 19 D 7 

3-5 

4590 

96.4 

143.0 

19D8 

- 

4400 

96.4 

137.5 

20D? 

3.6 

4520 

95.8 

136.5 

20D8 

- 

4550 

96.6 

137.0 

Average 


4515 

96.3 

138.5 

160° T. 17D7 

3.4 

4540 

86.0 

129.0 

17D8 

- 

4525 

86.6 

128.8 

18D7 

3-2 

4340 

88.8 

129.0 

18D8 

- 

4250 

87 .O 

126.0 

Average 


4415 

87.1 

128.2 

185° F. 14D7 

3.0 

4o4o 

81.2 

132.4 

14D8 

- 

4200 

85.8 

138.0 

15D7 

2.4 

4250 

91.8 

128.4 

15D8 

- 

4450 

96 .O 

134.4 

Average 


4235 

88.7 

133.4 













f 




95 


TABLE XVI 

STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 

CURE METHOD C - ( 20 hrs. steam & 13 days lab. air) 
( Age at test - 14 days) 

CYCLE NO. I 


Max. 

Temp. 

Specimen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

$ 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

1° 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 

135 ° r. 

22D9 

1.9 

4480 

86.3 

128.0 


22D10 

- 

4370 

84.0 

125.0 


3D9 

2.9 

3280 

75.2 

117.6 


3D10 

- 

3300 

75.6 

118.5 


Average 


3855 

80.3 

122.3 

l60° F. 

2D9 

2.5 

3570 

81.8 

120.3 


2D10 

- 

3480 

80.0 

117.3 


4D9 

2.3 

3900 

81.5 

120.4 


4D10 

- 

3640 

79.8 

112.8 


Average 


3650 

79*8 

11?.? 

185° F. 

5D9 

1.9 

3590 

84.5 

119.0 


5D10 

- 

3200 

75.3 

IO 6.3 


6D9 

2.0 

2990 

73.1 

110.6 


6 D 10 

- 

2800 

68.6 

104.4 


Average 


3120 

75.4 

110.1 














I 





96 


TABLE XVI - Cont'd 

STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 
CURE METHOD C - ContM 

CYCLE NO. II 




Moisture 


$ 28 Day 


Max. 

Specimen 

Content 

Comp. Str. 

$ 7 Day 

Temp. 

Number 

at Test 

(psi) 

Comp. Str. 

Comp. Str. 

135 0 f. 

12D9 


4030 

75.5 

124.6 


12DX0 

- 

3880 

74.4 

120.2 


13 D 9 

3.0 

4o65 

78.2 

126.7 


13 D 10 

- 

4245 

81.4 

132.1 


Average 


4055 

77.6 

125.9 

l60° F. 

9 D 9 

2.2 

4190 

85.3 

124.0 


9D10 

- 

4200 

85.4 

124.4 


21D9 

2.5 

4250 

89 .O 

134.0 


21D1G 

- 

4100 

85.7 

129*0 


Average 


4185 

86.3 

127.8 

185° F. 

7D9 

2.1 

3260 

76.3 

124.0 


7D10 

- 

3250 

76.1 

123.6 


8 D 9 

2.6 

3720 

76.5 

110.8 


8D10 

- 

3700 

76.1 

110.0 


Average 


3480 


76.3 


117.1 


































97 


TABLE XVI - Cont’d 

STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 
CURE METHOD C - Cont'd 

CYCLE NO. Ill 


Max. Specimen 

Temp. Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

$ 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

i 7 Bay 
Comp. Str. 

135° F. 19 D 9 

3-1 

4o4o 

88.8 

126.5 

19DXG 

- 

4030 

88.5 

126.0 

20D9 

3-3 

4500 

95.5 

133.0 

20D10 

- 

4400 

930 

136.0 

Average 


4240 

91.5 

130.6 

160° F. 17D9 

2.9 

4330 

82.2 

123.4 

17 B 10 

- 

4500 

91.8 

128.2 

18D9 

2.4 

4280 

87.8 

123*5 

18D10 

- 

4030 

82.3 

116.4 

Average 


4285 

86.0 

122.9 

185° F. l4B9 

1.7 

3830 

78.2 

125.6 

14D10 

mm 

4080 

83.2 

134.0 

15D9 

1.9 

4050 

8?.5 

122.3 

15D10 

mm 

4l?0 

90.0 

126.8 

Average 


4030 

84.7 

127.2 


















TABLE XVII 


98 


STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 

CURE METHOD D - (sealed molds - 24 hrs. steam & 13 days lab. air) 
( age at test - 14 days ) 

CYCLE NO. I 




Moisture 




Max. 

Specimen 

Content 

Comp. Str. 

j> 28 Day 

# 7 Day 

Temp. 

Number 

at Test 

(psi) 

Comp. Str. 

Comp. Str. 

135° F. 

22D11 

- 

4480 

86.5 

128.0 


22D12 

- 

4225 

81.2 

121.0 


3D11 

3*0 

3320 

? 6.0 

119.0 


3D12 

- 

3210 

73.5 

110.0 


Average 


3810 

79*3 

119.5 

l 6 o° F. 

2 D 11 

2.5 

3770 

86.5 

127.0 


2D12 

- 

3730 

85.5 

125.8 


4D11 

2.3 

3650 

76.2 

113.0 


4D12 

- 

3370 

70.5 

104.0 


Average 


3630 

79*7 

117.4 

185° F. 

5D11 

2*3 

3430 

81.8 

113.8 


5D12 

- 

3100 

73*2 

103.0 


6D11 

1.9 

3140 

76.8 

116.0 


6D12 

®E» 

2700 

66.1 

100.0 


Average 


3090 

74.5 

108.2 

















TABLE XVII - Cont *d 


99 


STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 
CURE METHOD D - Cont*d 

CYCLE NO. II 


Max. Specimen 

Temp* Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

% 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

t 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 


135° F. 12D11 

2.6 

4100 

78.6 

127.1 


12D12 

- 

3870 

74.3 

120.0 


13D11 

2.6 

4l60 

80.0 

133.5 


13D12 

- 

3820 

73.4 

131.0 


Average 


3990 

76.6 

127.9 


160° F. 9D11 

2.4 

4150 

84.4 

123.0 


9D12 

- 

4000 

8 I .3 

118.4 


21D11 

3 *S 

4220 

88.3 

133.0 


21D12 

- 

4l60 

87.0 

131.0 


Average 


4130 

85.2 

126.3 


185° F. 7D11 

2.4 

3330 

78.0 

126.8 


7D12 

- 

3100 

72.6 

118.0 


8D11 

2.3 

3620 

74.5 

107.8 


8D12 

- 

3600 

74.2 

107.0 


Average 


3390 

74.3 

114.6 













r 







100 


TABLE XVII - Cont 1 d 

STRENGTH RESULTS - STEAM CURE INVESTIGATION 
CURE METHOD D - Cont*dL 

CYCLE NO, III 


Max. 

Temp, 

Specimen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

$ 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

$ 7 Bay- 
Comp. Str. 


135° F. 

19D11 

3*0 

3900 

85.8 

107.0 


193)12 

- 

3920 

86.2 

144.6 


20D11 

3.6 

4l6o 

88.4 

126.0 


20D12 

- 

4l4o 

88.0 

125.6 


Average 


4030 

8?.l 

125.8 

160° F. 

17D11 

2.5 

4480 

83.2 

127.5 


17D12 

- 

4200 

79.7 

120.0 


18D11 

2.3 

4020 

82.5 

115.8 


18 D 12 

- 

4060 

83 .O 

117.0 


Average 


4190 

82.1 

120.1 

185° F. 

14D11 

2.1 

3610 

73.7 

118.3 


14D12 


3720 

75.8 

122.0 


15DH 

2.2 

4290 

92.6 

129.3 


15D12 

- 

4430 

96.0 

134.0 


Average 


4015 

84.0 

126.0 

























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































102 













































































































































































































































































































































































qxnc 


103 



riXMTf. 


Y/MVM 






























































































































































































































































































































































104 





Cm* M 




!W &<H£ 


US'S E 


11 




id 


4 i 


TJ 








































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































/ 







105 



n Qm. hi 


PflEBSlVE 





rr 

Un 



















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































107 































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































108 


TABLE XVIII 

STRENGTH RESULTS - DISCARDED MIXES 

MIX ID - Cured, as Type I Cycle - 135° F. max. temp. 
(Unsatisfactory w/c and cement content) 


Cure 

Specimen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

% 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

i ^ 

-O 

• 

S3 

• 

A 

ID 5 

5.2 

1580 

42.4 

72.2 


ID 6 

— 

2280 

61.1 

104.0 

B 

ID? 

1.6 

3640 

97.6 

166.0 


1D8 

- 

3700 

98.3 

168.5 

C 

1D9 

3.5 

3370 

90.6 

153.0 


1D10 

— 

3060 

82.0 

139.0 

D 

ID 11 

2.5 

3200 

85.8 

146.0 


1D12 

— 

3400 

91.2 

155.0 

MIX 10D 

- Cycle II 

- l6o° F. 

max. temp. 




(Extreme 

temperature variations during cycle) 



(see Figure 22 for temp, record) 





Moisture 




Cure 

Specimen 

Content 

Comp. Str. 

% 28 Day 

$ 7 Day 


Number 

at Test 

(psi) 

Comp. Str. 

Comp. Str. 

A 

10D5 

3.7 

2570 

52.5 

93.5 


10D6 

— 

2450 

62.9 

89.1 

B 

10D7 

2.8 

3900 

79.6 

142.0 


10D8 

- 

4000 

81.6 

145.0 

C 

10D9 

2.1 

3430 

70.0 

124.6 


10D10 

— 

3610 

75.7 

131*0 

D 

10D11 

2.4 

3180 

65.0 . 

115.6 


10D12 


3610 

75.7 

131.0 











S ..ISA 1 














■ . 












109 


TABLE XVIII - Cont»d 

STRENGTH RESULTS - DISCARDED MIXES 

Mix 11 D - Cycle II — 135° F. max. temp. 

(Extreme temperature variations during cycle) 
(see figure 22 for temp, record) 


Cure 

Specimen 

Number 

Moisture 
Content 
at Test 

Comp. Str. 
(psi) 

i 28 Day 
Comp. Str. 

£ 7 Day 
Comp. Str. 

A 

11D5 

5.0 

2120 

42.5 

67.0 


11D6 

- 

2060 

41.2 

65.2 

B 

11D7 

2.3 

3350 

67.0 

106.0 


11D8 

- 

3260 

65.3 

103.0 

C 

11D9 

1.7 

2860 

57.2 

90.5 


11D10 

- 

3080 

61.7 

97.4 

D 

11D11 

2.3 

3200 

64.2 

101.0 


11D12 


3350 

67.0 

106.0 

Mix 16D 

- Cycle III - l60° F. max. temp. 
(Unknown water^cement ratio) 




A 

16D5 

5.5 

2325 

49.2 

71.0 


i 6 d 6 

- 

2270 

48.0 

69.5 

B 

16D7 

3.6 

4070 

86.0 

124.3 


16D8 

- 

4320 

91.3 

132.0 

C 

16D9 

2.4 

3780 

80.0 

115.4 


16D10 

- 

3775 

79.8 

115.0 

D 

i6dii 

2.5 

3610 

76.4 

110.0 


16D12 

— 

3315 

70.0 

101.0 








:! 


I., 















' 






GRHPN No Z2 no 









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Ill 


Discussions of Results 

The strengths presented in all the tables and figures have 
been calculated as a percentage of the 7 and 28 day moist cured con¬ 
trol strengths. This procedure was adopted in order to minimize vari¬ 
ations due to difference in strengths of the control cylinders due to 
slight differences in water-cement ratios. 

Control Strengths 

A study of figure 14 and Tables XII and XIII shows that 
fairly good control was obtained for all the mixes used in the investi¬ 
gation, especially the correlation between 7 day and 28 day strength. 
That is, where 7 day strengths plotted low, on the water-cement ratio 
plot, the corresponding 28 day strengths were also low. This fact 
indicates the necessity of expressing all the results as percentages 
of the control strengths. An interesting condition is presented in 
that for all the mixes from ID up to and including 10D, the points are 
in the lower portions of the groups. This is evidently due to the fact 
that a new job lot of cement was used for mixes from 10D to 22D and it 
gave slightly higher strengths when used in the same mix formula. This 
condition, however, is minimized when the results are presented as 
percentages of the control strengths. 

Cure Cycles 

Figures 15, 16 and 17 indicate that each of the cycles gave 
essentially similar results. The 24 hour strengths increased with 
temperature until temperatures in the vicinity of 160 - 170 degrees F. 
where reached, after which Cycles I and II showed a slight decrease for 
increasing temperatures, and Cycle III continued to give very slight 


increases in strengths 








i ith' 


i :,'ij 5V/.0liS 







., r r 


0 $. 




ail 



■ f 


,1 r 




V-Vol/ 


;*} firf v 




i 




J >—• 


* 




112 


In the case of the 14 day strengths. Cycle I gave highest 
strengths at 135 degrees F. and decreasing strengths with increas¬ 
ing temperature. Cycle II on the other hand produced the highest 
strengths at 160 degrees F., with 135 degrees F. producing strengths 
somewhat lower. The 185 degrees F. temperature in the case of Cycle 
II produced the lowest 14 day strengths. Cycle III was somewhat like 
Cycle I, in that 135 degrees F. produced the highest 14 day strengths, 
hut the 160 degrees F. produced the highest 14 day strengths, hut the 
l60 degrees F. temperature resulted in strengths slightly lower than 
those for 185 degrees F. 

In all of the cycles the strenghts at 14 days for the two 
methods of cure (i.e. Cure Method B - 24 hours steam and 6 days moist 
air and 7 days laboratory air, and Cure Method C - 24 hours steam and 
13 days laboratory air) the same relationship holds, in that the 
difference between the two methods is greatest at 135 degrees F. and 
that the difference decreases with an increase in temperatures. 

Cycle III beyond 160 degrees F. does not show this trend but it is 
probably due to inaccuracy of some of the points, particularly at 
185 degrees F. for cure method B. 

These results are in line with what would be expected, and 
the explanation is that at the lower curing temperatures the immedi¬ 
ate 24 hour strengths are not fully developed, and this leaves a 
greater potential for strength to be gained when the specimens are 
cured for an additional 13 days. At higher temperatures the immedi¬ 
ate 24 hour strength is increased, but the temperature obviously 
destroys some of the potential for strength gain in the subsequent 


7 • ■ ... " '.••• I f : " I- ■■c ' ■ 


■ • 

/," I .. :• 

j .? ' ;v: . .•; rj\ : y: )r„: ■: •. *; 7 v • 5 'a,' II . •/ Oltl 

. 

* 

It" I..- ‘ - :/~ 


, \ • - '■ .? ■ ; v:o' o 

. ' ' 

z 

• 

■ . ;• 

.. ' , 

■. 


. 

■ ; : r ■; '■ • •• 


ro £1 ■■ (il 


' : t ■ ' ■ . 

■■ i 


( i 


' *) ■ ■ ; • J ■ I • ■ - ■■ ■ ; f;> x-'S m;: . : 


* 

'll ‘ '• $ •• 

- 


■ 

!. ; f&JLT.ft : ' I ^ 

* 

, 

I ’ ; >.!' ' I • : ‘ ; . i: ; r 

.O'; 9- /.II 


' 

. 


; : .. I ■ . -if -I I 'IV- 

• 

■' . . 1 ,. . .. ■■ ' / : 



Ir: !• -"'v;; ; ;• .II j'.'/a , <;■ i It ^.v-V Oil \ ■ I ;/j 

j... r j r t ".n nrf.^ ' • s: I • 0 J 


113 


13 days storage. In the case of Cycles I and II the 185 degrees F. 
temperature appears to he high enough to reduce the immediate 24 hour 
strengths as well. In the case of Cycle III the gradually increasing 
temperature rise over the length of the cycle apparently reduces to 
some extent the effect of the elevated temperature. 

The diminishing difference between Cure Methods B and C at 

14 days can he explained hy the same reasoning, i.e., the advantage of 
subsequent moist curing is reduced as the potential for strength gain 
is reduced with increasing temperatures. 

An interesting and indicative feature is revealed in each of 
the three cycles in that the difference between Cure Methods C and D 
is in all cases very slight with the bare cylinders producing the 
higher strength values. (Cure Method D is identical to C except that 
for D the cylinders were enclosed in sealed molds during the steam 
curing treatment, so that the condition of the curing atmosphere could 
not affect the moisture in the concrete mix.) This indicates that a 
properly saturated atmosphere was created and maintained by the steam 
cabinet designed for this investigation. 

Comparison of Curing Cycles I. II and III 

A graphical comparison of the three cycles is given in fig¬ 
ures 18 and 19 which show strengths obtained as a percentage of 7 and 
28 day moist cured control strengths. 

From the basis of immediate 24 hour strengths these figures 
indicate that Cycle I and Cycle III compare very closely, with Cycle I, 
giving slightly higher strengths at 160 degrees F. At 180 degrees F., 
however, Cycle III produces the higher 24 hour strength, the differences 
for both cycles being negligible. Cycle II produced 24 hour strengths 
considerably lower than the other cycles. 










114 


When considering strengths at 14 days, however, Cycle III 
developed strengths higher than Cycle I for all temperatures. Cycle 
II in this case produced strengths higher than the other cycles at 160 
degrees F,, especially in the case where there was 6 days moist curing 
following steam treatment. The strengths for 135 and 185 degrees F. 
were comparable to those of Cycle I. 

The gradual temperature rise to a peak value, and followed hy 
a gradual temperature drop in Cycle II, explains why the 24 hour strenghts 
of Cycle II are lov/er than those for Cycles I and III, The maximum 
temperature in the case of Cycle II is maintained for a considerably 
shorter period, and so would not develop the accelerated strengths to 
the same extent* At the same time it would not reduce the potential 
for strength gain to the same extent and consequently would account for 
the larger relative 14 day strengths, as well as the greater advantage 
of subsequent moist curing, which is especially noticeable at the 160 
degrees F, temperature. The 185 degrees F. temperature apparently has 
an adverse effect, even when applied for short periods. The gradual 
temperature rise used in Cycle III similarly accounts for the slightly 
higher strengths than those for Cycle I, 

Figures 20 and 21 also give a graphical comparison of the 
cycles and temperatures, and also give a comparison of strengths versus 
time, with the moist cured control cylinders. These curves show that 
early strengths increase with temperature, but that after steam curing 
further strength gain is not as rapid as for moist curing. The rate 
of strength gain decreases with temperature, and the long time strengths 
are less than the final strengths for moist cure, especially in the 
case of temperatures in excess of l60 degrees F, 





O'-."; ;U 



() 


■/ 




f 


0 




f V ; 




115 


The results from two mixes 10D and 11D which were subjected 
to rapid temperature rises to temperatures in excess of 200 degrees F. 
are also included in figures 20 and 21• These results forcibly indi¬ 
cate the adverse effects of thermal shock and higher temperatures dur¬ 
ing the curing cycle. As indicated in figure 22, mix 10D did not re¬ 
ceive the rapid temperature rise until the cycle was almost completed, 
while 11D received two such treatments, one quite early in the cycle. 

The relative positions of the curves for these two mixes indicate that 
thermal shocks are not as disastrous when they occur near the end of 
the steaming cycle. The curves given in figures 20 and 21 agree in 
principle with similar relationships discussed in an article by 
Walter H. Price, entitled factors Influencing Concrete Strength 11 pub¬ 
lished in the February 1951 Journal of the American Concrete Institute 
(ACI proceedings Vol. 47). 

The moisture content at test for one cylinder of each pair 
cured under identical conditions of each mix is also included in 
Tables of Strength Results. A comparison of the moisture contents and 
corresponding values expressed as a percentage, shows that where strengths 
were higher the moisture contents were lower. Due to the influence of 
other factors, such as variations in water-cement ratios, effects of 
steam curing and testing errors, it would be extremely difficult to 


draw any conclusions 


r 


::■/ . . i. ■ v; Cri’ 


f ' o 


0: 




o 


:o 




» 




oar •• j 


ov,’j iVnoc 


owj o' 






4 . 




£l 


hm ' , ' 


(" /*S - ' - c, » 


0 


'' J . 


■ ■ “ 












. ■ ■ 




If: 



' ■ ; ■ ■ 


$; 


*' 


■ 




116 


Summary of Conclusions 

1. A properly saturated atmospheric pressure steam curing treat¬ 
ment will increase the early strengths of concrete. The 
strengths produced generally increase with temperature, up to 
temperatures in the vicinity of 160 - 170 degrees F., after 
which there is little, if any, further gain in strength. 

2. After saturated atmospheric pressure steam curing treatment 
the rate of gain of strength is less than that of moist curing 
at 70 degrees F. and the long time strengths developed hy 
steam cured cylinders are less than for moist curing at 70 
degrees F. 

3* The concrete specimens cured in saturated steam at atmospheric 
pressure gain strength more rapidly when subjected to a period 
of moist curing, than when subjected to yard storage, hut the 
advantage decreases with an increase in curing temperature 
used. 

4. The strengths developed by saturated atraospheric pressure cur¬ 
ing are affected to some extent by the type of curing cycle 
used. 

5* Thermal shock and high temperatures during steam curing have 
an adverse effect on both early and long time strengths. 



■ ■ O ' j !i JOC’J .Vi'S .t .v' 2 *'.f fT 

■ '• «■' V' ‘.r"* .vO j ■ ■ ? -'to:-. ' r " l 

■ ■■' ' 

: . 

*r': . j • . ' ' • v, /v. ■ 5 / . : ■' ;; - r 

' ■' • ' " ■::{ ■■■. . j* . -;; •' ■ - •; -y .. 

: •• ’ •' '■ :■ • r S ■ r e .! :r . V oi. ■ , e i •/.: -rfj 

: ' j i • • J • 

• 

oJ.’V.'il ‘j ■ - , ' ' r * *• r ■■■ ■ 

.00 Z■ .0 oJ OOf./rO' : ■ r :: ' . . ■•■CO £ {j ' *? :} ' 3 e'OV 

- - ■ , ' ■ • • ■ '■ ■ ■ • 

' t ■ 

, 

'.■ ' 1 o ’ o '(> ; : ' • r- - ' ■" . ■■ 

> ‘ • ■ 

. 

■' '’O' '- . ' ■.>' ' ' •: •> . :t ''ok,. ~:l . • : v'v;v r orf? 

* 



117 


PART V 

Application of Results to Practice 

The results of this investigation indicate that a very con¬ 
siderable increase in early strengths is obtainable from a properly- 
executed saturated atmospheric steam curing program. Such early 
strengths would reduce yard storage necessary, and enable a producer 
to place his concrete products on the market more quickly. 

The results also indicate that curing temperatures in excess 
of 165 - 170 degrees P. do not appear to be economically feasible, since 
the slight increase in early strengths obtainable would be offset by the 
increased cost of maintaining higher temperatures, as well as by the in¬ 
creased cost of concrete mixes of sufficiently increased strengths so as 
to meet 28 day strength specifications. 

Also considerable care must be used in designing curing kilns, 
and operating them so that thermal shock, and improper curing conditions 
will not adversely affect the concrete products. 

Suggested Further Investigations 

This investigation has covered a very minor portion of the 
field of steam curing as a method of obtaining accelerated strength in 
concrete manufacture. However it does constitute a beginning, from 
which many questions arise. 

A few suggestions for further investigation concerning the 
effect of atmospheric steam curing of Portland Cement concrete are 
listed below* 

1. More information is required along the lines of this investi¬ 
gation, particularly with respect to other temperatures 








j' r I ‘ "} ' C'l . ' J 












■ . 

















■ 


- '.t " -.,V r ' ; 


■ 


r 







- ' • : ' : J y.;j\ 


i-y 








118 


■between 75 degrees and 200 degrees F. and the long time 
strengths resulting from subsequent storage. 

2. The effect on flexural strengths, modulus of rupture and 
durability of normal concrete mixes as well as air en¬ 
trained mixes, is not definitely known and further data 
is required. 

3» The effect of steam curing on the properties of concrete 
with widely varying water-cement ratios, water content per 
cubic yard and aggregate gradings and aggregate types is 
yet to be investigated. 

4. Reliable data on the effect of curing conditions maintained 
at various percentages of saturation and composition is re¬ 
quired to determine the lower limits of moisture and 
temperature requirements for good curing conditions. 

5» Additional data on the effect of steam curing on concrete 
mixes using the different types of Portland Cement is re¬ 
quired to indicate possible need of variation in techniques 
to obtain optimum results. 

At the present time very little information is available 
with regard to these problems and only through a proper investigation 
will reliable answers be forthcoming. 

Under the present conditions of increasing construction 
trends and increasing shortages of construction materials, more and 
more impetus is placed on the use of concrete products to take the 
place of other building materials, as well as increased production 


. ■ ' 

. ■ 

« r f- ; v v - : c r •'%'Mtfa . 

jls.'l ' ’ ' : 

» 


* 


' t ' ' '" •'•■■':■'■ 


• '"V' ' 

' ' 




' 


Bi ,• ;; ; •ifjjyf v fj'ffil .■ j'L 

■ 


« 


. 

t • 


' 

3*1 LLlw 






119 


for normal uses of concrete* In order to meet this demand, increas¬ 
ingly efficient methods must he adopted in producing concrete, while 
still maintaining high standards of quality* The information 
obtained from investigations are of inifinite value in this respect 
and will ensure that concrete will continue to he used even when 
the other construction materials become easily available again* 


" ' . • -' • : ’ . * . . a ' ■ ■ ■ r \ <. 

•• ~ •• • 

c *■ 

. '■' ■ ; - r ' v* * • “ •••••■ ,■ i ' Iv ; •. 

* ■ 







j 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


'•High Pressure Steam Curing" - a progress report by A.C.I., Committee 
716, April 1944, Vol 40, pp 409-16. 

"Studies of High Pressure Steam Curing" - by J.C. Pearson and E.M. 
Brickett, Proceedings A.C.I., 1932, Vol 28, pp 537 . 

"The Effect of High Pressure Steam on Crushing Strength of Portland 
Cement Mortars and Concretes" by R.J. Wig, A.S.T.M., Vol. 11 , 
1911. PP 580. 

"Strength and Resistance to Sulphate Waters of Concrete Cured in 

Water Vapour at Temperatures between 100 and 350 degrees F." 

- D.G. Miller, Proceeding A.S.T.M. 1930, Vol. 30, Part II - 
Technical papers, pp 636 . 

"Effect of Steam Treatment of Portland Cement Mortars on their 

Resistance to Sulphate Action" - by T. Thorvaldson and V.A. 
Vigfusson. Engineering Journal, March 1928, pp 174. 

"Concrete Masonry" - by Amund M. Korsmo, H.H.FA. Technical Bulletin, 
No. 9* March 1949* PP ?• 

"Early Strength of Concrete as Affected by Steam Curing Temperatures" 

- by Joseph J. Shideler and Wilbur H. Chamberlain, A.C.I. 
Journal, December 1949* proc. Vol. 46, pp 273 . 

"Steam Curing of Concrete" - by R.W. Nurse, "Magazine of Concrete 
Research", June 19^9* No. 2, pp 79 (British Publication). 

"Curing - Most Efficient Methods Determined by Tests" - by George A. 
Mansfield, "Rock Products" Journal, February 1947* 

"Curing - A Problem in Thermodynamics" - by George A. Mansfield, "Rock 
Products" Journal, August 1948. 

"High Temperature, High Humidity" - by Bror Nordberg, "Rock Products" 
Journal, January 1947* 

"Factors Influencing Concrete Strengths" - by Walter H. Price, A.C.I. 
Journal, February 1951* Proc. Vol. 47 pp • 

"Concrete Manual" by United States Department of Interior - Bureau of 
Reclamation, Denver, Colorado. 

"Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Guide, 1946" - by American 
Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers. 

"Humid Air and Super-heated Steam as a Drying Media for Rigid Porous 
Solids" - Progress Report No. 2, Project M715* Owens-Illinois 
Glass Co., by G.W. Govier, August 30, 1947* 























}. 















B29763 



