For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 
















For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 









Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/jewishmessianismOObris 


JEWISH MESSIANISM 


AND ITS LATER DEVELOPMENTS 

A Dissertation 

submitted to the B. D. Committee of the 
Senate of the University of Alberta 
in candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity 

by 


Rev. E. G. Brisbin, B.A. 


University of Alberta 
April 1944 











CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 

Introduction i 

I Preliminary Survey 1 

II A History of Old Testament Messianism 5 

III Pre-Christian Apocalypticism of 

Apocryphal Literature £1 

IY A Critical and Exegetical Study of 
Allegedly Messianic Passages 
in the Old Testament 26 

Y Jewish Messianism in the Christian Era 48 

VI Eschatology in the Teachings of Jesus 70 

YII Messianism in the Patristic Age 100 

VIII Medieval and Modern Times 110 

IX A Critical Study of Modern Millenial 

Theories 127 

















. 





















■ 
















INTRODUCTION 


An almost inevitable feature of the cruder form 
of nationalism is the hope held by members of the nation 
that they will some day see their country dominant in 
world affairs, whether it be politically, economically 
or spiritually. In this hope the Hebrew people were no 
exception, belief in the ultimate supremacy of Israel 
over other nations being a prominent factor in the Jewish 
religion from comparatively ancient times. Since this is 
so, it would be well to examine this belief, or hope, as 
it might better be called. How did it originate, in 
what form, and when? Then, after considering its roots, 
we can follow its growth and changes down to the present 
day. 

It is an undeniable fact that the Jews considered 
themselves favoured in the sight of Yahweh from earliest 
times. In their nomadic days they held to the desert 
religion — worship of a tribal god who in some way was 
a blood relation of the members of the tribe. Their god 
led them into battle, watched over their fortunes, caused 
their misfortunes when they displeased him, and in general 
wa3 the source of all their rewards and punishments, 
prosperity and suffering. Then, at the time when their 




■ 




' ;■ :: ,l; 













i. 


c 

















-ii- 


nomadic era was nearing its end, and the people were 
looking with envy at the comparatively easy life of the 
agriculturalists in Canaan, their leader, Moses, was won 
over to the god of his father-in-law, Jethro, and took 
the religion of Yahweh to his people. Still, however, 
they held to their tribalism in religion, and Yahweh 
became the god of the Jewish nation alone. Naturally, the 
people believed that Yahweh would help them, give them good 
fortune and prosperity and in every way show that He was 
the most powerful god in existence by raising up His people 
to the most prominent position in the international scene. 
At times this trust thrived with apparent Justification, 
as in the time of the united kingdom under David 
particularly, when their fortunes rose, Canaan was 
thoroughly conquered, and all portents pointed towards a 
glorious future. 

Such conditions, however, never last in inter¬ 
national affairs, nor did they last in the case of the 
Hebrew kingdom. Gradually but steadily the foundations 
under their kingdom shook and crumbled, ending in the final 
captivity of the whole Jewish community in 586 B.C. at the 
hands of powerful Babylon. The realization was forced on 
the people that, like it or not, their God was not 
prospering them in the present. Nevertheless, their 
belief in Yahweh*s favour did not die: it merely shifted 

















: ' , 




■ ■ •• .*v. = 




i X 













' 

t J 






-iii- 


frorn the present to the future, often strongly connected 
with the hope of restoration of the Davidic dynasty, 
when Yahweh would show His favour on them, and His power 
over all the nations, since by this time Israel had 
progressed to a monotheistic religion, more or less inter¬ 
national in its outlook. This is the belief that has come 
to be termed the Messianic hope, although, as will be seen, 
the personal element implied by the term Messianic was not 
always present, and it is with this belief that we shall 
concern ourselves. 

"Three factors contributed to the spread of 
Messianic belief in Israel: the loss of national 
independence and the attendant deprivations, the 
will to live dominantly and triumphantly as a 
rehabilitated people in its national home and 
the unfaltering faith in divine justice by 
whose eternal canons the national restoration 

was infallibly prescribed . The messianic 

ideal was a group conception into which political 
aspirations, religious imperialism and moral 
vindications merged." (1) 


(1) A History of Messianic Speculation in Israel, p. ix. 








. 

- 

. 













Chapter I 


PRELIMINARY SURVEY 

Out of the Jewish nationalism, as we have seen, 
grew the maxim f, that tlod gave many commands and ordinances 
to the people of Israel for the purpose of providing them 
with much reward." (1) However, as conditions in Israel 
grew worse everyone realized that this reward was not in 
the present and the hope grew stronger that a future day 
would see the glorification of Israel. As is natural in 
human conceptions, there was not complete unanimity of 
opinion as to the nature of the future kingdom, nor as to 
the method by which it would be effected. 

This variance of belier i‘egarding the method to be 
used resolved into two main categories, the theory which 
claimed that the divine kingdom would be achieved by the 
intervention of a representative of the Deity — the 
Messiah; and the alternative theory which looked to direct 
iivine action, with no Messiah. In the field of the 
nature of the kingdom to come there were also two main 
beliefs, in that while some looked more for a moral 
purification of the nation, resulting in a perfect race, 


(1) The Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ, p. 128 
















-2- 


others concentrated on temporal matters -- the political 
superiority of Israel to be achieved through force of 
arms • 

These later developments, however, need not 
concern us at present. "The older Messianic hope 
virtually moves within the boundary of the then present 
circumstances of the world, and is nothing else than the 
hope of a better future for the nation."(1) This better 
future was interpreted as a state in which the lewish 
people would be morally purified through divine action and 
would live in internal peace under a righteous ruler of 
Davidic ancestry. Its foreign relations would be 
untroubled after the inevitable destruction or conversion 
of the Gentile nations, and this peace would be further 
enhanced by the abolition of all natural evil and 
suffering. This hope of better conditions in Israel was 
the nucleus of the prophetic Messianic teachings. It will 
be seen at once that little or nothing is said concerning 
an agent of Yahweh appointed by Him to carry out the 
miraculous changes in the moral and temporal conditions 
of mankind. The hope for the Kingdom of God on earth was 
born long before any theory of an intermediary came into 


(1) Ibid., p. 129 





-3- 


existence. 

Since national pride is common to all nations, 
Jewry could not be expected to be alone in such a belief. 
Persia and Egypt both had traditions of another world, 
either in the past or future, traditions which may well 
have influenced Jewish beliefs when the races involved 
learned of each other’s cultures. Persia in particular 
had vivid eschatological conceptions. The Persians looked 
to the time when the age-old struggle between the forces 
of good and evil would come to a crisis — Persia would 
be attacked by her foes and saved only by the intervention 
of Hushedar, son of Zarathustra. The ensuing battle was 
expected to last a millenium, ending in victory for the 
forces of the good. 

A second millenium'followed this victory — one 
of perfection and happiness under Hushedar Mah, another 
son of Zarathustra, but since the absence of evil removed 
all ambition, loss of faith was expected to ensue, at 
which time the Evil One would loose a dragon on the world 
which would kill a third of mankind, eat all plant life, 
and destroy all morality. The dragon’s death would be 
followed by peace and finally the inauguration of the 
perfect kingdom with only one battle before the attain¬ 
ment of immortality for the righteous. 












-4- 


Egypt also had a definite belief in the perfect 
world, but the Egyptian tradition placed it in the past 
rather than in the future. Legend told of the existence 
of a perfect kingdom before the beginning of time, in the 
valley of the Nile, ruled over by Osiris. 

There are obvious similarities between Jewish 
eschatology and that of the Persians particularly, and it 
is fairly evident that Jewish beliefs were influenced by 
the Gentile traditions when Israel came into cultural 
contact with Persia. 





Chapter II 


A HISTORY OF OLD TESTAMENT MESSIANISM 

’’’The Messiah 1 (with the article and not in 
apposition with another word) .... occurs for the first 
time in apocalyptic literature .... In the Old Testa¬ 
ment the earliest use of the word is with YHWH (or with 
a pronominal suffix referring to YHWH) as a title of the 
ruling sovereign Meshiah YHWH (God’s anointed one’...)”(1) 

The use of the name "Messiah 1 ’ is not found 
in the Old Testament. However, the general idea of a 
righteous king occurs often in the writings of the Old 
Testament prophets. The origin of the word is found in 
the practice of anointing the king, as seen in I Sam. 

15:1 and elsewhere, nor can there he valid doubt that 
this ceremony of anointment was looked on as investing 
the king with magical power and a superhuman status in 
life. As the anointing of the high priest consecrated 
him and gave him immediate access to God, so the anointing 
of the king established him as the person chosen by God 
to rule Israel (I Sam. 10:1). 

Naturally, the common people would hope for 
righteous kings, but Isaiah is the first prophet to 

(1) The Jewish Encyclopaedia, Vol. VIII, p. 505. 







- 6 - 

express this hope for a future ideal king, as seen in 
Isa. 9:6-7, in which he prophesies the appearance of a just 
and peaceful ruler who will lead Israel under Yahweh’s 
care.(l) It is worthy of notice that the prophet speaks 
of a peaceful and righteous era under this king, a 
conception to which the catastrophic visions of the 
Apocalyptic era, and indeed of popular belief in Isaiah’s 
own time, are wholly foreign. 

In Oesterley and Robinson’s "Hebrew Religion, Its 
Origin and Development” (2) we find the viewpoint expressed 
that this belief in a future righteous ruler held by 
Isaiah developed out of his conception of the relations 
between Yahweh and Israel, relations of co-operation or 
interdependence based on Isaiah’s belief in the highly 
moral nature of God. Growing out of this belief are also 
the prophecies that, whatever the sufferings Yahweji’s 
people may endure, some remnant will return to enjoy the 
rule of the future righteous ruler (Isa. 7:3 — the name 
of the prophet’s son "Shear-yashub" -- a remnant shall 
return), which, though expressed with varying degrees of 
conviction, nevertheless occur fairly often in his 

(1) Driver, after considerable discussion, concedes 
Isaianic authorship for this passage. 

(2) pp. 241 f. 


















- 7 - 


writings. This nucleus developed into the full Messianic 
doctrine which was to take such a predominant place in 
Jewish religious development. 

It is apparent, however, from the writings of Isaiah’s 
predecessors, that there already existed a popular faith 
in Israel’s ultimate ascendancy to a position of 
importance in world affairs. Probably one of the earliest 
examples of this is found in the J document of the 9th 
century B.C., where we see this hope expressed in Yahweh’s 
promise to Abraham of His favour to him and his 
descendents,(Gen. 12:1 f). Out of this belief there 
developed soon the idea of the "Day of Yahweh". 

"The original conception was probably that of the 
day on which YHWE manifests Himself as the wielder of 
thunder and lightning, as the devastator who shatters the 
powers opposing Him; and this was in historical times 
transformed into the day when He would smite Israel’s foes"* 
(i) 

Such an interpretation met opposition first in the 
writings of Amos, seen most explicitly in Ch. 5:18-20, 
where the prophet declares that the longed-for Day of 
Yahweh will be one of terrible punishment and destruction 


(1) Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. IV, p. 476 




















Vi 






Ell 


















- 8 - 


lot so much of Israel’s enemies as of Israel herself* 

3osea at first shares in this explanation, pointing out that 
just as Yahweh brought Israel out of Egypt, so He will 
destroy her (Hos* 13:9). Isaiah, howwver, picks up this 
teaching and carries it on to the forecast that this 
punishment will be in the nature of a purification by fire, 
Dut of which Israel will emerge restored on a basis of 
righteousness (Isa. 1:24-26). 

Here, then, is a concrete development of the ’’Day of 
Yahweh” into the hope of the righteous kingdom, which, 
vhen connected with Isaiah’s prophecy of the righteous king, 
produces the Messianic hope in its essence, the nucleus 
around which grew the ideas of the later prophets, and still 
later, the various religious leaders of Apocryphal and 
Christian times. 

After Isaiah, little or nothing was written on 

Vlessianism, whether personal or impersonal, until near the 

close of the sixth century B.C. The only contribution 

Isaiah’s successor, Micah, could be said to have made to¬ 
wards continuing the hope of a future righteous king would 

be his denunciation of contemporary rulers who corrupted 

their high offices for personal gain (Hos. 3:9f). Such a 

passage as 5:1-3 speaks of an apparently divinely- 

authorized ruler, and hence might be called messianic, but 






- 9 - 


there is good internal evidence for considering these 
verses post-exilic, probably of the time when Zerubbabel 
was being looked to as the Messiah* (1) 

After Micah Judah returned to heathenism under 
Manasseh, who opened the door3 for the Assyrian gods, 
particularly to Ishtar, the planet Venus, queen of heaven. 
The pagan religion spread alarmingly throughout the land, 
helped by the memories of the old men and women of Judah 
of a past religion. 

"All the old Semitic stock of gods, whose altars and 
sacred poles Hezekiah had scrapped, now trooped back 
for a final fling before the great prophets and the 
scourge of the exile should drive them out forever."(2) 

Such a state continued without protest until about 
625 B.C. when Zephaniah revived the warnings of Amos a 
century earlier concerning the Day of Yahweh as a time of 
punishment for Judah’s sins, based probably on fear that 
the Sythians, then raiding adjacent territory, would attack 
Jerusalem (Zeph. 1:7, 14f). As is the case with Micah, 
Zephaniah’s message is negative -- there is no hope of a 
future more righteous kingdom whatsoever which can be 
conceded as original* 

(1) International Critical Commentary, p. 102 

(2) A History of the Hebrew Commonwealth, p. 221 








- 





































. o 




- * 













• 



























- 10 - 


This long period of dormancy in Messianic teachings 
is finally broken by the prophet Jeremiah, writing at 
approximately 625-580 B.C. As with Zephaniah, it is 
possible that Jeremiah was forced to overcome his dislike 
of publicity and openly denounce Judah’s sins, by fear of 
a Scythian invasion (Jer. l:13f). He has, however, 
comparatively little to say on this matter, due largely to 
the fact that, being a practical man living in a time of 
turmoil — the Babylonian threat and invasions — he was 
chiefly occupied with the task of averting the complete 
destruction of the nation* The clearest example of his 
hope for a future righteous king of the nation is given 
very concisely in Ch. 23:3-6, where he speaks of a divinely 
appointed ruler of Davidic lineage who will enforce law 
and justice, resulting in security for Judah and Israel 
after the people have been gathered together as a restored 
nation. In such passages as this, and in his buying of the 
land in Anathoth (Jer. 32:7-9) he shows his confident 
expectation of a brighter future, in spite of the precarious 
condition of Judah under the imminency of Babylonian 
invasion. The spiritual aspect of this future state is 
seen by Jeremiah in the "New Covenant" which Yahweh will 
make with Judah and Israel after the restoration, a 

covenant based on the peoples’ complete understanding and 














■ 
















- 11 - 


hence obedience to God’s will (Jer. 31:31-34). 

Throughout this period, from the eighth to the early 
part of the sixth centuries, the emphasis in prophetic, 
social, political and religious teachings was in the main 
on the inevitability of divine intervention. The prophets 
denounced the sinful nation and warned of impending doom. 

The forecasted doom arrived speedily in the shape of 
the Babylonian invasion and the exile of the Jews, 
completed in 586 B.C. As a result of this catastrophe the 
people realized that these years did not constitute the Day 
of Yahweh -- the nation had been conquered and enslaved, 
but their hope of ultimate triumph, instead of dying, grew 
stronger. Out of the time of exile came one of the most 
beautiful of the psalms — 42, 43, voicing the discourage¬ 
ment of the people but praying for intervention of Yahweh 
to rescue them and lead them back to Jerusalem and the 
religious services of the Temple. 

It is natural that such an experience as the exile 
should have strong effects on the Jews. Any race, on being 
transplanted to a vastly more elaborate culture, will 
change gradually or speedily, becoming continually more 
influenced by its environment. The most prolific writer 
of the early exilic years, Ezekiel, shows this effect well. 








. 

■ 


















< ' 

. . 










. 
















- 12 - 


Ezekiel, the priest, was taken to Babylon with the first 
deportation in 597 (3:15) and from there followed the course 
of events leading to the destruction of Jerusalem in 586. 
Never did he voice the least hope that Jerusalem would resist 
the siege -- it was a hopeless resistance to a powerful 
enemy. With the capture of Jerusalem the tone of his teach¬ 
ings changes from futility to hope for a future restoration. 
His warnings of the fall of Jerusalem were proven true and 
he became respected, and popular because of his prophecies 
of a happier future. 

Ezekiel uses his usual visionary methods to express his 
interpretation of the hope for restoration of Israel and 
Judah. Moreover, as is characteristic with lessons derived 
from ecstatic experiences, the motives he sees behind 
Yahweh*s promises are not highly moral. Recurring continu¬ 
ally throughout the last section, the new covenant between 
Yahweh and His people is motivated by vanity on Yahweh* s 
part -- the race will be restored and made dominant in world 
affairs in order to teach the nations that Yahweh is 
supreme. His conception of this new kingdom of true 
followers of Yahweh, eternal and prosperous, under the 
sovereignty of "my servant David" (Moffatt) is seen best in 
37:21-28. The reference to David could mean either a des¬ 
cendant of David, or David himself returned to earthly life.(l 


(1) International Critical Commentary, p. 402 
























































* 



















' 





















- 13 - 


One cannot decide between these two alternatives, but either 
of them demonstrates Ezekiel’s admiration of the national 
hero and of his belief that the Messianic king will be 
Davidie. In this teaching Ezekiel repopularizes the hope 
for a restoration of the Davidic dynasty. The doctrine of 
the Messianic king is beginning to assume a definite shape. 

Little need be said of Ezekiel’s contemporary, 

Obadiah. He returns to the old interpretation of the Day 
of Yahweh, particularly with reference to the traitorous 
Edomites — a time to come when they will be punished by 
Yahweh, along with all the nations. But since the Jews 
have already suffered, they will be restored, what is left 
of them, to dwell again in Zion in complete protection 
under Yahweh (vv. 16-18). No mention is made of a divine 
or human viceroy — Yahweh’s direct intervention will be 
the cause, and He will be the ruler of the nation. 

Very soon after Obadiah had announced his message, 
international strife on a comparatively large scale 
appeared. Persia, becoming steadily more powerful, 
conquered the rather short-lived Babylonian Empire in 538, 
under the leadership of Cyrus, in the following year, he 
gave his permission to the Jews to return to their native 
land. A few years before this liberation there arose a 

prophet, called now for lack of knowledge of his real name, 














' 




. ' 


. 

. 





. 
















• v -ri 

, m ' 


« 

. - ' 





. 













. 


. 







- 14 - 


II Isaiah, whose writings are now embodied in Chs. 40-55 
of our book of Isaiah, according to the generally accepted 
theory today. 

The interpretation of II Isaiah has been a matter of 
dispute, centering mainly around the question of who the 
"Servant" so often referred to represents. At present let 
it suffice to accept the viewpoint held by the majority of 
critical scholars of the present — that the Servant is not 
some person but the nation as a whole, hot until centuries 
later did the former interpretation appear, and it can well 
be dealt with in its proper chronological position* 

The writer of II Isaiah was deeply religious, seeing 
Yahweh as supreme controller of all nations, the power 
behind the conquests of Cyrus (Isa* 48:14). He has a vivid 
picture of the restoration of Israel, the first stage of 
which must be the moral purification of the people (Isa.44:2 
through Yahweh 1 s forgiveness. On this moral basis the 
redemption for the world is built, for after the purificat¬ 
ion, Israel will be worthy of divine favour. This favour, 
however, will be shown, says the prophet, in an unexpected 
way. There is nothing of the Day of Yahweh theory, nor of 
any day of destruction to Israel’s enemies, an idea which 

is incompatible with the prophet’s monotheism, since 















. 






v, , . ; 











, 










■ 




















■ 















v 












“ 



































- 15 - 


Yahweh is God and protector of all nations. Instead of the 
former crude prophecies of ruin, the faith here expressed is 
that the nations of the world will see how Yahweh restores 
Israel after her punishments, which were preparatory to her 
future service, and will realize that Yahweh is the one and 
only true God. After this realization the nations will come 
to the religion of Yahweh, deserting their former idols, the 
world will be unified under the one God, and international 
goodwill will follow (Vide e.g., Isa. 45). in this 
apocalyptic hope there is no personal Messiah, but an inter¬ 
national unity of worshippers of Yahweh, accomplished 
through the activities of God in the human scene. It is 
notable that here in II Isaiah the idea of Yahweh as God of 
all nations is carried to its completion *— that in the 
kingdom to come, the old disputes between Jew and Gentile 
will be removed and all will be one. 

Like most prophets, the writer of II Isaiah indulges 
in considerable hyperbole. He speaks confidently and 
glowingly of the coming return of the Jews to Palestine over 
a straight and level road across desert, through valleys and 
hills to their goal. Their home coming will be in happiness 
and triumph, led by their God to the sacred hills of Zion, 
(Isa. 40:If). It is a picture of absolute faith in a bright 
future, not only for Israel, though she will be enriched 

















. 


. 

. 
























. 


I 

. 

. 

. 

. 










- 16 - 


first, but later for the whole world, brought to Yahweh by 
the admirable example of his servant, Israel. 

Unfortunately, the actual return was the very opposite 
of the prophet’s expectations. Over a long and weary road 
the exiles travelled, back to a despoiled and ruined 
Jerusalem, to be greeted by cold unfriendliness on the part 
of those who had taken over the city and were loathe to 
give up the land they had appropriated. Dissention arose 
among the returned exiles and the natives and all the 
glorious hopes for the new Jerusalem seemed doomed.(1) 

The returning Jews looked forward, as we have seen,to 
an age of national prosperity, and found a ruined city. 
Because of this, the first requisite to the new age, the 
rebuilding of the temple, faded into insignificance beside 
the need of such material things as homes for the people. 
This condition lasted for five or six years after the first 
return in 526 B.C. until it faced its first challenge under 
Eaggai and &echariah, both of whom protested vehemently that 
the Jews could expect no favor from Yahweh as long as He had 
no Temple, and promised in E^s name that when the Temple was 
rebuilt, the people would receive His blessing in the form 

(1) A History of the Hebrew Commonwealth, p. 272-3. 






























■ 




' , ■ ' ! 




















■ 


... 













• ' ■ 


. 


■ 

















- - 

■ 












- 17 - 


of material prosperity (Haggai 1:2-5). Zachariah even goes 
so far as to tell them who will rule them under Yahweh, 
telling them to place the crown upon Zerubbabel (Zech.6:ll) 

Under this inspiration, and with the approval of 
Darius, the people quickly started the work, and the Temple 
was finished in 516. 

Even now, however, the promised age did not arrive, 
and Zerubbabel, far from becoming their king, seems to have 
disappeared completely from the scene. Various attempts 
were made to enthrone their own king, but all were defeated 
and the final result was the placing of a Persian governor 
at the head of the Jewish colony. 

With that action the hopes of the people for a true 
Jev/ish nation seemed doomed, and this situation had an 
unfortunate effect on the people. The actual effects are 
seen in the writings under the name "Malachi", where we 
read of very poor support of the Temple, of sacrifices of 
the poorest animals, but worse than that, of intermarriage 
between Jews and the surrounding Gentiles, intermarraiges 
accomplished sometimes by the divorcing of Jewish wives in 
favor of Gentile women, (Mai. 1:12-13; 2:14). 


It is possible that the attempt to rebuild the wall 















- 18 - 


lescribed in Ezra 4 followed soon after the message of 
"Malachi" (1); but one would be unwise to put too much trust 
in the history contained in Ezra. If, however, this 
conjecture is true, the attempt to follow the teachings of 
the preceding prophet failed, evidently because of the 
intrigue of the surrounding peoples who were loath to see 
Jerusalem rebuilt and strengthened. ±n order to prevent 
this they sent word to Artaxerxes, now king of Persia, 
telling of the attempt to rebuild the wall of Jerusalem, and 
pointing out all the underirable consequences of the plan 
which could possibly happen. Artaxerxes, in reply, gave 
orders for the cessation of work on the city wall, and thus 
defeated another attempt to make a city nation of 
Jerusalem. 

However, the plan was finally brought to a successful 
conclusion when Nehemiah arrived in Jerusalem in 445, with 
permission to build the city wall. By dint of marvellous 
organization, in spite of all sorts of attempts to discredit 
the plan itself, he completed the wall and the perpetuation 
of the Jewish religion and , indeed, of the Jewish race, was 
made possible. Again there seemed reason to hope for the 
new age under divine rule. 


(1) Israel’s Messianic Hope, p. 197. 









































' 






. 





















4 






« . ■ 


























t 












-19- 


There might now have been a tremendous revival of 
Messianism had it not been for the fact that during the 
days of depression the Priestly class had siezed the power. 
From the time of the disappearance of Zerubbabel the power 
of the priests had been growing stronger, until the high 
priest himself was a virtual king. During this time the 
P document of the Pentateuch was published, and it is 
probably some priest who was responsible for attributing 
some of the reforms of Nehemiah to the far less objectionable 
Ezra, who may never have even lived, apart from tradition. 

As it was, the silence was broken rather violently 
by the brief message of Joel somewhere around 430 B.C., 
telling of the coming Day of Yahweh, when Judah would be 
prospered and all other nations would be summoned together 
for a final judgment. It is an unfortunate return to the 
old ideas of national prosperity and foreign destruction, 
totally uninfluenced by the almost contemporary inter¬ 
national teaching of the book of Johah. Joel’s was a purely 
national hope for a better world, to be brought about by 
Yahweh, with no Messianic mediary. 

A century later the hopes of the Jewish people 
received a temporary uplift by the Macedonian conquest of 
Persia, carried on by Alexander the Great. This feeling is 


















' 


■ ! 






■ 






. 






. ' : 









. 









. . • • . 

r 














■ 

. 






' . t 
























-20- 


re fleeted in Isaiah 24-27, which tells of the promised Day 
of Yahweh, along traditional linesof extreme nationalism — 
the gleaning of the faithful from among the Gentile nations 
before the great destruction, leaving the Jews safe and 
prosperous in Jerusalem. 

At this time also Zechariah 9-11, 12-J.4 was written, 
telling of how the Jews will be used by Yahweh in His plan 
for the destruction of the surrounding nations. Both 
writings reflect a strong hope living in spite of desperate 
present conditions which are inevitable in the presence of 
var close at hand. 

After this there followed an era which, in the field 
of literature, featured homiletic writings, under the ever- 
spreading influence of Greek culture, unbroken until 167 B.C. 
when the Jews* simmering hatred of the Greeks finally burst 
Into open revolt under the Maccabees. 




















' 




. 



















. 


















. 






. 

. 








. 


r • 












■ 









Chapter III 


PRE-CHRISTIAN APOCALYPTICISM OF APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE 

It has been seen how the apocalyptic hopes of the 
Jewish people had taken on an impersonal aspect, featuring 
no divine agent of any sort. The book of Daniel, the last 
canonical writing of this period, tells of the establish¬ 
ment of the divine Kingdom as a result of the work of God 
and His angels. There is no mention of any ruler of the 
Davidic lineage, nor of any special human person used by 
God to fulfill His purposes. The symbolism of this book 
uses a beast to represent the irreligious foreign nations, 
and a man to represent the saintly, but there is nothing 
to justify taking this man as a person in his own right. 
Daniel’s hope is the universal dominion of the saints. (1) 

From the time of the Maccabaean uprising until the 
appearance of Christian canonical writings, we must look 
to the apocryphal literature for any signs of change in 
messianic conceptions on the part of the Jewish people. In 
this field, we do, however, find considerable signs. 

"Never was the intensity of Israel’s forward look greater 
than in the century and a half preceding the birth of 


(1) The Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ, 
Div. & Vol. II. 







ML 





































. 

. 

. 

. 

■ 






- 












. 


T 












■ 









































- 22 - 

Jesus. In no period are the details of the future pictured 
more variously.” (1) 

With the appearance of the Maccabaean leaders, the 
idea of a personal agent of Yahweh grew in strength, but 
the detailed following of this development is made rather 
difficult by the impossibility of dating these writings 
with absolute certainty. 'With what knowledge we have as 
to dates of these writings, we can see, however, that this 
growth of belief in the coming of a personal Messiah was 
not uninterrupted, but that writers prophesied both 
personal and impersonal forms of apocalypticism. This is 
well represented in the book of Enoch, more properly called 
a compilation of several books. Written during the first 
and second centuries before uhrist, these books speak of 
the establishment of the perfect kingdom through direct 
divine intervention, to be followed by the rule of Yahweh, 
or of the appearance, after the attainment of the new 
world, of a Messiah, who may be either pre-existent or 
newly born. (2) There was no unanimity of opinion in this 
much-discussed matter, every writer having his own beliefs 

(1) Israel's Messianic Hope, p. 247. 

(2) The Millenial Hope, Ch. 2. 






j ■ 


















-23- 


and showing no concern whatsoever for the differences 
between his and other writers 1 ideas. The political and 
international turmoil of the age was reflected very strongly 
in the apocalyptic literature. 

As might be expected, the various prophets of the new 
age claimed varying followings. The intellectual class too£ 
the whole idea much more soberly than did the common people. 
Those with a knowledge of contemporary world history could 
see quite clearly how it happened that the Jewish people 
were in subjection, but those less well informed saw only 
the nation which they firmly believed was God’s favorite 
did not prosper, and therefore trusted that divine favor 
would ultimately show itself in a material way. 

This feature came strongly to light during and after 
the Maccabaean revolts when the Jewish nation finally 
achieved full independence in 143-2 B.C. At the first hope 
of such a change in their state, the common people rallied 
around Mattathias, and later, his son Judas and fought with 
a religious zeal that gave them addea strength. When Simon 
was declared high priest forever the Pharisees showed their 
attitude by casting doubts on his right to that position. 

As a result, at the time when the nation should have been 
strenghening their forces by uniting, the priestly class 




. 

























» 





















■ 

. 














-24- 


jo ined. hands with the more politically minded Sadducees 
against the Pharisees. Thus, while the populace were 
expacting the steady growth of a divinely guided kingdom, 
their leaders were leading to its downfall. 

The downfall finally came when, in 63 B.C., Pompey 
led his Roman army into Jerusalem, having taken advantage 
of the growing weakness of the Syrian empire to conquer its 
colonies for none. Jerusalem again became a subject state, 
governed by Hyrcanus II as high priest, acting under 
authority and supervision of the Roman governor of Syria. 

The desperate condition of the Jewish erstwhile nation came 
to a climax in 37 B.C. when Herod, Idumaean son of Antipater 
became governor of Jerusalem. This became an age dotted 
with sporadic and short-lived revolts, when any man with a 
gift for leadership could become acclaimed as the promised 
Messiah and lead an ill-fated and badly equipped army 
against the Romans. Roman domination heightened faith in 
a future better world, and this, coupled with a growing 
belief in a spiritual rather than anthropomorphic Yahweh, 
made the idea of a Messiah to appear and lead the people to 
freedom necessarily strong. (1) The Jewish colony of the 
Roman Empire was a hotbed of seething hatred, helped 


(1) The Jewish World in the Time of Jesus, Bk. II, Ch. IV 

























:r 


















. 










J 




















' 


« • ' ' • ' r i; I 


. 


■ 





















-25- 


considerably by the fact that they were being governed by 
a foreigner, and the whole populace continually expected 
the Messiah to appear. For the people this faith was their 
only hope; for their rulers it was their chief trouble. 




























































Chapter IV 


A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL STUDY OF 

ALLEGEDLY MESSIANIC PASSAGES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT 

Throughout the preceding chapters certain inter¬ 
pretations have been assumed concerning translation and 
chronology in regard to passages in the Old Testament which 
are considered by many as being Messianic in tone. In some 
cases the treatment of these passages has differed, 
implicitly or otherwise, with that which would be given 
them by a follower of what might be termed the "orthodox 
school*" For that reason it would be well to study 
sections whose Messianic character is open to question in 
order to justify the interpretations which have been used 
heretofore. Due to frequent difficulty in stating the date 
of writing with any finality, it will be best to deal with 
these sections in the order in which they appear in our 
Bible rather than in any attempted chronological order, 
since the latter course would result in something akin to 
chaos. 


Genesis 3:15, giving the divine curse on the snake in 
the Garden of Eden, has been considered as prophesying a 
Messiah. Clarke’s Bible Commentary, q.v., says that there 
is $o justification for taking this passage literally, and 





















. 


. 























































’ . ' 
















-27- 


according to this source Satan is referred to, since he 
inspired the serpent. n He shall strike •••• " refers to 
Christ, the son of woman only ("her seed"), and, as Clarke 
proceeds, the bruising of the serpent’s head refers to the 
destruction of Satan’s power through the atoning death of 
Christ. The bruising of "his heel" is interpreted into a 
prophecy that the salvation of man could be brought about 
only by the death of Christ. 

However, there seems to be no reason for refusing to 
accept a literal treatment of this verse since it fits the 
context perfectly. Furthermore, to say that a virgin birth 
is implied in the phrase "her seed" is just as illogical as 
to say that our expression "the woman’s son" outrules the 
possibility of the child in question having a human father. 
There is no justification possible for subjecting this verse 
to such a contorted exegesis. 

In Genesis 12:7 is found the promise of God to 

Abraham and his seed. At first glance one would almost 

certainly consider that here "his seed" refers to Abraham’s 

descendents. However, Paul read into it a reference to 
Christ (Gal. 3:16) since the word used, ’’ 'j y 1 J O) " is 

singular and therefore must refer to one person. One wonderj 

at such an interpretation especially since, in v. 29 of the 









.... 

, 




. 



, - \ i 


■ 













• • ■ 

. 





f 










-28- 


same chapter, Paul himself uses the singular "seed", 

" " 9 to refer to Christians of unlimited number* 

The Hebrew language uses the singular form in a collective 
sense whenever the idea of offspring is expressed. Because 
of this normal usage, this passage is justly considered as 
being non-Messianic. 

In Deuteronomy 18:15 a definite and obvious prophecy 
of the coming of Christ is seen by some. However, such an 
idea is completely disproven when one remembers that in 
this verse and in verse 18 it is definitely stated that the 
expected prophet will be like the writer, and since the 
writer of this book never makes Messianic claims, he could 
not have been looking forward to anything more than a 
coming prophet of no spectacular nature* 

The Book of Psalms contains the next disputable 
passages, a few psalms having been termed Messianic by 
some scholars. The first of these is the second psalm, 
into which has been read a picture of the kingdom of Christ 
and an exhortation to accept it. This interpretation is 
shown to be a mistake by the fact that the king referred to 
is evidently contemporaneous to the writer (v. 6). The 
reference in v. 2 to the "anointed one" offers no obstacle 
to such an interpretation since the kings of Judah were 








. 


. 


: ■■ r - 


t 'lO 


. 

; 1C . / ' : ■ ' ' 

. 

. « 








. 

. 












. 









* 














-29- 


anointed as earthly agents of God, holding their sovereignty 
under Him. Thus Saul is anointed by Samuel (I Sam. 10:1), 
and although the verb ” n vti " is different from that in the 
psalm, " t 'OJ w , it is a synonym. 

Psalm 45 has been summarized as depicting the majesty 
and grace of Christ’s kingdom, although the reasons for 
that interpretation seem rather obscure, since the psalm 
lends itself readily to something more along the line of a 
wedding celebration, possibly written at the time of Ahab’s 
marriage to Jezebel, which would explain verse 10# There 
appears to be no clear justification for considering this 
an allegory of any sort. 

Fsalm 47 is also looked on as prophetic of Christ’s 
kingdom by some. However, the psalm’s martial tone is 
totally lacking in harmony with the character of Christ and 
the kingdom of which he himself spoke. For that reason 
alone this psalm could well be dismissed from the list of 
Messianic passages in the Old Testament. 

In Psalm 72 is seen one which might be taken as 
Messianic if only the content were considered without any 
effort being made to date it or determine the identity of 
the king to whom it refers. However, Oesterley and 
Robinson consider it a song written for a king ascending 






















. 




s 






1 









. 





f . 






























































-30- 


the throne at that time.(l) Possibly it was written in 
620 B.C., when Josiah was enthroned; at any rate it shows 
too high a moral insight to justify its Davidic inscription. 
There is no reason to consider that this psalm was written 
in a prophetic vein apart from the conventional forecasts 
of a glorious reign. 

Brief mention many be made of Psalm 93, into which 
has been read a prophecy of Christ’s kingdom. This is a . 
theocratic psalm and mentions no divine agent of any sort, 
therefore it obviously cannot be considered Messianic. 

The next book to be investigated, The Song of Songs, 
needs only a single reading to show that it is far too 
carnal (not in any way disagreeable to the writer’s 
contemporaries) to be considered prophetic of anything in 
the field of moral achievement. Several theories about this 
book have been promulgated, of which the tT dramatic wedding 
lyric” seems the most suitable. There is no reference, 
whether explicit or implicit, to either God or a Messiah, 
and whatever the correct interpretation is, it calls for 
a seriously strained exegesis to consider that this very 
humanly passionate poem could possibly disguise a prophecy 

)l/ Hebrew Religion, Its Origin and Development, p. 376. 














. 

C 


















c * 4 

• 











. 








' 




■ . 


. 
















. 

• 



, 



. 



L 

t 




t 

■ 




































- 31 - 


of the coming of Christ. 

The book of Isaiah, now to be considered, must be 
divided roughly into three sections, namely Chapters 1-39, 
40-55, 56-66. It should be remembered, however, that all 
sections falling into the first group, for instance, need 
not necessarily be treated as the work of Isaiah, although 
this group is mostly authentic. Similarly, not all of Chs. 
40-55 is written by Beutero-Isaiah, nor is there any unity 
of authorship throughout.Chs. 56-66. 

In the second chapter of Isaiah the prophet foresees 
a better world to come. Because of the Authorized Version 
translation of the phrase Tf V * ’ n J7 n inA'D.” as "in the 
last days" in v. 2 this is often taken as a prophecy of 
Christ’s kingdom. However, the above translation is some¬ 
what exaggerated since " l p**” means "after" when used in a 
temporal sense, and therefore this phrase should be trans¬ 
lated, as Moffatt puts it, "in after days". When this is 
done it is obvious that Isaiah was not referring to any 
apocalyptic kingdom to come at the end of this present world 
but was instead expressing his conviction that the world was 
going to turn soon to the one true God with universal and 
eternal peace resulting. Moreover, there is no reference to 
any divine intervention, either directly from God or through 













♦ 

« 

_ 



. 







- 32 - 

His agent, so this passage may be justifiably treated as 
non-Messianic. 

Isaiah 7:14 has been almost universally construed as 
a prophecy of the birth of Christ, due to a mistranslation 
which makes the passage correspond in detail to the 
tradition of the virgin birth of Christ. The fault lies in 
the Hebrew word " " which is translated as " n 

in the Septuagint, as " « in the later Aquila, 

Symmachus and Theodotian manuscripts, and as "virgin" in the 
Authorized Version. Unfortunately for the traditional view 
the Hebrew word under dispute does not mean "virgin", and 
the " 7 TrtfGesos ** of the Septuagint must be considered a mis¬ 
translation* " means simply a young woman of 

marriageable age, whether actually married or not, or still 
possessing her virginity or not* 


H. T. Fowler explains the true context very clearly, 
showing its reference to the near future; 

"The king (Ahaz) is determined to carry out 
his own plan, and so Isaiah offers him a sign 
from Jehovah, such as he himself shall choose* 

With feigned reverence, Ahaz declines to put 
God to the test, and the prophet, in Jehovah’s 
name, determines the sign to be given. As soon 
as a young woman bear a child and that child can 
grow to the earliest choise of good and evil, nay 
sooner, the land whose two kings thou abhorrest 
shall be forsaken. The time element is surely a 
main feature of the prediction, but Isaiah’s words 
are not merely a general poetic statement of time: 
he refers to some particular child to be born to 














. 

. 

' 





. 




■j 
























whom the symbolic name God-with-us, Immanuel, 
is to be given.” (1) 

In Isaiah 9:6f is another passage usually connected 
with the coming of Jesus. This is rather hard to understand 
since the characteristics of the model king prophesied have 
nothing in common with those of Jesus. Ihe qualities of the 
foreseen ruler are those of a just but stern king, with no 
mention of the love taught so much by Christ. Fowler 
contends that the prophet here has been carried away by the 
name ”God-with-us” and is visualizing the coming kingdom as 
an established fact, so certain is he that the future will 
be as he has prophesied.(2) Whether this treatment is 
justified or not, it seems obvious that to interpret this 
passage as a true prophecy of Christ f s kingdom is to do an 
injustice to the person of Jesus, since the moral standards 
are definitely on a lower scale than are those of Jesus. 

With Ch. 11:Iff appear certain difficulties in 
deciding authenticity of authorship. Fowler considers this 
”... one of the wonderful passages of this book ... ” and 
expresses doubt that Isaiah wrote it.(3) Oesterley and 
Robinson, however, say it is ”probably the utterance of an 


(1) A History of the Literature of Ancient Israel, 

pp. 150-151. 

(2) ibid. p. 151. 

(3) ibid. p. 160. 






• . 








• ' ■ ■ . . 


■ 


■ 

. 







































, 

. 

, 




. 








- 34 - 


exilic prophet...". (1) The nature of the kingdom does 
rather favor an exilic dating, but be that as it may, what¬ 
ever its authorship, the passage is definitely Messianic 
and prophesies a righteous kingdom under a JJavidic king in 
which even Mature will join in the universal harmony. 

The next section to consider is Oh. 22:20f, which, 
although not alleged to be a reference to the kingdom of 
Christ, has been construed as a prefiguration of that king¬ 
dom. This judgment is definitely weak, since only a purely 
temporal kingdom under Eliakim is prophesied, set up and 
later broken down by iahweh’s direct action. There is 
nothing to justify any connection between this and 
apocalyptic beliefs. 

Ch. 28:16 is the last passage of this first section 
of the book of Isaiah which has been included in Messianic 
prophecies. There is actually nothing here to justify any 
personal interpretation. Yahweh is going to lay a found¬ 
ation stone in Zion, but the next verse would indicate that 
the stone represents not a Messiah but the qualities of 
justice and\equity. The prophecy would seem to be a 
protest against the nation’s international policy in 

(1) Hebrew Religion, Its Origin and Development, p. 241, 
(footnote 1). 




■ 

■ 

. 








' 








■ - .!:■ *»;#[, | 








- 35 - 


Isaiah's time, under the belief that it was based on 
intrigue and dishonesty instead of righteousness and 
honesty. Only a strained treatment could make a Messianic 
prophecy plausible here: it is a statesman-prophet’s 
protest against a short-sighted and unfaithful government. 

Any study of Chs. 40-55 of Isaiah involves the 
problem of the identity of the "Servant" so often featured 
by the writer. On that question hinges our decision in 
regard to the Messianic or non-Messianic nature of this 
section. Up until fairly recent times it was unquestioning^ 
accepted that the "Servant" was a definite person, commonly 
believed to be Jesus. Of late years, however, considerable 
doubt has been cast on that assumption, arguments having 
been advanced favoring the idea that the "Servant" is a 
personification of the Jewish nation, and the dispute is 
still far from being settled. 

H. T. Fowler holds no brief for either position in 
his treatment of these chapters,(1) but such a compromise 
is no solution. Oesterley and Robinson argue strongly for 
a personal interpretation, saying that "only a forced and 
unnatural exegesis" can support a national meaning.(2) 

(1) A History of the Literature of Ancient Israel, p. 273. 

(2) Hebrew Religion, Its Origin and Development, p. 304. 











r ■ m ■ I 


* 

' 

. 

. 


. 

-g •/' f: 




. 

: I 















- 36 - 


Their claim is that it is impossible to explain such 
passages as Chs. 49:1, 5, 6; 53:4-6 if the "Servant" is 
considered a personification of Israel. Guignebert mentions 
that Isaiah 53, for example, is generally accepted as 
national, but cites Hugo Grossman 1 s argument that the 
"Servant" suffers with his people, and since history shows 
no such servant, the passage must, therefore, be Messianic.1 
Whether such a stand is tenable or not can best be decided 
in the light of direct translation from the Hebrew. 

The first "Servant" passage in II Isaiah reveals 

clearly and indisputably the identity of the "Servant". 

Ch. 41:8 introduces this theme with the words " D/taH 

" T 2J x i <js — But thou, Israel, my servant....". 

There is nothing to contradict this interpretation in later 

verses, nor can "Israel" be treated as a gloss since the 

parallelism of the next lines substantiates the national 

identity of the "Servant" beyond any valid dispute: 

". Jacob whom I have chosen, race of Abraham 

my friend ... and said to thee, Thou are my servant." 

In Ch. 42 the author records the task Yahweh has 
assigned to the "Servant" -- the redemption of the nations 
of the world. Moffatt has mistranslated v. 6(b) in a way 
inconsistent with his treatment of the "Servant" as Israel, 

(1) The Jewish World in the Time of Jesus (Ek.H) p. 146. 













- 37 - 


when he says, ”... I have formed you for the rescuing of 
my people ...”. It is obviously impossible for Israel to 
rescue Israel. However, this line should read, ”... the 
people...” since there is no pronominal suffix attached to 
the noun "vj w in the Hebrew text. 

Again in 44:21 we are definitely told that Israel is 
Yahweb’s servant, and 45:4 also speaks of the co-identity 
of Israel and the ”Servant”. 

Against such evidence Oesterley and Robinson’s 
contention that the "Israel” in 49:3 is a gloss(l) is rather 
pointless. Not only have they the backing of only one 
Manuscript (2), but they leave untouched many similarly 
explicit references to Israel as the "Servant”. It would 
seem almost certain that the national interpretation is the 
correct one, in spite of such objections as have been 
mentioned. Undoubtedly there is a strong personal tenor 
in the writings of this prophet, but that is no argument for 
a personal meaning, since the writers of Israel commonly 
associated themselves so closely with thq troubles of the 
nation as a whole that their national writings very often 
seemed more individual than social. Oesterley and Robinson 

(1) Hebrew Religion, Its Origin and Development, p. 304. 

(2) Biblia Hebraica, v. Isa. 49:3. 












- 38 - 

themselves admit this in saying that many seemingly 
individualistic represent the community under the guise of 
an individual. (1) 

Having, then, demonstrated clearly that the Jewish 
nation is the "Servant" we may safely conclude that none 
of the writings of II Isaiah is Messianic in the sense of 
predicting the coming of a personal Messiah in any manner 
whatsoever. II Isaiah looked forv/ard to a glorious, 
righteous and peaceful world of the future, hut this world 
would be attained by Israel f s consecration of herself to 
the service of Yahweh in the task of bringing the nations 
of the world to the one true God. 

In the next book to be studied, Jeremiah, are found a 
few passages often associated with Messianism, inasmuch as 
a Daviaic king is prophesied. Jeremiah was a statesman- 
prophet, having a deep affection for his country and concern 
for its welfare. In Ch. 22 he speaks for Yahweh in 
condemning the wrongs of Judah 1 s ruler, Zedekiah, and his 
court. This continues into the following chapter, and here 
he forecasts the coming of a Davidic king, appointed by 
Yahweh, to the throne of Judah. Under this king the nation 
will be ruled justly and well, to compensate for its 


(1) Hebrew Religion, Its Origin and Development, p. 339. 


















. . 













i 








. 






. 













'' £ 














































• 









- 39 - 


wretchedness at the tine of Jeremiah’s writings. It is, 
however, worthy of note that the prophet considers this king 
vill he strictly mortal -- there is no supernatural tone in 
the prophecy. It is a purely political state, albeit 
governed by a pious and just king. 

The same prophecy is found in Ch. 33: 15-16, almost 
word for word with the previous one, which, like 23:5-6, 
cannot be treated as a conscious prophecy of the appearance 
of a leader such as Jesus. 

The only passage of this book which has been definitely 
associated with Jesus is 31:22, where the words "A woman 
shall compass a man", have been taken as referring to the 
virgin birth of Jesus. The verb here, in the 

Po’l’el form, means anything from "go about" to "defend" 
and it is therefore absurd to look on such a verse as 
referring to the birth of Jesus. 

There are three chapters in the writings of Ezekiel 
which have been interpreted as prophecies of Christ. Of 
these, Ch. 36 speaks only of the coming of the better world 
vhich will be established by Yahweh for reasons discussed in 
an earlier part of this work. There is nothing to suggest 
a divine mediator, human or otherwise, bringing about or 
ruling this future world so this chapter cannot logically be 

























*' : i 

. 






. 






i 

' 










■ 

■ 


■■■ 








' 




. 1 '.I,. 

■ ■ 








- 40 - 


treated as a prophecy of Christ’s coming. 

The other "Messianic" passages are in Chs. 34:23-24; 
37:24 where we are told that David will return in person 
to assume the throne of the new world. Here, then, any 
connection with Jesus is outruled since, although Christ’s 
ancestry was traditionally traced hack to David* no one 
ever went to the extreme of claiming that Jesus was a re¬ 
incarnation of David. Ezekiel indisputably believed that 
David would return at Yahweh’s will and no one else. Nor 
is there any room for doubt in the translation since the 
Hebrew, " 7^7 can mean only "my servant David" and 

none other. 

Nowhere, then, in the book of Ezekiel, can there be 
found any prophecy referring to Jesus. 

Micah 5:1-3 is considered by the editors of the 

Authorized Version as prophetic of the birth of Christ. 

Apart from the question of the authenticity of this section, 

which has already been discussed, there is little similarity 

between the king whose birth is here prophesied and the 

actual person and life of Christ. The person referred to 
in the book of Micah was to rule Israel, but Jesus never 

tried, nor even wanted, to follow that line of action. 

There is, therefore, no reason for interpreting this 













- 41 - 


section as a reference to a person who repudiated the pri¬ 
mary feature of the prophecy* 

In the sixth century writings of Zechariah appear 
another series of prophecies regarding a future king of 
Judah, e.g., Zech. 3:8 speaks of a divinely appointed 
person referred to as the "Branch". In a later chapter, 
6:10 f, the identity of this king is revealed as someone 
contemporary with the author, although there is some doubt 
as to the actual person Zechariah had in mind. The 
Authorized Version follows the Hebrew in naming Joshua, son 
of Josedech, the high priest, although Kittel (q.v.) 
considers the phrase in question added to the original 
Hebrew text. Moffatt emends the verse to read, "Zerubbabel 
the son of Shealtiel" for deductive rather than textual 
reasons. Haggai and Zechariah were contemporary prophets 
and urged the rebuilding of the Temple in preparation for 
the purification of the nation. Haggai prophesies the 
exaltation of Zerubbabel, then governor of Judah, to a 
higher honour. Kittel finds no fault in this verse (v. 

Ch. 2:33), yet has reason to dispute the reading in Zech. 
6:11 where a member of the priestly class is suddenly 
substituted as the future ruler of Judah for no apparent 
reason. In view of the similarity between these two 
contemporary prophets, in teaching if not in method, one is 
















* 




• 

. 



. 

N".| 











* 








- 42 - 


strongly tempted to agree with Loffatt’s conclusion that the 
original reading here was "Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel” 
rather than "Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest” 
and that the change was made by someone in sympathy with 
the aspirations of the priestly class to temporal power 
later in Jewish history. 

Be that as it may, there is no basis whatsoever for 
considering the "Branch” as a term for Christ, for the 
"Branch” is someone living in Zechariah’s time. 

The next section of this book, Chs. 9-14, is not 
authentic with the first section, having been written much 
later, under different international conditions, probably 
sometime in the middle of the second century B.C. Whoever 
is referred to in Ch. 9:9 it could hardly be Jesus for the 
writer shows no interest at all in the sort of kingdom 
Jesus wanted, as is seen in the latter part of Ch. 14 where 
he speaks of a new Judah which will be ritualistically pure. 
This writer’s idea of the righteous nation was one whose 
people piously observed the ilosaic Law to an almost 
fanatical extent (Ch. 14:20-21) and it is obvious that such 
a person could never look with favor on the religion taught 
by Jesus, and therefore would not be joyfully prophesying 

(9:9) the coming of a king of Christ’s type. 
























■ 














- ■ 


• . 


. 







- 

, . . u . • , ' . ' : . ■''> ^ 

\ V J 

ii ■. :J.* 

. 

* 





. 

■ 

* 












- 43 - 


Ch. 11:12 cannot be connected with the betrayal of 
Jesus considering that, although the sums of money are 
identical, in no way can the rest of this section be 
applied to the life or death of Jesus. Similarity in one 
phrase, when countered by dissimilarity in all the context, 
is insufficient evidence to justify accepting this passage 
as a Christological prophecy. 

The same situation is found in the other "Messianic" 
passages of this section and one is justified in discarding 
these as well as the former verses from any compilation of 
prophecies pointing to a future leader of the type of 
Uhrist. The prevailingly martial tenor is completely out 
of tune with the nature and aim or desus. 

One may safely say that the confusion in inter¬ 
pretation of the book of Malachi arises out of the un¬ 
fortunate translation of the Hebrew " y ? X $ X " as a proper 
noun rather than as a common noun, "my messenger". For 
that mistranslation there is no justification -- indeed it 
is difficult to understand why it was done. 

The general corruption of the Jev/ish nation as 
described in this book makes it fairly certain that it was 
written sometime soon after the return from the Babylonian 
exile, when the religious life had become an utterly soul- 














■ 






i£ ■ 


. 






. 

■ 














■ 





















' ,1 




. 






' 


• ■ ' O '' ! 






' . .. ■ 1 






, . ! 










- 44 - 


less observance of sacrificial laws. Through the unknown 
writer of this book Yahweh declares his hatred of such 
"worship” and warns the people of a coining day of judgment, 
when "the Lord (will come) suddenly (to his temple)", 

(Ch. 3:1). There is no suggestion that this event might 
not take place for centuries; instead it is expected in the 
very near future and the people are warned implicitly to be 
ready. Neither the messenger nor the Lord can possibly 
refer to Jesus, for the prophet wrote these words four 
hundred odd years before the time of Christ, and was writing 
for the benefit of his contemporaries, not posterity. We 
cannot, then, look on the book of Malachi as prophetic of 
Christ himself, but rather of a day to be dreaded when 
Yahweh would come to judge a corrupt nation. 

In summary one may safely say that in no writings of 
the Old Testament prophets do we find a prophecy of the 
coming of Jesus. The prophets were all men who saw the 
evils of their nation at their time and believed that such 
evils must be abolished if the nation were to survive. 

They were not writing for the benefit of readers hundreds 
of years later; in fact it is open to doubt if they thought 
their messages would be preserved that long. They wrote in 
the hope that what they declared to be the will of God 
would have some effect on their people and lead them into 











; • 






■■ 


■ 












* 









- 45 - 


a righteous and God-fearing way of life. lio matter what 
may be done by commentators to wrest out of the prophetic 
writings a meaning that was never intended to be there, it 
still remains that the prophets were public-minded leaders 
who wrote and preached for their day and for the immediate, 
but only the immediate, future. 

It would be a mistake, however, to say that there is 
no connection between the Old Testament writings and the 
life and teachings of Jesus. Jesus himself said he had not 
come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, but to fulfil them. 
(Matt. 5:17) His following remarks, from v. 20 to the end 
of the chapter, show what hemeant when he said he came to 
"fulfil” the Law and the Prophets. He went far beyond 
observance of the letter of the Law and stressed the 
necessity of a spiritual life, and of a mental attitude to 
one f s fellow man which would be in accord with the Law. It 
was not enough to refrain from murder because the Law 
forbade it: one must not even want to commit murder. A 
man’s mental attitude towards a woman was just as important 
as his actual behaviour with her. The Holiness Code 
commanded the Jew to love his neighbor as himself (Lev. 
19:18) but Jesus knew this had been interpreted as 
referring only to Jews, and so taught that everyone was a 
man’s neighbor. In short, Jesus fulfilled the Lav/ by 










- 46 - 


making it more nearly perfect, and the Prophets by teaching 
and living the highly spiritual and moral life which they 
had taught, 

Jesus also fulfilled the writings found in the Old 
Testament by removing religion from the sphere of cold 
ritual and making of it a deeply spiritual way of living. 
Many prophets had spoken against ritualistic religion, as 
we know, but none had been able to break the hold such 
practices had on the Jewish faith. Their hopes were brought 
to a successful fulfilment in the teaching of Jesus as 
accepted by his church, or at least by a large part of it. 

He alone was able to lead his followers away from a 
religion of ceremony and legalism into a purely spiritual 
faith such as had been taught centuries before by the 
prophets of Israel. 

The religion of the prophets was fulfilled in Jesus 
further in his development of the international idea of 
God, a doctrine which had been taught by some of the 
prophets, but which had never reached complete fruition. 
Jesus brooked no boundaries of nationality, race or creed 
when he taught his followers to love one another, and told 
them that God was the Father of all mankind. Any limit¬ 
ation imposed upon God’s love for His children discredited 






























. 

. 





















-47- 


the universality of the deity in Chrises eyes and 
therefore could not be justified. 

In these many ways, therefore, Jesus fulfilled the 
writings of the prophets of the Old Testament, and while 
we cannot rationally believe that any of them looked 
forward to such a leader as Jesus, we must believe that 
without the Old Testament teachings, the appearance of 
Jesus in Palestine would not have been possible, so strong 
is the link between him and the prophets of past centuries. 
The gradual ascendancy in moral and religious insight from 
the time of the earliest prophets is not one of crude 
prophecy but of the deepest spiritual emotions of man. 
Because of this the Old Testament is incomplete without 
the climax of Christ, and the New Testament is groundless 
without the foundation of the Law and the Prophets. 














Chapter V 


JEWISH MESSIANISM IN THE CHRISTIAN ERA 

Messianic speculation in Jewish circles carried on 
relatively unaffected by the advent of Jesus and the 
Christian church. There were, of course, the inevitable 
minor flurries of argument between the scholars of the two 
faiths, but the Christian claim that the Messiah had al¬ 
ready come and died to return to his people in no way pre¬ 
vented the Jews from looking forward hopefully, century 
after century, to the day when the true Messiah would come 
to free them and lead them to their rightful destiny. 

Possibly the prime point of divergence between the 
early Jewish Christians and loyal Jews was the belief in a 
suffering Messiah — one who would die for the salvation of 
his people. By the time of the Targums (200 A.D. and later) 
the idea of a suffering Messiah was repugnant to the Jews, 
and even the disciples* attitude to Jesus shows this belief 
that the Messiah was come to lead their nation into battle 
against their oppressors (Matt. 16:22; Luke 24:21). The 
Jews had always believed, and continued to believe in a 
Messiah of a definitely active nature, and Jesus failed to 
fill their requirements in this respect. Because of that 
he was denounced by them, and the heritage of Messianic 
prophecies remained, for them, unfulfilled. 





"" .. • . 












I 








t 






. 


« 





■ 
























V 






. 


. 















- 49 - 


The general plan or tns Messxcinic world remained that 
of the Apocalypses of pre-Christian times. The Messianic 
age would end with a tremendous war waged against the 
heathen nations, in which war the Jews would be victorious. 
There would follow a new wonderful world in the restored 
Jerusalem, then a general resurrection, the divine judgment 
of the people, and reward according to merit. There were, 
of course, various divergences from this scheme according 
to the beliefs of the different apocalyptic writers and 
their followers, but such divergences were not drastic 
enough to change the general picture of the last days of the 
world. 


The first century A.D* brought feverish Messianic 
speculation, largely because it was believed that the 
Millenium would start during the Creational year 50uu. 
According to Silver, Jesus’ Messianic claims were received 
by the people because he taught that the time was fulfilled 
for the coming of the kingdom of God, which coincided in the 
popular hope in the year 500U in the Creational calendar.(1) 

There were at this time four main schools of thought 
on the matter of the Messiah. The Zealots, as might be 


(1) A History of Messianic Speculation in Israel, p. 6. 
































. 

. 

. 












- 







. 

. 






. 








































- 50 - 


expected considering their martial nature, expected someone 
similar to, but even greater than, Judas Maccabaeas who 
would lead the Jewish nation into absolute and permanent 
freedom from all oppression, and dominion over all other 
nations. The Pharisees, however, looked on the Messiah as 
a perfectly human righteous ruler of Yahweh's people after 
they had been set free. In the idea of the mortality of the 
Messiah the Pharisees differed most from the Essenes, who 
thought the Messiah would be a supernatural envoy of God. 

The fourth group was that of the politicians of the day, who 
considered all Messianic thought to be a dangerous illusion; 
dangerous beacuse it strained the relations between 
Jerusalem and Rome and hence endangered their positions; an 
illusion because there were no signs of the prophecies ever 
being fulfilled. 

Apart from these four clear groups were the great mass 
of the common people, who believed that some day, in some 
place, there would appear a great leader of the Jewish 
people, who would carry out the divine plan for the 
liberation and exaltation of his people. Because of this 
fervent faith, every pretender to the title of Messiah 
could count on a following of varying size. This led to 
anti-Roman revolts under the leadership of one after 
another self-appointed Messiah, which finally resulted in 






- , .. " -■ . • • 

















, ■ kT ■ , r ; 





































* 















. 



. 


■ 



































- 51 - 


the complete downfall of the nation. The most disastrous 
of these revolts was that organized by the "Messiah" Bar 
Kochba, in 132-5 A.D. By the time this had been put down 
by the Roman armies the Jewish nation was completely 
devastated, so much so that further Messianic activity was 
discouraged for the next several centuries. The Rabbis 
began to fix on distant dates for the Messianic age rather 
than on the immediate future which had been the custom 
before the destruction of the Temple. The commonest date 
was some four hundred years in the future, corresponding to 
the four hundred years of the first exile in Egypt. Jewish 
credulity had been dealt a severe blow, and not until the 
fifth century did it fully recover. 

As the fifth century progressed to its close, bringing 
with it the decline and fall of Roman power, Messianic 
speculation found a corresponding rise in popularity. Such 
study had received some encouragement in the third century 
due to political conditions at the time when, during the 
years 235-284 A.D. twenty emperors ruled over the Roman 
empire. The consensus of calculations pointed to the fifth 
century for the Redemption of Israel, and as the years went 
by the people again became ready to rebel. One pseudo- 
Messiah did appear at this time to prophesy a second 
crossing of the water for the Jewish people. This self- 









. 














































t • t I 






























. 

. 







. 

i 












- 52 - 


styled Moses convinced numerous Jews in Crete that he was 
going to lead them across the ocean to the mainland of 
Palestine. The result was naturally the death by drowning 
of several followers. Most of them were saved but the 
immediate disappearance of their ♦’Messiah" prevented any 
punishment of him for his perfidy. 

Again Messianic calculation received a set-back as a 
result of this disappointment, but scholars still continued 
to write on that subject. The literature of the fifth and 
sixth centuries abounds in such thought, possibly 
encouraged by the international crisis at that time. This 
condition lasted into the seventh century, when Jerusalem 
was taken over by the Arabs after their defeat of Persia, 
which conquest aroused more hopes for a Messiah. 

The first pseudo-Messiah to appear after the fifth 
century Moses was Isaac ben Yahub Obadiah Abu Isa al- 
Isfahani, who flourished at Isfahan at the end of the 
seventh century. There is some doubt whether he claimed 
to be the Messiah, or just his forerunner, but whatever his 
claims, he met the khalif in battle and was defeated. One 
follower, Yudghan of Hamadan, was acclaimed as Messiah by 
some, but gained no eminence. Contemporary with him was 
Serenus, a Syrian, who, in 720 A.D. promised to restore the 




















> • ' :: 




. 

O 












. 


. 


. 






. 






. 

















■ 

, 






C 




C 










■» 




















- 53 - 


Jews to their home land and hence gained a wide following. 
However, he was soon brought to trial before the khalif and 
turned over to his fellow-countrymen as a self-confessed 
impostor. 

Messianic speculation and calculation had always been 
influenced by contemporary affairs as affecting the Jews. 
Therefore it is not surprising that in these centuries of 
international discord there was considerable Messianic 
literature. Calculation of the exact date of the Redemption 
was rudely discouraged by the uneventful passing of the 
various dates fixed upon, but men still retained their high 
interest in the subject. 

inuring the Mohammedan period, lasting roughly from the 
seventh until the thirteenth centuries, wnich includes the 
times of the Crusades, there was a large amount of 
Midrashic apocalyptic literature published, m these 
writings various dates were aiscussea as possible deadlines 
for the Redemption with more or less conviction. Some 
expected the Messiah to come immediately after the Arabs 
had conquered Persia, but as this event came and faded into 
history the fateful date was pushed further and further 
into the future by successive scholars, unly one author is 
known in all these writings, one named Saasia Gaon (888-994) 



























. 






. 

' 

■ 

. 


' 









, • 

t 

t 








. 

. 

. 


. 














- 54 - 


who based his calculations on three separate figures in 
Daniel. His calculations indicated that the Messiah would 
come after the passing of 1335 years. Unfortunately, he 
neglected to state the starting point of this era, so his 
prophecies were of interest only to a few who attempted to 
find the unknown date. 

During the early part of this era the years 958-968 
were generally decided on as the date of the Messiah’s 
appearance, so when that decade approached popular interest 
reach high levels. There was great excitement in Israel, 
and scholars corresponded with friends in other countries 
throughout the known world discussing the question hopefully 
The years in question passed without event, however, and 
Jewish hopes were once again crushed. One rather unexpected 
feature of this era is that, in spite of its significance to 
the hopeful Jews, there were only three pseudo-Messiahs 
from the years 600-1000 A.D.,and none of these gained any 
following worthy of note. The years of the Crusades 
changed that situation, however, for during that time there 
appeared numerous self-appointed Messiahs. 

The period of the Crusades deserves special mention in 
that it brought high Messianic feeling to prominence in both 
Christian and Jewish circles. Christians looked on these 
















- 
















. 




’ 

. 


























. 






, . 




























. 









- 55 - 


wars as holy enterprises undertaken to free the land which 
gave birth to Jesus from the anti-Christian Mohammedans. 
Religious fervour all too often gives rise to religious 
intolerance, and in this case the Christians in Europe were 
no exception to that failing. The Crusades broke the 
spirit of the Jews in Germany particularly and brought 
depression, superstition and asceticism, fertile ground for 
Messianic speculation.(1) 

Several prominent Rabbis during the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries indulged in Messianic calculation, and all 
decided that the Redemption was to come fairly soon. Such 
calculations became more and more intricate as time went on 
and previous dates had been discredited by harsh reality. 
Complex mathematics and allegories were put to use to 
produce new dates that would have a semblance to logic 
behind them, such as would convince those who were eager to 
be shown that the future held prosperity and glory for the 
Jewish nation. 

Along with this Messianic excitement came various 
false Messiahs who met with short-lived success and then 
were brought down from their leadership by hostile powers. 
The first important one of these was David Alroy, who came 

(1) A History of Messianic Speculation in Israel, p. 63. 















. 

























■ 













. 


























. 



























- 56 - 


from the north of Persia from one of the free Jewish tribes 
who claim their descent from the lost tribes. Starting in 
Kurdistan in 1160 he gathered a large following in a 
campaign to lead the Jews back to Palestine at a time when 
the sultan was involved with the Crusaders. He was soon put 
down, however, and disappeared completely. 

Possibly the boldest of all these upstarts was Abraham 
ben Samuel Abulafia, who went to Home in 1281 and attempted 
to convert the Pope to Judaism with imprisonment as a result 
He escaped and four years later announced himself in Sicily 
as the Messiah, and proclaimed the year 1290 as the begin¬ 
ning of the millenium. The fixed date came and went with 
no result, and Abulafia disappeared without trace, apart 
from two obscure disciples who met the same end. 

Immediately after this a certain Nissim ben Abraham, 
of Avila, rose into prominence and declared 1295 to be the 
date of Redemption. The result of his attempt at power was 
the same as with his predecessors. 

Still undeterred, the Jewish people later became 
convinced that 1358 would bring the long-awaited Messiah. 
There was less writing on the subject in this period, and 
only one claimant to the title^ of Messiah, who gained little 
prominence, but the generally held belief was that the 











. 


















. 





... 













. 






. 


. 

. 







. 
















- 57 - 


appointed time was near. Such hopes were dealt a particul¬ 
arly vicious blow through the occurrence of the Black Death 
during the middle of the century, instead of Redemption the 
Jews got the plague, and not for approximately 150 years was 
anything more said about the promised new world. Even the 
traditionally patient Jews sickened of the subject after 
this latest blow and they were content to live as best they 
could without hoping for anything better as a result of 
divine intervention. 

The sixteenth century was one of great Messianic 
interest to both Christians and Jews. The Christian church 
was undergoing the Protestant Reformation, and religious 
feeling ran high, resulting in anti-Semitic activities in 
some countries in Europe. Jews were expelled from Germany, 
Spain, Portugal, and to some extent from Italy. As might be 
expected, these refugees experienced a revival of Messianic 
belief and carried it to the various districts around the 
Mediterranean in which they settled in large numbers. 

Coming from the intellectual West, they dominated the 
literary life of those communities and produced correspond¬ 
ingly fervent belief in the approach of the Messianic age 
in their new homes. 


Such hopes were helped by the ill feeling between the 













. 


. 

























♦ 






■ 

- 








< 










t 




. 













































- 58 - 


Mohammedans and the Christian persecutors of the Jews, 
which led the Jews at least to contemplate the possibility 
of the defeat of the Christian nations. This was further 
assisted by the schism in the Christian church caused by 
the Reformation, and the Jews had definite hopes that their 
enemies were facing destruction through exterior force and 
interior disunity. It is worthy of note also that the 
discovery of America in 1492 brought forth the suggestion 
that the lost ten tribes of Israel were inhabiting this new 
world. These three factors all contributed to the Jews’ 
hope that the day of Redemption was in the very near future. 

This century witnessed a revival also in speculation as 
to the date in which the Messiah would reveal himself, and 
of the twelve prominent calculators Isaac Abarbanel is the 
most noteworthy. Abarbanel wrote three books on the subject 
and decided that the Messiah was born at some time immed¬ 
iately preceding the expulsion of the Jews from Spain in 
1492. 


Along with Messianic interest came the inevitable false 
Messiahs, although none of tne taree who gained fame 
actually claimed to be the Messiah, but were given that 
title by their followers. 


At the close of the previous century David Reubeni, 

































* 

































* 




















































- 59 - 


claiming to be emissary of a mysterious King of Kaibar, 
went to Egypt, Palestine, Venice, and then to Rome to see 
the Pope in an effort to get military aid in a war against 
the sultan. From there he went to Portugal’s King John III, 
and while there was successful enough in his mission to 
merit the admiration of quite a number of Portugese Jews, 
who were surprised at any Jew being so close to an anti- 
Semitic _ruler. 

Not the least of his followers was Solomon Molko, a 
Christian Jew who reverted to Judaism with no encouragement 
from Reubeni. Molko went from Portugal to Turkey and there 
gained considerable support through a mysteriously gained 
knowledge of Judaism and a rather occult mysticism. He 
then returned to Europe and met Reubeni, now discredited in 
Portugal and living in Italy. Molko had prophesied that the 
new kingdom would come in 1540, and the sack of Rome in 
1527 lent credence to his forecast. He later went to Rome 
and there was arrested by the Inquisition, at the instig¬ 
ation of his Jewish enemies, as a renegrade Christian, for 
which herecy he was sentenced to death through burning. 

The final fate of Reubeni is unknown, for nothing more is 
known of him following his meeting with Molko in Italy. 


Another leader who never claimed Messiahship was Isaac 

















- 





. .•***£ ft!? 




. 

■ 










. 















* 



■ 


















. 











- 60 - 


ben Solomon Ashkenazi Luria, who professed to be the fore¬ 
runner of the Messiah. He looked on his principle disciple, 
Hayyim Vital Calabrez as a man unsoiled by sin, and on 
Luria*s death Vital succeeded him and claimed to be Messiah 
ben Joseph, to be followed by Messiah ben David. During 
Vital’s lifetime a rival appeared named Abraham Shalom, who 
claimed to be Messiah ben David. All three, however, had 

little effect on the Jewish race, and little is known of the 

latter years of either Vital or Shalom. They had their 
short time of fame and some power, but eventually dis¬ 
appeared into oblivion. 

The seventeenth century brought a further decline in 
the fortunes of the Jews in Europe. Ghettoes were still 
common in all too many countries, and in Poland particularly 

the Jews suffered. As the government of Poland began to 

decline the Jesuits took charge and focussed hatred on the 
Jews with terrible results. Then the Cossacks invaded 
Poland bringing with them a two year reign of terror. 

Poland, however, was merely an extreme case of conditions 
prevalent throughout Europe. 

With these conditions making Jewish life desperate the 
victims turned their attention on the future and more than 
ever showed active interest in Messianic speculations and 







- 61 - 


calculations. The year of years was now set at 1648 by 
most shholars and Jews throughout the world were in a state 
of high excitement. Hopes were heightened by the Thirty 
Years War (1618-1648) in the belief that such a long war 
could be only the often-mentioned "pangs of the Messiah" 
which would precede the coming of the Messiah. 

During this war a boy was born who was to become the 
most remarkable and influential of all pseudo-Messiahs. 
Shabbethai Zebi, born in 1621 or 1626, even as a boy had 
little interest in the orthodox teaching of the temple 
schools and concentrated on the more mystic writings 
relevant to Messianism. His father had learned of the 
common prophecy that the Messiah would appear in 1648, and 
the new era would come in 1666, and looked on his son as so 
nearly divine that Shabbethai became encouraged to the 
point of revealing himself to be the Messiah in the appoint¬ 
ed year for his appearance. He was banished from Smyrna by 
the Rabbinical authorities and wandered around the Orient 
for some time until the approach of the year 1666 brought 
him back to Jerusalem, not as the Messiah, but as a 
canvasser for public relief during impending calamity. At 
this time he married a woman who claimed to be the appointed 
wife of the Messiah, then returned to Smyrna to reveal him¬ 
self publicly as the Messiah. This gained him absolute 
































.. ' L 7 : 








Bj 






























' 


. i i ' ' • ' i 





















- 62 - 


power over the Jewish community. 

Shabbethai now became famous, but was arrested by the 
sultan during a visit to Constantinople. Kis imprisonment, 
however, served only to increase his influence, even though 
he was removed to Abydos. While there he interviewed Nehe- 
miah Ha-Kohen, who had claimed to be the forerunner of the 
Messiah, an interview which ended in mutual dissatisfaction. 
Nehemiah then fled to Constantinople, accepted Mohammedan¬ 
ism and denounced Shabbethai. 

Following this Shabbethai was moved to Adrianople, 
where he finally realized the danger of his position and 
himself embraced Mohammedanism, announcing to his followers 
that such was God’s will. This, of course, cost him nearly 
all his followers, and he himself ultimately disappeared 
completely, leaving only one trace in the formation of a 
fudaistic Mohammedan sect which survives to this day. 

Shabbethai Zebi was followed by a host of petty 
"Messiahs", none of whom became very influential. The last 
to become seriously accepted was Jacob Frank (ca. 1775) an 
apostate several times over, who finally turned Christian 
and advised his followers to do the same. Only one more 
need be mentioned, and not because of his following. Moses 
Bayyim Luzzatto (1707-47) was remarkable for the fact that 







- 

■ 

■ 

. . 

t 



, 


. 


. 




. 


. 


. 


. 

»,J M 


' 




. 1 | 



" 









■ ' 


f 

. 


. 


t 

. 

- ‘ • •• I ......:r 

i 

. ' < • ' 

t 

, . i 

■ 














- 63 - 


he conscientiously thought himself to be divinely inspired. 
He was finally banished by the Rabbis of Venice and wandered 
into Palestine where he soon died of the plague. 

The last quarter of the eighteenth century thus 
witnessed the end of recurrent Messianic enthusiasm in the 
modern world. JMot since the time of Jacob Franic has any 
section of Jewry been stirred into a turmoil by the appear¬ 
ance of self-appointed Messiahs, and Jews throughout the 
world became content to pursue such happiness as they could 
gain, either discarding the whole Messianic hope, or 
relegating it to a passively awaited event. 

Before passing on to another field of study, however, 
it would be well to note certain features common to this 
speculation throughout the centuries of its prevalence. All 
calculations as to the date on which the Messiah would 
reveal himself to the waiting people were based on compli¬ 
cated interpretations of material found in the Old Testament 
with the minor exception of astrology, which, although an 
ancient practice with the Jews, never occupied a dominant 
position among the calculators. The most common method was 
the interpretation of the book of Daniel, which lent itself 
well to explanations which at times became almost wierdly 
complicated because of its mysterious references to unnamed 



















. 































- 64 - 


persons, countries and dates. While other Biblical texts 
were also used, this book was always the favorite of the 
scholars. 

Many speculators favored a comparison with past Jewish 
exiles as a method to determine the length of time which 
must pass before the appearance of the Messiah. They had 
records of the lengths of the Egyptian and Babylonian exiles 
and from this material deduced how long Israel must remain 
in its contemporary bondage before its final liberation 
through divine intervention. 

Not satisfied with the complexity of those methods, 
other students of eschatology turned to a practice termed 
Gematria for the key to the puzzle of Israel’s destiny. 

This system of the interpretation of a word through the 
numerical value of its letters gave rise to three variations 
notarikon, the taking of each letter of a word as the 
initial letter of another word; ziruf or hil\*f, the trans¬ 
position of the letters of a word; temurah, the substitution 
of one letter for another. It will be readily seen that sue] 
methods gave considerable scope to the scholar. Gematria in 
general was bounded in its findings only by the ingenuity of 
the writer and the number of dates which were fixed upon for 
the appearance of the Messiah was infinite. It reached 




. 


' 






, ' • 't 



• 


: 









. 











. 












* 

< . 




. 




. 















- 65 - 


great heights in the seventeenth century and was of great 
Importance in the progress of the Shabbetaian movement, the 
Last great revival of active Messianism in modern times. 

It should not be considered, however, that such specul¬ 
ation went unhindered. At all times there was definite and 
active opposition to such thought, though the opposition 
fluctuated in direct proportion to the prominence of 
Messianic calculation. This opposition was based largely on 
the fear that when any given "date" passed without the 
hoped-for Redemption, the people would refuse to believe 
there would ever be any Redemption or Messiah. There was 
also a fear of pseudo-Messiahs appearing to take advantage o i 
the people*s hopes, a fear which, as we have seen, was all 
too well justified. 

There were four major groups of opponents in Jewish 
circles. Some categorically denied the coming of a Messiah; 
others denied such an advent because they recognized no basis 
for hope in either the Bible or the oral tradition. Still 
another group admitted Biblical basis for Messianic faith 
but held that the prophecies were undecipherable and 
purposely hidden while the fourth group declared that 
Redemption would come at any time whatsoever, depending only 
on Israel*s complete repentance. But whatever their reason 
all members of these four groups, among whom were scholars 






















- 














, 




1 






- 66 - 


of no mean repute opposed without compromise all forms of 
speculation concerning the date on which God in fils Wisdom 
would intervene in the affairs of man to rescue his children 
from their misery. 

It would be difficult to say, with any degree of 
certainty, how effective this opposition was in convincing 
the common people that the divine plan was not to be dis¬ 
closed through even the most diligent search of the 
Scriptures. Possibly it prevented many Jews from falling 
into line during the various Messianic revivals and camp¬ 
aigns, and thus spared them from bitter disappointment and 
heartache. At any rate, it eventually triumphed in the 
eighteenth century and it is to be hoped that the victory 
will be permanent. Since that date the fortunes of Israel 
have fluctuated violently, but there have been no recurrence 
of wild, uncontrolled speculation, nor appearances of any 
pseudo-Messiahs. 

During the eighteenth century itself the Jews, in 
general, degenerated and lived almost completely segregated 
from their Gentile neighbors. Social intercourse was kept 
to a minimum and even the children had very incomplete 
knowledge of anything concerning the land in which they 
lived or the people of that land. 









- 







... ‘c : ... .' > 


■ 






















. 









- 67 - 


This condition prevailed throughout the most of Europe 
until the following century, when Jews began to enter more 
into public life, taking up the professions to a large 
extent. There is no doubt that the French Revolution played 
some considerable part in the liberation of the European 
Jews, with its emphasis on liberty, equality and fraternity. 
The emancipation, unfortunately, was short-lived, for during 
the last quarter of the nineteenth century the curse of anti< 
Semitism descended on parts of Europe, venting its hatred of 
the Jews through persecution in Russia and ostracism in Ger¬ 
many, Austria and France. 

One result of this cultural degeneration was the birth 
of Zionism, a movement founded in 1895 by Theodor Herzl. 

Its founder hoped to see all Jews return to their ancestral 
home of Palestine, there to restore their identity as a 
unified nation rather than remain in their present 
scattered state. Even this, however, did not constitute a 
Messianic movement, for the motive for the movement was not 
the hope that, once united in Palestine, the Jews would 
become the one dominant world power. This movement, it may 
be noted, is still in existence, though not very powerful, 
but has met with little success for reasons not connected 
with the field of this thesis. 










- 68 - 


Messianic hope, however, has not died out completely 
in the Jewish faith by any means, though it has undergone 
definite changes in some circles. The Jewish religion has 
become divided into two general groups -- the Orthodox and 
the Liberal. The Orthodox Jew still includes in his daily 
devotions a prayer for the coming of the Messiah to lead 
Israel to its God and its destiny among the nations of the 
world, a prayer that has remained unchanged since its origin 
The Liberal Jew has interpreted the term Messiah so as to 
refer to a personification of a system of ideas and doctrine: 
To him the coming of the Messiah will be the universal 
acceptance and domination of Jewish ideas and culture. The 
Kingdom of God will come for the Liberal Jew when all people 
repent and are redeemed, not through any divine act of 
sudden intervention, but through the consecration of the 
souls of all mankind to the godly life. 

In this latter belief is seen something very closely 
akin to the Christian faith. .Like the Liberal Jew, the 
liberal Christian looks forward, not to the return of Jesus 
in the flesh to set up the Kingdom of God, but to the 
attainment of that ideal through the consecrated efforts of 
individual Christians throughout the world, great and small, 
m this respect Jews and Christians are working together, 











. 




















• . 







' 



. 






















. 

. 







. 

- '! .. 











- 69 - 


and there is reason for hope that it will become the means 
whereby these two faiths will beoome even more closely knit 
in a common desire to see the day when all people will live 
together as one family under God, when the Jew will 
recognize Jesus as the completion or fulfillment of his 
prophets and the Christian will recognize the Jew as his 
spiritual forefather. 










Chapter VI 


ESCHATOLOGY IN THE TEACHINGS OF JESUS 

As has already been noted, the common people of Galilee 
in the time of Jesus were eagerly awaiting the arrival of 
the Messiah of God. It is not surprising to find Mark 
attributing Messianic significance to Jesus during Ills 
Galilean ministry and relating how the crowds, with glowing 
expectancy, hounded this new Messiah so that to avoid them 
he sometimes had to speak from boats (Mark 3:7-12). In vain 
attempts to break away from this popular obsession Jesus 
travelled from one place to another, but He always met with 
the same reception. The loyalty and emnity which His person 
produced were the seeds of the conflict which were ultimately 
to issue in His death. 

Jesus* attitude to this messianlsm was not without its 
problems, for while we have record of his opposition to it, 
yet we also read in his own sayings definite eschatological 
prophecies. This latter factor in his teachings has led to 
misunderstanding as to the purpose of his ethical teachings, 
and to their intended duration. The first step in under¬ 
standing Christian messianism must then be to comprehend the 
position Jesus took, through a study of the writings of Paul, 
which give us our earliest record of Christianity in practice 






























■ 













- 71 - 


and of the gospels, in which certain false colourings 
arising from the writers* preconceptions will have to be 
cleared away in order to arrive at a true picture. 

Since Jesus confined his teachings to the spoken, 
rather than the written, word, we must search the earliest 
Christian writings in order to discover his eschatological 
beliefs. This necessity turns us to the letters of the 
apostle Paul for two reasons: they were written before the 
Synoptics; Paul’s messianic beliefs had features which he 
did not draw from his Jewish faith, and therefore must have 
taken either from his knowledge of the teachings of Jesus, 
from the leaders of the newly-formed church, or from the 
Hellenistic culture of the extra-Palestinian world of that 
time, from which Paul came. 

Two lines united to form Christianity -- Judaism and 
Hellenism; but twenty years after the death of Jesus 
Christianity was fast parting company with Judaism. That 
this change was taking place we know through Paul’s argu¬ 
ments as to the validity of the Torah in the Christian 
community, e.g., Romans 4; Gal. 5. The name Messiah was 
discarded in favor of Christ, and with that change in 
terminology came a change in connotation. Jewish thought 
taught of a Messiah who would be strong, warlike, just, and 















* 






: 















. 

















\ 

i 


' 




■ 




- 























- 72 - 


somewhat fierce. Paul, on the other hand, taught Jesus as 
meek and reasonable (II Cor. lu:l); a man who loved us 
(Rom. 8:37), and whom we ought to love (I Cor. 16:22). Here 
was a way of life which, in Paul’s mind, was worthy of 
imitation, albeit largely a reversal of what he had been 
taught as a strict Pharisee.(1) In this way Paul taught 
faith in a Messiah who had none of the features of the 
Messiah of Jewish expectation. 

There is no doubt that Christians of the outside world 
were influenced by the Greek mystery religions, with their 
dying and rising gods. Christianity, a new and none too 
powerful religion, could not help but be affected by these 
faiths and rituals of Hellenistic culture. From that world 
came Paul, an educated Jew who would be familiar with Greek 
religion and Greek modes of thinking in general. He was, 
therefore, highly aware of the fact that parochial Jewish 
Christianity woulp. not be acceptable in Hellenistic circles, 
and saw how ‘Christianity must be made universal in its out¬ 
look and philosophical in nature. 

The apparently spontaneous nature of his conversion must 
also have influenced Paul in his conception of the mission of 

(1) cf. McNeill, Spinka, Willoughby, Environmental Factors 

in Christian History, p. 47. 





■. < : 1 « 

« 


■ 











•• 

















. 





■ 

' 





















- 73 - 


Christ. He felt that with his acceptance of Christ as his 
personal Saviour and Lord he had been released from the 
power of sin, the bondage of the Torah, the principalities 
and powers of the height and depth, and had gained access to 
a new and wonderful spiritual life, if, then, this had 
happened to'him, rabid persecutor or the Christians, it must 
be tne result or axvxue grace and love, must be available 
to all mankind, irregardless of race, and must be taught 
along international lines. 

With this realization in mind, Paul proceeded to re¬ 
mold the Jesus-tradition, which he had received. The fact 
that he retained parts of this tradition indicated the 
presence of an Oral Gospel, since Paul speaks of sayings of 
Jesus as if they were well known to his hearers, even 
though there was no written gospel at that time. There was 
some form of gospel being carried throughout the Christian 
world, and Paul was familiar with it, since he makes 
allusions to various events in the earthly life of Jesus 
which would be meaningless if the people were not familiar 
with it. Thus in I Cor. ll:23f he reminds them of the Last 
Supper, of 'which they had already been told. The crucif¬ 
ixion is referred to in I Cor. 2:8; 5:7, etc. The traits 
in Jesus f character referred to previously would be based 
on stories of his life which Paul had already shared with 








- 74 - 


the new Christians whom he had converted. 

In the interpretation of this life, however, Paul was 
influenced by Hellenism. Jewish monotheism still held him, 
but he refused to subordinate Jesus to God in actuality, 
though he does allow it in theory (Rom. 15:5). He is 
leaning towards the Logos solution which makes God and 
Christ equal in nature, but subordinate in function (I Cor. 
8:6). The purpose of the death of Jesus is also brought 
more parallel to the death of the god in the Mystery 
religions: the convert dies so far as his old life is 
concerned, but rises with Christ into the godly life (Rom. 
6:3ff). In a similar way the magical element of the 
Mystery rituals is applied to at least one of the Sacraments 
The Lord f s Supper is believed to affect insincere communican* 
like poison, (II Cor. ll:27ff). 

In this way Paul made of Christianity a religion which 
would be readily understandable to the people of the 
Hellenistic world, and so surmounted the worst obstacle in 
the path of a universally-minded church. Instead of teach¬ 
ing about a Jew who claimed to be the Messiah but was 
killed on the accursed cross, he was able to tell of the 
sacrificial death of a man who was raised to near-parity 
with God, and who could raise all men to his life if they 












* 











- 



. 

. 




. : 

. 







t 

































, 






• 








-75- 

would have faith in him and in God. 

One prominent feature of Jewish Messianism was re¬ 
tained —faith in the Messianic kingdom. I Thess. 4:15-17 
shows that Paul expected to witness the return of Christ 
and his establishment of a new world order in the near 
future. Later in his lifetime this hope of being still 
alive at the expected time waned and was replaced by the 
faith that he would be with Christ after death (II Cor. 
5:6-8). Still, however, he has the firm conviction that the 
present times will shortly be replaced by the Messianic age, 
as is shown in I Cor. 7:31. 

It is a debatable Question whether Paul 1 2 s preference 
for celibacy (I Cor. 7:1) is based on his eschatological 
beliefs or on the custom of the age. Dobschutz holds that 
ft ... it was the asceticism of his age which influenced him 
in regarding marriage as the lower state."(1) Goodspeed 
favors the other alternative, saying, "... it was his 
messianic expectation that largely controlled his views on 
marriage."(2 ) Paul *s reason for advocating celibacy is 

(1) E. von Dobschutz, The Eschatology of the Gospels, 
pp. 12-13. 

(2) E. J. Goodspeed, An Introduction to the New Testament, 
p. 49 . 


















-f, '■■’.trin&m - 




' 

. 








. 























* 












- 76 - 


that it leaves the person free to give complete loyalty to 
God (I Cor. 7:32-34), and argument which could very well 
arise from the belief that Christians have little time left 
in which to work. It would seem more probable, then, that 
from Paul’s expectation of the early return of the glori¬ 
fied Christ came his unfavorable attitude towards marriage. 

In view of the presence of this new Messianism in the 
letters of Paul, and in view of the large amount of Mess¬ 
ianism and eschatology in the Gospels, it would seem very 
probable that these features originated in Jesus. However, 
in this view not all scholars share. S. J. Case states 
that while the synoptists would say that Je3us placed 
paramount importance on his Messiahship yet "Jesus had been 
more concerned with fidelity to the cause of God, whose 
spokesman fittingly claimed genuine inspiration but not 
official installation. It is very doubtful whether Messiah¬ 
ship from Jesus’ own point of view would have been a cate¬ 
gory of sufficient value to serve him significantly at a 
critical moment in his experience.”(1) In that author’s 
estimation, the early Christians were responsible for the 
distinctively Christian Messianism which we find in the 
New Testament, and particularly in the Synoptics. 

(1) S. J. Case, Studies in Sary Christian Messianism, 
p. 322. 































. 






















. 

' 


■ 























• 





• 


































- 77 - 


This position is taken on several grounds. Messianic 
features are by no means uniformly distributed throughout 
the Gospels, there being largo sections like the Sermon on 
the Mount where none is found. Jesus talks often of the 
Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Heaven, but never of the 
Kingdom of the Messiah, which leads one to believe that he 
probably belonged to the non-Messianic school of eschatology. 
Further, states Case, it is obvious that none of his 
disciples, during his lifetime, looked on him as an eschat¬ 
ological Messiah, while some believed that he was the 
Messiah who would deliver them from Homan bondage.(1) 

Having this conception of the mission of Jesus, the 
disciples undoubtedly went through a crisis when the object 
of their faith suffered the ignominious death of the cross. 
Eventually they surmounted this obstacle, saw that their old 
Messianic faith was wrong and sublimated it into a faith 
that Jesus had risen from the dead, ascended into heaven, 
and would presently return to the material world to set up 
his Kingdom. So strong was this belief that some returned 
to Jerusalem to await his return, there keeping the Jewish 
Law most diligently, and preparing, according to Case, 


(1) ibid. p. 324 








« 


. 

« 

< 

« ' 























- 






. 

' 










■ 


' 


■ 
















- 78 - 


records of the heroic doings of their Lord. At the same 
time, the less inspired followers of Christ wandered farther 
afield, spreading his teachings, and for that purpose 
compiling his sayings and preserving them in writing. 

Finally the two groups were forced together and the result 
was that the "sayings" and "doings" were combined into one 
story of the life of Jesus, containing the ethical teachings 
of the extra-Palestinian records and the Messianic features 
of the Jerusalem records. From these circumstances our 
Gospels arose, containing strictly ethical teachings side 
by side with Messianic prophecies.(1) 

Case infers from the above circumstances that Christian 
Messianism in the Synoptics is the work of Peter and his 
friends in Jerusalem, and that they accepted the recorded 
sayings of Jesus only because advancing time forced them to 
recognize the need for ethical teachings as well as 
Messianic doings.(2) Such an idea, however, is by no means 
universally accepted. It rests on the assumption that the 
two records postulated by Case, the "sayings" and the 
"doings" were combined before the writing of Mark (ca. 

70 A.D.), and even before the earlier Q source. There 


(1) ibid. pp. 328ff• 

(2) ibid. p. 331. 



























■ 



- 





<■ 








' 










. 


















- 79 - 


seems to be little or no basis to believe, however, that 
there was a written gospel at this time. Before one can 
decide how much, if any, of the Messianism and eschatology 
ascribed to Jesus is authentic the various Messianic 
passages in the Synoptics must be studied, having in mind 
their probable origins, their parallels in the three 
gospels, if any, and their appropriateness to the life of 
Jesus in general. 

The problem is further complicated by the tendency of 
the synoptists to colour the sayings of Jesus so as to lend 
to them a stronger Messianic tone than might have originally 
been the case. They were writing with the acknowledged 
intention of bringing a gospel of life to the heathen, and 
this favorably prejudiced viewpoint naturally crept into 
their works. 

A clear example of such treatment of the teachings of 
Jesus is found in the parallel passages Matt. 7:21-23, 

Luke 6:46, presumably taken from the Q, tradition. Here lip 
service, unaccompanied by action is condemned, but by 
adding vv. 22-23 Matthew transforms the section into an 
eschatological prophecy of condemnation. It is, however, 
fairly certain that these verses are not authentic in that 
context since they constitute an interruption in the 























' • . . 4 















* 






. 

, 








■ 




. 










■ 




. 


























- 80 - 


continuous Q, narrative, and are found in Luke 13:27 in quite 
a different context. The obvious conclusion is that 
Matthew has transferred the two verses from their original 
place in Q, to this passage in his gospel in order to 
strengthen Jesus* condemnation of insincerity by giving it 
an eternal nature. 

Another instance of such treatment is in Matthew’s 
version of the two parables on the Kingdom of heaven (13: 
24-30; 47-50). From their highly similar natures one con¬ 
cludes that these were originally a couplet. The comparisons 
-- wheat harvesting and fishing -- indicate that Jesus had 
something continuous in mind, but by inserting a highly 
eschatological allegorical interpretation of the parable of 
the wheat and tares between the two parables Matthew makes 
them both prophecies of the last judgment. 

The most extensive example of such additions of esch¬ 
atological teaching is that of the "Little Apocalypse” 

(Mark 13). This is almost certainly an independent section 
incorporated by Mark into his gospel, and copied with 
additions by Matthew and Luke. Mark 13:14(b) along with v. 

20 indicates very strongly that these prophecies were not 
spoken by Jesus, but are the written works of some unknown 
eschatologist. There is considerable similarity between 
passages in this section and authentic sayings of Jesus 

















- 81 - 


(cf. Mark 13:15,16 with Luke 17:31; Marh 13:21-23 with 
Luke 17:23 and Matt. 24:26; Mark 13:26 with Mark 8:38 and 
Mark '14:62), but it is still a virtually undisputed 
contention that this "Little Apocalypse" originated neither 
in Jesus nor in Mark. 

Christ’s saying concerning Jerusalem illustrates a 
different type of manipulation of the tradition as recorded 
in Matt. 23: 37-39 and its parallel in Luke 13:34-35. The 
closing words, "Ye shall not see me until ye shall say, 
Elessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord" could 
be interpreted either eschatologically or historically. 
Matthew, by placing the passage after the entry into 
Jerusalem in his gospel, makes it an eschatological 
prophecy while Luke, by placing it well before the entry in 
his record, shows that he considers it a historical 
prophecy of the triumphal entry. 

In the same way Luke revises a prophecy in the "Little 
Apocalypse" (Mark 13:14 " Matt. 24:15 " Luke 21:20). Mark’s 
version, "But when ye see the abomination of desolation 
standing where he ought not ... " is very vague. Matthew 
clarifies the reference by inserting "... standing in the 
holy place ..." but Luke, evidently deciding that such 
cryptic talk is unjustified, states flatly, "But when ye 








: 








■ 








































■: 







■; v,,. : r 












- 82 - 

see Jerusalem compassed with armies ..." and in that way 
makes this prophetic of the fall of Jerusalem.(1) 

There remains yet another method by which the 
Synoptists,notably Matthew, strengthened their teaching of 
Jesus as Messiah. They had at their disposal a vast lit¬ 
erature, the Old Testament, in which was a wealth of 
prophecies, many of which could be applied to Jesus, albeit 
with the necessity of a certain amount of isogesls and 
allegorization. If the religion of Jesus was to be accept¬ 
able to the Jews, it must first be proven that in Jesus was 
the fulfillment of these prophecies, which would make him 
the Messiah of Jewish expectation. Mark and Luke paid 
little attention to this problem, but Matthew, throughout 
his gospel, recalls prophecies of the Old Testament, not 
always correctly, ariu fits them into the pattern of the life 
and death of Jesus. The chart which follows will serve to 
illustrate this more clearly. 


Matthew 

Mark 

Luke 

Source 

1:22 



Isaiah 7:14 

2:5f 



Micah 5:2 

2:15 



Hosea 11:1 

2:17 



Jeremiah 31:15 


(1) see further E. von Dobschutz, The Eschatology of the 
Gospels, Lecture II. 





. , . 

* 

t 






f • v, . t 




. 

















' 













- 83 - 


Matthew 


Mark 


Luke 


Source 


2:23 

3:3 


1 : 2 (?) 


3:4 


Isaiah 40:3 
Isaiah 9:1,2 
Isaiah 53:4 
Malachi 3:1 
Jonah 1:17 


Isaiah 11:1 (?) 


4:14f 
8:17 
11:10 
12:40 
13:14 
13:35 
21:4 


1:2 


7 :27 
11:30 


U UUUU -A. « -L. / 

Isaiah 6:9, 10 
Psalm 78:2 
Isaiah 62:11 
Unknown 

Zechariah 11:12,13 
,1m 22:18 
Isaiah 53:12 


u 


26:54ff 


27:9 

27:35 


15:28 


22:37 


(variant context) 


As may readily be seen, not all these prophecies which 
Matthew recalls are strictly accurate. The only possible 
source of that in Matt. 2:23 is Isaiah 11:1, but it is 
based on the resemblance, in the Hebrew, of "branch" and 
"Nazarene". This is anything but sufficient proof of a 
prophecy of Jesus 1 Messiahship. Mother instnace is in 
Matt. 27:9, where the writer recalls the 'words of "Jeremy 
the prophet" yet the source of the prophecy is not Jeremiah 
but Zechariah. Again the source for Matt. 26:54ff is 
unknown and cannot be found in the Old Testament. 

However, apart entirely from these mistakes made by 
Matthew in his zeal to prove the Messiahship of Jesus there 
is one great fault in the whole plan. As has already been 
shown in a previous chapter dedicated to such prophecies, 
there is no saying or writing in the Old Testament which 

















< 




















. 








. 




■ 

. 

• • 









. 




































- 84 - 


can be logically interpreted as referring to any person to 
come in the distant future. Therefore we must conclude 
that all Matthew’s work in this regard is valueless for us 

in this day, since none of the prophecies he cites can 

possibly refer to Christ. The same conclusion, of course, 
applies equally to the other gospels. 

In the above ways -- allegorical interpretation, 
changed context and isogesis, — the evangelists drew a 
picture of Jesus as the long-awaited Messiah, showing their 
belief in him as such. It is apparent that Jesus was re¬ 
garded by at least Matthew and Luke as of Davidic lineage. 

They take the time to trace his ancestry not only to David 
but to Abraham, (cf. Matt. 1:10 with Luke 3:23-34). 

However, it would seem that no great importance was 
attached to this ancestry by either Jesus or the disciples 
since in Matt. 22:4-46; Mark 12:35-37; Luke 20:41-44 we are 
told of Jesus deprecating the traditional belief in the 
Davidic descent of the expected Messiah. Quite possibly 
Jesus was descended from David, but he gave the disciples 
no basis on which to stress the matter, thus showing a 
considerable lack of interest in it. 

In respect to the coming death of Jesus there were 
some misgivings. The gospels tell of Jesus’ forecasts of 






i 











. 







‘ 

























* 




















. _ 










. 














. 


* 


- 






. 




' 





























- 85 - 


his suffering and death, but the disciples were unable to 
believe that their Messiah would have to bow to such 
indignity. This is seen in the parallels Matt. 16:21-22(a); 
Mark 8:31-32; and further in Luke 18:34; 24:21. John 12:34 
shows that this perplexity was shared by the common people 
as well as the disciples. 

The Synoptists’ use of various names or titles for 
Jesus -- Son of Man, Son of God, teacher and Lord — also 
give us some clues as to their estimation of him as the 
Messiah. Furthermore, since these titles were accepted by 
Jesus, so far as we know, they also help in reaching the 
solution of the problem of Jesus’ Messianic consciousness. 
Moreover all of these have some significance in the 
Messianic field, whether they were used by Jesus or by his 
followers. 

The phrase, "Son of Man" was always spoken by Jesus, 
and never used independently by the disciples in referring 
to Jesus. For this reason alone it is certain that the 
title is authentic, since if the disciples had ascribed it 
to Jesus without his sanction they would not have confined 
it to such use. In both Mark and Q the phrase appears in 
discussions of the Parousia; in Mark alone it is connected 
with the Passion. This connection of Son of Man with the 

















- 




































< . ; 









■ 














- 




* 

« 


















- 86 - 


Parousia in the earliest stratum of the gospels is sig¬ 
nificant in that it indicates the meaning Jesus placed on 
the title. In Daniel and JSnoch the Son of Man comes from 
heaven, and in the sayings of Jesus he also comes from 
heaven. From this similarity one draws a justified conclu¬ 
sion that Jesus expected the Son of Man to U 3 her in the day 
of judgment before the new era, as he does in Enoch. 

Granting that deduction, we are faced with the question 
of the identity of the Son of Man, for Jesus always used the 
phrase in the third person. This fact has been pointed to 
as proof that he did not believe he himself was the Son of 
Man, but it would seem more probaoxe mat tuxs was his 
method of cloaking Messianic prophecies so as not to dis¬ 
close his identity as the Messiah. The disciples understood 
that Jesus was the Son of Man, so the predictions of the 
Parousia would be clear to them as prophecies of Jesus* 
return after death; but as we know, they did not see the 
full import of his words until after the resurrection 
experiences. 

The identification of Jesus with the Servant of Old 
Testament prophecies was accomplished, not so much through 
a definite title as through reference to his alleged 
fulfillment of those prophecies. In neither Mark nor Q is 






















. 

- 








' 


< 











. 













































there a clear identification of Jesus with the Suffering 
Servant, unless Mark’s story of Jesus’ dying cry on the 
cross be taken as such f This is a highly questionable 
conclusion. What is more probable is that Matthew saw in 
that cry a fulfillment of Psalm 22, and from that point 
proceeded t<? couple the events of Jesus’ lire with the 
Servant prophecies. However, in no place are these 
prophecies looked on by the writers as prophetic of the 
suffering and death of Jesus. Matt. 8:17 quotes Isaiah 
53:4, but not with any idea of the coming Passion in mind; 
similarly, Matt. 12:17 Jesus is identified with the Servant, 
but again with no reference to his suffering. 

These facts indicate that the identification of Jesus 
with the Suffering Servant of Israel belongs to a later 
date, and since this identification is present in Acts, one 
might conclude that it originated among Hellenistic 
Christians. Certainly, however, the first disciples did not 
see the Suffering Servant in Jesus, nor did Jesus himself 
believe the parallel existed. 

To the Jew of the first century another title for 
Jesus, Son of God, might mean various things: one of the 
angels, possible a king, sometimes Israel, often a special 
angel and hence more often the Messiah. The phrase is found 











t 


.... u„‘. :r ,; V.: 


. 

' 

' ■ •' „ ' ‘ ■' : 

■ 


■ 




- 




■ 










. 

: ■ 

. 




• { 




- : 


' 















- 88 - 


in Q, only once (Matt. 11:25-27; Luke lu:21-22) and the 
liturgical character of this section, together with its 
dissimilarity with anything else in Q, indicates an origin 
later than Q,. In Mark the title occurs six times: twice 
spoken by demoniacs; twice by the voice from heaven; once 
by the high priest, and once by the centurion at the cross. 
It is never used by the disciples themselves, and never by 
Jesus; the high priest almost certainly used it because it 
would appear most dangerous in Homan eyes through its popula: 
connection with the political Davidic Messiah; the centurion 
probably used it thoughtlessly and the demoniacs certainly 
lacked an understanding of it. We are therefore confined to 
its use by the voice from heaven in the study of its 
connotation* 

The voice first spoke at Jesus’ baptism (Mark 1:11; 
Matt. 3:17; Luke 3:22), and constituted a revelation to 
him of his mission in life. The second and last occurrence 
was at the transfiguration (Mark 9:7; Matt. 17:5; Luke 9:35) 
when the voice spoke to the disciples about Jesus, revealing 
him to them. There is no doubt that Matthew and Luke 
particularly saw in these revelations proof of the unique 
Sonship of Jesus, not only spiritually but physically also. 
In the Fourth Gospel this category becomes more spiritual an 

metaphysical, less connected with the human birth of Jesus. 








; 




. 

. 






. 













. 


. 






, 

- 









- ' 


. 







■ 






. 






































- 89 - 


The use of the title, however, shows a belief in the 
Messianic nature of Jesus, since it would convey that idea 
in the minds of his followers. 

The term "Lord" as used of Jesus was originally the 
Aramaic "Maran", a word commonly used as an expression of 
honour. The Greek equivalent, "kurios", had more extensive 
connotations, and when it supplanted the Aramaic, these 
wider meanings were kept. In the oldest gospel strata, 
however, "kurios" takes a definitely secondary place to the 
Jewish title, "Rabbi", represented in the Greek by either a 
direct transliteration or by "didaskalos". It would appear, 
therefore, that Jesus was most commonly referred to as 
"rabbi", especially in Jerusalem and Galilee in general, but 
that, as Christianity spread into other districts, the 
Iramaic "Maran" was used, which became translated into 
"Kurios" under Hellenistic influence. Y/ith this change in 
titles there came a change in meaning, for while "rabbi" is 
purely humanistic, "maran" could well carry Messianic sig¬ 
nificance, and "kurios" was by that time completely coupled 
with religion, and would imply divinity in the personality of 
Jesus. This shows a steadily increasing recognition of Jesus 
as the Messiah who had the power to raise men to divine 
Levels if they had faith. 


Luke uses a unique method of pointing out the Messianic 











































« 





■ 








* 






























































■ 




> 


. 




















- 90 - 


nature of Jesus in the first two chapters of his gospel. 

In this introdcution to his story of the life of Jesus.Luke 
puts into the mouths of various persons songs which serve to 
tell the reader that the coming births of John the Baptist 
and Jesus are highly important events, both to man and God, 
These songs are definitely Messianic in tone, with the 
result that anyone reading this gospel would realize that a 
divine plan was being executed. Thus Zacharlah is told by 
Gabriel that Elizabeth, his wife, will give birth to a 
second Elijah (1:13-17). Six months later Mary is informed 
by the same angel that she is to bear a son to whom "...the 
Lord God shall give ... the throne of his father David," 
and who will be conceived of the Holy Ghost (1:30-33; 35-37) 
Mary’s song to Elizabeth shows this idea of the divine 
nature of the coming birth in her declaration that "...from 
henceforth ail generations shall call me blessed." (1:48) 

The same Messianic tone and style of speech is present in th 
Benedictus (1:68-79) and the Nunc Dimittis (2:29-32). 

Doubts have been cast on the Magnificat and the Benedictus, 
notably by /estcott and Hort, but this question need not 
concern us here since the remaining unchallenged poems serve 
to illustrate Luke’s desire to build up in his reader’s 
mind the expectation of miraculous and divine events.(1) 


(l)see further S.J.Case (Ed), Studies in Early Christianity, 
pp.285 ff. 















- 

' 

■ 














... 






















. 




































- 91 - 


In all the above mentioned ways the gospel writers 
pointed up the Messianic nature and mission of Jesus, draw¬ 
ing a picture of his as the prophesied agent of God, 
deliverer of Israel and Saviour of mankind. The question 
now arises: How much, if any, of this picture of Jesus as 
the Messiah was drawn by Jesus himself? 

There seems to be no doubt that Jesus did believe 
himself to be the Messiah, unless we are to discount every 
eschatological passage in the gospels as non-authentic; but 
for this we would have no good basis. Jesus 1 ministry 
starts on a note of impending doom for sinners (Matt. 4:17 " 
Mark 1:15) which would indicate that Jesus at least 
believed he was in some way a special envoy of God. Again, 
in the Lord’s prayer he makes the petition, "Thy kingdom 
come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven." This 
shows his expectation of the Kingdom as a state of high 
morality, where God r s will goes unchallenged. The next 
problem is the question of what part Jesus expected to play 
in the advent of the Kingdom. Some scholars have said that 
Jesus expected to become the Messiah after death, and yet 
he replied to the Eigh .driest at his tra 1 with the words, 

"I am ((the Christ, the Son of the Blessed.))" (:._ark 14: 
61-62). Matthew’s version is not in the same words (26:64) 
but is equally impossible to explain satisfactorily as any- 



































. 


■ 


. 

t 














































* • 




























, 


















- 92 - 


thing but a claim or Messiahship. The fact that he took no 
exception to the superscription mounted on his cross is also 
or some value in the question. Earlier in nis career, when 
Peter acclaimed him as the Messiah, Jesus accepted the title 
but demanded secrecy, in the race or such evidence it Is 
virtually impossible to say that Jesus did not look on 
himself as the Messiah. 

Apart entirely from this evidence, there are also 
features in the teachings of Jesus which have a definitely 
eschatological tone. Jesus himself told the disciples they 
were fortunate in witnessing his actions and life in general 
(Matt. 13:16 " Luke 10:23) which indicates a belief that his 
was no ordinary life. He speaks often or the mutual dislike 
and even hatred between relatives his Kingdom will cause, 
which was an accepted feature of the older Messianic writ¬ 
ings (Matt. 10:34-35" Luke 12:51-43). Jesus reception in 
his own home (Mark 3:21,31ff; Matt. 12:46ff; Luke 8:19ff; 

John 7:5) illustrated the family schisms he had prophesied. 
The same is true of his countrymen, who looked on Jesus as 
the son of a carpenter and nothing more (Mark 6:16; Matt. 
13:53-58; Luke 4:16-30). One might also say that Jesus 
exemplified the separation of people in the Messianic age 
when he called an unwilling person to follow him (Luke 9:60f) 
yet in other situations said that not all the willing ones 






- 93 - 




would be allowed to follow him (Matt. 7:22f). 

The traditional Messianic feast also makes its appear¬ 
ance. Jesus considered that those who were flr^t invited 
are now refused because of their disbelief, and so concen¬ 
trated on publicans, the poor and the Gentiles. These 
features are seen in Matt. 8:llff ’* Luke 13:28ff; Matt. 8:10 
" Luke 7:9; Matt. 21:31 (cf. Luke 7:29); Matt. 22:1-14 (cf. j 
Luke 14:16-24). 

further Jesus* obvious belief in a new attitude to the 
Law of Moses could possible arise from the idea that he and 
his disciples belonged to a new era, and hence were above 
the laws of fasting, sabbath observance and so on. 

It is also worth noting that when Jesus was asked by 
disciples of John the Baptist if he was the Messiah, Jesus 
told them to look at the wonders he had performed and draw 
their own (obviously affirmative) conclusion (Matt. ll:3ff T » 
Luke 7:19ff)• 

There is no doubt that Jesus claimed a close relation¬ 
ship to God such as would befit the Messiah. In Luke 4:17-21 
he stated that the fulfillment of prophecy was in himself, 
thus implying that he had been divinely appointed. He spoke 
and taught in such a way as to impress his hearers with more 



. 




. 



















‘ 














: i? 


. 























- 94 - 


than usual authority; ho made claims for service from his 
followers with the terms "for my sake" or "for my name’s 
sake" and increased such claims L-fter Peter* s annunciation 
of him as the Messiah. This demanding attitude increased 
steadily until, in the words of C. J. Cadoux, "The general 
tone ... of the incidents that followed upon the Triumphal 
Entry ...suggests continuous tension between Jesus and the 
religious leaders on the question of his status and 
authority."(1) The tension reached its climax at the trial 
when the High Priest asked Jesus if he was the Son of God 
and received the affirmative answer which became the 
evidence of Jesus* conviction as a blasphemer. 

If, then, Jesus thought he was the Messiah, what 
connotation did he attac.h to the title, and what sort of 
Messianic era did he expect to inaugurate? It is fairly 
obvious that he held no brief for Jewish hopes of deliver¬ 
ance from Rome, since he took no exception to the payment of 
taxes to Rome. It is true that to a certain extent he was 
nationalistic, going to totally non-Jewish territory only 
once (Mark 7:24-31 " Matt. 15:21-29). Apart from that, 
however, his ethical precepts were distincly international 
even to the point of including the long-hated Samaritans. 

(1) C. J. Cadoux, The Historic Mission of Jesus, p; 59. 







■ 















- 95 - 


Possibly his hope was that the Jews would be the means of 
bringing the Gentiles to the Kingdom of God. 

This hope would involve nothing of a political, and 
therefore, dangerous nature. Even in Jesus’ definitely 
objective teachings the Kingdom of God was beyond the realm 
of politics and race. He almost certainly expected the 
imminent advent of the Kingdom of Heaven, saying that many 
of his own generation would witness it (Luke 9:27); there 
would be no warning of its approach and the wise man would 
be eternally prepared. 

Such, to use Dobschutz’s phrasing, (1) is his ’’distinct 
eschatology” as contrasted with his ’’transmuted eschatology”, 
The latter, however, would appear to be the more basic in 
the teachings of Jesus -- the concept of the kingdom as an 
experience in the hearts of men and not a cataclysmic over¬ 
throwing of the world’s temporal powers at the hand of God. 

An example of this idea of the Kingdom as an attitude 
of mind, and therefore already present, is seen in the 
casting out of devils in Mark 5:24-27. Here Jesus argues 
that the Kingdom cannot last unless its opponents are put ou*i 
of power. -mIso, in Luke 11:19,20; Matt. 12:27-28 he states 


(1) E. von Dobschutz, The Eschatology of the Gospels - 
Lecture III. 




















. 


















. 

■ 




















, 
















. 




























- 96 - 


that since he is casting out devils through the power of God 
vested in him then the Kingdom is already present. Again 
in Luke 17:20-21 Jesus answered questions as to when the 
Kingdom would come by saying that it was already present. 
Matt. 11:12-13; i^uke 16:16 give another example of this 
attitude, though not with equal clarity. Apart from all 
possible questions as to origin and interpretation, however, 
it seems certain that here Jesus marked two divisions in 
time: that up until John the Baptist, and that after him. 
There is no third Messianic era included, which indicates 
that Jesus thought of that era as already existent but not 
recognized. 

Jesus apparently placed the material side of the King¬ 
dom in a subservient position to that or the spiritual: in 
other words, his transmuted or realized eschatology was more 
important than his distinct eschatology. This is indicated 
in the parallels Matt. 9:6-8 ft Mark 2:10-12 " Luke 5:24-26 
where Jesus heals the man with palsy in order to show that 
the Son of Man can forgive sins. Both healing and forgive¬ 
ness were to be features of the Kingdom, but here Jesus 
shows explicitly which is the major feature. 

It has been stated, notably by Schweitzer, that Jesus* 
eschatology is the sole motive for his ethics: that men are 










■ 








- 


' 

- ■ ■ , 

. 

* 


. 

- • 







- 















- 97 - 


to live according to his code of conduct in order to gain 

salvation in the face of a swiftly approaching new era. It 

is true that the Kingdom is used by Jesus in many places 

as a sanction for obedience to his laws. He spoke of the 

Last Judgment, of the perils of Gehenna, of the difficulty 

of entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, and of the necessity 

for preparedness. Nevertheless we more often find him 

appealing to the rationality of his listeners, to the 

sanctity of the Scriptures, and especially to the nature of 

God. Eschatology may be the dominant sanction, but the 

essential sanction is the nature of God. 

"The essential sanction represents an appeal simply 
to the reason and discernment, to the God-conscious 
moral nature of men, assisted by the witness of 
Scripture and the example and authority of Jesus."(1) 

This argument that Jesus taught an "interim ethic" is 
further confuted by the fact that there is a mass of his 
ethical teachings totally unconnected with any eschatolcgica 
matter. To pour all such teachings into the common mould is 
to change their appearance beyond all recognition. Jesus’ 
gospel of humility, universal love, trust in God, returning 
evil for good and so on have no connection with the idea of 
a coming judgment day and lose their value, their prophetic 

(1) A. N. Wilder, Eschatology and Ethics in the Teaching 
of Jesus, p. 154. 
















- 98 - 


insight, and their moral character when thrust forcibly into 
association with, much less dependence on, eschatological 
prediction. 

From the preceding pages comes a picture of Jesus as 
believing himself to be the Messiah, but having instead of 
political ambitions, the mission of teaching such a way of 
living with God and one’s fellowman as would brln^* the will 
of God into actuality in the world and hence inaugurate the 
Kingdom of God. He may have expected the uresent world to 
come to an end soon, but if he did, it is still questionable 
whether he was mistaken. We are still working slowly towards 
the goal of the world he envisaged, and in that sense, the 
older world is gradually ending, being replaced, though very 
slowly, by a more and more perfect world which will event¬ 
ually be what Jesus referred to as the Kingdom of Heaven, and 
in which he will be recognized as king. 

As has already been noted, our narratives of the nature 
and mission of Jesus have been coloured, first by Faul, then 
by the Synoptists. The Fourth Gospel is important chiefly 
for its furtherance of the Hellenization of Christianity. In 
this gospel Jesus is explained to the Greek readers as the 
Logos, pre-existent and divine, having the same nature with 
God. Considerable attention is paid to John the Eaptist with 








. 

. 

. 

. 


“ 


. 



e -■ -• c 


















- 99 - 


the intention ol* proving beyond doubt that he was merely the 
forerunner of Jesus, not the real Messiah. John acclaims 
Jesus as the "Lamb of God" who has come to bring salvation 
to the world. Jesus is made equal to God, if not a part of 
the Godhead, and his mission on earth is a self-accented 
lowering of himself to human status in order to bring mankind 
up to the divine level through his death and resurrection. 
Such is the Messianic nature of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel -- 
a nature acceptable to Greeks as a way of salvation, and 
quite free from the Jewish apocalyptic hope. 









Chapter VII 


MESSIANISM IN THE PATRISTIC AGE 

There was one feature common to all Messianic writings 
in this period, namely, that Jesus was accepted as the 
Messiah, usually with pronounced eschatological significance. 
The hope of his speedy return was still prevalent, and the 
intermittent Roman persecutions of Christians served to 
strengthen that faith. The Revelation of St. John the Divine 
was written in the reign of Domitian (81-96 A.D.) to strength 
en Christians during the persecutions of that ruler, and give 
a typical example of the popular reaction to an unsympathetic 
government. 

Revelation v/hich arose out of persecution, was written 
by an apparently persecuted Christian for his brother 
Christians. By this time the practice of emperor worship, 
started by the provinces out of gratitude for continued 
peace under Roman rule, had become required of all people 
living in the Roman empire except the Jews. It was well 
known that Christians, members of an illegal religion, would 
take no part in such sacrilegious practices, and the natural 
result was sporadic but severe persecution in which John was 
involved. Going to the island of Patmos, either voluntarily 
or forcibly, he experienced an ecstatic vision, in v/hich 

there was revealed to him God's plan for world's salvation. 


















- 101 - 


Revelation embodies this vision, and in it the writer 
pictures Jesus in the form of a lamb revealing God's plan in 
heaven, and his acclamation as ruler of the earth. The 
scene then changes to the earth, where a succession of 
disasters is broughtto a climax by the complete destruction oi 
Rome. The final act of this tremendous drama shows the 
establishment of the New Jerusalem under the rule of God and 
Christ. In this way Jesus is made the immortal co-worker 
with God, destined to rule the earth, and Christian readers 
of this apocalypse were reminded that even the Roman rulers 
were subordinate to God, and would eventually be replaced 
with Christ. There is no doubt that John expected that this 
new world would appear in the very near future: in two places 
he says explicitly, "... the time is at hand", (1:3; 23:10). 
Further, he says that the present emperor will be followed 
by another who will reign for a very brief period, after 
which Nero will return to set up his kingdom. This last 
government, however, will last only three and one-half years, 
and will be followed by the millenial kingdom, which will 
come into being after preliminary wars, destruction of Rome 
and punishment of the wicked. This one New Testament 
reference to the millenium (Rev. 20:3) it might be noted, 
provides the basis for ail later millenial views, which is a 
rather slight foundation on which to build a faith. As the 










' 

. 

■ 

. 








- 102 - 


years of the millenium in Revelation are drawing to their 
close, Satan will be released for a final attack on the 
righteous but will be defeated in the attempt. The new 
Jerusalem will then descend from heaven and the righteous 
will live in it for eternity, enjoying the reward of their 
faithfulness. Again it should be noted that all this was to 
come to pass in the near future, and cannot be applied to any 
later date. 

At about this time Christian groups were splitting up 
over the Docetist controversy. Docetists held that since 
Jesus was the Messiah and the Son of God, he could not have 
actually been human and have suffered physical agony on the 
Cross. They therefore decided that his sufferings were only 
apparent and not actual, and that he himself was not really 
possessed of a physical body. These views were expressed 
considerably later in the Acts of John (ca. 160) and the 
Gospel of Peter (ca. 135). 

For the purpose of denouncing this sect the three 
epistles of John "the Elder" were written. The Elder warns 
Christians against those who do not acknowledge the coming 
of Jesus in human form, declaring them to be agents of the 
Antichrist. This dominant theme runs through all three of 
his letters and shows the serious nature of the controversy. 











_ 














■ 


























' 





. 






















■ 













































- 103 - 


To orthodox Christians the fact that the Messiah had assumed 
human form, and had accepted a human death for them was all- 
important. Hence the Docetic theory that it was an illusory 
life and death which Christ had experienced was prime heresy, 

Docetism gave rise all too often to an immoral dualism. 

In the early years of the second century there were many so- 

I 

called Christians who relied on the mercy of God to forgive 
all sins, denied the atonement theory of the death or Jesus, 
and led lascivious lives. The Epistle of Jude (ca. 125) was 1 
written to remind Christians of the necessity of faith, not 
only in God, hut also in Christ, and of the danger of ignor¬ 
ing Jesus. A generation later this short epistle was 
incorporated into II Peter. A whole century had passed since 
the death of Jesus, and Christians were beginning to doubt 
his return. This epistle was written to declare the certainty 
Df the Second Coming of Christ. This will take place without 
warning (3:10) and will be accompanied by the destruction of 
the earth through fire, to be followed by the establishment of 
a new heaven and earth to be occupied by the righteous. In 
El Peter a fading eschatological hope is brought back in its 
Driginal vigour and taught as an essential feature of the 
Christian religion. 


It should not be assumed, however, that the writing of 



















. 























- 104 - 


EI Peter shows a widespread indifference to eschatological 
hopes, for such was not the case, in the first decade of the 
second century a handbook was being circulated among Christ¬ 
ians in Syria which closed with the words "... ror you Know 
not the hour in which our Lord cometh." (Didache, Ch. 16) 

This warning is accompanied by a definitely planned prophecy 
Df the last days, ivioreover, many of the leaders of the church 
were numbered among the eschatologists or their days, and it 
is from their writings that we get our knowledge 01 tiie 

i j 

speculations being circulated in the early Christian church* 

In the first half of the same century Ignatius'of 
Antioch and Polycarp of Smyrna both expressed belief that 
they were living in the last days of this era. The unknown 
writer of Barnabus foretold that the millenium would start 
six thousand years after the Creation, inaugurated by the 
return of Christ. Following that era a second transformation 
would occur starting a new world. Papias, of Hierapolis, 
drew from Jewish imagery his conception of the llessianic 
kingdom, when he pictured it as one typified by miraculous 
abundance in nature and peace between wild animals* 

Some time in the middle of the second century Hermas 
wrote "The Shepherd" in which he speaks of Christ in the same 
terms used for God, showing his belief that Christ was divine. 




















' 



























\ 












■ 





















- 105 - 


He looked on Jesus as the pre-existent Spirit who created the 
universe and became flesh according to God’s will in order to 
effect human salvation. Here we see a typical example of the 
increasing exaltation of the person of Jesus from that of a 
man to a rank functionally equal to God. 

Apocalyptic speculation continued to attract some 
attention as the Roman Empire declined. Justin (ca. 160 -n.D.] 
said that Christ’s coming had been delayed in order to give 
more people time to repent. There will certainly be a return, 
however, but it will be preceded by the appearance of the 
Antichrist. With the coming of Jesus the wicked will be 
judged, the righteous dead will arise, the world will be 
destroyed by fire, but Jerusalem will be restored to serve as 
the home of the faithful and capital of the Kingdom of 
Heaven on earth for one thousand years. 

Irenaeus, a few years later, produced a somewhat aifferei 
plan for the last days. He believed that the present world 
would last six thousand years, at the end of which time there 
would be an increase in suffering, then the Antichrist would 
come to rule in Jerusalem for three and one-half years. He 
would then be conquered by Christ and the righteous would 
rise from their graves to live in a highly fruitful earth. 
Hollowing that era the final judgment would take place and 














- 106 - 


the new heaven and new earth would be set up to last for 
eternity. 

With the turn of the century Tertullian came into 
prominence with a definite eschatological program directed 
against doubters. He believed that the decay of the Roman 
Empire would precede the appearance of the Antichrist, after 
which Christ would return to bring about the resurrection of 
the righteous to live in the new kingdom in Jerusalem for 
one thousand years and then to go to heaven for eternity while 
the earth would be destroyed by fire. 

During the early years of this third century eschatology 
met its severest critic of Christian times, in the person of 
Origen. He treated millenial imagery in the Bible figur¬ 
atively, giving it an allegorical interpretation which 
rendered its aims spiritual rather than physical or material. 
He expressed the belief that through a period of time the 
imperfect would gradually be made perfect, but took no part 
in eschatological predictions of any sort. 

Origen 1 s was a lonely voice, however, for at the same 
time Hippolytus was foretelling in Rome the ena of this era 
not only six thousand years after the Creation, but also 
five hundred years after the birth of Jesus. In these early 


















, 






- 























* 

























. 


. 






■ 





















- 

.. 































. 













- 107 - 


years when the Christian church was being oppressed Christ¬ 
ians saw little hope for a better world except by divine 
intervention and those who were not content to live as best 
they could under the circumstances, clung tenaciously to 
whatever hope was held out to them of future deliverance. 

About fifty years later Commodian rose to some promin¬ 
ence in North Africa with another eschatological scheme in¬ 
volving two Antichrists: first Nero would reign for three and 
one-half years, then yield to a Persian ruler who would him¬ 
self be conquered by the returned Christ. The establishment 
of Christ’s kingdom would be accompanied by the resurrection 
of the saints to live for one thousand years in a world of 
abundance centered in Jerusalem. At the end of this 
millenium would come the final judgment of the wicked. 

Prom the North African scene came Lactantius (310 A.D.), 
the first eschatologist of the fourth century. Since the 
creation took six days and man was created on the sixth, he 
decided that this world would last six thousand years, and 
the creation of the new man (Christians) was the sign of the 
inauguration of the new world. At the outset of this new 
kingdom there would be dire distress, increasing wickedness, 
general wars and the destruction of the Roman Empire. The 
Son of God would then descend to rule over the resurrected 
saints for ten thousand years. This would be followed by 
the final judgment of all people -- the wicked to suffer 

















' 











■ 




- 

’ 







- 


. 




■ 
























- 108 - 


eternal punishment witnessed by the happy righteous. 

Methodius, bishop of Olympus in Lycia, in the first 
quarter of the fourth century, believed in a simpler and 
somewhat more vague eschatology than that held by his 
African contemporary. He taught that the day of judgment 
and first resurrection would be followed by a thousand years 
under Christ, after which the material bodies of the right¬ 
eous would be transformed and they would be transported to 
some heavenly region to live with God. 

During this same century, however, great changes were 
taking place in Christendom which were to affect millen- 
arianism for centuries to come. Christianity was aking 
rapid progress and eventually became the legal religion of 
the Roman Empire. The natural result was a cessation of 
persecution of Christians and a more favorable attitude on 
the part of Christians towards the Empire. No longer was the 
destruction of Rome looked forward to with high hopes as a 
prerequisite to the establishment of the Kingdom of God on 
earth; the future looked reasonably bright in the field of 
Christian faith and there was no strong desire for divine 
intervention into human affairs. Eschatological predictions • 
became unpopular and interest centered in temporal conditions 
rather than on what might happen at some unknown date in the 





■ 












. 







' 

. 

■ 











- 










- 

































- 






fife 



















-109- 


future. Typical of this new attitude was Augustine’s 
treatise, City of God, written after the fall of Rome in 
410 A.D. In this work Augustine states that the long- 
awaited new era began with the earthly life of Jesus, and 
that the Christian church is the City of God on earth. Thi 
meant that the millenium was already in existence, and work 
ing from this point of view, Augustine so effectively laid 
the task of making the City of God worthy of God on the 
shoulders of the Christians that millenarian speculation 
was silenced for centuries. 












Chapter VIII 


MEDIEVAL AND :..0DERN TIMES 


For three hundred years after ^ugustine no eschatol- 
ogist attained any prominence. Ecclesiasts directed their 
energies chiefly to the acquisition of temporal power as a 
means of bringing about the rule of God on earth. The kings 
became regarded as vice-regents under God, but took guidance 
from the religious leaders. An example of this conception 
of monarchy may be seen in a letter from Pope Gelasius I 
(494 A.D.) to the Eastern Emperor Anastasius in which he 
points out to the emperor that "... as a pious man you yield 
your neck to the administrators of divine things."(1) This 
relationship between the spiritual and temporal powers 
lasted until the beginning of the fourteenth century, when 
Boniface VIII was defeated by Philip IV of France in the 
battle for supremacy. 

A few millenialists of that period are worthy of mentlor 
Fursa of the seventh century and Aelfric, an English abbot o 
the eleventh century, kept eschatological hopes high in theii 
immediate circles; but not until the middle of the twelfth 
century was there any considerable arousing or such interest. 
This was incited by Joachim or Flora, who combined an 


(1) J.T.McNeill, Christian Hope for 7/orld Society, p. 32. 







. 



. 


■ 









-Ill- 


allegorical interpretation of the past with a prophetic out¬ 
look on the future. In 1254 Gerard of Gorgo San Donnino 
published an edition of Joachim 1 s prophecies in which 126u 
was set as the date for the inauguration of the new world, 
corresponding to the number of days the woman mentioned in 
Rev. 12:1-6 stayed in the wilderness. Joachim divided 
human history into three stages: the age of the Father (the 
era of the patriarchs and obedience to the Law); that of the 
Son (from the time of John the Baptist, marked by the 
quality of wisdom); that of the Spirit which was to commence 
according to Gerard 1 s edition, in 1260. .Vhen the new era 
arrived the present church would be purified, the elect of al 
nations would be gathered for a final conflict with the 
powers of evil, to be followed by the judgment and the new 
world. 

Shortly after Joachim’s death Francis of Assisi came 
into prominence, to be acclaimed by jpany of his followers 
as the Messiah of the new era. ^fter his death these 
followers split into two parties, the Spiritualists 
concentrating on the apocalyptic hope. Taking as their 
center of interest the prophecies of Joachim, they revised 
them continually to produce new dates for the coming of the 
new world. As preference dictated, either Pope Boniface 
VIII or King Philip IV was looked on as the antichrist, and 











' 




r 










■ 













c 








■ « 






. 




. 




















- 112 - 


their expectations were so intense as to become deep 
convictions, gradually becoming linked with some definite 
political plan. The best known case of this latter devel¬ 
opment was that of Cola di Rienzo, a Roman of the fourteenth 
century who tried to lead a general revolution to be 
followed by the renovation of humanity, but without prolonged 
success. That he was able to achieve any success whatever 
shows the general feeling that the end of this present world 
was near, a feeling that was brought to its height by the 
loss of ecclesiastical authority through Philip IY's defeat 
of Boniface VIII, which loss marked the end of an era of 
church power and could well mean, in the minds of the common 
people, the end of the temporal world. The eschatological 
hopes of the people from this time on were kept high by the 
prevailing unrest which reached its climax later in the 
Protestant Reformation. 

Particularly in Bohemia were such reelings common. In 
the latter part of the fourteenth century Militz of Kromeriz, 
i forerummer of John Huss, revolted from the corruption of 
the times, and found in the Scriptures convincing proor that 
ike Antichrist was active in his world. From his studies he 
lecided that the end or the world was to occur some time 
between 1365 and 1367. Huss himself did not la. particular 
stress on the coming end or the world, but often spoke of the 




■ 























.« 


- 




. 

' 

• ,,y r'<m 





















- 














* 












- 113 - 


kntichrist as a present evil power waiting to capture the 
faithful. During the Hussite wars following the violent 
ieatn ox nuss tue Bohemian people saw in their own country 
ample reason to believe that the world was approaching its 
end. 


Such theories were bolstered at this time by the Tabor- 
ite movement, whose leaders painted in glowing colours a 
picture of the imminent judgment day. They pointed to the 
signs of the times -- war and rumours of wars, false prophets 
and traitors within their own movement -- as proofs of the 
rapidly approaching end. So convinced of the impending doom 
were the Taborites that they chose five cities of Bohemia 
which had not yielded to the Antichrist as cities of refuge 
against the day of world destruction,and to those cities the 
people flocked, selling their property and turning the 
proceeds over to their leaders. The restoration of peace 
naturally caused a decline in that group’s following, but 
similar hopes were preserved in the milder sect called the 
Bohemian Brethren. The pope was pointed to as the antichrist 
and the imminence of the second coming was stressed, 
particularly during the period of turmoil in the Thirty 
Years’ War. 


As might be expected, the reformers in Switzerland and 









- 114 - 


lermany also looked on the Roman church as an evil power. 

Sarly in the sixteenth century such feelings reached their 
climax among the fanatical members of the Anabaptist group. 
Accompanying the revolt against the feudal system ending in 
the Peasants’ War of 1525, Melchior Hoffman posed as one of 
the two witnesses mentioned in Rev. 11:3 and announced that 
Strassburg was to be the New Jerusalem. Owing to opposition 
tie and his followers moved to Munster, taking possession of 
the civic government, and waited for the return of Christ. 
There they held complete power until 1535, when the movement 
/vas forcibly suppressed. 

Apart from such extremists, however, the eschatology of 
the Reformed churches was usually cohsiderably restrained. 
Jndoubtedly the Roman hierarchy was regarded as the Antichrist 
and the approaching end of the world was often anticipated, 
out the belief in a literal millenial reign of Christ was not 
generally accepted by the leaders of the various Protestant 
churches. 

Unfortunately the common people did not always follow the 
examples of their leaders. Millenial teachings still found 
many supporters, particularly in the seventeenth century. 

Human affairs were in a turmoil, with religious wars in 
Germany, religious persecution in Prance and political 
revolution in England under Cromwell. As has always been the 













- 115 - 


case, such social unrest led many people to believe that it 
indicated the beginning of the end for the present world. 

In France and Germany such views were favored by 
certain individuals rather than by sects. In 1627 the 
German scholar Alsted forecasted the beginning of the 
millenial era to come in 1694, while in France a generation 
later Protestant Jurieu set the date 1689 for the downfall of 
the Antichrist Roman church, in England, however, such 
thinking reached the stage of organization into a political 
movement called the Fifth Monarchy Movement, opposed to 
Cromwell. The professed aim of this group was to fight for 
Jesus, whom they believed was to come and establish a world 
monarchy. This conviction resulted in two vain attempts at 
revolt in 1657 and 1661. Members of this group v/ere 
activated by hatred for the Roman church, and strong 
communistic and mystical tendencies. Rational scriptural 
study was looked on as evil, and mystical knowledge was 
considered the only true guide to the meaning of the 
Scripture. 

In 1726 millenarianism in Germany reached the level of 
organization in the founding of the Ronsdorf sect, under 
Elias Eller, who claimed that he and his wife (who married 
him after her conversion to his faith) were the two witnesses 
of Rev. 11:3, and were chosen to establish the New Jerusalem. 










- 116 - 


Encouraged by the success which his movement enjoyed, he late: 
declared himself to be the incarnation of the Godhead and his 
wife to be the future mother of the saviour of the world. 
Following Eller’s death in 1750, however, the sect declined 
rapidly in popular support and shortly became extinct. 

At about the same time Germany became the scene of 
aroused eschatological interest in scholastic circles, with 
the publication of a commentary on Revelation in 1740 by 
J. A. Bengel. Rejecting the allegorical and spiritual inter¬ 
pretations of the Book of Revelation, Eengel decided that 
the literal interpretation was millenarian, and deduced from 
it that the new world would begin in 1836. 

Late in the seventeenth century England experienced 
renewed millenial interest under Ann Lee and the "Shaker” 
movement. Meeting opposition in England, she moved to Americt 
and there organized several Shaker settlements, communistic 
in type and celibate in organization, the men and women 
living in separate communities. It was believed that the 
last cycle of the world’s history had commenced with the 
life of Ann Lee and would result in the establishment of the 
new age. 

The rench Revolution with its attendant tyranny, 
destruction and death produced the inevitable increase in 












•• 



' ■ - 





















■ 







- 117 - 


millenial speculation. The German theosophlsts, schonherr, 
identified Napoleon with the antichrist, his home city of 
Konigsberg with the city whose doom was predicted in Rev. 
17:9ff, and declared that the coming of Christ was near at 
hand. A generation after Schonherr T s death in 1826 Christoph 
Hoffman proposed to rebuild the temple in Jerusalem in 
preparation for the return of Christ, but without success. 

Apart entirely from such sectarian activity, members 
of the Protestant churches themselves took great interest in 
the predictions allegedly contained in the Bible. Following 
Bengel's system, such interpreters of the Scripture combined 
their isogetical gleanings with various contemporary events 
in order to arrive at definite predictions of the date for 
the return of Christ. This practice was prevalent through¬ 
out Europe in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and, 
in fact, has attracted varying numbers of followers down to 
the present day. 

Near the end of the seventeenth century, or the early 
years of the eighteenth a movement was started in the 
Russian Ukraine which, through a chain of adverse circum¬ 
stances found its home in Canada in 1899. This sect, called 
the Dukhobors, has its origin shrouded in mystery but it is 
known that various leaders in its history have claimed, and 
won, the title of Christ; they even established a dynasty of 


















. 

' J 1 

. 


























- 118 - 


Messiahs. In 1899 the Dukhobor colony was transplanted to 
Canada, under a previously secured guarantee of religious 
liberty and freedom from military service. Their leader, 
Peter Verigin, then imprisoned in Siberia, v/us granted free¬ 
dom to follow the colonists to Canada in 1902, and his 
arrival was followed by several pilgrimages undertaken to 
meet Jesus, whom they believed to be on his way to rule their 
modern Zion. After various quarrels with the federal govern¬ 
ment over vital statistics, Peter Verigin bought a tract of 
land of considerable size in British Columbia and moved six 
thousand of his followers to this new land of promise, where 
they set up their own community government and lived as 
disconnected from the outside world as was possible, in which 
state they still exist. 

In 1787 George Rapp, of Wittenberg, organized a movement 
named the Harmony Society, which also was later transferred 
to this continent. Six hundred followers settled in Pitts¬ 
burgh in 1804 and established a communistic form of society 
to await the second coming of Christ. However, due to 
encouragement of celibacy and natural decline of interest as 
the years progressed, the group had disappeared by 1903. 

Great Britain also experienced this apolcayptic trend of 
thought at that time, notably through three movements and 

















»1 ‘ ■ J.. 






. 

. 







■ 


















- 119 - 


their offshoots. The Catholic Apostolic Church was started 
in 1823 by Edward Irving, a Scotch Presbyterian. Irving 
attracted the early support of a rich banker, Henry Drummond, 
at whose home yearly conferences were held. In the belief 
that Christ was to return to earth very soon, lih^r instituted 
a form of apostolic church based on the primitive Christian 
church, so as to be prepared for the coming or Jesus. While 
the date for Christ’s return was first set at 1832, the 
movement persisted after that date had passed and even 
gained a small gathering of supporters in the United States, 
where the first church was started in 1851. In the early 
years of the group a schism appeared, resulting in the 
establishment of the New Apostolic Church, which sect also 
hoped for the speedy return of Christ, and actually had 
much in common with the parent body. 

The second main sect in Britain at this time was the 
Plymouth Brethren, organized in 1830. This group was also 
based on the early Christian ecclesiastical government, and 
entertained high hopes of the return of Christ, to rule them. 
They later divided into several denominations, and now claim 
a few thousand adherents. 

Late in the eighteenth century Richard Erothers claimed 
divine authority to rule England and demanded the abdication 
of King George, for which claim he was promptly imprisoned, 








































- 120 - 


and later confined to an asylum as a criminal lunatic. Upon 
his release he gathered a fair number of followers, but at 
the time of his death he claimed only two disciples. One of 
these, John Finlayson, kept his master's ideas alive, and by 
the time of his death in 1854 the movement was gaining 
popularity. From this none too admirable origin the present 
British-Israel sect developed and has grown to considerable 
size at the present time. World scholarship has, on the 
whole, passed it by with scant attention, as a few 
quotations will show. 

Tt The Theory ... rests on premises which are 
deemed by scholars -- both theological and 
anthropological -- to be utterly unsound,"(1) 

"The whole movement is interesting as a 
'reductio ad absurdum' of too literal inter¬ 
pretation of the prophecies."(2 ) 

"In support of the theory many alleged 
identifications in respect to custom, 
traditions, beliefs, etc., have been adduced. 

These without exception depend upon very 
inadequate support."(3) 


The British-Israelite theory is that the Anglo-Saxon 
peoples are the descendants of the "lost" ten tribes of 


(1) Encyclopaedia Brittanica, Yol. II, p-. 31 (Eleventh 
Edition) (under "Anglo-Israelite Theory). 

(2) Jewish Encyclopedia, Yol. I, p. 601. 

(3) Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, Yol. I, p. 482, 
(under "Anglo-Israelism"). 
















- 121 - 


Israel, and are destined by divine will to rule the world 
for all time. The truth of the matter is, of course, that 
the ten tribes were not lost for the simple reason that the 
large majority of them never left their native land. The 
Assyrian records of that date (722 B.C.) claim the deport¬ 
ation of only some twenty-seven thousands which would not 
appear to be more than a small part of the inhabitants of 
Samaria. If this was the case, and we have no reason to 
suppose otherwise, then there is no basis for believing that 
the ten tribes migrated to the British Isles, there to await 
the fulfillment of their destiny as the leaders of the 
world. For a more complete discussion of the defects in 
British-Israelitish reasoning the reader is referred to the 
works of N. H. Parker and S. H. Wilkinson which are listed 
in the bibliography. To pursue the study of this movement 
intensively in this worK would be to grant it more space 
than it merits. The beliefs of its followers are based on 
highly fanciful interpretations of the Scripture, so 
unjustified and irrational as to repel the interest of any 
unbiased investigator. There is the further fault or its 
philosophy, which holds the totally anti-Christian idea that 
any one race is favored by God and is therefore destined to 
hold the balance of power in the world. 


It is obvious that no follower of this movement can 




• • • . ... , . ..... 7 . , • 

. 

' 



■ 








. 

. • 

. 

* 





- 122 - 


accept the belief that the Kingdom of God is a spiritual 
realm, or that Christ is ever to rule over it. Their 
belief is that the throne of David was destined to be the 
seat of judgment forever, and therefore they have decided 
that when the Davidic dynasty was conquered in Israel it 
immediately was transferred to Britain, or what is now 
Britain. The Kingdom of God is, then, a purely political 
kingdom, has no connection with the definitely spiritual 
kingdom referred to by Christ, and is to be found under the 
British throne. Such teaching is naturally abhorrent to the 
sincere and rational Christian, but has attracted much 
support and now publishes large quantities of proselytic 
literature, emanating from London. 

Early in the eighteenth century the United States was 
experiencing increased interest in millenarianism. In 1830, 
according to the Mormon tradition, Joseph Smith started The 
Church of Jesus Christ of the latter Day Saints. Smith felt 
that he was called upon to found a new community where Christ 
would set up his millenial kingdom when he returned to this 
earth. Having definite mystical tendencies, he produced the 
Book of Mormon, professedly revealing the word of God as it 
had been given to the ancient inhabitants of America. After 
some misfortune the Mormons found a permanent home in Salt 
Lake City, but have carried their beliefs far beyond that 














-. 123 - 


district, and their followers still expect the return of 
Christ to rule them. 

In 1831, a year after the origin of the .ormon church, 
William filler founded the Adventist movement in New York 
state. From his study of the Bible Miller had decided that 
Christ was to return to establish the millenial age In 1843, 
which date was subsequently postponed to 1844. After this 
later date had passed uneventfully, more caution was used in 
fixing successive times ror the advent or Christ. The 
group split into seven divisions in 184b, but raith in the 
early advent of Christ is still alive, and the groups carry 
on an extensive missionary campaign. 

Millenarians are still to be found within the ranks of 
almost all denominations of the Christian church. There was 
a definite movement organized in 1878, starting with a 
conference in New York, attended by members of ten different 
Protestant churches. These self-styled "Evangelists" 
professed to interpret the Bible correctly in the light of 
present day conditions and events, and from their studies 
they concluded that the present world was working towards a 
speedy end, to be replaced by the millenial kingdom. The 
World War of 1914-1918 bolstered their hopes of a new era, 
but interest waned with the peace in 1918. 

Late in the nineteenth century the International Bible 















- 124 - 


Students Association was organized by C. T. Russell. This 
evangelist gained immense support following his widespread 
campaigns and insistently repeated prophecies of tli 9 end of 
this world at various dates. Accompanying this tragedy 
would be the downfall of the forces of evil, namely, all 
governments and all churches other than his own, at which tlm( 
the elect (his followers) would take power and govern the 
millenial kingdom. The outbreak of the World War in this case 
also undoubtedly caused many people to think that his 
prophecies were to be fulfilled, but although support declinec 
somewhat after the end of the war, the movement was able 
carried on after Russell f s death, by J. F. Rutherford. 

Ancient hopes die hard, however, and the present world 
war has produced renewed speculation. This increasing in¬ 
terest began in the years of the depression, when the tragedy 
of widespread unemployment was regarded as a sign of 
approaching doom. As the years went on and small or large 
localized wars occurred in various parts of the world, 
apocalyptists were convinced that these were preliminary to 
the final, world-wide conflict which would usher in the 
millenial kingdom. In 1931, at the height of the depression, 
the Russellites, taking advantage of popular bewilderment and 
frustration, silently changed their organizational name to 
"Jehovah*s Witnesses” and through contorted exegesis of the 
Scripture again found proof, to their own satisfaction, that 









- 125 - 


all religions of the present day are opposed to the will of 
God and that they alone have the truth. According to their 
literature, which is very extensive, Satan and his followers 
were cast out of heaven in 1914, at which time God enthroned 
Christ as king and the government of the new world began. 
Because Satan is accordingly holding sway on earth after his 
fall from heaven, we are told that we can expect no improve¬ 
ment in world conditions until after the coming battle of 
Armageddon, when the faithful prophets and patriarchs will be 
taised from the grave at Christ’s command and will rule as 
princes under the sovereignty of Christ, in a world completel 
free from sin of any sort, and enjoying the blessings of 
extreme prosperity. At this time there will be a complete 
resurrection, and those who pass successfully through the 
testing time of Satan’s temporary release from bondage will 
enjoy everlasting life in the new world, while the sinful 
will receive eternal punishment along with Satan. 

The Jehovah’s Witnesses should properly be termed post- 
millenialists, since they believe that the kingdom is with 
us now, that the second advent has already occurred, but is 
not apparent because of human blindness. This, of course, 
is the keystone of their theory, for to them anyone who 
disagrees with them is promptly condemned as too blind to 
see the light, and therefore all opposition is automatically 
based on such profound ignorance as to make it not worth 











- 126 - 


notice . 

With this grandiose and detailed plan for the 
consummation of God’s will the Jehovah’s ,/itnesses have 
attracted a considerable number of followers, and much 
unfavorable attention. They owe allegiance to no one save 
God, are unalterably opposed to organized religious bodies, 
and possess a fanatical belief in their own election to rule 
the future world that makes rational discussion of their 
doctrines impossible. They are, however, merely the present 
outward form of a hope that has been in existence for 
couhtless centuries, and will in all probability endure the 
sane fate of ultimate extinction which has been the lot of 
their predecessors. 







- 





. 








. 
















Chapter IX 


A CRITICAL STUDY OF MODERN MILLENIAL THEORIES 

The preceding chapters have shown the history of the 
various forms of millenialism in Jewish and Christian thought, 
their ancient origin and recurrent popularity down to the 
present day. Particularly in times of turmoil and war, men 
have looked on conditions around them, realized the sinful¬ 
ness present in the world, and have directed their thoughts 
towards a visionary future world of happiness and righteous¬ 
ness. Sometimes this vision has led them to work construct¬ 
ively for a better social life, but often it has evolved into 
a defeatist attitude based on fantastic interpretations of 
Scriptural prophecies. 

As has already been demonstrated in a previous chapter, 
there is no prophecy in the Old Testament applicable to Jesus 
in his earthly life, much less in a returned life. Each and 
every writer in the Bible was concerned with conditions in 
his own day, and wrote either to remedy prevailing wrongs, or 
to strengthen the faith of his countrymen in time of trouble. 
One can easily imagine, therefore, now astounded Isaiah would 
have been had he been informed that his prophecy of a highway 
for the returning exiles v/ould later be construed as a 
reference to the modern railway from Joppa to Jerusalem, whici 
construction has been placed on that verse by modern 










. u i .. 





‘f 











■ J. 


' ; ' 











j '(JO 







• ! 












- 128 - 


niillenialists. Similar treatment is given countless other 
passages of both Old and New Testaments, 

The book of Revelation, in particular, is abused by such 
so-called scholars. Ignoring completely the author’s obvious 
concern for the welfare of his fellow Christians In a time of 
persecution, they contort his prophecies into references to 
modern events and equate the number 666 with Mohammed, the 
pope, or any person regarded by them as an unequalled 
incarnation of evil. The fact that time and again their 
confident forecasts of the end of the world have been dis- 
proven by the brutal facts of history deters them not in the 
least. As each date for the end of the world has passed 
quietly on its way a few disillusioned disciples have 
deserted their respective leaders, but the memory of the 
credulous is short, and some later time finds a new movement 
rising in strength and popularity, based on the inspiring 
hope that this time the predictions will come true. 

This form of human gullibility was shown during the firsl 
world war, when large numbers of people became convinced that 
they were living on the threshold of the new world. The war 
ended, the world entered into a period of prosperity, which, 
though short-lived, discouraged belief in the approaching 
milienium, and men turned their attentions to this present 
world, and the work which had to be done in it. 










- 129 - 


Later, as social conditions took a sharp decline ending in 
the economic depression of 1929-39, men again began to wonder 
if the resultant widespread poverty and misery did not 
precede the return of Christ and the inauguration of his 
kingdom. Such surmises crystallized into definite beliefs 
as the countries of the world again plunged into what was to 
be the most catastrophic war in history. Here the pre- 
millenialists stepped in to declare that this war was fore¬ 
told in the Scripture as a prelude to the millenial kingdom. 

Exemplifying this theory, the Jehovah’s Witnesses of 
Canada see in the eleventh chapter of Daniel a prophecy of 
present day conditions, through the purely arbitrary equating 
on the rT king of the north” with the totalitarian powers, and 
the TT king of the south” with the democratic United Nations. 
From this point they go on to declare that this prophecy 
proves the world is in its last stages and its end will 
include the destruction of all totalitarian rule, from Satan 
and his demons on down to men, including the pope and the 
whole Homan church, if not all churches. It is obvious that 
this interpretation of Daniel has no basis whatsoever, and 
since that example is typical of the group’s allegorizations, 
it is likewise obvious that the sect’s whole basis of faith 
is unsound. 

Added to this fault in premillenialism, there is the 
further defect of its philosophy. Any adherent of this sect 




I 


i' '... ’; . : r :> 














... , .. ... 1 *. 


.1j 






. . 









' -‘.v 


V 










. -’a 


a ? 

■ .. ■■ ■ . . V 

.‘la 






. a , 




■ 




. 














. 














- 130 - 


accepts as a primary doctrine, whether explicit or implicit, 
the ultimate uselessness of human intelligence. According 
to them it is futile to try to improve this present world 
because God has already decreed that the world shall become 
steadily worse until He steps in, either directly or through 
Eis envoy, to establish forcibly a divine kingdom. If this 
contention be true, then the teachings and sacrifices of Old 
Testament prophets, of Jesus himself, and of all idealists 
throughout the history of mankind, have been for naught, 
because it is the predestined fate of the world to follow 
evil. 


If, then, such applications of Biblical prophecies are 
wrong, what estimate of value should be placed on such 
writings? To find our answer we must look back into the 
conditions under which the books were written. At several 
times in the history of the Jewish race, the future looked 
very dismal. Religious faith suffered under the threat of 
persecution, or under the influence of the grandeur of pagan 
religions. In such times some prophet has recognized this 
threat to the ancient faith and has written, either in the 
form of fiction or prophecy, to strengthen the people in 
their time of trial. Since apocalypticism was the most 
efficient vehicle of courage or hope., and since it was 
generally accepted to some degree in ancient days, these 
writings usually took a definitely messianic trend. Thus, 










; * 






. 


. -v ... ■ t ; 








- 

. 












- 


. 

. 










' 
















• 




• 


. 











- 131 - 


in the time of the Babylonian exile, the exiles were assured 
that a remnant of the people would return to a glorified and 
sanctified Jerusalem. Later, while suffering under the 
fanatical Antiochus, the writer of Daniel promised his 
readers that a better time was ahead, when the powers of evil 
would be crushed and the righteous would reign in divine 
glory. Again, after the shocking death of Jesus, Christians 
were told, through the disciples and various writers, that 
their Lord would return to set up a godl}' kingdom and rule 
over them for all eternity. ?Jhen the Roman government saw in 
that Christian faith a potential threat to its power and 
began to persecute it, the writer of Revelation inspired and 
strengthened the Christians with a renewed hope. 

It should be clearl3^ seen from such facts that the 
apocalyptic and prophetic writings of the Bible were 
intended as a source of strength in troublous times. The 
writers had enough to cause them concern in their own days 
without looking ahead to sea what was going to hapren one or 
two thousand years in the future. To believe that any 
prophecies of the Bible are to be fulfilled literally in this 
age is to indulge in a gross and entirely unwarranted conceit 
as to the value, in the eyes of God, of this generation over 
and above all the countless preceding generations in the 
history of man. 


Apocalyptic hopes have been invalidated continually by 






■ i 

■ 

' 






















- 132 - 


the passage of history. Reinterpretations of Biblical 
predictions have likewise been rendered untenable time and 
again as the dates set for the end of this world have been 
proven false. Because of this it would seem obvious that 
man must set himself to the task of personally working for 
the improvement of world conditions; he must cast aside 
entirely the apparently vain hope that God is to enter the 
human scene in person to set right the wrongs which men, in 
their slow struggle towards perfection, still allow to 
remain in their lives. When all people become convinced 
that this is their own responsibility, and see that they 
must work as God's agents to bring the world to Eim, then 
they will have entered into the first stages of the Kingdom 
of God on earth and the long-predicted millenium will have 
arrived, without any catastrophic prelude, but through the 
gradual human progress towards the godly life. 





- 

' 











. 

- 








• 


• 





. 



: 






* 

■ 




' 


♦ 














































BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics 
Encyclopaedia Brittanlca - Eleventh Edition 
Jewish Encyclopaedia - Funk and Wagnalls Co., Few York, 1904 
International Critical Commentary - Charles Scribner’s Sons, 



New York, 1920. 

Atkins, G.G. 

MODERN RELIGIOUS CULTS AND MOVEMENTS, 
Fleming H. Revell Co., New York, 1923. 

Bailey and Kent 

A HISTORY OF THE HEBREW COMMONWEALTH, 
Chas. Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1920. 

Cadoux, C.J. 

THE HISTORIC MISSION CF JESUS, 

Harper and Bros., New York. 

Case, S.J. 

THE MILLENIAL HOPE, 

University of Chicago Press, 1918. 

Case, S.J. (Ed. ) 

STUDIES IN EARLY CHRISTIANITY, 

Century Co., 1928. 

Clarke, A. 

BIBLE COMMENTARY, 

Thomas Tegg & Son, London, 1838. 

Cook, S.A. 

THE OLD TESTAMENT - A REINTERPRETATION, 
W. Heffer & Sons Ltd., Cambridge, 1936. 

Coombs, J.V. 

RELIGIOUS DELUSIONS, 

The Standard Publishing Co., Cincinnati 
1904. 

Dobschutz, E. von 

THE ESCHATOLOGY OF TEE GOSPELS, 

Hodaer and Stoughton, 1910. 

Ferguson, C.W. 

THE CONFUSION OF TONGUES, 

Doubleday, Doran and Co., New York,1929 

Coodspeed, E.J. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO TEE NEW TESTAMENT, 
University qf Chicago press, 1937. 

Guignebert, C. 

THE JEWISH WORLD IN THE TIME OF JESUS, 
E. P. Dutton & Co., New York, 1939. 



















( 







Hastings, J. 

A DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE, 

Chas. Scribner*s Suns, New York, 1909. 

Eerford, R.T. 

THE PHARISEES, 

The Macmillan Co., ITew York, 1924. 

Jackson, F.J.F. 
and Lake, K. 

THE BEGINNINGS OF CHRISTIANITY, 

Part I, Volume I, Prolegomena I, 
MacMillan & Co. Ltd., London, I92u. 

Klausner, J. 

JESUS OF NAZARETH, 

The Macmillan Co., New York, 1926. 

Mathews, S. 

THE MESSIANIC HOPE IN THE NEW TESTAMENT, 
university of Chicago Press, Chicago, 

19 04. 

Moore, G.F. 

JUDAISM, (Vol. Iij, 

Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
1927. 

HcGiffert, A.C. 

A HISTORY OF CHRISTIAN THOUGHT, (2 vols. 
Chas. Scribner*s Sons, New York, 1932. 

McNeill,J.T., et al 

ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN CHRISTIAN 
HISTORY, University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, 1939. 

Oesterley, W.O.E. 

JUDAISM AND CHRISTIANITY, 

The Macmillan Co., New York, 1937. 

Oesterley and 
Robinson 

HEBREW RELIGION, ITS ORIGIN AND 
DEVELOPMENT, 5.P.C.K., London, 1937. 

Parker, N.H. 

THE TEN TRIBES AND ALL THAT, 

Ryerson Press, Toronto, 1938. 

Feake, A.S. 

THE PEOPLE AND THE BOON, 

Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1925. 

Pfleiderer, 0. 

THE EARLY CHRISTIAN CONCEPTION OF CHRIST 
Williams & Norgate, 1905. 

Schurer, E. 

THE JEWISH PEOPLE IN xHE TIME OF JESUS 
CHRIST, T. T. Clark, Edinburgh, 1SS5. 

Schweitzer, A. 

THE Q,UE3T OF THE HISTORICAL JESUS, 

A.C.Black Ltd., London, 1922. 










Sheldon, H.C. 

STUDIES IN RECENT ADVENTISM, 

The Abingdon Dress, New York, 1915. 

Silver, A.H. 

A HISTORY OF MESSIANIC SPECULATION IN 
ISRAEL, Macmillan Co., New York, 1927. 

Weiss, J. 

THE HISTORY OF PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY, 

(2 vols.), Macmillan & Co. Ltd., 

New York, 1937. 

Wilder, A.N. 

ESCHATOLOGY AND ETHICS IN THE TEACHINGS 
OF JESUS, Harper L Bros. New York, 1939 

Wilkinson, S.H. 

BRITISH ISRAELISM EXAMINED, 

John Bale, Sons and Danielsson Ltd., 
London, 1923. 






























