For Reference 

NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 

AUTOMATIC 
GAIN CONTROL 



















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/jordan1935 




The undersigned hereby certify that they 
have read and recommended to the Committee 
on Graduate Studies for acceptance a 
dissertation on ” Automatic Gain Control 
for a Broadcast Amplifier"* submitted by 
Edward C. Jordan in partial fulfilment of 
the requirements for the degree of Master 


of Science 










AUT OMATIO GAIN CONTROL 


for a 

BROADCAST AMPLIFIER 


By 

Edward Q, Jordan B.Sc. (E.E.) 

An investigation carried out under 
the direction of Dr, H, J, MacLeod. 


Presented to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies, University of Alberta, as a 
partial requirement for the degree of 
Master of Science. 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 
EDMONTON 


December 15 , 19^5 












Introduction 


It has been estimated^ that when the Philadelphia Symphony- 


Orchestra of some hundred odd pieces plays Bach 's "Toccata and Fugue 
in D Minor", there is between the loudest burst of music from full 
orchestra and the softest note of the gentle flute a volume range 


p 

of 70 decibels. Experiments have shown that when a radio receiver 


is operated in the home under average conditions, the range between 
the loudest comfortable listening level and the lowest volume suf¬ 
ficient to overcome background noise of both the room and the re¬ 
ceiver is forty decibels. Between the input to the microphone and 
the output of the receiving set then, there must exist some agency 
to contract the larger range to within the limits of the smaller* 
This 'agency' is ordinarily the control operator and it is among his 



main gain control that the loudest 


notes will just modulate the transmitter to its capacity, and then 
vary his controls more or less continuously to contract the volume 
range the necessary amount. It is this latter operation which might 
profitably lend itself to automatic or semi-automatic control. 

It is quite true comparatively few programs will show the full 
seventy decibel variation; but some controlling is always necessary 
on any program - except perhaps that of a modern dance orchestra. 
Moreover it is only under ideal conditions that the forty decibel 
range can be tolerated. The working range of a transmitter of a 

1. The Reproduction of Orchestral Music in Auditory Perspective, 
Bell Lab. Record, Vol. 11, No. 9 , May, 1955* 

2. Communication and Broadcast Engineering. 




given power rating is a function of its average percentage modula¬ 
tion and a station which is broadcasting a program having a forty- 
decibel range, the peak signals of which modulate the transmitter to 
90% will have an average modulation of only 10 or 15 %• The result is 
that except for favorable locations near the transmitter the softer 
portions of the music will not be sufficiently far above the atmos¬ 
pheric noise level to make reception worth while. Again, at the re¬ 
ceiving end, there are comparatively few listeners who operate their 
sets so that the peak signals reach the loudest comfortable listen¬ 
ing level. Whether or not it be right, the general tendency is to 
have the radio on at rather low volume, so that ordinary conversa¬ 
tion can still be carried on above the program. A 4o decibel varia¬ 
tion under these conditions would mean the complete inaudibility of 
the softer passages. For these reasons it has been found necessary 
to contract the range still further and practice dictates a permiss- 
able variation of JO decibels. 

Although the problem of automatic control has been recognized in 
the broadcast field^ the chief attacks upon it have been made in the 

2 

field of long distance telephony. A device known as the 'compandor' 

(compressor-expandor) has been developed for use in the transatlantic 
long wave radio telephone circuit between London and New York. Its 
function is to compress the range of the signal variations at the trans- 

1. Stuart Ballantyne, ‘'High Quality Broadcasting", Proc. I.R.E., 

p. 571; 1954. 

2. R.C. Mathes and S.B. Wright, "The Compandor", B.T.S. Monograph 
B-798: June 1954, 



5. 


mitting end and expand the condensed range back to its normal value 
at the receiving end. The principle of operation is interesting: 
the plate resistance of two tubes connected in push-pull is made the 
shunt arm of an H type network, and this ”losser H network is inserted 
at the input to the amplifier. The plate resistance of the push- 
pull tubes is a function of their grid bias and by causing this 
grid bias to vary with the amplitude of the signal envelope at the 
amplifier input, it is possible to automatically control the amount 
of loss introduced. Fig. 1 shows a rough schematic diagram of the 
compressor. 




In the broadcast field there has been developed^ a semi¬ 
mechanical control which is actuated by the number of peaks per 
second exceeding a predetermined limit. It uses a system of re- 


1. Stuart Ballantyne; Loc. cit. Page 571 • 






























4. 


lays to cut resistance pads into the input circuit, reducing the in¬ 
put to the amplifier in 2 D.B. steps until the number of excessive 
peaks per second is below the limit established by the apparatus. 
This device serves to back up the control operator in his judg¬ 
ment and acts as a safety valve. It has the disadvantage however 
of being 'a posteriori 1 in its action, a certain number of over¬ 
load peaks having to occur before the control will act. 

It was the fourfold purpose of this investigation 

(1) to determine the possibility of adapting the simple auto¬ 
matic volume control of receiving sets to an audio amplifier and 
utilize this action to work as a safety device on overload peaks. 

(2) to build such a control for an existing transformer coup¬ 
led studio amplifier. 

(5) to attempt a continuous control action rather than a mere 
safety valve on peaks. 

(4) if possible, to show the action of the control oscillo- 
graphically and so determine what distortion it might introduce. 

General Considerations 




(b) — AUDIO FREQUENCY 


FI O. 2 


A.V. G. CIRCUITS 































The theoretical a.v.c. circuit of receiving sets as applied 
to the radio frequency stages is shown in fig. 2(a), while develop¬ 
ed from it for an audio amplifier is the circuit of 2(b). The 
signal is fed through tube 1 and the remainder of the amplifier, 
and appears in amplified form at the detector or amplifier output 
as the case maybe. Here a portion of the energy is used to feed 
a rectifier, the output of which, after suitable filtering by the 
low pass filter circuit (C,R), is applied to the grid of the 
variable-mu tube (tube 1). If the connections are correct an in¬ 
crease in signal will produce a larger voltage drop across R and 
increase the bias on tube 1, thus reducing its amplification by an 
amount that depends on the signal strength. An automatic control 
is thus accomplished. 

There are however several general requirements that such a 
control must meet before it can be considered satisfactory for the 
use proposed. These maybe assembled under the term - Naturalness 
of reproduction*. This involved the consideration of such factors 
as: The time constant of the control, that is speed with which the 
control acts in reducing or increasing the volume; the effect on 
background noise during in-between periods of no nusie; the ’power 5 
of the control, being the decibels reduction due to the control 
for a given number of decibels output; the ’intensity’ of the 
control, indicated by the slope of the input-output curve with the 
control operative; and the range of the control, being the range 
in decibels output over which the control is effective. A major 
factor is freedom from distortion. This might be steady-state dis¬ 
tortion such as could occur in any audio amplifier and includes 



(a) Frequency distortion, 

(b) Amplitude distortion, 

(c) Phase distortion, 

or it might be transient distortion introduced only while the con¬ 
trol is operating to change the volume from one level to another. 
This latter could be expected to show itself as a change in wave 
form during actual operation of the control* That is, if a pure 

• 5 a ) is reduced sharply to a simi¬ 



lar sine wave (fig* ^>h) having amp¬ 


litude what form does the wave 


shape take between these two points 


of c on st ant amp 1 itud e ? 


Fie. 3 

The Circuit 

Fig. 4 is a schematic diagram of the studio amplifier and its 
associated automatic gain control. The additional equipment re¬ 
quired for the control circuit is that shown outside the dotted 
lines as well as the condenser and resistor C and R. The first 
stage tube T^, i.e. the controlled tube, is a variable - mu 
tetrode replacing the usual triode. Tr.^ is a line to grid tran¬ 
sformer having a voltage step up of about 11:1. and ?2 are 
200,000 W potentiometers. T 2 is the volume indicator tube and T^ 
the automatic control tube l both 112A*c. G and R are part of the 
control circuit but are kept within the amplifier shield (indi¬ 
cated by dotted lines) to maintain short leads in the grid circuit. 










* 
























.« 






' 
















' 



■ 






T I 



Z 


FIG. 4 ~ AMPLIFIER WITH CONTROL 














































Volume indication is accomplished by plate rectification of the signal 
by tube 2 and allowing this rectified signal to actuate a 0 - 1 mill- 
iameter (ma. 2)* The no-signal current is determined by the fixed 
grid bias 5gj and the setting of potentiometer P^. The amplitude of 
the meter swing for a given signal is adjusted by means of P£* The 
control tube T^ is normally biassed beyond cut-off by Eg 2 and Eg^ 
and a variable bias supplied by P^. The setting of P^ determines the 
amplitude of the signal voltage applied to T^ for a given amplifier 
output. If the voltage is sufficient to swing the grid of tube T^ 
more positive than cut-off a direct current will flow in the plate 
circuit and a D.C. voltage will appear across R, increasing the 
bias on the variable-yu tube, and so reducing the amplification fac¬ 
tor of that tube. 0 is large enough to effectively by-pass any aud¬ 
io frequency variations. The output voltage at which the control 
becomes operative maybe varied by means of P^ (although it also de¬ 
pends on the setting of P^) while the setting of P^ determines the 
amount of control voltage available for a given output voltage. 

Switch S-^ provides a convenient means for disconnecting the entire 
control circuit from the main amplifier and permitting uncontrolled 
operation. A 0 - 50 panel milliameter inserted in the plate cir¬ 
cuit of tube 1 at serves to indicate the extent of the automatic 
control action, the D.O. plate current being a function of the bias 
voltage as shown in graph A. Condenser C and resistance R form the 
time circuit and upon the rate of charge and discharge of C depends 



~ 


' 


■ 

. 

. 

, 

■ 



- 

. . 





8 


the speed of action of the control in reducing or increasing the 
vol ume. 

The operating technique developed with the control was simple. 
Potentiometer was adjusted to give a bias of about 1 volt be¬ 
yond cut-off. (Cut-off bias was indicated when the plate millia- 
meter at just began to deflect.) With the program passing 
through the amplifier at normal level, the setting of was in¬ 
creased until the desired amount of control action was obtained, 
as indicated by listening tests and observations of the program 
meter and panel milliameter. Once set, there was no need to 
change the adjustment of either P^ or P^. The manual gain control 
was then increased about 10 db above its setting with the amplifier 
uncontrolled. The form of control action obtained maybe under¬ 
stood by an examination of graph B. The curves show the amplifier 
gain at different outputs for several settings of P-^® They were 
obtained for a single 1000 cycle note and apply to steady state 
volume levels only. From them it is seen for example, that with 
P^ set at 80 for^power input of - 54 decibels (averaged over say 
a 1/5 second interval) the output will be - 21 decibels, an am¬ 
plifier gain of 55 decibels* But if the average power input is in¬ 
creased 10 decibels to - 44 the output is only - X5db, e gain of 51 
decibels; while if the power input is increased 20 db to - $b th© 
output will be - 9 db, an amplifier gain of only 25 decibels# A 
little experimentation readily determines the optimum settings of 
Pi and P 3 # 



9 


The Controlled Tube * 

Several considerations were involved in the selection of the 
controlled tube. It was important that it be of the vari&ble-mu 
type and have an amplification as least as great as that of the tube 
it replaced. Variable-mu tubes, being of the screen grid class, all 
have high amplification factors but correspondingly large plate re¬ 
sistances so that for them the mutual conductance rather than the 
amplification factor becomes the figure of merit* of the tube. For¬ 
tunately most screen grid tubes have a transconductanee at least as 
high as that of the corresponding triode, though in this particular 
case the tube being replaced was a 112A, which has the largest trans¬ 
conductance among triodes of the voltage amplifier class. A compari¬ 
son of tube types available showed the following values for gm**: 
type 112 s 1700 micromhos, type 58 ■ 1600 mmhos., type J8 = 1450 
mmhos. for Es a g. = 100 and 1650 mmhos. for Es.g. - 125, type 55 5 
1100 mmhos., type 59 = 1000 mmhos. The low values for gm rtjled 

* Terman, pg. 5^4 


E - ue g . 2 l u . ZpRp . e g - gm-Zeg. 



where E is the amplified voltage developed 
across the load, and gm - u r transconduct¬ 
ance of the tube and Rp 

Zeg. s Zj^Rp - Zi when Rp >> Z^ 



For screen grid tubes R P » 



**gm - transconductance 









out the latter two at once. Between the 58 and 78, the second has a 
lower filament drain than the first, being 0.5 amperes at 6.5 volts 
(which voltage was available) against 1 ampere at 2.5 volts for the 
58. However on running the respective Eg - Gm curves, that of the 78 
was found to have a sharp break near the working region, viz. at Eg = 
-1.5 volts. For this reason and because the voltage-dropping resistor 
required for the filament supply of the 58 afforded a convenient and 
accurate means of obtaining the fixed bias for the tube, the latter 
was the one selected. 

With any given transformer there is always a particular value 

of plate resistance that must be used if the amplification is to be 

1 

maintained constant over a reasonable range of frequencies . This 
condition ordinarily prevents the interchange of tube types in trans¬ 
former coupled circuits. However in the case of a triode being re¬ 
placed by a screen grid tube having a very high plate resistance it 
2 

can be shown that if a resistor of suitable size be shunted across 
the primary of the coupling transformer, the frequency distortion 
with the tetrode will be exactly the same as with the triode. The 
required value of resistance is that which will make the equivalence 
resistance of the screen grid tube resistance and the shunting re¬ 
sistor in parallel equal to the plate resistance of the tube re¬ 
placed. In the present instance the theoretically correct size for 
the resistor is 5^00 ohms. Had the coupling been impedance-capacity 

1. Terman, pg. 152, 

2. Terman, pg. 559 . 







' 






. 

' 

' 




. 






the same argument would have applied, while with resistance coupling 
there would have been no problem of frequency distortion involved. 

The Rectifier . 

The choice of rectifier was dependent on the conditions of 
lir>£ferity of rectification, efficiency of rectification, and suff¬ 
icient amplification of the signal by the rectifier to produce a 
reasonably large D.C. controlling voltage. The rectifiers in gen¬ 
eral use in receiving sets are triodes using plate detection, triodee 
using grid detection, biassed diodes and copper-oxide rectifiers^. 

Of these all except the first form an appreciable load across the 
circuit to which they are connected and so consume a comparatively 
large fraction of the signal energy. In the last two mentioned there 
is no voltage amplification so that unless a large signal output is 
available an additional stage of amplification is required to furnish 
sufficient controlling voltage. Grid leak detection gives a greater 
output voltage for a given input, especially for very weak signals 
but cannot handle large voltages. Plate detection has the disadvant¬ 
age of a rather indefinite cut-off point, but this is of little im¬ 
portance when, as is the case, the tube is normally operated beyond 
cut-off. It has however the advantages of being able to handle large 
signals such as will be found at the amplifier output, and of pro- 

1. Grondahl and Place, Copper 0xide Rectifier used for Radio 
Detection and A.V.C., Proc. I.R.E., March 19^2. 

















• 






* 

.. 

. 

* 




. 



■ 











. 












. 













' 























ducing no appreciable load on the line as long as its grid is main¬ 
tained negative. Moreover in this case it proved particularly easy 
to incorporate it into a circuit which combined the functions of 
visual indication of volume and automatic gain control. 

The tube selected to function as rectifier was a 112A. It was 
operated with a plate supply voltage of 22^- V giving the plate current 
characteristic shown in graph C. Had a greater controlling voltage 
been required a type 57 tube could have been used# 

The Filter Circuit 

Whenever an output ciruit is coupled to its own input circuit 
there is danger of either regeneration or degeneration* especially 
for the lower frequencies where the coupling is greatest (assuming 
capacity coupling). However the double filter used is particularly 
effective in isolating the grid or input circuit from the output 
circuit and the percentage of the signal voltage in the plate cir¬ 
cuit of the rectifier tube appearing in the grid circuit of tube 1 
is very small indeed.* 


* This can be shown mathematically using the equivalent circuit: 

Fig. 5(a) is the exact equi¬ 
valent circuit of the filter 
system* while fig. 5(b) is the 
approximate equivalent circuit 
at 1000 cycles assuming a 1 volt 
signal generated in the plate 
circuit of the rectifier* 




Voltage across 4o W ---- 

Voltage between grid and cathode 


40 s .0012 volts 
35000 

.0012 K 159 s .0000019 = 

100,000 


1.9 microvolts 


















. 

. 




. 






■ 









■ 





■ 














, 






. 










. 




' 




. 








The Time Constant 


There are two different times* involved. One is the time re¬ 
quired for the control to reduce the gain on a loud passage; the 
other is the time taken to increase the gain on a softer passage, 
after a peak has passed. The first is the time of charging the 

condenser thro 1 the average plate resistance Rp ** of the rectifier, 

it av 


♦The time of acting of the control is defined arbitrarily as the time 
required for the condenser to become charged or discharged to an 
amount which is (1 - l/e) 5 2/^ approx, of its full charge. This 
follows logically from the fundamental relationship for the discharge 
of the condenser thro 1 a resistance, Q - Q 0 e”^/^, where Q 0 is the 
initial charge and Q is the charge at time t. Evidently when t = T 
s CR, Q a Qo ©” 1 = Q o / 0 . That is the condenser is approximately 
2/5 discharged. 

**Rp av s TtRp for a perfect (straight line) rectifier operated at 
cut-off. Rp is the A.C. plate resistance of the tube operated as 
an amplifier. For assume a linear rectifier as shown: 



When eg (max} - Eg.*Rp av s "HRp 

Thus Rpav and therefore the charging time of the condenser is in¬ 
versely proportional to the amplitude of the rectifier grid swing. 
























15 


the shunt resistor R having little* effect in this case. With the 
constants used this time is of the order of l/lO - l/5 seconds. 

This can be calculated approximately from the known value of 0 and 
an estimated value of average plate resistance but is shown more 
readily by the oscillographic records. Thus plate (2b) shows a 
reduction of 5 D.B. occuring on a J00 cycle note in about 1/6 
seconds. It is to be noted that while the contraction is not com¬ 
plete in this time, the major portion has occurred. Plate (2e) 
shows 'a much more rapid reduction (t = about 1/^0 seconds) obtained 
by using a 1 mfd. condenser for 0. In practice the rapidity with 
which the control may act is limited by two considerations. The 
first is that if no new audible frequencies are to be generated by 
its action, the time should not be less than \ of the period of the 
lowest audio note it is desirable to amplify. Arbitrarily taking 

*The effect of the resistor shunting the condenser is to reduce the 
time of charging, the amount of reduction increasing with the ratio 
Rp av • In this case Rp av is small (about 1/lQ - l/5) and the effect 

R^shun^unt ^ the time oj? U cliarging is also small. This can be read¬ 
ily demonstrated by the following experimental circuit: 



36 /*«*• 












' 


. 

. 

* 

, 

. 

. 




* 




- 


. 





. 

. 

' 




■ 








- 


. 

























this as JO cycles gives 1/120 of a second. However there is another 
limiting factor which operates before the above comes into account. 
That is the maximum decrement per unit time in decibels per second 
which the ear can tolerate before interpreting the result as a ’cut¬ 
ting-off 1 or 'throttling' effect. Experiment with the control show¬ 
ed that such an effect* was just perceptible on very large sudden 
peaks with the time constant resultant with a condenser of about J 
microfarads. Increasing the capacity, and hence the time, to four 
times this value completely eliminated the effect. 

The second time involved, that is the time required to increase 
the volume after a loud passage has passed, is the discharge time of 
the condenser C through the resistance R. With the constants shown 
in figure 4, the time of discharge sCxR-4x„2- .8 seconds. 

It is this time which is important in determining the naturalness of 
reproduction. In the tests it was varied from l/lO to 5 seconds and 
the value of .8 seconds finally selected, although any time within the 
range of ^ to 2 seconds is satisfactory. If too short a time is used, 
say 1/19 second, then the control increases the volume on a soft pass¬ 
age too quickly and some of the artistic effect is destroyed. If a 

*The same effect is obtained when the manual control is operated too 
rapidly. The relative speeds of operation can be compared by study¬ 
ing plates (2 - a,b & 9 ), "a 5 shows the manual control operated rather 

rapidly. l b' shows the automatic control with a normal time constant 
while ‘e' shows the automatic with a small constant. 


, 

' 

. 

■ 

. , 

. 



. 







very long constant is used, such as 5 seconds, then the gain on 
being reduced by a loud passage, remains at this lowered level for 
so long that if these peaks occur at all frequently, the average 
level of the program will be maintained at too low a value. Paren¬ 
thetically it maybe stated that this last condition is the one that 
usually pertains with manual control. If the crescendo is a sharp 
one and at all unexpected, it is most probable that by the time the 
operator reaches his control to lower the volume the peak will be 
passed and the dnsuing soft passage will traverse the amplifier at 
the reduced gain. It takes two or three seconds to determine wheth¬ 
er or not the peak is being followed by others. What the experienc¬ 
ed operator does of course is to anticipate the music as far as 
possible and reduce or increase the gain gradually before the volume 
change actually occurs. Such however is not readily done unless one 
is well acquainted with the particular selection or provided with the 
musical score. 

It should be noted that the two times can be varied almost 
independently of each other. Considerable experimentation showed 
that while there exists a fairly wide latitude in the exact values, 
the optimum times are about as given. 



The Input - Output Curve 


The type of control action is made apparent by the shape of the 
input-output curve* The ideal shape for such a curve is probably that 
shown in fig. (5). There the control becomes operative at somewhat less 
than average level and from this point on reduces the gain in propor¬ 
tion to the amplifier output until the maximum output desired is 

reached. At this point the curve 
flattens off holding the output 
constant regardless of input. 

Quite fortunately this is very nearly the shape of the actual curves 
obtained with the control ds in fig. k and as shown by Graph B. How¬ 
ever it was felt that for the sake of completeness, the full extent 
of the various types of controlling obtainable should be shown. It 
was especially desired to examine the particular case where the input- 
output curve is a straight line over the major portion of the working 
range of the amplifier. To realize this condition the rectifier was 
operated at cut-off and the degree of control action was reduced by 
means of potentiometer P^. The first change was designed to extend the 
range of the control to make it operative at lower values of output 
volume, while the second was intended to reduce the ^intensity 3 of 
control so that the reduction of volume was not too great at the large 
amplifier outputs. 

That such results were at least partially realized is shown by 
the curves of Graph B which show different degrees of control action 
















■ 


. 

* 




- 


■ 
















corresponding to various settings of . However on comparing num¬ 
bers of these, especially some which had been extended into the re¬ 
gion beyond the working range, it becomes evident that all of them 
were decidedly concave downwards at one portion on their range, and 
that on that part of the curve which was substantially flat, (that 
is the upper portion), the slopes were very nearly the same regard¬ 
less of the degree of control. It was thus inferred that these two 
characteristics of the curves were inherent properties of the control 
as constructed, and indeed an analysis of the action reveals this to 
be so. Although a rigorous mathematical solution is not possible, 
chiefly due to lack of knowledge of the law upon which the Eg - Gm 


1 


curve of the controlled tube operates, the general esse maybe profit¬ 
ably investigated: 


If in fig. (6) we let 

Eo 

s input voltage 
E 0 s output voltage 
V - dc« controlling voltage 


FIG. 6 

Then E 0 = K x f(l/V) E 1 --UV, 

where is a constant depending on the normal gain of the amplifier, 
and f(l/v) indicates some function of the control volts V depending 
on the characteristics of the controlled tube . 

ALso, V * K 2 Ep --- 

if we assume a perfect (linear) rectifier operated at cut-off. 


-II- 


*This is derived as follows: V a R X aver. i?-RXjX2XgmX eg^nax) 

tr 

a K2E% if gm is constant 






























Now if we further assume that 


f(l/v) = !c 
W 

then ( 1 ) becomes 



Susbtituting for V from (fi) 



(2a) 


( 5 ) 

(4) 


E o + 1= SlJS S 1 

from which 

log 10 E o =_1_l°o K i k E 1 

a + ! 

1 

= 1 log K Si - 1 log E x * log K®""^ 1 - (5) 

a + ! a * 11 

Now for any given value of a, log X 1 is constant, and 

Slope of Input-Output Curve = log E 0 - 1 -( 6 ) 

log 1Q E x a + 1 


That is, when using a linear rectifier the slop© of the input- 
output curve depends only on the value of a, and from equation ( 2 a), 
a is seen to be the index which determines the amplification of the 
variable-mu tube at different values of grid bias. That is 8 a 8 is 
a parameter of the variable-mu tube. An examination of Graph S 
gives a slight indication of values for 8 a 8 which might be expected® 
The observed curve shows the amplifier output in decibels, that is 






















21 . 


C log ^ E Q plotted against the control voltage V. Calculated from 
this are derived curves showing E^, Eg and ae functions of V. 

None of these curves are linear over the whole range showing that 
none of the indices chosen will do for values of l/a. However near¬ 
ly all the curves are linear over a portion of their range showing 
that ’a* varies and assumes different values at successive points on 
the curve. Indeed the inconstancy of the rate of change of curvature 
of the observed curve gives definite indication of this. However it 
is to be noted that the curve (a - 1), that is the volts 5 curve, is 
fairly linear over the range V r 5 to V = 12, corresponding to re¬ 
ductions of from 6 to 20 D.B.. This gives a slope for the input- 
output curve of \ over this range. Checking the actual slope from 

curve 80, graph B, gives 10^-2 s 8jr s .4 over the same range. 

58 - I<& 22 

Examination of equation (5) reveals that the function of the ^ 
various K 8 s becomes that of shifting this curve from left to right 
or vice versa, that is, merely varying the magnitude of output volt¬ 
age at which the control becomes operative. 

So far we have assumed alinear rectifier, which condition is 
approximated in practice with large signals (Graph C). However from 
equation (4) it is seen that the slope of the input-output curve can 
be decreased or increased by changing the index of E 0 in equation 
(2). If the rectifier were of the square ftw variety and 

v = k 2 e* 



. 

, 

. 

• • ' ,-{x - 

- 

- . . . 

, - ' , ::: ~ - - ; ' • ' 

. 

. 

. 

' 

- 



then (4) would become 


E 0 = % k 5 Ex 
From which 

Slope of input-output curve = 1 

2a + 1 

Thus tt S# of the input-output curve has been decreased, 

or the control action has been increased. 

If it is desired to reduce the intensity of the control action, 
a rectifier must be used whose output is proportional to some root of 
its input. While such devices are not common an approximation maybe 
obtained by operating -tie ordinary bias rectifier in the region where 
the grid will swing positive. Under these conditions the output will 
bear an approximately linear relationship to tte input until the volt¬ 
age swing is sufficient to cause the rectifier grid to become positive, 
at which point the putput will fall off from the straight line relation¬ 
ship. 

A few experimental curves (Graph D) serve to illustrate the action, 

while curve (2) of graph F shows the input-output curve resultant 

with such a control. Over the range in which the control is operative* 

the average slope of the curve now is 7? + 20 - 27 p~ g .8 Although 

-54 + 20 y\ 

there is still a slight concavity (due to the Eg - Gm characteristics 

I 

of the controlled tube) theintensity of the control action has been 
much reduced and the control gives a nearly straight input-output curve 
over a ^4 D.B. range. (-54 - -20). 

The double control arrangement shown in fig.(7) provides a 
paactical means for obtaining an input-output curve 












- • 


i 





. 


' 


• 







. 




. 


« - ' 7 




■ 


' 


• 







■ 






AMPLIFIER 


n c H 



FIG. 

which flattens off at any desired output level, (This gives an 
added safety valve action to prevent overload peaks.) The plate 
circuits of the two tubes, a 112A and a 57# are connected in 
parallel so that the current through R is the sum of their plate 
currents. Their grid circuits however have separate bias supplies 
80 that their cut-off points maybe independently adjusted. From 
the curves of graph C, it is noted that a small grid voltage change 
produces a much greater plate current variation in the 57 than in 
the 112A. By operating P 4 , at a higher setting than this differ¬ 
ence is emphasized. If now the 112 A is operated just beyond cut¬ 
off and the bias of the 57 ie adjusted so that it does not become 
operative until the amplifier output has reached the desired max¬ 
imum, we shall have normal automatic control action over the working 
range and beyond this a very sharp control action which will effect- 


1—I#Ih 














































I . 

- 

' 

. 

... • .— . 1 ■. 

. 

* 

. 

- 










2 4 


ively limit the output signal from the amplifier. Curve Graph F 
is an example of such action obtained by using the circuit of fig. ( 7 ) 

Because the parameter 'a* is fixed by the structure of the con¬ 
trolled tube, any change in the shape of the input-output curve must 
be effected through the rectifier and the above results are indica¬ 
tive of what may be expected. 

■^he “Power* and ’Range’ of the Control . 

The two other properties affecting the shape of the control 
curves are the “power* and the range of the control. The power, 
which expresses the decibels reduction for a given DB. output de¬ 
pends upon the amplification of the control circuit, it can be 
increased by the use of a 57 tube in place of the 112A, or should 
this not prove sufficient, by amplifying the D.C. control voltage by 
meane of a direct current amplifier. A better way perhaps than this 
last is to amplify the output voltage with another stage of ampli¬ 
fication before applying it to the rectifier. Care must be taken 
however to prevent audio-frequency feed-back resulting from the high 
amplification of the signal. 

The range of the control can be extended downward to lower in¬ 
put values by increasing the power of the control as mentioned above 
and by using a rectifier with a sharp cut-off. From this last stand¬ 
point a diode or copper-oiide rectifier or even a grid detection 
triode would give better results than the plate detection rectifier 
used. The limit to the range of the control in the upward direction 
is reached when the signal voltage swings the rectifier grid positive 



. 

. 


. 




. 

. 

* 


. 


. 






■ , 

. 

: 

•• 

- 








- 

% . 









. 












or the control voltage across R reaches the value of the plate 
supply battery Eg . Both of these limits maybe extended by mere¬ 
ly increasing both Eg 2 and Eg. In the case at hand neither of these 
limits was reached. The control curves (graph B) were not extended 
further upwards beyond the working range of the amplifier because 
of the experimental difficulty of obtaining sufficiently large in¬ 
puts from the signal generator used. One curve however ( 80 ) was 
extended slightly to show the trend. 

Distortion due to the Control 

(a) Frequency distortion 

An examination of the control circuit shows an almost complete 
absence of frequency discriminating elements. Transformer T r ^ and 
condenser C are the only possibilities. Modern commercial trans¬ 
formers can be built with a frequency characteristic flat from JO 
to 10,000 cycles, banishing concern in that direction. The conden¬ 
ser C functions as a by-pass to signal voltage variations in the 
plate circuit of the rectifier. *4. has a reactance of only 1200 
ohms at the lowest audio note amplified (JO cycles). This is neg¬ 
ligee compared with the 200,000 ohm resistor which it shunts, so 
this second possibility of frequency discrimination maybe dismissed. 

The control does however vary* the plate resistance of the con¬ 
trolled tube T^. Ordinarily in a transformer coupled circuit this 


♦Terman. Fig. 1 66 







- 

■ 

- 


, 












, 






- 


























' 






. 












. ' 





would alter the frequency characteristics of the amplifier but in 
this case the transformer primary is shunted with a 6000 ohm resis¬ 
tor so that any change in the relatively high value of (800,000 
ohms min.) is of no significance. 

(b) Amplitude distortion. 

The cause of amplitude distortion is non-linearity of a cir¬ 
cuit element. The only change occuring in the amplifier operation due 
to the control action is the grid bias variation of T^. The Eg - Ip 
characteristic of a variable-mu tube is inherently curved, but at no 
point is this curvature sharp (Graph A). Normal operation (no con¬ 
trol) takes place on a relatively straight portion of the curve 
(Eg s -1.6) but during a very loud passage the control may increase 
Eg to as much as -8 volts bringing the operation onto the curved 
portion. The amount of amplitude distortion then introduced will 
depend upon the grid voltage swing on this tube. Vacuum tube volt¬ 
meter measurements and calculations both give a probable maximum swing 
of .25 volts. With this small swing it becomes impossible to cal¬ 
culate with any degree of accuracy the very small percentage of 
second harmonic distortion introduced. It is of interest though to 
note that with the comparatively large swing of 1 volt (correspond¬ 
ing to an output of 12 D.B. above the normal maximum output of the 
amplifier) the distortion varies from 0-5% depending on the portion 


, 




- 

. 

- 

. 

, 


■ 

. 

. 

. 

. 


* 

“ 

. 






of the curve over which operation occurs^. With a swing of 4 volts 
this would reach 10% in the worst case, indicating that while dis¬ 
tortion is negligble at the maximum voltage actually applied, it 
would become serious^ at larger voltages. Fortunately the maximum 
grid voltage applied to the first tube is in most studio installa¬ 
tions very much less than that occuring in this case. Because of 
the low gain of this particular amplifier it is necessary to feed 
from the mixer as large an average signal as the microphones and 
record pick-ups will furnish, if the output level is to be maintain¬ 
ed at that required by the transmitter. With the more usual three 
stage amplifiers having a gain 20 to 50 decibels higher, the input 
to the first tube is correspondingly reduced and the problem of 
amplitude distortion does not exist. However the above does serve 
to indicate the inadvisability of using the control on any stage 
other than the first. 


1. For example: for a 1 volt swing at Eg = -2 (from Graph A) 

% harm dist. s I max - I min - 1 Q - 7*0-5.9 - 6.4 

2 __ 2 

I max. - I min 1.1 

- 4.5% 

For a 1 volt swing at Eg = -6 
Harm. dist. - 2.925 - 2.92 - 1% 

.45 ~ 

2. Frank Massa, Permissable Amplitude Distortion of Speech in an 
Audio Reproducing System, Proc. I.R.E. May, 1955> shows that the 
permissable amplitude distortion varies with the frequency range. 

He gives 5% for an amplifier with a 14000 cycle range and as high 
as 12% when the range is restricted to 5000 cycles. High Fidelity 
Systems require less than 5%. 







* 

■ 

- 

■ 







' 








(c) Phase Distortion 


The problem of phase distortion is usually dismissed with the 
statement that it is of little importance in audio apparatus. The 
reason for this lies in the nature of phase distortion^ and the 
characteristics of the ear. As far as it is possible to separate 
the effect5of phase distortion from those of amplitude distortion, 
the former represents the change in wave shape due to a change in 
the phase relations of the different frequency components present 
in the received wave. Such a change will occur when the phase 
characteristic^ is not a straight line thro ! zero or some multiple 
of U 

2 

But it is one of the fundamental laws of hearing that the 
ear responds not to the wave shape of the combined frequencies but 
rather to the stimuli produced by the various individual frequency 
components such as are obtained on analysing the wave by Fourier 
Series. It follows then that the phase difference between two 
frequencies is unimportant so long as the difference in time de¬ 
lays is small. Since a change in phase of radians between a 
500 cycle and a 1000 cycle note represents a time delay difference 
of only l /6000 of a second, for the purposes of this investigation, 
the effects of phase distortion maybe ignored. 

1. 0.5. Lane, Phase Distortion in Telephone Apparatus, B.T.S. 
Monograph B 481, May, 1950. 

2. Ohm 1 8 Acoustical Law. See van der PtfL, A New Transformation in 
A*C. Theory, Proc. I.R.E. February, 1950. 





(d) Transitional Distortion. 

While the automatically controlled amplifier might be distor¬ 
tionless as far as the amplification of a constant signal is con¬ 
cerned, there still exists the possibility of distortion during those 
transition periods when the control is decreasing or increasing the 
amplifier gain. The only possible means for determining such 
would seem to be an oscillographic record of the wave form while 
the control is operating. 

The Oscillograms. 

To obtain such a record, a series of 9 snaps'* of a J00 cycle 
wave were taken immediately before and at brief intervals after 
the control came into operation. A pure 500 cycle note**, syn¬ 
chronized with the 60 cycle power supply was fed through an at¬ 
tenuator network to the amplifier being controlled. The output of 
the amplifier was connected to the oscillograph, where because of 
synchronization with 60 cycle, a steady wave was observed. By 
cutting a Ao ohm shunt in or out of the attenuator network the 
signal input could be varied by about 8 decibels, this change in 
volume showing itself in a corresponding change in amplitude of 
the wave being observed. With the automatic gain control on and 
a signal input of say - 4o D.B., the shunt was removed by the 

♦See Appendix A. 

**See Appendix B. 




switching mechanism, increasing the input 8 D.B. The A.G.C. then 
became operative to reduce the increased output by a predetermined 
amount (depending on the settings of the control). Using the 
switching arrangement described in Appendix 1, instantaneous ex¬ 
posures of the wave shape were taken at approximately l/4o of a 
second intervals after the volume increase with the results as 


shown in plate 1 












. Wm JF . h> . 



PLATE 


















PLATE 















Plate I 


The first snap in plate I a shows the initial output of *». 

**4 D.B. The second and third snaps show the wave immediately after 
the input had been increased by 8 D.B. The remainder in b and ^ 
c^except for the last) show the wave in successive l/4o second 
intervals. There is thus portrayed a complete picture of the ac¬ 
tion over a period of approximately 6/4o seconds, during which time 
the gain reducing action has been completed. The last snap but 
one in c shows the final volume (-|D.B.) at which the output was 
held by the control while the last picture shows for comparison the 
final increased volume (+ 4 D.B.) without the control. 

So far as it is possible to detect it there is no distortion 
of the waveform due to the control. Each snap shows a pure sine^ 
wave differing from the initial wave only in amplitude. 

Plate 2 

Plate 2 shows the same 500 cycle wave taken over a period of 
seconds with the continuous film attachment*. Strip 2(a N ) shows the 
note at - 6 D.B., increased to 44 D.B. by the manual control, held 
there for approximately 5/10 seconds and then decreased again by 
the same control. The tick marks indicate tenths of seconds. The 

1. For an explanation of the slight variation in amplitude of the 
6 cycles in each snap (especially noticeable in the last one) see 
Appendix B. 


* Appendix C 





slight 60 cycle modulation, previously mentioned. Is more noticeable 
here because of the closeness of the adjacent cycles. The five 
2D.B. steps of the manual control are readily discernable. Strips 
b,c, and d show the same cycle of events with the automatic control 
in operation. (Note that c and d are continuations of b.) The 
amplitude is increased as before by means of the manual control but 
instantly starts to decrease due to the automatic control and is 
held finally at a much smaller amplitude (about 0 D.B.). At the 
point where the volume is decreased manually (near the end of 
strip 2 b) the amplitude drops the full 8 D. B. and for the next 
second the control functions to gradually raise this level. (2 c 
and 2d). 

From this plate it is observed that while the control starts 
to operate immediately on a peak it requires about a l/7 of a sec¬ 
ond to effect the major part (2/^) of the reduction and a full sec¬ 
ond to return the amplification to the maximum after the peak has 
passed, it is clearly evident too that there is no distortion of 
the wave form. The pure $00 cycle sine wave of constant amplitude 
becomes a pure sine wave whose amplitude decreases gradually ac- 
cording to an exponential 1 law Ae 

1. Because thi is the law followed by the charging of condenser G 
through the plate resistance R . Note that the expression for the 
wave (B + Ae” tv CR ) sin wt doesriot admit of being broken up by a 
Fourier analysis into a number of waves of differing frequencies. 
That isno new frequencies are introduced. 





* 

. 



. * . 










* 




, 






. 

' 

■ 

' 

■ ‘ 

. 

. 


■* 

■ 

. 

* 

. 




Strips e and f show the same series of operations using a condenser 
in the time circuit having only J the capacity of that ueed in b, 
c end d. In this case the major portion of the reduction occurs in 
about l/^O of a second which (as the oscillogram shows) is about the 
same length of time as taken by the manual control to raise the 
volume. 

The 'time' of the control however (i.e* to bring the volume 
back to normal) is still about one second as shown in 2e and 2 f 
and measured by the 60 cycle time wave. This was accomplished by 
using a larger resistance R so that the product GR was the same as 
previously. 

PI site 5 

Plate 5 and b) and (c and d) shows two similar portions from 
oscillograms taken of a soprano voice^, The particular portions 
shown are of a very sudden high peak, indicated by the abrupt in¬ 
crease in amplitude, a and b show the passage uncontrolled while 
c and d show the same passage with the automatic control operative. 
The time ticks are l/60 seconds. *t maybe observed that the in¬ 
crease in volume is so rapid that the wave reaches almost the 
same height with the control as without. However the control be¬ 
gins to act within l /60 of a second (as gauged by the 60 cycle 
timing wave) to reduce the level. The control action in this case 

1. Lotte Lehman singing H Er ist der Richtige 11 from Arabella. 
Parlophone Series, Record R.O. 202^6 




is quite marked and represents the limit of what might be expected 
in the form of very sudden volume changes. After being decreased 
the gain remains at this reduced value throughout the remainder of 
the passage shown although the peak itself is passed. This time de¬ 
lay in returning the araplification to its full value is essential 
if the naturalness of reproduction is to be maintained. 

Plate 4 

Plate 4, stripe (a and b) and (c and d) are oscillograms of 
the voice of the baritone, Feodor Chaliapin in the “Song of the 
Volga Boatmen" (Victor Record 6822 - A). The passage shown is the 
last upward swing at the end of the first crescendo. The ticks 
indicate fifths of seconds so we are viewing the sound waves occur- 
ing in an interval of less than two seconds. The individual peaks 
are quite visible and the complex nature of sound becomes readily 
apparent. The dark passages occuring within t.he envelope are due 
to the rapidity with which the spot of light was required to traverse 
these portions. The beam width was narrowed slightly and this plate 
lacks the clarity and definition of plate 

Strips (a and b) show the passage uncontrolled while (c and d) 
show the same passage automatically controlled. Tick no. 2 in 4 a 
corresponds to tick no. 1 in 4 c. The difference in amplitude 
between the beginnings of strips a and c represents the extent of 
the controlling action already operative. As the volume increases 


























■ 

. 

. 

* 

. 

■ 

. 

. 

, 

' ^ - ■ 

. 




still further at tick 5 in(a^(tick 2 in c), there is a further re¬ 
duction of gain by the control as shown occuring between ticks 5 
and 4, strip c. Comparing d with b shown that the gain remains re¬ 
duced throughout the rest of the loud passage shown'. 

The oscillograms have shown very clearly the exact nature of 
the control action. There is no change of wave shape discernable 
(Plate 1), but merely a gradual increase or decrease in the amp¬ 
litude of wave envelope. (Plates 2,5,4). This is the same 
action as that produced by the manual control (Plate 2a) except 
that the automatic control has the advantages of being more gradual 
(and therefore less noticeable) and more accurate, the amount of 
reduction or increase of gain bearing a definite relation to the 
output volume. The reductions of gain ordinarily encountered are 
not nearly so drastic as would appear from plates 5 and 4. These 
are special instances, extreme cases of very sharp crescendos, 
selected to show the operation of the control under the most severe 
conditions. Moreover the relative amplitudes of the envelopes are 
functions of the voltage ratios of the signal output, and a re- 


*r The tracings on (c and d) are spread out more than those on 
(a and b) due to a slight difference in film speeds. 

Actually the beam deflections appeared to be more nearly pro¬ 
portional to the power output (voltage^). If this were so, a re¬ 
duction of 6 D.B. in output would reduce the amplitude of the en¬ 
velope! o i its former value. 



duct ion of gain of 6 D.B. (comparatively small in a passage having a 
range of ^0 to 40 decibels) will reduce the envelope amplitude to 
one half its former value. Under the more usual circumstances a 
passage of music or a song will increase or decrease in volume 
gradually over the comparatively long period of 1 or 2 seconds and 
here the control action will be correspondingly gradual - so gradual 
as to be almost indiscernable on the oscillograms. 




A 











































































































































































































































































































































































































B 




















































































































































































































































































































































































































































c 




































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































So 

T 


















































































































































































































































































































Comment on Experimentel Curves 


Graph B : The input signal was obtained from a 1000 cycle micro¬ 
phone hummer and fed to the amplifier through a resistance network 
and a G.R. Type 655/200-ohm) gain control. The output was measured 
without the control, the input calculated, and the output again 
measured with the control operative. 

Graph C : These curves were obtained to determine the relative 
merits of different tubes to fee used as plate detection rectifiers. 
While the 57 appears to have a much sharper cut-off than 112 or 
201 A, actually this is not so. For while the Ip of the 57 in¬ 
creases from 0 to 50 mils, with decrease of 1 volt grid bias again¬ 
st volts required for the 112, the next 1 volt decrease, increases 
the plate current by the relatively large amount of 200 mils. How¬ 
ever this characteristic becomes useful in connection with the 
'double control* of fig. (7). 

Graph D : The curves show a method of obtaining a 'square root law* 
detection at large signal inputs. The grid resistor serves to in¬ 
crease the desired downward concavity of the curves. 







Graph Ef To determine approximately the value of 'a 1 in the equa¬ 
tion, - Amplifier output - k X amp, input. The observed output 

v a i 

was expressed in volts 2 , volts and voltss. Linearity of the curve 
denotes a value of 1 for l/a for that particular case. A small 

portion of the volts 1 curve shows linearity. Note that over this 

2 i 

same range, the volts curve is concave down while the volts- curve 

is concave up. 

Graph Eg * shows the same curves as over a restricted range. 

Graph F : Curve 2 illustrates the action of the root rectifier in 
changing the slope of the upper portion of the control curve. Note 
that it is approximately linear from - 54 to -20 D.B. Curve 5 
shows the cut-off effect of the ’double control' circuit. 

Studio Technique 

The studio and operating technique with the control is simi¬ 
lar to that evolved without its help. Microphoneplacement, relative 
positions of soloists and accompaniment, and so on, remain unchanged. 

It was felt that because the large volumes consequent to hav¬ 
ing the microphone too close are partially masked by the control, 
the correct placement might be rendered difficult. Such is not the 
case. This is in part due to the method of operating with the control. 
The panel milliameter at j. 1 provides a convenient and accurate 
indication of the extent of the control action at any moment. It 






. 





. 


. ' ■ 

. 

> 









1 

. 

. 




is only necessary then instead of increasing the manual control until 
a certain swing is obtained on the program meter, to increase the 
gain up to the point where the automatic control can act upon the 
level as indicated by the swings of the milliqmeter. The manual 
control is thus adjusted for each individual selection as before 
(it is closed between selections in any event) but the continual 
controlling throughout the selection is done automatically. Should 
the operator err in his judgment and set his gain control too high, 
there is no unpleasant blasting to proclaim the fact to the entire 
listening audience; instead he merely observes that the control 
action is stronger than normal, and so reduces his gain - at his 
leisure. 

The automatic control is particularly helpful in the produc¬ 
tion of dramatic programs. Here, three, four cr even more channels 
are in use at once and it ordinarily becomes extremely difficult 
to keep the optimum balance between channel outputs and at the 
same time maintain the correct level to the transmitter. With the 
control relieving the operator of the latter duty, his work becomes 
simplified and its execution improved. 






, 





, 














. 

A 

. 











The Control on Detonations 


40 . 


Examination of theosoillograms reveals that the control re¬ 
quires from l/lO to l/5 seconds to complete its reduction of gain 
on a sudden peak. Is the control then of any use on those sudden 
sharp sounds which occur so often in plays (rifle shots, gongs, 
screams, etc.)? An oscillographic record of a rifle shot fired 
close to the microphone showed the main part of the report to be 
completed in l/20 of a second. The program meter in this case in¬ 
dicated no reduction in level due to the control. However when the 
shot was fired some distance from the microphone, the control was 
effective in reducing its volume, this because of tbs time required 
for the sound to build up to its maximum in the room. Thus for 
indirect microphone pick-up (that is^ where the main volume is due 
to wall reflections - source of sound more than two feet from the 
microphone) the control will act on any sound however sharp. Even 
with direct pick-up (source close to the microphone) most sounds 
such as gongs, buzzers, etc. are sufficiently slow in building up 
to their maximum to permit the control to operate. The effective¬ 
ness of the control on sharp reports is aided by the property of the 
ear of not recognizing sounds at the loudness corresponding to their 
intensity unless they are of at least .2 seconds duration. A pulse 
of given intensity lasting only .02 seconds appears to the ear to 
have the same loudness as a continuous note of 20 D.B. lower in¬ 
tensity. If a peak occurs suddenly then, it may momentarily reach 









its uncontrolled height, but the control starts to operate within 
about 1/60 of a second, rapidly enough to prevent the sound reach¬ 
ing a loudness corresponding to the initial high intensity. 

Full Automatic Control 

Full automatic control, though not impossible to achieve, would 
be impracticable in operation. On the supposition that a 60 decibel 
range is to be reduced to 50 decibels (much as a scene is reduced 
on viewing through an inverted telescope) this would in practice 
mean increasing th© gain on a very soft passage by 50 decibels. At 
this point of maximum gain all the in-between-selection noise would 
occur. Artist 8 s breathing, th© turning of music pages, and back¬ 
ground record scratch would all be audible. Moreover the large re¬ 
duction from this point of maximum gain required, for example, at 
the start of a load orchestral selection would, more often than not, 
exceed the limits s©& by th© maximum permissable decrement per unit 
time previously mentioned. 

From these and other considerations it would seem that purely 
automatic control is not feasible. The control operator, with his 
human abilities to think, to reason, and to anticipate is still 
essential - even though his judgment be backed and his work made 
easy be an ever-ready assistant in the form of automatic control. 



■ 

. 






. 



















. 

. 

, 







Conclusions 


Although more complicated circuits such as that of figure (7) 
are required to obtain special forms of control action, the funda¬ 
mental circuit of figure (4) provides a simple and effective control. 
It is easily built in to any amplifier circuit, the adjustments are 
few and simple, and it gives a distortionless, imperceptible control 
action. Such properties make it an important addition to any 
broadcast amplifier. 

An investigation such as this cannot be undertaken without 
coming to some realization of the general spirit of cooperation 
and willingness to assist which prevails in the departments of the 
University. To Dr. Macleod, for supervision and advice during the 
course of the investigation, to Messrs. Cornish and Porteous, for 
assistance in constructing the continuous film equipment, and to 
Mr. Brown for use of the Department's photographic facilities, the 
author tenders his sincere thanks. 




Bibliography 


The references of particular importance for this investigation 
are marked , (*). 

* John C. Steinberg, Effects of Phase Distortion on Telephone 
Quality, B.T.S. Monograph B-482, May, 19^0. 

H. Nyquist and S. Brand, Measurement of Phase Distortion, B.T.S, 
Monograph B-485, May, 1950• 

* C.E. Lane, Phase Distortion in Telephone Apparatus, B.T.S. 
Monograph B-481, May, 1950. 

* R.C. Mathes and S.B. Wright, The Compandor - An Aid Against 
Static in Radio Telephony, B.T.S. Monograph B-798 July, 195^* 

* Stuart Ballantyne, High Quality Radio Broadcast Transmission 
and Reception, Proc. I.R.E., May, 195^• 

P.S. Gates, Controlling Overmodulation, Communication and Broad¬ 
cast Engineering, April, 1955 

Harold A. Wheeler, A.V.C. for Radio Receivers, Proc. I.R.E., 

Jan. 1928. 

Modern Automatic Volume Gontrols, Pamphlet 8 SBX, M.R.I. 

Carl Dreher, Broadcast Control Operation, Proc. I.R.E. April, 1928. 
Herbert J. Reich, A new Method of Testing for Distortion in A.F. 
Amplifiers, Proc, I.R.E., March, 1951* 

* D.O. Israel, Sensitivity Controls - Manual and Automatic, Proc. 

I. R.E. March, 1952. 

* Grondahl and Place, Copper"Oxide Rectifier for Radio Detection 
and A.V.C., Proc. I.R.E., March, 1952. 











44 


* Harry Sohon, Supervisory and Control Equipment for Audio Fre¬ 
quency Amplifiers, Proc. I.R.E., Feb., 1955* 

* Frank Massa, Permissable Amplitude Distortion in an Audio / 
Reproducing System, Proc. I.R.E. May, 1955* 

C.E. Kilgour and J.M. Glessner, Diode Detection Analysis } Proc. 

I.R.E. July, 1933- 

* van der Pol, A New Transformation in A.C. theory with an 
Application to the Theory of Audition, Proc. I.R.E., Feb, 1930. 

* Orchestral Music in Auditory Perspective, Bell Lab. Record, 
Vol. 11, No. 9, May, 1933- 



45 . 



the mechanical switching arrangement 

The Still-Film Oscillograms 

To obtain the 8 snaps’ of Plate 1, the above switching arrange¬ 
ment was used. The record turntable revolved at the constant speed 
of 80 r.p.m. It was connected to the motor by a clutch arrangement 
$o that the motor could be already in rotation and. the turntable 
brought up to speed almost instantly by throwing in the clutch. 
Varying time intervals between removal of the shunt by arm 1 and the 
snapping of the exposure switch on the oscillograph were obtained 






















by changing the angle between the turntable arms. The accuracy 
of the timing arrangement itself was estimated at one fiftieth of 
a second, but due to the internal switching mechanism of the oscill 
graph there is a time lag between the operation of the exposure 
switch and the actual exposure of the film, which lag may very 
between 0 and l/^O seconds so the accuracy of the system is only 


about one twentieth of a second. 



47 . 


Appendix B 


The 500 Cycle Oscillator 

While it was possible to generate a fairly pure 500 cycle 
note with an ordinary oscillator, for the purpose of viewing in 
the mechanical oscillograph it was desirable to have a note which 
was synchronized with the 60 cycle power supply, so giving a 
stationary wave shape. To obtain this a harmonic generator* 
circuit of the plate distortion type was built up and the fifth 
harmonic of 60 cycles amplified by the tuned circuit. This gave 
a 500 cycle note but there was also present the lower 60 cycle 
note, with the result that the wave form showed a 60 cycle 
envelope as illustrated (fig. 8). 



have a 500 cycle wave of uni¬ 


to determine a circuit which 


form amplitude, a series of 


Because it was desirable to 


experiments were carried out 


would give this. That of fig. 


(8a) was finally evolved. 


1. Terman pg. 221. 







48 



205 0 







-2 

7~ 


€ 


Reactance in Ohms 

- Rrsnch 

1 ' 

2 


2 &, 3 in II 

At 6o ~~ 

15000 

12 

1000 

- j# 

_At yn~ 

_75000 _ 

_ 35$ . . 

_-353-. 

_l£4-4no __ 


There are two circuits, tuned to 300 cycles so that there is 
high discrimination against the 60 cycle. The circuit branches 
2 and 3 parallel resonant at 300 cycles while branch 2 is 
series resonant at 60 cycles. There is an optimum A.C. grid 
voltage found by experiment to be 50 volts (effective). 

The result was a relatively pure wave form seen in plate 1. 

A trace of the 60 cycle modulation is still visible in the last 
snap in 1-c. 


-oim 

prr n 












































* 9 . 


Appendix C . 

The Continuous Film Attachment 

To observe the speech output of the amplifier over a period 
of seconds a continuous film attachment was constructed for the 
oscillograph. This consisted of a light-tight drum containing 
an aperture fitted with a sliding cover. Inside the drum revolves 
a cylindrical block of wood around which the film (SS - 120) is 
wrapped. The block has a length slightly in excess of the width 
of the film and a circumference equal to the length of the film 
(50 H ). The speed of revolution is determined by that of the 
driving motor (a variable speed Dumont) and the ratio of the 
gearing used (1:8 or 1:50). The time axis was removed from the 
oscillograph light beam by fitting a stationary mirror above the 
rocking mirror of the oscillograph. A vertical, single line trace 
was thus obtained which was spread out into a wave form by the 
movement of the film past the aperture. 

The internal mechanism of the oscillograph was such that the 
operation of the exposure switch produced e single trace across the 
screen, the time of this trace being the same as the time required 
for the single forward motion of the rocking mirror, that is half 
the period of revolution of the oscillograph motor. By gearing the 
revolving block to the oscillograph motor with a 2:1 ratio so 
that the cylinder revolved once while the motor made -§• revolution. 





it became possible to ensure that a single trace ohly would appear 
on the film and that this trace would cover its entire length. 

The advantages of this form of attachment over the double 
spool arrangement are its simplicity of construction, the wide 
range of film speeds obtainable (2/5 8 /sec. to 15'/sec.), the use 
of easily purchasable film (SS 120 panchromatic) and the constancy 
of film speed over the entire period of exposure (the cylinder is 
already revolving when exposure commences and no time is lost 
in comming up to speed). The length of exposure is of course 
limited to that of one film, 50% though if desired this could 
be increased to 6o” by shifting the beam path from one side of the 
film to the other during one revolution thus making possible two 
traces on the single film. 








































