B29737 


\<\ c \< 


ii v-4 

University of Alberta Libra 


o 1620 3448196 8 


TV*. 


V3 


I 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


























!; ■'*31 



















B. D. Tliesis: 

The Basis of Authority in Religion. 


by J. E. Kirk 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/kirk1910 


1 


After much reading and thought on the 
basis of the authority in religion, I have con¬ 
cluded that Professor Eucken, in his book:"Christ¬ 
ianity and the Hew Idealism," struck the key note, 
when he said: "To think that the discovery of a 
religious basis is a simple, and easy matter, be¬ 
tokens but a poor and weak conception of religion. 
That there remains beyond our sphere some dim im¬ 
mensity of Being, some unfathomable depth beyond 
all that our plumet can reach, is indeed scarcely 
open to dispute. But to admit this is not yet to 
enter into relationship with this unfathomed deep; 
and the admission, therefore, fails to give us a 
religion. It is essential to religion that the 
higher power in our midst should be not merely an 
influence, but a living Presence, and that our 
relationship to this Presence should not be just 
any sort of relation, but one in which our whole 
nature is involved. How we are to reach certainty 
in this matter is not so obvious.' 1 

In Sabatier's book; "Religions of Authority," 

we find this statement in the introduction; "To 

the thinking man a discord between methods is a 

graver matter than opposition between doctrines. 

The antagonism which has arisen between trad- 









J ; . 
















2 . 


itional theology and the kindred group of all 
other modern diciplines is of this kind. In the 
former the method of authority still reigns. The 
latter depends only upon experience. It follows, 
that between the two there can be no bond nor any 
common standard. It is the property of this meth¬ 
od of authority to base all judgment of doctrine 
upon the exterior marks of its origin and the trust¬ 
worthiness of those who promulgated it. In religion 
this method appeals to miracles, which accredit 
God’s messengers to men, and stamp their words or 
writings with the divine imprint. On the other 
hand, the modern experimental method puts us in 
immediate contact with reality, and teaches us to 
judge of a doctrine only according to its intrins¬ 
ic value, directly manifested to the mind in the 
degree of its evidence. The two methods are so 
radically opposed that to accept the latter is at 
once to mark the former as insufficient and out- 
worn.” 

In the Middle Ages, the method of author¬ 
ity seemed to be most influential over the human 
mind, and dominated in all sciences. It is sur¬ 
prising how the human individual was reduced to 
submission in all phases of life under this method 




























3 . 


of authority. 

However, such men as Galileo and Bacon, in 
the realm of physics, and Descartes, in philosophy, 
shook this method of authority to its very found¬ 
ation when they introduced the method of observa¬ 
tion and experimentation and resolved to accept as 
true only those traditional ideas which, in the 
light of experience, appeared to be true . This 
intellectual revolution vsas the basis upon which 
the human mind began to assert its own right of 
judgment and self-government. 

This, however, did not exempt the mind 
from the influence of law altogether; but gave it 
the liberty of placing, not outside of itself in 
an exterior authority, but within itself, the stand¬ 
ard of judgment for its ideas. This explains the 
character, the independence and the marvellous ex¬ 
pansion of modern culture during the past three 
hundred years. 

If theology still retains the old method 
from which other diciplines have freed themselves, 
it will not only become isolated, but it will be¬ 
come subjected to the hostile judgment of a reason 
that is becoming more and more independent and 
certain of itself. If religion could remain in the 











4 . 


realm of sentiment it would be beyond the juris¬ 
diction of science; but religion finds its expres¬ 
sion in doctrines and institutions which are sub¬ 
ject to criticism. These doctrines and ideas of 
a bygone period of human history, cannot have the 
seme normative value for the present age. 

However, to the majority of men today, it 
seems quite safe to say that the problem of author¬ 
ity becomes a question of life or death for theol¬ 
ogy, and even for religion. Yet it should be re¬ 
membered that a change of method does not necessar¬ 
ily mean the destruction of a science; so that the 
experimental method that is used so v/idely in nat¬ 
ural sciences, may, far from destroying, give a 
new life to religion itself. 

In metaphysics there is no problem more 
important than that of the relation of the partic¬ 
ular to the general, of the individual being to 
the universal being. Authority is the right of 
the universal over the individual; autonomy is the 
right of the individual with regard to the univer¬ 
sal. If the former be pressed, all individuality 
is engulfed in a materialistic pantheism. And if 
the latter be pressed, where we have more distinct¬ 
ly marked individualities, individualisation becomes 














5. 

the law of universal evolution. Consciousness, 
which embodies both, should become the profound 
reason of things. 

However individuality does not tend toward 
disorder. True, individual energies cause divis¬ 
ion and separation, but in every consciousness, 
there is a nev/ principle of unification. In the 
intelligence itself, there is an element of gener¬ 
alizing reason, and in the heart aprinciple of 
sympathy, a law of fraternal love, bringing indi¬ 
vidual wills into harmony and unity. Solidarity, 
which in nature is a ruthless fact, becomes in the 
realm of the spirit, a moral ideal, a holy obli¬ 
gation. So that it seems that it ought to be the 
ambition of humanity to elevate above the physical 
universe, the moral universe, with its grandeur 
and harmony reproduced on a higher plane. 

The moral consciousness appears slowly, 
depending upon the subordination of its physical 
laws to its own laws. So that there is always a 
double relation between nature and the spirit. 
Hature is a necessary support for moral conscious¬ 
ness, but at the same time an obsta.de to be over¬ 
come; so really the spirit can triumph only in 
raising itself above nature. 

















6 . 


In the sphere of history the relation of 
the species and the individual is more easily de¬ 
fined. Every individual life is, from the begin¬ 
ning, determined by the collective life from which 
it comes. The race, the family, the organism from 
which one emanates has determined in advance the 
main conditions and tendencies of one’s life, and 
has very largely determined the outlines of one’s 
destiny, according to eminent psychologists today. 
The conditions and environment of the home and 
society are responsible, very largely, for my in¬ 
clinations and development, intellectually, mor¬ 
ally, and physically. Heredity, the political 
order, custom* historic tradition and all such 
things extend my life and enlarge my personal 
experience. All these influences are concentrat¬ 
ed and made active by relations which they are 
continually creating and developing. Authority of 
the family, authority of the school, authority of 
the tribe, city and Church, are conservative and 
educating forces fundamental to the progress of 
civilization and moral culture. n Authority then, 
has its roots in the organic conditions of the life 
of the species, and the end in the formation of 

the individual. This pedagogical mission at once 


. 










. 









7 . 


justifies and limits it. Like every good teacher, 
authority should labor to render itself useless,” 
says Sabatier. 

From his parents and masters, the child 
receives his language, his ideas, his manner of 
life, his ways of thinking and feeling. At first, 
his trust is wholly in his parents and masters, 
and his power of testing and reasoning for himself 
almost a non-entity; but as his education developes 
and his mind becomes capable of reasoning, he be¬ 
gins to judge the things which come to his notice 
from' day to day. He tests according to his own 
experience the statements of his teachers, who now 
have to substitute reason for the original author¬ 
ity; and if he expresses an opinion, it is not on 
the faith of his instructors, but as a result of an 
inward ordeal to which he has submitted it. Thus, 
gradually, the method of authority is succeeded by 
the method of experience; so that through the edu¬ 
cation of mankind, there is a gradual transition 
from faith in an external authority to an inward 
conviction, and all ideas are judged according to 
the truth which can be recognized in them. 

Authority which is purely external, which 

ought to be a guide, grows tyrannical. The past 







8 . 


is trying continually to maintain ascendency over 
the future, which is the cause of so many crises, 
revolutions, conflicts and martyrdoms. '’History 
is amoral pedagogy," says Sabatier, "whose vital¬ 
ity lies in the perpetual struggle between the 
autonomy of the conscience and social authority. 

Of this struggle are born all the problems which 
civilized people today have to face." In the po¬ 
litical order where the struggle is between the 
governing class, and the governed, the problem is 
to reconcile the autonomy of the citizen with the 
necessities of the social order. In the indus¬ 
trial order, the conflict is betv/een labour and 
capital. To reconcile the rights of the moral 
personality of woman and child with the existence 
and the unity necessary to a family, is the great¬ 
est racial problem. The religious and moral prob¬ 
lem, which is more profound than all others, is to 
reconcile the autonomy of thought with the laws of 
consciousness, and the scientific freedom with 
faith in God who is spirit. 

Because authority and autonomy are not fix¬ 
ed quantities, but states essentially unstable, the 
relations between them are rather complex. The 

sovereignty of eternal authority is weakened only 









9 , 


when that of reason and the conscience begin and 
incres.se. 

It is a mistake to endeavour to destroy 
authority by violence. It is a necessary function 
of the species, for self preservation. It may be 
transformed, it cannot disappear. Pure anarchists 
are unconscious dreamers. The experiences of the 
past and those of the present are equally fund¬ 
amental. We cannot renounce the benefits of our 
forefathers. Individuality is the child and heir 
of the labours of the entire human race. The civ¬ 
ilized man ! s present autonomy rests upon the auth¬ 
ority of tradition, and is its fruit. 

Humanity and the individual man do not 
exist apart from each other. One is necessary to 
the other. Their apparently contradictory rights 
are in reality, mutual duties. The moral dignity 
of a society is measured by what it does to develop 
its members; and the moral dignity of each member 
of society is measured by what he does to benefit 
other members of society as a whole. The progress 
of one necessarily depends upon that of the other. 
Weak individuals mean a weakened society. Social 
authority and individual autonomy cannot more legit¬ 
imately be opposed to each other than the final 
















10 . 


destiny of man to that of humanity. 

Authority cannot be the philosophic ex¬ 
planation nor ultimate reason of anything. The 
explanation of authority is in the past; and its 
justification lies in that which must follow it. 
Authority,to live, must show itself reasonable 
and change as the customs and social order of man¬ 
kind change. The authority of material force, of 
custom, tradition, the code, more and more yields 
to the inward authority of conscience, and the 
reason; and in the same way becomes transformed 
for the subject into a true autonomy. 

True autonomy, which is the true obedience 
and inward consecration of the soul to the lav/ of 
go°dness, instead of leading to anarchy, is the only 
thing that will bring about the highest order and 
entire harmony. 

neither authority nor automomy can be con¬ 
sidered absolute. They are necessary the one to 
the other. So that every historic authority demands 
both respect and criticism: respect,because it 
brings us a heritage from the past by which we 
have profited; criticism, because it represents 
but little more than a bygone phase of evolution, 
and its only justification is that it makes pos- 



















































11 . 


sible a new progress. Free inquiry in regard to 
authority is not only a right, it is a duty. 
Authority in its true conception is, ana- can he, 
only relative. 

This theory of authority in its relation to 
the ordinary course of human things will easily he 
granted; hut when it involves religion, we meet 
immediately with opposition. It is maintained 
that religion has another type of authority. Var¬ 
ious religious orthodoxies differ as to form and 
seat of authority. Some put it in the Bihle, others 
in the Church, hut its nature is the same. It is 
a divine authority; and because it is supernatural 
in its institution it must he infallible in its 
teaching. However, nothing that takes place in 
history is perfect, hut yet we can not find any¬ 
where a higher institution than the Church. 

Besides,the Bihle is the hook above all hooks, it is 
the lamp that gives light to them who are seeking 
God. Christianity can neither realize nor propo- 
gate itself without the Church; the Church cannot 
live without the Bihle. 

The Church and the Bible did not come into 

being in any other way than our institutions; hut 

the ancient fathers to place them above criticism 
and wrest them from history, erected them into im- 





s 
















12 . 


mediately divine institutions and authorities which 
were set up as infallible' oracles. From that time, 
the Church and Bible have not only been instru¬ 
ments to help believers find the truth, they have 
become the model a,nd matter of truth itself. 

Thus were formulated amd established the 
fundamental dogmas of the Roman Catholic system, and 
of the old Protestant system: the supernatural 
authority of the Church, and the supernatural auth¬ 
ority of the Bible. 

The Roman Catholic dogma of authority took 
about sixteen centuries for its establishment. It 
arose at the time of Irenaeus and Tertullian and 
reached its completion at the Vatican Council. And 
though the Roman Catholic dogma of authority be¬ 
came so firmly established, it was by no means a 
work of mystery; it can be explained in history. 

While there seems to be general, agreement 
among the Roman Catholics in their profession of the 
general principle of the infallible authority of 
the Church and its tradition, there seems to be a 
division among them as to where this authority 
should be placed. The GaJlicans placed authority 
not in the Council alone, nor in the Pope alone; 
buo in their definite and necessary agreement. 











.13 


There grew up three conceptions of the 
Church and its government. The first considered 
the Church as an aristocratic republic whose pres¬ 
ident might be elected from the body of bishops 
to act as their, representative. The second con¬ 
ception, that of the Galileans, was that the Church 
was a constitutional monarchy, the law of which 
resulted from the consent and accord of the two 
great powers, namely the Pope and the Council. 
Finally we have the third conception of the Church 
which was an absolute monarchy, in which all rights 
and powers were vested in the person of the Pope and 
flowed from him. 

The last conception finally triumphed and 
the v/orld grew to look upon Rome as the fountain 
of divine authority in the Church. Those who did 
not submit to her decisions were severed from the 
Church. 

In 1854, Pius IX, the bishop of Rome, made 
the first trial of his power. He consulted the 
bishops without calling them together for deliber¬ 
ation, and then upon his own pontificial authority 
added a new dogma, that of the Immaculate Concep¬ 
tion of the Virgin, to the credo of the Church. 

Thus the Pope became not merely a servant 




.14 


of tiie Church, who obeyed the Soul of the Church, 
but his infallibility become entirely a personal 
thing independent and absolute. This personal 
infallibility became the real foundation of the 
Church. One is in communion with the Church only 
so long as he remains in communion with the Pope. 
Even when this divine personality errs, and though 
he may be a bad man, he still demands honour and 
absolute obedience from all Catholics. Neither is 
it enough to yield him external obedience in sil¬ 
ence and respect; the only worthy and religious 
obedience is inward, the obedience of the heart. 

This he demands. 

Finally faith became nothing but a sub¬ 
mission to an external authority; and religious 
truth became not a matter of knowledge or of reason, 
but a matter of politics and diplomacy. Nothing 
that related to the life of the Christian was for¬ 
eign to it. Ho individual was allowed to judge for 
himself, for there could be no opposition to the 
Church, nor to its dogmas. The government of the 
Pope became the government of G-od; it is neces¬ 
sarily absolute. 

The infallibility of the Pope is derived 
in law and fact from the Church and the infalli- 























. 15 

bility of the Council. So it becomes clear how 
the new dogma triumphed. 

From having been in the apostolic times a 
pure democracy, the Church became a great insti¬ 
tution governed by bishops. It was then an aristo¬ 
cratic system; later it became a monarchy,aided by 
councils at first, then more and more centralized 
until it became absolute. How the Pope became the 
great centre from which all light emanated to the 
extremities of the body of the Church, through 
bishops and priests. 

To understand the Catholic dogma of auth¬ 
ority it is necessary to trace it back through its 
stages of development in the church tradition, sup¬ 
ernatural priesthood, episcopate and papacy, be¬ 
ginning with the Catholic notion of the Church. 

It seems to be the conception of the Cath¬ 
olic Church to present religion itself as a super¬ 
natural institution; one that is charged by God 
Himself to teach men what they ought to beljeve and 
do, and to save them. The divine word had need of 
a visible organ and a human medium in order to com¬ 
municate God Himself to man. Like Christ, the vis¬ 
ible Church is conceived and organized by the Holy 
Spirit in the bosom of humanity. Like Christ too, 












.16 


the Church is human and divine. 

Taking this into account nothing seems more 
logical than the dogma of the infallibility of the 
Church and the conception that outside the Church 
there is no salvation. If the Church is nothing 
more than an institution for saving men who have 
been necessarily condemned by original sin, it would 
be the natural conclusion that outside of her, there 
is no salvation. Then too, if the Church is a div¬ 
ine institution, directed by the hand of God, it 
cannot make a mistake. 

Yet it can be traced through history that 
all the grea,t empires, all the great societies of 
former days, were equally attributed to divine 
origin. The fables woven a,round the beginning of 
the papacy a.re of no greater historic value than 
other legends. We can mark the date of their ap¬ 
pearance in history. It was only after the Church 
had claimed herself to be an infallible authority 
that we meet with this justification of hersCf in 
theory. Dogma never consecrates anything that has 
not a,lready passed into practice for a century or 
two^ this is noted throughout the history of the 
Catholic Church.. So that it is not the dogmatic 
and supernatural theory of the Church which makes 










■> 










* 



■ ■ '■ 


























.17 


its strength, it is the strength of the Church 
which leads to the theory; so that the strength 
and victory of the Church came from another source. 

The origin of the Roman Catholic Church is 
found deeply rooted in the Hebraic religion which 
gradually developed in the early Christian commun¬ 
ities. The ca.tholic notion of the Church first 
appeared, in any distinct form, in the time of 
Irenaeus, Clement, Tertullian and Cyprian. 

The original germ of the Catholic Church is 
the Messianic idea of the Kingdom of God or of 
Heaven. ^t claims to be this very kingdom, the 
object of the hopes and prayers of the prophets 
and seers of Israel; though there is such a vast 
difference in the two conceptions. The Kingdom of 
heaven was to come from heaven at the end of time, 
so the early Christians thought, when God should 
judge every man according to his works, and estab¬ 
lish righteousness and peace upon earth. There 
seems little similarity between this conception and 
that of the Roman Catholic Church, which was an 
idea of a religious society politically organized, 
living in history, having, like the secular insti¬ 
tutions, its chiefs, it laws, interests and dipld- 

macy, and maintaining its position through struggle 
























.18 


Par from willing this Homan Catholic con¬ 
ception of the Church, there is no possible indi¬ 
cation that Jesus could have foreseen such a thing, 
for he thought that he had come in the last days. 

Since the appearance of the book of Daniel 
all pious souls in Israel had believed themselves 
to be living in the last days. The apostles and 
the first generation of Christians could not im¬ 
agine that the world would last long, since the 
Messiah had come. 

The picture that we get in the letters of 
Saint Paul, of the first Christian community of 
Corinth; and also that of the Christians of Jeru¬ 
salem in the Acts of the Apostles; give us a def¬ 
inite idea of the first period of individual in¬ 
spiration and free expression. They seem to be 
sojourners with little thought of any enduring 
organization; but each individual was guided en¬ 
tirely by the spirit. However, a change was inev¬ 
itable with the passage of time. These gifts and 
powers of individuals were bound to take form and 
become a permanent ecclesiastical function. 

It was a natural development, that beside 

the apostles, prophets and teachers, who held 

their vocation directly from God alone, and who 
were travelling missionaries, that each community 







.19 

should draw from its own body its own permanent 
ministers, known as elders, bishops and deacons, 
who became directly responsible for the community 
in which they lived. So that - gradually there grew 
up side by side with the apostolate a settled 
ecclesiastical body which was destined to replace 
and absorb it. The progress of this absorption 
marks the progress of the Catholic conception of 
the Church. 

The first Christian communities were com¬ 
posed, at first* of members who were equal among 
themselves, but later became organized bodies and 
churches, characteristic of their own geographical 
and social surroundings. Yet, its organized body 
was governed by the same idea. It is only natural 
that these Christian communities should have a vivid 
consciousness of their spiritual unity. Unity, in¬ 
ward harmony, the communion of saints, is distinct¬ 
ly set forth as the essential character of the 
Church of Christ. But this unity is not conceived 
as an exterior and visible unity, it is not found¬ 
ed upon unity of government, upon rites, or even 
upon dogmas; it is entirely moral, and is born of 
the communion of the spirit? it is practically re¬ 
alized and maintained by mutual love. 




























. 



20 


As individuals felt an imperative desire 
to group themselves in an organization or church, 
so the different churches felt a desire to draw 
near one another. Thus the ideal unity of the 
Church tended to become a visible reality by unity 
of government, worship and discipline. 

To do this, tv r o conditions were necessary. 
First, apostolic Christianity should find a fixed 
centre around which individual churches might be 
grouped. Secondly, it was necessary for them to 
develop within themselves a dogmatic rule and a 
principle of authority which would permit this cen¬ 
tre to subdue all heresies and oppositions hich 
were so prevalent at that time. Thus in the very 
beginning of early Christianity the future centre' 
of the Catholic Church became apparent, and epis¬ 
copal authority was constituted. 

In the very beginning two events occurred 
to determine the course of the history of Christ 
ianity. The first was the success of Paul’s mis¬ 
sions in the Roman Empire;and the second the de¬ 
struction of Jerusalem and the Jewish nation in 
the year 70 A.D. These events caused early Christ¬ 
ianity to shift from Jerusalem to Rome. From that 
date the Primitive Judaeo-Christian group began to 



• wi';' J-. • 








■ 










.21 


decline, and the Pagano-Christian group gain as¬ 
cendency. 

The first representatives of these groups 
were Paul of Tarsus and James, the brother of 
Jesus; James representing the Primitive Judaeo- 
Christian group, and Paul representing the Pagano- 
Christian group. Though James was the brother of 
Jesus, and may have succeeded him by a sort of 
hereditary right founded on kinship, in blood and 
Davidie descent, Paul represented the moral princ¬ 
iple of the gospel of Jesus, the religion of in¬ 
ward faith and of liberty; so that the future re¬ 
mained not long uncertain. 

Paul appears to have proceeded method¬ 
ically from province to province in the Creek and 
Roman world, so that the new Christianity seemed 
to be working in harmony with the imperial power 
of the Empire. Rome became the eternal and sac¬ 
red city. The capital of the empire was marked 
in advance to become the capital of Christianity. 
There was no miracle in this, it was a natural 
result of the social and political conditions of 
the time. 

/ In the formation of the Catholic Church 

the action of the Roman genius was decisive. 



























.22 

Rome stood for administration, the maintenance of 
the rule, the inclination for, and the spirit of, 
government. It gave no order as yet, simply frat¬ 
ernal counsels, but these counsels had the weight 
of the prestige of Rome behind them, and the 
strength and wealth of its community. 

I Clement, a letter which the church of 
Rome addressed to that of Corinth, in the last 
period of Domitian f s reign, shows the influence of 
Rome, though the bishop of Rome is not considered, 
to have greater authority than the bishop of Cor¬ 
inth. In the division in Corinth at this time, 
between the two factions; the revolutionists and 
the representatives of established authority, Rome 
takes the side of the latter, and easily found evi¬ 
dence, for the stand she took, in the Old Testa¬ 
ment . 

About this period appeared for the first 
time the name Catholic Church. It was not yet a 
general expression for the great Church. To make 
a strong organized society out of this whole com¬ 
pany of believers, with their various character¬ 
istics and tendencies, and thus combat the here¬ 
sies, sects and religious parties springing up on 
every side, it was essential to establish a strong 




.23 


rule of faith, which would he everywhere accepted 
as the expression of the apostolic tradition; and 
to form a government sufficiently well establish¬ 
ed and sufficiently powerful to reduce the whole 
mass to unity and obedience. The double crisis 
of Gnosticism and Montanism, which broke forth 
between 130 A.D. and 150 A.D., and lanted nearly 
a century, furnished both. 

It was the attempt of Gnosticism, arising 
from the speculative mind of Greece, to- transform 
faith into "gnosis 11 or knowledge, and positive 
religion or philosophy. On the other hand the 
Montanists claimed that in them the gift of the 
spirit had revived;and they also predicted the 
near return of Christ. Gnosticism was a return to 
the Greek spirit; Montanism was a revival of the 
Jewish spirit. Therefore, the great Church which 
was destined to become the Catholic Church must 
seek a middle course, neither rejecting the one 

nor the other, but accepting such elements as 
could be mingled in the doctrines of her own 

Church. So during this crisis emerged the Cath¬ 
olic theory of the church, which, far from being 
handed do ?in from heaven by a supernatural power, 
remained long uncertain. However, in face of 
























.24 


dangerous heresies, it is clear that this form of 
Christianity was the only one possible at this time. 

It was Rome in this crisis that took the 
lead, treating religious questions as political 
matters, solely intent upon maintaining the unity 
and pa. er of the Church. 

The conceptions of the Catholic Church and 
of the Kingdom of God were blended. The apocalyp¬ 
tic hope lost its object. The reign of God was to 
be one of conquest through the instrumentality of 
the Church, so that there could be no question of 
weakness or erring. Thus, atlast, about the third 
century, we meet the Catholic dogma of the Church. 

It is impossible to imagine a greater de¬ 
lusion than that of the Roman Catholic Church, when 
it seeks to discover its own image in early Christ¬ 
ianity. Jesus wrote nothing nor caused anything 
to be written. There is no indication that he 
thought of the possibility of another volume of 
scripture being added to the Old Testament. The 
Master confided his gospel to the free and living 
preaching of his disciples, and the assistance of 
the Spirit. 

However, unconsciously, the Apostles no 
doubt began to lay the foundation of tradition by 















.25 


their own testimony about Jesus, which likely led 
to the idea of Apostolic Succession. But all who 
knew, or believed they knew, something about 
Christ, brought their contributions to the common 
treasury. 

Christian tradition is not of divine in¬ 
stitution. It came Into existence much the same 
as historic traditions, and has the same main char¬ 
acteristic, namely, the farther they are from 
their own time, they groY/ richer but less depend¬ 
able. 

At first tradition was at a rather un¬ 
stable stage; but according to the Catholic theory 
of Tradition, it became a very definite official 
rule of faith. The Catholic Church maintains that 
the Apostles drew up and left to their successors 
an unchangeable formulary of Christian faith, to 
which succeeding generations added nothing, sub¬ 
tracted nothing, changed nothing, as to the cus¬ 
toms and ideas which they inherited; and finally 
the bishops become the successors of the Apostles 
and heirs of their gifts and privileges. This is 
an illusion; for we know that tradition hands 
down everything, so that the heritage of the past 
can be accepted only with reserve. But at the 























,26 

end of the second century historical criticism did 
not exist, men lived largely in the supernatural. 

So that in course of time these legends of tradi¬ 
tion came forward to defend the dogma of which they 
were born. 

The Church of Rome has always obstinately 
defended tradition, because the infallibility of 
tradition is the omnipotence of the heirarchy. 

In the Catholic system tradition is to the episco¬ 
pate what the body is to the soul. Their union is 
fundamental. Without tradition the episcopate 
would be merely a political caste whose reason for 
being had been lost and its power unjustifiable. 
Tradition is only another name for the well known 
theory of Apostolic Succession, whence the Church 
deduces the divine right of bishops to teach truth 
and govern souls. 

Since in the history of Catholicism we 
find this peculiar law, that dogmatic theory al¬ 
ways lags two or three centuries behind the prac¬ 
tical reality, which is true also as to the ques¬ 
tion of the episcopate, it seems quite logical 
that we should go back to history herself to ask 
for the origin of the episcopate. 

In Paul’s Epistles to the Corinthians, 








1 - **• 



27 


while he insists upon his apostolic authority, he 
never understood nor exercised it except as a moral 
authority. Paul merely becomes a guide to the be¬ 
lievers, and always insists upon the right of each 
to his own judgment. The directing power resides 
nowhere except in the assembly of believers. We 
have a true Christian democracy. 

The bond which united them was still simp¬ 
ly of the mystical and moral order. The Christ¬ 
ians together formed the body of Christ, because 
the spirit of Christ lived in each of them ajid 
became to them, as a common soul. Faturally at 
this period we find no trace of a division of 
Christians into clergy and laity. There is no 
trace of abishop nor any official authority. The 
most humble had their share of activity. The 
zeal of all reached the extreme and needed dis¬ 
cipline rather than stimulus. 

Fothing can be clearer than that the ad¬ 
ministration of the community was by itself. 

Paul no doubt gives counsel and does not spare cor¬ 
rection, but he does this to spur on to action; 
the community has the right of self-government 
and power to choose its own representatives. Feed¬ 
less to say that f as their Christian community ex- 





.28 


panded and the family character of the church dim¬ 
inished, the function of the church became more 
stable and regular; deacons and elders were elec¬ 
ted to definite charges in the community. But 
there was nothing more miraculous or unusual about 
this spontaneous organization than any other of that 
time, whether in the Jewish synagogue or in the pag¬ 
an associations. 

When we turn to the church of Rome some for¬ 
ty years later, at the time of the reign of DonJjt- 
ian, we find that in the catholic sense of the word, 
there was neither a bishop in Rome nor in Corinth. 
However, the various crises tended to strengthen the 
authority of the Church. The authority of the body 
of believers had gradually passed into the hands of 
the Council of Elders, and it passed from their 
hands in to the hands of the most influential man in 
their council, who became their bishop or episcopos 
by pre-eminence, who in turn, finally became the 
Roman Catholic bishop. Then at a later date the 
bishop of Rome became the universal bishop of 
•Christendom. 

The general movement, by which the organ¬ 
ization of the early churches.led up to the Cath- 

olio episcopate, was nothing more than the working 















.29 


of a social law. There v/as nothing miraculous in 
it. The little Christian communities, which were 
formed, were largely the work of itinerant preach¬ 
ers, hut the apostles were not the only itinerant 
preachers. Christ had not delegated this work to 
the twelve alone; so the first link of the golden 
chain forged hy Catholicism to attach its hierarchy 
to the apostles, is a myth. 

In the beginning we find two classes of lab¬ 
orers occupied in this Y/ork of God; one was the men 
of the word, apostles, prophets and teachers; the 
other was the elders, the overseers or episcopoi, 
and the deacons. The former are the servants of the 
Church at large, the latter are the ministers, the 
elected servants of a particular community. A con¬ 
flict, however, was inevitable between these two- 
classes, and the laity was finally reduced to a sec¬ 
ondary position. It was a necessity of the time 
that the ecclesiastical authority should elevate 
the official clergy; but nothing seemed to contrib¬ 
ute more practically to the establishment of the 
episcopate. The privilege and influence of the of¬ 
fice increased and in the end the entire activity 
of the community was concentrated in the clergy. 

In the first centuries, each central coun- 


■ 

















.30 


cil, being composed of members who represented the 
community councils, would have one or more episco- 
poi, v/ho were in charge of the general interests 
and needs of the entire community. This would lend 
to that office a real pre-eminence. This is an¬ 
other cause for the formation of the episcopate. 

Before long the sentiment of a special dig¬ 
nity was attached to the title of bishop. All this 
system necessarily followed the Roman administrat¬ 
ive divisions, and about the year 150 A.I), we have 
the first personage who figures as bishop, in the 
name of Anicetus. 

In spite of protest against the elevation 
of one man above the others, and placing power in 
his hand, no force seemed sufficiently strong to 
stop this closely knit organization. In propor¬ 
tion as Christianity grew inwardly cold, this de¬ 
veloping order felt a necessity to strengthen the 
external unity by a more thoroughly organized in¬ 
stitution. 

The priestly idea, which becomes a reality 
in the third and fourth centuries, completes the 
idea of the episcopate. The priest is endoY/ed with 
a sacred chnranter, raising him above the rest of 



















.31 


men, and he holds in his hand the keys of heaven 
and hell. All are dependent upon him. Bowhere in 
the thought of Jesus, nor in the teaching of the 
aposties is there any idea of raising up a superior 
caste, much less the idea of a priesthood, which in¬ 
volves the idea of sacrifice. The worship required 
by Christ and made plain in the gospels was worship 
in spirit and truth. Repeatedly, Jesus shows his 
disdain for Levitical rites and sacrifices. In the 
primitive church it was the gift of the spirit alone 
which made the true Christian, so it seems evident 
that there remains no reason to justify a priest for 
raising himself above the community of which he is 
simply a servant. 

Beside the episcopate being completed by 
the notion of the priesthood, it was also completed 
by the theory of the Apostolic Succession; but the 
theory followed, not preceded, the establishment 
of the episcopate. Bov/ that this theory is estab¬ 
lished, the.question of how to defend it from at¬ 
tacks without and discussions from within became a 
critical one. Neither historic tradition nor gov¬ 
ernmental authority could prevent schisms, banish 
heresy and maintain order; so the power of govern¬ 
ment and those who exercised it, was placed outside 






















.32 


and above the judgment of the Church itself. It 
found its : eat in a supernatural power, not derived 
from the will of the Church, hut received from heav¬ 
en by official transmission, legal, uninterrupted, 
from God to Christ, from Christ to the Apostles, 
from the apostles to the bishops and their succes¬ 
sors . 

Of course this reasoning is fictitious. 
Authentic history mentions no example of a bishop 
consecrated by an apostle, nor having received any 
of the apostle’s powers, for an interval of more 
than half a century separates the disappearance of 
the apostles and the appearance of the first bishop 
in Rome. Besides, the apostle held his mission from 
God, and was devoted to the work of general evangel¬ 
ization; he could not be a settled director of any 
particular parish; no apostle was ever a deacon or 
a bishop. Neither the bishop’s origin, nor his 
reason for being, is found in his particular commun¬ 
ity, but in the Catholic Church. Apostolic Succes¬ 
sion guaranteed by official ordina/tion becomes the 
real foundation of the authority of the bishops. 
Moreover, the bishops added to the monopoly of auth¬ 
entic tradition, that of the true inspiration. 

Thus by a laborious and slow process 



































33 


through conflicts and protests, the rights and 
graces, which, in the early church were the pos¬ 
session of the entire community of believers, be¬ 
came the monopoly of the clergy; and after twelve 
centuries, the power of the bishops of Home, both 
religious and political, was firmly grounded. 

The Church modelled her form of organiza¬ 
tion on those of the empire. Representatives of all 
the peoples of the world flocked to Rome. As Rome 
was the political capital of the empire, so the 
Church of Rome became the religious capital of 
Christendom. 

It was at Rome that the first farm of the 
apostolic symbol wa.s drawn up. It was Rome that put 
an end to the controversies of the Eastern Churches 
touching the canonical books, a.nd practically deter¬ 
mined the final form of the Hew Testament collec¬ 
tion, which had now become the sacred book of 
Christians. Again it was at Rome that the bishop 
gained pre-eminence. In 194 A..D., Victor, the bishop 
of Rome, authoritatively issued an edict that cut 
off all churches that did not follow the Roman cus¬ 
tom in the matter of Easter. This is the date of 
the Roman papacy. The example instituted by Victor 
















.34 


would Toe followed by his successors in opposition to 
the strong protests of Cyprian, the bishop of Car¬ 
thage. 

The legend of St. Peter*s Chair, which claims 
that Peter is the apostle of Rome, whom the bishops 
of Rome succeed, lent distinction and prestige to 
the seat of Christendom. 

However, when the historic evidence is exam¬ 
ined we find that there is nothing definite to show 
that the relations of Peter to the first Christian 
community of Rome were of any consequence. We can 
not trace with any certainty as to whether or not 
the origin of Christianity in Rome is due to either 
Peter or to Pa„ul. It can be attributed to no known 
ap>ostle. Paul had been in Rome, but it is not a 
certainty whether or not Peter came to visit Rome 
and suffered martyrdom there. If he aid, we may 
conclude from the letter of Clement of Rome that 
though it may be of some historical interest, it is 
certainly of no dogmatic importance. There is no 
connection between the foundation of the Church of 
Rome and the historic person of Peter; there is 
still less, if possible, between Peter and the Roman 
Episcopate, which is the most mythical part of the 
legend; for an apostle whose mission it was to carry 














.35 


the gospel everywhere could not he hound to any 
particular place. Besides, Peter, who was consider¬ 
ed not more influential than either Paul or James 
in the days of ea.rly Christianity, Y/ould not likely 
gain pre-eminence over.Paul. 

The text: }, Thou art Peter, and on this rock 
I will huild my church, 11 (Matt. 16: 18), does not 
have any dogmatic significance ascribed to it hy the 
Roman Church until the third century, when the bish¬ 
ops of Rome found the need of it to sustain their 
new theory in regard to the Episcopate. 

Finally, this theory of the Legend of St. 
Peter’s Chair has little historical advantage to 
the bishops of Rome, when it has been clearly dem¬ 
onstrated that there is no link between themselves 
and Peter, none between Peter and Rome, and lastly, 
none between Rome and the religious thought of 
J esus. 

From a religious point of view, Rome is en¬ 
tirely outside of the horizon of Christ, who pro¬ 
claimed a kingdom which was soon to come down from 
heaven, not a monarchial church modelled upon the 
laws of the empire of the Caesars. 

It is impossible to admire too highly the 

order that the Roman Church brought to this common 



































.36 


work of defence and organization. At the same time 

human weakness also appears. The Homan genius was 

/ 

never troubled with scruples, and the sacredness of 
the end pursued diverted attention from the charac¬ 
ter of the means employed. 

However, the early bishops of Rome, who were 
superior men in ability and common sense, gradually 
increased their pov^er, while everything around them 
seemed to be on the decline. The religious charac¬ 
ter of the bishopric of Rome protected its incum¬ 
bents from any individual moral weakness, and the 
office seemed to profit from both the rebellious and 
the saints. Dissensions in the Roman Empire, es¬ 
pecially in the East, seemed to strengthen the seat 
of authority at Rome. 

The Council of Sardis, in 349 A.D., recog¬ 
nized that bishops condemned in their own provinces 
had a right to a peal to the bishop of Rome, who 
should pass final judgment. This is the origin of 
the custom to appeal to the court of Rome, nothing 
seemed to have contributed so much to the pre- emi¬ 
nence of the Bishop of Rome. Then in 440 A.D., Leo, 
a man of extraordinary virtue, eloquence, and most 
of all, political genius, appeared in the See of 

Rome. He was in fact the first Pope in history and 






.37 


the true founder of papacy. Besides, he appeared 
at the time of the Barbarian invasions, which gave 
him an opportunity to display his political genius, 
resulting in the birth of the long political activ¬ 
ity of the Popes and the theocratic idea of Empire. 

The theocratic idea, latent in the very in¬ 
stitution of the papacy, took its second step in 
progress in the year 800 A.D. 6n Christmas Day of 
that year, in the Basilica of St. Peter, Pope Leo 
III placed the imperial crown upon the head of the 
king of the Pranks, amidst the plaudits of the pop¬ 
ulace, who cried “Long live the emperor Charles 
Augustus, whom God himself has crowned.“ How the 
Pope stood before the Homan world as the represent¬ 
ative of God. 

Another event v r hich served the cause of the 
papacy was the successive appearance of several 
collections of letters or decrees of former bish¬ 
ops of Rome. During the middle ages the entire 

policy of the Popes was inspired by these fictitious 
documents: the most celebrated of which were the 
false decretals of the Pseudo - Isidore. 

The papacy, though humiliated and opposed 

for a time because of its weak members, triumphed, 
because its roots were sunk deep in the religious 























.38 


faith of the people. Because God had put into her 
hands the guardianship of the people, both princes 
and people owed her divine obedience, and it became 
the churches’ mission not only to guide, but govern. 

With Innocent III at the beginning of the 
thirteenth century, the papacy dominated Europe. 
However, its triumph was only for a short time; the 
next century brought a tramsformation. The nation¬ 
al sentiment awoke and the moral and ecclesiastical 
horizon broadened. 

Hour great crises mark the decline of the 
theocracy. The first definite step in the decline 
was due to the struggle of Boniface VIII against 
Philip the Pair, with the States-General of Prance 
at his back,' which ended in the emancipation of the 
royal power and the humiliation of the papacy. Two 
centuries later the Reformation finally proclaimed 
the autonomy of the Christian conscience. Still 
later the French Revolution swept away the divine 
right of the Middle Ages. Then finally, in our own 
day, the fourth step in the decline is the founda¬ 
tion of the new kingdom of Italy, crowned by the en¬ 
trance of the Italians into Rome in 1870 and the 
retreat of the Pope into the Vatican. 

During the decline of the theocracy the 

















.39 

papacy certainly did not die, "but it was trans- 
formed. 

The infallibility of the Pope has been in¬ 
fluenced by the measure of authority which he exer¬ 
cised. ?/hen his authority became absolute, his in¬ 
fallibility became entire. Cf course, the placing 
of the Pope in this position of ere-eminence was 
preceded by a long laborious struggle, which culmi¬ 
nated in 1850 A.D. with Pius IX, who demonstrated 
his authority over that of the Church by decreeing 
the dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin 
Maery upon his own authority. 

However, by exalting itself, the papacy has 
destroyed its own foundation. It rests upon its own 
affirmation, with no possible justification either 
in history or in reason. The papacy created it¬ 
self, that is the whole storv. 

The future of the papacy will depend large¬ 
ly upon its power to adapt itself to the necessity 
of modern times, naturally the Homan Church does 
not accept liberty of conscience. To do this "would 
be to destroy its power. The attitude of the pap¬ 
acy remains the same; the theocratic idea is the 
very essence of it; and the secret of the Church’s 
strength is that men confuse her system of govern- 
























.40 


ment with the Church itself, and identify the 
Church with religion, thinking the destruction of th 
papacy would mean the downfall of religion itself. 

In moral questions man breaks away from 
authority and thinks and trusts to the judgment of 
his own conscience. Thus all authorities are re¬ 
lative and must be modified with time, if they are 
to be maintained. But the Catholic Church has not 
understood it so, and has, to save her authority, 
invested it with the supernatural. Authority must 
change and be restated to meet the needs of the day. 
But if the authority of the Catholic Church is in¬ 
fallible, what need is there for restatement? How¬ 
ever, reformation proves its fallibility. This is 
the dilemma in which the Roman Catholic Church finds 
itself. 

The Reformation of the sixteenth century, 
which played such an important part in the decline 
of the Roman Catholic theocracy, was not an acci¬ 
dent, it was a natural result of the conditions of 
the day. The Middle Ages was a period of transi¬ 
tion between the old age and the new. Hothing prov¬ 
ed more fruitful for the souls of western nations 
than this long severe discipline, which tempered the 
thought and will of the age. 




.41 


At this time the notion of the universe was 
enlarging. The discovery of America,, inventions of 
every kind, particularly printing, inspired in the 
human mind the idea of endless progress. The study 
of literature caused a. distaste for the old form¬ 
alism. True and sincere piety was forced to aban¬ 
don the exterior authority of the age, and learned 
to distinguish between the inward and the outward, 
the soul from the body of religion. It fell back 
upon itself and gained a clearer consciousness of 
true spirituality and its independence from outward 
institutions. Thus all through the middle ages as 
the Church morally declined, and the papacy, priests, 
and monks more openly drifted toward corruption 
and immorality,•in the same degree, the Christian 
spirit grew inwardly stronger. Christendom grew 
more restless daily. The soul, starved by the trad¬ 
itional order,hungered for a new order of things. 
Inflammable matter seemed everywhere. 

The success of the Reformation is no doubt 
due to the intimate harmony between the general 
tendency of the time, and the strong religious lead¬ 
ers, who came forth. It was not due to the humanist 
movement, though its leader was instrumental in 
awakening the minds of men, but rather to the re- 

























.42 


former, who uproots and replants. 

It is not a question of theory which under¬ 
lies the Reformation, hut a moral and thoroughly 
practical question. It was a real desire for inward 
righteousness and peace with God. In the Catholic 
Church the ideal principle of the religion of the 
spirit v/s,sY>ouhd up in the forms, the rites, the hier- 
archial organization of the Church. The Priest had 
become the necessary mediator. But Luther had learn¬ 
ed from experience that these external institutions, 
instead of bringing peace to a troubled soul, had 
left it more despairing. He had found salvation only 
in entering into personal relation with the Master 
of Soule*. Prom the moment Christian souls learned 
to distinguish between the external and internal 
authority, they began to break the bonds of formal¬ 
ism. 

In the Catholic system, Christianity had be¬ 
come a law or rite. In Protestantism it was a life 
in the soul. In the first case it involved servi¬ 
tude; in the second it brought forth liberty. 

When Jesus entered upon his preaching work 
he did not attack the Mosaic institutions with the 
idea of utterly destroying the Law; nor did he try 
to shatter in any way the faith of his disciples; 




.43 


he came not to destroy but to fulfil. He merely 
replaced the influence of the Mosaic Law by a spirit¬ 
ual and moral law; by dropping into the hearts and 
lives of men the living seed of love, sacrifice and 
service and leaving it there to germinate. However, 
Luther, who was not entirely set free from Scholast¬ 
icism, did justify the permanent criticism of dogma 
and formalism in bringing religion back to inward 
faith, and theology to Christian experience. But 
contrary to Luther*s intentions, the Church became 
divided in itself. Instead of one Church we have 
two forms of Christianity. 

Though in perpetual conflict these two forms 
of Christianity remained redacted. Catholicism op¬ 
ened itself to the Protestant spirit, and the Cath¬ 
olic spirit reappeared in Protestantism, But finally 
each arrived at its logical expression; the prin¬ 
ciple of authority at infallibilitygconcentrated in 
the person of the Pope, the Protestant principle at 
the autonomy of the Christian conscience. 

In the Middle Ages no one seems to have en¬ 
tertained a doubt that an infallible external auth¬ 
ority was .' necessary. So an attempt was made to con¬ 
stitute a dogma of the infallibility of the scrip¬ 
tures. But since the Protestant churches did not 























































44 


consider themselves infallible, it was difficult 
for them to constitute an infallible canon of sac¬ 
red scriptures. Besides,the Reformation disorganiz¬ 
ed the old system of authority. The clash of the 
Catholics and Protestants destroyed both the auth- 
o.. ity of the Holy Scriptures and traditions. The 
dogma of the infallibility of the scriptures was by 
no means primitive in Protestantism. The Reforma¬ 
tion knew nothing of it in the early days. 

The Reformers proceeded not by the way of 
external authority, but by way of inward experience. 
They brought theology back to the moral sphere. 

To conclude that the Reformers thought the "Word of 
God. 1 * with its texts, canon, and even the letter 
of the biblical books, had come down from heaven, 
is a great mistake. On the contrary their faith, 
being of a purely moral and religious order, clung 
to the moral and religious substance of the Bible 
and not to its letter and outward form, which are 
matters not of faith but of history. In their 
preaching, the human imperfections of the Bible are 
lost sight of in the glory of the divine truth which 
it contains. The divine which was in the "Word of 
God" was that part which spoke to the conscience. 
"Christ is the master, the scriptures are the serv- 




































45 


ant. rt This is the true method of testing the hody 
of the canon. We must See whether or not they are in 
harmony with Christ's teachings. The hook that does 
not teach Christ is not apostolic, regardless of 
who wrote it. 

The Reformers no doubt were men who 'were, to 
some extent, dominated by the ideas of the past; 
but in spite of this they established a new concep¬ 
tion of religion by removing the seat of religious 
authority from without to within, from the Church to 
the Christian cousciousness. They were very far from 
the later dogma of the exterior and absolute author¬ 
ity of the Bible which succeeded in taking away from 
the Christian conscience the liberty which they had 
so dearly bought. The Reformers, and especially 
Luther, never dreamed of raising up an exterior in¬ 
fallible authority like that of the Church. The 
Catholic agrees blindly to accept everything that 
the church may teach, regardless of his convictions. 
There have been, and doubtless there are still, 
Protestants that have the same attitude in regard 
to the Bible. Luther rather than manifesting faith 
in authority and placing absolute and. equal value 
on all books of the Bible, valued the scriptures 
because of their spiritual power. 




.46 


Sabatier says, "The Christian religion is 
not true because it is in the Bible, but it is in 
the Bible because it is true." Truth reveals itself 
to the conscience, which to appropriate it, may 
have need of the scriptures, as of other teachers, 
but in the end the conscience only retains it be¬ 
cause it is truth. 

A very great honour is due the scripture, 
though it is not .the mistress of true Christianity, 
but only the handmaid; but above all things it is 
a faithful servant, which should suffice. Scrip¬ 
ture is the compilation of the earliest Christian 
tradition and is more worthy of our faith than any 
other that we possess, though it is not more secure 
from error, forgetf Iness, imperfections and addi¬ 
tions. The certitude of Luther f s faith did not rest 
upon a previous theory of the infallibility of the 
scriptures; any theory of the scriptures which he 
may have had rested upon the inward certitude of 
his faith. 

Calvin who was called upon to make a system 
of doctrines and a new church organization, tried 
to establish a firm rule founded upon the authority 
of the Scriptures. Yet he realized that the auth- 

ority of the Scriptures did not rest upon the auth- 

































.47 


ority of the Church, but before all things, upon 
the witness of the Spriit. Zwingli who speaks of 
the Word of God having the virtue of creating faith 
in the Church says, H Only pious hearts know this, 
for faith does not depend upon the discussions of 
men, but has its seat and rests itself invincibly 
in the soul. It is an experience which,every one 
may have. It is not a doctrine nor a question of 
knowledge, for we see the most learned men who are 
ignorant of this thing, which is the most salutary 
of all.” Here again the priority of experience is 
emphasized. 

nevertheless a new principle only gradually 
frees itself from past influences, and the Cath¬ 
olic principle was sure to influence Protestant¬ 
ism, and it is a natural thing to expect the Pro¬ 
testant Church to make an attempt to replace the 
authority of the Church by the external authority 
of the Scriptures, a^fter the disappearance of the 
Reformers. 

The belief that the Bible is of divine or¬ 
igin and was in seme way dictated by God, is in 
reality older than Christianity. It is neither 
specifically Jewish nor Christian. It is universal. 
All ancient legislation, all the higher religions 




.48 


of the East, rest upon sacred books, which are con¬ 
sidered the product of divine inspiration. 

The prophetic inspiration does not carry 
with it infallibility. it was later when the re¬ 
ligious genius of the prophets had bee me extinct, 
and the great literary epoch had closed, that the 
sacred books became revered; and the Jews and the 
Hellenists respectively conceived a belief that 
the Hebrew text and the translation of the Septua- 
gint, were the very Word, of God, the dictation of 
his spirit. The allegorical interpretation, at the 
time of Philo, proves the general belief in the in¬ 
spiration of the sacred writings. The early Christ¬ 
ians feil heir to this Jewish tradition, and there 
is no doubt that Jesus and his disciples looked upon 
the sacred books in no other way than did the other 
men of their generation. 

However, the traditional doctrine did not 
imprison the consciousness of Jesus. By the in¬ 
tuition of his consciousness he was led to a higher 
revelation. He brought forth a new spirit to the 
disciples. 

The new inspiration which ga^ve to the im- 
media/te followers of Jesus and Preachers of the 

Gospel an assurance that they were entrusted with 













.49 


the mission of bearing the Word of God, gave rise 

eventually, through.their efforts to record the life 

and teachings of Jesus, to a new collection of books 

not 

though these occasional writings were/thought of as 
a collection of Scripture in the apostolic time, for 
people expected the end of the world. Instead of 
creating distinctions, the new inspiration estab¬ 
lished a real unity. Christianity c me into the 
world as a religion of the inward freedom of the 
soul. 

The apostolic inspiration did not put those 
whom it touched beyend the possibility of human 
fallibility. Doubtless there was no individual 
writer of the early Christian ara but was in many 
ways influenced by his age. All writings bore marks 
of the social conditions then in existence; and 
each wrote in harmony with the circumstances sur¬ 
rounding him. However, in no way were these writ¬ 
ings considered to be of divine origin, but were 
produced from a fervent religious faith, with their 
own individual characteristics of style, thought 
and genius; .and subject to imperfections of form, 

errors of detai1, ard traces'of prejudices. Yet 
through all there is to be found general unity promp 



< 













ted by a powerful common inspiration. 

Erome th- middle of trie second century, all 
is changed. As these writings and gospels were read 
in the churches side by side with the Old 'Testament 
scriptures, they gradually became classed in t 
same category, and the same conception of inspira¬ 
tion was applied to them. (II Peter 3; 2) 

It was impossible at this time to fix a 
cl-early defined doctrine of inspiration. The limits 
of inspiration remained especially uncertain, neither 
the Church lathers, nor the Councils, could come to 
any definite agreement as to the number of books 
that were the supernatural work of the Holy Spirit, 
nor upon the marks by which they might be known. 

The Church by declaring herself infallible 
has made herself the object of faith, and as Aug¬ 
ustine said: "People no longer believed in the 
Church because of the Scriptures, but in Scriptures 
because of the authority of the Church. w 

Erasmus held that the apostles, though ani¬ 
mated by the Holy Spirit, were none the less falli¬ 
ble men, and th t without injury to the gospel, they 
were mistaken in certain matters and ignorant in 
others. Luther has shown how free the Christian 
conscience was, in the early years of the Reforma- 













; 



















.51 


tion, with regard to the traditional canon. 

The dogma of the authority of the Bible was 
not defined at the close of the middle ages, either 
in regard to the theory of inspiration or the sec¬ 
ond collection of -writings. Until now the Church 
had sufficed for everything, but a change had taken 
place; and the authority of the Scriptures, having 
been placed in opposition to that of the ancient 
church and her tradition, created a condition which 
made it imperative that this new authority should 
be defined. 

The principle of that Protestant dogma of 
authority in matters of faith was first officially 
laid down in the Confessions of Baith in the six¬ 
teenth century. These documents based their auth¬ 
ority, neither on themselves nor the synods that- 
issued them, but solely upon the ord of Cod”. 
Passing over distinctions, and relationships of 
different parts of the text, the a thors in their 
mad rush to establish an infallible external auth¬ 
ority, boldly identified the Word of Cod with the 
traditional Bible, and emphatically uttered the 
brief formula: "The canonical Scriptures are the 
very Word of God, and this Word proves itself to 
be true and salutary, not by the human witness of 
the Church, but by the divine witness of the Holy 

















.52 


Spirit in the conscience. M ('Religions of Author¬ 
ity by Sabatier p.173). But Protestants have become 
convinced, at heavy cost, that it is impossible to 
base an external infallible authority upon a sub¬ 
jective fact of moral experience. 

ho one among the Reformers handled the old 
scriptural argument: "it is written , n with more de¬ 
cision and vigour than Luther, he believed in the 
divine origin, and inspiration of the Scriptures; 
but at the same time no one was more liberal with 
the handling of the letter and the form of the 
traditional collection. The Reformation Lathers 
considered the Bible from within; but their suc¬ 
cessors considered it from without, and fell into 
the same rut as the Roman Catholic Church by trying 
to build up a religion of authority. 

The Bible, once defined as the literal Lord 
of God, was seen to be absolutely opposed to the 
claims of human reason. If the human reason of man 
was allowed to distinguish between the human and 
the divine parts of the Scriptures, it would destroy 
the authority. Therefore Protestant theology claim¬ 
ed that God himself or the Holy Spirit was the auth¬ 
or of the boohs of the Bible. God needed men to _ut 
his Word into writing, but these human writers were 








.53 


only instruments. They were net enlightened or in¬ 
spired in any way. They were not unconscious, for 
they knew they were writing, hut entirely passive. 

It was not necessary for them to understand what 
they put down. ho thing was left to chance or human 
fallibility. God himself was responsible. 

Then we reach this stage the theory is con¬ 
fronted with some facts which must be explained. In 
the Scriptures there are discrepancies, and even 
contradictions, besides, varieties of styles a d 
grammatical errors. It became evident that they 
could not stop at asserting the inspiration of the 
words; it*was necessary to go on even to that of the 
syllables, the vowels and the consonants. Indeed 
it became necessary to maintain that the Scriptures 
were exempt from error, not only in matters of his¬ 
tory and morals-, but in matters of history, geogra¬ 
phy and @ o sinology; and discoveries of every kind 
were condemned that in any way endangered the verbal 
infallibility of the sacred text. The claims of 
Protestantism became ridiculous. 

If the text of the Bible is divine, every 
available means should be used to restore its orig¬ 
inal and authentic form. Row is it possible to 
know that the successive copies are true to the crig- 





.54 


inalV This was a grave question.. Still more 
complex was the question of the Biblical canon ana 
its authentic limits. The Apocryphal books of the 
Old Testament, preserved in the German Bibles, had 
been severely excluded from the Reformed Bibles. 

"vhen the Catholics accused the Protestants of mut¬ 
ilating the divine Scriptures, they retorted with 
the accusation that the Catholics had added to its 
works purely human and unauthoritative writings. 

It was impossible to say, with any definiteness, 
whether this existing collection of Scriptural 
books contained all the books written by the Holy 
Spirit, or whether some found in the collection 
might not be unauthentic. It seems quite probable 
that at any rate,both m the Old Testament and hew 
Testament ..writings were incomplete. 

The question of the authenticity of the 
ancient Scriptures, which, since that time has pro¬ 
voked so many controversies and researches, seemed 
to these theologians of minor importance. 

The true demonstration of the divinity of 
the Scriptures is an inward revelation, taking 
place in the conscience. The old theology never 
undertook to demonstrate by reasonable proofs, the 
essential dignity of the Bible; it left it to justi- 


























fy itself to the consciousness. We cannot oppose 
this appeal to experience, and to moral and relig¬ 
ious evidence, hut this evidence is a subjective 
thing and it cannot possibly serve as the basis of 
an external, material authority. This is the weak 


point of the ProteMjtarit theory of the infallibility 
of the Scriptures. 


The Protestant system was barely completed, 
when its weakness became evident, so an attempt was 
made to strengthen it by altering its basis. The 
new theory, the direct reverse of the seventeenth 
century orthodoxy, has become the current orthodoxy 
of our own time. 

The reasoning of the new theory starts with 
the fact that the four Gospels and the.Epistles of 
Paul are authentic, for the writers knew the truth 
about Christ. Therefore the miracles of Jesus, and 


especially his resurrection from the dead, are 
established facts, because of the supernatural in¬ 
tervention of God. Then when the fulfillment of 
the prophecies are added to this, mb have establish¬ 
ed the divine authority of the Cld and Hew Testament 
When the biblical question was carried into 
the domain of his.tory, there was begun a real revo¬ 
lution. When men gave themselves to the critical 












.56 


study of the Scriptures with some degree of freedom, 
they found many things which were hard to reconcile 
with the theory of divine origin. The writers, of 
the liew Testament especially, do not claim infalli¬ 
bility in any way, neither for themselves, nor for 
their writings or teachings. Paul exhorts the. 
Christians of Thessaionica and Corinth to judge for 
themselves what he writes to them: f, to prove all 
things.” The theory that Cod accommodated himself 
to human errors and individual peculiarities in his 
divine interpretation served for a while, but this 
did not satisfy the critical mind. 

Textual criticism began to undermine the 
authority of Protest,ant dogma. At the same time 
the critical!, examination of the tradition as to the 
date, origin, and authorship of the books of the Bi¬ 
ble showed its mistakes and discrepancies. .All ques¬ 
tions were raised and men began to get glimpses, 
through the veil of dogmatics, of an entirely new 
historic reality, which our own age was at last to 
bring to the open light of day. 

Under the influence of this’ criticism the 
dogmatic authority of the canon of Holy Scripture 
vanished away. Pas it not quite piobable that though 
the Bible contained the Word of Cod, .it also contain- 





















>57 


ed orher things in no wise especially divine? So 
we see what an influence historic criticism exercised 
upon theology. 

Prom the early part of the eighteenth century 
we find rationalism, ’ creeping in everywhere, gaining 
pre-eminence over revelation. It is generally admit¬ 
ted at this time that Scriptures can contain nothing 
absurd or immoral, and any thing of such nature 
found in Scripture must be interpreted according 10 
reason and the conscience. The mystic witness of 
the Holy Spirit, bringing to the soul immediate con¬ 
firmation of the truth of Scriptures, is no longer ad¬ 
mitted. or even comprehended. 

Under rationaliIni the religious atmosghere 
grew cold and inspiration became dead. Practical 
Religion bereft of warmth and ideal, was reduced to 
the art of living well, and turning to the beet ad¬ 
vantage , the good things of the earth. It was all 
a matter of reason and reflection. 

It was at this time that a new revelation 
came into being, when religion' was at a low eoo. 

Men turned from the external authority of the Bible 
to the essential principle, to the inner witness of 
the Holy Spirit. Rosseau was the first to turn men 1 s 
thoughts to the simple gospel of Jesus Christ; and 
























.58 


religious thought, with uncertain steps, made its 
way from the surface to the heart. 

It is not because the Christian religion is 
in the Bible that it is true. It does not rest en¬ 
tirely upon the Bible. The Christian Church created 
the hew Testament. Christian religion existed be¬ 
fore the canonized Bible. It contains revelations, 
but there are many things in it that are foreign 
to religion. The spirit acts through the letter, but 
it is not bound to it. 

The common error, both of the rationalists 
and the supernaturalists, was to consider faith as 
a sum of traditional doctrine, which one party de¬ 
duced from reason and the other believed to have 
fallen from heaven. Both methods reduced religion 
to an intellectual operation. Schleiermacher said: 
"Faith is not a doctrine, nor a dogma*, but a vital 
piety, the inward tendency of the religious senti¬ 
ment itself; it is the loving and joyful recogni¬ 
tion of the relations of the soul with God." Re¬ 
ligious truth must spring out of Christian exper¬ 
ience itself. Holy Scripture could no longer be 
the foundation of faith, it became an auxiliary, 
a means of grace. It is faith in Christ that makes 
the Christian; and which makes it -possible for him 







♦ 








to recognize the peculiar authority of Scripture. 

Thus in Trotestantism was.begun the evolu¬ 
tion of the religion of the letter toward the relig¬ 
ion of the spirit. 

Institutions and religious forms consecrated 
by a long tradition, though t times they may seem 
outworn, yet at every fresh awakening of the con¬ 
science they are revered, and often revived. In the 
nineteenth century the soul’s life was again stirred 
to its depths by the Revolution and Revival. Amid 
the storms of the Revolution the individual grasped 
a clearer vision of the infinite, and longed again 
for those mystic influences of the cathedral and 
religious rites. The religious revival was compli¬ 
cated with a political reaction. The Revolution 
had cast down throne and altar, both must be restor¬ 
ed. Liberty had been carried to the extreme, now 
the idea, of authority seized men with equal passion. 
To. escape doubt .and uncertainty, there was a mad 
rush everywhere to find some authority which would 
silence reason, philosophy and criticism of every 
kind. The question was not whether the Bible and 
the Pope were really infallible, they must be made 
so. 

Along with the awakening of the religious 













.60 


sentiment two other forces had sprung up, namely; 
the science of history and natural s. cience, which at 
first seemed to render religion service. But the 
clash came when religious sentiment tried to revive 
dogmas and rites of the middle Ages, which caused a 
state of doubt and almost passiveness in the minds 
of men, in regard to the old religious tradition. 

Owing to the advance made along the lines of bibli¬ 
cal criticism and exegesis, during the first half 
of the century, k death struggle between the ancient 
dogmas and the conclusions of investigation, became 
inevitable. History was endeavouring to discover 
the actual character and true meaning of these books 
upon which dogma was founded. 

During this crisis of the middle of the nine¬ 
teenth century, Scherer, who had been struggling with 
this question of tradition in the church, exerted a 
great influence in favour of criticism and biblical 
exegesis. 

Scherer, because of a fervent piety, accept¬ 
ed, in his early life, the Revival dogma of trie total 
inspiration and infallible authority of the Scriptures. 
By his lectures on "Biblical Criticism and Exegesis," 
he tried to justify the ancient dogma, but he found 
it impossible to justify; and because of his own 

































.61 


frankness and honesty, he made no hesitation in 
confessing the change through which he had passed. 

Criticism is no more a means of destruction 
than a means of salvation. Its sole purpose is 
truth. Until the end, Scherer loved the truth more 
than anything in the world. 

In any exterior authority there must always 
be some sort of mediator between man and the truth, 
this is a remnant of Catholicism. Under the rule 
of the Spirit, there is immediate contact between 
the consciousness and truth, which is the first and 
true principle of the fieformation. 

The struggle of this age would not have 
been so acute hah the dogma of Protestantism been 
less rigid. The burning point of controversy every¬ 
where, especially in England, was the authority of 
the Scriptures. But gradually under historic crit¬ 
icism the old dogma and tradition was breaking down 
and man was emerging once again into liberty of 
thought and freedom of judgment. The believer finds 
no longer the assurance of faith in an exterior 
authority, a divine infallible letter, but in Christ¬ 
ian experience. The Word of God is the word of man 
with all its infirmities, ignorances and errors, but 
penetrated by the Spirit of Christ and animated by 













.62 


his power oi life and of salvation. It was not the 
writings, but the writer, that were inspired, accord¬ 
ing to his faith. 

Nothing in Protestant theology could 'prevail 
over the historical method arid principle. Those who 
tried to check the progress of historical criticism 
were, like Scherer, drawn along with it. However, 
there was one important difference between this 
revolution and that of the eighteenth century; the 
discipiles of Biblical criticism had .as much of a 
religious sense, as a historic sense, in their worn. 

A deeper piety inspires the new criticism. Prayer 
^companies the discussion of the texts. Reform be¬ 
came urgent if a catastrophe was to be avoided. In 
this Reformation, .Richard Rothe, a pious German 
theologian, said the ancient dogma, should not be 
reformed in a,ny part, but should be discarded alto- 
gether, as there wes no medium between the rule of 
tha letter and teat of the spirit. 

To overcome the belief in an infallible 
Bible was a herd task; and as a final argument, the 
advocates of authority fell upon this: that in¬ 
fallibility surely belonged to the words of Jesus 
Christ. This point was most difficult to defend. 

Bor, if Christ’s first historians had been sacrifi- 



















. 63 


ced to criticism this argument availed nothing. Un¬ 
questionably the words of Jesus in the first three 
gospels, bear a general stamp of living authenticity, 
but if we go on to the letter and details, we meet 
with many difficulties. tf My words ,' 1 said Jesus, 

"are spirit and they are life." As to the Spirit, 
the gospel is immortal; as to the letter, it is 
impossible to bring about its authentic restoration. 

Jesus belonged to his race by flesh and 
blood, and to his generation, and therefore was 
subject to the influence of the social conditions 
of that day. So it is impossible to imagine him 
removed from the conditions of every human exist¬ 
ence. To deny him a natural development, the effect 
of home influences, and social education, is to 
call in question his true humanity. Besides, it is 
to deny the gospels which state that, rs Jesus in¬ 
creased in wisdon and in stature, and in favour with 
God and man." So that it seems evident that Jesus 
would use the same methods of expression that were 
used in his time. His words would be suited to the 
occasion. Besides his words were on the lips of the 
people for forty years before they were fixed in 
writing, then they were interpreted in the Greek, as 
occasion required, from the original Aramaic, in 




.64 


which they had been spoken. So when the evange¬ 
lists collected them for their gospels, half a cen¬ 
tury after his death, they must have been distort¬ 
ed and twisted from the original, so that it is im¬ 
possible to establish authenticity in regard to the 
exact letter of Jesus. 

But tc Jesus the letter was a secondary con¬ 
sideration; he cared only for the spirit, He dis¬ 
couraged the idea, of the disciples to lower his gos¬ 
pel to the rank of a law. To believe in Jesus is 
an entirely different thing, in the thought of Jesus 
himself, than sharing all his beliefs or repeating 
the letter of his discourses. 

Ho doubt the Master spoke with authority, 
but his authority came not from an external source, 
as that of the Scribes and Pharisees, it came from 
an iMrard source: his personality and soul. 

Christ did not come unavailingly into the 
world. He is identified with, and hax become the 
culmination of, the divine history of Israel. 

Every soul that attains to a high moral and relig¬ 
ious life bears his marks. The moral world in which 
we live is his work, and none may rebel against or 
escape the intuitions, laws, aspirations and suffer¬ 
ings of this new world, without the consciousness 





65 


of a moral fall. 

This is the profound explanation of the re¬ 
ligious and moral action of the Bible upon the 
Christian consciousness. It is this persistently 
creative and stimulating action upon the moral life 
which gives it authority. Its authority is wholly 
spiritual, it depends, not upon the letter, but 
upon the spirit of the Scriptures and appeals to 
the mind and heart. 

The revelation of God to humanity and the 
Bible are not identical, for revelation is a prog¬ 
ressive development that cannot be shut up in any 
document or special institution. However, since 
the revelation of Israel was of such a high char¬ 
acter, the Bible should not be separated from it. 

We may say, therefore, that the Bible maintains the 
revelation of God in the souls of men. The Bible 
itself has the means of dr swing the soul that is 
hungry for righteousness and truth. Ho witness can 
be more trustworthy than the essential spirit of 
the Bible. It becomes a source of inward joy, a 
strength of life, and an undying hope. This light 
shining into the darkness of the inner life is a 
fact. The power which produces it is a fact. 






















• 66 

Wherever the Bihle is held in honour, it remains the 
safeguard of .Christian liberty, an ever-living agent 
of reformation, a power for progress. 

From the historic and literary point of view, 
the Bible is really a great classic literature of 
Judaism and Christianity, expressing the two spirits 
of these periods. It ages of course, and in many 
ways becomes unadapted to the conscience of the gen¬ 
erations that folio?/ ages after it. Time and sur¬ 
roundings must be taken into account. Adaption be¬ 
comes necessary. Both criticism and piety guide us 
in this. Ho Christian today reads the Bible without 
subjecting it to a certain degree of criticism, ac¬ 
cepting that which harmonizes with his own conscience 
and leaving the rest, or,at least, becoming passive 
to it. 

The letter of the Bible then is no longer 
the infallible rule of religious thought. It remains 
no longer a code or law, but a testimony and a means 
of grace. Ho church could give up the Bible thus 
understood without cutting itself off from communion 
with the original source of life. The historic doc¬ 
ument safeguards us from illusions and is a guide to 
inspiration. Scherer, who became the vigourous op¬ 
ponent of the inspiration and authority of the letter, 
























67 


said: "The Bible will ever be the book of pov/er, 
the marvellous book, the book above all others. 

It will be the light of the mind and the bread of 
the soul*. Heither the superstitions of some, nor 
the irreligious negations of others, have been able 
to do it harm. If there is anything certain in the 
world, it is that the destinies of the Bible are 
linked with the destinies of holiness on earth. ** 

By tracing the evolution of Catholicism and 
Protestantism, it seems apparent that it is a trait 
cf human nature to grasp for some exterior infall¬ 
ible authority in religion. However, history has 
forever refuted all claims to such an authority as 
the basis of religion, neither the infallible 
Church nor the infallible Bible survived the crit¬ 
icism of history. There Is no such thing as infall¬ 
ibility, except in God. He alone is infallible. 

Hor is He an exterior authority; his spirit dwells 
within us. The outward authority of the letter has 
given way to the inward and purely moral authority 
of the Spirit, This is the basis of authority in 
religion. External authorities have repeatedly 
changed in the history of Christianity, but the 

Spirit abides. To this inward religion of the Spirit, 
God seeks to lead His Church. 





























.68 


Sabatier says: "The religion of the Spirit 
is the religious relation realized in pure spirit¬ 
uality. It is God and man both conceived under the 
category of the spirit, mutually interpenetrating 
and thus arriving at full communion." It is the 
religion of love, liberty and holiness. 

The gospel in its very principle implied 
the annulment of the religion of authority, and in¬ 
augurated, as a fact,the religion of the spirit. 

The relation of God to man was not possible by an 
instrument such as a priest, nor by the letter of a 
law, but by the inner bond of love, by the conscious¬ 
ness of a filial relation, as that between a father 
and his son. 

In the gospels we have a change of emphasis 
in the religious life, from the institution to the 
conscience, so that the institution became only an 
instrument, a m eans to an end. 

Jesus, no doubt, was aware of the revolution 
he was stirring up. He meant to overthrow, if pos¬ 
sible, the very principle of religious hierarchy, 
which in the early religions had divided men into 
two classes, putting the conscience of one class un¬ 
der that of the other. He proclaimed fraternal 






















































.69 


equality, individual independence, but social unity. 

There is no doubt that Christ realized his 
special function as that of a religious teacher, but 
nowhere does he attribute his authority to anyone 
except God. He never appeals to miracles to convince 
those that argued with him, but always fell back up¬ 
on this decisive argument: "If any man wills to do 
the will of the Father, he will know of my teaching, 
whether it be of God or whether I speak of myself.” 
it is the virtue, the effectiveness, of his word 
that gives it authority. "The Word of God” seemed 
almost to radiate out from his very person, so that 
he would feel no hesitation or doubt in regard to 
his authority, and could say: "Heaven and earth 
shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.” 

Therefore Jesus was not concerned about 
displaying his miraculous gifts to support the truth 
of his gospel. He does not command belief, but cre¬ 
ates and inspires confidence,which is something en¬ 
tirely different. There is, instead of fear, a 
stimulating power in his teaching. 

The spiritual life is not a state, it is an 
aspiration, a desire, a prayer, an act. To feed 
this spiritual life, in direct contrast to the meth¬ 
od of authority of the Scribes, Jesus draws men to 


* 






















. 








































• , 




















70 


him by the spirit of love, which is inspired from 
within. He created the spiritual man in the carnal 
man. 

Above all things, Jesus attempts to arouse 
his hearers to religious and moral activity; so he 
always places himself in their environment, and a- 
dapts himself to their methods of reasoning in such 
a way that he can reach every heart. So his auth¬ 
ority becomes the authority of the things he teaches, 
the divine work that he carries on in the hearts 
of men. His ¥/ord is like a seed scattered, in the 
confidence that it will never fall upon good ground 
without taking root and multiplying indefinitely. 

"His authority over the conscience is of the same 
nature as that of God - inward, moral - and by that 
very fact, sovereign. It is the authority not of 
the letter, which oppresses and kills, but of the 
spirit, which makes alive. 1 ’ 

Jesus recognized in the Scripture the word 
of God; but he finds in it the spirit of the Fath¬ 
er. It is quite evident that he uses scripture 
liberally; but almost instinctively he goes to the 
moral and religious element of the books, and 
leaves the rest. He seldom quotes a text as of 
authority, except for argumentative purposes (Luke 


. 






































■ 




• 








• 











































. 








. 
























































.71 

20: 27-44), because it is a part of Holy Scripture, 
but always as having authority in itself by virtue 
of the sentiment it expresses. Therefore he sets 
aside all that contradicts his own inward experience, 
and emphasizes those that confirm and sanction it. 
Thus he drew an entirely new religion from the old. 
Out of its legal forms of righteousness, he drew an 
entirely new and higher principle of moral right¬ 
eousness. Indeed, he did not come to destroy,but 
fulfil. 

The moral consciousness of Jesus was not an 
exceptional divine thing, reserved only for himself; 
it was his constant effort to create within his dis¬ 
ciples this same moral consciousness, and thereby 
put them in a position so that they might carry on 
his work of criticism, distinguishing between that 
which was eternal and that which was perishable in 
the Old Testament. In his teachings, Jesus merely 
laid down his method, and in some cases applied them 
by way of example. His revelation is not superim¬ 
posed upon the conscience, like that of Moses, it 
is realized in the conscience itself, it is the con¬ 
science radsed to a higher power of clean sight and 
energy. 

The personal authority of Christ is not that 



72 


of the letter, it arises from the outshining of 
the inner consciousness of Jesus himself, reveal¬ 
ing the presence of God within him. Sabatier says: 
"The mysterious power which in his consciousness, 
and by his word, subjugates cur souls and makes 
them his, is the authority of God himself, it is 
the spirit of truth, of love and of holiness. In 
this sense it must be said that as soon as this 
authority reveals itself to us, we feel also that 
it is sovereign and absolute. This consciousness 
of Jeaus realizes and includes for us the spiritual 
and moral bond between the human soul and God, 
their absolute union; so that when his consciousness 
becomes ours, we feel ourselves to be in perfect 
religion, in moral and eternal relations with God. 
This is why we cannot separate ourselves from this 
consciousness of Christ, which is the essence and 
the religious dignity of his person. In the last 
analysis and to go down to the very root of the 
Christian religion, to be a Christian is not to 
acquire a notion of God, or even an abstract doc¬ 
trine of his paternal love, it is to live over, 
within ourselves, the inner spiritual life of 
Jesus and by the union of our heart with his, to 
feel in ourselves the presence of a father and the 
































































.73 


r ality of our<filial relation to him, just as Christ 
felt in himself the Father’s presence and his fil¬ 
ial relation to him. It is not a question of a new 
teaching, but a transformed consciousness. Christ 
is far more than the highest authority in Christian¬ 
ity; he is Christianity itself.” The true object of 
faith in Jesus Christ is therefore not the man Jesus, 
but the revelation of the Father, which is in him. 

The authority of Christ is absolute, as that 
of God himself, in respect to religious experience, 
but to extend the authority of Christ to the body 
of general and traditional notions is to destroy it. 

He claimed no external authority. Both he and his 
gospel disallowed the infallible outward authority 
upon which the Scribes and Pharisees founded their 
religious system. His was the authority of the Spirit 

The essential characteristic of the gospel 
of Christ is that it places the exterior lav/, as 
secondary to the internal law, the very essence of 
religion. Thus the religious world has been revers¬ 
ed. Hever has human history seen such a revolution. 
However, it is a mistake to think that Jesus intro¬ 
duced a new doctrine of God, His notion of God is 

that of the Old Testament. The idea of God as the 
Father is not new. The new thing is that the em- 



























* 

* 


.74 

phasis is placed cm the inner life. Christ was not 
only the prophet of the religion of the spirit, he 
introduced it into the world, and forever remains 
its master. 

In the Old Testament; - Jer. 31; 31-33 - 
Jeremiah, prophesied: "The word of Jehovah: behold 
the days come that I will make a new covenant with 
the house of Israel and with the house of Judah; not 
according to the covenant that I made with their 
fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to 
bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my cov¬ 
enant they broke, although I was a husband to them, 
saith Jehovah. But this is the covenant that I will 
make with the house of Israel after these days, 
saith Jehovali; I will put my law in their inward 
parts, and in their heant will I write it, and I 
will be their God, and they shall be my people." 

It is impossible to imagine how Jesus could have 
better fulfilled this prophecy, than when he estab¬ 
lished this new covenant forever between God and 
man. The divine law was transformed to the heart 
and human conscience, making faith an inward light 
and power, and exalting the wrhole of life. This 
is the new gospel, the religion of the Spirit. 

This is the character in which apostolic 



.75 


Christianity is shown in the entire hew Testament. 
The Christian life is not represented as obedience 
and submission to an authority, but as the product 
of an inspiration. 

Thus the Hew Testament speaks everywhere of 
the gift of the Spirit, which has become the heri¬ 
tage of all Christians. The Spirit has become not 
only a gift which each may accept, but the Book of 
Acts shows clearly that it is not possible for men 
to become true and complete Christians, unless they 
reasily experience the gift of the Spirit. Matt. 3; 
11, distinguishes between John the Baptist f s bap¬ 
tism, and that of the Messiah of the new era: 
said John the Baptist, "ba,ptize you in water but 
the one that cometh a,fter me is mightier than I, he 
shall baptize you with spirit and the fire. M "The 
spirit symbolized by fire, is the power which is 
to renew the hearts of men." says Sabatier. 

In the beginning all Christians felt them¬ 
selves to be inspired; in fact it was a sign that 
they were the children of God. Today we have fall¬ 
en far from this high ideal. We need to get back 
to the religion of the Spirit. 

In Paul f s gospel the idea of the Spirit is 




















































. 



- 

















the soul of his doctrine. Faith and the gift of 
the Spirit are inseparably connected. It may be 
said that in the initial stages of conversion, the 
part played by man is an act of faith, that of God 
the gift of the Spirit. "To believe in Christ." 

"To be in Christ.” "the life of Christ in us," and 
"to receive the Spirit." would seem to be synony¬ 
mous terms. If this is true, a Christian then is 
a man Who. having believed the gospel, has by that 
act, received into himself the Spirit of Christ, as 
a life principle, the permanent inspiration of his 
thoughts and acts. Paul calls Christians properly 
speaking "the inspired." They are moved and guided 
by the spirit of God. The action of the spirit is 
felt by the whole being; both the intellect and the 
will are influenced. The spirit reveals to the re¬ 
generated believer things that the carnal man could 
never have understood. By some way wre feel that by 
Jesus bringing to us the religion of the spirit, the 
old idea., of fear and servitude has been done away, 
and has given place to liberty, love and joy. Side 
by side with the traditions of the Church, though 
less elaborate, we find a tradition of the religion 
of the spirit, flowing beneath the other. There 
is a never-ceasing struggle between these two trad- 








77 


itions, which becomes more evident with the passing 
years. 

As early as the second century it became 
quite evident that the Christian body was losing its 
inspiration, while their numbers were increasing. 
Quite naturally, as the spiritual bonds became weak¬ 
er, it was necessary to strengthen their united body 
by exterior b:nds; so little by little the external 
authority of the Church took the place of the in¬ 
ward authority of the Spirit, and more and more rare 
became the individuals who still remained true to 
the high ideals of the early Christian period,and 
finally became branded as heretics by the Church. 

However, while the Catholic Church was or¬ 
ganizing its complicated system of authority, the 
religion of the Spirit took refuge in the inner 
life of a few pious souls. Eor example, we find it 
burning in the inspired letter of the Christians of 
Lyons and Vienna to the Churches of Asia., which we 
real in Eusebius. We find it again in a loftier 
and a somewhat rationalistic form in the teachings 
of Origin and Clement of Alexandria. We find that 
all down through the ages the stream of divine in¬ 
spiration never ran dry, and never ceased to re¬ 
fresh the souls of those that were athirst for God. 


















.78 


It grew larger, stronger and more free in the six¬ 
teenth century, until Luther and Galvin released it 
from its restricted limits. In principle, at least, 
authority was vanquished by oo nscience and piety and 
came forth from its long imprisonment. By sharing 
the life of the age it became influenced by, and in¬ 
fluenced, modern culture, and entered into the do¬ 
main of human affairs. Of course the religion of the 
Spirit was then a new religious idea,1, and in fact, 
it is pretty much an ideal in our own day, but it 
has been becoming ever more and more a reality. From 
the Reformation of Luther do?ra to the present alli¬ 
ance of Christian life with scientific theology, we 
note a great progress in the establishment of the 
reality of the religion of the Spirit. 

Since 'we have expanded our idea of nature un¬ 
til it has become large enough to include all phen¬ 
omena, and out piety profound enough and spiritual 
enough to feel that the divine influence is in all 
things, it is possible for us to recognize divine in¬ 
spiration more easily through the voice of reason 
and conscience, than it w r as while religion dVvr§lt 
chiefly in the disorder of the senses of the imag¬ 
ination. In the normal and' active play of all the 
faculties, it is clear that there can be no antag- 
























’ 


















. 


















’ 












79 


onisms between the religion of the Spirit, and mod¬ 
ern science and ethics; and that their investigations 
and .findings are manifestations of the religion of 
the Spirit. The gospel proposes not to rescue only 
a part of man, but the whole man with all his fac¬ 
ulties . 

The transformation of the Christian con¬ 
sciousness and its liberation from all exterior 
servitude was assured on the day when piety and 
science first came together. The religion of the 
Spirit v r ill reign when they become one. Since this 
is the case, the urgent need of the day is the con¬ 
stitution of a truly scientific theology. 

The form of the religion of the Spirit is 
liberty, its content is the gospel. Liberty is a 
quality, a form of the activity of the Spirit; but 
the spirit is free only to determine it? elf,* so it 
follows that liberty remaining undertermined, be¬ 
comes contrary to liberty. This is why liberty 
has a la?/. In morals it is duty. However, duty 
does not destroy liberty, it gives life. 

The religious consciousness is much the same 
as moral consciousness. To be free is not to be 
without law, it is to obey the lav. of one’s being. 

The individual man from birth is in a state of de- 


















































































80 


velopment, and ho comes to realize his moral being 
by the power of the Holy Spirit which is inherent in 
his soul. This pov/er from on high which calls him 
in the moral substance of his being, he must obey 
under penalty of destroying himself. If he resists 
this law ho harms himself. God is in man, but in 
such a way that man harms himself before he can harm 
God. The lav/ of his being is the law of Him who 
called him into being. The divine law and human law 
are essentially identical. It is this immanent law, 
(when man becomes clearly conscious of it), which 
makes him dependent as a created being, and inde¬ 
pendent so far as he is a spiritual being. This is 
why there is such a, thing as religion. 

Religion is the vital and happy reconcilia¬ 
tion of dependence and freedom. Therefore it fol¬ 
lows that it is impossible for a moral individual, 
who obeys the laws of his inner being, not to be in 
some measure religious. It is not necessary to be¬ 
lieve in God in the traditional sense of the word. 

If a man obeys and wills his own inner lav/, he per¬ 
forms an act of religious faith. Indeed the relig¬ 
ious consciousness becomes oppressed if it is sub¬ 
ject to.an exterior authority which cfiashes with its 
own personal convictions. 












. 




..... 

. 










The inward inspiration is the divine ele¬ 
ment in man, it is the spirit witnessing with his 
spirit, it is the source of all true conviction. 

The new covenant which Jesus brought to men was 
written in the heart and sealed by the Holy Spirit. 
The religion of the Spirit is the adequate and nat¬ 
ural form of the gospel, and the gospel is the con¬ 
tent, the very substance, of the religion of the 
spirit. The person of Jesus is the living expression 
of the gospel. That which malces us Christians is 
not the letter of the gospel, it is 
the spirit of Christ, which is the emanation of his 
consciousness. The fulhand moral development of the 
Christian consciousness can tahe place only under ±he 
influence of Christ, who becomes our mediator, in 
Just so far as we abide in him, that his filial con¬ 
sciousness may become our own; that his spirit may 
become our spirit; and that God may dwell in us as 
He dwelt in him. This is the sea,! and confirmation 
of the religion of the Spirit. 

Beside the tendencies of Paganism and Juda¬ 
ism, we have two other tendencies which are opposed 
to the religion of the Spirit, namely; tradition¬ 
alism, which is a tendency of the Roman Catholic 
Church; a,nd independence, or the 'false individual- 




























































































.82 


ism, by which the Protestant churches are crumb¬ 
ling to pieces and becoming socially sterile. The 
Protestant Christian who isolates himself, believ¬ 
ing that he can draw all his religious truth from 
the Bible, or his individual inspiration, lives and 
thinks in unreality. An individual experience is 
only a part of the whole experience of humanity, 
and it is. necessary to be related to the whole body of 
experience to keep our own tempered. Only in social 
solidarity can the Christian life blossom out, and 
find at once health and security. An unusual Christ¬ 
ianity is a stunted Christianity. 

The religion of the Spirit must reconcile 
all that is true, no matter from what source it may 
come; whether from history or psychology, whether 
from Catholic principles or Protestant principles. 
Theology must proceed on a, scientific basis. 

Learned men who'do not recognize the relig¬ 
ious character of science, and Christian men who 
oppose science, undermine their own faith. } ’Sci- 
ence in piety is scientific theology. 1 * Theology 
to be received by the other sciences, must become I 
like them in method and form, though she is dis¬ 
tinct from others as to subject. 

$hen historic forms of the pa.st come under 




83 


the principles of criticism, scientific theology 
forces religion to discard its borrowed foreign 
element and become purely religious and moral. 

When it reaches this stage it is the Religion of 
The Spirit. The two essentials, and the parallel 
functions of the religion of the Spirit, are to seek 
truth by the exercise of an unbiased intellect, and 
pursue after holiness by the energy of a purified 
heart. 

Man is naturally religious. Ever since his 
creation, in so far as we have any knowledge of him, 
he has stood in awe of some powerful, mysterious, 
unknown Being, whom he calls God and whose nature 
he has, in some way, attempted to interpret. Man 
has endeavoured to worship a.nd commune with this, 
God. He has sought to appea.se the gnawing pangs of 
his hungering soul by trusting in an exterior 
authority, but to no avail; and finally to satisfy 
his yearning soul . has turned to God Himself, and 
find?that God*s spirit, revealed to him through 
Jesus, communicates itself to his spirit. It seems 
evident, after pondering; over this important and 
profound theme: The Basis of Authority in Religion, 
that the reel authority in religion is not external, 
but personal, found in the depths of the human con¬ 


science 



Reference Books; 


1. Sabatier, Auguste. 

Religions of Authority (and the 

Religion of the Spirit). 
Hodder and Stoughton, New York, 
February 1904, Fourth impression. 
XXII + 410 pp. 


2. Eucken, Rudolf, 

Christianity and the Few Idealism. 
Harper & Brothers, London 8c Hew York. 
January 1912, Second edition. 

XIV + 161 pp. 


3. Foster, George Burman, 

The Finality of the Christian Religion. 
The University of Chicago Press. 
September 1909, Third impression. 

XXI + 518 pp. 


4. Bland, Salem Goldworth. 

The Few Christianity, or The 

Religion of the Few Age. 
McClelland 8c Stewart, Toronto. 
March 1920. 

168 pp. 


5. Lindsay, Thomas M. 

History of the Reformation. 

T. & T. Clark, Edinburgh. 

Fovember 1907, Vol. I,Second edition. 

XVI + 528 pp. 

February 1908, Vol. II,Second edition. 

XVII + 631 pp. 


6. The Bible. 




















