













For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 










A Critical Review 
of 

Schweitzer’s 

M 2he Q,uest of the Historical Jesas*% 
being a thesis presented in the course for the degree of 
B.D. in the University of llberta 

Sam* R* Laycock 9 M*A* 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 

, • -r * 

* * T * 


https://archive.org/details/laycock1920 


Bibliography 


hes 1 5 
/</22 
42 . 


Schweitzer, A - 


The s,uest of the His tori oal Jesus 
Translated by W* Montgomery 
Second English Edition 
London - A* C« Black - 1911 
X + 410 p. 


Scott, Mm F® - 


The Kingdom and The Messiah 
Edinburgh - T & T Clark 
Second impression - 1917 
Pirst Published - 1911 

nii-t 26 i p. 

Sanday, W - 


The Life of Christ in lie cent ?io search 
Oxford - Clarendon Press - 1907 
¥1 328 p« 

Sanday, W - Edited by 

Oxford Studies in the synoptic Problem 
Oxford - Clarendon Press - 1911 
EXVXl + 456 p. 

Van Dobschutz, !£.- 

The Eschatology of the Gospels 
London - Eodder and Stoughton - 1910 
VI + 207 p. 

pfrench, G® E* 

The Hibbert Journal 

A Eeview of n the Cuost of i±ue Historical Jesus” 
London - ..ill isms and Korgate - October 1910* 

Sanday, W* 


The Hibbert Journal 

The Apocalyptic Element in The Gospels 
London - willissns and Korgste - October 1911 









- :t . . ; : 





1 , 


A Critical Review of Schweitzer’s 
"The Quest of the Historical Jesus"- 
Being a thesis, submitted in the course for B* D* in the 
University of Alberta by Sam R* Xaycock, M*A* 

"When", says Schweitzer in his opening paragraph, "at 
some future day, our period of civilization shall lie, closed 
and completed, before the eyes of later generations, German 
theology will stand out as a great, a unique phenomenon in the 
mental and spiritual life of our time* For nowhere save in the 
German temperament can there be found in the same perfection 
the living complex of conditions and factors of philosophic 
thought, critical acumen, historical insight, and religious 
feeling — without which no deep theology is possible*" 

Before the war w© had been content to accept this* 

We were willing to follow the lead of Germany not only in 
theology but in education of most every sort* Professor Sanday 
in his lecture, "Twenty Years of Research," opens with the 
statement that, "those of us who make use of German tools and 
who try to acknowledge adequately the debt they incur, in doing 
so run the risk of becoming tedious to their own countrymen* 

The world is apt to grow tired of hearing Aristides called the 
Just* And yet, if one is constantly consulting Aristides, that 
is the least that is due*" And Dr* Sanday goes further to say 
that "while I more often agree with my own countrymen, 1 learn 
more fran the Germans"* 

And then came the war which revealed itself as the 
logical outcome and product of the German mind and of the spirit 
of the German nation* And with it came the famous defence of 
the action of their government signed by ninety-nine of the 
leading educationalists of Germany, including most of her dis¬ 
tinguished theologians, and we begin to wonder if it were not a 
question of the blind leading— 

To what extent, then, can the bold assertion with which 
Schweitzer begins his great work be agreed in* One must admit 
at once the thorough-going attitude of German criticism* English 
and American scholars make desultory raids into the unknown country, 
but there is in Germanic science a persistent spirit of forward 





















2 , 


movement. When a German scholar sets himself a particular 
thesis, his first step is to get to know nearly as he can 
all that has been written about it. In this way the step is 
based on previous steps and the continuity of research is never 
broken. And the German scholar is fearless in his pursuit of 
truth. Having put his hand to the plough he neither looks back 
nor to one side, and if underbrush and perchance beautiful 
flowers are in his pathway, yet his furrow must be straight. 

And so we find in Schweitzer’s book that the greatest 
attempts to write a life of Jesus have been actuated by hate; 
and there is given in paragraph after paragraph the undiluted 
expression of men who agree only in their unflinching desire 
to attain historical truth. As Dr. Burkift remarks M We are not 
accustomed to be so ruthless in England. We sometimes tend to 
forget that the gospel has moved the world and we think our 
faith and devotion to it so tender and delicate a thing that 
it will break, if it be not handled with the utmost circumspec¬ 
tion." So we become dominated by phrases and afraid of them. 

But the German is not afraid of phrases, if they have been beaten 
out by real contact with facts. We must admit, then, in German 
theologians a more "thorough-goingness" than we often attain. 

On the other hand the German mind is lacking in two 
qualities — those of spiritual insight and the ability to 
grasp truth as a t&lo!©. The German sees not truth but an aspect 
of truth* The wood is lost in the trees. His mind seems incap¬ 
able of seeing all around a subject, of grasping it as a whole 
in all its relations. In that larger sense it is not philosophic. 
Then, too, spiritual truth can only be properly conceived by a 
mind in which the finer edge of spiritual quality is contained. 

The war, after all has been said, was a struggle of conflicting 
ideals. It was because that, inherently in the German tempera¬ 
ment and training, there is lacking that finer perception of 
spiritual truth, that the greatest of all catastrophes came upon 
our world in 1914. 

But to return to our book - "Yon Beimgft^us Zn Wed©" - 
it was written while the author, then a privatf-docent at Strass- 
burg was still a young man with all the enthusiam if the weakness 
of youth. He takes the line that only by the pursuit of relent¬ 
less logic is it possible to arrive at the truth. And certainly 
his own logic is relentless. A single impetus carries It on 
from cover to cover. He is no respecter of persons and hetakes 







fc 









3, 


no pains to suppress his dislikes* As a rule he favours the 
innovators. He writes with clearness and vigour and with a 
sturdy individuality by which he chooses his own line and 
holds to it through thick and thin. Dr. Sanday acknowledges 
the merit of Schweitzer*s work by saying, "There is no recent 
book I have found so helpful"• 

Schweitzer’s, "The Quest of the Historical Jesus", 
may be expressed as the struggle of three problems - -either 
purely historical or purely supernatural; the second, either 
Johannine or Synoptic; the third, either eschatological or 
non-eschatological. 

The first division begins with Beimafcrus. Before 
him, no one had attempted to form an historical conception of 
the life of Jesus. Early Christianity had been indifferent 
towards the life of the historical Jesus* Paul did not desire 
to know Christ after the flesh; he looked rather to the speedy 
return of Christ to the world* This was the guiding principle 
of early Christianity for some centuries* It felt vaguely 
that with the introductionof the historical Jesus, there would 
arise seme thing new, in the thoughts of the Master himself, and 
that thereby contradiction would be brought to light. But the 
world continued to exist and the historical Jesus and the 
mundane Christ had to be brought together. This was accomplished 
by the influence of Gnosticism and Logos Qhristology. Both agreed 
in sublimating the historical Jesus to the ^$fi$*mundone idea. At 
Challedon the Church doctrine of the two natures dissolved the 
unity of the person and thereby cat off the possibility of a return 
to the historical Jesus. This dogma had to be shattered before 
men could again go in quest of Kim® This investigation did not 
tike its rise from purely historical interest. It arose in the 
struggle against the tyranny of dogma. And hate, rather than 
love inspired many of the great lives of Jesus. It was easy for 
them, resolved as they were to open the way even with seeming 
blasphemy, but those who sought to revive the historical Jesus at 
the call of love found it difficult to be honest. Schweitzer’s 
book is an effort to trace the attempts to deal with the subject 
and to show clearly what they really did to advance the formulation 
of the problem. 

The work of HemS^rus, which appears towards the close of 




















the 18th century, stands out by Itself* He had no predecessors, 
neither did he have any disciples* He recognized in the 
preaching of Jesus the single oontent of " Repent ye, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand". The Kingdom of Heaven must, 
however be understood in the Jewish way of thought* Jesus, 
says ReimaHrus, took His stand within the Jewish religion and 
acoepted its Messionic expectations without in any way correcting 
them* If He gives it a new development it is only In proclaim¬ 
ing that it is near at hand* And the form the coming of the 
Kingdom was to take was purely political* Jesus did not come 
to do away with the Jewish religion* He stood upon the law 
unreservedly l MattV -18)* Only in a demand for a new and 
deeper morality did he go beyond his contemporaries. Matt X:5 
shows his racial exclusiveness* Baptism meant nothing more than 
that Jesus was the Messiah while the Lords Supper was but an 
episode in the last paschal meal of the Kingdom* Most of the 
miracles have grown by tradition, or been ascribed in accordance 
with the miracle- stories of the old Testament, else why did He 
perform no miracle at the feast when one single one would have 
caused the multitude to flock to His standard* 

For this popular uprising, ReimaV&s maintains that 
Jesus waited in vain# Twice He expected it — when He was 
sending out His disciples —"Ye shall not have gene over the 
cities of Israel before the Son of Man comes (Matt X*23). 

He expected that people would flock to Him* The second time 
was at Jerusalem* He made a Messianic entry, confident that 
He would carry the people with Him, but the people refused to 
rise and Jesus is condemned, dying with the words of despair 
on His lips# 

The disciples at first despaired but reluctance to 
go back to their old tasks and work with their hands for a 
living caused them to determine to continue their mode of life* 
They stole the body of Jesus, hid it, and proclaimed that He 
would soon return# Reimateus, goes on to show that the whole 
thing, even with Paul, was a deliberate fraud* 

Schweitzer in his critical remarks on the work of 
Reimalirtts gives him a high place as he was the first to 
recognize that the world of thought in which Jesus lived was 
essentially eschatological# True his work is polemical, but that 
was a natural reaction from the extreme literalism of his con¬ 
temporaries# But he saw eschatology in the wrong perspective 
for he held the Messianic ideal to be political, and from that 















5 


fundamental error, all the rest followed* Contemporary 
theology was, however, unable to overtake the long stride made by 
Reima*rus. His work was neglected and the stimulus it was capable 
of Imparting failed to take effect* 

We now come to the lives of Jesus written by the school 
of Earlier Rationalists. The term €arlier/?ationalists is 
used because the day of a rationalism which accepted only so 
much of religion as could be proved by reason had not yet 
dawned* By the earlier school supernatural!sm and rationalism 
were still int ©mingled* The only part of their teachings 

which is rationalistic is the treatment of the teachings of 
Jesus. They make a principle to lose no opportunity to reduce 
the number of miracles* Where they can explain a miracle by 
natural causes they do not hesitate a morient* Its method* is 
quite unhlstorical. Its problem is solved by bringing Jesus 
near its own time. Jesus is made to speak in a rational and 
modern fashion and accordingly all His utterances are reproduced 
in the most modern of styles. His speeches are taken to pieces 
and recast with a view to make them really lively and modem. 

The real contribution of these writers lay in this, that in 
their attempt to bring Jesus near their own time, they become 
the pioneers of the historical study of his life* 

^ The exponents of the ear Irrationalism were Hess, 

ReiShard, Opitz, Jacobi, and Herder. We will discuss briefly 
the views of Hess and Herder, as outstanding exponents of their 
theory* 

Hess* life of Jesus is a paraphrase and harmonizing of the 
four gospels, more or less arbitrarily welded together. He admits 
miracles are a stumbling block but if Jesus had not been Son of 
God, they would not have been necessary. He feels that the retention 
of the supernatural birth and resurrection are absolutely essential 
but at every other opportunity the narrative is rationalized* The 
meaning of most parables is completely travestied by the ethical 
and historical allusions he finds in them. All the beauty of the 
speech of Jesus has been changed into modernity of the grossest 
sort* 


For Herder miracles stand outside the possibility of proof 
but are to be accepted in a limited sense as a ground for historical 
evidence. Jesus in order to help his miracle-loving age, reconciled 











6 * 


himself to the necessity of perfomlng mirfioles# Thus Herder still 
belongs to the primitive rationalists# He did not feel that the 
adoption of the historical viewpoint involves the necessity of 
doing away with miracles# He did much toward the clearing up 
of ideas, but, by evading the question of miracles, he evaded a 
problem which had to be solved before an historical conception of 
the life of Jesus was possible# 

Schweitzer now turns to the fictitious lives of Jesus 
represented by the work of Bahrdt and Venturinl# "It is strange", 
he says, "that it was these fictitious lives which first attempted 
to apply with logical consistency a non-supernatural interpreta¬ 
tion of the miracle stories of the gospel# Further these writers 
were the first to attempt t© grasp the inner connexion of cause 
end effect in the events and experiences of the Life of Jesus* 
Since they did not find it in the gospels they supplied it 
themselves - that Jesus was the tool of a secret society# 

According to Bahrdt Jesus was the tool of the Bssenes, 
whose work as an order was to detach Judaism from political 
aspirations and lead it to a knowledge of spiritual truths* 

In order to do this they must find a Messiah to destroy false 
Messianic expectation# 

As a child they watch over Jesus and instil into His 
mind their doctrines# A mysterious stranger gives Him two 
remedies — for diseases of the eye and nervous disorders# 

John and Jesus discuss how they shall open the eyes of the 
people to the tyranny of the priests# In order to accommodate 
Himself to the superstitions of the people Jesus is obliged 
to appear in the role of Messiah and to work by means of 
miracles* The Sssene order stage-manages the miracles in a 
cleverly staged drama# In all cases the process was really 
natural* The explanation given to the feeding of the five 
thousand is that the order had collected a quantity of bread in 
a cave and this was gradually handed out to Jesus who stood at 
a concealed entrance and took some each time the disciples were 
busy with the multitude# The miracles of healing are to be 
attributed to the art of Luke# 

The order decides that the Messiah must die and rise 
again in order that the false conceptions of the Messiah may be 







. . 


I ■ 




7 * 


spiritualized* Luke guarantees that by the aid of powerful drugs 
the Lord would be able to endure the utmost pain and suffering 
and yet resist death for a long time* Hicodemus guarantees that 
he will arrange in the Sanhedrin for the execution to follow 
the sentence and for the crucified to remain but a short time 
on the cross* In the end the drama works out well* Jesus 
makes a Messianic entry and provokes the authorities* The Essenes 
in the Sanhedrin urge his condemnation* Jesus by a loud cry and 
the bowing of the head shows every sign of death* Then Joseph 
comes and rmoves the body to the cave of the Essenes and begins 
resuscitation* By the third day he was able to walk. As the 
women came to the tomb, Jesus came down the slope, while an Essene 
in the garb of an angel proclaimed the resurrection to the women* 
Prom his place of concealment Jesus appeared several times to 
His disciples, the lest time on the Mount of Olives. As He 
ascended He was enveloped by the mist and cloud of the higher 
slopes* Prom the cave of the brotherhood He still continued 
to direct the destinies of the community to His death* 

Venturini 1 s scheme is better worked out than Bahrdt's* 

All the miracles are ascribed either to medicaments or are 
assigned to obvious misunderstandings* While the Essenes 
play a large part, it was not a piece of play acting as with 
Bahrdt* Jesus really expected to die and was put in the tomb 
where the Essenes watched over it* Then the earthquake came 
and the brethren heard a sound in the grave* The whole order 
hastened to the spot and Jesus was removed to their lodge* He 
came out at intervals and appeared to His disciples* 

These lives of Jesus are important for Schweitzer, not 
only because they are, as was pointed out above, an attempt to 
find for the series of occurrences portrayed by the gospels a 
connexion of events % but also because in making Jesus the passive 
tool of a secret society, they are the forerunners of that later 
eschatological school who thought of the passivety of Jesus as 
determined by the eschatological plan of God* 

We now pass to the exponent of fully developed rational¬ 
ism - Pa ulus* With him, events produced by the laws of nature 
are really produced by God, hence the miracles consist merely of 
the fact that eyewitnesses report events of which they did not 
know the secondary causes* for one who has discovered the second¬ 
ary causes the fact remains but not the miracle* In the cases of 
















8 


healing Jesus worked through His spiritual power on the nervous 
system of the sufferer or used secret medicines. The nature 
miracles are all explained naturally. The walking on the water 
was an illusion of the disciples. Jesus was walking along the 
shore and was taken for a ghost by the excited occupants of the 
boat. Ihen Jesus called to them Peter threw himself into the 
water and was drawn ashore just as he was sinking. When they 
had received Jesus into the boat, they forthwith doubled a 
headland and got clear of the stoim centre; they therefore 
supposed that Jesus had stilled the storm* 

The cases of raising frcsn the dead, Paulus treats as cases 
of coma. The death of Jesus was somewhat the same. Jesus 
"died” surprisingly quickly. The loud cry which He uttered just 
before shows that His strength was not exhausted. It was a case 
of a deathlike trance. The earthquake rolled the stone from 
the grave. Jesus arose, dornied a gardener’s dress and appeared 
to the disciples. He met them on the Mount of Olives and with 
His hands raised in benediction moved from them until a cloud 
interposes between them and Him. His departure came to be des¬ 
cribed as an ascension. 

At times Paulus writes with real feeling, but more 
often it is with an utter lack of a sense of the aesthetic, which 
spoils everything. In describing the 'wse at Bethany, for 
example, he speaks of Jesus as ” a Messiah with n© stiff formal¬ 
ity about him." 

Paulus recognizes the importance of eschatology, but 
makes the mistake in Schweitzer’s opinion, of saying that Jesus 
went back to the political ideal of a Davidic king. On the 
other hand he rightly interprets the death of Jesus, as the 
deed by which he thought to win the Messiahship proper to the 
Son of Man. 

In Hqge and Schliermacher we arrive at the last phrase 
of rationalism. Ihile they still cling to the rationalistic 
interpretation of miracles they are not always sure of this and 
often leave it with a question mark, thus earning for themselves 
the designation of "Sceptics of Rationalism". 

, 

In his work. Hose uses the rationalistic interpretation 
| of miracles whenever possible* In regard to the stilling of the 











9 


storm, it is unoertain Aether Jesus through His knowledge 
of nature was able to predict the end of the storm or whether 
He brought it about by possession of power over nature. Thus 
he leaves open the possibility of miracle. 

Hose, really, accepts the Johannine miracles as authentic 
and says thosfcof the synoptists rest on misunderstandings as the 
authors were not reporting first hand tradition. But what straits 
he would be in if the authenticity of John had to be given upi 

In Haae we meet for the first time the idea of two 
different periods in the life of Jesus, which was the prevailing 
view down to Johannes Weiss. The non-es chat ©logical fourth gospel 
preserves in their pure form the ideas of the second period. 

Schliermacher is not an historian bat a skilful dialectician. 
He is not in search of the historical Jesus but the Jesus of his 
own system of theology. He gets over the miracle difficulty in 
two ways; first by admitting that in certain cases the rationalistic 
method may have a limited application, and secondly by recognizing 
a difference in the miracles themselves, retaining the Johannine 
and rejecting the synoptic* Only in John is the consciousness 
of Jesus truly reflected. He claims that John is the gospel 
closest to Jesus because it was the report of an eye witness. He 
ignores the graphic realism of Mark, *his was not on any real 
ground but because the synoptic picture of Ghrlst does not fit 
that which he wishes to insert into history# He abolishes the 
Gethsexiane scene, merely beeaus^infers from the silence of John 
that it cannot have taken place. On such premises, says 
Schweitzer, it may be possible to write a life of Qhrist, but it 
is not possible to write a life of Jesus. 

With D&vid Frederick Strauss we come to a name which 
is a landmark in the treatment of our subject. His book of 
fourteen hundred pages is one of the most perfect of literary 
productions. 

Before Strauss the conception of myth was not truly 
grasped nor properly applied. Its application was confined 
to Jesus’ caning into the world and His departure from it, 
while the sections lying between His baptism and resurrection 
were left outside the field of application* To quote Strauss, 

"Myth formed the lofty gateways of the entrance to and exit 
















10 . 




from the gospel history; between these two lofty gateways lay 
the narrow and crooked streets of the naturalistic interpretatian• ,, 

The obstacles, Strauss contended to the application of 
the word myth were first the supposition that Matt, and John were 
reports of eyewitnesses, and secondly the offence caused by the 
word myth due to its association with heathen mythology. But 
that any of our evangelists were eyewitnesses .cannot be maintained* 
Even if only a generation elapsed betweeif death and the 
composition of the gospels such a period is sufficient to allow 
the historical material to become intermixed with myth. 

Then too, Strauss maintains, the dislike occasioned 
by the word myth disappears if one really understands the essential 
character of religious myth, It consists in the clothing in 
historic form of religious ideas, shaped by the unconsciously 
inventive power of legend and embodied in an historic personality, 
"God-manhood, the highest idea conveyed by human thought, is 
actually realized in the historic personality of Jesus. But while 
conventional thinking supposes that this phenomenal realization 
must be perfect, true thought which has attained by genuine 
critical reasoning to a higher freedom, knows that no idea 
can realize itself perfectly on the historic plane and that its 
truth does not depend on the proof of its having received perfect 
external representation, but that its perfection comes about 
through that which the idea carries into history. For this reason 
it is indifferent to what extent God - manhood has been realized 
in the person of Jesusi the important thing is that the idea 
is now alive in the common consciousness of those who have been 
prepared to receive it by its manifestation in sensible form 
and of whose thought and imagination that historical personality 
took such complete possession, that for them the unity of Godhood 
and Manhood assumed in Him, enters into the common consciousness." 
This idea of God-manhood, the realization of which in every person¬ 
ality is the ultimate goal of humanity, is the eternal reality 
in the person of Jesus, which no criticism can destroy. Jesus 
therefore, the' Creator of the religion of humanity, is beyond 
criticism. 


From the opposition of the supernatural and rational¬ 
istic conceptions Strauss brings forward a new — the mythological 
conception. 


The story of the temptation is for Strauss, quite 














11 


unsatisfactory# whether it be taken as supernatural or as an 
inward struggle of supernatural events* It is for Strauss 
merely primitive legends woven together out of old Testament 
suggestions. 

And thus Strauss goes on with incident after incident* 

The nature miracles which he heads, ” Sea Stories and Fish Stories’* 
have a larger admixture of the mythical. That the ascension is 
a myth Is self evident. 

Schweitzer feels that Strauss in his criticism pushes 
the boundaries of the mythical explanation for beyond their 
proper limits. For one thing he overestimates the importance 
of Old Testament motives in reference to the creative activity 
of legend. Strauss does not see that the mythical explanation 
may to sane extent explain the form of a narrative but It does 
not explain its origin . There may be mythical material in 
the narrative of the feeding of the multitude, but it is rather 
far-fetched to say that it can all be accounted for by referring 
to the manna in the desert, or the miraculous feeding of the 
multitude by Blisha. There may be myth in it but it has cer¬ 
tainly seme historical basis# 


But what alarmed the contemporaries of Strauss was 
the searching fire which he directed against the gospel narra¬ 
tives. He analyzed every section and then pronounced the 
proportion of myth which entered into each of them. And the de¬ 
cision was Invariably against the gospel of John* John} he 
claims, is dominated by a theory and is simply a more advanced 
stage of the mythopoltlc process than is found In the synoptics. 
In John, however, Strauss goes on to say, we have no longer 
one odious action of legend, but a clearly defined and dogmatic 
purpose# John substitutes for the Jewish Messianic conception 
the Greek conception of Divine Sonship and makes Jesus apply to 
Himself the Greek speculative conception of pre-existence# 


The importance of Strauss In the Johannine struggle 
lies in the fact that he recognized the decisive point, namely, 
that the question must be determined not by a comparison of 
listorical data but by the theological character of the two 
lines of tradition# 

For Strauss the proper order is Matthew, Luke and 























12 * 


John* He is hostile to Mark whom he recognizes as merely a 
satellite of Matthew* His prejudice lies partly in the 
faot that Mark by his terse and graphic style has rendered groat 
service to the rationalistic interpretation of miracle, and 
Strauss feels like dealing peremptorily with rationalism* 

Again, it is not, until one looks at the gospels from the 
stand point of the inner connexion of events that one realizes 
the superiority of Mark and Strauss denies that there is any 
traceable connexion of events at all* 

In his treatment of eschatology Strauss tries to 
avoid the dilemma of either spiritual or political in regard 
to the Messianic plans of Jesus and to make the eschatological 
expectation intelligible as one which did not set its hopes on 
human aid but on divine intervention! and in the recognition of 
this fact lies a real contribution to the eschatological 
problem* Jesus expected to restore the throne of David and 
to rule over a people freed from political bondage, but in this 
he did not set his hopes on the sword of human followers but on the 
legions of angels which His Heavenly Father would give Him* All 
this, Jesus left to the Father, who knew the right moment of the 
cata^ophic change* For Strauss, the eschatological passages were 
the most authentic of all* If there is anything historic about 
Jesus it Is His assertion of the claim that, in the caning kingdom 
He would be manifested as Son of Man* 




The significance of Strauss for his contemporaries lies 
the fact that he made for them the end of miracle as a matter 
of historical belief, and gave the mythological explanation its 
due* Schweitzer hails him as a prophet of a coming advance in 
knowledge, inasmuch as the historical personality which emerges 
from the mist of myth is a Jewish claimant for the Messiahship, 
whose world of thought is purely eschatological* 


The three problems raised by Strauss were; first, the 
relation of miracle and myth? secondly, the connexion of the 
Christ of faith with the Jesus of history, thirdly, the relation 

J f John to the synoptics* It was the first of these which 
ttracted most attention and more than half of his critics 
devoted themselves to it alone* Sven so they failed to get 
a thorough grasp of it. The only thing they clearly see is 
that Strauss altogether denies miracles; the full scope of the 












13 * 


mythological explanation as applied to the traditional records 
of the life of Jesus is still a riddle to them* 

One of the oritics of Strauss, Tholuck takes Strauss to 
task for rejecting miracles by saying, "Even if we admit that 
no act can have proceeded from Christ which transcends the laws 
of nature, there is still room for the mediating view of Christ’s 
miracle working activity." Thus Tholuck posj-ts mysterious powers 
of nature as operating in the history of Christ-powers of which 
we have but a partial knowledge. His method is a sort of spurrous 
rationalism. 

The pure rationalists found it more difficult than did the 
mediating theologians to adjust their attitude to the new solution 
of the miracle question. Strauss had made it difficult for them 
by remorsely exposing the absurd and ridiculous aspects of their 
method, and by refusing to recognize them as allies in the battle 
for truth. Ammon’s life of Jesus is a survival of a peculiar 
kind of rationalism. In most cases he portrays Jesus in a ration¬ 
alistic manner, as using medicines, etc. but in spite of a deeper 
view of miracle •which he sometimes exhibits, his work is essentially 
a revival of that rationalism which Strauss had slain forever. 

We cannot take account here of the numerous works, produced 
by opponents of Strauss, but one can sum up by saying that all 
the efforts put forth by mediating theology, rationalism, and 
supernaturalism could do nothing to shake the conclusion of Strauss 
that it was all over with supernatural!sm as a factor to be reckoned 
with in the historical study of the life of Jesus, and that scienti¬ 
fic theology instead of turning back to rationalism and supernatural- 
ism must move straight onward between the two and seek a new path, 
ill other views exhausted themselves in the struggle against him, 
and subsequently abandoned position after position without waiting 
to be attacked* 

The second problem raised by Strauss was the relation of the 
historical Jesus to the ideal Christ* Some of his opponents 
thought to refute him by showing that his view in this matter could 
not be justified from the point of view of the Hegelion philosophy. 
Strauss in his reply admits that Hegel(s philosophy is ambiguous 
in the matter and that he has added to the edifice of Hegel’s 
religious philosophy an annexe of historical criticism of which 
the master would not have approved, yet he maintains that he is the 










14 . 


only logical representative of Hegel’s essential view. 

To the third problem the relation of the synoptists to 
John there was no response. Only Hengenstenberg understood its 
significance m * mi namely that critical theology, having 
admitted first- mythical elements in the Old Testament, and then 
in the beginning and end of gospel history, and having, in con¬ 
sequence of the latter admission felt obliged to give up the 
first three gospels, was now being beaeiged by Strauss in its 
last stronghold. 

But Strauss himself was his own chief opponent. In the 
third edition of his book he inserts additions and retractaions 
in deference to the uncritical works of Tholuck and ITeander. He 
began to hesitate in his denial of the historical character of 
the Fourth G-ospel —* the very foundation of his critical view. 
Almost immediately he saw his mistake and in the fourth edition 
he retracted all his concessions, "The babel, he says,"of oppon¬ 
ents, critics, and supporters, to which I had felt it my duty to 
listen, had confused me in regard to the idea of my work? in my 
diligent comparison of various views I had lost sight of the 
thing itself® In this way I was led to make alterations which, 
when I came to consider the matter calmly, surprised myself, and 
in making which it was obvious I had done myself an injustice." 

Schweitzer remarks that it was unfortunate that the 
impulse in the direction of progress, which might have been 
given by Strauss* treatment of the relation of Jesus to the 
law, of the eschatological conception, of the Son of Man and the 
Messiahship of Jesus, whplly failed to take effect. One must 
remember that for Schweitzer a writer was important largely in 
sofar as he conceived the importance of eschatology in the life 
of Jesus. 


We now come to another great name that of Christian Hermann 
Weisse - the first great exponent of the Maroan hypothesis; that 
is to say of the priority of Mark as an historical source. He 
begins at the point where Strauss leaves off. His aim is to 
discover, if possible, seme thread of general connexion in the 
narratives of the gospel tradition, which if present, would represent 
an historically certain element in the life of Jesus, and thus 
serve as a bjEtter standard by which to determine the extent of 
myth than can be found in the subjective impression on which Strauss 
relies. The idea that Mark’s gospel might be the earliest of the 










* 






* 





L 



.3 


15 * 


four first occurred to Weisse during the progress of his woxk. 

He observed that the graphic details of Mark, which had formerly 
been looked upon as an attempt to embellish an epitomizing narrative, 
were too insignificant to have been inserted for this purpose. 

Hence there was only one other possibility - that their abscence 
in the first and third gospels was due to emission. 

The limits of this essay proscribe a detailed account of 
the points vfoich Weisse put forth in maintaining the priority of 
Mark, but they may be briefly summarized as followss- 

1* In the first and third gospels traces of a common 
plan are found only in those parts which they have in common 
with Mark not in those which are common to them, but not Mark a iso. 

2* In those parts which the three gospels have in common 
the "agreement" of the other two is mediated through Mark. 

3* In those sections vfcich the first and third gospels 
have, but Mark has not, the agreement consists in the language and 
incidents, not in the order. Their common source, therefore, the 
Logia of Matthew did not contain any type of tradition which gave 
an order of narration different from Mark. 

4* The divergence of wording between the other two 
synoptists is in general greater in the parts where both have 
drawn on the Logia document than where Mark is their source* 

5. The first evangelist reproduces the logia document 
more faithfully than Luke does; but his gospel seems to have been 
of later origin. 

With regard to the gospel of John^Weisse is in accord 
with Strauss. What is the use of talking about the plan of John 
he says, when manifestly it has no plan. The Fourth Gospel, has, 
it is true, graphic descriptions but they are the graphic detail 
of a writer who desires to work up a vivid picture, not the natural 
•couches of an eyewitness, and there are inconsistences T/eisse 
]joints out, as in the healing at the pool of Bethesda. The 
circumstantiality is due to the care of the author not to assume 
$ knowledge on the part of his readers of Jewish usages and customs* 
Evidently many of the details are supplied because of the trouble 
* t cost the narrator to orientate himself in regard to the scene of 
action and he wishes to spare his readers a similar difficulty. 























16. 


Weisse agrees with Strauss that the historic Jesus 
could never have proclaimed the doctrine of the Johannine Christ* 

»»It is not so much a picture of Christ that ibhn sets forth; as 
a conception of Christ; his Christ does not speak in his own 
person, hut of his own person.“ 

On the other hand the authority of the whole Christian 
church from the second century on hears too much weight with 
weisse for hint to deny altogether the Johazmlne origin of the 
gospel, so he steers a middle course. He assumes that the 
didactic portions are from John himself who originally for himself 
alone, recalled by a laborious effort some of the discourses of 
his lord. As his recollections were growing dim he endeavoured 
to set down what hr could recall. These tentative "essays' 1 not 
originally intended for publication, came after the death of the 
apostle into the hands of his adherents and disciples, who added 
narrative portions here and there. Buch, according to Weisse 
was the origin of the Fourth gospel. 

This hypothesis is, says Schweitzer, beset with very 
grave difficulties. Here is the beloved disciple who even at 
the time of Paul’s visit to Jerusalem was chosen as an apostle 
of the Jews* How is it possible to explain that a man of such 
antecedents and mental attitude came to clothe his master in 
this foreign garb of Hellenistic speculation and attribute to 
him an alien manner of spe&v Welsse says, however, it is best 
to assent to the improbable than to set oneself obstinately against 
the weight of testimony of the whole Christian church up to the 
present day* 3uch a defence is the best argument against the 
genuineness of the Fourth gospel. It simply rules it out. 

But, for Bohweitzer the fundamental error of Weisse 
lay in this, that by a mistaken idea of the originality of Jesus 
he refused to admit that Jesus had any part in the current Jewish 
expectations and hopes of the future, and thus rejected eschatology. 
It was not, says Bchweitzer, until the time of Johasm&s Weiss 
that theology escaped from this baneful influence of Weisse. 

We now turn, in our study, to the great name of Bruno 
Baner. The task he undertook was to follow out to its ultimate 
consequences, the litery solution of the problem of the life of 
Jesus* How far this path would lead him he did not at first 
suspect. When he began lie thought to save the honour of Jesus 














17 


and by famishing a proof that the historical Jesus could not 
have been the Jesus Christ of the gospels, to bring him flmto 
a living relation with history* Ihis task, however, was given 
up in .favor of the larger one of freeing the world from the 
domin&n of the Judaeo - hanan idol, Jesus the Messiah, and in 
carrying out this endeavour the thesis that Jesus Christ is a 
product of the Imagination of the early church is formulated in 
such a way that the existence of an historical Jesus is problema¬ 
tical or at any rate quite indifferent* Later he comes to the 
conclusion there never was an historical Jesus* 

Bauer treats in his first work of the fourth gospel 
only, but, when he had come to the conclusion that, in the 
Gospel of John, no smallest particle could be found which was 
unaffected by the Creative reflection of the author, inevitably 
the question arose, how will it stand with the synoptics? He 
had expected in the sy**,*ties to come to a solid foundation but 
he found the difference was not one of kind but one of degree* 

£he criticism of the fourth gospel leads us to recognize that 
a gospel may have a purely literary origin* It is impossible 
here to go into the detailed argument but Bauer by a further 
study came to the point where the Marcan hypothesis took the 
following foam — that our knowledge of the gospel history does not 
rest on any basis of tradition, but only upon three literary 
works* Iwo of these are not Independent, being merely expansions 
of the first, and the third of these, Matthew, is also dependent 
on the second* Consequently there is no tradition of gospel 
history but a single literary source* Ihe next question was 
this* iho is to assure us that this gospel history, with its 
assertion of the Messiahshlp of Jesus, was already a matter of 
common knowledge before it was fixed in writing and did not first 
become fixed in a literary form* Clue man would thus have 
created out of general ideas the definite historical tradition 
in which these ideas are embodied* It is a mistake, however, 
to assert that according to Bauer the earliest evangelist 
invented the gospel history and the personality of Jesus* 
iTiis is to carry back the ideas of a further stage of develop¬ 
ment into the original fom of his view* i.t the beginning of 
his work he assumes that a at, a unique personality, who 
so impressed men by his character that it lived among them in 
ideal form, had awakened into life the Messianic idea; and that 
what the original evangelist did was to portray the life of this 
Jesus—the Christ of the community which he founded in accordance 
with the Messianic view of him* It was only in the course of his 
investigations that he became more radical and grew bitter against 










18 


the theologians* 

Bn example of Bauer’s method is shorn in the temptation 
which, he declares, embodies and describes an experience of the 
early church. ihe narrative represents her inner conflicts 
under the form of a conflict of the Redeemer• On her march 
through the wilderness of the world she has to fight with 
temptations of the devil, and in the story of Mark and Luke 
artistically finished by Matthew she records a vow to build 
only on the inner strength of her constitutive principle* 

Ihe question, therefore, whether Jesus was the historic 
whrist ( Messiah) is answered by Bauer that everything that is 
known of Him belongs to the world of imagination, that is the 
imagination of the Christian community, and therefore has nothing 
to do with any man vho belongs to the real world* Bauer says 
the world is now free and ripe for a higher religion In Tshlch the 
religious ego will become ajjslly mature, not by the self - aliena¬ 
tion of Christianity, but by penetrating and ennobling the world* 
But he never succeeded in showing to the world what that higher 
form of victory over the world was, which he declared superior to 
Christianity* 

Bauer’s importance therefore lies, says Schweitzer not so 
much in the problems that he solved but in the discovery of 
problems, for his work is the ablest and most complete collection 
of the difficulties of the life of Jesus anywhere to be found. 

In the study of the subject we new come to another period 
characterized by imaginative li&s of Jesus. She Chief writers 
along this line were Eennel, Gfrorer, H<?ack and Shillany. Sheir 
work is not of very great importance and we will pass it by with 
the remark that Schweitzer feels like emphasizing Ghillany for 
"Ho was the first to place the eschatology recognized by Strauss 
and Heimahrus in an historical setting and to write a life of 
Jesus entirely governed by the idea of eschatology* 

Up to this time thedfatin peoples had scarcely bear touched 
by the two and a half generations of critical study which had been 
devoted to the life of Jesus* How came a writer with the character¬ 
istic -trench mental accent who gave to the^atin world in a single 
book the result of the whole proeess of German criticism. This 
writer was henan, a Frenchman, whose great work was planned at Gaza 
during a tour which he made of the &ast. henan laid the problem 

£ ch had hitherto occupied theologians only, before the whole 
tured world. Bnd not so much as a problem, but as a question of 






T 











a 







19 , 


jfalch he, by means of his historical science and aesthetic 
power of reviving the past, could provide a solution. He 
offered his readers a Jesus who was alive, whom he, with his 
artistic imagination had met under the blue sky of Galilee, 
and whose lineaments his inspired pencil had seized. "Siren's 
attention," says Schweitzer, " was arrested, and they thought 
to see Jesus, because Benan had the skill to make them see 
blue Skies, seas of waving com, distant mountains,^gleaming 
lilies, in a landscape with the Lake of Genesareth for its 
centre, and to hear with him in the whispering reeds the eternal 
melody of the 3exman on the Mount"* 

Henan's story of the rise of Christianity is that of 
a pastoral play. Bauer, with Biting sarcasm writes as follows 
LV Benan, who is at once the author of the play, the stage manager, 
and the director of the theatre, gives the signal to begin and 
the electric lights are turned on full power, the footlights 
ase turned higher, and as the orchestra strikes up, the people 
enter and take their places among the bushes and by the shore 
of the lake." nd Schweitzer continues, M Bnd how confiding 
this gentle and peaceful company of Galilean fisher folk! and 
HO, the young carpenter, conjured the kingdom of Heaven down to 
earth for a year, by the spell of infinite tenderness which 
radiated from Him. By the women He was more beloved than He 
himself liked*, but from His passion for the glory of the father 
He was content to attract these fair creatures ( belles creatures) 
and suffered them to serve Him and God through Him* Ihree or 
four devoted women constantly accompanied Him and strove with 
one another for the pleasure (le plaiser) of listening to His 
teaching and attending to His comfort* Bome of tham were wealthy 
and used their means to enable this amiable (charaEmt) prophet to 
live without needing to practice his handicraft. Ghus He rode 
on His long - eyelashed mule frim town to town. Ghe sweet 
theology of love (la deli clause theologi^T do 1* amour) won wim 
all hearts"* 

Jesus went up to Jerusalem and because there He found 
people on whom His chazm had no effect He returns with revolutionary 
ardour in His heart* Ghe second act begins* -he action becomes 
more serious and gloomy. Up to this point Jesus had hoped to bring 
about the kingdom of God by natural means, by teaching and influenc¬ 
ing men* How Jewish eschatology becomes more prominent* He 
becomes a wander woifeer. His kingdom becomes that of the apocalyp¬ 
tic writings* By the end of the period He has cast off earthly 




20 * 


ambitions and goes forward to His death, outwardly a hero, but 
inwardly in despair because He has turned aside fran His tnue 
path* The gentle lang-eyelashed mule bears Him to Jerusalem. 

The third act begins. The stage becomes darker and 
darker. Jesus had His hour of gloom to fight through in Gethsomane. 

Hi is dead and Benon pronounces an epilogue " Jesus will 
never have a rival* His religion will again and again Itself; 
His story will call forth endless tears; every successive century 
will proclaim that among the £cns of Men there hath not arisen a 
greater than Jesus”* 

Henan's book passed throu^i eight editims in three months* 
Barely has a book so convulsed the thought of a nation* Her was it 
confined to France alone* It crossed the Lhlne and there appeared 
within a year five German translations. 

Schweitzer's criticism of Renan is that his work lacks 
conscience* There is a kind of insincerity in it from beginning 
to end* He professes to write a scientific work and yet he 
always has in mind the great public and how to interest it. But 
the book is vir real interest for French and Germans* The German 
finds in it German thought in a novel and pe quint form* The 
Frenchman discovers behind the familiar form ideas of a world 
\&ich me foreign to him, but which attract* him. Thus does 
Schweitzer's German arrogance, lead him to appropriate as German 
anything of value which,by chance, he discovers in tte work of a 
foreign writer* 

In the literal lives of Jesus, exemplified by Holt maty 
ochenkel and \veizacker we have a new development of the Harcan 
hypothesis* Y.eisse had been sceptical as regards detail; the 
new Marc on hypothesis based conclusions even on incidental remarks 
in the text* According to Welsse there were not distinct periods 
of success and failure in the ministry of Jesus; the Hew Harcan 
hypothesis confidently affirms this distinction and goes so far 
as to place the sojourn of Jesus in the parts beyond Galilee under 
the heading of "Flights and retirements”, l&feisse's hypothesis 
denied that outer circumstances influenced the resolve of Jesus to 
die; according to the later hypothesis, it was the opposition of 
the people, and the impossibility of carrying out his mission on 
other lines which forced him to enter on the path of suffering* 

For V.elsse, Jesus* development was completed at the time of his 
appearing* In the new interpretation of Mark, Jesus continued 






ttt. 









21 . 


to develop in the coarse of his public ministry. There is, 
liov/cvor, complete agreement between Weisse, Holtzman^ Schonkel 
and Weizacker, in the rejection of the Korean hypothesis. 

The net contribution, which these writers of the 
liberal lives of Jesus made to the study of the subject was that 
they cleared up the relation between John and the synoptlsts. 

How was this? Did not Holtzmaxm, Behenkel, weizacker and Ease tains 
up a mediating view on this point? But the very attempt to hold 
the position made clear its inherent impossibility. 

The real significance of this result, lies for Schweitzer 
in the fact that the separation of the synoptics and the fourth 
gospel is only the first step to a larger result which necessarily 
follows frem it - the complete recognition of the fundamentally 
eschatological character and influence of the Hare an and Matthsan 
Jesus. Inasmuch# as they suppressed the consequences, the writers 
of the "liberal lives" still lay under the spell of a modem 
ideal fourth gospel. It is only then the eschatological question 
is decided that the problem of the relation of John to the 
synoptics to finally laid to rest. 

further, if the Marcan plan be accepted, it follows that 
Jesus had never, previous to the incident at Caesarean Philippi, 
given himself out to be the Messiah or been recognized as such. 

The perception of this fact by this school marks a real advance in 
the study of the subject, says Schweitzer, Two questions arise, 
why did Jesus down to that time make a secret of his Messiahship 
even to his disciples and whether at any time, and if so, when 
and how, the people were mad© acquainted with his Messianic claims? 
Both questions were smothered by the ill-starred psychology of the 
"liberal" writers. It was regarded as self evident that Jesus 
had concealed his Messiahship from his disciples for so long in order 
in the meantime to bring them, without their being aware of it, to 
a higher spiritual conception of the Messiah; it was regarded as 
equally self-evident that in the last weeks the Messianic claims 
of Jesus could no longer be hidden from the people, but that he 
did not openly avow them, but merely allowed than to be divined 
in order to lead up the multitude to the recognition of the 
higher spiritual character of the office which he claimed for 
himself. These writers did not seem to recognize that there is 
not a word of all this in Mark; and that they have read it in 
themselves thereby crestia^ a Messiah who both wished to be Messiah 
and did not wish to be it and who as far as the people were 













22 


concerned both was and was not the Messiah, -hey thus side¬ 
tracked the proper study of the Messiahshlp of Jesus, but, 
says uchweit zer, a deeper understanding is brought to pass whan a 
theory is carried to its utmost limit and proves its inadequacy. 

We now turn to the name of another frenchman - that 
of Colani (1824 - 1888). Formerly Jesus had been held to be 
independent of all contemporary Ideas, but the studies of 
Hilgenfeld and Dilmann had made known Jewish apocalyptic in 
its fundamental characteristics, and it became necessary to 
take account of it in interpreting the thought of Jesus, Ihe 
starting point of Colani 1 s study is the question "How far was 
Jesus a Jew? :t According to him the two threads of Jewish thought 
regarding the Messiah - namely whether the kingdom of the 
Messiah belonged to the present world order, and the apocalyptic 
which transferred it to a future age, had not yet been brought 
into any kind of unity. Jesus himself in the early part of 
his ministry, up to Mark ¥111. had never designated himself 
as Messiah. Only little by little did his consciousness take 
on the Messianic coloring. By revealing himself as the lord 
of the spiritual kingdom he puts an end to the oscillation between 
the sensuous and spiritual in the current expectations of the 
future blessedness* He points to mankind as a whole as the people 
of the kingdom and substitutes for the apocalyptic catastrophe 
an organic development. He aims to he the suffering, not the 
triumphant Messiah. It is to the influence which his passion 
©zeroises upon the souls of men that he looks for the firm establish- 
mart of his kingdom. 

2hls spiritual conception cannot be held along with the 
thought of a glorious second coming, for in that case this exist¬ 
ence would be looked upon as a mere prologue to that second 
existence. therefore, Colani argues, the Jewish and Jewish 
Christian eschatology found In the gospelscannot belong to the 
preaching of Jesus and must be out from the text on critical 
grounds. therefore he discards all eschatalogical passages. 

According to Colani, Jesus did not expect to come 
again from heaven to complete his work. It was completed by his 
death, and the purpose of the coming of the spirit was to 
manifest its completion. For Schweitzer, Colani was important, 
in that he, though rejecting ewchatology, realized it could not 
be lightly disposed of, but necessitated a critical analysis of 
the text. 






2Z. 


Weiffenbach (1873) ©stressed the view that Jesus 
gave expression to the thought of his near return; and Jewish - 
Christianity subsequently painted it over with the colours of 
Jewish eschatology# Vhen this Jewish - Christian apocalypse has 
been eliminated, we arrive at the discourse on the Mount of 
Olives, which GOiffenbach takes as a standard by which tfe judge 
all eschatological sayings and discourses# *his “authentic thought" 
which Weiffenbach takes as his standard has for its sole content 
the expectation of a visible return in the near future, "free £i*om 
all more or less fantastic apocalyptic and Jewish - Christian 
expectations about the future# ** ihus all the eschatological dis¬ 
courses of Jesus are to be judged by a colorless and unreal 
figment of theology# whatever cannot be squared with that is 
declared spurious# i*he standard, thus becomes in the hands of 
V/elffonbach a club with which he clubs on© after another of the 
synoptic sayings# 

On© thing, Weiffenbach does recognize — that Jesus 
foresaw the last judgment but not the destruction of Jerusalem# 
Hitherto that Jesu3 had foreseen the destruction of Jerusalem 
had been taken as self - evident and had been regarded as the 
nucleus of Jesus’ discourses about the future, 

She expectation of the Second Coming was painted 
over by the early Christian cocaaunity with the colors of its own 
eschatology, because of the delay o £ the par-ousia® After the 
destruction of Jerusalem the return of Jesus was relegated to 
the distant future by the aid of the doctrine that the gospel 
must first be preached to the heathelw 

Welffenbach, says Schweitzer, in addition vo 
emptying Jesus' expectation of his return of all its content, 
failed to bring Jewish apocalyptic material into relation 
with the synoptic data# 

In the development of eschatology Baldensperger marks 
a real advance# 'Xhe genesis of the Messianic expectation was 
now traced out and it was shown that the world of thought which 
meets us in Daniel had won the victory# But the weakness of his 
work lies in this, instead of tracing down and working out the 
conception of the Kingdom of God held by Jesus as a product of 
Jewish eschatology, at least by way of trying whether that 
method would suffice he takes it over direct from modern theo¬ 
logy# He assumes that Jesus* conception of the kingdom of God 
had a double character; that the eschatological and spiritual 










e 






' 







24 . 


conceptions were equally represented and conditioned each, 
other; and that therefore Jesus began to found a spiritual 
kingdom, whose fulfillment he expected by supernatural means. 
Consequently there must have been a duality in his religious 
consciousness, in \&lch these two conceptions were combined. 

In making these assumptions he does not ask himself whether 
it is not possible that for Jesus the purely Jewish conception 
of a transcends! Messiah may Itself have been religious and even 
spiritual, just as well as a messiahship resting on a vague, 
indefinite, colorless sense of union with Cod which modem 
theologians arbitrarily attribute to him. However Schweitzer 
deals leniently with Baldensperger because of his view that 
Jesus possessed a fully developed eschatology, and for Schweitzer 
the recognition of eschatology covers a multitude of sins. 

In the tracing of the sudy of the lives of Jesus 
Schweitzer points out here, the problem which was stated at the 
beginning of the thesis as expressed in three great alternatives. 
The first was laid down by Strauss - either historical or super- 
natural. The second was worker out by the Tubingen school and 
Holtzmana - either synoptic or Johannine® How comes the third 
by Johannes Weiss - either eschatological or non - eschatological. 

The general conception of the kingdom was first 
ri^tly grasped by Johannes Weiss, whose work closes one period 
and opens another. Whan all modem ideas have been eliminated, 
we arrive at a kingdom of Cod which is wholly future and therefore 
at present purely supra- mundane® Its nearness is recognized 
by the paralysis of the kingdom of baton. Jesus does not 
establish the kingdom. He merely proclaims its coining. He waits 
like others, for Cod to bring about the kingdom by supernatural 
means. But it was not so near as Jesus thought. The hardness 
of heart of a great part of the people, and the implacable 
enmity of His Opponents at length convinced Him that the establish¬ 
ment of the kingdom of Cod could not yet take place, and that the 
mighty obstacle, the guilt of the people must first be put away. 

It becomes clear to Him that His own death must be the ransom 
price. So He dies for the many* cfter His death He would come 
again in all the splendor and glory with which, since the days 
of Daniel, men’s imaginations had surrounded the Messiah. m& 

He was to come within the lifetime of the Generation to which 
He had proclaimed the nearness of the kingdom of Cod. With 
political expectations He had nothing whatever to do as all 
earthly institutions shall not exist in the coming kingdom. 















* 






25 . 


The distinguishing feature of Jewus is the 
consciousness of Els Messiahship* He awoke to this at His 
baptism* But His Messiahship is not present but future* 

On earth therefore. He is only a prophet and “Ban of Man” 
must be purely eschatological* 

Thus, says Sohweitzer, Johannes Weiss in his little 
work of sixty seven pages, puts on an unassailable basis that the 
preaching of Jesus is purely eschatological* 

In the struggle against eschatology we must take 
account of the work of Bousset, Those position may he character¬ 
ized by two thoughts* first, that the trsnscend^lizing of the 
future implied a spiritualizing of it; secondly, that in post- 
exilic Judaism there was always an undercurrent of purer and 
more spontaneous piety, the presence of which is especially to 
be traced in the psalms* “Into a dead world”, says Bousset, ” 

“there came a living msou He is living because in contrast to his 
contemporaries He has a living idea of God* His faith in the 
fatherhood of God was Jesus’most essential act* It signifies 
a breach in the Jewish transcendental idea of God, and an 
unconscious negation of Jewish eschatology* ” That which at 
first view seems to be eschatologyical preaching, turns out 
to be a renewal of the old prophetic teaching with its positive 
ethical emphasis* Jesus, therefore, is a manifestation of that 
ancient spontaneous piety of which Bousset has shown the existence 
in late Judaism* 

The most characteristic thing about Jesus continues 
Bousset is His joy in life - not the joy produced by the eschatolog¬ 
ical view which was a joy of indifference to the world but a real 
genuine joy in life for its own sake* The Pharisees spoke of 
Jesus as ” a gluttonous man and a wine bibber”* They felt 
vaguely that the whole life of Jesus was “sustained by / the feeling 
of an absolute antithesis between Himself and His time. He 
brought the present and the f uture into one* Hlg own time was 
the Messianic tins and He could therefore recognize the worth of 
the present, freed as He was from all extravagant Jewish delusions 
about the future* Thus, in spite Of, nay even because of His 
Opposition to it, Jesus was the fulfiXXer of Judaism* 

But can Bousset make good, asks Schweitzer, the asser¬ 
tion that Jesus 1 joy in life was a more or less unconscious inner 
protest against the purely eschatological world-renouncing religious 














4 ■ ~ ■ : : •' '■ 


. 

; .j 


26 


attitude, the primal expression of that "absolute" antithesis 
to Judaism? Is it not true that His attitude toward earthly 
goods was wholly conditioned by eschatology? The answer 
to these questions must determine whether Boo8set f s view is a ten¬ 
able one or not* Schweitzer claims Bousset 9 s position cannot 
be defended for the opposite view has at its disposal inexhaust¬ 
ible reserves of world - renouncing, wo^d - contemning sayings 
and the few utterances which might be expressed as having a 
positive joy in life desert and go over to the enemy, for they 
textually and logically belong to the other set of sayings* 

The significance of Bousset, lies for Schweitzer, in 
the fact, that he recognizes the supreme Importance of eschat¬ 
ology in the teachings of Jesus cannot be got rid of by Whittling 
away a point here and there; but only by fully admitting it, 
while at the same time counteracting it by asserting a mysterious 
element of world ^-acceptance in the thought of Jesus and con¬ 
ceiving his teaching as a sort of alternating current between 
positive and negative poles* With Bousset end" the last possible 
sincere attempt to limit the exclusive importance of eschatology 
in the preaching of Jesus* 

It is notour purpose to follow Bchweitzer through 
the discussion on dr<paic sources, except briefly, in passing* 

In 1896 Lietzmann maintained in a thesis that Jesus had never 
applied to Himself the title Son of Man because in the Aramaic 
the title did not exist, and on linguistic grounds could never 
have existed* In the language which is used W n ^ 
could have been only a periphrasis for a "Man 4 ®* in 1898, 
however, Dalman declared that he could not admit the linguistic 
objections to the us© at the expression " Son of Man" by Jesus* 
'Biblical Aromaic", he says, "does not differ in this respect 
from Hebrew* She simple ui J If. and natUJ J X 1^* is the term 
for man* It was therefore \ case of returning to the starting 
point and deciding on historical grounds in what sense Jesus 
had used the expression* 

The concrete result of the discussion lies in its 
revealing the trustworthiness of the tradition* The evangelists 
writing in Break can hardly have retained an understanding of the 
purely eschatological character of that self-designation of 
Jesus* It had become for them merely an indirect method of 
self designation* nevertheless the evangelists, especially Mark, 
record the sayings of Jesus in such a way that the original 
significance and application of the designation in his mouth 
















J . 


I 



:s 




27 . 


is still clearly recognizable, and we are able to determine 
with certainty the isolated cases in which this self - designa¬ 
tion in his discourse is of a secondary origin, And now Schweitzer 
turns to a statement of the position of our subject at the close 
of the Nineteenth century, ihe credit of having written a life 
of Jesus, which is strictly scientific and in its own way very 
remarkable, belongs to Oskar Holtzmaim. He has complete confidence 
in the Harkan plan and fits all the sayings of Jesus into this 
framework to show what can belong to each period in the life of 
Jesus and what cannot. His method is to give free play to the 
most important passages in Mark making other sayings of similar 
import cone and group themselves round the main passages. For 
example the saying in Matt. ¥11:6 about not giving that which 
was holy to dogs or casting pearls before swine, does not belong 
to the Reiman on the Mount, but to the time when Jesus, after 
Caesarea Philippi, forbids this disciples to reveal the secret 
of His Messiahship to the multitude; Jesus 9 action la cursing 
the fig tree, so that it should henceforth bring forth no fruit 
to its owner, who was perhaps a poor man, is to be brought into 
relation with the words spoken on the evening before, with 
reference to the lavish expenditure in His anointing, ,f 5?he 
poor ye have always with you, ' the pftint being that Jesus now, 
in the clear consciousness of His approaching death, feels his 
own worth, and dismisses the contingency of the poor having to 
lose something for His sake with the words ’**' it does not matter”. 

It will be seen, that these transpositions and new connexions 
mean a great deal of internal and external violence to the text. 

However, says Schweitzer, the real service 
rendered by Boltzmanns work is of showing how much reading 
between the linen is necessary in order to construct a life of 
Jesus on the basis of the Marcan hypothesis in its modern 
interpretation. It Is thus, for example, that the author must 
have acquired the knowledge that the controversy about the 
ordinances of purification in Mark ¥11 forced the people 
”To choose between the did and New religion” - in which case 
it is no wonder many "turned back frem following Jesus”. But 
where are we told there was any question of an old and a "New” 
religion. 2he disciples apparently, did not think of things in 
this way, if one may judge from their conduct at his death and 
the discourses of Peter in Acts, mere do we read that the 
people turned away from Jesus? In Mask ¥11:17 & 24 all that 
is said is, -that Jesus left the people and in Mark ¥11:33 the 
same multitude is still assembled when Jesus returns frem the 












28 


’•banishment” into which Holtzmann relegates him# 

Mother thing Holtzmann knows is that it required a good 
deal of courage for Peter to hail Jesus as Messiah, since the 
"exile wandering about with his^jmall following in a gentile 
country" answered " so badly thSb the general picture which 
people had fowned of the coming Messiah". He knows, too, that 
Christianity, in the moment of Peter’s confession, became 
complete in the sense that " a community separate from Judaism 
and centering about a new ideal then arose*" fhis " community 11 
frequently appears from this point onwards* ihere is, however, 
nothing about that in the narratives, which know only of the 
twelve and the people* 

ihese examples are cited not in an attempt to give a full 
resume' of Holtzmazm’s work:, but rather to illustrate his method 
of approach to the gospel narratives and to point out his 
significance in the study of the subject* Schweitzer in his 
estimate of Holtzmann*s work:, asks the question, "Is there not a 
certain irony in the fact that the application of "natural" 
psychology to the thoughts of Jesus c&xpels the assumption 
of supra - historical private information such as this? After 
&L1$ does not this supplementary knowledge destroy the historicity 
of the simplest sections of the Markon narrative? 

Oskar Holtzmann*s work was the only large seale lire 
of Jesus that the Marcop. hypothesis had produced, and alms at 
providing a scientific basis for the assumptions riiich that 
hypothesis compels him to make* Its significance lies in the 
fact that it made clearly apparent that this process can only 
be carried through at the decisive passages by violent treat¬ 
ment or even the rejection of the Markon text in the interests 
of the Markon hypothesis* 

In Ton Roden’s "Tacation lectures" we find somewhat 
of the same method as in Oskar Holtzmann* Ton Soden seems 
to possess special information about the peculiar history 
of the "origin" of the Messianic consciousness of Jesus* He 
knows that it was subsidiary to a primary general religious cons¬ 
ciousness of sonship* Zh e rise of this Messianic consciousness 

implies in its turn, the "transformation of the conception^ of 
the kingdom of God, and explains how in the mind of Jesus this 
conception was both present and future"• Ihe greatness of Jesus 
is to be found, he says, in this fact that for Him the kingdom 
of God was only a limiting conception^fche ultimate goal of the 






of the gradual process of approximation, uro the question 
where it was to he realized* in the present or the future* Jesus 
would have answered " that no man kaoweth, no not the Son". 

But what would Yon Soden do with the petition of Jesus M Ihy 
kingdom come". Ihus, modern historical theology will not allow 
Jesus to have formed a theory to explain ^fels thoughts about 
/his passion. "For him" they say, "the certainty of his death 
was amply sufficient". Is there no theory inplied in the 
saying "my blood which is shed for many for the forgiveness of 
sins". How too, one may ask does Yon Soden determine what was 
"amply sufficient" for Jesus. 

It is with scepticism that Yon Joden approaches 
the gospels, themselves* He sees in the Sermon on the Mount 
references to persecutions and warnings which undoubtedly are the 
reflection of a later time, and in many other ineidents he sees 
only reflections of experiences of the later Christian community. 
Without knowing it, he was headed straight into Bauer 1 s position, 
for the passages which Ygn Soden ascribes to a later time stand 
in just as closely knit historical connexion as the other 
parts of the gospel narrative. How can one cut out the stories 
of the feeding of the multitude and the transfiguration as narra¬ 
tives of secondary origin, without destoying the whole of the 
historical fabric of the gospel of Mark? ihis method, says 
Schweitzer, is therefore unjustifiable for in Mark the super¬ 
natural and the natural stand in equally good historical 
connexion. Either one must, like Bauer, challenge all the 
facts of Mark, or if not, one must take the gospel as a whole 
because of the plan running through it and try to explain the 
historical basis which underlies it. 

Modem historical theology is thus left with a 
tattered and tom gospel of Mark in its hands, but the life 
of Jesus produced is by no means of a fragmentary character, 
xhe liberal Jesus has given place to what Schweitzer calls the 
"Germanic Jesus". Is in Benan, the romantic spirit created the 
personality of Jesus in its own image, so at the present time 
the Germanic spirit is creating a Jesus after its om likeness. 
Only that is admitted as historic which the spirit of the time 
can take out of the records in order to bring out of it a 
living form. Historical criticism has become, in fact, a 
secret struggle to reconcile the Germanic religious spirit 
with the spirit of Jesus. For this German critical study of 
the life of Jesus is an essential part of German religion. i*o 




30 


quote cohweitzer, "as of old Jacob wrestled with the angel, 
so German theology wrestles with Jesus of Hazareth and will 
not let him go until he bless it - that is until he will 
consent to serve it and will suffer himself to be drawn 
by the Germanic spirit into the midst of our time and our 
civilization* But when the day breaks the wrestler must let him 
go* He will not cross the ford with us* Jesus of Uazareth 
will not suffer himself to be modernized* As an historic 
figure he refuses to be detached from his own time* He has 
no answer for the question '•Tell me thy name in our speech 
and for our day”* But he does bless those who have wrestled 
with him, so that, though they cannot* take him with them yet 
like men who have seen G-od face to face and received strength 
in their souls, they go on their wa£ with renewed courage, 
ready to do battle with the world and its powers * w The time 
had not yet come when theology was to rid itself of that 
rationalistic bias, which leads it to project back into history 
what belongs to its own time and seek in history justification 
and authority for its beginning# 

According to Halthoff Christianity arose, as it wer|, 
by spontaneous combustion when the inflammable material, 
religious and social, of the Xtoman empire cam© into contact 
with the Jewish Messianic expectations* Jesus never existed ; 
even if he had been one of the numerous Jewish Messiahs he 
did not found Christianity* ihe story of Jesus which lies 
before us in the gospels is in reality only the story of the 
way the picture of Christ arose - that is the story of the 
growth of the Christian Canmunity^Kalthoff in his conjectural 
argument takes as his starting point the social movements in 
the homan empire* He goes on to ahow that in the empire among 
the oppressed masses of sl-aves and people, eruptive forces 
were at high tension. 4 Communistic movement arose to which 
the influence of the Jewish element among the people gave a 
messianic apocalyptic colbring* The Jewish synagogue so 
influenced social conditions that the seething unrest crystall¬ 
ized into the new Christian soilal movement* .early Christian 
writers had learned in the synagogue to construct personifica¬ 
tions, and thus the Christ become the ideal hero of the 
community* Thus the figure of Christ was nothing more than 
the sublimated religious expression of the social and ethical 
forces which were at work* All the events of the life of 
Jesus even the death and resurrection represent experiences 
of the Christian community* For instance!, the story of the 
unfaithful steward alludes to Pope Callixtus, vh .09 when the 
slave of a Christian of high position, was condemned to the 









31, 


mines far the crime of embezzlement* Bat is not this kind of 
criticism also, asks Schweitzer, the casting oat of Satan by 
the aid of Beelzebub* If he ms going to invent on this scale 
he woold have found no difficulty in accepting the figure of Jesus 
evolved by Modem theology* 

xhe names of Haatmann, Be Jonge, and Kirchbacfe, we will 
not pause over, except to offer the observation that the one char¬ 
acteristic feature of these lisas of Jesus on the threshold 
of the new century is the tendency to subordinate the historical 
interest to the interests of the general world view* Men, not ac¬ 
quainted with the deeper results of research, wrote a life of 
Jesus in order to set forth their general religious view in 
a portrait of Jesus which has not the faintest claim to be 
historical, and the most far fetched of these lines have found 
favour with the multitude, 

rhe imaginative lives have little to offer to Venturinis 
contribution* 2hey differ from his largely in the fact, that 
the cures are now handled from the standpoint of hypnotism and 
suggestion* 

M now we come to the climax of our work to deal with 
thorough-going scepticism and thorough-going eschatology as 
exemplified by frede and Schweitzer himself in his book, ** A 
Sketch of the life of Jesus”* Ihesa two works, published on 
the same day, present a striking agreement in their criticism 
of the modem historical conception of the life of Jesus; and 
yet they are written, one from the point of view of literj^y 
criticism, and the other from that of the historical recognition 
of eschatology* Modem theology has thus been attacked on both 
flanks and the battle is to the death* Sven if half of the 
argument#of Wrede and Schweitzer are true, the modem historical 
view of theology is wholly ruined* 

ihe critical objections raised by Weds and Schweitzer 
are as follows* In order to find in Mark the life of Jesus of 
which it is in search, modem theology is obliged to read 
between the lines a whole host of things and those often the most 
important, and then to foist them on the text by means of 
psychological conjecture* It is determined to find evidence in 
Mark of a development of Jesus, a development of the disciples, 
and a development of outer circumstances; and professes in so 
doing to be only reproducing the views of the evangelist* As 








32, 




a matter of fact, however, the evangelist has not one word of 
all this. Mark knows nothing of any development in Jesus, 
nothing of any conflict in the mind of Jesus between a spiritual 
and a popular political Messianic ideal; n« does not know 
either, that in this respect there was any difference between 
the view of Jesus and that of the people; he knows nothing of 
the idea that the use of the ass at the triumphal entry signified 
as non - political Messiahship; he does not know that the first 
period was a period of success and the second a period of failure; 
he represents the Pharisees and the Herodians as resolved upon 
the death of Jesus, ^hile the people down to the very last day 
when he preached in the tempi© were enthusiastically loyal to 
him. 


Of all these things the evangelist says nothing and yet 
they are at the basis of the modem view. Should they not 
first be proved instead of being merely called "self - evident!" 

The modern historical view also assumed as ”self - evident* ; 
the fact of an f, historical kernel”. But must they not prove that 
we can and ought to distinguish between the kernel and the husk? 

It really amounts to this that each critic retains whatever portion 
of the critical sayings can be fitted into his construction of the 
facts and his conception of historical possibility, and rejects 
the rest* The psychological explanation of motive and the 
psychological Sonuexion of events and actions which such critics 
have proposed to find in Mark, simply do not exist. Wrede and 
the "Sketch” are canpolling theology to read the Harken text with 
a simplicity, which consists of dispensing with the connecting 
links which it has been accustomed to discover between the sections 
of the narrative, and recognize frankly that it is difficult to 
pass from one to the other. Indeed it la not simply that there 
Is no very obvious connexion, but in almost ©very case there is 
a positive break in the connexion, ioid there is a great deal on 
the Markan narrative which is inexplicable and contradictory. 

The task of the sceptical and eschatological schools, 
then, is this. If the connexion in Mark is really no connexion, 
it is necessary to try to discover whether say principle can be 
discovered in this want of connexion. Gan any order be brought out 
of chaos? They answer in the affirmative. Ihe complete want of 
connexion is due, they savwfco the fact that two representations 
of Jesus 1 public ministry?fiere crushed into one. A dogmatic 
element has intruded itself into the description of this life - 
something which has no concern with the events which form the 






outward course of that life* ihis do&natic element is the 
Messianic secret of Jesus end all the secrets and concealments 
that go along with it. Up to this point Yirede and Schweitzer 
are in complete agreement* They differ when they explain vhence 
the system that runs through this disconnectedness comes* Here 
the ways divide* Qtl the one hand is the eschatological solution 
which raises the marloto account as it stands with all its disconn¬ 
ect edness into genuine history; and on the other hanc^ is the 
literary solution which regards the incongruous dogmatic** 
element as interpolated by the earliest evangelist into the 
tradition and therefore strides out the Messianic claim altogether 
from the life of Jesus* Wrede therefore distinguishes between 
the outward course of the history of Jesus and the dogmatic idea 
which claims to lay down the lines of its inward course* 


xhe two conceptions of Jesus, the natural and supernat¬ 
ural are brought not without toe latencies into a harmony by 
means of the idea of intentional secrecy* ihe idea of a secre 
until the resurrection could only arise at a time when th@ 
llossiahship of Jesus was thought of as beginning with the 
resurrection* The positive fact to be Inferred from this is 
that the appearances of their risen Lord, produced a sudden 
change in the disciples' conception of him* Ihe resurrection 
is therefore, for Wrade, the areal Messianic event in the life 
of Jesus* 


a 


The Marian narrative arose from the impulse to give 
a Messianic form to the earthly life of Jesus* -his impulse 
was however, rostra toed by the impression and tradition of the 
non - messianic character of the life of Jesus, which were still 
strong and vivid, and therefore it was not possible to wholly 
recast the material, but yet it was able to force its way into 
the narrative* 


Bauer had conceived of the interpolation of 13® Messian¬ 
ic secret as the personal absolutely original act of the evangelist* 
For brede it was rather a collective act - a thing moulded by 
tradition before it was fixed by the evangelist*^ 2Jgl s assumption 
is a precarious one, for tradition alteri^ESS; 
draws threads of a different material through the texture of 
the tradition, without otherwise altering it* This is purely 
literary and could only be the woifc of an individual person* 


The only alternative for ..rede is to distinguish two 




34 


stages of tradition in early Christianity, a naive* freely 
working earlier stage, and a more artificial later stage 
confined to a smaller cirche of a more literary character* 

This wrede does i and in three of the most important passages - 
Peter’s confession, the entry into Jerusalem, and the High 
Priest's knowledge of Jesus' Hesslahahip, finds himself obliged 
to refer these to tradition instead of to the literary conception 
of Mark* This unde mines his literary hypothesis for the 
conception of a tradition always involves the possibility of 
genuine historical elements* 

7/rede drags everything in a most arbitrary fashion 
into his theory of secrecy* Mark: is for him a writer who is 
to be judged from a pathological point of view, a writer, who, 
dominated by the fixed idea of introducing s everywhere the 
Messianic secret of Jesus, is always creating unintelligible 
situations, even when these do ntt serve directly the interests 
of his theory* Qrede refers everything inexplicable to the 
principle which he recognizes in the dogmatic stratum of the 
narrative, and is consequently obliged to deny the historicity 
of such passages, whereas, the veiling of the Messiahship is 
only involved in a few places and is there indicated in clear and 
simple words* «r©de, says Schweitzer, does not recognize that another 
element than Jesus' Messiahship enters into the dogmatic stratuSs 
of the narrative -- that is Jesus* preaching of the kingdom and the 
mystery of the kingdom of God is the wider sense, 

what therefore must be done, says Schweitzer, is, in 
contrast to 7/rede, to make a critical examination of the do&natic 
element in the life of Jesus, on the assumption that the atmosphere 
of the time was saturated with eschatology, for why should not 
Jesus think in terns of doctrine and make history in action, just 
as well as a poor evangelist can do it on paper under the pressure 
of the thological interests of the primitive community* 

And now m turn to the work of Schweitzer himself. 

There is, he claims, in the public ministry of Jesus taken 
as a whole, something quite incomprehensible* According to 
Mark it lasted less than a year for, since he speaks of only 
one passover journey, it is safe to conclude that only an© 
passover occurred during Jesus' ministry, for otherwise the 
Pharisees who took him to task-about handwashings and other 
things would most certainly have done so had he not attended 
a passover* 


Wilfr this in view Schweitzer assumes the outline* 





35, 


of the life of Christ to ho sane thing on this wise* Josus 
in going up to the Passover, came into contact with the John 
the Baptist movement, and after forty days in the wilderness 
appeared in Galilee proclaiming the nearness of the kingdom of 
God* This was continued till the sending out of the twelve - 
that is to say at the most a few weeks* After the mission 
of the twelve a great multitude thronged about Him on his 
journey along the northern shore of the lake* In the midst 
of these initial successes the journed northward and only resumed 
Eis work as a teacher in Judea on His way to Jerusalem, Of His 
public ministry a large part is, therefore, missing* It dwindles 
to a few weeks of preaching here and thero^ in Galilee and the 
few days of gis sojourn in Jerusalem* 

The explanation that Jesus * cause in Galilee was lost 
and that He was obliged to flee, has, according to Schweitzer, 
no foundation in fact* It owes its existence to Mark's simple 
statement,” And Jesus departed and went into the region of 
Tyre” (Mark Vll: 24) without offering any explanation of the 
decision, very probably because he knew of none* Probably 
Jfce decision of Jesus rests upon considerations lying outside 
of history, for His life was dominated by a dogmatic idea which 
rendered Him indifferent even to his work as a teacher which was 
opening before Him* The question is asked, *How could Jesus, 
the teacher, abandon at that time a people so anxious to learn 
and eager for salvation?'* But did Jesus really conceive of 
Himself a3 a teacher? If you subtract the sayings occasioned 
by controversial discourses and answers to questions, there isn't 
much didactic preaching left, and even the purpose of the 
parables was not to reveal but to conceal* In connection with. 

His teaching regarding the kingdom it might be noticed that He 
seems to be confined, by a higher law, to the parabolic foam 
of discourse* It Is, as if for reasons we cannot grasp. His 
teachning lay under certain limitations* It appears merely as 
an accessory aspect* He was thus able to give it up when the 
prospect of Its success was opening before him* 

One reason for this limitation is predestination 
(Mark 17:10 - 12)/ Jesus knows that the truth He offers Is 
exclusively for those definitely chosen by God* duly the 
teaching, ”Hepent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand”, belongs 
to the public teaching. This is the only res sage the twelve 
were to deliver. The form of this repentance for this special 
interval before the caning of the kingdom He explains in the 
Sermon on the Mount* But everything beyond that simple phrase 








/ 








36. 


must be expressed in parables, so that only those who are shown 
to possess predestination by having the initial knowledge which 
enables than to receive more advanced knowledge may understand* 

Thus eschatology and predestination go hand In hand* This 
is exemplified in the parable of the king f s son where the man who 
in response to a public invitation, sits down to the table of the 
king, but is recognized from his appearance as not called, is 
thrown into perdition* 

Jesus often felt relief in this thought as, for example, 
when the rich young ruler turns away, but afterwards He says that 
with God all things are possible; namely that in spite of £ 
appearances, he may yet be found to belong to the kingdom, solejr 
in virtue of the secret, all powerful, will of God* 

The Beatitudes are not an © 2 &.ortaticn but a simple matter 
of fact that, in being poor in spirit, in meekness, and in love 
of peace, it is made manifest that they are predestined for the 
kingdom* These qualitites are the earmarks of their predestina¬ 
tion* The kingdom is not to be earned* Men are called to it and 
show themselves to be called to it* 

But in what does the mysterjr of the kingdom of God consist? 
Certainly in more than its near approach for that had been already 
Openly proclaimed* 

In the parables, evidently the question is suggested, how 
and by what power can wonderful and glorious results be achieved 
by an insignificant fact without hftman aid* Tor example, an 
extremely tiny grain of mustard seed is planted and there arises 
a great bush, which cannot have been contained in the seed. How 
did that happen? The parables stress, therefore the inadequacy 
of the initial fact and the miracle vhich follows at the appointed 
time by the power of God* 

Jesus speaks of the sowing as the initial fact* That has 
been already done* In that case the kingdom must follow as 
certainly as the harvest* The initial fact was the repentance 
evoked by the Baptist and deepened by his own work* As infinite 
power produces the harvest, so the kingdom must come by the 
power of God* This was really and temporarily connected with the 
harvest, for when the reapers went into the £* fields, then would 
God have His Harvest reaped by the Holy angels* In sending out 
the twelve Jesus tells them plainly that he does not exje ct to 












37 


see them back in the present age* *fce Parousia, He tells them, 
will take place ere they can have ccmjbleted a hasty journey through 
the cities to announce it* But the prediction was not fulfilled 
and the disciples came back* For Jesus, vJb.cne world was one 
of dogma, that was the first historical occurrence* It closed 
the former period of His life and gave to the cuuang period 
a new character* Modern theology had recognised the two periods 
and to account for them had Invented the thoary of growing 
opposition and waning support* 1'hey believed in Jesus’ desertion 
by the multitude simply because they could not explain his change 
of attitude and his altered plans* But the thorough - going 
eschatologlst recognizes that the non-occurrence of the parousia 
made Jesus change vitally his plans and attitude* 

Hot only was the prediction of the Parousia unfulfilled 
but also that/the sufferings connected with it* Modem theology 
being unable to understand it strikes it t>ut* 3ut, says, 
Schweitzer, are not these sufferings absolutely unMstorlcal? 

In the first place because there was nothing in the experience of 
Jesus up to that time which would lead Him to such a prediction* 

In the second place, the predictions were not fulfulled* Thirdly 
these saying are closely associated with the Parousia which did 
not occur* Fourthly, what is to befall the disciples has no 
basis in experience* why should they suddenly be hated for 
the name of Jesus, seeing that that name had played no part in 
their preaching? It most be that a revealation of Jesus as the 
son of man will take place in the interval by divine intervention* 

Ik kind of supernatural illumination will make known to all the 
secret of the kingdom and Jesus* position therein* The disciples 
themselves will speak with a supernatural wisdom which will 
astonish thanselves* 

The whole discourse at the sending out of the twelve is 
a prediction of the events of "the time of the end”, in which 
the supernatural eschatological course of history will break 
through into the natural course* The expectation of sufferings 
is therefore doctrinal and unhistorical* The Parousia is to 
be predeeded by a time of strife and confusion - the birth pangs 
- and the out pouring of the spirit; Schweitzer therefore says 
that this discourse is historical, precisely because modem 
theology judges it to be unhistorical* It is, in fact, full 
of eschatological dogma* Jesus had no need to instruct the 
disciples as to what they should teach as they had only to utter 
a cry, but of the events preceeding it was necessary to instruct 
them* The discourse therefore consists not of instruction, but 






38 


of prediction of suffer lugs and of the Parousia* 

V/hen the disciples retained the thought of Jesus was to 
get away from the people, but they followed Him and overtook 
him* He crossed to Bethsaida and Ifcen back to Sapexmaum bat still 
they followed* He slipped away to the north, but His flight 
was not as modem theology claims, caused by the hostile scribes 
bat by the people who dog His footsteps* 

In connection with the change which was to take place 
at the Paroosia, Jesus, believing that He was to be reeled as 
the Sen of Man, must have Relived that He first must be super- 
naturally removed and transformed* A vivid eschatological expect¬ 
ation is therefore impossible to conceive apart from the idea of 
a metamorphosis* Xhe resurrection is merely a special form 
of this, the foim it is to take in the case of these already 
dead* Bu@ Paroosia, resurrection, and metamorphosis will take 
place simultaneously - are in fact cm and the same act* 

that Jesus of Hezareth knew himself to be the Son of 
Man who was to be revealed is for Schweitzer the great fact of 
his self - com^ousness, which is not further to be explained 
whether there has been any preparation for it in contemporary 
theology or not* ihe self consciousness of Jesus cannot, in 
faet, be explained* All that can be explained is the eschat¬ 
ological world view in which the man who possessed that self- 
consciousness saw reflected in advance the coming events, bath 
those of a more general character and those which related more 
particularly to Mims elf. 

Por Schweitzer, the eschatology of Jesus can only be 
interpreted by the aid of the curiously intermittent Jewish 
apocaljptic literature between the period of Daniel and the 
Bar - eochba rising* Are not, he says, the synoptics, the 
letters of Paul and the Book of Revelation products of the 
most flourishing period of Jewish apocalyptic* Writers have 
often described Jewish eschatology to illustrate the teachings of 
Jesus* xhe reverse should be the case* Ho attempt has been made 
to writ© the history of Jewish eschatology as it really was-that 
is with the inclusion of the Baptist, Jesus, and gaol. Instead 
there has been a gap left in it because the greatest documents 
that relate to it have been left out* 

Mark, Matthew, and Paul, continues Schweitzer, simply 
represent a phase of the Jewish apocalyptic hope which manifested 













39 . 


Itself from time to time* ihe lines of connection which nm 
backward through Daniel, and the Psalms of Dolaman, and forward 
through the apocalypses of Baruch and **&och 9 ^Sad extremely im¬ 
portant for the understanding of general conceptions* On the other 
hand, one feels like strongly emphasizing the uniqueness of the 
point of view exemplified by the eschatology of the Baptist, 

Jesus and Paul* 

i‘he difference between the eschatology of Jesus and the 
others was this, that all the others were associated with 
historical events which called them forth* Daniel was called 
forth by the religious persecution of Jsitiochus, the Psalms 
of Solomon by the civil strife at Jerusalem, fourth Ezra and 
Baruch by the destruction of Jerusalem* In contrast to this the 
apocalyptic movement at the time of Jesus was not connected with 
any historical event* Ihls is proven by the indifference shown 
by the Homan authorities, who apparently knew nothing of a 
general Messianic movement* Ihe Baptist and Jesus therefore 
were not carried forward on the wave of an historical event which 
issued in an eschatological movement* Bhey themselves set the 
forces in action, by creating eschatological facts* Jesus* 
purpose in sending out the twelve was to set the eschatological 
development of history in motion, to lefe loes-e the final woes, 
the confusion and strife from which was to Issue the parousia 
and bring in the last act of the eschatological drama* ihls was 
the task for which Jesus had authority upon earth* 

Jesus chose His disciples not as teachers, but as those 
who were destined to throw the firebrand into the world and 
afterwards assist Him in ruling it* 

In familiarizing others with the thought of tribulation 
and persecution, Jesus must have reco^aized the strong probability 
of His own death* Indeed that thought must have been closely 
associated with His Messianic self consciousness from the first* 

How far could that messianic self consciousness remain concealed? 
Did the authoritative **P } of the Beatitudes set the people think¬ 
ing? what did they think, when He spoke of people who at the 
Day of Judgment would call upon Him as Lord, and appeal to the 
works they had done in His name, and who yet were destined to 
be rejected because He would not recognize them? 

Yet the people did not think of Him as Messiah* ihey 
guessed Him to be^prophet* Hor them the Messiah was a superb- 
natural personality who would not appear until the last time had 
actually arrived* How did some of the people conceive of Jesus 







40 , 


as Elias? Was not John held to be i*lias? Ho, John did not claim 
to be Elias, and Jesus was the first person to attribute that 
office to him. Further John did no miracle, was not a super¬ 
natural man, and himself pointed to the coming of .alias* When 
John sent to ask Jesus who He was, it was to ask him not If He 
was the Messiah but if Jesus was “he who was to come 0 - namely 
-lias. 


In disclosi^ to the people the true office of the baptist 
Jesus revealed to them almost the whole mystery of the kingdom 
of trod and nearly revealed His Messiahship. If -*lias had come, 
who then waw Jesus - why the Messiah, of course* 

Y.e see here, says Schweitzer, how in the thought of Jesus, 
the Messianic doctrine forces its way into history and simply 
abolished the historic aspect of events* Yhe Baptist had not 
held himself to be Elias, nor had the people thought of him as 
such, nor did the description of Elias fit him, yet Jesus desig¬ 
nated him as Elias, simply because Elias must first come, ©re 
His own manifestation as the Son of Man could take place* 

When we turn to the feeding of the multitude, Schweitzer 1 s 
solution is that the narrative is historical, except that all 
were not filled* She feeding of the multitude was an eschato¬ 
logical sacrament of salvation, in which Jesus, as the Messiah, 
with a morsel of bread seals and consecrates them as partakers 
of His glory in the coming Messianic feast* She idea of sealing 
was oconon to all apocalyptic literature - Ezekiel, Psalms of 
Solomon, and Paul* It is very prominent in the apocalypse of 
John, where the locusts can hurt only those who have not the 
seal of God upon their foreheads Eev 3X:4,5* She baptism of 
John was also an eschatological sacrament - a provision for 
salvation - pointing forward to the pouring forth of the spirit 
and the judgment * 

She Last Supper was also an eschatological sacrament 
only this time the disciples understood what was meant because 
Jesus told them He would drink no more of the fruit of the Vine, 
until He drank it new in the kingdom of God* 

She question is asked tt How does Peter at Caesarea 
Philippi know the secret of the Messiahship of the Master?” 
Evidently it has not dawned upon him by a gradual process* 

Jesus shows no joy or surprise at Peter f s declaration, but 
tells him to say nothing of His Messiahship* How is this to be 
explained? Schweitzer points out that the story of the 















41. 


transfiguration must be closely considered at this point. 

There the Divine ^onship is a second time revealed to Peter, James 
and John. But Mark has the incident following that of Caesarea 
Philippi and seems to overlook the fact that the disciples knew 
this already. Peter in addressing Jesus at first simply called 
him Eabbi and Jesus in descending the mountain forbids them to 
speak of what they have seen. That would prohibit them from 
telling the other disciples. 7*hy should this be if Peter had 
already made his declaration at Caesarea Philippi. Further, 
in the conversation during the descent frctn the mountain, it is ak 
shown that against the Messiahship of Jesus the disciples have 
but one objection - that iillas was not yet come. Xhus we see 
the importance of the revealation which Jesus made to the people 
in making known to them the seoret that the Baptist was ^lias. 

But if the nom-appearance of Blias was the primary diffi¬ 
culty with the disciples as they descended the mount of 
transfiguration, why did it strike them at that time, if Peter 
had already declared the Messlahshlp of Jesus at Caesarea 
Philippi? To make the narrative intelligible the narrative of 
the transfiguration must precede that of Caesarea Philippi. 

Schweitzer goes on to show how Mark has, at this point, 
combined the two sets of narratives in a wrong manner. He 
probably inserted MK Tills34 — 1Z:30 at the wrong place 
because the section contains an inpress lee discourse to the 
people on following Jesus in His sufferings, crucifixion, and 
death (Mark Tills34 — IXsl) Ihich he assumed to have taken 
place after Peter had revealed Jesus as the Messiah at 
Caesarea Philippi. It was, however, says Schweitzer, six days 
after Jesus had been surrounded by the people, not six days 
after the revealation at Caesarea Philippi that the trans¬ 
figuration took place. 2here is therefore nothing strange in 
Pe£er*s declaring who his master is, nor is Jesus surprised or 
rejoiced at it. She transfiguration had really been the 
revealation of the secret of the Messiahship to the three. 

At Caesarea Philippi Peter disregarded the lord’s 
command and betrayed to the twelve Jesus' self - consciousness of 
his Messiahship. Jesus did not apparently, ask the question in 
order to reveal himself to them as Messiah. He had probably 
never intended to reveal *%is Messiahship to the twelve, other¬ 
wise He would have done it when He sent them out telling them 
they should never return. Peter’s impulsive speech probably 
made Him change His course of action with the disciples. Jesus 
therefore did not voluntarily give up His secret as Messiah, it 











-4* 




42 , 


was "wrung from Him by the pressure of events"# 

In order to understand Jesus* resolve to suffer, we 
must first, according to Schweitzer, recognize that the 
mystery of suffering Is part and parcel of the mystery of the 
kingdom, since it cannot come until the TT~e s has 

taken place# 2his certainty of suffering is quite independent 
of the historic circumstances as is shorn in the predictions in 
the discourse at the sending out of the Twelve# Jesus* prediction 
of His suffering is the same - unintelligible, dogmatic, and there¬ 
fore historical# The "must be" of the sufferings is the same 
in the coming of the kingdom, of the Parousia, which are dependent 
upon the having taken place# 

For Jesus, then, it may be said suffering had always 
been associated with the Messianic secret, since He placed his 
parousia at the end of a period of Messianic tribulations in 
which He was to have His part# k fhe new thing at Caesarea is 
that this is now connected with an historic event - His coming 
visit to Jerusalem# He henceforth ceases to speak of a 
general tribulation which awaits His followers# It is now con¬ 
centrated on Himself alone# He must suffer for others that 
the kingdom might come# 

Jesus had hoped when He sent out the twelve that the final 
tribulation would then be inaugurated and it had not occurred# 

'How He conceives the idea that something further must be done# 

The movement for repentance has not been sufficient# Evidently 
God had a different plan than the rrzy? <*- , and 

had eliminated it from his programme* God had therefore appointed 
Jesus, whose commission it had been to bring It about, instead 
to accomplish it In His own person# As He was to rule over the 
members of the kingdom in the future He must now give His life 
for them and by His blood render Ihe atonement they would have 
had to render in the tribulation* The TTo\k oc for whom 

Jesus died are the predestined of all generations# 

Jesus found this thought in the suffering servant in 
Is^Lah# There He learns that He must suffer unrecognized and 
that those for whom He suffered should doubt Him. In that case 
those who doubted would not be condemned* therefore He no 
longer urges His disciples to be faithful to Him# They must be 
offended in Him, but it doesn*t matter for He bears all their 
sins and transgressions# Her does it matter whether they under¬ 
stand his secret or not# 


















43* 


Jesus went to Jerusalem not to teach hut to die 
there* He purposely provoked the Pharisees so that they might 
be compelled to get rid of Him* He dies alone, But even while 
the soldiers are on their way to arrest Him He prays tha£, 
if possible. He may be delivered from the f * a 
Literal history does not exist for Him, merely the will of 
Ood, and this is exalted even above eschatological necessity* 

The Messianic entry was Messianic for Himself 
alone and not to the people* It was carried out because 
Jesus wished the prophecy of Zech 1A:9 to be secretly ful¬ 
filled* At the trial they could not bring the three necessary 
witnesses to charge Him with being the Messiah, therefore, 
one must suppose that the people had not conceived of Jesus in 
that way* He was condemned on His own admission* 

How then did the entry of Jesus appear to the 
people? Lid they not acclaim Him? Yes, but it was as ’Him 
who is to come** - that is as Blias* 

Except Jesus and the disciples, therefore, no 
one in Jerusalem Knew of His messiahship* But the High Priest 
suddenly shoved Himself in possession of the secret* How did 
this come about? Through, the betrayal of Judas* The Question 
of why Judas betrayed his master is not nearly so important 
as what he betrayed* The perfidy of Judas, says Schweitzer* 
does not lie in his simply designating a suitable place for 
the arrest* Shis could easily have been discovered by spies* 
She real significance of his act lies in his betrayal of the 
Messianic secret* But as Judas was the sole witness they 
tried to condemn Jesus on grounds of blasphemy, and it was 
only when that charge failed, that the High Priest asked 
Jesus the direct question, whether He was the Messiah or no* 

The people knew nothing of the Messiahship* 

On the morning of the trial, the people in coming to Pilate 
to ash for the release of a prisoner, knew nothing of Jesus' 
arrest* Pilate in attempting to play off the priests against 
the people created an awkward situation for the former* They 
then had to go among the people and tell thou why He was 
condemned by revealing to them the Messianic secret* That 
made Him into a blasphemer instead of a prophet* 


And now we come to the last chapter of the book 















’<8 






44 , 


in which Schweitzer sums up the results* 

"•The Jesus of Hazareth, Tfcocame forward publicly as the 
Messiah, who preached the ethic of the kingdom of God and founded 
that Kingdom upon earth, never had any existence. He is a 
figure designated by rationalism, endowed with life by liberalism, 
and clothed by modem theology in an historical garb"* 

"whatever the ultimate solution may be, the historical 
Jesus of whom the criticism of the future, taking as its start¬ 
ing point the problems \diich have been admitted and recognized, 
will draw the portrait, can never render modem theology the 
service T&ich it claimed for its own half historical, half 
modem Jesus. He will be a Jesus, who was Messiah, and lived 
as such either on the ground of a literary fiction of the 
earliest evangelist, or on the ground of a purely eschatological 
conception". 

"In either case He will not be a Jesus, to Them the 
religion of the present can ascribe, according to its long 
cherished custom, its own thoughts and ideas* as it did with the 
Jesus of its own making. IT or will tie be a figure which can 
be made by a popular historical treatment so sympathetic and 
universally intelligible to the multitude. She historical 
Jesus will be^four time a stranger and an enl^na." 

Schweitzer goes on to say, that theology i§" its 
quest for the historical Jesus thought it could being Him 
direct into our time as a teacher and Saviour, but Then 
they had loosed Him from the bonds of ecclesiastical doctrine 
He passed by our time and returned to His own* Jnd they had 
to let Him go. 

Jesus has significance for us according to Schweitzer, 
because from Him flows a great spititual force which permeates 
even to our time. Modern theology made a mist dee in p supposing 
that J^us would moan more to our time by entering it as a man 
like ourselves, ihat was impossible for two reasons, both because 
such a Jesus never existed, and also because historical imowlctege 
cannot call spiritual life into existence. * 

In the course of the critical lives of Jesus, therefore, 
after a resistance of two generations, theology was forced to 
doubt the artificial histozy vhich it had thought to give, new 
life to Christianity, and to yield to facts. Then w© attempt 











6 






45, 


to draw Jesas near our time we are obliged to admit our 
failure in Paul f s words, " If we have known Christ after the 
flesh, yet henceforth know we Him no more#” Jesus as historic¬ 
ally known may, therefore, be a hindrance to religion; but 
Jesus as spiritually risen has significance for us and can 
help us* Hot the historical Jesus, says Schweitzer, but the 
spirit which goes forth from Him and in the spirits of men strives 
for new influence and rule, is that which overcomes the world* 

History has tried in vain to separate the abiding and 
eternal in Jesus from the historical forms in which it worked 
itself out* It has atempted to wrench Jesus from His native 
soil of eschatology, and has not recognized that the abiding and et¬ 
ernal is quite apart from historical knowledge and can only be 
understood by contact with His spirit whioh is still at work 
in the world* In proportion as we have the spirit of Jesus* we 
have the true knowledge of Jesus* 

“Jesus as a concrete historical personality remains 
a stranger to our time, but His spirit, which lies hidden in 
its words, is known in simplicity and its influence is direct* 

JaJvery saying contains in its own way the whole Jesus*” 

w\> 

Ihat which is eternal is. the words of Jesus, continues 
Schweitzer, is due to the fact that it is based on the eschato¬ 
logical world view* It is the expression of a mind for which 
the contemporary world with its historical limitations had no 
existence* Ihey raise the coonen man above his world and 
time and make him inwardly free, so that^his own world end 
time he may be a channel of the power of Jesus* 

Jesus came not as a teacher but as one who felt 
himself to be an imperious ruler in His inmost being and 
therefore designated Himself the 3on of Man* We can find 
no designation which expresses what He is for us* 

Schweitzer closes his monumental work with the 
following paragraphs- " He canes as one unknown, without 
a name, as of old by the lakeside. He came to those men who 
knew Him not* He speaks to us the same word, “follow tnou 
me”, and sets us to the tasks which He has to fulfill for 
our time* He eemmands, and to those who obey Him, whether they 
be wise or simple. He will reveal himself in the toils and 
conflicts, which they shall pass through in His fellowship. 






% 








46. 


and as an ineffable mystery, they shall learn in their 
om experience who He is.” 

Lhat has been attempted in the proceeding pages of this 
essay has been to set forth in a summarized fashion the chief 
characteristics of the Life of Jesus literature from the time 
of Beima%rus to Y<rede with Schweitzer’s criticisms of each, 
ihen an attempt was made to set forth briefly Schweitzer’s 
own view. It will now be our task to state briefly seme of the 
views and criticisms called forth by the publication of "The 
Quest of the Historical Jesus.” 

And first I wish to deal with the eschatological 
theory from the standpoint of the Kev. Burnet Hillman Streeter, 
Those views are set forth in the "Oxford Studies of the 
Synoptic Problem#,” edited by Dr. Sanday, and published in 1911. 

Skater recognizes three distinct stages in the 
development of the eschatological teaching ascribed to our 
tord. These he finds in the document called Q, Hark, and 
Matthew. In % the conception is of the kingdom as already 
present and to be extended by a process of gradual growth. 
Sayings implying that its appearance is future occur but are not 
filled in in detail. 



It is undeniable that the language of a definitely 
apocalyptic type is already present in Q« n ln an hour when 
think not the Son of Man caneth w luke Alls40 - Mt 
^ - may be argued that these and similiar sayings imply all 
the essential elements of the cataifophic eschatology of 
Matthew, and that the clouds of glory, attendant angels, the 
trumpet blast, etc. do no more than fill in the detail of this 
picture already Implied by Q. But the significant fact is, that 
in Q this filling in. of detail still remains to be done. A 
vagueness and reserve are the characteristics of the apocalyptic 
sayings in Q, Thich certainly were not characteristic of Paul 9 s 
letter to the Thessalonians. 


Sayings which appear as cata^pophie are rare in Q. 

The eschatological sayings characteristic of Q. are rather those 
Thich imply a ^Jagdcm Tixich is, in some sense, already present 
and which will 7 increase by gradual growth. 


Streeter gives the following example*-: (a) "If I 
by the finger of God ....... then is the kingdom of God cone 







47 


upon you* Lake XI:20 - Mt. Xll:28. 

(b) Jofcds qaevtiaa M ^rt thou he that should come? Is answered 
by a list of tokens of the actual presence of the kingdom - 
"the blind see etc/* - Luke Vlli22 - Mt Xl:5. 

(c) "He that is leafct in the kingdom of heaven, is greater 
than he". Luke 7111:28 - Mt Xl:ll. 

(d) The parable of the mustard seed ( Luke 2111:18-19 

- Mt Xlll 31-32} is meaningless unless it refers to the idea 
of a gradual growth. 

(e) The parable of the heaven { Luke Xlil:20 - Mt Xlll:33) 
expounds the kingdom as an influence slowly pervading society. 
Thus the eschatology present in Q is vague and undefined. 

In Mark there is a development. He represents a 
transitional stage. The emphasis is on the future cataStophic 
conception which is worked out with much detail along apocalyptic 
lines. 

Mark Xlll dominates the eschatology of the second gospel, 
but Streeter takes the view that very little of that discourse 
can be regarded as authentic teaching of Jesus, the rest is in 
the ordinary manner of Jewish and Christian apocalypse. 


In theee passages, however, outside of Chapter Xlll the 
cata^ophic coming of the kingdom is alluded to with a detail 
not found in Q« 


(?) Mark 7111:38, "tfor whosoever shall be ashamed of 
me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, 
the son of man shall also be ashamed of him when he cometh 
in the glory of the father, with the holy angels." This 
saying was in Q in a slightly different form, so that Mark 
evidently changed it slightly in passing it through mind. 
Matthew further modified Mark’s development. The following will 
illustrate this point. 

. 


Luke Xlls 8 

"But he that denieth me in the 
presence of man, shall be denied 
in the presence of the ingels of 
£od." 


Matt X:33 

"But whosoever shall deny 
me before men, him also 
will I deny before my father 
who is in heaven. 









48 


How compare this vdth Mark and the work of Matt* and 

Luke* 


Mk Vlll:38 


Mattel;27 Luke IX:26 


"for whosoever shall 
he ashamed of me and 
my words in this adulter- 
cuv and sinful generation, 
the Son of Man also shall 
he ashamed of him, when he 
ccmeth in the glory of his 
father with the holy angels. 


"For the Son of 
Man shall ccrne in 
the glory of his 
father with his 
angels, and then 
shall he render 
everyman according 
"to his deeds*" 


"For whosoever 
shall he ashamed 
of me and my words 
of him shall the 
Sen of Man he 
ashamed when he 
cometh in his cm 
glory and the 
glory of the father 
and of the holy 
angels*" 


2his series gives in epitome the eschatological evolution 
of / the gospels* Ma£k adds to Q o'reiv <^ v ^<7 

-rev rroL-ff? d £ Matthew develops it further by 

omitting the first part, "whosoever is ashaned of me", in which 
orig^nal^y lay its whole point u aid. elaborates the last part 
AVt Tort Juto Su/cr^ eKo£<t r f etc, tins 
changing completely the whole character of the apocalyptic pro¬ 
phecy* 


(h) 

Mk IX: 1 Matt Xvls28 Luke IX: 27 


"Verily, I say unto 
you, there are seme 
here of than that 
stand by, who shall 


"Verily I say unto 
you, there are seme 
of them that stand 
here, who shall in 


in no wise taste death,no wise taste death 
till they see the king-till they see the 
dam of God come with bon of Man, coming 
power" in his kingdom*” 


"But I tell you of 
a truth there are 
some of than that 
stand here, who 
shall in no wise 
taste death till 
they see the king¬ 
dom of God* 


Hote Mask’s phrase £ * B'ctl&lV' ZV' Sw 

which seems to limit the coming of the kingdom to a cata^ogihie 
form and the date limit* Q never dates* Hote also that Matthew 
changes the vague kingdom coming" into the more definite "Son 
of Man caning into his kingdom*" 




X 




f 


V 










49 


In Matthew the detail of Mark is still further 
elaborated and the catastrophic conception emphasized both 
by ~1iat he says and what he leaves out* For instance Matt* 
in Chap* XXIV and XXV has further developed the apocalypse 
of Mark Xlll. He has added the apocalyptic sections of 
Q ( Mt XXV : 26-28, 57-51) and given them a heightened 
apocalyptic colour and has also added the three apocalyptic 
parables of Chap XXV ending up with the Great Assize. 

Matthew alone gives, with their interpretations 
annexed, the two parables of the Tares (Xlll:24-30 & 30-43) 
and the Dragnet (Xlll:47 - 50) Ho explanation is given of 
the other parables of the kingdomgiven in this chapter such 
as those of the mustard seed andoqeaven, the hidden treasure, 
and the pearl of great price* These last seem to be incompat¬ 
ible with a catastrophic conception of the kingdom* Hence 
the highly catastrophic interpretation given to the two 
parables explained, acquires a real significance because 
it shows the tendency of the author behind them* 

In Matthew also we find, constantly repeated, certain 
apocalyptic, phrases - e*g* the expression cris^ r£ 
too A ‘i-©peated by him five times and is found nowhere 

else in the gospels* The phrases “weeping and gnashing of 
teeth** occur six: times in Matthew, only once in Luke and 
nowhere else in the Hew Testament* 

But Matthew not only gives events a heightened 
apocalyptic color but he has a tendency to omit sayings which 
are inconsistent with the view of the kingdom as entirely 
future and catastrophic* 

He emits the parable of the seed growing secretly 
(Mk IV:26-29) and substitutes for itXlll*24 - 30) 
with its apocalyptic explanation* <Ur ^xT 

The above examples of Streeter suffice to show how 
in the series of Q, Mark, and Matthew he traces a steady 
development in the direction of emphasizing, making more 
definite and even creating, sayings of our Lord of the 
catastrophic, apocalyptic type, and of putting into the 
background all sayirgs which do not seem to Confirm this 
view* 


jjurther, Streeter says, the process of which Q, 
Mask, and Matthew exhibit a development had begun before Q, 









50, 


had crystallized the tradition into writing* For already 
the dayings had lived in and been coloured by the memory 
of the disciples before they v/ore reduced to writing* 

However the whole of the apocalyptic element cannot 
be thus explained away, for wtet was so central in the belief 
of the early church must have been present at least in Germ 
in what the master taught* Still the nearer we get to Jesus 
the greater is the emphasis on the present, the gradual and 
internal aspects of the kingdom and the less there is of 
contemporary apocalyptic* 

In all departments of life, concludes Streeter, great 
men are only partially understood* Some one-sided aspect 

of the master's thought is seized upon by his followers, over¬ 
emphasized and made an essential part of his teaching* Ih© 
early disciples, steeped in Jewish apocalyptic thought, seized 
upon that element in Jesus teaching and amplified it in accord 
with their own ideas* However this process was checked by 
Paul and John who by a counter revolution brought the church 
back to deeper and more spiritual conceptions* 

From the above it will be seen how far Streeter dis¬ 
agrees with Schweitzer in his attitude towards eschatology* 
ihey are in fact at opposite poles# 

In the Hibbart Journal for October, 1910, there 
appeared a review of Schweitzer's book by G* a* I^ench® 

He recognizes the immense mastering and arranging of the 
material* He is rather disappointed that Schweitzer dealing 
with the whole of German theology, taking account of work 
done in France, and showing acquaintance with linglish writers, 
yet entirely ignores Dr* Sanday's, "Outlines of the life of 
Christ*" She scope of the work is then Sketched in broad 
outline, which will be passed over here, as it has already 
been fully dealt with* 

j 

French's criticism may be summoned up thus, that 
in spite of the - cleverness of the book Schweitzer's description 
of Jesus is that of a deluded enthusiast* Fhe historical part 
of the work is of great value but his own contribution to the 
study of the subject is of only limited value* In getting 
away ftfom the study desk and looking at the world, we see, 
says Srench, Christianity a potent force in the life of today. 







51 


and we ask whether the Jesus of German theology could ever 
have grown Into the Christ who supplied the motive power 
to the great programme of Christian Missions? He was, not 
a teacher, says Schweitzer, hut an imperious ruler* Great 
however as Schweitzer conceived Jesus to he, the mighty 
dynamic forces which He put in action proclaim Him to he 
greater still* 

We now turn to the view expressed hy Dr* A* I?* Scott, 
late professor at Q.ueen f s University, Those position is set 
forth In his hook entitled The kingdom and the Messiah* M 

Professor Scott says that it was at Caesarea Philippi 
that Jesus first made explicit avowal of his messiahship* 

He approaches the subject tentatively - seeking to discover 
if His disciples have guessed His secret* He implies hy the 
command to silence that He was divulging it for the first time* 

Professor Scott is of the opinion that the joy at the 
confession which Matthew narrates is foreign to the original 
narrative* His mood was rather one of gloomy presentment* He 
is overwhelmed with a sense of the solemn import of the 
declaration* Is a matter of fact it was only half the secret* 
He had revealed it merely as a preliminary to the further 
declaration that the woafe of the Messiah would he accomplished 
through suffering* He knew that this would appear repellent 
to His disciples and make His claim incredible* It was threfore 
necessary that they should themselves acknowledge Him, on the 
constraining evidence of His life, rather than to recognize 
it on the hare assertion of Jesus Himself* 

At Caesarea Philippi Jesus made a twofold declaration 
- that He was the Messiah and that He, in the fulfillment of 
that Messiahship, would suffer death* He had been conscious 
of His Messiahship from the first hut the full conviction 
of His Messiahship did not fully awaken in Him until He fore¬ 
saw the inevitable mad of His mission* 

The next question Scott takes up is why Jesus enjoined 
upon His disciples the keeping of His messiahship as a strict 
secret* In answer to this various theories are treated in turn* 

The first theory is that Jesus had originally hoped to 
win Israel hy His activity as a prophet and teacher, and it 
was only when this failed that He introduced what wae origin- 




r - 

■ 

■ 












52- 


ally foreign to His plan, and identified Himself with the 
popular hope of a Messiah* Phis theory gains colour because 
at the olose of His life He seems anxious to reveal rather than 
comooal His Messiahship* Dr* Scott’s criticism of this is 
that even if we would reconcile this conduct with what we 
know about Jesus, it would be hard to see what He could expect 
to gain by it, for He would know that the stirring up of a 
Messianic agitation must bring on Himself the wrath of the 
Homan authorities* 

xhe second theory claims that it was just on account 
of the desire to avert a collision with the Homan authorities 
that He guarded His secret* But it is difficult to think that 
ou2f of fear of possible consequences He concealed the essential 
fact of His mission* It also entirely fails to explain His 
ultimate decision to declare Himself* Ihe people were as 
unprepared as ever to acknowledge Him in His true character, yet 
He abruptly changed His course and took that which was certain 
to bring Him into danager* 

Th& dhird theory is that Jesus perceived the inadequacy 
of the current Messianic idea, and would not adopt it until He 
had impressed it with a new meaning* It was necessary that men 
learn to know His own mind aid personality in order that their 
idea of the Messiah might be transformed* Xhls theory, says 
Dr* Scott, has much to recommend it, but one must ask this 
question. If Jesus had desired to educate His followers to a 
truer conception of the Messiah would He not have told them 
definitely that their ordinary ideas were mistaken? Yet up 
to Oaesarea Philippi He allowed them to share the cannon 
expectations and only there began to educate them to His new 
doctrine of the Messiah* 

Dr* Scott next takes up the theory of ^rede - namely 
that Jesus never professed to be the Messiah, that this claim 
was first advanced after His death and read back into history* 
ihe early church, claims Wrede, in order to explain the 
silence of Jesus on His Hessiahship interpolates the theory 
of the Messianic” secret”, by t&ich they say that Jesus did 
recognize Himself as Messiah but forbade His disciples to 
uspeak of it till after His resurrection* vfrede has indeed 
shown, says Scott, that Mark’s insistence on the secrecy of 
Jesus is, to a large extent, artificial, and even when Mark 
was written the facts of the life of Jesus were beginning to 
be modified by theological speculation* 






53, 


Scott criticizes the theory on the following grounds 
(a) we may farly argue that Hark is trying, not always 
successfully, to do Justice to a genuine tradition* He knows 
that Jesus only disclosed His Hessiahship near the end and 
under conditions of reserve but he does not know in detail how 
this disclosure was made* (b) It is quite impossible that 
the belief in the Messiahship of Jesus could have grown up with¬ 
out any foundation from His actual teaching* »hy did the disciples 
immediately after His death, in what looked like the ruin of their 
cause still recognize Him as Messiah? Dut here we might in turn 
criticize bcott, and say that in the growth of the tradition of 
Jesus'*Messiahship., he overlooks the fact that there occurred 
between the life of Jesus and the writing of Hark, Jesus* death 
and resurrection which changed the disciple view concerning 
Him and was quite sufficient to account for the tradition* (c) 

If we discard the messiahship of Jesus, continues Scott, we would 
have to throw out the whole gespel narrative for the passages 
involved are not a few isolated ones but lie at the very heart 
of the narrative* Ihis, one feels like saying to Scott, is 
quite true* It is, all of one piece but It is all Hark *s coloring 
qnd interpretation, (d) The hypothesis further collapses, says 
Scott, in view of the fact that by His entry into Jerusalem and 
the cleansing of the temple Jesus undoubtedly intended to declare 
Himself the Messiah* further in the confession before the High 
Priest Jesus asserted his claim in plain words* In reply to 
Scott one feels like saying that certainly Mazk conceives of 
Jesus' entry into Jerusalem as a Messianic entry, but was that 
Jesus'own conception? 

The important point is that Dr* Scott believes that 
Hark reflects a genuine tradition, that Jesus conceived himself 
as the Messiah find made his entry into Jerusalem as such* 

Wo will next consider the view of Professor Von Dobs chut z 
of the University of Strassborg, who in his book, **The Eschatology 
of the Gospels**, takes Schweitzer to task by saying - if 
eschatology is the key to all gospel questions then it becomes 
the problem of problems how Christianity could go on without 
eschatology through so many centuries* If there was nothing 
in Jesus but eschatology, then he was a misguided enthusiast and 
it would be almost impossible to explain how the name of an 
eccentric become the symbol for millions and millions of 
Christians who took from Him not only vain hopes of the futuie 
















54, 


bat a joyful experience of real salvation and an unexampled 
amount of moral energy* 

Von Dobschutz claims that there was no self consistent 
doctrine of eschatology among the Jews of Jesus'time, and 
that the influence of eschatology was rather restricted to 
some circles, the life of the people being occupied by the 
business of the present and governed by Pharasaic ordinances* 
Whatever position Jesus took, then, with regard to eschatology. 
Von Dobschutz claims that it was much more important in early 
Christianity than it was in late Judaism® 

It is quite certain continues Von Dobschutz, that Jesus 
claimed to be the Messiah* But it is equally certain that He 
speaks of His coming again in glory and power* Many passages 
support this® M For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my 
words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man 
also shall be ashamed of him whai He ccmeth in the glory of 
His father with the holy angels ( Mk 7111:58 # te Matt XVI: 27 
Luke IX:26} .3bhe warnings against the false Messiahs ( Mk XI11: 
6,21, lake XVII:23,24, Mt XXIV:23-28) presuppose the idea of 
His o m earning again* Von Dobschutz further says that Mark 
is a greater supporter of eschatology than Q, though the latter 
is by no means free frem it* He comes to the conclusion that 
the notion of the coming of the Son of Man as something still 
to be expected is a commonplace in gospel - tradition and has 
to be traced back to Jesus Himself* Jesus believed that the 
change in all things would come quickly and not later than the 
end of His om generation* 

But Jesus also had the idea* says Von Dobschutz, that 
the kingdom was a present inward experience and that His own 
activity was a means, not so much of preparing as bringing 
salvation to His people® And His disciples did understand Him® 
At a time when people thought of Him in various ways. His 
disciples by the mouth of Peter found expression by soXemly 
declaring Him to be the Messiah - the unique and final ba&nger 
of salvation* He only forbad them to speefc of it because it 
would cause a political revolution* 

Von Dobschutz says that Schweitzer is thorough-going 






1 


55, 


eschatology can only he maintained hy doing violence to the 
tradition which besides considerable eschatological matter, 
gives seme very expressive utterances of non - eschatologicax 
material* It can be maintained only by doing violence to 
the group of sayings that represent the kingdom and the 
Messiahship as present* But it is not only the presence of 
non - eschatological doctrines that forbids us to account for 
Jesus* whole teaching by eschatology, it is the permanent 
value of liiose non - eschatological doctrines and the history 
of the church which has proved the non - eschatological 
element to be essential* Yet it is unwise in view of the other 
strong group of sayings to say that eschatology had no place 
in the mind of Jesus* 

And then Van Dobschutz turns to the gospel of John where 
he finds an approximate expression of Jesus* om views* However 
strong eschatology might have been It was only of secondary 
importance for Jesus’ life and teaching* Christianity is - 
and ever will be-the religion of sure salvation, brought by 
Jesus and to be experienced by His followers in their present 
life* 2his does not exclude Christian hope, for the more 
present salvation is experienced the greater Christian hope 
will be* xhis is Jesus* great lessen to us* He realized 
in Himself absolute and supreme communion with God, and yet 
He looked forward to a time of final salvation/He was the Son 
of God and had to bring salvation® And the afeLding truth 
of eschatology lies in the fact that w© have to expect and 
pray for a state of things in which God’s dominion will be fully 
established* 2he Christian is a new creature, but he looks 
for a new heaven and a new earth and his prayer will ever 
be that T^iich his Lord has taught him "Shy kingdom cane"* 

So sum up then. Yon Dobschutz says that Jesus thought 
of Himself as Messiah - that is as an officer in ushering in the 
kingdom* But he was an officer of the kingdom because of 
his superiority - He revealed a moral order* For Yon 
Dobschutz Bitschl’s idea is the valid one - that Jesus has the 
value of God in virtue of His moral superiority* Shat, 
however, is a nineteenth century interpretation made for our 
own age* It really is impossible to say that tint was Jesus* 
own interpretation of Himself® 

we cone now to the views of Professor Sanday* She 
word "views" is used advisedly, for it is necessary to point 
out that Sanday’s position underwent a radical change in the 
course of time*- His first position with regard to Schweitzer 




















56 , 




is set forth in his "Life of Christ in Recent Research#** 

In the opening paragraphs of this thesis several extracts from 
Dr* Ganday’s work were quoted* in which was pointed oat the 
great significance he ascribed to German theology in general 
and Gchweitzer’s work in particular* ”lhe book Von Reimafcrus 
Zu vfrede" says Sanday^is the most striking work of its kind 
I have read for some time*** xhe conspicuous merit of 
Schweitzer for Sanday is that his work is dominated by a 
siggie purpose namely the showing the prominent part which 
apocalyptic teaching plays in tho synoptic gospels* 

Schweitzer had taken to task modern theology for reading 
a psychological connexion into the narratives and actions of 
Jesus* Sanday agrees with him up to a certain point* yet he 
says it is not possible to dispense with it altogether for all 
history involves a certain mount of psychological analysis* 

It is part of the effort to reconstruct a coherent picture 
of the course of events in our own minds* for it would not be 
coherent if there were not a thread of psychology running through 
it: if there were not some conjectural connecting of actions 
with motives* 3ut just because this thread of psychology comes 
frcm ourselves* we ought to exercise special care with regard to 
it and to attribute only that kind of motive which is suitable 
to the time and place* 

Sanday agrees with Schweitzer that there has been too 
much tendency to minimize or explain away everything that 
is not congenial to oar modem point of view* 

Sanday, with Schweitzer, looks with reserve on the 
theories of development* We ought not* he says, posit 
development for like sake of development* We need not go 
further than we have tangible evidence for going* ind it is 
probably true that the two periods of our Lord’s public 
ministry should not be divided and contrasted so sharply as 
is sometimes done* 

On tbe other hand Sanday claims Schweitzer has over¬ 
stated the case with reference to his conception of Jesus 
as a prophet, not as a teacher* Schweitzer had compressed 
all Jesus’ ministry into Is ss than a year* He puts aside 
all incidental teaching that was drawn from the lord by 
passing controversy and then classes the parables under the 
head of eschatology* Sandy points out that this cannot be 
done with all the parables* ihe parable a of the Good Samarit^h, 



) 





57 


and the Pharisee and the Publican, surely came under the head of 
moral teaching and so would the greater part of the Sermon 
on the Mount* Sanday maintains that Jesus appeared to his dis¬ 
ciples and the multitude at once teacher and prophet* 

Sanday also disagrees with Schweitzer in his claim that there 
was no political element in the Messianic expectation of the Jews 
and that therefore Jesus had not to recast and transform the 
Jewish Idea* Dr* Sanday claims there was and always had been 
a large political side to Jewish eschatology* It is shorn in 
the Old Testament doctrine of “the day of the Lord” - a day of 
judgment upon the enemies and oppressors of Israel* 

The following quotation from Dr* Sanday sums up his position 
with regard to Schweitzer* M I am aware that Schweitzer prides 
himself on the logical thoroughness of his theory, and that he 
regards his thorough - going logic as essential to it, but it 
seems to me that in order to carry this out he has to ignore a 
good many well - attested facts* I believe it to be on the 
whole as great a mistake to try to explain everything in the 
life of our Lord in terms of eschatology, as it is to treat the 
eschatology as a mere appendage•“ 

what then, says Sanday, is the essential meaning of 
the kingdom of God? Is it not the asserted and realized 
sovereignity of God, Divine influence, and Divine power, felt 
as energizing in the souls of men? At what point in history 
did this new access of divine power enter the world? ;.as it not 
from penticost onwards? as we still pray “Thy kingdom 00130 ,“ 
there has been and is a real coming and yet we feel that the 
coming has never yet been exhausted; in its plenitude it is 
still afar off* 

m Mh& Life of Christ in Recent Research appeared in 1907* 

By October 1911 Sanday had modified his opinion of Schweitzer to 
such an extent that he feels called upon to retract somewhat 
of the approval he had extended to him* In the Hlbbert Journal 
for that month there appears an article by Professor Sanday under 
the heading “The Apocalyptic Element in the Gospels.* f In this 
he regrets that he was attracted somewhat unduly by Schweitzer' 1 s 
book* The author had, he continues, pushed things to extremes 
at the dictates of logical consistency* He called his theory 
“consistent eschatology" and sought in it the siggle key to 
the life, acts and words of Christ, and in this, Sanday says, he 
was -undoubtedly mistaken*" The great value of apocalyptic and 
its recognition lies in this that it postulates throughout a 








58 


real manifestation of God upon earth, and not merely as a 
teacher more eminent than the rest* Another great point about 
the insistence of apocalyptic is that it is true* It finds 
in the gospel* something that is really there and not merely 
read in from outside* 

Sanday says that if he were summing up the effect of 
the five years following the publication of Schweitzer*s book, 
he would say that it was marked by a strong affirmation of the 
reality and importance of the apocalyptic element in the 
gospels - not exactly as the starting point - but as a, main 
starting point for the teaching of our lord and His own 
conception of His mission* One must emphasise, too, the pert 
played by this apocalyptic in the preparation of our lord*s 
coming and on the other hand one must emphasize the new 
importance he gave to it* The language which he made use of 
was essentially apocalyptic, but he made use of it in a manner 
that was essentially his own* 


Sanday gives unqualified approval to the work of Yon. 
Dobsch&tz* In his opinion. Yon Dobsehutz hits the mark more 
closely than any other* 


Apocalyptic ideas flourished from 165 3* G* to 135 1*3* 
During this time the soil, though not flooded, was in most 
places strongly saturated with apocalypticism* All documents 
or litstrata criticism had distinguished in the gospels 
contain clear traces of apocalyptic influence* These differ 
in degree in regard to their locality and the decade in which 
they were written* Sanday follows this up by an unqualified 
approval of streeter, who, it will be recalled, traced the 
development of the eschatological view through ft, Mark and Matthew* 


Sanday* a conclusion is that the eschatological attitude 
temper was by no msens a fixed quantity, but that it varied 
considerably in the periods when the synoptic gospels were written, 
sometimes it was stronger, sometimes it was weaker; it took a 
deeper hold on some minds than others* Allowance for this has 
gto be made in estimating how far the gospels preserve for us 

E true proportion of the mind of Christ* ^The objective facts 
one thing, the subjective fasts mediums another* However 
irous the writer of a gospel may have been to set down 
faithfully what he knew, he could not help being influenced 
by his own prepossessions; he fell into the attitude which 
was natural to himself* Therefore in the matter of eschatology 
ihe medium through which we look is not a transparency but 






< 




59 


more or less colored# Ihe general agreement of all oar 
documents makes It certain that our Lord himself did actually 
use the eschatological language of our time; but when wo 
ask precisely how far he used it, how far he expressed his inner 
thought in it, there is a ’’margin of uncertainty”. It is 
impossible to say wh$t belongs to the master and what to the 
disciple# Our Lord, says Ban&ay, took over many apocalyptic 
terfes - Boa of Man, Messiah, Son of David - but He did not take 
them over and leave them as they were# 1'he apocalyptic kingdom 
was wholly future; Our Lord while using that language also 
thought of it as present# Ho apooalyptist would have written, 
kingdom of God is within you ;t # 

ihe fundamental mistake of Schweitzer remarks Dr# Ban&ay, 
is this; because the leading terms of the gospel had their origin 
in apocalyptic, he will have it that they must be apocalyptic 
to the end# According to him the ethical teaching of our Lord 
is an f, Interimsethik ft - a system of ethics strictly adapted to 
the short interval of time that still remains before the end 
of the world# As a matter of fact neither our Lord nor Paul 
preached an “Interimsethik, u and only by a great deal of forcing 
can the ethics of Jesus be described as such# She movement to 
refine and spiritualize the ancient code went on in Christianity 
but it was parallel to apocalyptic rather than a direct product 
of it* 


Shore has been also a great tendency to concentrate 
attention upon the predictive aspect of the eschatology of the 
gospels# Its reel significance lies in the fact that it supplied 
the form under irhich our Lord expressed His conception of His 
own purpose and mission# Ihe terns M Son of Man”, and the 
•’Kingdom of God** are quite astonishing in the depth and richness 
of meaning of which they are capable, and He availed Himself of 
them to the fullest degree# 

Sanday takes the view that we cannot tell exactly what 
was in the mind of the speaker# be must be content not to know 
as the Divine Son was content not to know - ”of that day no one 
knows, no not the Son#” We can discover three things in the 
consciousness of our Lord A stream sense of impending 
catasrophe to Israel as a nation (b) a deep conviction of His 
own mission to bring about restoration and regeneration (c) 
k prophetic forecast in which the immediate future is filled with 
an eschatological outpouring of the Spirit# But it is impossible 
to say, concludes Dr# Danday, with what degree of sharpness and 




60 , 


clearness these different strains of thought presented thanselves 
to Him, and in any case they have become more or less blurred 
and confused in the tradition that has cctne down to us* 

And now m came to the concluding part of this 
thesis* **nd here it is the duty of the writer to sum pp 
his own personal criticism and the conclusion he has reached 
from the study of so great a mass of detail that Schweitzer 
has presented, and by the study of that literature which "She 
Quest of the Historical Jesus” called forth. 

My own view at the beginning of this study was that the 
writers of the synoptic gospels had misunderstood the viewpoint 
of Jesus with regard to eschatology, and that only in John 
did w© find the true view of the Second Goming — the ccaning of 
the spirit of Ghrist into the hearts and lives of man* As I 
read Schweitzer through for the first time I was greatly 
impressed and felt that, whether I liked it or not, a relentless 
loyalty to truth might force me to admit that Jesus* view 
was essentially eschatological* She logical persistence with 
which Schweitzer followed his thought through all the life - of 
- Jesus literature, and the subtlety of his method had almost 
persuaded me to give his views at least a qualified approval* 

But a more careful reading and more complete realization 
of his purpose and method led me to realize that like Dr* Sanday, 

I had been somewhat too hasty in my commendation* A complete 
view of what Schweitzer has done leads one to recoil with 
dislike, and almost horror* In his treatment of the various 
lives of Jesus, he works with only one end in view ~ how far do 
they have any bearing on the development of eschatology* He does 
hot appraoch these works, nor yet the gospels themselves with an 
open mind seeking’ for what truth he may find, but he approaches 
them dominated by one idea and only one, nssnely how he may use 
them to advance the eschatological view of the life of Jesus* 
Whatever view does not harmonize with his one purpose is promptly 
chloroformed by the subtlest of methods, Ss very cleverness 
maki&fe it all the more revolting* Schweitzer*s work, in fact, 
reminds the writer of his visit to the ancient city of Louvain 
after the signing of the Armistice* rhe German hordes, in 1914, 
had destroyed a considerable portion of this Belgian city including 
its fanous library and the major portion of its fine old collegiate 
church of St* Pierre* Phis was done, not in accord with any 








61 # 


principle of justice or in accordance with the laws of 
warfare, hut simply to create a spirit of terrorism* In 
the centre of the city stood the richly carved and wonderful 
Hotel De Ville, unhaimed* uhy? Hot because of its grace and 
beauty, but because in its use as administrative offices by 
the German authorities, their own end - the subjugation of a 
free people - might be furthered* ihus does Schweitzer in like 
fashion, in his review of the life - of - Jesus literature leave 
a trail of destruction in his wake* Only such work is allowed to 
remain standing as will further his end- the sujection of every¬ 
thing in the gospels to the eschatological view* 

At the opening of this essay we noted the arrogant 
German spirit of the writer* Further, it may be pointed out that, 
although he purports to give the results of the study of the life 
of Jesus, this is confined with a couple of exceptions to German 
lives of Jesus* Ihese exceptions are references to the work 
of Frenchmen, but even in these he points out carefully that they 
are foreign to French thought and have real value only so far 
as they are Goman in spirit* As for the English theologians, 
he has carefully avoided making any mention whatsoever of their 
work* He passes them by with a quifct scorn which does not 
consider than sufficiently worthy even of a word of condemnation* 

Schweitzer*s treatment of Jesus is one with which we 
must profoundly disagree* Bahrdt had made Jesus the tool of the 
As sen© order, Schweitzer made Him the passive tool of the eschatol¬ 
ogical plan of God* His Jesus v&ks nothing more or less than an 
automaton, wholly conditioned and limited by eschatology* He did 
not come to teach or to bring the people into the kingdom* Every¬ 
thing was fixed for Him, according to Schweitzer, by predestination* 
Only those predestined belonged to the kingdom and Jesus was merely 
an instrument in ushering in that kingdom* Such a view robs 
Jesus of all His personality, Uinsmeness, and power* Such is 
not the Jesus whom w© know and who has dominated the civilisation 
of the world for nearly twenty centuries* 

Ihen too, w© might ask Schweitzer, how is it, if the time 
of Jesus was so soaked in apocalyptic and if Jesus Himself was 
wholly conditioned and dominated by it, that Jesus got away 
from its influence to such an extent as to give forth the great 
quantity of high ethical teaching vhich we find in the gospels* 

If His whole age was steeped in apocalyptic does not the fact 









62 , 




that He rose above it in the many passages of high ethical 
teaching like that of the parable of the Good Samaritain, 
proclaim triumphantly that Jesus cannot be contained wit Iain 
the narrow limits of eschatology* Does not Schweitzer’s 
very insistence on the eschatological temper of the age, 
here defeat his own purpose? 

ihen too, along with the eschatological sayings of 
Jesus, we place that great quantity of high ethical teaching 
which Schweitzer has largely ignored, and ask him what he is 
going to do with these teachings? They cannot be explained 
as merely incidental* 

Turning away f*om Schweitzer for a moment the writer 
feels like expressing his appreciation of the work done by 
Streeter* By his showing the gradual development which apoca¬ 
lyptic passed through in the earlier and later documents he 
has done a real service* By showing the heightening which 
apocalyptic underwent as is shown in % Mark, Matthew, and 

Luke, Streeter laid his finger on a most significant fact* 

■ ■ ’■ - 

Schweitzer claims that Hark represents Jesus as the 
apocalyptic Messiah, and in this X think he is right, but when 
that is granted, one feels like asking the further question, 
what did Jesus think of Himself? Streeter has shorn that in 
the earliest document there is the least trace of apocalyptic, 
but between the life of Jesus and even that earliest document 
there had happened a great fact — the resurrection* Lnd it 
was the resurrection experienced which made the disciples re¬ 
interpret the man who had meant so much to their sown religious 
life* when ofchey returned to Galilee all ufcheir old enthusiasm 
and love returned and in the light of certain resurrection 
experiences they interpreted their Lord in a new way* 

It this point it will be seen that we disagree with 
Dr* 1* F* Bcott, who claims that it is quite Impossible that 
belief in the messiahship of Jesus could have grown up without 
any foundation from His actual teaching* On the other hand, 
we maintain that there occurred between the life of Jesus 
and the writing of Mark a great experience which changed 
the disciples view concerning Jesus and was quite sufficifet 














63 , 


to account for the tradition* 

It is evident that Mark has a distinct idea how Josus 
as; the apocalyptic Messiah should function* For him the histpry 
of the world consists in a struggle between Satan and G-od* 

Jesus overcomes Satan and takes his official place in the new 
kingdom* He was for Mark the preliminary apocalyptic Messiah* 

Matthew holds that Jesus was the Messiah from his birth and 
yet he copies Mark and you have the two views of the Davidic and 
apocalyptic messiah in Matthew* He is forever showing how 
Jesus fulfills Old Testament prophecy* But it was only in the 
intertestament period that the apocalyptic part arose* Matthew 
shows how Jesus came from David, but he is far enough away from 
events that he is able to tack the title X/- 7 ks-'tcs on to Jesus* 

In the Gospel of John the apocalyptic Messianic hope has 
vanished almost entirely* Jesus has official significance not 
only upon the earth but before* The task of John’s Messiah 
was to save men* This was certainly not that of Mark’s* 

"./hat did Jesus think of Himself? Between the ear 13a st 
interpretation and the life of Jesus comes the crucifixion and 
resurrection* Schweitzer expounds Mark’s thinking and feels 
that Mark’s thought is what Jesus thought of Himself* 

Ton Dobschutz and Haraack stress the 3 document! They 
emphasize the high ethical value of Q and place eschatology on 
a lower level* 

The problem is, what idea concerning the Messiah had 
fundemental significance in Jesus 9 day* As far as can be 
known there were the two views - Davidic and apocalyptic* The 
Davidic is the only one which had in it a place for a man who 
lived on earth* The apocalyptic hope thad no place for such 
a man so it doesn’t fit* On the other hand Jesus died and that 
had no place in the Davidic hope* Tith the people the two ideas 
ran side by side* Jesus died, time passed, and he did not corn© 
again* The person of Jesus had so impressed His disciples with 
His religions value and meaning for their own lives that when the 
Davidic attempt at evaluation fails ( i e. at the entry into 
*>erosaj.em), they still know that the person of Jesus is supreme 
in their religious life and so they evaluate Him in the highest 
form their thought could take - the relation expressed by the 






64 , 


apocalyptic Messiah# Bat the stimuli coaid not arise in 
Jesus* day since in the apocalyptic hope there was no place 
for a Messiah to come as a man to earth# 

In Jesus day the thought of the Messiah was to the 
fore because of John’s preaching# John stresses salvation 
from sin to be accomplished by the coming of the Messianic 
age# John held to the apocalyptic type* Jesus also held 
to the apocalyptic type but that doesn’t say that Jesus 
thought of Himself as the apocalyptic Messiah* Jesus used 
apocalyptic terms in describing the kingdom of heaven# He 
does not think of. Himself as an officer of the kingdom# His 
relation is more personal# He is shocked that men hold 
themselves aloof from God# He realizes God as the great 
father of all and for his own day brings a strenuous ethical and 
prophetic message# 

The life of Jesus is that which he lived in Galilee, but 
a life of Christ is the way He manifests Himself today# Professor 
Sanday says ” The Messiahs hip of Jesus by those who deny it, is 
denied as a Hessiahship viiich is Jewish and postulate a Christ- 
ology which makes room f or the essential soteriological work 
of Jesus.'' 

It is incorrect to say that Jesus was not the Messiah, but 
it is to say that he was such in the Havidic or apocalyptic 
sense# Because of his great value for the disciples' religious 
lives he did function as Messiah, but the highest way they had of 
interpreting that was by expressing it as apocalyptic# Jesus 
is truly the Messiah for us today as he was for them, in that 
for us too he has that great religious value for our lives which 
is abundantly able to save and to keep# In the highest sense we 
may sag in the words of the evangelist of old, "For he it is, 
who shall save his people from their sins# t? 










<r 




X 
























