For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


LOGIC, TRUTH, AHD REALITY 

Ly 

Ross G. RoLinson 





@X IIBM* 

mamnm 








UNIVERSITY OF /»_ IRTA 
LI i.': tRY 


Regulations Am , or- J . Iuk T ;ie ss£ _and_ J issor t aLions 

Typescript copies of theses and dissertations for Master’s 
and Doctor’s decrees deposited In the University of Alberta 
Library, as the Official Copy of the Faculty of Graduate Studies, 
may be consulted in the 1 el renc< 5a In; Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under those 
i 1 >ei vis Lon the work was done. Some Depart ents are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the inter library loan 
service of the University of alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertacions are to be used only with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library ;Aaen extended passages are used. 
Alien permission has' been granted, credit must appear in the 
published work. 

This chesis or dissertation has been used In accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library Is obligated to secure the signature of each 
user. 

< 

Please sign below: 


Date _ Signature ___ ins tituti on 

































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/logictruthrealitOOross 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


LOGIC, TRUTH, AND REALITY 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


by 

ROSS G. ROBINSON 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
APRIL, 1951 



University of Alberta 


Faculty of Arts and Science 
Department of Philosophy and Psychology 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 
have read and, recommend to the School of Graduate Studies 
for acceptance, a thesis entitled ’’Logic, Truth, and 
Reality”, submitted by Ross G # Robinson, B*A#, in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master 
of Arts* 




Dated; 











An Abstract of “Logic, Truth, and Reality” 


The theme which runs Implicitly throughout the thesis 
is that logic is concerned with how we obtain knowledge* The 
first three chapters are taken up with discussions of what 
might be called the technical subject-matter and operations 
in acquiring knowledge* The fourth chapter is a restatement 
of the coherence theory of truth, based on the results of 
the earlier chapters* And the fifth is a consideration of 
whether the laws of logic are a priori or whether they are 
empirics! generalizations* 

There is no doubt that some definitions merge into 
propositions! and all are agreed that inference has to do with 
propositions* But, rejecting the notion that inference pro¬ 
ceeds according to formal principles, I conclude that infer¬ 
ence is a matter of seeing relationships between various com¬ 
binations of meanings* Ihen the inferred propositions have 
been tested by their coherence with other propositions, and by 
empirical tests where applicable, they are said to be true; if 
they fail both the coherence and the empirical tests, they are 
said to be false* Although 'this is not a completely satisfac¬ 
tory position, that the logical lavs are inductions seans to 
me to be a little more plausible than that they are a priori * 





Note: The bibliography lists only one viork for each 
philosopher mentioned* References in the text are 
made by stating the name of the philosopher and the 
page number of his book* 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter 


Page 


I* DEFINITION. 1 

H. PROPOSITIONS. 16 

m. INFERENCE. IiO 

Fart 1. IjO 

Part 2. 60 

IF. TRUTH. 7h 

V. IJStS OF LOGIC. 91 













CHAPTER I 


DEFINITION 


To reason well is the business of comparatively few 
persons* To reason, well or badly, is a necessity at some time 
or other for every sane person. It may be the fairly single matter 
of getting wood from the shed to the fireplace; it may be the ques¬ 
tion of how to budget for a holiday; it may be a problem in pure 
mathematics; it may be the question ,r $hat is the Good?” IThatever 
the situation which demands, or perhaps excites, our efforts in 
reasoning about it, if the results of our reasoning are to be at 
all satisfactory they must be at least relevant to the problon. 

This is not just an idle commonplace* Too often it happens that 
results of deliberations are give n as being reasoned answers and 
explanations vrilth the implication that they are final because they 
are reasoned, when in fact what is proffered as an answer or explan¬ 
ation is not even relevant'to the issue. If there are any conclu¬ 
sions in this investigation, I think that they will be reasoned 
ones and also that they will be relevant to the subjec t, but 
they will certainly not be put forth with any degree of finality* 

In An Introduction to Logic Joseph writes that n Logic is 
the science which brings to clear consciousness the nature of the 
processes which our thought performs when it is thinking about other 
things than Logic 11 , (p. 367). A more general and less contentious 








!-> 






(2 


statement is that logic is the study of the processes of reason¬ 
ing* All attempts to reason have a common characteristic, namel.y, 
their aim is to bring some degree of order and unity into our 
thinking* Order alone is not sufficient* Items of our thought 
may be classified and grouped, presenting an appearance of order 
when we reflect on them, yet there may be no connections between 
the classes or groups, there may be gaps which prevent the slight¬ 
est feeling of unity* Reasoning is largely the attempt to fill 
the gaps by discovering connections between items of knowledge* 
What the logician does is to study hair we do see these relation¬ 
ships* 

Although it is probable that thinking and reasoning 
occur without the use of words, it is unquestionable that lang¬ 
uage facilitates the processes* However, language must be learned 
before it can be used, and the difficulties of learning languages 
are many* There is no point in uttering nonsense syllables; 
there is not much use in uttering sounds whose meanings are 
only privately known* The various sounds and groups of sounds 
must have meaning in order that we may communicate* Bat how are 
two persons to learn the same meaning for a particular word? There 
are two methods: 1* by means of actions, and 2* by means of other 
words; and it is the second method which is important for logic* 

The purpose of defining words is to give some kind of meaning to 
them, so that they may be used with more precision and clarity in 
sentences* The sentences should be meaningful since they are the 
verbal expression of propositions; indeed when a sentence is not 






( ) 





(3 


meaningful, there is no proposition of which., it is the express¬ 
ion* And propositions are the vital units of thought for they 
serve as the basis for inference and as the means by winch 
meanings are connected and inter-related* However, in spite 
of the fact'that’ propositions are the bricks of knowledc ge, 
without inference the edifice would fall to the ground. Infer* 
ence is the seeing of relationships between the propositions^ 
it is the cement of the building. 

What I propose to do in this essay is to investigate 
the natures of definitions, propositions, and inference, with the 
intention of combining the results to form a theory of truth, 
which in turn will give an indication of what I hold to be the 
nature of reality. And lastly (and to continue the metaphor) 

I shall discuss the plan of the building, the laws of logic, in 
the respects of why the laws are the plan and of whether there 
can be any other. 

At the outset I should explain that by the word "tiling” 

I mean what Richard Robinson means: "anything whatever, occurent 
or non-occurent, selfconsisteit or selfcontradictory, as far as 
it is the meaning of some word". Xp.31) . Since "thing" is an 
almost indispensable word in philosophical discussions, yet the 
one most open to the objection "What on earth do you mean by 
* thing* ? n , such a definition was needed* 

It seems to me that the object of knowledge is the uni¬ 
verse, and particularly our own little part of it, the world, 
lhat we know must be in some way applicable to reality, to the 
universe. We make use of language in discovering new things 








o 






















about the world, but, as mentioned above, the words must have 
clear and precise meanings for best results* Consequently 
we are interested in definitions which are attempts to give 
words those clear and precise meanings "which we wish them to 
have* 

All definitions are, in a sense, nominal definitions, 
and most definitions are, in a sense, real definitions* Those 
persons who contend that definitions are either one or the other 
exclusively do so be straining the ordinary meanings of the 
words used or by interpreting the word and process of defini¬ 
tion so that it will conform to their general philosophical 
outlook* The forcing of meanings into systems of knowledge is 
unfortunately frequent in philosophy, with the result that 
many of the arguments of philosophers are attempts to persuade 
opponents to adopt the usual meanings of words so that they 
avoid interpretations which seem ludicrous* To interpret a 
word in the most natural way or idth its usual meaning is not 
always easy, far meanings may change gradually, and the same 
word may have different meanings in different parts of a country 
or two or three different meanings in the same language* In 
spite of the difficulty, however, of. determining the usual 
meaning the result, of the activity has one distinct advantage 
over the process of forcing the meanings to fit a systan of 
meanings* The latter brings about confusion by introducing 
new meanings where they are not needed, and by discarding part 











t 


) 







(5 


of the meaning which is generally given. And whatever the 
manner of definition may be, it is carried through in the 
interest of consistency, whether the consistency of a particular 
system of meanings or of being consistent with ordinary usage. 

The most significant difference between nominal defin¬ 
itions and real definitions — one would think so* at any rate, 
from the two adjectives “nominal" and “real" — is that the 
definiens of a nominal definition refers to the words it consists 
of, whereas the definiens of a real definition refers to reality 
independent of words. Another interpretation of the difference, 
which is equivalent to that given in the preceding sentence, is 
that in a nominal definition the definiendum is defined as a 
word, whereas in a real definition it is defined as what the word 
stands for. Thus it is possible for &ome philosophers to assert 
that since all definition is of words or symbols it is nominal, 
while others assert that it is real because all definition is 
about what the word or symbol means, A 'third group, Kant and 
his followers, assert that definition is of concepts which are 
neither mere words nor things in reality. To say that only con¬ 
cepts are defined is to complicate the problan of definition and 
to avoid the fact that definition has to do with wordsj that is 
to say, words may be or may refer to concepts, according to some 
philosophers, but since to all philosophers words are words, the 
complication is unnecessary. It is not possible to deal so sum¬ 
marily with the other two groups of philosophers. 

In Robinson 1 s book entitled Definition , the author dis¬ 
tinguishes three kinds of definition: word-word, ward-thing. 







. > i: 




(6 


and tiling-thing* He does not discuss word-word definition 
because he thinks that “its importance is slight’** (p. 19) 

On page 178 he writes, “I think we can confidently say that 
the confusion between the analysis of tilings and the nominal 
definition of words has been by far the most damaging error in 
the theory of definition, and among the most damaging errors 
in the whole of philosophy” * By “the analysis of things” 
Robinson means thing-thing- definition which, for him, is 
real definition* He proposes on page 190 that “we had better 
drop the term ’real definition 1 , and call, by a more specific 
name, each of the twelve different activities that 1 real 
definition 1 has meant, and confine the term definition 1 to 
nominal definitions”. Thus, for him, there is only one impor¬ 
tant land of definition and that is the word.-thing kind which 
is nominal definition* He subdivides word-thing definition into 
lexical definition reporting the customary or dictionary 
meaning of a word”) and stipulative definition ’^“establishing 
or announcing or choosing one’s own meaning for a word”). He 

believes “that all three kinds of definition.are possible 

event?, and occur from time to time, and have their valuej but 
thing-thing definition had better be called by some other name 
than ’definition 1 ”, and the word-word kind is unimportant* 

Robinson interprets word-thing definition very broad¬ 
ly: “any process, whether verbal or otherwise, by which any 
individual, whether God or angel or man or beast, brings any 








(7 


individual, whether himself or another, to know the meaning 
of any elementary symbol, whether verbal or other, and if 
a verbal symbol whether a noun or an adjective or a prep¬ 
osition or any other sort of word". On this interpreta¬ 
tion, the process of teaching a child that "block" means a 
little cubical figure with a letter on one side, a picture 
on another and various colors on the remaining four, is defin¬ 
ition, although the process may consist only of picking up or 
pointing to a block and saying "block 11 * This sort of activ¬ 
ity is more appropriately termed "naming"* Robinson agrees 
with Stebbing, who contends that limping certain different 
activities under the general heading of definition is to 
confu.se the natures of the activities $ but he qualifies his 
agreement by saying that if the activities have a common ele¬ 
ment then one is justified in giving them a common name* 

This is rather Dike saying that we can call bread "cake”, or 
cake "bread" because flour is a common ingredient of the two* 
And, of course, we can if we wish* But to call cake "bread" 
is not to distinguish between bread and cake, nor is there 
an apparent distinction between naming and definition when both 
are called by one name* 

This broad interpretation of word-thing definition 
covers, or it is intended to do, the two subdivisions, lexical 
and stipulative definitions* It is not clear, however, why 
at least some lexical definitions are classed as word-thing 
instead of word-word definitions, unless one explains it by 
saying that Robinson insists so strongly that definition is 
a process of relating symbols to things that the only kind of 













(8 


definition which he thinks is really definition is the word- 
thing kind* Although he does not discuss word-word definition, 
he gives an exajiple of what he means by this kind: "If....* 
someone tells you that the German word , rot I means the same 
as the French word * rouge 1 , while you remain ignorant what 
either of these words refers to, that is a word-word definition "5 
and it would be generally agreed that this is a fairly unimpor¬ 
tant process* Would there, however, be general agreement that 
the process is definition? I wonder that Robinson calls it 
definition* He refuses the name to real definition because 
real definition is not of symbols and is entirely of things* One 
would think that he would also refuse the name to word-word def¬ 
inition on the ground that the word-word kind is of symbols only, 
because it is obvious that he regards only a combination of sym¬ 
bols and meanings as definition* However, he says tr lford-word 
definition correlates a word to another word, as having the 
same meaning" (p* 17 ); yet two or three lines above he says that 
the correlation is word-word definition while there is ignorance 
of the meaning, lhat he means is that Then someone learns 
that "brins" and "rolic" have the same meaning, without knowing 
what the meaning is, he learns a word-word definition, and that 
when someone learns the two words and their meaning he learns 
a word-thing definition. Suppose that someone knows what rolic 
means; then to say " 1 rolic 1 means so-and-so and so-and-so" is to 

give a word-thing definition, and to say "rolic is so-and-so 
and so-and-so" is to give a real definition. 





■ 


> r- ’ 




I 












(9 


Robinson makes a nice distinction at the expense of 
the ordinary usage of ’the terras. While the ordinary usage 
is not to be followed at all costs, net to follow it increases 
confusion although by not following it one may perhaps bring 
some clarity and order into ordinary usage* In at least one 
instance he makes a distinction -without a difference* Plato 
and Aristotle, he says, are realists in the sense that they 
discuss things, they look for essences, they search for a 
"non-existent identity of meaning” of a word, they seek a 
cause; (and real definition had better be called by some other 
name). Xet on page 62 he cites an example of a stimulative 
definition: “Is envy really a bad thing?— It depends what you 
mean by ;l envy I; . If you mean feeling bitterness and hate towards 
a man because he has some good which you lack, then" etc. He 
says this is an example of giving a thing to a name* It cer¬ 
tainly is not an example of giving anything whatever to a name, 
for the tiling given is at least sometimes called ‘‘envy 1 ** He 
does not mention any other thing which might be called “envy”; 
but I suggest that if he had given another meaning, it world be 
similar to the first, the two containing a common element with¬ 
out which a thing is not envy* In what way does his example 
differ from Plato 1 s discussion of “knowledge”, “virtue”, “beauty”? 
It seems to me that the two are essentially the sane, in spite 
of the fact that he calls his example stipulative definition 
and Plato*s, real definition, in order to distinguish between 
the two * Plato, at the very least, had a vague notion of the 
meaning of the terms he was trying to define* He did not dis- 



.1 


•:> 




(10 


cuss anything whatever as a possible meaning of a particular 
term, though he was indeed concerned to discuss the essence 
of a tiling. In point of fact, the example cited above is 
evidence that Robinson is confused about the nature of defin¬ 
ition, He first asks "Is envy really a bad thing?"; ostensibly 
he is asking a question about the tiling, envy. In answering, 
however, he talks about the word "envy" when he suggests a mean¬ 
ing for it. On reading the question one expects an answer which 
will be about the thing, envy, an analysis of the thing or a 
description of the thing, Robinson, however, writes about a 
thing for the purpose of relating it to a word. But what is 
the difference? A pair of quotation marksi Stipulative defin¬ 
ition: "envy" is so-and-so* Real definition: envy is so-and- 
so, And the so-and-so T s are precisely the sane. 

Now what is gained by making a distinction between 
word-thing and thing-thing definition, if the only difference 
is that the second kind is a definition of a thing represented 
by a word, and the first kind is a definition of a word? The 
latter is not a definition of a word alone. When the word to be 
defined is not known to anyone, e*g, rolic (so far as I know, 
the word "rolic" has not appeared in any spoken language or in 
any literature, other than in this essay) , then the jprocess of 
defining it can truly be said to be stipulative: "rolic" means 
the house at the end of the street. On the other hand, "envy" 
is known $ the word has been used in literature and in the spoken 
language; a suggested meaning for the word "would be at least 







I 




f 



t 



3' ‘ i' 















(II 


similar to its customary meaning ; and a person meeting the word 
for the first time would know from its position in -the sentence 
that it is not an adverb or a conjunction* To anyone "rolic 11 
might be any part of speech* But when either word is given 
meaning and the relation between the word and meaning is noted 
in a sentence, then the sentence is a definition. For, Then 
understood in the most natural way, a definition is a sentence 
which contains the word or phrase to be defined, known as the 
definiendum and which is usually the subject of the sentence, 
a word or group of words which gives the definiendum 1 s meaning, 
which is known as the definiens and is usually the predicate of 
the sentence, and a joining ward “is”, “are”, or “means 11 * Mill 
gives the best definition: “The simplest and most correct no¬ 
tion of Definition is, a proposition declaratory of the meaning 
of a word; namely, either the meaning which it bears in common 
acceptation, or that which the speaker or writer, for the par¬ 
ticular purposes of his discourse, intends to annex to it n * 
(Logic I, p. 182) 

A sentence, then, which is composed in the manner 
described above, is a definition, the meaning of at least one 
part of which is known. It is obviously a verbal statement. 

Some logicians, who consider it as a statement relating two 
different sets of symbols, call it a nominal definition* Other 
logicians, who consider it as a statement about things, call it 
a real definition* Bichard Robinson, who wishes to clarify the 
question of Definition, asserts that the statement is about sym¬ 
bols and things •, and instead of finding another adjective to 






(12 


describe his compromise definition, he uses "nominal", though 
why he chooses "nominal” rather than "real", I do not know — 
however, one is as good as the other* Thus it is that all 
definitions are nominal in the sense that they are certainly 
sets of symbols which are related to each other } and most de¬ 
finitions are real, in the sense that they are about things* 

The others, which cannot be considered as real, definitions 
since they are meaningless (except in the sense that one is to 
understand that one symbol whose meaning is unknown is equiva¬ 
lent to another symbol whose meaning is unknown) , are nominal 
only In the sense that they are about symbols* 

There is one more point concerning Definition which it 
is worthwhile to discuss* It is: are proper names indefinable? 
Mill contends that proper names are indefinable since a proper 
name i3 "a mere mark put upon an individual, and of which it is 
the characteristic property to be destitute of mealing"* (p* 182) 
In opposition, Robinson asserts that any sign is lexically defin¬ 
able* But it must be remembered that a sign is lexically defined 
by any process which brings an individual to know the meaning d£ 
the sign$ moreover, the process need not be verbal* If one were 
to say, with a nod of the head, "That is Clement Attlee who is 
coming out of the car", and if the hearer understood that the 
name of the man getting out of the car was Clement Attlee, then 
the speaker would have given a lexical definition of the words 
"Clement Attlee"* This sort of process is covered by Robinson*s 
definition, and therefore he asserts that proper names are defin¬ 
able, they point to some thing, they have meaning since a mean- 



* J ' 1 . ; ? ■ r ■ ■ 









) 











(13 


ingless sign is not a sign* To say 1 * Gladstone* is the su]>- 
name of one of the Prime Ministers of Great Britain during the 
19 th century" is to define lexically the word Gladstone 1 . 

Ttiis definition does not tell very much about the word except 
that its owner was not a sailor in Plymouth and suggests that 
there were other Prime Ministers of Great Britain during the 
19th century whose names were not "Gladstone". The ever- 
increasing precision and specification of meaning is charac¬ 
teristic of lexical definitions, whereas the stipulative def¬ 
inition is designed to give a short, concise meaning to a word* 
Robinson*s definition of definition (i.e* lexical 
definition) is much wider than Ml11*s. As mentioned above. 
Mill understands definition in what seems to me to be the most 
natural way as being coirposed of words in a sentence* On page 
183 of the Logic he asserts: "(It is not a j definition of 
*John Thomson* to say he is *the man now crossing the street*. 
These propositions may serve to make known who is the partic¬ 
ular man to whom the name belongs; but that may be done still 
more unambiguously by pointing to him, which, however, has not 
usually been esteemed one of the modes of definition". Ihat 
Mill means, I think, is that because proper names have no 
connotation (i.e. proper names can be given arbitrarily to any 
number of individuals who may have nothing in common, other 
than being human beings, which can serve as a singular mark as 
a basis for meaning) they have no meaning* It is not as though 
"Clement Attlee" means an Englishman who is short, bald, mous- 






t 


I 


, 


T 


J 


■ 


X t. 


f; 


tached etc, for the description can be of others who are not 
called “Clement Attlee”, One could give a list of the fea¬ 
tures and historical facts with accompanying dates cdT the man 
known as Clement Attlee, so comprehensive that there would be 
no possibility of confusing him with anyone else. Mill simply 
retorts, “You have made it perfectly clear whom you mean; but 
you have not given me a definition”, Joseph says in An Intro¬ 
duction to Logic , p, 153, that “Mill really intended by con¬ 
notation general meaning, but thought that to lack it was to 
lack meaning altogether”. Mill is evidently using “meaning” 
in a narrow sense, and, since for Mill a definition declares 
the meaning of a word , proper names are therefore indefinable, 
“Harry Truman was the President of the United States 
during 195>0“ is an intelligible statement which tells something 
about Harry Truman* I see no reason why “the President of ihe 
United States during 195>u“ cannot correctly be considered as 
at least part of the meaning of “Harry Truman”, The whole 
statement, then, may be called a defi nition in spite of Mill , s 
protests. But, one must agree with Mill that there is a differ¬ 
ence between a statement like “E.C, Manning is ihe present 
Premier of Alberta” and a statement like “the aeroplane is an 
engine-driven machine capable of tra.velH.ing through the air at 
great speeu ;j , even though one does not agree with him that the 
first is not a definition. In order to distinguish the two 
kinds with different names, the first may be termed denotative 
definition and the second may be termed connotative definition. 










,) • . , 








(IS 


As its name implies, a denotative definition is one which 
attempts ‘bo clarify meaning by denoting things to which the 
word to be defined is corredtly applied. Thus, ”steamship 11 
means what is denoted by Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, Maur¬ 
etania, H e de France. A connotative definition attempts 
to give the meaning of a certain word by signifying ‘the 
descriptive characteristics of aH things denoted by the 
word. Thus, n steamship ,l means a sea-going vessel propelled 
by the power of steam. On this distinction a proper name can 
be denotatively defined, the denotation being only one thing. 
It can be said, then, that in one sense proper names have 
meaning* 





■ 







■ 







: : • ' :■ , c 

■ 4 ./ ;: ■■ ’ -■ '■ • * 









(16 


CHAPTER II 

PROPOSITIONS 

Logic is chiefly the study of the relationships 
between propositions* What, then, is a proposition? A num¬ 
ber of answers have been advanced: a proposition is the judg¬ 
ment expressed in words; a proposition is a class of sentences 
which have the same intensional significance for anyone who 
understands 'then; a proposition is that which is true or false; 
a proposition is a portion of discourse in which a predicate is 
affirmed or denied of a subject* Although these answers are ncbt 
all that have been made, they are among those which form the 
subject-matter for this chapter* Some philosophers take judg¬ 
ment to be primary* In such cases, it is judgment which is dis¬ 
cussed, with the distinction between judgment and proposition 
noted* 

The proposition is the verbal expression of the judg¬ 
ment, according to idealists* To judge is to affirm or deny a 
predicate of a subject* (This, in effect, states that logic is 
concerned with categorical propositions only*) It is possible 
to be mistaken about our affirmations aid denials; M and Logic 
can render mo greater service than ‘to make us alive to the dis¬ 
tinction, which the grammatical form of the proposition fails 
to reflect, between opinion and knowledge* 11 (Joseph, p* l6o) 

We may assert that the sidewall: is covered with snow, which will 
be false if, unknown to us, the snow has been cleared away* We 
do make assertions which we think are true, yet often these asser- 





) 



< 


J 




t 




(17 


tions turn out false* 7Jh®t is important is the distinctive 
characteristic that propositions (the verbal expressions of 
judgments) are either true or false* Questions* exclamations* 
and commands are not propositions although they may imply 
propositions* The question n Are you the chap who had the 
accident here yesterday?” is neither true nor falls e; but it 
expects an answer which is true* ".Amazing i” may imply an 
assertion* but it is itself not one* "Get out!” cannot be 
true or false; although the proposition ,l He said ! Get out* 11 
is true if he did say so* These examples are not propositions 
and cannot be true or false* 

A proposition (i*e * a categorical proposition) is in 
the correct logical form when it is in the indicative mood. The 
subject and the predicate are its two parts* Some logicians in¬ 
clude the copula in the predicate* whereas others consider it 
to be the third part of the proposition. In either case the 
copula is* in a sense* the sign of the act of judging, r, To 
think the copula is the synthesis (or linking) of judgment. n 
(Joseph* p* 163) And it may be asked: what is synthesized? 

The fundamental tenet of those philosophers who are 
objective idealists is a set of three assumptions so inter¬ 
related that an inadequate account of this idealist position 
is given whenever the set is not complete, 1, The work! is a 
set of objects and relations of which I frame an idea* 2* The 
world has no meaning for me except as presented in the idea 
which I frame. 3* The Ideas and the Things which they repre- 



: 


> r.; 




t 








z 







. \ : V 






(18 


sent are not two classes of Reality^ the Ideas, taken as parts 
of a world, are the Things* (These are, unnumbered, in Bosan- 
quet*s Essentials of Logic, page 12) On this view, an idea 
is not what is normally thought of as being in the head in the 
sense that only minds have ideas, but it is a thing, a part 
of the world, an idea in the gigantic mind cf the Absolute 
(whatever that is) • Ideas are not separate from the things, 
known by a mind which treats the ideas and not the thing* The 
knowing mind is a fiction, says Joachim* It seems, then, that 
a judgment is not the coming together of two ideas in the human 
mind, for the latter is not the Kantian mind which somehow 
operates with its perceptions to give them certain orders and 
forms, "It is absurd to assume that a judgment, in strict and 
ultimate analysis, is a fact of mind (a psychical fact)* 11 
(Joachim, logical Studies , p, 212) Nor is a judgment the link¬ 
ing of sensations* Again quoting Joachim, p* 126: "There are 
no Sensations 1 . Though there is sensating in every perception, 
it *is there 1 and only as a 1 moment* of the whole experience, 
and (being a , moment 1 , not a * constituent*) has no character 
or object peculiar to itself or exclusively its am*" And on 
page 2^0: "Judgment is concrete, i*e. *one* or Shole*,, ..It 
is the self-development of an * object*, a movement in which an 
object constitutes itself and becomes known as what it !really* 
is, viz* a * spiritual fact* or 1 truth*. An intellectual proced¬ 
ure is.*,. * synthetic analysis* or 1 analytic synthesis**" Brad¬ 
ley asserts that all truth, if really true, is true of the ul¬ 
timate non-phenomenal fact. 







J 


!■ > 






t 


I 


# I 


f T 


I 


t 


r 1 I ■ I 




T 




(19 


It is apparent that much of the language of the 
above quotations is obscure, for tyro reasons: !♦ some of 
the terms are not used in the ordinary Tray, and 2* what is 
referred to cannot (on this theory) be talked about in em¬ 
pirical terms* I confess that it is by no means clear to me 
exactly what is the position of the objective idealists^ but 
I shall try to express what 1 think their general position is* 
Knowledge is mental* Things are mental, but tilings 
are mental only in the respect' that we cannot know about them 
unless we are made aware of them by their being present men¬ 
tally* I knew there is a sidewalk outside, and inasmuch as 
it is known it is a thing* Were I to discover that it is one 
foot thick it would be one more bit of knowledge about the side¬ 
walk, and I would therefore be contributing to the self-devel¬ 
opment of the sidewalk, to its self-realization* Discovering 
more things about the sidewalk will add to my knowledge of it, 
it is true, although the cosmic importance of ny discoveiy is 
that Hie sidewalk becomes more real with each fresh discovery 
until finally, with all things known about it, it becomes com¬ 
pletely true* This latter will happen, however, only when all 
things are known for each new thing discovered can in some re¬ 
spect (if only in respect of negation) be said to have a certain 
relationship with the sidewalk* That is, some feature in Van¬ 
couver is found to be precisely one thousand miles distant from 
a point of the sidewalk Thick is directly in front of the door 







(20 


of this house* This is a new discovery, a fresh relationship 
which adds to reality as a whole, and to the reality or truth 
of the sidewalk (also to the feature in Vancouver) * Thus it 
is that the idealists (those objective idealists who derive 
from Hegel, and of #1011 the most famous representatives 
among British philosophers are Bradley and Bosanquet) say 
that the world or reality or truth is a coherent systen of 
relationships. One thing which is newly discovered is immed¬ 
iately placed in certain relationships with all other things. 

Our method of handling these relationships is to express them 
in words. When we see that the words conflict we are certain 
that something is wrong, either with the way in which we are 
using the words or with the things which are represented by the 
words. It is a matter of faith, or is a basic assumption, that 
contradictions cannot occur in reality^ i,e, it is inp>ossible 
that something should be and also not be in the same place at 
the same time. Whatever is, can be expressed in propositions 
which ought not to contradict each other* When reality is 
given adequate and accurate verbal expression all the proposi¬ 
tions must be true. It is for this reason that Joachim asserts 
that logic is the science of ^knowledge-or-truth 11 * Whatever 
is discovered in logic is true, it is of the real* Falsehood 
has no part in knowledge and therefore has no part cf reality or 
truth. 

The theory of each thing being related in some way to 
every other thing is similar to the theory cf Whitehead that a 
thing is a concrescence of prehensions, the prehensions being df 






















3 ; 1 


.J. ■: 




(21 


both positive and negative kinds. 

Because of the oneness of reality these idealists 
do not allow that judgment is about reality. The act of 
judging is itself the self-developing of the subject of the 
judgment. If the judgment is not about reality, then there 
is no judgment* Judgment is the cognizance of differences in 
an identity, or as Joachim asserts, it is a synthetic-analysis 
or analytic-synthesis of a logical subject. I judge that 'the 
blotter under my paper is pink and rectangular because they 
(the different qualities; pinkness, rectangularity) belong to 
the blotter. When put into words this is an affirmation of 
a predicate of a subject, and is called a proposition* 

In contrast to the idealists who assert that the 
ideas are the things of reality, is the empiricist who asserts 
that the ideas are of the things. Ideas are psychical facts 
which result from sense impressions. Without sensation there 
are no ideas and therefore no knowledge* 

At the end of his analysis of the things which we de¬ 
note by names, J.S. Mill writes that 11 all we can knew of matter 
is the sensations which it gives us, and the order of these 
sensations; and that while the substance Body is the unknown 
cause of our sensations, the substance land is the unknown per¬ 
cipient” * (Vol* 1, p. 100). The four classes of Hameable Tilings 
which he records are: 1. Feelings, or states of consciousness, 
2. the Minds which experience these feelings, 3* the Bodies, 




} ff 




s ! 








(22 


or external objects, which excite certain of those feelings, 
and iu the Succession and Co-existences, the likenesses and 
Unlikenesses, between feelings or states cf consciousness. 

Trie relations mentioned in b do not subsist between things 
other than states of consciousness. To say that two things 
are like, therefore, is to say that the sensations of the 
two things are like* The likeness is not a relation which 
holds between the things, but between the ideas (for I 
suppose Mill means “states of consciousness" and "ideas" to 
be synonymous) . 

On the empiricist theory, then, we know only our 
sensations and the various relations which we may see to hold 
between the sensations. And since sensations are considered 
to be such only Then we are conscious of then That we know is 
only our states of consciousness. ITnen we are asleep or un¬ 
conscious and we do not hear noises which we would hear if 
we were awake and conscious, a noise which, were we awake, 
would be a sensation for us, is not a sensation. When I h§ye 
a sensation of blueness and I say "I see blue", what I am 
asserting is that I have a sensation of blueness, for all I 
can know is what is in my mind* The obvious question to be 
put to the empiricists is: how do you know whether there is 
anything in reality which you can talk about? The answer to 
this concerns one of the chief functions of logic. Mill says, 
namely, proof. As this will be discussed below with respect 












(23 


to a more appropriate topic, I shall not discuss it now* But 
in order to get over the present inconvenience of leaving 
empiricists with nothing but their states of consciousness 
to talk about, I shall say that although the empiricists 
maintain that only states of consciousness can be known, when 
they make an assertion they intend it to be about something in 
reality* When I assert that I see blue, in spite of the fact 
that I ought to say ”1 have a sensation of blueness 11 , I do 
mean that I see a blue thing* In this way, the empiricists 
claim to be talking about tilings other than their own mental 
states*. The mental state is the immediate ground for die asser¬ 
tion, but what is meant, what is referred to, is not a mental 
state necessarily — it is, of course, possible to talk about 
one*s mental state treated, as objects are treated, at one remove 
A proposition is a portion of discourse in which a pred¬ 
icate is affirmed or denied of a subject* (mil, Yol* 1, p* 103) 
Ihen we try to find out That is the nature of a proposition we 
must have one of two objects in mind: n to analyse the state of 
mind called Belief, or to analyze what is believed”* (p* 116) . 
Mill rejects the first object suggested as being the chief con¬ 
cern of the psychologist, not of the logician* A proposition, 
then, is an assertion of belief respecting the analysis of some¬ 
thing* The analysis may consist merely of the fact that two 
different names are given to the same object, as Hobbes asserts. 
The proposition "All animals are four-footed creatures” is not 
true because some things which are not four-footed are called 






u 









(2li 


animals. But "All animals are living creatures" is true because 
"living creature." is a name of everything of which "animal" is a 
name* Mill accepts Hobbes*s contention only with respect to 
objects denoted by proper names. Since proper names have no 
meaning (by which Mill means connotation) two different labels 
may be given to the same object without violating the meanings 
of the words used. Hobbes & error, according to Mill, is to suppose 
that all names are given arbitrarily, whereas in fact many (and 
indeed all that have connotation) are given because of attributes 
possessed by the object. Mill recognizes that names in 'the first 
instance are assigned arbitrarily; what he opposes is the theory 
on which, when I s^y "This blotter is pink", it is said that I 
simply choose to call the same object "this blotter" and "pink"; 
whereas the object is called a blotter because it has certain 
characteristics or attributes or qualities, and tills particular 
object is a blotter which, in addition to having the qualities 
which justify its being called a blotter, is pink. 

lhat does a proposition assert in the analysis of what 
is believed? Tnere are five things. Mill says, which propositions 
assert: sequence, co-existence, simple existence, causation, and 
resemblance. A proposition may assert only one, or it may assert 
two or more of these matters-of-fact. Sequence and co-existence 
may be affirmed or denied between phenomena, and between noumena, 
and between noumena and phenomena. (Mill says"between a noumenon 
and phenomena"; but I do not see any reason for restricting the 












(25 


relation to one noumenon, and phenomena, for it seems to me that, 
in Hill’s usage, the proposition “There are four pieces of cake 
left on the plate" is affirming our belief in the coexistence 
of both phenomena and noumena.) Simple existence may be asserted 
of noumena independently of their phenomena T.hich are their sen¬ 
sible manifestation* And in affirming the simple existence of 
noumena, we affirm causation, since the noumena are ‘the unknown 
causes of phenomena* Apparently Mil knows that noumena exist, 
because the universal law of causation asserts that "every fact 
which has a beginning has a cause"• (p* 395)♦ Xet, on the follow¬ 
ing page Mill asserts: "X premise, then, that when in the course 
of this inquiry I speak of the can. se of any phenomenon, I do not 
mean a cause which is not itself a phenomenon". It is not at all 
clear to me precisely what Mill (whom I am talcing as a represen¬ 
tative empiricist) means by asserting that the nature of a propo¬ 
sition is the analysis of what is believed. For he says quite 
definitely many times that we can know only our sensations (and 
I think that this is generally considered a fundamental assumption 
of the empiricists) * let he also says that we know phenomena and 
he occasionally mentions noumena as the causes of phenomena though 
he believes that noumena cannot be known* What a proposition does, 
I am not sure. It may assert one of the five matters-of-fact 
about sensations, i*e* about the feelings in one’s mind (which is 
unknown) • It may assert one of the five matter s-of-f act about 
phenomena, i.e. about what causes the feelings in one’s mind* Or 
it may assert one of the five matter s-of-f act about noumena, i.e* 




(26 


about the causes of the causes of the feelings in one’s mind. 

I do not think that Mill means the third alternative. The first 
alternative is suggestive of solipsism, a suggestion which I am 
sure Mill would refuse to be associated with* It is the second 
alternative which seems to me to fit in best with most of what 
Mill asserts, although it is by no means consistent with every¬ 
thing which he asserts* 

For the pragmatist, logic is the theory of inquiry, 
and since inquiry is a synonym for thought, logic is the theory 
of thought. Thought is not comprised of judgments or decisions 
which are static and final* Thought is one cf the means by which 
the human being as a psycho-physical organism adapts itself to 
the environment. Ideational or conceptual operations are in 
functional correspondence with the operations which involve the 
use of the sense organs. These two kinds of operation, namely, 
thinking and sensing, help u£ to solve problems, solving prob¬ 
lems being essentially the business of adapting to the environ¬ 
ment, We recognize a problem as an indeterminate situation, there 
is something lacking or unexplained in it which prevents our see¬ 
ing tiie situation as a coherent whole* Inquiry is the controlled 
attempt to transform the indeterminate situation into a determin¬ 
ate situation* (cf * Dewey) . 

Judgment is the settled outcome of inquiry* A judgment 
is dofferent from a proposition in that whereas the “content of the 
latter is intermediate and representative and is carried by symbols sr , 
a judgment, “as finally made, has direct existential import 5 '. 

(Dewey, p. 120) . There are partial judgments, which Dewey sometimes 






(27 


calls estimates or appraisals, and final judgments* But the 
only distinction between propositions and judgments which seems 
to have any point is that propositions are verbal, or symbolic, 
and judgments are ideational# For the difference between partial 
judgment and final judgment is merely verbal, unless Dewey uses 
final judgment to mean something which is not included in his 
definition of judgment* Partial judgments are the intervening 
steps between the recognition of a problem and the judgment of 
its solution* A number of possibilities might occur as sugges¬ 
tions which n just spring up, flash upon us M . (p* 110) • If the 
suggestions are thought to have a function to perform in the res¬ 
olution of a problem, they become logical ideas* The final test 
is whether they do function* Presumably, when they function neg¬ 
atively (i#e* if they are relevant to the problem though they do 
not advance it towards its solution), and when they function pos¬ 
itively by assisting in the solution, though not conclusively in 
the sense of justifying a final judgment, they are partial judg¬ 
ments* Mien, as a result of using the suggestions or logical 
ideas to discover by observation facts not previously observed, the 
situation is regarded as a coherent whole, the judgment is final* 
And so far, it is a fairly plausible account of certain steps 
which might occur in solving a problem: relevant facts are discov¬ 
ered, which do not form a consistent whole; there are gaps left 
to be filled; the last fact is discovered to make all the others 
fit together* 

However, since Dewey is not consistent in his use of 
































c. 




ft'. 









) 













(28 


the tern " judgment 111 * I am not by any means sure of exactly what 
he means when he says that something is a judgment* Ke asserts* 
for instance* that {judgment is "the settled outcome of inquiry"* 
yet that it "is not something occuring all at once", "Since it 
is a manifestation of inquiry* it cannot be instantaneous and 
jet be inquiry." Judgment "is temporal not in the external 
sense that the act of judging takes time* but in the sense that 
its subject-matter undergoes reconstitution in attaining the 
final, state of determinate resolution and unification which is 
the objective that governs judgment". !t seems to me ihat Dewey 
uses judgment to mean two things: 1. Inquiry* the solving of a 
problem* which takes time* and 2. the final result of the inquiry* 
the understanding of the total situation. Excepting for his div¬ 
ision of judgment into partial and final* I should think Dewey 
means the time-taking process of inquiry. The second suggestion 
has two arguments against it. One is the fact that -there is a 
good deal of evidence supporting the first suggestion that judg¬ 
ment is temporal* The other is that "the meanings which are sug¬ 
gested as possible solutions of a problem ... form the predica- 
tional contents of judgments". The contents of the predicate¬ 
meaning has " logical status only as it is taken for ... a method 
of solution not itself a solution". This provisional aspect of 
the predicate holds* I take it* for final as well as partial judg¬ 
ments. If this latter be true* then it is doubtful whether a 
final judgment ever can be given* for it would contain in the 










■ 











. 






predicate a suggested method for solving a problem; and this 
might well be what Dewey is intimating, since he is committed 
to the view that as psycho-physical organisms we are contin¬ 
ually trying to adapt ourselves to the environment*. 

Whatever the meaning of judgment, Dewey thinks that 
there are two different things involved* Facts, tilings which 
exist, external objects, these form the subject of judgment if 
they fulfil two conditions: 1* the existential thing "must de¬ 
limit and describe the problem in such a way as 'bo indicate a 
possible solution 1 ' 1 , and 2. “it must be such that new data, in¬ 
stituted by observational operations directed by the provisional 
predicate, **. will unite with its subject-matter to form a co¬ 
herent whole”* (p. 127) • The other thing is ideation* What 
Dewey seems to mean is that we are confronted pith real problems, 
not 'With' imaginary bnes, dnd w&’ deal' with these problems by 
thinking about them and testing the results of our thinking by 
appealling to reality. The ideas, which I think he would call 
the various predicates possible in a judgment, may not work well 
enough to let us see the situation as a coherent whole; but when 
they do and a final judgment (in one sense) is reached, this final 
judgment has ”existential import”* We start Pith sametiling 'which 
is real, and by thinking about it we may discover new facts, facts 
which go to make the total situation consistent* Thus, for Dewey, 
inquiry is carried out by thinking about reality and discovering 
new things which we can also call real on the strength of their 
fitting in with what we have previously discovered* Judgment, 

















(30 


then, is non-existential in the sense that it is ideas, al¬ 
though judgment refers to things in the world* 

Pragmatists are opposed to the notion of life*s being 
static in any aspect* Human beings are psycho-physical organ¬ 
isms in constant interaction •with the environment. The stimu¬ 
lation of the organism does not occur by means of sensations 
which, according to Schiller, are “mere figments of theory 51 , but 
by perceptions. Or rather, stimulation causes perceptions which 
interpret the stimulations in the light of previous experience. 

The entire business of being acted upon, reacting subjectively, 
and reacting objectively is really one action, or process, or 
function* Because words are static, pragmatists distrust them* 
Since propositions are symbolic forms of judgments, they are 
attempts to make judgments static, having bad consequences* For 
single words, and groups of words, may have one meaning in one 
setting, and another meaning in a different setting; and it is 
possible to use the same word, or group of wards, with different 
meanings when under ‘the impression that they are being used with 
the same meanings* This is one reason why pragmatists have lijzrile 
or no use for traditional, or formal. Logic; the latter is mere 
verbiage which supposedly symbolizes individual, static thoughts* 
Thinking is not dead, it is alive; i.e* it is a process, a function 
talcing place in a psycho-physical organism, having reference to 
factual existence* Propositions are the result of attempts to 
know more about the process by sampling* 











The comtemporary movement in philosophy which is known 
as Logical Positivism is one of such thoroughgoing phenomenalism 
that it is strikingly similar to a theory of subjective idealism* 

The movement began with a group of philosophers known as "the 
Vienna circle ’ 1 headed by Moritz Schlick, has received contri¬ 
butions from Wittgenstein and Bussell, and is currently very in¬ 
fluential in Britain and .America* The positivists accept Berke¬ 
ley 1 s denial of the notion of material substance* That there is 
any material tiling which causes me to see that the blotter on the 
desk is pink is an unwarranted assumption, is unverifiable in prin¬ 
ciple, and is consequently a meaningless statement. For what can 
I know about the blotter other than certain phenomena which form 
the logical construction which I call a blotter? That the blot¬ 
ter is both pink and rectangular is a proposition which can be 
empirically verified* But to assert that some thing is pink 
and rectangular in the sense that pinkness and rectangularity 
inhere in a thing is to assert what cannot be verified empiric¬ 
ally (for anything I might discover will be phenomena) and what 
is not logically necessary* These two conditions are the tests 
for the two kinds of propositions which phenomenal!sts recognize* 

A proposition is analytic if it is a tautology, i*e, it is known 
to be true without recourse to experience, simply because of our 
determination to use words or symbols in a certain wqy * A prop¬ 
osition is syn thetic if it can be empirically verified or if it 
is conceivable that it could be empirically verified with improve¬ 
ments in our methods of observation, i#e* if it is verifiable at 
least in principle* 








(32 


A .priori propositions, then, are necessary or anal¬ 
ytic because we refuse to let them be other-rise* The proposi¬ 
tions of logic and mathematics are necessary because we make 
them so* 7 / 5 * 12, not because any real entities are re¬ 
ferred to for an empirical test$ rather the proposition 7/5-12 
is true by definition — for the sum of 7 and 5 to be any other 
number but 12 would involve an inconsistent use of mathematical 
symbols* An empiricist like Mill agrees that propositions in 
arithmetic and geometry may be considered to be true by defini¬ 
tion, but he does not mean thereby that certain wards are equi¬ 
valent to certain other words* He asserts that the systems of 
mathematics are constructed from inductive generalisations*, Mill 
uses the example that we know three is two and one because exper¬ 
ience has shown us that three objects in a group can be separated 
into two groups of two objects and one object. What he objects 
to is ‘the notion that a number is an abstract entity. Three may 
refer to towns, books, or toes, but it does not refer to nothing. 
We generalise from the fact that three apples are two apples and 
one apple, and from the fact that three games are two games and 
one game, and from similar facts, that one and two are three. 

. Being an inductive generalization, it is contingent upon our ex¬ 
perience, and therefore falls short of certainty. Now this is not 
what the logical positivists assert* They assert that 3 « 2 / 1 
because the denial is self-contradictory* Anyone who maintains 
that three is not equal to the sum of two and one either has his 
own private system of symbols or he is using the conventional sys- 








tern such that the proposition contradicts itself* It is not 
necessary to have empirical verification of the proposition, 
for it is not a proposition about a matter of fact but of a 
relation of ideas which involves a consistent use of words* 

Propositions in logic are analytic for the same rea¬ 
sons viz* the consistent usage of words precludes the possi¬ 
bility of self-contradiction. Either this paper is white or it 
is not white* Once the meanings of "either 1 *, "or”, and "not” 
are understood, the proposition is known to be true; and no em¬ 
pirical consideration influences us to question its truth, since 
it is irrelevant to the truth of analytic propositions. Because 
analytic propositions have no factual content they cannot be 
proved or disproved by experience* The Proposition "Either this 
paper is white or it is not ""provides no information whatsoever" 
about the color of the paper "and it is for this reason that no 
experience can confute" it* (Iyer, p. 7 9) -Ayer asserts, however 
that the lack of factual content is no reason to suppose that 
analytic propositions are senseless in the way that metaphysical 
utterances are senseless* (A metaphysical utterance is one which 
cannot be verified even in principle e*g* the Absolute is lazy.) 
Analytic propositions illustrate how we do use words. We may then 
see new implications which can, in a sense, be considered as a way 
of deriving new knowledge from analytic propositions* But this 
will be discussed further down under Inference. 

Hie logical positivists classify propositions, then, 
according to whether they are known by definition to be true or 


' 


















■ 


* 










( 311 . 


false, and whether they are about matters of fact. The former 
are the analytic propositions of logic and mathematics$ the 
latter are synthetic propositions having factual content. There 
is an attempt to give a priori justification to some propositions 
concerning matters of fact by asserting that the ostensibly syn¬ 
thetic proposition is actually an analytic proposition record¬ 
ing our determination to use words in a certain way* Ayer sug¬ 
gests as an example (p. 79) u No thing can be coloured in differ¬ 
ent ways at the same time with respect to the same part of it¬ 
self n * Tliis may be merely an analytic proposition about our 
linguistic usa^e$ but if it is, it can be argued, as Pap argues 
in Elements of Analytic Philosophy , that hardness and weight 
are co-existent predicates (in many objects) simply because 
we decide never to use one while excluding the other. We obey 
ll the implicit semantic rules that it is incorrect to apply the 
expression l it is hard and it has no weight 1 to anything 11 . Pap 
does not accept this argument, for he thinks that the invariable 
conjunction of hardness with weight is an empirical fact, and 
that, though it may be unimaginable, it is not self contradic¬ 
tory to assert that one can get, H in looking at the self-same 
part of a surface, simultaneously the color sensations called 
’red 1 and *blue 1 u * (p. h2 6 ). It seems to me that no arranging 
of words Trill change empirical facts, that an object is both 
hard and heavy (i.e. it has weight) not because we decide that 
the tiro words should be used together, but because the two pro¬ 
perties, hardness and weight, do co-exist. That one space-time 











( 35 ' 


region cannot be referred to as both red and blue is an empir¬ 
ical fact, and this is the reason why we do not use both words 
when referring to only one part at any one time* To say that su&h- 
and-such is an analytic proposition is itself a synthetic prop¬ 
osition which falls short of certainty, excepting when a propo¬ 
sition of this kind — this proposition is analytic — is consid¬ 
ered to be of a higher order than synthetic propositions of 'the 
type: the ground is covered with snow* 

There is still to be discussed the logical!, positivistd* 
definition of a proposition* dyer asserts that "we may define 
propositions as a class of sentences which have the same inten- 
sional significance for anyone who understands them"* (p* 88). 

Both" .Ayer and Pap remark that this does not mean that a proposi¬ 
tion is a collection of sentences, but rather that to speak 
about a given proposition is a way of speaking about certain sen¬ 
tences* This seems to me to be an unsuccessful attempt to rid 
logic of the notion that a proposition is an ideal construction* 
Instead of the proposition being an abstract entity which may 
be expressed by different groups of words, the positivists assert 
that a proposition is a logical construction out of synonymous 
sentences* IFnen it is objected that a proposition can exist 
without a sentence expressing it being either written or spoken, 
they reply that the objection holds only if a proposition is 
identified with a collection of synonymous sentences. Since a 
proposition is a class of sentences, they assert that the objec- 







• • i 




(36 


tion does not hold* But'of a proposition is a class of sen¬ 
tences, and if a class is a logical construction, and if it 
is not even necessary that the sentences be formulated, what 
is a proposition? .Surely, if this is the case, a proposition 
is an abstraction, and to call it a logical construction rather 
than an ideal construction is to show a preference in terminology* 

How that I have explained, albeit inadequately, what 
a proposition is for an idealist, an empiricist, a pragmatist, 
and a logical positivist. That can be said about the different 
views and propositions? ihat a proposition must be meaningful 
is indisputable* ill logicians agree that if a proposition 
have no meaning then it is not a proposition^ but unfortunately 
propositions cannot be identified with meaning. Although single 
words have meaning, they are not propositions, and no one thinks 
of a single word as a proposition unless there is at least one 
other word tacitly understood with it* This is not to say that 
any word can be incorporated in a proposition by the addition of 
any other word* Ihat it does mean is that the single word "dogs" 
is not a proposition In spite of its being a meaningful word, and 
that the two Words taken together in the order "dogs exist 11 is a 
proposition* A proposition, then, is a coifoinahion of meanings, 
which must have the further qualification of being meaningful* 

Each of the three words in the group "Pencils blotters white" has 
meaning, and in a sense the group is a combination of the meanings* 
But in a strict sense of combining there is no combination without 
another word or two, such as "Pencils and blotters are white"* A 











.1 




; ' ' + : ■ : 

:‘ . r; ‘ ; 

V 

J '■ .1 - 



■ \ -v: 









(37 


proposition must be a combination of meaning in this second 
sense. The criteria of meaningful combination of meanings are 
that it forms a unit of thought (i.e. it is complete and un¬ 
derstandable without the addition of more meanings) and that 
it can be judged true or false. ,l Calendars softly hammer” is 
not a meaningful combination of meanings and, hence, cannot be 
said to be either true or false. “Calendars softly flutter" is 
a meaningful assertion, the truth or falsity of nhich can be em¬ 
pirically determined. 

A proposition which is expressed in words is a sen¬ 
tence which may be grammatical or ungrammatical. The sentence 
"Them racehorses is black 1", ungrammatical though it is, never¬ 
theless expresses a proposition, a meaningful combination of 
meanings. And judgment is the act of judging a proposition to 
be true or false. Bradley asserts that "judgment proper is the 
act which refers an ideal content (recognized as such) to a 
reality beyond the act", and it is for this reason that he asserts 
that a judgment claims truth* But as I have tried to show, a 
proposition is a combination of meanings, judgment the act of 
judging it true or false — and it seems to me that my use of the 
word "judgment" is more in conformity with its connotation (not 
a strong argument, yet a favorable rather than an unfavorable one) 
To assert that every judgment refers an ideal content, a universal 
a "wandering adj.ective" to use one of Bradley* s phrases, to 
some tiling in reality other than the act of reference, is either 
to suppose that a mistake is never made in judging or to restrict 









A 





'& J 






(38 


judgments to those acts -which do refer ideas to reality, inde¬ 
pendently discovered to be reality. That is to say, we first 
know reality, then refer our ideas to it, and consequently we 
make no mistake in the reference. Bat an idealist cannot ad- 
mi: t this for it is by the very act of judging that he acquires 
knowledge of reality* There is a distinction to be made between 
proposition and judgment, a distinction which is not that a 
proposition is the verbal expression of the act of referring an 
ideal content to reality. 

Since the verbal expression of any meaningful combin¬ 
ation of meanings is a sentence, I see no reason for not calling 
it a sentence and reserving the word "proposition! 1 to refer merely 
to meanings. I am not giving to the word "sentence" the wide 
meaning which Ayer gives: any form of words that is grammatically 
significant; for on Ayer*s definition, and one of his reasons for 
defining it in this way, literal meaningfulness is not required 
to be a property of a sentence. No5 a sentence is the verbal 
expression of a proposition; it therefore must be meaningful. I 
am, however, well aware that my disagreement with Ayer is largely 
verbal. He wishes to say that a group of words that is grammat¬ 
ically significant though literally meaningless is a sentence 
expressing a statement, and that a literally meaningful sentence 
expresses a proposition, propositions being a sub-class of state¬ 
ments. I am asserting that a group of words which is not literally 
meaningful is not a sentence; and since I do not give a broader 
meaning to sentences I have no need to introduce the tern "state¬ 


ment" 








In asserting that a proposition is a meaningful 
combination of meanings I do not commit myself to any state¬ 
ment about what constitutes meaning* Whether what is referred 
to are sensations, phenomena, sense-data, ideas, or a problem 
is still an open question* Although tills may seem the app¬ 
ropriate place for the discussion, since the emphasis was on 
meaning in my exposition of the four views of propositions, I 
shall defer the discussion to a later chapter on the nature of 
reality so that there will be as little repetition as possible* 




(Uo 


CHAPTER III 


INFERENCE 


Part 1 . 

In logic there are two chief notions: one is 
proposition, the other is inference, In the preceding chapter 
I have tried to show that a proposition is a combination of 
meanings, which is of such a nature that it can be said to be 
true or false* As yet there has been no statement about how 
to determine truth or falsity; there is only the frank accep¬ 
tance of the fact that we do attribute truth or falsity to 
propositions and that this fact is one of the tests of the 
meaningfulness of combinations of meanings* Inference is a pro¬ 
cess of thought which moves from one or more propositions to 
another proposition which is involved in the former* Inference 
has nothing to do with the establishment of the truth of the 
inferred proposition since a proposition which is validly in¬ 
ferred may yet be false. An inference is true only in the sense 
of being an actual inference as distinguished from anything else. 
An inference is properly said to be valid or invalid. 

Before going further it should be noted that !, to infer” 
has a sound usage in matters other than the derivation of one 
proposition from another or others. Mien a person reads or 
hears any word, it is a legitimate use of the verb to say ”he 
infers the meaning of the word”. Hie necessity of inferring 
meaning is the cause cf one of the great difficulties of com- 



‘■J 


c 


■j 








v: ■ •> ' - r 








J \ J > ; ' • 'i 











munication, for there is no guarantee that B will infer a mean¬ 
ing which is equivalent to the meaning which A symbolized in 
some way* An individual is completely alone in this respect, 
for he can be assisted only by more symbols the meanings of 
which he must infer for himself« This use of the word has 
the sanction of good writers $ but it is not the meaning which 
is to be attached to the word in this chapter* 

I shall pass quickly over the subject of immediate 
inference* Immediate inference is the process of inferring one 
proposition from another, both having the same terms* It is not 
the drawing of a conclusion from a pair of propositions, but 
from one proposition on the basis of the relation to one another 
of the terms of the proposition* Hence the adjective **immediate 11 
no middle term is required as a means of passing to the conclu¬ 
sion*. The operations of obversion, conversion, inversion, con¬ 
traposition, and the various relations involved in the square of 
opposition are immediate inferences* It is these operations and 
the symbolic form of syllogisms in traditional logic to which 
Schiller refers when he says that most of traditional logic is 
a game to be played by manipulating symbols in special ways* 

So few remarks on immediate inference can hardly be 
justified by the plea that inference is ordinarily taken to mean 
something which cannot be called immediate inference, and that 
the discussion ought therefore to be about this other thing which 
is correctly called inference* It may be, too, that the plea is 
weakened.by the fact that Mr* H*W*B* Joseph considers both immed- 










iate and mediate inference to be fundamentally the same, in 
that in the process of each, thought moves from at least one 
proposition to another proposition which is seen to be involved 
in the first. So far, I agree that from “No S is P“ one can 
immediately infer that “No P is S“, that from “All S is P n one 
can immediately infer that “Some S is P“, Nevertheless there 
is a distinct difference between these operations of immediate 
inference and the processes of inference which are to be dis¬ 
cussed here, The characteristic of immediate inference is that 
both the given and the immediately inferred propositions are 
equivalent* A proposition and its converse, its obverse, its 
inverse, and its contrapositive are equivalent; one does not 
say more, or less, or anything different in the two, “Some S 
is not P“ has precisely the same meaning as “Some not-P is not 
not-S“ though the second proposition is more complicated than 
the first* The exceptions to the assertion that given and 
immediately inferred propositions are equivalent are those in¬ 
ferences pertaining to the square of opposition, From “Some S 
is P“ one Immediately infers the contradictory “No S is P“ ; but 
these two propositions are not equivalents, they are contradic¬ 
tories, Similarly with others of the A E I and 0 propositions, 
their relations are inferred, immediately but the given and in¬ 
ferred propositions are not equivalent. Whereas the given and 
inferred propositions in immediate inference are equivalent to 
each other (with the exception of the inferences obtained by 
means of the square of opposition) the given and inferred prop- 






















► 








o > 










ositions are not equivalent in cases of mediate inference* 

The inferred proposition in the latter is a fresh combination 
of meanings, a combination which is not in any one of the 
given propositions taken singly* Perhaps this latter land 
of inference involves the same kind of process of thought as 
immediate inference does* Because of the difference mentioned 
above, between immediate and mediate inference, and because 
mediate inference is by far the more interesting, mediate infer¬ 
ence ulll be discussed here* Hereinafter I shall use the word 
"inference 1 * to mean mediate inference, inserting the adjective 
"immediate" when I wish to make a distinction* 

Some thinkers treat syllogism and inference as being 
synonymous* It is a mistake to do so: "inductive inference" is 
not only a meaningful phrase, inductive inference is a fact. 

It matters not at all whether induction results in a conclusion 
which is known to be true or whether it is merely a fancy word 
for guessing, the fact is that thought proceeds in certain cir¬ 
cumstances from something which is known to something which is 

the 

not known* Since A unknown something is taken to be involved in 
what is known, the whole process can be as correctly called in¬ 
ference as syllogism can* However, because induction has not 
the certainty that deduction has, it will be discussed further 
downj for it is as well to start with a process which is undoubt¬ 
edly inference* 

At the beginning of the chapter inference is defined 
as that process of thought which results in a proposition seen 































to be involved in one or more given propositions. Noting that 
immediate inference requires only one given proposition, and 
setting aside induction for the time being, I propose to inves¬ 
tigate that type of inference "which proceeds from at least two 
given propositions and which is usually called deductive infer¬ 
ence, (remembering that immediate inference is also deductive, 
in the sense of being certain, but that there is a clear diff¬ 
erence between immediate and mediate inference) . There are two 
principal forms of syllogistic inference. One is the tradition¬ 
al syllogistic form, of which the following is an example in 
Barbara: All men are mortal: All kings are men: Therefore, all 
Icings are mortal. The other is the inference from a transitive 
relationship which is syllogism insofar as the conclusion 
follows from two premises: A is greater than B: B is greater 
than C: Therefore A is greater than C. Now the whole question 
of inference can be resolved into the question; why does the con¬ 
clusion of every valid syllogism follow necessarily from the pre¬ 
mises? A thinker who accepts the premises is constrained to 
accept the conclusion as well. Aristotle was the first to recog¬ 
nize and record his recognition that reasoning in a certain form 
has such telling effect, that once an opponent in argument agrees 
to two propositions which can be brought together in a syllogism 
he must logically agree to the proposition which is derived as 
the conclusion. And it is certainly true that the proposition, 
Apes have no hands, follows from the conjunction of the two prop¬ 
ositions, No animals have hands, and Apes are animals. 











it 



:: 














\ 








(US 


The last example brings out a significant feature 
of inference, namely, the validity of the inference does not 
depend on the truth of any one or both of the propositions. 

From All books have pink covers, and This is a book, it follows 
logically that This has a pink cover. Although only the second 
proposition may be true, the conclusion is validly derived. If 
both premises are true, the conclusion will be true; but a valid 
conclusion, itself false, may be drawn from false premises. In¬ 
ference, then, is a process of thought which does not heed the 
truth or falsity of its elements. 

Most logicians, I think, would agree with much of what 
I have asserted in the two preceding paragraphs, particularly 
with the notion that there is a necessity about the conclusion 
of a syllogism, which is quite irrespective of the truth of ihe 
premises, Schiller, however, and probably Iris f oil ewers, seems 
to object to some of the terminology. He will have nothing to 
do with 'the idea that a conclusion f ollows f rom the premises, 
and he denies what he calls u the Necessity 1 of inference’ 1 , 

This is not to be wondered at since Schiller is concerned to 
discredit Formal Logic as an attempt to analyze the thinking 
process into static forms by which thought proceeds, sometimes 
giving valid results and sometimes invalid ones. Because Formal 
Logic tries to find premises which give a certain conclusion, 
he denies that the conclusion follows from the supposed premises; 
the grounds for the conclusion may be different from those which 
Formal Logic discovers for it. About necessity Schiller states. 


n Nor can we ever be c ompelled to go on thinking; we can stop at 














# 




any point* No necessity of thought, therefore, can be generated 


without a vri.ll to infer 11 * (p. 169) Lest this quotation give the 
impression that Schiller has no stronger argument, here is an¬ 
other; "Now, after the event the inference, if it was of the 
type called 1 logical 1 , may, cf course, appear as 'necessary'; 
it may be seen to have grounds, and to depend on them; if it 
were not in this sense 'necessary*, it would be irrational and 
indefensible 11 * (p* 171) Yet lie adds "But just the same situa¬ 
tion would have appeared if any of its rivals had in fact been 
preferred. Grounds could have been assigned to all of ihem 
(sufficient, or insufficient, good or bad)', but they would 
never have compelled any one to judge thus". Thus it seems to 
me that to the Formal Logician who contends that conclusions 
follow necessarily from premises Schiller scys "They don't. You 
think you are analyzing actual thinking, but you aren't." For 
he asserts, "The only way of really explaining the course thought 
is going to take is to go into its antecedents, i,e* the motives, 
character, and circumstances of the thinker", (p, 172) 

Another objection, which m ight be made to what I have 
so far asserted about syllogistic inference, would come from 
idealist logicians. There may be some logicians who, insisting 
that a judgment to be a judgment is true and that one can there¬ 
fore infer from judgments only, assert that the business of der¬ 
iving a conclusion from premises, at least one of which is false, 
is not inference. If this objection were made, I think it would 
be simply a matter of verbal disagreement about whether or not 
inference is restricted to judgments which are true* Even 






1 


•> : • ' ' ’ ' i , ■ "■ ' 








granting that only true propositions are involved in inference, 

I can imagine that one of 'the objectors night agree that n Some 
animals are not gophers” is validly inferred from “All gophers 
have long legs” and “Some animals have not long legs”, on the 
ground that the propositions, at any rate, are facts in this 
paper no matter what the length of gophers* legs. 

The question still unanswered, apart from these two 
objections, one actual, the other possible, is: how is it that 
we see a conclusion to be involved necessarily in the conjunction 
of the premises? Is deduction valid? Mien we reason, do we in 
fact reason syllogistically? 

On examining the valid figures and moods of the syll¬ 
ogism (composed of A E I and 0 propositions and excluding trans¬ 
itive relationships) one notes that in every valid syllogism at 
least one of the premises is either of the form “All S is P“ or 
of idle form “Ho 3 is P”. Because a universal proposition is 
either a definition or an inductive generalization, some log¬ 
icians criticize the syllogism as being a petitio principi i. 

They assert that in every valid syllogism the conclusion, T.hich 
is supposed to be different from the premises in the sense of 
being new, is actually assumed in the premises. Ifi.ll, specif¬ 
ically, asserts that in every syllogism, considered as an argu¬ 
ment to prove the conclusion, there is a petitio principii . 

And to use the old but not worn out example which all logicians 
use at some time or other: All men are mortal^ Socrates is a 
man* therefore, Socrates is mortal. Mill contends that in order 
to know that All men are mortal, we must consider the possibility 







■ ! 






1 

















of Socrates* being mortal, along -with other individual men. 

Thus, that Socrates is mortal is presupposed in the major 
premise. This objection, I think, is unanswerable an Mill * s 
theory* If we find that All men are mortal, then we must have 
considered Socrates; far if we had not, our first premiss would 
not be true. However, Mill is not so much concerned with the 
question whether the conclusion is assumed in the premises 
as with the very different question whether we do reason syllo- 
gistically. It is not because the conclusion is assumed in the 
premises that Mil objects to syllogism. What he objects to is 
the notion that we reason through, or from, a universal proposi¬ 
tion, that we reason deductively. For, asserts Mil, the fact 
that we can say that all men are mortal is but one of the great 
advantages of a civilized language, that we really mean every 
single person who makes up the group of all men. By 11 all” we 
mean each individual, but by means of our language we are able to 
refer to each taken collectively. We discover that John is mortal 
James is mortal, Harry is mortal etc. Although we may refer to 
these several persons as u all I! in the proposition that All men 
are mortal, we do not conclude that all men are mortal frqm our 
findings* What happens is that on the strength of our having 
found John mortal, James mortal etc. we infer that Socrates is 
also mortal. In short, we reason from particulars to particulars, 
and since syllogism depends on at least one universal proposition 
for a premise we do not reason syllogistically, 

I mentioned that on Mll*s theory the objection is 
unanswerable* A superficial examination of the process 


of thought 







reveals what the empiricists assert, that we do reason from 
particulars to particulars« We see hydrochloric acid turn 
blue litmus red, and sulphuric acid turn blue litmus red, and 
we then infer that prussic acid will turn blue litmus red. We 
do not first see that all acids redden litmus before inferring 
‘chat prussic acid will do so too, because we do not know this 
property of prussic acid. On the strength of our seeing that 
this and this and this are siich-and-such, we infer that this 
other is also such-and-such* And since "every proposition 
which conveys real information asserts a matter of fact", the 
universal proposition conveys no real information unless it is 
a generalization by complete enumeration, in which case the con¬ 
clusion is included in the universal premise and 'Hie syllogism 
is a petitio prlncipii . Thus, asserts Mill, reasoning occurs 
not by deductive inference but by inductive inference* 

Mill, however, cannot give up the syllogism entirely 
for he recognises in it a strength which induction does not 
possess* Ee rejects as the principle of the syllogism the 
Dictum d e omni et nullo (variously interpreted to mean: What 
is predicated about any whole is predicated about any part of 
that whole) in favor of "the fundamental maxim of ratiocination, 
namely, that whatever has a mark, has what it is a mark of 5 or, 
(in the case of universal propositions) , that whatever is a 
mark of a thing, is a mark of whatever else that thing is a 
mark of". (Mill, Vol* 1, p* 3i|l) Those who consider the dictum 



















) 

















as the foundation of the syllogism think of a proposition as 
asserting no tiling more than 'that something belongs to a 
class $ so that a valid syllogism merely records the consistent, 
but artificial, classification of classes* An empiricist re¬ 
jects tlie notion of Class inclusion in a proposition, for that 
of the assertion of coexistence, succession, simple existence, 
causation, or resemblance of phenomena, or of houmena* Combining 
this notion and the principle of affirmative syllogisms we get 
the following version of the traditional example: file attri¬ 
butes of man are a mark of the attribute mortality; Socrates 
has the attributes of man; therefore, Socrates has the attri¬ 
butes of mortality* 

A stronger argument which shows clearly that 11111 
considered deduction the more powerful form of inference, how¬ 
ever much he thought deduction to be merely a mode of induction, * 
is the fact that he wishes to justify induction deductively* 

In spite of these arguments suggesting that Mill 
thinks syllogism a powerful form of reasoning, it is nevertheless 
true that he argues for inductive reasoning from particulars to 
particulars. And what may be considered a final confirmation 
of his general position is his conviction that universal propos¬ 
itions are merely registers of previous inferences, M and short 
formulae for making more 11 * Consequently, the conclusion of a 
syllogism is not I! an inference dr aim from the formula, but an 
inference dram according to the formula: the real logical 






antecedent, or premises, being the particular facts from-which 
the general proposition was collected by induction”. (Vol. 1, p.2^9) 
This leaves no doubt 'that Mill thinks that all inference proceeds 
from particulars to particulars, whether the inference happens 
to be thrown into syllogistic form or not. 

But does this theory account satisfactorily for the 
look of horror on the face of the hostess who, just having heard 
from the Abbe that his first penitent had been a murderer, is told 
by a nobleman guest that he was the Abbe ! s first penitent? 

As would be expected the logical positivists give 
a different explanation of deductive inference. Since the work¬ 
ings of thought are said to be in the province of psychology 
rather than logic, these logicians do not concern themselves with 
why or how one thought is connected with, or is contained in, or 
is involved with one or more other thoughts as thoughts. Logic 
is concerned with constructing definitions or analytic proposi¬ 
tions, with combining the propositions by means of specifically 
logical constants (all, some, either ... or, if ... then, not), 
and with examining the formal relationships between the propositions 
Hence, syllogism is really a form of implication, a hypothetical 
proposition in which the antecedent is a conjunctive proposition 
formed by the major and minor premises, and the consequent is the 
conclusion*- One of the members of a conjunctive proposition 
being false, the whole is false, and the consequent does not 
necessarily follow. But 'if--the conjunctive proposition is true 










: 




i'": 







a 
















(52 


then the consequent is true. Thus, in a syllogism we assert 
that the conjunction of two premises implies the conclusions 
This is so because we refuse to let it be otherwise# 

Hie positivist account resolves itself into one of 
linguistic usage# By a conventional and consist ait use of 
language, we discover the relationship between ”if”, tt then”, 
and ”all” in such a proposition as ”If all dogs are animals and 
Hover is a dog, then Hover is an animal”. Ayer asserts that this 
is not a proposition about a matter of fact. It simply shows 
that the proposition All dogs are animals and Rover is a dog 
implicitly contains another proposition. Hover is an animal# This 
explanation is similar to, though not identical with, the view of 
the symbolic logicians who symbolize the syllogism thus; p*qf)r. 
Tills form does not tell us whether r is something quite different 
from p and q, such as in the proposition ”If I travel 300 miles 
south and 30 miles east, I shall be in Lethbridge”, or whether 
r is a valid inference from the joint assertion of p and q* To 
say, as Pap does, that we agree ”to use the phrase *q follows 
from p* in such a way that q follows from p if and only if the 
conjoint assertion of p and not-q is self-contradictoiy” is not 
true of material implication though it is of strict implication# 

For it is not self-contradictory to say ”If I go 300 miles south 
and 30 miles east, I shall not be in Lethbridge” though it may be 
falser whereas the assertion ”A11 triangles contain 180 degrees 
and Scalenes are triangles implies that Scalenes do not contain 
180 degrees” is both false and self-contradictory# Yet Pap implies 
that ”p entails q” is equivalent to ”a#tO c” where p is the conjunc- 






(53 


tive proposition a*b, and q is c* 

This seems to me to be very confused, so I shall try 
to restate the case* The logical positivists regard deductive 
inference as a form of implication and they mean specifically 
strict implication* The conlu ,sion follows from the premises 
in deduction because to affirm the premises yet deny the con¬ 
clusion involves an inconsistent use of language and the whole 
process is self-contradictory* But there is in their explan¬ 
ation the implication that the inference is like the logical 
implication of a hypothetical proposition, that it is a case of 
ground and consequent in which the ground being true the conse¬ 
quent is true* For example, Ayer writes: “Thus, if I know the 
existence of May Queens is a relic of tree-worship, and I dis¬ 
cover that May Queens still exist in England, I can employ the 
tautology *If p implies q, and p is true, q is true* to show 
that there still exists a relic of tree-worship in England* But 
in saying that there are still May Queens in England, and. that 
the existence of May Queens is a relic of tree-worship, I have 
already asserted the existence in England of a relic of tree- 
worship, The use of the tautology does, indeed, m able me to 
make this concealed assertion. 11 Now, if I am not mistaken, the 
use of the tautology does nothing of the kind* The tautology 
describes a particular relationship which may hold between prop¬ 
ositions* Applied to the example, p stands for the two premises 
and q for the conclusion ♦ In what wa;y is the conclusion a con¬ 
cealed assertion? If the tautology is applicable there is no 




concealment^ the three assertions are plainly known, and the taut¬ 
ology is fitted to them. 

Ayer goes on to assert that 11 it does not provide me -with 
any new knowledge, in the sense in which empirical evidence that 
the election of May Queens had been forbidden by law would provide 
me with new knowledge. 11 It must be supposed that Ayer is merely 
noting a distinction which exists between inferred facts and ac¬ 
tual experiences. But why does he refuse to call the conclusion 
of a syllogism new knowledge? I think the reason is (and it is 
common, it can be found in many books on logic) that the philos¬ 
opher usually puts into syllogistic form the propositions wfjieh he 
already knows, that is, that he neglects to imagine a case in 
which the premises are known separately. If a person hears that 
all children under two years of age were killed this morning and 
then thinks 11 Say 1 Little Garry Richards is only eighteen months 
old”, then all he will be able to do is hope that the information 
is false or mourn little Garry*s death. Supposing the information 
to be true, I see no reason why the person would deny that he re¬ 
ceived new knowledge which did not come to him in the form ,l All 
children under two ... 11 . 

The question about deduction which is to be answered (and 
the question applies to the tautology "p.pzDq.rD.q" too) is, does 
p imply q, and if it does how does it? To say that a valid dedu©- 
tive inference is a demonstration that we sometimes use words in 
a consistent fashion is not an adequate answer* 

There is one other account of inference which I wish to 
discuss, that of idealist logicians, particularly Bradley. Because 









- 


' 











■ 





• ■ • , - . , ' • 







* 













(55 


it is patently false that all reasoning is syllogistic Bradley 
rejects the dictum de omni et mullo as the principle of inference* 
The inference from "A is greater than B w and »B is greater th&n 
C" to U A is greater -than C ,r cannot be put into a syllogistic 
form which is valid, for the result cf the atterpt is four terms 
instead of three: "A is included in the class of things greater 
than B", U B is included in the class cf things greater than C"; 
no conclusion follows on the principle of the dictum * And it 
cannot be denied that (to use one of Bradley 1 s examples) from "Gold 
is heavier than lead and lead is a metal" a conclusion certainly 
follows, although this example is far from looking like the trad¬ 
itional syllogism. Indeed, Bradley hopes that the syllogism will 
be banished since he feels "sure that the syllogism, if it contin¬ 
ues to be taught, mil be taught as a form to which we must re¬ 
duce every valid argument". (Vol* 2, p*5>31) 

The idealists assert, and on this I think they are all 
agreed, that an inference is an ideal construction* Certain 
facts are known to us; when known facts are manipulated a new 
arrangement will display new facts; when this manipulation of 
known facts resulting in an unknown fact occurs in our heads, that 
is, when the operation is ideal, it is inference* To see a new 
relation of facts in an ideal construction is reasoning, and to 
show this new relation is a demonstration of reasoning. However, 
any rearrangement whatever or anjr result of manipulation will not 
be a reasoned fact; but if by stretching the meaning of reason it 
could be considered a reasoned fact, it will not necessarily be a 
fact which is validly inferred* There are two conditions for a 

















. 




, 









valid inference, asserts Bradley: 1. It is impossible to reason 
except upon the basis of identity, 2. It is impossible to reason 
unless at least one premise is universal. (Vol. 1, p.285) 

If there is no common point in the premises how can 
they be connected? And if they are not connected how can there 
by unity in the process of inference? And if there is no unity 
can there truly be inference? A is related to B and G is related 
to D; what can be said of A—C, A—D, or B—C, B—D? Unless there 
is some connection no relationship can be seen between the tiro 
premises, and there is therefore no inference. But if there is a 
connection, how do we know that the link is a common one? Here 
the Principle of Identity is introduced, namely, “what seems the 
the same is so fax the same, and cannot be made different by any 
diversity”, This, of course, does not mean that "seems” is equated 
with “is” in the sentence “The chap in this photograph seems to be 
the one I saw”, for, as Bradley says, if one were dead the other 
would be. Space and time relations may be the only two points in 
which one description of an object may differ from another descrip¬ 
tion of the object. If we see no reason to suppose that the 
object is different in any other respect than relations of space 
or time, we say that it is the same object because it seems to be. 
The Principle of Identity, Bradley asserts, may be a monstrous 
assumption, but without it there can be no inf erenc e. There must 
be a connection between two premises in order to infer from them, 
and this connection he calls an identity. 

The second condition of inference, that reasoning is 
Impossible unless at least one pranise is universal, is hardest 








(57 


to see in cases where the middle term is singular: A is to the 
right of B, B of C, therefore A is to the right of C, In what 
way is B a universal? According to idealists every judgment is 
universal in the sense that it is a synthesis of differences^; but 
I do not think this is relevant to the argument, for n Some S is 
P !? is not a universal premise in syllogism, though, for idealists, 
it is universal, in this other sense* To say of B-that "it trans¬ 
cends the context B—C and is therefore universal" is not very 
different, if at all, from saying of "Some S is P" and "Some S 
is M" that S is universal* It seems to me that Bradley is tiying 
to find a definite distinction between identity and universality, 
insofar as these are the requirements of the common point which 
is necessary for inference^ and there is no such distinction for 
the iwo ideas are fused together* The attempt to make a distinc¬ 
tion involves him in a dilemma* He is faced -with the assertion 
that in the premise of the above example, B is to the right of C, 

B is identical with the B in the premise, A is to the right of B, 
yet if there is no difference of any kind, then both premises 
are identical and there is no inference. And he is also faced wtiibh 
the assertion that a universal extends beyond the particular, that 
"the relation B—C is true of a subject Ydiich extends itself be¬ 
yond those limits, and is the identical subject of which the re¬ 
lation A—B is also true"* This is,resolved by saying that B is 
an ideal construction which is a synthesis of differences, an 
abstraction from the two relations B—A and B—G such that the 


relations go to make up B 






(58 


Bradley fails, I think, to distinguish between the universal¬ 
ity of B and the particularity of A or C, unless he means 
merely that a universal has more than one relationship* Although 
I do not think Bradley intends this naive view to be taken of the 
difference between the two, I am not sure what he does mean. 

From “Edmonton is north of Calgary and Calgary is north of Leth¬ 
bridge" it follows that Lethbridge is south of Edmontonj but in 
what sense is Calgary a universal and Edmonton not? And if Ed¬ 
monton is also a universal why does he go to such trouble to 
explain that the middle term is the universal? 

I think it will have to be agreed that none cf these 
accounts is satisfactory — and not merely for the reason that I 
may have misrepresented them. Nor is the traditional theory sat¬ 
isfactory, according to which an inference is valid by its form 
alone, hence the exhaustive examination of the ways of combining 
A S I and 0 propositions and the resulting set of rules governing 
formally valid syllogisms. There is, however, something in each 
theory which is valuable in giving a better understanding of logic 
and its function. The empiricist lays an almost overwhelming em¬ 
phasis on the importance of experience in giving us knowledge of 
particulars only. The value of this undue enphasis lies in the 
assumption, at least the tacit assumption, that logic has something 
to do with life and the world. It is not a closed system, as it 
is sometimes said to be. It is not a, water-tight compartment of 

our knowledge in which there is no room for anything but the 
principles that are the furniture which came with it* The trad¬ 
itional theory supplies conclusive evidence that some inference 





(59 


depends on suitable formal relationships between elements of our 
knowledge* And the idealists assert that all inference is an 
ideal construction of a unity which we see in differences, 
based on the assumption that the whole of knowledge, were it 
known, would be a complete system of interlocking ideas. The 
logical positivists stress the importance of language and its 
consistent use, but unfortunately fail to regard language as the 
expression of anything but the logical constructions out of 
sense-contents. The consistent use of language is an important 
aid in thinking, but it is not vital* After asking a greengrocer*s 
assistant for some oranges and receiving the reply "We haven’t 
none today", no one, excepting perhaps a logician, expects the 
assistant to set oranges before him. It is the meaning of the 
language we use which is vital* Indeed, thinking is the process 
of giving meaning to our experiences and attempting to relate 
the meanings into a coherent system. Obviously a consistent use 
of language helps us in this work, since most cf it is carried on 
by means of words. 

Since inference, then must be the process of seeing rela¬ 
tions in sets of meanings (and this operation is mental) what can 
be said of syllogistic reasoning? Well, I should say that "Socrates 
is mortal" follows from "All men are mortal and Socrates is a man", 
not because of the valid form of the argument, but because the con¬ 
clusion is not only compatible with but involved in the meanings 
of the premises. To derive the conclusion "Socrates is not mor*? 
tal" or "Socrates is sick" is not merely to display an inconsistent 
use of language, it is actually to show an inability to see coher- 

















































' 










(60 


ence in combinations of meanings, p strictly implies q if 
and only if the meaning of q is both compatible with and in¬ 
volved in the meaning of p. 


Part 2. 

At the beginning of the chapter I stated that induction, 
as well as deduction, can be significantly called inference, and 
in Part 1 I have tried to show why a valid conclusion necessar¬ 
ily follows from premises irrespective of the truth or falsity 
of the premises. Induction, however, is not universally regarded 
as a type of inference; Tarski doubts whether there is my logic 
of’ the empirical sciences. But I see no good reason to reject 
the notion of inductive inference: something very like induction 
occurs, and what occurs is very like what is meant in the defini¬ 
tion of inference, namely, a process of thought which moves from 
one or more propositions to another proposition v/hich is involved 
in the foimer. It is true that this definition is more applic¬ 
able to deduction than to induction unless there is some qualif¬ 
ication of 5, is involved in”, for obviously a universal proposition 
cannot be said to be wholly involved in a particular proposition. 
The general meaning, however, of seeing the relationship between 
two propositions, or between two or more propositions and another, 
is equally well the meaning of induction as of deduction. The 
great difference lies in the certainty of the Inferred proposition. 






(61 


There is no doubt about a valid deductive inference. There may 
be doubt about a proposition which is arrived at by induction* 
Indeed, excepting in only two cases an induction is taitative 
in the sense that it cannot stand against negative instances* 

One of the ways in which Aristotle uses the word "in¬ 
duction" is to mean the complete enumeration of a set of partic¬ 
ular instances, giving a generalization* This process Aristotle 
calls Perfect Induction because there is no possibility that the 
generalization is inconclusive since all the particulars are 
subsumed* There are some logicians who do not allow that com¬ 
plete enumeration is induction; they assert that it involves the 
failure to distinguish between a true universal and a "collective", 
and argue that a collective generalization is not inference. As 
ordinarily conceived, inductions will apply to unobserved instan¬ 
ces, and it is this notion which gives rise to the difficulty, nay, 
impossibility, of proving an induction. But if all the observed 
instances are included in the generalization and if it is known 
that there are no unobserved instances, then the requironent of 
an induction that it apply to both the observed and the unobserved 
instances is not fulfilled* Therefore, say these logicians, 
complete enumeration is net induction for there is no inference* 
This is a pertinent criticism, I think, but one which is not ser¬ 
ious enough to warrant a change in the definition which, whether 
too wide or too narrow, covers complete enumeration or perfect 
induction* 

The other case of an induction which is certain is that 
of the inferred proposition being a matter of definition. The 











i 











(62 


one example -which comes to my mind (and I can neither remember 
nor find the authority) is that of the persons who, refusing to 
let a black swan falsify the proposition "All swans are white", 
called the swan by a technical name which was not c ygnus . 

These two cases of inductions which, if inductions, 
are certain, are of minor importance* Induction proper, if 
it may be so modified, is sometimes called intuitive because 
we pass from particular instances to a generalization which will 
include both these and all other like instances. This is the 
sorb of thing which natural scientists doj they cannot often ex¬ 
amine every single instance of a certain type which has occurred 
or occurs and they certainly cannot examine future ones, so they 
generalize on the ground of the instances which have been observed. 
In this way science has advanced, and with it, knowledge* The 
rationalist opponents of induction decry it as an invalid proced¬ 
ure since it is incapable of achieving results which are as cer¬ 
tain as those obtained by deduction. Aristotle recognizes this 
supposed weakness, which affects the efficacy of the syllogism by 
throwing doubt on the truth of universal premises. To use the 
usual example, how can it be known with certainty that All men are 
mortal, since all those who are not dead are living and more are 
expected to be bom? Yet if the universal is not true, can we be 
sure that Socrates is not immortal? Gan we be certain that a 
solution tested tomorrow, which turns blue litmus red, has at 
least some of the properties of an acid? It was considerations 
such as these which gave tise to what is called the problem of 
induction, namely, the problem of "shoving that the general con- 





(63 


ditions of some system are fulfilled by a set of particulars 
assumed to belong to the system, when it is not known that these 
are all the particulars in the system 1 .** (Eaton, p.U8lO . 

Ayer contends that the problem of induction is a fic¬ 
titious one. Assuming that it is a genuine problem, there are 
two ways of attempting to prove the proposition that n certain 
empirical generalizations which are derived from past experiences 
will hold good also in the future". (Ayer, p.Ii9) • One is to 
atteupt to deduce it from a purely formal principle or tautology 
from which one cannot deduce a proposition about a matter of 
fact. The other is to attempt to deduce it from an empirical 
principle with no reason to prefer one empirical principle to the 
other. Since the proposition cannot be certainly established, 
its only justification as a form of scientific procedure is its 
success in practise, and the fact of its success is not a logical 
guarantee that it will continue to be successful. i\yer then 
asserts, "This does not mean that it is irrational to expect 
future experience to conform to the past" because "*being rational* 
entails being guided in a particular fashion by past experience", 
(Ayer, p.5b) 

Granting that it is impossible to prove that inductions 
will hold for unobserved instances, are we forced to the positi¬ 
vists* conclusion that the rationality of the inductive procedure 
is a mere matter of definition? It seems to me that induction is 
not just a convenient aid to science but a necessity for a fruit¬ 
ful scientific method. It is not inconceivable that there are 












> ' ■> I 








(6b 


natural lairs "which cannot be known a^Jp^iori^ and if there are, 
how are they to be discovered but by a method which is at least 
partly inductive? Success alone is not the justification of 
induction^ we are not yet driven to the pragmatist position* 
Without induction, there would be wide gaps in our knowledge 
which might otherwise be filled* Without induction, there would 
not be that interlocking of propositions which is necessary for 
the strength of the system* No proposition stands completely 
alone, quite unrelated to any other, and the more its relation¬ 
ships, the stronger it is* I take it, then, that since induction 
cannot produce certain results there is a sense in which induction 
can be said to constitute a problem, but in another and more 
important sense it contributes to the certainty of all our know¬ 
ledge, other than perhaps mathematics and symbolic logic which 
Russell holds is not-logic* It is consequently a problem only 
because the results may need revision* 

J*S. Mill, the most famous inductive logician, treats 
of induction not so much as a method of passing from particulars 
to a universal as inferring from the conditioned the condition* 

He assumes that everything has a condition without which it would 
be something else, and from this assumption concludes that induc¬ 
tion is a search for causes* Accordingly he develops four methods 
of experimental inquiry, two of which he combines to form a fifth* 
The first is the Method of Agreement: 

n If two or more instances of the phenomenon under investigation 
have only one circumstance in common, the circumstance in 
which alone all the instances agree, is the cause (or effect) 

of tlie given phenomenon.” 




(65 


The second, the Method of Difference: 

"If an instance in which the phenomenon under investi¬ 
gation occurs, and an instance in which it does not occur, 
have every circumstance in common save one, that one 
occurring only in the former; the circumstance in which 
alone the two instances differ, is the effect, or cause, 
or a necessary part of the cause, of the phenomenon* 11 
Tile Indirect Method of Difference, or the Joint Method of 
Agreement and Difference is the third: 

"If two or more instances in which the phenomenon occurs 
have only one circumstance in common, while two or more 
instances in which it does not occur have nothing in 
common save the absence of that circumstance; the circum¬ 
stance in which alone the two sets of instances differ, 
is the effect, or cause, or a necessary part of the cause, 
of the phenomenon*" 

The Method of Residues is the fourth: 

"Subduct from any phenomenon such part as is known by 
previous inductions to be the effect of certain antece¬ 
dents, and the residue of the phenomenon is the effect of 
the remaining antecedents*" 

And the fifth is the Method of Concomitant Variations: 

"Whatever phenomenon varies in any manner whenever another 
phenomenon varies in some particular manner, is either a 
cause or an effect of that phenomenon, or is connected 
with it through some fact of causation*" 

These five canons are quoted from Book III, Chap*8, of Mill’s 
System of Logic* 










* 




- 















. ( 


. 




, 




















*- 











. 


(66 


I do not propose to discuss the canons in detail* 

Mill himself admits that by the Method of Agreement one can get 
false conclusions. Against each of the methods can be levelled 
the charge that it does not prove a generalization* but only 
the particular results* and the Method of Agreement does not 
always do even this much. Underlying each method is the principle 
that differences can be eliminated* In "Probability and Induc¬ 
tion”* Mr* W* C. Kneale criticizes Mill for obscuring the nature 
of the argument by offeling independent methods instead of 
"talking of three tests to be applied to hypotheses about the 
cause of a phenomenon* namely the tests of co-presence* co¬ 
absence* and co-variation”, (p.56) The methods are both helpful 
and instructive to those persons who do not already use them un¬ 
knowingly* As methods for proving inductions* they fail utterly* 
being (in Bradley^ phrase) ”a confessed fiasco”. 

Nevertheless* we do infer from particular instances 
generalizations which we expect will hold in the future* barring 
adverse,evidence. However* all the advances in science are not 
made by means of simple generalizations such as "All a-things are 
b” and "Every c-thing is invariably followed by d”. Hie greatest 
advances are made by means of hypotheses which need not originally 
have been regarded as generalizations* but under which particular 
instances can be subsumed* That they can be subsumed under the 
hypotheses is a later discovery* one which substantiates the 
hypotheses and* in a sense* gives them new status as inductions. 
According to the general meaning of induction as inferring univer- 











(67 


sals from particulars* Newton would have been entitled to say 
only that all unsupported apples fall* a fact known to everyone* 

It was Newton's perspicacity which allowed him to see a relation¬ 
ship between objects* which no one had seen before. His hypothe¬ 
sis* which happened to fit the facts* became the lav of gravitation* 
an induction. 

Inductions of the kind mentioned in the preceding para¬ 
graph are termed primary inductions* or of the primary phase of 
induction. The secondary phase* or secondary induction* is in¬ 
duction from previously established primary inductions. There is 
an attempt to find one theory which will acount for two or more 
sets of scientific facts* each set having its special theory. 

This is precisely what Clerk-Maxwell's general theory of electro¬ 
magnetic waves has done. Heat* light* and electricity* which 
were formerly thought to be separate branches of physics* can 
now be explained by Clerk-Maxwell's theory. This activity of 
forming and testing hypotheses for the purpose of bringing together 
empirical generalizations of different fields of study is made 
possible, asserts Kneale, by the use of a "transcendent object 
terminology". This latter is unfortunately not completej but 
if it were* it would provide an expression for wery term of the 
"perceptual object terminology" such as "copper* lightning* 
freezing" and also contain expressions"e.g. electron" which have 
no corresponding expressions in the perceptual object terminology 
(Kneale* p#95) 

It can be seen from the nature of induction that it is 
impossible for us to be certain that a generalization will apply 







(68 


to future instances, that to demand proof of an induction is to 
demand too much. In spite of this however, induction is im¬ 
portant for logic because it makes causation a logical study. 

It was noted above that one of the ways of looking at induc¬ 
tion was as a method of inferring the condition from the con¬ 
ditioned, or the search for causes. The result, when general¬ 
ized, is the specifically inductive part of the process. But 
seeing the causal relationship can be significantly termed an 
inference. Thus causation is usually discussed with induction. 

nowadays we generally speak of cause in the sense of 
efficient cause or Hume ! s antecedent cause. When one investi¬ 
gates the notion of cause one looks for a causal relation be¬ 
tween two or more phenomena which are successive in time, or one 
of T/hich precedes the other(s) though it may also co-exist. This 
does not mean merely that I have assumed what others have set 
out to prove, namely, a causal relationship between two events. 

It is the very starting-point for every investigator, for no 
matter whether he admits causation philosophically he undoubt¬ 
edly sees -what he would normally call a causal relation. Even 
Hume admits this* The argument about causation is over the ques¬ 
tion of whether or not the causal relation is necessary. Is the 
relation between cause and effect a logical one? Is the relation 
between cause and effect necessary although we cannot know it 
a priori ? Is the relation be ween cause and effect a fiction? 

An investigation of causation should result in an answer to at 
least one of these three questions. 




(69 


The reason Hill develops his five methods is to 
attempt to prove inductions by examining the constant conjunc¬ 
tion of phenomena, for Mill is a Humean insofar as causation 
is concerned. To those critics who assert that Hume denies 
causation Ayer objects on the ground that Hume, concerned only 
with defining it, maintains that our only evidence for believing 
in causal relationships is that frequent observations of A fol¬ 
lowed by 3 give rise to the expectation that whenever A occurs 
B will follow. The causal relation is not one that can be per¬ 
ceived empirically, and there is nothing about the idea of A 
which involves the idea of B, i.e. we perceive A and we perceive 
B as separate and distinct phenomena, A may be defined without 
any reference to B; we associate the two as being causally re¬ 
lated because we have frequently observed that A is followed by 
3, which influences us ’to expect that it will also do so in the 
future. How if this admittedly brief account of Hume 1 s notion 
is correct, then Hume denies causation. At any rate, I think 
we can safely say that Mill thinks Hume’s denial unanswerable; 
hence, his attempt to formulate methods which would not fail to 
discover constant conjunction of phenomena that are said to be 
causally related. However, suppose that Ayer 1 s objection is 
justified; what follows? Surely, it can be said that Hume’s 
definition is poor. Perhaps constant conjunction of phenomena 
suggests to us that there may be a causal relationship between 
them, but this is not the reason for our believing -there is, 
if there is. 

The positivist contention, which Ayer attributes to 
Hume, that any proposition asserting a causal connection can be 







































(70 


denied without self-contradiction is put forth as proof that 
the causal relation is not a logical one. This must be agreed 
with if logical means by definition* But I can see no reason 
for confining logical operations to 'those which are deductive. 

To define logical necessity as a deductive function is legit¬ 
imate inasmuch as a definition may be arbitrary. Hew ever, since 
the function of definition in logic is the clarification of mean¬ 
ings, our ultimate goal being a coherent system not merely of 
meanings but of meanings which are based on experience, a def¬ 
inition ought to include what is relevant to the ordinary mean¬ 
ing of the term being defined. It is argued above that the 
strength of deductive inference lies in the coherence of the 
meanings of the propositions involved, and that inductive infer¬ 
ences increase in strength in proportion to their ability to 
bring unit 3 r into a system of meanings. If it is admitted that 
empirical generalizations are not wild guesses which happen to 
work but are inferences from actual experiences, what is the ob¬ 
jection to attributing logi c al n ecessity to them? If we refuse 
to assert logical necessity of inductions, then for the sake of 
consistency we ought either to reject induction as a form of 
logical inference or to call what we now call logical necessity 
by its correct name ^deductive necessity 11 . This is not a o x uarrel 
about words only; but I have probably obscured the point of my 
argument* It is this: there may be laws of nature, or ,f truths 
of principle” as Kneale calls then, which are necessary, yet 
unknowable a priori. This is a meaningful sentence. It is con- 

















; • : 






























(71 


ceivable that B will always follow A because their relations are 
such that whenever A, then B. We cannot know about this deduct¬ 
ively from any principle, for the reason that principles are 
themselves inductions* 

Is causation a fact? There are times when we act as 
though causation is a fact. If we have an unpleasant-tasting 
food in our mouth we try to get rid of it is quickly as possible* 
When someone remarks that Mr* Smith died of cancer, we understand 
that cancer caused the death. It is clear that we do see causal 
relationships. It is equally clear that we do not think constant 
conjunction as sufficient reason for asserting that phenomena 
are causally related, lhat follows more regularly than night 
does the day, or day the night? Yet it is silly to say that 
night causes the day or that day causes the night* And in case 
this example is subject to the objection that night and day recur 
in such an order that it is impossible to tell which came first, 
so that if a cause precedes an event, as it must, thoi it cannot 
be said which is the cause; another, which is not reciprocal in 
that sense, is that no one thinks that 10:19 o 1 clock causes 
10:20 o r clock despite the fact that the second always follows a 
minute after the first. The fact is that we do distinguish events 
which are causally related from events which (at present, at any 
rate) do not seem to be so related. 

The curious feature about our ability to tell a causal 
relation from another kind of relation is that we are not slow 
in giving a causal explanation for an event which we expected not 
to occur. We see that event A causes event B. Event A occurs, 










(72 


B does not* Immediately we thinl: that we were mistaken in think¬ 
ing that the event was A, it must have been some other* What we 
do not consider is the proposition, A does not cause B* 

I think it is plain that Hume is wrong about causation, 
that we do really see causal relationships as distinct from other 
kinds of relationships. That sentences to the effect that one 
event causes another can be denied without self-contradiction is 
true* Bat that does not mean that the causal relation is not a 
necessary one* The causal relation is an inference from experi¬ 
ence, which, when as firmly established as possible by means of 
the principle of the elimination of differences whieh has received 
classic statement in JUTUs five canons, may be ejected to hold 
in the future. It is regarded as a necessary relation which 
holds between two types of events* Deductions, on the other hand, 
are necessary given the premises* But all deduction rests ultim¬ 
ately on induction, on experience, excepting those deductions 
from analytic propositions when the latter are considered to be 
groups of words which are given systematic usage but which have 
no reference to reality. The premises of deductions may always 
be questioned, and if they are not tautologies, they must be 
empirical propositions* Since empirical propositions are not 
certain, deductions from them are not on a more sure footing than 
inductions* That is to say, although from the promises deductions 
are necessary, when taken as inference from what one kind of pre¬ 
mise stands for (i.e* experience) the deduced results cannot be 


considered to be necessary, 


















: c:k ■ 








(73 


I do not think that what I have been trying to say in 
the last few sentences can be reduced to the proposition that 
deduction is induction. The greater part of the chppter is taken 
up with showing that deduction is not induction. But what I am 
concerned to note is that the conclusions arrived at by deduc¬ 
tion are in one sense no more certain than are those arrived at 
by induction. I therefore conclude that in the pursuit of know¬ 
ledge an undue emphasis on the deductive method is based on 
prejudice. 


'• 0 


GIIAPTEE IV 


TRUTH 

"Beauty is Truth, Truth Beauty", However poetical this 
line of Keats % it is a most unphilosophical statement* The 
traditional division of Philosophy into Logic, Ethics, and Aes¬ 
thetics gives to each its special subject, the True, the Good, 
and the Beautiful. While Ethics and Aesthetics are still concern¬ 
ed with their respective subjects. Logic and the True have almost 
parted company. Logic is becoming the study of forms of deduc¬ 
tive inference in a way that Aristotle and the Schoolmen never 
dreamed of. The highly abstracted f or ms with their comp lie ated 
relationships apparently have less and less to do with the True, 
in spite of the chapters on truth-values in the textbooks on 
Symbolic Logic, There seems to be genuine concern about the 
correct manipulation of the symbols so that there will be no 
doubt that the conclusions follow from the premises, but there 
seems to be little interest in whether or not the premises are 
true. Some logicians, indeed, are searching for a few postulates, 
preferably one postulate, from which all knowledge can be deduced, 
in much the same fashion as Descartes developed his system. This 
is a tribute to their love of system but not to their desire for 
knowledge. Logic and the metaphorical True are still relatives, 
though the relationship may not be universally acknowledged. 

The question "What is true?" is legitimately asked of 
propositions, A1 -though "true" is sometimes used to mean "gen¬ 
uine" or "real", and "false" to mean "artificial" or "sham", 
philosophically, and specifically logically, "true" and "false" 









\ 












; . .... 

■ j.'c; /: 




* 




* 






■ 

, 

• ^ .. t:; : 

, 




' ' . 




... ; -r 






. 












are applicable only to propositions. We do not sqg of a mater¬ 
ial object that it is true when what we mean is that it exists. 
Material facts simply are, they are not either true or false. 
However, there are some people who use "true” and "Truth" in 
a metaphysical sense, and speak about striving to know the 
Truth. Although these people presumably are equating knowledge 
with The Truth, it is an unnecessary confusion of terms to do 
so, and truth and falsity are not given their customary meanings. 
In logic a proposition may be either true or false; or, depend¬ 
ing on the evidence for it, it may be only probable. Since I do 
not intend to discuss the subject of Probability, for the pur¬ 
poses of this thesis a proposition is either true or false. 

On the correspondence theory of truth a proposition is 
true if and only if it corresponds with reality. The only plau¬ 
sible meaning which can be assigned to the phrase "correspondence 
with reality" is that ideas correspond to things in reality, i.e. 
that mental events correspond with non-mental entities. This at 
once raises the difficulty of comparing things "in my head" with 

t 

things outside my head* We compare a landscape painting with the 
landscape by looking at the two. But we cannot look at our ideas 
in the same sense as we look at either the landscape or the paint¬ 
ing. If a person asks me to look at my idea of a clock and then 
compare it with the clock itself, there might be some point to 
the suggestion if I were to "have a mental image" of a grand¬ 
father clock and then look at a grandfather clock. However if I 
have a mental image of a grandfather clock and then look at a 







(76 


small bedside alarm clock there is little similarity between what 
I think of and what I see. This notion of being able to compare 
ideas with things is based on the assumption that it is possible 
to know the tilings apart from the evidence for them gained by 
experience. This is simply not true. We can see that a book 
has a black cover and white pages, we can feel it as fairly 
smooth and hard, perhaps notice a faint odor. These and sim¬ 
ilar qualities make up our idea of the bookj we cannot "get at" 
the book itself because so far as we are concerned these qualities 
are the book. When it is suggested that intangible things are 
to be sought to correspond with our "tangible ideas" on the 
supposition that we can compare the two, it is apparent that the 
correspondence theory is inadequate and that we ought to abandon 
it. 

Another theory which can be rejected without much dis¬ 
cussion, in spite of its influential supporters, is the prag¬ 
matic theoiy of truth. The essence of what pragmatists assert 
about truth is that whatever is useful is true. If a thing works, 
then it is true. Dewey writes, "The best definition of truth 
from the logical standpoint which is known to me is that of 
Peirce: ,r Ihe opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to 
by all who investigate is what we mean by the truth, and the 
object represented by this opinion is the real 1 " (Dewey, p.3U5, 
footnote) . Because of this uncertain nature of truth, Dewey 
himself substitutes the term Warranted assertibility" for "truth", 
and uses the term as a predicate of the outcome of inquiry. Since 
for Dewey a proposition, as explained in Chapter II, is the outcome 









(77 


of inquiry and depends on the satisfactory adjustmnnt of the 
organism to the environment, the test of whether a proposition 
is or is not a warranted assertion is pretty well decided by 
our own comfort. Essentially then, as stated above, what is 
true is what is useful. But this can lead to absurdities, 

A and B are two men on a ship. If B sees A hanging over a 
deck-rail, looking as though he wished he had only a minute to 
live, and if B considers the suggestion "A is ill”, to find it 
abhorrent because it disturbs him for he really does not wish 
to move from his comfortable position on his deck chair to try 
to help A, then B may decide that A is not ill, A theory which 
treats facts as though their are selected fictions, -which we con¬ 
sider true or false according to the consequences of our belief 
or disbelief in the fictions, is plainly inadequate, 

A theory of truth -which is important not only because 
of its eminent contemporary advocates is the theory of the log¬ 
ical positivists. The positivists assert that the terms "true 11 
and "false” serve only as marks of assertion and denial, 'ihen 
one asserts that a proposition is true, all that one is doing 
is asserting the proposition; that to say u 1 Canada has vast 
areas of uncultivated land 1 is true" is simply to assert that 
Canada has vast areas of uncultivated land; that ttl p* is true” 
is to assert ”p", When one asserts that a proposition is false, 
what one does is to assert its contradictory; that to say 
111 Ostriches are the swiftest to-legged creatures 1 is false" is 
to say that ostriches are not the swiftest two-legged creatures; 




(78 


that "*p* is false" is the assertion of "not-p". Thus the 
positivists assert that in sentences the -words "is true" and 
"is false" are logically superfluous* From this they go on 
to assert that the question of the truth or falsity of propo¬ 
sitions is really the question ,f What makes a proposition true 
or false?" The discussion of truths therefore, is the discus¬ 
sion of how propositions are validated* 

The positivists distinguish two kinds of propositions, 
analytic and synthetic. Since analytic propositions are taut¬ 
ologies > which are known a priori to be true ( to say 'that an 
analytic proposition is false is to say that it is self-contra¬ 
dictory) , only synthetic propositions can be validated other 
than by examining to see that they are not self-contradictory. 

And the way in -which synthetic propositions can be validated is 
to determine whether they can be verified, at least verified 
in principle. Hie verification of a synthetic proposition 
rests ultimately on the possibility of experiencing sense-contents. 
The proposition may itself not be about sense-contents^ but in 
order to be verifiable, if it is not about sense-contents, it 
must entail a proposition which is about sense-contents or one 
which, in conjunction with others that are either analytic or 
independently verified, entails a proposition, not deducible 
from these others alone, which is about sense-contents. In other 
words, a synthetic proposition is verifiable either directly or 
indirectly by recourse to experience. Every synthetic proposition 
is, in effect, an hypothesis which may or may not be empirically 








verified* Ayer recognizes that this is a criterion of meaning 
put forth to distinguish literally meaningful statements from 
metaphysical statements* "Grass grows at a depth of ten miles 
directly beneath Edmonton" is literally meaningful since under 
suitable circumstances it could be verified. However, on the 
positivists 1 'theory such statements cannot be said to be either 
true or false. They are meaningful, capable of verification 
(at least in principle) , but they cannot with justification be 
either asserted or denied since there is at present no set of 
sense-contents which can or cannot substantiate the statement. 

What are sense-contents that so much of meaning should 
depend on them? Ayer asserts that a sense-content is part of a 
sense-experience, that it is neither mental nor physical. Sense- 
contents "occur", out of which logical constructions are made* 
There is no distinction between mental sense-contents and phy¬ 
sical sense-contents but there is between the objects which are 
logical constructions out of them. This does not mean that an 
object is actually constructed out of sens e-contents $ it is a 
way of asserting that "all sentences referring to it are trans¬ 
latable into sentences referring to theta?. (Ayer, p*123). Not¬ 
withstanding the fact that Ayer protests the charge of solipsism 
by arguing that on the solipsist theory other persons and material 
objects have the status of metaphysical objects, statements about 

which are unverifiable in principle, and that it is absurd to 

* 

class another person as a metaphysical object, it nevertheless 
seems to me that he does adopt the position of the subjective- 
idealists. Since sense-contents are neither mental nor physical. 





- 

* 

r 















(80 


and since he denies the causal theory of perception* and since 
objects are only logical constructions* -what is the connection 
between the object and the observer? How does he know there 
are material objects? Hair is it possible to distinguish between 
the pink elephants one might occasionally see and the objects 
of the every-day world? The possibility cf verification depends 
on suitable circumstances^ given suitable circumstances I dare¬ 
say the pink elephants might reappear* On this theory knowledge 
varies with the degree of success of our attempt to make consis¬ 
tent the language which we use to describe sense-contents. 

The last theory to be discussed is the coherence theory 
of truth. The basis for the coherence theory is* that of two 
contradictory propositions one must be false. From this basis 
rise the notions that all true propositions will "cohere" to 
form one system of knowledge* that inconsistencies are evidence 
of errors* that no true proposition need remain outside the sys¬ 
tem. A proposition which is true will be so because it does not 
contradict any other proposition known to be true and because it 
is consistent with other true propositions. But* it may be 
asked* how are these latter propositions knara to be true? If 
these are true because they cohere with still others* what about 
these others? Coherence must surely mean something more than 
coherence of propositions* To this it may be answered that 
coherence assuredly does — in a sense. 

This essay begins with a discussion of Definition. It is 
noted that there are both nominal and real definitions. The maj¬ 
ority of real definitions are originally formulated tentatively 
















* 


















(81 


asuaominal definitions* After investigations are carried out, 
end perhaps minor changes made, a definition emerges as a 
real definition, — there are few definitions which are merely 
records of equivalences of different sets of words* The defin- 
tens of a real definition always refers to some tiling other than 
the words which make it up* Real definitions, then, tend to 
attain the status of propositions. A sentence which defines a 
word by referring to something by means of other words is a de- 
finitionj but the same sentence may be regarded as a sentence 
esqpressing a proposition which may be true or false. And this 
is the function of definitions, to serve as hypotheses in the 
process of the clarification of meanings * Although definitions 
may be arbitrary, and consequently cannot be said to be true or 
false, their arbitrary character is not completely irrelevant 
to our experience, at leant if it is, then the definition is not 
a good one. For our purpose in using a definition is either 
to set limits to the meaning which we wish to assign to a 
particular word or to prescribe the meaning without which we 
would not assign a particular word. In so defining words we are 
able to use than Tilth as little ambiguity of meaning as possible* 
However in the course cf experience we may discover that a def¬ 
inition is too wide or too narrow, that it either includes more 
than we wish it to include or excludes a part of what we really 
mean when we use the word. 'When this happens we change the def¬ 
inition, every change being made in the interest of a further 
clarification of meaning. Obviously it is possibis that this 
sort of activity can be carried on Tilth regard to a system of 







(82 


meanings which has no reference to our experience, except the 
experience of formulating the abstract system* It is both 
possible and actual that we do this sort of thing ■with regard 
to our experience. And the resultant definitions can, many 
of them at any rate, be significantly regarded as propositions* 

In tlie second chapter, on propositions, only the categorical 
proposition is discussed, but what is said there applies to the 
other types as well* The reason for the other types is that 
their functions are different from those of the categorical. 

The alternative proposition is best suited to stating various 
possibilities of a case, for the purpose usually of eliminating 
some of them, although aU the alternants may be true. When 
there are only two arguments, only one of which could possibly 
be true, they are stated most effectively in a disjunctive 
proposition since 'this kind of proposition does not assert the 
truth of either disjunct and allows that both may be false. The 
hypothetical asserts an implication or supposed connection 
between two propositions, a property which makes hypothetical 
propositions especially useful in scientific investigation. For 
conveying information, making factual statements, stating problems 
and solutions, and doing what cannot be done better by another 
kind, the categorical proposition is used. No matter what the 
kind, the proposition itself is a meaningful combination of 
meanings, different relationships between the meanings being 
expressed by the logical constants: is, and, either ... .or, not 
both, if ... then. The most important of these is the implicative 



(83 


relation because of its suitability for recording any inference 
after the inference is made* That is, syllogism can be expressed 
as a hypothetical proposition, the premises constituting the an¬ 
tecedent, the conclusion the consequent. It is noted in the 
chapter on inference that syllogism cannot be intelligibly 
symbolized as either a^>b or as p.qZ>r, since there is no in¬ 
dication that the conclusions do foliar from the premises* If 
either symbolic proposition were correct, the second would be 
less likely to be than the first since there is nothing in u p M 
and tt q M to show that they are in any way related other than by 
the conjunctive u and M , whereas in the first, “a” would apparently 
symbolize the two premises which presumably would be related in 
some way in order that a conclusion should follow* 

I should like to reiterate that inference in the first 
instance is not formal* The inference is made because of a rela¬ 
tionship in meanings* After it is made, and is put into n if 
then * 1 form or is given symbolic form, operations according to 
the rules of deductive logic may be carried out. This is why I 
stress that for logic the interesting feature about deduction 
is not so much the fact that valid conclusions may be obtained by 
the correct manipulation of symbols, as the very different fact 
of our being able to see the relationship between the meanings 
of what forms the first proposition for those persons who wish 
to calculate from it. That the proposition ten lines down from 
the original proposition may be validly derived from the orig¬ 
inal is not nearly so wonderful as the implicative relationship 
which holds between p and q, if p does imply q* 




(8k 


Inductive inference also is a matter of seeing 
relationships between meanings, but since the relationships 
are hypothetical they need to be established as well as they 
c an be by tests or experiment, In spite of the tentative 
element of all inductive generalizations many of them are so 
highly probable that for practical purposes they are regarded 
as certain* For those which are constantly subject to tests, 
successful results are taken as evidence for the validity of 
the induct ion although the procedure is that of affirming the 
consequent, a procedure which does not validate the antecedent* 

It is clear that meaning is of paramount importance. 

It is not at all clear what meaning means. However, one thing 
we may be sure of is that when we say a proposition is true we 
mean that no other proposition known to be true contradicts it, 
and that if it can be tested empirically it will be substantiated. 
When we say a proposition is false we mean the first and perhaps 
both of the following propositions: the contradictory is known 
to be true, and there is no empirical justification for the pro¬ 
position. These are the implicit meanings of the words 11 true" 
and 5 , false u * If questioned, every person would have to agree 
that he uses the words “true” and "false 11 of propositions 
which meet the requirements of being contradictory to true pro¬ 
positions or not, and o® being empirically verifiable or not. 
Although the test of empirical verification to determine truth 
or falsity does not apply to every proposition, every true pro¬ 
position must be consistent with other true propositions which 







. 










_ 


























are relevant to it, and every false proposition must be the 
contradictory of a true proposition or be inconsistent with 
those propositions, known to be true, whose meanings are suf¬ 
ficiently relevant to be tested for their consistency while 
excluding the false proposition* Meanings must be consistent; 
propositions must cohere if they are to be true. 

Consistency of meaning, then, is the goal of rational 
thought. But what is meaning? Meaning is nothing if it is not 
mental. Meaning is the interpretation of our experience. It is 
not merely the recording of our sense experience, it is the inter¬ 
pretation of it. The interpretation takes the form of an ideal 
construction of our sense experience such that we can say with 
Bosanquet that "Ideas, taken as parts of a world, are the Tilings". 
The ideas are "in the mind"; the things are external to minds 
and are as they are known to minds. When we interpret our ex¬ 
perience, what we are doing is to give meaning to it; and when 
we try to bring order into the meaning we are reasoning. Bring¬ 
ing order into the meaning is the business of every sane person 
at some time in his life, the success of the venture varying from 
almost no integration to the highly-organized and comprehensive 
view that a specialist has of his field. And I do not doubt 
that there are some few persons who succeed in seeing relation¬ 
ships between two or more apparently isolated branches of study. 
Indeed one of the functions of philosophy is to attempt to re¬ 
late all departments of knowledge in order to form one coherent 
system. The basic subject-matter is our experience to which we 
give meaning* Then, if we are able, we see relationships between 





'1 . ■ ! . 


C 


*x ; ■ ■ 




. . • 






(86 


meanings; but the relationships are often only hypothesized, 

•their establishment depending on how well we do see the re¬ 
lationships and also on our future experience. In a previous 
chapter I try to show that, given certain meanings, others 
can be deduced as being involved in and compatible with those 
given, and that these can in a sense be certain; and I try to 
show that induction is a matter of seeing relationships too, 
though inductions are not certain in the sense in which deduc¬ 
tions are generally considered to be certain. Our future ex¬ 
perience bears directly on how well we infer inductively, and 
bears indirectly on the effectiveness of some of our deductions 
which may have been inferred from weak inductive premises. 
Evidence from experience must not be neglected, nor must it 
be rejected on the ground that it is inconsistait with a theory 
which we hold (a theory being an attempt to bring under one 
head a number of relations which apparently are connected) , for 
the aim of a good theory is to embrace all of the relevant ex¬ 
perience, to systematize all meaning. If the evidence of ex¬ 
perience is practically incontrovertible then we ought rationally 
to alter the theory so that it will account for the new experience 
as well as the old. 

As everyone knows, though some persons wish to maintain 
that there is no evidence for it, this activity of giving mean¬ 
ing, inferring meaning, and organizing meaning into systems 
which may eventually become one system, is a mental activity. 

But what is meant may or may not be mental. We can say legiti¬ 
mately of a particular inference that it is valid, and mean 







(87 


the inference as a mental event. Yle can also speak of a valid 
inference ■which has reference to non-mental events, and mean 
the non-mental events. The distinction is a real one* 

There are some ‘tilings which I find impossible to explain 
away* Among them are the propositions in A Defence of Common 
Sense 5 which G. E. Moore asserts as propositions which he knows 
with certainty to be true* They begin: "There exists at pre¬ 
sent a living human body, which is my body. This body was bom 
at a certain time past, and has existed continuously ever since, 
though not without undergoing changes * • • • ”. Moore goes on to 
list many more truisms. In addition to these propositions which 
Moore asserts, it seems to me to be impossible to explain away 
(or to disregard) the fact that we have sense organs by means 
of which we gain our experience, and the fact that scientists 
are engaged in work which has proved conclusively that sense 
organs are receptive only to physical stimulation. A theory with 
which these facts are incompatible simply does not integrate 
all of our esperience. If there is a theory which does make 
consistent our experience, then on rational grounds it must be 
preferred to others which do not* 

To revert to meaning, what do we mean by a non-mental 
event? At least one kind of non-mental event is a thing which 
we can directly experience, such as the material objects in 
the environment. That is, there is the evidence of the senses 
to support our knowledge of the thing. This is not to say that 
we have sense-contents which we combine in various ways to form 
logical constructions, the latter being only convenient ling- 







f ' • 






. 

■ 







































(88 


guistic fictions for talking about the world, because to do 
so is to disregard what is asserted in the above paragraph as 
being something which must be taken into account. The evidence 
gained through the senses is caused by physical stimuli, and 
this means that there is an external Object 11 which stimulates 
the senses. Whether or not the ‘’object” has continuous exist¬ 
ence through some period of time is a question which is decided 
on the ground of further experience and how well alternative 
possibilities fit the theory* Let the “object” be one volume 
of Bradley’s “Principles of Logic” which lies on my desk at 
the present time. How do I know that it is the same book as 
was there yesterday, the day before, and a month ago? On each 
of these days my sense experience of the book was precisely the 
same, so far §,s I could tell* Why, then, could it not have been 
a different book each time, although it looked the same? The 
answer is, of course, that it could have been; I have no proof 
that it was not changed daily. But that it was is highly improb¬ 
able for the following reasons; It takes a comparatively long 
time to publish a book; it is unlikely that there are in Edmoi>- 
ton more than five copies of the book; the library markings 
differ on different copies, so the books cannot have come from 
the same library; the library lists only one copy in this edition; 
etc* In short, there is ample evidence in the rest of my exper¬ 
ience to support the conviction which I have that the book is 
the same one today as the one I borrowed from the library a 








■ 








1 







(89 


month ago# It also consist s wi th other propositions about my 
experience to assert that the book*s existence is entirely in¬ 
dependent of my own or any other persons existence, although 
had neither Bradley nor his publisher lived there would be no 
b ook. 


Another kind of non-mental event is a thing infoich vre 
cannot directly experience though there is good theoretical 
evidence (and often experimental evidence) that it exists, 
namely, a physical concept. Physical concepts are not avail¬ 
able to sense perception, but there seems to be no good reason 
to deny their existence. 

A third kind of non-mental event are relationships 
which exist between things# There is a relationship between 
hardness and weight; A is greater than B; this is higher than 



that# 


These three kinds of non-mental events (by no means an 
exhaustive list) have been .suggested as things which, though 
independent of ourselves, are s^ome of the things that may be 
meant by words and propositions# They are the sort of things 
which, so far aw we can see, exist whether human beings do or 
not. And when we infer relationships be ween meanings, we imply 
that the relationships exist between the things which are meant. 
Two tests are taken as the means of proving the inferences# When 
the inferred proposition coheres with other relevant meanings, 
that is, when it satisfies the test of coherence, it is said to 
be true# And when the inference is verified empirically, if it 






(90 


is possible to verify it empirically, it is said to be true# 

The coherence test applies to all propositions, the empirical 
test only to those which can be verified empirically* 

As stated above, the basis of the coherence test is, 
that of two contradictory propositions one mast be false* 

Even more fundamental than this are the laws of logic, on which 
is constructed the whole system,of knowledge. How the laws are 
derived is the topic of the next and final chapter* 








(91 


CHAPTER V 

THE LAWS OF LOGIC 

The law of identity, the law of non-contradiction, 
and the law of excluded middle are the laws cf logic, or the 
lavs of thought as they are sometimes called* (It will become 
evident why I think: n the laws of ‘thought” a misnomer and why 
I prefer the other name*) These three logical laws underlie 
all rational thought* Contradictory ‘theories, incompatible 
propositions, are alike in the respect that they are based on 
these laws* without them, meaning is impossible* lhat I wish 
to do is to discover how these laws are derived, that is to say, 
to find out whether the laws of logic are a priori or whether 
they are empirical generalizations* 

In the first place, it is clear, I think, that a law 
of thought is not a law in the sense in which a physical law is* 
Material objects do not rest unsupported* A stone which rolls 
slowly down a gentle slope to the edge of a cliff does not stop 
there nor does it continue rolling along an imaginary extension 
of the gentle slope; when it passes the edge of the cliff, ex¬ 
cepting for a slight trajectory which depends on its momentum, 
the stone drops directly down and falls until it lands on some¬ 
thing which will support it. There is no exception to this law. 
Even the apparent exceptions of some of the gases are only appar¬ 
ent exceptions, which can be explained according to the lav* It 
is not true, however, that all thought is carried on in accord¬ 
ance with a lav, for it is an obvious misfortune of some persons 







(92 


that they are irrational. If irrationality were characterized 
merely by inconsistency in one*s words, or actions, or words 
and actions, it could be argued that the thoughts themselves 
were consistent with the laws, and that the irrationality 
consisted only in the failure to integrate the thoughts. That 
is to say, a car would be always recognized as a car and a street 
as a street, but the driver would attempt to keep the car on the 
boulevard. Such a case as this differs from a case of another 
type of irrationality, that in which -the sense experience is 
not given consistent interpretation. For exanple, if a person 
who is looking at a car calls it in succession a car, a street, 
a book, five prairie chicken, and walks up to it to try to shake 
hands with the right fender, then 'the person is conpletely dis¬ 
organized; he fails to interpret in a consistent fashion his 
various experiences and is consequently unable to integrate them. 
Sincd this sort of thing occurs, it seems to me that it is proof 
that thought does not necessarily conform to law. This is one 
reason why I object to calling a logical law a law of thought. 

The words "law of thought” are too suggestive of similar groups, 
n law of motion”, ”law of gravity” and others— suggestive, no 
doubt, because thinking is an activity of the mind as moving and 
gravitating are actions of physical objects. Even in this sense, 
a law of thought is false. But ”law of logic” has no such unhap¬ 
py connotation, and it is unlikely to be compared to the other 
groups for nothing ”logicates” as a rock moves and gravitates. 





(93 


TUbat is meant when one says that the lay/s of logic 
are a priori ? One tiling which is meant is that no empirical 
evidence will discredit them. No tiling in our experience 
will influence us to think that it is not itself. The contrad¬ 
dict or y of a true empirical proposition is held to be false, 
unquestionably. Another thing which some logicians mean by a 
priori laws of logic is that, being tautologies, the laws are 
true because by our conventional and consistent use of language 
we refuse to let them be false* The tautology, A is A, is true 
because unless A is contained in a synthetic proposition the only 
thing A can be is A, If the proposition "All cities in 'the Dom¬ 
inion pay federal taxes" is true, then the proposition "Some 
cities in the Dominion do not pay federal taxes" is false* 
"Either there are clouds in the sly or there are not 1 !' is a true 
proposition whatever the state of the sly* Considerations such 
as these give rise to the question: is the world a logical world? 
How is it that a prior i laws of logic are applicable to reality? 
Why do logical laws hold for empirical facts, if they do? 

If logical laws are rules of procedure for drawing in¬ 
ferences and for making our use of language consistent, then if 
they apply to reality, they apply in the sense of being observed. 
That is to say, we follow these rules because they are good or 
useful or helpful, and inasmuch as they do assist us in coping 
with facts they can be said to "fit" the facts. We do not use 
other laws since we never find that from true premises a false 










(9h 


conclusion is derived. Thus we consider the rules to be good 
or useful because they lead from true descriptions of facts 
to true descriptions of facts. In this way it can be said 
that logical laws are applicable to reality, (cf. Popper) . 

With this we would have to agree, especially when it 
is pointed out that rules of procedure can include both rules 
for deriving valid conclusions from true premises and rules, 
which resemble canons for careful work, which are applicable 
in induction. But is this asserting enough? What of the cases 
of valid reasoning that occur in spite of an inconsistent use 
of words? Insofar as there is language inconsistency there is 
a failure to make coherent all of one*s experience; but this 
does not mean that a person who is careless in his use of lang¬ 
uage is incapable of valid inference. For inference is seeing 
relationships between meanings which may or ma^r not be symbol¬ 
ized by words alone* It Is not easy to imagine anyone at all 
reasoning correctly about abstract concepts in physics or phil¬ 
osophy, yet it is hardly doubtful that at least a few persons 
at some time or other make valid inferences with an extremely 
limited knowledge of language. And the reason Is, as is stated 
in the last chapter, that inference is not merely seeing relation- 
simps between meanings (a purely mental, activity) but it is 
seeing the relations which exist between what is meant partic¬ 
ularly when what is meant is some tiling in the common sense 
world. It seems to me that it can be said that these few persons 
are thinking logically when they make valid inferences whether 
they do so by means of linguistic consistency or not. But to 











( 9 ? 


such cases the explanation about logical laws being rules of 
procedure is not applicable* 

There is another reason for questionring whether to 
assert that the laws of logic are rules of procedure for draw¬ 
ing inferences is to assert enough. It is a point which I 
have stressed again and again, but it must be repeated. To 
limit logic to the study of how valid conclusions are derived 
deductively from premises which are given is to reduce logic 
to an intellectual game to be played with words and special 
symbols. Logic, as "primarily the doctrine of valid inference 1 ', 
to use a phrase of Popper ! s, is at least concerned with infer¬ 
ence, valid or invalid. Now to restrict inference to the man¬ 
ipulations of propositions in order to obtain certain conse¬ 
quences is to refuse to recognize the problem of how the given 
propositions themselves are obtained. As one of the contrib¬ 
utors to a symposium on "Why are the Calculuses of Logic and 
Arithmetic Applicable to Reality?", Prof, Ryle discusses the 
proposition "if given that today is Monday, tomorrow is Tuesday 
then given that tomorrow is not Tuesday, today is not Monday", 
This proposition. Prof, Ryle asserts, is an application of the 
principle, "if p implies q then not-q implies not-p". That the 
denial of the consequent can be logically followed by the denial 
of the antecedent is true* Indeed, once the meaning of "if 
then" is understood there can be no question about the relation; 
we do express certain relationships in that hypothetical way. 






























(96 


from which conclusions follow because of rules of procedure# 
Consider the proposition, n if given that today is Monday, the 
bear at the zoo is hungry, then given that the bear at the zoo 
is not hungry, today is not Monday”. The whole thing is absurd, 
for we know that it is a modus tollens syllogism^ surely no 
one denies or questions this* But logic must be concerned with 
why the propositions ’’today is Monday” and ”the bear at the zoo 
is hungry” are not related, or with why they are, if they are* 
The question again confronts us, ’‘does p irply q?” .And this 
is not itself, nor is it obtainable by, a rule of procedure. 

The second alternative which I wish to mention is: 
are the laws of logic empirical generalizations? If empirical 
generalization implies that it might (so far as we can see) have 
been otherwise, then the question can be answered at once: laws 
of logic are not empirical generalizations. Although incompat¬ 
ible theories are produced, the laws of logic underlie the 
thinking which produced them. The laws cannot be otherwise if 
there is to be coherence of meaning and rational thinking. 

However, can it be said that the laws of logic are in 
no sense empirical generalizations? Ti/hen we do not assert dog¬ 
matically that A is not not-A because in the interest of consis¬ 
tency of language we will not let it be anything else, is it 
not possible that we might think a lamp is 3 lamp because it is 
a lamp and not another thing? The answer seems to me to be so 
obvious that I wonder if I have not gone completely astray in 








(97 


thinking that some persons would answer no* Yet I believe 
that some do give that answer, among whom are the logical 
positivists and the subjective idealists. I can only explain 
why I think they may be wrong by giving an example of how the 
lays may have been derived. 

On the desk there is a brown metal, gooseneck lanp which 
has been standing there for over six months. There is also on 
the desk a blue metal calendar frame which holds a number of 
cards, one for each month of the year; the calendar has been 
standing close to 'the lamp for as long as the lam? has been there. 
On looking at them, I can distinguish the lamp from the calendar 
and botii from the wallpaper background and from the large pink 
blotter on which they stand. Ylhen I am not looking at them. When 
I am outside the room and cannot look at them, there is not the 
slightest doubt in my mind that 'they are still there. Each time 
I see them I do not think that there is a different lamp or a 
different calendar from those objects which I have previously 
seen there. If there is any change in them, it is Imperceptible 
to me (other than the different monthly cards) . I am certain 
that the lamp is the lamp, that it is not the calendar, and 
that it is not anything else but the lamp. Now it seems to me 
that from my experience in regard to these two objects against 
their surroundings, it is possible to infer the three lavs of 
logic as inductions from them in conjunction with my thinking 
about them. That is 'bo say, I can experience the lot without 
rolling my eyes or turning my head, yet the objects are disting- 








, 








V : A 

* 


* 



















- 


- 















j ‘i 










■ % 















(98 


uishable and one is not another nor different from itself. 

¥hy should this experience not be generalized in the forms 
of tlie three laws? The inductions have been tested and re¬ 
tested, and since they have never failed a test it is not to 
be expected that they ever will. 

However, the notion that the laws of logic are empir- 
ical generalizations presents a difficulty* Since an enpir- 
ical generalization falls short of certainty, how can the 
laws of logic be known to be certain? And since it is known 
as a matter of fact that they do underlie all rational think¬ 
ing, they must be certain. Does this mean that some inductions 
are certain? Or does it mean that, since the laws are certain, 
they are not inductions? ¥e seem 'bo be confronted with ”a 
certain induction”, which by definition is a contradiction in 
terms, and is evidence that there is something wrong with the 
thinking which leads to it. 

Two or three times I make the categorical assertion that 
the laws of logic underlie rational thought, because I think no 
one doubts that they do* But why are we certain that the laws 
are fundamental? It is true that any criticism of them presup¬ 
poses themj but how do we know that criticism of them presup¬ 
poses them? Is it not because we have analyzed our experience 
and found that it is in accordance with the laws, i.e* that the 
laws pervade our experience to make it what it is? An affirm¬ 
ative answer does not necessarily imply the admission that the 
laws are inductions, for it can be contended that they are 
found there because they are a pr iori and "regulate” our exper- 






(99 


ience. Bat an affirmative answer mast be given* whatever the 
reason we wish to give for it. However, the two possible 
reasons are that the laws are a priori or that they are empir¬ 
ical generalizations; so the main question is still unanswered. 

It seems to me that the term 11 a priori ” is incorrectly 
applied to the laws* in one sense* and correctly applied in 
another sense. It is the case that the proposition* books 
are books* is true because it conforms to the law of identity* 

A is A. And the proposition which is symbolized* A is A* is 
true because it conforms to the law of identity* A is A. In 
this sense it can be said that the 1 aw* A is A* is a priori . 
However* the law itself* which is not in conformity with itself 
because it is not yet made* conforms only with experience. That 
is to say* we can significantly assert the proposition* A is A* 
only when we know the meaning of "is n as well as the meaning of 
the subject; and we learn the meaning of n is n from experience. 
Thus* to say that the proposition* A is A* is true is to say 
so because it conforms to the law; whereas to egg that the law 

is true is to say that it is consistent with our experience* 
since without knowing the meaning of “is” we cannot know that 

the law is a tautology. On the strength of this* it seems to 
me that It could at least be contended* and possibly maintained* 
that the laws themselves are empirical formulations* which* be¬ 
cause of their fundamental nature* can be considered as certain 
as any proposition which conforms with one of them. 

At any rate it is certain that thinking cannot be 
undertaken except according to the laws of logic* and any 









(100 


thinking worthy of the name is the attempt to make coherent 
our experience. Among other things the attempt involves 
tiie discovering of relationships which we do not directly per¬ 
ceive, in order that we may see (mentally see) the connections 
between the macroscopic relationships that are directly percep¬ 
tible, the aim being to order, to make consistent, to bring 
some measure of unity into what we know* It is my contention, 
therefore, that logic is concerned with how we apprehend real¬ 
ity, with those procedures (both inductive and deductive) by 
which we are increasing our knowledge, and with the validity 
of the methods of determining truth and falsity. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Ambrose and Lazerowitz; Fundamentals of Symbolic Logic# 

' Rinehart & Co*, Inc# 191+8. 

Ayer, A#J*, Language Truth and Logic* Victor Gollancz 
" Ltd* 19U8* 

Boole, G#, The Mathematical Analysis of Logic* Oxford, 

' B; Blackwell* 19U8. 

Bosanquet, B*, The Essentials of Logic* Macmillan & Co*, 

' ' Ltd., 1928* 

Bradley, F*H*, The Principles of Logic* Oxford University- 
Press, 1928* 

Cohen and Hag el. Ah Introduction to Logic and Scientific 
'' Method* New York, Harcourt* 193lu 
Dewey, J*, Logic, The Theory c£ Inquiry* Henry H olt & Co* 
'1938. 

Eaton, R*M*, General Logic, Charles Scribner * s Sons* 1931 

Joachim, H.H*, Logical. Studies, Oxford University Press* 1928* 

Joseph, H*W*B*, An Introduction to Logic* Oxford University 
Press. 3.931. 

Kheale, W*C*, Probability and Induction* Oxford University 
*' Press. 19it9# 

Mill, J.S., Systan of Logic, John W* Parker* 19U6* 

Moore, G*E*, 11 A Defence of Common Sense”, Contemporary British 
Philosophy* George Allen & Unwin Ltd* 192?* 

Pap, A., Elements of Analytic Philosophy* The MacMillan Co* 

' * 19k9. 

Popper, K*R*, In the Proceedings of the Joint Session of the 

Aristotelian ’ Society and the Mind Association, I9U6 
Robinson, R*, Definition. Oxford University Press* 1950. 

Russel}. B., A History of Western Philosophy* Simon and 
Schuster, 19U5« 

Ryle, G., in the Proceedings of the Joint Session cf The - 
Aristotelian Society and The Mind Association, I9U6 
Schiller, F.C.S., Formal Logic* MacMillan and Co* 1931* 

Tarski, A», Introduction to Logic* Oxford University Press* 

' New York. 19U6. 

Werkmeister, W*H., The Basis and Structure of Knowledge* 

Harper and Brothers. 19U8* 
















