THE FRACTIONAL 1 101T OF TITA11I1T B g III LIARLIIT: 


by 


BERTA JlcGIBBCN. B.So. (Alberta) 




@x mm 

imiciBSiwais 

aBERMIHSB 


















This is to certify that the undersigned 
have read and recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis submitted by 
Berta McGibbon, B.Sc®, entitled;- 

rati Yi lin . L ite. 


Professor 



/Ufi* . > f € - or » h/t H\ '-ArsJ 






Professor 







THE FRAOTIOTATIOH OH VITAMIN Bg IN MAHMI1E 



BN 


BERTA MeGIBBON. 3.So, {Alberta) 


Submit ted 
University of 
reo 


A Thesis 

to the Department of Biochemistry, 
Alberta in partial fulfilment of the 
uirements for the degree of 
Master of Science, 


Edmo nt on, Alber t a 


April 1935 






3K : Ll 



i'he writer wishes to express her deep gratitude 
to Professor Hunter and to Hr, Mcparlane, for their 
invaluable assistance, advice and constant interest 
in her work. 

Her thanks are clue to Hiss Hilne of the Depart¬ 
ment of poultry Husbandry, who ver, kindly insured 
the supply of chicks and feed for the experiments, 

carried out the autopsies and gave instruction in 

~ 

the care and feeding of chicks. 

And finally to Hr, Cantor for his assistance 
with pat ho1o gic al mat e rial. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/mcgibbon1935 


0 0 if T E II T S 


Introduction 


Page 


1 


Review 2 

1. The Relation of Vitamin 3 to Anaemias 2 

II. The physiological Action of Vitamin 4 

III. The Chemical properties of Vitamin 3g 5 

Experimental 7 


I. A Preliminary Attempt at the Direct Isolation 
of the flavin pigment from Marmite 


II. The fractionation of Vitamin Bp in Marmite 
Using ChicEs for the Biological Assay 


7 

10 


first Series 12 

A Study of the Methods of Rendering the Basal 

Ration Deficient in Vitamin Bg "by Heat 

Treatment 12 


Outline of Experiment 15 

Results 13 


Votes 13 

Comments on Results 14 

Second series 17 

The Vitamin 3 2 Content of Marmite as Determined 
by Supplementing the Control 3?ellag.ra Producing 
Diet with Varying Amounts of Marmite 17 

Outline of Experiment 17 

Results 17 

Votes 17 

Comments on Results 22 

Third Series 27 

The Solubility of Vitamin 3o in 60 and in 80% 
Alcohol * 27 





Page 

Third Series (continued) 

Outline of deeding Experiment 50 

Results 31 

Notes 32 

Comments on Results 35 

Fourth Series 39 

The Adsorption of Vitamin Bp on Fullers’ Earth 
or on Lloyd’s Reagent from Alcoholic Extracts 
of Maritime 39 

Outline of Feeding Experiments 41 

Results 42 

Notes 42 

Comments on Results 43 

Fifth series 46 

The Curative Method of Assaying Vitamin Bg 46 

. outline of Experiment 46 

Results 46 

Notes 47 

Comments on Results 47 

General Discussion 48 

Summary 54 

Tables and Graphs 55 

Bibliography 5 Y 




INTRODUCTION 


The aim of this investigation at its inception was to 
elucidate the chemical nature of the anti-anaemic substance 
contained in Marmite. In view of the suggested relationship 
of vitamin Bg to this substance it was decided to proceed 
directly to the isolation of vitamin from liarmite follow¬ 
ing the procedure of Kuhn (1933) and to experiment with the 
pure -oroduct in a study of anaemias, 

The methods used by Kuhn had at this time been described 
only as applied to egg white and to whey. Early in our work 
it became apparent that there were difficulties attending the 
extraction and isolation of vitamin Bg from Mar mite which 
had not arisen in the fractionation of whey or egg white with 
the result that a crystalline flavin pigment was not obtained 
by us from Marmite. It was now evident that each stage of the 
fractionation of Marmite would have to be followed by a bio¬ 
logical assay of the vitamin Bg content of the fractions. The 
researches to be described herein are confined to such a study 
and it remains for future work to effect their completion before 
a study of the anti-anaemic activity of the nure nroduct can 


be. carried out 

































. 

















2 


REVIEW 

I. THE RELATION OP VITAMIN Bg TO AMELIAS 

The results of many recent investigations of the aetiology 
and pathology of pernicious anaemia are consistent with the 
theory that pernicious anaemia is a deficiency disease character¬ 
ized by the absence from the gastric mucosa of a specified enzyme. 
By the interaction of this thermolabile principle in gastric 
.iuice (variously named "intrinsic factor 11 Castle (1929), "AcLdisin" 
Morris et al. (1952) and rT hematopoietin" Wilkinson and Klein 
(1952)) and beef muscle protein as substrate a. haemopoietically 
active thermostable substance is formed. This product is believed 
by Klein and Wilkinson (1952) to be identical with the specific 
anti-anaemic substance contained in liver. 

The chemical nature of the "liver active principle 11 or of 
its precursor contained in beef protein has not yet been determined. 
The extrinsic factor was believed by Strauss and Oastle (1952) to 
be vitamin 3g since the characteristics and distribution 11 of the 
extrinsic factor and vitamin Bg were strikingly similar and since 
an jauto.lyzed yeast product (Marmite) after incubation with gastric 
.juice was found by them to be anti-anaemically active. 

* The original objective of the writer was to examine this 
suggested relationship between vitamin B^ and the principle in 
liver active in pernicious anaemia. Marmite was -used success¬ 
fully by Wills and paish (1955) in the treatment of tropical 
sprue, a macrocytic anaemia closely resembling pernicious anaemia 
but in which the intrinsic factor is believed to be present in 
the gastric iuice. It is now generally accepted that the haema- 




topoietic action of autolyzed yeast is in large measure due to 
its high content of extrinsic factor. At the same time Marmite 
is the richest known source of the water soluble vitamin B com¬ 
plex. The consensus of evidence (Davidson (1952): Groodallf 1952) 
Ungley (1955); and Wilkinson and Klein (1952)) is however, 
against a common identity for the extrinsic factor and the growth 
promoting constituent of the vitamin B "complex. Following the 
recording of several failures to prepare an anti-anaemically 
active fraction by the interaction of highly purified vitamin Bg 
nrenarations and normal gastric iuice (Ungley and James (1954); 
Diehl and Kuhnau (1955)) Castle (1954) has, in effect, with¬ 
drawn his original suggestion in this regard. 

While purified vitamin Bg may not act as the extrinsic fact¬ 
or the evidence, nevertheless, points to some connection as yet 
undetermined between vitamin Bo and haematopoiesis. .According 
to Cuba (1951) vitamin Bg deficient rats suffer from an anaemia 
which does not respond to iron or copper but is cured by 3.iver 
or yeast fractions. r jhe extensive researches of Goldberger et 
al (1928) on human pellagra have revealed that this disease 
results from a lack of, and is specifically cured by a substance 
contained in yeast, named oy him the "P.P.Factor" and now believ¬ 
ed to be identical with vitamin B r * In pellagra there occur 

k 

degenerative changes of the spinal nerves similar to those found 
in pernicious anaemia. Rhoads and 'Tiller (1955) have demonstrated 
a striking resemblance between the syndrome of chronic black 
tongue with anaemia in dogs usually regarded as analagous to 
pellagra, and the macrocytic anaemia and clinical features of 
snrue. The condition was alleviated by substance a riel in 









4 


vitamin B ; but not by parentfal administration of large doses 
of liver extract. It was suggested therefrom that "the dog 
utilizes vitamin Bg as such in haematopoiesis and not as an 
intermediate product of gastric digestion”. The glossitis of 
sprue and of Addisonian pernicious anaemia In man may very 
well be caused by the lack of some part of the vitamin B comple 

II. ' THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTION OF VITAMIN Bg 

The dual nature of vitamin B was first recognized by 
Goldberger (1926) and later confirmed by other workers. The 
first differentiation between vitamins 3^ and Bg as they are 
now known was effected by autoclaving. Vitamin is destroyed 
by autoclaving for one hour at 120°C, with the solution adjust¬ 
ed to pH 8tt 9 , but vitamin Bo retains its activity. This separ- 
at ion of the two components of the water soluble B complex led 
to a concerted attack on the problem of further concentrating 
and purifying vitamin Bg* Chick, Coping and Boscoe (1950) 
have shown that concentrates of vitamin Bg, free from Bi may 
be conveniently obtained from egg-white by removing the heat- 
coagulable proteins. GrUha (1951) obtained a concentrate of 
vitamin Bg from yeast by successive fractionations with lead 
acetate and alcohol. Levene (1952) described a procedure by 
means of which concentrates of both vitamins Bg and Bg may be 
obtained from brewers * 1 yeast, the latter being found in the 
residue remaining after applying his silica -extraction process 

Each step in the separation of the two components of the 

p 

water soluble vitamin B complex was controlled by biological 
assays which are based on their different physiological actions 





5 


Vitamin U, is the antineuritie growth promoting factor and 
vitamin Bo the anti-pellagra growth Promoting factor. A de- 
ficiency of vitamin Bg in the diet is the cause of pellagra 
in human beings, of retarded growth and a characteristic 
dermatitis in rats and chicks and of black tongue in dogs. 

These symptoms are accompanied by nerve lesions and disturb¬ 
ances of the gastro-intestinal tract. 

The effects of vitamin Bg deficiencj/ on rats and chicks 

I -■ . \ ** '■ 

have been studied extensively by numerous workers. In vitamin 

Bg studies with rats synthetic diets are used which have been 
freed from the vitamin B complex and supplemented! by vitamin 
B-, ( B, ). The assay method was curative and the growth rates 
taken as the criterio of activity. With chicks synthetic 
diets have riot been found satisfactory. At present a basal 
diet of natural foodstuffs is being used (Kline et al. 195B-35) By 
subjecting this diet to dry heat they claim that vitamin Bg 
is destroyed but without any appreciable destruction of the other 
essential factors. This diet produces a pellagrous like derm¬ 
atitis as well as retardation of growth. The vitamin Bo content 
of a supplement to this diet is measured by its activity to 
prevent pellagra and to promote growth. 

III. THE CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OP VITAMIN Bg 

Coincident with these investigations on the physiological 
action of vitamin Bg progress was also made toward the elucid¬ 
ation of its chemical nature, Narayanan.and Drummond (1930) 
found that vitamin Bg could be almost completely adsorbed on 
Fullers’ earth at pH 0.1 but encountered a great difficulty in 







6 


removing the adsorbed active factor. This difficulty was over¬ 
come by Kuhn, Gyorgy and Wagner-Jauregg (1933) who succeeded 
in eluting the active adsorbate with a mixture of four parts 
of water, one part of pyridin and one part of methyl alcohol, 
prom this elution they prepared a crystalline flavin pigment 
and claimed to have established its identity with vitamin Bg. 
x 'heir alleged vitamin Bg activity of flavin was based on the 
growth response obtained with rats when the Bourquin-Sherman 
(1931) vitamin Bg free diet (supplemented with B 4 * ) was used. 

The pellagra-preventing activity of the flavins could not be 
demonstrated because with this diet the rats did not develop 
dermatitis. Gyorgy (1935) has found that the failure of rats 
to develop dermatitis was due to the fact that the 80^ alcohol 
extract of wheat used as a source of vitamin B^ in the Bourquin- 
Sherman diet contained also sufficient amounts of the pellagra¬ 
preventing substance. Using a crystalline preparation of B-, 
he found that vitamin Bg is a complex of at least two factors 
i.e. (a) flavin and (b) the ” supplement ary factor 11 (or perhaps 
factors) contained in Peters’s (Kinnersley at al., 1933) ’’charcoal 
eluate” from bakers’ yeast. The flavin pigment has growth 
promoting activity only. The pellagra preventing action is a 
characteristic of the 11 supplementary factor” which is also 
growth promoting, but the body weights remain subnormal unless 
flavin is added. 

*Vitamin B 4 is contained in the mercuric sulphate precipitate of 
a vitamin preparation-®# B^_ concentrate' prepared from yeast 
according to kinnersley et al. (193E) 








1 



















. 












































































7 


EXPERIMENTAL 

A PRELIMINARY ATTEMPT AT THE DIRECT ISOLATION OF 
THE FLAVIN PIGMENT FROM MARMITE. 

The procedure employed by Kuhn (1933) for preparing ovo¬ 
flavin consists in shading finely powdered egg albumin with 

o 

8 05 methyl alcohol for 24 hrs. at 30 C. The supernatant is 
syphoned off and the shaking with more methyl alcohol repeated 
for 12 hrs. The combined pigment extracts are distilled, 
acidified with concentrated hydrochloric acid to a pH 0*1 and 
then are shaken for one hour with Fullers’ earth (lOOgms. to 
2 Kgms. egg albumin). The centrifuged adsorbate is washed 
free of chloride and eluted by shaking 1# hrs. with a mixture 
of one part of pyridine, one part of methyl alcohol and four 
parts of water. It is then . centrifuged and washed with 50<p 
methyl alcohol. The eluate and washings are concentrated in 
vacuo. The additional precipitate of Fullers’ earth is centrir- 
fuged and washed again. An equal or twice, the volume of methyl 
alcohol is added to precipitate the colloidally dispersed 
Fullers' earth and if necessary a few drops of glacial acetic 
acid are added. The Fullers’ earth is removed by centrifuging 
and the supernatant is concentrated in vacuo. Sufficient ace¬ 
tone is now added to precipitate the colourless compounds. The 
acetone is removed by distillation and the residual solution 
is extracted with aether until the ether shows no yellow colour¬ 
ation. The yellowish brown aquaeous solution which has a xreen 
fluorescence is now $uite clear. It is again precipitated by 
adding acetone until complete Precipitation is obtained. Next 








8 


\ 


day it is filtered and concentrated in vacuo to 20 cc, and 
again shaken with Fullers’ earth for three hours. The adsorp¬ 
tion filtrate is still yellow in colour .The Fullers* earth is 
washed with a little water and shaken for 2-if hrs with a mix¬ 
ture of forty marts of water, twenty parts of methyl alcohol 
and fifteen parts of pyridin, After centrifuging, the super¬ 
natant is concentrated in vacuo to 40 cc. precipitated with 
acetone and left overnight. The next day the solution is 
filtered and concentrated in vacuo to 10 cc. A 5 r ? silver nit¬ 
rate solution is then added until complete preeiritation is 
obtained. The reddish brown precipitate separated by centri¬ 
fuging is extracted Y/ith small portions of 50% acetic acid until 
the acid layer is colourless. The combined solutions are freed 
from silver with hydrogen sulphide and centrifuged. The super¬ 
natant is concentrated almost to dryness in-vacuo and the 
crystals Y/hich separate out are recrystallized three times in a 
small amount of boiling 21?. acetic acid. Two kilograms of dry 
egg albumin (commercial) yield 2 mg. crystalline ovoflavin. 

The needle shaped crystals are orange-orown in colour, and form 
round clusters. The empirical formula of flavin is O^^HgQ^Os 

In our attempts at isolating crystalline flavin from 
Mar mi t e Ilohn* s' method as described above was in general adhered 
to. In the first attempt we used 100'gms. and in the second 500 gms. 
of Marmite. To prepare an 8Of? alcohol extract the ..larmite was 
dissolved in a minimum amount of water and 95p methyl alcohol add¬ 
ed to the desired concentration. For adsorption we used kaolin. 

Our failure to obtain a crystalline preparation of flavin 
from Marmite was probably due to the small amounts of Marmite 

used. Kuhn obtained only 2 mg. of flavin from 2 yg. of dry 














9 


egg albumin* Since .larmite is a highly concentrated source of 
vitamin Bo we assumed that it likewise contained a relatively 
large amount of flavin. Such may not be the case and in fact 
■ Iarmite, weight for weight, may contain a much smaller amount 
of flavin than egg-white or whey powder. Later experiments 
indicate that in the preparation of the alcohol extract a con¬ 
siderable loss of flavin may have taken place* The main 
reason for our failure we believe to have been due to the use 
of kaolin for adsorption* Gyorgy, Kuhn and ’Vagner-Jauregg 
(1954) have found that kaolin, aluminum oxide, kieselguhp or 
calcium carbonate are.unsuitable for the adsorption of flavin. 
This article appeared after we had discontinued these experi¬ 
ments and had commenced the studies now to be described and 
in which Fullers* earth has always been used. 







10 


II. TEL FRACTIONATION OF VITAMIN B 2 III LIAEIIITE 
USING CHICKS FOR THE BIOLOGICAL ASSAY. 

Throughout the experiments to be described the following 
conditions were observed. Bay-old chicks in groups of 6 to 
£5 were used. They averaged in weight from 30 gms. to 35 gms. 
At the end of the first week they were banded with numbered 
wing bands, weighed, and the weight recorded. Weekly records 
of weights were kept. The chicks were housed in a well vent¬ 
ilated laboratory kept at 70°-80°F, Large wire cages with 
raised wire screens were used to prevent coprophagy. The 
cages were heated with electric light globes painted red to 
give maximum heat with minimum light. 

The basal ration used was that of Kline, Keenan, Elveh.jen 

and Hart (1932) and was composed of;- 

Yellow Corn 58 parts Salt (common) 1 parts 

Middlings £5 ” God Liver Oil 2 ft 

Casein 12 * CaGO^ 2 " 

o 

The diets were made up in lots of £50 gms. and 500 gms. 
defending on the number and age of the chicks. 

The basal ration was rendered deficient in vitamin by 
heating in a dry state for six days. Varying temperatures 
within the range of 95°C. to 130°C. were used. The ration was 
spread on trays in layers a quarter of an inch thick and heated 
in a thermostat oven. Temperature variations were checked from 
time to time. Only the yellow corn, middlings, casein and salt 
were treated thermally. The cod liver oil and CaC0~ were added 
as the diets were nreioared for feeding. 







r 




photograph of Chiok. (Group 'GCV) 
with "ully developed symptoms of Pellagra 












11 


Marmite, or an extract prepared from Marmite was used as 
the vitamin B£ supplement. Marmite is a commercial autolysate 
of yeast preserved with salt and is of a semi-solid consistency 
To insure its even distribution in the diet the following pro¬ 
cedure was employed. A small amount of hot water was added to 
the weighed portion of Marmite and stirred to a thick paste 
with a glass rod. This paste was slowly diluted until all the 
Marmite dissolved. The heated hasal ration was then added in 
an amount sufficient to give a thick mush. This mush was then 
incorporated in the remainder of the diet by rubbing thoroughly 
to ensure its freedom from lumps. 

No feeding experiment was conducted longer than six weeks. 
The birds were observed daily and examined if necessary. The 
first signs of pellagra or any other pathological symptoms 
were recorded. The external manifestations of pellagra are 
minute lesions at the beak which gradually increase in size as 
the disease progresses and finally appear as round crusty sym¬ 
metrical scabs at both corners of the mouth. The eyelids 
become granular, contract and finally close so that vision is 
completely impaired. The wing feathers are shed and in general 
feathering is retarded. The birds are very nervous, somnolent 
and congregate as close to the lamp as possible. The food 
consumption is reduced but apparently not as the result of loss 
of appetite. These symptoms are associated with a character¬ 
istic retardation of growth and great mortality. 























. 
















' 



















2nd* photograph of Chick (Group XXV) 
Showing the Cure of Pella? vr. hy feeding 
for twelve days an Alcohol extract 
of Tar mite in amount Equivalent to ilarmite 







12 


FIRST SERIES 

A STUDY OF THE IffiTHOD OF RENDERING- THE BASAL RATION 
DEFICIENT IN VITAMIN 3 £ BY HEAT TREATMENT. 

According to Kline* Keenan, Elvehjem and Hart (1932) 
chicks reared on the basal diet of natural foodstuffs heated 
dry at 100® for six days invariably developed definite symp¬ 
toms of pellagra at about three weeks of age. No other de¬ 
ficiency resulted from this treatment. They, therefore con¬ 
cluded that a ration so treated was especially valuable, 
because it eliminates the necessity of preparing a synthetic 

! ■ § ,. o' S 

diet and adding a vitamin Bj_ concentrate, which is the usual 
procedure in vitamin assays. 

Our preliminary experiments with the basal ration heated 
dry at 95 0 -100°C. and used immediately, and the same ration 
used six months after the heat treatment gave widely divergent 
results. In the first case sufficient destruction of vitamin 
Bo was not obtained to warrant our using this ration for assay 

d 

purposes. In the second case the destruction of vitamin Be. 

d 

as indicated by the incidence of pellagra was sufficient to 
permit the utilization of this ration as a basis for assay. 
However the characteristic symptoms of pellagra were further 
complicated by other symptoms due evidently to the destruction 
of other dietary factors essential to the normal nutrition of 
the chick. Further studies were necessary, to establish the 
conditions of heat treatment which would render the basal 
ration deficient in vitamin 3% a degree suitable for our 
purposes, without impairing the nutritional value of the ration 














■ 






















■ 





























in any other respect. The following experiment was therefore 
carried out. included in these experiments is an assay of 
the basal unheated ration using chicks of three different 
breeds. This was necessary since a future supply of chicks 
all of the same breed was not assured. 


OUTLINE OF EXPERIMENT 

Group I - Unheated Control Diet 

Group I A White Leghorn Chicks 
Group I B White Plymouth Pock Chicks 
Group I 0 Rhode Island Red Chicks 

Group II - control Diet Heated at 95°~100°G. 

Group III - Control Diet heated at 98°-100°C a and stored. 

Group VI -Control Diet heated at 105°-1S0°C. 

Group 7 - Control Diet heated at 96°~110°C. 

RLCULTS 

The experimental results are assembled in Table I and the 
growth rates graphed in Fig. I. 


NOTES 

Group I Unheated Control Diet 

A. White Leghorn chicks. The growth of these chicks was 

a good average for this breed, nil the chicks were healthy with 
one exception, which, in the 5th week, developed a bone condi¬ 
tion diagnosed as nerosis. 

B. White Plymouth Rock Chicks. The chicks were healthy 
throughout the experiment and show good average growth for this 
particular breed. 

C. Rhode Island Red Chicks. The chicks showed good growth, 
but four developed perosis. 

Group II Control Diet Heated at 95 o -160°C . 

“hite Leghorn Chicks’, imight chicks (53mJ showed symptoms 
of pellagra.in the fourth week, in the 5th week ten chicks had 
lesions at the corners of the beaks, .retarded fe theri-g, 
granular eyelids and in two cases the eyes were closed entirely. 
Growth was subnormal but there was no mortality. 















photograph of Chick (Group 7) 
with Typical Opisthotonos 
Characteristic of Vitamin deficiency. 
















14 


III G < ? 1 1 ' > . T. _ __- -1000. used after six 

months 3tor:.l :’£ 

White Plymouth pool Chicks, ^rorn the first .week the chicks 
failed to grow normally.. At the end of the second wee.- four 
chicks (45) hod severe pellagra. A fifth chick developed 
pellagra at the end of the 3rd week, where was 100^ mortality. 

The gain in weight in four weeks was only 56 grams as compared 
with a gain of 116 gras, in the same period by chicks of the 
same breed on the same ration unheated. 

roup IV Control Diet heated at 105 q -120°g . 

*■ hit e plymouth Bock Chicks. Gfrowth was aImo st comol <= t ? y 
retarded, onlg 25 gms. were gained in four weems. ... 50 : 
incidence )f pellagra at the end of the 2nd wee.' and 50y mort¬ 
ality in the first week resulted. By the end of the 4th week 
all the chicks were dead, 

Croup V Control Diet Heated at 96° -110 Q C » 

Hhode Island Bed Chicks, fhe average gain in weight during 
the first three weeks was 23 grams but only 24 grams at the end 
of the.4th week. There was 85 - pellagra at end of the 3rd week 
which involves all the surviving chicks. Two chicks with slight 
lesions at the corners of their beers recovered' spontaneously at 
the end of the 4th week. Four out of seven chicks were dead at 
th week, one had polyneuritis, another poly- 
■ neuritis and pellagra, a- third pellagra, and a fourth was squatting 
and falling over when a11empting to move. 


n at. f-/rn'T-.Tin q nrr •d'P■ST TT m q 

'• J O liili iX -— i-J W „ . i U- < O JL- j. -J 


A basal ration of natural food-stuffs promotes average 
growth in chicks of various breeds, when this ration is heated 
at -100°C. or above some factor is destroyed, in the absence of 
which chicks developed a pellagrous-like syndrome characteristic 
' r L , A 

can therefore be rendered deficient in vitamin B g by heat 
treatment. 


The chief symptoms of this. pellagrous-like syndrome are 
■ led growth, dermatitis and increased .mortality. It was 
clearly demonstrated that the severity of these symptoms is 
more marked when the temperature to which the basal ration has 
been heated is increased. It is possible that the length of 













time which the ration is stored after heating may also he a 
factor in increasing its deficiency. The relative gain in 
weight of the chicks on the different diets was as follows: 

flrouT) Cain in V/ei ght (pms .■) 

in three weeks 


I A Control unheated diet (White Leghorns) 89 

3 Control unheated diet (White Plymouth Rocks) 116 

C Control unheated diet (Rhode Island Reds) 155 

Control diet heated at 95 d -~lOO 0 C. W. L- . 

Ill Control diet heated at 95^100^0. 56 

used after 6 months W . ^ 

rr Control diet heated at 10.5*-1E0.“ C. w. n* . 25 

Control diet heated at 96 S -11O 0 C. K ,~\ .1\. 24 


It will he seen that the control diet heated at 95°-100°C* 
gave slightly retarded growth. The gain in weight of the 
chicks on this diet for a period of three weeks was 21 gms. 
less than the gain in weight of the normal chicks, over the 
same period. Pellagra developed at four weeks and its incid¬ 
ence was 64%. The mortality (15%) indicates that the symptoms 
are not fatal. This represents a mild condition of vitamin Bg 
deficiency. 

The control diet heated at 95°-100 a C. and stored for six 
months gave retarded growth from the Beginning. The gain in 
weight of the chicks on tnis diet for a period of three weeks 
was 60 grams less than the gain in weight of the normal chicks 
over the same period. The onset of dermatitis is at two weeks; 
its incidence is 5? and the mortality 100 . This represents 
an acute condition of vitamin Bg deficiency. Storage of the 
diet after heating increased the destruction of vitamin Bo. 








































- 

. 

. 

. 




V : 

... 

' 


















16 


With the control diet heated dry at 105°-120°C. very poor 
growth resulted.- I he average gain in weight over the three 
wee.: neriod was only 25 gms. The onset of dermatitis is 50 °] 0 
at two weeks and the incidence also 50h. he 50w mortality 
in the first w eek and 100k mortality at four- weeks indicates 
that the entire vitamin B complex is lacking in this diet. 

This heat treatment has destroyed not only vitamin 3- hut in 
addition some other essential factors. 

The control diet heated at 9:6°-110 °G. gave letter growth 
during the first three weeks than the control diet heated at 
95*-100°C. and stored for six months. Growth ceased in the 
4th week, judging by the incidence of polyneuritis and other 
symptoms (which for convenience are referred to as "paraimsis" 
other factors besides vitamin Bg were affected by the heating, 
in fact as there was at the same time a spontaneous remission 
of symptoms of pellagra in two cases it is quite possible that 
the sudden cessation of growth v^ras due to a deficiency of 
vitamin Bi or some factor other than vitamin Bg and that 
vitamin B£ is only partially destroyed by heating at the above 
temperature. The low mortality from pellagra and the fact 
that three chicks survived after four weeks points in this 


direct ion 
















































































17 


SECOND £ 3 


THE' VITAMIN 3, CONTENT 0 7 IARMITE AS 

SUPPLIANT ING the control pellagra 


DIETS V/ITH VARYING AIK)TINTS 0! 


DETERMINED BY 
PRODUCING 
1 MARMITE. 


OUTLINE OF EXPERIMENT 

A. Control Diet heated at 95°-100°c. 

Group 71 + 2; Marmite 
Group 711 -f O' •: Marmite 

B• Control Diet heated at 95°-100°C. and stored six months. 
Group 7111 * o': Marmite 

C. 1st and 2nd' week - Control Diet heated at 95°-100° C. and 

stored for six months. 

3rd and 4th week - 0 hanged to Control Diet heated at 130° 

5th and 6th week - Changed to Control Diet heated at 

105°-120°C. 

Croup IX + 47 Marmite throughout 
Group X + 67 Marmite throughout 

D. Control Diet heated at 105°-120°c. 

Group XI 1st and 2nd week 4* 57 Marmite 
3rd week + 4 Marmite 

4th Meek 4- 6% Marmite 

Group XII 67 Marmite added throughout 
Group XIII First two weeks 4* 6 • Marmite 
After 2nd Reek + 87 Marmite 

E. Control Diet heated at 96°-100°0. 

Group 717 + 67 Marmite 


RESULTS 

The experimental results are assembled in Table II and 
the growth rates graphed in Figs. II, III, 17 and 7. 

NOTES 


Experiment"A 

Group ~ rT . Control Piet h eated at 95” -100° C. 4- 2PJ 0 Marmitp . 

Y/hlte Leghorn chicks~~reoei y ing this diet "showed " better 
growth than chicks of the same breed fed the unheated control 
diet. There were no pathological symptoms, one chick died in 
the 2nd week. 












IB 


ro 711 Qc __ ___ t • h _ J , _____ __ _c. 

White Leghorn chicks. The rate of growth greatly ex¬ 
ceeded that of the chicks fed the unheatel control diet or 
that of the chicks receiving Z-o ilarmite (ftroup 71). Where 
was no mortality and no pathological symptoms. 

^xperimint 3 

Group Till Control Diet heated at 95°-100°C, and stored for 
six months + 6y ilarmite, 

White Plymouth Dock Chicks. Whey showed excellent growth 
for the first two weeks, ihe two smallest chicks died in the 
second week. In the third week four chicks remained squatting 
and were unable to stand. Their legs were atrophied. In some 
respects these symptoms resembled those described by Keenan, 
Kline, Elvehjera and Halpin (1932) and described by them under 
the general term ”paralysis” as follows: ’’The onset of the 
paralysis is marked,by tne preference of the bird to squat 
rather than stand. If disturbed it will rise, walk a short 
distance and squat again. In almost all cases a marked atrophy 
of the leg muscles can be detected. Generally death occurs a 
few days after the development of these symptoms but chicks 
that grow slowly may survive two or three weeks.' 1 These symp¬ 
toms occurred in chicks fed a synthetic diet arid of average 
weight of 70 gras, at three weeks of age. Our chicks were fed a 
diet of natural foodstuffs heated dry at 95°-100O0., stored 
six months, and supplemented with 6< ilarmite, and averaged in 
weight 04 grams when two weeks old. The four chicks with 
’’paralysis” died shortly after, the symptoms developed. The 
post-mortem showed empty- intestines, enlarged and clogged 
coeca and pale hypertrophied kidneys. 

According to Keenan, Kline, Elvehjera and Halpin (1933) 
birds with "paralysis” show a degeneration of the brain.which 
is "confined in most cases to the cerebrum and in a few cases 
to the cerebellum. The. affected area appears white and caseous 
and the cells oedematus in character.” The brain of one oi 
our chicks which died of "paralysis” was examined by the 
Provincial laboratory. They reported that sections of the 
brain and cerebellum showed no obvious abnormalities. 

•^eenan et al. ascribe this paralysis to a deficiency of 
vitamin 3 or a substance closely related to it chemically and 
physically. They observed several.cases of Paralysis in groups 
of chicks reared on grain rations. The majority of these cases 
were encountered with grain that had been stored for several 
months. The addition of b-12 yeast to unpurified synthetic 
diets did not correct the deficiency but T8y vacuum-dessicated 
hog liver did. 

Three more chicks died in the 3rd week, only one .chick 
survived. This chick showed a remarkably rapid rate of growth. 
At the end of six weeks it weighed 407 gms. The average weight 
at this age for chicks of the same breed on the unheated basal 
control was 337 gms. 










. 






' 

■ 





















































Exr^er imerit 0 . 

1st and 2nd week - Control Diet heated at 95°-100°C. and 

stored six months. 

3rd and 4th week - changed to control diet heated at 30° 

5th and 6 th week - changed to control diet heated at 105°-120°C 

&rour> ip. + 4 %,iiarrni t e 

White Plymouth Rock chicks, The growth was better than 
average during the first two weeks. After the second week growth 
was retarded and was poorest in the 5th week when the average 
gain in weight was only 6 gms. as compared with the normal rate 
of 80 gms. for that period and for. that breed of chicks. After 
the 5th week the rate of growth increased very rapidly. The 
mortality was 57%. One chick died in the 1st. week an d a 
second in the 4th week. In the 5th week a death from haemorr¬ 
hage occurred and another in the 6 th week. Three chicks sur¬ 
vived till the end of the experiment. Their average weight was 
181 gms. at six weeks. 

Grout) Y , Same diet as grout) IX \ 6- Jarmite . 

White Plymouth Rock chicks. Growth was excellent during 
the first two weeks. The rate of growth declined from the 2nd 
to the 5th week, becoming again more ranid In the 6 th week. 

The mortality was 50% but there were no deaths during the first 
three weeks, one chick was observed to squat, turn round and 
round and to fall over on its side. It preferred to sit propped 
up against any support. A similar condition has been observed 
in rats by Haliday (1934) and was attributed by her to a defi¬ 
ciency of a factor found in Y/hole wheat, vh ieh closely resembles 
34 but is not identical with it. 

A second chick was also observed squatting. In this 
case the condition more closely resembled the chick "paralysis 11 
described by Ke£ian• Examination also revealed a subcutaneous 
haemorrhage of the left breast and under the left wing. At 
death there was a haemorrhage from the mouth. These two chicks 
died when three weeks old. Two more cases of haemorrhage 
occurred. One in the 5th week which ended fatally and another 
in the 6 th week. Similar haemorrhages were observed and de¬ 
scribed by bam and Schonheyder (1934) in a study of a deficiency 
disease in chicks resembling scurvy. This disease occurs in 
chicks reared on a certain artificial diet containing 10% Mar- 
mite but was not observed when the starch in this diet was re¬ 
placed by a mixture of cereals. According to these authors 
ascorbic acid given by mouth or subcutaneously does not prevent 
the disease. The disease is ascribed to the lack of a factor 
or factors occurring in cereals, McParlane, Graham and Richard¬ 
son (1931) first described this haemorrhagic condition in chilcks 
and observed the failure of the blood to clot. These haemorr¬ 
hages did not occur when the protein of the die t was caseinogen 
which had been extracted with ether. When ether-extracted white 
fish meal or ether extracted meat powder was used in lieu of 
caseinogen the haemorrhages occurred. Rations containing fish 
meal and meat powder which had not been extracted with ether 
did not cause haemorrhages. 














































' 































In our experiments these haemorrhages occurred in chicks 
receiving a mixture of cereals and casein which had. been sub¬ 
jected to heat treatment at various temperatures. 

J• Control : )iet,..^eated i i 4 a imL 

1st aiio 2nd week -h Marmite 
3rd week -+► 4> ^ Marmife 
4th Week 4- 6 Liar mite 

White Plymouth Hock Chicks. Growth was retarded from 
the beginning. The rate of growth in the first two weeks was 
similar to that of Group III, i.e. fed the control diet heated 
at 95°-i00 o C> and used after six months. It increased slightly 
when the percentage of Harm it e was raised in the 3rd and 4=tli 
week. There was 63ki mortality in the first week and 100k at 
the -end of five week.-. The mortality in the fir- st week was 
greater than that of chicks fed the unsupplemented control 
diet heated at 105°-120* 0. Two chicks developed pellagra and 
died in the 3rd week. One chick died following a haemorrhage 
in the 5th week.. 

■Sron-o -qi * Control Diet heated at 105°-120°0,+ 6; .. Harnlt e . 

Rhode island Red Chicks. The growth of these chicks 
was retarded. Their average weight a 4 : five weeks was the same 
as that of the chicns of this breed fed the unheated basal 
ration at four weeks. The same relation exists as that already 
found between the growth rates of white Leghorn chicks receiving 
■the control diet heated at 95°-100°C. and the same breed of 
chicks fed the basal unheated.diet. (Group I A and Group II). 
in that experiment 2k Marmite gave better than normal, growth. 

it Group XII 7 l or By Marmite would have 
been sufficient to insure normal growth ant that the control, 
diet heated at 105°-120° 0. contains one seventh or one eighth 
of the amount of vitamin Bg contained in the control ration 
heated at 95®-100 e C. This deduction is not signifieantly 
affected by the fact that different breeds of chicks were in¬ 
volved. The mortality was 71, » Three chicks died when two 
weeks old and two died in the 4th week. jne of these showed 
severepellagrous dermatitis and haemorrhages of the right leg 
and right side. Another case of haemorrhage combined with an 
abdominal oedema occurred in the fifth week. The chick 


experiment 

Group XI 



*The haemorrhages described above occurred when or 6% 
Marmite was fed. In addition to the salt in the basal ration 
Marmite contains 7,54 of salt. It was thought possible that 
the eoderna and haemorrhages resulted from too high a salt 
content of the diet. The salt content of this and of all 
subsequent diets was adjusted to 1 fo allowing for the salt in 
the Marmite supplement. 

















photograph of Chick (Group CIV) 
?uff erinr? fr-jM J aru z&nia* 







survived till the end of the experiment. Dam and Schonheyder 
have also observed that the haemorrhages were often absorbed 
in the course of a few days and the birds could be reared up 
to the age of two months (the end of the experiment.) 

fro.. • :m. Control Diet heated at 105° -120° 0. 

First two weeks- + oh Marmite 

After two weeks +■ 8h Marmite 

Rhode Island Red chicks. For two weeks the chicks of 
this group were reared together with the chicks of group XII. 
•The early and rather large incidence of pellagrous dermatitis 
(35" ) at the end of the second ween was evidence that 6f 0 
Marmite was not sufficient to supply the vitamin Bp deficiency 
of the heated control diet. The birds were, therefore, divided 
into two groups. Six chicks (one died early) were left as 
control on Marmite and eleven were given 8f5 Marmite. The 
eleven chicks placed on 8M Marmite included all which had 
already dermatitis. 


Supplementing with 8 diarmite gave improved growth at 
the end of the 3rd week or one week after the chaage of diet. 
Their'..average weight at that t ime was 94 gms. as compared with 
an average of 67 gms. for the chicks still receiving 6k Marmite. 
They continued gaining rapidly an at the end of the 5th week 
their average weight was 201 gms. i;e. 50 gms. less than that 
of the chicks of the same breed fed une basal unheated diet. 

The difference is explainable as being due to the large number 
of sick chicks. It has'been our experience throughout these 
experiments- that once a chick develops dermatitis it never 
resumes quite normal growth, after being changed to a diet 
giving complete protection. 

The mortality of this group was 16w as compared to 71 
mortality in proup XII. Of the chicks with pellagrous lesions 
which were transferred from Group XII two died at the end of 
the 3rd week, one recovered at the-end of the third week and 
three recovered at the end of the 4th week. There were two 
cases of slight haemorrhage at the end of the 5th. week. 

Experiment M. 

vroun MI7 Control Diet heated at 96 s -110^0. -fr 61 Marmite. 

The average weight of this 'group of chicks at three 
weeks was only slightly lower than that of the chicks receiving 
the corresponding unheated basal ration and slightly higher 
than the weights of the chicks fed the control diet heated at 
105°-120°0. supplemented with &1 Marmite. At the end of the 
4th week there was a sudden slowing of the growth rate. 

There v/as no nellagra but there were two cases of f, *nar- 
alysis". The syndrome of paralysis is characterized by squatt¬ 
ing, falling to one side, or falling with head forward and 
bent downward as if unable to hold up the head, toes extended 
and the head bent down between them. The bird keens moving 
the head from side to side and emits sounds of distress as if 
in pain. At the onset of the condition the birds fly rather 













than walk hat later are too we^k to do either. One of these 
cases was fatal. 

comments on results 

When added in sufficient amounts Marmite will adequately 
supplement a basal ration of natural foodstuffs rendered 
deficient in vitamin hy heating dry at 100 C. or above. 

Marmite therefore, contains vitamin Bp. 

When a ration, rendered deficient in vitamin Bg by heating 
at 95°-100°C., is fed to chicks their average weight at five 
weeks is the same as the average weight at four weeks of the 
same breed of chicks on the unheated basal ration. Two per¬ 
cent Marmite is more than sufficient to make good this defic¬ 
iency. It has been found, as will be seen later, that this 
relation of weights is an approximate expression of the growth 
response to -2 % Marmite. 

The appearance of nellagrous dermatitis either follows a 
slow continuous retardation of growth or a sudden rapid loss 
of weight. A sufficient supply of the growth factor gives 
also nrotection from pellagrous lesions. The quantitative 
relationship suggested above would appear to apply both to 
growth and to the dermatitis. 

Four per-cent Marmite as supplement to a ration heated at 
100 °G. gives an average weight at four weeks equal to that of 
chicks at five weeks receiving the basal unheated control. 

This is an indication that in this case we have a surplus of 
vitamin Bg equivalent to that contained in 2 % Marmite. The 
results with Group VI support this conclusion. The results 
obtained with Group VII also indicate that the chick has an 



























































23 


optimum requirement of vitamin Bg. 

Six ner-cent Marmite added to a control diet which has 
been heated at 95°-100°0. and stored six months after heating 
gives better than average growth and complete protection from 
dermatitis. Four per-cent of Marmite would most likely have 
been sufficient. As 2*f 0 Marmite was more than sufficient to 
supplement the deficiency of vitamin Bg in this same diet six 
months before, this is additional proof that storing increases 
the destruction of this factor. Storage of the heated diet 
appears to have resulted in the destruction of factors other 
than vitamin Bg since chicks on this diet developed ^maralysis’ 1 
The ^Paralysis" and haemorrhage will be discussed after all 
the cases have been presented. 

In Groups VIII and IX we employed three diets of three 
different degrees of deficiency and supplemented with 4-t or 6 a7 0 
Marmite. we observed that in the 3rd week although the diet 
being used at this time was more deficient in vitamin Bg than 
the preceding one the growth is still good and did not decline 
until the 4th week. The rate of growth was less with 4 % Mar¬ 
mite than with 6% Marmite and least in the 5th week. This 
would indicate a storage of vitamin Bg in the body. 

Three, four and six per-cent Marmite added to a ration 
heated at 105°-120°c. does not prevent pellagra. When B% 
Marmite is used however complete protection results. The 
deficiency of the ration heated at 95°-100°0« was fully sup¬ 
plemented by 2% Marmite (Group II), the same ration stored 
for six months required 4$ Marmite (Group III) and now a ration 
heated at 105°-120° 0. is seen to require supplementing by 8 f 0 












■ 


' 






‘ 

■ 






. 








. 




. 










■ 






, 












. 


















_._ 






24 


Marmite. Storing the heated ration destroyed about one-half 
of the vitamin Bg in the basal ration. Heating to 120°C. 
seems to destroy completely the vitamin Bg in the basal ration, 
in this latter case the high mortality indicated a heat de¬ 
struction of the entire vitamin B complex. As an approximation 
we may say that 8 6 ? 0 Marmite contains the same amount of vitamin B p 
as the basal unheated ration or that the vitamin Bg content of 
Marmite is about 12 times as great as that of the unheated 
basal ration. 

When 6^ Marmite was added to the ration heated at 105°-120°C. 
the average weights of the chicks at five weeks was the same as 
that at four weeks of the chicks on the basal unheated ration . 

When 8fo Marmite was added the protection was complete. This 
further supports our contention that there is a definite quant¬ 
itative relationship between the rate of growth of chicks and 
the vitamin Bg content of the diet. 

We have made some preliminary observations on the effect 
of heating and of autoclaving on the vitamin B 9 content of 
Marmite. Elvehjem, Kline, Keenan and Hart (1932-33) found 
that heating yeast at 95°-100‘ 5, C. for six days destroyed half 
its content of vitamin Br>« Block and Farquhar (1933) claim 
that heating yeast at 95^-100°C. for two or four weeks does 
not impair its vitamin Bg activity. 

We heated Marmite at 120°C. for six days. The sL ight 
destruction of vitamin Bg in the basal ration when heated at 
100°0. was the reason for using a temperature of 120°C. in 
the heating of Marmite. The Marmite was first dried at 100°C. 
for four days, reduced to a powder and then heated at 120°C. 









■ 




















■ 

’ 




















25 


for six days. Marmite thus treated was added to the control 
diet heated at 95®-100°G. (stored for six months) in amounts 
equivalent to 6% unheated Marmite. The autoclaving of Marmite 
was carried out at 120°G. and 15 lbs. pressure for five hours. 
The autoclaved Marmite was added to the same control diet in 
amounts equivalent to 6% untreated Marmite. White Plymouth 
Hock chicks were used, 1'he results are summarized in the 
following table; 



Marmite Heated Dry at 
105°-120°G. for six days 

Marmite autoclaved at 
120 ^0. for five hours 


Weight 

pell¬ 

Mort¬ 

Pood 

Weight 

Pell¬ 

Mort¬ 

Food 


in 

agra 

ality 

Consump¬ 

in 

agra 

ality 

Consump¬ 

weeks 

Grams 



tion 

Crams 



tion 

1 

41 


1 

30 

53 



40 

2 

51 

2 

1 

45 

70 


1 

57 

5 

63 

3 

2 

55 

97 

-2 

2 

65 

4 

62 


2 

64 



2 


5 

123 



71 





6 

w 



71 






. J 0 

•71-;,’ 

: 66% 

556 


40% 

100 % 

162 


it ■. 


The average weights of the chicks receiving the heated 
Marmite are lower than the corresponding weights of chicks on 
the heated control diet alone. This indicates that the dry 
heating of Marmite at 120°C. for six days not only destroys 
its vitamin content, but also results in the formation of 
substances having a depressing effect on growth, the mortality 
was greater than the incidence of pellagra, -khe water content 
of Marmite was found to be approximately 26%. 

The average weights of the chicks receiving autoclaved 
Marmite are better than the corresponding weights of the chicks 
fed the heated control diet alone, but lower than the weights 

























■ 



- 





' 














■ 




- 3 


- . ' : 















■ 

. 































of the chicks fed the unheated basal ration for the same period 
of time. Their weight at three weeks is the same as the weight 
at four weeks of the chicks receivin '' the heated control diet 
This indicates that an amount of autoclaved Marmite equivalent 
to Marmite affected growth to the same extent as 2m Marmite 
or that autoclaving destroyed two thirds of the vitamin 3 0 in 
Marmite. Chick and Roscoe (1930) Chick Hoping (1930) and 
11. H. Roscoe (1933) found that autoclaving Marmite at 120°0., 
lb lbs. 5 hrs. at its nat.ural vH : destroys' half its vitamin 

3 . content, The fact that the Marmite used in our experiment 
had been stored in the laboratory for three years prior to 
its use may have, affected these results. 

The mortality was 1001. It is a. well established fact 
that autoclaving a ration at 120°C. under 15 lbs. pressure for 
5 hours destroys its total vitamins 3p and content, The 
heated control diet used in this experiment has already been 
shown (Croup III) to be deficient in more than one resoect. 

One chick receiving autoclaved Marmite showed the characteristic 
opisthotonos of polyneurit is. This shows that the heated con-, 
trol diet used in this experiment was deficient not only in 
vitamin B,- but also in vitamin B n - 













J.’L 3uL’J3 ILL-Y u',? 3, IK 60; ..I'D III Q0> ALCOHOL 


A preliminary experiment in which a control pellagra 
producing diet was supplemented with an 801 methyl alcohol 
extract of Marmite gave negative results. Kuhn and his co~ 
workers (1935) claim that the flavin pigment, isolated and 
identified hy them as the growth promoting vitamin Bg is 
soluble in 8 Ox Alcohol. I 1 he always use 80 alcohol in their 
purification of tlie flavin pigment. Day{ 1954) on the v. ther 
hand found that 80 alcohol extracts only about 2Oh and 60 
alcohol extracts approximately 50m of the vitamin B 0 in yeast. 
Our own results as well as the widely divergent data in the 
literature regarding the solubility in alcohol of vitamin B 

£ 

made it desirable to establish this point definitely before 
proceeding further with the purification of this vitamin. 

Two methods were used in the alcohol extraction of Marmite. 
The first method consisted in dissolving Marmite in the least 
possible amount of boiling, distilled water and boiling eight 
minutes with constant stirring. The volume of the solution 
was measured and an amount of 95^ alcohol necessary to give a 
final concent rat ion of 60 or 8 Of. alcohol was added. A pre¬ 
cipitate formed, but complete precipitation was only obtained 
after allowing the suspension to stand overnight, because if 
centrifuged immediately more precipitate formed and the centri¬ 
fuging had to be repeated. The precipitate was gummy and could 
not be completely separated either by centrifuging or filtering. 
It was dark brown in colour and great difficulty was experienced 






28 


in effecting the complete extraction of pigment from it by- 
washing. As we were proceeding on the assumption that the 
vitamin Bg activity was contained in'the pigmented portion 
of the Marmite, the extraction of all the pigment was of the 
utmost importance. 

Owing to the large volume of washings there w.,.s a great 
volume of liquid to be freed from alcohol by distillation 
thus making the process tedious and lengthy. Filtering in 
place of centrifuging did not simplify the procedure and on 
the whole we preferred eentrifaging. The first two extracts 
one an 80% alcohol extract, and the other a .60 alcohol ex¬ 
tract of Marmite were prepared according to the above method. 

The 8Of alcohol extract was inactive when amounts equivalent 
to 41 Marmite were added to the control diet heated at 95°-100°C 
and tested as a curative agent on pellagrous chicks. The 60% 
alcohol extract gave better than average growth and a complete 
protection from pellagra when amounts equivalent to 6% Marmite 
were added to the control diet heated at 95°-100°0* and stored 
for six months. 

While freeing the above extracts from alcohol by distilling 
in-vacuo it was noticed that a white precipitate formed in the 
distilling flask as the alcohol concentration decreased. This 
indicated the presence in the solution of a substance soluble 
in alcohol but less soluble in water. We proceeded therefore 
to experiment by extracting Marmite separately with water and 
v;ith alcohol. 

It was found that when Marmite was dissolved in an equal 
weight of boiling water and the solution kept on a boiling 











































29 


water-bath for 8-10 minutes, stirring constantly, a precipit¬ 
ate formed. After standing in the refrigerator overnight this 
nrecinitate centrifuged sharnly. The precipitate was light 
brown in colour and a few washing with small amounts of water 
sufficed to remove practically all the pigment. If the wash¬ 
ings were continued long enough to effect complete removal of 
the pigment the precipitate could not be separated sharply 
from the supernatant but remained in suspension, when Marmite 
was dissolved in five times its weight of boiling distilled 
water, left overnight and centrifuged, the amount of the ure- 
cinitate was the same, but it was colourless. As only a few 
washings were needed, however, to remove the pigment where an 
equal amount of water was used and the final volume of water 
was smaller, it was decided to adopt the technique of extract¬ 
ing Marmite with an equal ¥/eight of water. 

The volume of the combined supernatant and washings of 
the aqueous extract of Marmite was then measured. The aqueous 
extract was poured with constant stirring into an amount of 99$ 
alcohol to give a final concentration of either 60$ or 80$ 
alcohol, and centrifuged. A clear supernatant containing all 
the pigment was obtained. The separate fractionation with 
water and alcohol greatly simplified the preparation of the 
alcohol extracts of Marmite and effected quantitative extract¬ 
ion of the nigment, The 80$ alcohol extraction precipitated 
about one third of the solids of Marmite. This degree of 
concentration could not be obtained with the 60$ alcohol ex¬ 
traction. 

The combined supernatant and washings of the aLcohol 













1 








, 





. 




* 




. 

. 


















' 













extraction were freed from alcohol by concentration in vacao 

below 60^0. The almost dry residue was taken up in an amount 

of hot distilled water just sufficient to dissolve it. The 

300 grns. of 

residue from an 80$ extract of/ Mar mite could be dissolved in 

an amount of boiling water to give a final total weight of 

300 g. On the other hand to dissolve the residue from a 60S 
300 gras. of 

alcohol extract/of Marmite a greater amount of boiling water 
was required giving a final weight of 500 g. 

The extracts so rrenared were incorporated in the various 
vitamin deficient diets in amounts equivalent to varying 
percentages of Marmite. 

OUTLINE QE FEEDING EXPERIMENT 

Group XV 

Control Diet heated at 95°-100°C., fed alone until Pellagra 
developed. An amount of an 80$ alcohol extract of Marmite 
equivalent to 4$ Marmite added to the heated control diet during 
the 6th and 7th week. 

Group XTI 

Control diet heated at 95 <? -100°C. and stored six months. 
Supplemented with an amount of a 60S alcohol extract of Marmite 
equivalent to 6$ Marmite. 

Group X^II 

Received a 60$ alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent to 

6$ Marmite added to the heated control diets changed as follows: 

1st and End week - Control Diet heated at 95°-100°C. 

and stored six months 

3rd and 4th week - Control Diet heated at 130°C. 

5th and 6th Week - Control Diet heated at 105°-1E0°C. 


















. 



* 








































































51 


Grout) XV III 

Same as Group XVII, with the exception that an amount of 
an 80$ alcohol extract equivalent to 6$ Marmite Was used. 

Groa n X 1:1 

Control Diet heated at 10h°-120°C« Supplemented with a 
60$ alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent to 5$ Marmite. After 
three weeks changed to an amount of the alcohol extract equi- 
valent to 8$ Marmite. 

Group XX 

Same as Group XIX, hut supplemented with a 60$ alcohol 
extract of Marmite equivalent to 6$ Marmite. After three weeks 
changed to an amount of the alcohol extract equivalent to 5$ 
Marmite. 

Group XXI 

Same as Group XX, hut fed an 80$ alsohol extract equivalent 
to 8$ Marmite. 

Group XIII 

Commenced on the same diet as Group XXI, bat at the end of 
the 2nd week the die t was supplemented with an 80$ alcohol ex¬ 
tract of Marmite equivalent to 10% Marmite. 

JXOup L „.xm.L 

Control diet heated at Ob^-llO^C. Supplemented with an 
80$ alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent to 8$ Marmite. 

RESULTS 

The experimental results are summarized in Table III and 
graphed in pigs. VI, VII, and VIII. 








‘ 



































































"roi^ M 7 Control diet heated at y5°-100°C. , fed alone for 

five weeks until nellagra developed* An amount of 
an 80? alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent to 4% 
Marmite added to the heated control diet during the 
6th and 7th week. 

“hite Leghorn Chicks, The growth of these chicks was 
subnormal. Their average weight at five weeks was only slightly 
higher than the weight at four weeks of the same breed of chicks 
fed the basal unheated ration. Growth was still subnormal in 
the 6th week and at the'end of the 7th week the average weight 
was the same as that of chicks receiving the unheated basal 
ration at five weeks. 

Three chicks had pellagra at the end of the 5th week and 
at the end of the 7th week the fourth chick developed nellagra. 
There was no mortality. 

Group XYI Control diet heated at 95°-100 c C. and stored for six 
months. Supplemented with an amount of a SOT alcohol 
extract of Marmite equivalent to 6% Marmite. 

White Plymouth Rock Chicks. The average weights of this group 
are better throughout the experiment than the corresponding weights 
of the chicks of the same breed fed the unheated basal ration. 

They are the same at the end of six weeks as the weights of the 
surviving chick on the same heated control diet supplemented with 
6f 0 Marmite. The mortality was 40%. One chick died when two days 
old and another in the 3rd week. There was no pellagra. One chick 
had a swelling and haemorrhage of the left hock when two weeks old 
but recovered in the third week. At the end of the 4th week the 
same chick had greatly swollen cheeks showing subcutaneous haemorr¬ 
hages. These symptoms subsided during the next two weeks but did 
not disappear entirely at the end of the experiment. In the 4th 
week one chick showed sygiptoms of squatting and turning round and 
round. Yeast extract (Harris)* was administered and the chick 
recovered the next day. There was also a fatal case of haemorr¬ 
hage in the same week and another of squatting and turning. A 
postmortem on this chick showed no visible nathologieal changes. 
Another chick with a swelling and haemorrhage of the right hock 
recovered and survived till the end of the experiment, -t-here 
were two cases of perosis in the 6th week and one in the'6th 
week. 

Group XYII Received a 60% alcohol extract of llarmite equivalent 

to 6% Marmite added to the heated control diet changed 
as follows: 

1st and End week - Control diet heated at 95 -100 C. 

stored six months 

3rd and 5th week - Control diet heated at 130°C. 

5th and 6th week - Control diet heated at 105°-120°C. 


*Harris Yeast extract is the Osborne and Wakeman 
and Is a concentrate of vitamin an & 


(1919) fraction 
















White Plymouth Hock Chicks. The average weights of this 
group during the first two weeks were better than the corres¬ 
ponding weights of the chicks (Group IB) on the unheated basal 
ration and the same as the weights of the chicks fed 6 c q Mar- 
mite as supplement to the same heated control dlets. {Group X) 

At the end of the third week the average weight. of this group 
was the same as the weight of the chicks on the mheated basal 
diet and.slightly higher than the weight of the chicks on the 
same heated control diets supplemented with 6'? Marmite. At 
the end of the 4th week the weight on this diet is much lower 
than on the unheated basal diet, but not appreciably lower 
than on 6 a Alar mite. Growth continues subnormal to that with 
the unheated basal diet till the end of the 6th week (the end 
of the experiment ) but in the ath week is better than that ob¬ 
tained with 6% Marmite added to the same heated control diets. 
The average gaJLn at the end of six weeks is 285 gms. on tfhe 
unheated basal diet, 117 gms. on the three different heated 
control diets and &'• Marmite, and 113 gms. on the same heated 
controls used with an amount of a 60d alcohol extract of Alar- 
mite equivalent to 6f 0 Marmite. 

The mortality was 7IX. There was no -pellagra but there 
were four cases of haemorrhage in the 4th week. Two chicks 
showing haemorrhages died in the 4th week and one in the 5th 
week. 

Group XVIII Same as Group XVII with the exception that an 
. - — amoun t of an Q0% alcohol extract equivalent to 

6f 0 Marmite was used. 

White Plymouth Rock Chicks. The growth rate of the chidks 
in this group was practically the same as Group XVII. The aver¬ 
age gain in weight at the end of six-weeks was 114 gms. i.e. 

one gram more than the corresponding gain for Group XVII. 

The mortality was 73X. Half of the deaths occurred in the i_rst 
week. The surviving chicks were healthier than in Group XVII. 
There was no pellagra, but two cases of slight haemorrhages of 
the wings and neck occurred in the 4th week, neither of them 
fatal. ohe symptoms subsided before the end of the experiment. 
There was also a fatal case of squatting in tine 3rd week. 

Group XIX Control diet heated at 105°-120 tJ C. Supplement eel 
' with a 6OX alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent to 

3<x Alarmite, after three weeks changed to an amount 
of the alcohol extract equivalent to 8 , Marmite. 

White Plymouth Rack Chicks. The average weight of these 
chicks in the first week was the same as the corresponding 
weight. of the chicks on the heated control" diet alone. In the 
second, third and fourth week the weight approximated that of 
the chicks on the heated control diet supplemented with 3A, 4 
and 6 ; T : r ar mite. In the 5th week the weixlit w as the s ame as 
that of the chicks on the unheated basal diet at four weeks and 
at six weeks was the same as the weight at five weeks of the 
chicks on the- unheated basal diet. The mortality was 60M. Two 
chicks died in the second week. One with slight pellagrous 










. i 

. 


■ 

' 




































. 




■ 






























' . 












34 


dermatitis died in the 3rd week, j-'here were three cases of pell¬ 
agra in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd week. Two of them recovered in the 
fifth-week and gained in weight steadily till the end of the 
experiment. 

irou^ .11 Same as group HX, hut supplemented with a 60- ,lcc ol 

extract of liarmite equivalent to 6% Liarmite, after three 
weeks changed to a supplement equivalent• to 8-Liarmite. 

White Plymouth Pock Chicks. The average weight of these 
chicks in the 1st and 2nd week was the same as the corresponding 
weight of the "chicks on the same heated control diet supplemented 
with 6k liarmite. The average gain in weight of the chicks in 
group XX at four weeks was the same as the corresponding gain in 
weights of the chicks on the same heated control diet supplement¬ 
ed with ok Liarmite. The gain was only 3 gms. in the 5th week, as 
compared with a gain of 48 gms. by the chicks receiving the 6k 
Liarmite supplement. At the end of the 6th week the weight of these 
chicks (group XX) was the same as that at four weeks of the chicks 
on the unheated basal ration. The mortality (71k) was exactly the 
same as the mortality of ? the chicks on the same heated control 
diet supplemented with.6 ’ Liarmite (Croup XII). There were two 
cases of pellagra in the 2nd week, both terminating fatally, and : 
two eases of haemorrhage, one fatal and the other recovering. 

-roup XXI Same as group XX, but receiving an 80k alcohol extract 
equivalent to 8 f 0 Liarmite. 

Rhode Island Red Chicks. The average gain in weight of these 
chicks at the end of the experiment (five weeks) was exactly the 
same as the corresponding- gain in weight of chicks of the same ' 
breed on the same heated control diet supplemented with 6k Liarmite 
for the first two weeks and changed to 8k Liarmite after the second 
week. The mortality was 50-;. Llore than half of the deaths occurr¬ 
ed in the second week. * t here were two cases of slight dermatitis 
in the 3rd week which recovered spontaneously in the 4th week, 
and four cases of haemorrhage after the 3rd y/eek. The two most 
severe cases of haemorrhage died. 

grou v [ II Commenced on the same diet as group XXI, but at the 

end of the£2nd week the diet was supplemented with an 
80p alcohol extract of ‘farmite equivalent to 10k 
liarmite. 

Rhode Island Red Chicks, -kie gain in weight of these chicks 
at the end of the experiment (five weeks) was the same as the 
corresponding gain in weight of the chicks in Group XXI or of the 
chicks on the same heated diet supplemented with 6-'- and 8 . Liarmite. 
There was no.mortality and no pathological symptoms. 

group XXIII Control diet heated at 9L c - 110°C•, supplemented with 
an 8Op alcohol extract of liarmite equivalent to 8k 
Liarmite. 

























. 






















Hhode Island Red Chicks, ihe average weights of these 
chicks during the first three weeks were practically the same 
as those of the chicks on the unheated basal diet, {Croup I 0) 
At the end of the 4th ween however, the rate of growth slowed 
down and the gain in weight in that week was 29 gins, as com¬ 
pared with 58 gms. gained during the same neriod by the chicks 
on the unheated basal control diet, where was no pellagra, 
no other pathological symptoms and.no mortality. 


C Chi hi''13 011 RESULTS 

A 60%. alcohol extract of Marmite added to control diets 
heated at temperatures ranging from 95°-180°C. had the same 
effect on growth and incidence of pellagra as did equivalent 
amounts of Marmite. ihis indicates that the factor or factors 
present in Marmite which promote growth and orevent pellagra 
are completely soluble in 60% alcohol. 

An assay of the 60^ alcohol precipitate from Marmite gave 
the following results; 


Contr o l Diet heated at 95 Q -100°C., stored for six 
months supplemented by the 60% Alcohol precipitate 


in an amount equivalent to 51 Marmite. 


eeks 

Body weight 

Incidence of 

Mortality 

Pood Consumption 


in grams 

Pellagra 


in grams 

1 

42 


2 

28 

2 

58 

2 

1 

59 

8 

79 


2 

78 

4 

102 

8 

8 




68% 

100% 



Ihe average weights of the 'white Plymouth Mock chicks receiv¬ 
ing the 60% alcohol insoluble residue were practically the 

same as those receiving the heated control diet alone (Croup III) 

when 

Phe average gain in v/eight for four weeks was 60 gms./fed the 

when 

residue and 56 gms./fed the unsupplemented heated control diet, 
phe incidence of pellagra was slightly higher in ihe group 










56 

receiving the residue. In both groups the mortality was 100 
The residue was quite inactive. ihis proves that 6Of? alcohol 
extracts all the growth promoting and pellagra preventing 
substances present in Marmite. 

Y/hen control diets heated at three different temperature, 
ranges were supplemented with Marmite or an equivalent amount 
of a 60% alcohol extract of Marmite the average gain in weights 
for six weeks with the Marmite was 117 grams and with the 60- 
alcohol extract 113 grams, fhere was no pellagra in the chicks 
fed either supplement, -his is further evidence that the 
vitamin Bo content of a 60— alcohol extract of Marmite is the 
same as that of Marmite. 

When control diets heated at three different temperature 
ranges were supplemented j with Marmite or an equivalent amount 
of an 80^ alcohol extract or an equivalent amount of a 60f? 
alcohol extract the average gains in weight for six weeks on 
the three supplements were respectively 114 gms., 117gms, and 
113 gms. ihe average weekly weights of chicks on the 6Ofl 
alcohol extract and the 80W alcohol extract were almost ident¬ 
ical. •‘■here was no pellagra. Ihis indicates that contrary 
to our previous findings vitamin Bp as contained in Marmite 
is completely soluble in 8Of? alcohol. 

When a control diet heated at 105°-1£0°C. was supplemented 
for the first two weeks with 6 - Marmite and for the next three 
weeks with Q% Marmite the average gain in weight at the end of 
the 5th week was 150 gms. fhe same gain in weight over the 
same neriod of time and on the same heated control diet was 
obtained with an 8Of? alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent to 

8 > Marmite. fhere was no pellagra on either 8% Marmite or on 










£7 

an equivalent amount of an 80f> alcohol extract of Marmite. 

It is evident, therefore, that for.purposes of isolating 
vitamin from Marmite either 60$ or 80$ alcohol can be used. 
There is, however, an important advantage in using 80 • alcohol 
since it precipitates a. greater amount of inert material and 
so gives a greater purification of the active substance. 

These observations were confirmed at the time of writing 
by Elveh.jem and Koehn Jr. (1935), Their studies show vitamin Bg 
as contained in liver to be soluble in concentrations of alcohol 
as high as 9 Op and that high concentrations of alcohol do not 
have a destructive action on this vitamin. 

We have already mentioned (page 12 )that the evaluation of 
our results with Marmite and its various alcohol extracts was 
complicated by the occurrence of haemorrhages an d at least 
three tynes of "paralysis". As haemorrhages do not occur in 
any subsequent experiments our observations in this regard 
may be summarized now. 

We found that haemorrhages did not occur in feeding trials 
either with the unheated or with the various heated unsupplement 
ed control diets. They did not occur on feeding the supplement¬ 
ed control diets heated at 95°-100°C. or at 96°-110°C. They 
appeared when a control diet heated at 95°-100°G. and stored 
for six months or a control diet heated at 105°-120°G. was sup¬ 
plemented with Marmite or with alcohol extracts of Marmite. 

Their onset was at four weeks or later when Marmite was used 
and as early as the second week when equivalent amounts of the 
alcohol extracts of Marmite were fed. With a diet heated at 
120°G. and supplemented with 6h Marmite the haemorrhage was 
more severe and even fatal, but on feeding the same heated 






























' 









- 














. 
















control supplemented with 8% Marmite it was very slight. In 
the group receiving the same heated control supplemented with 
an alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent to 8% Marmite there 
were four cases of haemorrhage, one of these fatal, hut on 
feeding the equivalent of 10% Marmite there were no haemorr¬ 
hages. Therefore the amount fed of Marmite or alcohol extract 
of Marmite influences the incidence and the severity of haemorr¬ 
hages, and further the salt content of the diet is not a con¬ 
tributing factor. 

Prolonged storage of a ration heated at 100°G. or heating 
a ration at 120°G. seems to destroy the factor which prevents 
the occurrence of haemorrhages in chicks. The amount of this 
factor destroyed in the basal diet by the above treatment is 
contained in 10 % Marmite or an equivalent amount of an alcohol 
extract of Marmite. The rate of growth seemingly affects the 
incidence of haemorrhage. Indicative of this is the absence of 
haemorrhage on the above mentioned heated controls when used 
alone and the great incidence of haemorrhage when better 
growth is obtained by supplementing with an alcohol extract of 
Marmite equivalent to 6% Marmite. This was the case with the 
control heated at 95°-100°C. and stored for six months (Group XVI) 
It seems therefore that the more rapid the growth rate the greater 
is the requirement for the dietary factor which prevents these 
haemorrhages, with an adequate supply of vitamin Bg growth 
progresses in spite of the appearance of haemorrhages. The 
haemorrhage preventing factor has no growth promoting properties, 
in a total of 84 chicks there were 26 cases of haemorrhage, IS 


of which were fatal 











- 




' 













■ 














■ 































FOURTH SERIES 


THE ADSORPTION OF VITAMIN B 2 OS FULLERS' EARTH OR OS 

LLOYD'S REAGENT* FROM ALCOHOLIC EXTRACTS OF MARMITE 

The solubility in 60f a and in 80f5 alcohol of vitamin Bo 

Cj 

as contained in Marmite being now established we proceeded to 
the next step in the isolation of the growth promoting and 
pellagra preventing factor, namely the adsorption on Pullers' 
earth and the elution therefrom with dilute methyl alcohol^ 
pyridin mixture, fhe method followed was that of Oyorgy, Kuhn 
and wagner-Yauregg (34) but applied to Marmite in a slightly 
modified form. 

The procedure consisted in first extracting the Marmite 

with 

with water and precipitating the aqueous extract/o0f5 or 80% 
alcohol and freeing it f rom alcohol by concent rat ion in-vacuo 
as already described. The aqueous solution of the residue 
diluted to twice the original weight of Marmite was acidified 
with concentrated hydrochloric acid (37 cc. of acid to 450 cc . 
of the extract) to give an ll/l HC1 solution. 

The proper normality of the solution is the most import¬ 
ant condition of adsorption on Pullers' Earth. The acidified 
aqueous extract was then shaken for one hour with pullers' 
earth (25 g. Pullers'earth to an amount of the extract equi¬ 
valent to 500 gins, of the original Marmite). Next day the 
suspension was centrifuged and freed from chloride by washing 
repeatedly until the centrifugate acidified with dilute HFO^ 
failed to give a precipitate with AgHOg. The pigment adsorbed 
on Pullers' earth was eluted by shaking for Itt hrs. with a 

^Lloyd's reagent is an activated Puller^' earth. 









. 






















■ 



















Si • 























40 


mixture of pyridin (1 part) methyl alcohol fl part), and dis¬ 
tilled water (4 parts). The Fullers T earth was removed by 
centrifuging and washed with 50 % methyl alcohol. The eluate 
combined with the washings was concentrated to approximately 
60 cc. by distilling in-vacuo at a bath temperature never 
above 60°0. The Fullers’ earth which separated during dis¬ 
tillation was separated by centrifuging. There was still 
colloidally dispersed Fullers' earth in the supernatant. 

This was precipitated by adding an equal volume or two volumes 
of absolute alcohol, again separated by centrifuging and 
thoroughly washed with 50 % alcohol. The combined supernatant 
and washings were concentrated in-vacuo to 50 cc. and finally 
diluted with distilled water so that 1 cc. of the solution 
corresponded to 5 gms. of Marmite. 

The activity of the first two elutions prepared as above 
was negligible. Slightly active eluates were of no value for 
the further fractionation of vitamin B 9 . To determine where 
the loss of activity occurred an assay of the vitamin Bg con¬ 
tent of the adsorption filtrates was carried out. The com¬ 
bined filtrates and washings from Fullers’ earth adsorption 
were distilled in-vacuo almost to dryness. The residue was 
dissolved in water so that 1 cc. of the solution contained the 
equivalent of 1 gm. of Marmite. Feeding experiments showed 
the adsorption filtrates were active. The probable explana¬ 
tion of the loss of activity during adsorption aa d elution 
was that the Fullers’ earth used had a poor adsorption capacity. 
We decided to try adsorption on Lloyd’s Reagent. The adsorp¬ 
tion on Lloyd's Reagent and the elution theirefrorn was carried 





. ■ 












. 

. 




















, 


■ 






























. 
























41 - 


out according to the methods described above . The adsorp¬ 
tion filtrate was also assayed, 

Sooner (1934) reported that adsorption on Lloyd's reagent 
of a 40 - 50 fold concentrate of vitamin Bg prepared from 
whey and subsequent elution with a mixture of four "Darts of 
water, one part of pyridine and one ~oart of methyl alcohol 
gave a highly active concentrate of the vitamin, 

OUTLINE 0M FEEDING EXPERIMENTS 

A , 60 c -. Alcohol Extract of Marmite, adsorbed with Fullers' earth , 
Grouu XXIV Control Diet heated at 105°-120°C.+ the 

eluate in an amount equivalent 6m Marmite. 

After End week eluate increased to amount 
equivalent to 12$ Marmite. 

B» 80$ Alcohol Extract of Marmite 

I, Adsorbed on pullers' Earth 

Group 2X7 Control Diet heated at 105°-120 o C. 

1st and End week Hh eluate equivalent to 10 Marmite 
3rd week + eluate equivalent -to 20$ Marmite 
4tn week +• eluate equivalent to 25$ Marmite 
Group MX7I Control Diet heated at 96°-110°C. + eluate 
equivalent to 12$ Marmite. 

* Group XXVII Control Diet heated at 96°-llO°C. 4- adsorp¬ 
tion filtrate equivalent to 12$ Marmite 

II, Adsorbed on Lloyd's reagent 

Group XXVIII Control Diet heated at 96°-110°C.eluate 
equivalent to 12$ Marmite. 

Group XXIX Control Diet heated at 96°-110°C. 4 - adsorp¬ 
tion filtrate equivalent to 12m Marmite. 






































. 










. 





































4 '£ 

. RESULTS 

The experimental results are assembled in Table IY and 
the growth rates graphed in Rigs. II, X and XI. 


NOTES 


A. 604 Alcohol extract of Marmite adsorbed on Pullers’ Earth. 


Or o urn XXIY 


o o 

Control Diet neated at 105 -120 C. + the eluate 
equivalent to 6 % Marmite. After 2nd week eluate 
increased to an amount equivalent to 12X Marmite. 


White Plymouth Rock Chicks. The average weights of these 
chicks were slightly lower than those fed the heated control 
(Croup IY) alone. The gain in weight at three weeks was 8 gms. 
while with the heated control it was 10 gms. The mortality 
was 1004. At the end ;of the 3rd week all the chicks were dead. 
On the heated control diet the chicks were all dead at the end 
of the 4th week. There was one case of pellagra. 

3. BOX Alcohol Extract of Marmite. 

1. Adsorbed on Pullers’ Earth 

Croup XXY Control Diet heated at 105°-120°0. 

1st and 2nd week +■ eluate equivalent to 10- S 

Marmit e 

3rd week + eluate equivalent to 2OX Marmite 
4th week +- eluate equivalent to 254 Marmite. 


Rhode Island Red Chicks. The .average gain In weight in 
three weeks was 31 gms. as compared with 91 gms. for the same 
period with the same breed of chicks fed the same heated control 
supplemented with an BOX alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent 
to 104 Marmite. The mortality was 100f,. There were three cases 
of pellagra. 

Croup XXYI Control Diet heated at 96°-110°C. + eluate 
- equivalent to 12$ .Marmite. 

Rhode Island Red Chicks. The average gain in wei$it for 
three weeks was 59 gms. as compared with 100 gmg. when the same 
heated control supplemented with an 80$ alcohol extract of 
Marmite equivalent to 8X Marmite was fed. This means that the 
eluate contains 25$ of the growth promoting activity of the 
alcohol extract. There were six cases of pellagra but no mort¬ 
ality by the. end of the 4th week. 

C roU p XXYII Control Diet heated at 96°-110°C. +- adsorption 
filtrate e q u i v al e n t t o 12- ; lari a i t e. 

Rhode Island Red Chicks. At three weeks the weight was the 
same as that when the unheated basal control v/as fed or when the 












■ 

■' • 































■ 

■ 

. 











- 










43 


same heated control supplemented with an 80> alcohol extract 
of 'Iarraite equivalent to 8U Marmite was fed. The rate of 
gain was different, however, as the weights at the end of the 
first and second week were greater than those of the tv/o 
controls. The gain in weight in the 4th week was 67 of the 
gain in weight in the 3rd week. The same relationship in 
the gain of weight was obtained with the heated control sup- 
piemen ted with an 80-\ alcohol extract of liar mite equivalent 
to el' Marrnite. In this case the gain in weights in the 4th 
week was 61j of that in the 3rd week. 

'here was no pell, agra, but there were cases of "paralysis", 
two in the-second week showing symptoms similar to those de¬ 
scribed by Keenan et al. (1933) One was fatal and the other 
recovered. Another case occurred in the 3rd week with symp¬ 
toms resembling those described by Halliday (1934) in rats. 

This chick recovered. In the 4th week there was one more case 
showing the Keenan (1933) syndrome, 

II. Adsorbed on Lloyd’s Reagent 

: "III Oont 6°-110°p. -r the 

______ eluate equivalent to 12% Marmite. 

Hhdde island Reds. The average, weights are practically the 
aame as those of chicks fed the el.-aie from Fullers * earth. The 
incidence of pellagra was also the sane, but the mortality occurs 
earlier and was twice that which resulted on feeding the elu^t 
from fullers’ earth, in this group there was greater variation 
in weight, and in the severity of pellagra among the individual 
chicks. 

Oroup XXIX Control Diet heated at 96°-110°0. the ad- 
“ — “ sorntion filtrate equivalent to 12-1 Marmi.te. 

Rhode- Island Reds. The weights of these chicks are much 
higher than those receiving either the unheated basal control 
or the same heated control supplemented with an 80% alcohol 
extract of larmite equivalent to 8 ( - > .larmite, or those fed the 
adsorption filtrate from Fullers* earth equivalent to 12% liar Ate, 
The weight at the end of the first week more than doubled the 
average initial weight of 32.5 gins. ith the basal unheated 
diets the average gain is about 20 grams in the first week. 

The evidence "is. therefore that three quarters of the Potency of 
the 80- alcohol extract of Marmite remained in the adsorption 
filtrate from Lloyd's reagent. There was one death in the End 
week but no -Pathological symptoms appeared up to the middle of 
the 4th week. There were however indications that the rate of 
growth was declining. 


CQ1MEMTS Oil RESULTS 

An eluate from a Fullers' earth adsorption of a 60% alcohol 
extract of Marmite did not show any vitamin B P activity in amounts 















equivalent to 6$ and 12$ Marmite when added to a control diet 
o o 

heated at 105-120 0. The extract appeared to aggravate the 
deficiency symptoms. This is indicated b; the higher mortality 
at an earlier age. Later experiments show that only one-quarter 
or at the most one-third of the vitamin B£ in an alcohol extract 
of Marmite was adsorbed on Pullers’earth. An amount of the ex¬ 
tract equivalent to 10A Marmite was necessary to prevent pellagra 
when supplementing the diet heated at 105 O -l£0°C. These findings 
account for the inactivity of the eluate when fed in amounts 
equivalent to 6 ' Marmite. They do not, however, explain the in¬ 
creased severity of the symptoms, on the same basis we can also 
account for the slight activity of an eluate from a Fullers’ 1 
earth adsorption of an BOM alcohol extract of Marmite added to 
the same heated control as above in successive amounts equivalent 
to 10$, 20$ and-25M of Marmite. 

The results obtained with Group XXVII show that the growth 
promoting activity of an amount of the adsorption filtrate equi¬ 
valent to 12$' Marmite is roughly the same as that given by an 
amount of 80 alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent to 8$ Mar¬ 
mite. be may conclude therefore that two thirds of the growth 
factor contained in the 80$ alcohol extract of Marmite was not 
adsorbed on Fullers’ earth but remained in the adsorption fil¬ 
trate. as we have previously stated (notes on Group XXVI ) the 
eluate contained one fourth of the activity of the 60 c ' alcohol 
extract of Marmite. Eleven-twelfths of the original activity 
of the 80 alcohol extract is thus accounted for. One twelfth 
of the original activity was not eluted from the adsorbate or 
was lost during the washing of the adsorbate free from chloride. 



















, 

■ 














■ 













. 






















' 





• 


















45 


We noticed that on prolonged washing of the Pullers’’earth 
adsorbate it became exceedingly difficult to effect its sep¬ 
aration by centrifuging and some loss in the supernatant re¬ 
sulted. Lepkovsky (1955) found that about one half of the 
vitamin Bg Potency of liver extracts was lost in the first 
adsorption with Pullers’ earth. 

While we cannot be so definite in explaining the behaviour 
of the alcohol extract of Marmite adsorbed on Lloyd’s reagent 
it would .appear that three-quarters of the activity remained 
in the adsorption filtrate and one quarter was adsorbed. This 
indicates that Lloyd's reagent adsorbed less vitamin Bg 
than did Pullers-’ earth. However the total vitamin 3% content 
of the alcoholic extract was accounted for. more quantitatively 
in the two fractions (adsorbate and adsorption filtrate) when 
Lloyd’s reagent was used than when Pullers' earth was employed. 

Elvehjem and Koehn (1955) found that the material in liver 
extract adsorbable on Pullers’ earth was inactive when tested 
with avitaminosis 3o chicks and that the adsorption filtrate 
was highly active. 






■ 











' 











- 





























• 






































46 


TI^TU SERIF’S 


TEE CURATIVE 


ATI 


TTQ. yi'l 1 . 


So far all assays except one (Group XV) have been prevent- 
ative. A preliminary experiment was carried out to observe the 
effect on chicks of the curative method. 

OUTLIE! OP 1C v ' r " D l."RI : tEVT 

pine chicks were fed for five weeks the control diet heated 
at 95°-100°0. At the end of this period all the chicks showed, 
subnormal growth and five had pellagra, They were now divided 
into three groups as follows: 

^ronp II Control diet heated at 95°-100°C. 

Croup R Changed to the unheated basal. 

Grour> 0 Control diet heated at 95°-100°C. ■+* 4^ Marmite. 

These groups were fairly uniform in weight at the beginning of 
the fortnightly experiment and each contained one or two of the 
five cases of pellagra. 


RESULTS 

The results are graphed in Pig. II B. and then are - summarized 


in the following table; 




oup i: 

T 

J. 

Croup B 

Croup C 

Weeks ■ 

■<t. in 

Pell¬ 

Mort¬ 

“t. in 

Pell¬ 

Mort¬ 

At . in 

Pell¬ 

Mort 


Crams 

agra 

ality 

Crams 

agra 

ality 

Crams 

agra 

ality 


149 



161 

2 


154 

2 


6 

181 

‘ 1 


215 

-2 


195 ■ 

• 2 


7 

207 

1 


276 



264 





L 001 

































47 


m 


ES 


group II 'The averag-e weights of the chicks continued sub¬ 
normal and all the chicks had nellagn at the end of the 
experiment. There was no mortality. 

^roim B The average gain in weight of these chicks durin-r two 
weeks was 116 gras. as compared with the 58 gras, gain 
in weight of the chicks in group II during the same 
period. The chicks with pellagra recovered in the sixth 
week. 

Group G These chicks gained 110 gms. during the two experimental 
weeks. The chicks sufferiiw from pellagra recovered 
in the sixth week. 


C0TE.nj.IT3 oh RESULTS 

Chic ms fed a control diet heated at 05 o -100°0. showed retard¬ 
ed growth and a i incidence of pellagra at the end of the fifth 
week. When the diet was changed to the unheated control or the 
heated control was supplemented with 4g Marmite the gain in weight 


during two weeks was about twice that of the chicks which were 
continued on the heated control. The chicks changed to the 
unheated.control diet or given the 4 ’ llarmite supplement were 
cured of pellagra a week after the change in diets occurred. 











48 


GE! T E?.AL 31 S O U S 810 IT 

The vitamin Bo requirements of the chick appear to he 
relatively large since they failed to grow normally and develop¬ 
ed, after four weeks, a characteristic pellagrous dermatitis, 
when fed a diet the vitamin 3g content of which was only part¬ 
ially destroyed by heating. Ihe chick is therefore a oartic- 
ularly useful experimental animal for vitamin Bg studies. 

The basal diet used in these experiments was adequate for 
normal growth and development, ^ry heat treatment of the same 
diet destroyed several essential dietary factors. The nature 
and severity of the pathological disturbances exhibited by 
chicks fed the various heat treaten diets was related to the 
actual temperatures' within the range of 95°-130°C. t which the 
diet had been subjected, is evident from our results that, 

of the thermolabile substances contained in the diet vitamin 3g 
is theleasl stable in dry heat, and that it should be Possible 
to find a temperature or range of temperature to which to expose 
the drv diet so that the maximum destruction of vitamin Ik, is 

w Cj 

obtained without significantly affecting other essential factors. 

A careful examination of the symptoms shown by the birds 
fed the diets heated at various temperatures and particularly 
in relation to their rate of growth, affords information which is of 
a very considerable assistance in establishing the optimum temp¬ 
eratures at which vitamin 3,. alone is destroyed. In our exp- 
erirnents -we found that chicks fed a diet heated 
for six dfiys developed symptoms of vitamin Bg deficiency onl: ; * 

These symptoms- however v/ere not sufficiently drastic to serve 


. 

. 




■ ' 






' 




■ 






- 































our purpose. Heating at 110°, 1£0° and 130°0. as well as storing 
for six. months the diet heated at 100°0. destroyed a number of 
factors other than vitamin B^ and the symptom's of their defic¬ 
iency complicated the vitamin assays. The chief deficiency 
symptoms other than pellagra were haemorrhages, and paralysis. 
When the diets heated at 100°G. and stor.ed ; and at 120°C. were 
fed alone growth 'was retarded and the only symptoms were those 
of pellagra. Among the birds receiving the unsupplemented diet 
heated at 110°G. there first developed a case of polyneuritic, 
then one of pellagra and polyneuritis and one of paralysis, of 
the six chicks with pellagra, two recovered spontaneously, 'he 

•-Q 

experience with this diet indicates that whenever there is a 
deficiency of the entire vitamin B complex with its resultant 
mortality the only apparent symptoms are those of pellagra, 
perhaps the requirement of-the chick for the growth promoting 
pellagra preventing factor is greater than for any of the other 
components of the vitamin B complex. Heating at 110°C. may be 
in effect a borderline temperature where the destruction of the 
different vitamin 3 factors is even! balanced and we must look 
for our differential temperature, somewhere below 110 U C. and 
above 1G0°0. 

With the one exception cited above, -oaralysis occurs onl: 
in the absence of pellagra. Evidence is presented for the exist¬ 
ence of three types of paralysis. In the one type the chicks 
could only get up with great difficulty, they would take a few 
steps when roused but preferred to squat. This type was usually 
fatal -o rob ably owing to the inability of the birds to reach 
food and water. These symptoms occurred in birds fed the diet 




heated at 10Q°C. and stored for six months when either supp¬ 
lemented with op llarmite or with an alcohol extract equi¬ 
valent to 6l Llarmite, and when fed the diet heated, at 96°-llQ°C. 
supplemented with the adsorption filtrate from fullers* earth 
equivalent to l£fb Marmite. In all these cases growth was ex¬ 
tremely ranid* 

fee birds with the ..second type of paralysis squatted also 
"but tried to get up* This was usually accompanied by turning 
round and round and falling over to one side, These symptoms 
occurred on the same diets as above where the rate of growth 
was greatly accellerated, They showed improvement after Harris 
yeas t was adminis t eared. 

The third- type of paralysis occurred only on feeding the 
diet heated at 96°~110^G. supplemented with 6 f 0 llarmite. The 
growth was not accelerated. The symptoms were very peculiar* 
The birds were squatting and when they tried to walk they fell 
with head bent downward, As the disease nrogressed they were 
not able to lift their heads, hut squatted leaning on their 
heads* These cases were always fatal. 

On the diet heated at 96°-110°G. there were two well 
defined groups those with pellagra and those with paralysis. 
Practically all the birds fed the eluates from alcoholic ex¬ 
tracts of i/larmite developed pellagra and showed retarded growth. 

The chicks receiving the adsorption filtrate, or 61 garnite 
or the 801 alcohol extract equivalent to 8 marmite showed a 
50 la incidence of paralysis preceded hv average or better than 
average growth. In every one of these groups there is a sudden 
dror> in the rate of growth at the end of the third week. As we 









































. 







■ 














■ 




. 













51 


mentioned before the chicks receiving the heated diet alone 
had pellagra, polyneuritis and paralysis and their weights 
showed the same characteristic drow at the end of the fourth 
week, f |here is no doubt that this dron in weight was closely 
associated with the occurrence of paralysis. 

The great incidence of paralysis among these chicks 
suggested the possibility of an epidemic or of some toxic 
substance in the diet. However when we changed^ the diet of the 
chicks receiving the Lloyd’s reagent adsorption filtrate to an 
unheated basal diet the chicks did not develop paralysis. 

There v* T as never a case of paralysis among chicks receiving 
the control diet heated at 105°-120°G, whether supplemented or 
not, The peculiarity of this diet, however, was that though 
the supplement of Hermite or its alcohol extract was raised 
sufficiently to prevent pellagra the weights of the chicks 
could not be increased-beyond a certain point, as if there 
still existed a deficiency of another growth, factor which is 
not contained in Marmite. The absence of paralysis where 
growth is retarded and its great incidence where growth is 
accelerated indicates that the requirement for a growth factor 
varies with the rate of growth of the chick. Boqhfcr (1954) 
came to the same conclusion in her experiments with rats, 
rphe factor whose insufficiency precipitates paralysis’ is 
evidently also a growth factor because the sudden drop in 
weight and the pathological symptoms are synchronous• 

The pellagra preventing factor is also closely bound up 
with a growth factor. *he pellagrous dermatitis appears to be 
the final visible expression either of a long continual slight 















' 


. 















• W:-W r: 




■ 








insufficiency-of a growth factor or an acute shortage thereof* 
Pellagra appears earlier when the deficiency is acute and later 
when the growth is only slightly subnormal. The growth is 
always retarded when there are symptoms of pellagra. Whenever 
enough of the anti-pellagra factor is present there is also 
better growth. Itter, Orent, Lie Gall urn (1955) found that there 
is an apparent lowering of the glutathione in the blood and 
liver of rats deprived of vitamin Bg which can be appreciably 
raised by addition of .5$ whole yeast to the diet. The admin¬ 
istration- of glutathione and cysteine to rats depleted of the 
vitamin B 0 complex resulted in maintenance of weight over a 
period of six weeks, whereas the controls showed a loss of 
weight. The Possible role of vitamin Bo in sulphur metabolism 
gains additional interest in view of the most recently postu¬ 
lated dual nature of vitamin B . Vitamin Bg according to 
Oyorgy (1955) is a complex composed of laetoflavin and the 
pellagra-preventing factor. Harris (1955) claims that flavin 
has no antipellagra action. It is however a constituent of 
the vitamin Bg complex in the sense that it causes some improve¬ 
ment in the weight curve when given as a supplement to vitamin 
Bj . With vitamin B^ plus the pellagra-preventing fraction only, 
pellagra was always prevented or cured. Without further addi¬ 
tion of flavin, however, body weights remained subnormal. The 
combined effect of vitamin P T plus flavin plus Peters’ eluate 
(containing the antipellagra factor) was approximately equal, 
in its Weight—promoting action and in the cure or prevention of 
symptoms, to that of the total complex given in the form of 


ivlarmite. 















' 

. 













■ 


... 








. 










. 





















The findings of Gyorgy and Harris, as well as the claim of 
Kuhn (1953) that flavin is adsorbed on Pullers 1 earth.and the 
counterclaim of Elveh.jem and Koehn (1935) that the factor 
promoting growth and nreventing pellagra in chicks was not 
adsorbed on Pullers T earth but remained in the adsorption fil¬ 
trate, are illustrated to some extent by our results with the 
adsorption of alcohol extracts of Marmite on fullers’ earth 
and Lloyd’s reagent, summarized in Table IV. Our eluates 
which presumably contain flavin did not prevent pellagra and 
gdLve retarded growth. The adsorption filtrates prevented pel¬ 
lagra and gave good growth for three weeks, but showed a sub¬ 
sequent drop in the rate of growth. However Marmite (6<f 0 ) or 
an alcohol extract of Marmite equivalent to 8 f 0 ...Carmite showed 
the same sudden decline in the 4th ?/eek. Therefore in our 
experiments the decline in weight is explainable not only as 
due to the splitting of the vitamin Bo complex into flavin 
and the pellagra preventing substance, which though both 
growth promoting can only promote normal growth when given 
together, but that the heating of the diet at 110°0, destroys 
a growth factor which is needed by chicks in increasing amounts 
as the growth progresses. 






' 



; 

. 














































54 


SUMMARY 

1* ohiok has been found to be a Particularly useful animal 

for vitamin Bo studies. 

2. There is a definite quantitative relationship between the 
rate of growth of chicks and the vitamin Bg content of the 
diet. 

5. A storage of vitamin Bg in the body of the chick is indicated. 

4, A diet of natural foodstuffs can be rendered deficient in 
vitamin Bg when subjected to dry heat treatment at 100°0. or 
above for six days. Using this diet variously supplemented 
the following observations were made. 

A. When added in sufficient amounts Marmite will adequately 
supplement a vitamin Bo deficient diet. 

B. Storing a diet which has been heat treated increases 
the destruction of vitamin B c , but also causes the 
destruction of other essential factors. 

0. Vitamin Bg is shown to be completely soluble in either 
6Q-o or 80^1 alcohol. The 80- alcohol extraction effects 
a greater purification of the active substance. 

D. The vitamin Bg content of alcohol extracts of Marmite 
is only partly adsorbed on fullers’ earth, the major 
part of the activity remains in the adsorption filtrate. 

A. Lloyd’s reagent adsorbs less vitamin from alcohol 
extracts of Marmite than does fullers’ earth. 

5, An improved method for extracting Marmite with alcohol is 
presented. The preliminary fractionation of Marmite with 
alcohol has been improved by a separate fractionation with 




water and alcohol. 'This procedure greatly simplifies the 
preparation of alcohol extracts of liarmite and effects a 
quantitative extraction of the pigment. 




TABLES AND GRAPHS 







Showing 

the wee 

kly increase in 

weight, 

► incider 

ice oi 


pellagr 

a, rnorta 

lity an 

d weekly 

' food c<. 


_P 


chicks 

fed on t 

he cont 

rol diet 

, an a o i 

i ij ii 6 cor 

itrol 




diet 

heat hr 

eated. 




Or o up 

I A 

T D 

x Xj 

I 0 

II 

hi 

IV 



uontrol 







rly.P. 

A, if- 


. - 

105-1 



lo 


-ID- 

15 







soay height in 

drams 



i 

OS 

a 2 

DO 

54 

44 



| 2 

73 

78 

84 

72 

58 

51 

67 


103 

118 

130 

96 

75 

57 

81 

4 

142 

168 

188 

122 

100 

70 

62 


192 

248 

253 

151 




t 6 


33 7 

517 





;i inm A. .vecKS 

Incidence of pellagra 

i 

j 2 






a 

4 

■ 3 





1 



4 




8 



-2 

1 g 




2 




6 












64‘A 

57m 

50;: 


| Time 




o r t al 11 y 



; 1 




1 


3 


1 2 





2 


2 






2 

1 

1 

l 4 





2 

2 

4 

| 5 

6 




1 








13A 




| Time in 7e~ 



ons umn tion (gran 




I 


41 

54 

33 

26 

29 

5 6 ■ 

2 

63 

76 • 

67 

54 

48 

86 

45 

3 

71 

131 

99 

65 

53 

64 

48 

4 

170 

175 

143 


125 

125 


5 

221 

224 

167 

179 




6 



222 





I'otal 

^361 

647 

732 

351 


504 



* 


Stored for six months after heating 

















































































































Summarizing the rates of growth, evidences 
of dietary deficiency, mortality and food 
consu.tnption of chicles fed on the various 
control (heated) diets supplementing with 


varying amounts of Marmite. 


(Group 

VI 

VII 

viii 

12L 

;; 

MI 

XII 

Mill 

. s 1V 

I no. of Chicles 




- T — 

o 



IT— 


! Time in weeks 




) dy 

Weigh 

in 

■in ms 



1 

55 

56 ■ 


60 

60 

43 


O JL 

59 

1 2 

85 

87 

84 

66 

81 

60 



o 2 

3 

117 

120 

165 

115 

112 

82 

87 

94 

109 

4 

166 

197 

252 

125 

125 

107 

141 

143 

12 G 

| 5 

239 

275 

8.07 

151 

loo 


189 

.201 


B 6 



407 

181 

177 





[ Time in 'Teens 

Incidence 



, Ha 


analysis 


t l - 


i i. 

"TU 

i i- 

nr 

a T 

13 

l ; 

i f 

2 



4 




i 

6 


1 n 





1 2 

2 

i 

1 


4 




1 

1 

1 

2 



5. 




1 




2 


6 





1 





Time in peeks 

Mortality 

hr 



p 

1 


5 




1 2 

1 


7 




2 



3 




1 

2 

O 

- 




4 




]_ 



2 

2 

y 

5 

1. 6 




1 

1 

1 




% Mortality 

6 i 


9 0;5 

5 7T- 

bo;S 

loo y 

7 In 




"og a uo ns ump 1 1 on ( >t ana ) 

per Oh: 

_ 


-_ T - — 


24 

50 

51 

49 

26 

26 

36 

27 

1 2 

68 

73 

65 

72 

62 

60 

52 

52 

70 

% 

80 

101 


100 

94 

. 24 

60 

75 

74 

1 4 




1 Q 2 

181 

71 

35 

107 

106 

5 

276 

829 


186 

200 


125 

129 


| 6 




250 

m 5 





Total 

476 

557 

115 



181 



87 


















































































































Summarizing the rates of growth, evidences of dietary 
deficiency, mortality and food consumption of chicks 
fed on vitamin B 2 deficient diets supplemented with 
60 - alcohol or 80C~ alcohol extracts of Marmite 


Croup 

XV 

XVI 

XVII 

XVI11 

XIX 


XXI 

XXII 

XXI T I 

No. 01 Ohicks 4 

10 

n 

i 

11 

— 5“ 

7 

10 

7 

7 

Time m weeks 




Body ':eight in 

Crams 




1 

53 

55 

59 

58 

46 

55 

0 5 

55 

57 


73 

85 

87 

84 

67 

68 

79 

78 

84 

% 

98 

133 

120 

119 

80 

97 

108 

115 

128 

4 

127 

197 

129 

132 

113 

136 

158 

152 

157 


153 

287 

150 

148 

163 

139 

205 

206 

6 

187 

402 

172 

172 

244 

164 




7 

19 7 










Time in weeks 

Incidence 

of Pellagra, 

e . r 

and Paraly 


1 

P|H|P 


. 


l |- 

I 

1:i |f 

H 

~r 

1 1 







"0 — 




2 


1 




1 

2 




3 


1 

2 



1 


2 2 



4 

2 

2 


4 

2 

1 

1 

-2 1 


-L 

5 

A 

1 





-2 

1 

1 



7 

1 










Time in weeks 

Mortality 

1 




1 

4 

2 

i 2 




2 


1 


1 

1 



O 



% 

kj 


2 



2 

1 

2 

1 



4 




2 



1 

1 



5 

6 

7 




1 

1 






fa ‘Mortality 

0 

40 ! 


7IX 

73f. 

6 OX 

71 1 

50': 

0 


Time 'in peeks 

Food Consumption (grams) per Chick 

1 

<05 

39 


63 

38 

31 

45 

35 

55 

41 

2 

54 

81 


83 

92 

58 

54 

77 

77 

71 

5 

65 

123 


L24 

144 

52 

44 

96 

95 


4 


214 


217 

164 


84 

161 

119 

102 

5 

179 

250 


201 

113 


155 

160 

121 


6 

176 

333 


194 

150 


133 




7 

208 












L040 


882 

706 


515 

529 

447 

518 




























































































i 1 ab 16 XV 


Summarizing the rates of growth, evidences of diet¬ 
ary deficiency, mortality and food consumption of 
thicks fed on vitamin Bg deficient diets supplement¬ 
ed with, the material adsorbed from alcohol extracts 
of Marinite on pullers’ earth or on Lloyd's Reagent. 


rroup 

MX IV 

MM V 

i XXVI 

-CIVII 

XXVIII 


!!o . ( 

7 

5 


7 

7 



Body MelgiM 

in Ora 

ns 

1 

42 

52 

-60 

o o 

5 9 

69 

2 

49 

61 

• CP 

9 9 

75 

110 . 

*5 

50 

67 

* 86 

12 7 

82 

151 

4 


85 

99 

146 

105 


5 








Incident 


Lagra and Paralyi 



pel.Par, 

Pel.Par 

■ Pel.Par, 

Pel-.Par 

,Pel.Par. 

P 1 M ar . 

1 







2 

1 

*i 

1 

«u 

2 

2 




£ 

£ 

1-1 

o 


4 

5 




2-1 



6 








Mortality 

1 

1 

1 




1 

2 

6 

1 


1 



£ 

1 

1 


1 

i 


4 


2 

1 


i 


5 







Mortality 

100 

100% 





dime in weeks 

• Pood Consumption {grams) per Qhiek 

1 

25 


47 

44 

41 

49 

' 2 

50 

45 

66 

79 

58 

106 

£ 


65 

62 

98 

71 

156 

4 


57 

61 

152 

75 


6 







ToX<tl 

55 

177 


£ £ £ 

£45 

291 

















































































H 

tiO 

•H 


• CD 
O O 








P ( 

3 











o 

O 











o 

P 











o 

H 



P 








—! 

! 



0 








1 

O 



P 

0 





• 


o 

LD 



erf 

p 

p 




p 


m 

o 


• 

o 

0 

o 




o 


05 

H 


p 

•rH 

p 

P 




o 





o 

P 

o 

Eh 

tj 



o 


P 

P 


o 

rj 

erf 


P 



H 


erf 0 

erf 



•H 

p 

6 

3 



l 


P 



-i 


,.Q 

o 




o 


P P P 


i 

0 



4 



in 


0 d 

0 


o 

•rH 

d 

P 

■i 



05 


POP 


CO 


•H 

■ M 

ci 





.rf s 

erf 


05 

erf 


EH 

O-i 



-p 


0 

0 



P 






erf 


P X 

P 


P 

tp 

d 

p 

Q 





•H 



0 

erf 

0 

O 

;P 



p 

-p 

p 0 p 


P 

'H 

> 


P 



0 

0 

0 1 

0 


erf 

—i 

•rH 

10 




-p 

•rH 

•H P 

•H 


0 

0 

W) 

EH 

:3 



erf 

p 

p 0 

P 

P 

P 

.O-i 


d 




0 


P 


0 



0 

a 

M 



p 

_1 

H O 

H 

•H 

P 

a 

•H 


Eh 


P 


O 

O P 

O 

P 

0 

o 


Eh 

p 


Q 

-p 

P 

p 0 

P 


•H 

p 

Oh 

H 



•H 

0 

P 

P 

P 

H 

P 

p 

d 

3 

O 


d 

*H 

d 

d p 

d 

O 



o 

P 

P 

P 


r d 

o 

o d 

o 

P 

H 

w 

p 

EH 

p-i 

o 

H 


p 

P erf P 

P 

O 

d 

CiO 



EP 

O 

H 




d 

P 

■rH 


EH 

W 

p 

fH 

O 

i 

1 

i 

b 

P 

P 

p 

-rt 

EH 

•s 

-P 

Sh 




p 

d 

0 

o • 

sp 

rgs 

P 

d 

-P 

0 

0 



o 

p 

erf P 

'-pi 

■ 6 


o 

M 

b<! 

M 

0 

i 

p 

P 

0 0 


P 

p 

o 

o 

o 

o 

bd 



d 

P 

CO 

p 

•3 


p 

•rH 

♦H 

o 

0 

i 

0 

d s 

;3 


EH 

1 


P 

P 

•H 

P 



•h d 

3 

P 

EH 


i 

P 

P 

P 

o 

0 

0 

* d 

M 

Tj 

-• 

0 


0 


O 

•H 

P 

,P 

0 0 

P 

EH 

P 

p 

0 

d 

M 


d 

. o 

o 

0 ,p a 

P 


> 

o 

JU 

o 

o 

P 

P 

•H 

•H 

> o d 

P> 

P 

p 

*rH 

O 

o 

o 

O 


P 

P 

P -H o 


Eg 

p 

P 

•rH 

p 

p 

o 

P 

P 

O 

d P p 

PH 

M 


o 

P 



p 

0 



O O tiD 

O 

>H 



P 

p 

p 


P 

P 

P 



o 




-p 

p 

p 


0 

o 

P P 0 

EH 

P 


p 

d 

d 

d 

p 

P 

P 


POP 

D 

EH 


o 

p 

o 

o 

d 

d 



p 

P 

• co 


d 

o 

S 

s 

o 

erf 

O 

IM 

o p 

PH 

C] 


bO 

d 

l>* 

i>> 

a 

H 

d 

. 0 

p 0 CxO 

&H 

Q 


0 

W) 

—i 

H 

f^S 

0 

erf 

r Q 

oop d 

s 



P 

0 

Oh 

(P 

H 

EH 

H 

s 

g -H 


P 



P 



04 . 


0 

d 

0 3 fe: 

P 

M 


0 


0 

0 


0 

M 

d P d o 

td 



-P 

0 

-P 

P 

0 

P 



P P 

EH 

EH 


•H 

-P 

•H 

•rH 

p 

O 

0 

0 

0 H 


P 


r d 

•H 

P 

P 

•H 

d 

P 

P 

d P o 

3 

M 

P 



eg 

P=» 



'3 

,P 

O 

P 

EH 

OEH P 

M 









P 






c 


P 

M 


o 


• 


O 




M 


M 

> 



p 


tn 



M 

tH 

M 

M 

M 

EH 

> 

EH 


CO 










O 





Oh 

Cl) 

Oh 

a 

a. 

a 

Oh 

Eg 





d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 






O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 






Jh 

Ph 

P 

p 

p 

p 

P 






p 

p 

P 

p 

:3 

p 

P 






o 


o 

O 

o 


o 

o 



CO 

C\2 







































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































0 












cd 












a 




.2 








a 



‘ 

a 








a 












•g 




2 








o a 




A 






0 


Ph Cd 



• 

FO 





0 

a 


tuO 



0 

Oh 





a 

■H 


a 



a 






•H 

a 


Ph 0 



•H 

&H 






Ph 


0 a 




O 





Ph 

cd 


a cd 



Ph 






cd 

a 


a 0 



h cd 

txj 





a 



cd a 




o 

• 





m,' 






is; 

EH 





’sH 


0 a 




W 

ixq 




w 



a 0 




CO 

M 





_L 


•H *H 




pq 

Q 




+ 

T 


s a 



+ 

< 






• 


Ph 





A 



• 

• 

a 


cd 0 

• 


• 

Q 

O 



a 

o 

o 


a a 

o 


O 

*22j 

a 



o 

o 

o 


a 

o 


o 

<1 

EH 



o 

o 

o 


a 

o 


o 


ps\ 



o 

o 

H 


a 0 

o 

• 

o 

a 

O 



H 

H 

* 


•h a 

—1 

a 

H 

EH 

a 



1 

1 

o 


^ 0 

l 

0 

1 





o 

o 

a 


0 

o 

•H 

o 

6 

a 



in 

a 

a 


taD ii£ 

a 

a 

a 

a 

ra 



a 

a 



q 

CD 


CD 

a 

EH 





a 


*H 0 


a 



a 


a 

a 

a 

cd 


a > 

a 

0 

a 


a 


0 

cd 

cd 



q -h 

cd 

a 

cd 

o 

M 


•H 



a 


0 a 


cd 





a 

a 

a 

0 


a 

a 

0 

a 

ra 

a 



0 

0 

a 


0 PH 

0 

a 

0 

EH 



H. 

a 

a 

cd 


H O 

a 

g 

a 

< 

o 


O 

cd 

cd 

0 


Ph a 

cd 

q 

cd 

A 

EH 


Ph 

0 

0 

a 


'Ph 

0 


0 




a 

d 

Ol 


q fcio 

a 

0 

a 

Q 

a 


q 



a 


0 q 


a 


a 

a 


o 

a 

a 

0 


•H 

a 

a 

a 

CO 

a 


o 

0 

0 

•H 


a a 

0 


0 

<4 

a 

• 


•H 

•H 

a 


O 0 

•H 

o 

•H 

&q 

< 

H 

a 

a 

a 



0 

a 

a 

a 

a 


a 

0 



H 


a a 




a 

a 

ca 

a 

H 

H 

O 


o 

H 

a 

H 


M 

0 

cd 

O 

O 

Ph 


0 >» 

o 

0 

o 

M 


cd 

0 

Ph 

Ph 

a 

i>; 

a a 

Ph 

hfl 

Ph 


a 


a 

a 

a 

pj 

cd 

a 

a 

q 

a 

PO 

EH 

0 

q 

q 

q 

o 

0 

0 a 

q 

cd 

q 

a 

M 

> 

a 

o 

o 

o 

0 

0 

o 

a 

o 

EH 

far-* 

•H 


o 

a 


cd 

0 a 

ZJ 

o 

a 


s 

a 






a Ph • 




2 

L l 

cd 




M 

0 

a cd a 




r^H 

a 

a 

t—1 

M 

M 

> 

ao 

M 

a 

o 

M 

<-H 

^-1 

M 

M 

> 

> 

•H 

tcO 0 O 

H 




{2* 

0 





a 

q Ph O 


Ph 


o 

M 

> 

Ph 

a 

q 

Ph 

o H 

cd 

♦H H 

Ph 

q 

Ph 

01 

a 

0 

q 

q 

q 

Ph 

& q i 

q 

o 

q 

CO 

iS 

Ph 

o 

o 

o 

o 

P 

O 0O 

o 

Ph 

o 



a 

Ph 

Ph 

Ph 

Ph 

O 

a 0 a 

Ph 

a 

Ph 




a 


a 

a 


co a a 

O 


q 



• 

< 





pq 









Weeks 










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































f/r 















SHOWING THE GROWTH RESPONSE AND ABSENCE OE PELLAGRA 






C. stored 

°G . 





02 

o o 





P 


O 02 





R 


o • • I 



EH 


fl 


H O 1 



N 


O 


1 o o 



M 




3 O LO 



p 



LO to O 





X 


O H H 



p 


*r-^ 





o 


03 


R R R 



oc 




cd cd cd 



Eh 


T3 







0) 


T3 T3 T3 



o 


H 


CD 0) 0 



o 


o 


R R R 





R 


cd cd cd 



p 


03 


CL) 03 03 



P 




P P P 



Eh 



(13 




C 


O 

R 

R R R 



p£j 


o 

•H 

03 0) 03 



w 


o 


•R 03 *H «H 




o 

H 

TJ P 'O T3 



<q 


rH 

cd 

-R 





1 

m 

H P rl H 



o 


o 

o o o o 



Eh 


lO 


U s H H 





o> 

CO 

r+3 R -R 



P 




C X S3 PS 



P 


R 

4 

O *R O O 



P 


0? 


O 02 CJ O 



P 



R 




<q 


TJ 

<D 

1 8 1 





03 

•rH 




CO 


R 

'O 

M A4 M 

03 


M 


cd 


03 03 03 

R 

03 



03 

H 

03 03 03 

•rH 

R 

m 


P 

O 

£ £ £ 


•H 

Eh 



U 


H 

a 

M 

r 

4-» 

+5 

T3 P P 


H 

Si! 

03 

<13 

Pi 

PS R +» 


cd 

s 

•rH 


o 

02 H lO 


F=-i 

T3 

T3 

o 







r a T3 P 



H 

H 


Pl PS PS 


LO 


O 

O 

03 

cd cd cd 

+ 


PI 

m 

U 

u 

R 

R 'O P 


+ 

R 

R 

cd 

0) 



PS 

PS 

03 

02 HR 

> 

03 


O 

O 

W 

H tO LO 

o ^ 

\ > 


o 

O 

—-—-v 

p. 

) o 




i 



P 


1 

1 

M 


1 

<; 


p 

H 

M 


H 

i 


M 

M 


« 


M 

M 

|> 


M 


O-i 

Pi 

P 


Pi 



3 


P3 


P5 

3 


o 

O 

O 


O 

O 


H 

H 

5h 


H 

H 


C5 

PJ 

O 


e> 

p) 
























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































SHOWING THE EXTREME DEFICIENCY OE THE CONTROL DIET 


m 

(l) 

<D 

£ 

o 

£ 


u 

o 

'H 


o 


• 

• 

o 


o 

o 

o 


o 

o 

02 


o 

o 

r —! 


02 

02 

8 


rH 

rH 

O 


i 

8 

LO 


O 

Q 

o 


LO 

LO 

H 


o 

o 



rH 

rH 

Eh 




<; 


+-» 

4-> 



CD 

cd 

P 




P 



X3 

Eh 


CD 

CD 

<q 


-f-> 


P . 


cd 

cd 

W 


CD 

CD 

HP 

P 

si 



CD 

-H 

4-» 


■i—! 

<D 

CD 


r O 

•iH 

•H 



T3 

S3 


rH 




o 

rH 

rH 



O 

O 



U 

m 


C 

4-> 



o 

C 

a 


o 

O 

o 



o 

o 


8 

t 



P 

1 

> 

M 


M 

M 

X 



P 

O a 


3 


3 


o 

o 

o 


Jh 

jh 

Jh 







CD 

CD 


-f-> 



•H 

•rH 


Si 



Jh 



cd 

cd 


3 

m 





CD 

CD 


f 

+■ 

S3 S3 r C3 

. 

. 

CD CD CD 

O 

O 

'O'O'O 

O 

O 

r a r a r a 

o 

o 

cd cd cd 

02 

02 


rH 

H * 

CD <D CD 

8 

8 Q) 

-H +-».+J 

O 

O -«-* 

•H *H -H 

LO 

LO *rH 

s s s 

o 

. O 3 

M ^ M 

rH 

H ^ 

III 


cd 

+■> 

-H’ ^ 

cd 

cd 




CO ^ to 

r a 

S3 CO 


0 

CD 

1 8 1 


-H +“ 


cd 

cd 


CD 

CD 02 

CD 

si 

Si P 

CD 


CD 

£ 

+* 

+-» CD 


CD 

CD ^ 

S3 

■»r—I 

•H 

C 

r o 

-a o 

02 


£ 


i—1 

rH +-» 

S3 CD CD 

o 

O 

c <u <d 

u 

Jh Jh 

cd £ £ 

4-» 

+-> CD 


c 

C +» 

+■> "o -d 

o 

O <H 

02 Jh -f-> 

o 

o cd 

rH CO H 4 

8 

8 


M 

M 


8-H 

M 





P 

P^ 


3 

3 


O 

O 


Jh 

Jh 


CD 

P 































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































CD 






H-> 






•rH 






g 


Pr 

g 




E) 

tf 








cP 

Eh 



CO 



l-H 





M 




+ 


EH 

cd 





Jz; 




• 


Q 

<S5 



o 


v-M 



« 

o 


M 

w 


o 

o 


Hi 

EH 


o 

i — s 


pH 

M 


o 

rH 


S 

fa. 


r—1 

1 




rH 

o 

m 

CD 

Eh 


t 

CO 



PP 


O 

CD 

♦ 

PR 

M 


CO 


m 

O 

P 


CD 

+-* 

•H 





a 


Eh 

P 


-H> 


O 

O 


aS 

r o 


P 

« 



CD 


pR 

EH 



-E> 


pR 

N 


CD 

cs3 


W 

o 


+-> 

CD 


o 


cd 





• 

CD 



3 

p 

+» 


-fj 


Eh 

m 

CD 


CD 



Eh 

•r-t 

-H 

•H 


CP 

<$ 

'O 

CD 

T3 


Jzj 



•rH 



M 

jxj 

1—i 

T3 

(—1 




o 


O 


O 


u 

rH 

JH 


W 


H-> 

O 

HH> 


CD 


3 

U 

c 




o 

4-* 

o 




O 

£j 

o 





O 





1 

o 

1 




o 

1 

>1 






1—1 




M 

*> 

X! 




n< 

p4 

Qa 




2 


3 




o 

o 

o 




Jh 

fH 

Jh 




O 

CP 

CP 



















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































. 


































































































• 

, 














- . ..--- -- 




















l 




































- 













































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































SHOWING THE COMPARATIVE GROWTH sS=& RESPONSE WITH 




£! 







-p 







r- 




<H 







O 



d O 







£ -p 




P 



a3 


• 


o 


• 

p 


02 


o3 


02 

.£ £ 


si 


p 



-P <D 


p 


p 


a; 

CO H 


£ 


X 


CD 

cd 


o 


0 


£ 

£ F> 


S. 

• 




♦HI «H 



0 

i—1 


£ 

£ 


K 

p 

o 


0 

d O 1 


P 

P 

Si 


F> 

0 a) 


02 

a 

o 


0) 

P 



p 

o 


02 

£ co 


d 

oj 

H 



CO -p 


0 

js) 

Cl) 


P 



p 




O 

<o g 


o 




Hi 

H p 


p 

CO 

o 



ft aj 


02 


CO 

EH 

M 

d 

0 

ft^i 

£ 


* 

4 - 

4- 

s 


02 Pi 


4 

• 



o 


o 

o 

• e 

< 

• 

« 



o 

o 0 


O 

O -P 


o 

o 

O P 


o 

o o 


o 

o 

O P 


o 

O £ 


o 

rH 

o £ 

o 

o 

O P 


H 

1 

H P 


r—1 

H P 


l 

o 

' ^ 

CO 

1 

1 !>< 


o 

in 

o ^ 

Eh 

o 

O <0 


n 

CD 

n 

O 

m 

n 


CD 


CD ^ 


CD 

a> i—i 



p 

CO 

« 


o 


p 

o3 

P 

EH 

p 

p ,£ 


o3 

ClJ o 


a} 

c\3 o 



- d 

p 



o 


d 

0 

d 

d 

d H 


0 

p 

0 p 


0 

<0 cd 


p 

cd 

p £ 

O 

p 

p 


cd 

0 

o3 0 

w 

cd 

cd^L 


0 

Si 

0 H 

o 

0 

0 o 


si 


Si o3 

o 

.£ 

si co 



p 

> 

hH 



p 

p 

0 

p P 

<q 

-p 

p £ 

0 

0 

*H 

0 £ 


0) 

a3 * 

P 

P 

d 

p d 1 



p 0 

d 

d 


d 0 


d 

d ,£ p 



i—i 




p p 

i—I 

i—! 

o 

H 0 


i—1 

H H g 

o 

O 

p 

O P 


O 

O £ P 

p 

P 

p 

P P 


p 

P a3 

p 

P 

£ 

p g 


-p 

p A4 ^ 

£ 

£ 

o 

£ P 


£ 

£ 0 

O 

o 

o 

O ci3 


o 

O 0^ 

o 

o 


O ^ 


o 

O £ 

1 

, 

1 

l 


1 

1 



H 





pq 

1 — 1 

hH 

M 


M 

> 


M 

P 

> 


PI 

M 

M 

M 

> 

w 


P4 

ft 

a. 

ft 

ft 

ft 



£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 


O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 


P 

p 

p 

P 

p 

p 



e> 


d 





Weeks 



























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































■ 







■ -vst. : }•'' r;2dxg4rirj±^xq:t3xia: yxz 












' 




















































































o 








































































































































































































ILLUSTRATING THE COMPLETE EXTRACTION OF VITAMIN B, 


CM 




<13 





4-> 


4-9 



•H 

49 

S3 



s 

S3 

0 



• 

0) 

rH 



03 03 

rH 

aS 


T3 

^ a 

ctf 

P> 


0 

•H 

f> 

‘H 





S3 


O 

H LO 


a 1 


4-9 

a3 

a* 

0 


0 

+ 

03 

/l) 


- 

^ • 

0 

4-> 


• 

LO O 

49 

•1—4 


O 

O 

•H 

a 


o 

X ° 

& 

H 


o 

+ CM 

14 

Cti 


o 

* H 

a5 



rH 

O 1 

^ ' 



| 

o o 


C H 


o 

O LO 


O 


lO 

CO o 

O 


o 

o> • 

rH rH 


4-9 

a 

0 


+9 

O 

o 

4-j -f_> 

4-9 4-* 

O 

05 

o 

Ctf 'H 

a? aS 

a? 

5H 

Hi 

gl 


54 

49 

<q 

'■& 54 

T3 r a 

49 

X 


0 OS 

03 03 

M 

0 


-H 3 

-+-> 4-> 

0 


o 

03 

05 Otf 


rH 

CO 

0 0 0 

H 

O 


43 LO 43 43 

O 

43 

a 



43 

0 

o 

-H -f 

4-9 4* 

O 

0 


0 

03 03 

O 

rH 


•H 03 

•H t-» 

H 

aJ 

o 


r a 'a 

aJ 


<o 

+* 





H C H H 


0 


O O 

o o 

0 

co 

pq 

h a 

*4 5h 

LO 



+-> 

4° 4-» 


+ 

pq 

S3 M 

S3 53 

+• 


Eh 

o ♦*—* 

O O 


0 

i — i 

O 03 

O O 

0 

49 




4-9 

0 

w 

1 

1 1 

0 

•r4 




■1-4 

TJ » 

Js> 


M 44 

r 0 . 

0 


0 

03 0) 

0 

rH 4-9 


a> 

03 03 

rH 4-9 

O -r4 

o 

> 

& £ 

O *r-t 

P a 

a 



Jh £j 

4-9 H 

pH 

T5 

43 43 

49 H 

S3 cri 


S3 

4-9 4-> 

S3 aS 

O ^ 


CM 

^ LO 

0 ^ 

O 




0 



TJ 

n '-a 


0 LO 


S3 

S3 S3 

0 LO 

S 


aS 

aS 


c3 0 




c3 0 

02 49 


4-> 

T3 43 

CO 49 



03 

H 4-> 


l 


rH 

co m 

1 






44 


1 


M 

M 


X 


£ 

ti 


an 


cu 

P. 


33 


S3 

S3 


O 


O 

O 


54 


P 

U 


e> 


O 

CJ3 





































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































. 





































. 


























































































































■ 






















. 











































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































SHOWING THE GROWTH RESPONSE WITH ALCOHOL EXTRACTS 









0 

0 

0 






0 

0 

R 






r ca 

Jh 

R 






0 0 

P 

g 






jh 

R 

Jh 






-R O 


cd 






O d 

JH 







d *h 

0 







Jh 

R • 

R 






-R 0 

R 0 

O 






W ^ 

<; r 


JZ. 





0 0 

•rH 

R 

O 





0 

a 

O 

w 




« 

<H ^ 

* Jh 

cd 

Eh 




0 

O 

0 d 

Jh 

O 




R 

P 0 

R ^ 

R 

<C 




R 

0 0 

•H 

K 

K 




£f 

O Jh 


0 

Eh 




Jh 

rH P 

Jh 00 


X 




g3 

Cd -R 

cd 

1 — 1 

W 

pq 



tej 

PR 


^ 0 

O 


3 




JH 

R 

p 

!3 

P 




O 0 


0 

t> 

P 



JO 

JO -R • 

0 R 

0 

M 

P 




■ 'H 0 

JO d 

i — 1 

Eh 

0 



4- 

4. < -R 

0 

cd 

< 

O 




' R 

4 " 


EH 

W 



• 

* 3 

d 


M 

PH 


• 

0 

O * Jh 

• p> 

0 

Eh 



O 

0 

0 0 cd 

O *H 

00 

^5 

CO 


O 

0 

O -R ^ 

0 d 


<q 

M 


O 

CM 

CM R 

0 a 1 

d 

P 

w 


CM 

1 —f 

rH 

02 0 

d 

a? 

Eh 


iH 

1 

1 Jh 00 

rH 





( 

O 

0 d 

I R 

bO 

O 



O 

m 

m ^ 0 

0 s 

d 

P 

pq 


LO 

0 

0 -R 

in d 

R • 

M 



O 

1 —f 

rH 

0 0 

0 0 

Eh 

cm 


rH 


CO R 

rH £3 

d r 

<q 

w 



R 

R d 

- d 

•HI 

o 



R 

cd 

cd 0 0 

R 

R g 

i — i 

!z5 


o3 


-R H 

cd d 

d Jh 

Q 

M 



T3 

T3 cd 

d 

P d 

*25 

Jt-P 


T3 

0 

0 R f> 

T3 


M 

<q 


0 

-R 

R C-H 

0 0 



EH 


R 

cd 

cd 0 3 

R R 

hV 

0 

M 


cd 

0 

©HO* 

d 

M 00 


> 


0 

jd 

.d d 0 

0 nd 


5 



.d 


f> 

.id 0 

O 


(3 

+3 


-R 

R R R 

0 

d r 

13 

O 

0 

r 

0 

0 3 £ 

R cd 

0 

EH 


R 

0 


•h tf d 

0 0 

Jh r 

M 


P 

•H 

P 

p 0 O 

•rH JH 

w d 




P 


g 

TJ O 

0 

s 


1 —l 


1—1 

rH 0 CO 

d 

0 rH 



O 

1 —* 

0 

O R 

rH R 

d Cd 

3 


JH 

O 

u 

Jh *h sd 

O 

P> 



R 

JH 

-R 

R g cd 

Jh 0 

0 R 

PH 


C 

R 

d 

d Jh 

R r^ 

g d 

0 


O 

fl 

0 

O d 0 

d 0 

CD O’ 



O 

O 

0 

O m R 

O 0 

sg 0 




O 



O £ 




1 


1 

i 


1 




1 



1 




FQ 


IH 

5*1 


M 




> 

M 

M 

lx* 




M 

M 


lx! 

M 





Ou 

a, 

Pj 

pH 

Oh 



jd 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 



0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

O 



Jh 

JH 

JH 

Jh 

Jh 

Jh 



Cl 

C 

c 

C 

C 

C 























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































SHOWING THE RETARDED GROWTH. OBTAINED WITH ELUATES 






O 

43 £4 




T3 

O 02 




«H 0 

O 02 




O tiO 

H >5 




S3 

cd 




-P cd 

T3 




o P 

^ S3 




cd o 

O CM 




n 

to 




-P 02 

54 

p 



X rX 

cd <12 

o 



CD (1) 

•P 

!U 



0 

g C H 

o 



H £ 

o <c 

o 



O 

54 

P 



43 02 

C H 02 

<c 



O 02 

• -P 




O 

02 02 

Ph 



H 43 

-P ^ ^ 

o 



cd -p 

Cd *rH 54 

CO 



^ 54 0 

rH M ^ 

P 



O <D 4-» 

© cd _ 

Eh 



t£) 4-* »iH 





, <H 3 

4- CM 

P 



-f <q 

PS 

P 


• to 

O 

E-h 


* fS] 

O <H 

CO 

M 

• 

o • 

O O o 

p 

s 

o 

O 0^ 

o -P 


o 

O -P CO 

CM -P 



o 

CM *H 

H -P <3 

w 


CM 

H El O 

8 d 02 

£h 


1 — 1 

l H -P 

O 02 rH 

PI 

P 

1 

o cd 

in h cd 

< 

o 

o 

lO^-P 

O cd F> 



to 

O S3 

rH {> *rH 

to 

o 

H <12 

•rH 3 

*- 

EH 

1—1 

CO rH 

-P 3 Cf- 

CO 

O 


•P cd 

Cd 02 

PS 

<c 

-p 

cd o f> 

02 

p 

« 

cd 

•P -H 

rO O 

p 

Eh 


'O 3 

02 02 +3 

g 

M 

r o 

<D -P O* 

-P -P 

p 

P 

0 

•P P (12 

Cd *<H ro 

p 

*p 

cd <12 

02 ^ 02 



cd 

(Drl-H 

43 54 CQ 



0 

43 cd c 

cd cd 

O 


P 

F> 02 

-P ^ 02 

PS 



•P -P 8 

0 U 

P 


•p 

02 Cd 02 

•rH tp O 



0 

•rl tfH 

ro o a 

P 


•H 

r a <12 ft 

•rH 

pc] 


"O 

ft 

rH -P 

« 



H 12 d 

O O 0 

<; 


rH 

O ~P CQ 

54 Cd -P 

p 

g 


O 

54 *H 

-P p cd 


54 

■h S cd 

S3 -P 3 

PS 


*P 

C n 

o X rH 

P 



o Cd O 

O 0 0 



o 

o ^ H-» 




o 

i 

i 



1 


> 




X 

M 



> 

M 

X 



M 

X 

ix 



ft 

ft 

ft 



3 

PS 

3 



O 

o 

o 



M 

n 




ci> 

C!d 

e» 


Group XXV - Control diet heated at- 1Q5°-120°C. +* eluate of 8Q% alcohol 
extract of Marinite in amounts increased as follows: 

1st and 2nd week - equivalent to 10% Marini te 

3rd week - equivalent to 20% Marrnite. 

4th week - equivalent to 25% Marmite 

























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































-H 












3 












0 









RH 



i—l 

3 

3 







O 



cd 

cd 

cd 





H-» 





;> 







S3 


0 



•rH 


H 







+-> 



3 

O 

O 





O O 


cd 



a* 


• 





a**. 


p 



0 

a> • 

0 0 

\ 




•p do 


El 




-H 0 

■H -f-» 




O H 


O 



-H 

Cd -H 

Cd -rH 


p 



Cd CD 


0 



O 

3 -H 

jr g 


p 



?H P «M 


T3 



cd 

H £i 

-H !R 

Ph 

a 



-H -H O 


cd 



3 

0 H 

H cd 


HI 



K 





■H 


•rH ^ 

K 

<q 



CD 03 -H 


3 

0 0 0 



(-H pH 


EH 

EH 



M S3 


cd 

-H -H -H 


0 

H-» 

VL 

fe 

P 



H CD CD 



•rH *rH «Hi 



JR ^ 

3 02 

6 

O 



O CD H 


E| 

a a a 


(—1 

cd 03 

O H 

« 

o 



.3 cd 


d 

Jh Jh Jh 


o 

0 H 

•rH 





o P> 


JR 

cd cd cd 


M 


-H O 


CO 



O O .rH 


p 



o 

- O 

Ph 

p 

HI 



Hi •!> 3 




o 

0 4* 


W 


. 


cti h» a 1 


0 



H 

?H 

O -H 

Eh 

pcj 

P 


CD 


-H 

O O to 


cd 

0 -H 

0 3 


EH 

Eh 


u 


cd 

H 02 02 



H 3 

■O 0 

Fr 

l—i 

< 


O CD 0 


3 



H 0 

cd H 

O 


pq 


00 -P 43 


H 

o o o 


o 

3 H 

cd 


K 

9 


RR +> 


0 

H-> -H H-> 


00 

<hi cd 

4d ;> 

S23 

<: 

o 


4- < 






f> 

•H «rH 

O 


CO 


^ o 


-v 

-H -H -H 


V 

4 * 

H 3 

M 


P 


• -H 


3 3 3 



^ 3 

cd Cd 

EH 

P 

<q 


o « 


• 

• 0 0 0 


o 

• O' 

0 0 

« 

o 


« 

O 0 TJ 


o 

0i—1 i—1 H 


o 

O 0 


O 


w 

o 

o h a) 


o 

-h cd cd cd 


o 

o 

► 0 

Ph 

CO 

Eh 

O 

02 *H 0 


o 

•rH > p> f> 

« 

H 

O 0 

0 -H 


Eh 

m 

o 

H E; cd 


02 

E; *rH ««H "rH 

CO 

H 

H -H 

JR *H 

< 

O 

<1 

02 

J Jr 0 


H 

jr 3 3 3 

o 

1 

H *rH 

0 a 


< 

p 

1 — 1 

O Cd JR 


1 

cd cd o 1 cd 

o 

O 

i a 

H JR 

}» 

K 


1 

to ^ o 


O 

^000 

H 

CO 

O JR 

H cd 

P 

Eh 


o 

o 3 


lO 

H 

cr> 

co cd 

3 ^ 

| 2 i 

K 

CO 

to 

H -H 


O RH 0 0 0 

1 


o» ^ 


o 

P 

PS 

o 

00 


H 

O 4-> -H» H-> 

O 

-H 


'H 


P 

HI 

-H -H 



cd cd cd . 

CO 

cd 

-H H 

4- o 

EH 

P 

P 


(3 0 0 


-H 

-h 3 3 3 

CT> 


cd o 


s 

O 

P 

-H 

h-> cd 


cd 

O H i — 1 i — 1 




H -H 

w 

D 

cd 

'TJ H 



cd 0 0 0 

-H 

0 

r a +-» 

O O 

Eh 

O 

Fr 


0 +» -R 



!R 

cd 

-H 

0 o 

JR cd 


o 


H 

•h c K 


0 

•Hill 


cd 

H—’ cd 

H- 3 JR 

Eh 

Hi 

P 

0 

cd 0 0 


-H 

X 

*3 

0 

cd JR 

3 H-> 

O 

<q 

a 

+* 

0 H 


cd 

0 M 

0 

43 

0 -H 

o « 

<q 

P 

Eh 

cd 

3 cd h 


0 

0 

H-> 

0 

p X 

O 0 

pR 


<u 

f> o 


P H 0 

cd 

-H +-* 

0 



O 

P 


H-> -r-J P 



o s 

0 

0 -rH 

H-> 

'0 H 

P 


HI 


0 3 0 


-H P 


•rH g 

0 H 

0 o 

9 

>H 


-H 

•rH a* o 


0 

o r a 


JR 

•rH O 

-h 4d 

Eh 

EH 


CD 

H 0 H 


•r-S 

o 3 

-H 

cd 

r 0 4d 

cd o 


HI 


•rH 

cd 

• 

-O H 02 

0 

H ^5 

o 

0 o 

Ci 

> 


'O 

H 0 

0 


cd MM 

•rH 


H O 

P H 

P 

M 



O -H 0 

-H 

1 - 1 

■O 0 0 

r a 


o H 

cd 

M 

Eh 


1—1 

Sh *h P 

•rH 

0^3 0 0 


+-* 00 

jh cd 

0 

Eh 

O 


o 

-H g -H 

a 

SR 

o cd ^ ^ 

H 

3 

-H 



<q 


SR 

S3 J-h 

H 

H~> 

00 

O 

O O 

3^ 

cd o 

« 



-H 

O cd H 

( cd 

3 


H 

O -H 

o o 

co oo 

Eh 

<3 


3 

0^0 


o 

3 03 JR -H 

•H 


O CO 


CO 

£h 


O 


o 

cd h to 

3 

1 


i 

p 

Hi 

HI 


O 

1 




O 


1 


Eh 





1 


o 

M 


M 

Hi 

O 


1 

HI 





HI 

HI 

M 

HI 

brH 



M 


h> 


1 

HI 

l> 




IV 

8 


rS 


> 

R 

« 

R 




Ph 

Ph 


Oh 



Qj 

Ph 

Ph 




3 

3 


3 


3 

3 

3 

^3 




o 

O 


o 


o 

o 

o 

O 




H 

5h 


JR 


5R 

H 

JR 

H 




C5 

c3 


Cl 


(3 

C5 

C!5 

O 


a 





o 

o 

to 


snrejg 





































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































COMPARING THE GROWTH RESPONSE OBTAINED WITH A PULLERS' EARTH 





. 

p 




0 

o 




. p 





•H 

G * 




a 

O 0 



Ch . 

a’ jh 

•rH P 



O 0 

p cd 

-P *H 



P 

cd P 

q* a 



CD *iH 

3 

Jh Jh 



4-> a 

p^ 

O cd 



cd Jh 

0 Cv? 

0 P 



h cd 

P 

r CJ 



rH P 

P 

cd^t 



0 

c o 

c\j 




0 P 

p p 



P CQ 

^0 

S3 



P rH 

cd p 

0 o 



JH 

0 S3 

hO-p 

• 


cd o 

JH 0 

cd 

fxj 


0 P 

P 

0 -p 

Eh 



0 cd 

Jh S3 



- P 

- r> 

0 

p 


0 53 

TJ ‘H 

0 P 

p 


JH 0 

>> 3 

- cd 

P 


0 rH 

o cd 

'O J> 


H cd 

P 0 

>V«H 

Eh 


H l> 

P 

O 3 

P 

P 



0 

+ +* 

P cd 

P 0 

P 


Cd 

«pH 


< 


4- ^ 

* d 

O Jh 

4- ^ 

“ p 

jjj 


• 0 

o cd 

• *rH 



O P 

o p 

o a 

U1 


O *H 

i—! 

O P 


• 

o a 

p p 

o cd 

P 

o 

rH JH 

1 o 

p ^ 

p 

o 

rH Cd 

o 

rH 

o 

o 

1 P 

CD P 

1 P 

p 

I—1 

o 

a> o 

O O 

p 

1 —1 

CD <HH 

cd 

CO 


8 

CT> O 

p Jh 

cr> p 

<q 

O 


cd p 

o 


co 

P P 

X 

p cd 

Pq 

cr> 

cd o 

r C5 0 

cd Jh 

O 


cd 

0 

-p 


P 

TJ JH 

P P 

*0 X 

Eh 

a 

0 P 

cd o 

0 0 

<q 


P X 

0 p 

p 

p 

r o 

cd 

P o 

cd P 

P 

(U 

0 

o 

0 o 


P 

P rH 

-p p 

P P 

p 

cd 

O 

0 cd 

o 

N 

0 

P P 

•p 

p o 

t— i 

P 

0 O 


0 p 

b> 


•H O 

o 

•rH Cd 


P 

T5 P 

P CO 

r 0 

&q 

CD 

cd 

o 


P 

•«H 

i—i 

JH S3 

P o 

<$ 

T3 


-p cd 

O 00 

P 


JH O 

S3 

Jh 

P 

rH 

P CO 

O «H 

p S3 

(xj 

O 

£ 

O o 

S3 cd 

Jh 

O S3 


o 


P 

o cd 


o 


c 


JH 



O 


l—1 

X 


o 

M 

M 


> 

J> 

w 



X 

X 

X 


> 

R 

H 

W 


a 



o* 


3 

g 

H 

3 


o 

o 

o 

O 


Jh 

SH 

in 

P 


CD 

cd 

CD 

CD 



























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































o 




















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































- 57 - 


Biock •-nd Harquh- ? (1935). J. Biol. Ghera. 103, 64;, 

Booher (1934). J. Biol. Chem. 107, 591. 

-— (1934). J. Biol. Chen. 107, 599. 

Bournuin and Sherman (1931), j. Araer. Chem. 3oc. 53, 3501. 

Castle (1929). Amer. J. Med. Sci. 178, 746. 

--(1934). Year Bool of General Medicine, p, 336. 

Chick and Roscoe (1930), Biochem. j. 24, 105. 

--- and Coping (1930). Biochem.JJ. 24, 932. 

-- ----- and Roscoe (1930). Biochem. J. 24, 1748. 

Cohn-, McMeekin and Minot (1930). J. Biol. Chem. 87, Mlk. 

ham and Sehonhevder (1934), Biochem, J. 28, 1335. 

jJ avidson (1932). Lancet II, 629. 

hay (1934), J. Amer. Chem, Soc. 56, 452, 

Diehl and Kuhnau (1933). Deutsche Arch, f.klin, Med. 176, 149. 

Elveh.j em, Kline, Keenan and Hart (1932-33). J, Biol. Chem. 99, 309 
Elveh.jern and Hoehn (1935). J, Biol. Chem. 108, 709, 

Goldberger, wheeler, Lillie and Borers (1926 ), pub. Health Bep. 

U.S.P.II.S. 41, 297.. 

Goldberger, -/heeler, Lillie and Rogers (1928). pub. Health pep. 

' ‘ TT q P TJ o A r l. 1 KQ G 

« O * JL • .. « J « xfc*-' , .Lt/Oo S 

Goodall (1932), Lancet II, 919, 

G-uha (1931). Biochem, J. I, 25, 931. 

(1931). Biochem, j. I, 25, 960. 

Gyorgy, Kuhn, Wagner- jaur egg (1934). 3. physiol, Chem. 223, 27. 

------ (1935), Biochem. J. 29, 741, 

Halliday (1934). j. Biol, Chem. 106, 29, 

Harris (1935). Biochem. J. 29, 776. 

Itter, Orent and McCollum (1935), J. Biol. Chem, 108, 585. 

Keenan, Kline, Elvehjem, Hart and Halpin (1933). J. Biol. Chem. 

103, 671, 

Kinnersley, O’Brien, Peters and Reader (1933), Biochem. -J. 27, 22a 
Klein and v/ilkinson (1934). Biochem. J. 28, 1684, 

aline, Keenan, Elveh.jem and Hart (1932-33). J. Biol. Chem. 99, 295 
IT.... ...... — (1932-33), J, Biol. Chem. 99, 309 

iruhii, Gvorgd and W'agner'4-Jauregg (1933). Ber. deutsch. chem. Ges• 

“ v ~ ~ 66, 317, 

..... ...... (1933). Ber. deutsch. chem. Ges. 

66, 576. 

Lepkovsky, Popper and Evans (1935), J. Biol. Chem. 108, 257. 

Levene (1932), J. Biol. Chem. 95, (325) 

McEarlane, Grab a s and Richardson (1931). Biochem. -7. 25, 358. 
Morris, Schiff, poulger, Rich and Sherman (1932). Brit. Med. J. II 

1050. 










- 58 - 


LI 


Narayanan and Drummond (1930). Biochem. J. 25, 1931 
Norris and Ringrose (1930). Science 71, 643. 

Osborne and Wakernan (1919). t # Biol. Ohem. 40, 383. 

Rhoads and filler (1933). J, Exoer. Med. 58, 585. 
Roseoe (1933). Biochem. J. 27, 1540. 

Strauss and Castle (1932). Lancet II, 111. 

Strauss and Castle (1932). New Eng. Journ. Med. 207 

Ungley (1933). Quart. T. led., N. S. II 381. 
tjngley and Tames (1934). Quart. J. Med. Ill, 523. 

Wills and Naish (1933). Lancet I, 1286. 

Wilkinson and.Sain (1932). Lancet I, 719. 

Wilkinson and Klein (1933). Lancet II, 629. 

























B29743 










