






































1 

4 



SOME PROBLEMS OE ULTRA-SONIC WAVES 


BY 

S. C. MORGAN 


A RESEARCH CARRIED OUT UNDER THE 
DIRECTION OE 
DEAN R. W. BOYLE. 


Physics Laboratory, 
University of Alberta, 


Edmonton, 
April, 1923 











CONTENTS. 


Page 

Introduction.. . • . l 

Generation of Ultra-Sonic Waves . 2 

The Ultra-Sonic Transmitter. 4 

Audible Method of Detecting Ultra-Sonic Energy 9 

Part I (a) Shape of Ultra-Sonic Beam in Air ..... 11 

Measurement of Energy Intensity of Radiation 

Pendulum ....... . 11 

Ultra-Sonic Beam in Air. 13 

Comparison with Verdet’s Formula. 15 

Comparison of Yerdet’s Curve and Lane’s Curve . . 21 

Part I (b) Audible Beats Prom Inaudible Sources ... 26 

Part I (c) Methods to Determine the Telocity of Ultra- 

Sonic Waves in Fluids. 32 


Application of Eundt's Method and Results .... 33 

Observations of Other Investigators Using Kundt 1 s 

Method. 35 

Telocity Determination by Listening Method ... 37 

The "Dust Figure" Method . ..... 59 

Telocity Determination Using a Smaller Quantity 

of Liquid . .. 40 

Method Using a Tertical Column with Listening 
Detector Device ..... . . . 41 

Part II Measurement of Telocity and Adiabatic Com¬ 
pressibility of Fluids. 46 


Measurement of Ultra-Sonic Waves in City Tap Water 46 
Change of Telocity with Change of Temperature . . 46 
Telocity in Salt Solution of Tarious Densities . . 48 
Telocity Change with Change of Temperature, Salt 


Solution Density 1.025 . 49 

Telocity of Ultra-Sonic Waves in Liquids ..... 50 

Adiabatic Compressibilities ........... 52 

Conclusions... 53 






















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/morgan1923 


SOME PROBLEMS OE ULTRA-SONIC WAVES 


INTRODU CT ION . 

Ultra-sonie waves are longitudinal waves of very high, 
pitch, well above the limits of audibility* Such waves when 
set up in a fluid have very short wave-lengths ranging from a 

fraction of a centimeter to five or more centimeters and there¬ 
fore can be reflected, refracted, and diffracted, similarly to 
light waves. 

When a disk or diaphragm executes high frequency 

vibrations in a medium, if all the points of the face of the 

diaphragm vibrate in the same phase and the diameter of the 

diaphragm is a number of times the v/ave-length. then most of 

the ultra-sonic energy is radiated into the medium from the 

face of the diaphragm in the form of a beam, v/hose angular 

width is determined from the relation sin 6 - X. where 0 

D 

is half the angle of the beam, }\ is the wave-length of the 
supersonic wave and D is the diameter of the diaphragm. 














- 2 - 


It can be shown mathematically that when ultra¬ 
sonic waves in a fluid strike an object which has a density 
and elasticity much different from those of the fluid, the 
waves suffer reflection, and if the reflecting object is a 
plane surface at right angles to the beam and correctly posi¬ 
tioned, the advancing and reflected waves meet and interfere 
to form standing waves. 

The wave-lengths of ultra-sonic waves are inter¬ 
mediary to the long wave -lengths of sound and the extremely 
short wave-lengths of light. Using an appropriate type of 
oscillator these waves can very conveniently be used for 
investigating the variation in the velocity of the wave with 
change of medium, the compressibility of the medium, its 
viscosity, and other related problems. 

Generation of Ultra-Sogjc Waves . 

If a parallel beam of light is passed normally 
through a small circular opening in an opaque screen, alter¬ 
nate zones of reinforcement and neutralization are formed 
due to interference. The position of these zones of maxi¬ 
mum and minimum intensities depends upon the diameter of the 
opening and the wave-length of the energy passing through 
it. If ordinary sound waves pass through the hole, inter¬ 
ference does not take place but the energy is distributed 














































































uniformly in all directions, that is, the hole he comes the 
center of the emergent waves. This latter phenomenon is due 
to the relative size of the hole and the wave-lengths involved. 
If the wave-length is much greater than the radius of the hole 

the energy is distributed spherically, as in the case of sound 
waves of ordinary pitch passing through an aperture. But if 
the radius is large compared to the wave-length, diffraction 
takes place. Therefore if sound waves can he obtained with 
a sufficiently small wave-length through or from an aperture 
of relatively large diameter, diffraction will result. It is 
obvious that if instead of plane waves passing through a hole 
a solid plate with parallel faces is set in vibratoiy motion 
in such a way that all points of its face are vibrating in 
the same phase, the sane conditions will prevail. And if the 
plate has a diameter large in comparison ?/ith a ?/ave-length 
and the plate is forced to vibrate in a fluid, a radiation 
will be produced and diffraction will take place forming the 
zones of maximum and minimum intensities. Such a vibrating 
disk may be formed of plates of any substance possessing the 
piezo-electric property. 

One of the outstanding substances exhibiting the 
piezo-electric property is Quartz cut from the crystal in 
a certain way. If a plate of it, appropriately cut, is sub- 



. 










, 

■ 


- 





- 4 - 


jected to a mechanical pressure, positive and negative elec¬ 
tricity will "be liberated on opposite faces of the plate; and 
if there is a contractive force applied there will he liber¬ 
ated a positive charge on the previously negative face. Con¬ 
versely, if a quantity of positive and negative electricity 
is applied to the two faces there will be a contraction or 
expansion depending on the direction of the applied electric 
field. 


The above property is the principle of the hind of 


ultra-sonic transmitters used here. If an alternating elec¬ 
tric field is applied to the opposite faces of the quartz, 
alternate expansion and contraction of the plate takes place 
and these vibrations are transmitted to the medium surround¬ 
ing the transmitter. 

The Ultra-Sonic Transmitter. 


The quarts used for the ultra-sonic transmitters is 


cut from a quartz crystal in a definite manner. In a quartz 
crystal there are three electric axes. The piezo-electric 



phenomenon is exhibited both along, 
and in one direction at right angles 
to, these axes. In Figure 1, 

Aq, Ag, A3 represent a hexagonal 
section perpendicular to the prin¬ 
cipal axis. Aqaq, A-2 a 2' 811(1 ^3 a 3 


a.3 

Fig. 1. 



























■ 






















. 
















+68 

+ 60 

+ 57 

•+62 

+ 64 

+ 64 

+ 69 


+59 

+53 

+50 

+40 

+43 

+38 

+79 


+ 69 

+ 59 



+ 59 

+ 86 

+ 83 


+69 

+ 72 

+62 

+-73 

+71 

+64 

+84- 


+ 52 

+ 72 

+■54 

+-62 

+ 60 

+75 

+ 89 


+91 

+ 79^ 

-<77 

+ 80 

+15 

+ 88 

+ 96 


F~/<$. 3. 
































6.2 Cnt -*-j 



F/gvre 


























- 5 - 


are the electric axes of the crystal 
and are at an angle of 60° to one 
another. If a rectangular prism MU 
he cut from the crystal with faces 
and sides perpendicular and parallel 
respectively to the electric axis Axa^, 
then this plate will exhibit the 
piezo-electric phenomenon. Figure 2 
represents such a plate. 

One type of transmitter used in this laboratory was 
built as follows: A solid rectangular piece of quartz, 1*508 cm. 
thick and surface dimensions 11.5 cm. x 10 cm. was cemented to 
a back steel plate 1.587 cm. thick and 9.4 cm. in diameter. 

The plate was subjected to a test in order to find the 
electric properties of its faces. This test was carried out 
by an ordinary electrometer and a mechanical compression pressure 
applied to the faces. This pressure caused a release of elec¬ 
tricity on the faces and the results for one face were as shown 
in Figure 3. The number in each section represents a compara¬ 
tive value of the electric condition of the quarts in that 
particular area. 

The quartz plate with a back plate of steel was placed 
in a metal casing, the shape and dimensions of which are shown 
in Figure 4, with the open face of the quartz covering the hole C. 



















■ 

' 










- 










. 




■ 















. 

























F/suRi£ 5V7 

z. ~f f? /e Con i Avc 7 p 2 /. 


F/0,1/RE & 









































































































To the back plate was attached a well insulated cable. The 
casing was then filled with a hot mixture of paraffin wax and 
resin, in proportions of 1 to 3 by weight, and allowed to cool. 

If the instrument is placed in a medium like water, and alter¬ 
nating voltage applied to the two fhces of the quartz, the quartz 
will be forced to contract and expand alternately and thus set 
up longitudinal oscillations in the water, transmitted in a 
direction normal to the face of the quartz. 

The other type used was erected in the following 
manner: Five circular quartz discs shown in Figure 5 were 
placed as shown in Figure 6, positive faces together and nega¬ 
tive faces together, with a 0.006 inch circular plate of zinc 
between each disc, the positive zinc strips connected together 
to form one terminal A and the negative zinc strips all joined 
to form the other terminal B. The quartz discs were subjected 
to a piezo-electric test as described above and the results are 
shown in Figure 5. When placing the discs in position a hot 
mixture of paraffin wax and resin was flowed between the discs 
and care taken to expel all air bubbles between the plates. The 
pile thus constructed was placed in a casing, the style and 
dimensions of which are shown in Figure 7. The discs rested 
against a thin brass plate, which in turn covered the 4.5 cm. 
opening. The negative terminal A was connected permanently to 






Figure 

GENERATING CIRCUIT E-.M.F.’S. 



) 
























































7 


the easing and a well insulated cable was attached to the posi¬ 
tive terminal B and brought out through the pipe opening R. 

When an alternating voltage was applied to the two terminals a 
small increase or decrease was produced in the thickness of the 
pile of quartz, depending on the direction of the electrostatic 
field. 

Constructed as above these transmitters really form 
electric condensers with quartz as the dielectric. The trans¬ 
mitters were excited by means of high frequency oscillating 
voltages generated from electronic valves as in wireless, and 
electrical energy was thereby changed to ultra-sonic energy of 
the same frequency as the voltages applied to the plate. The 
generating system is shown in Rigore 8. A 60-cycle, 110-volt 
A. C. supply was used as source of electrical power. This was 
stepped-up to 4400 volts and rectified by two E-electrode valves 
connected in parallel as shown. The potential on the plate of 
the generating valve ?/as, therefore, a series of uni-directional 
pulses giving a tonic train of 120 pulses per second. The 
oscillations thus given to the plate, and then to the water, were 
therefore not continuous, but were transmitted in a tonic train 
in which the group frequency was 120 per second. See Figure 8. 
The transmitter acted as a condenser of the oscillating circuit, 

one side of the plate being connected to the filament end of 
the oscillating inductance and thus behaving as one side of 









• > 









I 


'fy 














a condenser, while the other side of the condenser was 
furnished by the insulated face of the plate. An electro¬ 
static voltmeter measured the high frequency voltage across 
the transmitter. 

A 2000-volt D. C. source was obtained by switching 
the key K. The D. C. source furnished power for the genera¬ 
tion of continuous waves. 

The arrangement and devices described above furnish a 
very convenient means of carrying out researches on wave and 
other problems which cannot be treated in any other way, or at 
least not with so great a facility and accuracy. For instance, 
the compressibility of liquids has been very little investiaged 
on account of experimental difficulties. A sufficient proof 
of the difficulty of obtaining accurate results is furnished 
in the comparison of the results of different observers. But 
with the use of ultra-sonic waves a new method is obtained, 
using apparatus of only ordinary and convenient dimensions, 

which affords the means of making accurate measurements. Simi¬ 
larly, viscosity and absorption effects may be more easily 
and accurately determined by this method. In fact the ease 
with which the ultra-sonic waves can be generated and con¬ 
trolled furnishes a powerful and reliable device to study the 
elastic properties of any medium in which such waves can be 
generated. 





. 










9 - 


Audible Method of Detecting Ultra-Sonic Energy . 

As mentioned above the ultra-sonic oscillations 
generated in the wai er, when excited by an alternating current 
source, were transmitted in a tonic train with a group fre¬ 
quency of 120 per second. On account of this condition it 
is possible to detect the ultra-sonic beam with a device such 
as a stethescope by listening for the 120 cycles per second 
frequency, The listening detector device used was made as 
follows: Two very thin mica discs, each 2.0 cm. in diameter, 

see Figure A, were supported by a brass 
ring 2 centimeters in diameter, 0.5 
cm. thick with a 1.4 cm. concentric 
hole. A hollow brass tube B was sol¬ 
dered rigidly to the ring and a hole L 
connected the two spaces S and S^. The 
tube B, about 30 cm. long, was con¬ 
nected at the other end to the ear 
tubes of the stethescope. When a sound wave impinges on the 
mica discs they are forced to vibrate, and the sound thus set 
up is carried to the ear by the tube B and the stethescope. 

This listening detector device if placed in the path of the 
ultra-sonic beam is subjected to the radiant pressure of the 

high frequency ultra-sonic waves. The beam is made up of a 
number of groups constituting the tonic train; and each group 



Fig. A. 















10 - 


is capable of exerting a pressure. This pressure is exerted 
on the discs in the following manner: each tonic train is 
made up of a number of oscillations and these oscillations 
are so rapid that the mica discs cannot respond, just as 
the diaphragm of a telephone receiver cannot respond to the 
rapid wireless oscillations of a reception circuit. The mica 
discs can respond for each group, since each group contains 
energy and thus exerts radiation pressure. The pressure causes 
a movement of the mica discs and a sound impulse is thus pro¬ 
duced in the stethescope. The number of impulses per second 
so produced will be the same as the number of groups per 
second in the tonic train, which in the present case was ISO. 
Consequently a note of ISO pitch is heard in the stethescope. 







. 















































































- 11 


PART I (a) 

SHAPE OE HI.TEA-SONIC BEAM IN AIR. 


Measurement of Energy Intensity of Radiation by Pendulum . 

Lord Rayleigh 1 has shown that a plane sound wave 
impinging upon a perfectly reflecting surface produces a 
pressure of magnitude s 2 E, where E =. energy density in 
the incident wave train; and W. Altherg 11 has used this 
radiant pressure to measure the absolute intensity of sound 
radiated by a £undt s s tube in air. 

Ultra-sonic energy can be detected in various ways 
but in all quantitative methods the radiant pressure of the 
ultra-sonic waves is utilised. Perhaps the most successful 
quantitative method of detecting such energy is the torsion 
pendulum method. 

A torsion pendulum is made by soldering two thin, 
small, plates of brass, lead, or some other metal, square or 
circular in shape, at right angles to each other and suspending 
them by a phosphor bronze strip. 111 Lead is more extensively 

I Phil. Mag.(6) p. 338, 1902. 

II Lrude Annalen der Phys. 1903. 

III Lehmann: Ultra-Sonic Oscillations, Pt. I, Sec. 3(d). 





















. 








' 

. 











FlCH/REI 





9 . 








































- 12 - 


used than other metals because of the low velocity of sound 
in this material; thus sheets of lead are suitable for the 
vanes. The pendulum is suspended in the ultra-sonic beam and 
the radiant energy of the beam striding the vertical vane 
deflects it. A counterpoise is furnished’by the horizontal vane. 

A plan and elevation view of the square and round 
pendulums used in this laboratory is shown in Figure 9. Var¬ 
ious sizes have been used, but investigation has shown that 
the best conditions prevail when a circular vane pendulum is 
used, having a thickness of about 0.1 \ and a diameter of 
about 1.5 \ , where X is the wave-length of the ultra-sonic 
energy in the material of the vane. 

For purposes of investigating the properties of the 
beam the pendulum is passed through a vertical section and hori¬ 
zontal section of the beam. The pendulum is deflected by the 
radiation pressure of the beam and the deflection is reduced 
back to zero by twisting forward the suspension. The amount 
of torsion in the suspension is measured by noting the angle 
of twist turned through in order to bring the pendulum back 
to its zero position, that is, to the position where the 
vertical vane is at right angles to the direction of the 
energy beam. It can be shown mathematically that the amount of 
restoring torque produced by the torsion in the pendulum is 





- 13 


proportional to the energy density of the ultra-sonic heam. 1 
Ultra-Sonic Beam in Air . 

For investigating the ultra-sonic beam in air, the 
pile of plates transmitter was used as a source of ultra-sonic 
energy. Attempts were made to obtain Kundt' s figures in a tube 
containing lycopodium dust, by placing the tube along the axis 
of the beam. A reflector was placed approximately 60 cm. from 
the transmitter and at right angles to the direction of the 
beam. Different sized tubes were used but no figures were 
formed. The lycopodium dust was next allowed to fall through 
the beam and was caught on a glass plate placed at the bottom 
limit of the beam. It was thought that with proper adjustment 
of the reflector the advancing and reflected waves would meet 
to form standing waves and that the dust particles would be 
driven into the nodal lines out of the agitated regions and 
that the arrangement of the dust would be similar to the figures 
in a hundt's tube. However, no results were obtained. 

In the next attempt to study the beam a torsion 
pendulum \*/as employed. A lead pendulum, 2 cm. in diameter by 
0.25 cm. thick, was suspended by a phosphor bronze 0.0015 inch 
strip, 80 cm. long, and placed in a position to obtain a vertical 
and horizontal cross-section of the beam. On account of air 
currents and the very little damping of the pendulum it was 


’Lehmann: Ultra-Sonic Oscillations, Pt. I, Sec. 3. 




















- 

■ 
























' 








. 














14 - 


found necessary to shield the pendulum from air currents and to 
provide a damping arrangement. The latter was furnished hy 
attaching to the lower end of the vanes hy means of a small hu.t 
rigid brass wire another brass wire at right angles to the 
supporting wire, 3.81 cm. long hy .0 71 cm. in diameter, moving 
in a beaker of water. £he transmitter was forced to oscillate 
at its approximate resonant frequency and the readings obtained 
are as in Table I. 


TABLE I. 


Tempera¬ 

Frequency 

Yoltage 

Position 

Pendulum 

ture 

of 

across 

of 

Deflection. 

°C. 

Oscillations. 

Transmitter. 

Suspension, 



Horizontal Section 


17.75 

40,500 

1500 

4 

Bight 

18 

17.75 

IT 

1525 

2 

IT 

24 

18.3 

IT 

1525 

6 

TT 

10 

18.35 

TT 

1550 

8 

TT 

3 

18.4 

TT 

1525 

9 

TT 

0 

18.0 

n 

1500 

0 

TT 

31 

18.0 

TT 

1500 

2 

Left 

23 

18.0 

IT 

1525 

4 

IT 

14 

18.1 

TT 

1510 

6 

IT 

12 

18. 2 

TT 

1500 

6 

IT 

10 

18.1 

TT 

1525 

8 

TT 

5 

18.2 

TT 

1525 

10 

TT 

0 















TABLE I (Continued) 


Tempera¬ 

Frequency 

Voltage 

Position 

Pendulum 

ture 

of 

across 

of 

Deflection. 

°C. 

Oscillations. 

Transmitter. 

Suspension. 


Vertical Section 


19.0 

40,500 

1530 

1 

Down 

22 

17.5 

TT 

1525 

1 

TT 

27 

18.95 

n 

1525 

2 

IT 

24 

19.0 

Tl 

1530 

3 

TT 

21 

17.5 

Tt 

1525 

3 

TT 

26 

17.5 

n 

1525 

6 

TT 

9 

16.4 

IT 

1500 

9 

TT 

2 

16.65 

If 

1540 

10. 

5" 

0 

16.4 

IT 

1500 

12 

TT 

2 

16.65 

Tl 

1525 

15 

TT 

0 

17.5 

TT 

1525 

2 Up 

13.5 

18.85 

TT 

1525 

4 

TT 

8 

18.75 

TT 

1525 

5 

TT 

5 

18.95 

IT 

1525 

6 

TT 

4 

18.75 

TT 

1525 

7 

TT 

7 

18.75 

TT 

1525 

9 

TT 

3 

18.75 

TT 

1525 

11 

IT 

2 

18.85 

TT 

1525 

13 

TT 

0 

Comparison with Verdet's 

Formula. 





As mentioned above ultra-sonic oscillations generated 


by an oscillating disc are analagous, mathematically, to the 
optical phenomenon of a parallel beam of light passing through 


a small circular opening. E. Verdet* has mathematically 
treated the optical case. 


Lecons d T 0ptique Physique, 
Tome 1, page 301. 












16 


Verdet made the assumption that parallel rays of 
light pass through a circular opening in a direction normal 
to the plane of the opening. Since the phenomenon is sym¬ 
metrical, the effect will he the same in all planes which 
are normal to the opening and include a diameter of it. Verdet 
considered the effect in one plane. Let AOB, Figure B, he 
the opening and M the point at which the intensity of illum¬ 


ination is to he considered, 
has shown that 


Verdet 


I s Z TT 2 H 4 


2 12.’ ) 2 S 


. m 6 
(IT) 2 4 


] 



Fig. B. 


where = intensity of illumination 
at M. 

R - radius of opening - 
m = TTB sin 6 

X 

0 - angle between the line joining 

I to the centre of the opening 
_ and the central axis OH. 

A - wave-length in the medium of 
the energy under consideration* 

As 0 increases, m increases, and the value of the 

bracketed expression becomes alternately positive and negative 

and therefore must pass through zero values. That is, as 0 


increases the intensity of illumination varies from a maximum 
when 0=0, down to zero intensity, then increases to a maximum 
and again falls to zero, and so on. Thus, the energy is dis- 






























































17 


tribute! from the opening in zones of maximum intensity separ¬ 
ated from one another by zones of zero intensity. The values 
which give maximum and minimum intensities have been calculated 
by Verdet and his results are found in Table II together with 
the relative values of various maximum intensities. 

TABLE II. 



m 

ir 

Intensity 

First Max. 

0 

1.0 

First Min. 

0.610 

0 

Second Max. 

0.819 

0.0175 

Second Min. 

0.116 

0 

Third Max. 

1. 353 

0.00415 

Third Min. 

1.619 

0 

Fourth Max. 

1.847 

0.00165 

Fourth Min. 

2.120 

0 


The above table shows that the second and subsequent 

zones have intensities which are negligible in comparison with 

the intensity of the first maximum. Thus, most of the energy 

is limited to the central zone, the angular width of which can 

be determined from the value m at the first minimum. 

As found by Yerdet the value of 2£ for the first mini- 

TT 

mum is 0.610. Since m = IT R sin 6 or sin 0 a S A , then 

, FE 

sin 0 = .610 X or 1.22 X where D is the diameter of the 
R D 









* 









. 







































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































18 


opening. Airy'has pointed out that in order to obtain the 
central zone, \ must he small in comparison with D. 

The condition as investigated mathematically for 
optics by Verdet and Airy is obtainable in the case of ultra¬ 
sonic oscillations. When the transmitter used in the investi¬ 
gation of the ultra-sonic beam in air was placed 102.5 cm. 
from the pendulum, as described above, deflections were pro¬ 
duced, the amount of the deflection being greatest when in 
the center of the central zone and decreased when moved away 
from that position. The energy density is proportional to 
the deflection. This transmitter had a diameter of face of 
6”, and oscillated at a frequency of about 40,900 cycles per 
second in air, at the temperature of 18.5° 0. Taking the 
velocity of sound in air as 53,100 cm. per second at 0°C., 
then velocity at 18.5° C. is 34,210 cm. per second. The 
pendulum was moved through the central zone, vertically and 
horizontally, and the shape of the beam sections in each case 
is shown in Figures 10 and 11 respectively. Choosing the hori¬ 
zontal section, it is noted that the maximum energy density 
when B s 0 is represented by 31. Taking this as 1, then the 
relative value can be found of any point on the curve. For 
instance, to get the energy density represented by 0.9, take 

B. Airy: Mathematical Tracts,—Intensity 
of Light Passing Through a Hole. 







■» 






























■ 



. 


1 . 















. 

- 







19 


0.9 of 31 and get 27.9. Looking for this value on the curve 
it is noticed that it has abscissa reading 1.2. Then the 9 in 
radians will be 1.2/102.5 where 102.5 represents the distance 
from the transmitter. Different values of energy density are 
taken and the corresponding values of 9 found. Figure 12 
shows the energy density plotted as a function of 9 in radians. 

In Yerdet T s expression I 2 represents the intensity of 
illumination in the optical case and corresponds with the energy 
density of the ultra-sonic beam. As stated above the energy 
density is proportional to the pendulum reading; then to obtain 
a comparison between Yerdet*s optical results and those obtained 
experimentally for the ultra-sonic beam in air it is only neces¬ 
sary to compare the of Yerdet*s expression with the experi¬ 
mental ultra-sonic beam in air. The values of R and A occurring 
in the ultra-sonic sections are substituted in Yerdet*s equation 
and the values of I corresponding to different values of 0 are 
calculated. The values of m which make I 2 s 0 are found by 

putting sin 0 = *61 x X i n the calculation of the wave-length 

R 

A - I is used where Y - velocity of sound in air and n s fre- 
n 

queney of oscillation. 

In order to compare Yerdet’s ease with the ultra-sonic 
case using the radius of the transmitter for the radius of the 
opening and the same frequency, the following calculation was 
made: 



































































































































































































































20 


A 

- 

34,210 - 837 cm 

40,900 

R 

- 

3.0 in. s 7.62 cm. 

Sin 0 


.61 .61 x -837 , .0670 

R 7.62 

.*. © 

= 

3.8° (approx.) which is the angle that will 
make the energy density I 2 = 0. 

m 

s 

7TR sin 0 


Different values of m are substituted in Verdet's 


formula 


= K(l 


m 


- m 


( 21)^3 *”( 377^4 


by choosing various values of 9 from 0° up to 3.8°. When 
K = 1, the value of I 2 can be determined, The calculated 
values are found in Table III and Figure 12 shows the value of 

p 

I plotted as a function of the angle in radians. 


TABLE III. 


Distance from Transmitter * 102.5 cm. 

Frequency of Oscillation - 40,900 cycles per sec. 


Angle in Radians. 


I 


2 


0663 

0.0 

0611 

.0030 

0401 

.3272 

0209 

.6922 

0105 

.9120 

0 

1.0 













. . 







; rS 















• f 




















' 



- 21 


Comparison with Curve of Lane. ^ 

In an investigation of "Minimum Sound Energy for 


Audition for Tone of High Frequency 11 Lane used the Hewlett 
Generator^"as a source of high frequency sound energy. In his 


calculations Lane assumed the amplitude of the sound wave to he 
the same at the diaphragm surface as that of the diaphragm. The 
total amount of sound energy E given off per second hy one side 
of the diaphragm is given hy 



where S = area of each side of the diaphragm 
n - density of the air 
V - velocity of sound in air 
A =, amplitude of vibration of the diaphragm 
w - 2 tt times the frequency* 

Quoting Lane: "Considering a simple spherical distri¬ 
bution, the energy density per sq. cm. at a distance D cm. from 
the source is E/2"irL 2 , which represents the average value for 
energy density on the surface of a hemisphere of radius D. 

If R is the ratio of the actual value, J, at a distance I) from 
the source, to the average value, then, 

J = ER/2-rrx> 2 

"Assuming the sound field to he symmetrical with re¬ 
spect to the asis of the diaphragm the relative distribution 

^hys. Review (2) XIX, p. 52, 1922. 

>Phys. Review (2) XIX, p.492, 1922. 



































































































































- 22 


of energy density on the surface of a sphere of radius D is 

determined by calculation from the measurement of a minimum audible 

amplitude of the diaphragm as it was turned about a vertical axis, 

through its center, through an angle of 180°. ,T Figure IS shows 

energy density determined at 10,000 cycles per second plotted 

in arbitrary units as a function of the angle• 

In order to compare Verdet’s optical beam with the 

beam formed by the Hewlett Generator in air the same method was 

followed as in the comparison of Verdet ! s optical beam and the 

ultra-sonic beam in air. The frequency for both - 10,000 cycles 

per sec. Experiments were carried out at night. Velocity of 

sound in air 33,900 cm./sec. X z ~ » iq*- 3.39 cm. 

R - 5 cm. Sin 0 = S A s .610 x • ,•. 0 - 0.4259 radian 

IT R 5.00 

(approx.), the angle which gives zero energy density. Then 
substituting in Verdet’s expression, the values of I 2 corre¬ 
sponding to chosen angles can be determined. The calculated 
results are sho?m in Table IY. 

TABLE IV. 

Frequency of Oscillation - 10,000 cycles per sec. 

Distance from Transmitter* 150 cm. 


Angle in Radians 

I 2 

.4259 

0.0 

.4014 

.0001 

.3002 

.0958 

.2007 

.3950 

.1012 

.8590 

0.0 

1.0 






















































. 




















- 









■ 



' 

• 




















- 


































































































23 


Lane did not make any comparison "between Ms results 
and Yerdet's expression, but using Lane T s values and choosing 
30,000 of his arbitrary units, the maximum energy density, as 
represented by 1, the relative values of energy density are 
known. Such values when plotted against the corresponding 
value of the angle 0 in radians give a curve as shown in Figure 
14. In the same figure is found Yerdet T s curve representative 
of optical values. 

Thus it can be seen from figures IS and 14 that both 
the energy beams obtained in air from a piezo-electric pile- 
of-plates generator and from a Hewlett generator do not con¬ 
form to the mathematical relations deduced in Yerdet's formula. 
But in Lehmann's work, already referred to, it was found that 
a piezo-electric oscillator, made in a certain way, when radi¬ 
ating into water generated an ultra-sonic beam in which the 
energy intensities agreed fairly well with the mathematical 
formula of Yerdet. Possible explanations of this are the 
following: 

First, when experimenting in air, the torsion pendulum 
cannot be absolutely free from air currents. The pendulum 
and transmitter were both shielded as completely as possible 
under the existing circumstances. However, air currents were 
still possible and on this account the shape of the beam may 
not be absolutely correct. 



' 

. 






- 


, 
















. 


' 

. 







- 24 - 


Again, the transmitter used for this experiment in air 
was made in such a way that the pile of quartz rested against 
a steel plate hearing on the face of the casing, a measured 
6” diameter surface of the steel being exposed to the air 
medium. When the transmitter is generating ultra-sonic waves, 
the vibrating quartz and steel have perfect freedom only in an 
area in the middle of the opening in the face of the casing; 
the sides of the quartz very likely are impeded in their movement 
and the diameter that was chosen, namely, 6 ,T , is too large. This 
will introduce an error in the angle © which in turn will change 
the values of all calculations depending on 9. Thus, the 
value of m is changed and consequently I 2 has different values 
from those shown and the shape of Yerdet’s beam will be wider. 
Also, it may be that the casing itself is forced into a vibratory 
motion by the oscillating quartz and the steel face plate, and 
this forced vibration interferes with the generation of the 
ultra-sonic sound waves and causes a change in the shape of the 
beam. 

Yerdet T s beam does not show any similarity to Lane’s 
beam in air from the Hewlett generator. A reason for this 
probably is that the confined edge of the vibrating diaphragm 
also restricts the motion of the diaphragm and the diameter 
used is, again, not the true diameter of the vibrating section. 
Also the resulting tone as given by the Hewlett generator is 
impure. The impurities consist of the octave and higher partials 




. 





' 






- 






' 






25 


of the fundamental. However, at high frequencies, 10,000an& 
over, the impurities are inaudible unless the fundamental is 
very tense. At high frequencies the beam goes in a well defined 
beam, but as shown above it is not the beam given by Yerdet's 
relation. 

In the investigation carried out by Lehmann, it was 
found that there was a very good agreement in comparing Verdet T s 
beam and the ultra-sonic beam in water. 1 The reason for good 
agreement probably is that the transmitter used by him was built 
in such a way that the hole of the casing exposed to the water 
was first covered with a thin sheet of mica, behind which was 
placed the quartz plate. The quartz plate was approximately 
the same size as the hole and thus there was no binding offered 
to the vibration of the quartz by the edges of the hole which 
supported the mica and quartz. Also the face of the casing was 
not set in motion by the vibrating quartz. These two effects 
were possibly present in the transmitters used in the experiment 
in air here described, and thus the disagreement with Yerdet's 
relation. 


'Lehmann: Ultra-Sonic Oscillations, Pt. I, Figure 29 








■ 


. 











26 


PART I (b). 

AUDIBLE BEATS EROM INAUDIBLE SOURCES. 


When two sounding bodies placed near one another have 
not exactly the same frequency, there will be interference 
between the waves emitted by them and the disturbance at any 
chosen point is continually changing. V/hen compressions from 
both sources arrive simultaneously, or rarefactions arrive simul¬ 
taneously, a maximum of sound is produced. In a short time con¬ 
densations from one body arrive at the same time as the rare¬ 
faction of the other, and a minimum of sound results. Thus, 
there is set up a pulsating effect known as beats. 

Suppose that two transmitters a short distance apart 
and facing each other are caused to oscillate with the same 
frequency; then two beams of ultra-sonic waves of the same fre¬ 
quency will be transmitted to the medium, and although the 
vibrations of the two transmitters may not be in step and there 
is interference between the waves, still at any given place 
the nature of the disturbance remains constant. But, if the 
two superimposed waves have different frequencies then the phase 
relation between the two will be constantly varying. The wave 
with the lower frequency will lag more and more behind the one 




27 


with the higher frequency until the phase difference between the 
two reaches 180°. After this the phase difference will get less 
and less until they are once more in phase. Thus the amplitude 
will he constantly varying from a maximum to a minimum, causing 
"beats", and the variation in the amplitude of the resultant motion 
will have a definite "beat frequency" equal to the difference be¬ 
tween the two primary frequencies. For example, if the frequencies 
of the two superimposed ultra-sonic waves are 100,000 and 101,000 
per second, respectively, the pitch of the resultant beat will 
be 1,000 cycles per second. With the separate frequencies the 
waves on striking the ear would produce no sound, since the adult 
ear cannot appreciate a sound with a frequency of over 20,000 pe r 
second (about); but with the superimposing of the waves a beat 
note with a frequency of 1,000 should be heard. Thus, we should 
expect to be able to produce beats from inaudible ultra-sonic 
sources. 

In this part of the experimental work two transmitters 
excited from two different sources were placed 60 cm. apart in 
water and facing each other. One transmitter was forced to 
oscillate at approximately 40,000 cycles per second and the other 
at 40,000 i 0 to 10,000. To investigate the nature of the effect 
between the two transmitters a listening device was made con¬ 
sisting of a small, thin, rubber nipple, attached to one end of 
a hollow brass tube the other end of which was attached to a 
stetheseope. As stated above when the source of energy exciting 

















, 



































































■ 

' ci 






28 


the generating valves is rectified alternating E. M. E., the 
ultra-sonic oscillations are transmitted in a tonic train, the 
group frequency being twice the number of cycles per second. 

See Figure 8. When the nipple is moved through the energy beam, 
the radiant pressure of each group of ultra-sonic oscillations 
impinges on the nipple causing a slight distortion, and a sound 
impulse is produced in the tube attached to the nipple. 

In the present instance when the electrical exciting 
source was alternating the tonic train produced an audible note of 
120 cycles pitch, which note was heard in the stethescope when any 
one of the two transmitters was set oscillating. When both trans¬ 
mitters were set oscillating, being 60 cm. apart and facing each 
other, and when the nipple was placed in the path of both beams, 
immediately musical beats were detected, superimposed on the note 
of the tonic train. The pitch of the beat note could be made to 
vary throughout the whole musical scale by varying gradually the 
frequency of oscillation of one or other of the transmitters, 
exactly the same as is done in the ease of 1T heterodyne beat note TT 
in wireless. 

When the electrical exciting source was a continuous 
high potential, there was of course no tonic train and nothing 
could be heard in the water when one transmitter only was acting. 

But with the two transmitters acting, the beat note broke out 
and was easily heard as a pure musical tone. The above experiment 
was repeated at different times with both A. C, and D. C. electrical 
exciting sources, at primary frequencies from 40,000 to 150,000. 





















































- 












29 


In these experiments indications of the formation of 
standing waves could also he noted. As the listening device was 
moved along the interfering beams there were noted maximum and 
minimum points of heat sound intensity. These maximum and mini¬ 
mum points were formed as is usual in sound; there v/as inter¬ 
ference between the two sets of oppositely advancing waves. 

The waves could he continuous as in the case of D. C. excitation, 
or in a tonic train as in the case of A. C. excitation. Since 
successive maximum points or successive nodal points are one 
half ?/ave length apart, the length of the wave is known. The 
frequency was known from the Hertzian wave meter, therefore the 
velocity of the ultra-sonic waves can he determined from the 
relation V - nA. Ho readings of half wave lengths were taken 
in these experiments, hut the method for determining the velocity 
of ultra-sonic waves in a medium was disclosed and the work in 
the velocity determinations following was a direct result of 
this experiment. 

Attempts were made to detect the formation of heats in 
air hut with no success. The failure was due no doubt to the 
insufficient radiant energy to impress the rubber nipple. The 
energy of the wave in water or a similar medium was great enough 
to distort the nipple and produce the necessary heat sound. 

In the above if we consider two sets of plane waves 
advancing through a medium with frequencies of nx and n g , then, 
expressing relations in two dimensions only, they may he rep¬ 
resented thus: y = a^ cos 2TT(n-j_t - x_J and y = a^cos 2HtngtH-x_) 





































, 




■« 







wmmm 








30 - 


respectively, where t - time, \ - wave-length, and x - distance 
measured along an axis parallel to the directions of the propaga¬ 
tion of the waves. 

When n^ =. ng - n, and a^ and a^ are about the same 
and equal to a, standing waves are formed by the superposition 
of the wave trains and such waves are represented by the expression 

y c a cos 2ir(nt - x) + cos 2“tr(nt+x) 

A A- 

- 2a cos (.Efx) x cos (2imt). 

\ 

When x = 0 or is an integral number of half wave-lengths, 
the amplitude of vibration is maximum and consequently an anti- 
node occurs. And when x is equal to an odd number of quarter 
wave-lengths, the amplitude of vibration is zero and a node results 

When n^_ is not equal to n*> beats are formed and an 

interference pattern as well is formed which has a mathematical 

expression much more complicated than the formula for standing 

waves. But to the listening detector device there appears the 

usual form of standing waves. This result is due no doubt to the 

device having a width which will not allow it to separate the 

pattern 

contiguous parts of the interference because of their proximity. 

We have an example of the corresponding case of standing 
waves in optics in the system of color photography devised by 
Lippmann. 1 The film of a photographic plate is placed in contact 
with clean mercury, and the plate is exposed to light on the 
glass side. The incident and reflected waves in the gelatin 

T Edser: Bight for Students, p. 423. 





















. 

' 

. 



























. 


■ 








- 31 


combined to form stationary waves, and if jT represents the phase 

change on reflection, nodes will be formed at the reflecting 

surface and at distances 3^ .... from the surface. Then on 

2 2 

account of the light producing a chemical change only at the 
antinodes, eciuidistant planes in which chemical change is pro¬ 
duced were separated by spaces in which no chemical action took 
place, that is, at the nodes. When the film was developed and 
a cross section of it examined under the microscope, there were 
found a number of transparent layers of gelatin separated by 
thin layers of silver. The thickness of each transparent layer 
was equal to half the wave-length of the light used in the 
experiment. 

Such experiments are extremely difficult to perform 
on account of the smallness of a wave of light. But in the 
case of ultra-sonics there is great ease in demonstrating all 
the properties of stationary waves on account of the very con¬ 
venient size of wave, and the possibility of using the most 
ordinary materials. 
























' 






. 







PART I (c). 

METHODS TO DETERMINE THE VELOCITY OF 
ULTRA. -SONIC WAVES IN FLUIDS* 


In the endeavor to determine the velocity of ultra¬ 
sonic waves in water, various kinds of experiments were per¬ 
formed* The results of some of the preliminary ones though 
inconclusive at present are of use in that they open up certain 
problems for further Investigation. 

The electrical device for generating the alternating 
voltage which is to he applied to the transmitter described 
above, emits electromagnetic waves which can be detected by a 
Hertzian wave meter calibrated to give readings of impressed 
frequencies to within 1.5 per cent. The electromagnetic waves 
thus given out are identical in frequency with the mechanical 
waves sent out by the transmitter; therefore, if the frequency 
of the electrical wave is known, the frequency of the mechanical 
wave is also known. If any method furnishes a means of determin¬ 
ing the wave length of the mechanical waves, the velocity is 
known from the relation: velocity of a wave - wave-length x 
frequency of wave. Therefore efforts were made to devise 

























■ 

. 
























- 33 


methods whereby such wave-lengths could he easily and accurately 
determined. 

In the experiment on heats, already mentioned, in v/hich 
standing waves were first noticed, a method for determining the 
velocity of ultra-sonic waves hecame apparent. It was noticed 
that as the nipple of the listening device was moved through 
the beam in a direction perpendicular to the transmitters that 
successive points of maximum and minimum intensities were heard, 
giving evidence of the formation of standing waves. Since the 
distance between two successive maximum planes or between two 
minimum planes is one half wave-length the wave-length could 
be determined. Thus the method for determining the velocity 
is obvious. 

In the next experiment one transmitter only was used 
for the source of ultra-sonic waves, the other transmitter being 
inactive and used only as reflector for the ultra-sonic waves 
from the first. (Then finally it was replaced by a lead plate 
reflector. In all cases standing waves were easily detected. 
Application of Kundt 1 s Tube Method and Results . 

The first attempt to take actual readings for the 
determination of the velocity was made with a Kundt’s tube, 

61 cm. long and 3.4 cm. in diameter provided with an iron 
plunger 3 cm. thick, placed in the centre of the ultra-sonic 
beam. The position of the plunger could be adjusted in the 












34 


same way as the reflecting disc of the ordinary Kundt 1 s tube. 

On account of coal dust being used in previous experiments in 
this laboratory 1 it was deemed advisable to proceed at first 
with this material as indicator. 

The tube was placed in the beam of energy coming from 
a transmitter, all in v/ater contained in a large tank. It was 
expected that if standing waves were formed the dust would settle 
at the nodal points in or fashion similar to that in which the 
lycopodium dust settles in a Kundt 1 s tube. However, no figures 
were formed. 

The plunger was removed and a reflector placed about 
30 cm. from the transmitter and normal to the path of the beam. 
But again the experiment was unsuccessful, the dust figures 
were not formed. This tube was dispensed with and another tube 
14.9 cm. long and 0.85 cm. in diameter was used. Bust figures 
were formed as soon as the tube was placed in the energy path. 
Tubes of various lengths and diameters were experimented with, 
but though a large number of readings were taken, no satis¬ 
factory results were procured. 

It wasnoticed that the dimensions of the tube had a 
marked effect on the dust figures. In the process of using 
tubes of varying lengths and diameters it appeared that standing 
waves of much greater wave-length than those required for ultra¬ 
sonic frequencies were superimposed on the existing ultra-sonic 

! R. J. Lang: High frequency Vibrations and 
Elastic Modulus of Metal Bars. 













' 

■ 

' 


' 






















35 


waves, and the position and size of the superimposed waves 
seemed to depend on the dimensions of the tubes used. And the 
figures were formed even when the tube was held at right angles 
to the direction of the beam. These results have been reserved 
for future investigations, but they are not published here. 
Observations of Other Investigators Using Kundt T s Method . 

A publication by Karl Dorsing 1 refers to the deter¬ 
mination of the velocity of sound in water when using a modi¬ 
fication of Kundt*s tube. In his first attempts he met with 
difficulties in determining the velocities, which difficulties 
were subsequently removed when the resonant vibrations of the 
walls of the tube were considered. He found that in order to 
obtain Kundt* s figures it was necessary to excite the source 
of sound in exact resonance with the tube used, for if the 
period of oscillations of the glass and of the water at the 
point of contact were different the water oscillations could not 
produce the dust figures. 

Dorsing* gives a formula for determining the velocity 
of sound in a limited mass of liquid which applies in particular 
cases. 



where u s velocity of sound in the limited mass 
of liquid, 

v - velocity in the tube, 
r - radius of tube, 
d - thickness of wall of tube, 

E - elastic coefficient of the tube, 
p s density of the liquid. 


T Annalen der Physik IY, 25, p. 227. 


































‘ 












' 


















36 - 


The wave-lengths of the superimposed figures in the 
present investigation seem to indicate the presence of resonant 
vibrations with frequencies much lower than the ultra-sonic fre¬ 
quencies. This effect may he produced by resonant vibrations 
occurring in the tube walls as suggested by Dorsing T s work or 
by low frequency, resonant, oscillations in the water column. 

Lamb 1 has shorn that the yielding of the walls produces 
an appreciable effect; the wave-length is lowered. If C Q be the 
theoretical velocity of sound in a liquid, and C the actual 
velocity, it is found that in the case of tubes with small wall 
thickness h that 

C 2 s c o" 

VrZ Ka/hE 


where a s internal radius 

K - volume elasticity of the liquid 

E - value of Young 1 s Modulus for the 
material of the tube. 

In the case of water where K s 2,22 x 10 1 ®, contained 

in a glass tube for which E - 6.03 x 10 11 and whose thickness 

is 0.1 of the radius, C - 0.759 C 0 . When the walls are very 

thick - , where p. - rigidity. Since u for glass 

C 0 ^ ” K+jl 7 7 

is approximately 10 times K for water a diminution of about 
3fo in the wave-length would result. 

ho further attempts were made to determine the ultra¬ 
sonic velocity by the above method. 


’Lamb: Dynamical Theoiy of Sound, p. 173 








37 


Velocity Determination by Listening Method * 

The transmitter was now placed 60 cm. from a reflect¬ 
ing wall. The listening detector device, consisting of the 
mica-walled capsule attached to a stethescope as described 
before, was fastened to a wooden frame and could be moved hori¬ 
zontally between the transmitter and reflector. Adjustments 
of the position of the detector were made until distinct 
maximum and minimum points were noted by the maximum and mini¬ 
mum sounds in the stethescope. As already described these maxi¬ 
mum and minimum points forming the standing waves ?/ere produced 
by the meeting of the advancing and reflected tonic trains of 
ultra-sonic waves. The listening device was moved through a 
known distance and the number of maximum points noted. From 
this the number of half wave-lengths were obtained and the 
wave-length determined. The electrical frequency was read from 
the Hertzian wave meter and attached curve. This was also the 
frequency of the ultra-sonic wave. The velocity of the ultra¬ 
sonic wave in water was then calculated from the relation V - nA . 
The readings with the calculated results are given in Table V. 

The results were satisfactory for they gave an idea of the 
approximate value of the velocity required. 
































' 





























38 


TABLE V. 


Tempera¬ 

ture 

°C. 

Wave- 

Length 

cm. 

Frequency of 
Oscillation 
^/sec. 

Velocity 
cm. /sec. 
x 10 5 

15.35 

3.70 

40,700 

1.50 

15.35 

3.446 

43,700 

1.50 

14.85 

3.104 

48,000 

1.49 


U. B. The values of the wave-length given in Tables Y, YII, 


VIII, 12, and Z, are the average values of a number of readings. 









































- 39 - 


The "Dust Figure" Method, 

Up to this point a large body of water constituted 
the medium, hut thereafter a much smaller body was used. A 
small wooden tank, 4 1 x 10" x 12" deep, was used with a glass 
window running the length of one side of the tank. A lead plate 
0.25 cm. thick and of cross-sectional dimensions slightly less 
than those of the tank was used as a reflector. The mica disc 
listening detector device already described served to Investigate 
the effects in the ultra-sonic beam, together with another 
method, which hereafter will be called the Method of the "Dust 
Figure." 

If a fine dust be sprinkled on the surface of the water 
in which standing waves are formed, the particles as they pass 
through the energy field will be driven into nodal regions and 
swept out of those more agitated. Placing horizontally a flat 
rectangular piece of glass, or tray, at the bottom of the energy 
beam, these dust particles fall in curtains in the regions of 
minimum disturbance, and during the action the falling particles 
form parallel curtains plainly visible through the glass side 
of the tank. They settle in lines on the tray, which lines are 
the trace of the nodal planes. Figure 15 shows such an arrange¬ 
ment. Since the nodal planes are one half wave-length apart, 

if the frequency is known the velocity can be determined. 

Different dust materials were used for this experiment. 


including coal cinders, coal dust, silt, cement and powdered 






- 40 


sodium carbonate. Coal cinders sifted through a 40-mesh sieve 
and caught on a 60-mesh sieve were found to give the most 
satisfactory results when the liquid used was water. 

Velocity Determination Using a, Smaller Quantity of Liquid . 

In the experiments to date these two methods have 
been employed to determine the velocity of ultra-sonic waves 
in liquids, namely, (1) the listening method, and (2) the dust 
figure method. In the experiments when water was used, or a 
solution with water as a solvent, the quantity of liquid did 
not have to be considered. However, if different liquids are 
to be used, a method is necessary in which only a small amount 
of the liquid is required, for the sake of economy. And further, 
the dust in the dust method tends to make a liquid murky after 
three or four trials, so that the first attempts were made only 
with the listening device. 

In the experiments where only a small quantity of 
liquid was available, a small metal tank of the following 
dimensions was built: 76.5 cm. long 6 cm. wide x 8 cm. deep 
with a bay at one end, 14 cm. square x 12 cm. deep. A pile-of- 
plates quartz transmitter was placed in the bay and a plate of 
steel, 1 cm. thick, acted as a reflector of the waves. 

Experiments were performed to check up the difference, 
if any, between the velocities as determined using a larger 
body of the liquid and those that were determined using the 
smaller tank. The transmitter oscillated at approximately 
















































- 41 - 


80,000 cycles per second and dust was allowed to fall through- 
the energy beam. Velocities thus obtained for water varied 
from 1.5 x 10® cm* per sec. to 1*80 x 10^ cm. per sec. But in 
the majority of cases the velocity was in the neighborhood of 
1.5 x 10®. In one case distilled water was used and the average 
velocity was 1.50 x 10 . The results indicate that if the width 
of the beam is small the results are approximately the same as 
those obtained using the larger body of water. But it must 
be noticed that if the beam is wide enough to strike the tank 
sides or if the side beams from the transmitter strike the 
tank sides, reflections into the main beam cause a complication 
and distortion. The arrangement of the dust figures will not then 
be regular, and thus an error is possible in determining the 
distance between nodes. However, it was easily seen in the 
experiments when conditions were unsuitable for reliability. 

Method Using a Vertical Column with histening Detector Device . 

An attempt was made to design an apparatus to meet the 
requirements stated above, namely, a small body of liquid, and 
at the same time avoid the use of dust particles. A cylindrical 
glass jar, 40 cm. long and volume of 2,000 c. cm. had rigidly 
attached to one end the small transmitter, and the whole was 
placed in a vertical position. See Figure 16. The hollow 
brass tube AB, with a mica diaphragm fixed at one end free to 
vibrate and the other end connected with the stethescope, could 
be lowered and raised gradually through the vertical column of 


















. 

















































































42 


liquid. A pointer attached to the holder moved over a fixed 
scale. The liquid surface was the reflector. Readings were 
obtained using tap water. It was observed that the surface of 
the liquid changed slightly in position; for as the listening tube 
was pushed further into the liquid, more liquid was displaced and 
the surface was raised thus changing the position of the reflector 
and the position of nodes and loops. Also the motion of the surface 
disturbed the regularity and symmetry of the standing waves. 
Therefore, it was advisable to discard the surface of the liquid 
as a reflector and instead use a solid metal reflector so placed 
that it would always be completely immersed. Different lengths 
of columns were chosen by varying the position of the reflector. 

In one set of experiments a saline solution of 1.025 
density was used as liquid and velocity obtained using various 
length of columns. The maximum and minimum points were clear and 
distinct and the results obtained very satisfactory. From 1200 
to 1400 c.c. of liquid were found to give the best results. See 
Table YI. 

TABLE VI. 


Temperature Frequency of Voltage across Y/ave- 

°C. Oscillations. Transmitter. Length. 


Velocity 
x 10 5 


14.3 

43,400 

4,200 

3.66 

1.58 

13.4 

45,000. 

3,450 

3. 53 

1.59 

13.7 

44,800 

4,200 

3. 60 

1.61 

15.4 

45,700 

4,700 

3.42 

1.56 

15.6 

45,300 

4,500 

3.45 

1.56 








43 


When a 95% solution of ethyl alcohol was the liquid 
under consideration it was found that the regularity of the 
loops and nodes had disappeared. In the liquid column a very 
few, two or three, loops could he detected in order, then would 
follow a group similarly placed, hut furnishing an arrangement 
different from the first group. Then would come another gioup 
similar to the first, then a fourth similar to the second. In 
certain arrangements an audible whistle note was easily heard. 

There are two possible, obvious, causes for the above 
discrepancies. First, electrical harmonics in the oscillating 
circuit, and second, mechanical harmonics of the transmitter. 
Further readings were procured and attempts made to locate the 
electrical harmonics. The readings were similar to the above- 
mentioned set, and the work brought the undoubted conclusion 
that harmonics interfered with the regular arrangement of 
standing waves. Electrical harmonics, when they were present, 
could be detected by the wavemeter. If there are harmonics, 
either electrical or mechanical, then there will be in the 
column complicated interference of sets of advancing and reflect¬ 
ing waves; that is there will be a superposition of sets of waves 
giving an arrangement as noted. However, if these harmonics are 
eliminated there will be the regular interference of advancing 
and reflected ?/aves, giving the regular form of standing waves. 
The conclusion is that if the electrical generating device is 
adjusted, or an electrical filter used, so as to give a pure note, 













































- 44 - 


and if mechanical harmonics are also eliminated, then this method 
of a short vertical column of liquid with a listening tube is 
quite suitable to determine the velocity of the waves, The 
readings obtained with the saline solution were satisfactory 
because no harmonics were present and a pure note prevailed. 

The transmitter used had a resonant frequency of approximately 
90,000; using a frequency lower than 70,000 it was noted that the 
effect of harmonies became apparent. 

The method is not so reliable as the dust figure method, 
for, on account of having to locate the nodes and loops by a 
listening device, the holder of which occupies a space of over 
1 cm. , it is obvious that the frequency must be relatively low 
in order to obtain a half wave-length that will be large enough 
to make the error in measurement small. 

But even in the dust figure method, if the beam is 
wide enough for intense portions of it to strike the sides of 
the tank, or if the side beams strike the sides there are re¬ 
flections into the main beam from the sides of the tank, which 
produce an irregular and distorted arrangement of the maximum and 
minimum regions of sound intensity, and lead to irregular measure¬ 
ments of the distance between successive nodes or loops. For 
satisfactory results when using this device, the following con¬ 
ditions must prevail: the frequency of the wave must be low; 
there must be no harmonics either electrical or mechanical ; and 
the beam must be narrow. 










■ 














. 














//<?. / 8 . 


















45 


Figure 17 gives an idea of the arrangement of the 
dust particles when measurements are not taken, conditions 
for obtaining stationary waves being poor. Figure 18 shows the 
arrangement when measurements are taken. Generally the arrange¬ 
ment was much better than the figure indicates. 







46 


PART II. 

MEASUREMENT OF VELOCITY 
AFD 

ADIABATIC COMPRESSIBILITY OF FLUIDS. 


The ease and accuracy with ?/hich ultra-sonic waves 
are generated and handled enables the methods described in 
Part I (c) to be used effectively, first, to determine the 
velocity of ultra-sonic waves in fluids, and second, to determine 
the adiabatic compressibility of fluids. 

Measurement of Ultra-Sonic Waves in City Tap Water . 

This measurement was carried out in a large tank of 
water. Table V, page 37, shows the readings and calculated 
results. 

Change of Velocity with Change of Temperature . 

Experiments were carried out to show the change in 
velocity of ultra-sonic waves with change of temperature of the 
medium. Both the listening and dust figure method were employed. 
City tap water was used in a tank 4 ! x 10” x 12” deep. The 
readings and results of this experiment are found in Table VII. 
Figure 19 represents the velocity plotted as a function of the 
temperature. 
















1 













1-53 


(MM 

OF 

w/rt 

fyst/tt /9 

r St/OWJNG CHfftfSFM \£lOC/TY 
VlTF/hSO/1/C WAVES//f W/7TEF 

1CHMGF OF TFFIFFF/mJFF . 







130 



* Di/S/- flff/IOD 
o Z/S/EF/F^ /iFfHOP 








V> 

§ 

X 

S' ms 










a 

r 

§ 

$ 

.1 

* o 

X 

o _-o 

T'o ; 

V -C 

'- o o 

c 

or 








X 

k 

$ 

AM 
























< 

r 

i- 8 ^ 


> u j 

Tsmpefft 

o w / 

/FF-°C. 





o" 































































47 


TABLE VII. 


Listening Tube Method * 

n _ frequency of oscillation. 

V Z velocity of ultra-sonic energy. 

A s ultra-sonic wave length. 

N s maximum number of successive nodes measured. 
L = distance occupied hy U half wave lengths. 


Tempera¬ 
ture °C. 

n cycles/sec 

IT 

L 

ems. 

Average 

A cms. 

V 

cms./sec. 

0.7 

80,000 

35 

30.6 

1.75 

141,000 

1.5 

79,500 

36 

32.0 

1.77 

141,000 

2.1 

79,500 

30 

26.8 

1.79 

143,000 

2.7 

79,500 

27 

24.1 

1.79 

142,000 

3.4 

79,500 

20 

18.0 

1.80 

143,000 

3.9 

79,500 

30 

27.9 

1.80 

143,000 

4.65 

79,200 

33 

28.8 

1.80 

143,000 

4.85 

79,700 

20 

18.0 

1.81 

144,000 

5.45 

79,200 

41 

37.0 

1.80 

143,000 

5.9 

79,700 

36 

32.4 

1.80 

144,000 

7.0 

79,200 

40 

35.9 

1.81 

143,000 

11.0 

79,200 

40 

36.6 

1.83 

146,000 

14.9 

79,200 

16 

14.8 

1.86 

147,000 

19.9 

79,700 

40 

37.5 

1.87 

149,000 

Lust Eigure Method 


0.8 

79,500 

41 

36,9 

1.78 

142,000 

1.75 

80,200 

20 

17.5 

1.75 

140,000 

2.3 

7f, 500 

30 

27.1 

1.80 

141,000 

3.9 

79,500 

27 

34.4 

1.81 

144,000 

4.0 

79,200 

26 

23.7 

1.79 

142,000 

4.4 

79,700 

35 

31.6 

1.81 

144,000 

6.7 

79,200 

14 

12.8 

1.83 

145,000 

7.1 

79,200 

18 

16.2 

1.80 

143,000 


79,700 ^ 

79,200 7947n> 

30. 

31^° 

28.6 '7 

1.83, 

1.84 

145,000 

146,000 

15.1 

79,700 

55 

51.0 

1.85 

148,000 

20.0 

79,700 

45 

42.3 

1.88 

149,000 


cnrd 



















































































































































































































































































































- 48 - 


Velocity in Salt Solution of Various Densities , 

The change of the velocity in a salt solution with 
change of concentration was investigated. Table VIII gives the 
readings obtained. Figure 20 shows the velocity plotted as a 
function of the density of the solution. The average temperature 
was 17° C. There is a decided change in velocity with change in 
concentration and this may account for the change in velocity of 
the ultra-sonic waves in tap water used at different times of the 
year. At one time there may be a different quantity of salts in 
solution from that found at another time of the year. 

TABLE VIII. 

Listening Tube Method . 


Specific 

Gravity. 

n 

cyeles/sec. 

IT 

L 

cms. 

Average 

A cms. 

V 

cms./sec. 

1.000 

80,200 

34 

31.4 

1.84 

147,800 

1.010 

80,200 

30 

28,0 

1.86 

148,800 

1.010 

80,200 

30 

28.1 

1.88 

150,100 

1.018 

80,200 

30 

28.4 

1.88 

150,300 

1.0E7 

80,400 

30 

28.5 

1.90 

152,100 

1.032 

80,400 

40 

38.1 

1.91 

153,700 

1.036 

80,400 

28 

27.0 

1.93 

154,200 

1.042 

80,400 

40 

38.7 

1.93 

155,200 

1.046 

80,600 

50 

48.8 

1.94 

156,000 

Bust Figure Method 


1.000 

80,200 

50 

46.6 

1.85 

148,000 

1.018 

80,200 

54 

51.2 

1.90 

152,000 

1.021 

80,000 

40 

37.6 

1.90 

152,000 

1.032 

80,400 

40 

38.6 

1.92 

154,000 

1.036 

80,200 

29 

30.0 

1.93 

154,000 

1.042 

80,400 

30 

29.0 

1.92 

155,000 





































































- 49 


Velocity Change with. Change of Temperature-- 

Salt Solution, Density 1.025 gms./c.c. 

The change of velocity of ultra-sonic waves in a salt 
solution of constant density with change of temperature was 
studied and the results are tabulated in Table IX. Figure 21 
shows graphically the relation between the two. The points 
forming the curve were arrived at in a manner similar to those 


in the graph showing change of velocity in water with change of 
temperature. See above. 


TABLE IX. 


Listening Tube Method. 


Tempera¬ 
ture °C. 

n 

cycles/see. 

IT 

L 

cms. 

Average 

)\ cms. 

V 

cms./sec. 

0.2 

80,200 

50 

45.1 

1.80 

144,000 

1.9 

80,200 

50 

45.4 

1.81 

145,000 

3.3 

80,600 

50 

45.9 

1.82 

146,000 

4.9 

80,600 

40 

36.5 

1.82 

147,000 

5.4 

80,600 

40 

36.7 

1.85 

149,000 

5.7 

80,200 

50 

46.0 

1.83 

147,000 

8.8 

80,200 

50 

46.7 

1.86 

149,000 

10.0 

80,400 

50 

46.4 

1.85 

149,000 

11.6 

80,200 

50 

46.3 

1.87 

150,000 

13.6 

80,900 

50 

47.0 

1.88 

151,000 

14.7 

80,200 

40 

37.7 

1.89 

151,000 

17.7 

80,900 

40 

37.9 

1.89 

152,000 

19.1 

80,600 

40 

37.9 

1.91 

154,000 

24.0 

80.400 

39 

37.2 

1.92 

154,000 


Lust Figure Method 


0.3 

80,200 

47 

42.9 

1.83 

146,000 

2.0 

80,200 

30 

27.4 

1.83 

147,000 

2.4 

80,200 

43 

41.3 

1.83 

146,000 

4.1 

80,200 

30 

27.7 

1.84 

147,000 

8.9 

80,200 

25 

23.6 

1*88 

150,000 

9.3 

80,200 

40 

37.7 

1.90 

152,000 

10.1 

80,400 

40 

37.2 

1.85 

149,000 

11.5 

80,200 

29 

27.3 

1.88 

150,000 

13.6 

80,400 

48 

37.2 

1.85 

149,000 

14.8 

80,200 

40 

38.0 

1.91 

152,000 

17.7 

80,400 

40 

38.2 

1.91 

153,000 

19.6 

80,600 

40 

38.5 

1.92 

155,000 

23.8 

80,400 

50 

48.1 

1.92 

155,000 





















. 


















































































- 




- 

- 


. 









- 

. 

; ; 

■ 

* 










- 50 


Velocity of Ultra-Sonic Waves in the following Liquids: 

Salt Solution. Ethyl Alcohol, Methyl Alc oh ol, Transformer Oil. 

In Part I (c) the two methods for determining the 
velocity of ultra-sonic waves in liquids were described and the 
merits and demerits of each noted. On account of the difficulty 
there experienced in the listening method, the following experi¬ 
ments were carried out using the dust method exclusively and con¬ 
fining the liquid to a horizontal column about 30 cms. long. The 
small pile-of-plates transmitter was used as the source of ultra¬ 
sonic energy. 

The following table gives the readings obtained with 
the calculated results: 

TABLE X. 


Voltage Wave- Frequency of Velocity Tempera- 

across Length Oscillation cm./sec. ture 

Transmitter cm. rv/sec.*°C. 



Salt 

Solution—Density 

1.025 grns./c. c. 



3700 

1.66 

95,700 

158,900 

15.4 


3600 

1.643 

96,700 

158,900 

15.7 


3300 

1.388 

113.000 

156,900 

15.8 



Ethyl Alcohol--95% l 

Solution. 



3100 

1.118 

113,000 

126,300 

16.4 


3900 

1.328 

97,200 

129,100 

15.6 


3200 

1.565 

85.200 

133.300 

15.2 


Methyl Alcohol 

3600 

1.257 

99,300 

124,800 

17.3 


3650 

1.283 

98,900 

126,900 

16.3 


3650 

1.057 

118,700 

125,500 

15.5 


3600 

1.033 

118,700 

122,600 

14.9 


3300 

0.835 

142,400 

118,900 

14.0 


Transformer Oil 

3800 

1.75 

85,000 

148,900 

18.7 


4200 

2.0 

76,400 

152,800 

18.7 


3300 

1.39 

112,600 

156,300 

19.2 


4300 

1.61 

97,600 

157,300 

19.6 
























r 

. 














- 51 


Stephenson, in the Physical Review, Volume 21, 

Second Series, No. 2., page 184, states his results in regard 
to the velocity of sound in seawater. He found that with a 
3.35$ salinity and temperature of -0.3° C., the average 
velocity of sound in seawater was equal to 1453.3 meters per 
second. According to curve shown in Figure 21, the velocity 
of the ultra-sonic energy at -0.3° C. is 1445.0 meters per 
second in a salt solution of 1.025 specific gravity. 

It will "be noticed in Table X that there is a decrease 
in the velocity of the ultra-sonic waves with an increase in 
frequency. This is particularly noticeable in the experiment 
with methyl alcohol, where a high frequency of 142,400 was 
chosen to study the effect. 

In the ease of transformer oil, it was noted during 
the experiment that with a high frequency (113,500 cycles per 
second) that the energy of the beam was dissipated and no 
stationary waves were formed with a 30 cm. column, but the 
temperature assumed a decided increase. However, with a 14 cm. 
column the ultra-sonic energy was great enough to form the 
required standing waves. 

Also there was the stiggested effect of the viscosity 
of the liquid diminishing the velocity as the frequency became 
highe r. 


















. 



























- 52 


Adiabatic Compressibility . 

The formula Y , where Y - velocity of the wave in 

a medium, E - the modulus of adiabatic compressibility of the 
medium, d - density, enables us to determine the adiabatic com¬ 
pressibility of the liquids used above, namel , water, salt 
solution, ethyl alcohol, methyl hydrate, and transformer oil. 

The density of each was determined by the specific gravity bottle 
method and the hydrometer method. The velocities used were the 
averages of those noted in Tables Y and X. 

In the following table are found the calculated results 
for bulk modulus, compressibility per bar (i.e., 10 6 dynes per 
sq. cm. ) and compressibility per atmosphere for the above-men¬ 
tioned liquids. 

TABLE XI. 


Av.Vel.of 

Liquid Density u. s.waves Av. Tern- Bulk Comp.C. Cornp.C. 

gms./c.c. in liquid perature Modulus per bar per atm. 

cm. / sec. 2£j .x lO 1 ^ x 10° x 10° 


Water 

1.000 

150,000 

Salt 

Solution 

1.025 

158,200 

Ethyl 

Alcohol 

0.896 

129,600 

Methyl 

Alcohol 

0.819 

124,900 

Trans. 

Oil 

0.879 

153,700 


15.0 

2.25 

44.4 

44.9 

15.6 

2.56 

39.1 

39.6 

15.7 

1.354 

73.8 

74.7 

16.0 

1.278 

78.3 

79.2 

19.0 

2.076 

48.1 

48.7 








' 






























































53 


Another observer Tyer 1 has determined the adiabatic 
compressibility of liquids by a static method in which he has 
subjected the liquids contained in a suitable vessel to a change 
in pressure of about one atmosphere, and then measured the 
volume change before any of the heat produced in compression was 
lost. In the case of water he found the adiabatic compressi¬ 
bility to be 46.81 x 10 ~ 6 at 14.12° C. and in the case of 
ethyl alcohol 93.80 x 10“ 6 at 15.52° C. (The compressibility 
is expressed per atmosphere.) He has no results for comparison 
with salt solution, methyl alcohol, or transformer oil, but there 
is fair agreement between his results and those given here in 
the case of water. 

Conclusions. 

Though the velocity of ultra-sonic energy is not greatly 
affected by the frequency of vibration, there is a slight sug¬ 
gestion of a diminishing velocity with increasing frequency. 

This would be due to the viscosity of the liquid. 

The experimental error due to measurements was about 2$; 
the frequency was measured by a Hertzian wavemeter, which was 
subject to an error of 1.5 fo, giving a total experimental error 
of about 3.5 fo. If the velocity in water at ordinary temperature 
is chosen it is found that the average value over the range of 
frequencies used here is in the neighborhood of 150,000 cm./sec. 

1 Journal of Chemical Society, C III, 

Pt. 2, Transactions, 1913, p. 1682. 








54 


and the greatest deviation is not over 4000 cm./sec. This 
represents an error of nearly 3%, which is about the order of 
the experimental error. 

The possible error in either method is about 5.5$. 

The curve shows that the velocity of ultra-sonic energy in 
pure water varies from 141,400 cm./sec. at 0° C. to 149,800 
cm./sec. at 20°C., giving a variation of 5.9$. The variation 
in density of water over this range is 0.2%. The change in 

velocity must then be due chiefly to a change of the elasticity 
of the liquid. 

In the temperature gradient experiment a large number 
of readings ?;ere taken in the neighborhood of 4° 0. Water at 
this temperature has its maximum density and it was thought 
that there might be a change in the elastic properties which 
would be indicated by a change in the ultra-sonic velocity. 
Ho?/ever, no marked change was noted. 

The addition of a small percentage of salt increases 
the velocity to a marked extent. This very likely accounts 
for the discrepancies in the velocities in tap water deter¬ 
mined at various times of the year when there is a variation 
in the nature of the impurities in tap water. 

The velocity determination by the ultra-sonic method 

is more accurate in the case of sea water than that determined 
under actual sea conditions, for in the ultra-sonic method 
the mass of water is of such dimensions that the temperature 






















_ 

' 

. 









■ 

. 










55 


is the same throughout, whereas such a condition cannot he 
obtained in the measurement at s ea. 

In regard to the adiabatic compressibilities, there 
are variations from the results of other observers; and this 
is noted in the case of Tyrer 1 , who is the latest to do work 
of this kind. But a comparison of the two methods leads one 
to believe that the method here employed furnishes a means 
of getting more satisfactory results with a smaller chance 
for errors. 


1 Journal of Chemical Society, C III, 
Pt. 2, Transactions, 1913, p. 1682. 





















■ 























