For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 

STUDIES ON THE CLEANING 
OF FINE COAL 
BY A D.S.M. CYCLONE 


T. E. MORIMOTO 


















































0X UBBMi 














UNIVERSITY OF ALLARTA 
LILA ARY 


Regulations Ra[, n ding TtioSoS anc. J'Issor tations 

Typescript copies of theses and dissertations for Raster's 
and doctor's degrees deposited in the Unive-3 sity of Alberta 

, as the fficial Copy of tl c iculty of G-raduat l tudies, 
m ult ad ii 1 the - t . 1 ence I 3a In Ro Dm only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
work was done. Some apartments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the inter library loan 
service of ti University of alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
r< ar to priority rights of the author. dritten permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
Unive Lty of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 

:1 permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
pub1ished work. 

This, thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed belot, The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user. 


Please sign below: 


Date 


Signature 


Ins titution 








































































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https ://arch i ve. org/detai Is/mori moto 1952 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


STUDIES ON THE CLEANING OF FINE COAL 
BY A D*S.M# CYCLONE 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ENGINEERING 

DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICAL AND PETROLEUM ENGINEERING 


by 

THOMAS E* MORIMOTO 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 
APRIL, 1952 














. . . 




























. 













University of Alberta 


Faculty of Engineering 

Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled B Studies on the Cleaning of 
Fine Coal by a D*S*M* Cyclone”, submitted by Thomas Eiichi 
Morimoto, B«3c*, in partial fulfilment of the requirements 
for the degree of Master of Science* 



Date ??*.!??? 









r : 



















PREFACE AM) ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The investigations described in this thesis were 
conducted in the laboratories of the Research Council of 
Alberta, under the supervision of Mr* W. A. Lang, Senior 
Research Chemist. The work was carried out under the direction 
of a committee composed of Dr* G. ¥* Govier of the Department 
of Chemical Engineering of the University of Alberta, Dr. K. A. 
Clark of the Department of Mining and Metallurgy of the Univer¬ 
sity of Alberta and Mr* W. A* Lang of the Research Council of 
Alberta. Sincere appreciation is extended to the members of 
the committee for their helpful advice and guidance during the 
course of this work. 

The author also wishes to extend his sincere thanks 
to the many members of the staff of the Research Council of 
Alberta who have so generously given of their time and assist¬ 


ance, 























' 













gM? 0‘ b I' •' o 








' Q 

* 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

The Problem........ 1 

Abstract...2 

I Introduction •. 5 

II Review of Coal Cleaning Processes ••••••...•••••••••• 7 

Wet Processes • •. ...•••«•.«•••.••••••••...• 9 

Jig Washers ...•••• .9 

Heavy Media Washers • •«.10 

Deep-Bath Types ...........••.••••.. 12 

Shallow-Bath Types 13 

Other Heavy-Media Processes lU 

Classifier-Type of Washers ••••••.••••«••••«•• . 16 

Trough or Launder Washers •«• • •. ••••••.•••..« 17 

Wet Concentrating Tables 19 

Humphreys Spiral 20 

Froth Flotation ••«•••••••••••••••• .22 

Pneumatic Processes 2k 

Pneumatic Table 2h 

Pneumatic Jig.. ..... 25 

Stephens-Adams on Air-Sand Cleaner .••••«••••••• .. 25 

III Theory..... 28 

Settling Velocity. 29 

The Effect of Particle Shape •••....•..•..•••.••••..o.•••... 32 

Separation Due to Difference in Density . 3k 

Hindered Settling 36 

Separation Using Centrifugal Force .. 37 

IV Review of Literature and Theory of Cyclone Washer .. kO 

V Methods Used for Evaluating Coal-Washing Performance ••••••••• U6 

Float-Sink Analysis... •••«•••• . hi 

Fraser-Iancey Efficiency .. 51 

Tromp Distribution Curve .. *•••• 53 

Anderson Efficiency. 57 

Probable Error •••••.•••••• .. 63 

Driessen Error Area ....... 6h 

Area Efficiency. 65 

Discussion of Various Methods of Evaluating ... 66 

Coal-Washing Performance 

VI Object and Scope of Present Investigation 67 


























































Table of Contents (cont t d) 

Page 

VII Experimental Equipment and Procedure.•. ••••••••••• 70 

Description of D.S.M* Cyclone ....• •. ••••••••••••• 71 

Description of E^erimental Equipment •••••*••• . «• 72 

Experimental Procedure •••••. .•.. 73 

Initial Magnetite Recovery Procedure ..... 73 

Final Magnetite Recovery Procedure •••••••••.•• ... 7k 

Operating Variables Investigated .. •••••••••••.. 75 

Underflow Opening Diameter and Specific Gravities of 

Magnetite Medium used for Experiments ••••••.•••••••«• 77 

Types of Underflow Discharge ...... 76 

Coal Used..... 78 

Medium Used ••.••.••••••••••••••••••• ..... 7 9 

VIII Results and Interpretation of Results •.•••••••••••••«••••••••• 80 

A. Influence of Operating Variables on Cyclone Performance • 81 

1* Pulp Ratio of the Slurry ........ 81 

2. Specific Gravity Composition of the Feed • •. . 83 

3* Particle Size of the Feed • •. ... 88 

B. Influence of Size of Underflow-opening and Specific Gravity 

of Medium on the Apparent Efficiency of Cleaning •... 92 

1# Specific Gravity of Separation •••••••••••••••••••••••• 9h 

(i) Previous Work •••••.•••••••«••••• .. 9k 

(ii) Present Investigation .. ••••••••• 99 

2. Error Area...... 103 

3. Probable Error..... •••••••• XOS 

U. Fraser-Yancey Efficiency ••••• .. 111 

5. Anderson Efficiency •••••••. •••••••••••• Ilk 

6. Recapitulation and Discussion...... 11 5 

IX Conclusions.lip 









































- 1 - 


THE PROBLEM 


The general problem was the cleaning of fine coal. Following 
a literature survey of coal-cleaning processes attention was centred on 
the D.S.M. cyclone washer. The problem was then divided into two phases. 
In the first phase the influence of various operating variables on the 
washing performance of the cyclone were to be investigated. In the 
second phase, the various means of judging coal-cleaning performance 
were to be studied to ascertain their behaviour when the specific 
gravity of separation was increased by varying the size of the cyclone 
underflow-opening and the specific gravity of the medium. 




; • r. < 


c > 




; .r 


r ■ 


r : •) >' 


'i ' v' • V.' n i 


, j' 




r 


O t r : 


) 


>~i;< .i. 




ABSTRACT 


The general problem was the cleaning of fine coal. An 
extensive literature survey of coal-cleaning processes was made; follow¬ 
ing this, studies were begun on a three-inch D.S.M. cyclone washer. 
Experiments were performed in which fine bituminous coal (10- to 100-mesh) 
was mixed with a suspension of magnetite and water and pumped throu^i 
the cyclone. 

In the first phase of the investigation, the influence of 
the operating variables of pulp ratio of the feed slurry, specific 
gravity composition of the feed and particle size of the feed coal 
were studied. The cyclone was operated with a 0.78 square inch feed 
inlet area, 1.03 inch overflow diameter, 13.5 p.s.i.g. inlet feed 
pressure, 1.30 specific gravity medium and the size of the underflow 
opening adjusted to give ratios of underflow to overflow-opening area 
between 0.31 and 0.41. A pulp ratio of six-to-one was used for all 
of the experiments except those to determine the influence of pulp 
ratio. 

Satisfactory cleaning was accomplished with a pulp ratio 
as low as four-to-one. A high error area of 86 and low Fraser-Xancey 
efficiency of 93.4$ resulted with the three-to-one pulp ratio; with 
pulp ratios between four-to-one and eight-tc-one, error areas ranging 
from 47 to 71 and Fraser-Xancey efficiencies 97.2 to 98.3$ were obtained. 

The amount of material within i 0.10 specific gravity of 
the specific gravity of separation in the feed coal had no noticeable 
effect on washing effected by the cyclone. Error areas ranged from 





i 















. 


H* 







- 3 - 


29 to 46 and Fraser-Yancey efficiencies varied from 96*1 to 97. 5% 
for feeds with t 0.10 values between 25.6 and 9.8. 

Particle size of the feed had a very marked influence on the 
cyclone cleaning results. Washing was performed at higher specific 
gravities of separation with less efficiency on the finer sizes. The 
specific gravity of separation was 1.63 and Error Area 44 for the 
10- to 14-mesh fractions while these values were 1.84 and 84 respect¬ 
ively for the 65- to 100-mesh size fraction. 

In the second phase of the investigation, the influence of 
size of cyclone underflow opening and specific gravity of the medium 
on the specific gravity of separation. Error Area, Probable ^rror, 
Fraser-Yancey Efficiency and Anderson Efficiency were studied. 

It was shown that for washing performed by the cyclone the 
Error Area is not dependent upon the specific gravity of separation, 
which is itself dependent upon the cyclone underflow dimension and 
specific gravity of the medium. The Error Area, Probable Error, 

Fraser-Yancey Efficiency and Anderson Efficiency reacted differently 
when the cyclone dimensions and suspension specific gravity were varied. 
The Error Area and Probable Error gave similar results; the discrepancy 
between the two is likely due to the latter being an approximation of 
the former. The Fraser-Yancey and Anderson Efficiencies also gave 
similar results. However, the Error Area and Probable Error did not 
agree with the Fraser-Yancey and Anderson Efficiencies. The reason 
for this disagreement is due to the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency being a 
material balance on coal of a certain ash content whilst the Error 
Area and Probable Error show the sharpness of separation according to 


i;. 







■ 




i 











i ' 




l 








- 4 - 


specific gravity. 

It was demonstrated that a probable error greater than 
0.07 was not too great for satisfactory cleaning. 

The "Magnitude of Imperfection" was shown to be meaningless 
for separations performed by the cyclone. The method of transform¬ 
ation of the distribution curves into straight lines proposed by 

Cerchar investigators was not satisfactory for the cyclone separations. 

/? 

C77sc/e»cy /s se <7. 7%/s 7%oc/ /s y i ‘^ 

£rxsr /Qs'e# a ft <7 exf ftsses 77* “* s t< 

pcrae^e ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

'/aanKe ce*'7/**-e'7zrs, 





5 


I INTRODUCTION 




- 6 - 


A major problem of the bituminous coal industry today is 
that of reducing the ash content of the finer sizes (minus i-inch of 
coal. This problem is particularly acute in Alberta where the coals 

hate ra/ic/<*re.d -fr/a^/e. ctAcf £>e*h</s erf //r\f>tsrr 

have been intimately mixed with the clean material. These effects 
have been the result of tectonic movement, after deposition of the 
coal, in the mountain areas where the large deposits occur. As a 
consequence, most Alberta bituminous coals, as mined, contain a large 
proportion of fines and have a high ash content. In recent years, the 
advent of stripping operations and mechanized mining has further aggra¬ 
vated the situation. At the same time, the increasing competition from 
oil and natural gas is making it necessary for the coal operators to 
produce a cleaner coal. 

Realizing the importance of this problem to the Alberta 
coal industry, the Research Council of Alberta agreed to undertake 
research in this field. However, before deciding on the particular 
process for cleaning fine coal that would be investigated, a detailed 
literature survey was made of all the processes used for cleaning 
both coarse and fine coal. A summary of the information gained in 
this survey has been included in the first section of this thesis. 

As a result of the survey an investigation was begun into the 
possibilities of the D.S.M. cyclone washer recently developed at 
the “Dutch State Mines laboratories under M. G. Driessen. 





i ' ■/ ' . .1 









1 .]■ 




• , * 




1 ,; . 






) 






) 


-■ 




K 






1 


Li 















II REVIEW OF COAL-CLEANING PROCESSES 








- 8 - 


Practically all of the processes for cleaning coal (with 
the exception of froth flotation) depend on the fact that particles 
of shale or of the higher-ash, so-called bone coal have a higher 
density than the particles of clean coal* In other words, all of the 
processes depend on the principles of gravity concentration for making 
a separation between clean coal and high-ash bone coal or shale* 
Methods of coal washing have closely followed the development of con¬ 
centrating devices used for separating heavy minerals from their ores* 
However, because the difference in density between coal and shale is 
so much less than that between most heavy minerals and the gangue in 
their ores, cleaning coal is a more difficult proposition than that 
of concentrating heavy minerals* 

Nevertheless, the cleaning of coal larger than i-inch is 
not too difficult* Jigs give reasonably efficient separations if 
they are properly operated and the coal is suitably sized before 
treatment. In recent years heavy-media washers have come to the fore 
because of the very sharp separations which they are able to make* 
However, the cleaning of fine coal presents a much more formidable 
task* Jigs and heavy media washers are inefficient when used on fine 
coal and dry pneumatic equipment generally has proven to be unsatis¬ 
factory, especially when the feed is damp* Wet concentrating tables 
are said to give fair results on coal as small as 60 mesh but require 
a very large floor space. At present, froth flotation appears to be 
the only method of satisfactorily cleaning coal finer than 60 mesh but 
it has the disadvantage of high cost. 

There are two general classes of coal-cleaning methods. 
These are the wet processes and the dry pneumatic processes* The 




i • I 


t. . i . 


i l. . u . 




)Q 




- 9 - 


equipment for the wet processes may be subdivided into jigs, heavy 
media, classifier-type and trough-type washers, and wet tables* The 
chief dry methods consist of the pneumatic table, pneumatic jig and 
air-sand processes. 

WET PROCESSES 

Nearly all of the coal that is wet-washed in Alberta at 
present is treated by means of jigs, although one mine is using heavy- 
media separation for coarse coal and wet tables for treating some of 
the fine coal. As far as can be determined these are the only wet 
processes in operation in the province at this date. 

Jig Washers (8) 

Jigging is the stratification of a mass of solid particles 
by upward and downward pulsations. Hie stratification is usually 
effected in a rectangular open-top container having a perforated bottom 
through which the pulsations of water are applied to the materials to 
be separated. The process of jigging usually involves three steps: 

(1) the reception of the raw coal, (2) the stratification of the coal 
and refuse so that the refuse settles to the screen plate, and (5) the 
overflow of the cleaned coal and the withdrawal of the refuse collected 
on the screen. Pulsations are imparted to the water in the washbox by 
means of piston plungers or compressed air. In the plunger type, a 
piston plunger is placed beside a fixed screen. As the water is forced 
down by the plunger on one side, it is forced up through the screen 
on the other. The Baum-type jig has a fixed screen with a sealed 
chamber over the space occupied by the plunger in the plunger-type 
jig. Compressed air is admitted to this sealed chamber which forces 





- 10 - 


the water downward on one side and upward through the screen on the 
other side. The air is then exhausted and the water again flows down¬ 
ward through the screen plate and upward in the air chamber so that 
the cycle may again be completed. The Vissac is an air-operated 
pulsator jig in which air is alternately compressed and allowed to 
expand to produce the pulsations. At present in Alberta nearly all 
of the wet cleaning of coal is accomplished with either Uaum or 
Vissac jigs. 

Coal-clean lug tests were made with a Baum-type and Vissac 
jig by Yancey and Geer (48) (49) of the United States Bureau of Mines 
in 1938. It is difficult to compare the performance of the two jigs 
on the basis of these tests because the feed sizes were not the same; 
the feed for the Baum jig was minus 3-inch coal whilst that for the 
Vissac was 3 -to 1^-inch and lj- to 4 -inch. There seemed to be little 
to choose between the cleaning accomplished on the 3- to i-inch range. 
Since coal smaller than J-inch was not cleaned in the Vissac jig no 
comparison of the performance of the two types of jig on minus ^-inch 
coal can be made. 

Heavy-Media Washers (38) 

Heavy-media washers are sometimes called "float and sink” 
washers because they depend on the separation of heavy material from 
the clean coal by immersion of the raw feed in a heavy-medium bath; 
the higher ash material which has a density greater than that of the 
bath sinks, while the clean coal with a density less than that of the 
separating bath, floats. 





' 








u ' 




>j :0 Olt 




' t 
















{ 









- 11 - 


There are several different types of heavy-media washers, 
each of which uses a particular suspension and bath design. Bath de¬ 
signs can be divided generally into two classes, deep and shallow 
tank types. The deep tank baths are based on the separation occurring 
in the central zone of a deep body of liquid, so that displacement ef¬ 
fects are smoothed out in the large body of liquid available. The 
shallow tank processes depend upon a horizontal separation occurring 
progressively as the coal travels with the liquid along the tank. 

The distinguishing features of the two types, apart from actual size, 
are the flow conditions, and the methods of removing the refuse. The 
deep tanks are tapered downward from the separating zone to an outlet 
device (Chance and Cyanamid) or to an elevator boot (Barvoys and 
Tromp). These tanks are usually from 15 to £0 feet deep. The refuse 
has to settle through this depth of liquid and is usually then raised 
to discharge above the liquid level. The shallow type generally has 
a horizontal or inclined floor at the depth of separation (usually 
three to five feet). This floor may be traversed by a scraper as 
in the Dutch State Mines washer, or a rubber belt conveyor such as 
that used by the Ridley-Scholes process. With the Link-Belt washer 
the floor is a rotary drum. In the deep baths the tapering sides 
allow the refuse to be collected at the bottom of the tank at a central 
point. In the shallow-bath types the refuse settles on to the conveyor 
at any part of the floor area. There is thus a large area for depos¬ 
ition of the refuse which has only a short distance to sink. 

Little current is needed to maintain a uniform specific gravity 
with a stable medium such as that used in the Barvoys process, although 
a slight upward current is employed to help movement of the lighter 



- 12 - 


coal and suspended middlings. On the other hand, in order to main¬ 
tain the required specific gravity in the bath when using an unstable 
medium, the whole separating zone must be swept by current flow, 
either vertically as in the Chance, or horizontally as in the Tromp 
washer. Both stable and unstable suspensions are employed with the 
deep bath type of washer. Unstable suspensions cannot be used with 
the shallow tank types since the current flow, which is usually hor¬ 
izontal in washers of this class, does not prevent settling out of 
the suspension. 

Deep Bath Types - The Chance process (32) uses a suspension of 
sand and water in a conical-shaped bath. The suspension is unstable 
due to the size of the sand particles (48 to 150 mesh) and so upward 
currents are necessary to keep the sand in suspension. This instab¬ 
ility makes it rather difficult to attain a steady separating specific 
gravity with varying rates of feed and a large size range of feed 
coal particles. Medium recovery is fairly simple with this process 
due to the large grain size of the sand particles. 

The Barvoys process (32) uses a mixture of barytes, clay 
and water for a suspension. An advantage of this process is that 
the medium is reasonably stable in the bath so that an accurate 
separation is accomplished. The high density of the barytes simplifies 
the operation and control of the medium, but it is a rather costly 
material. Emphasis in this process is placed on stability in the 
separating bath and almost "theoretical’ 1 results over a wide range 
of densities can be achieved. The average particle size (90$ minus 
270 mesh) of the solids in the medium is much smaller than it is in 





v • ■ 


; 




j 


0 






! , . . 









- 13 - 


the Chance washer* 

The Tromp washer (7) is similar in principle to the Barvqys 
except for the middlings removal system and the material used as the 
suspension in the medium. In the Tromp process the middlings are 
removed by horizontal currents and an inclined scraper, whereas an 
upward current is utilized by the Barvoys washer. The Tromp system 
uses a finely-ground suspension of magnetite which is more stable than 
the coarse-sand medium of the Chance process but less stable than the 
barytes suspension of the Barvoys system. The equipment is designed 
to use the instability of the medium so that a low specific gravity 
layer exists at the top of the bath and a high specific gravity layer 
exists at the top of the bath and a high specific gravity layer at 
the bottom. Considerable circulation of heavy medium is required 
but less than if the system demanded the same specific gravity 
throughout the depth of the separator. 

The American Cyanamid process (28) utilizes a cone similar 
to that employed in the Chance washer. Finely-ground magnetite 
(90$ minus 325 mesh) in water is used as the medium and upward cur¬ 
rents are not required to keep the magnetite in suspension. The 
coal floats on the surface of the bath and is removed by overflowing 
a weir. Hie refuse sinking through the medium is continuously removed 
from the bottom of the cone by an air-lift. Magnetic separators are 
used for recovery of the magnetite. 

Shallow Bath Types - The Ridley-Scholes process (38), developed 
in England, uses a shallow bath of wedge shape with a rubber belt 
conveyor to remove the refuse from the floor of the bath. The 





- 14 - 


floating coal is discharged over a weir by paddles. The medium 
employed is mill-scale or iron ore which is rather coarse, being 80 
to 9C$ through 200 mesh. 

The Dutch State Mines washer is also a shallow bath type. 

It uses a suspension of loess in the water as the medium. Loess is 
a naturally occuring wind-blown material with a density of approx¬ 
imately 2.6 Horizontal currents are maintained by the motion of an 
endless scraper conveyor which removes refuse from the floor and 
clean coal from the surface of the bath. 

The Link-Belt process (7) was developed in co-operation 
with the American Cyanamid Co. whose magnetic recovery system is 
used to recover the magnetite which is used as the suspension in 
this washer. The separatory vessel consists of a drum within which 
is a revolving, lifting wheel with perforated flights. The feed enters 
at one end of the drum and the clean coal is floated across the sur¬ 
face of the bath to an outlet weir. Refuse drops to the bottom of 
the drum, is picked up by the lifting wheel and is discharged on 
to an outlet launder at the top of the vessel. 

Other Heavy Media Processes - The Lessing Washer (7) used a 
1.35 specific gravity solution of calcium chloride in a cone-type sep¬ 
arator and an upward current to maintain an effective specific gravity 
of about 1.5. The weak liquor washed off the coal was concentrated 
by heating it in a boiler and then passing it to a vacuum evaporator. 
The process gave very accurate separations and several plants of 
this type were built in England and Wales in 1928. They were abandoned 
after several years operation because of the high cost of the process. 






- 15 - 


The Belknap washer (7) employs a calcium chloride solution 
of a specific gravity much lower than the effective specific gravity 
which is maintained by mechanically induced upward currents. No 
attempt is made to remove all of the calcium chloride from the coal, 
so that a dustless, non-freezing product is obtained. It is stated 
that the size range that can be washed is limited to a four to one 
ratio between top and bottom sizes and three to one or two to one 
ratios are better. Several installations of this type of cleaner 
have been made in West Virginia and Virginia in the United States. 

The Du Pont process (7) uses organic liquids of high 
specific gravity as the heavy medium. Halogenated hydrocarbons 
such as pentachlorethane and tetrabromoethane are used as heavy 
liquids either separately or mixed depending on the specific gravity 
desired. The coal is pretreated with a wetting agent which places 
a thin film of water over the surface of each particle prior to its 
introduction into the heavy liquid. This water film prevents absorp¬ 
tion of the organic liquid by the coal during its passage through 
the separating tank. According to Mitchell (7) the losses of organic 
liquid run from five to nine ounces per ton of feed, amounting to from 
3.1 to 5.6 cents per ton of feed coal. In 1936, the Du Pont Company 
built a pilot plant of 50 tons per hour capacity at Shenandoah, 
Pennsylvania, but as yet no commercial application of this process 
has been noted. 

A new process of heavy medium cleaning is that of heavy- 
medium jigging (7). This method involves two essential features; 

(1) th9 circulation in the jig of a 1.7 to 2.0 specific gravity bone 




; • ' ' . ' . ' : l .■ • 














* 






OV ■ : ' J 


■ 









. 














- lb - 


middling which is 3/16 to 0 inches in size* This material fills the 
interstices of the jig bed and in effect converts the jig into a float 
and sink separator, and (2) the use of a suction stroke to hold the 
medium in the bed and prevent its washing over with the coal* It is 
claimed that this process effectively cleans coal with a size range 
of from 3 inch to 65 mesh. The difficulty of washing as shown by the 
t 0.10 specific gravity distribution curve* is said to have no effect 
on the efficiency obtained* 

Classifier Type of Coal Washers (28) 

This type of washer depends on upward currents of water 
for making the separation* Some of the processes in use are the 
Menzies Hydroseparator, the Hydrotator and Hydrotator Classifier. 

The Menzies Hydroseparator apparently gives rather poor 
separations, although it is claimed that this process is being utilized 
successfully by a major coal operator in the United States as a primary 
scalper to eliminate rock and thus do away with costly hand picking. 

The Wilmot Hydrotator and Hydrotator Classifier are used 
in conjunction with one another, the former to clean coarse coal, and 
the latter to clean fine coal. The cleaning results with these two 
processes are said to be good but the feed coal must be carefully 
presized. For example, in one installation, with a size range of 
1.3 inch to 28 mesh, the coal must be screened into six fractions 
which are then treated in four hydrotator and two hydrotator-classifier 
units. 

* See P. 8U for explanation of this curve. 











I 




.■ ; 


. 



n ' , ■ " 


i 






{ 


■) 



17 


The Sy-Vor Fine Coal cleaner (2) uses a fluidized bed with an 
upward current of water to separate shale from the coal. A slight 
pulsating action is employed to assist in the sorting of coal from 
refuse. Work so far has been done only on a laboratory scale and no 
commercial utilization of this process has as yet been noted. 

Trough or Launder Washers (37) 

In the launder process, a stream of liquid carries the material 
to be separated down a channel provided with draws for separating the 
heavy-gravity product and some means for overflowing a lighter one. 

A comparatively solid bed of material forms on the bottom of a launder, 
while above this bed is found a layer of particles moving at a slow 
speed. Above this layer, successive strata move with greater and 
greater velocity. Hindered settling conditions prevail in this flowing 
mass of material and govern the fall of particles to the bottom. In 
hindered settling, particles settle in the following order? 

1. Large heavy particles. 

2. Large light particles and small heavy ones. 

3. Small light particles. 

If the launder is operated so that only the first two reach 
the bottom, then the selective effect of the flowing stream is effective 
in transporting lighter material faster and consequently farther down 
the launder. These particles are then subjected to removal in the 
following order: 

1. Large light particles. 

2. Large heavy particles, 

3* Small heavy particles. 





: oi 

. ,,.C ) ' ‘ JS \ : ' 




r * • 1 • 0 






■ - 






•jd; 



- : • 

■ 










; t ) 


f 










- 18 - 


If this process could be stopped with the removal of large light 
particles, the separation would be a perfect one* However, this is 
not possible because of turbulence in the flowing streams, the entrap¬ 
ment of light particles by the bed, and the lessening of the density 
of the bed by the withdrawal of products* 

The most common launder washer is known as the Rheolaveur. 
Shallow pockets are spaced at points along the bottom of the trough 
for the removal of heavy particles against rising currents of water. 

In some cases the feed coal is not presized and minus U-inch coal is 
fed to a coarse coal rheolaveur unit. The minus 3/8-inch coal is 
screened out and rewashed in a fine coal rheolaveur unit. According 
to Needham (3i|) trough washers give results similar to those given by 
jig washers, i.e. fair cleaning for coal larger than 30 mesh, and 
negligible cleaning for coal smaller than this. 

The Lamex is a trough or launder-type washer which was dev¬ 
eloped in France by the Societe Lamex. The inclined trough has a 
varying cross-section* at the upper end the cross-section is rectangular 
in shape and gradually changes to a rounded U-shape, until at the bottom 
end, the cross-section is a sharp V. The performance of this washer is 
said to be greatly influenced by the shape of the trough. A splitter 
at the end of the trough divides the coal into three products: clean 
coal, middlings, and refuse. 

An experimental Lamex washer has been installed at Blairmore 
by West Canadian Collieries, who claim to have obtained good cleaning 
results with it. Latest reports indicate that a series of Lamex washers 
are to be installed by this company for washing fine coal. 




V ■ r 


x 


r. f ■ 


o i . •• 


■ ■ > 




- 19 - 


Wet Concentrating Tables 

The web concentrating table (ll) consists of a sloping deck 
with longitudinal riffles# The feed, consisting of a water and coal 
mixture, is fed to the upper side of the table and water is introduced 
parallel to the feed# A differential motion is imparted to the table 
which makes it approach its reversing point and recede from it with 
greater speed at one end of its travel than at the other. 

The most generally accepted explanation of the action of the 
Concentrating Table is that as the coal is fanned out over the table 
deck by the differential motion and gravitational flox*, the particles 
have become stratified in layers behind the riffles# This stratific¬ 
ation is followed by the removal of successive layers from the top 
downward by cross-flowing water as the stratified bed travels toward 
the outer end of the table. The cross-flowing water is made up partly 
of water introduced with the feed and partly of wash water fed separately 
through troughs along the upperside of the table# The progressive 
removal of material from the top toward the bottom of the bed is the 
result of the taper of the table riffles toward their outer end, which 
allows successively deeper layers of material to be carried away by the 
cross-flowing water as the outer end of the table is approached# By the 
tine the end of the table is reached only a thin layer, probably not 
thicker than one or two particles, remains on the surface of the deck, 
this being finally discharged over the end of the table# 

Although the fundamental principle of the wet table is that 
stratification is due to the nearly horizontal action of the table deck 
and the cross-flow of water, it is thought by Gandrud (23) that some 





- 20 - 


hindered settling occurs in the vicinity of the riffles. While the 
effect of hindered settling along any individual riffle is probably 
relatively small, the cumulative effect along the entire series of 
riffles across the width of the deck may be large enough to have a 
material influence on the character of the table separation. 

According to Gandrud (23), tables have a high cleaning 
efficiency on the sizes between l/U-inch and 65-mesh, while the cleaning 
on minus 100-mesh material is practically zero. At present, the table 
is one of the most efficient devices for cleaning fine coal below l/l|- 
inch in size. An advantage of this process is that no suspension 
medium, with its attendant recovery problems, is required. The main 
disadvantage is the large floor space needed, e.g. a table handling 
five to seven tons of coal per hour requires an area of approximately 
200 square feet. 

At present, as far as can be ascertained, wet tables are 
used in only one coal cleaning plant in Alberta. This is at the Green- 
hill tipple of West Canadian Collieries at Blairmore, where four Deisster 
tables have been installed. 

Humphreys Spiral 

The Humphreys Spiral (26) consists of a spiral channel of 
modified semicircular cross-section. A typical installation for treating 
fine coal consists of six full turns in a vertical height of five feet 
with an outside diameter of two feet. A circular refuse port is provided 
at each 120° interval of spiral turn at the lowest point in the cross- 
section of the channel. A small launder paralleling the main channel 
carries wash water, which is introduced as a cross-flow at the inner 



, . 







) . 









> 




t- - 


c. 



- 21 - 


edge of the stream below each refuse port* Coal and water at a solids 
concentration of 15 to 20% is introduced at the top of the spiral. As 
the coal flows downward it is stratified in the stream according to 
particle size and specific gravity. 

The following explanation of how the spiral works is given 
by Gleeson (27): 

“As water flows down the spiral channel of modified semi¬ 
circular section, each element will be subjected to a centrifugal force, 
tangential* to the channel, directly proportional to the square of the 
velocity of flow and inversely proportional to the radius at which the 
element is located. This centrifugal force piles water up on the outer 
run of the spiral until the flowing stream reaches an equilibrium between 
centrifugal force outward and gravitational force downward. Once est¬ 
ablished, the position of the stream is fairly constant for uniform 
pitch and radius. 

“Velocity of the spiral stream decreases with depth from its 
maximum just below the water surface until it approaches zero velocity 
at contact with the channel. The la rgest percentage decrease in 
velocity will occur nearest to the channel contact, giving rise to the 
fluid film concept that is well-developed in hydrodynamic literature. 

“In any curved channel, whether a pipe or a river bed, the 
bottom layer of water, retarded by friction has much less centrifugal 
force and consequently will flow sidewise along the bottom toward the 
inner bank of the curved channel, carrying with it the heavier particles 
of sand. Simultaneously with this bottom flow of water inward, the 
upper mass of water must flow outward to replace it. There is, conse¬ 
quently, besides the flow of water down the length of the spiral, a 
flow of decreasing velocity downward and across the channel to the 
inside, then upward and across the channel to the top, progressively 
increasing in velocity until friction again enters. 

“The several flows and forces combine to sort and concentrate 
any particles which may be suspended in the stream. Oddly enough, a 
limited size classification also takes place. Particle size, within 
limits, is not a critical factor, and no particular advantage is gained 
by prior classification. Once the idealized arrangement has been est¬ 
ablished, it is a simple matter to remove concentrate and middling 
through suitable openings located near the inner radius of the spiral. 

“For particles of lower density, which sometimes are not 
entirely lifted into the main stream at the inner radius of the spiral. 


Probably meant to be “normal”. 








- 22 


wash water is added to the inner edge of the stream. This wash water 
tends to wash off lighter material on the surface of the heavier and 
return it to the concentration zone”. 

A test was made with the Humphreys spiral by the Humphreys 

Investment Co. on a sample of minus l/8-inch bituminous coal from the 

Crowsnest Pass District. A yield of 78.3? of washed coal with an ash 

of 11. 3% was obtained from a feed containing 17. W ash. This left a 

refuse product containing 39.3# ash* "Theoretically” perfect cleaning 

on this coal as shown by a float-and-sink test on the feed would have 

been 87.5$ yield at 11.3$ ash leaving 12.5$ refuse with an ash of 57*5%* 

^ 78 3 

The Fraser-Yancey efficiency"' for this test was therefore --- - --x 100 « 

87 

89.5?. These results indicate that there was considerable loss of 
Clean coal. However, because of its simplicity and low cost this process 
may find application as a preliminary cleaner. For example, if a 11.3# 
ash product is acceptable, the fine coal could first be cleaned in a 
Humphreys spiral and the refuse might then be treated in a flotation 
cell. 

The spiral process has the advantages of low cost. The cost 
of cleaning (31) in the United States is estimated at 7*5 cents per 
ton of minus U-mesh feed. The installation cost in the United States 
is estimated at $1000 per ton per hour. These costs would probably be 
considerably higher in Canada. 

Froth-Flotation 

Coal finer than 65 mesh cannot be cleaned satisfactorily by 
normal gravity concentration methods. This is primarily because the 
fine particles do not follow the same laws of settling as do the coarser 


*/v* 

See p. 51 for explanation of Fraser-Yancey Efficiency. 







>.* : • 


c • :t 









- 23 - 


sizes* At present the only method which is acceptable for cleaning 
this size range is froth flotation* According to Needham (3h) the 
froth flotation process is usually acceptable for cleaning the whole 
size range of minus lU-mesh coal, although the cleaning is poorer for 
the minus 100-mesh size than it is for the lU- to 100-mesh range* 

Many froth flotation installations have been made in Europe, where it 
is essential to recover as much of the combustible material as possible. 

As far as can be determined, no froth flotation installations have as 
yet been made in this country. 

Two installations of small commercial kerosine flotation 

plants, treating 12 and 22 tons per hour respectively, have been made 

(39) 

in Alabama* The kerosine flotation process is similar to the conventional 
froth flotation process, except that the flotation reagent is kerosine, 
rather than the coal-tar derivatives which are often used* Operating 
costs for the 22 ton per hour plant were estimated at lU cents per ton 
of feed, while operating costs for the 12 ton per hour plant were 21; 
cents per ton of feed. These costs are perhaps misleading in that they 
do not include depreciation or labor costs. They are based upon a price 
of 10 cents per gallon for kerosine as compared with a cost of approx¬ 
imately 25 cents per gallon in Alberta. The cost of buildings to house 
the plant would in all probability be much higher in Alberta than they 
are in Alabama where severe winter weather conditions are not a problem. 
Taking all these factors into account it is probable that the cost of 
cleaning fine coal by the kerosine flotation process would be at least 
double that quoted by Schiffmin^or the 12 ton per hour plant* The cost 
of drying the wet product, would, of course, be additional. 

A typical size analysis of a mine-run coal from a Crowsnest 
Pass bituminous mine shows that 6l.6$ of the coal is minus l/2-inch. 














C : ;k • £ 



,0 






; .1 ';'.v>‘T O."- 


d f ‘ > ( £ ! 0 










) d 


r i 






: '•. i"’ 






■; d ■ oX.'jv.'J) 




o 


- 2k - 

3 il # 2% minus l/li-inch, and 7« minus U8-mesh. At the present time 
flotation is probably out of the question for treating the minus l/U- 
inch coal which comprises 3h% of the total mine output. However, if a 
cheap method of cleaning the l/U-inch to U8-mesh fraction were available, 
it might be profitable to clean the minus U8-mesh coal by flotation. 
PNEUMATIC PROCESSES (12) 

The most common types of pneumatic processes for cleaning 
coal in use today are the pneumatic jig or air-flow cleaner and the 
pneumatic table. A third type is the Brusset Vacuum-jig. Several 
cleaners of this type are in operation at the cleaning plants of West 
Canadian Collieries at Blairmore* No operating data on the vacuum-jig 
are available in the literature, so that no assessment of its perform¬ 
ance can be made. 

Pneumatic Tables (1?) 

At the present time, in Alberta, most of the minus l/U-inch 
coal that is cleaned is treated on pneumatic tables. The majority of 
these tables are built by the American Coal Cleaning Corporation. The 
several models built by this company differ mainly in the shape of the 
table deck. The earliest model was the C J which was followed by the 
S J, the Y, the R and the Twin-Bex models. The V Table developed by 
the Birtley Company in England is similar to the American R Table. 

The pneumatic table consists of a perforated riffled deck 
supported on toggles and reciprocated longitudinally with a jerking 
motion. The motion of the table moves the particles of coal and impur¬ 
ity longitudinally along the deck toward the refuse end of the table. 

A slight upward component of the deck motion, imparted by the toggles, 
assists the current of air rising through the perforations of the deck 






o 


O'. • •- rr it 


) v ) 


, . J‘ •) 




r v 


^ c. 


o . > 


•> r 








- 25 - 

in stratifying the particles. The lighter coal particles are buoyed tp 
and flow across the riffles to discharge along the side of the deck* 

Their movement is aided by the slope of the deck in this direction. 

The heavier refuse particles caught behind the riffles are moved toward 
the end of the deck, where they are discharged. Middlings are discharged 
along the side of the table between the clean coal and refuse. 

The Air Flow Cleaner or Pneumatic Jig (12) 

This type consists essentially of a stationary, pervious deck, 
sloping several inches per foot from the feed to the discharge end, 
through which rises a pulsating current of air, supplied by a centrifugal 
fan, is caused to pulsate by the rotation of a shutter in the air duct. 
The coal, as it flows along the sloping deck, is stratified by the 
pulsating air current. The upper strata of the bed (clean coal) are 
discharged over an adjustable weir, while the underlying strata (refuse) 
are removed through a rotating valve at a lower level. 

Stephens-Adamson Air-Sand Cleaner (12) 

This cleaner is based on Fraser *s Air-Sand process. Air is 
bubbled through a porous plate through a mass of dry sand 30 to 80 mesh 
in size. The coal floats on this aerated sand mass and the refuse sinks. 

A demonstration model of this type of cleaner was loaned to 
the Research Council of Alberta by the Stephens-Adams on Manufacturing 
Company. The essential part of this cleaner was a launder-type separator 
through which sand flowed at a relatively rapid rate, the flow being 
induced by the launder being inclined at an angle of 5° to the horizontal 
and being given a reciprocating motion. The floor of the separator- 
consisted of three porous* alundum plates through which air passed upward 








t. 


'1 





u 


<• :;) 







26 - 


and was released in fine bubbles uniformly over the bottom of the separ¬ 
ator a Two vertical shale chutes were provided in the floor of the 
separator, one after the first porous plate and the other between the 
second and third plates. The sand was delivered continuously to the 
upper end of the separator from a storage hopper, the flow being 
regulated by a gate. As the sand passed through the separator it was 
aerated and fluidized by the air passing through the porous plates. 

The sand was discharged from the separator to a de-sanding screen for 
return to the sand hopper* 

Several tests were made with this model on a high-volatile C 
bituminous coal from the Sterling Collieries in the Coal spur Area of 
Alberta. The sample used was 1/8- to l/U-inch in size with an ash of 
20.1%*. The cleaning results obtained were good when compared with those 
given by other pneumatic devices. In one typical test the yield of 
washed coal was 79*?$ with an ash content of 11.9$ leaving 20.?$ refuse 
with an ash content of ??. 1<%. The Fraser Yancey efficiency was 9k% while 
the probable err or ^ was 0*1??. Conditions for this test were quite 
favorable since the feed was perfectly dry and the size ratio was two 
to one or less. Another factor which affected the performance was the 
rate of feed. It was found that the cleaning was most efficient when 
only a single layer of coal was allowed to flow down the primary clean¬ 
ing section. 

Perhaps it should be emphasized that the results of these tests 
made with the demonstration model do not necessarily apply to the full- 
size Stephens-Adamson air cleaner. 


See p. 63 for definition of probable error. 





L 


- ' 




c :; 


O 






- 27 - 


As far as can be determined, only one installation of this 
type has been made in Canada—that at the Franklin Mine of the Bras 
D*Or Coal Company at Bras D 1 ^, Nova Scotia* It is stated that this 
Stephens-Adamson Cleaner which has been in operation for approximately 
two years is treating 60 tons of l*-l/2- to 1-l/li-inch coal per hour* 
The raw feed coal has an ash content of and a sulphur content of 
5.7J£* The cleaned product has an ash content of 9*2$ and a sulphur 
content of b»3% whilst the average amount of refuse is 8*5$* 






28 


III THEORY 







SETTLING VELOCITY (?) 


The settling velocity of a pa rticle under free settling 

conditions may be determined from a force-balance on the particle* 
The forces acting on the particle in absolute units are? 

(1) the gravitational force downward « mg 


(2) the buoyant force of the liquid upward « wg 


(3) the resisting force « F*^ 


where ra 
w 
g 


mass of particle 

mass of fluid displaced by particle 
acceleration due to gravity. 


Then the resultant force tending to move the particle down¬ 


ward is 

F 1 = mg - wg — F*£ 
since F 1 = ma = m~~ 


m— = mg - wg - F*. 
dt 


(1) 

( 2 ) 


For laminar flow Stokes (ill) showed that the force resisting 
the motion of a spherical particle is 

F‘ r = 3 It D/'v. (3) 

where D ■ diameter of spherical particle 
^ *= viscosity of fluid 
v * velocity of pa rticle relative to the fluid. 





♦ 











- 30 - 


Substituting this value for F* R for a spherical particle in Eqn. (2), 

/ / D3 dv *= M D^ —' 

6 /^ s db ~ (/°s " 3V/D//V (W 

where ^0 g = density of particle 
/° = density of liquid 

Dividing both sides by ^/O g 


dv 

dt 




18// v 


(?) 


At the maximum or terminal velocity = o. 

dt 


. ^ ~/° ) 
g A 


18 P v. 


£ 


A 


( 6 ) 


D 2 


- (/Os -/? . ) , 

g 18 


Z' 


(7) 


This is the form in which Stokes law is usually given and is applicable 
to a non-porous, incompressible, spherical, solid particle in an incom¬ 
pressible fluid in laminar flow# 

Newton ( 35 ) developed an expression for the resisting force 


F* R as follows : 

F* 


= f 


• A/^ 


area 


R ' 2 

where A ® representative area of the particle 
ft = friction factor 

For a sphere, the representative area A may be the projected 

Td 2 


( 8 ) 


and for this special case 


F, R ’ 

where fp 


2L D 2 /Q 


( 9 ) 


friction factor for this specific case. 





















o.'\ , r ' ' ' ■ . 










O- , «; 


1 


t r 





! 






- 31 - 


Substituting this value for F ! r in equation 2 for a spherical particle 
II D 3 /O g dv // g 


dt 




- f D 


// D^Qv 2 


( 10 ) 


Dividing by // iP /O 
6* s 


dv 

dt 


• /*■ 


3 f /° v 2 

n fD /ur 


dv 


At max* or terminal velocity v*,, ~ = q 

dt 


(id 


C^s -/?) 

/°3 


= 3f D /f. 
* 


isi_ 


( 12 ) 


V/n 


l/^ (/^s -/°) 

P f D /O 


(13) 


Equation 13 is frequently called Newton’s Law, expressing the terminal 
velocity for falling spheres in terms' of a variable friction factor fp. 
This equation may be used for laminar or turbulent flow providing that 
the correct value of fp is employed. Solving equation 13 for fp 


■ 5 I? m 

If the value for vra for laminar flow of equation 7 is substituted for 
vm in equation lU. 


f D = k ls . _ 

3 gD yo s -y°) 


(15) 




















) o 



) 










- 32 - 


2U jU 

c v m ^/3 


2k since 2ZZE 
Re. 


Re, 


( 16 ) 

(17) 


Under laminar flow conditions, equation 17 may be used directly 
to find the friction factor f D or equation 17 may be expressed in logar¬ 
ithmic form: 

log f D ■ log 2h “ log Re. 


Thus, when ”f;p” is plotted as a function of “Re 1 * on a log-log scale, 
the resulting curve is a straight line with a slope of minus one for 
”Re” up to approximately three, (Fig, l)”. In the turbulent flow 
region ("Re” greater than 300 or liOO), the value for ”fp" becomes nearly 
constant, independent of r &e” until a ”Re” of about 200,000 is reached 
when the friction factor decreases sharply. The reason for this sharp 
decrease is that an eddy is formed immediately behind the particle^ 
the particle and eddy travel together, thus forming a streamlined body. 
The transition from laminar to turbulent flow is rather 
indefinite, as indicated in Fig, 1, i,e,, there is no sharp break from 
the straight sloping line representing laminar flow to the horizontal 
line delineating turbulent flow where ”fp” is practically constant* 

THE EFFECT OF PARTICLE SHAPE (3) 

The equations in the foregoing subsection have been developed 
for the terminal velocity ”vm” of spherical particles. This is a 
special case since in nature most particles have irregular shapes. The 
shape of a particle may be defined in terms of the sphericity ^ * 

-X- 

Figs. 1 and 2 reprinted from Unit Operations by Brown, C.G*, et. al. 















10,000 




10.000 


0.1 1 2 4 6 10 100 1000 10.000 10 5 10 6 

Reynolds Number, using D, 

• ! drag i. nt, vcrMjh Reynolds number for particle* oi •!«* m spheri' 1 e 


Fig,2 


1000 

600 

400 


200 
'•S 100 
I 60 

£ 40 

I 20 

T3 

if 10 
6 
4 


1 

0.6 
0.4 

02 
01 

0.001 0.01 


(These diagrams reprinted from Unit Operations by Brown G*G* et al.) 


















































































































































































































































































































































33 - 


where - 


surface area of a sphere having the same volume 
as the particle. 

surface area of the particle 
D avg i 



( 16 ) 


where D aV g 
Ds 


n 


average screen size 

diameter of sphere having same volume as the particle 
(D s » Dgyg for a spherical particle) 

specific surface'"" of the particle 

specific surface of a sphere with 
diameter D aV g 


Fig* Z shows the family of curves resulting when "fp" is plotted 
against "Re" using the sphericity,^. as a parameter. These curves are 
based on a "diameter", Ds* which is not the same dimension as the size 
of a particle determined from a screen analysis. The screen size 
approximates the second largest dimension of the particle* For example, 
a prism a by 2a by 3a has the effective' dimension 2a as its "size" 
in screen analysis, but the diameter of a sphere having the same volume 

p s 

is 2.25 a. Brown (9) presents a table of factors of =r—— for various 
= ^avg 

shaped particles. Thus, in order to use the curves in Fig. 8, an estim¬ 
ation of the particle shape would have to be made by microscopic examin¬ 
ation. The screen size, D-^g, would then have to be multiplied by the 

factor -P.S-- to get the value of D s to be used in the settling equations 
^avg 

or the friction factor plot in Fig. 2. The curves labelled "crushed 
silica" and "Crushed galena" in Fig. 1 were determined experimentally 


•> 

■ 8 " 

The specific surface is defined as the surface area per unit of mass# 







) ,, . .0 




c. 


7 ,' 




>'• ' 1 . Vo > 


. 


: } 


v • :o 


1 ) 




j : :r.: 


l , : > . . 








- 3U - 

and may be used directly without computing the sphericity. The dis¬ 
placement of these two curves is due to the use of the screen size, 

D aV g, rather than D s for the particle dimension. 

Values of the sphericity, ^ , for coal have been determined 
experimentally by several workers. Gaudin (2l|) cites values of 0.5 to 
0.7 Tor coal and minerals whereas Skinner et.al. (1*0) quote a value of 
0.U for coal. Oberholtzer (36) obtained values of 0.36 to 0*U9 for 
150- to 200-mesh Alberta coals ; the lower value was for a sub-bituminous 
and the higher value for a bituminous coal. However, Oberholtzer 
thought that these values were low because of screening errors and 
believed that a value of 0 o 6 was more nearly correct. 

SEPARATION DUE TO DIFFERENCE IN DENSITY (9) 

The separation of solid particles on the basis of differences 
in their densities is known as sorting. When materials of the same 
density are separated on the basis of their size, the operation is 
known as sizing. Since feeds of absolutely uniform size are never 
obtained in actual operation, sizing is always involved to a certain 
extent in every sorting operation. Sorting depends upon the principle 
that the toward or downward direction of the flow of solid particles 
through a fluid depends upon the density of the solid relative to that 
of the fluid. The solid particles may be sorted by introducing them 
into a body of a fluid having a density intermediate to the densities 
of the solids* The particles with a density less than that of the fluid 
will float, and the particles with a density greater than that of the 
fluid will sink. A suspension of very fine solid particles in a fluid 
will have a similar effect as the simple fluid providing that the proper 













- 35 - 

amount of fine particles is added to give the required effective specific 


gravity. Suspensions of this sort are used to provide the separating 
baths employed in the heavy-media processes of coal-cleaning. 

The effects of both size and density of particles can be con¬ 
sidered in combination to calculate the range of sizes of a feed that 
can be separated according,to density. This is done by employing the 
concept of "equal falling" particles (10), which are the sizes of part¬ 
icles of two different materials to be sorted having equal settling 
velocities. Under laminar flow conditions 


v„, 



</°A. ~/° ] 



= \l (/>B \ 

% jf />A 


g d b ~/° ) 

--- (19) 

( 20 ) 



where is the ratio of the diameter of spherical particles of two 
different materials A and B having the same terminal settling velocity 
v M , and is called the "spherical settling ratio". 

Under turbulent conditions 


J A 


k g d a V°a 7°) 

3 (^d)a /O 

“/> ) ' % 


k g % ) 

3 (f D )B./° 


( 21 ) 


3 B -yO ) 


■Dg 


( 22 ) 


where D^/Dg is again' the spherical settling ratio* In many cases, as 
with particles of the same sphericity, the values for fg are the same 
for each material and (fg);^/ (fg)g = 1. In most cases for fine coal 
it can be assumed* that the sphericities of the clean coal and shaly 











' 


s. 











s 

\ 














- 36 - 

material are approximately equal so that the above equation reduces to 


% 

Db 


A 7* 


AO 


The "settling ratio" (D aV g)i(D OT g) B represents the ratio between the 

maximum and minimum ”screen diameters n of particles that may exist in 

a sized mixture of the materials A and B, if a clean separation between 

these two materials is to be made by classification, using the fluid in 

D s 

question. The ratio =-— may be found from tables and used to find 

D avg 

the settling ratio (Davg)A/ (^avg^B* ra;tio —— is the same 

/ D avg 

for both materials the n settling ratio” is the same as the ”spherical 
settling ratio”. 


HINDERED SETTLING (?) 

The equations which have been derived in the previous sub¬ 
sections apply to free settling. Such conditions are not usually 
encountered in practice where "hindered settling” occurs. Under 
hindered settling conditions the particles interfere with one another 
and the equations for settling velocity (equations 7 and. 13) do not 
apply. If, however, the apparent density of the solid-liquid mixture 
is substituted for the density of the separating fluid, an approximate 
value of the settling ratios may be found. It will be seen from equations 
20 and 23 that if ^ is increased and is smaller than 

ratio of the diameter of equal settling particles D a /D b becomes larger. 
This effect is produced by hindered settling, in which the particles, 
interfering with one another as they settle, act as a sorting bed of 
higher density than the fluid itself. The separation is thus improved 
under hindered settling conditions. The capacity of the equipment is 






> ::' 0. v. 


) ( 


' •: i 


> V l i'V’ , ; . ■ , ) 








37 - 


greatly increased if hindered settling rather than free settling 
conditions exist, since a larger amount of material can be passed 
through a given cross-sectional area. 


SEPARATION USING CENTRIFUGAL FORCE 

The force acting on a particle can be greatly increased by 
subjecting it to centrifugal force. The centrifugal force (21) may be 
expressed as 

Fc = JSi. (2U) 


where F c = centrifugal force 

m « mass of the particle 
u = peripheral velocity 
r = radius of curvature or path 
using the same absolute units as in the force-balance 


If this force F c is now included in the force balance 
resultant force tending to move the particle is now 


of equation 1. 
of equation 1, the 


—'i— (in a horizontal direction + mg - wg - Fg 
r toward the wall) (25) 


2 

The centrifugal component - acts in a direction normal to the 

r 

gravitational and buoyant force components, mg and wg. The force acting 
on the particle is now a resultant of the vertical and horizontal forces 


(mg- wg) and HLH— as shown in Fig. 3. 
r 


Mien 



is large compared with g, as is usually the case 


r 

in centrifugal separation, the particle tends to move in a horizontal 
direction towards the wall as shown in Fig. 3. For the cyclone separ¬ 
ations performed in the present investigation the inlet velocity was 









- 


y • 





r 


t } 






Fig 



• 3 Diagram illustrating the forces acting on a particle of 
mass "m" which has been subjected to centrifugal force. 



















- 38 - 

approximately 12 f.p.s. and for the three-inch cyclone at the inlet 
r = 0.125 ft. 

u 2 12 2 1152 o 

r g 0.125 x 32.2 32.2 

Therefore the centrifugal force was approximately 36 times as great as 
the gravitational force near the cyclone inlet. It is thus evident 
that the introduction of centrifugal action greatly increases the forces 
tending to make particles settle. 

Centrifuges are not used for coal cleaning because the separ¬ 
ating liquid must either be a true liquid or a suspension of particles 
so small that they would not settle out if subjected to centrifugal 
force. A true liquid such as carbon tetrachloride has the disadvantage 
of high cost. According to Driessen (21), the use of a suspension in a 
centrifuge is not practical, because the particle size in the suspensions 
normally used (barytes, magnetite, etc.) is too great and the particles 
tend to separate out along with the shale, leaving clear water instead 
of a suspension as the separating medium. 

A device which uses centrifugal force to separate coal and 
shale but which overcomes the difficulties encountered with the centrifuge 
is the D.S.M. cyclone. The cyclone can be used as a thickener, in which 
case the working principles are much the same as in the well-known air 
cyclone. The cyclone can also be used to separate materials of different 
density if the separating liquid has a density intermediate between that 
of the materials being separated, a suspension of very fine (minus 325 
mesh) particles of some material such as magnetite or barytes may be used 






X Oil 


o x •:! x • ' x .• “O r 




c: 


c O 


c 




< 5 . 


I 





J 


1 ; 


) v, 









') 






- 39 


as the separating liquid. Driessen (21) states that the suspension 
particles do not settle out in the cyclone as they do in the centrifuge 
because "the suspension in the cyclone is not relatively stationary but 
in constant motion so that the small suspension particles are prevented 
from settling against the inner wall of the cone". 


; ,* - ; ' x'' ' >, O;-*) ; /; oh 

• ■ , ■ '■ :: ; hh ■ (;.* > ' •• *■ "• 1 : 

/. *. .. . '; • ; ;> r r o,- . * . : :■ : 

.l > > 














REVIEW OF LITERATURE AMD THEORY 


OF CYCLOHE WASHER 






Originally, the cyclone washer was developed by workers at 
the Dutch State Mines as a thickener in connection with the Loess 
Heavy-Media Coal Cleaning process# The use of the cyclone as a thickener 
was first reported by Briessen (17) immediately before the war in 1939* 
Several reports (13, lU, 1?, 16, 19) have been published since that time 
on the theory and use of the cyclone thickener# The Dutch discovered, 
accidentally, that the cyclone could be used as a coal cleaner as well 
as a thickener# In 1soon after the war ended, Driessen presented 
a paper describing the use of the cyclone as a coal washer (18)# This 
paper and another by the same author (19) showed that the cyclone per¬ 
formed very sharp separations on fine coal# These reports did not give 
any details as to the effect of the various operating variables of the 
cyclone on its performance# 

In 19U7* Geer and Yancey (25) of the United States Bureau 
of Mines investigated the influence of different operating variables 
on the performance of a cyclone used to clean Pennsylvania and Washing¬ 
ton bituminous coals# The variables investigated were underflow and 
overflow-opening diameters, feed-tube opening diameter, feed-inlet 
pressure and variations in the amount of impurity in the feed# The 
results of this investigation showed that when the overflow opening 
was made larger or conversely, the underflow opening for the refuse 
was made smaller, the cyclone made separations at higher specific 
gravities# It was found also, that the size of the inlet feed open¬ 
ing had little effect on cyclone performance# When the feed pressure 
was varied, the efficiency of the separation dropped off as the pressure 
was decreased from 20 to 10 p*s*i»g# Sand was mixed in with the raw 



. 


i 

' 



* 





. 


Q, 


... . 



* 



• * {M* ; 

. «■. 

■ 

- 

= t 







feed coal to determine the effect of varying the amount of impurity in 
the feed* These tests showed that the amount of refuse removed varied 
directly with the amount of impurity present* 

The results of work done by Van der Walt on the cyclone 
washer at the Fuel Research Institute of South Africa were published 
in 19U9 in two papers (14;, !£)• This work investigated the influence 
of the apex angle of the cyclone, design of the overflow opening, various 
combinations of overflow and underflow openings, feed pressure, size 
analysis of the feed, specific gravity of heavy medium slurry, and pulp 
ratio of the slurry* The object was to obtain a low-ash coking coal, 
and to that end the separations were performed at comparatively low spec¬ 
ific gravities in the region of 1*35# As a result, the yields of washed 
coal were also low, ranging from 2 $ to 1;0$. Generally, for ordinary 
coal-washing, the yields of washed coal vary from 65>-95$* Van der Walt 
found that a 25° cyclone apex angle gave better separations than a 38 ° 
apex angle, and that the specific gravity of separation was less with 
the 2 $° cyclone than that obtained with the 38° cyclone. Van der Walt*s 
experiments also demonstrated that the addition of a vortex finder tube 
for the overflow exit from the conical section of the cyclone improved 
the performance. The length of this tube was not critical provided 
that it was not abnormally long and not less than 1-l/U-inches in length 
for a 9-l/2-inch diameter cyclone. The conclusions reached by Van der 
Walt as to the diameter of the overflow and underflow openings, were that 
the largest possible overflow should be used together with the underflow 
opening necessary to give the required specific gravity of separation. 

The effect on cyclone performance of varying the inlet feed-pressure 
seemed to be small, as long as the pressure was kept above a critical 





■) 






t 





I 0 


\ 


■) 





- U3 - 

value of 7*5 p.s.i.g. To determine the effect of particle size, a 
test was carried out with l/U-inch to 100-mesh coal* The cleaning 
was found to decrease appreciably for coal smaller than I 4.8 mesh* 

Several papers on the cyclone washer were presented at the 
First International Conference on Coal Preparation at Paris 1950. The 
Centre d*Etudes et Recherches des Charbonnages de France or Cerchar as 
it is more commonly known, have made numerous tests on the cyclone 
washer (U)* It was shown that the best results were obtained when the 
inlet and outlet exit diameters of the cyclone were approximately equal 
and when the specific gravity of separation approached the value of the 
specific gravity of the medium. With a suspension specific gravity of 
l%h$ 9 sharp separations (probable error* 0 * 035 ) were obtained on coal 
down to 30 mesh in size. With a medium of 1.26 specific gravity, the 
probable error was low ( 0 . 0 l; 6 ) for particles as small as 150 mesh. 
However, this separation was performed at a relatively low specific 
gravity of separation so that losses of clean coal were probably quite 
high. 

In Belgium, Burton (11) conducted investigations with an 
80 -mm. (approximately 3 -inch) diameter cyclone using magnetite and 
water as the heavy medium. These tests were made on minus one m.m* 
(approximately 16 mesh) coal. He observed that the Probable Error 
increased with specific gravity of separation and attributed this to 
the increase of “viscosity” in the separating zone. Burton also found 
that cleaning with a probable error of 0 . 08 U was performed on coal as 
fine as 200 -mesh. 

Dries sen who made a study of the theory of flow in the 
cyclone ( 20 ) assumed that the flow could be compared with a two- 










) 




■ > V ;> 

< r i : 


c ■ ,;. r tic]' : 








- bh - 

dimensional vortex flow, and applied the Navier-Stokes equations to 
obtain a solution for the tangential velocity as a function of the 
radial distance from the center of the cyclone. In order to solve the 
Navier-Stokes equations the following assumptions were made: (1) an 
incompressible fluid, (2) steady flow, (3) two-dimensional flow, (i.e. 
no flow in an axial direction), (U) the radial velocity negligible as 
compared with the tangential velocity (5) the maximum tangential 
velocity to occur at the outlet radius. 

The general solution obtained for the tangential velocity was 



where v * 
c - 

r = 

c " 

n = 
where E = 


tangential velocity 
resultant velocity 
radial distance from center 
constant of integration 

‘ iW' + 1 

_ 2 TTvr 

"turbulent viscosity coefficient" 


The Navier-Stokes Equations as given by Dries sen are: 


c)tl , 

St 

s* 

• + 
r c)r 

_ 

S* 

r 

1 

/3 

Z>r 

St + 


V i)v 

r^> + 

>v; 

+ 

U V 

r 

3^ 

/Or 

Sp 

<5<p 

<9w 

St 

+ 

£r 

V Jw 

+ 

_Sw 

w 5z 


= _ L 
P 

If 


+ V- 


+ V, 


+ Vr 


where u = radial velocity component 

v = tangential velocity component 
w = axial velocity component 
r and (p - polar co-ordinates 
z = axial co-ordinate 


/o = density 
t = time 
p = pressure 

* viscosity terms 





o cl 


■ 




X 






':k/ 


o 


o 


- - 


. 














.. f 













j: : : 


- v ; i; 






Driessen conducted experiments with a flat cyclinder which represented 
an approximation of a this section of a cyclone* Air was blown through 
the cylinder and pressure distribution measurements were made at various 
radial distances from the center of the cylinder* From these experimental 
data the tangential velocities were computed* These computed tangential 
velocities were plotted against the radial distances from the center 
of the cylinder on a log-log scale# The tangential velocities given by 
the solution of the Navier-Stokes equations were also plotted versus 
the radial distances on a log-log scale. Various values of the term 
"n" were assumed in order to calculate these latter tangential veloc¬ 
ities* It was found that a value of n = -1 gave a curve which agreed 
very closely with the curve obtained from the experimental data* From 
this value of n = -1, the value of the "turbulent viscosity coefficient, 
^ , was determined# Driessen states that "due to the turbulence caused 
by the walls and by the high relative velocities between adjacent layers 
a force will be created which can mathematically be interpreted as an 
increased kinematic viscosity. This "increased kinematic viscosity" is 
the "turbulent viscosity coefficient 1 * * These experiments were con¬ 
ducted with air as the fluid medium* More work remains to be done before 
the validity of Driessen 1 s work can be assessed* One assumption that 
may be questionable is that of two-dimensional flow, i*e* no flow in an 
axial direction* Although this assumption was probably quite reasonable 
for Driessen* s experiments with a flat cyclinder, it may be doubtful 
whether there is any justification for assuming such a condition to 
exist in a conical cyclone. 




V METHODS USED FOR EVALUATING 


COAL-WASHING PERFORMANCE 






- U7 - 


In this investigation it was decided to determine the 
relative importance of the operating variables by conducting a series 
of tests in each of which there was, as far as could be determined, 
only one variable* The relative importance of any variable could then 
be appraised by the use of some reliable basis of comparison. Of the 
many methods which have been proposed for evaluating the performance 
of coal-washing equipment, the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency (22), the 
Anderson Efficiency (1), the Probable Error developed by the French 
(3, l\2) and Driessen f s Error Area (18) are those most used in Europe 
and America. 

FLOAT-SINK ANALYSIS 

All of the above methods are based upon float-sink analyses 
of either the raw feed coal or the products* For a float-sink analysis 
a sample of the coal is placed in an organic liquid of 1.30 specific 
gravity* The float coal is skimmed off, dried and weighed. The material 
that sinks is drained and placed in a liquid with a specific gravity of 
l.kOj the float coal is again dried and weighed. This procedure is 
repeated with heavier liquids to give data such as that shown in the 
first two columns of Table I. The third column, cumulative weight per 
cent, is computed from the preceding columns and gives the weight per 
cent floating at a definite specific gravity, e.g., 7Q*9% of the total 
feed floated at 1.60 specific gravity. An ash analysis of each specific 
gravity fraction is made and these data are given in the fourth column. 
The cumulative ash content per cent shown in the last column is calcul¬ 
ated from the preceding columns and gives the ash content of the coal 
floating at various specific gravities, e.g., the cumulative ash content 




c. 


•f 



: 0 ' : 3t.f 


n ’ ■j- 1 o 









! 


c 


) ye. ■ i 






t . * 




' i: 



- 1*8 - 

of the 78.9? of coal floating at 1.60 is 9.2#. The cumulative weight 
per cent of float is plotted against the cumulative ash content to give 


TABLE I 

Example of Float - Sink Data for Raw Feed Coal 
(Cadomin 10- to 100-mesh) 


Specific Gravity- 
Fraction 


Weight of 
Fraction 
(Float) % 


Cumulative* 
Weight 
(Float) % 


Ash Content 
of Enaction 
% 


a* 


Cumulative 
Ash Content 
(of Float) 


Float 

1.30 

21*. U 

21*. 1* 

3.26 

3.3 

1.30 ■ 

- 1.1*0 

33.? 

57.9 

8.05 

6.0 

1.1*0 ■ 

- 1.60 

21.0 

7.8.9 

17.92' 

9.2 

1.60 ■ 

- 1.80 

7.? 

86.1* 

38.10 

11.7 

1.80 • 

- 2.00 

h.6 

91.0 

53.05 

13.8 

Sinks 

2.00 

9.0 

100.0 

75.01 

19.3 


100.0 


# ** All weight percentages and ash contents, given in this thesis, are 
on a dry basis. 

the curve shown in Fig. U. The so-called "theoretical yield" at a 
certain ash content can be obtained from this curve e.g., for a washed- 
coal product containing 12# ash, the curve indicates that with perfect 
recovery the yield should be 87#$ this value is the "theoretical yield". 
The dashed portion of the curve extrapolated to zero per cent cumulative 
weight of float demonstrates, the "inherent ash" content of the coal 
(2*5# in this case). 

















0 


>: 



.0 




, 



> 


’ V *- ' « 















FIG.4 CUMULATIVE FLOAT VS. CUMULATIVE ASH 

CURVE 


















- h9 - 

A weakness in the use of float-sink analyses for appraising 
the cleaning performed by a coal washer is the effect of particle size 
of the coal. It is conceivable that a piece of material containing 
bands of both coal and shale may have a different specific gravity than 
the same material broken up into several smaller pieces e.g., the spec¬ 
ific gravity of a lump of coal may be IJ4O, but when it is broken in 
two, the specific gravity of one portion containing mostly clean coal 
may be 1.30, whereas, the specific gravity of the other containing more 
shale may be 1.50. Thus, the size of the coal has an effect on the 
results of the float-sink analysis. Similarly, the float-sink analysis 
depends upon whether or not size reduction of the feed coal takes place. 
Size degradation of the feed usually does occur, in the wet-washing of 
coal| this is especially true when the friable Alberta bituminous coals 
are wet-washed. An example of the effect of immersing Cadomin bitumin¬ 
ous coal (10- to 100-mesh) in water and mixing is shown in Table II. 

The weight percentages and ash contents of the various size fractions 
of the new coal are shown under the heading "Before water immersion". 

The other heading "After water immersion and drying" gives the data 
for the size fractions after the coal was mixed with water for one 
hour and allowed to stand in water for three hours, then drained on a 
100-mesh screen and dried. The particles smaller than 100-mesh were 
therefore lost. These data illustrate that the amount of each size 
fraction (with the exception of the 80- to 100-mesh fraction) was less 
after the water immersion, showing that size degradation of each fraction 
did occur. The data also demonstrate that the ash content of each size 
fraction was less after water immersion, thus giving evidence that the 
shale breaks down to a greater extent than the coal. This is further 



L 



r : v 




(%' 


j 


, < 


.) 




•) ) 


X 


O 








c d 





5 o 


TABLE II 

Data Illustrating Effect of Size Degradation on Ash Contents and 
Weight Percentages of Various Size Fractions of Cadomin 10- to 
100-mesh Coal. 


Before water immersion After water immersion 

and drying 


Size Fraction 
(Tyler mesh) 

Weight % 

Ash Content 
% 

Weight 

Ash Content 
% 

10 - 

■ lh 

19.5 

23.3 

1 U .3 

19.0 

1 U - 

28 

3 6.9 

19.3 

32.8 

16.7 

28 - 

- U 8 

28.5 

16.9 

25.9 

15.7 

hs ■ 

- 65 

10.3 

16.8 

9.3 

15.7 

65 - 

- 80 

3.6 

18. U 

3.1 

15.7 

80 - 

- 100 

1.2 

19.6 

2 .U 

15.1 



100.0 


87.8 


Ash Content of 
Total Sample 


19.1$ 


16.6% 




Weight percentages given in terms of original weight of sample, 
































- 51 - 

proven by a material balance on ash of the total sample, which shows 
that the ash content of the 12*2$ of material finer than 100-mesh was 
37 %. 

FRASER-YANCEY EFFICIENCY 

The most widely used method for evaluating clean coal perform¬ 
ance is probably the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency; it is the ratio, expres¬ 
sed in per cent, of the actual yield of washed coal over the "theoretical 
yield" of float coal. The "theoretical" yield is found from the cumul¬ 
ative weight of float versus cumulative ash curve (Fig. Ij.) at the same 
ash content as that of the washed coal e.g. if the actual yield of 
washed coal were 80$ and the ash content of this washed coal were 12$, 
the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency would be calculated as follows: the yield 
of float coal at this ash content of 12$ found from the cumulative 
float versus cumulative ash curve in Fig. U is & 7 %. 

The Phaser Yancey Efficiency 

Actual Yield of Washed Coal. 

s ---- —— — -—• X 100 $ 

"Theoretical" Yield at same Ash Content as 

Washed Coal. 

00 

- ^ x 100 $ « 92$ 

In washery operation, where the quality of washed coal and the yield 
are of prime interest to the operator, the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency 
is useful since it gives a measure of the loss of salable coal. It 
is in fact, a material balance on coal with a certain ash-content; 
for the above example it is a material balance on coal with a 12$ ash 
content. If/s 4 SSO*<l</ </rj nx/e ffc* occurs. 




0 












- 52 - 


Although the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency is useful in determining 
the loss of clean coal, there are several factors which limit its useful¬ 
ness for assessing the results of the cyclone washing tests in the 
present investigation. First, the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency is a function, 
not only of the performance of the washer, but also of the character of 
the coal being treated, the specific gravity at which the separation 
between coal and impurity is made, and the specific gravity of the feed 
coal. Second, size degradation of the feed greatly affected the use of 
this efficiency in evaluating the results of the present investigation. 

The ash content of the feed as calculated from the products for most of 
the washing experiments was approximately 17$ as compared with approx¬ 
imately 19% for the raw feed coal, and meaningless values of the order 
of 103$ were given when the Fraser-Yancey efficiencies were computed 
from the raw feed curve. A serious shortcoming of the Fraser-Yancey 
Efficiency is the fact that as the yield approaches 100$, the efficiency 
value also approaches 100$, with the anomalous result that if no refuse 
is removed, the efficiency for the separation is 100$. A minor objection 
is that there does not seem to be a large enough variation between the 
Fraser-Yancey Efficiency values representing good cleaning and those 
indicating poor cleaning. Fraser and Yancey have stated that the clean¬ 
ing performance of a washer is satisfactory if the Fraser-Yancey Effic¬ 
iency is 95$ or greater. Using this standard, a value of 96 $ represents 
acceptable cleaning, whereas a value of 9h% represents cleaning that is 
not acceptable. 

An attempt was made in this investigation to use a uniform 
feed, although the separations were performed at various specific 
gravities. Size degradation of the feed occurred but since the ash 




r' 


. ) 


t 




.) ' c 




c. 






< 


( 0: 


s. 








1 V ) 


■ ■ 






- 53 - 

content as calculated from the products only varied from 17*0 to 18.0$ 
it was believed that the amount of degradation was practically uniform 
for all of the washing tests. The "theoretical yield" used for com¬ 
puting the Fraser-Yancey efficiencies was obtained from the cumulative 
float versus cumulative ash curve for the feed calculated from the 
products of washed coal and refuse. In view of all the factors involved, 
it was felt that the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency was not a suitable basis 
for comparing the performance of the cyclone washer in these experiments, 
except in those instances where the ash contents of the washed-coal 
products were approximately equal (since the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency 
is actually a material balance on coal of this ash content). However, 
the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency was calculated for each washing test, 
because it gave an indication of the loss of clean coal. 

TROMP DISTRIBUTION CURVE 

A means for showing the sharpness of the separation effected 
by a coal washer, which is believed to be substantially independent of 
the character of the feed coal, is the distribution curve developed by 
Tromp (Ij.3). This curve, an example of which is shown in Fig. 5 , is 
derived from float-sink analyses of both the washed coal and the refuse. 
In addition to these data the yields of the washed coal and refuse 
products must be known. An example of the method of obtaining the 
distribution curve follows: The data in Table III show the yields and 
specific gravity analyses for the products obtained in the cyclone 
separation in Experiment Ho. ii.0. The first three columns are self- 
explanatory. The last column shows the weight percentage of each 
specific gravity fraction of the feed that has gone into the washed 
coal. To calculate these, the various weight percentages must be 





- ?: 


,s; 


. .' . 





a r 






o 






o r 








_r 






■ r. J 





. i 1 


■ 








'** * 



■ : 


















■ 


. . ... a , 

o 


c) 




c ). , ; 


. . .. )• Ui • ’ .• 




u 





FIG.5 DISTRIBUTION CURVES 

AKE - EXPERIMENT NO. 40 
A HKDE- PERFECT SEPARATION 
SHADED AREAS - ERROR AREA 


100 


<70 

O 

o 

Q 60 

LJ 

X 

CO 50 

< 

£ 

o 40 


e> 

o 

o 


30 


1.40 1.50 1.60 1.70 1.80 1.90 2.00 2.10 

SPECIFIC dRAVITY OF FEED COAL 


LU 
CO 
40 => 


50 


60 O 

2 


O 

70 


B 






















TABLE III 


Float-Sink Analyses and Yields of Products 
Obtained in Experiment No. Lj.0 


Specific Gravity 
Fraction 

Yield =* 81.0? 
Washed Coal 
Weight ? 

Float 1.30 

29.0 

1.30 - l.UO 

U6.5 

1.1*0 - 1.60 

18.6 

1.60 - 1.80 

5.2 

1.80 - 2.00 

0.6 

Sinks 2.00 

0.1 


100.0 


yield = 19.0% 
Refuse 
Weight ? 

Feed going to 
Washed Coal 
% 

0.5 

99 .6 

1.6 

99.2 

2.3 

97.2 

23.1 

U8.9 

28.5 

8.3 

UU.o 

0.9 


100.0 


converted into terms of the feed, e.g. for the material floating at 
1.30 specific gravity 

Washed coal floating at 1.30 

= 29.0? of 81.0? = 23.U9? of the feed 

Refuse floating at 1.30 

= 0.?? of 19.0? » 0.10? of the feed 

Total material floating at 1.30 = 23.59? of the feed 

Percentage of Float 1.30 going to Washed Coal = x 100 = 99. 

23.59 

These percentages are calculated for the remaining specific 
gravity fractions in a similar manner. They are then plotted against 
the mean specific gravity of the fraction as shown in Fig. 5* An 

























- 55 - 


assumption that the lightest material in the coal has a specific gravity 
of 1.25 and the heaviest material a specific gravity of 2.60 is neces¬ 
sary in order to estimate the mean specific gravities of the fractions 
that float at 1.30 and sink at 2.00, which are plotted at 1.275 and 
2.30 respectively. This assumption is not far wrong for most coals. 

For the other fractions, the mean specific gravity is taken as the 
specific gravity of a bath on which half of the fraction would float 
and half would sink. This mean value is determined from the cumulative 
weight of float per cent versus specific gravity curve for the feed 

/s 

coal. The manner in which this A accomplished is perhaps best shown by 
an example. The float-sink data for the calculated feed used in Exper¬ 
iment No. 1|0 is presented in Table IV. 

TABLE IV 

Float-Sink Data for Calculated Feed for Cyclone 
Separation of Experiment No. i»0 


Specific Gravity 
Fraction 

Weight of 

Fraction 

(Float) 

% 

Cumulative 

Weight 

(Float) 

% 

Ash Content 
of Fraction 
% 

Cumulative 
Ash Content 
(of Float) 

% 

Float 1.30 

23.6 

23.6 

3.11 

3.1 

1.30 - l.Uo 

38.0 

61.6 

7.H6 

5.8 

1.H0 - 1.60 

1?.? 

77.1 

17.21 

8.1 

1.60 - 1.80 

8.6 

85.7 

28.98 

10.2 

1.80 - 2.00 

5.9 

91.6 

H5.13 

12. H 

Sinks 2.00 

8.U 

100.0 

71. HO 

17. H 

















. o 




' 











The cumulative weight per cent floating is plotted against the specific 
gravity; thus, 77*1% of coal floating at 1.60 is plotted at 1.60 
specific gravity in Fig. 6. The weight per cent floating on a bath 
that would divide the 1.30 to l.UO fraction into half float and half 
sink is the average of the cumulative weight per cent floating at 1.30 
and l.ljO specific gravity, respectively. These values read from the 
cumulative weight per cent versus specific gravity curve in Fig. 6, are 
23*6 and 6l »6% respectively. The average of these two values is 1|2.6$. 
From the curve in Fig. 6, it is found that the specific gravity of the 
calculated feed corresponding to this cumulative weight per cent of i*2.6 
is 1.325# This is therefore, the mean specific gravity of the 1«30 - 
l*ij.O fraction and the corresponding percentage of this fraction which 
has gone into the washed coal (99*2 in the last column of Table II), is 
plotted against this value to give a point on the distribution curve 
shown in Figure 5. The remaining points are found in a similar manner 
so that the whole curve is built up. Examination of the distribution 
curve AKE, in Figure 5 shows that the slope is a measure of the sharp¬ 
ness of separation, i.e., the steeper the slope, the sharper the 
separation. Theoretically perfect cleaning according to specific 
gravity is illustrated by the dashed curve AHKDE in Figure 5. Here the 
slope has become infinite, or in other words, the curve has become a 
vertical line at the specific gravity of separation. 

The specific gravity of separation is determined 
from the distribution curve, and is defined as the specific gravity of 
material in the feed which is distributed equally between washed coal 
and refuse, i.e., the specific gravity at the 50% point. The specific 
gravity of separation has been defined by Yancey and Geer (lj.8) in this 


-•) .1 


) 


CUMULATIVE WEIGHT ( FLOAT ) 



Fig.6 


Cumulative float vs. specific gravity curve 
for calculated feed of experiment No.40 

















way, because the distribution curve in Fig* 5 shows that "a washer 
does not make a sharp and distinct separation, sending all material 
lighter than a certain specific gravity to the washed coal and all 
heavier material to the refuse* Instead, some of the material in each 
specific-gravity fraction of the feed reports to the washed coal and 
some reports to the refuse, the proportion reporting to either product 
varying with the specific gravity of the fraction. Because the separ¬ 
ation between coal and Impurity takes place in this fashion, the only 
logical and correct definition of the specific gravity of separation 
is that it is the specific gravity of material in the feed which is 
distributed equally between washed coal and refuse"* 

The shaded areas in Fig* 5 show the "Error Are a" which will 
be discussed in detail later on in this section* 

Since the distribution curve is based upon float-sink analyses 
of the washed coal and refuse products, the weaknesses which were 
pointed out under the discussion of float-sink analysis apply to the 
use of this curve* The influence of particle size of the coal on the 
float-sink analysis was assumed to be uniform since a sized feed coal 

v/a* ■ 

(10- to 100-meshThe effect of size degradation on the results of 
the float-sink analyses was also assumed to be uniform for all of the 
experiments since the ash content of the feed as calculated from the 
products only varied from 17 to 18$* 

THE ANDERSON EFFICIENCY (1) 

This Efficiency, which is being widely used in the United 
States (I|li) is based on the concept of misplaced material developed by 
Yancey (U8), i*e*, anything in the washed coal heavier than the specific 



#■ ' ■ ; ■: 


i oir 






; 


\ :■ . ■ 3 

, 







- 58 - 

gravity of separation is misplaced material, as is anything lighter 
than the specific gravity of separation in the refuse* The Tromp 
distribution curve is used to find the specific gravity of separation. 
The following is an illustration of how the Anderson Efficiency is 
calculated: the float-sink analyses of the washed coal and refuse 
products obtained in Experiment No. 35 are shown in Table V. The 

TABLE V 

Float-Sink Data for Products of Cyclone 
Separation of Experiment No. 35 


Specific Gravity 
Fraction 

Yield = 88.5$ 
Washed Coal 
Weight % 

Held = 11.5* 
Refuse 
Weight % 

Feed Going to 
Washed Goal 

of 

p 

Float 1,30 

29.k 

0.3 

99.9 

1.30 - 1.U0 

30.3 

0.2 

99.9 

l.kO - 1.60 

30.8 

0.3 

99.8 

1.60 - 1.80 

7.9 

6.6 

90.3 

1.80 - 2.00 

1.1 

29.2 

21.9 

Sinks 2.00 

0.5 

63.U 

lw5 


100.0 

100.0 



calculated percentage of each fraction going to the washed coal is 
shown in the last column. The specific gravity of separation is 
obtained from the distribution curve plotted from the data in the last 


































column of Table V and is found to be 1.8CT. If the coal with a specific 
gravity less than 1.80 is now classed as clean coal and all coal with 
a specific gravity greater than 1*80 is classed as refuse, the clean 
coal lost in the refuse is 7»k% of the total weight of refuse and the 
misplaced refuse in the washed coal is 1*6$ of the total weight of 
washed coal* These percentages of misplaced material are converted 
into percentages of the feed and their sum subtracted from 100 to give 
the Anderson Efficiency, e.g.. 

Weight misplaced in Washed Coal - % 

= 1.6$ of 88.5$ (Yield of Washed Coal) = l.bZ 

Weight misplaced in Refuse - % 

= 7.h% of 11.5$ (Yield of Refuse) « 0.85 

Total weight misplaced - % « 2.27 

Anderson Efficiency = 10 O- 2.27 “ 97*7% 

Zero efficiency has been defined by Anderson as that when no 
effective separation has been accomplished, i.e., when the specific 
gravity composition of the cleaned coal and refuse products is the 
same. Float-sink data as shown in Table VI have been used by Anderson 
to illustrate that the specific gravity composition of both washed coal 
and refuse are the same when the Anderson Efficiency is zero. 

The definition of 100$ efficiency has been offered by Anderson 
as being that when there is no sink material in the washed coal with a 


The above example was chosen because the specific gravity of 
separation was 1.80 which was the specific gravity of one of the 
float-sink baths employed. If the specific gravity of separation 
does not happen to have the same value as that of one of the float- 
sink liquids, (which is the usual case) the amounts of misplaced 
material are found by interpolation. 




ex’ f'-j .o'. 








60 - 


TABLE VI 

Float-Sink Data Illustrating Anderson Zero Efficiency 


Specific Gravity 
Fraction 

Washed Coal 
Weight % 

Refuse 
Weight % 

Float 1.30 

25.0 

25.0 

1.30 - 1.1)0 

35.0 

35.0 

1.1)0 - 1.50 

8.0 

8.0 

1.50 - 1.60 

5.0 

5.0 

1.60 - 1.70 

1).0 

H.o 

1.70 - 1.80 

2.0 

2.0 

1.80 - 2.00 

1.0 

1.0 

Sinks 2.00 

20.0 

20,0 


100,0 

100.0 


specific gravity higher than the specific gravity of separation and 
no float in the refuse with a specific gravity lower than the specific 
gravity of separation* The data in Table VII have been presented by 
Anderson to illustrate this definition of 100$ efficiency# The specific 
gravity of separation in this case was 1#60# 

A point which the coal-cleaning authorities who contributed 
to a written discussion of Anderson*s paper (29) seem to have over¬ 
looked is that the Anderson Efficiency does not use the basis for zero 
efficiency which Anderson has specified* The efficiency has been defined 
as being zero when the float and sink analyses of the refuse and cleaned 
coal, and therefore, of the feed are the same; in other words, when 















. ; 


r. 


) 


:) p( . r *.];<; 


) 


c 




t 



















- 61 - 


TABLE VII 

Float-Sink Data Illustrating 100 % Anderson Efficiency 


Specific Gravity 
Fraction 

Washed Goal 
Weight $ 

Refuse 
Weight $ 

Float 1.30 

90.0 

0.0 

1.30 - 1.1*0 

5.0 

0.0 

1.1*0 - 1.50 

U.o 

0.0 

1.50 - l .6 o 

loO 

0.0 

1.60 - 1.70 

0.0 

1.0 

1.70 - 1.80 

0.0 

luO 

1.80 - 2.00 

0.0 

5.0 

Sinks 2.00 

0.0 

90.0 


the coal comes out of the cleaner in the same condition as it went 
in, the efficiency is zero. However, this definition of zero efficiency 
is lost sight of in the course of the efficiency calculations. Here is 
an example illustrating this point. Table VIII shows the data from 
which Anderson has calculated 55$ efficiency (1). The yield of washed 

TABLE VIII 

Float-Sink Data Illustrating 55$ Anderson Efficiency 
Yield of Washed Goal = 50$ 


Specific Gravity 
Fraction 

Washed Goal 
Weight $ 

Refuse 
Weight $ 

Float 1.30 

1.0 

0.0 

1.30 - 1.1*0 

6.0 

2.0 

1.1*0 - 1.50 

10.0 

5.0 

1.50 - 1.60 

76.0 

76.0 

1.60 - 1.80 

5.0 

10.0 

1.80 - 2.00 

2.0 

6.0 

Sinks 2.00 

0.0 

1.0 























0 3 









* 
















- 62 - 


coal is given as 50 % and the specific gravity of separation as found 
from the distribution curve is 1*55* The amounts of misplaced material 
in both washed coal and refuse are found to be 22.5$, making a total of 
h5%* The Anderson efficiency for this separation is therefore 100 - 
55$. Anderson, has stated that, M if for some ridiculous reason, a 
cleaning process should deliver a refuse product containing more float 
than the washed coal product, a true separation, nevertheless, could 
be effected by the cleaning equipment, but the efficiencies of separ¬ 
ation would be less than 50$ ,T . In other words, if the washed coal 
product comes out of the equipment dirtier than when it entered, the 
efficiency is less than An illustration of separation with an 

efficiency of this order is given by Anders on i the specific gravity 
composition of the washed coal and refuse products shown in Table yill 
are switched to give the distribution of material shown in Table IX, 

TABLE IX 

Float-Sink Data Illustrating Anderson Efficiency 
Yield of Washed Goal - $0% 


Specific Gravity 
Fraction 

Washed Coal 

Weight % 

Refuse 
Weight % 

Float 1.30 

0.0 

1.0 

1.30 - 1.1)0 

2.0 

6.0 

1.1)0 - 1.50 

?.o 

10.0 

1.50 - 1.60 

76.0 

76.0 

1.60 - 1.80 

10.0 

5.0 

1.80 - 2.00 

6.0 

2.0 

Sinks 2.00 

1.0 

0.0 














' 


) 


o 






o 



i* 







- 63 - 

i.e., what was the washed coal is now the refuse and vice versa. 

The Anderson Efficiency for this separation is It seems ridiculous 

that a process giving a washed coal product which is dirtier than the 
feed should be assigned a positive efficiency, especially since zero 
efficiency has been defined by Anderson as that when the feed coal 
goes through the equipment unchanged. In fairness to Anderson it 
should be pointed out that such a. separation is probably never met 
with in practice. However, the fact still remains that this weakness 
does exist and although the percentage of misplaced material (which 
Cerchar calls the ” tramp error”) or its complement when subtracted 
from 100 is a useful criterion for judging washery performance, this 
complement should not be represented as an efficiency. 

PROBABLE ERROR (3, 1*2) 

This method, which was proposed by Terra (lj.2), is also based 
on the distribution curve. The probable error is the numerical value 
of half of the difference between the specific gravities at which the 
distribution curve crosses the ordinates representing 25 and 75 % of 
the feed going to washed coal. 

The probable error for the cyclone separation of Experiment 
No. 1*0 is found from the distribution curve in Figure 5* The specific 
gravity value at the 2$% point is 1.765 and that at the 75$ point is 
1.62$. The difference between these values is O.lliO and half this 
difference is 0.070 which is the probable error. 

This method has been adopted by the French Centre d f Etudes 
et Recherches des Charbonnages de France (Cerchar) as a means of 
showing the sharpness of separation in place of the error area. 




V ' ■'[ 


6 




3 


; X) ; X : 


3 v 


), 


L r . * o 


o- o c 


o 


r 




' X ■ ^ ■ :o 




3 


r ' 


; , o, 


!0,. 


! 


X > 


■ : > ^ )•>{> ",: y 


) 



- 6h - 

DRIESSEN ERROR AREA (18) 

Driessen plotted the distribution curve using a fixed scale 
of 1 cm. » 2% of weight on the ordinate and 1 cm. = 0.10 specific 
gravity unit on the abscissa. The sum of the shaded areas, AHK and KDE, 
shown in Figure 5, are defined as the error area expressed in square 
centimeters. The upper area, AHK, gives a measure of the amount of 
clean coal which has been discarded with the refuse and the lower area, 
KDE, gives a measure of the refuse which has gone into the washed coal. 
The sum of these two areas is the Error Area for the washing process. 

The main disadvantage of the Error Area is that a planimeter is required 
to determine the areas. Another objection is that it does not express 
the sharpness of separation as a percentage. 

The authorities on coal preparation both in Europe and on 
this continent have accepted the Error Area which uses the fixed 
centimeter scale proposed by Driessen as a measure of coal washery 
performance. A much more flexible and simple method would be that 
proposed by Van der Walt (h5), of expressing the Error Area in terms 
of (specific gravity x weight percent) units. Any scale could then 
be used to plot the distribution curve. 



.. ^ 


f 


a f: 


; of 


c. 




0 •; ' i :' 


1 










-AREA EFFICIENCY 

It would be advantageous if the Error Area could be 
expressed as a percentage efficiency rather than an area in square 
centimeters, since a percentage is much more readily understood than 
the number of square centimeters which must be compared with some 
standard reference area* As a result of the studies during the present 
investigation a new method of expressing the Error Area as an efficiency 
of separation is proposed. Using the distribution curve shown in 
Figure 5 as an example, the Area Efficiency would ber 


(Area AHKB - Area AHK) + (Area KFED - Area KED) 


Area AHKB + Area KFED 


x 100$ 


A perfect separation according to specific gravity would give 100$ 
separation efficiency by this method since the Areas AHK and KED would 
approach zero as the slope of the distribution curve approached the 
vertical at the specific gravity of separation. In other words, when 
the error area is zero the Area Efficiency is 100$. This method has 
the advantage that any scale can be used for plotting the distribution 
curve and that the degree of separation is shown by a percentage 
efficiency rather than an area. 

This efficiency is directly proportional to the Error Area 
as is shown in Fig. 7 in. which the area efficiencies have been plotted 
against the corresponding error areas for some of the cyclone separ¬ 
ations obtained in this investigation. It is therefore a simple matter 
to convert from Area Efficiency to Error Area or vice versa providing 
that the lightest and heaviest portions of the feed coal are assumed 
to have specific gravities of 1.25 and 2.60 respectively. 

For these conditions Area Efficiency $ = (100 — 0.39 E)$ 
where E = Error Area in sq. cm. 
















)• 




t ■/;' 




+ 


! •' .i 


X 


o V : "r: 








' ■' 


)! 






; i . 






. , 










». • r. v:', va 




) , > 

















































































































































































































































































- 66 - 


DISCUSSION OF VARIOUS METHODS OF EVALUATING COAL-WASHING PERFORMANCE 

The foregoing efficiencies and formulas represent some of 
the numerous attempts •which have been made to represent the performance 
of coal-cleaning equipment by a single factor. As has been pointed 
out, all have some merits and some deficiencies. During the last few 
years, Cerchar coal preparation engineers have made a detailed study 
of methods of expressing the efficiency of coal-cleaning equipment. 

Their conclusions (3) were that the problem of evaluating the perform¬ 
ance of/coal-cleaning unit is a difficult one, and that it is impossible 
to judge the performance adequately by means of a single term. The 
Cerchar engineers suggest that the most useftil methods are the probable 
error, distribution curves, "tramp” error, and loss of organic efficiency. 
The "tramp” error is the percentage of misplaced material which has been 
mentioned previously. The Organic Efficiency is the same as the Fraser- 
Yancey Efficiency. The loss of Organic Efficiency is the difference 
resulting when the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency is subtracted from one 
hundred. 

In this investigation, the Probable Error, Error Area, Area 
Efficiency, Anderson Efficiency and Fraser-Yancey Efficiency have been 
used to evaluate the results of the cyclone experiments. 



: 7 . - 7 ' 










) ■; . o 


7 









67 


VI OBJECT AM) SCOPE OF PRESENT INVESTIGATION 




- 68 - 


The literature review of coal-cleaning methods showed that 
none of the processes were entirely satisfactory for cleaning fine 
coal, i.e., coal below l/U-inch or l/8-inch in size. Of all the coal- 
washers reviewed, the cyclone washer seemed to give the most promise 
as a fine coal cleaner* Consequently, the Research Council of Alberta 
began studies on the cleaning of fine coal with a three-inch D.S.M. 
Cyclone. 

The literature survey on the cyclone washer demonstrated that, 
although considerable work had been done by other investigators, data 
were lacking on the influence of several important operating variables 
on the performance of the cyclone washer. Accordingly, the first phase 
of the present investigation was concerned with a study of the effects 
of pulp ratio of the slurry, specific gravity composition of the feed 
and size composition of the feed. 

The second phase of the present investigation was concerned 
with the evaluation of coal-washery performance. As has already been 
pointed out in the preceding section, many methods of assessing the 
quality of coal-cleaning are in use. However, no agreement seems to 
exist between any of these various means of judging coal-washing per¬ 
formance. In addition, there is lack of agreement among the leading 
coal-preparation authorities as to the influence of the specific 
gravity of separation on the Error Area and Probable Error. Perhaps 
the major reason for the existence of such a condition is that sufficient 
data on coal-cleaning separations have not been published. Therefore, 
the object in the second part of this study was to obtain such data on 
cyclone separations and to examine these critically so that some insight 



. 







t. 








o' 



: ')■ , 










- 69 - 

could be gained into the behaviour of the various means of measuring 
the efficiency of coal-cleaning* It was proposed to do this by deter¬ 
mining the influence of the variables of cyclone geometry and specific 
gravity of the medium on the specific gravity of separation. Error Area, 
Probable Error, Fraser-Yancey Efficiency and Anderson Efficiency* 




- 70 - 


VII 


EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT AMD PROCEDURE 






- 71 - 


DESCRIPTION OF D.S.M. CYCLONE 

Fig. 8 shows the design of the D.S.M. Cyclone used in the 
experiments conducted for this investigation. This diagram shows the 
simple construction of the cyclone* The conical section is six inches 
long and has a maximum inner diameter of three inches. Above the 
conical section is a cylindrical section called the feed chamber and 
directly above this component is the vortex finder and overflow chamber. 
The vortex finder consists of a hollow~tube set in the center of a 
circular plate. At the left of the diagram can be seen the tapered 
feed inlet which is joined tangentially to the cylindrical feed chamber. 
Removable shims can be inserted to adjust the size of the feed inlet 
but these were not used as it was desired to make all tests with the 
greatest throughput possible. At the apex of the cone Is a rubber 
valve which is merely a cylindrical rubber ring held in place by a 
constriction ring and an adjustable tailpiece. The tailpiece and the 
lower part of the cone are threaded* so that turning the tailpiece 
pushes the constriction ring against the rubber valve* thereby adjust¬ 
ing the diameter of the opening in its center. This valve regulates 
the refuse discharge from the bottom of the cyclone. The diameter of 
the opening can be varied from a maximum of 0.78 inches to as small an 
desired. 

The feed slurry enters through the feed inlet tangentially 
to the cylindrical feed chamber. The slurry rotates in the cone so 
that a vortex is formed and a vertical air column is maintained in the 
central part of the cyclone. According to Driessen (18) a state of 






G 


I 



Q 








5fCT/OKAl £l£i/A7/0\! 

'/S 'D'A fM* « ' APfx /At 


fig. 8 Design of D.S.M. Cyclone. 

3 H diameter. 20° Cone. 



3£CT/Oa/ A-A 
reeo //vz^r 

AV TV -OUT 5*4,^ 











































































- 72 - 


equilibrium appears to exist between the centrifugal force working 
on the small suspension particles and the flow of the liquid which 
acts in the opposite direction* The suspension particles which are 
introduced into the cyclone together with the raw fine coal, are forced 
towards the wall and move down towards the apex. Here some of the 
particles leave the cyclone while others rise in the central vortex 
and either leave the cyclone through the overflow at the top or are 
again forced towards the wall to repeat the above cycle. In this way, 
some of the suspension particles are circulating in the cyclone, so 
that the concentration and therefore the specific gravity of the sus¬ 
pension is higher in the cyclone than it is at either the feed inlet 
or overflow outlet. 

DESCRIPTION OF EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT 

The expermental set-up is shown in Figs. 9 and 10. Batch 
tests only were made since neither the equipment nor facilities for 
continuous operation were available. The cyclone was installed over 
a sixty-gallon mixing tank (a) which was provided with baffles and a 
two inch bottom outlet. A one-half horsepower "Lightnin" mixer (b) 
provided efficient mixing of the slurry. A one-inch centrifugal sand 
pump (c) drew the feed slurry from the tank and delivered it to the 
feed inlet of the cyclone (d). Overflow and underflow from the cyclone 
were returned to the mixing tank. However, provision was made for 
collecting and weighing timed samples of the overflow and underflow 
streams by simultaneously directing the flows into two weighing tanks. 
The trough (f) carried the underflow stream containing the refuse into 
the weighing tank (g) and the overflow stream containing the clean coal 








' : ■ c 


: 


>*,»r- 


K ' ' v . ‘ ' 


. • i ; /• 


> n! ' o c! v£ J: 


. o r 




■ 




Fig* 9 Experimental set-up of D.S.M* cyclone 
coal-washing equipment* 













73 - 


travelled through the overflow pipe (h) into the weighing tank (j). 

The refuse trough and overflow pipe were joined so that samples of 
underflow and overflow could be taken simultaneously* 

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 

The procedure adopted for a coal cleaning tests was as follows? 
The suspension of magnetite and water was brought to the required 
specific gravity and a quantity of fine coal (-10 + 100 mesh) was 
added- the amount of coal to be added depended upon the desired pulp 
ratio*. The pump was then started, the valve to the cyclone feed inlet 
opened and the inlet valve to the pimp regulated until the required 
pressure was indicated on the inlet pressure gauge of the cyclone. 

When the operator was ready to collect samples of each stream, the 
flows were simultaneously directed into the two weighing tanks for a 
timed interval. At the end of this time the streams were returned to 
the mixing tank. 

Initial Magnetite Recovery Procedure 

The first method used for recovering the magnetite medium 
was to pump the slurry containing the magnetite, washed coal, and 
water through a laboratory-site belt-type Dings magnetic separator. 

(k in Fig. 10) The belt was turned by means of the motor (w) and a 
chain and sprocket arrangement. The magnetite was carried by the belt 
past the influence of the separator magnets and dropped through a 
demagnetizing coil (m) through the pipe (n) into a pail (o). The washed 


The term ”pulp ratio” is defined here as the ratio of the weight 
of magnetite and water suspension to the weight of coal* A pulp 
ratio of six to one was used for most of the experiments in this 
investigation. 














f 




- t 











' 








r*< r 












Fig. 10 Another view of D.S.M. cyclone 
showing magnetic separator and 


coal-washing equipment 
100-mesh shaker screen. 





















- 7U - 

coal dropped to the bottom of the separator through the pipe (p) into 
the tank (v). The "Lightnin" mixer (r) was employed to keep the coal 
in suspension# This slurry was then punped through the pipe (s) to 
the feed entrance of the magnetic separator for another pass through 
it to remove the remaining magnetite. The coal was again removed from 
the separator through the pipe (p) and routed through a brass trough 
(t) which was placed over an efbtromagnet (u). This electromagnet 
was designed to pick up any remaining magnetite in the slurry# The 
coal was caught in a 100-mesh dewatering screen (not shown in Fig. 10) 
placed at the end of the trough. The above procedure was repeated for 
the underflow slurry containing the refuse product* The washed coal 
and refuse products were then dried, weighed, and sampled for ash and 
float-sink analysis* 

Final Magnetite Recovery Procedure 

After several cleaning tests had been conducted, using the 
above magnetite recovery procedure, it was found that considerable 
size degradation of the coal occurred. As a result of this size 
degradation, the ash content of the feed as calculated from the products 
varied from Ik to 17$, whereas, the ash content of the original raw 
feed was 19$. Because of this factor it was almost impossible to 
compare the cleaning results from the various experiments. The size 
degradation was due to the lengthy immersion time of the coal in the 
circuit, coupled with the pumping and mixing necessary in the magnetite 
recovery process. The immersion time of some of the coal was as much 
as three hours because of the limited size of the magnetic separator 




. 


\: 


s, 


' ■’ ; 




- 75 - 

and the necessity of two passes for each product through the equipment* 
Because the calculated ash content of the feed varied so 
widely when the magnetite was removed in the above manner a different 
method of separating the magnetite from the washed coal and refuse was 
finally adopted* The samples in the first experiments contained from 
20 to 30 lbs. of coal and were collected in 30 to U5 seconds. In the 
later experiments the sampling time was cut to approximately 15 seconds 
so that samples of slurry containing approximately 10. lbs. of coal were 
collected. The magnetite was rinsed off the washed coal and refuse 
by spraying with water on a 100-mesh screen. In this manner, the 
immersion time was cut to 15 or 20 minutes and the need for excessive 
punping and mixing of the slurry was circumvented. This procedure for 
removing magnetite from the products was used for all of the experiments 
for which data are reported in this thesis. Considerable size degrad¬ 
ation still occurred with the revised magnetite recovery procedure, 
since the ash of the feed as calculated from the products was approx¬ 
imately 17% as compared with 19% for the ash content of the raw feed. 
However/ this calculated ash figure was reasonably constant so that 
the various separations could be compared. 

OPERATING VARIABLES INVESTIGATED 

Some of the variables which may influence the operation of 
a cyclone washer are inlet feed opening, vortex finder (overflow) 
diameter, inlet feed pressure, underflow apex diameter, specific 
gravity of the medium, pulp ratio of the slurry, size composition of 
the feed coal, and specific gravity composition of the feed coal. 

Geer and Yancey (25) have shown that the size of the inlet feed opening 




‘ j: . 












<• 


i 





- 76 - 

has little influence on cyclone performance* For this reason and 
because maximum throughput was desired, the largest inlet feed area 
of 0.78 square inches was employed for the present experiments* Further, 
it was considered that the feed inlet and overflow opening should have 
approximately the same area for most efficient operation, since most 
of the feed slurry goes out through the overflow* Therefore, a vortex 
finder diameter of 1*03 inches and area of 0*83 square inches was 
selected for all the experiments* The maximum inlet feed pressure 
that could be maintained by the feed pump was 13*5 p*s a i*g* This 
pressure was used for all the experiments because the work of Geer and 
Yancey had indicated that increased efficiency was given by higher 
pressures* A pulp ratio of six to one was used for all the experiments 
except those in which the influence of pulp ratio on the performance 
of the cyclone was being studied* The throughput of raw coal at an 
inlet feed pressure of 13.5 p*s.i.g. and pulp ratio of six to one 
through the three-inch diameter cyclone was 1.2 tons per hour. 

The influence on cyclone performance of the variables of pulp 
ratio of the feed, ^J^^composition of the feed, and particle size of 
the feed were studied in the first phase of the experiments. In the 
second phase of the investigation, a study was made of the influence 
of the size of the cyclone underflow-opening and specific gravity of 
the medium on the specific gravity of separation. Probable Error, 

Error. Area, Fraser-Yancey Efficiency and Anderson Efficiency. 




' 









77 - 


UNDERFLOW OPENING DIAMETER AND SPECIFIC GRAVITIES OF MAGNETITE 
MEDIUM USED FOR EXPERIMENTS 

Cerchar investigators (U) have reported that the best 
cyclone operating results were given when the overflow and underflow 
exit diameters were approximately equal and the specific gravity of 
the medium approached the value of the specific gravity of separation* 
This means that, if it were desired to perform a separation at a 
specific gravity in the region of 1.60 - 1.70 at maximum separation 
efficiency, a suspension of the same order of specific gravity would 
be required. It was believed that, in this country, it would likely 
be more economical and practical to sacrifice a slight sharpness of 
separation for reduced costs of medium and medium recovery by using 
suspensions with as low a specific gravity as possible. In order to 
utilize these suspensions of lower specific gravity, the ratios of 
underflow to overflow exit diameters had to be much less than the ratio 
of approximately one to one recommended by the Cerchar investigators. 

The underflow opening diameter was varied from 0.73 to 0.58 inches 
while the overflow exit diameter was held constant at 1.03 inches. 

Thus, the maximum ratio of underflow to overflow diameter was 0.76 
and the minimum 0.56j the corresponding area ratios were 0.58 and 0.31. 
By employing underflow openings smaller than the overflow opening, use 
was made of one of the advantages of the cyclone washer over other 
heavy-media methods of cleaning, i.e., the separations were accomplished 
at much higher specific gravities than the specific gravities of the 
suspension used. 



i or. 


' Cu *'i0$ 







- 78 - 


TYPES OF UNDERFLOW DISCHARGE 

The minimum underflow opening diameter that could be used 
was determined from preliminary experiments to be 0.55 inches since 
any opening smaller than this did not produce a spray discharge. When 
an underflow opening of less than 0.55 inches was used under the 
experimental conditions as outlined in preceding sections, a ”rqpe” 
type of discharge was produced. The difference between a "rope* 1 and 
a “spray” discharge was easily discernible during operation of the 
cyclone. When a “spray” discharge was being maintained, the sound of 
air rushing through the apex of the cone was clearly audible, the inlet 
pressure gauge remained steady and the underflow discharge was in the 
form of a vortex which sprayed around the inner edge of the tailpiece. 
With a “rope” discharge there was no rush of air, the pressure gauge 
was often unsteady, and the underflow discharge had the appearance of 
a rope. A rope discharge was undesirable since with it excessive under¬ 
flow product was carried over into the overflow. 

COAL USED 

The coal used in this investigation was a medium-volatile 
bituminous-rank coal obtained through the courtesy of Cadomin Coal 
Co. Ltd. The coal was crushed and screened to give a sized product 
of 10- to 100-mesh. Coarse material could not be used in a three- 
inch cyclone and 100 mesh was considered to be the finest size that 
could be recovered on the dewatering screen. This size range is greater 
than that used by Geer and Yancey (25) (lli- to 35-mesh) but it was 
decided to extend the lower limit to determine whether or not cleaning 
could be accomplished on the finer sizes. 








i r ( 


- ■: 





- 79 - 


The same feed coal was used for most of the runs in order 
to keep the number of variables to a minimum. However, various types 
of feed were made up from this coal by blending with it a portion of 
the loUO-1.80 specific gravity fraction or the material heavier than 
1.80. This gave the variable feed which is encountered in actual 
commercial cleaning plant operation. 

MEDIUM USED 

The medium used was a suspension of finely-ground magnetite 
and water. The magnetite, designated as Magnetite B, was obtained 
from the Foote Mineral Co., Philadephia, Pa. The size specification 
given for the material was that 90-95$ passed through a 325 mesh screen. 
A screen analysis showed that practically none of the magnetite was 
retained on a lf?0 mesh and 93«3$ went through a 325 mesh screen. Mag¬ 
netite was chosen for the suspension medium because it was thought 
that magnetic separation of the magnetite from the coal might be the 
answer to the medium-recovery problem. In addition, since magnetite 
has a high density (Iu6 - Iw7) the amount required to give the required 
specific gravity of suspension is small and the H viscosity ,r of the 
medium is lower than would be the case with most other materials. 





. 














80 


VIII RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 





81 


A. INFLUENCE OF VARIOUS OPERATING VARIABLES 
ON CYCLONE PERFORMANCE 


In this first phase of the investigation an attempt was 
made to determine the influence on the cyclone performance of those 
operating variables on which little or no published data were available. 
The efficacy of the cleaning accomplished in each experiment was 
assessed by an appraisal of the yields and ash contents of the products, 
Fraser-Yancey Efficiency, Probable Error, Error Area and the amount of 
misplaced material* 

(i) PULP RATIO OF THE SLURRY 

The experiments to determine the influence of pulp ratio 
of the slurry were conflicted under the following constant conditions: 
specific gravity of magnetite medium 1*30, inlet feed pressure 13• 5 
p*s.i*g*, inlet feed area 0*?8 square inches, overflow vortex finder 
diameter 1*03 inches, and underflow apex diameter 0*?9 inches; the 
ratio of underflow to overflow-opening area was 0*33« The only variable 
in this series of experiments was therefore the pulp ratio of the 
slurry which has previously been defined as the ratio of the weight of 
water and magnetite suspension to the weight of coal added* The pulp 
ratio was varied from three-to-cne to eight-to-one for this phase of 
the investigation* The data given by these cyclone separations are 
shown in Table I. 

The best separations resulted from use of the eight-to-one 
pulp ratio* This was what might have been expected, since the "viscosity” 
of this slurry was lower than that of the others used in this series of 






•:. n 




82 - 


experiments due to the smeller amount of coal added* As the pulp 
ratio was decreased or in other words, as greater quantities of coal 
■were added, the sharpness of separation deteriorated; this is shown 
by both the probable errors and the error areas* The only unacceptable 
separation was that due to the three-tc-one pulp ratio with a probable 
error of 0*130 and error area of 85# 7* The Fraser-Yancey Efficiency 
also decreased as the pulp ratio decreased with the only unacceptable 
efficiency of 93»h% again being given by the three-to-cne pulp ratio* 

TABLE X 

Data for Cyclone Separations Illustrating Influence 
of Pulp Ratio on Cyclone Washing Performance 


Test Number 

Pulp Ratio 

Yield of Washed 
Coal % 

Ash Content of 
Washed Coal % 

Ash Content of 
Refuse % 

Calculated Ash 
Content of Feed % 

Specific Gravity 
of Separation 

Probable Error 

Error Area sq.cm* 

Fraser-Yancey 

Efficiency % 

Misplaced Material % 

Area Efficiency % 


1*6 

1*7 

8 to 1 

6 to 1 

82.0 

82.2 

9.6 

9.8 

52.6 

52.8 

17.2 

17.5 

1.65 

1.67 

.066 

.072 

1*6.6 

52.7 

98.3 

97.6 

3.7 

5.2 

81.9 

79.1* 


1*1* 

1*5 

1* to 1 

3 to 1 

81*. 2 

79.1* 

10.1* 

10.0 

53.9 

1*5.2 

17.3 

17.2 

1.69 

1.62 

.092 

o 

on* 

H 

0 

70.5 

85.7 

97.2 

93.1* 

6.0 

9.2 

72.5 

66.6 









, * 









83 


These results indicated that as long as the pulp ratio was 
not allowed to become less than four-to-one, satisfactory operation 
could be achieved* The yields of washed coal varied from 82.0 to 
81u2? and the ash contents of the washed coal varied from 9*6 to 10. 1$. 
In other words, fluctuations in feed rates would not greatly affect 
cyclone performance as long as overloading was avoided. 

Van der Walt r s data (!£) showed that pulp ratios as low as 
three-to-one did not appreciably affect the quality of the separations. 
However, the diameter of the underflow opening of the cyclone used by 
Van der Walt was almost the same as that of the overflow vortex finder, 
(l.?0 inches and 1.88 inches respectively). Under these conditions it 
is likely that the so-called "viscosity” effects in the lower conical 
section of the cyclone were less in Van der Walt*s experiments than 
was the case for the cyclone used in the present investigation which 
utilized a much lower ratio of underflow to overflow-opening area 
(0.33 as compared with 0.6U). 

(2) SPECIFIC GRAVITY COMPOSITION OF THE FEED 

A series of experiments was conducted with feeds having 
various specific gravity compositions in order to discover whether the 
specific gravity composition of the feed coal had any effect on cyclone 
performance. It was desired to utilize feeds which differed only in 
the percentage of coal present in the several density fractions, but 
which had, as nearly as possible, the same characteristics such as 
particle size, shape, etc. To attain this end, the cyclone was used 
to wash Cadomin 10- to 100-mesh coal at different specific gravities 
of separation. The products were blended with raw Cadomin 10- to 100- 
ms sh coal to give the various feeds. So far as can be ascertained, 
no attempt of this nature has been made heretofore. Other workers 





•• ■ 


< )f 








. 









have generally added foreign material such as sand to the raw coal or 
used different types of coal to obtain feeds with dissimilar density 
compositions* 

An example of the ± 0.10 specific gravity distribution curve 
for the calculated feed coal of Experiment No. I 4 O is presented in 
Fig. 11. This curve was proposed by Bird ( 6 ) to demonstrate the 
degree of difficulty of washing of a coal. It shows the percentage 
of the feed coal lying within a range of 1 0.10 of any specific gravity. 
The data for plotting the curve are obtained from the cumulative float 
versus specific gravity curve shown in Fig. 6 , e.g., the cumulative 
float at 1.60 specific gravity is 77ol$ whilst that at 1.80 is 85.7%# 
Therefore the difference between these two values - 8 . 6 $ » is the 
amount of material in the feed lying within 1 0.10 of 1.70 specific 
gravity (i.e. between 1.60 and 1.80). This value of 8.6 is plotted 
at 1.70 specific gravity and the points for the remainder of the curve 
are found in a similar mariner. 

Bird* s method presupposes that the degree of washing diffi¬ 
culty of coal is dependent upon the amount of material near the specific 

assessing 

gravity of separation. This seems to be a logical method of/the wash- 
ability of coal* other things being equal* (particle size, shape, etc.) 
it seems reasonable to assume that the greater the percentage of 
material in the feed near the density at which the separation is to be 
made, the more difficult will be the separation. The scale of washing 
difficulty proposed by Bird is shewn in Table XI 


' 


rmi, -i \ o v'. •/ % 




! 






.r .-or ‘ o y'.r ■ c 




c. 




> v 






x 







Specific gravity of coal 



Fig.11 ±0.10 Specific gravity curve for feed coal 

used in experiment No.40 












\ 



- 85 - 

TABLE XI 


Scale of Washing Difficulty Based on t 0*10 Specific Gravity 
Percentage Values Proposed by Bird ( 6 ) 


Specific Gravity 
% 

Degree of Difficulty 

Preparation 

0-7 

Simple 

Almost any process, 
high tonnages 

7-10 

Moderately difficult 

Efficient processes; 
high tonnages 

10-1? 

Difficult 

Efficient processes; 
medium tonnages, 
good operation 

15-20 

Very difficult 

Efficient processes; 
low tonnages; 
expert operation 

20-25 

Exceedingly difficult 

Very efficient 
processes; low ton- 
ages; expert operation 

Above 25 

Formidable 

Limited to a few ex¬ 
ceptionally efficient 
processes; expert 
operation 


The data for the series of experiments for this phase of 
the investigation are shown in Table XII* These experiments were all 
made under the following constant conditions f specific gravity of 
magnetite medium, 1*30, pulp ratio 6 to 1, inlet feed pressure of 
13*5 p*s*i*g*, inlet feed area 0*?8 square inches, overflow vortex 
finder diameter 1*03 inches, and underflow opening diameter of 0*66 
inches. The only variable was the specific gravity composition of 
the feed* 



















' 










' 


\ 












oJU 


i i :■ 


t 


+ - t . „ . 

* ■ 












- 86 - 


TABLE XII 

Data for Cyclone Separations Illustrating Influence 
of Specific Gravity Composition of the Feed on 
Cyclone Washing Performance 


Experiment Number 

h9 

53 

50 

51 

t 0.10 Specific 

Gravity % 

9.8 

1U.6 

17.6 

23.6 

Yield of Washed Coal & 

79.7 

73.1 

68.1 

75.8 

Ash Content of Washed 

Coal % 

9.1 

10.2 

8.9 

10.1* 

Ash Content of Refuse % 

5l.l 

50.9 

1*8.5 

39.6 

Calculated Ash Content 
of Feed % 

17.6 

21.6 

21.6 

17.5 

Specific Gravity of 
Separation 

1.61 

1.62 

1.58 

1.59 

Probable Error 

0.073 

0.070 

0.067 

0.039 

Error Area sq.cm. 

1*6.0 

ia. 2 

ia.o 

28.5 

Fraser-Yancey Efficiency % 

97.? 

96.8 

96.2 

96.1 

Misplaced Material % 

1*.0 

5.2 

6.2 

U*5 


The unblended feed of Experiment No. k9 gave the lowest 
1 0*10 specific gravity value of and, therefore, under Bird T s 
classification is a moderately difficult coal to wash. The feed for 
Experiment No. 53 was a more difficult coal to wash with a t 0.10 
specific gravity value of llu 6%, whilst the coal used for Experiment 
No. 50 was classed as a very difficult washing problem with a t 0.10 
value of 17 . 6 %, The feed for Experiment No. 50 with a t 0.10 value of 
23*6 was classed as an exceedingly difficult coal to wash. These 






1 ’ ) 




c 




* 







- 87 - 

1 0*10 specific gravity values were all found from the 1 0*10 specific 
gravity curve for each feed coal at the actual specific gravity of 
separation* It will be noted that, although the calculated ash contents 
of the feeds for Experiment Nos* h9 and 5l were almost identical at 17*6 
and 17.5$ respectively, the degree of washing difficulty was quite 
different with i 0.10 values of 9.8 and 23.6$ respectively. The feeds 
of Experiment Nos. 50 and 53 had identical ash contents of 21.6$ but 
different t 0.10 values of 17*6 and ll*.6$ respectively; the difference 
between these two values was probably not great enough to have any 
effect on the washing results. 

Further examination of the data in Table XII shows that the 
sharpness of separation, as measured by the error areas and probable 
errors did not deteriorate with increasing difficulty of washing, i.e. 
the probable errors and error areas for Experiments Nos. l*9> 53 and $0 
were approximately equal. The lowest probable error and error area 
were given by the separation achieved in Experiment No* 5l* A probable 
explanation for these results is that this sharpest separation, obtained 
with the feed which was presumably the most difficult coal to wash, was 
due to the influence of particle size. As has been stated previously, 
the feed coals for all of the experiments in this series except that 
for Experiment No* 1*9 consisted of raw coal (such as that used for 
Experiment No. 1*9) to which was added coal on which previous separations 
had been made with the cyclone washer. A certain amount of sizing 
occurred in the cyclone, with the coarser material tending to go to 
the underflow. Only a small amount of high-ash refuse material was 
added to the raw coal to make up the feeds for Experiment Nos. 50 and 53 $ 


c 


. . ) 




. : ■ i ‘or 






iu ti 



- 88 - 

these amounts were probably too small to alter the over-all size 
composition of the feed. However, for the feed used in Experiment 
No* 51 a considerably larger amount of coal having an intermediate 
specific gravity in the region of l.UO - 1.80 was used for blending. 

It is likely, therefore, that this feed contained a larger proportion 
of coarse material than did the others in this series of experiments. 

This would account for the lower probable error and error area values 
achieved in this experiment, since the cyclone performs much sharper 
separations* on the coarser particles (+h& mesh) than it does on the 
finer particles ( -1*8 mesh) of coal. 

Despite this undesirable influence of particle size on the 
separations, the results demonstrated that the cyclone was surprisingly 
adaptable to changes in the washing difficulty of the feed coal. This 
was shown by the ash contents of the washed coal products which only 
varied from 9*1 to 10. k%» The ability to yield a product with a 
specific ash content is important in coal preparation, since a washed 
coal with a guaranteed minimum ash content is usually required. In 
addition, the Fraser-Yancey efficiencies for the separations in this 
series of experiments were satisfactory showing that there was no 
excessive loss of clean coal. 

(3) PARTICLE SIZE OF THE FEED 

Experiment No. h7 was conducted to investigate the influence 
of particle size of the feed coal on the cleaning effected by the cyclone 
washer. This experiment was conducted with a 1.30 specific gravity 
medium and a 0.5>9 inch underflow opening diameter so that the ratio of 
underflow to overflow-opening area was 0.33* All the other variables 

* 

See p. 89 for Influence of Particle Size. 





I , 







Ov, 







89 


were held constant at the same values as those employed for the 
experiments for which the data are presented in Table XIV. Screen 
analyses were made on the washed coal and refuse products and float- 
sink analyses were performed on each size fraction; from these, dis¬ 
tribution-curve data were calculated# A summary of the data for this 
experiment is shown in Table XIII while the distribution curves for 
the various size fractions are shown in Fig. 12# 

TABLE XIII 

Summary of Results for Cyclone Experiment No* U7 

10- to 100-Mesh Cadomin Coal 
-- 


Data 

Screen Size Mesh 

-10+11* -llf+28 -28+1*8 -1*8+65 -65+100 -10+100 

, 


Weight of Fraction 
(in terms of the Feed)% 

19.3 

38.2 

27.5 

8.7 ' 

6.3 

100.0 

Yield of Washed Coal % 

75.1 

81.0 

85.8 

86.9 . 

88.2 

82.2 

Ash Content of Washed 

Coal % 

9.9 

8.1* 

9.5 

10.3 

11.8 

9.8 

Ash Content of Refuse % 

20# 3 

51.2 

53.8 

58.U 

63.2 

52.6 

Calc. Ash Content of 

Feed % 

20*0 

17.3 

15.8 

16.6 

17.9 

17.1* 

Specific Gravity of 
Separation 

1.63 

1.65 

1.72 

1.79 

1.81* 

1.66 

Probable Error 

0.061 

0.088 

0.089 

0.115 

0.156 

0.072 

Error Area sq. cm# 


61.2 

61*. 3 

75.5 

81*. 2 

52.7 

Area Efficiency % 

82.7 

76.1 

75.1 

70.5 

67.1 

79.1* 

Fraser-Yancey Efficiency 
% 

99.9 

96.9 

97.5 

97.7 

97.8 

97.6 

Misplaced material % 

5.8 

5.9 

5.2 

U.8 

5.3 

5.5 

t 0#10 Specific Gravity % 

lk.8 

8.7 

5.7 

5.8 

l*.l 

8.3 































Fig.12 Distribution curves for various size fractions. 
Experiment No.47. on Corres n?£r 

~k screen Sizes c/ 














- 90 - 


The distribution curves illustrate the manner in which the 
sharpness of separation deteriorated as the particle size decreased, 
the lowest probable error and error area being attained with the 10- 
to Ui-mesh fraction* As the particle size decreased, the specific 
gravity of separation increased, the 10- to lli-mesh fraction being 
separated at 1 # 63 and the 65- to 100-mesh fraction at 1.8U specific 
gravity* These results verify the findings of Geer and Yancey (25)# 

Van der Walt (U5)* and Burton (11) that the specific gravity of separ¬ 
ation increases as the particle size decreases. However, the lower 
limit of coal that could be satisfactorily cleaned was not found to be 
the same as reported by these investigators. Geer and Yancey reported 
satisfactory cleaning on particles down to 65 mesh, but not on the coal 
in the 65- to 100-mesh size fraction. Van der Walt reported satisfact¬ 
ory cleaning on particles down to the U8-mesh size and unsatisfactory 
cleaning on sizes smaller than this. Burton, on the other hand, 
reported sharp separations with a probable error of 0.08U for the 120- 
to 200-mesh size range. In the experiment for the present investigation, 
satisfactory cleaning was accomplished on the 65- to 100-mesh fraction. 
Although the probable error of 0.156 was high as compared with that of 
0.078 cited by Burton for this size range, the cleaning was considered 
to be good since the yield of washed coal for the fraction was 88.2? 
whilst the ash contents of the washed coal, refuse and feed were 11.8, 
63.2 and 17*9? respectively* furthermore, the P*aser-Yancey Efficiency 
was 97*8? which indicated that the loss of clean coal was not too great. 

It is interesting to note that Geer and Yancey and Van der 
Walt used underflow to overflow-exit area ratios of 0.86 and 0.75 


> ... v. 


91 


respectively which were much larger than the ratio of 0*33 for 
Experiment No. U7# Cerchar () investigators have stated that the 
lowest probable errors are obtained when this ratio is slightly less 
than one and the density of the medium approaches the value of the 
specific gravity of separation. Better cleaning was accomplished on 
the 65- to 100-mesh coal in Experiment NO. hi than that achieved on 
this size range by Geer and Yancey, and Van der Walt, even though the 
above mentioned conditions were met to a greater extent in their 
experiments than they were in the present investigation. Burton has 
not reported the cyclone underflow to overflow diameter ratio employed 
in the experiment to determine the influence of size composition of 
the feed. However, the underflow and overflow opening diameters for 
cyclone separations performed at similar specific gravities of separ¬ 
ation were reported by Burton (11). The ratio of underflow to overflow¬ 
opening area for these experiments was 0.36 which is approximately the 
same as that used in Experiment No. h7 of the present investigation. 

If the assumption is correct that the underflow to overflow size ratio 
used by Burton for the particle size experiment was of this order, it 
would appear as though better cleaning on the finer sizes (minus 65 
mesh) can be accomplished with a smaller ratio of underflow to overflow¬ 
opening area than that recommended by Cerchar investigators. 



92 


B. INFLUENCE OF SIZE OF UNDERFLOW OPENING AND SPECIFIC GRAVITY 
OF MEDIUM ON APPARENT EFFICIENCY OF CLEANING 


Although the two operating valuables of size of underflow 
opening and specific gravity of the medium do not seem to be related 
yet they are so closely linked that it is difficult to discuss one 
without mentioning the other* This is because the specific gravity 
at which a separation is performed with the cyclone washer is 
by the size of the underflow opening <?/*/the specific gravity of 

the he dim. WfM f yve* Sfec/fip 

uhderf/c*u /*<? Jficc/Y* ar&r//y or /J s*cr&isec£*fy rttfS/ry ^crf/c 

yrmvrty +f the £*<z/*n,J Consequently, these two most important operating 

variables are discussed together. In the following subsections, the 

influence of the operating variables of size of underflow opening and 

specific gravity of the medium on washing effected by the cyclone is 

studied in an attempt to determine the cause or causes of the lack of 

agreement between the various methods of expressing coal-cleaning 

efficiency* In addition, data obtained by other workers are reviewed 

.the lack of agreement 

to demonstrate/between these various efficiencies. A summary of the 
data illustrating the influence of the above mentioned variables is 
presented in Table XIV. These experiments were conducted under the 
following constant conditions! inlet feed area 0*?8 square inches, 
overflow vortex finder diameter 1.03 inches, inlet feed pressure 13*5 
p.s.i.g., pulp ratio six-to-one, feed coal Cadomin 10- to 100-mesh. 

The data in Table XIV are divided into four sections! the experiments 
in each section were conducted with a constant specific gravity of 









D 





* 


* 





'O. 


v i/Ya! 





TABLE XIV 

Data for Cyclone Separations Showing Influence of Underflow to Overflow 
Area Ratio and Specific Gravity of Medium _ 


- 93 - 






















1 












suspension and various sizes of underflow opening* These data give 
the yields and ash contents of the products as well as the specific 
gravities of separation. They also show the efficiency of cleaning, 
as measured by the various methods which have been discussed previously. 

(1) SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF SEPARATION 


There has been a considerable amount of debate as to whether 


or not the distribution curve ( and therefore the Probable Error and 
Error Area) is independent of the specific gravity of separation. 
Yancey and Geer (1*7)* maintain that the distribution curve is virtu¬ 
ally independent of the specific gravity of separation. Vissac (1;6) 
Tromp (30) and the French investigators at Cerchar (3), on the other 
hand, take the stand that the Probable Error increases with higher 
specific gravities of separation. In the following subsection the 
views and arguments of both sides are presented. 

(i) Previous Work 


As mentioned above the French Cerchar investigators state 


that the slope of the distribution curve is dependent on the specific 
gravity of separation. They have proposed a function called the 
"Magnitude of Imperfection" I, by which the sharpness of separation 
achieved by coal-washing equipment operating at different specific 
gravities of separation can be compared. 



where I » Magnitude of Imperfection 
E * Probable Error 
dp= Specific Gravity of 


separation 


However, no data have been presented by the Cerchar investigators to 
demonstrate the relationship between specific gravity of separation 




) 




' 


>; .0 O; 


Yi/' - i , /■; • . 


, ■' . i 







FEED GOING TO WASHED COAL 


O.l 



SR GR. OF COAL 


Fig. 13 Transformed distribution curve for cyclone separation 

of Experiment No, 26 using probability scale for ordinate 
and logarithmic scale for abscissa. 




95 


and Probable Error, nor has any reason been given for dividing the 
Probable Error by the quantity dp-1, other than that "mathematically 
I (the Magnitude of Imperfection) is approximately the reciprocal of 
the anamorphosed curve for a separation conforming to the logarithmic- 
normal law, whereas E (the Probable Error) is the reciprocal of the 
slope of the anamorphosed curve representing a separation following 
the normal law” (3). 

Cerchar investigators (3) have stated that the distribution 
curves, which normally have a reversed S-shape, can be transformed into 
straight lines by the use of a probability scale on the ordinate. 

Three types of scale are used for the abscissa. It is asserted that 
most coal-cleaning devices give separations whose distribution curves 
can be transformed into straight lines by using a logarithmic scale 
for the specific gravity of the coal on the abscissa. Where this is 
not successful the specific gravity minus one is plotted on the abscissa, 
still using the logarithmic scale. Separations of this type are said 
to follow the ”logarithmie-normal law”. The distribution curves of 
other separations can be transformed into straight lines by using an 
arithmetic scale for the specific gravity of the coal on the abscissa. 
These are said to follow the "normal law”. Belugou and de Chawlowski 
(U) of Cerchar obtained cyclone separations whose distribution curves 
foil wed the so-called "normal law”, i.e. the curves could be trans¬ 
formed by using the probability scale for the ordinate and an arithmstic 
scale for the abscissa. However, none of the separations performed by 
the cyclone in the present investigation followed either the so-called 
"normal” or "logarithmic-normal laws”, since the transformed curves 






i y 










■, r ' ■ 








) 








FEED GOING TO WASHED COAL 



Fig* 1U Transformed distribution curve for cyclone separation of 
Experiment No* 26 using same scales as Fig. 13 but with 
specific gravity of coal minus 1.0 rather than specific 
gravity of coal plotted as abscissa* 

■ 





96 


all had a reversed S-shape similar to that of the original distribution 
curve* This coincided with the experience of Yancey and Geer (1*7) who 
report that they ’’have plotted a large number of distribution curves 
on the scales advocated by Cerchar, with varying degrees of success* 

The data always show some curvature, and in many cases plotting as a 
straight line involves a significant sacrifice in accuracy* The 
reports of Cerchar contain a great number of distribution curves 
plotted on a probability scale, but in most cases the accuracy of the 
straight-line representation cannot be judged because the plotted 
points are not shewn and no numerical data are given* Even though 
Cerchar advocates the use of the straight-line type of plot, it admits 
that no distribution data form a perfect straight line and that in 
many cases the deviation is serious* 11 

Belugou and Vitaux (?) of Cerchar showed transformed distri¬ 
bution curves for a rheolaveur washer which had a shape similar to 
those obtained in the present investigation, although the distribution 
curves for other coal-cleaning devices demonstrated good straight-line 
transf ormation. 

In Fig. 13 the distribution curve for the cyclone separation 
accomplished in Experiment No. 26 has been plotted using the probability 
scale for the ordinate and a logarithmic scale on the abscissa. In 
Fig. lU the same scales have been employed for ordinate and abscissa 
as in Fig. 13• however, in Fig. ll* the specific gravity of the coal 
minus one is plotted rather than the specific gravity. Fig. 1? shows 
the transformed distribution curve when an arithmetic scale was used 
for the abscissa. The cyclone separations in the present investigation 


: I l 


) 


) 


) 


i: 









> 



FEED GOING TO WASHED COAL 



Fig, 15 Transformed distribution curve for cyclone separation of 
Experiment No, 26 using probability scale for ordinate 
and arithmetic scale for abscissa. 




97 - 


yielded distribution curves which all had a similar shape when an 
attempt at such straight-line transformation was made* None of the 
foregoing curves are straight lines* There is thus some doubt regard¬ 
ing the validity of the method for the transformation of the distribution 
curves into straight lines* Cerchar engineers have justified the use 
of the "Magnitude of Imperfection", I, mentioned previously, on the 
premise that mathematically I is the reciprocal of the slope of the 
transformed curve for a separation following the "logarithmic-normal 
law", whereas, the Probable Error, E, is the reciprocal of a separation 
foil wing the "normal law". In view of the foregoing evidence, it is 
doubtful whether the reciprocals of the slopes of these transformed 
curves have any significance* 

Vissac has presented data (1*6) to illustrate the effect of 
the specific gravity of separation on the probable error but the data 
were not free from the influence of particle size* It was demonstrated 
that with the various sizes of coal treated in a jig handling an unsized 
feed, the separations made at higher specific gravities were character¬ 
ized by greater probable errors* However, the separations made at the 
higher specific gravities were those made on the finer sizes of the 
feed* As has been indicated in the section illustrating the influence 
of particle size’" on cyclone performance, separations made on the finer 
sizes are achieved at higher specific gravities with greater probable 
errors* Therefore, as Yancey and Geer have pointed out (1*7 )> it is 
likely that in this case, the particle size had more influence on the 
probable error than did the specific gravity of separation. 

oo 

See page 98. 








3 


c 


c 


•I 










1 

















Fig.16a Probable error vs. specific gravity of separation- 

Burton's data (II ) 



Fig.16b Data for cyclone experiments plotted in same way as 
Burtons data in Fig. 16 a 















98 


Burton (11) made a series of tests with the cyclone washer 
on fine coal in which all the variables were held constant except the 
specific gravity of the medium* It was concluded that the Probable 
Error increased as the specific gravity of separation was increased 
and that this was due to the greater " viscosities 11 at the higher 
specific gravities. A plot of the probable errors versus specific 
gravity of separation from Burton* s data is shown in Figure l6a* While 
this seems conclusive evidence that the probable errors do increase with 
higher specific gravities of separation, the data obtained in the present 
investigation (Table XIV) when plotted in a similar manner indicated 
that this is not necessarily true (Fig. 16b). Each of the four curves 
was obtained with a fixed underflow-opening diameter and all variables 
held constant except the specific gravity of the medium. When the 
ratio of underflow to overflow-opening area was 0.31 a curve similar 
to that shown by Burton was obtained. However, the other three ratios 
of underflow to overflow-opening area gave curves which demonstrated 
that the probable errors decreased at the higher specific gravities 
of separation. It would appear, therefore, that Burton has presented 
insufficient evidence to prove that the probable error increases with 
specific gravity of separation. 

Yancey and Geer, in disagreement with Vissac, Burton, Troup 
and the Cerchar investigators, maintain that the Probable Error is 
virtually independent of the specific gravity of separation, at least 
for the range of specific gravities at which washeries are usually 
operated. They cite data obtained from an experiment made with a wet 
concentrating table to substantiate this stand (lj-7)* Tromp (30) con- 


'i 


l ( . 


y .:-' 






3 ‘ ; 


1 : . . O 




t 


•o .xro.Wrv x 




x • 


: : 






itraight-iine relationship 




, 1 

x:.u 


t 



































































































































































































































































































- 99 - 

tends that these separations are not comparable because the data for 
the individual zones were added together to provide separations at 
various specific gravities and thus the time of separation was different 
for each case* Tromp maintains that, in this case, the separations 
at the lower specific gravities were obtained by shortening the path 
along which the particles travelled, and therefore the time available 
for the particles to sort themselves out was less. This objection 
seems to be a reaonable one, but should not apply to washing accomp¬ 
lished with the cyclone, in which the separation time is very short. 
Yancey and Geer have also presented data for three cyclone separations 
which gave identical probable errors. These were made at specific 
gravities of separation of 1.56, 1 . 63 , and 1.75 with error areas of 
37* ill and k3 square centimeters respectively. Tromp (30) pointed out 
that if these error areas were divided by the respective specific 
gravities of separation, the resulting quotients were almost constant, 
with values of 2U.U* 25*1 and 2iu6 respectively. Therefore, Tromp 
maintained that this was evidence that the sharpness of separation 
decreases as the specific gravity of separation increases. 

(ii) Present Investigation 

In the preceding subsection the views of various coal- 
preparation authorities have been presented concerning the influence 
of the specific gravity of separation on the Probable Error and Error 
Area* in this and the following subsections the cyclone data shown in 
Table XIV are analysed in an attempt to find the reasons for the 
divergence of opinion on this subject. The cyclone data are also 
analysed in an endeavour to find the cause or causes of the disagreement 





-o 1 






o ", v; 




■ ’ 


■ f 


:.n 




'f4 **\ 



















































































































































































































































































- 100 


between the various efficiencies by which coal-cleaning is measured. 

In Fig. 17 the specific gravities of separation have been 
plotted against the ash contents of the washed coal from the cyclone 
separation data presented in Table XIV. This plot illustrates that 
for this feed coal and under these operating conditions, there is a 
general straight-line relationship between the ash content of the 
washed-coal product and the specific gravity of separation. It is 
thus possible to predict the approximate ash content of the washed- 
cosl from the specific gravity of separation providing that all of 
the operating conditions are the same as those outlined for the 
experiments of Table XIV. 

In Fig. 18 the specific gravity of separation has been 
plotted against the ratios of underflow to overflow-opening area" 
with the specific gravity of the medium as parameters. In Fig. 19 the 
specific gravities of separation have been plotted versus the specific 
gravities of the suspensions with the ratios of underflow to overflow¬ 
opening area as parameters. These two figures represent a cross-plot 
of the data, showing the manner in which the specific gravity of 
separation varies with changes in the two variables. The curves for 
the 1.30, 1.35> 1.U0 and 1.1*5 specific gravity suspension in Fig. 18 
are approximately parallel. Similarly in Fig. 19 the curves for the 
four constant cyclone dimensions with ratios of underflow to overflow 
opening area of 0.31, 0.37, 0.50 and 0.58 are approximately parallel. 

The ratios of the underflow-opening area, to the overflow opening area 
are used throughout this thesis although the overflow opening was held 
constant and the underflow-opening only was varied. The area ratios 
are used because they are thought to be a more fundamental cyclone 
dimension than the sizes of the underflow opening alone. 



) 




l V ! 




:> . r- 








































































































































































































































































































- 101 - 

These diagrams show that the specific gravity of separation is approx¬ 
imately a linear function of the type y • m x + b where "b" is the 
intercept, "m" the slope of the line and "x n is the independent vari¬ 
able. In Fig. 18 the independent variable ,f x ,T is the ratio of underflow 
to overflow area. The slope M m n is approximately constant for all the 
specific gravities of medium employed, while the constant M b u is 
different for each medium since it is the value of the intercept. 

In Fig. 19 the independent variable ’be" is the specific gravity of 
the medium. The slope M m w in this case is approximately constant for 
the ratios of underflow to overflow-opening area of 0*31* 0.37* 0.50, 
and 0.58. 

These two diagrams (Figs. 18 and 19) demonstrate that for 
coal washing performed by the cyclone, the specific gravity of separ¬ 
ation is not an independent variable * it may be likened to the volimie 
in a very simple analogy, viz: 

Volume: length, width, height. 

Specific gravity specific gravity size of underflow other 

of separation of medium opening variable 

In this example, the volume depends upon the length, width, and height. 
When the height is held constant, the volume depends upon the length 
and width. If the length is fixed the volume depends upon the width 
and if the width is fixed the volume depends upon the length. By 
analogy, the specific gravity of separation depends upon the specific 
gravity of the medium, size of the underflow opening and all other 
variables. The height is analogous to the numerous other variables 
which are held constant. Under these conditions the specific gravity 




- 102 - 

of separation depends 15 )on the specific gravity of medium and the 
size of the cyclone underflow opening; when the suspension specific 
gravity is fixed the specific gravity of separation depends upon the 
size of the cyclone underflow-opening and when the latter is fixed 
the specific gravity of separation depends upon the specific gravity 
of the medium* These results may help to explain the divergence of 
opinion as to whether or not the distribution curve is independent 
of the specific gravity of separation* It would seem from the argu¬ 
ments advanced by the workers mentioned in the previous subsection 
that they have assumed that the specific gravity 0 / separation is an 
independent variable; Figs* 18 and 19 demonstrate that this is not 
so* This aspect will be discussed in more detail in the following 
sections* 

It will be noted that one point in Figs* 18 and 19 has been 
disregarded* this is for the separation performed with the 1*30 specific 
gravity medium and the 0 * 5>0 ratio of underflow to overflow-opening 
area* The reason for doing so becomes apparent on examination of the 
curves in Fig* 19* The curves for the 0*37, 0.5>0 and 0.58 ratios of 
underflow to overflow-opening area are parallel if the specific gravity 
of separation for the above-mentioned separation is not included* 
Similarly in Fig. 18, the curves for all the specific gravities of 
suspension from 1.30 to 1.U5 are parallel if this point is again 
disregarded* A well-established trend was demonstrated by the other 
specific gravities of separation; therefore, it was believed that under 
the operating conditions cited for this experiment the specific gravity 


} 




;]• 

fts'T 










K d ' d 









urn 


T 


m 


■ 

-|-r 

m 








qdiit 

. 

■Hu. 

i'll XX 



ZSL 



- 

jin 


iiS 















































































































































































































































































































' 



103 


of separation should have been greater than the value of 1.1;0 actually- 
obtained# 

(2) ERROR AREA 

In Figs. 20 and 21 the Error Area has been plotted versus 
the ratios of underflow to overflow-opening area and specific gravity 
of medium respectively. These cross-plots of the data correspond to 
Figs. 18 and 19 in which the specific gravity of separation was plotted 
against the same variables. Fig. 18 shows that there is a uniform 
rate of change in specific gravity of separation for each suspension 
as the underflow opening size is changed, since the curves are approx¬ 
imately parallel straight lines. However, Fig. 20 demonstrates that 
the change in Error Area does not follow the same pattern. The curves 
for the 1.30 and 1.35 specific gravity suspensions are parallel, indic¬ 
ating a uniform rate of change in the Error Area with these two 
suspensions as the underfloor opening size is changed* The curves for 
the 1* I|0 and 1.U5 specific gravity media are parallel but have steeper 
slopes than those for the 1.30 and 1.35 suspensions. Therefore, con¬ 
sidering Figs. 18 and 20 it is evident that with the 1.30 and 1.35 
suspension specific gravities, the Error Area increases from 38 to 53 
and from 1*0 to 55 respectively when increasing specific gravities of 
separation are obtained by changing the ratio of cyclone underfloor to 
overfloor opening area from 0.58 to 0.31* With the l.UO and 1.1*5 
specific gravity media, the Error Area shows a greater increase from 
3k to 62 and from 35 to 65 respectively, at higher specific gravities 
of separation when the latter are again achieved by decreasing the 
size of the cyclone underflow opening# 



■\*A" 


' 


o : < 


Error Ai 



imderflow to overflow 


fords refer to cyclone 






Wfi 


l fj 





















































































































































































































































ioU - 


It is problematical whether the curves in Fig. 20 should 
be represented by S-shaped curves or by straight lines. The Error 
Area versus specific gravity of medium curves in Fig. 21 together with 
the curves in Fig. 20 represent a cross-plot of the data. The curves 
in Fig. 21 seem to be best represented by straight lines. The straight- 
line representation also seems to best suit the plot of Probable Error 
versus area ratio in Fig. 22 which corresponds to a similar plot for 
the Error Area in Fig. 20. The Probable Error is an approximation of 
the Error Area, and the two should give similar results. Because of 
these circumstances the straight-line representation was chosen. 

Fig. 21 demonstrates that each Error Area curve for constant 
cyclone dimensions has a characteristic slope; this slope is different 
for each cyclone underflow to overflow-opening area ratio, being a 
fairly steep positive slope for the 0.31 ratio, less steep for the 
0*37 ratio, and negative for the 0*50 and 0.58 ratios* Thus for the 
small underflow opening (0.31 ratio of underflow to overflow area), 
the Error Area increases with higher specific gravities of medium; 
since the specific gravity of separation also increases with greater 
suspension specific gravities, this means that for these cyclone 
dimensions the Error Area rises from \\9 to 62 (Fig. 20) when the 
specific gravity of separation is raised from 1.65 to 1.9k (Fig. 18) 
by changing the specific gravity of the medium from 1.30 to 1.U5# 
Similarly for the 0.37 ratio of underflow to overflow-opening area, 
the Error Area shows a similar though less pronounced trend, changing 
from 53 to 6l as the specific gravity of separation is raised from 
1.65 to 1.85* It will be noted that the curve is less steep than the 
preceding one. However, for the 0.50 and 0.58 ratios the curve common 


‘10 


' 0 ?f. ; 


■:> 



* 


r r 


c. 


o 



-6/e Jzrror 






























































































































































































































































































to both shows a negative slope, indicating that the Error Areas now 
decrease from 1*1 to 38 for both cyclone dimensions as the specific 
gravities of separation are raised from 1.1*8 to 1*70 and from 1.1*2 
to 1*61* respectively by varying the specific gravity of the medium 
from 1*30 to 1*U5* 

(3) PROBABLE ERROR 

In Figs. 22 and 23, the probable errors have been plotted 
against the ratios of underflow to overflow-opening area and the 
specific gravity of the medium in the same manner as the error areas 
were plotted in Figs. 20 and 21. The curves in Figs. 22 and 23 
demonstrate that the probable errors follow the same trend as the error 
areas in Figs. 20 and 21. This is what might be expected since the 
Probable Error is an approximation of the Error Area. The curves for 
the Probable Error in Fig* 22 which correspond with the curves for 
the Error Area in Fig* 20 have greater negative slopes as the specific 
gravity of the medium is increased. This means that the probable 
errors increase with increasing specific gravities of separation when 
the latter are achieved by varying the underflow-opening area and the 
suspension specific gravity is held constant. The probable errors 
increase from 0.061* to 0.076 (Fig. 22) as the specific gravity of 
separation is increased from 1.1*2 to 1.70 (Fig. 18) for the 1.30 specific 
gravity medium* Similarly for the 1.35, 1 *1*0 and 1.1*5 suspensions the 
probable errors increase from 0.055 to 0.079, 0.0l*2 to 0.081 and 0.01*1* 
to 0.085 for specific gravity of separation increases from 1.50 to 1.78, 
1*55 to 1.81* and 1.60 to 1.92. When the probable errors are plotted 
against the specific gravity of medium with the ratios of underflow to 




3 : 





variation i|n Frob 


ihowing 


underflow to overflow 


>s of cyclone 


area as_specific g ravi ty} 


ratio'fs. of underfl 


eye lo be 































































































































































































































































































106 - 


overflow-opening area as parameters as in Fig* 23, the resulting curves 
have varying slopes; the slopes are greatest for the smallest underflow 
to overflow-opening area ratio and become less as this ratio is increased. 
Thus the slope for the 0*31 underflow to overflow area ratio is positive, 
that for the 0.37 ratio is approximately zero (horizontal) whilst that 
for the 0.50 ratio is negative and the slope for the 0.58 ratio is still 
more negative. Thus the probable errors in Fig. 23 show the same trends 
as do the error areas in Fig. 21* The probable errors increase from 
0.069 to 0.085 for the 0*31 underflow to overflow cyclone dimension 
ratio as the specific gravity of medium is varied from 1.30 to 1.U5* 
producing an increase in specific gravity of separation from 1*65 to 
1.9U# For the 0.37 underflow to overflow area ratio, the probable error 
remains approximately constant at 0.075 as the specific gravity of 
separation is increased from 1.65 to 1.85* With the 0.50 ratio of 
underflow to overflow-opening area the probable errors decrease from 
0.066 to 0.05U as the specific gravity of separation is increased from 
l.Ij.8 to 1*70* Similarly when the cyclone dimensions are changed so 
that the underflow to overflow ratio is 0.58 the probable errors decrease 
from O.O6I4. to 0.038 as the specific gravity of separation is increased 
from 1.1*2 to 1.6Iu 

Although the general trend shown by the Error Area and Probable 
Error is similar, there is some discrepancy between the results obtained 
for these two measures of the sharpness of separation. This is undoubt¬ 
edly due to the fact that the Probable Error takes into account only 
that part of the distribution curve between 25 and 75$ of the ordinate. 




K 


>‘S, ’> V.iK V 




i 0 


ac 


o 


) V o 


■'i - : ■ 



- 107 - 


whereas the Error Area takes the whole curve into account® In other 
words, the Probable Error shows the sharpness of separation for the 
material of intermediate specific gravity, whilst the Error Area shows 
the sharpness of separation for the complete range of specific gravities. 

In a previous subsection, data cited by Yancey and Geer for 
three cyclone separations showed identical probable errors while the 
error areas were 37* I 4 I and 1*3 for specific gravities of separation 
of 1®5>6, I .63 and 1.75 respectively® Tromp maintained that this was 
evidence that the sharpness of separation as shown by the Error Area 
deteriorated as the specific gravity of separation increased® An 
examination of the cyclone data in Figs. 21 and 23 may throw some 
further light on the argument between Tromp and Yancey and Geer con¬ 
cerning the variation in the distribution curve with specific gravity 
of separation. For the underflow to overflow area ratio of 0.37* as 
the specific gravity of medium is varied from 1.30 to 1.US giving a 
rise in specific gravity of separation from 1.65 to 1.8$, Fig. 23 
shows that the probable error is approximately constant at 0.075* On 
the other hand, the error area increases from 53 to 60 under the same 
conditions (Fig. 21). Thus, in this case, the Probable Error remains 
constant whilst the Error Area rises with increasing specific gravities 
of separation. These trends are the same as those shown by the data 
of Yancey and Geer, but this does not necessarily prove that the Probable 
Error remains constant or that the Error Area increases with higher 
specific gravities of separation. These data illustrate that three 
separations do not supply sufficient evidence on which to base such 


See page 99. 




y; 






) 


r-c; 


(. i 


T 






) 




0 


“O' 





- 108 - 


broad general conclusions, since it has already been shown (Figs, 21 
and 23) that the Error Area and Probable Error may either increase or 
decrease with greater specific gravities of separation. All parties 
in the argument seem to have disregarded the fact that the specific 
gravity of separation is not an independent variable but is a dependent 
variable| for the cyclone washer it depends upon the independent vari¬ 
ables of size of underflow opening and specific gravity of the medium 
providing that all the other variables are fixed. 

It will be noted that suspensions with a specific gravity 
of 1.30 were used to perform washing at specific gravities of separation 
between 1.61 and 1.69. The only mention in the literature of such low 
specific gravity suspensions being employed with the cyclone washer to 
accomplish specific gravities of separation of this order is in the 
work of Belugou and de ChawlowsldL (U). For such separations these 
Cerchar workers obtained probable errors ranging from 0.07 to 0.09, 
which they considered to be much too great for satisfactory cleaning. 
They therefore recommended the use of larger ratios of underflow to 
overflow-opening area and suspensions of higher specific gravity. 

Figs. 21 and 23, showing the error areas and probable errors resulting 
from the separations accomplished in the present investigation, demon¬ 
strate that much sharper separations are obtained with the larger 
underflow openings. However, a consideration of the data for two 
separations presented in Table XV serves to illustrate that satisfactory 
cleaning is achieved when the probable error is greater than 0.07# The 
data for Experiment Nos. 26 and 32 are presented in Table XV. Experiment 
No. 26 was performed with a suspension of 1.U5 specific gravity and an 


I o 


C V. 3 i 


f'G 



- 109 


TABLE XV 

Comparison of Data for Experiments Nos* 26 and 32 


Experiment No. 

26 

32 

Specific Gravity of Medium 

1.U5 

1.30 

Yield of Washed Coal $ 

82.2 

82.0 

Ash Content of Washed Coal $ 

9.2 

9.k 

Ash Content of Refuse $ 

55.0 

53.0 

Specific Gravity of Separation 

1.63 

1.6U 

Fraser-Yancey Efficiency $ 

97.5 

97*5 

Calculated Ash Content of Feed $ 

17.3 

17.3 

Probable Error 

0.0U3 

0.07lr 

Error Area. sq. cm. 

39.7 

53.2 

Misplaced Material $ 

3.2 

5.0 

i 0.10 Specific Gravity $ 

8.7 

10.0 


underflow to overflow-opening area ratio of 0*58 whilst a 1*30 
specific gravity medium and a ratio of underflow- to overflow-opening 
area of 0*37 was used for experiment No* 32* These separations were 
performed at almost the same specific gravity of separation, 1*63 and 
1.6U for Experiment Nos* 26 and 32 respectively. The degree of washing 
difficulty as shown by the ± 0.10 specific gravity value was 8.7$ for 
the feed of Experiment NO. 26 and 10.0$ for the feed of Experiment No. 
32. Variations of this order do not affect the cleaning results 
obtained with the cyclone washer so it can be assumed that the effect 









.. * ■ 


1.0 






o 







Fig. 2h Yancey and Geer (U7) plot of 
Error Area vs. Probable Error. 



Fig* 25 Grounds and Needham (30) data illustrating approximate 
straight-line relationship between Error Area and 
Probable Error. 












































































no - 


of the washability of the coal was negligible. The probable error 
values of O. 0 I 43 and 0.07U and the error area values of 39*7 and 53*2 
respectively demonstrate that Experiment No. 26 gave much the sharper 
separation. The yields of 82.2 and 82.0$, washed-cocl ash contents of 
9#2 and 9*W and refuse ash contents of 55*0 and 53*0$, respectively, 
indicate that Experiment No. 26 showed slightly the better performance. 
However, from the viewpoint of the coal operator, there may not be too 
much to choose between the two separations, since the yields and ash 
contents of the products are almost the same. In addition the Fraser- 
Yancey efficiency for both separations was 97*5$, so that in neither 
case was there an excessive loss of clean coal. The foregoing data 
serve to prove that a probable error value of more than 0.07 is not 
too high for satisfactory coal-cleaning. In view of these results, 
economics would probably dictate the use of the 1.30 specific gravity 
medium rather than one of 1.1(5 specific gravity to perform such a 
separation. If the 1.30 suspension is used the ratio of cyclone 
underflow to overflow-opening area is 0.37* This, of course, is much 
smaller than the ratio of slightly less than one (0.91 for a 350 mm 
cyclone) advocated by the Cerchar investigators. 

Cerchar investigators (3) stated that there is a straight- 
line relationship between the Probable Error and Error Area and there¬ 
fore that it is unnecessary to calculate the Error Area. They state 
that the Error Area = 590 x Probable Error. Yancey and Geer plotted 
error areas against the corresponding probable errors from coal-washing 
data which they obtained and found that there was a general relation¬ 
ship between the two, although the upper end of the curve veered away 
from a straight line (Fig. 2k )• Grounds and Needham (30) have also 


) a r. 


ii " . 







.rating 









































































































































































































































































- Ill - 

shown a plot of error areas versus probable errors (Fig* 2$) for a 
number of separations performed in British coal preparation plants 
which indicates a general straight -lin e relationship# An approximate 
straight-line relationship is also demonstrated by the data obtained 
from the cyclone separations made for this investigation (Fig# 26)# 

It must be emphasized that this relationship is very approximate and 
that large errors can result if the Error Area is calculated from the 
Probable Error on the assumption that one is directly proportional to 
the other# For example, errors as great as 6$% may result from this 
assumption if applied to the data in Figs, 2U> 2f> and 26# As stated 
above, the Cerchar investigators quoted a coefficient of $90 by which 
to multiply the Probable Error in order to convert it into the Error 
Area# Values of 730, SJO^and 735 respectively^ are found for this 
coefficient from the data of Yancey and Geer, Grounds and Needham, and 
the present investigation as compared with the value of 590 cited by 
the French investigators# These results show that the Error Area 
cannot be calculated with any degree of accuracy by multiplying the 
Probable Error by some coefficient# 

(U) FRASER-YANCEY EFFICIENCY 

The Phaser-Yancey efficiencies obtained from the cyclone 
data in this investigation have been plotted against the ratios of 
underflow to overflow-opening area with the specific gravities of the 
medium as parameters in Fig# 27* In Fig# 28 the Fraser-Yancey effici¬ 
encies have been plotted versus the specific gravities of the medium 
with the ratios of underflow to overflow area as parameters# These 
two figures represent a cross-plot of the data corresponding to Figs. 

20 and 21 for the Error Area and Figs. 22 and 23 for the Probable Error# 



0 





:,r 






<L ' t 








medfurr\ 


.Uustrkting VariatiLi 


iration 


cyclone ope 


underflow 













• r\ 




















j 






















































































































































































































































































































































- 






















- 112 


Fig* 2? demonstrates that the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency 
exhibits a trend opposite to that displayed by the Error Area* as the 
specific gravity of separation is increased by decreasing ratios of 
underflow to overflow-opening area (Fig* 18). For constant suspension 
specific gravities of 1.U5, 1.1|0, 1*35 and 1.30 the Fraser-Yancey 
efficiencies increase from 97*? to 99.1$, 97.1 to 98 . 6 $, 96 .O to 98.7# 
and 75 to 97*6# respectively as the ratios of underflow to overflow 
area decrease from 0.58 to 0.31* Under these same circumstances, the 
Error Area increases from 35 to 6!*, 33 to 62, U0 to 55 and 39 to 5U 
respectively (Fig. 20). Since an increase in the latter function 
denotes a decrease in the sharpness of separation, it is evident that 
under these conditions the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency exhibits opposite 
tendencies to those demonstrated by the Error Area, i.e. the Fraser- 
Yancey shows an increase in efficiency whilst the Error Area indicates 
a decrease in separation efficiency. 

In Fig. 28, the Fraser-Yancey efficiencies have been plotted 
versus the specific gravities of medium with the ratios of underflow 
to overflow-opening area as parameters. These correspond to similar 
plots of the specific gravity of separation, Error Area, and Probable 
Error in Figs. 19, 21 and 23* The curves in Fig. 28 are identical for 
the two smaller underflow to overflow area ratios of 0.31 and 0.37* 
shoring a slight increase in Fraser-Yancey Efficiency from 97*5 to 
99*0# as the specific gravity of the medium is varied from 1*30 to 
l.ii5. It has been noted previously that under these same conditions 
the specific gravity of separation rises from 1.65 to 1.9U and from 

*The Error Area is taken as representing the sharpness of separation 
since the Probable Error is considered to be an approximation of the 
Error Area. 




n-:' 






showing 






































































































































































































































- 113 - 

1*65 to 1#80 for the 0*31 and 0.37 size ratios respectively. Under 
the same conditions the error area rises from 1*9 to 62 and from $8 to 
61. Therefore, the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency displays a trend opposite 
to that exhibited by the Error Area as the specific gravity of separ¬ 
ation is raised by employing higher specific gravities of medium; i.e. 
under these conditions the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency increases whilst 
the separation efficiency, as measured by the Error Area, decreases. 

For both the 0.50 and 0.58 cyclone underflow to overflow area ratios, 
the Fraser-Yancey efficiencies show an improvement, rising from 80 to 
98% when the specific gravity of separation is increased from I.I 48 to 
1.70 and from 1 . 1|,2 to 1 . 6 U respectively, by utilizing suspension specific 
gravities from 1.30 to 1.1|5. Under identical circumstances the error 
area decreases from 1 ;! to 38 , denoting an improvement in separation 
efficiency. Therefore, for the larger underflow openings the Fraser- 
Yancey Efficiency and the Error Area show similar trends when the 
specific gravity of separation is increased by varying the specific 
gravity of the medium from 1*30 to 1.Ii5. Thus, the cross-plots of 
Fraser-Yancey efficiency versus the ratios of underflow to overflow 
opening area and specific gravity of the medium, when compared with 
those for the Error Area, show that there is no evident similarity 
between these two methods of judging coal-cleaning efficiency. Each 
may vary in a different manner depending on the cyclone dimensions 
and suspension specific gravity employed. 

It will be noted that the only Fraser-Yancey efficiencies 
which were less than 9%% were given by the two largest ratios of 
underflow to overflow-opening area of 0.50 and 0.58 in combination 


( 




'turn 


Ion in Anderson Efficiency^ 


Curves 


suspension specify 


with constant 


□.one 
























































































































































































































































- Ill* - 

with the lightest suspension of 1.30 specific gravity. (Experiment 
Nos. 58 and 5U respectively). These low Fraser-Yancey efficiencies 
of 82.8 and 78*1$ resulted, even though the error areas were 39 and 
111 and the probable errors were 0.066 and 0.061|, respectively, for the 
two separations. The yields for these two separations were low, 53#6 
and 51$ respectively, as were the specific gravities of separation, 
l.d'0 and l.iil respectively. For washing in this range, the amount of 
coal within t 0*10 specific gravity of the specific gravity of separ¬ 
ation in the feed is very high—l;7»0 and 1*7*3#’* for the feeds of these 
two experiments. The low Fraser-Yancey efficiencies are probably due 
to the small yields of washed coal rather than to the difficulty of 
washing as shown by the ± 0.10 specific gravity values. It is likely 
that even if the separations were much sharper the Fraser-Yancey effici¬ 
encies would still be less than 95% if the washing were performed with 
such low yields and low specific gravities of separation. 

(5) ANDERSON EFFICIENCY 

Figs. 2 9 and 30 represent a cross-plot of the data for the 
Anderson Efficiency similar to those for the Error Area, Probable 
Error and Yancey Efficiency in the previous subsections. In Fig. 29 
the Anderson efficiencies are plotted versus the ratios of cyclone 
underflow to overflow area with the specific gravities of the medium 
as parameters, whereas in Fig. 30 the Anderson efficiencies are plotted 
against the specific gravities of medium with the area ratios as par¬ 
ameters. These two figures illustrate that the Anderson Efficiency 

The reason for the 1 0.10 specific gravity values being so great is 
due to the fact that most of the material in the feed coal has a 
specific gravity near 1.1*. 





t. 


Os"' 


.1 E ! 







. i tion i n And 


illus 


itbrating yard 


stant pyclonp dimehsions 


sncy for 




-| 

F 







m 

F 



9 . 











i 









ft jl 







F. 




i 




i 





































































































































































































































































- 115 - 

shows similar tendencies to those displayed by the Fraser-Yancey 
Efficiency* Thus in Fig, 29* for the three suspensions of 1,1*5* 1,1*0 
and 1,35 specific gravity, the Anderson Efficiency increases slightly 
from 97*0 to 97*5#* 9U«5 to 99*0%, and 91 to 96.5# respectively as the 
size of the underflow opening is decreased so that the underflow to 
overflow area ratio decreases from 0,58 to 0,31. For the 1,30 specific 
gravity medium the rise in Anderson Efficiency is much sharper, increasing 
from 83 to 9&% under the above conditions. In Fig, 30 as the specific 
gravity of the medium is raised from 1,30 to 1.1*5* the Anderson effici¬ 
encies rise from 9l*«5 to 99* h% for the 0,31 and 0,37 ratios of underflow 
to overflow-opening area, and from 97*2 to 98*2$ and 86 to 97% for the 
0.50 and 0,58 ratios respectively. 

The only separations which gave Anderson efficiencies below 
90% were those which gave the unacceptable Fraser-Yancey efficiencies 
which were mentioned in the previous subsection (Experiment No, 58 and 
51*), The large amounts of misplaced material, 13,5 and 16,1$ respect¬ 
ively for these two separations are due to the large amounts of material 
in the feed near the specific gravities of separation (1,1*0 and 1,1*1). 

(6) RECAPITULATION AND DISCUSSION 

In the foregoing subsections it has been demonstrated that 
the specific gravity of separation is a dependent variable as are the 
various functions enployed in expressing coal-cleaning efficiency. It 
has been pointed out that the manner in which the specific gravity of 
separation changes depends upon the variables that are altered to produce 
this change^ in the case of the cyclone these variables are the specific 
gravity of the medium and size of the underflow-openings providing that 






■ .... h 



- 116 - 


all other variables are held constant* The data presented also reveal 
that the manner in which the Error Area, Probable Error, Fraser-Yancey 
Efficiency and Anderson Efficiency vary as the specific gravity of 
separation is increased depends upon whether the change in specific 
gravity of separation is achieved by varying the size of the underflow 
opening or by altering the specific gravity of the medium* Therefore, 
the variations in the Error Area, Probable Error, Fraser-Yancey Effici¬ 
ency and Anderson Efficiency must be represented in terms of these two 
variables rather than the specific gravity of separation which is not 
an independent variable* The reason for the disagreement among the 
various coal-preparation authorities as to whether or not the Probable 
Error and Error Area vary with specific gravity of separation thus 
becomes quite evident, i*e. they have been attempting to define one 
dependent variable (Error Area or Probable Error) in terms - of another 
dependent variable (specific gravity of separation)* It has been 
demonstrated that the Fraser-Yancey and Anderson efficiencies increase 
as the specific gravity of separation is raised but that the variation 
in these efficiencies is again dependent upon the two variables of 
cyclone dimensions and specific gravity of the medium. Since the 
Error Area and Probable Error sometimes display a decrease in separation 
efficiency with higher specific gravities of separation, it is easy to 
see why there is often no agreement between the various efficiencies, 
if, for example, some adjustment is made to the cleaning equipment and 
the change in the quality of cleaning is calculated by the various 
methods* It has been pointed out that the Probable Error is an approx¬ 
imation of the Error Area and that this, therefore, probably accounts 
for the dissimilar results sometimes exhibited by these two methods of 
expressing separation efficiency. The dissimilarity between the Error 


CO 






D 


r ; ■ 


-'1 w . o 


oc 



: 


?: ■ 


0 u>> 




icrrio j.f'C 


>.;. 





117 


Area and the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency is due to the fact that the 
latter is a material balance on coal of a certain ash content whilst 
the former is a measure of the sharpness of separation. 

Yancey and Geer ( k7 ) have stated that the Fraser-Yancey 
Efficiency and sharpness of separation are two entirely different 
things and therefore cannot be compared. Therefore, they object to 
the use of the term Efficiency'* for those methods which evaluate only 
sharpness of separation. In view of the data submitted in the present 
investigation, it is evident that there is no relationship between the 
Fraser-Yancey Efficiency and the sharpness of separation as shown by 
the Error Area and Probable Error, It is also true that the Error 
Area and Probable Error are not actually Efficiencies'* in that they 
are not expressed as percentages. However, this is not the case with 
the Area Efficiency, which is proposed in this thesis as a measure of 
the sharpness of separation. Therefore, it is difficult to see any 
objection to calling the Area Efficiency an efficiency of separation. 

The French Cerchar have suggested the use of a function 
called the "Magnitude of Imperfection" to correct for the higher 
probable errors which are said to result at higher specific gravities 
of separation. The "Magnitude of Imperfection" (I), is obtained by 
dividing the Probable Error (£) by the specific gravity of separation 
minus one (dp - 1), It is difficult to see the justification for such 
a modification to the Probable Error, since it has been shown that for 
washing performed by the cyclone, the Probable Error is not dependent 
ipon the specific gravity of separation alone. The Cerchar invest¬ 
igators have justified the use of the probability scale for transforming 


o 





- < 




; 




0 : b f V. ' I! ') 'v 


o: id 'o 


o; 


> ?v ■ ill. ‘ v 





* ; v I ; • \ 1 r< . . 1 


o '5 ; q.'a) 




- 118 - 


the distribution curves into straight lines on the premise that the 
reciprocals of the slopes of these transformed curves are approximately 
equal to the ’’Magnitude of Imperfection’’ for separ at ions foil owing the 
’’logarithmic-normal law”, whereas the reciprocals of the slopes of the 
transformed curves for separations following the ’’normal law” are 
approximately equal to the probable error. If the Probable Error is 
not dependent on the specific gravity of separation, the ’’Magnitude of 
Imperfection” has no meaning. Therefore, the fact that the reciprocals 
of the slopes of the transformed curves are equal to this function is 
of little or no significance. The primary object of the straight-line 
transformation is to obtain greater accuracy in fixing the specific 
gravity of separation. It has been made clear that the transformed 
curves for the cyclone separations in the present investigation did 
not yield straight lines and that these results coincided with the 
findings of Yancey and Geer (1*7)« Since these transformed curves 
often give much less accuracy than the curves plotted in the normal 
manner, there does not seem to be any valid reason for using special 
graph paper and various scales on the abscissa in order to procure 
straight-line distribution curves. 


no 


!"i ■ ) 




- 119 - 


IX CONCLUSIONS 





INFLUENCE OF OPERATING VARIABLES 


Operation of the cyclone washer can be adequately controlled 
by regulation of the size of the underflow opening while holding all 
other variables constant* Suspensions with a specific gravity of 1*30 
can be used to perform satisfactory coal-washing at specific gravities 
ranging from 1.60 to 1.70 with probable errors of approximately 0.07 
and error areas varying from 1*0 to 50. 

Improved separation occurs as the pulp ratio is increased 
from three-to-one to eight-to-one. A large error area of 86 and low 
Fraser-Yancey efficiency of 93«W resulted with the three-to-one pulp 
ratio but satisfactory cleaning can be accomplished with pulp ratios 
between four-to-one and eight-to-one inclusive. For this range of 
pulp ratios the error areas varied from 71 to 1*7 and the Fraser-Yancey 
efficiencies varied from 97*2 to 98*3#* 

Specific gravity conposition of the feed has no appreciable 
effect on the performance of the cyclone washer. Feeds with 1 0.10 
specific gravity values between 23.6 and 9*8 were cleaned with resulting 
error areas between 29 and 1*6 and Fraser-Yancey efficiencies between 
96.1 and 97.5*. 

Particle size of the feed coal has a very marked influence 
on the separation efficiency achieved by the cyclone washer. The 
washing results become progressively poorer as the particle size 
decreases. Error Areas were lil* for the 10- to ll*-mesh size fraction 
and 81* for the 65- to 100-mesh fraction. The corresponding Fraser- 
Yancey efficiencies were 99*9 and 97*8. The specific gravity of 
separation increases as the particle size decreases; the specific 





121 


gravity of separation for the 10- to lU-mesh fraction was 1.63 whereas 
that for the 65- to 100-mesh fraction was 1.81*. 

In view of the evidence showing the influence of pulp ratio 
of the feed slurry, specific gravity composition of the feed, and 
particle size of the feed on cyclone performance it is evident that 
the cyclone is able to cope with radical changes in feed quality and 
feed rate but that the size composition of the feed must not be 
allowed to vary widely if the quality of the washed-coal product is 
to be kept within certain limits* 

INFLUENCE OF UNDERFLOW OPENING AND SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF MEDIUM ON 
APPARENT EFFICIENCY OF CLEANING 

For washing accomplished by the cyclone, the specific gravity 
of separation depends upon the variables of size of underflow opening 
and specific gravity of the medium (providing that all the other vari¬ 
ables are fixed)* Similarly the Error Area is also dependent on these 
two variables* The Error Area thus does not depend upon the specific 
gravity of separation since it may either decrease, remain constant, 
or increase, as the specific gravity of separation is raised* the 
manner in which this variation in Error Area occurs depends upon 
whether the specific gravity of separation is increased by varying 
the cyclone underflow dimension or by changing the specific gravity 
of the medium* 

The Probable Error, which is an approximation of the Error 
Area shows results similar to those given by the Error Area. The 
discrepancy between the two is due to the fact that the Probable Error 
takes into account only that part of the distribution curve between 



1 c. 


m:-.. -'v 





• 122 


25 and of the ordinate, whereas the Error Area takes the whole 
curve into account* 

The Fraser-Yancey and Anderson Efficiencies demonstrate 
similar trends, showing slightly greater values as the specific gravity 
of separation is increased by either using lighter specific gravities 
of suspension or decreasing the size of the underflow opening. 

The Error Area and Probable Error do not show similar results 
as the Fraser-Yancey Efficiency because the latter is actually a mater¬ 
ial balance on coal of a certain ash content, whereas the two first- 
named methods show the sharpness of separation according to specific 
gravity of the feed coal* 

Satisfactory cleaning results when the probable errors are 
greater than 0*07 although this figure was thought by Cerchar investi¬ 
gators to be much too high for satisfactory coal-washing* 

The method of transformation of the distribution curves 
proposed by Cerchar investigators was not applicable to the cyclone 
separations accomplished in this investigation* No justification is 
seen for the "Magnitude of Inperfection" proposed by Cerchar investi¬ 
gators since the Probable Error does not depend upon the specific 
gravity of separation alone* 

A new method of expressing the separation efficiency of coal¬ 
cleaning equipment is proposed* This method is based upon the Error 
Area and expresses the Error Area as a percentage efficiency rather 
than as an area in square centimeters* 



t 


0 


c 


, 


) 


■ 




Gv 


,0 ??OT$ '•* 


! ■ «;> 




REFERENCES 


1* Anderson, W.W. Quantitative efficiency of separation of coal-cleaning 
equipment. Trans. A.I.M.F.. Min. Eng. 187:256-261** 1950. 

2. Andrews, L* Problems in the utilization of small coals. Proc. B.C.U.R.A. 
Conf. pp. 236-2U3. 1 9hk. 

3* Belugou, P. Control testing of a cleaning device. Centre d*Etudes 
et Recherches des Charbonnages de France pp. 16-17. Note technique 
No. h9/h, 19ii9. 

Iu Belugou, P. and S. de Chawlowski. Experimental study of the cyclone 
washer. Proc. First Int. Conf. Coal Prep, ijj 520-531. 1950. 

5o Belugou, P. and Vitaux. The control of the washing of fine coals 
in the coalfields. Proc. First Int. Conf. Coal Prep. 2:196-216. 

1950. 

6. Bird, B.M. Interpretation of float-and-sink data. Proc. Third Int. 

Conf. Bit. Coal. 2:721-735. 1931. 

7. Bird, B.M. and D.R. Mitchell. Dense-media processes. In Coal 
Preparation, ed. by D.R. Mitchell, pp. U70-531* AmericalF*Institute 
of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers* New York. 1950. 

8* Bird, B.M. and D.R. Mitchell* Jigs* In Coal Preparation, eel. by 
D. R. Mitchell, pp. 391-U3U* American^nstitute of Mining and 
Metallurgical Engineers, New York. 1950* 

9. Brown, C.G., et al. Unit Operations, pp. 72-79. John Wiley and Sons, 
Inc., New York* 1950* 

10. Ibid, pp. 8U—85* 

11. Burton, G. Behavior of fine coal during treatment in thickening 

and separating cyclones. Proc. First Int. Conf. Coal Prep. U:5o5-5ll. 
1950. 

12. Carr is, E.C. and D.R. Mitchell. Pneumatic coal cleaning. In Coal 
Preparation, ed. by D.R. Mitchell, pp. 391-U3k* American iTOtitute 
of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers, New York. 1950. 

13. Criner, H.F. The vortex thickener. Proc. First Int. Conf. Coal 

Prep. 5:627-6U3. 1950. 

llu Criner, H.E. and M.G. Driessen. Cyclone thickener applications in 
the coal industry. Trans. A.I.M.E. Min. Eng. 187:102-107* 1950. 

15* Dahlstrom, D.A. Cyclone operating factors and capacities on coal 
and refuse slurries. Trans. A.I.M.E. Min. Eng. 18U:1057-1067. 

19U9. 



f 


^ * * V 


. c 



16. Dahlstrom, D.A. High-speed classification and desliming with the 

liquid-solid cyclone, Trans, A.I.M.E. Min, Eng. 190-153-165. 1951. 

17. Driessen, M,G, Cleaning of coal by heavy liquids, J, Inst, Fuel 
12:327-310.. 1939. 

18. Driessen, M,G, The use of centrifugal force for cleaning fine coal 

in heavy liquids and suspensions with special reference to the 
cyclone washer, J. Inst, Fuel 19:33-U5. 19U5. 

19. Driessen, M.G. The use of hydraulic cyclones as thickeners and 

washers in modern coal preparation. Coal Tech, T.P, 2135. 19U7. 

20* Driessen, M.G. Theory of flow in a cyclone, Proc, First Int. 

Conf. Coal Prep, 1*: 1*1*9-1*61. 1950, 

21. Flowers, A.E. and S. H, Hull, Centrifuges. In Chemical Engineers 
Handbook, ed. by J. H. Perry, McGraw Hill BooJT'Co, Inc,, New York. 

1950. 

22. Fraser, T. and H.F. Yancey. Interpretation of results of coal¬ 
washing tests. Trans. A.I.M.E. 69:1*59. 1923. 

23. Gandrud, B.W. Concentrating tables. In Coal Preparation, ed. by 
D. R. Mitchell, pp. 1*35-U69. AmericanTnstitute of Mining and 
Metallurgical Engineers. New York. 1950. 

2l*. Gaudin, A.M. Principles of Mineral Dressing, pp. 232-233. McGraw 
Hill Book Co. Inc. New York. 1950. 

25® Geer, M.R. and H.F. Yancey. Preliminary tests of a cyclone coal 
washer developed in the Netherlands. Coal Tech. A.I.M.E. T.P. 

2136. 191*7. 

26. Geer, M.R. et al. Laboratory performance tests of the Humphreys 
spiral as a cleaner of fine coal. Trans. A.I.M.E. Min. Eng. 
187:1057-1067. 1950. 

27* Gleeson, G.W. Why the Humphreys spiral works. Eng. and Min. J. 
11*6:85-66. 191*5. 

28. Griffen, J. Coal washers of the classifier type. ]n Coal Prepar¬ 
ation, ed. by D. R. Mitchell pp. 270-359. American Institute of 
Mining and Metallurgical Engineers. New York. 1950, 

29. Griffen, J. et al. Discussion on paper "Quantitative efficiency 

of separation of coal-cleaning equipment" by W.W. Andersoh. Trans. 
A.I.M.E. Min. Eng. 187:1162-1166. 1950. 

30. Griffen, J. et al. Discussion on paper "Efficiency and sharpness 
of separation in evaluating coal-washery performance", by Yancey, 

H.F. and M. R. Geer. Trans. A.I.M.E. Min. Eng. 190:99U-1000 o 

1951. 










31. Hubbard, J.S., W,E. Brown, and M. Welker, The Humphreys spiral 
concentrator for cleaning minus l/4-inch coal, Proc. First Int, 

Conf. Coal Prep, 4:441-448. 1950, 

32, Lynch, S, Notes on coal preparation, J, Inst, Fuel, 21:187-193• 

1948. 

33* Mitchell, D,R, Coal preparation plant control in the United States, 
Proc, First Int, Conf, Coal Prep, 1:73-83, 1950, 

34. Needham, L,W, The cleaning of fine coal. Coll, Eng, 26:167-174. 

1949. 

33 * Newton, Isaac, Mathematical principles of natural philosophy. 

Book II, (English Translation of 1729), 

36, Oberholtzer, J, Some physical properties of Alberta coals. 
University of Alberta, M.Sc. Thesis, 19)41* 

37, Proctor, C.P,, and J,T, Crawford, Launder washers. ^ Coal 
Preparation, ed. by D.R. Mitchell, pp, 360-390, American Institute 
of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers, New York, 1950, 

38, Ridley, F,F, The design of dense-media coal washers, Proc, First 

Int. Conf. Coal Prep. 4:419-440. 1950, 

39* Schiffman, L,E. Kerosine flotation of bituminous coal fines. Trans. 
A.I.M.E, Min. Eng. 187:1047-1056. 1950. 

40# Skinner, D.G,, et al. Method of determining particle size in the 
sub-sieve range, British Colliery Owners Research Association, 
and British Coal Utilization Research Association, London, 1942, 

41, Stokes, G,G. Mathematical and physical papers, Trans. Cambridge 
Phil, Soc. 9 , Part lit 5l ff. 1851, 

42, Terra, A. Theory of the washing of coal. Revue de l f Industrie 
Minerale 425:383-403, 1938, 

43, Tronp, K,F. New methods of computing the washability of coals, 
Gluckauf 73:125-131, 151-156, 1937# Excerpts in Coll. Guard. 
154:955-959, 1009, 1937* 

44* Van der Walt, P,J. Recovery of the coking fraction from Witbank 
fine coal by means of the cyclone washer, J.S. Afr, Chem. Inst, 
2:29-58. 1949. 

45. Van der Walt, P.J. Operating characteristics of the cyclone washer. 

Fuel Res. Inst. S. Afr. Report No. 17. 1949. 

46. Vissac, G.A, Scientific methods of washery control. Proc. First 

Int. Conf. Coal Prep. 1:41-49. 1950. 


1+7* Yancey, H,F., and M#R, Geer, Efficiency and sharpness of separation 
in evaluating coal-washery performance, Trans, A,I,M.E, Min, Eng, 

190:507-517. 1951. 

J 48 , Yancey, H,F,, and M.R. Geer, Performance of a Eaum-type coal¬ 
washing jig, U.-S.B.M. R,I, 3371# 1938* 

!|9. Yancey, H,F,, M, R, Geer, and R, E. Shinkoskey* Performance of 
a pulsator-type coal-washing jig* U,S,B,M, R.I* 3372. 1938, 



r. 




% 



















































■J# 


I 










I 

I 




