For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


















(3x lIBItW 

Jinwttsroiis 





y */&{$ 

’ st ?¥ 









A Thesis 


MYRISTIC ACID FILMS AT LOW SURFACE PRESSURES 


By 


G»P * SEMELUK- B•Sc « 


University of Alberta 


Department of Chemistry. 
August 11, 194#* 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/myristicacidfilmOOseme 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 


This is to certify that the undersigned 
have read and recommended to the Committee on 
Graduate Studies for acceptance, a thesis submitted 
by G«P* Semeluk, B.Sc*, entitled 

^Myristic Acid Films at Low Surface 
Pressures** 


Professor 

Professor 

Professor 

























. ; 







MYPJSTIC ACID FILMS AT LOW SURFACE PRESSURES 


Submitted in Partial 
Fulfillment 

of the 

Requirements for the degree 
of 

Master of Science 


by 

G.P. Semeliik, B.Sc. 


Under the direction of 
Dr. J.L. Morrison 


Time devoted to this work - 12 months. 


Edmonton, Alberta. August 1948 • 








ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The author wishes to express his sincere apprecia¬ 
tion to all who have assisted him in this work® 

To Dr® J*L. Morrison* who supervised this project, 
for his generous assistance and encouragement during the in¬ 
vestigation® 

To Mr® G»W. Hodgson, who acquainted the author with 
monolayer technique and helped him overcome his first diffi¬ 
culties* 

To Mr. J.W.V. Hahn, who designed the horizontal 
film balance* 

To the Department of Chemistry for provision of 
laboratory facilities and materials* 

To the National "Research Council, who made it 
financially possible for monolayer work to continue, and for 
the award of a bursary to promote this work® 

To all those connected with the Department of 
Chemistry who assisted in moving and setting up the apparatus 
in the new laboratory. 







' 

. 

. 








• - , • 

- K • UM tv. ■' f 

. 


"■ ! ’■ ■ 













TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Introduction 1 

General Theory of Insoluble films on Water Surfaces® 

1® History 2 

2® Spreading ' 3 

3® The Kinetic Picture of the Monolayer 5 

4® Limitations of the Analogy 8 

5® Myristic Acid Films 12 

6® Rubber 13 

Apparatus 

1® The Horizontal Film Balance 14 

2® The Wilhelmy Balance 15 

3® Surface Potential System 15 

4® Additions and Changes 15 

5® Reflux - Fractionating Columns 16 

6» Modified Soxhlei Apparatus 16 

Experimental Procedures 

1® Tray Preparation 17 

2* Myristic Acid Preparation 18 

3® Solvents 18 

4® Run Procedure 19 

5® Thiocyanation of GR-S 20 

Results and Discussion 

A* Myristic Acid Films 25 

1® Films from Petroleum Ether 25 

2® The Island Phenomenon 28 

3® Double Molecules 33 

4® Films from Benzene 36 

5® Films from Acetone-Petroleum Ether 36 

B* Solvents 37 

G® Thiocyanation of GR-S 39 

D® Films of Thiocyan&ted GR-S 41 

Summary 46 

Recommendations for further work 46 

Bibliography 49 


Appendix; A Critical Appraisal of Monolayer Technique 





• . 





























■ 





















INTRODUCTION 






INTRODUCTION 


Although the original intention was to study films 
of rubber derivatives by means of a film balance* it was 
soon found that a critical study first had to be made ©f 
monolayers at very low film pressures in order to become 
familiar with the effects of solvents on measurements, and 
to become acquainted with the characteristics of gaseous films. 
For this purpose, myristic acid was chosen because of its 
solubility in the same hydrocarbon solvents used in rubber 
work, and because it has previously been studied and found 
to produce gaseous monolayers. 

This study of gaseous myristic acid films was 
confined to molecular areas ranging from 27,000 to 600 
square Angstroms per molecule. 


















. 

■ 
























- 2 - 


GENERAL THEORY OF INSOLUBLE FILMS ON WATER SURFACES 
1* History 

The existence of monomolecular films, or monlayers, 
was first postulated by Rayleigh in 1899, to explain a 
peculiarity in the behavior of a water surface when an oil 
was spread on it. Both Pockels and Rayleigh had observed 
that no perceptible lowering of surface tension was caused 
by a given quantity of oil, provided the area occupied by 
the oil film exceeded a certain critical amount, but that 
as the area was decreased below this critical value, the surface 
tension fell rapidly. Within the next fifteen years more 
experimental evidence came to light which confirmed this 
postulate, and the kinetic theory of monolayers was developed. 

Monolayers were first studied with a film balance 
in 1917 by Langmuir (l), who made force-area measurements 
on oils and the fatty acids. His results led him to deduce 
the existence of two dimensional states analagous to those 
in three dimensions. A great many other workers entered 
this field, contributing new techniques, and adding to the 
knowledge of the subject, Guyot and Frumkin introduced the 
determinations of surface potential, and the simultaneous 
measurement of surface pressure and surface potential was 







, 

. 



' 

















-3 


added by Adam and Harding (2). Long-chain fatty acids and 
alcohols have been extensively studied by Schofield and Rideal, 
Adam and Jessop, Harding, Schulman, Harkins and others. 

Gorter, Philippi, Dervichian, Guastalla, Langmuir, and Bull 
have studied proteins. 

The results of these experiments have assisted 
greatly in determinations of molecular structure and molecular 
or particle weight, particularly where conventional methods 
have failed. The application of the monolayer technique to 
synthetic rubber research is more recent. 

2. Spreading 

Three theories have been advanced to explain the spreading 
of insoluble substances oh water surfaces: 

(a) Rayleigh believed that only impurities on the 
surface would prevent spreading. 

(b) Langmuir believed that the molecule must possess 
certain characteristics before it will spread. The molecule 
must contain a polar or ’•water-soluble' 1 group to be attracted 
to the water, and a non-polar group to make it insoluble in 
water. 

(c) Harkins thermodynamic theory, which covers all types 
















- 








* 






' 

. 


- 








- 



































- 4 - 


of spreading, states that a substance will spread only if it 
lowers the free energy of the surface in the process by which 
it spreads.. Whether a monolayer or a duplex film (one in 
which the upper and lower surfaces have no effect on each other, 
usually a multilayer) forms depends on which will give the 
lower free energy. Only a few examples of the duplex film are 
known* Generally, if a spreading substance is placed on the 
surface in an amount in excess of the quantity needed to form 
a monolayer, the excess forms one or more lenses, with the 
remainder of the surface covered by a monolayer. 

Rayleigh*s theory has now been discarded to a large 
extent, while the other two are favored. Experimental results 
supporting either theory, or the interpretations of these 
results, often contradict each other. Thus, Adam (4) says that 
measurements have been made on fatty acids containing from 14 
to 34 carbon atoms, while Harkins (3) states, "n-straight 
chain paraffin acids are particularly non-spreading as 
monolayers if the number of carbon atoms is much greater than 
twenty." Some evidence has been obtained in this work which 
seems to support Harkins* theory. 

It appears that both of the latter theories apply 
for measurements made under the usual conditions employed in 














‘ 











- 












. 

* . 

































- 5 - 


monolayer work. This will be discussed later. 

3. The Kinetic Picture of the Monolayer 

According to the kinetic theory, the monolayer may 
be considered as single molecules floating on the water surface, 
free to move about on the surface, but anchored to it by polar 
groups. Such a system is, in effect, a two dimensional 
system. Assuming thermal agitation of the molecules, existence 
of intermolecular forces and collision diameters, the picture 
becomes analagous to a three dimensional system. The two 
dimensional system, then, might be expected to exhibit changes 
of state, dependent, as in three dimensions, on the properties 
of the system* Such is found to be the case (figure l), the 
intensive properties being temperature and surface pressure, and 
the extensive property being the area. 

The monolayer technique is concerned primarily 
with measurements of some of these properties, and consists 
essentially of spreading a substance to a thickness of one 
molecule on the surface of an aqueous substrate, confining 
this film to a known variable area, and making two types of 
measurements on its 

1. Force or surface pressure exerted by this film for 










' 





, 

. 

* 

. 



























Area 


Figure 1 


Tfo Dimensional States - Adam f s Classification 

























- 6 - 


the different areas occupied by it. 

2. Potential change across the film for the different 
areas, which assists in determining molecular orientation in 
the film. 

If the film Is dilute enough, it may behave as a 
gas in two dimensions. In studying such a film it is useful 
to postulate an ideal gaseous film, just as it is useful, in 
three dimensions, to postulate an ideal gas. The ideal gaseous 
film would then be composed of point masses with random thermal 
motions, and no inter-particle forces. The equation of state 
might be written 

FA = nRT, 

where F is the surface pressure in dynes/cm., A the area occupied 
by the film, n the number of moles comprising the film, R the 
gas constant in units which are suitable, and T the temperature 
in degrees Absolute. The derivation of this equation from the 
kinetic theory parallels that of its three dimensional 
analogue(5)» 

Deviations from the ideal are to be expected, and are 
found experimentally to be analogous to three dimensional 
deviations(figure 2). Reasoning similarly to Van der Waals (4) 




















, 







■ 










, 














- 

























P OR F 


Figure 2 


Deviations from Ideal Laws 




















- 7 - 


the corrected equation of state for a real gaseous film becomes 

(F + ot /A*)(A -(9 ) = BT, 

where A is now the area per mole, is the force of attraction, 

andis twice the actual area of the molecule. At very low 
surface pressures becomes negligible compared with A, giving 
the equation 

FA = RT - 

which does apply to fatty acid films at pressures below 
0.1 dynes/cm. * 

At higher pressures, °*/A z becomes negligible compared 
with F, resulting in the equation 

FA - RT + fiF. 

All gaseous protein films which have been studied, and the 
long chain dicarboxylic acids at moderate surface pressures 
behave according to an equation of this form. * 

These two equations are very useful in determining 
the molecular weights of surface active compounds of unknown 
molecular weight. If gaseoud films of the compound can be 
obtained, a plot of FA against F for a considerable range of 
F will reveal whether the gaseous film is of the n hydrogen type 1 , 1 

* These characteristics have been determined only at 
temperatures very close to room temperature. 

















- 











- 



































8 


or of the 11 oxygen type". If it is of the hydrogen type* the 
intercept of the straight line obtained in plotting FA against 
F, on the FA axis, divided by RT gives the number of moles in 
the film| and the weight of stfb stance in the film divided by 
the number of moles will give the molecular weight. The slope 
of this line is a measure of the area occupied by the molecules 
of the film. 

3 Should the film be of the oxygen type* a plot of 
FA against l/A for values of F below the inversion pressure 
is used in a similar manner. The slope of the line in this 
case is a measure of cohesive forces operating between molecules 

4. limitations of the Analogy 

The analogy between the monolayer and a three 
dimensional system is* of course* not strictly true. In the 
analogy* no account is taken of any possible interaction between 
the film and the underlying water which might cause a change 
in the surface tension of the water. In the study of monolayers 
of different substances* exceptions to the simple analogy are 
well known. Several additional states other than solid, liquid 
and gaseous exist, and the phase relations in a monolayer 
are somewhat anomalous when compared to three dimensional 





, 




















. 








- 









. 








- 9 - 


relations. For instance* phase changes in two dimensions are 
rarely of the first order, and are usually of the second or 
third order (3)• 

A simple method of classifying phase changes (3) is 
to consider the discontinuities in the first, second, and third 
order partial derivatives of the free energy of the system with 
respect to the film pressure at constant temperature. A 
discontinuity in one only of these derivatives means the phase 
transition is the order of the discontinuous derivative . In 
more familiar terms, a first order change is one in which there 
is a discontinuity in the area of the film with respect to 
surface pressure, with an accompanying latent heat change; a 
second order change is one in which there is no latent heat 
change, no discontinuity in the area, but in which there are 
discontinuities in the heat capacity and in the compressibility 
a third order change is one in which there are none of the 
above discontinuities, but a discontinuity in the specific 
heat with respect to temperature. 

Only one first order change has been observed 
experimentally. This is the direct transformation of a solid, 
condensed liquid, or expanded film to the gaseous state. The 
remainder, which have been proved to exist, are second order 






■ 














.. 

. 

. 








- 10 - 


changes, although one third order change is sufepected (3)* 

An additional first order change has been reported recently (6). 

Harkins considers these apparently anomalous phase 
relations as characteristic of a two dimensional system: the 
direct result of the loss of one dimension. Further, he states 
that the actual existence of transformations of order greater 
than the first (*) is proof that the binding to the subphase 
is loose enough to allow observation of the increase in order(6) 

Guastalla (7) believes that the presence of a coherent 
film can increase the surface tension of the aqueous subphase 
because of the electric field it creates, which would cause 
a decrease in the measured surface pressure. On the basis of 
this assumption he proposes an equation of state for a liquid 
expanded film which contains a term that will take this surface 
tension change into account. Empirically the term evaluates 
to b/A% . where b is a constant and A the area. Further, 
his observations indicate a proportionality between the 
coefficient b and the calculated electric moment. His empirical 
equation fits experimental data on fatty acid films extremely 
well from a pressure of 0,3 dynes/cm. to nearly 25 dynes/cm. (8) 


* Most three dimensional transitions are first order. 







- -a ' : ' ■ ' ' 











. 






. 










- 

- 










. 
























- 11 - 


What appears to be an extension of Guastalla*s 
hypothesis is derived theoretically by Feng and Band (9)• They 
state, as one of their assumptions, ”the interaction potential 
between the ’liquid ends* of the molecules is equivalent to an 
’intrinsic pressure* which has the effect of increasing the 
surface tension at the interface between parent liquid and the 
monolayer”. The picture of the film is,briefly: 

The polar ends of the molecules (termed the ’’liquid ends”) 
which extend into the surface behave as an imperfect gas trapped 
in an intrinsic pressure, while the tails of the molecules extend 
above the surface, and, having less cohesion between them, act 
as a more perfect gas * It is the attraction between the liquid 
ends that gives the film its coherence, and the free ends which 
cause it to behave more like a two dimensional gas than a two 
dimensional liquid?. 

For purposes of comparison, the equations are 

F = kT/A - b/t f + c/f?' S (Guastalla) 

F = kT/(A - A 0 ) - B/A r ' r * C/A 4 (Feng and Band) 
where the constants b, c, B, C, are independent of the area 
and A© is an area dependent only on the collision cross section 
of the molecules. At large areas, both equations may be written 

F = kT/A, 






; 


. 

' 
















* 








. 















- 12 - 


which is the equation of an ideal gaseous film. The significance 
of this is that even if interaction with the subphase exists, 
gaseous films should still approach the behavior ef an ideal 
gaseous film at stifficientiy low surface pressures. 

5. Myristic Acid Films 

These have been investigated at high pressures in 
very great detail by Adam and Harkins and their respective co¬ 
workers. The results of these extensive studies show that 
myristic acid films exhibit the expected changes of state (those 
analagous to the three dimensional changes) and in addition 
exist in states for which there are no corresponding states 
in three dimensions. With the exception of the experimental 
determination of thermodynamic quantities other than pressure 
and area, studies may be considered completed. On the other 
hand low pressure measurements on gaseous films, because of 
limitations of conventional apparatuses and the accompanying 
experimental difficulties, have lagged far behind. The most 
recent report concerning low pressure determinations on 
myristic acid which has come to the attention of the author 
dates back to 1933 (10). The present investigation was 
concentrated in the range 0.02 to 0.3 dynes/cm., with the 














.. 


' 


- 










- 






















. • 







- 13 - 


larger number of determinations made below 0.1 dynes/cm. 

6, Rubber 

Rubber, both natural and synthetic, is known to be 
unsaturated, which suggests that polar groups could possibly 
be added to the molecules to give a product which would spread 
on an aqueous subphase. This, of course, introduces the 
possibility of substantial structural changes within the molecule 
during the process of addition. However, in the opinion of 
workers at the University of Illinois and the University of 
Western Ontario, relatively few polar groups per molecule are 
needed to give a spreading derivative (at variance with Harkins* 
Theory of Spreading)* Therefore, it is felt that the risk of 
some structural changes is worth taking . Even if the molecular 
structure is somewhat altered, some elucidating information might 
still be obtained from measurements made on monolayers of these 
derivatives. 

The polar group which is considered to give the 
smoothest addition is thioeyanogen. The addition procedure 
usually followed Is due to Pummerer and Stark (11) and Rehner (12). 
No evidence has yet been obtained by any workers that rubber 
derivatives form gaseous films. 
























- 

- 




' 




. 












. 











APPARATUS 







- 14 - 


APPARATUS 

The apparatus used is essentially the same as that 
described in great detail by J. W. V, Hahn (13) and 
G. W, Hodgson (14)> with a few additions and minor changes; 
and is now located in a new and much larger laboratory equipped 
primarily to accomodate monolayer work*- 
Its main features are: 

1. The Horizontal Film Balance 

This balance is of the Langmuir-Adam type, with 
original modifications by Hahn* It measures forces directly by 
means of a phosphor-bronze torsion wire of suitable diameter. 

Two sizes of torsion wire were used in the present investigation. 
One, a 5 mil wire, allowed measurements of forces from 0.005 to 
j1 -dyne/cm. The other, a 3 mil wire, allowed measurements of 
forces from 0.0005 to 0.1 dynes/cm. The 3 mil wire was not 
used in the lowest tenth of its range. 

Forces are registered by float movements, which are 
transferred through a lever arrangement to a suitable optical 
system that magnifies them. This balance is used as a null 
point instrument. 





, 

. 

- 








■ 








, . :■ . : 
















































-15- 


2* T he Wtlhelmv Balance, which is a vertical type balance, 
operates on the principle of vertical displacements of a glass 
slide dipping through the surface of the substrate. These vert¬ 
ical displacements are actuated by surface tension changes. 
Movements are magnified by the use of an optica,!- system, forces 
being determined by scale deflections® 

Since this balance does not have the required sensitivity 

(,05 to 2 dynes ) in low pressure measurements, it was not used 
cm 

in this ¥?ork, except as a check on the horizontal balance, 

3® Surface Potential System , 

This is for practical purposes a DuBridge and Brown Amplify¬ 
ing circuit* (15), adapted for surface potential work by a polon¬ 
ium coated air electrode and a calomel halite! 1 (13 & 14)* 

A minor change was made in the switching arrangement to permit 
convenient transfer from the coarse to the sensitive galvanometer® 

4* Additions and Changes * 

A refrigerating unit has been installed to allow better control 
of temperatures® The thermostating liquid is still tap water, as 
it has not been possible to obtain ethylene glycol in the quan¬ 
tities needed to make the change over® 

A control box with a removable front panel and a, hinged top, 
was built to house the electrical units of the auxiliary control 
circuits® If any unit should fail, it is a simple matter to re- 















1 








■ 

. . • 

' 






























I 



Surface Potential Controls. 
















- 16 - 


move the control panel (connection with the units is made through 
two Jone*s Plugs) and swing open the top, leaving the units exposed and 
easily accessible for repairs, A crude alternating current potential 
divider (from which the relay currents were tapped) was replaced by 
a transformer, which gives much better service and is less trouble¬ 
some. 

Provision was made for charging batteries without the necessity of 
their removal from the circuits, by proper operation of a system of 
switches, 

5 Reflux-Fractionating Columns , 

Four of these were constricted, one of which is sho?m in Fig, (3), 
These were designed in such a manner that drying of the solvent and 
fractionating could be carried on without having to change over from 
a reflux condenser to a fractionating column, the receiver being 
permanently attached to the column® The atmosphere within the column 
is kept moisture free by an anhydrite absorber between the receiver 
and the atmosphere. This is the only direct contact with the atmos¬ 
phere, The Solvent is displaced from the receivers when needed by 
air pumped into the apparatus through the drier. Such an arrangement 
helps to eliminate the possibility of contamination which exists with 
the usual procedures of refluxing and fractionating. 

Modified Soxhlet Apparatus (Fig,A) 

This was designed primarily for use in rubber work, the purpose 
being to prevent heating of the extraction chamber by the vapors of 
















' 






. • . •; ' ^ • - . - 

■ 











‘ 





. ■ 

. 




- 

* 








* 














Reflux-Fractionating Column 



































Figure 4 


Modified Soxhlet Apparatus 













































-17- 


the extracting liquid* There is a possibility of structural changes 
in synthetic rubber when it is heated much above room temperattire, 
and one of the extracting liquids used in this work, ethanol-toluene 
azeotrope has a boiling point near 80*0® 

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES * 

1* T ray Preparation! , 

The tray is the most important unit in considerations of cleanliness 
and therefore requires careful attention in its preparation® It is 
covered with 25 coats of baking type bakelite lacquer (detailed in 
appendix) for electrical insulation, after the method of McBain and. 
Perry (16), and then scrubbed with boiling distilled water and soap 
with a final complete rinse with more boiling distilled water® Steam 
is blown through the false bottom and a petroleum ether (B,P, 40-60 
degrees C,) solution of refined filtered paraffin is painted on* The 
steam line Is then disconnected and the tray set in the cupboard to 
cool, and for the remaining petroleum ether to evaporate. After re¬ 
maining thus for five or six hours, it is removed and sprayed with a 
jet of cold distilled water, using compressed air to obtain the pressuH 
and the adhering droplets of water removed^with clean filter paper. It 
is then carefully placed within the thermostat box and filled to the 
brim with 0*0INHCL, which is made from conductivity water, and then 
treated with norit to ^remove surface active impurities. 

The box is then closed and the system allowed to reach equilibrium 
conditions of temperature and humidity, which takes shout five hours. 
Using the above procedure, which is a modification of that previously 















■ 






- 
















- 18 - 


used (14) 7 contamination pressures as low as 0*01 dynes at one- 

cm 

quarter compression were observed. Unfortunately this increased with¬ 
in twenty-four hours to the usual level of 0.03 dynes * For this 

cm 

reason the substrate was replaced once a day with one freshly prepared 
and cleaned with norit. When replacement of subphase no longer lowers 
residual contamination, the tray is removed from the box and stripped 
of its paraffin film by scrubbing with boiling distilled water and 
soap, and reparaffined as already described. This may be repeated for 
as long as the lacquer adheres closely to the metal surface, but when 
a blister develops the lacquer must also be replaced with a. fresh coat. 
(Appendix). 

2. Myristie Acid Preparation . 

The myristie acid used was from Eastman Kodak, It had a yellow¬ 
ish tinge, so it was purified by recrystallizing from absolute aftthanol 
three times, with norit treatment before each crystallization, then 
carefully dried. The product gave a sharp melting point at 54®C 
(uncalibrated thermometer)• 

3* S olvents . 

Petroleum ether, thiophene-free benzene, and acetone were refluxed 
for 12 hours over phosphorus pentoxide and then fractionated at the 
rate of one drop per second, in the combined reflux-fractionating col¬ 
umns described under Apparatus. The petroleum ether fraction boiling 
from 30 to 35®C was the solvent most often used. A fifty-fifty mix¬ 
ture of this with acetone composed the third solvent ?diich was studied. 

























, 

. 

' ... . . ' t .! ' ' • 



• ■ 








. 


■■ - .1 ' : '■ 












. 






- 








-19- 


This solvent is the one used in rubber studies by the workers at 

the University of Western Ontario (17) • 

Solutions of (d) Solutions myristic acid in each of the solvents 
were prepared in the concentrations: 

1. Petroleum ether: 0*0011 mg/ml, 0*0021 mg/ml*0.OO43 mg/ml* 

0.0086 mg/ml, 0.0172 mg/ml. 

2. Benzenes 0.0035 mg/ml, 0.0070 mg/ml* 0.0140 mg/ml. 

3. Acetone-petroleum ether: 0.0034 mg/ml, 0.0069 mg/ml* 

0.0138 mg/ml. 

To ensure no $>eri:ous change in concentration of solutions* these 
were run off immediately after preparation* old solutions being found 
unreliable. 

4® Run Procedure . 

The surface was swept 10 times* the balance head lowered, and the 
zero point given time to settle down and become constant. The time 
allowed for this as determined from a preliminary study of zero point 
changes* was 10 minutes in the case of the 5 mil torsion wire* and 20 
minutes in the case of the 3 mil torsion wire. 

Each film was spread at 20°C, drop by drop* over different parts of 
the surface* from a micropipette delivering 0.0878 ml.* on an initial 
surface of 687 cm?, A standard 10 minutes* also determined from a 
preliminary study of spreading times* was allowed for solvent evapor¬ 
ation and spreading of the film. Two types of runs were used: For 













. 




. 

' 

- 



I ■ 

j ,i •; 7 •• n I 

■ 


■ 








■: .j: " 










- 20 - 


all areas below 7000 A */ m °l ecu l e * 'the usual procedure of success¬ 
ively decreasing the surface area available to the film was followed* 

A hundred runs were made in this manner. For areas above 7000 A 
-r /molecule each film was spread on different available areas* and 
only the one initial reading taken. (The balance response was poor 
when the usual procedure was followed). The surface was then swept 
and another film spread on a different initial spreading area. This 
method is very slow and laborious] only one reading can be taken every 
three-quarters of an hour* while with the other method from 6 to 10 
determinations can be made in that time. 

Surface potential changes were determined only on the less dilute 
films* as at very high dilution no change is determinable with the 
present apparatus. The area probed by the air electrode is less than 

■Q 

1 cm * meaning that relatively few molecules are under the electrode 

g, 

to cause a potential change. In addition to this, surface potential 
measurements made on these films are not very reliable. In spite of 
extensive shielding of the potential apparatus* any slight variation 
in the control circuit voltages (110 V.A.C.) causes galvanometer deflec 
-tions of the same order as those observed on diltite films. The best 
readings were obtained at night* when voltage fluctuations are not so 
pronounced. 

5. Thiocyanation of GR-S . 

The particular synthetic rubber designated W GR-S l! is a copolymer 
of Butadiene and styrene in the appro&mate proportions six to one. 









. 

. - ■* ■ 

■ . . 


: . ' ‘ i .'l? ’ .! .■U'J. J : > L : t 

■ 


. 




- 

‘ 


■ 






. 


'. ■) . ;q .1 i /.t 1 ■ ' ;; . ..r,.V' -■ 







- 21 - 


A sample of this product was obtained from the Polymer Corporation 
with the intention of convei&ng it into a derivative suitable for 
monolayer sudy* 

Before addition of polar groups is attempted, anti-oxidants, 
s atalyag fas, and emulsifying agents must be removed from the raw pro¬ 
ducts A Soxhldf 1 extraction thimble is filled with small pieces 
(4x4x4 mm*) of the sample, placed in the modified Soxhlet, and ex¬ 
tracted for at least eight hours with an azeotfropic mixture of ethanol 
and toluene to which 10 % water has been added (18) • The extracted 
material is then placed in a Soxhlet apparatus and extracted further 
with acetone, which removes the ETA and water, facilitating subsequent 
drying* The final extracted polymer is dried in an Abdjfhalden vacuum 
apparatus* 

A one percent solution in clean, dry benzene is made immediately 
after drying., to hinder oxidation by the atmosphere,, and this sol¬ 
ution is subjected to the addition reaction* 

There are two methods used to add the thiocyanate group to a 
double bond, which will be referred to as ^External Addition 11 and 
"Internal Addition”* 

^Hereinafter referred to as W ETA W * 

1* External Addition (17) 

2,2 ml* of a 6 % solution of bromine in purified carbon tetrachlov- 






































< 

r • , . - ■ - , ■ ■ '■ 'J... : 





































- 22 - 


ide is added drop by drop to an excess (about 1 g,) of lead 
thiocyanate suspended in a few ml. of carbon tetrachloride. 

This addition is made at a low temperature (0 to 5*C.) in such 
a way that the color of free bromine disappears before more 
bromine solution Is added. The clear liquid separating from 
the solids is decanted through fine glass wool into 100 g. 
of the 1 % solution of GR-S in benzene. The air above the 
Reaction mixture is flushed out with nitrogen, and the flask 
with this mixture, stoppered tightly and set in, an icebox for 
eighteen hours. At the end of this time thiocy^nogen addition 
to the double bond is presumably complete, 
ii. Internal Addition. 

In this method, one gram lead thiocyanate is suspended in 
100 g of the 1 % solution of GR-S, and to this is added drop 
by drop with stirring, 2.2 ml. of 6 % bromine in carbon tetra¬ 
chloride, This mixing is also done at low temperatures, with 
each fresh addition made only when the solution is again color¬ 
less. After removing the air with nitrogen the reaction flask 
is stoppered and set in an icebox as before. When the reaction 
is complete, the solution is filtered through fine glass wool 
to remove the suspended lead salts. 


Concentrations of these solutions are determined by eva- 




• :T 

. 

r 

- 

. 

. 












- 23 - 


porating 10 ml, aliquots to dryness and weighing the residues. 
Solutions of concentrations which will give monomolecular films 
on complete uniform spreading of derivative.are then made from 
the stock solutions* Calculation of these concentrations is 
.based on the assumption of a film density equal to one (20), 

The concentrations employed weres 
i* Internal addition solutions: 

0*967 mg/ml, 0*483 mg/ml, 0*242 mg/ml * 0*121 mg/ml, <5t060 
mg/ml 3 

ii* Ext.ernal addition solutions: 

0*763 mg/ml, 0*381 mg/ml, 0*3,91 mg/ml, 0*095 mg/ml 0*048 
mg/ml* 

Extent of thiocyanogen addition is determined by microk- 
jeldahl nitrogen determinations (21) on samples of appropriate 
volume, both before and after addition* Nitrogen determinations 
before addition give an indication of the completeness of ETA 
extraction of the raw product* (Any nitrogen present would be 
due to the anti-oxidant phenyl ^2 -naphthylamine) * For the 
solutions mentioned above, ETA extraction was considered complete* 



















. . ,; ■’ . . : - . r ' 

. 

. 


' 
















- 24 “ 


RESULTS MB DISCUSSION 







- 25 - 


R q suits and Discussion . 

A. Myristic Acid Films* 

Experiments conducted at very low surface pressures are 
fraught with difficulties. Only the utmost cleanliness com¬ 
bined with the greatest care can overcome them. Zero point 
changes, discussed fully in the appendix, may register apparent 
surface pressures of a greater magnitude than those exerted by 
the film. Surface contamination in amounts considered negli¬ 
gible at moderate pressures becomes extremely important at low 
pressures. Rapid, complete spreading, which minimizes the 
effects of a changing zero and of accumulating contamination, 
is prevented; and at the same time the float sensitivity is 
decreased. 

Only two-thirds of the runs made on myristic acid films 
are, in so far as the author was able to ascertain, reliable 
determinations on the gaseous films. The following discussion 
is based on these ms. 

1. Films from Petroleum Ether . 

Measurements made on these dilute films were used in two 
ways? to find the FA extrapolation value at zero pressure, and 
to calculate the lateral cohesive forces between the molecules. 
The assumption was made that at low pressures the film should 
behave according to an equation of the form 

FA = /3 - _fC_ 

A 







- 26 - 


in accordance with deductions made from the analogue of the 
7an der Waals equation (Introduction)® The equation of the 
best fit straight line was calculated from the experimental 
measurements by the method of least squates and the constants 
obtained in the process were correlated.with the ideal FA 
value, and with the ’’internal cohesion force”• It Is usually 
the practice to do this calculation separately for each run* 
However, this was not in the present instance® Surface 

pressure changes with relatively large changes in area are very 
small at these dilutions, so that only five or six measurements 
can be taken in the course of one run* For this reason, all 
determinations in a particular area range were included in one 
calculation® 

Results obtained are divided into two classes according 
to whether they were determined in a conventional type of run, 
or single-value runs* The conventional type of run was em¬ 
ployed for areas less than 7000 square Angstroms per molecule, 
using a 5 mil torsion wirej for areas greater than this, a 3 
mil torsion wire was used and only one determination made on each 
film, in an attempt to prevent any vibration which might cause 
a zero point change® 



.O 1 
















! ' - i 







* 

. 







- 27 - 


Table 1 summarizes the results* 


TABLE 1. 


Run type 

Nol of Determinations 

FA 



Conventional 

59 

405x10"— 

ergs 

molecule 

tt 

5.15x10 dynecmV 

Single Value 

29 

406 " 

(molecule! 

4.31 


Ideal 

402 " 

ii 

0 


The surface vapor pressure at 20*C was found to be 0.258 dines, 

cm 

and the transition of gas to liquid began at approximately 700 
^/molecule. Comparison with Adams'curves (4) shows that these 
results are near the expected values for this temperature. 

A comparison of the internal forces with those of carbon 
dioxide, which shows changes of state below«&0*C, is possible. 
Arbitrarily choosing an area of 12,000 A* /molecule for myris- 
tic acid, the corresponding film pressure is approximately 0.03 


dynes . 

This pressure is equivalent to a three dimensional pressure 
dynes r dynes 

of 0«03 om — 6.67x 10’ era- 

4.5^ "ljrcm 

~ 6.58x 10” ? atm, 

using Adam f s method (4) of comparison. 


The Volume of one mole of carbon dioxide at this pressure. 


and at 2Q 0 C, is 363®5 litres. 


sure is 






from which the internal cohesive 

= Z-7$ l iCT^nXyyi.. 


pres- 
























. 




















' 

. 














. 

. 


. 

























- 28 - 


In the case ofmyristic acid. 



fj 1 /.++*//■)-*+ f 


X JO *d.y"n£S^C77i . 


7*0 u 


In three dimensions this is equivalent to 




- S6 K/C~* citrr,' 


This value is greater than that for a three dimensional 
system, in a corresponding state, but is less than internal 


cohesive forces of liquids, the order of which is from 10^ to 
10 5 atm (22). 


The FA values are in good agreement, being only about 1% 
high. Adam and Jessop (5) reported extrapolation values consis¬ 
tently 25% low at 14*5*0* The phenomenon discussed below may 
be a partial explanation of their low values. 

2. The Island Phenomenon^ 

a 

For areas less than 6000 A /molecule, force readings taken 
at successively smaller areas ten minutes after spreading a film 
exhibited the strange phenomenon of a lower film pressure at a 
smaller surface area instead of a greater pressure. This would 
continue for several decrements of area, t-henthe pressure would 
suddenly rise, and again the same behavior would be repeated. 
Mapping the surface with the surface potential apparatus qual¬ 
itatively indicated a nonghomogeneous film. Wherever a drop of 
solution had been placed, the surface potential was 5 to 10 










_ 
















. 



















- 29 - 


millivolts more positive, *t)ther portions of the surface showed 
no change from the clean-surface potential. This indicated 
the presence of islands, which meant that no measurements taken 
on this film could be considered reliable determinations on a 
gaseous film. Since the film did not become homogeneous in a 
convenient lenght of time, a device was employed which improved 
the conditions. The film was compressed to one-sevsa&th its 
original area to cause the islands to merge, then it was ex¬ 
panded very slowly (during 10 to 15 minutes)® Surface poten¬ 
tials still varied over the .surface, but to a lesser extent (2 
to 6 millivolts), and nowhere was a clean-surface potential read. 
It was concluded that the film was much more uniform, and the 
run was repeated, with more consistent force measurements ob¬ 
tained, This type of behavior was evident with both petroleum 
ether and benzene solutions. Table 2 illustrates the island 
phenomenon. 


TABLE 2 : 

Rune no, 73 (0.0878 ml, of 0.0043 mg/ml in petroleum ether) 


A 02 

a(£_ ) 

MOLECULE 

F (dvneg) 

c m. 

FA (ffffcule 

6820 

0,045 

309 

6020 

0.097 

583 

5220 

4 0,097 

<507 

4410 

< 0,097 

<428 

3610 

0,12.6 

455 
























j v , -.'v L . . ‘ : *Bi 










s 

■ 










. 







- 30 - 


2810 

< 0*126 

354 

2010 

0*172 

346 

Re- run of no® 73 i 

(after de-compression) 


6820 

0*045 

309 

6020 

0*052 

3.12 

5220 

0,058 

304 

4410 

0*068 

300 

3610 

0*074 

269 

2810 

0,091 

255 

2010 

0,113 

227 


Although the time required to complete a run is increased 
by this modified procedure, it wasfound that contamination had 
not increased sufficiently to alter the results* 

When the 3 mil torsion wire was used, a few more runs were 
made in this area range to check on the island phenomenon* 

Curiously enough, the effect was not nearly so pronounced, al¬ 
though it still was evident- These check runs were further handi¬ 
capped by changes of zero induced by vibrations caused on decreas¬ 
ing the areas® It was because of this that the single-value run 

» 

method was adopted for work on areas up to 30,000 square Angstroms 
per molecule® It was found that solutions more dilute than 0*0043 
mg/ml apparently did not give rise to islands <3 complete spreading- 
had taken place within ten minutes after the film was pipetted on 










. 

* 





■ 

■ 


' 

. 


1C 


■« 

. 

. 

■ 

. 

. 

, 

. 







'0 

■ 












to the surface. 


- 31 - 

Formation of islands is easily explained. Careful observa¬ 
tion of the surface during spreading showed that each drop of 
solution did not form a leas larger than two to three cm, 
diameter before it had evaporated, leaving behind an island of 
myristic acid. Immediately after pipetting the solution on 
surface, the pressure always rose momentarily to a fairly high 
value (an estimate would be about 0,3 dynes/cm,/, which rapidly 
fell back to zero as the solvent evaporated within a minute, then 
the pressure rose very slowly for the next few minutes* This 
confirms Harkins® Theory of Spreading, which requires a monomole- 
cular film of hydrocarbon in equilibrium with visible lenses of 
liquid. If this is actually the case, then it is not difficult to 
see that the spreading of the solvent to a monomolecular film 
of a thickness of 5 to 10 would not w drag w many myristic acid 
molecules along with it, since these molecules are anchoredto the 
surface* It is more likely that the great majority of myristic 
acid molecules are concentrated at the site of the lens, and must 
spread by themselves after the solvent has evaporated. 

Erratic force measurements in the presence of islands can also 
be explained. Each Island, would have its own pressure, which 
would be greater than that of the homogeneous film, since the 
area ©ccupied is much less* The force measured is that exerted 
on the float. If an island were to come close to the float it 
would cause a rise of pressure to above that of a uniform film. 



■ 



. 














. 




. 















' 







:■ v ; .. , - - •* i, u 


■ 

. 




■ ■ 

»■ 
















' » 

■ . 






> 




■ 









- 32 - 


depending, of course, on the extent of float length it acted 
on* If there are no islands in the immediate# vicinity of the 
float, the action would effectively be that of.a two dimensional 
vacuum and cause a low force measurement* It is to be noted that 
this situation is not the same as that of incomplete spreading 
caused by contamination* In this case the surface pressure is 
uniform over the ¥vhoie surface* 

That islands can exist for seme time is also easily understood* 
Thermodynamically, for a substance to spread It must in the act of 
spreading lower the free energy of the surface (or the surface 
tension)• Kinetically, one would expect the rate of spreading 
to be directly proportional to the extent of this lowering* If 
we denote rate of spreading as ds/dt, and change in surface tension 
as /\Y (free energy change would then be times the area), we 
could write tentatively 

ds/dt = khY 

where k is the proportionality constant* For a lowering of 
1 dyne/cm *, 

ds/dt " k 

For a lowering of 0*05 dynes/cm* (as at 680C?A* /molecule), 
ds/dt = 0*C5k 

The area of the available surface is 687 cm * 

Therefore, spreading time at 1 dyne/cm . 687 

k 























> 











. 




- :■ 





























































- 33 - 


Soreading time at 0,05 dynes/cm _ 687 

" 0,05k 

Ratio of spreading times _ 687/k _ 1 - 20, # 

687/0,05k " “ 0,05 

whi.ch means that it would take about 20 times as long for a film 
to spread at a potential surface tension lowering of 0,05 dynes/cm. 
than at 1 dyne/cm. In addition, internal’cohesion forces are con¬ 
siderable, and this too would tend to hinder spreading. If only 3 
minutes were necessary for spreading at 1 dyne/cm (Nutting and 
Harkins (23) allowed 15 minutes for an area about twice the sise 
of that used here), it would take an hour for a film to spread 
at 0.05 dynes/ci$u The spreading process may be hastened by spreading 
the solutions over* various portions of the surface instead of on 
one place, 

# This calculation is not intended to be exact - it is merely 
j an illustration, probably an over-simplification of the real- 
case • 

3* Dpii ble Mo 1 ecules. 

Moss and Rideal (10), working in the same area range as the 
author but using a balance employing a vertical torsion wire 
activated by a couple exerted on the float, have reported a near¬ 
ly constant value of FA near 200 for gaseous myristic acid films 
at 17*C. This led them to conclude that the film consisted of 
extremely stable double molecules instead of as single molecules. 
These results are contradictory to those reported in this thesis, 


















. 










*■ 

' 

- 

. 1 ■ 

















- 34 - 


but can be largely explained by them. The above authors used a 
spreading method quite different from that used here. Instead of 
obtaining successively smaller areas by moving a barrier towards 
the float, they spread a film from one drop of a solution over the 
surface, then took a force measurement$ another drop was placed on 
top of the existing film to obtain half the molecular area and 
again a force measurement was taken. A series of such measure- 
ments on films spread one on top of the other comprised their run. 

These results were duplicated here to a certain extent (Fig 5), 
but the author was never able to obtain an FA value near 200 for 
the first film (spread on a clean surface) in each run. In view of 
this fact, and the further fact that the island phenomenon dis¬ 
appeared as the areas became much greater than 7000 A /molecule, 
it is possible that the molecules must be within a certain dis¬ 
tance of each other before they will spontaneously form double 
molecules on spreading. This suggests that a critical concentration 
exists, which is conducive to spontaneous double molecule formation. . 
Since the island phenomenon was most pronounced with the solution of 
0.0043 mg/ml concentration, it is believed that this is near this 4 
critical concentration. Unfortunately, Moss and Rideal do not re¬ 
port their solution concentration, nor do they give the dimensions 
and the available surface area of their tray, so that it was 
impossible to duplicate ^b e Ir procedure exactly . Also, it is not 
unlikely that temperature is important in the formation of double 
molecules® Therefore, it seems reasonable to suppose that it 

















ii 



■ 

' 





. 




. 



















' 







* 

' 

. ' 

. 

■ 


























Figure 5 



. A V 0 






















































-35- 


would be easier to obtain double molecules at 17*C than at 20*C. 

Avssuming that the films obtained by Moss and Rideals* method 
consisted essentially of double molecules, the measurements were 
used to calculate the internal cohesive force factor and the 
extrapolation value of FA. The factor is approximately one fifth 
as large as for single molecules, and the extrapolated value of 
FA is 420. These two values indicates 

(1) The double-molecule state behaves much more like an 
ideal gaseous film at 20®G than does the single- 
molecule state. 

(2) Not all molecules were in the double¬ 
molecule state* 

The distinct separation of the two sets of results in- . 
dicateft that both states are stable, which further supports the 
hypothesis of critical concentrationss that is, double mole¬ 
cules would form in the lens before actual spreading occurred. 
Once either state had completely covered the surface, no 
further change would take place. This was tested by allowing 
each state to remain on the surface for over an hour at a con¬ 
stant area. The surface pressure in each case remained constant. 
It is thus apparent that the sub-phase does have an effect on 
the monolayer.. For single molecules, although the cohesive 

















► 






. 

' 




■ . 


, v+ 

. 




. 






7 ; > 


; 














. 

- 

i . > d 


■ 









- 36 - 


forces are great, the surface tension of the underlying liquid 
is great enough to keep the molecules apart® The double mole¬ 
cules appear to be a stable enough association to resist the 
tendency of the subphase surface tension to separate them, 

4* Films from Benzene ® 

Because of residual benzene pressure (see under Solvents) 
measurements made on solutions giving areas gfeater than 2740 A 
-i/molecule are not reliable, and hence are not included in 
this discussion* At forces greater than 0,1 dynes/cm the films 
from benzene gave measurements nearly the same as those obtain¬ 
ed from petroleum ether solutions® Seventeen determinations in 
the range 2740 to 1000 f\ z . ‘-/molecule extrapolated to an FA 
value of 419® and the internal cohesion factor was calculated to 





Both values are higher than those 


with petroleum ether which is believed due to the increased 
effect of residual benzene pressure at the larger areas® The 
area of transition and the surface vapor pressure were the same 
as for the films spread from petroleum ether® 

5* Films from Acetone-Petroleum Ether ® 

No significant results were obtained from this solvent® In 
this case the residual pressure was great enough to mask' entirely 
the effects of the myristie acid in the film® FA values were 
much above 500 , and increased with increasing surface pressure 
instead of decreasing as they normally would® This solvent was 







i ■■■;r 











. 

• 

* 














• ■ • - ■ ... 

■ 

■- . 

,* . . 

h 

. ■ 

. 





- 37 - 


discarded as unsuitable after two runs. 

In Figure 6 a summary of the results obtained Is shown in 
a plot of FA against F. The plotted values are sample points 
to illustrate the distribution about the best fit curves. 


B. SOLVENTS 

Table 3 summarizes the determinations made on the solvents. 


TABLE 3 

(0.0S7S ml* of each solvent was used.) 


Solvent Residual 

Pressure 
(dynes/cm) 


Benzene 0.015 

0.0097 

Petroleum 

ether 

(B*P. 30-35*0) 0 


Surface 

potential 

change 

(millivolts) 

-6 


? 


Acetone 

Petroleum 

ether 


0.162 

0.110 

0.071 

0.071 




Time after 
spreading 


5 min. 
10 min. 


5 min. 


10 min. 
13 min. 
17 min. 
20 min. 


It now becomes apparent why acetone-petroleum ether gave such 


high values of FA. Since a standard 10 minutes was allowed for 
evaporation and spreading for every film, acetone-petroleum ether 


at dilute concentrations contributed more to the measured pressure 











. 

. • 








. 




, 


■ . 










■ 















■ • • 


. 


■ 























-ii> ev 


Figure 6 


Graphical Summary 
















- 38 - 


than did the myristic acid monolayer. In the case of benzene 
the effect of evaporation time on force measurements is illus¬ 
trated in Figure 7® Actually, it was found that after eight 
minutes the readings did not vary, but ten minutes was chosen 
arbitrarily as the evaporation plus spreading time to be on the 
safe side® Petroleum ether evaporated in a shorter length of 
time than required to make a surface potential measurement, so 
that no values were obtained® The full ten minutes were allowed 
to give as much time for dissipation of islands as could be 
conveniently allowed• 

Each solvent has its disadvantages® Petroleum ether eva¬ 
porates too quickly, which is conducive to island formation® 
Benzene and acetone-petroleum ether leave a significant residual 
pressure, and in addition contaminate the surface quickly. Ace- 
tone-petroleum ether is particularly bad in this respect® It 
was found that after two runs using this solvent the contamination 
had increased two-fold, and several extra sweepings of the surface 
would not lessen it® This is to be expected, in view of the great 
solubility of acetone in water, and it seems to suggest that the 
acetone concentration in the surface extends for a considerable 
distance into the bu Lk of the substrate® Benzene dees not con¬ 
taminate the surface 'as quickly® Both benzene and acetone- 
petroleum ether give negative surface potential changes, which 
makes it impossible to determine the positive surface potential 
changes of myristic acid films. The surface potential determin- 



' 




. , 









« 




























> V .. 






' 


. 

. . 
















Figure 7 


Effect of Time of Evaporation on Forc e Measurements 
G)\0873 ml. of 0.0070"mg/ml* Myristic Acid 
in Benzene on 0.01 N. HC1. 

























- 39 - 


ations reported are, therefore, those obtained from petroleum 
ether solutions. 

Referring once again to Figure 6, it is interesting to note 
that the benzene and petroleum ether curves approach each other 
as the residual pressure of benzene contributes proportionately 
less and less to the force measurements. Above 0.1 dyne s/cm 
the curves should be practically identical, since above this 
value the residual solvent pressure is less than one-tenth the 
total pressure. 

C. THI0CYANATI0N OF GR-S 

Thiocyanation is far from easy even under the best of cir¬ 
cumstances. Any trace of moisture or oxygen in the reaction 
mixture, or over-exposure to light induces polymerization of the 
thiocyanogen itself. In the case of thiocyanated rubber to be 
studied as a monolayer, such an occurrence could be the source of 
a serious error, since polytbiocyanagen is itself surface active. 
The assumption is usually made, by the workers at the University 
of Illinois and Western Ontario, that all the thiocyanogen adds 
on to the rubber, and that any polythiocyanogen formed precipi¬ 
tates out of the solution. The possibility of the continued 
existence of polytbiocyanogen as a colloidal suspension in this 
solution seems to have been overlooked. Accordingly, it was 
decided to check on this possibility. The tests conducted on 
two samples, one made by External Addition and the other by 







■> 






, • . 


. 












' 







■ 






■ 

. . 

.. > 

















- 40 - 


Intemal Addition, were: 

1. Visual comparison of Tyndall effects to determine the pres¬ 
ence and relative amounts of colloids® 

2. Centrifuging the samples at 1430xG for 10 minutes, then 
another comparison of Tyndall effects® 

3® Nitrogen determinations twenty-four hours after preparation, 
and again two weeks later, to determine extent of polythiocyan¬ 
ogen precipitation. 

The results are tabulated in Table 4s 

TABLE 4 

Sample 1 prepared by External Addition 
Sample 2 prepared by Internal Addition® 


Sample 

Cone® 

(mg/ml) 

Attempted (CNS)^ 
Addition 

Apparent 

Addition 

Tyndall 

Effects 

1 

7 ®55 

15* 

9.8* 

intense 

2 

9.43 

15* 

2.8* 

slight 

After two 

weeks: 




1 

7.63 


9.0* 

intense 

2 

<5.67 


2.7* 

slight 

No® 1 

gave a darker yellow liquid than 

no. 2 within 

the 


eighteen hours storage time® Both were apparently clear® How¬ 
ever, no® 1 exhibited a very intense Tyndall, effect which polar¬ 
ized white light® On the other hand, no® 2 exhibited a slight 

Tyndall effect of about the same magnitude as the original un¬ 
treated rubber solution® No® 1 was filtered through fine glass 




























* 

• j . -w- l' ■: ....... ' I 

- ... ; ■: . ; ■ •' ■§ 

’ ■ v.>. 













- 

. 









‘ ' 

- 

;, r-, ::4 

. 















- 41 - 


wool, and then centrifuged at 1430 x G„ Neither procedure 
apparently decreased the Tyndall Effect, 

After two weeks nitrogen determinations showed a decrease 
in apparent (GNS) ? addition in both samples, in the proportions 
l/l2 for sample 1 and l/2& for sample 2, suggesting twice as 
much loss in apparent addition in the first sample. No, 1 showed 
signs of very slow precipitation of polythiocyanogen on the sides 
of the flask. 

It would thus appear likely that polythiocyanogen is produced 
as a contaminant during thiocyanation of GR-S, taking the form 
of a fine colloidal dispersion. If such is the case, any measure¬ 
ments made on thiocyanated GR-S before first removing all the 
polythiocyanogen would not be reliable. Since polythiocyanogen 
is bo much smaller a molecule than GR-S, it would give a pressure 
much out of proportion to the actual weight present in compari son 
with the amount of rubber derivative on the surface, 

X), FI LMS OF THEQCIANATED GR-g 

Measurements made on the two samples of thiocyanated GR-S 
show an entirely anomalous behavior. Characteristics of this 
behavior ares 

1, Forces measured -were functions of the initial spreading area, 
and not of the area, available to each molecule, 

2, In every ease, and for all concentrations (even those which 

isrould give multi-mole<uilar films on complete spreading) the 
first forces measured were of the magnitude of the residual 





. 

' 










- 






f-: > v 1 










1 . '■ 'ISi V ’ " ' 








.. 


. 


' 








- 42 - 


benzene pressure* which renders them meaningless, end.the 
final ones never were higher than 0*4 dynes/cm, all of them 
falling between 0.3 and 0.4 dynes/cm. 

3. The amount'of apparent thiocyanogen addition appeared to have 
no appreciable affect on measurements. Films of sample 1 and 
sample 2 exhibited similar behavior. 

Visual spreading tests(described in the Appendix) and a com¬ 
parison with the spreading of myrista c acid from similar concen¬ 
trations confirmed these observations. Unfortunately, it was 
impossible to make surface potential measurements on these films, 
as the runs were made at the conclusion of the investigations, and 
the tray insulation had broken down by this time. Repairs would 
have required at least two days. 

Two interpretations of these results are possible % 

X. The rubber thiocyanates did not spread, which would be 
another confirmation of Harkins 9 Theory. If it is a fact that 
thiocyanation does give the polymer the ability to spread, then 
it may mean that there is no actual addition of the thio cyanogen. 
Polythiocyanogen may be formed and exist either as a colloid, or 
as colloidal particles tightly adsorbed to the larger rubber mol¬ 
ecules. This would help to explain the yellow color of the 
addition product. The thiocyanates of isoprene and dimethyl- 

butadiene, closely related to rubber, are known to be colorless, 
while polythiocyanogen is yellow. In order for the rubber 















. 

■ 




' 






















- 43 - 


addition product to have a color, the process of addition must 
promote the formation of a conjugated double bond system along 
the polymer chain* The resulting resonance might then give a 
visible color to the molecule* Although this is not impossible 
is does not seem likely that addition to an isolated double-bond 
system should conjugate the unaffected double bonds* That the reson¬ 
ance within the benzene rings contained in GR-S molecules has no 
effect, was demonstrated in the preliminary stages of this investi¬ 
gation? Tblocyanation of natural rubber, which is a polymer of 
isoprene alone, yielded a. similarly yellow ^addition product** ~ 

2, Spreading does take place, but gives a monolayer of hereto¬ 
fore unknown properties« An extremely coherent film composed of 
molecules capable of being bent to occupy less area could con¬ 
ceivably behave in such a manner* If the molecules were crowded 
sufficiently, it is possible that the polar groups could be de¬ 
tached from the surface (since there are relatively few of them 
in one molecule - only one for every 82 carbon atoms in the 
chair at %% addition), and the whole molecule would stand up, 
remaining anchored to the surface only at one end* This' would be 
much the same as oleic acid molecules which are held flat on the 
surface by the carboxyl, group and the double bond, but stand 
up when the molecules become tightly packed* 

The second interpretation, if it is correct, would confuse 
attempts to elucidate the structure of rubber thiocyanates* It 





















- 

. 






* 

' 










. 

■ 

. 




■ 






. 

■ 

■ 









- 44 - 


wculd be much easier to determine the structure if the molecule 
were firmly anchored to the surface* 

Since a multilayer of the derivative gave the same range of 
pressures, it is more likely that the first interpretation of 
non-spreading is true.. 

Reports from Western Ontario (20) and Illinois (24) indicate 
measurements are actually made of these surface films of rubber 
derivatives® Measurements are made with a Genco hydropb.il balance 
of a 0*2 dynes/cm sensitivity (25)« Since the balance used at the 
University of Alberta has a sensitivity of 0*005 dynes/cm, it 
should give more reliable results® However, this may not be 
necessarily the case, since the concentrations and volumes of 
solutions used to form a film yhry greatlys for monomolecular films 
of rubber the author uses less than 0.1 ml of solution to minimise 
the residual solvent pressure, while the others use quantities as 
large as 5 ml to obtain the same film thickness® 

The results of the experiments made here force the author to 
conclude that thiocyanated GR/S does not spread, at least not under 
the conditions which were used® 











■ 




. 









. 








' > . ■ . ■. v' mi: 

. 

■ 

. 








■ , 
















- 45 - 


SIJMMARX 











SIB1MARI 


It has been shown that the value of FA for a myristic acid 

film at 20 *C and at very low film pressures extrapolates close 

to the theoretical value of 402 x Ifl? ^ ergs if measurements 

molecule 

are very carefully made* At the time it is possible for 

this film to be made up of double-molecules* Both the spreading 
method and the concentration of solutions are factors which de¬ 
termine whether the single-molecule or the double-molecule state 
will be formed* A critical concentration for the formation of the 
latter state has been postulated, but remains unknown* 

The existence of islands in a gaseous myristic acid film has 
been shown to be both possible and likely, and seems to be re¬ 
lated in some manner to the critical concentration for double¬ 
molecule formation* 

The importance of the type of solvent used, especially in 
low pressure work, has been established* A water soluble 
solvent must not be used* Benzene may be used for pressures 
above 0*1 dynes/cm, but only in very small quantities* The low 
boiling fraction of petroleum ether is the best at low pressures® 
It is doubtful whether thiocyanated rubber prepared by the 
’’External Addition” method is reliable* 

All results obtained from films of thiocyanated GR-S indicate 
that this derivative does not spread* 

Recommendations for further works 

1, An attempt should be made to find the critical concentration 










- 47 - 


for the double molecule state* 

2. The double molecule state should be fully investigated* 

3* Runs should be made at other temperatures, to determine 
thermodynamic properties of gaseous films* 

4* Thiocyanation of GR-S and other rubbers should be studied. 
5* -An attempt to add other polar groups to rubbers should be 
made, e*g., thiol-acetic acid. 









BIBLIOGRAPHY 









- 49 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

(l{ Langmuir; J. Am. Chem. Soc. 22 9 1848 (1917) 

(2) Adam and Harding: Proc. Roy. Soc. A138 , 411 (1932) 

(3) Harkins, W.D.s Publication no. 21, The American Association 

for the Advancement of Science, Page 40-87. 

(4) Adam, N.K.; The Physics and Chemistry of Surfaces, Oxford 

University Press, 3rd Edition, London (1941) 

(5) Adam and Jessop; Proc. Roy. Soc., A110 , 423 (1926) 

( 6 ) Harkins and Copeland: J. Chem. Phys® 10 , 273 (1942) 

(7) Guastalla, J.; Compt. Rend. 196 , 1376 (1933) 

( 8 ) Guastalla, J.s Compt. Rend. 107 , 307 (1933) 

(9) Feng and Band; J. Chem. Phys* 8 , 977 (1940) 

(10) Moss and Rideal; Jour* Chem. Soc. 1525 (1933) 

(11) Pummerer and Stark: Ber. 64 , 825 (1931) 

(12) Rehner: J* Tnd. Eng, Chem. 36 , 118 (1944) 

(13) Kahn, J.W.V.: Experimental Methods for the Study of Protein 

Monolayers, Thesis, University of Alberti (1948) 

(14) Hodgson, G.W.; Protein Monolayers, Thesis, University 

of Alberta (1947) 

(15) Strong: Procedures in Experimental Physics, Prentice Hall, 

New York (1943) 

(16) McBain and Perry: J.Ind. Eng. Chem. 2i * 35 (1939) 












... . . 

, 








. 

. 






















- 50 - 


(17) Private Communi cation from C. Sivertz, University of 

Western Ontario, 

(18) Private Communication from I.M. Kolthoff, University 

of Minnesota. 

(19) Bruson and Calvert: J. .Am. Chem. Soc. ^0 , 1735 (1928) 

(20) Private Communi cation from 0. Sivertz, University of 

Western Ontario. 

(21) J. Ind. Eng, Chem., Anal. Ed.. 14 , 2$0 (1942) 

Ibid. 18 , 61 (1946) 

(22) Glasstones Textbook of Physical Chemistry, 2nd Edition, 

D. Van Nostrand Co,, New York (1947) 

(23) Nutting and Harkins: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 61 , 2040 (1939) 

(24) Private Communication from F.T. Wall, University of 

Illinois. 

(25) Private Communication from F.T. Wall and E.H. Fohrell, 

University of Illinois. 










5 






























APPEM)IX 







INDEX 


A CRITICAL APPRAISAL OF MONOLAYER TECHNIQUE 
Title Page 

A. Sources of Error 

(a) Force Measurements 2 

(b) Surface Potential Measurements 5 

B» Elimination of Errors of Technique 

(a) Zero Point Changes 6 

(b) Cleanliness and Contamination 16 

(c) Surface Potential Measurements 24 

(d) The Wilhelmy Balance 27 

(e) Additional Precautions 29 




APPENDIX 

A CRITICAL APPRAISAL OF MONOLAYER TECHNIQUE 
The following section is intended primarily for those 
persons who will continue monolayer work in this department at 
the University of Alberta. Although partly of general interest, 
the greater part applies to the facilities available in the 
Chemistry Department. It is written with the hope that the 
novice may benefit from the results of the author®s experience. 
The recommendations and procedures described below gave the best 
results, although some may seem to have no logical explanation. 

Monolayer study is a fascinating but exacting technique 
demanding patience, care, sometimes even endurance, but above all 
extreme cleanliness. Reports in the literature give only the 
slightest hints as to the actual difficulties encountered. The 
first prerequisite to reliable measurements is to become 
acquainted with the w personality H of the apparatus. Every 
sensitive instrument has its owl peculiarities, and the film 
balance is no exception. These peculiarities will be described 
fully in this appendix. 


















. 


. 

- 

* 


■ 

. 











- 2 - 


A. SOURCES OF ERROR 

(a) Force Measurements 

In the case of force measurements, these are numerous, 
but may be divided into three classes : 

1. Zero Point Changes, This is the most frequent and often 
the most difficult to correct. At low surface pressures, it is 
essential that no change im zero take place, otherwise measurements 
become meaningless. 

To check the zero point after completion of a run, 
move the dial, pointer back to the second last reading, increase 
the area to the second last area reading, move the dial, back 
ter the third last reading, increase the area to the third last 
area reading, and so: on, repeating this procedure until the 
maximum area is reached. At maximum area set the dial at the 
first reading taken. Wait two or three minutes for oscillation® 
about the wall scale~reading zero to cease, then observe the 
reading on the wall scale. If this reading has not changed, 
or has changed very little, consider the rim reliable, Hysterisis 
in the film may change the reading slightly, but this is 
insignificant in comparison with a change caused by a zero shift. 
With esqperiene© it is not difficult to decide whether a change 
is due to film hysterisis or to change of zero. It is strongly 






- 3 - 


recommended that the zero point be checked after each run. This 
increases the time required for a run, but is worthwhile in the 
peace of mind that comes from being sure that the forces 
measured were reliable for that film. Checking the zero point 
may be omitted for measurements beginning at about 0.3 dynes/cm. 
This exception applies only when a 5 mil, ©r larger, torsion' 
wire is used. When using a 3 mil torsion wire always check the 
zero point, 

Tlsere are two causes of zero point changess mechanical 
and inherent. The mechanical cause and its prevention is out¬ 
lined below under B.(a), The cause termed n inherent” is due 
to changes in the substrate level. Most monolayer work is done 
in a water-saturated atmosphere, and since the substrate is 
seldom pure water and usually a solution of a salt, the vapor 
pressure of the substrate is lower than that of pure water. 

This means there will be a transfer of water to the substrate, 
which will gradually increase its volume, raising its level, 
which in turn will raise the float and change the zero point. 
Fortunately, the ef*ror introduced by this cause does not become 
significant in the time required to make a run. The mechanical 
causes of zero change, on:the other hand, can introduce very- 
serious errors into the force measurements. 



. 








* 


* 























- 4 - 


2, Non-uniform Spreading. This may take the form of multi¬ 
layers, or of a monolayer not completely occupying the whole of 
the available surface, causing an erroneous area measurement. 

It can usually be checked with the surface potential apparatus. 

It is always good practice to check beforehand the 
spreading properties of the substance under study. The method 
used depends on the solvent: 

If the solvent is water (as in protein work), sprinkle some 
lycopodium powder on the surface in a small circle, then place 
the solution drop by drop in the centre of this circle, and note 
the time it takes for the film to push the lycopodium to the 
edges of the surface available for spreading. 

If the solvent is a hydrocarbon liquid, spread the solution 
drop by drop over different parts of the surface between two 
sweepers, wait a suitable length of time for the solvent to 
evaporate (5 to 10 minutes), then compress the filmeto one third 
or one quarter of its initial area. Behind the sweeper which 
was moved in the compression, sprinkle lycopodium in a line over 
the whole width of the tray. Carefully remove that sweeper, and 
note the time it takes for the film to push the line of powdwr 
to the position the sweeper occupied before compression. 

The reason for the different technique with the 






- 5 - 


hydrocarbon solvents is that the hydrocarbon itself spreads 
very quickly before evaporation, and in the process scatters the 
powder all over the surface, making observation of film spreading 
impossible* 

3. Leakage of the Film , past either the float or barrier. 
This causes a decreasing force reading at a constant area. 

Dusting a little lycopodium powder behind the float and barrier 
will detect a leak. 

(b) Surface Potential Measurements 

When the surface potential apparatus registers 
inaccurately, it generally does so in such a manner that the 
readings cannot be confused for reliable ones. Characteristic 
of faulty behavior are: 

1, Frequent and erratic fluctuations in the filament 
current. 

2. Inability to obtain a balance between the plate current 
and the space charge grid current. 

3* Apparent variation in clean-surface potential when the 
electrode remains stationary. Do not confuse this with a sudden 
momentary variation caused by line voltage changes in control 
circuits, which occurs, for example, when the motor of the 
refrigerating unti 






- 6 - 


refrigerating unit stops or starts. Turn off the refrigerating 
unit when taking a reading. 

B. ELIMINATION OF ERRORS OF TECHNIQUE 
(a) Zero Point Changes 

Many of the methodical errors peculiar to the horizontal 
film balance can be almost entirely eliminated. The most out¬ 
standing one* that of zero point shift* was found to be almost 
wholly due to an absence of equilibrium among torsion wires, 
the silver lever wires, and the gold ribbons $ and an improper 
balance of pan and counter-weight on the crosspiece suspended by 
the main torsion wire. The author*s laboratory notes show how 
annoying this can be. In one two-hour study of zero point 
changes, observations showed that in that time the zero point 
did not remain constant enough to permit-an accurate measurement 
of even the first force registered ten minutes after spreading. 
Careful assembly of the balance head prevents such a discoiiraging 
situation. The procedure outlined below is both quick and 
adequate. 

In dismantling, 

1. Raise the support for the crosspiece (also called leveilin 
device) and clamp the latter in position. 

2. Remove the head from the thermostat case, place it on its 





- 7 - 


stand, and replace the plexiglass front on the case. 

3. Detach the silver wire from the crossniece and then 
the miri’or lever wire from its dural anchor on the float. 

(Wherever any parts are held by cement, before detaching first 
melt the cement*) 

4. Loosen the main torsion wire, and then the nut which 
clamps the crosspiece to this wire. Be careful in doing this 
or the main torsion wire may be broken. 

5. Remove torsion wire and crosspiece from the balance 
head, and place them aside in a manner which will not kink the 
wire. 

6. Loosen the mirror torsion wire, then remove it, along 
with the mirror, from the head. 

7. Detach the gold ribbons from the feet and float and 
place them in benzene. 

8* Remove the legs and stand them up, feet down, in benzene. 

9® Detach the dural anchor piece from the float, also the 
silver wire, and place the float in a wide test tube containing 
benzene. 


The float, feet, and ribbons are prepared by the method 
described in the section on cleanliness, and then reassembly may 





- 

. 


, 

1 • •* 

.. 





' 




. 

, 








. 













- 8 - 


begin? 

1. Screw the legs back to the balance head, with the feet 
pointing inwards, and put the front edges of the feet in line 
with a ruler. 

2. Centre the dural anchor piece on the float (which is set 
on clean filter paper), then attach it to the float with medium 
or soft DeKhotinsky cement. 

3 * Temporarily, place the float midway between the feet, line 
up its front edge with the front edges of the feet. 

4. Smooth the gold ribbons to take out the kinks and other 
irregularities, then form them into shapes as nearly identical 
as is possible. A screw driver stem of appropriate diameter 1 is 
very useful in doing this. The must just fit between the 

feet and float without undue forcing. This is extremely important, 
otherwise the float will not stay centred when it is floating on 
the substrate, nor will it remain in line with the feet, thus 
causing error in both force and area measurements. Generally, it 
is impossible to obtain a perfect fit, but the following 
characteristics are necessary? The top and bottom of the 
must be flat and parallel, the two ribbons must be nearly the 
same shape, and it is better for the ! s to be slightly too 
large than slightly too small for the space. 








' 


. ' | : ! n.; o .i'i :v Mm | 

' 

. 











- 9 - 

5. Take the float from between the feet, place it on a 
piece of filter paper in such a manner that the ends of the float 
project just beyond the edge of the filter paper. Place a gold 
against the end of the float with the convex part next to 
the float and facing front; 


Oj 


fr&n t 


With slightly more than 


half the width of the ribbon above the plane of the float, cement 
the in place with a drop of hard cement. (Hard cement is 
preferable because it hardens quickly, while soft cements flow 
too far along the ribbon before they harden, which causes a 
loss of sensitivity.) Cement the otherin place symmetrically 
to the first. 

6. Attach a one mil silver wire of sufficient length to the 
middle of the float,not too close to the front edge. 

7. Once again place the float, with the attached gold 
ribbons and silver wire, between the feet, centre it, and line 
it up between the feet as before. 

8. Approximate the actual level that the float will occupy 
when on the substrate, raise the feet to the same level by putting 
blocks beneath them, and cement the ribbons to the feet with 

hard cement, making certain that the top edge of the ribbons 
will be horizontal when the float rests on the substrate. This, 
too, is generally impossible to do the first time, so make 









- 10 - 


alterations in the positions of the ribbons after observing the 
way they rest when the head is in position to take measurements. 

9. Suspend the mirror from* but do not cement it to, a 3 
mil torsion wire; cement a one mil silver wire below, but very 
close to, the axis of suspension (a third order lever), attach 
the ends of the torsion wire to the clamps, qnd tighten the wire 

10, Balance the mirror against the damping vane in such a 
way that the mirror face is vertical. Drops of cement placed 
discriminately on the damper or counter-weight is a suitable 
way to accomplish this. 

11. When the mirror is balanced, attach it with soft cement 
to the torsion wire, 

12 Cement the mirror lever wire (one mil silver) to its 
dural anchor. Be careful here. The attachment must be made in 
such a way that the face of the mirror is not moved from the 
vertical to any great extent. Do not attempt to take out the 
slack in the silver wire, as this moves the mirror face so far 
from vertical that the zero point will not settle down in a 
convenient time. The slack in the wire does not interfere with 
the transference of small movements from the float to the mirror 

13. String the main torsion wire through the hole in the 
crosspiece, clamp the ends into their holders, and tighten the 




- 11 - 

torsion wire. Now balance the pan by adjusting the counter¬ 
weights. When doing this*be sure that the balance head uprights 
are vertical: use a level to check this, (When the torsion wire 
is a new one, i.e., just off the spool, allow it to remain taut 
in its holders for a few hours before continuing further. This 
is a good method of straightening kinks and the natural coiling 
tendency of a new wire. Under no circumstances attempt to 
straighten kinks by pulling the wire between two finger nails. 

This only makes matters worse.) 

14. Adjust the centre of gravity of the crosspiece until it 

is just below the point of suspension. This is easily accomplished 
by moving the nut on the vertical arm up and down. The position 
of the centre of gravity is decided by watching the swing of the 
crosspiece. If it swings completely in one direction and does 
not swing back, the centre of gravity is above.the point of 
suspension. The closer the centre of gravity is to the point of 
suspension from below, the longer will be the period of the swing. 

15. Adjust the bolts on the levelling fingers to give even 
support to the horizontal arm of the crosspiece. 

16. Fix the crosspiece in position first with the levelling 
device, then with the clamp (or M pliers w ). 

17. Loosen the torsion wire slightly, and tighten the nut 









- 12 - 


which fixes the torsion wire to the crosspiece. Excessive 
tightness is undesirable. It leads to a movement of the 
upright arm of the crosspiece away from the vertical, causing 
an irregularity in force measurements, and is a source of 
constant error in the calibration. 

18. Now remove any torque which may be present in the main 
torsion wire as follows: Detach one end of the wire from Its 
holder. Note that the holder has introduced a kink into the 
wire. Allow the wire to unwind itself, rotate the holder until 
it fits the kink, and clamp the wire back into the holder. 

Repeat this procedure with the other end of the wire. 

19. Tighten the torsion wire, release the crosspiece, and 
watch its? swing. If it does not come to rest vertically, make 
adjustments by rotating both holders equally until it does, 

20. Raise the levelling device, but do not use the clamping 
device. Cement the free end of the silver wire, the other end 
of which is already attached to the float, to the bottom of the 
vertical arm of the crosspiece. Again, do not attempt to take 
up all the slack in the silver wire. 

21. Release the crosspiece, and watch its swing. If it 
comes to rest too far from vertical, in the direction of the 
float, the silver wire is too tight. It is difficult to explain 





- 13 - 


precisely what "too far from vertical" means. Experience and a 
study of zero point changes will help to decide this. 

22. Raise the levelling device to prevent swinging of the 
crosspiece during transfer of the head, and replace the head in 
the thermostat case, in position for measuring. Lower the 
levelling fingers and allow the balance head to attain thermal 
equilibrium with its surroundings. This requires about three 
to four hours. The head itself probably does not take this long, 
to reach equilibrium, but the removal of the plexiglass front 
allows the atmosphere within the tank to become very much like 
that of the room. The attainment of constant temperature and 
humidity conditions does take this long. During this time the 
zero point changes steadily. 

23• Once equilibrium is reached, sweep the surface ten 
times, raising and lowering the balance head between sweepings 
to allow any contamination adhering to the float, ribbons and 
and feet to spread over a cleaner surface and be removed with the 
next sweeping. It is generally a good practice to have the 
sweeper behind* the float when the head is lowered and raised, 

* "in front of", "the front", denote the direction in 
which the film lies relative to the object. Thus, the facing 
edges of the float and barrier are said to be"front" edges, 
"behind" has the opposite meaning. 





- 14 - 


as this will tend to prevent accumulation of contamination at 
tray edges behind the float* where efficient sweeping is difficult. 
Subsequent forward movement of the sweeper takes the contamination 
with it. In this way contamination is concentrated behind the 
barrier* between the sweepers and the end of the tray. * 

24. The last two sweepings are managed in this way: Whereas 
previously each sweeper was dropped behind the float and moved 
forward (to your right when facing the open side of the tank)* 
the second last is dropped at the opposite end* just in front 
of the previous sweeper. The balance head is lowered and raised* 
then the sweeper is moved towards the head until it lies behind 
the float. The head is lowered and pressed firmly down on the 
tray (this is necessary because of a peculiarity on the dial 
side of the head - the main upright on this side will not slide 
right down to its support unless it is pressed down with the 
hand. This peculiarity is a possible cause of leaks,). The 
barrier is then placed in front of the balance head and swept 
forward until it slips into its £lace''between the fingers of the 

* The difference between sweepers and barrier is merely 
one of length. The barrier is long enough to reach and rest 
between the fingers of the compressing device. Sweepers are just 
long enough to rest between the fingers of the sweeping 
mechanism when they are vertical. 




- 15 


compressing mechanism. The dial pointer is then moved to the 
right of the zero position, and then brought back slowly to the 
zero mark. 

25. Now move the barrier towards the float and carefully 
observe its position relative to the tray edges. The fingers 
should not raise and lower the barrier as it is driven forward. 

At all times the barrier must rest on both edges of the tray. 

Any vertical movement of the barrier causes a zero point change 
and can be the source of a leak. 

In connection with this, note that there is an irregularity 
in the tray edges between the drum readings 340 and 260, which 
causes a lowering of zero point. This is a constant change, so 
so that its effect ©jfi force readings is easily determined with 
the dial. Force readings taken in this region must be corrected 
for the zero point change. 

Another peculiarity exists, this time in the fingers 
which face the plexiglass. Their tendency to rise is compensated 
for by the use of a counterweight on the horizontal arm. 

26. Study the zero point for a period of at least one hour 
by observing movement of the light spot on the graduated scale, 
noting especially the changes in the first twenty minutes. It is 
within the first twenty minutes that the film must be spread if 




- 16 - 


the effects of contamination falling on the surface are to be 
negligible during the run, 

(b) Cleanliness and Contamination 

Quoting G. W. Hodgson (Thesis, 1947), "the need for 
extreme cleanliness cannot be overemphasised’ 1 . On cleanliness 
depends the succes of nearly all determinations made on monolayers. 
At low pressures contamination may place force measurements' in 
error by 100$ or more. Contamination also hinders complete 
spreading (see photograph, Thesis by G, W, Hodgson, entitled 
”Film Balance with Talc Boundary”.), introducing another error, 
in this instance, in area measurement* The standard method for 
determining surface contamination is to compress the ’’’clean” 
surface slowly to one fourth its original area, and measure 
the pressure developed. If it is 0.03 dynes/cm. or less, the 
surface is considered clean. It is difficult to obtain a 
cleaner surface, but the author did so by modifying the cleaning 
procedure (main body of this thesis). 

A few general remarks may be made concerning 
cleanliness: 

1. lour hands should be washed before each run and shirt 
sleeves rolled up. 





- 17 - 


2. Touch nothing with the hands which will later come in 
contact with the substrate. 

3. Keep the inside of the tank clean, put on a few coats 
of black enamel about once in six months. The time may be 
determined by the extent of corrosion in the tank. 

4. For cleaning sweepers and barrier use only conductivity 
water which has been treated twice with norit. 

5. Cause no excessive jarring of the thermostat box which 
may shake something from the ceiling on to the surface. 

6. Keep lubricants away from the inside of the tank as 
much as possible, because they too have a vapor pressure, and 
partially oxidized oils are extremely surface active. If it is 
necessary to use a lubricant to keep the working parts 
operating smoothly, use a heavy oil, and use it sparingly. 

Preparation of the Tray 

The most important unit in cleanliness is the tray, 
which is prepared as follows: 

Scale off the old lacquer, and polish the edges, inside 
walls, and bottom with fine emery and polishing paper until all 
dark spots have been removed. Wipe off the grindings with a 
clean duster, fill the tray with boiling distilled water, scrub 
it with a clean test tube brush, spill out the water, and rinse 






- 18 - 


with more boiling distilled water. Turn the tray face down on 
clean paper and allow it to cool. While it is cooling, mix 
the bakelite lacquer with its thinner in the proportion ltto Z 
by volume. Although this appears very thin, it was found that 
it sticks to the metal -surface better. 

When the tray is cool and dry, with a small paint 
brush which has been cleaned and soaked in thinner, paint on 
a thin coat of the thinned lacquer. Make certain there are no 
air bubbles on the tray, then place in the oven set at 135® G. 
It is especially important that the first coat have no air 
bubbles on it. 

After a half hour or slightly longer in the oven, 
remove the tray from the oven, let it cool, apply a second 
coat with the precaution mentioned above, and again place in 
the oven for half an hour. This procedure is repeated until 
twenty-five coats of lacquer have been applied and baked on. 

It is advisable to keep a log of the number of coats and the 
times of application. It will be found that only one coat can 
be baked on in an hour, so arrange to put them on in two series 
of applications. 

Excessive exposure to heat seems to hinder adhesion 
between series of coats. Thus, the author discovered that if 




» 19 


he painted the coats on in three series of applications ( two 
series of eight coats each, the last of nine coats), the resulting 
film of baked lacquer scaled off in three layers. When leaving 
the tray in the oven overnight, turn off the fixed heaters. The 
twenty-five coats are necessayy to ensure a sufficiently high 
resistance to ground so that the surface potential measurements 
can be made. 

While making runs keep a close watch for blisters in 
the lacquer, A blister means that the substrate has come in con¬ 
tact with the metal and corrosion has begun. A blister is a 
seat of contamination and a cause of varying surface potentials. 
When a blister develops remove the tray from the balance, take off 
paraffin, scale off all the lacquer and begin as before. 

Temporary repairs serve to cut down contamination, but do not 
permit film potential measurements to be made. 

When the last coat of lacquer has been applied and 
baked on, remove the tray from the oven, cool it to room 
temperature, then place it in the sink and blow steam through 
the false bottom. Scrub the inside of the tray with boiling 
distilled water and soap. Rinse with a large quantity of boiling 
distilled water (6 to 8 litres), then lift the tray out of the 
sink and allow the remaing water to evaporate. With the steam 





- 20 


still flowing through the false bottom, paint on the paraffin 
solution, and follow the rest of the procedure as described in 
the thesis proper. 

Preparation of Balance Head Units 
The balance head units which come in contact with 
the substrate must also be treated to prevent them from being 
sources of contamination. Float, gold ribbons, feet and float 
cradle are the ones to be considered. 

When the float has had all adhering paraffin removed 
by soaking in benzene, it is rinsed with clean benzene, allowed 
to dry, then coated with paraffin in the following manner: 
Holding one end with tweezers, the float is dipped into molten 
paraffin, withdrawn and moved in such a way as will prevent 
uneven distribution of paraffin. When the paraffin has hardened 
the float is placed on a clean piece of filter paper, picked 
up at the other end with tweezers and again dipped and withdrawn 
When the wax has hardened, the float is ready for attachment. 

After the gold ribbons have been formed into the 
desired shape, they are rinsed in clean benzene, dried, and 
attached to the float.a'All handling after the benzene rinse is 
done with tweezers, Yfhen the balance head has been completely 
assembled, the top edges of the gold ribbons are lightly covered 






- 21 - 


pure petroleum jelly. 

When the paraffin has been cleaned from the feet and 
legs, and the lacquer scraped off, the feet and legs are rinsed 
in clean benzene and dried. Five to eight coats of lacquer are 
baked on the feet in a manner similar to that used on the tray. 
Then the feet and a! half-inch of the legs are dipped into 
molten paraffin, withdrawn, and the paraffin allowed to harden. 
They are now attached to the balance head. 

The parts of the cradle in the substrate, and for an 
inch above are also covered with lacquer and paraffin in the same 
way. The cradle, which supports the float when the balance head 
is raised, should be only three to four millimetres below the 
float when it is resting on the substrate surface. 

Preparation of Barrier and Sweepers 

These are cleaned in hot cleaning solution, rinsed 
in tap and distilled water, and dried in the oven. Subsequently 
they are dipped into molten paraffin, holding one end with 
filter paper between the fingers. Three coats are sufficient. 
When the paraffin has hardened, the barrier and sweepers are 
stored in a cylinder of conductivity water until they are to 
be used. 

These items are cleaned immediately before use in a 
way that does not allow the parts which will later touch the 
substrate to come in contact with any possible contaminating 
































' 
















. 

- 

■ 

' 


' 




, 


■ 



























- 22 


agent. They are handled in transfer only at the extreme ends, 
and when they are removed from the case they are rested, one 
end on a piece of clean paper, the other end on the edge of a 
filter paper box, leaving the middle section always untouched. 

A convenient method of wiping them clean is to pick up a piece 
of qualitative filter paper by the edge with the left hand, fold 
it over by manipulation with the fingers of the same hand in 
such a way as to bring what was the bottom face of the paper to 
the outside of the fold, and, holding the wash bottle in the 
right hand wet the paper with norit-treated conductivity water. 
Setting the wash bottle aside, a sweeper or barrier is picked 
up by one end with the right hand, the wet part of the filter p 
paper is folded around the sweeper near the end which is held, 
and the sweeper drawn lightly through the fold. Avoid wetting 
the filter paper to the extent that the fingers become wet also, 
and do not use a filter paper more than once. The cleaning is 
done in one motion, do not rub or hold the paper tightly against 
the paraffin, because this will rub the contamination into the 
wax. When there is excessive adherence of water to the paraffin, 
strip the paraffin off, clean as before and recoat with clean 
paraffin. 


A good plan is to clean and prepare barrier , sweepers 





- 23 - 


and balance head each time the tray inquires cleaning and 
reparaffing. In this way contamination originating with these 
items will not nullify the effect of a clean tray. 

Preparation of the Sub-state 

All aqueous substrates are prepared similarly. Use 
conductivity water to prepare the solution, put in two or three 
spatulas^ of nor it, shake and let stand for about an hour. 

Filter through two filter papers ( 50 cm., folded ). Sometimes 
norit comes- through if only a single paper is used. Always 
invert the filter paper, facing the side, which is exposed in 
the package, inwards 3 . Two treatments with norit are usually 
sufficient. 

The apparatus for preparing conductivity water is an 
adaptation of Ellis and Kiehl f s, The entering distilled water 
is preheated by steam to drive off the carbon dioxide, and is 
distilled from 0.025 M phosphoric acid to remove ammonia. The 
phosphoric acid should be replaced every three months. 

Preparation of Solvents 

All liquids used as solvents for substances which are 
to be studied as monolayers must be free from surface active 
agents. Conductivity water treated with norit is suitable when 
the solvent is water. Water insoluble solvents such as the 





















' 

' 

. 

■ 

. - 


. 












24 


hydrocarbons should be dried and fractionated immediately before 
use. This can be done conveniently in one of the reflux- 
fractionating columns available in. the laboratory, and described 
in detail in the main body of the thesis, Adam and Jessop (5) 
found that subjecting these dried solvents to chromatographic 
adsorption did nothing to improve their qualities, 

(c) Surface Potential Measurements 

In surface potential measurements the most frequent 
cause of trouble is a breakdown in tray insulation. Therefore, 
when varying readings on a clean surface are obtained, examine 
the tray closely; first for blistered lacquer, then for chipped 
lacquer under the feet. A less frequent source of breakdown is 
a contact between sweeper fingers and a bare spot on the outside 
of the tray. When sweeping the surface do not allow these fingers 
to rub against the sides of the tray, andean soon as sweeping 
has been completed, turn the fingers away from the tray. 

If the trouble is not located in the tray, then check 
the switches and wiring in the control board. When testing for 
short circuits, remember that high resistance leaks are detrimental 
to a D.G. amplifying system, so that in using the ohmmeter to 
measure resistance to ground, use the range 0 to 250,000 ohms. 
Remember also that parts of this circuit are grounded. Trace 






- 25 


out the circuit on the wiring diagram, then disconnect at a 
convenient spot the portion of the circuit being tested from 
the portion which is grounded. 

Fluctuations in the fi&ament current may be caused by 
either the battery condition or a short in the filament circuit. 
An over charged battery causes an erratic filament current, but 
may be safely corrected by discharging it through a three or 
four ohm resistance for a short length of time. If this does 
not correct the fluctuations , then look for shorts in the 
filament circuit. 

If it is impossible to obtain a balance between the 
plate and space charge grid currents, then one or both circuits 
may have high resistance leaks in them. Look for these first 
at the soldered joints, where the shielding on the wires may 
have broken through the insulation. 

Complete and detailed wiring diagrams of all circuits, 
along with operating instructions, are available in the 
laboratory files. Be sure you understand them completely 
before you undertake to operate any of them. Some of the parts 
are expensive and not easily replaced. 

Inductive effects, caused by line voltage changes, are' 
easily recognised. They cause the light on the wall galvanometer 






- 26 - 


scale to move sharply to the observer*s left when he is facing 
the galvanometer, and occurs only when the control grid is in 
the circuit. This is caused by incomplete shielding of the 
circuit, but is unavoidable because of the plexiglass front on 
the case. The laboratory sources of line voltage changes are 
the intermittent operation of the refrigerating unit, and 
intermittent currents in the relay circuits. Only the 
refrigerating unit causes galvanometer deflections serious 
enough to prevent the taking of a reading. 

Check the conditions of the batteries once a week, 
adding distilled water if necessary. It is not necessary to 
remove them from the box for recharging, as a switching 
arrangement for charging is provided on the box. Instructions 
for this arrangement are also in the files. If batteries are 
properly taken care of, they will not fail to give a very steady 
current. 

Finally, read the instructions on the data sheet regarding 
care, installation and operating characteristics of FP-54 
electronic tubes. These are very expensive and take a long time 
to replace. 






. 

, 

- 




, 


<! 











- 27 - 


(d) The Wilhelmy Balance 

In contrast to the horizontal film balance, the 
Wilhelmy is relatively free from peculiarities. The only 
serious possible source of error is the angle of contact between 
the slide and the substrate. This must be a zero contact angle 
otherwise it would be necessary to measure it and make 
corrections in force measurements. 

There are two considerations in obtaining and 
maintaining a zero contact angle: 

1. Cleanliness of the slide, 

2, A saturated atmosphere surrounding the slide. 

Slides are cleaned as follows: 

They are boiled for fifteen minutes in a solution of 
trisodium phosphate, rinsed with distilled water, and placed 
in hot cleaning solution for fifteen minutes. After a second 
rinse in distilled water, they are placed upright in a beaker 
to allow the excess water to drain off. Grasping them by the 
thin edges, place them in their holders and stand the whole 
assembly up in hot cleaning solution, having the cleaning 
solution reach about three quarters of an inch above the level 
which the substrate will reach when the assembly is in position 
for measuring. Rinse the slides with conductivity water after 






- 28 - 


fifteen minutes of this second cleaning solution treatment, 
and let them soak in conductivity water of the same depth as 
the cleaning solution, for at least one hour. Following this, 
store them in a beaker of 6N NaOH. About five* hours before 
the Wilhelmy is to be used, remove from the base, rinse and 
soak in conductivity water for one hour, place them in the oven 
(at room temperature) to dry. Drying them upside down keeps 
drainage marks away from the parts which will come in contact 
with the substrate. When the slides are dry they are hung inside 
the thermostat case to allow them to reach the proper 
temperature and equilibrium conditions before they are actually 
used. This eliminates most of the period of waiting for 
equilibrium conditions if the slides are merely dried and 
immediately set in place for measurements. The author found 
that it often took three hdufts■■■for the slides t© reach a constant 
1 ©v©1 in th@ substrate* if they w§i*t m% first brought t© 
equilibrium conditions by hanging them in the thermostat box. 

It will be found that the slide edges do not wet as 
completely as the slide faces, because of irregularites in the 
edges . Although this does not introduce any serious errors into 
measurements, it can be corrected to a large extent by 
gr5_nding the slide edges down on some fine emery polishing paper. 





- 29 - 


In calibration, it is better to remove weights from 
the left hand pan rather than to add them, because this duplicates; 
the true action of the slides when in use, that is, they rise 
in the substrate with lowering of surface tension. 

(e) Additional Precautions 

1. Always be suspicious of a zero p6int which is very 
steady and settles down quickly. This is usually a sign that: 
the mirror counter-weight is resting on the lower one mil silver 
wire connecting the crosspiece to the float, or this same wire 
is dipping into the substrate, or the mirror lever wire has 
broken. Check this always, immediately before spreading. 

2. Decide on a spreading method which is suitable for 
the particular substance, that is, a method which makes the 
spreading time a minimum, and adopt it as a standard procedure. 

If other methods are tried, keep the results of these runs 
separate from the others. They will not necessarily agree. 

3. In turning the force dial, rest only your wrist on the 
case; do not lean against either the case of the concrete block. 
When operating the compressing device, turn the handles slowly. 
This will minimize vibrations which are transferred to the float 
and hinder force measurements, A too rapid turning of handles 








- 30 


also may cause a zero point change. 

4* When taking force readings, it is advisable to turn 
off the stirring motor in the reservoir, as the slight 
vibration caused by this motor is transferred to the tray and 
float, 

5» Take care of all continuously running mechanisms, 
especially pump motors. Stirring motor, pump motor, and fans 
should be cleaned and oiled regularly. A satisfactory cleaning 
procedure is to soak motors in carbon tetrachloride once a 
month. Oil them according to instructions in the files. Check 
the brushes of the pump motor once a week. It does not pay 
to neglect the auxiliary equipment. 

In conclusion, do not be too discouraged if your 
first runs appear to be failures. Be patient, success will 
come with experience. 







. 







, 

- 

■* 





















