


































For Reference 



















UlOTHHijITY OF iiLBSHl'A 


FACULTY OF ARTS AllD SGUmCES 


(DIVIRITY) 


We, the undersigned. hereby certify that 
we have read the within thesis entitled 
^^HATURALISTIG HUMARISIR' 
submitted by William H. MoDannold,'-^.A., in 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
of Bachelor of Divinity, and we hereby recommend 
its acceptance. 


) 

I 

Edmonton,j 
Alberta. 


.ipril 13, 
1933. 





*U>\: 




n.*’ ^>11 4i4i:|Wlf 

• ■ ■ ' ■ ’ -'""MB® , ..VtS 

.ur..ooe-t 

■ 't '-3 

•4t,y 




lHafe 


HiKiili^Kini 






T H S 3 I S 


K^TUIULISa?IiO KUIuiinSlI 


Baing an examination of ITaturalistio Humanism 
and a comparison of its values and weaknesses 
with those of Theism, 


A Dissertation 

Submitted to the 3,D. Committee 
In candidacy for the Degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity, 

WILL lil/'i K • Me DiAHiOL D« 


April, 1955 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/naturalistichumaOOmcda 


GONTMTS: 


Page 

Introduction;- 1 

Section 1. Survey of Humanism to Present-Day 

naturalistic Humanism. 4 

A. Influences from the Early Greek 

naturalists,,., 4 

B. liVhat Humanism Owes to Stoicism. 9 

C. The Renaissance...15 

D* The Influence of Comte,.... 18 

E« Modem Humanism, .. 24 

Section 2, The naturalistic Humanists. , .. 33 

A* The Quest of the Ages - Mr^E, C, Hayden., 34 

B. Is There a God - Mr, Max Carl Otto 45 

C. A Preface to Morals - Mr, W, Lippmann,... 60 

D. A Summary. .. 99 

Section 3. The problem of the Conflict re-Stated,.,,102 

A. Definition of Value.. 103 

Can Humanism Get a Hearing,.. 106 

C. Does the Humanist E-bhic Demand a 

non-Theistic Interpretation of Life? ,,.,109 

Section 4. The Theistic Solution of the 

Problems Raised......................... 112 

A. Value.. 112 

B. A Hearing for Humanism.127 

C. 'Why - The necessity of Being 

non-Theistic.. 130 

Section V. 

Conclusions.. 135 

















' .‘O' 


; . . , ■ ’ . ' :|(V: ^P/Trt. c . c V ■ .Ir-r 

.' ■' ‘ I' V,’ ■: ■ 

■cr.r:': ' : 


tCTj; 9{■;.■'; 




()■' 

















BIBLIOGKAl-’HY. 


A. preface To Morals. 

IS There a God - A Conversation in Christian 
Centuiy - February to Aug.,1932. 
The Quest of the Ages. 

Christianity in 1h e New World. 

Theism and the IVIodern Man. 

The Stoic Creed. 

The philosophy of Comte, 

Humanism, Another Battle Line. 

Prospects of Hniia.nism. 

Humanism and America. 

Whither Mankind. 

Emergent Evolution-- Notes coirc^iled on Alex¬ 
ander’s Space, Time & Deity. 
Emergent Evolution. 

Reality. 

Canadian Journal of Religious Thought 


Walter Lipmann, 

Max Carl Otto, 
Eustace Hayden, 

F. R, Barry. 

W. M. Horton. 

W. L. Davidson* 
Edward Caird. 

Wn. King, Editor, 
Lawrence H^de, 
Norman Foerester, 
Chan, A, Beard. 

J, M, Ma-cEac hr an. 
Lloyd Morgan. 

B. H. Streeter. 


Editor. 

t! 


Vol. Vlll. No. 2. March-April 1931 




1 . 


T H E S IS. 

NATURALISTIC HUMANISM. 


\Vhat is humanism? This is the question I have set before myself to 
examine in order that I may understand and appreciate its promise and its 
limitation. There are many schools among the humanists which we shall look 
at but in the ms.in we shall limit this thesis to the work of two or three 
humanists who may be looked upon as representative. Again we wish to examine 
the humanism virhich is, strictly speaking, naturalistic, that is non-theistic, 

A theist is a person who acknowledges the real and objective presense 
of a ’’Creator Spirit at work in the world with whom in a personal w&.y he can 
have fellowship. That ’’Other” may, in some measure, be understood in exper¬ 
ience and is usually called God. John Line says that ’’Religion is ’Creature 
feeling’ or it has its roots in fear or the consciousness of dependence” 

The theist then, through a feeling of dependence acloiowledges that health 
and strength and understand.ing come from the ’’Real Other”. 

But humanism, generally speaking, recognizes nothing beyond man’s 
mental and physical powers, Man must stand alone on his feet. Any philosophy 
about the Universe which he may have must recognize that he has no strength 
other than the.t to be found in himself from which or from whom he may gain 
inspiration. Naturalistic humanism might be called ethics without God, It 
is not a religion for it recognizes no objective validity which lies beyond 
whatever ideas it has, Bertrand Russell says, ’’The philosophy of ha.ture is 
one thing, the philosophy of value is quite another. What we think good has 


1. John Line p. 98, Canadian Journal of Religious Thought « Vol. Vlll. 
”How Humanism Game and ''Miat it Is,” 






''{ :’■' ■ *' '■.. / ■ 

0-t a i ',v ^ ■^Yint 'I: '■ ''''' 



■ 8cri: ■■:"•; -w. .fcii'iO t-:] •■>t o•x r cr . X ’ ..''t'vil’tK.;'!*' ''x"0„t*£ 

:!'V/r ‘■,;;'t,-{,3 917 .d^4i;i!\v 'tid'd' ■.>n':.4' 

^ixr.i-i *fo •Qiv.t lo^ - ^iv., '©dd' 

'c //‘Viv .4■r^ow"^fy 

Tvry-3 ':•' b(i.7d'»id.b|#d-0d; 

■ 0ri: ^' ^>1 '^£0^ xJ^Zmi& ■tj- M 

■ ‘ , '■ - '- 'to ^ft'^q:o5;,l6 '■■ 

r r ‘ r!o^' b«>X.'"'X p-' 

■ ''■ '. ' • / , ’ ' . , ' ' ' '. 

^ 'W, ©dcj:Q''';''l ‘'v, .PXf^ 

<■■ :7 ,riid''fed' Vd'^ifp:;;‘ 

. V ■ ;;' ■". l'':i;d!'!y;'AV'V;rt!-'!^' ..vV 'yi' .:. 


©jJw^rdv a->T’. '{0^(uvrB/ iroBl t£^miS:d p'i- 


pd 40f' 

fflt:.. ‘''X'^feX:': 





d 1 vv o.^'3 .i;o, .beX p 

"-• ■ ■'•■' ’ r*'" "!.d .* di'X-.-v xvx d'o.ai'do' ’ 6c^ \ ,0 00 

opoXX.'!p pyX" ,':iV73'i ^d'.cVi■.J;^^v: ': , 

\ ^’r,u'&t,. pv/ (tjJi ; . -i.'j'do.r’, o’uy'i', 


0'd‘&[0 




.Kt-t^rflYT f.. 


J0.^W,(;.3;{ Pa .CiintMou X1 





no bearing whatever upon what is ... In the philosophy of m ture we are 

subordinated.But in the philosophy of value the situation is reversed.... 

It is we, who oreat value, aid our desires v>rhioh confer value. In this realm 
we are kings”. 1,Again concerning this inpersonality of nature wiiich is a cen¬ 
tral doctrine of naturalistic humanism, wherein we see the influence of modern 
science, w4 sha"* 1 quote Otto. says ”lt is a constructlTe social suggestion 
that we assume the universe to be indifferent towards the human venture that 
messns everything to us; that we acloiowledge ourselves to be adrift in infinite 
space — the sole custodians of our ideals.” 2. 3fow Yfhat ¥i/arrant or authority 
have values if controlled by whimsical desire, granted that there is nothing 
beyond men^rhich is more than relative? 

It is an open question. The naturalistic humanist is, in my mind, 
wrong and to prove that is the obgiect and aim of this thesis. If the theists 
do turn dit to be wrong, which I doubt, I believe that they will be as braye 
in facing life as the humanists are. For the theist the richest traditions 
and the finest experience has come doi^rn through the human storjr in the lives 
of men who were theists. There is nothing in the findings of modern science 
which disqualifies a theistic interpretation of experience. There is much that 
points to it , We are often told that science can find no evidBnce of the exist¬ 
ence of God. Just how science would picture God in a satisfying way has never 
been explained. Can it picture friendship or 1 ove or ideals, Way — ratter 
VTQ look to it as enriching our experience as it describes as far as it is able 
the processes of the universe. It cannot explain the ultiraates of personal 
experience. The hinnan raind can investigate what it is capable cf investigating 


1. Bertrand Russell — What I believe p, 14. 

2. Max Otto — Things and Ideals p. 289. 



:.o 


'if'.'. 




c. 


0 






..o : -i 





'(■ 


•;^/y oS^' - f 


. 0 


c; 


G 


^',0 


0 ; ’’0 


:rd 





Q 


3 


but beyond that it can only revere what is beyond its tools. 

Naturalistic humanism may be fairly described I believe as the ethical 
quest for and the maintainence of values in a vrorld where there is no God. 
Ffchics without God in an ir^ersonal physical universe mil do for a working 
definition of non-theistic naturalistic humanism. 

The argument that we are entering upon 5.n this essay is as to Y/hether 
the naturalistic humanist caa make effective any ideals which he may have 
vi thout being convinced that they are rooted in Yhat is real. He says there 
is no God. How can he be effective when that irhich he recognizes as fact 
contradcts that vfhich he calls his values. Russell notwithstandi ig , 

it follews logical ly that we turn out to be not kings but victims if our 
ideals are utterly foreign, or contradictory, to the central core of the 
Universe. We believe that theism is not only, the only logical philosophy 
which can overcome this fatal dualism at the base of naturalistic humanism 
but that it is also the truest interpretation to be made by a person #10 will 
m.ake the widest possible survey of all the facts or factors of life. 






,.C:-'.o: . /I'. '; 0 . yyr ^. 1 - :■ /.C 1 ;^ 

■;-;'ooo ’0,: ''o,-.:; yon^f: 'y-r‘:^r[:.‘..Q'rx^'oi\ •• ;r ..c; ' , ocv .or' :r.‘. 


l'v r ;ro': od odddxro O'’- d -.d.: "'o: v.d 'v "‘ 

--.ordoo ord:- 'O' "■.■ 'd'O '&• o:C"- ^ o; / .,'.O, .: 

: ■ -.O'co o/rj-' ^v;r;-.. do. . j;. ,r o 'd' d.o d o / 'o'. .-d 

d : ,‘:'d. ,oo- ‘Vo o,';d' 0 : .d ,d'/'"r -.r 'j •'o .':-d.d. 

■ 'o' ■;dov:.: ^>d- .for;.':.,.d';d ■ ■•..' ■.■.;d:':,' d' odd or-'" ■ .d o'; d d'^r/ 

o '■o.'d'-;: ; d'o.;;'!; ordd .'dd': do -oo'-'oo.dd'.''‘O', odo d o:.diOT 






4 


Section (1) Survey of Humanism to Present Day Naturalistic 
Humanism, 

(a) Influences from the Early Greek Naturalists, 

The beginnings of Greek philosophy are obscure. Colonies were homes 
of prominent schools. We require only rough details. 

The ancient Greeks were the first naturalistic humanists, Thales 
(585 at Miletus) was a unique man in that he was the first to attempt an 
explanation of the world in natural terms. He said that it wa.s conposed of 
Y/ater in various forms eg, -- water, steam or ice. He opened up the vmy for 
others to seek a natural explanation, Heracleitus declared that there is no 
permanency, that change is the Lord of the Universe and that fire is the ulti 
mate reality. Later the Eleutic school contradicted Heracleitus and declared 
that there is one God comparable to mortals, neither in form nor in thought, 
’^God is the material viniverse unchanging and Eternal”, This group of natur¬ 
alists denounced the popular belief in polytheism, with its anthropamorphic 
Gods, 1 

A third school known as the Mediators had its turn, Empo:^doeles says 
man is weak, ignorant and self-deluded, ”Mind is the spell which governs 
heaven and earth. There is change in the position of matter but it is not 
separated. The four basic substances which make up matter are earth, air 
water and fire. Nothing is destroyed,- there is only mingling and separation 
Love and hate are the two principles which bind and separate, Anax^gor^as 
further developed this contention Y/ith a quantitative atomic theory. Matter 
thins but in places and intermingles in varjring proportions, Leucippas said 
that there Yj-as no qualitative difference in the atoms. There are an infinite 
number of them and each has its oYm motion, Democritus declared that objects 
shed minute replicas or copies of themselves which entered the eyes and the 
senses, 


1 


I am indebted to Rodgers — A Students History of philosophy — for 
this brief survey. 


•■'i ■; -li, '.iO; ^ ■ ■ 

fl ' ;.' ' ■; 

0-r; vUix^ino,: :'0(v^,ri lo n;y,,n,‘:Lr^^o(;.r 

I „ ' ■. '.- V x'!'’ <X)'C''!:.ff)r’'i' ■'.)., ’ „ .L[!'OOi.O('i. ;x. , '■'.o 


..•(II ;-xov; ji-f:->.u.i.xx' wil 


•1r 


I'mI/..’ ■ .«■ v ■ ■ V--’ •re'-'-''.'^ ■ ■ 

-' . ■:- ! xxixl'' r:i, , ■■ ■■'■ ■' ''i: xx:* '■ X- " 

• ■ ' .1:-‘I^'X cX.if:'>r:J"r. '-fX.'' , ', 

■:'i ^ . ■-,■,! «.r.:j bo'I ‘ /v;. r^o.I ;'^' 

:' If.t.'; I',.';' ■■,•-■■■:.•■ '■v'-::;;-/;, ,• b ' .uX’,'' 0 '{H-' lil ,bQ 0 -^^ 

■.'■'bYM!o'| ■ ■■■■I '.‘r', ' '.I' i;";.'' iv:^0'.(T;ro!'‘:' i.' a;! ‘"iiJ 

..... ^ ^ . , , . ,, 

I H'io;;-0:A, ^V'..,/ ;'o .'' ■■ ■::■[ £.'O • = ..'O M'- ., i 

- "v, 

-r., xj; O'/. .AO r<i:-vTBO{l 

• ‘ .■ ( O I Oi{i « V i 

.n ;•. -: '-I ,': ; ‘ . .^ISv,-.■;-•■■ i.'.. ;:■ I;';-! i ,,Ieva.,b .At 

' ■■' •'O-x 'A: xj{).I,,:,.x.L;iVi;'tQ.:I,ftf; b" ';.A)o.iOv" .AX'■ .aI:!’, ' - 



■ Oi:vr;0'y Ol;j ^ ■ ..ili.^x;.-■ ■ 'AO nox: I.tjxll'xl', 

' -AUVV f;,rex fo'''-?£!_ 

■>-X .-II,i:o .O.OlX'-rA'i '.vO XIAO..". I' : '1 




;xo^l o:)' l)OlJfi'Lu;x 


" :C;.' 

1 :’ ’ ■•'' • : a: ■', .:■. 


xoLrl^-'-' 

.Ivdx.:;^ x; 



6. 


Pj'-bhagoras fomded a religious sod ety inhose main tenet was that the 
reality of things consists in number. Each number or arrangeie nt thereof 
was supposed to have its o\m mystical form (Plato?), Harmony developed 
from the proper use and arrangement of numbers. 

This very sketcl^ review of the first gropps of philosophers who 
sought to explain the universe in terms of natural phenomena leads mp 
directly to the question of humanism. It is not stating it too strongly 
to say that all these attempts were later judged to be inad.equate. Men 
grew tired of such discussions. 

It was natural for them to cease looking out upon the natural -world 
for an answer to the meaning of life, Tsrhen such looking ended in contradictions, 
amd to look within. We hear of Protagoras the Sophist saying" That man is the 
measure of all things”, by which he probably meant that hiiman experience is 
the proper study tbr man. That it is the clue to reality. Elsewhere he is 
reported to have said, ”0f the Gods I can IcnoYv nothing, neither tin.t they 
are ncr that they are not”. 

In this new emphasis and in that of the naturalists of the schools 
cited above there is one new feature in common and that is the denial of 
supernatural ism. In these movements among the early Greek thinkers,men no 
longer looked back to a "Golden Age” or forward to "Elysian Fields” but rather 
to a future sjf infinite possibility of development, under the powerful di rection 
of research and education. protagotas ims careful to emphasize the creative 
elements involved in human progress. Man needed be^/ond physical instincts, -- 
the pov^rer of initiative, 3.nvention, deliberation, a sense of right and some 
conception of purposive living. He firmly believed in the laws, conven-ti ons 
and institutions of organized society. 

The best known sophist is Socrates, He insisted upon the necessity of 
penetrating beyond the immediate uncritical and narro’wly selfidh foundations of 
daily conduct to the real b.b.3ic principles of experience. There -would be found 
according to Socrates, vihact he called imiversals or permanent values, which give 













:' 0 


C) 


c;/ 


o 


0 . 


o. 


yi 



< 


c 


0 



. C) 


.. o 


•: 0 o 



'i 


6 


TIB ajiing to life and organize it into a oonsistent whole. Self-loiowledge, 
that is proper appreciation of these universals led to self-riastery. ’^at seems 
to have happened in his use of the dialectic was an endless round of questions 
and an-swers which ended up in nothing immediately constructive. In his chief 
pupil Plato, we find a profound distrust of every person but perhaps some of 
the philosophers to whij h class lie v/as partial, Mr. Livingstone in his book 
"The Greek Genius" (1) malces out that Plato stood apart from the rain stream of 
Hellenism, as the Greek humanism, is called. For Plato there is a profound flaw 
in hujnan nature and where that exists humanism is not a satisfactory view|:oint. 
There is a deep chasm arisir^ out of Plato’s dualism which contradicts the Greek 
genius. 

The Greek humanized all his environment. His is tlie curiosity of a 
young boy in the vroods at nesting time or after a fresh fall of snow. Accord¬ 
ing to Mr. Livingstone the Greek, of Athens heyday, took a naive interest in 
seeing things clearly for their oim sake. His poetip/ and art was a vivid 
description rather than an inteiq^retaldaiof I'rhat he saw. The reader has to do 
his ovm interpreting. Again, one aught to avoid extremes because it is bad 
taste. For the Greek of Athens greatest era could be a soldier, scholar, 
sculptor, statesman, historian, A friend was an ai’fair of profit. Freedom 
of speech, intensity of idea.s, aa enthusiasm fl&r living marked the Gree^ 
humanism. 

It has also a sombre side for it was not all positive. Mark the vjords 
of Sophocles, "that is the final lot of men, even old age, hateful, impotent, 
unsociable, friendless, wherein all evils of evil dwell." Humanism is a better 
gospel for the young, the strong and the free. It has no comfort for an old 
Greek. Death was the croming indignity f5r both Greek and Jevj, 


(1) Livingstone "The Greek Genius" — Chapter 7 — Libert^r 




. , ' '0 , 




■ 'JO':?-; 




o .'■■ . ' c::^ 




0 


i' 


,'f'■ 






O'-'''. 


<> 


0 , 





’O" o.:,' <;t 











7 . 


Again^Athens ivas a civilization built up on slavery so far as ’foutine 
labor was concerned. The natural result cf that situation in times past 
has been a slacloiess in practicality, in invention and in progressiveness. 

The Greeks invented and discovered or surmised many of the m chines and laws 
on which modem science has built its achievnents buit they would not demean 
themselves by taking them -beyond the play stage. Such work was fit for 
slaves! VanLoon in his essay ’’Ancient and Medieval Civilizations” writes 
thus of Greece (l am not sure that he is altogether correct) ”A free-born 
citizen elevated himself to the pursuits <£ the mind —,everything done by 
thethandA was left to the menial merd. es of tile slave. Even the great artists, 
the great sculptors and architects, did not escape this feeliig of despisement”.M 

Has Livingstone exa.ggerated the Greek genius? Is it true of only the 
few chosen lights? There was intense cruelity in the mines of Athens. It may'- 
be said in reply that there is cruelity in modern industry a^lmost as bad. 

There is however a growing protest 8.gainst such conditions. Greek humanism 
did not ap-parently worry about it too m.uch , — will modem hummisii prove as 
ineffective in our day? 

professor S, H* Butcher reminds us of a debt to Greek huranisra, ’’The 
appreciation of a clear end fearless intellect to every domain of life was one 
of the services rendered by Greece to the world”. (2) Professor Percy Gardner 
somewhere speaks of the three great discoveries. The discover^?- of God by Israel 
to which the Greeks later contributed something. The discovery of the worth of 
man by the Greeks to which, one must add, Jesus contributed a grea'b deal* The 
discovery of nature and natural laws to which the credit is due almost entirely 
to the Greeks. 

How ’’All the best things go bad on us unless referred to a. transendeit 
standard”.39 The Sophists cf whom we have spoken and other Greeks 

(1) '^hither Mankind — Ghas. A. Beard, Editor, p* 61* 

(2) P,18 Humanism, Another Battle Line - Butcher as quoted from ’’Some Aspects 
of the Greek Genius”. 

(3) F. R, Barry P.SO, Christianity and the Hew World”. 





trfl 

T 


o:: 


O . 0: 


R r, 







8 . 


confidence in man but ’’gave no ultimate ground for believing in him”. (1) 

This is just the point we shall liave to face. We find in Greek |>ura 9 .nism 
no reason as to why we sj^ould believe in man. That this is a real fact as 
can be shovm by reference to the gradual decay of Athens on her humanist 
basis and her cruel rassacre of the Corcrycaias an.d her growing greed for 
conquest. It ruined her. Already we have noted a scepticism towards huinaa 
nature on the part of Plato and Socrates. 

Sometimes writers contrast the ”grey breath <f the Galilean” mth the 
sunshine confidence of paganism. Dr. Barry asserts that the ojjposite is the 
truth (2) Tbe resultant of Hellenism'and its corresponding humanism wb.b an 
agnostic dualism Y/hich was based on a profound and radical unbelief in life. 
Hellenism has no message to-d^ , the Galilean has. His is the company of those 
v<rho believe in life and that ”more abundantly”. Tfee confidence of Hellenism, 
only three centuries later, ended in a paralysis of enterprise. Latterly it 
had no philosophy about the Hniverse aid was no longer a confident attitude 
v/ith regard to the life of human beings but was a number of rules about conduct. 

”Man is the measure of all things”, said Protagosaa, Our contention 
will be further developed that there must be an absolute background against 
which all our relative truths must be set — if even relativity is to re an anythin • 
The Greek background, the Olynpian dynasty ims too unreal and too much at the 
mercy of his whims and fancy to hold the Greek steady* Also he v/as not inter¬ 
ested beyond the immediacy of the day. Live sv/iftly. Old age comes on apace. 


(1) Barry op.cit. p.62. 

(2) Barry op.cit. p.63. 


o : ' . o 


.0 




'M 


'A D 


A _ 


A 


'#lr' 


S ■' ''■ '-^i^ 

•' - v;^ 





9 


B* l/7hat Humanism O'^/es tp StoicisEi* 

Out of the first great humanist movement there grew a second. ”As 
Cicero (putting it rhetorically in the Tuscalan Disputations 5 says, 

’’Socrates was the first to call doviffi philosophy from heaven and to place 
it in cities, and to introduce it into the houses of men, compelling merijto 
examine into life and morals and good and evil”.l.We owe -to him the irpluse 
to make an exact and entpirical study of ethical and social phenomena in 
which the inductive method led on to clear concepts and definitions, Socrates 
never questioned the existence of truth or man^s abil5.ty to attain imto it. 
jjplato did this). It was a strenuous business to come up v/ith truth. The 
’’use and wont” of the eystomary must be rationally and critically and contin¬ 
uously re-exandned. IJaturally it was 'unsettling to young men to be asking 
questions about cherished convictions and. hoary traditions. For some it was 
good and for others it led to cjmicism or at least to mistrust of one another. 
Socrates main emphasis is to be discovered in his assertions about the supreme 
importance of self-control and of character. He is the founder of mental and 
moral science. His mastery of the inductive method in a well managed dialectic 
of cross examination along with the variety ard' many-sidedness of his ideas lefi; 
to great developmerbbs through his pupils. 

As noted above the Sopfeists were pre-eminently educationists. They were 
in agreement tvith Protagoras who led them away from the old physical speculations 
and who directed the study of man to man himself. Given an age before printing , 
an highly intellectual, an eagerly inquisitive people, a naturally disputational, 
an eminently artistic, a politically enthusicistic people, democratic in their 
leanings and couple this to a belief in oratory as a power to sway peopb and 
win coveted influence in the state and we have the setting for the Sophists. 

1. Davidson — The Stoic Greed — P*5. 


o 




.0 


O ' 









10 


The outcome of Sophistry led to two schools that of the Stoics and 
that of the Epicurean. The early story of the Stoic is not well known. It 
is only preserved in fragments. We know tliat the later Stoicism which we know 
in Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius was softened and modified considerably. The 
work of Zeno and Cleanthes the founders has been lost except for meagre frag¬ 
ments, This school is post-war and came from a people past their prime 
politically speaking. It has to do vrlth the fe>rtunes of’ change. It was a 
very stern philosophy in its inception and embraced a high ethical ideal 
which wsiS allied with a conteii 5 )t for mere pleasure. Stoicism is the second 
great source fertile modern naturalistic humanist movemait. 

The Stoics are primarily iib erested in human nature in its individual 
and social sides. This interest they defined as philosoiihy ’''/hioh was a 
striving afyer wisdom. This was put to the test of utility, ”As philosop^ 
was to them a substitute for religion it v/as, above all things, their aim to 
make it a rule of life, ’^a way of livii-:g”,..,a power operative for good in 
daily action.” (1) , The end of living ¥/as the proper discharge of duty. But 
what dATty is we are never told. Life is a pilgrimage and it has no end. 

”Stofoism required that the philosopher be himself a man of shiplicity of aim 
and a person thoroughly convinced cf his doctrines — convinced.... on 
rational grounds”. (2). IText the philosopher must* shoiv his principles in his 
lifej he must be a man of noble character and consistent wra.lk and conversation”. (3) 
Again ” I will show the sinews of a philosopher. '’/?hat sinews are these? Desire 
never failing of its object, aversion not liable to chances, proper impulse, 

diligent purpose, assent that is net precipitate. These you shall see”, 

8 

(Epictetus - Dissertations 2 ) (4) In theory at least the Stoic must have wide 

human synpathies and must not despise the plain man. Actually in Seneca if he 
is representative enough we have a popular teacher of Stoic doctrintand. a 
ruthless money-lender. 


(51 Davidson op.cit. p,48, 

( 2 ) 


(3) Davidson op.cit, p.53, 

( 4 ) 


Op.cit, p, 52. 


op. cit. p* 53 




r 






11, 


Accrarding to the Stoic all has to be learned by the individual 
from experience. They did not believe in inate ideas. Knowledge was not 
memory. Only through sense impressions could a stoic "gain knowledge of 
the external vrorld and of his felloYmien". (1) He neglected heredity or 
language. 

Heracleitus ccntributed two cardinal conceptions to the Stoic view 
of the world. He resolved "mechanical change into continuous djmamlcal 
progre5:s and as its consequent the idea of an unbroken sequence df successions 
constituting an invariable cosmic march or rhythm of events, whijh might be 
personified as an unalterable cosmic will or destiny or generalized into an 
abstract uniformity of natural law**, (2) This dynamical progress i,s called 
Logoslby Heracleitus. To it he ascribed besides unity and rationality, 
eternity, omnipresense aaid divinity. In the Stoic school it becomes the 
Eternal divine reason imm^ent in the world and finding its highest inter¬ 
pretation in an ethical order. Man shcr-TS in himself the divine especially 
in Iiis soul”. (3) Again ”f/atch hov/ all things continually change, once 
accustom yoir self to realize that nature's prime delight is in changing things 
that are, and making new things in their likeness. All that is, as it x^/ere, 
the seed of that which shall issue from it”. (M, Aurelius - Meditations 4 '^'“’)(4) 
The world itself has only a temporary existence. ’*It comes from God, the 
prima.l ether, completes its course and then is reabsorbed, in God again in 
accordance with infinite and. unvarying circles."(5) God is ma.terial and the 
source of all tliat comes out, even man's soul. 


In spite of all his materialism the Stoic anserts tha,t ’*the Y,nrld order 

is ethical and that character is mans highest concern and his greatest achievment’*. 

( 6 ) 





dI .. -o 


r\ 


Or^ 


X 


0 


"'.0 


OX .: n ’ r o' 


t: 


o 


0 










12 


Seneca deems the body to be but a’prison house* for the soul which is 
’’that part of man which contains the master faculty of reason” jjl). 

But the Stoics are naturalistic here as eveiywhere else for the soul is material ~ 
but of a very fine texture. The soul is a material entity which is hharac- 
terized by self-consciousness and moral perception and therefore the ruling 
and authoritative principle in man,that which guides him to right thought 
and right action. One au^t to live ’’agreeably to ndure”. (2) This means that 
man must recognize the world coarse as rational and conform to it. Freedom 
will come through emancipation from slavery to irrational desires. This can 
only be achieved by the legation of desire as far as it is possible. Modem 
humanists like Mr. Hayden who promise all sorts of goods must face the Stoics 
here. ’’There is only one vrecy to happiness,.. .to turn away from what is 
be;^nmd ones power of choice and regard nothing as ones ow,..,”. (Epictetus 
Dissertations IV.^). (3) 

Theoretically the Stoics latterly asserted an enthusiasm & r humnity. 

Ms-n was made to be virtuous. Virtue is its o^m reward. It is ”A sodal thing 
ard that the individuals good is bound up in that of the oo mmunity” (4), 

What is good for him is good for the community and vise versa. If a man 
attends to his oim interest and well-being it works out for everyones profit. 
Humanity is an ’’organism and its parts can do no wrong. On the one hand we have 
the Stoics appreciation of man’s dignity and worth -- akin to God the primal 
substance, and on the other hand it was tau^t that if a man harmed another 
he did it from ignorance. 

We cannot agree that the world is ’’(Me and Perfect”. M. Aurelius likens 
its imperfections to chips lying about in a carpenter^ shop. (Meditations IX "‘^)(5) 
”A man’s lot and circumstances of life are both in the hands of Deity”, (6) 

1, op.cit, p, 142. 

2, op, c it, p. 142, 

3, op. cit. p.liS. 

4, op.cit. pited at p, 2.1 . 

5, op. cit. p. 211. 

6 • op. vit. p. 2 





o 


;no>' 


lo 


•: a 




O'* 


'.:o 


I ■ 


Jc 






13. 


But the qi.Testion that cannot be satisfactorily decided is whether the 
deity is personal or impersonal, Epictetus used language that iiiplies per¬ 
sonality in deity. ”To his intensely religeous nature God is personal as 

everpresent. Father, Creator, Ruler and Guardian seeing our every deed. 

holding us responsible to him for otr character and conduct”. 1. Marcus 
Aurelius asserts a pantheism based less on the hylozoism of the earlier Stoics 
than on the rationality of the all; intellectually conveived; it is spiritualis¬ 
tic or idealistic rather than physical or materialistic”. 2« The cnmon factor is 
the notion of a supreme all-permeating, all cbn^rehending essense that stimulated 
the Stoics and gives im{)luse to his aspirations”. 3. And yet says M. Aurelius 
’’ViThatever be fa 5-Is was fore-prepared for you from all time; the woof of causation 
was from all eternitiy weaving the realization of your being and that v^hich shall 
befall you,” (Meditations X 5) 4, Truly Stoicism is a mass of paradoxes. Of 
course truth is often found at the heart of a paradox. 

n The x^hole of stoicism is riddled with inconsistencies. It is the best 

of all worlds but full of necessary evils. Ifen are brothers but we cannot love 
them, as it would lead to emotional excess. We can only gain freedom by turn¬ 
ing ouf heart into stone otheiw/ise we s|}.ould be emotional. 

There are two points conmon to all Stoics namely resignation anv^differ- 
entism. not Mr. Lippimnn a stoic? They imke a virtue of necessity. 

Tfhatever is, is right. Stoicism seems 'bo have been, largely, talk. In common 
with Plato ad Aristotle it cared not at all about the slaves who mad.e up the 
masses of the population. 

Both Epicurean and Stoic are post-war systems, Epicurus went through 
life in the spirit of a gentleman, shall we say, ard enjoyed in moderation 
what could be enjoyed. He was not the sensualist and. glutton diich some have 
made out and yet he h8.d a profound distrust of life. Both of these systems 

1. op.cit. p. 214. 

2. op.cit. p. 214 

3. op. cit p, 216 

4. op. cit. 228. 





0 


c. 







o 


14 


were born out of shock and d sillusionment. Men*s fortunes were changiig 
rapidly. Chance of fprtune were regarded as the supreme forces. '/Yhat can 
man do against an irresistable force which acts without regard fb r personal 
merit? Deny it said Epicurus and with dignity. Submit as gracefully as 
possible said the Stoics. Both are defeatist. Both are humanistic and on 
a purely naturalistic basis. Stoic philosophy \ms a varied theory whereby 
men proved calamities to be blessings. So far as we knav Stoicism seldom 
come ck'ivn into the valley where men suffered in order to help them. It had 
no message fb r the man who was sore distressed. Lite Christian Science it 
was for people in comfortable oiroumstan.ces or who had tenacity and imagina¬ 
tion enough to pretend that evil was not real. 








15 


C. Tlie Renaissance, 

Stcfeism dd not survice after the crash of the Roman entire. The 
Christian church had moved,in the meant hue, up out of the hidden places and 
catacombs of the Empire and now turned in a most un-ciiristian way upon its 
persecutors. Some influence of Stoicism was preserved in Christianity but 
the Greek learning of vhlch Stoicism was the largest off-shoot seems to have, 
generally speaking, disappeared after Alaric in 410 A. D. sacked the great d ty. 

" It might perish”, wrote Augustine, ”but the city of Bod built on the ruins 
of her wsLS Eternal”, The influence of the Greek spirit wa.s at an end for a timeo 

The return of the Greek spirit which is the spirit of modern humanism 
can be linked, for easy purposes of dating, mth the fall in 1453 of another 
great city, Constantinople in that year fell to the Turks and Greek learning, 
in the persons of its scholars, became ^ refuged-looking for another domicile 
or sanctuary. Italy welcomed the scholars who brought their manuscripts and. a 
great amount of learning that had been lost to the West for upwards of a 
thousand years. 

Italy went mad about the new learning. It was really the old learning. 
The <D untry a.t that time v^ras badly split up into a number of petty d. ty states 
each of which was intensely jealous of the others. Reigning famiilies such as 
the Medici went on the hmt for new innovations for their courts. This petty 
rivalr^r furthered the coming in of the new learning for there were under this 
system many of the nobility anxious to become patrons of the refugee scholar. 
That is, once the idea became fashionable. 

The new learning resulted in an intense intellectual' seal. De Vinci 
who was an artist, a mat|i.ematician, a poet, a.n engineer is a fair representa¬ 
tive of the many-sidedness brought about by the Renaissance. The word literally 
means re-birth. It brouglifc great advances in the tecliiiique of expression in 
art and in letters. Great paintings, the coming of the printing press, the 
intense ne ,7 irb erest in life as against the theological emphasis of life in 

”the hereafter” are ■nremcnt features of this new movement. It is unis love 

1 . ■ • 



r 






'■ ,C 




( 









:0 






0 


'■ c 


f 






16 


of Ibtters, the classics, which has been called humajiities until our modern 
day. ’’Thus in Oxford the curriculum knoYm as Litterae Humaniores consists 
of I/iten and Greek literature and philosophy”.!. Again ”in general any system 
of thought or action which assigns a predominen^ interest to the affairs of 
men as compared v/ith the supernatural cr abstract. The term is specially 
applied to that movement of thought which in Western Europe broke through 
the medieval traditions of scholastic theology and philosophy and devoted 
itself to the rediscovery and direct* study of andient classics. This revolt 
was essentially a revolt against intellectual and especially ecclesiastical 
authority, and 3s the parent of all modern developments Ydiether intellectual, 
scientific or social”, 2, 

The new learning entered Western Europe mth the return of the soldiery 
of Charles Y, who we^s doYm to Rome on in^erial business. In Italy it had some¬ 
times emphasized the physical and human eleiants of‘experiaa ce in such a way as 
to lead to sensual excess. But at its highest this movement #iidi exalted 
the importance of life in this world, Irrought good. 

Erasmus, More and Golet raised the Renaissance to a very hi^ level of 
achievment in Western Europe, Colet*s school for bo\^s became the model for 
education in England and elsewhere. Oxford s:nd. Caiibridge beeg-use church con¬ 
trolled did not like the neif learning and it had to fight fir a-dmittance, 

Erasmus believed that he had. no need to go to Italy for he oo uM get the new 
Learni]:g , equally as well, at Oxford. 

Tie Renaissance had a direct influence on the Reformaton which \^s the 
first step toY;-ards spiritual equality. Later in the French revolution there 
ims to be a struggle for political equality and. who can deny that to-day an 
intense struggle, not clearly reoogp.ised as yet by many, is gsing on about 
us for economic equality? It all traces back to the Renaissance aid beyond, 

1. British Encyclopedia — Humanisia 

2, British Encyclopedia -- op.cit. 




£<i 




r 


:.;OrL, 




1 


O .: 


■;) 


•■ fi',-'■. ' M' ■■ 




'JiT ■ 



:;0' 


■ V' 








17. 


to the Stoic and kindred movements, to Socrates and Plato, to the early 
Greek naturalists. We believe Jesus/'spirit v;hen recognized has supplemented 
the hiunanistic movemenb but we shall raise this question later. 

There is a literary humanism to-day. Its leadii^g voices are Irving 
Bubbitt, Paul Elmer More and G. W, Elliott. 


VI 




\ 



*VI 





■■ rl./s' : 011, ocr 

^ ^rfo" I 11.:! 10 0% :;/o . ol:? o-I:i' 


'i-.'- orly oc t <0P.d%“|acI or"- ^'■'C-'m:'p^'0i:i ^e";.,.': 

1 '"' - '*■' .•;. .. ■ ■ -/ / •' . ■ .' ■ 



--dd'o::..j::££^-;'d b. i^I. odcdT 

’‘I" ' ' ■ \ 


ujyS 




18, 


D. The Influence of Comte, 

One (f the products of the Renaissance was the birth of modern science 
and the inductive scientific method. In brief this resulted in a direct first¬ 
hand study of the world. Men -\ith telescopes upset the old world-presently 

the old idea that all obgects were enda'/ed with a kind of soul (Stpicism) was 
discarded. All of existence came to be viewed as a machii© -like business which 
according to the Deists, had been vround up and stt going by a clock-mdcer. 
Personal traits and values were beyond the iifcerest of the aforesaid artisan 
fir he was no longer directly responsible. The world went on of itself by 
virtu® of its mfechanism. 

The upshot was the bblief that nature red in toath and claw exhibited 
nothing corresponding to personality of any quality whatsoever. Out of such 
a world view as this Positivism was born. It was clearly enunciated by Auguste 
Comte. 

Comte*s major prem 3 .se is that the empiricist method is the sole way of 
attaining loiowledge. One knows only what one experiences. Hence positivism 
gives over the search for final causes and repudiates metaphysics and la^rs 
emphasis on rdiatever is capable of experinent and. verification. Research will 
not go beyond the limdts of observation,measurement and as mparison. Experience 
is set up as the sole test of what is rea.l and knomble. What oahn.ot be known 
eEpirically is not real, God can neither be denied nor affirmed for he may be 
only an idea, or a.n illusion in the mind. Since there can be no certainty here 
let us go to where certainty con be established! let us give our devotion and 
strength to our fellow-men whose lives are real beyond question. Hence in the 
society cf men m have a field of service and opportunity which I’/ill be a finer 
thing than elevation to a God of whom we are not certain and who doew not require, 
in either case, our service. Comte^s religion of Homanity is thus fbunded on 
those activities which open up a great venture of service. 




:r 




c 


O 



C 



C; 



o 




■:o ' 


n. 



0 


10 



Q 


n--0 o "I'- ^on: 


'lO , 




•■) 

I 


- o . 


t 


0 ■) 


nrr r 


0 




■■ 1 




19. 


To Comte the real core of religion is the inner quality or mihd 
and spirit of man. There is nothing higlier in our experience thati the spirit 
of Man. Therefore Comte sets up the worship of humanity. He postulates a* 
even affirms what he calls Humanity as the end of all Y/orsliip. 

Let us examine his system in sore detail for we shall see that Comte 
is a forarminer of present-day humanism. Especially that humanism which is 
natura3_istic in viewpoint. 

Comte s&w that philosophy and Theology were based on the perennial wants 
of man’s spiritual nature for which a real satisfaction must be found. The last 
stage or positive stage, the successor aid fulfiller of the two previous stages, 
is a negation of the past and yet all that the past had of value is re-affirmed. 
JJomte's main thesis is”that the whole progress of man ias just been his gradual 
av/alcening to the necessity of renouncing all effort to penetrate behind the veil 
of phenomena. Man’s utmost knowledge cannot reach beyond the relations of par¬ 
ticular things to each other,.,,. The individual man himself is essentially re¬ 
lated to his race. That is the greatest ifact about him. According to Comte the 
individual mn is a mere abstraction and that jjhere is ndb hing real but 
Hymanity” 1. One must understand that Comte means by Humanity those subjective 
relationships between the persons of society in order to grasp his theorjr, 

’’Man as an individual,” he declares, ’’cannot proJ)erly be said to exist except 
in the too abstract brain of modem metaphysicians”. 2. 

Comte’s theory is based upon the law of three stages and in the second 
place on the subordination of the scien.Ges as a first means to man’s social 
Y/ell-being. Hed3)es not like Rousseau who had heli that the liberty of the 
individual Tvould bring about a fin^ social order, Comte, instead of individual 
liberty, worked an enthusiaanS) r humanity, guided by science wliich could be 
directed to secure the highest happiness nds individual but 

of Humanity, This triumph of sooial sympathy is the first necessity of 
civilization, (Hayden), 

1. Caird Comte’s philosophy p. 106, 

2. ” op. c it. p. 121 


o 







o 


-ro 


<1 









20 


Mnn in hie earliest experience saw in”nature nothing but the reflection 
of his o^-vn face”. 1. This anthropomc^)hisiii led to a theological explanation of 
the universe^ Presently men recognized lnw v/hich appeared to be more or less 
fixed and it seemed to limit the validity of the first explanation. In the 
ensuj.ng re-examination of the anthropomorphic stage a metaphysical seach for 
first causes grew up. This was a revolt of the mild against the heart for there 
Y/as set up the theory of one overruling will. In time even the theory of the 
existence of the v/ill surrendered in successive areas of life to the experience 
of the uniform and uncliangeable order of things, progressively nature becarae 
the name given for the “general cause of things”, 2. 

Positive science isj according to Comte, the real cause of all intellectual 
progress. It has abways reaped ”the fruit cf every victory” 3. which re taphysics 
or theology have lYon over each other. 

Social passion has been the great drive of all the ages. In tliis way 
scientific loioYfledge will act and react, at once limi-ting and supporting each 
other, and amid all the darlmessof a universe which is ^absolutely unloiowable” 
and even relatively to himself is only pa.rtially IcnoYra.ble, man can get a kind of 
unity and completeness to his transitory existence. For all he needs to Imow is 
that which experience ha.s been constantly teaching, the imiformity and constancy 
of the la'ws of phenomena, 4* , Hence for Comte a coherant picture of existence 
CO nntitutes a religion. Humanity, that is a general subjective relations of men 
with men, must also be a relationship with the world in lAhich he lives. His 
religion must have its eyes open to bitter facts and it must be expressed in 
a noble frame of mind idiich desires to serve the common good. It follorrs that 
the progressive scientific mastery of phenomena Y/ill result in the \lew that the 
■whole race of men is an organic and self-developing unity, in Yhl h we a.s indi¬ 
viduals a/re parts or members”,5, 


1. Gaird 

op. c it, p. 

7 

2. Caird 

op.cit. p. 

13 

3, Gaird 

op.cit. p. 

17 

4. Caird 

op, G it. p. 

19 

5. Caird 

op.cit. p. 

24 


c 


i 


< 


0 


i 


‘ O 


c 


c 






21 . 

’’The life of an individual in any age is what it is, by’-reason of the 
whole progressive movement of humanity”.!. The individual can realize himself 
to be a link” between the past and future of the race, and soldier of humanity 
in that continual struggle whereby it adapts itself to its sphere of action”. 2. 
which is the irastery of self through the mnstery of phenomena. But humanity 
has no absolute power as it is not the creator. Hence Comte sets up the principle 
of the Grand ^bre whose purpose is to ”direot provisionally the evolution of our 
best feelings”. 3. YiTorship of Humtmity is a provisional principle from wideh 

4 

the nevj- life of ”sociooracy” must spring. All progress depends on mastering 
nature which can only come about through ’mowledge and obedience to, even amid 
difficulty, her lav/s, Man must subrrdt to natures way so that he can master her. 

The end to which the mastery of nature points in Comte*S'^ystem is a 
socialized state. The individual must become conscious of laboring for others. 
Somehow Comte wished to bring about the development of a social inpiiilse in 
which even faiaily interests would be given over to the service cf humenitj?-. 

That this relation called Humanity was subjective rather than objective, 
that is to say no one could actually visualize Humanity, did ndb interfere 
rath Comte*s scheme, positivism intended to reach out and to finally unite 
the three great imits of society namely, the family, the state and. the church. 

In the individual there is nothing except physical force which is ”very 
limited when it is merely individual”«> 5. solitary men must fbid an organ if 
therr are to be effective. In ”great socdal movements there is a spontaneous 
convergence of m ny particular tendencies will, finally, the individual appears 
who gives them a common centre, and binds them into one r/hole”, 6. Before this 
ideal social unity can be acljieved there must be a mastery of the inorganic 
world through submitting to its laws. These are the necessities pre-supposed 
in man*s existence. Moral and. intellectual influences can only'come in afterward. 


1. Caird 

2. Caird 

3. Caird 

4. Caird 

5. Caird 


op.cit. p. 25 
op. cit. p 26 
op. cit. P.27 
op.cit. p. 35 
op. cit. p. 36. 


0 



0 ’ • 9 ■' 


O 



0 


•) 


o 


0 


1 ■, 


n 












22 , 


in the second place, to modify the ruthless energy of the practical life”.l. 

The family whose bond is affection is‘*the first instruTreA in man's social edu¬ 
cation” ,2, Capitalists et cetera, vdio are really the natural leaders lack in 
00 nsciousness of their social function. The aim of all social refb rm enters 
in at this point (and in our own day) ®r it is the effort to bring back that 
willing subordination to leaders inspired by the sense cf social duty”. 3. 

All social doctrintmust be based on scientific loiowledge and rais t be re-enforced 
by the rise of a new spiritual power to teach and apply it to modern society. 

”lt is the •i\'lder spiritual unity d* hinnanity tliat alone can ^ ve renewed strength 
to the bonds of the material order in the state”, 4. This sense of unity will 
be carried fonmrd by a priesthood of scientists w'ho YJ-ere to rake i® n conscious 
that all their occupations were social functions, 

n Positivism thus sees in ^uman society a field for love and service. 

Its religion of humanity is founded on realities and actualities of experience, 
and is wide enough for all our devotion or for spiritual adventuress Humanists 
say that Humanism is not Positivism, Grant this and yet the affinities of the 
two philosophies far outnumber their contradictions, positivism is declared 
to Ib an artificial system, substituting the vforship of humanity which object 
of worship is deemed to be an ’’abstraction laving no concrete counter-part 
in objective realityi for the worship of God Ydio for the naturalistic humanist 
does not exist,” 5, Basically naturalistic Huna.nism and Positivisii are one, 

’’The bas8.1 article” of the faith of humanism is the conviction that human life 
is of supreme worth. So jealous is the Humanist of human worth that he insists 
on regarding it as inherent and not derived from a super-world mazdof any sort.” 6. 

1. Gaird op.cit. p, 37 

2. Gaird op.cit, p, 38 

3/ Gaird ” p. 39 

4. Gaird ” p, 40 

5. Humanist Sermons - Carl Reese, Editor p. VI, & Yll. 

6. Humanist Sermons, op.cit. p. 104-6 


I 


C) 









0 : 0 


o 



0 


(S). 





■¥ 


:m '' 












23 


This naturalistic eirphasis is portinert: to bcth positivism and 
Humanism, Montague (Belief unbound - pages 22-3) as quoted by John Line 
says ”iAiLi3.e the indifference of the world to the values of living things 
is no recent discovery, modern science has given it a new and terrible em¬ 
phasis.The better we understand the laws of nature the. mere indifferent 

weal and vice do they appear”. 1. Hence we have the uniting of an enthusiasm 
for human progress Yfhich ha.s been furthered by the empericist doctrine of 
knowledge, to a cosmic naturalism or mechanism Vv’-hich has been, until recently, 
supported by nearly every great scientific investigation. Humanism expresses 
the view that we can explain the rj-hole order commonly called nature in 
mechanistic terms. The poirt at issue being this, that it is vain to seek 
within the natural order any moral cr purposive activity akin to what we fini 
in ourselves and which affords re-enforcement to our ideals, Man is the supreme 
achieviTenb of all existence. Beyond him a/nd his observation of phenomena there 
is nothing knovvable mth which an intelligable relationship wbh or ’response to’ 
can be established. Man sets up all his or\nlid.eals. He establishes them in his 
OT-m strength. Ideals are those values resident in man which distinguishes him 
from animals. Having ideals he is capable of living unto social ends or values. 
Humanism, thep., like Positivism, is the philosophy which seeks to direct human 
activity towards a realization or incarnation of the human values resident in 
man because he is ia man. Positivism deals with man in a collective sense 
whilst hiananism takes him as an individual and makes what it can of him. 


1, Jolm Line ibid p. 106 







24 


(E.) Modern Humanism, 

The word humanism is a tag v/hich is being rather indiscriminately 
used by several groups. This thesis is to be a study of naturalistic human¬ 
ism. but before entering at first hand grips with several exponents of this 
philosophy we will briefly examine two groups. One is Imomi as Romanticists, 
The other group which is not naturalistic since its exponents favor theism 
or at least grant validity to a philosophy of life which embraces the idea 
of God finds a voice in Irving Babbitt and others. 

The Romanticist group are very severely criticised by Babbitt and 
others r/’ho say, first of all, that it is not humanism. It is a school of 
thought vj-hich from a very humanitarian standpoint inter]Drets the life cf 
mankind in an idealistic way, Rousseau expresses the very heart of this 
philosophy. Babbitt says it is not humanism but mj contention is that it 
has certain features which humanism cannot afford to neglect. The upshot of 
Roussesu^s n^th concerning thn altruism 6‘f natural man'^s goodness has been 
to discredit traditional controls, both humanist and religious, ”Huniility^ 
conversion, decorum all go by the boand in favor of imrestricted teriper- 
mental overflow”, 1, But evidence is, amid all this, that the ’’will to 
power” is more than a match for the desire to serve. As one looks critically 
at life agreement must be made iilth BabDitt'’'s criticism. To express oneself 
in modern society has not set up the question very generally ¥/hether there was 
anything to ex|3ress. Many people have a. waist-line philosophy which hunts 
feverishly for somethiig that never comes that way, — contentriBiiit of mind. 

It would not be called that but that is probably what is reeded. 

Elsewhere Babbitt writes ’’Between the humanist and humnitarianist 
I have said there is a clash of first principles. Between the huraanist and 
the authentic Christian there is room for important GO-operation”.2o The 


1. Humanism ^ Araerica - Foerester- Editor Babbitt p.35. Humanism, an Essay 

at ©efinition 

2, Babbitt op. cit. p. 37, 








1 




1 


0 




! 


o ■ 




O-r 


T 





I 


i 


I 


1 


pi,,34 









25 


weakness of humanitarianism is ’’that it holds out the hope of seoiring spirit¬ 
ual benefits — for example, peace end brotherhood, without any ascent from the 
naturalistic level”* 1. Again ”As a result of the combined influence of the 
various types of naturalists the present age is at once mcr e emotional and more 
mechanical than any other of which we have historical record”. 2. 

Babbitt’s criticism is th-t the Romanticist which he calls humanitarianist or 
naturalist, has put slight eirphasis on discipline, upon inmer control of appetite. 
Spiritual anarchy has resulted against which the humanist stands mth his l8.w of 
measure and his emphasis on hard discipline. The dangers of this anarchy, 
combined, as it is, v/ith the accumulation of a f) rmida,ble mnss of machinery that^ 
in abeyance to any higher v/ill, is likely to be pressed, into the service of the 
will to power, is appalling.” 

We have had a general revolt by folk who are not just sure what they are 
revolting against. Art, psychologjr, morals are but a few areas vterein an escape 
from moral obligations is sought. The mases must learn that liberty never od nsidt 
in mere release from old restraints for thereby seven devils will come in where 
one was before. Much of the revolt has expressed itself in an apparently delib¬ 
erate attempt to muddy all of life in the name of a. realism which is bit a revolt 
against any ethical interpretation of life. We are reminded by Paul Elmer More 
that ’’brain power is no guarantee for rightness of thinking”. 3, 

A very interesting defense of the central point of Romanticism vdiich is 
of course, ’that the heart must be trusted as well as the head’ is made by 
Lawrence Hyde in his book The prospecjjs of Hum^anism, ”We accept, then, the principle 
that the act of understanding is one in which the whole man is involved”. 4. The 
right to set up truth ani truths is based on other qualifications besides the 
purely intellectual one. The wisdom of the heart cannot be ib glected for the 

1. Babbitt op, cit. p. 44 

2. Babbitt op. cit. p. 45, 

3. Babbitt op. cit. p. 50 

4. Humanism & America - Paul Elmer More The Humility of Common Sense” p. 64 



') . 


o 



? 


I 


O 


0 ; ‘litM ■ 


i 


0 





i! 







26 


•Tindi vidua 1 becomes more ejid more conscious of the inability of the secular, 
rationalistic intelligence to deal vdth fundamental realities, and at the same 
tire more and more av/are of the significance of those things which cannot be 
defined only shoivn” . 1. 

The highbrow I^yde defines as a person vdio has ’'permitted that part of 
his mind which exercises itself in analyses and classification to become unco¬ 
ordinated vi th those most delicate organs which serve to bring him into sympathetic 
rapport vdth his environment”, 2. Again ’’The more our spiritual life imfolds, 
the mar e things reveal their character to us directly mthout there being any 
occasion for re®urse extrinsic evidence”, 3, Whilst modemists^expert in putting 
objjects against modern backgrounds of thought it does not occur to them to sub¬ 
mit the background itself to serious examination. Hyde thinks that the humanists 
are one-sided ah3. fail as in the more delicate issues because of the disunity of 
personality caused by the gulf fixed between both the md and the heart. The 
whole man mnst see inwardly, 

A psntial view cf life is thal which can be attained otherwise. Hyde 
believes that Russell, "j^utch. Babbitt and others reveal for this very reason 
a ve^y marked individual bias and that no one df them has centrality of visio||. 
Blindness is ultimately of the soul, vision the fruit, not merely of cerebration, 
but of sincere aspiration.” 4. 

Ancient truths came not merely of intellectual assent but chiefly through 
discipline, through what these men chose to express to eiiibody. Since what 
they believed, they incarnated in their flesh and lives they have power over us, 
’’Talk”, says Carlyle sorewhere, ”has no meaning until the thing is done”. What 
the mse men formulated as a philosophy was what they experienced. It was based 
on Yfhat they were. Can anyone escape this ins inuation? To-da"- re n are looking 
for a ’’way out” and we need directions for movomnnt, Hyde S8,ys that Lippman overi© 
looks the fact that the”d is interested” wise man was committed to^i'hat was 
1. The pros|)Gcts of Humanism, Lar/renoe Ilyde p, 24 


2. 

Hyde 

op, c it, p 

30 

3. 

Hyde 

op. c it. p, 

34 

4, 

Hyde 

op, c it. 0 

36. 




- • o 












27 


praotically cruoifiction of the carnal or ordinary self. The humanist must 
incarnate or ’’make flesh” the word of discipline which he offers but so long 
as the head is divorced from the heart his word will not have authority. 

”lf we are to live creatively we must undertake something more fundamen¬ 
tal than merely checking our lower impulses”. 1. We mpst transmute our mtive 
powers or harness the powers of the cave men to something larger than our ovm 
ego. We cannot leave out the fact of emotion as Babbitt does. ”He is an in- 
tellectualist who is unwilling to face the ultimately inescapable obligation 
of putting his trust in a wisdom which is only to be acquired at the cost of 
transcending that plane on which the intellectualistic self is supreme.” 2 
We must respond to life with our vfhole being for our life is essentially one. 

Who can escape the in^lication of St, Paul in First Corinthians, ”The eye 
cannot sB.y to the hand I have no need of you, 3, The humanist must not 

localize the issue by making the solution only a mental dialectic void of 
feeling. One wonders iT the humanist maintains his protest against the Roman¬ 
ticist in order that he might substitute a concern mth cultural problems for 
a more deep-seated challenge to live creatively. The great examples in creative 
liying were essentially simple minded and did. not use the coii^')licated codes of 
their generations as a medium with which to speak their Message, 

The Jesus of the Gospels did not divorce his mind from his heart. 

The Romanticist is right to a -d;egree but when his heart lets him run. to 
sensualism even though in the name of beatty let us check him up by our 
humanist friends test or measure of the disciplined or ordered life. There 
is a true Human it arianism which is nob' so wicked as Babbitt makes out. 

The second group have given voice to their literary humanism in the 
book Humanism- and Africa, T|iis movement has fellowship with the huimnism of 
Erasmus and More and Golet, It looks for great things if it can restore them, 
from two principles which have been valid in Europe for ages, namely ”the Spirit 


1. Hy3e op, cit. 
3. ” ' op. cit, 
3, ” c-ih. 

1. Gor. 12. 


p. 

P* 

P- 


92 

97 





‘ "0 ■: 'j 


fSfPW i- ■-' 


■ 

f . t«‘U' • 




"'-•O 


i; : '‘'O 










■ -I i.< 




"'>l; ;,'v; 




'1 - r 


■,i.:,!rfv af';Cf d'or: ',' 





ii-JX . naiXXy'X" >; % 


)f .' u .. , e ■ :'■■■ X 0 d'Qif fci ■: * 




' ■■ ■ ' ' ' X . ■ •■■ X" 'X‘"'vX|SJ 

X.- ■;. k'O ■ ’ij. :(;''rrO# M l.( '.:.J, J. 

"io X. ■ u-i ‘>o trcx/.'xtot^jX.^o ??|^jxu'i:'l ds.L. 

5X -dor" ■^'X.'■ 


'x ' 'X i ■ ‘c'V : kkMkc|lc^'^g'k].^;''.:o OOB 

yf^ri ■ai,;X, ' X ^ Xji:,.-. ki. 







-'■'■■X'':; 1;”^ 





, . .:rc’■' «<X 0 f'Vi 

„ :: D ,qft, 

’■ •* ■ « 




28 


of a gentleman” and "the spirit of religion", Ho’v religion and philosophy 
f rom vh ich cotes literature, seek to interpret life. That is their fiaiotion 
or calling. The novelists convejr their interpretations through sji imagina¬ 
tive series of concrete situations in ^ih ich a hero or heroine is stt up battling 
bravely for "sweetness and light". To-day philosophy and literature, and religion 
increasingly so, is realistic and the first two are sometimes very naturalistic# 
Modern literature expresses a frankly physical type of existence i^hich is una¬ 
bashed by animallike impulses. It expresses what I sometimes call a waist-line 
philosophy .'h ich seldom rises above the stpmach and is usually loYier than that# 
There is no significance to life beyond the imnBdiate and physical enjo^nrent 
or experience of the passing moment. It seeks to live intenselyiw'bh odd results. 
It does not pretend to be ethical or philosophic but realistic. This realism, 
portrayed in current novels, so called i,\iiich leads to sensuality of varjring 
degrees of lewdness done up in the name of art and the like, is protested against 
by the literary hTUtmanist# ITofc e ninety percent of the films, the rania fads in 
dress and exterior decorating and what not and you mil agree that the protest 
is valid and opportune. 

The exaltation of biological fa-ctors in life puts life at a level that 
is sub-huran. Anyone who reads the essays "Dionysus in Disman" 1. and " Tin 
Dilemma of Medem Tra.ged 3 r" 2. will get the point of the literary humanists 
attack. They blame it on the Influence of ^umanitarianism as personified in 
Rousseau and his doctrine. Literary humanism on the other hand aims at the 
integrity of life in which all our parts, eg, instincts and irr|)ulses,will fall 
into place* These humanists say that an existence mnrked by poise and dignity 
can be attained only by subjecting the various impulses of our nature to our 

!• Humanism and America op,cit, p, 205. 

2. Hymanism nd America op.cit. p. 127. 






■j:o 


1 


' .D 





Ov 


o: 





■tpil >?: 


\ i 

•' ■r ■ 


* "I 


;•: -rqi 


t 




•j 


.,' 0 


T'i -' 





29 


ovrri higher will. It recognizes three levels of exj^erience, the natural 
and the human but has no dealings to speak of mth the divine. It is 
dualistic fir Paul Elmer Viore asserts ’’that a stone and the human soul ca 
cannot be brought under the same definition”. 1 , 

G, R. Elliott defines literary humanism as ’’the study and practice 
of the principles of himan happiness uncomplicated by naturalistic dogmas 
on the one side and religious dogmas on the other”. 2, Humanism makes a 
high claim for life but it is an adventure ifithout God. Morals and ethics 
must stand on their own. feet and create their oiA/n authority. Yet as we 
shall see there is much in coiimionblstween theism and humanism that is both 
literary and naturalistic. Life is TOrth goiig on i-''Jith even though it may 
not last long. At the heart':of life there is something fine and. lovely 
axhich it is our duty to express. Something of the nature of this duty is 
found in the life of Jesus and some seers such as Socrates and Plato and 
Aristotle, But Christianity leaves Christianity and goes a step farther. 

For theists realize that, that which it is our duty to do and to beaame 
rises up out of the very nature of things| that the ’Creator Spirit’ is at 
v/ork in the universe th mighty purposes not fuily toldj that the ethic 
of ^eses Christ which is so generally admired, springs out from his faith 
in and response to a living and creative God 5 that we cannot make the ethic 
prevail mthout the regeneration .of heart wlilch follo\'TS our catching the 
vision of God and surrendering to it, ”1^ father worketh hitherto and I 
work”. 3, 

n Humanism is a rray of discipline for the humanist knows that the 

quality of life is higher or l®rer according as our power <f restraint is 
exercised. The humanist of the Renaissance aimed at a harmonious development 

1. More op. cit, p. 73. 

2. Humanism and America G, R. Elliott, The Pride of Modernity p. 99 


3, H. T. John 5, 17 




I 


1 


c '0 


c 


J- O 


c 


d-. i 'u'- .;. ‘I 


t;o • 




o 


o 


I 


i 


■’ '' ' 0 


o 




0 / odi: ' ■;.■ 




i'.O 


.‘V 




t ■ ? 




i 









30 


of their faculties in this world rather than at other-war H ly felicity. 

He appeals to his intuition to settle whect is right. Babbitt cites as 
an authority to establish the fact that human nature has a centre, pascal 
to the effect, ’’that the great man is he who coiTibines in himself opposite 
virtues and occupies all the space between them. ” 1, 

If human nature has a centre then humanism must set up a model for 
imitation. It differs from religion, in putting as the basis of the pattern 
it sets up, not man^s divinity, but something in his nature that sets him 
apart simpler as man from other animals and that Giciro defines as ”a sense 
of order and decorum and measure in ivords and deeds”. 2. This is reeded 
for the naturalistic mood has led to a surrender of pbise in favor of the 
new unique and spontaneous elements of experience 

Humanism has two main meanings according to Mr. Babbitt, First 
it has a historical meaning of the scholars who turned to Greece and Rome, 
latterly it has a psychological meaning derived from tfe3 experience of 
the historical group, ’’Humanists in this latter sense are those who, in 
any age, aim at proportionateness through a cultivation of the law of 
measure”, 3, 

’’The humanist is not hostile to science as such but only to a sclience 
that has overstepped its due bounds, and in general to every form of 
m turalisra, whether rationalistic or emotional, that sets up as a substi¬ 
tute for humanism or religion”. 4. In getting his centre the humanist 
may appeal to tradition or intuition. Bothcmodem and modernist sifd under 
convulsion to accept in some form the ancient maxim ’lbhat ”man is tie 
measure of all things”, 5. Only the modern bases his measure on the 

1. Babb itt op,cit. p. 22 

2. Babbitt op. cit. p, 28 

3. Babbitt op. cit p. 30 

4. Babbitt op cit. p. 32. 

5. Bsbbitt op, cit. p, 32 


- -r: : ■ ■ ■ - :• 1 . ■ .'/WJ 


.-•TO 




c 


■ o 


0 . 


o.. .' c 




i; 



f 


o : - ■ j 

i 

o.' ‘ < 

( 




• o 


Q 













31 


*4perception of the soia -thing in himsolf that is set above the flnx 
and that he possesses in coinriion with other men”. Whereas the modernist 
loves r.nd bows dov/n to ”the chsaigeful within and vd.thout himself”. 

Babbitt asserts that Lippman's ”high religion” becomes ”disin'berested” 
only Ktter the scientific fashion, that he ignores the gap between the 
wisdom of the ages and the laboratory method, that he escapes from 
humanitarian tendency (which is Babbitt’s pet aversion) only to encourage 
the main tendency to accord to physical science and unwarranted authority. 

For ages Europe depended upon the "Spirit of a gen.iReman” and the 
"Spirit of religion”. The first has obviously declined, especially in tlie 
CO llapse of traditional standards in ^iiorica. Again Altruism is not a 
substitute for the supernatural. 

Babbitt says further on, -— ”l believe that the humanist will finally 
be forced to recognize that there is truth rn pascal’s ®-nteirii on, that he 
Y/ill have to take sides in the debate between naturalists and supernaturalists, 
T....For my OY/n part, I range myself unhesitatingly on the side of the super- 
naturalists. Though I see no e-vldence that humanism is necessarily ineffective 
apart from dogma.tic and revealed religion, there is, it seems to me, evidence 
that it gains immensely in effectiveness v^rhen it has a background of religious 
insight” 2. 

Babbitt challenges Lipp] 93 .ann not to abandon the conception, that the 
modenr man appears to have lost, th8.t "there is an immortal essense presiding 
like a king over his appetites”.3. Iffhy not affirm it? The higher m 11 must 
singly be accepted as a mystery that may be studied in its practical effects, 
but that, in its ultimate nature, is incapable of formulation”,4. must turn 

1, Babbitt op, cit. p, 32 

2, Babbitt op. cit. p. 39 

3, Babbitt op. cit. op, 39 

4, Bo-bbitt op, cit. p. 40. 




! 



■! 






t 













V 


O'* 


a.c 


fj. 





-r-aafcji; 



. ■ o 


.•1 -c 







32 . 


’.’Ve must turn the higher will to account. The chief enemy of the humanist 
is that one who dismisses the ?.One, ^^ich is actually a living intuition, 
as a metaphysical abstraction” 1. Babbitt raises the question of the 
difficulty of determining x^iat is genuine religion. He sees in both 
Christ and Buddha the principle of renunciation. ”The hjjmanist does not 
carrv’’ exercisd of this mil beyond a subduing of his v/ill to the law 
of measure” 2. ”The individual viio is practising humanistic ontrol is 
really subordinating to that part of himself which he possesses in common id. th 
other re n, that part of himself which is driving him apart from them”. o^Che 
first step to overcome the prevalent anarchy is correct definition. We 

must have a '’nevr Humanism” or a ”new Christianity” if we are to escape ”from 
intellectual anarchy, from unbridled individualism, from sunsualism, from 
scepticism, from pessimism, from every ate rat ion Y^hich for a century and 
a half has been harassing the soul of man and the society of mankind under 
the name Rora nt icism” , 4, 

It is evident that this group, of whom Babbitt is perhaps the chief 
spokesman., is nob antagonistic to the philosophy of theism. 


1. Babbitt op, cit. p. 42 

2. B-^bbitt op, cit. p, 47 

3, Babbitt op. cit, p, 49 

4, Babbitt op. cit. o. 50. 








r 


f' 




. c:- 


r; 


o 


0 


o 


1 


o ■ ;.i' 


'3 







'.";c A .0 








33 


SECTION li ’ Th© Naturalistic Huiiianists. 


7fe have now come to the group m th whom we must contend in the 
interests of theism. This group appposes Literary Humanism and Christian 
theism \± th a rather dogmatic denialo There is no God and that is final, 

Man must live out his little day upon this planet. He has no destiny 
beyond such riclmess of experience as he can attain to during his three-score 
and ten jrears. It is a bootstrap philosophy. 

Not only is there eir^hatic denial of theism but vigorous charges 
are brogght against the groups who believe in God. They are cowards and 
do not face life as it really is. They, as a group, have done more to hold 
progress back than to advance it. Theistic beliefs are put aside as not 
Yery worthy any who are not superstitious. 

But now, they assert, we have the sqintific method and let us have 
high faith, along v.dth that, in the rational mn. The ie vj scientific 
technique will brimg new freedom, -- ”a new earth” ’^u^ no heaven. Only 

** , -i- 

Mr. Lippman, alone, regrets the loss of the ancient certainties i^^iiich the 
”acids of modernity” have cut away. Men still requiresthcs e values and 
exT:)erienoes fcr which they stood. There is something akin to a gloomy 
lament in his book ” A Preface to Morals”. The other two nen, Otto and 
Hayden, whose vievjpoint we shall examine ^exalt in Y^-hat they choose to call 
their nevj libeidy. Otto seeks to make his faith in the non-existence of God 
radiantly tmd creatively positive. Hayden, in his turn, writes idth a beautiful 
flow of diction and almost, at times, sings a hymn of joy or praise. 
lYe shall exaiiiine the^L, the work of these three men. 



( 


; o 




o 


'_'vO 


; 


0 



•„ - rf ’ 'n . 0 


c r ' *: r 


0 .- o , 




> o 





34 


"A” The Quest of the Ages as Defined by Mr. Ha^^den 

Professor Eustace Playden of Chicago University presnnts a very sim¬ 
ilar vieiv^joint as that of Mr. Otto, in his book "The Quest of the Ages". 1. 

He writes \± th passion and his style and diction is beautifu. The central 
thing in religion is the quest for the good life" v/herein God is loft out 
entirely. As we shall see the good life is a life of social relations 
plentifully surrounded by material goods. The quest has come out of an 
"inward impulse" i,^h5ch has driven men to seek the good life. In the past 
the quest being unanswered iian put his answer into another life. Ho created 
the Gods to hide his disappointment. Ho'f with our new scientific powers we 
are in a place of power wherein we may realize the good life. , 

"The winning cf satisfaictions of elemental needs of life was man’s 
central interest" 2. In that shared quest for the values of a satisfying 
life is the fundamental motive. Tte looking to spiritual factors came in 
when we Y^rere thwarted here. Mystery there Yfas in all this for the men who 
made the religions of the past. But in religion itself there was no mystery 
ff>r its origin is in "natural human hungerings" and it was entirely practical. 
This blendirg of the practical end matter-of-fact use of knoYrledge and the 
magical-social ceremonial into a single unit wq.s characteristic of early 
religions. 

"It we.s the dismal failure of men to find the good life on thisearth, 
Yiiich in cneturies long past gave primary importance to the ® mpensatory unseen 
world of wish and ideal", 3, Mature was too much for him. Tfith the religions 
of culture came disillusionment so that the religions quest turned a social 
order in ih ich frustra^ted ideals mi^it be realized. The le roic spirit of man 
refuses to accept defeat," The desire-driven spirit of man refused to be 
denied; ....the long labor in i/iihich sons of earth had been engaged throughout 
the agds in the effort to YJrest a g) od Y/orthful life from a reluctant planet 
came at last to be read in terms of theology, of ideas of the supermtural, 
of beliefs regarding another Yrorld-.«,.., •Y\rhere human, ity, baffled and 




0 



1 



' o 


■C) 


•f 




j 


■;c' 


;o 



0 


'O’ 


c 


I 

1 


■fi 


o 


(■■i" ' • V O’ 0’ i i. '.>'K 


i; 

■I 




'ro 


.:.J- ‘'lo 


0 


0 


i 









35 


broken, yet vdth hope ever renewed, battles still for fulfillment, there is 
living religion. For-life refuses to be conquered” 1. It is a struggle 
with nature. Give ni.an a sufficiency of goods and he will be happy. But 
will he? ' 

The historic view, continues Hayden, is that all religion is a 
product: of social living and that all truth ” is hammered out on the anvil 
of ^luiian experience,,..,,” 2, We really require a compromise between 
Eucken 3, who moors men to infinity and Hayden who moors him to social 
struggp.e. Every serious minded person knoYJS how hard the complex loyalties 
of our modern world bears dovm upon the individuals spirit, Hayden continues 
”The .endless complexity of mndern civilization adds to our perplexity. The 
new science has transformed the whole significance of earthly life for man. 

It has given him powers over the material world beyond even the most fabulous 
dreams of the pgst. Steam, Electricity, means of swift communication, have 
so conquered space and time that the pro|3lems of every little nation become 
world problems. Sleeping cultures of orfental lands aviraken, startled to find 
themselves in the steel grip of machines, thousands of miles aY\ray, A poYrer- 
driven civilization has settled itself doYjn over all the ’world, changing the 
old conditions of life, altering the habits, hopes and needs of men, multi¬ 
plying and intensifying problems. Like a fairy Ged-mother, science has put 
in to the hands of men the magic Y-fand,.., a marvel|ous technique of control 
over nature. The powers of earth, and. air and ocean bow obediently to the 
human will. But the gift avails ndc hing until all this pfe/er and knowledge 


notes of p, 34 included on this page, 

p. 34, 1, Professor Eustace Hayden,,.The Quest of the Ages. 

2. Hayden op, cit, p. 2 

3, Ha57d.en on,cit, p,7 

Pa.ge 34. 1. Hayden op.oit. p. 15, 

2, Hy den op. cit. p. 17 

3. Hxyd Eucken Truth of Religion p, 211. 


w.r ’■r>v ■ - 



^ : c; 

. - ■■ ■^■ 


0 


V-. 

' .G 






36 


is momlizod , humanized and made safe for cuiture,”!. Bertrand Russell 
has asserted from time to time that science is putting pcyr er into the 
hands of undic ip lined men. We must, he somewhere suggests, fnd a way 
to inoculate the unscrupulous ones with kindty sentiments, llm Mr, Hayden’s 
description is apt but he must face two things. How can he control the 
human spirit when it is rebellious even after he ccmitrols mture? Again 
wherein is there any truth in the above statement wliich constitutes a 
genuine and essential denial of theism? The humanist cannot ignore tiie 
fact of conversion as knoTn to the Christian theist. Has he any moral 
equivaleifc to it, or a substitute for it? ”our problem is to summon 
sufficient intelligence and godd will to develop a socitl order in -thich 
the creative energies of men v/ill fmd their glory in the achieini© rt of 
spiritual values of an evermore richly;- satisfying life for the race. 

This is to take up the time-hallowed task of man, the religious quest of 
the ages"2. What Hayien appears to mean is that if we create abundance of 
goods so that life becomes comfortable we shall have reached our goal. 

”The dawn will be near when the machines are at last freed from 
greed and subjected to the beautifyDng oflife; itien a new educational 
science shall develop the individual to full capacity for co-operative 
service and make him a thinker capable of dealing Yfith facts; iten a new 
organization of socitty ^all so distribute the resources of the earth 
so as to give every last lonely child of men at least a free opportunity 
&r release of all his powers. Tens of thousands of creative spirits 
n^w submerged and lost may then arise to continue the task”, 3, 

Educati onal science shall teach the lessons of co-operation. This is 
to say that science has the last word in regenerating unsocialized lives. 

Is it true? 

1» Hey den op,cit. p, 18 & 19 

2. Hayden op, cit. p. 21, 

3, Hayden o;^, cit. p, 25 










0 -■ 


o:U- 


' 0 :', 


:• ■. . . •:: iJ asi ■ . ' c 

:o^'t '. , ' Ov ■; ■ c^- 

r . (• 

— -: »V(^ 




0 







37 


In Chapter four Mr. Hayden hijfs upon much tho same as we shall 
find presented by Mr. Otto. ’’yVhen evolution clashed vdth cosmology in 
the nineteenth century, modernizers made peace by asserting that 

evolution is God^s method of creation.The question of ultimate 

origins may be an insoluble problem. Modern science is, at this point, 
in exactly the same position as the theorisers of the ancient world. 

To begin d th Tao, or God, or galaxies is only to postpone the question 
ani put a term on thought. Before the te ginning, both plkllosopher and 
scientist stand silent, gazing into the unkno-twi” 1. Inter, ’’The age 
of man is but a moment in the clock of tiine, the age of culture is still 
more brief, yet man uld read the meaning cf it all in terms d* his 
noblest hopes. The historic dualism place fylfillment above and beyond 

the world in another realm cf reality.,,Tho re w naturalism seeks 

fulfillment in a more satisfactor^r social order of this world. Spiritual 
values have n^anings only in hinnan relations and are as much a part of 
the evolutionairy process as the physical structure of mn. See from the 
standpoint of philosophy of religion, the -quest of the ages points to the 
control of the process of evolution on the social level fir Hie actualizing 
of the highest values in human living” 2, Can we get spiritual values mth% 
out a foundation in something finer than ourselves? To my mind Mr. Hayden r 
does not face the problem of tho iimor life,“““ffir out of the heart comes 
all manner of evil. The new naturalism may provide goods but that, in it¬ 
self, is no solution for most of our social problems. The use of goods 
always sets up a moral problem. Thtt is to what end shall we ude them? A 
knife in the hands of a surgeon is a different instrument than teb it is 
when it is in the hands of an assassin, YiHiat can naturalism, do about the 

1. Hayd«n op, city p, 44. 

2, Hayden op. cit. p. 50. 








38 


difference. The assassin inner life must be changed or he mil remain 
an assassin. Of course we can lock him hp, 

’‘'v^e must deny God when God must be denied, in order to clear the 
way for a nobler and vrorthier conception of the nature of the ’’cosmos 
mi.lieu” v/hich gives man courage and confidence in his search for the 
values of life has through the centuries be en the task of the prophet 
aid the reformer” 1, Again, ’’The loiowledge given in the irystics exper¬ 
ience v/as found to be no greater than that of his social environment..,. 
The idea of God’s existing in an invisible realm Yf8.s a part of the 
heritage from our primitive ancestors. Even ii/hen modern intellectuals 
surrendered the supernatural, they still continued ib r generations to 
malce a division of their one reality between nomenal and phenomenal, 
spiritual and material, another relic of the ancient age”. 2, One 
does not read fsr in most humanist essays before the statement is made 
that intelligent people have given up the supernatural. It is not as 
true as they would have us believe. Again, even after God was dra.wn w 
mthin the universe man continued to read it in terms of their inherited 
ideas of God ”as purpose, providence, and perfection.” ’’More than a 
century of drifting religious philosophies intervened before man came 
to appreciate the relative and functional nature of the God-ideas and to 
take seriously into account the materials of the religious soiences. 

The changing ideas of God during the last few generations were the result 
of an effort to retain the tradiional idea afid at the same timn come to 
terms vdth man’s new vrorld of knowledge and experience. It was still 
apologia and rationalizing rather than empirical analysts”. 3, The 
result philosophizing was that the sharp meenings of the old theology 

was Y/ashed out and the old terms were refilled with new meanings. Hayden 
is saying what we shall find Lippmann saying, that is th^t we haie lost 
God by changing our terms in describing vrhat he means to us today. 

That is to say in giving a new content to old terras we lose the reality v.. 



iC ' r. . : •: ; . d'-i^ c ct.C'j ■': ■ 

vr. ■' ;. '. ’ . -■ '.Co o.;iv' bn^. i}'! 


^4n. 




•ii ... 


>VD; 


..il'j; .CC -ioit: 


rr* our;^>:r.o 

.- Oo O-KJ oj;:ri 



0 




which they in their day sought to e^q^ress. Ido not agree. 

Surely there v/as a^xmys a vital difference between that terminology 
with which in successive generations, and by using the Imowledge of 
their o-'Nn day, men sought to express in langua.ge that ’^something” beyond 

themselves li th which they felt a kinship,-axi that Ssomethiig” as 

it is Ln itself. The old terms and the reality of God ^re two different 
things. As Patmore says; 

’’YiTliats best worth saying 
In divinity and love can’s be said’*, 
amd yet we ^lust alwai^s try, 

Preseit ly, continues Hayden, ’’the finite God reaches the minds 
of folk ( at last) in the popularizations of Wells & Kennedy, But 
with this change in the idea of God went also some of th© old ,valu@s, 
’’For, he continues, ”a really finite God could not furnish the peace 
end security of the past, nor give an absolute guarantee of victory”!. 
Religion is a search for a perfect existing God but Hayden i^KOtild 
deny the possibility cf meeting such a God in actual experience. He 
agrees with Mr. Ames who has defined God as a SArmbol of our highest 
social values or ideals. For Haylen the centreil eleiierb' in religion 
is man’s search for a good life. He is a naturalistic humanist. 

Indeed all humanism and philosophy turns upon the author’s conception 
of God, One could, by Ymj of contrast, say that Jesus was the great 
hunEinist and that he did discover and appreciate the individual. It 
was not the Greeks nor the modern humanist. 

It is a question, already raised by me, whether all intellectuals 

Motes for Pages 38. 

1. Hayden op, cit, p. 95 

2. Hayden op. cit. p, 103, 

3. Hayden op. cit. p. 104 

Page 39. 

1* Hy den op. cit, p. 107 







40 


have discarded the supernatural. Irving Babbitt has not and many others 
have hot. Surely we can say that the supernatural breaks into the 
natural and that there is no clear line of demaraation. Practically 
Hayden is wrong in stating that we ’’continue to make a division”. I 
vVe shall later argue that history reveals the Eternal creative activity 
in Time. To many of us the only dualism remaining is that which must be set 
apart because it appears to be beyond science and thought and over against 
that which we can immediately appreciate. 

Bi'^t for Hayden the only support for man in seeking to win the good life 
is the enfolding social environiaent. Three factors are in man*s favor, H© 
is supported by the stable balance of the natural Y/orld. Also he has a 
secure biological heritage. Finally ”a third and more ir^iortant phase of 
cosmic structure is the enfolding social environiaent*, This, in the last 
analyses, is his real support, master, guide and the Guarantor. It,too, 
is older than the individual and the generation. It is the continuously 
growing tnd conserving continuum of racial experience in civilization and 
culture”. 2 It almost reads as if Mr. Hayden vras invoking cosmic blessing 
upon things as they are in social conditions but we know that he is not. 

”lt is in this social mode of cosmic life that the values and ideals of relig¬ 
ious quests have their secure place. Even a superficial knowledge of the gods 
is enough to shovi clearly that the social and human structure is the source 
from which they have have derived character and definition. Spiritual values are 
the tried, transformed and tested fruitage of long centuries of experience in 
social living. They are evolutionary products. They, too, belong to the very. 

nature of the world..Safely held in cosmic actuality, enshrined in the 

heart of a group, they exercise a dominant authority over indi vidua Is-““@oinraanding 
loyalty, giving assurance and hope. All religions of mankind have recognized the 

1. Hayden op, cit. p, 110 

2. ” op, cit. p. 114 

3. ” op, cit. p. 115. (P“41) 




. ■■ ' " 

!;.;■ B,[;-:» ri r:.'r' . ;t! ..i o',, 

■ u-. \;i^llT Cl.<: 

■ ■'- ' '''■' ' s 

.' ■ : '■ ,; ■ '^'K- I .'- ^ ‘ ■ "■ O': iloj,: Cffd' 


'"oJ' 0 i‘ 

:‘J ■; r-'O.t'so 0 .', 

i-;'i'. ' :o::,'■; 

o'( I’lc!0’( V ■■ ' -.-O-'OC' 

■ ■ ' -r;-:0J '•■orv.u 'V. 

... , .. ,.,. 

« '-'od'! uo 

•/ :;f..: 000 D’iO'lvi' lfiO'..U 

o'. ; o-.ono Mo ‘Y} 0 r: ^x. .‘t:; d’x 

M'Xf'OXfO. ,ri ■. , r:u;' ;' '<'O.i0 ' ■•l-'lY/ ' v Mj' oMocfjp OXfC:i 

■O’O':.:' soM -oo;;;, voii;) ( :f r';ji;'oOo ^ '; 

X''..ro-'OO'h; V'' -0X0 ; ovoxi oo-vrlM iVt, x/& r^ivoM 
- ’ xM j).);o..ov '1 ‘ Xf'M'-i::',' ^xxoo'cd or?M 

.■oo.Md'-'vo ■•••■'. , ■■ ,.- :•; ■.;;;:0 5 

’■'M V- d''io'-'. 

r iy Dn.::^0' VO.!'... o-' ■ ■•■ ' dv-cy4' 

.. i> ^ Mo'.' ■ ','00.0 .; .. ' ■,v,dX^o.l- 

' rvlll O.' 


'■ ,0 ’ '-'o . ?;o .Rei>Y i -Y. 






41 


controlling authority of these social values and ideals”. 1. This 
passage irpresses me as a very naive piece of Argui® nt. Later he writes 
that ”the values of God, to be actual, must be vroven into the warp and 
woof of the organized life of the world”. 1. 

At times, Hayden confesses, the now dream in past times seemed 
to end in cynicism as one after another of the social forces escaped 
its service but to-day vie cannot copy our . ancestors in seeking out 

r 

vdiat he calls a "dreamworld”. Indded we are better off for "the 
consciousness of social solidarity has made" us able to enter sympathet¬ 
ically into the lives of our fellow's, even at times a.oross racial bounds”,2. 
One wonders if Mr, Hayden is fully aware of the source of the Hegro 
problem or the reason that the U,S*A, has erected so m.any barriers 
against other nations. Surely he is leaving out those colors which would, 
not let him paint a nice picture. He ad.ds that ”the modern ideal of the 
good life must be social and inclusive in an entirely this-\^prldly sense”.3 

Earlier in his book Hayden had said that vdien we Inve realized the 
good life there is no objection to continue the use of the word God. 

”But the continuation of the evolution of the planet by a social organ¬ 
ization, eventuating in a unified world intelligence, heart and purpose, 
is a ’must be’ rather than'an ’is*.,.God in this sense of unified Cosmic 
support and leadership belongs to the future,God may be throiAjn up 
later in the process but is not now,” 4. 

We must ¥/-in.’ 'Ne have burned our bridges behind us. Ho longer 
will the ancient solution suffice. After a.ll is said and done Hyien has 
a vision of a splendid social programme but I do not believe that it has 

any ”go” to it. There are historically speaking two expressions which 

havdftomn out of the theistic faith and that cannot be lightly dismissed, 

1, Hayden op cit. p, 125 3. Hayden op, cit. p. 169 

2, Hayden op, cit. p. 169 4. Hayden op. cit, p. 120. 












/•ii^ 


;wr OC:' 


>,;■ :!'iorY-',;'; 


o ' 


" ‘^iS 


\ o 
■'> 




42 


The first v/e see as well as anpvhere else in the ’’inner light” spoken 

of by the psalmists and the second is that social adventure of protest 

that we see in the prophetic succession. Historically the protest has 
usually groxm up out of that ’’inner exi^erience” which wee all faith in 
God. For am I, as Mr<> Hayden iii 5 )lies that theists do, reading back in¬ 
to the lives of the prophets that which is not there. One requires to read 
Amos or Micah for himself to see what Mr, Hayden pleads for, and more, 
in his social crusade, ’’What doth the Lord require of Thee but to love 
mercyj to do justice and to walk humbly with Thy God,” 1, The inspiration 

of the prophet, Mr. Hayden, notwithstandiig , was more than human amd 

social. The vision of Yahwe/L was the first factor. Fever has our society 
on this continent had so many social programmes as it has to-day end yet 
we are not getting very far. The reason is that they have no power to 
cleanse and revive the heart or inner life of man. Many churches fail at 
this point too or they would count for more. Life works from ’’within out” 
and not from ’’without in” in the last analyses even though an empty belly 
maknth a bitter spirit, 

’’The task, ” says Mr. Hayden, ”is to iiiqjose human purpose upon the 
cosmic process, to shape the course of flowang streams of life...,,.so that 
it may converge towards practical expression of creative idealism”, 2, 

To create a good social order is our sole aim. ”it is the practical 
technique for actualizing these ideals that is needed and which is 
lacking here and in the Orient”. 3. The.way must be discovered by trusting 
intelligence dedicated to scientific investigation. Evil pensions of men 
may be overcome in this way ff Mr. Hayden is correct. Babbitt, More and 
Elliott all say that humanism may be supplemented by Theism, ”lt is 
inevitable that intelligent idealism ?fill seek some organized unification 

1. Micah, 8. 
la Hayden op. cit, p, 207 
o. Ha/-den on. cit, u, 224 










i 






43 


of the social struoturo as an instrumeit of guidance.... but individuals 
aro developed in an existing society which must be changed before a good 
generation v.ill arise. If we could transform the^social milieu” we could 
produce the new individual^ if we could produce the ne?>r individuals they 
would produce the new society” 1. If we couldJ Christian theism has 

produced som.e splendid examples of the ’’new.man”. ”lfe require something 
to oppose to time” 2. says Euckeii or else it follows that our opinions 
remain the sole orbit as of xvhat is good and true. 

Surely we have the key of understanding in the ?rorld by vdiat is 
in us. So speaks A. E. Taylor in his important book ”ThG Faith of a 
Moralist”. ”lt is surely arbitrary to assume that while our physical 
structure and 3 .ts history throw light on the character of the system of 
realities which includes human organisms among its constituents, our moral, 
aesthetic and religious being throws no light on the nature of this reality, 
dot ....There must be at least as much to learn about the inmost character 

of the real from the fact that our spiritual life is cnntrolled by such- 
and-such conceptions of good and right as there is to learn that the laws 
of motion are what they are......Our geometrical Icnowledge may be much 

clearer than our Imowledge of life and sentience, and this again much 
clearer than our ledge of our o^jn moral being. And yet, it may >Tell 

be that, for all its dimness, it is just this loiowledge which b&ngs us 
most drectly into contact with the very heart of reality. ”For in a world 
dim with unprecedented bloodshed, misty i/dth subtle suspicion and self- 
seeking, and darkening ever more with impiety and lust they would produce 
by political(i.e. legislationists) or social machinery the lights of peace, 
goodwill, purity and temperence. They are busily wiring a twilight ^^rorld 

1. Eucken -- Christianity and the iJew Idealism, p. 38-41 

2. A. E, Taylor, TI. volumes— ’’The Faith of a lioralist”. 






1 


o 


'>:c 





o 





f 


. 0 . 


0':0 




t. 


■ v;o.u ,o4>; 


as fj 



■in : 0 









44. 


for incandescent epodness. They would arrest and softon with electric 
legislation the avfful wo rkirg-out of divine laws.” Perhaps this 
x^uotation is an apt commelit on Mr. Hayden’s naive philosophy of 
humnism? 


1. G. H. Elliott ibid. p. 9o 





45 


(B) 

Is There a God. — Mr. Max Otto will Answer. 

Recently when the Christian Century published a debate loiown 
as "Conversation about God" the management chose Max Carl Otto of 
vrisconsin University to present the naturalistic humanist position. 

His best lmo\m book is recent-"Things & Ideals". 

Professor Otto calls his non-theistic position "an affirmative 
faith in the non-existence of God".l. Ho asserts that his position 
differs from the athiest who dogmatically says that God can be laioi;m 
not to be and the agnostic who is negative or neutral. "Gradual|:y 
writes Otto, "A new faith took shape, a faith as affirmative a s the 
old one, thougi now in the non-existence, rather than in the existence of 
God. It is important to emphasize this fact of affirmation. One can be 
without a belief in the existence of God or have a belief in the non¬ 
existence of God" 2. For Mr. Otto the two positions are drastically differ¬ 
ent. 

In ansvfering Mr. PIcIntosh andaxoponent in the delate who believes 
that there ought to be a God Otto says "Indeed I am convinced that a 
Cosmic‘Being, if such existed, ¥D uld be unable to appreciate the true, 
the good, the beautiful as these are experienced in the life of humankind, 
even as a human being is unable to anpreciate the satisfantions peculiar to 
the world of fish and fowl." o. Man must develop his oim powers. 

"Usually", writes Otto, "It is regarded as necessary that certain 
great truths mnst first be)set up in the light of which particulars of 
experience may then be interpreted. But he chooses, what he thinlcs is 
an opposite course to that of the theists. He will be strictly |.nductive 
and not deductive. Also he will be inductive in a particulan sense. 

"Life has tauglt me to pursue an opposite course: to take the x)a,rticula,r 
situation as authentic, to interrogate it for light and leading" 4.(Dewey?) 


1 . 

2 . 


First cycle The Christian Century,Feb.24,32, p. 250. The debate was 
run in cycles ie, the three spokesmen each had a turn. We shall refer 

Fhsfcjrho'oproit! p!’250- 3- op.oit.p.252. S.Firot Cycle 


op.oiy, p.252 







46 


The debate at this point of ©urse is as t o what sort of background 
Mr, Otto will his particular situation over against. Situations, 
like quotations, require a background if they are to yield up their 
proper meaning. We s^all keep this point in mind throughout ’this 
thesis, 

”l have learned that it was the search for the”Good life” 
that gave rise to the concept of God; that moral customs gave rise 
to ethical principle; that eveyjrday thinking vfith its ups emd dovms, 
gave rise to logic. It was not the other imy round. After the same 
manner, wdrthy philosophies of life, worthy prograjtmnes of livirg 
have been, are or 'vvill be the outgrcjvth of specific loyalties to the 
better alternatives offered in acting, feeling end thinking” 1, 

What are the alternatives? This is to raise the question of value whth 
we must face later. Otto, of course, is asserting that all value is of our 
oiiVn creating. That an experience of God, authentic to many, is but a 
projection or illusion. Religion as a response to God is a mistake. 

It is a question whether Mr. Otto is not about as naive in his faith 
in alternatives to theism as it is possible to be. It is tragic to be 
a theist who, according to our author, ”tum themselves, and encourage 
others to turn from the flesh and blood, the intelligence and goodmll, 
on which they have been, and are dependent for every blessing their brief and 
troubled existence can yield’,’. Surely Mr, Otto does not mean just what he 
says but later he confirms it, he believes that the use of ones intelli- 
gence is somehow inconsistent with theism.. Without a great deal of work 
we could assert and nam.e a long list of believers in God who are prominent 
in iri.odicine, education, social reform and in other worthful activities. 

Was not the church the mother of education? 


1. First cycle op.cit, p. 252, 

2, First Cycle op, cit, p. 250 










47 . 


Kr. Otto believes that personality is ’’inoonpatible with the 
great vasttoess it is made a property of in the common religious con¬ 
ception”, This raises the real question of our problem. Gan man 
respond to an^^thii^ "beyond himsolf”? Or is it only a projection of 
his desire to which he prays? Speaking of projoctions one feels that 
the desire for the "good life" -when looked for among actual people is 
not the fine thing it is mado out to be in the v.rritings of lir. Otto and 
Mr. Hayden. Taking ones stand on the sufficiency of man by no means 
clinches the argument that ascribing personality to the power of this 
universe is naive and childish and unwort|3y of full gromi minds. 

If Mr, Otto is right man is supreme for who of us knows anything finer 
than personality. It naturally suggests itself that being a person, being 
able to sit in judgment on ones invironment, being able to plan, to think, 
to dream, that the experience or stuff we loiow in ourselves and which we 
call personality is not 'without kinship to the creative power of the 
universe. Again, just who in particular does Mr. Otto mean by "Man"? 

Does he mean the laborer, the coal-miner, whose empty belly in 'bhese pre¬ 
sent dajrs make the bitter spirit, or the mobs of the race-track or has he 
in the back of his mind only a small select group sitting in rather comfort¬ 
able circumstances in booklined studies or dens. Franlcly a great many 
people whom I have m.et make me utterly dubious of "the sufficiency of man" 
unless his heart is regenerated. Gan social idealism do that? I doubt 
it. Rather doo'S’ idealism follov\r a change of heart. 

Otto does not think that the new views lately prevailin-g in natural 
science are of helpto one who whshes to believe in God. He quotes from. 

Sir James Jean^s book "The Misterious Universe" in which Jeans asserts that 
"The universe begins to look more like a great thought than like a great 
madiine". 1, Yfliat do^'^n it matter adds Otto "is this, then, all that life 
amounts to? To stumble, almost by mistake, into a universe which was 
clearly, not designed f) r life, and which, 'bo all appearances, is either 
1. Third cycle pApril G, 32. cited by Mr .Otto cit. p. 443 





:■) r 0.- - . ^ 

.-..r ' i;. 'X •:: :■ -O'^ I.''- ' ^ ‘- ■ ^ 

;x,;,;: . G.:, iio-r:; 

■■ ■- •• -o': '•i- ' - ' •■' ■'•'• ■ ■ -■ 

Olid- G. •;. 1-'- 




'I' orio Gi'-'ild. -'-■ —■ ■■' ■ 

; ■ ,:,J' -- - 




0 - -■:.: - .0 '!■ -'iX ■:-: r* ;T,r: 

J G ' 1. O', ' * - ■ ,. 'b * 

• lo - o: -;.:;:..:oi-0 .T-v; ■ I •'Cr': " 

d O' ..O' •:. ‘ '"i i : .:: -.M-o 

;, ■■ •.; X... .:■ 

libp 1' - ■ ' -1 ■ '. 

X. 

b 

■ ,p 

b 

^ ..': Cvih:' .;:M' 


" ■ d ' ' V- ; b ■ i.! .'■' ■■ 'b '•' ■ . Cl . 

;/: , .. . ■: 'M--' b ■ c '■• : i" 

fi, :1’ 0.!...'.: 

-lb 'iboboic^ -- '"ibi- '.■o’-; 

.V , ■ o Cl 


v;v.:;;, .,1.,; o 


‘b _• _ 0 . 0 , o ,::ob 'x b.oo,'., •; ^ 

; d d , -d .i't:rib.'.oJ 

• ;i- ::"a- P3b.i ■ ebc" ’ 

b ^''■■ ''■0 ,,.vr '''i-, . o.;. ofjoii 

'b -10 :'o 'o'-'-x'O G Olid' bo Gx.'o.i'': 9,',:,' ^ ’ c 

b .od. ■. ' ' bd- bb-o..i ■ 

■•■■‘i r:.’ ' ,oi-.o)';'.' d rioX'i-G j..L,■■■.■;•:G-,n : 

d' ; b.-'d.’ ; bo obo'-ob -ibr 

; d bi b’' PC ooibrfbn boib 

bd:-'::.- .':.'d ' ' doi;.i;o 

' , b'' 

d vdv'.;\d rb .d .iroG IboJ.: 

iXd-l.x «jV.1.o' d: o,Os' ' 0,!. TOOb ,■ , 

O'- ;}' , ,:0 ....d. l..d V G'-o.fTb' ■ . 

■• , b 

„ o- ' '. . -''■■o.oxxn o oc,d‘'0 

i • oi; ..L ..b' on'd' "■: -d ■,;; . j' 

d' ooxdors’ O'H. o..'T;b 

', . d . ' d o, ■ ■■■.■ b d ■„ ,, od' 0 o.Uio'b 0 ; 

do >aG •'d.odo.b bo o-‘:£ f^io-odio-’ 


■.;;Toi;':::. .d‘''.’:IsC y-xt’"' :>'oo ' r> d 'll:: 


.'.: i ' O ■' 1 .'bv b d'-: '1 ■> -bdi-d O'X.O'-: 

:od od' o.-d b-c Od’i- vd-bj 

^ . ■ -d ' ■■d' 0 0 ■■■. .;b.o " odd 

"■'oi' : 

P.. .'-'. Ob ~ «- b-O'b ■,1 -iOt.;/. 

■ db: 

■■ . ■., o'o . ' ■ od o' , ! ' . 1 •.’; ' i lo 

d : ^':odb..obo' ,.vl foo ^^ ■■■ 

■ . _ • dd ‘ O'd- ^d-d ,b- ,ob 

d .d ‘■': d' .b',’,fCO!.i'■' ■ d dx'- ^ . o ;o 

d ?id .d.d"ido'bo d/r.dd'b ,d 

' •' . . b'd: 



48 


totally indifferent or definitely hostile to it, to stay clinging on 
to a fragment of sand rintil we are frozen off, to strut our tiny hour 
on our tiny stage with the knowledge that our aspirations are doomed to 
final frustration, and that our achie'vments must perish with our race, 
leaving the universe as though it had never \een” 1* It it really as had 
as all this? We must agree that we do not gain much by picturing uhe new 
cosmos as the’'Thought of t Divine Matheruatician”. Otto properly calls 
some of the new theories hallucinations of despair so far as proving the 
reality of God is concerned. 

Hr. Otto, suggests a point which we must face later. ”We have 
seen only a small part of the drama, CnC© i't looked as if the play 
had been designed for fish, then for reptiles, then for mammals nnw for 
5 ;isn. But the play is nolt^ over", 2. That is true and if that which we 
have called personality is only in the making there is a great future 
ahead. We do not know of a higher quality of life than that unity in man 
which we have called personality, possibly, while our role in the drama 
is only an episode for our years are "threescore and ten",we are going 
in the right direction in a drama which now seems designed, Ivir. Otto’s 
om words,for man to play some little part in, in asserting that that 
which is beyond our* loiowing ’ at least has a quality with that which in us 
"Inown", Hot only in us is there the quality and capacity of"laiowing" 
and setting in judgment upon the ’loiom’ but also the capacity to reach 
out for that Yfhich at the present stage is unknown. Life growrs. So does 
that which we call pwrsonal5.ty. Does it just grow up like Topsy or, is 
it a slowr unsteady response to a great "Other” " than ourselves^ To affirm 
this is at least as respectable as Mr, Otto’s affirmative denial* 


1. Third cycle- quoted by Mr. Otto, It reads like B. Russell p. 443. 

2. Third cycle op. cit. p. 


443 





':■) 'iO. ■ >'’ 


o 'l'" 



XO:Xi'':i CO' 


■ •: a 


('I 


c 


xJ V’^d- 


c 


O ■ 


C. 




t 


t 






o ■ .\ > .0 : t 




';o 




• ^ 



. .:o 









49 


It it an argument against theism as Mr. Otto ma].CGS out in his 
fourth paper in the Conversation that brevity^of life, generation by 
generation, proves that that which we laiow as life is only a momentary 
existence. "Tlio laiovrs? Life is not proved by duration but by quality in 
either case, IVho can say that death closes down on an individual’s or 
a generation’s part in the drama, 

Mo.n must always grow by contending with his environment. Primitive 
man may have been responding somewhat bln.ncTly but perhaps very wisely in 
conceiving powerful forces, to account for i-fhed: was about and within him¬ 
self, in terms of his ovn exporience. For myself I do not know hovf else 
mankind could have grovn. We must seek to . understand our environment and 
we must speak our om language for v^re cannot live as the cattle of the fieldo 
To hnmanise natural forces did not allow any escape so as to be able to 
ignore them or disguise thorn from being what they were in antual experience. 
It is 8.n assumption taken for granted, but without any proof, that those 
who believed in the gods of Eomer wore less brave than those who did not. 
polytheism, is very early in the worlds history end its existence has ver^^ 
little to do with a denial of theism in this century. 

The discovery of natural laws,which is a recent discovery^lp.s revo¬ 
lutionised our thinking about the world, God end ever;^H:hing else. Law has 
driven the idea of the impersonality of the natural order, Sven the human 
life, the person, has by the behaviorist been put into physical termn. tt 
I think unsuccessfully. But Mr. Otto has no data which actually piroves that 
there is nothing to which personalit^r^ias we discover it in ourselves, can 
respond^nn the universe. For example you and I have a body, we know som .0 
of its laws, we can gain certain loiowledge of its organization and parts. 

We can draw a diagram of our bodies. But I am, whether you are or not, 
more certain than I am of aryH:hing else tha.t I em more than my body. 

I ha.VO an ”1” or an ”Ego” Yirhich thinks. One can look at ones brain but 
can the brain return the look? IJow perhaps this is a poor way of saying 





50 


that all the scientific discovidriGS in the whole world cannot 
disprove theism or confirm it. lly life and that of other people 
is of a spiritual quality. 

Can anyone deny orccnfirm friendship by drawing a diagram of it or can 
you make a picture of friendship? Friendship is of the inner life and 
cannot be ddsected. So also, I believe, is the friendship of God to 
which the theist responds. It is an idle argument to suggest that 
because we change our diagram of God, as most have had to do, not willing¬ 
ly, in this modern world, that have lost God or changed Him in any antual 
sonsG. I do ndb see anything in the scientific views of the universe 
which touches the problem. I accept with Mr* Otto the findings of science 
as such but my central conviction whth does not depend upon diagrams, is 
upon God. 

Mr. Otto calls redefinition in our concept of God a retreat from 
theism. We do not think it to be such, rather one can believe that is 
more affirmation than in any previous century so far as intellectmals 
are concerned. I am not,as Mr, Otto suggests, asking for the privilege 
of believing in God. We will likely continue to believe without asking 
anyones permission. l¥hy the theist can be said to be giiring up theism be¬ 
cause we drm'’ our new picture of God in terms of science, philosophy, that 
which is related to our experience to-day is beyond me. Grant that there 
may be that creator spirit which we call God. It fol^-ows that while we can 
not picture or make a diagram, of those activities amj,qualities that He means 
to us which probably are only a small part of what he actually is, we must, 
in responding to Him., in our day visuiize and conceptualize Him as best we a 
can. If either Mr, Otto or myself lived the life of a bushman there "would 
be a great loss in our vision of God. Perhaps the bushman’o offspring would 
overtake us and even pass us a little later? 








51 


"All our ideas have changed. hTaturalism has changed no less 
than theism". 1. Mr. Otto points out the difference in conception, 
of the God of Mr. .Yhitehead and that of Homer and asserts then in the 
case of theism "the trend indicates a steady mthdrawal of God from 
vital relationships from every day concerns". 2. Again this trend boars 
"^^ritness to the fact that man has more and more taken into his ovm charge 
interests and actions which were formerly regarded as under divine control"S> 

These results are true. One wonders if such a God as Mr. Wliitehead 
pictures is unreal because it is too narrowly scientific and if the 
crea.tor of that concept had allowed other equally legitimate evidence 
to influence his picture pust what cfi. fference it would make. After all 
arguments are done with God is on experience vfhose reality is intuitively 
or inwardly grasped by the whole man. That many activities are no?»r re¬ 
garded as secular does not touch the question very deeply, Mr, Otto, 
naturally, makes the claim that secularization has made gains possible 
which would net have done under the theistic principle. Substitution of 
a non-theistic for a theistic principle of explanation has uniformly re¬ 
sulted in the enhanceiiBnt of human welfare" 4, 

"The claim is supported by marked improvement in the control of 
floods, in ihe prediction of the weather, the growing of crops, breeding 
of fruits and ahimals, transportation of foodstuffs and people, and in a 
thousand similar operations ¥d.th natural phenomena and mechanical devices, 
Man*s power to ameliorate his lot has grovjn vi th the exclusion of God as 
relevant to the venture". 5 Otto adds to this contention in the story of 
modern medicine, mental disorders and in sex and population problems, A 
little later he adds, "lYhat I do mean is that men and woraien have nowhere 
t o turn for help but to themselves and each other? and further,that if 

1. 4th cycle, ^ril 7th, 1932. p. 541. 

2. 4th cycle, p/ 541, op, cit. 

3. 4th cycle, p, 531, op, cit. 

4. 4th cycle, op, cit. p. 541 

5. 4th cycle, op, cit, p, 541. 


V::\ 




O ■ .0' 'J 









52 , 


they turn to themselves and each other, resources of mind and heart, 
now unsuspected, may be discovered that will enable them to transform 
their individual and common life into something joyous, beautiful and 
wo rthy" 1 

”To early man the Gods were real in the same sense that the 
mountains, forests or waterfalls which were thought to be their home, 
were real”.2 It is an open question whether the above statement is 
true . However it serves Mr. Otto’s argument that vital faith in 
God is well-nigh passed away. The sphere of self-dependent, action 
has been so enlarged at tfoe expense of’God-dependmt’ action aid in the 
end theism was destroyed. Bit by bit contends Mr. Otto the retreat of 
God has come by way of re-definition. That is to say that, ib r the 
cause of theism, to re-define is not to positively advance but to 
retreat. It is always a retreat. 

As theism has retreated science the splendid method,, wherein 
man has shown his self -sufficiency, has moved in. 'Em science is 
in control of most of the provinces of human interest and is outflan&ing 
theism in areas still held. It amounts to this says Mr. Otto, ”prattical 
faith in the non-existence of God has worked, has worked better than faith 
in his existence did. It has enlaTged msn’s effective acquaintance mth te 

the world andhas helped him to satisfy, to enrich and to elevate his wants”3 
Probably Mr. Otto would admit in view of modern war-fare in the spectacle 
of a generation -which has mistaken comforts and conveniences for civili¬ 
zation, in the depressed state of millions of employees, that science with¬ 
out a regenerated heart in control constitutes a moral problem tkt makes 
a continual nightmmre for some of our sta^tesmen. In Y7-h8,t way has a non- 
thoistic principle ever dealt with this real and vital problem which unless 

1. Fourth cycle op. cit, p, 542 

2, Fifth cycle May 16, 1932, p, 639. 

3. Fifth cycle op.cit. p, 640 



53 


quickly ond succossfully dealt v/ith will malce the nations soionco 
and all go shipwreck. Years ago ^fcCauley pointed out that the noted 
destroyers of life were men of high intelligence wedded to Io/Y desires. 

That problem is with us yet. Theism has dealt with it successfully 
in scores of cases but has naturalistic humanism? Theism at least has 
a promise in its philosophy and experience to cKnge the heart. Science 
wedded to a greedy directs rate can make a hell very quickly and on this earth 
end a more lasting one than earthquakes, volcanoes and tidal waves can* 

. Mr. Otto refuses to put it briefly, in his fifth paper, to 

recognize that apparently ’’inhorant unwillingness on the part of people 
to live up to their best. The church has stated the problem in the 
doctrine of the '^fall of man”, Otto calls it ”the ancient but tragically 
persistent belief in human depravit^r” 1, It seems to me that humanists 
have sat in state in lecture ha.lls but have too seldom been among men 
of low degree.” 

Biological history has been to our eyes incredibly bungling 

and wasteful. There have been many volumes written, says Otto, in Yfhich 

the course of evolution has been described to prove purpose in the universe. 

”lf the great scene we look out upon, vfith its waxing and waning of suns, 

its appearance anddisappearance of plant worlds, its rise and fall of 

animal dynasties - if all this or any part of this is expressive of 

divine purpose, "friendly to man’s intellectual, moral andreligious 

education”, the fact remins to be demonstrated?.. ^ He asks, ”What 

happened to Socrates? To Jesus? If we can believe the recofd, they 

gave their Ji'ves to God and in the hour of their need he deserted them. 

Do we see ’the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green 
bay tree’ or do we not? 2. 

lo Fifth cycle op.cit. p. 640 
2. Fifth cycle op. cit. p. 641, 





54 


Wo do.Surely tho pov/or of Jesus Christ over tho lives of men is 
refutation of the above comment. Is it desertion on the ];)art of God 
when Jesus would not betray tho "'Word’ of his life to selfish and 
callous men? ’/Vliy do we hear of him to-day? 

Mr. Otto cites Studdert-K©nnody on God’s helplessness to prevent 
war. That was true. It was the ingrained unwillingness to do the best 
they \mevT, which fact Mr. Otto denies, which mad© war possible. The 
problem of evil has never been satisfactorily answered. But it does 
not invalidate thoism. It can be reasonably shown that much of it 
comes of pure selfislmess or sin. This does not cover the ground as one 
is helpless before an earthquake or a malady like cancer. Yet it is not 
unlaioim that the Christian or theistic sufferer has exr)eriencedj on a bed 
of pain a richness and miracle of grace. 

In his sixth paper Mr, Otto sets out to describe the godless good 
life. Such a life is proposed ”in the conviction tint it opens the ‘way 
to a deeper, truer, richer life of the spirit than that associated v/ith 
rival views”. 1. The social value of theism will, of course, depend upon 
the vision of God. The vie^sr of God that we see in the synoptic gospels 
is not incompatible with those ideals which lead to social progress. 

We do not deny thab for some himanism has a very great deal to 
offer, but it meets, I believe, the need of a very few small minority. 
Otto is in the main correct in vrriting that ”few beliefs are more widely 
adhered to than the belief that a generous disposition, ethical idealism, 
civic mindedness , interest in spiritual grov-rth can be expected from none 
but those who count on the co-operation of God.” 2. 

1, Sixth cycle - June 8, 1932, p. 736. 

2, Sixth cycle, op. cit. p. 738. 



55 


Later Otto adds ’’Without God, v/e have been cold, the logical position 
is a c:',’nical, pessimistic, degraded attitude towards life”, 1. Just 
who told him he does not say, and there is some truth in it. Generally 
speaking, however, naturalistic humanism has, if the novels and v/ritings 
are authentic data, led to disillusionment and skepticism. I do not 
believe that all non-theists come to this attitude. T^to factors must not 
be forgotten and that is that until recently hums.nism has been largely a 
philosophy gf protest and that the original force of Christian theism from 
which it sprang has not been entirely sloughed off. 

’’The drive of desire”, as someone has daid, ”is the engine offLiving” 
Men even though they lost faith in God continued to desire. Wliy do men 
give up struggling? The ansYver is apparent. One ’’knows tint men gives up 
the struggle because they despair of finding life meaningful in terms set 
by their ovm. natures. Disappointment,in love, failure to get Yrork, inabil- 
ity to hold their heads up in self respect, recognition that the possibility 
of adventure is past — such are the reasons why men end their lives”.o 
Just what standards determine what are meaningful terms as set by their 
natures is a debatable question. It is, I am convinced, mans natural dis- 
content mth inperfootion, his inate desire for more significent living, 
his native persevering quest for the idealized object of his desire — it 
is this incurable spiritual aspiration which is the vital force at Yrork 
in mans striving upward” 4. Whence came this inate desire for more signifi¬ 
cant living? Otto rules out the idea that it is a response to the enlighten 
ing spirit of the Creator, He ehds ”lt is neither formula, creed:, program, 
nor faith in God Yrhich is back of mans desire to elevate' his wants. Man 


1. Sixth cyclo op. cit. p, 736 

2. Sixth cycle, op. cit. p, 737 

3. Sixth cycle op. cit. p. 737 

4. Sixth cycle op. cit. p. 737 





56 


himself is back of this desiro”. 1. It may turn out to be Gods desire 

as well as mans. What is man? Sometimos he is a brave idoalist, seeking 

to maloe life a beautiful community of goodwill and at other times he is a 

greedy,almost inhuma.n, creature who ruthlessly reached out for physical 

satisfactions with never a thought above his waist line,not cii upward looko 

Live in an industrial centre where life is hard and greedy and a constant 

struggle. Desire for food, a/'os and never get enough, it seems, but can 

men live on bread alone? Unless man is mnde”in the image of God*’ he is 

only made in his or/n ima.ge which iTia.y mean loss than nothing. 

We cannot ta.ke all of Mr, Otto’s argument, as illustrated by his 

reference to the Greeks in his essay, that many heroes have not required 

a theistic beliif in order to do their work. There are many qualities in 

man like Moguohi and Vazzine and others x^-hich incite; our hipest admiratiois, 

China is not, |>oxTever, a fair illustration, Otto quotes an oriental student 

as follows, ’’All the talk about the loss of God leadirg to cynicism and 

despair makes ime indignant. The whole history of Chinese culture is a 

had 

sufficient reply. The cultivated Chinese has^neither God nor immortality 
to support him, yet there never was a people, not even the classic Greeks, 
Y/ho Imew so xTell how to realize the joy of living, with neither cynicism 
or despair” 2. The fallacy of the above is revealed in the classification 

mnde — ’’cultivated Chinese”, Yevy fevr Chinese are. One only has to read. 

Hee Shihs essay in ”l^3.th0r Mankind” 3. to realize Iioyt hopeless has been 
the lot of the masses of China tied doxvn by, amng other things, the 
Confucian tradition of ancestor idolatory. pearl Buck was accused of 
misrepresenting China in her novel ’’The Good Earth”, Her csitio made the 
same distinction,— cultivated or cultured Chinese or equivalent words. 

Her reply %as to the effect that she was x^riting about the masses of 
common people of China, the condition of xTOich her critic probably loiex-ir 
very little. 

1 Sixth cycle op. cit»* 737 

2, Sixth cycle op. cit. p. 738 

3, Whither Mankind — Hoe Shih -p, 25 The Civilization of East & West. 






57 


Hr. Otto speaks of Russia. Just what is happoning in Russia 

is 

cannot be clearly grasped yet> But it/»truc that coinriiunism is the one 
largo factor that we have wherein the gospel of naturalistic humanism 
is getting a cliance. It seems cruel and is based on force but so is our 
civilization in so many ways. The outcome is in the future. Can a 
ruthless materilistic minority shape the whole nation by educati:gg them 
with a closed and coirplete system of propaganda.? The Russian people 
are by nature mystics. 

We do believe with Hr, Otto that we show our faith in God only 
as vre -rationally use the powers of mind and body. It would be silly to 
refuse to do what we can do for ourselves. We do believe, however, that 
God brings a plus element into our experience. For as Mr. Otto declares 
’’Undor the conteirpo,iaiy(tieological mantle beats the le art of eurly man, 
a heart seeking to find a guarantor in some abiding cosiaio reality for 
things that are valued”,!. That is true. And over against it is the heart 
that wants to do as it likes. Is there-ary reason to be ashamed of that 
desire for a guarantor. We do not loiow of any. 

In his last essay in the ocsiversation Mr, Otto -writes beautifully 
as folloT/s; ”Men and women engaged in the work of feeding, housing, clothing 
and transporttog us ma.ke an iirportant contribution to the stock of human 
values. They add not only to the comfort and ease of living but to lif-es 
dignity and beauty. They,too, are in search of happiness and significance, 
and they shouM have a fair chance iOf- realizing their hopes. If they are 
to have this chance, they must be one to participation in the ethical advance 
of mankind. Their act of oo-operation must be enlisted in the attempt to 
visualize the best that can be done v/ith life and to contrive idbc^Wsive steps 
in the direction of that best. We cannot prosper, in the highest sense, if 
millions of people must devote their energy and thought to occupations which. 


1. Seventh cycle Jime 28, 1932, p» 834 





58 


while they are essential to our very existence, are also by common 
consent regarded as utterly devoid of spiritual qualities, utterly 
foreign, indeed antagonistic to any genuine kind of aspiration or 
idealism. We are united in a common enterprize. It is our fate to 

succeed or fail together” 1, Our pro|)>lem then is the same*, Mr* 

/ 

Otto in facing this says God does not exist and therefore does not 
count. We believe that God vrould have us use our minds and bodies, 
the technique and tools of our day to fashion a spiritual civilization* 
Tkattho grace of God will keep us from disallusionment and skepticism 
as we face the high task. 

The raterial and spiritual world are one, suggests Mr. Otto. 

Yfe do believe in that feeling of oneness and we can understand him when 
he speaks of the good earth. But I disagree with Mr* Otto in his con- 
eluding statement. There is some truth in it, ’’Reliance upon God for 
what life does not afford has, in my opinion, harmful consequences. It 
diverts attention from the specific ® ndtions upon which a better or a 
worse life depends* it leads men to regard tlieiTiselves as spectators of a 
course of events which they in reality help to determi ne; it makes the 
highest human excellence consist in acquiesence in the supposed will of a 
being that is defined as non human, a being that is above the driving 
influence of impulse that does not experience the vacillating moods or 
conflicting desires, that is never harrassed by doubts or misled by 
ignoranee”.This statements conclusion reminds one of the scripture, 

”Thou thoughtest I was such a one as thyself”. But theism Mr, Otto 
notvrithstanding, does not necessarily divert attention from specific 
cond it ions. 

’’Humnism, addopted as a way of life, gives substance to idealism.. 
Adds worth to labor, business, and the professions, brings dignity to the 


1. Eighth cycle Aug, 10, 1932. p. 977 




c 



o 


o:' 



'-O 


o , 


; I'Sr'O i 


I 







59. 


public service, and opens for everyone a promising way to sanctity, 
riclmess and joy in living”. 1. It has to be proven that theism does 
not do this as well, probably better. 

Earlier we asked ”‘iVlrio is the sufficient man?” Until we are sure 
what humanists mean by ms.n cannot say that humanism has answered its 
own mamn question. 




1. Eighth cycle op.cit. p. 980. 



60 


C. A Proface to Morals -- '.falter Lippmarm. 

’’Anion^ those who no longer believe in the religion of their fathers, 
some are proudly defiant, and many aro indifferent. But there are also a 
few, perhaps an increasing number, y/ho feel tho ro is a vacancy in their lives” 1. 
ViTith these words fj’alter Lippmarm began his inportant book ”A Preface to Morals”. 
It,is a book in which analyses is keen and thorough but it offers, I think, no 
solution for the problems raised. It deals with, asserts Lippmarm, that 
group who are disturbed ” by oonsequences of their own. irreligion. This is 
another book dealing with what Hayden has called the "Quest of the Ages”. 

It is a sincere effort to find a non-theistic answer for those who recognize 
the need vdthin life, formerly ministered to by religion. Lippmann states 
their problem in these words. "They are likely to point to the world about 
them, and to ask whether the modern ma.n possesses any criterion by yj-Mch he 
can measure the value cf his own desires, f/hether there is any standard 
he really believes in which permits himto put a term on tlmt pursuit of money, 
of power, and of excitement which has created so much of the turmoil and the 
squalor and the explosiveness of modern civilization”. 2» Ho longer,tho author 
adds, speaking about the activities of modern life, is the individual sure that 
they are worth doing”. 

Modern people cannot bo beguiled by false prophecies. The asylums of 
the nineteenth century are not any good for we are a realistic people. We 
cannot, like Wardsyj-orth, take refuge in nature,” ”The theme of this prophecy 
has been that man is a beautiful soul who in the course of history had somehow 
become enslaved by 

"Sceptors, tiaras, swords and chains & tomes 
Of reasoned lyrong, glazed on by ignorance,” 
and they believed vdth Shelley that vj-hen "The loathsome mask had fallen” 
man, exempt from all, worship, degree, the king over himself, would then be 
"free from, guilt or pain”. This vms the othodox liberalism to ?^hioh men turn 

1. Walter Lippmann A Preface to Morals p.l, 

2o ” " op, cit. p. 4 






.0 


<; •• 


C 




{ 

-I 

I- 


. . - - . 


c 



c 


■'J 


O 


O, 


r . 


'.0 


r--- ■ '.';c 




•v^ rrr^:■ j* 


4 . 



.u ‘C , < „ ; •.: . j^n'. 




^'•or£d''te 


:ry ^ 9::# ^n^l; 


0 


■-. . . . 





61 


when they lost the religion of their fathers”, 1 But it has not worked out. 

They rebelled but ©uld not see whore they were when peace was patched up, 
Lippmnn describes the woe of the brilliant athiests, ” Wlio have defied the 
Methodist God and have become very nervous| in the women vt.o have emancipated 
themselves from the tyranny offathors, husbands and homes, and mth the in- 
termittant but expensive help of a psychoanalyst, ajie no# enduring liberty 
as linterior decorators; in the young men and yoimg women world v/eary at 

twenty-two; ...in the millions, at last free to think without fear of 

priest or policeman, who have made moving pictures and the popular newspaper 
what they are” 2, 

In short, Lippmann has ma-de an apt description of a. successful, can 
we say, revolt. Released prisoners ought to be happy. They have thrown off 
the old restraints, ’’There are no conventions, no tabus, no gods, priests, 
princes,fathers or relatims Yfhich they must accept. Yet the result is no^so 
good as they thought it would be. The prison door is Yfide open. They stagger 
out into a trackless space under a blinding sun.”3. Having successfully 
rebelled against discipline and restraint they are, I believe that klr, Lippmann 
is right, lost, utterly without a sense of direction or purpose, ?fe are really 
living in a new world quite different, so far as social controls are concerned, 
from the past. What are we to do about it? 

Our forefathers found direction, purpose and meaning for their lives in 
religion. But for us, this i^i Mr, Lippmann’s thesis, ’’the acids of modernity 
have dissolved that order for many of us, and there "'dr© some in consequence 
who think tha.t the needs which religion fulfilled have been destroyed. But 
horrever self-suffieient the eugenic and perfectly educated man of the future 
ma.y be, our present experience is that the need remains”, 4 Lippmann 
suggests tint ’’trivial illusions” have been substituted for ’’majestic faiths”. 
The modern does not believe the Gospel but he be lieves the best advert, sed 
notion. The older faith may be incredible to-day, but when it was credible 

it bound to-gether the rfhole of experience upon a st8.tely and dignified theme”5. 

Motes on next page. 





f 





i 











62. 


Yet the modem mrji is incredibly credulous in other ways. He is at the 

crossroads and does not Imow whero to go. ’’There is no theory of the 

meaning and value of events whidi he is compelled to accept but he is 
none the loss compelled to accept the events. There is no moral authority 
to which he must turn novr, but there is coersion in opimions, fashions and 

fads.He does not feel himself to be an actor in a great an0^dramatio 

destiny but he is siibject to the massive powers of our civilization, forced 

to accept their pace, bound to their routine, entangled in their conflicts. 

He cannot, however, escape the compulsion of events. They compel his body 
and senses as ruthlessly as ever did king or priest. They do not compel 
his mind”, 1. Again, ’Stfhen he believed the unfolding of events vras a 
manifestation of the will of God he could say ”Thy will be done”.,,....... 

in His will is our peace; b^it when he believes that events are determined by 
the votes of a majority, the orders of his bosses, the opinions of his neigh¬ 
bors, the Imrs of supply and demand and the decision of quite selfish men# 

Ha yields because he has to yield. He is conquered but unconvinced.”, 2. 

This is rather a hopeless pj.cture to face and yet it is essentially true, 
hr. Lippmann is facing the facts of our modern society in a ivay tha.t is, 
it appears, quite different from that of Hayden and Otto, 

’’There is nothing nevf in the fa.ct that men have ceased to believe 
in religion of their fa.thers” 3. That is quite true otherwise we could never 
laove forward. Mr. Lippmann infers that when educated, folk come to religion 
they acce|)t it in what he calls a ’’higher sense” and that^m so doing that vdiich 
was essential to the earlier or m.ore primitive experience or vieYq)oint is lost. 


notes for page 61. 

1. Lippmann op.cit, p. S. 

2. Lippmann op.cit. p. 6. 

3, Lippmann op cit. p. 7 

4, ” op.cit. p. 8 


Page 62 notes 

1. Lippmann op. cit. p. 8 

2. ” op. cit. p. 9 

3. ” op. cit. p, I'li 







O' ■ 






g/ 




1 


I 

! 

i 








f 


'oj 
O:; •' ■ 


(. 


■■ o 



" 0 . 


^Vi. 


I 


^:k:'o. 




c;. 








/ 







63 


Rather than this I would say that it is outgrovm vrhich is a difforont 
thing to saying that it is lost. To-day, rather than the outgroYfing of 
tradition, keeping in mind that the place for tradition is behind or in the 
foimdations of ones life, we have a revolt against both tradiii on and religion. 
Lippmann suggests that after the activity of revolting, usua3.1y a very inter¬ 
esting and strenuous time, there lies come especially ameng the rebels of to¬ 
day an utter ’’disillusionment with the rebellion”® 1 

How shall Vie moderns think about God? He must hold a central place 
in our convictions for if he is only a casual interest on the fringe of exper¬ 
ience he cannot count for much. Lippmann does not-believe in God but he sin¬ 
cerely recognizes the needs in human experience to wliich formerly the belief 
in God ministered. But is® let me state the problem in his words. ”By the 
disillusion of their ancestral ways men have been deprived of their sense of 
certainty as to why they Y/ere born, w'hyvthey m-ust work, Y/hom they must love, 
what they must honor, yrhei'e they may turn in sorrovr and defeat” 2» The charge 
is that once God was very real to all or most men but the intellectuals have 
given Him up by re-definition, Ho longer do vm really believe in God in the 
way we should. Says Lippmann ’’Simply and literally, I mean that they have 
defined and refined their ideas of him until they can no longer honestly say 
that he exists, as they Yrould say that their neighbor exists”, 3 Tlrat is a 
very direct charge. First of all it is a question whether, by faith in God, 
men of earlier times were any surer of his existence than those who among us, 
who by faith that is rational affirmation of mind, heart and will, say to-day 
that God exists. We believe that he doesj vrnen we say we have experience of 

Him our miodem critics make out that we are deceiving ourselves, YWiat Lippmann 
is saying is that in having given up the old pictures, which came from an earlier 


1. Lippmann op. cit. p. 8 

2. ” op.cit. p. 8 

3. ” op. cit. p. 9 






64. 


socioty than that in which wo live, wg have given up God. Ho is mailing the 
same mistake as Otto did in assorting that the categories or pictures we have 
of God vrherein we visualize His spiritual presense is identical in quality, 
is that the right word, with God himself. Already I have contended that a pic¬ 
ture or a symbol of God is something quite different from what God is in him¬ 
self. Geothe somewhere v^rote that ’’the highest cannot be spoken” nor can it 
be written, or drarm or pictured or s^^/mbolized. It is their inherant right, 
without which we should have remained in barbarism, for each genera-cion to 
symbolize as best it can out of the materials of the past and the present the 
insight and experience derived from its response to God. Actually this d d 
happen before ever the modern thought of progress was ever started. How by 
all this wevare not to, think of God as only an idea but as a reality effectively 
at work in this universe. Our ideas about God change but who can say that God 
changes? The traditions of theism reveal progress and regress in that human 
story in which we see slow'Iy coming, ever finer and more worthful conceptions 
of God. If Mr. Lippmann, on the other hand, is right then theism is doomi.ed 
unless it rushes back to the time of perhaps David or Saul in our i thought of God* 
Again it is a question, let anyone read the old testai® nt story carefully, 
or that of the e8.rly centuries of the Christian churches history, whether for 
any great length of time the church has remained for very long under any single, 
unchanged conception or picture of God* The picture of God he.s always changed. 

It mil continue to do so. But to say that on ray part, or to have Mu. Lippmnnn 
say it, proves that the picture changes but this d&es not invalidgte the belief 
as a fact of 9X];)erienoe in the lives of many fine and intelligent people of today, 
in the reality of a creator spirit to whom they can really respond. The fact is 
true if Mr. LippmanJi’s description in the opening oha.pter of his book is correct 
that folks no longer find God,not because he cannot be found, but more probably 
that Inving procured, lately, larger wages and more goods they have mistaken 
comforts for civilization and for the end of life* One does not work in the 
ministry of any church today for very long before the conviction comes on apace 
that men do hot want to find God because to give over to Kim would mean to change 



'"M 











65 


their vmys. This may not be the only reason but it is one of the chief 
ones, 

Let us return to Mr* Lippmann and read farther,’’plainly the Modernist 
churchman does not believe in the God of Genesis who walked in the cool of 

the evening and called to Mam ajid his v;ife.nor even in the God of 

the fifty-third of Isaiah who in his compassion for his sheep who have gone 
astray,having turned everyone to his ovm way, laid on the Mfin of Sorrows the 
iniquity of us all”. Does Mr, Lippmm understand this last passage of 
Scripture? plainly he insists that Tie must return to the old pictures of God 
or lose Sim* This we do not admit* If religion is a response of ones spirit 
to some”RGal Other” then I am compelled to picture that ’’Real Other” in terms 
of my ovm experience or in terms of someones experience whom I trust* An.other 
mans religion cannot take the place of oim. Mr. Lippmann accuses the 
intellectuals of giving up the accepted meaning of the word God, Such a 
statement obviously must be qualified for as we have tires comely insisted above” 
’’the accepted meaning of the word God has in the old testament and in all other 
great literatures of religious aspiration, been progressively enriched or re¬ 
gress ively made poorer. In Christian theism we believe it has been enriched 
and that further enrichment is yet klicad in the vision of God given us in Christ 
Jesus (”God is spirit and those o worship Him must worship Him In spirit 
and in truth”) Also we are not afraid to look at God in modern terms for we 
have to live out our faith in our ovjn day and not in a past generation. It 
is true that ”ln other ages there was no acknowledged distinction betY>reen the 
ultimnte beliefs of the educatid and uneducated’.’ 2 The uneducated beliefs of 
thos@past times are not ImoYm, The distinction is modern and constitutes a. 
problem.. Yet to this it must be said that the educated cannot of ford to give 
over to the uneducated for it is understanding that the world needs nand not 
FiOre i^.orance, presently perhaps the sharp distinction, say in an area like 
Tennessee may be in another generation or two overoom-e. At present, however, 

1. Lippmnnn op, cit. p.27 
2* ” op. cit p. 30 



o 








66 . 


the controversy that Mr. Lippmarm writes of between fundamentalists and 
modernists is real, and it rests not so much on our view of God as it does 
upon how we shall read our Bible. As we read it must we turn altogether away 
I rom the world of our day to a world, in which there is no conception of natural 
law or where most an;^rthing could happen? Do we have to believe in God as 
David believed him to be a God of war? Or are we dishonest in reminding 
ourselves that we are still in the same physical world that David actually 
lived in? Can we turn our backs on the discover^^ cf natural law, unknown in 
the old testam.ent, as law in the modern scientific,sense of the word. We cannot 
and do not. Immediately we face the iir^) lie at ions of Mr, Lippm.ann*s thesis that 
we cannot hope to speak v/ith authority to men of exiDerience of God. We are 
accused of having made Sim. uncertain and. unreal, low if God really exists that 
will be overcome. Surely it is ligitimate for a person who te responds to God 
nowadays to seek to show, vj-hen he wants to share his experience, that not only 
out of the religious experience of Bible characters but in natural laws Y^e see 
something of his activities. We might remind ourselves at this point that super¬ 
natural laws may turn out to be very natural laws. We go to our greatest book 
of experience, the Bible, and Y/e go beyond or rather to other places too, that 
”we may see Gods footprints in the saMs of time", 

Mr. Lippmann raises the question of Bible reading. Modern people can 
no longer use allegory as a m.ethod of interpreting scripture. "To men who ha.d 
the unconscious certaintgsabout God and his universe allegory was a perfectly 
safe method of interpreting the Bible, because all interpretations, however 
fantastic, were inspired by the same prejudgments and tended therefore to confirm, 
the same convictions”, 1 Again v/ith insight, Lippmann*s analyses reveals the 
point of difference. It is our prejudgments Ydiich have changed, that is, -we have 
been compelled to place that literature of religious experience which Tie call our 


1. Lippmann op. cit, p. 39 




:: y: 

‘..0 r;r^c 

c - rzlr^vo :-'. 


':l . .a 


:. O 


c :i:oo::;' odv 

. D.'.-d'B/’frrjsIt 
..r .arc.iB jdj' 

|fq-.{Oc> jXi3Q(l 






67 . 


Bible into a v/orld situation different from that recognized under the 
theory, 

literal inspiration, a We cannot read the Bible to find rfhat our pre¬ 
conceptions may v/ant for varifications but vre read it to understand r/hat 
it says. To understand it we must study it critically a rst of all as a 
literature which developed over a long period of time and in var^ririg situations. 
Mr. Lippmann quotes from Dr. Fosdick^s book, ”A Modern Interpretation of the 
Bible" to the effect that the modernists now theory is that there are to be 
ib und within the Bible "abiding messages" placed in a ’transient setting’. 

This theory as I understand it really means that in the Bible Yfe find accounts 
of men responding to the living God. That response and the satisfaction and 
strength constitute wha.t we would call a religious experience, Isaiah had often 
been in the temple but suddenly, this time, he was in a different situation for 
he was net alone" I, The record tells of the difference that experience, and 
the ensuing response made to Isaiah the patriotic preen her-statesman, liow 

Isaiah pictures God in language that some at least of his hearers could under¬ 
stand. And so we too must in our day do the same thing. The Bible is. from 
beginning to end, in different generations and in different places and circum¬ 
stances, the story of the response first of all of the tribe or nation of Israel, 
and latterly of individuals to God. Even for Jesus religion, day by day, was a 
response"that Thy will be done on earth as it is in Hea.ven". 2, Of course the 
point that Mr,Lippmann is Isboring to prove is that denials of men like Dr, 
Fosdick destroys God for the average man, practically that seems to happen but 
it is an open question who is right. We cannot prosper on. an untruth. Both 
are responding ta something which has entered their experience. But let Mr, 
Lippmann speak again of modem/men. "They reject revelation. They reject the 
authority of any church to speak directly for God. They reject the literal 
inspiration of the Bible,.They do not believe in God as a law giver, 
judge, father and spectator of human life" 3 The last sentense of the abc»‘e 

1..Isaiah Chap, 6 

2. St, Lukes Gospel Chap, 11, 4 

3, Lippmann op, cit. p, 46 




S8. 


quotation is not exactly fair. Modernists do believe in God as the 
source of moral and physical lawj of the heart M lives of men ' 

but the picture is different; as our Father and as our Friend who 
challenges and shames us and who restores our souls day by day; as ’’One" 
who is vitally interested in our lives. The rest of the accusation is 
largely true. In a later paragraph we are charged with overthrowing the 
conviction that religion comes from God. Is Mr. Lippmann meaning to say 
that it has come from institutions? If not then I do not accept the charge 
as all through this essay I have spoken of religion as ”a response to God”. 
Religion begins when a man is at prayer and is talking to "Something” that is 
real and other than himself. It is perhaps true that we read the scriptures 
in our modern way and to use our minds and understanding in selecting passages 
for guidance it is to "have stripped the scriptures of their authority to 
command mens confidence and to compel their obedience", 1 But what other 
treatment is fair and honest to our scriptures as we come to know their original 
setting. Onl^ iBr the naive and wilfully ignorant does this constitute a 
closed door to this great Book. Lipumann is certain that if people were certain 
of meeting God they would go to church. He is raising the question of what 
modernism leaves out and goes on to say that "A man cannot cheat about faith”. 
That is true and faith is not som-ething we put on for church but it is the m.ost 
central thing in life, "Without complete certainty religion does not offer 
genuine consolation. It is without strength to compensate our weaknesses”, 2 
My ansvj-er to Mr. Lippmann’s ass;ertion at this point is that a person ]®.y have 
certainty now as well as at any other time. The real difficulty an.d the human¬ 
ist must face it^ is that we are a people who have come to trust their fortunate 
circumstances,—which is a different m-atter from trusting ourselves or God, 

A sense of partnership with God is fundamental to all religion. It was this 
sense of fellowship, indeed it was a vision of God^ that Jesus Christ revealed. 
That is what the gospel is. It was this that brought about the church. 

Actually we live in the same world that the early Christians or any other 


1. Lippmann op, cit. p. 46 

2, " op, cit, p, 49 


1 


... * (• 




u 


■ 0 


■'a' i'i 


. o 




i 


r 





. ' .r.r ^ ;;r... * ' ..• ..., ^ r r r(ji: J'rn. ^ ^ 0’’i. i'I 

' ■' .■'■Of:■■■ • ■ ‘O' '-■^o■ro■: A 

■ ■ ■' ' .’o-'o : .'■ ' .: . 'j.') ‘>0000 

^ 00 ■■::■■ ..! i , I '('“'I i;)* 'ji.if.ff' 

'■■ ■ V' '.' ' 0’■••■.o.j:. ■'J/iicoo f).! '' ■ =■■'/’I' ow 

■'-'Vo , , -T , < Q'; "fto.i'.ovr :• , 

■ ■ V:..-I'" ’ . .• ; r<\ .1* 




60 . 


Christirais, lived in. 

”ln truly religious men the experience of God is much more 
intensely convincing thansurr'^ definition of his nature ivhich they cam 
put into words,’*! flat is true and yet there is a difficulty, real enough 
for many fine and promising lives, in visualizing God as an aid to livirg and 
to worship. It does not help very much to knoviT as Lippmann points out that 
Chrysostom conceives ”of God as the Creator, the ruler and the judge of the 
universe. Wuen he says that God is incomprehensible he m.eans that it is im¬ 
possible for a human being to imagine Tfhat it would be like to be God*....,. 

He is very definitely on his Imees before the throne of a divine king vj-hose 
radiance is so dazzling that he cmmot look his Lord in the face”,2. In 
other words Chrysostom lived in his omi day in which, for us, difficulties of 
the faith seem conparatively easier, ’’low if we examine the religious difficulty 
of modern men, we find, I think, that they do not lack the sense of iiystery, of 
majesty, of terror, and of wonder which overY\rhelra Chrysotom and Luther, The 
emotional disposition is there. But it is somehow inhibited from possessing 
them utterly. The mil to believe is checked by something in their experience 
that Chrysostom did not have”. Part of the difficulty lies in moral covrardice 
that is, we do not want to change our ways, lew adjustments are painful. Many 
modern believers in God express their belief in ethical terms which are deep- 
rooted in the reality of Gdid- as a presnese in one^s life. ”The modern man is not 
incapable of faith, but has within him a contrary passion, as instinctive and 
often as intense as faith, which makes incredible the testimony of his faith”3, 
May we say at once of our conception of God, if rrords will suffice, that God 
might be more truly called a Creator Spirit than anything else, lo one re- 

^ I. 

spends to or worships an ^lan vital or the sum total of laYJS. God is both 
transendent and immanent as I, myself, conceive of him. To borrow a famous 
phrase of principal Caird’s, we have in religious experience and in the laws 

1, Lippmann op. cit p. 51 

2, ” op, cit, p. 52 

3, ” op. cit, pa 53 














70 


of nature the activity of ”God going beyond Himself” into the several 
levels of creative activity. Only as we come to be persons can we establish 
fellowship contacts v/ith Him, For as Lippmann truly writes ”lf faith is to 
flourish, there must be a conception of how the universe is goveimed to 
support it”. 1. Truly one cannot draw a diagram of God. Heither cai 
love, faith, hope andfriondship, the things we really live by, be illustrated 
by a diagram or a syiT±>ol. They can only be expressed in first-handed lived 
experience, '*Vhen faith has to be proved by arginnent it is not faith. 

Argument only proves that I am right and that my opponent is wrong. 

Lippmann raises the question as to whether the departure of large num¬ 
bers of people in America from ruraj. to urbaii centres has not had something 
to do v;ith the loss of fxith. For he vj-rites, ”The deep and abid.ing traditions 
of religion belong to the countryside”2, Most of American society is adrift 
and has lost its moorings. It is in an environment in which novelties and 
form^ of exciteiiBnt act as substitutes for faith. It is a society which 
"provides no leaders and no clear standards of conduct®..,.. .IJo one is re¬ 
cognized as the interpreter of mora.ls and the arbiter of tast 0 ”o. MoSt 
standards, Lippm-ann adds are "fashions of a season” and the rule-makers in 
the game are the successful money kings. 

The dissolution of the ancestoral order is still under way,.,,...The 
prime fact about modernity,' as it presents itself to us, is that it not merely 
denies the central id.eas of our forefathers but dissolves the disposition to 
believe in them”, § Were these central ideas of our forefathers actually 
true? Mr. Lippmann never asks that. We must be efficient in all callings 
but in religious education must we refuse to fs-ce our new day in order not 
to deny God since we do not pitture Him as it was formerly done? Modem 
men who are religious do believe that their religion is the clue to an mder- 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 


Lippmann op. 




op, 

op. 


op. 


cit, p. 5S 
cit. p, 57 
cit. p. 68 
cit, p. 65 


11 




{■ 


f. 


' o 


o . 


o 











71 


standing of th« world, its government, its history and the destiny of life. 

Only for the humanists and the irreligious has “the sense of actuality 
gone out of this tremendous conception of life”,!. The root of irreligion 
is to the desire to be left alone. If religion gave unregenerate men 
everything that they asked for we should have something quite different from 
what religion is — the promise of loaves instead of inward truths and the 
grace and strength to perform them. 

For the average man, whom Mppmann says is the ’’literal man” it 
follows that ”the disposition to believe in the rule of God depended, 
therefore upon the capacity to believe in a visible church upon earth which 
holds its commission from God”. 2 Again ”it is this concrete sense of divine 
government which modem men have lost,,,,,, .what Luther (£. d v/as to destroy 
the pretensions not dinly of the Roman Catholic church, but of any church and 
of any priestly class^o administer Gods government on earth” 3. 

The churches have weakened themselves by toleration which was forced 
on them from without asserts Lippmann. Even though ’’Inwardly to their comm'uni- 
cants they continue to assert th8.t they possess the only complete version oi* 
the truth. But ou twardly, 4* The inability to co-operate among 

the sects and churches has resulted in the secularization of education and yet 
’’They always agree that the present godless system of education diminishes the 
sanctions of morality and the attendance at their respective churches” 5, 

Much of the churches former loyality has been lost to the modem state. The 
fact has been becoming more and more true since the signing of the Augsberg 
religious peace treaty. Lippmann speaks of the modem state as absolute for 
”lt claims the right to make war, to make peace, to conscript life..,,.. .to 
regulate personal habits, and to censor opinions. The modern state claims 
all these powers ...,,..”6 Taking all this into account it is true that over 

!• Lippmann op. cit. p. 69 

2. ” op.cit. p. 72 

3. ” op.cit. p. 73 

4. ” op. cit. p,75. 


5. Lippmann op. cit. p, 78 

6. ” op. cit. p. 80 












72 


wide eareas of society, "Religion has become for jjiost modem men one phase 
in a varied experience;" 1* 

After reviewing provinces lost to religion, such as business, the 
family which is the inner citadel and art Lipp^iann writes of the effort of 
Modernity as follows: "The effect of modernity, then, is, to specialize, and 
thus to intensify our separated activities* Once all things were phases of 
a single destinyi the church, the state, the family, the schools were means 
to the same end; the rights and duties of the individual in society, the 
rules of morality, the themes of art, and the teachings of science were all of 
them ways of revealing, of celebrating, of applying the laws laid down in the 
divine constitution of the imiverse..,, • •This separation of activities has its 
counterpart in a separation of selves; the life of a modem man is not so much 
the history of a single soulj it is rather a play of many characters within a 
single body". 2. 

"The thoroughly modem men has really ceased to believe that there is 
an immortal essense presiding like a king over his appetites". In other 
words man is but a bundle of desires in which case "Morality becomes a traffic 
code designed to keep as many desires as possible moving together without too 
many violent collisions", 3 Hense for Lippmann morality is purely relative 
and accidental for morality conceived as a disip line to fit men for heaven 
is resented, morality conceived as a disipline for happiness, is understood by 
very few. The objective moral certitudes have been dissolved and in the 
liberal philosophy there is very little to take their place." 4. 

The masses want the miracles. Buf they, especially the old type, 
are out of the question in our modem world. Lippmann believes that few 
people understand the difference between the scientific method and revelation. 
"There is at least as much mystery ft) r the common man as there ever was in 
religion; in a sense there is more irystery, for the logic of sciente is alto¬ 
gether beyond his understand ng, whereas the logic of revelati on is the logic 
of his own feelings." 5, Actually between the two there can be no truce nor 
Footnotes on following page. 





---.I 

■ --0' 




e:: 0-: co'': 




'j‘t. ;::9-: 




■' " ■ ’■,: ; ■ %ix ^ 

:3. W -G'-Goaol;' . " 


■v-■--■'^ o ^gg ;- -G'i * G.G;0/-G.'.; I odr d / 3 ^^: q.:? 


.-. ; > . g: .'■"'gg: GCVGi g.go rr.; 

.C'.';.:G ^'idC .GC GG,-;;-.G:'- G: G^G-G 

nd.w *’; cj-i ■/gg:' :: ' ..it 


od:^ lo d'G 


0:;G 


-O 


•; 'GO,.- ■. GiGOG 

: 3 " ■ G ...g: G ■■ ■ 'G'. 




'Cj 


GGO 


■G -HOdW^OO 




73 


need there be. Science in its own logic cannot admit that it cannot 
explore all fields and answer tentatively at least most questions. The 
question arrives whether the religionist or the scientist is to establish 
the limits of ligitimate enquiry for the scientific method. "To Mr. '//hite- 
head, therefore, the ultimate arbiter is science, and what he means by re- 
concilliation is a scientific view of the universe sufficiently wide and 
sufficiently subtle to justify many of the in^ortant, but hi^erto unverified, 
claims of traditional religion. " 1. It follows that, "If the method of 
science has the last v/ord, then revelation is reduced from a means of arriving 
at absolute certainty. To a flash of insist which can be trusted if and 
when it is verified by science." 2. The real problem of course is whether 
science is the ultimate arbiter. Science has a limitation which we have 
already mentioned. It has great descriptive value but it cannot deal with 
ultimates in a scientific way. Even its conclusions in the field of physical 
investigation are open to suspicion and therefore are being constantly revised. 
Friendship, that is the quality if it, or love or beauty cannot be contained or 
expressed in either a photograph or a diagram or in a scientific analyses. It 
appears to me that science cannot deal with the spirit of a man or of God, 

Yet ViTho of us who lives will say dogmatically that the spirit of man is non” 
existent (what else have the humanists to appeal to?) or the question is real 
in the universe? 

The gospel of science does not lead up to a climax because the scientist 
cannot affirm truth for he finds that it may change tomorrow. Sometimes our 
conception of God is revised in a simihr way. Religion, however, is the 
affirmation of the inward spirit of a mans life. It is in one form or another 


ITotes for page 72 Notes for page 73 


1. Lippmann op.cit. p. 68 

2. ” op.cit. p. 69 

3. " op.cit.p. 72 

4. " op.cit.p. 73 

6. " op.cit. p. 75 


1. Lippmann op.cit. p. 78 

2. " op.cit. p. 80 


;ov ■/ 





L 







74 


the”everlasting yea” whilst science is the everlasting ”we do not know 
and we cannot say” • Actually it is true that religion and science use 
different data, valuations, ani evidence to prove their cases. Religion 
is a form of affirmation about the meaning oflife and of the universe. 

But science is not science when it affirms too much, ”lt becomes plain, 
therefore, that scientific explanation is altogether unlike the explanation 
to v/hich the common man is accustomed” 1, To admis+this is not to invalidate 
the religious interpretation of life. Mr, Lippmann is surely mistaken about 
the desire existing, very generally, to reconcile the !(^nesis account with 
that of Darwin, Our contention is that no reconcilliation is possible or 
even necessary and this is becoming increasingly true for the common man, 

”P” 2 wrote with the materials of his day of his religious experience, God 
was real to the writer otherwise the first chapter of Genesis has no meaning. 
We live in the same world and the same conviction about the creative activity 
of God is valid today. 

Science today is a descriptive and analytical effort to uderstand the 
world. It is neutral or even negative in its results so far as affirming 
theism is concerned. Nevertheless in times past, ”they never doubted that 
the chief duty of man and his ultimate chance of happiness was to discover 
and then to cultivate a riglib relationship to a sv^reme being, ”lf Mr, 
Lippmann*s description of a chaotic society is, in the main, correct then 
it v/ould not be utterly foolish to say that is yet, science notivithstanding, 
”the chief duty of man”. 


1, Lippmann op, cit* p, ISO 

2, P — The symbol used by old Testament scholars to signify the priestly 
writer of the fifth century before Christ, His work provides the framework 
of the pentatuch. 








,1 

i 




1 


I 



i 









75 


Lippmann asserts that men formerly thought that only through obedience 
to the commandmenbs, thought to have come from God and therefore unquestioned, 
man could obtain happiness. The la^^ so revered were typical solutions which 
were in course of time codified for exarrple by Moses and Hamurabi. But later, 
dissolution came on apace for "Kant argued in his Critique,of.Pure Reason" that 

the existence of God cannot be demonstrated.,.So he insisted God must exist 

to justify morality", 1. 

"It follows necessarily" continues Mr, Lippmann "that they must find the 
tests of righteousness wholly within human experience,,, ..Happiness cannot be 

the rexyard of virtue; it must be the intelligable consequence of it,,.. 

such a morality may properly be called humanism, for it is centered not in 
superhuman but in human nature. When men can no longer be theists, they must, 
if they be civilized, become human!its. They must live by the premise that 
whatever is righteous is inherently desirable because experience will demon¬ 
strate its desirability" 2, Possibly Mr, Lippmann has never realized that 
doing the will of God means to those who seek to do it just what, if not more, 
he has written and which he defines as humanist practice and experience. 
Certainly doing the will of God does not mean less than being truly natural. 

The question comes unbidden as to how many folk will,so test "the fruits of 
righteousness" for it certainly fjpears true that "the teachers of humanism 
have no credentials",Swhere- they would do much good, 

"The h\Bna-^istic view is that the popular faith does not prove the 
existence of its objects, but only the presence of a desire that such objects 
should exist", 4 Is humanism in its turn a perverse desire that they should 
nob ? Who is to prove that the desire is not flbunded, in the case of theism, 
on something that is objective. The popular religion, in short, rests on a 
theory which, if true, is an examination of physics and of history; the 

1. Lippmann op, cit, p. 134, 

2, " op, cit, 136. 

3, " op, cit, 137 

4. " op, cit, 138 








c. 



f'- 





■i 

■ji 


"-A 





76 


humanistic view rests on human psychology and an interpretation of human 
experience" !• 

It would be Hell and not Heaven if a 11 lour desires were fulfilled 
on this earth. "The attempt to imagine a heaven is an attempt to conceive 
a world in -which the disorders of human desire no longer exist". 2. Mr. 

Lippmann continues further in suggesting that "Somehow we are so constituted 
that we demand the impossible. There is in us somewhere an intimaton that 
we ought not be defeated". 3 To make it vivid this picture was visualized 
in a previous Golden Age. Really "It is a deep conviction that happiness 
is possible, and all enquiry into the foundations of morals turns untimately 
upon whether man can achieve this happiness by pursuing his desires or whether 
he must first learn to desire the kind of happiness that is possible". 4. 

This staiaement of Mr. Lippmann’s uncovers the central problem with which this 
book deals, previously we have suggested that soir©"desires" might ccane from 
something deep in the actual nature of things, "Byt^eir fruits shall ye know 
them" that is to day that desire must be tested and it is a central fact in 
the teaching of both the Old and Testaments that desire must be corrected 
by the "Will of God" . Men had to learn TJ-hat they ought to desire. Histori¬ 
cally speaking, doing the will of God has many times contradicted the desires 
of the unregenerate populace. The prophets were unpopular because they be¬ 
lieved God -would have the poeple do other than as they desired. Man must, as 
Lippmann suggests, reconstruct himself before he can do the "Will", The Hew 
Testament calls this remaking a rebirth. It is a surrender to that which 
contradicts sensual and self-centred desire. What effective contradiction 
has humanism to offer? 

There are two views of human nature that prevail. The first is based 
on dstrust,that is, that the naive passions are evil and the second view is 
that they are essentially good. "When human nature is wholly distrusted and 
severely repressed, sooner or later it asserts itself and bursts its bonds; 
and wlien it is naively trusted, it produces so much di sorder and corruption that 
men once again idealize order and restraint". 5 


II 












77 


We are in an era which has naively trusted its passions and disillusionment 
and "world weariness at twenty-two" has come* Both hxnnanism and theism 
have to face the common problem of overcoming this cynicism v/hich is deep- 
rooted in this generation, "There is no cb ubt that in one form or another, 
Socrates and Btiddha, Jesus and St. Paul, plotines & Spinoza tau^t that the 
good life is in^ossible without asceticism, that without renundation of n^y 
of the ordinary appetites, no man can really live well" 1 The tradition of 
discipline as a first means to happiness is too well authenticated to dismiss 
lightly, ■ "If asceticism in all its forms were as stupid and as cruel as it is 
now the fashion to think it is, then the traditions of saintliness and of 
heroism are monstrously misleading. For in the legends of heroes, of sages, 
of explorers, inventors and discoverers, of pioneers andpatriots, there is 
almost invariably this same underlying of sacrifice and unworldliness,,,.,,,. 

By ordinary standards they are extremely uncomfortable". S In all such lives 
there is discipline conscientously and rationally carried out for some high end. 
Some of their teaching concerns in some details a world that is gone, "But 
for an understanding of himoan nature we are still very largely dependent, as 
they were, on introspection, general observation and intuition," 3 The modem 
world, suggests Lippmann, does not really believe in asceticism and the result 
is a contradiction between present practice aid. the issues of the wisdom of the 
past. 

But humanism arises in oDiplex and changing societies, and if it is to 
have any power to make life coherant and orderlyi it must hold an assured view 
of how man can govern himself”, 4. Man cannot govern himself vd.thout discipline 
and both humanism and theism agree about this point. But as Lippmann points 
out "Morality if it is not fixed by custom and authority, becomes a mere matter 
of taste determined by the idiosyncrasies of the moralist." 5 Aristotlefe doc- 
Motes for page 76. Motes for Page 77 


1* Lippmann p, 143, op, cit* 

2, ” p, 143, op. cit. 

3, " p, 146. op.cit, 

4, ” p. 150 op. dt. 

5, " p. 151 op, cit 










78. 


trine of the mean was an effort to face andovercome this dilemma. 

’’He had expounded the theory that virtue is a mean betv/een two extremes.♦ 

Thus between rashness and cowardice the mean is courage; between prodigality 

and niggardliness it is liberality,..”1 Such a: code as this is an 

inventory of good and bad satisfactions and appetites. That is to say that 
some desires are inherently bad and others inherently good and that there is 
something akin to absolute bad or absolute evil. But Mr. Lippmann does not believe 
such a distinction makes good sense, '’Therefore**, he explains, ’’the quality 
of good and evil lies not in impulse as such, nor in objects as such, but in 
the relationship between iirpulse and object. Therefore the making of inven¬ 
tories is fundamentally misleading.” 2. Of ® urse all moral codes are there¬ 
fore, it is inplied, fundamentally misleading, especially the historic ones, 
Inpulses do not move all people in the same v/ay and desires are not only 
coup lex but are continually changing. What he means is that we must shift to 
the study of impulse and desire if we are to understand human nature. We 
must do this in order to get ”an assured view of how man can govern himself”. 

’’The attempt to construct moral codes on the basis of an inventory is 
an attempt to understand soriiething which is always in process of change by 
treating it as a still life and taking snapshots of it,”3. That is to aay 

that Mr. Lippmann proposed, ”to look upon each moment of behaviour not as 
the manifestation of certain fixed elements in human nature but as a stage 
in the evolution of human nature. We grow up, mature, decline; being 
endowed vfith memory and the capacity to form habits, our conduct is cumulative. 

We drag our past along with us and it pushes us on.” 4 It is this theory 
of development used as a means to gain a wise understanding of human nature 
which Lippmann calls the matrix of hujmnism. 

’’But to the moralist the study of development is focussed on the 

1, Lippmann, op. cit. p. 166 

2. ” op, cit, p.l68 

3. ” op.cito p. 170 

4, ” op, cit, p,171 






0 



I 





79 


effort to discover those processes of develofiinent v/hich can be moe to 
produce right relationships between the individual and his environment, 
and by a right re laid onship he is bound to mean one in which there is a 
harmonious adjustment between desires and objects of desire" 1, Mr. Lippmann 
allows for an intuitive gift of insight on the part of a good psychologist. 

That is to say that some psychologists have better evaluating minds than 
have others. There are tvro poles from which and to which development 
takes place, which he calls infantilism and maturity. The aim of• humanism 
and of education is to lead the soul or child through successive stages of 
development until at last we may have a "harmonious and autonomous personality,. 

..To replace the conception of man as the subject of a heavenly king which 

dominates the whole ancestoral order of life, himianism takes as its dominant 
pattern the progress of the individual from helpless infancy to self-governing 
maturity." 2, Lippmann calls it the career of a soul. Of course for him 
all the old viewpoint is based only on a desire for wish-fulfillment. At this 
point we may state our growing convicii on that he avoids the appearance of 
pessimism by limiting the wants of the mature person. It really is an arbi¬ 
trary ruling that God does not exist, that men Virho believe are mistaken, that 
maturity is the end of life and must be self-attained. To be mature means 
among other things to desire only what one can be fairly sure of attaining. 

At first sight it would appear as if zest and adventure ing the in^ossible" 
would disappear. It would be childish and immature to desire to do it. 

What Mr, Lippmann appears to be doing at this point in his argument 
is this, commenced with naturalistic psychology which explains life in 

terms of the data of biological ir^ulses and urges. This psychology, note 
the behaviourists, looks upon the mind as the instrument for the satisfac¬ 
tion of bodily desires. But Mr, Lippmann is a humanist. So to get rid of 

1, Lippmann op.cit, p, 172 

2, " op.cit, p, 175 




('■ 


c 


T: 


1 '-' '■ 





.0 



I 

i 


80 


behaviousism he uses a psychological theory of development which leads 

readily to a "mature mind". The mature mind is in contrast to the 

naturalistic mind. Maturity involves discipline. The natural mind is 

the bond servant of the desires of the body while the mature mind is lord 

and master of all it surveys for it seeks a truth which is the judge and. 

not the slave of bodily interest. The natural mind wants to express instincts 

and impulses whether they are disciplined or not. The mature raind craves a 

disinterested virtue and believes that virtue is the only rei^ard. "For when 

our desires come into contact with the world created by understand.ing, their 

character is altered." 1 That is .more true of the theist than of the humanist 

if I may suggest it. Let us listen to Mr. T. S. Eliot another humanist,- 
’• at 

"I believe that^the present time the problem of unification of the world and 
the problem of the unification of the individual, are in the end one ard the 
same problem; and that the solution of the one is the solution of the other".2 
Earlier in his essay Eliot asserted that humanism, religion and science cannot 
become full-grown without dependence upon each other. To rny mind Mr. Lippmann 
does not face the irplication of the statement of Mr. ^liot for that v/hick 
constitutes the mature mind can never be generally established and it will 
depend on the taste and the desire of the individual just as truly so, as the 
theists belief in a "creative power" in the heart of the world depends upon 
his experience. Later I hope to show that the unification of the life of the 
individual and the world*s society seems to be more clearly established, if 
it is ever to be, on the basis of theism. 

Let us pursue li/ir. Lippmann*s interesting argument further. The "passage 
into maturity" section of the book is the description of the gradual growth 
of a boy into the powers of manhood. Of another boy it was said long ago that 
he "increased in wisdom, and in statue and in favor with God and man" 3, All 
youn^ people come up from babyhood and gradually the kingdom, so to speak, in 
which their desires are regnant is limited. The world is a growirg world in 

1. Lippmann op.cit. p. 18Z. 2. Humanism & America op.oit I.S.Eliot Humanism 

^ 3 ;:3t, Luke 2, 62 vvitnout Religion p, 112. 




y 






0 






c" . ,.^0 




I 


' o ■ / ■ .i! :;■ : -o 


o 


o \J c 


O' 


0 


■0 : :■'■■ ■ '. / ^ ■ . 0 


0 


.i^:" '-';.o,' 


.oivv 




81, 


spite of this loss of authority. New insights and new horizons are constant¬ 
ly appearing# New interests attract the attention* Let a boy take you and 
show you the stars for exanple* But let Mr* Lippmann say it rather dogmati¬ 
cally, I think . "But until and unless he feels the vast indifference of the 
universe to his own fate and has placed himself in the perspective of cold 
and illimitable space, he has not looked maturely at the heavens**’ 1. One 
might reply that one could give a scientific analytical explanation of the 
stars but yet be in syn^athetic identification with the felt grandeur Y/hich 
led to the psalmists beautiful response to it, *’i/Vhat is man that fhou are 
mindful of him?"* The {ffifferenoe in viewpoint is a matter of interpretation* 
Interpretation whether religious or acientific or something else depends upon 
a valuing mind* Why a theistic interpretation is not as valid as another remains 
to be proven* How can science picture a creative spirit whether we see it in 
human genius or in the activity of God* 

’’The sense of evil”, Lippmann adds later ”is acquired late; by many 
persons it is never acquired at all”* 1 Evil is real and genuine* This is 
a dark problem for tneism and possibly a darker one for humanisio* Christisoi 
theism faces the fact of evil as bravely, generally far more bravely and 
persistently, than any other philosophy* Throughout the v/orld the leper 
colonies, the hospitals in theigungles, and in the filthy comers of the 
world (made so, as a rule, by man’s insatiable greed), are manned by the 
heroes of immaturity yWio ’’wash the Yrounds trusting that God YYill heal theiii’* ” 
Just what humanism is doing more than theism about evil, beyond using it as 
an argument against theism, is a question* Usually I suspect it retires to 
an armchair. Yfhy the difference in practical expression if I am not unjust 
in suggesting it. Surely Mr. LippEiann is expecting a very great deal of benefit 
from psycho-analyses as a technique for re—educating desire and for ohangiig: 
the heart of man? 


1* Lippmann op* cit* p* 188 









X-.V/^-il^-*-'; 'I l;0'i 






iu-i.ijj-n '.-r[■■ 


>^:').' :) -7 ..■.^':C'‘ 


«.• 


9;'.w 1,0 u'-'it ^r.i ; ^ . 


■ 'T "'Or i .;.: i.([v 


:;00';XO ; ; ' 

’■ ■ 0 ;<■: 01- -, o;;-' 

' f'■ ' .’■'. O,O.0v:--* 


V 



82 


’’The childish belief that each of us is the centre of an adoring 
and solicitous universe becomes the source of endless disappointments because 
we cannot reconcile what we feel is due us with what we must resign ourselves 
to.” 1. This is an overetatement of theism* We do not pray for easier tasks 
when we are theists but for strength to acconplish our duty. Then there are 
two to face it so to speak. As defined above theism has a large element of 
childishness in it but the definition is wrong. Theism is an essential and 
difficult challenge to high ways of living. Inherent in it is a protest 
against the dispoilmenb of life. This sense of wronged lives is the source 
of social preaching which is not liked by many in places of business. It 
is a challenge in greed and selfishness and it is against the dlspoilment of 
life. Grant even that Mr. Lippmann’s analyses is largely true of many childish 
minds it is yet in accord with ny thesis to say that theism must be challenged 
where it is receiving its finest exposition as well as where it is mob-minded. 
We must test it by its incarnations in our finest exaii^j-les in human experience. 
Does Mr. Lippmsum ilphold hinmanism at its worst? We do not think of ourselves 
as the centre but rather of God as the centre to whose will we can respond. 

We test God’s existence by experience in living situations as much as by any 
other way. Like the humanist, mature or otherwise, we use our valuing minds. 

To be mature then is to learn ”to hold on to things which do not slip away 
and change, to hold on to things not by grasping them, but by understanding 
them and by remembering them.” 2. The above would serve as well for the theist 
as it does for the humanist, 

”l have asked what significance there was for us in the fact that men 

,.« .,, form of j . ,. . ^. 

have so persistently associated the good life with somej^ascetic discipline 
and renunciation. The answer is that asceticism is an effort to overcome 
immaturity.” 3. Sometimes, one must add, it has be en a purely selfish thing 
and fostered immaturity rather than maturity. The root of all immaturity is 


1. Lippmann op.citu p. 189 

2. ” op cit. p. 191 

3. ” op. cit. p. 191 




u 






bat' 


i, 

'1 






83 


selfislrjaess# The fact is that all the difference is made by the end or 
value which is held in view* xt follows that asceticisiTis end moralities 
are at best means to an end; they are more or less substitutes &> r the edu¬ 
cational process and natural growth of wisdom*’’! They are moral short cubs 
that are derived from past experience, "The mature character may be attained 
by growth and experience and insight, or by ascetic discipline, or by that 
process of being reborn lArhich is called conversion; vhen it is attained, the 
moral problem of v«rhether to yield to impulse or chedc it, and how much to 
check it and how* much to yield, has disappeared, A mature desire is innocent*.’ 2, 
The secret of the sage was that he learned what to desire* "I veiture, at least, 
to suggest that the function of high religion is to reveal to men the qualiiy 
of mature experience, that high religion is a prophecy and an anticipation of 
what life is like when desire is in perfect harmony with reality* It announces 
the discovery that men can enter in to the realm;of the spirit when they have 
outgrown all childishness", 3, That is to say it hides its pessimism or dis¬ 
appointment by saying we only want what we are sure we can get* To desire 
what a man can search out in his o'm strength is childishness. It is not 
unfair to suggest that the theist can come up to all the abcve when he desires 
to do the ¥ 7 ill of God for the wil^ of God is a discipline against selfishness, 
sngry-heartedness and self-centred living. The emphasis is on a healthy in¬ 

terest in others. It believes, for example, that those vfho bring gladness in 
to the lives of others cannot keep it from themselves. 

For the first time in the book, that is in the ciiapter on High Religion 
and the Modem World, Lippmann admits that religion may not be identical vL th 
past views if how God enters or governs the world. That is true. We must 
stand upon our own feet, I do not mean to disrespect the past, asid;-interpret 
God in our own day and in our own tongue as best we can* Another generation’s 


1, Lippmann Op# cit, p, 192 

2, " op. cit, p.l92 

3* " op,xdit, p*193 




C ' 


0 







84 


view and experience of God cannot take the place of having a view and 
experience f6r ourselves. The concern of great teachers has been to "alter 
the will of man"* That is true* But their message was that man must alter 
his life if he was to see God* That is still our problem* "This alteration 
of the human will they conceived as good not because God demands it, but be¬ 
cause it is intrinsically good for man, becuase by the test of experience it 
yields happiness, serenity, wholeheartedness." 1. Again, "The difference 
between religion conceived as the art and theory of the internal life of man 
and religion conceived as cosmic government is the great difference between 
the religion of these great sages and the religion of the multitude’*’ 2* 

The distinction is valid but it seems tome that the art and theory of the 
internal life of man cannot mean very much until it is related to "Something" 
which can be set over against the idiosyncracies of the mature individual* 

To agree with Mr* Lippmann and to suggest that God is only an ideal does 
not resolve the problem of just what in actual ethical qualities the internal 
life is to be built up on. And even among the "minority to whom religion is 
primarily a reconditioning of their o^vn souls* " 3. The problem remains as 
to what real or tangible end the reconditioning is made. I agree, keeping 
this problem in mind, tith Mr* Lippmann when he says that "The real effect 
of modernity upon religion, therefore, is to mdc e religion which vsras once the 
possession of an aristocracy of the spirit the only possible kind of religion 
for all men." 4* Many of the aristocrats of the spirit v/ere theists. The 
difficulty that Mr. Lippmann avoids is fiund in the assertion that the ciianging 
conception of the aristocratic minority among men of God, has destroyed for 
the masses any real belief in God. If the old pictures are disproved, they 
are disproved. But to say that the loss of the pictures proves that "God is not" 
is a debatable point. We believe the restoration of the masses to sane views 

1. Lippmann op. cit* p. 195 

2. " op. cit p. 195 

3. " op. cit. p. 196 

4* " op* cit. p. 197 


w<:>pr 




o :: ■; j; 


j 

i 





85 


and satisfying experience depends upon that minority who have really found 
God# Ours is the first society in history that has not had a fairly dis¬ 
tinct word-view. Can the humanist ideal of the mature man win the multitudes? 
I believe not. The odds are in favor of the Christian theist. Proof will 
come from either side by incarnating -what is actually believed. The sages 
crucified the ordinary self to incarnate that which they taught. They were 
happy, 

Unregenerate wishes are childish and selfidh, Christian theism does 
not teach that God yields to unregenerated w. shes but rather that regenerated 
lives see what God means and receive grace to live that out which it has seen. 

The Hevj- Testament teaches the necessity of the changed life if one is 
to live abundantly. Many, of course, are ready to fight critical students 
of the Mew Testsiment but few are ready to live out its theistic implications 
or even the best humanist ethics which are also found there. Both Humanist 
and theist are facing the problem of the unregenerated heart, ”In their 
scriptures there is to be found the teaching that true salvation rests upon 
internal reform of desire,,,,,,, For to the few 7/ho are converted., goodness 
is pleasant and needs no sanctions. It needs no authority for it has been 
verified by experience. But vhen men have to be coerced into goodness, it is 
plain that they do not care for it”, 1, This statement is so true and mates 
it most strange that, generaLlly speaking, humanists do not want to recognize 
the unwillingness of men to live up to the best that they know, I do not 
believe that humanism can successfully deal with this problem as well as 
theism can. "These multitudes, though they have lost the ancient certainties, 
have not outgrovn the needs to which they minister. They need to believe but 
cannot.,...,.Their situation is adult but their dispositions are not,”2. With 
all due respect to lir. Lippmann^s analyses it grows upon me that that sentence 
would be a truer account if we wrote it to read, "They reed to believe but 
will not" In a generation that is even yet pleasure mad can the humanist 

1* Lippuiann op. cit, pp. 201-2 
2, " op,cit, p, 203, 





j; 


86 


get a hearing except among the select few who think as they read. It follovj-s 
that if they think hard and logically enough they m 11 become theists. 

Can it win men«s interest to the religion of the spirit and do it 
more successfully than theism can? To me it does not appear so but it can do 
a very great service m th its criticisms:, ‘'High Religion" Lippmann calls 
it, has three features; that is an emphasis on a regenerate life without God; 
a disinterested view of life expressed in a high patrician ethic; and the 
idea which is called maturity which puts away what is called childishness or 
the notion that men can respond to God or that God cares about their welfare, 
Tkitil lately hi^ religion has belonged to the aristocrats of the spirit ani 
has been a thing apart from the main concerns cf the most of mankind. Early 
Christianity was in the early years of its history a thing apart from the main 
intellectual currents of the Entire. Later the monastic ideal furthered the 
feeling that religion was a thing apart from the streams of norraal life and 
commerce. Lippmann contends that no way was knovjn to cure the "fever of hinnan 

passion except by attempting to excise it,....But no way was known, and 

therefore the practice of high religion had to mean separation from human 
society and violence to human nature." 1, Ho necessity arose that ccmpelled 
other ways to be set up, 

"It is ray thesis that because the acids of modernity have dissolved the 
adjustments of the ancestoral order, there exists to-day on a scale never before 
experienced by mankind and of an urgencjr without a^parallel, the need for that 
philosophy of life of v/hich the insight of high religion is a prophecy......» 

The preoccupation of high religion is with the regeneration of the passions 
that create the disorders and the frustrations. In so far as modernity has 
dissolved the power of the popular religion to govern and to conpensate, the 
need for a high religion which regenerates becomes irperative and Y/hat was a 
kind of spiritual luxury of the few has, under modern conditions, become an . 
urgent necessity of the many." 2. Is Mr. Lippmann really hopeful that high 


1. LippmEonn op. cit, p. 

2. " op. cit. p. 


207 

208 




'I 


87 


religion will do this great work? One does not wish to be dogmatic but 
the gospel of Jesus Christ has changed men's lives even when the theology 
of the groupv/as someYfhat repellant. It gives them something much larger 
than themselves to live for* It mi^t by certain critical ones be deemed 
the power of a false idea but the power is there. Do men gather grapes of 
thorns? Neither humanistsKor theists will get much of a hearing until 
circumstances force us into situations where we can no longer trust our 
furtunate circumstnnces, or where comforts are not taken as a sure sign of 
civilizaion. 

The moralist is having a difficult time of it. The populace ”no longer 
knows whether it is right or wrong, and of course gives itself the benefit of 
the doubt.1. Having no official code which can be enforced the moralist 
is facing anarchy -vi thin and v/ithout. To revise his premises can, under the 
circumstances, mean only one thing; that he occupies himself with the problem 
of how to encD urage that groT-vth into maturity, that outgrowing of naive desire, 
that cultivation of disinterestedness, which renders passion innocent and an 
authoritative morality unnecessary.” 2, If Mr, Lippmsnn is essentially 
correct then Jesus was not mature. That is to ask whether the humanists 
have either method or a spirit comparable to the theistic en^hasis of Christ 
mth regard to the changed heart. To theists He has given the highest inter¬ 
pretation of life that we know and we find within his life those ideals which 
Mr, Lippmann calls high religion and which he insists are necessary, vd th one 
chief difference, Jesus' ethic was re-^hforced by a theistic enphasis, 
n In facing life onesdoes not find that the humanists are actually 

more realistic than the theists for neither group run away, 
at least on paper, from the problem of evil. Both accept it as real. 

But our author iii 5 )lies that is not so, ”lf the principle of a theocratic 
culture is dependence, obedience, conformity in the presense of superhuman 
powers which administers^ reality; the principle of humanism is detachment, 
under St ajding, and disinterestedness in the presense of reality itself,”3 
1, Lippmann op cit. p, 209, 2, Lippmann op,cit.p,209, 3, Lippmann op,cit,p.221. 


1 



! 




88 


’’it can be shown, I think, that those qualities which civilized man, • •. 
••••have agreed to call virtues have disinterestednessas the ir inner principle.. 
.....I am ta3.king about such virtues as courage, honor, faithfulness, veracity 
justice, temperance, magnanimity, and love.” 1. Virtues are difficult and they 
transend ordinary iii^ulse. They require the kind of courage wliidi has first 
counted the cost and them, that willingly accepts the risk. ’’Virtues action is 
conduct which responds to situations that are more extensive, more complicated 
and take longer to reach their fulfillment, than the situation to #iich we 
instinctively respond.” 2. Personally I have seen many of these virtues in¬ 
carnated in many Christianjjor theistic) lives and in the missionary adventure 
viThich it is the fashion to criticise without any great depth of thought. But 
let us read further, ’’But they have a common principle, which is detachment 
from that which is apparently pleasant, and they have a common quality h 
is disinterestedness, and they spring from a comraon source, which is maturity 
of character.” 2. This seems to be a sort of Patrician philosophy which might 

soimd a different note if overtaken by really difficult circumstances. But 

who can say. Very few of us can sit so calmly on the sidelines of life. Actu¬ 
ally thereare not many who can be wholly detached and disinterested. The cost 
and consequences of things mean too much in real life, I make this criticism 
as it seems that Mr. Lippmann is offering a substitute of theism f) r the 
multitude. Has he or anyone a substitute without setting up a hi^er value 
as the meaning of life? We can be virtuous and be theists at the same time 

and the terms are not contradictory unless we arbitrarily mafe them so, 

’’Virtue is a product of human experience; men acquired their knowledge 
of the value of courage, honor, temperence, veracity, faithflilness and love, 
because these qualities were necessary to their survival and to the attainment 
ofhappiness,” 4. li/Iorality is alsD a product of experience ard has come out 
of a profound understanding of human life. The prophets and Jesus and some of 
the great moralists knew, more accurately than do the humanists, #iat was in 
man. What makes morality unconvincing to modern men is not entanglement libh 
theocratic notions but economic self-interest. All through modern society 

l.Lipp^nn op.dt.p, 221 2. Lippmann op.cit.p,224(3Lippme!nn op.cit p.225 

4 ' op.cit.p. 227 








89 


there is an undertone of snarling going on between top-dog and under-dog. 

The under-dogs are sharper nor than they ever were befire. 

The unbelief in authority came out of naturalism. During the last 
century and more novelists and philosophers have been identifying men vd.th 
nature. During the past decade especially after the descent into Hell of a 
whole 0 ivilization^ if our novelists are correct in5hberpreting life, we have 
proudly and openly descended below the beasts of the fields. It has not only 
hastened the decay of the heroic tradition; it has led to utter eirptiness of 
life. Slaves to sensual tenperments are not realists but rather do they reveal 
a marked bias in favor of the carnal mind. ”To be carnally minded is death” 
wrote St, Paul • Even so and it is true for societies too. That is what we, 
both humanist and theist must face and that is why moral codes, or virtues, 
have been discarded by s o many. 

In the face of all this Mr, Lippmann believes that "the insight of high 
religion into the value of disinterestedness, will, if pursued resolutely, un¬ 
tangle the moral confusion of the age and ma^e plain.......what we are coiipelled 

to want, what, rather dimly now, we do v/ant, and how to proceed about achieving 
it. 1, Very few it is to be feared vfill ’’pursue resolutely” this high ideal 
and indeed Lippmann recognizes that, unless circumstances conpel, men will not 
accept it. ”For men will not iake seriously, they will not devote themselves 
to the discovery and invention of ways of cultivating maturity, detachment, and 
disinterestedness unless events conspire to drive them to it.” 2. If this 
fails to win men, as it is bound to do, I am afraid, then theism may not fare 
much, if any, better. The revolt is on a deeper level than Mr, Lippmann has 
plumbed or sounded. 

One of the characteristics of the age in which we live is that we are 

forever trying to explain it. We live in a new world-power machinery 

has made sweeping differences. It has brought tangible hopes of deliverance 

1. Lippmann op.cit. p..230 
2 ” op-cit. p. 230 





90 


to the masses, ’’invenii on of invention” 1, is no longer casual but culminative. 

It is a correct statement to make in saying that ”the motives and the habits 
of mind vdiich are thus brought into play at the very heart of modern civili¬ 
zation are mature and disinterested,”2 Only in a limited sense is this true. 
Those of us viio buy gD ods suspect (although I clearly understand I think what 
Lippma.nn is saying) that even science is often a prostitute of mammon. Witness 
•the racketeering lately carried out in radio patents. Realism, in dealing with 
data in a conpany maintained labatories, as a habit of mind does not work as 
Mr, Lippmann suggests. That is my opinion. Let anjrone who doubts the prosti¬ 
tution of the scientific method read an article ’’Discredited lilagic” by Idary Vay,3 
It is a brief introduction to the Consumers Research League idiose work has been to 
investigate the quality of many expensively advertised products that are on the 
market for the buying public. This organization is situated in "Eew York cdty. 

V\re do believe m th Mr, Lippmann that nations mu st enthrone the scientific 
spirit if they are to prosper, (How many patents hjgve been killed) But they 
have not done it yet. 

It was a revolt from the restraints of a landed society which led the 
early capitalists to set up their own thearetic justification in the philosophjr 
laissez-faire. It was the assertion of natural rights by a new class, themselves, 
as over against the formerly re®gnized traditional rights of the landed gentry, 
’’They did not urd erstand science. They merely exploited certain of the inventions 
which scientists produced,” But presently a whole course of evils resulted 
for society to deal with, of ®urse at its own expense, such as child labor, slum 
areas, uneir^)lojnnent and public health. The inevitable result wa.s an increase 
in taxation which has been going on ever since. By legislation certain modi¬ 
fications were introduced to control some of the results of ruthless monopoly. 

But the challenge is m th us yet. We are not aS well off as v^e ought to be even 
though Lippmann says ”ln advanced communities the mere multiplication of industry 
produces such a complicated environment that the business man is compelled to 
substitute considered policies for his intuitions, objectives surveys fr his 

guesses, and conferences world without end for his natural liberties.the. 

modem environment is invisible, coiiplex, vdthout settled plan, subtly and 



1 



t ■ C 






n 

H 





' o,: 


ic Jjoi 


')V'! o<'JOi. 


Vtor^ 


'.•'ll/ 


.a 




91 


swiftly changing, offering innumerable choices, demanding great knowledge 
and imaginative effort to comprehend it.” 1 The modem indi strialist nO' longer 
seeks justification. 

Our legislation was a ’’necessary atteupt to police those who had been 
left free to pursue their ofm interest in their own way.” 2. Socialists 
believe that it is almost impossible to police the capitalist errployers. 
Lippmann suggests that this ccnviction was the dynamic of their movement* 
such a thing as the judgment of a Creator Spirit does not enter the environment 
if the humanist is right. In any case the laissez-faire doctrine was a ration¬ 
alization of unregenerate men as if they would look after any interests but 
their own. One of Mr. Lippmann’s predicd ons is possibly being upset by 
Germany at the present time. He predicts that a dbctotorship can only succeed 
amid relatively simple industrial arrangements. He believes that machine 
industry will reach a stage of complexity that will create a pressure ‘vh ich 
will lead to socializing it. He quotes Mr. Keynes as saying that ”ih e battle 
of socialism against unlimited private profit is being won in detail every 
hour. 3 

In applying his”High Religion” to the problem of modem government 
Mr. Lippmann raises some very interesting problems. ”The idea of toleration, 
of freedom of speech, and above all the idea of organized oppos ition,alters 
radically the attributes of the sovereign.” 4 Many people are incapable of 
being loyal to ©institutions and, even less capable, to ideas. Allegiance is 
so complex that it weakens loyalty very (snsiderably. Tbs re is a dangerous 
lack of unity in the activity of the average indvidual citizen of to-day. 

The en^-ability of madern civilization arises out of the complexity of its 
loyalties. ’’Its strength lies in its sensitiveness.” 5 Mass leadership mnl®s 


Rotes for previous page as fAllows 

1. Lippmann op»Git,p. 255 

2. ” op.cit. p. 237 

3. The ChristignlCenWrj?-- April 5-1932 


Rotes for above page;- 


l.Lippmennbop.cit. p. 246-7 

2. ” 

op.cit. p. 24S 

3. 

op.cit, p, 258 

4. ” 

op.cit, p, 262 

5. ” 

op.c it.p. 273 






:oj . I 


'Oi'l 





92 


for safety* ’’The essential point is that as the machine technology makes 
social relations complex, it dissolves the habits of obedience and dependence, 
it disintegrates the centralization of power and leadership; it diffuses the 

experience of responsible decision throughout the population. The real 

law in the modern state is the multitude of little decisions made daily by 
millions of men*” 1 Again, ”The amount of law which a legislature can 
successfully impose is relatively small,” 2 Iflfhat the state does is to 
bring organized force to the aid of folk who believe in law. But really 
says Lippmann government is in the people and stays there. We have many 
more politicians than we have statesmen* The statesman expresses something 
of high religion in that he 'seeks to give to the people ’’not what they 
want but what they will learn to want.” 

In his study of love in the great society Lippmann says that ’’The 
larger number of men and women living within the orbit of the Great Society 
are no doubt aware that their inherited beliefs about religion, politics, 
business and sex do not square entirely with the actual beliefs upon v/hich 
they feel compelled to act*” 3 The distinction that he makes can only be 
briefly mentioned and it is that owing to the fact that knowledge of birth 
control has been generally disseminated there has been accepted the practice 
of love as an art and as a vocation. Art is for purely physical enjoyment* 

The practice of love as a vocation has to do with parenthood and the rearing 
of children, Lippmann reports that this hedonism has not resulted in happi- 
ness and gladness,” Instead of the gladness which they were promised, they 
seem like Hegesaias, to have found the wasteland,” 4 In speaking of Huxley 
& Hemingway he reports that for them it seems as if ’’love is at times a kind 
of obscane joke”, 5 'What are the finest and miost exalted activities which 


1, 

Lippmann 

op, cit. 

p. 275 

2. 

n 

op. cit* 

p, 276 

3. 

t» 

op. cit. 

p. 284 

4* 

fi 

op* cit. 

p. 302 

5. 

tt 

op, cot. 

P a 303 



o 



93 


aro to be stimulated, and liberated? According to Lippmann these virtues 
do not say* Most of them are artificial and of interest to very few people, 
/’But if ^ou idealize the logic of birth ccntrol, make parenthood a separate 
vocation, isolate love from work and the hard realities of living, and say 
it must be spontaneous and carefree ---what have you done? You have separ¬ 
ated it from all the important activities which it illuminate and liberate.” 1 
Man is not a collection of separate impulses each of which can be 
satisfied. The reformers seeing the evils of such a tragedy as the unwanted 
child and the birth-ruined moth^i^saw in birth ©ntrol a way out. But mates 
who do not love in a deeper sense than physical will never endi re and co-bp- 
erate in the proper rearingof children. Children require the atmosphere in 
the home created by the right example and decent thinking. Love ’’endi res 
only when the lovers love many things to-gether.” Conpatibility is a process 
and an achievment and never an accident. The Romanticist theory of affinities 
is unstable and wrong for it-’’rests upon an immature theory of desire,” 2 
Successful wedded life is a partnership rich in many and common interests* 
Lippmann*s cc noL usi op. * is that the convention of marriage ’’will survive as the 
dominant insist into t-he reality of love and happiness, or it will not survive 
at all,” 3 Modern lovers will be compelled ”to transcend naive desire and 
to reach out towards a mature and disinterested partnership with their world,” 4 
The moralist, then, is not popular in the modern world which is an 
unbelieving world. They are in the eyes of men as Dean Inge says people who 
feel themselves ’’attracted by God viien ihey are really only repelled by people.”S 
For the orthodox moralist conduct must oon&rm to the estaolished code, Lippmann 
does not believe that the revolt is di e to perversity siose it is vrorldwide 


1, 

Lippmann 

opocit. 

P* 

305-6 

2, 

tt 

op*cit. 

p. 

310 

3, 

It 

op,cit. 

Vo 

312 

4. 

» 

op,cit. 

V* 

313 

5, 

It 

op.cit. 

Vo 

314 











C. 





94 


especially where science and the hr chine are rapidly changing societies. 

Possibly so but let us not Porget that the machine is the magic symbol that 
holds the promise of comfortable d rcumstances that are yet to be realized 
by the masses^ Such a prcjmise provides the dynamic for Soviet Russia’s 
experiment. It is not wrong to be comfortable but it is no guarantee of 
happiness for the human spirit. But let Mr. Lippmann add this,-”mudi of 
what appears to be a tough self-sufficiency is protective, it is a brittle 
crust covering depths of uncertainty.” 1 

The moralists says Lippmann have failed to understand their times. 

!tAri authoritative code of morals has force and effect when it expresses the 
settled customs of a stable society.” 2 We see that generalization very clearly 
expressed in Mark Twains disillusionment about the new society in the young 
■'Westj anyone can catch it in many of his novels.” 3 To-day the moralist 
must win his way as an interpreter of human needs. ”The moralist cannot 
teach what is revealed; he must reveal what can be tau^t.” 3 Exactly, as 
we have said earlier, he must incarnate or make flesh the truth or the 
experience that he teaches. Only by living out what he dads at the highest 
levels of experience can he elucidate what the good is.” Theism believes 
that it has seen something of that highest good incarnated in Him ”who was a 
servant of men”; who taught conformity, not to the will of men ”for he knew 
what was in man”, but rather to the will of God.. 

Lippmann believes that the way out is through the re-education of 
their desires ”by an understanding of their own relation to a world which is 
unconcerned with their hopes and fears.” 3 For a modem population "the old 
rules are becoming progressively unsuitable and the old symbols of hope and 
fear progressively unreal.The ultimate question is not how the populace 

1* Lippmann op.cit.p. 316. 

2. ” op.cit.p. 317 

3. Humanism & America op.cit. Pandora’s Box of Americain Fiction Clark p. 186 

4. Lippmann op. cit. p. 318 

5. ” op.cit. p. 321. 





o 
















CM to to 


95 


is to be ruled, but what the teachers are to think." 1 For it follows 
that "If civilization is to be coherent and confident it must be known in 
that civilization what its ideals are." 2 At present we have no world-view. 

"To elucidate the ideals with which the modern world is pregnant is the 
original business of the moralist." 3 Shall we find the ideals of brotherhood, 
internationalism, unity of the race apart from the fatherhood of God? These 
are ideals the 'lack of which, if not soon accepted, will soon leave us in ruins. 

"But WQ begin to see, I think, tbat the evidence converges upon the 
theory that what the sages have prophesied as high religion, what psychologists 
delineate as matured personality, and the disinterestedness which the Great 
Society requires for its practical fulfillment} are all of a piece and are 
basic elements of a modern morality." 4 But let us remember that even though 
they afe overlaid with much that is obsolete in details, "In great moral 
systems - and the great religions are embedded the recofds of how men have 
dealt with destiny and only the thoughtless will argue that the record is 

obsolete and insignificant.The vdsdom it contains has to be discovered 

before the old symbols will yield up their meaning." 5 There is a dilemma 
says Lippmann for modem men. "They are coirpelled to choose conscioujsly, 
clearly and with full realization of v«rhat the choice implies, betw^een religion 
as a system of cosmic government and religion as insight into a cleansed and 
matured personality; between God conceived as master of that fate, creator, 
providence, and king, and God conceived as the highest good at which they 
might aim. For God is the supreme symbol in which man expressds his destiny, 
aid if that symbol is confused, his life is confused." —Is such a deliberate 
antitheses necessary except on the part of Mr. Lippmann who is trying to be 
consistent? I do not believe that the choice is so necessary for cosmic 
re3.igion as he calls it is not necessarily inconsistent with the cleansed 

1.Lippmann op.cit. p. 321 
op.cit. p.322 
op. cit. p. 323 
op. cit. p. 323 
op.cit. p. 324 



1 








96 


personality and in incarnating of virtues. At the very centre of Christian 
theism is the doctrine of "rebirth”, 

"The choice is at last a personal one" 1 It is true enough that 
there are those who do not find a principle of order in the belief that 

they are related to a supernatural power,.They are deeply perplexed. 

They have learned that absense of belief is vacancy; they know.that 
there is no freedom in mere freedom. They must find, then, some other prin¬ 
ciple which will give coherance and direction to their lives," 2 Revelation 
is out of the question says Lippmann. There is no authority of a will beyond 
themselves to which they can respond, indeed "there is no place they can find 
it except in an ideal of the human personali-ty ," 3 Theists believe that the 
required ideal is to be found in Jesus» life. But his life was deep-rooted 
in a belief in God. Take God out of it and there is very little left. If 
God is not then he would turn out to be a mistaken fool. Devotion to such 
an ideal, we are told, may be called the religion of the spirit. 

"It alone is perfectly neutral about the constitution of the universe, 
in that it has no expectation that the universe will justify naive desire," 4 
Its approach, and inner motive, to life is not that of acquisiiion but that of 

syn^athy, "To understand is not only to pardon, but in the end to love,. 

Its principle is to live and let live.It is the only disposition of 

the soul which meets the moral difficulties of an anarchial age, for its 
principle is to civilize the passions not by regaining them iiaperiously, 
but by transforiTiing them vdth a mature imderstanding of their place in an 
vi ro nvip^ pt." 5 This is a somewhat dogmatic statement for Christian 
theism has made practically the same eii?)hasis many times. Of course Mr, 
Lippmann has refused to acknowledge validity to a modem man*s conception oi 


1 , 

2 , 

3. 

4. 

5. 


cit, 

cit, 

cit, 

cit. 

cit. 


p, 326 
p, 326 
p, 326 
p .327 
p. 328 


11 






HX’i 

J'/j-hvQ: i ;.;; 

Of:;:. 






97 


God but may we assert again tliat the discipline of humanism and all that 
it has to offer vdll be overtaken by one who seeks to do the will of God as we 
have it revealed in the life of Jesus. Such a life will be a life character¬ 
ized by love, goodivill, sympathy and mercy. 

In the realm of the spirit, blessedness is not deferred. "That my 
may be in you and that your joy may be full". Also judgment is a constant 
fact in that day by day you are what you are. Evil is to be overcome now 
ana happiness to be achieved in this world for "He was moved with compassion 
on the multitudes" and so must we be whether we are humanists or theists. 

There is nothing of the nature of a commercial transaction type of thing to 
be found in the Hew Testament v/hen disinterestedly or properly understood. 

For both groups it may be"a kind of experience which is inherently profitable."! 

"And so the mature man would take the world as it comes, and within 
himself remain quite unperturbed." 2 Indeed the Hew Testameat reveals a 
spirit which men can accept and which does not leave them at the mercy of 
things that may happen. Hot many folk will find, I believe, a solution in 
Mr. Lippmann^s book. Defeat, truly, may be no less interesting than victory 
but it d) es not allow you to advance/ Of course if one wants to try and sit 
on the sidelines of life it would be easier to accept this cold Patrician 
philosophy. The patridan has never had a reputation for being so very happy. 

It is a dogmatism, unproven and imsubstantiated that the humanist faces pain 
better than the theist. The theist believes that the universe is a home for 
his free-born spirit but the humanist is a stranger within a weary land. 

It is too bad that Mr. Lippmann’s book ends on such a pessimistic note. 

He avoids the appearance of pessimism by stringently limiting his vsTants, and 
yet what else is it. What does life really mean, can it be interesting and 
thrilling, will one run risks if life is summed up in the following;- "Since 

1, Lippmann op# cit. p. 329 

2. " op, cit, p. 329 


'..V - -I 


-[J- 0j> 






-■' o-'O ' . ■ -Jo 0 ' ■ .-o, , 

■ . 0I'':O , 

' ■'■ ' --f .j, '.■■•Y 

^ Y. Yo:’.:'.!, Yu.;' .'. !.Ji u.r J-Y.rrI'TO-:'! n(! 7: 

^ '■'o/i7'!Y i i '-.,v -i :• '■ ' ' ■ •• 


C>: 


7 7' 


r 7 ,-' cyJo! :.oo - 7 f 


'yC Yrf 7-j.DYYY 


Oo.lOj; o,\:. r.:, f If ry ){ 


Tii'i;:; 



98 


nothing gnawed at his vitals, neither doubt or ambition, nor frustration, 
nor fear, he would move easily through life. And so whether he saw the 
thing as comedy, or high tragedy, or plain farce, he would affirm that is 
what it is, and that the wise man can enjoy it,” Do we not meet the stoic 
again in modern guise? YiTho then is this mature man? Where did he ever live? 


I;;,;': ':R^"rj'9ii^‘, G'a iMt . ^ QVqnt, bXfuy/f. ox' , 

' '‘'''''y^- i V '■ . ' ''■■' ; :. ' ' -rX-r'i ’ ■' ' , '. ' ■ 

'f.o t to , '• q o 

-' .bfv.- , ■ .; 

idJ- air imhr 00:' vositf.", rrtti'jQm 




; 4^L?:c>^a 


J:'; ■^©(.'■lo 

■■'il' " ■ :' ' 


,'f' ■ ';; ■'• .■„• 

0.^'; ;:^n;.n;ij- 

': vl'l: J-.nilw 

,ux 



99 


”D'* a Smmnar y 

We have now examined three authors. Every one of the three is 
a naturalistic humanist. That is to say, supematuralism or theism is 
ruled out by them, either as a necessity or as having any objective bearing on 
the problem of ideals and the meaning of life. Mr. Hayden and Mr. Otto have 
very high faith in the rational man but Mr. Lippmann's faith in man is very 
much more reserved. Until circi-imstances force ’’high religion” as a necessity 
upon men, he is anything but confidant that it will be accepted as a way out 
by very many. Neither is Mr. Lippmann as idealistic. Each of the three have 
great faith that the new scientific technique is going to help them solve their 
moral problems. It is to bring men new freedom. 

For Mr. Hayden au-d Mr. Otto the outlook is somewhat rosy. They write 
enthusiastically and both in their way seek to make an "affirmative denial” 
of God. One cannot think that they are facing life as it really is on this 
continent from the industrial and social points in so viewing the situation. 
Theirs is too much an artificial vieair because, possibly, th^ are not enoisgh 
out of the artificial Yforld of the university caucus. In such a situation 
one is amid intellectual currents, valid and g) od, whidi', are non-existent 
among vast numbers of the populace. These men have high faith in the scientific 
technique as a means to creating a new heaven, so to speak, upon this earth. 

Have they looked realistically a,t monopolies and control of patent s mth which 
tte actual returns in terms of better living are stringently controlled by 
the credit kings. These profits come largely from the new technique made 
possible by science. For most people life is bound up with wages and not 
ideas, lyiy contention is that naturalistic humanism has nothing but its own. 
bias and dislikes, its own taste and standards, lith which to confront a 
society that is missing its v/ay. lly theistic thesis is that defeat comes out 
from God to those people and individuals who identify themselves v/ith ways that 
ought not to persist. Theism is the recognition of that creative and ever 





"M 


\ 

1 

4 








i 







f"> „'■ 


■■-l O 







100 


active ’’something" over against which our little part in the drama is 
played. For the humanist it is vanity to suppose that we ojan respond to 
and receive guidance from the Creator Spirit. Of course we do nob agree. 

For Mr. Lippmann it would appear that the outlook is not rosy. He 
is too good at realism to sing about the moral dilemma of our day. His 
confusion, to Tnjr mind, is genuine and he is too sincere to avoid looking at 
life and endeavouring to see it whole. But one cannot but believe that Mr. 
Lippmann is mistaken in his thesis that the changing concept of God, as held 
by modeifn teacher 5 ,as yet a minority, is to destroy oelief in God. There 
are other reasons to account for the loss of faith. In the Old Testament, as 
we have already menii oned, there is a changing and an enriched concept of God* 
Compare the war~gocff of David mth that of Hosea, the man who out of a great 
love overcame the tragedy of his home and who preached to Israel about a God 
who was love. This is only one example of many to be found in a theistic 
or polytheistic ego, of a changing conception of God. We believe that our 
thought of God VT±11 continue to develop® tov/ards that spirit incarnated in 
Jesus Christ, Many folk have pre-Christian notions of God which must be and 
can be corrected by that which we see in Christ, 

^ Again whilst Mr. Lippmann*s analyses of the present moral situation 

on this continent is keen and the dagnosis is in the main correct we do not 
believe that he has a solution. It is a somewhat naive faith in psycho¬ 
analyses to believe that it will yield up the meaning of life, -High religion, 
that is maturity and disinterestedness in ethics may help a few foil: but it 
has very little for the masses. We cannot postpone a solution until they 
come up to it. At Mr, Lippmann*s attenpt at a solution one may say of it 
^4iat he says of Mr. Russell*s code that it depends upon the likes and dislikes 
of the author. There is in it no standard over against which we can test our 
lives. The ideal it offers is really vague. He is quite sure that modern 
folk cannot find God if they are full-grown mentally and spiritually. We 

do not believe that. It is much easier to seek to find God who will be 






o 


o 


I 


I 


> [: j- .n'' 


f?. 


•■'I , J ^ ; :o; 


":V' 





101 . 


at least objective whilst hiimanistic standards can be only at best, 
subjective and enslaved to bias and dislikes. 

One must add in all fairness that in asserting the philosophy and 
experience of theism that one does not identify oneself with some of the 
ugly things which Mr. Lippmann has exposed. If we were bushmen we should 
write differently. The point is moralists all are we, whether theists cr 
humanists. We must find the best answer and then co-operate in making it 
effective in living situations. 







'cfiv vIrK) 9cf: 3.5-i:..d!'T;0rf'3 qj;.hun)%fwd ,:teliis“v- >v ''j;qJo J njH'i 

V ■ , , 7.0"'’'.i: ■'32 f:. ,DX-,i 3.'.u*<,!', 0 J- 

o'^cd‘V>ki63cili/% 0 /id: ;:-vA2:d';i:,‘>3B.y sil rr.;. crt) 

Of),j 'io omO'.^ do hi *vXeBOj‘C',.-Xo'-i.^ooi) 0 x 10 , di/.rut fiO-iXOfiJ- Xo „',:',{r-v.i:-£Oi''>:#> 

i:}ij:;qri3. <:m m.iro ow ‘3:1/ , w’lorpo rffpiinaiii,.: * ■: P-.LPy aqrri:;;^ 

- 'X) odaxdflci' ,Gv; <:•£_- .[.C.!’ KJ f')i;.D.'i PVT ap J’Dxaq 'KiT . r:Id'ft0'Xf.Pl'u a 'fjp/.xv' , 

, di xdipw.ii. 0 .;,xcj: Bd;x'i::M! 0"“00 .On,:; 'Xfwaxn: oxid* Ixcdd; o.. »aj a.Ii;i.Anii.jrr. 

dp,.' . ■ 

:;';p:d , » axwxxhx/d'i; '! cr^' ‘-v’.' 








102 


SECTIOmi 

The Problem of the Conflict Re-Stated, 

There are problems which force themselves upon the present day- 
naturalistic humanists, iVe intend to suggest three but first of all let 
us raise a preliminary question. Is there any unanimity in the answers of 
the humanists? In several sections of my survey of humanism and even among 
the three men whose work was more closely examined it became apparent, did it 
not, that there are many stripes and much confusion among those who call 
themselves humanists. As to the naturalistic humanism we find only one 
common point of agreement,- that is, the denial of the existence of God. 

To say that he is only a symbol is also a denial. l/Yhat definite solutions 
have they to offer that are superior in dealing with living situations, than 
those which Christian theism offers. Industry? Peace? Interm tionalismJ??In 
all these important fields I do not find that the humanist is particularly 
active and clear in his solutions. The point is, that thdre is as much, 
probably more, confusion and contradiction among the humanists as ever there 
was among theists. Granted that many theists, Roman Catholics fb r exairple, 

picture God in ways that seme of us have left behind or put aside, yet the 

fact remains that God is real to the'm. Likewise the fundamentalists and the 
modernists, Mr, Lippmann notwithstanding, find God as the central reality in 
life. He is revealed in the life of Jesus Christ and in other ways but in 

human-terms v/e find Him best in the incarnation of the new spirit, the life 

of Jesus, True that Jesus* teaching does not speak exactly and drectly to 
some of our modern questions. He would have talked over the people’s heads 
to have done so. He lived in the first century and not in the twentieth. 

But who can question that a new spirit and attitude towards life is apparenb: 
in Christ’s life. Again who can gainsay that he is the present daily inspir¬ 
ation of nany lives? ’iYho does not believe that the world needs the changed 
^eart and what better quality of heart can one suggest tlan Christ’s spirit. 


■'I; fC'l' 'i-lJ ',.0 


iC;'. i. 


) 




103 


Again he was a teacher of ehhics but all that he ever said or did was deep- 
rooted and grew up out of his vision of God, Only as we gain a vision of 
God shall we advance. That is what the world needs. 

Mr, Lippmann and the other humanists would not say so,-What we 

need is a vision of man. Let me say 4t once that man is dwarfed until we 
put him over against a creative background. That is what we shall try to do 
in the remaining pages of this thesis. W'"e must do this for we believe that 
the acids of modernity” arise from a loss of that vision. That loss has 
occurred not because of a changing ajoncept of God but because the prophecy 
of "plenty” the fulfillment of which the masses have been lookingfor. Again 
one cannot dismiss as easily as Ij![r, Otto does, that strange unwillingness, 
found in most human beings, to live on the level of the ’Spirit( if he can 
remain on the level of the "Flesh”. If the masses really come to see that 
Spiritual poverjjy will frustrate all materialistic utopias then, perhaps, 
they will repent and accept the vision. 

”Tis ye, tis your estranged faces 

That miss the many spendored thing.” 

A, Definition of Value 

The first problem that the naturalistic humanist must establish is 
a definition of value that can be uid erstood by ordinary people. This is to 
say that humanists must define what is for them the end of life. Many of 
them are quite clear that the end of life has nothing to do with the favour 
of God. He does not exist. Until we establish what value is no progress can 
result. What does iry life mean? The -question is where will the naturalistic 

humanist find value. To find his value is to establish the authority which 

he has not yet won over the m.asses whom he asserts re ed his message just now* 

If the end of life is wha.t Hayden calls the "good life” and which ^e 

calls the "quest of the Ages" it appears to me that most people will seek 
other ways than that which the humanist has to offer. That is to say if 
spiritual values ^hen actually perceived turn out to be only physical comforts 
the hu^ianist can well be ignored. To my mind that is the danger which he is 







/j;r> ''hit 




■\. ■'v 

. • 0 ' 


off'T’i'Vo; 


4... 


•XT'' "' O'-.,’ r 


■' J' 0 
•• i'.'' i.; ’ .;■ 

- 'x-fo/'-; ■ -( I , Xi' iv; 





104 ^ 


facing. ’’Man cannot live by bread alone”. And yet trhat else is the humanist 
offering when you analyse terms. Values, such as beauty and truth turn out 
often to be only names about which no clear distinctions have been set up. 

What can be true in a desert of relatives or what can be beautiful? It must 
depend on something more than one’s bias or viewpoint. There must be a great 
transcendent background over against which our creative instincts can function 
and to v/hich they can respond. 

The humanists have rendered high service as critics but our generation 
requires something deeper than information. ®ever has a gcnerationlj^een 
burdened m th so great an amount of factual information. What is needed 
is interpretation. To most of us facts do not mean much until we examine 
them in their context or set them over against a philosophical background. 

Another lesson that our generation needs to learn is that ’’Being is 
dynamic, thought is static.” 1 The distinction is made in different yet 
similar ways by both Canon Streeter and Bergson. It is this, we can draw a 
diagram of life at the one instant but life moves on and we must re-draw our 
diagram. Life is a series of diagrams for one who tries to capture it that way. 
But diagrams cannot symbolize life and change and that which makes for movement. 
The only way to visualize life is in a portrait which lends itself to the 
expression of movement and creative activity, of continuity and change. That 
suggests does it not thn,t'the ’’act of understanding is one in Yfhich the whole 
man is involved.” 2 Is it not fair to suggest that the humanist group tends 
to rule out as invalid and childish or immature whole legitimate areas'k>f man’s 
life. Too often to understand life is thought to be an act only of the intellect 
and the emotional life is repressed entirely. Is it any v/onder that the natur¬ 
alist humanist voices are so uncertain about jjrhat they have to offer to human 
beings? 

1. ^de op.cit. p. 31 

2. ” ep.cit. p. 24 




'lI ■:;;;].]!o J'fjii;:; .iuy 

C':;o !■•':!':/J' rfyif'crj- :>ro :• 

c ITS inf ctc.'ao d,, ^ 

.V ; ’ 'J ':.'./ ■' :''i ,'■(;':>■) J 

' ■■ ^' cfcur':- .I" 


"M'-r, 'x o ".'f•. •'■ 

>■:>!.'<: [:J: ' , -^- 


^V'f .r.r 




.0!':- : ,0 


•• w ! ', ■ ' '■ , ■ ; ■ r:a'i 


' 

^,.; n.; .fii- i 'vr n'f •, 









105 


Allow ine to quote again from Mr. Hyde. "The religious attitude is 

pre-eminently the natural attitude and always will be.” 1 Has he not hit 

upon hard fact. ”The bases of effective activity on the material plane 

is an internal anchorage to something within which is raised above the level 

of the fluctuating and the fugitive". 2 Again "The man who is devoting his 

powers to perfecting his own self inevitably becomes a victim of egoisn. 

The fact is if we wish to live creatively we must undertake something more 

fundamental than merely checking our lower impulses. The end of the road is 

not repression but transmutation.” 3 I do not wish these quotations to 

carry all the weight of my argument but they do seem pertinent to the problem. 
Unless we have something 

more than our individual bias out of which to create our ideals there is no 
authority or strength behind what is offered. Allow me to refer to Mr. Hyde 
once more, "But I do insist on the fact that the basis of the whole humanis¬ 
tic attitude is an obstinate and deep-seated egoism which is only reenforced 
by the individual's efforts to transcend it." 4 Actually theism has as sane 
an attitude towards the good things of life as has humanism and it avoids 
self-centredness better. 

naturalistic humanism must, then, overcome its dilemma about what is 
Value. At present it has many voices crying in the wilderness with no lan¬ 
guage but a cry. Some of them we respect and others vrould call us dom to 
the level of a naturalism that is expressive only of a sensual perversity. 

Am I to live on a physical basis and level or am I to believe that God has 
made men capable of being "a little lower than the angels,” If man is not 
made in the image of <jod whose image has he? Is there a logical and ration¬ 
al interpretation available apart from theism? Ethics without God, without 
a standard approaching the doctrine of perfection, leaves me to do pretty 
much as I Y^rant to do.. It has no challenge pointing to a change of heart. 


1. 

Hyde 

op. cit, p. 

82 

2. 

n 

opp cit. p. 

85 

3. 

tt 

op.cit. p. 

92 

4. 

tt 

op. cit. p. 

89 














106 


T-ie ’’sages" of* which l!r. Lippmaim wrohe so beautifully were men who were 
captured to the service of an ideals and truths which they interpreted 
against a background lit up with a moral grandeur beyond what they found 
in themselves. Socrates was a religions man. Assiss: i Confucias d d 
not knov\r and his ethic was only for the patricians of the land-ovming 
aristocracy of his day. It was never incarnated in the lives of the common 
people. Gautama’s ethical system had a splendid chance to succeed but it 
failed to win the people until it was related to a supernatural backgrouhd* 
^/Vhat is the reason? 

What then is value? From what does it proceed and to what end? 

B. Ceu Humanism Get a Hearing? 

Has naturalistic humanism any prospects of a hearing? If it cannot 
gain the ear and the interest of a larger number ofpeople it becomes only 
a mental calisthenic of doubtful value. This problem is real. Humanists 
and theists are moralists and the repute of such is at stake. If Mr. 

Lippmann is right in his analyses then moralists must find out what can be 
taught. Does this mean that teachers must teach only what is acceptable, 

■i'Vho is to decide? Is not the iir 5 )lication being made that authoritative codes 
are unnatural and really do not fit human needs. 

It is a question whether our generation has outgrown the Ten Command¬ 
ments, possibly excepting one or two minor details. My contention is that 
this code, which is popularly supposed to be outgrown, speaks yet to the 
needs which this generation does not want dealt with if it can find an easier 
way. At the moment this code seems to be psychologically sound. It is good 
for man to worship something higher than himself. It is not a good habit to 
develop carelessness in one’s speech. i/iThat does rest d) for one that this 
generation does not need and worship? It is not good to steal, to commit 
adultery, to be envious. flha.t is really outgrown in this code? The ccntext 
is, in which the code has been set, but not the wisdom it contams. But we 
are told that we must teach what can be taught. What is the good of teaching 
at all if it does not at least contain this much wisdom? We cannot get aro^d 







107 


or beat the Ten Commandmaits. To me it is fairly evident that all moralists 
have been facing a generation which was going to have its fling regardless 
of cost. But the fling was costly for the endless rush of pleasure reveals 
a very vinhappy heart. 

And so, if the naturalistic humanist finds a fairly satisfactory 
definition of value can he mafce it effective in a creative way in society. 
There is nett much evidence that this movement is doing much practical work in 
bettering conditions.. Thus far it has been a movement of criticism and has 
knocked over some old idols among the theists who dS. d not recognize them for 
what they v/ere. The theist has had to move out into the modern world and 
face his critic. It has been good for theism. 

But I doubt if humanism will prevail beyond a somewhat restricted, 
from the point of number, intellectual group. The movement centres largely 
as far as I can see about the university campus. Of course such centres are 
strategic points. Many of our great theists are also on the campus. I doubt 
the success of humanism because it has no great’dynamic * which will compel 
its adherents \vith an inner compulsion to go out into lonely and desolate, 
crowded and poverty stricken areas and there beccaiB a life incarnating 
compassion, love, syii5)athy and hope. Theism has the much criticised b;ut 
really adventurous and ms.gnif iceit home and foreign missionary enterprise 
to show despite its faults. Humanism has nothing comparable that I know of. 
Russia was cited by Mr. Otto as an example of a society in v^hich naturalistic 
humanism was the basis of its corporate life, Ho one ought to have a quarrel 
vdth the good in the Russian experiment. It Y/ill be and has already become 
a challenge to the TtTest. If it oonpels us to set our house in order it will 
be for our g) od. Those who do not like its non-theistic iir5)lications will 
find, I predict, that they cannot talk it down,— they can only live it down. 
But just what is happening in Russia remains to be seen. It is clashing with 
theism on all missionary frontiers at home and abroad. One wonders if the 
humanist movement as we knov/ it in America would prosper in Russia. Free-born 






O'v; Xi ■: dyu(d" ;l,r;''X,).r /n 


I . .'l'::o 


I'!.': : ^ :■■ i; 




. .ij 


om/ ; '. ;.: p 

'f-'■■' y 1. . )',, '■J.t'l'.j f/' ■ ■') 

oX - o:; ■■, , ^r, pX ' r • 


d.: 


' '/dl 






'rr.f, 


X-X'dii 


1Q8. 


people do not like dictatorships or censors. There does seem to be 
something akin to a dynamic in Commimism, Is it bom of hate? The dynamic 
of Christian theism is love. Which will win love or hate? If hate wins out 
then man turns out to be something far less than the kind ofbeing that our 
idealists, humanist and theists believe him to be. Men instead of being a 
"little lower than the angels" would prove to be a beast snarling at beast. 

That is if hate, or force akin to hate, turns out to be the supreme quality 
in the universe. We believe in man because we are capable of love and so is he 
l/lTliat do we find? Is it not true that there is a strong tendency tov/ards 
disillusionment and despair in a great deal of modern humanism. Let anyore 
read the book Humanism & America, especially those essays which deal with the 
decay of the heroic tradition and spirit as revealed in modern novels. Or 
read Mr. Lipproann’s account of the loss that has come to men in their loss of 
God, Hote his account of the brave and brilliant atheists who are very nervous 
of the young women who, freed from tabus and conventions, are becoming slaves 
to their unsteady tempermentsj of folk who have rebelled and now not knomng 
what to do next are world weary at tv/enty-two. 

Purely ethical programmes seemed to have always failed. Gautama*3 
system is one instance. Comte*s movement is another instance for his group 
did not get far. It is the historic forerunner of modem naturalistic human¬ 
ism, This is denied but it is true never the less. Has Bertrand Russell 
an^rbhing to offer that will win and cormel men to finer living? Hayden? Otto? 
Mr, Lippmann comes nearest but he w&s eumre that circumstances were against 
him at the time, at least, when he wrote his book. We cannot escapte the 
challenge of the scripture,-"By their fruits shall ye know them". 



:j:i 00' O'l/'Oa 00©]')' ' ■■ 'On!., u 

h]'.: o’vJ'O.d 'j;o ©VO '; , . ' ..OVOV' ■d'OVJ' f 

■) o:.] ',VV V 'idiid 'O') -')'"0 ] :' ©■) J. ’ ' ' ' ' , '. ' ' ' 

:'0 ..V;] . ■000;l 0:']d O/Oi..'- ■ . ' 0->n);.:.:; 0:; 





o.[ I, M/O.i 


)■: 



■] 


1 


O'Oiiv;! : 









fH CO CO 


109 o 


"C.” 

Does the Humanist Ethic Demand a 

NonrTheistic Interpretation of Life? 

The third question that I v/ish to raise is this* Does humanism have 
to be non-theistic to do all that it hopes to achieve* Babbitt says no but 
perhaps his evidence is not good for he takes sides with the naturalist* 

”I believe the humanist will be forced to recognize that there is truth in 
pascal»s contention, that he will,have to take sides in the debate between 
naturalists and supernaturalists•” 1 Again’^ ’’according to Lippmann the con¬ 
viction the modern man has lost is that, ’’there is an immortal essense presiding 
like a king over his appetites. But v;-hy abandon the affirmation of such an 
essense or higher v/ill^ to the mere traditionalist. 1/Vhy not affirm it?**.*.** 
The higher t-vIII must be accepted as a mystery that ma^r be studied in its 
practical effects, but that in its ultimate nature, is incapable of formulation. 
*......”.2 We may liken the man who refuses to turn the higher will to account 

until he understands its nature to one who for similar reasons refuses to 
accept electricity. ’’The chief enemies of the humanist are the pragma.tists 
and other philosophers of the fI k who simplify this problem for themselves by 
dismissing the One, who is an actually living intuition, as a metaphysical 
abstraction.” 3 Babbitt does not believe ths-t religion can be replaced by 
humanism* 

G, R. Elliott in his essay the pride of Modernity also takes sides 
v/ith' supernturalism. ’’Colombia, the progressive modern spirit, is too proud 
to face the fearful carnage of human values and the foggy confusion of principler, 
brought about by the modern heart”. 4 The modem heart has gone wrong. 


.Babbitt op. cit. 
* ” op. cit. 

It 


op. cit. 
op. cit. 


p, 38 Humanism & America 
p. 39-40 
p. 43 
p. 94 


ti 










110 


Leaders parrot that the old corLflict is ever and yet demonstrate conclusively 
that the heart is still unregenerate* ’’Most hopeful is the work of a small 
and quiet group of theologians belonging to various churches, who are resuming 
and carrying fonmrd the thwarted hope of the great Christian humanists of the 


Renaissance.Humanism may be theistic or non-theistic; It is unsound when 

anything betv/een#..Religion needs the humility derivable from the 


consideration that happiness may be obtained without religion./^hen religion 

assists irreligion in softening God’s laws, humanism will insist that a re¬ 
discovery of their severity is essential for right humility and happiness,” 1 
A little later Mr. Elliott quotes Von Hugel to the effect that Christians must 
understand ’’the fact that the ethical or humane way has a distinct or divinely 
ordained validity of its oivn for those who cannot honestly follov/ the religious 
way; and that the full health of each way depends upon the full health of the 
other,” 3 

The position of l-ir, Lippmann is based almost altogether on a strictly 
scientific interpretation of the universe., If the objection we have already 
raised is valid it follows that we may accept science as a description of 
natural processes. It can only draw diagrams of what it sees. We do not 
believe that it can possibly account for all that it sees and keep within 
the bounds of measurement and accuracy such as we expect of it. It is true 
that science as a descriptive process leads to naturalism yet when one reflects 
and evaluates scientific findings with reference to a backgi^ound, the whole 
of life or ultimate truth, can one escape from a Theistic interpretation? 

Even science is in the hands of the evaluating mind. We are corbelled to ask 
what dc^s it mean? Wh^ does it work that way? Mr. Lippmann rather arbitrarily 
dismisses a theistic interpretation and then attempts a solution upon a 
naturalistic or materialistic basis. It may turn out tiiat supernatural laws 
are not unnatural laws, 

1, G R. Elliott, op, cit. p, 98-99 

2, ” ” op,cit. op, 100 











0 f; 








'"I ; 1) ',rr- 


0 





Ill 


Mr, Hayden seeks to prove that religion is only the quest of a good 
life in a good world, meaning by the term ”good’^ only things ethical, social 
or temporal. This position is not borne ont byithe facts of history, Reliciori 
began with the recognition of a mysterious power upon which the primitive men 

felt, and believed, that he depended* First it was life that was every’^vhere- 

in trees and stones et cetera. This mysterious power was ]aiown as "mana” and 
had various names the world over, With the Iroquois of this continent it was 
called orenda. Religion as I understand it is the development of man’s Prac¬ 
tice and habit of seeking to establish friendly relations with that mysterious 
power upon which he felt dependence. It was to gain assistance in the struggle 
for the good life. It was not out of frustrated hopes but from the earliest 
davjn of the race that man has sought aid from a power not himself. To my 
mind Mr, Hayden’s position is based on an unproven and largely discredited 
theor 3 % It reads well but is it true. Mr, Otto is in agreement with Mr, 
Hayden, 

There is no essential reason for the strong, even antagonistic, non- 
theistic emphasis. Most of the huinanist’s ideals come out from Christian 
theism T^rhich includes humanism within its philosophy. That is to say that the 
Christian ethic outreaches the humanistic ethic. The hujnanist movement has 
come out as a protest against iniquity, injustice and robbery about which 
organized religion, which is often something quite different from theism, 
has done so little. It is the protest of the prophets, in a real sense, done 
over into tvj-entieth century language mth the ethical protest being made not 
in the naire of God but in the name of man. It Y/ould have more "go” if it 
had the conviction and experience of God behind it. Theism, I think, will 
win out but not without much opposition and I trust hellth-giving criticism. 


:4 







t’ 


r 




' I 


; ■ 


j 


.-■•J'lJ s'£ 1 J-'-f : I' uv. 


] 




Oil4' '/o 


. ! 




I 


•lori: O'V'r,. 





112 


Seotion TT ~ Theistic Solution of the Problems Raised. 

The theistic position overcomes humanism at just the three points 
which we raised in the last section. 

"A” First of all our definition of value must be established. "In¬ 
comparably the most impervious challenge which to-day confronts Christianity 
is the moral chaos of our generation. We cannot meet it by repetition of 
formulas, however holy and however venerable..But there is another 
question,' for more summary, which the world is asking daily and it is calling 
aloud for decisive answer. In its simplest terms the question is, "’’^Yhy 
shouldn’t I? There is no piecemeal answer to that enqu5.ry. If we take the 
established rules one by one, in their traditional form, we may fjnd ourselves hard 
put to it to justify them*,..., ,'What is required'/is less demonstration thajj this 
or that behaviour is'^vrong", than a constructive philosophy of life, Yjhich candidly 
faces all the new factors which have entered into the moral situation to make it 
both more delicate and more cceioplex and offers genuinely positive leadership," 1 
These words are from Mr. P. R. Barry’s opening paragraph in his new book 
"Christianity in the Hew World." It seems to me that both he and Mr. Lippraann 
are in very close agreement in their respective statements of the problem which 
faces the moralist, 

Mr. Barry believes that ai y answer which we may give must be creative, 
that is, having YiTithin it the elements of continuity and change. "We do 
Christianity a grave disservice if we identify customs and com/entions of an 
age that is now rapidly passing from us mth permanent Christian moral values," 2 
This is exactly, as we pointed out, what some of the humanists have been seeking 
to do. Their plea is that redefinition is retreat whereas actually it may be 
an advance, a positive and creative one. 

1. F. R. Barry-” Christianity in the HeYj World- p 1. 

2. " op.cit. p. 2 




] 









113 


Again, "The only authority which can be rightly claimed tr any 
moral standards or principles is that they are genuinely responsive to 
the deepest and truest needs of men. An honest ethic is always an "offence"j 
it is always bound to challenge the weakness and passions of the average sensual 
man.It is not one of the least of our temptations so to secularize the 
Christian ethic as to make it chime with the rhythm of the world. It can never 
offer men what they want merely at the level of their unredeemed desires. Yet 
no moral system can approve itself to the free critical judgment of mankind 
which seems to deny, frustrate or impoverish any essential needs of human 
personality." 1 Our conviction is that ethics must be set dovm in a "satisfying 
and coherent world-view." The ethic of humanism fails to satisfy us because 
it is grounded on naturalism which is not an adequate explanation of the whole 
of life as we knovtr it both within and without ourselves. Again that which we 
call our ethic is our social attitude to what has value in our oonscioi;isness 
and experience. It is our expression of what has value. The ethic of Jesus as 
we call it is made up of what he thought and did for men. An ethic cannot be 
unsocial but it can be very imregenerate. 

Christian theism has always had an ethic at its centre. The religion of 
the prophets was religion that was shot through and through 7/ith ethical impli¬ 
cations. The question for us is this, is the Christian theistic interpretation 
of man»s life the true one?- Many intellectuals v^rave it airily to one side and 
dismiss it. Such performance has usually revealed an intense personal bias in 
sohb other quarter. "Can Christianity come out intb the open, take a survey of 
various new factors, psychological, economic, socialogical and offer creative 
moral leadership at once more progressive and more stable than non-Christian 
thinking can promise?" 2 vve believe it can. And it must be said at once 
that Christianity is not primarily an ethic. Earlier in this essay we defined 
humanism as etiiios v/ithout God and so of course theism is at least an ethic 
carried on with the support of God. There is no such thing left as real 

1. Barry op. cit. p. 2 
2 " op. cit. p. 5 






114. 


Christianity if from it is remoired the religions element. Like humanism 
it is a way of living but it is'’primarily a relationship to God which issues 
in distinctive v/ays of living and characterietic valuations on life.” 1 
It is life based on the assuiiption that God really is and ttoat we can respond 
to Him and that to do so properly is to become ethical in the highest sense 
that we know* 

The way out for the ethics of theism if they are to be "vindicated 
to the hearts and minds of this generation, is to re-enthrone the Christian 

faith in God in the only position which it can rightly occv^y-at the centre 

of man*s thinking and willing, and their interpretation 6f life." 2 They 
are "an insight to be achieved"* The validity of the insight which planes 
God at the centre, at the point of focus from v/hich all else follows, is 
challenged by humanism. The "acids of modernity" have eaten away the old 
k) rmulas and therefore, it is assumed the "Real Other" whose presense they 
sought to make real, "The real question about Christian ethics is therefore 
to show hovf the Christian vforld view, centred upon faith in a living God and 
accordingly supernatural in its eu^hasis, can offer itself as the interpreta¬ 
tion of our rich and manifold experience in an ever widening and bewildering 
universe." 3 

Science is called incto justify many dogmas. What we require is 
rational affirmation which is quite different from personal bias or dogmatics. 
Science is "by the laws of its ovm logic, a resolute abstention from certainty 
and a ceaseless revision of hypothesis." 4 It follows that behind science is an 
evaluating mind* Religious field of investigation is that which goes on in 
the mind and spirit of man, Howhere have we any certain accepted body of truth 
and so in science, in religion or anytrhere else there is no common interpretation 
of what life really means. To gain such an interpretation is our problem, 

1. Barry op* cit, p. 7 

2. " op. cit. p. 8 

3. " op. cit, p. 10 

4* " op. cit. p. 11 


1 





'vv\- f'Dv in jY ^ 




C' 





115 


indeed it is the problem of all moralists, of all those v/ho believe that 
there is inherit in men^s lives something finer than sensual and physical 
appetite* 

Actually says Barry ’’Life has lost its controlling unity," 1 b;© far 
as our modern civilization is concerned. He agrees with Lippmann vhen he 
points out that an ordinary man’s life is now a number of specialized 
activities, "parallel and largely independent, each v/ith its own tednique, 
its own traditions and more and more, its own moral standards*" 2 Amid all 
this, "Religion too has become specialization and dwells in its oivn house."3 
Barry believes its health is seriously menaced by its spirit of aloofness^ 

He does not think intellectual solvents can carry tl« burden for most of the 
population. He quotes from Re inhold Neibuhr’s book "Does Civilization need 

Religion"-"The fact is that more men in our modem era are irreligious 

because religion has failed to make civilization ethical than because it has 
failed to maintain intellectual respectability." 4 And so, says Barry a little 
further on, "The task which confronts Christianity is to lift this world, so 
rich, yet so penurious, on to loftier planes of possibility by setting man's 
life againso its eternal background and redeeming all its this-worldly 
concerns by the cleansing presense of the supernatural." 5 

The weakness of theism has been its "other-worldly" over er>phasis. 

Cut of this escapeffrom the world it has only recently forsaken Hictism in 
the great and growing desire to Christianize all personal relationships. Too 
often religion has put its sanctity about economic selfishness. Too seldom 
has it sought to do the vdll of God in actual relationships. A growing social 
and Christian od nscience is awakening in these present days. Men are be¬ 
ginning to realize thn.t, "Religious experience cannot in fact mean anv-thing 
but the life-experience of a religious man, his total response to his enviren- 
ment as directed and sustained by his religion," s Also theists are awakening 
to the fact that it is an idle business to talk of spiritual experience "apart 
from those manifold occupations of thought, contenplation or conduct which 

1. Barry op. cit. p. 14 3. Barry op, cit, p. 15.5Barry op, cit, p, 19 

2, ” op.cot, p. 14 4 . op. cit, p. 16 6* " ^p. cit. p, 33 



t 


n 








'I 


('• 


( 


I 



(■' 


) 


! 

|l 


,'■> 





116 


the perogatives of spirit.And religion mainly consists in relating 

these, through its characteristic activity of worship, to God as the 
supreme Source of Value.” 1 This is the emphasis more and more being made 
by the theistic interpretus of life to men and v/omen to-day. Is it not 
as hopeful, if not much more so, that the intellectual solvents of the 
humanists? Theism must not utterly lose its other-worldly emphasis fb r that 
viTould leave us no better off that the humanists * Such an enphaais leads to 
a creative background by which we can test ourselves by somethirg finer than 
ourselves from whence, I take it, we have come. 

A new spirit was incarnated in this world in the life of Jesus who was. 
called Christ. We believe that that new spirit is akin to the deepest and 
finest quality of the universe. The humanists have the fact of Jesus* life to 
face. They, cannot, if they Y/ished, explain away the gospels, not' the Christian 
society. Sven though ”The New Testament is an(other-worldly book: its primary 
concern is not Yrith social duty: it is vj-ith sin, for^veness and atonement 
and the source of spiritual regeneration in the redemptive love of God the 
Father.” 2 Again ”The moral creativeness of Christ Himself is not shown in 
discussing conduct in different language from that of the .Rabbis, but in 
the ne'w temper and insight v/hich He brought to bear on existing material and 
the common stock of moral reflection.” 3 

Hellenism decayed says Mr. Barry because it had made claims on life 
which could be satisfied only by something which Hellenism itself could not 
provide. ”lt presupposed a confidence in life, a sense of innerfsecurity and 
freedom which has in fact no basis in experience save in the strength of 
spiritual conviction that at the heart and core of Reality is a mind and will to 
whom mankind is dear and in whose image it is made.” 4 Is not humanism in 
the same difficulty? YiThere there is a suspid on at the heart of life "and 
where the gods actually turn out to be only a "solemn pretense” or a symbol 
of ideals there is nothing with v/hich to redeem m.an. Surely we must, as Mr. 
Barry says, have something approaching an ultimate basis for believing in 
him. Can the humanist sustain belief in man, v^hen it is difficult to do. 






it 


,0 Y. 




’ 0 


1' .5 




'/:o 


o 1, o:' 


/ 


I'V 




O' i" 




:■ I),U' 00' j; 




n . n-[:y 


)i 


■ ■' nui'l Y'oio'.iii.: :• Y o; ■; , 

lo .av .‘o,:,':'o;i0- 


i; 





i 

i 


'X 0‘| ' ’ 




117 


Avithout a definite reason? 

Chn stianity won its way into the Greek-Roman v/orld because it had 
such a basis for belief, do have stressed the other-worldly emphasis in 
Christian theism but there is also within it a Christian humanism. The two 
currents are to be found side by side in the Kew Testament. Read Paul’s 
chapter on love in First Corinthians. 1 It is a central conviction of theism 
that life cannot be greatly transformed from without, vdthout being transformed 
from vrithin. To make people comfortable is not necessarily the same thing as 
making them happy or good. This may appear to be hard doctrine but it is true. 
But the theist must always bear in mind that "faith without works" of mercy, 
love compassion is as dead as can be . 

To atteii 5 )t to make the sayings of Jesus serve as an answer to all our 
questions would be folly. An incarnation involves limitations of time, of en¬ 
vironment and of culture. In Christ we have a revelation of the meaning of 
goodness, "He has become for us the personal symbol in which we object if 
your recognition that a secret has faded out of life which it would be worth 
all progress to recapture,"2 His life suggests Mr. Barry is a "supreme 
concentration". The saints do little and are much." 3 There are many ques¬ 
tions which he left aside to which directly and exactly he did nob speak, 

"In other words the concern of Jesus was not primarily with donduct at all,.... 
rather it was to redeem the relationship of all men and women to God," i 
Right conduct will follow if the le art is right. 

personally I wonder if we should be interested, in theism at all if 
it were not that our valuations of one another’s lives and the ansv/er to the 
meanii-g of life was set by Him over against the activity of a Creator Spirit. 
Barry writes truth when he says, "The whole story moves in an atmosphere of 
wonder, fringed, as it were, wmth a "numinous" corona vjhose flfones leap up 
in immeasurable splendid into spaces which v/e cannot chart." 5 We cannot 


1 . 

2 , 

3. 

4. 

5. 


St. Paul l,Cor, 13, 
Barry op, cit. p, 81 

" pp.cit. p.^ 85 

" op. cit. p. 88 

" op. cit, p, 98 



vl r 




'> -x. ,; 




.■ 'rxr’Ton ’ 











iX 



118 


tear it out of that setting. It may not turn out to be an aside from o^r 
quest to remind ourselves that Jesus walked, as we now are doing, upon this 
earth. 


Christian theism, at first looked upon as an alien bhing, as it moved 
out into the Greek-Roman world proved itself ’’the creative nucleous of a new 
society, sustaining, redeeming and transforming all that vj-as vital in the 
surrounding culture.” 1 

’’The tradition dies hard that Christianity is in some sense inimical to 
the arts,” 2 Most hujnanist writers do have this conviction, ’’There are indeed 
two strains in Christianity as there are in the fabric of European culture---- 
the world affirming and the world denying,” 3 Roughly made this is the dis¬ 
tinction between the doctrine of immanence and that of transcendence. The 
Renaissance was reaction in favor of the former. Actually the two sides of 
the question require balancing, Hi-imanism is historically speaking based on the 
doctrine of immanence which under the impact of the scientific method and 
knowledge has lapsed in humanist circles -to naturalism or materialism, Barry 
vronders whether what is true and vital in the humanism of our century can 
survive the ’’subsidience of its Christian bases”. For he raises the point 
about which we must ccotend, ’’But we cannot genuinely believe in man or the 
excellence of man’s perogatives unless we also believe in something more than 
man. We cannot coribine the ChrisU an valuations with a non-Chrisli an metaphysic. 
Humanism I’d.!! soon have to choose.” 4 . 

The fruits of naturalism are disillusionment. Let anyone read the essays 
in Poerester’s book ’’Dionysus in Dismay”5 or ’’pando'ra’s Box of Americain Fiction”,# 
and withstand, w'hat appear to be ligimate conclusions,of these writers if one 
disputes the abo-Te content! on about humanism, ’’Hence, as we know, the do ctrine 
’’Follow nature” came to mean a surrender of the vd.ll and reason in a carnival 
of sentimentalism and an uncontrolled facility of emotion. One impulse from 
the vernal wood was prized above all the wisdom of exper5ence.” iy Himiesnists, 


1 Barry op,cit, p, 103 

” op.cit, p. 105 

3 ” op,oit. p, 107 


4, Barry op. cit. p, 113 

5, Humanism & America -Chase p, 205 

7'. Barry op. d.t."p. P- 


", 





O ■ , ■■ o-:"- 


■: ,) I(V J' 


I'O uO T V ' ■ v' ' . • r ' ' m ./ • o ' ■ 


f 


■ ) i 


:■ ,';o :>, L' 




■ 


n :. .1 T 


:o i 


■‘■.n 


£ 


'1. 




^£C' h"-yi: o.ro"'• ^ - a '■ 


c) 




o d.. ml.y , o-’-: -v;? 



VC Vv' -' i 


■i'ij,:. 




M- 


'u-'t cny yy 


i: 


ba. 


': /1' 


>f KV, 



b-0 





119 


as we already said, call upon us to repudiate Romanticisn and take a real 
Humanism seriously, ’’Man, with his rational prerogatives and his high spiritual 
capacities, must be the measure of his own values, the guardian and guide of his 
ovm destiny.” 1 Exactly,but has Humanism a better case? Actually industrial 
relations, naturalism combined with a doctrine of natural goodness became the 
doctrine of laissez-faire. Then came the new 5.dea of progress based on the 
avowal, in popular science, of evolution. Progress became a magic word. Let 
things ride, it was said, and they will work out for good. 

To-day ”Mon*s minds are full of the thought of an open universe-a 

creative process, not a created fact, a movement whose life is within itself, 
out of which new events, new values, new and undiscovered possibilities cease¬ 
lessly emerge into present fact, 2 Science to many minds is a ma^an second to 
none, ”lt is the religion of popularized science; the romantic faith in Nature 

made more convincing and enriched with moral and religious sanctions.We 

are now responsible for our destiny. Give us time and we will make ourselves 
perfect,” 3 Mr, Barry in his next paragraph quotes from T, E. Hulme’s book 
’’Speculations” from page thirty-two by v/ay of reply to the above, ”We place 

hiJiman perfection where it should not be-on this human plane,,,,. •The abolition 

of some discipline or restriction would enable us, we imagine, to progress 
along one of these roads. The fundamental error is that of placing perfection 
in humanity.” 4 

’’Poverty, disease, crime and ignorance are id thin our power to eliminate, 
and scientists will eradicate the old Adam: education , travel and economic 
betterment will enable us to put on the New Man,” 5 

Such (b ctrine is fast becoming a world religion and it is a real rival, 
Barry says the one rival, to Chzi stian theism. It has achieved great things 
but now, challenges Barry, the world is paralyzed through lack of faith in it, 

1, Barry op, cit, p, 121 

2, ” op. cit, p, 124 

3, ” op. cit, p, 125 

4, ” op, cit. p, 125 

5, ” op. cit. p. 126 






'• r 






< 


I 


n'l '■ > 



I 








o ;■:/;.[ iI;;':.f 0'£„'M ho;:-;’ -'i ^ ■:> 







120 


It has set man on the world*s vacant throne: but it can no longer worship 
its idol. Self-worship is seldom successful," 1 

Only a few humanists have been constantly a\mre, apart from the theists, 
that the first necessity is self-mastery. "If we pride ourselves on being merely 
human, we shall soon cease to be even that/" 2 Mr, Babbitt proposes an ’’inner 
check" whidi will put a brake on our inner impulses, Mr, Lippmann proposes High 
Religion which is another intellectual solvent. Both of these solutions ignore 
some of the real factors within the life of a human being but in the act of 
understanding or in the quest for value the whole man enters in. "The centre 
which can give poise and unity lies, says religion, in the Will of God, It is 
there only that man can find peace," 3 

Barry refers us to a real and Christian humanism v/hich sings its way 

through the New Testament, "It offers all that Romanticism stards for-—the 

ample vista of a man's potentialities, a far-flung reach and range of aspiration, 
a claim on life that has scarcely any limit to it -but all sustained, disci¬ 

plined and fructified by a burning conviction about God and the vision of his 

in 

transcendent love and holiness,,,,,,.We find it ther^^individual lives- 

vivid interest in all that is interesting, gladness in all the good things of 
life, a reverance for and a trust in human nature, hallov/ed and controlled at 
the core of selfhood by faith, hope, love and consecration enkindled by the 
vision of God in Christ. ' This is a faith which is built on foundations," 4 
And I agree m th Barry that, in good part, "The irreligiousness of our contem- 
pories is in fact a standing rebuke to the poverty of the church’s thought about 
God," 6 Too often official representatives of theism ha^re been on the wrong 

side. We are in the world and the question is, can Humanism or can Christian 

faith in God redeem the world from "corroding triviality, enrich everything that 
is in it, cleanse, direct, sustain and sanctify its manifold enterprises and 

actitbies." 6 Redemption is the central note in theism as I understand it. 

1, Barry op® cit, p, 126 Barry op, cit, p, 130 • 

2, " op. cit. p, 127 5. " op. cit. p, 131 

3, " op. cit. p. 129 6, " op, cit. p. 131 





0 \ . 


■ ) 


O .1 i' 




'.iiO %:■ 


'I'joj; K'^Ti; 'i'.r,!o 


■.yiiijitu (yi 'ifv- 



' ■ ■':''ov o .;r:.M ^ , 

:v'::rO'^VJ rnJ f’:;'.' /'^■■■■":> ; • ]\ : 'u)' ;■ 'V' 

U/ n’-i.C'K! 'i:' , ; ;x:/; 


i.JYo' ao' 

« o*: ’ 'Yi: o r 


'/.Yi'.l . o'v.'oo yo'.': 

:>oOY .1. 'TYY o,uJ’ 


r-k 




()■:' 


r. 





121 


The heart and life of the Christian ethic is the redemption of our desires 
and wills, the transfiguration of our values, by God*s power and presenee in 
Jesus Chii st*” 1 

Modem humanism, like Hellenism did to man in times past, ’’has left him 
homeless and disillusioned and is less and less able to justify his distinctively 
^uman prerogatives,” 2 Our task then is to build anew the magnificenb humanist 
legacy upon a firm foundation in this new world so that the ’’heroic tradition” 
might return again, Barry is convinced that it must be built on a firm theo¬ 
logical basis. That is to say upon a theistic view of life and the universe, 

”For in God’s will all values are consummated,” 3 Sainthood may tum out to 
mean a discovery ’’that there is in life a richness of content which will never 
disdose itself to mere common sense, that there are depths and delicacies of 
insight which are open only to the single eye, and ranges of heroic consecration 
which only a life lived with God can sustain,” 4 If we rule out the supernatural 
we have cut the nerve of ethics. In the Christian world-view the supernatural 
is conceived as manifested within what is natural, yet as self-con^lete and 
transcendent. And man’s task and destiny is interpreted neither vfholly virithin 
the time process, nor as an escape from this world of time, with its fragmentary 
goods and conflicting duties, to the more real heaven of eternity; but as the 
realization here in time of a divine and eternal goodness in the sharing of 
which he is fulfi lied.” 5 

For Christian theism then man’s goal and fulfillment consists in ’’doing 
the Will of God”. It is a^er against this that we theists interpret value, 
that is, what man’s life means. That is to say we must decide what, for us 
at least, is the meaning of the imiverse. What is its purpose and tendency? 
Carlyle somewhere defines a man’s religion as vh at he really and truly believes 
about the universe and his relation to it. Our real question is whether at the 
centre of it —God is creatively active, ’’The theistic emphasis can no longer 
be laid on God as a personified Creator, anthropomorphically ccnceived and 
pictured, who is the centre of Biblical religions it must be on the immanent, 
creative spirit' revealing Himself in the life of the whole universe in all its 
Notes on folloiving page. 


: F 




1 


o 


It’' 


;: r f; 


-Fv^O (V 


t 








;f; nojiLl 


. O,; 


.'■'v T’f . i::'i!t fo,:!:; vor; ; 


■■xjH 


f 


0 :. 


f, 



■.■‘rol 





51 ' ' 


■Yx TD- 





r 


'.'O 







122 


mpjaifold, stupendous processes. The question is whether this iBcessity is 
fatal to a supernatural faith and rules out belief in a "personal God". 1 
Many writers assume that the God who is at the cmtre of the Christian faith 
is no longer intellectually respectable. But is this so? It is assumed that 


theism is inseparably tied to the crude anthropomorphic pictures of a dead 


generation. Mr. Middleton Murray^s writings, and others, give us some first 
class examples of anthropomorphism." 2 Note this example as cited by Mr. 

Barry from Murray*s book "God" (p.23o) does not exist, but we shall never be 
able to do without Him unless we know in ourselves the reason why He was created."3 


Again "V/hy it is considered crude and obscurantist to conceive Gk)d in terms of 
personality (at worst, the least inadequate terms we have) but philosophical 
and scientific to personify a fiction called life-force I have never found 
it easy to understand." 4 Nor have I. 

Religion, the quest for real value, demands a real and living God. 

We must find that value for our own day. We can, I think. We no%v live in a 
world in vhichthe doctrine of evolution is regnant in the Diinds of thinlcing 
people. May not this evolutionary thinking find its best and truest inter¬ 
pretation in theism? The word evolution is a word which,like humanism, has been 
used in so many different ways. As Barry says,"Its proper use is biological: 
at any rate it involves an adaptation of some part of the world to its enyiron-' 
ment. The universe as a whole cannot "evolve", nor can Truth or Goodness 

evolve...It is the minds of men which evolve, not the truth or goodness 

which they realize. Valuations may evolve: but values are the measure of 
evolution." 5 Again "Clearly we can talk of development only if there is some¬ 
thing which develops, permanent through the whole changing process and more 
fully expressed and realized in the final than in the initial stages, tot 


Notes for page 121;- 


1. 

Barry op. cit. 

p. 

132 

2. 


op. cit. 

p. 

134 

3 

Tt 

op. cit. 

p. 

137 

4. 


op cit. 

p. 

138 

5. 


op. cit. 

P* 

144 


Notes for above page;- 

1. Barry op. cit. p. 147 

2. Hyde's criticiam of j^ftirray- 
op.cit. p. 169- The New 
Romanitdsm—Chapter VI. 

3. Barry op. cit. p. 150 

4. " op. dt. p. 150 

5. " op. cit. p. 153 






1 






123 


is 

is it ih atevolving in the universe?.Development thus prepupposes 

’’purpose”. 1 Thus the modem theistic interpretation of the universe 

is the story of life ”as the progressive realization or disclosure of a Divine 

purpose at various levels of responses." 2 

»Ye believe that God is at work in the universe. Nor is Chiist the only 
revelation of God but for persons like ourselves He is God's fullest disclosure 
of Himself to us, "It cannot be urged too often or too emphatically that 
to claim dvinity for Jesus is not to claim honors for Him, but to make an 
affirmation concerning God.••,•..The whole Christian faith is really meaningless 
iniless we conceive God's work in Christ in relation to the v/hole sweep and range 
of God's work throughout the cosmic processes," 3 It follows, then, that for 
us to express God's \¥±11 is to co nform to those laws which express his purpose 
at any given level of life and experience. More of us can always be religions 
in the sense of alvmys being engaged at devotional exercises. Also the exper¬ 
ience of religion enters into all our living and it is ir^ossible for only a 
part of us to be religious. Also "What is God’s ’will at the level of religion 
cannot be in opposition to His will in the natural or economic order." 4 

liVhat then are values? It was necessary to cover the ground so that 
our ansvfer would appear to be rational rather than only dogmatic. Let us 
borrow again from Mr. Barry and make a very necessary qualification, "If 
value means anybhing for conduct, then it must be something wiiidi may be 
sought and recognized in quite humble and elementary grades of our response 

to the gifts and claims of life-in paying the grocer and watering the 

garden ——• not less than the pursuit of pure knowledge or thirst for the 
beatific vision.” 5 In so many books we have set up, as values, the trinity 
of Beauty, Truth and Goodness which may mean nothing to the man in in 

hunbled or in exalted circumstances in making a brave life. These terms as. 
they are so commonly used are "fatally lacking in just that precision and 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 


t; 


Barry op. cit. p 155 

" op. cit, p, 156 

" op, cit, p9 161 

” op. cit, p. 137 

" op. cit. p. 167 










' r 


.£V.,f: : rii 





124 


concreteness which is most needed." 1 For vfhat actually constitutes any of 
the above trinity, and th^ are inseparable and differ only in the degree 
of awareness with which they are realized in a given situation, values is 
precisely the goodness that they share in common* " There is just goodness, 
and we have glimpses of it, apprehend and express it in many different v;ays, 
but all as responses of our complex selves*" 2 

¥ow it is importait for theism to recognize the ultimate "unity of the 
good"* Otherwise if there are many goods irreducible into any organic imity, 
then the more good we seek to realize the more distraught and unharmonized are 
we," 3 For as Barry adds "this essential mutuality and interdependence of the 
modes of goodness, all implicit in one another and all responsive to personality, 
is of immense philosophical im port for the vindication of Christian theism," 4 
Let us analyse and investigate all vre v/ill but we cannot get behind the idea 
of goodness, "It is no more definable than truths but it conveys some meaning 
to all of US 5 and we all recognize goodness when we see it," 5 our lives 

gain meaning from that which we d aim, those things for vj-hich and by which we 
live* Those things for which we live and which we regard as good are what v/e 
call our "values". Value as we define it is related to purpose and to the 
quality of goodness which it contains, '^yiiatever a man lives for, that is what 
life means and that is what he believes to have value. Can humanism warrant 
on a non-theistio basis' that men mil want to live for what is best and m.ost 
worth while, "The idea of value, in our interpretation of it, is always 
related to the idea of purpose," S It is because an act has value that 
men carry it out, 

Barry objects to the popular idea that what life means also evolves. 

If so lifers meaning is relative and it has no real meaning* He is raising 
the distinction, a valid and necessary one, as to the difference between 
"valuations" which do evolve, and values. Yfnat the vforld "means" cannot 
change or evolve. But "we who come out of its evolving process may advance 





125 


to a less inadequate recognition of its worth, its meaning and its purpose,” 1 
To-morrow our generation may find value where in times past, and to-day, we 
were entirely unavyrare of it. Progress depends upon such discoveries. To 
gain fine and better valuations is to progress. If the evolutionary description 
of the creative process is true then there is ground for believing tha.t new 
’’evaluations” will yet emerge. 

It is this power to value, to differentiate that makes us persons, 

’’Value is relative to persons valuing; the characteristic of what we call 
value is to be sought in the subjects attitude.” 2 Truth, beauty, goodness 
are there to be discovered but apart from the valuing or imderstanding mind 
they seem to mean little or nothing. Is not the valuing mind akin, theh, to 
something deep in the nature of things. That is not to say that our minds 
create value but that by successive stages of valuations they approach towards 
it, ’’Values and va3.uations are correlative,” llr, Barry adds to his argument 
a statement from M, A. E. Taylor»s book ’’The Faith of a Moralist” (vol.l-p, 61),- 
’’Any tradition of living would soon cease to be a living tradition if men could 
be pursuaded that it consists of‘valuations ’ manufactured by themselves and 
i]T5)Osed on the‘real facts* of life from outside, A tradition thus degraded 
would lose all its power of inspiring to fresh endeavor and ketter action. 

The ideals of good which in actual history move men to fresh efforts only move 
so powerfully because they are not taken to be an addition iii 5 )osed on the facts 
of life but to be the very bones and marrov/ of life itself,” 3 

Many humanist^, Bertrand Russell for one, have sought to divorce fact 
from value. Actually in life we have neither facts without values nor values 
unattached to facts. Rather does fact reveal value and its value is dependent 
upon its character and setting in the totality of one*s environment. Also 
values which are set up unattached to some real fact are not values but are 

1, Barry op, cit. p, 178 
2/ ” op, cit, p, 180 
3, ” op. cit, p, 183 



O'- 


) 


o^ ui; £iT'.'. .i. 


!';;oV/lo 


O' 


O 'v 


o 


£'l ■■.irr'I; .-!./• 






, f.; 0 



'I 

■il 

j! 

4 





126 


illusions bom. of a subjective delusion. In other words facts must be in¬ 
terpreted if they are to serve their purpose and yield up their meaning. 
Russell and others are facing a fatal dualism and the solution in the logical 
sense is either to admit that fact and value are positively and creatively 
related or to say that life has no value, 

‘^Goodness is what all men seek after as that which will supply some 

purpose. That purpose may be limited or temporary...or it may be v/hat we 

call our life purpose. Every such satisfaction of purpose is, within its ovm 
limited context, good.” 1 Again, ”The hi^er the goodness a man achieves, the 
richer and more unified his character.” 2 Life sometimes becomes tragic since 
men sometimes are satisfied wholly with lesser goods that only minister to 
physical needs. ”Where there is no vision the people perish” said a wise man 
long ago. It is that being content with lesser goods which really is what we 
call sin. Being content with less than our best constitutes the moral problem 
with which both humanist and theist must deal. 

This, then, is our basis of value. The conviction in the reality of 
the goodness of a Creator Spirit who is an actual reality'-♦ He exists. He 
is something much more concrete than an ideal. There is ggt?ing out from 
the centre into successive levels that which we recognize as goodness. That 
is the foundation of value. It is from it that we wrest the ”good life”, 

l /Tnr) cannot create it but as conduct passes into something akin to worship 

he incarnates it. There is at this point no equivalent for ’’doing the VYill 
of God”. ”Y?e cannot be good in our family relationships, our citizenship or 
our daily duties, unless w'e are endeavoring to be more than good,-—to be 
conformed to the holy will of God.” 3 

Y/hen men*s lives are put over against a different background thah that 
one gets when comparisons are made between ourselves as we are, tJat is when 
9 iem are put over against the vision of God as realized before us in t3e life 

1. Barry op. cit, p. 186 

2. ” op. cit, p. 187 

3. ” op. cit, p. 195 






..Uo r. 






to L 


, : ■ 1 , O ; v ;.' 0;'O O'. '"‘)j " ' ' '1 

»':■(•■! ...H.i ■'''■k;.:: .C.'O'.‘I T/O-o i 'i 




127 


of Jesus,-there appear some new standards of measurement, We have not 

where 

yet come to the piaoe,y^ur valuations internationally speaking are very 
friendly but perhaps in this and other fields we will. 

V/e have set up what we mean as value. It is a legitimate definition. 

The charge remains against humanism that it has a real lack of clarity, almost 
one might say, a lack of definition about vdiat it sets up as value. It is 
based on something in man. Upon what men or what class of men? 'virno really 
is the sufficient man? 

Our answer is that ’’goodness" is the central constituent in the ground 
plan of the universe and from it all else proceeds. It is an inclusive and 
creative activity. It is to be found on various levels amid actual limitation§; 
for revelation always depends upon the capacity to accept it. We must admit 
that this definition does not surroiond the problem of evil but it does give 
moral support to those who are combatting it. For "It is not the will of your 
heavenly Father that one of these little ones should perish". 

"B" 

We shall not deal at great length with the second point at which theism 
has an advantage^ logically and actual, over humanism, Y/e raised the question 
as to v/hether humanism could win a response from the multitudes. Personally I 
do not believe that it can or that it will. 

First of all it needs to be said in refutation to the general eii^hasis of 
Mr, Hayden to the effect that the prophets and religionists of old gained their 
message solely from the social conditions of their day that it is not true. If 
such is true it is strange that Isaiah and Amos and Jeremiah stood out against 
popular opinion as they did. Actually they stood in direct oppo^itionsto the 
popular philosophy of the time. That was, that being prosperous (meaning those 
in control of affairs) they were righteous. We heard something like this not 
long ago about Thanlcsgiving time and for several years on this continent from 
Mr, Calvin. Coolidge. The prophets stood out against their day and their assert¬ 
ions made in the name of Yahweh were later found to be true. They had first to 


, ' -r -j;) -cj.erM -r!v.’' ; ' ■ 

' .bi, iC-Q il'-.b-j':-*?*! ; " 'jfv i: 

b; "'obil/' dov '{ ’:'; ' i -V, . 

. ,, Qvq „ ' ■ 

■jCiQXr ^Aii^h S'l ■ 

"'' ■■ ■' ocadf^;;’. ' •.' 






".;. '".o ,■■:■:■: ': 

’lo 

' /id f - b'*i ’ : ■ 




128 

educate their people or allow their experience of life to do it before 
God’s ethical challenge and judgment made sense. Their thought of God 
was for several centuries progressively ethical and more and more spiritual, 
^ point is that in the prophets there enters an element which Vr. Hayden 
cannot account for on any naturalistic basis. Moreover as we have already 
asserted it is the theists who in our day are serving their fellows in the 


dark and difficult corners of the world. Many of them receive very little 
in terms of this world’s goods. 

The prophetic tradition comes to a cliimx in the life of Jesus. 

Now whence comes the authority for Jesus and other theists? It was not 
wholly conditioned by time and space. Many of them were stoned to death but 
they have never been lived down. May I suggest that in these prophets and in 
Jesus we have an authority which authenticates itself through the' generations 

to men. The humanists say that the only authority is to be found within man - 

divinity is in man. 

This doctrine is at once an inspiration and a peril. Humanism is 
blind and philosophy would be, if it refuses to look squarely at personality 
and acknowledge that in the ascending scale of evolution individuality and 
freedom, increase as life reveals itself in forms ever intenser and more intri¬ 
cately organized. The point we are after is that theism has an explanation for h 
the quality we call personality and therefore can set man dcfirvn against some¬ 
thing ’’other*’ than himself. That vd.ll provide our authority as morals, 

Nov this universe is a coherant system or scientific laws mean nothing. 

If we speak of the power that is in all and through all as personal then it 
must be in a sense that transcends us infinitely both in purpose and in range 
of knowledge. And if our ideas grow up out of experience then we must expand 
our ideas of personality to fit the problem or at least approach it. Actually 
our thought is controlled to a degree by imagination but life is something 
more, for by a direct inner experience we come to see that ’’that vrhich knovirs 
is definitely related in sore actual way v/ith that which is iaiovm. All human¬ 
ists have this major distinction of principal caipis to face, that is the 
unityof the knower and the knom by a third quality or person. All we really 
taow about life pertains to quality and riobness of experience and 


r 



■ J-ai'if i.[y 

.on:;-': <r.£0;.: I'.t;-: 


'‘O’ 






.f^ 

t 


i0 O't boif ■ . ■: ■■ 'v r v:;vr' ..;‘ 



3 




■I 

I 


'l 


CcX9 'x.) rr::Xt:o!‘.‘ 


fti'U ' , r'-.G;., 


vD.b'TrK'xxo 


■a*}';]’;/, :xa .'Xo 

; .X'uiJ' .1 ; rf< x-;'Vf:v . •; ; ' ' ' ■ ; b-‘.Hi'f'■ d .X:'tG 


XG 4 :K:X)'';si' 04 .;: xo, 

dx;):rci'‘ . ' i{f:i,HO 


. v y-x■ a .... ■ x.cgg'g^,,', x x 

It '"'X . - „ ' ‘ ':,;.V, 

i i;.iv;' ■'.jx.iiG:;' ,xci,bb<>d^ xi-' 

!b , T'. Gn;-' ai; .fCoixibiV d.ai'U'ad'Ai, ■' 


W of' 


■i “ig 


'I''- ■x'ayiMo: 


o xh. .ax:xxi: 

' ^ '.' ddx i- ■ ix>r. ;i 
: ■ ' Gp|x|(;xb'', 

I .tJ'. ' n.i ■V\r-.vf 



ft 




129 


measurements, 

Now is personality only something to be found in man or are we just 
persons who are in the m.aking? In his book ’’Reality’^ Canon Streeter in the 
chapter entitled "The Christ" says this. In trying to account for the uni¬ 
versality of the impression of Christ" the life and character of Christ are 
an embodiment (whether perfect or approximate hardly affects iry argument) in 

concrete experience of an ideal prinicple --The principle of creative love. 

It follows that the thinker who wishes to form a conception of the universe 
must regard the occurence in history of such a life as a phenomenon of^ique 
importance. The life of Christ is a fact; no theory, therefore of the diverse 
can be intellectually watertight which is inadequate to explain this fact. And 
when a principle has been realized in concrete experience, we must ask how far 
it is representative of an element in Ultimate Reality, The fact of Christ, 
the actual emergence upon the stage of history of-this transcendent personality, 
is an empirical phenomenon which challenges explanation. For every effect we 
must assume a cause adequate to produce it. If the personality of Christ is 
the effect, is it not reasonable to infer, in that Infinite Creative Life which 
vre must assume as Cause, a character in which love is an essential element," 1 
Was Jesue miistaken in thinking that he was responding to the Will of 
God, Did his attitude of prayer, that was central in his life, bring back o 
only the ‘echo* of a wistful heart? I do not so believe. It follows that if 
Jesus discovered and incarnated something of the "Creator Spirit" that there 
is somethirg beyond ourselves to which we in our day can respond. 

That sense of "Something" which we believe is incarnated in a measure 
in the lives of the prophets and fully in Jesus gives ua a background over 
against which to place our challenge to men on behalf of higji living. It is not 
to frighten, if that ?/ere possible, but to help them to realize that along the 
road of doing the "will of God" lies the way to the "good life" for themselves 
and all other men and women, "He that saveth his life shall lose it" and that is 


1 . 


B. H. Streether, Reality — 209-10 



o .■ ' “T - "10 n. if r.i. o'., ocf od' r"i 

:■ 


:''6 '7' ’j:;-) 'V:. '■'I' k- 


!■ ; 




vioao' ov'O rr. 




3 



C)0' 

■fvQil;;!? i;,r.i'!7.:- 

rio'T 0 

r d' 

mv\k o 




oJ/'j 

.r.iiTi-n,' i 


' ‘ '\jX C '< ‘ C ’ 






130. 


a law of God and not of man. Humanism has nothing, only its tastes and 
fancies, with which to create auih ority. 

Again we believe that the theist can make an intelligent use as the 
non-theistic can of the scientific inethod, knowledge and technique. There is 
nothing inconsistent in making such an assertion and yet we noted a challenge 
to ry statement or at least such an iirplication being made by Mr, Otto, The n 
naturalistic humanists are quite sure that there is nothing immaterial or 
supernatural in the scheme of things which cannot be comprehended in the 
scientific method. Early in this essay we asked the question as to what sort 
of a picture science could give us of God. I think the answer is that it can 
give none but that it can help us to understand the possible framework in which 
a Creator Spirit could act. 

I refer of course to the doctrine emergent evolution as vre have it 
expounded by Alexander and more particularly by Lloyd Morgan, Both lectured 
at St. Andrevj-s University in 1921 and 1922 respectively under the auspices of 
the Gifford Foundation, In 1927 Morgan*s book was published under the title 
"Emergent Evolution", His general outline or description of the evolutionary 
activity is identical or nearly so with that of Mr, Alexander's as expressed in 
his book "Space, Time & Deity", Morgan however challenges and questions quite 
candidly the philosophical ir^lications drawn out of the scheme by Alexander. 

If I remember Mr. Bergson at all correctly, his general thought suggests 
that life or creative activity is something v;-hich shoots out and grows and 
ripens without ceasing. Time, duration, existence is a continuous upspringing 
of the Elan Vijjal into something new. There is something akin to this in the 
two philosophical systems that we wish to examine briefly. 

Alexander begins with Space-Time in order that he might have fluid 
relations for movement and change, vTe are to think out all that has emerged 
in the evolutionar^r process, indeed everything up to something just short of 
annihilation. This remainder he calls a world-ground. It is ccai 5 )osed of points- 
instants in fluid relations. But of this primary original matrix of the universe 


1 


'0 . 



131 


matter emerged. Out of matter higher and still higher orders emerged in an 
ascending scale until finally deity emerges as the highest product of nature. 
Alexander requires something in this scheme to account for m.ovement, activity 
and the evolving of higher levels. Time, an ancient category, is active by 
its oi-vn right. Space-time points provide the fundamental-go of the universe. 
Deity is found at the highest level after matter, vegetable life, conscious 
life, and personal life have evolved.Deity is always the last stage or highest 
level and thus deity is evolving. God in Alexander's scheme is the emergant 
universe that is. He is not at any one point, but is found throughout all the 
process. Each higher entity in the ascending scale is an emergant complex of 
many entities of lower grade in which a new or higher kind of relatedness gives 
integral unity. Life, for example, is a higher form of relatedness: than is 
matter. Also it must be kept in mind that Alexander does not allow that, in the 
jbrmation of higher complexes, something has been inserted 'ab extra'. liVhen 
life or mind appears it is not as though at these points some special alien 
influence was introduced. All qualities later realized at higher levels, emerge 
from mthin the pyramid. nothing comes into it from without. The future is 
still infinitely rich in possible developments. liThat the next highest level 
will be we cannot say. It can be called deity which is the name given to the 
next highest level as compared to that already achieved.” 1 

Lloyd Morgan called his book”lmergant Evolution^ He accepted Alexander's 
scheme but frankly di allenged the philosophical inferances drawn from it. The 
whole problem resolves itself about the nature of activity. ?/hat brings about 
novel events in the scheme of things,that is to say what makes emergance emerge? 
Morgan defends himself against the charge of beipg an uncritical acceptor of the 
mechanistic dogma. ”The odd thing here is that the whole doctrine of emergance 
is a ©ntinued protest against mechanical interpretation, and the very antithesis 

1. Indebtedness must be acknowledged to Dr. l^jcEachern’s notes on Alexander. 

These were prepared for his class in Philosophy 53 in 1929-30. 

2. L. Morgan Emergant Evolution p. 32. 




132. 

to one that is mechanistic. It does not interpret life in terms of physics and 
cnemistry. It does not interpret mind in terms of receptor-patterns or neurone- 
routes,” 1 

Again ”The essential feature of a mechanical -or if it be preferred, 

a mechanistic - interpretation is that it is in terms of resultant effects 

calcuble by algebraical summation. It ignores the something more that 

must be accepted as emergan^..,lt regards life as a regrouping of physio- 

chemical eveit s with no new kind of relatedness expressed in an integration v/hich 

seems, on the evidence, to mark a new departure in natural evenbs.Resultants 

there are but there is emergance also..That it cannot be mechanically inter¬ 
preted in resultants only, is just that for which it is our aim to contend with 
reiterated emphasis,It may be that we have just to accept the newly given 

facts-all the facts as we find them-in the frankly agnostic attitude 

proper to science. Or it may be that in the acknowledgment of God an ultimate 
philosophical explanation, supplementory, to scientific interpretation, is to be" 
found. That Yfill be the position I shall try to maintain.” 2 

In some chapter farther on in his book v>rhich we cannot examine very 
thoroughly, we read this. "New one of the cardinal irplications of emergant 
treatment is that the richer cannot adequately be interpreted in terms of the 
pooreri tha.t life cannot be interpreted in terms of physio-chemical relatedness 
onlyj that human affairs, v/hich depend on the quality of mind, require something 
more than biological interpretation; and that conduct I'dien deity is emergant 
depends for its guidance, in the naturalistic sense, on that which is expressed 
by this richest of qualities," 3 Morgan says that the critics of Alexander's 
philosophy say "that it is incomplete sance it not only ignores but disallows 
the concept of activity. Novy I am one of those who hold that, for purposes of 
naturalistic interpretation, this concept is quite useless, and that all the 
facts, those of life and mind included --—can be adequately described without 
invoking activity of any sort from start to finish. None the less from the 

1. Morgan op. cit. p. 7 

2. " op. cit. p. 8-9 

3. " op. cit, p. 204 












.‘I ' y i:.:: .I 'y: 


'r 



133 


point of view of a constructive philosophy, I, for one, am unable to see how 
one is to explain all that goes on from start to finish without it. At every 
upward stage of emergant evolution there is increasing richness in stuff and in 
substance. With the advent of each new kind of relatedness the observed manner 
of go in events is different.; in brii§f, the more adequately we grasp the 
naturalistic and agnostic position, the more urgent is the call for some further 
explanation which shall supplement its merely descriptive interpretation.” 1 
Morgan admits that he accepts ’’Activity under v/hat I have called acknowledgi^ment."2 
In the next paragraph, ”Por me tlie acknowledgment takes the form of belief in 
God.” Also we find the same conclusion expressed in the final page of his book. 

”We acknowledge God as above and beyond. But unless we also intuitively enjoy 
His Activity within us, feeling that we are in a measure one with Him in sub¬ 
stance, we can have no immediate knowledge of causality or of God as the source 
of our own existence and emergant evolution.” 3 

We might sum up Morgan*s position in a few words, A resultant is a 
meolianical equivalent but an emergent is more than a resultant since in every 
emergent there is something fresh, or new, a novelty which cannot be fU lly ex¬ 
plained by iffhat went in. For example oxygen and hydrogen combined in proper 
proportions make vj-ater. Yfater has properties of its own quite different from 
either of its constituents. The gases oxygen and hydrogen v/ill bum but water 
will not. That is to say there is some new quality in water T^rhich cannot be 
explained mechanically. The *whole* in this case, as usual, turns out to be 
more than the sura of its parts, 

Morgan acknowledges God as an immaterial source of change. He is the 
Hisus, spoken of by Mr, Alexander as the push to ever higher levels, through 
whose creative activity emergence emerges and the whole ao urse of evblution is 
directed. 

How the naturalistic humanists can accept Mr, Alexander’s scheme, and. his 
philosophy vrithout discomlbrt and vrith naturalipiety. Deity which v/ould be the 

1. Morgan on, cit. p. 205-8 

2. ” '^p. cit, p. 207 

3. ” op. cit. p. 301 



r 





i 







'■( 




1 ■: 






■4 






134 


Bexi: level above bhe best; qualibies yie have in persons now liv3.ng, or known 
of*, migji't well, if* he is right, turn out to be our unrealized ideals* But 
can they neglect to face Mr, Morgan*s challenge that an emergent is something 
that requires a different explanation from that required by a resultant, Mr, 
Alexander has a closed system with nothing getting out or nothing coming in. 

That may be a logical and true account but if it should not turn out to be so 
then his mistake is that he has not acknowledged all that was to be found, 
neither at the lower nor at the higher levels, Morgan is drawing a different 
conclusion out of a study of Alexander’s vivid and interesting scheme opens up 
a rational bs.sis for a theistic theology ’which does not have to retreat from 
things as they are. 

In other words accof^ding to Lloyd Morgan, that is if I am interpreting 
his emphasis correctly and in general terms, iirananent actionty cannot be ex¬ 
plained without reference to transcendent activity. Two principles must be 
recognized, they are continuity and change. In a’uni-verse ’, as described by 
either of these men, life is one for it is held to-gether by a kind of creative 
relatedness. On the higher levels we find personality. This raises the 
question whether we are to allov^r empirical scientific surveys to shout out 
the equally authentic testimony of experience in our effort to understand our 
v;orld. Some say that they know no God and some of us believe we do know 
something fine, beyond ourselves, a challenging and redeemirg spirit over against 
which our attitude of self is purged and redirected. 

Even, as we may later discover, if we are ohly persons in the making 
it follows that in the advance to higher valuations in our search for value 
and meaniig for life there must be some power finer than ourselves, indeed a 
good distance ahead of us. Does naturalistic humanism gain by being non- 
theistic? We do not know what it gains but we believe that it loses a great 
deai.1 As St, Paul wrote it; ”We are called to be fellow-workers YJ-ith God,” 

Mot a God whose only desire is praise and adoration and who is beguiled by 
flatterv and easy lip-rorship but One whose lavra and v/hose will as men become 
ready to incarnate them in fine liviig and service will open up the road to 
perfect freedom. 




135 


SECTION T. 

Conclusions, 

It is proper to call our answer to naturalistic humanism, Christian 
humanism because it includes within its theistic viev/ and expression of life 
those ethical ideals towards which most genuine humanists strive. The point 
of difference of course is that theism has a background over against which it can 
test its ethics but that humanism has not. i^iid theists are ethical and believe 
in God and humanists are ethical and do not. Of course there is a different 
emphasis on ethics betvreen the two groups. Being relative for the naturalistic 
humanist they are wholly subjective whereas Christian theism is the belief that 
in some real ways ethics correspond to the will of an objective and really ex¬ 
isting Supreme Being, 

Modern humanism looks forward to the future development of psychology 
and the social sciences as means to establishing a good society in this present 
world, Hmmnism and theism agree in te ing interested in making life happier 
on earth and both have faith in the potential and actual dignity of m.an and 
in the undeveloped or developing goodness of human nature and in the trust¬ 
worthiness of the human reason and conscience. To this faith in man an immense 
impetus was given by the rapid discoveries brought out in the physical scietxjes. 
Thus naturalism came to be the basic creed of the humanitarian doctrine of 
progress out of which, of course,, came many false prophecies. Along with the 
deistic concept of a clockmaker God who, having v/ound things up, went and 
never bothered again about his machine, came Kant»s assertion that the "human 
mind is active in cognition." About the middle of the nineteenth century 
romanticism gave way to an epoch of positivism and agnosticism of* which modern 
naturalistic humanism is the direct deseendent." 1 

There are four tenets of humnism which we must take into account. 

Horten quotes DV.John H. Dietrich (Humanist Sermons op.cit.p. 102-113) in 
connection v^ith the tenets of humanism. First "the conviction that man as 
"the highest product of the creative process," with "nothing above or beyond 
him”, but his o-wn ideals, is "an end in himself” and not a mere means for 
Note on next page. 




or " ' ■ V r . ■ ■■ ' ■„ * ' /o 




o'oo:, c ■ j o 






i 


1 









o. 



. r: 



■ r r ; 


"lo 







136 


carrying out the purposes of a superior being; (2) faith in the possibility 
of improving human life; (3) "belief in the essential unity of mankind, and 
the necessity of bringing men to a consciousness of this mityj (4) faith 
in man - belief that power to realize these great ideals lies in man him¬ 
self not in any "friend3.y providence" or "miracle-working God". 1 

Humanists persistently warn us against reading into the non-human 
world our ovm ideals and values. The world order is naturalistic and the 
only higher things are one ^s own ideals. Indeed we quoted Mr. Russell early 
in this essay to the effect that in the realm of value we are kings and victims 
in the realm of fact. 2 Herein is the fundamental dualism which is the basis 
of naturalistic humanism. We believe that our-interpretation of theism over¬ 
comes it but that it leaves himianism in a weak position. Horten contends that 
humanism can escape this basic contradiction by doing one of two things; 

"either by adopting a rigidly consistent naturalism which will destroy its 
faith in man or by affirming the objective validity of human values, Y/hich 
vj-ill lead it to a more appreciative view of the non-human world." 3 

Mr. Horten argues that Mr. Lippmann cannot carry out the logic of his 
position to its ultimate conclusion because "he is still a victim of that 
falsely shajrp distinction between the philosophy of nature and the philosophy 
of values which as we saw, is so fundamental a feature of the humanist position. 
This evidenced in the ambiguity of his favorite word "disinterested" . When he 
faces towards nature, he appears to take an attitude v/hich is disinterested in 
the sense of being imperturbable, indifferent, free from frustration because 
entirely free from hope and faith. VWien he turns to consider the large con¬ 
cerns of business and politics, he recommends that the statesman adopt an 
attitude which is "disinterested" in another sense; free from prejudice and 
self-seeking, btt certainly not wholly free from faith in human nature or hope 


Note for page 135;- 

Indebtedness must be acknowledged to Mr, Horten for the material in this 
paragraph. Horten-Theism and the Modem Mood. 


Notes for page 136;- 1. 

2 

3. 


Horten op. cit, pp 54-55 

B, Russell -op,cit.p.14-17 "What I believe". 
Horten op. cit, pp.81-2 


r 






j 


1 


i 






... . ,... .-.r: 






137 


of a happier human destiny, 'mien, finally, he oo mes to the ultimate personal 
relations of men and women, he finds the word "disinterested" more or less of 
an incubus (try if you can, to imagine a "disinterested" lover) and in a burst 
of frankness at the end of the Chapter he agrees vfith Dean Inge that not cool 
disinterestedness but "personal affection for men" is the path that leads to 
m-oral salvation." 1 Again "A cool and suspicious attitude towards the cosmos 
is hard to combine with a trustful and affectionate attitude toward humian beings."2 
Horten cites the new emphasis to be found on the part of professor Ames in his 
latest book "Religion" (pp. 173-175) in ^-hioh he finds in cosmic spaces an "order, 
power and beauty", that expresses exactly vfhat we lave been contending for on 
behalf of theism. "The idea of God may thus be seen to express more than the 
mere projection of himan ideals, for that expression still carries within it 
the old dualism between and alien cosmos and man*s little world of interests 

and values,.Manjr advocates of modern "huimanism" commit this fallacy of 

supposing that the one term of a dualistic conception may be dropped Y/hile re¬ 
taining the othe r........ They have luirfittingly separated man from nature with 

the same stroke, and have left their hiamanistic realm suspended between the 
void of matter on the one side and vacanc^r left on the other by the removal of 
the old supernaturalistic deity." (Religion Pp,173-75) 2 

In a footnote comment on Mr. Eddington*s book "The Mature of the Physical 
World" as inserted by Mr. Horten in his book I find confirmation of my argument 
that redefinition or new word pictures of that reality, who <£ course is un¬ 
touched in its real nature by our definitions, did not constitute a Y/ithklraYral 
from theism but an advance. It is a warning not tooaccept as absolutely correct 
or valid physical theories, "Yet he concludes by warning us against supposing 
that the destruction of a theory involves the destruction cf the facts and 
principles on which it is based. Scientific theories, he points out, are like 
the successive hypotheses wh±ch a man vrorking on a vast and complicated jig¬ 
saw puzzle might hazard from time to time, in the effort to guess what the 
Gor^licated picture was to be.......So, one might say, the discarding of out- 

Motes on follovfing page. 

















T 


do 


•o 




/> ir';'). 


I 


0 ■■ 


,0 


) 


d 'r' I 


O'l. V 





0 



o:-;' J:',!!-. 



t'\v> Oi;d \‘X‘} 




& -o 











138 


worn ideas of God does not in^ly that they had no basis in reality, but 
rather that they were warped and incomplete views, based on an inadequate 
survey of reality.'* This supporting comment may be worth something to iiy 
argument. 

We must bring religion into haririony with the scientific spirit so 
that religion might always be humane. Horten suggests that our idea of God 
must meet two conditions. First ’’That for an age seeking to progress in 

intelligence and in sincerity of purpose.its object of worship should 

be identical with, or at least include without inconsistency, the supreme 
idea of goodness Y>rhich tte-t age has been able to conceive,” (Religion in 
an Age of Science — Burt) and second that aiy idea of God be abandoned 
which could not under proper conditions be verified in every normal human 
experience,” 1 Earlier in this essay we liave tried to meet these two 
requirements. 

Mr Horten says the new theology regards God ”as a Being revealed in 
human experience, a dependable factor in it which can be isolated by scienti¬ 
fic analyses just as one isolates chemical elements or bacteria or vitamines,” 2 
Again ”God is that supremely worthful Being by devotion to which (or whom) man 
may attain the most vigorous vitality and the highest degree of selfhood of 
which he is capable,” 3 Let us follovj- Wr* Horten’s argument in a general way. 
First of all ”God is my own better self”" 4 But whom am I? Am I anything 
which I have received or that has not been commimicated to me? Obviously not. 
Well,then all through my life, at first passively and then actively I have 
been receiving. 

In the second place it follows that ”God is all that is best in our 
human heritage.” The realm marked out by this second provisional definition 
is a vast one, including the Yirhole social heritage of men, past and present. 


Hotes for page 137 

1, Horten op. cit, 

2, ” op,cit. 

3, ” op. cit. 



Hotes for 

138;- 


81-2 

1. 

Horten 

op, cat/ 

p. 92 

82 

2. 

tt 

op, cit. 

p. 97 

85 

5. 

n 

op. cit. 

p. 104 


4, , 

!1 

op. ci t. 

p. 107 



fJ'tOvv 


t n‘ ^ i: .. , vr>,i::-' ••; r • ■ y;-. '-'-fj ... , 

' - ■; ;H, -/;j i Jli. .C O ■ .i,;. ; ■ , 




t'liO 


o;;' ; ■rT,,,. , :; 


rj. •■)■; 


■' ' > ' ' ' ’ ‘ ■ * ■ . ' ' r- 

o , ' r ) \; . , .• ,■ 


= yO/' -rx. \r< '_ y> ■ ■ ’ , v,r . 'f , -- 

■ Cit'iJ'/.; ' . ■ ;■ 

":ci . a'’X.''i'' 

' •;.!>; ■i?„X . ^ oX" .IfD.' ■ ; ;> . r" ■ 

X"X.'-: ■o M , 

•-■. ■: j-/ ■ 

X xx -n ;hra ' 

' ' 'y):h‘y.x.'- I ’oo 

' -X ■; yfii/ix- ^ ^ 


V, •%>■' .. ■■ 

v;‘ H ‘ i-, ,A ) 


X-Vi: X/v^;c' ^ 




■ .; :i-;r '(o'l r^oX-nif 






iBm ni;. ' 

■■ • r ;■. ' 


f'X. iTOOlf, 

r.X 

■■' X -X H’ 


,f.:, :il :Siji . ,, 

fo fif) /OfX 

^ ■ (}, 

- y o , X... 









159 


Men with their devotion to their families, great scientists and teachers 
devoted to their work, sd 1 must find for themselves ’’where in this great 
realm is the supremely worthful object of devotion.” 1 The pi*ophetic succes¬ 
sion is filled vdth great names,- Hosea, Jeremiah, Jesus. For theism the ’’acids 
of modernity” will do great service if they will cut away the base and waste 
materials. Horten hopes that the spirit of science and that of democracy will 
become integrated in our great tradition of theism as did the Greek philosophi- 
aal spirit long ago. In all this ”God is the highest quality of life that has 
emerged in humani'by.” 2 For ’’The roots of what is best in humanity run deep 
dovm into nature and what we have called ’’the widening current of goodvj-ill” 
which runs through human history and has its sources far back in the biological 
and cosmic evolution.” 3 Eucken wrote many volumes to prove this. 

The third provisional statement about God is this ”God is a vast cosmic 
drift or trend toward harmony, fellowship, and mutual aid, whereby our efforts 
to create a just equilibrium in human affairs are supported and sustained.” 4 
This is an empirical fact, capable of social verification. What Horten means 
is that, for exarple, justice and peace are sustained by something in the 
structure of the universe i ’’the stars in their courses fight against Y/ar and 
oppression.” Actually it appears that the religious and philosophical quests 
come to-gether when pursued far enough. Horten v/rites —-’’human history is only 
the most recent chapter in the history of a trend towards harmony and co-opera¬ 
tion that is as old as the atom.” 5 

Horten maintains that to only call this trend a ’’drift”, reduce it to 
its loYvest terms, and ’’even on this minimimi basis, the process has religious 
meaningi and to define God in terms of it is to worship a great and exalted 
deity. Is it all an accident? As for me I cannot understand why a process of 
blind moverent, if it is that, should have culminated in the appearance of 
self-consciousness as we knoYv it is its best expression, nor even in its lesser 

1. Horten op. cit. p. 112 

2. ” op. cit. p. 115 

3. ” op. cit. p. 116 

4. ” op. cit. p. 117 

5. ” op.cit. p. 120 


incarnations. 



■'i: : rOjiocr 


c.' 


d' ^ ; r-OV.U ■ r’ 


■ ^ !' u'.:ro - C 

■'; V::"r;C^'' ^ ^;; ' " '. 


■;)£n 0 





'■'vA.’i:^; o,: 


J: ; .o - 


f 

■< ; 







T 





.'u :■ ', ' f>' (' 


^■'OV :. r.f.; •■■ .'fOi'i ^ 


.hn;?)*T ,;r 





!- 


J'Q.";' 




■ i'. 








140 


One more word and I have quickly to sum up v>rhat has been written. 

Such a conception o f God as we have tried to make clear cannot be acceptable 
to lir. Lippmann who apparently has fixed ideas that a popular theism must have 
a naive, childlike immature picture of God, I have tried to refute it. "It is 

a curious fact, however, that this naive picture of God "the God of popular 

imagination" as I should prefer to call it —is nowhere to be found in serious 
theological literature, before or after Copernicus. Meither Arigen nor St. 
Augustine nor St, Thomas Aoquinas had any such notion of God; and even Dante, 
v/hen he completes the ascent of the celestial spheres, and is ushered into the 

presense of God finds-VlThat? Mot a king upon a throne, but a sea of light 

and life and love, wherein the essense of all goodness and beauty is comprehend¬ 
ed, and in the contenplation of which the restless 'will of man is stilled and 
satisfied at last," 1 

Life is what 'cme might call a forced option, ViTe must in the last 
analyses make a personal choice. The alternative to theism, to my mind, is a 
blind mechanism. Mechanism cannot serve as a basis of interpretation for such 
areas of the world as life, mind or spirit that is those qualities which make up 
what vie call personality. 

Mow if our argument is at all sound we have presented a logical and 
rational place for theism. In it we have left room or included four things. 

First, we do not need to be afraid of naturalistic phenomena as being in 
any way a contradiction of theism. 'We gladly welcome the descriptive or explan¬ 
atory work of the scientist. We have a place beside us but it is beside us and 

not instead of us,©nly in co-operation do vfe both achieve our end-that is a 

well-rounded humane experience in life. 

Also our interpretation has allowed for the fact of emergence. This 
principle very definitely overcomes the dualism which, as vie pointed out, is 
at the root of humanism. The point is whether "we can love one another" if we 
live in a cold hostile world. Faith in human beings depends in the last analyses 
upon recognition of that reality which holds human beings together. Possibly 


1. Horten op, cit. p. 145 




141 


'we respond in ways of love to each other because love or something akin to 
it is closer to our lives than v/e know and because that which we value in 
one another is not a contradiction of what is really true in the heart of 
things. 

Then we have not neglected in our world-view the fact of personaliiy. 

It is the highest quality that we loiow. Can it be possible that it corresponds 
to nothing real and has come together by a fortuitous arrangement of something 
which we cannot measure and handle scientifically? The saner vi^ew, it has 
seemed to me, is that in ways we cannot yet comprehend, for now^’"we see 
through a glass darkly”, personality does correspond and respond on its 
higher levels to something akin to itself. We have called this ^Something” 

by name,-God or the Creator Spirit, Even though we turn out to be only 

persons in the making, theism has the more logical and rational explanation, 
Wnatever produced personality was not foreign to it. It follor/s that there 
must be personality producing forces in the Universe. 

Again, we have by implication been asserting what mky perhaps be called 
a sacramental view of the Creator Spirit at work in various levels in a universe, 
A lower level cannot stand in judgm.ent upon a higher level. If these levels are 
determined by a kind or kinds of relatedness then it naturally suggests■itself 
that the kind of relatedness felt and experienced by the best personality 
we know, to Eis environment vj'hich of course would include elements just beyond 
us, who are only average, until we increase in stature, is a truer interpre¬ 
tation of life than has been generally attained to. Listen to thisj ” father 
vrorketh hitherto and I work”. Such words were thought necessary by a first 
century writer to interpret the life of Christ® 'liVhat a background it was I 
That quality we have called goodness, which he called God eg. ”none is good, 
save one, even God”. 1 will be found to increase and vary on the lower and 
lowest levels. Perhaps it becomes more intense and progressively mare and 
more real, in the sense that it can be realized on the higher levels. Our 
conception is of the Creator Spirit or God ”going beyond Himself” so that he 
might realize Eis purpose in the universe. We believe the clue to that pur¬ 
pose can be found in Christ, 

1. St. Luke 18-19 R,¥. 




•C-I 


I' 












’■ '■ arJd’ ' /■ ’ ..u': 


■J ''Oi '' ■' 


fru'Oc 




i; 





• ' ■ *■'■■ '■ -■' -'r or ■) • ■ ■ 

vtX'Oi '’j'C'i:' ‘O t ■ - —■ ^ ■ . ■■ ■ r;.,;,. 

^ '■ ’ • i.L'r, - ■•. ^ .• • • ^ 

' ■ ■■ ' ^o;;-cr,'; r o'o ' ' ■■ ■ ; oj 

•A)i; * , ' 

■ ■/ ^,'00:..' ' ' r,;;;-)--ojvv 

' - ■ '■ , ■.; o ':i r-of) 


:»' 


j. 


Oa!.. 


■ 'Mi 




,'i,«!!' 


. m 

'"'•-■'I O'iOCT 


■.^0'j ;V 


. ■ o:',a;’ oif ■• ■ ■'U/uoir^: 








.aM , , r i 

:U'' , ' ' If/ 




142 


Such an answer as the above does not annul, but compliments the 
hummistic position on the dignity of life ^nd the place of personality. 

Our answer is a positive affirmation of the existence of God. All scientific 
findings have been gladly received for what they seemed to be v/orth virhen set 
dovm as fairly as we do it, in the whole of life. It would have been incon¬ 
sistent to have refused to make, allowance for the”valuating”mind that is 
behind all science and all philosophy and religion. Persons do sit in 
judgment upon their environment and upon their oi/vn ideas. We are convinced 
that persons are not any more accurate when they "observe”, this includes 
scientist, than when thej?- "experience”. Even scientists must get into the 
current of life. 

Life has been interpreted in terms of the "best” that we know. That 
best person was a theist. His life which incarnated a very vivid and personal 
and daring theistic world-view has given an immeasurable support to innumerable 
lives. It cannot be lightly put aside. In other words the theistic interpret¬ 
ation has been very fruitful in terms of noble and adventurous, steady and 
faithful living. 

JIaturalistic humanism must first of all resolve the dilemim in which it 

is placed -value and fact. The house that is divided against itself is 

not a strong house nor is the household ever happy, Sofar as sod a.l reform is 
concerned, it is of course very debatable, humanism mil not lose but gai n 
much by co-operating with theism. At present naturali stic humanism is really 
altogether subjective, I mean that its idea of value, which has, so it is said, 
no relation to What really is, depends upon individual bias and taste. ¥iy 
opinion is as good as yours et cetera, lilote the confusion that is revealed under 
the nanB humanism.. Each group is recognizing only its likes and dislikes. The 
end disillusionment for there is nothing beyond whereby he may correct his bias. 
In a word, the 3 .dealism of naturalistic humanism is hitched to nothing. What 
can come from nothing? 

”just v/hen the folly thee i&aiiy of the omniscience and omnipotence of 
man was narrowing religion, comprehending heaven and earth by the dogmas of 


h'T:V ■■■'■■ O ' ' rr ^ ir^'’' '■ v'l " r-..', ■ 

,‘; 'v^ :. ■ ■'. ', ‘ . V ^ 1-. -V'K.^ 




Xv- 


.:J: 

,5 '- ■xX.-’V- 


b:''-- X.. 'X'^'I''-.X'/X bffb niO'f-’ ... , X •, ; X' X-; ‘v . r- ‘X '.!■. 

vX'vX'' 'T;-'/ ■;;:X'■ •' 'vX*' •‘^Xo":' . , X'*' '■■ '(^'.r ■ \ ‘ 7 



rv.'i'aOC XX"-' ■ X'' ^ ■ b'T" XX>.^ ■ t'-Xo:': .'X: v;','.>r.' •' i.Xj: Xr-7¥;ffK?.X X:XX 

! -■ X):,r.X;: fX,.i X C -• o ; ■ X-n^'X o X' ,.7^x.w^■rtX 


X ■ ‘ X' cV'' i ..! - ’X';. Cj.'£0 !' 

6rc- :£tV/;o. Xo ■ X'.'XbX:)'.'' avXX ‘Xco v’"' oXX i-'; ' ;;t';;;,X' ? 

a.X'aX{i- ";'X. "'XX'£.;£:). Xcxx. i'fi'r^;iXX\-Xxn.u&xo^fO'6X’7wo, v’': '' XX-': • ^ ^ .-.--r-rr' XX; 

■ ■ ■’ ■" ' • ■' " '■ '■ ■ ^' ’'Xv' 





143 


their wisdom, piloting the whole world according to their ovm vail by the 
magic formulas of their prayers and offerings, a pious genius gradually 
led the omniscient and omnipotent to that which they did not and could not 

know and do.to the lilies of the field and the birds of the air, 

as to whose bloom and life man was at his wit’s end, because this life 
welled up out of the infinite itself 5 then on to man himself, in whose 
soul were hidden abysses of life Yirhich no-one could fathom, but which yet 
caught the echoes of compassion, a righteousness and perfection, whose home 
and hearth are in the bosom of the infinite, in the bosom of the hea-venly 
Father; they whisper to man that he is not what he has become, but vfhat he 
is endo^ved to become, that he is an infinite becoming,” 1 

If theism has to fight for its life, so to speak, as an interpretation 
of life for men and women of the TiYentieth Century it will be even harder for 
humanism. Theism can trust life and out-last humanism in so doing. 


1, Burman Foster - ”The Finality of the Christian Religion” p, 170* 




oo b.fto O O ' , 

I, 



.■i.'- ’-.O 

0 i 

.On; : ^;.E n, 


.; On;:U: 

-! ■ 

, Orv:. 

e no 

M" C - 


' ; ;.'0 n’ ; 





v/') ■ ^ 

. . ' 


0 ■ f'OO 

Off'i: 0 : 

r. -- ' * 

- 

.Oof,- n; ^-T: O' 

r;V’- 

00 o nio 

nrv 

' o • • • .. 

' ■' vs i .v 

Jo:.i' ,■>!•■. •• •,.■: 




1 


■ .'. 0 - ■■ ■ 

f ' ' t ' 



■ '■ C 


Ocl .it," , I 'i Jk';-) 

, i 







iSiSM 









