




































For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 



0.X OBBIS 








The Searoh For A Norm In Theology . 


Thesis 

Presented in part fot the degree of 
B.D., in the University of Alberta. 


Alexander Whyte Ogston. 


1923 







Thes i$ 
/?33 

ft* 


Contents. 


1. Introduction : - 

Definition of Theology. The function of Theology. 
Theology and Soienoe. Definition of Religion. Origin 
of Religion. Dogma. 


11. The Search for a Norm :- 

Roman Catholicism. Roman Catholic Modernism. 
Classical Protestant Orthodoxy - types - Anglicanism, 
Lutheranism, Calvinism, Anti-ecclesiastioal, 
Sectarianism, Constructive and Anti-modern Orthodoxy. 
The appeal of Theology to Christian Experience - 
Lessing, Sohleirmacher, contemporary. Ritschlianism. 
Modern Positive Theology. The Theology based on 
Monistic Idealism. Theology and Evolution. 


111. The Modern Norm of Theology :- 

The influence of the Historical Method of studying 
Theology. 

The Testing of our religious beliefs. 

The necessity of a creedal statement. 

The character of the doctrines set up. 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https:// arc h i ve. o rg/detai Is/og sto n 1923 


Brown 

Bibliography. 

The Essence of Christianity. 

Caird 

The fundamental ideas of Christianity. 

Clarke 

Outline of Christian Theology. 

Campbell 

The Hew Theology. 

Carlyle 

Heroes and Hero Worship. 

Cooley 

Human Nature and the social order. 

Dods 

The Bible its nature and origin. 

Gordon 

Ultimate conceptions of Faith. 

Herrmann 

The communion of the Christian with God. 

Leo Xlll 

"Enoycl." "Immortals Dei" (1885). 

Lobatein 

Protestant Dogmatics. 

Loisy 

In his "Quelques Lettres". 

Mathews. 

The Gospel and the modern man. 

Morgan 

The Religion and Theology of Paul*. 

Patti son 

The Idea of God. 

Pratt 

The Religious Consciousness. 

Sabatier 

Religions of Authority. 

Seeberg 

The fundamental truths of the Christian 

Rel ig io n . 

Smith 

Social idealism and the changing theology. 

Smyth 

Passing Protestantism and coming 

Catholicism. 


Painted Windows* 









































The Searoh for a Norm in Theolog y. 


itroduction. 

The etymological meaning of the word ’Theology* de¬ 
notes 'discourse or doctrine concerning God*. The word 
was used in this sense hy the Greeks to describe the 
work of poets, and the speculation of philosophers re¬ 
garding the ultimate ground of things. In the early 
Christian era the appellation of 'theologian* is given 
to the author of the Apocalypse, probably because he 
maintained the divinity of the logos. This term is 
also applied to the orthodox Greek Fathers in defending 
the personality and divinity of the Logos. But it is 
commonly understood now that 'Theology* is not restricted 
merely to one department concerning the doctrine of God. 
It also incorporates and deals with that content of 
human experience termed 'religion', referring to man's 
knowledge of God, to self-oonsoious life as organic to 
the world, to sin and death, to salvation and immortal 
life. 

As science deals with some definite department of 
human experience, so we may properly regard theology 
as that branch of science which deals with the depart¬ 
ment of human experience known as religion, from which 
experience man's knowledge of God and divine things is 
obtained. Theology has been defined as the science 
which deals, according to scientific method, with the 
facts and phenomena of religion and culminates in a 
comprehensive synthesis or philosophy of religion, 
which seeks to set forth in a systematic way all that 
can be known regarding the objective grounds of re¬ 
ligious belief. Thus a science of religion is a study, 
not only of the subjective contents of the religious 
consciousness, but also of the objective grounds of 
religion and the ultimate truth or reality which under¬ 
lies and explains the religious experience of mankind. 

jlfe Funotion of It is the aim of science in any of its departments 

Theology to discover facts and to establish connections between 
the facts; to discover certain laws which regulate the 
development and relationship of things and thus to 
unify into a coherent systematic whole a body of truth 
suoh as may be described as knowledge or reality. 

Inasmuch as theology seeks to apply this method in re¬ 
gard to the data of human experience in the department 
of religion, it is rightly described as a branch of 
science. The instrument of scientific investigation 


jfinition of 
leology. 















1 


rmty 



2 


is the reason with its powers and laws of perception, 
oonoeption, inference eto. The scientific theologian in 
building up a science of theology makes use of the same 
instrument. The function then of theology is to analyse, 
classify, co-ordinate and systematise all that is re¬ 
vealed to us in the department of religious experience. 

The physicist, the mathematician, the biologist may 
realize he does not know the ultimate natpre of matter, 
of space and time, of life and consciousness. It is 
here the metaphysician carries out the work of the 
scientist one step further. But here too, the metaphy 
sioian is faoed with problems of an ultimate kind, as 
in other soienoes, which still remain obscure. We con¬ 
clude, that theology and science as such, rest fundamen¬ 
tally on a foundation of faith - faith in the reliability 
of our faculties of knowledge (perception, cognition, 
inference, etc.) and on the ultimate reasonableness of 
all that is given to us in experience. 

Theology is the science of religion. Religion pre¬ 
cedes theology since it furnishes theology with the 
matter with which it deals. "Religion", says Carlyle, 

"is the chief fact with regard to man." 1. Religion is 
the primary and universal interest; theology is secondary 
and limited. Religion is the material, theology is the 
form. Religion is master, theology is servant. Religion 
may be viewed as life, and theology as the expression 
of this life in fundamental ideas set in their true 
order . 

The rationalistic school of the last century de¬ 
fined religion as the mode of knowing and worshipping 
God, that is, an intellectual apprehension of the true 
doctrine concerning God, and worship consisting of 
outward forms and rites. This definition must be dis¬ 
carded as wholly inadequate on the ground that the 
reality made central belongs merely to the circumference 
of the fact itself. If we are to discover the essence 
of religion we must look deeper. The essential fact that 
gives religious faith its distinctive oharacter is the 
personal relation of God to man and of man to God. Re¬ 
ligion has been truly defined as the 'union of man with 
God, of the finite with the infinite. On the one side 
it involves the self manifestation of God to men - the 
presence of the living God, who is not far from every 
one of his children, the God in whom we live, move and 
have our being. On the other side it involves some re¬ 
cognition, some presentiment of the supernatural on the 

!• Heroes and Hero Worship, page 8. 






. 


, 





■ 





part of man, some sense of dependence upon Him. 

Various theories as to the origin of religion have 
been advanced. The rationalistic orthodoxy has explained 
it through the hypothesis of a primitive revelation, 
which in the instance of the heathen has become corrupt, 
or has joined with deism in accepting the theory of in¬ 
nate religious ideas. Unbelief has had its theories. 

The old explanation that religion was a human invention, 
originating in priest-craft and the policy of kings, has 
yielded to more satisfactory views. The same may be 
said of the theory that fear is the cause of religion. 

A theory which has found much favour in the present 
generation is that of animism. Tylor has developed this 
view, and in his "Primitive Culture" maintains that men 
are led to the belief in a soul that is independent of 
the body, by the phenomena of dreams, of death, and of 
certain morbid states. The idea thus originated they 
transfer to other forms of existence - plants, animals, 
and even lifeless things. Thus they are led to infer 
the existence of higher spirits, which become objects 
of worship. According to Herbert Spencer, who olosely 
agrees with Tylor as to the origin of the idea of the 
soul, religion has its source in the worship of ancestral 
spirits. But all these theories are inadequate and 
artificial. The source of religion must lie deeper than 
in manifestations of this character. If man were with¬ 
out religion before the animistic theory presented 
itself to his mind, animism by itself could not have 
led to the rise of religion. The factors involved in 
animism do not explain the religious nature of man- 
the divine spark in man. Animism and ancestor worship 
are rather symptoms of the actual religious experiences 
of man. The actual presence of God, and His influence 
upon a spirit made for communion with Himself account 
for religion in all its stages. All men have some 
knowledge of God and find their souls going out to the 
divine in some response to His revelation. W.H. 

Oarruth in his beautiful poem on, "Sach in his own 
tongue", finely expresses this response on the part of 
man: - 

A fire-mist and a planet- 
A crystal and a oell- 
A jelly-fish and a saurin 
And oaves where the cave-men dwell; 

Then a Benee of law and beauty. 

And a face turned from the clod- 
Some call it Evolution, 

And others call it God. 


























4 


A haze on the far horizon, 

The infinite tender sky, 

The ripe rioh tint of the cornfields. 

And the wild geese sailing high- 
And all over upland and lowland 
The oharm of the goldenrod- 
Some call it Autumn, 

And others call it God, 

Like tides on a crescent sea-beach 

When the moon is new and thin, 

Into our hearts come yearnings. 

Come welling and surging in¬ 
come from the mystic ocean 
Whose rim no foot has trod- 
Some of us call it Longing, 

And others call it God. 

Religion is fundamentally the soul’s yearning after God; 
the search of the finite for the Infinite; the striving 
of the spirit of man for the Divine. It is the attempt 
on the part of man to soften the antithesis between the 
seen and the unseen. There is an infinity in man which 
makes this striving universal. As Tennyson expresses it 

”0 God, in every temple, I see people that see Thee; 

And in every language I hear spoken, people praise 

Thee . 

Polytheism and Islam feel after Thee, 

Bach religion says. Thou art one without equal.” 

This yearning of the soul after God leads to acts 
of worship which prompts man to regulate his conduot 
so as to secure the favour of the powers symbolising 
the Infinite, and eventually of the Infinite itself. 
Religion then may be defined as the natural belief in 
a Power or Powers beyond our control, and upon whom 
we feel ourselves dependent. This belief and feeling 
prompts to organization and specific acts of worship 
and to the regulation of conduct. 

The religious disposition of man, by virtue of its 
relationship to God has its natural expression in 
’belief*. Bvery religious act is at the same time an 
expression of religious belief. Religious belief, it 
has been assumed, in its earliest form, was not merely 
the outcome of an intellectual process, but rather the 
'perception of the Infinite’; giving expression to the 

feelings and emotions, it has been maintained that the 


■ 








5 


* perception of the Infinite* is an inadequate interpre¬ 
tation of religion, being too individualistic to the 
exclusion of the social factor. Pratt would rather define 
religious belief as, "The serious and sooial “attitude* 
of individuals or communities toward the Power or Powers 
which they conceive as having ultimate control over their 
interests and destinies. Religion is an attitude of a 
self toward an object in which the self genuinely be¬ 
lieves" 1. In regarding religion as an attitude the 
advantage is gained by involving the whole man, and not 
merely identifying religion with one department of 
psychio life. The origin of religion is no longer to 
be identified with theology as in the eighteenth cen¬ 
tury, or in any external revelation, but within the 
subjective needs of human nature. Just as language, 
morality and art have developed, so the development of 
religion is to be traced through purely human influences. 
Though subjective in origin and growth religion pre¬ 
supposes the acceptance of the objective. As Pratt main¬ 
tains, it is an attitude toward the Powers in ultimate 
control of one*s destiny - the "Determiner of Destiny". 
Prom this viewpoint then, Pratt would endeavour to guard 
against both the extremes of narrowness and of excessive 
breadth of either the theological or sociological de¬ 
finitions of religion. Religion is both a social and 
individual matter. The individual brings with him into 
the world certain abilities, tendencies and disposition. 
These determine largely what his religious attitude 
shall be. At the same time it is characteristic of the 
individual that he is sensitive to sooial influence and 
is capable of being moulded by society. "A separate 
individual is an abstraction unknown to experience", says 
Cooley, "and so likewise is society regarded as some¬ 
thing apart from individuals. The real thing is Human 
Life, which may be considered either in an individual 
aspect or in a social, that is to say a general,aspect; 
but is always, as a matter of fact, both individual and 
general." 2. So when we speak of the “perception of 
the Infinite* we are really using a concept that is 
worked out actually through social intercourse. The 
content of one’s religion depends largely upon his 
original psychical endowment and the influence of 
society. If then., from this point of view, the content 
of religion is a sooial matter, the responsibility of 
the individual becomes more apparent and encumbent upon 
him to accept and realize the ideals of Christ that 
they may be reborn in the hearts and lives of the 
individual members of each new generation. 

1. The Religious Consciousness, p.£. 

2. H«man nature and the social Order, p.l. 








1 













6 


gna The religious disposition exists prior to theology. 

The soientifio reflection of religion determines the 
formal element of dogma. "The root of dogma is found in 
the religious experience, (produced or awakened by an 
objective factor, in which is recognized a divine mani¬ 
festation or revelation)" 1. Dogma has its living 
source in the religious life and is the formal develop¬ 
ment of the intellectual elaboration of religious data. 
Dogma and religious belief are not identical. Religious 
belief becomes dogma when it clothes itself in an in¬ 
tellectual form as a means of self-manifestation and pro¬ 
pagation. It is the intellectual expression of the 
common religious consciousness in a given society. Dogma 
is the product of the religious society, and presupposes 
the authority of law within the Church which has pro¬ 
mulgated it. Thus dogma contains the elements of 
collectivity and authority. It becomes then, the function 
and duty of theoldgy to make dogmas intelligible and when 
necessity justifies it to renew them. History both 
justifies and condemns dogmas. History justifies the 
form of dogmas for a particular age in the past; but 
with the change of environment and the progress of 
thought beliefs grow old and therefore need to be re¬ 
newed, notwithstanding the most obstinate resistance of 
religious conservatism. Theology fulfils its true 
mission as a reforming agency in creating for religion 
new forms, in bringing the teachings of Christ to bear 
upon the consciences of men and upon modern society. 
Theology thus "becomes a benefioent mediator between the 
life-principle of Christianity and the needs and re¬ 
quirements of the present time." 2. 

The question as to a norm in theology is equivalent 
to that of authority in matters of faith, and it is from 
this point of view we shall approach the question of a 
norm in theology and from a study of types perhaps 
clarify our own religious thinking and get our own stand¬ 
point . 

In the search for Truth - or a norm - there have 
been efforts to establish assurance and authority on 
different aspects of truth, and often these have been re¬ 
garded as final . Conflicts have arisen owing to mis¬ 
interpretation and dogmatism as to where assurance and 
authority do reside; whether in Institution, or Book, 
or Sxperienoe. 

1. Protestant Dogmatics-Lobstein, page 11. 

2. Religions of Atthority. page 359 Sabatier. 


e Search for 
a Norm 









' 


■ 







7 


Man as he is constituted demands an authority-the 
positing of a norm in matters of faith. Poster says, 

'Our inner life demands an authority, objective and 
absolute; and at the same time present within man in such 
a way that its commands are inwardly compelling and not 
forced upon man by some external power 1 . This statement 
seems paradoxical but nevertheless it contains a vital 
truth. There are the objective %nd subjective factors 
of experience, upon one or both of which theological 
thought has endeavoured to base the assurance and 
authority of religious belief. 

Roman Catholicism is the first type we will con¬ 
sider. Romanism is built upon a world view belonging 
to a past age, namely, upon the political and military 
system of the Roman Empire. The Emperor in thosedays 
was the embodiment of all authority. Romanism may be 
defined as an attempt to interpret religion in terms 
of its Divine perfection. The Romanist would argue, 
that in religion mankind should have nothing but the 
best, the absolutely pure, the unalloyed. Eenoe a purely 
God-given religion is man's greatest need. Roman 
Catholicism is the only custodian of a purely God-given 
religion. It possesses a purely supernatural system 
into which nothing given by man has entered. We must 
see it as an hierarchical system in which the superior 
denotes a oertain content to the inferior. We may look 
upon it as a system of donation and reception. 

Man as he now is, is inherently corrupt. This 
corrupt state came through the fall of Adam and has been 
transmitted from generation to generation. According to 
Augustine man could reveal only so many splendid vices. 

If that be true, if man exercises his powers he goes 
astray. Hence any religious truth arrived at by human 
ingenuity is futile; it is defiled because man himself 
is defiled. Thusthis must be removed. Man cannot do 
it; the cure must be received. It cannot come from any 
man; but from God. There is a fundamental distrust of 
human power, of man's conscience, reason and emotions. 

The key to the whole system is the absolute antithesis 
between man and God. 

Certain definite implications arise out of these 
suppositions. In the first instance, there can be only 
one true religion; one truth and that is God’s truth. 

All others are false or else serious perversions and a 
menace to mankind. The one true religion is Roman 
Christianity because it is divinely instituted and or¬ 
ganized. In the second place, there can be only one true 








■ 





8 


kind of Christianity, and that one divinely authorized, 
i.e., given by Christ to Peter and so on to the Bishops 
of Rome. It is, therefore, the one universal Church 
organization after the divine pattern; all other forms 
are to be discredited, indeed should be crushed. The 
keyword then, in every stage of the organization, is 
divine authority. 

What then, is the primary virtue in Romanism? It 
is implicit obedience to authority. A true Romanist re¬ 
ceives his beliefs, obeys the beliefs and ritual of the 
Church as told. Father Knox says, "The intellectual 
duty of a Christian is to resist the natural tendencies 
of his reason and believe what he is told, just as he is 
expected to do what he is told, not what comes natural 
to him." 1. He is passive - passive even in his ac¬ 
tivity. Anything whioh weakens passive obedience is 
bad. inquiry is bad. Criticism is bad. If a man wants 
to get any other reason for the Church 9 s decree, that 
is bad. 

Since religioe rests on this divine authority we 
must locate it. The primary question must be; where is 
the authentic Word of God‘ ? The answer is; the Roman 
Church divinely founded to declare God’s Will. Pope 
Pius VII said, "To the Church Christ intrusted the 
whole deposit of divine revelation". Where do we get 
the divinely authoritative revelation of Christian 
truth? Again the answer is; the Church. The Church is 
the agent. Christ by using his divine authority appoint¬ 
ed Apostles, endowed them with the Holy Spirit and thus 
they were oapable of infallible judgment. They also 
had the power to transmit to their successors their 
prerogative. As time went on, in order to maintain 
ecclesiastical authority, the Vatican Council in 1870 
created the infallible authority of the Pope, endowed 
with "Full and supreme power of jurisdiction over the 
universal Church, not only in things which concern 
faith and morals, but also in those which concern the 
discipline and government of the Church in the whole 
universe. If anyone denies it, let him be anathema." £. 

The perfect agent is the Roman Church; the perfect 
content is in Scripture and Tradition. All tradition 
is involved in scripture made explicit to fit all con¬ 
crete situations. The Church alone can interpret the 
exact meaning of Scripture, and no scholar may question 

1. Painted Windows, p. 64 

2. Leo XIII Snoyol "Immortale Dei" 1885. 























the deoree of the Churoh in its interpretation of 
Soripture. In Romanism then, one finds and infallible 
objective revelation, objectively defined and located by 
an infallible Churoh, and this Churoh speaks infallibly 
and finally through the Roman Popacy whose ’ex cathedra’ 
judgments are final utterances. 

Roman Christianity, then, is a complete autocracy 
formed on the basis of a special divine prerogative 
which is absolute. Truths are given to man and not dis¬ 
covered by him. The administration of authority belongs 
to a divinely authorized priesthood. The thinking of 
the people must be watched from above. There is a 
fundamental distrust of all secular education and enquiry. 
Man, because of his natural religious inability cannot 
arrive at truth. The supernatural grace which alone oan 
transform a natural man into a Christian comes by way of 
the Church and specially mediated by certain channels, 
namely: faith, through the Church doctrine, confirmation, 
mass, penance, confession, etc. A religious attitude 
of mind is one of unquestionable loyalty and obedience 
to a divinely established system. 

Modernism is a movement with a progressive programme 
within the Roman Catholic Church. During the latter half 
of the nineteenth century Romanist scholars began to give 
attention to Church history. That led inevitably to a 
study of the Scriptures from an historical or critical 
standpoint. There was a tendency to become dissatisfied 
with infallibilities and ’’absolutes”. These scholars 
became known as Higher Critics or Modernists. So wide¬ 
ly has the influence of the movement spread that the 
Vatican is now seriously alarmed at its extent and 
vitality. Some Protestant observers believe that it is 
destined to be the greatest religious movement since the 
time of the Reformation. 

What is the issue between the Modernist and the 
Roman Churoh? How does the Pope define the issue? It 
is a question fundamentally between loyalty and disloy¬ 
alty to a divinely authorized institution. "A good man”, 
says Pope Pius X, ’’will want to be loyal to God's re¬ 
ligion as set forth by God’s Churoh; any other attitude 
is a serious error of the mind”. 

In an Snoyolical of Pope Pius X on "Feeding the 
Lord's Flock", we find represented the attitude of the 
Vatican towards Modernism. We not© such utterances as 





_ 







- 10 


these: They are "striving, by arts entirely new and full 
of subtlety, to destroy the vital energy of the Churoh"; 

"They are enemies of the Churoh";"They are the most per¬ 
nicious of all the adversaries of the Churoh, For, as 
we have said, they put their designs for her ruin into 
operation, not from without, but from within; henoe, the 
danger is present almost in the very veins and heart of 
the Churoh." "Every Modernist sustains and comprises 
within himself many personalities; he is a philosopher, 
a believer, a theologian, an historian, a oritio, an 
apologist, a reformer." They attempt to ascribe to a 
love of truth that whioh is really the result of pride 
and obstinacy." "The security of the Catholic name is 
at stake". "We should define it as the synthesis of all 
heresies". Such is Modernism in the mind of Pius X. 

What is the meaning of this movement which seeks to 
modernize Roman Catholicism in the free spirit of 
democracy? Don Romolo Murri says, "We desire a Christian 
ity more pure, more intense, more practical, more 
Christian, more conformed to its original, more conformed 
to the Gospel". Such then, is the spirit and outlook of 
those who are regarded as rebels against authority by the 
Roman Church. These so called rebels claim to be a body 
of men obedient to the Churoh, loyal sharers in her 
common life and task. They offered their Churoh a 
suggestion of a programme befitting her in this age. 

Is there only a conservative spirit in the Churoh? Are 
we always to b© bound to a mediaeval outlook? Is there 
to be no progressive programme of study and work suited 
to our new age? Their only ambition is to bring the 
Churoh into touch with new problems. 

The methods of Roman Catholicism and Modernism of 
arriving at truth are at variance. The logic of the 
orthodox Roman is a priori. Truth is given, not dis¬ 
covered. On the other hand the Modernist would build 
on the materials of experience. He Is inductive in his 
method and follows an unprejudiced enquiry into the 
facts. The orthodox Roman says this method is unsatis- 
factozy, for It cannot give certainty or assurance. To 
the Modernist the method of arriving at truth is vitally 
important. The seeking of truth is a sacred privilege-- 
as sacred as the affirmation of a Christian doctrine. 

As he studies the Scriptures from an historical and 
scientific point of view he comes to the conclusion that 
a human element has entered in to the production of the 
Books. His aim is to discern what is permanent and 
universal. Loisy, who was exoommunicated from the Roman 
Catholio Churoh in 1906, represents the historioal develop 




- 11 - 


ment of Christianity as an organic whole, and throughout 
the continuous Christian tradition he seeks to discover 
the vitalizing and formative principles of its develop¬ 
ment. In a letter justifying his position as a Catholic 
he wrote, "I have denied that Jesus, properly speaking, 
has founded a Church with its organs of government and 
its usages of worship, because the texts, interpreted 
according to the sense and the guarantees which they offer 
to the historian, allow us to affirm that Christ did not 
do anything else, up to the close of his ministry, than 
to announce the near coming of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

The Church was born first, positively and historically, 
from the immediate action of Christ upon a determinate 
group of persons, who recruited other believers; from 
the spirit of universal charity, which is that of the 
Gospel, and from the idea, likewise, of the Kingdom of 
God, which was conceived as the universal society of the 
just." 1. 

"The primary fact", says the Modernist, "is the 
religious experience of living men." The orthodox 
Homan considers the primary fact to be the divinely pro¬ 
vided system . The seat of authority is an infallible 
Church. Father Tyrrell defines the Modernist f s principle 
of authority as in Christ, "He is our first and our 
highest authority. Were they to forbid the appeal, 
their own dependent authority would be at an end." 2. 
Again Father Tyrrell affirms, "Any interpretation of 
papal infallibility which finds the organ of Catholic 
truth in the miraculously guided brain of one man; which 
renders futile the collective experience and reflection 
of the whole Church, destroys the very essence of 
Catholicism in favour of a military dictatorship which 
is the apotheosis of individualism. Authority, then, 
is not an external influence streaming down from heaven 
like a sunbeam through a cleft in the clouds and with 
a finger of light singling out God*s arbitrarily chosen 
delegates from the multitude, over and apart from which 
they are to stand as His vice-gerents. Authority is 
something inherent in, and inalienable from, that 
multitude itself; it is the moral ooerciveness of the 
Divine Spirit of Truth and Righteousness immanent in 
the whole,dominant over it s several parts and members; 
it is the imperativeness of the collective conscience" .3. 

1. In his Quelques Lettres p. 237 

2. Opuscit, p. 19 

3. Ibid, p. 369. 












I 



1 










- 12 


Thus do we find manifesting itself in the static 
domain of Homan Catholicism, the same vital energy and 
spirit which has been pressing in upon the protestant 
world. In God’s providence men to-day have come to think 
and aspire in a new and other way than that existing when 
old dogmas were formed. We have now a new outlook on 
life, a new interpretation of the world. Must then the 
Christian faith always be confined to thought forms of 
another age? May we not translate our outlook into new 
thought-forms? May we not state our thought In view of 
the problems of to-day - to win men to the feet of 
Jesus, and thus bring the function of the Church up-to- 
date? Shall Christianity cont inue to be defined in 
teims of a finished and perfect dogma, or as a spirit 
and an aim which may make use of new methods of enquiry? 
"Men's minds”, says Newman Smyth, "must live and breathe 
to-day in the same intellectual atmosphere; the Homan 
Catholic mind cannot, if it would, escape from the 
environment of free education. It may adapt its faith 
slowly; it may for a time refuse to go forth from its 
close systems into the freedom of it; but live in it, 
it must; It must breathe in the general intellectual 
atmosphere of the day, or die”. 1. The general situation 
present within Protestantism as well as within Roman 
Catholicism indicates the perpetual vitality of re¬ 
ligious faith which refuses to be anchored to the dead 
past, for it is a living vital thing demanding adapt¬ 
ation to its present and modern environment. This is 
the distinguishing factor between Modernism with its 
new outlook and the perishing authoritative and in¬ 
fallible beliefs of the Vatican. 

The norm of Christianity cannot be taken from any¬ 
one century or identified with any one of the stages 
of historical development. Modern Christianity must 
use modern social and political contents in order to 
interpret and propagate Christian truth; through modern 
channels which are the conditions in which we live. We 
can express the entire truth of Christianity only as we 
use it all,la» the whole movement of truth. We must 
be trulyUatholio, we must allow the influence of the 
whole movement to be felt in our lives. The entire 
history of Christianity must be spiritualised so as to 
be free to apply itself to this modern age. 

The mediaeval world was organized with a certain 
definite mode of thought applied in a most thorough¬ 
going way to all departments of existence. And because 
Roman Catholicism applied that thought she was a great 

1. Passing Protestantism and coming Catholicism, p. 96. 




constructive foroe in that age. But the modern outlook 
is different. We employ another mode of thought - 
another world view - and only as we utilize this modern 
mode of thought are we likely to prove a great con¬ 
structive foroe. The real issue between the mediaeval 
and the modern is that of two ways of thinking. The 
aim of the mediaeval was to secure an absolute obedience 
to a divinely constituted authority which represented a 
tranasndent God; whereas, the modern way establishes 
human rights in a secure place through an emphasis on a 
divine immanence. So to-day we are inclined to widely 
extend the sphere of man's responsibility, not to God 
alone, but to matokind, to the whole cosmos, the whole 
organism of whioh we are a part because God is in it. 

How did we come to think of this way? It has been a 
search for a solid foundation - ana that in ’experience® 
- in the experience of man; and we have found all men 
with a capacity forreligion and therefore forced to the 
conviction of an Immanent God. But it may b© argued 
that this is a tendency to make human consent the final 
arbiter. Does this rule out God? HO: for He is the 
indwelling personality in the world. He speaks in and 
through men. Whatever good there is in the world is a 
sign - a spark of the Divine. The task and responsi¬ 
bility then of the Christian citizen is to make God the 
all dominant power, to make the outcome of political 
laws God-like. Applying this to theology the same is 
to be said. Our Christian judgments as to doctrine are 
final in so far as God moves in men. Therefore con¬ 
fessions and creeds will have a Divine validity in pro¬ 
portion as the Church is responsive to the spirit and 
will of God in creed making. 

Classical Protestantism arose in a mediaeval world 
whioh Roman Catholicism had already interpreted, and it 
presupposes the same conditions which Romanism pre¬ 
supposes. Original Protestant theology departed from 
Romanism because Luther and his followers became con¬ 
vinced that Roman Catholicism had no right to claim 
divine authority exclusively. Both groups agreed on the 
transcendence of God and obedience to Him, but Pro¬ 
testantism objected to the Church's claim to God ex¬ 
clusively. Therefore Protestantism sought to redefine 
and relocate divine authority. 

Luther was in great religious distress about his own 
salvation. He wanted absolute assurance that he was 
right with God. He sought it in the ways of Roman 
Catholicism, by prayer, fasting, penance, etc. But he 



T 








I.) 













- 14 - 


failed to find it in these and the process was painful to 
him. He only found peace when he realized that ‘the just 
shall live by faith*. As a consequence of his search 
Luther became convinced that Homan Catholicism was full 
of uncertainty. He reached the conclusion that no man 
can give peace to another; no institution or indlvi&ual 
can give assurance. It can come only from God Himself. 
Therefore, Luther stood solidly on the ground of the 
T Priesthood of Believers*. No intermediaries can stand 
between the soul and God or ought to try to. Classical 
Protestantism said - f away with intermediaries!*. 

Classical Protestantism accepted as axiomatic that 
the doctrine of the Word of God was given in the Bible. 

All that man needed to know was found formally stated 

there. That was the divine revelation. "Through 
Scripture God Himself so speaks to the soul that the man 
is convinced without the intervention of any other proof 
or authority that this is the Word of God. The individ¬ 
ual does not need the Church to tell him that this is 

the Word of God. God tells him so, and makes all other 

authority superfluous." 1. There are two main principles 
then in Luther*s theology. The first, the material 
principle, is justification by faith. The second is the 
normative authority of the Bible . Church Tradition was 
man" r s judgment, but f°Ee™Mble" is purely God’s thought. 
Thus Calvin in Book I of his Institutes says, “The 
Christian must read the Bible saying as he reads, God 
is speaking thee© words to my soul here and now.” 

Since the Bible is God * s Word all that theology 
means to do is to set forth what the Bible teaches. Thus 
we have the development of Biblical Theology. Starting 
from the premise that divine truth is revealed in the 
Bible the question follows; what does the Bible teach? 
Romanism declared that a divinely authorized Church de¬ 
clares what the Bible reveals. But Protestantism did 
away with all intermediaries. How, then, shall we be 
sure of what the Bible teaches? What is the Protestant 
duplicate of the Roman doctrine of a divinely given 
Church interpretation of Scripture? For the Protestant 
the interpreter is the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit 
interprets that Word for the Christian. The" inner 
testimony is that of the spirit. The us© of a mao's own 
understanding is unsafe. The understanding is guided, 
not by a Church, but by the spirit of God. Calvin says 
"The same spirit which dictated the divine original must 
speak in the heart testifying to that divine original". 
Here then is the parallel to the Roman Catholic system . 

i* The Bible its nature and origin, pods P«42 










T 










T 






- 15 


God tells what His word is by His Spirit. But suppose 
that Christian men were to differ regarding this inner 
testimony of the Spirit - what then? It would appear 
that almost any Christian man may set himself up as a 
Pope. That is exactly what has happened again and again 
through history. It would seem then that the whole sy¬ 
stem is divisive rather than unifying. What we have is 
a picture of two absolute authorities denouncing each 
other. The outcome has been division and sectarianism. 
This is the root of all division from then on. 

Since God's revelation is given in words and sen¬ 
tences, a kind of grammar, of etymology, helps one to an 
interpretation of Scripture . That more than the Spirit 
is needed is a factor in interpretation. So Protestant¬ 
ism began to develop scholarly methods of interpretation. 
But this leads to an embarrassing situation, namely, the 
one best fitted to interpret is the expert - the 
scholarly Christian. This may have been all right in 
Mediaeval thinking, but after a civilization or two 
scholarship was moved by a new scientific purview. 
Specialization became the order of the new day. Thus in 
our modern day the position apparently presents dangers, 
that is, scholarship is so specialized as to get so 
far in advance of the average Christian, and the inter¬ 
pretation of scholarship is reckoned as hazardous in an 
age of change. Here, then, we have the dilemma of 
Protestantism. First, in leading to sectarian bigotry; 
second, in putting the ordinary Christian subordinate 
to scholarship. Protestantism was thus driven to either 
one of these directions, fl) to a clear-cut interpre¬ 
tation of Scripture or (2) to Scholarship. 

The tendency has been to modify the presuppositions 
of Mediaevalism, and in that process we get away from 
Popes to something broader. There has been a great 
change. There have come schools of thought and types 
of theology and these became the types of Classical 
Protestantism which have involved controversies and 
heartaches . 

There are four main types of Classical Protestantism, 
Anclicanism , Lutheranism, Calvinism and Anti-Ecclesiasti¬ 
cal Sectarianism. 

ioanism I. Anglicanian was not a religious revolt against Home 

such as we find in Lutheranism, It was rather a politi¬ 
cal revolt or an assertion of national rights. Primarily 
it was a national political movement, but at the same 




• ) 





4 








- 15 - 


time it made use of the Protestant polemic to buttress 
the action they had taken. The chief difference between 
the Roman Catholic Church and the Anglican is that the 
Anglioan Church does not recognize the Pope. Where does 
the Anglican posit his authority? Bishop Hooker in his 
vindication of Episcopacy sets forth the answer in main¬ 
taining that God gave His revelation to a small body of 
men who were the Divine eeclesia and that has continued 
through an unbroken succession. The authority of the 
Church remains. But the Anglican is an eclectic and 
comprehensive, therefore you find the distinctly Protest¬ 
ant note included as well as the Catholic, i.e. God 
speaks through His divinely given Word with an absolute 
authority, and also through the Reason of men by His 
Spirit, for Reason is also a divine gift. The Anglican 
Church is very catholic in its outlook and tastes. But 
this very catholicity has its dangers, for we find three 
great schools of religious thought within the Church 
itself. There is the Anglican who finds his basis of 
authority in the Church - he is the High Chiashman . 

Bishop Gore is the most devoted defender to-day of this 
party. His whole mind leans towards the authority of 
the Church. He maintains that there must be an organ¬ 
ized society of believers, believers in the creeds, and 
an absolute obedience to authority among these belters. 
At the same time authority alone is not sufficient. 

"We must teach” h© says, "fully teach, reteach the truth 
on grounds of Scripture, reason, history, everything, 
so that we may have a party, a body which knows not 
only that it has got authority, but that it has got the 
truth and reason on its side" 1. Then we have the 
distinctly protestant type who finds the Bible as the 
most essential feature. The Church has its authority 
only as it is based on the Scriptures, The Church is 
secondary, the Bible is primary - he is the Low Church¬ 
man. There is also the man who sees truth and authority 
in both, and he declares you must articulate these two 
by the use of Reason - he is the Broad Churchman . 

If Bishop Gore represents the traditionalist within 
Anglicanism, Dean Inge represents the conservative 
modernist. The true goal is for him an unified exper¬ 
ience which will make authority no longer external. He 
thus finds himself compelled to disagree with certain 
religious opinions which are widely held such as the 
infallibility of ’the living voice of the Church 1 , and 
the finality of the appeal to Holy Scripture, and also 
with those religious philosophies which make religion 

1. On Bishop Gore in "Painted Windows" p. 15 . 





- 16 


eranism II. 


rinism III. 


-Ecclesias¬ 
tical IV. 
arianism 


exclusively an affair of the will, or the intellect, or 
the aesthetic sense. The crucial question he maintains 
is whether Christianity can come to terms with the awak¬ 
ening self-ooosoiousness of modern civilization, equipped 
with a vast mass of new scientific knowledge and animated 
for the first time by ideals which are not borrowed from 
classical and Hebrew antiquity. To Sean Inge, "It is 
what Christ said that matters, what He taught that de¬ 
mands our obedience, what He revaled that commands our 
love. Christianity for him is not a series of extraor¬ 
dinary acts, but a voice from heaven. It is not the 
Christ of tradition before whom he bows his knee, but the 
Christ of history, the Christ of faith, the Christ of 
experience - the living and therefore the evolving 
Christ". X. 

Lutheranism is a system of religious thought and 
truth designed to satisfy the certainty of divine sal¬ 
vation. The keyword of Lutheranism is "Assurance". 

How is one to experience this certainty of salvation? 

God in His Word has made certain promises to men and all 
they are called upon to do is to receive the promises, 
to claim them and to rest upon them by faith and they 
are saved and they know it, they have found assurance. 

No rational element enters here at all. One is not saved 
by Reason but by faith. Here the individual is to the 
fore as over against the social control of Romanism and 
Anglicanism. The crucial points for the Lut*er)fan are: 
the Bible is the revealed Word of God: you are justified 
by Faith. 

The characteristic of Calvinism as over against 
Lutheranism was its greater interest in a more complete 
system of religious thought, and its relative distrust 
of emotional life. Assurance does not depend on feel¬ 
ing. It does depend on obedience to the Divine Decrees, 
"If any man shall do he shall know". The aim of Calvin 
was to organize the whole life of society on the basis 
of these Divine Decrees. Calvin gave a religious 
significance to the State, education, politics and 
industry. For Calvin the Bible is a system for Life to 
b© applied in every day life by rulers and people. 

Anti-Ecclesiastical Sectarianism represents in¬ 
dividualism ruthlessly applied. Every man has the right 
to interpret the Bible for himself by the guidance of 
the Spirit. They feel that the main Church bodies are 
too much under restraint, that they simply accept the 

1. On Bean Inge in "Painted Windows" p. 15 . 

















' 


■ 



. 




f . 


■ 



. ' 



- 17 


I 

istructive 

and 

ti -Modern 
sp ho doxy. 



heritage handed on to them - a kind of Popery* Their 
chief accusation against the Churches is that they have 
not come apart from the world. "Come ye out from among 
them and he ye separate", is their favourite injunction. 
They view the Scriptures very literally, and usually 
discount, even despise learning. They believe the ideal 
is a study of the Bible and that alone. You find this 
type in Anabaptists, Plymouth Brethern, Mennonites, 
Mormonism and Seventh Day Adventism. These sects have 
no theological conttibution to make. They do produce 
a certain stubborn kind of loyalty, but as far as 
scholarship is concerned they are at best fragmentary. 

There are two types of orthodoxy, constructive 
orthodoxy and Anti-modern orthodoxy. The spirit of 
Protestant orthodoxy of to-day continues to display 
the spirit of Classical Orthodoxy. The latter greatly 
assisted in a day when the world was drifting from the 
Homan See. It supplied new sanctions in a day when old 
sanctions were losing their power. It was the gfceat 
constructive force of that new day. So present day 
orthodoxy has entered into a new world and is showing 
itself in some degree a constructive force. It seeks to 
interpret and to build up in the face of a new science 
and of new political conditions a wholesome philosophy 
of life in line with the sacred Scriptures. It main¬ 
tains the authority of Scripture as guide but in the 
interpretation it is broader than Classical Orthodoxy. 
There has developed a spirit of general inclusiveness 
in line with our changing philosophic ideas and our 
advancing scientific knowledge. This new outlook is 
represented by such men as William Adams Brown and 
William Hewtom Clarke. Brown would approach the study 
of Christianity by the scientific and historic method 
in order to find what is universal in Christianity; "to 
express, in terms recognized as valid by large bodies 
of men, that which successive generations of Christians 
have found distinctive in the religion of Christ." 1. 
Constructive orthodoxy gives a primacy to Scripture, 
but at the same time it opens a way for a type of re¬ 
ligion which is based on religious experience as a 
whole. "The Christian Experience" says Clarke, "has 
been the great preserver of the Christian revelation. 

This experience is the actual life of Christianity iteelf, 
in it Christianity lives and has its being. The bible 
itself is an expression of experience". 2. 

1* The Essence of Christianity p. 11. 

2. Outline of Christian Theology, p. 18. 














- 18 


Anti-Modern Orthodoxy is of a dogmatic type. It de¬ 
sires to he so religiously perfect as to command man in 
God's name, 'Thus and thus must ye do 1 r It becomes 
evident that the world is using a new approach to its 
conclusions. The modern protestant refuses to be dragoon- 
ed; he wants to be rationally convinced and therefore 
demands the right of enquiry, and enquiry convinces him 
that some things in the Bible must not be taken liter¬ 
ally, for instance, the early chapters of Genesis, or 
some particular theory of the Atonement. At any rate 
some problem may have mad® him doubtful of the Christian 
presentation of truth. Now, dogmatic orthodoxy demands 
that he submit to God's authority without question. 

There is the Bible, take it. It is polemical rather 
than constructive, divisive rather than unifying, 
denunciatory rather than persuasive. This group has 
become well organized to-day and includes the Funda¬ 
mentalist and the whole Pre-Millenarian movement, 
(Adventism, Pentioostalisra, Russellism, etc.) repre¬ 
sented by such men as Torrey and Haldeman. The move¬ 
ment has received much of its inspiration from the Moody 
Bible Institute, of which most of the Bible Training 
Sohools are reflections. Under the direction of certain 
leaders conferences are organized and a series of 
prophetic conferences are held in large centres to 'save 
the world from its awful apostacy 1 . A tract of the 
Moody Bible Institute says, "You can deal with men only 
as you conquer them by God's Word, and only as you pre¬ 
serve the literal inspiration of God's Word is this 
possible". They hold that Sohools, Colleges and 
Universities do not make people aware of that fact, 
therefore the need for institutions that stand on the 
pure Word of God. Comparing this with Romanism we 
find that both are dogmatic and arbitrary, both scepti¬ 
cal of free education, both make it clear that salvation 
is not possible apart from their own clear-cut way. 

This school can never have the dominance because it is 
so arbitrary and dogmatic. 

Appeal of "The letter”, says Lessing emphatically, "is not 

eology the Spirit. The Spirit acts through the letter, but 

xperience. it is not bound to it. It blows where it will, and it 
blows everywhere. Oh, Luther, thou hast delivered us 
from the yoke of tradition', who shall deliver us from 
the yoke of thy letter?" Lessing is the prophet of 
the religion of the Spirit. 1. If Lessing was the 
prophet of this new outlook of theology, Sohleiermaoher 
was the great creator. He it was who displaced the 

1. Religions of Authority, p. 207.Sabatier. Ibid p.2lo 









: 














19 


basis of the old dogmatio and transformed the very nature 
of theology. As Sabatier says, "With him the Protestant 
oonsoienoe finally passed the strait which separates the 
theology of authority from the theology of experience. 
Religious truth could no longer be given by an oracle; 
henceforth it must spring out of experience itself, and 
never cease to reproduce itself in pious souls, undeh 
the permanent influence of the Spirit of Christ. Holy 
Scripture could no longer be the foundation of faith; 
it became an auxiliary, a means of grace.” Schleier- 
maoher had opened a door to the future which no one 
would thenoeforth have power to shut. A few contempor¬ 
ary thinkers who are emphasising theology’s appeal to 
evangelical experience are Stearns, Clarke, H.C.King, 
Lyman Abbott and Adams Brown. In this new type of 
theology there is a radical departure from the found¬ 
ation of the preceding; sohools. Previous systems set 
out to authenticate a divinely given revelation, to 
prove the divine authority of the Church or the Book. 

In this new system the materials for building a 
theology are to be found fundamentally in experience 
rather than in a Church or Book. That method of approach 
is radical if carried out. It would do away for 
example with the proof text method and would demand 
logically the employment of an inductive method . That 
is to say, it would aim by starting with the facts of 
life and on these alone base your conclusions. Thus 
in order to avoid an extreme radical interpretation, 
the basis of the appeal was made to Christian experience 
^4*,.&*he-are •••#itrd : ^d«ep' : assurances and a message of 
authority. While accepting the new method, at t he same 
time, the old conclusions were held to. They had a 
deductive frame of mind with an inductive method. They 
appealed to experience, but it was an experience which 
an older theology had put into it. Prom a critioal 
point of view then, this appeal to experience turns out 
to be very unsatisfactory. In order to have scientific 
value at all Christian experience must be well defined. 

It should be differentiated from other experience. The 
scientific method was not consistently followed because 
they felt the pull of the past. 

This appeal to experience has brought about certain 
notable changes in theology. Scripture is no longer 
regarded as a compendium of doctrine as Calvin saw it, 
or as developed by Hodge; it is above all Books valuable 
as a means of grace. 

The traditional aim was not to find the meaning of 
God in human experience but rather to affirm the 




! 



f 
















i 























- 20 - 

ontologioal character of God, viewed as transcendent, as 
beyond experience. When we base our doctrine of God on 
human experience we will not speak in terms of super¬ 
naturalism but rather in terms of life and its environ¬ 
ment. Theology has come to speak of God in terms of an 
unfolding process. Through this type of theology God is 
known through the channels of Love, Friendship and 
Comradeship. It will emphasize the Mercy, Forgiveness 
and Long-suffering and Patience of God. These things we 
actually know. There will be little space given to the 
metaphysical qualities, but the practical and experien¬ 
tial will be emphasized. 

As to the doctrine of Creation, previous theologies 
looked upon Creation as a Divine fiat - the will of God 
expressed in action. The account is a product of 
Semitic thinking in the form of a picturesque stoiy to 
explain a fact. But this new outlook in theology inter¬ 
prets the creation In terms of the evolutionary con¬ 
ception . 

Regarding the doctrine of man experience will not 
say much as to whether man was created as a special 
species, but it will surely say much about sin, conscience 
a sense of guilt, forgiveness, redemption, about the 
life of Christ here and now. The tendency is to be¬ 
come less metaphysical and more practical. The older 
theologies had much to say about Adam and lay the blame 
at his door. We lay emphasis on sins that destroy life 
here and now. 

The Person of Christ is at the heart of the whole 
Gospel. Does experience testify to His pre-existence, 
the raising of His body from the dead, etc.?. The 
modern tendency is to emphasize the person and Work of 
Christ as actually known in human experience. This 
means we are putting the emphasis upon His personality. 
This is not taking away from Christ His pre-eminence. 

He oontrols our human situation in spite of apparent 
indifference and laxity. 

It has been customary to commend faith in the 
miraculous as the only faith that is in a position to 
give God the honour which is His due. The world of our 
experience is a world of order where miracle does not 
exist - or rather where mystery is everywhere, therefore 
miracle is everywhere. If we abandon the method of the 
appeal to the Book and regard the appeal to experience 
as primary, does this necessarily invalidate miracle? 

hare is no dispute, because miracle is so common and 
is everywhere. 









































£1 


ichlianism:- 

Ritschlianism may well “be oonneoted with the theol¬ 
ogies which appeal to evangelical experience. The 
connection, however, is not chronological, it may rather 
be set forth in the method of appeal to Christian exper¬ 
ience $ that Christian experience was not adequately 
defined, k Christian theology must be an expression of 
Christian faith. It must, therefore, set for itself the 
task of finding out what the elements of Christian ex¬ 
perience really are. It is the first business of theol¬ 
ogy to set forth the contents of a living Christian 
faith. But more, a living Christian faith has a source, 
it is caused by something, it has an historical origin, 
and we are not really scientific about it until we press 
through and back to the source or origin. 

Ritschlianism was a movement of religious thought 
which built upon Christian experience, but it insisted 
on relating that Christian experience always to its 
origin. It is of no use said Ritschl building upon 
metaphysical abstractions nor upon vague mysticism. 
Neither Hegelian philosophy with its bold world view 
assumptions, nor yet Sohleiermacher T s vague Cod - con¬ 
sciousness is solid ground for any Christian thinker. 

The first question, therefore, that a Ritschlian 
would ask is; What makes a man a Christian? or what does 
his Christianity rest upon? Herrmann who is one of the 
followers of Ritschl answers the question. He says, 

"The older theologies believed that their great task 
was to present in their logical connection those thoughts 
in which the classic witnesses to Christianity had ex¬ 
pressed their faith. We go farther back for, and desire 
to show how these thoughts arise in the course of 
communion with God in the Christian’s soul that has been 
set free to enter into this experience. Thus we ex¬ 
hibit these thoughts, not as something handed down by 
tradition, but as something in vital growth at the 
present moment as, in short, thoughts of faith." 1. That 
is to say, the older theologies believed they had to 
take the thoughts of the Scriptures into a body of faith; 
the Ritschlian seeks for that which is behind the 
Scriptures, namely, the experience. So it makes the 
psychological process the basis, not the Book. The 
Lutheran viewed the Scriptures as a revelation of God 
which can be experienced by each human soul. This was 
opposed to the Roman view that the Church was the 
official interpreter. The Ritschlian theology here is 
in sharp contrast with orthodoxy, as it maintains that 

1. The Communion of the Christian with God, p.40,41. 












T 










zz 


revelation depends upon the impression made on one*, it 
is a matter of subjectivity. Nothing oan be revelation 
unless it oan be personally experienced. 

Religious experienoe deals with values rather than 
objective reality. We are part of the unity of the 
natural order but our mind rebels against being merely 
a product of nature. We are conscious of being something 
over and above the natural order, though 1 in numberless 
ways we are dependent upon it. We are in nature but 
not of it. We are forced to make claim of a higher 
worth. The fundamental problem is to find a solution 
which will enable us to realize what we feel to be the 
highest value and our true destiny. Such a solution 
man oan only find in the thought of a higher power, in 
postulating a God, a Divine Will which creates the world 
for the ends of a spiritual life. The idea of God is 
neither an intuition nor yet a rational inference, it 
is a necessary postulate of human existence to explain 
this worthfulness which a man feels. So the idea of 
God rests exclusively on the judgment of its own worth 
by a man’s spirit. The idea of God springs from this 
judgment of value which the soul passes upon itself* 

The whole of religion rests on that sense of value. 
Religious knowledge moves in the sphere of independent 
judgments 6f value and has nothing to do with things in 
their objective and scientific relations or philosophic 
speculation, hut solely with what helps or hinders this 
spirit of ours in the attainment of religious ends. The 
task of the Christian theologian is to deal with those 
Christian values which make up Christian experience. 

Religious assurance for the Ritsohlian must not 
rest on human ideas which are subjective and illusive, 
nor on feelings subjective and vague, but on experience 
built on objective reality, that is, faith rests on 
historical fact. What undeniable objective facts have 
the spiritual power to compel from us value judgment? 

It is not enough to have religious feeling values. 

Those values must be traced back to historical reality. 
There is only one historical fact that produces a value 
judgement such as to give it convincing assurance, 
namely, the very contact with Jesus. In contact with 
Jesus we are sure that God is meeting us in Him. Jesus 
compels the value judgment of God. The personality of 
Christ in contact with us, compels us to say, "My Lord 
and my God”. Assurance then is built upon the fact of 
Jesus and His inner life. The Scriptures of the New 
Testament are an historical witness of that inner life. 















ern Positive 
heology 


- £3 - 

It is the impact of Jesus ana our reoeptivity that makes 
us Christian. Ritschlian theology is based on an histor¬ 
ical fact, namely, the inner life of Jesus. Thus it is 
a theology ufoioh is Christocentrio. Christ is at the 
heart and* centre of everything. 

The Ritschlian holds that purpose rather than sub¬ 
stance is the ultimate reality. For the Ritschlian the 
significance of the term God is to be found not in an 
abstraction like substance, or looking back to Cause, 
but by looking to purpose. What purpose does God serve? 
The great purpose of God is set forth in the dominating 
conception of the Kingdom of God. God has one great 
purpose in His heart and that is the Kingdom of God set 
up through Jesus Christ. It is a righteous association 
of holy people, a righteous socity. Righteousness is 
thoroughly social and ethical. It is the religious 
interpretation of the world, glorious and decisive. In 
the historical person of Jesus there appeared the triumph 
and the will and purpose of God, that men associate 
themselves with that purpose to establish a social order 
after the aim and thought of God - that is Christianity. 
Such a concept can be a mightyforce in the preaching of 
righteous ness in making a highway for Christ and the 
establishment of the Kingdom of God. How do men get 
into this Kingdom? Is atonement necessary? Men dwelling 
in sin find it difficult to believe there is a God of 
Love. They are blinded. Sin is a blinding force. Jesus 
mediates that revelation to men. He shows to a world of 
men a God who loves, and loves supremely, to the death 
and beyond. He comes as a convincing power. We are not 
saved by the death of Christ as such, but by the whole 
revelation of Himself. That whole life is a revelation 
with saving power as it impresses itself on our souls. 

To be saved is to be seized vitally by Christ, by Love 
and by Righteousness. 

As we have seen, Ritschlianism was very radical in 
its attitude towards the Scriptures. It declared that 
the Historical Christ was the basis of our modern faith 
and not the Scriptures. To many, Ritschlianism appeared 
a destructive force. Under the pressure of events there 
arose a group of orthodox men who saw the futility of 
trying to hold to a Biblical infallibility. Yet they 
felt the great need of retaining the substance of the 
ancient Protestant faith, seeking to base it on grounds 
that would commend itself to modern people. So it 
became largely a question of method after all. How 
might they secure a satisfactory foundation? They 














. 


. . 























































24 


wanted certainty if people were to be held at all, and if 
the Chur oh were to grow. So two things were set forth, 
(a) No real element of Christianity oan be surrendered, 
(to) The old faith must be told in a new method, i*e. in 
accordance with modern needs and modern thought forms. 
Thus Modern Positivism proclaims itself as a new way of 
setting forth an old faith. It does, however, represent 
one thing, i.e. the abandonment of an orthodox dogmatism. 
It is an admission that there oan be no settlement of the 
question by an appeal to dogmatic authority whether of an 
Institution or of a Book. 

Positivism is a synonym meaning objective. A thing 
is 'there 1 as contrasted with the claim that it is a 
matter of subjective experience. We have a Christianity 
Divinely established, a solid foundation upon v\h ioh the 
soul may rest. Over against Ritschlianism, Positivism 
would say, there is a real God on whom we oan rest, not 
merely as a value in the Jesus of our experience. There 
is a real Christ, not simply a value judgment of exper¬ 
ience. There is a real Incarnation and atonement, facts 
that are realistio, not merely religious values. They 
ate Redemptive facts. The content of Modern Positive 
Theology is summed up in the conception that it keeps 
in the foreground a definite supernatural revelation as 
the foundation of Christianity. The positivity of the 
Gospel means the effectual primacy of the 'given'. It 
is revealed, not discovered. It is a gift to our 
poverty, not a triumph of our resources. Positive 
Theology is creational, creative by a special act of 
God. All this means, that this type ig like orthodoxy, 
but is not orthodoxy. They want to preserve the origin 
of the orthodox statements. The facts are there as the 
effectual primacy of the given. 'These facts”, says 
See berg, ”come to man from the outside, they have a 
realistic basis, they are there”. 1. 

The content of Positive theology resembles Ritsoh- 
lianism in many forms. But Ritsohlianism insists that 
the life of Christ is validated by a feeling of value. 

It declines to discuss his metaphysical nature. 

Positivism gives too, centrality!© Jesus and finds vali¬ 
dation in our experience. But that is not enough ; it 
insists on a theology of objective facts to validate our 
Experience, Positivism then, locates authority in 
objective facts which have been narrated in Scripture, 
dressed up in local terminologies and in concrete 
situations in the language of the period. But the whole 
point of view is so unstable that you cannot pin them 
down. It does not face squarely many critical questions. 

1. The fundamental truths of the Christian religion, 
p. 10, seeberg. 





„ ^ 

















- 25 - 


The positivist starts out to minimise experience and yet 
he is extremely subjective when you do pin him down. 

The system of Positivism retains orthodox realism 
and dualism (the natural and supernatural world). That 
means that the experience of man’s soul is not a sound 
basis of authority. Positivism goes behind this and 
rests it on something a priori. Yet the method of 
orthodox realism is positively abandoned as applied to 
Scriptural authority, at any rate, the Positivist speaks 
of Scripture as a history of redemption or salvation. 

It is the history of the miraculous working of God. It 
follows then, if we regard the Bible as a history, we 
must come to terms with historical criticism. We cannot 
quarantine the Scriptures. The moment we say it is a 
history we must submit it to historical examination. We 
must also bear in mind the great fact that historical 
study is not confined to one literature or religion. 

There are other religions making similar claims for 
their sacred books which present a redemptive plan. So 
we have here a position of history as over against ex¬ 
perience . 

This failure to face thd critical questions has led 
apparently to the weakening of the movement in Germany 
where it had its origin. Its adherents have taken one 
of two courses, either they have gone back to external 
authority or have moved on to the purely historical 
position. This much should he said that it suits the 
mood of a large number of Christians to-day, and es¬ 
pecially those who are not interested in oiritical 
questions of theology. This type of theology can be 
very easily popularized. The man in the street under¬ 
stands it because its background is mediaeval. It is 
the most popular boat to weather the stoimy criticism 
of our day. 

A second type of Positivism is found in America. 

The Positivism of America is set forth by Shailer 
Mathews in his book "The Gospel and the Modern Man." 

The modern positive school in Germany sought to 
conserve the older doctrines but to interpret them in 
a modern way. The same is true of Mathews, but his 
approach is from the angle of historical critical 
scholarship. In his approach we have the same great 
distrust of subjectivism. Instead of analysing Christian 
experience, Mathews would attempt to find objectively 
and historically what are the sources of our Christianity 
ana Christian experience. The content of theology is 




T 

; * r, r, • 

| 















- 26 


something to he defined as the oontents of science are 
defined. ”A characteristic of a positive, evangelical 
theology” he says, ”uses the material which theologies 
of the past have employed. It would throw away nothing 
which its analysis of the dootrinal development may 
disoover to he more than concepts used to interpret 
eternal realities to a given age. But it starts with 
the strictly evangelic data which hsve been worked into 
the corpus of doctrine, rather than with that corpus 
itself”♦!. 

In his positivism he would build on the New Testa¬ 
ment rather than traditional theology! In order to bring 
the gospel to the modern man of to-day, the peimminent 
values of the Christianity of the New Testament must be 
set forth, but above all, of the historical Jesus him¬ 
self, in the light of evolution, divine immanence, 
social solidarity, and a sense of reality borne of 
scientific method and a perception of worth. 

In order to arrive at the signal facts of the New 
Testament we should study carefully the oldest records 
of the life of Jesus and of the primitive Christian 
faith. We should compare the world views of New Testa¬ 
ment times with the ideas dominant in the general history 
of the day; then distinguish sharply between the world 
view and the facts interpreted by these world views. 

We must seek to discern the principles that lie at the 
heart of the facts. Having reached the heart of the 
story we must take these first century facts and 
principles and give them a twentieth century interpre¬ 
tation and there we have our positive Gospel. 

The norm of religious authority lies in the power 
of the gospel to give control to the impulses of the 
spiritual life by the use of facts that have both 
historical and religious significance. The authority 
of the gospel lies in its capacity to evoke the response 
of the spiritual life. 

Theology This theology is Ideal not Meehanieal. Monistio Ideal¬ 
ised on ism represents a world that is different from that which 

stic Idealism is pre-supposed by all the theologies previously dis¬ 
cussed. Monistic Idealism explains the past in terms 
of process. The world has come into being not by a 
single act, but by a progressive activity. God is in 
the whole progressive activity. There is only one world 
and that world is Spiritual. If God Is in the movement 
the old dual iau is broken down. 

1. The Gospel and the modern man, p.7 









27 


The task before people who look at things in this 
way is to explore and interpret the world. We begin with 
the fact of self-consciousness. This self-consciousness 
tells us of an intricate relationship with environment. 
Monistic Idealism says, we are creatively part and parcel 
of our world. There is no such thing as a world in 
itself, or a self in itself. These two things are simply 
aspects of the same dynamic process. We do not have to 
have impressions made upon us. The thing to do is to 
actively realize the forces of which we are already a 
part. 

If we want to find out the ultimate reality, there 
is only one way to do it, and that is, to analyse our 
conscious experience. If it is true that our conscious 
experience is part and parcel of this process, one with 
it, and of the same nature with it, then ultimate reality 
can come to be known. We do not have to go beyond our¬ 
selves know it. We are part of the only world there 
is, therefore our task is the analysis of our creative 
consciousness. All this means, theologically, that in¬ 
stead of looking for credentials to verify the existence 
of God in another world order, we study our experiences 
and by analysis we locate facts that require God to 
explain them. For instance R. J. Campbell says, "All 
religion is the recognition of our essential relationship 
between the human soul and the great whole of things of 
which it is the outcome and expression. The mysterious 
universe is always calling, and, in some form orother, 
we are always answering.” 1. Religion is the soul 
reaching for and finding itself one with the great my¬ 
sterious environment. It is then not merely a donation, 
it is just as much a quest as a donation. It is a 
quest in which certain mystical experiences occur, and 
which are the very essence of religion. 

The conclusion of Monism is that,since we are part 
and parcel of the same thing we can begin our study in 
ourselves. Our experience is jpst the universe working 
through us. It wglls up in us in the form of con¬ 
sciousness. The fundamental character of consciousness 
is the dynamic unifying of detail into our organic pro¬ 
cess. Consciousness embraces an infinite number of 
details and always is, from the cradle to the grave 
dynamically unifying them. So we must think of the 
universe as an unified organism of infinite details. 
Projecting this into the larger whole we get our thought 
of iniversal consciousness - which is God. In our quest 
for God w© seek for the al1-embracing reality in our own 

1. The New Theology, p.16 













■ 









28 


consciousness; not a far off static something, hut rather 
a spirit who ia even in our life, a part of our con¬ 
sciousness. So the result of this theology yields primar¬ 
ily what is known as the Immanent God. 

R. J. Campbell maintains that our limitations are 
necessary to self-manifestation, ie . if there were no 
self-limitations there would be no real courage, pat¬ 
ience, justice and love. If it were not we were limited 
these would never become a reality to our experience at 
all. So it is with God. This is how he approaches the 
problem of evil. God reveals Himself through His self¬ 
limitations imposed upon Him by the necessities of this 
world order. 

Man is a finite being. Because of that he is in 
need of something he does not possess. He is localized 
in time and space and he does not recognize his true 
nature and destiny. He is only a spark of divinity, 
created in the image of God - to "think God f s thoughts 
after Him”. He has a capacity for God. But he does not 
realize his capacity for God, that he is really one 
with God. Man like all else is a channel through which 
the Infinite is working out His great plans. But he is 
different from other things of the created world. A 
tree can share in that part of creative work, but it 
does not know it. We share in It and we may know it. 

And religion consists in having this inner communion of 
spirit with spirit, of finite with infinite which arises 
out of the sense of one-ness in the great enterprise. 
Principal Caird asks the question, ”In what does man T s 
likeness to God consist?" He answers, "It consists, in 
general in this, that as God is the Infinite Self-reveal¬ 
ing Spirit, so in the very essence of man r s nature as 
spirit there is a reflection of the spirituality, and, 
in one sense of the infinitude of God.” 1. We are 
really living in God's world rather than in the world 
of nature. We are more akin to God than the world of 
things. But the trouble is we are tragically blind to 
this fact. 

What in this theology does sin mean? Sin is really 
imperfection, that is, we for some reason are prone to 
act merely as finiteness rather than infiniteness. Sin 
according to R. J. Campbell is "living for the self at 
the expense of the whole. Sin is therefore selfishness. 
If the true life is t he life which is lived in terms of 
the whole, then the sinful life is the life which is 

1 . Fundamental ideas of Christianity, p.177 





? ' 
















' 





1 











. ' 





29 « 


lived for self alone. Sin is actually a quest for life, 
but a quest whioh is pursued in the wrong way. It is 
seeking life in the deathward road.” 1. What then does 
salvation mean? It is to be saved from our finiteness. 
Salvation is provided by the Divine Inoarnation and 
Atonement. The Inoarnation means that God enters into 
human life and lives there in finiteness to lift that 
finiteness into infinity-to life in God. The Incarnation 
in orthodox theology is one specific event, but in 
Hegelian theology it is an age - long process, only. It 
Jesus it becomes unique - God becomes incarnate. In 
orthodox theology the Atonement is by Jesus and by Jesus 
alone in one specific act - his death on the Cross. In 
Hegelianism it is wrought by God eternally. He is doing 
eternally what Jesus did on the Cross. The Hegelian 
speaks in universal terms. 

What conception of Jesus do we find in this system 
of theology? In all this system there is an effort to 
build on Universal principles and not on specific events 
or acts. So it would be expected that Jesus as a mere 
historical figure would not be a sufficient datum for 
this type of theology, at least we may say this, that 
they look at the life of Jesus in its universal principles. 
The term, Christ, stands for the universal redeeming 
principle. Just as God is the one through whom the 
world gets its meaning, so the "Eternal Christ 1 is the 
One through whom Christian living, society and the 
Kingdom of God,get their meaning. Jesus is the redeem¬ 
ing principle. He is the incarnation, the unique ex¬ 
pression of the Divine in the flesh. This Christ is 
the spiritual unifying force through whom the details 
of Christian living get their existence and their 
significance. Campbell says, "Christ is the logic of 
a religiously conceived world”. 

What we have in this system of theology is a new 
conception of religious experience. The real content 
of this system is so different from the content of 
traditional Christianity that the question will inevit¬ 
ably be raised as to whether this system is Christian 
or not. Whether the system should be called Christianity 
or not depends on what we think Christianity is. If 
Christianity is a fixed static content of truth, then 
this is not Christianity. But if Christianity is spirit 
and life, involving a new attitude of heart and mind, 
there is + no reason why one may not say that it is an* 
interpretation of the spiritual life and attitude sought 
to suit itself to the needs of our day. But whether 
to oall it absolute Christianity is another question. 

1. The ijew jheology pp.51-52. 












30 logy and 
Evolution. 


- 30 - 

This particular theology is being challenged increasingly 
in our day. But we must be just and admit freely that 
it has contributed to theological thought. It has given 
us a keener appreciation of the nearness and greatness of 
God. It is not likely to have such a great history in 
days to come. Its dialectic has been tested by pragmatism. 
It cannot reach the absolute . It is an absolute philoso¬ 
phy and the philosophy of to-day is very shy in using 
the term absolute. The trend to-day is towards an empiri¬ 
cal approach of the actual faots of experience. 

The doctrine of evolution after the days of Darwin 
meant at least for theology, that the early chapters of 
Genesis could not be taken as literal facts. This is 
where the battle-ground commenced. Thus the dilemma 
was this - if evolution be true can we any longer take 
what the Bible says as the ground work of our belief? 

It was maintained that if the doctrine of evolution 
be accepted in any thorough-going way, then the human 
species becomes simply a product of nature like any 
other species and we cannot sharply differentiate between 
man and the animal Kingdom. Moreover, it would mean 
there was no wuch thing as Adam’s fall in the literal 
sense. When we consider how vital the degeneration 
theory was in the older theology, we see how revolutionary 
the conception of evolution becomes. 

The conception of evolution does not speak of 
finalities. Nothing is ever finished here up to date. 

If this theory be true then our thinking must be in 
terms of process. Christian theology thought in terms 
of finality, in terms of a faith once and for all given 
to the saints. All that, then, has to be changed if we 
accept evolution in a thorough-going way. Evolution 
says, things do change. If there is no finality in 
process then the whole doctrine of authority and assur¬ 
ance is involved. Where is the norm to be found? It 
was that situation that brought forth books like Glad¬ 
stone^ "The impregnable rock of Holy Scripture". The 
new theoiy meant that nothing could claim exemption 
from questioning and doubt and re-examination. It was 
true for the scientist and equally true for the theol¬ 
ogian. A settlement must be met whether accepted or not- 
if accepted, then there would be a reconstruction in 
theological thinking. 

Moreover, evolution would mean, if aooepted, the 
close dependence of man on nature. If man is through 
and through the product of nature his description must 










m 




























- 31 


be in terms of nature, i.e. of the process of nature. 
Then, this appeal makes an older supernatural!am look 
antiquated, but it is to be ebserved here that Nature 
is different. We have a new conception of what nature 
means. We are interpreting nature spiritually, not in 
terms of essence, but in terms of personality and that 
change makes all the difference. Thus Evolution is muoh 
harder to meet than Monistic Idealism. The latter is 
professedly hypothetical, but in science, the former 
professes to build on scientific investigation and from 
the study of facts to get our conception of God. 

What is current theology doing about it? It some¬ 
times takes the attitude of the Bible Schools, The 
doctrine of Svolution is unsoriptural and therefore 
false; thus the task of theology is to JEtfect it from 
its teaching and to continue the system of absolutes and 
dogmatic interpretation. Evolution is looked upon as a 
purely material theory, which would banish God out of 
His universe. They repudiate it as an enemy of God and 
man. They insist that it contradicts the Bible, under¬ 
mines religion, and degrades man to the level of the 
beast, therefore it ought to be anathema to all true 
Christians. This is the attitude taken by William Jen¬ 
nings Bryan. In an address recently on "The Enemies 
of the Bible" he vigourously denounced the modern 
doctrine of Evolution and those who believe in it as 
enemies of Scripture and declared that "neither Darwin 
nor his supporters have been able to find a fact in the 
universe to support their hypothesis", and that "no 
one could make a monkey out of him". The Legislature 
of Kentucky, hearing the speech of Mr. Bryan on 
"Enemies of the Bible" introduced a bill to make it 
a penal offense for any school supported by the State 
to teach Evolution as a scientific doctrine. It seems 
nothing short of a tragedy to conceive of such an 
attitude. In striking contrast to the above is the 
attitude of Miss Maude Royden, the brilliarat woman 
preacher of England. In an address on the need and 
prospect of a spiritual revival. Miss Royden said, 

"A spiritual redval means knowledge of God. A religion 
cannot be founded on an emotional experience alone. It 
must be founded on light, on the knowledge of God, and 
every great Christian revival has been caused by some 
one or some generation giving light about the nature 
of God; Christ Himself supreme, and after Him His great 
followers." And then she adds; "For two generations 
now we have been refusing the light which God gave us 
through the great men of science. The result has been 









- 32 - 

appalling. It means a soienoe which is materialistic,It 
means a religion which is ignorant, and it means a dis¬ 
illusioned world.” Thus we are faced with the dangers of 
ignorant denunciation. One holds that the findings of 
the leaders of science are opposed to God and the light, 
the other that they are rays of the light which brings 
us to God. 

Another attitude is held by those who attempt to 
harmonize Evolution with the Bible. They recognize the 
theory of Evolution and accept it as a working explan¬ 
ation of the processes of life. At the same time they 
are anxious to retain for theology the foundation of an 
authoritative Bible; so they are going to claim both. 

Their reason is this: If we can show that the Bible 
when rightly interpreted gives such evidence of the an¬ 
ticipation of modern thinking, i.e. setting forth an 
evolution, we can greatly reinforce Biblical authority. 
Possibly that can be done if sufficiently elastic in 
one's interpretation, e.g. making the seven days in the 
Creative story of Genesis into long periods of time. The 
idea is to make the Bible back up the view of Soienoe 
and Science the view of the Bible. Did the writer of 
Genesis anticipate the view of modern science? Allow 
any one to use this same Method and he will make any 
ancient book modern. The method is weak. It is trying 
to adjust facts to a theory. It is not really an 
attempt to get at the truth, but rather that two Iter¬ 
ations are almost one and the same. The method is 
fruitle ss in the logg run. 

Others attempt to make a clear-cut distinction be¬ 
tween the science of the Bible and the religion of the 
Bible. In regard to the science of the Bible they admit 
that th© views of nature belong to a pre-scientifio age; 
the science of the Bible does not conform to our time 
but to a view of the world which was naive. The Bible 
is not to be regarded as a book of science or Histry, 
it is a book of religion. You may discount its soienoe 
but not its religion. When you study what the Bible 
says about God you have fact. When you seek to study 
science in the Binle you have not fact. In the religion 
of the Bible you have truth and absoluteness, but you 
have only human theory in its science. This kind of 
religion begins with a transcendent God; the old dualistic 
view. 


Another view held is the acceptance of the evolu¬ 
tionary hypothesis of life without any condition. Those 






■ 

■ 


. 

' 



























- 33 


maintaining this attitude declare that there is latent 
in this process a Divine urge, there is a purpose in 
everything. God is in that process by which man has come 
to he from a sub-human species, and if God should see fit 
to make man thus, he is none the less man, he is none the 
less made in the image of God. Thus Divine immanence 
and not intervention is emphasized. But at the same time 
it is taken for granted that theology will be written 
under the same chapter and headings used by older theol¬ 
ogians - an attempt to make the same ideas fit. It is 
an assumption that the old theological terms will fit in 
to the new thought form. It is an impossibility it can 
not give us the same theology. 

What is the logical issue of the process of Evolution? 
Suppose that someone does accept evolution as a working 
hypothesis and to be thorough-going in building up his 
theology in accordance therewith, what will be the logi¬ 
cal issue of taking that ground? The scientific Christ¬ 
ian will start with new categories, i .e. organism and 
environment, just as the scientific man starts. Then 
the problem of theology becomes this - he will seek to 
ascertain what resources are in our environment. What 
can th© organism find and use? It will find certain 
physical forces and the process of interpreting these 
forces is going on. But w© find there are certain 
forces with witch we are convinced we may have personal 
relationship, i.e. there is a non-mechanical environ¬ 
ment - prayer and worship. That would mean this, that 
there is something in our environment that evokes from 
us a religious interpretation just as the physical 
world evokes a scientific interpretation. Life is mak¬ 
ing the demand upon us to explore this great realm. 

Man is fundamentally religious we are accustomed to say. 

He has an innate desire to explore that unseen environ¬ 
ment, an intuition that someone is there to respond to 
his deepest nature, and his deepest satisfaction is 
found in carrying on that quest. Thus science and 
religion are engaged in the same task, i.e. the explor¬ 
ation of environment in order that we may establish a 
richer and more wholesome relationship, one along phy¬ 
sical lines, and the other along personal and spiritual 
lines. 

Moreover, the Evolutionist will not entertain the 
thought that science has arrived at finality. It is 
capable of indefinite improvement. It remains probable 
that certain theories of the scientific world will be 
revised or displaced by more adequate theories. That 
is going on all the time. Science is not afraid to 
reach out. 







' 

■ 

■ 

■ 

















- 








































Iwisiii 







34 


Now, in exactly the same way we will not think that 
religious thinking has arrived at finality. We have ex¬ 
plored so little of the resources of our unseen environ-, 
ment. Sven the saints are but children spiritually. An 
endless vista appears before each age, a new light and a 
new approach. Therefore, to subscribe to a creed in a 
literal rigid way is impossible. We can only subscribe 
to the direction or intention of the creed. Science does 
not require that in its realm one should subscribe to 
its creed. A scientific hypothesis may be revised with¬ 
out causing more than s ripple on the sea of scientific 
thought. But if there is even a movement towards re¬ 
statement in theology, an army of heresy-hunters will 
appear. Science does not fear the results of scrutiny. 

It says, *oome along and help us 1 . The Church says, 

1 hands off* . The Church will only move in the case of 
the greatest urgency. Only in times when men are for¬ 
saking the sanctuaries will the Church face reconstruct¬ 
ion, and such a time are we living in to-day. 

The question may well be asked, what then are some 
of the aspects of religion which bring no objections of 
science? Man is a product of nature through and through 
in the new sense of the process. Our theological 
trouble arises in part because we are half-way evolution¬ 
ists. Religious thinking in the past defined man as 
partially a product of nature and partially as a special 
creation of Cod. The soul element did not come out of 
evolution but the body did. When we admit that, it 
means nature is materialistic and so the scientists 
take us at our word and they go on to explain everything 
in terms of material. That is exactly what happened in 
practically all the theories of Evolution. For example, 
Darwinian ism and Neo-Darwinian ism explained the devel¬ 
opment in the process as being due to Natural selection. 
The organism that revealed the closest correspondence 
between the individual and his environment survived. 

He survived gloriously, and these peculiarly fit indiv¬ 
iduals gave direction to the species. Lamarck explained 
the species or the whole process of life on the basis 
of the inheritance of acquired characteristios.(through 
the germoplasm ) Another theory is that the physical 
and chemical potencies of germ cells produce variations 
of life. This is a reduction of life to physios and 
chemistry. Finally, we have the Mutation Theory of Le 
Vries. He emphasizes the sudden emergency of new 
features on the basis of changes in the relation of 
chemical elements, for example - a readjustment of these 
will bring about a new flower. Progress is by sudden 





35 


leaps and bounds rather than a slow gradual development. 
The course of progress is uneven. So if we admit that 
this natural process is material, very soon the scientist 
will be explaining everything on the basis of materialism. 

But, on the other hand, if we think of man T s soul 
as a fact of nature, as a part of the process as a whole, 
then there is no truthful explanation of nature made 
merely in terms of material. Those who explain man must 
now do so as to account for the spiritual personality 
of man . Under the old theology there was no need to do 
this. But modern theology is compelling soience to take 
into consideration a new set of facts, and soa philospjhy 
of religion is becoming just as reasonable as a philosophy 
which explains nature. Indeed it has been this very 
fact that has caused Materialism as a philosophy of life 
to become an exploded theory. Let science explain all 
there is in nature, that is the challenge of modern 
theology to science. 3y this demand science has been 
made over and made humble and now its results are proving 
the basis for a spiritual philosophy of life. When it 
sees the point we can use it without danger. 

Any particular activity of a living being is prima 
facie evidence of a real interaction between the living 
being and a real environment. For example, the origin 
and development of the eye, soience claims, was a devel¬ 
opment out of a mutual interaction between rays of 
light and a sensitive part of the organism; and so with 
all our instruments of knowledge, the nose, the ear, 
the sense of touch, etc. Likewise our instincts and 
impulses are there because a real aspect of environment 
stimulated them in the original cell by some native 
power, and this action and interaction have made them 
the power they are to-day. So too, may we not say 
that out religious acitivity, our religiousness, is 
prima facie evidence of something in the universe which 
plays upon our native powers? Does not then, our con¬ 
ception of God, immature as it may be, explain this 
arrival of religious life. Just as the stimulus of 
light rays explain the arrival of the eye? A non-relig¬ 
ious universe would mean that no one is really religious. 
But no-one can believe that men are not essentially re¬ 
ligious in view of the universality of religion itself. 

It is the fundamental factor in the making of the world 
and the scientist is compelled to accept this point of 
view. A spiritual background is demanded as the only 
substantial world background of the universe, and in 
that spiritual background are placed the spiritual 




















. 

■ 

■ 

' 

























36 


agencies which project their unseen pressure and foroes 
into every physical and psyohical realm of the world. 

The particular kind of activity which characterizes 
human beings is thought activity . The lower forms take 
up their environment in a mechanical and automatic way. 
The organism reacts in certain ways to certain stimuli. 
But man is different. He takes his environment into his 
life in terms of thought and he may take all the time he 
likes in experimenting with thought. His life can be 
guided by rational deliberation. That means, then, that 
human life exists in relationship with a world translated 
into spiritual, or personal terms. This relationship 
gives a qualitative significance to mao's life, and this 
means a new kind of measure for living, a measure which 
is not required in the case of animals. Physical science 
cannot deal with this quality, it cannot account for it. 
On no theory has it been able to do so to-day. William 
James affirms that, "Those who most unconditionally 
affirm the dependence of our thoughts upon our brain to 
be a fact are often the loudest to insist that the fact 
is inexplicable and that the intimate essence of con¬ 
sciousness can never be rationally accounted for by any 
material cause". What does this mean then? We human 
beings have another side to our nature other than the 
purely material. We are more truly spiritual. This 
conviction has gradually driven science to a new interpre¬ 
tation of material, an interpretation in terms of the 
spiritual . 

Ill 

Modern 

of Theology 

The Influence of the Historical Method of Studying 
Theology:- 

Until the rise of Historical study in the nineteenth 
century, the Old Testament was just read as such. It was 
accepted as it appeared on the surface without further 
question. It was regarded as the direct word of God. 

The result of Historical criticism made it clear that we 
did not know the history of the Hebrew unless me came to 
know it in relation to the life history of the surround¬ 
ing peoples. The Historical method of study in the Old 
Testament convinces us that the religion of Israel was 
not so different from others as we have been thinking. 
Much of it was derived from non-Hebraic sources, from 
great influences from the outside. What we have in the 
Old Testament is the surpassingly wonderful story of a 

people working out its religion step by stup as it was 






37 


compelled to think by the exigencies of its own life. 
Isaiah for instance held certain convictions because of 
the problems he had to face, and the situations through 
which he lived. The prophets were men who were tremendous 
ly human and they found their faith in tragic human sit¬ 
uations. 

In the realm of Church History the Historical method 
has had its influence. Edwin Hatoh (1835-89) was the 
pioneer here. Lecturing on the history of the Church, he 
pointed out a striking contrast between the Sezmon on the 
Mount and the Nioezie Creed. He drew attention to the fact 
that one has for its background the Syrian peasant world, 
the other has for its background Greek philosophical 
thinking. One comes to the conclusion that the Nicene 
Creed is answering a Theological problem which is not in 
the Bible at all. The disciples of Jesus were not 
quarreling about a Trinitarian formula. It arose out of 
the exigencies of Greek thinking; the result of talking 
in teims of Substance, and the relationship of the world 
with God could only be interpreted in terms of Substance. 
Thus Nicene Theology developed from Greek thinking. It 
was an endeavour to help those who thought after a Greek 
manner of thinking; to enable a Greek world to remain 
and become a Christian world.fib longer then can we think 
of Christianity as self-contained and exclusive. Many 
factors from without made it* altered it and formed it. 

In other words there was action and interaction. It was 
a movement of truth, but there were other movements and 
tftese influenced each other. Truth is not static but a 
gradual growing power. How, some people are willing to 
think of the Old Testament in this new way, and even 
of later Church History in this light, but they refuse 
to think of the New Testament in that way. They say, 
hands off, use the old way of thinking about it. 

What is the outcome of this method as applied to 
the New Testament? The Gospels are not much earlier 
than 70 A.D. Why were they written? Primarily, they 
were written to help people who were living at the time 
they were written. Therefore the writers would select 
those things about Jesus which would help people who 
were worrying over certain problems. They were written 
to answer the needs of the people of that day. They were 
not written to ^olve our problems, but of a people living 
about 60 or 70 A.D. Passing to the Fourth Gospel we have 
a more complicated situation. It was written largely 
to meet a Hellenistic need. It was written to solve the 
problems of those thinking in terms of Greek Philosophy. 











38 


Turning to St. Paul, we find him moving largely in a 
Gentile world. He had to meet the looal Church problems 
of organization and the like. He addressed himself to a 
particular Church situation. But he had to face the wider 
problems of the day .Paul had to encounter the principles 
of the Judaising party and their attitude towards the Law. 
He was confronted with the problems raised by the Mystery 
Faiths. There were a great many people who had inter- 
pretated their religious life in terms of the God of the 
Mystery Faiths. Paul had to deal with these. 

Again, the Virgin Birth, the Flood Story have their 
parallels. There are, it is said, thirty-nine stories of 
the Virgin Birth alone. Thus we must face the question. 
The content of Christianity was not independently pro¬ 
duced, but came by action and interaction, moulded by 
the circumstances of the day, by the philosophic and 
economic views of that day, by the civilization surround¬ 
ing it. Therefore, we cannot understand the Bible by 
studying it independently« We must build upon a broader 
basis. 

This method of studying Christianity would take into 
account all the formative influences that have deter¬ 
mined its form so far as can be discerned. The outcome 
of the method is this conclusion; that we never find any¬ 
where in the history of religion a pure religion, i.e. a 
religion that is not influenced by social and local con¬ 
ditions. They determine the form by which it comes to 
us. Fvery religion is the result of s social complex. 

When we continue the method we find something every¬ 
where. For instance, books of systematic theology to-day 
have some reference to Evolution in them, it is part of 
our social thought. We cannot set forth a system of 
theology to-day without at least giving it consideration. 
It has become a determining factor influencing our whole 
outlook. If we trace the history of any doctrine we find 
that sot ©thing is being contended - The Atonement for 
example. Various theories may be put forward. If we 
had just the facts of the life and death and resurrection 
of Jesus to-day without these theories, upon what would 
we put the emphasis? Would we emphasize the blood atone¬ 
ment of the Hebrew,or the Hansom or the Devil theory of 
Origin, or the Feudalistic conception of Anselm , or the 
Moral influence of Abelard, or the Governmental theory 
of Grotius? Upon what would we put the emphasis if these 
were wiped out? We are beginning to realize that the 
theology of any group is made up in this way - It has a 







39 


certain heritage of thought, habit and attitude. It 
takes this heritage and in the light of its own oon- 
viotions and needs it applies this to its own social 
world and its own special human need; and if it fails to 
do that, theology will stagnate and die. It requires 
an interpretation in order to meet the need of to-day. 

Some of the types of theology here discussed do not 
want that ground-work, that is, on the basis of Historical 
Christian experience alone. These systems either want an 
authoritative Church or authoritative Bible to build on, 
and want a revelation in Christ which is valued not in 
terms of Jesus experience of God, but in terms of God's 
mandate to us in Jesus. They are efforts to begin with 
something ^uite beyond experience. In spite of this the 
appeal of experience is making itself felt more and more 
as the starting point. 

Many people have pictured the missionary propaganda 
as something that can be transferred as a body of doctrine 
and ritual to another country. But our missionaries are 
finding that that does not work altogether. The Orientals 
for example have their own problems and therefore they 
have their own peculiar viewpoints. Racial groups are 
now wanting the right to propagate their own Christianity. 
That is to be desired. The whole history of Christianity 
means that it is the natural thing to do. Only as it 
adapts itself to living situations will it continue to 
live. It must be regarded as a constantly adapting move¬ 
ment of truth to meet the need. 

The Historical way of looking at Christianity does 
not and cannot eliminate a single fact of Christianity. 

It may and it does deny the validity of certain pre¬ 
suppositions, but they are not Christianity, nobody can 
prove them to be. So the Historical School may question 
presuppositions but not Christianity. The Bible of the 
Historical School is identical with the orthodox man. 

It does not mean that anything is cut out. The only 
question that arises is as to what that Book means. Our 
reverence for the Book remains the same. It is never a 
question of elimination but rather one of interpretation. 

The Historical School would maintain also that all 
theology will be intimately related with the religious 
life from which it springs . The soil is the religious 
life. The test then, which the historian makes of the 
validity of any Christian Theology, is this, was it 
actually serviceable for the life from which it arose? 

Was it sufficient to meet the need and to enable men to 


' 

i [ : 














' 







40 


interpret life in a large way and to live nobly? In 
early times it was believed that demons were the oause 
of sickness, loss and disaster. A religion which taught 
how to control these demons was the highest interpretation 
of God. It was serviceable to that age. Godvas a God of 
deliverances. But when we come to an age which no longer 
thinks in terms of Demon Theology concerning disease and 
disaster, the old theology does not apply in the form 
which it was enunciated. We therefore require a re¬ 
interpretation in teiras of sufficiency for our modern need. 
So the theology of to-day must be asked this question 
above all - Does it enable men to meet their circumstances, 
temptations, their fears triumphantly? If not, there is 
something wrong with it. We can only convince men by our 
Stiffioiaoces to-day, not in finalities. That is what the 
world is demanding. Are we likely to arrive at any 
finality in this world? This much may be said; if human 
history generation after generation makes certain 
identical affirmations there is at once some ground work 
for our thinking. We find that no religion can command 
the response and respect of men that does not put at 
the heart of things, Righteousness. All religions have 
their God of righteousness, but it is most pure and 
intensely moral in Christianity. The same may be said 
abdut Purpose in the heart of things; also Love. There 
is a never-ending tradition containing these religious 
forces, but there are also never-ending variations. 

That means that each generation has the responsibility 
of forming its own theology out of the materials thqt 
are available. 

How will the task of Theology be defined from this 
point of view? It can be most adequately defined as 
the thinking over of what we receive from tradition in 
the light of the actual experiences and needs and con¬ 
victions of our day. The worth of a doctrine in history 
is determined by how much it enables men in that day to 
give a lofty interpretation to their world. It stands 
because it enables men to live nobly, to render service 
in uplifting religious life, that is, in all life. The 
theology of Paul was powerful and extraordinary, not 
because of those ideas common to Jewish Rabbinical 
teaching, but because of his interpretation of that 
world in the light of the experience of Jesus. By this 
he gripped the hearts of men and held them for the 
Kingdom of God. There is a group in all our Churches 
that will sooner or later wake up to this view. When 
they do it always means revival, reformation, and a 
revised Theological statement. We ought to bear in 

mind that Luther's, Calvin’s, and Wesley’s theology were 














- 41 


once new theologies. They were onoe bitterly denounced. 

It is the process of histcry. In order that Christianity 
might be a vital force we constantly need religious re¬ 
vival along with theological restatement. Truth is a 
living thing and it demands an up-to-date vital express¬ 
ion of its content. 

What, then, is to determine the Norm of theology to¬ 
day? The Norm must be determined largely by the religious 
questions the people are asking at the time. Take Calvinfe 
time for example; one of its burning questions was, am 
I sure of Salvation? or, am I or am I not among the elect? 
That question is not asked in the same way to-day. Our 
urgency is along a different line. The real question 
seems to be this, "Is there a God who cares? This has 
been asked with increasing intensity since the war. The 
sentiment is reflected in much of the class literature of 
to-day, for example. Well’s books. If men are busy over 
that question they will not care muoh to discuss the 
Divine Decrees of Calvin’s theology, lapsarian and supra- 
lapsarian questions. This question has never been asked 
with such urgency and when the Christian Church is able 
to answer it intellectually and in Christian living, one 
of the great advances will come in the history of the 
Christian Church. Of course there are other questions 
implied in it* namely, our duty to God and our duty to man. 
X theology which will meet that situation will not begin 
by deriving doctrine from a Book,cexcept as a record of 
an astonishingly vital religious experience;,but by deriv¬ 
ing it from life, from the very stuff from which life is 
made, fron Christian experience in its farthest out- 
reaches. 

Here the experience and personality of Jesus will be 
our most powerful and convincing factor, and upon each 
Christian experience a powerful statement will be forth¬ 
coming. We will then see religion as a quest of the 
human soul which is hungry for some kind of spiritual 
communion with the great mysterious power of the universe. 

+{With that in mind we will see all other religions as so 
many experiments or working hypotheses by which men have 

V<***+>«>«* i w+rt o -Pul 1 oy* avrvflriflnflfi n-F f! V»v 3 at: i «t n 1 ‘ftT?! 

+Wlth that m mind we will see ail other religions 
as so many experiments, an* expertbntlal process m which 
men have sought in their quest for life. Some of them 
‘are rude and crude, but none the less serious experiments 
to bring them into relationship with the divine. We will 
also look at the various doctrines of Christianity as so 
many experiments or working hypotheses by which men have 
been able to enter into a fuller experience of Christianity. 



Q <3 


3noi;^il0T i:-.*UvO IXk- sea -Xiiw ew £>nlm ax mrJ 3 dXX'^_ 
uo i dw n; aae-oi’-. mqx9 *ng t *s*n9mjfcT9qpcs «fiifli oa ete 

me aJ ;o e rfo!; ,;>'•. XI icl .meup iXectt ni Jdjsjjos evpn non 
: ••>at -■ ooxe &. jjo lxea aae l edJ 9cr0n Xucf ,ebmo bn •■*. ebiff ex:# 
I i iiv €>£ .errxyib 9 iJt dXlw qid&nol^xlex oXnX merfX snlxd oX 
os f, 9 v fm i:m It riO • c o 3n lx Xoo b a 00 .lxs v ’ 9 dX X0 5c 0 1 0a If* 
v •? ;' fie :" ( t rfo X dw 7 cf ae 3 <3 c .} oer\> d §n X jfr or x o a 1 ne nr fxe or9 vn ext 
•’ i-aixoO to eonsx.feoxe •’ a b! :j' x ctn.f tttx' oX e Ion. need 









41 


once new theologies. They were onoe bitterly denounced. 

It is the process of histcry. In order that Christianity 
might be a vital force we constantly need religious re¬ 
vival along with theological restatement. Truth is a 
living thing and it demands an up-to-date vital express¬ 
ion of its content. 

What, then, is to determine the Norm of theology to¬ 
day? The Norm must be determined largely by the religious 
questions the people are asking at the time. Take Calvinfe 
time for example; one of its burning questions was, am 
I sure of Salvation? or, am I or am I not among the elect? 
That question is not asked in the same way to-day. Our 
urgency is along a different line. The real question 
seems to be this, "Is there a God who cares? This has 
been asked with increasing intensity since the war. The 
sentiment is reflected in much of the class literature of 
to-day, for example, Well’s books. If men are busy over 
that question they will not care muoh to discuss the 
Divine Decrees of Calvin’s theology, Xapsarian and supra- 
lapsarian questions. This question has never been asked 
with such urgency and when the Christian Church is able 
to answer it intellectually and in Christian living, one 
of the great advances will come in the histcry of the 
Christian Church. Of course there are other questions 
implied in it* namely, our duty to God and our duty to man. 
A theology which will meet that situation will not begin 
by deriving doctrine from a Book,c except as a record of 
an astonishingly vital religious experience;,but by deriv¬ 
ing it from life, from the very stuff from which life is 
made, fron Christian experience in its farthest out- 
reaches. 

Here the experience and personality of Jesus will be 
our most powerful and convincing factor, and upon each 
Christian experience a powerful statement will be forth¬ 
coming. We will then see religion as a quest of the 
human soul which is hungry for some kind of spiritual 
communion with the great mysterious power of the universe. 

+(With that in mind we will see all other religions as so 
many experiments or working hypotheses by which men have 
been able to enter into a fuller experience of Christianity^ 
Also we find that certain of these religions have become 
discredited with the passing of time. They were unsatis¬ 
factory experiments. Their rituals and sacrifices have 
failed to bring satisfaction. When that is the case then 
the religion of Christianity has its great chance and 
opportunity. When the world has become tired of religious 
experiments that is the day of the Church’s opportunity. 
Nothing will satisfy the human heart that does not give 













1 






- 4 £ - 


moral reinforcement and satisfaction and a great spiri¬ 
tual experience that lifts up. A religioo which has not 
that p&wer will never prevail. 

In finding such a religi&n the Historian looks over 
the ground of all these religions in their strength and 
weakness and he is greatly impressed with the religion 
of Israel, especially by the prophetic. Among the Hebrew 
prophets we find s?me thorough-going experimenting. As 
Science built upon Copernicus and Newton and is satisfied 
to receive their statements of physical laws so the 
Theologian will take his stand on the worship of Right¬ 
eousness and Love in the universe as revealed ip’ and 
through Jesus Christ, and he will shape his doctrines in 
harmony with an unfolding revelation. 

The same thing may be seen in the life of Jesus. He 
grew in wisdom, in stature and in favour with God and man. 
That means He came to realize that God was not only 
Righteousness but One in loving and intimate assooiation 
with us. He grew into a knowledge of God. The mystic* 
emphasized this close relationship with humans life. But 
in the ®as© of Jesus this communion was so free from all 
formality and ritualistic observances that He regarded 
all the common blessings of life as a part of that 
communion. And so there was in the life of Jesus a 
humanising of God. That relationship with God was of 
such a personal, intimate character that we speak of Him 
as, * on© with the Father 1 . But that was a growing con¬ 
ception. That is the tradition we have of Jesus by the 
earliest records. But here is the trouble - our 
tradition of Jesus has been linked up with the metaphy¬ 
sics and social theory of that day, so that we have al¬ 
most lost the real Jesus to-day and the Got of Jesus. 

This is the grievance of Greek philosophy. It played 
havoc with the human race, it removed God and Jesus far 
off. Our particular age is not interpreting the world 
in the light of Greek metaphysics, we are past that. 

We are interpreting the world in terms of life values. 

Now that very thing is one of the causes of our restless¬ 
ness to-day. We have a world that was Interpreted cut 
of Greek philosophy and a religion built on it. Here 
lies the urgency for a theology to match the life of to¬ 
day. Men are beginning timidly to ask the question - do 
we know that this God whom w© are now rediscovering as 
the Father and Companion of Jesus, that He corresponds 
with the transcendent Absolute that theology has 
taught so long? H.G. Welle, in his conclusion of "The 
Invisible King” says, ”We do not know that veiled Being, 

He means nothing to us. We have been worshipping this’ 









43 


veiled Being because we have departed from the Jesus of 
the earliest records.” We do know there is a real Being, 
an unseen friend, with whom we can have vital communion, 
our experience has taught us that. In spite of sorrow 
and tragedy and loss we cannot get away from the deep 
significance of this unseen environment. We must start 
there and upon interpreting that experience in the light 
of Jesus, we will find the God whose intimate association 
with human life will reveal and transform.- 

All this means that the upshot of our life experiment 
is driving us slowly to the conviction of a new concept¬ 
ion of God. In the light of the Great War it looks as 
if the cosmos were bringing men by another blood-stained 
road back to the conception of the God of Jesus. Our 
present task is to lay a ground-work so that a more 
positive and decisive step can be taken to make this 
world righteous, and the expression of it, one of a 
righteous and loving God. And how can God triumph if 
His victory Is not our victory? We are His children. 

How can an earthly father give a son what he would unless 
it also be the son * s doings We must be of th# mind and 
heart by which He is able”to give. 

The hypothetical content of the term God is not of 
great moment. The method is vital if we are to obtain 
the right content . The method then is the first thing 
if we are to move forward. We are interested in dis¬ 
covering whether the results of our religious quest can 
be so interwoven with our life and understanding, that 
we may transmit to the next generation that living de¬ 
posit w it la-which we would not have our theology at all. 
This method may involve many tentative attempts. We 
make head-way slowly, and any progress depends on the ex¬ 
perience and the clarity of its interpretation. So when 
a large and comprehensive re-statement is demanded it 
may take time. All authoritative and dogmatic religions 
will speak of true and false forms of faith. But the 
historically minded man will have a real reverence for 
all forms of religion wherever he sees them. He will 
see in them so many attempted solutions to establish 
satisfying relations with the great unseen. Not only 
so, but this method will make a man more tolerant with 
those in his own church who do not see eye to ©ye with 
him in theological matters. He will seek to be sure of 
his own ground by seeking a deepening spiritual exper¬ 
ience of God. 

The Testing of our Religious Beliefs; What is a defensible test 






■ 
















f, 








. 

















j 


i 






~ 44 


of a religious belief? The real test of a religious 
belief is first of all this: How completely does it 
make possible a real social cosmic relationship, to our 
work socially and to God? It is different from the 
scientific test or dogma. A scientific hypothesis is 
seeking for mechanical control over physical nature and 
that is an impersonal thing. Mechanical tests are quite 
irrelevant when it comes to the spiritual religious 
experience. Here a social spiritual end is kept in view. 
Our religious beliefs make possible our religious 
activity. They relate our life to the highest things 
in a concrete way and therefore creeds are not only 
justifiable but necessary. Does it matter what a man 
believes? The issues of life depend on that very thing. 
How, those who see our religious beliefs as a means for 
interpreting this spiritual environment, are less dis¬ 
turbed by traditional views and by the modification of 
these which may come from time to time. We modify our 
scientific beliefs when new facts enter in which compel 
their modification, and we modify our eredal statement 
when new facts enter in to compel a re-interpretation. 

It iis only as we fail to recognize this function of 
religious beliefs that we become disturbed by the terms 
"Orthodoxy" and "Heterodoxy”. We are after truth and 
religious beliefs are a means to that end. Religious 
beliefs go through a critical testing in their own 
realms, and it is the experience of some need e £hat 
compels a man to try his beliefs out, to critfze them 
drastically. The exigencies of life compel him to do 
that. This testing is a good and enriching thing, and 
a corrective as well. If our theological dogmas do 
not appeal to us it is simply because they are not 
adequate to meet our special needs of to-day, - that they 
fail to react to the active sociological life of our 
day . 

When a mao wants to be religious he is not satisfied 
to be so in on© content of his being. His religion 
must dominate his life and his theology must fit his 
intellectual outlook. A man cannot be content to leave 
a section of his life explained. "The unexplained life 
is unlivable,” says Plato * The constant effort of his 
life is towards harmony and order. He is constantly 
seeking the principles which are all-inclusive as an 
explanation. So when his environment suggests to him 
new problems this means the modification of his exper¬ 
ience and religious beliefs. 

It is interesting to observe how the Bible supple- 
raeats and 0 orreats itself. y or example, there is not in 









! 


i . :■• . . ■ < 






45 


either the Old Testament or the New Testament a uniform 
unchangeable doctrine of God. Sven in the new Testament 
one oan see Theology changing to suit new viewpoints. 
Paul, a Jew, discards the ancient Law (although it was 
held to be a revelation of God) out of regard to the fact 
that Christianity aspired to capture the Gentile world. 

It could not do this if it made the Jewish Law a pre¬ 
supposition of all Gentile adherence to Christianity. 
Later, about the beginning of the second century the 
author of the Fourth Gospel has a wider theology still. 

He gives a new interpretation of sin and salvation. 

Jesus is regarded as the "Logos". Judgment is a present 
and inward reality, not a spectacular and dramatic 
event. The Second Coming is now inward and spiritual. 
All this means that religious men change and criti^ze 
their own doctrines to suit the need and new experiences 
of the human heart. Religious interests then, will 
modify our religious beliefs. Why did Calvinism go? 
Because religious living caused it to go - not science 
merely. It did not meet th4 needs of the human heart. 

Cur past theological orthodoxy went through its testing 
at every point of history and the result flas a modifi¬ 
cation to meet the new needs and demands of life and 
intellect. The trouble with some of our theology is 
that Its God is defined still largely in terms of a Greek 
metaphysical view. That is the pathos of it. In our 
day this testing and sifting of our beliefs are due 
largely to a new science and new sociology - a science 
which has adopted ©volution as an hypothesis and a 
sociology which has a new worth of man. Those are the 
two fundamental things which are causing us to re-think 
our theological statement. And this sifting will do to¬ 
day what Hellenistic thinking did for Jewish theology. 

Our present difficulty is owing to this fact that the 
Church insists that our religious beliefs shall be in 
accord with an ancient science and an ancient philosophy 
rather than In accord with modern science and philosophy. 
The danger to-day is that the Church may be strong enough 
to prevent a restatement in harmony with modern facts. 
But our gseat faith is this, as we look over history the 
best thing that could have happened is the thing that 
did happen. Every epoch made its contribution. 

What would the testing of our beliefs do for us today? 
The influence of science will he to substitute for de¬ 
duction and dogmatism induction and inquiry. We will 
seek to understand the processes of life. This has been 
going on quietly all through. We do not burn witches 
now, but it is only two hundred years ago when it was 





■ I ■ V . ■ ' ' 

■ • ■ • ' n 


' . i . ; 1 ; i y;:,m •' : '1 

: ' . " : } : : ; ' • 

. ■ ; : ' ■ 
: 

i bb' B '{ B'BBBXB 

, ■ ■ ■ 




\y. 


■ , 


; K 
















tij 

' 












46 


done. We do not scare children into goodness by the 
terrors of a literal hell, or submit men to the thumb¬ 
screw because they do not accept our creed. Why? Be¬ 
cause an attempt has been made to understand the pro¬ 
cesses of life. With this comes the banishment of 
taboo's and the elimination of untenable superstitions. 

The testing of our beliefs would also compel us to 
think of religion in relation to an orderly universe - 
not of caprice. We will no longer think of a God who 
is pure Will, issuing decrees irrespective of moral and 
ethical demands, of working miracles for the benefit of 
a few. We will think of a God who is working in an 
orderly way for the benefit of all. Religious education 
is based on this view and for our day it is taking the 
place of spasmodic revivals. Ghildrer have to be re¬ 
taught the truths of religion. 

The Necessity of a Oreedal Statement:- 

There is no satisfactory substitute for religious 
beliefs. Holland asks the question, "Oould we get along 
without religious beliefs?” He answers, "Our life would 
be mutilated and impoverished infinitely by the absence 
of religious beliefs, but it is utterly unthinkable we 
should get along without them". We are living in re¬ 
lation to a total environment, physical and spiritual. 
Some of these relations are explicable and some in 
explicable. Scepticism and agnosticism does not get 
u8 any nearer; even a false belief not absolutely per¬ 
fect will get ue somewhere, it may be relatively helpful, 
but agnosticism will never do anything . We must act in 
relation to the mysterious as well as to the Known in 
our life. Life compels us to do something. It is an 
inherent demand of man's mind. The unknown is always 
challenging. We must have religious beliefs and act 
upon them to find out the mysterious and that brings us 
to the larger reality. 

What will be the character of the doctrines thus set 
up? In our day we must become familiar with a working 
hypothesis which enables us to function. It may be 
that the working hypothesis be pictorial, allegorical, 
symbolical. But that religious belief and hypothesis 
is defensive in proportion to its fruitfulness in actual 
living, in bringing the individual into accord with 
reality, in giving an actual knowledge of God. Any re¬ 
ligious doctrine which facilitates our functioning id 
justifiable by that very fact. The theological state- 
ment of belief to-aay is composed of suoh hypotheses. 



















- 47 


Once let us recognize this faot and the misunderstanding 
between soienoe and religion will evaporate. All anoient 
theologies to begin with were working hypotheses,i.e. they 
were the truth in the light of the philosophy and soienoe 
of their day. They were doing what we are doing to-day, 
endeavouring to bring our beliefs into fullest aooord 
with reality. 

The testing of our beliefs would compel us to a 
oonoeption of God in the light of this new world. What 
gives us the right to postulate the reality of God? With 
the doctrine of God we make such fruitful experiments 
with life as to bring enrichment, reality and intellectual 
satisfaction. That postulate explains the facts, answers 
our demand for activity and brings us fruitful relation¬ 
ships which are a joy and peace. What has the doctrine 
of God actually done in the past? Whether the doctrine 
provided by Hebrew tradition, or Greek philosophy, or by 
the amalgamation of the two, or the God represented in 
the light of feudalistic conditions, or the God of 
creative energy, each postulate enabled men to live in 
relation to a universe so as to obtain spiritual power, 
reinforcement, redemption, hope. But it also enabled 
them to organize their national life. Now if the 
doctrine of God is actually to begin with a working hy¬ 
pothesis to promote the social organization of men, to 
give abundant life, has not the time come now to re¬ 
cognize that a social order has religious sanctions be^ 
hind it, if not we had better scrap it and get a new one. 
Someone has said that,"There are many signs that the time 
has come, and that men see that the time has come, to 
make the experiment of T applied Christianity T on a scale 
as large as the world”. What is needed above all else 
to-day is a social order on the basis of th$ demands of 
a God who is the Friend, Companion, and Redeemer of all 
men; One who values the infinite worth of every individual 
and who has set again Righteousness and love as the 
inherent demands because of our relations one with the 
other.” We must learn to think of God as the immanent 
co-worker always toiling with his children rather than as 
a sovereign to whom they are subject, and from whom 
they receive special benefits and favours as from a 
patron. The salvation which God makes possible must be 
interpreted as a process of co-operation with God rather 
than as an endowment from another realm”. 1.We must think 
uod not merely as a Creator, Provider, or a law-giver 
but think of him fundamentally as an Immanent Creator 
Redeemer, Companion whose whole life centres about 
Righteousness and love. If we constructed our social 

i. Sooial I dealisa and The changing t heology saith p.228 

































•) , 

- r:f 






















■ 


. 

t 

. 













- 48 


order on this new demand there would be no measuring of 
the influence of the sooial transformation. 

In testing our postulate of God we find that our 
faith involves an element of mysticism. We are conscious 
of a kind of identity between our deepest life and the 
life of the universe. Mysticism is the form of an ex- 
perience in which we feel that we have come face to face 
with the great cosmic companion - the deepest reality of 
the universe and the secret of its meaning. Has my¬ 
sticism a valid place in our Christian religion? Dr. 
Morgan answers the question. He says, ”It must be con¬ 
ceded that Christian mysticism has proved its vitality 
by its constant resurgence. It will never, one may 
confidently affirm, become the dominant type of piety, 
never be more than the piety of a circle. But its circle 
it will always have. Always there will be those for 
whom religion means above all else a feeling for the 
universal Spirit that touches them in the great universe 
and that manifests its presence in the secret motions 
of their own soul”. 1 . 

One thing we find in our quest is that, God is 
always and everywhere accessible. The older theology 
said, God is omnipresent. Is God in one place as much 
as In another? On the basis of our experience God is 
in every place we seek Him. We are convinced He is there 
found - other men say the same. It means that there is 
no experience in life where the Inquiring soul may not 
find God, in our wor£, in the home, in the Church. It Is 
our privilege ever to reach out after Him. 

We may also speak of the transcendence of God; but 
it will be different from the old view. Our experience 
of God does not exhaust the reality-meaning of God. 

There is always more to experience than we at any given 
time know. We are sure of that because as we enter 
varying experiences we find God the answer to our deepest 
needs. And in the same way others testify to the same 
thing. So our conclusion is that there is always more to 
be experienced than we know - 


Sffort, and expectation, and desire. 
And something evermore about to be. 2. 


We are reverencing and praying to a someone plus something 
more than we experience in that personality. The same is 
true of science. We know it as far as it is explored, 
but there is the unexplored - the transcendent. So in 


1 . 

2 . 


ihe Religion and Theology of Pani n i aa 
Wordsworth, Tke prMude - ; 300 k yj ,p,X44 * 


j 








49 


religion we trust in what we know, but there is more 
beyond. THus as Browning says - 

A man's reach should exceed his grasp, 

Or what's a heaven for? 1. 

It means, then, that our experience of God is synonymous 
with God just in the same way as our experience of the 
world is synonymous with the world. Pringle Pattison 
truly points out that, "there can be no true doctrine of 
God which is not based on a true doctrine of man". £. 

The Chiistian conception of God is one that is 
brought to us through the experience and discipleship of 
Jesus. In the older view of theology the deity of Jesus 
was conceived in terms of essence. A God-substance 
came from God and brought that substance to us. In him 
we are linked to God. The modern view interprets the 
deity in terms of personality. Jesus is the supreme 
personality of history in whose experience we see God and 
He is made vital and real to us in the processes of grace. 
To know God, the Father, through the experience of Jesus 
as we enter into His life is to get a Christian con¬ 
ception of God. Jesus is our own companion in this re¬ 
ligious quest, but he is the pioneer. He is the one who 
died in the quest but lives on. He had a vital assurance 
about God, the future, and redemption and he it is who 
leads us into the secret places where doubt is banished 
about the possibility of communion with God, about His 
reality. His accessibility. His Love, His redemptive 
power, His response to all our quest. 

We get to know God through His relation to our inner 
life. The root of the teaching of Jesus is that God, 
takes a living personal interest in us. Such a God is 
necessary for any real worship. If we worship an 
abstract far-off divinity the inevitable result will 
be the introduction of inter mediaries. For all mankind 
He takes on some kind of concrete form. Most Christians 
think of Him in terms of the Christ. The great resource 
of our Christian thought and life is in Jesus. We turn 
to him and see Gcd through his eyes and his personality. 
Bousset says that, "the faith in God the Father was 
nowhere conceived with such unerring certainty, such 
self evident simplicity as in the preaching of Jesus. 

Jesus created the holiest and most lasting symbol that 
has ever appeared in the history of religion - the lord's 
Prayer, in which all who are truly his disciples will meet 
on common ground." The assurance of this God of Jesus is 


1. Andrea Del Sarto. 


2. The Idea of God, p.254 










50 


supremely promoted through our disoipleship with Jesus. 

If we want to be sure of the nature of God we will find 
it by following Christ. This is the place where we 
often fail - we get lost in speculation and our vision 
gets dim - but never on the road in disoipleship with 
him. The pictures of God whioh we get through the 
picture of the life of Jesus are the most potent forces 
for making effective our human life. Christ is the 
one through whom the experience of God in all His love 
and Wisdom becomes real and vital. So we may well 
attribute to him those titles which he claims, the Way, 
the Truth and the Life. 

God is known in relation to human history. We are 
dependent on history for our faith in God. Saoh man 
does not start in by himself to find God. Our religious 
experience is developed because we are a part of human 
history. The basis we receive from our parents. For 
example, they tell us there is a God, that He is a God 
of Love, and our experience of the world in due time leads 
us to that on face value and w© act upon it. It may be 
that some day we have such a convulsive experience of 
the presence of God that we are suddenly led to say, 

"I know there is a God of Love and Righteousness”. Then 
we identify ourselves with a Church - a historic body 
in which God has been truly worshipped. To be a 
Christian means to take our place obediently and gladly 
in that great movement or succession in which this God 
has been worshipped, to make that relationship signifi¬ 
cant in our own life and to pass it on in ever larger 
significance to generations to come. 

There has been a movement in recent centuries to 
divorce religion from history. The reason for this 
originally was that many of the orthodox people limited 
Christian histoxy to specific miraculous incidents. The 
whole movement received an impetus through the discussion 
of rational and absolute ideas. Histoiy rightly used 
keeps us relationised with our faith. We get Christian 
faith set before us In perspective and in its unfolding 
and we study it relatively. In the nineteenth century 
men sought an infallible absolute and discussed exper¬ 
ience in relation to the Absolute. We are coming to see 
that in this life we must be content with a relative 
faith; that we cannot conceive of the Absolute; that the 
finite cannot comprehend the infinite. This life is a 
life of relativity and religious experience is a 
relative thing. 











51 - 


The great purpose of history is that we see the pur¬ 
pose of God located in the control of history. We cannot 
read history and believe that it just happens. There is 
a sense of control and purpose on every page of it; and 
we come to believe that the heart of that purpose is to 
be found in the meaning of the Kingdom of God. Thus this 
transformation of history reflects the purpose of a 
loving and righteous God. It is in pureuanco of feat- 
pur po a e -of a loving a nd- righteous God . It is in pur¬ 
suance of that purpose that we must interpret the thought 
and life and work of Jesus. He gave himself to the 
transformation of that historical process, i.e. to re¬ 
flect God. 

God f s purpose and work are revealed and carried 
through by men. The Kingdom is established by the deeds 
of men in co-operation with God. So our trusting God is 
only half of religion, the other half is God's trust in 
us. He has committed to us the great enterprise of His 
Kingdom in fellowship with Him. And that is a part of 
the glory and grandeur that belongs to human life. Our 
communion with God becomes most directly possibly as 
we devote ourselves to the building up cf the Kingdom of 
God. The great bulwark of assurance is just this de¬ 
votion to the things of the Kingdom . A missionary 
motive and propaganda are absolutely necessary if we are 
going to keep on solid ground. The call of God and the 
assurance of His presence are inseparably bound up with 
this. Sometimes our co-operation is definitely linked 
to an ecclesiastical organization; but this is not 
necessarily true. We must distinguish between the 
Church and the Kingdom, The Church is a means to an 
end. Take the present great social awakening - who 
brought it about? We must face the fact that the new 
humanitarianism did not come directly through an 
ecclesiastical channel but through social channels - 
clubs etc.; by people touched with 1 man's humanity to 
man*. Through secular channels God has been working . 

But the Church needed her awakening and got it through 
outside forces bearing upon her. This ferment of a 
new day demands a solution by people outside and inside 
the Church. If we can present a gospel and organization 
in harmony with the life of Christ we need not fear the 
future. 

In these days of world convulsion, when the self- 
sufficiency of modern life and dogmatic authority on 
the part o.f religion seem to have failed to meet our 
deepest and most urgent needs, religion must seek to be 








52 


the servant of life and co-operate with modern life for 
the promotion of social and religious welfare. This can 
be accomplished through the experie nee of God in the 
lives of men. In the new appreciation of the conception 
with its infinite content of meanings for man as revealed 
to us in the life and personality of Jesus, lies the 
source of all our moral, social and religious progress. 
Our final norm comes not from any institution or book, 
or standard of modern life, or even from Jesus Christ 
himself as a man, but from God. Christianity in its 
essence i£ the interpretation of God through the life 
and personality of Jesus and the exaltation of man 
through this interpretation. "A God better than the 
Father of Christ is forfnan inconceivable. A diviner 
interpretation of human existence than that of Christ is 
unimaginable." 1. The religious consciousness of man¬ 
kind is the highest known to mankind. The content of 
his experience Godward and manward is without rival. 

We make the primal discovery of our faith when we 
identify our moral and religious consciousness with that 
of Jesus. Herein lies the inestimable value of the re¬ 
ligious experience of Christ for the world - that our 
religious experience can become enlightened and con¬ 
trolled by the spirit of Christ and his interpretation 
of God. "Thus" says Sabatier, "the religious and moral 
consciousness of Jesus is repeated, continued, diffused 
and remains actually present and living in each 
Christian generation,” 2. The optimism of our religious 
faith embraces God f s world-plan and purpose for the 
education of mankind through our assimilation of the 
religious and moral content of the religious conscious¬ 
ness of Christ. Our hoge for the future lies in the 
recovery of the spirit and mind of Jesus made incarnate 
in the lives of men, nothing else will suffice. 

Christianity is life aod life means growth and 
adaptation to environment. Religious experience is a 
thing that develops and it is the gravest error to sub¬ 
stitute for the ever ripening expression of the inner 
life of Christianity the Christian experience of any 
single age as an authoritative, infallible norm of the 
Christian life for all time to come. A Christian theology 
must be based upon a definite philosophy of life aod the 
facts of experience harmoniously related to the ex¬ 
perience of God as revealed in the personality and 
teaching of Jesus. This is our norm of religious truth. 


"We still see in God with the Greek theologians the 
ultimate reality of the universe, the Absolute in whom 


1 . 

2 . 


Ultimate conceptions of faith 
ifiLigions of Authority, p.274. 


Gordon,p.299 























53 


thought rests, and toward whom aspiration strives. WE 
still confess with Galvin that the Will of God is the 
supreme law, back of which no man can press. But we 
have learned from Christ to call this Supreme Being 
Father, and to see in His will the expression of a 
character like that of Jesus Christ. For the abstract 
absolute of philosophy we substitute the God and Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ . When we confess His 
sovereignty, we mean that the principles of Jesus are 
some day to dominate the world. When we speak of the 
incarnation, we mean that in the life of Jesus of 
Nazareth, simple, human, brotherly as we have learned 
to see it, God is revealing to all who have eyes to see 
what He Himself is like, and what He would fain have all 
men become.” 1. 


1. The Essence of Christianity, Brown, p. 313. 










