
For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


THE ORIGIN OF THE JURY SYSTEM 


Robert Edward Wynne 


DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY 
















Sx liBBIS 

MraciRsnaJis 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/originofjurysystOOwynn 















. 






















' 


















SYNOPSIS 


The origins of the jury system can be found in earliest 
mediaeval Europe, but the institution soon died out on the continent. 
Only in England did it develop and have continuous being, and from 
England it made its way to North America and other parts of the 
English world. The jury system found its way back into Europe 
by way of the French Revolution, which here, as in so many other 
places, derived its ideas from institutions and ideas -which had 

proved themselves in England. Little wonder, then, that the jury 

» 

system was to the powers of the anclen regime of Europe only 
another of the hated end dreaded institutions of the French Revolution. 
Equally, it was to the liberal-minded spirits one of the essential 
requirements for a. freer way of life. The 1848 revolutionaries in 
Germany and the subsequent Bundestag of Frankfurt demanded trial by 
jury as one of their reforms. The great interest aroused by politic al 
discussions of the subject led to extensive research into the history 
and origin of the jury system. 

Dr. Brunner was at that time professor at the University of 
Prague, then a part of the Austrian Empire. His main study was the 
History of the German Law and he was the author of a widely read text¬ 
book on that subject (Deutsche Rechtsgeschichte) . In 1866 Dr. Brunner 
reed a paper to the Academy of Sciences ( Academie der Hissenschaffen ) 
in Vienna concerning evidence by witnesses and through inquisition 
in the Carolingian era: Zeugen-und-Inquisitionsbeweis der Karoling- 
ischen Zeit . There he hinted at a possible connection between the 
Frankish inquisition and the beginnings of the jury. Encouraged by 
many of his colleagues he began a more intensive research whose results 




















■ ■ ♦ 

f ... .... 




. 

t. .. . t 

- . .. . ■ . ' .• . ... 

. x « ... 

♦ 

* 


. 





, 


. 











led him to believe that he might be able to track down the 
elusive origin of the jury system and settle the dispute amongst 
experts whether the jury was a child of the English or continental 
law. Most modern historians still accept Dr. Brunner as the leading 
authority on the subject. 

Dr. Erunner considered the jury to have originated in a 
special procedure before the Frankish King f s Court, an inquisition 
held by the king or his representative and consisting mainly in 
the summoning of witnesses and questioning them about a particular 
matter in dispute. The novelty in this procedure was that the 
witnesses were not called by the party concerned but by the king 
and that the strict and formalistic procedure of the Frankish Common 
Law was set aside in favour of one freer and more elastic. 

From the Frankish Law this institution came into the Borman 
Law when the Normans took over Normandy, The Normans accepted the 
system, modified it and brought it with them to England alter 1066. 
Anglo-Norman Law further developed the inquisition and the use of 
jurymen in various types of action. From an institution for getting 
evidence the jury finally developed into a body of men whose judge¬ 
ment of factidecided certain legal actions. 

Dr. Brunner showed that the jury continued to develop only 
in England because in Normandy its further growth was stopped after 
the re-union of Normandy with France -where the jury ceased to develop 
under the impact of the Roman and Canon Law. Only in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth century did the jury become widely used in Europe 
where it has come to be a symbol of democratic government. 






- 




• . 


. * : - - 

. 


« 


. . 




✓ 

. . 

. t 

, . 


* ; ....0 . ' 'X'■ ,: '■ 

• • - .> j 


Thesis 

mi 

#35 

THE UNIVERSITY OF AIBERTA 

The 

ORIGIN 
of the 

JURY SYSTEM 


Abridged and adapted from Dr. Heinrich Brunner 1 
Die Entstehung der Schwurgerichte 

Berlin, 1878. 


Submitted to the School of Graduate Studies 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for 
the Degree of Master of Arts 


FACULTY - OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY 


by 

Robert Edward Wynne, B.Ed., J.D. 
Edmonton, Alberta. 

March, 1958. 





CON TENTS 


I Research done before Dr. Brunner Page 1 

II The Genesis of the Jury in General 22 

III Teutonic Legal procedure 26 

IV Frankish Law after Clovis 33 

V Development of the Norman Law 45 

VI The Organisation of the Norman Judicature 52 

VII The Norman Conquest and Anglo-Saxon Law 62 

VIII Inquests in Normandy and England 71 

IX The Church and the Inquest 83 

X Ordinary Recognition Procedure 87 

XI Assizes and lurata 101 

XII Evidence through a Record 108 

XIII The Trial Jury 111 

XIV Further Development of the Jury in Normandy 118 

XV The Jury and the Criminal Law 126 

XVI Conclusion 135 


Bibliography 


















RESEARCH DONE BEFORE DR. BRUNNER 


While there has been a continual English interest in the history of 
the jury system, continents! interest dates only from the time of the 
French Revolution. There is thus only about half a century of significant 
continents! research into this subject before Dr. Brunner. It may have 
been this fact, coupled with the extraordinary interest of nineteenth 
century liberals in the jury system, which prompted Brunner to undertake 
his research. As he himself says in his introduction, the jury system 
has spread further in less time and has tsken root in more diverse legal 
systems than has any other institution in the entire history of law. He 
notes that before the French Revolution the jury was limited to the Eng¬ 
lish and related lege! systems but that since that event it became an 
integral part of European culture, incorporated into the legal systems 
of most civilized countries, non-European as well as European. 

Since the French Revolution, then, and before Brunner, a very con¬ 
siderable amount of time and study was devoted to the study of the origins 
and history of the jury system, Germans, French, English, and others 
all worked on the problem, usually with the furtherance of their own 
national reputations in view. Some investigators even reached across 
Europe to the Serbs and Stephen Dushan for the parentage of the jury. 

In Germany during the first half of the nineteenth century a hot 
debate raged about the usefulness of the jury system to German law. Ger¬ 
man historical investigations, therefore, tended to centre on this aspect 
of the question. Some historians condemned the jury without reason, 
while others overvalued it equally uncritically. Much of the investigation, 
then, was polemical even to the exclusion of impartiality. Nevertheless 
useful facts were uncovered. This research culminated in the voluminous 




. 

. 

■ 

e . 

, 

. 

. 

' 

. 

. 

. 




2 


( 1 ) 

work of F. A. Biener, who, incidentally, opposed most violently the 
introduction of the jury. After Biener, interest in the jury shifted 
from past history to present applications, and there is a gap of a 
decade in this particular historical research until Dr. Brunner resumed 
it in the middle 1860*s. 

French legal literature can boast of few positive contributions 
to the history of the jury system. The French were interested only in 
its political aspects, in the popular element of the jury. At the time 
Dr. Brunner wrote, there had been no significant French contributions 
to his filed of study for more than half a century. 

In England, of course, there was a livelier interest in the subject. 

But English legal studies contented themselves with carrying the history 
of the jury in England on a firm and secure basis back to the thirteenth cen¬ 
tury, to a point at which there was no longer abundant English source 
material and precisely to the point at which an examination of the con¬ 
tinental sources might have suggested itself as profitable. But English 
scholars failed to take this step. It was their insularity which prevented 
them, according to Brunner, who found this insularity particularly prom¬ 
inent in English attitudes to the history of continental law. 

Vhen Brunner began his researches, studies about the origin of the 
jury fell into three categories: those discussing the possible place 
of origin, those that tried to find the institution from which the 
jury developed, and those which attempted to ascertain the reason for 
its development. The first type emphasised the historical, point of view, 
the second the legal, and the third what might be called the speculative. 
Predominantly historical research resulted in many hypotheses about which 
particular national law had produced the origins of the jury. Invest- 

1. Biener, F.A. - Englisches C-eschworenengericht Srd , Berlin, 1855. 








. 

, 

' 

. 

. 

* 

, 

. f 








. 

« 

• * 









5 


igations of a legal nature concentrated on an attempt to find the most 
ancient form of procedure from which the jury might have developed, 
while inquiries of a speculative nature were directed at possible 
conditions which might have necessitated the creation of the jury 
system, at the social and cultural backgrounds of which the 
jury system might be a legal reflection. Obviously the answers 
to this third question depended upon correct solutions of the 
first two problems and it was found impossible in actual practice 
to separate any one of these attitudes completely from either of the 
other two. 

1. Historical Enquiries . 

Before Dr. Brunner the common view was that the jury originated 
in the .Anglo-Saxon law. National myth in England would have had it 
that King Alfred either created the jury or at least improved it con¬ 
siderably by laying down the number of jurors and by other instructions. 
This reference to King Alfred is completely unfounded and was rejected 
by more serious experts such as Spelman, Selden, Coke, Turner, Phillips 
and G.L.V. Maueer. However, they all still attribute the origin of 
the jury to Anglo-Saxon law. 

The second assumption was that the jiiry originated in England 
but was a child of the Anglo-Norman law. Supporters of this view pointed 
to the undisputed fact that both types of jury, the accusing jury (l) and 
the evidence jury, were first generally established under Henry II, 

Without giving conclusive proof, Forsyth stated that the jury was unknown 
to the Anglo-Saxons and developed independently in England a full century 
after the Norman conquest(2). He emphatically rejected the idea of a 

1. We shall have much to say about the accusing jury. See within Ch.XV 
and Page 8, footnote also various other references too numerous to cite. 

2. Forsyth, History of Trial by Jury, p.92, London, 1852. 





. 

. 

. . 

. , ' 

* . . 


, 


. 




• r . ) : 


, 

. 

. 

* * • . 









4 


Norman origin and declared that the jury in Normandy was only a 

poor imitation of the English jury. Biener, whom we have already 

mentioned in the introduction, also places the origin of the jury in 

England in the Norman period. The English jury appeared to him to be 

older since in England the jury was more cleanly defined and better 

developed than in Normandy. Later, however, he changed his mind and 

supported the view that the jury had come from Normandy. Palgrave 

offered yet another variant: he assumed that the jury dealing with 

criminal cases was established by William the Conqueror, hut asserted 

that the jury dealing with property litigations dated back to the Anglo- 

( 1 ). 

Saxon era. 

The majority of opinions agreed that the roots of the jury system 

were imported into England, though views differ widely as to the 

ultimate origin. Those who placed the origin of the jury in Anglo- 

Saxon law assumed that the Anglo-Saxons brought it with them from their 

Teutonic forests. Mary believed it to be a common Germanic institution 

which survived amongst the Anglo-Saxons in view of peculiar circumstances, 

but became extinct amongst the other Germanic tribes. Nicholson, for 

( 2 ). 

example, pleaded for the Germanic origin of the jury So did Sir 

(5) (4). 

Francis Bacon , Montesquieu, Savigny and Blackstone 

(1) Palgrave» 'The Rise and Progress of the EnglishCommonwealth^ 

vol.2, London, 1852. 

(2) Nicholson, "Prefacio de iure feudal! veterum S&xonum," ad Wilkin^, 
Leges Pnglosexonicae, p.ix, London, 1721. 

(3) Bacon of Verul em. Discourse on the Laws and Government of England . 
ch.28. re-printed in H.Cock, Commentatio de iudiciis iuratorum, 
ch.2. London, 1821. 

(4) Blackstone, N. New Commentaries , London, 1868, iii, Ch.25: "....It 
is certain that the juries were in use amongst the earliest Saxon 
colonies.,..Hence it is that we may find traces of juries in the 
laws of all those nations which adopted the feudal system., as in 
France, Italy, Germany." 









, 

. 













. - 








, 

. 

. 

- . 








. . 

* • • • r • . , 

.... 

"« , ' . 





















Most of these men traced the jury beck to men who pronounced 
judgement. 

Others asserted that the jury was common to the Anglo-Saxons, 
Scandinavians and to those Germanic tribes near the sea, Michelsen 
found the jury among Danes, Swedes, Norwegians, Icelanders and 
Anglo-Saxons. He saw in it a legal institution developed from most 
ancient days and brought to England by the Angles and Saxons from 

(i) 

their original habitat. According to Hilda , the jury was found 
in Nordic law though Anglo-Saxon records showed only the beginning 
of the jury system. He left the question open whether the English 
development of the jury was along northern Germanic or Scandinavian 
lines. 

This view of the Nordic origin of the jury had many supporters. 

On two separate occasions the Scandinavian law had come into contact 

with the English lew end from these contacts the transfer of Nordic 

institutions to England could be explained. First, there were many 

invasions and settlements in England by Danes and Norsemen up to and 

including the Danish conquest of England by King Canute. Second, there 

was the conquest of England by the Normans in 1066. These Norsemen 

had lived since 912 on west-Frankish territory end in their domain 

of Normandy taken over many institutions of their conquered hosts. 

Hicks, an Oxford scholar 1 2 , named sources that supported the theory 

( 2 ) 

of a Norman origin . His work was largely responsible for 

(1) Hilda, Ueber den Ursprung der Geschworenengerichte , Luebeck, 1848, 
p. 229. 

(2) Hicks, Linguarum vett. septentrionalium Thesaurus , Oxford, 1705. 






. 

. 

. 

. 

* 

■ 

, 

. 

' 

. I 

; 

, 

* 






6 


popularising that view. He assumed the existence of the jury in Norman 

law end custom from a passage in a Danish history according to which 

an early ninth century Danish king, Regner Lodbrog, introduced a 

twelve-man jury. The Normans brought that institution to Normandy and 

( 1 ) ( 2 ) 

then to England. Amongst others, Reeves and Crabb adopted the 

argument of Hicks. The same origin was claimed during a debate in the 

French National Assembly concerning the introduction of the jury system. 

In the session of 51 March, 1790, a deputy, Goupil de Prefeln, pointed 

out that the jury had come to France with the Normans and had been taken 

(5) 

to England from Normandy . Eeiner adopted the view of a Nordic origin 

(4) 

of the jury and supported it more fully. Utilising a complete know¬ 
ledge of Nordic law, Konrad Maurer investigated again the connection of 
the English jury with related Nordic legal procedure. He declared 
the Norman jury to be the model of the English jury. With reservations, 
he presented the opinion that the original form of the jury was common 
to all the northern Germanic tribes, that the jury had developed indep¬ 
endently and fairly late in each individual tribe and that, therefore, 

(5) 

it was known to the Normans of France 

If one accepts the fact that the English jury derived from the 
Norman jury, it is still possible that the Normans did not bring the 
seeds of the jury from their ancestral homes in northern Europe, but 
found it in Normandy and only developed it further. It was von Daniels 
who first tried to prove the Frankish origin of the jury in an essay 

(1) Reeves, His~tory~"of the English Law, Oxford, 1787. 

(2) Crabb, History of the English Law. Oxford, 1829. 

(5) Moniteur, ed. 1790, No. 91. 

(4) Biener, F.A. Das Fnglische Geschworenengericht. 5 vols, 1855. 

(5) Maurer, Konrad, "Das Beweisverfahren nach Deutschen Rechten, tT printed 
in the Kritische Ueberschau, 1857, vol. v, p. 180. 














. 


. 


* 












. 


, 

* ■ 

, 










. 




■ 

s ♦ 


. 

- 

. , . 





7 


entitled, Ursprung und Vert der Geschworenenanstelt, read to a meeting 
of the Law Society in Berlin on 11 February, 1848. His reasoning carried 
little conviction, even at the time, since it was realised that he had 
based it upon a completely false premise. 

Uncertainty over the character of the older English jury made 
possible attempts to find its origin even in the Homan law. A resem¬ 
blance was noted between the Roman ’’iudices” and the English jury, and 
the Latin term began to be translated as ’’jury”. Confusion became 
worse confounded by argument based, in effect, on this translation 
and by an assumed identity of terms. Blsukensee and Laboulaye were 
particularly prominent in the perpetration of this error. According 
to Laboulaye the jury had to develop everywhere. All free people, he 
held, realised that political freedom was only possible when independent 
men, elected from the people, delivered judgement upon their fellow 

(i) 

citizens’ life and honour , Others, however, did not bother to con¬ 
sider the two institutions side by side, but treated the jury as a mere 
remnant of Roman lew, Finlason, who published a History of the English 
Law of the Reeve, was of the opinion that Roman law had been preserved 
in full force in the English Common Law which, he held, dated from the 
days of the Roman occupation and included both Roman law and Anglo-Saxon 
law side by side. The jury was supposed by Finlason to be one of the 
institutions belonging to the Roman legal system. However, this view 
of the Roman origin is to-day rejected by all experts, 

(1) LabouYayVT^d.^”Essai sur les Icis criminelles des Remains 

concernant la responsibilite ties Nagistrats, Paris, 1854, pp, 551. 









. 

. 

, 

, 




, 


• , ? 

... 

. 

. 









8 


Moehl advanced yet another theory. He traced the jury system 

from the canon lav. The procedure generally adopted at the courts of 

the special clerical itinerant justices was, according to him, the 

(i) 

prototype of the jury . It is true that there was a close resemblance 

between these institutions but more recent investigations have discovered 

that the procedure before the ecclesiastic courts was molded on the 

( 2 ) 

Frankish Ruegeverfahren , which appeared to be the common root for 
the accusing jury and the special ecclesiastical courts. 

2. Legal Inquiries . 

When speaking of the legal (rather than historical) origin of 
an institution of law one, generally, understands something of the 
nature of an historical bench-mark, a clearly visible starting point 
for a continuous organic development at the end of which that institution 
has reached its characteristic form. As in the history of nature, 
there can also occur in the historic development of legal institutions 
a change in species, and many such institutions have gradually under¬ 
gone such a change that they have become in the end something very 
different from what they were in the beginning. 

The opinion of those who regard the jury as an institution which 


(1) In the Frankish era, and in varying degrees later on, clerics were 

not subject to the secular jurisdiction but were tried by ecclesiastic¬ 
al courts (subject to an appeal to the king). Just as the secular 
jurisdiction of the court was supervised and controlled by special 
itinerant justices of the king ( missi dominici ), so were ecclesiast¬ 
ical courts supervised by special clerical judges. 

(2) The Frankish Ruegeverfahren used the accusing jury. This was a 
group of men of good repute, living in the district. Their duty 
was to report to the justice at the time of his visit in the 
district any suspects or criminals. It was not, however, the duty 
of this type of jury to pronounce a judgement. 









- 




. 

, 






. 






' 

. 

. 


, 

. 

. 

, 

. 

. 

. 




9 


had come into being in its completed form by a particular statute or 
became established by usage, can be completely ignored. Equally attempts 
must be exclMed which explain the jury merely by comparing it with 
related institutions without attempting to establish a direct link with 
an older form of legal procedure. 

Investigations into the legal roots of the jury system can be 

limited to Teutonic law since up to Brunner f s time no attempts had 

been successful in proving other origins for the jury. Ve have already 

( 1 ) 

noted Finlason's attempt to find the origin of the jury in the 
iudices of the Roman law, a thesis now rejected by all scholars. 

Similar institutions to the jury existed in some Slavic laws. For 
example, we can find from a statute of Stephen Dushan that some kinds 
of jury existed in Serbia in the thirteenth and fourteenth century. 

No connection can be established between these institutions and the 
juries of Normandy and England, 

There were two different theories which traced the jury from one 
of the older Teutonic forms of legal action. One regarded the instit¬ 
ution of the judgement-finders as the origin and the other looked to 
another of the older forms of evidence. 

The theory based on the action of the judgement-£ind#s or suitors 
was very popular amongst scholars. When people on the continent of 
Europe began to compare the English jury system with their native 
institutions, the non-professional element of the English jury was 
the most noticeable one since this was the element completely absent 
in their own legal institutions which latter has grown out of the Roman 
and Canon law. The participation of ordinary people in the administration 
of justice was regarded as the essence of the English jury system; 
nr See above, p,7. 






, 

. 










. 


. 




. 








. 

. 

. 


. 

. 

' 



10 


this h&d obviously developed from a process by which the assembled 
members of the community passed sentence. On closer scrutiny it 
was noticeable that the older Teutonic rules of procedure say nothing 
ebout the division of trial procedure into questions of facts and 
questions of law, which is such a principal, characteristic of our 
modern trial procedure, the modern jury being confined in its competence 
to judgement on matters of fact* To get over this difficulty various 
theories were put forward. For example, Reynolds attempted to explain 
the transition from the old Germanic procedure to the jury system by 
saying that in England the court days were attended by fewer and fewer 
men and the sheriffs were finally compelled to select twelve men 
from amongst the people to act as jurors. When Henry II introduced the 
system of itinerant justices, questions of facts were separated from 
questions relating to points of law, decisions on the latter being 
transferred to the judge. As can be seen, this theory explained circum¬ 
stances rather than gave an explanation of origin. Furthermore, this 
theory operated on assumptions which had not been proved. Original 
sources do not support it, and indeed even refute it. 

Explanations which sought the roots of the jury in the Teutonic 

procedure of evidence usually took as the origin of the jury either 

the institution of oath-helpers or the Teutonic witness procedure. 

Some, however, combined either suitors ana oath-helpers or the latter 

(i) 

and witnesses 

( 2 ) 

As a result of Rogge’s monumental work on the Teutonic judicial 
system, in Germany, the institution of oath-helpers was regarded by 

(1) Oath-helpers were men who by their oath testified as to the character 

of the party who was swearing an oath, either supporting his claim 
or his innocence. Oath-helpers were also referred to as compurgators 
by scholars of the later Middle Ages. 

(2) Rogge, Ueber das Gerichtswesen der Germanen . 1820, pera.44. 




. 

.* 







. 

. 


. 

. 

, 

, 


. 

- 


- 




11 


many as the origin of the jury. The oath-helpers of the plaintiff were 
the forerunners of the accusing jury and those of the defendant the 
beginning of the evidence jury. This development was explained by the 

(i) 

abolition of trial by ordeal . The gap in the rules of evidence had to 
be filled somehow and the oath-helpers were given the added function of 
finding the defendant, under certain circumstances,innocent or guilty. 

This transition did not take place in Germany because Charlemagne in 
his capitularia (instructions) empowered the judge to appoint the oath- 
helpers. These premises upon which Rogge built up his theory are, however, 
wrong- and what he said about Charlemagne is based on a misunderstanding. 

The capitularia on which he relied do not refer to the oath-helpers. 

Such an interpretation presumed that the oath-helpers were previously 
in a position to pronounce the defendant "not guilty”, which was not 
the case. 

Side by side with the fully developed trial jury, the evidence 

jury continued to exist for a long time in England in the curious form 

known as the f wager of law 1 in actions of debt and detinue. It was 

abolished finally in the spring housecleaning of the Civil Procedures 

Act of 1833 which did away also with trial by battle. In view of this 

( 2 ) 

continuation, Ludwig von Maurer modified Rogge*s theory . He assumed 
that the jury developed from the oath-helpers of the plaintiff. This seemed 
more probable since they ceased to be used at an early stage. In more 
recent days, Biener, and even more precisely, Konrad Maurer, made clear 
the unsurmountable gap which separated the institutions of jury and 
oath-helpers. To draw attention to these two experts should be sufficient 
and further exhaustive research clearly shows that it was impossible 
to trace back the jury to the oath-helpers. 

(1) The ordeal was a means of evidence applied when witnesses were not 

available or insufficient. God was supposed to show which party was 
right. 

(2) Maurer, L., Geschichte des altgermanischen Gerichtsverfahrens. 1824.p.108. 






-- •:; 

' ' > ■ "" ! 

. 

. 

■ . 

. 

. 

* 

, 

. 

. 

. 

* 




12 


( 1 ) 

Another adherent to this doctrine was Gundermann who cited 

the case of the defendant 1 2 3 caught red-handed ? . There, the plaintiff 

( 2 ) 

declared on oath, called the fore-oath , that the wrong had been 
perpetrated. He was supported by his oath-helpers who testified on 
oath to the plaintiff’s credibility. This institution was supposed 
to contain the basic factors for the origin of the indictment jury. 

The seme argument that had been applied to the oath-helper theory in 
general, was applied only to the oath-helpers of the plaintiff. Yet 
neither the concept of ’caught red-handed’ nor Gundermann’s extension 
of it, are historically allied with the beginnings of the modern 
criminal jury, the jury concerned with criminal cases. This cannot 
form the starting point of an investigation since the criminal jury 
is of more recent origin than the civil jury, the forms of which were 
transferred to it. 

According to Phillips, the jury developed neither exclusively 

from the oath-helpers nor from suitors but from a gradual combination 

(5) 

of the two . A growing suspicion of the oath sworn by compurgators, 
the influence of Canon Law and the centralization of the administration 
of justice at the king’s court (where the king or a person appointed 
by him presided and which relied less upon Common Law than on Equity) 
were supposed to have produced this amalgamation. 

Oath-helpers and suitors are of such different natures that it 
would be impossible without a clear historical connection to accept 
the theory of their fusion. Apart from that, it is not possible to est¬ 
ablish in the Anglo-Saxon law the existence of jurors: e.g. a fixed 

(1) Gundermann, Geschichte der Entstehung der Jury, 1847. 

(2) The fore-oath is distinct from the definite oath of proof and 
was required from a party commencing a suit unless the fact 
complained of was manifest e.g. a wound. 

(3) Phillips, Versuch einer D arstellung der Geschich t e des angel - 
sachsischen" Pc chtes ," 182L1 








. 

* 

, 




, - 


. 


. 


, 






. 











, . 








13 


number of verdict finders. 

(i) 

Koestlin had yet another theory. The essence of his theory 
was that the jury owed its existence to the fusion of evidence 
obtained by means of oath-helpers with that from witnesses. With the 
oath-helpers the important factor was that their evidence rested 
on conscience; with the witnesses it was a twofold matter: they 
not only could assert the credibility of the party who had called 
them, but they could also give evidence about facts. The reference 
to evidence through witnesses, and particularly through community 
witnesses, brings us a step nearer the correct solution but the 
puzzle is far from solved. Even if one combines evidence by witnesses 
with that by oath-helpers, we still do not have evidence as the modern 
law knows it, e.g. the witness can give evidence which can be favourable 
or damaging to the party. Original sources show that the Teutonic 
witness oath by oath-helpers was only a one-sided means of evidence, 
it was not a conscience-inspired verdict as to the innocence or guilt 
of the principal party taking the oath, but merely a confirmation that 
the party was credible. Koestlin, however, showed a considerable 
insight when he advanced the thesis of the origin of the jury in England 
in the following way: as the older means of evidence became insufficient 
the community took over their work in England whereas in other countries 
government officials concerned themselves with new principles of investig¬ 
ation. 

In Koestlin 1 s theory we have the explanation for the transition 
to the ’witness theory 1 . Thorough investigation by English scholars 

(1) Koestlin, ”Bie Entstehung und Fortbildung der Jury Auf Englischem 

Boden”. Printed in Zeitschrift fuer deutsches Hechfc, 1848, vol.xii, 
p*406. 

Das Geschworenengericht fuer Nichtjuristen dargestellt, 1849. 




















. 


. 







. 


, 















.... 











* 






















14 


established the fact that jurymen, even at an early stage, were ad- 

(i) 

missible as witnesses in respect to evidence. According to Palgrave 
evidence by jurymen was originally only witness evidence. In its 
primitive form a trial by jury was only a trial by witnesses. Jurymen 
were distinguished from other witnesses only by the customs which 
imposed on them the obligation of an oath, regulated their number, 
prescribed their rank and defined their residential qualifications. 
Forsyth argued similarly: the principle of the jury lay in the require¬ 
ment that disputes should be decided by witnesses from the neighbour¬ 
hood, who had to be sworn in. Beiner, too, pointed out that it was 
the jurymen’s purpose in the first instance to be witnesses. Konrad 
Maurer, who was particularly concerned with the laws of the Nordic 
tribes, came also to the conclusion the jurymen were primarily witnesses, 
particularly the community witnesses. It was Brunner’s opinion 
that von Daniels came nearest to the origin of the jury, when he referred 
to instructions by Charlemagne and his successor, Louis the Pious, con¬ 
cerning the procedure of witnesses. These instructions ordered that 
the witnesses should be nominated by the judge and no longer be selected 
by the party concerned. Furthermore, they ordered an examination of 
the witnesses which is referred to in documents of that time as 
inquisitio (inquisition). This examination of witnesses is also found 
in the ancient French and Norman enquete which was an assembly in a 

community under the chairmanship of a judge to discover the application 

( 2 ) 

of the Common Law in a particular case . 

(1) Palgrave, The rise and Progress of the English Commonwealth, 2 vols. 

1852, 1, p.244. 

(2) See page 125. 














. 


. 

■ 




- 

































. 

. ■ 















15 


Von Daniels was on the right track as to the origin of the 
jury but reached a wrong conclusion since he failed to distinguish 
between the ordinary, formalistic witness procedure and the 
special calling of witnesses and their examination by the judge at 
the king’s court, referred to as inquisitio . 

5, Speculative Inquiries . 

We come now to the third avenue of research in connection with 
the origin of the jury: why was the jury introduced and wht was the 
social and cultural background it reflected? What was the connecting 
link between the development of the jury and the fundamental principles 
which governed Teutonic legal procedure? 

Koestlin attempted to find the origin of the jury by viewing the 

question from the point of view of Hegelian theory. To him the essence 

of the Teutonic evidence-procedure lay in its subjectivity, in contrast 

to the objectivity of Roman law. The ancients of Germany were content 

with the evidence of their senses, and drew only the most elementary 

conclusions from this about the inner nature of the deed, the criminal 

intent or lack of it. In practice, this meant that if, for example, 

a man was killed in a fight, no distinction was possible along our 

modern lines between murder and manslaughter. He was either guilty of 

murder or not, and the whole burden of deciding this guilt, on what 

to us would be the most flimsy of evidence, rested on the conscience 

of the judge. Naturally, voluntary confession was put in the very 

centre of Teutonic evidence procedurej being an act of the accused’s 

conscience, it was eminently suited to set the conscience of the judge 

( 1 ) 

at rest when he found the accused guilty. If such a confession -was 

(l) Eut see immediately below for Boehlau’s pertinent limitation 

on the old Teutonic concept of confession. 





. 

. 

, 

* 

, 

. 






16 


missing, it was replaced by an expression of the conscience of the 

community, through oath-helpers, or by a verdict of God, through ordeal. 

While in Roman law evidence by a witness was in itself a sufficient 

source of knowledge, Teutonic law, without excluding it altogether, 

always asked in addition for a more subjective method of evidence. 

Koestlin asserted that during the further development of Teutonic 

evidence procedure, it was only necessary to make good this one-sideness 

by finding additional material evidence. While in Germany and France 

the principle of subjectivity gradually disappeared in favour of 

factual evidence in the sense of the Roman law, in England this 

original principle was maintained. The development of the jury 

happily reconciled the two principles. On the one hand jurymen were 

presented with material evidence, on the other, their verdict was a 

subjective expression of their knowledge. Furthermore, the jurymen 

represented the conscience of the community at large and so we are back 

( 1 ) 

at the original idea of community witnesses. Boehlau had a very poor 
opinion of Koestlin, whose historical works, he said, had little if 
any objectivity and were in fact merely attempts to bend historical 
developments into a framework of preconceived ideas. According to 
Boehlau, the weight of historical evidence, the sum of all the evidence 
from original sources, showed that there was in Teutonic law r 
no such thing as confession in the sense in which the word is used 
in modern criminal law. Instead of confession the older procedure 
took account only of admission and then only with limitations. In the 
older forms the defendants admission included a statement of argument 
■which set the admitted facts in the best possible light for him, and 
was thus in fact a defence rather than a confession or even an admission. 
(1) Boehlau, Nove Constitutiones Domini Alberti. 




r ■ 

' 

. 




, 


, 









. 



. 






. 






, 

, 

’ 

■ 









17 


Koestlin f s fundamental error lay in the mistaken idea of what 
constitutes ’evidence 1 . He defined it as follows; It is the sum total 
of all means which convince the judge of the truth of such facts 
as come under the definition of a particular law. If evidence is on 
only what Koestlin describes, then Rogge is correct in asserting that 
the ancient Germans had no procedure of evidence at all. In the Roman, 
Canon end modern laws evidence is rendered to the judge, but this did 
not apply to the Teutonic law. 

When Koestlin talked about the conscience of the members of a 
jury, it is obvious that he referred to the evidence jury, and not 
the accusing jury. We should keep in mind the cixrious procedure of 
the Teutonic law wherein the verdict preceded the procedure to obtain 
evidence. Therefore, any intention to quieten the conscience of the 
members of the jury would have been hardly possible. In these 
early days it was the community which had to be convinced of the truth, 
and not the judge. Hence evidence was produced for the benefit of 
the community. Our modern, and often casuistic procedure would have 
been most unsuitable and the close observation and the carrying out 
of the same strict formalities at all times were necessary prerequisites 
for any evidence produced. The community assembled at the meeting 
knew exactly what to expect, and the simple and honest members could 
easily follow the procedure. It was not the subjectivity of the Teutonic 
procedure but its formalism that needed supplementing as time went on 
and the jury did exactly that. The history of the jury is also the 
history of the slow acceptance of factual evidence, but always within 
the fremew T ork of the Common Law, How this development progressed is 


shown later 


■ 


















. 


. 

* 

. 

, 




f 



. 



, ' 





18 


( 1 ) 

Gneist ,another well-known scholar, offered many interesting clues 
as to the reasons behind the development of the English jury. He dis¬ 
tinguished between a Teutonic, an Anglo-Saxon and a Norman share in 
the development of the jury. Like Koestlin, he thought that the Teutonic 
influence was to be found in the concept that the guilt would have to 
be established in the mind of the judge. Since social position and 
standing in the community were criteria of credibility, independent 
and critical analysis of the evidence was impossible. If the accused 
denied the charge and had not been 1 caught red-handed 1 no discretion 
was allowed to the judge. Oath-helpers or trial, by ordeal settled the 
evidence one way or the other, and the judge pronounced his verdict 
accordingly without making an independent investigation. The evidence 
of oath-helpers was the contribution of Teutonic procedure to the 
development of the jury. 

The Anglo-Saxon part in the development was seen by Gneist to 

lie in the collective responsibility of the community. This principle 

of collectibe responsibility was introduced by the Anglo-Saxon kings 

to arrest the dissolution of the community by making it become, by 

me bus of the novel institution of the inauest, an important factor 

( 2 ) 

in the investigation . In practice the inquest was carried out by 
representatives of the community who thus contributed to the development 
of the jury. In other countries this duty devolved upon officials 


(1) Gneist, Pie Bildung der Geschworenengerichte, 1849 and. Das Englische 
Verwaltungsrecht, 1867. 

(£) Before the Norman Conquest a custom prevailed in England whereby 
the freemen of a community were responsible for the good conduct 
of each other. Ten men formed an association called a tithing . 

If one member of a Ui-tiing committed an offence the nine others were 
liable for his appearance in court to make reparation. A law of 
Edgar compelled every man to find a surety. The head of the tithing 
was the tithing man, who became the village constable, when the 
tithings became a territorial division. This system is referred to 
as Erank-pledge by the Normans. (Also mentioned in Holdsworth, 
History of the English Law , vol 1, 15. 14.) 










, 

. 

. 

. 

. 


. 


. 






* 

, 

* 






19 


end Gneist saw here one of the reasons why the jury died out in 
Normandy and was not developed in Europe for many centuries, Palgrave 
denied that this collective responsibility was actually introduced 
by Anglo-Saxon kings though he admitted its existence in the 
Norman era. Its influence upon the jury was only indirect. It was the 
enmity between the Normans and the defeated Anglo-Saxons that necess¬ 
itated the introduction of the collective responsibility of the 
community. This responsibility was a means of strict supervision, 
subordination and limitation of the Anglo-Saxons by the ruling race 
for its own protection and not a means to preserve the Anglo-Saxon 
community. The foreign officials found it necessary to enforce the 
principle of inquisition against a hostile population. Palgrave T s 
theory about collective responsibility was considered by Dr. Brunner 
to be more likely than Gneist f s view of the existence of such re¬ 
sponsibility in Anglo-Saxon days. 

The Norman share in the development of the jury appeared to Gneist 
to lie in the centralization of the whole judicature through the King f s 
Court and in the institution of itinerant justices. In addition, 
the enforcement of the inquest and the introduction of the recognitions 

(i) 

procedure in civil litigations assisted the development of the 
jury. 

Dr. Brunner agreed with the opinions expressed above, but saw 
in them not an explanation for the cause of the development of the 
jury but incidents in the process of its development. 

(1) Recognitions procedure was established by royal writ. A jury 

called jurata or recognitio, held inquests to inquire into 

interlocutory matters. 





, 

, 

. 






.. 


■ 

' 


. 






. 




. ■ yj 










, 










20 


Dr. Brunner’s Findings ; 

Dr. Brunner’s researches demonstrated that there were elements 

of truth in most of these theses of his predecessors but that none of 

them was complete in itself. His own conclusions were briefly these: 

1. The jury originated in the Frankish law. 

2. The jury developed from a special procedure concerning witnesses 
before the King’s Court, where the royal prerogative often set 
aside the formalistic procedure of the Common Law. This was a 
special procedure of inquest ( inquisitio ) by which the king, or his 
representative, called witnesses and examined them to ascertain the 
truth. 

5. From the Frankish law the procedure passed into the Norman law 
when the Normans conquered and occupied a major portion of the 
Neustrian territory of the Frankish king (the occupied portion 
became better known as Normandy.) 

4. After the Norman Conquest the procedure known as ’inquisitio T 
came to England, where one of its earliest uses was during the 
compilation of the ’Domesday Book’. 

5. While this institution died out in Normandy and all continental 
countries, it was preserved in England where it evolved until it 
reached its modern form. The modern version of the jury is the 
final development of a long process of organic growth and was not 
the result of a particular act of legislation in mediaeval days. 
With Henry II the exceptional procedure became normal and what was 
once a royal prerogative used solely in the interest of the king 
was generally granted to the subjects as a royal favour. 









, 


. 

' 

. 



. 

. 

* 





El 


Having summarized these views of Dr. Brunner, the following 
chapters will follow him in detail through certain selected chapters 
in his principal work. They will deal with Frankish legal procedure 
as far as it was affected by the inquest, then with Norman procedure 
which merged with the Anglo-Norman after the Conquest. The disappear¬ 
ance of the jury in Normandy and the argument as to the precedence of 
the Norman, or English jury are briefly mentioned. Reference is also 
made to the general, principles underlying Teutonic legal procedure 
since these were the basis for the Frankish and Anglo-Saxon law. 


, . 

* 

t ' ■■■• •' 

. 

. 





22 


THE GENESIS OF THE, JURY IN GENERAL 

English lev uses the jury in criminal end. civil cases. Use of 
the jury in civil cases is older and was the model for the criminal 
jury. On looking for the origin of the jury it is more profitable, 
therefore, to examine the civil jury. 

But it vould be idle to look in the remote past for the jury in 

its present form. The function of the jurymen to-day differs greatly 

from his predecessor in the Middle Ages. To-day, witnesses are examined 

in their presence and other types of evidence axe produced before them. 

Their verdict is based on all the evidence submitted. In the past, the 

verdict of the jurymen was based on their own knowledge acquired out 

of court. Modern jurymen begin their duty in complete ignorance of 

the evidence submitted during the action! indeed any such knowledge 

would mean their exclusion. The mediaeval jurymen had the function 

of our witnesses and were not sworn in unless they did have previous 

( 1 ) 

knowledge of the case . In short, the verdict of the jurymen, now 
a judgement on the evidence submitted, was evidence itself. The old 
civil jury was an evidence-giving and not a verdict-granting body. 
Nevertheless the parent of our modern trial jury was this evidence¬ 
giving jury whose members gave evidence like our modern witnesses. 

Documents of the Carolingian era tell us quite definitely about 
an extraordinary procedure of the Frankish law, the inquisitio, an 
inquest or inquiry. In criminal cases it was the forerunner of the 
(I) See also page 36 and 37. 
























































• • . •- ’ ^ 






. 

, 

* 

* 











procedure of the Grand Jury - abolished in England, but still flourish¬ 
ing in the United States, and in civil cases it was the forerunner of 
the evidence jury. The civil jury shows three consecutive stages of 
development: an inquest to give facts (jury of administrative inquiry), 
a jury to give evidence (evidence jury) and a trial jury (the jury which 
delivers a verdict.) The first belonged to the Frankish era, the second 
to the Norman and Anglo-Norman, while the third, the ch&ng-over from 
evidence to trial jury, was a development of English law. 

The use of an inquest to obtain evidence was a great departure 
from the earlier, highly formal judicial procedure. Only the king 
could call an inquest since his court was not tied to the strict 
formalism of Common Law and could function as a court of equity. This 
was an important point since both the evidence jury of the Norman ducal 
court and of the English king f s court derived their special position 
from the extraordinary prerogative of the rulers concerned. 

The Norman evidence jury is of particular importance since it 
was on the one hand a development from the Frankish ’evidence through 
inquest* and on the other hand the model for the Anglo-Norman jury. The 
legal officials of Norman law possessed the same privilege of deciding 
their actions following an inquest as did their predecessors in the 
Frankish law. A limited extension of this privilege to ecclesiastical 
property existed in Norman law as it did under the Carolingian kings 
but not as a general competence! it had to be granted on every occasion 
by special royal writ which only the Frankish kings or the Norman dukes 
had the power to grant. Henry II made the inquest an integral part of 
Norman procedure of evidence. In Normandy this inquest was known as 
recognitio and is dealt with here in a later chapter. 




24 


Inquest procedure differed with various actions. It invaded 
the ordinary. Common Law, procedure not only through the eviaence jury 
ordered by royal writ, but also by becoming legal custom, as in the 
iurata - by absorbing the old formalistic method of giving evidence by 
community witnesses. Finally, the inquest was used outside the legal 
field for administrative purposes, as for example in the compilation 
of the Domesday Eook, It was also used to establish a particular 
point of Common Law when this was in doubt. The latter use was fre¬ 
quent in England after the Norman conquest, and in Normandy, after 
the French kings re-established, their rule over their ancient territory, 

Norman legal institutions were introduced into England with William 
the Conqueror and his successors, particularly Henry II. The royal 
prerogatives were exercised in the conquered lands even more drastically 
than in Normandy. With Henry II the inquest, initiated by royal 
writ, became an ordinary means of evidence and was called assisa 
(assizes). Another form of evidence jury had already developed 
through custom Etna was known as jurat a . Both in the jurat a and 
assisa the jury answered ’yes 1 and f no f , speaking still out of their 
own knowledge. They were not judges of fact, but witnesses who were, 
however, not examined as their modern namesakes are. 

Unmistakable traces of a procedure in old French laws which was 
like the procedure of the Norman jury have been established. Since the 
continuity between the Frgnkish and the old French inquest procedure 
is not in doubt, it is to be assumed that the Normans adopted their 
inquest procedure from the French rather than that they brought this 
institution from northern Europe. 




























. 


. 







. 



* 




. 




. ! 






' 


. 













25 


Before explaining in greater detail the Frankish procedure 
of inquiry, some mention must be made of the ancient Teutonic legal 
procedure in general. This will show that the origin of the jury 
could not possibly" lie there and that nothing found in Teutonic 
legal institutions was the forerunner of the jury. 













- - 



26 


TEUTONIC LEGAL PROCEDURE 

Like other ancient legal procedures the Teutonic ran to a very 
narrow interpretation of words, an extreme rigid formalism, and a 
pedantic adherence to outward manifestations. The progress of any 
procedure was limited by the form of initiation of the procedure by 
the litigants concerned and the free consideration of the court was 
thus severely limited. A rigid and compulsory formalism regulated 
the initiation of any action, the procedure before the court, the 
evidence and the restitution or satisfaction. 

In Teutonic law it was the litigant’s responsibility to summon 

the defendant, and this summons had to be carried out with a certain 

formalism which required minute attention to all its details if the 

summons was to be a valid one. Only if the defendant was ’caught 

( 1 ) 

red-hnnded’ was the formal summons ( mannitio ) unnecessary so that 
the plaintiff could bring the apprehended criminal bound and gagged before 
the court. The need for a summons applied to all other cases, civil 
and criminal alike. 

Once the plaintiff had initiated his action by a properly 
carried out summons, he directed his complaint in solemn form directly 
to the defendant. The exchange of words was not influenced by the 
court, and it was the plaintiff, not the court, who demanded an answer 
from the defendant. He solemnly adjured the defendant to reply 
’word for word’. Only two possible alternatives existed for defendant’s 
reply — complete admission or complete denial. Following the 

(1) [Almost a technical term of early Teutonic law, the equivalent of 

the Roman law term ’ in flagrante delicto ’H 






■ 

* 

■ 

, 

. - 

. 

, - 

. 







27 


principle of strict verbal interpretation, any words of the accusation 
that had not been expressly denied were considered to be admitted. 

This need for word for word negation excluded ary pleas since this 
would mean a f but f rather than a simple f yes T or T no *. Insofar as 
pleas were later permitted, these were considered to be formal 
objections to the demand for a reply, a lawful refusal to answer 
the charge. The accusation and its denial formed the basis for the 
further procedure and evidence was supplied by the plaintiff and defendant 
for their respective assertions. An exception to this was again the 
case of the "accused caught red-handed", who was not even allowed to 
reply, since the oily necessary objects of evidence were the words of 
the accusation. 

A verdict was demanded by formal act of the plaintiff and the 
verdict was pronounced not by the judge but by the assembled tribe. The 
members based their verdict only on the actions end speeches which had 
taken place before the court. Their verdict did not aim to clarify a 
past situation but to state what should be the position from now on. 

In its contents the verdict was two-fold: first, it declared how the 
question of evidence should be decided and second, what should be done 
following the outcome of the evidence. Thus it was a verdict on evidence 
and a final decision all in one. 

An appeal against the verdict was possible. The dissatisfied party 
had to observe certain formalities and had to complain without delay 

a) 

against the judgement of the judgement-finders of the tribe (suitors). 

This complaint against a verdict was settled by trial by battle, 

(1) fjThere were two kinds of"such"judgement-finders elected by the 

people in the old Teutonic law, called respectively Rachimburgi and 
Scabini. The former were ad hoc jurors, elected specifically to 
try actions already before the ding or assembly, while the Scabini 
were elected for a period of time to try any cases which might come up 
during their term of office. The Scabini were obliged to promise 
to attend any court which might be held during their term of office. 
Both had to be confirmed by the king f s representativeJ 














. 

















♦ 









. 











. 












If the complaining party was unsuccessful in this ordeal, he had to 
pay a fine to each member of the jury, a fine over and above the fine 
paid to the other side, although the other party to the action had 
taken no part in the appeal which was directed solely,, against the 
judgement finders. This complaint differed profoundly from the modern 
appeal in that it was in effect a new suit directed by the complaining 
party at his judges. The assumption was that the judges pronounced an 
unjust verdict, not that they had misunderstood the case; it was an 
appeal against their integrity and not against their opinion. 

Old Teutonic procedures sought to establish whether a violation 
of the law had occurred and the verdict, therefore, outlined before¬ 
hand what should happen if such a violation had actually taken place. 

The verdict also laid down how the proof was to be carried out. The 
nature of the Teutonic idea of proof can be seen from the fact that 
decisions about proof and the results of proof were not intended for 
the court but for the other party to the action and for the members of 
the community present. The discretion of the judge was severely lim¬ 
ited by a strict formalism and the types of proof were of formal nature. 
The underlying idea was to place the opinion and the will of the 
community above the individual person. The court did not carry out an 
evaluation of the proof submitted. If the conditions under which proof 
was to be rendered were fulfilled, it was considered that the party had 
proven his case. 

The oath and the ordeals were the forms of proof recognised. The 
oath was sworn by the party concerned either alone or with oath-helpers 
who swore that the party was of such a character that his oath was 
free from perjury. The proof submitted by the plaintiff or defendant 
could fall only because an essential formallity had been omitted or 














. 

- 

. 

. 

. 












t • -* 


, 











.. 


because the oath-helpers had refused their oath. On the other hand., 
it was unthinkable that the oath-helpers would use their oath to 
assist the other side. 

It cannot be too strongly emphasized that the oath-helpers did 
not exist to confirm or dery a statement made by the plaintiff or 
defendant. Their sole and only function was to bear witness under oath 
to the general trustworthiness and honesty of the party they supported. 
They were akin to the modern ,! character witness”, a person with no 
knowledge of the action but occasionally called by defendants in a 
modern action to bear witness to their general good character. This 
type of witness is rarely called today, but he was an integral part 
of an old Teutonic action, shoring up, as it were, the credibility of 
the oath taken by whichever of plaintiff or defendant he supported. 

The more honourable men each party had supporting him as oath-helpers, 
the more credible his oath. The number of oath-helpers, incidentally, 
varied according to the nature of the case and the standing which the 
party concerned had in the community. Each party usually found his oath- 
helpers among the members of his own family or clan. 

The use of witnesses was more limited in the Teutonic law than it 

( 1 ) 

is today. Accidental observation did not make a person a witness. 
Beaumanoir, the Baillie of Clermont, wrote in his law book of 1£85 
about the limitations of witnesses in Teutonic law: ,? Even if a person 
were to have complete knowledge about a case, he could not appear as 
a witness unless the plaintiff or defendant - as the case might be - 
called him to court. Bor could he produce him as a witness at that 

(X)C The German word for ’witness* is Zeuge . The verb, from the seme 
root, is ziehen . meaning: to pull or draw in. This etymological 
connection would indicate that an accidental witnessing was not in 
the original meaning of the word.7 

























. 


.. - 

, V r 3ft-v. 










» 






















-1 t • •• • t • 

, j i , .. . . . 

. 






• ; ■■ 


■ 


, 

. j ' ; ' .. 


■ - - 









30 


stage unless he had requested him to witness the particular business 
at the time it was concluded.” For example, consider the case of a 
horse sold for a certain amount. The vendor would have had to call 
a third party to witness the actual transaction if he wished to pro- 

a) 

vide for that person as a witness at a later stage in court 
The essential here is the conscious summons. Even presence throughout 
the whole transaction would not qualify a person a witness in the legal 
snese if his presence had been purely accidental.. 

Neighbours and members of the community could also be witnesses 
concerning local conditions and events, other than the particular event 
under dispute. 

As to number of witnesses, Saxon law required two or three as 
a minimum but it was considered better to have more. Frankish law 
required more witnesses; records mention from seven to twelve as normal. 

Though the oath of the parties and their oath-helpers and 
witnesses could be questioned, the ordeal as a means of proof was 
beyond dispute. It was applied only if the plaintiff or defendant 
was unable to prove his case by producing the required number of oath- 
helpers . 

If the verdict had instructed that proof was to be rendered by 
witnesses, these were to be made available on that particular day which 
had been set aside for the trial. But the court did not concern itself 
with their summoning and no sanctions were imposed for failure to 
produce them. The only penalty for failure to produce the required 
witnesses was the failure of the case which their testimony supported. 

(1) fDr. Brunner uses the term" Geschaeftszeugen which is perhaps best 

translated as ’’transaction witnesses.’’J} 





51 


More, summons to appear in accordance with such a verdict was com¬ 
pulsory only in the case of the particular type of "transaction-witness” 

(to use Dr. Brunner’s expression) we have just noticed. Indeed his 
original witness, involving an implicit promise to testify to the fact, 
had been performed for a consideration. It was also necessary to establish 
the fact, presumably by oath of the person calling the fact-witness, that 
he actually had attended at the transaction in dispute, and he had to 
be identified as the person present at that time. The community wit¬ 
nesses could only be objected to because of the absence of such property 
qualifications and social standing as the law required, or because of 
their lack of membership in the community. Their appearance in court 
depended entirely upon their own good will and. they could not be compelled 
to appear. 

No examination of witnesses took plane. This was not necessary 
since the proof was already laid down in the verdict. Each witness had 
to repeat word for word the formula for his testimony as it had been set 
out in the verdict. The Teutonic witness did not merely promise to 
speak the truthj he knew as a fact what he was going to say. The only 
way he could fail in his proof was by a mistake in the form of his state¬ 
ment. The actual content of his statement had no force of proofs he 
merely repeated what had already been expressed before in the verdict. 

The witnesses usually gave their evidence in unison and not one 
after the other. This was the custom of the Frankish law but was not 
common to ell Teutonic laws. 

The action was decided as soon as the witnesses had taken the 
oath and given their evidence, provided the necessary outward forms 
had been observed. In the laws of some Teutonic tribes it was 
possible for one party to prevent the evidence of the witnesses of 









- 

. 




■-3 ’ 




' 

’ 






* 

- 

, 





32 


the other party by objecting to them. This wag done by challenging 
them to a duel and they thus were prevented from teking the oath. A 
decision was pronounced in this case after the duel. If witnesses 
lied and the party in consequence lost the action, he could claim 
compensation from the witnesses. 

Summing up this old Teutonic procedure. Dr, Brunner felt certain 
that there were no possible starting points here from which the modern 
jury could be said to have developed. The essential feature of the 
modern jury is that it decides only questions of fact, while the court 
administers the law within the facts as determined by the jury. There 
was nothing of this in the procedures we have examined and, in fact, 
all of the community participants to an action, presiding judge, 
community ( ding ), Rachimburgi» Scabini, all were in effect concerned 
with questions not of fact but of law. Their only function was to 
determine whether correct procedures had been followed. Facts entered 
only through the oaths of the two parties to the action. If, at the 
end of the trial, there was still contradiction, there was also no 
competence on the part of anyone connected with the trial to make 
a subjective determinantion as to the correctness of fact. Recourse 
had to be ordeal, usually by battle. 





55 


FRANKISH LAW AFTER CLOVIS 

The conversion of the Teutonic tribes to Christianity and the 
subsequent influence of the church left the fundamentals of their legal 
procedure untouched. The pagan aspects of the forms of procedure had, 
of course, to give way, but the forms themselves remained in a Christian 
dress. Particularly were the oath and the ordeal given a distinctly 
Christian aspect. Nevertheless the close contact of church and legal 
procedure in no way changed the fundamental principles of the latter. 

The development of a strong royal authority became important 
since, with the increased power of the kings, the authority of the 
courts increased too. Frankish kings early in the Merovingian period 
added important new institutions to the ancient tribal laws. These 
innovations were introduced through the intervention of the royal 
judges and existed for a time side by side with the older forms but 
replaced them eventually. Whereas tribal laws used as their source of 
power the formalism of the acts performed, the new institutions were 
based on the authority of the crown as exercised by the judge. Some 
of the new institutions were of a general, and others of a more special 
nature, e.g. not meant to be applied to the normal procedure of the 
Common Law. The former were gradually accepted into the procedure 
of the Common Law, as was the case with the jurat a, a form of jury 
already mentioned. The latter, for example the inquest by jury, eman¬ 
ated from the king^ court and was limited to this court and those 
derived from it. The fact thajfc some procedures were limited to uhe 
king 1 s court brought out and kept alive the distinction between Common 
Law and Equity, The decline of the Carolingian monarchy prevented a 
continuity and set an end to the further development of legal reforms 
based on Equity. In Germany, then, and in France (outside Normandy), 


















.... V ... ... . ’ 

. 30U . . i -• t }.5 •" 1 

< • ’ • 

t ♦ 

. 

• • 

... 

. 

. 

.. 

j J: D i : . r- -J:. •.* 

. 

. . . . t . .. .. ’ i‘- - ■■ •• ; 

C ... ■ ... - -• ..' ' • - - 

' 

. „ . ,....; , / * . „ 'Tj. ... ... , . ... ~ ' . ... - 

.. . ... ■ . .. ... * . <? 

. 

. • ' . .. , ' ... <?, :: 

r j ... j ■ .... . 

• • . .. .. j . . ..• ... . ... . ? . i:. ’ 

. 

, 

i u .. .: .. . ...... . ..... 

. t % 



34 


the fruitful interplay between Common Law and Equity thus came to 
an end. It was left to the Norman monarchy to continue and to develop 
further procedures that began under the Frankish kings. Thus the 
evidence-jury was further developed, first in the Norman law and 
then, after the Conquest, in the Anglo-Norman law. The final stage, 
the trial-jury, was a child only of the English law since the re-union 
of Normandy with France brought to an end a similar development on 
the continent. Brunner gives high praise to the Anglo-Norman law 
for this development. He saw there the only form of legal procedure 
developed in the Germanic and Romanic nations which was substantially 
uninfluenced by the Roman and Canon law and which yet reached a 
high technical level. 

The moving spirit behind these Frankish reforms was the new 

concept of the duties of royal power. The king and his officials 

assisted the individual to obtain justice, and as a consequence, 

criminal prosecution. In Teutonic law purely a matter of private 

concern, was now undertaken in the interest of the crown as well as 

of the community, to say nothing of the fact that fines were a useful 

( 1 ) 

addition to the royal treasury. Feud was limited, private executions 
of criminals was prohibited and the official penalties were extended. 

In rules of procedure new institutions can be traced to these new 
conceptions. With the exception of a few special cases, the mannitio- 
the formal act of the plaintiff to summon the defendant before the 
court - was replaced by the bannitio, where the judge*s order to the 
defendant to appear in court replaced the formal act of the plaintiff. 
The seme applied to witnesses, insofar as they were called by the 

(1) [Private war between the family of a murdered man and that of his 

slayers*J 



































. 






. 

. 






' 








55 


plaintiff or defendant who hitherto had to use the mannitio . Wit¬ 
nesses were now summoned by the judge. In cases where the Common Law 
did not provide for a charge or complaint by the injured party, legal 
action was made possible by the court, through the accusing jury. 

If the case were one of f caught red-handed 1 a royal official took 
action ex officio . The procedure by which the plaintiff demanded 
reply and oath from the defendant and a verdict from the suitors 
gradually lost practical importance ana was finally replaced by 
the order of the judge to reply, to take the oath, and to pronounce 
a verdict. In case of disobedience to an order by the judge the 
indirect coercion, based on a threat to outlaw the offender, was 
replaced by the immediate penalty of seizure or arrest. 

To stop the misuse of evidence through oath-helpers it was 
ordered that some oath-helpers would have to be selected by the 
opposing side. In certain cases the other litigant was permitted to 
outbid the usual number of oath-helpers and so to compel the opponent 
either to abandon his evidence or to produce a greater number of 
oath-helpers. Also the procedure of the oath with helpers was changed. 
Instead of all taking the oath in unison, each oath-helper had to 
swear separately ana thus was made more conscious of his personal 
responsibility. 

a) 

A new form of evidence was found in the written document. 

If a litigant referred in court to a document and produced it on the 
spot, the court had it read. On the basis of this record the court 
could decide the action and pronounce a verdict, providing the other 


(1) See page 108 








. . 


' 

... >- ■ 

-- <L . -■ 

: X " - '• - 


• • , _ - i> 


0 ... 



: 

. 


: : ■ • V • 






- 

. 

. • .. v * :■ - . >i 





. ■ 

__ 


1 X i i : X ^ - 

. . ■ - * ;v ’ ■■ • -> •■'- ’ - l ' 


. 

. 

. - - ' - -.. • •' r 

*- " ** " “* “ 

... 

. . . • ■ : ; 

• - • 

• 

j ■' ' •• ' 

. •.. . • . „ < 

- . • •• ' * 

’ . .. «... - .. • - - — ^ - * •' - 1 

. - : - » • 


- 


. 






56 


litigant did not dispute the contents of the document. In case of 
a dispute, the document’s authenticity had to be proven first. It was 
forbidden, however, to dispute a document issued by the king. Whoever 

a) 

dared to do so, could be punished by death. When a private doc¬ 
ument needed proof, it was done by triad, by battle. 

Special attention should be paid to royal innovations in the 
witness procedure. On the whole, Frankish law did not touch the formal 
character of this procedure and any reforms initiated were intended 
as far as was possible to prevent perjury on the part of the oath-helpers 
Penalties for perjury were increased, witnesses were qualified by a 
process of "legitimation”, and permission was granted for counter¬ 
witnesses. 

The procedure of legitimation had for its object the establish¬ 
ment of the credibility of the witnesses or oath-helpers. The first 
point to be established, then, was whether the witness possessed the 
necessary qualifications. According to all Teutonic laws property and 
social prominence were a yardstick of credibility, and a minimum amount 

of property was an essential part of a witness’s qualifications. Lombard 

( 2 ) 

law, in particular, emphasised this question of property qualification 
To ensure the credibility of witnesses, a capitulary of Charlemagne 
instructs judges to examine them before they were admitted to the 
oath. This procedure of examination was referred to as either an 
inquisitio or a discussio testium, but despite this use of the term 
inquisitio it partook in no sense of the nature of the later inquest 

(1) Anglo-Norman law also placed the king’s document outside any dispute. 

(2) Bavarian and Lombard law required the possession of property to the 
value of 12 solid! (the solidus was a Byzantine gold coin the value 
of Roman "libra"). In Frankish law, any amount of real estate was 
a sufficient qualification for a witness. 












. 


. 




. 


* 

, 


. 




















. 


. 






‘ O'" : 

* 






.. f 


. ■ 






‘ 

. 
















57 


of Norman days. This earlier inquisitio was merely an inquiry into 
the general, credibility of witnesses and into the particular matter 
of their knowledge of the character and reputation of the litigant 
whose oath they were helping by their witness. If a witness proved 
to have no such knowledge, he was dismissed. Such sources as 
are available show that the introduction of this discussio testium 
rather added to than diminished the formality of the general trial, 
procedure. As before, the judgement-finders pronounced a two-fold 
verdict, the first touching on the proof of witnesses by laying down 
the contents of the oath, ana the second saying what should be done 
if the proof should succeed. As before, the verdict was followed by 
the agreement of the litigants to abide by the verdict. The result 
of the examination of the witnesses by the judge was of no consequence 
to the formulation of the witnesses 1 oath. Since the oath had 
already been laid down in the verdict, it would have been im¬ 
possible for the judge to change this in any way as a result of his 
examination of the witnesses. At best, he could only reject a witness 
whom he found to be completely ignorant. Hence, this institution 
cannot be regarded as of inquisitory nature but rather as a part of 
the process of legitimation in which the person ? s suitability as 
a witness was established. 

If evidence were given by the community, the opposing party 
was permitted to present his own witnesses against them. This was 
followed by an examination of all the witnesses. If their evidence 
disagreed, one witness from each side was chosen to be the champion 
in a trial by battle and only these two witnesses took the oath. 

Hence, in a case of witness against witness, the ordeal decided 
whose oath was true. The defeated champion lost one hand as penalty 





. . 

. 

* 

. 

r 

■ 

, 

, 

, . 

. 

, ; 

- 

, 

« 

* 

. 




58 


for his perjury and his fellow witnesses had to pay a fine equiv¬ 
alent to the wer for a forfeited hand. Although they had not taken 
the oath, they were punished thus for their willingness to swear 
falsely. 

Changes in the witness procedure, possible through the increased 
power of the king, were not the only innovations of that era. The 
privileged position of the king was extended to royal property. While 
no distinctions were made between the royal domain in its largest 
interpretation and the private patrimony of the king, violations 
of royal property were punished more severely than violations of other 
property. Kb taxation or dues of any kind were levied on the king’s 
property. Its legal position in the Frankish era was derived from 

(i) 

the status of public property in the Roman law. It would have been 

impossible to treat the king like any other party in a court of law. 
Since he could not be compelled to render oaths or to submit to trial 
by battle, he had to be represented by one of his officials$ in cases 
involving property, this was usually the royal bailiff. To prevent 
any disadvantages to the king from the formalistic character of the 
Common Law procedure, the royal official had the general privilege 
of bringing any case before the king’s court. This privilege was, 
of course, used whenever the king’s case looked weak. After the 
Carolingian era all cases affecting royal property were submitted 
only to the king*s court. 

These privileges also applied to property, mainly certain 
monasteries and churches, as had placed themselves under royal 


(1)( It is only in recent years that suits against the state 
have been permitted in modern law courts, and invariably 
the state’s consent must be given before the suit can be 
initiated, 



, 

t 

. 






. 




■ 



t , - 

. 

.. ■ ■■■ . . i - • 

* 

. 

t •• 

jdi -i.. va .1- .■ - 

. .... ... : : J - ' ' -/•' - ' 3 -' i: - ‘ 

« 

. ' 

* - "•■■ : 

. t r ---" 




■ ■ i :x ■ .. 


_ yr. •• 




.. .. / .. * 

: 1 








59 


protection. If these considered that the Common Lew procedure 
would put them at a disadvantage, they were privileged to have their 
case heard before the king f s court. Such cases were decided by 
secular and clerical jurymen under the chairmanship of the king. This 
participation of the clergy, well versed in Roman and Canon Law, was 
of great importance to the further development of the law of the 
western Franks. 

¥hen Charlemagne set up the institution of the missi dominici 
(itinerant justices), their courts also became organs of the royal 
equity. 

One of the procedures introduced by the king T s court, and until 
then unknown to Frankish procedure, was known by the technical term 
inquisitio (inquiry, inquisition, or inquest). In this procedure 
the judge summoned members of the community who were believed to 
possess particular information reletting to cases under dispute. 

The witnesses sworn in as members of such an inquest promised under 
oath (except in the case of clerics whose general vows were held 
to stand in lieu of a particular oath) to answer truthfully the ques¬ 
tions of the judge. After the witnesses were sworn the formal inquiry 
was begun. 

This new procedure was adopted both in legal and administrative 
cases. It was used as a means of obtaining evidence and its findings 
could be the basis for a final verdict. Its form differed substan¬ 
tially and fundamentally from the ordinary, formalistic witness 
procedure of the Frankish Common Lew in many ways, which might be set 
out in tabular form as follows: 








■ 




























. 







, 




, 







40 


Frankish Common Law 

Witness Procedure Inquest procedure 


1. -The judge consulted with the The judge ordered the inquest 

suitors, and then gave his on his own competence, 

verdict. 

-The verdict ordered 

-what evidence was to be 
produced and 
-what was to be done 
following the evidence 


2. The oath of each witness was The judge could allow pleas, 

determined beforehand. It could 
only be repeated word for word 
or rejected in toto. No pleas 
were permissible. 


3. Evidence was rendered from one 
litigant to the other and not 
to the judge. The evidence 
only followed strictly the 
terms of the litigant 1 s 
agreement. 


The evidence was rendered to 
the judge -who based his verdict 
on it. There was no such limit¬ 
ation on evidence as was in the 
Common Law procedure. 


4. Litigants were responsible for The judge summoned witnesses 

producing their own witnesses and could compel their pres- 

and for obtaining their evidence, ence and their evidence. 


5, Witnesses gave their evidence 
first and then took their oath. 
The oath was thus assertive. 


Witnesses were sworn first 
and only after the oath was 
their evidence taken. The 
oath was thus promissory. 


6. The oath in itself was the proof. 
The examination was before the 
oath and existed only for the 
purpose of legitimation of 
witnesses. 

7. The witness*s oath was a one¬ 
sided affair, rendered in favour 
of the party who had called him. 

If not in favor it was not ren¬ 
dered, 

8. Disagreement between witnesses 
could be settled only by trial 
by battle. 


9. Litigants whose witnesses 
failed (as they could fail 
so easily somewhere in the 
over-formalistic procedure) 
could not produce additional 
witnesses. 


The oath was limited only to 
a general promise to tell the 
truth. The evidence was given 
after being sworn, and the 
evidence furnished the proof. 

Witnesses might give replies 
favourable or unfavourable to 
either party. He was obliged 
to say the truth, regardless 
of its effect. 

The results of an inquest could 
not be challenged except in the 
case of suspected perjury. In 
this case the judge ordered a 
trial by ordeal. 

The judge in an inquest was 
under no such limitations. He 
could summon any witnesses he 
wished ana question them at will 
until he was satisfied he had 
arrived at she truth of the matter. 




, 


. 



, 

. - 




... . • - 

. . 

. 

. ... . ... ' 


' 

. 

. ■ ' 4 

■ - 

- 

» 

. 

. 


. 


: y, . 

. 

* - 

. 

. . 

, 


* . 

, 


. . 

. 

■ :>i. . I... ii <; 


. 


■j . ■ -•..••• 'f 

.. . . . 



41 


The inquest was at first severely limited in its application. 

It was almost exclusively used in cases involving property or the 
status of a person. And only a limited number of persons could 
avail themselves of this new procedure - the king, his representatives, 
and such other persons as the king, from time to time and always 
by special writ, may have granted this privilege. 

The practical advantages of this procedure were manifold 
and obvious: 

1. Witness could be compelled to give all the evidence within 
their knowledge, 

2. Evidence through assertive oath or through trial by battle 
now became inadmissible. Evidence thus became more a matter 
of objective consideration, and therefore more reliable, 

3. The plenary powers of the judge in an inquest made possible 
proof which the older formalistic witness procedure -would 
have disailowed. 

The inquest procedure, as an aspect of the royal prerogative, 
was not instituted by any particular ordinance, and therefore may 
perhaps also be considered also to be of Common Law origin, flowing 
from the succession of the Frankish kings to the rights and privileges 
of the Roman State, particularly where the royal property was con¬ 
cerned, Similar procedural privileges to that of the inquest are 
to be found in the Codex The odo si anus , It is very doubtful, however, 
that this thesis can ever be successfully proven and the continuity 
is therefore a very doubtful one. Documents of the Cerolingian era 
and royal instructions to the missi dominici were the first to refer 
to this royal privilege, though in an indirect way. The judges were 
given instructions as to specific points in inquisitional procedure, 
wherefore the existence of such a procedure must be assumed. For 


example, instructions by Charlemagne to his judges emphasized that 


























V 




. 










• - r 

t ’ 









. 





























































• _ .. ■ ■ 


. 




.. 




, . . .... 


:■ .. i 

- ,l vi .. . . . 














j ,.. 









42 


^hey should not allow the older formalistic witness procedure 
in actions concerning property which had belonged to the Crown 
in the days of Pippin. In all matters affecting Crown property 
the most creditable men of the community should be summoned as 
witnesses and sworn in. In another case, a royal official was 
informed that only in actions involving the Crown should witnesses 
from the community be submitted to the inquiry. In an ordinance 
for Italy, issued by Charlemagne, it was ordered that witnesses who, 
in the course of an inquest, had become suspect of perjury, should 

a) 

be subjected to trial by ordeal either of battle or cross. 

Charlemagne ordered in 802 that witnesses who gave evidence in 
favor of the Crown should be granted special protection, and if mol¬ 
ested, their attackers were liable to be outlawed. Itinerant just¬ 
ices were to inquire whether any jurymen had been killed or suffered 
injury because of any evidence they had given. Documents mention a 
ce_se in 863, wherein Charles the Bald decided through inquisitional 
procedure whether the monastery of Auisole belonged to the Crown 
or to the Bishop of Le Mans. In this case the king himself acted 
as judge and inquirer. Another case of 807 is preserved. Here Count 
Unfried presided in a court where a certain Iirothelm claimed pro¬ 
perty which the Crown was alleged to have acquired illegally. An 
inquiry was ordered and members of the community questioned on oath. 
Following the inquest, the suitors were instructed to pronounce their 
verdict. 

The right to demand that an action should be decided through 
inquest was extended to church property which was thus put on an 

(1 )L Ordeal of the Cross meant that accuser and accused had to stand 
before a crucifix. Whoever moved first to ease his position, 
was considered guilty. This type of ordeal was abolished towards 
the end of the 9th century as being irreverent to the crucifix.7 




t. 

, 





45 


equal footing with Crown property. Among the successors of Charle¬ 
magne we find that these privileges were constantly extended or 
existing privileges confirmed. The wording of these documents shows 
considerable similarities to the later charters granting privileges 
of inquest in the Norman era. The continuity of the procedure is 
clearly preserved. 

In general, mandates giving the power of inquest were granted 
without reservation to the palsgrave within his territory and to the 
itinerant justices. The ordinary judge, normally the count of the 
district, did not have this power, but it could be given to him. This 
was done either by a special mandate valid only for one particular 
case or it could be a general mandate which empowered the count to 
use inquisitional procedure at his own discretion. If the plaintiff 
had brought his case before the king and it was considered that a 
trial at the King’s Court would be impracticable, the plaintiff obtained 
a royal writ which instructed the count of a particular district to 
hold an inquest. These special writs (breve) of the C&rolingian era 
corresponded to the breve inauisitionis of Norman times. 

It is known that the predecessors of Charlemagne sent out special 
commissioners, missi ad hoc, to deal with particular cases and these, 
too, were granted the king’s mandate to hold an inquest. Charlemagne 
divided the realm into administrative districts, each allotted to an 
official whose duty was to visit it regularly. These permanent 
commissioners also possessed the king’s mandate to hold inquests when¬ 
ever they considered it necessary. 

In certain cases lower courts, not normally empowered to hold 




. 

, 




, 


. 


, 

, ■■ . J: . jw '. ■ - SOf • i ' •• :0 . 





44 


inquests, were compelled to do so. If a party possessed of the 
royal privilege of inquest demanded that it be used in a particular 
case, the court was obliged to do so. Occasionally the king might 
instruct the count of the district to hold an inquest in a particular 
case, although this happened very rarely from the time of Charlemagne 
on, since the mis si were empowered to handle all such cases. The Jews 
were under royal protection; an inquest was always obligatory in cases 
where a Jew could not find therequired six Christians to swear against 
another Christian. Finally, whenever widows, orphans or minors 
were parties to an action an inquest was mandatory; these latter were 
regarded by the Frankish kings as standing particularly in need of 
royal protection. 

In short, there abundant evidence of the use of the inquest as 
a means of obtaining evidence in Frankish times. Its independent 
use began only in Carolingian times, but some few documents mention 

a) 

the inquest as a supplementary procedure in Merovingian times. 


(l)f Dr. Brunner cites no authority for this statement other than 
** a paper he himself had written for the historical and philo¬ 
sophical section of the Vienna Academy of Science: 

"Zeugen und Inquisitionsbeweis der Karolingischen Zeit w 
Proceedings, Wiener Akademie hist. Phil. Klasse , li (1866) 


Brunner, H, 


page 111. 


I 







■'1.. ” * 

: 

t, 


• •- * 




, 






. 

. - 











t 

t ' ' ’ 




' 

• ;. . • 








. 

, .. . - 



. 

: ■ : ±:... •, ui. stf •?£!; \o aci-iooa 





45 


DEVELOPMENT OF THE NOBMAN LAW 
1. The Period 912-1066 


The districts of Neustria that were ceded to Polio and 
his Normans by the Treaty of Saint Clair sur l’Epte in 912 re¬ 
mained in feucfial theory a part of the West-Frankish Empire. Charles 
the Simple handed the land over to the victor as a vassal of the 
French Crown, However independent Roll© may have been in fact, in 
constitutional law he was a margrave of the West-Frankish Empire 
and his successors continued to be enfeoffed as counts of Normandy 
by the kings of France, The French liege lord of the count of 
Normandy always called his vassal ’our trusted count* when he 
authenticated his orders relating to churches and monasteries 
and the Norman chancellor dated the documents of the count, his 
master, according to the years of each French king’s rule. The 
Norman chancellery was in fact closely modelled on the Frankish one. 

As the conquerors outwardly fitted into the Frankish state, 
we have good readon to believe that they maintained the law and 
customs of their new home. By leaving the defeated people their 
ancient laws they accepted them themselves, just as they accepted 
their faith, and after a few generations, their language. Even 
if allowance is made for the Normans preserving for a time their 
native laws, these could not for long resist the Frankish institu¬ 
tions. Both legal systems were closely related and existed side 
by side on the seme territory. Obviously, the lesser developed 
legal system in this case the Norman, lost its identity to the 






46 


stronger one. The less they differed fundamentally, the sooner 
was the process of absorption. The relatively small number of new¬ 
comers, dispersed over the whole country, fitted themselves sur¬ 
prisingly quickly into the new way of life surrounding them. They 
could hardly be expected to maintain their nordic legal system 
based upon a far simpler way of life. The Neustrian legal system 
must have appealed to them very much since it was meant originally 
for a conquering tribe (Franks) and its relation to a defeated 
native population. It is possible that the clergy played the 
part of mediators and soon gained a far-reaching influence upon 
public affairs. 

During the war years and immediately after the conquest, 
some institutions had fallen into disuse but were revived as the 
French court and the neighbouring French territories served as 
models to the new administration. For this reason records refer 
to the activities of Hollo as a law-giver. In this capacity he 
is important as Charlemagne in Frankish history or Alfred in 
English. 

Besides these more general conclusions, comparisons drawn in 
later years confirmed the conclusions that the Frankish law had 
survived in Normandy. An analysis of Norman law, as known from 
sources of the thirteenth century, revealed throughout unmistakable 
traces of a Frankish legal basis. A comparison of Norman laws with 
those that prevailed outside Western Neustria shows in every respect 
a close relationship. Furthermore, the terminology of the Norman 
law was exclusively of Romano-Frankish and not of Nordic etymology, 
which is another strong indication of the acceptance of the laws 
of the conquered land by the Normans. 


♦ 

. . 

« 

. 

. 

. 

t ■; 

. 

. 

t . 

, 




47 


Experts in Norman history supported the theory of a contin¬ 
uation of the Ji’Ejnkish institutions in Normandy. For example, 

(!) 

Stapleton's remarks on the Rolls of the Norman exchequer, or 

(2) (3) 

Palgrave's, or Lappenberg 1 2 3 4 s. If some wish to seek the origin 
of the Norman law wholly or in part in the Norman's Nordic origin, 
it must be pointed out that not a single Norman source shows any 
real suggestion of such a relationship. Nevertheless, the poss¬ 
ibility of such a relationship in individual laws should not be 
denied. References to all such institutions that were of a gen¬ 
eral Teutonic nature must be left out, of course. Such institu¬ 
tions were: Wergelt (Anglo-Saxon Weregeld); Busse (fine); 
Zweikampf (duel); and eheherrliche G-ewal t (legal authority of 
the husband.) 

The oldest period of Norman legal history came to an end 
with the conquest of England in 1066. Unfortunately, sources for 
that time are very poor. Contemporary historians and writers of 
chronicles side-stepped legal questions and even surviving docu¬ 
ments are few" and far between in Normandy until the middle of the 
(4) 

eleventh century. 


(1) Stapleton, Magni Rotuli Scaccarii Hormanniae, 2 vols.London 1840. 

vol. i obs.xvi: "The province, though it had new 
rulers, retained the institutions of the parent empire.” 

(2) Palgrave, History of Normandy. 2 vols. vol.i, page 699,700. 

(3) Lappehberg, Geschichte von England, vol.ii, p.22 ”¥e recognise 

sufficiently that the Normans accepted the institutions 
of the Frankish empire just as they had accepted 
her religion and language •" 

(4) Nhat material there was remained larely unprinted even at the 
time Dr. Brunner wrote his book. 














~ ..o . 

♦ 


- . . . . . ; . : . -i ' : 

. 

. 

. ■ . 

! - ■ „• 

. - . . : •. j ; . 

. 

. < 

. ______ .. . . . : ' - . • ■ - - •; -1 . . . 

. 

. 

: 

- - ; <,) _ : . . . . , • . . . . > ..w h; 

. ■ 




- 


.. . _ ... - • ' ■; .. e ‘ . 

, 

• , _.. . t 

. .. . . , . •. .. 

. . ... . . 

■ - ■ fc . • 1 .... . - ... • j . . 









48 


ii. The Period 1066 - 1£Q5 

With the conquest of Anglo-Saxon England the sphere of the 
Norman lew was extended to England. 

The Normans in England used Norman law for their mutual 
relations while dealings between the English and the Normans were 
regulated by special orders. In principle, the Anglo-Saxons 
were assured of the continuation of their own law but practice 
was otherwise. The w T hole of the Anglo-Sexon body politic, based 
on communal organisation, was weakened and fell before the strong 
feudal organisation of the Norman state. Equally, the Anglo-Saxon 
law had to give way to the stronger Norman law. The fact that no 
Anglo-Saxons took any part in the administration while the conflict 
between the two nations was at full height, gave the Norman law 
preponderance. The upper layers of society and the great land¬ 
holders were almost exclusively Normans who held all the clerical 
and secular offices. While the Anglo-Saxons kept deliberately away 
from the court of the Norman kings, the royal entourage was entirely 
composed of Normans. The curia regis . the highest court in the 
country, was therefore dominated by the influence of the Norman law. 
Since the king’s Court was the apex of the legal system, since most 
reforms of the law emanated from and were confined to this Court, 
and since the effectiveness of the lower Courts was thus paralysed, 
it was on Norman institutions that the further development of the 
law in England was based. 

The older A.nglo-Norman sources of law can be used to illus¬ 
trate the state of the law in Normandy. As the Normanization of 
England and her law went ahead slowly, the law on either side of 







. 

. 

, 

. 








, 


' 


. 


. 






. 











49 


the Channel continued its development. Differences were obvious 
since innovations were put in effect in England more ruthlessly 
end more systematically than was possible in Normandy where tra¬ 
dition was a restraining factor. 

The legislation ox the Norman kings in England differed from 
that in their home country. Ordinances played a fax more important 
part in England than in Normandy'. The law which was transferred 
from Normandy to England was written down there sooner than at 
home. The dislogus de Sceneario was probably compiled in 1178 

( 1 ) 

and portrayed the Anglo-Norman financial administration very well, 

Glanville gives a contemporary description of the Courts, and par- 

( 2 ) 

ticularly the King f s Court in the days of Henry 11 while the oldest 

v (5) 

description of Norman law, the Tres Ancienne Coutume de Normandie 

stemmed from the beginning of the 15th century. The last mentioned 
was a compilation which contained some older statutes. The Hagni 
Rotuli Scaccarii contained legal sources common to Normandy and 
England, The surviving accounts of the Norman Exchequer date back 
to 1180 and the English ones to 1130. Under the Plantagenets, juris¬ 
prudence was la^ply dominated by financial considerations and the 
Account Rolls, particularly those of Normandy, showed great detail. 


(1) Printed by Madox, The History and Antiquities of the Exchequer 
of the Kings of England, London, 1769, see page 54. 

(&) Glanville, Tractatus de legibus et consuetudinibus regni 

Angliae, printed in an appendix to Phillips Engiische Reichs-und 
Rechtsgeschichte. Berlin, 1827, vol.2, p.354. 

(5) £ Brunner named so the older part of the compilation which 

Warnkoenig published in the second volume of his. History of 
the French State and Law and called Statute et Consuetudines.l 
















■ 

V , 

< :.i ~ . '• w - ■ - 

• ... 

, 

. . . _ . ■ ...... 

. 

. * • - ' 

. 

. _ : _ * 

. t , ! : .. 

. .. - - . 


... 



... •; 1 . __ . : .. - - - - • J - ' 

■ ,. i. 

. 

. 



50 


These Rolls were, therefore, a most fruitful source of information 
about legal procedure in the absence of histories and. commentories. 

In order to learn about the independent development of the Norman 
law in the days before the reunification of Normandy with France, 
we have to rely upon the many documents of that period. The numerous 
documents appertaining to Norman Court procedure had hardly been 
exploited by 1870, particularly since many of them had not been 
printed. Their importance cannot be overestimated because they could 
be used in place of those official edited records which began for 
the curia regis in England with Richard I, 

Careful collation of the many scattered sources existing in 
Normandy for the twelfth century enable us to clear up some obvious 
errors in the existing relationship between the Norman and Anglo- 
Norman laws. Thus the proposition can be refuted that it had been 
English law which took the lead while Norman institutions became 
mere reflections of legal innovations from England. Gundermann had 
suggested that Normandy, to the Anglo-Norman kings, became after 

a) 

1066 a land of secondary importance comparable to Ireland and ¥ales 
It was not, said Gundermann, England which was ruled as a colony 
from Normandy, but rather otherwise, that laws made in England were 
then imposed upon the continental, dukedom. To prove this point, 
Gundermann had cited new customs which developed during and after 
the reign of Henry II. His assumption can be answered by pointing 
out that until Glenvil wrote his tractatus there had been a, contin¬ 
uous influence on the English law by the Norman and that up to that 
time the Norman law had been a Ecdel for the English rather than the 
(1) Gundermann, Engllsches Privat-recht, vol. i, 1864. 







- 





, 


- 

. 

, 














51 


reverse. As far as the statutes of Henry II are concerned, it must 
be remembered that he had been duke in Normandy and justiciar 
of England before he became king of England. Particularly, from 
the days before his kingship we have clear documentary evidence of 
Norman origins of the alleged creations of the Engiis law. Also, 
against the theory that Normandy followed England's wake, we have 
the important evidence of Lappenberg according to which Sormandy 

(i) 

served as example and model for the English lands. Towards the 
close of the period of union the condition alleged by Gundermann 
did exist. But by this time the union between the two countries 
had become quite weak and Philip Augustus of France found very 
little resistance when he invaded Normandy. 


(1) Lappenberg, Geschichte von England, vol.iii, p.145 















' .. • ’/ - 


: 


• 


, . 





' .... ■ - - ■ v. ; • - 


' 

* • 

- 




■ 

. • . . *. • 











52 


THE ORGANIZATION OF THE NORMAN JUDICATURE 
1. The Oldest Form. 


"What little information we possess about the oldest forms 
of the Norman constitution and administration is nevertheless 
sufficient to allow us to draw conclusions regarding their relation¬ 
ship with the institutions of the Frankish monarchy. Supreme 
juridical, military and financial power rested with the sovereign. 
Though Normandy consisted of several Frankish counties, no special 
counts were appointed for these districts. The power of the count 
was reserved for the duke and the titles belonged to him and to 
the members of his family. His position was similar to that of a 
margrave in the Holy Roman Empire, a fairly independent ruler of 
an outpost territory. 

The Supreme Judge was the duke himself. The curia principis 
was both Supreme Court and the highest administrative organ; it 

(i) 

was modelled on the King’s Court of the ¥est-Franks. The first 
officials of the ducal Court were also the highest officials of 
the state. Like the Frankish kings, the duke of Normandy held his 
court on feast days and these courts were also used to dispense 
justice. Bishops, ecclesiatical and secular dignitaries and all 
who by reason of their feudal duties had to attend, were present. 

Like the King’s Court of the irankish era, the Norman Ducal Court 
was a Court of Equity. Following the festive and court days, accounts 


(1) Stapleton, Observations. London, 1840, i,c.I.p.l6: The Petty 

Court of Normandy took its model from the superior Court of France. 







.. 

. 




' j 






. 








. 

■ 

. 

, 1 ... 




...... , 


■ 






53 


were rendered. The vicomte s and praeposit i accounted for the 
income and expenditure of their administration and handed over 
any surplus. 

If the duke himself did not preside as judge, he was repre¬ 
sented by his highest court official, the Senescalius fbrmanniae, 
also mentioned as Dapifer Normanniae or Comes Paletii , and later 
regularly referred to as Iustitia Normanniae. 

Occasionally the duke exercised his jurisdiction through 
missi who were instructed to settle certain disputes in his name. 
William the Conqueror in 1170 instructed one lay and one clerical 
official, the vicomte of Avranches and the Abbot William of Caen, 
to carry out an investigation into the estates of the monastery 
of Fontenai. In a like manner Henry I delegated the Bishop of 
Lisieux and two nobles to assist the church of Baieux to obtain their 
rightful estates. (¥e have, noticed similar cases in the empire of 
Charlemagne). 

For the purpose of administration, the country was divided into 

( 1 ) 

counties headed by vicomtes . As in the Carolingian constitution 

the vicomtes of Normandy appeared in the main as military leaders. 

The county was subdivided into vicariates administered by the vicarius 

( 2 ) 

or centenariu s. As in the Frankish era, both terms were used. The 
prepositi were administrators or stewards of the ducal estates. 

Complaints about the number of officials were heard early and 
Normandy soon developed, as did the German Marks, a disposition 
towards a well-organised bureaucracy. 

(1) Sohm, Gerichtsverfassung , vol. i, p.50S; ”The vi comte of the 
Carolingian era is the missus comitis whose office had become 
permanent. ” 

(2) This term disappeared in the eleventh century. 



















- 






. 



« 





. 


















54 


ii, Judicature under the Plentsgenets . 

With the middle of the twelfth century the picture of the 
organisation of the judicature under the Normans became clearer. 

Older institutions appear to have been developed further or are 
easier to understand. Fundamental changes bore witness to the 
organising genius of the first Plantagenets. 

In the reign of Henry II, the king’s court was also called 
scaccarium, from the chequered cloth which covered the large 
table on which the tallies were laid by which the money was counted 
and around which the royal officials were seated when checking 
the accounts and cash. Since the same officials were also judges 
of the king’s court, a smaller edition of the Great Council, end 
dispensed justice in the same room, the term scaccerium was applied 
to the court too, 

a) 

Nobody will deny to-day 7 " the seniority of the Norman Exchequer 

over the English Exchequer as it is proven in the Dialogue Scaccario, 

compiled about 1179 and extensively referred to by Madox, He wrote 

a history of the English Excheauer ana gave convincing proof that 

( 2 ) 

the Norman Exchequer antedated its English counterpart , The fact 
that English documents mentioned the name ’Exchequer 1 2 earlier 
than Norman ones, was explained by Madox by the extreme paucity of 
Norman records up to the middle of the twelfth century. 

(1) 1872, the date at which Dr, Brunner wrote, 

(2) Madox, The History and Antiquities of the Exchequer of the Kings 
of England, London, 1769, f Compare, however, the later work of 
Dr, R.L,Poole, the Exchequer in the 12th Century , (Oxford, 1902), 
pages 40, 57-9, cited in Holdsworth, A History of the English Law, 
5th edition, London, 1951, page 45. Dr, Poole maintains that 

(see continuation of footnote page 55.) 












* 

. 

. 

. 

, 

' 

. 

• * * 

, Vfi % 0l 

, 

. 










55 


The expression scaccarium wes also found in other places: an 
exchequer for Poitou was mentioned in the days of John and the 
Court of Leicester had a scaccerium in 1125. The Counts of Alencon, 
of Beaumont-le-Roger and the Archbishops of Rouen called their 
courts Exchequers’. 

After the innovation of Henry II, the members of the scaccarium 
were divided into barons and iusticiares (judges). Apart from 
the lords temporal and spiritual who appeared at the Court of their 
feudal lord, a number of experts, nominated by the king, were there 
too. Naturally the influence of these iusticiares increased visibly 
and contributed largely to continuity and to a well developed judicial 
system. During the reign of Henry II, the king’s court was served 
by a school of experienced legal experts. 

Both in Normandy and England, the Exchequer developed two 
main branches according to the two main groups of administration 
required: the Echicuier de causes (judicial) and the Echiquier 
de comptes (administrative). The decisions of the scaccerium 
sitting as Court of Justice were recorded already in Anglo-Norman 
days. Unfortunately these records have not survived. We do 


(footnote contd. from page 54.) 

.. .the Exchequer was invented by Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, and 
introduced into Normandy from England. He suggests that the Exchequer 
existed during the reign of Henry I, and that the name itself appeared 
first about the year 1118, Plucknett, A Concise History of the English 
Law. (4th ed., London, 1948), page 65, also suggests Roger of Salisbury 
as the inventor of the counting system which gave the Exchequer its 
name. Dr. Poole’s instance of the year 1118 is a momentary triumph 
for the English side in the perennial controversy between England 
and Normandy for the honour of the origin of institutions. It certain¬ 
ly antedates John’s scaccarium in Poitou, and Dr. Brunner himself 
mentions (as noted above) a scaccerium in the Court of Leicester in 1125. 
But one cannot resist the conclusion that Dr. Brunner, were he alive 
to-day, would not be in the least disconcerted. An emphatic protagonist 
of the Norman side of the controversy, he would undoubtedly retire, 
under a covering barrage of emphatic and ambiguous German, to 
his prepared position of "the extreme paucity of the early Norman records 



















, 


. 


. 

, 

. 












. 




* . . . . v . > . - . . 



, 

f V 

, 

. 

. 

. 

, 





56 

( 1 ) 

possess, however, a private collection of decisions from 1207 which 
were copied from an official collection which is lost to us. The best 
record of Norman law, however, is a law book of 1270 or 1275, written 
by an unknown author and referred to as: Somma de legibus consuetudinum 
Normanniae (commonly Somma ) or known by the title of the French translat¬ 
ion as: Grand Coutumier de Uorrar ndie. 

The office of senescalius (Chief Justice) became more clearly 
defined after the reign of Henry II, This official supervised 
the ordinary judicature, checked the abuses of the bailiffs and 
represented the king as chairman of the King f s Court. As the 
king*s representative he shared, like the Frankish count palatine, 
the extraordinary jurisdiction of the king and was empowered to 
apply certain types of Equity in contrast to the strict formal 
law. In the safe conducts of the Norman kings and dukes it was 
invariably stated that the persons possessing these privileges 
were to bring their actions before the king or his Chief Justice. 

The writs granting the privilege of recognitio or giving permission 
for the commencement or continuation of actions, which were necessary 
after the reforms of Henry II, were either in the name of the king 
or his Chief Justice. 

In Normandy, earlier than in England, the king exercised his 
extraordinary jurisdiction by means of itinerant justices. (A sim¬ 
ilar institution existed in Charlemagne 1 s days). In England, Henry II 
created the barones emantes or iusticiarii itineraries (itinerant 
justices/ like the earlier missi sent out to deal with particular 
cases. However, the system of itinerant justices remained for a 

(1) Narnkoenig in his Franzosische Staats-und Rechtsgeschichte. 












r 

, 


. 

. 

. 


, 


. 

. 

. 

* 

. . 





















57 


long time a somewhat flexible institution because it was dependent 
upon particular needs and momentary conveniences. The Tres Ancienne 
Coutume de Normandy reports court meetings that took place once 
or twice a year in each vicomte (vicariate.) These courts were atten¬ 
ded by three to four bar ones iurati or milites and were, generally 
called assisia (assizes.) The judges of these assizes were called 

barons jures : barons because this term was frequently used in the 

( 1 ) ^ ( 2 ) 

same sense as justiciars. jures because they were on oath to find 

justly, to protect the right of the innocent, to preserve faithfully 

the records of the assizes and not to accept presents nor to suppress 

the just and to favour the unjust. The missi of the king or seneschall, 

( 3 ) 

selected to hold the assizes, called on knights and legates homines 
of the district to sit at the assizes. Reports of these assizes 
agree with those mentioned in the Tres Ancienne Coutume de Normandie . 
According to records the assizes were held by three or four judges 
called justiciarii domini regis, (justiciars). In Normandy and in 
England the technical term justiciarii itineraries (itinerant just¬ 
ices) was used. Occasionally the king himself presided at the assizes 
and they must be regarded as King *s Court even if the itinerant justices 
sat in his place normally. 

Available records do not suffice to give a clear picture of 
how the country was divided into districts of the missi. It seems 


(1) Reeves, History of the English Law, 1787, newly ed. by F'inl&son, 
1869, vol.i, p.87. »The administration of justice in those days 
was so commonly attendant upon the rank and character of a baron 
that baron and justiciar were often used synonymously. f 

(2) The English justiciars had to swear a similar oath, 

(5) pMen who had not forfeited their civil rightsr? 























' 







. 


- 








* 

- - . 














...... 






O r 




... 




. . 

.... _ . . . .... .... . ... 

. . .-.- ' - 






. - 4 - - - 

-t 


. . 

, 

: ’ 


. « ■ . • ..- • i - • - r - - ’ 

- ' 

- 

- - •• -• _ _ ...... . .. 

, 
















58 


certain that.the same judges visited a number of countries since 
the same names appear for different places* 

Later distinctions began to appear in the terms and in the 
extent of the powers of the itinerant justices in England. It is 
doubtful if the same took place in Normandy, though occasionally 
we come across missi with limited power, for example to preserve 
certain royal privileges. Apart from the missi the old custom 
prevailed by which the king appointed missi ad hoc to settle certain 
specific legal actions. 

The relationship of these institutions with the missi and missi 
ad hoc of the Frankish realm is quite abvious. Two explanations axe 
possible t either the needs in the Frankish and Norman countries were 
so similar that analogous institutions developed independently or 
their relationship is genetic. Historically it has been pointed 
out by many that the itinerant justices were a development of the 
Frankish missi . There are good reasons for believing this to be 
highly probeble. In the west-Frankish realm the institution of 
missi had been revived after a lapse of time not long before their 
part of the Neustrier territories were ceded to the Normans. Charles 
the Bald, in his Capitulare Missorum of 855 included the territory 
of the latfer Normandy into the districts of the missi . The formula 
for these instructions reappears partly in the instructions to the 
English itinerant justices. Lapperiberg (1) has pointed out that 
notices of the presence of missi in western Neustria shortly before 
Rollo 1 s conquest, makes a connection with similar institutions in 
Norman England probable. This probability is increased by recent 
discoveries which show that the itinerant justices of Normandy were 
a link between the Frankish and English institutions, a fact which 
was then unknown. 

(1) Lappenberg, Geschichte von England, vol II ch. 4. 
















3 Jf 






3 













t 












3 '.,. 


‘ -. 3 . 












59 


It becomes almost a certainty when we compere the duties of the 
Norman missi with the functions of the Frankish Machtboten 
(delegates with special powers). Like the roissi they either 
supplemented or controlled the administration of the ordinary 
officials. Like the Frankish missi and barones iurati they are 
delegates carrying out jurisdiction reserved for the king f s court 
and representing the king. They dealt mainly with such matters as 
were beyond the competence of the vicomte and lower judges. As 
seen later, the duke used them, amongst other purposes, for the 
exercise of his power of inquisition. According to the capitula 
de instructione missorun of 828, the missi were especially charged 
with inquiries into the conduct of the ordinary officials in 
respect of the carrying out of their duties. Equally, it was 
their duty to inquire into the conduct of the vicomte themselves 
or their deputies^ whether, for example, they had proceeded 
irregularly against innocents, or whether they had shown favours to 
thieves or other criminals in return for bribes, or whether they had 
arranged a secret penalty in a case of homicide and pocketed the 
fine. It was mentioned often in Frankish records that the missi 
would protect the poor against the strong and particularly against 
the oppression by the bureaucracy. The Tres ancienne coutline de 
Normandie mentions specially as one purpose of the assizes that the 
poor could use them to complain against vicomte and even bring an 
action against him. 

The office of the vicomte underwent some change during the days 
of the Plantagenets, a change which derived from their earlier 
experience in Anjou, On becoming dukes of Normandy the Counts of 
Anjou had introduced one innovation which had taken place earlier 
in the French territories. Vicomtefc who had earlier in France been 


















. 

, 

. 

, 

■ 






60 


granted juridical rights were deprived of these rights and their 
courts replaced by royal courts. A similar re-allocation of 
jurisdiction became necessary in Normandy too, since the office 
of vicomte not infrequently had become a hereditary fief. When 
Henry II decided to use the judicature as a substantial source of 
public revenue, it became necessary to bring to an end a system 
by which court fees went to a vassal-judge instead of to the Ex¬ 
chequer. During his reign the country was also fully divided into 
*Hundreds 1 each with its own court. 

Tiie Somma de legibus Normanniae divided the jurisdiction, except 
in the cases where it was exercised by the duke himself, into 
jgA sd 4ctio. commissar!a and iurisdictio feodalis. The former was 
exercised by ducal officials and the latter by the lords of the manor 
(seigneurs) and limited to matters arising from his seigneurial tenure. 
The secular jurisdiction of the church over church property was 
analogous to this manorial jurisdiction. Fees from any actions arising 
out of manorial or ecclesiastical jurisdiction were not passed on to 
the king. 

The extent of manorial jurisdiction in Normandy was determined 
by the fact that the duke reserved for himself and his officials the 
higher jurisdiction, including the right over life and limb. 

According to a commentary of the reign of Henry II explaining 
the rights of the Norman dukes, the following cases were reserved for 
the duke or his officials; murder| manslaughter; robbery; rape; 
serious defamation; forced devastation; arson; breaking the peace 
of home, field, and the duke f s highways; assault on people who were 
travelling to the king's court; breach of the peace that was promised 
in court; finally all matters relating to the army and coinage. 

If we complete the list by referring to the Tres encienne 
Coutume Tvomp.ndlp.j these cases were also reserved for the duke 1 s 















' 

















« 




. 


. 




. 






1 



















. 











61 


jurisdiction: decisions as to the possession of churches: all 
recognitions and disputes concerning the title to an estate. 

It is not possible to uphold the contention that the Norman 
duke never granted jurisdiction over life and limb, but such grants 
were exceedingly rare. Except for the rare extension of jurisdiction, 
seigneurs in Normandy exercised over their tenants only lower 
jurisdiction such as simple complaints from which the accused could 
cleanse himself by oath, or civil case which could be settled by 
trial by battle. The only exception in criminal cases was theft. 

Such a case the seigneur could decide even though the accused could 
not end the action by oath. Even most cases based on simple 
complaint could not be proceeded with further if the accud denied 
the charge on oath. 

Tor denial or delay of justice, a person could bring his action 
from the manorial court to that of the duke. Such a denial or delay 
had to be established formally and proven. If a tenant brought his 
action directly before the duke f s court by evading that of his 
seigneur, that court could decide the case unless the seigneur had 
claimed his own jurisdiction in time. 









62 


THE NORMAN CONQUEST AND ANGLO-SAXON LAW 

So far our narrative has been concerned solely with developments 
in the Norman law (whether in England or Normandy) up to the year 
1205, the year in which Philip Augustus reconquered the province for 
the French Crown, For the history of developments in England this 
has, of course, been only pert of the story, and before proceeding 
to a study of post-1265 developments in that country it will be 
necessary to retrace our steps to the time of the Norman Conquest 
and to observe the effect of that cataclysm on the development of 
the Anglo-Saxon law. 

The history of the Anglo-Saxon legal procedure of England alter 
1066 in one of gradual Normannization not so much through the 
introduction of new laws as through the new approach of the Norman 
administration. 

The Frank!sh-Norman law placed in the hands of the king extensive 
procedural powers which were ruthlessly applied in England, The king*s 
lew and the king *s court became the starting points for a complete 
change in court procedure. In the lower courts the Anglo-Saxon law 
was maintained to a greater extent but these became less and less 
active and were of little importance in the development of legal 
procedure. The reason for this was that Norman innovations like the 
inquest, showed themselves to be more practical than their English 
equivalents and consequently became more popular while they were 
denied to the lower courts. The Icing*s court and those courts that 
derived their authority from it, such as the courts of the itinerant 
justices, monopolised the new procedures and litigants began to avoid 
the lower courts limited as they were to Anglo-Saxon procedure. 

I b 



ll 

'i ;.. „ •. . • . ■ 

* 

.. , . .. . .. » ■ - ■ • < • 

. ... .. •. , • - . ■- - : . :•* 

.. 

. 

t 

» 

, 

-. : . 

....... V..;. . . 

, T . . ... - , -J- . : " : :■ 

. ... . ^ .. 

- 

. 





65 


While the ordinances of William I were still based to a large degree 

on Anglo-Saxon law, the so-called Leges Edwerdi Confessoris and the 

Leges Henrici Primi both of the twelfth century, showed a noticeable 

influence of Norman law though they were ostensibly compilations of 

( 1 ) 

Anglo-Saxon law only. The greatest progress in the Normannization 
of the English law occurred of course with Henry II whose legal 
reforms were based entirely on Norman practices. 

All this meant that the Anglo-Saxon law had little influence 
upon the development of the English evidence jury as we see it in the 
thirteenth century. Conditions in England during the first century 
after the Norman Conquest assisted the introduction of the jury from 
Normandy by msiting a supplement to the existing legal procedure even 
more necessary in England than it had been in Normandy. 

The acceptance of the jury in England was made easier by the 
close relationship of the Anglo-Saxon procedure with Norman. Both 
had grown from Teutonic roots and shared a general, formal structure. 

In particular the extreme formalism of the procedure of proof "was 
common to both. Both had the oaths of the litigants, perhaps 
supported by oath-helpers, proof by witnesses and ordeals. 

(1) "jjo""piucknett, (A Concise History of the Common Law,~p.241-242,) 

the law of Edward the Confessor is a tremendous flimflam, a 
forgery in the interest of Anglo-Saxon nationalism. But how far 
was the crown not perhaps associated in such deception, in the 
interests of an easier tranquillity for the Kingdom and a 
further strengthening and legitimation of the royal authority? 

Once again it may not be impertinent to point out that Dr. Brunner 
is an emphatic pro-Norman, in the England-orONormandy argument for 
the parentage of institutions and that this development of Anglo- 
Saxon legal procedures in its pre-1066 phase is perhaps the weakest 
part of his whole argument. It is certainly the most weakly 
documented (which myy, of course, depend upon paucity of documentary 
material) end is relegated in his book to a most unimportant place 
(Chapter SIX) near to the end of the book, as if it were a rebuttal 
of an unimportant and minor argument* 










' 

. 

. 

. 

. . 

. 

■ 

■ 

. 

. 

. 

. 









64 


There were differences, however. For example, trial by battle 

did not exist in Anglo-Saxon law and William I specially preserved 

for the Normans in their disputes with Anglo-Saxons their right to 

trial by battle. Anglo-Saxons were allowed to evade the duel but 

only under terms which placed them in an unfavourable position 

vis-a-vis the Normans. By the twelfth century trial by battle had 

become generally accepted as a means of proof though individual 

districts were exempted from it by royal privilege. The obvious 

attempts to obtain such a privilege showed that the English did not 

take readily to this new form of proof. The general Anglo-Saxon 

dislike for trial by battle made the introduction of the recognitions 

( 1 ) 

procedure from Normandy particularly welcome. One of the reasons 

for the introduction of this procedure was precisely to remove from 

the Anglo-Saxons the limitations and restrictions placed upon them 

by their national disinclination to trial by battle. 

In the absence of trial by battle Anglo-Saxon law was compelled 

to make extensive use of ordeals and these remained in frequent use 

even after the Gonquest. The veto of the church, as far as ordeals 

wore concerned, left a gao in the Teutonic evidence procedure and led 

( 2 ) 

to an increased use of the evidence jury in criminal cases 


(1) See later; page 71 and 87 

(2) See page 131. 





* i 

. 

§f 






65 


As far as the oath by oath-helpers was concerned there was a 
large measure of agreement between the Anglo-Saxon and the Norman 
institutions. Since the Anglo-Saxon law did not know trial by 
battle as a means to prove an oath, it was necessary to find 
recourse to a combination of oaths in cases where there was an 

( 1 ) 

objection. The Leges Henrici I mention the iuramentum frangens , 

a proof by oath where the formalism of the procedure was so 

complicated end the danger of failing in the oath was so great that 

the party was often advised to make use of the ordeal rather than 

expose himself to the danger of perjury. To make proof more 

difficult it was customary to multiply the oath (e.g. to demand that 

( 2 ) 

the oath be taken several times . Obviously an institution of 

proof which had to make use of such devices could not seriously 

retard reforms introduced by the Normans. As far as oath with oath- 

helpers was concerned it took on the Norman form and became known as 

( 5 ) 

a ’wager of lew 1 2 * 4 ( vadiatio legis) . Following the Norman procedure, 

oath was now taken in two forms: as oath on the ’staff’ and oath not 

on the ’staff*. The latter was comparable to the simple oath. 

In Anglo-Saxon law proof by the community or by those who 

had witnessed a particular business transaction, differed from Norman 

procedure. As far as the so-called ’transaction witness’ vras concerned, 

we have an ordinance of Edgar which ordered that every burgh should 

elect thirty three, and smaller burghs and districts at least twelve 

( 4 ) 

men as ’transaction witnesses’. . These men were obliged to promise 


(1) In Anglo-Saxon days ’frangere’ meant the failure of an oath or 
ordeaJL. 

(2) e.g, nine oaths before nine altars in nine different churches. 

(5) See above, page 11. 

(4) Compare page 30 and 31. 













. 

. 

, ? 

- 1 







♦ 

. . 

. 

. 








66 


on oath to give truthful evidence as so required. Any two or three 
of these were under immediate obligation to attend any purchase or 
other transaction as required to do so by the contracting parties. 
Attempts have been made to make this statute of Edgar the origin of 
the 13th century evidence-jury. This is an erroneous connection, 
however, since these witnesses were not a group of people who were 
to give evidence but a number of people from whom contracting 
parties selected men to witness a transaction. If during a later 
court action the need arose to bring in witnesses, the plaintiff or 
defendant, as the case may be, had to produce these two or three 
men before the court. Their oath was of an assertive nature: "In 
the name of God I truthfully testify for N.N. without being asked 
or paid that I saw it with my own eyes". This type of witness 
disappeared in the Norman era and the f wager of law* became the 
normal procedure in actions for debts if documentary evidence was 
not available. 

As far as proof by the community was concerned we find examples 
of it in the oath of witnesses as they were produced by plaintiff or 
defendant, and also in the unsworn evidence of members of the Ding 
an assembly of the men of the community. The custom of using the 
unsworn evidence of members of the assembled community, functioning 
in their capacity as a court, lasted into Norman days. Like that of 
the later evidence-jury, this form of evidence was of a collective 
character. It differed,however, in that it was limited to well-known 
facts of local character and was more informal. To strengthen the 
unsworn evidence of the community, a certain number of members were 
occasionally selected to confirm on oath what had been sard. This 
evidence of the Anglo-Saxon community was also applied to matters of 

















. 






, . 

. 





, 

. 








. 

. 


67 


the crown, but only during the earlier years of Dorman rule. It 
was for the time preserved as the informal ,f neighbours 1 evidence” 
(testimonium vieineti* in cases where the royal writ for a 
recognitions procedure was not available. There are examples 
to show that Dorman procedure with witnesses was used immediately 
after the Conquest, but the Anglo-Saxon procedure of evidence 
through the community was retained for a time even after the 
introduction of the assises, though on a very restricted scale. 

The question arises whether or not the roots of the jury were 
already in Anglo-Saxon law. Those in favour of this view base 
their claim on passages such ass 

1. Allredes and Gudrumes, frid e.5f 

”If a thane of royal blood is accused of manslaughter 
he can expurgate himself with the help of twelve royal 
thanes. A non-royal thane can to this with the help of 
eleven men of his own standing and one royal thane”. (l). 

2. Geraednes betweox Bunset&n, c.3: 

”In actions between Welsh and Angles twelve laymen shall 
decide; six Welsh and six Angles”. (2). 

3. Ethelred, Cone.Wanetungense, c.5: 

”And a court shall be held in every wapentake and the 
twelve leading thegns along with the reeve shall go out 
and swear on the relics... that they will not accuse an 
innocent man or shield any guilty one”. (5). 

The first passage refers clearly to oath-helpers. Mchelsen (4) 
also dismissed this passage as an evidence of an Anglo-Saxon jury. 

The second passage was dismissed as evidence for an Anglo-Saxon 
jury by Phillips (5) and by Conrad Maurer (6). Both scholars 


(1) Reprinted in Schmidt, Geschichte der Angelsaechsen. 2nd ed 

Leipzig 185 B page 106. 

*2) Ibid , page 560 

(5) Ibid , page 215. also in Pobertson*s trans.. Laws of the Kings of 
England, page 65 (Ethelred, 5,1) 

(4) Michelsen, Die Genesis der Jury. 1847. 

(5) Phillips, Geschichte des Angelsaechsischen Rechtes. 1825, p. 209 

(6) Maurer, Konrad. Das Beweisverfahren nach deutschen Rechten . 
printed in Kritische Ueberschau, 1857. vol V f p.589. note 5. 















' 

; 

..... .. 





30 : 










. 


t, 








Tl 











. ii 


'.1 3 / J - - ... , 




o., .:' 3.3. ^ : r 

...... . 

.u.: 3- - .-3 . j , 





. .. .. .* 


_ ;; 0 : •... 


j '.. 


a 


3 3 ■ . iii'w -3„= . 




,.j3 


, . ...... 


- - j.;.. . * .33 3.., : J.. . 


3 _ j 3.030 3 i.3 ' I 


: v 




f _ _ 1 _ ■_ > ._ 










3 ■’ 3.> 

.... ..... . ". * ' ■ - • ' - : - ” * • ■ 

< > ■ .. • ; 

,. , .;. r 

, _ .: .. ... . . . .. .... * 

- ; . ' ■ . . ’ v ’ . ' . ... < 

* . , • ■ __,. . j : ._ A - 
















68 


pointed out that this passage referred to an institution of twelve 
men whose duty it was to mediate in actions between litigants of 
races who spoke different languages. This institution lacked ary 
authority to pronounce a verdict or give evidence on questions of 
law. The view of these scholars must be accepted. 

The third passage cannot be dismissed so easily. At best, it 
refers to an indictment procedure that existed in Anglo-Saxon law.(l) 
This appears more likely as later on Ethelred 1 2 3 s ordinance refers to 
the accused as cleansing himself through ordeal. Konrad afeurer (2) 
doubted whether the passage refers to Anglo-Saxon law at all. In his 
opinion it applies only to parts of England occupied by the Dane s 
and shows many references to Scandinavian law (3). 


(1) See page 12, 18. 

(2) Maurer Konrad, Kritische Ueberschs&u 1857, vol V, p. 389, note 2. 

(3) [Maitland, The History of English Law, (vol I, C.U.P., 1911, 
p. 122) agrees with Maurer by explaining this passage as being 
of purely local character, applicable only to Danish districts. 

The word *wapentake f is the term in the Danish districts of England 
comparable to the Saxon •Hundred*. 

Hurnard, Naomi, "The Jury of Presentment and the Assizes of Clarendon", 
English Historical Review, vol 41, (July 1941). Miss Hurnard cites 
the arguments of Vinogradoff in his English Society in the Eleventh 
Century, and of Stubbs in the 5th edition of his Constitutional 
History of England . At page 8 of hi£- work. Miss Hurnard quotes 
Vinogradoff as agreeing with Maurer that Ethelred*s law was due to 
Scandinavian influences. He admits, however, that this law was not 
without influence on the jury of presentment as established by Henry II 
at the Assises of Clarendon. Nevertheless, the Anglo-Norman inquest 
provided the last link in the formation of the indictment jury. 

Stubbs, according to Miss Hurnard, is of the opinion, at pages 655 
and 662 of His Constitutional History. that there could have been the 
germ of a more advanced system in Saxon England and Ethelred*s law 
could be connected with the later jury as a whole is of continental 
origin. 

Miss Hurnard rejects the general opinion that the jury of presentment 
was a creation of Henry II. She maintains that at the Assizes of 
Clarendon only specific cases were mentioned that were to come under 
the *new* jury. There had been cases in previous Pipe Rolls that had 
been dealt with by on accusing jury. She particularly refers to 
Ethelred*s law to support her view that a form of presentment jury 
existed in Anglo-Saxon and early Norman days. If her view is correct 
then Brunner *s opinion that the civil jury preceded the criminal jury 










- - • . ... 

...... . . ' 

■ . .... ♦ - o. . 

. i& ■ ...'. "• i . isv ... . i . 

, .-. o. . . 

, . . . o . • . oo _• ....... j . . ' ..'. .: 

.. . ... oo.o ~c. ... ... ..» ... o;o. j.i. ■: c, .. o • y± 

! L, : 

. . ■ j,. ..■ - . : !■ . . o ■ ). 

- 

w .'..i. . j.4.. /} .... wivOt ■ a» j *: ; „ ■ ■ _• oj ... 3 J'J: L.l o 

• _ , . 


< -• t • « 

,:Jl~ -■ V i_. 1 O ; 


. j ..... i»3 ■ (I) 

■ • _ - .. /_/.•: . • ... ' 

,. . ; •/..... ^ . _■ .1 * x -. . 1 

- 

■ < .. o j ... • j. ... Y ‘Z'J i 


■ • 


. '. oY : 




Yo.b . ' 




? •.. 1 :o: ■ : 

• • • •' <. •. ... ._ * 


, 3 ± >. 

. 

_ jo : _ 

o o . . - r . .. . . ■ : . . . 




* 


u - . , , : - 

j ■ 4 J - w ■ -J - - - • 3 - - ■ - - V j j . - — ■' ■> ■- -- • 

- .' . : ....... 

. , - ■ -o'. o. : Y a .-i oo; Y j;.•..: . .1 /... 

. - , . . ■ •• . .. ' , : ;.:o:: , JY ...:: o. , . oo. . 

o: . u j j .* > ^ . • " . ; .';;oo.‘; o':.. : ... 

' ■ - .... .. . ■ 

; . ! ~..: o: ■' o : o : . o >...:oo o ..’ .:...o 




1 

r ' -o ■■ .o.o 

* 

- ,'o.o.:.;0 


o.-o - ; ■ - . ..: ... .j. . , . . ... ;. o’. . .... 

- • ^ -• ■ - i o.I.o= J.; 


• o; o o f ’0 0-.O'..: ... ■; . 

.. o : :o ? '... , ri • 0 o. J 


. 


. o o ... 
0 : 


, 

.. .... .. , ( j 


, . - ■ -oo : ..: : . .. .... 

. -• ... . T . j.' 

; . o.o. - o :' .. ... : j 

' 









69 


There is good reason to believe that Ethelred*s law does not 
refer to an accusing jury at all. Following an accusation in Anglo- 
Saxon law, the accused had to cleanse himself by a simple or triple 
ordeal.(1) It depended on his general reputation whether the 
simple or triple ordeal was demanded; the man of good repute 
submitted only to a simple ordeal, but the person of ill-feme had to 
endure the triple ordeal* Ethelred f s law simply referred to the 
procedure to be adopted when the accused was to undergo the ordeal. 
The twelve thegns gave evidence as to the character of the accused 
and following their evidence one or the other form of ordeal was 
demanded from him. Further on in this particular law the question 
is settled what to do if the lord of the accused challenged the 
evidence of the twelve thegns. If the lord, assisted by two thega*% 
could prove that the accused had never paid a fine for theft nor ever 
had been accused of theft, the accused was considered to be of good 
character irrespective of the evidence of the twelve. 

If Ethelred*s lew is considered in its whole context its meaning 
is perfectly clear and the law cannot be used as an argument for an 
Anglo-Saxon jury. 


(l)£ln a simple ordeal the red-hot iron to be carried or held weighing one 

pound, while in the triple ordeal its weight was three pounds. If 
the litigant had to lift a stone out of boiling water, in a simple 
ondeel the stone- was suspended a span (9-in) deep, in the triple 
ordeal, one ell (45-in) .j 


is incorrect. Brunner, however, never denied the existence of some 

institution by which members of the community accused a stispect 
(Buegejury) but he denied that this had aiy connection with the 
modern criminal jury. The members of an accusing jury in Anglo- 
Saxon and Frankish law merely acted in place of the complainant 
and forced the accused to cleanse himself by oath against the 
accusation. At no time did they provide evidence. It was, however, 
the evidence jury in civil actions which provided the link between 
the Frankish inquest to give facts and the English trial jury. 

But see immediately above for Brunner*s argument,J 





„ . 

* 

, 

• • 


- 






. 








* ’ . ,J ■ 




' 






,.•**. ..,.3 


.... jvi - - 

£ 


■ 

. , ; . • ,r. :■ ' w u • ; 3. .7 v • •: ,3 ' - 3 

. 

, . . . . - ' ‘ - 
.. . . - . 1 • -: 

. . 


■ 

. 

. 

, : : . .. • , . 

. .. 

. ■ 1 . . ... .:v.. . ' • 




70 


The Norman conquest stopped to a great extent thefurther 
development of Anglo-Saxon law (1) and the evidence jury, in its 
final form, could hardly have been the result of an evolution 
in that legal system. The informal "neighbours* evidence” was 
no exception to this general trend ana ceased soon after the 
Conquest. Thus neither in the field of criminal proceedings 
nor in that of civil actions can a forerunner of the evidence 
jury be found in Anglo-Saxon law. 

It is, therefore, necessary to turn to the inquests of the 
Norman and Anglo-Norman law to seek the origin of the evidence 
jury which later became the trial jury. 


(1) See page 62 





j_ : oJ'. : 3.:/:. o 






J 


—o 


- ■'■/i 


;i. -x o.-j .10 > 


. i .. 


; ... - x .. 


' 30 . 








O'..... 

; ; * *o ,‘i .: 3 V.; . 


; oJ' ;i,• ■ Jj ::j o.x 


. 


33: ..lV 3. 


_ 


0 l 


- J 








- , , .J . : vJ ... . ■ v 




3 


. 








71 


INQUESTS IN NORMANDY AND ENGLAND 
The collection of Norman legal usage, known as the Somma de 
legibus Normanniae, mentions in 1720 two types of inquests: 

1. Inqulsi t io ex institutions or recognitions procedure. It 

derived from the inquest of office which is referred to by 

( 1 ) 

Brunner as inquisitio ex privilegio . The authority 

for each inquest is derived from individual writs issued by 

the king - or duke - for each individual case. In England 

(2) 

this Type of inquest was referred to as assizes 

2. Inquisitio ex jure or Common Law inquest. This type of 
inquest was of more recent origin than the recognitions 
procedure and, as its name suggests, derived its authority 
from the Common Law. It became known in England as jurat a . 

Its use was limited to certain types of actions, such as 
those to claim parts of an inheritance; to establish the 
degree of kinship; to claim and establish the value of 
property illegally sold; to claim one’s deceased wife’s 
dowry; to establish primogeniture; and to claim for a 
guarantor just restitution from a d_ebtor whose debt he had paid 
but who refuses repayment. 

The root of the Common Law inquest lies very likely in the 

(3) 

’evidence of the community’, a procedure known to both Frankish- 
Norman and Anglo-Saxon law. Influenced by the practice of the king’s 
court it took on the character of an inquisition and became Common 
Law practice. Glanvil mentions on several occasions such a procedure 
the forms of which had not reached their final stage. The status of a 
person-free or unfree-was very often established through the ’evidence 

(1) See page 38. 

( 2 ) See page loi* 

(3) See pages 66 and 67. 

















. 
















. 
























V 







■ 








. 


. 














72 


of the community 1 2 . 

Apart from the two types of inquests mentioned there was, of 
course, the inquest of office used by the crown then as it had been 
in the days of the Frankish Empire. 

In Normandy and in England the sovereign made full use of the 
procedure by inquest. It was the only procedure which he could use 
effectively since the trial by battle of the Common Law was as 
impractical a means of proof for the ruler in Norman days as it had 

a) 

been: in Frankish . The ruler could not demean his sovereignty by 

submitting himself to the indignity of combat with a subject. Since 

the trial by battle did not exist in England before the Norman Conquest, 

( 2 ) 

this question did not arise in Anglo-Saxon law. 

In all actions where the duke, or king, was involved, either as 
plaintiff or defendant, the inquest was used. This inquest of office 
found its counterpart in ordinary land actions when a special writ was 
granted to the plaintiff. In the troubled days before Henry I, end 
again alter his death, much ducal or royal property was alienated. 

Henry I and his grandson, Henry II, made extensive use of the inquest 
to restore these properties to the crown. Records show that the people 
of Normandy were not too happy about this frequent ducal use of the 
inquest to recover ducal property alienated during the time of trouble. 
Ducal forests and the rights and duties of the people in their neigh¬ 
bourhood too often vrere the objects of inquests. 

(1) See page 38. 

(2) {jThis is perhaps a further significant argument for a Norman rather 
than an Anglo-Saxon origin of the jury. Ordeals were increasingly 

looked upon with suspicion, trial by battle was unpopular -with 
the Anglo-Saxons, w r hat wonder that the inquest by jury became 
popular after the Norman Conquest. If this institution had been 
in existence in Anglo-Saxon law why is there no mention of its 
use?] 



















■ 


















. 

. 










. 
















75 


Another use of the inquest of office, that of interpreting 
the Common Lav, came into being almost with the Norman conquests 
in Western Neustria and, later, in England. Since fundamental changes 
in the government had occurred in these two countries and since the 
upper classes of society had no knowledge of the Common Law of the 
country, it was essential to find some means to ascertain the law 
of the land. In England, the so-called Leges Edwardi Confessoris 
were the result of a far-reaching inquest for such a purpose. Accord¬ 
ing to the preamble to this source of law, William I celled in the 
fourth year of his reign twelve men from each county, men well-esteemed 
in their own communities and well-informed in its local levs, from 
whom the king hoped to learn all about the law and customs of his new 
country. The Leges Edwardi Confessoris was their compilation. 

In Normandy arose a similar need to ascertain the law of the land 
after Hollo T s conquest. And even as late as in the reign of Henry II 
twelve jurymen, mentioned by name, gave a legal opinion on the rights 
of the crown in Normandy. Their opinion became an appendix to the 
Tres Ancienne Coutume de Normandie and is referred to there as 
jurea regalis . Again, after the re-conquest of Normandy by Philip 
Augustus in 1205, an inquest was held on the position of the Norman 
Church and the verdict of the jurymen was written down. 

The inquest to interpret, or to ascertain, the law of the land 
gave way to the French enquete par turbe when French institutions 
began to replace the native Norman ones. 

But ascertaining the Common Lew was not the only use of the 
inquest of office. It was also used for administrative purposes. 

The Domesday Book was one of the earliest results of the use of such 
an inquest in England. Henry I used the institution too to determine 
the services and dues which the district of Winchester were obliged 















































■ 

' 




, 





















74 


to render him. In this case obligations as they had been in the 

( 1 ) 

days of Edvard the Confessor were alleged to have been ascertained 

( 2 ) 

Another case, recorded by Palgrave , referred to an inquest of 
office ordered by Prince William, the son of Henry I, concerning part 
of a church building belonging to the Abbey of St. Augustine. The 
building was claimed by the crown and the inquest established this 
ownership; following which the building, out of the king's grace, 
was restored to the church. Palgrave mentioned another inqust of 

(S) 

office as having been ordered by Henry II. A jury had to determine 
the number of pigs which the Abbot of Abington in the days of Henry I 
had been allowed to send out to pasture in a royal forest without paying 
a fee. 

The inquest, certainly, was applied to a wide range of objects 
but the procedure w T as alw r ays the seme: locel men of the district gave 
evidence on oath. Generally, inquest of office for administrative 
purposes were more frequent and better organised in England than they 
were in Normandy. From the time of Henry II the itinerant judges were 
the officials generally concerned -with those royal inquests. They 
received written instructions, capitula itineris, which directed 
their attention to such particular points as needed it. These 
instructions were very similar, in form and subject matter, to the 
capitula missorum of the Frankish era. During the twelfth and 
thirteenth century these instructions increased greatly in number 

(1) Palgrave, The Rise and Progress of the English Commonwealth, 2 vol, 
1852. vol. 1 pp. 275. 

(2) Ibid , vol II page 179, note 5. 

( 1 2 3 ) Ibid , vol II page 181, note 6. 


























75 


to keep up with the increased number of inquests on behalf of 
the crown. 

The inquest procedure then was introduced into England by the 
Norman kings and carried out there very much in their interests. 

As time went by, however, a very different aspect developed. Just as 
the rights and privileges of the king were ascertained and firmly 
established through sworn evidence by local men of repute, the extent 
of the duties and obligations of the people towards their sovereign 
became also circumscribed and, in that way, controlled by them. Palgrave 
comments pertinently on this development^): "If a number of well- 
known members of the community is selected for specific important 
duties, these men will eventually achieve an independent position and 
be able to resist the very power that created them. Once the ruler 
made it a habit to use the inquest, the royal prerogative became 
limited in every sphere." The people had bitterly complained in earlier 
days about the frequency of inquests of office to limit their rights 
in the interest of the king and to extend the royal privileges, but 
in the thirteenth century inquisitorial procedure was used to limit 
the power of the king. King John had to promise in the Magna Carta» 
amongst other things, to arrange in all districts for twelve knights, 
duly sworn in, to ascertain ell malpractices concerning forestry and 
fishery rights. It was not without good reason that the establishment 
of such institutions was: one of the demands of the French Revolution, 

A few words should perhaps be said about the actual workings of 
the inquest. 


(1) Ibid, vol I page £75 









, 

iv .. .. .. - - -1 • ■ ' 

. . ... . ... ... „ . •' • • - ~ - • 


. 

: t t ‘ ' 




J • -• ■ ‘ ‘ ... - • - - - - 


.0 -J* ■■ • • - - - 


; . t . ' 

• j.i. la .. ' 'j;i ’ -I r ’ . ■ .■ . ' • - - , • - - ~ 

.... x-; _ ,i ... ... ■: .. ;• X 


li *. ;:oiJ:: ..c - 


x 

. 



...... x j ... x - 

..... .. . 


...... % . J.: 1J . oi .0 la ■ , J - : • , 


« . '• .L 

< . :vi . .. ..c - . > - - J -ix 


y.. Ijlx'vi . . j. 

..... 

.. ■/... .. 

. 

. ... . - . « '■ . 


0 . _ : , ' 


, 


. 


' J _..... ... ; ;, 

, 


. 






76 


Brunner stresses again and again the importance of the fact that 
only the duke or king had the authority to order inquests. The chain 
of causation from the inquest-procedure to the trial-jury can be 
understood only if this particular limitation is kept in mind. The 
only exception to this generality was that body of persons, mostly 
clerical, to whom the duke had granted the privilege of inquest. 

This principle of a uniqueness of competence reserved to the 
duke or king derived from Frankish days and was jealously guarded 
by all the Norman kings even beyond the time of Henry II* s action 
in making it meaningless by introduction of the recognitions 
procedure, the essence of which was its availability to all. Even 
here, each separate recognition had to be applied for separately 
to the chancellery, and required a separate writ make out in the 
king’s name by the chancellor. The fiction of the universality 
of the king’s competence in this respect was maintained even after 
the fact of its abandonment had become obvious. 

It should of course be noted that the existence of the Common 
Law Inquest has no relation to this argument, deriving as it did 
not from the royal authority but from the Common Law. Moreover, as 
we have noted, its application was very limited, and its use, therefore, 
was no great limitation on the king’s plenary inquest power. The 
practical effect of these limitations was that barons and seigneurs 
were forbidden use of the inquest in their own courts. Only after 
the second half of the thirteenth century were exceptions made and 
then only in Normandy which by that time had been conquered by 


the French kings 




. 

. . ■; - " - •- ' . ^ ' - 

. . : ' •• " ■ '. ' - 

V ,d 4 tlJ ' t* 

, 

; _ V . ■ ■ '■ .. ■ • • ; - •- ' 

■ 

; - : I , ..' - 

4 .: , . . .. 

. . . ' . . c . - - 

i.' 

... . . ■ > . : • - 

j V . r o.:. . , * - 











. 






77 


If one party requested an inquest while the other p8rty 
desired the ordinary procedure, only the duke or king had the 
power to compel the second party to submit to the inquest. Secondly, 
in ordinary procedure the community could not be compelled to 
give evidence; it was only the power of the ruler which could 
compel the community witnesses to take the oath as jurymen. None 
of the local barons had such power and neither had the ordinary 
judges. How closely the writ was linked with the person of the 
ruler can be seen by the fact that upon his death a writ made out 
in his name lost its validity. 

In legal actions of the crown the jurymen were selected by 
the judge for the purpose of the inquest. Since, however, the 
itinerant justices did not always have the personal knowledge re¬ 
quired to select jurors, use was made of electors, acting under 
oath, who supplied the names of suitable jurymen. This practice 
was a common one in both Normandy and England. The number of these 
electors was generally kept down to two. Men elected as jurymen 
were neighbours who had knowledge of the circumstances of the matter 
and who possessed substantial property. Their number varied consider¬ 
ably in individual cases, being usually from six to ten jurymen, but 
often more and sometimes mazy more. At least once a jury of sixty 
six jurymen was empanelled. Records of John*s reign show that generally 
four or five jurymen were used then. Occasionally a record states 
that only three men were used but it usually emphasizes that there 
were not many suitable men in that district. The number of jurymen 
was certainly not laid down and the number twelve should not be 
regarded as a particular characteristic of the jury. In Blackstone's 


. „• ... • - . - ■ * i • 

. I . ■ • • 

. 

. . 

. . 






, 





: 0 . i 


. 










, 











... 

. 

: 


. 




. 

. 

. 



78 


(1) 

commentary on the laws of England mention is made of the 

inquest of office in matters of the fisc: ”.... by a jury of no 

determinate number, being either twelve or less or more.” Forsyth 

( 2 ) 

states : ....in the infancy of this institution (the jury) the 

number seems to have fluctuated.” 

Not always did the jurymen have to take an oath; often a 
reference to their oath of allegiance to the king or duke was con¬ 
sidered sufficient. Priests, both secular and regular, referred 
frequently to their religious vows and were not sworn in. 

The judge did -the questioning generally between the oath and 
the verdict. The jurymen were informed about the matter in question 
and normally the judge was satisfied with the question period. 

Occasionally questions about the fact on issue were put to the 
witnesses before they took the oath. This distinguished the 
procedure from present day practice. On occasions the community was 
questioned repeatedly to clarify matters. Questions were directed 
at the jurymen individually or as a group. The way and form 
in which the jurymen answered the questions was important to the 
gradual development from inquest to evidence jury. 

The nature of the verdict must be regarded as particularly 
important in the development of the jury. Three aspects were important in 
the future development of the inquest for facts into the evidence jury; 

(1) Blackstone, Commentaries o~n "the' Lews of“England, Oxford, 1765 f 

vol III, eh. 17, p.258. 

(2) Forsyth, History of Trial by Jury 3 London, 1852, p.151. 







. . 
















. 




* 

, 









, 








































79 


(a) How the jurymen arrived at their verdict end how it was delivered. 

(b) The relationship between evidence and verdict. 

(c) The reasons given for the verdict. 

(a) The purpose of the inquest was to establish a certain 
fact by questioning a number of men from the community concerned who 
had knowledge of the matter. To obtain information the judge might 
assemble the jurymen and question them as a group, after which the 
jurymen would discuss the matter amongst themselves and exchange 
their knowledge. The judge was interested only in their final 
answer and was not concerned how much information each individual 
•witness contributed to it. On the other hand, the judge might 
separate the witnesses, question each individually and privately, 
and then draw his own conclusions from the information received. 

Between these two extremes there were various intermediate 
forms. For example, the witnesses could be questioned individually 
but in the presence of the whole group, or witnesses who had the 
same information could be questioned as a group with others 
questioned individually. The isolation of a witness and his 
questioning in private was a special feature of the procedure in 
canon law. On the other hand, it was a specific characteristic 
of the evidence jury that the verdict of the community was received 
as a group reply. Between these two forms stood the Frankish 
inquest and the older French inquest, the enquete . 

The evidence jury became in Normandy and England the only 
form of the inquest. It was a 'group* jury and this tendency of 
the inquest to crystallize itself into a group is seen in legal 
terminology which referred to it as jure a or iurei a . Anglo-Norman 
sources also refer to the group of jurymen by collective terms 






80 


such as •inquest 1 , ’recognition 1 , or ’assizes’, rather than 
by such plural forms as testes (witnesses), or jurat a (jurymen) which 
would have suggested a plurality of individuals without a group- 
nature. The term ’ iuree T had been used in the Frankish-Roman 
terminology and was another link with the immediate past. 

French procedures of evidence by inquest developed differently 
from the English. From Louis IX on the practice of questioning jurymen 
individually became more and more common. Once they were questioned 
in private as well, the procedure became the seme as that of the Canon 
Law. When Normandy was re-united with France, this development was 
applied also to the jury in Normandy and the eveolution of the jury 
there and in England moved in opposite directions - in England towards 
the evidence jury and then to the verdict jury, in Normandy and France 
towards extinction, 

(b) Normally, the evidence given covered all the facts under 
consideration and points of law were also decided by jurymen when the 
occasion warranted it. The value of property, disputed boundaries, 
questions concerning the degree of relationship between people, 
possession of goods and similar questions of fact were decided. As 
a rule the judge attempted to obtain an objective evidence, limited 
to bare facts, and he tried to separate facts from the personal 
opinion of the witnesses. Sometimes the evidence given was so 
exhaustive that the verdict followed it very closely and differed 
only in points, mostly of style. The development in France 

went towards a more and more careful interrogation of the witnesses 
which was repeated, if necessary, until the judge was able to obtain 
the facts as free from the personal opinion of the witness as possible. 





.. 1 ’ >. f 

....... . ■ 

._/ ; - •* _ Jl , . - . - ; . - • ■ iV'?:, 

_ 

* - 

. 

, .. / . .v: ’ .• : r - ■■ ■*' - 

. 

'X } . ... ... . . ...... - - w . : 0 ... j - . • • ■ , - , - • - •• - - - 

x •.. • _ . . .. . : . - . - 3 

. • . , ... , 3 - 

, 

’X • . • ■ . .' ’ — 1 . • •' i •" ' t , •• • - 

.. .. 

, 

. 

...... t ,v... ... . .. . 

. _ io. . . c 3 i '■ * 

, .... 

. • j ;. -/ .. ' ■ ... ..... . ... -v j '-'X" 

. M 

... , _ .. :)j . : ... .. .. ... . . ■ * 

.. , :: l ±.. , _ ... .1 * . - - 




81 


(c) As a rule, the verdict was free from subjective reasoning 
but the judge had the right, according to Anglo-Norman law 7 , to 
ask the jury for the reason for their verdict. This was, however, 
rarely the case, particularly if their evidence agreed on all points. 

The nature of the questions asked did not leave much room for 
subjective reasoning; normally the answers stated facts, things 
the witnesses had seen or heard to which their ancestors or contempor¬ 
aries had referred. The verdict was valid and accepted by the judge 
even if it was based on generally held assumptions. In contrast, the 
French and the Norman-French inquest strongly emphasised the difference 
between knowledge and hearsay. As the French influence became gradually 
stronger in Normandy, by the end of the thirteenth century there 
was a clear differentiation between witnesses -who based their evidence 
on hearsay and those who had actual cognition. 

The verdict of the jurymen did not need to be unanimous to 
be accepted by the judge. A careful record was made of it, particularly 
if the case was to be decided by the King*s Court and not by the judge 
who held the inquest. 

Tvhen in England the Crown tried, particularly during the reign 
of Henry II, to establish its rights to former properties, general 
inquests were held by the itinerant justices. They called on some 
members of the community, placed them under oath, and obtained 
information about any violation of crown property and rights reserved 
to the Crown. Though these jurymen acted in the capacity of an 
accusing jury, they were an evidence jury too, since the judge based 
his summary against the possessor of such property or rights upon 
the evidence of the jury and no trial at all took place. If the. 

























. 























' 

. 































82 


person summarily treated felt wronged, he had to start an action 
afterwards or make his peace with the king privately. 

The use of the inquest and of jurymen for a variety of purposes 
was fairly widespread by the time of Henry II. By contrast the 
absence of this application in Anglo-Saxon days clearly points to 
the Borman origin of the jury, which,ggain, could be traced back to 
the Frankish kingdom without any difficulty. 





. - t . - • - • 

. . 

. 


. . . ... - . 




85 


THE CHURCH AND THE INQUEST 


The church as well as the state made extensive use of the 

inquest, Norm&n and English legal sources classify church property 

according to type of tenure, whether tenor a per elemosinsm or tenura 

per osmosne . The true personal relationship between lord and vassal 

was impossible because of the nature of the church, but normal 

tenure could be approximated as far as property was concerned. The 

founder of a church was entitled to certain rights as a patron. In 

the Frankish era this was of special importance in the case of a 

church endowed by the king, since this gave the church important 

privileges. If the church property was completely freed by the king 

( 1 ) 

it became ’immune * church property. The same principle applied in 
Normandie in the relationship between the duke and the church, and 
after the Conquest in England, between the king and the church. 

Church property could have originated either from the king or duke, 
or from another source, but the privilege of immunity was only 
granted by the king or duke as supreme liege-lord. In all other eases 
only such property rights could be transferred to the church as the 
donor had himself. 

Disputes about church property were settled in the ecclesias¬ 
tical courts, with two notable exceptions. Questions concerning the 
extent or nature of an immunity were reserved for the secular courts, 

(1) Immunity meant freedom from public dues and services and also 

affected the position of the tenants, who were partly or wholly 
withdrawn from the secular jurisdiction and placed under that of 
the immunity holder. As far as protection was concerned, it placed 
the church under the special care of the public authorities. 







• . •. - * \ - ; 

■ ' r ' *.;LLi-- 

: j. j y~J J i • 1 W&yJ ‘ *• ' 

. 

, 

. ... 

_ .. . . .... » • -w - J '> -’ 

. 







84 


as were all cases involving church property less than thirty years 
in the possession of the church. This latter type of church pro¬ 
perty was called Restricted' property, this being presumably in origin 
a canon law term adopted into general usage and referring to 
the limitation on the complete clerical authority over the pro¬ 
perty. On the royal side of the question this insistence of a 
thirty-year waiting period, as it uere, before admitting the com¬ 
petence of the ecclesiastical courts in questions of church pro¬ 
perty served as an effective block to the easy extension of the 
property and influence of the church. Needless to say, these spheres 
of jurisdiction were jealously guarded by both sides. There were 
many cases, however, in which it was doubtful whether the land con¬ 
cerned was secular or ecclesiastical property. This type of ce.se 
was reserved for the ducal court in Normandy or the king's 
court in England. Particularly, these courts decided cases in which 
the church claimed property rights in property held by a lay incum¬ 
bent, end the layman holding the property claimed it to be secular. 

The personal status of the litigants was irrelevant since a layman 
could hold church property and a cleric secular property. In a 
property dispute between two churches the deciding authorities were 
the ducal court in Normandy and the king's court in England. 

The customary formal procedure for securing evidence was 
generally applied in the secular courts in disputes about real or 
alleged church property. In certain special cases such property 
disputes could be decided by inquest if the church concerned had that 
right either by special privilege granted by the duke or by thirty 
year's possession. 





















, 




















85 


The ’letters of protection* (Mundbriefe ) granted by the 
dukes of Normandy, after reciting a general assurance of protection, 
specify particular privileges in legal actions. They resemble 
closely in form and in content the letters of the Frankish kings 
granting special privileges to certain churches. Protection and 
immunity were generally mentioned in these letters. 

The historical connection between Norman and Frankish ’letters 
of protection’ is clearly visible, except that the Frankish documents 
especially mention the immunity while Norman documents simply 
give the church the same rights as are possessed by the fisc . This 
is understandable since in Frankish days the position of crown property 
was not quite so developed. It was only after the time of Louis the 
Pious that the idea of the state as an indivisible entity was thought 
of in the Frankish monarchy. Charlemagne, and. his predecessors, were 
content to see in the territories of the realm a patrimony, capable, 
on the death of the ruler, of division into equal parts between his 
heirs.,, Royal domains w T ere not regarded as in any sense different from 
state property. But once Louis the pious had accepted the idea of 
an imperial and indivisible state, provision had to be made for the 
endowment of members of the royal family with some means of private 
income. Different lands w T ere given by him as appanages to his sons. 
Gradually the royal domain became alienated from the state, with 
obvious consequent loss of revenue to the king. 

The special protection which the church gradually obtained 
in the Norman era had important consequences for the legal position 
of church property. The judicial authority of the district where an 
alleged violation of church property had taken place was informed of 
such violation by the church authorities and had to institute 



. 

. 



. 

■ 








' 

















86 


inquisitional procedure. Church property under ducal protection 
had the same procedural privileges as had the state. 

Occasionally, the patron of a particular church placed it 
under the duke’s protection in order that the church might par¬ 
take of the same privileges as the crown. This protection was 
granted in return for something of value, e.g. a yearly tribute or 
use of some property. 

Any church, however, had the right to make use of the inquest 
for one particular purpose of proof. If a layman had made a claim 
to church property and the church opposed it on the ground of 
thirty years’ possession, it could demand that this fact be estab¬ 
lished by inquest. This was a privilege already established in 
8£9 through the capituiare ¥ormatiense and retained in the Korman law. 

If the church claimed a property that was secular, the 
possessor obatined from the ducal chancellery a special writ under 
whose terms a jury of twelve had to decide whether the property was 
ecclesiastical or lay. When the recognitions procedure became 
general under Henry II, the church had an interest in holding the 
older form of inquest by which it did not require a special writ. 

While the practice of the judges varied, it was finally decided 
during the first years of the reign of Richard I that the church 
would not be required to obtain a special writ in the case of a 
property claim. One should not forget that only a comparatively 
small number of churches had permanent immunity granted and did not 
need a writ from the king. 








• 




. 






. 




♦ . 

’ 

, . 

. 

, : * 

. 




* 








... . • •• • -• .- • - - 

, 

. 

. 



















87 


QKDINABY PROCEDURE BY RECOGNITION 


The term recognitio was originally applied to a 
new procedure introduced both in Normandy and then in England 
by Henry II. The novelty of the procedure lay in the fact that 
the verdict was pronounced, not by the judge as in the ordinary 
inquest procedure, but by the witnesses empanelled, in effect, 
as an evidence-jury. The recognition, then was an inquest by 
jury rather than an inquest by judge. It was a development of 
the inquest procedure and possibly also a development from the 
earlier evidence-jury. The term came to be used later in 
Normandy for all inquests held following a ducal writ, while 
in England the term ,, recognition u melted eventually into the term 
assizes,in origin the English term for all inquests held following 
a royal writ. 


Nineteenth century scholars were undecided where to place credit 









. 

*4 

. . i -‘.c; ." 

. 

, 

■ 

. 

•' - 

. 




88 


for the origin of the recognition procedure. Was it English or 
Norman in origin? A closer comparison of the Norman end English 
recognitio in its earlier meaning precludes the possibility 
that it originated end -was developed independently in both 
countries. Either Normandy borrowed it from England or vice versa. 
Norman and German scholars have asserted, without, however, offering 
proof, that the Norman recognitio was the older institution. In 
England the Norman institution was considered a weak and abortive 
imitation of the English original. Two reasons were given for this 
opinion. One was that the Norman jury became stunted and withered 
away, while the English flourished; the other was that recognitions 
were mentioned in English records a century before they were in 
Normandy. 

The first reason for the Norman jury ceasing to develop as 
the English institution did is of consequence for the question of 
priority of origin; most Norman institutions suffered a like fate 
after France reconquered Normandy in 1205. The second English 
allegation, that English documents mentioned this institution earlier 

(i). : . 

than Norman documents did, is not correct in fact Beiner referred 

to the Grand C o utuxoier de Normandie , and to a collection of documents, 
the Etafclissements de Normandie , which were used as one of the sources 
for the first mentioned compilation of Norman law. The use of a jury 
in the recognitions procedure between 1205 and 1207 was shown in these 
documents to be well established. This would make it contemporary with 
the English institution. Moreover, Norman Exchequer Rolls, preserved 

JTj Biener, F.A. Das Englische Geschworenengericht , 5 vol. 1852/5, 

vol i p.45 and 60. 
























, 



























89 


to us as far back as 1180, shoved money paid as fees for the 
granting of writs for the recognitions procedure. Hence, the 
existence of this institution in 1180 must be accepted. Unpub¬ 
lished records exist which permit us to set the date back before 
( 1 ) 

1180, These records, all referring to the district of Baieux, 

were dated 1150, 1152 and 1156, They show the directions of Hen- 

ricus dux ibrmanniae to his judges to hold a recognitions procedure 

according to as si si am mean (my instructions.) It should be remembered 

that before Henry became king of England in 1154, he was already diike 

in Normandy. The wording of his wits clearly indicates that he 

was the originator of this procedure in Normandy. As Henry II of 

England, he instituted recognitions procedure there too, and it 

(2) (S) 

became known there as assizes. Glanvil*s work, which was com¬ 
pleted towards the end of the reign of Henry 11(1154-1189), shows 
this new procedure fully developed. 

T'rom all this one can deduce that Normandy shuid be credited 
with being first to use the recognitions procedure, and that 
Henry II was its originator in both countries, even if the new 
procedure seems to have been introduced first in Normandy. In both 
countries the procedure was instituted by statute and was not of 
Common Law origin. 

(1) Cartulaire de Baieux, folio 7, #24,25,27; printed by De la Rue 
in hiss Essais Historiques sur la Villa de Caen, Caen 1820,vol.i 

(2) The assize-meaning assembly had both legislative and judicial 
functions and the name was transferred from the actual meeting 
to the royal ordinances and verdicts which were produced there. 

In such a way the assize which produced the recognitions pro¬ 
cedure gave the procedure Its name, e.g. assize. 

(5) Glanvil,R.: Treatise on the Laws and Customs of England, 1187/9, 

printed in Phillips, Inglische Reichs-und Rechtsgeschichte, Berlin, 
1827/8, Voi.2. 














•v 

, 

. 

. 


r _ ,: ... - - L • ■ . 






* 








. 

- -- 






. 

, ... ‘ - •- -- • 


# i . ? 






. 


. 








, 

3 -- ■ ... - . •' - : Ji ' - 

. ...... . ' . • 


„ . •. .. 


. • ' ■ : ■ 
. - ■ - •' ■■ - ■ 


. ... . . ' .. ' : ' ’ - - " - 




< , , , ■ -- ■ f. 




\ t .. .. . _'... - - •• 




■ ---- -- - — • ■ • • 

- 

...... - ■ ■ j 


. . . 












, . 









90 


It was, of course, not b new practice for the duke or king 
to issue individual writs for an inquest in certain actions. We 
have seen this practice even in the Frankish era. The ordinary 
procedure by recognitions, as instituted by Henry II, was developed 
from these older writs of inquest. What then was the practical 
importance of Henryk innovation? It lay in the fact that the 
chancellery was then instructed, once and for all, to grant a writ 
for recognitions to any party provided that certain requirements 
had been met. Whereas previously each recognition had required a 
special writ from the duke or king, now writs could be made out 
in his name without his personal instruction. That is to say 
while previously the issue of the writ depended upon the discretion 
of the ruler, litigants now had a right to demand such a writ in 
the type of case for which this new procedure had been introduced. 
Their number was, and remained, somewhat restricted. 

The recognitions procedure being only the continuation of 
and development from an older institution, there was little change 
in the new r procedure save that the form of it was made very exact. 
Once the recognition had become the normal means of obtaining 
evidence, it became necessary to determine exactly the varying 
forms of the inquest so that the parties were no longer forced to 
rely on the discretion of the judge. 

Even if the new procedure had been merely a continuation of 
the older evidence by inquest, its introduction would have been an 
epoch-making event in the history of legal procedure, but it was 
more than that. The more trial by battle replaced the other forms 
of proof in old French and I^orman evidence procedure, the more 


, 

, - • • • • • • •' - '' ' - . 

, ... • - - . t ;: .. - J < • • ' ' . 

. . - • 

* 

• : . - - • .• • ~ '• - ' ~ - • . ' ' - 

.... ■- : • -. ' ■ • 

- - , y ■ - - • ■ - . .. < - • - ' • 

, 

. : • . ••• '' tx 

• - . » - •' 

. -. - • : - - - - - ■ ; ■ - 

. 

: t - • 

..... . ♦ 




91 


important reform became. The more efficient procedure of the 
canon law was making it a serious competitor to the clumsy and 
inflexible procedure of the secular courts. The marked extension 
of church jurisdiction in old France, Normandy and England, can 
partly be explained by the desire of certain classes of people 
to seek the ecclesiastic courts to avoid the trial by bat Lie which 
then dominated the secular courts. The best way to limit the juris¬ 
diction of the church was to reform the secular courts. It was no 
accident that Henry 11, who greatly reformed the procedure in England, 
at the seme time confined the church T s jurisdiction within narrower 
limits. Widows and. orphans, particularly, made use of the eccles¬ 
iastic courts and a desire to help them is explicitly mentioned in 
the Assizes of Clarendon which introduced the recognitions procedure 
into England, when the secular power introduced a procedure based 
on principles of equity, it successfully removed any justification 
for an extraordinary ecclesiastic jurisdiction. In an indirect way, 
therefore, the king asserted his power against a powerful church 
without an overtly hostile act. 

Apart from being a move in the political chess game between 
church and state, between archbishop and king, this was also an 
act of social justice. For example, it opened to the small pro¬ 
perty holder new avenues of procedure which were closed to him 
before, previously he had been barred from legal, action against 
a powerful man by the fact that trial by battle was an expensive 
and often doubtful procedure. Apert from the likelihood of serious 
personal injury, the loser had to pay a fine, and he would also owe 
to guards and witnesses considerable perquisites. Indeed, the office 
























"f : J - ' 




- 












. 




















• . -• J 




. . 


. 








- 
















- 


















t .. 

* • r j... :.. .. ; ' ... 


92 


of umpire for trials by battle became a hereditary fief and, 
when Louis IX abolished this form of proof by introducing the 
inquest into France, holders of that office demanded five gold 
pieces whenever there was an inquest at the king f s court instead 
of a trial by battle. 

In Normandy, particularly, the development of another 
institution, that of the champion, made necessary some sort of 
limitation on the trial by battle procedure. Champions were 
professionals of the trial by battle, who acted for litigants for 
a scale of fees which very soon became highly organised and graded 
according to the wealth of the litigant. 

Obvious abuses soon crept into the system. For example, 
the wealthy developed a habit of cornering the market before an 
action by hiring all the available champions of a certain district. 
Poor litigants who could not outbid the wealthy frequently were 
in danger of losing not only property but life. An unsuccessful 
attempt had been made to abolish this institution in Normandy by 
forbidding the hire of champions, but many found ways and means of 
evading the prohibition. 

Once the recognitions procedure was made available on a wider 
basis there were many applications for it. Apa~rt from individual 
records, Norman Exchequer Rolls have survived showing sums of money 
paid to the Crown for the grant of writs for recognitions. On the 
roll for 1180 over one hundred entries are shown. One entry, for 
example, reads; n ..N.N. debit ten pieces of gold for the grant of 
a recognition against M.M. 11 The majority of the fees shown ranged 
between twenty and forty pieces of gold, but the extreme range was 























«. - 




r- 








































.; : . : . ....... L : >- ,. 


j • -' j , . • 








_. . ... . .. -.- -. f ■ ■ 

’ .... ;<■- .j ‘ 


. 0 --" ' < 






"i 






. - ♦ ,... ■ . jij • ..... b -yiixiJLi j.: ' • *ic.i - ~ 

. . ,. i 

























95 


from ten to one hundred pieces. 

It is not easy to explain these entries. They could not be 
fees for writing out the writs since the amounts vary so much and 
are in many cases far too high. The theory that the recognition 
remained an extraordinary means of evidence granted only in return 
for money must be rejected. This would be quite contrary to the 
expressed purpose for introducing the recognition procedure as 
mentioned above. 

These amounts could be explained by the basic principle 
underlying the whole royal judicial system of those days, a prin¬ 
ciple which was dominated by the idea of revenue for the Crown, 

Even if it was the intention to limit formal procedure by intro¬ 
ducing the recognition, there was no intention whatever of reducing 
the king ! s income, Nothing was more simple than to demand money 
from those who asked for writs and the amount was related to the 
wealth of the applicant and to the importance of the case. There 
were also cases where the king directly interfered with the justiciary 
by issuing a writ when it normally would not have been granted. Ob¬ 
viously, extraordinary payments were demanded in such cases. 

Since the recognitions procedure was restricted to certain 
cases, for all others the older formalistic procedure remained in 
force, While in England the recognitions procedure existed side 
by side with the older forms, in France the development was differ¬ 
ent, There, Touis IX abolished trial by battle in his courts a,nd 
replaced it with the inquest - enquete , Henry IT, on the other 
hand, still allowed trial by battle along with the inquest and only 
replaced the older form occasionally. Where there was a conflict 







. „ •' - - 








. 




- 














t 










- • 


















: ■ .. .; 




• *• 

■ . . A ... ' . . , . . ... . . ... .. • '• ' -■ - ’ 1 • « 

* 

: .. l' • - • ' 

. 

• - . 

. . ' . i • - ' ' • - * 

. 






..... . . 


' . 3 




- 

• . 

.. . 

. 



94 


between the two procedures, the writ authorizing the recognition 
explicitly suspended the ordinary procedure and instructed the 
judge to take all necessary steps for an inquest, such as, to 
select and summon the jurymen and where necessary to arrange 
for a visit to the object of the action - a view or visus terrae . 

The procedure at the Great Assizes in England was different insofar 
as two separate writs were required for each action, one for the 
ordering of the inquest, and a second for a special suspension of 
trial by battle in that particular action. Apart from the mandate 
for the inquest the writ also contained the special formal applicable 
in that particular type of action. There is a considerable analogy 
between the Anglo-Norman writ procedure and the ancient Homan method 
for the granting of formulae . There, the praetor (judge) allowed 
in his formulae an action to a litigant -which could not have been 
had under the stricter normal legisactiones procedure. In the Anglo- 
Norman procedure the royal chancellery granted writs that allowed 
actions unknown in the Common Law. It became the general principle 
as a legal system developed, whether Roman, Frankish, or Anglo-Norman, 
that a novel case warranted novel actions, from the jus civile to the 
jus honorarium and from the formalistic folk-laws to Equity. 

The recognitions procedure was divided into two pants: the 
introduction and the actual inquest. The preparatory stages were 
the concern of the sheriff, while the inquest itself was the sole 
responsibility of the judge. After the re-union of France and Nor¬ 
mandy this dualism ceased in the latter country but continued in 
England where the institution enjoyed a healthy development. The 
royal writs required the sheriff to select twelve men, while for 
the Great Assizes he instructed electors to name the jurymen. 










9 £ 


This right to select jurymen gave the sheriff the opportunity 
to influence the verdict and many instances are recorded where the 
right was abused. The English Exchequer Rolls show entries for 
money received, even by the king, for selecting jurymen who were 
indicated by one of the litigants. 

It was a civic duty to act as juryman and, then as now, many 

tried to evade it. Records of fines paid by evaders show that their 

number was considerable and that attempts to evade service on a 

jury are as old as the institution itself. One of the items on the 

itinerant justices* agenda concerned the impeachment of sheriffs 

who took bribes from prospective jurymen to exempt them. There is 

a record of a complaint from some poorer knights in a district, 

who petitioned the Exchequer in Normandy because of the buraens and 

( 1 ) 

expenses involved in jury duties. The petition points out that 
the wealthier persons of the district were able to evade these duties. 
In consequence, an order was issued that in future only the wealthy 
should be chosen as long as justice did not suffer. Similar complaints 
were common in England, too, and service on a jury was finally reg¬ 
ulated by law. 

In selecting jurymen their knowledge of the matter in dispute 
and their creditability were che most important considerations. Hence 
lack of actual residence in the district concerned disqualified a man. 
As far as towns were concerned, all jurymen were selected from amongst 
the citizens. Great emphasis was laid upon the good character of the 
jurymen and, in general, knights were preferred. Outlaws ana suspected 
men were excluded from jury service. In some recognitions procedures 

- - - - 


(1) larnkoenig, Franzoesische Staats-und Rechtsgeschiehte,. 
Basel, 1846-48, p.127. 














- 

, m 


^ - 

t .... 


. 

. , .’li 




- r: . JJ-~ . - 

* 

. ... — 

, 


, 








•„ v JO 'S ,j*ICOv'i 1 


. 




. •• - t >° • ' ' 0 

. 

i • < 


. . •• 


- • ~ -■ — — 







. ' ...... t - - - - 

. •• <• ' ■’ 

. . .; . „ . :• 1I 







. 

. 




96 


membership in the jury was restricted to knights, with a minimum 
of four. 

An inspection of property - a v isus terrae - was sometimes nec¬ 
essary and served two purposes. First, it determined exactly the 
location of the property at issue and secondly it instructed the 
jurymen on the spot. If, for example, an inspection had already 
taken place but an inquest was ordered later, the inspection had 
to be repeated. Actions involving trial by battle required four 
knights to be present at the inspection. What great importance 

was attached to this rule can be seen from a little incident reported 

( 1 ) 

in one of the chronicles . Three knights, proceeding on an 

inspection, and being thus short of a quorum by one man, solved 

their difficulty by knighting a passing peasant. ¥hen the king 

heend of this irregular procedure lie was so furious that he de- 

( 2 ) 

dared the whole inquest invalid . In later days the presence of 
knights on a jury dealing with property disputes ceased to be 
compulsory but where an inspection had to be carried out, the com¬ 
pulsion remained. If they were not available in the community, 
they had to be found elsewhere. This was an important departure 
from the rule that jurymen had to be members of the community. These 
outside knights, however, were restricted to the inspection and 
were not sworn in. Jurymen who took an oath still had to be members 
of the community. In actions which involved only possessional 
rights and not ownership, the presence of knights was not regarded 
as essential. As possessional actions were unknown to the Gomroon 
Law trial by battle was not an acceptable means of proof in them. 

(1) Beaumanoir, Les Coutumes de Beauvoisis, 2 vols., Paris 1852, 

ch. 35, para. 26. 

(2) [it is not specified-whether the king invalidated the peasant’s 
Knighthood as wellIJ 



































- 






. 

- 
























' 




































J$7 


Nevertheless, even in such actions it -was preferred to have 
knights on the jury, 

While the social position of the juryman could guarantee 
character, there were nonetheless circumstances in which he 
might be suspected of not being quite impartial and for which he 
could be disqualified, Amongst these records mention grefct friend¬ 
ship, or family connections, or a known hate or enmity to the litigants. 

The recognitions procedure before the court was divided into 
two parts, the part before and the part after the deliberation of 
the jury. 

The first part included the inspection where that was necessary. 
This was followed by a session in court with both litigants and 
jurymen present. The judge read the writ and gave each party in 
turn an opportunity to object to a recognition being held. This 
objection was decided by the judge on the spot. If the continuation 
of the action was allowed, the jurymen were called up individually, 
to give both litigants an opportunity to raise possible objections 
and thus to ensure that each juryman was individually acceptable 
to both parties. The jury empanelled, the jurymen took the oath. 

At this time each juryman was to excuse himself because of friend¬ 
ship, relationship, or any other cause that would make him not 
impartial. Then followed an admonition by the judge to the jurymen 
to speak the truth. Finally, the judge gave his instructions to 
the jury and asked such questions as he considered necessary. Usually, 
however, the judge kept his questions very close to the wording of 
the writ, and, in England, it became customary for him to read out 
the writ repeatedly. 



98 


Once the jurymen had taken the oath, no one but the judge 
was allowed to talk to them. To answer questions the jury would 
withdraw and deliberate together. If their finding was unanimous, 
one of them would speak lor the whole jury. If the judge considered 
the verdict unintelligible or suspect, he would question each 
juror individually. 

In a previous chapter what happened fchen the jury was not 

a) 

unanimous was briefly indicated. For the jury in the recognitions 
procedure we have more detailed information recorded which may 
be summarized thus:- 

As a rule twelve jurymen were required, though I'brman law 
required twenty four w r hen the jury considered a murder case. At 
the Great Assizes the four electors who selected the jury also 
voted with them, making sixteen. 

As to the unanimity of the verdict, the usual practice was 
that eleven jurymen had to agree. One could disagree without 
upsetting the verdict. If two declared themselves ignorant about 
the matter but did not disagree, the verdict was still valid if 
ten jurymen agreed. Earlier records mention that, if the verdict 
failed because of lack of unanimity, two more attempts were to be 
made to obtain agreement by replacing the dissenting jurymen each 
time. If this failed too, resort was made to the formal procedure 
with trial by battle. Later sources, for example the *Somma 1 , do not 
mention this procedure of repetition, and, if the jury disagreed, 
the old formal procedure was used immediately. 

At the Great Assizes unanimity of all jurymen was needed 


(1) See page 81 





























. 








M. 











. 




















. i 

















-- 







. 





. 

















for actions involving property ownership. Dissenting or ignorant 
jurymen, however, could be replaced until unanimity was achieved 
(this expedient was also known to the Frankish inquest.) After the 
thirteenth century, however, initial unanimity was required and a 
substitution was not admissible. Where the action was concerned 
with possession of property and not ownership, a simple majority 
was sufficient. If the jury were evenly divided the action was 
considered to have failed. In England, the unanimous verdict of 
seven jurymen sufficed in possessory action and often the jury was 
composed of only seven men. 

That there was suchjb. wide variety of practice in this respect 
is easily explainable by reference to earlier procedure and the 
further development of the inquest itself. Before the introduction 
of the recognitions procedure no firm principle was laid down, but 
if a great number of the coimnunity dissented from the verdict, it 
was considered invalid. The more important the action the more 
was unanimity required and this was achieved in part by repeating 
the inquest and replacing the jury. Hence, special regulations 
regarding the jury that were not unanimous were not considered nec¬ 
essary for a long time. 

As soon as the recognitions procedure was introduced, unanimity 
was required for the jury’s verdict in actions involving ownership 
of property. This was necessary since with one single dissident wit¬ 
ness on the jury the defeated party could demand trial by battle and 
thus defeat the whole purpose of the recognition. Once it was made 
impossible to substitute jurymen until unanimity was achieved. 


. 

. 

# 

• - 

. 

* 

, 

. 

, 

. 

* 

. 




100 


English law had to insist on the unanimity of the jury's verdict 
from the outset. This need for unanimity was unknown in Normandy 
after the conquest by Philip Augustus. In post-conquest Normandy 
the verdict was considered valid if not more then one juryman 
disagreed. This was based on biblical and canonical practice where 
it was considered that all necessary evidence could be provided by 
two witnesses. In cases of possessory action unanimity was never 
seriously required and a simple majority was sufficient. 

If the jury's verdict were valid, it could not be upset by 
another procedure unless the jurymen had made a mistake. Then, 
another inquest could be ordered by the king. This, however, was 

a) 

not done very often in England and was even rarer in Normandy 

This procedure very likely harks beck to the days when trial by 

battle was the commonly accepted proof, a proof often fatal to 

one of the litigants. During the reign of John, there were more 

instances of verdicts being upset, but this was probably due to 

the corrupt practices of his reign and in no sense instituted a 

new norm of legal practice. The historical precedent used to 

upset a verdict was derived from the custom in Frankish times 

when jurymen could be convicted of perjury following trial by 

( 2 ) 

ordeal 

Tl) WeinkoeTnig, Assisia Normanniae 3 in his: Frmzoesische Staats- 
und Rechtsgeschichte , Basel, 1846-1848, vol.ii.p.48.ff. "No new 
inquest can be held about the same facts unless other facts 
become known." 

(2) See also page 105. 









101 


ASSIZES AND IURATA 

Both assizes and iurata in England used the recognition or 
inquest by jury. The assizes derived their authority from royal 
ordinence and the jurat a from the Common Law. The former consisted 
usually of a judge and jury of twelve substantial, local, men whose 
verdict came from their own investigation and knowledge, but on 
occasion was made up of knights or gentry from outside the community. 
The younger institution of the iurata was a jury of twelve men. 

In Normandy the two corresponding institutions were the older 
recognitions jury and. the younger Common Law inquest ( inquisitio 
ex jure.) The recognition jury originated in a royal writ while 
the Common Law inquest, as its name suggests, found its authority 
in Custom. 

In Normandy the recognition was granted immediately on the 
request of thejdefendant, while in England his request for the Great 
Assizes, when granted, suspended Common Law procedure in the local 
court. The Norman claimant was, therefore, obliged to begin a 
recognitions procedure in the king’s court by obtaining a royal 
writ for the holding of a recognition. This writ ordered the vice- 
come s to instruct four knights in the community to choose twelve jury¬ 
men. After that, another writ instructed the vice comes to summon 

a) 

the jurymen. 


(1) Yearbooks of the Reign of Edward 1. No.£G,£l (edit.by A. J.Norwood, 
London, 1863.) 


















, 








- 












102 


The early beginnings of the iurata are to be found in the 

veredictum viclnet i (evidence of the community) which is mentioned 

( 1 ) 

by G1 anvil, though not in its final form . This 'evidence of the 
community* was ba^sed on ancient practice of the king's court and 
had been brought over from Normandy. 

Legal, texts of the thirteenth century show that this jury was 
used on three different occasions: 

First , on the mutual consent of the parties to the action, jurats 
ex consensu vel quasi consensu partium ). 

Second , at the discretion of the judge, ( iurata ex gratia iusticiarii ) 
Third, by special, writ, ( iurata ex brevi .) 

The old Norman law had been, as ve have seen, very strict and 
formalistic in its trial procedures. ¥hen an action was initiated 
the required proof was determined in advance and, in fact, the ver¬ 
dict actually preceded the action. It may well be imagined that 
such a procedure very often did not fit the facts of a particular 
action and a whole permissive system of objections had grown up 
around it. When such permissible objections were raised in the 
course of the action, it had the effect of causing it to fail. 

The next step in the older procedure would have been a duel 
or an ordeal of some sort. In England trial by battle was a Norman 
institution -which had never engrafted itself onto English custom. 
Neither, somewhat naturally, were the ordeals popular. A custom 
grew up, therefore, of accepting the consent of both parties to the 
convocation of a iurata which should adjudicate such actions as had 
fallen down through permissive objections on the part of the litigants. 

(1) Biener, F.A. Das Geschworenengericht, 3 vols. 1852, vol.i, p.65. 

Englische 


























■ 








„ 

















. 




, 








10.3 


Originally, the consent of both parties was en absolute 
necessity, since it was practically a new action which was being 
instituted, but gradually this agreement became a mere formality 
to be assumed. Eventually, the point was reached at which it 
became impossible for a litigant to object to the assembling of a 
jurats, to pick up the action if it should fail through objections 
to the verdict. If plaintiff objected to a jurata he was estopped 
in his complaint, while if the defendant objected his objection was 
ignored and the action proceeded as though his objection had not 
been made. ¥ith all this in mind, the long-winded Latin name of 
this particular variety of jurat a (ex consensu vel quasi consensu 
partium - out of the consent, or as if it were out of the consent 
of the parties) exhibits itself in all the heavy-handedness of 
its mediaeval humour. 

When the litigants had agreed (I) to a jurat a the community 
was assembled and the jurymen gave their evidence. 

The second kind of jurata« granted at the judge f s discretion, 
became obsolete once the jurata was recognised either by ordinance 
or usage. It was used if one party had a justifiable reason for 
not providing evidence, as, for example, when a document had been 
lost or was difficult to procure. 

The third kind of jurat a was very similar to the Norman Common 
Law inquest ( inquisitio ex jure ). The only difference was that a 
writ was needed to initiate it. It was used in England more fre¬ 
quently than in Normandy where it was commonly classified as just 
another recognition. But even in England some sources placed inis 
















l - . 

-Jff 


< * 

l 

. • 


• 

'Z / 0 ,. 




... 


, 








. 

... . . t C • ■ • - ' ‘ 

... 

•„. - - - -- ’ ,• • 1 

. 



104 


( 1 ) 

form of jurat a under assizes. Based on a special, royal "writ, 
this jurat a was most commonly used in possesory actions and the 
sheriff was ordered by the king to act as an itinerant justice. 

In some cases the writ only gave authority for the holding of the 
inquest, the second part of the procedure being reserved for the 
ordinary assizes; it was a mandate to institute the action only and 
not to decide it. 

It may be worth while to point out some of the differences 
between the iurata and the assize. 

As mentioned before, the iurata. was based on Common Law, while 
the assizes had been instituted by royal ordinance. The oath of 
the iurata was not limited to a particular evidence laid down in 
advance or to a particular object that needed to be viewed: the 
jurymen simply promised to tell the truth about whatever the judge 
would ask them. The actual form of the oath was: quod veritatem 
die am« de hoc, quod a me require tis (I shall speak the truth about 
anything which is asked of me.) It is important to note that this 
form of oath was very similar to that used in the old Frankish and 
Norman royal procedure. The oath shows yet another link between the 
later jury and the earlier extraordinary procedure of the Frankish 
law and also indicates the continuation of Frankish institutions 
into the Norman and Anglo-Norman law. 

This form of the oath allowed the judge to deal freely with 
the evidence, since the jurymen of the iurata simply promised to 
tell the truth. ¥e have now come close to the modern form of the 
jury; once the jury was freed from restrictions in the scope of its 


(1) Gundermann, Englisches Frivatrecht. 1864, vol.i, p.396 
















105 


evidence, the way became clear for further development. The 

advantage that the jurata had over the assizes, which were tied 

to a certain evidence only, is quite obvious. 

The jurata differed from the Little Assizes in that the 

verdict of the jurymen was valid even if they were afterwards 

convicted of a crime, as, for example, perjury. They were liable 

to the injured party for damages. Only in possessory actions would 

their verdict be invalidated and replaced by a true and honest 

one. This procedure became known under the technical term of 

( 1 ) 

attaint. It was carried out by a new jury twice the size of 

the old one. In that way each juryman could be convicted by two 

new ones. This was similar to the procedure with oath-helpers, 

where the evidence of one witness could be destroyed by two 

oath-helpers. The new jury was called by royal writ in which 

the formula by vhich the previous assize had based their verdict, 

was repeated word for word. The new jury pronounced their own 

verdict but new pleas were not allowed. The fact that it was 

normally not permissible to bring an action of attaint against 

( 2 ) 

the iurata is explained by some scholars as due to the agree¬ 
ment both parties had made when they chose that form of procedure. 
That this agreement had become a mere formality did not matter. As 
far as actions involving ownership were involved, the verdict of 
the Great Assizes could not be overthrown because their verdict 
produced a final and unalterable result, just as did trial by 
battle. Eventually, however, it became possible to bring in 


(1) Compare page iqq. 

(2) Brae ton, Henrici de Bracton de Legibus et Consuetudinibus 

Angliae. 5 vols. printed London, 1640, p.290. 

















, 

' 


■ . 






- 


























13 .. / 




• - 






- 








;y. J.i .... 




D 




■ 


. 






. 




t 

t t - 







.... . . .• 




106 


an action of attaint against any verdict of a furata and the 
distinction between them and the assizes ceased to exist. 

Normally, an action of perjury against a jurata was not 
easy to carry through, since the jurymen based their verdict more 
on what they believed was true than on what they knew from their 
own experience. Indeed, most of the evidence was asked after they 
had taken the oath. Here the jury of the iursta approached the 
modern jury, where the jurymen are, and must be, ignorant of the 
evidence submitted to them. 

As to the assizes Brunner’s treatment is, on the whole, meagre. 
He merely notes certain particular actions in which the Constitutions 
of Clarendon in 1164 and the Assizes of Northampton in 1176 intro¬ 
duced the evidence-jury, thus contributing greatly to its growth. 

All these actions w T ere concerned with rights of possession rather 

( 1 ) 

than with rights of ownership . They were: 

1. Assize utruni , dealing with the question whether land, Precedents 
for the use of a jury in such cases, it was said, went back as far 
as the days of Stephen. 

2, Assize of novel disseisin, by which a tenant was safeguarded 
in the possession of his land when attempted to be disposessed un¬ 
justly and without judgement. He could have recourse to a royal 
writ summoning a jury to decide the question. If the jury decided 

(1)£plucknett, op.cit., page 539, holds that the distinction 

between possession and ownership was not at sll clear in English 
law^. Plucknett is perhaps a better authority here than Brunner, 
the Englishman having perhaps a better appreciation than the 
German of the pragmatic character of the English and its reflect¬ 
ion in English lawGJ 
















■ 















































- 















107 


in his favour, the judge restored him to his land. The actual 
question of ownership of the land might require further long liti¬ 
gation, but meantime, by this action, the tenant was at least 
secure in the possession of the land, a security much in the public 
interest. 

3. Assize of mort d f ancestor, which decided the claim of an 
heir to the tenancy of his predecessor against an attempt of the 
lord of the manor to recover his property. This was largely a 
royal interference with the operations of feudal injustice, A 
jury ox neighbours decided the action. 

4. Assize of darrein presentment, which adjudicated the conflicting 
claims of two persons to present a new incumbent to a vacant church. 
An inquest of neighbours was empanelled to determine who., presented 
the last incumbent. This action became particularly important 
after a ruling of the Lateran Council of 1179 had decided that, if 

a church remained vacant for some months, the right of presentment 
reverted to the bishop. 

Assizes and iurata tended soon to merge the one into the other. 
Their origins were different, the one based as it was on royal writ, 
the other on the Common Law, but their similarity of procedure tended 
soon to obliterate this difference. For our purpose the essential 
point is that both were evidence juries and that their continued and 
prominent use paved the way for the introduction of the trial jury 
in the fourteenth century. 









. 




. 


. 

. 

< • 

. 

I 

_ 

. 

, 

\ 

, 

, 



ID 8 


EVIDENCE THROUGH A RECORD. 

Before we discuss the transformation of the evidence-jury 
into the trial-jury, a few words must be said about the record as 
a means of evidence. The term Record* is generally applied to 
the evidence of selected men of the community who testified to 
acts that were performed in their presence, before a court. 

One of the characteristics of the record, according to Eng¬ 
lish and Norman sources, was its ivioiability: it could not be 
disputed. Originally, only the king*s court had this right of 
record. Those courts that developed from it, and later became 
independent, as for example the Exchequer Court or the Assizes, 
also had the privilege. 

In a lower court, the party could raise objections to a record. 
According to the laws of William I, even a person who had made a 
statement before a court and then denied it, was permitted to talk 
himself successfully out of this contradiction except in a court where 
the king personally presided. This was recognised in later legal 
records; there it was mentioned that a party who wished to object 
to a record was obliged to have a witness a free-born man who had 
seen and heard what was asserted and was willing to prove it in a 
trial by battle. Later on, exceptions were allowed and this rule 
somewhat modified. In certain procedural actions a true record 
was always possible. Every court obtained the right of record about 
the following matters; trial by battle and everything connected with 
it 5 the inspection of property, when carried out by a judge and 
twelve jurymen who afterwards recorded the inspection before the court-; 


* 




. 



















, 







. 












. 
























. 

* 

' 

* . 


. i i 







109 


the inspection of a body carried out by a judge, four knights 
and eight ordinary jurymen; the inspection of a. wound shown to a 
judge and a sufficient number of jurymen; in criminal actions 
the capture and confession of a criminal or the criminals promise 

a) 

before a judge and some jurymen to leave the country. According 

( 8 ) 

to Maurer the list enumerated in the f Sorama f is by no means complete. 
For example, the record concerning the summons on a nobleman is 
missing. There the baillie or vicomte and four knights summoned 
a baron and then made a record of their action. This procedure 
was adopted to spare a nobleman the embarrassment of a later and 
useless false oath denying the summons. 

Matters that could be the subject of a record were not recorded 
by the court ex officio but were submitted as evidence by a litigant 
with whom the initiative remained. 

If the verdict was to be based on a record, this record was made 
if a sufficient number of court witnesses were present; if not, a 
special date to obtain a record was set. If a litigant offered that 
kind of proof, the onus was on him to provide the witnesses and, if 
the required number could not be found, the proof failed. The pre¬ 
sentation of court witnesses by a litigant was an essential character 
istic of the record. The other litigant had the right to exclude 
all those from being witnesses at a record who were ineligible to 

( 3 ) 

serve as jurymen in an inquest. As with ordinary jurymen, the wit¬ 
nesses took an oath to speak the truth. Seven was the usual number 

(1) Somma de legibus Mormanniae. ed. 1525, vol.ii, p.56-58. 

consuetudinum 

(2) Maurer, Konrad; ”Bas Beweisverfahren nach deutschen Rechten, ” 

printed in Kritische Rundschau , 1857, vol.v,p.551, noue 1. 

(3) See page 97 # 









; * 'i, : ,• 't 

. 

. 

* 

..... 


. 




. j 

. 

. 


. < . , 

l - ■•• • 















lio 


of witnesses for a record, but this number was by no means aacrosanct. 
In addition to the numbers of special cases we have noted above, in 
the king f s court the king and one juryman sufficed for a record. 

A collection of court records of the Exchequer Court reveals that, 
generally, a number of witnesses were favoured, usually more than 
seven. It must be remembered that one dissenting or two ignorant 
witnesses could make a record invalid if their total number was 

(i) 

just seven. 

This Norman and Anglo-Norman record is obviously a special 

( 2 ) 

case of the evidence jury. 


(1) Deiisie, Recueil de Jugements de 1’Echiquier ae Normandie, 

1207-1270. Paris, 1864. Rec. #166, nine witnesses£ 

Rec. #201, ten witnesses; Rec. #84 & 167, eleven wit¬ 
nesses; Rec. #153 and 168, twelve witnesses; Rec.#107, 
thirteen witnesses. 

(2) [plucknett; on cit.,p.i2, makes an interesting point about 
the ”Record n : n . . . and it is possible that the strict insistence 
of the Exchequer officials upon the letter of the Domesday Book, and 
their refusal to allow? it to be questioned, was the beginning 

of the notion of ’record 1 2 as a technical thing. From this one book 
the idea of certain officially compiled documents being beyond 
question seems to have spread to the rolls of the Exchequer, and thence 
to the rolls of the courts of law. If this conjecture is true, then 
’Records 1 must be regarded as financial in origin, and only later 
becoming judicial. n J 






. * 

. 

- 

. 


. 

■ 

. 

. 

• ' * w 

... 

. 

. 

i . 










Ill 


THE TRIAL JURY 


We come now to the closing stages in the development of the 
modern jury, a trial jury, usually held to have been derived from 
a hypothetical combination of the inquest*s evidence jury with the 
"transaction-witnesses” of the record-witnessing procedure, a com¬ 
bination whose ultimate effect was to change the jury completely 
from an evidence-giving body into a fact-judging body. 

Koestiin and Gundermann opposed this theory, pointing out 
that the jurata was already giving verdicts based on evidence 
produced before it. They supported their theory by referring 

(i) 

to the secta in general, and in Particular to their use in 

( 2 ) 

dowry actions. Forsyth followed much the same general argument 

but was not nearly so Laid in his conclusions. He held, for example, 

that the evidence ox a secta had in no sense the force of complete 

proof possessed by the verdict of the evidence-jury. On the other 

hand this evidence did, he held, furnish a necessary supplement to 

the evidence which the inquest-jury was, in theory, supjjosed to 

possess itself, but in actual fact very often didn*t. In this 

capacity it supplied a necessary further step in the development 

( 2 ) 

from evidence-jury to trial-jury. 

Brunner dissented from this view and adhered to the earlier 
view that the origin of the trial jury was to be found in a cornbin- 


(1) Evidence on behalf of the plaintiff to the truth of his claim. 

(2) Gundermann, Bnglisches Privatrecht, 1864, vol.i,pp.597. 

(5) Forsyth, His tor?/ of Trial by Jury, 1852, p.158:”As the use of 
juries became more frequent and the advantages of employing 
them in the decision of disputes more manifest, the witnesses, 
who formed the secta of a, plaintiff, began to give their evidence 
before them and like the attesting witnesses to deeds furnished 
them with that information, which in theory they were supposed 
to possess previously respecting the cause of quarrel. 
















. 




' t 

? . 

. 


. 




. 








. 

* * 






. . . ... 

• • 

, ■ 


; ■ ; • o 


, 





. 


• • t . ... t 





t 

. 

. 














118 


etion of jurors of an evidence jury and the record witnesses. 

From the relationship of secta and jury it appeared to him unlikely 
that the former could have been the origin of the trial jury. 

As in the Frankish and Norman law, so in the English law 
the simple word of the plaintiff was not sufficient to compel 
the defendant to reply to a charge and to defend himself. The 
fore-os/bh played the same part in Anglo-Saxon law as did the 

(i) 

evidence of plaintiff’s witnesses in Norman law. Charges in 

case of murder or wounding obviously needed no witnesses. After 

the Norman Conquest the fore-oath was gradually replaced by the 

Noman practice of using witnesses to support the plaintiff’s 

claim. One of the old records states: H Ho freeman can be forced 

into court or compelled to take the oath by a simple claim, un- 

( 2 ) 

supported by true witnesses brought for that purpose” or ”If 

the plaintiff has no proof it would appear that the defendant 

(S) 

need not defend himself in this or any other action.” 

The body of witnesses brought by the plaintiff to support his 
claim was referred to in English records as secta and was offered 
immediately after the claim was made. While Norman law required 
only one witness, English law demanded several for a simple claim, 
whose testimony had to be in complete agreement for the secta to be 
acceptable. This agreement was established by a judicial examination 


(1) See page 12. 

( 2 ) Fleta, Comment srius Iuris Anglicani. quoted in a reprint by 
Houard: Anciennes Loix des Francois. Rouen 1766, para 2 , vol.ii,63. 

(S) Bracton, H. De legibus et consuetudinibus Angliae. London,1640, 

f.520. 


















■ •' ' - 

. j.-jX 

, . - - ■ 3 - ■' ' - ^ 

» 

. ... ; . • ■ IO . J-' ; - 


. 

. ■- •- ... ■ X; - li - 
... ? - 




■ 

. , . . 


. . ... ! 




ana if no agreement was reached after a second examination, the 
action was postponed indefinitely. 

This evidence by secta was only a necessary support and not 
a full proof of claim. As the -witnesses did not take an oath 
they were not liable to an action for perjury and their evidence 
was therefore regarded as merely creating a presumption and not 
being of itself proof, as was the verdict of an evidence jury. 

The defendant had the right to submit evidence by which the 
probability which the s ecta had given to the claim could be des¬ 
troyed. That the secta could not be considered on an equal foot¬ 
ing with the jury can be seen from the fact that servants and retainers 

could be members of a secta but were excluded from membership in 

( 1 ) 

an inquest jury. Bracton has this to say: ” The secta does not 

form proof but only a weaK presumption which can be defeated by 

counterproof and by defence according to the law. ,f Fleta makes a 

(£) 

similar statement; "The secta gives a minor presumption until proof 
to the contrary is established^ proof to the contrary is made by 
defence according to the law and the law defeats the secta .” The de¬ 
fence according to the law 1 2 referred to is the oath with oath-helpers 
which freed the defendant from the evidence of the secta so long as 
the number of oath-helpers was twice that of the secta . 

Since the Forman law gave the plaintiff also in England a 
procedure by which the probability of his claim was established, it 
followed that the defendant was given the privilege of a secta 
too. English custom placed the two sectae opposite each other and 
that which was regarded as the better one after the judge f s examination 


(1) Ibid , f. 400 b. 

(2) Fleta, Commentsrius Iuris Anglican!, para 9, voi.iv, 16. 

















114 


carried the day. If both were thought to be equal, then other 
members of the community were called and their evidence taken too. 

The secta played a special role in such actions as those 
concerned with dowry. The extreme strictness and the formalism 
of the Common Law was very inappropriate for these actions. This 
may explain why in such cases the secta was used not only to 
provide basis for a claim, but, under certain circumstances, as an 
independent medium of evidence. For example, suppose that a widow 
claimed her dowry and that the original promise of a dowry was 
not denied by defendant who pleaded instead that other and satis¬ 
factory provision had been made for the plaintiff. The members of 
the widow’s secta became her witnesses in the evidence procedure and 
no inquest was held. If the defendant supported his plea with 

U) 

witnesses, the better secta prevailed. The whole secta procedure 
was distinguished by a certain informality and in the case of two 
sectae f acing each other the judge’s discretion was very great indeed. 

But these dowry actions were unique in their completeness. The 
main use of the secta was to initiate proceedings only, and it was 
thus limited to preliminary hearings only. This was the reason for 
the procedure by secta being informal and not having the character 
of the evidence procedure before a jurat a . The evidence of the secta 
and the decision of the jurat a were independent of one another and 
their relationship was like the relationship between the Grand-Jury 
and ordinary jury in modern times. The jurat a was only assembled after 
the members of the secta had supported the plaintiff’s claim. Since, 
also, the members of the secta w r ere not examined in front of the jurat a 


(1) Brae ton, H., op.cit. f.504 b. 





















:o 






. 

•' :iz :io„. ... -J 

- 




















' 













115 


these two institutions had no direct contact. The secta rendered 
its affirmation of the plaintiff*s claim to the judge only end not 
to the jurymen. Koestlin*s and Gundermann*s claim that the secta 
was an element in the development from the evidence jury to trial 
jury, cannot then be maintained. 

As to the place of the witnesses of a record in the trans¬ 
formation of evidence jury to trial jury, the picture is a little 
more promising. 

If the authenticity of a record was challenged the Frankish 
law, and later the Anglo-Norman law, demanded that the litigant 

(i) 

who produced this record should also provide proof for it. 

The special procedure for the providing of this proof was called 

finnatio chartae . Trial by battle was the recognised procedure 

and the champion for the record was Its writer or one of its 

witnesses. This form of proof was still known in England 

( 2 ) 

even in Glanvil*s days. 

After the abolition of trial by battle, proof of a disputed 
record was established by an inquest to which witnesses of the 
record ana the community were summoned by royal writ. The community 
was represented by twelve knights or freemen who gave their evidence 
jointly with the witnesses of the record after being sworn in. The 

( 5 ) 

verdict was a joint verdict of both groups. Such a combination of 

record witnesses and men from the community was known already in 

__ (4) 

the Frankish era, the oldest record, dating from the year 876. 


(1) See page 55. 

(2) Glanvil, Tractatus de Legibus et Consuetudinibus Regni Angliae, 
vol.ii, 3, x,12;"The record is proven by means of a combat.” 

(3) Bracton, H., De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae , f398, para 14. 

(4) Menard, Histoire des Mimes, 7 vols. Paris, 1750. vol i, xl:”The 
court ordered the party who had produced a record to bring five 
men who would affirm the truth of the document, and other witnesses 
from the community. ” 










. 

’ . 

. 

■' ■ - - ft ' , - 

. 

- . - - ft 

- 

* 

. T .... 

, - - - 

; . . . : - - * ■ < ■ ; • ' -• • 1 ; 

. . : • - ' 1 '• '' 

■ ■ - . .. ; : v . .ij ' .'.-.c :> -y. ■ : 

. _ . .... t • 

. . 

.... ft- 

t • 

ft. 5 . 

/ . ; . . • ■ ft.. . . 

yjti 

. 












116 


Here in this sitting together end consulting together of wit¬ 
nesses and jurymen we have the combination of evidence jury and 
witnesses which led ultimately to the trial jury. In the final 
stage, of course, witnesses were excluded from the jury and had 
no more say in the verdict. They merely gave their evidence before 
the jury which then pronounced the verdict. 

The earliest examples of this procedure are found to occur 
about the middle of the fourteenth century. These examples begin 
uniformly with the examination of witnesses of records separately 
before a jury. As time -went on this separate examination was applied 
to all witnesses. John Fortescu in his De laudibus legum Anglias 
(cl460) showed this new procedure in the examination of witnesses 
already fully developed. 

The process of evolution from evidence jury to trial jury was 
not completed in a short time. For over three hundred years the 
jury occupied a dual position, functioning both as evidence jury 
and also as trial jury. Its verdict was based partly on evidence 
submitted to it and partly from the juror*s own knowledge. This 
type of hybrid jury was formally ended by a statute in 1650 by that 
great ender of institutions, Cromwell. In a statute of that year 
the roles of "witnesses and of jurymen were clearly separated the 
one from the other, and the verdict of the jury now was to be re¬ 
turned on the basis only of evidence produced during the proceedings. 
The oath of the members of the jury compelled them to return a true 
verdict according to the evidence obtained. In consequence, the 
judge was no longer allowed to ask jurymen for the reason of their. 












; 

. 

* 












117 


decision, nor was it necessary to select the jurymen from the community. 
The prosecution of jurymen for perjury became impossible since their 
decision had ceased to be evidence and was based entirely on a sub¬ 
jective evaluation of evidence placed before them. 

By the middle of the seventeenth century, then, the English 
trial jury, an institution peculiar to English law, had developed 
roughtly into the form which is familiar to-day. 












118 


FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF THE JURY IN NORMANDY 

The main task of this work - the determination of the origin 
of the English jury - has now been brought to a conclusion and a 
definite chain of evolution established from the Norman recognition 
to the English juries. But since the most obvious fact in the modern 
history of the English jury is that it was uniquely English until the 
French Revolution brought it back to its place of origin, a few words 
may not be inappropriate on the subject of the atrophy of the parent 
institution in French Normandy after 1205. 

After Philip Augustus conquered Normandy he left the province more 
or less untouched as far as its legal system was concerned, merely 
abolishing the office of senechal. The Great Baillies became the 
permanent judges at the assizes and issued any writs for recognitions 
themselves. They were Frenchmen, foreigners in Normandy, who therefore 
had no interest in developing the jury any further along English lines. 
Somewhat naturally they furthered the application of French lew. In 
this aim ohey were partly checked by royal assurances that the indig¬ 
enous law would be preserved. But these guarantees did not allow for 
any further development and as a consequence, Norman law as such ossified. 

At the same time the French version of the jury was introduced, 
a far different institution from the Anglo-Norman jury. Of the several 
types of French inquests, the enqudte par turbe resembled the Norman 
inquest of office and differed from the other French inquests as they 
















































119 


developed during the middle of the thirteenth century. It is proper 
to speak of the middle of the thirteenth century although it is only 
from fourteenth century sources that a. clear picture of the procedure is 

(i) 

obtained. However, a verdict of the Parlement of Paris of 1287 indicates 

clearly that this procedure was firmly established much earlier. In 

and inquest to establish the Common Law it was the rule to let the 

witnesses give their verdict collectively. This communal character 

was also characteristic of the enquete par turbe . 

An ordinance of 1312 gives further important information about 

it. This referred to a type of inquest into local custom which took 

place by order of the Parlement of Paris. If one party to a dispute 

referred to a custom and the other party objected the custom had to 

be established by an individual inquest. Special officials sent 

by the Parlement took a copy of the party ! s assertion with them and 

called on the spot a meeting of prominent and respectable men of 

the community who might be expected to know this particular custom. 

These were then given a copy of the alleged custom whereupon they 

solemnly declared "that they will say and honestly tell what they 

( 2 ) 

may know and believe and may have seen concerning this custom.” 

After this oath they withdrew to discuss the matter amongst them¬ 
selves. Their verdict was announced publicly and had to be supported 
by a further declaration on their part. After this final oath the 
verdict was written down, sealed and sent to the Parlement . 

(1) French Parlements were not parliaments in the English sense. Their 
members were not elected representatives nor did they have 
legislative powers. They were law courts. The Paris Parlement 
had an additional function, that of registering the roysl edicts. 

(2) £Brunner’s text p.387, has ! scient f - will know. A misprint for 
^ f sciant T - may know?_] 












120 


In a compilation, Coutume S tyle et Usage de N ormandie, legal 
norms were often mentioned which had been established by inquest. 

One reason for the frequent use of the inquest was the fact that 
the foreign judges who staffed the Norman courts after 1205 were 
ignorant about the native law and therefore. that the Common Law 
had to be proven continually by inquest, an expensive matter for 
litigants. 

A 

Apart from the enquete par turbe, the jury, as it was used 
in France generally, became slowly established in Normandy. In 
the French jury witnesses were interrogated by the judge singly and 
often in camera while their answers were gradually rejected unless 
they knew from their own direct experience about the matter to be 
proven. This was very different from the Anglo-Norman procedure 
in which hearsay evidence was accepted and the knowledge of the 
juryman from his own direct experience was not required. This 
searchingly inquiring character of the French procedure as it 
became established in Normandy became more and more important. 

The evidence jury for which witnesses -were allowed to give evidence 
based on hearsay became less and less used, and the French form 
of inquest, called inguesta » w r here witnesses had to have direct 
knowledge on matters about which they gave evidence, became more 
popular. The evidence jury, which, by its very nature, severely 
constrained the judge f s part^did not fit at all into the later Norman 
legal system, in which thejudge possessed plenary powers of verdict¬ 
granting on all questions w T hether of fact or of law. An exception 

a 

to this exaltation of the judge was the enquete per turbe , concerned 
as it w T as with interpretation of Common Law. When the compilation of 


the Norman 







. . • 




, ■ i .. . 


. 


. 

, 

.... •. - • . • 

. 







121 


Coutume began in 1577, very few legal minds had any understanding 
of the operation of the older French jury. Finally in 1667 the 
Qrdonnance Civile of that year abolished the enquete par turbe 
which had passed out of use long before, the Redaction Officielle 
de Coutume of 1585 making no mention of it. 

In the beginning of this chapter it was mentioned that Philip 
Augustus guaranteed to the Formans the continuity of their own 
institutions, including their legal system. Following this idea 
the faction was developed that the French king reigned in Normandy 
only as duke of Normandy. The Normans themselves maintained that 
the union with France was personal rather than organic and that 
their laws and customs continued in full force. But the preservation 
of this system of law depended mainly upon the judicial activities 
of the Norman Exchequer and this was occupied almost entirely 
with the administration of French ordinances, national in their scope, 
the purely Norman law began to wither on the vine. The few edicts 
which specifically applied to Normandy during the thirteenth century 
played a very minor part in the development of the law. There is no 
evidence of specific legislation implementing Philip Augustus 1 s 
guarantee of 1205 and designed to preserve the Norman law. 

But certain particular collections give, when taken together, 
a reasonable picture of customary Norman law. There is first of all 
the Statuta et Consuetudines Kormann iae ( Etablissements et Coutumes 
de Normandie ). This consisted of two, originally separate, parts; 
the Tres Ancienne Coutume de Normandie , the French title is Brunner’s, 
which was probably written during the Anglo-Norman period, and an 
independent tract, Tractatus de brevibus et recognitionibus, a treatise 


on the Norman recognitions procedure, written shortly after 1218 






















. 

■ 

V ■- 

* 









\ 

















122 


A collection of verdicts of the Norman Exchequer, mainly during 

the years 1207 to 1245, also gives us a clear picture of the laws 

of the period. A related source is the As sisiae Normanniae, a private 

collection of verdicts rendered by the assizes of Caen, Baieux, 

( 1 ) 

Falaise, Exmes, and Avranches . The main depository of Norman i#w 

is the Somme de legibus consuetudinum Normanni ae, an anonymous but 

( 2 ) 

masteriul compilation written some time between 1270-1275. 

The Norman law as w r e see it in the above sources seems very 
archaic when compared to the English law which developed from the 
same roots. Anglo-Nonan law in England, a mighty arm for the extension 
of the royal authority, was tremendously developed by many and far- 
reaching royal, ordinances after the separation of Normandy from England, 
while in Normandy further native legal development came almost to a 
standstill, when the local ruling family was replaced by an alien 
ruler and when native officials were replaced by foreigners. 

This change was at one and the same time the easier to male and the 

more deeply felt by the Normans since in Anglo-Norman days the duke 

and his officials had become the main vehicle of the judicature 

through the magnificent reforms of Henry II. And yet Indigenous 

Norman law had still sufficient strength to maintain itself for a 

while against the competition of the more modern French law, even 

though the latter had behind it the whole prestige of the royal authority. 

The development of Norman law was not only thwarted by the 
abolition of the office of seneschal (chief justice) but also by 
the growing practice of transferring actions from Norman courts 

(1) M.A.J.Marnier, Assises de Normandie in Etablissements et Coutumes 

Assises et Arr€ts de l^chiquier de Normandie au XIII siecle. 

Peris, 1859. Nsrnkoenig—Stein, Assisiae Normanniae, in vol.2 of his 
Franz. Staats-und Rechtsgeschichte, Basel, 1846. 

(2) Somma de legibus consuetudinum Normanniae, ed by Ludewig, Pelpzig, 
1726. There is an early 16th century French translation: C-rand 
COutumier de Normandie , ed# ^ Francois Regnault, Paris, 1525. 



















■ 

. 

* 


















. 

. 








125 


to the Paris Psrlement, a step which greatly reduced the prestige 
of the Norman Exchequer. Local patriotism caused many bitter 
complaints about the emasculation of their native judicature. This 
was in fact a general tendency of the French monarchy and the 
abuses of the centralised French bureaucracy gave rise to a general 
unrest in many parts of France at the beginning of the fourteenth 
century to such a degree that Louis X had to retreat before the unrest 
and restore many local privileges. Normandy benefitted from this 
and obtained in 1515 the well-known Chsrte aux Norma iris in which 
the king promised full maintenance of ancient Norman freedoms and 
privileges. This charter was confirmed by the king T s successors 
on many occasions. It plays a similar role in Normandy - if one can 
compare something smaller with something greater - to that of 
Magna Carta in England. 

In spite of the struggle for the ancient laws and privileges, 
the weight of the French crown, supporting as it did the doctrines 
of an alien law, brought about important changes, particularly 
in legal procedure. The 1 Somma * is still free from those changes 
but they appear, surprisingly, in the verdicts of the Exchequer 
towards the end of the thirteenth century and provide proof that 
a grim adherence to ancient customs retarded, the development of 
the native law without being able in the least to prevent the invasion 
of the foreign law. As the conflict went on any deeper under¬ 
standing of the national law was gradually lost. This is shown in 
the insistence upon the continuance of outmoded minor forms, partic¬ 
ularly the Clameur de Haro and the summary procedure based upon 


































































124 

. (1) 

it . While this antiquated formality was carefully preserved 
in Normandy, the jury, a product of the native soil, was allowed 
to disappear under the very eyes of the Normans without anyone 
noticing it. A somewhat similar alien procedure, the enquete par 
turbe, was allowed to push it aside so completely that at the end 
it was not even necessary to formally abolish the obsolete native 
institution, so completely had the foreign law displaced the 
native. 

The change became noticeable first in the verdicts of the 

( 2 ) 

Exchequer which have been recorded continuously since 1536 . 

If they are compared to the English f yearbooks 1 of the same years, 
a very discerning eye is required to detect traces of the original 
common basis of Norman and English law. Far more noticeable are 
the innovations which were destined to overwhelm even the spirit 
of the ancient law. 

(1) Rollo,first Norman duke of Normandy, was supposed to have 

ordered that in case of danger his name should be called: 

Hal Rouj This cell would bring the neighbours to the rescue. 
Diez's etym. dictionary, vol.il, p.541, explpxins the word ' hero y 
to mean ' hieher 1 (come hither). This somewhat legendary 
Clamour de Haro became the watchword for the Norman autonomy 
movement. It tried to keep the Normans watchful against the 
encroachments of a foreign law. Indeed, until 1789 no law was 
promulgated in Normandy without the meaningless provision; 
non obstant clameur de hero et charte Normsnde . 

‘It may be of obscure interest that the Clameur de Haro is still 
retained in the law of the Channel Islands, the last remnant of 
the Norman patrimony of the English crown^ 

(2) A number of verdicts of the 14th century can be found in ch.79 
of Coutume, Style et Usage aux temps des Echiquiers de Normandie 

(in Memoires de la Societe des Antiquaires de Normandie , 27 vols 
1869). 

























. 






























125 


Later Norman law can be consulted in a number of glossaries 

(i) 

and collections of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. In 
these collections the jury is described as still existing but 
limited in use. But as we have noticed the official Coutume 
Normande of 1585 omits any mention of the jury. As far as the 
authorities were then concerned, the institution had ceased to 
exist. From this time on the history of the Norman law merges 
with that of the French law and has no further bearing on the 
question of the origin of the jury, 

(1) [The principal source of Norman law in French time is the 

Grand Coutumier du pays et duche de Normandie published in 
Paris in 1525, and declared in its subtitle to be n very 
useful and profitable to all practitioners. 0 
This appears to have been a printing of a sort of Norman 
legal encyclopaedia of the preceding century, containing 
not only customary law with a contemporary exegesis but 
also legal texts and commentaries from earlier periods. 

The principal, sources to which Brunner refers as his author¬ 
ities here are): 

1. Stllle de ; :.TQceder en pays de Normandie , a much used 
and often edited, rewritten and re-edited description 

of procedural rule, which took its final form only during 
the second half of the 15th century. It is reprinted 
in this form in an appendix to the Grand Coutumier . 

2. The Glossary to the Grand Coutumier which attempted to 
explain the Norman laws of the Grand Coutumier by comparisons 

with foreign laws. This glossary is later than the Stille 

de proceder 9 but is still of 15th century origin. 

5. A commentary to the Grand Coutumier published in 1504 
bypGuillaume Le Kouille d*Aleneon. D , Aleneon * l 2 * * 5 s comments 
were principally by way of reference end, comparison to 
the Roman and Canon law, 

jin addition to these references for the Grand Coutumier Brunner 
repeats his reference to Couture, Style and Usages au temp s 
des Echiquiers de Normandie, and adds a reference to Terrien, 
Guillaume, Commentaires du droit civil tant public que prive 
de NormandieT (X5 74~Vl 
























. • 





. 














. 




















THE JURY AND THE CRIMINAL LAV 


So far in this study the overwhelming emphasis had been on 
the developments of type of jury for civil procedures, since it 
is by way of the procedures in civil actions that a chain of 
development can be traced from a parent form in the inquest vro- 
cecure before the Frankish royal courts. But in modern procedures 
juries are predominantly concerned w 7 ith criminal actions and their 
use has tended to atrophy in civil actions. It will, therefore, 
be necessary for the completion of this investigation to notice 
hew and when earlier criminal procedures were changed by the admission 
of the jury to the criminal actions. The bridge seems to have 
been the condemnation of the various ordeals by the Fourth Lateran 
Council in 1215, wherein the church forbade its priests to take 
part in the rites of the ordeal. This condemnation was sufficient 
for all Western European and Catholic countries. Without ary 
further domestic legislation the ordeals fell to the ground. 

In the earliest Teutonic law criminal proceedings could be 

instituted only if an injured party made a claim in accordance with 

the formal procedures laid down by the Common Law. In early Frankish 

times, however, one car discern an enlargement of this elementary 

form in the comoetence granted to certain officials to initiate 

( 1 ) 

proceedings by way of prosecution . But official action even here 
was limited by the Common Law evidence procedure, and the official 
was estopped in his action if he could not obtain a claim from the 
injured party to support it. He could proceed without this support 
(V) fin Anglo-Saxon law it was the shire reeve, later known e.s sheriff.1 

























. 


. 















, 

























. 












V 

„ 


127 


only in the case of actions against known criminals or against 
someone *caught red-handed 1 2 3 in his crime. 

The meagreness of this procedure as a protection to the 
interests of the crown was improved by the introduction into 

(i) 

Frankish law and into Anglo-Saxon law, probably in the time 

( 2 ) 

of Ethelred , of an institution after 1166 known as the 'accusing 
(S) 

jury* 

The accusing jury was a body of men of good character in 
a community whose duties were to inform the itinerant justices 
of breaches of the law or of the presence of suspected characters 
in the district. 'While some form, of this accusing jury existed 
in England in Anglo-Saxon times, nevertheless its duties were 
sharply modified after the Norman Conquest to accord with the form 
of the accusing jury as it existed in Normandy. This institution 
proved itself so powerful that its ’’bills of indictment’ 1 had the 
effect of banishment. The Assizes of Clarendon of 1166 state that 
”in every county twelve men of every hundred and four men of every 
township are to swear that they will make true answers to questions 
1 whether any man is reputed to have been guilty of crimes such as 
murder, robbery, larceny, or harbouring criminals 1 . Those accused 
go to the ordeal but even successful there, they must abjure the 
realm.” The Assize of Northampton of 1172 has the same provision 


(1) Dove, R., ”Untersuchungen ueber die Sendgerichte”, Zeitschrift 
fuer Deutsches Recht, vol. xix, 252, 567. 

(2) page 12 and 68 f. ^footnote). 

(3) (From rules concerning the feud, laid down by Edmund in the middle 
of the 10th century and other rules as late as 1100 we can see 

that the feud existed side by side with the newer institution 
of the accusing juryj 





































128 


( 1 ) 

but the list of crimes is longer 

Eut the essential point in this develojjment is not the power 

of the accusing jury, but the progression marked by its institution. 

By it, susjjected persons could be compelled to submit to a Common 

Law evidence procedure without the necessity of a private claim being 

laid. Documents to that effect go back as far as Pippin in the 780 T s. 

Under threat of trial by ordeal for neglecting their duty a number 

of the prominent men of the community took the oath before the count, 

acting as judge, to inform on any criminals in the district. If they 

failed to do their duty, it was considered that they had. broken 

their oath and they had then to cleanse themselves through ordeal. 

Failure to do so meant for a laymen a fine eauivalent to his vergeld, 

‘(2) 

while for a priest the fine was twice as high . The legal basis 

for the performance of accusing duties was the general allegiance 

owed by &-subject to his king. The Capitulg de instruction s missorum 
(5) 

of 828 refer to the duty of selected men from the community to 

report to the missi dominici any misuse of their office on the part 

~ - ( 4 ) 
of bishops and counts. An instruction of Charles the Bald of 855 , 

directed to the west Frankish part of the realm which included the 

later Normandy gives yet more information about the use of these 

accusers. The work of the missi dominici in Normandy, so close to 

Rollo ? s conquest, led Lapperiberg to believe that the accusing jury 


(1) ]Jhe text of this paragraph is still, as throughout, adapted 
from Brunner, but the remark about the powder of the accusing 
jnry and the citations from the Assizes of Clarendon and 
Northampton are from Pollock and Maitland: The History ox English 
Law, Cambridge University Press, 1911, vol.i, p,152j 

(2) Capitulere Secreti ores, of Pippin, para. 6. 

Capitularien im Lengobardenreic h, pp.156. 

(5) Hertz, Monumental Germa.nniae Historie s Leges, 2 vols. Hannover, 
1855/7, p.528. 

(4) Ibid, vol.i, p.424. 



















.. 

























* 



. , 
















129 


(D 

of Norman England had its origin in the similar Frankish institution . 

Later Norman sources do not mention this particular kind of jury in 

greet detail but the ’Somma 1 2 3 refers to notoriety as the necessary 

prerequisite for an action ex officio against criminals. Regino 

of Pruem, in his description of the procedure of the missi dominiei , 

written after 906, mentions the accusing jury. The heading of 

chapter two of the second volume reads: De luratoribus Synodi . 

It appears to be the earliest documentary mention of the term 

( 2 ) 

iuratores for the witnesses in inquest procedure 

Documents of the thirteenth century show accusing juries 
supporting not only judges but also sheriffs in minor police 
matters. The interests of the Crown in all cases were visibly 

( 5 ) 

dominant . The accusing jury dealing with crimes was initially 
a royal institution, an annex to the inquest of office, dealing 
with infractions of Crown rights. The king’s treasury was as 
important as the prosecution of crimes, if not more so. 

It was a peculiar characteristic of the accusing procedure 
in England that it was linked with the collective responsibility of 
the community in any given district. It has been suggested that 
the origins of the jury system are to be found in this collective 
responsibility aspect of the accusing jury. But this line of 
speculation proves very quickly, upon investigation, to be a 
barren one. The functions of the accusing jury were completed when 
the accusation was made, and they had no further part in any process 

(1) Lappenberg, Geschichte von England, vol.ii, 4. 

(2) Regino of Pruem, De Synodalibus Ogusis et Disciplinis 
Ecclesiasticis, 2 vols., ed. by Vasserschleben, 1840, p.207. 

(3) LPlucknet-t; op. cit. In 1301 Edward I caused justice to be 
done to malefactors in order to recoup the expenses of twenty 
years of war, they thereby amassed great treasure.”-, 
































■ 

. 


. 



































- 

' 






130 


arising out of their accusation, neither in the presentation of 
evidence, nor in the judgement of evidence, nor in the preparation 
of a verdict. If anything, their function is to be compared to 
the earlier oath-helpers, a. community judgement of character or 
presumption of fact to be judged by others. It is true, of course, 
that a principle of collective responsibility is common to both 
the accusing jury and the modern trial jury, but beyond this 
connection no argument can be made. If any other argument were 
needed it can easily be found in the fact that the accusing jury 
flourished in Normandy after its reconquest by France, while the 
recognitions procedure, the true parent of the trial jury, withered 
away in the French law. 

The one definite characteristic of the accusing jury was 
that the verdict, invariably referred to as "presentment” or 
"indictment" was always pronounced by the jurors in a sort of 
choral reading in unison. No examination of witnesses took place; 
the jurors were faced immediately with the formal questions as to 
the state of the crime in their community as soon as they had taken 
their oath, and persons accused by them then cleared themselves 
either through ordeal or, later, by means of an evidence jury. 

Connections have been noted between the modern American Grand 
jury and the accusing jury. It is true that this modern jury is 
a species of accusing jury, but it developed, not from the accusing- 
jury we have just noticed, but from the Grand Inquest, first mentioned 
in the fourteenth century. The Grand Inquest was selected from a 
whole county and consisted in the first place of twenty-four men, a 
number which was later reduced to twenty-three. The Grand Inquest 
was a type of accusing jury, but its procedure differed from the 
older jury in that while the older institution acted on the basis 






































. 








151 


of its own knowledge the Grand Inquest heard evidence end, if it 
felt that the evidence warranted it, issued bills of indictment 
against persons charged before it. There is thus no connection 
between the Grand Inquest and the accusing jury. 

In addition to the accusing jury, thirteenth century A nglo- 
Norman law also included a procedure for evidence juries in criminal 
actions. These juries had existed before the abolition of ordeals 
and were not brought into being by this development. But it is 
probably true to say that the abolition of ordeals enormously furthered 
the development of the evidence jury, since the evidence jury was 
the only institution at hand to replace the ordeal. 

In view of the general principles underlying the old form of 
criminal procedure, it was not possible to use the evidence jury 
unconditionally. The evidence of witnesses was in Common Law 
not sufficient to convict a personj it merely initiated either an 
ordeal or a trial by battle. However, the evidence jury came into 
criminal procedure by way of pleas, by the f back door* so to speak. 

If the accused agreed to submit to the verdict of an evidence jury, 
its use was admissible. This was often the case when there were 
severs! pleas offered by the accused which in the formal procedure 
of the Common Law were not allowed. If the verdict of the jury 
confirmed the assertions of the accused, the plaintiff f s accusation 
was then rejected. 

Another case of the use of the evidence jury was the instance 
of & person summoned before the sheriff because of a private accusation. 
He then could obtain a royal writ for an inquest which might avoid 
his being imprisoned until his trial. The sheriff summoned a jury 
to find out whether or not the action was brought because of hate or 


. 

, 

' 


, 


. 

. 


s 

* 

. 






. 




• o 








. 


* 


malice and, if the jury found so, the accused was allowed to go 
free but had to guarantee on penalty of death to appear in 
Court for the trial. In view of the limited jurisdiction of the 

f 

sheriff, the final decision was reserved for the itinerant justices 1 
court. If the sheriff’s jury decided that the action was not based 
on malice or hate, the accused then had to undergo imprisonment 
until the time of his trial, although he could, if he wished, avoid 
the action by submitting himself to an ordeal. 

This earlier limitation of the inquest’s competence to questions 
only of hate or malice on the part of the accuser were later removed 
and its competence became general. During; the reign of John, examples 
became more frequent of the accused denying a charge and applying for 
an inquest to be held in which a jury would decide his innocence or 
guilt. Such a privilege was granted by the king, normally, in return 
for a sum of money. Article 56 of Magna Carta said: "nothing should 
be taken or received from a person who requests a writ for an inquest 
in matters affecting life and limb." This passage is very important 
since it established the right of an accused for a writ of inquest 
and removed thejgrant from the discretion of the king. We have noted 
earlier that Henry II made the recognitions procedure, which used the 
evidence jury in civil actions, generally available? as a right rather 
than as a privilege. 

From then on the calling ox an evidence jury became a general 
practice in criminal as well as civil actions and attempts were made 
to compel the accused to submit to a jury. Officially, however, the 
principle was maintained that the accused requested an inquest and 
the principle of the Common Law was left intact. However means 










t’ 

. 








- * 






t 

. 








. 

. 

. 























- 

4W!? 


.. 

.. . ‘*:viy.£ »a'. 

. 


• -■ •• — ■ * : - 




, 

: . _ : ' • ‘ ■ ; " • : - 4 , 





, 






is; 


existed - and were used - to ’encourage* the suspect to make such 
a request; he could be kept in strict confinement, barefoot, without 
headgear, to spend days and nights on the bare floor, to have his 
food restricted to bread one day and water the next. This treatment 
could be continued until the suspect agreed to submit to the verdict 
of an evidence jury. In mitigation of this somewhat cruel procedure 
it must be noted that the Common Law did not know the institution 
of torture and that the imprisonment of the suspect was usually quite 
short. However, chronicles refer to rare cases where a prisoner was 
so stubborn that he preferred to starve to death rather than submit, 
but normally his request for a jury came fairly soon. Procedures of 
this kind - reminiscent of the Norman vel quasi consensu i nquest 
were the same in England and Normandy except that in the latter country 
the prisoner could not be kept longer than a year and a day. 

After the re-union of Normandy with France the royal writ xor an 
inquest remained & royal privilege in Normandy while in England it 
became a right. Gradually, the practice in Normandy was to grant 
a writ for an inquest in criminal actions only when both parties 
requested it. ¥e can see here again the general hostility of the 
French judiciary to the use of the jury. In civil actions it was 
the inquest by jury into matters of interpretation of theCommon 
Law which lasted longest and then only because the Frenehking had 
guaranteed Normandy’s customary law. 

The French practice in Normandy of requiring both parties to 
an action to agree to the holding of an inquest did not apply to 
the case of aecusation by an official. Here accused had a unique 
right to an inquest. Further, he could be convicted only by inquest. 





. 0..; T 

.. . i^ ...'. J •• • . . . . 

• : 

» 

. 


- 

.... : ...... • 

■ 

. 

:... . i .. 

. 

. 

. 

. 







134 


Hence, if he refused to avail himself of this alleged privilege 

the official accused was estopped in his action and accused went 

free I Hence a saying was current in Normandy: "It is only a 

fool who would submit to an inquest". Needless to say the French 

crown did not long permit such a condition of anarchy to exist. 

An ordinance of Louis IX declared that the judge could order an 

( 1 ) 

inquest be held if the suspect refused to request one . The judge 
was, however, forbidden to sentence the accused to death, and could 
only ban him from his district if the accused were found guilty. 

It should be noted that this was only an administrative measure and 
not a sentence in the proper sense since a trial according to 
Common Law had not taken place. French criminal proceedings grad¬ 
ually moved away from the principles of the older inquest and hard 
in hand with this move, went a decline of the evidence jury in favour 
of an inquiry held by the judge alone. 

As the evidence jury in civil actions, so the jury in criminal 
actions declined in Normandy after her reunion with France and the 
further development of the jury was continued solely in England. 


(1) "Etablissemens de S.Louys", vol.ii. 16. In appendix to Joinville’s 
Histoire de S, Louys , ed. De Fresne du Cange, Paris, 1668. 














. 






155 


CONCLUSION 


So much for Brunner, peace be upon his ashes. How have 
his researches, made in the late 1860’s, fared in the middle 1950’s? 
In two words, fantastically well. The ghost of the old Prague 
professor must every so often wag his beard in emphatic satisfaction 
at tne utter rout of his rivals. Koestlin, Gundermann, the Maurer 
trio, all are forgotten and Brunner reigns unique and supreme. More, 
at the end of everything the o3_d man is ca.pa.ble of inspiring in his 
readers a sort of frustrated and annoyed yet affectionate admiration 
which must be unique in the history of historiography. Theodore 
Piucknett, the latest in a long line of text—book writers on the 
history of English law, bears tribute to this odd capacity of 
Brunner’s when he speaks with tolerant amusement of ’’the famous 


researches of Brunner”: 


The history of the jury has now been settled by the famous 
researches of Brunner ... This history certainly goes back 
to the early ninth century when we find the emperor Louis 
the Pious, son and successor of Charlemagne, ordering in 829 
that for the future the royal rights shell not be ascertained 
through the production of witnesses, but by the sworn state¬ 
ment of the best and most credible people of the district. (l) 

The echo of Brunner is obvious. Like Brunner, Piucknett rejects 

all such possible Anglo-Saxon origins for the jury as the doomsmen 

of the ancient communal courts or the oatth-helpers or compurgators; 

( 2 ) 

his reasons for this rejection are a repetition of Brunner’s 


JT) Piucknett, T., A Concise History of the Common Law , 4th edition, 

London, Butterworth and Co., 1948, pp. 106-7. 

(2) Ibid .» pp. 105-6, Cf'. page 65. 

















* 




- 











156 


The famous twelve thegns of Ethelred f s law ere cited by him, but 
he rejects the Vantage Law as an origin of the jury for much the 


same reasons that all modern English scholars except Miss Hurnard 

( 1 ) 

reject it . Brunner said it all before them. 

The standard modern authorities on the history of theEnglish 

( 2 ) 

law T are the works of Pollock and Maitland and of Holdsworth 
A few quotations taken almost at random from these two writers are 
self-evident confirmation of the continuing adhesion of English 
legal historians to what might be termed the Brunner thesis of the 
origin of the English jury: 

That we the English received from the cNormans a contribution 
of Frankish ideas and customs is indubitable. 

The English jury has been so highly prized by Englishmen, 
so often copied by foreigners, that its origin has been sought 
in many different directions. At the present day, however, 
there can be little doubt as to the quarter to which we 
ought to look. We must look to the Frankish incmisitio. the 
prerogative rights of the Frankish kings. We see it in the 
Frankish empire of the ninth century, we see it in the Neustria 
v T hich the Normans are invading ... on the whole v r e may say 
that, but for the conquest of England, it would have perished .. 
Such is now the prevailing opinion, and it has triumphed in 
this country over the natural disinclination of Englishmen 
to admit that this "palladium of our liberties" is in its origin 
not English but Frankish, not popular but royal ... It is 
certain that of the inquest of office or of the jury of trial 
the Anglo-Saxon dooms give us no hint, certain also that by 
no slow process of evolution did the doomsmen or oath-helpers 
become recognitors. (5) 

The jury when first it makes its appearance in England, is, in 
essence a body of neighbours summoned by some public officer 
to give, up)on oath, a true answer to some questions. (4) 


Xl) Ibid . pages 9 and 11, also page 63. 

(2) Pollock and Maitland; A History of the English Law 7 , Cambridge 
University Press, 5 ed. 1911 2 vols. Holdsworth, V.S. 

A History of the English Law, Methuen, London, 5 ed. 1951, 13 vols. 

(3) Ibid , p. 140, 141. 

(4) Ibid. P.117 









* 












, 

. 

. . 



























» 






. 










157 


It is this institution, the Frankish inquest, which is the 
aroot from which the English jury springs, (l) 

More recently, Miss Naomi Hurnard has attempted to adduce 

the famous twelve thegns of Ethelred's Law as authority for some 

sort of a beginning for the jury in Anglo-Saxon days. National 

myths die hard] Brunner had clearly noticed this passage and 

rejected it as any such authority. Holdsworth almost echoes 

Brunner: 

Except the passage about the accusing thegns in Ethelred*s 
law there seems to be nothing in the Anglo-Saxon laws, 
secular or ecclesiastical, which suggest a jury. This single 
passage from Ethelred*s law does not carry us very far. It 
may be that siich an institution might have developed into a 
jury but it does not necessarily point to the existence of 
any similar institution. ¥e must conclude . . . that though 
there may be more than one possible origin of the jury, though 
England may have been prepared for its introduction, it was 
definitely introduced by the Norman kings. (2) 

In Germany as in England, Brunner*s thesis is still accepted. 

Heinrich Mitteis has written a history of German law r comparable in 

its German reputation to that of Plucknett in England. In this text 

Mitteis expounds the Brunner thesis and considers Brunner to be the 

(5) 

sole authority on the subject . Schwerin-Thieme, the author of 
another German text of equal reputation, echoes the Brunner thesis 
when he states: 

...the procedure of obtaining evidence by inquest in Frankish 

law was the root of the English evidence jury and the trial jury.(4) 

(1) Holdsworth, i, p. 512.”" 

(2) Ibid , i. p.515 

(5) Mitteis, H. Deutsche Rechtsgeschichte , Munich, 4 ed. 1956. p.74,75. 
(4) Schwerin-Thieme, Grandzuege der Deutschen Rechtsgeschichte, Berlin, 

4 ed. 1950, p. 102. 






















■ 



































138 


In Germany, too, as might be expected, a dissenting voice 
has been raised. Ernst Meyer has attempted, with some apparent 

a) 

success, to modify the Brunner thesis . Unfortunately his work 
has been unobtainable during the writing of this thesis and about 
all that can be said of it here is that while Plucknett regards 
Meyer as significant he has not, in Plucknett f s opinion, upset 
Brunner. This essay must therefore end on the tantalizing note 
that those who may still be dissatisfied with Brunner f s conclusions 
must commence their criticism, of Brunner with an examination of the - 
at present to this writer - unknown Mayer. 


71} Mayer,E. Ge schwor ene ngerichte and Inquisitions prozess, Munich, 

IS16, Duneker and Humboit. 





























- 


* 




















List of Primary Sources mentioned in concise form 
in the text* 


Affo Storie della citta di Parma . Parma 1792. 

Anciennes Constitutions du Chatelet de Paris ed. de Lauriere. Paris 1699. 

"Anciens Usages d’Artois” in Coutumes generates d’Artois avec des 
notes par M. Adrien Maillart Seconde edition. Paris 1756. 

e 

Ancienes Usages inedits d’An.jou publies d f apres un muse, du XIII siecle 

par M.A.J.Marnier. Paris 1855. 


Assises de la Eaisse Cour de Jerusalem . Les Livres des assises et des 
usages dou deume de Jerusalem, sive leges et institute regni 
Hierosolimitani ed. E.A.Kausler. Stuttgart 1839. 

Assises de la Haute Cour de Jerusalem . Recueil des historiens des 
Croisades. Lois. Assises de Jerusalem ou recueil des ouvrages 
de jurisprudence composes pendant le XIII e siecle dans les royaumes 
de Jerusalem et de Chypre. Tome premier. Ass. de la H.C.publ.par 
M. le comte Beugnot. Paris 1841. 

”Assises de Normandie” in Btablissements et Coutumes, Assises et Arrets 
de I’Fxhicuier de Normandie au Xllf^ldecl e ... par M.A.J.Marnier 
Paris 1839, Pages 87 ff. 

”A„ssisiae Normanniae” in Warnkonig-iStein Franzoesische Staats-und 
Rechtsgeschichte. Basel 1846 -1848, Vol. II, Documents pages 
48 ff. 

Beaumanoir Les Coutumes du Beauvoisis publ. par M.le comte Geugnot. 

2 vols. Peris 1842. 

Beyey Urkunderibuch zur Geschichte aer mittelrheinisehen Territorien . 

2 vols. Coblenz 1860 - 65. 

Bouquet Recueil des historiens des Geules et de le France V-IX. Peris 

1744-1757. 

Bourdot de Richebourg Nouveau Coutumier general ou corps des coutumes 
generates et particulieres de France . 4 vols. Paris 1724. 

Boutaric Actes du gar lenient de Paris I vol. Paris 1865 (Archives de 
1’Empire. Inventaires et Documents.) 

Bracton Henrici de Bracton de legibus et consuetudinibus Angliae libri 
quinque . London 1640. 

Britton The French text carefully revised with an English translation 

introudction and notes by Francis Morgan Nichols. 2 vol. Oxford 1865. 

Brussel Nouvel Examen de 1’usage general des fiefs en France pendant le 
XI e , le XII fe "r~le" X TTI fe "et le XIV e s iecle . 2 vols. Paris 1727. 































, 




• , 

. 











. 


















. 

. 












2 


Campi Del^istoria eccles. di Piacenza . Piacenza 1652* 

Carli Delle Antichita italiche . 1-4. Milano 1790-95. 

Cartulaire de Baieux, Liber niger capituli Baiocensis, Antiquus 
Cartularius eccl. Baioc. Manuscript. 

Cartulaire du chs.pitre de Coutances, Mnscr. 

Cartulaire de l f Abbsye de la Sant Trinite de Rouen. Certularium 
monasterii S. Trinitatis de Monte Rothomagi publ. par A Deville 
in the collection de Cartulaires de France III. Paris 1841 in 
appendix Guerard Cartulaire de S. Bertin. Collection de Socuments 
inedits. 

Cartulaire de Montebourg. Chartularium Montisburgense, Mnscr. 
Bibliotheque Rationale, fonds latin 10087. 

Cartulaire de Philippe Auguste. Registrum Philippi Augusti. Mnscr. 
Archives Nationalss JJ. 26. 

Cartulaire de Redon en Brltagne publ. par De Courson. Paris 1865. 

Coll, de doc. ined. 

Cartulaire de Saint Andre de Gauffer . Mns cr. 

Cartulaire de Saint Pierre de Preaux . Mnscr. 

Cartulaire de Saint Victor de Marseille publ.par Guerard. 2 vols. 

Paris 1857. Coll, de doc. ined™ 

Cartulaire de Saint Vincent de Macon publ, par Ragut. Macon 1864. 

Cartulaire de Savigni. Liber cartarum domus Savign. in episcopatu 
Abrincensi, Mnscr. 

Cartulaire de Troarn. Chartularium Troarnense, Mnscr. Bibliotheque 
Rationale fonds latin 10086. 

Cheruel Histoire de Rouen pendant l^poque communale suivie de pieces 

.justificatives . 2 vols. Rouen 1843-44. 

Chronicon Jocelini de Brakelonda de rebus gestis Samsonis abbatis 

monasterii sancti Edmundi ed. J.G.Rokwode. London 1840. 

Chronicon monasterii de Abingdon ed. by Jos. Stevenson. 2 vol. 1858. 

Rerum Britannic arum Scriptores or Chronicles end Memorials of 
England etc. 

Codex Laureshamensis diplomaticus . 5 vols. Mannhemii 1768, 

Coke Institutes of the Laws of England . S vol. London 1317. The 

first part (1 Inst.) with additions by Hargrave and Butler vol. I, XI. 
The second part (2 Inst.) exposition of many ancient and other statutes 
vol. Ill, IV. 

Collection Lechaude vol. 1 -20. Mnsc. 





































3 


Compilatio de usibus et consuetutiinibus Andegavie . (Foreword). 

Compilatio de usibus et consuetudinibus Andegavie . See” Anciens Usages. 
d»Anjou. /J 

”Consuetudines usitate in insulis de Guernercyo et Jerseyo Diversitantes 
a consuetudine Normannie” in Memoires de la Societe des 
Antiquaires de Normandie XV . 207, col. b. 

"Coutumes tenues toutes notoires et jugees au Chatelet de Paris” in 
the Coutume de Paris commented par Julien Brodeau. 2 vols. Paris 
1658, 1669. 

”Coutume Style et Usage aux temps des Echiquiers de Normandie” publ. by 
M.L. ^de Valgoger Caen 1847 (Older Stile). In the Memoires de la 
Societe des Ant, de Norm . XVIII. 

”Coutumier de la Vicomte y de I’Eau de Rouen” by Beaurepaire De la Vicomte 
de l^-au de Rouen et de ses coutumes au XIII e et au XIV e siecle. 

Coutumier de Pi car die . Ancien Cuut. de Pic. publ. per M.A.J. Marnier. 

Peris 1840. 

De Fontaines Le Conseil de Pierre de Fontaines ou traite de l^ncienne 
jurisprudence francaise, new edition, publ. par M.A.J.Marnier. 

Paris 1846. 

De La Rue Essais hlstorique sur la ville de Caen et son arrondissemer.it . 

2 vols. Caen 1820. Rreuves. 

Delisle Cartulaire Normand de Philippe Auguste. Louis VIII. Saint Louis 
et Philippe-le-Hardi . Caen 1852. Extrait du tome XVI des memoires 
de la Societe des Antiquaires de Normandie. 

Delisle Histoire du Chateau it des Sires de S. Sauveur-le-Vicomte, 
Valognes 1867. Appendix with pieces justificatives. 

0 , gi g 

Delisle Recueil de Jugements de l t lchiquier de Normandie au XIII sie 
(1207-1270)J ?srisl864. Etctrait du tome XX, deux^ .partie des 

Notices et Extraits des Manuscripts et du t.XXIV aeaux e . partie des 
Memoires de l’Acad. des Inscr. et B.L. 

Die s Etymologisches Vorterbuch der romanischen Sprachen. 3, ed. 2 vll. 
Bonn 1869 -70. 

Dorn Bessin Concilia Rotomagensis Provinciae . Rotomagi 1717. 

Dronke Codex diplomaticus Fuldensis . Cassel 1850. 

Dugdale Monasticon Anglicanum sive Pandectae coenobiorum (Dodsworth et 
Dugdale). First volume of the Editio secunda Londini 1682. 

Etablissements et Coutumes. Assises et Arrets de l f Echiquier de horm a.ndie 
au XIII C siecle... publ. par M.A.J. Marnier. Paris L839. 

” Et abli s seme ns de S. Louys” in appendix to Joinville Histoire de S. Louys 
ed, Du Fresne du Cange. Paris 1668. 






























. 









4 


"Fleta seu coramentarius iuris Anglicani” cited from the reprint in 
Houard Coutumes Anglonormandes III . 

Fleury Institution au droit francais publ. par MM. Ed. Laboulaye et 
H. Dareste. 2 vols. Paris 1858. 

"Forjurement d»une Court.” reprinted in the Memoires de la Societe 
des Ant, de Norm . XXIV, pages 232 ff. 

Fumagalli Cfrdice diplomatico S, Ambrosiano , Milano 1805. 

Gallia Christiana . 15 vols. Parisiis 1715 sequ. 

”Geoffroy le Tort”. see in Assises de la Haute Cour de Jerusalem . 

Glanvilla Tractatus de legibus et consuetudinibus regni Angliae by 
Phillips’knglische Reichs - und Rechtsgeschichte." Berlin 1827 - 28, 
second volume, pages 334. ff. 

Gold as t Rerum Alamannicarum Scriptores aliguet vetusti . 3 Bde. Frenco- 
furti 1661. 


”Grands Roles des Echiquiers de Normandie”. Memoires de la Societe des 
Ant, de Normandie XV, XVI . 

Grand Coutumier. Le grand cousturaier du pays et duche de normandia, tres 
utmlle et profitable a tous practiciens euquel est le texte diceluy 
en francois auec la glose ordinaire et femiliere etc. Paris, Francoys 
regnault (1523). 

Grand Coutumier de France . Bouvelle edition par Ed. Labouleye et 
R. Dareste. Paris 1868. 

Great Rolls of the Pipe for the first year of the Reign of King Richard 

the first 1189-1190 . Edited by Jos. Hunter. 1844 (publications of 
the Record Commissioners). 

Great Rolls of the Pine for the second, third and fourth years of the 

Reign of King Henry the second 1155-1158 . Edit, by Jos. Hunter. 1844. 
(publications of the Record Commissioners), 

Houard Anciennes Loix des Francois conservee dans les Coutumes 
Angloises . 2 vols. Rouen 1766. 

Houard Traites sur les Coutumes Anglo-Normandes . 4 vols. Rouen 1776. 

Jean Desmares. ”Decisions de Jean Desmares” in the Coutume de Paris 
commentee par Julien Brodeau. 2 vols. Paris 1658, 1669. 

”Jean d'lbelin” s ee Assises de la Haute Cour de Jerusalem . 

Kindlinger Geschichte der deutschen Horigkeit, insbesondere aer Leibeigen - 
schaft. Berlin 1819. 

Li Livres de Jostice et de Piet publ. par Rapetti. Paris 1850. Coll, de 
doc. in£d. 


Livre des droiz et des commandemens d y office de .justice publ. par 






























' 



















i 









■ ' 












5 


Heaut ems-Be aupre. 2 vols. Paris 1865. 

Li Usage de Borgoigne . Anc. Cout. de Bourgogne publ. par Marnier. Paris 
1858. (Extrait du tome III de la Revue historique du droit francais 
et Stranger.) 

Loysel (Loisel) Institutes coutumieres . Nouv. ed par MM. Dupin et Ed. 
Laboulaye. 2 vols. Paris 1846. 

Lupi Codex diplomatics civitatis et ecclesiae Bergomatis . Berg. 1784. 

Mabillon Annales ordinis s. Benedicti . 6 vol. Lutetiae Paris. 1705 ff. 

Madox The History and Antiquities of theExchequer from the Forman 
Conquest to the End of the Reign of King Edward II . London 1769. 

Magnus Rotulus Scaecarii vel Magnus Rotulus Pipae de anno 5 1° reghi 

Henrici (ut videtur) 1150-1151 ed. Jos. Hunter Lond. 1855. 

Martene et Durand Thesaurus nevus anecdotorum . 5 vo. Lutetiae Paris. 1717. 

Martene et Durand Veterum scriptorum et monumentorum emplissime collection . 
9 vol. Parisiis 1724 -1755. 

Matthaei Paris. His tori a m ai or Anglorum ed. ¥. Wats. Parisiis 1644. 

Merkel Lex Salic a with an introduction by Jac. C-rimm. Eerlin 1850. 

Meichelbeck Historia F risingen sis . 2 vol. Aug. Vind. 1724-29. 

Memoires de la Societe des Antiquaires de Normandie to the end of 1869 
27 Bde. series 1, vols. 1-10. Series 2, vols. 11-20. Series 5, vols. 

21 ff. 

Memorie di Lucca. Memorie et documenti per serv ire all Asto ria del 
ducato di Lucca . 8 vol. Lucca 1815. 

Menard Kistolre de Id.sines . 7 vols. Paris 1750. 

Monument a. Boica 58 vol. Monachii 1765 ff. 

Mur atori Antiquitates italicae medii aev i. 6 vol. Mediolendi 1758-1742. 

Mur at or i ;'L# Rerum italic arum Scriptor es. 28 vol. Mediolani 1725-51. 

”Myrrour of justice” in French. Text in'. Houard Coutumes Anglonpr marjq^s ^ IV.. 
In English translations The Mirrour of .justices by Andrew Horne, 
translated by William Hughes, Manchester 1840. 

Neugart Codex diplomaticus Alemanniee et Burgundig e_.trai^iurajis-e, 

2 vols. £. Elasii 1791. 

Neustria pip, auctore pat-re Arturo Du Moustier. Rouen 1665. 

Olim. Les Olim ou Registres des Arrets rendus par la Cour du Roi 
publies per l e comte Beugnot . 4 voIsT Terrs 1859 -±848. Coll. 

de doc. indd. 



















































. ‘ . 





















6 


Ordonances des rois de France de la troisieme race recueillies par 

ordre chronologique avec des renvois des unes sux autres, des 

sommaires et observ? tions sur le texte (Ordonnances du Louvre). 

21 vol• Paris 1724 -1848. 

Palgrave The rise and progress of the English Commonwealth . Anglosaxon 
Period. 2 vol. London 1832. Part II: Proofs and Illustrations. 

Paxdessus Diplomats, chartae, epistolae, leges aliaque instrumenta ad 

xes Gallo-Francicas spectantia prius collects a de Brequigny . 2 vol. 
Lutet. Paris 1843. 

Perard Recueil de plusieurs pieces curieuses servant a l'histoire de 
Bourgogne . Paris 1664. 

Pertz Monumenta Germaniaw histories Leges I,II . Hannoverae 1835, 1837. 

Philippe de Navarre . See Assises de la Haute Cour de Jerusalem. 

Placitorum Abbreviatio . Placit. in domo capitulari Westmonasteriensi 
asservatorum Abb. temporibus regum Roc. I. Johann. Henr. III. 

Edw.I. Edtt.II. ed. by George Rose and ¥. Illingworth. 1811. 

(Publ. of the Rec. Commiss.). 

Reginonis abbatis Prumensis libri duo de synodslibus esusis et 

d isciplinis ecclesipsticis e d . Wasserchleben. Lipsiae 1840. 

Roger de Hovenden. Chronica magistri Rogeri de Houendene ed.by William 
Stubbs. 3 vol. London 1868-1870 (Rer. Brit. Script, or Chronicle and 
Memorials of Engl.). 

Rotuli Curiae Regis . Rolls and Records of the Court held before the 
Kings Justicars or Justices ed. by Francis Palgrave. 2 vol. 1835 
(public, of the Record Commiss.). 

Rotuli Formanniae in turri Londinensi asserveti ed. by Thomas Duff us 
Hardy, 1835 (publ. of the Rec. Comm.). 

s 

Rosiere Recueil general des formules usitees dans l y empire des Francs . 

2 vol. Paris 1859. 

Schmid Gesetze der Angelsachsen . Second edition. Leipzig 1858. 

Sickel Acta regum et imperatorum Karolinorum . 2 vois. Vienna 1867. 

Somma de legibus consuetudinum Normannie (Latin text of the Grand 

Coutumier de Norm) by Ludewig Reliquiae Manuscriptorum omnis aevi , 
tomus VII, p. 149 ff. Francofurti et Lipsiae 1726. 

Stapleton Megni Rotuli scacesrii Normanniae sumptibus societ. Antiquar. 
Lond. 1840-44. 2 vol. with introductions. Observations on the great 
rolls of the Exchequer. 

’’Statute et consuetudines (Kormaniae) ” Warnkoenig Franz, Stsats-una 
Rechtsgesch . vol II. Documents. 









































. 






■ 


























. 

. 
















7 

Statutes of the Realm from original Records and authentic Mss. printed by 
command of his majesty King George III. from the earliest times to the 
End of the Reign of Queen Anne. II vol. 1810-1828. 

"Stille de proceder" (Later stile). Le stille de proceder au pays de 
Normandie nouvellement corrige en plusie urs li eux. Appendix to the 
edition of the Grand Cout. de Norm , -of 1525, no Paginatur. 

Stilus suprem e curie psr lamenti Parisi e nsis cum additionibus (Dubreuil). 
Parisiis (Galliot Dupre)”1542. 

Tardif Monuments historioues . Paris 1866. Archives de l f Empire, 
Irxventaires et Documents. 

Teulet Layettes du tresor des chartes . Tome premier de l’annee 755-1223. 
Paris 1863. Archives de 1*Empire, Inventaires et Documents. 

Thierry Recueil des monuments inddits de 1 f histoire du tiers Etat . 

First series. Tome I. eontenant les pieces relatives V l'histoire 
de la ville d»Amiens. Paris 1850. Coll, de doc. ined. 

Thorpe Diplomat erium Anglicum aevi Ssxonici . Lond. 1865. 

Tiraboschi Memorie storiche Modenes i. 3 vol. Modena 1793-94. 

"Tractatus de brevibus et recognitionibus" (Trait/ de Brie's &et de 
Requenoissanz) Warnkonig Franz. Staats-und Rechtsgesch . vol II. 
Documents Book 30 ff., Marnier Etablissements etc. 58 ff. 

"Tres ancienne Coutume de Normandie." Warnkonig Franz. Staats-u . 

Rechtsgesch . vol II, documents. S. 5-50, Marnier Etablissements etc. 
p. 1-58. 

Troy a Codice dipl on atico Longobardo . 5 vol. Napoli 1855 (Storia 
d’ltslia del medio evo vol. IV). 

Twysden Historiae Anglicanae Scrip t ores X. Lond. 1652. 

Ughelli Italia sacra ed . Coleti. 10 vo. Venetiis 1717-1722. 

U.O.E. Urkundenbuch des Landes ob der Enns . 5 vols. Linzl852-1862. 

Vaissete Histoire geherale de Languedoc . 5 vol. Paris 1730-1745. 

Varin Archives legislatives de la ville de Palms . 4 vols, Paris 1840/52. 
Collection de docum. ined. 

Walter Corpus juris gennanici antipui . 5 vol. Berolini 1824. 

Wartmann Urkundenbuch der Abtei Sanct Gallen . 2 vol. Zuricn 1863-66. 

Wirtembergisches Urkundenbuch edited by the Royal State Archive in 
Stuttgart. 2 vol. Stuttgart 1849-58. 

Year Books of the Reigne of Edward the first . Years 20-21, 30-51 and 
32-55. Edited and translated by Alfred John Norwood. London 1865- 
1866 (Her. Brit, Script.). 































































SECONDARY SOURCES 


v, Savigny Geschichte des Roemischen Fechts im Mittclrlter , 1st. ed. 
1815, I, 216; 2nd ed., 1854, I, 258, espec!ally Note h. 

Rogge Ueber dps Gerichtswesen der Germsnen 1820, #44. 

Wit De iudic. iuratorum englic. 1820 (cited in Mittermaier 
Strafve-rf ahren I, 289, Note 11.) 

Henrici Cock Commentatio de iudiciis iuratorum 1821, chapter 2: 

"iudicii iuratorum historia." 

Van der Does de Bye Historia iudicii iuratorum 1822 (cited in 
Mittermaier, op. cit .) 

Hermes oder krit. Jahrbuch der Literatur . First volume for the year, 
1822, a critical, analysis of von Rogge T s Gerichtswesen der Germanen . 

G.Ludwig von Maurer Geschichte des altgermanischen und nemenilich 
altbairischen Gerichtsverf a lire ns 1824. 

Phillips De Anglosaxonum re indielaria 1825. 

Phillips Versuch einer ParsteHung der Geschichte des angelsach- 
sischen Rechts 1825. 

Ewers Das Aelteste Recht der Russen 1826 

Friedr. Aug. Biener Beitrsege zu der Geschichte des Inquisitions- 
processes und der Geschwornengerichte 1827. 

Phillips Englische Reichs - und Rechtsgeschichte seit der Ankunf 
der Nornannen 1028 (II, 285, ff.). 


Zentner Das Geschwornengericht mit Oeffentlichkeit un Kundlichkeit 

im Gerichtsverfahren, in besonderer Rucksicht auf den Strafprocefs 

geschichtlich, rechtlich und politisch betrachtet , 1st Ed.1850. 

2nd ed. 1848. 

Homeyer in the Berliner Jahrbuchern fur wissenschaftliche Kritik , 1850, 
Aprilheft, S. 554,ff. (Anzeige von Grimms Rechtsalterhumern.) 

Dahlmann Geschichte von Danemark 1841, II, 195, 557 ff. 

Reynolds De vera iudicii iuratorum origins, nature et indole 1842. 

Hopfner Ueber den Anklageprofefs und das Geschwornengericht 1844. 

Homeyer Des Sachsenspiegels zweiter Theil , vol II, 1844, "System des 
Lehrnrechts" S. 621. 

Rintel Von der Jury, ihre Notwendigkeit und Steilung im Straf - 
verfahren. ihre Geschichte u. s. w. 1844. 

Mittermaier Das deutsche Strafverfahren. 4th edition, 1845, I, 287 ff. 
with ample references to sources. 













































■ 












. 














' 

. . 

. 






. 























2 


Mittermaier Die MuncLLichkeit. das Anklsgeprincip, die Qeffentlichkeit 
und das Geschworn e ngericht 1845, S. 558. ff. 

Dahlmenn ”Ein Vegweiser durch die Geschichte der englis chan Jury” in 

the Zeitschrift fur deutsches Becht und d eu t s c h e Re chwi s s e ns chef t 

1846, X, 185 ff. 

Fr. Aug. Eiener Abhendlungen eus dem Gebiete der Re chtsgeschichte, 1846, 
ed. No. Is ’’Ueber die Einfuhrung der Geschwornengerichte in 
England”; 1848, ed. No. 2, ”Begrundung des Criminalrechts und 

Processes Bach historischer Methode.” 

Fr. Aug. Biener n Zur Geschichte der englischen Jury,” Zeitschrift fur 
deutsches Recht 1847, XI, 57. 

Steman n Die Jury in Strafssche n, a monograph 1847. 

Leue Das deutsche Schoffengeric ht, 1847, S. 275 ff. 

Gundennann Geschichte der Entste h ung der Jury und deren leitemrder 
Gedanke, ein germanistischer Versuch 1847. 

Michelsen Ueber die Genesis der Ju ry, e ine germsnisti sche Untersuchung 

1847. 


Mohl Ueber des Geschwornengericht 1848, 2nd ed. 

Vilda ”Ueber den Ursprung der Geschwornengerichte” in the Verhandlunge n 
der Germanisten zu Lubeck on 27th, 28th, and 50th September 1847, 
Lubeck 1848, p.249 ff. 

Graf v. Blahkensee Schwurgerielite, ein e h istorisch-politische 

Abhandlung uber den Ursprung derselben aus der sitesenten Vorzeit , 

with an introduction and postcript by Kletke 1848. 

von Daniels Ur sprung und Perth der Geschwornenanstait , Extract from a 
lecture given on 11th Feb. 1848 at the Law Society in Berlin. 

G. Ludwig von Maurer Ueber die Freipflege 1848. 

Koestlin ”Die Entstehung und Fortbildung der Jury auf englischem Boden,” 
Zeitschrift fur deutsches Recht 1848, XII, 406. 

Koestlin Der Uenclepunct des deutschen Strafverfahrens im 19, Jahrhundert , 
kritisch und geschichtlich beleuchtet nebst ausfurlicher 
Darstellung der Entstehung des Geschwornengerichts 1848. 

Gundennann Ueber die Eihstimmigkeit der Geschwornen, Beitrag zu 
Geschichte und Verstandnifs des Schwurgerichts 1848. 


Koestlin Das Geschwornengericht fur Nichtjuristen dargestellt 1848. 
Gneist Die Bildung der Geschwornengerichte 1849. 

Fr. Aug, Biener Das englische Geschworne ngericht , 5 vols. 1852 to 1855. 
Fr. Aug. Biener ”Die Criminal jury in England und ihre Zukunft ” in 












































































Kritischen Zeitschrift fur Rec h tswissenschaft und Gesetzgebung de s 
Auslands 1853, XXV 

S achf s e Das Beweis ve rfphren nach deutschem, m i t Berucksichtigung 
verwandter Hechte des Mittelaltcrs 1855, #9 . 

Vilhelm Maurer "Ueber angelsachsische Markverfassung insbesondere als 
Grundlage des St adt ewe sens, der grundherrlichen Gerichte und des 
Verfshrens durch Geschworene", Zeitschr ift fur deutsches Rech t 1856, 
XVI, 201,ff., German rendition by the same author: An inquiry into 
Anglo-saxon mark-courts and their relation to manoria l and 

municip al institutions and, trial by .jury 1855. 

Schwarse, Article "Schwurgericht” in Veiske's Rechtslexicon Band X, Iff. 
1856. 

Konrad Maurer "Das Beweisverfahren nach deutschen Reciiten". Kritische 
Ueberscheu 1857, V, 180 ff., 532 ff. 

von Tippelskirch "Ueber die Entstehung und den Charakter des 

Geschwornengerichtes in England” (a lecture given on 9th Jan. 

1858 in the Sitzung des wissenschaftl. Verei ns zu Stettin ) 1858. 

John In fontibus antiqui Iuris Dithmarici "Nemeae” invenitur . 

Qualis sit eius nature, et qualis cohaerentia cum iuratorum iudicio 
Angliae qua,eritur. Dissertatio 1860. 

Gneist Geschielite und heutige Gestalt der englischen Communelverfassun g 
oder des Selfgovernme nt, 2nd ed. 1863, I, 96 ff., 168 ff. 

Gundermann Englisches Privatrecht vol. I, 1864. 


Heinrich Brunner "Zeugen und Inquisitionsbeweis der kerolingischen Zeit" 
1866 ( Sitzungsberichte der Wiener Akademie hist, phil. Klasse, LI ). 

Gneist Das englische Verwaltungrecht vol. I, 1867: Geschichte des 
englischen Verwaltungrechts S. 178, 264. 

lecher Die Schwurgerichte in Strafsachen und burgerlichen Reehts - 

streitigkeiten, Geschichte derselben in England. Frankreich und 

Deutschland vom •wissenschaftfichen Standpuncte u. s. v. 1868. 

Laband Die vermogensrechtlichen Klagen nach den sachsischen 
Rechtsquellen des Mittelalter s 1869, S. 219 ff. 


Heinrich Brunner Article "Schvmrgerichte” (historical) in von Heltsen- 
dorffs Rechtslexicon. 










































■ 























4 


Selden Analecton Anglobritan n icon libri duo, 1615, lib. II, cap. 6. 
p. 105. 

Spelman Glossarium g trchaeologicum s. v. iursta, Lord. 1687, fol. 
antiauae litteraturae septentrionalis utilitate etc. dissertatio 
epistolaria. Oxoniae 1705. 

Nicholson in the ”Praef atio de iure feudali veterum Saxonum” byi Hilkins 
Leges Anglosaxonicae, Londini 1721, p. IX ff. 

Mathew Hale History of t he Co mmon Law of England, chapt. XII touching 
trial by jury, 1st. ed. after the author*s death 1794, sixth edition 
by Charles Eunnington 1820, S. 556 ff. 

Blacks tone Commentaries on the Laws of England . 1st. ed. 1765, last 
by Malcolm Kerr 1857. 

Pettingal An Enquiry in t o the use and practice of juries among the 
Greeks and Bona ns. from whence the origin of the English J u ry ma y 
probably be deduced. London 1769. 

Reeves History of the English Law (first 1787) from the time of the 
Romans to the end of the reign of Elizabeth, a new edition with 
numerous notes and an introductory dissertation by Finlason 1869. 
r ef,. Kritische Vierteljahrsschrift (Munchen XIII, 228 ff. 

John Millar An Historical View of the English Government, 4th ed. 1818 
(first 1787), I, ch. XII, S. 527 ff. 

Turner **History of the manners, landed property, government, laws etc. of 
the Anglos exons” 1805, Bopk" 5., chapt. 9: the trial by Jury. 

(Also as vol. 4 of Turners History of the Anglos axons 1799 ff.) 

Philipps Des pouvoirs et des obligations des jurys, tra duit de 1*anglais 
par le Comte 1819 (cited by Mittermaier a. a. 0.). 

Probert The Ancient laws of Cambria 1825, 

Spence An inquiry into the origin of the laws and politica l institutions 

of modern Europe 1826 (cited by Mittermaier I, 289, Note 12). 

Crabb History of the English Law 1829, translated by Schaffner als 
Geschichte des englischen Rechts 1859, 

Pefggave The Rise and Progress of the English Commonwealth , 2 vols. in 
4 , 1852. 

(Starkie) ”Qn the trial by jury,” Law Review and quarterly Journal of 
British and Foreign Jurisprudence No. 4, August 1845, Art. 10 
Biener Geschwornenger. Ill, 81.). 

Spence The equitable Jurisdiction of the Court of Chncery I, 1846. 

Hall am Supplemental Notes to the View of the State of Europe during the 
Middle AEe 1848, S. 241 ff.. Note 158; trial by jury. 

Forsyth History of Trial by Jury. 1852. 

















































... ... ' 1 






- 













5 


Stephen-Blackstone New Commentpries 1868, III, 549 


Olaus Worm Danicorum Monument a t Hafniae 1645, lib.l, cap.10, p.91 ff. 

Stjernhols De lure Sueonum et Gothorum 1672, 1. 1, c.4. 

Kolderup-Rosenvinge Dissertatio de usu iuramenti in litibus ,.robe.mis 
et decidendis iuxta. leges Daniae antique-s 1815 , p. 21, Note. 

Larsen ’’Bidrag til de gamle Danske Provindsis.1 Lovb'ogers Historic” in 
Oersteds Juridisk Tidskrift XV (1827) extracts printed by Paulson 
in the Kritischen Zeitschrift fur Rech t swissensed, u. Ges . 
des Auslands vol. I, 484 ff. 

Repp Historical treatise on trial by .jury, wager of Law a nd other 

co-ordinate forensic institutions formerly in use in Scandinavie a nd 
in Icelan d, Edinburgh 1852, in German by Bufs 1855. 

Schlyter Anmarkningar angaaende det forma forhallandet emellan domare 
och namd in dessen Juridiska Afhandlinger, Upsala 1856 (cited 
by Konrad Maurer a. a. 0.). 

Nordstrom Bidrag till den Svenska S amhalls-Forfattningens Historic , Andra 
Afdelningen, Helsingfors 1640, S. 775 ff. 

Worsaae Den danske Erobering ef England og Normandiet . Kjobenhavn 1865, 

S.585: see Waitz in the Gottinger Gelehrten Anz . 1866, nr. 42, S. 1675. 


Montesquieu De l f Esprit des Lois 1. XI, ch. 6 und passim (zuerst 1748). 

Bernardi Institution au Droit francais , Paris, an VII. in appendix a 
dissertation sur l’origine des jugements par pairs (cited by v. 
Savigny I. c.JT 

Selves Explication de l f origine et du secret du vrai Jury et comparaison 

avec le Jury anglais et le Jury francais 1811, 

Mayer Esprit, Origins et Progres des Institutions judiciares 1819. 

T,e H-r^nd de Recherches sur 1 1 administration de la. Justice 

criminelle chez les Francais avant 1’institution des parlemens et sur 

1’usage de .juger les accuses per leurs pairs ou jures 1822. 

Aignan ’’Histoire du Jury” 1822, translated in 1st volume of the Themis 
Heidelberg 1825. 

Couppey ’’Tableau de 1’administration de la Justice criminelles”. Memo ires 
" de la Societe Royale academique de Cherbourg 1858. 









































. 


































I 




. 
















. . 

























6 


De la Moriniere Etudes historiques sur les Institutions, les Lois et les 
Coutumes de la Normandie in der Revue de Rouen et de la Normandie 183 8. 

Rathery "Etudes historiques si ir les Institutions judiciaires de la 
Normandie.” Extract from the Revue Frgncaise, Paris 1859. 

Lebastard Delisle Precis de l r administration de la Justice criminelle 
chez les Remains* Paris 1841. See MLttermaier Strafverf. I, 289, 

Note 12 ami Archiv des Criminelrechts 1844, S. 151. 

De la Rue ”De l f origine du Jury et son ancienne existence chez les 
Scandinaves et en Normandie' in the author f s Verfassers Nouves.ux 
Essais historiques sur la ville de Caen et son arrondissement 1842. 

Coup A oey ”De la preuve judiciaire au moyey age en Normandie” in the 
Memoires de la Societe Royale academique de Cherbourg 1847. 

Ed, Laboulaye Essai sur les lois criminelles des Romains concernant 
la re # sponsabilite des Megistrats* Paris 1854, p. 551 ff. 


Du Boys Histoire du Droit criminel des peuples modernss consideree 
dans ses rapports avec les progrfes de la civilisation. Peris 1854- 
1860, 5 vols, 

Laferriere Histoire du Droit Franc sis t. V (1858) p. 349 ff. 620 ff. 

Ambroise Buchere ”Etude historique sur le origines du Jury” 1862. 
extract from the Revue historique de droit Fr&ncgds et Etran ger. 


Nadav Maciejovski Historic prevodavstv Slowianski ch. Nydanie drugie 
tom. Ill, 192 ff., 340 ff* v. Warszavie 1859. 


























































