












ED*< 


7CU. ALT/ 




UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that 
they have read and recommend to the Faculty 
Council for acceptance a dissertation on 
"The University Extension Movement" submitted 
by Albert Edward Ottewell, B.A. , in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
of M.A. 

Edmonton, 

April, 1915* 
















THE UNIVERSITY EXTENSION MOVEMENT 


by 

Albert Edward Ottewell , B. A. 


Secretary of the Department of Extension in 


the University of Alberta. 



Edmonton, April, 1915. 










Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


h tt ps ://a rc h i ve. o rg/d eta i I s/otte we 111915 


Tk&svs 
i V5 


plan 

1 ^ i 

THE UNIVERSITY EXTENSION MOVEMENT 

I. In Britain* 

II. In the Antipodes. 

III. In the United States# 

IV. In Canada. 

The Trend and Fnture of the Movement. 


V 






Wt 







I. 

To find the first enunciation of the principle 
which underlies the modern university extension move¬ 
ment the student must go much further back than a cur¬ 
sory examination of available records would show. It 
is commonly thought that the first acknowledgment of 
responsibility of universities to those unable to at¬ 
tend them in the regular way was made by the University 
of Cambridge. In the year 1873 that university inaug¬ 
urated her extension lectures under the direction of Mr. 
James Stuart,at that time a Fellow and lecturer of Trin¬ 
ity College. This is usually considered the beginning 

1 

of the university extension movement. 

However , one of the great English educators has 
1 shown clearly that at the very beginning of the Univer¬ 
sity Movement the same underlying causes were at work 
as those which have given rise to the University Exten¬ 
sion Movement. These causes he enumerates as follows: 

"(l) The introduction of new subjects of study as em¬ 
bodied in a new or revived literature. (2) The adoption 
of new methods of teaching which these subjects render¬ 
ed necessary. (3) The growing tendency to organization 

1. Dr. Roberts in Eighteen years of University Extension. 










which accompanied the development end consolidation- of 
the nationalities• It is a matter of general agreement 
that these earlier Universities took their rise usually 
in an endeavour to obtain and provide instruction of a 
kind beyond the monastic and Episcopal schools/ 1 

As the older Universities were founded to teach 
the contents of the body of knowledge revealed by the 
rediscovery of the ancient literature , in the same way 
the University Extension Movement has been found necess¬ 
ary to carry to the great mass of the people information 
disclosed by the rapid advance of the Natural Sciences. 
Particularly is it incumbent upon those in possession 

' 

of this knowledge that they should show to the agricul¬ 
turist and the artisan the significance of the discov¬ 
eries of science in their callings. It is a matter of 
common knowledge that if the information relating to 
I scientific agriculture now stored up in libraries and 
bulletins of experiment stations were in the hands of 
the man upon the land, agricultural practice would be 
at least a generation in advance of. what it is at the 
present time. It is evident that the majority of the 
people cannot drop out of the ranks of the active pro¬ 
ducers for a term of four or five years to study and 
















3 


master this essential information. Moreover , it is 
increasingly recognized that the older branches of 
learning such as Philosophy, History and Literature 

have messages of richness and content for the life of 

. 

the busy men and women. The University Extension sys¬ 
tem seeks to connect in a vital way the body of available 
knowledge with those who hitherto have been beyond its 
direct influence. 

Methods of teaching, which, if not entirely new, 
have been rediscovered in such fashion as to seem so , 
have been utilized for the purposes of this recent 
movement. The itinerant lecturer while a familiar enough 
figure in the streets and markets of Athens is a dis¬ 
tinct innovation in the make-up of a modern university. 
The tutorial class for the working-man, the travelling 
library for the isolated rural community, the corres¬ 
pondence study course for the busy mechanic , the refer¬ 
ence bureau for the harassed civic official , placing at 
his command for the solution of his problems all the 

resources of science , the provision for the student of 
public ouestions of reliable and up-to-date information, 
all these are among the new educational instruments 
which this this modern system of education has fash- 





4 


ioned for its use. 

And again, the tendency toward organization which 
resulted in national consolidations seven or eight hun¬ 
dred years ago has its most recent expression in the 
great industrial organizations of capital and labour 
peculiar to the time since the industrial revolution 
of a little over a century ago. Indeed every section 
and class of the modern community seems inclined to 
consolidate. One of the most striking indications of 
this tendency is the challenge which women are making 
for recognition on the same footing as men in practic¬ 
ally all lines of endeavour. 

Uor is the obligation ?/hich the leaders in the 
intellectual realm feel to share their privileges with 
those less favoured peculiar to these times. It seems 
to have been inherent from the beginning of the Univer¬ 
sity Movement. As long ago as 1374 it was recorded in 
the endowment deed of Clare College , Cambridge , that 
that Institution was founded that the number of stud¬ 
ents might increase "to the end that knowledge , a 
pearl of great price , when they had found it and made 
it their own by instruction and study in the aforesaid 
University, may not be hidden under a bushel, but be 




5 


spread abroad beyond the University , and thereby give 

light to them that walk in the dark by-ways of ignor- 

„1 ) 

ance. 

’ 1 

It would appear that the modern idea of the Univ¬ 
ersity as an esoteric institution, where only the priv- 
j ileged few might go, did not exist at the time of the 

founding of most, if not all, of the older Universities. 

2 

According to an acknowledged authority on this subject , 
the foundation statutes of these institutions usually 
reouired that "the persons accepted as students should 
include T the poor 1 , ’the indigent’ , ’men living on alms’, 
in most cases the applicant being reouired to make af- 
j fidavit to a condition of poverty.’’ But the difficulty 
was that exceptions appear to have been made in favour 
of privileged persons and it was not long before stud- 
1 ”ut pretiosa scientiae mar garita ab eis studio et doc- 
| trina in diets universitate inventa et etiam acquisita 
1 non sub irodio latent sed ulterius divulgetur lucemgue 
preebeat divulgata .iis qui ambulant in semitis ignorant- 
iae tenebrosis.” (Begule Collegii de Clare 1341). Eight¬ 
een years of University Extension. Ur. Boberts. 

2 , Bean Beber , University of Wisconsin in Paper before 
Eleventh Annual Conference of Association of American 
i Universities. 




6 


ents were accused of wishing TT to live rore delicately 
than suits the poorer sections of the conmunity and 
make the modus of their expenditure notably to exceed 
that which their founder by rule appointed." It is said 
that such a reproof was administered to the Fellows of 
Merton as early possibly as 1284 ^ But according to an 
authority Quoted by Bean Beber "the important differ¬ 
ence between Mediaeval and Modern Oxford is not that in 
the Middle Ages the majority of the students were drawn 
from the poorer classes , but that in the Middle Ages 
the university was open to practically all who desired 

learn, irrespective of wealth or poverty. " 



Gradually through various influences the avail- 
lability of a university education for the poorer class 
'became less and attempts were made by different persons 
to restore this lost opportunity. 

I-n the year 1575 Sir Thomas Gresham signed his 
memorable will providing for the foundation of Gresham 
College in London f the purpose of which was to provide 
for the needs of scholars and also for the needs of the 
general public. In an old paper of regulations of this 
institution appears the statement: 

T ! lures much as the public reading of the said lec¬ 
tures is to be performed in that manner as may most 







7 


tend to the Glory of God and the common benefit of the 
people of this City (which we do not doubt to be the 
principle ends of the Founder in ordaining the said 
lectures) and for that the greatest part of the inhab¬ 
itants of this City understand not the Latin Tongue, 
whereby the said lectures in short time may become sol¬ 
itary if they shall he read in the Latin Tongue only," 
it was ordained that every third lecture should be read 
in English--"which third lecture, to avoid confusion 
and interruption in the course of reading, may be the 

effect of the two former lectures which were read next 

1 

before in the Latin Tongue." 

For different reasons this college does not seem 
to> have accomplished the desire of its founder. 

Seventy-five years later the master of Caius Col¬ 
lege , William Dell, in a pamphlet entitled The Right 
Reformation of Learning in Schools and Universities , 
wrote "that schools should be erected throughout the 
whole nation, not only in Cities and great Towns , but 
also in the lesser villages, and that there should be 
some Universities or Colleges for the instructing of 
Youth, but why these. Universities end Colleges should 
1. Dr. Roberts in an Address at Cambridge, July, 1908. 























■ '■ 





































8 


be only ft Oxford and Cambridge I know no good reason 
wherefore. Doubtless it would seem suitable and more 
advantageous to the good of the people to have Univer¬ 
sities and Colleges , one at least in every great town 
and city of the nation." 

He was not slow to point out the truth embodied in 
the theory of manual training in schools , that students 
whose education has been derived solely .from books are 
at a disadvantage in life, and so be contended that 
"‘Colleges being as hath been spoke , dispersed through¬ 
out the great Cities and Towns of the Commonwealth, it 
may be so ordered that the youth may spend some pert of 

|the day in some lawful calling, or one day in study and 

. 

another in business as necessity or occasion shall re¬ 
quire , and if this course were taken in the disposal and 

ordering of Colleges and studies it would come to pass 

1 

that twenty would learn then where one learns now." 

It was not until 1850, two hundred years later, 
that the question of University Extension was raised 
again, this time by Rev. William Sewell, Tutor ot Ex¬ 
eter College, Oxford, who laid before the University 
Commission a plan for establishing University Lecture¬ 
ships in centres throughout England where students 

n 

1. Quotation in Dr. Roberts 1 paper on University Extensio" 











- 9 - 






mi ght 


qualify for the Oxford examinations while 


still 


living at home. 

It will be noticed that a sharp distinction appears 
in the last proposal and those of Gresham and Dell. The 
last is a scheme to cheapen the regular university educ¬ 


ation while the former proposals were devised to meet 
the need of other than regular students. These two 


ii 


;i 


underlying ideas have developed side by side in Eng¬ 
land , resulting in the founding of a number of Local 
Colleges and Universities on the one hand and on the 
other in the University Extension Movement proper , the 
last and best expression of which is found in the Tut¬ 
orial Classes now carried on by or under the direction 
of a number of the British Universities. 


. 

Mr. Sewell T s scheme , in the elaboration of which 
he enunciated the question since become the slogan of 
University Extension Work, "Though it may be impossible 


to bring the masses requiring education to the univer¬ 


sities , may it not be possible to - carry the university 
to them?", was rejected by the authorities on ‘the 
jground that the available resources were needed for the 

intre mural work of the University. 

. 

Some years later there was a concerted demand from 
■ 











10 


the mechanics 1 institutes for lectures by university 
men. Lord Hervey in 1855 published a tract strongly 
advocating the granting of their request. His suggest¬ 
ions included a proposal for courses of six lectures to 
he given by 71 professors , to be nominated by the univer¬ 
sity." The poor railway service prevented the immediate 
adoption of this plan but it served to excite interest. 
The immediate result was the establishment of University 
Local Examinations by Oxford in 1857, and by Cambridge 
in 1858 , which, according to Mr. Sadler, secretary to 
the Oxford Delegacy for University Extension, provided 

I the administrative machinery afterwards used to arrange 
University Extension lectures under the .supervision of 
these two universities. 

To an organization of women teachers , however , be¬ 
longs the honor of being the first to set on foot a 
scheme of real university extension work as at. present 
understood. In the year 1867 the organization referred 
to , which was later known as the iJorth of England Coun¬ 
cil for the Education of Women, invited Professor Stuart, 
of Cambridge University, whose name is most closely 
associated with the whole movement, to give them a course 
oh the art of teaching. This he modestly declined to do, 











- 11 - 

but offered to "describe the art of teaching by show¬ 
ing a bit of it. TT On the acceptance of his offer he 
gave a course of eight lectures on astronomy, the first 
series of popular lectures in England. The same course 
of lectures was requested by other organizations and a 
circuit WcS formed. Professor Ituart introduced at 
this stcge two other features which h.ve been char:ct- 
eristic of University Extension in Great Britain, the 
printed syllabus and the written examination. This 
letter innovation met with some opposition on the 
ground that it wa 3 ”uniadylike for women to go into an 
examination, especially when conducted by a man.* 1 How¬ 
ever , the difficulty was overcome by a compromise and 
the work went steadily on. 

The next step in the development of the movement 

t as t^ken in response to a request from the working 
en of Crewe that Professor Stuart should lecture at 
he Mechanics 1 Institute in that town. He consented 
and announced the subject "Meteors.” By & peculiar 
coincidence it is stid a brilliant meteoric shower oc- 

sured on the evening preceding that set for the lect- 
are, with the result that the lecturer ..».s confronted 
by til expectant :udienee of fifteen hundred. Heedless 











12 


to spy the lecture wps a huge success, partially due to 
the spectacular press agent work of the well-timed met¬ 
eoric display. A course of lectures followed and the 
principle of University Extension was firmly establish¬ 
ed among the working men of Crewe. 

The development of the class in connection with 
the extension lecture was the result of an accident. 
Professor Stuart left a number of diagrams hanging up¬ 
on the well of the lecture room and found on his re¬ 
turn that a number of the men had been examining them 
end had Questions to ask. This formed the beginning 
of what is now the generally accepted form of the tut¬ 
orial class , a lecture period of one hour, and an hour 
for discussion of points raised in the preceding lecture 
So that in these early attempts all the essential feat¬ 
ures of the extension work of to-day were exemplified^ 

: lecture, class, syllabi, and examination. 

After delivering courses of lectures at Leeds , Liv¬ 
erpool , Manchester and Sheffield Professor Stuart appeal 
ed to Cambridge University to definitely commit itself 
to extension work along the lines he had been following. 
His request was acceded to by Cambridge in 1873 and her 

lead was followed by the founding of the London Uni’ver- 

■ 

| sity Extension Society in 1876 and the commencement of 





13 


extension work by Oxford in 1878. At the present time 
practically all the universities of England and Scot¬ 
land are engaged in some form of extension. Among 
those which may be mentioned which issue full reports 
are Oxford, Cambridge, Liverpool, Victoria, Manchester, 
London. 

Bight at the outset one of the constantly recur¬ 
ring problems of University Extension was encountered, 

the difficulty of finding men with the peculiar oual- 

. 

ifications needed to make e success of this form of 
instruction. According to Dr. Roberts the successful 
extension lecturer "should be able to speak fluently 
in public, and have the power of putting the principles 
of his subject clearly and attractively before his aud¬ 
ience. He must also be a man of tact and sympathy, 
and should possess the art of conducting a class so as 
to induce the students to ask Questions and put their 
difficulties freely to him." A high standard of ex¬ 
cellence indeed, this which is demanded I but we may 
remark the same should be reouired of any teacher who 
is to make a success. 

In the petition which was addressed to the -Univ¬ 
ersity of Cambridge in 1872, three special classes of 

■ 

people were specifically mentioned as likely to be ben- 










14 


efited by the establishment of lecture courses. 

(1) Ladies end persons at leisure during the day. 

(2) Young men of the middle classes, clerks and others 
engaged in business who have only the evenings at their 
disposal. 

1 . 

(3) Artisans. 

In the arrangement of the courses at Derby, Notting¬ 
ham, end Leicester--where the University Extension 
scheme was inaugurated--provision was made for these 
three classes. 

The lectures for the first class were given dur¬ 
ing the day and for the others in the evening. 

Some peculiar information was obtained by these 
early experiences. Ladies of leisure attended in num¬ 
bers and they have continued to be among the most en¬ 
thusiastic supporters of the movement , while the evening 
lectures were attended by thoroughly mixed audiences but 
by a comparatively small number of the second class. 

One of the outstanding features of University Ex¬ 
tension Work in England has been the enthusiasm with 
which persons of advanced age have devoted themselves to 
the study of subjects in which they were interested by 

Eighteen years of University Extension. Ur. Eoberts. 








- 15 - 

, 

the lectures. 

At the beginning another question was raised which 
has been the subject of spirited discussion wherever 
university extension work is carried on--thet of the 
recognition to be granted to students completing defin¬ 
ite courses of study. Whet the average extra mural 
student wishes is to be allowed to specialize in some 
particular branch of study for purposes of his own and 
to obtain recognition for work done which would entitle 
him to be considered a specialist in his subject. This 
appears to be the last trench which the conservative 
university will abandon. There seems a reluctance to 
'grant adecuate credit for work which is not done within 

the cast iron limits set by the campus and resident in- 

' 

struction. Fyen in such a democratic institution as the 
University of Alberta the best response that the Faculty 
Council could be induced to make to a request that the 
University should offer correspondence-study courses was 
that these courses might be offered on the condition 
■that no university credit was to be allowed for such 

Work. This is precisely the position which the Univer¬ 
sities of Cambridge and Oxford took at first and pract- 











) 





16 


ically maintained for thirty-five years , and which they 
have been compelled--albeit somewhat reluctantly--to 
abandon. By devices such as affiliation and the grant¬ 
ing of special certificates and diplomas the extension 
students of the British universities have been given 
the recognition needed as an incentive to continued 
j study. That the necessity of this was early recognized 
is shown by the following extract from a memorial pres¬ 
ented to the London University Extension Board by a 
number of students, 

"It may be urged that if for private or profess¬ 
ional reasons the acquisition of a degree would be of 
service to us, all we have to do is to apply ourselves 
to the obtaining, of one of the existing degrees of the 
University. To do this we would answer that the course 
of study is laid down with a view to students who are 
able to devote three years to study, passing by way of 
Matriculation Examination from school work. We rapresT 
ent , however , a class of students who , while continu¬ 
ing their ordinary occupations , desire to pursue dur¬ 
ing adult life some particular course of study with a 
view to gaining such proficiency in the subject as will 
enable them to carry on some independent line of work. 







17 


A student who devotes five jeers of continuous study 
to, say. History on e well-designed plan, with constant 
opportunities of independent work and the guidance of 
a lecturer , obtains a firmer , a irore comprehensive and 
a more interesting grasp of the subject than a student 
who endeavours to obtain the minimum knowledge of the 
subject that will enable him to pass an examination 
in which he has to present four or five different sub¬ 
jects at the same time. We believe it is to the ad¬ 
vantage , not only of the students themselves, but of 
the University, to encourage adults who are interested 
in a particular subject to carry on the study of that 
subject to a higher level, even to the level of the B. 
A. in honours* and that, while an individual student 
of unusual energy and determination may be found to do 
this without any encouragement, the number of students 
undertaking such work would be indefinitely increased 
if recognition were assigned, on completion of the 
work, of a nature that would be recognized by the out¬ 
side world as entitling a student to be regarded as 
having reached a high degree of proficiency in the sub¬ 
ject . ” 

Here the issue is clearly defined, what courses 
shall be offered and what credit shall be granted for 













18 


their completion. Two other quotations emphasize the 
importance of this point. The first, an extract from the 
memorial presented to the University of Cambridge from 
the Midland towns expresses the opinion "that the best 
teaching would fail to attract students in large num¬ 
bers , or to give stability to this movement in their 
behalf, unless accompanied by a programme of a course 
of study with periodical examinations conducted by the 
University authority, and the conferring of some degree 
on those who succeeded in passing the examination.” 

Canon Moore Eade , another of the pioneers of the 
University Extension Movement says that its object 
"would be more speedily brought about if the University 
would give some formal recognition to the University 
Extension Students; if, for example, all those who had 
attended a certain number of lectures and classes and 
passed a satisfactory examination at the end of each 
term were allowed some title, such as ’A. C. T (Assoc¬ 
iate of Cambridge)”. 

The question may naturally be asked, Why this re¬ 
luctance on the part of the University authorities to 
grant satisfactory recognition for work done by Exten¬ 
sion students? The obvious reply is that they were 

doubtful of the possible quality of'work done under 














■ 





- 


• 










. 































. 







’ 



■ 




■ 




• 























' 









































19 


such conditions. They were afraid of cheapening Uni¬ 
versity degrees end encouraging superficial work. The 
testimony of those in closest touch with the corres¬ 
pondence and tutorial class students however , all goes 
to show that if anything, more thorough and painstakr 
ing work is done hy them than hy the ordinary degree 
students because a greater degree of application and 
perseverance is required to carry on the work under 
the manifest disadvantages of having to study when 
tired from the day’s work or during the time one would 
naturally feel like devoting to recreation. The Amer¬ 
ican universities in most cases have frankly accepted 
the inevitable and many of them grant full credit for 
correspondence study work, up to one half of the amount 
required for the Bachelor's degree. 

By means of the scheme providing for affiliation 
of local centres the University of Cambridge in 1886 
made it possible for students to complete all but two 
years of the work required for a degree. The import¬ 
ance of this step lay in the fact that the University 

placed the stamp of its approval upon the work of loc¬ 
al centres. 

Possibly a .still more important step was taken by 
the University of Cambridge in 1890 when special classes 







20 


for Extension students were arranged for the month of 
August* Oxford had already begun with a session in the 
summer of 1888. There is this broad difference between 
the two however , that whereas the Cambridge summer 
school is designed for the more earnest of the extension 
students and is in.its Mature selective, the, summer 
school at Oxford is open to all who care to attend. It 
is in effect a course of popular instruction. Later, 
however, the Oxford authorities arranged for a shorter 
course for the more serious students, to follow the gen¬ 
eral one. 

In summing up the results achieved in the first 
eighteen years of extension work Dr* Roberts divides them 
under two general headings, direct and indirect. The 
direct he describes as the statistics of attendance at 
lectures and the records of those having passed examin¬ 
ation, while the indirect result he described as the 
changed attitude on the part of the mass of the people 
toward the subject of higher education. 

A brief outline of the methods of carrying on Ex¬ 
tension Work by the English universities follows. It is 
compiled from the current circulars of the Universities 
of Liverpool , Cambridge , Oxford and London. 







El 


Methods of Instruction 

Three types of lecture courses with or without 
classes are offered. 

1. Pioneer L ectures . The pioneer lecture is usually 

a single lecture given for the purpose of arousing in¬ 
terest and stimulating the desire for more extended 

' 

courses of instruction. It is popular in character and 
has no class or examination associated with it. 

2. Short Courses of Lectures . These courses usually 

consist of a series of six lectures and have classes , 

■ 

!paper work 'by students , and final examinations assoc¬ 
iated with them, hut no recognition is given by the 
University Authories for the work done. 

3. Full Course of Lectures . The full course may vary 
from twelve to twenty-four lectures , depending upon 
the type of local organization under the auspices of 
which it is given. Classes , essays and final examin¬ 
ations are made use of and a successful completion of 

the assigned work is given some form of recognition by 
"the University Author it ies. 

4* bocal Organization. In the regulations of the Univ¬ 
ersity of Cambridge for University Extension four local 
:|agencies are mentioned. 













A. A Local Committee which may consist simply of a 
group of representative citizens of any community who 
undertake to secure audiences for the lectures and to 
meet all expenses associated with them which are ordin¬ 
arily chargeable to the local centres. Under this meth¬ 
od of organization expenses are defrayed by the sale of 
admission tickets to the lectures. 

B. University Extension Societies. 

The principle on which a University Extension Soc¬ 
iety is formed is that of securing a body of annuel sub¬ 
scribers. This method has the great advantage of in¬ 
suring a definite fund for the carrying on of the work 
'and more complete plans can be made than under the meth¬ 
od described under A. Special provisions are made for 
the members of Friendly Societies, Co-operative Soc¬ 
ieties, Mutual Improvement Associations and the like. 

C. Students* Associations. 

The object of the Students’ 1 Association is to do 
all in its power to help the lectures achieve the best 
results. Usually the members of this organization busy 
themselves to see that the necessary tickets are sold 

and -to ensure the widest kind of publicity. Usually it 

■ 

holds meetings in addition to the regular lecture gath¬ 
ering and frequently develops info what is to all in- 



23 




tents and purposes an educational club for its members. 

D. The Library. 

The University provides a travelling library con¬ 
taining the text-books and books of references required 
in the course. These are loaned free of charge, except 
carriage both ways and making good of loss and damage. 

E. University Extension Book Union. 

This is a Union of Centres formed to facilitate 
the exchange of books between centres and to assist in 
the formation of Local Libraries for the use of students. 
| F. The Cambridge Local Centres 1 Union. 

The Local Centres 1 Union is designed, to promote co¬ 
operation between the various Local Centres by means of 
exchange of views and consultations and to provide an 

j agency for any common action either by the Union itself 

- 

or in co-operation with other similar unions along any 
lines deemed to be in the best interests of University 

Extension Work. 

. . 

G. University Extension Bulletin. 

A periodical designed to further the cause of Univ¬ 
ersity Extension and known as the University Extension 

Bulletin is published three times annually under the 

■ 

sanction of the London, Oxford and Cambridge Extension 




24 


Authorities end provides the medium for official sn- 

. 

nouncements. In addition to these agencies are the 
Summer Meetings such as those of Oxford and Cambridge. 

Expenses . 

The University Extension Movement in Crest Britain 
has been to a large extent self supporting. Admission 
fees, course tickets and local subscriptions have in 
some cases entirely, and in others largely paid the 
lecturers 1 fees and expenses. The balance has been met 
by funds placed at the disposal of the central author¬ 
ity by private subscription or from the general funds 
of the University. On the whole the cost of carrying 
on the work does not seem to be high. The cost of 
lecture courses as announced by the University of Cam¬ 
bridge , which may be taken as representative , is as 
follows: 

For a course of six lectures from £20 to £36 
" " " ” twelve " TT £34 " £56 

> These fees are inclusive, i.e. , they cover lecturers’ 
fees, travelling expenses, syllabi, correction of 
students’ papers and the hire of lantern slides end 
i text books. 

The extent of the Extension Work'being carried on 






25 


by the English Universities may be inferred when we 
note that during the year 1912-13, the Univers ity of 
Liverpool conducted 422 lectures and classes with 
1,704 students in average attendance, of whom 425 
took examinations. 

For the same period the University of Cambridge 
reports 2 ,405 students , 268 of whom wrote on examin¬ 
ations , of which number all but ten were successful* 
These figures do not include the Tutorial Classes , of 
which more will be said later. 

The Annual Report of the Oxford Delegacy shows 

a total of 1,345 lectures for the above period divid- 

. 

ed into 161 courses given in 125 centres with an aver¬ 
age total attendance, including Tutorial Classes, of 
14 ,130 persons. 

Equally striking figures could be presented for 
London, Sheffield, Durham, Victoria and others. 

Special mention should be made here of the two 
most significant of recent developments in connection 
with the University Extension Movement in Crest Britain. 
These are the Workers’ Educational Association and the 
Tutorial Classes. 

One of the most noticeable features In connection 








/ 


26 


with university Extension Work has been the tendency 
to make keener students dissatisfied with the somewhat 
meagre program of the original courses. As one working 
man put it, the taste of intellectual food had made him 
end his fellows hungry for more. Consequently , at a 
comparatively early stage in the movement the demand 
arose for Local University Colleges where teaching of 
a more systematic and exhaustive sort could be carried 
on. From this demand arose the Colleges of Leeds, Liv¬ 
erpool, Nottingham, Sheffield, Heading, Exeter and Col- 
; Chester , several of which have developed into independ¬ 
ent universities. 

But even with the development of Local Colleges and 
Universities there yet remained the important task of 
further prosecuting the work of higher education among 
the working classes. For various reasons the efforts 
of the Universities to influence working men had not 
been as successful as it was at first hoped they would 
be. Perhaps the chief reason was because the working 

man was suspicious that the University Extension Move¬ 
ment was only another attempt 6f the "master class" to 
,retain its slipping hold upon the reins of power. This 

attitude of the working man is well expressed in the 










27 


speech of Mr. J. M. MacTavish, e dockworker, before the 
Oxford Conference of 1907, in which he says in pert,... 

1 "Democracy will realize itself, with or without the as¬ 
sistance of Oxford; hut if Oxford continues to stand 
apart from the workpeople, then she will ultimately 

be remembered , not for what she is but for what she has 

. 

been...We want the workpeople who come to Oxford to 

undertake definite work. But whet is the definite work 

' 

to be? We want them to come back to us as missionaries, 
j but what is their message to be? If workpeople are to 
; come to Oxford, and they are to be trained for the 
| great task of lifting their cl&s'-s--which is no class 
but the nation--if they are to come to Oxford to be 
| trained for this great task, then the study--as has al¬ 
ready been pointed out--the study of history and econ- 
: omics is an essential part of that definite work. But 
what school of economics does Oxford accept as auth¬ 
ority? Will her interpretation of history inspire a 
man to remain in his class, or will 'it imbue him with 
a desire to escape from his class, which is supposed to 
have no history or only one of menial service?...The 
economics which emanate from Oxford are well-adapted to 
meet the requirements and stimulate the minds of those 







28 


young gentlemen who frequent her colleges, end becruse 

they are reduced to a science of social conduct and in¬ 
dustrial practice which has made them and keeps them 
comfortable. But you cannot expect the people to en¬ 
thuse over a science which promises them no more than 
e life of precarious toil. 

"We went from Oxford a new science of national 
and international economics--a science that will teach 
us the true relationship between production and con¬ 
sumption; that will teach us the true economic relation¬ 
ship in which men ought to stand to men and men to 
women--a science based , not on the acquisitiveness of 
the individual, but on social utility. Even as much 
do we want from her a new interpretation of history-- 
not one that will continually remind us that we are on 
the edge of the abyss, but one that will inspire us; 
not the short and simple annals of the poor, but the 
history of the people. For although we are supposed to 
have no recorded history, without us all history was 
end is impossible." 

With the attitude of the workingmen, such as these 
eloquent ?/ords from, one of their ablest spokesmen would 
indicate, there is no wonder that the best results were 






















































28 


young gentlemen who frequent her colleges , and because 

they ere reduced to a science of social conduct and in¬ 
dustrial practice which has made them and keeps them 
comfortable. But you cannot expect the people to en¬ 
thuse over a science which promises them no more than 
e life of precarious toil. 

"We want from Oxford a new science of national 
and international economics--a science that will teach 
us the true relationship between production and con¬ 
sumption; that will teach us the true economic relation¬ 
ship in which men ought to stand to men and men to 
women--e science based, not on the acquisitiveness of 
the Individual , but on social utility* Even as much 
do we want from her a new interpretation of history-- 
not one that will continually remind us that we are on 
the edge of the abyss, but one that will inspire us; 
not the short and simple annals of the poor, but the 
history of the people. For although we are supposed to 
have no recorded history, without us all history was 
end is impossible." 

With the attitude of the workingmen, such as these 
eloquent words from one of their ablest spokesmen would 
indicate, there is no wonder that the best results were 








£9 


slow in coming from University Extension Work. But at 
the Oxford Summer Meeting a new agency entered the field. 
This was the organization, now known as the Workers 1 
Educational Association, which according to the annual 
report of 1911, consisted at that time of 1,541 organ¬ 
izations, including Trade Unions, Trades Councils, Co¬ 
operative Committees, Adult Schools and Classes, Univ¬ 
ersity bodies , Local Education Authorities , Workingmen 1 s 
Clubs and Institutes , Teachers 1 Associations, Education-' 
al and Literary Societies and other societies. 

Its purpose is to stimulate the demand for educat¬ 
ion and to organize the supply in the interests of 
those who are largely occupied by manual labour. It is 
non-political and non-sectarian and through its organ¬ 
ization consisting of a Central Council, eight District 
Committees, and more than UO branches , it has exerted 
and is exerting a profound influence in freeing the 
minds of the people from suspicion of each other and 
other influences which retard true educational progress. 

Its proud boast is that it has brought together on its 
platform men of every position and calling in life, 
from the agnostic to the Salvation Army Officer and 
from the statesman to the day labourer. 






























' . 


. 







. 














' 














. 












30 - 


Its chief accomplishment, however , in so far as the 
purpose of this discussion is concerned has been the 
initiation of the Tutorial Class Movement. At a Con¬ 
ference held at Oxford in August , 1907 , between repres¬ 
entatives of the University and the working classes the 
establishment of Tutorial Classes beyond the limits of 
the University was recommended. 

The Tutorial Class, while retaining many of the char- 

I acteristics of the ordinary Extension Class , has some 
peculiar features. The number of the class is limited 
to about thirty who pledge themselves to attend a three 
year course of classes , twenty-four annually of two 
hours duration each and to write a certain number of 
essays, usually twelve Annually, on.subjects prescribed 
by the lecturer. 

The subjects of study have generally been some phase 

t f Economic or Industrial History, but some classes 
ave chosen Literature and Natural History. Nearly all 
the students are working men and women, some of them 
leaders in labour organizations. The local management 

F s usually undertaken by the Workers 1 Educational Assoe- 
ation while the general management of the work and the 
appointment of the lecturers are in the hands of a 









31 


Joint Committee consisting of an eoual number of Univ- 

1 

ersity men end of representatives of the Association, 

The financing of the work has presented the most 
serious difficulty. For the classes conducted in con¬ 
nection with the University of Oxford the tutor receives 
£80 for the twenty-four weeks work. As he is expected 
to conduct five classes his total income is £400. The 
tutors working under the direction of the other Univer¬ 
sities receive somewhat less. The cost is distributed 
in three directions , the University bearing half and the 
remainder being made up of' grants from the Board of Ed¬ 
ucation and the Local Educational Authority. As the 
funds are strictly limited at the present time not so 
many classes are being opened as there is opportunity 
for , but the leaders of the movement feel confident 
that funds will be forthcoming as soon as the general 
puhlic realize the value of the work being done. 

The extent of the work is shown by the fact that 
for the session of 1911-12 103 classes were at work 
with 2,500 students, 75 % of whom attended at least 
fourteen of the lectures. 

The last development in connection with the Tutor¬ 
ial Classes is the organization of summer classes , the 


i # 


P n r -1 


ongress of Universities-:'London ’12. p. 279 







- 32 - 

first of which was held at Oxford in July and August 
of 1910. The object of these is to give intensive 
instruction for a short period to groups of picked 
students. It is confidently expected that these Sum¬ 
mer Classes will be a permanent institution. 

The results so far from the Tutorial Class Move¬ 
ment seem to justify the predictions of those respon¬ 
sible for their establishment. During 1911 a special 
inspection was made of some. 14 classes by the Board 
of Education and the report prepared in this connect¬ 
ion has nothing but commendation for the quality of 
work being done , which the inspectors agreed was in 
many cases quite equal to work of a similar charact¬ 
er done by regular students in attendance at the Un¬ 
iversities. As a matter of fact some of the essays 
produced by students in Tutorial Classes are collect¬ 
ed and given to students reading for degrees in the 
Universities. 

One of the most remarkable features of this lat¬ 
est development in University Extension Work in Eng¬ 
land is the spirit and zeal developed among the mem¬ 
bers of the classes. From some of the older classes 
missionaries are sent out who organize and teach 








33 


classes in villages end smeller centres which cannot 
support e regular class. These men give their services 
•free simply animated by the desire to share the light 
which they have received with their less fortunate 
fellow-workmen. 

A concluding paragraph from the report of H. M. 
Inspectors on the Tutorial Classes sums up the general 
impression made on all who have seem them at work. 

”We have only to add, in conclusion, that no one 
could attend these classes without being struck by the 
zeal and earnestness of the students, their happy re¬ 
lations with the lecturer , the general atmosphere of 
comradeship and good feeling in the classes , and the 
strong appreciation by the students of the benefits 
which they are deriving from, the work. These impress¬ 
ions are not derived from any single class or type of 
classes. They are common to the diverse and widely 
scattered centres which we have visited, and they in¬ 
dicate the possibility of a very wide extension of 

1 

teaching of this type." 

The consensus of opinion among British educators 
as expressed in the numerous reports issued upon the 
subject is that University Extension of the older type, 

1. Appendix 3. University Tutorial Classes. Mansbridge. 








34 


which has .not been by any means superseded , but rather 
supplemented and stimulated by these later developments, 
as well as the Tutorial Classes are both educational 
agencies which have and will continue to have a definite* 
recognized and important place in the spread of know¬ 
ledge in Great Britain as well as in other countries. 


II. 

Turning for a moment to a consideration of Univer¬ 
sity Extension in Australia, where the Universities seem 
to follow the British traditions more closely than those 
of Canada or the United States , a rather curious state 
of affairs prevails. According to the statements of re¬ 
presentatives of the University of Melbourne , up to the 
present time they have not got into vital touch with the 
orking man at all. While University Extension Lect¬ 
ures have been held in various centres for several years 
it is stated that the representatives of labour held 
aloof. One of the delegates claimed that the workingman 
of Australia did not think the University could teach 
iim anything. One cannot help feeling after reading 
the remarks of this speaker that in his attitude there 
1. Report of Congress of Universities. 1912. p. 298. 











35 


is much of that point of view of which Mr. MacTavish 
spoke in his address referred to above , where the uni¬ 
versity is implicitly and explicitly accused of try¬ 
ing to impose her interpretation of economics and 
history--which it must be confessed is all too likely 
to be that of the "master class "--upon the workingman. 
So that if he prefers his political meeting and his 
club to University Extension lectures given by a men 
who is thoroughly imbued with a class spirit ,-end that 
of a class whose whole tradition is diametrically op¬ 
posed to the present day aspiration of the working 
man-anyone with any power of discrimination will not 
blame him* 

Another o.f the Australian delegates to the Confer¬ 
ence stated that he was convinced University Extension 
Work in Australia had been a comparative failure , but 
he had been much impressed by a visit paid to the Univ¬ 
ersity of Wisconsin where he was very willing to con¬ 
fess the movement had not been a failure. 

However , from the University of Aidelaide came the 
cheering report that the Labour Government of 

South Australia had just increased the annual grant 
to the University by £4,000 in perpetuity, and that in 
that state there was the warmest sympathy and co-op- 












36 


eration between the working men end the University. 

Recently, Mr. Mensbridge , secretary of the W. E. A. 
in England and one of the prime movers in the Tutorial 
Class Movement , visited Australia and the Universities 
of the Commonwealth ere now taking up the question of 
launching a similar movement in that country. The 
writer regrets that more detailed information is not 
available with reference to University Extension Work 
in the Antipodes , but a number of inquiries addressed 
to Universities were unanswered, possibly because of the 
their having gone astray in the mails. 

On the continent of Europe there does not appear to 
be an organized Extension Movement among the Universities 
though many of the educators are following with interest 
the Tutorial Class Movement and it is thought that some 
adaptation of this scheme may be introduced there , part¬ 
icularly in Germany. 

III. 

The one country outside 6f Great Britain where the idea 
of University Extension seems to have taken root firmly 
is the United States. Financial support is accorded 
the Extension Divisions in some of the American State 








37 


Universities of the Middle West--such as Wisconsin 
end Minnesots--on a scale that , to quote a delegate 
at the Congress, "makes one's mouth water" and people 
as a whole seem to thoroughly appreciate the efforts 
which are being made to make the "State University 
co-extensive with the State." 

Two distinct sides of Extension Work are in evidence 
in connection with the development of American Colleges 
I and Universities--Agricultursl Extension Teaching and 
University Extension of the more general type. While 
the ideals of the two are identical the methods are 
necessarily somewhat different and each will be treated 
later in some detail. 

The United States , which has always been the home of 
popular movements , was not devoid of these along educ- 
I ational lines. 

The American National Lyceum, which was founded in 
1831, although not formally connected with any univer¬ 
sity, was a por/erful agent for diffusing university in¬ 
fluences. To its lectures courses , which were given in 
every part of the country, such men as Daniel Webster , 
Emerson, Horace Mann and Wendell Phillips contributed. 

The Lowell Institute of Boston and the Peabody In- 











38 


stitute of Baltimore are both outgrowths of the Lyceum. 
The Lyceum also promoted debating clubs and introduced 
the travelling library which is such an important aid 
to Extension Work when in 1831 it inaugurated its it in 
ersting libraries/ 1 

Such an authority as Mr. H. B. Adams in the Report 
of the United States Bureau of Education for 1900 states 
that the summer schools of Wisconsin, Harvard, Virginia 
and other state universities can be directly traced to 
the Lyceum, and that the summer schools of Oxford and 
Cambridge were suggested by American experience. 

Correspondence-study, which is one. of the outstand¬ 
ing features of University Extension Work in America, 
appears to have been introduced by Chautauqua about the 
year 1878, nine years before its introduction into Eng¬ 
land , under the title "Printed Lectures.” These lect¬ 
ures were very similar to the correspondence study as¬ 
signments of the present time. 

At one time it was possible for Chautaugua students 
to obtain University Degrees by pursuing its courses, 
these being granted by the University of Hew York. With 
the spread of home study opportunities however, this 
privilege was withdrawn. 

£t the meeting of the American Library Association 







39 


in September, 1887, Professor H, B. Adorns of Johns Hop¬ 
kins University presented the English system of Univ¬ 
ersity Extension. As 8 result of the interest crested 
extension work was undertoken under the auspices of 
the puh]ic libraries of Buffalo, Chicago and St. Louis. 

The first state appropriation for the organization 
of university extension was made by the state of Hew 
York in 1891 to the extent of $10 ,000 for organization, 
printing, and supervision. 

This grant followed the action of a committee of 
Hew York State and colleges who recommended the intro¬ 
duction of university extension as an integral part of 

the State educational system. 

. 

In 1890 at Philadelphia the American Society for the 
Extension of University Teaching 1 *-an organization in- 

; dependent of University aid--was organized and work 

■ 

started along the lines in vogue in England. In six 
months’ time twenty-three centres were at work. 

To what a small extent the Hew York appropriation,: 
furthered the real university extension type of work is 
indicated by a quotation from the report of Mr. Dewey 
to the regents of the university. 

’’The university extension law met with opposition 

from the legislature till the- clause was added that 











40 


in.working out a system in which one great essential 
was lectures, no money should he paid to lecturers. 

Thus the opponents were willing to have the play of 
Hamlet if the Prince of Denmark could be excluded by 
state law, Fortunately (continues Mr. Dewey) there 
was no prejudice against public libraries and we took 
the line of least resistance and spent our time and 
money in building up libraries and developing our 
splendid system of travelling libraries and collect¬ 
ions. The language of the appropriation allowed us 
! to develop study clubs , to do some general adminis¬ 
trative work and print syllabi for occasional exten¬ 
sion courses throughout the state , but we had no funds 

for the two most essential elements , competent organ- 

1 

izers and experienced lecturers.” 

In 1891 an association was formed in Chicago for the 
extension of university teaching, but when in 1892 the 
University of Chicago made extension work part of its 
regular program this organization was disbanded. 

1. Paper on University Extension. Dean Beber before the 

Association of American Universities. 1910. 









41 


In December of 1891 a national congress in the in¬ 
terests of University Extension-was held at Philadel¬ 
phia, In the four years since Mr. Adam's address ex¬ 
tension work had been organized by twenty-eight states 
and territories and the enthusiasm of the delegates 
knew no bounds. Any one who ventured a note of warn¬ 
ing that this sudden zeal might receive a check was 
hailed as a pessimist. All were obsessed with a vis¬ 
ion of "university education for the whole nation or- 

1 

ganized on itinerant lines." 

During the next few years a decided reaction set 

in and many were ready to indorse the statements of 

2 

the writer of "Doubts about University Extension" 
who contended that the success of the university extea” 
sion movement in England was due to the fact that it 
"accompanied a general democratic upheaval of an aris¬ 
tocratic nation, it springs up in the-neighbourhood 
of universities where the common people do not resort; 
in its country other facilities ^or enabling man to 

1. Paper on University Extension, Dean Eeber , at Con¬ 
gress As. A. U. Madison, 1911. 

2. Atlantic Monthly, March, 1895, Prof. G. W. Palmer. 







42 


capture knowledge do not exist.” The same writer ser¬ 
iously questioned whether America with its magnificent 
distances was susceptible to the seme methods of 
treatment as England with its compact territory, dense 
settlement and well organized system of transportation* 

According to Dean Reber , in his monograph on the 
subject of University Extension, at this time the cur¬ 
rent publications abounded in expressions to the effect 
that University Extension was dead in America. Prom 
the gibe of one of its opponents who described it as 
offering r, the second rate at second hand” to the pess¬ 
imistic statements of its friends that "it failed be¬ 
cause it did not meet a popular demand” and ”It has 
not created so large a body of serious students as was 
expected” or "University Extension has fallen into 
channels of. papular appeal" , the whole range of unfav¬ 
ourable comment was covered and there were those who 
voiced the sentiments of the Oxford commissioners long 
before that the resources of universities were all re¬ 
quired to develop properly the work within their walls. 

However , in spite of these dismal forebodings 
University Extension has survived in America and at 
present forms a definite part of the program of more 
than fifty universities and colleges. 
































■ 


























































■ • 



43 


In 1910 no loss then 23 state universi ties were 
offering general extension 7/ork, 15 of which had fully 
organized extension divisions. (Universities of Cal- 
ifornia , Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Iowa, 
’Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, Nevada, Oklahoma, Oregon, Tennessee, Texas, 

Utah, Washington, Wisconsin, Wyoming, Pennsylvania 

1 

State College and Rhode Island State College.) 

Universities offering credit work by means of ex¬ 


tension courses numbered 22 (Brown, Chicago, Cincin¬ 
nati , Colorado, Columbia, Florida, Harvard, Indiana, 

; 

Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota., Missouri, Nebraska, No.rth- 

|western, Oregon, Pittsburgh, Texas, Toledo, Tulane , 

' 

Washington--at St. Louis-~Wisconsin, and Wyoming). El¬ 
even of the foregoing use correspondence study in their 

teaching (Chicago, Florida, Indiana, Kansas, Minnesota, 
\ / 

Nebraska, Oregon, Texas, Washington, Wisconsin and Wy- 

rv • 

oming) . 




As it has always been even in England, so in the 
United States, the problem of securing men with the 
peculiar qualifications necessary, for successful ex¬ 
tension, work is a serious one. Mr. Lyman W. Powell, 
at one time secretary of extension work at Wisconsin, 
is reported to hove said some years ago of university 
1-2 Paper by Dean Reber. 




44 


extension "It is not a system; it is e man." To a 
degree this is still true but.not so much as formerly. 
The many phases of extension work have been developed 
until its success or failure does not depend entirely 
upon a staff of lecturers who combine the qualities of 
teacher , organiser, public speaker, scholar and phil¬ 
anthropist ." 

The older attitude toward extension work is re¬ 
flected by the statement of President Hadley of Yale. 

"We made some experiments of that- kind fifteen year 
ago , and repeated them in a little different form five 
or six years ago; but we felt in both cases that with 
conditions as they existed in this part of the country, 
the men who were capable of conducting such courses 
could obtain larger results by directing their energies 
into other channels." 

Side by side with this should be placed the state¬ 
ment of an experienced lecturer in extension work from a 
report of the department of extension of Columbia Uni- 
vers ity. 

"like all ideas and movements , it has fulfilled it¬ 
self in unseen ways. It is no longer an occasional and 
accidental phase of university work; it is an organic 
1 Dean P.eber’s Pater. 







J 



45 


pert of it. It is no longer concerned merely or prim¬ 
arily with short lecture courses; for without neglect¬ 
ing the lecture work that appeals to general audiences, 
it aims to reach, like any other part of the university, 
a student hody--the very large body of partial or non¬ 
resident students " 

A personal letter received by the writer from the 
Director of Extension Teaching at Columbia University 
shows how far that institution has approached the ideal. 
The appropriation for extension teaching at Columbia for 
the session 1913-14 was $62,000, all of which it was ex¬ 
pected would be returned in fees. A staff of 157 persons 
was employed full or part time in handling the work. 

The amazing part of the whole thing is that this univer¬ 
sity has succeeded, to such a degree in showing the vital 
importance of extension teaching in its constituency 
that it can collect over $62,000 in fees,for extra mur¬ 
al teaching in a single year. The director called at¬ 
tention to the difference between the State Universities 
and Columbia, since in the former case the appropriat¬ 
ion for extension work was not returnable while in the 
case of Columbia the work had to be made , in the nature 
of the case , self-supporting. 











- 46 - 

For the year 1909 Columbia had 12 ,925 extra mur¬ 
al students of whom 1,206 were taking work for credit 
and 11,719 for non-credit courses. In addition to ex¬ 
tension work in the way of evening courses at the univer 
sity itself, credit courses were carried on at several 
centres in end about New York City, at which twenty 
courses were given including 615 lectures. Non-credit 
work was conducted at fifteen centres. 

Turning for the time to a slightly more detailed 
treatment of the methods of extension .teaching in vogue 
j in America, the attention is arrested at once by the im¬ 
mense variety and scope of extension teaching in agrir 

' 

culture and the tremendous progress which has been made 
in a little more than a quarter of a century, i. e. , 
since the birth of scientific agriculture as the express 
; ion is understood to-day. 

.Agriculture, which has been the last of the great 
industries to be put upon a scientific basis, was unfort 
unate in that it was compelled to wait for the develop¬ 
ment of such phases' of the Natural Sciences as are in¬ 
timately related to it. Organic chemistry, the most 
difficult branch of that science, is the part having to 
do with agriculture. Soil physics is a creation of 







47 


yesterday. But in the last twenty-five years an im¬ 
mense amount of invaluable knowledge has been accum¬ 
ulated at experiment stations and agricultural colleges 
and the problem before the agricultural teachers is to 
get this into the hands of the actual tiller® of the 
soil. 

Several causes have contributed to make the gen¬ 
eral adoption of scientific practice in agriculture 
; slow. In the first place the man who boasts a pedi¬ 
gree of several generations of farmer ancestry is very 
| sceptical of the ability of any "college professor" to 
teach him anything about farming. Has he not been farm- 
■ ing all his life and has he not the experience of the 
generations before him on which to draw? So this state 
of affairs actually exists that the man to be benefited 
has first to be convinced that he needs any help. Then 
again the first and most valuable work in the field was 
done by pure scientists, who embodied the results of 
their work in bulletins of such a technical character 
as to be absolutely unreadable by an ordinary individ¬ 
ual. And again, until recent years the financial support 
given agricultural education has been of such a meagre 
sort in comparison with the work to be accomplished 








48 


that little progress could be made. 

There have not been wanting also those who have 
asked by what right ought the farmer to claim special 
trade education at the public expense any more than the 
members of any other calling. The obvious answer which 
has been somewhat slow in coming (except on the polit¬ 
ical platform) is that the base of the pyramid of soc¬ 
iety is agriculture, end that all the other callings 
are only subsidiary to it. The time may come when 
workers in all vocations will be trained by the state , 
but be that as it may no state can passively allow its 
agriculture to decline, and hope to survive. 

Within the last few years a great variety of agen¬ 
cies for agricultural extension teaching have been 
devised and put in practice. For the sake of clearness, 
these as arranged by a typical College of Agriculture, 
may be enumerated as: 

A. Systematic instruction comprising: 

(1) The Extension School, 

( 2 ) The Demonstration Farms, 

( 3 ) The Correspondence Course, 

■ 

(4) The Lecture and Heading Course, 

(5) The Study Club. 







































































49 


B. Informal Teaching, comprising: 

(1) The Convention end Lecture; 

(a) The Farmers’ Institute, 

(b) Farmers 1 Week, 

(c) The Conference, 

(d) The Occasional Lecture* 

(2) The Object Lesson: 

(a) The Demonstration, 

(b) The Railway Special, 

(c) The Exhibit , 

(d) The Educational Excursion. 

( 3 ) The Publication, comprising: 

(a) The Press Bulletin, 

(b) The Leaflet, 

(c) The Monograph f 

( d) The Travelling Library. 

( 4 ) Advisory Work: 

( a) Correspondence , 

(b) The Travelling Advisor or Expert, 

(c) The District Field Agent. 

C. Organization, comprising: 

(1) The Rural Conference, 

( 2 ) The Campaign, 

(3) The Definite Work of Organization or Federation. 




50 


A. Certain types of Extension Work are naturally 
gathered under a general heading inasmuch as their pur¬ 
pose is to give more or less systematic and formal in¬ 
struction to a non-resident "body of students.. In other 
words, their object is to develop a course of study which, 
although shorter than those of the regular college work, 
yet makes possible the rather careful study and analysis 
of some branch of knowledge. 

B. There is no sharp line of distinction between the 
first and second method other than that the second is 
more occasional and stimulating as well as suggestive. 

C. This form of extension work presents the agricul¬ 
tural college in its capacity as the unifying agency 
for the forces at work in the interests of rural better¬ 
ment. One of the most conspicuous functions of the up- 
to-date college of Agriculture is that of strengthen¬ 
ing with all its resources the different agencies, both 
religious a.nd commercial which are trying to spread the 
gospel of scientific agriculture. 

A. Formal Instruction: 

(l) The extension school of agriculture is a group of 
short courses of instruction, organized as a school, 
and held at some other place than the college. It is 
essentially a school of instruction. It must have 










| subjects systematically presented end a regular enrol¬ 
ment , and should have discussions affording opportunity 
for questioning by both instructors and students , and 
so far as possible theory should be supplemented by lab¬ 
oratory work. For example , in connection with the agri¬ 
cultural short course schools in the Province of Alberta , 
several carloads of choice live-stock are used for pur¬ 
poses of illustration and practice in stock judging by 
the students. The length of the session is immaterial; 
its essential characteristic is that in its substantial 
features it should be a real school of instruction. 

(2) The Demonstration Farm. 

The demonstration farm is designed to be a permanent 
object lesson to the farmers within its. neighbourhood. 

It is not an experiment station but its fundamental idea 
is to put into actual practice the facts which have been 
established by experiment. It is intended to show that 
the teaching of the agricultural college is capable of 
application to ordinary field conditions. It teaches 
recognized principles by actually demonstrating their 


application. 


ion 


Broadly speaking there are two types of 
farm, the co-operative and institutional. 


demonstrat- 


The latter 










52 


is the farm owned by the college or state and run under 
the direct control of the college or state, instructors. 
The former is of the type much in vogue, for example , 
in Minnesota, where a farmer agrees for a term of years 
to conduct his operations under the advice of a state 
'agricultural expert upon whose assistance he may draw 
at all times. This is designed as a first hand object 
lesson to the farmer and his immediate neighbourhood of 
what can be done by them under local conditions by adopt 
ing approved scientific principles. Sometimes in a 
given case only one feature may be illustrated; it may 
be a demonstration grass plot , the demonstration pasture 
the demonstration orchard, the demonstration barn, etc. 
The essential idea is some permanent object lession de¬ 
monstrating the application of fundamental principles. 

(3) The Correspondence Course. 

The correspondence course is a series of systematic 
lessons, offered either by means of a text-book, out- 
nines, or printed lectures, supplemented by formal re¬ 
ports which are corrected and returned to the student. 

It is presumed that this course will be pursued until 
completed. It may or may not have a credit standard in 
the regular collegiate work of the institution. It may 







53 - 


be 8Iso and frequently is supplemented by personal cor¬ 
respondence in addition to the more formal work. 

(4) The Lecture Course. 

The lecture course comprises a series of lectures 
usually by one person and covering with some thorough¬ 
ness a give field of study. It is accompanied by dis¬ 
cussion and written reports. Heading courses consisting 
of a recommended 1ist of books are given to supplement 
the lectures. Incidentally it may be necessary to state 
that occasional lectures or "popular” courses are not 
considered phases of this type of extension work. 

(5) The Study Club. 

The study club is an organized group of persons , 
designed to afford, through social contact and mutual 
discussion, more complete utilization of books, lectures, 
or correspondence courses. The study club may be organ¬ 
ized as a part of any farmers' organization, women's 
club, high school, or it may have a distinct organization 
of its own. It is not usual to include boys’ and girls' 
clubs under this heading unless some systematic study is 
carried on in connection with them. 

B. Informal Teaching: 

(l) The Convention and Lecture. 











54 


This type of extension work includes various meth¬ 
ods hy means of which information is presented orally 
either at a single meeting hy a number of speakers , or 
by a single lecture before some organization or other 
group of people. 

(a) The farmers’ institute, one of the oldest forms of 
extension work, is a meeting of from one to three days 
duration, for the purpose of discussing problems con¬ 
nected with country life. Its aim is inspirational 
rather than logical or analytical. The method is usual¬ 
ly to have a short presentation of a topic followed by 
discussion. A characteristic feature of the institute 

i is the employment as speakers of men who are not spec¬ 
ialists but farmers or others who have made particular sue 
cesses in different lines of work. These relate their 
ow r n experiences and seek to stimulate their hearers to 
follow their example in the hope of securing like fav¬ 
ourable results. Thus the teaching of an institute is 
rather incidental and indirect. 

(b) Farmers 1 Week. 

This is a name given to a gathering of farmers , 
held usually at the state agricultural college during 
the winter season. It has rather more the nature of a 




55 


school then an Institute. Usually the majority of the 
speakers ere recognized professional experts.. Question 
and answer are used, hut discussion is not a promin¬ 
ent feature of the sessions. 

(c) The Conference. 

This is a meeting held for the purpose of taking 
up a particular subject or of reaching a particular 
class. As e rule its purpose is to spread propaganda. 
It may be "a good road conference" or a "dairy confer¬ 
ence"; the special object is to discuss a restricted 
field for the purpose of arousing public opinion or pro 
yoking action along a particular line of work. Or a 
more general theme might be discussed, such as agricul¬ 
ture and the country life movement , as was done recent¬ 
ly in California, but with the object of reaching a 
particular class of people , in this case the country 
ministers. In other cases it might be rural teachers, 
members of some club or institute. 

(d) The Occasional lecture. 

The individual lectures are designed to meet the 
needs of different agencies in connection with their 
ordinary activities. They may be before all sorts of 
organizations and on all sorts of topics. Their essent 








56 


ial characteristic is the lack of arrangement into 
systematic courses or groups. 

( 2 ) The Object Lesson: 

The object lesson is a phrase used to indicate the 
i objective and concrete method of reaching the minds to 
be informed. The object lesson may be used freely in 
conjunction with conferences or lectures; it may be 
developed independently , or on the other hand, it may 
incidentally have connected with it a lecture , or even 
| a.conference. 

(a) The Demonstration. 

The demonstration is a method of showing a group 
I of people how to perform a certain process or to carry 
out a certain theory. Its purpose is much the same as 
that of the demonstration farm only its form is not 
permanent. It is usually used to illustrate a partic¬ 
ular lecture and to reach a particular group. For exe 
| ample , the Live Stock Commissioner of the Province of 
-Alberts is in the habit of giving instruction on the 
proper method of slaughtering and curing meats. The 
demonstration method is used-, one or more animals be- 
ing slaughtered and the carcasses cut up either by the 
| instructor himself or by the students under his dir- 












57 


ection. This is only one of the many forms the dem¬ 
onstration may take which are as numerous as the ends 
to he obtained, 

(b) The Railway Special: 

This is a car or train fitted up with an exhibit 
of apparatus or products and accompanied by expert 
lecturers. Its outstanding feature is that it makes 
; comparatively short stops and serves many communities 
in a day’s run. Usually it has some definite object 
in view, i.e., it is a "dairy special", a "pure seed 
| special" , a "swine special", etc., or, as it sometimes 
| does , it may combine a number of these., in which case 
special cars are devoted to the illustration of the 
I different points. 

(c) The Exhibit. 

j 

One of the characteristic methods of teaching by 
means of object lessons is by an exhibit arranged at 
: a fair or convention. One of the best illustrations of 
this is the exhibit frequently set up at fairs by the 

I 

U. 3. Federal Department of Agriculture* which is design 
to show various phases of scientific agriculture. 

(d) The Educational Excursion. 

A common method of informal extension work is by 







58 


means of organized excursions to the agricultural 
college or demonstration farm or other education in¬ 
stitution, 

(3) The Publication: 

| (a) The Press Bulletin. 

The press bulletin is a condensed typewritten or 

■printed statement , sent to agricultural or other per- 

■ 

jiodicals at intervals with the expectation that it will 
be published either whole or in part. It may deal with 
some phase of agriculture or may contain the results of 
experiments being conducted or may call attention to 
any point likely to be of interest or value to the agri¬ 
cultural or general community. In some cases where the 
agricultural college is connected with the state univer¬ 
sity a general press bulletin is issued to which the 
agricultural department contributes in common with the 
bther departments. 

(b) The Leaflet. 

The printed leaflet is usually distributed to an 
definite mailing list , and its chief function is to 
serve as a brief announcement of experiments , or better , 
short concise treatment of important agricultural facts 
that need wide distribution but which appeal particul- 












59 


arly to the more intelligent farmers. 

(c) The Monograph. 

The monograph is a. booklet or pamphlet treating 
of some important subject in the field of agriculture. 
It is not a techincal bulletin, but frequently contains 
the gist of such a bulletin worked, over into a popular 
form so as to appeal to the average'farmer. In effect 
it often amounts to a compilation of the results of a 
number of experiments. 

( d) The Travel].ing library. 

The travelling’ library is a well recognised agent 
of extension work. It is not usually operated direct¬ 
ly by a college or department of agriculture, but these 
often act as distributing agents. Usually the actual 
machinery for the development of the travelling lib¬ 
rary work is in the hands of a library commission, but 
there is always a close connection between extension 
agencies and the public library boards , however they 
may be comprised. 

(4) Advisory Work: 

(a) The current correspondence of the extension de¬ 
partment is incapable of being organized in a formal 
way because it comes from the appeal of farmers for in¬ 
formation from men they have met in the field whose 










reputation as authorities makes their particular opin¬ 
ion desirable. Any officer of an agricultural college 
or department of agriculture may be called upon for ... 
such service , the function of the extension department 
being that of a clearing house for information of in¬ 
terest , and advice to farmers. 

(b) Travelling Advisor or Expert. 

The travelling advisor or expert is a man who 
gives practically all his time to the field work, 
usually in some specialty like that of dairying or 
agronomy, and whose function is to serve communities 
and individuals as a professional advisor. 

(cj The District Field Agent. 

The district field agent is a^ special type of ad¬ 
visor or expert. He is given a restricted field such 
as a county or district. He may be considered capable 
of giving advice in any line or his chief function may 
be that of acting as local clearing house between the 
farmers and the institution., rather than that of him¬ 
self giving expert advice. His chief task may be com- 

. 

munity building in the wider sense. 

C. Organization: 

The function of the extension work under this head 
is that of seeking to drew together the' scattered forces 









61 


: for rural progress that they may unite their efforts on 
behalf of the general betterment of the business of agri 
culture and country life. Some of the methods are: 

(l) The Rural Conference. 

A conference on rural progress or on country life , 
end a conference Of rural social workers are types of 
this method. These conferences differ from the ordin- 
|ary conferences already referred to , in that they are 
essentially conferences of representatives of organiz¬ 
ations and institutions. Further, they have as a spec¬ 
ial object discussion of the rural problem in its larg¬ 
er aspects , rather than its special or technical aspects 
( 2 ) The C amp sign. 

By a campaign is meant a combined effort on the 
part of many organizations and agencies , but usually 
under the general direction of the extension department , 
(though it may be managed by any other central agency, 
the extension service participating) , which attempts to 
|achieve notable improvement in some definite field of 
endeavour. An illustration is a dairy campaign , which 
:attempts to unite dairy associations and producers gen- 
erelly, together with consumers, middlemen, transport¬ 
ation companies , experiment stations , boards of agri¬ 
culture , the dairy bureau, boards of health, in a com- 










62 


prehensive effort to improve the milk supply end to 
bring et the seme time a surer profit to the farmer. 

(3) The Definite Work of Organization or Federation. 

Extension may seek to accomplish three distinct 
ends under this head. It may organize breeders 1 assoc¬ 
iations, farmers* clubs, boys’ and girls* clubs, wo¬ 
men 's clubs, etc.; it may co-oper^te in special enter¬ 
prises like the Grangers , with the Y. M. G. A. in some 
special work which these organizations ere fostering; 
it may seek to federate country life agencies into one 
general committee or co-operative enterprise in the 


federations for rural progress and betterment. 

The above analysis of the forms of agricultural 
extension work and definition of the terms used in con¬ 
nection with it is taken with very few minor modific¬ 


ations from a reply to a personal enquiry sent to one 
of the leading American Colleges of Agriculture. It is 
merely an attempt to formulate in a concise and concrete 

iway a description of the different devices at present 

■ 

in use in the work of agricultural extension work. It 
is not. for a moment assumed that by any means all the 
possible methods have been discovered, but it is clear 
that the scope end variety of the work is enormous. All 














63 


of the agencies mentioned ere in use in many of the 
United States and the Provinces of Canada. When or 
where each was first used would he a task hopelessly 
outside the limits of this discussion to describe. It 
is sufficient to note that practically all are discov¬ 
eries of the last twenty-five years and many of them 
of the last ten. That the leaders in agricultural educ^* 
stion, as well as the legislators, have faith in their 
effectiveness is shown by the way'money is being voted 
for their continuance and extension. The State of Geor¬ 
gia is spending $40 ,000 this year on agricultural exten¬ 
sion , $15,000 of which is devoted to the promotion of 
boys' and girls' clubs; Wisconsin is spending an even 
larger amount on similar work and so are Illinois, Minne¬ 
sota and California. Iowa is devoting $81,000 to its 
extension v/ork. Practically every state in the American 

[Union is voting most generously in the effort to achieve 

1 

by means of agricultural education what Dean Davenport 

calls a "permanent agriculture." 

University Extension Work apart from teaching in 

Agriculture is best exemplified in the United States by 

. 

the University of Wisconsin. The University Extension 
Division of that State was re-organized in 1906 and since 

1. Illinois College of agriculture.. 









■ 





64 


that time has pursued an aggressive policy of develop¬ 
ment which has placed it at the front among the State 
Universities of the United States, 

So frequently has the statement been made of Wis¬ 
consin that the boundaries of the State University 
campus are identical with those of the State it¬ 
self as to become a truism, but an examination of the 
genius of its organization and work makes the accuracy 
of the claim more evident. 

The University of Wisconsin is based upon a tripos 
the three supports of which are research, teaching, 
and popularization. In each of these activities the 
Extension Division plays an important part. 

In organization it forms one of the co-ordinate 
colleges of the university, with a dean at its head. 
There are four departments of the Division (l) corres¬ 
pondence study, (2) instruction by lectures, (3) de¬ 
bating and public discussion,, (4) general information 
and welfare. Each of these departments is subdivided 
egein--for instance that of correspondence study into 
the twenty-nine departments in irhich instruction is 
given such as English, history, education, accounting, 
engineering, etc. Thirty-one instructors give full 
time and thirty-five part time to the correspondence 









65 


study work. A staff of ten is employed in the depart¬ 
ment of debating and public discussion, while that of 
instruction by lectures has a secretary, assistant 
secretary, and occasional assistance in the field. The 
department of general information and welfare has five 
bureaus with a chief at the head of each: (l) municipal 
reference, (-2) social centre development, ^3) health 
instruction, (4.) visual instruction, (5) community mus¬ 
ic . 

The State is divided into six districts, which will 
later be subdivided, with officers centrally located in 
each. At each office is a university district repres¬ 
entative with field organizers, itinerant instructors 
and the necessary clerical staff. 

The division employs 51 instructors and administrat¬ 
ors full time and 16 part time. In addition to these , 

18 of the resident faculty conduct correspondence study 
courses and 37 participate in the work in other ways. 

Of stenographers and clerks 45 are employed in the work 
of the division. 

In its correspondence study department the Univer¬ 
sity Extension Division of the University of Wisconsin 

' 

gave instruction during the academic year to 5,375 






66 


students. The fees received froic^ correspondence stud- 
;ents on the basis of $20 for each full course end $15 
for each additional course, amounted to more than $20-, 
000. The courses offered were 300 in number along 28 
departmental lines; 70 of these were in engineering 
sub jects. 

The ratio of credit students in correspondence 
courses varies at the different institutions. At the 
University of Oklahoma the proportion is 20 credit to 
1 non-credit; at the University of North Dakota, 3 
credit to 5 non-credit; at the University of Wisconsin 
1 credit to 7 non-credit; at the University of Indiana 
10 credit to 1 non-credit. The amount of credit ob¬ 
tainable by correspondence study varies with differ¬ 
ent universities , froin nothing to one half of the work 
required for the Bachelor’s Degree. 

There is a general agreement among instructors who 
come in contact with students working for credit by 
correspondence study that they are rather above the av¬ 
erage in earnestness of purpose and thoroughness of 
work. Where such students have come into residence 
for the purpose of completing their work for degrees 
they have more than held their own with the students 

who have taken all their work in residence. The fol- 







67 


lowing statement from a circular of the University of 

Wisconsin sums up the argument for correspondence study 
admirably. 

"The possibility of teaching by correspondence has 
been clearly demonstrated by practical experiment. While 
such instruction lacks some of the advantages which re¬ 
sidence study gives , it has compensating advantages of 
its own. In correspondence instruction teaching is per¬ 
sonal and individual. Every student studies and recites 
the whole lesson, comes in contact with the teacher as 
an individual, not as the member of a large class. It 
can be done at home, thereby bringing into the home a 
new influence and charm. Correspondence work arouses , 
throws a man upon his own resources and makes him self- 
reliant and self“determining." 

One of the most fruitful fields of university ex¬ 
tension work is that of assisting the work of element¬ 
ary schools and school teachers. Some nineteen univer¬ 
sities of the United States offer definite assistance 
to high and elementary schools. Single lectures and 
lecture courses are arranged, lantern slides and films 
are loaned, printed lectures to accompany theie are 
furnished, and debating is encouraged by the organiz¬ 
ation of leagues and debating societies and by prov- 








68 


iding material for debaters in the preparation of their 
subjects. The value of this work in unifying the ed¬ 
ucational forces is almost incalculable. In the work of 
! instruction by lectures , which is the oldest type of 

university extension work, the University of Wisconsin 

/• 

furnishes illustrations of practically every type be¬ 
ing carried on. 

There is the class lecture which roughly resembles 
the tutorial class of the English Universities. This 
is often used to give courses equivalent to those given 
in residence instruction to groups of students working 
toward; degrees. 

Again, lectures are arranged by members of the univ¬ 
ersity faculty for special occasions, such as commence” 
ment exercises and other community functions. These 
are provided at nominal cost. 

Probably the commonest type of extension lecture 
in the United States is that'Which combines instruction 
with entertainment. Very frequently courses are ar¬ 
ranged on the n lyceum TT plan. Such a course consists of 
a number of lectures of a more or less popular variety 
with musical recitals and readings interspersed. Some 
universities are opposed to offering the lyceptm courses 






69 


but a majority of those engaged in extension .work 0 :iua 
large scale seem to favour their use and there is no 
doubt that the demand for them is growing. It is estim¬ 
ated that during the college year, 1912-13 some 200,000 
persons attended lectures and concerts arranged by the 
extension division of the University of Wisconsin. The 
|number of courses offered is 209, made up of two-fifths 
concerts , two-fifths lectures , and one-fifth other 
forms of entertainment. About one-fourth of the contrib¬ 
utors to the courses are members of the university faculty. 
The remaining work is done by high class entertainers 
who are selected by the university extension author¬ 
ities. The method of organization of districts gives 
to-Wisconsin a peculiar advantage in the arrangement 
of courses suited to the local needs. 

The University of Michigan which is the leading ex¬ 
ponent of the non-lyceum type of lectures offers each 
year a limited number of lectures by members of the fac¬ 
ulty, which are given free of charge in order of applic¬ 
ation received. For the session If 1912-13 a list of 
309 lectures was given by 106 members of the faculty to 
audiences totalling 71,500 persons. 

Practically the universities engaged in extension 




70 


work offer lectures either singly or in courses. The 
methods with regard to expenses vary all the way from 
the lectures free of cost , as is done by the University 
of Michigan, to making the work done self-supporting, 
as is done hy the College of the City of New York, the 
University of Texas and a number of others. 

Local classes, somewhat after the tutorial class 
pattern, are conducted to a considerable extent by sev¬ 
eral American Universities. During the 1912-13 term, 

85 such classes were conducted in 29 cities with an at-? 
tendance of 1,493 students. A particularly noteworthy 
feature of these classes is the proportion which are of 
a vocational character. A number of them have been form¬ 
ed in shops and factories with the. co-operation of the 
management. 

In Wisconsin 18 instructors and professors give 
their entire time to engineering extension work. Eleven 
of these are located at the University itself, while 7 
are placed at the different industrial centres of the 
State. In many cases employers have fitted up class¬ 
rooms for their men and have given the time spent in 
study classes. In a number of cities the extension div¬ 
ision has headquarters with officers and class-rooms , 




71 


while in still others school and public library build¬ 
ings are used for teaching purposes. 

In all 35 American universities end colleges offer 
local classes , by far the larger proportion of them of 
a vocational nature. 

One of the kinds of university extension work which 
has had and still ehjoys large vogue in the United 
States is that conducted under the head of debating and 
public discussion. The aim of this work is to encour¬ 
age the study and 'discussion of public ouestions. De¬ 
bating societies and leagues are organised or encourag¬ 
ed to organize and material for the preparation of de¬ 
bates is lent in the form of package libraries made up 
of books, newspaper'.and magazine clippings and type¬ 
written extracts. Bulletins and briefs for debaters 
are published and supplied free to citizens of the State. 
In 1912-13 from the University of Wisconsin alone 2,- 
829 package libraries on 1,030 different subjects were 
sent to 347 different localities. Since the organiz¬ 
ation of this work in 1907 considerably over 10,000 
such libraries have been sent out. 

Other Universities are doing a great deal of this 
work,, particularly the Universities of Kansas, North 
Dakota, Texas and Washington. The list of subjects is 






72 


instructive and interesting. Woman Suffrage seems to 
hold the lead easily in the number of packages supplied., 
with Immigration a close second. 

Probably the most spectacular end in some respects 
the most useful university extension work is that con¬ 
ducted under the title of general welfare work. As has 
already been stated, at the University of Wisconsin, 
where this kind of work has its greatest development , 
welfare work is divided under five bureaus. 

The municipal reference bureau serves as a bureau 
of information for civic officials of the State and for 
citizens interested in the solution of municipal prob¬ 
lems. Data are collected on all subjects of municipal 
I government--pavements , sewers, water-works, street 
lighting, dust prevention, garbage collection, sanitat¬ 
ion, etc.--and this information is put within the reach 
of those who will use it. City reports and ordinances 
are gathered from all available sources and advice and 
information given. ffe&ei ordinances on subjects of mun¬ 
icipal regulations, such as the censorship of moving 
picture films, building codes, etc., are framed and 
submitted and the officials of towns and cities are 
given advice and information regarding the various types 





73 


of city government , management , accounting, insurance, 
etc., in the form of reference bulletins. 

In addition to providing information, the bureau of 
municipal reference assists communities in the solution 
of their problems by putting them in touch with experts 
on the different phases of municipal work. For instance , 
if a small city which is hot able to employ a consulting- 
engineer is planning to install a water works system an ex 
pert from the municipal engineering department is sent to 
make an investigation and.report on the best solution of 
the problem. At first members of the engineering pro¬ 
fession were a little suspicious of the engineering ex¬ 
tension work on the ground that it might interfere with 
their business , but the head of this bureau assured me 
that now they are in cordial sympathy with it as it act¬ 
ually assisted them , in that communities are enabled to 
undertake work requiring the services of engineers which 
they would not undertake without the advice and assist¬ 
ance of the extension division. 

The civic and social centre bureau has as its object 
the promotion of the use of the schoolhouse as the soc¬ 
ial centre of the community. It is urged that the use 
of the schoolhouse as a meeting place for the discuss- 









74 - 


ion of public questions will help to develop a public 
conscience which is now not always existent. 

A great deal has been accomplished in this widening 
the use of the school plant. A law has been passed by 
the state legislature requiring trustee boards to en¬ 
courage the use of schoolhouses as communitiy forums 
wherever the citizens are properly organized. The 
first year’s work of this bureau in the State of Wiscon¬ 
sin resulted in an increase of about 100 per cent in the 
use of schoolhouses for purposes of public service 
other than that of being used for school classes. Com¬ 
munities are advised and assisted to organize accord¬ 
ing to a definite plan and to engage when possible the 
services of a neighbourhood secretary to direct commun¬ 
ity work. A year’s program at a time is mapped out by 
the central bureau so that there is no lack of incent¬ 
ive to effort. 

The health instruction bureau has as its object the 
spread of information relating to public arid personal 
health with the belief that knowledge supplanting ig¬ 
norance will go far in the solution of health problems. 

Travelling exhibits have been prepared and are dis¬ 
played at conventions, schools, fairs, libraries, etc. 







75 


Information is spread by the use of charts , bulletins , 
lantern slides, end moving pictures. Bulletins on in¬ 
fant mortality and the care of the baby as well as on 
preventable diseases and on rural hygiene are prepared 
and circulated. A health bureau news service is given 
a large mrber of the newspapers of the state on sub¬ 
jects of personal and public hygiene. Correspondence 
courses are offered on principles and practices of san¬ 
itation and investigations are conducted. The object is 
to give the general public, in practical form, that in¬ 
formation upon which personal and public health depend. 

The work for public welfare along health lines done 
by the University of Wisconsin is only typical of that 
being done by many other American universities. One 
institution which deserves special mention in this con¬ 
nection is the University of Cincinnati. The social 
science department has organized a "confidential exchange" 
which with a council of charities acts as a clearing house 
for social service workers end organizations. Some 20,- 
000 cases a year are treated in dispensaries directed by 
the college of medicine with clinical instructors from 
the university. School garden work is encouraged in 
every possible way as well as other child welfare work. 

A school garden fair is held annually in connection with 







76 


the vacant lot gardening carried on by the school chil¬ 
dren of the city. 

The department of psychology conducts a laboratory 
for the investigation of defective and retarded child¬ 
ren discovered in the public schools. Special schools 

S -^or defective and retarded children have been estab- 
.ished as a result of this work. The closest co-oper- 
tion exists between the university and the educational 
authorities of the city and district in the playground 
2 nd physical education movement. A municipal refer¬ 
ence library with two persons in charge is- conducted in 
■;he City Hell under the direction of the department of 
political science. 

The Universities of Illinois , North Dakota , Cal¬ 
ifornia and a large number of others also are doing 
jaggressive work in the interests of public health. 

At the University of Wisconsin a bureau of commun- 
• ity music has been established to spread the use of 
music through the State. Correspondence courses in 
music are being conducted to stimulate the use of mus- 
: ic by the individual and community. A pamphlet with 
18 selected songs has been published and community chor 









77 


uses have been organized in a number of centres in the 
State. 

In recognition of the great educational possibilities 
of lantern slides and moving picture films a bureau of 
visual instruction has been organized at the University 
of Wisconsin. A carefully selected library of education 
al lantern slides is being accumulated for lending to 
the schools of the State in connection with the regular 
class work of the schools. Some of them are purchased, 
but by far the greater number are being made in the de¬ 
partment in a specially eouipped laboratory. 

Moving picture films are being collected in the same 
way for the use of schools and community centres wher¬ 
ever these are equipped toemake use of them. Manuscript 
readings are supplied with slides and films to add to 
their entertaining and educational value. 

All the bureaus under the general welfare department 
combine their forces in community institutes , social 
service institutes, and welfare exhibits. The object 
of the first mentioned is to concentrate the attention 
of a community upon the study of some of its own prob¬ 
lems for a period of three or four days. The plan is 






78 


to make such a vivid impression that the community will 
be roused to undertake actively the solution of its pro- 
: blemsj with the assistance of the University and State 
experts• 

The social service institute is designed to train 
social service specialists in the larger cities on such 
subjects as the relief of poverty, social service in 
hospitals , the treatment of juvenile delinquency and 
:its prevention. 

The community exhibit emphasizes but one topic, 

■ 

such as health. An exhibit furnishes the central feat¬ 
ure of the program which is supplemented by the explan¬ 
ations , addresses, working models, lantern slides and 
|moving pictures. 

The college of agriculture co-operates by conduct¬ 
ing general welfare work in the rural districts along 
lines already indicated under the outline of agricul¬ 
tural college extension. 

Before passing on to deal in conclusion vith Univer¬ 
sity Extension Work as it has developed in Canada mention 
must be made of an outgrowth of the whole movement in 

the United States. This is the establishment of ex¬ 
tension universities devoted entirely to instruction 








79 


of university gre.de "by correspondence. Although there 
ere £ number of such institutions the mention of one is 
sufficient. La Salle Extension University, in Chicago, 
offers correspondence courses of university grade on the 
completion of which degrees are granted on a number of 
subjects, all utilitarian in their nature. The list 
includes such studies as lav/, accounting, business, in¬ 
terstate commerce, etc. As guarantee of the confidence 
the management have in the quality of their work && 

I agreement is signed to coach free of charge for the bar 
examinations of his state any law student who has sue- 
: cessfully completed the regular course , but who has fail 
ed in examinations for admission to practice 1aw. This 
university numbers its students by the thousand and 
includes among its instructors and writers of text-book 
some of the leading authorities on the subjects includ- 
; ed in its .curriculum. One of the outstanding contrib¬ 
utions of extension teaching:is the unioue type of text- 
beak which has been produced to meet the need of the 
student who must work by himself. Some of them are 

marvels in clear and concise exposition of intricate 


and difficult subjects. 








80 


IV 

Turning to a consideration of University Extension 
in Canadian universities , the first observation nec¬ 
essarily is that up to the present no serious attempt 
has been made to grapple with the educational problems 
for which this type of work provides the solution. Our 
educators, for the most part, seem content to see more 
or less worthy correspondence teaching institutions of 
the United States canvass Canada for students and gather 
thousands of dollars of Canadian money for which fair 
returns are not always received, and yet do nothing to 
relieve the situation. 

However to our credit it may be said that one in- . 
stitution, Queen’s University , Kingston, founded in 
1841 , by Royal Charter and largely supported by the 
Presbyterian Church, has recognized its obligations 
to those unable to attend its classes. In addition 
to offering extension lectures of the usual type as 
well as a summer session this institution provides, 
by its system of extra-mural instruction, for the ed¬ 
ucational needs of many who would otherwise be denied 
a university training. It is possible to do by corres¬ 
pondence in a number of courses three-fourths of the 






/ 


81 


work required for the Bachelor T s Decree. Books from 
the University library ere lent to extra-murals and 
every encouragement and assistance is afforded ambit¬ 
ious students. 

Some four or five years ago McGill University began 
evening classes in the city of Montreal. Courses are 
offered in Political Economy, Commercial haw, Account¬ 
ancy , Concrete Construction, as well as language courses 
for teachers. In one department, McGill has been doing 
valuable educational work. This is the system of trav¬ 
elling libraries organized as part of the University 
library work. Libraries have been sent almost all over 
Canada and have met a real need in many communities. 

The University of Toronto has for some years offer- 

::ed whet are called Local Lectures by members of the 

■ 

University staff. These ere given by volunteers who are 
remunerated for their services , the expense being shar¬ 
ed by the local organization and the Board of Governors, 
jLectures are offered either singly or in courses (pre¬ 
ferably the letter) on a Wide range of subjects. In all, 

last year some 120 lectures were given in this way. In 
,addition, special courses are offered for teachers in 
!the City of Toronto and a special summer session is 


held for teachers of the Province. 











8 


The University of Manitoba offers specie! even¬ 
ing lectures in the City of Winnipeg and local lectures 
at points throughout the province, There is no special 
appropriation by the university authorities for the 
work. The expenses are borne by local organizations 
entirely« 

The University of Saskatchewan offers extension 
work only through the College of Agriculture which is 
carrying on an extensive .campaign similar to those out¬ 
lined in connection with the American Colleges of 
Agriculture. 

It should be noted that extension work is being 
done on a large scale by the Agricultural Colleges of 
Eastern Canada and several notable developments have 
been first made there. Eor example , the district agri¬ 
cultural representative; was first used by the Ontario 
Agricultural College of Guelph, Ontario. This, method 

of teaching scientific agriculture has been widely ad- 

, 

opted in the United States, notably in Wisconsin and 
Minnesota. 

To the University of Alberta belongs the distinct 
ion of being the first Canadian university to organize 
| a departir-ent of extension as a recognized part of itg 
general scheme with special appropriations for support. 










83 


Prom the first year of its existence 1907-08 , exten¬ 
sion lectures have been given by members of the fac¬ 
ulty, consisting of special evening lectures to school 
teachers and lectures of a more general character at a 
number of local points. 

. 

However , at the beginning of the session of 1912- 
13 a secretary was appointed to give his entire attent- 
’ion to the extension work. Several definite lines of 
work were undertaken. 

A, Extension lectures: 

lectures were arranged in a number of centres 
throughout the Province , the towns being grouped in 
! circuits and from one to six lectures being given at 
each point. The University provided the travelling 
expenses of the lecturers , who served as volunteers 
without special remuneration, .while the local organiz¬ 
ation, usually the school board, paid hall expenses and 
hotel bills. During the session of 1912-13 some twenty 
five points were reached in this way. In 1913-14 this 
number was increased to fifty, while some sixty .are 
|being served during the present session. Since the be¬ 
ginning the average audience at extension lectures has 
been about one hundred , so that several thousands of 
!persons have been reached each year. 








84 


Generally speaking the demand for lectures on lit¬ 
erary end scientific subjects is greatest. However , 
for the current year the general interest in the war 
has been recognized. Lectures on various aspects of 
I the situation have been given in many communities to 
large end interested audiences. Every effort is made 
to direct the thought of the people of the province 
| along worthy and profitable lines. 

B. Publication: 

A press bulletin is published weekly during the 
college term and sent to all the newspapers and pro¬ 
minent men of the province , as well, as to the princip¬ 
als of high schools and similar institutions. The 
items contained are paragraphs of things of interest 
to the public not rerdily available through the ord- 

-n 

inary channels, hesuits of scientific experiments in 

- 

the university laboratories , medical and industrial , 
which have a bearing on the life of the people are re- 
ported in brief, popular form and the public are kept 
in touch with the development of their university. In 
addition a special press service is provided for a 
number of daily and weekly newspapers * consisting of 
paragraphs on questions of public health and indust¬ 
rial problems. 







85 - 


C. Debeting end Public Discussion: 

Under this heeding assistance is offered societ¬ 
ies end individuals interested in the .study of pub¬ 
lic cuestions. Peekege libraries ere prepared from 
carefully selected material on both sides of debatable 
questions and upon request are lent for stated periods. 
This service has proved very popular , hundreds of pack* 
ages on e wide range of subjects being sent out yearly 
Such questions as Equal Suffrage, Oriental Immigrat¬ 
ion , Direct Legislation, Co-operation, Compulsory 
Military Training, etc., are much discussed. In ad¬ 
dition, a Provincial High School Debating League has 
• , ' 

been organized with the co-operation of the princip¬ 
als of the high schools. Luring the session of 1912- 
13 five schools entered, in 1913-14 fifteen, and the 
present term twenty-three. A series of elimination 
contests culminates in a final debate at the Univerr 
sity, to the winners of which a trophy emblematic of 
the provincial championship is presented to be held by 
them for one year , or permanently if they win it three 
times in succession. A good deal of interest has 
been created and much valuable work done in connect¬ 
ion with these contests , such questions as Direct Leg¬ 
islation, Oriental Immigration, Consolidation of Eur- 













86 


rl Schools and Compulsory Military Training being dis¬ 
cussed. In connection with this work several public¬ 
ations have been issued, such as briefs on subjects for 
debate and a manual of instruction for debater. 

D. Travelling Libraries: 

With the session of 1913-14 a. system of free trav¬ 
elling libraries was inaugurated. Luring that year six¬ 
ty communities were served and marked appreciation was 

shown by the people , particularly of some of the rural 

. 

districts. Luring the present term collections of lan¬ 
tern slides have been secured and are lent on the same 
terms as books, i. e., the payment of transportation 
charges both ways and the making good of unnecessary 
damage. At the present time about 2,500 volumes are 
included in the travelling libraries and 1 ,000 lantern 
slides in the collection. 

In all , during the Academic year of 1913-14 a 
rather careful estimate placed.the number of people 
outside the University reached by the extension work 
at 25,000. While this does not represent by any means 

all that can be done in Alberta it does indicate that 
some effort is being made to extend the influence of 
the university. 

The direction and control of extension work in the 








87 


University of Alberta is in the hands of a committee 
working directly under the Senate of the university 
and reporting to it. The President of the university 
is the chairman of this committee and the secretary 
of the department of extension is its executive offices. 

The appropriation for extension is made upon a per¬ 
centage basis , approximately ten per centum of the cur¬ 
rent expenditure being devoted to this'purpose. By 
this means the development of a consistent policy of 
expansion keeping pace with the growth of the province 
and the university is made possible. 

Cordial appreciation is shown in many quarters of 
the efforts which are being made to bring the people’s 
university into close touch with the public throughout 
the province. 

Mention should be made of the extra-mural work be¬ 
ing done .by Robertson College, the Presbyterian theo¬ 
logical college affiliated' with the University of 
Alberta. Correspondence'study courses are offered for 

the theological students and recently the work of this 
mature .fo'x. the entire Dominion of Canada has been 
handed over to this institution. 








88 


Some Questions naturally arise as to the present 



j movement. 


There is a disposition in some Quarters to regard 
the extension lecture as a form of entertainment. Nat¬ 
urally a university professor objects to having his 
efforts so regarded, but on the other hand it would seem 
to be not altogether a bad thing for the professor to 
have to pay some attention to the attractiveness of his 
manner of presenting knowledge , as well as to the accur- 

! acy of his statements of fret. While no one would wish 

; 

university education unduly cheapened, it is quite cer¬ 
tain that many university classes would be better served 
by their instructors if these latter were required as 
part of their training to deliver a number of lectures 
to popular audiences. The experiment might be rather 
hard on the audiences but would undoubtedly be good for 
professors and the students they would later be called 
upon to instruct. 

A more serious considered ion is that of the educ¬ 
ational value of single lectures. There is no quest¬ 
ion in the minds of close observers that the practice of 

giving single lectures in communities or groups of more 





89 


or less unrelated lectures by different men is a pass- 
ing phase of extension work. These lectures serve the 
double purpose of stimulating interest in intellectual 
pursuits end of bringing the university instructors into 
moire intimate touch with the conditions end people of the 
community they serve. While this last result has a 
value which can scarcely be over-estimated it must be 
kept in mind that the goal of the lecture work is the 
organization of definite courses of study upon lines 
similar to those of the tutorial classes of the W. E. 

: A. movement in Great Britain. 

The value of correspondence study has unquest- 
ionably been demonstrated and present indications are 

that the university which does not make some attempt 

. 

to meet the demand for this type of teaching will soon 
be considered archaic in its view-point and - ethods. 

What has been accomplished through the debat¬ 
ing and public discussion and general welfare work of 
different universities does not begin to represent the 
opportunity for service of this kind which every uni- 
versity possesses. It means that if this opportunity 
is realized the public mind can be advanced a half a 
century at least in its point of view on many problems 
of general interest. Instead of the trite saying that 





- 90 


what the universities think the people will think 
fifty years hence being even measurably true , & new 
standard of the effectiveness of university work would 
be set up. The present state of the public mind should 
reflect directly what the leaders of thought: are engag¬ 
ed upon. 

The travelling library and art collection have an 
educational value which is only beginning to be realised. 
There is unlimited opportunity for the expert in the de¬ 
velopment of this work. Whet it means to a community t.o 
have the best literature of the past and present being 
freely circulated among the people can only be dimly un¬ 
derstood. Sometimes we are asked , Why is it necessary 
for the university to undertake such work? The obvious 
answer is that the function of the university is to lead 
the way along intellectual lines and one of the most 
valuable types of leadership is that which indicates 
where the treasures of the mind are to be found and puts 
them within the reach of those who need but to be intro¬ 
duced to them to become appreciative possessors. When in 
a semi-rural community where it has not been possible to 
establish a public library, a travelling library of fifty 
volumes has a circulation of two hundred and fifty in 
four months , and as a result of its popularity the people 









91 


rre now asking why they have not long ago had a library 
of their own, and are taking steps to secure one, it is 
high time some institution assumed the leadership in en¬ 
couraging the taste for reading. And this is not an 
isolated case in the province of Alberta. 

Again there is the opportunity for utilizing the 
1 most valuable educational devices which have been dis¬ 
covered recently, the projection lantern and the mov¬ 
ing picture machine. Teachers and leaders everywhere 
| are deploring the moving picture craze when they should 
be hailing it as an ally, capable of rendering useful 
assistance. A start has been made in Alberta as well 
as elsewhere by collecting educational lantern slides, 
but as yet the path has only been blazed. One of the 
greatest openings- for service lies along the line of re¬ 
deeming and improving the amusements and recreation of 
the people. 

At the risk of being monotonous I must once more 
repeat that there is no reason to suppose that nearly 
all educational devices have been discovered and the 
extension worker occupies a unique position in that 
he is hampered by no hard and fast traditions. In the 
humble opinion of the writer more can be accomplished 








92 


■ 

iby means of university extension work towards fusing 

the varied elements in our population and producing 

. 

the most virile type of national life than by any 
other means, unless it be the public school, and the 
latter can only do its best work in closest co-oper- 
ation with the unive^siity, and the agent for co-oper~ 
jation is the university extension movement. 

Magnum opus est: sed nil desperendum. 


i 




n 




















