







@X 1IBBIS 

wrnmmm 

aiiBaiiiMis 












THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


PERSONALITY ADJUSTMENT 

0 F 

GERMAN BAPTISTS OF ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF ARTS 


in 


THE FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


THE DEPARTMENT OF PHILOSOPHY AND PSYCHOLOGY 


by 

KARL KDRELLA, B.A. (Alberta) 

EDMONTON* ALBERTA 


1952 








A B S T RAC T 


Personality Adjustment of German Baptists of Alberta is a survey 
of the personality status of the group. It involves a study of 153 indiv¬ 
iduals of the German Baptist faith by means of Bell 1 s Adjustment Inventory, 
the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, and a questionaire pre¬ 
pared by the writer for the purpose of detecting problem areas. After 
testing procedures, the group of 66 males and 87 females was divided 
according to residential status, i.e. Immigrants, First Generation, and 
Second Generation, and into age and educational groups. The total group 
was studied in relation to the inventories® norms as well as to the norms 
of Normal Albertans. The subgroups were compared one with the other and 
with the total group. 

The results obtained show that this random sample of German 
Baptists have relatively many problems and significantly higher scores 
compared to the MMPI norms. The differences of German Baxrfcists and 
Normal Albertans are considerably smaller though still significant in some 
instances. But these variations are not indicative of maladjustment; 
instead they suggest cultural differences. ¥hile among males the 
Immigrants reveal the most and the Second Generation the least problems, 
and among females the First Generation show the most and the Immigrants 
the least problems, inventory scores do not confirm the presence of 
significant variations. The factors of age and education contribute but 
little toward a better understanding of the total group. 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/personalityadjusOOkarl 


ACKN0TO2DGEMENTS 


A study of this nature is never the sole and 
exclusive product of one individual. It is the result of 
many valuable contributions in the form of both direct and 
indirect suggestion, of constructive criticism and counsel. 
Interested friends, members of the Alberta churches of the 
North American Baptist Denomination, and pastors of these 
churches have lent their varied assistance in a most admirable 
way. The writer is especially indebted to Drs. Douglas E. 
Smith and Don Spearman for their invaluable guidance without 
which this dissertation in its existing form would have been 
impossible, and to Mrs. Robert B. Hoilisten for the secretar¬ 


ial work 




CON TEN T S 


Chapter Page 

Introduction . .. 7 

I Personality And Adjustment . . , . . 10 

II Adjustment of Immigrants and Their 

Descendents.. . • 20 

III Historic-Cultural Background Of 

The German Baptists . . . , . 31 

IV Specific Problems Of The German 

Baptists. 45 

V Specific Survey. 5$ 

VI Results Of the Survey. ....... 73 

VII Discussion And Conclusions ..... 152 

Bibliography . .. 162 


Appendix 

A The Beginnings of the German Baptists 16? 

B The North American Baptist Denomina¬ 
tion. ... . 175 

C The Adjustment Inventory and the MMPI 190 



















0 . 






■; .o 






... : . 










TABLES 


No. of Table Page 

la North American Baptist Churches and Membership in the 

Northern Conference .. 36 

2a General Population, German Population, and German 

Baptist Population of Canada. 37 

1 Distribution of Problems on Problem Measurements? Males 74 

2 Distribution of Problems on Problem Measurements? Females 75 

3 Adjustment Inventory Scores? Entire Group ....... 86 

4 Adjustment Inventory Scores: Total German Baptists and 

Inventory Author’s Subjects. ... 89 

5 Adjustment Inventory Scores? The Three Generations. , • 92 

6 Adjustment Inventory Scores: Age Groups .. 95 

7 Adjustment Inventory Scores: Educational Groups .... 99 

8 MMPI Scores: Entire Group ... . ....... 103 

9 MMPI Scores? German Baptists, MMPI Author’s Subjects, 

and Normal Albertans? Males. 108 

10 MMPI Scores? German Baptists, MMPI Author’s Subjects, 

and Normal Albertans? Females ..... . 112 

11 Percentage of Individuals with MMPI T-scores of 70 and 

Above for each Category ............... 114 

12 MMPI Scores: The Three Male Generations ........ 1X9 

13 MMPI Scores? The Three Female Generations ....... 123 

14 MMPI Scores? Male and Female Age Groups ........ 128 

15 MMPI Scores; Male and Female Educational Groups .... 134 

16a to I6f Relationship of Test Scores. ......... 141 

17 Percentages of Individuals with Problem Areas ..... 150 

1- x No. of North American Baptist Churches in the Nine 

Conferences ....... . ....... 180 

2- x Membership of N. Am. Bapt, Churches in the Nine Confs • 181 

3- x N. Am. Bapt. Conferences and Location of Churches . . . 182 

3-y N. AM. BAPT. Confs. and Location of Churches (Cont.). . 183 



























, 

. 







PROFILES 

No, of Profile Page 

I Adjustment Inventory, Entire Group 85 

II Adjustment Inventory, German Bapt. and Inventory 

Author’s Subjects 88 

III Adjustment Inventory, The Three Generations, . * , 91 

IV Adjustment Inventory, Age Groups ......... 94 

V Adjustment Inventory, Educational Status . . . . . 98 

VI MMPI: Total Males - with K-correction, ...... 101 

VII MMPI: Total Males - without K-correction ..... 1G1 

VIII MMPI; Totsl Females - with K-correction. ..... 102 

IX MMPI; Total Females - without K-correction .... 102 

X MMPI; German Bapt., MMPI Author’s Subjects, and Normal 

Albertans; Males - with K-correction. ..... 105 

XI MMPI; German Bapt., MMPI Author’s Subjects, and Normal 

Albertans; Males - without K-correction .... 107 

XII MMPI; German Bapt,, MMPI Author’s Subjects, and Normal 

Albertans; Females - with K-correction, .... 110 

XIII MMPI; German Bapt., MMPI Author’s Subjects, and Normal 

Albertans; Females - without K-correction • . • 111 

XIV MMPI; The Three Male Generations - with K-correction . 117 

XV MMPI; The Three Male Generations - without K-correction 118 

XVI MMPI; The Three Female Gen. - with K-correction. , . , 121 

XVII MMPI; The Three Female Gen. - without K-correction . . 122 

XVIII MMPI: Male Age Groups - with K-correction. ...... 125 

XIX MMPI; Male Age Groups - without K-correction ..... 126 

XX MMPI: Female Age Groups - with K-correction. ..... 129 

XXI MMPI: Female Age Groups - without K-correction .... 130 






















; 







No. of Profile Page 

XXII MMPI: Male Educational Group - with K-correction . » . 132 

XXIII MMPI? Male Educational Group - without K-correction. . 133 

XXIV MMPI: Female Educational Group - with K-correction . . 136 

XXV MMPI: Female Educational Group - without K-correction. 137 

1 




















. 





































- 7 - 


INTRODUCTION 


The present survey is a study of the personality status of the 
German Baptists of Alberta who are part of a larger body, known as the 
North American Baptists. This religious, ethnic group is composed of 
immigrants and predominantly of first and second generations bom in 
Canada and the United States. 

The immigrants entered Canada from a number of European countries, 
such as Poland, the Balkan states, various parts of Russia, Austria, and 
Germany proper. The first generation constitutes people who were bora of 
German parentage originally coming from Europe, while the second generation 
comprises the off-spring of Canadian or U.S. bom individuals whose parents 
came to this continent as German immigrants. 

The difficulties of the immigrant to Canada are apparent to the 
Canadian, The newcomer is often seen struggling with language problems, 
the adjustment to new ways and methods of work, Canadian customs, and a 
number of other problems. In this struggle his self-esteem is at times 
injured and his security is undermined. Even individuals of the first or 
second generation, when leaving their parental home and their German church 
and community life, carry with them vesieges of European culture and customs 
which may render them somewhat unadjusted to the Canadian way of life. At 
least, they may appear slightly different from other Canadians who, in one 
way or another, tend to discriminate against them. As a result of two wars 
with Germany discrimination against German-born Canadians was at times felt 
very poignantly. Such experiences would seem to be thwarting, and could 
influence personality development in one way or another. 





< 




.:.0' r ; 


j 


ioV. ") ;■ 




c ‘ 


i 




< 


Kod'&Q 




' 










' ••/ ' L • : 

./ V.-' .'p 


. 







- 8 - 


PURPOSE. 

In view of the unique environmental background of the German 
Baptists, the demands upon them for adjustment to Canadian ways, and. 
possible frustration and conflict, the writer of this study was interested 
to discover how well the group has adjusted. On the basis of results 
obtained from a questionnaire and two personality inventories, he will 
attempt to answer questions such as: 1) Is there an actual trend for 
personality deviation among this group? 2) How does the group compare to 
the inventories 1 norms in general, and to a sample of the normal Albertan 
population specifically? 3) What effect does the residential status have 
upon the group as represented by the three generations: Immigrants, First 
Generation, and Second Generation? 4) Do age and educational differences, 
if any, possibly explain certain trends of the total group? 

These questions will form the nucleus of the present study. 

As in the case of most surveys, this disertation was motivated by 
a personal interest. Having been associated with the German Baptists for a 
number of years, the writer felt that he wanted to know more about them.# 

Moreover, his relationship with them familiarized the writer with 
their customs, culture, and beliefs, and qualified him for this study as 
an inside observer, A portion of this work is the result of observation 
and personal experiences prior to the selection of this topic. 

From the practical point of view, this study may reveal facts of 
value to individuals interested in the problems of immigrants and the 
succeeding generations. At least it will indicate what may be expected of 
the newcomer of German Baptist origin and his offspring on Canadian soil. 


(# The writer served as Clergyman of German Baptist congregations.) 






, 












■ , 


















■ 





, 

, 

* 

. 

. 

. 

. 


- 9 - 


It may also stimulate further study in this area and, as a result, 
provide a better setting for their adjustment to Canadian ways. 

To date, there have been no attempts made to investigate the 
problem of adjustment of the German Baptist of Alberta from the psycholog¬ 
ical viewpoint. As far as the writer was able to ascertain, nothing 
similar has been done with any German Baptist group of the North American 
Baptist Denomination. For that reason, the writer hopes that his 
investigation will prove to be a fruitful attempt. 



, : • ■ r . 






. 


- 





; r. 

■ • : ■ ■•i • 










■'■11 , ■ . ■ 



, 

. 



• 



V: 


. 


*... ; • ?. . ■■ '■ 





- 10 - 


CHAPTER I 
PERSONALITY AM) ADJUSTMENT 

The human personality is a complex phenomenon which comprises 
the various psychological aspects of an individual# It ordinarily 
refers to the person’s distinctive thoughts and feelings, interests, 
attitudes and views, and to his peculiar traits and expressions. 

Most volumes on personality agree on the complexity of the concept# 

There is, however, less agreement regarding the precise meaning. 

MEANING OF PERSONALITY. 

Various definitions . 

This disagreement is seen in a comparison of definitions 
given by various authorities in the field. Allport (l) presents an 
exhaustive list of definitions each of which is unique. He begins 
with theological, philosophical and other nonpsychological meanings, 
and then proceeds to discuss a variety of types formulated by students 
of psychology. The latter attempts are classified as "omnibus", 
"integrative and configurational* 1 , and "hierarchical" definitions as 
well as definitions in terms of "adjustment” and of "distinctiveness”. 

Under "omnibus” definitions Allport groups all those that 
describe personality in terms of "sum-total”, "composite”, "aggregate" 
and other similar inclusive terminology. This type of definition, 
however, is frowned upon in most psychological circles because it is 
too general to be valuable. 

The "integrative and configurational” definitions stress the organ¬ 
ization of personality qualities into patterns while the "hierarchical” 
meanings mention levels of personality organized into pyramidical fashion. 





- • ( . 


• ) 



- 11 - 


An example of such definitions is William James’s approach that 
constructs personality out of four selves, the "material", "social", 
"spiritual" selves and the "Self of selves". Finally, personality 
in terms a) of "adjustment" and b) of "distinctiveness" is defined 
respectively, as the organism in the process of adaptation to its 
environment and its own needs; and as the individual who appears 
as a distinct entity apart from his social group. 

Choice of Definition , 

Allport* s meaning of personality, which the writer accepts 
for this thesis, "represents a synthesis of contemporary psychological 
usage", in the words of the author. He then states that "Personality 
is the dynamic organization within the individual of those psychophysical 
systems that determine his unique adjustment to his environment" (1), 

This attempt incorporates aspects of integrative, hierarchical, 
distinctive and the adjustive meanings. 

An analysis shows that the definition is in harmony with 
current psychological views on personality. There is 1) little 
controversy to date regarding the "dynamic organization" of the 
individual. The constant process of evolving and changing and 
reorganizing is quite obvious even to non-psychologieal observers. 

2) "Psychophysical systems" of habits, attitudes and sentiments are 
even more obvious and have been studied extensively for their own 
sakes, and with the intention to discover how 3) they "determine" 
behavior and activity, while 4) "unique adjustments", referring to 
the individuals characteristic reactions in terms of time and place 
and quality, is confirmed by the entire study of individual psychology. 







t. 

. 








■ 








.. 

. 

' 





- 12 


5) Adjustive behavior is not only directed to effect inner organization 
but to the ’’environment” in a spontaneous and creative way. 

In view of its adequately broad basis, and the support received 
by current psychology, the above meaning will be kept in mind whenever 
referring to personality in this study. 

THE NATURE OF ADJUSTMENT. 

The description of personality given in the preceeding pages 
implies another major concept of this thesis, i.e. the process of 
adjustment. The very fact that there is n dynamic organization” suggests 
the possibility of change and disorganization, and the attempt for 
Adjustment” presupposes maladjustment or lack of adaptation. 

Meaning of Adjustment . 

Symonds (39) in his approach to the dynamics of the human 
individual defines adjustment as ”a satisfactory relation of an 
organism to its environment”. The word satisfactory, to be sure, is 
a relative concept and must be interpreted in the light of the individ¬ 
ual f s social and cultural setting. Behavior which is regarded as normal 
in one society may not be acceptable somewhere else. The concept of 
environment is a less relative term and commonly includes three aspects: 
the physical surrounding, the social milieu and the “self”. This three¬ 
fold environment consists respectively of 1) all outer physical and 
natural surroundings which have to be manipulated to sustain life and to 
escape danger? 2) the society of other individuals and their institutions, 
customs and laws? and 3) the individual himself, i.e. his own person, 
which has to be controlled and managed. 



c 


'f 


c ' < 









- 13 - 


Symonds also thinks of adjustment in terms of "adaptation to 
the demands of reality" (39). Both definitions imply that adjustment 
calls for harmony between the personality aspects of the individual 
and the outside world. 

The Process . 

Shaffer (37), also devoting a volume to the study of adjustment, 
describes the process of adjustment as taking place in a number of 
distinct steps. There is, to begin with, the motivated individual who 
seeks relief from tension caused by any of a great number of desires. 
These urges, some of them biological, as the need for food and mating, 
and others sociological, consisting of recognition and acceptance, are 
not always readily satisfied. There may be strong barriers to overcome. 
In the course of time tension will mount and lead to varied types of 
activity. These attempts will persist until tension is reduced to a 
level of tolerance and the individual experiences a reasonable degree 
of harmony. At this point, it may be said, adjustment has taken place. 
Modes of Adjustment . 

However, adjustment does not always mean attainment of the 
Original goal. "Any response that reduces the drive-tension and thereby 
brings the activity sequence to an end is a solution of the adjustment" 
(37). There may be merely an attainment of substitutive goals. Gratif¬ 
ications thus obtained may be satisfactory to the individual involved but 
may not be adequate as far as the social environment is concerned. For 
that reason one may speak of constructive and substitutive adjustments. 

Shaffer (37) arranges the major modes of adjustment in the 


following ways 





' 






c 




. X 


' . 






■ . 









- 14 - 


1) "Adjustment by defense". This mode is characterized by excessively 
aggressive behavior which is usually undesirable from the social point of 
view. 

2) "Adjustment by withdrawing" shows a marked inability to cooperate or 
participate in social activities. It may reveal itself either by retiring 
passivity or by stubborn refusal to cooperate, by phantasy and retrogres¬ 
sion or retreating to less mature levels of behavior. 

3) "Adjustment involving fear and repression", though present to some 
degree in every form of maladjustment, is especially emphasized in the 
socalled phobias known as specific, strong, irrational fears. Repression 
is essentially forced forgetting. 

4) "Adjustment by ailments" is seen most frequently in hysterical 
individuals, and may assume the form of pains, paralyses, cramps and 
others for which there is no physiological bases. 

5) "Persistent non-adjustive reactions" are modes of response which 
fail to reduce emotional tension. As a result, the individual will show 
signs of nervousness, anxiety and exhaustion. 

These various modes of adjustment are in part measured by the 
psychological tests used for the present study. Some of them probably 
will be recognized in the chapter on results. 

THS COICEPT OF NORMALITY , 

The individual characterized by strong defensive behavior, whether 
of an aggressive or withdrawing nature, by fear and repression, or by 
ailments, is essentially an abnormal person. A well adjusted individual, 
on the other hand, is a normal individual. Maurice Levine (21) outlines 




. ? 





) 


O : ! 






■; v ' ‘ ;;; 









,V-- 


, - • : ' r 








- 15 - 


the concept of normality in general agreement with current psychological 
thought. His criteria lend themselves effectively for a better under¬ 
standing of the present work. 

1. Normality is not an absolute, but relative concept. It does 
not appear in a complete form, but in "quantitative approximations". 

2. Normality must agree with "statistical averages" of a given 
group. Still, these averages must not be contrary to health and maturity 
standards. 


3. There must be absence of physical disease and the presence of 
good maturity, structure and function. 

4. The individual must have normal intelligence. 

5. There must be no neurotic or psychotic s5^mptoms. 

6. In contrast to neurotic behavior, there must be "emotional 
maturity". This includes, in Levine ! s words: 

”a) ability to be guided by reality rather than by fears. 

b) use of long-term values. 

c) grown-up conscience. 

d) independence. 

e) capacity to "love" someone else, but with an enlightened 
self-interest. 

f) a reasonable dependence. 

g) a reasonable aggressiveness. 

h) healthy defence-mechanisms. 

i) good sexual-adjustment with acceptance of own gender. 

j) good work-adjustment.” 

Tyson (41) in his exhaustive study of the nature of good adjustment 


confirms all of Levine*s criteria. However, not all of them wall be 
examined by the psychological test material employed in this thesis. 







; :n 


* 


' 



Oft 


■ ( 

• :■ - • an • ■ ; : it, \ a 

• '■ V.. ■ ' /> : .* '■ 

" - : : ' . " ■ ■:' ; v: - ' :• ' ' • * ■ . o 

. ' ' ’■' :V • ’ .-a-": : ■■ a 


' 


r h<, - 1 




- 16 - 


To do so, would require a good many techniques, both psychological and 
medical. Nevertheless, some of them will be brought out on subsequent 
pages, and will prove helpful in assessing the adjustment status of the 
German Baptists. 

CULTURAL ASPECTS INFLUENCING PERSONALITY. 

The fact that some individuals are normal and others poorly 
adjusted is primarily not a matter of biological forces, but of cultural 
influences. These influences have long been observed in psychology and 
related fields* R. Stagner (33) in his work on personality maintains 
that "each personality is the product of an unique biography”. R. Linton 
( 23 ), speaking from the anthropologist ! s point of view, endorses the 
statement by saying that the cultural aspect is the "dominant factor in 
establishing basic personality types in various societies". Similar 
claims are made by G. Bateson of the American Museum of Natural History 
(19). He argues that all human behavior is either acquired or modified 
by learning, a process which is essentially interpersonal and cultural 
in nature* 

Stagner (33), studying cultural influences, emphasises three 
major aspects; the family, the school system, and economic factors. 
Significant also are religious and political institutions, and purely 
social contacts whether through the gang or the club or other social 
activities. 

The Family . 

The influences of the home are fundamental in personality 
development, and assume an unique place. 

1) They are common to virtually all human individuals for a prolonged 




r 


rief 








• - 


, | r 






v .. - , • 


•: • : ' -v 





- 17 - 


period of time. Even after the young person has entered the larger social 
circle, such as the school, the gang, church life and others, the family 
continues to shape his personality. 

2) The child has its earliest and basic experiences in the home, which 
will bias his perceptions and interpretations of later life. He will 
react to novel relationships as he reacted to some similar experiences 
in childhood, and treat his fellows the way he treated members of the 
family. 


In order to establish good adjustment patterns, certain factors 
in home relationships are imperative. There must be parental love and 
acceptance of the young individual. Discipline, though firmly exercised, 
should be moderate and consistent to avoid confusion and possible trauma 
or mental shock. Equally significant are congenial inter-sibling and 
inter-ma^rital relations. These tend to provide the needed atmosphere of 
security. 

The School System . 

The influences of school are next in importance and tend to be 
closely related to those of the home (33). 

The transition from family to school adjustment may not appear 
very significant. Child attitudes toward parents are transfered to 
teachers and sibling rivalry to classroom competition. Yet both teachers 
and classmates will behave differently than parents and siblings, thus 
creating novel situations. Perhaps more significant yet are certain 
institutional rules and requirements which have a frustrating effect upon 
the child. 

Even with older individuals in more advanced training, the school 
system follows an authoritarian pattern. This is seen in the very hierarchy 




• 'v- ' Hiro 


■ • 


O' 


r 




r <v 


J! • 


r r 



- 18 - 


of the personnel involved. There is the board of education, the school 
board, the principal, and the teachers, one exercising authority over the 
other. The partly arbitrary control from above is generally extended to 
classroom procedures which then, too, assume an autocratic atmosphere. 

The results are similar to the effects of the authoritarian system in the 
family or elsewhere. 

On the other hand, there are positive values which facilitate 
personality development. Apart from the value of training individuals 
for better jobs, the program of education provides for better understanding 
of others and of self, thus aiding indirectly in establishing group 
cooperation and effecting personality growth. 

Economic Factors . 

Economic influences appear to have molded personality at least as 
much as education. R. Stagner (33) maintains that "differences in economic 
status within American civilization are related to important differences 
in individual personalities". In actuality, the various economic levels 
constitute subdivisions of American culture and greatly determine not 
only modes of behavior, but shape habits, attitudes, views and the general 
personality pattern. For example, the executive class has the opportunity 
to exercise initiative and authority, develop^ self-confidence, and maintain 
self-respect and respect from others without direct effort, while the 
average worker submits to authority, obeys orders blindly, and receives 
relatively small rewards. 

Such influences are not limited to adult individuals, but are 
passed on to their children. Parental traits developed under the impact 
of economic pressure, and opportunities provided or denied, determine child 
personality development both directly and indirectly. 




•:f. 




.v , ■ ' '■ V '■ " ■ ■: • • 


• ■ 


, rv . . , , ,, - - r - r 

■ ’ ' • • ' 










- 19 - 


Other Influences . 

Religious as well as political influences also belong to the 
pattern of cultural determinants. It is not difficult to see how a polit¬ 
ical system like Democracy makes for different attitudes and practices as 
compared to an Authocracy or Totalitarianism. A political system either 
provides freedom of expression, a sense of worth of the individual, and 
development of personality resources or limits the individual to become a 
tool of the state. 

Religion appears to be even a greater determinent of personality. 

A classical example is the monotheistic belief of the ancient Hebrews (49). 
¥herever this form of religion was maintained the race retained its identity. 
Hence, the Judean faction of the old Hebrew kingdom could not be absorbed by 
Babylonian and, later, Greek and Roman culture despite the destruction of 
the Hebrew political power, 

Campbell (47), describing the effect of religion upon the individ¬ 
ual, maintains that religion provides a goal, establishes attitudes, and 
generates and releases energy. Some of his examples are Father Doyle, 

Santa Theresa, and Count L, von Zinsendorf. 

In a slightly different approach Klein ( 48 ) maintains that w The 
kind of God the child is taught to worship may make some difference in the 
kinds of values that child cherishes and in terms of which he disposes of 
his conflict situations”. 

By sanctioning certain ideas and forms of behavior and by prohibit¬ 
ing others religion may either provide support, approval, and acceptance or 
create feelings of guilt and conflict. Thus, the mode of religion that 
allows for a maximum of support and love is most conducive to personality 
development. 







- 19a 


The great variety of purely social contacts similarly leave 
their impression upon personality for better or worse* 


These cultural aspects will be kept in mind while studying the 


personality status of the German Baptists. 



- 20 ~ 


CHAPTER II 

ADJUSTMENT OF IMMIGRANTS AM) THEIR DEPENDENTS 

In the present study of personality adjustment a survey of 
the immigrant and his children and grandchildren in general may prove 
helpful in understanding the German Baptists who also are composed of 
immigrants and two succeeding generations. There is good reason to 
expect that certain problems and modes of adjustment are common to 
most immigrants and their descendants because of similarity of 
experiences on this continent. 

PRINCIPAL REASON FOR IMMIGRATION. 

War© ( 44 ) 9 studying the problem of immigration in general 
maintains, a) that "the direction of immigrant flow is determined by 
the lure of opportunity, real or imagined”, and b) that immigration is 
usually the result of some n sort of maladjustment produced by unfavor¬ 
able home conditions” but that it is accompanied by the "hop)e«..o£ 
bettering ones status”. While these observations summarize the chief 
reason for immigration they also indicate the probability of poor 
adjustment among most immigrants. 

The maladjustment appears to be based chiefly upon economic 
needs because "the type of opportunity most generally sought is economic” 
( 44 ) • The number of individuals leaving their homeland for other than 
economic reasons is relatively small, although political and religious 
factors, in some instances, are also conspicious in motivating immigration. 

The opportunities sought were chiefly in agriculture and only 
secondarily in industry. The greater majority of immigrants have been 
agricultural workers, general laborers, and domestic servants. Only in 




r • 




? ■ " ' 

■' '■ ■■ or- 




‘ > 















- 21 - 


recent years did the number of artisan and industrial worker immigrants 
increase, pointing to a shift from the agricultural to the industrial 
sphere. 

However, economic adjustment has apparently not been a greater 
problem for the immigrant than for the native moving from the east to 
the west, or from agricultural to urban and industrial centers. (44). 

FACTORS FACILITATING IMMIGRATION. 

While the chief reason for immigration is the desire to 
establish a more favorable economic status there have been a number of 
factors facilitating the flow of population to other countries. Ware 
(44) summarizes them as follows; 

1) factors inherent in the governmental structures of the countries 
involved, which either facilitate or obstruct emigration and immigration! 

2 ) similarity of culture between the homeland and the receiving country! 

3) the presence of friends and relatives in the receiving country! 

4) political and religious persecution at home and freedom offered abroad 

5) specific occupational experiences of the prospective immigrant and 
better opportunities to use his qualifications in another country. 

OUTSTANIING CHARACTERISTICS OF IMMIGRANTS. 

Seeing that the desire for improvement lies at the root of 
most immigration, it would be expected that immigrants are individuals 
with great drive. This, in fact, appears to be one of the outstanding 
characteristics of newcomers* The majority of them are ambitious 
individuals ,! who seek personal advancement ,! (44). To begin with, there 
is the usual struggle for existence! in the corn’s© of time many of them 
become prosperous. 






© . •' ' ■ 0 







- 22 - 


This ambition is also seen in acute competition for place and 
recognition within the group. As the struggle for existence, intra¬ 
group competition leads to dramatic conflicts (9). 

On the other hand, there are ”the misfits who seek escape” (4-4)• 
This group, in most instances, has been a failure in the new home land to 
the chagrin of other more progressive immigrant elements. The type of 
immigrant entering a country from time to time will depend on the 
circumstances bringing about emigration. 

Despite their individualistic tendencies, immigrants, moreover, 
are inclined toward segregation (9). They frequently establish them¬ 
selves in colonies or ”bloc settlements”. Such groups are usually 
composed of a single nationality or represent unities based on a common 
culture, using the same language. In most immigrant areas, the common 
language factor constitutes the chief characteristic by which satis¬ 
factory group relations are established^the unity of the group is 
maintained. Especially in cities the segregated immigrant colony 
represents ”bits of the Old World transplanted to the soil of the new 
one” (9). 

Such segregation is more spontaneous than directed, arising 
from the immigrants’ need for recognition and security. Though invariably 
slowing down the assimilating process, segregation helps the foreign 
group to "make the transition from their transplanted culture to that 
of the new environment” (9). Some immigrants, to be sure, will remain 
content in their segregated areas ; the majority, however, eventually 
reach a stage where they enjoy relatively free intercommunication with 
the native population. 









- 23 - 


ATTITUDES OF RECEIVING POPULATION. 

When immigrants enter a country as individuals or in small 
family groups, they usually create no problem for the native population. 
More often than not, they are received in a friendly way or viewed with 
curiosity. Under less favorable circumstances they are treated with 
mere indifference. As their numbers increase there are ordinarily signs 
of opposition which may become vivid and organized, depending on whether 
or not their presence is regarded as a threat against the cultural or 
economic status of the native population (9)* 

Such opposition is not entirely without grounds. Whether the 
danger seen in the influx of immigrants is real or imagined, the fact 
remains that the newcomer is the bearer of alien culture traits which 
do not harmonise with the cultural pattern of the receiving country! 
and though the immigrant constitutes a reliable source of labor for 
undesirable jobs, he also is a competitor on the labor market - a fact 
viewed with suspicion and hostility by native groups in times of 
employment scarcity. 

It is unfortunate that largely because of language barriers 
alien groups become n known through indirect, casual, socially distant 
contacts made through hearsay, newspapers, stories, and propagandistie 
media. In these and similar other ways the majority group develops 
popular notions which are never accurate either in detail or in broad 
outline M (9). Attitudes thus formed create additional barriers to 
intimate and personal contacts and render the lot of the immigrant 
increasingly more difficult. 






no 


r 


rj:» 








* 


r ... . . - f- , 







. 





- 24 - 


PROBLEMS OF IMMIGRANTS. 

While the apparent threat created by immigration is more 
imaginary than actual, the problems of the immigrant are very real. 

Dawson and Gettys (9) describe the following as the greatest difficulties 
interfering with the adjustment of the newcomer: 

1) the antithetical attitudes by the recipient population already 
described above; 

2) the counter attitudes of the immigrant, generated in response to the 
opposition of the native group; 

3) language difficulties of the newcomer and the resultant inability to 
make close social and cultural contacts with non-immigrants; 

4) the immigrant 1 s isolation especially within the boundaries of his 
segregated community. 

These factors lead to a number of unfavorable circumstances 
creating additional problems, such as exploitation by native employers 
in work and wages, by landlords in rental charges, or by unscrupulous 
interpreters, shyster lawyers and unsympathetic police and judges in 
numerous other relationships. 

ADAPTATION OF IMMIGRANTS. 

Stages . 

The process of adaptation of newcomers consists ideally of 
four steps (9): 

1. The initial contact of the immigrant with the native population; 

2. conflict resulting from cultural and other differences; 

3. accommodation; and 

4. assimilation. 












n > o 










- 25 - 


Ordinarily, there is considerable variation from the ideal 
pattern: some stages are omitted while others overlap or are not 
attained at all* 

The initial contacts with people of the adopted country are 
made because of necessity. These are chiefly secondary contacts because 
of the absence of a common language. But they are imperative in securing 
work, purchasing commodities, and making oneself understood for various 
other reasons. Because of cultural and social differences, these contacts 
soon lead to conflicts of various degrees. 

Some of the major conflict situations have been briefly 
mentioned above. At this point, however, it must be emphasized that they 
are not isolated occurences, but a process which recurs from time to time 
until assimilation is complete. 

Before long some sort of superficial adaptation takes place 
known as accommodation. Dawson and Gettys (9) describe it as fortuitous 
and opportunistic adjustments” which consist of adaptation essential to 
holding a job and carrying on a few simple business transactions. This 
basic adaptation can be seen in adopting native dress, manners, language, 
and certain practices. Most immigrants make such adjustments rapidly (43)• 
But many of them do not attempt to progress beyond this point. This is 
especially the case with individuals who have come as adults. 

It is doubtful whether adult immigrants ever complete the cycle 
of adjustment to the social and cultural life of the new world through 
its final phase, i.e. assimilation (9). This is not an exaggerated 
statement if complete assimilation implies full incorporation of a 
person into the new environment where heritages of nationality and 
family are renounced or reconciled and sentiments and attitudes of the 














O 

’ ,10 od •’ " 






■t d a 




r, r ■. 


■ ). ; ' ■ rt f V' , ' • : 













- 26 - 


native population are unequivocally shared. The attainment of this 
stage is scarcely possible for an immigrant who is the finished product 
of an unique tradition and education adapted to a specific place, a 
selected social group, and to particular conditions (44). 

Local Determinants . 

The speed and nature of the process of adaptation will depend 
greatly on the locality in which the immigrants settle. In rural 
communities and on new frontiers the process is slow and virtually 
painless. Adjustment to native social and cultural life may never be 
made because a) of the absence of external pressure, and b) the reduction 
of social and cultural practices to their simplest forms. Alien ways 
can therefore be maintained or discarded depending on the individual or 
the group. 

In industrial centers, cities and towns, social and cultural 
life is far more complex and contacts between immigrants and natives are 
by necessity much closer. n ...The immigrant 1 s choice is frequently 
forced by official policies and unofficial external pressures as well as 
by the nature of the native social organization” (44). The use of the 
language of the land for official, business, and educational purposes, 
the public school system, the lack of recognition of cultural differences 
are means of exerting strong influence upon the immigrant to make him 
renounce his own culture* 

Individuals or small groups of immigrants will eventually make 
the best possible adjustment. But n the adult newcomer cannot ... fully 
enter into an understanding and appreciation of native culture, and 
achieves essential similarity with the native only in the most elementary 
or superficial terms” (44). 







- 27 - 


In large settlements where immigrant groups organize into 
colonies or ghettos with their characteristic food stores, national 
societies, newspapers and other agencies, the need for adjustment to 
native ways is less imperative. However, ”in either case personal mal¬ 
adjustment on the part of the immigrant generally ensues...” (44)* In 
the first instance the immigrant renounces his heritage and, not fully 
entering into native thought and practice, becomes culturally impoverished. 
On the other hand, in organized immigrant communities, alienism is 
maintained, making adjustment to native ways even less possible. At best, 
the process is greatly retarded. 

FIRST AND SECOND GENERATIONS. 

Since the adult immigrant can neither abandon completely the 
results of his traditions and education, nor fully capture the essence 
of his new environment, he is bound to impart to his children some 
measure of his heritage (44). In many instances European customs and 
culture are deliberately and painstakingly maintained. Segregation in 
ethnic areas and the maintainance of the mother tongue become means for 
the perpetuation of the highly treasured 'traditions. 

The First Generation . 

The first generation individuals born of immigrant parents, 
and reared especially in large, populated centers on American soil, 
constitute an unique group. While social interaction for them is 
relatively easy, they encounter conflict situations usually not known to 
the immigrant and the second generation. 

Still strongly bound by family ties and rooted in their basic 


culture, they go back and forth between home and school, their isolated 
national group and the shop or factory, their church, community life, and 






■' 


1 






0 









- 28 - 


motion picture theater. As they reject many of the traditional ways of 

from 

their immigrant parents they meet with disapproval both ]// their elders 
and the neighbor immigrants, which in turn leads to friction between 
the immigrant and first generation, and to doubt and confusion on the 
part of the younger group. Dawson and Gettys (9) found that n since they 
are without the stabilizing influences of memories and sentiments connected 
with life in the old country, and since they have not yet established a 
rapport with the life and institutions of the native community, they are 
more or less at loose ends and occupy that difficult, unsettled, half- 9 
world position of marginal persons”. With them the conflict for recog¬ 
nition and acceptance continues and often becomes much stronger than 
with the immigrant population. 

Ware (44) observed that outside pressure for conformity and 
repudiation of alien ways and the lack of close contact with native 
persons constitute the chief factors in creating confusion, conflict, and 
delinquent and criminal tendencies among the children of immigrants. 

In rural communities and on new frontiers, on the other hand, 
the first generation does not face the problems encountered in cities and 
towns. As in the case of the immigrant, socio-cultural aspects in rural 
and pioneer life are reduced to a minimum and, therefore, are not likely 
to cause adjustment difficulties. 

The Second Generation . 

While the problem of adjustment is most acute among first 
generation individuals, living in cities on American soil. Ware (44) 
observed in U.S. immigrant mass settlements that even three generations 
of immigrant ancestry have not succeeded in eradicating certain differences 
between cultures of the old and new world. Walter (43), making his 




'dr 


dv,-', 








• >r: 


* 







' r ' 1 ' ' '■ • 


r 













- 29 - 


observations on the American scene, appears more optimistic. In his 
view, the grandchildren of immigrants, in most cases, become completely 
assimilated. Dawson and Gettys (9) tend to confirm the latter obser¬ 
vations, maintaining that the cycle of social interaction is virtually 
complete in the second generation except in the case of Orientals and 
Mexicans. 

AIDS AND OBSTRUCTIONS TO ASSIMILATION. 

Some of the difficulties of the immigrant and the first generation 
remain problems despite sincere and numerous attempts to solve them. 

Still there are certain proved aids and obstructions to assimilation 
which either facilitate the adjustment process among the newcomer and 
his children or hinder it. Some of the chief aids are? (43) 

1) economic opportunities — factors closely bound up with social and 
cultural status; 

2) official and sympathetic aid by American and Canadian people to help 
the immigrant and his descendants to become Americanised; and 

3) understanding assistance by ethnic groups to fellow nationals. 

On the other hand, the greatest obstruction to better 
adaptation is intolerance based upon 

1) racial myths and confusion; 

2) fear of competition on the part of the native population; and 

3) isolation by the immigrant and his descendents. 

A reasonable control of these factors will lead to both better and more 
rapid adjustment. 

The foregoing observations thus reflect the problems common 
to most immigrants and their children and grandchildren, and show how 
successful they have been in their attempts to adapt themselves to the 





- 30 - 


ways of receiving countries especially on the North American Continent* 
This chapter also provides a basis for understanding how successful 
the German Baptists have been in their attempts at adjustment. However, 
before tracing specific problems encountered by the German Baptists, an 
examination of some of the historic-cultural aspects may prove enlight¬ 
ening. A Sketch of the beginnings of the German Baptists, both in Europe 
and on this continent, and an outline of the founding and the growth of 
the North American Baptist Denomination, to which the German Baptists of 
Alberta belong, will be found in Appendices A and B. 


' 




■ ' m ~.;y ' 

v • ' » ' ■ ■ '• . .*■ ; -V- • ■•r',;- . • •} • • 

^ - , ’ ■ • . : • , . 

" ' ‘ ■’ ' 

' - ' •. ■ ■■■■ : ' ” ' •' ■ ;■ , • ‘ . 

• ■. : • • '. , ' J • '■ • 

* . • '0 ' < . : ■ ‘ ; o,, r [‘ ' i . ” • 



- 31 - 


C H A P T E R III 

HISTORIC-CULTURAL BACKGROUND OF THE GERMAN 
BAPTISTS 

In their early stages German Baptist congregation in Eastern 
Canada and, later, on the Prairies were composed exclusively of 
immigrants from Europe and settlers from the U.S.A. The European 
immigrants had migrated chiefly from Poland, the various parts of 
Russia, the Baltic States, Austria-Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Roumania, 
and Yugoslavia (25). They were the descendents of the German stock 
that originally had moved to these countries in search of n Lebensraum H * 
Dissatisfied with prevailing conditions they, like their fathers before 
them, migrated to a different land* 

EMIGRATION AND IMMIGRATION* 

Emigration * 

In most instances, the underlying cause for emigration from 
Europe was by no means singular. There were usually a number of factors 
motivating German families and individuals to leave the country of their 
birth in search of a new homeland. Moreover, the factors were not 
identical in each case. Some of the most significant ones can be listed 
as follows: 

Religious Intolerance and Persecution. 

Intolerance and aggression toward religious minority groups, to 
which also the German Baptists belonged, appeared to have been one of 
the major causes (33). This was a strong factor especially during early 
European emigration. In isolated cases intolerance continued to the very 







• J 


9 


'lO r •: v 







- 32 - 


beginning of the 20th century (25) (12). But in later years it became 
increasingly more localized to communities where minority groups aroused 
the hatred or jealousy of the representatives of the state church. In 
the third decade of this century, however, persecution again came in 
vogue. This time the Communist regime of the U.S.S.R. launched out upon 
a program all its own. It was a systematic and relentless attempt at 
extirpating religion. Persons of all creeds suffered and made plans to 
leave Russia. Great numbers of them succeeded. Many of these reached 
this continent. Among them were immigrants who left Russia especially 
after 1926. 

Economic Difficulties in the Homeland, 

The economic factor was perhaps just as important in emigration 
of German Baptists, judging from the numerous reports received by the 
writer personally, and from his own observation. Growing families were 
compelled to subside on a few acres of land with no prospect of ever 
increasing the size of their little estate. Land was scarce and 
extremely expensive in relation to the earning capacity of the individual. 
Economically there seemed to be no future for the ambitious person* There 
was privation and need and, in some cases, actual starvation. During, 
and immediately after, World ?Jar I, suffering increased and became almost 
universal in Europe. 

Lack of Homesteads in the U.S.A. 

A closely related factor was the quest for more land which lay 
at the root of the U.S.A. immigrant to Canada (10). Steady agricultural 
expansion of the U.S. made it increasingly difficult to obtain land 
cheaply there while Canada offered homesteads to settlers for next to 
nothing. Numerous German Baptists availed themselves of this offer. 





■ 


?• r 


' ' 


f Z V 


< v ' '■ : ' r "f 


’» ' • V 4 ; 









t 






y s ./ 





yyt on.;: ci 





- 33 - 


Escape from Military Service in Europe. 

In some cases the European male emigrated in order to escape 
compulsory military service. At times families with adolescent boys 
seized upon the opportunity to leave the land before the boys became of 
military age. Service in the Russian or Polish forces under the Czar 
was allegedly an ordeal which had to be warded off at any cost. 
Immigration . 

Apart from the European - U.S.A. conditions resulting in 
emigration to Canada there were factors inherent in the Canadian 
pattern which invited immigration* especially from Europe. 

Homesteads in Canada. 

As a new country the Canadian West had vast tracts of land 
which were still uninhabited. Homesteads were available for the mere 
taking except that some minor obligations had to be met* such as the 
clearing and cultivating of a given acreage over a stipulated period of 
time. When immigration barriers were lifted after World War I there 
was still an abundance of government lands to be had (11). 

Government Assistance, 

Immigration to Canada* moreover* was rendered comparatively 
simple. The federal government not only invited settlers* but facilitated 
their entry into Canada through a number of agencies through and apart 
from the Department of Immigration and Colonization (12). 

Assistance by Railway Companies. 

Because of their program of expansion* the railway companies 
also played an important part in encouraging immigration and colonization. 
They were generally regarded as the most important agency of the Depart- 
ment of Immigration (10) (11). 




9(>.j v 


o ' 




O! 








r 




- 34 - 


Aid by Other Organizations. 

The Red Cross and other national organizations also made 
their contributions (12). In addition, religious societies assisted 
those of kindred faith to find a new home. For instance, since 1926 
the German Baptist Immigration and Colonization Society of Canada and 
U.S.A. encouraged and supported numerous immigrants from all over 
Europe to enter both Canada and the United States (25). 

These were major factors underlying the exodus of German 
Baptists and facilitating their immigration to Canada. As among other 
national groups, the economic factor was fundamental. But unlike many 
others, the desire for religious freedom among the German Baptists was 
at least as strong a motive as the desire to improve their economic 
status. (25). 

CHURCH ORGANIZATIONS IN CANADA. 

Once on Canadian soil German Baptist groups, as a rule, moved 
into settlements, and formed congregations and organized churches. 

Other German speaking elements were attracted. Eventually, many of 
them joined the Baptists. The establishment of German Baptist church 
communities made adjustment in the new homeland a less painful process. 
But it also perpetuated European ways which, in some instances, continued 
to cause difficulties. 

Churches in Eastern Canada . 

The beginning of the German Baptist cause in Eastern Canada 
runs parallel with that of the Eastern U.S.A. The first General 
Conference of the entire body of German Baptists of North America, 


convening in 1865, was held in Wilmot, Ontario, at that time a center 











>. : :> 




» , . 











- 35 - 

of German Baptist activities. In the course of a few decades of the 
present century the work in Eastern Canada declined considerably. A 
comparative study of figures shows that in 1911 there were ten churches 
in Ontario with 1145 members, and in 1931 only five churches with 490 
members (28). 

Churches of Western Canada . 

Although statistics of 1941 reveal an increase in membership 
and churches in Ontario to 613 members and six churches, the shift of 
German Baptist activities was gradually to Western Canada where there 
are at present 49 congregations with a membership of 5,535, most of which 
are vigorous and progressive (Table la). Appendix A presents a more 
comprehensive summary of the expansion of the German Baptist cause on 
the Prairies. It- should, however, be added that in comparison to the 
population of Canada in general, and to the German population in 
particular, the German Baptists of both the East and the West constitute 
a relatively small group ©f 6,181 individuals (Table 2a). let, their 
growth in relation to the total population was proportionate, and in 
relation to the increase of the German population in Canada much better 
than would be expected. 

Churches in Alberta . 

While German Baptist missionary activities in Western Canada 
began as early as 1885 and the first church ms organized in Eden void, 
Saskatchewan, in 1886, it was not until 1892 that the first German 
Baptist congregation united into a church body in Alberta (25). This 
church organized approximately seventeen miles southwest of the city of 
Edmonton, known as the Rabbit Hill Baptist Church. 

The settlements between Calgary and Edmonton were comparatively 





: .. J' : V.-' ;■ ■ "■ ./ ; 1 

■ 

- 



. . 

V 

. . ... 


' . 

H l . • - ■ 1 1 • l : 

■ 

• : 



36 


TABLE la 


1950 

1945 

1940 

1935 

1930 

5 

JO 

Ut 

1920 

1915 

0161 


8 

8 


8 

8 

S 

b 

M 

Ot 

£ 

O 

tr 

• 

M 

O 

00 

S 

Oi 

2175 

JO 

3 

ON 

1390 

1156 

I 

B 

P 

8 

O 

g 

• 

M 

M 



H 

M 

H 



o 

F 

00 

O* 

fc 

$ 


£ 

8 

8 



P 

*>3 

-0 

O 

ON 

U* 



U) 

03 

O 

&* 

• 

1594 

H 

U3 

00 

V* 

B 

B 

1171 

<2 

B 

S 

1 

» 

IO 

VJt 

JO 

vn 

g 

• 

JO 

M 

s 

H 

00 

5 


& 

a 

£ 

ON 

a 

tr 

• 

H* 

§ 

00 

H* 

S 

On 

£ 

JO 

1527 

I 

I 

B 

JO 

1130 

» 

M 

§ 

• 

8 

i3 

o» 

Ol 

fc 


vo 

vO 

03 

JO 

8 

o 

tr 

• 

vn 

« 

u» 

S 

O 

4959 

4774 

to 

M 

03 

O 

s 

2816 

1976 

g 


w 


g 

a 

a 

p 


p 

I 


8 


( 27 ) 


NORTH AMERICAN (German) BAPTIST 
CHURCHES and MEMBERSHIP 
in the 

NORTHERN CONFERENCE 

From 1910 to 1950 (27) 


































- 37 - 


TABLE 2 a 

GENERAL POPULATION, 

GERMAN POPULATION, 
and 

GERMAN BAPTIST POPULATION OF CANADA 

from 1911 to 1941 (8) 



1211 

1221 

1931 

1941 

General 

Population 

7,206,643 

8,787,949 

10,376,786 

11,506,655 

German 

Population 

403,417 

294,635 

473,544 

464,682 

German 

Baptist 

Population 

3,303 

3,915 

5,163 

6,181 


m 












- 33 - 


vast tracts of land still uncultivated and partly overgrown with trees 
and shrubs, and partly open prairie (36). Occasional roaming Indians 
and frequent wolves and bears inspired fear among the newcomers who 
lived in sod huts and log cabins. There was extreme poverty among the 
immigrant families. This could be observed both in their home and 
community life. They subsided on simple and meager rations. Some of 
the older families of the Rabbit Hill congregation relate instances of 
families living on rabbits, bread, and water for weeks on end. For 
worship, people gathered in their shack homes or in some primitively 
constructed chapel. The severe climate made it difficult to farm. 

There was struggle, disappointment, and many a tear. But the soil was 
good and there was much of it. Increasingly more settlers moved in. 

More small German communities were founded and new German Baptist churches 
were organized. As early as 1910 there were eleven German Baptist 
congregations in Alberta, counting a membership of 890 (Table 3e). 

It is not difficult to see that such mode of living called for 
resourcefulness and endurance often beyond the capacity of the settlers. 

What the results on personality development were is difficult to say - 
at this stage of the survey. 

Present Status of Churches . 

Since its inception the German Baptist cause in Western Canada 
shows consistent growth (Table £). The Conference Report of 1950 (27) 
shows a total of 49 churches with 5>585 members. Twenty of these 
churches are located in Alberta. The stock of German Baptists in the 
various churches of the Prairie Provinces and B.C. is almost identically 
the same. It consists of immigrants and first and second generation 
German Canadians. The immigrants came from various European countries. 







f 


















- 39 - 


In Canada they shared the same difficulties and were held together by 
the same tenets of faith and the same nationality. 

The churches themselves are located in towns and villages as 
well as in the open country and in the cities of the provinces. In 
Alberta there are four city churches, eight churches in smaller populated 
centers, and eight in the country. The urban churches, however, are 
numerically not the stronger churches. With one exception, i.e. the 
Central church of Edmonton, both town and country congregations compare 
favorably in size and activity with the groups in the city. Before this 
thesis is completed three additional congregations in the province will 
have organized into churches, one of them composed exclusively of post 
World War II immigrants. 

TENETS OlFAITH AM) CHURCH POLITY. 

The greatest single unifying factor among the German Baptists 
was not the fact they had left their original homeland because of 
common hardship and religious persecution, nor because they all ?;ere 
eagerly pursuing a common goal, namely to find a home in Canada. Not 
even the ethnic aspect played the largest role in holding the group 
together. Though common nationality was very significant, other ethnic 
Baptists occasionally worshipped along with the German Baptists. Tenets 
of faith and church practice appeared to have been the greatest factor 
in building a denomination of churches. (33)* 

let, in regard to faith, there is no General Council or General 
Conference or any organization dictating to the local churches what to 
believe. Principles of faith and practice are determined by the local 
congregation through the study of the Scriptures. In this respect the 
German Baptists closely resemble the New Testament Baptists of other 








- 40 - 


denominations (2). This approach has made for variance in opinion. 

On the other hand, it served as a basis for democratic practice (42)« 
Tenets of Faith . 

In general, the German Baptists believe, with most other 
Baptist denominations (2), 

1. that the Old and New Testament Scriptures are inspired. They were 
given by God to men through the infusion of the Holy Spirit for the 
purpose of salvation and perfection. (2.Tim.3!15-17). 

2. There is but one God (is.45:21,22) who is self-existing, 
perfect and eternal, and who has climaxed his revelation in Christ 
his Son and in the Holy Spirit. (John 1:1-13$ 15:26). 

3. Man was created in the image of God. By disobedience to 
God, however, he has fallen into sin, and thus has become subject to 
death. (Gen. 1:27; 3:1-6). 

4* Because of man’s hopeless state Christ came into the world 
to save the individual from guilt and condemnation. (John 1:14*29$ 3:14*16) 

5. Repentenee of sin and faith in Christ frees the individual 

from his guilt and condemnation and secures j.for him God ! s forgiveness 
and favor. (Acts 16:31$ Rom.4:4,5$ 5:1,2). 

6. While repentenee and faith represent the human side ^ 
regeneration is the divine aspect of salvation wrought by the Spirit 
of God. The^experience of such a rebirth is imperative. It renders 
the act of salvation complete. (John 3: 3*5,7). 

7. After having been saved the believer cannot be separated 
from the love of God (Rom. 8:35-39$ 1 Peter 1:5) except he himself 
choose to affect a separation. (John 15$6,7). Man has a free will under 
whatever status he exists. 








r ./• ; . * 







- a - 


8. Baptism, like the Lord’s Supper, is an ordinance to which 
Christ himself submitted and which he commanded others to practice 
(Matt, 3:13-17; 38:19,20). The form is immersion in water in the name 
of the Triune God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. It is 
not a sacramental act but a symbol, (Rom. 6:3,4). 

9. The Lord’s Supper is an act of commemoration of Christ’s 
death for the believer. The bread and the cup are symbols of the 
broken body and the shed blood on the cross. (1 Cor. 11:23-29). 

10. All civil government is divinely ordained whether its rule 
be just or otherwise. Magistrates, therefore, are to be prayed for, 
obeyed, and honored. (Rom. 13:1“?). 

11. Christ will come again. At his second coming he will 
appear in unlimited power and in resplendent glory to judge the nations 
of the earth. (Matt. 24s25-51). 

12. Upon Christ’s return there will be a universal resurrection 

of both the just and the unjust dead. Each one will receive his due 
reward. (Dan. 12:2; 1 Gor. 15:22-24; Rev. 20). 

These tenets then constitute in summary the major aspects of 
the German Baptist faith and, more inclusively, the faith of most 
Baptist organizations. The Scriptural references cited above are but 
a small sample of passages used by them to defend and confirm their 
religious beliefs. 

Polity and Practice . 

The polity and practice of the German Baptists, though less 
uniform than the tenets of faith, is similarly the outcome of the study 
of the New Testament (2). In stating the bare facts about church 
administration it may again be elucidating to give Scriptural references. 














r r ■ 













- 42 - 


1. Regarding the church itself, the Baptists refer to a 

Church Spiritual and a Church Formal. The Church Spiritual includes 
all the believers, regardless of name, age, or race, who are known and 
are acceptable before God. The Church Formal is a congregation of 
regenerated believers baptized by immersion in the name of the Triune 
God. This company of individual believers represents the body of 
Christ. (Col. 1:18; 1 Cor. 12:27,28). 

2. With reference to administration, the church is not legislative 
but executive in nature. This becomes evident from the principles of 
belief. The law already has been laid down by New Testament injunctions. 

It is now the obligation of the church to execute it. It also means that 
the local church is a self-sufficient, authoritative body the rights and 
privileges of which are not to be usurped by a Church Universal. The 
latter, in fact, does not exist in Baptist belief or practice. 

3. All members of the church have in theory and practice equal 
rights to share in the responsibilities of church government. No one 
individual or groups of individuals is to exercise control over the 
church. All questions of policy and practice are decided by a majority. 
Various committees appointed at different times for specific functions 
act in behalf of the church only as far as they are authorized to do so 
by the church. (Matt. 18:17,18; 23:8-12). 

4* As an organized congregation the local church also assumes 
the right and duty to exercise discipline over its members. (Matt. 18:15-17; 
1 Cor. 5s5,7,11,13). This practice has a multiple purpose: a) to save 
the offender (Gal. 6:1); b) to save others from being tempted and 
corrupted by the example of evil conduct (1 Tim. 5:20); and c) to 
vindicate the character of the church (2 Cor. 6:14-16). 


c\; 













:■ ' ■ ' ' • " 1 • 




H - l . -.: ' j 




■ 




. 


‘I 


’ . 







- 43 - 


5. In its administrative and disciplinary duties the church 
is not to seek, support of authority from secular agencies* Alliances 
with secular governments are to be avoided in order to maintain 
spiritual independence. (Mark 12:17; John 17:14-16). 

6. No ecclesiastical organization outside of the local church 
is to exercise authority over it. There is to be, however, an inter¬ 
dependence and cooperation of churches. (John 17:21; Acts 6:15; 

Rom. 15:25-27). Individual congregations group together into associations 
and conferences for concerted planning and action. But the local church 
need not bind itself to any resolutions passed by an inter-church body 
unless it voluntarily chooses to do so. 

7. In organization the Baptist church recognizes only two 
officers, the pastor and the deacon. The pastor performs the various 
functions attended to by the New Testament bishop, evangelist, elder and 
presbyter. The deacon is the pastor’s assistant. There also are other 
officers, to he sure, but they are regarded as individuals functioning 
in committees to do specific tasks for the church. 

Each of the above historic-cultural aspects form an important 
link in the development of the German Baptists of Alberta. The section 
on emigration and immigration points to the factors that prompted the 
group to leave Europe and find a new homeland in Canada. A sketch of 
the organization of churches traces the establishment and growth of the 
group in this country, and the tenets of faith represent the religious 
bond holding the group together regardless of other differences. 

While most of the factors underlying emigration and prompting 
immigration to Canada were also seen at work among other ethnic groups 
these influences, nevertheless, together with the more characteristic 




* 









) ': . 













! . ' . . • • 











■ 

















V; ~ f . -s r v ‘W: 










German Baptist history and principles of faith and practice, con¬ 
stitute forces which determined the group and molded it into the 
specific denomination it is today. 






- 45 - 


CHAPTER IV 

SPECIFIC PROBLEMS OF THE GERMAN BAPTISTS 

In contrast to the foregoing part of the thesis, the present 
chapter is based largely upon the writer*s observations and upon inter¬ 
views with immigrants who seemed to have an intelligent understanding 
of problems past and present. Among these were German Baptists who 
entered Canada recently and those who have been residents of the Dominion 
for many years. Representatives of the first and second generations have 
made some valuable contributions as well. A few clues to the problems of 
the German Baptists, however, can be found among the causes of emigration 
and immigration and among the difficulties encountered by other ethnic 
immigrants and their descendents. 

THE RELIGIOUS FACTOR. 

It will be remembered that one of the factors underlying 
emigration of the German Baptists from Europe was religious intolerance. 
The result, in some instances, was persecution. This was a constant 
source of irritation and fear. Where religious experiences were highly 
cherished and faith appeared particularly Jeopardised the religious 
factor became the chief motive for emigration. 

Religious Conflicts . 

Once on Canadian soil, the group no longer needed to ward off 
the threat against their faith. Religious freedom proved a great relief. 
But for immigrants who came after World War I there were other sources of 
irritation. In comparing Baptist religious practices in Europe with those 
in Canada, there were a few differences which greatly disturbed many 
religiously zealous newcomers. In the first place. Baptist groups in 






, • j '■ , 


'ii i?: 











- 46 - 


Europe were closed organizations and in practice highly conservative. 
Inter-marriage with other ethnic groups, cooperation with secular agencies, 
political aspirations, higher education, and even organized charity were 
generally precluded. The Baptists had to be segregated from what was 
called sinful and worldly. The vastly greater liberty in Canada with 
reference to these practices was interpreted repeatedly by the immigrant 
as decidedly un-Christian. Theological views, on the other hand, were 
seldom a source of dispute or grievance. 

Furthermore, the practice of showmanship, the display of greater 
emotion, and the lack of ritual in worship services in Canada, as compared 
to the solemnity of worship in Europe, led the immigrant to believe that 
the German Baptists of Canada were superficial and insincere. In European 
churches hymns had to be sung in a slow and venerable tempo, sermons were 
well prepared and intellectual, and the entire procedure of worship in¬ 
spired awe and reverence. In Canada, quite to the contrary, many hymns 
were of a light and evangelistic nature and sermons appealed primarily 
to the emotions. 

These differences in worship and practice led to conflict among 
immigrants and the later generations. It appeared that they had left one 
thwarting situation only to encounter other obstacles, all of which called 
for further adjustment. 

Mitigating Influences . 

Seeing that each individual is the product of his unique bio¬ 
graphy (33), it is highly probable that these experiences left some 
imprint upon both those who in Europe endured hardship because of their 
beliefs and those who found religious practices in Canada irreconcilable 
with their traditional religious ways. Fortunately for them, and the 
church groups which accepted them, the common tenets of faith had a 







. 


D ■' 












'5 






" '' ■ ' '■ '■ • ■ ’ ■■ ' ‘ 


■ ■ 


- 47 - 


unifying influence and the democratic approach to the interpretation of 
the Scriptures always maintained a degree of tolerance until more 
liberal attitudes were established among the newcomers. 

Effect upon Descendants . 

The children of the immigrants, on the other hand, appear to 
have had less difficulty. They adapted themselves more readily to the new 
religious ways and influenced their immigrant parents to establish more 
liberal attitudes. This accelerated the adjustment process of the 
immigrant generation. Yet, the departure from traditional religious 
practice and the acceptance of Canadian ways on the part of the younger 
group caused conflict and tension in the home. It is probable that these 
experiences had a considerable influence upon the personality development 
of the younger generation. 

It should be added that not all German Baptists left their 
original homeland because of religious difficulties, and that not all of 
them experienced religious conflict in Canada. The religious factor 
therefore is significant only in relation to a certain percentage of 
German Baptists, and it is this unknown quantity whose problems differ 
from those of other ethnic groups in general. 

THE POLITICAL PROBLEM. 

Non-participation of Immigrants . 

On the political scene the problem for the German Baptists does 
not appear as great. It is true, the European countries from which the 
group emigrated were anything but democratic in nature. Russia, for 
instance, was autocratic since its beginning. The Czar, surrounded by 
his ministry and church dignitaries, functioned as absolute ruler. In 






- Vr - 


• f»' •): iO- • .)■/: .pf> 




) • 






n 


f . ivi 






", 








r 


f >.{ 






■ 


■ ■ 


■ 






' 









• ! ; . : 



; ' ,/ ' ■ ' '• '• • "■ Off;.’, 





- 48 - 


1917 Russia established communistic socialism. Now the Communist Party, 
headed by a dictatorial figure, became supreme. In Germany, on the other 
hand, militarism dominated the entire political drama from the first to 
the third Reich. Even the democratic interval from the expulsion of the 
Kaiser to the rise of Hitler could not exclude the militaristic phantom. 

In Poland the situation was not much better after tfforld War I had given 
the country independence from Russia. In every instance, there was no 
necessity for the people to participate in government. In fact, they 
were not expected to do so, and thus they were not trained in democratic 
ways. 

Possible Affects . 

These experiences would seem to have some effect upon the individual. 
An autocratic government would tend to effect personality development some¬ 
what simils.rly to an autocratic family setting. At the same time, 
participation in politics among German Baptists was regarded unnecessary, 
to say the -least, even where people were given an opportunity to voice 
their opinion. 

It is possible that this withdrawal tendency was brought about 
by traumatic experiences arising from conflicts in the religious sphere. 

There may also have been a degree of rationalisation? since there was not 
much opportunity to participate in government, the group felt that it 
simply was not necessary for them to do so. 

Training; and Participation of Bescendents . 

The first and second generations born on this continent, who had 
not been reared within the European political setting and knew little of 
its limiting influences, have shown a lively interest and, occasionally, 


have taken an active part in the political life of this country. In fact. 





* 



F ■ 


a 


r 













■ i 














- 49 - 


they have regarded such participation as part of the duties of Democratic 
citizenship. This is not difficult to understand in view of Canadian 
educational influences upon the younger generations and their relatively 
close contact with fellow Canadians. 

It is interesting to observe that participation in political 
life by individuals of the later generations was not met by opposition 
on the part of the immigrant group; instead it was viewed with a sense of 
pride. Immigrants often felt important as they identified themselves 
with the descendants of their fellow countrymen who were capable and 
privileged to have a part in the government of the new homeland. 

Although the political life in Europe probably had some adverse 
influence upon the personality development of the German Baptist immigrant, 
the political factor in Canada appeared to have been no problem to the 
later generations. Moreover, political influences could not have been 
more significant for the German Baptist immigrants than for other ethnic 
groups coming from the same European environment. 

THE ECONOMIC FACTOR. 

European Setting . 

The economic picture is slightly different. The rich in European 
countries remained wealthy and the poor stayed poor except in cases where 
the vicissitudes of war, revolution, conflagration, famine, and other 
major catastrophes chose to bring about some change. This state of 
economic affairs was the greatest single agency in marking off the many 
social strata. It was wealth that determined the educational status of 
the individual. If he was mentally capable of acquiring a higher educ¬ 
ation, wealth alone could purchase it for him. This was especially true 






- 50 - 


in Gzarist Russia and up to the 1920*s under the Communist regime. In 
Germany the situation was more favorable for the poor classes. 

The professional class on the Continent, backed by wealth or a 
substantially high income, enjoyed a higher economic status than most 
groups except the businessman and the industrialist. Next came the 
craftsmen and skilled laborers; third, the farmers; and finally the 
common workers, and, in Russia particularly, the peasant. There was 
actually no opportunity for economic advancement for the great masses of 
people to which the majority of the German Baptists belonged. 

The Canadian Scene . 

On Canadian soil the situation was considerably altered. In the 
first place, the influx of professional individuals among German Baptists 
to Canada was nil, except for a few clergymen. Craftsmen and skilled 
laborers improved their position considerably because of the demand for 
their services. Their training was thorough because of the years of 
apprenticeship required in most European countries. They were well 
qualified to compete with Canadian skill and craftsmanship. The common 
laborer appeared to improve his position even more. In most Continental 
countries he frequently subsided on extremely meager wages; in Canada he 
enjoyed a comparatively satisfactory income. The farmer benefited most. 
He came from a few acres of land in Europe, to quarters and sections of 
rich farming soil. Since the majority of German Baptists were farmers by 
vocation, they generally improved their economic status. 

At the same time, there was also the poverty of the immigrant 
and his children. Financial difficulties were almost a universal source 
of frustration. In the case of the homesteader there was the task of 
clearing and breaking the land. Even where this difficult enterprise 





u: 




















- 51 - 


was greatly facilitated by natural conditions the land still had to be 
tilled - a process that called for more equipment than a spade and a 
handplow. But there was no capital for the purchase of implements. In 
other instances, the newcomer had to search for labor. Often the fare 
from Europe had to be earned on Canadian soil in addition to supporting 
a family. Yet, the experiences of privation in the new homeland were not 
more severe than those encountered in Europe. Besides, the brighter out¬ 
look for the future gave the immigrant and his children a state of morale 
which enabled them to bear difficulties much more effectively. Today, the 
German Baptists in general are economically well established. 

The effects of hardship and privation undoubtedly left an impres¬ 
sion on personality. This was probably more so for the newcomer than for 
the first two generations born in Canada. The immigrant, In the first 
place, had been exposed to privation In the old homeland, and now had to 
endure hardship on this continent as well, while the later generations 
obviously were removed from, the European scene and, as natives of this 
country, invariably enjoyed the fruits of the labor of their Immigrant 
ancestry. 

The economic factor, therefore, would be more significant in 
personality adjustment for the immigrant population than for their 
descendents. On the other hand, its influences were not confined to 
German Baptists exclusively but were felt by the majority of other ethnic 
groups as well. As pointed out before, economic needs constituted the 
basic motive in most immigration (44)® 

At present, the economic status of the German Baptists of Western 
Canada, and of Alberta specifically, compares favorably with that of other 
racial and religious groups. Racially the group is known for its industry, 








- 52 - 


organization, and aggressive attack upon prevailing problems (ll). These 
qualities have proved an asset in a country where there is free enterprise 
and an abundance of good soil. Most German Baptist farmers own their 
farms, while town and city residents usually own real estate. Some 
individuals have become very prosperous. The economic problems, therefore, 
are chiefly a matter of the past. 

THE SOCIAL ASPECT. 

Closely related to the religious and economic factors is the 
social aspect. Religion and economics among the German Baptists in 
earlier years appeared to have pulled in opposite directions with reference 
to social intercourse. Church life ordinarily facilitated contact among 
the group, while economic conditions separated families and individuals 
as they settled across the prairie. 

The Immigrant and His Social Life . 

Immigrants, especially from Germany, found Canadian social life 
dull. Social contacts among both young and old in European countries 
were allegedly much more frequent and on a wider basis as compared to 
Canada. 

The greatest single factor that tended to make social life diff¬ 
icult, especially for the farm-worker, was the vast country-side with 
isolated farm homes here and there across the prairie. Even the radio 
and the automobile, in later years, could not bridge sufficiently the 
interpersonal gap resulting from geographical distances. European farm 
homes, in contrast, were clustered together in village fashion. 

But there were other factors as well. The Canadian appeared 
much more individual!stieally inclined than the European; he gave the 



0'' 










fv 









~ 53 - 


impression that he wanted to be left alone* During the last few decades 
there was also considerable discrimination against and ostracism of the 
newcomer by native Canadians* All this made social contact difficult 
for the immigrant. 

The situation was partly compensated for by a minimum of class 
distinction in Ganada. The European labored incessantly under the effort 
of classifying the rich and the poor* the educated and the uneducated and 
the illiterate, employer and employee and what not. There were even 
marked social strata among the common laborer and the farmer. This 
depended upon the amount of his income, the specific type of work he was 
doing, or the number of cows and horses he owned. The absence of such 
class distinction was a pleasant relief for the immigrant who usually 
had little education and nothing but debt to his name. 

Another compensating factor was the functioning of the church 
as a center of social life. Since the time of the earliest settlers, the 
main gatherings, religious and social, were in connection with the church. 
This was true in other German and Dutch communities (H). In earlier 
years attempts were made to teach the German language as a subject in 
Sunday School in order to maintain German traditions. 

Compensations . 

It is difficult to say how .much the absence of class distinction 
compensated the German Baptist immigrant for social ostracism resulting 
during the earlier years especially from geographical distances and, 
later, from race prejudice. It is probable that the greater social 
equality practiced in Canada had some compensatory effects. On the other 
hand, it is quite certain that the church, as a social center, provided 
the immigrant with the greatly needed contact and compensated for his 












‘ 


' 0 


. 

















- 54 - 


exclusion from outside social circles. 

Assimilation Tendencies . 

The younger generations have been less subject to social 
ostracism. In the first place, they knew little about European social 
life, and since they were reared in Canada, they regarded their surround¬ 
ings as their home. Whether it was town or open prairie, it was not a 
place of separation from a gay and colorful social world. Moreover, they 
mingled more freely with other Canadian groups. For years^there has been 
a growing tendency among the later generations to find their entertainment 
and cultural pursuits inside as well as outside German Baptist circles. 
There are numerous instances where there have been inter-marriages with 
other ethnic elements. 

While there is still a certain degree of ostracism of the children 
of German Baptist immigrants, they appear to have established reasonably 
satisfactory outside contacts and, at the same time, manage to maintain 
their status within the church and ethnic community. Here they usually 
are organized in young peoples® societies and carry on a program of 
worship and recreation. 

LANGUAGE FACTOR. 

The factor related most closely to the social aspect is language. 
While it did not affect materially intra-group contacts, the inability on 
the part of the immigrant to use English proved a barrier to outside 
intercourse. With the coming of later immigrants this problem appeared 
less acute. Outside group contacts were often made through the later 
generations who functioned as interpreters. But these were secondary 
contacts. At the same time, the use of the English language by the first 



. 



• • ■ ' ' ■ ' . • • ' 






- 55 - 


and aspecially the second generation ostracised the immigrant from his 
own ethnic group. 

The language problem constituted a source of tension especially 
in church activities: the immigrant population demanding German and the 
younger generations clamouring for English. In a number of churches the 
language problem has not been solved as yet. Although both German and 
English are used in most church activities the problem of a satisfactory 
ratio still remains. 

EDUCATION. 

Canadian compulsory education in itself did not appear to con¬ 
stitute a problem. In most instances it was welcomed as an opportunity 
for social and economic advancement, especially by immigrants coming from 
illiterate Russia a few decades ago. These people encouraged their 
children to avail themselves of the educational opportunities. Problems, 
however, arose as soon as the younger generation carried the English 
language into their immigrant parental homes and began to practice Canadian 
ways contrary to European mores. Where the old traditions were strongly 
entrenched clashes between the older and younger generations occured 
frequently. 

The difficulties arising from the language factor and from 
education among the German Baptists were similar to those of other ethnic 
groups. These problems were essentially the result of clashes between 
two incompatible cultures. 

THE HDME. 

Whatever problems arose from social contacts, such as the use of 
the English language or education, they were likely to become problems of 




:: ' ' . ' ;■ ' f. • . V ■ f )V n 

. ' ' 


. • • : , . . ■ 1 ■ ’ 

.■'> ■ r'" ■- 1 ' ‘ '•' ' . 


- ’ : ' 



.■ - 


- 

' ' ' * 

1 • - ■ ... " ‘ ‘ ■ '. • ■ 

- 1: ♦ ' 

, ' ! . ' — ' ‘ ' " ' ■ " ' " • ' ■ ■' : ' .‘ 

v ■ V' • • ■ • '"' . 1 \ r 0\V r ' : ’ 

:>?') :‘i ; f ■' v '• ' • • • * ; " *r : .'...f 

■ ; r • ■ ■ ■ • „ 1 • r-. ‘ ’ 

, . ■ . ■ ■. ■' ’ 



■ 

» : ' 

It'. 9 r •• • ' . r .'..t C'D I/.:'.' < 1 ■ . os; • ' 




- 56 - 


the home. Outside of that, home relationships were ordinarily satisfact¬ 
ory although they were based chiefly on autocratic rule. 

During the earlier years the home and the church were the two 
outstanding institutions providing protection and security against an 
outside, rigorous environment. It appeared necessary that the family 
present a common front. This tendency can be observed again among 
recent immigrants. 

Considering the older settlers and the later generations, the 
situation has changed. The use of the English language and the practice 
of Canadian ways have facilitated numerous contacts outside the home. 

There is greater independence of the younger individuals with a tendency 
to friction between parents and children, Yi/here European traditions 
continue dominating the home, family ties gradually lose their cohesive¬ 
ness and children leave for a more congenial environment, 

ASSIMILATION PROCESS* 

To date, the German Baptists in Western Canada have generally 
maintained their identity. To be store, the acquisition and the use of 
the English language, the standard of living, and other cultural aspects 
have erased many of the differences between the German and Anglo Saxon 
and other national groups. The two ¥iorld wars also had a cogent influence 
in accelerating the process of Canadianization, German speech and ways 
and sympathies were concealed in order to avoid arousing undue antagonism. 

The process of assimilation is decidedly slower in strong German 
Baptist communities than in localities where one or a few families reside. 
This observation has also been stressed in a study of the German Catholics 
by Dawson (10), He found that it requires three generations or longer to 










- 57 - 


affect complete assimilation in bloc settlements. Since the German 
Baptists consist of immigrants and first and second generations, and 
since they have settled mainly in communities, it would seem that their 
assimilation as a group into the Canadian pattern is likely to be 
incomplete at present. 





- 58 - 


CHAPTER V 

SPECIFIC SURVEY 

It has been observed that the German Baptists of Western 
Canada are a distinct ethnic-religious group organized into churches 
which, in turn, constitute the Northern Conference, Cooperation among 
members of the same congregation and among the various churches was, 
and still is, on a democratic basis. The bond, holding the group together, 
consists primarily of the tenets of faith and only secondarily of the 
common ethnic origin. To be sure, originally the German language was 
fundamental in the cohesion of the congregations. To-day it is no longer 
true. The mother tongue is gradually falling into disuse in worship and 
church activities. In social intercourse it is not used at all with the 
later generations. 

On the other hand, the cultural influences are not as readily 
erased as the use of the language. In some cases they have been modified 
by education and outside social contacts and incorporated into the 
Canadian way of lifej in other instances they were maintained as separate 
cultural entities. Whatever the procedure, the results showed themselves 
in various degrees of conflict, tension, and at least temporary maladjust¬ 
ment. 

In view of these developments the present study is to discover 
the personality status of the German Baptists. The results should reveal 
how successful the group has been in adjusting itself to its new environ¬ 
mental demands, and prove useful in predicting adjustment possibilities 
of new immigrant groups and their descendents. 







;n ; 










- 59 - 


THE PROBLEM. 

In approaching the problem of the present survey an attempt will 
be made to answer the following pertinent questions: 

1. Are there evidences of personality deviation among the German Baptists 
as compared to normal Albertans, specifically, and as compared to the 
norms established by the authors of the inventories used for this study? 

2. Are there differences between immigrants and later generations? Does 
the residential status actually cast some light upon the adjustment 
pattern of the total group? 

3. If there are deviations, what cultural factors could possibly be 
responsible for them? 

4. Are there indications that difficulties caused by cultural clashes on 
Canadian soil have brought about specific modes of personality adjustment? 

5 . Does age - and education offer an explanation to given personality 
trends? 

Specifically, the problem of the present survey Is to ascertain 
whether the German Baptists are a body of maladjusted individuals, or 
whether its members have succeeded in effecting a satisfactory and 
adequate degree of adjustment. 

SELECTION OF SUBJECTS. 

The historic, ethnic, and cultural aspects of the German Baptists 
of Alberta are closely interwoven with those of the entire group of West¬ 
ern Canada. It may be said that the national origin, the historical back¬ 
ground, and the cultural problems are essentially the same for the whole 
group. However, for practical reasons it is necessary to limit the 
psychological survey. It will render this study more specific. Therefore 









- 60 - 


the selection of subjects has been made from Alberta only. In fact, the 
writer has exercised care to confine his test survey exclusively to 
resident members of Albertan German Baptist congregations. 

The scope of selection, however, was extended over the entire 
province. Subjects were chosen from the greatest majority of German 
Baptist congregations, ranging from Medicine Hat in the south to the 
Peace River in the north. The selection, with but a few exceptions, was 
made on a random basis for both males and females: a) the subjects had 
to be able to read and understand the test material, and b) they were not 
to be younger than fourteen years of age or older than sixtyfive. The 
writer felt that the tests used in the study would not do justice to 
individuals beyond these two age limits, c) Moreover, the writer was 
careful to include in his selection Baptists only who were practicing 
their faith. 

Most of the contacts with the subjects were made by the writer 
in person. In a few instances pastors were requested to contact parish- 
eners who qualified as testees with reference to the above selection rules. 

After the selecting process had been completed and the test 
returns had come in there were approximately 160 subjects. A few of the 
test returns had to be eliminated because they failed to meet the minimum 
test requirements. The total number of qualified subjects eventually was 
153 of which there are 66 males and 87 females. 

TEST MATERIAL, 

The selection of test material was made with the intention of 
measuring personality adjustment. As a result, the Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory by S.R. Hathaway and J.0 9 McKinley was chosen as the 






- 61 - 


first and main psychometric tool. To supplement it, the Adjustment 
Inventory by H.M. Bell was added. The writer also prepared a question- 
aire entitled Problem Measurements, to detect difficulties that might 
have a bearing upon adjustment. A description and evaluation of the 
inventories can be found in Appendix G. 

Problem Measurements . 

The two inventories chosen for the survey can be expected to 
provide a satisfactory picture of personality adjustment of groups if 
each statement is answered conscientiously. However, the purpose of 
part of this thesis is to discover the effects of frustrating experiences 
encountered by German Baptists on Canadian soil. Hence the writer devised 
Problem Measurements, a simple questionaire. Tills was done in consult¬ 
ation with some of the pastors of German Baptist congregations. Only 

those questions were included which referred to difficulties encountered 

later n 

by immigrants and the/generations most frequently. The questionaire in 

its complete form appeal’s on the next page. 

Evaluation, 

Problem Measurements is obviously a limited questionaire. It 
touches only upon fourteen major situations which are thought to be 
thwarting to the immigrant and the immediately subsequent generations. 

The fifteenth question is partly to offset the limitations. Moreover, 
the writer and his collaborators felt that these questions represent the 
major problems among the German Baptists and that they would, if anything, 
cause feelings of frustration and conflict. 

The questionaire is also limited in its nature because of the 
personal element involved in answering any questionaire, a) It can be 
falsified, b) Traumatic experiences called for in Problem Measurements 



. 







, !;V 










f ■ ■ o’ ■: ■ "• ’ - ' ' . 


-I. - 














. 

' 








■ ■ •' • v : 



■ 




fV?.jU V> . 

* 


■ : 






•• 7 - 




ho ' 


r -■ ■■ ' 







- 62 - 


PROBLEM LI S A S D R E M ENTS 
IDENTIFICATION: 

Name_______ _ Age ____________ 

Sex __ PLACE of birth ___________ 

Education____ Residential status: 

Immigrant? ______ 

First Generation? __ 

DIRECTIONS: Second Generation ? 

Indicate whether the following experiences have been problems to you at 
any time during your residence in Canada. Behind each statement check 


one of the following: 

1. Canadian ways of life (customs) 

2 . English language difficulties 

3. A poor education ....... 

4. No education ... . 

5. Condition of Canadian Baptist 

Churches ...... 

6. Condition of Canadian political 

or social life ..... 

7. Ostracism from the social life 

of your church or community 

8. Lack of home-life ...... 

9. Home-sickness ........ 

10. Financial needs . . 

11. Readjustment to new types or 

methods of work ...... 

12. Poor job (Had to accept any job 

available) . . . 

13. No job (Out of work) ..... 

14. Personal feelings of prejudice 

against other racial or 
national groups ...... 

15. Mention any other problem not 

stated above & check . . , 


Severe 

Problem 

Moderate 

Problem 

No 

Problem 


































































































- 63 - 


are ordinarily repressed and forgotten, if severe, and therefore would 
not be checked, c) What at one time constituted a problem may not 
appear significant in retrospect. 

Despite these limitations, and they must be considered, Problem 
Measurements should prove of some value in this survey. 

Use of the Questionaire. 

In scoring the results not all responses under the category. 
Moderate Problem', were regarded as significant. Every individual is 
bound to have problems of some sort. Only where there is an accumulation 
of problems are there likely to be personality difficulties. For that 
reason five or more checks were considered noteworthy, seeing that the 
number five represents approximately the mean of the total scores of 
moderate problems. 

Gn the other hand, where checks under the Moderate Problem 
category ran parallel to high inventory scores, they were counted regard¬ 
less of number. Moreover, severe problems were all counted whether they 
appeared parallel to high inventory scores or by themselves. Even one 
severe problem might have a traumatic effect upon the individual. 

The Adjustment Inventory . 

The Adjustment Inventory is an instrument which attempts to 
measure certain areas of adjustment significant to mental health. These 

areas are; a) Home Adjustment 

b) Health Adjustment 

c) Social Adjustment 

d) Emotional Adjustment 

e) Occupational Adjustment. 

In the light of the specific problems of the German Baptists the value of 
measuring adjustment in the foregoing areas is obvious. For instance, 
difficulties in the home and in social contacts among the group under study 
appear to have been some of the major problems. 








' 















- 64 - 


The Inventory consists of two forms, the Adult and the Student 
form* The writer used both for his survey since some of his subjects, 
at the time of testing, were students. The simultaneous use of both 
forms was further justified because of the claims by the author regarding 
the high test reliability (3), and the findings by Traxlor (40) regarding 
their high intercorrelation. The fact that some of the subjects were 
students, however, and that the occupational scale does not appear in the 
Student Form, made it necessary to eliminate this scale for all subjects. 
Actually, this was no disadvantage because the majority of the female 
subjects were housewives and more than half of the males farmers, and 
therefore self-employed, while the occupational scale measures chiefly 
adjustment arising from employee-employer relationships. 

Interpretative Meaning. 

Appendix G will provide a further description of the inventory 

as such and give an evaluation of it as well. let, it should also be 

mentioned, that interpretation of the test material will be made on the 

basis of the author ! s interpretative categories which are virtually 

self-explanatory. These are: 

“Very unsatisfactory” (or “very retiring” for the social 

scale) 

“Unsatisfactory” (or “retiring”) 

“Average” 

“Good" and 
“Excellent”. 

A very low score ranges from “Excellent” to “Good". As the score 
ascends adjustment becomes increasingly less satisfactory. A high score 
in the categories of “Unsatisfactory” and “Very unsatisfactory” is 
indicative of maladjustment. 


d* ■ o t 



c 





' 


■ 




r - 







- 65 - 


Reasons for Choice of Test. 

The Adjustment Inventory does not have the relatively high 
validity found in the MMPI. Its usefulness as an individual test could 
therefore be questioned. The writer chose it, however, because he felt 

1) that as a test for group study it would measure up to require¬ 
ments. Moreover, as a supplementary psychometric instrument it would be 
very useful indeed, seeing that it had been used before with the MMPI 
with narked satisfaction (20). 

2) The Adjustment Inventory is decidedly a test of personality 
adjustment. Since the instrument covers areas such as home, health, 
social, and emotional adjustments, it is particularly significant in the 
study of the German Baptists. If there is maladjustment among the group, 
it should be evident particularly in the home and social areas where 
conflict is most likely to occur. 

3) Its scope of measurement is also more extensive than many 
other inventories. 

4) It is easily administered and requires no supervision. 

5) Finally, it can be used with a wide age and eduicational 
range of subjects, both males and females. 

The MMPI . 

The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, referred to 
from now on as the MMPI, consists of two forms, the card system and the 
booklet form. Since there is no difference in content, the latter was 
used because it could be manipulated easier in group tests with subjects 
scattered geographically. 

In essence the test consists of 566 statements covering a wide 


range of subjects. The entire test material is divided into twelve scales. 





1 


' 








. ", o:'“i 












' ;'!• . ' !■;. 








5 


' 





)f ' V 


















\ I f •.;> 

, 





- 66 - 


three of which are validating measures while the remaining nine constit¬ 
ute diagnostic measures. These twelve scales and their abbreviations 
are: (Appendix C) 


Question Score 

(?) 


Lie n 

a) 


Validity n 

(F) 


Plypo c ho ndriasi s 

Scale 

(Hs) 

Depression 

ii 

(D) 

Hysteria 

1! 

(Hy) 

Psychopathic Deviate n 

(Pd) 

Interest 

11 


Masculinity- 


(Islf) 

feminity) 


Paranoia 

II 

(Pa) 

Psychasthenia 

11 

(Pt) 

Schisophrenia 

11 

(3c) 

Hypo mania 

II 

(Ma) 


A thirteenth scale was added later, known as the K-scale, and also 


referred to as E-correction and E-factor, Its purpose was to render 
five of the diagnostic scales more sensitive, namely Hs, Pd, Ft, Sc, and 

Ma. 


A glance at the diagnostic scales will at once re\ T eal that the 
MMPI attempts to measure certain mental disorders as they are classified 
in psychiatric literature. The presence or absence of such s^romes 
shows respectively bad or good adjustment, 

Inter pretation. 

Interpretation of the MMPI results will be made in accordance 

with the author’s norms. A T-score of 50 on the profile sheet, or a few 

u 

points above or below, is a normal score. The higher the scale rises 
above the 50 T-score line the greater is the tendency to deviation. T- 
scores of 70 and above are significant indications of maladjustment. 
However, a lower than 70 T-score may also be significant if the general 
profile is comparatively even, while one or a few scales are proportion¬ 
ately high (17), (# A T-score is a corrected score as compared to a 

raw score.) 













- 67 - 


Furthermore, interpretation will be made in terms of the meaning 
which the author of the inventory attached to each scale. The greater 
emphasis, however, will be placed upon patterns of response as indicated 
by related groups of scales. It has been found that such approach prcv- 
ides a truer personality picture (13). The writer, therefore, will refer 
to the neurotic triad when speaking of Hs, H, and Hy, of the psychopathic 
area consisting of Pd and Mf, and of the psychotic scales, Pt, Sc, and Ma. 
Roughly speaking, these three areas measure respectively the three major 
psychiatric mental disorders, i.e, neurosis, psychopathy, and psychosis. 

The diagnostic scales, for which the E-factor was designed, will 
be presented both with and without E-correction. Some studies have shown 
that the K-scale hinders rather than facilitates the discriminatory 
capacity of the diagnostic measures particularly in group studies (6), 
but also with individuals (34). The presentation of scales with and 
without E-factor, it is hoped, will bring out the mode of personality 
adjustment more clearly. 

Reasons for Selecting the MMPI. 

The reasons determining the choice of the MMPI as a psychometric 
instrument for this study ares 

1) that it is primarily a test of personality adjustment. The 
various categories of statements constitute scales for measuring specific 
personality deviations. An individual with an extremely high score cn 
Hy or Sc, or any other diagnostic scale or group of scales, is decidedly 
a maladjusted person. 

2) The MMPI was also chosen because of its relatively high 
validity and reliability coefficients. TJhile there are disagreements on 
these points, the inventory nevertheless takes a leading position among 






: 










r 






.. r, . 




> 

‘ .• /• — . ; ' ■: '" • 

:hvy:ti 













• '• : >■ 










- 68 - 


other questionaire type of tests by measuring what it sets out to 
measure and presenting nearly the same results at retests. 

3) Moreover, the scope of the test makes the MMPI a practical 
psychological tool. A wide variety of personality categories, covering 
some of the major syndromes in neurosis and psychosis, can be obtained in 
a single testing operation. 

4) The test also is self-administering. It requires a minimum 
of instruction and no supervision. It can, therefore, be taken by the 
subject during his spare time anyplace - a factor significant for this 
survey. 

5) Finally, the MMPI can be applied to a wide range of age and 
educational groups both males and females. 

ADMINISTRATION OF TEST MATERIAL. 

Testing procedures were carried out in accordance with instruct¬ 
ions given in the inventories. In each instance the subjects were urged 
to read directions carefully, to work independently, and to be free from 
outside disturbances. They were also assured that their responses would 
be kept confidential. 

Ifone of the subjects were supervised while working on the tests. 
All the test material was therefore self-administered in the homes of 
the subjects and during their spare time. 

Test returns were made chiefly by mail, and scoring was done by 

hand. 

STATISTICAL METHODS. 

During scoring procedures the waiter segregated his male and 
female subjects into two groups which now constitute his main group of 





0:V O: 






■ 










o'i 




- 69 - 


German Baptists of Alberta, With the completion of scoring, males and 
females were divided into subgroups according to variables. This, it 
was believed, would provide a better understanding of the entire group 
under study. The divisions obtained are based upon residential status, 
age factor, and educational factor. 

Subgroups . 

1. The residential status groups, males and females, consist of 
three each: Immigrants, First Generation, and Second Generation. The 
immigrant group is composed of individuals who have entered Canada from 
some European country, while the first and second generations represent 
people who were born in Canada or TJ.S.A. The first generation comprises 
the children and the second the grandchildren of immigrants. 

2. There are two age groups among both males and females. The 
younger group is composed of individuals aged 14 to 24 and the older group 
aged 25 to 65, About 2% of subjects constitute the two age extremes 14 
and 65, The writer felt justified in including them because of the 
relative maturity in the first case and the keen interest shown in the 
latter instance, 

3. The educational male and female groups, also two each, were 
divided according to public school education comprising grades I to VIII, 
and according to high school and more advanced training. The latter group 
includes subjects with grade IX to XU education, nurse’s training, 
commercial and university students. Since there were relatively few sub- 
jects with more than high school training, the writer did not consider it 
advisable to formulate a separate group. When, therefore, referring to 

to high school in the following pages the writer means the entire advanced 
educational group. 





. 




' 


I 














. 











- 70 - 


Statistical Computations , 

Formulas. 

After the division into groups the Means and Standard Deviations 
were found for all subjects and for each subgroup on every scale on both 
inventories. To check on the actual differences of the various Means 
both the t-ratio and the Critical ratio,t (46), were applied. The t- 
ratio was used for the smaller samples (45) (46), while the Critical 
ratio was used for the larger groups. Hence, t-ratio computations were 
made on immigrants and the two succeeding generations, and Critical ratio,t 
computations on the total group and the age and educational, groups. 

The t-ratio computations are based upon Fishers formula as 
stated and explained by Guilford and Smith (15) (46)2 



The Critical ratio formula used in this study was taken from Linquist 



Interpretation. 

The soealled 5, null hypothesis 11 , i.e. that there is no difference 
between the true Means of compared samples, ,! can never be rejected or 
accepted with complete certainty] it can merely be shown to be highly 
improbable, highly probable, or something inbetween’ 1 (46). Yet, these 
concepts imply criteria which are commonly used in testing an hypothesis 
and in determining the significance level of the degree of differences 


between means. 


















j 









' , ‘ g ' ’ r »•; ' ■ I ■ , ' ' !■ 

- 1 ‘ ■ 











- 71 - 


In most investigations of larger groups, i.e. of 30 and more 
cases, the commonly accepted criteria for the Critical ratio are: 

A M t” value of 1,96 indicates that 5 in 100 or 3 % of the variations in 
sampling could occur by chance. 

A "t M value of 2.58 indicates 1 in 100 or 1 % chance variation. 

A n t M value of 3*00 indicates 3 chance variations in 1000. 

For interpretative purposes the criteria are probably more 
meaningful in terms of levels of confidence or significance. Hence, 

1) a confidence level of less than 5$, or a ,! t” value of less than 1.96, 
is regarded as insignificant; 

2) a confidence level between 5 % and 1 % 9 or a n t w value between 1.96 
and 2.58, is of doubtful significance; and 

3) a confidence level of 1% 9 or a ”t” value of 2.58, and above, is 
significant. 

The lower the confidence levels and the higher the n t n values become 
the more significant are the differences. 

"IJhile the above criteria will be used for interpreting the 
Critical ratio computations, the t-ratio results obtained from smaller 
samples, i.e. from less than 30 subjects, call for slightly different 
rules. The significance levels for the t-ratio are based upon the number 
of subjects in each group and, therefore, vary from group to group. Since 
the residential status groups in this study consist of less than 30 
subjects, except the First Generation females, the following levels of 
significance, based on Fisher’s significance ratio table (45), will be 
used for Immigrants, First, and Second Generation: 










.0 








, r ! 


















; ' ■ ' •, ' ' ' • 


' 

' 






















- 72 - 


Levels of Significance 


5 % 

Insignificant 


Of doubtful 
significance 


1/0 

Significant 


Ivlales 


Immig. and First Gen, 
Iraraig. and Sec, Gen. 
First and Sec. Gen, 


2.02 

2.04 

2.04 


2.42 

2.45 

2.45 


2.70 

2.75 

2.75 


Females 


Immig. and First Gen 
Immig. and Sec. Gen. 
First and Sec. Gen. 


2.00 

2.02 

2.00 




TAB IE 3 AM) PROFILES 


Following the computations, the writer prepared tables of the 


statistical results on both inventories for the total group as well as 
for each subgroup. Upon the basis of these tables personality profiles 
were drawn to represent graphically the test findings. Since the 
Adjustment Inventory has no profile sheet, the writer devised one to 
meet the needs of the present study. Similarly, other tables were 
arranged. Both tables and profiles appear in the following chapter. 



.1 





: ; 



i' 









‘ ■ ' ' 









* 



« •' ' • 







- 73 - 


CHAPTER VI 
RESULTS OF THE SURVEY 

The survey, thus far, of the historic-cultural trends and that 
of the specific problems of the German Baptists has pointed to the poss¬ 
ible sources of difficulties encountered by the group* In the following 
pages an analysis will be made of the results of Problem Measurements. 

This is an attempt to show situations that actually created problems as 
seen by the subjects themselves. Following Problem Measurements there 
will be an examination of the findings of the two inventories. 

RESULTS OF PROBLEM MEASUREIJEKTS. 

The Total Group * 

An examination of the results of Problem Measurements (Tables 1 
and 2} reveals both the presence and absence of difficulties. While there 
are areas in which there appears to be no stress at all, there are also 
situations in which the group frequently experienced frustration. 

Severe Problems. 

On the basis of Table 1, educational problems , financial needs . 
employment difficulties , and problems under statement 15, which were not 
specified except in rare cases, constitute severe difficulties for many of 
the male subjects. The problems under item 15 that were specified included 
difficulties such as ’’lack of memory”, need for ’’independence in business”, 
and ’’treatment of German nationals”. For the female group (Table 2), 
education and finances also play a conspicuous part but not as large 
proportionately as among the males. Instead, difficulties for the females 
appear considerably more frequently in the areas of political, social and 


home life 














TABLE 1 


- 74 - 


DISTRIBUTION OF PROBLEMS ON PROBLEM MEASUREMENTS 

According to Percentages 

Among 6 6 Males 



1 SEVERE PROBLEMS 1 

MODERATE PROBLEMS 


p- 

1lGen. 

2Gen.f 

Imm. 

lGen. 

2Gen. 

1. Canadian ways of life 



1 

32.0 

12.0 

6.6 

2. English language diff¬ 
iculties 

20.0 



35.0 

| 23.1 

26.6 

1 

3. A poor education 

20.0 

j 

I 

13.3 

28.0 

38.5 ; 

|46.6 ! 

4* No education 

1 

4.0 | 

j 4.0 

! 20.0 

12.0 

12.0 


5. Condition of Canadian 
Baptist Churches 

4.0 

4.0 


32.0 

30.7 

33.3 

6. Condition of Canadian 

political and social life 


4.oj 

i 

! 35.0 

I 

( 46.2 

60.0 

7. Ostracism from the social j 
life of your church or 
community 

1 

1 

! 4.0 

1 


16.0 

| 

! 19.2 

6.6 

8, Lack of home-life 

1 



20.0! 

I 

j 12,0 | 


9. Home-sickness 

4*0 

4.0 


j 24.0 

! 19.2 | 

[ | 

! 6.6 

10* Financial needs 

20.0 

8.0 


j 60.0 

j 70.0 

73.3 

11. Readjustment to new types | 
or methods of work 


4.o; 


44.0 j 

1 30.7 

40.0 J 

12. Poor job (Had to accept any 
job available) 

4.0 

j 

6.6 

3 

32.0 

12.0 

j 6.6 ! 

1 | 

13. No job (Out of work) 

4.0 



20.0 

j 

12.0 

6.6 1 

J 

14. Personal feelings of prejud~j 
ice against other racial 02 
national groups 



] 

l 

1 

28.0 

23.1 

20.0 | 

15. Mention any other problem 
not stated above and check 

8.0 

4.0 i 

1 

1 1 

4.0 

4.0 

r 

1 

1 


N -25 

N -26 

N-15 

N-25 

N-26 

N -15 













































. 


.• j . ; J 


■ v. 


; 

i 


I A , 






. 




' 


: •- ' • f ■ 


. 


• . ■' . = 




. LM r 


^ # 


: --r.rO) ctor; 


■ • 


. 


, 


yv{ ' nc.'J'i':. 





i 



















- 75 - 


TABLE. 2 . 

DISTRIBUTION O F PR OBLEMS ON PROBLE M MEASUREMENTS 
Aceordin £ to P ercentages 


Among 8 7 



SEVERE PROBLEMS 

MODERATE PROBLEMS 


limn. 

jlGen» 

2Gen. 

Imm. 

IGen. 

■2£§S-1 

1. Canadian -ways of life 


12.3 


18.8 

4.5 

1 

2. English language diff¬ 
iculties 


j 

1 2.3 


37.5 

9.1 

jn.i 

3. A poor education 


2.3 


43.8 

44.0 

j 22.2 

4. No education 

6.2 

6.8 


18.8 

9.1 

1 3.7 j 

5. Condition of Canadian 

Baptist Churches 


2.3 

7.4 

25.0 

27.3 

1 1 

1 26.0 j 

6. Condition of Canadian 

political and social life 


6.8 

3.7 1 

1 

43.8 

1 

! 

32.0 

) 

26.0 

7, Ostracism from the social 
life of your church or 
community 


2.0 


18.8 

22.7 

7.4 

8. Lack of home-life 

6.2 


3.7 

6.2 | 

20.5 

3.7 

9. Home-sickness 


9.1 


50,0 

16.0 

40.7 

10. Financial needs j 

12,2 


3.7 

43.8 

50,0 

52.0 

11, Readjustment to new types 
or meihods of work 




25.0 

32.0 

40.7 j 

12, Poor job (Had to accept any 
job available) 


2.3 



13.6 

■ 

15 . 0 1 
* 

13• No job (Out of work) 



3.7 


6.8 

3.7 

14. Personal feelings of prejud-; 
ice against other racial or' 
national groups j 



: 

18.8 | 

16.0 

18,5 

15. Mention any other problem 

not stated above and check 1 


4.5 






N-16 N-44 N-27 N-16 N-44 N-27 














































■ 






■: 


I; 































. 
























- 76 - 


Since statement six (Table 2) does not separate political and 
social problems, it is impossible to determine which of the two is more 
important. It is questionable, however, that the political aspect should 
be significant. Ordinarily, the German Baptist female does not show 
great interest in politics. 

Difficulties with Canadian wavs and personal feelings of preju ¬ 
dice were not checked at all under category Severe Problems , by the male 
groups. Similarly, personal feelings of prejudice are insignificant for 
the females. In addition, there appear to be no problems regarding new 
types of work . 

Moderate Problems. 

While the category Severe Problem s, reveals difficulties in some 
areas and none in others, the category Moderate Problems , shows some 
difficulties in every area represented in the testing instrument. More- 
over, while only relatively few subjects show severe obstacles , a decid 
edly larger precentage of the group reveal contact with moderate obstacle 
let, there are degrees of emphasis here as well. 

A large proportion of the male population claims to have encount 
ered moderate difficulties especially in the areas of financial needs . 
readjustment to new types of work , education, language , conditions of 
political , social and church life , and personal feelings of prejudice . 
Canadian ways , ostracism from church and community , and employment diff¬ 
iculties appear to be of smaller consequence. 

Among the female population the picture is slightly different. 
While financial needs are most frequent under Moderate Problems , poor 
education and conditions of church , political and social life , too, have 


been perplexing. Problems of language , employment , and feelings of 



























' ■ 

■ . 





• - - 


5 • . " ■ 









■ 

• • ■ ' ' .• ' .'••'••• 


‘ r . . . . , - , r ; v ; r ' 

' • r>; " . ' , . ’ ' 



- 

’ 

. 



; 





- • ■ '■ ■ ■ ■ 





. ' " 1 











- 77 - 


prejudice appear to have been less trying. Instead, there is considerable 
emphasis upon home-sickness and lack of home life . 

The differences of females as compared to males are especially 
evident under the category Severe Problems . Language , education , and 
financial needs , "which are related areas, are especially important to 
masculine status in the cultural pattern of Western Civilization. Hence, 
they tend to offer maximum frustration to the male population. While these 
factors are also significant to feminine status, they are commonly of lesser 
consequence to the female population. 

The Three M ale G enerations • 

An examination of the results of Problem Measurements with 
reference to Immigrants, First, and Second Generation reveals still another 
pattern. 

Immigrant Males. 

It will be noticed that male Immigrants find the use of the 
English language , a poor education , and financial needs most often sever¬ 
ely problematic. In fact, these three problem areas were checked with 
the same frequency (Table 1). Next in importance are non-specified 
difficulties checked under item 15. Finally, least of the severe problems 
are related to difficulties encountered because of lack of e ducation . 
condition of Baptist churches , ostracism from church or community life . 
home-sickness , and poor .jobs or no employment . Conditions of Canadia n 
political and social life , lack of home life , readjustment to new types 
and methods of work , and personal feelings of prejudice appear to have 
had no severe effects. 

The same problem areas that were checked under category Severe 
Problems , were also marked under Moderate Problems , and with greater 



































■ 






. •!' ... ... . 


’ 






. 














■ 


. 


. 


























' 













- 78 - 


frequency. In addition, other items not checked as severely distressing 
were regarded as moderate difficulties. 

There is, therefore, no consistent parallel between severe and 
moderate problems. Readjustment to new work , the condition of Canadian 
political and social life, personal feelings of prejudice , and Canadian 
ways were not severe problems to any of the Immigrant male subjects. 

Yet, these factors presented obstacles of a moderate degree to a large 
percentage of the Immigrant male group. 

Nevertheless, there are parallels between the two categories. 
Items that were checked most frequently under Severe Problems have also 
a high percentage of scores under Moderate Problems . It is probable that 
the items showing the highest percentages of scores under both categories 
combined represent areas of greatest frustration. These areas in order 
of importance to the German Baptist male Immigrants are: financial needs , 
English language difficulties , a poor education , condition of Baptist 
churches , and poor jobs . Problems of 3aast difficulty are: lack of home 
life , personal feelings of prejudice , and Canadian ways . 

First Generation Males. 

Under category Severe Problems , male subjects of the First 
Generation reveal the same difficulties as their Immigrant fellows in 
only five of the fifteen problem areas (Table l). The highest score is 
on financial needs . The other severe problem scores are on items: no 
education , condition of churches and of political and social life , home ¬ 
sickness , and other unspecified problems. All these scores are uniform. 
Other areas offer no severe obstacles. Even language difficulties and 
poor education , which are highly significant to the Immigrant group, are 
not a severe problem to the First Generation. 





























- 79 - 


Under category Moderate Problems , each item was checked. 

Financial needs seem to have caused extensive moderate difficulty. Other 
significant items are: condition of political and social life , a poor educ ¬ 
ation . condition of Baptist churches , readjustment to new work , language 
difficulties . personal feelings of prejudice , home-sickness , and ostracism . 

The results of both categories. Severe and Moderate Problems combined, 
show in order of frequency the greatest difficulties in the areas of financial 
needs , condition of Canadian political and social life , condition of Baptist 
churches , readjustment to new work , and home-sickness . Least significant were 
problems with reference to Canadian wavs , lack of home life , poor job , and 
unemployment . 

It is interesting to note that there is a decrease in the number 
and extent of problems from Immigrants to the First Generation. This tend¬ 
ency to encounter less problems and to reduce the number of problem areas 
is quite striking on Problem Measurements. 

Second Generation Males. 

Males of the Second Generation confine their responses to even less 
problem areas. There are but four items checked under category Severe 
Problems (Table 1). These items are: no education , poor education , poor job , 
and out of work . Actually, these four areas represent two major aspects, i.e. 
educational and employment difficulties. Hence, severe problems are not as 
extensive as those of either the Immigrants or the First Generation. 

Under Moderate Problems the most frequent difficulties for the 
Second Generation are: financial needs , condition of Canadian poli tic al and 
social life , and poor education . In each instance, the scores are higher 
for the Second Generation than for either Immigrants or First Generation. 
Significant also are: readjustment to new work , condition of Baptist churches. 

































































- 80 - 


and English language difficulties * This appears contrary to expectations. 

If any of the residential status groups achieves a reasonably satisfactory 
degree of adjustment in work, church life, and the use of the English 
language, it should be the Second Generation. 

Probably more satisfactory are the combined results of both 
categories. Severe and Moderate Problems . In these terms the Second 
Generation males appear to encounter most obstacles with poor education , 
jobs , financial needs , and the condition of political and social life . 

Least distressing are Canadian wavs , ostracism , and home-sickness . 
Relationship Among Male Residential Groups. 

The foregoing results of Problem Measurements thus show a tendency 
to limit problems to fewer areas with each succeeding generation. There is 
also a difference in emphasis of areas. For instance, while Immigrants and 
First Generation each have percentage scores of 4 on item no education , the 
Second Generation has a score of 20 - the highest of its scores under Severe 
Problems . Similarly, Immigrants have a high of 20 and First Generation a 
zero score on item a poor education , while Second Generation has a score of 
13.3. 

Another phenomenon is the fact that there is but one instance under 
Severe Problems , namely on item no education , where Immigrants as well as the 
two succeeding generations score. In other areas there is considerable 
irregularity. A problem among Immigrants may continue to cause difficulty 
for the First Generation and then disappear; or it may disappear with the 
First Generation and reappear among subjects of the Second Generation. How¬ 
ever, there are no severe problems among individuals of the Second Generation 
which were not also present among Immigrants. 

The differences thus seen between the two categories, as well as the 

























o ... 



f), 

- .T' . 



v.o ~ : j r : < .M ■:) 


• . • t * ... : ; . . ‘ ..... 

c - V'. ' r;r .• ' ’ \ __ 1._ 

, <.. .. _ . /. 

‘ ' ‘ '■ * v^vr.; /. / . <- v >■' 

:. • .• . . , ’ j / - :.r .‘Tl :r.• 101 


■ 1 f: \ .■ : •. ■ r . . "... ; ■ • f : ■ l\(. 

■ ' ■ -r.' ■ •' 

. 





- 81 - 


differences in the emphasis on problem areas, are undoubtedly the result 
of a difference in socio-cultural background of the three male residential 
groups. 

The Three Female Generations . 

Immigrant Females. 

Problem areas of Immigrant females under category Severe Problems , 
are relatively few. They are confined to financial needs , no education , and 
lack of home life (Table 2). Even these problems do not occur very frequent¬ 
ly. The highest score is on item financial needs , having a score of 12.2, 
while the other two items have scores of 6.2 each. Aside from these, no 
other severe difficulties were checked. 

Similarly, under Moderate Problems. Immigrant females did not score 
on every item. Poor .job , no .job, and other unspecified problems under item 
15 were not checked at all. Those that were checked have relatively high 
consistent scores. There is but one exception: the item on lack of home 
life has a low score. The highest scores are on home-sickness , a poor 
education , condition of Canadian political and social life , financial needs , 
and English language difficulties . 

The total results of both categories combined point out financial 
needs and no education as the most significant problems among the Immigrant 
female group. 

First Generation Females. 

¥hile under category Severe Problems , percentage scores of the 
First Generation females are not higher than those of Immigrant females, 
they are much more extensive in range (Table 2). All but two items were 
scored. Those that were omitted are readjustment to new work and personal 
feelings of prejudice . The items showing the highest scores are: home- 
































V. 




' 


. 0'' 






f O'on oo > v:x 


iOO v ; •/. 


00-0 


o 




O' ■ 


. 


no. 


v t- • r nl 


‘ton. i: 0-£O 

. 


. ■ o 












- 82 - 


sickness , no educatio n, and condition of political and social life . 

Under Moderate Problems all items were scored except item 15 * 

This confirms the tendency to more extensive difficulties among the First 
Generation in comparison to Immigrants. The scores themselves, however, are 
not higher than those of the Immigrant group. Even the distribution of 
problems is similar. The highest scores are on financial needs , poor educ¬ 
ation . condition of Canadian political and social life , and readjustment to 
new work . 

The results of both categories combined are less decisive than 
those of Immigrant females. Items that were scored high under Severe 
Problems by some subjects of the First Generation are scored less frequently 
under Moderate Problems by others of the same group, and vice versa. For 
instance, item home-sickness, reveals the highest score under Severe Problems , 
but has a score of only 16.0 under category Moderate Problems . Conversely, 
item financial needs shows a score of 50.0 under Moder ate Problems , but under 
Severe Problems it was not scored at all. 

Second Generation Females. 

Female subjects of the Second Generation appear to have encountered 
a wider range of obstacles under Severe Problems than Immigrants, but less 
extensive than the First Generation (Table 2). The highest score is on item 
condition of Baptist c h u rches. But this score is lower than the highest 
scores for both Immigrants and First Generation. The four other items 
scored show a low of 3«7 each. 

Category Moderate Problems reveals a few high scores. Financial 
needs . home-sickness . and readjustment to new work have scores as high as 


the highest among the other two residential female groups under the same 
category. There are, however, a few very low scores, namely, on no education . 


































, /• . . ‘ ; : Q;iO.- ‘ • UO ',‘T : \L t '< ‘ • V.-i-i/.l 

- 

' . : ' ■ 



•:> 'TO 1 ’ jo drl ■ :" r 

■ . ' ' ’inij 

' • ? : • . .• - ' : /• *. ' • <■ C" 1'_;'1.1 

. 
















;• ■■■ ; :j 00 *ro uto 


v 1/ y 














■ .o • : 


si 19 ; . ■ 


/- o,/ : ... . :o. •' .y.Yyv 1 c :U‘ ;-r; j -': 

{ j ' • . ..... - - • r ' ; • • o ••••• • . 

. 




,/v .! . ; . ■ . : y ■ *o 


■j; . I O'- . d : '"O 






y, '.;o i '.13 coo 

. 

, \ ; _ " . . ' v • •.. . . ..... . ... 

■■ 

■ 



- S3 - 


lack of home lif e, and no .job. Problems under item 15 have not been scored. 

The results under both categories collectively show that the 
condition of Baptist churches , financial needs , and the condition of Canadian 
political and social life are frequent problems among the females of the 
Second Generation. To some individuals of this group they seem to have 
caused severe stress. 

Relationship Among Female Residential Groups. 

There is no item in Problem Measurements under category Severe 
Problems , which was scored by all three generations. There is a close 
relationship between Immigrants and First Generation on item no education , 
and a less close relation between Immigrants and Second Generation on items: 
lack of home life a nd financial needs . A further relationship is found on 
items: condition of Baptist churches and Canadian political and social life 

between First and Second Generations. Under Moderate Problems all three 
groups score on most items. 

Unlike the males, the three female residential groups do not reveal 
a decrease in the extent of difficulties under Severe Problems with each 
succeeding generation. On the contrary, the Immigrants reveal a relatively 
narrow range of problems. Among subjects of the First Generation the score 
is widely extended, while among the Second Generation it is narrowed down 
considerably. But the range of problems is still greater for the Second 
Generation than the Immigrants. Under Moderate Problems this trend is not 
evident, 

The problems, thus, for each group of the three generations are 
different. These variations, as among male residential status groups, are 
undoubtedly a reflection of socio-cultural influences. 

To be sure, the limitations of Problem Measurements, as outlined in 
























- 84 - 


the previous chapter, should be kept in mind, a) Responses can be falsified, 
b) Traumatic experiences to be measured expecielly under category. Severe 
Problems, are ordinarily repressed and forgotten and, therefore, would not 
be scored, c) Difficulties that were outstanding problems at one time may 
not appear significant in retrospect. Still, Problem Measurements points 
out difficulties which at least have been recognized as problems by the 
subjects, and which most likely have brought aboxit specific adjustment 
trends among the German Baptists. 

RESULTS OF THE ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY. 

Bell* s Adjustment Inventory, examined in the preceeding chapter 
and in Appendix C, claims to measure specific areas in which maladjustment 
may be seen frequently. These areas are the home, health, social inter¬ 
course, and emotional balance. The scores may range from excellent to veiy 
unsatisfactory. 

The Total Group . 

The results obtained by this instrument in. testing the German 
Baptists as a group are by no means extreme. AH the scores fall within the 
category w Average 11 . as seen on Profile I. 

Total Males. 

More closely examined, the male profile does not reveal a very 
sharp rise of scores from one adjustment area to the other. The greatest 
extremes are noted in Home Adjustment with a low- score approaching category 
Good , and Social and Emotional adjustments with a high score located centrally 
within category Average . The score on Heal th Ad justment takes a relatively 
central position. 

The Standard deviations in Table 3 reveal less variability for the 
group in Home and Health adjustments than in the other two areas. 

















□ : i. ■ ■ ’ 


a 


. 

' 

’ 




o [ - L ■ • - ■ ., ■ 








1 r •.>; . v \;i 


.7 


i 






. • • 'f.': :: : 


• . - 
















'V oja rt! liar/on 7's i \-y 

..." "'■■■■ t - 

. . • * 

r. c j. 



PROFILE I 


- 85 


ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY PROFILE 
FOR THE 

ENTIRE GERMAN BAPTIST GROUP 

MALES FEMALES 

Home Health Social Emo- Home Health Social Emo¬ 
tional tionAl 


Very 

unsatisf. 


17 

14 

21 

16 

— 16-- 

--13- 

_..-20—- 

-15- 

15 

12 

19 

14 

Unsatisf. 




12 

9 

16 

12 

11 

8 

15 

11 

10 


14 

10 

9 

7 

13 

9 

8 


12 - 

8 

Aver age ~ 

( 

6 

/l 1 

7 

6 


' 10 

6 

5^" 


9 

5 

4 

4 

8 

7 

4 

3 

3 

6 

rr 

3 

Good 


O 


2 

2 

3 

2 


IB 15 25 21 

— 17-14-24-20-- 

16 13 23 19 

13 10 20 16 


12 9 19 15 

11 18 14 



1 ~ 1 ’~2 1 1 1 4 2 

Excellent 







TABLE 3 


ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY SCORES 
FOR THE 

ENTIRE GERMAN BAPTIST GROUP 


MALES N-66 FEMALES N s 87 



M. 

S.D. 

M. 

S.D. 

Horn© 

4.97 

4.75 

5.36 

5.46 

Health 

5.64 

4.63 

7.40 

5.00 

Social 

12.12 

6.33 

15.38 

6.12 

Emotional 

8.11 

6.93 

11.38 

6.43 


























■■v.V 




P r 




r 


r - 


or 








- 87 - 


The profile for the total female group is similar to that of the 

t 

males (Profile I). All scores fall within category Average . There is a 
low score on Home Adjustment and there are high scores in. both the Social 
and Emotional areas. Yet, there are also differences. Home Adjustment is 
lower and Health Ad jus tment higher for the females than the male group. 

Standard deviation scores for the female population also show less 
variability for the female group on the first two scales, but the differences 
are smaller than among the scores for males. 

German Baptists and Inventory Nonas . 

A comparison of Inventory data for the total German Baptists with 
Adjustment Inventory norms, as given in the Manual (3), reveal a slightly 
higher tendency of scores for the German Baptist subjects than for Bell’s 
standardisation group (Profile II). But this trend is not consistent. 
Comparative Data for Males. 

Among the German males the scores tend to be similar to those of 
Bell’s subjects. In fact, both groups have nearly identical scores on 
Health and Edmotional adjustments. In the areas of Home Adjustment the 
German group takes a higher and in Social Adjustment a lower position. 

The Critical ratio shows that the difference in the Social area 
is not statistically significant (Table 4) • In the area of Home Adjustment 
the difference is actual*/ The probability that such variation might have 
occurred by chance is less than 1%, This, therefore, implies better adjust¬ 
ment among German Baptist males in Home relationships than among Bell* 8 

standardization group. 

Similarly, the Standard deviations of the two male groups show 
little difference. The greatest extremes are in the Home and Emotional 
areas. In the first instance the German group shows greater homogeneity; 

(# i.e. significant) 














* • ' -■ 7. ) . ;i i 







■■ :o . • on" 



' *.> •’• 

• 








. ' .. ' r . ■ 1 • \ 





t 





. 


*: v • * 








1 





* ’ .• 





5 ■ .. ’ 1 r i y ; ■ > 'U . 


. ■ ; '■ '• ' •• _ ■ V, 

, I . ■: ... > 


• . .1 _ v . " • '■ '' . ‘ ^ r 

' 

• . .... ’ '■ ' ' '■ 


*' v ! t nrnrono 

1 ' ' : r ■ . . _ 1 •■;rronn . 

• ■ 


Jv _ • .. I 







. 










■ 









- 88 - 


Very 

unsatisf. 

Unsat is f. 

Aver age 

Good 

Excellent 


PROFILE II 


ADJUSTMENT 
GERMAN BAPTISTS 


INVENTORY PROFILE 
FOR 

AND AUTHOR* S SUB JECTS 


MALES 


FEMALES 


Home Health Social Emo¬ 
tional 


Home Health Social Emo¬ 
tional 


• 

17 14 21 16 IB 15 25 21 

— 16-13----20-15— —17-14--24-20— 

15 12 19 14 16 15 25 19 

12 9 16 12 15 10 20 16 



1121 1142 


GERMAN BAPTISTS — 
AUTHORLS SUBJECTS- 












TABLE IV 


- 89 


ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY SCORES 

for the 

TOTAL GER. BAPT. GROUP AND 

INVENT. AUTHOR'S .SUBJECTS 

MALES 

German Bapt . Author's Data Ger. Bapt. & 
N*66 . N=194 Author's Data 


M. 

S. D. 

M. 

S.D. 

C.R. 

Home 

4.97 

4.75 

7.02 

6.20 

2.94 

Health 

5.64 

4.63 

5.28 

4.28 

. 56 

Social 

12.12 

6.33 

11.38 

6.32 

.S3 

Emotional 

8.11 

6.93 

7.70 

5.46 

.43 


FEMALES 


German Bapt. 

N=87 

M. S.D. 

Author T s Data 

N s 2?4 

M. S.D. 

Gar. Bapt. & 
Author's Data 

C.R. 

Home 

5.36 

5.46 

8.26 

6.24 

4.20 

Health 

7.40 

5.00 

6.i a 

4.24 

2.07 

Social 

15.38 

6.12 

14 .12 

7.20 

1.62 

Emotional 

11.88 

6.43 

11.00 

7.16 

1.07 


































- 90 - 


in the second instance Bell’s subjects reveal greater similarity. 

Comparative Data for Females. 

Among females a trend for higher scores of the German Baptists is 

evident (Profile II). There is also a degree of consistency. With the 

exception of Home Adjustmen t the German females have higher scores. Yet, 

with the application of the Critical ratio the differences in the Social and 

Emotional areas are statistically not significant, and the difference in 

Health status is of doubtful significance. 

In Home Adjustment , where the trend is reversed, the Critical ratio 

ft 

bears evidence to an actual difference. In fact, the probabilities are only 
fractional that such variation could occur by chance. 

Thus, the slightly higher trends of the German Baptist population on 

the profile sheet cannot be accepted as significant. In most instances they 

## 

are statistically nil* In only one area the Critical ratio score is of 
doubtful significance. On the other hand, Home Adjustment is more adequate 
for both German males and females than for Bell’s group. 

The Three Generations . 

A comparative study of three male and female residential status 
groups, by means of the Inventory, does not manifest any conspicuous extremes. 
In fact, the differences between Immigrants, First Generation, and Second 
Generation are relatively small (Profile III). 

Males. 

Profile III seems to point out that adjustment is poorest among 
Immigrant males and best among male subjects of the Second Generation. 
Immigrants and First Generation subjects have higher scores on Home and 
Social adjustments, and Immigrants have a higher score for Health than the 


two later generations. This would indicate that there is a partial parallel 
(# a significant difference. ## insignificant.) 















. 

































































- 91 - 


PROFILE III 


ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY PROFILE 
FOR THE 

THREE GENERATIONS OF (GERMAN BAPTISTS 


MALES 


FEMALES 


Home Healtn Social Emo¬ 
tional 


Home Health Social Emo- 
tional 


Very 

unsatisf. 


Unsatisf. 


17 

14 

21 

16 

IB 

15 

25 

21 

16- 

---13- 

— 20— 

— 15— 

— 17— 

-14— 

-24— 

-20 

15 

12 

19 

14 

16 

13 

23 

19 

12 

9 

16 

12 

13 

10 

20 

16 


Ave rage 


Good 



Excellent 


112 1 


114 3 


IMMIGRANTS ■ 
FIRST GEN. 
SECOND GEN. 











TABLE S 


92 


M 


70 


JP S 

o p 

H* M 
P c+ 

m cr 


G> 


O 


o v_n 


vO 

70 



CX> 

70 


o 


VJ1 

70 


VJl 


vn 

is 


3 

hS 

3- 

125 O 

fa p 


CO 

a 




H 

3 

5? 

© 

p 

tr« 

U 

O 

O 

P 

3 

c+ 

H- 

M 

© 

H* 

P 

c+ 


O 

2 

M 

P 4 


P 

H* 

M 



oa 

M 

ON 

vn 

* 

• 

• 

• 

VO 

CO 

ON 

70 

70 

ca 

oa 

oa 


<7 

<3 


-1 


G N 

4>' 


o 


vD 


O 

ON 


AS 

P 

a 


M 

VO 


oa 

M 


vn 


o 

CXI 


V3 

SO 


-J 

VO 


ON 

NO 




% 

KJ1 ON 



ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY SCORES 
for the 

THREE GENERATIONS 





















































p, 









I 


i 



I 





I 


J 











- 93 - 


with Problem Measurements where Immigrants have most and Second Generation 
subjects least difficulties. Yet, in none of these instances are the 
differences statistically significant (Table 5)• The highest t-ratio is 
1.40 in the area of Health Adjustment between Immigrants and the First 
Generation. This t-ratio score does not even approach the 5% confidence 
level. 

Females. 

Among the three female generations the differences appear more 
distinct (Profile III). First Generation subjects have the highest and 
Immigrants the lowest scores in three adjustment areas. Only in two 
instances do scores converge on identical positions, i.e. for Immigrants 
and Second Generation on Home Adjustment and for the First and Second 
Generations in the Emotional area. 

Another similarity of pattern to that in Problem Measurements is 
evidenced under category Severe Problems . It was noted that First Generation 
female subjects had the widest range and the greatest number of problems, 
while Immigrants showed the fewest difficulties. However, this apparent 
trend shown by Adjustment Inventory results is not significant. The t-ratio 
computations for the three female groups do not show significant differences. 
In each instance the confidence level is higher than 5%* 

Standard deviation scores show the greatest extremes among female 
Immigrants. This indicates that the Immigrant group is more varied than the 
two succeeding generations. 

Age Fac tor. 

Adjustment Inventory results of the age groups appear to contribute 
but little to the understanding of the status of the German Baptists. 












- 94 - 


Very 

unsatisf. 

Unsatisf. 

Average 

Good. 

Excellent 


PROFILE IV 


ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY PROFILES 
FOR 

GERMAN BAPTIST AGE GROUPS 


MALES FEMALES 

Home Health Social Emo- Home Health Social Emo¬ 
tional tional 


17 14 21 16 18 15 25 21 

-16—-13-20-15— —17—-14—-24——20— 

15 12 19 14 16 13 23 19 


12 9 16 12 13 10 20 16 



1121 1142 


AGES 14-24 
AGES 25-65 








TABLE 6 


Home 

Health 

Social 

Emotional 


Home 

Health 

Social 

Emotional 


ADJUSTMEM 1 INVENTORY - AGE FACTOR 

MALES 


Ages 14 to 24 

IF 27 

M. S.D. 

Ages 25 to 65 

N=39 

M. S.D. 

Ages 14-24 
and 25-65 

C.R. 

5.89 

3.74 

4.41 

4.96 

1.38 

5.19 

4.09 

5.95 

5.04 

.96 

11.93 

6.53 

12.51 

6.18 

.36 

7.15 

6.32 

8.26 

7.36 

.65 

F E 

Ages 14 to 24 

MALES 

Ages 25 to 65 

Ages 14-24 

N=49 

M. 

S.D. 

N=3S 

M. S.D. 

and 25-65 

C.R. 

6.22 

5.47 

4.24 

3.53 

2.04 

7.06 

5.20 

7.32 

4.94 

.70 

15.59 

6.38 

14.58 

6.30 

.74 

12.49 

5.92 

10.32 

6.98 

1.53 




































- 96 - 


Males. 

To be sure, there is an obvious trend among younger and older 
males, for with the exception of Home Adjustment , the older group takes a 
higher and the younger group a lower position on the profile sheet (Profile 
IV). The profile for the younger age group is relatively even, while that 
of the older group follows a steady and consistent rise from Hom e to Social 
adjustments. On Home Adjustment the older group approaches closely the 
category Good . 

But these inter-group differences are not significant (Table 6). 

In each of the foiir areas the Critical ratio computations show that the 
confidence level is higher than 5 %» Intra-group variability is larger for 
the older group, except in the area of Social Adjustment . 

Females. 

The Female profile for the age groups does not reveal any particular 
trend (Profile IV), Like the males, the older female group has a lower score 
on Home and a higher one on Health adjustments. But, unlike the males, the 
younger group has higher scores in the areas of Social and Home adjustments. 

These differences are statistically insignificant except for the 
Home Adjustment scores. Here variations are of doubtful significance. The 
difference between intra-group variability is slightly smaller than among 
males. 

Educational Factor . 

The profiles of educational groups seem to reveal greater differences 
than those of the age and residential status groups (Profile V), 

Males. 

The male profiles start on identical positions in the area of Home 


Aft j J*stment . From here the High School group scores gently rise from one 














O':co''> 





M M '• ‘ , C r 

'.‘ . ‘ <. . 

. ... 

0&- ’ '■■■ y -So ,'0 

■ Jhr.’iM # 








c 


' 


0 ’ < t ■ i rye' To 0 


' v vl 


. 1 / i • yol - . 

... • •• • t 

■•■■■ - vv: t- ■ . • M-; r '. 


O MO. 0 ' M S.U. 


m ■ , 


r. 'ey: 




' ]S. ' 


Q 0 S 


, i .1 . ' 

. : ■ . ' ' ■ ■ ’ ‘ ’ . ‘MM . ' j 

. 


J • !.■ y.f.'jrtr.: J. j '• Sr Cr'y BJC<T M 

... 

' 


. 

■ 

* 




- 97 - 


adjustment area to the other to reach the highest peak on Emotional Adjust¬ 
ment . Public School group scores, on the other hand, take a sudden upward 
sweep on Health and Soci al adjustments and then drop slightly to a lower 
position in the Emotio nal area* 

An examination of the Critical ratio computations discloses a 
significant difference between the two male educational groups in the 
Social area (Table 7). Differences in Emotional Adjustmen t are of doubtful 
significance, 

A comparison of the male educational status profiles (Profile V) 
with the Adjustment Inventory norms (Profile II) shows that the more 
advanced educational German group is slightly more, and the Public School 
group considerably less, satisfactorily adjusted than the Adjustment Inven¬ 
tory standardization group. The significant difference in Social Adjustment 
between the two educational groups tends to ascribe the better adjustment of 
the High School group in the Social area to educational influences. 

Standard deviation scores show no consistency in intra-group variab¬ 
ility between the two educational groups (Table 7) * 

Females, 

Among the two female educational groups the trend for better adjust¬ 
ment among individuals with High School training is not present. In two 
areas only. Health and Social adjustments, the Public School group takes a 
higher and the High School group a lower position. The greatest extremes 
for both groups are in the Home and Health areas. 

As among the male groups, the Critical ratio among the females 
reveals a significant difference in Social Adjustment (Table 7). The 
influences of education, therefore, seem to have been effective in bringing 
about better social adaptation, not only for High School males but also for 
















PROFILE V 


ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY PROFILE 
FOR 

GERMAN BAPTISTS 1 EDUCATIONAL STATUS 


MALES 


FEMALES 


Home Health 


Very 

unsat isf. 17 14 

— 16 ---13- 
15 12 

TJnsat isf. 

12 9 


Social Emo¬ 
tional 


Home Health 


Average 


Good 

Excellent 


21 

■ 20 * 

19 

16 


16 

15- 

14 

12 


18 

17- 

16 

13 


15 

14- 

13 

10 


Social Emo¬ 
tional 


25 21 

-24--20* 

23 19 


20 


16 



PUBLIC SCHOOL 
HIGH SCHOOL 













TABLE 7 


ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY - EDUCATIONAL STATUS 

MALES 


Public School 


High School 



Pub. & High 

C.H. 

.32 

1.38 

3.30 

2.07 


FEMALES 


Public School High School 


Pub. & High 


N-42 

N s 45 



M. 

S.D. 

M. 

S.D. 

C.R. 

Home 4.50 

5.59 

6.16 

5.52 

1.40 

Health 7.62 

5.09 

7.18 

4.95 

.42 

Social 17.21 

5.46 

13.67 

6.36 

2.77 

Emotional 11*24 

6.27 

12.25 

7.02 

.62 





























V 





r r 




f:, \t 


r 







- 100 - 


High School females in comparison to the Public School groups. The same ed. 
influences may also have caused greater intra-group variability among High 
School individuals as measured by the Standard deviations of the scores. 

With reference to a better understanding of the personality status 
of the total group, the educational variable makes no significant 
contributions. 

RESULTS OF THE MMPI. 

While Problem Measurements and the Adjustment Inventory attempt to 
measure problems and adjustment in various areas respectively, the MMPI is 
designed to disclose syndromes. The results obtained by the MMPI follow. 

The Total Group . 

As in the case of the Adjustment Inventory, the MMPI test results 
for the German Baptists are not extreme. There are no significantly high 
T-scores nor any outstanding peaks on the profiles. 

Among males on the K-correcied profile (Profile VI) the highest 
T-s c or e is Mf with 59, and the lowest Pa and Ma with 53 each. The psycho¬ 
pathic and psychotic areas appear to dominate slightly the neurotic triad. 

On the profile without the K-faetor (Profile VII) Sc and Ma are lowest. 

The psychotic aspect is less and the psychopathic and the neurotic areas are 
more prominent. 

Among the females the two extreme T-seores are 55 on Hy and 43 on 
Ma with and without the K-factor (Profiles VIII and IX). Although the 
psychotic area is somewhat emphasized with E-correction , the Hy scale remains 
the highest peak. This would seem to indicate a hysterical tendency among 
the female population. Still, such possibility must be accepted with 
reservation seeing that individual scales cannot be taken too seriously. 










r : 






- 




- 


f 

■ ' na T'OJ' I 

’ ’ . 

. ■ v .i 




. 






: 

• .. • : or &££ 

■ . .. • :• ' .•?,A 

. : ■ • " ' / O •' ■■ fol 

. 

. “ ’• t 

. 






■ 






;.K. ■' : o-: 


; - • ; : 

i ' ■ 




. 




. 





. 



















+.5K +.4K + IK +1K +.2K 


PROFILE VI & VII 


T Score 


101 


•— tOCOrf^CnCD^JOOCOOi—tO 

oooooooooooo 


•o 

r* 

w 

*n 


X 

m 


X 

*< 


*0 

a. 


a 


w 

a 


s 

Q 































































































*■ ■ 












1 

1 












1 

























■ 

























, j 

























































■O 

tr* 

W 

»n 


T) 

o. 


« 


C/2 

o 


No 

1 o 

. 3 

® 

« o 

c+“ 

' S’ 

I 3 

VI 

* ■m 

• §• 

'a 

! T 

' § 
i i 
© 
i © 

' £ 
I 3 

a 

a 

i 


{» 

r* 

w 

CO 






















































+.5K +.4K +1K IK +.2K 


- 102 - 


PROFILE VIII 8c, IX 


T Score 

►-tocorf^cncn^aoocooi—-to 
oooooooooooo 


•o 

r 1 

W 


X 

to 

o 

X 

NJ 

a 

s 

Hi 

a 

y 

w 

n 

2 

Q 



m 


, S 

e+ 

r 

& 


. 8 











































- 103 


TABLE 8 


MMPI SCORES FOR THE ENTIRE GER. BAPT. GROUP 



MALES 

N-66 

FEMALES N=87 

M* 

S.D. 

M. 

S.D. 

? 





L 

5.33 

2.60 

5.33 

2.37 

F 

4.55 

3.43 

3.59 

3.07 

K 

14.68 

4.77 

13.30 

4.49 

Hs 

5.74 

5.07 

6.53 

4.40 

Hs-r*5K 

13.08 

4.94 

13.23 

3.95 

D 

19. U 

4.50 

19.94 

4.09 

Hy 

19.53 

4.69 

21.60 

4.49 

m 

16.29 

4.58 

14.48 

4.08 

P<K.4K 

22.16 

4.49 

19.84 

4.08 

Mf 

25.19 

4.48 

35.89 

4.21 

Pa 

9.50 

4.87 

8.94 

2.63 

Pt 

12.45 

7.27 

13.80 

6.94 

Pt-IE 

27.13 

5.57 

27.21 

4.49 

Sc 

11.26 

7.25 

10.72 

6.16 

Sc-IE 

25.94 

5.83 

24.13 

5.21 

fife 

15.03 

4.65 

13.20 

4* 04 

Ma-.2K 

17.97 

4.36 

15.88 

3.87 
















- 104 - 


but should be interpreted in terms of patterns ( 13 )• 

The greatest Standard deviations for both males and females occur 
within Ft and Sc, with and without K-factor (Table 8) • The male group is 
slightly more varied than the female group. 

Thus, a) the German Baptists show no unusual extreme scores on 
the MMPI profiles, b) Among males there is a slight preponderance of 
psychopathic-psychotic scores compared to the neurotic triad with K-co rr¬ 
ection , a psychopathic-neurotic emphasis over the psychotic area, c) Among 
females there is an indication of a singular hysterical tendency, d) The 
males show slightly greater intra-group variableness than the females as 
indicated by generally higher Standard deviations* 

German Baptists. MMP1 Norms, and Normal Albertans • 

A comparative study of German Baptists and other groups is based 
upon the MMPI author’s norms and civilians living in or close to Alberta. 

The MMPI norms were provided by Dr. Starke R. Hathaway in personal corres¬ 
pondence with Dr. D.E. Smith of the University of Alberta. The Albertan 
norms were established by Paulson, Smith, and Thomas, and are on file in 
the Psychological Laboratory at the U. of A. in an unpublished research 
report ###. These subjects will be referred to as Normal Albertans. 

The Three Male Groups. 

In studying these three groups the most obvious phenomenon is the 
fact that the K-corrected profile line for the German Baptist males runs 
almost consistently above those of both the MMPI standardization group and 
the Normal Albertans (Profile X). There are three points where German 
Baptists and Normal Albertans take identical positions. There is no over¬ 
lapping of scales of the German group nor the Albertans with the MMPI author* s 
(### Data were provided by the curtesy of Dr. D.E. Smith) 







■ ■ 

- 



. 

' 

i f > r . -. . 5‘ 

i'h-- _ h ■ !"fi ; .. 

-• r 0 •' >.l 


. 

... . . /- .. ‘ ' ^ . 

( » ■ 

• ■ - • • £ ■ ' 

. 


. - 

• . 

v ■' t' ’ • • . : 11 ,•" >■: • : nr’xon 

, . 1 • . 

- 

‘ ’ . .1 ■ -■ 

' ■ : 

. 








+.5K +.4K -flK -flK +.2K 


105 


PROFILE X 


T Score 



i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
8 
8 
8 




•6 
i m 


i 

i 


3 

W 

CO 
























































- 106 - 


subjects. Without the K-factor the males of the three groups approach one 
another more closely (Profile XI). 

On the validity scales there are some differences between the 
German group and the Albertans on L and K. 

A more detailed comparison between German Baptists and MMPX stand¬ 
ardization subjects shows outstanding differences on the K-corrected profile 
for practically every scale (Profile X). In each instance, except for Pa 
and Ma, there is less than 1% probability that variations might have occurred 
by chance. Hence, the differences shown by the Critical ratio are signif- 
icant (Table 9)• For Pa the difference is of doubtful significance, and 
for Ma it is insignificant. 

Without the K-factor these differences are considerably reduced 
(Profile XI). Both groups, German Baptists and the MMPX author* s subjects 
converge slightly and thus narrow the gap on scales Hs, Pt, So ? and $[a. As 
a result Critical ratio scores also become smaller, and thus the differences 
between Hs, Sc, and Ma are statistically insignificant. 

Although the differences between the German Baptists and the Normal 
Albertans are not as great as those between the German group and the MMPI 
norms there are, nevertheless, variations. On the K-corrected profile these 
differences are observable on Hs, D, Hy, Pd, Pt, and Sc. Critical ratio 
computations show that Pd, Pt, and Sc are significantly different. The 
differences for Hy is statistically doubtful (Table 9). 

Without the K-factor the differences on the profile for Pt and 
Sc virtually disappear (Profile XI)• Even the difference for Pd becomes 
of doubtful significance in the light of the Critical ratio. 

As to intra-group variability, there are no greater deviations from 


the standard among the German Baptist males than among the other two male 







. 

. 

■ 

t . r ' ;c l 


. ‘ ■" 

. 

,■ j ■ i,C . ■ ! " > : ' ' .. :■ ' ' ■ . ) 

\ , . ' . . , _ . '' 

■' " , 

, 

' - ■ ' ' , ■ ■ r ' j 


’ • ’ '■ ‘ ; ’ , v . 

. 

. 

' 

' 


t \ , .. : ■ 7-xm ' 


' - .: J ; . . 








+.5K +.4K + 1K +1K +.2K 


107 


PROFILE XI 


•— tO CO 

o o o 


T Score 

cn CT> 'O oo 
O O O O 


CO o 
o o 


to 


•o 


•o 


r* 


f* 


w 








X 

H 


X 


o 




X 


X 


»d 

o. 


>d 

o. 


as 


s 


►d 

A 


*d 

Q 




y 


CO 

o 


CO 

n 


2 


2 




MMPI PROFILE - GERMAN BAPTISTS AND OTHER GROUPS 
(Without K-oorreetion) 


























































TABLE 9 


108 


W V 8 S? 

h ^ 


3 

-I" 

K 


S’ (S S 2 9 ° 

+■ 


15 


W 

co 

.+ 

» 





H 

ca 

• 

l: 

15.74 

M 

VO 

is 

vD 

» 

vO 

O 

£ 

• 

vO 

O 

M 

O 

• 

>v0 

to 

CO 

« 

>0 

o 

to 

VT3 

• 

to 

M 

to 

o 

& 

M 

vrt 

. 

O 

H 

f-* 

00 

• 

to 

to 

M 

00 

. 

VO 

vO 

12.06 

f- 

9 

e 

*2S 

00 

o 

VO 

• 

-1 

VO 


1 

3 9 

c* 4 



















P 3 
3 P 



















CQ J-J 

VO 

• 

<3 

~0 

r- 

vn 

CO 

» 

-<1 

. 

vO 

to 

vn 

h 

On 

. 

o 

to 

VO 

. 

to 

O 

4s- 

• 

VO 

vri 

■t' 

^3 

VO 

H 

vn 

vn 

£ 

VO 

e 

<3 

VO 

« 

-3 

vO 

1- 

O 

vn 

o 

H 

to 

k 

CO 

© 

o 

• 

? 

VO 

M 

to 


& 


M 

• 

• 


M 

• 

vji 

• 

to 

« 

to 

. 

00 

. 

Ut 

• 

u> 

• 

4>- 

• 

f* 

to 

* 

H 

. 

vO 

00 

<2 

->3 

*3 


to 

to 

£ 

3 

'0 

H 

0 s 

CO 

VO 


00 

to 

H 

vn 

to 

VO 

H* 

<3 

o 


w 



to M 

* • 

vO VO 

O <J 


to 


Vn 

vO 


» 


I 

a 

i 


to 

to 

to 

M 

M 

H 

• 

. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

o 

M 

o 

to 

vn 

VO 

o 

O 

00 

VO 

vO 

4s- 


o 

S3 


O 
0 

> H • 

O' P 

»? *§• 

c+ • 


SCORES FDR MALES 


























Cl a 

















I 


I 

i 






- 109 - 


groups (Table 9). In fact, the Standard deviation scores of the three 
groups for each of the scales runs closely parallel. 

The Three Female Groups, 

A study of the three female groups, German Baptist, MMPI standard¬ 
ization group, and Normal Albertans, does not disclose as many differences 
as the related male groups. The profile of the MMPI female group, similar 
to that of the males, runs closely along the 50 T-score line, both -where the 
K-factor has been applied and omitted. The other two female profiles 
approach it and intertwine (Profiles XII and XIII)• 

With K-correction German Baptist females and the MMPI author 9 s 
subjects take nearly identical positions on scale Hs. From here the German 
group rises slightly on JD and more suddenly on Hy . The descent to Pd and jfff 
is almost as abrupt. Then there is a slight elevation on Pa, Pt, and Sc, and 
a sudden drop on Ma to a T-seore of 43. The German female profile runs con¬ 
sistently above that of the MMPI norm except on Hs and la. Without K-factor 
a slight but insignificant difference arises on Hs, Pd remains virtually 
unchanged, and differences on Pt, Sc, and la are notably reduced. 

The K-corrected profiles for the German female group and Normal 
Albertans show comparable scores on Hs, Pd, and Pa. On Hy . Pt , and Sc 
German female scores are higher than those of the Albertan group. But even 
these differences are not large. On D and Ma the profile of the German group 
drops below the Albertan norm. Without K-factor the relationship between the 
two female profiles is not changed significantly. 

The considerably slighter differences among the three female groups, 
as compared to those of the male groups, is further indicated by the Critical 
ratio (Table 10)» The variations between the German females and the MMPI 
author 1 s females are obvious on Hy, Pa, and Pti-K , All three scales show 









r.. , . '• :;o . • - r;«. \ ' ' J ? ' ' . 1 • : je.• ) ■ ; 

. 

■; , ' • ■ . ■ ■ ■; • ■ - > '• ■ , 

<•1 ‘ . ' - , -■ , r • r. .L ■' 

, /= : . < . • , ; ■ j • "■ 




l.?C 









1. " 



. 



' 













* 




• 




• 





- r. 




•; J 







. 









# 











• ■ 


J • ' - 














t ; 








, 











* 





! f 





















■ 












- 

eo.n^.a;! ■ 






X ... c 


■ 



,:ov 















; i ..... <. 11 . . .. t .; j. '• . •; : 


» 

. • • r. • ■' - ‘ 

.. _ -' i re ' 

. 

< : ‘ •• • •. ; . • :■ 0 

, m‘ j '■ :> o>'t 0'.’' : "* 






. 



' , J 


, . . .. 








+.5K +.4K 4- IK + IK 4-.2K 


PROPILK XII 


- 110 - 


T Score 




























































+.5K +.4K +1K +1K +.2K 


111 


PROFILE XIII 


T Score 



o 

© 

;? 

w 

£ 

d* 


W 

& 

tj. 

© 

o 

c+- 

© 




w 

3 

m 

co 


MMPI FRDFIIE - GERMAN BAPTISTS AND OTHER GROUPS 
(Without K-correction) 























































TABLE 10 


- 112 - 


t 

8 


CO 

00 


VO 

SJ 


Va) 




£ 


VO 


& 5 

+ 


->3 

to 


ij 

to 

M 


VO 


CO 

O 


00 


£ 


VO 

vn 

3 


ft 


vO 


J5 


2 S 


4>- 

00 


to 


o 

o 


vO 




» 


to 

vo 


o 


vn 

VO 


W HcJ 


VO 

o 


Vn 

vO 


to 
(— 1 




ON 


6 


ON 


iS 


to 


on 

vo 


f' 

to 


o 

co 


o 

CO 


3 


4N. 

3 


VO 


vO 

Vn 




■P; 

NO 


VO 

3 


VO 

VO 


to 

3 


16.83 

13.65 

to 

to 

• 

ON 

vn 

10.73 

to 

vn 

• 

to 

H 

M 

VO 

£ 

7.98 

VO 

ON 

• 

vn 

M 

oa 

» 

13.44 

18.80 

19.26 

M 

VO 

. 

£ 

♦ 

# 

gj 

# 

VO 

• 

• 

ON 

• 

• 

ON 

♦ 

<3 

• 

vo 

» 

• 

*■ 

*■ 

vn 

« 

vn 

« 

f- 

vn 

. 

0! 

vO 

vn 

vn 

>o 

O 


VO 

CO 

to 

to 

ON 

M 

oa 

to 

t 

\Q 

O 

O 

ON 

ON 

CO. 

to 

VO 

vn 

vo 

ON 

oa 

oa 

oa 

» 

vo 

vo 

VO 

VO 

VO 

VO 

Vo 

M 

Vo 

VO 

4s* 

vo 

Vo 

vo 


<3 

VO 

3 

vo 

3 

<3 

VO 

3 

3 

O 

oa 

-3 

Vo 

3 

-V2 

vn 

& 

VO 

3 

t2 

• 



M 

f 

3 


i 


O' 

s s= 

S* b 

g fr 


to 

. 

. 

to 

. 

1 

t 

VO 

. 

. 

vo 

e 

9 

to 

. 

to 

. 

vn 

• 

M 1 

* 

. 

o 

vO 

to 

1 

vn 

oa 

o 

3 

o 

H 

O 

VO 1 

ON 

to 

■fcs 

ON 


M 

oa 

o 


On 

so 

ON 

to 



•o 

t+ 



?o 

H 


H 

M 

• 

• 

. 

4 

. 

. 

& 

fc 

fc 

VO 

ON 

CTN 

SO 

to 

vn 


vn ON 
vn Vo 


■S 


v0 

to 



I 

t 


o 

b 



Q 

CD 

4 

W 

% 


SCORES K)H FEMALES 





























.) C • ■ f 











- 113 - 


significant differences* Pd*-K and Pd, Sc, and Ma, both with IC-correction . 
are of doubtful significance. 

There is no statistically significant difference between the 
German group and Normal Albertans except on the Ma scale with K-correction * 
Without K-factor the Ma Critical ratio merely approaches significance. On 
every other scale the differences are insignificant. 

Standard deviations for the three female groups run parallel. 

Hence the differences in intra-group variability from one group to the other 
are small (Table 10). 

In summary, it may be said that there are significant differences 
between the three groups. These differences are apparent especially 

a) between the German Baptists and the MMPX standardization groups and, 

b) between the male groups. Variations between German Baptists and Normal 
Albertans, and between the three female groups are relatively small and few. 
Since the relationship of the German Baptists to the Normal Albertans is 
more relevant for this study because of the common socio-cultural setting of 
the two, it appears c) that deviation of the German Baptists from the 
Albertan norm is not extensive or large. 

Deviant Scores . 

Nevertheless, German Baptists generally have higher scores on the 
MMPI than Normal Albertans. This fact suggests the probability that there 
are actually more maladjusted cases among the German Baptist population. 

For that reason Table 11 was prepared. It represents the percentages of 
male and female individuals with T-scores of 70 and above. Scores of this 
nature are usually regarded as indications of deviant personality (17). 

A comparison of total percentage scores of the German group with 


Normal Albertans shows the following results % a) for males, German Baptists 








,M ... 


, '• i 




/.;■ • . . .' ' •' r ' ■ ■ : 




■ 


r •■'hco*' 


... 

ii ■* 










, 


■ - • . 


. 
















- r ?M9 




•9‘. r j j , ' 'v-r . -,V (-.1 r.^: v..';- ; q 


. 






e: .. ■ . • - f,0 





. ..... 

. 

. ' • 

. : . 


: ■ ■ j' ‘H : f 3 '3 f t> .. 




. :o r 'C 



< \ : 









TABLE 


11 


E §“ 

us. up 

S}° 

£5 g* 

? ■a- 

» • 

o 



M 

VJl 

M 

VjO 


H 


• 

M 

• 

o 

tr* 

M 

to 

O' 

u> 


oa 

u> 

• 

VJI 

• 

o 


to 

to 

M 



o' 

VjO 

• 

oa 

U* 





si 

U> 

o 

Ui 

O' 

—=H* 

c+ 

<3 

o 

• 

M 

• 

M 

W tr 
to 





P 





*d 





‘O 





h{ 

Vx> 

to 

sO 

H> 

o 

•xs 

\D 

• 

u> 

• 

O 

• 

» ^ 
H* 




O' 

P 

c+ 

® 

9T 

O 

f- 


to 

• 

O' 

# 

to 

<3 

vO 

M 





o 


M 

• 

oa 

« 

O' 

• 

►d ^ 
&> ® 

to 

H 

-3 

H 

o 





dr 





H» 





O 

M 

• 

O' 

O 

• 

O 

M 

O 

• 

h*» 

O 

• 




VTl 

O' 


to 

to 

VO 

M 

to 

*xJ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

P 

oa 


O' 

H 


to 

o 

<2 

O' 

•d 

• 

# 

• 

9 

Cb 

vO 

o 

O' 

M 


4N. 

to 

CO 

Va> 

CO 

• 

• 

• 

• 

o 

H 

u> 

u> 

H 

• 

M 

• 

oa 

• 

O' 

• 

¥ 

4^ 

h-» 

o 


to 

H 

VO 


•fc. 

o 

» 

0o 

• 

VO 

• 

** 

3 

oa 

4^ 

-3 

VjO 



fed 


R 


CQ 

O 

-3 

O 


1U 


























( 


c 


I 









- 115 - 


33*3 and for Normal Albertans 33*7; b) for females, German Baptists 13,4 
and for Normal Albertans 20,8. There is, therefore, a lower percentage 
score of .4 in favor of the German males and a score of 2.4 in favor of the 
German females. 

Since there is even a slightly smaller percentage of individuals 
among the German Baptists who may be referred to as maladjusted in compar¬ 
ison to the Normal Albertans, the differences among the total German 
Baptist group and the total Albertans, as represented by Profiles X to 
XIII and Tables 9 and 10, cannot be explained in terms of 70 and above 
T-score individuals. 

An examination of percentages on individual MMPI scales on the 
same T-scor e levels shows interesting differences. These probably indicate 
the nature of the socio-cultural stress of the German group. 

Validating Scales. (Appendix C). 

On the Validating scales , both German males and females have higher 
percentage scores on L than the Albertans. On F the Albertan male score 
rises considerably above that of the German males. 

Diagnostic Category. (Appendix C). 

Under the Diagnostic category the differences are greater. Espec¬ 
ially interesting are the high T-score percentages of German males on Hy and 
Pa and the low percentage on Sc as compared to the Albertan males* 

At first glance, these scores would indicate that some of the group 
is characterized by suspicion, oversensitivity, and delusion, and others by 
hysterical symptoms, as suggested by Pa and Hy respectively. However, all 
three scales are preliminary measures (17). Moreover, a pattern analysis of 
the MMPI record is a more satisfactory approach than an analysis of indiv¬ 


idual scales. 









. " . 

t ' 

. 

. 

j c f . i ' . ■■ 

. - , , < ' ;■ .1 . ' 

: C ' ■: .. : ' 

• . 

.;. ;;r ■ ; 1 ' ‘ l J.< ■ ’ < 0.1 f ■ . J . 

Ti.' - .1 ; ■ >" ' i.: - ' . :V'., 1 _ _. _ _:• 

, :>-••• ; . ' <: • .• .i - .!: ■ ■. ' : ' * 

\ . 


. 


. 

' .. 

' ■- ■ ' '•!. 6 ' 

. , ' ' l ' 

r . . ;r ■ 4 . . ! •‘■’Ji.-v-l 

J.O : : •“ . f 

••</ ' i f J‘ 

. 







- 116 - 


Among females the absence of 70 and above T-scor e individuals is 
conspicuous. There are no individuals with deviant T-scores on Hs, Mf, and 
Pt, and a negligible percentage on Pd and Ma. Such a record implies that 
there are probably no females among this German Baptist group who are sign¬ 
ificantly hypochondriacal and psjrehasthenic, and that the group* s interests 
are feminine. Moreover, psychopathic and hypomanic tendencies may be found 
in a very small percentage of individuals. 

However, when examining scales individually, caution should also be 
exercised in using the results of the female records, even if Hs and Pt are 
relatively complete and therefore more valid measures than some of the 
preliminary scales. 

Residential Status Groups . 

A further study of the MMPI record includes the results of responses 
given by the residential status groups, Immigrants, First and Second Gener¬ 
ation. 

Males. 

The profiles with K-correction for the three male generations run 
parallel on Hs and D and on Pt and Ma (Profile XI?). At every point of these 
four scales the Immigrants take the highest and the Second Generation the 
lowest position. On Ma all three groups converge on an identical position. 

On the remainder of the four diagnostic scales there is considerable 
intertwining of profile lines. 

Without the K-factor the scores become lower and differences between 
profile lines less distinct on Pt and Sc (Profile XV). 

The differences among the three generations are not as great as 
might be anticipated. The widest range in terms of T-scores is from a low 
of 52 on Hs^K for the Second Generation to a high of 61 on Mf for the First 














. 1 . • • Of ■ ' ' • 1 • 

• - 


* 






























;J •' 4 

. 






) • • b.i ■•o ■ 


. 


. 


_ 






. { M 


no I, 








• 



.. 






. 





• 

h 










* 














, 

■■■; no 












+.5K +.4K + 1K -f* IK +.2K 


PROFILE XIV 


117 - 


*—* to CO 

o o o 


T Score 

C/i CT> OO <0 


•— to 
o o 


■o 

r 1 

a 

M 

o 

w 


e. 


0 


C/2 

n 































■ • 

—— 
















































II 

! ' ! 












f 












I 

ij \ 

w 












V 












/ 












\ 












ft 












... 

j / ^ 
























































■■o 

W 


ffi 

IB 

D 


*< 


o. 


*T3 

o 


C/2 

o 


1 

I 

to 

3 

1 

3. 

o 

© 

61 


> 

t-« 

w 


MMPI FRDFIIE - THE THREE GENERATIONS 
(With K-correction) 





















































+.5K +.4K + 1K +1K +.2K 


PROFILE XV 


- 118 - 


*—• tO CO 


T Score 

cn (T> *0 OO CO 

— o 


H- to 
o o 


w 

X 

» 

D 


X 

•< 


*d 

a. 


•v 

0 


CO 

o 































vf 

iiJ 




























































Y 












I 

A 












\i 












' 























1 

r 




































































•o 

t+ 

X 

m 

V 


X 

*< 


n•) 

a. 


*T3 

a 


CO 

n 


§■ 

ca 


3 

>4 

(6 

<+ 

S’ 


> 

tr* 

£*J 

*0 


r.fPI PROFILE - THE THREE GENERAT3DHB 

(Without ^correction) 







































































TABLE 12 


- 119 


W 


co co 
o o 


3 2 S? 


a 2 § ° 

• * 

IS 


« w 

M CO 



II ro 

M H 


VK 



M 

VO 


53 




0 s 


VO 

o 




H 

\D 


58 


IO 

o 


vO 

VO 


e 


V? 

vO 


CO 3 

e* P* 
GO 
Q • 

CD R° 

3 


VO 

vO 


IO 

00 


-1 

vn 




VO 

vO 




& 


00 


vO 


<1 

vO 


CO H 
CD 3 
O § 

00 

Q • 

CD PP 

3 


£ 


nQ 


3 


ON 

vO 


ON 

VO 


VO 

VO 


o 


is 


VO 

ON 


vO 


CO 

VO 


o 

CO 

O c+- 

§ Pp 


































f 












I 

1 


I 

] 





- 120 - 


Generation. 

The Standard deviations show less variability within the three 
groups from Immigrants to Second Generation on the Hs scale with and with- 
out K, and on all the psychotic scales with the exception of uncorrected Pt. 

The application of the t-ratio shows no significant difference 
between the three male generations on any scale (Table 12). Hence, the 
residential status variable does not reveal the influence of socio¬ 
cultural differences of the three residential groups. 

Females. 

The K-corrected profile of female residential status groups pre¬ 
sents a different personality picture as compared to the male profile 
(Profile XVI), Yet, the differences among the female groups are not much 
larger. First, there is no consistency on scales Hs and I). Moreover, on 
Hy . Mf . Pa . Pt, and Se_ the Second Generation rises consistently above the 
other two generations. There is also a greater Standard deviation variab¬ 
ility from Immigrants to Second Generation, but the tendency is not 
consistent. 

Without the K-factor there is a general lowering of scores, similar 
to the male profiles (Profile XVII). 

T-ratio computations show that there is only one significant differ¬ 
ence, i.e. on uncorrected Sc between Immigrants and First Generation (Table 
13). On Pa the differences between Immigrants and Second Generation and 
between First and Second Generation approach closely the confidence level of 
. Nevertheless, the variabilities are still of doubtful significance. 

Hence, the female residential status trends, which appear reasonably 


distinct on the K-correct ed profile, find no statistical support from the 
t-ratio. 








v ... 


sa 






■ S': ( ■ : ■ • 

V. 


[ 


' 

f 


t . . V 


. ;nr 


. 

* 


. ’ ' ■ 

* • ■■ i ' ■ - 


) v'v . .) : ; 


i; ■ • ■ 

: • : -- ■■ ' .. ' ■' .:r'■ : - 


j'• 1 < ’■ ■ ■ i:<.' l . : 'one-.- ■ Mi '■ 

, 

/ f• i * ' ■ ' 1 ■ <> 

■j" «r.o ■ " . 

; t ' 



+.5K +.4K -|-IK + 1K +-2K 


PROFILE XVI 


- 121 


•— to CO 
o o o 


Cn 

o 


T Score 

cn sa oo 
o o o 


CD 


K> 

o 


•o 

r« 
W 
*4 

x 

n 

o 


X 

•< 


*T 3 

o. 


a 


C/3 

o 































n 












jf 




































1 • 
























77 j 

/ / 












A 












\ 












ff T 

V I 

1 












1** 




































































•■o 

t - 1 

W 

-d 

M 

O 


W 

•< 


CL 


» 


c/3 

o 




c+ 

m 

*4 

** 

W 


S 

1 1 
m 

> 

c+ 

f 

O 

<D 

w 

• 

OJ 

<9 

CO 


8 

& 

a 


MHPI PROFILE - THE THREE GENERATIONS 
(With E-correction) 



































































•r; ’ 













C 




l 

























+.SK +.4K +1K + 1K +.2K 


PROFILE XVII 


- 122 


•— to CO 
o o o 


01 

o 


T Score 
o> 


CO CO O 

o o o o 


to 

o 


x 

•< 


0 . 


0 


CO 

n 







































































































?/ 












i 












[\ 












7 

if 











T 

/ 

1 











l/j 

























































•■0 

lr* 
W 
*0 

X 

sa 

D 


tu 

*< 


Qu 


*0 

0 


CO 

o 


i: 

* S 

g > 

w 

9 w 

P 

« 

CO 

® 

o 

o 

a 

y 

? 


MMPI PROFILE - THE THREE GENERATIONS 
(Without K-correction) 







































TABLE 13 


123 - 


W 


to 

o 

& 


5 S 
£ 


& 


£ 







£ *9 


o 


12 


70 


O' 

H 


O) 


O 

Ul 


VjO 

VjO 


h-» 

k 


on 

On 


£2 
O 4 
• 01 
c+ 

Q _ 
CD £° 



























] 

] 

1 


t 











- 124 - 


Age Factor . 

A variable which was to provide a better understanding of the 
German Baptists as a total group is the age factor. While this factor 
reveals some significant differences between the younger and older age 
groups, the differences in general are but small and the relationship to 
the total group is relatively insignificant. 

Males. 

The most obvious variations between the older and younger male 
group on the K-eorrected are found on Pd, Mf, Sc, and Ma (Profile XVIII). 
Without K-correction there is a general lowering of scores. Yet, the 
differences between the groups remain practically unchanged (Profile XIX). 

The application of the Critical ratio shows that there are statistically 
significant differences on Ma+K and Ma only. 

A comparison of the German male age group to Normal Albertan males 
as found by Paulson, Smith, and Thomas reveals most of the notable variations 
in the psychotic area. The youngest Normal Albertan males (aged 15-24) take 
a decidedly higher position than the older groups on every scale from Pa to 
Ma. Their highest score is on 31c with a T-score of 60. The older groups 
(aged 25-45 and over) are clustered relatively closely within the 50 to 55 
T-score range, having their lowest scores on Sc. This broad trend remains 
essentially the same without K-correction . 

In contrast to this trend, the older German males have a higher 
score on Pt and a lower score on Ma. both with and without K-factor , than 
the older Albertan age groups. Since there is a significant difference on 
Ma»K and Ma between the two German age groups, it may be said that the older 
German males tend to exhibit low hypomanic tendencies. 

The Standard deviations show but little difference in intergroup 










, 







C4 . • 







W (hi,' 1 .; wi’J 


. ’ V v, 


?. i IX 


. 


j'o 




. ■' ■ . 















+.5K +.4K + 1K -flK +-2K 


125 


PROFILE XVIII 

T Score 



f 

s> 

* 

£ 

** 

if 

a 

M 

V* 


v-n 


W 

CO 


MMPI AGE FACTOR PROFXIE 
(With K-oorrection) 



































































+.5K +.4K + 1K +1K +.2K 


126 - 


PROFILE XIX 

T Score 


•— cocorf^cncn^aoocoo^co 
oooooooooooo 


•o 

r* 

W 

n 

o 


X 

*< 


cl 


a 


CO 

n 



















• 
























/I 
















































n 

;! 





































7 











T 












n 












% • 

. \ ... 
























































•o 

f 

« 

e 

(0 

D 


X 


o. 


*0 

» 


CO 

o 


m 


K 

BE 

*• 

> 

f 

® 

CO 

W 

CO 

M 

'tf 


* 



MMPI AGE FACTOR PROFILE 
(Without K-oorrection) 










































































- 127 - 


variability (Table 14)* If* anything, the older group is slightly less 
homogenous than the younger one. 

Females. 

Among the two German female age groups there are distinct trends in 
the neurotic triad and in the psychotic area (Profiles XX and XXI). But the 
differences are small. In the neurotic triad the older group takes a higher 
and in the psychotic area a lower position. On Ma the older group drops to 
the lowest T-score of 45* The K~faetor does not change this trend; it merely 
changes individual scores. 

The most obvious change caused by the K-factor is in the psychotic 
area. With K-corr ection there is a relatively rapid descent from scales Pt 
to Ma; without K-corr ection there is a gradual decline of profile lines and 
a general lowering of scores on the same scales. 

Critical ratio computations reveal that the differences in the 
neurotic trend are insignificant (Table 14). In the psychotic area there 
are significant differences on Pa and Ma. In both instances there is a 
confidence level of less than 1 %. 

In comparison to Albertan age groups the German female trends show 
great similarity. There is a parallel on the three neurotic scales. Among 
both the Germans and the Normal Albertans, the younger females take the 
lower and the older ones the higher position. In the psychotic area there 
is also a parallel. The younger and older groups reverse their position, 
except for the oldest Albertan group (aged 55 and over) which continues to 
maintain the higher position parallel to the youngest group. On Ma only the 
oldest group descends to the 50 T-score line. Without the K-factor scores 
are considerably lower except for the older group on Ma . 


The most conspicuous difference between German and Normal Albertan 





, . ( 


. 








• 








' 




. 





• 






■:! ■ 



. 




' 


. . I . 

■ . : ■(-. !:■ . - ^ ; .’ 

* ' . ’ . ' 

. ■ i - v , ' . ' ' ■ • r rJ • i i " 


: r ' : '• • ; ' ■' . a v '. : ; .,n:. ei. - •."'i 

, ( 

. : 

. 

-V . - ;j. ' ■: ' r. ■ ... . ■ ...'. . . • . 

' • ' ; i -. .. • 

• ' .. . i 

.... : 


* . ' i : 

n ■-,! : -<;}■/ 0.".;- 


■ 

■ 




TABLE 14 


128 - 


w to 

o o 

+ 


5 5 
K 




3 


ta oq 


a 







Vto 


to 

nO 


TO 




On 


Vto 

to 


TO 


TO 

Ot 


TO 


53 £ 


vO 

to 


y 


vO 


Vto 

Vto 


Vto 

ON 

55 


Vto 

o 


H 

O 


O 


to 

O 


nO 


O 

to 


TO Ot 


<1 

to 


vO 

to 


M to 

Vto • ot 

• to 

H to 


53 


ot 

to 


ON Vto 


Vto 


Ot 


ot 

TO 


TO 

» 

<1 

O 


4>* 

-0 


Vto 

# 


ON 


h 


Vto 


4N- 

TO 


Vto 


to 

TO 


On 

NO 


M 

I- 1 

• 

• 

nO 

• 

53 

• 

h- 1 
Vto 

* 

to 

• 

Vto 

Ot 

a 

M 

NO 

* 

M 

Vto 

» 

TO 

M 

• 

to 

M 

• 

nO 

g 

H 

O 

O 

to 

ON 

Vto 

-o 

NO 

Vto 

Ot 

O 

to 

Ot 

TO 

Vto 

4>- 

M 

Ot 

TO 


On 


to 


TO 

3 


O' 

to 


Vto 

Vto 


ON 

Ot 

to 

TO 

Vto 


Vto 

4N- 

4^ 


Ot 

• 


a 

a 

• 

• 

a 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Vto 

TO 

Ot 

TO 

Vto 

H 

ON 

ON 

O 

Ot 

<! 

Vto 

H* 

O 

ON 

O 

H 

TO 

O 

to 

-3 

Vto 

H-* 

t—* 

Ot 

nO 

Vto 

Vto 


TO 


TO 


TO 


TO 


TO 


to 

Vto 


TO 

a 

ON 

o 


f £ 
53 


to Vto 


? > 
f 

M 

to 


>» 

■/■■■ 

CD 

CD 

TO 


ON 

iOt 


c+ 

O 


o 


is; 


TO 
B JOt 


w 

s 

{J> 

w 

to 


ON 

tot 


mi SCORES - AGE FACTOR 
























? r 






•t 


I 

I 







+.5K -|-.4K + 1K + IK +.2K 


- 129 


PROFILE XX 

T Score 


toco^cno>vjooco 

oooooooo 


r* 

W 

►TJ 

X 

B 

o 


X 

*« 


a 


a 


W 

A 































II 

1 












T7 




































1 
























7 












w j 

\ 












* 

IL 












1 












It 

] 












/ 
























































■o 

f 

K 

w 

D 


X 

•< 


Pu 


ft 


in 

A 


> 

CD 

m 

Ip - 

»* 

•8 ^ 

tn W 

TO W 

X 

v.n 


MMPI AGE FACTOR PHOFIIE 
(With K-correction) 




































































+.5K +.4K + IK +1K +.2K 


- 130 


PROFILE XXI 

T Score 


•— tO CO 

o o o 


o 


cn o> •<! 
o o o 


CO CO 


*— to 
o o 


•o 

r* 

w 

X 

sa 

o 


X 

* 


flu 


0 


CA 

o 































JJ 












I 




































\ 

\ 

L 












l \ 












1/ 

/ 












i 












! 



































/ 

/ , 

, 

l 
























































■O 

t* 

X 

"d 

X 

» 

o 


X 


*T3 

ft 


CA 

o 


£ M 

• S 

£ 


m 

M 

X 

vn 


MMPI AGE FACTOR PROFIIE 
(Without K-correction) 

























































- 131 - 


female age groups is seen on Ma-i-K . Since the Critical ratio for the two 
German female age groups, and the Critical ratio for the total German females 
and the total Normal Albertans reveal significant differences on Ma-^K , the 
older German age group is mainly responsible for the lover total group score 
on the Ma scale. The younger German group has a normal and the older group 
a subnormal score on Ma . 

Standard deviations in general disclose greater variability among 
the older females, especially on Pt and Pt+K. 

Educationa l Fact or. 

The educational group of the German Baptists reveals no greater 
extreme of scores than the age factor. The differences are also no more 
significant than among the age group. 

Males. 

On the K-corr ected male profile there is no particular trend 
(Profile XXII). Profile lines cross one another on JD, between Mf and Pa . 
and on Pt, end converge to almost identical positions on Ma. The greatest 
extremes are for High School individuals from If to Pa. Here the profile 
line dips down from a T-score of 61 on Mf to 53 on Pa. Without E-correction 
there is a lowering of scores on Pt and Sc for the high School group (XXXII). 

The application of the Critical ratio show T s that the differences 
between the two male educational groups are not signifleant. 

A comparison of the two German groups to the results of the Albertan 
educational groups, as found by Paulson, Smith, and Thomas, shows similar 
profiles. The greatest differences are the higher score on Hjs and the lower 
scores on Sc and Ma for the German Public School group, and the higher scores 
on Pt and £c for the German High School group as compared to Normal Albertans. 
But these differences are not large either. 




















- ' ■ : ■ • : ' - * . " ........ ' ' ' • 

. 

. .■ .. ..... 

; f ■. f . o' 1 ' .i ■ ■ ' • <•. ■ : « /oJ“> •' 

J . 

‘ 

• 1 

. 

• • • • 

. .. 

.. 1 ■■ ■ ’ .. 1 ' • ? 

9.i ' ; v. . : - , , _ . ■ ' •“ ■ 

•/ ■ " ;vv r - ; :y( -' ■ ' j .1 ' 

.(II. , ■ 




















+.5K +.4K +1K +1K +.2K 


132 


PROFILE XXII 

T Score 


►—• to CO 
o o o 


CnCTJ'OOOCOOi— tO 

oooooooo 


•o 

r« 

w 

a; 

m 

u 


X 

*< 


»d 

o. 


o 


to 

ft 































A 













i 





































f 

I 


























6 













1 \ 


























1 












] 

I 












0 

IS 

0 
























































■o 

W 


as 

(B 


X 

*< 


o. 


Q 


to 

ft 


! I 

o 

i 

w 

1 §• 

?f 

o 


s 

§ 

CO 

o 

a 

o 

H-* 

a 


I 

i <J 
<D 


W 

CO 


MMPI PROFILE - EDUCATIONAL STATUS 
(With K-correetion) 

























































+.5K +.4K + 1K +1K +.2K 


- 133 - 


PROFILE XXIII 


CO CO 


cn cn 
o o 


T Score 


CO CD 

o o 


to 

o o 


*4 


o. 


*T3 

a 


C/2 

n 































♦ 

A 












Y 




































\\ 












} 

ji 












\ 

1 
























Y 












II 












; 

1 1 












if 
























































tr- 

W 

m 

c? 


K 

*< 


a. 


*0 

a 


C/2 

o 


' \l 

H* 
8 O 

I CO 

o 

' §■ 
I o 

M 
I * 

» m 

? H* 
I ICR) 

cr 

8 
I 
I 
I 
8 
» 

8 
I 


CO CO 

o 

g - 

o 

H 

P 

! 

0 


MMPI PROFILE - EDUCATIONAL STATUS 
(Without K-correction) 
































>".f 


■ 












b 




























l 









' 




















TABLE 


15 


- 134 


S 


*xJ 

P> 


2 3 






H 

H 

M 

H 


vn 

vn 

TO 

• 

• 

• 

• 

On 

O 


VO 

vO 

VO 

00 

M 


5 J 


TO 

iS 


3 


vO 

3 


TO 

is 

M 

H 1 

& 

M 

00 

M 

vO 

M 

VO 

o 

M 

VO 

is. 

vn 

• 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

VO 

O 

is 

CO 

M 

vn 

o 

M 

vO 

VO 

00 

vO 

Vn 

VO 

O 

to 

vn 

<1 

VO 

is 


£ 


TO 


VO 

CTN 


O 


TO 


TO 

00 


CO 

is 


VO 

vO 


VO 

<! 


VO 

o 


vn 

• 

vn 

ON 

• 

^3 

• 

O' 

• 

<3 

• 

VO 

• 


vn 

# 

is 

♦ 

is 

• 

i* 

vn 

• 

vn 

• 





8 

8 

TO 

CO 

fc 

V 3 

-4 

vO 

je 

ON 

TO 

8 

& 

VO 

o 

£ 

<1 

ON 

is. 





H 

M 

TO 

f-J 

M 

M 


TO 

TO 

1— 1 

TO 

(—* 

(-J 


M 




00 

• 

Vn 

• 

vn 

• 

O 

• 

On 

• 

M 

• 

OCX 

• 

vn 

• 

TO 

• 

O'* 

• 

o 

• 

vO 

• 

VO 

vn 

• 

vn 

• 

f- 

vn 

• 

TO 

• 

& 

TO 

O 

00 

4S 

M 

ON 

-a 

o 

M 

v.0 

8 

-a 

VO 

H* 

is 

S 

o 

00 


o 

^n 

8 

ON 

00 

£ 

VO 

TO 

o 

vn 

VO 

• 

VO 

• 

vn 

• 

ON 

• 

Vn 

♦ 

ON 

• 

VO 

• 


4S. 

• 

vn 

• 

is- 

• 

4S 

• 

is 

• 

f* 





H 

o 

M 

is 

o 

to 

& 

ON 

TV) 

M 

vn 

VO 

VO 

3 

3 

CO 

S3 

00 

$ 

fc 






s 


JS 

cr 

cn 

o 

? 
1 M 


m a* 

*{ 3 * • 

P* 


H 

M 

TO 

M 

TO 

H 


VO 

J—* 

M 

TO 

M 

l-J 


H 






►r} 

vn 

• 

TO 

• 

is 

• 

o 

• 

ON 

• 

VO 

• 

00 

• 


no 

» 

VO 

• 

O 

• 

vO 

• 

TO 

• 

ON 

• 

VO 

• 

VO 

• 

y* 

VO 

• 



1 

it 

is 

00 

TO 

ON 


S 3 

M 

-3 

is- 

it 

ON 

is 

M 

O 

00 

M 

5 

nD 

VO 

nD 

vn 

VO 

00 

TO 

H> 

vn 

o 

NO 

CO 


• 

s; 

£ 




















ii 

o 




















is 

JS \ 


is 

is 

vn 

ON 

is 

vn 

VO 

is 

• 

VO 

VO 

is 

VO 

is 

is 





U 1 

cvj 

%j i 

o 

§• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

VO 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 





• 


o 

H 

O 

8 

e 

TO 

O 

8 

$ 

8 

00 

ON 

vO 

VjJ 

vn 

•^3 

vO 

CO 

M 

VO 

vn 






a 

• 


IH 


VO 


CO 

vO 


£ 

i 3 


M 

O 


on 

is 


3 

C7N 

nO 


f—• 

VO 

h 


M 

VO 

IV) 

H 

TO 

TO 

M 


M 


O 

-o 

o 

vn 

TO 

O 

VO 

ON 

Vo 

VO 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

» 

• 

• 

* 

• 

o 

M 

Os 

H 

nQ 

M 

CO 

ON 

00 

VJ 

o 

00 

o 

Vo 

VO 

ON 

TO 

is 

M 

00 


<3 

VO 


TO 


O 

o 



ps 

* 3 * 

CO 

o 

§• 

M 


Pp» 

Wicr • 

0 ^ 


MMPI SCORES - EDUCATIONAL STATUS 

























o 


o 


f 


L 


44 




( 



! 












- 135 - 


Intra-group variability for the German educational groups is seen 
on Hs and Pd with and without K-factor . With the exception of Pd, all 
Standard deviations show a greater degree of variability among public School 
males. Education may have had a leveling influence. 

Females. 

The German female educational groups reveal as much irregularity in 
profile as the male groups (Profiles XXIV and XXV). Yet, female profiles 
are slightly lower and the differences between scores are greater. 

With K-correction the profile for Public School individuals follows 
an uneven line relatively close to the 50 T-score level, except on Ma where 
it takes a sudden decline to a T-score of 45- Without K-correction the 
profile becomes more regular. 

High School females have a less regular K-corrected profile, but 
their scores are more extreme than those of the Public School group. While 
Hs and D scores remain close to the 50 T-score line, there is a sharp rise 
on Hy and a rapid decline to Pd and Mf. There is another sudden rise to Pd. 
From here the decline is steady and consistent to a 50 T-score level on Ma . 
Without the K-factor the profile becomes more even especially in the 
psychotic area. 

The Critical ratio shows that the differences between the two 
educational female groups are significant on Hy „ Mf, and Pa. Thus, the High 
School female group indicates greater tendencies toward hysteria, feminity, 
and paranoia. These differences also indicate that the educational factor 
might have had a greater influence upon the females than upon the males 
(Table 15). 

A comparison of the German females to the Albertan educational 













+.5K +.4K + 1K -flK +.2K 


136 


PROFILE XXIV 


T Score 



i 



i 

i 


W 

s 

> 

f 

w 

co 


MMPI PROFILE - EDUCATIONAL STATUS 
(With K-correction) 





































































+.5K +.4K + IK +1K +.2K 


- 137 - 


PROFILE XXV 

T Score 


•—'coco*f*.cn<7>-*aoocooi— to 
oooooooooooo 


■o 

r- 1 

w 

•n 

K 

n 

o 




o. 


*a 

a 


CO 

o 































7 












/ 




































i 

1 












f\ 

I \ 












/ 












• • 

1 

k 











\ 

k 












f 

• 
















































































■o 

t- 4 

“n 

A 

(0 


w 


QU 


a 


CO 

o 


s? 


sr 

o 

o 

m w 


£ 


I 

O 

M 

(ft 

& 

! 

® 


MMPI PROFILE - EDUCATIONAL STATUS 
(Without K-correction) 



























































- 138 - 


groups shows that there are similar differences for the Albertans on Hy 
between Public School and University individuals, but not Public School and 
High School groups. In contrast to the German groups there is little diff¬ 
erences on Pa for the Albertans. Hence the significantly high Hy and Pa 
scores for the German High School females are characteristic of the German 
group. Yet, educational differences do not explain the status of the total 
group of German females. There are no significant differences on Hy, Mf, and 
Pa between total German females and total Normal Albertans (Table 10). 

Differences in intra-group variability are small except on Pa and Pt. 
On the Pa scale Public School females and on Pt High School females show 
considerably greater variability. 

RELATIONSHIP OF TEST RESULTS. 

It is now evident that the results of the three instruments. Problem 
Measurements and the two inventories, do not always correspond. 

Total Groups . 

According to Problem Measurements there are numerous problems among 
both German Baptist males and females (Table 1 and 2). These problems were 
recognized as difficulties by individuals of the group. The impact of some of 
the problems might have left an adverse impression upon personality. However 
an examination of the results of the Adjustment Inventory does not confirm this 
impression for either males or females (Profile II). All the Adjustment 
Inventory scores are centered under category Average . Although there is a 
slightly higher trend for German females as compared to the Inventory norms 
(Profile II), the differences are statistically insignificant (Table 4). 
Instead, there is better Hom e Adjustment for both German females and males 
than for the Adjustment Inventory author* s standardization group; end this 






. 





, 

r. 



■ 


. 


■ 




' 








* 

■■■ 



. 




. 





< 

. 














. 






• 





■ ! 





* &o . 









• . . 



IS 






. - 






' 




’ 










' 








■ 

130,1 






. 










' 
























- 139 - 


is a significant difference. 

On the other hand, there is some relationship betveen the results 
of Problem Measurements and the MMPI record for the German Baptists. There 
is a trend toward less satisfactory adjustment of the German male group as 
compared to MMPI and Normal Albertan norms (Profiles X and XI). In most 
cases the differences betveen the German, group and the MMPI standardization 
subjects are significant. The difference betveen the German males end 
Normal Albertans is smaller. But some of the variations are significant 
(Table 9). 

Among females the differences are even less (Table 10). Neverthe¬ 
less, these findings are also in keeping with the general results of Problem 
Measurements. There are not as many problems checked by the German females 
as by the males (Tables 1 and 2). 

The Three Gen er ation s. 

A parallel examination of the three generations does not provide 
the same results on all three instruments. 

Problem Measurements for males shovs the greatest number of 
problems among Immigrants and the least number among the Second Generation 
(Table 1). The Adjustment Inventory, however, does not support this claim 
(Profile III, Table 5)• The MMPI also takes a relatively neutral stand 
(Profiles XIV and XV). While there is some tendency on the profiles for 
Immigrants to have the highest and the Second Generation the lowest scores, 
the differences are not significant (Table 12). 

Among the three female generations the relationship betveen the 
results of the testing instruments is not closer than among the males. 
Problem Measurements reveals the greatest number of severe difficulties 
among subjects of the First Generation and the smallest number among I mini- 



. 

. 









' 


- •. - ; 


















■■■ :'r: 






< t 


























. ■) 




! ' 









• 

t 

. 











■/X ... . 




. 















- HO - 


grants (Table 2). The Adjustment Inventory profile seems to confirm this 
claim by showing that First Generation subjects have the highest scores 
(Profile III). Yet, t-ratio computations disclose no significant differences. 

On the other hand, the MMPI record reverses the position of the 
First and Second Generation. Here the Second Generation shows the highest 
and the Immigrant the lowest scores. The results of the three instruments 
would seem to agree on the Immigrant female status. Yet, t-ratios of MMPI 
results show significant and doubtful differences on three scales only. 

The combined test results of the three instruments, therefore, show 
agreement in some instances; while in others there is either some disagree¬ 
ment or neutrality. 

Deviant Responses . 

Since the inventories were designed primarily to detect personality 
maladjustment, the writer arranged tables of individuals with conspicuously 
high, scores on the three instruments (Tables 16a to I6f) . These tables 
indicate how many subjects of the total group involved in this study reveal 
unusually high scores on one, two or all three test instruments. 

Probably it should be recapitulated that on the basis of Problem 
Measurements all subjects giving one or more responses under Seve r e Problems , 
and five or more under Moderate Problems , were included in the tables. The 
reason for this procedure is the assumption that only an aggregation of 
moderate problems could be significant in personality adjustment. It should 
also be stated that in numerous instances the same subject responded to some 
problem areas under Moderate Problems. and to others under Severe Problems. 
Total Result s. 

A closer examination of Tables 16a to I6f reveals that there are 
108 individuals of the total 153 who have conspicuously high scores. There 















• « 





' , . ) 


, 


. 


* 

. 

. 

* 



. 


. 

... • 

t '• • • 





, 

, .... - - ■ h[ r : 7 f ; 

* 





.. 





. 








. 






TABLE 16a 


- 141 


RELATIONSHIP OF TESTS 1 SCORES 

MALES 

Immigrants 

MMPI 


T-Scores of 70 
and Above 

Adjust. 

Inventory 

Problem 

Measurements 

Val. 

No. of scale 
Subjects 

Diag. 

Scale 

Unstf. 

Very 

Unstf. 

Moderate 

Problems 

Severe 

Probl. 

1. 

# 



UU!ULU m 
TfTtlTjilT TtiT 

# 

2. 




mm# 

# 

3. 


m# 


m 


4. # 




# 


5. 

# 

# 

# 

m# 


6. 




uif-tfn ip u 
WWWWw w 


7. 

# 



it if/i 

WWW 

# 

a. 

mm m 

# 

m 

ini'll 

WWW 

# 

9. 




ItitWwW 

m# 

10. 

m 


§ 

tfll an 

rrttww 


11. 




It!!!!!!!! U If 
rffrfnrfr fnr 

# 

12. 

§ 

# 


mm m 

m 

13. 

# 



m 


14. 




#m 

# 

15. 


# 

# 

#m# 

## 

16. 

MM 

ttlrtrrt 

# 

# 

mm m 

m# 

17. # 


mut 

frftw 


mm # 


18. 

UUJlfM 

nmnnt 


mm 

mm 


19. 


# 


mini mu 

/TWffTfW 


20. 


# 


mm m 

# 




































- 142 

TABLE 16b 

RELATIONSHIP OF TESTS* SCORES 

MALES 
First Generation 


MMPI 

T-Scores of 70 Ad .just. Inventory Problem 

and Above . Measurementa 


Val. 

No. of Soal9 

Subjects 

Diag. 

Scale 

Unstf. 

Very 

Unstf. 

Moderate 

Problems 

Severe 

Probl. 

1. # 

am 


m 

mm 

ft Sr If ft 


2. 


# 


m 


3. 

# 


# 

mm am 

* 

4. 

m 

m 

a# 

am 


5. 

## 



a 


6. 


# 




7. 

# 


# 

it n/i it n nnn 
trWWffW ftmt 


S. 



a 

mm # 

# 

9. 




mm a 


10. 


# 


mma # 


11. 


# 


mm 


12. 


## 


m 


13. 



# 

mm a 


14. 




m 

#### 

15. 


# 

## 

a 


16. 

H-MM 

itwtrirtt 



MMS 

Trlhrtflf 


17. 

# 

m 

m 

mm m 




























TABLE 16c 

RELATIONSHIP OF TESTS 1 SCORES 


MALES 
Second Generation 


MMPI 

T-Scores of 70 Problem 

and Above Ad.iust. Inventory Measurements 


No. of Val * 

Subjects Soale 

Diag. 

Scale 

Unstf. 

Very 

Unstf. 

Moderate 

Problems 

Severe 

Probl. 

1. 




mm 

# 

2. 


# 

# 

m ■ 

m 

3. 

JUtfl 

Trtrtr 


m 

# 

m 

4. 


## 


#mm 


5. 


m 


j nut Jin 
TifnrirtT 


6. # 

# 



m 


7. 

§ 



m 


8, 




mm # 


9- # 




mm 


10. 


# 


m 




. 



































- iu 


TABLE 16d 

RELATIONSHIP OF TESTS 1 SCORES 

FEMALES 

Immigrants 


MMPI Ad.iust« Inventory Problem 

T-Scores of 70 Measurements 

and Above 


No. of 
Subjects 

Val. 

Scale 

Diag. 

Scale 

Unstf. 

Very 

Unstf. 

Moderate 

Problems 

Severe 

Probl. 

1. 



# 


m 


2. 



m 

# 

§#m 


3. 




# 

msm 

Tflrifnu 


4. 

M 




mm# 


5# 

§ 


# 


m 

# 

6. 





§m 

# 

7. 





MSJUl S 

mrtrfnr tt 

# 

8. 





#m## 


9. 


# 

# 

# 

MtMJLUL 

Trfrfrff 

MS 

Iran 

10. 


m 

# 


//• tfiff }t // OMMUM 

frfrtnru tflffffnT 
# 


11. 




m 



12. 



m 

# 


m 

13- 

# 





## 





















\ 





















TABLES 16e 

RELATIONSHIP OF TESTS 1 SCORES 


FEMALES 
First Generation 


MMPI 

T-Scores of 70 Problem 

and Above Adjust Inventory Measurements 


m e Val * 

0 N °! °f Scale 

Subjects 

Diag. 

Scale 

Unstf. 

Very 

Unstf. 

Moderate 

Problems 

Severe 

Probl. 

1. # 


# 


m 


2. 


m 


MM 

# 

3. 

# 


# 

m 


4* 




mm # 


5. 


m 


Mtjmt m 
T iTttnnT If 

# 

6. 


m 




7. 


# 


Mi 


8. 




mm 

# 

9. 


# 




10, 


# 


# 


11. 


# 

# 

mm m 


12. 



m 

mmm 

# 

13, 


# 


M 


14. 




mm## 

### 

15. 


# 


MJjMStt it 

WTtirwIt Tr 

# 

16, 

±i 

w 

# 

# 

m 


17. 

m 

# 

m 

MM 

M 

18. 

# 


# 

M 


19. 




MSM 

it U It It It 


20. # 

# 

M 

# 

#m# # 

# 


- 145 
























- 146 


TABLE 16ee 

RELATIONSHIP OF TESTS 1 SCORES 

FEMALES 

First Generation 

(Continued) 


MMPI 

T-Scores of 70 Problem 

and Above Ad .just. Inventory Measurements 


No. of V&T* 

Subjects Scale 

Diag. 

Scale 

Unstf. 

Very 

Unstf. 

Moderate Severe 
Problems Probl. 

21. 


# 

# 

m 


22. 


# 


# 


23. 




UJUtM 

attwttW 

m 

24 . 


# 

## 

« 


25. 


m 

m 



26. 


# 


nil it (in 
trTftW 


27. 




{LnJULUi mi 
(Thu 11 it TuT 

Mjmn 

jlirfrfr 

28. 


# 

m 

MMM MM 

Trltwtrft Till rite 


29. # 


# 


# 


30, # 




M 




































147 


TABLE 16f 

RELATIONSHIP OF TESTS 1 SCORES 

FEMALE 
Second Generation 


MMPI 

T-Scores of 70 
and Above 


Problem 


Adjust. Inventory 


No. of Val ! 

Subjects Soale 

Diag. 

Scale 

Unstf. 

Very 

Unstf. 

Moderate 

Problems 

Severe 

Probl. 

1. 



# 

MM-S 

frfnttt 


2. 




# 

if 

3. 


# 


MMMUf 

frfnrfr 


4. # 






5. 


# 


mm m 


6. 



# 

//////■ 

irfnr 


7. 


# 


# 


8. 


# 

## 

MIULUm 

frrrfnfn 


9. 

# 

# 


mm 


10. 


# 




11. 


# 


mjt 

trttw 


12. 


# 


m 


13. 




m 

if 

14. 


## 


mm m 


15. 


# 


trtrtrtnt 

if 

16. 

WTTlt 

m 

# 

if 

if 

17. 


MM 


MM 

Wfttr 


18. 


# 

# 

# 

























- 148 - 


are many more responses to Problem Measurements than there are deviant 
scores on both inventories. This shows that some individuals who had both 
moderate and severe problems reveal no deviation on the inventories. But 
there is a considerable degree of correspondence between deviant scores and 
problems. 

The percentages of relationships are as follows: 

1) In 83.1$ cases the combined results of the MMPI Diagnostic scales and the 
two categories of the Adjustment Inventory correspond to the results of both 
categories of Problem Measurements. This relationship is on the basis of 
either one or all three categories of the two inventories to one or both 
categories on Problem Measurements. 

Similarly, there is a correspondence 

2) in 18.4$ cases of the combined results of the MMPI Diagnostic scale and 
category Very Unsatisfactory on the Adjustment Inventory to Severe Problems 
on Problem Measurements; 

3) in 30.2$ cases of MMPI Diagnostic scales to both categories of Problem 
Measurements; 

4) in 75.6$ cases both categories of the Adjustment Inventory to both 
categories of Problem Measurements; and 

5) in 22.7$ of MMPI Diagnostic scales to both categories of the Adjustment 
Inventory. 

The results of these relationships suggest that vhile each instru¬ 
ment measures certain common personality deviations each one also measures 
aspects not detected by the other. 

The Three Generations . 

In view of the relatively positive relationship between the invent¬ 
ories end Problem Measurements the test results of the three generations may 











' » ; ■ ■ . 

. 

. 












, . 

. 






, 












♦ ' 
















- 










• . 






- 149 - 


be more meaningful. Table 17 represents a summary of the results of each of 
the three instruments for Immigrants, First Generation, and Second Generation 
with scores indicative of deviant adjustment. 

In this table MMPI percentages of Immigrant males with T-scor es of 
70 and above are nearly twice as large on the Diagnostic scales as those of 
the Second Generation. This implies that there are almost twice as many 
deviant Immigrants than Second Generation subjects. The First Generation 
assumes an intermediate position. This tendency was indicated previously by 
the profiles for the total three generations but not considered significant 
by t-ratio computations (Profiles XI? and XV, Table 12)• 

The females tend to follow the same trend on the MMPI 70 and above 
T-score level. This is contrary to the MMPI profiles for the total three 
female generations (Profiles XVI and XVII). But again t-ratios indicated no 
significant differences there (Table 13). 

On the Adjustment Inventory, the differences under Unsatisfactory 
adjustment between the three male generations is not great. Yet, there is 
a trend for less maladjustment from Immigrants to Second Generation. Under 
Very/ unsatisfactory adjustment there is a reversal of trends between Immi¬ 
grants and First Generation. This is evident also when the categories are 
combined. The Second Generation, however, shows the lowest percentages in 
every instance. 

The percentages of Unsatisfactory scores for females increases 
from Immigrants to Second Generation, indicating that there are more mal¬ 
adjusted people with each succeeding generation. But the reverse is evident 
in Very unsati sfa ctory scores. These results correspond to MMPI findings. 

The trend for both categories combined also shows a slight, but consistent 
tendency to poorer adjustment with each succeeding generation. 













■ 
























. 


















» 

'.T, r . S- ;;0 

■ 

■ 










• , , 













»... 

. ■ ; 

* 


■, ■ ■ 


s 




' 








TABLE 17 


150 - 


tFl 
4 
d* 
« H* 

I 4 

SJ® 

O 

4 

O 

£ 


o 

VO 


CO 
(0 
o 
tsj * 

si 

4 


s 

4 

t2{ CO 

II d- 

4 


M cq 

M 4 
O P 
4 
d- 
CO 


<2 

4^ 


to 

« 

Vn 


teJ 

4 

c+ 

s; h- 
I? 4 
O' CD 
On 

Q 

4 

O 

•g 


M 

CO- 


CO 


II 

H O 


H* 

4 

« M 
1 c+ 
M 

On Q 
0 
4 


M 

*1 

II OQ 

to 4 
Vn P 
4 
c+ 
03 


00 


to 

O 


vO 


VJ 

O 


co a 
o H* 
P P3 
MCPQ 

0 • 


-a 




c 59 

M 


4>- 

-f>* 


00 


4 s - 

00 


4>- 

VJ1 


VO 

<5 


VO 

* 

00 


to 

o 


V>3 

o 


00 


VO 

0 


to 

4- 


V 1 
to 


vD 


M 

00 


Vft 


PO 

VTl 


VO 


to 


to 


VD 


VO 


VO 

o 


00 


to 

4>- 


vn 

VTi 


vn 

to 


vo 


vn 

O 


6 

vO 


VO 

Vo 


Vo 


V): 

o 


o 


4 ® 
CO 4 
€+*■< 


O t'j 
4 H- 
d - 
O' ET 
O 0 
d- 4 
4* 


ter 

a. 

S* 

to 

c+ 

I 

,4 

d" 


* 

ON 


ca 

vn 


to 

V 


VO 

-3 


vo 

ON 


to 

0 


Vo 

o 


CO 


4>~ 

CO 


o 


00 

vn 


00 

<3 


to 

vn 


co 


vo 

vn 

O' 


to 

NO 


CN 


V3 


H 


vn 

o 


4>- 

00 


£ 

O 


4>' 

o 


o 


4" 

to 


vo 


ON 

o 


o W 
o o 

O* Q> 


►d 03 
4 ® 
O <! 
a* a> 

H 4 


O fcd 
4 H* 
d* 

8* S' 

d- 4 


PERCENTAGES OF INDP/XDUAIS 7ITH PROBLEM AREAS 

























i r 






- 151 - 


Problem Measurements reveal approximately the same trend for the 
three male generations as demonstrated by the MMPI. Immigrants show the 
most moderate problems and the Second Generation subjects the least. Under 
category Severe P r oblems . Immigrants still lead. But First instead of 
Second Generation individuals have the least difficulties. The total 
results disclose a trend toward fever problems from Immigrants to Second 
Generation. 

For the female group the results are similar under Moderate Problems 
Under category Severe P roblems * the First Generation has higher scores and 
Immigrants and Second Generation subjects have nearly equal percentage scores 
Thus, while the trends shown by the instruments are not always 
consistent, there is nevertheless a tendency toward less maladjustment from 
Immigrants to the Second Generation. This trend is distinct among the males. 
It is less obvious among the female groups. 






. 

' , . 

* 

, 

, 

. 




- 152 - 


CHAPTER VII 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

It has become apparent that the results of the present survey are 
not uniformly conclusive. In some instances they are doubtful or even 
contradictory. But there are some facts -which are helpful in evaluating 
the personality status of the group under study. 

GENERAL PERSONALITY STATUS. 

Upon the basis of test findings the German Baptists constitute a 
psychologically normal group. There are no unusually high or extreme scores 
on the inventories. ‘While Problem Measurements reveals considerable con¬ 
tact with difficulties in a variety of problem areas, the Adjustment Invent¬ 
ory shows an Average adjustment status for the group (Profile I). The MMPI 
confirms these results (Profiles ¥l to IX). The scores of the group remain 
relatively close within the 50 to 60 T-score range. Standard deviation 
scores of both inventories also show no extremes (Tables 3 and 8). This 
implies that the group is reasonably homogenous. Thus, it is most probable 
that the historic-cultural background of the German Baptists, and the spec¬ 
ific problems arising from it, had no extremely adverse influence upon the 
personality development of the group as such. 

AREAS OF ADJUSTMENT. 

Adjustment in the Home . 

The normal personality status of the group, however, does not 
exclude the presence of socio-cultural differences. These are evident from 
the results derived in comparing the German Baptists with other groups. 
Results on Total Group. 

One of the differences may be seen in the Home area on the Adjudt- 






. 









. 










• 




■ fTC- 




t 





: 





, 





_ yi ' 

■ 







. 






: no o 





K i f". 




.i j 

J 


- 













, - r f 

. 



n ’ J ■ ■ 



/ 

• 







■ 



L .-.V 



- 

• 

3 

, . . « 

’ 


. 






■ t ■ 

. 

• aL I: 

, 






• r ’<l .. • 

, 



- 153 - 


ment Inventory for both males and females (Table 4)• The German group 
shows better adjustment in home relationships than the Inventory standard¬ 
ization group. These results are statistically significant. 

The reason for a better adjustment within the home on the part of 
the German group probably cannot be fully explained. It was noted that the 
introduction of Canadian ways and the English language into German Baptist 
homes caused conflict in some instances. Yet, there may have been other 
factors which offset these influences. The relatively limited outside 
contact of the group, the experience of ostracism and frustration, and the 
resultant feelings of insecurity necessitated the establishment of security 
within the home. It seems that it was imperative for the individual to have 
some place of retreat where he could find acceptance and approval and where, 
together with others of the family, he could present a common front against 
what was believed to be a hostile environment. 

It is probable then that the need for acceptance and security within 
the home called for maximum congenial relationship among members of the 
family, despite the occasional tension created by the practising of Canadian 
ways and the use of the English language by the younger generation. 

Results on Younger Generations. 

On the other hand, the conflict created by the introduction of 
foreign ways into German Baptist homes can also be overemphasized. In an 
autocratic family setting, like that of the German group, the younger 
generations undoubtedly would experience a greater degree of frustration 
than the Immigrant parents. The results would be evidenced by less adequate 
adjustment in Home relationships among First or Second Generation. While 
there are some indications to that effect among the residential status 
groups (Profile III), statistical results do not verify this (Table 5)• 






p • 




- 



• 



it. . 

• 


















• 


. 







«, 0 

' 












, 






* 





i . 
























^ « - 

• 





•' ... .'.-a: . 









. 


■ 




. 









t : 



' o '.o: v - 







' 





















' 

r. 



























oj . 







• 










. 







P V 

a.i . 


ex 



. 

. 

. 

• • 

V , ' , : . . t: jl/J 

■ ■ ■ • 

0 ' •. •/ : : ' : • 'O •••; ■; ■' 

* '■■ ■' ' ' : ■ : 1 ■■ ,rlj , (,• i: 



- 154 - 


The nearest approach to a significant difference in Home Adjustment may be 
seen among the female age groups (Table 6). But these results must be used 
with caution, seeing that the variation is of doubtful significance. 
Educational Factor. 

While the educational factor, too, has little to offer toward a 
better understanding of the Home relationship status, its results are inter¬ 
esting with reference to Social Adjustment (Table 7). Both males and females 
show considerably higher scores in the Public School group than for High 
School individuals (Profile V). Since these differences are statistically 
significant, it may be said that better Social adjustment could be 
associated with better education. 

This phenomenon is probably less difficult to understand than the 
one of Home Adjustment . Individuals with Public School training only, tend 
to settle on the farm or accept employment which ordinarily calls for a 
minimum of social intercourse. The lack of personal equipment as a result 
of a lower educational status has a tendency to limit contacts. On the other 
hand, individuals with High School and more advanced training are likely to 
have acquired considerable knowledge of socio-cultural institutions and 
their functions, and a proficiency in the use of the English language. These 
factors are basic in social intercourse. Moreover, individuals with better 
training are inclined to seek employment in populated areas where social 
contact is imperative and satisfactory social habits are being established. 

The need of an education and the ability to use the English language 
were seen clearly on Problem Measurements as some of the greatest problems 
(Tables 1 and 2). These factors played a large role especially among males. 
From Immigrants to the Second Generation the struggle with language and 
education is essentially a struggle for assimilation. . This process continues 











' '■..!■■■ . ■„ ) '■ JI- i: .‘I •. '• JiC ■ ■ fi . VS 

■ ; - ■: . ' : - ■■ :• * • J 

, 


v: . 






. 


■ 








* 




■ 






c' \ / .. ■ 


'' . 

-,o 


. ■' - . 


' 

. ... 

. 

• ; QT.J- / 

. 

















- 155 - 


until assimilation is complete. The relationship, therefore, between 
education and Social Adjustment seems relatively close. 

PSYCHIATRIC SYNDROMES, 

As the specific Home and Social adjustments are characteristic 
features of the personality status of the German Baptists so also are certain 
differences found on the MMPI record which emphasizes syndromes instead of 
areas of adjustment. 

German B a ptists. MMPI Norms, and Normal Alber tans. 

While the German Baptists as a group are not maladjusted, a com¬ 
parison of them to the MMPI standardization subjects reveals consistently 
higher scores for the Germans (Profiles X to XIII)• Among females there are 
exceptions in but two scales. The majority of these differences are 
statistically significant (Tables 9 and 10). 

But Normal Albertans also have considerably higher scores than the 
MMPI standardization group. This suggests, therefore, that a comparison of 
the German Baptist group to the Albertan norms is more relevant than to the 
MMPI norms. Actually, the present study is to show how successful the 
German group has been in adjusting to the environment to which Normal 
Albertans have adjusted. 

German Baptist Males and Normal Albertans. 

Such comparison shows that the German Baptist male group has sign¬ 
ificantly higher scores than the Normal Albertans on Pt and Sc , both with 
E-correction . If the application of the K-factor provides a more reliable 
record, as claimed, by the author of the MMPI (IB), and if the S_c scale can 
be accepted as a valid measure, the above results indicate that the German 
males may have psychasthenic and schizophrenic tendencies - syndromes 















.■ : , ' . ■ ’ o'. 

. 



*: 


. 










' 


: f 



’ 

■ . $r. , r /‘ 




■ / Vp .. .1. 1 % 





. 

• 



. •.■. 

... . -. ■ t . 


Sff OP •' ? " V’ 









' 




■ 1 ■■■■ 

■ 


, r ; 


V". 






• . . .. ' i ■ . \ ", .• 

' . ; : ■ i . , " 1 ' ) f 




lo X ..0 * t . ■ -', i ■' , ' ’ 

c-,:/ J' , 














' ' l 








. 






■ s f i ,*< • • . .1 , • U n/;: 85 reps . *tot' .1 

. 








. 






























- 156 - 


characterized by fear and withdrawal. 

At their face value, there is some relationship between Pt and Sc 
and the difficulties shown by Problem Measurements and by the socio-cultural 
background of the German Baptist group. Difficulties might have been 
traumatic enough to create extreme fear for some individuals, and to induce 
others to withdraw from the scene of conflict, as suggested by Pt and Sc 
respectively. 

German Baptist Females and Normal Albertans. 

The relatively close approach of the German Baptist females to the 
Albertan norms could probably be accounted for in terms of fewer difficulties 
for the German females as compared to the males. This is supported by 
Problem Measurements (Tables 1 and 2). Especially under category Severe 
Problems , males have considerably more difficulties in both number and extent. 

This is also in harmony with the cultural pattern. 

The female, being more closely confined to the home than the male, 
was not exposed as freely to outside environmental impacts caused by cult¬ 
ural clashes. Traditionally, the German woman*s place is in the home. To 
accept this place, was a gesture of compliance to European mores. It also 
provided a degree of security against threats from without. Religion, 
sanctioning tradition, reinforced the demands of the mores. 

An additional support of this hypothesis may be found on the notably 
low' score for the German Baptists females on Ma+K (Profiles XVI and XVII, 

Table 13). The group as a whole tends to reveal a lack of ordinary hypomanic 
ambitions characterized by enthusiastic outside pursuits. 

Deviant Grows . 

There are other indications of socio-cultural differences among 
individuals registering MMPI T-scores indicative of maladjustment (Table 11)• 




. 

. 

■ " ' ; r: ; : ./ • 

. 

■ 

. 

L i V ;/ ■ 

■' . 

. 

? ■ ... 


■ 






. 









• 

t 

■ 

: 







• 








' ■ .-« e.i31AJvj.w?j 



- 157 - 


These may be seen among the percentage scores on the Diagnostic scales. 

The high T-score percentages of German males on Hy and Pa , and the 
low percentages on Sc . indicate that this group of maladjusted individuals 
has probably no withdrawal tendencies. Instead some of them may be predom¬ 
inantly suspicious, oversensitive and delusional, and others reveal hyster¬ 
ical conversion tendencies, as shown respectively on Pa and Hy. The high 
Pt and S£ scores for the Total group are not supported by the percentage 
scores of the deviant males. 

Among the German females there is an a,bsence of individuals with 
T-scores of 70 and above on Hs, Mf, and Pt, and only a negligible percentage 
with Pd and Ma. These results would suggest that the German Baptist females 
are probably preoccupied with their domestic duties on a femine interest 
level without inviting physical complaints and fears. Moreover, there may 
be relatively little outside social ambition. The low percentage score on 
Ma*K among this deviant group has a parallel low score on the same scaJLe 
among the entire group. 

In terms of total percentage scores It can be shown that there are 
no more deviant individuals among the German group than among the Albertan 
standardization group. Thus, the higher scores for the German Baptists in 
general cannot be explained in terms of more maladjusted people, but as a 
result of generally higher scores for the total group. 

Reside ntial S tatus Groups . 

Similar to the Adjustment Inventory record, the MMPI results on 
residential status do not bring out so cio-cultural differences (Tables 12 
and 13). There is but one exception, namely between female Immigrants and 
the Second Generation on Sc . 

This conspicuovts absence of differences on both inventories is 


















' 




















■ 

t , fl ■ ,> 

. 

. 








' 








n . 








< ■■ ; 


. 

vXi JoitCLt-v 




lh . :. yj$ ;■ 








no : 


va J rj,. ,,A odt oX xaUfai;. 


. 



















- 158 - 


contradictory to the record of Problem Measurements (Table 1 and 2). It 
also is out of harmony with the historic-cultural background of the German 
Baptists. It has been seen that the Immigrants were exposed to many more 
difficulties than the Second Generation. But the inventories do not 
register significantly different results. 

Yet, parallel results of the three instruments on deviant individ¬ 
uals, divided into residential status groups, show in general positive 
relationships (Table 17). There is a trend for an increasingly smaller 
percentage of maladjusted individuals from Immigrants to Second Generation. 
The trend is not as clear among females as among males. This is in harmony 
with the total socio-cultural pattern. The females ordinarily are not 
exposed to as many nor as severely traumatic experiences. 

.Age Groups . 

The age factor offers relatively little assistance toward a better 
understanding of the total German Baptist group. 

The only significant differences between the younger and the older 
male age groups are on Ma-v-K and Ma. These indicate that the older group has 
smaller hypomanic tendencies. 

A comparison to the Albertan age groups s.lso shows a considerable 
lower score for the older German group on the Ma scale than for the older 
Albertans. ¥hile these differences suggest a relatively low state of 
productivity on the part of the older German population, there is little 
evidence in the cultural pattern that would support such claim. 

The significant differences between the two German female age groups 
shows the younger group taking the higher and the older group the lower pos¬ 
ition on Pa and Ma (Profile XX). There is a smilar difference among the 
Albertan age groups, except that on Ma*K and Ma the youngest Albertans 







* 





• 

4 





. 



' . 

* 


. 


. 


• 


* r x.. nj# ,v*j J.,, i'l.l . 7 ..:.. ■ v■ 


4 


■: ‘ S. ) : ' 


. 

'7'' * •; ' '■ 

. jscr '7 7,te: 


* 

. 

... >'.. . ! 0 

•/ ' '• ■- . '■ ,-r ^ '• - 

- 








- 159 - 


suddenly rise to a 55 T-score level while the older groups remain close to 
the 50 T-score line* 

This shows that there are differences between both younger German 
and Albertan and between older German and Albertan females, with the German 
groups taking the lower position. This may be a reflection of the socio¬ 
cultural pattern of the German females. Ordinarily the pattern of behavior 
for the German female is not overproductivity in outside pursuits as indic¬ 
ated by a high Ma score. 

At the same time, the indication for a lower hypomanic tendency 
among the total German females as compared to the total Albertan females 
cannot- be explained chiefly in terms of the older female group. 

Educational Factor . 

The results of the educational status are not much more indicative 
of variations. For the male educational groups there is no significant 
difference on any scale; for the females there are significant variations on 
Hy , Mf, and Pa (Table 15). 

But the significantly higher scores for the High School females on 
Hy and Pa, and the lower score on Mf are not important in relation to the 
total female group. In themselves they suggest that with higher education 
there may be greater hysterical tendencies and possibly more sensitivity 
and suspicion. At the same time,there appears to be a greater emphasis on 


feminine interests 













. 



- 160 - 


SUMMARY. 

1. The German Baptists as a group constitute a psychologically 
normal group as measured by the two inventories, the Adjustment Inventory 
and the MMPI. 

2. Both males and females on the Adjustment Inventory show a 
tendency to better adjustment in home relationship than the Inventory norms. 
This adjustment tendency seems necessary for supportive and defensive 
measures against real or imagined outside threats. 

3. Where the group has been exposed to influences of more advanced 
education it appears to have developed better social ways and hence, 
achieved more satisfactory Social Adjustment . 

4. Because of their common environment, differences on the MMPI 
are more relevant between German Baptists and Normal Albertans than between 
German Baptists and the MMPI standardization group. These German Baptist - 
Normal Albertan differences reveal greater Ft and J>c, both K-corrected . scores 
among the German males, and smaller Ma-vK scores among German females. These 
variations probably represent the results of the socio- cultural impact. This 
hypothesis becomes more probable, if the K-factor facilitates instead of 
reduces the discriminatory power of the scales. 

5. Similar influences may be seen among individuals with T-scores 
of 70 and above. But the German group does not reveal a greater percentage 
of maladjusted people than the Albertan sample population. 

6. The results of the study of the residential status groups show 
no significant differences between Immigrants, the First, and the Second 
Generation. There is but one exception, i.e. on Sc . 

7. The age factor reveals low hypomanic tendencies among the 


older male group and among both female age groups as compared to Norms! 
(# no significant difference on the two inventories.) 











</ 





l . ' 14 ^ 






, 



. 

. 

: 'f • ' . 

. 




■ 


„ 












Ctf 

. 

. 




. 


. 


« 

. 






a ; :< 


» 

, > ' . 


. :.r ■ !>£io ;.r.» 'jj. ••vo/il; . .< v) 

■ 


: v.t. . ■ : • ■ ; ,r ■ . . :• • 'I 







- 161 - 


Albertan age groups. These low scores suggest that the older German males 
and both female groups may have less tendency to overproductivity than 
Normal Albertans. 

8. The educational factor indicates that hysterical tendencies, 
greater sensitivity, and feminine interests are associated with higher 
education among females. 

These various phenomena, however, are not evidences of maladjust¬ 
ment, but appear to be characteristic expressions of socio-cultural diff¬ 
erences of the German Baptists. 




. 

. 1 

. 

' < . 

it. ■ ■ v : 

* 













- 162 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Allport, Gordon W., 

Personality . A Psycholocical Interpretation . 

New York: Henry Holt and Company, 

1947, 25-50. 

2. American Baptists, 

A New Baptist Church Manual . 

Philadelphia, Penna: The American Publication Society, 
1944, 9ff, 27ff. 


3. Bell, Hugh M., 

Manual For The Adjustment Inventory . 

Adult F'orm 

Stanford University, California: Stanford University 
Press. 

4. Bell, Hugh M., 

Manual For The Adjustment Inventory , 

Student Form 

Stanford University, California: Stanford University 
Press. 

5. Benton, Arthur L., and Probst, Kathryn A., 

f, A Comparison of Psychiatric Ratings with MMPI Scores 51 , 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology . 

41:1946, 75-78. 


6. Blair, W.R. N. , 

A Comparative Study of Offenders and No n-Cf fenders 
In The Canadian Army 

University of Alberta Thesis: University of Alberta, 
1949. 

7. Buros, Oscar Krisen, 

The 1940 Mental Measurements Yearbook 
Arlington, Virginia: The Gryphon Press, 

1945, 1199-1201. 

8. Canada Year Book . 1948-49 

Ottawa: King 1 s Printer and Controller of Stationery 
1949. 


9. Dawson, C.A. and Gettys, W.E., 

Ah Introduction to Sociology . Third Edition 
New York: The Ronald Press Company, 

1948, 352-409. 







































- 163 


10. Dawson, C.A., 

Group Settlement . Vol. VII, 

Toronto: The McMillan Company of Canada Limited, 
1936. 

11. England, Robert, 

The Colonization of Western Canada . 

London: P.S. King and Son, Ltd. Orchard House, 
1936, 94ff, 226ff. 

12. Foster, Kate A., 

Cur Canadian Mosaic . 

Toronto: The Dominion Council Y.W.C.A., 

1926, 22ff, 92ff. 

13. Gough, Harrison G., 

"Diagnostic Patterns on the Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory", 

Journal of Clinical Psychology . 

2: 1946, 23-37. 

14. Gough, Harrison G., 

"Simulated Patterns on the MMPI", 

Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology . 

42: 1947, 215-225. 

15. Guilford, J.P., 

Fundamental Statistics in Psychology and Education . 
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc. 

1950, 208-235. 

16. Hampton, Peter J., 

"The MMPI as a Psychometric Tool for Diagnosing 
Personality Disorders Among College Students", 
Journal of Social Psychology . 

26: 1947, 99-108. 

17. Hathaway, Starke R., and McKinley, J. Gharnley, 

Manual for the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory , 

New York: The Psychological Corporation, 

1943. 

18. Hathaway, Starke R., and McKinley, J. Gharnley, 

Supplementary Manual for the Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory , 

New Yorks The Psychological Corporation, 

1946. 


19. Hunt, J. McV., 

Personality and the Behavior Disorders , Vol. II 
New York: The Ronald Press Company, 

1944, 714-732. 







































t. 




































- 164 


20. Lavell,. George D., Laurie, Gloria, and Marvin, Doris, 

U A Study of the Bell Adjustment Inventory n , 
Psychological Abstracts . 

23: 1949. 

21. Levine, Maurice, 

Psychotherapy in Medical Practice . 

Nev/ York: The McMillan Company, 

1948, 283-302. 

22. Linquist, E.F., 

A First Course in Statistics . 

Cambridge, Mass.: The Riverside Press, 

1938. 

23. Linton, Ralph, 

The Cultural Background of Personality . 

New York: D. Appleton Century Company Inc., 

1945, 125-153. 

24. Marsh, Charles J., 

H The Diagnostic Value of the Bell Adjustment Inventory 
For College Women", 

Journal of Social Psychology . 

17: 1943, 103-109. 

25. McLaurin, G.C., 

Pioneering in Western Canada . 

A Story of the Baptists, 

Calgary: Published by the Author, 

1939, 325£f. 

26. Morris, Woodrow W, , 

n A Preliminary Evaluation of the Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory iS , 

Journal of Clinical Psychology , 

3s 1947, 370-374. 

27. North Am. Bapt. General Conference, 

Annual Conference Reports , 

Cleveland, Ohio: Roger Williams Press, 

1910, 1915, 1920, 1925, 1930, 

1935, I 94 O, 1945, 1950. 

28. North Am, Bapt. General Conference, 

Annual Conference Reports , 

Cleveland, Chios Roger Williams Press, 

1911, 1921, 1931, 1941. 






























t. * 









5: *■ 




, ♦ 











- 165 


29. North Am. Bapt. General Conference, 

Constitution of the North American Baptist 
General Conference. 

Cleveland, Ohio: Roger Williams Press, 

1946, 5ff. 

30. North Am. Bapt. General Conference, 

Denominational Directory . 

Cleveland, Ohio: Roger Williams Press, 

1941, 1946, 1949. 

31. North Am. Bapt. General Conference, (Thirteen contributors) 

These Glorious Years, 

(One Hundred Years of German Baptist History) 

Cleveland, Ohio: Roger Williams Press, 

1943, 64ff. 

32. Pedersen, Ruth A., 

’’Validity of the Bell Adjustment Inventory When 
Applied to College Women”, 

Journal of Psychology , 

9: 1940, 227-236. 

33. Ramaker, Albert J., 

The German Baptists in North America, 

Cleveland, Ohio: German Bapt. Publication Society, 
1924, 13-95. 

34 * Rubin, HaroId, 

’’The MMPI as a Diagnostic Aid in a Veterans Hospital”, 
Journal of Consultant Psychology . 

12 : 194S, 251.254. 

35. Schmidt, Lt. Col. Herimann C., 

’’Test Profiles as a Diagnostic Aid: The Minnesota 
Multiphasie Personality Inventory”, 

Journal of Applied Psychology , 

29: 1945, 115-131. 

36. Schulte, G.A., 

Erinnerungen ans melner fuenfzlgjaehringen Wirksamkeit , 
Cleveland, Ohio: German Bapt. Publication Society, 
1912, 209ff, 151ff. 

37. Shaffer, L.F., 

The Psychology of Adjustment . 

Boston, Mass: Houghton Mifflin Company, 

1936, 113-277, 































< 




t 



1 t 

r 

' 


* 













- 



- 


* 




* 

• . ■ 













- 166 


38. Stagner, Ross, 

Psychology of Personality . 

Hew Yorks McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 

1948, 342-434. 

39. Symonds, P.M., 

The Dynamics of Human Adjustment . 

New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 

1946, 1-11. 

40. Traxler, A.E., 

n The Reliability of the Bell Inventories and their 
Correlation with Teacher Judgment”, 

Journal of Applied Psychology . 

25i 1941, 672-678. 

41. Tyson, R., 

n The Nature of Good Adjustment”, 

Journal of Clinical Psychology . 

7: 1951, 1-100. 

42. Vedder, Henry C., 

Baptist History . Book IV, 

Boston, Mass: The American Baptist Publication Society, 
1909, 9ff, 47ff, lOlff. 

43. Walter, F.A.F., 

The Social Sciences. 

Toronto: D. Van No strand Company, Inc., 

1949, 97-99. 

44. Ware, C*F., 

” Immigration’', 

The Encyclopaedia of Social Sciences . 

New York: The McMillan Company, 

1932, 587-594. 


ANNEX 

45. Linquist, E.F., 

A First Course in Statistics . 
Revised Edition 

Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 
1942, 102-143. 

46. Smith, G. Milton, 

A Simplified C-^ride to Statistics . 

New York: Rinehart & Company, Inc., 
1950, 55-72. 



























• t 





t * 


t 






















s 




!' , ■ ; * r 

t 









-166a 


47. Campbell, C.M. 

Human Personality and The Environment . 
New York: The MacMillan Comoany, 

1934, 226-40. 

43. Klein, D.B. 

Mental Hygiene . 

New York: Henry Holt and Company, 
1944, 469-73. 

49. The Bible 

Old Testament Historical Books 











- 167 - 


APPENDIX A 

THE BEGINNINGS OF THE GERMAN BAPTISTS 

The Baptists as a religious body appeared on the historical 
horizon during early modern times almost simultaneously in Europe and 
on the North American Continent as the direct descendents of the 
Anabaptists who emerged all over Central and Western Europe during the 
Reformation (2). It was in 1644 when English literature (42) first 
portrayed a group of church organizations which bore the name Baptist, 
and taught baptism by immersion of believers only as the New Testament 
mode of baptism. 

This practice immediately became a distinctive and striking 
feature of the new religious group. It set them apart from traditional 
Christian belief and practice and rendered them a target of ridicule and 
persecution. The fundamental tenet of faith, however, from the very 
beginning, was not the practice of baptism by immersion, but the 
acceptance of Christ as Savior and Lord and guide for ethical living. 

The emphasis was upon a personal, New Testament, relationship between 
the believer and his C-od. The church organization itself, independent 
of the state, was regarded as a mere means by which such relationship 
could be enhanced. Both belief and practice of the Baptists grew 
entirely out of the study of the Scriptures. 

In the course of time, a variety of religious groups professing 
widely differing tenets of faith were called Baptists. This indiscrim¬ 
inate labeling led to confusion and controversy. Even at present there 
are different groups of Baptists. However, they are now more carefully 
classified. Most of them have certain fundamental principles of faith in 


common, 






' y':’ 


’O'- ; ol 









t'o.r 





- 168 - 


ORIGIN IN GERMANY. 

Oncken and His Group . 

The official beginnings of the German Baptists in Germany can 
be traced back chiefly to one individual, John Gerhardt Oncken, who was 
born at Oldenburg in 1800. Little is known of his boyhood years except 
that he had been subject to the influence of his grandmother who was a 
fervent Christian woman. In 1813 young Oncken entered the service of 
a merchant. His employment eventually gave him an opportunity to travel 
extensively in Germany, Scotland, England, and France. In England, where 
he spent some years, he received the impetus for his subsequent life f s 
work. While attending a preaching service in a Methodist chapel at 
London one day, he experienced a Christian conversion while listening 
to a sermon on the text, ’’There is therefore now no condemnation to them 
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the 
Spirit”. (Romans 8:1). The conversion experience proved so overwhelming 
to young Oncken that he decided from that day on to tell others about 
the Gospel of Salvation (25). 

In 1823 Oncken was sent to Germany as a missionary by the 
British Continental Society. While working among the young people of 
Hamburg, and continuing the study of the Scriptures, he found that in 
apostolic times only believers were baptized. There were, however, no 
evidences of such practice on the Continent at his time; and when he 
learned of the Baptists of America and became acquainted with Professor 
Barnas Sears, of the Hamilton Seminary, who was studying in Germany, 
Oncken, his wife, and five other believers were baptized by the 
professor in the River Elbe near Hamburg in April, 1834* As a result 
they established the first Baptist church on the Continent. Soon after, 





■ ■ 


■ 




:T, ; r 




HU 


l 






- 169 - 


the Triennial Convention of the Baptists of America appointed Oncken 
as their missionary in Germany (42). 

Expansion Within and Outside of Germany . 

The Baptist cause in Germany now made extensive progress. But 
the little group of believers endured much hardship for some time because 
of persecution. Oncken himself was fined, imprisoned, and forbidden to 
conduct religious services. His household possessions were confiscated 
and sold, while the other believers were forced to bring their infants 
to Lutheran churches to be baptized. Finally, in 1858, the Hamburg 
church was given legal status, and thus the Baptists were protected 
against further violence. 

From the rapidly growing nucleus of believers in Hamburg 
other Baptist churches were gradually established in most of the larger 
cities of Germany, including the city of Berlin. In time these churches 
formulated associations, and in 1849 four of these bodies organized the 
Triennial Conference which in the 1850 ! s became known as the German 
Baptist Union under which eventually all German Baptist churches of 
Germany became united. Under this organization the publishing house, 
founded by Oncken in 1828 as a private enterprise, became the property 
of the churches. A seminary was begun in 1880 and, eight years later, 
acquired a spacious building with the financial aid of the American 
Baptists. The entire movement was marked by strong missionary motives 
prompting the believers to carry their doctrine beyond the borders of 
Germany to Denmark, Finland, Poland, Holland, Switzerland, Russia, 
Hungary, Bulgaria and eventually to other Balkan states. With the 
coming of the second World War the Baptists in Germany had a membership 
of over 80,000 (25). 




V 












r 



- 





















r 


r 


0 ilK/l 






:: v ■: )% r <; >sn 















- 170 - 


BEGINNINGS ON THE NORTH AMERICAN CONTINENT. 

Multiple Beginnings . 

■While the origin of the Baptist cause in Germany centered 
around J.G. Oncken and a small group of his co-laborers, and the early 
founding of Baptist churches among the German speaking population in 
other Continental European countries was chiefly the result of the 
aggressive missionary effort of the Baptists of Germany in general, the 
beginning of the German Baptist denomination on the North American 
Continent was of a still different nature. There were, in reality, a 
number of beginnings entirely independent of one another. No one 
German Baptist church can claim to be the "mother" church out of which 
the denominational "family" emerged, nor can one single individual be 
called the founder of the movement (33). A variety of circumstances 
and a number of religious leaders were instrumental in assembling small 
congregations and in establishing church organizations in different 
localities. In some localities, for example, Baptist immigrants from 
Germany made the start. In other places English speaking Baptists made 
converts among the German population and baptized and organized them. 

In still other instances non-Baptist German missionaries, independent 
of either the Baptists of Germany or America, preached to their country¬ 
men and gradually, through the study of the Scriptures, came to accept 
Eaptist beliefs together with their congregations. In this apparently 
haphazard w&y a number of the early German Baptist churches were 
organized. In general, organizational procedures were slow because, 
like all German Separatists, little emphasis was laid upon organization 
(33). A few concrete examples will suffice to depict the beginnings of 
the German Baptists of North America. 








- 171 - 


Earliest Attempts * 

The earliest attempts made were by Konrad Anton Fleischmann 
at Newark, N.J., in the region of Blooming Grove, Pennsylvania, and in 
the city of Philadelphia. This fervent Separatist missionary was born 
in Bavaria, Germany, converted in Geneva, and trained in theology at 
Bern, Switzerland. Upon an invitation from George Mueller of Bristol, 
England, to preach to the German immigrants in America, Fleischmann set 
sail for New York in March, 1839. But from the beginning missionary 
opportunities appeared to be lacking. He became therefore pastor of 
a small Protestant church at Newark, and when refusing to baptize 
infants, he lost the support of his congregation. Only a few members 
adhered to his principles of faith. These he gathered about him and 
three of them he soon baptized by immersion. In time, a few more 
converts were added, and in 1849 a Baptist church was organized, 
consisting of thirteen charter members. 

In the meantime, Fleischmann directed his attention to 
Pennsylvania where there were settlements of Pietists, Mennonites, 
and ”Tunkers n , sometimes called ”German Baptists”, because of their 
practice of immersion (33). Encouraged by American Baptist ministers 
of Philadelphia, Fleischmann extended his activities to localities, 
such as Blooming Grove, Fairfield, Hepburn and Anthony. A religious 
revival followed late in 1840 and early in 184! and, as a result of it, 
nearly two hundred believers were baptized. But the organization of 
churches was delayed until 1853. 

In the city of Philadelphia, which had become Fleischmann 1 s 
headquarters, the German Baptist cause was but feeble even though the 
organization of a church had been affected earlier. This was 
achieved in 1843. As a result of evangelistic efforts early in the year 








- 172 - 


Fleischmann baptized five believers and, soon after, eight more* In 
July he presented a brief Scriptural confession of faith to the 
baptized believers, inviting them to afix their signature* The response 
was positive, and as a result of it, the church was considered organized 
and became known as "The German Church of the Lord that meets on Poplar 
Street"* Fleischmann remained with this congregation until his death 
in 1367. No other single individual proved as successful in organizing 
the German Baptists during the early formative years as did Konrad 
Fleischmann. He was also the leading figure in organizing the first 
Conference in 1351. 

In a similar fashion others were laying the foundation of the 
German Baptist cause in New York City, Buffalo, Rochester and Brooklyn, 
N.I. John Eschmann, originally pastor of a church of Immersonists in 
Switzerland, opened a German mission in New York City in 1345. This 
work was sponsored by the American Baptist Home Mission Society, and 
one year later, resulted in the organization of a church consisting of 
sixteen members. With the founding of the first Conference, this church 
was numerically more than twice as strong than any other German Baptist 
church. Perhaps also more than other congregations the church in New 
York City endured severe trials because of doctrinal differences. Yet 
it continued growing rapidly because it had been planted in a strategic 
center, German immigrants of varied creed settled in large numbers in 
the new rapidly developing metropolis. Eventually seven other congreg¬ 
ations emerged from this church. 

The origin of the German Baptists of Buffalo, N.Y. is closely 
associated with Alexander von Puttkamer, who migrated to this continent 
because of a desire for adventure or "Wanderlust", as he himself claimed 











- 173 - 


(33). He had been an officer in the Prussian Army. After arriving in 
America, 1835, he found himself stranded, penniless, and without a job, 
which were factors leading to his religious conversion and baptism in 
an English speaking church near Corning, N.Y. A few years later von 
Puttkamer entered the service of the American Tract Society which sent 
him to Buffalo as a colporter. In this city he soon made friends among 
the Germans and started propagating the Baptist cause. Since this was 
against the rules of the non-denominational Tract Society, he resigned 
his position as colporter and became a missionary of the American Baptist 
Publication Society. The first fruits of his work was the baptism of 
nine persons. Others followed, and in 1849 a German church was organized 
Baptist immigrants swelled the ranks of the membership. Von Puttkamer 
was ordained as pastor of the church. In 1852 he left for a mission 
field in Cincinnati, Ohio, and then to Albany, N.Y. where he established 
other churches. 

The German Baptist work in Rochester, N.Y was begun by 
immigrants who had been members of the New York church. They settled 
in Rochester in 1848 and *49, and soon were conducting worship services 
in private houses, with the more gifted believers taking turns. In 1851 
the group organized into a church under the active support of Deacon 
Orrin Sage of the First Baptist Church of the city. In 1849 Andreas 
Henrich, a member of the newly organized German church at Buffalo, was 
called to become pastor. The church at Rochester showed no spectacular 
success, but the work progressed steadily. Later the eloquent and able 
Henrich served as pastor at Louisville, Ky., and organized a German 
Baptist orphanage. 










r 






o.f.r : * 












. . ...... 






















' 


■ 




' 


r~ 


... 


«. * 


■' 






- 174 - 


Expansion to the West . 

At about the same time a number of successful beginnings were 
made in the Middle West of the U.S.A. Milwaukee, Wis., had been a strong 
center of German immigration for some time. In 1847 a group of fourteen 
German Baptists from East Prussia and their pastor, William Edward Grimm, 
joined their German countrymen of that city and disseminated Baptist 
doctrine among them. From here, in the wake of migration, the Baptist 
work was extended to other localities of Wisconsin, namely Watertown, 
Kossuth and other socalled n bush n settlements (33). Grimm was a very 
staunch Baptist, a forceful speaker, and an extremely aggressive 
individual. Much of his success can be ascribed to these qualities and 
to his zeal for religion. 

Other centers of German Baptist activity during this time, and 
somewhat later, were St. Louis, and Concordia, Mo.; Chicago, Springfield, 
and Peoria, Ill., and Ontario in Canada. Individuals such as Christopher 
Shoemaker, Carl Kresse, J.H. Drueger, and especially, August Rauschenbusch, 
are outstanding in the beginnings of the German Baptist work in these 
centers. In a similar diversified and independent way the German Baptists 
evangelized, established churchs, and gathered their congregations from 
among their countrymen west of the Rockies and in Western Canada. Step 
by step they extended the Baptist cause and laid the foundation for the 
German Baptists of North America, or The North American Baptists, as the 
denomination now is known officially. In every instance, however, there 
was a group of Germans, aggressive and capable of Baptist leadership, 
and a zeal for the Baptist faith. 



, . ? ... 

. • ■ ■ ' 

< ■ ' • < ' ’ ' ' ' ' ; ' ' " • • ; 

;!■ ‘ ' ' • . ‘ ‘ ' ' 

< ' • , ' ■ ' : ‘ ‘ 

• • - • . . ■ 

- • <-. • ' ■ ' • ■ ' • • ‘ 

t.• < ■ ■. t • ■ < 

' ■ r ' ' ' ' ' t ‘ - 

<, ' • •' '■ * ' • ' . . ■ ► ' i 

S : . • ' ’ ■ ’• ■ ' ■■ 



T it .* w 



. • 


i 

■ ■ ■ 


. 


. 


' 




' 

■ d ,!■ > Oi'.i i/\ : >i o ' :' 

' 


• ■ • ■■■■•■■ ' ' • ’ ' . ’ ' ■ : 
' ' : ' < ' ‘ ' !' * 











- 175 - 


APPENDIX B 

THE NCRTH AMERICAN BAPTIST DENOIVIINATIQN 

THE FORMATION OF CONFERENCES. 

Basic Factors in Organization . 

By the middle of the 19th century the founding of German 
Baptist churches at different points on the North American Continent, 
and the consistent growth of these churches in membership and complexity, 
could be seen in many German settlements. At this time the necessity 
for further organization and inter-church unity became evident if the 
Baptist cause among the German speaking population was to survive. In 
keeping with the nature of Baptist belief this was best expressed in the 
formation of conferences, a loose organization of churches into co¬ 
operating bodies for the purpose of Christian fellowship and of 
promoting Christian educational and missionary activities. 

These organizations were the natural result of a number of 
factors that were commonly present in the various churches. 1) There 
was the factor of great similarity of faith. Despite minor differences 
of belief certain fundamental tenets were held by all the German Baptist 
churches. 2) The use of a common language was equally important. Most 
German Baptists, at that time, even if they understood English, felt 
more at home where their mother tongue was spoken. This feeling prevails 
in some churches to the present day, especially in the Dakotas and in 
Western Canada, although most congregations in the denomination have 
adopted the English language for decades. 3) There was the feeling of 
belonging to a common race, and 4) the feeling of belonging to a minority 
group which may well have also been factors in establishing closer 
fellowship and co-operation. Yet, it must be added, that in the course 














- 176 - 


of time many German Baptists have gone over to the English speaking 
Baptist denominations, while on the other hand, non-German ethnic 
individuals have joined German Baptist churches* 

The First Local Conference . 

The first attempt at establishing a practical working fellow¬ 
ship among a group of German Baptist churches in the east of the U.S.A. 
and Ontario was the formation of the first local conference at Phil¬ 
adelphia, Pa., in 1851. There were only eight individuals present, 
five ministers and three laymen. Statistics of the conference session 
showed the existence of a total of eight churches with a membership of 
405 in all. The name under which it was to be known was "Conference of 
Ministers and Helpers of German Churches of baptized Christians, usually 
called Baptists" (33). About twenty years later a constitutional change 
provided that this body, as well as subsequent conferences were to be 
conferences of churches instead of "Ministers and Helpers". 

The program of the first local conference included considerable 
discussion on church practice and missionary activity. The following 
questions appeared to be very pertinent: Should members be permitted 
to participate in the Lord^ Supper when having disagreements and 
quarrels with their fellows, and can membership in a secret organization, 
like the Masonic Order, for instance, be tolerated of a church member. 

The necessity of printing a statement of faith and rules for church 
procedure were discussed as well as the issuing of a German hymnal and 
a German periodical. The advice of the American Baptist Publication 
Board was solicited in these matters. In response, the Board sent a 
delegation which promised assistance to the conference. The result was 
the publication of a statement of beliefs and rules of order and a 



. ! • ; . 


Oil M &,??’ 


;r i ro 


r m 


■ ■ 


; '.i;v • 




o ■ \: u j ) 


imi 


* 

. 


; Vf 


fU'U ."f 


T'.- f '-.if-.'A 


n r > r 


■ 






- 177 - 


German hymnal. In August, 1853, the first issue of the "Sendbote dee 
Evangeliums" (The Gospel Messenger) appeared, now known as "Der Sendbote" 
Thus the German Baptist denomination had not only a definite beginning, 
but also assumed a definite character. 

The Western Conference . 

The following decade proved especially fertile in the founding 
of additional local churches. From 1851 to 1858, the eight churches 
increased to thirty, and the 405 members to 1,810. Moreover, there 
were now twenty four additional small groups of German Baptists scattered 
over the Middle West of the U.S.A. with 515 adherents. Such rapid 
expansion cdELed for further action. The result was a division of the 
original conference into an Eastern and a Western Conference (33). 

The first YJestern Conference convened in 1859, at Springfield, 
Ill. Eight ministers, two licensed assistants, and six laymen were 
present. They discussed matters of mutual interest which were, chiefly, 
missionary activities. The outcome of their discussion was the form¬ 
ation of a Missionary Society and the publication of a monthly paper with 
the striking title "The Bee on the Missionfield". The Western Conference 
at its very inception, could boast of sixteen churches and 495 members. 
The General Conference . 

The division of the original conference into two bodies soon 
called for another organization which would unify them and facilitate 
the German Baptist work in general. Such central organization material¬ 
ized in the formation of "Die Bundeskonferenz", i.e. the General 
Conference, which convened at Wilmot, Ontario, in 1865. The specific 
factor that prompted the convening of such a body was the competition 




'.. ;> ..v : ’ J': ': V’ ' * ;V 

■, - ■' r , - • ' - ; * ' : ' " - ’ ' :v 

K 


n i I - 




‘ -h 




: 






- ■ ■; . . " * ; 

.7 - ; r '.V,' ‘ ' ; i -■ . r -V , -> i' U • ' vr W : ^ "- n n ’ >-~ 1 ' 

■ •: : ■ ' ■ • . ' . ' ■ ' ■' ‘ '' ' ' 

, •/ ' . \ •' •' 

„ • ( .. 

- ' ! f ttr ' io p. ■ ' > "■ 

f •' ■ ' r • ' r; ’ •• '' : . • 1 ' 

’ ' • . • ' ‘ ' ' ' ' • 

*■• „ * ,• - r. ‘.i: v ‘ ; • ' ' 

. : , ' ■ - . .' ■ " r ■ ' ■< " - ■" • 

' ' ' - ' . ' ' ' 









- 178 - 


and dissension created by the two periodicals, ”Der Sendbote” and 
"The Bee”. Both papers were in a precarious financial state. Neither 
of the two opposing factions of subscribers showed willingness to 
decide in favor of one paper in order to eliminate the expenditure of 
publishing two periodicals. Some practical decision on this matter was 
imperative. In addition, there were ether relevant matters of business 
significant to both local conferences. 

The importance of the occasion was demonstrated by the number 
of delegates attending the General Conference. There were fifty four 
representatives from twenty five eastern and thirty three western 
churches. Fleischmann became the Conference’s moderator, and under 
his chairmanship all business matters were attended to in an orderly- 
fashion. The two periodicals were now uniquely amalgamated. Actually, 
"The Bee” flew out of existence with its editor, Philip W. Bickel, 
becoming the editor and manager of ,f Ber Sendbote”. The Conference then 
purchased "The Cheerful Sower”, a private paper of Bickel’s, and 
organised The Publication Society which is still an important corporation 
in the denomination. Among other matters of primary importance was the 
raising of a fund for an orphanage and a fund for the care of widows of 
ministers, and the election of a Committee for examination of candidates 
for ministerial trainees. In all, the General Conference proved so 
successful that it became a permanent institution meeting triennially 
since 1865* 

Additional Conferences . 

During the seventies the churches of the Western Conference 
and their membership increased to a point where, in 1880, it seemed 
expedient to create additional conferences. The Western Conference 









' 




• •••■ • 






• • V' •• r 


Ui 




' f 






* 






■ * 


hu 


i 

v 






9f»n 






V"' 


r 


k)’ ] L - \ • x n*. 







.o ■■ ■ J-' t i f i:l , ' ! • 


- 179 - 


therefore was dissolved, and in 1881 three new conferences appeared, 
the Central, the Northwestern, and the Southwestern Conference. In 1884 
the churches which had sprung up in Texas organized a conference of their 
own. By 1895 the churches at the Pacific Coast were in a position to 
similarly organize. Three years later the Atlantic Conference split off 
from the Eastern Conference. In 1902 the churches of Manitoba, Sask¬ 
atchewan and Alberta became the Northern Conference. Finally, in 1909 
the congregations of South and North Dakota also formed a conference (33) • 

At present there are nine conferences with 267 churches and 
41,560 members (Tables 1-x and 2-x). The increase of churches in some 
conferences has been negligible since 1910. In fact, in six conferences, 
the Atlantic, the Central, the Eastern, the Northwestern, the Pacific 
and the Southwestern conferences, there has been a gradual decline in 
numbers of church organizations, while only two conferences show a 
decided increase, the Dakota and the Northern conferences. The phenomenon 
of decline can be accounted for, partly, by the fact that entire 
congregations joined the American Baptists or the Southern Baptists and, 
partly, by the trend of migration. Members changed their residence, 
causing a gradual disintegration of churches. Totalling the churches 
of all nine conferences, there has been a gradual decline in numbers 
since 1910, namely from 288 to 266. 

Table 2-x, representing the church membership of the conferences, 
shows an increase since 1910. The exceptions are the Eastern and the 
Southwestern conferences with the Atlantic and the Central holding their 
own. Interesting to note is the general trend toward an increase of 
membership during a period when immigration was restricted and pioneering 
had become the exception. Even during the last forty years the German 


? • ■ •• • ' r "■ r ■ . f ■■ , ' ' ' • • 

. fi; 1 ■ • ‘ ' '■ '■■■■ • ’ ■' I ' ■ c 

1 . . • ■ ■ ' • ’ ' 

■ * 

. • 

V • ' 1 

" . , • • ' • • • ■’ • ■ • 






«• 






r •• 


... 


i :■ mr- i'f ■. 




1 

■ fit ■ 


• ' 

: ' 


' 

■ 

' 

, 






















' r •. f ^ . - "■ 




: 




















' • - ) 


i ; •. V. ■?-. ■ ’ 








■ : \ ‘ ’ ' 





- 180 


TABLE 1-x 


2 


to 

03 

00 


£ S? v 8 s g 
- j ft a a 

Ml 


& & 
S’ sr 

© n 

co 3 

© • 


9 

9- 

© 

a 

1 

H- 

O 

© 

& 

5 

M 

g 

3 

P 

P. 

c* 

H* 

o 


8 


• • 


• • 




0* Vo 


“ ol g 


8 

o 

4s 

Ut 

G 

TO 

ot 

VO 

03 

VO 

TO 

8 

fc 

vo 

03 

vo 

TO 

| 1215 

* 

h 

M 

VJt 

TO 

Ut 

is 

VO 

vD 

8 

$5 

£ 

vo 

TO 

1920 

Sj 1 

Ot 

Vo 

1 ^ 

G 

8 

*5j 

is 

tl 


VO 

TO 

VO 

O 

is 

HO 

*1 

1 * 

£ 

£ 

vo 

03 

£ 

K 

8 

vo 

TO 

8 

g 

*1 

1 * 

£ 

TO 

TO 

VO 

G3 

& 

& 

TO 

vo 

o 

8 

lot 

* 1 

!« 

£ 

£ 

iS 

u» 

H> 

Ut 

V* 

VO 

TO 

03 

8 

I 

* i 

1 » 

G 

TO 

Ut 

is 


£ 

V* 

Ut 

TO 

03 

TO 

vn 


» 1 

TO 

TO 

M 

8 

is 

$> 

£ 

ut 

V/! 

SJ 

TO 

Ut 

1950 


s 


( 27 ) 


. OF NORTH AMERICAN (German) BAPTIST 
CHURCHES IN THE NINE CONFERENCES 

From 1910 to 1950 i*l) 

























- 181 - 


TABLE 2-x 


9 


VjJ 

3 

8 


5? 5? 

s. a 
sr §r 

® d 

a d 

CT 

® 

*i • 

ts 


9 § 

& I 

« CD 

a 

• <+ 

at 

• 3 


ft 

f 

** 


p 

CD 

3 


t? O ft> 

® c+ 

ft 


I 

t 3 


I 

H* 

O 


1 V*) 


4^ 

M 

Vo 

VO 

ON JN. 

1 2 1 

a \0 
; » 

Vo 

G 

3 

O 

$ 

VJl 

>0 

vo 

$ § 



to vo io vo 

2 e & 

O O' -3 


vo 











r— 1 

* 

M 

£ 

& 

i 

to 

VJI 

vo 

vo 

£ 

vo 

1 

to 

CO 

g 

i 

» 

8 

M 

1920 

VO 











» 

to 

Oft 

o 

$ 

4S- 

VJI 

vo 

O 

JS 



fc 

Is 

8 

to 

VJl 

£» 

vO 

VJl 

£ 

is 

to 

K 

$ 

ts 

jto 

VO 











$ 

CO 

IS 

« 

1 

vO 

p 

45 

fc 

fc 

8 

to 

8 

to 

* 

vO 

6556 

fc 

£ 

1930 

vo 1 











^ 1 

to 

3 

1 O 

H 

J-* 

O 

VJl 

vo 

9 

v£> 

is 

3 

is 

£ 

6594 

ON 

9 

1 

|g 

3 

to 

vo 

VJt 

to 

vjj 

H 

s 

I 

§ 

VO 

^0 

S 

ON 

1 

ON 

to 

8 

1 

i 

3 

to 

J? 

to 

V£ 

nO 

VO 

s 

vo 

1 

* 

3 

8 

o 

1 

6738 

8 

CS 

a 

M 

1945 


to 

M 

V£ 

vn 

VJl 

to 


ON 



» 

o 

v* 

» 

§ 

fc 

§ 

8 

V/l 


•>3 

p& 

to 

3 

M 

to 

VJl 

VO 

jg 


( 27 ) 


IMHERSHIP OF NORTH AMERICAN (German) 
BAPTIST CHURCHES in the NINE 
CONFERENCES 

From 1910 to 1950 O’/ 






















4 

I 

1 





















TABLE 3-x 


- 182 


NORTH AMERICAN (German) BAPTIST CONFERENCES 
and 

IOCAT3DN OF CHURCHES acc. to 
STATES and PROVINCES L*1) 


CONFERENCES 

No. of 

No. of 

No. of 

No. of 


Churches 

Members 

Churches 

Members 


19 4 5 

19 5 0 

ATLANTIC 

Connecticut 

4 


4 


Delaware 

1 


1 


Maryland 

1 


1 


Massachusetts 

1 


1 


New Jersy 

10 


10 


New York 

5 


5 


Pennsylvania 

3 


3 



25 

4171 

25 

4253 

CENTRAL 

Illinois 

11 


10 


Indiana 

1 


1 


Michigan 

11 


11 


Ohio 

5 


4 


Missouri 



1 



28 

693 

Z! 

6871 

DAKOTA 

North Dakota 

32 


32 


South Dakota 

19 


19 


Montana 

4 


4 



55 

6738 

55 

6782 

EASTERN 

New York 

4 


4 


Ontario 

6 


6 


Pennsylvania 

4 


4 



14 

2410 

14 

2451 

NORTHERN 

Alberta 

20 


20 


British Col, 

1 


1 


Manitoba 

7 


7 


Saskatchewan 

19 


21 



47 

5410 

49 

5585 


( 27 ) 





























) 















- 183 


TABLE 3-y 

NORTH AMERICAN (German) BAPTIST CONFERENCES 
and 

LOCATION OF CHURCHES aec. to 

STATES and ElOVINCES (» f ) 
(Continued) 


CONFERENCES 

No. of 

No. of 

No. of 

No. of 


Churches 

Members 

Churches 

Members 


19 4 5 

1 9 

5 0 

NORTHWESTERN 

Illinois 

1 


1 


Iowa 

11 


11 


Minnesota 

9 


9 


Wisconsin 

16 


16 



37 

5609 

37 

5899 

PACIFIC 

British Col. 

4 


4 


California 

6 


8 


Idaho 

2 


1 


Montana 

1 


1 


Oregon 

7 


7 


Washington 

5 


5 



25 

4458 

26 

“594T 

SOUTHERN 

Alabama. 

1 


1 


Louisiana 

1 


1 


Texas 

11 


10 



13 

1203 

12 

“n?6“ 

SOUTHWESTERN 

Colorado 

1 


1 


Kansas 

11 


11 


Nebraska 

4 


4 


Oklahoma 

6 


6 



22 

2593 

22 

2586 

TOTAL 

266 

39284 

267 

41560 


( 27 ) 










































- 184 - 


Baptist group grew approximately 11,000 members stronger. However, 
more interesting yet was their rapid growth during the sixty years 
beginning with the middle of the last century when the small group 
consisting of eight churches and 405 members grew into a denomination 
of 288 churches and 30,786 members. Tables 3-x and 3-y represent the 
areas over which the local conferences extend and the number of churches 
and membership of 1945 and 1950 in the U.S.A. and the provinces of the 
Dominion. 

SOCIETIES AND INSTITUTIONS. 

With the evolution of conferences there was also a gradual 
emergence of societies and institutions. These bodies were organized 
in response to specific needs. Eventually, they were incorporated and 
now function as separate units each one having its constitution and 
bylaws and legal status within the state or province where they are 
located. Moreover, they are represented in the General Council, the 
co-ordinating and executive instrument of the denomination, and meet 
triennially with the General Conference for concerted planning and 
action. 

The Publication Society . 

The first of these bodies to be organized was the Publication 
Society in 1865. Five years later it obtained its charter, and in 1871 
it was relocated from its original locality, Cincinnati, to Cleveland, 
Ohio. Men such as Fhilip W. Bickel, Herman Schulte, Julius C. 

Haselhuhn, were outstanding during the early history of the Society (31). 
The primary purpose of its founding was the publication of "Der Sendbote", 
n The Cheerful Sower ,? , and religious tracts to facilitate missionary 



















f 


. 

■■ ■ . • 1 ' " 
■ I ■ ■ .'■> ' ' ■“ I' 
















- 185 - 


activities among the German speaking population. Other publications 
were added. Some of them have been continued to the present date, 
while others were substituted by still newer ones. At present, the 
organization is more indispensible to denominational needs than ever. 
Educational Institutions . 

The inception of direct educational efforts for the German 
Baptist cause can be traced back to 1850. The movement, however, did 
not originate within German Baptist circles although the churches 
welcomed a trained ministry and refused to tolerate religious cranks 
and fanatics (33). It was a group of staunch American Baptists, chiefly 
of Rochester, N.T., who, when founding the University of Rochester and 
a theological seminary, realized the missionary possibilities among 
the German churches and the lack of adequatly trained leadership. As 
a result, Zenas Freeman, Corresponding Secretary of the American 
Baptists, arranged for the admittance of German young men to the 
Rochester Theological Seminary in 1852. 

This was both a generous and prudent attempt from the view¬ 
point of missionary endeavor. Unfortunately, the class of German 
students soon discovered that they could not keep up their work because 
of language difficulties. Only a few succeeded while the majority gave 
up their studies as a hopeless enterprise. The situation was remedied 
in 1858 when the Board of the New York Baptist Union arranged for the 
appointment of a German teacher in the person of August Rauschenbusch 
and the establishment of a German Theological Department. 

The German churches at this time could contribute nothing 
except their ablest young men. American Baptists shouldered entirely 











- 186 - 


the financial responsibilities. Some individuals even responded with 
several endowment funds for the German Department. Only later were the 
German churches capable of taking over their financial obligations 
toward the seminary (31). 

In the course of time, the German Department expanded to a 
stage where it was necessary to increase the teaching staff. In 1872 
Hermann M. Schaeffer was appointed as an assistant to Rauschenbusch. 
Schaeffer was an aggressive and energetic man. Chiefly because of his 
efforts, the German Department was able to secure its own building and 
equipment. Five years later the Department became an incorporated 
institution under the name of M The Educational Union of the German 
Baptists of North America”. In 1884 a third teacher was added to the 
faculty, namely, Jacob S. Gubelman. Thus the institution grew to keep 
pace with the requirements of a growing denomination. In the fall of 
1949 it was relocated to Sioux Falls, South Dakota, also in accordance 
with existing needs. The teaching staff at present numbers five 
professors and the student body has a membership of approximately fifty. 

Of recent years the educational efforts have been extended by 
founding the Christian Training Institute of Edmonton. The prime mover 
of this institution was E.P. Wahl who is known as founder and president 
of the Institute. This school is primarily a Bible college having no 
recognised educational status in the Province of Alberta at present. 
However, in the summer of 1949 a government endorsed high school depart¬ 
ment was added to the Institute. During the past school year, the 
studentbody numbered about 125 young men and women. The teaching staff 
consists of nine members. 


" 


• 

• v • r: 


V ■. r sl -'. , ' ' - -V r : "• r I ; ;■ l- ' . 'D-r-' $ 

• . - # • ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ • ■ • ■ ' ■ • • • ’ 

. ■ ■ ■ . ■ ' 

V ■ 


■ 

i- 

I; >;!' • ' • r ‘ T"- 

. • . . • • 




; 


... ’ 


• 

' 

— ' •' • ‘ ■ " r 

• • ' ;• : ,r • ; • >r 

,. v . V ... ... . : ,, ,, ■ 





1 • • - ‘ . 



. 


. 


• 




■ 


. r ■ ■ -v" ■ Vy- 


‘v ‘ ■' Y' " . ' . :. 

■ *r i /. : :j 

. 1 





- 187 - 


The General Missionary Society . 

Perhaps the most potent of all the organizational bodies in 
the denomination was the General Missionary Society. It was founded 
during a special session at Indianapolis, Ind. Representatives from 
the four existing conferences at that time drafted the resolutions and 
the constitution of the Society. In autumn, at the session of the 
Seventh General Conference at Cleveland, the action was endorsed and 
the Society became an official organization. As a result, the mission¬ 
ary activities of the local conferences now became unified and re¬ 
enforced by a central body specifically designed for that purpose. 

To begin with, there was considerable apprehension that the 
authority on varied missionary activities would be vested in one or a 
few individuals, depriving the local conferences of their rights and 
privileges. In time, the fear of a possible dictatorship disappeared 
because of an ingenious plan whereby each local conference elects its 
own missionary committee which, in turn, delegates one or two members, 
depending on the size of the conference, to represent this local body 
in the General Missionary Committee. This Committee, under the chair¬ 
manship of the General Missionary Secretary, who is elected every three 
years at the General Conference, has jurisdiction of the entire mission¬ 
ary activities both at home and abroad (33). Like other societies, this 
organization is incorporated in order to give it legal status. 

The activities of the Society have been divided into three 
major parts, l) There is the Home Mission department. This branch 
supports and supervises missionary pastors, evangelists, colporters, 
secretaries of young people ? s and Sunday School work, as well as other 






’■ 









Cr 








, 






oooo.o ' ooj'o-p f.o i l 


■ . ■ ’ 

. • 1 • 1 • ■ ’ 




. : 


'vyr ■■■’. 




' 




r 


» iT" • ) 


ode 


r 


r 0 


0 0' -O O' 1 




n r.r f v;v 


r •; 




• • jo' 
















- 188 - 


home mission projects. In recent years the activities of the department 
have been extended to Spanish speaking centers in the U.S.A. and to some 
Indian reservations in Alberta. 2 ) The branch for European Missions 
rendered assistance to the Baptist cause in Russia, Poland, some Baltic 
and the Balkan states. Because of the war, most of these mission fields 
have been lost to the German Baptists of North America. In their place, 
however, the Society carried on European relief vrark on a large scale. 

3) The department for Foreign Missions attempts to Christianize arid 
civilize non-Germanic and non-European races. It sponsors an extensive 
program in the Gameroons, Western Africa. There are at present thirty 
two missionaries engaged in preaching, teaching, and medical work, 
serving a population of roughly 100,000, from eight mission centers. 

The two most outstanding individuals who have directed the 
Society in an aggressive program of missions and denominational enter¬ 
prise were J.A. Schulte and William Kuhn. These two men served a span 
of sixty three years. Since 1946 H.G. Dymrnel functioned in the capacity 
of General Missionary Secretary, and beginning March, 1951, Richard 
Schilke, an alumnus of the University of Alberta, accepted this position. 

Space does not permit elaboration on other German Baptist 
denominational institutions and societies. Each one of them, however, 
has played a more or less conspicuous part in the extension of the 
German Baptist cause, and therefore deserve at least mentioning. There 
are thus, the Homes for the Aged, four in the U.S.A. and one in the city 
of Medicine Hat, Alberta; a Children’s Home in St. Joseph, Michigan; 

The Baptist Youth and Sunday School Union; The Woman’s Missionary Union; 
and one Girls Home in New York City and one in Chicago. Each one has 








") ■" ' ' /i ■ : 


O ':' 'DO 


* 


fr . 




■ 


& 




' 


r 


, 


) 






? 


@ M '10' 


oono; r no 


. , 






■ ' f) J ' ; (| 


f 







- 189 - 


made its contribution toward the building of the denomination in one 
way or another. 

THE GENERAL COUNCIL. 

Like other bodies, the General.Council evolved gradually and, 
in time, became indispensable to denominational polity. Its purpose is 
to function as a coordinating instrument of the affiliated societies of 
the General Conference, advising and directing more than executing 
existing policies. It is composed, a) of the officers of the General 
Conference with the moderator-elect as chairman of the Council, b) of 
one representative from each of the cooperating Societies, such as the 
Publication Society, the Educational Union etc., c) of two represent¬ 
atives, one minister and one layman, from each of the nine local confer¬ 
ences, and d) of five additional members elected by the General Confer¬ 
ence (29). 


The Council has full power to act on behalf of the General 
Conference for the interim period from one conference session to the 
next. It deals, for instance, with all matters of policy, promotional 
plans, methods of raising finances, and the acquisition of property. 

It also distributes monies, appoints sub-committees, and engages 
individuals for church and missionary activities. In short, it is the 
centralizing and unifying body of the entire denominational enterprise* 
The various plans and policies of the Council are executed under the 
direction of the General Executive Secretary, a position held at present 
by Frank H. Woyke of Forest Park, Ill. 


nr- ■ r - r: -j; 'v[! ' v ’ ' 1 ' : '> i / J V tt i ‘ ■ ' 




•: ■ . '' ' ■ ‘ •• , 

: ■ ■ • • v. ‘ • ■ ' ■ ’ ' • •• 

, ■ • ... . ., • ■ , , • t 

r • >. • r •• • 1 

' ' t 

' ^ , .. , . ' 

v .‘i ' ' ’ ' 

- ‘ : ‘ ' <> « ' * 

■ I ' ' ■ ' ' t 

. 


odd” Oi, " h ' ' '' r '' '’■" ‘ ■ 


, 

, 

....... • ' 1 

„ • • ' 

■ 









- 190 - 


APPENDIX G 

THE ADJUSTMENT INVENTORY 

The Adjustment Inventory, by Hugh M. Bell, is a psychological 
test which appeared in two forms, one for students and one for adult 
subjects. The Student Form consists of four, and the Adult Form of five 
subtests. Although the separate items in each form are different, the 
categories are identical for both Inventories with the exception of the 
last category which is absent in the Student Form. 


CONTENT. 


The five separate variables measured by the Inventory can per¬ 
haps best be stated in the author ? s own words (3) (4)s 

”a. Home Adjustment. Individuals scoring 
high tend to be unsatisfactorily adjusted to their 
home surroundings. Low scores indicate satisfactory 
home adjustment. 

b. Health Adjustment. High scores indicate 
unsatisfactory health adjustment; low scores, satis¬ 
factory adjustment. 

c. Social Adjustment. Individuals scoring 
high tend to be submissive and retiring in their social 
contacts. Individuals with low scores are aggressive 
in social contact. 

d. Emotional Adjustment. Individuals 
with high scores tend to be unstable emotionally. 

Persons with low scores tend to be emotionally stable. 

e. Occupational Adjustment. 

Individuals with high scores tend to be dissatisfied 
with their present occupations. Those who make low 
scores tend to be well pleased with their present jobs.” 

These five scales, constituting the adult battery, comprise 160 items. 

The Student Form consists of the first four scales and 140 statements. 










' . ' . . 



vo ■..; n -i v;- -• - n ".; ■ .. ; f, - ; f> '■‘: >•, 


i ; ^ r ^ • ■ 7 •. J’ -■ ’ '■ '•* ' r ■ 

»’ r 1 •: • . ‘ r : ' . " V\ " t 






- 191 - 


ADMINISTRATION AND SCORING. 

The Inventory is self-administering. The items, in question 
form, are answered by drawing a circle around "Yes 11 or "No" or "?" in 
the margin before each item. Although the test can be administered in 
less than 30 minutes there is no time limit. Scoring is done rapidly by 
means of a translucent stencil which is placed over the answer sheet. 

The sum total of the circled responses for each scale represents the 
subject's scores. 

NORMS. 

In order to facilitate interpretation of each scale the author 
of the Inventory has established the following norms for men and women 
(3) (4): 

"Excellent" 

"Good" 

"Average" 

"Unsatisfactory" (or "retiring" for the social scale) 
"Very unsatisfactory" (or "very retiring" for the 

social scale). 

Each descriptive designation is assigned a given range of scores which 
differ both from subtest to subtest and between men and women. Means 
and standard deviations for the population upon which the norms were 
based are also given in the manuals. 

According to S.J. Beck (7) the norms for the Adult Form were 
obtained from what appeared to him a satisfactory representation of 
people, ranging in age from 20 to 50 years. The majority were between 
25 and 40? and were selected from adult extension classes in California 
and New Jersey, Counceling Service at the Y.M.C.A. in Seattle, a school 
at the Y.M.C.A. in Chicago, and adult classes in industrial psychology 
in Boston. Tentative norms for the Student Form (4) were derived from 





- 192 - 


high school freshmen, sophomores, juniors, and seniors at Chico and 
Redwood City, California; from college freshmen and seniors at State 
College, Chico, Calif., juniors at State College, San Jose, Calif., and 
freshmen and sophomores at Menlo Junior College, Menlo Park, Calif. 

RELIABILITY. 

The reliability for each of the variables or categories was 
determined by a correlation of odd-even items. The 84 adult subjects 
used for this purpose were employed. They were of both sexes ranging in 
age from 23 to 28. The 258 student subjects were college freshmen and 
juniors. The coefficients of reliability thus found are ( 3 ) (4 )2 



Adult Form 

Student 

Home Adjustment .. 

.91 

.89 

Health Adjustment .. 

.81 

.80 

Social Adjustment . 

.88 

.89 

Emotional Adjustment . 

.91 

.85 

Occupational Adjustment .. 

.85 


Total ..... 

.94 



Accordingly, reliabilities for each scale are higher than for most 
questionaire type of tests. The total scale with a score of .94 for 
adults and .93 for students is, in the light of D,G. Humm’s calculations 
(7) 66/0 better than chance. 

A.E. Traxler (40) found in a study of 43 high school pupils that 
the correlations are rather low between the scores of the Inventory and 
teachers 1 judgments regarding the same aspects. However, four out of 
six correlations are significant statistically. On the ether hand, the 
reliability of the two forms of the Inventory are quite satisfactory as 
compared to the reliability of tests of achievement and academic aptitude. 

VALIDITY. 

In his attempt at validating the battery the author followed two 







"';C' ( 









r 


;'/ { •. i "• 


i m: 






■r 




-f i -f f-V 


r « - ’ 




f 


' 





r. r..r r 


< 






- 193 - 


distinct methods (3). One of these consisted in the selection of only 
those items of test material which clearly differentiated between the 
upper and the lower 15? of subjects along the distribution curve. The 
second nethod called for a selection of ”very well” and ’’very poorly” 
adjusted individuals by specialists in adult counseling and the admin¬ 
istration of the Inventory in order to determine the degree of differ¬ 
entiation. The author enumerates nine counselors and counseling bureaus 
who assisted him in finding extreme cases. He claims (3) that the critical 
ratios based on his validation attempts indicate that ”the Inventory clear¬ 
ly differentiated between the extreme groups selected by the counselors in 
all five areas of personal adjustment”. 

Subsequent attempts do not show always clear cut results. There 
are both positive and negative findings. 

Huth A. Pedersen (32) in her study of 380 college freshmen women 
found that a comparison of entrance autobiographies and the personal 
student records in the dean*s files with the Inventory showed no sign¬ 
ificant difference between the emotional scores of emotionally adjusted 
and maladjusted individuals. There is, however, a positive correlation 
between a) the home adjustment scale and student autobiographies, b) the 
health adjustment scale and autobiographies and personal records, and 
c) the social adjustment scale and the ratings of the social advisor. 

A.E. Traxler (40) found that there is a positive correlation between the 
results of the Inventory and teachers 1 ratings, but that this correlation 
is low. 

A study by Charles J. Marsh (24) of about 1000 college freshmen 
and sophomore women indicates that ”the home adjustment scale...is more 
useful in predicting social and emotions!maladjustment...than the social 



* 

' , • ' ■ ■ ; ' : '■ “ ■’ ■ ' ' ' '■■■■; 

* ? yT r nvy •.■•vry n i\ r yy rywyyv) n 'ty 1 "'" :\y 










1 


XyT;! -''"r-.,;; fv' ‘ y-.T;;fv; ,i it 

i'l ■ .,t ? :■ v.V- ■; ■ 


. 1 




nr f, 


r .r ■■ 




■ 

' 

' 

: - • ■ : - , t I!I T • 

. . ' 

• 1 • ■ 

•: C 7 b • I b f>o:;i \ ;.it t y j ’• ■' • 

v : (f d . ' '■ ; - ,: ’ 






■:! ) ■' ' i 






* ■ '• 'i 7 - v • ’ 

. 




• hr 






-■ -r,,;H V f->:r Litn:,. ■ 71:.' .'-o uVv .n 






- 194 - 


and emotional scale”. He also found that the home adjustment scale 
becomes ’’sensitive” to subjects only whose condition of maladjustment 
has become critical. 

On the other hand, J.P. Guildford and Doncaster G. Humm (7) 
claim that the Inventory is an effective instrument in discriminating 
between well and poorly adjusted individuals especially in extreme cases. 
There is a better than chance ratio of from 19 to 1 in home adjustment 
to 499 to 1 in social adjustment. 

A comparative study of the MMPI with the Adjustment Inventory 
by the Lavells and Doris Marvin (20) by means of a specially constructed 
rating scale showed a) correlations to be higher for the Minnesota 
Inventory with the rating scale than for Bell’s battery, and b) that the 
Minnesota instrument was more discriminatory in its capacity for screening 
the lower extreme cases from the deviant group at large. 

APPLICABILITY. 

In Beil’s opinion (3) the Inventory has been useful in counseling 
where personality problems have arisen as a result of poor home, health, 
social, emotional, and occupational maladjustment. It is applicable to 
both sexes, and lends itself for comparative studies of individuals 
because of the relatively high reliability of its separate measures. 

Raymond B. Cattell (7) criticises the Inventory because it calls 
for perfect self-knowledge and absolute honesty as well as a wide under¬ 
standing of personality which only a few subjects possess. He also objects 
to the term ’’emotional adjustment” as a specific category since all 
adjustment is emotional. On the other hand, John G. Darley (7) maintains 
that the test is capable of locating a high percentage of adjustment 




i'i i> 










r 






r 




' , ' 




' 


• ■ 






3 



. 













' 






- 195 - 


difficulties prevalent in clinical cases, and that it appears most 
practical as a supplementary part of a battery of personality measure¬ 
ments, S.J. Beck (7) recommends the questionaire because it provides 
n much more satisfaction than most personality inventories". It is 
clinically useful because of the nature of its items and because of its 
approach to the entire personality. 

THE MINNESOTA MULTIPHA5IC PERSONALITY INVENTORY 

The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, generally 
referred to as the MMPI, is a technique of investigation developed at the 
University of Minnesota by S.R. Hathaway and J.C. McKinley. It was 
published in 1943, and at present appears in two forms: the card and the 
booklet form. It is an objective psychometiric tool designed to provide 
information regarding a number of personality variables in one single test. 

CONTENT. 

More specifically described, the MMPI consists of 566 statements 
and a specially designed scoring sheet for recording the testees 1 responses. 
The items appear in simple language and cover collectively a wide range of 
subjects including physical conditions, morale, vocational interests, 
social attitudes and others. These subjects are divided into categories 
which constitute twelve different scales. The significance for each scale 
may be summarized from the author*s manual (17) as follows: 

The Question Score (?) is the sura total of items to which the response 
"Cannot say" is given. It implies essentially a refusal to answer certain 
statements in the inventory, and, therefore, indicates distortions of the 
profile. A large Question score invalidates all other scores. 

The Lie Score (l) represents the attempts at falsifying scores in order to 





' c h > ■ > ;; : : '. ' / i' '' ' ' ■' 

. ' ■ ’ 

. ' ‘ ' • ■: ■: . :• ' 

• : • 1 " • 










' 




< 






,) :• ,i; v . o. •.* ; ' •'/ ' 


r 




' 


•r , :• ■ ■ 




. 

, ' ' ■ I . . . ■ ' ' ■ 

, , . ’ 1 : ■ . :• ' r , . * • ‘ 



- 196 - 


appear socially more acceptable. A high L-score indicates that the 
actual scores are probably higher than those obtained. 

The Validity Icore (F) checks the validness of the entire record. If 
there is a high F-score the subject either may have been careless in his 
responses or he may not have understood the items. The record therefore 
loses its validity. 

The Correction Scale (K) is intended to sharpen the discriminatory power 
of five of the clinical or diagnostic scales, i.e. Hs, Pd, Ft, Sc, and Ma, 
by making normal individuals appear more normal. 

The Hypochondriasis Scale (Hs) measures the degree of abnormal preoccupation 
with physical functions and bodily health. It segregates individuals 
complaining of vague pains and disorder which usually have no organic basis. 
The Depression Scale (D) measures the depth of depression characterized by 
poor morale, a feeling of uselessness, lack of self-confidence, and 
pessimism. 

The Hysteria Scale (Ply) is a measure of the degree to which mental and 
emotional strain has been converted into physiological symptoms. These 
conversion symptoms may either be general or specific. 

The Psychopathic Deviate Scale (Pd) detects individuals characterized by 
a lack of profound emotional response, the inability to learn from exper¬ 
iences, and a defiance of social mores by lying, stealing, sexual immorality, 
and excessive use of alcohol, or drug addiction. 

The Interest Scale (Mf) is intended to measure masculine and feminine 
interests. 

The Paranoia Scale (Pa) measures disorder among individuals who are marked 
by a high degree of suspiciousness, oversensitivity, and who have delusions 
of persecution. 












- 197 - 


The Psychasthenia Scale (Ft) segregates subjects who are suffering from 
phobias or compulsive behavior. The phobias may include a wide variety 
of fears of things or situations. Compulsion may either be explicit, 
revealing itself in behavior such as excessive washing of hands, or it 
may be implicit in the form of obsessive ideas. 

The Schizophrenia Scale (Sc) sorts out individuals with disorders 
characterized by withdrawal from outward reality and by inappropriate 
and bizarre thoughts, moods, and behavior. 

The Hypomania Scale (Ma) measures pathological behavior marked by over¬ 
productivity in thought and action. 

The first three are known as the validating scales, while the 
other nine constitute the diagnostic categories. The K-scale was added 
later and published in 194&. 

ADMINISTRATION. 

Testing procedures are simple. The subject is provided with a 
booklet containing the test items and a scoring sheet, and is told to 
read the instructions. If necessary, the examiner can further explain or 
demonstrate. The subject then will fill in with heavy, black marks the 
vertically dotted spaces behind each statement either under the column 
n T n or ,, F U . A statement which cannot be answered true or false is 3e ft 
blank. The subject must not talk while working nor should he be watched, 

SCORING, 

Scoring of the responses to the booklet form of the MMPI is done 
by means of specially designed stencils. Each category has one or two 
stencils which, for hand scoring, are perforated and when placed over the 
recording sheet expose the responses characteristic of a given category. 





■ 


- ’ ' 

'■ ’ 1 


■ 


'• • . 


' /' _ ' . 

r . ■ ' ■ ” ■ ■ 

.... 


■ 








■ t 




~ 






’ : 






r : c; 




. . 






■ 

■" - ■ •' • < • 

if i l ' : ■ l ■ ' ‘ 






, 

' 


' . ■ : ' 

vp. .t ■ ■ - ■ ■ 






. 




.... ; • ' ' . : ' • 1 ' ' ’ r ' •' ■’ 

• ■ • ' • ... 









- 198 - 


Then the marks are counted and recorded under the proper score. The 
score of the K-factor then is added to some categories in certain 
proportions as given in the instructions (18). Finally, the results are 
plotted on the profile sheet. 

STANDARDIZATION. 

Normative data of the Inventory were derived from approximately 
700 subjects. These were individuals visiting the University Hospital, 
and represent a cross section of Minnesota residents (17). Sampling of 
subjects for this purpose was done from an age range of 16 to 55 of both 
sexes. Additional data were gathered from 250 precollege and college 
students and from other special groups, such as epileptic and tuber¬ 
culosis patients and 7/PA workers. 

RELIABILITY. 

The reliability coefficients of the various categories range, 
according to the authors 1 findings, from .71 to .83 (17). These results 
were obtained by testing and retesting of 40 normal subjects at intervals 
of one week to several years. 

VALIDITY. 

A great amount of data are available on the validity of the MMPI. 
The author’s findings showed a positive correspondence between high 
inventory scores and clinical estimates ,f in more than 60 per cent of new 
psychiatric admissions” (17). Later studies have not always shown 
positive results. 

TJoodrow W. Morris (26) in his comparative study of 277 deviant 
subjects and a group of 43 normal individuals, found the Inventory useful 


. 

• • . • V ’ if, v V •: • rjfi 

■ . . , f - . 


' 


' 


... ■ ... 


or 


•T 








■ : 




r 


. 


r ■ ■ 


r 




■ 




• ; ■/ ' 0 : 

. • " 

1 

i ■ r v S' i . .? V ! '0 -i ?, \ 

- 

- 

. !* r ‘ 


- 199 - 


only as a gross screening instrument the results of which, he urged, 
should be used with considerable caution* He claimed that the nosolog¬ 
ical groups studied could not be differentiated one from the other on the 
basis of the test* All abnormal subjects scored above seventy under the 
Depression category, while only borderline normal people could be diff¬ 
erentiated from seriously pathological groups* Moreover, a study of 98 
V.A. mental hospital patients by H. Rubin (34) suggested that the Inventory 
has little diagnostic value. The K-scale hinders father than facilitates 
the discriminatory capacity of the test on certain individuals* The Pd 
scale indicates some diagnostic significance* Only the Sc scale diff¬ 
erentiated between the four deviant groups used in this study: chronic 
alcoholics without psychosis, psychopaths, psychoneurotics, and psychotics* 

A*L. Benton and K.A. Probst (5) found more positive results while 
comparing test scores of 76 patients with psychiatric ratings. For 
psychopathic deviate, paranoia, and schizophrenia trends there was a 
significant degree of correspondence* Agreement between ratings and test 
scores for hypochondriasis, depression, hysteria, feminity-masculinity, 
and psychasthenia was low. 

A preponderant amount of findings, however, confirm the validity 
of the MMPI as a diagnostic instrument. 

Lt. Gol. H,Q* Schmidt (35), in comparing a diviant group of 121 
subjects of various degrees of psychopathy, neurosis, and psychosis with 
a group of 98 individuals, found that the results of the Inventory and 
psychiatric diagnosis seemed to agree. Positive results were also found 
In two separate studies by H*G. Gouph* In one of the studies (13), using 
a group of 136 white and Negro soldiers with neurosis, psychopathy, and 
psychosis, and a normal group of 27, he found that their MMFI scores were 





, ' ; , . ‘ • .;h yt " ; \t ‘:.f, n \ 


v ’■ : ‘ • : i ' ‘ ' v ' !/.-’■ •. ’ ■; 1 > 

: > ■ : \ I f 

_ _ ' . ■ - ; ' . - 












b‘ -i' 




: ■■ v 


■ 

’ ' ■ '■ r ■ ’ •' . t < 

X 

\ ' 


. 

. . 

< r ,1) 

' 


. 


■ 










■ . 

. 


p 




■■ • . f • ■ • 

• • , •• l ■ •’ ■ 









- 200 - 


markedly different. The profile of the psychoneurotic subjects consisted 
of a high unequal neurotic triad with the depression category reaching a 
T-score of over 80 and the psychotic scores considerably lower. The 
psychotic subjects revealed a moderately high psychotic curve with prac¬ 
tically equal peaks for Pa, Pt, and Sc. He also found that the Inventory 
differentiated between mild and severe neurosis and psychosis. He 
eventually arrived at the conclusion that the MMPI has been discredited 
at times because the scoring categories were interpreted separately instead 
of in terms of patterns as they should be. In the other study by Gouph 
(14) 11 subjects: psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, psychiatric 
social workers, and personnel consultants simulated the Inventory scores 
and had them compared to the scores of 57 severe psychoneurotics and 13 
paranoid schizophereniacs. The conclusions were similar. 

To use one more significant example, the findings of F.J. Hampton 
(16) also confirm the validity of the MMPI as an objective psychometric 
tool. Ninetysix girls with a T-score of 70 and above out of a group of 
407 female students tested at Western College, and referred to psychiatric 
guidance, manifested the following deviant personality patterns: 

1) Psychiatrically diagnosed paranoid schizphrenia showed on 
the MMPI high scores of paranoia, psychasthenia, and 
schizophrenia^ 

2) psychopathic personality was demonstrated by an elevated 
score of psychopathic deviate and hypomania! 

3) the neurotic trend was clearly shown by a high score on the 
neurotic triad: depression, hypochondriasis, and hysteria. 

While the main objection to the MMPI is its failure to achieve 
differential diagnosis, the above studies and other attempts have estab¬ 
lished the Inventory as a useful clinical tool for segregating deviant 
from normal people. Every study of MMPI records has shown significant 
differences between clinical and normal groups. 


- ; : 



■ ' ' • ' ‘ '■ r . V ' * ' I 


\ y ■ . f . / 













* 

t 





















, 








• 














- 


* : 

* 1 

• 






. . • ... '.r 

' ’ ' 






i f ‘ ! ' f 

■ ‘ * 

u 










. f ' x 

- 


, 

■ 



! 
















































