














































For Reference 

























UKIV^RSITY OF aLBSRTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AMD SCISMCS3 

(THAOLOSY) 


*8, the undersigned, hereby certify that is 
have read the within thesis entitled "The Personality 
of Sod f n submitted by Lawrence 0, Seiber* £*n*, in 
fulfilment of the requirements fox 5 the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity, and we hereby recommend its 
acceptance* 


) 

) 

) 

) 

) 

iSdm jnt on,) 

Aifesrts, ) 

J 

| 

) 

) 

April 13, j 
1933. i 





TH3 P3K301UUTY OF CrOD 


A Dissertation 


by 

Lawrence S* Seiber, 3*A« 

In candidacy for the B* B* Degree* 


for 

Department of Philosophy of Religion 
under Dr* a* 3. futtle. 


April, 1933 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/personalityofgodOOseib 

















. 


■ 








BIBLIQGiwiPHY 


Alexander, G. , 11 Space, Time and Baity." 

Grifford Lectures, 1916-18, Vol. 1,11* 

Barry, F* R. , "Christianity and the Hew World." 

Br ovv n, W • a* , "C hri s ti an T he o 1 ogy i n Out 1 i ne. ” 

Clarice, . N. , "Outline of Christian Theology." 

Hueicen, R., "Christianity and the Hew Idealism." 

Suek.n, R., "The Truth of Religion." 

Fiska, J., "The Idea of Goa. 1 

GrenstaG, L. W*, "Psychology anti God." 

Haldane , J. 3 ., "The Philosophical Basis of Biology." 

King, X., "The development of Religion." 

Matthews, w. R., "God in Christian experience." 

Morgan, C. L., "emergent Evolution*" 

Gifford Lectures* 19BB-ES* 

Morgan, C. a., "Life, Mind and Matter." 

Otto, A., "The Idea of the Holy." 

Swain, R. L., "What and Where is God?" 

Tuttle, a. 3. Christian Theolo y Class Lecture notes, 

19S1-32. 

Webb, C. C. J., "God and personality. R 
Giffora nectu:os, 1918-19. 

Wright, Um K., "A Student’s Philosophy of Rail-ion." 

























»> • 








. 








■ 



























































. 

■ 

■ 

. 

. 





















' 








































CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 

(1) Reason for subject chosen — Page 1. 

( 2 ) Scope of the subject 

BODY 

I TEA HISTORY W THu IDA^ Or Q0L Page 2. 

(1) Primitive man’s world outlook 

(2) The numinous, definition and nature 

(3) The Mystoriurn Tr emend urn . 

(4) Mana 

(5) Animism 

(6) SpiritisBi 

(?) Nature worship 

(8) ancestor worship. 

(9) The evolution of deities 

(10) Monotheism 

II TE.il PHILOSOPHIC^ B^SIS Page 14 

(1) The problem 

(2/ The proof of an external world 

(3) Behind the external world what? 

(4) The idea of Power 

(5) Three altarnatives 

(6) Hmeuuarent evolution according tos 

a) Alexander 
(b) Lloyd Morgan 


PAi i30N.fi 

LI TY, H0^L« 

aSju LI ¥ IN A Pap e £ 

(1) 

The history o.i the word ’Person# f 

(2) 

The natui 

e of human personality. 


la) 

Objective 


U) 

Subj jctiva 

(Si 

Divine Pe. 

rsquality 


(a) 

anthropomorphic elements 


(e) 

Incone eIvabi1ity 


( o > 

The self ana the not-seIf 


(d) 

Unity 


U) 

S i If'-know ledge 


(f) 

Purpose 



Love 


(4) The 3upra-P;rsonal 


CONCLUSION 


Pa e 40 





( 1 ) 


INTRODUCTION 


The battle which has ra id about the appa ant 
conflict between religion and : hilosophy and science 
is a meia skirmish compared to the war which will be 
fought over the question of the personality of Qo&. 
ouch is the thought of Dr. Huxley in ointin toward 
one of the problems which va.ll have to be considered 
by philosophy, materialism has well ni h run its 
course and philosox^hy and science is now makin bold 
to say that behind all appearances there Is a spiritual 
source with which we have to reckon. 

In this dissertation we shall attempt an appreciation 
of the problem here suggested and try to pain some idea 
of the Personality, of Jod. Having traced through the 
history of man the idea of G©& we shall give the 
philosophic background for the discussion of Divine 
Personality. ds should .remember throughout the discussion 
that '/e apeak only from the Christian point of view* 



UJ 

1 TiU HIJTOuY Of 'Aid, In^, Ji- .sQj 

a strange mixture of feeling - of kinshi and 
estrangement - crowds in upon us when wo realize that we 
have in the intuitions of primitive man glimpses of what 
fox uj are philosophical truths founded upon experience 
interpretations. Primitive man soon came to the notion 
that the world he was li*in in was ore than what he 
could see ana feel. He was impressed by the forces 
about him ana he was terrifies because he could not 
distin uish them, from himself, these were beyond and 
behind appearances ana caused a response in himself 
which he could not understand* 

Lookin in upon himself, without being able to 
translate his feelings into a concept, primitive man hud 
what we may call the feeling of aumen. this feeling or 
mental state - a. reflection in the mine in terms of 
failing -was "perfectly sui ;enoris and irreducible to 
any other; am, like every elementary datum, while it 
admits of being discussed, it cannot be strictly defined, 
(li ‘The numinous is that unique ori inal overplus of 
feeling which we associate with the idea of holine m when 
the ethical or rational factors have been subtracted. 

It is a feeling of dependence. It is the emotion of a 
creature, abased and overwhelmed by its own nothingness, 
in contra t to that which is supreme ana above all 
creatures* You have the numinous re vealed in Abraham's 
woras when he pleads wit.. *od for the men of doaom: 

(lj Otto - Idea of the Holy, p, 7. 












■ 


. 


































. 

' 













( 3 ) 


"Behold now, I have taken upon me to apeak uato the 
Lord, which am but dust and ashes." (1) This creature - 
feeling is the first subjective accompaniernent and effect 
of another feeling-element in itself refering to an 
object outside the self - the numinous. 

"The nature of the numinous is such th^t it rips 
or stirs the human mind with this ana that determinate 
affective state." {£) We must give now an indication of 
these states. There i3 an element which occupies the 
mind with a bewildering strength and if we follow it u 
we finu it in rites and ceremonies, in the atmosphere 
that clings to religious monuments, buildings, temples 
and churches. This element wa may call appropriately 
myatariurn Tremonduai. The feeling of it may come as a 
sudden eruption from the depths of the soul, or as the 
hushed trembling of a ere bare JLu the presence of - of 
whom or what? - that which is a mystery inexpressible, 
beyond conception, extraordinary and above all other 
creatures. (3) 

The first stir of the mysterim tremendum begins 
in the feeling of something uncanny, eerie, or weird. 

This feeling forms the starting point for the history 
of all religious development. All explanations of 
religion must recognise this fact. The shuddering, 

(1) Genesis 18:£7 

(£} Otto - Idea of the Holy, p.l£. 

{3} ioxa, p.13. 



which is much more than natural fear, implies that the 
mysterious is already beginning to loom before the mina, 
to touch the feelings. At the highest level of all, where 
the worship of Boa is purest, this element does not 
disappear. The shudder has lost its crazy and bewila ;r- 
ing note, but not the ineffable something that holds 
the mind. It has become a mystical awe and sets free 
the creature-feeling. 

The complementary stir of feeling is contained in 
the second part of the tem - tramendum. It is a tremor, 

a baffling and puzzling property of the noman, not 

/ 

occasioned by natural fear b .it by orge. It is like a 

hidaen force of nature, eleetiricity, discharging itself 

- / 

upon any one who comes too near. On the surface orge, 

or wrath, appears as mere caprice, but it is a natural 
and rational expression of the Mysterious. va can only 
express it by the aid. of a naive analogy from the domain 
of natural experience, in this case from the ordinary 
passional life of man* Orge is an ideogram of a unique 
emotional moment sin ularly awe-inspiring# It is something 
supra-rational prompting to a sense of tremor that n 
na t ural ang e r e o uld arouse.” (1j 

The absolute unapproachability ti is felt carries 
with it a sense of overpoweringness and urgency. Because 
the numinous is beyona primitive man ana yet exciting 
within him a sense of something uncanny he cannot but 
(1) ibid, p.18. 



























' 



























' 


















f ol Its aweful majesty as active, compelling and alive. 
Through thio aeries of feeling appears the wholly other; 
that something which is inherently ineomme ns arable 'with 
his own kind ana character. The mystery is not only 
something to be wondered at by primitive man but also 
something which entrance him. 3o he is at the same time 
repelled and attracted. The numinous has both wholly 
Otherness ana fascinating aspects. 

The earliest manifestations of the numinous were 
not comprehensive. They were notions, beliefs, partial 
expressions carrying with them a strange idea of ov/er. 
This was the strand which ran through the naive and 
rudimentary fancies of primitive minds. It was an unsyat 
atie belief in a mysterious property, existing everywhere 
in nature, vague undefinable ana often . isunderstooa by 
those of other cultural levels. Though it existed 
everywhere primitive man*s attitude toward it was piece¬ 
meal, that was the way he looked out upon the universe, 
dacli object wan a thing in itself, so was his fallow man* 
and he did not attempt to analyse these things into 
body and soul. <e would say, psychologically, that the 
belief in this power was due to the awareness of an 
influx into consciousness of subconscious energy. 

Bisho Codriagton who workoa among the Melanesians • 
would say that this belief in potency or power - mana ~ 
was a conception of something supernatural, communicable, 
mobile and invisible diffused amongst natural objects 
ana himian beings; ana though im .rsonai and univex sal its 









* 













V 

























. 



















( 6 ) 


presence was assigned as the explanation of unusual powers 
in objects and persons* (1) 

&ana effected everything beyond the ower of primi- 
tive man and was revealed to him in physical forces and 
the excellencies of man* fhe savage saw it in a stone of 
peculiar shape which attracted his attention. If the 
shape of the stone resembled fruit he would lay it at 
the root of the fruit tree* If the crop was abundant 
this demonstrated that he was right; there was mana in it* 
He fait it in himself as subconscious impulses which 
influenced him and yet he coula not understand* las 
that not xaana, ana did he not feel it flowing through 
him, when in contact with a fellow man his emotions were 
heightened ana energies were increased? the amount of 
energy he possessed, therefore, determined his success 
and strength* What other conclusion could he came to 
than he should get this mana for himself, ana for his 
own benefit* ipeoial ability depended upon it and he must 
maintain right relations to it* Mana was, then, 
for primitive man the pervading an- animating principle 
of phenomena and of human action, but there is no evidence 
that he ascribed it to a personal deity* In fact Bishop 
Codrlugton assures us that mana was impersonal since 
p ixaitive man had no notion of a Supreme Being* The idea 
was altogether foreign to him since he could not conceive 
of any being occupying a very elevated place in his world. 
I.o think: that things and himself and his fellow-men 
(1) King - 2?hs Development of fieligion, p. 134* 




■ 


































■ 
































(7) 


had mana and ware alive was quite natural to primitive 
man and involved little reflection. He could not ima ine 
in other phenomena what he could not recognize in himself. 
The fact that he attributed life to external objects which 
was the same as his own did not mean that he confused his 
categories but that he lacked experience in bringing ob¬ 
jects under the two classes of animate and inanimate, 
rid he not react to those about him, to animals, ana to 
things? That was enough to cause him to believe that 
things reacted as well* The trees, the stars, the moun¬ 
tain, the dawn, the waterfall, animals and himself all 
had a material invisible life* To the sava e this was 
an unavoidable influence. 

This life was bound up within these forms. These 
things had spirits* But sometimes the spirits left their 
homes* The spirit of the tree left in the fall and re¬ 
turned in the spring* The spirits of the grass and the 
flowers did the same* was it that the spirit left the 
earth itself? Primitive man found the key to this quite 
natural transition in his own psychical experiences. ,;hen 
he went to sleep at nights he had dreams and in these 
dreams something wandered about at pleasure* This some¬ 
thing which went wandering must have been his spirit and 
the spirits of the things which accompanied him. dreams, 
the departure of life from the trees, and the departure 
of breath at death suggested that what makes a thing 
alive is something separable from it, so the idea of souls 
as distinct from the bodies which they inhabited arose. 










. 































The transition from the bound to the free spirit was 
made and naturally the above and beyond, the mysterious 
power, came to have a local habitation - it was incarnated 
Nov/ the spirit of life could be worshipped, and 
sacrifices could be luaaa to it. The mysterious power* 
outside and beyond the primitive man, to which he attri¬ 
buted a will such as he possessed but greater ana more 
mysterious, were now localized and partially interpreted 
so that he could worship them and offer sacrifices to 
them. The first self-intersat of the savage was fooa 
and shelter and these spirit-powers of the sun, wind, 
trees, grass, th nder, frost, etc., either hindered or 
helped him in getting food and shelter. He must treat 
them kinaly ana as they wished that he may oe successful. 
He must have these spirits on his side for his own benefit 
as he thought of, and worshipped objectively the 
spirits of nature so he like wise considered his ancestors 
The spirits of the dead were concieved as alive. The 
power which had gone out of the body resided in the 
breath, but where was it? It must be wandering about 
its former habitation because it came back to visit him 
in his dreams. And now it had the same form, although it 
an un-ubstantial thing, more mysterious and more powerful. 
He must treat it kindly to make use of the pov/ei in the 
hunt and in war. 00 primitive man placated, pleased and 
worshipped these departed spirits for his own good. 

The primitive man’s treatment and worship of the 
resident powers necessitated a ceremonial to get this 






















' 












































power or mana from the object of his attentions. It 
should be remembered that for the savage the object of 
his worship 3tood for the power or mana and represented 
his mental attitude, The descriptive names which we rive 
these forms are but terms for the objective reality. 

<>hy certain things sould become the objects of his wor¬ 
ship is explained in the fact that they in some way came 
into his everyday life, They were objects connected 
with food values, protection, reproduction, shelter, 
success etc., animals, trees, stones, wind, the *j things 
had power which he must keep on his side,, or must placate, 
many and varied were the ceremonials which grew up with 
their worship whose object was the obtaining of the spirit 
for one's-self. In the eating of food, the shedding of 
blood, the use of water, fire etc., lie found the means of 
evoking the power. In some ay the object of'his worship 
and he himself were one; but in order to gain more of 
this mysterious something he performs these rites. In 
this ¥#ay the mystic union or participation is made more 
complete. Because of this the practices acquire greater 
significance* The god is eaten so that the worshipper 
has possession of the god’s spirit, and yet the god 
continues to exist apart from the food with undim inished 
power. So that ”out of the original feeling for the 
impersonal mana, the belief in personal powers arose, 
and direct appeal to them was surely the most natural thing 
in the world.” (1) 

(!) Pratt - Religious Consciousness, p.312. 








' 


























■ 











( 10 ) 


a 3 soon as the source of menu became separated from 
the ceremonial it is on the way to developing into a god. 
and w ;on any external object becomes an independent object 
of ceremonial attention it is likely to be treated like 
a god with a spirit ov ghost. Obtaining a priest and 
temple it is virtually a god. animals and inanimate ob- 
j cts becoming gods are not anthropomorphic. They lack 

personal qualities and, for that reason, are vague, they are 

f 

like huge monsters, hut they soon acquire these qualities, 
and myths of many kinds develop around the resultant 
personal god and is celebrated in hymn and epic and por¬ 
trayed in atone as a heroic figure* In time man*s gods 
became exalted human beings - his ideals of what he 
himself would like to be* 

//hen the source and vehicle of raair. became associated 
with ancestors they developed in a different w ay into 
deities, that was more natural than that these people 
who believed in the living spirits or ghosts of their 
dead should continue to desire their aid and sympathy* 
fhs worship of ancestors became a domestic ceremonial, - 
the setting aside of food and'a. social gathering of both 
dead and alive. In time one ancestor became a tribal 
deity or god* Or some tribal hero with a great amount 
of lana became a god since ho was more powerful to help 
them after death than before* Spirits or ghosts of the 
departed were already anthropomorphic and to become gods 
only needed to become exalted in the minds of the worship¬ 
pers * the difference between a ghost and a god was only 
















. 

- 








































































■ 



































( 11 ) 

a matter of degree. 

as time went on these mciny gods fused into one God 
or world order and became lees anthropomorphic. T, as the 
phenomena of nature were generalized, the deities 
or super-human beings regarded as their sources were like¬ 
wise generalize , until the conception of nature as a 
whole gave rise to the conception of a single deity as 
the author an- ruler of. nature; and in accordance with 
th§ order of its genesis, this notion of deity was still 
the notion of a Being possessed of psychical attributes, 
and in some way like unto Man* 

Buv there was another cause, besides scientific 
generalization, which led men f s minds toward monotheism* 

The conception of tutelar deities, which was the most 
prominent practical feature of ancestor worship, was 
directly affected by the political development of the 
peoples of antiquity, as tribes were consolidated into 
nations, the tutelar gods of the tribes became generalized 
or the god of some leading tribe came to supersede his 
fellows, until the result was a single national deity, 
at first regarded as the greatest among gods, afterwards 
as the only God* The most striking instance of this method 
of development la afforded by the Hebrew conception of 
Jehovah.” (1) 

It is not surprising that we find nature worship 
predominant among one group of people and ancestor 
v/or ship among another, and that each should find a sup- 
(1) Fisks - Idea of God, p.72-4. 

























. 








' 






. 

- 




















reme deity at the sad of the avolution. ith the Greeks 
it wa j nature worship. Ho wonder, then, that they should 
have accomplished much in the realm of science, ouch 
abstract thinking revealed itself in the way they deified 
the powers of nature. They were able to imagine the 
indwel ing s frit of the sun, the sky, the storm, etc., 
without the help of an Inal victual ghost. 3o it wa that 
their great thinkers framed a conception of God acting 
in and throu h the powers of nature without a gross 
anthropomorphic symbolism* They regard. Deity as 
immanent in the universe, and operating through natural 
laws. God is the ever-present life of the world; through 
him do all things consist, and events are the revelation 
of the divine wisdom or reason* 

The great divinities of tbs hollenic pantheon were 
personifications of physical phenomena. Their crude 
beginnin ?a were developed in the Homeric poems into the 
most sublime beings that the mind could produce in 
anthropomorphic imagery* The great divinity, &eus, was 
no better nor worse than the people themselves. Both 
men and goas lived in close contact and sympathy with one 
another. The Greek conception of the world was that it 
was governed by a body of personal and reasoning rulers 
like man in mind and shape only higher* One God became sup¬ 
reme but so long as the Greeks clothed their god or 
gods in flfsh ana celebrated them as human beings writ 
large they put a limit to their spiritual roll ious 
development. 














■ 

























' 





























This was not an acceptable conception of deity for 
the Hebrew. His Goa was remote fro the world. This kind 
of thinking conceived of the iniverse as a machine impelled 
by outside force with a god removed from the activity 
and watching it go and interfering only when he pleased, The 
creator and the created are entirely separated f 

Yahweh, the great deity of the Hebrews, was a nation¬ 
al god and in time took on the attributes characteristic 
of an ideal king ana an ideal father* Upon this founda¬ 
tion the prophets built their conception of God* Go in 
one great leap of mind - it was a leap because their 
idea of one supreme being grew so ra idly - the family 

goa and the transcendant absentee god of the universe 

* 

became one. Finally the prophets of this people of gre t 
religious genius gave the world "an effective conception 
of God as independent of place and time and nation, 
upholder of social justice and individual morality, and 
accessible in tanas of personal intimacy to individual 
worshipper* 0 (l i 

These conceptions we of the western world have 
inherited ana developed in accordance ith our own 
peculiar genius. It is now left for us to translate 
and to interpret the nature of God for ourselves. But, 
before we can do this, we must try to discover the thought 
mould behind our iaea of God as revealed in the philosophy 
of the day. 

(1) ..right - dtuaent f s 'Philosophy of hell ;ion, p.141* 














■ 





































































II TiU PHILO.; )JiLIC,U, Il.JId 


How, then, uj v;a interpret this mysterious ower 
which the savage a ay; in the phenomenal worlds which acted 
upon the mind of the Greek and brought forth a man writ 
large as the personification of the unifying element in 
the universe; which caused the Hebrew to speak of the .ower 
as Yahwah above and in whom was wrapped up his own destiny 
ana that of the nations about him? Beneath all the cruditi 
of the thought of priiaitive man there was a feeling that 
behind all that he could see and hear and feel was a 
source, a power, which was other than material. Here is 
an essential truth which modern philosophy must recognize, 
sad if the savage gave to this power qualities, psychical 
qualities, similar to those which he possessed * a ;uin 
philosophy ought to consider whether this ia purely a 
psychological product, ox* whether it points to soma 
personal element in the power behind nature. Before the 
savage could postulate any unseen power beyond tha things 
of sense he had to recognise an external world common to 
himself and his fellow-savage. a. In like manner, must 
satisfy ourselves as to the nature of the phenomenal 
world before we can dix*eet ourselves toward that wrhieh lies 
beyond the material, This being done we shall find that 
science and philosophy through knowledge and experience 
cannot escape positing a power of some sort as the source 



















. 


. 






















■ 






■ 






















( 15 ) 


and guiding principle behind and within the universe. 

The savage aid not attempt to prove to himself 
that there vma an external world of things sensible* He 
encountered it every time he moved. He could make use of 
a stone, or a stick; ha beheld the trees* the mountains 
and the waterfall, the lightning and the stars; these things 
were outside of him. That was all the proof ha required. 

For us this is not enough# e also recognise these things 
but ask are they really external to our consciousness. 

hat, then, is the external world? The very fce^m s^gests 
that it is something which can be looked at from the point 
of view other than our own# If I .. ere the only conscious 
being in the world I would have nothing except the content 
of my own consciousness as data for an external world. 

This content I may account for by postulating an external 
world; but I could in like manner apply this hypothesis to 
the world of xny consciousness* "The motive, then, for the 
coneoption of an external world - a world which will 
remain significant when my consciousness ceases to be - lies 
in the existence of other conscious beings. le compare 
notes and we find that our experiences are not independent 
of one another. Much that is in my consciousness is 
individual, but there is an element common to other 
conscious beings. That common element cannot be placed 
in one man’s neutral ground ~ an external world. Jt# are 
all partners in it on the same footing. The external world 
is a symposium of the presentations to individuals 
in all sorts of circumstances. fT (1) 

(1) a. 3. Addington, "Science, Keli ;ion and Keality," 
edited y Joseph Meedham, p. 19E. 



















































. 

































Having established the reality of the external world 
we wonder whether it is self-contained or whether there is 
some deeper round of existence* science itself now 
points to the existence of another world, a world of 
being which ornis the background of the world of sense* 

"In exploring his own territory in the external world 
the physicist comes up against the influence of that 
wider reality which he cannot altogether shut out* 11 (1) 
There is no difficulty in recognizing a wider spiritual 
reality .rich the external world is a selection, 

but it is uifxicult to explain why this selected section 
seems to constitute a self-contained system* kay it be 
suggested with a* 3* Addington that the division into a 
material and a spiritual world is superficial, and that 
the line of cleavage is between the metrical and non- 
metricul aspects of the world* Tha physical worla then at 
some point, or throughout the whole, impinges upon the 
spiritual world and thus derives its actuality, at any 
rate the mind has by selection made its physical 
environment; may there not be a greater kind which has 
found part of its environment in these little sparks which 
flicker for a few years ana go out* Science says nothing 
as to the nature of the world-spirit being good or evil; 
"but it does perhaps justify us la applying the adjective 
creative*" (2) 

U) ibid, p*£l? 

(B) A* 3* Addington in 3* d* and K« - Joseph Needham, 

P* £17. 











































. 








































( 17 ) 


Physics tall us that all motions of matter axe 
manifestations of force, to which we cun assi n neither 
beginning nor end* letter is indestructible, motion is 
continuous, ana beneath both there lies the truth that 
force is _ersistent* Herbert Spencer has proven that the 
lav/ of universal evolution is a necessary consequence of 
this persistant force* This gradual evolution in which 
pro ress is from the si pie to the complex in its minute¬ 
ness of detail and its vastaesa from a e to as with 
all its weird and subtle changes la by means of an immanent 
power or resident force, or a single animating principle 
that is both infinite and eternal* 

/h ,t name shall we give to this power, or force or 
principle? If we call it Faroe we would not be enlightened 
since it acquired meaning only from the relations in which 
it is used* It Is merely a. symbol* But a symbol of what? 

It is desirable "that physios should have a ox*d as 
thoroughly abstract* as utterly emptier of all connotations 
of personality* as possible* so that it may be used like 
a mathematical symbol. Such a Word is Force*" (1) But 

what v;, are dealing with is the most substantial of 
realities* the Reality which is behind all appearances and 
from which we cannot escape* Let us name t is, not 
force which persists but, Bower~Immanent ~ which is everywhere 
manifested in phenomena. 

(1) Fiske -"Idea of bod,",:* IbB* 




( 18 ) 


Cun we, then, regard it as material* or cun we speak of 
its ceaseless activity as the working of "blind necessity?" 

.e cannot either regard this Power as material or 
its workings as blina necessity. It is the source of 
matter, of what we sea, hear anu touch, it cannot it elf 
be material. Hot only does this Power manifest its ,If as 
th external world, but it also prouucos states of 
consciousness, qualities, in our mines which we are apt to 
attribute to the external world* The point is "we are bound 
to conceive of the Reality in tarns of the only reality we 
know, or else rafr in from conceiving it under any form 
whatever. a might just as •well try to escape from the 
air in which va breathe as to expel from consciousness the 
Power wsich is manifested throughout what we call the 
material universe. But the only conclusion we can consistent¬ 
ly hold is that this is the very same power ’which in 
ourselves wells up under the form of consciousness’« n (1; 

Now the question is as to how this Power works, fhrae 
alternatives arise. First, is the Power imperialistic 
in natux ;? From what has been said above we can dismiss 
this proposition without discussion, secondly, does this 
Power or Being impart certain energy at the beginning by 
virtue of v?hich the movement is bound to go forward to 
its ultimate end, i.e* did matter receive an original 
endowment by virtue of which it contains the pr else and 
potency of all forms of life? Here we have a vie* of the 





. 















. 

































. . 




. 











( 19 ) 


universe which sees all that is called new coning out of 
something which was there in germ - an unfoldin of 
something which was implicit in the system* In a few 
primordial germs we havo the whole future v^orld* If this 
obtains our discussion as to a personal Power ends, but one 
alternative remains• Does this Power, continuously and 
ever—increasingly impart itself to, or realize itself in, 
the ereati o nal process? 

If this power continuously and. ever-increuslngly 
imparts itself for self-realization in the creational 
px’ocess, what can we say about It? The primitive mind 
sees in this power an impersonal fore 3 which is within 
and without, i*e*, immanent and transcendent* The scientist 
in v; or kin in his section of the external world is ever 
coming u, against the wider reality which he cannot neglect* 
The philosopher says that there is an infinite ana eternal 
ouree of energy from which all things proceed* They ail 
imply t i t, there is no robability or possibility of 
exhausting this reality - the known is such a small fragment 
of it* How are we to discover it? There is only one way 
finally -Su that is by experience* 

The savage from his own experience knows that his 
movements are due to will or urpo a and concludes that all 
motion is due to will or purpose* We, too, through exper¬ 
ience and speculation posit will or purpose in the power 
which is manifested in the external world and in us* 
































































• 




• 






























































«<• must then oostulate - consciousness in this Power and 
self-consciousness since it cannot be le as than ourselves. 

T^ore aj e two ways of thinking. vDe may begin with 
the particular work toward the universal, or we may begin 
ith the niversal ana find it in the particular, /which¬ 
ever e think we shall find that there is something of 
the universal in the particular and therefore the 
particular tells us somethin : of the universal. The scientist 
working in his restricted fields is ever coming u against 
the wider reality which he cannot shut out, and the 
philosopher working with a world view is forever finding 
the wider reality in the particular. It seems, then, that 
the ultimate Reality-deity - is the only thing that is 
knov/n and its meaning terminates in object* The finite 
is from the infinite, ana we know the infinite by reason 
of the finite which is expressed. 

fe find, then, in everything about us a aanifeatati n 
of deity, all existence is an outcome of Deity in the forms 
of space and time. n The history of the world must be the 
entrance of Deity into finite forms until at length it 
appears .in the fullness of the original divine thought. ” (1) 

Let us elaborate this view in the light of modern 
science and philosophy. The key word is evolution. Our 
difficulty is that we see in the universe partial view, 
bits of the process picked out and not the ever-flowing 
(1) Transcribed from lecture notes given by Dr. a* 


3. Tuttle 



( 21 ) 


streams of r; lity. That is the only way in which the 
finite can grasp the infinite* It matters not where we 
begin* /e may start with carbonated slime, motivated by 
heat whence life springs in unicellular form anc develops 
by refinement and complexity into consciousne s, self- 
consciousness, mind, - without any breaks in the proce s 
until Deity is reached; Deity being the next higher sta e. 

This view* of emergent evolution is set forth by 
Alexander in his book "Space, Time and Deity." Here Time** 
bpaee in fluid relations is the source and nisua of every¬ 
thing. By refinement and complexity matter emerges ana each 
higher degree in matter is a product of the same refinement 
and com laxity, Later life appears, than consciousness, 
self-consciousness ana mind with Deity at the top of the 
ladder. The basis oi the whole structure - Time-Space is 
impersonal and does not Satisfy us* 

a more satisfactory view may ..a obtained from the 
philosophy of Lloyd Morgan, Alexander*3 successor in the 
Gifford Leetux * Morgan accepts the framework of 

MXexand n *s schs e '.a z react to the hierarchy of emergent^# 
but he does not accept Time-Space as the nisua of the.system. 
God as conceived by Morgan is radically different from 
MLexand .r r s conception. Morgan interprets the universe in 
a naturalistic way arm also in a spiritual, and these two 
are not opposed. In his own words# my thorough-going 
naturalise takes form in the concept of evolution as an 
emergent and is universally applicable throughout nature, 
including htmmm nature, bodily and mentally. But I am one 



of tho3 Q who holds that life and. mind should not be 
identified with, bat should ho dlstin » spirit# 

I regard life and mind as nanifestuti m3 of spirit in an 
ascenaing hierarchy of such manifest.ations. This brings 
them within the orbit of natural events to be interpreted 
subject to the methods of naturalism* In accordance with 
this view, spirit is not a ’quality 1 at the summit of the 
evolutionary hierarchy* It is that of hi eh all qu-Ii'a , 
from the lowest to the hi; heat, ar anile si; mlons under the 

conditions of ’space and time .* n (1) 

Hera we have stated not only his position which needs 
filling in* but also fundamental criticism of Alexander’s 
position* >e shall now endeavour to state merman’s position 
more explicitly* The world in which re live seems to be, 
historically, an orderly sequence of events with every now 
and again a bringing forth of something new. This new 
element is called an emergent and it is with this idea of 
emergence that we have to do. The curegent is not a 
resultant since a resultant is a mechanical equivalent* 
a emar ent is more, it differs in the fact that at each 
stage in the evolving process there is a new outcropping 
which cannot be fully explained by what enters into it. 

The emergent cannot be completely prebi-tea. The emer.-ents 
are ,r integral entitles ana emergent evolution deals with 
their advance in complexity of stuff ana in richness of 
substantial unity* t! (2) The stuff is, for instance* the 
(Ij ?? Llfe, mind and matter* n p*l* 

(2) ibid, p*7. 



U3) 


separata ontuinod in H20, and the substantial unity 

is their relatedness* Without stuff there can be no 
substantial unity or substance* l 1 ha whole idea ia con¬ 
tained in another word of or ; n’s concomitance* This 
carries the aspect of relate ness where there is never 
one attribute without the other* It suggests that each 
integral entity or emergent com.lute in itself carries 
with it, ano cannot be rid of the emrogents of its lower 
levels. Lot us take consciousness* Consciousness is an 
advance in. cocrlaxity and richness on life; life is an 
advance on matter, but there is no conseiousne ,, without 
life and no life without matter* The higher emer ants 
involve the lower and without a lower there can be no higher. 
But what causes these emergent s to emerge? For a natural¬ 
istic treatment of the universe *s accept as being present 
i i : / di- folng together 

of these events in the way in which they do go together* 

In other words we reeognia. and 

ernorgents to emerge and the wav in which they emerge* e 
also accept as subsistent the determinate plan in ecor&ance 
with natural events in physical regard, v;a need not ask 
the question! ghat gives to events thair initial go? 
this or that determinate plan? this or that stage of their 
evolutionary advance? what gives the comprehensive plan 
to emergent evolution? 1 Given may not im;ly a Giver, 1 

If some say all advance is attributable to God, ar 


\ 


(& 4 ) 


others say no advance i3 attributable to God, both aeee t 
advance, IX for both. th 2 facta are the same, the difference 
Iie3 in the mental attitude towards what one party infers 
from the facts, and the other party oca not*" (1} 

"While I hold that the proper attitude of naturalism is 
strictly i most c, therewith I, for one, am not content* 
for better or for worse, I ackn:r/lar a Ooct as the Mis us 
through whose activity emergents emerge, ana the whole 
course of emergent evolution is directed*" (2) fhe concept 
of -emergent evolution is not inconsistent witt 
in lad or a Divin Purpose. 

That we ha.c, then, is a theistic emergent evolutionary 
interpretation of the universe* Above two mental attitudes 
were stressed; the one which says All advance is attributable 
to God. If the artist finds more meaning in the world 
and realizes a richer content in life than a cow with her 
1 effortless self-n u: ishmant* Is not this an advance » 
an emergent? If Lloyd iP>rgan fin s more reality in 
attributing all advance to a divine Purpose than he who 
does not so attribute advance may we not say the same? u, fhe 
stress is on the new attitu.e, for it is this that is* as 
i think, emergent*” (3j "Divine P’irpose is objectively 
real in so far as it is. possessed by mincu It is no other 
than the rational order of the universe* Bence it follows 
that only in so far as our concept of Divine Purpose in 
spiritual regard is accordant with rational.order in 
scientific regard, can we accept both as part of our final 
synthesis*" (4j 

(1) ibid, p*E80 

(2) C* L. Morgan, "Emergent Evolution," p*36 

(3) C. I»* morgan, "Life, mind and i.~atter, n Preface* 






u In the evolution of that which wo deem the highest of 
natural entities, a man, we have 3tep3 in the determinate 
plan which includes the evolutionary process of all 
relevant events in hit , alike in physical and mental regard* 
Vhat you regard as the conorehen.ive and determinate plan 
of events, I cannot regard hut as divine Purpose within 
which each miracle has a contrlhut ry lace* For if all 
advance i nature he a manifestation of divine Purpose, 
on what understanding can the divine intervene at any 
stage stage of the’manifested;! ? 1f (1J there is no 

dualism hut one reals 6 reality both natural and spiritual 
"Ood is ^11 in all hut in diverse modes and degrees of 
manifestation*" (£) 

<*oa is inclusive of all advance* n lf we regard the 

whole evolutionary process ,s a jaanifastation of Divine 

Purpose, it is in us us persons that the Divine Personality 

is revealed* M (3) therefore "the Living Ood who is 

behind and beyond the world, in creation goes out of 

himself and continuously and progressively nnifests 

himself ,11 '.he wo king toward the M heat manifestations 

of himself* r (4) hod the neonditioned has become the 

conditioned in the universe. e deem that the highest 

product of the evolutionary probes., is man and in him we 

find the fullest manifestation of God. The manifestation 

in human form is in Christ* 3o it is that we can read anew 

(li ibid, *300 
(£) ibid, p*3Gl 
(3j lord, p*302 

(4J Transcribed from lecture notes of nr. *v. 3* Tuttle. 










( 26 ) 


and with ’raster inwaning: "In the beginnin was the # ord, 
and the -ord was with Jod, and the /ord wa3 (Jod. The 
same was in the beginning with dod. All things were 
made by him; and without hi; was not anythin# made that 
was made. a.n& the Word was made flesh ana dwelt among 


us." (1) 

Now it remains for us through the expansion of 


thought to reach out towards, though we are really unable 


to fully grasp, the Personality of dad. 


(1) John 1:1 ff. 








Ill PCiiJONnLITY . Hlli. ..m AND .. Ivl;;j 


Ce shall turn now to the history of the word 
"person*” The original use of the word person "was 
the designation of the mask worn by the actor on the 
Homan stag j and came to be used of the actor himself 
and his part in the play." (1) From this it became 
synonymous with the relations of man in social inter¬ 
course generally. At no time, and especially in 
classical Latin, did a parson acquire that use to which 
we put person as equivalent to human beings. However, 
the early Christian Church used the word to express the 
dignity of the rational human being as contained in the 
Creek wor u-notr ravis * 

The xitarai meaning of u iro was "a standing 
un&ji or below” in reference to one being in ambush 
or e noealment. It came to signify what may be called 
real concrete existence as opposed to a mere appearance. 
The Latin word which was used in translating the Creek 
was ’substantia.’ Ooo'i^ which originally meant a 
being in the widest sense also was translated by 

c. ' y ' 

the Latin ’substantia’; thus unotrrao'ts and o J ^ lCc came to 
be used, in the .New Testament, almost interchangeably. 

In the early church there was a distinction made between 

c f -> / 

unoo-ran -s and ooo-iou 9 tha former rofering to the one 
divine nature and the latter designated the three 

(l) C.C.J. .ebb, "Cod and Personality,” p.bb. 






( 28 ) 


titles: Father, don ana Spirit, bat this was not 
generally accepted* Hence the two words became syn¬ 
onymous, and arson wraps u within itself the meaning 
of both. Boethius llj in the sixth century gives us 
the definition which, to all intents and purposes, is 
that which we use today: Personna est naturae ration- 
abilis individua substantia: a person is the inaiviaual 
subsistence of a rational nature. What do we mean by 
this? national nature by itself is not a person since 
it implies a universal quality. On the other hanu an 
individual is not a person unless it possesses a rational 
nature. We use person as describing an individual. A 
person then is defined as an individual who is aware of 
a nature eornnon to others and is able to x*eflect upon 
this and to give it a form as a general notion. 

Such a definition leaves much to be added by way 
of describing the content of ersonality. The only 
possible form of personality of which we have any 
knowledge is that which we find within our finite and 
imperfect selves, ^nd, as we know it, it is associated 
with limitations and imperfactions. we are limited b/ 
conditions of time and space. We never speak of a dog 
as having personality because we feel that it is minus 
that something which would make it possible for us to 
attribute personality to it. what is this something 
called personality? It is that "which for us is ultimate¬ 
ly real, that from which we derive all our conceptions 

(1) quoted in Webb, "God and Personality," from 
Contra mutyehen et Nestorium. 



( 29 ) 


of reality and being, and at the same time is incapable 
of being an object of knowledge in the ordinary sense*” 
(1) That is our intuition of personality. It is there¬ 
fore, measurable in quality and not in quantity; in 
terms of self-consciousness, will, and affection or 
love and not in terns of animality a3 known in a dog. 

Personality, which we may call spirit, carries with 
it, however, quantity or animality since the higher 
always involves the lower, we are both spirit and boay. 
Spirit is more than mere immateriality ana we know it 
through our own consciousness because v e are beings who 
think, fail, and will. "Personality in man is made up 
by the combination of those powers of intellect, sensi¬ 
bility and volition in a self-conscious unity, with moral 
judgment crowning their a tion with significance, as 
for the body, it is the servant of personality for 
the gathering of sensations, and its organ for the 
expression of its life and action. It is the seat and 
means of the present personal life, but of personality 
itself it is no necessai*y part. Personality might exist 
without it «..The Spirit is the ego, the person, 
and the body is its close ally ana servant." (2) 

The nature of personality may occupy us, then, 
from two points of view. It may be treated objectively 
in which case we consider persons as objects along 

(1) W. H. Matthews, "Eod in Christian Experience," 

p. 164. 

[Z) /, H, Clarke, "Outline of Christian Theology," 

p. 187. ff. 




with other objects in the world* or subjectively where 
we strive to enter into the meaning of personality 
by reflection upon ourselves. 

The first thing which wo notice when we consider 
persons along with other objects in the world i3 that 
they belong to the class of living beings and occupy 
the highest rung of the ladder of evolution. The dif¬ 
ference between the higher and the lower beings may 
be called a difference in individuality. From the first 
it is characterized by independence - relative indep¬ 
endence - of other lnbi\ ideals*- Things are individuals 
but into this discussion we shall not enter, mi 
individual is a being complete in It3elf and acting as 
a whole. With each advance in the evolutionary process 
there is an advance of individuality * a man is more 
individual than a dog# Aaeh rise in the scale also 
shows a complexity and refinement both in structure 
and function* but throughout there is unity. This we 
see in the beh&vious of the indivuala as they adapt 
themselves under all kinds of cireumstancea* along with 
behaviour we cannot help but sea that there i3 conscious¬ 
ness and this quality rises with the rising scale of 
structure ana function# The internal and external 
complexities correspond# The higher ty a of individual 
portrays a complexity of mental element which are not 
found in the lover type. One of the qualities which 
make individuals persons* therefore, is rationality. 
Another of the qualities which emerge in individuals 



which we call persons is a complexity ana refinement of 
living and acting about a single core called spontaneity# 
Though this is present in lov;er beings it comes to 
its fullest development hare ana displays itself finally 
in creativaness* This is the mark of a new being, and 
it is the mark of personality# "If we would see what 
personality is we may look at its achievements. Culture, 
art, civilization have been made by persons, ana these 
creations of arsonul mind, which transcend the realm 
of nuture, are sustained by persons ..........Take av/ay 

personal life and they vanish as thou h they had never 
been# 11 (1) 

But this objective consideration is not all, the 
subjective approach will offer us much more ana intro¬ 
spection will, besides saying much to us, present more 
difficult and perplexing problems. The difficulty into 
which introspection may lead us is that we will be apt 
to consider that the self or *1* is a composite existence 
which can be understood by exhibiting the relation of its 
alaments* The analysis doos away with the Idea that 
thex*e is a self which has its states, or is the bearer of 
experiences; it makes the self a sum of states or exper¬ 
iences* In spite of this psychology we believe that we 
are more than our states of consciousness and our 
experiences; we have these. This self, or ego, or f I f ie 
the*alogical f core which defies intellectual analysis# It 

{l> W# E. matthewe, "Qod in Christian axperionce," 

p* 166# 




■ 




































' 
















* 










Uh) 


is the activity out of which proceeds our mental and 
physical movements; it is spontaneity, creativsness; it 
is personality. Here we must distinguish between the self 
which knows, and the self which is known. The fact of 
knowing consists in this that there is a c >gnized 
experience: I know something. "It may br fully expressed 
by formula, *1, conscious of myself a, f eling, willing 
or knowing, know myself feeling, willing, or knowing 
something. 1 " (l) This *I f is the given activity or 

alogical core. The self is not a sum total of elements, 
it is "the central and essential element in self-hood; 
the real and active ego which is continually creative." (2) 
It is .ore than the mere knower, it is the knowing, 
feeling, willing activity. Our self-consciousness, then, 
is "an immediate awareness of the profound self which is 
the subject of knowledge, the bearer in feeling and the 
agent in willing#" (3) Ultimately o t of this self¬ 
experience spring all our conceptions of reality. 

•/e have seen that though we have a consciousness 
of self which is intuitive we also have a more intellec¬ 
tual acquaintance with ourselves in which the self is 
the object of knowledge and reflection. This knowledge 
of ourselves, like all knowledge, is liable to error 
wherefore ?s*e cannot know the self in com lateness. The 

(1) ibid, p. 1G9 

(2) ibid, p. 170 

(3) ibid, . 170 



( 33 ) 


*1* which knows ana the , me l which is known art) distinct. 
Our idea of ourselves must always bo imperfect because 
we are limited by circumstances which are butside 
and beyond ourselves. Our reflection is not a product 
of the active ego alone. The knowledge of self is 
influenced by im ulses and aeti uis caused by out 
environment and retained by memory as data with which we 
?/ork. "Though the creative activity of the ego is the 
essence of personality, that without which it cannot 
exist, the free orn cannot in human persona be absolute, for 
the activity is partly determined and limited by the 
conditions and the environment. e are thus in a position 
to see that personality in its human form is imperfect, 
and to note the obvious suggest!>ns which it contains 
of a Personality in which its limitations are removed." (1) 
It is, then, that we are not so much complete persons but 
rather that we are on the road to becoming com lite 
personalities. 

We have come to some understanding of the nature of 
personality■incomplete and limited as it is in mun, 
now it is for us to attempt an understanding of id vine 
Personality. The only worthy way in which to conceive 
Sod is not in thinking away that which is characteristic 
of human personality, but in conceiving the highest in us 
as present in dod in supreme degree. In fact the only 
way in which we can conceive of ded is in the terms of 

(1) ibid, p. 173. 







th^t which we ourselves know. 

most people conceive of loci very anthropo orphically, 
and if by reflection they lose some of their anthropom¬ 
orphic definiteness they never lose it entirely. Indeed 
they cannot. "It is quite true, on the one hand, that to 
ascribe what we know as human personality to the infinite 
deity straightway lands us in a conti'adiction, since 
personality without limits is inconceivable. But on 
the other ham, it is no less true that the total 
elimination of anthropomorphism from the idea of God 
abolishes the idea itself." (1) But we say that God 
is a spirit. the words of E. L. Jv/ain give us a very 
happy picture. "I believe in an anthropomorphic of sod, 
si. ply because I believe in a Theomorphie man. God must 
be in man’s image, because man is in Bod’s ima 3 . But 
it is not the animal man in whose image God is." (2) 

God created man in his own ima/: a, but that image 
is not the animal man which we can see. It is the 
unseen in man which is the ima e of Goa. This unseen we 
have called the alogical core, the real, active, creative 
ego, the 1 1* and ’me 1 ; but it matters not what .7 8 call it. 

3 may call it spirit, or soul or personality, throughout 
this discussion we have preferred to call it personality - 
personality of man, the personality of ^od. It is here 
that God and man meet. 

Ghen v,e try to conceive of God we are aware that we 
see through a glass darkly, ana we do not expect to think 

(1) J. Fiske, "the Idea of God, p. 135. 

(2) H. L. Swain, "hat and vhere is God." p. 49. 



Jod f a thoughts after* him except in the crudest of 
symbolic fashion. e cannot fully understand our own 
personalities, and that muy be because of the divine 
spark contained in them. The truth is thut neither 
intellectual concepts, nor human lan^ua ;e can fully 
express all that is contained in Baity. There is some¬ 
thin mysterious and awesome beyond the rational* In 
dealing with lod we axe treating of that which i 3 
Infinite and which transcends all our powers since we 
are finite ana limited* *ve cannot limit the Infinite* 

"Our ability to frame ideas is strictly limited by 
experience* and our* personality which is not narrowly 
hemmed in by the inexorable barriers of circumstance. 

We cannot, therefore, conceive of such an idea* But it 
does not follow that there is no reality : nswsring to 
what such an iitt would be if it leelved* 11 (1) 

"The test of inconceivability is only applicable to the 
world 'of phenomena from which our experience is gathered. 
It fails when applied to that which lies behind phenomena. 
{£) This does sot mean that wa are to speak of God as 
Personal because we do think of him in terms of our own 
being* "the side of his nature which is turned maiward." 

(3j But personality implies the existence of a contrast 
between self ana not-self, an e i anu an ’other 1 , so how 
can we conceive of the personality of Bod. «'e have seen 
that the 1 other 1 is an invariable accompaniment of human 

{li J. Piske, "The Idea of lod." p. 136. 

\z) ibiu, p. lao. 

{3} Otto, "Idea of the Holy," p. £08. 



( 36 ) 


personality, the only personality of hich we are in 
any degree certain, but w ha.e also ajen that it i 3 
possible to conceive of personality up ait fro circum¬ 
stances anu environment at least there must be a reality 
which answers to such an idea if vve could clearly 
conceive it* Personality is a ositive activity* 

"‘fhat this activity shoalu find itself o , os a am 
limited by forces or oonuitiona which a. s not cr-uted 
by itself may therefore be, not a necessary element in 
personality as such, but a characteristic of human 
pers enality, J * il) Personal life seems to be ossibls 
only within an environment* .iut in this sense loa 
cannot be thought of as a person because he Can ha.e ne 
environment u^ we conceive it; there is nothing quite 
* • ut i t t i 

the other, i*e* the self which know., and the -elf which 
Is known ana in that fellowship and responsiveness 
between those two elements In the lodhead wo may find 
the true secret to hi vine fer reality* 

fhe idea of Jod also sujges s the idea of the iouree 
of all things and beings* Ihe one distinctive rnaak of 
human personality is creativeness, so that the c>nc;p- 
ti n of one source gives us the hypothesis of a Personal 
lad* fhls is our e - - iosalilj of 

lod* Jod is the creator of all things. U,;on him all 
thing- depend, net in whom all things no which woula 
make him the absolute, nor who is exhausted in the things 

(1) I. R. Matthews, "lod in Christian experience." 

p. 17b* 



( 37 ) 


which he creates which would lo&ke all thin 3 God. 

Goa the Creative Personality distinguishes himself from 
himself and goes out to express himself in creation so 
that all things are made by Hii and upon him do all 
things do; end. 

In our. elves v/e see a col 1 ,xity and. multiplicity 
of structure and function striving for unity. The idea 
of God gives us the idea of unity and on his basis we 
can accept the hypotdesis of God as personal. In him 
all things consist. Here we see a solution to the 
vexing problem in philosophy - the one and the many. 

It is not completely solved because v/e cannot give a 
perfect picture of the Personality of God, but if we 
can clarify our thought and experience vs ha v; accomplished 
our task. 

The Idea of the personality of God gives U3 the 
idea of com lete self-knowl3d ;e. e ha, e seen in 
dealing with human personality and self-knowled e is a 
noceS3ary attribute of personality ai tot . Kafc 

In full measure in human persons. In the experience of 
God the knowing self finds its ima e in the self known. 

The , I* and the f me T are one and the some. This is the 
essence of self-hood and personality if we remember 
that it is a centre of a tivity. The *1* is active in 
knowing the ’me 1 ; the 'me* cannot be passive so that in 
its activity God knows himself. God the Father is 



( 38 ) 


knov* ; ing and. active in God the Jon who is also knowing 
and active, and in the Jon*s >ctivity the rather knows 
himself; there is reciprocal activity and fellowship# 

If we were to continue this thought we should see 
that in God e have the unity of the Trinity, and that 
the Creative Personality expresses itself through the 
Son, who is the a ant in creation, and in him God makes 
himself manifest in the highest form possible. The 
implication of this statement cannot be pursued here 
since we are concerned only with the Personality of God# 

The idea of Personality carries with it the idea 
of purpose# In human personality purpose is will express 
ing itself in actions in the physical world - conduct - 
which are the outcome of thought and feeling. In Livine 
Personality purpose is the xivine will expressing itself 
in the developing universe# God is distinguishing 
himself and going out to express himself in the 
evolutionary recess until at la t he has expressed 

..elf in the fullest and highest possible human fo 

All that is in an expression of divine Purpose which is 
motivated by will* The rivine Creative Personality is a 
neeassary hypothesis. 

The idea of Personality is an idea of love. God is 
love. This is the fundamental quality of the Livine 
Being and was revealed most completely in the Jon. The 
Love of God is not the natural emoti n whicx we know, nor 
is it that love which we express one to the other, but is 



as a disposition of will and is combined with an 
a ful element which cannot be expressed nor conceived. 

The love of man is an outreaching power which has as 
its object the good of the beloved and in this is found 
the vehicle of progress and the basis of fellowship. 

There is mutual responsiveness. In the lo/e of Jod, 
also is an outreaching power which wills the highest 
good of its object, man; not man as inclusive of the 
race but man us an individual. It is a re lation of 
persons. The Divine Personality goes out in love to 
man and draws him while man axpres as his responsive¬ 
ness by seiking fellows'll with the Divine through all 
the aspects and functions of worship. 

The Personality of Doa includes all that which we 
have tried to put into the words: self-experience of 
-self-knowledge, creativeness, purpose or will, and love. 

But when we have done this . e yet fall short of giving an 
adequate expression to what e mean by the Personality 
of dod. Just as we have seen that we cannot know the 
universal from inferences ana conceptions of the particular, 
just so we cannot put into the content of language the 
full idea of Divine Personality, aven in feeling we 
still sense something more - an awe and a mystery 
which can find expression only in the word supra-per , -rial. 

Because there is this mystery or non-rational content 
in the Divine Being we sometimes think that the mystic 



(40 ) 

will not accept personality as an attribute of lad. But 
if we remember that what the mystic means i3 a 
"preponderance in religious eonociousneso, even to the 
point of one-sided exaggeration, of its non-rational 
features,” (1) we shall unci ret and that for which he is 
contending* "It is the 1 wholly other* aspect of the numen, 
resisting ovary analogy, every attempted comparison, and 
every det rm nation; so that it is here really true that 
1 omnis determ 1 natio est na jaj io• * tf (2) HaX’e we have that 
element in which d>votion and worship find their consum¬ 
mation* But it is necessary for us along with this great 
influx of the Divine to melt it down into human trait3 
carried to the highest of that which we know. This we do 
thit we may not only feel this ’presence* but that 
w 3 may refer to the Divine as ’thou*. Out of this has 
arisen our whole discussion of the Personality of lad. 

Though 3 speak of the Divine Personality by which we 
mean that part of f Oo& turned manward, 1 there is also 
that part which burst the bounds of the personal. This 
strange paradox is the heart of the truth about the Divine. 
How can v;e possibly understand the Divine? Can the finite 
comprehend the Infinite? This is the content of the 
t e'rm s upra-pe rs onal. 

,/e have tried within the confines of these few pages 
to give the content to the title of the thesis, the Personal* 
of Dod, but have found that we have utteraa that which 
we do not fully understand; that which is too wonderful 
for our minds to grasp and for our langua e to express. 

(1) Otto, "The Idea of the Holy,” p. 202 0 

(2) ibid, p. 202 . 








