
PETROLOGY OF THE PURCELL SILLS IN 


THE ST. MARY LAKE AREA, B. C. 



























0X iSBBIS 

mwirsiwis 






















THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


#10 


PETROLOGY OF THE PURCELL SILLS IN THE 
ST. MARY LAKE AREA, BRITISH COLUMBIA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ARTS & SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY 


by 

GRAHAM HUGH HUNT 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


MAY, 1958 







ABSTRACT 


The Purcell Sills of the St. Mary Lake area, 

British Columbia, have mineral compositions and textures which 
can be related to deuteric alteration and autometamorphism of 
quartz diabase. Amphibolization, saussuritization and granophyric 
intergrowths reflect the different cooling histories of the various 
sills, which in turn are related to the depth of intrusion and 
thickness of the sills. 

On the basis of potassium-argon age determinations, 
which gave 600 and 620 million years as the ages of the emplace¬ 
ment of the Purcell intrusions, it is concluded that the Purcell 
Sills of southeastern British Columbia are late Precatnbrian in age. 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/petrologyofpurceOOhunt 






ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to express his sincere appreciation 
to all members of the Department of Geology, University of Alberta, 
for their assistance and encouragement. Thanks are especially due 
to Dr. R.A. Burwash, under whose direction and guidance this thesis 
was written, and to Dr. J.F. Lerbekmo for critically reading the 
manuscript. Dr. H. Baadsgaard provided data for the three 
potassium-argon age determinations. 

The writer received financial assistance from the 


University of Alberta in the form of a Graduate Research Fellowship. 







CONTENTS 


Page 


CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION . 1 

General Statement . 1 

CHAPTER II - THE BELT IAN GEOSYNCLINE.3 

Beltian Terrain in Canada . 4 

Purcell Series . 5 

Windermere Series . 7 

Lewis Series.7 

Beltian Terrain in United States . 8 

CHAPTER III - DISTRIBUTION OF PURCELL INTRUSIVES . 10 

CHAPTER IV - PETROGRAPHY.13 

Field Work.13 

Laboratory Studies . 15 

St. Mary Lake Area.15 

Resort Creek Section .... . 16 

Texture.17 

Mineralogy.18 

Contact Phase . 20 

St. Mary "B" Sill.23 

Kimberley Creek Sill.24 

Kingsgate Area .25 

Moyie Section.26 

Mineralogy ... . 26 

Contact Phase . 27 

Contact Relations ... . 29 

CHAPTER V - PETROGRAPHY OF TWO SILLS IN THE WATERTON 

LAKE AREA, ALBERTA .30 

Blakiston Brook Section . 30 

Lake Alderson Section . 32 

Contact Relations . ..34 

Logan Pass Sill. 35 


CHAPTER VI - MODE OF EMPLACEMENT AND ALTERATIONS 

ASSOCIATED WITH THE PURCELL DIABASES . . . .37 


Mode of Emplacement.37 

Alterations .38 

Amphibolization . 39 

Saussuritization . 41 

Granophyric Alteration . 41 


































































CONTENTS (continued) 


Page 

CHAPTER VII - GEOCHRONOLOGY. 44 

Collection of Samples . 44 

Preparation of Material. 44 

Results . 45 

Interpretations and Comparison . 46 

CHAPTER VIII - SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS. 48 

REFERENCES -. 50 

FIGURES - Figure 1 - Index Map of Sills in Canada 

and United States. 12 

- Figure 2 - Section of St. Mary M A" Sill. . 16a 

Figure 3 - Kootenay and Waterton Lake 
Map-Area 

APPENDIX 

PLATES I - Relict Subophitic Textures ....... I 

II - Mafic Minerals ............ II 

III - Granophyric Alterations .. Ill 

IV - Granophyric Alterations .. IV 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTIONS 

Resort Creek Section . V 

- St. Mary Lake "B" Sill.XVIII 

Kimberley Creek Sill . XIX 

Moyie Section . XX 

Blakiston Brook Section . .... XXVI 

- Lake Alderson Section . XXXII 

- Logan Pass Sill .XXXVII 





















) 




































CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 

GENERAL STATEMENT 

Exposed in the Purcell mountains on either side of 
St. Mary Lake in southeastern British Columbia is a thick succession 
of late Precambrian sedimentary formations. Within these sedimentary 
rocks occur numerous tabular bodies of basic igneous rock, known as 
the Purcell Intrusives. The intrusives are most abundant and thick¬ 
est within the Aldridge formation, the oldest sedimentary beds 
exposed in the Purcell Range. Although many of the Purcell intrusives 
cut their enclosing sedimentary beds, concordance is the rule. 

Since all of the bodies sampled for this study were concordant, the 
term Purcell sills was adopted in the title. 

The sills are composed of a medium-grained quartz diabase, 
with subhedral laths of plagioclase feldspar and green amphiboles 
showing relict diabasic texture. Intergrowths of quartz and feldspar 
occur either at the contacts of the sills from assimilated material, 
or within the sill as an acid differentiate. 

Sills which have been similarly described occur within 
the Purcell Mountains, eastward into the Waterton Park area of 
Alberta, and southward to central Idaho and west-central Montana. 

A study of the Purcell sills seemed justified at this time 
for a number of reasons: 

(1) Considerable work has been done on the Purcell 


intrusives, including the investigations of Daly (1912), Schofield 
(1915), Jure (1929), Hume (1932), Rice (1941), Swanson and Gunning (1949) 








' Ti: / !•;; 






n »•* a a ■ '■ t.P *Jj r ■ /’ -. \ a > ■ 

■a 3. ' :• " 0 b?, " : ~ ' o.~’ •- - .• ; - 


a 


, no • : r 3 ■ n ■ . r •' • 


,n.o a • ■ f 


3. 

: '<u/ 

j : :-'bS. ' .o.b': T o rlno 

" 3 ■ ' ' ; • 3 • • l r • 


. -V.?. - 3 0 3.3; oj r. 3 0 3- 3’ r yj 

•• . '.o'.' • oo -'o ; "o c?r o. 

: ooo:': o. J n o : o ' ■ r ,b; . po . o ' 

' :o ■' - rb . ' "• : oo . ’ ' \ ,.oo .. o 

r•' ' o sdoooo -- O' nor b ' o:' /o oo.onn • - o b v. o' " 
o/v on ;oo . o; "" 3 3. o' oO, r . co.o ; n? , opo pp , o o: 

■ b oo ' • :3 o n • i 3 3 ■ ■ '>••• -p 

o:' -- 3 :- o- ; - 0 0 r r 0 - o 0 ~ 3 < 

O-O'- .0 O " 00 '0 3 J f ' 3 O 3 3 ' 0 0 0 O ’o " O'.O.' ~ 0' h pbro 




ooo -o- -oovo • ; 3’ : : : o o- • ■ - 30' r oi'o : : or \'ii Lo 

• ■' '^r'o/ ,:on o ■ ob.on fob;' r obob ; o •"'"bob \>r on 

, ~O • " o’ ' JH “ ■ 3 3 f ■ ' ' / : 

= . ■ r '• :• -o ■ n - ■ ' . o ■ 3 

o' r " : b. -o:.' " ■ on?' 3 or .no- on ' op;’ 

.00 -:'o r o 0 ■ o!of 'o b • b -o. 1 b >7? 3 3 ' • ' 





2 


Leech (1952), Reesor (1953), Douglas (1953), and Scott (1954). 
However, few comparative studies have been made between sills 
from different areas within the Purcell terrain. 

(2) Maps on a scale of one mile to one inch recently 
published by the Geological Survey of Canada show in detail the 
distribution of the sills, thus facilitating field work. 

(3) The recently developed potassium-argon dating 
technique offered a possibility of dating the intrusion of the 
sills, using the biotite hornfels developed at the contacts of 
the sills. 

(4) The Proterozoic Purcell trough was filled with a 
large volume of sediments, apparently derived from an eastern 
source. More recently the uplifted Purcell strata have contributed 
material to the Cretaceous and later sedimentary formations of 
Alberta. The Purcell sedimentary sequence is thus of interest in 
relation to two widely separated periods in the geologic history 

of Alberta. 

In the spring and fall seasons, 1957, a detailed sampling 
was made of a sill exposed on Resort Creek, immediately north of 
St. Mary Lake. Samples were obtained for comparative purposes 
from five other sills in southeastern British Columbia and adjacent 


Alberta. 




3 


CHAPTER II 

THE BELTIAN GEOSYNCLINE 

In the area between Idaho and central British Columbia 
a thick succession of argillites, quartzites, and limestones was 
laid down over a long period in the late Precambrian. This system 
of rocks forms the Beltian of Walcott. The Purcell intrusives, 
and all diabase and gabbro sills which have been correlated with 
them, occur in formations of the Beltian system. The distribution 
of the Beltian terrain thus limits the occurrence of the Purcell 
intrusives. 

The main axis of the geosyncline or the greatest thickness 
of Beltian rocks extends from the Findlay Creek, British Columbia, 
map area (45,000 feet; Reesor, 1957) to Missoula, Montana (50,000 
feet; Clapp, 1932). The formations grade into each other with no 
suggestion of a break and possess similar lithologies. Generally, 
the rocks are very fine grained, with the lower part of the Beltian 
consisting of argillaceous quartzites and argillites, and the upper 
part similar but becoming more calcareous. They are shallow water 
deposits as seen by mud cracks, ripple marks and cross bedding. 

The sediments in this geosyncline were apparently derived 
from the mature weathering of an Archean terrain of low relief. 

The conditions of deposition were perhaps similar to those in the 
Gulf Coast geosyncline at the present time, where sedimentation and 
subsidence of the basin are in balance. 





Jc ) 


OL, 3 


, - • 




3 • . _ h 














4 


THE BELTIAN TERRAIN IN CANADA 

Our knowledge of the geology of southeastern British 
Columbia is based mainly on work done by the Geological Survey 
of Canada. 

G. M. Dawson (1885) explored a portion of the interior 
region of southern British Columbia between latitudes 49° and 51° N. 
He gave the name "Purcell Range" to all the mountains between 
Kootenay Lake and the Rocky Mountain Trench. 

R. A. Daly (1904) used the terra Purcell Series for the 
thick sequence of sedimentary rocks of the Purcell Range. He 
divided the series into formations, with type localities mainly 
along the International Boundary. 

S. J. Schofield (1915) studied the relation of the Purcell 
Series to the overlying Cambrian and placed the age of the Purcell 
as Precambrian. 

J.F. Walker (1926) divided the Purcell Series into lower 
and upper parts, designating the Purcell lava as the top of the 
Lower Purcell. In the Windermere area he named the rocks overlying 
the Upper Purcell, but underlying the Paleozoic strata, the Winder- 
mere Series. 

H. M.A. Rice (1937, 1941) gave the total thickness of the 
Purcell Series as 45,000 feet. This figure includes the basal Ft. 
Steele formation, found only in the Cranbrook map area. 

G.B. Leech (1954, 1957), in mapping the St. Mary Lake 
area, divided the Aldridge formation into three divisions. The 


,l .v ... 


•r 


. c,; "■ . c c ■.! ' . (;,i o 


O' \ ■ C'O OJ 


1 


bo: o $ . ' '>. . 


V;.. O o:‘.T>0' r . 


" r f 




.0..J01 v o.o.. 


b' b: 






5 


Purcell sills were shown to be most numerous in the lower and 
middle members of the Aldridge formation. 

J.E. Reesor (1957) gave an excellent review of the current 
knowledge of the Proterozoic of southeastern British Columbia and 
southwestern Alberta. He presented a correlation of stratigraphic 
successions and formation names for the areas which have been studied. 

Purcell Series 

An outline of the Precambrian stratigraphy of the central 
and eastern Purcell range, given by J.E. Reesor (1957), is as follows: 
Upper Purcell Mt. Nelson formation 3,400’+ 

Dutch Creek formation 3,500' 


Purcell lava 

Siyeh formation 2,800’ 

Lower Purcell Kitchener formation 5,000’ 

Creston formation 6,300* 

Aldridge formation 15,000’ 

Ft. Steele formation 6,000’ 


base not exposed 

The Purcell Series is described as follows: 

Ft. Steele formation - quartzite, argillaceous quartzite, grey 

quartzite, dolomitic argillite. This formation 
has not been found exposed west of the Rocky 


Mountain Trench. 









6 


Aldridge formation 

massive and laminated black argillite, very 

fine grained quartzite, rusty weathering. 

Creston formation 

fine grained quartzite or argillite, green 

or grey weathering. 

Kitchener formation 

variously-colored, calcareous and dolomitic 

argillite. 

Siyeh formation 

argillite and argillaceous quartzite. 

Purcell lava 

- dark green to black, amygdaloidal scoriaceous 

basalt. 

Dutch Creek formation 

- conglomerate, siliceous limestone, sandy 

argillite with abundant casts of salt crystals 

in Cranbrook area. 

Mt. Nelson formation 

massive dolomitic limestone in the Windermere 

area. A good marker horizon of white quartzite 

is found at the base of the formation. 


The outline above is a composite section, based on thicknesses 
given by Rice (1937, 1941) for the lower part, and by Walker (1926) for 
the upper part. 

The northern limit of the exposed Purcell Series is near 
latitude 50° 30' and longitude 116°. The upper Purcell strata form 
a north plunging geanticline and disappear beneath the younger Winder- 
mere Series. The Windermere rocks in turn plunge northward beneath 
lower Paleozoic strata. Rocks that may be correlated with the Winder- 
mere appear further north at the surface within the Big Bend of the 
Columbia River (Gunning, 1929). 











7 


Windermere Series 

Originally defined by Walker (1926) the Windermere comprises 
the Toby conglomerate, Irene volcanics and the Horsethief Creek 
formation, lying unconformably on the Upper Purcell strata. 

An outline of the Windermere Series in the Windermere 
area is as follows: 



Horsethief Creek 




formation 

5,000' 

fine grained elastics. 

Windermere 

Irene volcanics 


andesitic greenstones. 

Series 

Toby conglomerate 

50 to 2,000' 

conglomerate. 


unconformity 


Lewis Series 

Proterozoic rocks in the Waterton area near the Inter¬ 
national Boundary are known as the Lewis Series. The Lewis Series 
is comparable to the Purcell Series but is thinner (Reesor, 1957). 

Douglas (1953) gives a thickness of 11,000 feet for the section at 
Waterton, Alberta. A widespread lava flow occurs everywhere at, or 
near the same horizon (Reesor, 1957) and serves as a means of 
correlation of these thick unfossiliferous successions. 

An outline of the Proterozoic stratigraphy at Waterton, 
given by Douglas (1953), is as follows: 

eroded 

Kintla formation 2900'+ argillite 

Sheppard formation 600' siliceous dolomite 

Lewis 

Purcell lava 260' altered basalt 


Series 


Siyeh formation 


3000 


limestone 





o 



o: 








7 


i 













8 


Grinnell 

formation 

750' 

argillite 

& quartzite 

Appekuny 

formation 

1100' 

meta argillite 

Altyn formation 

500' 

siliceous 

dolomite 

Waterton 

formation 

617' 

siliceous 

dolomite 


base not exposed 

THE BELTIAN TERRAIN IN THE UNITED STATES 

The Beltian rocks have been mapped as a more or less 
continuous lithologic assemblage from the International Boundary 
to southeastern Idaho. The southern limit of the Beltian rocks 
is near latitude 44° 30' and longitude 113° 30', approximately 
30 miles south of Lemhi, Idaho. 

G.W. Berry (1943) stated that no Beltian rocks are found 
to the south in Tobacco Root, Madison and Gallatin Ranges. He 
confirmed Peales (1885) suggestion of a shore line with the presence 
of a Beltian conglomerate lying unconformably upon the Archean 
Pony Series. 

At Jefferson Canyon, Montana, conglomerates with gneissic 
boulders 18 M across consisting of unweathered feldspar prove that 
the shore line was close. Deiss (1935) considered the surface at 
Jefferson Canyon a peneplane resulting from a tremendous amount 
of erosion prior to the invasion of the Cambrian sea. He believed 
that the Beltian was originally present over the entire area but 
was locally removed. A uniform thickness of the Cambrian Flathead 
sandstone throughout the area indicates a nearly level surface. 




ra. 2 o \ . h 


CD toj.yao: 


nr. 




■j ro\m 


!i r'. '} 




■ 




foa^ 


■ on 










9 


R. Scholten (1957) states that there are no Beltian rocks 
exposed east of the Tendoy Range in the Lima region of southwest 
Montana and adjacent Idaho. He concludes it is either a non-depositional 
or an erosional edge phenomenon. 

The concept of an east-west trending shoreline with no 
Beltian deposition to the south of latitude 44° 30' and the pre- 
Beltian basement peneplaned to produce 40,000 feet of Beltian rock 
to the north, appears best to fit the field evidence. 





j r " g r : ~ .... . . :! G .: ( T’l GA ■ 

:'g: c :• <. , - _..A n. ■: . ,n _ .• . n ; 1 A A ,i: or 

g > r>- . •• r r: . r a. A.. or hu J'oiAo: r.H' $ |,c 3 n..;L ' :) rn _brv V n n 

. ‘ ii .. ' n - . i v 

n ■ g . : a: ■&*-:'a nr in • Aaron r r . 

r : r . , . :■ b "J. A.n' n G:i A..: o;i n.*J. :i A: a ; A r 


~ ‘ . ■■: 0 A mo la .. . : . . 3 Go m 

... r - . 1 . : : a. a. o: : a. a G'.na _g Aa v 



















a 








10 


CHAPTER III 

DISTRIBUTION OF PURCELL INTRUSIVES 

The dominant mode of occurrence of the Purcell intrusives 
is as sills. Dykes are relatively minor in terms of total volume 
of intruded rock. The sills are most numerous and thickest in the 
lowest formations of the Beltian system. In the St, Mary Lake area, 
and west of Kingsgate, the thickest sills are in the Aldridge formation. 
The uniform thickness of the sills suggests that they were emplaced 
between horizontal or gently-dipping beds. Evidence of thickening 
of the sills at the crests of folds is lacking. The sills were 
later tilted and deformed into their present position along with 
the enclosing strata. The exposure of the igneous bodies has become 
possible through extensive block faulting and upturning, followed 
by erosion. 

Granite stocks of Cretaceous age, satellitic to the Nelson 
batholith, occur in the St. Mary Lake and Cranbrook map area adjacent 
to the St. Mary fault. In the Dewar Creek map area the White Creek 
batholith has distorted the pattern of sill outcrop by sharply 
deflecting the regional strike of the Aldridge formation. 

The main characteristics of intrusive diabasic sills are 
their occurrence over vast areas and their uniform thickness for 
distances of many miles along strike. 

Pardee (1911), in the St. Joe River region, Idaho, named 
the Wishard Sill where it was traced for many miles. 





v ,“c,r 


j 3 O' 






-j or/B v. : .. 


. nrr . "Jn.Cfi 


'■ 3 Id 


,o:>: \ d 


V 


> Lon: 




-o-r (,!■- 





11 


Kirkhara (1926) traced a sill in the Boundary County, 

Idaho, for thirty-four miles before it was terminated by faulting. 

Anderson (1930), in the Clark Fork District, Idaho, traced 
a sill for twenty-one miles along the crest of the Cabinet Range. 

Gabbroic or diabasic sills within Proterozoic strata have 
been reported and mapped in many localities in southeastern British 
Columbia and adjacent Alberta. The following may be considered to 
be the main occurrences (see Fig. 1): 

1. St. Mary Lake, British Columbia; Leech (1957) 

2. Findlay Creek, British Columbia; Reesor (1953a) 

3. Dewar Creek, British Columbia; Reesor (1953b) 

4. Cranbrook, British Columbia; Schofield (1915), Rice (1935, 1941) 

5. Kingsgate, British Columbia; Daly (1912) 

6. Waterton Lake, Alberta; Douglas (1953). 

In the northwestern United States similar sills have 
been reported from the following localities: 

1. Boundary County, Idaho; Kirkham (1926) 

2. Clark Fork District, Idaho; Anderson (1930) 

3. Libby Quadrangle, Montana; Gibson, Jenks (1948) 

4. Canyon Ferry, Montana; Mertie (1951) 

5. Northwest Montana; Clapp (1932) 

6. Glacier Park, Montana; Dyson (1949). 





■ 


n 


:r - 


■ 




• V 


3 


3-., . ;V-. 


or 


o. 


























































































13 


CHAPTER IV 

PETROGRAPHY 

FIELD WORK 

During the summer of 1957 the writer visited the Purcell 
sills at St. Mary Lake and ICingsgate, British Columbia, and Waterton 
Park, Alberta. Samples were collected stratigraphically from these 
locations and were called the Resort Creek, Moyie, and Blakiston 
Brook sections respectively (for locations see Figure 3). 

1. Resort Creek Section. 

Resort Creek is a small stream which flows down the south 
face of Bootleg Mountain to St. Mary Lake near its east end. 

The section is taken across the south face of the upper "A" 
sill, sampling from north to south along Resort Creek (Schofield, 1915, 
p. 74). 

Sill M A M stratigraphically is the highest sill of a series 
of five sills and is approximately 200 feet thick, although the base 
was not exposed. A very sharp contact was seen between the upper 
margin of the sill and the Aldridge quartzites. 

A biotite hornfels extends at least 15 feet above the upper 
contact of the sill with the sediments. This baked sediment resembles 
a light grey, fine grained, biotite granite. 

2. Moyie Section. 

The sill sampled is exposed on the eastern slope of the ridge 
west of Kingsgate, British Columbia, on the International Boundary line. 














..: .. . ...•.. :■ ■ " a 


: 


■i 


3 



O ,. •„ 

















14 - 


The direction of sampling was from east to west on the 
upper "A" sill (Schofield, 1915, p. 72). 

A very sharp contact separates the dark green sill to the 
east and a light grey baked sediment to the west. This baked sedi¬ 
ment near the contact looks like a light grey, medium-grained granite. 

3. Blakiston Brook Section. 

A dark green, badly-fractured sill is exposed intruding 
the Grinnell formation near Blakiston Brook on the road to Red Rock 
Canyon in Waterton Park, Alberta (Douglas, 1953). 

Samples were collected stratigraphically across the sill 
from south to north. The sill is 50 feet thick and strikes in an 
easterly direction. 

The contact was very sharp between the sill and the banded 
red argillites and quartzites. A very fine-grained, light green, 
cherty-looking rock a few inches wide, forms the contact rock. 

Dr. T. Patching, in 1955, collected samples of a sill 
about 100 feet thick intruding the Siyeh formation at Lake Alderson, 
Waterton Park, Alberta. 

Dr. R.E. Folinsbee, during 1957, collected a sample from 
a southward extension of the Lake Alderson sill, at Logan Pass, 

Glacier Park, Montana. 

Dr. R.A. Burwash collected a sample from the Kimberley 
intrusive, east of the Sullivan mine, Kimberley, British Columbia. 






- \->o 


) d. 


;; r>,rf 












o , ?. a-aaii 












15 


LABORATORY STUDIES 

A study of thin sections from the following localities 
was carried out in the winter of 1957-58: 


1. 

Resort Creek Section 

13 

thin 

sections 

2. 

St. Mary Lake M B M sill 

1 

thin 

section 

3. 

Kimberley Intrusive 

1 

thin 

section 

4. 

Moyie Section 

6 

thin 

sections 

5. 

Blakiston Brook Section 

6 

thin 

sections 

6. 

Lake Alderson Section 

5 

thin 

sections 

7. 

Logan Pass 

1 

thin 

section 

Detailed descriptions of the 

thin sections 

are given 


in the Appendix. 

In this chapter the general features of the sills will 
be considered, starting with those in the St. Mary Lake area, from 
which the greatest number of samples were collected. The petrology 
of two sills in the Waterton Lake area will be discussed in the 
next chapter. 

Three samples of biotite from the contact phase of the 
Purcell sills were prepared and forwarded to Dr. H. Baadsgaard at 
the University of Alberta for age determinations by the potassium- 
argon method. The results of this work will be given in Chapter VII . 

ST. MARY LAKE AREA, BRITISH COLUMBIA 

The Purcell sills which intrude the Aldridge formation at 
St. Mary Lake are quartz diabase. The names Moyie Sills and Purcell 






' : 




i 


iGjniw r. 


. 


T" 


rad 





. , ... r ' a h 2 r q-| 


r 


. n . 


)■>-; 


•. "v r> 


: c 




. '! 


■ 


IV. i 


,vC : • 


iV. 


■ t 

















16 


Intrusives have been applied to these sills by previous investigators, 
who considered them to be metadiorites or hornblende gabbros. 

In this locality Schofield (1915) studied five sills 
which he called "A", "B", "C", "D", "E" from top to bottom 
respectively. They are located due north of St. Mary Lake, striking 
in a northerly direction and dipping approximately twenty degrees 
to the west. Sills "B" , "D", and '’E" are over 500 feet thick and 
sills M A" and "C" are somewhat less. 

Resort Creek Section - St. Mary M A M sill 

Near the headwaters of Resort Creek sill "A", which 
apparently represents the highest sill stratigraphically in the 
series, is at least 200 feet thick. A talus slide concealed the 
base of the sill but a sample of the sill taken 223 feet below the 
upper contact contained some biotite, indicating that the lower 
contact with the sediments was being approached. 

Samples were collected stratigraphically across the steep 
east face of this upper "A" sill (see Fig. 2). 

The dark green, medium-grained rock is classified as quartz 
diabase. Its mineral constituents are: amphibole 55-60%, plagioclase 
10-25%, quartz 5-207,, secondary minerals 10-307,, and accessories 3-5%. 
The amphibole is the actinolite variety and the plagioclase is domin¬ 
antly labradorite. Secondary minerals are calcite, magnetite, epidote, 
clinozoisite, kaolin, leucoxene, sphene, chlorite, sericite, and 
hematite. The accessory minerals are biotite, magnetite-ilmenite, 
apatite, sphene, pyrite, pyrrhotite and rutile. 




- 16a - 
Fig. 2 

























17 


Texture: 

The sill is subophitic due to crystallization of the 
plagioclase before the augite, which was subsequently altered to 
amphibole. The tabular plagioclase feldspar laths pierce the 
amphiboles and exhibit a random orientation with some interlocking 
(see Plate I). Long, interwoven, curved, euhedral amphiboles are 
poikilitic with small feldspar and quartz grains enclosed as chada- 
crysts. According to Harker (1932) this texture is developed in 
rocks in which the amphibole is in great part derived from augite. 

Probably the most conspicuous texture exhibited in the 
sill is the granophyric intergrowth of quartz and feldspar (see 
Plates III and IV ). The term granophyre has been used by some 
authors in a genetic sense, to refer to acid differentiates formed 
from basic magmas. It has been used by others as a descriptive 
term to apply to rocks having intergrowth textures of quartz and 
feldspar. Granophyric or granophyre is used here in a textural 
sense, applying to sills characterized by the irregular intergrowth 
of blebs, patches and threads of quartz in a base of feldspar. It 
is similar to graphic and micrographic but differs from these 
textures in that the intergrowth of quartz and feldspars is more 
irregular. 

Different types and amounts of granophyre are distributed 
throughout the sill. Generally there is a higher concentration of 
granophyre near the margins of the sill than at the centre with the 
greatest amount concentrated in the upper portion of the sill. This 
symplektitic intergrowth is discussed elsewhere in the paper (p. 41 ). 





18 - 


The inferred sequence of crystallization is as follows: 

1. Plagioclase, primary magnetite-ilmenite, sphene, apatite 

2. Pyroxene, altered to amphibole 

3. Epidote, clinozoisite 

4. Biotite 

5. Chlorite 

6. Quartz and alkali feldspar (granophyre) 

Mineralogy: 

The amphibole of the diabase is actinolite or uralite. 

In thin section the fibrous amphibole is green, strongly pleochroic 
and occurs as large, poikilitic, prismatic crystals that are usually 
twinned. The individual grains range in length from 1 to 5 mm. and 
average about 3 mm. They are euhedral to subhedral in shape, having 
formed later than the smaller plagioclase grains which they enclose 
or partly envelop. In some specimens the amphibole makes up as 
much as 60 percent of the rock. It is replaced chiefly by chlorite 
and to a less extent by carbonate, epidote, biotite, magnetite and 
clinozoisite. 

The optical characteristics are: Pleochroism - X = pale 
yellow, Y = deep green, Z = dark green, Z > Y > X; 2V = 80°, 
optically (-), C to Z = 17°. 

The feldspar of the diabase is mainly sodic labradorite 
and sodic andesine, although the complete range is from An 29 to An 5 ^.. 
The tabular plagioclase laths are highly altered and average 1 mm. 
in length. In places albite, Carlsbad and pericline twinning are 
distinct, but as a rule the plagioclase is altered to kaolin, sericite, 




a'r. ■ - " ~3:'n ; : ;>:■ r. .co-r ?. " 

; i - .." -o:\ :'■< o o o :.:3 • , , root- • ,nf f 

- • ■ ■ •' 


a 




7 - ; r 3 : : - aao o '.70 oo. o ' 3 1 


r ■ 


, :... v or 


0.3 3 . r 3 3 ' . 3 , 


3 .3 3 .3 , 3 3- ‘ ■ 

; 3 3 ' ' : :•■ ;.o n. .'•• r J " - r 3 r 3 o ao-' 3 Vo 

■ ' 30 : , / 3 ’." 3 O'3 ’ o ’ Vo ' ' . r: ■, •-3r- 

V '3 In V' ’■ 1 ''' ; ■ 3 3 r (.'•■■■ 000 \ 3.3 r " r o, 

Vo : :~:i , V :V.- 3 3 3" 3 3 3 ‘ ‘ 3'3 . ' V 3 3 V " V h 


h '33 ,: <" 


3 3 ' ' r .30 33 O' '3 


r 


r V. 3 ' 3:3 ' ■ f ' 


.3 ' 3 


, 3- - v o 


3 r ' >3 33- i 


3 f : 

i i 


>0 - } - 3. ' 3.'/ 0"-3 3. :'3. 3' 3 - Vo' 




' ' W ~ 


' 3 ■! '~ N " ~ 30 33 '■ > 

i : " 3.- r. .'0 33 ' r ■ o' \ . ■ . 3 : 3 ; .0 

3 r/: r r / ' ■/ : Or' : ” 3 .. ■ ' 3 3 ' ' 3 - ‘ ' ‘ >3 r 3 




■ " ■ " '."3 3 • ■ 3 3 •' .3 1 03.3'' ■ 3.333 




■ ".3 a.i.; roV r " : V : - fro .3 nB #wt ,'tip '.19 







19 


clinozoisite, epidote and carbonate. 

In some specimens there are two distinctly different 
kinds of plagioclase. Zoned crystals, having a labradorite core 
surrounded by a sodic andesine rim are more common near the margins 
of the sill. Albitization and saussuritization are more complete 
in the centre of the sill. The plagioclase is replaced by the 
secondary alteration products, largely epidote and quartz, due to 
late deuteric action of the magma. 

Quartz is erratic in distribution but is always present. 

It forms up to 20 percent of the rock near the centre of the sill. 

The grain size is variable but is commonly fine-grained. 

Near the boundary of a sill, in contact with the quartzitic 
sediments, granophyric intergrowths of quartz and feldspar occur in 
cuneiform and radial textures. 

Biotite is abundant near the contacts but is rare in the 
body of the sill. Yellow-brown, iron-rich flakes range up to 0.5 mm. 
in length. Some flakes have a pronounced sieve texture and partially 
replace the amphibole. 

Secondary minerals are alteration products of the feldspars 
and the mafics and make up 10-30 percent of the rock. Common minerals 
found are epidote, clinozoisite, calcite, chlorite, sericite, kaolin 
and leucoxene. 

There are greater amounts of secondary minerals near the 
centre of the sill, where late deuteric action was prolonged due to 
slower cooling, than at the chilled margins. Subhedral grains of 
epidote and calcite form patches completely replacing the mafics as 








20 


well as the feldspars. Veinlets of quartz and epidote are common. 

Accessories form up to 5 percent of the rock with sphene 
as the most abundant mineral. Other common accessories are magne¬ 
tite, ilmenite, apatite, pyrrhotite, hematite, and pyrite. There 
are patches of sphene up to 2 mm. in size forming before the amphi- 
boles and probably along with the other accessories such as apatite. 
Titaniferous magnetite, in part altered to leucoxene, is present in 
all specimens and may occur as skeletal crystals. Apatite is quite 
common as long idiomorphic needles, Pyrite, hematite and pyrrhotite 
occur as small specks. In some cases hematite veinlets were 
evidently due to outcrop weathering. 

Resort Creek Section Contact Phase - Biotite Hornfels 

Field examination of the upper margin of "A" sill on 
Resort Creek showed a knife edge contact between the diabase and 
the Aldridge quartzite. The dark green, columnar jointed sill is 
in sharp contrast with the light grey, rusty weathering quartzite. 

The intrusive apparently pushed the quartzite apart without impreg¬ 
nating any of these beds. 

The sediments were "baked" at least 15 feet above the 
upper contact with the sill and developed a hornfelsic rock. 
Mineralogy: 

The rusty weathered, light grey, fine-grained, wall rock 
consists essentially of interlocking quartz grains with minor amounts 
of feldspar. The texture is granoblastic. Recrystallized, untwinned 







21 


plagioclase may be present but could not be distinguished from 
quartz. The quartzite would probably show no effect from the in¬ 
truding action of the sill except the recrystallization to a grano- 
blastic texture. 

The argillaceous quartzite bands near the sill contact 
developed chlorite and biotite ranging up to 30 percent of the rock, 
through contact* met amorphic action. 

The main constituents of the fine-grained liornfels are 
quartz, biotite, chlorite and muscovite. Minor amounts of feldspar, 
secondary epidote, clinozoisite and accessories such as magnetite, 
apatite, zircon and rutile are present. 

Some quartz grains show undulose extinction, probably due 
to metamorphic stresses. Sutured intergrowths are common throughout 
but may be a result of regional metamorphism. The equidimensional 
grains are tightly interlocked as a mosaic. 

Fresh, medium-brown, iron-rich biotite flakes up to 0,3 
mm. long are arranged in a decussate structure. This indicates a 
lack of shearing stress in the rock. Some felted clusters range 
up to 0.5 mm. in size. There is no development of parallel mica 
flakes or schistose structure. 

Light green, aggregate-polarized chlorite with anomalous 
blue interference colors is found as isolated grains or associated 
with biotite or muscovite. In part, the chlorite appears to have 
replaced the biotite. More commonly the biotite is later than 


muscovite and chlorite. 


Jo .: 


.0 


oxi o.r; 



a--or. 


r, 


TX 


no. •: r>.a 


-N ^ ;■ 


C.i. 


r 


.: xx bur, ( 




S30. 



. . 


o. : : cl 


r: b 


jyloS. 


u.o bx:.; 


r x 





3 X o. 






0 j, ■'! 


X 









22 


No twinned plagioclase grains are observed. Microcline 
grains with indistinct twinning are present but could not be separ¬ 
ated from quartz in routine counting procedures. The potash feld¬ 
spar content of the rock is estimated at less than 10 percent. 

The secondary minerals epidote and clinozoisite are 
common alteration products. Scattered granular subhedral epidote 
grains range up to 0.4 mm. in size. 

Apatite, zircon, magnetite and rutile are common 
accessories throughout the rock. 

Conclusions: 

In summary, the study of the contact phase established 

that: 

(1) A fine-grained, equigranular mosaic texture extended at 
least 15 feet above the upper contact of "A" sill with the sediments. 

(2) There is no appreciable change in grain size throughout the 
hornfels. 

(3) No marked contact exists between the hornfels and the 
Aldridge formation. 

(4) The greatest degree of contact metamorphism produced in 
the quartzite by the sill is of the biotite facies. 

These conclusions do not agree with the interpretations 
of Daly (1912) and Schofield (1914) but are supported by the 
concepts of Grout (1932), Rice (1937, 1941) and Swanson and 
Gunning (1945). 

Daly (1912) named the acid rock a biotite granite. The 


•> n 


r \ ^ 















~'.n: p: 


' 









23 


composition of the granite is very similar to the quartzite above 
it, both chemically and mineralogically and Daly gave the origin 
of the granite as a process of assimilation. Schofield (1914) 
called this acid type (hornfels) a micropegmatite. He disregarded 
Daly's theory of assimilation for formation of micropegmatite. 
Essentially his theory was related to depth, where the parent 
reservoir after undergoing differentiation produced different 
magmas when tapped at various levels. 

According to Grout (1932) a diabase sill, in order to 
have an acid magmatic differentiate, has to be at least 500 feet 
thick. 

Rice (1937, 1941) stated that the granitic rocks are 
granitized sediments. His main argument was that he did not find 
a sharp contact between the granitic (hornfelsic) rocks and sediments. 

Swanson and Gunning (1945) agree with Rice's interpretation 
for rocks developed west of the Sullivan mine, British Columbia. 

The St. Mary "B" Sill 

A microscopic examination of one thin section gave the 
following composition: amphibole 55%, plagioclase 28%,, quartz 2%, 
secondary minerals 14%,, accessories 1%. 

The amphibole crystals are the green actinolite variety. 

They are fibrous and pierced by the feldspars, showing relict sub- 
ophitic texture. A few grains are small, idiomorphic prisms, but 
most are elongated and poikilitic with enclosed chadacrysts of 






D 





■ ' ‘ 'If M 

: 


:' .0 Tr ■ ... r nr ( n ' 3V ■ 




. " T f (-D 


r 












24 


feldspars and quartz. 

The optical properties are: pleochroism - X = light 
green, Y = dark green, Z = dark green, Z>Y>X ; 2V = 85°, 
optically (-), C to Z = 18°. 

The feldspar consists of two types of plagioclase, 
labradorite (An 52 ) and sodic andesine (A^q) . The glassy feldspar 
laths have albite, pericline and carlsbad twins. Some grains are 
zoned, but most are of uniform composition. 

Minor amounts of quartz occur in the specimen. The 
secondary minerals include epidote, clinozoisite, kaolinite, 
sericite, calcite and chlorite. Patches of chlorite and subhedral 
grains of epidote replace the amphiboles. Common accessories are 
sphene, titaniferous magnetite, pyrrhotite and apatite. 

The Kimberley Creek Sill 

Jure (1929) studied this intrusive between the Sullivan 
and Kimberley Creek areas, on the eastern limb of the Kimberley 
anticline. He proposed a differentiation hypothesis for this 
thick sill. 

A study of one thin section from this thick sill gave 
the following composition: amphibole (actinolite) 32%, plagio¬ 
clase 26%, quartz 8%,, secondary minerals 33%,, and accessories 1%,. 

The green actinolite appears to be largely altered to 
chlorite and other secondary minerals. The poikilitic, twinned 
and untwinned amphibole shows a subophitic texture with the feldspar 
laths. The actinolite contains small feldspar and quartz grains in 














'O. 











25 


a poikilitic texture. The optical properties are: pleochroism - 
X = light green, Y = dark green, Z = dark green, Z>Y>X ; 2V = 

85°, optically (-), C to Z = 18°. 

The plagioclase feldspar contains different types ranging 
from calcic labradorite to sodic andesine. Many of the tabular 
plagioclase laths are clear, glassy and have sharp albite twins 
and range from An 55 to An^ in composition. 

Quartz forms granophyric intergrowths with the feldspar. 

Secondary minerals make up a large percentage of the 
specimens. They include epidote, clinozoisite, kaolin, sericite, 
calcite, biotite, and chlorite. 

Common accessories are patches of titaniferous magnetite 
altered to leucoxene, sphene, pyrrhotite, pyrite and apatite. 

KINGSGATE AREA, BRITISH COLUMBIA 

Daly (1912) made the first real study of the Purcell 
sills at Kingsgate and referred to them as the Moyie sills. 

This section was described in detail by Schofield (1915). 
The four sills, "A", "B", "C", "D M , which are striking north and 
dipping 60 degrees to the east are exposed on the ridge west of 
Kingsgate, British Columbia, on the International Boundary line. 

Sill "A", the highest in the series, is actually two 
thin sills with a band of hornfelsic quartzite between. Samples 
were collected stratigraphically across the upper thin sill and the 
underlying quartzite. This upper thin sill is at least 30 feet thick. 


..>.0.. J v j.,. , SrZtfjJimJ hj 




2S.r,C:j :: <• 




n 


. 








:' c 5. 


;o ~ . 


: : r,o 


- 







. 




b .V 


b 


■ • j . h 


.1 










'_r 













26 


Moyie Section - The "A 1 * Sill 

The dark green, upper part of the "A" sill intrudes the 
Aldridge quartzite, developing a well defined hornfelsic rock at 
the contact. This "granitized" sediment grades into the quartzite. 

In places the contact metamorphism was sufficient to produce a 
hornblende, biotite rock. The blue-green, pleochroic hornblende 
is dissimilar to the amphibole in the adjacent sill. 

Mineralogy: 

The mineral constituents of sill "A" in the Moyie section 
are: amphibole 53%,, plagioclase 10%, quartz 5%,, accessories 2%>, 
secondary minerals 307,. 

The amphibole of the sill is usually in plume-shaped 
crystals or euhedral laths 1 to 3 mm. long. The green actinolite 
is pleochroic, twinned and fibrous. Optically: X = pale green, 

Y = green, Z = dark green, Z>Y>X ; 2V varies, but averages near 
80°, optically negative, with C to Z = 18°. 

The amphibole formed later than the plagioclase and 
encloses or envelops the feldspar and quartz grains in a poikilitic 
texture. 

In part, chlorite has replaced the amphibole. 

The feldspar consists of both labradorite and sodic 
andesine. The plagioclase occurs in lath-shaped crystals, which 
show carlsbad, pericline and albite twinning but on the whole are 
highly saussuritized. Zoning is evident and it shows an inner calcic 






27 


core (A 1154 ) grading to an outer sodic rim (An-^) . Saussuritization 
is more complete near the centre of the sill, where large amounts 
of feldspar are altered to secondary minerals. 

The quartz in the diabase is predominantly present in 
association with sodic andesine as granophyric intergrowths. Grano- 
phyre is more common near the centre and lower contact of the sill 
with quartzite. The enrichment in quartz near the margins of the 
sill may be due to assimilation of quartz from the intruded sedi¬ 
ments. The granophyre in the centre of the sill may be largely due 
to late deuteric or hydrothermal alteration of the cooling sill. 

Late magmatic alteration is suggested by the presence of large 
amounts of the secondary minerals from the earlier-formed plagioclase. 

Biotite is present in the margin of the sill but is absent 
in the normal rock. The brown flakes make up 1 percent of the specimen. 

Secondary minerals are quite conspicuous throughout and 
form up to 30 percent near the centre of the sill. The alteration 
products are kaolin, sericite, epidote, clinozoisite, chlorite and 
calcite. 

Accessories are common. Sphene occurs as wedge-shaped 
crystals and patches forming up to 2 percent of the rock. 

Contact Phase - Upper Moyie "A" Sill: 

The rusty-weathering, light grey, fine-grained contact 
rock has the hard, compact appearance of a recrystallized sediment. 

The mineral constituents are interlocking quartz grains 
and minor amounts of feldspar that are largely altered to secondary 








28 - 


minerals. 

The equigranular quartz grains are interlocked in a grano- 
blastic texture. Some of the quartzitic grains range up to 0.5 mm. 
in size and show undulatory extinction. In parts they exhibit a 
graphic texture that has been referred to as micropegmatite 
(Schofield, 1914). 

Altered, albite-twinned plagioclase grains and indistinct 
grid-iron twinned microcline were observed, but only in minor amounts. 

Brown biotite is developed near the contact and may make 
up 30 percent of the rock. It develops from irregular individual 
flakes, having an average length of 0.15 mm., to more localized 
blebs as the contact is approached. The biotite is altered to 
chlorite with the development of fine-grained titanite (Scott, 1954). 
Strongly pleochroic hornblende, in part euhedral, also replaces the 
biotite. 

The hornblende occurs as euhedral prismatic crystals that 
range in size up to 1 mm. in length. They are not poikilitic, twinned 
or fibrous and have a characteristic pleochroism: X = light yellow 
green, Y = olive green, Z = blue green; Z>Y>X. The pleochroism 
and habit of these amphiboles differs from that in the adjacent sill. 

Accessory sphene, apatite, ilmenite, and magnetite are 
common. Sphene, which has rounded outlines, is probably of detrital 
sedimentary origin. 







29 


CONTACT RELATIONS OF THE PURCELL SILLS 

Many of the sills in the Cranbrook area carry border 
phases 5-20 feet wide, usually marked by a biotite hornfels. 

Some contain up to 75 percent amphibole and 20 percent quartz but 
the rock five feet below the lower contact of "A" sill at Kings- 
gate has 30 percent biotite and 3 percent amphibole. Plagioclase 
is present but is much less abundant than in the body of the sill. 
Quartz forms up to 40 percent of the rock. 

Rice (1941) suggested that the amphibole is due to a 
process of streaming volatiles away from the interior of the sill. 
The amphibole of the contact phase exhibits different optical 
properties than the amphibole in the sill, suggesting a difference 
in chemical composition. Rice concluded that the contact rocks 
were formed from sediments by a process of granitization, with the 
development of biotite, hornblende and feldspar in appreciable 
quantities. Although he had not visited the Moyie sills, his 
conclusions are in agreement with Swanson and Gunning (1945) and 
the writer for the interpretations of the contact phase. 













ffj 




'v ,o 


' : : .o 3... .. od s‘ >' 


.0" 


3:3 33 i 


o::L .o:,! • 


rf :,;o ‘ !';q 




o.; br 


- ) 


;c o 3 < , vc. 3 u.. 







__ 






30 


CHAPTER V 

PETROGRAPHY OF TWO SILLS IN THE WATERTON LAKE AREA 

Petrographic descriptions were made on two quartz 
diabase sills in the Waterton Park area: the Blakiston Brook 
section, and the Lake Alderson section. The study of the Waterton 
sills was undertaken in the hope of establishing a similarity or 
difference between the Waterton sills and the sills in the St. Mary 
Lake and adjacent areas. 

BLAKISTON BROOK SECTION 

Diabase sills, mapped by Douglas (1953), intrude the 
Grinnell formation near Blakiston Brook. The location of the 
samples is given in Chapter IV. The sill sampled at Blakiston 
Brook is 50 feet thick, and quite uniform in thickness along strike. 

Petrography 

The average mineralogic composition of the Blakiston 
Brook diabase is pyroxene 177. , plagioclase 18 %, quartz 57., 
secondary minerals 457 0 , varietals and accessories 157o. 

The pyroxene of the diabase is titaniferous augite that 
fills the interstices between the feldspar crystals. Corroded reddish 
brown augite is slightly pleochroic or non-pleochroic. The grains 
range up to 3 mm. in length in the coarse phase of the sill. Some 
grains are twinned and some show schiller structure. The optical 
properties of the augite are: 2V = 62°, optically (+), C to Z = 45°. 









•> 


" 




O; 






. 






( ) 













31 


The larger plagioclase laths are highly altered and a 
composition determination was very difficult. However, the smaller, 
later forming grains have An 32 content. The most sodic plagioclase 
feldspar is calcic oligoclase An2g- 

Quartz was more abundant near the centre of the sill 
where it forms granophyric intergrowths with the feldspar. Quartz 
was never more than 57o of the rock. The low quartz content may be 
due to the fact that the sill has not assimilated silica from the 
wall rock. 

The secondary minerals form up to 45 percent of the rock, 
including large amounts of chlorite and magnetite which are probably 
due to deuteric alteration of sugite. 

Reaction rims of skeletal magnetite enclosing chlorite 
mark the former presence of the mafic minerals, usually augite. 

Near the centre, or coarser phase of the sill, calcite veins are 
associated with secondary quartz and the smaller plagioclase feld¬ 
spar grains. Some of the quartz surrounds the chlorite. 

There is considerable alteration of the feldspars to 
sericite, epidote and kaolinite. Some feldspars are completely 
saussuritized. The rock is badly fractured and some secondary 
minerals may be due to outcrop weathering. 

The main accessory is titaniferous magnetite, which is 
surrounded by leucoxene. Large skeletal and spear-shaped grains 
are primary as distinguished from the later forming magnetite 
associated with chlorite. 


Long, colorless, idiomorphic apatite needles reach a 


: 












32 


length up to 3 mm. These acicular grains are probably the chlor- 
apatite variety. 

Near the base of the sill there is an abnormal amount of 
sphene present, some wedge-shaped in outline, but more commonly in 
patches of blebs associated with leucoxene. 

LAKE ALDERSON SECTION 

Petrographic descriptions were made of five samples 
of a quartz diabase sill intruding the Siyeh formation of the Lewis 
Series at Lake Alderson in Waterton Park, Alberta. The location of 
the samples is given in the Appendix. The Lake Alderson sill is 
2200 feet stratigraphically below the basalt flows. 

Petrography 

The minerals of the diabase are as follows: pyroxene 
21-33%,, amphibole 4-8%, plagioclase 9-13%,, secondary minerals 
36-40%,, varietals and accessories 10-15%,. 

The pyroxene is reddish brown, titaniferous augite and 
occurs in a diabasic to subophitic texture. The augite is euhedral, 
twinned and shows varying degrees of corrosion in different parts 
of the sill. Some of the augite is altered to secondary amphibole, 
some to chlorite and iron oxide. The augite shows schiller structure. 
The optical properties of augite are: 2V = 62°, optically (+), 

C to Z = 45°. 

The amphibole consists of primary brown hornblende and 
secondary green amphibole or uralite. Both the augite and brown 






r 'U3 "i 3 r r, 


- 


'k.L. v g 


r. r, • Q 

-.. 3 : b 


0 


(+) 











33 


hornblende can be seen microscopically changing to the green uralite. 

The optical properties of the two hornblendes are: 

brown hornblende:- pleochroism - X = light brown, Y = red brown, 

Z = red brown, Z>Y>X ; 2V = 72°, optically (-) , C to Z = 15°. 
green amphibole:- pleochroism - X = light green, Y = dark green, 

Z - dark green, Z>Y>X ; 2V = 80°, optically (-) , C to Z = 17°. 

The feldspar of the diabase is labradorite and sodic 
andesine. The small tabular, glassy twinned plagioclase at the contact 
have An^ composition and are oriented parallel to the margins of the 
sill. Many grains are saussuritized and zoning shows a calcic feldspar 
core (An 54 ) to a sodic andesine rim (An^) . Small, glassy grains of 
late-forming plagioclase are generally sodic andesine in composition. 
Some of the plagioclase occurs as a granophyric intergrowth with 
quartz near the centre of the sill. 

Quartz is always present but forms less than 10 percent of 
the rock. Near the centre of the sill it occurs in the greatest 
amount, partly in a granophyric texture. 

The secondary minerals such as calcite, epidote, clinozoisite, 
kaolinite, sericite, chlorite and magnetite form up to 48 percent of 
the rock. 

Large amounts of calcite occur in the coarse phase of the 
sill where the feldspars are highly altered. 

Reaction rims are common in the diabase. Near the basal 
contact of the sill kelphitic rims of chlorite, ilmenite and limonite 
are very well developed. Iron-rich chlorite replaces the mafics with 
a rim of magnetite outlining the former mineral grains (see Plate II, 


fig. 2). 


) 


' j il.-d r.. 


, ~ d '.r ,:ijj 












34 - 


Titaniferous magnetite is present in all the specimens 
and may form up to 15 percent of the rock. Most of the titaniferous 
magnetite is surrounded by leucoxene. The large, octahedral and 
skeletal crystals of iron oxide are counted as primary in origin. 

The magnetite grains associated with the chlorite and forming reaction 
rims are considered to be the result of late deuteric action upon 
the early-formed mafic minerals. 

Accessory sphene and chlor-apatite are conspicuous in 
every thin section and form up to 2 percent of the rock. Pyrite, 
pyrrhotite and hematite occur as small blebs. 

PETROGRAPHY OF THE CONTACT ROCKS OF THE 
BLAKISTON BROOK & LAKE ALDERSON SILLS 

The contacts of the sills with the sediments at Blak- 
iston Brook and Lake Alderson in Waterton Park, Alberta, are a calc- 
flintas (Harker, 1932). Contact metamorphism produces a change in 
the carbonate rock over a zone 5 to 10 feet wide. The calc-flinta 
is green in color, cherty-looking and appears to be vesuvianite, 
epidote, wollastonite and garnet. 

Ramberg believes that the most important processes of 
contact metasomatism are caused by the difference in composition 
of the surrounding rocks and of the gases and solutions from the 
magma masses. A hornfels is produced where the sills intrude a 
quartzitic country rock but the sill develops a calc-flintas, where 
a carbonate rock is intruded. In both cases a high temperature 
gradient existed between the hot diabase magma and the solidified 






';C ' .o o' 


- 




r c, T ; 


s . ■> • r 


n 


:J itu 




a.c or. :lo o:\aoo 




'.o:, rj 


. 


■. o o v r h : o '• rh <. ‘ v <: a.a I f.: : n:•• 
>.’r a 1 j;a O/',-: :iy? ^r-tn 


, a * a ■ 


. ' 


/[:.! ) r 




. x7: r (T or : a or h { 




35 


country rock. 


PETROGRAPHY OF THE LOGAN PASS SILL 

The southward extension of the sill found at Lake 
Alderson passes beneath the parking lot at Logan Pass, Glacier 
National Park, Montana. Dyson (1949) remarked on the uniformity 
of the sill, about 100 feet thick, extending along strike for some 
20 miles. 

The mode, based on one thin section, is: pyroxene 8%,, 
amphibole 207 o , plagioclase 157o, quartz 107 o , secondary minerals 36%, 
varietals and accessories 11%. 

The pyroxene of the sill is red brown, titaniferous augite 
interwoven with tabular plagioclase laths in a subophitic texture. 
Cores of augite are surrounded by uralitized, green amphibole. 

Some of the augite is replaced by chlorite and magnetite. 

Amphibole makes up 20 percent of the specimen occurring 
as primary brown hornblende and secondary green amphibole. The 
optical characteristics are: 

brown hornblende:- pleochroism - X = light brown, Y = dark brown, 

Z « dark brown, Z>Y>X ; 2V = 70°, optically (-), C to Z = 15°. 
green amphibole:- pleochroism - X = light green, Y = dark green, 

Z = dark green, Z >Y>X ; 2V = 80°, optically (-) , C to Z = 17°. 

The feldspars of the sample are saussuritized plagioclase 
laths. Some of the smaller glassy grains are of andesine composition 
(An 35 ). The larger plagioclase feldspars, which were originally more 



3 




dra a.:": : a. 


( d bi)h ;r;o:czxni$ 


3 :: ! 


3 b . : ■"* i - d. .>:• . *r.x : 4 .. a a 




',T[ 




d. ; 


a 


■ j £•..' •> a'. • a'.' 


a:: ’ : v : ' . a . v:;' ^3.3.'.p i 


: i , . 3 


3' " 










calcic than andesine, are altered to secondary minerals. No fresh 
plagioclase more calcic than An^ was observed. 

Quartz forms up to 10 percent of the specimen. Inter¬ 
growths of quartz and feldspar exhibit granophyric texture. Some 
quartz grains are 1 mm. in size. 

Subhedral grains of intersertal epidote up to 2 mm. in 
length replace the feldspar as well as the mafic minerals. Iron- 
rich chlorite replaces the mafics, surrounded by magnetite forming 
a reaction rim and outlining the former mineral. 

Skeletal and octahedral crystals of titaniferous magnetite, 
which is largely altered to leucoxene, are quite evident. Primary 
acicular apatite needles and sphene make up 2 percent of the rock. 



3 bnrr 


nr h .-."t 


. 3: 




ft 




- r : r-h 


r 3 0... 




h 


ors v 


„ 1 i f 


:o.' -r:.' o: br 










37 


CHAPTER VI 


MODE OF EMPLACEMENT AND ALTERATIONS 

ASSOCIATED WITH THE PURCELL DIABASES 


Recent studies of the Purcell Series, particularly those 
of Reesor (1957), suggest that a pre-Purcell cratonic area was 
located to the east of the present site of the Purcell Mountains. 
Sediments derived from this craton accumulated in the Beltian geo¬ 
syncline, with a general thickening from east to west of the series 
as a whole. If these spatial relations are accepted, certain concepts 
may be evolved. If the concepts match the observed data, they may be 
a valid explanation of the regional geologic history. In the following 
paragraphs several unproved concepts are set forth for evaluation. 

MODE OF EMPLACEMENT 

A hinge belt lay between the Beltian geosyncline to the 
west and the cratonic shelf to the east. The hinge line extended 
from the present site of the Rocky Mountains in eastern British Columbia 
south to the Snake River Plain in Idaho. It was a zone of weakness 
in the crust which was responsive to stresses in the geosyncline. 

Tension fractures and fissures within the geosyncline allowed huge 
tabular basaltic intrusives to come up into the sedimentary strata. 

The phenomenon of chilling displayed by fine-grained border 
facies of the sills testifies to their igneous origin. Low grade 
contact metamorphism caused alterations of the sills and surrounding 
rocks. The diabasic sills were attacked by their own late magmatic 









. v.' ij 3: 










38 - 


fluids and fell victim to autometamorphism. The present mineral 
associations of the Purcell sills reflect the different cooling 
histories of the different sills, which in turn are related to the 
depth of intrusion and the thickness of the sill. 

ALTERATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH THE PURCELL SILLS 


The mineralogical alterations of the Purcell diabase 
following intrusion may be compared to those in a basalt found in 
the outer contact zone of the Oslo region, Norway (Barth, 1952, p,322). 

Scheme of Reactions Taking Place in Basaltic Rock 



Carried away 


CaO 

Si02 


Three types of alteration will be discussed in the following 


paragraphs: amphibolization, saussuritization, and granophyric alteration. 

















■) mid 


b r:.ti j 






b 






o.. .rr.cm.t 


ri 


Od 






X 


j :.-bd ::o 


;! or; 


b.b 


:r '). 


. ob.: 




: 



















39 


Amphibolization 

The development of a secondary amphibole or uralite 
from pyroxene is a relatively common deuteric alteration in a basic 
intrusive and is called amphibolization. Many of the previous work¬ 
ers on the Purcell sills consider the amphibole to be a uralite, or 
secondary hornblende’, most identify it as actinolite. The optic 
properties of the amphiboles have been discussed extensively in 
previous papers, both in Canada and south of the International 
Boundary. 

F.C. Calkins (1909), after studying the northwestern 
Montana sills, surmised that the amphibole is secondary and suggested 
that these rocks are uralitized diabase and gabbro. 

R. A. Daly (1912) concludes that the fibrous amphibole is 
secondary after the compact form. He found no trace of any pyroxene 
or pseudomorphs of pyroxene. 

S. J. Schofield (1915) found pyroxene in varying stages of 
alteration to uralite in the Purcell sills. He states that pyroxene 
changed to a fibrous amphibole which in turn was changed to a more 
compact amphibole. 

A.L. Anderson (1930) found that amphibole in several of the 
Precambrian sills of the Clark Fork district, Idaho, contained cores 
of hypersthene and augite. He suggests that the amphibole in all 
these sills had replaced pyroxene. ICirkham and Ellis (1926) were of 
the same opinion concerning the amphibole in the Precambrian sills in 


Boundary County, Idaho. 



' 



. 


:or 










: f a • 








, 


: o 3 














40 - 


Gibson and Jenks (1938) have discussed more fully the 
amphibolization of the sills in northwestern Montana. They believe 
the amphibolization to have been caused by hydrothermal solutions 
related to Mesozoic granitic intrusives. 

Rice (1941) concludes that the amphibole is probably an 
alteration product of pyroxene. In one instance pyroxene occurs 
partly replaced by amphibole. 

Conclusions: 

No pyroxene was recognized by the author in the St. Mary 
Lake, Kingsgate and Kimberley sills. The writer believes that a 
prolonged cooling history for these sills permitted complete trans¬ 
formation of pyroxene into amphibole. 

In the Waterton Lake area the amphibolization of the sills 
was arrested by more rapid cooling and both pyroxene and amphibole 
are present. 

The difference in rate of cooling may be related to depth 
of intrusion. The sills in the St. Mary Lake and Kingsgate area 
are 26,000 feet stratigraphically below the Purcell lavas while the 
Waterton sills are only 2200 feet below the flows. The precise 
location within the sill of the pyroxene described by Schofield (1914) 
and Rice (1941) is not given. If hypersthene is present it would 
normally occur within the lower third of the thick sills (Turner and 
Verhoogen, 1951). The basal parts of the thick sills were not 


sampled in this study. 



■)( 










41 


Saussuritization 

Saussuritizatlon is widespread in the sills. Near the 
fine-grained borders of the sills the most calcic plagioclase feld¬ 
spar found was labradorite. Grains of plagioclase, zoned from a 
labradorite core to a sodic andesine rim, are prominent throughout 
the sills. The original basic plagioclase is attacked and altered 
to an aggregate of a less calcic plagioclase, sericite, epidote, 
clinozoisite, calcite and secondary quartz. The production of the 
saussurite group of minerals is not restricted to the alteration of 
the feldspar alone, as can be seen in the diagram from Barth. 

Saussuritization is produced by hot residual magmatic 
solutions acting on mafic and felsic minerals. The fact that this 
alteration is so widespread, and reported in a similar pattern from 
all the sills examined, supports the theory of a late deuteric origin 
for the saussuritized sills. 

Granophyric Alteration 

Granophyric intergrowths are conspicuous in the marginal 
portions of various diabase sills intruding the Purcell and Lewis 
rocks. Granophyres may be either a product of reaction between the 
diabase magma and invaded quartzites, or the acid residium from the 
magma formed by differentiation. Gravitational differentiation seems 
to be ineffective in sills less than 500 feet thick (Grout, 1932). 

Granophyric rocks have a texture characterized by the 
irregular intergrowth of blebs, patches and threads of quartz in a 






> . V 


.a t : :■ :<:i; 


■ 






3 ... «•. . ,/.:• 




: . ■ ■. - n . ?• • •" ■ 






. 


■ 


: 


r j 


'j: Jv;.: . r : 

. : • . . : ■ ■ 1 - ■ 

•. :: n '.i.. 3. r b ::■,<> v 

- ■ 

•' :: . .:3 ; 3 : ' 3 .. 


:: . : £ ' ■ 
- ,i'.n;--' 1 , 

' 

\ ; 












- 


: ; . ' . 
















- 42 - 

base of feldspar. In the Purcell sills the feldspar is sodic 
andesine. Some degree of textural intergrowth involving quartz 
and feldspar is present in every rock. The degree and pattern of 
the intergrowth is quite variable. 

Leighton (1954), in a study of Proterozoic sills in northern 
Wisconsin, describes several types of texture which are comparable to 
those in the Purcells. These are: cuneiform, myrmekitic, irregular, 
radial and spherulitic. 

Cuneiform type (PI. Ill , figs. 1, 2) - Most authors describe 
this type as an ordinary micropegmatitic texture. It shows a regular 
pattern of wedge-shaped intergrowths of quartz and alkali feldspar. 

Myrmekitic type (PI. Ill , fig. 3) - A gradation may exist 
between this and the above types. The myrmekitic type shows elongated 
blebs or wormlike patches of quartz in feldspar. 

Irregular type (Pi. IV, figs. 2, 3) - This type has a less 
regular degree of intergrowth. 

Radiating or Radial type (PI. IV, fig. 1) - This type 
possesses a radial arrangement of intergrowths usually cuneiform 
or myrmekitic in character. It may consist of a central core of 
feldspar from which the intergrowths radiate outwards. 

Spherulitic type - This spherulitic intergrowth is feathery 
in shape and on a finer scale than the radiating type. However, this 
type was not recognized in the thin sections that were examined. 

Each type of intergrowth may appear by itself in one thin 
section. The gradational relationships in the degree of development 





t 


(1 j 


: : ror 





I'l] 


J 


, ;:d 







:.! > .. 


;i. c 


. bn■ 




i 




b :: re re: 


' > . f . j ",'3 a 


: h i : 









43 


of granophyric texture is not known. A decreasing anorthite content 
in the plagioclase feldspar tends to promote the development of inter¬ 
growths. The sodic andesine type plagioclase was found to be the 
most likely host for the quartz blebs. 

Origin of Granophyric Texture: 

Several possible theories may explain the formation of 
granophyre. These are: 

(1) Primary - (a) eutectic crystallization 

(b) simultaneous crystallization without eutectics 

(2) Secondary - (a) deuteric action or hydrothermal alteration 

(b) solid diffusion or some other granitization process. 

The origin of granophyric texture has been discussed 
exhaustively and may be still unsolved. Some writers suggest that 
the intergrowths may have both primary and secondary origins. 

Vogt supports the concept of eutectic crystallization but 
the finding of a wide variation in amounts of quartz to feldspar in 
the intergrowth eliminates the possibility of a eutectic relation. 

Wahlstrom states that crystal forces can produce the same 
features regardless of replacement origin or simultaneous growth. 

Simultaneous crystallization and replacement probably occur together. 

The occurrence of granophyre in unaltered diabases supports 
primary origin. In the present example the evidence favors quartz 
replacement of feldspar to give the granophyric intergrowth. 





, 




rxt ab 




nr,?Q 














44 - 


CHAPTER VII 


GEOCHRONOLOGY 


Age dating was undertaken to establish an age for the 
intrusion of the Purcell sills. The presence of biotite in the 
hornfels at the contact of the sill provides an opportunity to 
obtain an age by the potassium-argon method. 

COLLECTION OF SAMPLES 

Two hornfels samples were collected from the upper "A" 
sill contact at Kingsgate, British Columbia. 

Sample No. M-5B - 5 feet below the lower contact of "A" sill 

Sample No. M-6 - 35 feet below the lower contact of "A" sill 

One hornfels sample was collected from the upper or "A" 
sill contact at St. Mary Lake, British Columbia. 

Sample No. SM-8 - 2 feet above the upper contact of "A" sill 

PREPARATION OF MATERIAL 

The hornfelsic rock containing the biotite was mechanic¬ 
ally crushed and pulverized. The disaggregated sample was put through 
a series of sieves consisting of the following screen sizes, 35, 60, 
80, 100, and 200 meshes to the inch (U.S. Sieve Series). 

The material on the 200 mesh screen was transferred to a 
clean piece of paper and spread out in very thin films. A small hand 
magnet was then used to extract the highly magnetic fraction. 

The sample on the 200 mesh screen was separated into light 















t ' :• ■ . *. 

















- 45 


and heavy fractions using the heavy liquid tetrabromoethane (sp. gr. 
2.96 at 20° C.). The heavy fraction of the sink and float method 
was further separated into different magnetic fractions using a 
Frantz isodynamic separator. The strongly magnetic fraction was 
removed from the sample at a current strength of 0.2 amps. The 
setting of the Frantz separator was constant at a slope of 15 
degrees and a tilt of 8 degrees. A setting of 0.4 amps, effectively 
removed all the biotite from the sample. The above procedure was 
repeated several times to obtain a purer sample. 

The biotite sample still contained some other minerals 
but the biotite was removed by hand picking. The sample was passed 
over a series of paper sheets, allowing the biotite flakes to adhere 
to the paper. This separation was rather tedious but effectively 
produced a purer biotite sample. 

The three samples of biotite were dated by H. Baadsgaard, 
Argon extraction for sample M-6 was made at the University of Minne¬ 
sota. Samples M-5B and SM-8 were put through the recently completed 
argon line at the University of Alberta. All mass spectrometric 
measurements were done at the University of Minnesota. 

RESULTS 

The potassium-argon age determinations received from 
H. Baadsgaard are as follows: 



: o: 


o 


t f - 




o 



















46 - 


Sample No. 

Location 

Potassium 

analysis 

a 4° /k 4° 

Age 

M-5B 

Kingsgate, B.C. 

2.77% K 

0.0408 y 

620 m.y. 

M-6 

Kingsgate, B.C. 

2.497, K 

0.0392 x 

600 m.y. 

SM-8 

St. Mary Lake, B.C. 

5.49% K 

0.0200 5 

329 m.y. 


All dates for the above samples were calculated using: 

= 0.557 x 10’ 10 yrs. 

= 0.472 x 10~ 9 yrs. 

R = 0.118 

INTERPRETATIONS AND COMPARISON 

Age determinations by isotopic composition of galena 
samples have been made by Cumming, Wilson, Farquhar and Russell 
(1955) on galena ore specimens from the Sullivan Mine and North 
Star Hill Mine, Kimberley, B.C. They determined the ore to be 
1170 t 200; 990 1 200 and 995 1 200; 1020 t 200 m.y. respectively. 

Uranium-lead age determinations have been obtained by Kerr 
and Kulp (1957) on three different pitchblende specimens from the 
Sunshine Mine, Coeur d’Alene district, Kellogg, Idaho. The uranium 
samples were taken from veins occurring in the fractured St. Regis 

907 206 

formation of the Beltian sediments. The isotopic ages (Pb 7 /Pb ) 
for the three samples of pitchblende are 885 t 50 m.y.; 1190 t 30 m.y. 
and 1035 t 35 m.y. 

Kerr and Kulp (1952) gave an age of 850 t 50 m.y. for 
uraninite from the Sunshine Mine in an earlier paper. 










47 


A possibility exists whereby the lead and uranium ore 
deposits, located in the Purcell rocks, could have been mobilized 
from a pre-Purcell basement by Paleozoic or Mesozoic tectonic 
activity. The dates calculated from the lead isotope ratios give 
the time of separation of the lead from the earth's mantle. 

The apparent age of a galena sample in its present deposit may be 
older than its final time of crystallization. 

The two values of 600 and 620 million years determined 
for the biotite from the contact of the Purcell intrusion at 
Kingsgate, British Columbia, have a 3% difference but are within 
estimated analytical error. The lower figure of 329 million years 
determined for the biotite sample from the St. Mary sill may 
reflect argon leakage caused by the heating effect of Mesozoic 
intrusives in the St. Mary Lake area. 

The age of approximately 600 million years determined 
at Kingsgate represents the minimum age of the Purcell sills. 

This age may also be too low due to argon leakage. However, if 
the Purcell intrusives and extrusives are of the same age the 
depositional and erosional processes represented by the Upper 
Purcell and Windermere Series could have been completed between 
600 and 470 million years ago. A date of 470 million years 
probably corresponds quite closely to the time of deposition 
of the Lower Cambrian Cranbrook formation which unconformably 


overlies the Proterozoic formations. 









48 - 


CHAPTER VIII 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 


The Purcell Series represents a large volume of sediments 
apparently derived from an eastern source (Reesor, 1957). The 
11,000 feet of dolomitic and calcareous sediments now preserved 
in the section at Waterton Lake are believed to represent the 
near-shore equivalents of the 45,000 feet of fine elastics forming 
the Purcell Series to the west. This wedge-shaped assemblage of 
sediments is compared by Reesor (1957) to the present Mississippi 
delta deposits of the Gulf Coast geosyncline. 

The Purcell intrusions have mineral compositions and 
textures which can be related to deuteric alteration and autometa¬ 
morphism of quartz diabase sills. No pyroxene was recognized by 
the author in the St. Mary Lake, Kingsgate and Kimberley sills. 

The writer believes that a prolonged cooling history for these 
sills permitted complete transformation of pyroxene into amphibole 
as shown by the relict subophitic texture. Schofield (1914) reports 
pyroxene in the thick St. Mary sill, but the basal parts of the 
thick sills were not sampled in this study. In the Waterton Lake 
area the uralitization of the sills was arrested by more rapid 
cooling, and pyroxene and amphibole are present in a diabasic 
texture. Augite and brown hornblende can be seen microscopically 
changing to the green amphibole. The green amphiboles and the most 
basic plagioclase feldspars of both the St. Mary Lake and Waterton 
Lake diabases when compared show similar optical properties. 





: . . .. 73 ca 

. ' . : - . 33 

\ . . 3 3 . .. t . J>. .' ; . 1 3 \ 




' 


3 . 3 


■ 


;! : v ’3. ■ c:I. 




r ■30,% 


i 


h 


- 










! 












- 49 


The present mineral associations of the Purcell sills 
reflect the different cooling histories of the different sills, 
which in turn are related to the depth of intrusion. The sills 
in the St. Mary Lake area are 26,000 feet stratigraphically below 
the Purcell lavas while the Waterton sills are only 2200 feet 
below the flows. This concept is based on the assumption that 
the Purcell sills and flows are genetically related and were em¬ 
placed contemporaneously. Recent detailed mapping by the Geological 
Survey of Canada shows similar quartz-diorite intrusions cutting 
the Upper Purcell strata, but the age of these intrusions remains 
in doubt. Basic dykes of at least two ages are reported in the 
Purcell equivalents of Montana and Idaho. 

Due to contact metamorphism., a fine-grained, equigranular, 
biotite hornfels was developed adjacent to the contacts of the Purcell 
sills with the sediments. The biotite offered a possibility of 
dating the time of intrusion. The potassium-argon age of approx¬ 
imately 600 million years determined at Kingsgate, British Columbia, 
represents the minimum age of the Purcell sills. This age may be 
too low due to the heating effect of the Mesozoic intrusives, which 
would cause argon leakage. However, if the Purcell intrusives and 
extrusives are of the same age, the events following the intrusion 
of the Purcell magma could have taken place in the available time 


since that date. 





REFERENCES 


Anderson, A.L. (1930): Geology and Ore Deposits of the Clark Fork 
District, Idaho, Idaho Bureau Mines & Geol. Bull. No. 12. 

Barth, T.F.W. (1952): Theoretical Petrology, John Wiley & Sons, 
p. 322. 

Berry, A.D. (1951): A study of the Aldridge formation, St. Mary 

Lake Area, British Columbia, Unpub. M.Sc. thesis, University 
of Alberta. 

Berry, G.W. (1943): Stratigraphy and Structure at Three Forks, 

Montana, Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull., vol. 54, p. 2-29. 

Bostock, H.S., Mulligan, R. and Douglas, R.J.W. (1957): Geol. Surv. 

Can. Geology and Economic Minerals of Canada, Econ. Geol. 

Series No. 1, 4th edit., p. 283-392. 

Calkins, F.C. (1909): A geological reconnaissance in northern Idaho 
and N.W. Montana, U.S. Geol. Surv. Bull. 384, p. 49. 

Calkins, F.C. and Jones, E.L. (1913): Geology of the St. Joe-Clear- 
water region, Idaho, U.S. Geol. Surv. Bull. 530, p. 75-86. 

Clapp, C.H. (1932): Geology of a portion of the Rocky Mountains of 
Northwestern Montana, State of Montana Bureau Mines and 
Geol. Mem. No. 4. 

Clapp, C.H. and Deiss, C.F. (1931): Correlation of Montana Algonkian 
formations, Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull., vol. 42, p. 673-696. 

Cumming, G.L., Wilson, J.T., Farquhar, R.M. and Russell, R.D. (1955): 

Some dates and subdivisions of the Canadian Shield, Proc. 

Geol. Assoc. Can., vol. 7, pt. II, (May, 1955). 

Daly, R.A. (1912): North American Cordillera 49th Parallel, Part I, 
Geol. Surv. Can. Mem. No. 38, p. 221. 

Deiss, C.F. (1935): Cambrian-Algonkian unconformity in western Montana, 
Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull., vol. 46, p, 95-124. 

Douglas, R.J.W. (1953): Preliminary Map, Waterton, Alberta, Geol. 

Surv. Can. Paper 52-10. 

Dyson, J.L. (1949): The Geologic Story of Glacier National Park, 

Glacier Nat. Hist. Assoc. Spec. Bull. No. 3, p. 11-13. 

Eckelman, W.R. and Kulp, J.L. (1957): Uranium Method of Age Deter¬ 
mination, Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull., vol. 68, p. 1130. 

Fenton, C.L. and Fenton, M.A. (1937): Belt Series of the North; 

Stratigraphy, Sedimentation, Paleontology, Geol. Soc. Amer. 
Bull., vol. 48, p. 1873-1969. 









51 


Gibson, R. (1948): Geology and Ore Deposits of the Libby Quadrangle, 
Montana, U.S. Geol. Surv. Bull. 956. 

Gibson, R., Jenks, W.F., Campbell, I. (1941): Stratigraphy of the 
Belt Series in Libby and Trout Creek Quadrangles, North¬ 
western Montana and Northern Idaho, Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull., 
vol. 52, p. 363-379. 

Gibson, R. and Jenks, W.F. (1938): Amphibolization of Sills in the 
Libby Quadrangle, Montana, Amer. Mineralogist, vol. 23, 
p. 302-313. 

Grout, F.F. (1932): Petrology and Petrography, McGraw-Hill, p. 253. 

Harker, A. (1932): Metamorphism, Methuen & Co., Ltd. 

Hume, G.S. (1932): Waterton Lakes-Flathead Area, Geol. Surv. Can. 

Sum. Rept., pt. B, p. 1-20. 

Jure, A.E. (1929): Petrology of the Purcell Sills, Unpub. Ph.D. 
thesis, Univ. Wisconsin. 

Kerr, P.F., Kulp, J.L. (1952): Precambrian Uraninite, Sunshine Mine, 
Idaho, Science, vol. 115, Nq. 2978, p. 86-88. 

Kirkham, V.R.D. and Ellis, E.W. (1926): Geology and Ore Deposits 

of Boundary County, Idaho, Idaho Bur. Mines & Geol. Bull. 

10, p. 37. 

Leech, G.B. (1952): St. Mary Lake, B.C., Geol. Surv. Can. Pap. 52-15. 

- (1957): St. Mary Lake, B.C., Geol. Surv. Can. Map 15-1957 

Leighton, M.W. (1954): Petrogenesis of a Gabbro-Granophyre Complex 
in Northern Wisconsin, Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull., vol. 65, 
p. 401-442. 

Mertie, J.B., Fischer, R.P. and Hobbs, S.W. (1951): Geology of the 

Canyon Ferry Quadrangle, Montana, U.S. Geol. Surv. Bull. 972 

Park, C.F. and Cannon, R.S. (1943): Geology and Ore Deposits of the 
Metaline Quadrangle, Wash., U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap. 202. 

Pardee, J.T. (1911): Geology and Mineralization of the Upper St. Joe 
River Basin, Idaho, U.S. Geol. Surv. Bull. 470, p. 39-61. 

Reesor, J.E. (1953a): Findlay Creek Map-Area, B.C., Geol. 

Paper 53-34. 


Surv. Can. 









52 


Reesor, J.E. (1953b): Dewar Creek Map-Area, B.C., Geol. Surv. Can. 
Paper 53-25. 

- (1957): The Proterozoic in Canada, Roy. Soc. Can. 

Spec. Pub. No. 2, p. 150-176. 

Rice, H.M.A. (1937): Cranbrook Map-Area, B.C., Geol. Surv. Can. 

Mem. 207. 

- (1941): Nelson Map-Area, East Half, B.C., Geol. Surv. 

Can. Mem. 228. 

Schofield, S.J. (1914): The origin of Granite (Micropegmatite) in 
the Purcell Sills, Geol. Surv. Can. Museum Bull. No. 2, 
p. 1-34. 

- (1914): The Precambrian (Beltian) Rocks of South¬ 
eastern British Columbia and their Correlation, Geol. Surv. 
Can. Museum Bull. No. 2, p. 79-91. 

- (1915): Geology of Cranbrook Map-Area, B.C., Geol. 

Surv. Can. Mem. 76. 

Scholten, R.K. (1957): Paleozoic evolution of the geosynclinal 
margin north of the Snake River Plain, Idaho-Montana, 

Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull., vol. 68, p. 151. 

Scholten, R.K., Keenmon, K.A. and Kupsch, W.O. (1955): Geology of 
the Lima region, southwestern Montana and adjacent Idaho, 
Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull. 66, p. 345-404. 

Scott, B. (1954): The diorite complex beneath the Sullivan orebody 
with its associated alterations, Unpub. M.Sc. thesis. 

Queen's Univ. 

Swanson, C.O. and Gunning, H.C. (1945): Geology of the Sullivan Mine, 
Can. Min. and Metal. Bull. No. 402, p. 661-665. 

Turner, F.J. and Verhoogen, J. (1951): Igneous and Metamorphic 
Petrology, McGraw-Hill, p. 185. 

Walker, J.F. (1926): Geology and Mineral deposits of Windermere 
Map-Area, British Columbia, Geol. Surv. Can. Mem. 148. 







ry r 











PLATE I 


Relict Subophitic Textures 
Crossed nicols, x 80 


fig. 1. SM-9, St. Mary Sill Contact 

Plagioclase feldspar laths 
piercing green amphiboles 


fig. 2. SM-10, St. Mary Sill, 4 feet below upper contact 

Plagioclase feldspars interwoven 
with green poikilitic amphiboles 


fig. 3, SM-10 

Plagioclase'feldspars intergrown 
with green twinned amphiboles 




PLATE I 




fig. 2 



fig. 3 




PLATE II 


Mafic Minerals 
Crossed nicols, x 80 


fig. 1. SM-12, St. Mary Sill, 30 feet below upper contact 

A curved, twinned, green' poikilitic 
amphibole showing a rosette texture 


fig. 2. 3176, Lake Alderson Sill Contact 

A reaction rim of limonite, magnetite, 
chlorite, surrounding an augite core 


fig. 3. 3179, Lake Alderson Sill, 5 feet below upper contact 

Minerals shown are twinned brown hornblende, 
prismatic apatite needles, and magnetite 


II 

PLATE II 



fig. 1 



fig. 3 



PLATE III 


Granophyric Alteration 
Crossed nicols, x 80 


fig. 1. 2999, Logan Pass Sill 

Cuneiform type of intergrowth texture 


fig. 2. M-2, Moyie Sill, 10 feet above lower contact 

Cuneiform type of intergrowth texture 


fig. 3. M-3, Moyie Sill Contact 



Myrmekitic type of intergrowth texture 


Ill 


PLATE III 





fig. 3 







UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected Sept. 1957 

Collector G. Hunt 


SM-19 

Specimen No. 3074 

Locality St. Mary Lake, B. 

Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 14 ft. above upper contact "A" sill 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. light grey w.s. rusty 

Grain size fine grained 

Texture: mass i ve 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: quartzitic, granoblastic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS % 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 

Quartz 

60 

Alteration products (z) 

Biotite 

20 

Microcline 

10 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

Muscovite 

10 

Varietal (x) 







GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 

MINERALIZATION 


Accessory (y) 





Magnetite 

Hematite 

Apatite 

1 





SPECIAL FEATURES: 

1. Fresh brown Biotite flakes ranging up to 0.3 mm. in size, some felted clusters. 

2. Quartz grains of 0.1 mm. average size in a characteristic mosaic with sutured 

intergrowths and few strain shadows. 

3. Muscovite in 0.2 mm. shreds. 

4. Hematite veinlet due to outcrop weathering. 

NOTE Microcline grains with indistinct twinning were recognized, but could not be 
separated from quartz in routine counting procedures. The K-feldspar content 
of the rock is estimated at 107 o . No twinned plagioclase grains were observed. 


Biotite hornfels 


G. Hunt 


CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 













a 



UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


SM-7 


Date Collected 

April 1957 

Specimen No. 

2893 

Collector 

G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash 

Locality S t . 
Reference 

Mary Lake, B. C 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 7 ft. above upper contact "A" sill 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. light grey w.s. rusty 

Grain size fine to very fine grained 
Texture: massive 

Alteration: 

III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: quartzitic, granoblastic 


Structure: original 

laminated 

secondary 



PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS % 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 

Alteration products (z) 


Quartz 

60 


Chlorite 

15 

Microcline 

10 

Epidote 4 

Clinozoisite 

Biotite 

10 

Varietal (x) 


Muscovite 





GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 

MINERALIZATION 


Accessory (y) 





Apatite 

Magnetite 

1 





SPECIAL FEATURES: 


1. Fresh biotite flakes with average size 0.15 mm., some 0.3 mm. 

2. Few quartz grains 0.2 mm. but majority less than 0.1 mm. with sutured intergrowths 

and some strain shadows. 

3. Chlorite with anomalous blue colors replacing biotite. 

4. Few granular epidote patches 0.4 mm. 

5. Magnetite veinlet. 


Biotite hornfels 


G. Hunt 


CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 



















... : ' 





UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected Sept. 1957 

Collector G. Hunt 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 5 ft. above upper contact "A" sill 


II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 


Color: f.s. 
Grain size 
Texture: 
Alteration: 


light grey 
fine grained 
massive 


W.s. rusty 


SM-18 

Specimen No. 3061 

Locality st. Mary Lake, B.C. 

Reference 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: quartzitic, granoblastic 
Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 

Alteration products (z) 


Quartz 

Microcline 

65 

10 

Epidote 

Clinozoisite 

3 

Biotite 

18 



Chlorite 

1 



Varietal (x) 








GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Accessory (y) 






Magnetite 

Zircon 

rutile 

-Apatite- 

1 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 


1. Fresh tabular biotite flakes up to 0.3 mm., some felty clusters 0.5 mm. size. 

2. Quartz grains range from 0.1 mm. to 0.2 mm. 


G. Hunt 


Biotite hornfels 
CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 































. 




















■ 

; 






' . 

' ■ . 










- - - l 
















3 .'.' i'iCiji- - . . . ;5 <:•' 






VIII 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


SM-17 


Date Collected 

Sept. 1957 

Specimen No. 3060 

Collector 

G. Hunt 

Locality st. Mary Lake, B.C 
Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 3 ft. above upper contact "A" sill 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. light grey w.s. rusty 

Grain size fine grained 
Texture: massive 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: quartzitic, granoblastic 
Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




Quartz 

60 

Epidote 

5 

Biotite 

18 

Microcline 

10 

Clinozoisite 


Chlorite 

7 

Varietal (x) 








GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Accessory (y) 






Magnetite 

1 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 


1. Fresh biotite flakes average 0.2 mm. in size, some 0.5 mm. 

2. Few quartz grains up to 0.3 mm. but average less. 


Biotite hornfels 


G. Hunt 


CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 






















. -... 






. 




, on ■; 

: 




, 


: 








' 


















: . , Jj' 












UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


SM-8 

Date Collected Sept. 1957 Specimen No. 2894 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality st. Mary Lake, B.C. 

Reference 

I I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 1 ft. above upper contact "A" sill 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. light grey w .s. rusty 

Grain size fine grained 

Texture: massive 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: quartzitic, granoblastic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 



Quartz 

60 



Biotite 18 

Microcline 

10 

Chlorite 

Muscovite 

10 


Varietal (x) 


Epidote 

Clinozoisite 





GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 





Apatite 

Zircon 

Magnetite 

1 





SPECIAL FEATURES: 

1. Fresh biotite flakes up to 0.2 mm., some clusters are 0.5 mm. in size. 

2. Quartz grains with quartzitic intergrowths are 0.1 mm. in size. 

3. Some chlorite replacing the biotite. 

NOTE No appreciable change in grain size in this contact rock. 

Microcline twinning was seen in minor amounts throughout the hornfels. 
The recrystallization of the feldspar and quartz into a fine grained 
equigranular mosaic made it difficult to separate the minerals. 

No albite or carlsbad twinned plagioclase grains were recognized. 

The greatest degree of contact metamorphism produced by the sill was 
the biotite zone. 


Biotite hornfels 


G. Hunt 


CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 








. _ 


.. n 



-n - 



. 




















G C; C ' ■ ‘ :■ 




..•I „G 


G 


: . 





uli .[ . . ,:..3 4_j" 

■ - • G G ' . . : 

G . % . I'lG . . ;■ ;g . ,\ g ' . 


J ■ ' 


.. ■ 



G. 



■. .1 




i'..:l ■ 







UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected April 1957 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash 


Specimen No. 
Locality g £ 
Reference 


SM-9 

2895 

Mary Lake, 


B.C. 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: upper contact "A" sill with the Aldridge quartzites 


H. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium greyish green w . s . iron stained 
Grain size medium grained, 1-3 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: hypidiomorphic, subophitic, granophyric 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS ^ 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 



Actinolite 

60 

Epidote-clinozoisite 5 

Biotite 

6 

Plagioclase 

15 

Kaolinite-sericite 6 



Quartz 

5 

Calcite 



Varietal (x) 


Magnesium chlorite 



Sphene 

2 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 

MINERALIZATION 


Accessory (y) 





Pyrite 





Pyrrhotite 





Magnetite 

1 




Apatite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 

1. Tabular plagioclase feldspar laths up to 1 mm. in length, some curved, bent and 

altered to secondary minerals, pierce the amphiboles in a subophitic texture. 
Plagioclase An52, zoned plagioclase range An54 to An36. 

2. Twinned, green, pleochroic, poikilitic amphiboles with enclosed small feldspar 

grains are the Actinolite variety. Some are quite fibrous. 

3. Biotite flakes up to 0.5 mm. in length replacing the amphiboles. 

4. Intersertal secondary minerals such as 

granular epidote with anomalous blue interference color and 

magnesium chlorite with very low interference color and aggregate structure. 

5. Minor intergrowths of quartz and feldspar. 

6 . Pyrite and pyrrhotite present. 

7. Patches of sphene which formed before the amphiboles. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 
PETROGRAPHER 
















' 






1 


8 f. ■ ! I) . :x£ 







UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 


PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


SM-10 

Date Collected April 1957 Specimen No. 2896 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality st. Mary Lake, B.C. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 4 ft. below upper contact of "A" sill with the Aldridge quartzite 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. Medium greyish gree%. s . iron stained 
Grain size medium to coarse, 1-3 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: hypidiomorphic, subophitic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Essential 

Alteration products (z) 


Actinolite 

55 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

12 


Plagioclase 

13 

Kaolinite-sericite 

10 


Quartz 

7 

Magnesium chlorite 



Varietal (x) 


Calcite 



Sphene 

2 





GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 

Magnetite 

1 




Hematite 

Zircon 

Apatite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 


L. Plagioclase feldspar laths up to 1 mm. in length, two types An53 and An35 are 
partly saussuritized. 

2. Twinned, poikilitic, green amphiboles (3 mm.) with enclosed feldspar chadacrysts. 

Feldspars and amphiboles show relict subophitic textures. 

3. Intersertal epidote-clinozoisite. 

Cuneiform intergrowths of quartz and feldspar (4%). 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 
PETROGRAPHER 





















• '--C 

. ” : : 

, ■- a 









U P . P'U 


,::ivp. .■ - 











UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


SM-ll 

Date Collected April 1957 Specimen No. 2897 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality St. Mary Lake, B.C. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 15 ft. below upper contact of "A" sill with the Aldridge quartzites 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium greyish green w . s . iron stained 
Grain size medium 1-3 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: hypidiomorphic, subophitic 
Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

Essential 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

Alteration products (z) 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Actinolite 

58 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

5 


Plagioclase 

10 

Kaolinite-sericite 

20 


Quartz 

5 

Calcite 



Varietal (x) 


Leucoxene 

Magnesium chlorite 



Sphene 

2 





GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 





Magnetite 

Ilmenite 

1 




Apatite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 


L. Plagioclases are cloudy and largely altered to secondary minerals, An51. 

1 . Green, pleochroic, twinned uralite or secondary amphiboles are poikilitic 
with earlier crystallized feldspar and quartz as chadacrysts. Some are 
subhedral. Actinolite - 2V = 80°; opt. (-); C to Z = 17°. 

3. Granophyre with blebs of quartz intergrown with feldspar (37») . 

Titaniferous magnetite altered to leucoxene. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 
PETROGRAPHER 














■ ■ ! 



: ; >: ' ■... 1 *i •. ' ':l 

xti o . 

> j •. r -, i .0. • . j ’ . .1 ': a / : ' . v • ■ ./ 

. . _ • ■ 

■ > ,' . ■ \ J '■... : v s 1 . ::o a r i .i.id 









UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


SM-12 

Date Collected April 1957 Specimen No. 2898 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality st. Mary Lake, B.C. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 30 ft. below upper contact of "A" sill with the Aldridge quartzites 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium greyish green w.s. iron stained 
Grain size medium to coarse 1-5 mm 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic, hypidiomorphic 
Alteration: 


[II. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: subophitic, granophyric, rosette 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Essential 

Alteration products (z) 


Actinolite 

60 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

15 


Plagioclase 

13 

Kaolinite sericite 



Quartz 

7 

Calcite 



Varietal (x) 


Magnesium chlorite 



Sphene 





J 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 





Titaniferous magnetite 

2 




Zircon 

Apatite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 


Plagioclase feldspars An54 and An30 showing saussuritization to intersertal 
secondary minerals. 

i. Twinned, poikilitic, green secondary amphiboles (up to 5 mm long) in rosette 
structures. 

Well developed cuneiform and radial granophyre (5%). 

Subhedral epidote-clinozoisite. 

Intergranular iron ores. 

\. Coarse phase of sill. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 










- 


■ 







, T 


: 


13 . 


i-3. a.: 


)1 - . . '' 


t . 


,11, c Q-J 


iJ3.- :• 

£T , A, :* ; r J a 





ul 1-1 

o i ' 2 . •' - i 


.-3111:-.'. Gil 

-111 - min 

i . 313. 11 

... s , 



'i^ r-..;'. , 








i.i 








-• ,,il Ji-ti' 

• ■-A. - 

3 1 B 3 



^■p.bjy 3 

. 1 !£; ( J.3 . 




-33. ' 





3 


'It:,.;, ; 


3.r.j.r> . ig 
,. o . 3 

C; , O. sfJUWT- 


,3. : / n 3 

. . ., . . _ . _ i - O . • . / 1 , .l> .... 

..1.3. t . ii.;.. i.;rfj 

.3. io ictin. i i.. j.n^riil 


33 . 3 31 B 







XIV 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 

SM-I3 

Date Collected April 1957 Specimen No. 2899 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality St. Mary Lake, B.C. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 40 ft. below upper contact of "A" sill with the Aldridge quartzites 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium greyish green w.s. iron stained 
Grain size medium to coarse, 1-5 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 
Alteration: 


[II. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: hypidiomorphic, granophyric 
Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 



Actinolite 

55 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

20 




Kaolinite sericite 

3 


Quartz 

20 

Calcite 



Varietal (x) 


Magnesium chlorite 



Sphene 

2 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 





Magnetite 

1 




Ilmenite 





Apatite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 


No twinned plagioclase feldspar recognized, largely altered to secondary minerals. 
Poikilitic, tabular amphiboles, some over 5 mm. in length. 

Large amounts of cuneiform quartz, some intergrowths with secondary minerals. 
Late-forming subhedral grains of epidote-clinozoisite in large veinlets filling 
the fractures. Few flakes white mica up to 1 mm. in length. 

Sphene patches (2 mm.) forming earlier than amphiboles. 

Long colorless idiomorphic apatite grains. 

Coarse phase of sill with quartz blebs up to 2 mm. 


[uartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 

















i. J3 . 


- 




: 1 


3. $ n 

3 : ' :■ ;b: 

’ 33. 1 .. 


:/ . :i ' . b : 0 ■ .. /.< /. . j. 3 _ . 










: .. 













'1.1 . 3 Cj 3. 




aj: .. 


3 .33... 

. ^ . id... 


, 

3,: ' . 0 ': 

. 3 ... 3 .. -3 ,;j 
, j> 

i 


A r : ". .3. ^ 3..... 3 3.3 •. o_ .. .. 

3 3 .. '"..,.3 UvJ l.o' a 

j . r. r 3 3 - ... . " -. 5 ;.. •' 1 

• . ■ . L • a'... g J. jv : b 33 ^n.f..■ il 
.. : . .. 3 . - I 3 . , j . d.b: 1 * 

v L .3 (c-;r. 

3 3 3 3 3 _ .... 3 0 . t 

. -- 3 . 3 :... 3 j' '• 



















UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


SM-14 

Date Collected April 1957 Specimen No. 2900 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality st. Mary Lake, B.G. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 80 ft. below upper contact of "A" sill with Aldridge quartzites 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium greyish green w .s. rusty 
Grain size medium 1-3 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 
Alteration: 


[II. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: hypidiomorphic, subophitic, granophyric 
Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 



Actinolite 

55 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

17 


Plagioclase 

10 

Kaolinite sericite 

13 


Quartz 

5 

Calcite 



Varietal (x) 


Magnesium chlorite 





GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 





Sphene 

1 




Titaniferous magnetite 





Hematite 





Apatite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 


L. Plagioclase feldspars An^ are saussuritized. 

1. Few small idiomorphic amphibole prisms. 

Sphene, granophyre in lesser amounts. 

f. Subhedral epidote-clinozoisite in large amounts, some completely replacing 
the amphiboles. 

>. Coarse phase of sill. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 








































UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


SM-15 

Date Collected April 1957 Specimen No. 2901 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality st# Mary Lake, B.C. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: 149 ft. below upper contact of "A" sill with the Aldridge quartzites 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium greyish green w .s. rusty 
Grain size medium 1-3 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 
Alteration: 


H. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




Actinolite 

60 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

8 



Plagioclase 

18 

Kaolinite sericite 

12 



Quartz 

2 

Calcite 




Varietal (x) 








GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Accessory (y) 

Sphene 

1 





Magnetite 

Ilmenite 

Apatite 







SPECIAL FEATURES: 


L Sharply twinned plagioclase feldspars, Labradorite An 52 Oligioclase An 29 » 
i. Twinned Amphiboles (average 1 mm.), with subophitic texture. 

!. Granophyric intergrowths. 




pfiRcfeft&HER 
























-[ . 




i a ■ 


j. 


_ . 








' d ■ ’ . ;.IU! 


i_.? -i : ( .<C; 

s cdiu-Ud ■ % 




. ’.o-L'j: i* o 


: a 




( Y .: V ‘< '^‘>*1 

iSJlC;?.: 








:S»S5ivJT.i ' ’ i:S3 


d ■ d.. ' 3 ", j \ . c _.;w; . , 3 .... .1 

•- -f - - - . d • 3 : . (. ... . ) a. ... d.'.., . / b: nz, . 

.3 : . a . ’.. v j ; . . r...v: 



a d >.j::aa 










UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


SM-16 

Specimen No. 2902 
Locality St. Mary Lake, B.C. 
Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek Section 

Question: near base of "A" sill 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium greyish green w.s. iron stained 
Grain size medium 1-3 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 


Date Collected April 1957 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Bur wash 


II. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: subophitic , granophyric 

Structure: original 


secondary 


SECONDARY MINERALS % 

Alteration products (z) 
Clinozoisite-epidote 5 

Kaolinite sericite 

Calcite 

Magnesium chlorite 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Biotite 2 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 

MINERALIZATION 


PRIMARY MINERALS 
Essential 

Actinolite 

Plagioclase 

Quartz 

Varietal (x) 

Sphene 


Accessory (y) 

Hematite 

Sphene 

Magnetite 


60 

25 

5 


SPECIAL FEATURES: 


L. Zoned plagioclase feldspar. 

Carlsbad, Albite and Pericline twinning of the feldspars A^g. 


I , Biotite replacing twinned Amphiboles indicating near base of sill or contact 
with sediments. 

Few small idiomorphic araphibole prisms. 


3. Large amounts granophyric intergrowths. 
Increase sphene near base of sill. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 


PETROGRAPHER 














- 









"■oil.:. .unilti : n ; 


' - .. J 










XVIII 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 

SM-20 

ate Collected Sept. 1957 Specimen No. 3075 

ollector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality St. Mary Lake, B.C. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Resort Creek 

Question: Sill B 

D. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium to dark green w.s. 

Grain size medium to coarse 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 


II. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: subophitic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 


Actinolite 

55 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

9 


- Plagioclase 

28 

Kaolinite sericite 

5 


Quartz 

2 

Calcite 



[ Varietal (x) 


Magnesium Chlorite 





GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 

Sphene 

1 




Magnetite 

Ilmenite 

Apatite 






iPECIAL FEATURES: 


Carlsbad, Albite and Pericline twinning An^ and An^Q. 

Minor zoning but mostly sharp, glassy twins of plagioclase feldspar. 

!. Light yellow green to dark green pleochroic non twinned amphiboles of Actinolite 
variety with enclosed chadacrysts of feldspars and quartz. 

Subophitic texture with feldspar laths (up to 2 mm. long) piercing the amphiboles. 
Few small idiomorphic prisms and some Amphiboles are quite fibrous. 

(2V = 85°; opt. (-) C to Z = 18°). 

I. Patches of magnesium chlorite and subhedral epidote-clinozoisite replacing the 
amphiboles. 

I 


)uartz diabase 
Classification 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 






































3 ■ U 31 








XIX 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


t Date Collected 1954 

Collector R. A. Burwa s h 


Specimen No. EK-1 

Locality Kimberley, B.C. 

Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: located east of Sullivan Mine, B.C. 

Question: 

I II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium green w .s. 

Grain size medium 1—3 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 

III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: hypidiomorphic, subophitic 


Structure: original 

secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS % 

Essential 

Actinolite 32 

Plagioclase 26 

Quartz 8 

Varietal (x) 

SECONDARY MINERALS % 

Alteration products (z) 
Epidote-clinozoisite 14 

Kaolinite sericite 8 

Calcite 

Magnesium chlorite 11 

Biotite 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 


GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 

MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) Sphene 



Leucoxene 



Titaniferous magnetite 



Pyrrhotite 



Apatite 




SPECIAL FEATURES: 

1. Many tabular plagioclase feldspar laths are clear, glossy and have sharp Albite 
[ twins, composition An 55 , An5Q, An 35 « 


2. Poikilitic, twinned and untwinned, Amphibole of the green ferriferous Actinolite 

variety. In parts, altered to magnesium chlorite, epidote-clinozoisite. 
Subophitic texture, with the feldspars piercing the amphibole. 

Actinolite - 2V = 85°; opt. (-) C to Z = 18°. 

3. Granophyric intergrowths of quartz and feldspar usually Andesine composition. 

4. Patches Titaniferous magnetite altered to Leucoxene. 


Quartz diabase G. Hunt 

(CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 












c l'/'. j ...:' ^ :• .3. . • ■ .- . 33. 



l ar.dn*..*) :::. :c.« 








UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 


PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 

M-6 

Date Collected April 1957 Specimen No. 2908 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality Kingsgate, B.C. 

I Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Moyie Section 

Question: 35 ft. below lower contact of "A" sill with the Aldridge quartzite 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. light grey ws rusty 

Grain size fine to medium 
Texture: massive 
Alteration: 


pi. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: quartzitic, granoblastic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 


Biotite 

18 

Quartz 

45 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

13 

Chlorite 

17 

Plagioclase 


Calcite 

4 



Varietal (x) 


Sericite 

1 



Sphene 

2 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Accessory (y) 






Zircon 

Magnetite 

Ilmenite 

Hematite 

1 






Apatite 

jSPECIAL FEATURES: 


L. Trace of plagioclase feldspar with Albite twinning. 

>. Quartz with sutured intergrowths, some cuneiform in character. 
}. Twinned calcite patches 0.5 mm. in size. 

+. Subhedral grains of Epidote. 

5. Chlorite replacing Biotite. 

3. Long apatite needles. 

K Sphene grains are rounded. 


Biotite hornfels G. Hunt 

CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 



















XXI 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 

I M “ 5 

Date Collected April 1957 Specimen No. 2907 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality Kingsgate, B.C. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Moyie Section 

Question: 5 ft. below lower contact of "A" sill with Aldridge quartzite 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. light grey w .s. rusty 

Grain size fine to medium 
Texture: massive 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: quartzitic, granoblastic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




Quartz 

45 



Hornblende 

3 

Plagioclase 


Epidote-clinozoisite 

14 

Biotite 

32 

| Microcline 

Varietal (x) 

Sphene 

2 

Calcite 


Chlorite 

1 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Accessory (y) 






Magnetite 

Ilmenite 

Zircon 

Apatite 

1 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 

L. Few Albite twinned plagioclase feldspars recognized and minor amounts of microcline 
| with very indistinct grid-iron twins were observed. 

. Strongly, pleochroic hornblendes up to 1.0 mm. in length, some subhedral but not 
poikilitic or twinned. They are not similar to the amphiboles in the adjacent 
■ sill. The hornblende formed after the biotite and in part replaces it. 

Pleochroism: X - light yellow green, Y - olive green, Z - blue green; Z>Y>X 

3. Sutured intergrowths of quartz, some strained. 

i. Subhedral grains of epidote and minor carbonate. 

j>. Sphene grains are rounded. 


Hornblende Biotite Hornfels G. Hunt 

[classification PETROGRAPHER 























3 










o 







3.3 


: 3 ..j : . _ . .:. ' . ■> 









3.O.. 1 :.::3.-.. r ■ .. < ... /3 . 3 ..GJ. 


3 . ~ . 3: : 3 




; 3. " . '3 _ • L 3. , . vl£i'!'l ; 

. ... . . .. 

- - . - . 'i . : ■ J/. .... -1 ... , 1 . .3 

. >■ ■ ■ • ~ { ■ o . - i. j. " _ ‘ 3.. ' . ; -.3.,' 

. 5 ; '■ ■. : 3 '! 3 .' • ■ > L.- 3j '3 37 .... it \ :. 

1 ’ ■ V . O, . . . ; . 3 . Y ' 3.3 3 . . £ -> P.TfiWiiJ 


, 0 3V.I." 3 t... 33 :j, I‘{ t$ | 


3 3 3i i."... 3" 0 i ■ f.rj : ■- 3' ' T 












XXII 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 

II M-4 

I Date Collected April 1957 Specimen No. 2906 

Collector G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality Kingsgate, B.C. 

Reference 

| I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Moyie Section 

Question: near the lower contact of "A" sill with the Aldridge quartzite 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. light grey w.s. rusty 

Grain size fine to medium 
Texture: massive, baked 

Alteration: 

III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 


Texture: quartzitic, 

granoblastic 



Structure: original 


secondary 



, PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

30 


Quartz 

30 

Kaolinite sericite 

13 




Chlorite 

20 


j Varietal (x) 


Calcite 

5 



Biotite 

Leucoxene 

2 





GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

j Accessory (y) 





Sphene 

Magnetite 
| Ilmenite 

Hematite 

1 





SPECIAL FEATURES: 


11. Angular quartz grains up to 0.5 mm. size show undulatory extinction and sutured 
quartzitic boundaries between some quartz grains. 

2. Blebs of twinned calcite average 0.3 mm. in size, calcite present as veinlets 

as well as bonding material. 

3. Chlorite replacing the biotite in part. 

4. Very minor amounts of feldspar, largely replaced by secondary minerals. 


Hornfels 


G. Hunt 


CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 




























- 

. ,3 J?. i_' ■ .3 V 3 









•— 






. ho 


. 













' • • . i .■ j j. j , ... i ^ •. \..iX I 

■ J : 3 ■ - 3 . 

3.1.3 33 . L . ^ : • ■: : . 1 

.. , : r - . ■■ 3 .i . 3 ' 





3 3 : 



' 


. 


. 


31 






















XXIII 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected 
Collector 


April 1957 

G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash 


M-3 

Specimen No. 2905 

Locality Kingsgate, B.C 

Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 
Occurrence: 
Question: 


Moyie Section 

near lower contact of 


'A” sill with Aldridge quartzite 


II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 
Color: f.s. medium green 
Grain size medium 
Texture: 

Alteration; 


holocrystalline, phaneritic 


ill. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: sub op hi tic, granophyric 


Structure: original 

L_ 


secondary 



PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 



Actinolite 

50 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

7 

Biotite 1 

Plagioclase 

9 

Kaolinite sericite 

11 

Chlorite 12 

1 Quartz 

8 

Magnesium chlorite 



Varietal (x) 


Calcite 



Sphene 

o 




Z, 






GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 





Magnetite 

1 




Ilmenite 






!'SPECIAL FEATURES: 

|jL. Plagioclase feldspars An 52 are highly altered. 

2. Twinned, poikilitic, curved, green amphibole 2V = 80°; optically (-); C to Z = 18 


3. Large amounts of granophyre showing feldspar acting as host. 

4. Biotite present indicates contact of sill with sediments. 

|5. Two different chlorite alteration products but mainly iron-rich variety with 
anomalous interference colors. 




Quartz diabase G. Hunt 


CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 













































■ i. a 






. 










:. a. 


- 

. i . 

: 


• - r "• - ■ - 
: - - ..a r 


3 

?: 
















.. a'. ,a i . ,a 


~ ■ C . „ ^ . .. . t 

a . - : a •• , 3 ^, p, <- — ;;■ • 

•3 : 3 ■- - ; ' a : ar. . . a: v . a.•. ' T 


a 


; • ! a: r .u p .! o. a :''■ • 3. ac'Jai: lim * aiii.cb 
.a ■ : . . . 5.. : . a o .. '■ >! I 



















XXIV 


jDate Collected 
1 Collector 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


April 1957 

G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash 


M-2 

Specimen No. 2904 
Locality Kingsgate, B.C 
Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Moyie Section 

Question: 10 ft. above lower contact of "A" sill with Aldridge quartzites 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium green w .s. 

Grain size medium 1-3 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 

III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: subophitic, granophyric 


Structure: original 


secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 



Actinolite 

50 

Epidote-clinozosite 

5 


Plagioclase 

10 

Kaolinite sericite 

25 


Quartz 

7 

Chlorite 



Varietal (x) 


Calcite 

5 


Sphene 

2 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 





Magnetite 

1 




Pyrrhotite 





Apatite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 

1. Plagioclase feldspars are zoned ranging from A^^ to An 3 Q but considerable 

alteration to secondary minerals has taken place. 

2. Twinned, poikilitic, fibrous green amphibole. 

3. Cuneiform granophyre texture. 

Calcite blebs 1 ram. size and veinlets. 


|:Quartz diabase 

CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 



























-.Ji, 


0 




.. J :' 














] 








• > : ; ■ v i.■■ .. 3 


'' .. 3 .. ■. ec!’" .: j: Jl 




. . 12 ' . l 






' 

ri'ia 






' 

. j .:. .. -; 

. 1. 1: 2 U-'V 











i 


:•C" 

i, : t 
:1 : 






: r . • ■' *2 3 *. jb 2 ••• • i. .2. \ r 

2 . 2 : i. • o 2 : i \: : . 


• - .. j. ... . ■ Tg 3 . •: .1. : . 1. .. . I).' . ■ ... 




i ,.ij‘ us. - : 'C ; • oixsrn 

21 . - v y . 3 ..... 3' r .J • . :J.oX •; 













3. ; ' ;v i 













XXV 


)ate Collected 
Collector 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 

M-l 

April 1957 Specimen No. 2903 

G. Hunt, R.A. Burwash Locality Kingsgate, B.C. 

Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Moyie Section 

Question: 30 ft. above lower contact of "A" sill with Aldridge quartzite 


II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. medium green 

w.s. 

Grain size 

Texture: 

Alteration: 

medium grained 
holocrystalline. 

phaneritic 


HI. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: subophitic, granophyric 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 



Actinolite 

60 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

3 


Plagioclase 

10 

Kaolinite-sericite 

20 


Quartz 

2 

Calcite 



Varietal (x) 


Chlorite 

2 


Sphene 

2 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 





Magnetite 

1 




Ilmenite 





Apatite 






I SPECIAL FEATURES: 


Plagioclase feldspars are highly altered to secondary minerals. 
Few tabular laths with Albite twinning having composition 


2. Green amphibole with relict subophitic texture. 

3. Minor granophyre. 

4. The sample is taken near the upper contact of "A" sill. 


[Quartz diabase 


G. Hunt 


CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 
























I 

















.. 






XXVI 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 


PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected 
Collector 


Sept. 1957 
G. Hunt 


W-10 
3068 

Locality Waterton p ar k Alta, 
Reference 


Specimen No. 


I. FIELD NOTES 
Occurrence: 
Question: 


Blakiston Brook Section 

5 ft. below upper contact of sill with Grinnel formation 


II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s 

Grain size medium 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: saussuri tized 


iron stained 


til. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: diabasic 

Structure: original 


secondary 


,j PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

°/c 

j Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




| Titaniferous Augite 

20 

Kaolinite sericite 

17 

Chlorite 

14 

Plagioclase 

25 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

3 

Magnetite 

6 

Quartz 

5 

Calcite 




Varietal (x) 






• Titaniferous magnetite 

5 





Leucoxene 

3 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Sphene 

1 





Accessory (y) 






Chlor-apatite 

1 





Pyrrhotite 







5PECIAL FEATURES: 

IL. Small plagioclase feldspar An^ and corroded pyroxene with diabasic texture, 


ft Skeletal titaniferous magnetite forming reaction rims with chlorite, 
Primary magnetite altered to leucoxene. 


J. Less concentration of sphene at top of sill than bottom. 

K. Grain size of essential minerals average 1 mm. (smaller than near center of sill). 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 





















. 8 


Rin'o.': 


bon,, riia noyi wov . to’i' tlvnh 

i '.r ; . ..u. tu 

D...: .. '.roiio;, \ l.r»: 3 : . jqt 

bi ■v 'i , ; c3 33 

. 3 ' i 3 b 







:cv 


30 J1 .3.3..'.' 



: o ..303 il.r .3 L v; ., - ■. 3 i a :Ui 


( 
• k 


'.‘3. n 



3/ V. • 3 iil V.3. . . 33,. 


3 







XXVII 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


i Date Collected Sept. 1957 

| Collector G. Hunt 


W-9 

Specimen No. 3067 

Locality water ton Park, Alta. 

Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Blakiston Brook Section 

Question: 20 ft. below upper contact of sill with Grinnel formation 


II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s. hematite stained 

Grain size medium 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: saussuritization 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: diabasic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




Titaniferous Augite 

15 

Calcite 

9 

Chlorite 

33 

Plagioclase 

18 

Kaolinite-sericite 

6 

Magnetite 

5 

Quartz 

2 

Epidote-clinozoisite 




Varietal (x) 






Titaniferous magnetite 

5 





Leucoxene 

5 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Sphene 

2 





Accessory (y) 






Chlor-apatite 

1 





Pyrrhotite 






Hematite 







SPECIAL FEATURES: 


1. Saussuritized feldspars A^g and pyroxene with diabasic texture. 

2. Blebs, patches and veinlets of calcite. 

3. Skeletal magnetite and chlorite forming Kelyphitic rims. 

4. Long acicular laths leucoxene up to 3 mm. in length. 

5. The calcite veins are associated with secondary quartz and the smaller 

plagioclase laths. Some of the quartz surrounds the chlorite. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 


I 






























I XXVIII 

UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 

W-8 

Date Collected Sept. 1957 Specimen No. 3066 

Collector G. Hunt Locality Water ton Park, Alta. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Blakiston Brook Section 

Question: 30 ft. below upper contact of sill with Grinnel formation 


II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s. hematite stain 

Grain size medium 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: diabasic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




Titaniferous Augite 

17 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

13 

Chlorite 

20 

Plagioclase 

25 

Kaolinite sericite 


Magnetite 

5 

Quartz 

5 

Calcite 




Varietal (x) 

Titaniferous magnetite 

8 





Leucoxene 

Sphene 

7 

2 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


1 Accessory (y) 






Chlor-apatite 

Pyrrhotite 

1 






I SPECIAL FEATURES: 

1. Plagioclase laths are highly saussuritized but smaller laths show A^g. 


b Red brown Augite up to 3 mm. in length has characteristic diabasic texture. 

Some Augite crystals are twinned. 

3. Subhedral granular grains of epidote and long needles of apatite. 

%, Granophyric intergrowths of quartz and feldspar (2%). 

5. Large skeletal and spear-shaped grains of titaniferous magnetite are altered to 
leucoxene. Metamorphic magnetite associated with chlorite and late forming 
quartz shows corona structures in which the chlorite core has replaced a 
mineral (usually augite) and is in turn surrounded by a magnetite rim. 

,6. Coarse phase of sill. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 


























, £}"; i; ;i, j o. 





b R 1 £, b b. . lit 


J. ,r\ 


<■' 


jb.;.,L bi..R 


Q : c 


c : 





j.h: r. 


./■ : . .Jiv7 



ii 


vi jjL : 


J N 













XXIX 

UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected 
Collector 


Sept. 1957 
G. Hunt 


W-7 

Specimen No. 30 6 5 

Locality Water ton Park, Alta, 
Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Blakiston Brook 

Question: 15 ft. above lower contact of sill with Grinnel formation 


II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s. 

Grain size medium 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 
Alteration: 


hematite stain 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: diabasic 

Structure: original 


secondary 


. PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




I Titaniferous Augite 

18 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

15 

Chlorite 

17 

Plagioclase 

25 

Kaolinite sericite 


Magnetite 

5 

' Quartz 

5 

Calcite 




Varietal (x) 






1 Titaniferous Magnetite 

6 





Leucoxene 

5 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Sphene 

2 





Accessory (y) 






Chlor-apatite 

1 





Pyrrhotite 







>ECIAL FEATURES: 

L. The large plagioclase laths are highly saussuritized and smaller laths show An 3 £. 
Large titaniferous magnetite grains are skeletal and altered to leucoxene. 

I. Some of the reddish brown pyroxene exhibits schiller and diabasic textures. 

3. Increase quartz but lesser amounts of intersertal secondary minerals such as 
epidote, calcite, etc. 

+. Magnetite forms skeletal rims around chlorite which has replaced some other mineral. 
5. Decrease amounts of leucoxene and sphene. 

3. Coarse phase of sill. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 

























XXX 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 




W-6 

Date Collected 

Sept. 1957 

Specimen No. 3064 

Collector 

G. Hunt 

Locality Water ton Park, Alta 


Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Blakiston Brook Section 

Question: io ft. above lower contact of sill with Grinnel formation 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s. hematite stain 

Grain size medium 1 mm. 

Texture: holocrystal line, phaneritic 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: diabasic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




Titaniferous Augite 

20 

Kaolinite sericite 

25 

Chlorite 

19 

Plagioclase 

10 

Epidote clinozoisite 


Magnetite 

5 

Quartz 

2 

Calcite 

2 



Varietal (x) 






Titaniferous Magnetite 

5 





Leucoxene 

5 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Sphene 

5 





Accessory (y) 






Chlor-apatite 

1 





Pyrrhotite 







SPECIAL FEATURES: 


1. Larger, plagioclase feldspar laths are highly saussuritized and smaller grains 

have An 3 g. 

2. Corroded, red brown, pyroxene and feldspars are interwoven in a diabasic texture. 

3. Blebs, patches and veinlets of calcite. 

4. Trace of granophyric intergrowths. 

5. Skeletal crystals of magnetite associated with chlorite and primary titaniferous 

magnetite. 

6. Rock is badly fractured and iron stained. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 












c• :: r.Jii. r \vO..I 


V ' J 




' 

rx j - ■■ ■ . .0 










s-v c 




if. 


v: 


ol o r. : 


Vl: ^.r 


b 











XXXI 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected Sept. 1957 

Collector G . Hunt 


W-5 

Specimen No. 3063 

Locality Water ton Park, Alta. 
Reference 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Blakiston Brook Section 

Question: 5 ft. above lower contact of sill with Grinnel formation 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s. hematite stain 

Grain size medium 1-3 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 
Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: hypidiomorphic, diabasic 


Structure: original 


secondary 




1 PRIMARY MINERALS 

Essential 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

Alteration products (z) 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

| Titaniferous Augite 

15 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

28 

Chlorite 

15 

Plagioclase 
| Quartz 

H 

Varietal (x) 

I Titaniferous magnetite 
Leucoxene 

10 

2 

10 

5 

Kaolinite sericite 
Calcite 


Magnetite 

10 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Sphene 

4 





Accessory (y) 






Rutile 

Chlor-apatite 

1 Hematite 

1 

1 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 

1. Larger, plagioclase feldspar laths are highly altered but smaller late-forming 

grains have An 32 » 

2. Corroded, tabular, reddish brown Titaniferous Augite with diabasic texture. 

Augite - 2V = 62°; opt. (+); C to Z = 45°. 

3. Intergranular iron ores and intersertal secondary minerals form Kelyphitic reaction 

rims - skeletal crystals of magnetite enclosing chlorite. 

Primary large needle-like and octahedral titaniferous magnetite is partly 
altered to leucoxene. 


4. Long chlor-apatite needles up to 0.2 ram. 


5. Abnormal amount of leucoxene and sphene. 

6 . Badly fractured rock with iron oxide filling. 

Quartz diabase G* Hunt 


CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 






















- : - 

















XXXII 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected 1955 Specimen No. 3176 

Collector T. Patching Locality Water ton Park, Alta. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Lake Alderson Section 

Question: Basal contact of sill with Siyeh limestone 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s. 

Grain size fine to cryptocrystalline 

Texture: holocrystal 1 ine, aphanitic 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: porphyritic, kelyphitic 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential phenocrysts 

Alteration products (z) 




Augite 

12 

Reaction rims 

9 



Plagioclase 

3 

Ilmenite 




! Quartz 


Leucoxene 




Varietal (x) 


Chlorite 




Pyrrhotite 

7 

GROUNDM ASS >QR r :€EMENT< 


MINERALIZATION 


Accessory (y) 


Aphanitic groundmass 

69 




I SPECIAL FEATURES: 


1. Small, tabular plagioclase lineated parallel to the contact of the sill with the 
sediments. The glassy, clear, fresh laths have An 5 4 , Labradorite. 

[2. Some red brown Augite phenocrysts are twinned, euhedral and corroded. 

3. Very well developed Kelyphitic reaction rims - chlorite, ilmenite and limonite. 

4. Fine grained chilled sill at contact. 


Fine grained quartz diabase 

CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 































‘11 













brr.idlr. 



. 0- _ li. 


u\' 'i L>i 


) i 


J. • c 



j -rK .b • biwi.i a. 









XXXIII 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


1955 Specimen No. 3177 

T. Patching Locality Water ton Park, Alta. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Lake Alderson Section 

Question: 5 ft. above lower contact of sill with the Siyeh limestone 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s. 

Grain size fine 

Texture: holocrystalline, aphanitic 

Alteration: 


Date Collected 
Collector 


HI. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: hypidiomorphic, granophyric 

Structure: original secondary 


; PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 



Titaniferous Augite 

30 




Srown & Green hornblende 

8 

Calcite 

25 

Chlorite 

Plagioclase 

9 

Epidote-clinozoisite 


Magnetite 

Quartz 

3 

Kaolinite-sericite 



Varietal {x) 





Titaniferous magnetite 

5 




Leucoxene 

2 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Sphene 

2 




Accessory (y) 





Pyrrhotite 

1 




Hematite 





Apatite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 


1. Very few twinned feldspars, largely altered to calcite, sericite. 

2. Cores of red brown, non pleochroic titaniferous Augite largely altered to 

I secondary minerals. 

3. Subhedral to euhedral brown strongly pleochroic hornblende, some show twinning. 

4. Intersertal secondary minerals calcite and epidote in large amounts. 

Iron rich chlorite and skeletal magnetite. 

5. Minor amount of granophyre. 


Quartz diabase G. Hunt 

CLASSIFICATION 


PETROGRAPHER 


-F> Ui 
























. ,o:i 




lc z\ ■ ^ l ;!'■' 

cc.r, „: L. 












b.. 












. i.. 





fj 


Li U...Z .1 . 


, : 




ii •, ,'iVO*.rd h. 1 v: i 1 











XXXIV 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected 1955 Specimen No. 3178 

Collector T. Patching Locality Water ton Park, Alta. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Lake Alderson Section 

Question: Coarse phase in centre of sill 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w . s . 

Grain size medium size 1 mm. 

Texture: holocrystal line, phaneritic 
Alteration: saussuritization 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: subophitic, granophyric 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

°/o 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




Titaniferous Augite 

25 





Brown & Green hornblende 

4 

Calcite 

25 

Chlorite 

13 

Plagioclase 

13 

Epidote-clinozoisite 


Magnetite 

4 

Quartz 

Varietal Xx) 

7 

Kaolinite-sericite 




s Titaniferous magnetite 

5 





Leucoxene 

4 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


j Sphene 

1 





Accessory (y) 






Pyrrhotite 

1 





Hematite 






Apatite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 






1. Plagioclase feldspars 

An 34 

are highly saussuritized 

(up 

to 1 mm. in length). 



2. Corona structures of red brown Augite surrounded by brown and green subhedral 
hornblende. Subophitic texture with feldspar. 


3. Granophyric intergrowths of quartz and feldspar in cuneiform textures. 

4. Intergranular skeletal titaniferous magnetite largely altered to leucoxene. 

5. Large amounts of calcite in blebs and radial structures. 

6 . Skeletal magnetite with aggregate iron rich chlorite apparently last to form. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 


























(.• led b 


d 




XXXV 

UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected 1955 Specimen No. 3179 

Collector T. Patching Locality Waterton Park, Alta. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Lake Alderson Section 

Question: 5 ft. below upper contact of sill with Siyeh limestone 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s. 

Grain size medium grained 1 mm. 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: subophitic, granophyric 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 




Titaniferous Augite 

21 





Brown & Green hornblende 

8 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

16 

Chlorite 

15 

Plagioclase 

10 

Calcite 

14 

Magnetite 

3 

Quartz 

5 

Kaolinite sericite 




Varietal (x) 






Titaniferous magnetite 

4 





Leucoxene 

4 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 


Sphene 

1 





Accessory (y) 






Pyrrhotite 

1 





Apatite 







SPECIAL FEATURES: 

1. Plagioclase feldspars are highly saussuritized to secondary minerals but show 
subophitic texture. 


2. Corona cores of red brown Augite up to 1 mm. long uralitized to subhedral 

hornblende, some twinned. Brown hornblende - pleochroic; 2V = 72 ; opt. (-); 

C to Z = 15°. 

>3. Blebs, radial patches of calcite (1 mm), some twinned. 

4. Skeletal magnetite (altered to leucoxene) and chlorite form Kelyphitic reaction rims. 

5. Intersertal grains of epidote up to 1 mm. in length. 

Iron rich chlorite replaces the mafics. 

6 . Long chlor-apatite needles 0.5 mm. 

:7. Patches of quartz (2 mm.) and some cuneiform intergrowths. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 


















" ■ - ' ' n 1 i If •• ; I 1 . 1 

v i ■' I."'. : f,' , . ‘ 







XXXVI 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected 

Collector T. Patching 


I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Lake Alderson Section 

Question: upper chilled phase 


II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w.s. 

Grain size fine grained 

Texture: holocrystalline, aphanitic 
Alteration: 


Specimen No. 3180 

Locality w a terton Park, Alta. 

Reference 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 
Texture: porphyritic 


Structure: original 


secondary 



PRIMARY MINERALS 

i Essential 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS 

Alteration products (z) 

% 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS % 

1 Titaniferous Augite 

Plagioclase 

Quartz 

Varietal (x) 

Titaniferous magnetite 
Leucoxene 

33 

10 

5 

15 

Epidote-clinozoisite 

Kaolinite-sericite 

20 

Chlorite 6 

Magnetite 10 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 


MINERALIZATION 

Accessory (y) 





Pyrrhotite 

Sphene 

1 





SPECIAL FEATURES: 


L. Plagioclase feldspars are saussuritized. 

?. Corroded red brown Augite phenocrysts average 0.2 mm. in groundmass of Augite, 
feldspars, acicular magnetite, chlorite and intersertal secondary minerals. 

ft. Small titaniferous magnetite needles in very large amounts with minor leucoxene. 


quartz 


diabase 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 



















' r J 3: 


3v^ 3 0.,':: .j 


o' 1 ~ 2 3 ' .0,. M Ji 

y.Lx'xJ.i . o 


' . , . "• j : ~ . : rj bt, : ' ■ '.)■ . I 

1 ■ . O --- - . - . ( ,~>.. r ^ , J ’ O 


J ...../ - 






3 











XXXVII 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY 

PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION 


Date Collected 1957 Specimen No. 2999 

Collector R.E. Folinsbee Locality Glacier Park, Mont. 

Reference 

I. FIELD NOTES 

Occurrence: Located in the parking lot at Logan Pass, Montana 

Question: Southward extension of Lake Alder son sill 

II. HAND SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION 

Color: f.s. dark green w . s . grey brown 

Grain size medium to coarse 

Texture: holocrystalline, phaneritic 

Alteration: 


III. MICROSCOPIC STUDY FOR CLASSIFICATION 

Texture: subophitic, granophyric 

Structure: original secondary 


PRIMARY MINERALS 

% 

SECONDARY MINERALS % 

METAMORPHIC MINERALS 

% 

Essential 


Alteration products (z) 



) Titaniferous Augite 

8 




Brown & Green hornblende 

20 

Calcite 7 

Chlorite 

20 

Plagioclase 

15 

Epidote-clinozoisite 7 

Magnetite 

2 

Quartz 

10 

Kaolinite-sericite 



Varietal (x) 





* Titaniferous magnetite 

2 




Leucoxene 

5 

GROUNDMASS OR CEMENT 

MINERALIZATION 


Sphene 

2 




Accessory (y) 





Apatite 

1 




Pyrrhotite 





Ilmenite 






SPECIAL FEATURES: 

L. Most plagioclase feldspars are saussuritized but some have glassy Albite twins An 35 « 


2. Cores of reddish brown Augite uralitized to green, pleochroic hornblende. 

Augite shows subophitic textures with the long feldspar laths tup to 3 mm.). 
Brown hornblende - pleochroic, 2V = 70°; optically (-); C to Z = 15°. 

3. Alteration - Augite to green hornblende; brown hornblende to green hornblende. 

Subhedral grains of intersertal epidote (up to 2 mm.). 

Iron rich chlorite replacing the mafics. 

5 . Skeletal and octahedral titaniferous magnetite altered to leucoxene. 

S. Intergrowths of quartz and feldspar in cuneiform structures. 

7. Quartz grains up to 1 mm. 

3. Acicular apatite needles. 


Quartz diabase 
CLASSIFICATION 


G. Hunt 

PETROGRAPHER 




















































































































































































5I°00‘ 

"o 

o 

o 

rO 
































































































































































Fig. 3 

KOOTENAY LAKE - WATERTON LAKE AREA 

SCALE! - I INCH - 4 MILES 


! 1 


ACID INTRUSIVE ROCKS 
BASIC INTRUSIVE RC'CKS 
TRIASSIC 


PENNSYLVANIAN (?) , PERMIAN, AND TRIASSIC. 


KASLO SERIES 




T 




DEVONIAN 


CARB 


)NIFEROUS 


SILURIAN 

ORDOVICIAN 

CAMBRIAN 


PRE-MISSISSIPPI 


WINDERMERE 



PURCELL 
UPPER PURCELL 




LARDEAU SERIES 
BADSHOT FORMATION 
HAMILL SERIES 

HORSETHIEF CREEK FORMATION 
IRENE VOLCANICS 
TOBY FORMATION 


MT. NELSON FORMATION ^ROOSEVILLE FORMATION 
DUTCH CREEK FORMATION < PHILLIPS FORMATION 
^ GATEWAY FORMATION 


PURCELL EXTRUSIVE 


PURCELL INTRUSIVE 


LOWER PURCELL* 

KITCHENER 

- SIYEH FORMATION 


CRESTON 

FORMATION 


ALDRIDGE 

FORMATION 


FT. STEELE 

FORMATION 

























































AREA 


30SEVILLE FORMATION 
IILLIPS FORMATION 
VTEWAY FORMATION 











































118 ° 00 ' 



it 





































































































00 oS 11 
















































: ORMATION 


)N 





113° 0O' 












































