/ 


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


THE PETROLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY 


OF THE METHY FORMATION 


I s 


mm 


iM M IMIHB 

S' '■\ 

S?vp / ;: ffmP-rmi f 




« 






H.R. GREINER 


11 


‘An 




Thesis ■! 

WMt; 


vsst 

* u. 




APRIL 1951 


^*5# ? 

<;; 

Spl'W^wt! 








(3x UBBK 

raftssswaais 

MBMWIISIS 







UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
LIE?-; -1RY 


Regulations Y?; u J in a I nc ss a n c_ ass or t. wc i ons 

I ssci pt copies of theses a_ dissertations for Raster's 

and Doctor’s degrees deposited in the Univoi sity of Alberta 

, as the ffi( . al Copy of the acuity of G-i i< uat tudies, 

■ . - It 3d in U■ . : pence I 3... Ln I < >on nly. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supe] th ■ work was done. Some \ irtments are willing to 

loan their copy to libraries* through the inter library loan 
service of the University of alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used onIt with due 
regard to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 
h.en permissi >n has been granted* credit must appear in the 
pub1ishe d wor k. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below . The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user. 


lease sign below: 


Date 


Signature 


Ins titutIon 































































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/petrologypalaeonOOhugo 





ABSTRACT 


The Methy Formation is exposed along the Clearwater River and 
is recognized in cores of eight wells in the Waterways area. A 
detailed megascopic examination was made of the core sections, from 
which important petrographic, textural, and structural data were 
obtained. Twenty thin sections were also examined under the petro¬ 
graphic microscope, which yielded additional information. In one 
slide, a mineral believed to be brucite was found. So far as is known, 
this is the first recognition of this mineral in an evaporite series. 

Sedimentation and metasomatism of the formation are discussed. 

The theory, distribution and criteria for recognition of reef struc¬ 
tures are considered. Brecciation in its different forms is treated. 

Porosity and permeability tests were tried on two core sections, 
and porosity alone on two others. Structural relationships of the 
formation are outlined. 

Fossils obtained from the formation were identified as Middle 
Devonian in age. Correlation with other Middle Devonian formations 
in western and northern Canada is attempted. 

Finally, the possible economic value of the formation is dis¬ 


cussed. 



- 

■- 



; ■ " ■ ; •; : : " <.> • : ■ ■’ " o:v; \ a.C 

-~r- •: ' ■ i, ■ . .- : V •-> - 

. , - •. ; ■ "C ' 

■ ; , , :: J“ : .. 1 >: ' ; ■ . > . . ' ,£' J‘do 

. 

, 

■ 

t ■ " ■ . - a ■ . Kr: j 

' ' ' ■ : ' : 

£ l 

* 

8 

- 

>: . . \ > ;• l . ^^,'x ■■ 

, 

, 


















FRONTISPIECE 

Polished vertical section from Bear Vampire #1, 2088 
feet, illustrating mottling in reef flank beds due to argil¬ 
laceous matter. Note well-rounded ends of broken crinoid 
column, contrasting with the angular corners of those in 
Slide 50-90, Plate VII(b). Brachiopod shell fragments may 
also be seen. Dense, white areas may be algal growths. 

About three-quarters actual size. 








THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE PETROLOGY AND PALAEONTOLOGY OF THE ME THY FORMATION 


A DISSERTATION- 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGY 


by 

HUGO ROBERT GREINER, B.Sc. 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA, 


APRIL 6 , 1951 








TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

INTRODUCTION. i 


Nomenclature of the Me thy Formation.. 1 

Relationship to Associated Formations . 1 

Thickness and Distribution. 1 

Previous Work. 2 

Acknowledgments . 4 


PETROGRAPHY. 4 

Megascopic Descriptions. 5 

Dolomite. 5 

Chemical Composition. . . 5 

Bedded Dolomites. 6 

Limestone. 6 

Chert. 7 

Shale 8 

Anhydrite and Gypsum. 9 

Rock Salt. 9 

Clay. 10 


Microscopic Descriptions.10 

Textures.10 

Structures.11 

Mineral Composition . 12 

Metasomatism. . ..14 

Fauna. 15 

Other Features. ..15 


PETROLOGY, 


16 


Sedimentation , 
Pre-Methy , 
Methy * . , 
Post-Methy 


16 

16 

16 

18 



































.'. ; . . ....' „ . . ■ :z < : . i. 

, . , . - 0^ \; ; '-'0 >. .‘a 

, , * ’ •’■■■r .. V ■ ;: : ;V .. r ar 7 \ 

, , .. ' : •■ . ■ ■ Jcr' 








’ 



, * 



. • • 

.. ; . . 









Metasomatism.ig 

Dolomitization.ig 

Theoretical Considerations. ... . 18 

Effect on Textures and Structures . 22 

Chertification.23 

Biohermal Development.25 

Theoretical.25 

Present Application . 28 

Criteria for Bioherms as found in Well Cores. . . 29 

Brecciation and Fragmentation.33 

Evaporite-solution Breccias . 34 

M Bedded Granular” Fragmentals.35 

Reef-Flank Breccias.. 35 

"Flow” S true toes.37 

Porosity and Permeability.35 

Fluorescence.33 

STRUCTURE...33 

PALAEONTOLOGY.40 

Fossils Collected and Identification.40 

Correlation...42 

Winnipegosan Formation of Manitoba.42 

Presqu*ile Formation of Great Slave Lake. .... 43 

Ramparts Formation of the Mackenzie River .... 43 

Alberta Plains Area.43 

ECONOMIC POSSIBILITIES . 44 

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS.46 

BIBLIOGRAPHY...43 

APPENDIX I (Well Logs).51 

APPENDIX II (Thin Section Descriptions).66 































a- 









ILLUSTRATIONS 


FIGURES: 

1. Location Map.preceding page 1 

2. Middle Devonian Distribution and Isopachs .... 

• . • following page 1 

3. Relationship of Methy to Associated Formations. . 

.... inside back cover 

4. Cross Section A-B (North-South) . 

.inside back cover 

5. Cross Section C-D (East-West) . 

.inside back cover 

6. Contours on Base of Me thy Formation. 

. . . following page 38 

7. Isopachs on Me thy Formation. . . following page 39 


PLATES: 

Frontispiece 


Plate I.following page 3 

Plate II. " " 5 

Plate III. n " 9 

Plate IV. " " 27 

Plate V. " H 32 

Plate VI. " ,f 34 

Plate VII. " " 36 
































. . 



■:> ■ jC' ■.» 






. • 


•j; 



, .' r V v *?J ■ 1 ■ e ' 

v : , , « 


























, V . ‘ : i 

«*'*>,•* . t ,■«**.. v; 

• ... . . 













- FIGURE 1 - 














































































- 1 - 

INTRODUCTION 

Nomenclature of the Meth y Forma tion. 

The term, "Methy Formation," was first applied by geologists 
of Pacific Petroleums Ltd. to a formation encountered below the Elk 
Point Evanorites in the Waterways area, and found in outcrops on the 
Clearwater River. It is best exposed along the Clearwater River close 
to the famous Methy Portage. The latter made an important link in 
the water highway of early northern explorers, for It connects the 
easterly-flowing Churchill River drainage with that of the northerly- 
flowing Mackenzie Basin. 

Rela tions h ip to Associated Formations . 

In the Athabaska River-Clearwater River area of northeastern 
Alberta, the Methy Formation overlies the claystones, shales and red 
beds which in turn rest unconformahly on the ancient PreCambrian cry¬ 
stalline granites and gneisses. The dolomite Is overlain by the thick 
Elk Point Evaporites, and may best be considered the earliest deposit 
in the widespread Elk Point Basin. (Figure 2) 

Sediments which formed beds of the Methy Formation were depo¬ 
sited in the shallow waters of the Middle Devonian seas spreading 
down from the north, and overlapping onto the stable Shield area to 
the east. The deep Upper Devonian seas deposited the Waterways Forma¬ 
tion above the evaporites. After a long interval of erosion, Creta¬ 
ceous shales and sandstones were laid down, and, finally, Pleistocene 
glacial deposits complete the rock sequence. (Figure 3) 

Thi ckness an d D istribution . 

In thickness, the Me thy Dolomite varies from about 1Z.S feet at 
Bear Rodeo #2, to about 227 feet at Bear Westmount #1. It exhibits 
















, . 

' ■ : ■ -> < : 

. 






: ,:v ' ■: - - 


. 

. : ■ ■ ; in 



/;j : • : t’ ■ '' r ■ • ■ ■ r - ■ ■ , ; 








— r > ; ■ r • • ‘ 




• • ' ' ' : ' 




■ 


• ; . • ■ 


; 







' 






. 
















• . ■/'; r j ":I . 

■ - > , 

. ; : • •, • „ 






> 






























- 2 - 


the great variation in thickness usually associated with formations 
of a reef nature. 

the vte+h a 

In distribution, 4bin formation with its correlatives has great 
lateral extent. Near Lake Winnipeg it seems to be equivalent to the 
Winnipegosan Formation; on Great Slave Lake, the Presqu'ile Dolomite 
rrobably corresponds to it; and still further north down the Mackenzie 
River it may correlate with the Ramparts limestone, Hwmrcn* , Tie 
Methy Formation also is found in wells on the Plains to the southwest,— 
at Imperial Clyde #1, Imperial Darling #1, Imperial Irma #1, Imperial 
Provost #1, and elsewhere. 

For this work, the study of the Methy Formation is largely 
limited to the northeast section of Alberta, where Pacific Petroleums 
have kindly provided the use of cores from eight wells and information 
regarding surface exposures. The wells are: Bear Rodeo 1 & 2, 

Bear Vampire 1 & 2, Bear Westmount 1 & 2, Bear Biltmore 1, and 
Christina. River-Hardy 1. 

Previous Work . 

The Clearwater River, on which the Methy Dolomites are best 
exposed, was first surveyed by David Thomson in 1799. Later, most 
of the earl?/ explorers traversed this stream on their way west or north. 
In 1875, J. Macoun of the Geological Survey of Canada examined the 
Clearwater River exposures of Devonian age. He merely stated that 
they "....resemble Niagaran limestones of Owen Sound." Whether this 
remark included the Methy Dolomites, or only the later Waterways lime¬ 
stone is not clear. (18) 

In 1890, R.G. McConnell, also of the Survey, traversed up the 









. 





■ ■ . • 





e 





y 

»* ’ : j * 




- 

. 

. 








• 




. 








• 

■ 





- 
















. 

. . • •• * . t'\ ■ ' . ■ ■ 












■o o' 













. u)"XO 























: . ' 






• ; . , , 











- 3 - 


Clearwater River and ’’Pembina” River (now the Christina) as far as 
it was navigable. He would not encounter formations below the eva- 
porites there, nor does he mention exposures further up the Clear¬ 
water, where the dolomites outcrop. (19) 

J. C. Sproule, wlio traversed the Clearwater River in 1930, 
states, ’’the massive dolomites and thinly banded arenaceous and ar¬ 
gillaceous limestone at Cascade Rapids, sec. 8, tp. 89, range 2 and 
eastward, that yield a limited number of poorly preserved gastropods, 
pelecypods, and brachiopods, are probably Silurian. Below this point, 
the rocks are thinly banded limestones and shales and imperfectly 
bedded, rubbly, argillaceous limestones with zones containing an 
abundant Hamilton brachiopod fauna.Massive Silurian (?) dolo¬ 

mites are responsible for the treacherous series of raoids between 
Edwin creek and the 4th meridian. At various points, notably at the 
mouth of Gypsy creek, dolomitic erosion remnants, appearing as ir¬ 
regular vertical ’’pipes,” dot the broad valley, standing above the 
trees. It is estimated that the largest of these remnants rises 150 
feet above the river.” (22) 

Even at that time, Sproule appears doubtful about placing the 
dolomites in the Silurian. This was a doubt that had lingered, since 
the days of the drilling of the McMurray No. 1 Salt Well in 1920 (2). 
No fossils were obtained below the salt at that time, hence the pre¬ 
sence of Middle Devonian strata was not recognized. 

The discovery of the leduc Devonian oil pool in 1947 stimu¬ 
lated the interest of oil companies in the Palaeozoic forma.tions of 
the Great Plains. Detailed geological surveys down the Clean-rater 
River from the Precambrian contact to the Athabaska Forks were made 
by Imperial Oil Ltd.. , in 194&, nnd by Bear Oil Co. Ltd., In 1949. 


: • - : n - ■' 










. 


























■ 














, 

. 


) : r ■ 


; r : ■ 


. 

. 


■ 

























PLATE I 



I (a)—Scarp of dolomite at Contact Ra,pids. Bedded chert 
approximately at ten-foot mark. Fossils were taken 
from talus of this outcrop; they are believed to be¬ 
long to the upper section shown in photograph. Note 
that this is bedded throughout. 



I (b)—Small klint by foot of Pine Portage. This gives an 
excellent view of part of reef overlain by some 
layered dolomite. Fossils were collected from the 
foot of this pinnacle. 



















- 4 - 


Geologists of the latter company named the first dolomitic formation 
overlying the basal detrital zone "Methy Dolomite." This formation 
was recognized almost simultaneously in a number of wells south and 
west of Fort McMurrsy. 

Acknowled gments. 

The writer wishes to thank all members of the faculty and staff 
of the Department of Geology at the University of Alberta for their 
unstinting help rendered in the preparation of this thesis. 

Particular thanks are due Dr. P.S. Warren, under whose guidance 
this work was done. His kindness in making palaeontological deter¬ 
minations was invaluable. 

Mr. F. Trollope, who did geological field work for Standard 
Oil Co. of California, contributed information regarding outcrops 
on the Clearwater and Firebag Fivers. 

The Department of Petroleum Engineering of the University of 
Alberta kindly permitted use of equipment in conducting porosity and 
permeability tests. 

The writer is also indebted to Pacific Petroleums Ltd. and 
its geological staff for permission to examine their well cores, well 
logs and reports. Dr. P.E. Cotd, who traversed the Clearwater Paver 

for that company, particularly gave freely of his time and assistance. 

Photogy aj> hs a.lohy t Ine Ci farwa.'fer Rhyer a.r & U?r C* o\ c J ^ . 

PETROGRAPHY 

As used in this thesis, the term, "Petrography," is that defined 
by Dr. F.F. Grout: "the systematic and descriptive side of the study 
of rocks." Petrology is more comprehensive, including not only the 
























' ' ... 

‘>n y.) 








, ■ 




. 




. 




* 


. : ■ 























- 5 - 


description but theories of rock origin and interpretation of petro¬ 
graphic facts. The term also includes porosity and. permeability. 

The preponderant rock type found in the Methy Formation is 
dolomite. Also present are limestone, chert, anhydrite, gypsum, 
shale, and rock salt. 

Megascopic Examination . 

Dolomite : 

Commonly, the dolomite is cryptocrystalline to crystalline, 
varies from light buff to dark brown or dark grey in colour, and is 
either somewhat bedded or else some kind of a fragmental or breccia. 

In chemical composition, the dolomites vary principally in the 
amounts of argillaceous matter contaminating them. It is noteworthy 
that gradational mixtures such as 'calcitic dolomite,' 'dolomitic 
limestone,' etc. are extremely rare. They are, however, present in 
a gradational zone between the lower limestones and overlying dolo¬ 
mite at Bear Rodeo #1 and Bear Westmount #1. At other places, where 
the rock is fosslliferous, the fossils may retain their calcitic 

composition while the main rock mass is dolomitized. 

limestone 

Chemical analysis was made of a dark brown dolomite sample 
from Christina River-Hardy #1 well. The following results were ob¬ 
tained from Mr. J.A. Kelso of the Alberta Provincial Laboratory: 


Silica 

.51 % 

Iron Oxide 

.20 % 

Alumina 

.25 % 

Calcium Oxide 

41.45 % 

Magnesium Oxide 

9.96 % 

Loss on ignition 

47.55 % 


or, 





PLATE II 



II (a)—This photograph illustrates the flaggy appear¬ 
ance of "flow" type dolomite on weathering. 



II (b)—This picture shows ’’flow” type structure of the 

layered dolomite. See text for possible explana¬ 
tion of structure. 










- 6 - 


Silica 

.51 % 

Iron Oxide 

.20 % 

Alumina 

.25 % 

Calcium Carbonate 

74.02 % 

Magnesium Carbonate 

20.81 % 

Organic Matter 

4.13 % 


(Note: Analysis on salt-free sample.) 

uncle r taken 

Although this analysis was mainly .dene - to determine the organic 
content, it may be noted that the carbonates present are those of a 
dolomitic limestone, rather than a pure dolomite. (Pettijohn (20, p. 31 

gives Magnesium Oxide 7.07$, Calcium Oxide 45.65$, in a dolomitic 
limestone analysis he cites.) The high percentage of organic matter 
may account for the slow reaction with acid. 

The layered dolomites are mostly of the finely-granular kind. 

No primary precinitates of dolomites were recognized, although such 
may occur. (The criterion used was the cryptocrystalline, almost 
amorphous, nature of the precipitated carbonate.) Bedded dolomites 
mere most orevalent in the uppersections of the Methy. They appear 
to have originated as layered fragmentals. 

Brecciated and 1 fragmental 1 dolomites are most common. 


Limestone: 

Limestone in any amount is found only in two wells: Bear Ro¬ 
deo #1 and Bear Westmount #1. The intervening well, Bear Westmount 
#2 has no dolomitic lower section to correspond, thus the distri¬ 
bution of limestone seems to be quite erratic. (See Cross Section 
A-B.) One possible explanation for this is that given with regard to 
”dolomitization n (pa^e 21), namely, that the environmental range of 







- 7 - 


dolomite replacement is a narrow one, and a short lateral distance 
may witness the two different petrologic types being deposited con¬ 
temporaneously. 

Some significance may also attach to the fact that the limestones 
*re at the base of the Me thy. At that time it is .logical to suppose 
that the seas were less saline and less favourable to dolomitization 
than later on, when they became magnesia-rich. 

The limestones present are predominantly brown-coloured, argil¬ 
laceous, and fossiliferous. 

Fossils are generally better preserved than in the dolomite. 

Their broken remains yield fine to coarse t? coquinoid M fragmental zones. 
Sometimes the fragments are rounded through wave action. Evaporite- 
solution breedation, on the other hand, is less common in. the lime¬ 
stone zones. This is to be expected, for the conditions that produce 
evaporite interbeds are also those conducive to dolomitization. 

Hie enhanced porous nature of limestones which have been dolo- 
mitized has not been outstanding in the Methy core sections examined. 

The estimated porosity appears to be much the same in both the dolo- 
mitized and non-dolomitized rocks. 


Chert: 

Chert, which, according to Tarr (13)? is a dense, cryptocrvstal- 
line rock, composed minerslogically of chalcedony and cryptocrystalline 
ouartz, is found principally in two wells: Bear Biltmore #1 and Bear 
Vampire #2 (Appendix 1 and Cross Section A-B). In both places, the 
chert occurs as interbeds or local lenses, not as nodules or cavity 
fillings. 

These chert beds pinch and swell and bifurcate irregularly— 


.ao' 
















- 





■ 









, 





■ „ 

■ 





• 

■ 



, 

*o : '■?)/■■ 









■; 






? 




• 



. 






, 







• 




■ 


•', • • 




■ • 




» 



. 






- 






• 




■ 

■ 

■ 



• 








. 



' • '. > . ■ kt 





- 8 - 


and typically. Petrographically, the chert is a bone white to blu¬ 
ish grey, cryptocrystallin material. In the Biltmore well, the lox^er 
chert beds become porous and friable, probdbly due to recrystalliza¬ 
tion processes. Fossils are rather well preserved in this type of 
11 chert. n 

Shale : 

Although argillaceous dolomites and limestones are common in 
the Methy Formation, genuine shale beds are almost lacking. Most 
commonly, the shale occurs as thin partings or thin beds in the 
layered zones, or as lenticular or irregular concentrations in the 
breccias other than those of the evaporite-solution type. These 
breccias are those associated with slumping on the reef flanks, and 
thus may possess an angular bedding. Undoubtedly, the mud acted as 
a lubricant in the slumping.process. 

The shale present in the Methy dolomites is usually fissile, 
black to dark brown or dark grey in colour, has a fetid odour on 
fresh fracture, and often gives an oily smell on heating. A reduc¬ 
ing environment of deposition is indicated, therefore, which is 
further supported by the occasional presence of pyrite crystal.s. 

When found in limestone, the shady partings are usually calcitic, 
but in a dolomite section they give no reaction with acid and are 

fragments 

called "dolomitic.” Fossil parts are well-preserved in the shale, 
and consist mostly of crinoid stems and brachiopod shells. 

Shale is considered a part of the back-reef facies (l). Re¬ 
ducing conditions probably resulted from the abundant decomposing 
organic remains present on the lagoon-like sea. floor. The vertical 
circulation necessary for oxidation would, also be largely confined 





- •• ■« 


s'' 






. 






> 


'■j 





_ Q _ 


to a shallow surface zone, in these sheltered waters. 

Anhydrite and Gypsum : 

Anhydrite and its hydrated equivalent, gypsum, are typical 
associates, with dolomite, found in evaporite basins. In the x^ells 
studied, the Methy Formation is usually followed in sequence by an¬ 
hydrite beds. Some anhydrite also precedes deposition of the Methy, 
but in much less amounts. Another typical occurrence of both anhyd¬ 
rite and gypsum is as irregular ‘blebs' in the main dolomite section. 
Sometimes these may be recognized as simple crystalline vug fillings, 
at other times they are less obviously of this origin, and may be 
penecontemporaneous with the deposition of the host rock. Anhydrite 
also is present as fillings in small vertical diagenetic cracks 
near the top of the formation. 

In at least two wells, Christina River-Hardy and Biltmore #1, 
the order of precipitation to be expected in the waters of an eva¬ 
porating enclosed basin was followed: i.e., dolomite, then anhydrite 
or gypsum, and lastly, rock salt. 

In appearance, the anhydrite is commonly grey or bluish-grey, 
finely-crystalline and massive. 

Rock Salt : 

This mineral is present only as vug fillings in the Methy For¬ 
mation, although large thicknesses overlie it in many wells. Its 
occurrence appears to be restricted to those wells which have rock 
salt deposits overlying the Methy. Solution and reprecipitation by 
underground waters will account for the vug fillings. 

The size of the halite crystals is, of course, dependent upon 






PLATE III 



III (a)—This picture shows differential weathering of 
"flow” type dolomite. Main portion is massive. 
Note tripod at base. 



Ill (b)—Illustrates local steep dip of draping layered 
dolomite. Hammer handle is vertical. 












- 10 


the size of the openings. Quite often they ere up to 3 inches across 
but in other places small, paper-thin crystals have been observed. 

Clav : 

A light grey to white clay is intimately associated with the 
chert. It is friable and soft, and under the microscope has a 
cryptocrystalline mosaic texture. This clay has not been recog¬ 
nized, other than with the chert. 

Mi cr o s copi c Examina.11 on. 

Twentv thin section mounts were obtained for use in the micro¬ 
scopic examination of certain Methy core sections. It was hoped 
that the worth of this method in determining the petrogenic history 
and fossil constituents as well as the mineral content of the rock 
could be evaluated. What is the nature and genesis of certain "ir¬ 
regular structures?" Was the original rock before dolomitization a 
"fragmental” (i.e., coquina), or a breccia? What is the cause of 
the "flow structures" which are so common In the Methv dolomites? 

What part, if any, did the algae play in building the postulated bio- 
herms? These were some of the questions for which answers were sought 

Textures j 

The largest number of thin sections studied were finelv-cry- 
stalline and granoblastic. (This, of course, applies mainly to the 
ground mass, for most of the specimens examined were breccias or 
•fragmentals.) The carbonate crystals were generally anhedral and 
presented a typical mosaic appearance. 

A porphyroblastic, or uneven-grained, texture Is also quite 
common. Although no relationship between this type of texture and 




’•■ 


** 




















. 


- > 










































« 









! • ■ » • 



- 11 


the degree of dolomitization could be seen, it is believed that the 
tenner and. tim e of metasomatic replacement will induce a hiatal grain 
size. Penecontemporaneous dolomitization should produce gra.no- 
blastic textures, for the conditions producing the original deposit 
would still be present when dolomitization processes appeared. If, 
however, metasomatism followed lithification, no connection between 
the grain size of the original sediment and that of the replacing 
medium need exist, and porphyroblastic textures may result. The 
breccia, in Slide 50-73 is representative of this. 

It is interesting to note, as well, that post-contemporaneous 
growth in this fashion seems to be conducive to euhedral crystal forms, 
at least in the early stages of replacement. It is here suggested that 
this may offer a criterion for post-contemporaneous dolomitization 
in its early stages. 

Structure : 

The twenty thin sections were primarily made with, the hope of 
finding out more about various structures of the formation: 

(a) Some hand specimens, such as the core from which Slide 50 -S3 
was made, appeared to be originally fragmentals. Microscopic study 
often revealed a contrasting textural and structural variation be¬ 
tween the fragments and their matrix, which, was not visible to the 
unaided eye, and enabled them to be definitely classified as *frag- 
mentals. ' 

(b) The top of the Methy Formation at Bear Westmount #1 had 

structures which 

wha t looked like oolites or spherulites ^ e ^ofe-rop m the core section. 
Under the microscope, no radial or concentric features could be seen 

structures Considered 

in these, hence the rock was ^orixt to bp of a granular type. ^ Slio.es 










- 

» 














; * 






■ 

. 


















- 




, 









-- 






















• 
















- 









































• 







■ 






























- 12 - 


50-79 and 50-BO, Plates VI (b) and VII (a)) 

Sednnnavvhxry 

(c) Dolomitization destroys fossil ai ——ws-structures. It 
was found that the outlines of the original forms were more apparent 
megascopically than microscopically, in most cases. When the fossil 
remains were very small, however, the microscope proved a valuable 

aid in identifying the forms. (For example, Slide 50-81, Plate VI (a), 

mego-sc. op iced Uj 

where the gastropod shells were noticed in thin section, but not :in 

A 

the core.) 

Stromatoporoids and crinoids seem to resist dolomitization 
best, perhaps because they are calcitic. Aragonitic gastropod she13s 
and brachiopod shells, which are largely aragonite, are more easi¬ 
ly dolomitized. 

Palimpsest fossil or breccia forms are believed, to create the 
"irregular structures" seen in many core sections and mentioned in 
the well logs (Appendix I). 

(d) Stylolite structures were observed in Slide 50-75. A 
concentration of argillaceous matter with a little fine qua.rtz was 
seen on one solution surface, which is quite typical. The useful- 

-for sedimentary Avxgmosis 

ness of stvlolites.is limited: (1) thev indicate that■post-deposi- 

A 

tional solvent fluids were present, and, (2) they could be used to 
determine the top of a member. 

Mineral Composition : 

Dolomite and calcite cannot be readily differentiated optically. 
Hence, no important data pertaining to dolomitization effects could 
be obtained microscopical3.y. However, the two minerals can some¬ 
times be told apart by inference, as, for instance, in a highly 
dolomitized fossiliferous rock, the fossils may safely be considered 





- 13 - 


to constitute the remaining calcitic ingredient. A different grain 
size may then be apparent. In this way could the metasomatic re¬ 
placement of crinoid stems from the inside out be observed (Slide 
50-90, Plate VII (b)). 

One thin section of a chertified dolomite was made. The chert 
had a typical cryptocrystalline mosaic appearance. An interesting 
feature was the presence of numerous euhedral calcite or dolomite 
rhlmbs enclosed in the chert. As they could hardly have grown in 
the indurated chert, it seems they must have done so while the chert 
was still a colloidal gel, probably on the sea floor. 

Anhydrite in small amounts was observed In a few slides. Very 
often it had a fibrous habit, when viewed microscopically. 

Argillaceous material is present in varying amounts in nearly 
all thin sections. 

A mineral believed to be brucite, Mg(OE)^, was found occurring 
intergranularly in Slide 50-79 ‘(Plate VI (b)). Of fairly low bire¬ 
fringence, the mineral displays excellent micaceous cleavage, and 
is of positive uniaxial character. 

After crushing, the lighter brucite(?) was separated from the 
dolomite portion by flotation in bromoform. Unfortunately, the 
micaceous nature of the mineral yielded only minute fragments. How¬ 
ever, this feature also aided in bracketing the index of the ordinary 
ray (perpendicular to the basal cleavage). This index lies between 
1.5646 and 1.5695. That for brucite is 1.566. 

Seen as pore fillings In the hand specimen, the mineral has 
a pearly lustre, like brucite. 

So far as is known, this Is the first recognition of brucite 

in an evaporate series. Generally, brucite is formed by the thermal 
metamorphism of magnesian rocks,—a genesis incompatible with the 



„ ' ■> -j • 


„ 

, 



# 








. 

• 

■ 








• 





* 

■ 



. 


’ v r ' ‘ ■■ 






. 




' ■ 


- 












* 




























■ 







- 14 - 


history of the Methy Formation. Recently, other magnesian minerals 
of similar association have been recognized in evaporite beds. 
Magnesite (MgCC^), and talc (H 2 O. 3 MgO. 4 SiO 2 ) were observed in an 
east Yorkshire boring (24). In that well, bedding was not well de¬ 
veloped, and was often indicated by strings of dolomite grannies . 

The talc \/as always associated with halite, as thin ragged plates 
along the cleavages. F.H. Stewart suggests a mechanical rather 
than chemical replacement for it. The tabular magnesite was formed, 
with anhydrite, at the expense of dolomite. Both minerals were con¬ 
sidered secondary. 

Its occurrence between dolomite grannies suggests a secondary 
nature for the brucite found here. As metamorphic genetic agents 
are ruled out, some chemical reaction is suggested for its formation. 
The difficulty in obtaining an adequate amount of the suspected miner¬ 
al prohibited chemical analysis. It is useless to chemically ana¬ 
lyze the entire rock, in view of the presence of magnesium in the 
dolomite grains. X-ray diffraction methods might prove of value in 
further confirming the mineral. Unfortunate^/, the necessary 
equipment is not available. 

The group of minerals which are uniaxial and have a positive 
sign is very small; no others can be made to apply in this environ¬ 
ment. This fact, together with the evidence of the index of re¬ 
fraction, constitutes crnite good proof for calling the mineral 
brucite. 

Metasomatism: 

As this topic Is more fully discussed in the "Petrology 11 
section, no detailed discourse is given here. It should be mentioned, 







- 15 - 


however, that the microscope is of limited value in distinguishing 
degrees of dolomitization. Calcite cannot be told from dolomite 
in thin sections. 


Fauna. : 

foSS\\s 

S fe opo appear much the same as in the hand specimen. Gastropod 
spires were recognized in one slide (Plate VI (a.)) and a scolecodont(?) 
in another. 

No evidence pointing to the presence of algae in reef formation 
could be gained by microscopic study of the slides. 

Other Features : 

(a) In determining the reefal relationships of a core—for 
example, whether reef wall, fore reef, reef flank, etc.--thin section 
study has limited value. It is felt that careful study of the actual 
cores is of greater worth. 

(b) The »flw$ structure” so common in the Me thy Formation did 
not yield the secret of its genesis to the microscope. The typical 
angular layering is caused by the accumulation of argillaceous material 
along planes. But whether separation was effected by life forms, 
slumping on the reef flanks, is a feature of the bedding,, or is due 

to some other means is unknown. The topic is discussed more fully 
elsewhere (page 37). 

(c) In estimating worosity and permeability ouantitatively, thin 
section study is of little aid, especially when the pores are of large 
size. For determining the cause of the porosity they are sometimes 
useful,--for instance, stromatoporoid growths can often be found 
microscopically. 

(a) Evidence for the primary precipitation of dolomite was 
not obtained, unless the finely-crystalline, granoblastic nature of 








- 16 - 


some specimens is considered as such, 

PETRO LOGY 

Sediment?ti on. 

Pre-Methv : 

The Methy dolomites were deposited upon a detrital group of 
beds which lie in turn upon the Preeambrian basement rocks. This 
detrital zone is believed to be a true regolith or mantle rock. In 
ascending order, It consists of (a) a fresh, massive, crystalline 
granite or gneiss or porphyry; (b) an arkosic sandstone, grading 
upwards into finer siltstones; (c) red sandy or shaly beds, probably 
representing an ancient weathered surface; (d) claystones. Some 
dolomitic and anhydritic Interbeds occur throughout and. are more 
common near the base of the Methy (frequently referred to as the 
’’Second Evaporite”). 

A shallow Middle Devonian sea came down from the north and 
overlapped onto, the ancient peneplained Preeambrian Shield to the 
east. Upon that peneplain, the twin processes of disintegration 
and decomposition had created a regolith of variable thickness, 
which filled-in the depressions to create what must have been a 
monotonous topography of low relief. 

Meth y Sedimentation : 

The Middle Devonian sea was widespread and shallow. Coming down 
from the north, it spread onto the forelands of the Preeambrian 
craton to the east. The gradual submergence in low areas was not 
balanced by any pronounced uplift on the positive flanking areas, 
hence deposits were of the calcareous type. The warm shallow seas 
bred a prolific fauna capable of organic precipitation of limestones 











: ; 












. 




















[ 




> 































- 17 - 


However, the initial spread of the sea was relatively short¬ 
lived. Intense evaporation took place in shoreward arms and embay- 
ments; a magnesia-rich sea occupied these areas. Fringing or 
barrier reefs further fostered evaporation in back reef areas. In 
short, the warm, shallow, highlv-saline‘waters immediately replaced 
the early limestones with dolomite. Undoubtedly some primary depo¬ 
sition of dolomite occurred, as well. 

Corresponding to the marine environment described above, there 
exist lithologic and faunal counterparts. Initial encroachment of 
the sea deposited a thin, rather well-bedded, argillaceous dolomite 
or limestone. With these transgressive, relatively fresh, marine 
waters appeared numerous crinoid colonies, bryozoa, and brachiopods. 
These persisted until well past mid-Methy time, probably until the 
environment became too saline. Siliceous (?) sponges also lived in 
early Methy time. 

This lowest zone was succeeded by a more massive dolomite, 
which often has 1 flow. 1 structures. Solution brecciation also is 
widespread. At the base, this zone is sometimes highly chertified. 
Besides crinoid columnals and brachiopods, a few corals and stroma- 
toporoids make their appearance here. 

Beef growth flourished as this stage developed. Coral and 
stromatoporoid colonies built upwards and outwards from slightly 
higher parts of the ocean floor. Fragments of these colonies, as 
well as broken and comminuted brachiopod shells and crinoid stems 
filled the interstices of the reef wall. Interdigitation of reef 
rubbles and coral sands can be identified in this section in many 
wells. 

The latest sedimentation in the Methy, as the evaporites began 




- 18 - 


to dominate, features well-bedded, light buff or grey dolomite® with 
occasional interbeds of anhydrite or gypsum. 

As would be expected from the high salinity of the waters of 
this period, no faunas are to be found in this latest stage. 

Post-Methy : 

Gradually, the entire trough area, now occupied by the Elk 
Point Formation (Fig. 2) became an evaporite basin. Perhaps tectonic 
movements restricted egress to the open sea, perhaps super-abundant 
reef growth caused the same result—as it did, for instance, in the 
Capitan of the Texas Permian (l). In any case, the rate of inflow 
from the open sea exceeded that of outflow, and evaporation eventual¬ 
ly exceeded both. At first, beds of salt, anhydrite, and gypsum 
interbedded with the dolomites, but, as time went on, they predomi¬ 
nated. Finally, the entire evaporite basin dried up, and erosion 
went on until the Upper Devonian seas came down from the north in 
Waterways time, 

Meta s oma tism . 

Dolomitization : 

Dolomitization Is the conversion of diverse rock types, usually 
other carbonates, to dolomite. Theories as to the origin of dolomite 
may be grouped into three categories: (l) primary (chemical) precipi¬ 
tation of the dolomite: (2) selective leaching of calcite from an 
original mixture of calcite (or aragonite) and dolomite, and (3) 
replacement of an original calcitic limestone. (20, page 316) 

Evidence supporting the first two concepts is meagre, whereas 






- 19 - 


th?t for replacement is overwhelming. Data from the Funafuti boring 
somewhat support the leaching hypothesis. This theory finds less 
favour today, however, than it did in the past. There is as yet no 
proof of the direct precipitation of dolomite from the sea (23). 

Some fine-grained dolomites suggest this possibility, however, and 

it may be much more common than is generally supposed. 

other 

The process of replacement of A carbonates by dolomite may be 
divided into two principal methods, namely, (a) that contemporaneous 
or penecontemporaneous with the deposition of the original sediment, 
and (b) post-depositional thereto. There is, of course, overlapping 
between the two methods. 

(a) Cont e mporaneous or penecontemporaneous replacement (H almy - 
r olysis ). 

These are chemical replacements and changes occurring while 
the original sediment is being slowly precipitated on the sea floor 
(20, page 477). It is generally agreed that dolomite forms best 
when the following environmental conditions are met (23 and 27): 

(1) Karine rather than non-marine surroundings. Experimental¬ 
ly, dolomite has been formed at ordinary temperatures by solutions 
comparable to sea water, but not bv carbonate solutions similar to 
underpTound waters. Furthermore, many Tertiary coral reefs are 
dolomitized, where the only agent could be sea water (23). 

(2) Shall .ow, rather than deep, waters. 

(3) Inc: pease in salinity, especially of magnesia salts, stimu¬ 
lates dolomitization. This condition finds its aaxmum expression 
in enclosed basins or arms of the sea. 

(4) Warm temperatures. A condition which is notable, as well, 









■ 

' ' 




' 










. ' 

. 






















. ■ 






. 


: ' • •• : : 



















‘ 1 t ■ ' • " : ’ : ' f ■ ■ • ■ " ) 














■ 
































- 20 - 


for an optimum faunal development. 

(5) Reducing conditions probably generally exist where dolo- 
mitization is active. 

The question may here be asked: How are two such incompatible 
environmental conditions as shallow, inshore waters and reducing 
conditions to exist conjunctively? It is the writer’s belief that 
the ansx^er lies in the favour-able conditions existing for the pro¬ 
duction of life, in these shallow, warm seas. A high life incidence 
means a high death incidence, hence upon the sea floor, where actual 
conditions of sediment deposition are the most important, dead and 
decomposing organisms are extremely abundant. Reducing conditions 
will therefore prevail at shallower depths, where such decay occurs, 
than in places where it is not present. 

In the change to dolomite, there is the possibility that the 
rotting and sulphurous organic compounds may act as catalysts, as 
well. As far as is known, no experimental data are available on 
this point. 

(b) Post-depositions! replacement . 

Dolomites formed by replacements through underground circulation 
of water form a minority. They may be recognized by their relation 
to fissures, faults and other secondary openings. They may, there¬ 
fore, be expected to be more local in nature than those In the 
first group. 

In the replacement process of limestone by dolomite, a porous 
reservoir may be created when the rate of solution exceeds that of 
precicitation. This type of vugginess is of local character, as 
might be expected from a correct interpretation of Its cause (15). 





. 














. 








- 21 


Local dolomitization of this kind defends for its kind and 
degree on temperature and pressure conditions, the character and 
concentration of percolating solutions, and the character of the 
rock being replaced. (10) 

Now, turning to the dolomite formation at present under study, 
it can be seen how closely it meets the conditions required for the 
penecontemporaneous replacement formation of dolomite. In the Methy, 
dolomitization is widespread, rather than local; a marine evaporite 
basin follows the dolomite sequence, indicating a high salinity; it 
contains an abundant fauna, including the warm, shallow-water coral 
types. Even some indications of reducing conditions are offered by 
(a) occasional pvrite crystals, and (b) by the fact that at least 
in one.well the high organic matter content is present as carbon, 
not hydrocarbons (see page 44). In addition, the very presence of 
widespread reef zones indicates a. warm, shallow-water environment. 

Steidtmann pointed out that the critical state between the 
formation of a limestone or dolomite is a narrow one (23). This 
means that failure of one or more environmental factors In the re¬ 
placement process whereby dolomite is formed will result In lime¬ 
stone deposition, not in some intermediate carbonate mixture. If, 
for example, the sea waters have a low saturation of magnesia, or 
are too deep, dolomite formation will not be favoured. Yet at the 
same time, and at no great distance therefrom—in a shallow embay- 
ment, for Instance, where evaporation is more Intense—dolomite 

replacement of deposition may be actively taking place. This 
explanation will account for the presence of limestone instead of 






■ 

■ 



- ■ ’ ■ ' ■ r 



- 

• > ■ ’ : : ■ ' 

' ' ’ ■ ' 





• 












' 









■ 

) 


. 


) 




' 


- 





: 

, 



• . 

■ 




22 


dolomite in the lower sections of Bear Rodeo #1 and Bear Westmount 
#1 wells, while adjacent wells (Rodeo #2, Westmount #2) contain 
only a dolomite facies. (Comparison may also be noted with the dolo- 
mitized D3 reef at Leduc, while at Redwater, ^bout 45 miles distant, 
the reef is non-dolomitized.) 


*ect of Bolp] itiz tion on Textures an d Structure s: 

Whatever the full story of dolomitization, its effect on the 
original fossils and other structures is profound. The results of 
dolomitization are too well-known to need detailed repetition here. 
What, were cognate fossil forms in the original limestone remain 
merely as palimpsests, or else they are obliterated entirely. Bed¬ 
ding, which, at least in the dolomite at oresent under study, is 
related to horizontal argillaceous banding, fares somewhat better. 

The same is true for argillaceous breccia types. However, when 
the original limestone was quite mure, or when no areat composition¬ 
al difference existed, between the breccia fragments and their matrix— 
as, for instance, in many solution breccias—the elastic texture of 
the original rock may be'ouite lost. This is undoubtedly one source 
of the n irregular structures” described in many well cores. (See 
Appendix I, and Cross Sections A-B and C-D.) 

Hatch and Rastall state: "Dolomite has a strong tendency to 
form idiomorphic crystals, even when crowing within a solid limestone, 
and for this reason dolomitisation largely obliterates any struc¬ 
tures depending upon the original grouping of calcite or aragohitic 
crystals. ...Small fossils and oolitic (radial or concentric) struc¬ 
tures are obliterated during metasomatism.” (9) 





■ ' - . ' ' ' ■ ■ 

■ 

. 




- 

■ 





. : 




c 






) : 



: ' ; : 

. 


„ 











■ 

. 


- 23 - 

Complete recrystallization produces a fine- to coarsely-cry¬ 
stalline rock composed of dolomite anhedra. Incomplete conversion 
to dolomite, however, rroduces a porphyroblastic texture. The meta- 
crysts, in this case, are rhombic euhedra of dolomite embedded in 
a matrix of calczte. (20) 

Interpretation of petrologic and lithologic types in these 
hiphlv-dolomitized rocks requires an experienced eye able to n see 
through n the dolomitization back to the original sediment that was 
deposited, or that woul d have been deposited, had not dolomitiza¬ 
tion processes taken over. 


C he r tification . 

Modem theories as to chert origin may be classified as 
follows: (20) 

I. Syn genetic Origin. 

1. Clastic quartz. 

m 2. Chemical silica. 

(a.) Biochemical precipitate, 

(b) Chemical precipitate. 

(c) Magmatic precipitate. 

II. Penecontemporaneous silica. 

III. Epigenetic silica. 

1, Precipitation in the zone of cementation. 

2. Precipitation in the zone of weathering. 

Evidence supporting both the syn genetic and epigenetic theories 
is considerable. For the purpose in hand, it is perhaps sufficient 
to note the following points: 

1. Gruner (8) postulates a. tropical or sub-tropical, humid 
climate, and a low form of plant life to aid in dissolving the iron 
and silica. The colloidal silica was later precipitated by electro- 




lytes of the sea. waters. Such an environment is also theorized for 
Me thy time. We know, for instance, that an abundant fauna existed. 
Why not also an abundant low form of flora, such as algae, which 
may also have helped to build the reef structures? 

2. Trefethen (28) found that diagenetic cracks in chert were 
filled with limestone which was continuous with the limestone in 
the rest of the formation. Silica gets buried in limy sediments 
and undergoes dehydration and hardening at the same time as the 
lithification of the limy ooze. In places the limy ooze hardens 
first and squeezes the gel into it; in other places the gel hardens 
first. 

3. Tarr (27), besides agreeing with the chemical weathering 
and colloidal transportation ideas, also postulates low-lying, 
especially peneplained, source areas, where chemical erosion can 
predominate over mechanical erosion. Precipitation was effected 
by the action of alkalic salts in the sea water. The tendency of 
colloids is to aggregate in globular shape; burial makes the body 
assume a. lens shape. Fossils falling Into these gel masses, Tarr 
further states, would be perfectly preserved. 

The low-lying peneplained Shield area upon which the shallow 
Me thy sea lapped, the highly alkaline waters, the lenticular nature 
of the chert bedding, even the preservation of fossils, are features 
of the chert present in the formation under study. 

Cherts are said to increase, basinward (l). Certainly Bear 
Biltmore #1 is located in what is considered to be a basin-facies 
theatre. (See Contour Map, Fig. 7.) 

An interesting feature of the chert beds is the excellent 





porosity of the crystallized ‘chert.' Such a rock type could undoubt¬ 
edly act as a reservoir or carrier bed for petroliferous fluids. 

Biohennal Development . 

Th eoretical Consideration s: 

A bioherm, or organic reef, has been defined and described very 
veil by Wilson (29): n A reef is a sedimentary rock aggregate, large 
or small, composed of the remains of colonial-type organisms that lived 
near or below the surface of water bodies, mainly marine, and developed 
relatively large vertical dimensions as compared with the proportions 
of adjacent sedimentary rocks. The organisms, generally corals and 
algae and less commonly erinoids and bryozoans, creating the essential 
features of a. reef, lived their mature lives on it and their hard 
parts remain in place there after death. Reefs tend to develop as 
mounds or ridges but also grow in irregular, asymmetrical forms. In 
all, however, a rigid framework develops that does not compact under 
weight of overburden. This framework enables a reef margin to grow 
upward and outward at much steeper angles (even vertical) than is the 
case with sedimentary clastic rocks. Reefs are commonly characteri¬ 
sed by lack of well developed stratification. Differential settling 
in rocks adjacent to them usually causes draping of strata over reefs. 0 

The many theories as to the origin of bioherms have been clas¬ 
sified as follows: (11) 

■l 'k . 

1 • Those which require a. ch ang e of s ea leyel_ re lative to the 
reef foundation : 

(a) Darwin (5) proposed a subsiding foundation and consequent 

rising sea level. Under these conditions, organic growth 












- 26 - 


would transform a fringing reef into a barrier and finally 
into an atoll. 

(b) Daly’s Glacial Control Theory ( 4 ) explains how organic 
reefs could have originated on the banks left close to sea 
level at a time when the sea level was low because of the 
removal of water to form glacial ice on the land. Later, as 
the glaciers melted, the reefs grew upward with the rising 
sea level. 

2. Those that hold that reefs may develop without a change in 
sea level re 1 ative_ to the ree dation: 

(a) Hoffmeister and Ladd (11) presented the Antecedent Plat¬ 
form Theory, which holds that, ’’any bench or bank located 
within the circumequatorial coral reef zone can be considered 
a potential coral reef foundation, and that, if ecological 
conditions permit, a reef could grow up to the surface with¬ 
out any change in the sea level.” 

Typically, a bioherm consists of a massive, unbedded, central 
core of uneven-textured, fossiliferous carbonate rock surrounded by 
a relatively narrow reef flank zone made up of well-bedded, granular 
or breccieted, and sparsely fossiliferous strata which lap against 
and grade into the core and show steep dips away from it. Distal 
flanking beds grade into the horizontal and relatively unfossilifer- 
ous rock of the interbiohermal region. ( 20 , page 297) 

Fundamentally, reefs are expressions of intense biologic 
activity. They require a structure-building potential, and must 
have (a) frame-building, (b) sediment-binding, and (c) detritus- 










, ■ - 

, ■ ' ■ ;,r; 

•' ! • : 







■ 








> 


' 






27 - 


catching elements. (17) However, most authorities agree with Fair- 
bridge that, M in both living and ancient reefs, the proportion of 
actual colonial corals grown in situ is extremely small in relation 
to the enormous quantities of "coralline" sedimentary debris." (6) 
Reef-builders form a subordinate part of the whole. The reef struc¬ 
ture may make up only 5$ to 10$ of the reef mass. 

A sharp differentiation in faunal types must occur between 
assemblages on and off the structures. Greater density and varieties 
of species and larger forms occur on the reefs. The reef flanks are 
built up from bioclastic debris derived from the central core. 

The tops of Niagaran bioherms of the Great Lakes area are 
covered by layered bio elastics. (3.7) 

A barrier reef such as the Gapitan of the southwestern United 
States, breaks the area in which it grows into two parts: one in 
front and the other behind the reef. A trifold division in facies 
is thus possible: the reef wall proper, separating fore-reef and 
back-reef nrovinces, away from and toward the basin area respectively. 

The back-reef facies is highly fossiliferous, has shale and 
silt beds, anhydrite crystals and some pisolitic and oyrite crystals. 

The fore-reef facies features steeply-dipping bedding, boul¬ 
der breccia from the reef, with lime-mud and lime-sand lenses. It 
grades into the finer bedding of bottom-set beds, Basinal lime¬ 
stones and dolomites, with some chert, are grey or brown near the 
margins, but become dark and dense basinward. (l) 

link (16) applied the princiules of transgression and regres¬ 
sion of epi-continental seas to bioherm development, Peefs growing 
durino transgression are told from those growing during retreat of 





■ t 






PLATE IV 



IV (a)—Small reef growth, showing bedded ‘floor* sediments, 
structureless core, and arching in overlying beds. 

This may be principally an algal growth. These struc¬ 
tures form the many cascades in Long and Cascade 
Rapids (below Pine Rapids). 



IV (b)—Island made up of r, flow n type dolomite at Long 
Rapids, looking north. It shows the largest 
flexure observed in this vicinity. Its crest is 
at left edge of photograph. Dip is 20 degrees 
east. 















- 28 - 


a sea by the associated sediments, for the latter are found with 
evaporites. Criticism of this view is made on the grounds that an 
individual reef in its lifetime may have -undergone development 
during transgression as well as regression. It may have been fring¬ 
ing, barrier, and atoll, at different stages. Seldom is a clear- 
cut differentiation possible, for any individual reef. 

Pre sent Applicat i on : 

Structures which have been interpreted as reefs have been 
observed in field outcrops of the Methy Formation along the Clear¬ 
water River. Besides this, in seven of the eight wells examined, 
rock sections believed by the writer to be intimately associated 
with bioherms were obtained. 

On the Clearwater River, where the Methy dolomites outcrop, 
signs of biohermal development have been remarked at Whitemud and 
Pine Rapids. (Plates I (b), I? (a), and V) The structureless cent¬ 
ral cores, with rather steeply-dipping flanking beds draping away 
from them, together with the presence of such reef-building colonial 
elements as corals and stromatoporoids are evidence for the accep¬ 
tance of these as true organic reefs. 

The evidence for the presence of bioherms in the well cores 
is of a somewhat different and necessarily less complete nature. 

The closest two wells are about 8 miles apart: in the intervening 
distance a bioherm the size of the Marine Reef of Illinois—a clas¬ 
sic structure, outlined completely by subsurface methods—could be 
lost. Thus each well core had to be judged almost on its own, in 
its possible relations to reef facies. 



. 

- ■ 

: .. 

- * 


. . ) 

. 


- 




. . 

. 




■ 




' 

' 

' " 1 - ' o’ - : - : • ■■ 

. 

■ ‘ ■ ■ 

. 




A reef grows outwards, as well as upwards from its base. A 
drill bit may penetrate its vertical "axis," pass through a top 
bioclastic layered zone into the structureless, fossiliferous, and 
vuggy heart of the reef, and, finally, enter the platform upon which 
growth originated. On the other hand, drilling just to one side, 
a part of the expanded reef top may be struck, be passed through 
into the draping flank beds and down to the pre-reef floor sedi¬ 
ments. Other variations are numerous. For this reason, it was 
early felt by the writer that a set of reef criteria were needed. 

The following are diffidently suggested as a tentative basis: 

1. As reefs, above all, grow upwards from, the bottom, a.ny 
thickening of the su spec ted formati o n or strata may indicate reefal 
development. If this thickening is somewhat erratic in distribu¬ 
tion, and appears not to be merely associated with depositional 
"wedging" of the members, added evidence is provided. 

In the Bear Wells, thicknesses of the Methy Formation vary 
from 113 feet at Rodeo #1 to 227 feet at Westmount #1 ( see Figures 
4, 5, and 6). The former location is in a pre-Methy depression, 
where thicker sedimentation would normally be expected. 

2. Klints, or reef co res, are notably lacking in stratifica ¬ 
tion . 

In the wells examined, unlayered or structureless* sections 
were found in many places. A good example of this was in Westmount 
#2 (Figure 4). While undoubtedly some of this is due to massive 
types of sediments, in many places it is combined with other features 
in such a. way as to suggest reef cores. 










* >■:/ ■ , ; : 


''..'j.-; wtlf 0^1 



) 


■ 










; 



31 : fisy.; 3 oi;. 


> 


< ‘ ■ i 





o 


■ 


;o ■ v: 










ye :>) 








37 • I : 





- 30 - 


3. Strat a wi th high-angle di ps which cannot be accounted for 
by regional structure point to the presence of a local reef forma¬ 
tion of some sort. Differential compaction of surrounding beds, 
added to the talus-like slope of the original reef breccia accounts 
for the steep dips. 

Such reef flank strata, are common in the Methv well cores. 
Dips of over 40 degrees have been seen. This, in combination with 
reef-wall breccias and fossil fragments suggests flanking beds (see 
Frontispiece and Plate III (b)). It is possible, as well, that the 
common flow structures are related to reef-flank slumping. 

4. An abundan t and v ari ed faun a is an essential criterion 
for biohermal growth. Colonial reef-building forms—corals, stro¬ 
ma'toporoids and algae—are particularly necessary, but other faunal 
types, which contribute fossil debris to the structures, are also 
important. 

Methy time was extremely favourable to vital growth. Corals, 
stromatoporoids, crinoids, and brachiopods were very numerous. 
Bryozoans and sponges were less so; algal growths are not recogniz¬ 
able, but may have been extremely important as reef-builders. 

In situ corals of the reef wall can be differentiated from 
fragmental ones by their generally upright position, according to 

■yr 

Dr. Stelck. They have been noticed in this position in cores from 
Westmount #2, at 620 feet, and (less definitely) elsewhere. 

Crinoid columnals are Important contributors to the bioclastic 


S 


Stelck, C.R., personal communication. 










. ~ .. . 




* 









, 








' 




















: . 






■ . • ■ • . • . ' •• , :' - • : " ' ’■ > 

, 

. 




. 




■ 

■ 























: : : r . ’ v < • • > ; 











- 31 - 


debris around reefs. In normal sediments they are not generally 
rounded as thev are in the turbulent reef zones. (Contrast Slide? 
50-90, Plate VII (b), with the Frontispiece.) 

In brief, the mere presence of colonial types of corals and 
stromatoporoids is enough to make one suspect that there has been 
reef-building. The question then is simply the degree of vertical 
growth achieved by them. 

6 . While vugginess in itself is no criterion for a. reef, 
recognition of the vugs as molds of reef-building fossils may be. 
Stromatoporoids, even when dolomitized, usually retain pn excellent 
fine vugginess. Algae, on the other hand, are recognized by their 
extreme density. 

In the Methy, vugginess and porosity correspond with other 
criteria in the postulated reef facies (see Appendix I and Cross 
Section A-B, Fig. 4). Coarse vugginess is a reef-wall attribute; 
medium to fine vugs dominate in reef flank zones. Thus on-reef and 
off-reef zones may be theorized to some degree by the degree and. 
kind of porosity. 

7 . H Fragmentals ” found in rock sections sometimes provide 
another criterion for reef development. As no evidence for uplift 
or other dia.strophic movements - which might account for the produc¬ 
tion of breccias and fragmentals in Me thy time was found., these 
must have resulted either (a) by erosion of elevated parts, such as 
reefs, occurring in the deposition area, or, (b) by solution-brec- 
ciation methods (see page 34). 


The fact that much of the broken material is fragmental— 
that is, made up of pieces of fossils, rather than pieces of rock, 





- 32 - 


as. in true breccias—points to an origin in a fossil-rich source, 
such as a bioherm. 

8 . A zone of layered bioclastics o verlying the reef prope r 
may be a distinct reef element. Such a cover was found everywhere 
on the harine Pool reef cited before. Loi/enstam considered it to 
be the fossil analogue of a modern detrital reef surface (17). 

As can be seen from the cross sections (Figs. 4 and 5), a 
layered bioclastic blanket overlies the postulated reef at West- 
mount #2 and elsewhere. Reef builders are present but are no longer 
building upwards. They occur instead as layered elastics. 

The environment is not unlike that present during active reef 
development, but increasing evaporation conditions caused these 
differences: 

(a) Recession of the sea basinward uncovered the reef tops 
and subjected them to the sorting action of surface waters. 

(b) Increasing salinity was more than the crinoids and brachio- 
pods could bear; only the hardy stromatoporoids and corals remained 
to provide material for the blanketing detritus. 

9. Prox imi ty to a sh oreline may give cause to suspect barrier 
or fringing reefs. likewise, recognition of a. suitable elevation or 
antecedent platform on which a reef could be built may be an added 
criterion for such a structure. 

In the Waterways area, it is logical to suppose that the Middle 

Devonian sea lapped upon the Precambrian positive mass just to the 
east. As pointed out previously, that sea was probably shallow and 
warm, comparing with that in the present-day regions of the Austra- 


































■ 

„ . : • 

■ 








i ■ :. : 


;‘yj;■; 


. 

•" :■ ' 1 " : • 'i 






■ 


■ 










. 


, 








. 








•• ■ ‘ ' 



PLATE V 



V—Mesas of Methy dolomite on valley floor at Pine 

Rapids. All show reef rock in their lower portions, 
hence may also be termed klints. View looking north. 







- 33 - 


lian Barrier Reef. 

10. Both regressive and transgressive reefs will concentrate 
on steeper slopes of the sea floor (16), hence thickening of the 
suspected reef member at such places provides a criterion for reefs. 

Such increased thickening occurs at Westmount #1 and West- 
mount #2 where the pre-Methy bottom sloped rather sharply upwards 
towards the southeast (see Figures 6 and 7). 

11. Concentration of light fluids such as petroleum and/or 
ga/s may sometimes be attributed to their accumulation :'n an arch 
or dome over a reef. 

Notable concentrations of those products have not as yet been 
found in the Methy. 

12. Reef-wall rock sometimes possesses fluorescent properties 
(l). Such a specimen from the Methy Formation w^s no exception (see 
below). 


13. Finally, combinations of the abov e criteria, will accen¬ 
tuate belief that a reef exists. 

Brecciatlon and Fragmentation . 

identified as 

When the fragments in a breccia are ooen to consist of- nieces 
of broken fossils or agglomerations of fossils the rock is termed 
a "fragmental.” Hence, in the Methy Formation, with its abundant 
fossils, the "breccias” are more truly fragmentals. 

In various forms, fragmental rocks are most common in the 
Methy, as can be seen by reference to the cross sections (Figs. 4 


























. 





htS 

. 

■ : ; , 

.' . j: ■< • '. • "i 






: ' 0 : ' r 


: r . . •' '■ • ■ ') ■ ' 







' 






r 


' , I ■; ' ■ ; . e'' '■ v rl 






- . • '• ' - . 

. 

* ‘ 




• ) . ... 








. 

■ 

; . , 


' : ' > : f. • 


< 











. ; • r • - > 




- 34 - 


and 5). less common are the evaporite-solution breccias. In a 
formation where reef development is abundant, fragmentation will 
abound. As we have seen, the reef core itself averages only about 
10 % of in situ coralline material, while the rest is detrital; 
reef-flank beds are built up from detritus; layered bioclastics 
blanket the reef. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that 
the Methy Formation has relatively few bedded deposits, while 
breccias and fragmentals aboudn. (See Gross Sections, and Appendix 
I.) 

An important genetic type is a solution breccia. These are 
created when the intervening soluble evaporites—salt, anhydrite, 
pypsum, etc.—are dissolved away, letting the carbonate beds crush 
under the weight of overlying sediments. An extremely angular col¬ 
lapse breccia results, in which the matrix is of essentially the 
same material as the rock fragments, 

Sloss and Laird (2l) have used the term ”evaporite-solution 
breccias” for these, and apply it to breccias which ”ca.n be demon¬ 
strated to have resulted from the removal of evaporites. It seems 
probable that such breccias are to be found in most areas where 
evaporite-bearing strata crop out. ft 

These writers state further that, assuming ground-water cir¬ 
culation was necessary for solution of the anhydrite, widespread 
regional uplift occurred in the Montana area studied by them. To 
postulate similar uplift in the region around Waterways is untenable, 
hence one may conclude that the ”ground-water circulation” is not 
always a necessary condition for the production of evaporite-solu¬ 


tion breccias. 



■ 

: v‘"’ ■" 



" 

. 












- 














. ' •: ■ • ' ’ v ' 

- . - 


f 7 



PLATE VI 



VI (a)—Slide 50-81. Gastropod shells in a fine frag¬ 
mental calcitic matrix. 

Plain light, 20X. 



VI Cb)—Slide 50-79. Brucite(?), occurring in pores be¬ 
tween grains of dolomite. The mineral’s eminent 
basal cleavage is well illustrated, in this 
slide. Black areas are open space. 


Crossed nicols, 60X. 


















- 35 - 


These solution or collapse breccias can, with careful examina¬ 
tion, be separated from other fragmentals: 

(a) The bedded granular type, more common at the top of the 
Me thy, has been mentioned above. A sorting of clastic materials in 
layers is oronounced. 

(b) Less sorting affected detritus around the immediate reef 
flank. In this other important breccia type, large-sized fragments 
of coral and stromatoporoids in rubble interdigitate with a finer, 
often friable, earthy, coral sand. The breccia fragments in this case 
are usually less angular than in the solution breccia. They may even 
be somewhat rounded by wave action. Bear Rodeo #2, 840-860 feet, 
offers a tyoical example of this interdigitation. 

The importance of differentiating between ’solution breccias’ 
and ’reef-edge breccias’ in seeking petroleum pools will be apparent, 
for from the latter the presence of a reef structure in the vicinity 
may be predicted. 

Porosity and Permeability . 

Except for four core samples for which exact percent porosi¬ 
ties were obtained, the kind and quantity of porosity present in the 
Methy was only estimated (Appendix I). 

Rock pores are mostly of the intergranular type. Little credit 
is given to dolomitization processes in the creation of the openings. 
Ra.ther, the macroporosity represents a residuum from the original 
openings after cementation and other diagenetic processes. 

For the most part, these original openings were present as 
spaces between and in the fossil fragments which ma.de up the rock. 









' ' V 






- 36 - 

Fossil molds have been seen to form coarse vugs, as well. Stro- 
matoporoids, in particular, resist dolomitization and retain a very 
good fine porosity. Solution brecciation occasionally was import¬ 
ant in forming openings, especially in Vampire #1, where the vugs 
are filled with rock salt. Finally, the bedded fragmentals in the 
upper sections of the formation usually yield a pood fine to pin¬ 
point porosity. 

Intermediate porosity, or that which has no direct relation¬ 
ship to the grain properties of the rock, is a result of solution 
by ground water. Its effects are seen to work both favourably and 
adversely to the overall porosity of the rock: 

(a) Small vugs in dolomite are very frequently lined with 
calcite crystals. These were undoubtedly precipitated from .around 
waters. Their effect is to decrease porosity. 

(b) Fossil molds indicate that solvent fluids have carried 
away the original skeletal matter of the fossils. Brachiopod shells, 
which are largely composed of aragonite, are especially vulnerable. 
The effect, in this case, is to increase porosity. 

Porosity is related to reef facies. Estimates indicate that 
the reef cores have the coarsest vugs and best oorosity, flanking 
beds less, and normal sediments least of all. In order to partially 
check this thesis, and also the relative merits of limestone versus 
dolomite, four cores were subjected to quantitative tests, using a 
Ruska Porosimeter and Permeameter. The. results follow: 

We stmount #1: 

(1) Core 60, 1489 feet (Reef-wall dolomite). 

Porosity: 21.5$ 

Permeability: 15 to 64 millidarcys (varying In different 
•plugs’). 




PLATE VII 



VII (a)—Slide 50-80. Fine limestone grains in a dolo- 
mitic matrix, from upper bedded zone. Some 
anhydrite also is present. 

Crossed nicols, 60X. 



VII (b)—Slide 50-90. Crinoid columnals of calcite in a 
dolomitic matrix, from a bedded interbiohermal 
do3.omite» Contrast angularity of these crinoid 
parts with rounding of those shown in the Fronti 
piece, which is from the reef flank. Dolomi- 
tization of crinoid sections oroceedina- from 
inside out may be seen in fragment at lover 
right. 

Crossed nicols, 60X. 








- 37 - 


(?) Core 64, 1529 feet (probably reef-flank dolomite). 

Porosity: 12.3$ 

Permeability: 11 to 16 millidarcys. 

(3) Core 67, 1555 feet (bedded limestone). 

Porosity: 1.2$ 

Westmount #2 : 

(l) Core 78, 765 feet (bedded dolomite). 

Porosity: 3.2$ 

(As the last two samples were extremely dense, permeability 
re suits were ne gli gible.) 

The porosity of the reef-wall sample is exceptionally high. 
(Analogous cores from the Redwater oil field average about 13$ 
porosity.) The reef-flank sample also has excellent porosity. Of 
the bedded carbonate rocks, both are ’tight, 1 but the dolomite is 
slightly more porous than the limestone. 

lt Flow t> Structures . 

As seen in well cores, "flow 11 structures exhibit an argil¬ 
laceous layering of varying dip and uneven thickness. The most 
natural interpretation from a study of these is that they are a 
product of reef flank movements, with considerable lubrication pro¬ 
vided by the muds 'oresent. 

In the field occurrences, however, the relationship of flow 
structures to a reef facies is less evident, according to Dr. Cote.^ 
He offered three other possible explanations: 


I 


Cotd, P.E., personal communication. 







••■1 










■ 








: 






- . 

. ■; 

. 





- 38 - 


(1) They may be a product of dolomitization processes. 

(2) They may be due to algal growths. 

(3) They may be caused by the deposition of closely-interlayered 
limes and marls, with subsequent partial leaching of the marls prior 
to dolomitization. 

In the present writer*s opinion, one other likely explanation 
exists, namely, that the structures may simply be features created 
during the deposition of the sediment—a kind of bedding. They may 
have been modified by the various sizes of fragments present, slope 
of the sea. floor (e.g., whether on or off a reef flank), quantity 
of argillaceous matter present, etc. 

F luiorescence . 

Three cores from Westmount #1 were subjected to ultra-violet 
rays: (a.) one believed to be from a. reef core, (b) one from angular¬ 

ly-bedded flanking beds> (c) one from well-bedded dolomites. 

Only the reef-core rock exhibited a faint fluorescence and 
phosphorescence. This is in keeping with other known reef facies, 
notably the Gapitan Reef of Texas, where it was noted that fluores¬ 
cence increased reefward (l, page 307). 

S TRUCTU RE 

The Waterways area., in which the Me thy Formation is found, 
lies on the east limb of the Alberta Syncline. The formation of 
that structure is usually associated with mountain-building move¬ 
ments which created the Rocky Mountains in Tertiary time. In the 












' 

' 

. 


. 


... 

. 













- FIGURE 6 - 























- 39 - 


Middle Devonian, therefore, the Alberts Syncliiie was non-existent, 
and, for the most part, constituted a foreland area. A shallowly- 
dipping PreCambrian basement inclined to the west. With the crea¬ 
tion of the Alberta Syncline, this dip was considerably increased. 

In order to get a truer picture of the topography of the pre- 
Methy sea floor, the area was, figuratively speaking, rotated about 
an axis paralleling the strike of the basement rocks until only a. 
shallow easterly dip remained. Contours were then drawn on the base 
of the Metlw (Figure 7). (The regional strike and dip were obtained 
by solution of a three-point problem, using the three most widely- 
separated wells.) 

Important features derived from the resulting contour man, and 
possible interpretations of them, are: 

(a) Bo prominent elevations or depressions appear, hence the 
area was probablv one of low relief—a typical peneplain. 

(b) Low areas lie to the southwest and northeast of an arch 

or ^ose’ .just west of the axis of rotation. It is believed that 
this arching is, to some extent, a false one. The Precambrlan base¬ 
ment rocks found in well cores close to the strike axis give definite 
indications of faulting, together with some mineralization* It is 
suggested, therefore, that a "hinge zone" occurs just east of the 
strike axis, probably one of many associated With diastrophic move- 
ments forming the Alberta Syncline. . 

(c) A sione to higher elevations with an east-west trend is to 
■foe seen parallel:?ng the Clearwater and Athabaska Fivers. As noted 
before, reef development was good on this slope. 

_A possible explanation for this is that a culmination in the 




, 

, 



' 




. 


■ 







' 

. ..If. 








. 






























- 40 - 


Precanbrian basement occurs, with an axis extending somewhere south 
of the two rivers, in that wp, and at right angles to the regional 
strike of those early formations. 


An i sopach m«r> wap drawn of the Me thy Formation as well (Fig- 
iire 6). Wells with the best evidence for reef development have the 
thickest formation. Bear Rodeo #1, in which reef indications were 
poor, has the thinnest Methy. 


PALEO N TOLOGY 

The following collections of fossils were made in the field 

by Dr. Cotd of Pacific Petroleums Ltd.., and identified by Dr. P.S. 

Warren of the University of Alberta: 

(l) At Contact Rapids, on the Clearwater River: 

(Co li.Tmn.arl a?) dis.toncta Whiteaves. 

Favosites cf, aloenensls Winehell. 

F, limita.ris Rominger, 

Au lopora (?) so. 

Coe nite s ( Cladooora )(?) sp. 

Atrypa reticularis var. A Whiteaves. 

Atrypa 3 sreeies. ^ 

Strophe od onta. cf. demis gjS. Wall, 

S trln <?o cephalns brrtini de:F ranee. 

Camsrotoechia sp. 


(?) At Whitemud Falls and Pine Portage, on the Clearwater River 

Sohaerosoongia tesselata Phillips. 

Fa vo si tes cf. gold-f ns si C a-ste 1 nau ■ 

Alveol ite s cf. cryptodens Billings. 

Gy p i d.nla. cf. comis Owen. 

Gypidul a cf. o ccidental!s Hall. 

Atrypa. reti cularis var. A Whiteaves. 

Strinaocephalus b urtini def. 

Of this fauna, Dr. Warren states: n They are Middle Devonian 
and may be correlated with the Presqulile Dolomite. 11 





















■ 

; 




. 















' 










. 
























' 






, 







- 41 


Fron the well cores, the following were obtained: 
We stmount #1 : 


Syna rtophyllum sp., about 


P. , \u\ U 

d<? p\a\nvt\\e- 

Favosites cf. cervtcornls, 
Atrypa cf. arct ic? Warren, 

n ri II ' || 

n n n u 


Owen 

cf - rpri^f M»«k. 

Martiniopsis cf. subline ata, 

.ypg gp^ 9 * 

Gypidula (?) sp• 


ii 

n 

n 

t! 

II 

It 

II 

It 

II 

II 


1475 feet 
14S 5 " 

1516 " 
1548 n 
1558 » 

1568 " 

1558 " 

1568 » 
1579 " 
1578 » 

1578 n 


We stmownt §2 : 


Actinostroma sp., 

about 

618 

II 

* If “ if 

11 

645 

It 

Atrypa. cf. arctica. Warren, 
Atrypa sp. (coarse-ribbed), 

1! 

676 

tt 

it 

676 

ft 

Sponge spicules, 

tt 

676 

tt 

Fenestella sp., 

ti 

691 

tt 


Rodeo #1 : 


Gypidula (?) sp., 

Atrypa sp., 

" w (coarse-ribbed), 
Actinostroma, sp., 

Atrypa arctica Warren, 


about 888 and 935 feet, 

n 889 " 935 " . 

n 901 feet. 
n 912 » . 

n 9/C) it 


Biltmore #1 : 

Prismatophyl lura sp., about 2587 feet. 


Vampire #2 : 

Sponge spicules, 


about 773 feet. 


Dr. Warren says: "The cores from which Gypidula and Atrypa 
a rctica were identified are probably from the base of the Winnipego- 


san dolomite. The other specimens cannot be tied in, but are undoubt¬ 


edly Middle Devonian." 


















•;o ) / 


■ 




J0 


i 




.. 






















- 42 - 


In addition to these, F. Trollope collected fossils typical 

of the Methy Formation at the confluence of the Rochers and Slave 

Rivers, near Lake Athabaska. Among these were: 

Atrypa arc tica Warren. 

Gypidula cf. coni s Owen. 

Martiniopsis sp. 


Crinoid columnals, brachiopod shells, stromatoporoids and 
corals are abundant In most of the well cores. Often they are dolo- 
mitized and poorly preserved, hence are seldom, identifiable. 


Co rrelation . 

The Methy Formation correlates with the Winnipegosan Formation 
of Manitoba, the Presqu’ile of Great Slave Lake, and the Ramparts 
in the Norman Wells area. The best evidence for correlation is in 
the faunal assemblages. However, petrological resemblances are 
often striking as well, as can be seen from the following brief 
summarie s: 

(a) The Winnipeapsan of Mani toba. (3, 14) : 

defence Phillips 

Fauna: Stringocephalus burtim, Sphaerospongia tesselata., and 

“”A ' 

others. 

Lithology: The formation is 250 feet thick. Baillie notes two 
rock types: a massive bioberm facies, and a bedded, saccharoidal 
’’normal facies.” The normal facies is a grey, unevenly-bedded, 
sugary dolomite, with poor porosity. It is poorly fossiliferous, 
and contains large crinoid coltannals, poorly-preserved brachiopods 
and scattered corals. Beds are a few inches to 3 feet thick. The 
bioherm facies makes cliffs 15 to 40 feet high of thick-bedded to 










.5 





' 






; 

■ 

' • ;■ ■' 

, ; ' 























t % 

'' * > j ' •; ' ’ -T/ ‘ " ’• / ■ > * 

. 

: ':) : > /v | ■: > ' ; i ' 












massive dolomite. 


(Comparing with exposures represented in Plates 
I, IV (a), and V.) It is highly fossiliferous, with abundant corals 
and stromatoporoids. Ba.i3.lie thought the aligned vugs might be due 
to lime-secreting algae. Part of the rock is a tightly-cemented 
cooulna. 


(b) The Presqu ! ile of the Great Slave Lake Area, N.W.T. (IP .): 

de F. <?wen 

Faunas Strmgoceohalus burtiiru Gypidula cf. comis, Actino- 
stroma cf. nodulatum Nicholson, Clad op ora sp., and others. 

Lithology: A brown, light grey or mottled dolomitic limestone 
with some bituminous and recrysta.13.ized dolomite and sha.ly limestone 
The total thickness is 375 feet. 


(c) The Rampa rts Formation of the Norman We lls Area, H.W.T . 

.( 12. 13 ) : 

<A«F. 

Faunas St ringo c eo halus - burtlni_ » Cladopora sp., Prlsmato - 

Lithologys Compact, grey, bedded to knobby limestones, 
with thin-bedded, buff sandstones at the top. 


(d) Alberta Plain s Area : 

Argillaceous dolomites and limestones believed to be equiva¬ 
lent to the Methy Formation have been struck in certain deep borings 
on the Alberta plains. Crinoid columnsIs were the only macrofossils 
found. Thicknesses are similar to those of the Methy Formation in 
the Waterways area. (See Appendix I, op. 14~15.) 















, 


. 


. : ; ! 

















- 44 - 

ECONOMIC PO SS IBILITI ES 

There is little doubt but that the Methy reef dolomites may 
contain oil. The correlative Presqu ! ile Formation on Great Slave 
Lake has long been known to contain petroleum-filled, vugs. Indeed, 
it would be strange if such a porous reef rock did not contain some 
hydrocarbons or other fluids, either created in situ from the abun¬ 
dant organisms present, or brought in by migration from nearby source 
beds. 

Some core sections were exceptionally dark brown in colour. 

In order to determine the nature of the colouring agent, a quanti¬ 
tative chemical analysis of a sample was obtained from the Alberta 
Provincial Laboratory (see analysis, pages 5 and 6). 

An exceptionally high carbon content is noted (4.13$). In 
order to find out whether this carbon was present In the form of 
hydrocarbons or as the element, 31 grams of the powdered rock were 
treated with boiling carbon tetrachloride. Only 0.015 grams were 
removed in solution—a negligible amount. It Is concluded, there¬ 
fore, that the chocolate colour is due to finely-disseminated ele¬ 
mentary carbon. 

As we have seen, reef development was extremely widespread in 
Me thy time, providing domes and ridges favourable for oil accumu¬ 
lation. What is lacking, however, is a good capping rock. While 
evapcrite beds such as anhydrite and rock salt will effectively 
seal-in fluids, their method of formation is sufficiently slow to 
permit the greater part of any fluids to escape. A blanket of shale, 
on the other hand, not only provides an effective seal, but smothers 














; ' > 







■ 















the bioherm and its abundant life quickly. 

In the area studied, a shale bed overlying the Methy was not 
discovered. But it is entirely possible that such a member may be 
locally oresent elsewhere. Nor is it impossible to suppose that 
petroliferous fluids concentrated in the porous reefs after migra¬ 
tion from down-dip areas. For these, the evaporites would still 
provide an adequate cap rock. 

Large thicknesses of shales and other rocks which could pro¬ 
vide an abundant source for petroleum are lacking in the Waterways 
area, where the beds in immediate sequence are the evauorites. How¬ 
ever, possible source beds are intimately associated with, the equi¬ 
valent formations on Great Slave Lake and possibly even closer at 
hand. 

As to where a future search would be most favourable, the 
writer has two suggestions: 

1. Continuing northwesterly parallel to the Shield, an area, 
where oil is known to occur (in the Presou’ile) is approached. The 
evaporite basin is skirted; somewhere to the northwest it pinches 
out, perhaps where reefal growth was superabundant (as was the case 
with the Capitan Beef of the Texas Permian (l)). Thicknesses of 
shales and limestones, which might prove to be good source rocks, 
increase in that area, as well (12). 

Remaining f»rly close to the Shield, (a) shale beds are 
perhaps more likely to occur, being closer to the source of the 
sediments, and (b) depths to favourable horizons, such as the Me thy, 
would be shallower. 

2. Undoubtedly a culmination in the PreCambrian basement 








- 46 - 


trends southwesterly, with its axis somewhere south of Waterways. 
Reefs! development may be exrected to be strong on the flanks of 
this arch. 

The writer is convinced that the Methy Formation with its 
equivalents is one of the most favourable horizons in Western Canada 
in which to seek for accumulations of oil in commercial quantities. 

SUMM ARY OF CONCLUSIONS 

The Methy Formation is of Middle Devonian age, as indicated 
by its faunal content. Correlation with the Winnipegosan of Mani¬ 
toba, the Presqu’ile of Great Slave Lake, and the Ramparts Forma¬ 
tion of the Lower Mackenzie River is possible. 

The formation is overlain by the Elk Point evaporite series, 
in the Waten-rays area. Dolomite is the predominant rock present, 
with limestone, chert, shale, anhydrite, gypsum, and rock salt in 
lesser amounts. Some clay and disseminated, argillaceous matter 
are also present. The mineral brucite(?) has been identified, as 
well. 

An abundant fauna is found in the formation, hence a warm, 
shallow, marine environment is postulated for Methy time. Bioherm 
growth was widespread, and occurred throughout deposition of the 
formation. Stromatoporoids, corals and probably algae were active 
reef-builders, with erinoid columnals, brachiopod shells and other 
fragments providing abundant detritus. 

All types of reef facies are present in the formation. Care¬ 
ful examination of cores enabled a set of criteria for the recogni¬ 
tion of these facies in subsurface well sections to be formulated. 



. 


.. .. .. . v . . ' • . ; i : 7 : ' > > 




. 

. 

. 

. 



- 



% 






. 


• 



; 

. 



■ 

. 

■ 



■ 

- 




















- 47 - 


Structural study indicates that the Methy was deposited on an 
erosional surface of low relief'. 

Dolomitization processes have been intense. It is concluded 
that by far the greater amount of replacement occurred contempo¬ 
raneously or penecontemporaneously with deposition of the sediments. 
Calcitic shell fragments are less vulnerable to this metasomatism 
than aragonitic fossils. 

The lenticular chert interbeds were believed to be precipi¬ 
tated by electrolytic action as colloidal gels. The silica had its 
source in the low-lying neneolained Shield area to the east. Cherts 
are representative of the feasinal facies. 

Breccias and fragmentals are common and are related to reef- 
flank and reef-wall facies. Some evaporite-solution breccias also 
occur*. 

Great thicknesses of source rocks for petroleum are lacking 
in the Waterways area. However, the Methy Formation raay provide 
a good potential reservoir for these fluids, for it Is often very 
porous. 





- 48 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1. Adams , J.E., and Frenze l, H.I .; "Gapitan Barrier Reef, Texas and 

New Mexico;" Jour. Geol. ; Vol. 58, July, 3-950; pp. 289-312. 

2. Allan , J.A.; Rea. Coun. Alberta, "Mineral Resources of Alberta;" 

Second Annual Report, 1920, p. 102. 

3. Bai llie, A.D.; "Devonian Geology of Lake Manitoba-Lake Winnipego- 

sis Area;" Pub. 49-2, Mines Branch, Dept. Mines & Nat. Res; 

Prov. Manitoba. 

4. D aly , R.A.; "Pleistocene Glaciation and the Coral Reef Problem;" 

Amer. Jour. Sci., 4th ser., Vol. 30, pp. 297-308; 1910. 

5. Darwin , C.R.; "The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs;" 

Smith, Elder & Co.; London, 1889? 3rd Edition. 

6. Fairbridge , R.W.; "Recent and Pleistocene Coral Reefs of Australia;" 

Jour. Geol.; Vol. 58, July, 1950; up. 330-401. 

7. Gro ut, F.F.; "Petrography and Petrology;" McGraw-Hill Book Co. 

Inc.: First Edition, 1932. 

8. Gruner, J.W.; "Origin of Sedimentary Iron Formations;" Economic 

Geology, Vol. 17, Sept, 1922, pp. 407-660. 

9. Hatch, F.H., and Rastall , R.H.; "The Petrology of the Sedimentary 

Rocks;" Thos, Murby & Co.; 40 Museum St., London; 3rd Ed., 1938. 

10. Hew ett, D.F.; "Dolomitization and Ore Deposition;" Economic 

Geology; Vol. 23, No. 8; Dec. 1928; pp. 821-863. 

11 . Hoffmeister , J.E., and Ladd , H.S.; "The Antecedent Platform 

Theory;" Jour. Geol. Vol. 52, 1944, p. 388. 

12. Hume , G.S., Camero n, A.E., Whittake r, E.J., and W illiams , M.Y.j 

Reports in Geol. Surv. Can. Summ. Kept. 1921, Part B. 

13. Hume , G.S., and Link, T.A.; "Canol Geological Investigations in 

the Mackenzie River Area, N.W.T. and Yukon;" G.S.C. Paper 45-16, 


1945. 
























- 49 - 


14. Kind le, E.M. • "The Silurian and Devonian Section of Western 
Manitoba;" G.S.C. Summ. Kept. 1912, p # 247. 

15- Lande s. K.K.; "Porosity Through Dolomitization;" Bull. A.A.P.G.* 
March, 1946, Vol. 30, No. 3. 

16. Link, T.A.; "Theory of Transgressive and Regressive. Reef (Bio- 

herm) Development and origin of Oil;" Bull. A.A.P.G. Feb. 1950, 
Vol. 34, No. 2. 

17. Lowensta m, H.A.; "liagaran Reefs of the Great Lakes Area.;" 

Jour. Geol. Vol. 58, July, 1950, pp. 430-487. 

18. Macpun , J.; Geol. Surv. Gan. Rept. Prog. 1875-1876. 

19. McConnell , R.G.; "Report of a Portion of Athabaska District;" 

Geol, Surv. Gan. Ann. Rept., Part D, 1891. 

20. Pettijohn , F.J.; "Sedimentary Rocks;" Harper & Bros., New York; 1949. 

21. S loss , L.L., and Laird, W.M.; "Devonian System in Central and 

Northwestern Montana;" Bull. A.A.P.G. Vol. 31, No. 8, August, 

1947, pp. 1422-1423. 

22. Soroule , J.C., quoted in Ells, S.C., "Investigations of Mineral 

Resources and the Mining Industry;" Mines Branch Rept. No. 727, 
p. 107, 1932. 

23. S teidtmann , E.; "Origin of Dolomite as Disclosed by Stains and 

Other Methods;" Bull. G.S.A., Vol. 28, June, 1917, pp. 431-450. 

24* Stewart , F.H.; "The Petrology of the Evaporites of the Eskdale 

no. 2 boring, east Yorkshire: Part I;" Mineralogical Magazine, 

Vol. 28, Sept. 1949, pp. 622-675. 

25. Tarr , W.A.; "Contribution to the Origin of Dolomite;" Bull. G.S.A., 

Vol. 30, 1919, p. 114. 

26. " " ; "Terminology of the Chemical Siliceous Sediments;" Rept. 







•' :'n 







* 







- 50 - 


Coran. Sed., 1937-1938, mimeographed, Nat. Res. Corn. 1938, 

pp. 6-77. 

77. Tarr, W.A.; "Origin of Chert in the Burlington Limestone;" 

Amer. Jour. Sci. Vol. 44, No. 246, Dec. 1947. 

78. Trefethen , J.M.; "Some Features of the Cherts in the Vicinity of 

Columbia, Mo.;" Amer. Jour. Sci. Vol. 245, No. 1, Jan. 1947, 

pp. 46-58. 

29. Wilson , W.B.; "Reef Definition;" Bull. A.A.P.G., Vol. 34, No. 2 
Feb. 1950, p. 181. 

30. McGehee , J.R.; "Pre-Waterways Faleozoic Stratigraphy of 
Alberta Plains;” Bull. A.A.P.G., Vol. 33, No. 4, April, 

1949, p. 603. 









APPENDIX I. 

— WELL LOGS r- 


1 . 


BEAR WESIMOUNT #2 

Location 

9-36-88-8 W4 *K.B. 1 El. 837 

NOTE • The complete log of tills well is given here, as being 
typical for the entire group. For all other wells, only descriptions 
of the Methy Dolomite sections are included. 

The writer wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to Dr. P.E. Cot£ 
Of Pacific Petroleums Ltd. for the use of his core descriptions, and 
permission to amplify and abridge them as desired for this work. 


5*- 43* Limestone , light grey to light buff, cryptocrystalline, argil¬ 


laceous, massive, occasionally rubbly; cut by numerous dark 
grey shaly and silty bands, fairly regular crinoid stems. 


43* 


44* 

45* 

46* 

62 * 

68 * 

71* 


a few brachiopods; tight. 

44* Limestone , marked break, dark grey, argillaceous, interbanded 
with buff, granular limestone and dark grey calcareous shale. 

45* Shale , greenish grey, calcareous. 

46* Limesto ne, dark grey, highly fossiliferous, granular breaks. 

62* Shale, greenish grey, calcareous, with occasionally limy bands. 

68* Core lost. 

71’ Shale , as above. 

75* Lime stone , mainly, grey, argillaceous, mottled in black, high¬ 
ly fossiliferous at top, occasionaly rubbly, due to numerous 
shaly bands; pyrite. 


75* - 78* Argillaceous limestone , locally grading to shale, many shaly 
bands; 0.2’ coquinoid (brachiopods) at 77*. 


78* - 123* Shale , greenish-grey, calcareous, locally almost an argillaceous 
limestone, fair parting, some pyrite. 

123’ -138* Limestone , cryptocrystalline to crystalline, irregular texture 

due to fossil parts, looks very much like fine fragmental, tight 
some granular concentrations locally, pyrite, silty, some bracks 


138 - 146* Limy silty shale , green, almost a silty limestone, some brachio¬ 
pods. 

















I 



I 





- 52 - 

BEAR WESTMOUNT #2 


2 . 


146 - 191 

191 - 217' 

217 - 283* 

283 - 318* 

318 - 342* 
342 - 347’ 
347 - 379' 

379 - 383 1 
383 - 407' 


407 - 408* 


408 - 412' 


412 - 415* 


415 - 416* 
418 - 426* 
426 - 429’ 

429 - 441' 

441 - 44-9’ 
449 - 462* 


462 - 468* 


* Limestone , buff, looks like fragmental at top, generally 
with irregular thin argillaceous breaks, cryptocrystalline, 
occasionally interbedded with limy shale bands to 2* thick. 
Some crinoid stems and brachiopods, slightly silty, tight. 

Highly argill ac eous Limes tone , almost a shale, greenish grey, 
silty, locally grading to a definity shale, many brachiopods, 
ma s sive, tight. 

Shale, mostly, green, calcareous, with some liny concentrations 
and silt; some brachiopods at ton and in thin coquinoid lime¬ 
stone beds below. Some pyrite. Becomes increasingly interbedded 
with limestone below. 


Argillaceous limestone and limy shale, grey with green argil¬ 
laceous bands, a few brachiopods, mat to microgranular. 

Shale , green, calcareous, some brachiopods. 

Limestone, rubbly, argillaceous, with shale bands. 

Shale, grey to greenish-grey, good fissility locally, some 
limy concentrations. lingula sps. present. 

TOP OF ELK POINT EVAPOR!TES 

Siltstone, green grey, calcareous, interbanded with shale 
as above. 


Shale and limeston e, closely interbanded in one to two foot 
layers; shale as above; limestone, grey, cryptocrystalline 
to microgranular, possibly silty. 

S ilty elaystone , grey, calcareous, to dolomitic. 

Limestone , buff to light brown, silty, massive, some breccia. 

Claysto ne, sil tstone and dolomite, interbanded; claystone is 
silty and dolomitic; dolomite is buff, others are grey. 


Gl aystone , mainly, grey, silty, dolomitic, with gypsum bands. 

Gypsum , mainly, with many bands of silty elaystone. 

D olomite , buff, mat to microgranular, finely layered, cut 
by numerous gypsum bands and concentrations. 

Siltstone a nd silty elayst one, interbanded with shale and 

- • reenish grey, dolomitic. with some gypsum. 


Glaystone , grey to buff, 
thin layers of dolomitic 


dolomitic, silty 
silt, and gypsum 



.Qspsum, mostly, some green shale at top, numerous dolomite 
stringers. 

Dolomite, buff, bedded, argillaceous, with some gypsum 
concentrations. 






























. 




. 


' • 






















“ 

. 






































































> • ; ,, 






,.. : 

.. 







- 53 - 

BEAR WESTMOUWT #2 

468 - 477* Gypsum , prey, mottled in black with many shale bands. 

477 - 494' Gypsu m and anhyd rite ; anhydrite is highly brecciated and 
altered to gypsum; some shaly contamination. 

/q/ - 57*7 1 Anhydrite , brecciated in part and altered to gypsum contain¬ 
ing shaly impurities; also contains some dolomitic bands. 

527 - 528’ Dolomit e, light buff, microgranular. 

528 - 562* Anhydrite , with numerous dolomite "stringers,” brecciated 

Only, locally. 

TOP OF ME THY DOLOMITE 

562 - 564' D olomite , buff, cryptocrystalline to microcrystalline, lay¬ 
ered, anhydritic, silty. Anhydrite filling vertical fractures. 

564 - 569 1 Anhydrite, grey, crystalline, massive. 

569 - 570* G ypsum , grey, with much dolomite at top. 

570 - 581* Dolomit e, light grey to buff, micpigranular, in part recry¬ 

stallized, mostly dense at tor, excellent fine vugginess 
lower down, probably due to stromatoporpids, indistinct 
evidence of coral: irregular layering; shaly locally; vep- 
.tical anhydrite stringers at top. 

.581 - 585* Dolomi te, greenish grey, irregular fine vugginess (due to 
stromatoporoids?), micro .granular, slightly argillaceous. 

585 - 595' D olomite , light- grey, microcrystalline, massive, generally 
tight, some evidence of corals, indistinct lajrering locally. 

595 - 605’ Dol omite , buff to grey, to greenish grey, microcrvstalline, 
very finely vuggy throughout, vugs locally up to x n , layered 
throughout, locally shaly. Vugs lined with calcite crystals. 

TOP OF REEF 

605 - 617* Dolom ite, buff to greenish grey as above, some breccia, a' 
few irregular structures, locally shaly, probably reef. 

617 - 630 * D olomit e, as above, definite irregular structures, definite 
coral, probably reef, vugginess generally poor; brecciated 
near bottom. Also some limy -abases, with stylolites. 

630 - 64 O 1 Dolomite an d dolomitic limestone , as above, irregular struc¬ 
tures, much evidence.of corals (some only partly dolomitized) 
and coral sand; calcite-filled vugs up to 

640 - 658 1 Dolomite , as above, crystalline, stromatoporoids and corals 
and crinoid stems; locally fragmental (some coral sand); 
fair to good vugginess, with vugs to 1 " in diameter. 


BASE OF REEF 

















t 















- 54 - 

BEAR WESTMOUNT §2 


653 - 670* Dolpmite, brownish grey, layered at approximately 25° to 

horizontal (flow type layering;), contains some corals, many 
paper-thin brownish-black bituminous shale layers, some limy 
films and anhydrite blobs. Dolomite has sugary texture, fair 
to good microporosity. Possibly a few corals and brachiopods, 

670 - 671* Do l omite, breccia, buff matrix and brown coarse fragments 

somewhat layered, fine local vugginess. Coquinoid, with 
corals, stromatoporoids, brachiopods and crinoid(?) fragments. 

671 - 674* D olomite , dirty brown, sugary texture, finely layered, pos¬ 

sibly a fragmental; vugs up to ly n in diameter. 

674 - 678 1 Dol^M.tg.j>__.li mx.dolomite , near the bottom, brown, brecciated, 
some coralline matter, stromatoporoids, crinoid stems, and 
brachiopods. Considerable amounts of finely-broken organic 
matter. 


678 - 694’ Dolomite, dirty brown becoming greenish grey, microcrystal- 
line, locally shaly, fair to good vugginess to 1”, some 
breccia, good coral evidence and bryozoans ( Fenestella ?): 
shaly partings. Possibly reefal? 

694 - 704’ D olomite ,greenish grey, becoming mottled with buff, some 

breccia, fair to good vugginess, has crinoid stems present, 

704 - 730* Dolomite, sometimes limy, dark grey becoming mottled and com¬ 
pact at .base, mierocrystalline, fair vugginess, irregular 
layering at high angle. Crinoid stems, stromatoporoids, bryo¬ 
zoans and. brachiopods. A definite breccia, especially below. 

730 - 732‘ Dolomit e, grey, irregularly layered and argillaceous, fair 
vugginess; coarser vugs filled with gypsum. 

732 - 737’ A rgillaceous dol om ite , dark grey, finely bedded, slightly 
silty, dense, many crinoid stems. 

737 - 757* D olomite « very argillaceous, dark brown to dark grey, finely 
bedded, a few brachiopods, many crinoid stems, scattered 
coarse gypsum-filled vugs, becoming massive and. tight below - 
and indefinitely layered. Some bryozoans (Fenestella?). 

757 - 768' Do lomite , green at top, becoming dark brox-m, then buff at 
base, slightly layered at top, microcrystalline, massive, 
many small anhydrite inclusions, a few crinoid stems; bottom 
6 n shows no structures. 

Shale, greenish grey dolomitic, with fair to good parting, 
and fractures filled with dolomite from above marks base. 

BASE OF METHY DOLOMITES 

768 - 775 1 Shale, anhydrite and dolomite , interbanded, with many gypsum 
stringers. 

775 - 787* Dolo miti c claystone mainly, olive green, locally interbanded 
with dolomite or anhydrite, occasionally brecciated, some 
gypsum. 


















- 55 - 

BEAR WESTMOUNT #2 


TOP RED BEDS 

7£7 - 805' Cl aystone and dolomitic clay,stone , greenish grey to buff 

to green, some argillaceous dolomite and gypsum, slightly silty, 

805 - 807' Claystone as above, but mottled in red, top of Red Beds. 

807 - 848 1 R ed Beds , dolomitic claystone above, becoming increasingly 



arenaceous and silty below; local gypsum concentrations. 

848 - 858' 

Red beds, sandstone of rounded quartz grains, some arenaceous 
claystone; gypsum concentrations throughout. 

858 - 884' 

Red beds, arenaceous claystone, rusty red and green, silty, 
with gypsum concentrations. 

884 - 90S' 

Red beds, argillaceous breccia, dolomitic, rusty red, frag- 
ments up to 1”, some siltstone and sandstone; gypsum. 

908 - 936' 

Feldspar-hornblende-gneiss, highly-weathered at top, gypsi¬ 
ferous. Bottom of well. 


BEAR WESTMOUNT #1 

Location 

14-9-86-7 ¥4 *K.B.* El. 1627 


1416' 

TOP OF METHY DOLOMITE 

1416-1424' 

Dolomite, buff, granular, indistinctly layered, oolitic, 
vertical anhydrite-filled cracks, anhydrite n sand crystals.** 

1424-1428 1 

Anhydrite, blue grey, fairly pure, altered in part to gyp¬ 
sum, especially at base; some dolomite also present at base. 

1428-1460 1 

Dolomite, buff, granular, layered throughout, very fine 
fragmental probably, brownish black shaly films, fair to 
good very fine vugginess, bottom 3* become very compact. 

1460-1465' 

Dolomite, greenish grey, layered, microcrystalldne to granu- 
lar, very finely vuggy locally. 

TOP OF REEF 

1465-1480' 

Dolomite, buff, microgranular, irregular structures through- 
out, vugs to -6- n , coarse gypsum concentrations; some rubble 
at base; abundant evidence of corals and stromatoporoids. 

1480-1501' 

Dolomite, buff, crumbly, earthy lustre locally, otherwise 
microcrystalline, irregular structures, some local layering 
due to shaly films, vugs to considerably brecciated, with 

abundant corals, brachiopods, and stromatoporoids. 

1501-1511' 

Dolomite, buff, microcrystalline, some earthy crumbly sec- 
tions, (coral rubble?), vugs up to 1**, brownish shaly films, 
some gypsum concentrations and pyrite; locally coquinoid, 
recognizable corals and stromatoporoids. 














* 

■ r ■" ’ ■ , ' ' > : ■; 











, 










■ t 


















- 56 - 

BEAR WESTMOUNT #1 


1 511-1532 1 PoloijU-te, brown, flow layered, microcrystalline, fair mic- 
roporosity and vugginess, dark shaly films,- corals, stroma- 
toporoids and brachiopods; probably coquinoid rubble. 

1532-1542* ton e, dark brown to almost black, bedded 

throughout, argillaceous, microcrystalline, many black-brown 
shaly films; crinoidal, brachiopods and corals ( Syringopora ? 1 ). 

1542-1553* Limestone, to do lomitic limestone , dark brown, indistinct 
layering, micro crystalline, mainly,” argillaceous, massive, 
tight; coarse-ribbed Atrypas , other brachiopods, crinoid 
stems. ( Atrypa cf. arctica Warren.) 

1553-1583’ Limestone, dark brown, massive, indistinct layering, micro¬ 
crystalline, argillaceous, tight, abundant brachiopods and 
crinoids. Atrypa arctica Warren, Gypidula cf. comis , Martinio - 
Psis cf, sublineata. Meek, coarse-ribbed Atrypa s, an indeter¬ 
minate gastropod, Slickensiding common in shaly phases. 

1583-1593’ Limeston e, dark brown, massive, tight, very argillaceous, 
indistinct layering, few fossils than above. 

1593-1638 1 Limestone , becoming more dolomitic at base, dark brown, 

argillaceous, dappled in brown (due to fossils and irregular 
distributions of argillaceous matter, probably); many brachio¬ 
pods, crinoids, becoming fewer at base; massive, tight. 

1638-1648* Ca lcitlc dolomite , brown, some irregular structures, massive, 
vugs to ir M filled with anhydrite, argillaceous, finely 
silty; contains a few brachiopods. 

TOP O F SECOM D E VAPORITE . 


BEAR RODEO #1 

*K.B.* El. 822 

842* TOP OF I-v kliY DOLOMITE 

842 - 853* Dolomite , buff to brown, microcrystalline, with good to ex¬ 
cellent fine porosity, locally finely vuggy, slightly argil¬ 
laceous; some pyrite; salt encrusted; vertical joints, often 
filled with anhydrite; some indefinite coral forms. 

853 - 861* Dolo mite, similar to above, but marked by fine speckling 
due to small elongate buff forms, generally in alignment; 
probably a breccia; fine porosity; corals, brachiopods, and 
crinoid stems in evidence; becomes reddish-brown at base. 

861 - 885* Dolomite ♦ brown, microgranular to crystalline, finely porous, 
salt encrusted. Probably originally a breccia, as above; 
could be reef; irregular structures; locally layered; slight¬ 
ly argillaceous, moreso at base; a few brachiopods. 


Location 
89-9 W4 
































. 








■ 

, 


•.... j 

, 


. 






• • 










































- 57 - 

BEAK RODEO #1 


885 '- 888* Limestone, light buff, microcrystalline, microporous, 
probably fine fragmental; crinoids}, perhaps. 

888 - 889 1 Argill ace ous dolomite , dark brown and buff, a breccia. 

Gypi dula (?) sp. 

889 - 891' Limestone , buff, as above; auite pure. Atrvna sp. Crinoidal. 

891 - 893 1 Calcitic dolomi te, dark brown argillaceous, brecciated; 
brachiopods. 

893 - 898 |T Limestone , breccia, buff and dark brown; coarse, irregular, 

buff limestone fragments in a dark brown 'argillaceous matrix. 
A coarse fragmental, with some fine porosity, some anhyd¬ 
rite infilling. Brachiopods. 

898 - 899* Shale, black, calcareous. Brachiopods. 

899 - 900 1 Limestone , breccia, as above. 


900 - 903* limestone and shale , limestone as above, shale dark brown 
to dark grey, calcareous. Brachiopods and crinoid stems. 

Coar se-ribbed Atr ypas . 

903 - 922* Lime ston e, coarse fragmental, fragments of coralline and 

other limestones, buff, angular, locally rounded, contained 
in dark brown dolomitic argillaceous ground mass, the latter 
having definite oil smell when heated. Crinoid stems, 
brachiopods, stromatoporoids ( Actinostroma sp.), and corals; 
the latter especially at the base. 

922 - 925* Do lomitic shale , brownish black, looks like oil shale (as 
above), a few limestone concentrations; crinoid stems. 

925 - 944' Limestone and d o lom i tic(?) shale , limestone as buff-coloured 
fragments in dark brown oil(?) shale; a breccia or rubble 
originally, probably. Brachiopods (coarse-ribbed Atrypas , 
GypicLula ), crinoid stems, corals. 

944 “ 955' Limeston e, brown, dense, argillaceous, massive, tight; be¬ 
comes increasingly dolomitized at base; some shaly anhydrite 
blobs; fine-ribbed Atrypas , - - Atrvna arc ties. Warren. 


TOP SBCGKD E7AP0RITE 


BEAR RODEO #2 

Location 

5-17-91-9 ¥4 *K.B.* El. 803 

730 1 TOP OF FIE THY DOLOMITE 


730 - 7Z,3‘ Dolomite , light brown, granular, poor bedding, finely 
crystalline. 



























- 58 - 

BEAR RODEO #2 


743 - 753* Dolomi te, light brown, massive, granular, as above, but 
with corals. 

753 ~ 783 1 Dolomite , light brown, branular, massive, anhydrite blebs, 
becoming increasingly argillaceous towards base. 

783 - 793' Dolomite, brown to dark brown, generally crystalline, local¬ 
ly argillaceous, poorly bedded, anhydrite-filled vugs, 
brachiopods and crinoid stems observed. 

793 - 796’ Dolomite, dark brown, bedded to irregularly laminated, thin, 
dark, argillaceous bands locally; anhydrite-filled vugs; 
crinoid stems. 

796 - 807’ Dolomite , light brown, generally granular, crumbly, mas¬ 
sive, locally argillaceous; erinoidal and coralline (reef?). 

807 - 809* Dolomite, well layered, light brown granular as above, inter- 
banded with dark brown argillaceous phases--flow layered; 
pyritic, brachiopods ( Atrypa ( arctic s?), Martiniopsis sp.). 

809 - 829’ Dolomit e, dark brown becoming light brow, toward base, where 
argillaceous content is on decrease; locally finely layered 
to bedded; mottled; probably originally a coauinoid breccia; 
•nyritic; coralline and erinoidal; seme "coral sand." 

829 - 834* Dol omit e, light brown, granular, as aheve, but with brachio¬ 
pods near the ton. 

834 ~ 839* Dolomite , dark brown, argillaceous locally, strongly mottled, 
locally well bedded; local bands of crystalline dolomite; 
a breccia with brachiopods, at th<f base. 

839 - 865’ Dolomite , brown to dark brown, a. rubble breccia, mostly, 

hence granular to crystalline texture; layering almost ab¬ 
sent, better at base, where more argillaceous matter occurs; 
porosity varies from excellent to poor; stylolites and 
slickensiding common; indistinct coralline evidence, becomes 
erinoidal towards base. This *one max represent intend!gi- 
tation of rubble and chemical precipitates around reet edge. 

£65 - 878* Dolomite , greenish grey to buff, finely crystalline, argil¬ 
laceous, indistinct layering, massive, some anhydrite-filled 
vugs, becomes shaly towards base. 

TOP SECO ND EVAPORITBS 


BEAR VAMPIRE #1 

Location 

7-28-87-12 W4 ’K.B. 1 El. 1545 

1914t TOP ME THY DOLOMITE 

1914-1917’ Dolomite , mainly, bnown, argillaceous, locally finely lay¬ 
ered,, some anhydrite, finely vuggy, silty, microcrystal Line. 










- 

. 

; ; : .rr-v-,: : 

- ■■ 

, 


. 

o - ' 



j 



■ 

. 

: i 

■ 





, 



1 , : 







- 59 - 

BEAR VAMPIRE #1 

1917-1921’ Dolom ite, argillaceous, dark greenish grey, with dissemi¬ 
nated anhyd-H te and as beds to 0.4 1 thick. 

1921- 1922* Anh ydrite . 

1922- 1944' Dolomite, dark brown, finely crystalline, coarse vugs with 

coarse crystals of salt, massive, indistinct layering, some 
indications of breccia, contains some anhydrite,--a bed 
1.5* in thickness at the base. 

TOP OF REEF 

1944-1947* Dolomite, dark grey, finely crystalline, coarse vugs filled 
with salt, otherwise massive, anhydritic content on decrease 
downward s. 

1947-1957’ Dolomite, dark grey, microcrystalline, irregular reef struc¬ 
tures, fair to good vugginess, mainly filled with salt, ap¬ 
parently brecciated, definite coral development at base. 
Pyrite. 

1957-1960’ Dolomite , as above, anhydritic, coarsely vuggy, mainly 
filled with salt; brachiopods and corals present. 

1960-1968' Dolomite, dark grey, finely granular, irregular structures 
in top half, somewhat layered below; shows definite brecci- 
ation of the once-solid dolomite; contains some anhydrite 
and pyrite. 


1968-1978’ Dolomite , dark grey to brown, salt-filled, vugs, irregular 
structures, may be breccia; anhydritic; probably corals at 
ba se. 

1978-1988 1 - Doloiftit e", dark .brown almost black, irregular structures 
locally, salt-filled vugs, a breccia; stromatoporoids at 
centre section, also crinoids and possibly corals. 

1988-2008* Dolomite , buff to dark brown, irregular structures, brecci- 
ated and-fractured locally, medium, to coarse salt-filled 
vugs; crinoids, bryozoans and some coral at 1993*. 

2008-2018’ Dolomite , brown, irregular structures, locally brecciated, 
somewhat layered, coarse salt-filled vugs, massive finely 
granular; corals, brachiopods, and crinoids in evidence. 

2018-2022’ Dolomite, light brown, irregular structures, brecciated 
(of coral-rubble and-sand type), coarse salt-filled vugs 
to 3% some crinoids seen. 

B ASE OF BEE F 

2022-2028’ Dolomite , buff to brown, irregularly layered, shaly breccia, 
dolomitie fragments contained, in dark green shale, layering 
at about 20°, local thin beds of crystalline dolomite. 

2028-2038’ Dolomite , buff to dark green mottled, flow type breccia, 

fair vugginess; layered at about 20 degrees from horizontal. 
















) 


) 


©s 



. 


. 
















/ 


' 


. 

, I 







- 60 - 

BEAR VAMPIRE #1 


2038-2043* Dolomite , greenish-grey, mainly with buff layers; flow 

layered, dark dolomite has some shale, fair to good vuggi- 
ness; some brachiopods and crinoids. 

2043-2068’ Dolomit e, grey to buff, irreaular structures, some thin 

shaly partings, anhydritie, coarse tugs due to brecciation, 
probably; mostly salt-filled. 

2068-2078* Dolomite, buff to grey, flow-type layering at about 20 deg¬ 
rees, sucrose, shaly partings, decreasing vugginess from 
above, some brachiopods and possibly bryozoans. 

2078-2088' Dolomit e, as above, but denser and with numerous styolites. 

2088-2092’ Dolomite, buff to grey, flow-type layered, medium salt- 
filled vugs, dense, mottled, some large crinoid stems. 

2092-2125’ Dolomite , dark brown to dark grey, dense, strongly argilla¬ 
ceous, much irregular layering, crinoidal, shaly streaks. 

2125-2135* Dolomite , brown, massive, finely vuggy towards base, with 
vugs filled with salt crystals, sharp break at base. 

TOP SECOND EVAPOR ITE 


Location 
4-32-93-10 ¥4 


BEAR VAMPIRE #2 


’K.B.* El. 799 


604’ TOP METHY DOLOMITE 

604 - 640* Dolomite , buff to brown, coarse anhydrite concentrations, 

decreasing downwards, has distinct layering throughout, most¬ 
ly tight, locally argillaceous towards base, some pyrite, oc¬ 
casional shale partings, slickensiding, possibly diastems. 

640 - 654’ D olomite , light buff, quite massive, tight, locally layered 
between fragmental sections; suggest ”resorbed.” breccia; 
large stromatoporoid growths and (horizontal) corals, either 
in place or as fragments. 


654 - 673* Dolomite , buff, microcrystalline, a fragmental, coarse and 
argillaceous at the base; stromatoporoids, possibly corals. 

673 - 683’ Dolomite , buff, as above, fragmental, but has some fairly 
horizontal bedding; originally some coral and crinoid 
coquinoid. breccia. 

683 - 695' Dolomite, buff to brown as above, fragmental, some layering, 

large vugs; coarse-ribbed A trypas and crinoid stems in breccia. 

695 - 719’ Dolomite , buff, massive, irregularly-layered granular, 

dark bituminous shale partings, a few coarse vugs, ’’coral 
sand” type, with crinoid stems. 


























■ 


. 




; 




. 

. 










t 










■ 


, ■ 






• ' 








- 


. 


: 

- 








; 




- 61 - 

BEAR VAMPIRE #2 


719 - 732 

737 - 770 * 

770 - 780 > 

780 - 790 1 

790- 801 * 

801 - 807 * 

807 - 808* 


Location 

7-11-87-17 

2467’ 

2467-2470* 

2470- 2471 * 

2471- 2475* 
2475-2480’ 
27,80-2491 * 

249I-25OI* 


' 2pl o rc. i . i: :e> buff to brown, massive, flow layered, dark black 
shaly partings, anhydrite concentrations in old vugs; crinoid 
and brachiopod coquinoid type of fragmental, 

P-QbpDP-bg.* shaly to argillaceous, well-layered, some bands 
of black bituminous shale, some salt, anhydrite and gypsum 
concentrations, small to medium vugs, local narrow chertified 
zones; numerous crinoid stems, also brachiopods. 

Argillaceous dolomite , dark brown, layering not marked, gyp¬ 
sum concentrations, finely crystalline, a few vugs, salt-en- 
crusted; crinoid stems and brachiopods and sponge spicules. 

Argillaceous dolomite , as above, increase in argi1laceous 
matter and in brachiopods, decrease in layering, in porosi¬ 
ty and in gypsum and salt encrustation. 

Dolomite , brown, massive, argillaceous, irregular structures, 
possibly due to diagenesis rather than life growths, some 
irregular layering, some vugs small to medium, microcrystal¬ 
line, some anhydrite vug fillings; a. few crinoids. 

Dolomite 1 as above, but believed, to be a breccia, originally, 
probably microporous. 

At i l Ia ce ous d olomite , cryptocrystalline, dense, tight, 
structureless. 

BOTTOM KETHY DOLOMITE . 


BEAR BILTM0RE #1 


W4 


*K.B1* El. 1445 


TOP OF METHY DOLOMITE 


Dolomite , brown microgranular, finely layered, some dark 
brown shaly partings; finely vuggy in layers; vertical 
anhydrite-filled crocks. 

Anhydrite , grey, finely crystalline, fairly pure. 

D olomite , as above, but- some granular patches. 

Anhydrite , massive, as above, locally aolomitic. 

Dolomite , as above, with anhydrite layers up to 1* thick; 
thin shale partings; one foot breccia at base. 

Dolomite , brown, microgranular, flow type layering at top, 
mostly dense, Irregular structures (due to stromatoporoids 
or corals?) start at 2496*. Possibljr part of reef. 










































. 








■ 





















- 
















- 62 - 

BEAR BILTMORE #1 

2501-2521 1 dolomite, brown, microgranular as above, rather dense, 

irregular structures with occasional coarser vugs, filled 
with anhydrite or salt; shaly partings; some breccia in 
lower parts; brachiopod at 2511*; possibly reef. 

2521-2530’ Dolomite , dark brown, microgranular, locally argillaceous, 
irregular structures, with some coarse vugs) filled with 
salt and anhydrite, mostly dense; probably reef. 

2530-2540 1 Dolomite, brown, granular and locally crystalline, irregular 
structures, rather dense to finely vuggy, some coarse, 
anhydrite-filled vugs,, some dark shaly films; corals, 
probably reefal. 

2540-2545’ Dolomite , light to dark brown, as above, developing flow- 
type layering down. May represent base of reef? 

2545-2559’ D olomite , light to dark brown, light brown due to crypto- 
crystalline irregular structures; dark brown part is'more 
crystalline and irregularly-layered, probably due to argil¬ 
laceous content, at angle of about 40 degrees; mostly dense; 
some crinoid stems. Probably represents a brecciated section. 

2559-2569* Dolomite , dark to light brown, as above, irregularly 
layered, mostly granular, some recrystallized, mostly 
massive and dense; locally vuggy with gypsum infilling; 
less brecciated than above; crinoidal and coralline. 

2569-2589’ Dolomite , light grey or brown, flow? layered, dense, occa¬ 
sionally finely vuggy; shaly partings; crinoidal and 
coralline ( Pri s matophyllum sp., near base). 

( Top of Cher tif ied Zone .) 

2589-2599’ Dolomite , brown, with chert interbands irregularly layered, 
salt-filled vugs to 2”. Chert is often Sugary, porous to 
finely vuggy, probably represents coralline and other 
growth. Dolomite is generally crystalline, locally vuggy; 
somewhat brecciated below; crinoidal. 

2599-2621 ’ Dolomite, brown, with wrhite chert interbands, porous and 
sugary. Dolomite is dense and irregularly layered with 
shaly films, — ’’layered breccia” type. Brachiopods present 
(one 3” across at 2605’ was pyritized.). 

(B ase of chertified zone .) 

2621-2629’ Dolomite , dark brown, massive, granular, small irregular 
structures, probably due to resolution or dolomitization. 
Mostly dense, finely vuggy locally, sometimes anhydrite 
infillings. 


2629-2640 1 Dolomite , as above, but crinoidal. 

















. • 

. * 




- 


* 



■ 

. 







' 



. 

, 









.. 

• ,. 

• 

■ 











- 63 - 

BEAR BILTMORE #1 


2640-2658' Dolomite , brown, massive, dense, some irregular structures 
at top (fragmental?), mostly microgranular, some recrystal¬ 
lization, some vugginess, some evaporite infilling. 

2658-2660' Dolomite , light brown to grey, black mottling due to some 
argillaceous matter. 


BO TTOM RET RY DOLOMITE 


location 
14-25-77-9 W4 

2510-r « O '■ rr :. 


CHRISTINA RIVER-HARDY #1 


TOP OF METHY DOLOM ITE 


'K.B.' El. 1895 


2510-2520' Dolomite, buff, some layering throughout, but nevertheless 
believed to represent a brecciated section, friable to 
crumbly with earthy lustre locally (coral s^nd?), micro- 
granular to crystalline, sugary, fair to fine vugginess, 
some coarse vugginess, in part infilled with salt, anhydrite 
and gypsum; slightly argillaceous. 

2520-2530' Dolomite, as above, less crumbly, good layering at top, in¬ 
distinct layering below, upper part fragmental. Texture micro¬ 
crystalline, sugary; some salt-filled vugs; bottom 3* fractured. 

2530-2545’ D olomite , buff as above, but no layering, locally crumbly, 
a few thin layers of bituminous(?) shale, some irregular 
structures; crinoids; originally a coral sand and rubble, 
probably. 

2545-2553 1 Do lomite , buff to dirty brown, indistinctly layered, argil¬ 
laceous, massive, dense, microcrystalline, salt-encrusted. 

TOP OF REEF (?) 

2553-2560' Dolomite , brown to dirty brown as above, but with irregular 
structures at top, also is very coarsely vuggy throughout. 

Vugs are filled with salt or gypsum. Dolomite Is microcry¬ 
stalline , somewhat argillaceous; has some indistinct fossils. 


2560-2570' D olomite , dark brown as above, microcrystalline, cavernous, 

looks like breccia.; coarse vugs (2" plus), often salt-filled; 
thin black irregular bituminous (?) shale partings; a few 
small anhydrite concentrations. Stylolites occur in the shale. 


2570-2580' Do lomite , dark brown as above, but coarser anhydrite con¬ 
centrations; a few indefinite irregular structures; only 
mart of coarse vugs are filled with salt. looks like 
breccia, cavernous. 

2580-2600' Dolcmi te, dark brown as above, coarsely vuggy, more spotty, 

less so at bottom; vugs more infilled with salt, more irregu¬ 
lar structures, cavernous, probably reef. Looks like brec¬ 
cia, but dolomitization obscures fossils and other structures. 


























































. 








; 




. 










- 6/| — 

2600-2607* Polorn te , brown, tough, missive, structureless, many salt- 
filled vugs; cavernous, brecciated-looking. 

( Bottom of Me thy unattained .) 


IMPERIAL PLAIN LAKE #1 

Location 

1-11-53-12 V4 *K.B.» El. 2282 

4605 1 (?) TOP OF ME T HY DOLOMITE 

Dolomit e, grey-brown, microcrystalline to sucrose, occa¬ 
sionally earthy, pin-point porosity, with some anhydrite 
and salt casts. 

5010 »(?) BOTTOM OF METHY DOLOMIT E 


Location 
13-17-67-23 ¥4 


IMPERIAL GROSMONT #1 


*K.B. * El. 2066 


5035’ 


TOP OF METHY DO LOMITE 


Limesto ne and arg illaceous lime stone , some dolomite, brown 
to buff, finely-crystalline, dense to very finely-crystal¬ 
line . Crinoids. 

5285» B OTTOM OF METHY DOLOMITE 


IMPERIAL DAPP #1 

Location 

5-29-62-1 ¥5 *K.B.* El. 2086 

6280 * TOP OF METHY DOLOMITE 

Dolomite ,, dark brown, argillaceous, crystalline to sucrose, 
some vugs; crinoids. 

6380»(?) BOTTOM OF METHY DOLOMITE . 

IMPERIAL CLYDE #1 

Location 

9-29-59-24 ¥4 «K.B.* El. 2065 

5750' TOP OF METHY DOLO MITE 


I i me stone and dolom i te , buf f; cr i no i d s and Saracella . 
BOTTOM OF METHY DOLOMITE . 


5850’(?) 























r 






; 

. 





























. : 














location 

6-14-46-9 W4 

IMPERIAL IRMA #1 

*K.B.' El. 2312 

y—l 

TOP OF METHY 


Dolomite a nd limestone, grey to brown, dense, argillaceous 
Sa r acella , Trochilie cus. 


4900*(?) 

BOTTOM OF METHY 


Location 

1-33-37-3 W4 

IMPERIAL PROVOST #1 

*K.B. 1 El. 2420 

4980’ 

TO P OF ME THY 


Dolomite , light grey to brown, finely-crystalline, anhydri 
tic, dense, 

5270 1 (?) BOTTOM OF METHY 












- 66 - 

APPENDIX II 


— THIN SECTION DESCRIPTIONS -- 
Slide 50-71 Westmount 2, Core 66, 641* 

A greyish, fossiliferous, crystalline dolomite. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture: Ahhedral, equi-sized, crystalline, with small vugs. 
Structure : 

Original: A fossil fragmental. 

Secondary: Dolomitized fossil forms, which remain as 
palimpsests. 

Mineral Composition : Dolomite, with argillaceous matter. 

Hetasomatism : Dolomitization processes have been intense $ 
the matrix and much of the fossil parts have 
been replaced with dolomite. 

Fauna: Crinoids, corals(?). 

Other Features: 


Slide 50-72 Westmount'2, Core 63, 618 ! 

Hand Specimen Description : 

A greyish, rather pure coralline, argillaceous dolomite, with 
stromatoporoids• 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture : Microcrystalline, with dolomite (?) crystals in fine 
vugs. 


Structure : 

Original: A fragmental. 

Secondary: Structures somewhat destroyed by dolomitization. 

Mineral Composition : Dolomite, with argillaceous matter. 

Metasomatism : Original fragments are replaced by dolomite. 

Fauna : Stromatoporoids, corals. 

Other Features : Thought to be part of the reef wall through 
megascopic examination, in thin section the 
fragmental nature of the rock was found to 
predominate. This, however, may be a local 
feature. 






















, . r>c 

o. 

§p|°.. 

! • 

; ■■; 

- ' ■ ; . . ^ t 

* 

. V. : ... 

■ , • ' : .v-f : _ 

' 

i ;• ,;J..; 


- 

■ 

i . >'.v.r' ■ _ ; 

- 


. 


j"lv ' j t \>*r 

, ■ . . • 


. . 

. 

;v 

' 


. . ■ v ' T'-T ' V,; 2 ^ 

■ 

■ *’ - V„:; 

;• 

, ; T, ; 







Slide 50-73 


- 67 - 

Westmount 2, Core 69, 676* 


2 . 


Hand Specimen Descriptio n: 

A brox/nish, brecciated, argillaceous, replacement(?) dolomite, with 
numerous brachiopod. shell fragments, corals, and stromatoporoids. 

Microsconic Study : 

Texture : Fine ly-crystalline. Anhedral, porphyroblastic (i.e., 
uneven-grained) dolomite. 


Structure : 

“Original; "Fragmental," i.e., fossil coquinoid. 

Secondary; Dolomitized fossil forms—"palimpsest.” 

Mineral Composition ; Dolomite, with argillaceous matter. 

Metasomatism ; A completely dolomitized rock. Mo signs of fossil 
forms remain, except stromatoporoids. They are 
seen, however, in the hand specimen as moulds. 

Fauna ; Stromatoporoids, corals, brachiopods. 

Other Features ; This rock may represent brecciation and slumping 
close to the reef wall. 


Slide 50-74 Westmount 2, Core 70, 668’ 

Hand Specimen Description ; 

A greyish, rather coarsely/fragmental limestone, with concentrations 
of argillaceous matter around the fossil fragments. 

M icroscopic Study ; 

texture ; Microcrystalline, granoblastic, in matrix. 

Structure ; 

Original; Limestone fragmental. 

Secondary; Well-preserved fossil fragments, surrounded by a 
rather argillaceous matrix. 

Mineral Composition : Limestone fragments in a dolomitic argilla¬ 
ceous matrix. 

Metasomatism ; This specimen appears to be only weakly dolomitized. 
Fauna; Crinoid stems, brachiopods, corals. 

Other Features ; The fragmentation, abundant fauna, and relation¬ 
ship of the argillaceous matter may point to an 
origin in the reef flank. 




















, : . ■. . - ' ' > • - - •: •• •' • • ■ V -' 






. 

: — 

, 


■ 


- 








. 

„ 

. 




















. ' . 


- 














. 

. 






. 






, 










. 







- 68 - 


Slide 50-75 Westmount 2, Core 63, 619' 

Eand Specimen Description : 

Grey, unlayered, fossiliferous, calcitic dolomite, with fine 
stylolites. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture: Fine-grained, porphyroblastic matrix. 

Structure: 

Original: Rather large fossil forms, possibly in situ. 

Secondary: Stylolites, with typical concentration of 

argillaceous matter along their surface, on 
one side. 

Mineral Composition : Dolomite, with argillaceous matter; 

Faunal remains are calcite. 

Metasomatism : An early stage in the dolomitization process 
is probably represented. 

Fauna : Stromatoporoids, corals. 

Other Features : The core section from which this specimen 

was taken may represent reef wall. The stylo - 
litic n breaks n indicate that circulation of 
solvent fluids took place. 


Slide 50-76 Westmount 2, Core 66, 644 1 

Hand Specimen Description : 

Greyish, fragmental, calcitic dolomite, with stromatoporoids and 
corals. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture : Finely-crystalline, granoblastic (i.e., eqidgranular). 
Structure: 

Original: Fragmental. 

Secondary: Fossil structures are poorly-preserved. 

Mineral Composition : Dolomite and calcite, rather pure; 

some disseminated argillaceous matter; 
a few rounded quartz grains. 

Metasomatism: 

Dolomitization has been intense. 

Fauna : Stromatoporoids, corals. 


Other Features: 





























. . . v;- .vi. ....... .. 




' v: - 

. 


. 


■ 








. . v 

. 


■ '• : ■> ; 

. 


. 










. 

. 

; ■ •• / . : ••• . 








? « y ■ 




. 






• . ...... 

■ ^ 




. 








■ 




















Slide 50-77 


- 69 - 

Westmount 2, Core 73, 714» 


Hand Specimen Description : 

Mottled greyish and buff, irregularly-layered, fragmental dolomite. 
Microscopic Study ; 

Texture : Finely-crystalline, porphyroblastic. 

Structure: 

Original: Rather coarse fragmental. 

Secondary: Stromatoporoids and crinoid stems are 
fairly well-preserved. 

Mineral Composition : Mostly dolomite; rudaceous brachiopods 

and stromatoporoids are somewhat calciti 
Crinoid stems show rhombohedral twinning 
and are replaced by dolomite from centre 
out, in the case of the crinoids. 

Metasomatism : Dolomitization is well advanced. 

Fauna : Crinoid stems, brachiopods, stromatoporoids. 

Other Features : 


Slide 50-78 Westmount 2, core 75 

Hand Specimen Description : 

Irregularly-layered, dark brown, argillaceous dolomite. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture: Finely-crystalline, granoblastic. 

Structure : 

Original: Primary dolomite deposit? 

Secondary: Most fossil forms remain as palimpsests, 

except some crinoid stems. Argillaceous mat¬ 
ter Is in microlayers. 

Mineral Composition : Dolomitization may have been contempo¬ 
raneous or penecontemporaneous with de¬ 
position. 

Fauna : Crinoid stems, sponge spicules(?). 

Other Feature s: Crinoid stems seem to be most resistant to 

dolomitization. They may also imply an ori¬ 
ginal environment with sorted elastics. 


















. 


y ;.A; 

a O ' ■ ■ | 

> ' ' ' 


„ ■ ~ . 

. 

' 

. 

. 

. 

, 

' 








: : . .. 

• . •• 

. . 

, ' -• V .. . I . •; ■ _ 


. 

' 

... * • *: ; ; ; ■ : . 

- 

C ■ '.O' r : • •: ; .. 

; ' 0-_ 0_ 

„ 









Slide 50-7 9 


Westmount 1, Core 53, 1418 1 (Plate VI (b)) 

Hand Specimen D escrip tion : 

Granular or oolitic (?) buff-coloured dolomite, with anhydrite or 
gypsum intergranulerlv end in fine fissures. 


M5 Pros cord r gfnrhr: 

Texture : Clastic, granular. 

Structure : The well-rounded dolomite grains do not possess 
any concentric or radial features, hence are 
not true oolites. 


Minera l Composition: The thin section consists of dolomite grains, 

with the pores between filled with a mineral 
believed to be brucite, Mg(0H)p* The mineral 
had an index of 1.56 to 1.58, was uniaxial 
positive, possessed moderate birefringence, 
and had good cleavage. In the hand specimen 
it had a pearly lustre. (See page 13, text.) 

Metasoma tism: The original rock was probably a dolomite clastic; 

not much replacement of the dolomite grains took 
place. Whether the brucite(?) replaced some 
earlier pore filling is unknown. 


Fauna: Nil. 
Othe r Features: 


Slide 50-80 Westmount 1, Core 54, 1420* (Plate VII (a)) 

Hand Spe cimen Descr ip tion : 

Granular or oolitic(?), buff-coloured, calcltlc dolomite, with 
anhydrite-filled fine cracks. 

Microscopic S tudy: 

Texture : Clastic, granular. 

Structure : 

Original: A granular dolomite or limestone clastic. 

Se condary: Nil. 

Mineral Compos i tion : Fragments are rather limy; matrix is 

dolomitic. 

Metasomatism : The matrix, perhaps also the grains, are being 
replaced by dolomite. 

Fauna : Nil. 

Other Features: 




















- 71 - 


?P~§1 Westmount 1, Core 66 (Plate VI (a)) 

Hand Specimen Description : 

Cryptocrystalline, argillaceous, fossiliferous, brownish, doloni- 
tic limestone. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture : Finely-crystalline, granoblastic. 

Structure : 

Original: Fine fragmental—"calcilutiteprobably. 
Secondary: Fossil forms remain only as palimpsests. 

Mineral Composition : Dolomite, with disseminated argilla- 

ceous matter. 

Metasomatism : The rock has only been mildly dolomitized. 
Fauna : Gastropods, sponge spicules(?). 

Other Features : Gastropod spires can be quite definitely re¬ 
cognized in thin section. Other fossil forms 
have been dolomitized; only their outlines 
remain. 


Slide50-82 Rodeo 1, Core 86, 870* 

Hand Specimen Description : 

Brownish, microgranular, porous, dolomitic limestone, probably 
part of a reef wall. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture : Finely-crystalline, granoblastic, except for me¬ 
dium-sized (calcite?) crystals lining the vugs. 


Structure : 

Original: Fine fragmental? 

Secondary: Original discrete, probably organic, par¬ 
ticles have lost their boundaries. 

Mineral Composition : Dolomite, with the vugs lined with cal¬ 
cite crystals, apparently; scattered, 
disseminated argillaceous matter. 


Metasomatism : The rock has been intensely dolomitized, with 
the calcitic vug linings brought in later. 

Fauna: Nothing recognizable. 


Other Features: 
























- 


. 





. ■ 


-; . ■ . .. .. 

. 

.. 

. 

* 

- ■ • ) v; ^: .... 

, 

........... 

- 

• . .' ' 


* 






' d :' r " ' n.tc :-4,t' 


. • 

- 









- 72 - 


Slide 50-53 Rodeo 1, 850i 

Hand Specimen Description : 

Buff coloured, calcitic dolomitic rock, with irregular, light 
buff specks. May be a fragmental. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture : Micro crystalline, granoblastic, except for larger 
crystals lining the vugs. 


Structure : 

Originals Fine fragmental? 

Secondary: Boundaries of the fragments become quite 
fuzzy. 

Mineral Compos i tion : Dolomite, with argillaceous matter, 

and calcite vug linings. 

Metasomatism: Dolomitiaation had apparently been complete. 

Fauna: Stromatoporoid, scolecodont(?) 

Other Features : The high porosity of this rock was probably 
a pre-holomitization feature, and related to 
the postulated fragmental nature of the rock. 


Slide 50-84 Rodeo 1, Core 88, 897 1 

Hand Specimen Description : 

Brownish, crystalline limestone, with numerous brachiopod shell 
fragments. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture : 

Structure : Mierocoquinoid. 

Mineral Composition : Dolomite, with abundant disseminated 

argillaceous matter. 

Metasomatism : None recognized. 

Fauna : Brachiopods, crinoio. stems. 

Other Features : The rock is apparently an unreplaced lime¬ 
stone . 























. 

| '' '~a\ 

. 

.. .. 




;, ; j 






* 


•) i . .-O 


i : . ' ” ■ . 












.... ~ . : : ; 

•. .. .. 














.... 


: if: : 


... 

. 

* 






. 







73 - 


Slide 50-85 Rodeo 1 , Core 89, 917* 

Hand Specimen Description ; 

Brownish, calcitic crinoid fragments in a dolomitic, argillaceous 
matrix. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture : Anhedral, porphyroblastic, finely-crystalline. 

Structure : Fragmental or brecciated. In places, sutured. 

Mineral Composition : Calcite, dolomite, some argillaceous 

matter and anhydrite. 

Metasomatism : There may be some calcitic replacement along 
fissures. 

FaunaJ Crinoid stems, stromatoporoids. 

Other Features : Calcite crystals sometimes show rhombohedral 
twinning. 


Slide 50-86 Rodeo 1, Core 93 , 939' 

Hand Specimen Description : 

Chertified, dull grey limestone and dolomitic shale. 
Microscopic Study: 


Texture: porphyroblastic--cryptocrystalline chert with 
euhedral dolomite or calcite rhombs. 

Structure : Brecciated limestone fragments in a chertified, 
shaly matrix. 

Mineral Composition : Chert, limestone, dolomitic shale. 

Metasomatism : In part, this rock is dolomitized, in part, 
chertified. The chert seems to be of the 
bedded type, however. 

Fauna : Brachiopods. 

Other Features : Dolomitization seems to be later than cherti- 
fication, for a brachiopod shell in the chert 
is unreplaced by dolomite and well-preserved. 






















■ ■ , 

. 


, 








. 






i 


* 

■ 

: 






- . .: 






■ . 




i. . . . .... : 


■ • 

t 


. 














....... 


-) • ••■< v» i- • : re, : ■ . i u y- 

- 


- 

. 














- 74 - 


Slide 50-87 Rodeo 1, Core 87, 888* 

Hand Specimen Description ; 

Light buff-coloured, fine-grained fragmental limestone. 
Microscopic Study : 

Texture : Porphyroblasties euhedral calcite rhombs in a 
microcrystalline groundmass, and especially in 
fine vugs. 

Structure : Fine-grained fragmental. 

Mineral Composition : Calcite, rather pure, some argilla¬ 
ceous matter. 

Metasomatism : The rock is unreplaced. 

Fauna : None recognized. 

Other Features : The fine pores are probably related to the 
fragmental nature of the rock. 


Slide 50-88 Rodeo 1, Core 88, 898* 

Hand Specimen Description : 

Greyish-brown, argillaceous, limestone breccia, with brachiopod 
shell fragments. 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture: Brecciated, with anhedral, granoblastic matrix. 
Structure: Brecciated, or fragmental. 

Mineral Composition : Limestone, with argillaceous matter. 

One medium-sized, well-rounded quartz 
grain is present in the slide. 

Metasomatism ; The specimen is unreplaced. 

Fauna : Brachiopods. 

Other Features : 

Slide 50-89 Vampire 2, Core 73, 664 ? 

Hand Specimen Description : 


A rather pure, buff-coloured, fragmental calcitic dolomite. 






















4 - ' ' ' 




- AY • 

! . - '■ . . ;• 4 - ' • ' ' • 

■ ■■* . 

i 






. 


-> . v r vtr ■ r . 'h C. ^ zoo to 




. 

' j : - ; ; 


% 

, 




■j; . A: : . • :r ; _ _' 

. 


: - ■ ; , r 

* 




Ofj 00> 










: > '•> 


■' •' ' • ■ '■ 4'V. *• ■ ■ - . : - 




• . . 

■ ■ - ' 

* 


; * - o > ■ •: \, ; 

' 

: 3/-C 


. ■ : 


, : yyjo.::o . 

. 






.... 


1 ■ ■ r . .• : ;« T 

. 

. • ~ ■ 








- 75 - 


Microscopic Study : 

Texture : Anhedral, porphyroblastic. 

Structure : Fine-grained fragmental. 

Mineral,Composition : Dolomite, calcite, a very little ar¬ 
gillaceous matter. 

Metasomatism : Dolomitization has not been too intense, in 
this specimen. 

Fauna: Stromatoporoids, others not recognizable. 

Other Features: 


Slide 50-90 Vampire 2, Core 86, 776* (Plate VII (b)) 

Hand Specimen Description : 

Dark grey, crinoidal, fine-grained, argillaceous, calcitic 
dolomites 

Microscopic Study : 

Texture : Finely-crystalline, anhedral. 

Structure: Fossil forms are rather well-preserved. 
Crinoidal. 

Mineral Composition : Dolomite, calcite, some finely-dis¬ 
seminated argillaceous matter. 

Metasomatism : Fossil fragments are relatively unaltered. 

Fauna l Crinoids, brachiopods, sponge spicules, stromato¬ 
poroids (?). 

Other Features : The matrix consists of some of the most 
finely-crystalline dolomite seen in the 
thin sections. 



















Beat" Bll+tno\re N 


t 


SCALEP SLOT-ION 


B E.AR Biltmokel 1 TO PlNL Rapius. 

Scale 


Showing Relation 
Horizontal | >nc 

Vertical l me 


:SHIP OF MPTEP 

h i = 4 m 11 ^ s 
h = 400 f«et. 











































A f.hababKa R 

\Ja lley 








































































































































































: V.: o - . < 1 ■ ■•■! 

- ■ - - ■ ■ b, . 1 . 1 

. 

n r : ;v :y};’' to;t y; 

, 

;>/■ : :• j •,."i't *• , V;0 ■' ,:■■■ ' v :: • :;ybbb 



w.-y " , 1 ■ 1 ' ■ .' v ■<-> b, ' 


. . , • - ; • 

. C”j r' " , ; 'b > . . ■ ; ^ / " : T 

~ ' b :> :bb j t ' . .) ~ 

* 

3 • 

i^ : ; o Lwob-rj 37, 777-7 vb ■ ; a.L.u> ",r , 

. . . 

■ ■ 

, • - 0 ■ V b 

















s - «£> 




■ fcLa J_ 
3 iltrrrore 


1st Column : 
Petrology 


Ary ilia^ous 

Dolomite 




Do lomi 

Limestone Fn" 1 ] 

>y‘ 


* nh “ d rsV«" ra 

Shale 


e 

B i oherm 
Pyr ite 


2nd Column: 
BEDD ING, etc. 


Dolomite E3 


Bedded b==i 

p ” r tejwa 




Layered ['LL! 
Brecc.ated 


3rd Column' 
Fau nia 

Co-.is S3 

S4'romatbp-rr r "rtS 

C rirtonis m 

3ruchiopods 

Bryozocxns IS^J 


Rubbl^ ant* I 
>j-rixtiulur I 


COLOU R 


Buff n 
Grey L _. : l 

Brown a 


-V \ 


Va m p \ r ft 


c 

Hi 


st mount Z 


METHY FORMATION 

SUBSURFACE CR05S SECTION C-D 

-WATERWAYS AREA — 
WITH TENTATIVE CORRELATIONS 

Scale: Hn zontal I inch-Smiles 
Vertical l inch : 20 feet 
Datum: Base of Methy 


f Ba.aa-1 (jedded Zc 



























































































































