
NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


PHASE BEHAVIOR IN THE METHANE- 
CARBON DIOXIDE-HYDROGEN SULFIDE 
SYSTEM 


by 

ALFRED P. LORENZO 

DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICAL AND PETROLEUM ENGINEERING 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


NOVEMBER, 1957 




@X UBStt 

IWWIWW 

aiB»MSMl§ 
























TVv.s 

\9SS 

*11 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


PHASE BEHAVIOR IN THE METHANE-CARBON DIOXIDE-HYDROGEN 
SULFIDE SYSTliM 


A Dissertation 
Submitted to 

The Faculty of Graduate Studies 
In Partial Fulfilment 
of the Requirements for the Degree 
of Master of Science in Chemical Engineering 


Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering 

by 

Alfred P. Lorenzo, B. Sc, 

Edmonton, Alberta 
November, 1957 


ii 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/phasebehaviorinmOOIore 


ABSTRACT 


The phase behavior of the methane-carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide 
system was investigated at pressures of 400, 1000 and 1600 Ibs/in. abs. 
at a temperature of 40 degrees F.; and at pressures of 1000 and 1600 lbs/in. 2 
abs. at a temperature of 160 degrees F. 

The experimental technique employed involved preparation in the gas 
phase of mixtures of known composition with subsequent compression of the 
system to the two phase vapor-liquid region. Published data on each of 
the three binary systems was employed to facilitate the study of the 
ternary system. Experimental determinations of the compositions of co¬ 
existing vapor and liquid phases were carried out at each pressure; thus 
defining the isobaric, three component, two phase region. The isobaric 
ternary diagrams served to outline the ternary liquid and vapor surfaces 
existing from 169 to 1949 lbs/in. 2 abs. at 40 degrees F. and from 779 to 
1660 lbs/in.^ abs. at 160 degrees F. 

Correlation of the experimental data was achieved by calculation 
of experimental equilibrium ratios for each component. The determination 
of the effect of pressure on the equilibrium ratios enabled the prediction 
of the compositions of co-existing phases at intermediate pressures of 
700and 1300 lbs/in.^ abs. at 40 degrees F. and at 1300 lbs/in.^ abs. at 
160 degrees F. Calculation of activity coefficients illustrated the 
deviation of the liquid phase from ideal solution behavior. Non-ideality 
in the gas phase, resulting from the effect of pressure, was accounted 
for by the introduction of fugacities in the calculation of the activity 
coefficients. 


iii 


' 

: ' ; 

! 

, . .... 

* 

' " t .. • 

■ ■ ... t • r : t. .. : ■ Ht-j 

. 

* 

■ 

' • 

’ 

< - . . 

. 

■ 



■ 



The experimental results indicate that at low pressures, where no 
ternary critical point formation occurs, the dew point and bubble point 
curves are nearly straight lines and may be roughly approximated by use 
of the ideal solution law; the approximation being more reliable for the 
liquid phase than for the vapor phase. At higher pressures, deviation 
from idealized vapor-liquid behavior is very great. 

Equilibrium ratios were found to be functions of pressure, 
temperature and system composition with the effect of pressure being 
somewhat greater than that of temperature. The activity coefficients 
indicate that the deviation of the liquid phase from ideal solution 
behavior is also a function of pressure, temperature and system com¬ 
position and that each of these variables has an effect that is of 
relatively the same magnitude. 


iv 


' 

: 

■ i' ' . ' - \ I V if' i ' f:i 

■ v V.\‘ .. ' - f '£ :■ C:£/ ? bfs : i.- ■: • 





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The author feels deeply indebted to Dr. B. B. Robinson of the 
Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of 
Alberta, who directed the research project from its inception and 
whose efforts contributed greatly to its success. 

Many thanks are due to Mr. R. Kirby for his excellent work on 
the construction of the experimental equipment and to Mr. F. Butz for 
his assistance in the performance of the experimental tests. 

The author is also very grateful for the generous financial 
support that was provided by the National Research Council of Canada. 


v 

















. 












< 




- 



, 
































































TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. INTRODUCTION ...... 1 

II. THEORY . 3 

(1) Three Component Phase Equilibrium.. 3 

(2) Phase Behavior of CH 4 - CO 2 - H 2 S System. 4 

(3) Deviations From Ideal Behavior . 10 

(a) Ideal Solution Law .. 10 

(b) Behavior of Real Systems . 12 

(c) The Concept of the Activity Coefficient . 13 

III. EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT . 18 

(1) Experimental Technique Employed... 18 

(2) Modification of Existing Experimental 

Apparatus . 19 

(a) Equilibrium Cell .. 19 

(b) Air Bath .. 19 

(c) Measuring Cell . 21 

(d) Measurement of Experimental Variables ... 21 

(e) Valves, Tubing and Fittings . 22 

(f) Refrigeration System . 23 

(g) Heating System.. 25 

(h) Sampling and Analytical Procedure ....... 26 

(i) Gaseous Components . 27 
































































CHAPTER PAGE 

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS . 28 

(1) Experimental Phase Equilibrium Data . 28 

(A) Data at 40 Degrees F.. 28 

(a) CH^ - H 2 S System .. 28 

(b) C0 2 - H 2 S System. 28 

(c) Ternary System .. 31 

(B) Data at 160 Degrees F.. 37 

(a) CH^ - H 2 S System .. 37 

(b) C0 2 - H 2 S System .. 37 

(c) Ternary System.... 37 

(2) Correlation of Experimental Data .. 43 

(a) Use of Composition Parameter. 43 

(b) Equilibrium Ratios .. 45 

(c) Activity Coefficients . 58 

(d) Predicted Phase Equilibrium Data. 71 

(e) General Description of Ternary System at 

40 Degrees F. 78 

(f) General Description of Ternary System at 

160 Degrees F. 80 

V. CONCLUSIONS ....... 82 

(1) Validity of Experimental Results ............. 82 

(2) Discussion of Experimental Data.... 84 

List of References .. 87 

APPENDIX (1) Tabulated Data . 89 

(2) Sample Calculations .. 107 

vii 




































































LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Phase Composition Data at 40 Degrees F. and 

400 lbs/in. abs...... 89 

II. Phase Composition Data at 40 Degrees F, and 

1000 Ibs/in 2 abs. .... 90 

III. Phase Composition Data at 40 Degrees F. and 

1600 lbs/in. 2 abs. .... 91 

IV. Phase Composition Data at 160 Degrees F. and 

1000 lbs/in. 2 abs. ............................. 92 

V, Phase Composition Data at 160 Degrees F. and 

1600 lbs/in. abs. 93 

VI. Equilibrium Ratios at 40 Degrees F. and 

400 lbs/in. 2 abs.... 94 

VII. Equilibrium Ratios at 40 Degrees F. and 

1000 Ibs/in. 2 abs. ............................. 95 

VIII. Equilibrium Ratios at 40 Degrees F. and 

1600 Ibs/in. abs. ... 96 

IX. Equilibrium Ratios at 160 Degrees F. and 

1000 Ibs/in, 2 abs. ... .......... 97 

X. Equilibrium Ratios at 160 Degrees F. and 

1600 Ibs/in. 2 abs. .... 98 

XI. Activity Coefficients at 40 Degrees F. and 

400 lbs/in. abs. .... 99 

XII. Activity Coefficients at 40 Degrees F. and 

1000 Ibs/in. abs. ... 100 

XIII. Activity Coefficients at 40 Degrees F. and 

1600 Ibs/in. 2 abs. 101 

XIV. Activity Coefficients at 160 Degrees F. and 

1000 lbs/in. 2 abs. ....... ..... 102 

XV. Activity Coefficients at 160 Degrees F. and 

1600 Ibs/in. 2 abs. .. 103 


viii 




































TABLE PAGE 

XVI. Predicted Phase Composition Data at 40 Degrees F. and 

700 lbs/in. 2 abs. 104 

XVII. Predicted Phase Composition Data at 40 Degrees F. and 

1300 lbs/in/ abs. 105 

XVIII. Predicted Phase Composition Data at 160 Degrees F. and 

1300 lbs/in. 2 abs. . 106 


ix 
















LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Ternary Isobaric Diagrams at 40 Degrees F. 

Part (a) ..... 7 

Part (b) ....... 8 

Part (c) ..... 9 

2. Ternary Isobaric Diagrams at 160 Degrees F. .. 11 

3. Schematic Apparatus Assembly . 20 

4. Pressure-Composition Diagram for CHa - P^S System 

at 40 Degrees F. ....... 29 

5. Pressure-Composition Diagram for C0£ - H 2 S System 

at 40 Degrees F. ................................. 30 

6 . Molar Composition Diagram at 400 Ibs/in,^ abs. and 

40 Degrees F. ... 32 

7. Molar Composition Diagram at 1000 Ibs/in. abs. and 

40 Degrees F. ..... 33 

8 . Molar Composition Diagram at 1600 lbs/in. abs. and 

40 Degrees F. .. 34 

9. Pressure-Composition Diagram for CH^ - H 2 S System 

at 160 Degrees F....... 38 

10 . Pressure-Composition Diagram for CO 2 - H 2 S System 

at 160 Degrees F. . 39 

A 

11. Molar Composition Diagram at 1000 Ibs/in. abs. and 

160 Degrees F. .. 4l 

A 

12. Molar Composition Diagram at 1600 Ibs/in. abs. and 

160 Degrees F. 42 

13. Equilibrium! Ratios for CH^ at 40 Degrees F.. 47 

14. Equilibrium Ratios for C0£ at 40 Degrees F. .. 48 

15. Equilibrium Ratios for H 2 S at 40 Degrees F. .. 49 


x 












































FIGURE PAGE 

16. Critical C Values at 40 Degrees F. 50 

17. Equilibrium Ratios for CH4 at 160 Degrees F. . 53 

18. Equilibrium Ratios for COg at 160 Degrees F.. 54 

19. Equilibrium Ratios for H2S at 160 Degrees F. . 55 

20. Critical C Values at 160 Degrees F. . 56 

21. Theoretical Equilibrium Ratios . 59 

22. Activity Coefficients for CH^ at 40 Degrees F. ........ 62 

23. Activity Coefficients for C0£ at 40 Degrees F, ........ 63 

24. Activity Coefficients for HgS at 40 Degrees F. .. 64 

25. Activity Coefficients for CH^ at 160 Degrees F. .. 6? 

26. Activity Coefficients for CO2 at 160 Degrees F. . 68 

27. Activity Coefficients for HgS at 160 Degrees F. .. 69 

28. Predicted Molar Composition Diagram at 700 lbs/in.^ abs. 

and 40 Degrees F. ...... 73 

29. Predicted Molar Composition Diagram at 1300 lbs/in.^ abs. 

and 40 Degrees F. .. 7^ 

30. Predicted Molar Composition Diagram at 1300 lbs/in» 2 ' abs. 

and 160 Degrees F, .. 75 

31. Phase Diagram for the Ternary System at 40 Degrees F. .. 77 

32. Phase Diagram for the Ternary System at 160 Degrees F. , 80 





























LIST OF SYMBOLS 


C - 

F - 
f - 
f - 

V 

f * - 

r. 

i - 

K •• 

Ms - 
n - 

P - 

P* - 

77", P 

i - 

R - 
T - 

V - 
x - 

7 - 


component in a system 

composition parameter defined as the ratio of the mole fraction 
of carbon dioxide in the vapor phase to the sum of the mole 
fractions of methane and carbon dioxide in the vapor phase 

number of variables or degrees of freedom in a system 

fugacity of a pure component 

fugacity of a component in a solution 

fugacity of a pure component at a pressure equal to the system 
pressure 

fugacity of a pure component at a pressure equal to its own vapor 
pressure at the system temperature 

activity coefficient 

subscript referring to any component 

equilibrium ratio 

chemical potential 

number of moles of a component in the gas phase 
partial pressure in vapor phase 
vapor pressure 
- absolute system pressure 
number of phases 
universal gas constant 
absolute temperature in degrees Rankine 
volume of gas phase 

mole fraction of a component in the liquid phase 
mole fraction of a component in the vapor phase 

xii 




















































. 















LIST OF SYMBOLS CONTINUED 


compressibility factor 

Superscripts 

L - referring to liquid phase 

o - referring to standard state of pressure 
and concentration 


v - 


referring to vapor phase 




I. INTRODUCTION 


1 


The investigation into the phase behavior of the methane-carbon 
dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system begun by Bailey (l) was continued in 
this study. Phase equilibrium determinations at temperatures above and 
below that previously investigated were conducted. Necessary modifications 
of the existing experimental equipment, required to extend the tempera¬ 
ture range of the study, and improvements in the mechanical design of the 
equipment were made. The general experimental technique and analytical 
procedure employed by Bailey were not significantly altered and hence 
the estimated accuracy of the results is comparable to that which he 
reported. 

The theoretical treatment of the data was modified extensively. 

No attempt was made to calculate compressibility factors for the 
saturated vapor phase, as was done by Bailey, since it was decided that 
the accuracy of the volumetric measurement of the vapor phase at test 
conditions was insufficient to yield meaningful results. The technique 
employed in calculating activity coefficients was altered so as to result 
in a coefficient which gave a better indication of the deviation of the 
liquid phase from ideal solution behavior. Deviations from ideality in 
the gas phase, resulting from the effects of pressure were accounted 
for by the introduction of fugacities rather than included in an overall 
activity coefficient. 

The determination of activity coefficients over a considerable 
temperature range has enabled prediction of the effect of temperature 









i 5 


4 


t ' . ' ■ 

*i ■ ' : ' ' ■ . >* . ' 

■ ' - ■ ■' ; ‘ ■ • ' ‘ : : • * ‘ ’ •• .4J 


' 

• :• ' ■' • ‘ - « 


. 












■ • • 








. ; • f ' . • •: 

:• . " f; ' f : ;0 : > 














change, as well as the effects of changes in pressure and system 
composition, on the ideality of the liquid phase. 





II. THEOKT 


3 


(l) Three Component Phase Equilibrium 
Consideration of the phase rule 

0 + F = c + 2-(1) 

indicates that a single phase three component system has four degrees of 
freedom and, hence, in order to represent such a system in three space 
coordinates it is necessary to specify one variable as constant for the 
whole diagram. Phase equilibrium studies usually are carried out under 
isothermal conditions and therefore temperature is selected as the 
invariant quantity. Three dimensional representation of the phase 
equilibrium may then be achieved by selecting pressure as the ordinate 
and two independent concentrations as abscissae. 

The difficulties involved in representing phase equilibria by 
means of three dimensional models are partially overcome by the use of 
isobaric sections which represent vapor-liquid equilibrium at a particu¬ 
lar pressure and temperature. The phase compositions for a three 
component system are conveniently represented in two dimensions by the 
use of equilateral triangles which permit direct plotting of the two 
independent concentrations and the dependent concentration. 

A three dimensional model may be constructed from the isobaric 
sections by representing pressure on a perpendicular to the plane of 
the triangular diagram. Thus, the complete isothermal phase equilibrium 
model consists of a prism in which each side represents the pressure- 
composition diagram for one of the three binary systems. Liquid 



J 


M 








.. 


' / < • • ' 

« If 

■■ X &j- rr::.' , ; t, : ■ oh. - ; ; : ■; -a ■ ... i: 

■ ' ■ v, 

: . ’ . j ' .,. . . ? I .• ■. 

' j •. : . . : : ; ' 

■ • ' 

»<■'!! : : ‘rt ’ ■ ■ - . • 

' .. j ' i.:,v ^ " r ' <* 

' . 

' U ' ... ■; " . :/ . . m: ' V : - ; j ■ i <; , . ■ 

. ’ i • ‘I ' 

-■ ’ ;> ; • 

■ 

• , flio ■ = 

■ J > * ■ ; ' ' • ' ■ ' ..<• v V V. ■ ;'V-";.’ r , i. v _J ,o.:ut;o 








■ 



4 


compositions are represented by one surface within the prism and vapor 
compositions by a second surface. The compositions of any two co-existing 
phases may be indicated by straight tie lines connecting these two 
surfaces. Any specific point within the prism represents a three component 
system at a particular pressure. The single phase liquid or vapor regions 
are represented by solid portions within the prism and hence possess three 
degrees of freedom. The two dimensional surfaces represent the boundaries 
between the single phase regions and the two phase region. Any system 
within the region enclosed by the boundary surfaces will separate into 
two co-existing phases. 

In the two dimensional isobaric section the single phase regions 
and the two phase region appear as areas possessing two degrees of freedom 
as specified by the phase rule, while the boundary surfaces appear as 
lines. Such sections may be conveniently used for the direct plotting 
of the experimental data and then a three dimensional model may be 
constructed to give a clearer idea of the nature of the overall phase 
equilibrium at the particular temperature selected. 

(2) Phase Behavior of the Methane-Carbon Dioxide-Hydrogen Sulfide System 

The general form of the isobaric phase equilibrium diagrams for 
the ternary system may be predicted from a consideration of the pressure- 
composition diagrams for the binary systems which are available in the 
literature for this particular ternary system. The methane-hydro gen 
sulfide system was reported in 1951 by Reamer, Sage and Lacey (12). The 
carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system was reported in 1953 by Bierlein 



J- 




"X 




‘i . 




_ ! 4 




' 






•/ 




: 


' 





5 


and Kay (2). The methane-carbon dioxide system was reported in 1954 
by Donnelly and Katz (4). This latter work extended to a maximum 
temperature of only 29 degrees F. and so could not be used in this study 
in which data were obtained at temperatures of 40 degrees F. and 160 
degrees F. The critical temperature of hydrogen sulfide is 212*7 
degrees F* (11), of carbon dioxide is 88,0 degrees F. (2), and of 
methane is minus 115*8 degrees F. (10). 

At 40 degrees F. both hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide may exist 
as liquids under their own vapor pressures. Accordingly, all three binary 
systems - methane and hydrogen sulfide, carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide, 
methane and carbon dioxide - exist as liquids. In the carbon dioxide- 
hydrogen sulfide phase diagram at 40 degrees F. the bubble point and dew 
point curves extend across the entire composition range since the system 
temperature is below the critical temperature of both components. However, 
in the methane-hydrogen sulfide phase diagram at 40 degrees F. the bubble 
point and dew point curves terminate at the binary critical point, which 
represents the maximum pressure at which the two phase region can exist 
at this temperature. The critical pressure for the methane-hydro gen 
sulfide pair is 1949 lbs/in. 2 abs. and occurs at a composition of 0*55 
mole fraction methane. 

Fig. 1 represents typical ternary is©baric composition diagrams 
which may be predicted from the two component data without any experi¬ 
mental investigation of the ternary system. The binary pressure- 
composition diagrams and the triangular composition diagram are 
represented in the same plane in order to clearly illustrate the 
















■ ■■ 


j; 






;.ro 


6 

relationships between them. 

Part (a) illustrates the phase equilibrium at a pressure, P a , 

2 

between the vapor pressure of hydrogen sulfide (169 lbs/in. abs.) and 
the vapor pressure of carbon dioxide (570 Ibs/in. abs.). At this 
pressure both the methane-hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide-hydrogen 
sulfide systems form two phases and hence the ternary two phase region 
extends from the methane-hydrogen sulfide axis to the carbon dioxide- 
hydrogen sulfide axis. The methane-carbon dioxide system does not exist 
as a liquid at this pressure. 

Part (b) illustrates the phase equilibrium at a pressure, P^, 

between the vapor pressure of carbon dioxide (570 lbs/in. abs.) and 

the critical pressure of the methane-carbon dioxide system (estimated as 
2 

1240 lbs/in. abs. from consideration of the data obtained by Donnelly 

and Katz at 29 degrees F.). At such a pressure the binary systems 

methane-hydrogen sulfide and methane-carbon dioxide form two phases but 

the carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide does not since the system pressure 

is greater than the vapor pressure of either component. 

Part (c) illustrates the phase equilibrium, at a pressure, P c , 

between the critical pressure of the methane-carbon dioxide system 

2 

(approx. 1240 lbs/in. abs.) and the critical pressure of the methane- 
hydrogen sulfide system (194*9 Ibs/in. abs.). At such a pressure only 
the methane-hydrogen sulfide system forms two phases. Hence, the ternary 
two phase region no longer extends to the methane-carbon dioxide axis 
and, furthermore, as the pressure is increased this region diminishes 
until it meets the methane-hydrogen sulfide axis at the critical pressure 


• 

ii 


. ■ 


- 

■ 

- 


. 




I'.O* - ■■ ■■ v- •. 


■ 

i 

t . 

’• ■■ 

. 


' 

• 



■ 


• 


• 

• 

. • 



•.fv . V 








■ 

; . ' ‘ i< :: ' . • i: 

) ■ . * 


>'■■■; ; ■ ■ C ■ ■' 


- 

• 







' 





' \ ■ .. . 





; 


■ - • • ■-! : 

* 


' 


t ■ ■’ '' • 

: ? : • : u ■ ; • • 


. 

■tl 

* ' 


' 

v f. f .• 

1 t 

■ t 



FIG. I - PART (A). 



Isobaric Section At P a Where leS^Pa'CSTO Ibs/iaabs 


TERNARY ISOBARIC DIAGRAM AT 40°F 














FIG. I - PART (B). 



570 


1240 



\|/ 


Isobaric Section At P b Where 570 P b <( 1240 lbs/in. 2 abs. 


TERNARY ISOBARIC DIAGRAM AT 40°F 



















FIG I - PART (C). 



Isobaric Section At P c Where 1240^ P c ^ 1949 lbs/in 2 abs. 


TERNARY ISOBARIC DIAGRAM AT 40°F. 


















10 

of the methane-hydrogen sulfide system. 

At a temperature of 160 degrees F. the critical temperatures of 
both methane and carbon dioxide are exceeded by a considerable amount* 

Thus, the methane-carbon dioxide system does not form two phases at any 
pressure and hence no pressure-composition loop exists. Also, the 
pressure-composition loops of both the methane-hydrogen sulfide and carbon 
dioxide-hydrogen sulfide systems are located near to the hydrogen sulfide 
axis. Accordingly, the three component two phase region must be rich in 
hydrogen sulfide. 

Fig. 2 represents ternary isobaric diagrams at 160 degrees F. which 
may be predicted from the binary data reported in the literature. Part (a) 
illustrates the phase equilibrium at a pressure, P a , between the vapor 
pressure of hydrogen sulfide (779 Ibs/in. abs.) and the critical pressure 
of the carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system (approx. 1220 Ibs/in. abs.). 
In this case the two phase three component region extends across the 
triangular diagram. Part (b) illustrates the phase equilibrium at a 
pressure, P^, between the critical pressure of the carbon dioxide-hydrogen 
sulfide system (approx. 1220 Ibs/in. abs.) and the critical pressure of 
the methane-hydrogen sulfide system (1660 Ibs/in. 2 abs.). In this case 
the three component two phase region has diminished to a small area along 
the methane-hydrogen sulfide axis. 

(3) Deviations From Ideal Behavior 
(a) Ideal Solution Law 

According to Dalton's Law the partial pressure of a component 
present in an ideal vapor phase in equilibrium with liquid containing the 


















n> 


•v 


r 






« 









•; 














•- r- i 


















a mmm 





I!. 


Part (a). Isobaric Section At P a Where 779 < P a <( 1220 lbs/in 2 abs. 














12 

component is given as: 

Pi = y±TT — (2) 

According to Raoult's Law the partial pressure of a component present in 
a vapor phase in equilibrium with a liquid which contains the component 
and behaves as an ideal solution is given as: 

Pi = Pi* — (3) 

Combining these two expressions leads to the ideal solution law, 

y±7T = x i q* — W 

which relates the distribution of a component between liquid and vapor 
phases, in equilibrium at the system pressure, to the vapor pressure of 
the pure component at the system temperature, 

(b) Behavior of Real Systems 

The ideal solution law does not correctly describe the 
behavior of real systems for several reasons: 

(1) Non-ideality in the gas phase, i.e, Dalton’s Law inapplicable. 

(2) Deviation from ideal solution behavior in the liquid phase, 
i.e. Raoult's Law inapplicable. This deviation is considered to be a 
result of molecular association. 

(3) The vapor pressure of the pure component does not necessarily 
represent its "escaping tendency." 

The ideal solution law is never strictly applicable to vapor- 
liquid phase equilibrium because conditions must always be such that the 
solution is non-ideal. An ideal solution may be defined as one in which 
the partial molal volumes are independent of the composition of the 
solution, i.e. one in which the volumes of the components are additive. 







6 > 





























.• 






•• 


: - .i .. J ■ : ■ 










' 
















. 


' , 









13 


This is the case for a gaseous mixture at any pressure, provided the 
system temperature is above the critical temperatures of all the com¬ 
ponents , but, at such a temperature two phase equilibrium cannot exist. 
In order for the liquid phase to possess the property of additive 
volumes, the temperature of the system must be such that the vapor 
pressure of the most volatile component in the pure state is less than 
the system pressure. However, at such conditions of temperature and. 
pressure two phases cannot exist. In vapor-liquid equilibria, each 
component is stable in only one of the phases when it exists in the pure 
state at the system temperature and pressure; and hence the requirements 
for an ideal solution can never be met. 

(c) The Concept of the Activity Coefficient 

The activity coefficient has been introduced as a means of 
allowing for deviations from the ideal solution law. If it is considered 
to be a factor which corrects for all deviations from ideality in both 
gas and liquid phases, then the modified ideal solution law is written as: 
y ± 7T = y± x i p i* — (5) 

A better procedure is to correct for deviations from ideality in 
the gas phase, resulting from the effect of pressure, by introducing 
fugacities and to account for deviations from ideal solution behavior in 
the liquid phase and for the effect of molecular interactions in the gas 
phase by the use of the activity coefficient. 

The fUgacity of any component in a solution may be defined by the 
equation: 

= RT d In f ± 


— (6) 













- 

i 






. 

' 1 ' ' ' " ' ' •«; ; ‘ ' ' - ■ - ' ' ' : -v ~ ... - ’ 

■ 


■ 




• r 












: 


• 





, 

■ 

■ - 




i d .■ < 








: .§i: 


■ 











14 


Considering the vapor phase and integrating between two isothermal 
states, i.e. between an arbitrary standard state at system temperature 
and the system conditions: 


v x ov 

= RT In 




Also, the fugacity of a component in a solution is given by: 


_ v v 

f i ='3 r i 7i f p. 


( 8 ) 


Hence: 

v f 

.. y .. ov o . y. p, 

- sU. = HT In . i m .*-i_ -(9) 

x f. ov 

Considering the liquid phase and integrating between the same two 
isothermal states: 


L oL x i 

^i = RT In ^r-oir 


( 10 ) 


Also, 

?i L =r i L Xi f i * — (uj 

Hence: 

yCC t L _ sU° h = KT In ^-(12) 

fi 

Since the vapor and liquid are in equilibrium the change in the chemical 
potential in going from the conditions of the standard state to those of 
the actual system must be the same for both phases. 

The fugacity of a component existing in vapor and liquid phases in 


equilibrium must be the same in each phase. Hence, equating equations 











' 

hn -. . ' 


■ i 




























i ■ ; 














!• v. 






















■ 






■ 



(9) and (12) and cancelling terms gives; 


15 


Thus; 


Tx f Pi = ^i Lx i f i* — (13) 

L 

y± ~ x i ^i* (l^) 


Letting; 




— (15) 


Then; 


y i 

>* H 

11 

! 

* 

«h’ H 

(16) 

= 

r 

1 

<h ; 

(1?) 

x i 

X 

1 

h>! 

! 

J. 

1 


In terms of equilibrium ratios; 



r. k . 

1 1 Theor, 


— (18) 


The equilibrium ratio, K- , is the experimental ratio of the mole 

Ex p 

fraction of component ^ in the vapor phase to the mole fraction of 
component ^ in the liquid phase. The theoretical equilibrium ratio is 
equal to the experimental equilibrium ratio if there is ideal vapor- 
liquid behavior, since in this case the activity coefficient is unity. 

Since this procedure requires the use of fugacities rather than 
pressures it is necessary to evaluate these from consideration of the 



















, . ox 





. 
















' ‘ • " u . ‘X\ t 

" v ■ • ■ 







properties of the pure components. By the definition of fugacity: 


16 


v d P = R T d In f -(19) 


Hence: 



In 


f* 


1 

R T 


v d P -(20) 


f 



Thus, the value of 


f* 


p 

— at any pressure may be found by graphically 


evaluating l v d P, at constant temperature. This graphical 

) p* 

integration requires pressure-volume data for the pure component over a 
range from the vapor pressure of the component, at the system temperature, 
to the pressure of the system. 

At a temperature of 40 degrees F. the system is above the critical 
temperature of methane and hence the vapor pressure of pure methane at 
the system temperature is an imaginary value which may be obtained only 
by extrapolation of a plot of the natural logarithm of the vapor pressure 
versus the inverse of the absolute temperature. With both hydrogen 
sulfide and carbon dioxide the system temperature is below the critical 
temperature and hence the vapor pressures of these components at the 
system temperature are real. However, pressure-volume data can be used 
only for pressures below the respective vapor pressures, i.e. for 

pressures at which the pure component can exist as a vapor at the system 
f* 

temperature. The •—- values at pressures above the vapor pressure may 
fp 

r f* 

be obtained by plotting -— versus pressure and extrapolating using the 

f p 

curve for an arbitrary temperature above the critical temperature as a 
guide. 



















■ 




■ : ; . 

' 


.. • I ; • 








- / ■* X : ■ - ■ ’ r •*, it ■ -a ■. .. •• . 

• ' r * ■ ■ • ■ . , •_ 








", ...Ct. 

. 

4 •' 


• 1 1 ■ . v , ; ■ • 






17 


At a temperature of 160 degrees F., the system is above the 

critical temperature of both methane and carbon dioxide and hence the 

vapor pressures of these components at the system temperature are 

imaginary. In this case pres sure-volume data at pressures up to the 

system pressure can be obtained for both methane and carbon dioxide. 

However, for hydrogen sulfide the values at system pressures above 

f p 

its vapor pressure must be obtained in a manner analogous to that used 
at 40 degrees F. 

This technique of evaluating activity coefficients places the 
interpretation of vapor-liquid equilibrium data on a more quantitative 
basis and enables prediction of the deviation from ideality of the liquid 
with change in pressure or temperature. The experimental determination 
of the relative proportion of each component in gas and liquid phases 
in equilibrium is required since theoretical methods based on the thermo¬ 
dynamics of equilibrium are severely limited in utility due to their 
complexity and to the necessity of obtaining some experimental data to 


evaluate constants 








' 







III. EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT 


18 


(l) Experimental Technique Employed for the Study of the Methane-Carbon 

Dioxide-Hydrogen Sulfide System . 

This study involved the use of a variable-volume, visual type 
equilibrium cell adapted from a liquid level gauge. Changes of pressure 
within the system were brought about by addition of mercury to the cell 
by means of a hand operated mercury pump. Work at a temperature above 
that of the room was carried out by heating the constant temperature air 
bath surrounding the equilibrium cell by means of an electrical coil; 
while work at a temperature below room temperature was carried out by 
cooling the air bath with a standard compression type refrigerating 
system. 

Phase equilibrium was achieved by rocking the entire cell with 
resultant intermingling of the gas and liquid phases due to the mixing 
action of the mercury within the cell. Pressure was measured by means 
of a Bourdon gauge and temperature by means of copper-constantan 
thermocouples embedded in the wall of the equilibrium cell. Sampling 
of the gas phase was carried out under constant pressure conditions by 
addition of mercury to the cell at a rate just equal to that at which 
the gas was removed. The remainder of the gas phase was removed under 
constant pressure conditions prior to the sampling of the liquid phase. 

Fig. 3 is a schematic drawing of the experimental apparatus 
illustrating the general assembly of the basic equipment. 




- . , . f i ■ 

• ' jj ! : ■ ■ |8 < ■ ' ' r ' 

■’ 


■% ■ 

' 










' 




. 

' 



' 


: • • ; ' 

.... 

■ 

' f IiVO 

•; ■ r? ;. ' 

. 

■ 

. 

* 





19 

(2) Modification of Existing Experimental Apparatus 

Extensive modifications of the equipment used by Bailey were 
carried out. These were required both to improve upon the mechanical 
performance of the apparatus and to enable study of the system at 
temperatures below room temperature. 

(a) Equilibrium Cell 

No changes were made in the actual variable-volume type equilibrium 
cell used by Bailey. However, the bolts holding the equilibrium cell in 
position were discarded and the cell was supported by two specially 
machined stainless steel end fittings, held by set screws passing through 
collars welded to the end plates of the air bath. This gave a rigid mount¬ 
ing and also allowed for increased free space around the cell to facilitate 
installation of other apparatus in the air bath. The end fittings were 
tapped to take Aminco Union-type Superpressure connections. Lighting of 
the equilibrium cell was achieved by means of a Jerguson Level Gauge 
Illuminator consisting of a single light connected to a strip of lucite 
which was held flush against the sight ports of the equilibrium cell by 
stainless steel strapping. 

(b) Air Bath 

The overall length of the air bath was reduced by several inches as 
such a reduction was made possible by the new method used to position the 
equilibrium cell. This brought about a decrease in weight and also made 
rocking of the air bath and attachment of pressure fittings more convenient. 
The interior of the bath was lined with 1 inch thick insulation giving 
inside dimensions of about 10 inches by 12 inches by 3^ inches. 






-. r . -L . . . , - .... .■ . .. , 

. 

■’ ' ■ : . r . . , . ■ 

- T • ' ■■ - • ' . ■ v 

' 

- 

: • • • 

i. ■ ■ • ■ -, • : ,;4 ■; 









- . ■ 

• 






' :■ ' : . • • v - - o ' v 





' io > . o,; 

. 






‘ - V ■ : ■ - , 






■ ■ • t f ■ ; 


'■! ■■ 






20 . 


FIG. 3 SCHEMATIC APPARATUS ASSEMBLY 
























































































21 


(c) Measuring Cell 

A single Jerguson cell, approximately 120 c. c. in volume, 
was used to facilitate make-up of required system compositions. The cell 
was attached to the Dexion framework by means of two U - bolts. It was 
exposed to the room air and its temperature measured by means of a 
thermocouple embedded in the cell wall. 

(d) Measurement of Experimental Variables 

Temperature measurements were carried out by means of three 
copper-constantan thermocouples embedded one half inch in the wall of 
the equilibrium cell. Thermocouple cold junctions were held at the ice 
point and the leads were joined to a multiple position switch connecting 
to a Leeds and Northrup Portable Precision Potentiometer. 

Pressure measurements were obtained by the use of two Bourdon- 
tube pressure gauges manufactured by the Heise Gauge Company. One gauge 

o 

had a pressure range of 0 - 1000 Ibs/in. , with 2 lb subdivisions and 
an estimated accuracy of - 1 lb/in. 2 . The second gauge had a pressure 

r\ 

range of 0 - 5000 Ib/in. with 10 lb subdivisions and an estimated 
accuracy of - 5 lb/in. 2 . 

Volumetric measurements were made by direct determination of 
the elevation of the fluid interfaces by means of a cathetometer which 
could be read to 0.1 m. m. Volumes were obtained by determining 
differences in elevation relative to a permanent datum and then using 
these measurements in conjunction with volumetric calibration curves. 


















; v ' J ': j I c J 

* 

1 " ' 

. 


/ ' 'j.,.:- 

'u CM .. ,"' j 

’ 

-• : . 


& 

' • . ■ 

■ • 

. , ■ ' ■ • . y . 

. 

’*■ ' ■ ' i. ' 

* 


22 


(e) Valves, Tubing and Fittings 

All valves, tubing and fittings manufactured by the Ruska Company 
were removed since difficulty had been encountered by Bailey in regard to 
valve failures. These were replaced by Superpiessure equipment manufactured 
by the American Instrument Co., Inc. 

Valves used were of the 30>000 p. s. i. series; having stainless 
steel bodies and heat-treated stainless steel stems. Two-way through type 
and two-way angle type valves, both having port openings of l/8 inch., 
were employed. Fittings were of the union type, made of 18 - 8 stainless 
steel and machined from solid bar stock. The tubing was made of 304 
stainless steel and had i inch outside diameter and 3/32 inch inside 
diameter with a pressure rating of 30>000 p. s. i. at 100 degrees F. 

The union type connections consisted of a male tube having a 59 
degree conical seating surface that was fitted into a corresponding 60 
degree female conical seat in the body. An inner sleeve having a left 
hand thread was placed over the male tube and a gland nut having a right 
hand thread slipped over the sleeve and screwed into the opening in the 
body. In order to connect the tubing and fittings, the ends of the tubing 
were prepared, using special hand tools, by first turning the end to a 
cone and then threading it to take the inner sleeve of the coupling. The 
tubing was bent as required by clamping it in a vise and then slipping 
a piece of pipe over the free end and using it as a lever. To permit 
the rocking of the air bath, two coils of high pressure tubing were 
specially prepared by Aminco. The valves were supported by bolting them 
to the Dexion framework by means of the mounting holes in the valve body. 





. 




23 


(f) Refrigeration System 

A refrigeration unit was installed to maintain the equilibrium cell 
at 40 degrees F. The motor-compressor and air-cooled condenser, which were 
manufactured by Frigidaire Division of General Motors, were mounted, 
together with the starting box, as a single unit. The motor was rated at 
i H. P. and the unit drew line amperage of 8.2 amps. The system employed 
Freon 12 as refrigerant and the evaporator coil was constructed of 
twenty-five feet of •§• inch copper tubing. The expansion valve was a 
Frigidaire Modulux Refrigerant Control valve; which made use of a gas- 
charged modulating bulb, clamped to the suction line near the evaporator 
outlet. The valve used was an MX - 6 AC model, having a temperature range 
of -30 to +40 degrees F. A silica gel drier was installed between the 
condenser and the evaporator to remove moisture from the refrigerant, and 
a sight glass was installed just before the expansion valve to ensure 
that the line was filled with liquid. 

The evaporator coil was set in a small cork-insulated tank filled 
with ethylene glycol which was used as the coolant. A Minneapolis 
Honeywell Refrigeration Temperature Controller was used to maintain the 
ethylene glycol at the desired temperature by switching the compressor 
on and off. Pressure changes in a vapor filled capsule, which was 
submerged in the glycol, were transmitted through capillary tubing to a 
bellows which operated a mercury switch and thus cycled the compressor. 

A minimum temperature differential of approximately degrees could be 
set on the controller so that the compressor would be switched on at a 
temperature 2y degrees above the cut-out temperature. 






!> 



' 

• , • J i • • • *: ■ 




* 
































' • .. r • ; 


! 


. 




■ 




■ 












' 

■ ' 











24 


The glycol was pumped by means of a 1/15 H. P. centrifugal pump, 
manufactured by Eastern Engineering Co., through a series of j inch 
finned copper tubes arranged in a wooden duct mounted on the air bath. 
Flexible connections of lygon tubing were used between the pump and the 
finned tubes to permit rocking of the air bath. After passing through 
the finned tubes, the glycol was returned to the storage tank ard thus 
continual circulation was achieved. 

Openings were cut into the air bath, near the top and the bottom 
of the wooden duct, to permit a small blower, mounted on the air bath, to 
circulate air over the finned tubes and around through the air bath. The 
temperature of the air was controlled by an American Instrument Co. 
bimetallic thermostat mounted on the top of the air bath. The thermostat 
operated in conjunction with an electronic relay which actuated a solenoid 
valve located in a by-pass line from the discharge of the centrifugal 
pump. 

The solenoid valve was fastened to a bar of angle iron mounted on 
the storage tank. A flexible connection between the solenoid valve and 
the centrifugal pump was provided so that the shock resulting from the 
functioning of the solenoid valve was not transmitted to the primp. When 
the solenoid valve opened it permitted flow through the by-pass line and 
so reduced the flow of glycol through the finned tubes; thus lessening 
the cooling effect in the air bath. When the solenoid valve closed, all 
the glycol passed through the finned tubes and so maximum cooling was 
achieved. A manually operated valve was installed in series with the 
solenoid valve to regulate the amount of flow which the opening of the 






' ' .. 




* 


• 'cxr 


.. • . * 








it 




. 


■ 


' 





• . . , ■ 

h • • 
















25 

solenoid would allow through the by-pass. 

Control of the temperature in the air bath was thus dependent 
upon a balance between the range over which the glycol temperature 
fluctuated, the setting of the thermostat to control the solenoid valve, 
and the position of the manually operated valve. 

(g) Heating System 

For work at temperatures above room temperature the leads to the 
solenoid valve used in the refrigerating system were connected to a coil 
of nichrome wire mounted in the wooden duct in the space previously 
occupied by the finned copper tubing. Voltage to the heating coil was 
controlled by means of a Variac variable potential unit and approximately 
60 volts were required to maintain the cell temperature at l60 degrees F. 
Sufficient air circulation was provided by the blower used in the 
refrigerating system and temperature regulation was achieved by the on-off 
action of the bimetallic thermostat. 

For the phase equilibrium study at 160 degrees F. it was found to 
be necessary to maintain the temperature of the throttling valve above 
that of the equilibrium cell. This was due to the fact that the cooling 
effect resulting from throttling the gas phase from system pressure to 
atmospheric pressure caused the temperature of the valve body and 
connections on the upstream side of the valve stem to drop. Accordingly, 
the less volatile component in the vapor phase, i.e. the hydrogen sulfide, 
was preferentially condensed out and drops of condensate running down 
into the liquid phase could be observed. This condensation destroyed the 
equilibrium; making the vapor phase too rich in methane and in carbon 






' ‘X ... 




■ 


■ 





. 

* ■ ‘ :■ • 

■ ■ 

' 



■ 

‘ • ■ • i 

'. : ■ . 










. 

■ 


' 



. 


■ 


■ 

■ 

■ 

1 



26 

dioxide and the liquid phase too rich in hydrogen sulfide. 

To overcome this difficulty, the temperature of the throttling 
valve and the connecting tubing above the air bath was maintained at a 
level approximately 100 degrees greater than the temperature of the 
equilibrium cell. This was accomplished by mounting a piece of transite 
pipe, approximately 6 inches high and ? inches in diameter, on the air 
bath so that it completely enclosed the throttling valve. An electrical 
heating coil was mounted inside the section of transite pipe and 
approximately 60 volts were supplied through a Variac. By this means the 
temperature of the valve could be maintained at the desired level. Since 
the heating unit was mounted on the top of the air bath the insulation 
inside the bath prevented it from affecting the temperature of the 
equilibrium cell. This heating system was found to be very effective in 
completely preventing any condensation during the sampling operation. 

(h) Sampling and Analytical Procedure 

Sampling was carried out in exactly the same manner used by Bailey. 
No difficulties were encountered dn.e to failure of the Aminco Super¬ 
pressure valves. However, extreme care was required in throttling from 
cell pressure to atmospheric pressure across the valve mounted at the 
top of the equilibrium cell. 

No change was made in the analytical technique as an attempt to 
use a gas chromotography method proved unsuccessful. Hydrogen sulfide 
was determined by Tutweiler titration, methane by Orsat and carbon 
dioxide by difference. The Orsat analysis equipment used by Bailey was 



* 

• “J. ■ , . ■ . .. £ .. 

■ ■ - ' . 

■ 



















\0 ■ : ; . ,] • •; ; / , ■ ; 

' ■ ■ , 






- 


'■ ' 


: 











. ' 



27 

replaced by a new build-up model manufactured by the Burrell Corporation 


(l) Gaseous Components 

The gas cylinders were connected into a manifold system using l/8 
inch 0. D. Ruska tubing rated to withstand 15>000 lbs/in abs. A pressure 
regulator was connected to the methane cylinder as its pressure was too 
high to admit methane to the system at cylinder pressure. Throttling 
valves were connected to the carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide cylinders 
and these gases were admitted at cylinder pressure. 

The carbon dioxide used was supplied by Liquid Carbonic Co, and 
rated at 99 mole fo purity. The methane had a purity of 99.8 mole % and 
was supplied by Phillips Petroleum Co. The hydrogen sulfide was supplied 
by the Matheson Co. A typical analysis provided by the manufacturer 
was as follows: 


Hydrogen sulfide 

- 

98.8 mole 

Methylene chloride 

- 

0.4 mole 

Methyl mercaptan 

- 

0.3 mole 

Nitrogen 

- 

0.2 mole 

Carbon dioxide 

_ 

0.3 mole 


















■ 
















I V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 


(l) Experimental Phase Equilibrium Data 

(A) Data at 40 Degrees F . 

The preliminary stage of the experimental investigation involved 
a check on the data for the binary systems reported in the literature. 
Data at 40 degrees F. were directly available for the methane-hydrogen 
sulfide system and could be interpolated from values reported at 
temperatures near 40 degrees F. for the carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide 
system. Although two phase equilibrium occurs in the methane-carbon 
dioxide system at 40 degrees F. , the maximum temperature reported in 
the literature was 29 degrees F. and hence no check for this system 
could be carried out. 

(a) Methane-Hydrogen Sulfide System 

The pressure-composition loop for the methan©-hydrogen sulfide 
pair is illustrated by Fig. 4. Experimental determinations of the 
compositions of co-existing vapor and liquid phases were carried out at 
five different pressures ranging from 400 to 1600 lbs/in^ abs. The 
values obtained show a maximum deviation from the literature data of 
about 2 $ with most points agreeing within 1 $ or better. 

(b) Carbon Dioxide-Hydrogen Sulfide System 

The pressure-composition loop for the carbon dioxide-hydrogen 
sulfide system is illustrated by Fig. 5« Experimental checks of the 
interpolated literature data were carried out at three different 













ABSOLUTE PRESSURE - lbs/in?abs. 



















ABSOLUTE PRESSURE - Ibs/irvabs. 
















31 


pressures and agreement was better than 1 $ except in the case of the 

2 

liquid composition at 450 lbs/in. abs. where the deviation was about 
2 %. 


(c) Phase Equilibrium in the Ternary System 

The ternary phase equilibrium at 40 degrees F. was described by 
the experimental determination of the dew point and bubble point loci at 
pressures of 400, 1000 and 1600 lbs/in.^ abs. The experimental data are 
reported in Tables 1, 2 and 3 in the appendix and the isobaric phase 
equilibrium is graphically illustrated by Figs. 6, 7 and 8. 

The intersections of the dew point and bubble point loci with the 
axes of the equilateral triangle represent respectively the vapor and 
liquid phase compositions of the binary systems. Hence, the comparison 
of the binary data with the literature data gave a check on the terminal 
points of the ternary dew point and bubble point loci. In ternary 
systems, material balance considerations show that the overall com¬ 
position, the vapor phase composition and the liquid phase composition 
must lie on a straight line and thus a check on the reliability of the 
experimental work is provided. Consideration of the phase equilibrium 
diagram for the ternary system indicates that the overall system 
composition reported was high in carbon dioxide and in methane in almost 
every case. It is very probable that the reason for this error lies in 
the fact that carbon dioxide and methane were transferred from the 
measuring cell to the equilibrium cell and that in this operation a 
small fraction of the gas was trapped in the mercury lines; and, hence, 








■ 








' 



. 




■ 

• ■ ’lit 











FIG 6 MOLAR COMPOSITION DIAGRAM 

p = 400 / in 2 abs 


T = 40° F 














FIG 7 MOLAR COMPOSITION DIAGRAM 

T = 40°F P=IOOO Ibs./in 2 abs 












Vapor Phase. 

Liquid Phase 
Total Composition. 
Ternary Critical Point 
Ideal Phases— — — 


CH, 



0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 '04 T 03 0.2 

FIG 8 MOLAR COMPOSITION DIAGRAM 

T = 40” F P = 1600 lbs / in 2 abs 










s 







35 


the reported overall composition was higher in these components than 
the actual system. 

Fig. 6 illustrates the phase equilibrium at a pressure between the 
vapor pressure of hydrogen sulfide and the vapor pressure of carbon 
dioxide; and, hence, the two phase region extends from the methane- 
hydrogen sulfide axis to the carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide axis. The 
dew point locus, i.e. the locus of vapor phase compositions, was drawn 
as a best fit straight line. The bubble point locus, i.e. the locus of 
liquid phase compositions, was almost a straight line having only a very 
slight curvature towards the two phase region. 

Phase equilibrium at a pressure between the vapor pressure of 
carbon dioxide and the critical pressure of the methane-carbon dioxide 
pair is illustrated by Fig. 7* In this case the two phase region extends 
from the methane-hydrogen sulfide axis to the methane-carbon dioxide axis. 
The dew point locus exhibits considerable curvature towards the two phase 
region and a similar curvature is exhibited by the bubble point locus, 
but to a much lesser extent. This tendency for the dew point and bubble 
point loci to merge is probably a result of the development of inter- 
molecular forces of the type that lead to the formation of azeotropes. 

None of the binary systems form azeotropes but the existence of such 
intermolecular forces is discussed by Bierlein and Kay (2) in their 
study of the carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system. Evidence for the 
existence of these forces in the binaiy system is found in the inflection 
of the pressure-composition curves near the carbon dioxide axis; and 
in the fact that the dew point and bubble point loci tend to merge with 











■ 










t 


■ 


i 






36 

one another, giving a flat terminal slope to the loop. A similar region, 
in which the pressure-composition curves tend to become horizontal, occurs 
as the composition of a minimum-boiling azeotrope is approached in a 
system where such an azeotrope is found. 

Fig. 7 also shows a change in the slope of the tie lines, from one 
yielding more carbon dioxide in the vapor phase than in the liquid phase 
to the opposite case as the percentage of carbon dioxide in the overall 
system is increased. This indicates that there must be one particular 
system - 'containing about 33f° carbon dioxide - which would separate into 
vapor and liquid phases containing identical amounts of carbon dioxide. 

Fig. 8 illustrates the phase equilibrium at a pressure above the 

critical pressure of the methane-carbon dioxide system but below the 

V 

critical pressure of the methane-hydrogen sulfide system. In this case, 
the two phase region has diminished to a small line along the methane- 
hydrogen sulfide axis; and the boundary surfaces curve sharply in towards 
the critical point. Certain of the effects described by Bailey as occur¬ 
ing at the critical point in his work at 100 degrees F. were noted at the 
critical point for a pressure of 1600 lbs/in.^ abs. and a temperature of 
40 degrees F. However, no indications of the color phenomena described 
were present at the lower temperature. A nearly indistinguishable flat 
hairline meniscus was noted and pronounced ebullition of the system 
occurred upon an abrupt pressure reduction of only a few pounds. 

Momentary darkening of the system also occurred with subsequent slow 
reforming of the two phases. 









■ 


-J , ' 


. 




V: . ■ ,,.y:.. ■: f >;• tf.’irt 


■ 





;y 








C 








• '• n- /■ •- > . 








■ \i. 


■■■ 

























; ■ ' ' 



37 


(B) Data at l60 Degrees F. 

A check on the data reported in the literature for the binary- 
system at 160 degrees F. was carried out. Data were directly available 
for the methane-hydrogen sulfide system at this temperature and could be 
interpolated for the carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system. A temperature 
of 160 degrees F. is above the critical temperatures of both methane and 
carbon dioxide and, hence, two phase equilibrium does not occur in the 
methane-carbon dioxide pair at this temperature. 

(a) Methane-Hydrogen Sulfide System 

Fig. 9 represents the pressure-composition diagram for the methane- 
hydrogen sulfide system at 160 degrees F. Experimental checks of the 
published data were carried out at pressures of 1000 and 1600 lbs/in. 2 abs. 
and agreement was better than 1% in both cases. 

(b) Carbon Dioxide-Hydrogen Sulfide System 

The pressure-composition loop for the carbon dioxide-hydrogen 
sulfide system at 160 degrees F. is illustrated by Fig. 10. An experi¬ 
mental check of the interpolated literature data was carried out at a 
pressure of 1000 lbs/in. 2 abs. and agreement was again better than 1$. 

(c) Phase Equilibrium in the Ternary System 

The ternary phase equilibrium at l60 degrees F. was described by 
the experimental determination of the dew point and bubble point loci at 
pressures of 1000 and 1600 lbs/in. 2 abs. The e^qperimental data are 
reported in Tables 4 and 5 in the Appendix and the isobaric phase 



















. 






- 








. 



















. 














. ' 






- 




• . " . 












Absolute Pressure - lbs/in. abs. 



38 . 













1250 

1200 

1150 

1100 

1050 

1000 

950 

900 

850 

800 

750 


39 . 



Data of Bierlein a Kay o 

This Work A 


FIG. 10 

PRESSURE - COMPOSITION DIAGRAM 
FOR 

C0 2 -H 2 S SYSTEM AT 160 °F. 


0.1 


02 0.3 0.4 

Mole Fraction C0 2 


0.5 














40 

equilibrium illustrated by Figs. 11 and 12. 

Fig. 11 describes the phase equilibrium at a pressure between the 
vapor pressure of hydrogen sulfide and the critical pressure of the carbon 
dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system . The two phase region extends from the 
methane-hydrogen sulfide boundary to the carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide 
boundary. Since two phase equilibrium occurs only in systems that are 
rich in hydrogen sulfide, only the portion of the triangular diagram above 
the 75 per cent hydrogen sulfide boundary was shown. In this case the 
dew point locus was a straight line joining the vapor phase compositions 
of the binary systems; while the bubble point locus exhibited slight 
curvature towards the two phase region. 

Fig. 12 describes the phase equilibrium at a pressure between the 
critical pressure of the carbon-dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system and the 
critical pressure of the methane-hydrogen sulfide system. Only the 
portion of the triangular diagram above the 65 per cent hydrogen sulfide 
boundary is shown. The two phase region has diminished to a very small 
loop along the methane-hydrogen sulfide boundary and, hence, is ade¬ 
quately portrayed by a single three component system in the two phase 
region along with the ternary critical point. The composition for run 
E - 2 is shown as being just within the two phase region since this 
composition appeared to be the critical one for a system pressure about 
25 pounds greater than the required pressure. It was not possible to 
determine the exact critical composition for a pressure of 1600 lbs/in^ abs. 
due to the experimental errors arising in the preparation of the overall 


system. 




















41 . 


OJ 

o 


OJ 



FIG. 11. MOLAR COMPOSITION DIAGRAM 

T - 160 °F. P = 1000 lbs./in 2 ab& 




Vapor Phose. 


42 . 


CVi 

O 

O 

m 


c n 

OJ 

X 




FIG. 12. MOLAR COMPOSITION DIAGRAM 

T = 160°F P = 1600 lbs /in 2 abs 






43 

The phenomena at the ternary critical point were similar to 
those described for the work at 40 degrees F.; but, at the higher 
temperature, definite color effects were noted. At the equilibriiim 
pressure the system consisted of a single phase with a uniform reddish- 
orange color. An abrupt decrease in pressure of only a few pounds 
caused a violent eruption and momentary darkening of the entire system. 
This was followed by a return to the normal colorless appearance of the 
system with an accompanying rapid formation of a more dense phase. 

(2) Correlation of Experimental Data 

The correlation of the experimental data was accomplished by means 
of determination of equilibrium ratios and determination of activity 
coefficients. The experimental equilibrium ratios were calculated from 
the test data and then the variation of equilibrium ratio with pressure 
for definite composition parameters was illustrated for each component. 
Activity coefficients were computed by means of the technique described 
in the theory and the effect of variation in composition at a fixed 
system pressure was graphically illustrated. 

(a) Use of a Composition Parameter 

The experimental determination of the ternary phase equilibrium 
resulted in the establishment of tie lines located at random intervals 
on the triangular diagrams. The tie lines were randomly spaced for two 
reasons. In the first place, it was not possible to prepare an exact 
overall composition as required with the experimental technique employed; 
and, secondly, even if the desired composition could have been prepared 




















' ' ‘ • r . I . " ■ 4 -J t 






• • ' .: ' 

' 




V ■ ■ 






tJ '• ' ' ? ■' 


' 




p. • I'« • -V.T 


■ 
















' 




■ 


, : - 




44 

the overall system compositions required to yield definite vapor phase 
or liquid phase compositions could not be determined beforehand. Hence, 
in order to be able to compare data taken at different pressures it was 
necessary to establish tie lines at regular values of a composition 
parameter. 

The composition parameter chosen was the ratio of the mole fraction 
of carbon dioxide in the gas phase to the sum of the mole fractions of 
methane and carbon dioxide in the gas phase. The parameter could equally 
well have been based on the liquid phase. Methane and carbon dioxide 
were selected to establish the parameter since in most cases the overall 
system was rich in hydrogen sulfide and, hence, use of the mole fraction 
hydrogen sulfide would have resulted in a smaller range of possible 
parameter values at each pressure. 

A graphical technique was employed in establishing tie lines at 
even values of the composition parameter. On the methane-carbon dioxide 
axis of a triangular diagram the mole fraction of hydrogen sulfide is 
zero and, hence, along this axis: 

y CH4 + y C0 2 = 1 

therefore: 

c = -^- = y C 0 2 - (22) 

y CH4 + y C0 2 

The properties of the equilateral triangle are such that any line passing 
from one axis of the triangle through the opposite apex represents a 
locus of points having a constant ratio of the compositions of the two 





_ 

■' f !! 








. 






• ' 


' I ; • 




' 











. 

'• 

■ 




; W.t *x 




■ 












45 

components represented by the other apices. Hence, a line drawn from a 
particular value of C on the methane-carbon dioxide axis through the 
hydrogen sulfide apex must cut the dew point locus at a composition 
corresponding to that value of the composition parameter C. Thus, the 
points where the tie lines corresponding to even values of the com¬ 
position parameter terminate on the dew point locus may be obtained. 

To locate the points where the tie lines terminate on the bubble 
point locus, a graphical method of interpolating between the existing 
randomly placed experimental tie lines was employed. A line was drawn 
parallel to the methane-carbon dioxide axis from the intersection of 
each experimental tie line with the dew point locus and a second line was 
drawn parallel to the methane-hydrogen sulfide axis from the intersection 
with the bubble point locus. Thus, a series of triangles, each having 
the apex opposite the hypotenuse located on the dew point locus, was 
formed. A line was then drawn through the apex of each triangle which 
lies opposite the corresponding tie line. This line represents a locus 
of points which are located at the apices of similar triangles for each 
and every tie line. A triangle can be drawn for each tie line correspond¬ 
ing to a regular value of the composition parameter and, hence, the 
required intersections of these tie lines with the bubble point locus 
may be obtained. 

(b) Equilibrium Ratios 

By plotting tie lines at even values of the parameter C on each 
triangular phase equilibrium diagram, the corresponding values of the 






. 


• , ■ ' . ij 

■ ' . ■< , 

' ■ ■ 

.. : ■ V! 


-- 04 ' . 

■ 

« "• . •- v ' 

"■ ^ ' ■ ■ • ■' '• ' ■ ' ■ , . J ‘ > u&M. • 

, 


' 

■•u • r\ ■ , 

. 

. 

% . ■. ■ 






he 


e:jqperimental equilibrium ratio for each component were calculated. 

In this manner, equilibrium ratios were obtained from data which had been 

smoothed in regard to tie line location. These data for the phase 

equilibrium study at 40 degrees F. are presented in Tables 6, 7 and 8 

2 

for pressures of 400, 1000 and 1600 Ibs/in. abs. respectively. 

The variation of the equilibrium ratio with pressure at even values 
of the composition parameter C was illustrated for methane in Fig. 13. 

The values at a parameter of zero are for the methane-hydrogen sulfide 
system and, hence, a comparison between the results published in the 
literature and the results obtained in this study was made. Curves 
representing higher values of the composition parameter were drawn in 
using the first curve as a guide and thus a graphical smoothing of the 
equilibrium ratio data was achieved. No curves for values of C greater 
than 0.6 were shown since such values represent systems which form two 
phases only at the lowest pressure studied. No curve exists for a value 
of the parameter C equal to unity since this represents the carbon 
dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system. 

The curves become asymptotic to the vapor pressure of hydrogen 
sulfide at a temperature of 40 degrees F. This is due to the fact that 
at pressures near the lowest pressure at which two phases may exist the 
more volatile components would be distributed almost entirely in the gas 
phase and hence their equilibrium ratios would be very high. The pressures 
at which the curves terminate at an equilibrium ratio of unity correspond 
to the critical pressures for each particular system. These pressures 
were obtained from a plot of pressure versus critical G value which is 








. 






■ 

. 






















. 

. 











■ 








. 


' ■ 

































































PRESSURE - lbs /in' 

















represented by Fig* 16. The pressure for a C value of zero represents 
the critical pressure for the binary system methane-hydrogen sulfide. 

The critical C value at a pressure of 1600 lbs/in. abs. corresponds to 
the critical composition at that pressure, which was obtained in this 

p 

study. The critical C value at a pressure of 1240 lbs/in. abs. corre¬ 
sponds to the critical composition for the methane-carbon dioxide system 
at 40 degrees F., which was estimated from a consideration of the values, 
at temperatures below 40 degrees F., reported in the literature. The 
curve indicating variation of critical C value with pressure becomes 
asymptotic to a C value of unity since this represents the carbon 
dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system for which no critical point exists at 
a temperature of 40 degrees F. 

Fig. 13 indicates that for any particular composition the equi¬ 
librium ratio for methane decreases with increasing pressure. This is a 
result of the fact that more methane is forced into the liquid phase as 
the system pressure is increased. 

Fig. 14 illustrates the variation of equilibrium ratio with 
pressure for carbon dioxide. As with methane, the curves are asymptotic 
to the vapor pressure of hydrogen sulfide at the system temperature and 
the value of the equilibrium ratio decreases with increasing pressure. 

For certain system compositions a value of the equilibrium ratio below 
unity is shown, which indicates that for these systems the concentration 
of carbon dioxide is greater in the liquid phase than in the vapor phase. 
The curves are terminated at equilibrium ratios of unity at pressures 
corresponding to the critical pressure for each particular composition. 






« 


■ 

- 


. 












. 






. 






















- 



























. 

. 

. 

. 


. , ft • 








. 











52 

For a corresponding system pressure and composition, the equilibrium 
ratio for carbon dioxide is lower than that for methane because of the 
fact that the vapor pressure is lower. 

Fig. 15 illustrates the variation of equilibrium ratio with 
pressure for hydrogen sulfide. For every composition, the curve 
originates at an equilibrium ratio of unity at the vapor pressure of 
hydrogen sulfide, decreases with increasing pressure, passes through a 
minimum, and then increases to a value of unity at the critical pressure 
for that particular composition. The curve for a G value of one, which 
represents the carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system, terminates at 
an equilibrium ratio of unity at the vapor pressure of carbon dioxide. 

The equilibrium ratios for the phase equilibrium study at 160 
degrees F. are presented in Tables 9 and 10 in the Appendix for 
pressures of 1000 and 1600 Ibs/in. abs. respectively. 

Fig. 1? illustrates the variation of equilibrium ratio with 
pressure for methane at 160 degrees F. Consideration of the figure 
indicates that the curves are very similar to those obtained for 
methane at 40 degrees F. All curves become asymptotic to the vapor 
pressure of hydrogen sulfide at 160 degrees F. and terminate at 
equilibrium ratios of unity at the critical pressures corresponding 
to the system compositions. These critical pressures were obtained 
from Fig. 20 which is a plot of critical C value versus pressure. The 
equilibrium ratio decreases with increasing pressure as more methane 
is forced into the liquid phase. A comparison of the equilibrium ratio 
versus pressure curves for the two temperatures studied indicates that 






■ 




- 


- 








. 






. 










































































































1700 



























57 

temperature does not have a very great effect on the equilibrium ratio 
for methane. For corresponding pressures and system compositions, the 
equilibrium ratios usually do not differ by very much at the two 
temperatures. No general statement as to the effect of temperature on 
the equilibrium ratio for methane can be made since at some combinations 
of pressure and composition the equilibrium ratio is greater at 40 
degrees F. and at others it is greater at l60 degrees F. 

Fig. 18 illustrates the variation of equilibrium ratio with 
pressure for carbon dioxide at 160 degrees F, A comparison of this 
figure with the corresponding plot at 40 degrees F. (Fig. 14) indicates 
that the effect of pressure is more pronounced at the lower temperature 
but that in both cases the equilibrium ratio decreases as increasing 
pressure forces more carbon dioxide into the liquid phase. For 
corresponding pressures and system compositions, the equilibrium ratio 
for carbon dioxide is always higher at l60 degrees F. than at 40 
degrees F. 

The variation of equilibrium ratio with pressure for hydrogen 
sulfide at 160 degrees F. is illustrated by Fig. 19. Comparison with 
the corresponding figure at 40 degrees F. (Fig. 15) indicates that 
an increase in temperature results in an increase in the equilibrium 
ratio of hydrogen sulfide. This would probably be due to the fact 
that with increasing temperature the vapor pressure of hydrogen sulfide 
approaches nearer to the system pressure and, hence, more hydrogen 
sulfide goes into the vapor phase and the equilibrium ratio increases. 
The effect of pressure is found to be similar at both temperatures, 






' I ■ 







, 


- 
















, 

. 

. 










■ •• 




. 




. 


. 


. 

- 













58 

with the value of the equilibrium ratio passing through a minimum at 
a particular pressure dependent upon the system composition. 

(c) Activity Coefficients 

The deviation of the liquid and vapor phases from ideal solution 
behavior was indicated by determination of an activity coefficient. 
Activity coefficients were calculated from smoothed experimental 
equilibrium ratios, taken from the plots of equilibrium ratio versus 
pressure, in conjunction with theoretical equilibrium ratios computed 
by the method previously discussed. 

Activity coefficients at 40 degrees F. and at pressures of 400, 
1000 and 1600 Ibs/in. abs. are reported in Tables 11, 12 and 13 
respectively. The activity coefficients for each component were plotted 
as a function of system composition at the particular pressures studied. 
Fig. 21 illustrates the variation of the theoretical equilibrium ratio 
with pressure and was used to obtain the values of the theoretical 
equilibrium ratio which were required in the calculation of the activity 
coefficients. Figures 22, 23 and 24 illustrate the activity coefficients 
for methane, carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide respectively. 

Determination of the theoretical equilibrium ratio required 
pressure-volume data for each component as well as the vapor pressure 
of each component at the system temperature. A system temperature of 
40 degrees F. was below the critical temperatures for carbon dioxide and 
hydrogen sulfide and, hence, the vapor pressures for these components 
were real and could be obtained from the literature. A value of 
4100 lbs./in. 2 abs. was obtained for the vapor pressure of methane at 
































































' 












■ 






















- 




Data From Fugacity Charts 


Published Data 
























. 60 
40 degrees F. by extrapolation of known vapor pressure data. 

Pressure-volume data for methane at 40 degrees F. were not avail¬ 
able directly. However, data were available in the literature for 
temperatures of ?0 and 100 degrees F. (9) and for a temperature of 32 
degrees F. (10). The data at 32 degrees F. were converted to pressures 
corresponding to those reported at 70 and 100 degrees F. and then values 
at 40 degrees F. were obtained by interpolation. 

For carbon dioxide, pressure-volume data at pressures below that 
corresponding to the vapor pressure at 40 degrees F. were obtained by 
interpolation of data reported in the literature for 0 and 50 degrees 
F. (14). The plot of theoretical equilibrium ratio versus pressure was 
extended to pressures above the vapor pressure by using the curve for a 
temperature above the critical as a guide. The temperature chosen was 
100 degrees F. and data were available in the literature for this 
temperature. (14). To facilitate the extrapolation to pressures above 
the vapor pressure, values for the theoretical equilibrium ratio were 
obtained at both 40 degrees F. and 100 degrees F. from the generalized 
fugacity charts in Haugen and Watson. (5). The extrapolation was 
performed so that the deviation from the generalized values was in the 
same direction at both temperatures. 

Pressure-volume data for hydrogen sulfide at pressures below its 
vapor pressure were obtained directly from the literature. (11), The 
plot of theoretical equilibrium ratio versus pressure was extrapolated 
to pressures above the vapor pressure by using the curve at 220 degrees 
F. as a guide. Data at 220 degrees F., which is above the critical 
















- 

'■ 

- 

. 




. 






. 





- 

■ 

• ■ 




■ 




) . 






- 
















■ 



• 











61 


temperature of hydrogen sulfide, were available directly in the same 
reference. As with carbon dioxide, values from the generalized fugacity 
charts were calculated to facilitate the extrapolation. 

The numerical value of the activity coefficient is indicative of 
the effect of the non-ideal behavior of the liquid upon the distribution 
of the component between vapor and liquid phases in equilibrium. If 
ideal vapor-liquid behavior occurred then the theoretical and experimental 
equilibrium ratios would be equal and, hence, the activity coefficient 
would have a value of unity. Values of the activity coefficient of less 
than unity indicate that the component actually exists in higher con¬ 
centration in the liquid phase and lower concentration in the vapor phase 
than the ideal coefficient predicts. Conversely, activity coefficients 
greater than unity indicate a concentration of the component in the vapor 
phase greater than the theoretical. 

Fig. 22 illustrates the effect of system composition and pressure 
on the activity coefficients for methane at 40 degrees F. At all of the 
pressures studied, an increase in the value of the composition parameter- 
which means an increase in the relative proportion of carbon dioxide in 
the system - results in a decrease in the value of the activity co¬ 
efficient. Thus, increasing the proportion of carbon dioxide causes the 
concentration of methane in the liquid phase to increase relative to that 
predicted by ideal solution behavior. Similarly, an increase in pressure 
at a fixed system composition causes a relative increase in the con¬ 
centration of methane in the liquid phase. 

The effect of variation of system composition and pressure is 
















. 


































FIG. 22. ACTIVITY COEFFICIENTS FOR CH A AT 40°F 


62 . 



PARAMETER 












PARAMETER 













64 . 


o 


PARAMETER 





















65 

illustrated in Fig. 23 for carbon dioxide at 40 degrees F. Consideration 
of this figure indicates that as the system becomes richer in carbon 
dioxide the activity coefficient decreases and, hence, an increasing 
proportion of carbon dioxide must be forced into the liquid phase. This 
effect is most pronounced for low pressures and for systems having a low 
value of the composition parameter C, i.e. for systems that are relatively 
lean in carbon dioxide. Once a value of C of about 0.4 is reached, 
increase in the amount of carbon dioxide in the system has little or no 
effect on the activity coefficient. At a fixed system composition, an 
increase in pressure results in a decrease in activity coefficient since, 
as with methane, a relatively greater proportion of the component is 
forced into the liquid phase. The activity coefficients for carbon 
dioxide at 40 degrees F, are always above unity, regardless of the 
pressure or system composition; thus indicating that there is always 
more carbon dioxide in the vapor phase than there would be if the liquid 
was an ideal solution. 

Fig. 24 illustrates the effect of system composition and pressure 
on the activity coefficients for hydrogen sulfide at 40 degrees F. 

Increase in the proportion of carbon dioxide in the system has little 
effect on the activity coefficient of hydrogen sulfide at 400 Ibs/in. abs. 
At higher pressures, increase in carbon dioxide content results in an 
increase in activity coefficient for hydrogen sulfide which means that 
an increasing amount of hydrogen sulfide must go into the vapor phase. 

A similar result is produced by increasing pressure at a fixed system 
composition. 










. 























■ 




. 

. 

















. 



















i 

. 












■ 








* 














- 










■ 




66 


Activity coefficients at 160 degrees F. and at pressures of 
2 

1000 and 1600 lbs/in. abs. are reported in Tables 14 and 15 respectively. 
The variation of activity coefficient with system composition is indicated 
for methane by Fig. 25, for carbon dioxide by Fig. 26 and for hydrogen 
sulfide by Fig. 27. 

Hydrogen sulfide has a real vapor pressure of 779 lbs/in. 2 abs. at 
a temperature of 160 degrees F. However, this temperature is above the 
critical temperatures of methane and carbon dioxide and, hence, the vapor 
pressures of these components had to be obtained by extrapolation. The 

A 

value obtained for methane was 9300 Ibs/in. abs.; while that for carbon 
dioxide was 2350 lbs/in. 2 abs. Pressure-volume data at 160 degrees F. 
were available directly in the literature for methane (9) and could be 
interpolated from published data for carbon dioxide.(14). For hydrogen 
sulfide, pressure-volume data at pressures below its vapor pressure could 
be obtained directly from the literature, (ll). The plot of theoretical 
equilibrium ratio versus pressure for hydrogen sulfide at 160 degrees F. 
was extrapolated to pressures above the vapor pressure by using the curve 
at 220 degrees F. as a guide. (Fig. 21). To aid the extrapolation, values 
of the theoretical equilibrium ratio at 160 degrees F. were obtained from 
the generalized fugacity charts. 

The effect of system composition and pressure on the activity 
coefficient of methane at 160 degrees F. is illustrated by Fig. 25. A 
comparison of this figure with the corresponding one for a temperature 
of 40 degrees F. (Fig. 22)shows that the effects of increase in pressure 
or composition parameter are similar at both temperatures. For a fixed 




': 








































. 


























' 

















































, 










o 


67 



0.2 0.3 0.4 0 5 0.6 0 7 08 0 9 

PARAMETER C 








68 . 


o 


PARAMETER 











PARAMETER 












70 


system composition and a fixed pressure, the activity coefficient is 
lower at the higher temperature. Thus, an increase in temperature causes 
an increase in the concentration of methane in the liquid phase relative 
to that predicted by ideal behavior. The liquid phase appears to be 
somewhat further from ideal solution behavior at 160 degrees F. than at 
40 degrees F. This is probably a result of the fact that the higher 
system temperature is further removed from the critical temperature of 
methane. 

Fig. 26 illustrates the effect of system composition and pressure 
on the activity coefficient of carbon dioxide at 160 degrees F. A 
comparison with the figure at 40 degrees F. (Fig. 23) indicates that at 
the lower temperature the effect of system composition is more pronounced 
at low pressures; while at the higher temperature it is more pronounced 
at high pressures. The effects of variation of pressure, temperature 
or system composition on the activity coefficient of carbon dioxide are 
analogous to those for methane. 

Fig. 27 illustrates the effects of pressure and system composition 
on the activity coefficient for hydrogen sulfide at 160 degrees F. and 
it is clearly similar to the corresponding figure at 40 degrees F. 

(Fig. 24). The effect of increasing temperature is to cause a decrease 
in activity coefficient and, thus, an increase in hydrogen sulfide con¬ 
centration in the liquid phase. 

Considering the composition of the actual system relative to that 
predicted by ideal solution behavior, the general effects of changes in 
pressure, temperature or system composition may be summarized as follows: 













■ 
















' 

















■ 


















■ 




















- 
































71 


(1) Upon increase in system pressure at fixed composition and 
fixed temperature: 

(a) Methane concentration in liquid phase increases. 

(b) Carbon dioxide concentration in liquid phase increases. 

(c) Hydrogen sulfide concentration in liquid phase decreases. 

(2) Upon increase in the value of the composition parameter at 
fixed pressure and fixed temperature: 

(a) Methane concentration in liquid phase increases. 

(b) Carbon dioxide concentration in liquid phase increases. 

(c) Hydrogen sulfide concentration in liquid phase decreases. 

( 3 ) Upon increase in system temperature at fixed composition 
and fixed pressure: 

(a) Methane concentration in liquid phase increases. 

(b) Carbon dioxide concentration in liquid phase increases. 

(c) Hydrogen sulfide concentration in liquid phase increases. 

(d) Predicted Phase Equilibrium Data 

Phase equilibrium data were calculated at pressures between those 
at which experimental studies were carried out. Equilibrium ratios for 
each component at these pressures were obtained through use of the plots 
of equilibrium ratio versus pressure at regular values of the composition 
parameter C. The equations expressing the equilibrium ratios and the 
expression for the parameter C were solved simultaneously to yield 
equations for the mole fraction of each component in the liquid phase. 





































. 





■ 

■ 




• 





The equations required were: 


72 


1 ! 

3? 

£ 

on 4 

-(23) 

*ch 4 

K_ = 

y co 2 

— (24) 

co 2 

C\1 

O 

X* 

= 

y H 2 S 

-(25) 

*h 2 s 

G = 

y co 2 

— ( 26 ) 


y CH 4 + y C0 2 


These equations combine to give expressions for the component mole fractions 
in terms of the known equilibrium ratios and the parameter C. The 


particular equations employed were: 


t)0 2 


k CH4 


C(l 


[ HoS^ K CH 


C K GH4 < K C0 2 ~ K H 2 S^ + K C0 2 ^ K CH4" K H2 s ^ 1 “'^^ 

(1 - C) Kqq 2 x C 0 2 


(27) 

(28) 


C K, 


CH 4 


c H 2 S 


(x. 


C0 2 


X GH4 ^ 


- (29) 


The liquid phase mole fractions, calculated by means of the above 
equations, were then combined with the known equilibrium ratios to obtain 
the corresponding vapor phase mole fractions. 

The computed data for a temperature of 40 degrees F. and pressures 
of 700 and 1300 lbs/in . 2 abs. are reported in Tables l 6 and 17; while 
the data for a temperature of l60 degrees F, and a pressure of 











FIG 28 PREDICTED MOLAR COMPOSITION DIAGRAM 

T = 40 °F. P = 700 lbs/in 2 abs 




























, i: 







Liquid Phase 


Vapor 


ch 4 



FIG. 29. PREDICTED MOLAR COMPOSITION DIAGRAM 

__ ._. 0C . p = 1300 lbs / in 2 abs 


co 2 















FIG. 30. PREDICTED MOLAR COMPOSITION DIAGRAM 

T = 160 °F. P=|300 lbs/in 2 ab$. 









76 


2 

1300 lbs/in. abs. are reported in Table 18. The ternary isobaric 
phase equilibrium is illustrated by Fig. 28 for a temperature of 40 

p 

degrees F. and a pressure of 700 lbs/in. abs., by Fig. 29 for a tempera- 

2 

ture of 40 degrees F. and a pressure of 1300 lbs/in. abs., and by Fig. 30, 
in which only the portion of the triangular diagram above the 50 per cent 
hydrogen sulfide boundary is shown, for a temperature of 160 degrees F. 
and a pressure of 1300 lbs/in.abs. 

(e) General Description of Ternary System at 40 Degrees F . 

Fig. 31 represents the complete three dimensional phase diagram 
for the three component system at 40 degrees F. The general shape of 
the two phase region is defined by the three pressure-composition loops 
of the binary systems and by the three isobaric triangular diagrams 
representing the ternary equilibrium at pressures of 400, 1000 and 1600 

p 

lbs/in. abs. The predicted isobaric ternary diagramsat ?00 and 1300 
2 

lbs/in. abs. were omitted from the figure to lessen the confusion of 
intersecting lines which results when a three dimensional figure is 
portrayed in two dimensions. 

Each of the isobaric triangular diagrams shows the tie lines at 
even values of the composition parameter C. The line connecting the 
tie lines for each pressure at a C value of 0.2 is a locus of points 
located on the phase boundary surfaces for systems of corresponding 
composition at all intermediate pressures. This line intersects the 
ternary critical locus at a pressure corresponding to the critical 
pressure for a system having a C value of 0.2. This critical pressure 












. 


- 

- 

... ■ . 

. 




































- 






. 






























■ ' ■)/ •^1 



















- 










2000 


77 . 



FIG. 31. PHASE DIAGRAM FOR THE TERNARY SYSTEM AT 40 °F. 




































/ 2 i o 

is 1680 lbs/in. abs. as may be seen by reference to Fig. 16. Similar 
lines, originating at the hydrogen sulfide vertex at l6^ lbs/in. 2 abs. 
and intersecting the ternary critical locus at the appropriate critical 
pressures, could be shown for each value of the composition parameter C. 

Consideration of Fig. 31 indicates that at pressures below 169 
lbs/in. abs., which is the vapor pressure of hydrogen sulfide at 40 
degrees F., no liquefaction can occur in the ternary system. At pressures 
slightly above 169 lbs/in. 2 abs. the formation of two phases occurs, but 
only with systems that are very rich in hydrogen sulfide. As the pressure 
is increased, the two phase region approaches nearer to the carbon 
dioxide vertex; reaching it at a pressure of 570 lbs/in. 2 abs., which is 
the vapor pressure of carbon dioxide at 40 degrees F. Over the pressure 
range from 169 to 5?0 lbs/in. abs., the two phase region extends from 
the methane-hydrogen sulfide boundary to the carbon dioxide-hydrogen 
sulfide boundary. 

2 

With increasing pressure above 570 lbs/in. abs., the two phase 
region retreats from the carbon dioxide vertex and moves towards the 
methane vertex. The two phase region extends from the methane-hydrogen 
sulfide boundary to the methane-carbon dioxide boundary over the pressure 
range from 570 lbs/in. 2 abs. to 1240 lbs/in. 2 abs. , which is the critical 
pressure of the methane-carbon dioxide system at 40 degrees F. At 
1240 lbs/in. 2 abs. the ternary liquid and vapor phase surfaces meet at 
the critical point for the methane-carbon dioxide system. 

With increasing pressure above 1240 lbs/in. abs., the two phase 
region retreats from the methane-carbon dioxide boundary towards the 
















. 

. 


. 

, 


























1 . 





















- 

. 





79 


methane-hydrogen sulfide boundary. It gradually diminishes in 
magnitude until it disappears at the methane-hydrogen sulfide critical 
point at 1949 Ibs/in. abs. and 0.55 mole fraction methane. Over the 
pressure range from 1240 to 1949 lbs/in. 2 abs., the ternary liquid and 
vapor phase surfaces meet at the locus of ternary critical points. The 
composition spread between the ternary liquid and vapor phase surfaces 
is greatest at about 1000 lbs/in. 2 abs. and decreases only slightly up 
to about 1600 lbs/in. 2 abs., when the surfaces begin to merge more 
rapidly as a result of the convergence of the dew point and bubble point 
curves of the methane-hydrogen sulfide system. 

(f) General Description of Ternary System at 160 Degrees F . 

The complete three dimensional phase diagram for the ternary 
system at 160 degrees F. is represented by Fig. 32. Since two phase 
equilibrium exists only for systems rich in hydrogen sulfide, only the 
portion of the three dimensional figure between the 50 per cent 
hydrogen sulfide boundary and the hydrogen sulfide apex is shown. The 
two phase region is outlined by the pressure-composition loops for the 
methane-hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide systems and 
by the isobaric triangular diagrams representing the ternary equilibrium 

p 

at pressures of 1000, 1300 and 1600 lbs/in. abs. 

Two phase equilibrium in the ternary system begins at the vapor 
pressure of hydrogen sulfide, which is 779 lbs/in. 2 abs. at 160 degrees 
F. T Aith increasing pressure the two phase region retreats slightly from 
the hydrogen sulfide apex, but still extends from, the methane-hydrogen 
sulfide boundary to the carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide boundary up to a 



. 














. 



















' *1 ; 
















. 



















- 






. 


■ 




PRESSURE - lbs/ in. abs. 



FIG. 32. 

PHASE DIAGRAM FOR THE TERNARY SYSTEM AT 160 °F. 



























81 


2 

pressure of 1220 Ibs/in. abs. - the critical pressure for the carbon 
dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system. As the pressure is increased above 
1220 lbs/in. abs.» the two phase region retreats from the carbon 
dioxide-hydrogen sulfide boundary and moves towards the methane- 
hydrogen sulfide boundary. At the same time, there is a shift towards 
the carbon dioxide apex so that a maximum proportion of carbon dioxide 
is reached at a pressure of about 1300 lbs/in. abs. Above this pressure, 
the two phase region retreats rapidly towards the methane-hydrogen 
sulfide boundary, diminishing in magnitude until it disappears at a 
pressure of 1660 Ibs/in. 2 abs. - the critical pressure for the methane- 
hydrogen sulfide system at 160 degrees F. 

Over the pressure range from 1220 to 1660 Ibs/in. abs., the 
ternary liquid and vapor phase surfaces meet at the locus of ternary 
critical points. The composition spread between the phase surfaces is 
quite narrow over the entire pressure range of ternary critical point 
formation but increases as the methane-hydrogen sulfide boundary is 


approached. 






V. CONCLUSIONS 


82 


(l) Validity of Experimental Results 

The validity of the experimental results is dependent upon three 
factors. These are the control and measurement of the primary variables 
(temperature, pressure and volume), the maintenance of equilibrium 
conditions during the sampling operation, and the accuracy of the 
analytical work. 

Error in the measurement of the primary variables was relatively 
slight. Control and measurement of temperature to ± 0.1 degrees F. was 
achieved. However, since the thermocouples were embedded in the cell 
wall and the temperature of this point was taken as being equal to the 
system temperature, and since slight variation in temperature over the 
length of the cell always occurred, it would be more realistic to 
consider the error in measurement of system temperature to be somewhat 
greater. Temperature control in the work at 160 degrees F. was not quite 
as good as in that at 40 degrees F. due to the greater spread between 
system temperature and room temperature. 

Estimated accuracy of the pressure measurement is - 1 pound up 
to a pressure of 1000 lbs/in. 2 abs. and ± 3 pounds above 1000 lbs/in. 2 abs. 
Thus, the maximum error in a particular pressure measurement would 
usually be less than one half of one per cent. Volumetric measurements, 
obtained by use of the cathetometer in conjunction with volumetric 
calibration curves, are estimated to be accurate to within 0.1 c.c. 

Since component volumes were almost always 20 c.c. or greater, the 



























* 































« 




























maximum error would be - 0.5$. 


83 


The error arising from loss of equilibrium during the sampling 
operation is much more difficult to estimate. Generally speaking, 
pressures were maintained within i 3 pounds of the desired value through¬ 
out the sampling operation. However, greater deviations sometimes 
occurred as the sampling operation was very difficult to control. These 
pressure fluctuations were always only of brief duration as the desired 
pressure could be quickly re-established and, hence, it is felt that 
errors arising from loss of equilibrium were small. 

The analytical procedure is considered to have had accuracy 
comparable to that attained in measurement of the variables or in 
collection of representative phase samples. Volumes could be determined 
with the Orsat equipment to - 0.1 c.c. with a resulting accuracy of about 
t 0.4$ in determining the percentage methane. The Tutweiler analysis was 
less accurate; but, by taking duplicate samples and averaging, the error 
was kept to less than i 1.0$. 

A further source of error was present in the fact that overall 
system compositions were probably incorrect in some cases by about 1$. 

A fraction of the gaseous component would be trapped in the mercury lines 
during transfer from the measuring cell to the equilibrium cell; and, 
hence, the overall composition, as calculated from the component 
quantities present in the measuring cell, would not represent the actual 
overall composition in the equilibrium cell. This error did not affect 
the location of the dew point or bubble point loci as these were drawn 
as best fit curves through the compositions determined by the analytical 


. 

, 





. 

























. 



. - 








84 


work. However, this error did affect the location of the tie lines, 
which were drawn as best fit straight lines through the vapor phase, 
liquid phase and overall compositions; and, hence, it affected the 
equilibrium ratios. 

It may be concluded that the accuracy of the experimental work was 
sufficient to correctly describe the ternary phase equilibrium at fixed 
pressure and temperature and, hence, to give a good outline of the 
overall phase behavior of the system. The work was not sufficiently 
accurate to give exact values of the equilibrium ratio as a very small 
error in vapor or liquid composition can give a very large error in 
equilibrium ratio, particularly if there is only a very small amount of 
the component present in the system. 

(2) Discussion of Experimental Data 

The present study, when combined with the work done by Bailey, 
gives a fairly complete representation of the phase behavior of the 
methane-carbon dioxide-hydrogen sulfide system over a wide temperature 
range. 

The general nature of the phase equilibrium in the system may be 
summarized as follows: 

(1) At 40 degrees F., the system forms co-existing vapor and 

2 

liquid phases over a pressure range from 169 lbs/in, abs. to 1949 
lbs/in. 2 abs. The overall system must be rich in hydrogen sulfide at 
both extremes of the pressure range; but, a wide range of system 
compositions will form two phases at the intermediate pressures. 



- 

. 



































■ 








































,, 












- 




85 


At 160 degrees F. , two phase equilibrium occurs over a pressure range 
from 779 lbs/in. 2 abs. to 16)60 lbs/in. 2 abs.; but only for systems that 
contain 60 per cent or more hydrogen sulfide, 

(2) The ternary isobaric phase equilibrium deviates considerably 
from that predicted by the ideal solution law. The deviation from ideal 
behavior becomes much more pronounced at the higher pressures but is 
greater for the vapor phase than for the liquid phase, even at the lower 
pressures. 

(3) The existence of the type of intermolecular forces which lead 
to azeotrope formation is indicated by the tendency of the dew point locus 
to approach the bubble point locus in the middle region of the pressure 
range over which two phase equilibrium exists. This effect occurs at 
both temperatures studied. However, no ternary azeotrope actually forms 
and it is evident that such formation could not occur in this system since 
there is no azeotrope formation in any of the binary systems over the 
temperature ranges reported in the literature. 

(4) A locus of ternary critical points occurs at 40 degrees F. 
over a pressure range from 1240 to 1949 lbs/in,^' abs. and at 160 degrees 
F. over a pressure range from 1220 to 1660 lbs/in. 2 abs. In neither case 
is there any indication of the formation of a "maximum pressure" ternary 
critical point existing at a pressure higher than the critical pressure 
of the methane-hydrogen sulfide system. 

(5) In this system, equilibrium ratios are functions of pressure, 
temperature and composition. At a fixed temperature, the effect of 
pressure on equilibrium ratio is relatively greater at the lower pressures 






i :. . , vrtl 

- 

« 

* 

* 

; « . 

♦ 

- 



86 


for all three components. The effect of an increase in carbon dioxide 
content is to force more methane and carbon dioxide into the liquid phase, 
thus decreasing their equilibrium ratios; but to force more hydrogen 
sulfide into the vapor phase, thus increasing its equilibrium ratio. 
Temperature does not affect the equilibrium ratios to as great an extent 
as pressure does. Increasing temperature at fixed pressure causes an 
increase in equilibrium ratio for carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide 
but has a varying effect on that of methane depending upon system com¬ 
position. 

(6) The activity coefficients indicate that deviation of the 
liquid and vapor phases from ideal solution behavior is also a function 
of pressure, temperature and system composition. All three factors 
appear to affect the activity coefficient to a comparable extent. Real 
solutions which approach or attain ideal solution behavior, with respect 
to one of the components, occur at certain combinations of pressure, 
temperature and system composition. 

Two phase equilibrium in the methane-carbon dioxide-hydrogen 
sulfide system can exist up to a maximum temperature of +212.? degrees F. 
However, investigations at temperatures above 160 degrees F. would add 
little to the information noitf obtained since the two phase region would 
exist only over a very limited composition range, i.e. only for systems 
that are very high in hydrogen sulfide. Investigations at temperatures 
below 40 degrees F. could be carried out provided that a sufficiently 
effective refrigerating system was devised. An extension of the study 
to lower temperatures would be very helpful in obtaining an overall picture 
of the phase equilibrium in this system. 























. 















, 


, 









. 





. 









. 















t 




' 






■ 

. 




• - 

. 












LIST OF REFERENCES 


8 ? 


Bailey, J. B. , M.Sc. Thesis, University of Alberta, (1957). 

Bierlein and Kay, Ind. Eng. Chem., 4$, 6l8, (1953)• 

Billman, Sage and Lacey, A.I.M.M.E. Trans., 142 , 70, (1943). 

Donnelly and Katz, Ind. Eng. Chem., 46, 511» (1954). 

Hougen and Watson, "Chemical Process Principles - Part Two," 
John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York (1947). 

Keyes and Burks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 4£, 1403» (1927). 

Kurata and Kohn, Pet. Processing, VII, N12, 57* (1956). 

Kvalnes and Gaddy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 394, (1931). 

Olds, Reamer, Sage and Lacey, Ind. Eng. Chem., 922, (1943). 

Perry, J. H., "Chemical Engineers' Handbook," McGraw-Hill Book 
Co., Inc., New York, (1950). 

Reamer, Sage and Lacey, Ind. Eng. Chem., 42, 140, (1950). 
Reamer, Sage and Lacey, Ind. Eng. Chem., 42, 976, (1951)* 
Riesenfeld and Orbach, petroleum Engr., 2^, C 32, (1953). 
Sweigert, Weber and Allen, Ind. Eng. Chem., 28> 185, (1946). 






Tabulated Data 


Sample Calculations 



PHA.SE COMPOSITION DATA FOR SERIES A TESTS 


89 


£ 


c— 

o 

On 

CM 

On 

CM 

"LA 

E— 

O 

•H 

% 

[— 

On 

On 

co 

CO 

ON 

co 

rH 

CO 

O 

C— 

ON 

vO 

On 

"LA, 

.p 

W 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•H 


O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

CQ 










O 










& 










o 

o 



C— 

o 

On 

CO 

o 

o 

ON 

CM 


CM 

[— 

cm 


CO 

"LA 

O 

0 

O 

o 

o 

o 

H 

CM 

ON 

Pt 

CQ 

cd 

o 

• 

o 

• 

o 

• 

o 

• 

O 

• 

o 

• 

o 

• 

O 

o 

,£ 










fLi 










•H 

ES 


ON 

ON 

H 

On 

ON 

co 

1A 


Pt 

CM 

(A 


ON 

ON 

H 

H 


C7* 

w 

O 

O 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 

•H 

»£ 

o 

o 

• 

O 

o 

• 

o 

• 

O 

• 

o 

• 

O 

• 

o 


CQ 

8 

cg rt 

•H 

IQ 

s 

o 

o 

pj 

& 


cd 

Ph 

IQ 

<D 

< 1 > 

fib 

0 

n 


£ 

o 

•H 

-P 

•H 

CQ 

O 

Pi 

§ 

O 

0 

CQ 

cd 

£ 

£ 

O 

ft 

cd 

> 


£ 

o 

•H 

-P 

•H 

CQ 

O 

t 

o 

e 

0 

-p 

0 

!>» 

CO 


CP 

CM 

w 


CO 

LM 


On 

CO 

Pt 


rH 
i—I 

LA 

o 


c— 

a- 

vO 


C— 

a- 

-Pi¬ 


rn 

pj- 


Cn 

CM 


O \ 
CM 


O 

Pf 


CM 

On 

ON 


*LA 

ON 


CO 

H 

ON 


LA 

CM 

CM 


LA 

CM 


O 

v:, 

vO 


vQ 

ON 

vO 


O 

CM 

vO 


vO 

« 

o 


pj 

'LA 


A- 

I 

<3 


ON 

I 

<C 


Pt 

J 

*=4 


•LA 

I 


vO 

rH 


CO 

r—I 
"LA 


vO 

I 

<d 


■LA 

vO 

ON 




rH 

CM 

ON 

CM 

o 

CO 

la 

CM 


ON 

On 

•LA 

•LA 

•LA 

o 

ON 

o 

o 

rH 

H 

CM 

ON 

Pt 

LA 

vO 

o 

• 

o 

« 

O 

• 

C 

« 

o 

O 

• 

O 

« 

O 

• 

o 


■LA 

O 




rH 

CM 

A- 

On 

On 

vO 

ON 

CM 


co 


ON 

LA 

ON 

CM 


o 

o 

o 

H 

rH 

CM 

ON 

~~+ 

o 

• 

o 

» 

O 

• 

O 

• 

O 

« 

o 

• 

O 

• 

o 

o 


ON 


co 

a- 

rH 

A- 

vO 


Pt 

CM 

On 

ON 

vO 

CM 

CO 

"LA 

o 

• 

o 

K 

o 

CA 

O 

i— i 

• 

O 

rH 

O 

H 

9 

o 

i—1 

• 

O 

O 

• 

o 

C 

• 

O 





















PHASE COMPOSITION DATA FOR SERIES B TESTS 


90 


£ 

o 

-P 

•H 

W 

O 

f 

o 

0 

« 

I 

Ph 

•n 

•rt 

H 

O* 

3 


co 

cm 


CM 

o 

o 


oo 

VO 

1A 

CM 

pd 

Pd 


C— 

LA 

CM 

l—1 

CO 

pd- 


CO 

C— 

vO 

Pd' 

CM 

i—I 

o 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

o 

c 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 


o 

o 


o 

On 

r—1 

CM 


o- 

CO 

o 

CO 

O 

CM 

Pd 

LA 

VO 

+ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 


■LA 

Ta 

Pd- 

c - — 

Ov 

t- 

vO 

C"~ 

1—1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

i—1 

o 

O 

O 

o 

O 



§ 

•H 

-P 

•H 

00 

O 

f 

O 

0 

CQ 

| 

PH 

& 

> 



Pd 

rH 

On 

On 

ON 

pd 

CO 

CO 

On 

la 

CM 

C- 

o 

iff 

CM 

• 

CM 

• 

CM 

•» 

CM 

rH 

• 

rH 

• 


o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

O 

CM 


On 

vO 

CA 

rH 

r— 


CA 

vO 

LA 

C— 

VO 

o 

o 

rH 

CM 

(A 

pd 

la 

o 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 


vO 

o 

la 

co 

o 

On 

rH 

in- 

r— 

rH 

LA 

CM 


la 

pj 

pt 

CA 

CA 


• 

9 

9 

• 

* 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

O 


CQ 

0 

0 

& 

0 

n 

o 

pd 

n 


Pi 

o 

•ri 

-P 

•H 

00 

O 

I 

o 

fi 

0 

■p 

w 

CO 


■>; 

-p 

o 

E~> 



pd 

H 

CA 

O 

OO 

o- 

CO 

On 

LA 

C— 

CM 

rH 

1—1 


la 

LA 

Pd 

CA 

CM 

H 

ffi 

9 

• 

• 

• 

« 

• 


o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 



la 

CM 

CM 

CA 

c— 


CM 

la 

On 

CM 

CM 

o 

rH 

CM 

CA 

la 

vO 

a 

• 

9 


• 

• 

o 

O 

o 

O 

C 

o 


vO 

pd 

■LA 

CO 

On 

vO 

o 

CM 

c— 

CO 

la 

LA 

Pd 

CA 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

0 

« 



• 

• 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

o 


-P 

w 

0 

Eh 


rH 

i 

CM 

ft 

Pd 

la 

1 

vO 

1 

cq 

9 

Pd 

Pd 

PQ 

pd 






0.256 o.7iiU o.o 0.31*5 0.655 o.o 0.133 0.867 











2 


1 













PHASE COMPOSITION DATA FOR SERIES C TESTS 


91 


£ 

o 

•rl 

-P 

♦H 

(0 

O 

& 

o 

o 

<D 

to 

£ 

•H 

& 


£ 

O 

‘-P 

♦H 

co 

o 

I 

o 

<D 

CO 

& 

> 


£ 

o 

•H 

-P 

•H 

CO 

O 

I 

o 

£ 

-p 

co 

CO 

H 

ccS 

-p 

o 

Eh 


CO 

w 1 


CM 

O 

O 


pd- 

w 

o 


% 

w 


CM 

o 

o 


pd 

W 

o 


CO 


CM 

o 

o 


_£• 

W 

o 


Pt 

CA 

CO 

Pd- 

Pd 

CO 

c— 

vO 

Pt 

• 

• 

• 

o 

O 

o 


CA 

1 A 


VO 

CA 

o 

O 

(—1 

« 

* 

• 

o 

O 

o 

vO 

Pd 

r- 

LA 

On 

o- 

CM 

CM 

CA 

• 

• 

• 

o 

O 

O 

CM 

rH 

o 

On 

iH 

pd 

CM 

CA 

CA 

• 

a 

« 

O 

o 

O 


A- 

CM 

o 

co 

o 

7 ? 

• 

• 

• 

o 

o 

o 


CO 

o 

c— 


Pd- 

o- 

-=d 


CM 

O 

vO 


On 

CO 

O 


VO 


CM 

I 

O 


CO 

(H 

in 

a 

o 


LA 

“LA 


CO 

O 


CA 

I 

O 


o 

o 

vO 


£ 

o 

£ 

o 

•H 

-P 

CO 

O 

& 

O 

o 

o 

•HI 

-P 

•H 

£ 

O 


vO 

Pd 

c— 

CO 

CM 

Pt 

CA 

co 

LA 

pt 

Pd 

CA 

• 

* 

• 

• 

O 

o 

O 

O 


1 A 

H 


CA 

pt 


















PHASE COMPOSITION DATA FOR SERIES D TESTS 


92 


CM 


g 

•rl 

-P 

•H 

0 

O 

t 

o 

o 

0 

0 

ctf 

X! 

Ph 


& 

•H 

H—I 


% 


w 


CM 

o 

o 


o 


co 

NO 

H 

i—1 

vO 

CA 

iH 

On 

On 

On 

On 

co 

« 

• 

• 

• 

O 

O 

O 

O 



H 

(A 

On 


(A 

NO 

O 

o 

O 

o 

H 

• 

• 

• 

• 

o 

o 

o 

O 


CM 

CA 

NO 


CA 

CA 

CM 


O 

O 

o 

o 

• 

• 

• 

• 

o 

O 

o 

o 


£ 

o 

•H 

-p 

•H 

0 

O 

& 

o 

o 

0 

ra 

$ 

P-i 

5h 

O 

& 

> 


% 


K 


CM 

O 

o 


6 ? 

o 


xt 

NO 

CM 

1—1 

XJ 

<A 

CM 

r-i 

CO 

OO 

CO 

CO 

« 


• 

• 

o 

o 

o 

o 



1—1 

co 

On 


NO 

rH 

co 

o 

o 

rH 

H 

* 

• 

* 

• 

o 

o 

O 

O 


NO 

CA 

O 


1A 

O 

NO 


rH 

rH 

o 

o 

* 

• 

• 

• 

o 

O 

o 

o 


0 

£ 

ctf 

0 

0 

3> 

10 
0 
n 

o 

' 

rH 

11 

EH 


0 

O 

I 

O 


0 

-P 

0 

!>* 

CO 


co 


s* 

o 


o 


co 

NO 

r~ 1 

rH 

o 

r— 

NO 

1A 

On 

CO 

co 

CO 

« 

• 

« 

• 

o 

o 

o 

O 


o 

a 

O 


Ta 


o 

o 


CA 

On 

On 

—j 

O 

rH 

• 

• 

O 

O 


CM 

o 

NO 

On 

F- 


O 

o 

o 

• 

» 

• 

O 

o 

o 


-p 

0 

0 

Eh 


H 

I 

n 


^r 

1A 

CM 

i 

i 

1 

n 

n 

PI 



















PHASE COMPOSITION DATA FOR SERIES E TESTS 


93 



£ 

o 

•H 

•P 

•H 

W 

o 

I 

O 

0 

to 


Ph 

T) 

•H 

& 

•H 


% 

W 


CJ 

o 

o 


-=r 

trj 

o 


£ 

o 

•H 

-P 

•H 

(0 

O 

I 

o 

0 

to 

03 

£ 

b 

& 

> 


co 

CM 

W ' 


C\J 

O 

O 


o 


rH 

CO 

-£• 

H 

CO 

CO 

• 

• 

O 

o 


o 

CO 

H 

O 


• 

• 


o 

o 

• 

On 


( 0 
•§ 

^ £ 

1A 

NO 

♦H 

rH 

1—1 


• 

• 

CO 

O 

o 

,0 

*IA 

c— 

rH 

O 

O 

NO 

iH 

£ 

O 

CA 

CA 


C'~ 

r— 


• 

• 

£ 

O 

o 

o 


c — 

•H 

*P 

•H 

CO 

O 


CM 

Ph 

o 

O 

£ 

• 

• 

o 

o 

o 

o 

1A 

NO 

rH 

03 

o 

•H 

NO 

CA 

-P 

CM 

CM 

•H 


a 

£ 

O 

c 

O 



to 

0 

= 

& 

0 

o 

o 

vO 

H 

11 

Eh 


g 

•H 

-P 

•rl 

to 

o 

f 

o 

£ 

-P 

to 

J>> 

to 

-p 

o 

Eh 


CO 


CM 

O 

o 


AT 

w 

o 


At 

On 

TA 

CO 

NO 

1 A 

c— 

F"— 

c 

• 

• 

• 

o 

O 

o 



CO 

rH 


CM 

1 A 

o 

o 

O 

<9 

a 

• 

o 

o 

O 


NO 

CA 

At 

1—i 

O 

On 

CM 

CM 

rH 

• 

• 

• 

O 

O 

O 


-p 

in 

0 

Eh 


rH 

CA 

CM 

1 

1 

t 

w 


W 






















EQUILIBRIUM RATIOS AT REGULAR VALUES OF THE PARAMETER C 


94 


* 

W 



1 

0 


a 

P*H 


o 

ft 

I! 

Eh 



m 

LA 

"LA 

NO 

-ft¬ 

rH 

CM 

CO 

o 

NO 

L— 

On 

CO 

o 

On 

On 

's 0 

CM 

Pf 

LA 

oo 

ON 

C 

rH 

JCS1 

LA 

ft 

PT 

la 

LA 

us 

la 

la 

la 

NO 

NO 

o 


• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

9 

a 

•H 

_o 


o 

O 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

Id 













ft 

CM 

• 


o 

CO 

LA 

NO 

On 

o 

NO 

co 

o- 

p 

• 

o 

CA 

CM 

CM 

CO 

NO 

NO 

LA 

Lf\ 

LA 

•H 

O 


• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


a 

U 

rQ 

O 


CA 

H 

"LA 

CA 

CM 

rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

1—1 

H 

•H 

r , 













•H 













£ 






NO 

D- 

c— 

CO 

C— 

o 

a 

0 4 

PT 

o 

CA 

rH 

•LA 

Pf 

CA 

On 

ft 

NO 

H 

• 

ft 

ft 

• 

* 

« 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 



o 

CA 

CM 

O 

CM 


O 

rH 

CO 

IN- 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 


£ 


CO 

CA 

O 

LA 

CA 

CM 

CA 

co 

la 

rH 

H 

o 

m 

C — 

r— 

LA 

rH 

NO 

rH 

NO 

H 

IN— 

ft 

O 

•H 


On 

On 

On 

On 

CO 

CO 

c— 

C— 

NO 

NO 

NO 

-P 

ft 

* 

« 

• 

O 

• 

a 

• 

« 

• 

a 

9 

•H 

CO 

o 


O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

Pi 













fi 













O 













o 

C\J 


ft 

o 

On 

CO 

o 

ft 

LA 

L— 

On 

On 



o 

CM 

ft 

On 

la 

o 

LA 

O 

ft 

Cn 

0 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CO 

o 

• 

* 

« 

9 

• 

« 

* 

# 

* 

a 

a 

«d 


o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

ft 













ft 













TJ 













•H 

ft 

CM 

CA 

o 

NO 

On 

co 

CA 

c— 

co 

o 


£ 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CM 

rH 

rH 


a 4 

ft 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

•H 

o 

• 

• 

• 

a 

9 

9 

a 

• 

9 

a 

a 

ft 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

c 

O 

G 


CA 

CM 

rH 

CM 

O 

o 

NO 

r~ 

CM 

On 

CM 

o 

to 

On 

CO 

r- . 

NO 

■LA 

—r 

CM 

rH 

O 

co 

IN¬ 

•Hi 

L\J 

pj 

ft 

ft 

ft" 

ft 

pj 

ft" 

ft 

PT 

<A 

CA 

+3 

ft 

9 

« 

« 

« 

9 

9 

« 

a 

a 

• 

a 

•H 


o 

o 

o 

o 

c 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

0 













O 













ft 













g 













o 



CM 

NO 

rH 

o 

o 

ft 

co 

co 

O 

co 

o 

CM 


■LA 

o 

NO 

CM 

CO 

ft 

o 

IN- 

LA 

CM 


O 

o 

O 

rH 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CA 

ft- 

ft" 

la 

NO 

0 

o 

• 

e 

* 

* 

• 

* 

• 

9 

a 

m 

• 

0 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

cd 













ft 













ft 













G 


c~~ 

vO 

CA 

r— 

o 

o 

o 

LA 

o 

rH 


o 

PT 

o 

NO 

CM 

IN¬ 

CA 

CO 

CA 

IN— 

CM 

NO 


ft 

ft 

LA 

ft 

ft 

CA 

CA 

CM 

CM 

rH 

H 

O 

o 

cd 

o 

• 

• 

• 

» 

9 

• 

9 

• 

• 

• 

a 

> 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 


O H CJ 

« * 9 

o o o 


ca ft la vo 

» « » » 

o o o o 


c— CO 

» • 

o o 


On O 

« • 

O rH 




















EQUILIBRIUM RATIOS AT REGULAR VALUES OF THE PARAMETER C 


95 



A 


w 


Pd 

(A 

co 

CM 

ON 

H 

ON 

H 

co 

A- 


% 

CM 

-LA 

CO 

H 

CA 

a- 

PT 

co 

pd 

o 

• 

o 

<A 

CA 

CA 

pd 

Pt 

la 

NO 

NO 

c— 

co 

• 

•H 

• 

• 

• 

• 

# 

• 

• 

a 

a 

a 

• 

-P 

Pd 


o 

O 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

# 

§ 

CM 

. 

CA 

"LA 

H 

CM 

CM 

NO 


CO 

pd 

3 

OO 

CO 

■LA 

LA 

•H 

O 

• 

A- 

Pt 

CA 

H 

CO 

CO 

co 

co 

A- 

A- 


O 

• 

• 

• 

• 


• 

a 


a 

a 

a 

5 



H 

H 

H 

H 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

H 













♦rl 













s. 

Pd 

c— 

CA 

C— 

O 

NO 

t— 

o 

CO 

NO 

o 

On 

O' 

w 

CO 

MD 

IN- 

CM 

L- 

CM 

On 

co 

On 

H 

la 

H 

o 

• 

a 

« 

• 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 



LA 

Pd 

CA 

CA 

CM 

CM 

H 

H 

H 

CM 

CM 



CO 

H 

CM 

A- 

a- 

co 

H 

CM 

C— 

A- 


o 

% 

A- 

CM 

LA 

a- 

nO 

NO 

ON 

co 

o 

"LA 


•H 

co 

CO 

A- 

NO 

"LA 

CA 

CM 

H 

H 

O 

O 

-P 

pH 

• 

• 

• 

• 

« 

• 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

•H 


o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

W 













o 













ft 













gj 













o 













o 

CM 


H 

CO 

"LA 

o 

CO 

o 

H 

Pd 

pd 

A- 


o 

Pi- 

ON 

NO 

A- 

"LA 

On 

pd 

CM 

co 

NO 

0 

o 

CO 

o 

H 

CM 

p+ 

LA 

NO 

c — 

A- 

co 

CO 

o 

« 

• 

• 

« 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

cxS 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

X 













ft 













Tl 













•H 


CM 

co 

o 

CO 

CA 

Pd 

On 

r— 

On 

On 

CA 

ft 

pd 

CM 

CA 

"LA 

"LA 

NO 

t— 

C— 

A- 

NO 

LA 

CA 

cr 1 

ft! 

Hi 

H 

H 

H 

i—i 

H 

H 

i —i 

H 

H 

H 

•H 

o 

• 

9 

a 

9 

a 

« 

a 

a 

• 

« 

a 

ft 


O 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

C 

O 

o 

C 


pd 

o 

CM 

On 

On 

o 

o 

pd 

O 

NO 


o 

co 

co 

C\ 

On 

A- 

pd 

H 

"LA 

CM 

co 

Pd 


•ri 

CNJ 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

H 

H 

o 

o 

o 

-P 

Ph 

a 

• 

• 

• 

* 

a 

a 

a 

• 

a 

a 

•H 


o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

CO 













o 













ft 













e 













o 



H 

CM 

NO 

H 

LA 

o 

CA 

On 

o 

la 

o 

CM 


D— 

j 

H 

O 

On 

1—i 

c* 

CO 

CM 

la 


O 

o 

O 

H 

CM 

(A 

CA 

LA 

"LA 

NO 

no 

0 

o 

a 

• 

9 

* 

• 

• 

a 

• 

a 

• 

a 

0 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

ct5 













S 













p 


MD 

ON 

NO 

•LA 

o 

"LA 

o 

CA 

H 

Pd 

"LA 

o 

Pd 

H 

CA 

NO 

O 

"LA 

Os 

Pt 

CA 

CA 

CA 

pd 

ft 

ft 

A- 

NO 

LA 

LA 

p? 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

ctS 

o 

• 

* 

9 

9 

• 

• 

9 

a 

a 

a 

• 

> 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 


O 

ft 

o 








CM 


•LA 

LA 

LA 

0 

O 

H 

CM 

CA 

pd 

LA 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 


a 

» 

a 

a 

a 

9 

• 

a 

9 

a 

• 

H 

ctf 

> 

O 

O 

O 

o 

C 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 























EQUILIBRIUM RATIOS AT REGULAR VALUES OF THE PARAMETER C 


96 


3 

W 


n 

o 

•H 

-P 

Cfl 

O 

& 

o 

o 

<D 

W 

CD 

fi 

'd 

•H 

& 

•H 

h-J 


o 

•H 

-P 

•HI 

CO 

O 

I 

o 

<D 

CO 

I 

& 

& 

> 


CO 


CM 

o 

o 


% 

w 


CM 

o 

o 


-=f 

w 

o 


CO 


CM 

o 

o 


te 

o 


OA 

o 

UA 


Ox 

vO 

O 

o 

OA 


vO 

o 

• 

• 

• 

• 

O 

O 

o 

H 


• 

UA 

CO 

O 

• 

OA 

H 

o 

• 

« 

• 

• 


rH 

rH 

rH 

r- 

On 

CO 

O 

r- 

H 

UA 

O 


• 

« 

• 

CVJ 

CM 

H 

H 


-=t 

hit 

r— 


co 

o 

r— 


oa 

vO 

vO 


rH 

UN 

O 


vO 

CM 

VO 


r— 


rH 


UA 

OA 

UA 


CO 
CO 
OA 


UA 

H 

O 


vO 

vO 

On 

c — 

UA 

oo 

oa 

OA 

CM 

CM 

OA 

-=f 

• 

• 

• 

« 

o 

o 

O 

O 


CM 

UA 

rH 

OO 

On 

O 

OA 

CO 

CM 

OA 

OA 

OA 

• 

• 

• 

9 

O 

O 

O 

O 


On 


UA 


vO 

OA 

C— 

o 

O 

rH 

rH 

• 

• 

♦ 

« 

o 

O 

O 

O 


OA 

-C+ 

O 


vO 

CO 

CM 


CD’ 

> 

















EQUILIBRIUM RATIOS AT REGULAR VALUES OF THS PARAMETER C 


97 



-p 

•H 

1 

© 

P 

P 

© 

© 

■I) 

8) 

© 

n 

o 

vO 

rH 

SI 

Eh 




CM 

C*- 

-ft 

CM 

LA 

On 

CM 

IH- 

On 

CM 

© 

CO, 

c— 

r— 

co 

On 

On 

On 

O 

o 

O 

H 

o 

CM 

CO 

co 

oo 

OO 

CO 

CO 

On 

On 

On 

On 

•H 

ft 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

0 

0 

• 


-P 

rrt 


o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 













§ 

CM 

• 

On 

co 

"LA 

H 

rH 

-ft 

•LA 

i—1 

la 

•H 

O 

• 

CM 

C 

C— 

oo 

CO 

CO 

CO 

oo 

c— 


o 

• 

• 


4 

• 

• 

♦ 

0 

0 

0 




CM 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

•H 












H 












•H 












ft, 

-ft 

SH¬ 

CA 

rH 

LA 

CM 

CA 

O 

CM 

O 

co 


ft 

OO 

CA 

On 

-ft 

rH 

OO 

LA 

rH 

OO 

LA 

w 

o 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

0 

0 

0 



-ft 

-ft 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CM 

CM 

CM 

rH 

rH 

ft 


CO 

O 

ON 

On 

rH 

CA 

la 

CO 

O 

CA 

o 

co 

vO 

vO 

-ft 

CA 

CA 

CM 

rH 

o 

o 

On 

•H 

CvJ 

On 

On 

On 

On 

ON 

ON 

ON 

On 

On 

CO 

*P 

ft 

• 

0 

# 

• 

« 

• 

0 

0 

0 

0 

•H 


O 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

© 












O 












ft 












6 












O 












O 



IH- 

CO 

co 

C— 

o— 

o- 

C'~- 

o 

la 


CM 


o 

rH 

CM 

CA 

—ft 

LA 

vO 

co 

On 

© 

O 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

O 

O 

o 

O 

w 

o 

• 

• 

» 

* 

• 

• 

• 

0 

• 

a 

ft 


o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 













ft 












•Hi 


CM 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CM 

o 

CO 

la 

o 

CM 

ft 

-ft 

CA 

OA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CM 

CM 

CM 

H 

O" 

ft 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

C 

•H 

o 

• 

« 

• 

• 

♦ 

• 

0 

• 

# 

0 

ft 


o 

o 

c 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

c 

o 

ft 


-ft 

rH 

On 

f~ 

CA 

o 

la 

CA 

On 

la 

o 

CO 

-ft 

-ft 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CM 

CM 

rH 

rH 

•H 

_CM 

CO 

co 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

co 

co 

CO 

OO 

-P 

ft 

* 

« 

« 

« 

* 

« 

0 

0 

• 

0 

•H 


o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

W 












O 

o 












Hh 

s 



vO 

CM 

On 

C"— 

LA 

la 

-ft 

la 

vO 

O 



H 

CA 

-ft 

vO 

CO 

o 

CM 

-ft 

vQ 

O 

CM 

o 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


o 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

0 

0 

• 

0 

© 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

© 












ct3 












ft 












ft 












U 


VO 

CA 

On 

-ft 

o 

LA 

o 

CA 

vO 

On 

o 

-ft 

"LA 

-ft 

CM 

rH 

o 

CO 

r— 

la 

CA 

rH 

ft 

ft 

rH 

7h 

rH 

H 

i—l 

o 

O 

o 

O 

O 

ft 

o 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

0 

0 

• 

• 

0 

> 


o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 


O 

o 


rH 

CM 

CA 

-ft 

LA 

vO 

• 

0 

0 

0 

• 

0 

O 

O 

O 

o 

O 

o 


h- co 

« • 

o o 


On 

O 


1.0 0.0 0.189 0.811 0.0 0.109 0.891 _ 1.73 0.910 















EQUILIBRIUM RATIOS AT REGULAR VALUES OF THE PARAMETER 


98 


<D 

tS 

0 

0 

0 

lb 

0 

O 

o 

vO 

H 

It 

Eh 


•H 

U 

a 

H 

•H 

& 

W 


o 

•H 

-P 

•rt 

0 

O 

I 

o 

© 

0 

ct3 

I 

id 


S3 

o 

•H 

-P 

•rt 

0 

O 

I 

o 

0 

0 

I 

Ph 

6 

ct3 

> 


O 


3- 

W 


CM 

o 

o 


PJ 

w 

o 


3- 


CM 

o 

o 


-=T 

W 

O 


cn 

K 


CM 

o 

o 


CA 

1A 


C— 

On 

o 

CO 

co 

o 

• 


• 

o 

o 

rH 


c— 

VO 


1A 

CA 

c— 


On 

Pd" 


i—I 


ON 

H 

O 

a 

o 


\A 

ca 

A- 


O 


H 

H 

1A 

Pt 

CM 

1A 

co 

CO 

A- 

* 

* 

# 

o 

O 

O 


HI 

1A 

O 


On 

o 

Pd- 

1A 

vO 

On 

H 

H 

H 

9 

• 

9 

o 

c 

O 


1A 

1A 

A- 


1A 

O 


1A 

CO 

_=)• 

vO 

CA 

On 

A' 

CM 

H 

» 

9 

• 

O 

O 

O 


co 

o 

CM 























ACTIVITY COEFFICIENTS AT REGULAR VALUES OF THE PARAMETER C 


99 



S 

o 

o 

-G 

A 


(0 

-p 

G 


i>> 

*p 

•rl 

-p 

o 


CO 




CM 

o 

o 


o 


rH 

LA 

CO 


CO 

(H 

rH 

H 

CO 

CM 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

H 

1—1 

rH 

1—1 

H 




H 

C\J 

VO 


rH 

rH 

00 

CA 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

0 

Pd 

rH 

rH 


I—1 


co 

Ov 

CM 

■LA 

O 

OO 

O- 

CA 

• 

• 

• 

• 

CM 

H 

rH 

H 


(0 

o 

•rl 

-P 
H cfl 
rt PS 
o 


I 

•rl 

U 

& 

•rl 
r-1 
• 1 

& 


CO 

CM 

EU 


CM 

o 

o 




w 

o 


vO 

vO 

vO 

VO 

vO 

Pd 


Pd 

Pd 

Pd 

• 

• 

* 

• 

• 

O 

0 

O 

O 

O 



ON 

On 

On 

On 

• 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 


9 

• 

• 

« 

• 

H 

H 

rH 

H 


CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

On 

On 

On 

On 

On 

• 

• 

9 

« 

• 

VO 

vO 

vO 

vO 

vO 


-p 

•rH 

0 

,G 

G 

G) 

£ 

£ 

CO 

0 

0 

u 

to 

0 

n 

o 

Pd 

II 

EH 


etf 

-P co 
G O 
0 *H 

MU 

&0 
W *H 
U 

Tl ,D 
0 »H 
rG iH 
-P vH 
O G 
O O' 

S W 

00 



rH 

CA 

Pd 

c— 

On 

CO 

■LA 

"LA 

LA 

LA 

la 


• 

a 

• 

• 

• 

•H 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 





O 

LA 

la 



O 

CA 

CA 

C"— 

CM 

• 

* 

• 

• 

• 

O 

• 

CA 

LA 

CM 

rH 

O 

* 

rH 








LA 

LA 

,-d- 

LA 

CM 

O 

Pd 

Pd 

Ph 

• 

m 

• 

• 

0 

O 

pd 

CA 

CM 

On 

d— 


rH 

rH 

rH 




o 

o 


rH 

o 


CM 

« 

o 


Pd 

o 


vO 

o 


CO 

o 


6.30 1.63 0.60 6.98 1.29 0.I16 0.903 1.28 1.30 



























ACTIVITY COEFFICIENTS AT REGULAR. VALUES OF THE PARAMETER C 


100 


*p 

•H 

c 

0 

a 

ctJ 

fP 

CO 

0 

0 

feb 

0 

Q 


w 

£ 

0 

•H 

O 

•H 

ch 

0 

O 

O 

£ 

♦H 

-p 

o 


w 
o 
•H 
-P 
rH fti 

•H g 

-P P 

0 *iH 

P Sh 
O ,o 
0 *H 
,P H 

H 


& 

•H 

'd ,o 

0 *H 
P H 
-P *H 
° £ 
O O 1 

s w 

CO 


% 

w 


CM 

o 

o 


pd 

ip 

o 


CO 

IP 1 


CM 

o 

o 


CO 

tp* 


CM 

o 

o 


pd 

w 

o 


o 

rH 

H 


O 

On 


O 

CO 


LA 


CM 


O 

CA 


IN¬ 

CA 


LA 

EN— 


O 

CO 


Pd 


LA 

CM 

rH 

• 

CA 

LA 

CM 

• 

9 

9 

9 

• 

rH 

rH 

CM 

• 

rH 

LA 

CA 

o 

A 

pd 

rH 

o 

9 

9 

9 

9 

rH 

rH 

iH 

rH 


CM 

CA 

On 

rH 

O 

CM 

Pd 

CA 

On 

NO 

CO 

9 

9 

9 

9 

rH 

o 

o 

o 


On 

On 

On 

On 

On 

• 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

• 

9 

9 

9 

9 

• 

9 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

9 


NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 

NO 

• 

c— 

c— 

o- 

c— 

c— 

9 

9 

• 

9 

9 

9 

« 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

T-A 

"LA 

“LA 

LA 

LA 

LA 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

# 

9 

9 

9 

9 

9 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 


CM 

LA 

On 

Pd 

CA 

CA 

CA 

Pd 

9 

9 

9 

9 

o 

o 

o 

c 


1A 

pd 


1 A 


pd 

O 


Pd 

NO 


NO 

CO 


o 

On 


NO 

9 

O 


NO 

IN- 

» 

O 


On 

LA 


•LA 

PA 

NO 




















ACTIVITY COEFFICIENTS AT REGULAR VALUES OF THE PARAMETER . 


101 



to 

<D 

•H 

O 

•H 

0 

O 

O 

4? 

•H 

-P 

O 

<xj 


% 


w 


co 

o 

o 


pd- 

w 

o 



r— 

un 

Pd 

1A 

c— 

CO 

co 

• 

• 

• 

« 

i — 1 

rH 

CO 

co 



CO 

Ov 

ON 

• 

o 

r- 

Pd- 

# 

a 

* 

• 

• 

CO 

H 

H 



UN 

o 

vO 

1 — 1 

o 

On 

r— 

C\J 

On 

NO 

pj- 

• 

• 

a 

a 

H 

O 

O 

o 


to 

o 

•rH 

•P 


H id 
cd ftj 

o 



O rQ 
© tH 

^ H 
cr 


co 

o 

o 


Pd- 

o 


vO 

vO 

vO 

vO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

• 

* 

• 

• 

O 

o 

o 

o 


o- c~- c— 

VO VO 

• • • 

o o o 


o 

o 

o 

H 

rH 

rH 

» 

• 

a 

CO 

CO 

CO 


cd 

Pm 

to 

© 

0 

i 

tuO 

0 

Q 

O 

pd- 

u 

EH 




•ri 

.1 
rH 
♦ rl 

& 


£ w 


CO 


CM 

o 

o 


trl 

o 


o 

Pd 

o 


V0 

pd- 

9 

o 


rH 

vO 



UN 

O 

• 

ON 

CO 

0 

a 


• 

rH 

rH 


UN 

o 

UN 

UN 

On 

Pd - 

• 

* 

a 

CO 

rH 

H 


O n CO 

• » • 

o o o 


0.286 1.00 1.00 1.00 2.10 

















102 


w 

■8 

CM 

Pi 

•rl 

N 

CO 

s 

O 

o 

o 

rH 

A 


-P 

•H 

JB 

Pi 

CD 

£ 

03 

pH 

CO 

CD 

0 

6b 

o 

o 

o 

vj 

rH 

II 

Eh 


H 

cd 

-P 

Pi 

1 

Jh 

& 

W 


CM 

C 


vO 

c 


co 

o 


CO 


PJ 

in 

in 

vo 

c— 

in- 

CO 

•p 

Pi 

% 

o 

• 

o 

• 

o 

• 

o 

• 

o 

• 

cd 

• 

o 

0 

•H 

05 

H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

rH 

O 









•H 









<H 









4h 









0 

CM 


co 

vO 

rH 

Pd - 

vO 

On 

O 

• 

rn 

on 

on 

CM 

rH 

O 

O 

o 

• 

• 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 


o 

• 

rH 

r-l 

rH 

rH 

H 

rH 

J>> 









-P 









•H 









> 


o 

CM 

H 

rH 

cn 

IN- 

• 

•H 

pj 

in 

co 

m 

Pi¬ 

c— 

On 

• 

-P 

w 

1T\ 

p* 

Pt 

rn 

CM 

rH 

• 

O 

o 

« 

« 

• 

» 

• 

• 

• 



O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

• 



o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 




-P 

pj 

Pi¬ 

pj 

Pi¬ 


CO 

% 

CO 

co 

co 

co 

CO 

co 

CO 

o 


« 

• 

* 

» 

• 


♦H 

-P 

cd 

Pd 

w 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 



in 

in 

in 

in 

in 

in 

g 

CM 

• 

vO 

vO 

vo 

vo 

vo 

vo 

P 

o 

• 

• 

* 

9 

• 

• 

• 

•H 

o 

• 

rH 

i—I 

rH 

H 

H 

i—l 

!h 









rO 









•H 

.. 1 









1-1 

•rl 

PJ 

in 

in 

in 

in 

in 

in 

• 

p 

w 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

• 

u 1 

o 

• 

» 

* 

• 

• 

• 


W 


On 

On 

On 

On 

On 

On 




CM 

in- 

pI- 

in 

CO 

CM 

-P 



C"— 

IN- 

co 

On 

On 

O 

o 


CO 

CO 

CO 

co 

co 

CO 

On 

On 

w 

CM 

* 

* 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

o 

w 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

C 

•H 









•P 









cd 









Pd 



On 

in 

c— 

in 

CM 

On 


CM 

• 

CM 

CM 

rH 

o 

On 

r- 

•rl 

o 

• 

» 

9 

» 

• 

» 

• 

Jh 

o 

• 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

rH 

rH 

O 









•H 









rH 









•H 

p 

PT 

cn 

H 

Pt 

CM 

O 

O 

• 

O' 

w 

o 

Pt 

On 

H 

m 

CO 

• 

H 

o 

« 

• 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 

in 

pf 

on 

m 

CM 

rH 

• 


















ACTIVITY COEFFICIENTS AT REGULAE VALUES OR TIE PARAMETER G 


103 



to 

£ 

0 

•iH 

O 

•H 

«H 

0 

O 

O 

£ 

•H 

•S 

-p 

o 

<3 


CO 




CM 

o 

o 


_=t 




o 


CO 

o 

•H 
-P 
H ctf 

o 

•rl g 

-P 3 

0 *H 
U U 
O ,0 

J§ S 


CO 


OJ 

o 

o 


W 

o 


"LA 

CO 

OJ 

OJ 

OJ 

<A 

• 

« 

• 

H 

rH 

rH 



On 

la 

« 

rH 

o 

• 

• 

• 

• 

rH 

r—! 

H 

LA 

OJ 

oo 

CA 

o 

CM 

CM 

CM 

• 

* 

• 

o 

o 

O 



LA 

On 

4 

LA 


LA 

4 

1A 


LA 

« 

1A 



-P 

•H 

1 

0 

i:! 

s 

CO 

0 

0 

fe> 

0 

Q 

O 

r ; 


g -p 

•r! Ctf 

fe* 

W «H 
_ 

'O rO 
0 *H 
.A rH 
-P -H 
O 
O 


co 


CO 




OJ 

o 

o 


o 


4h 

o 

I 

> 


CO 

CO 

LA 

r— 

ON 

CM 

CO 

CO 

ON 

* 

« 

« 

o 

o 

O 



CM 

LA 


-d - 

OJ 

• 

• 

* 

* 

rH 

rH 


C— 

O 

O 

NO 

-=f 

OJ 

4 

9 

9 

rH 

H 

H 


"LA 

O rH r~i 

« a • 

o o o 


0.208 1.00 1.00 l.oo 5.95 1.19 0.700 0.168 0.8U0 1 .U 3 





























PREDICTED PHA.SE COMPOSITION DATA 


104 


CM 


+3 

•H 

j§ 

£ 

(D 

.1 

A 

CD 

0 

© 

£ 

hJD 

O 

o 

Pi - 

ti 

Eh 


£ 









o 

co 

CM 

PI¬ 

1A 

CA 

CA 

O 


•H 

CM 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CA 

CM 

At 

O 

-P 

W 

• 

• 

• 

« 

« 

• 

• 

•rl 


O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 

O 

10 









O 









a, 









g 









o 

o 

CM 


vO 

CM 

p- 

vO 

CM 

co 


o 

o 

O 

i • - 

CM 

Pt 

A 

CO 

0 

o 

• 

* 

* 

* 

• 

• 

• 

w 


o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 










s 









£ 

O 


CO 

o 

CA 

o 

rH 

oo 

CM 

©4 

w 

vO 

VO 

1A 

Pt 

CA 

CM 

H 


o 

0 

• 

• 

« 

• 

• 

• 

> 


o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

£ 



LA 






o 

CO 

CM 

O 

vO 

CM 

CM 

"LA 


•H 

At 

Cv 

Ov 

CO 

r— 

Pt 

CA 

o 

-p 

tu 

• 

• 

<9 

• 

« 

« 

* 



O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

to 









o 









£L 









S 









o 









o 



LA 







CM 


rH 

vO 

o 

Ov 

CO 

vO 

0 

CD 

o 

O 

o 

CM 

pt- 

■LA 

Ov 

to 

O 

• 

«* 

0 

• 

♦ 

* 

« 

ciJ 


o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

-£ 









C£ 









T* 









*d 

Pf 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

Ov 

C — 

-£■ 

o' 

t£ 

c 

o 

o 

o 

o 

Q 

O 

♦H 

O 

m 

« 

• 

• 

• 

9 

• 



o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 







1A 




CO 

in 

CO 

rH 

\A 

CA 

A- 

• 


AM 

CA 

CA 

— t 

J- 

LA 

LA 

• 


W 

• 

« 

* 

« 

• 

• 

• 

to 


o 

o 

O 

o 

O 

O 

• 

o 


















+3 









© 



















CM 

„ 



LA 

Pf 

o 

C\J 


o 

« 

o 

H 

CA 

Ov 

Ov 

G\ 

•H 

o 

• 

• 

* 

* 

• 

9 

• 

£ 



Pt 

CM 

rH 

o 

o 

o 

rQ 









•H 









r 1 









•H 









< £ 









cr 1 

W 

-£• 






LA 


K 

vO 

vO 

P- 

O 

"LA 

Ov 

o 


o 

9 

• 

9 

9 

® 

a 

• 



CO 

o- 

vO 

1A 

CA 

CA 

cn 


CM 

o 


-=r 

o 


vO 

o 


"LTv 

LA 

vO 


CO 

CO 



























PREDICTED PHA.SE COMPOSITION DATA 


105 


rj 

ft 

tQ 

0 

0 

feb 

0 

n 

o 

Pd 

n 

EH 


C 

O 

•H 

-P 

•H 

co 

o 

I" 

o 

o 

0 

w 

cd 


u 

o 

ft 

cd 

> 


C 

o 

•H 

-P 

•H 

10 

o 

f 

O 

0 

ra 

cd 

£ 

•d 

I 

♦H 
i—-i 


73 


-p 

0 0 
S O 
•H *ri 

f-i *P 
0 cd 

IJ 

Td *rl 
0 

-P ,0 
cd H 
H H 
O H 

ft ft 


CO 

d? 1 


CM 

O 

o 


Pd 

W 

co 


CO 

CM 

tt 


CM 

O 

o 


o 


CO 


CM 

O 

o 


Pd 

o 



1A 




r— 

CO 

o 

CO 

NO 

CM 

CM 

CA 

CM 

CM 

• 

• 


• 

• 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

7? 

On 

CM 

IN¬ 

CA 

• 

« 

• 

• 

• 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 


<A 

c— 

o 


1A 



pd 

NO 

CA 

NO 

1A 

Pd 

<» 

• 

• 

o 

o 

O 


1A 

rH 

1A 

CO 

co 

C— 

NO 

• 

• 

« 

o 

o 

o 


1A 

€ 


i: ) 

vO 


O 

Pd 


On 

Pd 

• 

o 


NO 

CM 


Pd 

<> 

o 


in- 

CA 


(A 

o 


c- 

ca 


•LA 

tA 




CO 

O 

CM 

1A 

NO 

HI 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

• 

9 

• 

* 

• 

O 

o 

O 

O 

O 


CA 

CO 

U\ 

JN- 

CM 

<A 

CA 

Pd 

1A 

r- 

• 

* 

« 

« 

« 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 


•LA 

1A 

1A 

"LA 

O 

ON 

H 

1A 

C— 

pd 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

CA 

(A 

CM 

H 

H 


1A 

o 


NO 

» 

o 


cd 

> 


1.10 0.97 0.90 0.29 0.1 t 9 0.22 0.33 0. U 9 0.18 



















106 


<M 


H 


a 


© 

u 

■A 

CO 

© 

© 

U 

CxO 

© 

n 

o 

vC 

rH 

II 

Eh 


£ 

o 

•H 

-P 

♦H 

CO 

O 

ft 

o 

o 

© 

CO 

cd 

fi 

iH 

& 

> 


£ 

o 

-P 

•H 

CO 

O 

o 

o 

© 

w 

I 

PH 

T$ 

•H 

& 

•H 

pi 


-P 

Pi 

© CO 

g o 

•H *H 
$H -P 
© cd 

RhK 


■d *h 
© £ 
-P r© 
cd 

rH rH 
O *H 

P H £ 

£ O* 
© W 

13 

M 


O 


cn 




a- 

c— 

A- 

CO 

CM 

CM 


CM 

■LA 

H 

On 

CM 

o 

• 

o 

O 

f—1 

rH 

CA 

o 

• 


• 

• 

« 

• 


o 

o 

O 

O 

O 



U\ 

A- 

A- 

NO 

CM 

NO 

Pd 

NO 

Pt 

CM 

A- 

CA 

oo 

W 

AJ 

CM 

CM 

rH 

rH 

o 

o 

« 

• 

« 

• 

• 

• 

O 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 


to 

tS^ 


CVJ 

o 

o 


pj 

o 


% 

SB 


CM 

o 

o 


lA 

ca 


On 

rH 

On 


H 

CD 

O 


O 

O 

CO 


NO 

CM 

A- 


CA 

O 

On 


NO 

rH 


CM 

CO 

CO 


■LA 

A— 

CM 

CM 

ON 

NO 

9 

• 

• 

CA 

CM 

CM 


CM 

O 


A- 

o 


o 

U\ 

CO 


Pt 

CA 

O 

On 

CO 

A~ 

9 

9 

9 

rH 

rH 

H 


NO 

iH 


OJ 


_=r 

o 


o 

NO 


On 

a- 

a- 


o 

1A 


CD 

-=t 


NO 

o 


CM 

ON 

•LA 


1A 

c3 


pj- 

rH 

On 

CM 

o 

r 

CA 

NO 

CA 

co 

O 

O 

O 

rH 

CM 

« 

a 

• 

• 

• 

c 

o 

o 

O 

o 

CA 

A- 

H 

On 

■la 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

A- 

O 

o 

o 

O 

O 

« 

• 

* 

a 

* 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 


Pt 

CM 

CM 

o 

o 

c 

rH 

CA 

NO 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CO 

OO 

ON 

<» 

e 

» 

« 

• 

c 

o 

o 

o 

o 


1A 

rH 


PJ 

rH 


CO 

9 

o 














10? 


TEST DATA FOR RUM 4 - SERIES B 

T=40 Degrees Fahrenheit P=1000 lbs/in 2 abs . 

PART I. PHASE CONDITIONS FOR COMPONENTS ADDED TO EQUILIBRIUM CELL 




(a) Component Pressures 




(b) Component Temperatures 




(c) Component Volumes 


Comp. 

Gauge 

Press. 

(lbs/in^) 

Gauge 

Corr._ 

(ibs/iur) 

Atm. 

Press^ 

(lbs/in^) 

Hg* 

Head D 

(lbs/in^) 

AbsOl. 

Press, 

(lbs/in 2 

Thermocouple 1 Thermocouple 2 

) MV Deg.F. MV Deg.F. 

Thermocouple B Datum 

Elev. 

MV Deg.F, (cm) 

Hg. 

Level 

(cm) 

AH. 

(cm) 

Vol, 

(cm^) 

K 2 S 

113 

- 0.8 

13.7 

23.1 

149 

0.168 

39.8 0.168 

39.8 

... 


.... 86.67 

57.41 

-29.26 

71.6 

ch 4 

170 

- 1.2 

13.7 

17.2 

200 

... 

... 

... 

0.860 


71.2 87.27 

88,40 

+1.13 

56.7 

co 2 

190 

-1.3 

13.7 

17.8 

220 

... 

... 


0.864 

| 

71.4 87.27 

86.09 

-1.18 

65.3 






PART II. 

EQUILIBRIUM CONDITIONS 









964 

+6.5 

13.7 

15.8 

1000 

0.172 

40,0 0.172 

40.0 

... 


86.65 

. 95.36 

+ 8.71 

... 






PART 

III. SAMPLE ANALYSIS 



I 







(a) Tutweiler Analysis 







(b) Orsat Analysis 






Phase 

Pipette 

Ip Used 
(cc) 

Ip for 10 ($ 
(cc) 

■ h 2 s % h 2 s 

Initial 

Gas Vol. 

(cc) 

li itial Vol 
+ Air 
(cc) 

Vol 
of . 
(ci 

Air 

c) 

Vol 

After KoH 
(cc) 

% ch 4 






No, 1 

1,65 

7.10 

23.2 











Gas 

No. 2 

1.55 

6.85 

22.6 

50.05 

93.65 

43. 

.60 

64.55 

41.8 






No. 1 

2.90 

7.10 

40.8 











Liquid 

No. 2 

2.85 

6.85 

41.6 

45.93 

88.65 

42.70 

50.70 

17.4 


















































108 


Sample Calculations - Series B - Run [( 

2 

Equilibrium Conditions: T=U0 Degrees Fahrenheit; P=1000 lbs/in abs. 
The desired total composition in the two phase region was: 


h 2 s 

0*32 mole fraction. 

CHJj 

0.30 mole fraction. 

I! 

CM 

O 

O 

0.38 mole fraction. 


(1) Addition of I^S to equilibrium cell* 


P 

2 

ll; 9 lbs/in abs. 

T 

U0 Degrees Fahrenheit = 500 Degrees R* 

V 

71*6 c.c* 

Z 

0.88 

R 

lb c.c* 

670 -. ■ T - 5 --— 

in. R gm.mole 

P V 

lit? x 71.6 


n = 


Z R T 


0*88 x 670 x U99*8 


0.0363 gn*moles 
















(2) Addition of CRJj. to measuring cell, 


109 


(a) Moles of CH^ required: 


30 

n * 32 


x 0.0363 


0.03^0 gm. moles. 


CH]^ was to be added to the measuring cell at a pressure of 
200 Ibs/in^abs. and at a cell temperature of 72 Degrees Fahrenheit. 
At these conditions the compressibility factor was 0.975* 

The volume required in the measuring cell was: 

n Z R T 0.031*0 x 0.975 x 670 x 532 


59*i c.c. 


(b) Actual quantity of CH^ added: 

P = 200 lbs/in 2 abs. 

T = 71 Degrees Fahrenheit = 531 Degrees R* 


V = 56.7 c.c. 


P V 200 x 56.7 


n 


Z R T 


0.975 x 670 x 531 


0.0327 gm. moles. 
































no 


(3) Addition of CO 2 to measuring cell* 


(a) Moles of C02 required: 


--2_- = 0*38 

n + 0.0363 + 0.0327 


n = 0 . 01*23 gm. moles. 


GO 2 was to be added to the measuring cell at a pressure of 

220 lbs/in^abs. and at a cell temperature of 72 Degrees Fahrenheit. 

At these conditions the compressibility factor was 0.909* 

The volume required in the measuring cell was: 


nZRT 

V = P 


0 . 0 U 23 X 0.909 X 670 x 5>32 
~ 220 


* 62*3 c.c. 


(b) Actual quantity of CO 2 added: 

P - 200 lbs/in^abs. 


T - 71.1* Degrees Fahrenheit = 531*1* Degrees R. 


V = 


65.3 c.c 









P V 

n = ZRT 


220 x 65.3 

0.909 x 670 x 531.U 


111 


(U) Total System Composition. 


= O.Obkk gm. moles 



Moles 

Mole Fraction 

h 2 s 

0.0363 

0.320 

CH U 

0.0327 

0.288 

OJ 

o 

o 

o.oW; 

0.392 

Compositions of Phases 

Analysis. 

at Equilibrium as 

Determined by 


Gas Phase 

Liquid Phase 

h 2 s 

0.229 

0.1il2 

CH U 

0.UX8 

0.17It 

CO 2 

0.353 

O.Ulli 



















